Source note (Tower of Babel staging): John Hawkesworth, An Account of the Voyages undertaken by the order of His present Majesty (London: W. Strahan & T. Cadell, 1773), Vol. II. Text from Internet Archive item b30413801_0002 (Wellcome Library scan, OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

*


V


V


*


t


i


r


A.


V


r


*


1


Z4


v


V


Ik


V


/  I


V


V


t


I


U'*»


4


i


*


S  '  f.


*


3f


*


“v


*


\


\


«  V


U  LtL  rXrit


A  N


C  C  O  U  N  T


OP  THE


V  O  Y  A  G  E  S

UNDERTAKEN  BY  THE

ORDER  OF  HIS  PRESENT  MAJESTY

t  %  y  I

FOR  MAKING

Difcoveries  in  the  Southern  Hemifphere,

And  fuccefiively  performed  by


COMMODORE  BYRON,
CAPTAIN  WALLIS,


CAPTAIN  CARTERET,
And  CAPTAIN  COOK,


In  the  DOLPHIN,  the  SWALLOW,  and  the  E  ND  E  A  V  O  UR  :


DRAWN  UP

From  the  Journals  which  were  kept  by  the  feveral  Commanders,
And  from  the  Papers  of  JOSEPH  BANKS,  Efq;

By  JOHN  HAWKESWORTH,  LL.D.

IN  TIER  EE  VOLUMES.

Illuflrated  with  CUTS,  and  a  gfeat  Variety  of  CHARTS  and  MAPS  relative  to
Countries  now  firft  difcovered,  or  hitherto  but  imperfe&ly  known.

VOL.  II.


LONDON:

9

Printed  for  W.  STRAHAN;  and  T.  CADELL  in  the  Strand,

MDCC  LXXIII.


\


/


-*


/


r


CONT  ENTS

O  F  T  H  E

SECOND  VOLUME,


BOOK  L

CHAP.  I.

The  Pajfage  from  Plymouth  to  Madeira,  with  fome  Account  of  that

Ijland.  Page  I

CHAP.  II.

The  Paffage  from  Madeira  to  Rio  de  Janeiro ,  with  fome  Account  of
the  Country ,  and  the  Incidents  that  happened  there .  1 2

CHAP.  HI.

The  Pajfage  from  Rio  de  Janeiro  to  the  Entrance  of  the  Streight  of

Le  Maire ,  with  a  Defcription  of  fome  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Terra

del  Fuego .  39

C  PI  A  P.  IV.

An  Account  of  what  happened  in  afcending  a  Mountain  to  fearch  for
Plants .  46

CHAP.  V.

The  Pajfage  through  the  Streight  of  Le  Maire ,  and  a  further  Defcrip¬
tion  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Terra  del  Fuego ,  and  its  Productions .  54

CHAP.  VI.

A  general  Defcription  of  the  fouth  eafi  Part  of  Terra  del  Fuego ,  and
the  Streight  of  Le  Maire ;  with  fome  Remarks  on  Lord  Anfon's

Account


CONTENTS.

Account  of  them ,  and  Directions  for  the  P  off  age  V/ejlward,  round
this  Part  of  America ,  into  the  South  Seas .  62

CHAP.  VII.

The  Sequel  of  the  Paffiage  from  Cape  Dorn  to  the  newly  difcovered
Iflands  in  the  South  Seas,  with  a  Defcription  of  their  Figure  and
Appearance ;  fome  Account  of  the  Inhabitants,  and  fever al  Incidents
that  happened  during  the  Courfe ,  and  at  the  Ship's  Arrival  among
them .  _  v  6g

CHAP.  VIII.

The  Arrival  of  the  Endeavour  at  Otaheite,  called  by  Captain  Wallis ,
King  George  the  Ill's  Ifland.  Rules  efablifhed  for  Traffic  with
the  Natives ,  and  an  Account  of  feveral  Incidents  which  happened
in  a  Vift  to  Toot  ah  ah  and  Toubourai  Tamaida,  two  Chiefs .  79


CHAP.  IX.  >

A  Place  fixed  upon  for  an  Obfervatory  and  Fort  i  an  Excurfion  into
the  Woods,  and  its  Confequences .  The  Fort  erected :  a  Vifit  from
feveral  Chiefs  on  board  and  at  the  Fort ,  with  fome  Account  of  the
Mufic  of  the  Natives ,  and  the  Manner  m  which  they  difpofe  of
their  Dead .  gg

C  H  A  P.  X.

An  Excurfion  to  the  E  aft  ward,  an  Account  of  feveral  Incidents  that
happened  both  on  Board  and  on  Shore ,  and  of  the  firfi  Interview
with  Oberea,  the  Perfon  who,  when  the  Dolphin  was  here,  was
fuppofed  to  be  ®ueen  of  the  Ifland ,  with  a  Defcription  of  the
Fort .  '99

CHAP.  XI.

■

The  Obfervatory  fit  up  ;  the  Quadrant  Jlolen,  and  Confequences  of  the
Theft:  A  Vifit  to  Toot  ah  ah :  Defcription  of  a  Wrefiling-match  :
European  Seeds  fown :  Names  given  to  our  People  by  the  Indians .

Hr

CHAP.


5


CONTENT  S.

CHAP.  XII.

Some  Ladies  vi/it  the  Fort  with  very  uncommon  Ceremonies:  The
Indians  attend  Divine  Service ,  and  in  the  Evening  exhibit  a  moji  ex¬
traordinary  Spell acle  :  Tubourai  Tamaide  falls  into  Temptation .  124

CHAP.  XIII.

Another  Vifit  to  Tootahah ,  with  various  Adventures  :  Extraordinary
Amufement  of  the  Indians ,  with  Remarks  upon  it :  Preparations  to
obferve  the  Tranfit  of  Venus ,  and  what  happened  in  the  mean  time
at  the  Fort .  1 3  5

CHAP.  XIV.

The  Ceremonies  of  an  Indian  Funeral  particularly  defcribed:  General
Obfervations  on  the  Subject :  A  Character  found  among  the  Indians
to  which  the  Ancients  paid  great  Veneration :  A  Robbery  at  the
Fort ,  and  its  Confequences  5  with  a  Specimen  of  Indian  Cookery >
and  various  Incidents .  142

•  ♦  •  1  \  '  •*  \  k  Jt  1  ’  T  '  '  «

*  .  *

CHAP.  XV.

9

An  Account  of  the  Circumnavigation  of  the  Ifland ,  and  various  Inci¬
dents  that  happened  during  the  Expedition  ;  with  a  Defcription  of
a  Burying-placc  and  Place  of  Worfhip ,  called  a  Moral.  1 55

CHAP.  XVI.

An  Expedition  of  Mr.  Banks  to  trace  the  River:  Marks  of  fubter-
raneous  Fire  :  Preparations  for  leaving  the  Ifland :  An  Account  of
Tupia .  172

CHAP.  XVII.

*

A  particular  Defcription  of  the  If  and ;  its  Produce  and  Inhabitants  ;

their  Drefs,  Habitations,  Food ,  domefic  Life  and  Amufement s.  1 84

&

CHAP.  XVIII.

Of  the  Manufactures,  Boats ,  and  Navigation  of  Otaheite .  210

CHAP.


CONTENTS.


CHAP.  XIX.

Of  the  Divifion  of  Time  in  Otaheite ;  Numeration ,  Computation  of
Di/lance,  Language ,  Difeafes ,  Difpofal  of  the  Dead ,  Religion ,
Weapons ,  and  Government  \  with  fome  general  Obfervations
for  the  Ufe  of  future  Navigators .  227

CHAP.  XX.

^  Defcription  of  fever al  other  Iflands  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  Ota¬
heite. ,  with  various  Incidents ;  <2  dramatic  Entertainment ;  and
many  Particulars  relative  to  the  Cufloms  and  Manners  of  the  In¬
habitants .  nAri


BOOK  n.

CHAP.  I.

The  Paffage  from  Oteroah  to  New  Zealand ;  Incidents  which  hap¬
pened  on  going  a-Jhore  there,  and  while  the  Ship  lay  in  Poverty
Bay.  2gl

C  H  A  P.  II.

A  Defcription  of  Poverty  Bay ,  and  the  Face  of  the  adjacent  Country .
The  Range  from  thence  to  Cape  Turnagain ,  and  back  to  Tolaga  \
with  fome  Account  of  the  People  and  the  Country ,  and  feveral  Inci¬
dents  that  happened  on  that  Part  of  the  Coafi.  2  96

CHAP.  III.

The  Range  from  Tolaga  to  Mercury  Bayy  with  an  Account  of  many
Incidents  that  happened  both  on  board  and  afloore :  A  Defcription  of
feveral  Views  exhibited  by  the  Country ,  and  of  the  Heppahs ,  or
f n't  fed  Villages  of  the  Inhabitants .


C  H  A  P.  IV.

The  Range  from  Mercury  Bay  to  the  Bay  of  Iflands :  An  Expedition
up  the  River  Thames :  Some  Account  of  the  Indians  who  inhabit
6  it%


CONTENTS.


its  Banks ,  and  the  file  Timber  that  grows  there  :  Several  Inter¬
views  with  the  Natives  on  different  Parts  of  the  Coqfi ,  and  a
Skirmifh  with  them  upon  an  If  and,  349

e  H  A  P.  V.

Range  from  the  Bay  of  Ijlands  round  North  Cape  to  Queen  Charlotte's.
Sound  y  and  a  Defcription  of  that  Part  of  the  Coaf .  371

C  H  A  P.  VI..

Tr a) fadions  in  Queen  Charlotte's.  Sound:  Paffage  through  the
Streight  which  divides  the  two  Ijlands ,  and  back  to  Cape  Turn-
again :  Horrid  Cufom  of  the  Inhabitants  :  Remarkable  Melody  of
Birds.;.  A  Vifit  to  a  Heppahi  and  many  other  Particulars .  385;


a  n


r


■  *


’  '

» „  ‘  /


"  *  '  '  ‘T.  :  \  .  Vi  J  .A  •  :


r  '


••


,  .  ■  S-:1  \Cfl  •:■  ■  •!•  '  r  •  *:  ?  ?  i

'  ■  .  ‘


//  /  V  i  I  O


* :


'  •  V.  V.  .  .  '  ■;  ■  .  ‘  ,:A


»'


I


.


.1/  M  /

-  /

■ '  v  A  -  '  ■  "•  *Vv,  .  /■;.  •  .  .  ;  v.  -#<:(#*  ■

’»  '>  :  A  > .  y '  *«V£;‘.*\v *

••  ’  ’'-'i  .  :  V  .*  -.v-  ’ .  p  ,

.*  -  Ci


■  A  •  '  \  Y.  '  /'  4  .  \  \  '


'

.  'YYY  ’


r  .  *

-


)  J


.  '  t

v

'


•  A


,


:

■  »  *  .  -•  .


■N


/  *■


/


\


-


-


A  N

•  »  •  -  «*

ACCOUNT

O  F  A

VOYAGE  round  the  WORLD,

<1

IN  THE  YEARS

JMDCCLXVTII,  MDCCLXIX,  MDCCLXX,  and  MDCCLXXI.
By  Lieutenant  JAMES  COOK,

Commander  of  his  Majefty’s  Bark  the  Endeavour*


vol.  n.


I


i.  mm  i  »■  1 ■Hua.iiw


m

INTRODUCTION.

T  Have  in  the  General  Introduction  to  this  work  mcn-
tioned  the  reafons  why  the  Narratives  of  the  feveral
Voyages  are  written  in  the  perfon  of  the  Commanders,
upon  what  ground  liberty  has  been  taken  to  introduce
fuch  fentiments  as  the  events  fuggefted  to  me,  and  what
the  materials  were  from  which  my  work  has  been  drawn
up.  It  has  alfo  been  faid,  that  with  refpect  to  the  Voyage
of  the  Endeavour,  I  had  flill  farther  afliltance,  and  of  this
I  am  now  to  give  an  account.

On  board  this  veffel  embarked  Jofeph  Banks  Efquire,  a
Gentleman  poiTefTed  of  conliderable  landed  property  in

Lincolnfhire.  Ele  received  the  education  of  a  fcholar  ra-

*

ther  to  qualify  him  for  the  enjoyments  than  the  labours
of  life ;  yet  an  ardent  defire  to  know  more  of  Nature
than  could  be  learnt  from  books,  determined  him,  at  a
very  early  age,  to  forego  what  are  generally  thought  to
be  the  principal  advantages  of  a  liberal  fortune,  and  to
apply  his  revenue  not  in  procuring  the  pleafures  of  lei-
fure  and  eafe,  but  in  the  purfuit  of  his  favourite  ftudy,
through  a  feries  of  fatigue  and  danger,  which,  in  fuch
circumftances,  have  very  feldom  been  voluntarily  incurred,

except


a  2


INTRODUCTION.


except  to  gratify  the  reftlefs  and  infatiable  defires  of  ava¬
rice  or  ambition.

Upon  his  leaving  the  univerfity  of  Oxford,  in  the  year
1763,  he  eroded  the  Atlantic,  and  vifited  the  coafts  of  New¬
foundland  and  Labradore.  The  danger,  difficulty,  and  in¬
convenience  that  attend  long  voyages  are  very  different
in  idea  and  experience ;  Mr.  Banks  however  returned,
undifeouraged,  from  his  firft  expedition  j  and  when  he
found  that  the  Endeavour  was  equipping  for  a  voyage  to
the  South  Seas,  in  order  to  obferve  the  Tranfit  of  Venus,
and  afterwards  attempt  farther  difeoveries,  he  determined
to  embark  in  the  expedition,  that  he  might  enrich  his  na¬
tive  country  with  a  tribute  of  knowlege  from  thofe  which
have  been  hitherto  unknown,  and  not  without  hope  of
leaving  among  the  rude  and  uncultivated  nations  that  he
might  difeover,  fomething  that  would  render  life  of  more
value,  and  enrich  them  perhaps  in  a  certain  degree  with
the  knowlege,  or  at  lead;  with  the  productions,  of  Europe.

As  he  was  determined  to  fpare  no  ex  pence  in  the  exe¬
cution  of  his  plan,  he  engaged  Dr.  Solander  to  accompany
him  in  the  voyage.  This  Gentleman,  by  birth  a  Swede,
was  educated  under  the  celebrated  Linnaeus,  from  whom
he  brought  letters  of  recommendation  into  England,  and
his  merit,  being  foon  known,  he  obtained  an  appointment
in  the  Britiffi  Mufeum,  a  public  inffitution  which  was
then  juft  eftablifhed  j  fuch  a  companion  Mr.  Banks  con-
fidered  as  an  acquifition  of  no  fmall  importance,  and  to
his  great  fatisfadlion  the  event  abundantly  proved  that

he


INTRODUCTION.  xiii

he  was  not  miflaken.  He  alfo  took  with  him  two  drafts¬
men,  one  to  delineate  views  and  figures,  the  other  to
paint  fuch  Subjects  of  natural  hiflory  as  might  offer;  to¬
gether  with  a  Secretary  and  four  Servants*  two  of  whom
were  negroes.

Mr.  Banks  kept  an  accurate  and  circumftantial  journal  of  the
voyage,  and,  foon  after  I  had  received  that  of  Captain  Cook
from  the  Admiralty,  was  fo  obliging  as  to  put  it  into  my  hands*
with  permiffion  to  take  out  of  it  whatever  I  thought  would
improve  or  embellifh  the  narrative.  This  was  an  offer  of
which  I  gladly  and  thankfully  accepted :  I  knew  the  ad¬
vantage  would  be  great,  for  few  philofophers  have  fur-
nifhed  materials  for  accounts  of  voyages  undertaken  to  difi*
cover  new  countries.  The  adventurers  in  fuch  expeditions
have  generally  looked  only  upon  the  great  outline  of  Na¬
ture,  without  attending  to  the  variety  of  fhades  within,
which  give  life  and  beauty  to  the  piece.

The  papers  of  Captain  Cook  contained  a  very  particular
account  of  all  the  nautical  incidents  of  the  voyage,  and  a
very  minute  description  of  the  figure  and  extent  of  the
countries  he  had  vifited,  with  the  bearings  of  the  head¬
lands  and  bays  that  diverfify  the  coafts,  the  fituation  of  the
harbours  in  which  fhipping  may  obtain  refreshments,  with
the  depth  of  water  wherever  there  were  foundings ;  the
latitudes,  longitudes,  variation  of  the  needle,  and  fuch
other  particulars  as  lay  in  his  department;  and  abundantly
Shewed  him  to  be  an  excellent  officer,  and  Skilful  navi-

9  gator.


«


INTRODUCTION.


igator.  But  in  the  papers  which  were  communicated  to
me  by  Mr.  Banks,  I  found  a  great  variety  of  incidents
which  had  not  come  under  the  notice  of  Captain  Cook,
with  defcriptions  of  countries  and  people,  their  produc¬
tions,  manners,  cuftoms,  religion,  policy,  and  language,

s

much  more  full  and  particular  than  were  expected  from  a

Gentleman  whofe  Ration  and  office  naturally  turned  his

principal  attention  to  other  objects ;  *  for  thefe  particulars,

*

therefore,  befides  many  practical  obfervations,  the  Public
is  indebted  to  Mr.  Banks.  To  Mr.  Banks  alfo  the  Public
is  indebted  for  the  defigns  of  the  engravings  which  illuf-
ftrate  and  adorn  the  account  of  this  voyage,  all  of  them,
except  the  maps,  charts,  and  views  of  the  coafls  as  they
appear  at  fea,  being  copied  from  his  valuable  drawings,
and  fome  of  them  from  fuch  as  were  made  for  the  ufe  of
the  artiRs  at  his  expence.

As  the  materials  furnifhed  by  Mr.  Banks  were  fo  intereft-
ing  and  copious,  there  arofe  an  objection  againR  writing  an
account  of  this  voyage  in  the  perfon  of  the  Commander,
which  could  have  no  place  with  refpedt  to  the  others ;
the  defcriptions  and  obfervations  of  Mr.  Banks  would  be
abforbed  without  any  diRindlion,  in  a  general  narrative
given  under  another  name  :  but  this  objection  he  gene-
roufly  over-ruled,  and  it  therefore  became  neceffiary  to
give  fome  account  of  the  obligations  which  he  has  laid
upon  the  Public  and  myfelf  in  this  place.  It  is  indeed
fortunate  for  mankind,  when  wealth  and  fcience,  and  a
3  ftro  ng

.

I  1 1  I

/

k


/


XV


INTRODUCTION.

/

firong  inclination  to  exert  the  powers  of  both  for  pur¬
poses  of  public  benefit,  unite  in  the  fame  perfon-;  and  I
cannot  but  congratulate  my  country  upon  the  profpecT  of
further  pleafure  and  advantage  from  the  fame  Gentleman,
to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  fo  considerable  a  part  of  this
narrative,.


t


errata.

V  O  L.  II.

P.  13.  i.  8.  from  the  bottom,  for  Char  ear  las,  read  Carcharlas .

P.  18.  parag.  2.  1.  3,  4.  for  Trio ,  read  Frio.

P.  29.  1.  6.  from  the  bottom,  for  within ,  read  without.

P.  124.  1.  7.  from  the  bottom,  for  him,  read  Mr.  Banks •

P.  125.  1.  1.  for  brought  them ,  read  brought  fix  of  them .

P.  256.  1.  13.  for  has,  read  had.

1.  14.  for  have,  read  had.

1.  1 5.  for  remain ,  read  remained ;  and  for  will,  read  would.

VOL.  III.

P.  429.  1.  3.  from  the  bottom,  for  is,  read  are.

P.  4.57,  1,  1 6.  for  whole,  read  hole.

P.  501.  1.  3.  from  the  bottom,  for  were,  read  had-,  and  dele  that  each  had.
P.  510.  1.  19.  for  conferable ,  read  confderable.

P.  626.  1.  10.  from  the  bottom,  for  trails,  read  tracks.

P.  753.  1.  8.  from  the  bottom,  for  grove ,  read  groove .

P.  762.  1.  9.  for  or  depofted,  read  or  materials  that  are  depofted.


AN


c


A  N


ACCOUNT

O  F  A

V  O  Y  AGE  round  the  W  O  R  L  D.

BOOK  I.

CHAP.  I.

'The  Pajfage  from  Plymouth  to  Madeira ,  with  fame  accou?it

of  that  If  and,

HAVING  received  my  commifUon,  which  was  dated  1768.
the  25th  of  May  1768,  I  went  on  board  on  the  27th,  ,  iVJay'  ^
hoifled  the  pennant,  and  took  charge  of  the  fhip,  Fnda7  27*
which  then  lay  in  the  bafon  in  Deptford  Yard.  She  was
fitted  for  fea  with  all  expedition ;  and  ftores  and  provifions
being  taken  on  board,  failed  down  the  river  on  the  30th  of  Sat  .July  30.
July,  and  on  the  13th  of  Augufl  anchored  in  Plymouth  Sat.Aug.  i1o
Sound.

While  we  lay  here  waiting  for  a  wind,  the  articles  of  war
and  the  adt  of  parliament  were  read  to  the  fhip’s  company,
who  were  paid  two  months  wages  in  advance,  and  told  that
they  were  to  expedl  no  additional  pay  for  the  performance  of
the  voyage.

On  Friday  the  26th  of  Augufl,  the  wind  becoming  fair,  Friday  26.
we  got  under  fail,  and  put  to  fea.  On  the  31ft,  we  faw  Wedner.  3i,
feveral  of  the  birds  which  the  failors  call  Mother  Carey’s
Vol.  II.  B  Chickens,


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


\


1768.

September.

< — —  , - '

Thurfday  1.


Friday  2. ,


Monday  5.


Chickens,  and  which  they  fuppofe  to  be  the  forerunners  of
a  dorm  ;  and  on  the  next  day  we  had  a  very  hard  gale,  which
brought  us  under  our  courfes,  wafhed  over-board  a  fmall
boat  belonging  to  the  Boatfwain,  and  drowned  three  or  four
dozen  of  our  poultry,  which  we  regretted  dill  more.

On  Friday  the  2d  of  September  we  faw  land,  between
Cape  Finider  and  Cape  Ortegal,  on  the  coad  of  Gallicia,  in
Spain;  and  on  the  5th,  by  an  obfervation  of  the  fun  and
moon,  we  found  the  latitude  of  Cape  Finider  to  be  420  53'
North,  and  its  longitude  8°  46'  Wed,  our  fird  meridian  being
always  fuppofed  to  pafs  through  Greenwich ;  variation  of
the  needle  210  4'  Wed.


During  this  courfe,  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  had  an
opportunity  of  obferving  many  marine  animals,  of  which  no
naturalid  has  hitherto  taken  notice  ;  particularly,  a  new  fpe-
cies  of  the  Onifcus ,  which  was  found  adhering  to  the  Medufa
Pelagica;  and  an  animal  of  an  angular  figure,  about  three
inches  long  and  one  thick,  with  a  hollow  pading  quite
through  it,  and  a  brown  fpot  on  one  end,  which  they  con-
jedlured  might  be  its  ftomach;  four  of  thefe  adhered  to¬
gether  by  their  fides  when  they  were  taken,  fo  that  at  fird
they  were  thought  to  be  one  animal,  but  upon  being  put
into  a  glafs  of  water  they  foon  feparated,  and  fvvam  about
very  brifkly.  Thefe  animals  are  of  a  new  genus,  to  which
Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  gave  the  name  of  Dagyfa->  from
the  likenefs  of  one  fpecies  of  them  to  a  gem :  feveral  fpe-
cimens  of  them  were  taken  adhering  together  fometimes  to
the  length  of  a  yard  or  more,  and  fhining  in  the  water  with
very  beautiful  colours.  Another  animal  of  a  new  genus
they  alfo  difcovered,  which  fhone  in  the  water  with  colours
dill  more  beautiful  and  vivid,  and  which  indeed  exceeded  in
variety  and  brightnefs  any  thing  that  we  had  ever  feen:  the
colouring  and  fplendour  of  thefe  animals  were  equal  to  thofe

of


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


3


of  an  Opal,  and  from  their  refemblance  to  that  gem,  the  J7^-

r  t  .  September.

genus  was  called  Carcinium  Opalinum.  One  of  them  lived  ..

feveral  hours  in  a  glafs  of  fait  water,  fwimming  about  with
great  agility,  and  at  every  motion  difplaying  a  change  of  co¬
lours  almoft  infinitely  various.  We  caught  alfo  among  the
rigging  of  the  Ihip,  when  we  were  at  the  diftance  of  about
ten  leagues  from  Gape  Finifier,  feveral  birds  which  have  not
been  defcribed  by  Linnseus ;  they  were  fuppofed  to  have  come
from  Spain,  and  our  gentlemen  called  the  fpecies  Motacilla
•uelificans ,  as  they  faid  none  but  failors  would  venture  them-
felves  on  board  a  fhip  that  was  going  round  the  world :  one
of  them  was  fo  exhaufted  that  it  died  in  Mr.  Banks’s  hand,
almoft  as  foon  as  it  was  brought  to  him.

It  was  thought  extraordinary  that  no  naturalift  had  hitherto
taken  notice  of  the  Dagyfa ,  as  the  fea  abounds  with  them  not
twenty  leagues  from  the  coaft  of  Spain ;  but,  unfortunately
for  the  caufe  of  fcience,  there  are  but  very  few  of  thofe  who
traverfe  the  fea,  that  are  either  difpofed  or  qualified  to  re¬
mark  the  curiofities  of  which  Nature  has  made  it  the  repo-
fitory.

On  the  1 2tli  we  difcovered  the  iflands  of  Porto  Santo  and  Monday  12&
Madeira,  and  on  the  next  day  anchored  in  Funchiale  road,
and  moored  with  the  ftream-anchor:  but,  in  the  night,  the
bend  of  the  hawfer  of  the  ftream-anchor  flipped,  owing  to
the  negligence  of  the  perfon  who  had  been  employed  to
make  it  faft.  In  the  morning  the  anchor  was  heaved  up  into
the  boat,  and  carried  out  to  the  fouthward  ;  but  in  heaving
it  again,  Mr.  Weir,  the  mafter’s  mate,  was  carried  overboard
by  the  buoy-rope,  and  went  to  the  bottom  with  the  anchor  :
the  people  in  the  fhip  faw  the  accident,  and  got  the  anchor
up  with  all  poflible  expedition  ;  it  was  however  too  late,  the
body  came  up  intangled  in  the  buoy-rope,  but  it  was  dead.

B  2  When


\


4  LIEUTENANT  .COOK’s  VOYAGE

1768.  When  the  illand  of  Madeira  is  firfl  approached  from  the
fea,  it  has  a  very  beautiful  appearance  ;  the  fides  of  the  hills
being  intirely  covered  with  vines  almod  as  high  as  the  eye
can  diftinguifh,  and  the  vines  are  green  when  every  kind
of  herbage-,  except  where  they  fhade  the  ground,  and  here
and  there  by  the  fides  of  a  rill,  is  intirely  burnt  up,  which
was  the  cafe  at  this  time.

Tuefday  13.  On  the  13th,  about  eleven  o’clock  in  the  forenoon,  a  boat,
which  our  failors  call  the  product  boat,  came  on  board  from
the  officers  of  health,  without  whofe  per  million  no  perfon  is
buffered  to  land  from  on  board  a  ffiip.  As  foon  as  this  per-
million  was  obtained,  we  went  on  fhore  at  Funchiale,  the
capital  of  the  ifland,  and  proceeded  direcdly  to  the  houfe  of
Mr.  Cheap,  who  is  the  Englifh  conful  there,  and  one  of  the
mod  confiderable  merchants  of  the  place.  This  gentleman
received  us  with  the  kindnefs  of  a  brother,  and  the  liberality
of  a  prince  ^  he  infilled  upon  our  taking  poffeffion  of  his
houfe,  in  which  he  furnifhed  us  with  every  poffible  accom¬
modation  during  our  flay  upon  the  illand :  he  procured  leave

for  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  to  fearch  the  illand  for  fuch

/

natural  curiofities  as  they  fliould  think  worth  their  notice ;
employed  perfons  to  take  fifh  and  gather  fhells,  which  time
would  not  have  permitted  them  to  colle<d  for  themfelves;.
and  he  provided  horfes  and  guides  to  take  them  to  any  part
of  the  country  which  they  fliould  chufe  to  vifit.  With  all
tliefe  advantages,  however,  their  exeurflons  were  feldom
puflied  farther  than  three  miles  from  the  town,  as  they  were
only  five  days  on  fhore ;  one  of  which  they  fpent  at  home,
in  receiving  the  honour  of  a  vifit  from  the  governor.  The
feafon  was  the  word  in  the  year  for  their  purpofe,  as  it  was
neither  that  of  plants  nor  infeeds  ;  a  few  of  the  plants,  how-
ever,  were  procured  in  flower,  by  the  kind  attention  of  Dr.

Heberden,


✓


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


5


Heberden,  the  chief  phyfician  of  the  ifland,  and  brother  to
Dr.  Heberden  of  London,  who  alfo  gave  them  fuch  fpeci-
mens  as  he  had  in  his  poffeflion,  and  a  copy  of  his  Botanical
Obfervations  ;  containing,  among  other  things,  a  particular
defcription  of  the  trees  of  the  ifland.  Mr.  Banks  enquired
after  the  wood  which  has  been  imported  into  England  for
cabinet  work,  and  is  here  called  Madeira  mahogany:  he
learnt  that  no  wood  was  exported  from  the  ifland  under  that
name,  but  he  found  a  tree  called  by  the  natives  Vigniatico,
the  Laurus  indie  us  of  Linnseus,  the  wood  of  which  cannot
eafdy  be  diftinguifhed  from  mahogany.  Dr.  Heberden  has
a  book-cafe  in  which  the  vigniatico  and  mahogany  are
mixed,  and  they  are  no  otherwife  to  be  known  from  each
other  than  by  the  colour,  which,  upon  a  nice  examination,
appears  to  be  fomewhat  lefs  brown  in  the  vigniatico  than
the  mahogany ;  it  is  therefore  in  the  liigheft  degree  pro¬
bable,  that  the  wood  known  in  England  by  the  name  of
Madeira  mahogany,  is  the  vigniatico..


1768.

September.


There  is  great  reafon  to  fuppofe  that  this  whole  ifland
was,  at  fome  remote  period,  thrown  up  by  the  exploflon  of
fubterraneous  fire,  as  every  done,  whether  whole  or  in  frag¬
ments,  that  we  law  upon  it  appeared  to  have  been  burnt,,
and  even  the  fand  itfelf  to  be  nothing  more  than  allies :  we
did  not,  indeed,  fee  much  of  the  country,  but  the  people
informed  us  that  what  we  did  fee  was  a  very  exaeft  fpecimen
of  the  reft.


The  only  article  of  trade  in  this  ifland  is  wine,  and  the
manner  in  which  it  is  made  is  fo  Ample,  that  it  might  have
been  ufed  by  Noah,  who  is  faid  to  have  planted  the  firft
vineyard  after  the  flood:  the  grapes  are  put  into  a  fquare
wooden  veflel,  the  dimenfions  of  which  are  proportioned  to
the  fize  of  the  vineyard  to  which  it  belongs  ;  the  fervants

then,


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

then,  having  taken  off  their  dockings  and  jackets,  get  into
it,  and  with  their  feet  and  elbows,  prefs  out  as  much  of
the  juice  as  they  can :  the  flalks  are  afterwards  collected,
and  being  tied  together  with  a  rope,  are  put  under  a  fquare
piece  of  wood,  which  is  preffed  down  upon  them  by  a
lever  with  a  done  tied  to  the  end  of  it.  The  inhabitants
ha\  e  made  fo  little  improvement  in  knowlege  or  art,  that
they  have  but  very  lately  brought  all  the  fruit  of  a  vineyard
to  be  of  one  fort,  by  engrafting  their  vines:  there  feems  to
be  in  mind  as  tlieie  is  in  matter,  a  kind  of  vis  inertias^  which
refills  the  firft  impulfe  to  change.  He  who  propofes  to  affift
the  artificer  or  the  hufbandman  by  a  new  application  of  the
principles  of  philofophy,  or  the  powers  of  mechanifm,  will
find,  that  his  having  hitherto  done  without  them,  will  be  a
Wronger  motive  for  continuing  to  do  without  them  Hill,  than
any  advantage,  however  manifefl  and  confiderable,  for
adopting  the  improvement.  Wherever  there  is  ignorance
there  is  prejudice;  and  the  common  people  of  all  nations
are,  with  refpecT  to  improvements,  like  the  parifh  poor  of
England  with  refpedt  to  a  maintenance,  for  whom  the  law
muil  not  only  make  a  provifion,  but  compel  them  to  accept
it,  or  elfe  they  will  be  ff ill  found  begging  in  the  Erects.  It
was  therefore  with  great  difficulty  that  the  people  of  Madeira
were  perfuaded  to  engraft  their  vines,  and  fome  of  them  Eill
obEinately  refufe  to  adopt  the  pradlice,  though  a  whole  vin¬
tage  is  very  often  fpoiled  by  the  number  of  bad  grapes
which  are  mixed  in  the  vat,  and  which  they  will  not  throw
out,  becaufe  they  increafe  the  quantity  of  the  wine  :  an
inEance  of  the  force  of  habit,  which  is  the  more  extraor¬
dinary,  as  they  have  adopted  the  practice  of  engrafting  with
refpeel  to  their  chefnut  trees,  an  objecT  of  much  lefs  impor¬
tance,  which,  however,  are  thus  brought  to  bear  fooner
than  they  would  otherwife  have  done.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


7


We  faw  no  wheel- carriages  of  any  fort  in  the  place,  which  1768.

1  •  «i  September.

perhaps  is  not  more  owing  to  the  want  or  ingenuity  to  invent  i_  — —
them,  than  to  the  want  of  induftry  to  mend  the  roads,  which,
at  prefent,  it  is  impoffible  that  any  wheel-carriage  fhould
pafs :  the  inhabitants  have  horfes  and  mules  indeed,  excel¬
lently  adapted  to  fuch  ways ;  but  their  wine  is,  notwith-
ftanding,  brought  to  town  from  the  vineyards  where  it  is
made,  in  veflels  of  goat-fkins,  which  are  carried  by  men
upon  their  heads.  The  only  imitation  of  a  carriage  among
thefe  people  is  a  board,  made  fomewhat  hollow  in  the  mid¬
dle,  to  one  end  of  which  a  pole  is  tied,  . by  a  ftrap  of  whit-
leather:  this  wretched  fledge  approaches  about  as  near  to
an  Englifh  cart,  as  an  Indian  canoe  to  a  fhip’s  long-boat ;
and  even  this  would  probably  never  have  been  thought  of,
if  the  Englifh  had  not  introduced  wine  veflels  which  are
too  big  to  be  carried  by  hand,  and  which,  therefore,  are
dragged  about  the  town  upon  thefe  machines.

One  reafon,  perhaps,  why  art  and  induflry  have  done  fo
little  for  Madeira  is.  Nature’s  having  done  fo  much.  The
foil  is  very  rich,  and  there  is  fuch  a  difference  of  climate
between  the  plains  and  the  hills,  that  there  is  fcarcely  a
Angle  objecT  of  luxury  that  grows  either  in  Europe  or  the
Indies,  that  might  not  be  produced  here.  When  we  went
to  vifit  Dr.  Heberden,  who  lives  upon  a  conflderable  afcent,
about  two  miles  from  town,  we  left  the  thermometer  at  74,.
and  when  we  arrived  at  his  houfe,  we  found  it  at  66.  The
hills  produce,  almofl  fpontaneoufly,  walnuts,  chefnuts,  and
apples  in  great  abundance;  and  in  the  town  there  are  many
plants  which  are  the  natives  both  of  the  Eaft  and  Weft  In¬
dies,  particularly  the  banana,  the  guava,  the.  pine-apple  or
anana,  and  the  mango,  which  flourifli  almofl  without  cul¬
ture.  The  corn  of  this  country  is  of  a  moft  excellent  qua¬
lity,  large  grained  and  very  fine,  and  the  ifland  would  produce


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


i768-  it  in  great  plenty;  yet  mod  of  what  is  confirmed  by  the  in-

September.  ,  ,  .  .  J

v — v - >  habitants  is  imported.  The  mutton,  pork,  and  beef  are  alfo

very  good  ;  the  beef  in  particular,  which  we  took  on  board
here,  was  univerfally  allowed  to  be  fcarcely  inferior  to  out-
own  ;  the  lean  part  was  very  like  it,  both  in  colour  and  grain,
though  the  beads  are  much  fmaller,  but  the  fat  is  as  white
as  the  fat  of  mutton.

The  town  of  Funchiale  derives  its  name  from  Funcho,  the
Portuguefe  name  for  fennel,  which  grows  in  great  plenty
upon  the  neighbouring  rocks,  and,  by  the  obfervation  of
Dr.  Heberden,  lies  in  the  latitude  of  32 °  33"  33"  N.  and  Ion-
gitude  160  49' W.  It  is  fituated  in  the  bottom  of  a  bay,  and
though  larger  than  the  extent  of  the  ifland  feems  to  deferve,
is  very  ill  built ;  the  houfes  of  the  principal  inhabitants  are
large,  thofe  of  the  common  people  are  fmall,  the  flreets  are
narrow,  and  worfe  paved  than  any  I  ever  faw.  The  churches
are  loaded  with  ornaments,  among  which  are  many  pic¬
tures,  and  images  of  favourite  faints,  but  the  pictures  are  in
general  wretchedly  painted,  and  the  faints  are  drelfed  in
laced  clothes.  Some  of  the  convents  are  in  a  better  tafte,
efpecially  that  of  the  Francifcans,  which  is  plain,  firnple,
and  neat  in  the  higheft  degree.  The  infirmary  in  particular
drew  our  attention  as  a  model  which  might  be  adopted  in
other  countries  with  great  advantage.  It  confifts  of  a  long
room,  on  one  fide  of  which  are  the  windows,  and  an  altar
for  the  convenience  of  adminiflering  the  facrament  to  the
lick  :  the  other  fide  is  divided  into  wards,  each  of  which  is
jufl  big  enough  to  contain  a  bed,  and  neatly  lined  with
gally-tiles  ;  behind  thefe  wards,  and  parallel  to  the  room  in
which  they  Hand,  there  runs  a  long  gallery,  with  which
each  ward  communicates  by  a  door,  fo  that  the  lick  may  be
feparately  fupplied  with  whatever  they  want  without  dis¬
turbing  their  neighbours.  In  this  convent  there  is  alfo  a

Singular

\  ,  '  v  '


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


9


fingular  curiofity  of  another  kind  ;  a  fmall  chapel,  the  whole  U68*
lining  of  which,  both  fides  and  ceiling,  is  compofed  of  hu-  ^

man  fculls  and  thigh  bones  ;  the  thigh  bones  are  laid  acrofs
each  other,  and  a  fcull  is  placed  in  each  of  the  four  angles*

Among  the  fculls  one  is  very  remarkable ;  the  upper  and  the
lower  jaw,  on  one  fide,  perfectly  and  firmly  cohere ;  how'
the  offification  which  unites  them  was  formed,  it  is  not
perhaps  very  eafy  to  conceive,  but  it  is  certain  that  the  pa¬
tient  mull  have  lived  fome  time  without  opening  his  mouth.:
what  nourifhment  he  received  was  conveyed  through  a  hole
which  we  difcovered  to  have  been  made  on  the  other  fide,  __
by  forcing  out  fome  of  the  teeth,  in  doing  which  the  jaw
alfo  feems  to  have  been  injured.

We  vifited  the  good  Fathers  of  this  convent  on  a  Thurfday
evening,  juft  before  fupper-time,  and  they  received  us  with
great  politenefs ;  “  We  will  not  afk  you,  faid  they,  to  fup
44  with  us,  becaufe  we  are  not  prepared,  but  if  you  will
“  come  to-morrow,  though  it  is  a  fall  with  us,  we  will  have
64  a  turkey  roafled  for  you.”  This  invitation,  which  fliewed
a  liberality  of  fentiment  not  to  have  been  expedled  in  a  con¬
vent  of  Portuguefe  Friars  at  this  place,  gratified  us  much,
though  it  was  not  in  our  power  to  accept  it.

We  vifited  alfo  a  convent  of  nuns,  dedicated  to  Santa  Clara ,
and  the  Ladies  did  us  the  honour  to  exprefs  a  particular
pieafure  in  feeing  us  there :  they  had  heard  that  there  were  '
great  philofophers  among  us,  and  not  at  all  knowing  what
were  the  objects  of  philofophical  knowleg.e,  they  afked  us
feveral  queftions  that  were  abfurd  and  extravagant  in  the
highefl  degree  ;  one  was,  when  it  would  thunder  ;  and  ano¬
ther,  whether  a  fpring  of  frefh  water  was  to  be  found  any
where  within  the  walls  of  their  convent,  of  which  it  feems
they  were  in  great  want.  It  will  naturally  be  fuppofed  that
cur  anfwers  to  fuch  quefiions  were  neither  fatisfa<5lory  to

Vol.IL  C  the


10


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

pternber.  nor>  i n  their  eftimation,  honourable  to  us ;  yet

-v — '  their  difappointment  did  not  in  the  lead:  leflen  their  civility,
and  they  talked,  without  ceafing,  during  the  whole  of  our
vifit,  which  laded  about  half  an  hour.

The  hills  of  this  country  are  very  high;  the  highefl,  Pico
Rui\o,  riles  5,068  feet,  near  an  Englifh.  mile,  perpendicu¬
larly  from  its  bafe,  which  is  much  higher  than  any  land
that  has  been  meafured  in  Great  Britain.  The  fides  of  thefe
hills  are  covered  with  vines  to  a  certain  height,  above  which
iheie  aie  woods  of  chefnut  and  pine  of  immenfe  extent,
and  above  them  forefts  of  wild  timber  of  various  kinds  not
known  in  Europe;  particularly  two,  called  by  the  Portuguese
Mirmulano  and  Paobranco ,  the  leaves  of  both  which,  particu¬
larly  the  Paobranco ,  are  fo  beautiful,  that  thefe  trees  would
be  a  great  ornament  to  the  gardens  of  Europe.

The  number  of  inhabitants  in  this  ifland  is  fuppofed  to  be
about  00,000,  and  the  cuftom-houfe  duties  produce  a  reve¬
nue  to  the  king  of  Portugal  of  20,000  pounds  a-year,  clear
of  all  expences,  which  might  eaflly  be  doubled  by  the  pro-
du6t  of  the  ifland,  excluflve  of  the  vines,  if  advantage  was
taken  of  the  excellence  of  the  climate,  and  the  amazing
fertility  of  the  foil;  but  this  object  is  utterly  neglected  by
the  Portuguefe.  In  the  trade  of  the  inhabitants  of  Madeira
with  Lifbon  the  balance  is  againfl  them,  fo  that  all  the  Por¬
tuguefe  money  naturally  going  thither,  the  currency  of  the
ifland  is  Spanifh ;  there  are  indeed  a  few  Portuguefe  pieces
of  copper,  but  they  are  fo  fcarce  that  we  did  not  fee  one  of
them :  the  Spanifh  coin  is  of  three  denominations  ;  Pifte-
reens,  worth  about  a  fhilling  ;  Bitts,  worth  about  fix  pence  ;
and  Half-bitts,  three  pence.

The  tides  at  this  place  flow  at  the  full  and  change  of  the
moon,  north  and  fouth;  the  fpring  tides  rife  feven  feet  per¬
pendicular,


HOUND  THE  WORLD,  xi

pendicular,  and  the  neap  tides  four.  By  Dr*  Heberden’s  ob-
fervation,  the  variation  of  the  compafs  here  is  now  15 0  30'  fep^"^ery,
Weft,  and  decreasing;  but  I  have  fome  doubt  whether  he  is
not  miftaken  with  refpedt  to  its  decreafe :  we  found  that  the
North  point  of  the  dipping  needle  belonging  to  the  Royal
Society  dipped  77 0  18"..

The  refreshments  to  be  had  here,  are  water,  wine,  fruit  of
Several  forts,  onions  in  plenty,  and  fome  Sweetmeats  ;  frefh
meat  and  poultry  are  not  to  be  had  without  leave  from  the
governor,  and  the  payment  of  a  very  high  price.

We  took  in  270  ft).  of  frefh  beef,  and  a  live  bullock,
charged  at  6131b.  3,032  gallons  of  water,  and  ten  tuns  of
wine  ;  and  in  the  night,  between  Sunday  the  18th  and  Mon-  Sunday  rg.
day  the  19th  of  September,  we  fet  fail  in  profecution  of  Monday  19,
our  voyage.

When  Funchiale  bore  North,  13  Eaft,  at  the  diftance  of  76
miles,  the  variation  appeared  by  Several  azimuths  to  be
*6°  3  o' Weft.


C  2


€  H  A  R


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


CHAP.  II.


"The  Paffage  from  Madeira  to  Rio  de  Janeiro ,  with  fome
account  of  the  Country ,  and  the  Incidents  that

happened  there •


1768.

September.

i - V - '

Wednef.  21.


Friday  23.


ON  the  2 1  ft  of  September  we  faw  the  iflands  called  the
Salvages,  to  the  north  of  the  Canaries  ;  when  the  prin¬
cipal  of  thefe  bore  S.  ~W.  at  the  diftance  of  about  5  leagues
we  found  the  variation  of  the  compafs  by  an  azimuth  to  be
1 70  50'.  I  make  thefe  illands  to  lie  in  latitude  30 0  iT  North,
and  diftant  58  leagues  from  Funchiale  in  Madeira,  in  the
direction  of  S.  16  E.

On  Friday  the  23d  we  faw  the  Peak  of  TenerifFe  bearing
W.  by  S.  4.  S.  and  found  the  variation  of  the  compafs  to  be
from  170  22'  to  160  30'.  The  height  of  this  mountain,  from
which  I  took  a  new  departure,  has  been  determined  by  Dr.
Heberden,  who  has  been  upon  it,  to  be  15,396  feet,  which
is  but  148  yards  lefs  than  three  miles,  reckoning  the  mile  at
1760  yards.  Its  appearance  at  funfet  was  very  ftriking ;
when  the  fun  was  below  the  horizon,  and  the  reft  of  the
ifland  appeared  of  a  deep  black,  the  mountain  ftill  reflected
his  rays,  and  glowed  with  a  warmth  of  colour  which  no
painting  can  exprefs.  There  is  no  eruption  of  viflble  fire
from  it,  but  a  heat  ifTues  from  the  chinks  near  the  top,  too
ftrong  to  be  borne  by  the  hand  when  it  is  held  near  them.
We  had  received  from  Dr.  Heberden,  among  other  favours,
fome  fait  which  he  collected  on  the  top  of  the  mountain,
where  it  is  found  in  large  quantities,  and  which  he  fuppofes
to  be  the  true  natrum  or  riitrum  of  the  ancients:  he  gave  us

alfo


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


alfo  fome  native  fulphur  exceedingly  pure,  which  he  had  I768*
likewife  found  upon  the  furface  in  great  plenty.

On  the  next  day,  Saturday  the  24th,  we  came  into  the  Saturday  24,
north-eaft  trade  wind,  and  on  Friday  the  30th  faw  Bona  Villa,  Friday  3o,
one  of  the  Cape  de  Verd  Iflands  j  we  ranged  the  ealt  fide  of
it,  at  the  diftance  of  three  or  four  miles  from  the  fhore,  till
we  were  obliged  to  haul  off  to  avoid  a  ledge  of  rocks  which
flretch  out  S.  W.  by  W.  from  the  body,  or  S.  E.  point  of  the
illand,  to  the  extent  of  a  league  and  an  half.  Bona  Villa  by
our  obfervation  lies  in  latitude  16  N.  and  longitude  21 0  51'

Well.

On  the  fir  11  of  October,  in  latitude  140  6'N.  and  longitude  oaober.
220  1  o'  W.  we  found  the  variation  by  a  very  good  azimuth  Saturday  u
to  be  io°37'W.  and  the  next  morning  it  appeared  to  be  io°.  Sundays
This  day  we  found  the  fhip  five  miles  a-head  of  the  log,  and
the  next  day  feven.  On  the  third,  lioillcd  out  the  boat  to  Monday  3,
difcover  whether  there  was  a  current,  and  found  one  to  the
eallward,  at  the  rate  of  three  quarters  of  a  mile  an  hour.

During  our  courfe  from  TenerifFe  to  Bona  Villa  we  faw
great  numbers  of  flying  filh,  which  from  the  cabbin  win¬
dows  appear  beautiful  beyond  imagination,  their  fides  hav¬
ing  the  colour  and  brightnefs  of  burnilhed  filver ;  when
they  are  feen  from  the  deck  they  do  not  appear  to  fo  much
advantage,  becaufe  their  backs  are  of  a  dark  colour.  We

alfo  took  a  Shark,  which  proved  to  be  the  Squalus  Chareavias

*

of  Linnscus.

Having  loll  the  trade  wind  on  the  third,  in  latitude  120  14'
and  longitude  22s  10',  the  wind  became  fomewhat  variable^
and  we  had  light  airs  and  calms  by  turns.

On  the  feventli,  Mr.  Banks  went  out  in  the  boat  and  took  Friday  7.
what  the  feamen  call  a  Portuguefe  man  of  war ;  it  is  the
Holothurla  Phyfalis  of  Linnaeus,  and  a  fpecies  of  the  Molhfca .

*  It


I


H  LIEUTENANT  COOK'S  VOYAGE

Oftober.  ^  confided  of  a  fmall  bladder  about  feven  inches  long,  very
Wvw  much  refembling  the  air-bladder  of  fifhes,  from  the  bottom
of  which  defcended  a  number  of  firings,  of  a  bright  blue
...  and  red,  fome  of  them  three  or  four  feet  in  length,  which
upon  being  touched  fling  like  a  nettle,  but  with  much
more  force.  On  the  top  of  the  bladder  is  a  membrane
which  is  ufed  as  a  fail,  and  turned  fo  as  to  receive  the  wind
which  way  foever  it  blows :  this  membrane  is  marked  in
fine  pink  coloured  veins,  and  the  animal  is  in  every  refpedt
an  object  exquifitely  curious  and  beautiful.

We  alfo  took  feveral  of  the  fhell-fifhes,  or  teflaceous  ani-
/  »aals,  which  are  always  found  floating  upon  the  water,  par¬
ticularly  the  Helix  Janthina  and  Violacea  ;  they  are  about  the
fize  of  afnail,  and  are  fupported  upon  the  furface  of  the
water  by  a  fmall  duller  of  bubbles,  which  are  filled  with  air
and  confifl  of  a  tenaceous  flimy  fubflance  that  will  not  eafily
part  with  its  contents  ;  the  animal  is  oviparous,  and  thefe
bubbles  ferve  alfo  as  a  nidus  for  its  eggs.  It  is  probable  that
it  never  goes  down  to  the  bottom,  nor  willingly  approaches
any  fhore ;  for  the  fhell  is  exceedingly  brittle,  and  that  of
few  frefh  water  fnails  is  fo  thin:  every  fhell  contains  about
a  tea-fpoonful  of  liquor,  which  it  eafily  difeharges  upon
being  touched,  and  which  is  of  the  molt  beautiful  red
purple  that  can  be  conceived.  It  dies  linen  cloth,  and  it
may  perhaps  be  worth  enquiry,  as  the  fhell  is  certainly
found  in  the  Mediterranean,  whether  it  be  not  the  Purpura  of
the  ancients.

Saturdays.  On  the  8th,  in  latitude  8°  25'  North,  longitude  22®  4  Well,
we  found  a  current  fetting  to  the  fouthward,  which  the  next
day  in  latitude  y°  pS'  longitude  220  13'fhifted  to  theN.N.W.

4  W.  at  the  rate  of  one  mile  and  a  furlong  an  hour.  The
variation  here,  by  the  mean  of  feveral  azimuths,  appeared  to
be  8°  39  Well.


3


On


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


Oil  the  tenth,  Mr.  Banks  fhot  the  black-toed  gull,  not  yet  1768.
defcribed  according  to  Linnaeus’s  fyftem  ;  he  gave  it  the  name  t
of  Larns  crepidatus :  it  is  remarkable  that  the  dung  of  this  Monday  I0*
bird  is  of  a  lively  red,  fomewhat  like  that  of  the  liquor  pro¬
cured  from  the  fhells,  only  not  fo  full ;  its  principal  food
therefore  is  probably  the  Helix  juft  mentioned.  A  current
to  the  N.W.  prevailed  more  or  lefs  till  Monday  the  24th,  Monday  24,
when  we  were  in  latitude  1 0  7'  N.  and  longitude  28°  50'.

On  the  25th,  we  crofted  the  line  with  the  ufual  ceremonies  Tuefday  25,
in  longitude  290  30',  when,  by  the  refult  of  fcvcral  very  good
azimuths,  the  variation  wyas  20  24'.

On  the  28th,  at  noon,  being  in  the  latitude  of  Ferdinand  Friday  289
Noronha ,  and,  by  the  mean  of  feveral  obfervations  by  Mr.

Green  and  myfelf,  in  longitude  320  5'  16 'W.  which  is  to  the
Weftward  of  it  by  fome  charts,  and  to  the  eaftward  by  others,
we  expe&ed  to  fee  the  iftand,  or  fome  of  the  flioals  that  are
laid  down  in  the  charts  between  it  and  the  main,  but  we
faw  neither  one  nor  the  other.

In  the  evening  of  the  29th,  we  obferved  that  luminous  Saturday  29,
appearance  of  the  fea  which  has  been  fo  often  mentioned  by
navigators,  and  of  which  fuch  various  caufes  have  been
aftigned  ;  fome  fuppofing  it  to  be  occaftoned  by  fill,  which
agitated  the  water  by  darting  at  their  prey,  fome  by  the  pu¬
trefaction  of  ftlh  and  other  marine  animals,  fome  by  eleo-
tricity,  and  others  referring  it  into  a  great  variety  of  diffe¬
rent  caufes.  It  appeared  to  emit  dailies  of  light  exactly
refembling  thofe  of  lightning,  only  not  fo  conftderable,  but
they  were  fo  frequent  that  fometimes  eight  or  ten  were
viftble  almoft  at  the  fame  moment.  We  were  of  opinion
that  they  proceeded  from  fome  luminous  animal,  and  upon
throwing  out  the  calling  net  our  opinion  was  confirmed  :  it
brought  up  a  fpccies  of  the  Medufa ,  which  when  it  came  ©n

board


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


16


J768.  board  had  the  appearance  of  metal  violently  heated,  and
— -v- — '  emitted  a  white  light :  with  tliefe  animals  were  taken  fome
very  fmall  crabs,  of  three  different  fpecies,  each  of  which
gave  as  much  light  as  a  glow-worm,  though  the  creature
was  not  fo  large  by  nine  tenths :  upon  examination  of  thefe.
animals  Mr.  Banks  had  the  fatisfaffion  to  find  that  they
were  all  entirely  new.


November.
Wednef.  2.

4


Sunday  6.


Monday  7,


Tueftlay  8.


On  Wednefday  the  2d  of  November,  about  noon,  being  in
the  latitude  of  io°  38' S.  and  longitude  320  13'  43"  W.  we
palled  the  line  in  which  the  needle  at  this  time  would  have
pointed  due  north  and  fouth,  without  any  variation  :  for  in
the  morning,  having  decreafed  gradually  in  its  deviation  for
fome  days,  it  was  no  more  than  18'  W.  and  in  the  afternoon
it  was  34'  Eaft.

On  the  6th,  being  in  latitude  19*  3' South,  longitude  350
50"  Weft,  the  colour  of  the  water  was  obferved  to  change*
upon  which  we  founded,  and  found  ground  at  the  depth  of
32  fathoms;  the  lead  was  call  three  times  within  about  four
hours,  without  a  foot  difference  in  the  depth  or  quality  of  the
bottom,  which  was  coral  rock,  fine  fand,  and  fhells  ;  we
therefore  fuppofed  that  we  had  pafted  over  the  tail  of  the
great  fhoal  which  is  laid  down  in  all  our  charts  by  the  name
of  Abrothos ,  on  which  Lord  Anfon  ftruck  foundings  in  his
paftage  outwards :  at  four  the  next  morning  we  had  no
ground  with  100  fathom.

As  feveral  articles  of  our  flock  and  provifions  now  began
to  fall  fhort,  I  determined  to  put  into  Rio  de  Janeiro,  rather
than  at  any  port  in  Brazil  or  Falkland’s  Iflands,  knowing
that  it  could  better  fupply  us  with  what  we  wanted,  and
making  no  doubt  but  that  we  fhould  be  well  received.

On  the  8th,  at  day-break,  we  faw  the  coaft  of  Brazil,  and
about  ten  o’clock  we  brought  to,  and  fpoke  with  a  fifhing-
2  boat }


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


l7


boat ;  the  people  on  board  told  us  that  the  land  which  we  i76^-
faw,  lay  to  the  fouthward  of  Sanfio  Efpirito>  but  belonged  to
the  captainfhip  of  that  place.

Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  went  on  board  this  veffel,
in  which  they  found  eleven  men,  nine  of  whom  were
Blacks  ;  they  all  fifhed  with  lines,  and  their  frelh  cargo,  the
chief  part  of  which  Mr.  Banks  bought,  confided  of  dol¬
phins,  large  pelagic  fcombers  of  two  kinds,  fea  bream,  and
fome  of  the  fifla  which  in  the  Weft  Indies  are  called  Welfh-
men.  Mr.  Banks  had  taken  Spanilh  filver  with  him,  which
he  imagined  to  be  the  currency  of  the  continent,  but  to  his
great  furprize  the  people  alked  him  for  Englilh  {hillings*
he  gave  them  two  which  he  happened  to  have  about  him,
and  it  was  not  without  fome  difpute  that  they  took  the  reft
of  the  money  in  piftereens.  Their  bufinefs  feemed  to  be  to
catch  large  fifti  at  a  good  diftance  from  the  fhore,  which
they  falted  in  bulk,  in  a  place  made  for  that  purpofe  in  the
middle  of  their  boat :  of  this  merchandize  they  had  about
two  quintals  on  board,  which  they  offered  for  about  1 6  {hil¬
lings,  and  would  probably  have  fold  for  half  the  money.

The  frefh  fifh,  which  was  bought  for  about  nineteen  {hil¬
lings  and  fix  pence,  ferved  the  whole  Blip’s  company ;  the
fait  was  not  wanted.

The  fea  provifton  of  thefe  filhermen  confifted  of  nothing
more  than  a  calk  of  water,  and  a  bag  of  Caffada  flour,
which  they  called  Farinha  de  Pao ,  or  wooden  flour,  which
indeed  is  a  name  which  very  wrell  fuits  its  tafte  and  appear¬
ance.  Their  water  cafk  was  large,  as  wide  as  their  boat,  and
exactly  fitted  a  place  that  was  made  for  it  in  the  ballaft;  it
was  impoflible  therefore  to  draw  out  any  of  its  contents  by
a  tap,  the  tides  being,  from  the  bottom  to  the  top,  wholly
inacceffible ;  neither  could  any  be  taken  out  by  dipping  a

Vol.  II.  D  veffel


i8

1768.

November.

V-— v— .


Saturday  1 2.


Sunday  13.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

veffel  in  at  the  head,  for  an  opening  fufficiently  wide  for
that  purpofe  would  have  endangered  the  lofs  of  great  part*
of  it  by  the  rolling  of  the  veffel :  their  expedient  to  get  at
their  water,  fo  fituated,  was  curious  ;  when  one  of  them
wanted  to  drink,  he  applied  to  his  neighbour,  who  accom¬
panied  him  to  the  water  cade  with  a  hollow  cane  about  three
feet  long,  which  was  open  at  both  ends  ;  this  he  thruft  into
the  cafk  through  a  fmall  hole  in  the  top,  and  then,  flopping
the  upper  end  with  the  palm  of  his  hand,  drew  it  out ;  the
preffure  of  the  air  againft  the  other  end  keeping  in  the  wa¬
ter  which  it  contained  j  to  this  end  the  perfon  who  wanted
to  drink  applied  his  mouth,  and  the  afliflantthen  taking  his
hand  from  the  other,  and  admitting  the  air  above,  the  cane
immediately  parted  with  its  contents,  which  the  drinker
drew  off  till  he  was  fatisfied.

We  flood  off  and  on  along  the  fhore  till  the  12th,  and
fucceffively  faw  a  remarkable  hill  near  Santo  Efpirito,  then
Cape  St.  Thomas,  and  then  an  ifland  juft  without  Cape  Trio,
which  in  fome  maps  is  called  the  ifland  of  Trio,  and  which
being  high,  with  a  hollow  in  the  middle,  has  the  appear¬
ance  of  two  iflands  when  feen  at  a  diftance.  On  this  day
we  flood  along  the  fhore  for  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and  at  nine  the
next  morning  made  fail  for  the  harbour.  I  then  fent  Mr.
Hicks,  my  firft  Lieutenant,  before  us  in  the  pinnace,  up  to
the  city,  to  acquaint  the  Governor,  that  we  put  in  there  to
procure  water  and  refrefliments ;  and  to  defire  the  afliftance
of  a  pilot  to  bring  us  into  proper  anchoring  ground.  I
continued  to  Hand  up  the  river,,  trufting  to  Mr.  Bellifle’s
draught,  publifhed  in  the  Petit  Atlas  maritime ,  Vol.  II.  N°  54,
which  we  found  very  good,  till  five  o’clock  in  the  even¬
ing,  expecting  the  return  of  my  Lieutenant ;  and  juft  as  I  was.
about  to  anchor,  above  the  ifland  of  Cobras,  which  lies  be¬
fore*


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


*9


fore  the  city,  the  pinnace  came  back  without  him,  having  1768.
011  board  a  Portuguefe  officer,  but  no  pilot.  The  people  in
the  boat  told  me,  that  my  Lieutenant  was  detained  by  the
Viceroy  till  I  fhould  go  on  fhore.  We  came  immediately  to
an  anchor ;  and,  a  knoll  at  the  fame  time,  a  ten  oared  boat,
full  of  foldiers,  came  up  and  kept  rowing  round  the  fhip,
without  exchanging  a  word :  in  lefs  than  a  quarter  of  an
hour,  another  boat  came  on  board  with  feveral  of  the  Vice¬
roy’s  officers,  who  alked,  Whence  we  came  ;  what  was  our
cargo  ;  the  number  of  men  and  guns  on  board  ;  the  objeCt
of  our  voyage,  and  feveral  other  quellions,  which  we  di¬
rectly  and  truly  anfwered  r  they  then  told  me,  as  a  kind  of
apology  for  detaining  my  Lieutenant,  and  putting  an  officer
on  board  my  pinnace,  that  it  was  the  invariable  cultom  of
the  place,  to  detain  the  firfl  officer  who  came  on  fhore  from
any  fhip  on  her  arrival,  till  a  boat  from  the  Viceroy  had
vifited  her,  and  to  fuffer  no  boat  to  go  either  from  or  to  a
fhip,  while  fhe  lay  there,  without  having  a  foldier  on  board.

They  faid  that  I  might  go  on  fhore  when  I  pleafed ;  but
wilhed  that  every  other  perfon  might  remain  on  board  till
the  paper  which  they  fhould  draw  up  had  been  delivered  to
the  Viceroy,  promiling  that,  immediately  upon  their  return,
the  Lieutenant  fhould  be  fent  on  board.

This  promife  was  performed ;  and,  on  the  next  morning,  Monday  I4#
the  14th,  I  went  on  fhore,  and  obtained  leave  of  the  Vice¬
roy  to  purchafe  provifions  and  refrelhments  for  the  fhip,
provided  I  would  employ  one  of  their  own  people  as  a
fadtor,  but  not  otherwife.  I  made  fome  objections  to  this,
but  he  infilled  upon  it  as  the  cultom  of  the  place.  I  objected
alfo  againll  the  putting  a  foldier  into  the  boat  every  time  fhe
went  between  the  fhip  and  the  fhore  ;  but  he  told  me,  that
this  was  done  by  the  exprefs  orders  of  his  court,  with  which  he
could  in  no  cafe  difpenfe.  I  then  requelled,  that  the  Gentlemen

D  2  whom


LIEUTENANT  COOKrs  VOYAGE


whom  I  had  on  hoard  might  refide  on  fhore  during  our  flay,
and  that  Mr.  Banks  might  go  up  the  country  to  gather  plants  ;
but  this  he  abfolutely  refufed.  I  judged  from  his  extreme
caution,  and  the  feverity  of  thefe  reflations,  that  he  fuf-
peted  we  were  come  to  trade;  I  therefore  took  fome  pains
to  convince  him  of  the  contrary.  I  told  him,  that  we  were
bound  to  the  fouthwardv  by  the  order  of  his  Britannic  Ma-
jefty,  to  obferve  a  tranfit  of  the  planet  Venus  over  the  Sun,
an  agronomical  phenomenon  of  great  importance  to  navi¬
gation.  Of  the  tranfit  of  Venus,  however,  he  could  form  no-
other  conception,  than  that  it  was  the  palling  of  the  North
Star  through  the  South  Pole  ;  for  thefe  are  the  very  words
of  his  interpreter,  who  was  a  Swede,  and  fpoke  Englifh  very
well.  I  did  nor  think  it  necefTary  to  afk  permiffion  for  the
Gentlemen  to  come  on  fhore  during  the  day,  or  that,  when
I  was  on  fhore  myfelf,  I  might  be  at  liberty,  taking  for
granted  that  nothing  was  intended  to  the  contrary ;  but  in

this  I  was  unfortunately  miflaken.  As  foon  as  I  took  leave'

•>

of  his  Excellency,  I  found  an  officer  who  had  orders  to  at¬
tend  me  wherever  I  went :  of  this  I  defired  an  explanation,
and  was  told  that  it  was  meant  as  a  compliment ;  I  earneflly
defired  to  be  excufed  from  accepting  fuch  an  honour,  but
the  good  Viceroy  would  by  no  means  fuffer  it  to  be  difpenfed
with.

With  this  officer,  therefore,  I  returned  on  board,  about:
twelve  o’clock,  where  I  was  impatiently  expected  by  Mr..
Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  who  made  no  doubt  but  that  a  fair
account  of  us  having  been  given  by  the  officers  who  had.
been  on  board  the  evening  before,  in  their  paper  called  a
Praflica,  and  every  fcruple  of  the  Viceroy  removed  in  my
conference  with  his  Excellency,  they  fhould  immediately  be
at  liberty  to  go  on  fhore,  and  difpofe  of  themfelves  as  they
pleafed.  Their  difappointment  at  receiving  my  report  may

eafily


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


21


eafily  be  conceived  ;  and  it  was  dill  increafed  by  an  account,  1768.
that  it  had  been  refolved,  not  only  to  prevent  their  redding
on  fhore,  and  going  up  the  country,  but  even  their  leaving
the  fhip ;  orders  having  been  given,  that  no  perfon  except
the  Captain,  and  fuch  common  failors  as  were  required  to
be  upon  duty,  fhould  be  permitted  to  land  ;  and  that  there
was  probably  a  particular  view  to  the  paffengers  in  this  pro¬
hibition,  as  they  were  reported  to  be  Gentlemen  fent  abroad
to  make  obfervations  and  difcoveries,  and  were  uncommonly

qualified  for  that  purpofe.  In  the  evening,  however,  Mr.

\

Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  drefied  themfelves,  and  attempted  to
go  on  fhore,  in  order  to  make  a  vifit  to  the  Viceroy  *,  but
they  were  flopped  by  the  guard-boat  which  had  come  off
with  our  pinnace,  and  which  kept  hovering  round  the  fhip
all  the  while  fhe  lay  here,  for  that  purpofe ;  the  officer  on
board  faying,  that  he  had  particular  orders,  which  he  could
not  difobey,  to  fuffer  no  paffenger,  nor  any  officer,  except
the  Captain,  to  pafs  the  boat.  After  much  expoflulation  to
no  purpofe,  they  were  obliged,  with  whatever  reludlance
and  mortification,  to  return  on  board..  I  then  went  on  fhore
myfelf,  but  found  the  Viceroy  inflexible  ;  he  had  one  an¬
swer  ready  for  every  thing  I  could  fay,  That  the  reftri<5lions
under  which  he  had  laid  us,  were  in  obedience  to  the  King,
of  Portugal’s  commands,  and  therefore  indifpenfible.

In  this  fituation  I  determined,  rather  than  be  made  a  pri~
foner  in  my  own  boat,  to  go  on  fhore  no  more ;  for  the  offi¬
cer  who,  under  pretence  of  a  compliment,  attended  me  when
I  was  affiore,  infilled  alfo  upon  going  with  me  to  and  from
the  fhip:  but  flill  imagining,,  that  the  fcrupulous  vigilance
of  the  Viceroy  mull  proceed  from  fome  miftaken  notion
about  us,  which  might  more  eafily  be  removed  by  writing
than  in  converfation,  I  drew  up  a  memorial,  and  Mr.  Banks
drew  up  another,  which  we  fent  on  fhore.  Thefe  memorials

3>  were;


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

v/erc  both  anfwered,  but  by  no  means  to  our  fatisfa&ion  ;
we  therefore  replied :  in  confequence  of  which,  feveral  other
papers  were  interchanged  between  us  and  the  Viceroy,  but
Hill  without  effetfl.  However,  as  I  thought  fome  degree  of
force,  on  the  part  of  the  Viceroy,  to  enforce  thefe  reftric-
tions,  neceflary  to  juftify  my  acquiefcence  in  them  to  the
admiralty  ;  I  gave  orders  to  my  Lieutenant,  Mr.  Hicks,  when
I  fent  him  with  our  lafl  reply  on  Sunday  the  20th,  in  the
evening,  not  to  fuffer  a  guard  to  be  put  into  his  boat.
When  the  officer  on  board  the  guard-boat  found  that  Mr.
Hicks  was  determined  to  obey  my  orders,  he  did  not  pro¬
ceed  to  force,  but  attended  him  to  the  landing-place,  and
reported  the  matter  to  the  Viceroy.  Upon  this  his  Excel¬
lency  refufed  to  receive  the  memorial,  and  ordered  Mr
Hicks  to  return  to  the  ffiip ;  when  he  came  back  to  the  boat’
he  found  that  a  guard  had  been  put  on  board  in  his  abfence,'
but  he  abfolutely  refufed  to  return  till  the  foldier  was  re¬
moved  :  the  officer  then  proceeded  to  enforce  the  Viceroy’s
orders ;  he  feized  all  the  boat’s  crew,  and  fent  them  under
an  armed  force  to  prifon,  putting  Mr.  Hicks  at  the  fame
time  into  one  of  their  own  boats,  and  fending  him  under
a  guard  back  to  the  ffiip.  As  foon  as  he  had  reported  thefe
particulars,  I  wrote  again  to  the  Viceroy,  demanding  my
boat  and  crew,  and  in  my  letter  inclofed  the  memorial  which
he  had  refilled  to  receive  from  Mr.  Hicks :  thefe  papers  I
fent  by  a  petty  officer,  that  I  might  wave  the  difpute  about
a  guard,  again!!  which  I  had  never  objected  except  when
t-ieie  was  a  commiffioned  officer  on  board  the  boat.  The
petty  officer  was  permitted  to  go  on  ffiore  with  his  guard,

would  hTrS  de,hVered  hiS  ktter’  WaS  t0ld  that  an  anfwer
would  be  fent  the  next  day.

About  eight  o’clock  this  evening  it  began  to  blow  very
Iiaid  in  fudden  gulls  from  the  South,  and  our  long-boat

1  coming


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


coming  on  board  juft  at  this  time  with  four  pipes  of  rum,  i768-
the  rope  which  was  thrown  to  her  from  the  fhip,  and  which  t  —  —  V
was  taken  hold  of  by  the  people  on  board,  unfortunately
broke,  and  the  boat,  which  had  come  to  the  fhip  before  the
wind,  went  adrift  to  windward  of  her,  with  a  Small  fkifF
of  Mr.  Banks’s  that  was  fattened  to  her  ftern.  This  was  a
great  misfortune,  as  the  pinnace  being  detained  on  fhore,
we  had  no  boat  on  board  but  a  four  oar’d  yawl :  the  yawl,
however,  was  immediately  manned  and  fent  to  her  aflift-
ance  ;  but,  notwithstanding  the  utmoft  effort  of  the  people  in
both  boats,  they  were  very  foon  out  of  fight :  far  indeed  we
could  not  fee  at  that  time  in  the  evening,  but  the  diftance
was  enough  to  convince  us  that  they  were  not  under  com¬
mand,  which  gave  us  great  uneafinefs,  as  we  knew  they
mutt  drive  dire&ly  upon  a  reef  of  rocks  which  ran  out  juft
to  leeward  of  where  we  lay :  after  waiting  fome  hours  in  the
utmoft  anxiety,  we  gave  them  over  for  loft,  but  about  three
o’clock  the  next  morning  had  the  Satisfaction  to  fee  all  the  Monday  m.
people  come  on  board  in  the  yawl.  From  them  we  learnt,
that  the  long-boat  having  filled  with  water,  they  had  brought
her  to  a  grappling  and  left  her ;  and  that,  having  fallen  in
with  the  reef  of  rocks  in  their  return  to  the  fhip,  they  had
been  obliged  to  cut  Mr.  Banks’s  little  boat  adrift.  As  the  lofs>
of  our  long-boat,  which  we  had  now  too  much  reafon  to  ap¬
prehend,  would  have  been  an  unfpeakable  disadvantage  to  us,
confidering  the  nature  of  our  expedition,  I  fent  another  let¬
ter  to  the  Viceroy,  as  foon  as  I  thought  he  could  be  feen,
acquainting  him  with  our  misfortune,  and  requefting  the
afliftance  of  a  boat  from  the  fhore  for  the  recovery  of  our
own;  I  alfo  renewed  my  demand  that  the  pinnace  and  her
crew  fhould  be  no  longer  detained :  after  fome  delay,  his
Excellency  thought  fit  to  comely  both  with  my  requeft  and
demand ;  and  the  fame  day  we  happily  recovered  both  the

longr


24


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


1768.

November.


Wednef.  23.


long-boat  and  ikiff,  with  the  rum,  but  every  thing  elfe  that
was  on  board  was  loft.  On  the  23d,  the  Viceroy,  in  his  an-
fwer  to  my  remonflrance  againft  feizing  my  men  and  de¬
taining  the  boat,  acknowledged  that  I  had  been  treated  with
fome  incivility,  but  faid  that  the  refidance  of  my  officers,  to
what  he  had  declared  to  be  the  King’s  orders,  made  it  ab-
folutely  neceffary ;  he  alfo  exprefTed  fome  doubts  whether
the  Endeavour,  confidering  her  drucdure  and  other  circum-
ftances,  was  in  the  fervice  of  his  Majefty,  though  I  had  be¬
fore  ffiewed  him  my  commiffion:  to  this  I  anfwered  in  writ¬
ing,  That,  to  remove  all  fcruples,  I  was  ready  to  produce  my
commiffion  again.  His  Excellency’s  fcruples  however  dill
remained,  and  in  his  reply  to  my  letter  he  not  only  exprefTed
them  in  dill  plainer  terms,  but  accufed  my  people  of  fmug-
gling.  This  charge,  I  am  conddent,  was  without  the  lead
foundation  in  truth.  Mr.  Banks’s  fervants  had  indeed  found
means  to  go  on  fhore  on  the  2  2d  at  day-break,  and  day  till
it  was  dark  in  the  evening,  but  they  brought  on  board  only
plants  and  infeeds,  having  been  fent  for  no  other  purpofe.
And  I  had  the  greated  reafon  to  believe  that  not  a  dngle  ar¬
ticle  was  fmuggled  by  any  of  our  people  who  were  admitted
on  fhore,  though  many  artful  means  were  ufed  to  tempt  them
even  by  the  very  officers  that  were  under  his  Excellency’s
roof,  which  made  the  charge  dill  more  injurious  and  pro¬
voking.  I  have  indeed  fome  reafon  to  fufpedt  that  one  poor
fellow  bought  a  Tingle  bottle  of  rum  with  fome  of  the
clothes  upon  his  back ;  and  in  my  anfwer  I  requeded  of  his
Excellency,  that,  if  fuch  an  attempt  at  illicit  trade  ffiouid  be
repeated,  he  would  without  fcruple  order  the  offender  to  be
taken  into  cudody.  And  thus  ended  our  altercation,  both
by  conference  and  writing,  with  the  Viceroy  of  Rio  de
Janeiro.


A  friar


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


25


A  friar  in  the  town  having  requefled  the  aftiftancc  of  i763-
our  furgeon,  Dr.  Solander  eafdy  got  admittance  in  that  — 1

character  on  the  25th,  and  received  many  marks  of  civility  Friday  25.
from  the  people.  On  the  a6tli,  before  day- break,  Mr.  Saturday  26.
Ranks  alfo  found  means  to  elude  the  vigilance  of  the  people
in  the  guard-boat,  and  got  on  fhore  ;  he  did  not  however  go
into  the  town,  for  the  principal  objects  of  his  curiofity  were
to  be  found  in  the  fields :  to  him  alfo  the  people  behaved
with  great  civility,  many  of  them  invited  him  to  their
houfes,  and  he  bought  a  porker  and  fome  other  things  of
them  for  the  flip’s  company  ;  the  porker,  which  was  by  no
means  lean,  coft  him  eleven  fhillings,  and  he  paid  fome-
thing  lefs  than  two  for  a  Mufcovy  duck.

On  the  27th,  when  the  boats  returned  from  watering,  the  Sunday  27.
people  told  us  there  was  a  report  in  town,  that  fearch  was
making  after  fome  perfons  who  had  been  on  fhore  from  the
fliip  without  the  Viceroy’s  permiffion ;  thefe  perfons  we  con¬
jectured  to  be  Dr.  Solander  and  Mr.  Banks,  and  therefore
they  determined  to  go  on  fhore  no  more.

On  the  1  ft  of  December,  having  got  our  water  and  other  December,
neceffaries  on  board,  I  fent  to  the  Viceroy  for  a  pilot  to  carry  Ahurfday  u
us  to  fea,  who  came  off  to  us ;  but  the  wind  preventing
us  from  getting  out,  we  took  on  board  a  plentiful  fup-
ply  of  frefh  beef,  yams  and  greens  for  the  fhip’s  company.

On  the  2d,  a  Spanifh  packet  arrived,  with  letters  from  Friday 2-
Buenos  Ayres  for  Spain,  commanded  by  Don  Antonio  de
Monte  Negro  y  Velafco,  who  with  great  politenels  offered  to
take  our  letters  to  Europe  :  I  accepted  the  favour,  and  gave
him  a  packet  for  the  Secretary  of  the  Admiralty,  containing
copies  of  all  the  papers  that  had  paffed  between  me  and  the
Viceroy;  leaving  alfo  duplicates  with  the  Viceroy,  to  be  by
him  forwarded  to  Lifbon.

Eol.IL  E  ,  On


26


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1768.

December.


Monday  5,


Wedncf.  7.


On  Monday  the  5th,  it  being  a  dead  calm,  we  weighed
anchor  and  towed  down  the  bay ;  but,  to  our  great  aftonifh-
ment,  when  we  got  abreafl  of  Santa  Cruz,  the  principal  for¬
tification,  two  fhot  were  fired  at  us.  We  immediately  ca ft
anchor,  and  fent  to  the  fort  to  enquire  the  reafon  of  what
had  happened :  our  people  brought  us  word,  That  the  Com¬
mandant  had  received  no  order  from  the  Viceroy  to  let  us
pafs  ;  and  that,  without  fuch  an  order,  no  veffel  was  ever  fuf-
fered  to  go  below  the  fort.  It  was  now,  therefore,  become
neceffary  that  we  fhould  fend  to  the  Viceroy,  to  enquire  why
the  neceffary  order  had  not  been  given,  as  he  had  notice  of
our  departure,  and  had  thought  fit  to  write  me  a  polite  let¬
ter,  wifhing  me  a  good  voyage.  Our  meffenger  foon  re¬
turned  with  an  account,  that  the  order  had  been  writtea
feme  days,  but  by  an  unaccountable  negligence  not  fent.

We  did  not  get  under  fail  till  the  7th ;  and,  when  we  had
paffed  the  fort,  the  pilot  defired  to  be  difeharged.  As  foon  as
he  was  difmiffed,  we  were  left  by  our  guard-boat,  which
had  hovered  about  us  from  the  firfl  hour  of  our  being  in  this
place  to  the  laft :  and  Mr.  Banks,  having  been  prevented
from  going  afhore  at  Rio  de  Janeiro,  availed  himfelf  of  her
departure  to  examine  the  neighbouring  iflands,  where,  par¬
ticularly  on  one  in  the  mouth  of  the  harbour  called  Raza,.

he  gathered  many  fpecies  of  plants,  and  caught  a  variety  of
infedrs.

It  is  remarkable,  that,  during  the  laft  three  or  four  days  of
our  flaying  in  this  harbour,  the  air  was  loaded  with  butter¬
flies  :  they  were  chiefly  of  one  fort,  but  in  fuch  numbers
that  thoufands  were  in  view  in  every  direction,  and  the
greatefl  part  of  them  above  our  maft-head.

*  We  lay  here  from  the  14th  of  November  to  the  7th  of
December,  fomething  more  than  three  weeks,  during  which

time


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


27


time  Mr.  Monkhonfe,  our  Surgeon,  was  on  fliore  everv  clay
to  buy  our  provjfions  *,  Dr.  Solander  was  on  more  once  ;  I  ^  .-y—
was  feveral  times  on  fliore  myfelf,  and  Mr.  Banks  alfo  found
means  to  get  into  the  country,  notwithdanding  the  watch
that  was  fet  over  us.  I  {hall,  therefore,  with  the  intelligence
obtained  from  thefe  Gentlemen,  and  my  own  obfervations,
give  fome  account  of  the  town,  and  the  country  adjacent.

Bio  de  Janeiro,  or  the  river  of  Januarius,  was  probably  fo
called  from  its  having  been  difcovered  on  the  fead-day  of
that  faint ;  and  the  town,  which  is  the  capital  of  the  Portu-
guefe  dominions  in  America,  derives  its  name  from  the
river,  which  indeed  is  rather  an  arm  of  the  fea,  for  it  did
not  appear  to  receive  any  confiderable  dream  of  frefh  water:
it  {lands  on  a  plain,  clofe  to  the  fhorc,  on  the  wed  fide  of  the
bay,  at  the  foot  of  feveral  high  mountains  which  rife  be¬
hind  it.  It  is  neither  ill  defigned  nor  ill  built ;  the  houfes,
in  general,  are  of  done,  and  two  dories  high;  every  houfe
having,  after  the  manner  of  the  Portuguefe,  a  little  balcony
before  its  windows,  and  a  lattice  of  wood  before  the  balcony.

I  computed  its  circuit  to  be  about  three  miles ;  for  it  appears
to  be  equal  in  dze  to  the  larged  country  towns  in  England,

Bridol  and  Liverpool  not  excepted  ;  the  dreets  are  draiglir,
and  of  a  convenient  breadth,  in  ter  feeding  each  other  at  right
angles  ;  the  greater  part,  however,  lie  in  a  line  with  the  cita¬
del,  called  St.  Sebadian,  which  dands  on  the  top  of  a  hill
that  commands  the  town.

It  is  {'applied  with  water  from  the  neighbouring  hills,  by
an  aqueduct,  which  is  raifed  upon  two  dories  of  arches,  and
is  laid  in  fome  places  to  be  at  a  great  height  from  the
ground,  from  which  the  water  is  conveyed  by  pipes  into  a
fountain  in  the  great  fquare  that  exactly  fronts  the  Vice-
joy’s  palace.  At  this  fountain  great  numbers  of  people  are

E  2


con-


J


28

1 768.

December,

v- — ^


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

continually  waiting  for  their  turn  to  draw  water;  and  the
foldiers,  who  are  polled  at  the  Governor’s  door,  find  it  very
difficult  to  maintain  any  regularity  among  them.  The  water
at  this  fountain  however  is  fo  bad,  that  we,  who  had  been
two  months  at  fea,  confined  to  that  in  our  calks,  which  was
almolt  always  foul,  could  not  drink  it  with  pleafure.  Water
of  a  better  quality  is  laid  into  fome  other  part  of  the  town,
but  I  could  not  learn  by  what  means.

The  churches  are  very  fine,  and  there  is  more  religious
parade  in  this  place  than  in  any  of  the  Popilh  countries  in
Europe :  there  is  a  proceffion  of  fome  parilh  every  day,  with
various  infignia,  all  fplendid  and  coltly  in  the  highelt  de¬
gree  :  they  beg  money,  and  fay  prayers  in  great  form,,  at  the
corner  of  every  ftreet.

While  we  lay  here,  one  of  the  churches  was  rebuilding ;
and  to  defray  the  expence,  the  parilh  to  which  it  belonged
had  leave  to  beg  in  proceffion  through  the  whole  city  once  a
week,  by  which  very  confiderable  fums  were  collected.  At
this  ceremony,  which  was  performed  by  night,  all  the  boys

#

of  a  certain  age  were  obliged  to  affift,  the  fons  of  Gentlemen
not  being  excufed.  Each  of  thefe  boys  was  drefTed  in  a  black
caffock,  with  a  fiiort  red  cloak,  hanging  about  as  low  as  the
waift,  and  carried  in  his  hand  a  pole  about  fix  or  feven  feet
long,  at  the  end  of  which  was  tied  a  lantern :  the  number
of  lanterns  was  generally  above  two  hundred,  and  the  light
they  gave  was  fo  great,  that  the  people  who  faw  it  from  the
cabbin  windows  thought  the  town  had  been  on  fire.

The  inhabitants,  however,  may  pay  their  devotions  at  the
fhrine  of  any  faint  in  the  calendar,  without  waiting  till  there
is  a  proceffion  ;  for  before  almoft  every  houfe  there  is  a  little
cupboard,  furnifhed  with  a  glafs  window,  in  which  one  of
thefe  tutelary  powers  is  waiting  to  be  gracious ;  and  to  pre¬
vent


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


*9


vent  his-being  out  of  mind,  by  being  out  of  fight,  a  lamp  is
kept  confiantly  burning  before  the  window  of  his  taber¬
nacle  in  the  night.  The  people  indeed  are  by  no  means  re-
mifs  in  their  devotions,  for  before  thefe  faints  they  pray  and
fing  hymns  with  fuch  vehemence,  that  in  the  night  they
were  very  diftindtly  heard  on  board  the  fhip,  though  fhe  lay  •
at  the  diftance  of  at  leaf:  half  a  mile  from  the  town.


1768.

December


The  government  here,  as  to  its  form,  is  mixed  ;  it  is  not-
withfianding  very  defpotic  in  fa£t.  It  confifts  of  the  Viceroy,
the  Governor  of  the  town,  and  a  council,  the  number  of
which  I  could  not  learn :  without  the  confent  of  this  coun¬
cil,  in  which  the  Viceroy  has  a  calling  vote,  no  judicial  aft
fhould  be  performed ;  yet  both  the  Viceroy  and  Governor
frequently  commit  perfons  to  prifon  at  their  own  pleafure,
and  fometimes  fend  them  to  Lifbon,  without  acquainting
their  friends  or  family  with  what  is  laid  to  their  charge,  or
where  they  may  be  found.

To  refrain  the  people  from  travelling  into  the  country,
and  getting  into  any  diftrift  where  gold  or  diamonds  may
be  found,  of  both  which  there  is  much  more  than  the  go¬
vernment  can  otherwife  fecure,  certain  bounds  are  preferibed
them,  at  the  diferetion  of  the  Viceroy,  fometimes  at  a  few,
and  fometimes  at  many  miles  diftance  from  the  city.  On
the  verge  of  thefe  limits  a  guard  confiantly  patroles,  and
whoever  is  found  beyond  it,  is  immediately  feized  and
thrown  into  prifon  :  and  if  a  man  is,  upon  any  pretence,
taken  up  by  the  guard  within  the  limits,  he  will  be  fent  to
prifon,  tho’  it  fihould  appear  that  he  did  not  know  their  extent,.

The  inhabitants,  which  are  very  numerous,  confift  of
Portuguefe,  Negroes,  and  Indians,  the  original  natives  of  the
country.  The  townfhip  of  Rio,  which,  as  I  was  told,  is  but
a  fmall  part  of  the  Capitanea,  or  province,  is  faid  to  contain


37,000


3°  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

December.  57’000  White  Perfons>  and  ^9,000  Blacks,  many  of  whom
w  v  t  are  free ;  making  together  666»ooo,  in  the  proportion  of

feventeen  to  one.  The  Indians,  who  are  employed  to  do  the
Kings  woik  in  this  neighbourhood,  can  fcarcely  be  confi-
dered  as  inhabitants ;  their  refidence  is  at  a  diflance,  from
whence  they  come  by  turns  to  their  talk,  which  they  are
obliged  to  perform  for  a  fmali  pay.  The  guard-boat  was
conflantly  rowed  by  thefe  people,  who  are  of  a  light  copper
colour,  and  have  long  black  hair.

1  he  militaiy  ellablifhment  here  confifls  of  twelve  regi¬
ments  of  regular  troops,  fix  of  which  are  Portuguefe  and  fix
Creoles ;  and  twelve  other  regiments  of  provincial  militia.
Po  the  lcgulai  s  the  inhabitants  behave  with  the  utmofl  hu¬
mility  and  fubmiffion ;  and  I  was  told,  that  if  any  of  them
fhould  neglect  to  take  off  his  hat  upon  meeting  an  officer,
he  would  immediately  be  knocked  down.  Thefe  haughty
feverities  render  the  people  extremely  civil  to  any  fir  anger
who  has  the  appearance  of  a  Gentleman.  But  the  fubordi-
nation  of  the  officers  themfelves  to  the  Viceroy  is  enforced
with  circumflances  ccjually  mortifying,  for  they  are  obliged
to  attend  in  his  hall  three  times  every  day  to  afk  his  com¬
mands :  the  anfwer  conftantly  is,  “  There  is  nothing  new.”

I  have  been  told,  that  this  fervile  attendance  is  exacted  to  pre¬
vent  their  going  into  the  country  j  and  if  fo,  it  effectually
anfwers  the  purpofe.

It  is,  I  believe,  univerfally  allowed,  that  the  women,  both
of  the  Spanifh  and  Portuguefe  fettlements  in  South  Ame¬
rica,  make  lefs  difficulty  of  granting  perfonal  favours,  than
thofe  of  any  other  civilized  country  in  the  world.  Of  the
Ladies  of  this  town  fome  have  formed  fo  unfavourable  an
opinion  as  to  declare,  that  they  did  not  believe  there  was  a
model!  one  among  them.  This  cenfure  is  certainly  too  ge¬
neral  ;

?


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


3*


neral;  but  what  Dr.  Solander  faw  of  them  when  he  was  on  1768.
{hore,  gave  him  no  very  exalted  idea  of  their  chaftity :  he  «  ecemberk
told  me,  that  as  foon  as  it  was  dark,  one  or  more  of  them
appeared  in  every  window,  and  diftinguifhed  thofe  whom
they  liked,  among  the  Gentlemen  that  walked  pall  them,
by  giving  them  nofegays  ;  that  he,  and  two  Gentlemen  who
were  with  him,  received  fo  many  of  thefe  favours,  that,  at
the  end  of  their  walk,  which  was  not  a  long  one,'  they  threw
whole  hatfuls  of  them  away.  Great  allowance  mull  cer¬
tainly  be  made  for  local  cuftoms ;  that  which  in  one  coun¬
try  would  be  an  indecent  familiarity,  is  a  mere  ad  of  gene¬
ral  courtefy  in  another  ;  of  the  fad,  therefore,  which  I  have
related,  I  {hall  fay  nothing,  but  that  I  am  confident  it  is
true.

Neither  will  I  take  upon  me  to  affirm,  that  murders  are
frequently  committed  here ;  but  the  churches  afford  an  afy-
lum  to  the  criminal :  and  as  our  cockfwain  was  one  day
looking  at  two  men,  who  appeared  to  be  talking  together  in
a  friendly  manner,  one  of  them  fuddenly  drew  a  knife  and
{tabbed  the  other ;  who  not  infiantly  falling,  the  murderer
withdrew  the  weapon,  and  {tabbed  him  a  fecond  time.  He
then  ran  away,  and  was  purfued  by  fome  Negroes  who  were
alfo  witneffes  of  the  fad  5  but  whether  he  efcaped  or  was
taken  I  never  heard.

The  country,  at  a  fmall  difiance  round  the  town,  which
is  all  that  any  of  us  faw,  is  beautiful  in  the  higheft  degree;
the  wildeft  fpots  being  varied  with  a  greater  luxuriance  of
flowers,  both  as  to  number  and  beauty,  than  the  belt  gardens
in  England.

Upon  the  trees  and  bufhes  fat  an  almofi  endlefs  variety  of
birds,  efpecially  fmall  ones,  many  of  them  covered  with  the
moil  elegant  plumage ;  among  which  were  the  humming¬
bird-


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1768.  bird.  Of  inlefts  too  there  was  a  great  variety,  and' fome  of

December.  '

them  very  beautiful ;  but  they  were  much  more  nimble  than
thofe  of  Europe,  efpecially  the  butterflies,  moft  of  which  flew
near  the  tops  of  the  trees,  and  were  therefore  very  difficult
to  be  caught,  except  when  the  fea  breeze  blew  frefh,  which
kept  them  nearer  to  the  ground.

The  banks  of  the  fea,  and  of  the  fmall  brooks  which
water  this  part  of  the  country,  are  almoft  covered  with  the
fmall  crabs  called  Cancer  vocans  ;  fome  of  thefe  had  one  of  the
claws,  called  by  naturalifls  the  hand,  very  large  ;  others  had
them  both  remarkably  fmall,  and  of  equal  fize,  a  difference
which  is  faid  to  diilinguifh  the  fexes,  that  with  the  large  claw
being  the  male.

There  is  the  appearance  of  but  little  cultivation  ;  the
greater  part  of  the  land  is  wholly  uncultivated,  and  very
little  care  and  labour  feem  to  have  been  bellowed  upon  the
reft  ;  there  are  indeed  little  patches  or  gardens,  in  which
many  kinds  of  European  garden  fluff  are  produced,  particu¬
larly  cabbages,  peas,  beans,  kidney-beans,  turnips,  and  white
radifhes,  but  all  much  inferior  to  our  own:  watermelons
and  pine  apples  are  alfo  produced  in  thefe  fpots,  and  they
are  the  only  fruits  that  we  faw  cultivated,  though  the  coun¬
try  produces  mufk  melons,  oranges,  limes,  lemons,  fweet
lemons,  citrons,  plantains,  bananas,  mangos,  mamane  ap¬
ples,  acajou  or  cafliou  apples  and  nuts  ;  jamboira  of  two
kinds,  one  of  which  bears  a  fmall  black  fruit;  cocoa  nuts,
mangos,  palm  nuts  of  two  kinds,  one  long,  the  other  round;
and  palm  berries,  all  which  were  in  feafon  while  we  were
there.

Of  thefe  fruits  the  water  melons  and  oranges  are  the  bed
in  their  kind;  the  pine  apples  are  much  inferior  to  thofe
that  I  have  eaten  in  England  3  they  are  indeed  more  juicy

and


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


and  fweet,  but  have  no  flavour ;  I  believe  them  to  be  natives
of  this  country,  though  we  heard  of  none  that  at  this  time
grow  wild  ;  they  have,  however,  very  little  care  bellowed
upon  them,  the  plants  being  fet  between  beds  of  any  kind
of  garden-fluff,  and  fuffered  to  take  the  chance  of  the  feafon.
The  melons  are  ftill  worfe,  at  leafl  thofe  that  we  tailed,
which  were;  mealy  and  infipid ;  but  the  water  melons  are
excellent ;  they  have  a  flavour,  at  leafl  a  degree  of  acidity,
which  ours  have  not.  We  faw  alfo  feveral  fpecies  of  the
prickle  pear,  and  fome  European  fruits,  particularly  the
apple  and  peach,  both  which  were  very  mealy  and  inlipid.
In  thefe  gardens  alfo  grow  yams,  and  mandihoca,  which
in  the  Well  Indies  is  called  Caflada  or  Caflava,  and  to  the
flour  of  which  the  people  here,  as  I  have  before  obferved,
give  the  name  of  Farinha  de  Pao ,  which  may  not  improperly
be  tranllated,  Powder  of  poll.  The  foil,  though  it  produces
tobacco  and  fugar,  will  not  produce  bread-corn ;  fo  that  the
people  here  have  no  wheat-flour,  but  what  is  brought  from
Portugal,  and  fold  at  the  rate  of  a  fhilling  a  pound,  though
it  is  generally  fpoiled  by  being  heated  in  its  pallage.  Mr.
Banks  is  of  opinion,  that  all  the  products  of  our  Well  Indian
iflands  would  grow  here ;  notwithftanding  which,  the  inha¬
bitants  import  their  coffee  and  chocolate  from  Lilbon.

Moll  of  the  land,  as  far  as  we  faw  of  the  country,  is  laid
down  in  grafs,  upon  which  cattle  are  paflured  in  great
plenty ;  but  they  are  fo  lean,  that  an  Englifhman  will  fcarce-ly
eat  of  their  flelh :  the  herbage  of  thefe  paftures  conlifts  prin¬
cipally  of  crefles,  and  confequently  is  fo  fhort,  that  though
it  may  afford  a  bite  for  horfes  and  fheep,  it  can  fcarcely  be
grazed  by  homed  cattle  in  a  fuflicient  quantity  to  keep  them
alive.


1768.

December.


This  country  may  poflibly  produce  many  valuable  drugs  j
hut  we  could  not  find  any  in  the  apothecaries  fhops,  except
Vol.  II.  F  pareira


34


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1768.

December.


c


pareira  brava,  and  balfarti  capivi ;  both  of  which  were  ex¬
cellent  in  their  kind,  and  fold  at  a  very  low  price.  The  drug
trade  is  probably  carried  on  to  the  northward,  as  well  as  that
of  the  dying  woods,  for  we  could  get  no  intelligence  of
cither  of  them  here.

As  to  manufactures,  we  neither  faw  nor  heard  of  any,  ex¬
cept  that  of  cotton  hammocks,  in  which  people  are  carried
about  here,  as  they  are  with  us  in  fedan  chairs  j  and  thefe
are  principally,  if  not  wholly,  fabricated  by  the  Indians.

The  riches  of  the  place  conflfls  chiefly  in  the  mines,  which
we  fuppofed  to  lie  far  up  the  country,  though  we  could
never  learn  where,  or  at  what  diflance ;  for  the  fituation  is
concealed  as  much  as  poflible,  and  troops  are  continually
employed  in  guarding  the  roads  that  lead  to  them :  it  is  al-
moft  impoflible  for  any  man  to  get  a  fight  of  them,  except
thofe  who  are  employed  there  ;  and  indeed  the  ftrongeft  cu-
riofity  would  fcarcely  induce  any  man  to  attempt  it,  for
whoever  is  found  upon  the  road  to  them,  if  he  cannot  give
undeniable  evidence  of  his  having  buflnefs  there,  is  imme¬
diately  hanged  up  upon  the  next  tree..

Much  gold  is  certainly  brought  from  thefe  mines,  but  at  an
expence  of  life,  that  mull  flrike  every  man,  to  whom  cuftom
has  not  made  it  familiar,  with  horror.  No  lefs  than  forty
thoufand  negroes  are  annually  imported,  on  the  king’s  ac¬
count,  to  dig  the  mines ;  and  we  were  credibly  informed,
that,  the  laft  year  but  one  before  we  arrived  here,  this  num¬
ber  fell  fo  fhort,  probably  from  fome  epidemic  difeafe,  that
twenty  thoufand  more  were  draughted  from  the  town  of
Rio.  .  .  :  ...  J  j

Precious  flones  are  alfo  found  here  in  fuch  plenty,  that  a
certain  quantity  only  is  allowed  to  be  collected  in  a  year ;
to  colled  this  quantity,  a  number  of  people  are  fent  into  the

country


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


3S


country  where  they  are  found,  and  when  it  is  got  together,  *768*

J  .  .  December,

which  fometimes  happens  in  a  month,  lometimes  in  lefs  and  < - v —

fometimes  in  more,  they  return  ;  and  after  that,  whoever  is
found  in  thefe  precious  didridfs,  on  any  pretence,  before  the
next  year,  is  immediately  put  to  death.

The  jewels  found  here,  are  diamonds,  topazes  of  feveral
kinds,  and  amethyds.  We  did  not  fee  any  of  the  diamonds,
but  were  informed  that  the  Viceroy  had  a  large  quantity  by
him,  which  he  would  fell  on  the  King  of  Portugal's  account,
but  not  at  a  lefs  price  than  they  are  fold  for  in  Europe.  Mr.

Banks  bought  a  few  topazes  and  amethyfts  as  fpecimens  :  of
the  topazes  there  are  three  forts,  of  very  different  value,
which  are  diftinguifhed  here  by  the  names  of  Pinga  d’agua
qualidade  primeiro,  Pinga  d’agua  qualidade  fecundo,  and
Chryftallos  armerillos  :  they  are  fold,  large  and  final  1,  good
and  bad  together,  by  odtavos,  or  the  eighth  part  of  an  ounce;
the  belt  at  4s.  9d.  All  dealing,  however,  in  thefe  floncs  is
prohibited  to  the  fubjedt,  under  the  fevered  penalties :  there
were  jewellers  here  formerly,  who  purchafed  and  worked
them  on  their  own  account ;  but  about  fourteen  months  be¬
fore  our  arrival,  orders  came  from  the  court  of  Portugal,
that  no  more  dones  fhould  be  wrought  here,  except  on  the
King’s  account:  the  jewellers  were  ordered  to  bring  all  their
tools  to  the  Viceroy,  and  left  without  any  means  of  fubfid-
ence.  The  perfons  employed  here. to  work  dones  for  the  King
are  daves.

The  coin  that  is  current  here,  is  either  that  of  Portugal,
confiding  chiefly  of  thirty-fix  fhillings  pieces ;  or  pieces,  both
of  gold  and  diver,  which  are  druck  at  this  place :  the  pieces
of  fiver,  which  are  very  much  debafed,  are  called  Petacks,
and  are  of  different  value,  and  eafly  didinguidied  by  the
number  of  rees  that  is  marked  on  the  outdde,  Here  is  alfo

E  ?  a  copper


\  '

LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


1768.

December.

V - * - ->


a  copper  coin,  like  that  in  Portugal,  of  five  and  ten  ree
pieces.  A  ree  is  a  nominal  coin  of  Portugal,  ten  of  which
are  equal  in  value  to  about  three  farthings  fierling.

The  harbour  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  is  fituated  W.  byN.  18
leagues  from  Cape  Trio,  and  may  be  known  by  a  remark¬
able  hill,  in  the  form  of  a  fugar-loaf,  at  the  well:  point  of  the
bay;  but  as  all  the  coaft  is  very  high,  and  rifes  in  many
peaks,  the  entrance  of  this  harbour  may  be  more  certainly
diftinguifhed  by  the  iflands  that  lie  before  it ;  one  of  which,
called  Rodonda,  is  high  and  round  like  a  hay-flack,  and  lies
at  the  difiance  of  two  leagues  and  an  half  from  the  entrance
of  the  bay,  in  the  direction  of  S.  by  W. ;  but  the  firfi  iflands
which  are  met  with,  coming  from  the  eafi,  or  Cape  Trio,  are
two  that  have  a  rocky  appearance,  lying  near  to  each  other,
and  at  the  difiance  of  about  four  miles  from  the  fhore :  there
are  alfo  at  the  difiance  of  three  leagues  to  the  wefiward
of  thefe,  two  other  iflands  which  lie  near  to  each  other,  a
little  without  the  bay  on  the  eafi  fide,  and  very  near  the
fhore.  This  harbour  is  certainly  a  good  one  ;  the  entrance
indeed  is  not  wide,  but  the  fca  breeze,  which  blows  every
day  from  ten  or  twelve  o’clock  till  funfet,  makes  it  eafy  for
any  fliip  to  go  in  before  the  wind  ;  and  it  grows  wider  as
the  town  is  approached,  fo  that  abreaft  of  it  there  is  room
for  the  largeft  fleet,  in  five  or  fix  fathom  water,  with  an  oozy
bottom.  At  the  narrow  part,  the  entrance  is  defended  by  two
forts.  The  principal  is  Santa  Cruz,  which  Hands  on  the  eafi:
point  of  the  bay,  and  has  been  mentioned  before  ;  that  on
the  well  fide  is  called  fort  Lozia,  and  is  built  upon  a  rock
that  lies  clofe  to  the  main  ;  the  diftance  between  them  is
about  4  of  a  mile,  but  the  channel  is  not  quite  fo  broad,  be-
caufe  there  are  funken  rocks  which  lie  off  each  fort,  and  in
this  part  alone  there  is  danger:  the  narrownefs  of  the  chan¬
nel  caufes  the  tides,  both  flood  and  ebb,  to  run  with  confi-

derablc


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


37


derable  Rrength,  fo  that  they  cannot  be  Remmed  without  a  i768-
frelh  breeze.  The  rockynefs  of  the  bottom  makes  it  alfo  y  —  —
unfafe  to  anchor  here  ;  but  all  danger  may  be  avoided  by
keeping  in  the  middle  of  the  channel.  Within  the  entrance,
the  courfe  up  the  bay  is  firfh  N.byW.  ~  W.  and  N.N.W.
fome thing  more  than  a  league ;  this  will  bring  the  velfel  the
length  of  the  great  road ;  and  N.  W.  and  W.  N.  W.  one  league
more  will  carry  her  to  the  iHe  dos  Cobras,  which  lies  before
the  city:  fhe  Ihould  then  keep  the  north  fide  of  this  ifland
clofe  on  board,  and  anchor  above  it,  before  a  monaftery  of
Benedidtines  which  Rands  upon  a  hill  at  the  N.  W.  end  of
the  city.

The  river,  and  indeed  the  whole  coaR,  abounds  with  a
greater  variety  of  fiRi  than  we  had  ever  feen  j  a  day  feldom
palled  in  which  one  or  more  of  a  new  fpecies  were  not
brought  to  Mr.  Banks  :  the  bay  alfo  is  as  well  adapted  for
catching  thefe  fifli  as  can  be  conceived  ;  for  it  is  full  of  fmall
iilands,  between  which  there  is  fhallow  water,  and  proper
beaches  for  drawing  the  feine.  The  fea,  without  the  bay,
abounds  with  dolphins,  and  large  mackrel  of  different  kinds,
which  readily  bite  at  a  hook,  and  the  inhabitants  always  tow
one  after  their  boats  for  that  purpofe.

Though  the  climate  is  hot,  the  fituation  of  this  place  is
certainly  wholefome ;  while  we  Rayed  here  the  thermometer
never  rofe  higher  than  83,  though  we  had  frequent  rains, :
and  once  a  very  hard  gale  of  wind.

Ships  water  here  at  the  fountain  in  the  great  fquare,  though,
as  I  have  obferved,  the  water  is  not  good  ;  they  land  their
calks  upon  a  fmooth  fandy  beach,  which  is  not  more  than  a
hundred  yards  diRant  from  the  fountain,  and  upon  applica-
tion  to  the  Viceroy,  a  centinelwill  be  appointed  to  look  after

3  them.


3S  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

Bomber  antl  clear  tlle  wa7  t0  the  fountain  where  they  are  to

u— be  filled.

Upon  the  whole,  Rio  de  Janeiro  is  a  very  good  place  for
fhips  to  put  in  at  that  want  refrefhment:  the  harbour  is  fafe
and  commodious;  and  provifions,  except  wheaten  bread  and
flour,  may  be  eafily  procured :  as  a  fuccedaneum  for  bread,
there  are  yams  and  caffada  in  plenty ;  beef,  both  frefh  and
jerked,  may  be  bought  at  about  two  pence  farthing  a  pound;
though,  as  i  have  before  remarked,  it  is  very  lean.  The
people  here  jerk  their  beef  by  taking  out  the  bones,  cutting  it
into  large  but  thin  ilices,  then  curing  it  with  fait,  and  drying
it  in  the  fhade  :  it  eats  very  well,  and,  if  kept  dry,  will  re¬
main  good  a  long  time  at  fea.  Mutton  is  fcarcely  to  be
procured,  and  hogs  and  poultry  are  dear;  of  garden-fluff
and  fruit  there  is  abundance,  of  which,  however,  none  can
be  preferved  at  fea  but  the  pumpkin  ;  rum,  fugar,  and  mo-
lafies,  all  exeellent  in  their  kind,  may  be  had  at  a  reafonable
price ;  tobacco  alfo  is  cheap,  but  it  is  not  good.  Here  is  a
yard  for  building  fhipping,  and  a  fmall  hulk  to  heave  down
by  ;  for,  as  the  tide  never  rifes  above  fix  or  feven  foot,  there
is  no  other  way  of  coming  at  a  fhip’s  bottom.

When  the  boat  which  had  been  fent  on  fhore  returned,  we
hoiiled  her  on  board,  and  Rood  out  to  fea,.


CHAP.


/


01  *'  *  \


it  c  a  y  V>  v '  a  o  o  ;7  *r  h  a  m  7  ? ’  \  1

•  1

0


r  •  ..


.Hi-i  i


h


.

\

i

:  Ari  l  «l.O'r‘  ’•*•  '  n  tf'V  ‘  -

„ .  t

-  .  .

■  ■  !.'■•!  ■  ■

-

■J»j.  '!»»»*'« hit  -s:  >"ii  fifts','*  *V  ' -V  -H  :  ■  •" i:  '■■  ■"

.  •  -  •  #  ,  •  *

.

•:•  '  -i,.;,  vr:on  \ w;io . jhrf&bwKfc  ••{  ri.nt  h  ;  »


>  ^  *  :.


/  *


.

.

.

.  m  *  -  _

^  v  *“

■  '

.  .  «,  ■  -  <  » •  ' '  V  t


'


n

•  %«  *

. . »


•i


/?*  \  ,‘  <>  -  .  f  H  •  v  >  *  tf.i  /  ""  ;

f5  *  -  .  -  *8  :  *  •&*  ..  *  -  *  «  -  '


"...  >  ’*y


-  :.


.{  ,4


*  ?  .


rs-,K


*

.


'


'  •  «  .

I  f‘

~T -


Sr  '•  -v


/  *.


\


AVieiv  of  Part  of  the  EhE  .  side  of  Terra


ora


o  and-  Staten  Land  talren  .from  the  Point  B.m  the  Chart


I^ACHAUTof  the  S  E  part  of  TERRA  DEL  FUEGO't
M  •  including*  |

|ySTRAIT  LEMAIRE  and  part  of  STATENTAXDf

CaokijCp .

a  /  ^  $•  $■■  a  ir* .■£&, T '"  y


9  ^trait  ie  mate


Re  f  erene  e  s  to  the  Vie  w  s

a .  Cape  St  1>  ieejo  .

Vincent.
c.Sapar  Hoof.

A. Middle  (ape  iSdatenZand.
e .  Cape  •!? Ha/'th  olonve/v.
i.E/ttra/vee  of  Sueee/s  Bay.
tr.dVe/v  Island .

£ .  Cape  Coed  jS* : uccejs.  /‘Vi

1 :  Cape  Horn .

PlHe/'ni  i  x V  Islet  n.ls


Vatentiiie Hay  ^
C.ofGoodSiudf


incertt


^AIRe

t  Indumv


CS’fBaT't/urlom


*  a  Jlerm  i  ts  JsU

\. Hermits  Islands .
lndiarm’ volts  Isles.
11 .  Events  Isle .

1 . 2  -  3  •  Ttu'ee  H /'others


rnuiiii.iiiiiiiiiMinTTiT^


one  J>


“prTmTimiiiiMiiilTTrnp


V7*  A:  J .  £il\FO/?  tS'c


«


vt


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


39


CHAP.  III.

The  Pajfage  from  Rio  de  Janeiro  to  the  Entrance  of  the
Streight  of  Le  Maire ,  with  a  Defcription  of  fome  of

the  Inhabitants  of  'Terra  del  Fuego .

»  \

»

ON  the  gth  of  December,  we  obferved  the  fea  to  be  co-  1768.

vered  with  broad  flreaks  of  a  yellowifh  colour,  feveral  ,r>eccmbv'"
of  them  a  mile  long,  and  three  or  four  hundred  yards  wide :  Fnday  9‘
fome  of  the  water  thus  coloured  was  taken  up,  and  found  to
be  full  of  innumerable  atoms  pointed  at  the  end,  of  a  yel¬
lowifh  colour,  and  none  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  line,  or  the
fortieth  part  of  an  inch  long :  in  the  microfcope  they  ap¬
peared  to  be  Fafciculi  of  fmall  fibres  interwoven  with  each
other,  not  unlike  the  nidus  of  fome  of  the  Fhyganeas ,  called
Caddices  ;  but  whether  they  were  animal  or  vegetable  fub-
fiances,  whence  they  came,  or  for  what  they  were  defigned,
neither  Mr.  Banks  nor  Dr.  Solander  could  guefs.  The  fame
appearance  had  been  obferved  before,  when  we  firft  difco-
vered  the  continent  of  South  America.

On  the  1 1  th  we  hooked  a  fhark,  and  while  we  were  play-  Sunday  ly¬
ing  it  under  the  cabbin  window,  it  threw  out,  and  drew  in
again  feveral  times  what  appeared  to  be  its  flomach :  it
proved  to  be  a  female,  and  upon  being  opened  fix  young
ones  were  taken  out  of  it ;  five  of  them  were  alive  and  fwam*
brifkly  in  a  tub  of  water,  but  the  fixth  appeared  to  have  been
dead  fome  time.

Nothing  remarkable  happened  till  the  30th,  except  that  Friday  50,
we  prepared  for  the  bad  weather,  which  we  were  fhortly  to
expect,  by  bending  a  new  fuit  of  fails ;  but  on  this  day  we

&  ran


40


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


December  rai1  a  courfe  one  hundred  and  flxty  miles  by  the  fog,
* — -v— — 1  through  innumerable  land  infecfls  of  various  kinds,  fome
upon  the  wing,  and  more  upon  the  water,  many  of  which
were  alive  ;  they  appeared  to  be  exactly  the  fame  with  the
Carabi ,  the  Grylli ,  the  Phalanx,  Aranea ,  and  other  flies  that
are  feen  in  England,  though  at  this  time  we  could  not  be
lefs  than  thirty  leagues  from  land;  and  fome  of  thefe  infects,
particularly  the  Grylli  and  Aranea ,  never  voluntarily  leave  it
at  a  greater  diflance  than  twenty  yards.  We  judged  our-
felves  to  be  now  nearly  oppoflte  to  Baye  fans  fond ,  where  Mr.
Dairy mple  fuppofes  there  is  a  paffage  quite  through  the
continent  of  America ;  and  we  thought  from  the  infedls
that  there  might  be  at  leaft  a  very  large  river,  and  that  it
had  overflowed  its  banks.

January  °n  ^  3d  January,  1769,  being  in  latitude  470  17'  S.  and
Tuefday  3.  longitude  6 1°  29' 45"  W.  we  were  all  looking  out  for  Pepys’
ifland,  and  for  fome  time  an  appearance  was  feen  in  the  eafl
which  fo  much  refembled  land,  that  we  bore  away  fpr  it ;
and  it  was  more  than  two  hours  and  an  half  before  we  were
convinced  that  it  was  nothing  but  what  failors  call  a  Fog-
bank.

'  *  '  ’  *  *  *'  1  *  ■  1  v  ■  l  i  ,  i  1. 4 .  y  ,

The  people  now  beginning  to  complain  of  cold,  each  of
them  received  what  is  called  a  Magellanic  jacket,  and  a  pair
of  trowfers.  The  jacket  is  made  of  a  thick  woollen-fluff,
called  Fearnought ,  which  is  provided  by  the  government.  We
faw,  from  time  to  time,  a  great  number  of  penguins,  alba-
trofles,  and  fheer  waters,  feals,  whales,  and  porpoifes :  and
Wednef.  u.  on  the  nth,  having  paffed  Falkland’s  iflands,  we  difcovered
the  coafl  of  Terra  del  Fuego,  at  the  diflance  of  about  four
leagues,  extending  from  the  W.  to  S.  E.  by  S.  We  had  here
five  and  thirty  fathom,  the  ground  foft,  fmall  flate  Hones'.
As  we  ranged  along  the  fhore  to  the  S.  E.  at  the  diflance  of


two


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


two  or  three  leagues,  we  perceived  fmoke  in  fcveral  places,
which  was  made  by  the  natives,  probably  as  a  fignal,  for
they  did  not  continue  it  after  we  had  palTed  by.  This  day
we  difcovered  that  the  fliip  had  got  near  a  degree  of  longi¬
tude  to  the  weftward  of  the  log,  which,  in  this  latitude,  is
3 j  minutes  of  a  degree  on  the  equator:  probably  there  is  a
fmall  current  fetting  to  the  weftward,  which  may  be  caufed
by  the  wefterly  current  coming  round  Cape  Horn,  and
through  the  Streight  of  Le  Maire,  and  the  indraught  of  the
S freight  of  Magellan  *.

Having  continued  to  range  the  coaft,  on  the  14th  we  en-  Saturday  14.
tered  the  Streight  of  Le  Maire  ;  but  the  tide  turning  againft  streight  of
us,  drove  us  out  with  great  violence,  and  raifed  fuch  a  fea  Le  Maire‘
off  Cape  St.  Diego,  that  the  waves  had  exacftly  the  fame  ap¬
pearance  as  they  would  have  had  if  they  had  broke  over  a
ledge  of  rocks  ;  and  when  the  fhip  was  in  this  torrent,  fhe
frequently  pitched,  fo  that  the  bowfprit  was  under  water.

About  noon,  we  got  under  the  land  between  Cape  St.  Diego
and  Cape  St.  Vincent,  where  I  intended  to  have  anchored ;
but  finding  the  ground  every  where  hard  and  rocky,  and
fhallowing  from  thirty  to  twelve  fathoms,  I  fent  the  Mafter
to  examine  a  little  cove  which  lay  at  a  fmall  diftance  to  the
eaftward  of  Cape  St.  Vincent.  When  he  returned,  he  reported,
that  there  was  anchorage  in  four  fathom,  and  a  good  bot¬
tom,  clofe  to  the  eaftward  of  the  firft  bluff  point,  on  the  eaft
of  Cape  St.  Vincent,  at  the  very  entrance  of  the  cove,  to
which  I  gave  the  name  of  Vincent’s  Bay :  before  this  an-

*  The  celebrated  navigator  who  difcovered  this  Streight  was  a  native  of  Portugal,
and  his  name,  in  the  language  of  his  country,  was  Fernando  de  Magalhaens  the  Spa¬
niards  call  him  Hernando  Magalhanes ,  and  -the  French  Magellan ,  which  is  the  ortho¬
graphy  that  has  been  generally  adopted  :  a  Gentleman,  the  fifth  in  defeent  from  this
great  adventurer,  is  now  living  in  or  near  London,  and  communicated  the  true  name
©t  his  anceftor  to  Mr.  Banks,  with  a  requeft  that  it  might  be  inferted  in  this  work.

Vol.  II.  G  choring


4*


1769.

January.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


4 9

1 7^9*  choriftg  ground,  however,  lay  feveral  rocky  ledees,  that

January.  J  &  1

— /  were  covered  with  fea-weed 3  but  I  was  told  that  there  was
watmda>  I  f‘  not  lefs  than  eight  and  nine  fathom  over  all  of  them.  It
will  probably  be  thought  ftrange,  that  where  weeds,  which
grow  at  the  bottom,  appear  above  the  furface,  there  fhould
be  this  depth  of  water ;  but  the  weeds  which  grow  upon
rocky  ground  in  thefe  countries,  and  which  always  diftin-
guifh  it  from  fand  and  ooze,  are  of  an  enormous  fize.  The
leaves  are  four  foot  long,  and  fome  of  the  ftalks,  though  not
thicker  than  a  man’s  thumb,  above  one  hundred  and  twenty:
Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  examined  fome  of  them,  over
which  we  founded  and  had  fourteen  fathom,  which  is  eighty-
four  feet ;  and,  as  they  made  a  very  acute  angle  with  the
bottom,  they  were  thought  to  be  at  leaft  one  half  longer :
the  foot  ftalks  were  fwelled  into  an  air  veflel,  and  Mr.  Banks
and  Dr.  Solander  called  this  plant  Fucus  giganteus .  Upon  the
report  of  the  Mafter,  I  ftood  in  with  the  fhip  ;  but  not  truft-
ing  implicitly  to  his  intelligence,  I  continued  to  found,  and
found  but  four  fathom  upon  the  firft  ledge  that  I  went  over;
concluding,  therefore,  that  I  could  not  anchor  here  without
rilk,  I  determined  to  feek  fome  port  in  the  Streight,  where
I  might  get  on  board  fuch  wood  and  water  as  we  wanted.

Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  however,  being  very  deftrous
K>  go  on  fhore,  I  fent  a  boat  with  them  and  their  people,
while  I  kept  plying  as  near  as  poftible  with  the  fhip.

Having  been  on  fhore  four  hours,  they  returned  about
nine  in  the  evening,  with  above  an  hundred  different  plants
and  flowers,  all  of  them  wholly  unknown  to  the  botanifts
of  Europe.  They  found  the  country  about  the  bay  to  be  in
general  flat,  the  bottom  of  it  in  particular  was  a  plain,  co¬
vered  with  grafs,  which  might  eafily  have  been  made  into  a
large  quantity  of  hay  3  they  found  alfo  abundance  of  good

2  wood


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


43


wood  and  water,  and  fowl  in  great  plenty.  Among  other
things,  of  which  Nature  has  been  liberal  in  this  place,  is
Winter’s  bark,  Winter anea  aromatica ;  which  may  eafily  be
known  by  its  broad  leaf,  fhaped  like  the  laurel,  of  a  light
green  colour  without,  and  inclining  to  blue  within :  the  bark
is  eafily  dripped  with  a  bone  or  a  flick,  and  its  virtues  are
well  known  :  it  may  be  ufed  for  culinary  purpofes  as  a  fpice,
and  is  not  lefs  pleafant  than  wholefome  :  here  is  alfo  plenty
of  wild  celery  and  fcurvy  grafs.  The  trees  are  chiefly  of
one  kind,  a  fpecies  of  the  birch,  called  Betula  ant  arnica  ;  the
flem  is  from  thirty  to  forty  feet  long,  and  from  two  to  three
feet  in  diameter,  fo  that  in  a  cafe  of  neceflity  they  might
poflibly  fupply  a  fliip  with  top-mafls :  they  are  a  light  white
wood,  bear  a  fmall  leaf,  and  cleave  very  flraight.  Cranberries
were  alfo  found  here  in  great  plenty,  both  white  and  red.


1769.

January.

Saturday  14.


The  perfons  who  landed  faw  none  of  the  inhabitants,  but
fell  in  with  two  of  their  deferted  huts,  one  in  a  thick  wood,
and  the  other  clofe  by  the  beach.

Having  taken  the  boat  on  board,  I  made  fail  into  the
Streight,  and  at  three  in  the  morning  of  the  15  th,  I  anchored  Sunday  15.
in  twelve  fathom  and  an  half,  upon  coral  rocks,  before  a
fmall  cove,  which  we  took  for  Port  Maurice,  at  the  diflance
of  about  half  a  mile  from  the  fhore.  Two  of  the  natives
came  down  to  the  beach,  expecting  us  to  land  ;  but  this  fpot
afforded  fo  little  fhelter,  that  I  at  length  determined  not  to
examine  it :  I  therefore  got  under  fail  again  about  ten
o’clock,  and  the  favages  retired  into  the  woods.

At  two  o’clock,  we  anchored  in  the  bay  of  Good  Succefs  >
and  after  dinner  I  went  on  fhore,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Banks
and  Dr.  Solander,  to  look  for  a  watering-place,  and  fpeale  to
the  Indians,  feveral  of  whom  had  come  in  fight.  We  landed
on  the  {larboard  fide  of  the  bay  near  fome  rocks,  ‘which

G  2  made


/


44-


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


ja/ifa?}*  mac*e  Smooth  water  and  good  landing;  thirty  or  forty  of  the

- — v - '  Indians  foon  made  their  appearance  at  the  end  of  a  fandy

beach  on  the  other  fide  of  the  bay,  but  feeing  our  number,
which  was  ten  or  twelve,  they  retreated.  Mr.  Banks  and
Dr.  Solander  then  advanced  about  one  hundred  yards  before
us,  upon  which  two  of  the  Indians  returned,  and,  having
advanced  fome  paces  towards  them,  fat  down  ;  as  foon  as
they  came  up,  the  Indians  rofe,  and  each  of  them  having  a
final  1  flick  in  his  hand  threw  it  away,  in  a  direction,  both,
from  themfelves  and  the  Grangers,  which  was  confidered  as
the  renunciation  of  weapons  in  token  of  peace :  they  then
walked  brifkly  towards  their  companions,  who  had  halted
at  about  fifty  yards  behind  them,  and  beckoned  the  Gentle¬
men  to  follow,  which  they  did.  They  were  received  with
many  uncouth  figns  of  friendfhip  ;  and,  in  return,,  they  dis¬
tributed  among  them  fome  beads  and  ribbons,  which  had
been  brought  on  fhore  for  that  purpofe,  and  with  which  they
were  greatly  delighted.  A  mutual  confidence  and  good-will
being  thus  produced,  our  parties  joined  ;  the  converfation,
fuch  as  it  was,  became  general';  and  three  of  them  accom¬
panied  us  back  to  the  fliip.  When  they  came  on  board,  one4
of  them,  whom  we  took  to  be  a  pried,  performed  much  the
fame  ceremonies  which  M.  Bougainville  defcribes,  and  fup-
pofes  to  be  an  exorcifm.  When  he  was  introduced  into  a
new  part  of  the  fliip,  or  when  any  thing  that  he  had  not
feen  before  caught  his  attention,  he  fhouted  with  all  his
force  for  fome  minutes,  without  directing  liis  voice  either
to  us  or  his  companions.

They  eat  fome  bread  and  fome  beef,  but  not  apparently
with  much  pleafure,  though  fuch  part  of  what  was  given
them  as  they  did  not  eat  they  took  away  with  them;  but
they  would  not  fwallow  a  drop  either  of  wine  or  fpirits :
they  put  the  glafs  to  their  lips,  but,  having  tailed  the  liquor,

'  they


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


45


they  returned  it,  with  ftrong  expreflions  of  difguft.  Curiofity
feems  to  be  one  of  the  few  paflions  which  diftinguifh  men  from
brutes  ;  and  of  this  our  guefls  appeared  to  have  very  little.
They  went  from  one  part  of  the  fhip  to  another,  and  looked
at  the  valt  variety  of  new  objects  that  every  moment  pre-
fented  themfelves,  without  any  expreflion  either  of  wonder
or  pleafure,  for  the  vociferation  of  our  exorcilt  feemed  to  be
neither.

After  having  been  on  board  about  two  hours,  they  ex-
preffed  a  defife  to  go  afhore.  A  boat  was  immediately  or¬
dered,  and  Mr.  Banks  thought  fit  to  accompany  them :  he
landed  them  in  fafety,  and  conducted  them  to  their  compa¬
nions,  among  whom  he  remarked  the  fame  vacant  indiffe¬
rence,  as  in  thofe  who  had  heen  on  board;  for  as  on  one
fide  there  appeared  no  eagernefs  to  relate,  fo  on  the  other
there  feemed  to  be  no  curiofity  to  hear,  how  they  had  been
received,  or  what  they  had  feen.  In  about  half  an  hour,  Mr.
Banks  returned  to  the  fhip,  and  the  Indians  retired  from  the
fhore.


1769.

January.

•w — -J-


C  H  A  P.\


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


CHAP.  IV.

An  Account  of  what  happened  in  afcending  a  Mountain  to

fearch  for  Plants .

/^\N  the  1 6th,  early  in  the  morning,  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.

Solander,  with  their  attendants  and  fervants,  and  two
feamen  to  affift  in  carrying  the  baggage,  accompanied  by
Mr.  Monkhoufe  the  Surgeon,  and  Mr.  Green  the  Aftronomer,
fet  out  from  the  fhip,  with  a  view  to  penetrate  as  far  as  they
could  into  the  country,  and  return  at  night.  The  hills,  when
viewed  at  a  diftance,  feemed  to  be  partly  a  wood,  partly  a
plain,  and  above  them  a  bare  rock.  Mr.  Banks  hoped  to  get
through  the  wood,  and  made  no  doubt,  but  that,  beyond  it,
he  fhould,  in  a  country  which  no  botanift  had  ever  yet  vi-
fited,  find  alpine  plants  which  would  abundantly  compen-
fate  his 'labour.  They  entered  the  wood  at  a  fmall  fandy
beach,  a  little  to  the  weltward  of  the  watering-place,  and
continued  to  afeend  the  hill,  through  the  pathlefs  wilder-
nels,  till  three  o’clock,  before  they  got  a  near  view  of  the
places  which  they  intended  to  vifit.  Soon  after  they  reached
what  they  had  taken  for  a  plain  ;  but,  to  their  great  difap-
pointment,  found  it  a  fwamp,  covered  with  low  bullies  of
birch,  about  three  feet  high,  interwoven  with  each  other,
and  fo  fiubborn  that  they  could  not  be  bent  out  of  the  way  •
it  was  theiefore  necefiary  to  lift  the  leg  over  them,  which
at  every  Hep  was  buried,  ancle  deep,  in  the  foil.  To  aggra¬
vate  the  pain  and  difficulty  of  fuch  travelling,  the  weather,
which  hitherto  had  been  very  fine,  much  like  one  of  opr
blight  days  in  May,  became  gloomy  and  cold  \  with  fudden

>  •  blaits


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


47


blafls  of  a  mod  piercing  wind,  accompanied  with  fnow.
They  pufhed  forward,  however,  in  good  fpirits,  notwiths¬
tanding  their  fatigue,  hoping  the  word  of  the  way  was
pad,  and  that  the  bare  rock  which  they  had  feen  from  the
tops  of  the  lower  hills  was  not  more  than  a  mile  before
them  ;  but  when  they  had  got  about  two  thirds  over  this
woody  fwamp,  Mr.  Buchan,  one  of  Mr.  Banks’s  draughtmen,
was  unhappily  feized  with  a  fit.  This  made  it  necefiary  for
the  whole  company  to  halt,  and  as  it  was  impoflible  that  he
fhould  go  any  farther,  a  fire  was  kindled,  and  thofe  who
were  mod  fatigued  were  left  behind  to  take  care  of  him.  Mr.
Banks,  Dr.  Solander,  Mr.  Green,  and  Mr.  Monkhoufe  went  on,
and  in  a  fhort  time  reached  the  fummit.  As  botanids,  their
expectations  were  here  abundantly  gratified;  for  they  found
a  great  variety  of  plants,  which,  with  refpecT  to  the  alpine
plants  in  Europe,  are  exactly  what  thofe  plants  are  with  re-
fpect  to  fuch  as  grow  in  the  plain.


x7^9*

January.


Monday  iCv


The  cold  was  now  become  more  fevere,  and  the  fnow-
blads  more  frequent ;  the  day  alfo  was  fo  far  fpent,  that  it
was  found  impofiible  to  get  back  to  the  drip  before  the  next
morning:  to  pafs  the  night  upon  fuch  a  mountain,  in  fuch
a  climate,  was  not  only  comfortlefs,  but  dreadful ;  it  was
impofiible  however  to  be  avoided,  and  they  were  to  provide
for  it  as  well  as  they  could.


Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  while  they  were  improving,
an  opportunity  which  they  had,  with  fo  much  danger  and
difficulty,  procured,  by  gathering  the  plants  which  they
found  upon  the  mountain,  fent  Mr.  Green  and  Mr.  Monk¬
houfe  back  to  Mr.  Buchan  and  the  people  that  were  with

I

him,  with  directions  to  bring  them  to  a  hill,  which  they
thought  lay  in  a  better  rout  for  returning  to  the  wood,  and
which  was  therefore  appointed  as  a  general  rendezvous.  It


was


48


LIEUTENANT  COOR’s  VOYAGE

January.  was  P10P°^e(^>  that  from  this  hill  they  fhould  pufh  through
Monday  16.  ^le  ^wamP>  which  feemed  by  the  new  rout  not  to  be  more
than  half  a  mile  over,  into  the  fhelter  of  the  wood,  and  there
build  their  wigwam,  and  make  a  fire  :  this,  as  their  way
was  all  down  hill,  it  feemed  eafy  to  accomplilh.  Their
whole  company  atfembled  at  the  rendezvous,  and,  though
pinched  with  the  cold,  were  in  health  and  fpirits,  Mr.
Buchan  himfelf  having  recovered  his  firength  in  a  much
greater  degree  than  could  have  been  expected.  It  was  now
near  eight  o’clock  in  the  evening,  but  Hill  good  day-light,
and  they  fet  forward  for  the  neareft  valley,  Mr.  Banks  him¬
felf  undertaking  to  bring  up  the  rear,  and  fee  that  no  flrag-
gler  was  left  behind:  this  may  perhaps  be  thought  a  fuper-
fluous  caution,  but  it  will  foon  appear  to  be  otherwife.  Dr.
Solander,  who  had  more  than  once  eroded  the  mountains
which  divide  Sweden  from  Norway,  well  knew  that  extreme
cold,  efpecially  when  joined  with  fatigue,  produces  a  torpor
c«.nd  fieepinefs  that  are  almoft  irrefiftible :  he  therefore  con¬
jured  the  company  to  keep  moving,  whatever  pain  it  might
cod  them,  and  whatever  relief  they  might  be  promifed  by
an  inclination  to  red:  Whoever  fits  down,  fays  he,  willfieep;
and  whoever  fleeps,  will  wake  no  more.  Thus,  at  once  ad-
monifhed  and  alarmed,  they  fet  forward  $  but  while  they  were
dill  upon  the  naked  rock,  and  before  they  had  got  among
the  bullies,  the  cold  became  fuddenly  fo  intenfe,  as  to  produce
the  effects  that  had  been  molt  dreaded.  Dr.  Solander  himfelf
was  the  firft  who  found  the  inclination,  againft  which  he
had  warned  others,  irrefifiible  ;  and  infilled  upon  being  dif¬
fered  to  he  down.  Mr.  Banks  intreated  and  remonfirated  in
vain,  down  he  lay  upon  the  ground,  though  it  was  covered
with  fnowj  and  it  was  with  great  difficulty  that  his  friend
kept  him  from  Beeping.  Richmond  alfo,  one  of  the  black

fervants,


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


49


fervants,  began  to  linger,  having  fufFered  from  the  cold  in  the
fame  manner  as  the  Doctor.  Mr.  Banks,  therefore,  fent  five
of  the  company,  among  whom  was  Mr.  Buchan,  forward  to
get  a  fire  ready  at  the  firft  convenient  place  they  could  find  ;
and  himfelf,  with  four  others,  remained  with  the  Do<5tor  and
Richmond,  whom  partly  by  perfuafion  and  entreaty,  and
partly  by  force,  they  brought  on ;  but  when  they  had  got
through  the  greatefl  part  of  the  birch  and  fwamp,  they  both
declared  they  could  go  no  farther.  Mr.  Banks  had  recourfe
again  to  entreaty  and  expoftulation,  but  they  produced  no
efFe<ft :  when  Richmond  was  told,  that  if  he  did  not  go  on  he
would  in  a  fliort  time  be  frozen  to  death;  he  anfwered,  That
he  defired  nothing  but  to  lie  down  and  die:  the  Doctor  did
not  fo  explicitly  renounce  his  life  ;  he  faid  he  was  willing  to
go  on,  but  that  he  mull  firft  take  fome  deep,  though  he  had
before  told  the  company  that  to  fleep  was  to  perifh.  Mr.
Banks  and  the  reft  found  it  impoftible  to  carry  them,  and
there  being  no  remedy  they  were  both  fufFered  to  fit  downj
being  partly  fupported  by  the  buflies,  and  in  a  few  minutes
they  fell  into  a  profound  deep:  foon  after,  fome  of  the  people
who  had  been  fent  forward  returned,  with  the  welcome  news
that  a  fire  was  kindled  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  farther  on
the  way.  Mr.  Banks  then  endeavoured  to  wake  Dr.  Solander

and  happily  fucceeded :  but,  though  he  had  not  dept  five

♦

minutes,  he  had  almoft  loft  the  ufe  of  his  limbs,  and  the
mufcles  were  fo  flirunk  that  his  flioes  fell  from  his  feet ;  lie
confented  to  go  forward  with  fuch  abidance  as  could  be
given  him,  but  no  attempts  to  relieve  poor  Richmond  were
fuccefsful.  It  being  found  impoftible  to  make  him  ftir,  after
fome  time  had  been  loft  in  the  attempt,  Mr.  Banks  left  his
other  black  fervant  and  a  feaman,  who  feemed  to  have  dif¬
fered  lead  by  the  cold,  to  look  after  him ;  promifing,  that  as
foon  as  two  others  fliould  be  diffidently  warmed,  they  fliould
Vol.  II.  H  be


A


I769.
January,
c. - - - ;

iVIonday  16.


5°

1769.

January.

’ - -v -

Mondayj6


LIEUTENANT  COOK'S  VOYAGE

be  relieved.  Mr.  Banks,  with  much  difficulty,  at  length  gotr
the  Do&or  to  the  fire  ;  and  foon  after  lent  two  of  the  people
who  had  been  refreshed,  in  hopes  that,  with  the  affiftance  of
thofe  who  had  been  left  behind,  they  would  be  able  to  bring
Richmond,  even  though  it  fhould  ftill  be  found  impoffible  to
wake  him.  In  about  half  an  hour,  however,  they  had  the
mortification  to  fee  thefe  two  men  return  alone  ;  they  faid,
that  they  had  been  all  round  the  place  to  which  they  had
been  directed,  but  could  neither  find  Richmond  nor  thofe
who  had  been  left  with  him;  and  that  though  they  had
fhouted  many  times,  no  voice  had  replied.  This  was  mat¬
ter  of  equal  furprife  and  concern,  particularly  to  Mr.  Banks*
who,  while  he  was  wondering  how  it  could  happen,  milled
a  bottle  of  rum,  the  company’s  whole  fiock,  which  they  now
concluded  to  be  in  the  knapfack  of  one  of  the  abfentees.  It
was  conjectured,  that  with  this  Richmond  had  been  rouzed
by  the  two  perfons  who  had  been  left  with  him,  and  that,
having  perhaps  drank  too  freely  of  it  themfelves,  they  had
all  rambled  from  the  place  where  they  had  been  left,  in
fearch  of  the  fire,  inftead  of  waiting  for  thofe  who  fhould
have  been  their  affiftants  and  guides.  Another  fall  of  fnow
now  came  on,  and  continued  inceflantly  for  two  hours,  fo
that  all  hope  of  feeing  them  again,  at  leaf!  alive,  were  given
up ;  but  about  twelve  o’clock,  to  the  great  joy  of  thofe  at  the
fire,  a  fhouting  was  heard  at  fome  difiance.  Mr.  Banks,  with
four  more,  immediately  went  out,  and  found  the  feaman
with  juft  ftrength  enough  left  to  flagger  along,  and  call  out
for  affiftance :  Mr.  Banks  fent  him  immediately  to  the  fire,
and,  by  his  direction,  proceeded  in  fearch  of  the  other  two,
whom  he  foon  after  found.  Richmond  was  upon  his  legs,
but  not  able  to  put  one  before  the  other;  his  companion  was
lying  upon  the  ground,  as  infenfible  as  a  ftone.  All  hands


were


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

ttfere  now  called  from  the  fire,  and  an  attempt  was  made  to
carry  them  to  it ;  but  this,  notwithftanding  the  united  ef¬
forts  of  the  whole  company,  was  found  to  be  impoffible.
The  night  was  extremely  dark,  the  fnow  was  now  very  deep,
and,  under  thefe  additional  difadvantages,  they  found  it  very
difficult  to  make  way  through  the  buffies  and  the  bog  for
themfelves,  all  of  them  getting  many  falls  in  the  attempt.
The  only  alternative  was  to  make  a  fire  upon  the  fpot ;  but
the  fnow  which  had  fallen,  and  was  flill  falling,  beftdes
what  was  every  moment  fhaken  in  flakes  from  the  trees,
rendered  it  equally  impracticable,  to  kindle  one  there,  and
to  bring  any  part  of  that  which  had  been  kindled  in  the
wood  thither:  they  were,  therefore,  reduced  to  the  fad  neceffity
of  leaving  the  unhappy  wretches  to  their  fate  ;  having  firft
made  them  a  bed  of  boughs  from  the  trees,  and  fpread  a
covering  of  the  fame  kind  over  them  to  a  confiderable
height.

Having  now  been  expofed  to  the  cold  and  the  fnow  near
an  hour  and  an  half,  fome  of  the  reft  began  to  lofe  their  fen-
fibility ;  and  one  Brifcoe,  another  of  Mr.  Banks’s  fervants,
was  fo  ill,  that  it  was  thought  he  muft  die  before  he  could
be  got  to  the  fire.

At  the  fire,  however,  at  length  they  arrived ;  and  palled  the
night  in  a  fituation,  which,  however  dreadful  in  itfelf,  was
rendered  more  afflicting  by  the  remembrance  of  what  was
paft,  and  the  uncertainty  of  what  was  to  come.  Of  twelve,
the  number  that  fet  out  together  in  health  and  fpirits,  two
were  fuppofed  to  be  already  dead  ;  a  third  was  fo  ill,  that  it
was  very  doubtful  whether  he  would  be  able  to  go  forward
in  the  morning ;  and  a  fourth,  Mr.  Buchan,  was  in  danger
of  a  return  of  his  fits,  by  frefh  fatigue  after  fo  uncomfort¬
able  a  night :  they  were  diftant  from  the  fhip  a  long  day’s

H  z  journey.


St

1769.

January.

< - , - *

Monday  16.


52


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


1769.

January.
Monday  16.


journey,  through  pathlefs  woods,  in  which  it  was  too  pro^'
bable  they  might  be  bewildered  till  they  were  overtaken  by
the  next  night ;  and,  not  having  prepared  for  a  journey  of
more  than  eight  or  ten  hours,  they  were  wholly  deflitute  of
provifions,  except  a  vulture,  which  they  happened  to  fhoot
while  they  were  out,  and  which,  if  equally  divided,  would
not  afford  each  of  them  half  a  meal  j  and  they  knew  not
how  much  more  they  might  fuffer  from  the  cold,  as  the
fnow  flill  continued  to  fall.  A  dreadful  teftimony  of  the  fe-
verity  of  the  climate,  as  it  was  now  the  midfl  of  fummer  in
this  part  of  the  world,  the  twenty-firfl  of  December  being
here  the  longefl  day ;  and  every  thing  might  juftly  be  dreaded
from  a  phenomenon  which,  in  the  correfponding  feafon,  is.
unknown  even  in  Norway  and  Lapland.


Taefday  17.  When  the  morning  dawned,  they  faw  nothing  round  them,
as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  but  fnow,  which  feemed  to  lie
as  thick  upon  the  trees  as  upon  the  ground  ;  and  the  blafts
returned  fo  frequently,  and  with  fuch  violence,  that  they
found  it  impoffible  for  them  to  fet  out :  how  long  this  might
lafl  they  knew  not,  and  they  had  but  too  much  reafon  to
apprehend  that  it  would  confine  them  in  that  defolate  foreif
till  they  perifhed  with  hunger  and  cold.


After  having  fuffered  the  mifery  and  terror  of  this  flota¬
tion  till  fix  o’clock  in  the  morning,  they  conceived  fome  hope
of  deliverance  by  difcovering  the  place  of  the  fun  through
the  clouds,  which  were  become  thinner,  and  began  to  break
awayv  Their  firfl  care  was  to  fee  whether  the  poor  wretches
whom  they  had  been  obliged  to  leave  among  the  bullies  were
yet  alive  ;  three  of  the  company  were  difpatched  for  that
purpofe,  and  very  foon  afterwards  returned  with  the  melan-
•  choly  news,  that  they  were  dead.


Notwithflanding


53,


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


Notwithftanding  the  flattering  appearance  of  the  fky,  the
fnow  flill  continued  to  fall  fo  thick  that  they  could  not  ven¬
ture  out  upon  their  journey  to  the  fliip  ;  but  about  8  o’clock
a  fmall  regular  breeze  fprung  up,  which,  with  the  prevail¬
ing  inHuence  of  the  fun,  at  length  cleared  the  air;  and  they
foon  after,  with  great  joy,  faw  the  fnow  fall  in  large  flakes
from  the  trees,  a  certain  lign  of  an  approaching  thaw :  they
now  examined  more  critically  the  flate  of  their  invalids  ;
Brifcoe  was  flill  very  ill,  but  faid,  that  he  thought  himfelf
able  to  walk ;  and  Mr.  Buchan  was  much  better  than  either
he  or  his  friends  had  any  reafon  to  expert.  They  were  now,
however,  preffed  by  the  calls  of  hunger,  to  which,  after  long
falling,  every  conlideration  of  future  good  or  evil  immedi-
ately  gives  way.  Before  they  fet  forward,  therefore,  it  was
unanimoufly  agreed',  that  they  Ihonld  eat  their  vulture  ;  the
bird  was  accordingly  fkinned,  and,  it  being  thought  bell  to
divide  it  before  it  was  fit  to  be  eaten,  it  was  cut  into  ten  por¬
tions,  and  every  man  cooked  his  own  as  he  thought  fit.
After  this  repafl,  which  furnifhed  each  of  them  with  about
three  mouthfuls,  they  prepared  to  fet  out ;  but  it  was  ten
o’clock  before  the  fnow  was  fufficiently  gone  off  to  render  a
march  practicable.  After  a  walk  of  about  three  hours,  they
were  very  agreeably  furprifed  to  find  themfelves  upon  the
beach,  and  much  nearer  to  the  fliip  than  they  had  any  rea¬
fon  to  expeCt.  Upon  reviewing  their  track  from  the  veffel,
they  perceived,  that,  inftead  of  afcending  the  hill  in  a  line,
fo  as  to  penetrate  into  the  country,  they  had  made  almofl  a
circle  round  it.  When  they  came  on  board,  they  congratu¬
lated  each  other  upon  their  fafety,  with  a  joy  that  no  man
can  feel  who  has  not  been  expofed  to  equal  danger ;  and  as
I  had  fuffered  great  anxiety  at  their  not  returning  in  the
evening  of  the  day  on  which  they  fet  out,  I  was  not  wholly
without  my  fir  are.


1769.

January.

Tuefday  17.


C  H  A  P,


a.


5  4


LIEUTENANT  COOK>s  VOYAGE


CHAP.  V.

The  Pajfage  through  the  St r eight  of  he  Maire>  and  a
further  Defcription  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Terra  del
FuegOy  and  its  Produ&ions .

\

j769-  /"^\N  ^ie  I^t^1  an^  I9t^1>  we  were  delayed  in  getting  on

- - fLs  V^/  board  our  wood  and  water  by  a  fwell :  but  on  the  20th,

Thurfday  xg.  the  weather  being  more  moderate,  we  again  fent  the  boat
Frday  20.  on  f^ore,  and  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  went  in  it.  They
landed  in  the  bottom  of  the  bay,  and  while  my  people  were
employed  in  cutting  brooms,  they  purfued  their  great  objeft,
the  improvement  of  natural  knowlege,  with  fuccefs,  collect¬
ing  many  fhells  and  plants  which  hitherto  have  been  alto¬
gether  unknown  :  they  came  on  board  to  dinner,  and  after¬
wards  went  again  on  fhore  to  vifit  an  Indian  town,  which
fome  of  the  people  had  reported  to  lie  about  two  miles  up
the  country.  They  fouhd  the  diftance  not  more  than  by  the
account,  and  they  approached  it  by  what  appeared  to  be  the
common  road,  yet  they  were  above  an  hour  in  getting  thi¬
ther,  for  they  were  frequently  up  to  their  knees  in  mud ;  when
they  got  within  a  fmall  diftance,  two  of  the  people  came  out
to  meet  them,  with  fuch  ftate  as  they  could  aftiime ;  when
they  joined  them,  they  began  to  hollow  as  they  had  done  on
board  the  fhip,  without  addreffing  themfelves  either  to  the
ftrangers  or  their  companions  ;  and  having  continued  this
Itrange  vociferation  fome  time,  they  conduced  them  to  the
town.  It  was  fituated  on  a  dry  knoll,  or  fmall  hill,  covered
with  wood,  none  of  which  feemed  to  have  been  cleared  away,
and  confifted  of  about  twelve  or  fourteen  hovels,  of  the  moft

rude


;yfVY<


ROUND  THE  WORLD.  55

rude  and  inartificial  ftru&ure  that  can  be  imagined.  They  J769'

.  January.

were  nothing  more  than  a  few  poles  let  up  fo  as  to  incline  < —
towards  each  other,  and  meet  at  the  top,  forming  a  kind  of
a  cone,  like  fome  of  our  bee-hives  :  on  the  weather  fide  they
were  covered  with  a  few  boughs,  and  a  little  grafs  ;  and  on
the  lee  fide  about  one  eighth  of  the  circle  was  left  open,  both
for  a  door  and  a  fire  place  ;  and  of  this  kind  were  the  huts
that  had  been  feen  in  St.  Vincent’s  bay,  in  one  of  which  the
embers  of  a  fire  were  {till  remaining.  Furniture  they  had
none  ;  a  little  grafs,  which  lay  round  the  infide  of  the  hovel,
ferved  both  for  chairs  and  beds ;  and  of  all  the  utenfils  which
necefiity  and  ingenuity  have  concurred  to  produce  among
other  favage  nations,  they  faw  only  a  bafket  to  carry  in  the
hand,  a  fatchel  to  hang  at  the  back,  and  the  bladder  of  fome
bead  to  hold  water,  which  the  natives  drink  through  a  hole
that  is  made  near  the  top  for  that  purpofe.

The  inhabitants  of  this  town  were  a  fmall  tribe,  not  more
than  fifty  in  number,  of  both  fexes  and  of  every  age.  Their
colour  refembles  that  of  the  rufi:  of  iron  mixed  with  oil,  and
they  have  long  black  hair :  the  men  are  large,  but  clumfily
built ;  their  fiature  is  from  five  feet  eight  to  five  feet  ten  y
the  women  are  much  lefs,  few  of  them  being  more  than  five
feet  high.  Their  whole  apparel  confills  of  the  {kin  of  a
guanicoe,  or  feal,  which  is  thrown  over  their  ihoulders,
exactly  in  the  {late  in  which  it  came  from  the  animal’s  back;
a  piece  of  the  fame  {kin,  which  is  drawn  over  their  feet,  and
gathered  about  the  ancles  like  a  purfe,  and  a  fmall  flap,,
which  is  worn  by  the  women  as  a  fuccedaneum  for  a  fig-
leaf.  The  men  wear  their  cloak  open,  the  women  tie  it
about  their  waifl:  with  a  thong.  But  although  they  are  con¬
tent  to  be  naked,  they  are  very  ambitious  to  be  fine.  Their
faces  were  painted  in  various  forms  :  the  region  of  the  eye

2.  was

t


5$


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


*769-

January.

5 - * -


was  in  general  white,  and  the  reft  of  the  face  adorned  with
horizontal  ftrcaks  of  red  and  black;  yet  fcarcely  any  two
were  exa&ly  alike.  This  decoration  feems  to  be  more  pro-
fufe  and  elaborate  upon  particular  occaftons,  for  the  two
■Gentlemen  who  introduced  Mr.  Banks  and  the  DoCtor  into  the
town, were  almoft  covered  with  ftreaks  of  black  in  all  directions,
fo  as  to  make  a  very  ftriking  appearance.  Both  men  and
women  wore  bracelets  of  fuch  beads  as  they  could  make
themfelves  of  fmall  Ihells  or  bones  ;  the  women  both  upon
their  wrifts  and  ancles,  the  men  upon  their  wrifts  only ;  but
to  compenfate  for  the  want  of  bracelets  on  their  legs,  they
wore  a  kind  of  fillet  of  brown  worfted  round  their  heads.
They  feemed  to  fet  a  particular  value  upon  any  thing  that
was  red,  and  preferred  beads  even  to  a  knife  or  a  hatchet.

Their  language  in  general  is  guttural,  and  they  exprefs
fome  of  their  words  by  a  found  exa&ly  like  that  which  we
make  to  clear  the  throat  when  any  thing  happens  to  obftrud:
it;  yet  they  have  words  which  would  be  deemed  foft  in  the
better  languages  of  Europe.  Mr.  Banks  learnt  what  he  fup-
pofes  to  be  their  name  for  beads  and  water.  When  they
wanted  beads,  inftead  of  ribbons  or  other  trifles,  they  faid
halleca  ;  and  when  they  were  taken  on  fhore  from  the  fhip,
and  by  figns  alked  where  water  might  be  found,  they  made
the  flgn  of  drinking,  and  pointing  as  well  to  the  calks  as  the
watering  place,  cried  Oodd.

We  faw  no  appearance  of  their  having  any  food  but  fhell-
filh ;  for  though  feals  were  frequently  feen  near  the  fhore,
they  feemed  to  have  no  implements  for  taking  them.  The
ihell-fifh  is  collected  by  the  women,  whofe  bufinefs  it  feems
to  be  to  attend  at  low  water,  with  a  balket  in  one  hand,  a
flick,  pointed  and  barbed,  in  the  other,  and  a  fatchel  at  their
backs  :  they  loo  fen  the  limpets,  and  other  filh  that  adhere  to

?  the


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


57


the  rocks,  with  the  flick,  and  put  them  into  the  bafket ;
which,  when  full,  they  empty  into  the  fatchel.


1 769-

January,


The  only  things  that  we  found  among  them  in  which
there  was  the  lead  appearance  6f  neatnefs  or  ingenuity,
were  their  weapons,  which  confided  of  a  bow  and  arrows.
The  bow  was  not  inelegantly  made,  and  the  arrows  were
the  neated  that  we  had  ever  feen:  they  were  of  wood,  polifhed
to  the  highed  degree  ;  and  the  point,  which  was  of  glafs  or
flint,  and  barbed,  was  formed  and  fitted  with  wonderful
dexterity.  We  faw  alfo  fome  pieces  of  glafs  and  flint  among
them  unwrought,  befldes  rings,  buttons,  cloth,  and  canvafs,
with  other  European  commodities  ;•  they  mud  therefore  fome-
times  travel  to  the  northward,  for  it  is  many  years  fince  any
fhip  has  been  fo  far  fouth  as  this  part  of  Terra  del  Fuego.
We  obferved  alfo,  that  they  fhewed  no  furprife  at  our  fire¬
arms,  with  the  ufe  of  which  they  appeared  to  be  well  ac¬
quainted  ;  for  they  made  figns  to  Mr.  Banks  to  fhoot  a  feal
which  followed  the  boat  as  they  were  going  on  fhore  from
the  fhip.


M.  de  Bougainville,  who,  in  January  1768,  jud  one  year
before  us,  had  been  on  fhore  upon  this  coafl  in  latitude
53°  40'  41",  had,  among  other  things,  given  glafs  to  the  people
whom  he  found  here  5  for  he  fays,  that  a  boy  about  twelve
years  old  took  it  into  his  head  to  eat  fome  of  it :  by  this  un¬
happy  accident  he  died  in  great  mifery ;  but  the  endeavours
of  the  good  father,  the  French  Aumonier ,  were  more  fuccefs-
ful  than  thofe  of  the  Surgeon ;  for  though  the  Surgeon  could
not  fave  his  life,  the  charitable  Pried  found  means  to  deal  a
Chridian  baptifm  upon  him  fo  fecretly,  that  none  of  his  Pa¬
gan  relations  knew  any  thing  of  the  matter.  Thefe  people
might  probably  have  fome  of  the  very  glafs  which  Bougain¬
ville  left  behind  him,  either  from  other  natives,  or  perhaps
Vol.  II.  I  from


1


58


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


January  ^rom  himfelf;  for  they  appeared  rather  to  be  a  travelling

' - v - '  hord,  than  to  have  any  fixed  habitation.  Their  houfes  are

built  to  hand  but  for  a  fhort  time  ;  they  have  no  utenfil  or
furniture  but  the  bafket  and  fatchel,  which  have  been  men¬
tioned  before,  and  which  have  handles  adapted  to  the  carry¬
ing  them  about,  in  the  hand  and  upon  the  back  ;  the  only
cloathing  they  had  here  was  fcarcely  fufficient  to  prevent  their
perifhing  with  cold  in  the  fummer  of  this  country,  much
lefs  in  the  extreme  feverity  of  winter ;  the  fhell-fifh  which
feems  to  be  their  only  food  mufl  foon  be  exhaufled  at  any
one  place ;  and  we  had  feen  houfes  upon  what  appeared  to
be  a  deferted  ftation  in  St.  Vincent’s  bay.

It  is  alfo  probable  that  the  place  where  we  found  them
was  only  a  temporary  refidence,  from  their  having  here  no¬
thing  like  a  boat  or  canoe,  of  which  it  can  fcarcely  be  fup-
pofed  that  they  were  wholly  deflitute,  efpecially  as  they  were
not  fea-fick,  or  particularly  affected,  either  in  our  boat  or  on
board  the  fhip.  We  conje<5tured  that  there  might  be  a  flreight
or  inlet,  running  from  the  fea  through  great  part  of  this
ifland,  from  the  Streight  of  Magellan,  whence  thefe  people
might  come,  leaving  their  canoes  where  fucli  inlet  termi¬
nated.

They  did  not  appear  to  have  among  them  any  govern¬
ment  or  fubordination :  none  was  more  refpe&ed  than  ano¬
ther;  yet  they  feemed  to  live  together  in  the  utmofl  harmony
and  good  fellowship.  Neither  did  we  difcover  any  appear¬
ance  of  religion  among  them,  except  the  noifes  which  have
been  mentioned,  and  which  we  fuppofed  to  be  a  fuperftitions
ceremony,  merely  becaufe  we  could  refer  them  to  nothing
elfe:  they  were  ufed  only  by  one  of  thofe  who  came  on  board
the  fhip,  and  the  two  who  conduced  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.
Solander  to  the  town,  whom  we  therefore  conje&ured  to  be

i  •  priefts.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


59


prieils.  Upon  the  whole,  thcfe  people  appeared  to  be  the
mofi  deRitute  and  forlorn,  as  well  as  the  moil  Rupid  of  all
human  beings ;  the  outcafis  of  Nature,  who  fpent  their  lives
in  wandering  about  the  dreary  waftes,  where  two  of  our
people  perilhed  with  cold  in  the  midfi  of  fummer;  with  no
dwelling  but  a  wretched  hovel  of  Ricks  and  grafs,  which
would  not  only  admit  the  wind,  but  the  fnow  and  the  rain  ;
almoR  naked  j  and  deRitute  of  every  convenience  that  is  fur-
niflied  by  the  rudeR  art,  having  no  implement  even  to
drefs  their  food  :  yet  they  were  content.  They  fcemed  to
have  no  wifh  for  any  thing  more  than  they  poffeffed,  nor  did
anything  that  we  offered  them  appear  acceptable  but  beads,
as  an  ornamental  fuperfluky  of  life.  What  bodily  pain  they
might  fuffer  from  the  feverities  of  their  winter  we  could  not
know  *,  but  it  is  certain,  that  they  fuffered  nothing  from  the
want  of  the  innumerable  articles  which  we  conRder,  not  as
the  luxuries  and  conveniencies  only,  but  the  neceffaries  of
life :  as  their  defires  are  few,  they  probably  enjoy  them  all ;
and  how  much  they  may  be  gainers  by  an  exemption  from
the  care,  labour  and  folicitude,  which  arife  from  a  perpetual
and  unfuccefsful  effort  to  gratify  that  infinite  variety  of  de¬
fires  which  the  refinements  of  artificial  life  have  produced
among  us,  is  not  very  eafy  to  determine:  poffibly  this  may
counterbalance  all  the  real  difadvantages  of  their  fituation  in
comparifon  with  ours,  and  make  the  fcales  by  which  good
and  evil  are  diflributed  toman,  hang  even  between  us.

In  this  place  we  faw  no  quadruped  except  feals,  fea-lions,
and  dogs ;  of  the  dogs  it  is  remarkable  that  they  bark,  which
thofe  that  are  originally  bred  in  America  do  not.  And  this
is  a  further  proof,  that  the  people  we  faw  here  had,  either
immediately  or  remotely,  communicated  with  the  inhabi¬
tants  of  Europe.  There  are,  however,  other  quadrupeds  in
this  part  of  the  country ;  for  when  Mr.  Banks  was  at  the  top

I  2  of


1769.

January.

e— -v— — J 1


6o


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

January.  of  the  hiSheft  hil1  that  he  afcended  in  his  expedition  through
v- — '  the  woods,  he  faw  the  footfteps  of  a  large  beaft  imprinted
upon  the  furface  of  a  bog,  though  he  could  not  with  any
probability  guefs  of  what  kind  it  might  be.

Of  land-birds  there  are  but  few ;  Mr.  Banks  faw  none
larger  than  an  Englifh  blackbird,  except  fome  hawks  and  a
vulture^  but  of  Water-fowl  there  is  great  plenty,  particularly
ducks.  Of  fifh  we  faw  fcarce  any,  and  with  our  hooks  could
catch  none  that  was  fit  to  eat ;  but  fhell-fifh,  limpets,  clams,
and  mufcles  were  to  be  found  in  abundance.

Among  the  infedts,  which  were  not  numerous,  there  was
neither  gnat  nor  mufquito,  nor  any  other  fpecies  that  was
either  hurtful  or  troublefome,  which  perhaps  is  more  than
can  be  faid  of  any  other  uncleared  country.  During  the
fnow-blafts,  which  happened  every  day  while  we  were  here,
they  hide  themfelves  j  and  the  moment  it  is  fair  they  appear

again,  as  nimble  and  vigorous  as  the  warmeft  weather  could
make  them.

1  .  »  •

Of  plants,  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  found  a  vafl  va¬
riety  ;  the  far  greater  part  wholly  different  from  any  that
have  been  hitherto  defcribed.  Befides  the  birch,  and  winter’s
bark,  which  have  been  mentioned  already,  there  is  the
beach,  Fagus  antartticus.,  which,  as  well  as  the  birch,  may  be
ufed  for  timber.  The  plants  cannot  be  enumerated  here ;
but  as  the  fcurvy-grafs,  Car damine  antifcorbntica>  and  the  wild
celery,  Apium  antarfticum ,  probably  contain  antifcorbutic  qua¬
lities,  which  may  be  of  great  benefit  to  the  crews  of  fuch
fhips  as  fhall  hereafter  touch  at  this  place,  the  following
fhort  defcription  is  inferted  :

Tne  fcurvy-grafs  will  be  found  in  plenty  in  damp  places,
neai  fprings  of  water,  and  in  general  in  all  places  that  lie
near  the  beach,  efpecially  at  the  watering-place  in  the  Bay

of


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


6 1


1769.

January.


of  Good  Succefs  :  when  it  is  young,  the  Rate  of  its  greateft
perfection,  it  lies  flat  upon  the  ground,  having  many  leaves
of  a  bright  green,  flanding  in  pairs  oppofite  to  each  other,
with  a  fingle  one  at  the  end,  which  generally  makes  the  fifth
upon  a  foot  ftalk :  the  plant,  palling  from  this  ftate,  Ihoots
up  in  {talks  that  are  fometimes  two  feet  high,  at  the  top  of
which  are  fmall  white  blofloms,  and  thefe  are  fucceeded  by
long  pods :  the  whole  plant  greatly  refembles  that  which  in
England  is  called  Lady’s  fmock,  or  Cuckow-flower.  The
wild  celery  is  very  like  the  celery  in  our  gardens,  the  flowers
are  white,  and  ftand  in  the  fame  manner,  in  fmall  tufts  at
the  top  of  the  branches,  but  the  leaves  are  of  a  deeper  green.

It  grows  in  great  abundance  near  the  beach,  and  generally
upon  the  foil  that  lies  next  above  the  fpring  tides.  It  may
indeed  eafily  be  known  by  the  tafte,  which  is  between  that
of  celery  and  parfley.  We  ufed  the  celery  in  large  quanti¬
ties,  particularly  in  our  foup,  which,  thus  medicated,  pro¬
duced  the  fame  good  effects  which  feamen  generally  derive
from  a  vegetable  diet,  after  having  been  long  confined  to  fait
provifions.

On  Sunday,  the  2 2d  of  January,  about  two  o’clock  in  the  Sunday  zx*
morning,  having  got  our  wood  and  water  on  board,  we  failed
out  of  the  Bay,  and  continued  our  courfe  through  the
Streight.


i


CHAP.


6™
v  •t'


1769.

January.

C— - -


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

“  *  •  '  f  .  •  .  -  *  .-  '  -  ^  ^  ;  1  f  *

'  *  :  ^  »  -  i'  .u.  .  .•/  I  oils «  3uu  ♦  ;v  1C

;#

■ -  *  .  i  .  .  .  .  j  „  .  i  . •  »  .

CHAP.  VI.

<  ■•*■•'  <•  .  .  V  •  -  v  •(  ,  *  -  *  '««.  '  .  i

general  Defer ip  t  ion  of  the  S.  E.  part  of  'Terra  del  Fit  ego,
and  the  Str eight  of  Le  Maire ;  w/VA  Remarks  on
Lord  Anfons  Account  of  them ,  Dire&ions  for  the

Faff  age  TVefiward ,  round  this  Part  of  America ,  into
the  South  Seas ,

ALMOST  all  writers  who  have  mentioned  the  ifland  of
Terra  del  Fuego,  defcribe  it  as  defliture  of  wood,  and
covered  with  fnow.  In  the  winter  it  may  poflibly  be  covered
with  fnow,  and  thofe  who  faw  it  at  that  feafon  might  per¬
haps  be  eafily  deceived,  by  its  appearance,  into  an  opinion
that  it  was  deftitute  of  wood.  Lord  Anfon  was  there  in  the
beginning  of  March,  which  anfwers  to  our  September;  and
we  were  there  the  beginning  of  January,  which  anfwers  to
our  July,  which  may  account  for  the  difference  of  his  de¬
scription  of  it  from  ours.  We  fell  in  with  it  about  twenty-
one  leagues  to  the  weflward  of  the  Streight  of  Le  Maire,  and
from  the  time  that  we  firfl  faw  it,  trees  were  plainly  to  be
diflinguifhed  with  our  glaffes ;  and  as  we  came  nearer,  though
here  and  there  we  difeovered  patches  of  fnow,  the  fides  of
the  hills  and  the  fea-coaft  appeared  to  be  covered  with  a
beautiful  verdure.  The  hills  are  lofty,  but  not  mountainous,
though  the  fummits  of  them  are  quite  naked.  The  foil  in
the  valleys  is  rich,  and  of  a  confiderable  depth  ;  and  at  the
foot  of  almoft  every  hill  there  is  a  brook,  the  water  of  which
has  a  reddifh  hue,  like  that  which  runs  through  our  turf
bogs  in  England,  but  it  is  by  no  means  ill  tailed,  and  upon

the


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


6J

-the  whole  proved  to  be  the  bed  that  we  took  in  during  our  1769.
voyage.  We  ranged  the  coad  to  the  Streight,  and  had  found-  >  Jan“ary;__,
ings  all  the  way  from  40  to  20  fathom,  upon  a  gravelly  and
Tandy  bottom.  The  mod  remarkable  land  on  Terra  del
Fuego  is  a  hill,  in  the  form  of  a  fugar-loaf,  which  dands  on
the  wed  fide  not  far  from  the  lea  ;  and  the  three  hills,  called
the  three  brothers,  about  nine  miles  to  the  wedwardof  Cape
St.  Diego,  the  low  point  that  forms  the  north  entrance  of  the
Streight  of  Le  Maire.

It  is  faid  in  the  account  of  Lord  Anfon’s  voyage,  that  it  is
difficult  to  determine  exactly  where  the  Streight  lies,  though
the  appearance  of  Terra  del  Fuego  be  well  known,  without
knowing  alfo  the  appearance  of  Staten  Land  ;  and  that  fome
navigators  have  been  deceived  by  three  hills  on  Staten  Land,
which  have  been  midaken  for  the  three  brothers  on  Terra
del  Fuego,  and  fo  over-fhot  the  Streight.  But  no  fhip  can
poffibly  mifs  the  Streight  that  coads  Terra  del  Fuego  within
light  of  land,  for  it  will  then,  of  itfelf,  be  fufficientlv  con-
fpicuous  ;  and  Staten  Land,  which  forms  the  ead  fide,  will  be
dill  more  manifedly  didinguifhed,  for  there  is  no  land  on
Terra  del  Fuego  like  it.  The  Streight  of  Le  Maire  can  be
miffed  only  by  danding  too  far  to  the  eadward,  without
keeping  the  land  of  Terra  del  Fuego  in  dght:  if  this  is  done,
it  may  be  miffed,  however  accurately  the  appearance  of  the
coad  of  Staten  Land  may  have  been  exhibited  ;  and  if  this  is
not  done,  it  cannot  be  miffed,  though  the  appearance  of  that
coad  be  not  known.  The  entrance  of  the  Streight  Ihould
not  be  attempted  but  with  a  fair  wind  and  moderate  wea¬
ther,  and  upon  the  very  beginning  of  the  tide  of  dood,  which
happens  here,  at  the  full  and  change  of  the  moon,  about  one
or  two  o’clock ;  it  is  alfo  bed  to  keep  as  near  to  the  Terra
del  Fuego  fhore  as  the  winds  will  admit.  By  attending  to
thefe  particulars,  a  fhip  may  be  got  quite  through  the

Streight.


64


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1769.

January.

-“v——


•  .  .  .  *

Streight  in  one  tide ;  or,  at  lead,  to  the  fouthward  of  Succefs
Bay,  into  which  it  will  be  more  prudent  to  put,  if  the  wind
fhould  be  foutherly,  than  to  attempt  the  weathering  of  Staten
Land  with  a  lee  wind  and  a  current,  which  may  endanger  her
being  driven  on  that  idand.

The  Streight  itfelf,  which  is  bounded  on  the  well  by  Terra
del  Fuego,  and  on  the  ead  by  the  well  end  of  Staten  Land,  is
about  live  leagues  long,  and  as  many  broad.  The  Bay  of
Good  Succefs  lies  about  the  middle  of'  it,  on  the  Terra  del
Fuego  fide,  and  is  difeovered  immediately  upon  entering  the
Streight  from  the  northward ;  and  the  fouth  head  of  it  may
be  dillinguilhed  by  a  mark  on  the  land,  that  has  the  appear¬
ance  of  a  broad  road,  leading  up  from  the  fea  into  the  coun¬
try  :  at  the  entrance  it  is  half  a  league  wide,  and  runs  in
wedward  about  two  miles  and  an  half.  There  is  good  an¬
chorage  in  every  part  of  it,  in  from  ten  to  feven  fathom,
clear  ground  ;  and  it  alfords  plenty  of  exceeding  good  wood
and  water.  The  tides  dow  in  the  Bay,  at  the  full  and  change
of  the  moon,  about  four  or  live  o’clock,  and  rife  about  live
or  fix  feet  perpendicular.  But  the  flood  runs  two  or  three
hours  longer  in  the  Streight  than  in  the  Bay ;  and  the  ebb,
or  northerly  current,  runs  with  near  double  the  drength  of
the  dood.

In  the  appearance  of  Staten  Land,  we  did  not  difeover  the
wildnefs  and  horror  that  is  aferibed  to  it  in  the  account  of
Lord  Anfon’s  voyage.  On  the  north  fide  are  the  appearances
of  bays  or  harbours  ;  and  the  land,  when  we  faw  it,  was  nei¬
ther  deditute  of  wood  nor  verdure,  nor  covered  with  fnow.
The  illand  feems  to  be  about  twelve  leagues  in  length,  and
five  broad.

On  the  wed  fide  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Succefs,  which  forms
the  S.  W.  enhance  of  the  Streight,  lies  Valentine’s  Bay,  of

which

3


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


65


which  we  only  faw  the  entrance ;  from  this  bay  the  land
trends  away  to  the  W.  S.  W.  for  twenty  or  thirty  leagues  ;  it
appears  to  be  high  and  mountainous,  and  forms  feveral  bays
and  inlets.

At  the  diftance  of  fourteen  leagues  from  the  bay  of  Good
Succefs,  in  the  direction  of  S.  W.  ~  W.  and  between  two  and
three  leagues  from  the  fhore,  lies  New  Ifland.  It  is  about
two  leagues  in  length  from  N.  E.  to  S.  W.  and  terminates  to
the  N.  E.  in  a  remarkable  hillock.  At  the  diftance  of  feven
leagues  from  New  Iftand,  in  the  direction  of  S.  W.  lies  the
ifle  Evouts\  and  a  little  to  the  weft  of  the  fouth  of  this  ifland
lie  Barnevelt’s  two  fmall  flat  iflands,  clofe  to  each  other ;  they
are  partly  furrounded  with  rocks,  which  rife  to  different
heights  above  the  water,  and  lie  twenty-four  leagues  from
the  Streight  of  Le  Maire.  At  the  diftance  of  three  leagues
from  Barnevelt’s  iflands,  in  the  direction  of  S.  W.  by  S.  lies
the  S.  E.  point  of  Hermit’s  iflands :  thefe  iflands  lie  S.  E.  and
N.  W.  and  are  pretty  high :  from  moft  points  of  view  they
will  be  taken  for  one  ifland,  or  a  part  of  the  main.

From  the  S.  E.  point  of  Hermit’s  iflands  to  Cape  Horn  the
courfe  is  S.W.  by  S.  diftance  three  leagues.

The  appearance  of  this  Cape  and  Hermit’s  iflands  is  re-
prefented  in  the  chart  of  this  coaft,  from  our  firft  making
land  to  the  Cape,  which  includes  the  Streight  of  Le  Maire,
and  part  of  Staten  Land.  In  this  chart  I  have  laid  down  no
land,  nor  traced  out  any  fhore  but  what  I  faw  myfelf,  and
thus  far  it  may  be  depended  upon  :  the  bays  and  in¬
lets,  of  which  we  faw  only  the  openings,  are  not  traced  ;  it
can,  however,  fcarcely  be  doubted,  but  that  moft,  if  not  all
of  them,  afford  anchorage,  wood  and  water.  The  Dutch
fquadron,  commanded  by  Hermit,  certainly  put  into  fome
of  them  in  the  year  1624 ;  and  it  was  Chapenham,  the  Vice

Vol.  II.  K  Admiral


1769.

January.


66


LIEUTENANT  COOTs  VOYAGE

January  Ac*miral  of  Z^1S  Squadron,  who  firfl  difcovered  that  the  land

— v - I  of  Cape  Horn -confuted  of  a  number  of  iflands.  The  account,

however,  which  thofe  who  failed  in  Hermit’s  fleet  have
given  of  thefe  parts  is  extremely  defective ;  and  thofe  of
Schouton  and  Le  Maire  are  flill  worfe :  it  is  therefore  no
wonder  that  the  charts  hitherto  publifhed  fliould  be  erro¬
neous,  not  only  in  laying  down  the  land,  but  in  the  latitude
and  longitude  of  the  places  they  contain.  I  will,  however,
venture  to  albert,  that  the  longitude  of  few  parts  of  the  world
is  better  afcertained  than  that  of  the  Streight  of  Le  Maire,
and  Cape  Horn,  in  the  chart  now  offered  to  the  public,  as
it  was  laid  down  by  feveral  obfervations  of  the  fun  and  moon,
that  were  made  both  by  myfelf  and  Mr.  Green.

The  variation  of  the  compafs  on  this  coalt  I  found  to  be
'  23°  to  25°  E.  except  near  Barnevelt’s  iflands  and  Cape

Horn,  where  we  found  it  lefs,  and  unfettled;  probably  it  is
difturbed  here  by  the  land,  as  Hermit’s  fquadron,  in  this
very  place  found  all  their  compares  differ  from  each  other.
The  declination  of  the  dipping-needle,  when  fet  up  on  fliore
in  Succefs  Bay,  was  68°  15'  below  the  horizon.

Between  Streight  Le  Maire  and  Cape  Horn,  we  found  a
current  letting,  generally  very  ftrong,  to  the  N.  E.  when  we
were  in  with  the  fliore;  but  loft  it  when  we  were  at  the  dif-
tance  of  fifteen  or  twenty  leagues.

Thurfday  2 6.  Gn  the  26th  of  January,  we  took  our  departure  from  Cape

Horn,  which  lies  in  latitude  S5°  S3  S.  longitude  68°  13' W.
The  farthefl  fouthern  latitude  that  we  made  was  6o°  io\
our  longitude  was  then  740  30' W.  ;  and  we  found  the  va¬
riation  of  the  compafs,  by  the  mean  of  eighteen  azimuths,  to
be  270  9'  E.  As  the  weather  was  frequently  calm,  Mr.  Banks
went  out  in  a  fmall  boat  to  fhoot  birds,  among  which  were
fome  albatroffes  and  fheerwaters.  The  albatroffes  were  ob-

ferved


3


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


67


fervcd  to  be  larger  than  tliofe  which  had  been  taken  north¬
ward  of  the  Streight ;  one  of  them  meafured  ten  feet  two
inches  from  the  tip  of  one  wing  to  that  of  the  other,  when
they  were  extended  :  the  fheerwater,  on  the  contrary,  is  lefs,
and  darker  coloured  on  the  back.  The  albatroftes  we  fkin-
ned,  and  having  foaked  them  in  fait  water  till  the  morning,
we  parboiled  them,  then  throwing  away  the  liquor,  dewed
them  in  a  very  little  frefh  water  till  they  were  tender,
and  had  them  ferved  up  with  favoury  faucey  thus  drefted,  the
difh  was  univerfally  commended,  and  we  eat  of  it  very  hear¬
tily  even  when  there  was  frefh  pork  upon  the  table.

From  a  variety  of  obfervations  which  were  made  with
great  care,  it  appeared  probable  in  the  highefl  degree,  that,
from  the  time  of  our  leaving  the  land  to  the  13th  of  Febru¬
ary,  when  we  were  in  latitude  490  32',  and  longitude  90°  3 7',
we  had  no  current  to  the  weft.


1769.

January.


February.
Monday  13.


At  this  time  we  had  advanced  about  12°  to  the  weftward,
and  3  and  4  to  the  northward  of  the  Streight  of  Magellan :
having  been  juft  three  and  thirty  days  in  coming  round  the
land  of  Terra  del  Fuego,  or  Cape  Horn,  from  the  eaft  en¬
trance  of  the  Streight  to  this  fttuation.  And  though  the
doubling  of  Cape  Horn  is  fo  much  dreaded,  that,  in  the  ge¬
neral  opinion,  it  is  more  eligible  to  pals  through  the  Streight
of  Magellan,  we  were  not  once  brought  under  our  clofe
reef’d  topfails  after  we  left  the  Streight  of  Le  Maire.  The
Dolphin  in  her  laft  voyage,  which  fhe  performed  at  the  fame
feafon  of  the^  year  with  ours,  was  three  months  in  getting
through  the  Streight  of  Magellan,  exclufive  of  the  time  that
fhe  lay  in  Port  Famine  ;  and  I  am  perfuaded,  from  the  winds
we  had,  that  if  we  had  come  by  that  paftage,  we  fhould  not
at  this  time  have  been  in  thcfe  feas  ;  that  our  people  would
have  been  fatigued,  and  our  anchors,  cables,  fails  and  rig-

K  2  ging


\


68


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

February.  ^*in£  muc^  damaged;  neither  of  which  inconveniencies  we
— had  now  buffered.  But  fuppofing  it  more  eligible  to  go
i bund  the  Cape,  than  through  the  Streight  of  Magellan;  it
may  dill  be  quedioned,  whether  it  is  better  to  go  through
the  Streight  of  Le  Maire,  ordand  to  the  eadward,  and  go
round  Staten  Land.  The  advice  given  in  the  Account  of
Lord  Anion’s  voyage  is,  V  That  all  Ihips  bound  to  the  South
“  Seas,  indead  of  palling  through  the  Streight  of  Le  Maire,
diould  condantly  pafs  to  the  eadward  of  Staten  Land,  and
fhould  be  invariably  bent  on  running  to  the  fouthward  as
far  as  the  latitude  of  61  or  62  degrees,  before  they  endea-
10111  to  dand  to  the  wedward.”  But,  in  my  opinion,  dif¬
ferent  circumdances  may  at  one  time  render  it  eligible  to
pafs  through  the  Streight,  and  to  keep  to  the  eadward  of
Staten  Land  at  another.  If  the  land  is  fallen  in  with  to  the
wedwaid  of  the  Streight,  and  the  wind  is  favourable  for
going  thiough,  I  think  it  would  be  very  injudicious  to  lofe
time  by  going  round  Staten  Land,  as  I  am  confident  that,  by
attending  to  the  directions  which  I  have  given,  the  Streight
may  be  palled  with  the  utmod  fafety  and  convenience  :  but
if,  on  the  contrary,  the  land  is  fallen  in  with  to  the  eadward
of  the  Sti eight,  and  the  wind  fhould  prove  tempeduous  or
unfavourable,  I  think  it  would  be  bed  to  go  round  Staten
Land.  But  I  cannot  in  any  cafe  concur  in  recommending
the  running  into  the  latitude  of  61  or  62,  before  any  endea¬
vour  is  made  to  dand  to  the  wedward.  We  found  neither
the  current  nor  the  dorms  which  the  running  fo  far  to  the
iouthward  is  fuppofed  neceffary  to  avoid ;  and  indeed,  as  the
winds  almod  condantly  blow  from  that  quarter,  it  is  fcarcely
podible  to  purfue  the  advice.  The  navigator  has  no  choice
but  to  dand  to  the  fouthward,  clofe  upon  a  wind,  and  by
keeping  upon  that  tack,  he  will  not  only  make  fouthing,
but  weding ;  and,  if  the  wind  varies  towards  the  north  of

the


2


69


ROUND  THE  WORLD,

the  weft,  his  wefting  will  be  conftderable.  It  will,  indeed,  1769.
be  highly  proper  to  make  fure  of  a  wefting  fufficient  to
double  all  the  lands,  before  an  attempt  is  made  to  ftand  to
the  northward,  and  to  this  every  man^s  own  prudence  will
of  neccftity  direct  him.

We  now  began  to  have  ftrong  gales  and  heavy  feas,  with
irregular  intervals  of  calm  and  fine  weather.


CHAP.  VII.

*

The  Sequel  of  the  Pajfage  from  Cape  Horn  to  the  newly
difcovered  Ifands  in  the  South  Seas ,  with  a  Defcription
of  their  Figure  and  Appearance ;  fome  Account  of  the
bihabitants ,  and  fever al  Incidents  that  happened  during
the  Courfey  and  at  the  Ship's  Arrival  among  them .


ON  the  ift  of  March,  we  were  in  latitude  38°  44'  S.  and
longitude  no°  33'  W.  both  by  obfervation  and  by  the
log.  This  agreement,  after  a  run  of  660  leagues,  was
thought  to  be  very  extraordinary ;  and  is  a  demonftration,
that  after  we  left  the  land  of  Cape  Horn  we  had  no  current
that  affedled  the  fhip.  It  renders  it  alfo  highly  probable,  that
we  had  been  near  no  land  of  any  confiderable  extent ;  for
currents  are  always  found  when  land  is  not  remote,  and
fometimes,  particularly  on  the  eaft  fide  of  the  continent  in
the  North  Sea,  when  land  has  been  diftant  100  leagues.


March.

Wcdnef.


t


Many  birds,  as  ufual,  were  conftantly  about  the  fhip,  fo
that  Mr.  Banks  killed  no  lefs  than  62  in  one  day ;  and  what
is  more  remarkable,  he  caught  two  forefi  flies,  both  of  them
of  the  fame  fpecies,  but  different  from  any  that  have  hither¬


to


7°


LIEUTENANT  GOOK’s  VOYAGE


1769.

March.


Wednef.  8.
'Friday  24,


Saturday  25.


to  been  defcribcd  ;  tliefe  probably  belonged  to  the  birds,  and
came  with  them  from  the  land,  which  we  judged  to  be  at  a
great  diftance.  Mr.  Banks  alfo,  about  this  time,  found  a
large  cuttle-fifti,  which  had  juft  been  killed  by  the  birds,
floating  in  a  mangled  condition  upon  the  water;  it  was  very
different  from  the  cuttle-flflies  that  are  found  in  the  Euro¬
pean  feas ;  for  its  arms,  inftead  of  fuckers,  were  furnifhed
with  a  double  row  of  very  fharp  talons,  which  refembled
thofe  of  a  cat,  and,  like  them,  were  retractable  into  a  fheath
of  Akin,  from  which  they  might  be  thruft  at  pleafure.  Of
this  cuttle-flfli  we  made  one  of  the  heft  foups  we  had  ever
tailed.


The  albatroffes  now  began  to  leave  us,  and  after  the  8th
there  was  not  one  to  be  feen.  We  continued  our  courfe
without  any  memorable  event  till  the  24th,  when  fome  of
the  people  who  were  upon  the  watch  in  the  night,  reported
that  they  faw  a  log  of  wood  pafs  by  the  fhip ;  and  that  the
fea,  which  was  rather  rough,  became  fuddenly  as  fmooth  as
a  mill-pond.  It  was  a  general  opinion,  that  there  was  land
to  windward ;  but  I  did  not  think  myfelf  at  liberty  to  fearch
for  what  I  was  not  fure  to  And ;  though  I  judged  we  were
not  far  from  the  iflands  that  were  difeovered  by  Quiros  in
ido6.  Our  latitude  was  22 0  1  ft  S.  and  longitude  127 0  55"  W.


On  the  25th,  about  noon,  one  of  the  marines,  a  young
fellow  about  twenty,  was  placed  as  centry  at  the  cabbin
door  ;  while  he  was  upon  this  duty,  one  of  my  fervants  was
at  the  fame  place  preparing  to  cut  a  piece  of  feal-ikin  into
tobacco-pouches :  he  had  promifed  one  to  feveral  of  the  men,
but  had  refufed  one  to  this  young  fellow,  though  he  had  afked
him  feveral  times ;  upon  which  he  jocularly  threatened  to  fteal
one,  if  it  fliould  be  in  his  power.  It  happened  that  the  fer-
vant  being  called  haftily  away,  gave  the  fkin  in  charge  to

the


ROUND  THE  WORLD,

the  centinel,  without  regarding  what  had  paffed  between
them.  The  centinel  immediately  fecured  a  piece  of  the  fkin,
which  the  other  miffing  at  his  return,  grew  angry ;  but  after
fome  altercation,  contented  himfelf  with  taking  it  away,  de¬
claring,  that,  for  fo  trifling  an  affair,  he  would  not  complain
of  him  to  the  officers.  But  it  happened  that  one  of  his  fellow
foldiers,  over-hearing  the  difpute,  came  to  the  knowlege  of
what  had  happened,  and  told  it  to  the  refl ;  who,  taking  it
into  their  heads  to  Hand  up  for  the  honour  of  their  corps,
reproached  the  offender  with  great  bitternefs,  and  reviled

-  •-  .  .  j  ■  .■  •  •  •  *

him  in  the  mofl  opprobrious  terms ;  they  exaggerated  his
offence  into  a  crime  of  the  deepefl  die  ;  they  faid  it  was  a
theft  by  a  centry  when  he  was  upon  duty,  and  of  a  thing
that  had  been  committed  to  his  trull;  they  declared  it  a  dif-
grace  to  aflociate  with  him  ;  and  the  Serjeant,  in  particular,
faid  that,  if  the  perfon  from  whom  the  fkin  had  been  ftolen
would  not  complain,  he  would  complain  himfelf ;  for  that
his  honour  would  fuffer  if  the  offender  was  not  punifhed.
From  the  feoffs  and  reproaches  of  thefe  men  of  honour,  the
poor  young  fellow  retired  to  his  hammock  in  an  agony  of
confufion  and  fhame.  The  Serjeant  foon  after  went  to  him,,
and  ordered  him  to  follow  him  to  the  deck :  he  obeyed  with¬
out  reply ;  but  it  being  in  the  dufk  of  the  evening,  he  flip¬
ped  from  the  Serjeant  and  went  forward:  he  was  feen  by
fome  of  the  people,  who  thought  he  was  gone  to  the  head  ;
but  a  fearch  being  made  for  him  afterwards,  it  was  found
that  he  had  thrown  himfelf  overboard  ;  and  I  was  then  firfl
made  acquainted  with  the  theft  and  its  circumflances.

The  lofs  of  this  man  was  the  more  regretted  as  he  was
remarkably  quiet  and  induftrious,  and  as  the  very  action
that  put  an  end  to  his  life  was  a  proof  of  an  ingenuous
mind  ;  for  to  fuch  only  difgrace  is  infupportable.

On


7r

1769.

March.

' - - - '

Saturday  25,


r*


72


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


1769.
April,
t - - -

Tuefday  4.
Lagoon
1/1  and.


On  Tuefday  the  4th  of  April,  about  ten  o’clock  in  the
morning,  Mr.  Banks’s  fervant,  Peter  Brifcoe,  difeovered  land,
bearing  fouth,  at  the  diftance  of  about  three  or  four  leagues.
I  immediately  hauled  up  for  it,  and  found  it  to  be  an  ifland
of  an  oval  form,  with  a  lagoon  in  the  middle,  which  occu¬
pied  much  the  larger  part  of  it ;  the  border  of  land  which
circumfcribes  the  lagoon  is  in  many  places  very  low  and
narrow,  particularly  on  the  fouth  fide,  where  it  confdts
principally  of  a  beach  or  reef  of  rocks  :  it  has  the  fame  ap¬
pearance  alfo  in  three  places  on  the  north  fide ;  fo  that,  the
firm  land  being  disjoined,  the  whole  looks  like  many  iflands
covered  with  wood.  On  the  weft  end  of  the  ifland  is  a  large
tree,  or  clump  of  trees,  that  in  appearance  refembles  a  tower ;
and  about  the  middle  are  two  cocoa-nut  trees,  which  rife
above  all  the  reft,  and,  as  we  came  near  to  the  ifland,
appeared  like  a  flag.  We  approached  it  on  the  north  fide,
and  though  we  came  within  a  mile,  we  found  no  bottom
with  130  fathom  of  line,  nor  did  there  appear  to  be  any
anchorage  about  it.  The  whole  is  covered  with  trees  of
different  verdure,  but  we  could  diftinguifli  none,  even  with
our  glaffes,  except  cocoa-nuts  and  palm-nuts.  We  faw
ieveral  of  the  natives  upon  the  fhore,  and  counted  four  and
twenty.  They  appeared  to  be  tall,  and  to  have  heads  re¬
markably  large  ;  perhaps  they  had  fomething  wound  round
them  which  we  could  not  diftinguifh ;  they  were  of  a  copper
colour,  and  had  long  black  hair.  Eleven  of  them  walked
along  the  beach  abreaft  of  the  fliip,  with  poles  or  pikes  in
their  hands  which  reached  twice  as  high  as  themfelves  :
while  they  walked  on  the  bcacli  they  feemed  to  be  naked  ;
but  foon  after  they  retired,  which  they  did  as  foon  as  the
fliip  had  paffed  the  ifland,  they  covered  themfelves  with
fomething  that  made  them  appear  of  a  light  colour.  Their
habitations  were  under  fome  clumps  of  palm-nut  trees,

which


1


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


13


which  at  a  diflance  appeared  like  high  ground ;  and  to  us,
who  for  a  long  time  had  feen  nothing  but  water  and  Iky,
except  the  dreary  hills  of  Terra  del  Fuego,  thefe  groves
feemed  a  terreftrial  paradife.  To  this  fpot,  which  lies  in
latitude  i8°  47"  S.  and  longitude  13 9 0  28'  W.  we  gave  the
name  of  Lagoon  Island.  The  variation  of  the  needle  here
is  2 0  S4  E*

*  /


1769.

April.

Tuefday  4..


About  one  o’clock  we  made  fail  to  the  weflward,  and  about  Thrumb-
half  an  hour  after  three  we  faw  land  again  to  the  N.  W.  We  1  ’

got  up  with  it  at  funfet,  and  it  proved  to  be  a  low  woody

-  *  »

ifland,  of  a  circular  form,  and  not  much  above  a  mile  in
compafs.  We  difcovered  no  inhabitants,  nor  could  we  diflin-
guifli  any  cocoa-nut  trees,  though  we  were  within  half  a  mile
of  the  fhore.  The  land,  however,  was  covered  with  verdure
of  many  hues.  It  lies  in  latitude  i8°  35'  S.  and  longitude
1 390  48'  W.  and  is  dillant  from  Lagoon  Ifland,  in  the  direc¬
tion  of  N.  62  W.  about  feven  leagues.  We  called  it  Thrum b-
Cap.  I  difcovered,  by  the  appearance  of  the  fhore,  that  at
this  place  it  was  low-water  ;  and  I  had  obferved  at  Lagoon
Ifland,  that  it  was  either  high-water,  or  that  the  fea  neither
ebbed  nor  flowed :  I  infer,  therefore,  that  a  S.  by  E.  or  S.
moon  makes  high-water.


We  went  on  with  a  fine  trade-wind  and  pleafant  weather,  Wednef.
and  on  the  5th,  about  three  in  the  afternoon,  we  difcovered  Bow IiW*
land  to  the  weflward.  It  proved  to  be  a  low  ifland,  of  much
greater  extent  than  either  of  thofe  that  we  had  feen  before,
being  about  ten  or  twelve  leagues  in  compafs.  Several  of
us  remained  at  the  mall-head  the  whole  evening,  admiring
its  extraordinary  figure :  it  was  fhaped  exadtly  like  a  bow,
the  arch  and  cord  of  which  were  land,  and  the  fpacc  between
them  water;  the  cord  was  a  flat  beach,  without  any  figns  of
vegetation,  having  nothing  upon  it  but  heaps  of  fea  weed,

Vol.  II,  L  which


J


\


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1769.

April.


\Vednef.  5.


which  lay  in  different  ridges,  as  higher  or  lower  tides  had
left  them.  It  appeared  to  be  about  three  or  four  leagues
long,  and  not  more  than  two  hundred  yards  wide  ;  but  as  a
horizontal  plain  is  always  feen  in  perfpedlive,  and  greatly
fore-fhortened,  it  is  certainly  much  wider  than  it  appeared  z
the  horns,  or  extremities  of  the  bow,  were  two  large  tufts
of  cocoa-nut  trees ;  and  much  the  greater  part  of  the  arch
was  covered  with  trees  of  different  height,  figure  and  hue  ;
in  feme  parts,  however,  it  was  naked  and  low  like  the  cord :
fome  of  us  thought  they  difcovered  openings  through  the  cord,
into  the  pool,  or  lake,  that  was  included  between  that  and  the
bow;  but  whether  there  were  or  were  not  fuch  openings  is  un¬
certain.  We  failed  abreaft  of  the  low  beach,  or  bow-firing,,
within  lefs  than  a  league  of  the  fhore,  till  funfet,  and  we
then  judged  ourfelves  to  be  about  half  way  between  the  two
horns:  here  we  brought  to,  and  founded,  but  found  no  bot¬
tom  with  one  hundred  and  thirty  fathom ;  and,  as  it  is  dark
almofl  inflantly  after  funfet  in  thefe  latitudes,  we  fuddenly
loft  fight  of  the  land,  and  making  fail  again,  before  the  line
was  well  hauled  in,  we  fleered  by  the  found  of  the  breakers,
which  were  diftinftly  heard  till  we  got  clear  of  the  coaft.

We  knew  this  ifland  to  be  inhabited,  by  fmoke  which  we
faw  in  different  parts  of  it,  and  we  gave  it  the  name  of  Bow
Island.  Mr.  Gore,  my  Second  Lieutenant,  faid,  after  we*
had  failed  by  the  ifland,  that  he  had  feen  feveral  of  the  na¬
tives,  under  the  firfl  clump  of  trees,  from  the  deck ;  that  lie-
had  diflinguifhed  their  houfes,  and  feen  feveral  canoes  hauled
up  under  the  fhade  ;  but  in  this  he  was  more  fortunate  than
any  other  perfon  on  board.  The  eafl  end  of  this  ifland,
which  from  its  figure  we  called  the  Bow,  lies  in  latitude
180  23'  S.  and  longitude  1410  12' W.  we  obferved  the  varia¬
tion  of  the  compafs  to  be  50  38'  E.


On


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


is

On  the  next  day,  Thurfday  the  6th,  about  noon,  we  faw  1 769.
land  again  to  the  wedward,  and  came  up  with  it  about  three,  1 , _j.
It  appeared  to  be  two  idands,  or  rather  groups  of  idands,  xhe  Groups.
extending  from  N.  W.  by  N.  to  S.  E.  by  S.  about  nine  leagues.

Of  thefe,  the  two  larged  were  feparated  from  each  other  by
a  channel  of  about  half  a  mile  broad,  arid  were  feverally
furrounded  by  fmaller  iflands,  to  which  they  were  joined  by
reefs  that  lay  under  water.

Thefe  iflands  were  long  narrow  drips  of  land,  ranging  in
all  diredtions,  fome  of  them  ten  miles  or  upwards  in  length,
but  none  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile  broad,  and  upon  all
of  them  there  were  trees  of  various  kinds,  particularly  the
cocoa-nut.  The  fouth-eadermod  of  them  lies  in  the  latitude
of  iB°  12' S*.  and  longitude  1420  42  W.  and  at  the  didance  of
twenty-five  leagues,  in  the  direction  of  W.  1 N.  from  the
wed  end  of  Bow  Idand.  We  ranged  along  the  S.  W.  fide  of
this  ifiand,  and  hauled  into  a  bay  which  lies  to  the  N.  W.  of
the  fouthermod  point  of  the  Group,  where  there  was  a
fmooth  fea,  and  the  appearance  of  anchorage,  without  much
furf  on  the  fhore.  We  founded,  but  we  found  no  bottom
with  one  hundred  fathom,  at  the  didance  of  no  more  than
three  quarters  of  a  mile  from  the  beach,  and  I  did  not  think
it  prudent  to  go  nearer.

While  this  was  doing,  feveral  of  the  inhabitants  aflembled
upon  the  fhore,  and  fome  came  out  in  their  canoes  as  far  as
the  reefs,  but  would  not  pafs  them:  when  we  faw  this,  we
ranged,  with  an  eafy  fail,  along  the  fhore;  but  jud  as  we
were  paffing  the  end  of  the  idand,  fix  men,  who  had  for
fome  time  kept  abread  of  the  fhip,  fuddenly  launched  two
canoes  with  great  quicknefs  and  dexterity,  and  three  of
them  getting  into  each,  they  put  off,  as  we  imagined  with
a  defign  to  come  on  board  us ;  the  fhip  was  therefore  brought

La  to>


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

Apru*  t0j  ^Ut  tlieir  fellows>  flopped  at  the  reef;  we  did

. not  however  immediately  make  fail,  as  we  obferved  two

a  huifday  6.  me|j'engers  difpatched  to  them  from  the  other  canoes,  which

were  of  a  much  larger  fize :  we  perceived  that  thefe  mef-
fengers  made  great  expedition,  wading  and  fwimming  along
the  reef ;  at  length  they  met,  and  the  men  on  board  the  ca¬
noes  making  no  difpofitions  to  pafs  the  reef,  after  having
received  the  meflage,  we  judged  that  they  had  refolved  to
come  no  farther:  after  waiting,  therefore,  fome  little  time
longer,  we  flood  off ;  but  when  we  were  got  about  two  or
three  miles  from  the  fhore,  we  perceived  fome  of  the  natives
following  us  in  a  canoe  with  a  fail ;  we  did  not,  however,
think  it  worth  while  to  wait  for  her,  and  though  flie  had
pafled  the  reef,  £he  foon  after  gave  over  the  chace.

According  to  the  belt  judgment  that  we  could  form  of  the
people  when  we  were  neareft  the  fhore,  they  were  about  our
fize,  and  well-made.  They  were  of  a  brown  complexion,
and  appeared  to  be  naked ;  their  hair,  which  was  black,  was
confined  by  a  fillet  that  went  round  the  head,  and  ftuck  out
behind  like  a  bu(h.  The  greater  part  of  them  carried  in
their  hands  two  weapons  ;  one  of  them  was  a  flender  pole,
from  ten  to  fourteen  feet  long,  on  one  end  of  which  was  a
fmall  knob,  not  unlike  the  point  of  a  fpear ;  the  other  was
about  four  feet  long,  and  fhaped  like  a  paddle,  and  poflibly
might  be  fo,  for  fome  of  their  canoes  were  very  fmall :  thofe
which  we  faw  them  launch  feemed  not  intended  to  carry
more  than  the  three  men  that  got  into  them  :  we  faw  others
that  had  on  board  fix  or  feven  men,  and  one  of  them  hoifled
a  fail  which  did  not  feem  to  reach  more  than  fix  feet  above  the
gunwale  of  the  boat,  and  which,  upon  the  falling  of  a  flight
fhower,  was  taken  down  and  converted  into  an  awning  or
tilt.  The  canoe  which  followed  ns  to  fea  hoifled  a  fail  not

£  unlike


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


77


unlike  an  Englifh  lug- fail,  and  almoft  as  lofty  as  an  Englifh
boat  of  the  fame  fize  would  have  carried.

The  people,  who  kept  abreaft  of  the  fhip  on  the  beach,
made  many  fignals ;  but  whether  they  were  intended  to
frighten  us  away,  or  invite  us  on  fhore,  it  is  not  eafy  to  de¬
termine  :  we  returned  them  by  waving  our  hats  and  fhout-
ing,  and  they  replied  by  {homing  again.  We  did  not  put
their  difpofition  to  the  teft,  by  attempting  to  land  j  becaufe,
as  the  illand  was  inconfiderable,  and  as  we  wanted  nothing
that  it  could  afford,  we  thought  it  imprudent  as  well  as
cruel  to  rifle  a  conteft,  in  which  the  natives  mull  have  fuf-
fered  by  our  fuperiority,  merely  to  gratify  an  idle  curiofity  ;
efpecially  as  we  expected  foon  to  fall  in  with  the  ifland  where
we  had  been  diredled  to  make  our  agronomical  obfervation,
the  inhabitants  of  which  would  probably  admit  us  without
oppofition,  as  they  were  already  acquainted  with  our  ftrength*
and  might  alfo  procure  us  a  ready  and  peaceable  reception
among  the  neighbouring  people,  if  we  fhould  defire  it.

To  thefe  iflands  we  gave  the  name  of  The  Groups.

On  the  7th,  about  half  an  hour  after  fix  in  the  morning,
being  juft  at  day-break,  we  difeovered  another  ifland  to  the
northward,  which  we  judged  to  be  about  four  miles  in  cir¬
cumference.  The  land  lay  very  low,  and  there  was  a  piece
of  water  in  the  middle  of  it ;  there  feemed  to  be  fome  wood
upon  it,  and  it  looked  green  and  pleafant ;  but  we  faw  nei¬
ther  cocoa  trees  nor  inhabitants :  it  abounded  however  with

birds,  and  we  therefore  gave  it  the  name  of  Bird-Island.

'  /

It  lies  in  latitude  170  48' S.  and  longitude  1430  3/  W.  at
the  diftance  of  ten  leagues,  in  the  direction  W.  4.  N.  from  the
weft  end  of  the  Groups.  The  variation  here  was  6°  32'  E.

On  the  8th,  about  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  faw
land  to  the  northward,  and  about  funfet  came  abreaft  of  it,

at


1769.
April,
t - „ — —J

Thurfday  6,


Friday  7.
Bird  Ifland.


Saturday  8.
Chain  Iiland*


yg  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

1769-  at  about  the  diftance  of  two  leagues.  It  appeared  to  be  a
double  range  of  low  woody  iflands  joined  together  by  reefs»
fo  as  to  form  one  ifland,  in  the  form  of  an  ellipfis  or  oval,
with  a  lake  in  the  middle  of  it.  The  frnall  iflands  and  reefs
that  circumfcribe  the  lake  have  the  appearance  of  a  chain,
and  we  therefore  gave  it  the  name  of  Chain  Island.  Its
w  length  feemed  to  be  about  five  leagues,  in  the  diredion  of
N.  W.  and  S.  E.  and  its  breadth  about  five  miles.  The  trees
upon  it  appeared  to  be  large,  and  we  faw  fmoke  riling  in  dif¬
ferent  parts  of  it  from  among  them,  a  certain  fign  that  it
was  inhabited.  The  middle  of  it  lies  in  latitude  170  23' S.
and  longitude  1450  54  W.  and  is  diftant  from  Bird  Ifland
forty-five  leagues  in  the  diredion  of  W.  by  N.  The  variation
Jiere  was,  by  feveral  azimuths,  found  to  be  40  5 4'  E.

Monday  10.  On  the  i oth,  having  had  a  tempeftuous  night  with  thunder
and  rain,  the  weather  was  hazy  till  about  nine  o’clock  in  the
morning,  when  it  cleared  up,  and  we  faw  the  ifland  to  which
Captain  Wallis,  who  firfl  difcovered  it,  gave  the  name  of
Ofnaburgh  Ifland,  called  by  the  natives  Maitca ,  bearing
N.  W.  by  W.  diftant  about  five  leagues.  It  is  a  high  round
ifland,  not  above  a  league  in  circuit ;  in  fome  parts  it  is  co¬
vered  with  trees,  and  in  others  a  naked  rock.  In  this  direc¬
tion  it  looked  like  a  high  crown’d  hat ;  but  when  it  bears
North,  the  top  of  it  has  more  the  appearance  of  the  roof  of
a  houfe.  We  made  its  latitude  to  be  170  48' S.  its  longitude
148  °  10' W.  and  its  diftance  from  Chain  Ifland  44  leagues,  in
the  diredion  of  W,  by  S.


CHA^.


I


\


\VW1  Longitude  from  Greenwich


Point  Venus


Variation  of  the-  Compafr  4  ° 46  E


Mar avai  Pay  K>  1


Mo  tu-  ah  o  i^’-n  a


Xy>  <Vu  n  auwe  A


/rruirri


•  m


Wliowpa


Lie  ut.  J  Co  ok


tNaiir?


Marais  rur  tv  0drn


V  eA  Longitude  from  Greenwicli


V.


ROUND  THE  WORLD*


79


CHAP.  VIII.

The  Arrival  of  the  Endeavour  at  Otaheite ,  called  by  Captain
IV alii S)  King  George  the  III  Is  Ifandt  Rules  eflablifhed
for  Traffic  with  the  Natives ,  and  an  Account  of  feveral
Incidents  which  happened  in  a  Vift  to  Toot  ah  ah  and
Toubourai  Tam  aid  a,  two  Chiefs .

ABOUT  one  o’clock,  on  Monday  the  10th  of  April,  fome

of  the  people  who  were  looking  out  for  the  ifland  to  APril-
which  we  were  bound,  faid  they  faw  land  ahead,  in  that  Monday
part  of  the  horizon  where  it  was  expedted  to  appear ;  but  it
was  fo  faint  that,  whether  there  was  land  in  fight  or  not,  re¬
mained  a  matter  of  difpute  till  funfet.  The  next  morning,  Tuefday  n>
however,  at  fix  o’clock,  we  were  convinced  that  thofe  who
faid  they  had  difcovered  land,  were  not  miftaken  y  it  appeared
to  be  very  high  and  mountainous,  extending  from  W.  by  S'

S.  to  W.  by  N,  4-  N.  and  we  knew  it  to  be  the  fame  that
Captain  Wallis  had  called  King  George  the  III.’s  Bland.  We
were  delayed  in  our  approach  to  it  by  light  airs  and  calms,
fo  that  in  the  morning  of  the  12th  we  were  but  little  nearer  wednef,- 12.
than  we  had  been  the  night  before ;  but  about  feven  a  breeze
fprung  up,  and  before  eleven  feveral  canoes  were  feen  mak¬
ing  towards  the  fhip :  there  were  but  few  of  them,  however,
that  would  come  near ;  and  the  people  in  thofe  that  did,
could  not  be  perfuaded  to  come  on  board.  In  every  canoe
there  were  young  plantains,  and  branches  of  a  tree  which
the  Indians  call  E' Midhoy  thefe,  as  we  afterwards  learnt,  were
brought  as  tokens  of  peace  and  amity,  and  the  people  in  one
of  the  canoes  handed  them  up  the  fhip’s  fide,  making  fignals

4  at


So  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

Apr*?.'  at  tIle  fame  time  with  Sreat  earneftnefs,  which  we  did  not
'  immediately  underftand  ;  at  length  we  gueffed  that  they

wilhed  thefe  fymbols  fhould  be  placed  in  fome  confpicuous
part  of  the  fliip ;  we,  therefore,  immediately  ftuck  them
among  the  rigging,  at  which  they  exprefled  the  greateft  fa-
tisfaclion.  We  then  purchafed  their  cargoes,  confiding  of
cocoa-nuts,  and  various  kinds  of  fruit,  which  after  our  long
voyage  were  very  acceptable.

We  flood  on  with  an  eafy  fail  all  night,  with  foundings
Thurfday  13.  from  22  fathom  to  12,  and  about  feven  o’clock  in  the  morn¬
ing  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  13  fathom,  in  Port-royal  bay,
called  by  the  natives  Mat  aval.  We  were  immediately  fur-
rounded  by  the  natives  in  their  canoes,  who  gave  us  cocoa^
nuts,  fruit  refembling  apples,  bread-fruit,  and  fome  fmall
fifhes,  in  exchange  for  beads  and  other  trifles.  They  had
with  them  a  pig,  which  they  would  not  part  with  for  any
thing  but  a  hatchet,  and  therefore  we  refufed  to  purchafe
it ;  becaufe,  if  we  gave  them  a  hatchet  for  a  pig  now,  we
knew  they  would  never  afterwards  fell  one  for  lefs,  and  we
could  not  afford  to  buy  as  many  as  it  was  probable  we  fhould
want  at  that  price.  The  bread-fruit  grows  on  a  tree  that  is
about  the  fize  of  a  middling  oak  :  its  leaves  are  frequently  a
foot  and  an  half  long,  of  an  oblong  fhape,  deeply  finuated
like  thofe  of  the  fig-tree,  which  they  refemble  in  confidence
and  colour,  and  in  the  exuding  of  a  white  milky  juice  upon
being  broken.  The  fruit  is  about  the  fize  and  fhape  of  a
child  s  head,  and  the  furface  is  reticulated  not  much  unlike
a  truffle  1  it  is  covered  with  a  thin  fkin,  and  has  a  core  about
as  big  as  the  handle  of  a  fmall  knife :  the  eatable  part  lies
between  the  fkin  and  the  core ;  it  is  as  white  as  fnow,  and
fome  what  o±  the  confidence  of  new  bread  :  it  mud  be  roaded
before  it  is  eaten,  being  drd  divided  into  three  or  four  parts:

its


N°2


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


81


its  tafle  is  infipid,  with  a  flight  fweetnefs  fomewhat  refem-
bling  that  of  the  crumb  of  wheaten-bread  mixed  with  a  Je-
rufalem  artichoke.


1769.

Aprii


Thurfday  13.


Among  others  who  came  off  to  the  fliip  was  an  elderly’
man,  whofe  name,  as  we  learnt  afterwards,  was  Owhaw,  and
who  was  immediately  known  to  Mr.  Gore,  and  feveral  others
who  had  been  here  with  Captain  Wallis  ;  as  I  was  informed
that  he  had  been  very  ufeful  to  them,  I  took  him  on  board
the  fliip  with  fome  others,  and  was  particularly  attentive  to
gratify  him,  as  I  hoped  he  might  alfo  be  ufeful  to  us.

As  our  flay  here  was  not  likely  to  be  very  fhort,  and  as  it
was  neceffary  that  the  merchandife  which  we  had  brought
for  traffic  with  the  natives  fhould  not  diminifh  in  its  value,
which  it  would  certainly  have  done,  if  every  perfon  had  been
left  at  liberty  to  give  what  he  pleafed  for  fuch  things  as  he
fhould  purchafe;  at  the  fame  time  that  confufion  and  quar¬
rels  mufl  neceflarily  have  arifen  from  there  being  no  flandard
at  market :  I  drew  up  the  following  rules,  and  ordered  that
they  fhould  be  pun&ually  obferved.

Rules  to  be  obferved  by  every  perfon  in  or  belonging  to  his  Majefy's
Bark  the  Endeavour ,  for  the  better  efablifhing  a  regular  and  uni -
form  trade  for  provifion ,  &c.  vuith  the  inhabitants  of  George's
Ifland.

44  I.  To  endeavour,  by  every  fair  means,  to  cultivate  a
“  friendfhip  with  the  natives  s  and  to  treat  them  with  all
44  imaginable  humanity.

44  II.  A  proper  perfon,  or  perfons,  will  be  appointed  to
44  trade  with  the  natives  for  all  manner  of  provifions,  fruit,
<c  and  other  productions  of  the  earth ;  and  no  officer  or  fea-
44  man,  or  other  perfon  belonging  to  the  fhip,  excepting  fuch
44  as  are  fo  appointed,  fhall  trade  or  offer  to  trade  for  any  fort
Vol.  II.  M  44  of


LIEUTENANT  COOK'S  VOYAGE

“  of  provifion,  fruit,  or  other  productions  of  the  earth,  unlefs
“  they  have  leave  fo  to  do.

“  III.  Every  perfon  employed  on  fliore,  on  any  duty  what-
“  foever,  is  flri&ly  to  attend  to  the  fame ;  and  if  by  any  ne-
“  gleft  he  lofeth  any  of  his  arms,  or  working  tools,  or  fufFers
“  them  to  be  flolen,  the  full  value  thereof  will  be  charged
“  againft  his  pay,  according  to  the  cuftom  of  the  navy  in
“  fuch  cafes,  and  he  fhall  receive  fuch  farther  punifhmene
“  as  the  nature  of  the  offence  may  deferve.

“  IV.  The  fame  penalty  will  be  infli&ed  on  every  perfon
“  who  is  found  to  embezzle,  trade,  or  offer  to  trade,  with
“  any  pan  of  the  Blip’s  ftores  of  what  nature  foever.

“  V.  No  fort  of  iron,  or  any  thing  that  is  made  of  iron,  or
“  any  fort  of  cloth,  or  other  ufeful  or  neceflary  articles,  are
“  to  be  given  in  exchange  for  any  thing  but  provifion.

“  J.  Cook.”

As  foon  as  the  fhip  was  properly  fecured,  I  went  on  fliore
with  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  a  party  of  men  under
arms,  and  our  friend  Owhaw.  We  were  received  from  the
boat  by  fome  hundreds  of  the  inhabitants,  whofe  looks  at
leaf!  gave  us  welcome,  though  they  were  flruck  with  fuch
awe,  that  the  firft  who  approached  us  crouched  fo  low  that
he  almofl  crept  upon  his  hands  and  knees.  It  is  remarkable
that  he,  like  the  people  in  the  canoes,  prefented  to  us  the
fame  fymbol  of  peace  that  is  known  to  have  been  in  ufe
among  the  ancient  and  mighty  nations  of  the  northern  he-
mifphere,  the  green  branch  of  a  tree.  We  received  it  with
looks  and  geffures  of  kindnefs  and  fatisfa&ion  j  and  obferv-
ing  that  each  of  them  held  one  in  his  hand,  we  immediately
gathered  every  one  a  bough,  and  carried  it  in  our  hands  in
the  fame  manner.


They


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


%

They  marched  with  us  about  half  a  mile  towards  the  place  17%.
where  the  Dolphin  had  watered,  conduced  by  Owhaw ;  they  v  -fpvr~l.  /
then  made  a  full  Hop,  and  having  laid  the  ground  bare,  by  Thurfdayj3«
clearing  away  all  the  plants  that  grew  upon  it,  the  principal
perfons  among  them  threw  their  green  branches  upon  the
naked  fpot,  and  made  figns  that  we  Ihould  do  the  fame  ;  we
immediately  fhowed  our  readinefs  to  comply,  and  to  give  a
greater  folemnity  to  the  rite,  the  marines  were  drawn  up,
and  marching  in  order,  each  dropped  his  bough  upon  thofe
of  the  Indians,  and  we  followed  their  example.  We  them
proceeded,  and  when  we  came  to  the  watering-place  it  was
intimated  to  us  by  figns,  that  we  might  occupy  that  ground,
but  it  happened  not  to  be  fit  for  our  purpofe.  During  our
walk  they  had  fhaken  off  their  firlt  timid  fenfe  of  our  fupe-
riority,  and  were  become  familiar:  they  went  with  us  from
the  watering-place  and  took  a  circuit  through  the  woods
as  we  went  along,  we  diftributed  beads  and  other  fmall  pre~
fents  among  them,  and  had  the  fatis  faction  to  fee  that  they
were  much  gratified.  Our  circuit  was  not  lefs  than  four  or
five  miles,  through  groves  of  trees,  which  were  loaded  with
cocoa-nuts  and  bread-fruit,  and  afforded  the  moll  grateful
fhade.  Under  thefe  trees  were  the  habitations  of  the  people,
moll  of  them  being  only  a  roof  without  walls,  and  the  whole
fcene  realized  the  poetical  fables  of  Arcadia.  We  remarked
however,  not  without  fome  regret,  that  in  all  our  walk  we
had  feen  only  two  hogs,  and  not  a  fingle  fowl,  Thofe  of  our
company  who  had  been  here  with  the  Dolphin  told  us,  that
none  of  the  people  whom  we  had  yet  feen  were  of  the  firlt
clafs  ;  they  fufpe<5ted  that  the  chiefs  had  removed,  and  upon
carrying  us  to  the  place  where  what  they  called  the  Queen's
palace  had  Hood,  we  found  that  no  traces  of  it  were  left.  We
determined  therefore  to  return  in  the  morning,  and  endea¬
vour  to  find  out  the  Noblejfc  in  their  retreats.

M  st  In


LIEUTENANT  COOK's  VOYAGE

In  the  morning,  however,  before  we  could  leave  the  fhip,
feveral  canoes  came  about  us,  moll  of  them  from  the  weft*
ward,  and  two  of  them  were  filled  with  people,  who  by  their
drefs  and  deportment  appeared  to  be  of  a  fuperior  rank :  two
of  thefe  came  on  board,  and  each  fingled  out  his  friend;
one  of  them,  whofe  name  we  found  to  beMATAHAH,  fixed
upon  Mr.  Banks,  and  the  other  upon  me :  this  ceremony
confifted  in  taking  off  great  part  of  their  clothes  and  putting
them  upon  us.  In  return  for  this,  we  prefented  each  of
them  with  a  hatchet  and  fome  beads.  Soon  after  they  made
figns  for  us  to  go  with  them  to  the  places  where  they  lived,
pointing  to  the  S.W. ;  and  as  I  was  defirous  of  finding  a  more
commodious  harbour,  and  making  farther  trial  of  the  dif-
pofition  of  the  people,  I  confented.

I  ordered  out  two  boats,  and  with  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  So-
lander,  the  other  gentlemen,  and  our  two  Indian  friends,
we  embarked  for  our  expedition.  After  rowing  about  a
league,  they  made  figns  that  we  Ihould  go  on  fhore,  and
gave  us  to  underftand  that  this  was  the  place  of  their  refi-
dence.  We  accordingly  landed,  among  feveral  hundreds  of
the  natives,  who  conduced  us  into  a  houfe  of  much  greater
length  than  any  we  had  feen.  When  we  entered,  we  faw  a
middle-aged  man,  whofe  name  we  afterwards  difcovered  to
be  Toot  ah  ah  ;  mats  were  immediately  fpread,  and  we  were
defired  to  fit  down  over  againft  him.  Soon  after  we  were
feated,  he  ordered  a  cock  and  hen  to  be  brought  out,  which
he  prefented  to  Mr.  Banks  and  me ;  we  accepted  the  prefent,
and  in  a  fhort  time  each  of  us  received  a  piece  of  cloth,  per¬
fumed  after  their  manner,  by  no  means  difagreeably,  which
they  took  great  pains  to  make  us  remark.  The  piece  pre¬
fented  to  Mr.  Banks  was  eleven  yards  long  and  two  wide;  in
return  for  which,  he  gave  a  laced  filk  neckcloth,  which  he
happened  to  have  on,  and  a  linen  pocket  handkerchief  i

i  Tootahahi


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


*5

Tootahah  immediately  dreffed  himfelf  in  this  new  finery,  176.9*
with  an  air  of  perfect  complacency  and  fatisfadlion.  But  it  <
is  now  time  that  I  fhould  take  fome  notice  of  the  ladies.  -  Fnday  L#i

Soon  after  the  interchanging  of  our  prefents  with  Toota¬
hah,  they  attended  us  to  feveral  large  houfes,  in  which  we
walked  about  with  great  freedom :  they  fhewed  us  all  the
civility  of  which,  in  our  fituation,  we  could  accept ;  and,  on
their  part,  feemed  to  have  no  fcruple  that  would  have  pre¬
vented  its  being  carried  farther.  The  houfes,  which  as  I
have  obferved  before,  are  all  open,  except  a  roof,  afforded
no  place  of  retirement ;  but  the  ladies,  by  frequently  point¬
ing  to  the  mats  upon  the  ground,  and  fometimes  feating
themfelves  and  drawing  us  down  upon  them,  left  us  no
room  to  doubt  of  their  being  much  lefs  jealous  of  obferva-
tion  than  we  were.

We  now  took  leave  of  our  friendly  Chief,  and  directed
our  courfe  along  the  fhore  ;  when  we  had  walked  about  a
mile,  we  met,  at  the  head  of  a  great  number  of  people,  ano¬
ther  Chief,  whofe  name  was  Tubourai  Tam  aide,  with
whom  we  were  alfo  to  ratify  a  treaty  of  peace,  with  the  ce¬
remony  of  which  we  were  now  become  better  acquainted.

Having  received  the  branch  which  he  prefented  to  us,  and
given  another  in  return,  we  laid  our  hands  upon  our  left
breafts,  and  pronounced  the  word  Taio,  which  we  fuppofed
to  fignify  friend ;  the  Chief  then  gave  us  to  underfland,  that
if  we  chofe  to  eat,  he  had  vi&uals  ready  for  us.  We  accepted
his  offer,  and  dined  very  heartily  upon  fifh,  bread-fruit,
cocoa-nuts  and  plantains,  drefied  after  their  manner ;  they
cat  fome  of  their  fifh  raw,  and  raw  fifh  was  offered  to  us,
but  we  declined  that  part  of  the  entertainment.

During  this  vifit  a  wife  of  our  noble  hod,  whofe  name

was  Tom  to,  did  Mr.  Banks  the  honour  to  place  herfelf  upon

the


S6  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

A*prii  lame  matt,  clofe  by  him.  Tomio  was  not  in  the  firft

r^idlT 7^  bloom  of  her  y°util>  nor  did  A16  appear  to  have  been  ever
remarkable  for  her  beauty:  he  did  not  therefore,  I  believe,

pay  her  the  moft  flattering  attention:  it  happened  too,  as  a
farther  mortification  to  this  lady,  that  feeing  a  very  pretty
girl  among  the  crowd,  he,  not  adverting  to  the  dignity  of
his  companion,  beckoned  her  to  come  to  him ;  the  girl,  after
fome  entreaty,  complied,  and  fat  down  on  the  other  fide  of
him  ;  he  loaded  her  with  beads,  and  every  ihowy  trifle  that
would  pleafe  her :  his  Princefs,  though  Ihe  was  fomewhat
mortified  at  the  preference  that  was  given  to  her  rival,  did
not  difcontinue  her  civilities,  but  flill  afliduoufly  fupplied
him  with  the  milk  of  the  cocoa-nut,  and  fuck  other  dainties
as  were  in  her  reach.  This  fcene  might  poflibly  have  be¬
come  more  curious  and  interefting,  if  it  had  not  been  fud-
denly  interrupted  by  an  interlude  of  a  more  ferious  kind.
Juft  at  this  time,  Dr.  Solander  and  Mr.  Monkhoufe  com¬
plained  that  their  packets  had  been  picked.  Dr.  Solander
had  loft  an  opera  glafs  in  a  fhagreen  cafe,  and  Mr.  Monk-
houfe  his  fnufif-box.  This  incident  unfortunately  put  an  end
to  the  good-humour  of  the  company.  Complaint  of  the  in¬
jury  was  made  to  the  Chief;  and,  to  give  it  weight,  Mr.
Banks  ftarted  up,  and  haftily  ftruck  the  but  end  of  his  fire¬
lock  upon  the  ground::  this  acftion,  and  the  noife  that  ac¬
companied  it,  ftruck  the  whole  aflembly  with  a  panic,  and
every  one  of  the  natives  ran  out  of  the  houfe  with  the  ut-
tnoft  precipitation,  except  the  Chief,  three  women,  and  two
or  three  others,  who  appeared  by  their  drefs  to  be  of  a  fupe-
rior  rank.

The  Chief,  with  a  mixture  of  ccnfufion  and  concern,  took
Mi.  Banks  by  the  hand,  and  led  him  to  a  large  quantity  of
cloth,  which  lay  at  the  other  end  of  the  houfe:  this  he  of-

4  fered


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


87


fered  to  him  piece  by  piece,  intimating  by  figns,  that  if  that  1769.
would  atone  for  the  wrong  which  had  been  done,  he  might  <_  Apn1^
take  any  part  of  it,  or,  if  he  pleafed,  the  whole.  Mr.  Banks  Fnday  H*
put  it  by,  and  gave  him  to  underftand,  that  he  wanted  no¬
thing  but  what  had  been  dilhoneftly  taken  away.  Toubou-
rai  Tamaide  then  went  haftily  out,  leaving  Mr.  Banks  with
his  wife  Tomio,  who  during  the  whole  fcene  of  terror  and
confufion  had  kept  conftantly  at  his  fide,  and  intimating  his
defire  that  he  fliould  wait  there  till  his  return.  Mr.  Banks
accordingly  fat  down,  and  converfed  with  her,  as  well  as  he
could  by  figns,  about  half  an  hour.  The  chief  then  came
back  with  the  fnuff-box  and  the  cafe  of  the  opera  glafs  in
his  hand,  and,  with  a  joy  in  his  countenance  that  was  painted
with  a  ftrength  of  exprefiion  which  diftinguifhes  thefe  people
from  all  others,  delivered  them  to  the  owners.  The  cafe  of
the  opera  glafs,  however,  upon  being  opened,  was  found  to
be  empty  ;  upon  this  difcovery,  his  countenance  changed  in
a  moment;  and  catching  Mr.  Banks  again  by  the  hand,  he
rufhed  out  of  the  houfe,  without  uttering  any  found,  and
led  him  along  the  ftiore,  walking  with  great  rapidity  :  when
they  had  got  about  a  mile  from  the  houfe,  a  woman  met
him  and  gave  him  a  piece  of  cloth,  which  he  haftily  took
from  her,  and  continued  to  prefs  forward  with  it  in  his
hand.  Dr.  Solanderand  Mr.  Monkhoufe  had  followed  them,
and  they  came  at  length  to  a  houfe  where  they  were  received
by  a  woman,  to  whom  he  gave  the  cloth,  and  intimated  to
the  gentlemen  that  they  fhould  give  her  fome  beads.  They
immediately  complied;  and  the  beads  and  cloth  being  depo-
fitedupon  the  floor,  the  woman  went  out,  and  in  about  half
an  hour  returned  with  the  opera  glafs,  exprefling  the  fame
joy  upon  the  occafion  that  had  before  been  exprefled  by  the
Chief.  The  beads  were  now  returned,  with  an  inflexible

rcfolution


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


83


1769.

April.


Friday  14,


refolution  not  to  accept  them ;  and  the  cloth  was,  with
with  the  fame  pertinacity,  forced  upon  Dr.  Solander,  as  a
recompence  for  the  injury  that  had  been  done  him.  He
could  not  avoid  accepting  the  cloth,  but  infilled  in  his  turn  '
upon  giving  a  new  prefent  of  beads  to  the  woman.  It  will
not  perhaps  be  eafy  to  account  for  all  the  Heps  that  were
taken  in  the  recovery  of  this  glafs  and  fnuff-box ;  but  this
cannot  be  thought  ftrange,  conlldering  that  the  fcene  of
action  was  among  a  people  whofe  language,  policy  and  con¬
nexions  are  even  now  but  imperfeXly  known ;  upon  the
whole,  however,  they  Ihow  an  intelligence  and  influence
which  would  do  honour  to  any  fyftem  of  government,  how¬
ever  regular  and  improved;  In  the  evening,  about  fix  o’clock,


we  returned  to  the  fliip.


*9


V


CHAP.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.  89

X


CHAP.  IX.

A  Place  fixed  upon  for  an  Obfervatory  and  Fort :  a7i  Ex -
curfon  into  the  Woods ,  and  its  Confequences .  7 he  Fort
ereEled :  a  Vifit  from  feveral  Chiefs  on  board  and  at  the
Forty  with  fo?ne  Account  of  the  Mufc  of  the  Natives ,
and  the  Manner  in  which  they  difpofe  of  their  Dead.

ON  the  next  morning,  Saturday  the  1 5th,  feveral  of  the

Chiefs  whom  we  had  feen  the  day  before  came  on  ■  Apnl‘
board,  and  brought  with  them,  hogs,  bread-fruit,  and  other  Saturda^Is»
refrefhments,  for  which  we  gave  them  hatchets  and  linen,
and  fuch  things  as  feemed  to  be  moil  acceptable.

As  in  my  excurfion  to  the  weftward,  I  had  not  found  any
more  convenient  harbour  than  that  in  which  we  lay,  I  de¬
termined  to  go  on  fhore  and  fix  upon  fome  fpot,  commanded
by  the  fhip’s  guns,  where  I  might  throw  up  a  fmall  fort  for
our  defence,  and  prepare  for  making  our  aftronomical  ob-
fervation.

I  therefore  took  a  party  of  men,  and  landed  without  delay,
accompanied  by  Mr.  Banks,  Dr.  Solander,  and  the  afirono-
mer,  Mr.  Green.  We  foon  fixed  upon  a  part  of  the  fandy
beach,  on  the  N.  E.  point  of  the  bay,  which  was  in  every
refpedl  convenient  for  our  purpofe,  and  not  near  any  habi¬
tation  of  the  natives.  Haying  marked  out  the  ground  that
we  intended  to  occupy,  a  fmall  tent  belonging  to  Mr.  Banks
was  fet  up,  which  had  been  brought  on  Ihore  for  that  pur¬
pofe  :  by  this  time  a  great  number  of  the  people  had  ga¬
thered  about  us  5  but,  as  it  appeared,  only  to  look  on,  there
Vol.  II.  N  not


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

not  being  a  {ingle  weapon  of  any  kind  among  them.  I  in*
timated,  however,  that  none  of  them  were  to  come  within
the  line  I  had  drawn,  except  one  who  appeared  to  be  a  chief,
and  Owhaw.  To  thefe  two  perfons  I  addrefled  myfelf  by
ligns,  and  endeavoured  to  make  them  underftand,  that  we
wanted  the  ground  which  we  had  marked  out  to  fleep  upon
for  a  certain  number  of  nights,  and  that  then  we  fhould  go
away.  Whether  I  was  underflood  I  cannot  certainly  deter¬
mine  ;  but  the  people  behaved  with  a  deference  and  refpedt
that  at  once  pleafed  and  furprifed  us :  they  fat  down  peaceably
without  the  circle,  and  looked  on,  without  givingus  any  inter¬
ruption,  till  we  had  done,  which  was  upwards  of  two  hours.
As  we  had  feen  no  poultry,  and  but  two  hogs,  in  our  walk
when  we  were  lafl  on  fhore  at  this  place,  we  fufpe&ed  that,
upon  our  arrival,  they  had  been  driven  farther  up  the  coun¬
try  ;  and  the  rather,  as  Owhaw  was  very  importunate  with
us,  by  figns,  not  to  go  into  the  woods,  which,  however,  and
partly  for  thefe  reafons,  we  were  determined  to  do.  Having
therefore  appointed  the  thirteen  marines  and  a  petty  officer
to  guard  the  tent,  we  fet  out,  and  a  great  number  of  the  na¬
tives  joined  our  party.  As  we  were  croffing  a  little  river  that
lay  in  our  way  we  faw  ibme  ducks,  and  Mr.  Banks,  as  foon
as  he  had  got  over,  fired  at  them,  and  happened  to  kill  three'
at  one  fliot :  this  {truck  them  with  the  utmofl  terror,  fo  that
rnofl  of  them  fell  fuddenly  to  the  ground,  as  if  they  alfo  had
been  fliot  at  the  fame  difcharge :  it  was  not  long,  however,
before  they  recovered  from  their  fright,  and  we  continued
our  rout  j  but  we  had  not  gone  far  before  we  were  alarmed
by  the  report  of  two  pieces,  which  were  fired  by  the  guard  at
the  tent.  We  had  then  draggled  a  little  diflance  from  each
other,  but  Owhaw  immediately  called  us  together,  and  by
waving  his  hand,  fent  away  every  Indian  who  followed  us

except  three,  each  of  whom,  as  a  pledge  of  peace  on  their

part,


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


9*

part,  and  an  entreaty  that  there  might  be  peace  on  ours,  1769-
haftily  broke  a  branch  from  the  trees,  and  came  to  us  with  ■  -  -  •

it  in  their  hands.  As  we  had  too  much  reafon  to  fear  that  J‘ur  y  IS*
fome  mifchief  had  happened,  we  hailed  back  to  the  tent,
which  was  not  diftant  above  half  a  mile,  and  when  we  came
up,  we  found  it  entirely  deferted,  except  by  our  own  people.

It  appeared,  that  one  of  the  Indians  who  remained  about
the  tent  after  we  left  it,  had  watched  his  opportunity,  and,
taking  the  centry  unawares,  had  fnatched  away  his  mufquet.

Upon  this,  the  petty  officer,  a  midffiipman,  who  commanded
the  party,  perhaps  from  a  fudden  fear  of  farther  violence,
perhaps  from  the  natural  petulance  of  power  newly  acquired,
and  perhaps  from  a  brutality  in  his  nature,  ordered  the  ma¬
rines  to  fire  :  the  men,  with  as  little  confideration  or  huma¬
nity  as  the  officer,  immediately  difcharged  their  pieces  among
the  thickeft  of  the  flying  crowd,  confiding  of  more  than  a
hundred  ;  and  obferving  that  the  thief  did  not  fall,  purfued
him,  and  fhot  him  dead.  We  afterwards  learnt,  that  none  of
the  others  were  either  killed  or  wounded.

Owhaw,  who  had  never  left  us,  obferving  that  we  were
now  totally  deferted,  got  together  a  few  of  thofe  who  had
fled,  though  not  without  fome  difficulty,  and  ranged  them
about  us :  we  endeavoured  to  juftify  our  people  as  well  as
we  could,  and  to  convince  the  Indians  that  if  they  did  no
wrong  to  us,  we  fliould  do  no  wrong  to  them  :  they  went
away  without  any  appearance  of  diflrufl  or  refentment ;  and
having  {truck  our  tent,  we  returned  to  the  fhip,  but  by  no
means  fatisfied  with  the  tranfadlions  of  the  day.

Upon  queftioning  our  people  more  particularly,  whofc
conduct  they  foon  perceived  we  could  not  approve,  they  al¬
leged  that  the  centinel  whofe  mufquet  was  taken  away,
was  violently  affiaulted  and  thrown  down,  and  that  a  pufh

N  2  was


9*


iy6g.

April.

Saturday  15.


Sunday  i6i.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

was  afterwards  made  at  him  by  the  man  who  took  the  mu£
quet,  before  any  command  was  given  to  fire.  It  was  alfo
fuggefted,  that  Owhaw  had  fufpicions,  at  leaft,  if  not  cer¬
tain  knowlege,  that  fomething  would  be  attempted  againft
our  people  at  the  tent,  which  made  him  fo  very  earned:  in
his  endeavours  to. prevent  our  leaving  it ;  others  imputed  his
importunity  to  his  defire  that  we  fhould  confine  ourfelves  to
the  beach  :  and  it  was  remarked  that  neither  Owhaw,  nor>
the  Chiefs  who  remained  with  us  after  he  had  fent  the  reft
of  the.  people  away,  would  have  inferred  the  breach  of  peace
from  the  firing  at  the  tent,  if  they  had  had  no  reafon  to
fufpedf  that  fome  injury  had  been  offered  by  their  coun¬
trymen  y  efpecially  as  A/Ir.  Banks  had  juft,  fired  at  the  ducks  ;
and  yet  that  they  did  infer  a  breach  of  peace  from  that  inci¬
dent,  as  was  manifeft  from  their  waving  their  hands  for  the
people  to  difperfe,  and  inftantly  pulling  green  branches  from
the  trees.  But  what  were  the  real  circumftances  of  this  un-
happy.  affair,  and  whether  either  and  which  of  thefe  conjec¬
tures  were  true,  can  never  certainly  be  known.

The  next  morning  but  few  of  the  natives  were  feen  upon*
the  beach,  and  not  one  of  them  came  off  to  the  fhip.  This
convinced  us  that  our  endeavours  to  quiet  their  apprehenfions
had  not  been  effe&ual  j  and  we  remarked  with  particular
regret,  that  we  were  deferted  even  by  Owhaw,  who  had  hi¬
therto  been  fo  conftant  in  his  attachment,  and  fo  active,  in
renewing  the  peace  that  had  been  broken.

Appearances  being  thus  unfavourable,  I  warped  the  fhip
nearer  to  the  fhore,  and  moored  her  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to
command  all  the  N.  E.  part  of  the  bay,  particularly  the  place
W/hicl-  I  had  marked  out  for  the  building  a  fort.  In. the  evem
ing,  however,  I  went  on  fliore  with  only  a  boat’s  crew,  and
fome  of  the  Gentlemen :  the  natives  gathered  about  us,  but

3  '  not


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


93


not  in  the  fame  number  as  before  ;  there  were  I  believe  be-  1769.
tween  thirty  and  forty,  and  they  trafficked  with  us  for  cocoa-  1  _
nuts  and  other  fruit,  to  all  appearance  as  friendly  as  ever.

On  the  17th,  early  in  the  morning,  we  had  the  misfortune  Monday  17,
to  lofe  Mr.  Buchan,  the  perfon  whom  Mr.  Banks  had  brought
out  as  a  painter  of  landfcapes  and  figures.  He  was  a  fober,
diligent,  and  ingenious  young  man,  and  greatly  regretted
by  Mr.  Banks ;  who  hoped,  by  his  means,  to  have  gratified
his  friends  in  England  with  reprefentations  of  this  country
and  its  inhabitants,  which  no  other  perfon  on  board  could!
delineate  with  the  fame  accuracy  and  elegance.  He  had  al¬
ways  been  fubjeCt  to  epileptic  fits,  one  of  which  feized  him:
on  the  mountains  of  Terra  del  Fuego,  and  this  diforder  being
aggravated  by  a  bilious  complaint  which  he  contracted  on¬
board  the  fhip,  at  length  put  an  end  to  his  life..  It  was  at
firit  propofed  to  bury  him  on  fhore,  but  Mr.  Banks  thinking
that  it  might  perhaps  give  offence  to  the  natives,  with  whole
cuftoms  we  were  then  wholly  unacquainted,  we  committed,
his  body  to  the  fea,  with  as  much  decency  and  folemnity  as  -
our  circumfiances  and  fituation  would  admit..

In  the  forenoon  of  this  day  we  received  a  vifit  from  Tn~
bourai  Tamaide  and  Tootahah,  our  Chiefs,  from  the  Well-
they  brought  with  them,  as  emblems  of  peace,  not  branches
of  plantain,  but  two  young  trees,  and  would  not  venture  om
board  till  thefe  had  been  received,  having  probably  been;
alarmed  by  the  mischief  which  had  been  done  at  the  tent,.

Each  of  them  alfo  brought,  as  propitiatory  gifts,  fome  bread¬
fruit,  and  a  hog  ready  dreffed:  this  was  a  moll  acceptable
prefent,  as  we  perceived  that  hogs  were  not  always  to  be  got;
and  in  return  we  gave  to  each  of  our  noble  benefactors  a;
hatchet  and  a  nail.  In  the  evening  we  went  on  fhore  and:
fet  up  a  tent,  in  which  Mr.  Green  and  my felf  fpent  the  night,.

in.


n

/

1769.

April.

V _ _ — -J

Taefday,i8.


W«dnef.  19.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

»  **  '  I  ‘

in  order  to  obferve  an  eclipfe  of  the  firfl  fatellite  of  Jupiter  5
but  the  weather  becoming  cloudy,  we  were  difappointed.

On  the  1 8th,  at  day-break,  I  went  on  fliore,  with  as  many
people  as  could  poflibly  be  fpared  from  the  fhip,  and  began
to  ere&  our  fort.  While  fome  were  employed  in  throwing  ‘
up  intrenchments,  others  were  bufy  in  cutting  pickets  and
fafcines,  which  the  natives,  who  foon  gathered  round  us  as
they  had  been  ufed  to  do,  were  fo  far  from  hindering,  that
many  of  them  voluntarily  aflifled  us,  bringing  the  pickets
and  fafcines  from  the  wood  where  they  had  been  cut,  with
great  alacrity:  we  had  indeed  been  fo  fcrupulous  of  in¬
vading  their  property,  that  we  purchafed  every  Hake  which

/  *

was  ufed  upon  this  occafion,  and  cut  down  no  tree  till  we
had  firll  obtained  their  confent.  The  foil  where  we  con-
flrudled  our  fort  was  fandy,  and  this  made  it  neceflary  to
flrengtlien  the  intrenchments  with  wood ;  three  fides  were
to  be  fortified  in  this  manner ;  the  fourth  was  bounded  by  a
river,  upon  the  banks  of  which  I  propofed  to  place  a  proper
number  of  water-cafks.  This  day  we  ferved  pork  to  the
Clip’s  company  for  the  firfl  time,  and  the  Indians  brought
down  fo  much  bread-fruit  and  cocoa-nuts,  that  we  found  it
neceflary  to  fend  away  part  of  them  unbought,  and  to  ac¬
quaint  them,  by  figns,  that  we  fhould  want  no  more  for  two
days  to  come.  Every  thing  was  purchafed  this  day  with  beads :
a  fingle  bead,  as  big  as  a  pea,  being  the  purchafe  of  five  or  fix
cocoa-nuts,  and  as  many  of  the  bread-fruit.  Mr.  Banks's
tent  was  got  up  before  night  within  the  works,  and  he  flept
on  fliore  for  the  firfl  time.  Proper  centries  were  placed
round  it,  but  no  Indian  attempted  to  approach  it  the  whole
night.

The  next  morning,  our  friend  Tubourai  Tamaide  made
Mr.  Banks  a  vifit  at  the  tent,  and  brought  with  him  not

only


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


95


only  his  wife  and  family,  but  the  roof  of  a  houfe,  and  J769*
feveral  materials  for  fetting  it  up,  with  furniture  and  im-
plements  of  various  kinds,  intending,  as  weunderdood  him,  Wnef*  19
to  take  up  his  refidence  in  our  neighbourhood :  this  indance
of  his  confidence  and  good-will  gave  us  great  pleafure,  and
we  determined  to  drengthen  his  attachment  to  us  by  every
means  in  our  power.  Soon  after  his  arrival,  he  took  Mr.

Banks  by  the  hand,  and  leading  him  out  of  the  line,  figni-
lied  that  he  fhould  accompany  him  into  the  woods.  Mr.

Banks  readily  confented,  and  having  walked  with  him  about
a  quarter  of  a  mile,  they  arrived  at  a  kind  of  awning  which
he  had  already  fet  up,  and  which  feemed  to  be  his  occafional
habitation.  Here  he  unfolded  a  bundle  of  his  country
cloth,  and  taking  out  two  garments,  one  of  red  cloth,  and
the  other  of  very  neat  matting,  he  clothed  Mr.  Banks  in
them,  and  without  any  other  ceremony,  immediately  con-
dueled  him  back  to  the  tent.  His  attendants  foon  after
brought  him  fome  pork  and  bread-fruit,  which  he  eat,  dip¬
ping  his  meat  into  fait  water  indead  of  fauce:  after  his  meal
he  retired  to  Mr.  Banks’s  bed,  and  dept  about  an  hour.  In
the  afternoon,  his  wife  Tomio  brought  to  the  tent  a  young
man  about  two  and  twenty  years  of  age,  of  a  very  comely
appearance,  whom  they  both  feemed  to  acknowledge  as
their  fon,  though  we  afterwards  difcovered  that  he  was  not
fo.  In  the  evening,  this  young  man  and  another  Chief,  who
had  alfo  paid  us  a  vifit,  went  away  to  the  wedward,  but
Tubourai  Tamaide  and  his  wife  returned  to  the  awning  in
the  fkirts  of  the  wood.


Our  Surgeon,  Mr.  Monkhoufe,  having  walked  out  this
evening,  reported,  that  he  had  feen  the  body  of  the  man
who  had  been  fliot  at  the  tents,  which  he  faid  was  wrapped
in  cloth,  and  placed  on  a  kind  of  bier,  fupported  by  dakes,
under  a  roof  that  feemed  to  have  been  fet  up  for  the  pur-

4  pofe :


9  6


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


i769-  pofe :  that  near  it  were  depofited  fome  inftruments  of  war,

April.  #  f

e — - 1  and  other  things,  which  he  would  particularly  have  ex-

Wcdnef.  i  o.  .  •  ,  -  n  J

amined  but  for  the  itench  of  the  body,  which  was  into¬
lerable.  He  faid,  that  he  faw  alfo  two  more  Iheds  of  the
fame  kind,  in  one  of  which  were  the  bones  of  a  human
body  that  had  lain  till  they  were  quite  dry.  We  difeovered
afterwards,  that  this  was  the  way  in  which  they  ufually  dif-
pofed  of  their  dead.

A  kind  of  market  now  began  to  be  kept  juft  without  the
lines,  and  was  plentifully  fupplied  with  every  thing  but
pork.  Tubourai  Tamaide  was  our  conftant  gueft,  imitat¬
ing  our  manners,  even  to  the  ufing  of  a  knife  and  fork,
which  he  did  very  handily.

As  my  curiofity  was  excited  by  Mr.  Monkhoufe’s  account
of  the  fituation  of  the  man  who  had  been  fhot,  I  took  an  op¬
portunity  to  go  with  fome  others  to  fee  it.  I  found  the  filed
under  which  his  body  lay,  clofe  by  the  houfe  in  which  he
refided  when  he  was  alive,  fome  others  being  not  more  than
ten  yards  diftant;  it  was  about  15  feet  long,  and  n  broad,
and  of  a  proportionable  height:  one  end  was  wholly  open,
and  the  other  end,  and  the  two  fides,  were  partly  enclofed
with  a  kind  of  wicker  work.  The  bier  on  which  the  corps
was  depofited,  was  a  frame  of  wood  like  that  in  which  the
fea  beds,  called  cotts,  are  placed,  with  a  matted  bottom,  and
fupported  by  four  polls,  at  the  height  of  about  five  feet  from
the  ground.  The  body  was  covered  firft  with  a  matt,  and
then  with  white  cloth  ;  by  the  fide  of  it  lay  a  wooden  mace,
one  of  their  weapons  of  war,  and  near  the  head  of  it,  which
lay  next  to  the  clofe  end  of  the  Hied,  lay  two  cocoa  nut-lhells,
fuch  as  are  fometimes  ufed  to  carry  water  in;  at  the  other
end  a  bunch  of  green  leaves,  with  fome  dried  twigs,  all
tied  together,  were  ftuck  in  the  ground,  by  which  lay  a  ftone

about


I


ROUND  THE  WORLD.  93

%  I

about  as  big  as  a  cocoa-nut:  near  thefe  lay  one  of  the  young  *769-
plantain  trees,  which  are  ufed  for  emblems  of  peace,  and
clofe  by  it  a  ftone  ax.  At  the  open  end  of  the  fhed  alfo  hung,  ^ ednef*  194
in  feveral  firings,  a  great  number  of  palm-nuts,  and  with¬
out  the  filed,  was  fluck  upright  in  the  ground,  the  flem  of  a
plantain  tree  about  five  feet  high,  upon  the  top  of  which
was  placed  a  cocoa  nut-fhell  full  of  frefli  water :  againfl  the
fi de  of  one  of  the  polls  hung  a  fmall  bag,  containing  a  few
pieces  of  bread-fruit  ready  roafled,  which  were  not  all  put  in
at  the  fame  time,  for  fome  of  them  were  frefh,  and  others
flale.  I  took  notice  that  feveral  of  the  natives  obferved  us
with  a  mixture  of  folicitude  and  jealoufy  in  their  counte¬
nances,  and  by  their  geflures  expreffed  uneafinefs  when  we
went  near  the  body,  Handing  themfelves  at  a  little  diflancc
while  we  were  making  our  examination,  and  appearing  to
be  pleafed  when  we  came  away.

Our  refidence  on  fhore  would  by  no  means  have  been  dif-
agreeable  if  we  had  not  been  inceffantly  tormented  by  the
flies,  which,  among  other  mifehief,  made  italmofl  impoffible
for  Mr.  Parkinfon,  Mr.  Ranks’s  natural  hiftory  painter,  to
work ;  for  they  not  only  covered  his  fubjedl  fo  as  that  no

part  of  its  furface  could  be  feen,  but  even  eat  the  colour

.

off  the  paper  as  fail  as  he  could  lay  it  on.  We  had  re-
courfe  to  mufquito  nets  and  fly-traps,  which,  though  they
made  the  inconvenience  tolerable,  were  very  far  from  re¬
moving  it.

On  the  sad,  Tootahah  gave  us  a  fpecimen  of  the  mufic  Saturday  22 1
of  this  country  ;  four  perfbns  performed  upon  flutes  which
had  only  two  flops,  and  therefore  could  not  found  more  than
four  notes,  by  half  tones  :  they  were  founded  like  our  Ger¬
man  flutes,  except  that  the  performer,  inflead  of  applying  it

Vol.  IL  O  to


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


to  his  mouth,  blew  into  it  with  one  noilril,  while  he  Hopped
the  other  with  his  thumb:  to  thefe  inftruments  four  other
perfons  fung,  and  kept  very  good  time  ;  but  only  one  tune
was  played  during  the  whole  concert.

Several  of  the  natives  brought  us  axes,  which  they  had
received  from  on  board  the  Dolphin,  to  grind  and  repair ;
but  among  others,  there  was  one  which  became  the  fubject
of  much  fpeculation,  as  it  appeared  to  be  French:  after
much  enquiry,  we  learnt  that  a  fhip  had  been  here  be¬
tween  our  arrival  and  the  departure  of  the  Dolphin,  which
we  then  conjectured  to  have  been  a  Spaniard,  but  now
know  to  have  been  the  Boudeufe,  commanded  by  M.  Bou¬
gainville.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


99


CHAP.  X.

An  Excurflon  to  the  Eaftward ,  an  Account  of  feveral
Incidents  that  happened  both  on  board  and  on  floor e,  and
of  the  firfl  Interview  with  Oberea ,  the  P  erf  on  who ,  when
the  Dolphin  was  here ,  was  fuppcfed  to  be  ^ueen  of  the
Iflandy  with  a  Defcription  of  the  Fort .

ON  the  24th,  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  examined  the
country  for  feveral  miles  along  the  fhore  to  the  eaft¬
ward  :  for  about  two  miles  it  was  flat  and  fertile  ;  after  that
the  hills  ftretched  quite  to  the  water’s  edge,  and  a  little  far¬
ther  ran  out  into  the  fea,  fo  that  they  were  obliged  to  climb
over  them.  Thefe  hills,  which  were  barren,  continued  for
about  three  miles  more,  and  then  terminated  in  a  large  plain,
which  was  full  of  good  houfes,  and  people  who  appeared  to
live  in  great  affluence.  In  this  place  there  was  a  river,  much
more  confiderable  than  that  at  our  fort,  which  ifliied  from  a
deep  and  beautiful  valley,  and,  where  our  travellers  crofled
it,  though  at  fome  diftance  from  the  fea,  was  near  one  hun¬
dred  yards  wide.  About  a  mile  beyond  this  river  the  country
became  again  barren,  the  rocks  every  where  projecting  into
the  fea,  for  which  reafon  they  refolved  to  return.  Juft  as
they  had  formed  this  refolution,  one  of  the  natives  offered
them  refrefhment,  which  they  accepted.  They  found  this
man  to  be  of  a  kind  that  has  been  deferibed  by  various  au¬
thors,  as  mixed  with  many  nations,  but  diftinct  from  them
all.  His  fkin  was  of  a  dead  white,  without  the  leaf!  appear¬
ance  of  what  is  called  complexion,  though  fome  parts  of  his

O  2  body


1769.


Monday  24.


5oo


j769-

April.


Monday  24


Tuefday  25.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

body  were  in  a  Email  degree  lefs  white  than  others  :  his  hair,.
'  eye-brows,  and  beard  were  as  white  as  his  fkin ;  his  eyes

appeared  as  if  they  were  bloodlhot,.  and  he  feemed  to  be  very
fliort-fighted.

/  ji..

At  their  return  they  were  met  by  Tubourai  Tamaide,  and
his  women,  who,  at  feeing  them,  felt  a  joy  which  not  being
able  to  exprefs,  they  burft  into  tears,  and  wept  fome  time
before  their  paffion  could  be  reltrained.

This  evening  Dr.  Solander  lent  his  knife  to  one  of  thefe
women,,  who  neglected  to  return  it,  and  the  next  morning
Mr.  Banks’s  alfo  was  miffing;  upon  this  occafion  I  mull  bear
my  telhmony,  that  the  people  of  this  country,  of  all  ranks,,
men  and  women,  are  the  erranteft  thieves  upon  the  face  of
the  earth  :  the  very  day  after  we  arrived  here,,  when  they
came  on  board  us,  the  chiefs  were  employed  in  Healing
what  they  could  in  the  cabbin,  and  their  dependants  were
no  lefs  induftrious  in  other  parts  of  the  lhip  ;  they  thatched
up  every  thing  that  it  was  poffible  for  them  to  fecrete  till:
they  got  on  ffiorc,  even  to  the  glafs  ports,,  two  of  which
they  carried  off  undetected.  Tubourai  Tamaide  was  the  only
one  except  Tootahah  who  had  not  been  found  guilty,  and,
the  prefumption,  arifing  from  this  circumftance,  that  he
was  exempt  from  a  vice,  of  which  the  whole  nation  be-
tides  were  guilty,  cannot  be  fuppofed  to  outweigh  ftrong  ap¬
pearances  to  the  contrary.  Mr.  Banks  therefore,  though  not-
without  feme  reluctance,  accufed  him  of  having  ftolen  his-
knife:  he  folemnly  and  fteadily  denied  that  he  knew  any¬
thing  of  it  ;  upon  which  Mr.  Banks  made  him  underftand,
that  whoever  had  taken  it,  he  was  determined  to  have  it  re¬
turned:  upon  this  refolute  declaration,  one  of  the  natives
who  was  prefent,  produced  a  rag  in  which  three  knives  were
very  carefully  tied  up.  One  was  chat  which  Dr.  Solander

1  had


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


ror


Bad  lent  to  the  woman,  another  was  a  table  knife  belonging
to  me,  and  the  owner  of  tile  third  was  not  known.  With
thefe  the  chief  immediately  fet  out,  in  order  to  make  refti-
rution  of  them  to  their  owners  at  the  tents.  Mr.  Banks  re¬
mained  with  the  women,  who  exprelTed  great  apprehenflons
that  fome  mifchief  was  deligned  againft  their  lord.  When
he  came  to  the  tents  he  reflored  one  of  the  knives  to  Dr.  So¬
under  and  another  to  me,  the  third  not  being  owned,  and
then  began  to  fearcli  for  Mir.  Banks’s  in  all  the  places  where
lie  had.  ever  feen  it.  After  fome  time,  one  of  Mr.  Banks’s
Servants,  underflanding  what  he  was  about*  immediately
fetched' his  mailer’s  knife,  which  it  feems  he  had  laid  by  the1
day  before,  and  till  now  knew  nothing  of  its  having  been  miffed.
Tubourai  Tamaide,  upon  this  demonflration  of  his  inno¬
cence,  expreffed  the  lirongeft  emotions  of  mind,  both  in  his-
looks  and  geflures ;  the  tears  darted  from  his  eyes,  and  he
made  ligns,  with  the  knife,  that,  if  he  was  ever  guilty  of
fuch  an  aCtion  as  had  been  imputed  to  him,  he  would  ful>
mit  to  have  his  throat  cut.  He  then  rulhedout  of  the  lines,,
and  returned  hadily  to  Mr.  Banks,- with  a  countenance  that
feverely  reproached  him  with  his  fufpicions..  Mr.  Banks
foon  underdood  that-  the  knife  had.  been  received  from  his
fervant,  and  was  fcarcely  lefs  affeCted  at  what  had'*  happened
than  the  Chief  j  he  felt  himfelf  to  be  the  guilty  perfon,  and
was  very  defirous  to  atone  for- his  fault.-  The  poor  Indian,
however  violent  his  paflions,  was  a  flranger  to  full  en  re  fen  t-
ment;  and  upon  Mr.  Banks’s  fpending  a  little  time  fami¬
liarly  with  him,  and  making  him  a  few-  trifling  prefents*.
he  forgot  the  wrong  that  had  been  done  himj  and  was  per¬
fectly  reconciled!

Upon  this  occaflon  it  may  be  obferved,  that  thefe  people
have  a  knowlege  of  right  and  wrong  from  the  mere  dictates
of  natural  confcience  ;  and  involuntarily  condemn  them*
a  felves;


1769.
April,
u — V— J

Tuefday  25.


102


LIEUTENANT  COOK's  VOYAGE


1769.  felves  when  they  do  that  to  others,  which  they  would  con-

A  on  1

« _ r  demn  others  for  doing  to  them.  That  Tubourai  Tamaide

1  uefday  25‘  felt  the  force  of  moral  obligation,  is  certain  ;  for  the  imputa¬
tion  of  an  aclion  which  he  confidered  as  indifferent,  would
not,  when  it  appeared  to  be  groundlefs,  have  moved  him
with  fuch  excefs  of  pallion.  We  muft  indeed  eflimate  the
virtue  of  thefe  people,  by  the  only  flandard  of  morality,  the
conformity  of  their  condudt  to  what  in  their  opinion  is  right ;
but  we  mull  not  haflily  conclude  that  theft  is  a  teflimony  of
the  fame  depravity  in  them  that  it  is  in  us,  in  the  inflances
in  which  our  people  were  fufferers  by  their  difhonefty ;  for
their  temptation  was  fuch,  as  to  furmount  would  be  confi¬
dered  as  a  proof  of  uncommon  integrity  among  thofe  who
have  more  knowlege,  better  principles,  and  flronger  motives
to  refill  the  temptations  of  illicit -advantage :  an  Indian
among  penny  knives,  and  beads,  or  even  nails  and  broken
glafs,  is  in  the  fame  flate  of  trial  with  the  meanefl  fervant
in  Europe  among  unlocked  coffers  of  jewels  and  gold.

Wednef.  26.  On  the  26th,  I  mounted  fix  fwivel  guns  upon  the  fort,
which  I  was  forry  to  fee  ftruck  the  natives  with  dread:  fome
fifhermen  who  lived  upon  the  point  removed  farther  off,  and
Owhaw  told  us,  by  figns,  that  in  four  days  we  fhould  fire
great  guns.

1

Thurfday 27.  On  the  27th,  Tubourai  Tamaide,  with  a  fuend,  who  eat
with  a  voracity  that  I  never  faw  before,  and  the  three  wo¬
men  that  ufually  attended  him,  whofe  names  were  Terapo,
Tirao,  and  Omie,  dined  at  the  fort:  in  the  evening  they
took  their  leave,  and  fet  out  for  the  houfe  which  Tubourai
Tamaide  had  fet  up  in  the  fkirts  of  the  wood  ;  but  in  lefs
than  a  quarter  of  an  hour  he  returned  in  great  emotion,
and  haflily  feizing  Mr.  Banks’s  arm,  made  figns  that  he
fhould  follow  him.  Mr.  Banks  immediately  complied,  and

2  they


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

they  foon  came  up  to  a  place  where  they  found  the  fhip’s
butcher,  with  a  reaping-hook  in  his  hand :  here  the  Chief
flopped,  and,  in  a  tranfport  of  rage  which  rendered  his  figns
fcarcely  intelligible,  intimated  that  the  butcher  had  threat¬
ened,  or  attempted,  to  cut  his  wife’s  throat  with  the  reaping-
hook.  Mr.  Banks  then  fignified  to  him,  that  if  he  could  fully
explain  the  offence,  the  man  fliould  be  puniflied,  Upon  this
he  became  more  calm,  and  made  Mr.  Banks  underdand  that
the  offender,  having  taken  a  fancy  to  a  done  hatchet  which
lay  in  his  houfe,  had  offered  to  purchafe  it  of  his  wife  for
a  nail :  that  die  having  refufed  to  part  with  it  upon  any
terms,  he  had  catched  it  up,  and  throwing  down  the  nail,
threatened  to  cut  her  throat  if  fhe  made  any  reddance :  to
prove  this  charge  the  hatchet  and  the  nail  were  produced,

and  the  butcher  had  fo  little  to  fav  in  his  defence  that  there

*  »

was  not  the  lead  reafon  to  doubt  of  its  truth.

Mr.  Banks  having  reported  this  matter  to  me,  I  took  an
opportunity,  when  the  Chief  and  his  women,  with  other  In¬
dians,  were  on  board  the  fliip,  to  call  up  the  butcher,  and
after  a  recapitulation  of  the  charge  and  the  proof,  I  gave
orders  that  he  fliould  be  puniffied,  as  well  to  prevent  other
offences  of  the  fame  kind,  as  to  acquit  Mr.  Banks  of  his  pro-
mife ;  the  Indians  faw  him  dripped  and  tied  up  to  the  rig¬
ging  with  a  fixed  attention,  waiting  in  fllent  fufpence  for  the
event }  but  as  foon  as  the  firfl  droke  was  given,  they  inter¬
fered  with  great  agitation,  carnedly  intreating  that  the  reft
of  the  punifliment  might  be  remitted :  to  this,  however,  for
many  reafons,  I  could  not  confent,  and  when  they  found
that  they  could  not  prevail  by  their  interceffion,  they  gave
vent  to  their  pity  by  tears.

Their  tears  indeed,  like  thofe  of  children,  were  always
ready  to  exprefs  any  paflion  that  was  drongly  excited,  and

like


103

1769.

April.


Thurfday  27.


io4  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

Apn\  ^10^e  ° ^  children  they  alfo  appeared  to  be  forgotten  as

i — — >. — — *  foon  as  died  ;  of  which  the  following  among  many  others,
.Friday  is  a  remarkable  in  dance.  Very  early  in  the  morning  of  the
28th,  even  before  it  was  day,  a  great  number  of  them  came
down  to  the  fort,  and  Terapo  being  obferved  among  the  wo¬
men  on  the  outfide  of  the  gate,  Mr.  Banks  went  out  and
brought  her  in ;  he  faw  that  the  tears  then  flood  in  her  eyes,
and  as  foon  as  fhe  entered  they  began  to  flow  in  great  abun-
'  dance:  he  enquired  earneftly  the  caufe,  but  inflead  of  anfwer-
ing  flie  took  from  under  her  garment  a  fhark’s  tooth,  and
ftiuck  it  fix  01  feven  times  into  her  head  with  great  force  j
.a  profufion  of  blood  followed,  and  fhe  talked  loud,  but  in  a
mod  melancholy  tone,  for  fome  minutes,  without  at  all  re¬
garding  his  enquiries,  which  he  repeated  with  dill  more  im¬
patience  and  concern,  while  the  other  Indians,  to  his  great
furprize,  talked  and  laughed,  without  taking  the  lead  no¬
tice  of  her  didrefs.  But  her  own  behaviour  was  dill  more
extraordinary.  As  foon  as,  the  bleeding  was  over,  flie  looked
up  with  a  fmile,  and  began  to  colledl  fome  fmall  pieces  of
cloth,  which  during  her  bleeding  fhe  had  thrown  down  to
catch  the  blood ;  as  foon  as  fhe  had  picked  them  all  up,  flie
carried  them  out  of  the  tent,  and  threw  them  into  the  fea,
carefully  difperfing  them  abroad,  as  if  fhe  wifhed  to  prevent
the  fight  of  them  from  reviving  the  remembrance  of  what
flie  had  done.  She  then  plunged  into  the  river,  and  after
having  wafhed  her  whole  body,  returned  to  the  tents  with
the  fame  gaiety  and  cheerfuhiefs  as  if  nothing  had  hap¬
pened.

It  is  not  indeed  drange  that  the  farrows  of  thefe  artlefs
people  fhould  be  tranfient,  any  more  than  that  their  paflions
fhould  be  fuddenly  and  flrongly  exprefled:  what  they  feel
they  have  never  been  taught  either  to  difguife  or  fupprefs,
and  having  no  habits  of  thinking  which  perpetually  recal

the


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


loj


the  pad,  and  anticipate  the  future,  they  are  affe&ed  by  all  i76?*
the  changes  of  the  palling  hour,  and  reflect  the  colour  of  t  ^
the  time,  however  frequently  it  may  vary :  they  have  no  Fnday  28"
project  which  is  to  be  purfued  from  day  to  day,  the  fubjedt
of  unremitted  anxiety  and  folicitude,  that  firft  rufhes  into
the  mind  when  they  awake  in  the  morning,  and  is  laft  dif-
milTed  when  they  fleep  at  night.  Yet  if  we  admit  that  they
are  upon  the  whole  happier  than  we,  we  mull  admit  that
the  child  is  happier  than  the  man,  and  that  we  are  lofers  by
the  perfection  of  our  nature,  the  increafe  of  our  knowlege,
and  the  enlargement  of  our  views.

Canoes  were  continually  coming  in  during  all  this  fore-  x
noon,  and  the  tents  at  the  fort  were  crowded  with  people  of
both  fexes  from  different  parts  of  the  Ifland.  I  was  myfelf
bufy  on  board  the  fhip,  but  Mr.  Mollineux,  our  mailer,  who
was  one  of  tllofe  that  made  the  laft  voyage  in  the  Dolphin,
went  on  fhore,  As  foon  as  he  entered  Mr.  Banks’s  tent  he

fixed  his  eyes  upon  one  of  the  women,  who  was  fitting  there

•

with  great  compofure  among  the  reft,  and  immediately  de¬
clared  her  to  be  the  perfon  who  at  that  rime  was  fuppofed  to
be  Queen  of  the  ifland  ;  fhe  alfo,  at  the  fame  time,  acknow¬
ledging  him  to  be  one  of  the  Strangers  whom  fhe  had  feen
before.  The  attention  of  all  prefent  was  now  diverted  from
every  other  objedt,  and  wholly  engaged  in  considering  a  per¬
fon  who  had  made  fo  distinguished  a  figure  in  the  accounts
that  had  been  given  of  this  ifland  by  its  firft  difcoverers  ;  and
we  foon  learnt  that  her  name  was  Ob  ere  a.  She  feemed  to-
be  about  forty  years  of  age,  and  was  not  only  tall,  but  of
a  large  make  ;  her  fkin  was  white,  and  there  was  an  un¬
common  intelligence  and  fenfibility  in  her  eyes:  fhe  ap¬
peared  to  have  been  handfome  when  fhe  was  young,  but  at
this  time  little  more  than  memorials  of  her  beauty  were  left..


Yoii,  XL


F


*o(5  LIEUTENANT  COOK^s  VOYAGE

April.'  As  foon  as  lier  fluality  was  known,  an  ofFer  was  made  to
Fti&ay^zsT*  con(ki<T  her  to  the  fhip.  Of  this  fhe  readily  accepted,  and
came  on  board  with  two  men  and  feveral  women,  who
feemed  to  be  all  of  her  family ;  I  received  her  with  fuch
marks  of  diftindtion  as  I  thought  would  gratify  her  moll,
and  was  not  fparing  of  my  prefents,  among  which  this  au-
gull  perfonage  feemed  particularly  delighted  with  a  child's
doll.  After  fome  time  fpent  on  board,  I  attended  her  back
to  the  fhore ;  and  as  foon  as  we  landed,  fhe  prefented  me
with  a  hog,  and  feveral  bunches  of  plantains,  which  fhe
caufed  to  be  carried  from  her  canoes  up  to  the  fort  in  a  kind
of  proceflion,  of  which  fhe  and  myfelf  brought  up  the  rear.
In  our  way  to  the  fort  we  met  Tootahah,  who,  though  not
King,  appeared  to  be  at  this  time  invefted  with  the  fovereign
authority ;  he  feemed  not  to  be  well  pleafed  with  the  dif-
tinclion  that  was  fhe  wed  to  the  lady,  and  became  fo  jealous
when  flie  produced  her  doll,  that  to  propitiate  him  it  was
thought  proper  to  compliment  him  with  another.  At  this
time  he  thought  fit  to  prefer  a  doll  to  a  hatchet ;  but  this
preference  arofe  only  from  a  childifh  jealoufy,  which  could
not  be  foothed  but  by  a  gift  of  exactly  the  fame  kind  with
that  which  had  been  prefented  to  Oberea ;  for  dolls  in  a
very  fhort  time  were  univerfally  confidered  as  trifles  of  no
value.

The  men  who  had  vifited  us  from  time  to  time  had,  with¬
out  fcruple,  eaten  of  our  provifions  ;  but  the  women  had
never  yet  been  prevailed  upon  to  tafle  a  morfel.  To-day,
however,  though  they  refufed  the  moft  prefling  felicitations
to  dine  with  the  Gentlemen,  they  afterwards  retired  to  the
iervants  apartment,  and  eat  of  plantains  very  heartily ;  a

myftery  of  female  oeconomy  here,  which  none  of  us  could
explain.


On


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


107


On  the  29th,  not  very  early  in  the  forenoon,  Mr.  Banks
went  to  pay  his  court  to  Oberea,  and  was  told  that  fhe  was
Hill  afleep  under  the  awning  of  her  canoe  :  thither  therefore
he  went,  intending  to  call  her  up,  a  liberty  which  he  thought
he  might  take,  without  any  danger  of  giving  offence :  but,
upon  looking  into  her  chamber,  to  his  great  aflonifhment,
he  found  her  in  bed  with  a  handfome  young  fellow  about
five  and  twenty,  whofe  name  was  Obadee:  he  retreated  with
fome  liafle  and  eonfufion,  but  was  foon  made  to  underftand,
that  fuch  amours  gave  no  occafion  to  fcandal,  and  that  Oba¬
dee  was  univerfally  known  to  have  been  feleCted  by  her  as
the  object  of  her  private  favours.  The  lady  being  too  polite
to  fuffer  Mr.  Banks  to  wait  long  in  her  antichamber,  dreffed
herfelf  with  more  than  ufual  expedition,  and  as  a  token  of
of  fpecial  grace,  clothed  him  in  a  fuit  of  fine  cloth  and  pro¬
ceeded  with  him  to  the  tents-.  In  the  evening,  Mr.  Banks
paid  a  vifit  to  Tubourai  Tamaide,  as  he  had  often  done  be¬
fore,  by  candle  light,  and  was  equally  grieved  and  furprized
to  find  him  and  his  family  in  a  melancholy  mood,  and  moft
of  them  in  tears  :  he  endeavoured  in  vain  to  difcover  the
caufe,  and  therefore  his  flay  among  them  was  but  fhort.
When  he  reported  this  circumftance  to  the  officers  at  the
fort,  they  recollected  that  Owhaw  had  foretold,  that  in  four
days  we  fhould  fire  our  great  guns  ;  and  as  this  was  the  eve
of  the  third  day,  the  fituation  in  which  Tubourai  Tamaide
and  his  family  had  been  found,  alarmed  them.  The  fentries*
therefore  were  doubled  at  the  fort,  and  the  Gentlemen  dept
under  arms  ;  at  two  in  the  morning,  Mr.  Banks  himfelf
went  round  the  point,  but  found  every  thing  fo  quiet,  that
lie  gave  up  all  fulpicions  of  mifcliief  intended  by  the  natives
as  groundlefs.  We  had  however  another  fource  of  fecurity
our  little  fortification  was  now  complete.  The  north  and

P  .2  foil tlu


1769.

April.

Saturday  2^.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

fouth  fides  con  filled  of  a  bank  of  earth  four  feet  and  an  half
high  on  the  infide,  and  a  ditch-  without  ten  feet  broad  and
^aurday  29.  deep  .  on  the  weft  fide,  facing  the  bay,  there  was  a  bank

of  earth  four  feet  high,  and  pallifadoes  upon  that,  but  no
ditch,  the  works  here  being  at  high-water  mark;  on  the
eaft  fide,  upon  the  bank  of  the  river,  was  placed  a  double
row  of  water  calks,  filled  with  water ;  and  as  this  was  the
weakell  lide,  the  two  four  pounders  were  planted  there,  and
fix  fwivel  guns  were  mounted  fo  as  to  command  the  only-
two  avenues  from  the  woods.  Our  garrifon  conlilled  of  about
five  and  forty  men  with  fmall  arms,  including  the  officers,
and  the  gentlemen  who  refided  on  fhore ;  and  our  fentries
■were  as  well  relieved  as  in  the  belt  regulated  frontier  in
Europe.

Sunday  30.  We  continued  our  vigilance  the  next  day,  though  we  had
no  particular  reafon  to  think  it  necellary ;  but  about  ten
o’clock  in  the  morning,  Tomio  came  running  to  the  tents,
with  a  mixture  of  grief  and  fear  in  her  countenance,  and
taking  Banks,  to  whom  they  applied  in  every  emer¬
gency  and  diltrefs,  by  the  arm,  intimated  that  Tubourai
Tamaide  was  dying,  in  confequence  of  fomething  which  our
people  had  given  him  to  eat,  and  that  he  mull  inftantly  go
with  her  to  his  houfe.  Mr.  Banks  fet  out  without  delay,  and
found  his  Indian  friend  leaning  his  head  againlt  a  poll,  in
an  attitude  of  the  utmoll  languor  and  defpondency ;  the
people  about  him  intimated  that  he  had  been  vomiting,  and
brought  out  a  leaf  folded  up  with  great  care,  which  they
faid  contained  fome  of  the  poifon,  by  the  deleterious  efFetfts
of  which  ne  vras  now  dying.  Mr.  Banks  hallily  opened  the
leaf,  and  upon  examining  its  contents  found  them  to  be  no
other  than  a  chew  of  tobacco,  which  the  chief  had  begged
Ojl  fome  of  our  people,  and  which  they  had  indifcreetly  given
1  ,  him;


10 8


1769.

April.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


109


\  '  f  '  \

him:  he  had  obferved  that  they  kept  it  long  in  the  mouth,  1769.
and  being  defirous  of  doing  the  fame,  he  had  chewed  it  to  <  Apal‘
powder,  and  fwallowed  the  fpittle.  During  the  examination  bunday  •  °-
of  the  leaf  and  its  contents,  he  looked  up  at  Mr.  Banks  with  •
the  moll  piteous  afpeCt,  and  intimated  that  he  had  but  a  very
fhort  time  to  live.  Mr.  Banks,  however,  being  now  mailer
of  his  difeafe,  directed  him  to  drink  plentifully  of  cocoa-nut
milk,  which  in  a  ihort  time  put  an  end  to  his  ficknefs  and
apprehenfions,  and  he  fpent  the  day  at  the  fort  with  that
uncommon  flow  of  cheerfulnefs  and  good-humour,  which
is  always  produced  by  a  hidden  and  unexpected  relief  from
pain  either  of  body  or  mind.


Captain  Wallis  having  brought  home  one  of  the  adzes
which  thefe  people,  having  no  metal  of  any  kind,  make  of
flone,  Mr.  Stevens,  the  Secretary  to  the  Admiralty,  procured
one  to  be  made  of  iron  in  imitation  of  it,  which  I  brought
out  with  me,  to  {hew  how  much  we  excelled  in  making  tools
after  their  own  fafhion :  this  I  had  not  yet  produced,  as  it
never  happened  to  come  into  my  mind.  But  on  the  firft  of  May.
May,  Tootahah  coming  on  board  about  ten  o’clock  in  the  Monday  1
forenoon,  exprefTed  a  great  curiolity  to  fee  the  contents  of
every  chefl  and  drawer  that  was  in  my  cabbin ;  as  I  always
made  a  point  of  gratifying  him,  I  opened  them  immediately,
and  having  taken  a  fancy  to  many  things  that  he  faw,  and
collected  them  together,  he  at  laft  happened  to  call  his  eye
upon  this  adze  ;  he  inflantly  fnatched  it  up  with  the  great-
ell  eagernefs,  and  putting  away  every  thing  which  he
had  before  feleCted,  he  afked  me  whether  I  would  let  him
have  that :  I  readily  confented ;  and,  as  if  he  was  afraid  I
fhould  repent,  he  carried  it  off  immediately  in  a  tranfport  of
joy,  without  making  any  other  requell,  which  whatever  had
been  our  liberality  was  feldom  the  cafe.


About


no


LIEUTENANT  CQOK's  VOYAGE

About  noon,  a  Chief,  who  had  dined  with  me  a  few  days,
before,  accompanied  by  fome  of  his  women,  came  on  board
alone :  I  had  obferved  that  he  was  fed  by  his  women,  but  I
made  no  doubt,  that  upon  occaiion  he  would  condefcend  to
feed  himfelf :  in  this,  however,  I  found  myfelf  miflakem
V  hen  my  noble  gueft  was  feated,  and  the  dinner  upon  the
table,  I  helped  him  to  fome  victuals :  as  I  obferved  that  he
did  not  immediately  begin  his  meal,.  I  prefTed  him-  to  eat:,
but  he  dill  continued  to  fit  motionlefs  like  a  flatue,  without
attempting  to  put  a  fingle  morfel  into  his  mouth,  and  would;
ceitainly  have  gone  without  his*  dinner,,  if  one  of  the  fervants.
had  not  fed  him.


C  H  A  P.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


in


CHAP.  XI.

The  Obfervatory  fet  up  ;  the  Quadrant  Jloleny  and  Gcnfe-
quences  of  the  Theft :  A  Vi  fit  to  Toot  ah  ah  :  Defcription
of  a  W reft  ling-match  :  Europea?i  Seeds  fown  :  Names
given  to  our  People  by  the  Indians .

IN  the  afternoon,  of  Monday  the  ifl  of  May,  we  fet  up  the  JJ^i
obfervatory,  and  took  the  agronomical  quadrant,  with  t  Mar»
fome  other  inflruments  on  fhore*  for  the  firft  time.  Monday  i.

The  next  morning,  about  nine  o’clock,  I  went  on  fhore  Tuefday  2.
with  Mr.  Green  to  fix  the  quadrant  in  a  fituation  for  ufe,
when  to  our  inexprefiible  furprize  and  concern  it  was  not  to
be  found.  It  had  been  depofited  in  the  tent  which  was  re¬
ferred  for  my  ufe,  where,  as  I  pafled  the  night  on  board,
nobody  flept :  it  had  never  been  taken  out  of  the  packing-
cafe,  which  was  eighteen  inches  fquare,  and  the  whole  was
of  confiderable  weight ;  a  fentinel  had  been  polled  the
whole  night  within  five  yards  of  the  tent  door,  and  none  of
the  other  inilruments  were  miffing.  We  at  firft  fufpedted
that  it  might  have  been  flolen  by  fome  of  our  own  people,
who  feeing  a  deal  box,  and  not  knowing  the  contents,  might
think  it  contained  nails,  or  fome  other  fubje<5ls  of  traffic
with  the  natives.  A  large  reward  was  therefore  offered  to
any  one  who  could  find  it,  as,  without  this,  we  could  not
perform  the  fervice  for  which  our  voyage  was  principally
undertaken.  Our  fearch  in  the  mean  time  was  not  confined
to  the  fort  and  the  places  adjacent,  but  as  the  cafe  might
pofhbly  have  been  carried  back  to  the  fhip,  if  any  of  our

6  *  '  own


2  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

17%.  own  people  had  been  the  thieves,  the  mo  ft  diligent  fearch
was  made  for  it  on  board ;  all  the  parties  however  returned
without  any  news  of  ehe  quadrant.  Mr.  Banks,  therefore,
who  upon  fuch  occafions  declined  neither  labour  nor  rifle’
and  who  had  more  influence  over  the  Indians  than  any  of
us,  determined  to  go  in  fearch  of  it  into  the  woods  5  he
hoped,  that  if  it  had  been  ftolen  by  the  natives,  he  fhould
find  it  wherever  they  had  opened  the  box,  as  they  would
immediately  difeover  that  to  them  it  would  be  wholly  ufe-

!efs :  or;  if  in  this  expectation  he  fliould  be  difappointed,  that

,  mr!1ghE/eC0Ver  U  hy  the  afeendaney  he  had  acquired  over

' 1  a  He  ftt  °Ut’  accompauied  by  a  midlhipmarr

and  Mr.  Green,  and  as  he  was  crofling  the  river  he  was  met

by  Tubourai  Tamaide,  who  immediately  made  the  figure  of
a  mangle  with  three  bits  of  ftraw  upon  his  hand.  By  this
Mr.  Banks  knew  that  the  Indians  were  the  thieves;  and  that
although  they  had  opened  the  cafe,  they  were  not  difpofedt
■  to  part  with  the  contents.  No  time  was  therefore  to  be  loft
and  Mr.  Banks  made  Tubourai  Tamaide  underftand,  that  he
muft  mftantly  go  with  him  to  the  place  whither  the  qua¬
drant  had  been  carried ;  he  confented,  and  they  fet  out  to¬
gether  to  the  caftward,  the  Chief  inquiring  at  every  houfe
which  they  paffed  after  the  thief  by  name:  the  people  rea¬
dily  told  him  which  way  he  was  gone,  and  how  long  it  was
fince  he  had  been  there :  the  hope  which  this  gave  them  that
they  fliould  overtake  him,  fupported  them  under  their  fatigue,
and  they  prefled  forward,  fometimes  walking,  fometimes
running,  though  the  weather  was  intolerably  hot ;  when
they  had  climbed  a  hill  at  the  drffianceof  about  four  miles-
their  conductor  fhewed  them  a  point  full  three  miles  far¬
ther,  and  gave  them  to  underftand  that  they  were  not  to  ex-
peift  the  inftrument  till  they  had  got  thither.  Here  they
paufed  ;  they  had  no  arms,  except  a  pair  of  piftols,  which.

Mr».


1


ROUND  THE  WORLD,

Mr.  Banks  always  carried  in  his  pocket ;  they  were  going  to
a  place  that  was  at  leafl  feven  miles  diflant  from  the  fort,
where  the  Indians  might  be  lefs  fubmiflive  than  at  home,
and  to  take  from  them  what  they  had  ventured  their  lives
to  get  j  and  what,  notwithstanding  our  conjectures,  they  ap¬
peared  defirous  to  keep :  thefe  were  difcouraging  circum-
fiances,  and  their  fituation  would  become  more  critical  at
every  ftep.  They  determined,  however,  not  to  relinquish
their  enterprize,  nor  to  purfue  it  without  taking  the  bed
meafures  for  their  fecurity  that  were  in  their  power.  It  was
therefore  determined,  that  Mr.  Banks  and  Mr.  Green  fhould
go  on,  and  that  the  Midfhipman  fhould  return  to  me,  and
defire  that  I  would  fend  a  party  of  men  after  them,  acquaint¬
ing  me  at  the  fame  time,  that  it  was  impoffible  they  fhould
return  till  it  was  dark.  Upon  receiving  this  meffage  I  fet  out,
with  fuch  a  party  as  I  thought  fufficient  for  the  occafion ;
leaving  orders,  both  at  the  Ship  and  at  the  fort,  that  no  ca¬
noe  fhould  be  fuffered  to  go  out  of  the  bay,  but  that  none
of  the  natives  fhould  be  feized  or  detained.

In  the  mean  time,  Mr.  Banks  and  Mr.  Green  purfued  their
journey,  under  the  aufpices  of  Tubourai  Tamaide,  and  in  the
very  fpot  which  he  had  fpecified,  they  met  one  of  his  own
people,  with  part  of  the  quadrant  in  his  hand.  At  this  mod
welcome  fight  they  flopped  ;  and  a  great  number  of  Indians
immediately  came  up,  fome  of  whom  prefling  rather  rudely
upon  them,  Mr.  Banks  thought  it  neceflary  to  fhew  one  of
his  piftois,  the  fight  of  which  reduced  them  inflantly  to  or¬
der:  as  the  crowd  that  gathered  round  them  was  every  mo¬
ment  increafing,  he  marked  out  a  circle* in  the  grafs,  and
they  ranged  themfelves  on  the  outfide  of  it  to  the  number
of  feveral  hundreds  with  great  quietnefs  and  decorum.  Into
the  middle  of  this  circle,  the  box,  which  was  now  arrived,
was  ordered  to  be  brought,  with  feveral  reading  g lades,  and

Vo l.  Ih  other


1769.

May.

< - - — — /

Tuefday  2.


ii4


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


1 769,
May,

- ,, -

Tuefday  2.


other  fmall  matters,  which  in  their  hiirry  they  had  put  into
'  a  piflol-cafe,  that  Mr.  Banks  knew  to  be  his  property,  it  hav¬
ing  been  fome  time  before  Holen  from  the  tents,  with  a  horfe
piflol  in  it,  which  he  immediately  demanded,  and  which  was
alfo  reflored.

.  •  w  ■  tj*  *  \  */  1  •

Mr.  Green  was-  impatient  to  fee  whether  all  that  had  been
taken  away  was  returned,  and  upon  examining  the  box-
found  the  Hand,  and  a  few  fmall  things  of  lefs  confequence,
wanting ;  feveral  perfons  were  fent  m  fearch  of  thefe,  and
molt  of  the  fmall  things  were  returned':  but  it  was  lignified
that  the  thief  had  not  brought  the  Hand  fo  far,  and  that  it
would  be  delivered  to  our  friends  as  they  went  back ;  this
being  confirmed  by  Tiibourai  Tamaide,  they  prepared  to  re¬
turn,  as  nothing  would  then  be  wanting  but  what  might
eafily  be  fupplied  and  after  they  had  advanced  about  two
miles,  I  met  them  with  my  party,  to  our  mutual  fatisfadlion,
congratulating  each  other  upon  the  recovery  of  the  qua¬
drant,  with  a  pleafure  proportioned  to  the  importance  of  the
event.

About  eight  o’clock,  Mr.  Banks  with  Tubourai  Tamaide
got  back  to  the  fort ;  when,  to  his  great  furprize,  he  found
Tootahah  in  cuHody,  and  many  of  the  natives  in  the  utmofl
terror  and  diflrefs,  crowding  about  the  gate.  He  went  haf-
tily  in,  fome  of  the  Indians  were  fuffered  to  follow  him,
and  the  fcene  was  extremely  affecting.  Tubourai  Tamaide
prefling  forward,  ran  up  to  Tootahah,  and  catching  him  in
his  arms,  they  both  burfl  into  tears,  and  wept  over  each
other,  without  being  able  to  fpeak  r  the  other  Indians  were
alfo  in  tears  for  their  Chief,  both  he  and  they  being  Hrongly
poflefled  with  the  notion  that  he  was  to  be  put  to  death.  In
this  fituation  they  continued  till  I  entered  the  fort,  which
was  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  afterwards.  I  was  equally

furprized


ROUNDTHE  WORLD.


furprizcd  and  concerned  at  what  had  happened,  the  con-  1 7 6g.

IV1  ^  v

fining  Tootahah  being  contrary  to  my  orders,  and  therefore  t  _  J
inftantly  fet  him  at  liberty.  Upon  enquiring  into  the  affair,  Tuefda)r  2*
I  was  told,  that  my  going  into  the  woods  with  a  party  of  men
under  arms,  at  a  time  when  a  robbery  had  been  committed,
which  it  was  fuppofed  I  ihould  refent,  in  proportion  to  our
apparent  injury  by  the  lofs,  had  fo  alarmed  the  natives,  that
in  the  evening  they  began  to  leave  the  neighbourhood  of  the
fort  with  their  effects: 'that  a  double  canoe  having  been  feen
to  put  off  from  the  bottom  of  the  bay  by  Mr.  Gore,  the  Se¬
cond  Lieutenant,  who  was  left  in  command  on  board  the
fhip,  and  who  had  received  orders  not  to  fuffer  any  canoe  to
go  out,  he  fent  the  Boatfwain  with  a  boat  after  her  to  bring
her  back :  that  as  foon  as  the  boat  came  up,  the  Indians,
being  alarmed,  leaped  into  the  fea;  and  that  Tootahah,  being
unfortunately  one  of  the  number,  the  Boatfwain  took  him  up,
and  brought  him  to  the  fliip,  fufFering  the  reft  of  the  people
to  fwim  on  fhore :  that  Mr.  Gore,  not  fufficiently  attending  to
the  order  that  none  of  the  people  fhould  be  confined,  had
fent  him  to  the  fort,  and  Mr.  Hicks,  the  Firft  Lieutenant,
who  commanded  there,  receiving  him  in  charge  from  Gore,
did  not  think  himfelf  at  liberty  to  difmifs  him.

The  notion  that  we  intended  to  put  him  to  death  had  pof-
fefted  him  fo  ftrongly,  that  lie  could  not  be  perfuaded  to  the
contrary  till  by  my  orders  he  was  ,  led  out  of  the  fort.  The
people  received  him  ,as  they  would  have  done  a  father  in  the
fame  circumftances,  and  #very  one  preffed  forward  to  em¬
brace  him.  Sudden  joy  is  commonly  liberal,  without  a  fcru-
pulous  regard  to  merit ;  and  Tootahah,  in  the  firft  expanfion
of  his  heart,  upon  being  unexpectedly  reftored  to  liberty  and
life,  infifted  upon  our  receiving  a  prefent  of  two  hogs  ;
though,  being  confcious  that  upon  this  occafion  we  had  no
claim  to  favours,  we  refufed  them  many  times.

0^2  Mr.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1 16

1^69.  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  attended  the  next  morning  in*

May.  .  0

v - their  ufual  capacity  of  market -men,  but  very  few  Indians^

'  cu‘e ' appeared,  and  thofe  who  came  brought  no  provifions.  Too-
tahah,  however,  fent  fome  of  his  people  for  the  canoe  that
had  been  detained,  which  they  took  away..  A  canoe  having
alfo  been  detained  that  belonged  to  Oberea,TupiA,  the  perfom
who  managed  her  affairs  when  the  Dolphin  was  here,  was,
fent  to  examine  whether  any  thing  on  board  had  been  taken
away:  and  he  was  fo  well  fatisfied  of  the  contrary,  that  he
left  the  canoe  where  he  found  it,  and  joined  us  at  the  fort,,
where  he  fpent  the  day,  and  flept  on  board  the  canoe  at  night.
About  noon,  fome  flfhing  boats  came  abreaft  of  the  tents,
but  would  part  with  very  little  of  what  they  had  on  board y
and  we  felt  the  want  of  cocoa-nuts  and  bread-fruit  very  fe-
verely.  In  the  courfe  of  the  day,  Mr.  Banks  walked  out  into-
the  woods,  that  by  converfing  with  the  people  he  might  re¬
cover  their  confidence  and  good-will:  he  found  them  civil*
but  they  all  complained  of  the  ill-treatment  of  their  Chief  y
who,  they  faid,  had  been  beaten  and  pulled  by  the  hair.  Mr.,
Banks  endeavoured  to  convince  them,  that  he  had  fuffered
no  perfonal  violence,  which  to  the  belt  of  our  knowlege  was
true  ;  yet,  perhaps  the  Boatfwain  had  behaved  with  a  bru¬
tality  which  he  was  afraid  orafhamed  to  acknowledge.  The
Chief  himfelf  being,  probably,  upon  re  collection ,  of  opinion
that  we  had  ill-deferved  the  hogs,  which  he  had  left  with  us
as  aprefent,  fent  a  mefienger  in  the  afternoon  to  demand  an.
ax,  and  a  fhirt  in  return  ;  but  as  I  was  told  that  he  did  not:
intend  to  come  down  to  the  fort  for  ten  days*  I  excufed  my-
felf  from  giving  them  till  I  fliould  fee  him,  hoping  that  his
impatience  might  induce  him  to  fetch  them,  and  knowing
that  aofence  would  probably  continue  the  coolnefs  between,
us,  to  which  the  firft  interview  might  put  an  end.


The


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


117

The  next  day  we  were  flill  more  fenfible  of  the  inconve-  1769.
nience  we  had  incurred  by  giving  offence  to  the  people  in
the  perfon  of  their  Chief,  for  the  market  was  fo  ill  fupplied  Thurfday  4*
that  we  were  in  want  of  neceffaries.  Mr.  Banks  therefore
went  into  the  woods  to  Tubourai  Tamaide,  and  with  fome
difficulty  perfuaded  him  to  let  us  have  five  bafkets  of  bread¬
fruit  ;  a  very  feafonable  fupply,  as  they  contained  above  one
hundred  and  twenty.  In  the  afternoon  another  meffenger
arrived  from  Tootahali  for  the  ax  and  ffiirt  j  as  it  was  now
become  abfolutely  neceffary  to  recover  the  friendfliip  of  this
man,  without  which  it  would  be  fcarcely  poffible  to  procure
provifions,  I  fent  word  that  Mr.  Banks  and  myfelf  would  vffit
him  on  the  morrow,  and  bring  what  he  wanted  with  us.

Early  the  next  morning  he  fent  again  to  remind  me  of  my  Friday  5;.
promife,  and  his  people  feemed  to  wait  till  we  fhould  fet  out
with  great  impatience :  I  therefore  ordered  the  pinnace,  in
which  I  embarked  with  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  about
ten  o’clock :  we  took  one  of  Tootahah’s  people  in  the  boat
with  us,  and  in  about  an  hour  we  arrived  at  his  place  of  re-
fidence  which  is  called  Eparre,  and  is  about  four  miles  to*
the  weflward  of  the  tents.

We  found  the  people  waiting  for  us  in  great  numbers
upon  the  fliore,  fo  that  it  would  have  been  impoffible  for  us
to  have  proceeded,  if  way  had  not  been  made  for  us  by  a
tall  well-looking  man,  who  had  fomething  like  a  turban
about  his  head,  and  a  long  white  flick  in  his  hand,  with-
which  he  laid  about  him  at  an  unmerciful  rate.  This  man
conducted  us  to  the  Chief,  while  the  people  fliouted  round
us,  Taio  Tootahah ,  “  Tootahah  is  your  friend.5’  We  found  him,
like  an  ancient  Patriarch,  fitting  under  a  tree,  with  a  num¬
ber  of  venerable  old  men  {landing  round  him;  he  made  a-
fign  to  us  to  fit  down,  and  immediately  afked  for  his  ax:

6  tliis '


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

this  I  prefented  to  him,  with  an  upper  garment  of  broad¬
cloth,  made  after  the  country  fafhion,  and  trimmed  with
tape,  to  which  I  alio  added  a  fhirt :  he  received  them  with
great  fatisfa&ion,  and  immediately  put  on  the  garment;  but
the  fhirt  he  gave  to  the  perfon  who  had  cleared  the  way  for
us  upon  our  landing,  who  was  now  feated  by  us,  and  of
whom  he  feemed  defirous  that  we  fhould  take  particular
notice.  In  a  fliort  time,  Oberea,  and  feveral  other  women
whom  we  knew,  came  and  fat  down  among  us :  Tootahah
left  us  feveral  times,  but  after  a  fliort  abfence  returned ;  we
thought  it  had  been  to  fhow  himfelf  in  his  new  finery  to  the
people,  but  we  wronged  hiin,  for  it  was  to  give  directions  for
our  refrefhment  and  entertainment.  While  we  were  waiting
for  his  return  the  laft  time  he  left  us,  very  impatient  to  be
difmifled,  as  we  weie  almoft  fuffocated  in  the  croud,  word
was  brought  us,  that  he  expected  us  elfewhere:  we  found
him  fitting  under  the  awning  of  our  own  boat,  and  making
figns  that  we  fhould  come  to  him :  as  many  of  us  therefore
went  on  board  as  the  boat  would  hold,  and  he  then  ordered
bread-fruit  and  cocoa-nuts  to  be  brought,  of  both  which  we
tailed,  rather  to  gratify  him  than  becaufe  we  had  a  defire  to
eat.  A  melTage  was  foon  after  brought  him,  upon  which
he  went  out  of  the  boat,  and  we  were  in  a  fhort  time  defired
to  follow.  We  were  conduced  to  a  large  area  or  court-yard,
which  was  railed  round  with  bamboos  about  three  feet  high,
on  one  fide  of  his  houfe,  where  an  entertainment  was  pro¬
vided  for  us,  entirely  new;  this  was  a  wrellling  match.  At
the  upper  end  of  the  area  fat  the  Chief,  and  feveral  of  his
principal  men  were  ranged  on  each  fide  of  him,  fo  as  to  form
a  femicircle ;  thefe  were  the  judges,  by  whom  the  viClor  was
to  be  applauded ;  feats  were  alfo  left  for  us  at  each  end  of
the  line,  but  we  chofe  rather  to  be  at  liberty  among  the  reft
of  the  fpedators.


When


When  all  was  ready,  ten  or  twelve  perfons,  whom  we  un-
derftood  to  be  the  combatants,  and  who  were  naked,  except
a  cloth  that  was  fattened  about  the  waift,  entered  the  area,
and  walked  flowly  round  it,  in  a  hooping  potture,  with  their
left  hands  on  their  right  breafts,  and  their  right  hands  open,
with  which  they  frequently  ftruck  the  left  fore-arm  fo  as  to
produce  a  quick  fmart  found  :  this  was  a  general  challenge
to  the  combatants  whom  they  were  to  engage,  or  any  other
perfon  prefent :  after  thefe  followed  others  in  the  fame  man¬
ner,  and  then  a  particular  challenge  was  given,  by  which
each  man  ttngled  out  his  antagonift  r  this  was  done  by  join¬
ing  the  finger  ends  of  both  hands,  and  bringing  them  to  the
breatt,  at  the  fame  time  moving  the  elbows  up  and  down
with  a  quick  motion :  if  the  perfon  to  whom  this  was  ad¬
dle  fled  accepted  the  challenge,  he  repeated  the  figns,  and  im¬
mediately  each  put  himfelf  into  an  attitude  to  engage :  the-
next  minute  they  clofed ;  but,  except  in  firtt  feizing  each-
other,  it  was  a  mere  conteft  of  ftrength :  each  endeavoured
to  lay  hold  of  the  other,  firtt  by  the  thigh,*  and  if  that  failed
by  the  hand,  the  hair,  the  cloth,  or  elfewhere  as  he  could
when  this  was  done  they  grappled,  without  the  leaft  dexte¬
rity  or  fkill,  till  one  of  them,  by  having  a  more  advanta¬
geous  hold,  or  greater  mufcular  force,  threw  the  other  on
his  back.  When  the  Cornell  was  over,  the  old  men  gave  their
plaudit  to  the  vi<5lor  in  a  few  words,  which  they  repeated
together  in  a  kind  of*  tune  :  his  conqueft  was  alfo  generally
celebrated  by  three  huzzas.  The  entertainment  was  then
fufpended  for  a  few  minutes,  after  which  another  couple  of
wreftlers  came  forward  and  engaged  in  the  fame  manner :
if  it  happened  that  neither  was  thrown,  after  the  contefl  had'
continued  about  a  minute,  they  parted,  either  by  confent  or
the  intervention  of  their  friends,  and  in  this  cafe  each  flapped
his  arm,  as  a  challenge  to  a  new  engagement,  either  with-

2  the


the  fame  antagonifl  or  fome  other.  While  the  wreftlers  were
engaged,  another  party  of  men  performed  a  dance  which
lafted  alfo  about  a  minute ;  but  neither  of  thefe  parties  took
the  lead;  notice  of  each  other,  their  attention  being  wholly
fixed  on  what  they  were  doing.  We  obferved  with  pleafure,
that  the  conqueror  never  exulted  over  the  vanquifhed,  and
that  the  vanquifhed  never  repined  at  the  fuccefs  of  the  con¬
queror  ;  the  whole  contefl  was  carried  on  with  perfed  good¬
will  and  good-humour,  though  in  the  prefence  of  at  lead:
five  hundred  fpedators,  of  whom  fome  were  women.  The
number  of  women  indeed  was  comparatively  fmall,  none
but  thofe  of  rank  were  prefent,  and  we  had  reafon  to  believe
that  they  would  not  have  been  fpedators  of  this  exercife  but
in  compliment  to  us.

This  lafted  about  two  hours  ;  during  all  which  time  the
man  who  had  made  way  for  us  when  we  landed,  kept  the
people  at  a  proper  diftance,  by  ftriking  thofe  who  preffed
forward  very  feverely  with  his  flick:  upon  enquiry  we  learnt,
that  he  was  an  officer  belonging  to  Tootahah,  ading  as  a
mafter  of  the  ceremonies.

It  is  fcarcely  poffible  for  thofe'  who  are  acquainted  with
the  athletic  fports  of  very  remote  antiquity,  not  to  remark
a  rude  refemblance  of  them  in  this  wreftling- match  among
'  the  natives  of  a  little  ifland  in  the  midfl  of  the  Pacific  Ocean:
and  even  our  female  readers  may  recoiled  the  account  given
of  them  by  Fcnelon  in  his  Telemachus,  where,  though  the
events  are  fiditious,  the  manners  of  the  age  are  faithfully
tranferibed  from  authors  by  whom  they  are  fuppofed  to  have
been  truly  related.

When  the  wreftling  was  over,  we  were  given  to  under¬
hand  that  two  hogs,  and  a  large  quantity  of  bread-fruit  were
preparing  for  our  dinner,  which,  as  our  appetites  were  now

keen,


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


1 2  {


keen,  was  very  agreeable  intelligence.  Our  hod,  however,
feemed  to  repent  of  his  liberality;  for,  indead  of  fetting  his
two  hogs  before  us,  he  ordered  one  of  them  to  be  carried
into  our  boat ;  at  firft  we  were  not  forry  for  this  new  difpo-
fition  of  matters,  thinking  that  we  fhould  dine  more  com¬
fortably  in  the  boat  than  on  fhore,  as  the  croud  would  more
eafdy  be  kept  at  a  didance :  but  when  we  came  on  board,  he
ordered  us  to  proceed  with  his  hog  to  the  fhip  ;  this  was
mortifying,  as  we  were  now  to  row  four  miles  while  our
dinner  was  growing  cold  ;  however,  we  thought  fit  to  com¬
ply,  and  were  at  lad  gratified  with  the  cheer  that  he  had
provided,  of  which  he  and  Tubourai  Tamaide  had  a  liberal
fhare.

Our  reconciliation  with  this  man  operated  upon  the  people
like  a  charm ;  for  he  was  no  fooner  known  to  be  on  board,
than  bread-fruit,  cocoa-nuts,  and  other  provilions  were
brought  to  the  fort  in  great  plenty.

Affairs  now  went  on  in  the  ufual  channel ;  but  pork  being
dill  a  fcarce  commodity,  our  Mader,  Mr.  Mollineux,  and
Mr.  Green  went  in  the  pinnace  to  the  eadward,  on  the  8th,  Monday  s,
early  in  the  morning,  to  fee  whether  they  could  procure  any
hogs  or  poultry  in  that  part  of  the  country :  they  proceeded
in  that  dire&ion  twenty  miles  ;  but  though  they  faw  many
hogs,  and  one  turtle,  they  could  not  purchafe  either  at  any
price :  the  people  every  where  told  them,  that  they  all  be¬
longed  to  Tootahah,  and  that  they  could  fell  none  of  them
without  his  permiflion.  AVe  now  began  to  think  that  this
man  was  indeed  a  great  Prince  ;  for  an  influence  fo  exten-
five  and  abfolute  could  be  acquired  by  no  other.  And  we
afterwards  found  -that  he  adminidered  the  government  of
this  part  of  the  ifland,  as  fovereign,  for  a  minor  whom  we
never  faw  all  the  time  .that  we  were  upon  it.  When  Mr*

Yol.  II.  R  Green


1769.

IViay.
Friday  5,


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


TOO


I769.

May.


L - - - 1

Monday  8.


Green  returned  from  this  expedition,  he  faid  he  had  feen  a
tree  of  a  fizc  which  he  was  afraid  to  relate,  it  being  no  lefs
than  fixty  yards  in  circumference ;  but  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.
Solander  foon  explained  to  him,  that  it  was  a  fpecies  of  the
fig,  the  branches  of  which,  bending  down,  take  frefh  root
in  the  earth,  and  thus  form  a  congeries  of  trunks,  which
being  very  clofe  to  each  other,  and  all  joined  by  a  common
vegetation,  might  eafily  be  miftaken  for  one.


Though  the  market  at  the  fort  was  now  tolerably  fup-
plied,  provifions  were  brought  more  flowly  :  a  fufficient
quantity  ufed  to  be  purchafed  between  fun-rife  and  eight
o’clock,  but  it  was  now  become  necefiary  to  attend  the  great-
eft  part  of  the  day.  Mr.  Banks,  therefore,  fixed  his  little
boat  up  before  the  door  of  the  fort,  which  was  of  great  ufe
as  a  place  to  trade  in  :  hitherto  we  had  purchafed  cocoa-nuts
and  bread-fruit  for  beads  ;  but  the  market  becoming  rather
flack  in  thefe  articles,  we  were  now,  for  the  firft  time,  forced
to  bring  out  our  nails  :  one  of  our  fmallefl  fize,  which  was
about  four  inches  long,  procured  us  twenty  cocoa-nuts,  and
bread-fruit  in  proportion,  fo  that  in  a  fliort  time  our  firft
plenty  was  reftored.


Tuefday  9.  On  the  9th,  foon  after  breakfaft,  we  received  a  vifit  from
Oberea,  being  the  firft  that  flie  had  made  us  after  the  lofs  of
our  quadrant,  and  the  unfortunate  confinement  of  Toota-
hah  ;  with  her  came  her  prefent  favourite,  Obadee,  and  Tu-
pia :  they  brought  us  a  hog  and  fome  bread-fruit,  in  return
for  which  we  gave  her  a  hatchet.  We  had  now  afforded  our
Indian  friends  a  new  and  interefting  objeeft  of  curiofity,  our
forge,  which  having  been  fet  up  fome  time,  was  almoft  con-
ftantly  at  work.  It  was  now  common  for  them  to  bring
pieces  of  iron,  which  we  fuppofed  they  muft  have  got  from
the  Dolphin,  to  be  made  into  tools  of  various  kinds  j  and  as

I  was


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


123


I  was  very  defirous  to  gratify  them,  they  were  indulged,  ex-  1769.
cept  when  the  fmitlTs  time  was  too  precious  to  be  fpared.  .  M*y‘._
Oberea  having  received  her  hatchet,  produced  as  much  old  Tuefday 9*
iron  as  would  have  made  another,  with  a  requefl  that  ano¬
ther  might  be  made  of  it:  in  this,  however,, I  could  not  gra¬
tify  her,  upon  which  fhe  brought  out  a  broken  ax,  and  de-
fired  it  might  be  mended  ;  I  was  glad  of  an  opportunity  to
compromife  the  difference  between  us :  her  ax  was  mended,
and  flie  appeared  to  be  content.  They  went  away  at  night,
and  took  with  them  the  canoe,  which  had  been  a  confide-
rable  time  at  the  point,  but  promifed  to  return  in  three
days.

*  *'  ■*  f  •  „ .

On  the  10th,  I  put  fome  feeds  of  melons  and  other  plants  wednei*.  10
into  a  fpot  of  ground  which  had  been  turned  up  for  the
purpofe  ;  they  had  all  been  fealed  up  by  the  perfon  of  whom
they  were  bought,  in  fmall  bottles  with  rofin ;  but  none  of
them  came  up  except  muftard;  even  the  cucumbers  and  me¬
lons  failed,  and  Mr.  Banks  is  of  opinion  that  they  were  fpoiled
by  the  total  exclufion  of  frefh  air.

This  day  we  learnt  the  Indian  name  of  the  ifland,  which  is
Otaheite,  and  by  that  name  I  fhall  hereafter  diftinguifh  it :
but  after  great  pains  taken  we  found  it  utterly  impoflible  to
teach  the  Indians  to  pronounce  our  names  ;  we  had,  there¬
fore,  new  names,  confiding  of  fuch  founds  as  they  produced
in  the  attempt.  They  called  me  Toote ;  Mr.  Hicks,  Hete ;
Molineux  they  renounced  in  abfolute  defpair,  and  called  the
Mailer  Boba ,  from  his  Chridian  name  Robert ;  Mr.  Gore  was
Toarro ;  Dr.  Solander,  Torano  ;  and  Mr.  Banks,  Tapane  ;  Mr.

Green,  Eteree ;  Mr.  Parkinfon,  Pat  ini ;  Mr.  Sporing,  Polini ;
Peterfgill,  Petrodero  ;  and  in  this  manner  they  had  now
formed  names  for  almoft  every  man  in  the  Blip :  in  fomc,
however,  it  was  not  cafy  to  find  any  traces  of  the  original,

R  2-  and


124


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


and  they  were  perhaps  not  mere  arbitrary  founds  formed'

^ — v - '  upon  the  occafion,  but  fignificant  words  in  their  own  lan-

e  ’  ‘c*  guage.  Monkhoufe,.  the  Midlhipman,.  who  commanded  the
party  that  killed  the  man  for  Healing  the  mufket,  they  called
Matte  ;■  not  merely  by  an  attempt  to  imitate  in  found  the  firft
fyllable  of  Monkhoufe,  but  becaufe  Matte  fignifies  dead ;  and;
this  probably  might  be  the  cafe  with  others-


€  FI  A  P.  XII..

Some  Ladies  vifet  the  Fort  with  very  uncommon  Ceremonies  z
The  Indians  attend  Divine  Service ,  and  in  the  Evening

exhibit  a  mojl  extraordinary  SpeSlacle  :  Fubourai  Fa-

*

maide  falls  into  Temptation •

•  .  r  '■  *  *  *  ”  *

Fy  RID  AY,  the  i  ?th  of  May,  was  diftlnguifhed  by  a  vdfit

from  fome  ladies  whom  we  had  never  feen  before,  and
who  introduced  themfelves  with  fome  very  lingular  ceremo¬
nies.  Mr.  Banks  was  trading  in  his  boat  at  the  gate  of  the
fort  as  ufual,  in  company  with  Tootahah,  who  had  that
morning  paid  him  a  vilit,  and  fome  other  of  the  natives ;  be¬
tween  nine  and  ten  o’clock,  a  double  canoe  came  to  the
landing-place,  under  the  awning  of  which  fat  a  man  and
two  women:  the  Indians  that  were  about  him  made  ligns
that  he  fhould  go  out  to  meet  them,  which  he  hailed  to  do
but  by  the  time  he  could  get  out  of  the  boat,  they  had  ad¬
vanced  within  ten  yards  of  him:  they  then  flopped,-  and
made  figns  that  he  fhould  do  fo  too,  laying  down  about  a
dozen  young  plantain  trees,  and  fome  other  fmall  plants :
he  complied,  and  the  people  having  made  a  lane  between

4  them?


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


shem,  the  man,  who  appeared  to  be  a  fervant,  brought  them  17-69-

to  Mr.  Banks  by  one  of  each  at  a  time,  palling  and  repairing  i _

fix  times,  and  always  pronouncing  a  fhort  fentence  when  he  Fndiy  ‘2*
delivered  them.  Tupia,  who  Rood  by  Mr.  Banks,  adted  as
his  mailer  of  the  ceremonies,  and  receiving  the  branches
as  they  were  brought,  laid  them  down  in  the  boat.  When
this  was  done,  another  man  brought  a  large  bundle  of  cloth,,
which  having  opened,  he  fpread  piece  by  piece  upon  the
ground,  in  the  fpace  between  Mr.  Banks  and  his  vifitors  ;
there  were  nine  pieces,  and  having  laid  three  pieces  one  upon
another,  the  foremoil  of  the  women,  who  feemed  to  be  the
principal,  and  who  was  called  Oorattooa,  Hepped  upon
them,  and  taking  up  her  garments  all  round  her  to  the
waifi,  turned  about,  with  great  compofure  and  deliberation,
and  with  an  air  of  perfedl  innocence  and  fimplicity,  three
times  ;  when  this  was  done,  fhe  dropped  the  veil,  and  Rep¬
ping  off  the  cloth.,  three  more  pieces  were  laid  on,  and  fhe
repeated  the  ceremony,  then  Repping  ofi*  as  before  ;  the
laR  three  were  laid  on,  and  the  ceremony  was  repeated  in
the  fame  manner  the  third  time.  Immediately  after  this
the  cloth  was  rolled  up,  and  given  to  Mr.  Banks,  as  a  pre—
fent  from  the  lady,  who,  with  her  friend,  came  up  and  fa-
luted  him.  He  made  fuch  prefents  to  them  both  as  he
thought  would  be  moR  acceptable,  and  after  having  Raid
about  an  hour  they  went  away.  In  the  evening,,  the  Gentle¬
men  at  the  fort  had  a  vifit  from  Oberea,  and  her  favourite
female  attendant,  whofe  name  was  Otheothea,  an  agree¬
able  girl,  whom  they  were  the  more  pleafed  to  fee,  becaufe,
having  been  fome  days  abfent,  it  had  been  reported  that  fhe
was  either  fick  or  dead.


On  the  1 3th,  the  market  being  over  about  ten  o’clock,.  Mr.  Saturday
Banks  walked  into  the  woods  with  his  gun,  as  he  generally
did,  for  the  benefit  of  the  fiiade  in  the  heat  of  the  day :  as  he

was


126


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s


VOYAGE


M^y,'  was  ^turning  back,  he  met  Tubourai  Tamaide,  near  his  oc-
caflonal  dwelling,  and  flopping  to  fpend  a  little  time  with
’  him,  he  fuddenly  took  the  gun  out  of  Mr.  Banks’s  hand,
cocked  it,  and,  holding  it  up  in  the  air,  drew  the  trigger:
fortunately  for  him,  it  flalhed  in  the  pan :  Mr.  Banks  imme¬
diately  took  it  from  him,  not  a  little  furprifed  how  he  had
acquired  fufficient  knowlege  of  a  gun  to  difcharge  it,  and  re¬
proved  him  with  great  feverity  for  what  he  had  done.  As  it
was  of  infinite  importance  to  keep  the  Indians  totally  igno¬
rant  of  the  management  of  fire-arms,  lie  had  taken  every
opportunity  of  intimating  that  they  could  never  offend  him
fo  highly  as  by  even  touching  his  piece ;  it  was  now  proper
to  enforce  this  prohibition,  and  he  therefore  added  threats  to
his  reproof:  the  Indian  bore  all  patiently;  but  the  moment
Mr.  Banks  croffed  the  river,  he  fet  off  with  all  his  family
and  furniture  for  his  houfe  at  Eparre.  This  being  quickly
known  from  the  Indians  at  the  fort,  and  great  inconvenience
being  apprehended  from  the  difpleafure  of  this  man,  who
upon  all  occafions  had  been  particularly  ufeful,  Mr.  Banks
determined  to  follow  him  without  delay,  and  folicit  his  re¬
turn:  he  fet  out  the  fame  evening,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Mol-
lineux,  and  found  him  fitting  in  the  middle  of  a  large  circle
of  people,  to  whom  he  had  probably  related  what  had  hap-
.  pened,  and  his  fears  of  the  confequences ;  he  was  himfelf
the  very  picture  of  grief  and  dejecflion,  and  the  fame  paflions
weie  ftrongly  marked  in  the  countenances  of  all  the  people
that  furroanded  him.  When  Mr.  Banks  and  Mr.  Mollineux
went  into  the  circle,  one  of  the  women  expreffed  her  trou¬
ble,  as  Terapo  had  done  upon  another  occafion,  and  ftruck  a
fn  ark’s  tooth  into  her  head  feveral  times,  till  it  was  covered
with  blood.  Mr.  Banks  loft  no  time  in  putting  an  end  to  this
univerfal  diftrefs  ;  he  affured  the  Chief,  that  every  thino-
w  inch  had  paired  fhould  be  forgotten,  that  there  was  nett

the


\


/


ROUND  THE  WORLD.  127

the  lead  animality  remaining  on  one  fide,  nor  any  thing  to  be  1769*

feared  on  the  other.  The  Chief  was  foon  foothed  into  confidence  ' - * - *

and  complacency,  a  double  canoe  was  ordered  to  be  got  ready,  Saturday  1  ^
they  all  returned  together  to  the  fort  before  flipper,  and  as
a  pledge  of  perfedt  reconciliation,  both  he  and  his  wife  flept
all  night  in  Mr.  Banks’s  tent :  their  prefence,  however,  was
no  palladium  ;  for,  between  eleven  and  twelve  o’clock,  one
of  the  natives  attempted  to  get  into  the  fort  by  fcaling  the
walls,  with  a  defign,  no  doubt,  to  ileal  whatever  he  iliould
happen  to  find ;  he  was  difcovered  by  the  centinel,  who  hap¬
pily  did  not  fire,  and  he  ran  away  much  falter  than  any  of
our  people  could  follow  him.  The  iron,  and  iron-tools,
which  were  in  continual  ufe  at  the  armourer’s  forge,  that
was  fet  up  within  the  works,  were  temptations  to  theft
which  none  of  thefe  people  could  withfiand.

On  the  14th,  which  was  Sunday,  I  directed  that  Divine  Sunday  i*.
Service  fhould  be  performed  at  the  fort:  we  were  defirous
that  fome  of  the  principal  Indians  fhould  be  prefent,  but
when  the  hour  came,  mofc  of  them  were  returned  home.

Mr.  Banks,  however,  crofted  the  river,  and  brought  back  Tu-
bourai  Tam  aide  and  his  wife  Tomio,  hoping  that  it  would
give  occafion  to  fome  enquiries  on  their  part,  and  fome  in-
fir  ucd  ion  on  ours  :  having  feated  them,  he  placed  himfelf
between  them,  and  during  the  whole  fervice,  they  very  at¬
tentively  obferved  his  behaviour,  and  very  exactly  imitated
it ;  Handing,  fitting,  or  kneeling,  as  they  faw  him  do  :  they
were  confcious  that  we  were  employed  about  fomewhat  fe-
rious  and  important,  as  appeared  by  their  calling  to  the  In¬
dians  without  the  fort -to  be  filent;  yet  when  the  fervice  was
over,  neither  of  them  alked  any  quefiions,  nor  would  they
attend  to  any  attempt  that  was  made  to  explain  what  had
been  done.

2  Such


1


128


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


*769-  Such  were  our  Matins ;  our  Indians  thought  fit  to  perform
— *  Vefpers  of  a  very  different  kind.  A  young  man,  near  fix  feet
&unday  *'4‘  high,  performed  the  rites  of  Venus  with  a  little  girl  about
eleven  or  twelve  years  of  age,  before  feveral  of  our  people,
and  a  great  number  of  the  natives,  without  the  leafi  fenfe  of
its  being  indecent  or  improper,  but,  as  appeared,  in  perfedt
conformity  to  the  cuftom  of  the  place.  Among  the  fpedla-
tors  were  feveral  women  of  fuperior  rank,  particularly  Obe-
rea,  who  may  properly  be  faid  ro  have  affifled  at  the  cere¬
mony  ;  for  they  gave  inflrudtions  to  the  girl  how  to  perform
her  part,  which,  young  as  fhe  was,  fhe  did  not  feem  much  to
Hand  in  need  of.

This  incident  is  not  mentioned  as  an  objedt  of  idle  curio-
fity,  but  as  it  deferves  confideration  in  determining  a  quef-
tion  which  has  been  long  debated  in  philofophy  ;  Whether
the  fhame  attending  certain  actions,  which  are  allowed  on
all  fides  to  be  in  themfelves  innocent,  is  implanted  in  Na¬
ture,  or  fuperinduced  by  cuftom  ?  If  it  has  its  origin  in  cuf-
tom,  it  will,  perhaps,  be  found  difficult  to  trace  that  cuftom,
however  general,  to  its  fource ;  if  in  inftindt,  it  will  be
equally  difficult  to  difcover  from  what  caufe  it  is  fubdued  or
at  leaf!  over-ruled  among  thefie  people,  in  whofe  manners
not  the  lead;  trace  of  it  is  to  be  found.

Monday  r.  On  the  14th  and  15th,  we  had  another  opportunity  of  ob-
ferving  the  general  knowlege  which  thefe  people  had  of
any  defign  that  was  formed  among  them.  In  the  night  be¬
tween  the  13th  and  14th,  one  of  the  water-cafks  was  ftolen
from  the  outfide  of  the  fort :  in  the  morning,  there  was  not
an  Indian  to  be  fcen  who  did  not  know  that  it  was  gone  ;
yet  they  appeared  not  to  have  been  trufied,  or  not  to  have
been  worthy  of  trull ;  for  they  feemed  all  of  them  difpofed
;to  give  intelligence  where  it  might  be  found.  Mr.  Banks
»  traced


HOUND  THE  WORLD.


12^


traced  it  to  a  part  of  the  bay  where  he  was  told  it  had  been
put  into  a  canoe,  but  as  it  was  not  of  great  confequencc  he
did  not  complete  the  difeovery.  When  he  returned,  he  was
told  by  Tubourai  Tamaide,  that  another  cafle  would  be  Rolen
before  the  morning :  how  he  came  by  this  knowlege  it  is
not  eafy  to  imagine ;  that  he  was  not  a  party  in  the  defign  is
certain,  for  he  came  with  his  wife  and  his  family  to  the
place  where  the  water  calks  Rood,  and  placing  their  beds
near  them,,  he  faid  he  would  himfelf  be  a  pledge  for  their
fafety,  in  defpight  of  the  thief:  of  this,  however,  we  would
not  admit ;  and  making  him  underRand  that  a  fentry  would
be  placed  to  watch  the  calks  till  the  morning,  he  removed
the  beds  into  Mr.  Banks’s  tent,  where  he  and  his  family  fpent
the  night,  making  figns  to  the  fentry  when  he  retired,  that
he  Ihould  keep  his  eyes  open.  In  the  night  this  intelligence
appeared  to  be  true ;  about  twelve  o’clock  the  thief  came,
but  difeovering  that  a  watch  had  been  fet,  he  went  away
without  his  booty.


1769.

Ivv ay.

/.  1

' - - - <

Monday  i  5,


Mr.  Banks’s  confidence  in  Tubourai  Tamaide  had  greatly
increased  fince  the  affair  of  the  knife,  in  confequence  of
which  he  was  at  length  expofed  to  temptations  which  nei¬
ther  his  integrity  nor  his  honour  was  able  to  refiR.  They
had  withfiood  many  allurements,  but  were  at  length  en-
fnared  by  the  fafeinating  charms  of  a  balltet  of  nails  ;  thefe
nails  were  much  larger  than  any  that  had  yet  been  brought
into  trade,  and  had,  with  perhaps  fome  degree  of  criminal
negligence,  been  left  in  a  corner  of  Mr.  Banks’s  tent,  to
which  the  Chief  had  always  free  accefs.  One  of  thefe  nails
Mr.  Banks’s  fervant  happened  to  lee  in  his  poffefilon,  upon
his  having  inadvertently  thrown  back  that  part  of  his  gar¬
ment  under  which  it  was  concealed.  Mr.  Banks  being  told
of  this,  and  knowing  that  no  fuch  thing  had  been  given
Vol.  If.  S  him.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


him,  either  as  a  prefent  or  in  barter,  immediately  examined
the  bafket,  and  difcovered,  that  out  of  feven  nails  five  were
miffing.  He  then,  though  not  without  great  reluctance,
charged  him  with  the  fad,  which  he  immediately  confefled,
and  however  he  might  fuffer,  was  probably  not.  more  hurt
than  his  accufer.  A  demand  was  immediately  made  of  refth-
tution ;  but  this  he  declined*  faying,  that  the  nails  were  at
Eparre  :  however,  Mr.  Banks  appearing  to  be  much  in  ear^
nelt,  and  ufing-  fome  threatening  figns,.,  he  thought  fit  to
produce  one  of  them.  He  was  then  taken  to  the  fort,  to  re--
ceive  fuch  judgment  as  fhould  be.  given.againft  him  by  the
general  voice*

After  fome  deliberation,  that  we  might  not  appear  to  think  -
too  lightly  of  his  offence,  he  was  told,  that  if  he  would  bring
the  other  four  nails  to  the  fort,  it  fhould  be  forgotten.  Tb
this  condition  he  agreed';  but  I  am  forry  to  fay  he  did  not
fulfil  it.  Inftead  of  fetching  the  nails,  he  removed  with  his
family  before  night,  and  took  all  his  furniture  with  him*

As  our  long-boat  had  appeared  to  be  leaky,  I  thought  it
neceffary  to  examine  her  bottom,  and,  to  my  great  furprize,
found  it  fo  much  eaten  by  the  worms,  that  it  was  necefiary
to  give  her  a  new  one  ;  no  fuch  accident  had  happened  to
the  Dolphin’s  boats,  as  I  was  informed  by  the  officers  on
board,  and  therefore  it  was  a  misfortune  that  I  did  not  ex«-
peCt :  I  feared  that  the  pinnace  alfo  might  be  nearly  in  the
fame  condition;  but,  upon  examining  her,  I  had  the  fati&-
faCiion  to  find  that  not  a  worm  had  touched  her,  though  fhe
was  built  Of  the  fame  wood,  and  had  been  as  much  in  the
water ;  the  reafon  of  this  difference  I  imagine  to  be,  that  the
long-boat  was  paid  with  varnifh  of  pine,  and  the  pinnace
painted  with  white  lead  and  oil ;  the  bottoms  of  all  boats
therefore  which  are  fent  into  this  country  fhould  be  painted

like


\  *


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


*3l

like  that  of  the  pinnace,  and  the  fhips  fhould  be  fupplied  1769.
with  a  good  flock,  in  order  to  give  them  a  new  coating  when  .  _j
it  fhall  be  found  necefiary.

Having  received  repeated  mefTages  from  Tootahah,  that  Wednef.  24,
if  we  would  pay  him  a  vifit  he  would  acknowledge  the  fa¬
vour  by  a  prefent  of  four  hogs,  I  fent  Mr.  Hicks,  my  Firfl
Lieutenant,  to  try  if  he  could  not  procure  the  hogs  upon
eafier  terms,  with  orders  to  fliow  him  every  civility  in  his
power.  Mr.  Hicks  found  that  he  was  removed  from  Eparre  to
a  place  called  Tett  ah  ah,  five  miles  farther  to  the  weflward.

He  was  received  with  great  cordiality  ;  one  hog  was  imme¬
diately  produced,  and  he  was  told  that  the  other  three*
which  were  at  Lome  diflance,  fhould  be  brought  in  the  morn¬
ing.  Mr.  Hicks  readily  confented  to  flay  5  but  the  morning
came  without  the  hogs,  and  it  not  being  convenient  to  flay
longer,  he  returned  in  the  evening,  with  the  one  that  he  had
got.

On  the  55th,  Tubourai  Tamaide  and  his  wife  Tomio  made  Thurfday^*
their  appearance  at  the  tent,  for  the  firfl  time  fince  he  had
been  detected  in  dealing  the  nails;  he  feemed  to  be  under
fome  difcontent  and  apprehenfion,  yet  he  did  not  think  fit  to
purchafe  our  countenance  and  good-will  by  refloring  the
four  which  he  had  fent  away.  As  Mr.  Banks  and  the  other
Gentlemen  .treated  him  with  a  coolnefs  and  referve  which
did  not  at  all  tend  to  red  ore  his  peace  or  good-humour,  his
flay,  was  fhort,  and  his  departure  abrupt.  Mr.  Monkhoufe,
the  Surgeon,  went  the  next  morning  in  order  to  effect  a  re¬
conciliation,  by  perfuading  him  to  bring  down  the  nails,  but
he  could  not  fucceed.


*


C  H  A  P.


L32


LIEUTENANT  CO  OX’S-  VOYAGE.

.

CHAP.  XIII.

*  .......  '  ‘  -!•  ,  ,  _  -  ;  •  >  *’  >  v

/  *  i  /  .  |  •  ■  i

Another  Vi  ft  to  Footahah,  with  various  Adventures  r  Ex¬
traordinary  Amufement  of  the  Indians,  with  Remarks
upon  it Preparations  to  obferve  the  ‘Tranfit  of  Venus y
and  what  happened  in  the  mean  time  at  the  Fort .

j7e9.  N  the  27th,  it  was  determined  that  we  fhould  pay  our

,  ^iay‘  vy  vifit  to  Tootahah,  though  we  were  not  very  confident:
Saturday  27.  that  we  fhould  receive  the  hogs  for  our  pains.  I  therefore
fet  out  early  in  the  morning,  with  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solan-
der,  and  three  others,  in  the  pinnace.  He  was  now  removed
from  Tettahah,  where  Mr.  Hicks  had  feen  him,  to  a  place
called  At  ah  ourou,  about  fix  miles  farther,  and  as  we  could
not  go  above  half  way  thither  in  the  boat,  it  was  aimed
evening  before  we  arrived :  we  found  him  in  his  ufual  flate,
fitting  under  a  tree,  with  a  great  crowd  about  him.  We
made  our  prefents  in  due  form,  confifiing  of  a  yellow  fluff
petticoat,  and  fome  other  trifling  articles,  which  were  gra-
cioufly  received ;  a  hog  was  immediately  ordered  to  be  killedt
and  dreffed  for  fupper,  with  a  promife  of  more  in  the  morn¬
ing  :  however,  as  we  were  lefs  defirous  of  feafling.upon  our
journey  than  of  carrying  back  with  us  provifions,  which
would  be  more  welcome  at  the  fort,  we  procured  a  reprieve
for  the  hog,  and  fupped  upon  the  fruits  of  the  country.  As
night  now  came  on,  and  the  place  was  crowded  with  many
more  than  the  houfes  and  canoes  would  contain;  there  being
Oberea  with  her  attendants,  and  many  other  travellers  whom
we  knew,  we  began  to  look  out  for  lodgings.  Our  party*

confided.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


*33


eonfifted  of  fix :  Mr  Banks  thought  himfelf  fortunate  in  be-  176 9*
ing  offered  a  place  by  Oberea  in  her  canoe,  and  wifhing  his
friends  a  good  night,  took  his  leave.  He  went  to  reft  early,  Saturday  2?*
according  to  the  cuftom  of  the  country,  and  taking  off  his
clothes,  as  was  his  conflant  pra&ice,  the  nights  being  hot,

Oberea  kindly  infilled  upon  taking  them  into  her  own  cuflo-
dy,  for  otherwife  fhe  faid  they  would  certainly  be  ftolen,

Mr.  Banks  having  fuch  a  Safeguard,  refigned  himfelf  tofleep
with  all  imaginable  tranquillity :  but  awaking  about  eleven
o’clock,  and  wanting  to  get  up,  he  fearched  for  his  clothes
where  he  had  feen  them  depofited  by  Oberea  when  he  lay
down  to  fleep,  and  foon  perceived  that  they  were  miffing.

He  immediately  awakened  Oberea,  who  darting  up,  and*
hearing  his  complaint,  ordered  lights,  and  prepared  in  great-
haile  to  recover  what  he  had  loft:  Tootahah  himfelf  flept  im
the  next  canoe,  and  being  foon  alarmed,  he  came  to  therm
and  fet  out  with  Oberea  in  fearch  of  the  thief:  Mr.  Banks
was  not  in  a  condition  to  go  with  them,  for  of  his  appareB
ftarce  any  thing  was  left  him  but  his  breeches;  his  coat,  and:
his  waiflcoat,  with  his  piflols,  powder-horn,  and  many  other
things  that  were  in  the  pockets,  were  gone.  In  about  half
an  hour  his  two  noble  friends  returned,  but  without  having,
obtained  any  intelligence  of  his  clothes  or  of  the  thief.  At
firft  he  began  to  be  alarmed,  his  mufquet  had  not  indeed--
been  taken  away,  but  he  had  neglecfled  to  load  it ;  where  I
and  Dr.  Solander  had  difpofed  of  ourfelves  he  did  not  know;
and  therefore,  whatever  might  happen,  he  could  not  have
recourfe  to  us  for  affiftance.  He  thought  it  beffi  however,  to
exprefs  neither  fear  nor  fufpicion  of  thofe  about  him,  and
giving  his  mufquet  to  Tupta,  who  had  been  waked  in  the
confufion  and  flood  by  him,  with  a  charge  not  to  TufFer  it  to
be  Helen,  he  betook  himfelf  aeain  to  ref:,  declaring  himfelf"
perfectly  fatished  with  the  pains  that  Tootahah  ana  Oberea-

i-  had


*  34


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  ‘VO  YAGE


1769.  had  taken  to  recover  his  things,  though  they  had  not  been
c — fuccefsful.  As  it  cannot  be  fuppofed  that  in  fuch  a  fituation
Saturday  „7.  fleep  was  very  founcj)  he  foon  after  heard  mufic,  and  faw

lights  at  a  little  didance  on  fhore :  this  was  a  concert  or  afl
fiembly,  which  they  call  a  Heiva,  a  common  name  for  every
public  exhibition ;  and  as  it  would  neceflarily  bring  many
people  together,  and  there  was  a  chance  of  my  being  among
them  with  his  other  friends,  he  rofe,  and  made  the  bed  of
his  way  towards  it :  he  was  foon  led  by  the  lights  and  the
found  to  the  hut  where  I  lay,  with  three  other  Gentlemen  of
our  party,  and  eafily  diftinguifhing  us  from  the  reft,  he
made  up  to  us  more  than  half  naked,  and  told  us  his  me¬
lancholy  ftory.  We  gave  him  fuch  comfort  as  the  unfortu¬
nate  generally  give  to  each  other,  by  telling  him  that  we
were  fellow-fufferers ;  I  Ihowed  him  that  I  was  myfelf  with¬
out  dockings,  they  having  been  ftolen  from  under  my  head,
though  I  was  fure  I  had  never  been  afleep,  and  each  of  my
afTociates  convinced  him,  by  his  appearance,  that  he  had  loft
a  jacket.  We  determined,  however,  to  hear  out  the  concert,
however  deficient  we  might  appear  in  our  drefs  ;  it  confided

of  three  drums,  four  flutes,  and  feveral  voices  :  when  this

»  >  /

entertainment,  which  laded  about  an  hour,  was  over,  we
retired  again  to  our  fleeping-places ;  having  agreed,  that  no¬
thing  could  be  done  toward  the  recovery  of  our  things  till
the  morning.

5  and  ay  28.  We  rofe  at  day-break,  according  to  the  cuflom  of  the

country  ;  the  firfl  man  that  Mr.  Banks  faw  was  Tupia,  faith¬
fully  attending  with  his  mufquet ;  and  foon  after,  Qberea
brought  him  fome  of  her  country  clothes,  as  a  fuccedaneum.
for  his  own,  fo  that  when  he  came  to  us  he  made  a  mod
motley  appearance,  half  Indian  and  half  Englifh.  Our  party
loon  got  together,  except  Dr.  Solander,  whofe  quarters  we
did  not  know,  and  who  had  not  aflided  at  the  concert :  in  a

6  Abort


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


/


*3S~

ffiort  time  Tootahali  made  his  appearance,  and  we  prefted  T769-

him  to  recover  our  clothes ;  but  neither  he  nor  Oberea  could  _ _

be  perfuaded  to  take- any  meafure  for  that  purpofe,  fo  that  Sunday  2b>‘
we  began  to  fufpedt  that  they  had  been  parties  in  the  theft.

About  eight  o’clock,  we  were  joined  by  Dr.  Solander,  who
had  fallen  into  honefter  hands,  at  a  houfe.  about  a  mile  di£-
tan t,  and  had  loft  nothing.

Having  given  upajl  hope  of  recovering  our  clothes,  which
indeed  were  never  afterwards  heard  of,  we  fpent  all  the
morning  in  foliciting  the  hogs  which  we  had  been  promifed;
but  in  this  we  had  no  better  fuccefs:  we  therefore,  in  no
very  good  humour,  fet  out  for  the  boat  about  twelve  o’clock, .
with  only  that  which  we  had  redeemed  from  the  butcher
and  the  cook  the  night  before.

As  we  were  returning  to  the  boat,  however,  we  were  enter¬
tained  with  a  fight  that  in  fome  meafure  compenfated  for  our
•fatigue  and  difappointment.  In  our  way  we  came  to  one  of
the  few  places  where  accefs  to  the  ifland  is  not  guarded  by  a
reef,  and,  confequently,  a  high  furf  breaks  upon  thefhorej  a
more  dreadful  one  indeed  I  had  feldom  feen ;  it  was  impof-
fible  for  any  European  boat'  to  have  lived  in  it  y  and  if  the
beft  fwimmer  in  Europe  had,  by  any  accident,  been  expofed
•  to  its  fury,  I  am  confident  that  he  would  not  have  been  able
to  preferve  himfelf  from  drowning,  efpecially  as  the  fhore
was  covered  with  pebbles  and  large  ftones  ;  yet,  in  the  midft
of  thefe  breakers,  were  ten  or  twelve  Indians  fwimming  for
their  amufement :  whenever  a  furf  broke  near  them,  they
dived  under  it,  and,  to  all  appearance,  with  infinite  facility,
rofe  again  on  the  other  fide.  This  diverfion  was  greatly  im¬
proved  by  the  ftern  of  an  old  canoe,  which  they  happened  to
find  upon  the  fpot ;  they  took  this  before  them,  and  fwam
out  with  it  as. far  as  the  outermoft  breach,  then  two  or  three


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


of  them  getting  into  it,  and  turning  the  fquare  end  to  the
breaking  wave,  were  driven  in  towards  the  fhore  with  incre¬
dible  rapidity,  fometimes  almoft  to  the  beach ;  but  generally
the  wave  broke  over  them  before  they  got  half  way,  in
which  cafe  they  dived,  and  rofe  on  the  other  fide  with  the
canoe  in  their  hands :  they  then  fwam  out  with  it  again,
and  were  again  driven  back,  juft  as  our  holiday  youth
climb  the  hill  in  Greenwich  park  for  the  pleafure  of  rolling  *
down  it.  At  this  wonderful  fcene  we  flood  gazing  for  more
than  half  an  hour,  during  which  time  none  of  the  fwinimers
attempted  to  come  on  fhore,  but  fcemed  to  enjoy  their  fport
in  the  higheft  degree ;  we  then  proceeded  in  our  journey*
and  late  in  the  evening  got  back  to  the  fort.

Upon  this  occafion  it  may  be  obferved,  that  human  nature
is  endued  with  powers  which  are  only  accidentally  exerted  to
the  utmoft ;  and  that  all  men  are  capable  of  what  no  man
attains,  except  he  is  ftimulated  to  the  effort  by  fome  uncom¬
mon  circumftances  or  fituation.  Thefe  Indians  effected  what
to  us  appeared  to  be  fupernatural,  merely  by  the  application
of  fuch  powers  as  they  poffeffed  in  common  with  us,  and  all
other  men  who  have  no  particular  infirmity  or  defecft.  The
truth  of  the  obfervation  is  alfo  manifeft  from  more  familiar
inftances.  The  rope-dancer  and  balance-mafter  owe  their
art,  not  to  any  peculiar  liberality  of  Nature,  but  to  an  acci¬
dental  improvement  of  her  common  gifts ;  and  though
equal  diligence  and  application  would  not  always  produce
equal  excellence  in  thefe,  any  more  than  in  other  arts  ;  yet
there  is  no  doubt  but  that  a  certain  degree  of  proficiency  in
them  might  be  univerfally  attained.  Another  proof  of  the
exiftence  of  abilities  in  mankind,  that  ire  almoft  univerfally
dormant,  is  furnifhed  by  the  attainments  of  blind  men.  It
cannot  be  fuppofed  that  the  lols  of  one  fenfe,  like  the  am¬
putation


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


*37


putation  of  a  branch  from  a  tree,  gives  new  vigour  to  thofe
that  remain.  Every  man's  hearing  and  touch,  therefore,  arc
capable  of  the  nice  diftincftions  which  aftonifh  us  in  thofe
that  have  loft  their  fight,  and  if  they  do  not  give  the  fame
intelligence  to  the  mind,  it  is  merely  becaufe  the  fame  intel¬
ligence  is  not  required  of  them :  he  that  can  fee  may  do
from  choice  what  the  blind  do  by  neceflity,  and  by  the  fame
diligent  attention  to  the  other  fenfes,  may  receive  the  fame
notices  from  them;  let  it  therefore  be  remembered  as  an  en¬
couragement  to  perfevering  diligence,  and  a  principle  of  ge¬
neral  ufe  to  mankind,  that  he  who  does  all  he  can,  will  ever
effect  much  more  than  is  generally  thought  to  be  poftible.


Sunday  28.


Among  other  Indians  that  had  vifited  us,  there  were  fome
from  a  neighbouring  iftand  which  they  called  Eimeo  oiTmao,
the  fame  to  which  Captain  Wallis  had  given  the  name  of  the
Duke  of  York’s  iftand,  and  they  gave  us  an  account  of  no
lefs  than  two  and  twenty  illands  that  lay  in  the  neighbour¬
hood  of  Otalieite.

As  the  day  of  obfervation  now  approached,  I  determined,
in  confequence  of  fome  hints  which  had  been  given  me
by  Lord  Morton,  to  fend  out  two  parties  to  obferve  the
tranftt  from  other  fituations ;  hoping,  that  if  we  fhould  fail
at  Otalieite,  they  might  have  better  fuccefs.  We  were,  there¬
fore,  now  buftly  employed  in  preparing  our  inftruments,
and  inftrudling  fuch  Gentlemen  in  the  ufe  of  them  as  I  in¬
tended  to  fend  out.


O11  Thurfday  the  ift  of  June,  the  Saturday  following  being  June,
the  day  of  the  Tranftt,  I  difpatched  Mr.  Gore  in  the  long-  Thurfday
boat  to  Imao,  with  Mr.  Monkhoufe  and  Mr.  Sporing,  a  Gen¬
tleman  belonging  to  Mr.  Banks,  Mr.  Green  having  furnifhcd
them  with  proper  inftruments.  Mr.  Banks  himfelf  thought
Vol.  II.  T


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


138

y69-  fit  to  go  upon  this  expedition,  and  feveral  natives,  particu-

<_ — - >  larly  Tubourai  Tamaide  and  Tomio,  were  alfo  of  the  party.

Very  early  on  the  Friday  morning,  I  lent  Mr.  Hicks,  with
Mr.  Clerk  and  Mr.  Peterfgill,  the  Mailer’s  Mates,  and  Mr.
Saunders,  one  of  the  Midfhipmen,  in  the  pinnace  to  the  eaft-
ward,  with  orders  to  fix  on  fome  convenient  fpot,  at  a  diilance
from  our  principal  obfervatory,  where  they  alfo  might  em¬
ploy  the  inilrurnents  with  which  they  had  been  furnifhed
for  the  fame  purpofe.

The  long-boat  not  having  been  got  ready  till  Thurfday  in
the  afternoon,  though  all  pofltble  expedition  was  ufed  to  fit
her  out ;  the  people  on  board,  after  having  rowed  moil  part
of  the  night,  brought  her  to  a  grappling  juft  under  the  land
Friday  2.  of  Imao.  Soon  after  day-break,  they  faw  an  Indian  canoe,,
which  they  hailed,  and  the  people  on  board  fhewed  them
an  inlet  through  the  reef  into  which  they  pulled,  and  foon
fixed  upon  a  coral  rock,  which  rofe  out  of  the  water  about
one  hundred  and  fifty  yards  from  the  fhore,  as  a  proper  fitua-
tion  for  their  obfervatory:  it  was  about  eighty  yards  long  and
twenty  broad,  and  in  the  middle  of  it  was  abed  of  white  fand,
large  enough  for  the  tents  to  Hand  upon.  Mr.  Gore  and  his
aftiftants  immediately  began  to  fet  them  up,  and  make  other
necefifary  preparations  for  the  important  bufinefs  of  the  next
day.  While  this  was  doing,  Mr.  Banks,  with  the  Indians  of
Otaheite,  and  the  people  whom  they  had  met  in  the  canoe,,
went  afhore  upon  the  main  ifland,  to  buy  provifions  ;  of
which  he  procured  a  fufficient  fupply  before  night.  When
he  returned  to  the  rock  he  found  the  obfervatory  in  order,
and  the  telefcopes  all  fixed  and  tried.  The  evening  was  very
fine,  yet  their  folicitude  did  not  permit  them  to  take  much
reft  in  the  night :  one  or  other  of  them  was  up  every  half
hour,  who  fatisfied  the  impatience  of  the  reft  by  reporting

3  '  the


139


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

the  changes  of  the  fky ;  now  encouraging  their  hope  by  tell-  »769*
ing  them  that  it  was  clear,  and  now  alarming  their  fears  by  Lu
an  account  that  it  was  hazey.

At  day-break  they  got  up,  and  had  the  fatisfa&ion  to  fee  Saturday
the  fun  rife,  without  a  cloud.  Mr.  Banks  then,  wifhing  the
obfervers,  Mr.  Gore  and  Mr.  Monkhoufe,  fuccefs,  repaired
again  to  the  ifland,  that  he  might  examine  its  produce,  and
get  a  frefh  fupply  of  provifions :  he  began  by  trading  with
the  natives,  for  which  purpofe  he  took  his  Ration  under  a
tree  ;  and  to  keep  them  from  prefling  upon  him  in  a  crowd*
he  drew  a  circle  round  him,  which  he  fuffered  none  of  them
to  enter.

About  eight  o’clock,  he  faw  two  canoes  coming  towards
the  place,  and  was  given  to  underhand  by  the  people  about
him,  that  they  belonged  to  Tarrao,  the  King  of  the  ifland,
who  was  coming  to  make  him  a  viflt.  As  foon  as  the  canoes
came  near  the  fhore,  the  people  made  a  lane  from  the  beach  to
the  trading-place,  and  his  Majefty  landed,  with  his  filler,  whofe
name  was  Nun  a;  as  they  advanced  towards  the  tree  where
Mr.  Banks  flood,  he  went  out  to  meet  them,  and,  with  great
formality,  introduced  them  into  the  circle  from  which  the
other  natives  had  been  excluded.  As  it  is  the  cuflom  of  thefe
people  to  flt  during  all  their  conferences,  Mr.  Banks  un¬
wrapped  a  kind  of  Turban  of  Indian  cloth,  which  he  wore
upon  his  head  inflead  of  a  hat,  and  fpreading  it  upon  the
ground,  they  all  fat  down  upon  it  together.  The  royal  prc-
fent  was  then  brought,  which  confided  of  a  hog  and  a  clog,
fomc  bread-fruit,  cocoa-nuts,  and  other  articles  of  the  like
kind.  Mr.  Banks  then  difpatched  a  canoe  to  the  obfervatory
for  his  prefent,  and  the  meflengers  foon  returned  with  an
adze,  a  fhirt,  and  fome  beads,  which  were  prefented  to  his
Majefty,  and  received  with  great  fatisfadlion.

T  2


By


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


140


Saturday  3.


By  this  time,  Tubourai  Tamaide  and  Tomio  joined  them,
from  the  obfervatory.  Tomio  faid,  that  Ihe  was  related  to
Tarrao,  and  brought  him  a  prefent  of  a  long  nail,  at  the
fame  time  complimenting  Nuna  with  a  fhirt.


The  firft  internal  contact  of  the  planet  with  the  fun  being
over,  Mr.  Banks  returned  to  the  obfervatory,  taking  Tarrao,
Nuna,  and  fome  of  their  principal  attendants,  among  whom
were  three  very  handfome  young  women,  with  him:  he
fliowed  them  the  planet  upon  the  fun,  and  endeavoured  to
make  them  underftand  that  he  and  his  companions  had
come  from  their  own  country  on  purpofe  to  fee  it*  Soon
after,  Mr.  Banks  returned  with  them  to  the  ifland,  where  he
fpent  the  reft  of  the  day  in  examining  its  produce,  which  he
found  to  be  much  the  fame  with  that  of  Otaheite.  The  people
whom  he  faw  there  alfo  exa<5lly  refembled  the  inhabitants
of  that  ifland,  and  many  of  them  were  perfons  whom  he
had  feen  upon  it;  fo  that  all  thofe  whom  he  had  dealt  with,
knew  of  what  his  trading  articles  confifted,  and  the  value
they  bore.

Sanday  4.  The  next  morning,  having  ftruck  the  tents,  they  fet  out  on
their  return,  and  arrived  at  the  fort  before  night.

The  obfervation  was  made  with  equal  fuccefs  by  the  per¬
fons  whom  I  had  fent  to  the  eaftward,  and  at  the  fort,  there
not  being  a  cloud  in  the  Iky  from  the  riling  to  the  fetting  of
the  fun,  the  whole  paflage  of  the  planet  Venus  over  the
fun’s  difk  was  obferved  with  great  advantage  by  Mr.  Green,
Dr.  Solander,  and  myfelf :  Mr.  Greenrs  telefcope  and  mine
were  of  the  fame  magnifying  power,  but  that  of  Dr.  Solan¬
der  was  greater.  We  all  faw  an  atmotfphere  or  dulky  cloud
round  the  body  of  the  planet,  which  very  much  difturbed
the  times  of  contact,  efpecially  of  the  internal  ones;  and  we
differed  from  each  other  in  our  accounts  of  the  times  of  the

1  contacts.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

contacts  much  more  than  might  have  been  expected.  Ac¬
cording  to  Mr.  Green,

Hours.  Min.  Sec.

The  firft  external  contact,  or  firft  appearance  of  Venus

on  the  Sun,  was  -  -  -  -  9  25  42)?

The  firft  internal  contact,  or  total  immerfion,  was  -  9  44  4  3  J
The  fecond  internal  contact,  or  beginning  of  the

a.

emerfion,  -  -  -  -  -  3  14

The  fecond  external  contact,  or  total  emerfion  -  -  3  32  10^  I

The  latitude  of  the  obfervatory  was  found  to  be  170  29'  15"  ;
and  the  longitude  1490  32  30"  W.  of  Greenwich.  A  more
particular  account  will  appear  by  the  tables,  for  which  the
reader  is  referred  to  the  Tranfadtions  of  the  Royal  Society,
vol.  lxi.  part  2.  page  397  Sc  feq.  where  they  are  illuftrated  by
a  cut.

But  if  we  had  reafon  to  congratulate  ourfelves  upon  the
fuccefs  of  our  obfervation,  we  had  fcarce  lefs  caufe  to  regret
the  diligence  with  which  that  time  had  been  improved  by
fome  of  our  people  to  another  purpofe.  While  the  attention'
of  the  officers  was  engrofTed  by  the  Tranfit  of  Venus,  fome  of
the  lhip’s  company  broke  into  one  of  the  Rore-rooms,  and
flole  a  quantity  of  fpike  nails,  amounting  to  no  lefs  than  one
hundred  weight :  this  was  a  matter  of  public  and  ferio\is
concern;  for  thefe  nails,  if  circulated  by  the  people  among
the  Indians,  would  do  us  irreparable  injury,  by  reducing  the.
value  of  iron,  our  ftaple  commodity.  One  of  the  thieves
was  detected,  but  only  feven  nails  were  found  in  his  cuftody.
He  was  punifhed  with  two  dozen  lafhes,  but  would  impeach,
none  of  his  accomplices.


241

1769.

June.

V. - - - l


r


C  HA  R


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


CHAP.  XIV.

Fhe  Ceremonies  of  an  Indian  Funeral  particularly  defer  ibed :
General  Obfervations  on  the  SubjeSl :  A  CharaSler  found
among  the  Indians  to  which  the  Ancients  paid  great  Ve-
neration  :  A  Robbery  at  the  Forty  and  its  Confequences  ;

with  a  Specimen  of  Indian  Cookery ,  and  various  Inci¬
dents.

/~\N  the  j-th,  we  kept  his  Majefty’s  birth-day;  for  though
it  is  the  4th,  we  were  unwilling  to  celebrate  it
during  the  abfence  of  the  two  parties  who  had  been  fent
out  to  obferve  the  Tranfit.  We  had  feveral  of  the  Indian
Chiefs  at  our  entertainment,  who  drank  his  Majefty’s  health
by  the  name  of  Kihiargo,  which  was  the  neareft  imitation
they  could  produce  of  King  George.

About  this  time  died  an  old  woman  of  fome  rank,  who
was  related  to  Tomio,  which  gave  us  an  opportunity  to  fee
how  they  difpofed  of  the  body,  and  confirmed  us  in  our  opi¬
nion  that  thefe  people,  contrary  to  the  prefent  cuftom  of  all
other  nations  now  known,  never  bury  their  dead.  In  the
middle  of  a  fmall  fquare,  neatly  railed  in  with  bamboo,  the
awning  of  a  canoe  was  raifed  upon  two  pofts,  and  under
this  the  body  was  depofited  upon  fuch  a  frame  as  has  before
been  deferibed:  it  was  covered  with  fine  cloth,  and  near  it
was  placed  bread-fruit,  fifli,  and  other  provifions:  we  fup-
poled  that  the  food  was  placed  there  for  the  fpirit  of  the  de-
coaled,  and  confequently,  that  thefe  Indians  had  fome  con*
fufed  notion  of  a  feparate  ftatc;  but  upon  our  applying  for

further


ROUND  THE  WORt'D;


further  information  to  Tubourai  Tamaide,  he  told  us,  that  1769.
the  food  was  placed  there  as  an  offering  to  their  gods.  They  «
do  not,  however,  fuppofe,  that  the  gods  eat,  any  more  than  lvlouday  5*
the  Jews  fuppofed  that  Jehovah  could  dwell  in  a  houfe :  the
offering  is  made  here  upon  the  fame  principle  as  the  Temple
was  built  at  Jerufalem,  as  an  exprelfion  of  reverence  and
gratitude,  and  a  folicitation  of  the  more  immediate  prefence
of  the  Deity.  In  the  front  of  the  area  was  a  kind  of  flile*
where  the  relations  of  the  deceafed  flood  to  pay  the  tribute
of  their  forrow ;  and  under  the  awning  were  innumerable
fmall  pieces  of  cloth,  on  which  the  tears  and  blood  of  the
mourners  had  been  fired  ;  for  in  their  paroxyfms  of  grief  it
is  a  univerfal  cuftom  to  wound  themfelves  with  the  fhark’s
tooth.  Within  a  few  yards  two  occafional  houfes  were  fet
up,  in  one  of  which  fome  relations  of  the  deceafed  conflantly
refided,  and  in  the  other  the  chief  mourner,  who  is  always
a  man,  and  who  keeps  there  a  very  lingular  drefs  in  which
a  ceremony  is  performed  that  will  be  defcribed  in  its  turn.

Near  the  place  where  the  dead  are  thus  fet  up  to  rot,  the
bones  are  afterwards  buried.

What  can  have  introduced  among  thefe  people  the  cuftom
of  expofing  their  dead  above  ground,  till  the  flefh  is  con-
fumed  by  putrefadlion,  and  then  burying  the  bones,  it  is
perhaps  impoffible  to  guefs  j  but  it  is  remarkable,  that  fElian
and  Apollonius  Rhodius  impute  a  fimdlar  practice  to  the  an¬
cient  inhabitants  of  Colchis,  a  country  near  Pontus  in  Alia,,
now  called  Mingrelia  ;  except  that  among  them  this  manner
of  difpoling  of  the  dead  did  not  extend  to  both  fexes  :  the
women  they  buried ;  but  the  men  they  wrapped  in  a  hide,
and  hung  up  in  the  air  by  a  chain.  This  practice  among  the
Colchians  is  referred  to  a  religious  caufe.  The  principal  ob¬
jects  of  their  worfliip  were  the  Earth  and  the  Air  ;  and  it  is
fuppofed  that,  in  confequence  of  fome  fupcrditious  notion,

they


144


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


i769-  they  devoted  their  dead  to  both.  Whether  the  natives  of

June*

k — ~v — j  Otaheite  had  any  notion  of  the  fame  kind  we  were  never  able

Monday  5,  .  .

certainly  to  determine  ;  but  we  foon  difeovered,  that  the  re-
pofitories  of  their  dead  were  alfo  places  of  worfhip.  Upon
this  occalion  it  may  be  obferved,  that  nothing  can  be  more
abfurd  than  the  notion  that  the  liappinefs  or  mifery  of  a  fu¬
ture  life  depends,  in  any  degree,  upon  the  difpofition  of  the
body  when  the  date  of  probation  is  pad ;  yet  that  nothing  is
more  general  thanafolicitudeaboutit.  However  cheap  we  may
hold  any  funereal  rites  which  cuftom  has  not  familiarized,  or
fuperdition  rendered  facred,  mod  men  gravely  deliberate
how  to  prevent  their  body  from  being  broken  by  the  mat¬
tock  and  devoured  by  the  worm,  when  it  is  no  longer  ca¬
pable  of  fenfation  ;  and  purchafe  a  place  for  it  in  holy
ground,  when  they  believe  the  lot  of  its  future  exidence  to
be  irrevocably  determined.  So  drong  is  the  adociation  of
pleafing  or  painful  ideas  with  certain  opinions  and  aftions
which  affeft  us  while  we  live,  that  we  involuntarily  aft  as  if
it  was  equally  certain  that  they  would  affeft  us  in  the  fame
manner  when  we  are  dead,  though  this  is  an  opinion  that
nobody  will  maintain.  Thus  it  happens,  that  the  dedre  of
preferving  from  reproach  even  the  name  that  we  leave  be¬
hind  us,  or  of  procuring  it  honour,  is  one  of  the  mod  power¬
ful  principles  of  aftion,  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  mod
fpeculative  and  enlightened  nations.  Podhumous  reputation,
upon  every  principle,  mud  be  acknowledged  to  have  no  in¬
fluence  upon  the  dead  ;  yet  the  defire  of  obtaining  and  fe-
curing  it,  no  force  of  reafon,  no  habits  of  thinking  can  fub-
-  due,  except  in  thofe  whom  habitual  bafenefs  and  guilt  have
rendered  indifferent  to  honour  and  fhame  while  they  lived.
This  indeed  feems  to  be  among  the  happy  imperfeftions  of
out  natuie,  upon  which  the  general  good  of  fociety  in  a  cer¬
tain  meafui  e  depends ;  for  as  fome  crimes  are  fuppofed  to

be


ROUND  THE  WOULD.


145


be  prevented  by  hanging  the  body  of  the  criminal  in  chains
after  he  is  dead,  fo  in  confequence  of  the  fame  aflociation  of
ideas,  much  good  is  procured  to  fociety,  and  much  evil  pre¬
vented,  by  a  delire  of  preventing  difgrace  or  procuring  ho¬
nour  to  a  name,  when  nothing  but  a  name  remains.

Perhaps  no  better  ufe  can  be  made  of  reading  an  account
of  manners  altogether  new,  by  which  the  follies  and  abfur-
dities  of  mankind  are  taken  out  of  that  particular  connec¬
tion  in  which  habit  has  reconciled  them  to  us,  than  to  con-
fider  in  how  many  inllances  they  are  effentially  the  fame.
When  an  honelt  devotee  of  the  Church  of  Rome  reads,  that
there  are  Indians  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  who  believe
that  they  fhall  fecure  the  happinefs  of  a  future  Rate  by
dying  with  a  cow’s  tail  in  their  hands,  he  laughs  at  their
folly  and  fuperRition ;  and  if  thefe  Indians  were  to  be  told,
that  there  are  people  upon  the  continent  of  Europe,  who
imagine  that  they  lhall  derive  the  fame  advantage  from
dying  with  the  flipper  of  a  St.  Francis  upon  their  foot,  they
would  laugh  in  their  turn.  But  if,  when  the  Indian  heard
the  account  of  the  Catholic,  and  the  Catholic  that  of  the  In¬
dian,  each  was  to  reflect,  that  there  was  no  difference  be-
*  tween  the  abfurdity  of  the  flipper  and  of  the  tail;  but  that
the  veil  of  prejudice  and  cuftom,  which  covered  it  in  their
own  cafe,  was  withdrawn  in  the  other,  they  would  turn  their
knowlege  to  a  profitable  purpofe.

Having  obferved  that  bread-fruit  had  for  fome  day£  been
brought  in  lefs  quantities  than  ufual,  we  enquired  the  reafon ;
and  were  told,  that  there  being  a  great  fhow  of  fruit  upon  the
trees,  they  had  been  thinned  all  at  once,  in  order  to  make
a  kind  of  four  pafle,  which  the  natives  call  Mahie ,  and  which,
in  confequence  of  having  undergone  a  fermentation,  will
keep  a  confiderable  time,  and  fupply  them  with  food  when
no  ripe  fruit  is  to  be  had.

Vol.  IL  U  .  On


1769.

Tune,

i  —  —  j

Monday  5,


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1769.  On  the  iotli,  the  ceremony  was  to  be  performed,  in  honour

, _ of  the  old  woman  whofe  fepulchral  tabernacle  has  juft  been

Saturday  10.  by  the  chief  mourner ;  and  Mr.  Banks  had  fo

great  a  curioftty  to  fee  all  the  myfteries  of  the  folemnity,  that
he  determined  to  take  a  part  in  it,  being  told,  that  he  could
be  prefent  upon  no  other  condition.  In  the  evening,  there¬
fore,  he  repaired  to  the  place  where  the  body  lay,  and  was
received  by  the  daughter  of  the  deceafed,  and  feveral  other
perforis,  among  whom  was  a  boy  about  fourteen  years  old,

*  who  were  to  aftift  in  the  ceremony.  Tubourai  Tamaide  was

to  be  the  principal  mourner;  and  his  drefs,  which  was  ex¬
tremely  fantaftical,  though  not  unbecoming,  is  reprefented
by  a  figure  in  one  of  the  plates.  Mr.  Banks  was  ftripped  of  his
European  clothes,  and  a  fmall  piece  of  cloth  being  tied  round
his  middle,  his  body  was  fmeared  with  charcoal  and  water,
as  low  as  the  fhoulders,  till  it  was  as  black  as  that  of  a  ne¬
gro  e  :  the  fame  operation  was  performed  upon  feveral  others,
among  whom  were  fome  women,  who  were  reduced  to  a
ftate  as  near  to  nakednefs  as  himfelf ;  the  boy  was  blacked
all  over,  and  then  the  proceftion  fet  forward.  Tubourai
Tamaide  uttered  fomething,  which  was  fuppofed  to  be  a
prayer,  near  the  body  ;  and  did  the  fame  when  he  came  up
to  his  own  houfe :  when  this  was  done,  the  proceftion  was
continued  towards  the  fort,  permiflion  having  been  obtained
to  approach  it  upon  this  occafion.  It  is  the  cuftom  of  the
Indians  to  fly  from  thefe  proceftlons  with  the  utinoft  preci¬
pitation,  fo  that  as  foon  as  thofe  who  were  about  the  fort*
faw  it  at  a  diftance,  they  hid  themfelves  in  the  woods.  It
proceeded  from  the  fort  along  the  fliore,  and  put  to  flight
another  body  of  Indians,  confiding  of  more  than  an  hun¬
dred,  every  one  hiding  himfelf  under  the  firft  fhelter  that  he
could  find:  it  then  crofted  the  river,  and  entered  the  woods,
palling  feveral  houfes,  all  which  were  cleferted,  and  not  a

fingle


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


fmgle  Indian  could  be  feen  during  the  reft  of  the  proceffion,  1769.
which  continued  more  than  half  an  hour.  The  office  that  Mr.  «,. jUnc*  .
Banks  performed,  was  called  that  of  the  Nineveh ,  of  which  Satun!;iy
there  were  two  beftdes  himfelf;  and  the  natives  having  all
difappeared,  they  came  to  the  chief  mourner,  and  faid
imatata ,  there  are  no  people,  after  which  the  company  was
difrniffed  to  wafh  themfelves  in  the  river,  and  put  on  their
cuftomary  apparel.

On  the  1 2th,  complaint  being  made  to  me,  by  fome  of  the  Monday  \z ,
natives,  that  two  of  the  feamen  had  taken  from  them  feveral
bows  and  arrows,  and  fome  firings  of  plaited  hair,  I  ex¬
amined  the  matter,  and  finding  the  charge  well  fupported,

I  punifhed  each  of  the  criminals  with  two  dozen  lafhes.

Their  bows  and  arrows  have  not  been  mentioned  before,
nor  were  they  often  brought  down  to  the  fort:  This  day,
however,  Tubourai  Tamaide  brought  down  his,  in  confe-
quence  of  a  challenge  which  he  had  received  from  Mr.  Gore,

The  Chief  fuppofed  it  was  to  try  who  could  fend  the  arrow
fartheft ;  Mr.  Gore,  who  beft  could  hit  a  mark:  and  as  Mr.

Gore  did  not  value  himfelf  upon,  fhooting  to  a  great  diftance,
nor  the  Chief  upon  hitting  a  mark,  there  was  no  trial  of
fkill  between  them.  Tubourai  Tamaide,  however,  to  fhew
us  what  he  could  do,  drew  his  bow,  and  fent  an  arrow,  none
of  which  are  feathered,  two  hundred  and  feventy-four  yards,
which  is  fomething  more  than  a  feventh,  and  fome  thing  lefs
than  a  fixth  part  of  a  mile.  Their  manner  of  fhooting  is
fome  what  fingular ;  they  kneel  down,  and  the  moment  the
arrow  is  difcharged,  drop  the  bow.

Mr.  Banks,  in  his  morning  walk  this  day,  met  a  number
of  the  natives  whom,  upon  enquiry,  he  found  to  be  travel-
ling  muficians  ;  and  having  learnt  where  they  were  to  be  at
night,  we  all  repaired  to  the  place.  The  band  confifted  of

U  2  two


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

j Ilf.  two  flutes  and  three  drums,  and  we  found  a  great  number

of  people  aflembled  upon  the  occafion.  The  drummers  ac¬
companied  the  mufick  with  their  voices,  and,  to  our  great
furprize,  we  difcovered  that  we  were  generally  the  fubjedt
of  the  fong.  We  did  not  expedt  to  have  found  among  the
uncivilized  inhabitants  of  this  fequeftered  fpot,  a  character,
which  has  been  the  fubjedt  of  fuch  praife  and  veneration-
where  genius  and  knowlege  have  been  moil  confpicuous ;
yet  thefe  were  the  bards  or  minftrels  of  Otaheite.  Their
fong  was  unpremeditated,  and  accompanied  with  mufick  ■,
they  were  continually  going  about  from  place  to  place,  and
they  were  rewarded  by  the  matter  of  the  houfe,  and  the  au¬
dience,  with  fuch  things  as  one  wanted  and  the  other  could
fpare.

^ednef.  14,  On  the  14th,  we  were  brought  into  new  difficulties  and
inconvenience  by  another  robbery  at  the  fort.  In  the  middle
of  the  night,  one  of  the  natives  contrived  to  fleal  an  iron,
coal-rake,  that  was  made  ufe  of  for  the  oven.  It  happened
to  be  fet  up  againft  the  infide  of  the  wall,  fo  that  the  top  of
the  handle  was  vifible  from  without ;  and  we  were  informed
„  that  the  thief,  who  had  been  feen  lurking  there  in  the  even¬
ing,  came  fecretly  about  three  o’clock  in  the  morning,  and,
watching  his  opportunity  when  the  centinel’s  back  was
turned,  very  dexteroufly  laid  hold  of  it  with  a  long  crooked
flick,  and  drew  it  over  the  walk  I  thought  it  of  fome  confe-
quence,  if  poffible,  to  put  an  end  to  thefe  practices  at  once,
by  doing  fometliing  that  fhould  make  it  the  common  interefl
of  the  natives  themfelves,  to  prevent  them.  I  had  given
flri6l  orders  that  they  fhould  not  be  fired  upon,  even  when
detected  in  thefe  attempts,  for  which  I  had  many  reafons.-
the  common  centinels  were  by  no  means  fit  to  be  entrufled
with  a  powei  ox  life  and  death,  to  be  exerted  whenever  they
fhould  think  fit,  and  I  had  already  experienced  that  they

were


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


H9


were  ready  to  take  away  the  lives  that  were  in  their  power,
upon  the  flighted:  occafion  ;  neither  indeed  did  I  think  that
the  thefts  which  thefe  people  committed  againA  us,  were,  in
them,  crimes  worthy  of  death :  that  thieves  are  hanged  in
England,  I  thought  no  reafon  why  they  fhould  be  fliot  in
Otaheite  ;  becaufe,  with  refpedl  to  the  natives,  it  would  have
been  an  execution  by  a  law  ex  pojl  fatto :  they  had  no  fuch
law  among  themfelves,  and  it  did  not  appear  to  me  that  we
had  any  right  to  make  fuch  a  law  for  them.  That  they
fliould  abfiain  from  theft,  or  be  punifhed  with  death,  was
not  one  of  the  conditions  under  which  they  claimed  the  ad¬
vantages  of  civil  fociety,  as  it  is  among  us ;  and  as  I  was  not
willing  to  expofe  them  to  fire-arms,  loaded  with  fliot,  neither
could  I  perfectly  approve  of  firing  only  with  powder:  at
firfi,  indeed,  the  noife  and  the  fmoke  would  alarm  them,
but  when  they  found  that  no  mifchief  followed,  they  would
be  led  to  defpife  the  weapons  themfelves,  and  proceed  to  in-
fuhs,  which  would  make  it  neceflary  to  put  them  to  the  tefl,
and  from  which  they  would  be  deterred  by  the  very  fight  of
a  gun,  if  it  was  never  ufed  but  with  effed:.  At  this  time,  an
accident  furniflied  me  with  what  I  thought  a  happy  expe¬
dient.  It  happened  that  above  twenty  of  their  failing  canoes
were  jufi  come  in  with  a  fupply  of  fifh:  upon  thefe  I  imme¬
diately  feized,  and  bringing  them  into  the  river  behind  the
fort,  gave  publick  notice,  that  except  the  rake,  and  all  the
refi  of  the  things  which  from  time  to  time  had  been  flolen,
were  returned,  the  canoes  fhould  be  burnt.  This  menace  I
ventured  to  publifli,  though  I  had  no  defign  to  put  it  into
execution,  making  no  doubt  but  that  it  was  well  known  in
whofe  pofleflion  the  flolen  goods  were,  and  that  as  refiitution
was  thus  made  a  common  caufe,  they  would  all  of  them  in
a  fliort  time  be  brought  back.  A  lift  of  the  things  was  made
out,  confiding  principally  of  the  rake,  the  mufquet  which

had


1769.

June.

< - „ - I

Wednef.  14,.


*5°


iy6g.

June.


Wednef.  14.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

had  been  taken  from  the  marine  when  the  Indian  was  iliot ;
the  p idols  which  Mr.  Banks  lod  with  his  clothes  at  Atahou-
a  fword  belonging  to  one  of  the  petty  officers,  and  the


rou


water  cade.  About  noon,  the  rake  was  redored,  and  great '
felicitation  was  made  for  the  releafe  of  the  canoes ;  but  I  dill
Thurfday  15.  indded  upon  my  original  condition.  The  next  day  came,
and  nothing  farther  was  redored,  at  which  I  was  much  fur-
prifed,  for  the  people  were  in  the  utmod  didrefs  for  the  fiffi,
which  in  a  ffiort  time  would  be  fpoilt ;  I  was,  therefore,  re¬
duced  to  a  difagreeable  dtuation,  either  of  releafing  the  ca¬
noes,  contrary  to  what  I  had  folemnly  and  publickly  declared,
or  to  detain  them,  to  the  great  injury  of  thofe  who  were  in¬
nocent,  without  anfwering  any  good  purpofe  to  ourfelves :
as  a  temporary  expedient,  I  permitted  them  to  take  the  fiffi ;
but  dill  detained  the  canoes.  This  very  licence,  however,
was  productive  of  new  confufion  and  injury  ;  for,  it  not
being  eafy  at  once  to  didinguiffi  to  what  particular  perfons
the  feveral  lots  of  fiffi  belonged,  the  canoes  were  plundered,
under  favour  of  this  circumdance,  by  thofe  who  had  no
right  to  any  part  of  their  cargo.  Mod  preffing  indances  were
dill  made  that  the  canoes  might  be  redored,  and  I  having
now  the  greated  reafon  to  believe,  either  that  the  things  for
which  1  detained  them  were  not  in  the  idand,  or  that  thofe
who  differed  by  their  detention  had  not  fufficient  influence
over  the  thieves  to  prevail  upon  them  to  relinquifh  their
booty,  determined  at  length  to  give  them  up,  not  a  little
mortified  at  the  bad  fuccefs  of  my  project.

Another  accident  alfo  about  this  time  was,  notwithdand-
ing  all  our  caution,  very  near  embroiling  us  with  the  In¬
dians.  I  lent  . the  boat  on  fhore  with  an  officer  to  get  ballad
for  the  ffiip,  and  not  immediately  finding  dones  convenient
for  the  purpofe,  he  began  to  pull  down  fome  part  of  an  in-
clofure  where  they  depofited  the  bones  of  their  dead:  this

2  the


HOUND  THE  WORLD.

the  Indians  violently  oppofed,  and  a  meffengcr  came  down
to  the  tents  to  acquaint  the  officers  that  they  would  not
fuffer  it.  Mr.  Banks  immediately  repaired  to  the  place,
and  an  amicable  end  was  foon  put  to  the  difpute,  by  fending
the  boat’s  crew  to  the  river,  where  ftones  enough  were  to  be
gathered  without  a  poffibility  of  giving  offence.  It  is  very
remarkable,  that  thefe  Indians  appeared  to  be  much  more
jealous  of  what  was  done  to  the  dead  than  the  living.  This
was  the  only  meafure  in  which  they  ventured  to  oppofe  us,
and  the  only  infult  that  was  offered  to  any  individual  among
us  was  upon  a  fimilar  occafion.  Mr.  Monkhoufe  happening
one  day  to  pull  a  flower  from  a  tree  which  grew  in  one  of
their  fepulchral  inclofures,  an  Indian,  whofe  jealoufy  had
probably  been  upon  the  watch,  came  fuddenly  behind  him,
and  (truck  him :  Mr.  Monkhoufe  laid  hold  of  him,  but  he
was  inflantly  refcued  by  two  more,  who  took  hold  of  Mr..
Monklioufe’s  hair,  and  forced  him  to  quit  his  hold  of  their
companion,  and  then  ran  away  without  offering  him  any
farther  violence.

i»‘

In  the  evening  of  the  i  pth;  while  the  canoes  were  ftill  de¬
tained,  we  received  a  viflt  from  Oberea,  which  furprifed  us
not  a  little,  as  flie  brought  with  her  none  of  the  things  that
had  been  flolen,  and  knew  that  Are  was  fufpe<5ted  of  having
fome  of  them  in  her  cuflody.  She  faid  indeed,  that  her  fa¬
vourite  Obadee,  whom  fhe  had  beaten  and  difmiffed,  had
taken  them  away ;  but  flie  feemed  confcious,  that  fhe  had
no  right  to  be  believed:  (he  difcovered  the  Arongeft  figns  of
fear,  yet  fhe  furmounted  it  with  aflonifhing  refolution  ;  and
was  very  preffing  to  fleep  with  her  attendants  in  Mr.  Banks’s
tent.  In  this,  however,  fhe  was  not  gratified ;  the  affair  of
the  jackets  was  too  recent,  and  the  tent  was  befides  filled
with  other  people..  No  body  elfe  feemed  willing  to  entertain.

her*


1 5*  i

1769.

Jane.


Thurfday  15..


Monday-  igy


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


>769.  her,  and  Ihe  therefore,  with  great  appearance  of  mortifica
- ,  non  and  dtfappointment,  fpent  the  night  in  her  canoe.


Tuefday  20.


The  next  morning  early,  Ihe  returned  to  the  fort,  with
her  canoe  and  every  thing  that  it  contained,  putting  herfelf
wholly  into  our  power,  with  fomething  like  greatnefs  of  mind,
which  excited  our  wonder  and  admiration.  As  the  moil  ef-
fecTual  means  to  bring  about  a  reconciliation,  fhe  prefented
us  with  a  hog  and  feveral  other  things,  among  which  was  a
dog  We  had  lately  learnt,  that  thefe  animals  were  efteemed
by  the  Indians  as  more  delicate  food  than  their  pork ;  and
upon  this  occafion  we  determined  to  try  the  experiment :  the
Og,  w  ich  was  very  fat,  we  conilgned  over  to  Tupia,  who
undertooK  to  perform  the  double  office  of  butcher  and  cook.

e  killed  him  by  holding  his  hands  clofe  over  his  mouth  and
nofe,  an  operation  which  continued  above  a  quarter  of  an
hour.  While  this  was  doing,  a  hole  was  made  in  the  ground
about  a  foot  deep,  in  which  a  fire  was  kindled,  and  fome  fmall
hones  placed  in  layers  alternately  with  the  wood  to  heat  -  the
og  was  then  finged,  by  holding  him  over  the  fire,  and,  by
fci aping  him  with  a  ffiell,  the  hair  taken  off  as  clean  as  if  lie
had  been  fealded  in  hot  water :  he  was  then  cut  up  whh  the
fame  inftiument,  and  his  entrails  being  taken  out,  were
fent  to  the  fea,  where  being  carefully  waffied,  they  were  mu
into  cocoa-nut  ffiells,  with  what  blood  had  come  from  fhe
body:  when  the  hole  was  Efficiently  heated,  the  fire  was
taken  out,  and  fome  of  the  ftones,  which  were  not  fo  hot  as
to  difcolour  any  thing  that  they  touched,  being  placed  at  the
bottom,  were  covered  with  green  leaves:  the  dog,  with
the  entrails,  was  then  placed  upon  the  leaves,  and  other
eaves  being  laid  upon  them,  the  whole  was  covered  with
the  reft  of  the  hot  ftones,  and  the  mouth  of  the  hole  cTofe
flopped  wtth  mould:  in  fomewhat  lefs  than  four  hours  it

was


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


*53

was  again  opened,  and  the  dog  taken  out  excellently  baked,  1769.
and  we  all  agreed  that  he  made  a  very  good  difh.  The  dogs  .  June<

-  which  are  here  bred  to  be  eaten,  tafle  no  animal  food,  but  are  Tucfday  20’
kept  wholly  upon  bread-fruit,  cocoa-nuts,  yams,  and  other
vegetables  of  the  like  kind :  all  the  flefh  and  fifh  eaten  by
the  inhabitants  is  dreffed  in  the  fame  way.

On  the  sift,  we  were  vifited  at  the  fort  by  a  Chief,  called  Wednef.  21,
Oamo,  whom  we  had  never  feen  before,  and  who  was  treated
by  the  natives  with  uncommon  refpedt ;  he  brought  with  him
a  boy  about  feven  years  old,  and  a  young  woman  about
fixteen :  the  boy  was  carried  upon  a  man’s  back,  which  we
confidered  as  a  piece  of  ftate,  for  he  was  as  well  able  to  walk
as  any  prefent.  As  foon  as  they  were  in  fight,  Oberea,  and
feveral  other  natives  who  were  in  the  fort,  went  out  to  meet
them,  having  firll  uncovered  their  heads  and  bodies  as  low
as  the  waifl :  as  they  came  on,  the  fame  ceremony  was  per¬
formed  by  all  the  natives  who  were  without  the  fort.  Un¬
covering  the  body,  therefore,  is  in  this  country  probably  a
mark  of  refpe<ft;  and  as  all  parts  are  here  expofed  with  equal
indifference,  the  ceremony  of  uncovering  it  from  the  waifl
downwards,  which  was  performed  by  Oorattooa,  might  be
nothing  more  than  a  different  mode  of  compliment,  adapted
to  perfons  of  a  different  rank.  The  Chief  came  into  the  tent,
but  no  entreaty  could  prevail  upon  the  young  woman  to  fol¬
low  him,  though  fhe  feemed  to  refufe  contrary  to  her  inclina¬
tion  :  the  natives  without  were  indeed  all  very  folicitous  to
prevent  her ;  fometimes,  when  her  refolution  feemed  t6  fail,
almoft  ufing  force:  the  boy  alfo  they  retrained  in  the  fame
manner;  but  Dr.  Solander  happening  to  meet  him  at  the
gate,  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  led  him  in  before  the
people  were  aware  of  it :  as  foon,  however,  as  thofe  that
were  within  faw  him,  they  took  care  to  have  him  fent  out.

Vol.  II.  X  Thcfe


4


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


*S  4

Tfunc'  Thefe  circumftances  having  ftrongly  excited  our  curioftty,
trrr'Z — *  ^‘enquired  who  they  were,  and  were  informed,  that  Oamo
was  the  hulband  of-  Oberea,  though  they  had  been  a  long
time  feparated  by  mutual  confent;  and  that  the  young  wo¬
man  and  the  boy  were  their  children.  We  learnt  alio,  that
the  boy,  whofe  name  was  Terridiri,  was  heir  apparent  to
the  fovereignty  of  the  ifland,  and  that  his  lifter  was  intended
for  his  wife,  the  marriage  being  deferred  only  till  he  Ihould
arrive  at  a  proper  age.  The  fovereign  at  this  time  was  a
fon  of  Whappai,  whofe  name  was  Outou,  and  who,  as  before
has  been  obferved,  was  a  minor.  Whappai,  Oamo,  and  Too-
tahah,  were  brothers:  Whappai  was  the  eldeft,  and  Oamo  the
fecond ;  fo  that,  Whappai  having  no  child  but  Outou,  Terri¬
diri,  the  fon  of  his  next  brother  Oamo,  was  heir  to  the  fove¬
reignty.  It  will,  perhaps,  feem  ftrange  that  a  boy  fhould  be
fovereign  during  the  life  of  his  father ;  but,  according  to  the
cuftom  of  the  country,  a  child  fucceeds  to  a  father’s  title  and'
authority  as  foon  as  it  is  born  :  a  regent  is  then  elected,  and
the  father  of  the  new  fovereign  is  generally  continued  in  his
authority,  under  that  title,  till  his  child  is  of  age  ;  but,  at
this  time,  the  choice  had  fallen  upon  Tootahah,  the  uncle,
in  confequence  of  his  having  diftinguifhed  himfelf  in  a  war.
Oamo  afked  many  queftions  concerning  England  and  its  in¬
habitants,  by  which  he  appeared  to  have  great  fhrewdnefs
and  underftanding.

*


OH  A  P.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


155


C  H  A  P.  XV.

Vln  Account  of  the  Circumnavigation  of  the  If  and)  and
various  Incidents  that  happened  during  the  Expedition  j
with  a  Defcription  of  a  Burying-place  and  Place  of
TV orfhip ,  called  a  Moral .

ON  Monday  the  26th,  about  three  o’clock  in  the  morn¬
ing,  I  fet  out  in  the  pinnace,  accompanied  by  Mr.
Banks,  to  make  the  circuit  of  the  ifland,  with  a  view  to
fketch  out  the  coaft  and  harbours.  We  took  our  route  to  the
eaftward,  and  about  eight  in  the  forenoon  we  went  on  Shore,
in  a  difhricft  called  Oahounue,  which  is  governed  by  Ahio,  a
young  Chief,  whom  we  had  often  feen  at  the  tents,  and  who
favoured  us  with  his  company  to  breakfaft.  Here  alfo  we
found  two  other  natives  of  our  old  acquaintance,  Tituboalo
and  Hoona,  who  carried  us  to  their  houfes,  near  which  we
Saw  the  body  of  the  old  woman,  at  wliofe  funeral  rites  Mr.
Banks  had  afiifled,  and  which  had  been  removed  hither  from
the  fpot  where  it  was  firft  depofited,  this  place  having  de¬
scended  from  her  by  inheritance  to  Hoona,  and  it  being  ne-
cefiary  on  that  account  that  it  Should  lie  here.  We  then
proceeded  on  foot,  the  boat  attending  within  call,  to  the
harbour  in  which  Mr.  Bougainville  lay,  called  Ohidea,
where  the  natives  fhewed  us  the  ground  upon  which  his
people  pitched  their  tent,  and  the  brook  at  which  they  wa-
tered,  though  no  trace  of  them  remained,  except  the  holes
where  the  poles  of  the  tent  had  been  fixed,  and  a  Small  piece
of  potfheard,  which  Mr.  Banks  found  in  looking  narrowly
about  the  Spot.  We  met-,  however,  with  Orette,  a  Chief

N  2  who

/


1769.

June.

< - -v— — J

Monday  26*


/


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


1*6

'jit.  who  was  their  PrinciPal  friend,  and  whofe  brother  Outor-
— - - -  Rou  went  away  with  them.

Monday  26.

This  harbour  lies  on  the  weft  fide  of  a  great  bay,  under
fhelter  of  a  fmall  iftand  called  Boourou,  near  which  is  ano¬
ther  called  Taawirrii  ;  the  breach  in  the  reefs  is  here  very
large,  but  the  Ihelter  for  the  fhips  is  not  the  beft.

Soon  after  we  had  examined  this  place,  we  took  boat,  and
alked  Tituboalo  to  go  with  us  to  the  other  ftde  of  the  bay ;
but  he  refufed,  and  advifed  us  not  to  go,  for  he  faid  the
country  there  was  inhabited  by  people  who  were  not  fubjedt
to  Tootahah,  and  who  would  kill  both  him  and  us.  Upon
leceiving  this  intelligence,  we  did  not,  as  may  be  imagined
lelinquifh  our  enterprize  ;  but  we  immediately  loaded  our
pieces  with  ball :  this  was  fo  well  underftood  by  Tituboalo
as  a  precaution  which  rendered  us  formidable,  that  he  now
confented  to  be  of  our  party.

Having  rowed  till  it  was  dark,  we  reached  a  low  neck  of
land,  or  ifthmus,  at  the  bottom  of  the  bay,  that  divides  the
iftand  into  two  peninfulas,  each  of  which  is  a  diftridt  or  gOr-
vernment  wholly  independent  of  the  other.  From  Port-
Royal,  where  the  fliip  was  at  anchor,,  the  coaft  trends  E.  byS.
and  E.S.E.  ten  miles,  then  S.  by  E.  and  S.  eleven  miles  to
the  ifthmus.  In  the  firft  direction,  the  fhore  is  in  general
open  to  the  fea ;  but  in  the  laft  it  is  covered  by  reefs  of  rocks,
which  form  feveral  good  harbours,  with  fafe  anchorage,  in
16,  18,  20,  and  24  fathom  of  water,  with  other  conveniences.
As  we  had  not  yet  got  into  our  enemy’s  country,  we  deter¬
mined  to  deep  on  fhore  :  we  landed,  and  though  we  found
but  few  houfes,  we  faw  feveral  double  canoes  whofe  own¬
ers  were  well  known  to  us,  and  who  provided  us  with  fup-
per  and  lodging ;  of  which  Mr.  Banks  was  indebted  for  his

fhare


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


157

{hare  to  Ooratooa,  the  lady  who  had  paid  him  her  compli-  1769.
ments  in  fo  lingular  a  manner  at  the  fort.  t,  — ^

In  the  morning,  we  looked  about  the  country,  and  found  Tuefday  27,,
it  to  be  a  marlhy  flat,  about  two  miles  over,  acrofs  which  the
natives  haul  their  canoes  to  the  correfponding  bay  on  the
other  fide.  We  then  prepared  to  continue  our  rout  for  what
Tituboalo  called  the  other  kingdom ;  he  faid  that  the  name
of  it  was  Tiarrabou,  or  Otaheite  Ete;  and  that  of  the
Chief  who  governed  it,  Waheatua:  upon  this  occafion  alfo,
we  learnt  that  the  name  of  the  peninfula  where  we  had
taken  our  Ration  was  Opoureonu,  or  Otaheite  Nue.  Our
new  affociate  feemed  to  be  now  in  better  fpirits  than  he  had
been  the  day  before ;  the  people  in  Tiarrabou  would  not  kill
us,  he  faid,  but  he  allured  us  that  we  Ihould  be  able  to  pro¬
cure  no  visuals  among  them  >  and  indeed  we  had  feen  no
bread-fruit  fmce  we  fet  out.

After  rowing  a  few  miles,  we  landed  in  a  didri£t,  which
was  the  dominion  of  a  Chief  called  Mar  ait  at  a,  the  bury-
ing-place  of  men ;  whofe  father’s  name  was  Pahairedo,  the
dealer  of  boats.  Though  thefe  names  feemed'  to  favour  the
account  that  had  been  given  by  Tituboalo,  we  foon  found
that  it  was  not  true.  Both  the  father  and  the  fon  received
us  with  the  greated  civility,  gave  us  provilions,  and,  after
fome  delay,  fold  us  a  very  large  hog  for  a  hatchet.  A  crowd
foon  gathered  round  us,  but  we  faw  only  two  people  that  we
knew  5  neither  did  we  obferve  a  fingle  bead  or  ornament
among  them  that  had  come  from  our  Ihip,  though  we  law
feveral  things  which  had  been  brought  from  Europe.  In  one
of  the  houfes  lay  two  twelve-pound  fhot,  one  of  which  was
marked  with  the  broad  arrow  of  England,  though  the  people
faid  they  had  them  from  the  Ihips  that  lay  in  Bougainville’s
harbour.


\Ye


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


We  proceeded  on  foot  till  we  came  to  the  diftricft  which
was  immediately  tinder  the  government  of  the  principal
Chief,'  or  King  of  the  peninfula,  Waheatua.  Waheatua.
had  a  fon,  but  whether,  according  to  the  cuftom  of  Opou-
reonu,  he  adminiflered  the  government  as  regent,  or  in  his
own  right,  is  uncertain.  This  diftrift  confifts  of  a  large  and
fertile  plain,  watered  by  a  river  fo  wide,  that  we  were
obliged  to  ferry  over  it  in  a  canoe  ;  our  Indian  train,  liow~
ever,  chofe  to  fwim,  and  took  to  the  water  with  the  fame
facility  as  a  pack  of  hounds.  In  this  place  we  faw  no  houfe
that  appeared  to  be  inhabited,  but  the  ruins  of  many,  that
had  been  very  large.  We  proceeded  along  the  fhore,  which
forms  a  bay,  called  Oaitipeha,  and  at  laft  we  found  the
Chief  fitting  near  fome  pretty  canoe  awnings,  under  which,
we  fuppofed,  he  and  his  attendants  flept.  He  was  a  thin
old  man,  with  a  very  white  head  and  beard,  and  had  with
him  a  comely  woman,  about  five  and  twenty  years  old,
whofe  name  was  Toudidde.  We  had  often  heard  the  name
of  this  woman,  and,  from  report  and  obfervation,  we  had
reafon  to  think  that  fhe  was  the  Ob  e  re  a  of  this  peninfula.
From  this  place,  between  which  and  the  iflhmus  there  are
other  harbours,  formed  by  the  reefs  that  lie  along  the  fhore,
where  fhipping  may  lie  in  perfect  fecurity,  and  from  whence
the  land  trends  S.  S.  E.  and  S.  to  the  S.E.  part  of  the  ifland.
we  were  accompanied  byTEAREE,  the  fon  of  Waheatua,  of
whom  we  had  purchafed  a  hog,  and  the  country  we  palled
through  appeared  to  be  more  cultivated  than  any  we  had
feen  in  other  parts  of  the  ifland :  the  brooks  were  every  where
banked  into  narrow  channels  with  flone,  and  the  fhore  had
alfo  a  facing  of  flone,  where  it  was  wafhed  by  the  fea.  The
houfes  were  neither  large  nor  numerous,  but  the  canoes  that
were  hauled  up  along  the  fhore  were  almoft  innumerable,

and  fuperior  to  any  that  we  had  feen  before,  both  in  fize  and

*

make ;


>5?


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

/

v  <  .


make  ;  they  were  longer,  the  herns  were  higher,  and  the
awnings  were  fupported  by  pillars.  At  almoft  every  point
there  was  a  fepulchral  building,  and  there  were  many  of
them  alfo  in  land.  They  were  of  the  fame  figure  as  thofe  in
Opoureonu,  but  they  were  cleaner  and  better  kept,  and  deco¬
rated  with  many  carved  boards,  which  were  fet  upright,
iand  on  the  top  of  which  were  various  figures  of  birds  and
men:  on  one  in  particular,  there  was  the  reprefentation  of
a  cock,  which  was  painted  red  and  yellow,  to  imitate  the  fea¬
thers  of  that  animal,  and  rude  images  of  men  were,  in  fome
of  them,  placed  one  upon  the  head  of  another.  But  in  this
part  of  the  country,  however  fertile  and  cultivated,  we  did
not  fee  a  Tingle  bread-fruit;  the  trees  were  entirely  bare,  and
the  inhabitants  feemed  to  fubfift  principally  upon  nuts  which
are  not  unlike  a  chefnut,  and  which  they  call  Ahee.


Tuefdav  27.


When  we  had  walked  till  we  were  weary,  we  called  up
the  boat,  but  both  our  Indians,  Tituboalo  and  Tuahow,  were
miffing :  they  had,  it  feems,  flayed  behind  at  Waheatua’s,  ex¬
pecting  us  to  return  thither,  in  confequence  of  a  promife
which  had  been  extorted  from  us,  and  which  we  had  it  not
in  our  power  to  fulfil.


Tearee,  however,  and  another,  embarked  with  us,  and  we
proceeded  till  we  came  a-breafl  of  a  fmall  ifland  called
Otooareite  ;  it  being  then  dark,  we  determined  to  land,
and  our  Indians  conducted  us  to  a  place  where  they  faid  wc
might  deep :  it  was  a  deferted  houfe,  and  near  it  was  a  little
cove,  in  which  the  boat  might  lie  with  great  fafety  and  con¬
venience.  We  were,  however,  in  want  of  provifions,  having
been  very  fparingly  fupplied  fince  we  fet  out;  and  Mr.
Banks  immediately  went  into  the  woods  to  fee  whether  any
could  be  procured.  As  it  was  dark,  he  met  with  no  people,
and  could  find  but  one  houfe  that  was  inhabited :  a  bread-

6  fruit-


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

7j9-  fruit  and  a  half,  a  few  Ahees,  and  fome  fire,  were  all  that
£~~>  it  afforded ;  upon  which,  with  a  duck  or  two,  and  a  few
curlieus,  we  made  our  fupper,  which,  if  not  fcanty,  was
difagreeable,  by  the  want  of  bread,  with  which  we  had
neglected  to  furnifli  ourfelves,  as  we  depended  upon  meeting
with  bread-fruit,  and  took  up  our  lodging  under  the  awning
of  a  canoe  belonging  to  Tearee,  which  followed  us.

,eC  :S-  The  next  morning,  after  having  fpent  fome  time  in  an-
other  fruitlefs  attempt  to  procure  a  fupply  of  provifions  we
proceeded  round  the  fouth  eaft  point,  part  of  which  is  not
covered  by  any  reef,  but  lies  open  to  the  fea  j  and  here  the
hill  rifes  direaiy  from  the  Ihore.  At  the  fouthermoft  part  of
the  iiland,  the  ffiore  is  again  covered  by  a  reef,  which  forms
a  good  harbour;  and  the  land  about  it  is  very  fertile.  We
made  this  rout  partly  on  foot  and  partly  in  the  boat:  when
we  had  walked  about  three  miles,  we  arrived  at  a  place
where  we  faw  feveral  large  canoes,  and  a  number  of  people
with  them,  whom  we  were  agreeably  furprifed  to  find  were
of  our  intimate  acquaintance.  Here,  with  much  difficult}',
we  procured  fome  cocoa-nuts,  and  then  embarked,  taking
with  us  Tuahow,  one  of  the  Indians  who  had  waited  for  us  at

Waheatua’s,  and  had  returned  the  night  before,  long  after  it
was  dark.

When  we  came  a-breaft  of  the  fouth-eaft  end  of  the  iiland
we  went  aflrore,  by  the  advice  of  our  Indian  guide,  who  told*
us  that  the  country  was  rich  and  good.  The  Chief,  whole
name  was  Mathiabo,  foon  came  down  to  us,  but  feemed
to  D:  a  total  Granger  both  to  us  and  to  our  trade:  his  fub-
jetts,  however,  brought  us  plenty  of  cocoa-nuts,  and  about
v  bt tad-fruit.  The  bread-fruit  we  bought  at  a  very
dear  rate,  but  his  excellency  fold  us  a  pig  for  a  glafs  bottle,

-  he  preferred  to  every  thing  elfe  that  we  could  give

3  him.


him.  We  found  in  his  pofleftion  a  goofe  and  a  turkcy-cock,
which,  we  were  informed,  had  been  left  upon  the  ifland  by
the  Dolphin:  they  were  both  enormoufly  fat,  and  fo  tame
that  they  followed  the  Indians,  who  were  fond  of  them  to
excefs,  wherever  they  went.

In  a  long  houfe  in  this  neighbourhood,  we  faw  what  was
altogether  new  to  us.  At  one  end  of  it,  fattened  to  a  femi-
circular  board,  hung  fifteen  human  jaw-bones ;  they  ap¬
peared  to  be  frefh,  and  there  was  not  one  of  them  that
wanted  a  fingle  tooth.  A  fight  fo  extraordinary,  ttrongly  ex¬
cited  our  curiofity,  and  we  made  many  enquiries  about  it ;
but  at  this  time  could  get  no  information,  for  the  people
either  could  not,  or  would  not  underttand  us.

When  we  left  this  place,  the  Chief,  Mathiabo,  defired  leave
to  accompany  us,  which  was  readily  granted.  He  continued
with  us  the  remainder  of  the  day,  and  proved  very  ufeful,
by  piloting  us  over  the  fhoals.  In  the  evening,  we  opened
the  bay  on  the  north  weft  fide  of  the  ifland,  which  anfwered
to  that  on  the  fouth  eaft,  fo  as  at  the  iftlimus,  or  carrying-
place,  almoft  to  interfedt  the  ifland,  as  I  have  obferved
before  ;  and  when  we  had  coafted  about  two-thirds  of  it,  we
determined  to  go  on  fhore  for  the  night.  We  faw  a  large
houfe  at  fome  diftance,  which,  Mathiabo  informed  us,  be¬
longed  to  one  of  his  friends ;  and  foon  after  fcveral  canoes
came  off  to  meet  us,  having  on  board  fomc  very  handfome
women,  who,  by  their  behaviour,  feemed  to  have  been  fent
to  entice  us  on  fhore.  As  we  had  before  refolved  to  take  up
our  refidence  here  for  the  night,  little  invitation  was  necef-
fary.  We  found  that  the  houfe  belonged  to  the  Chief  of  the
diftridf,  whole  name  was  Wiverou:  he  received  us  in  a  very
friendly  manner,  and  ordered  his  people  to  allift  us  in
drefling  our  provifion,  of  which  we  had  now  got  a  tolerable

Vol.  II.  Y  flock.


LIEUTENANT  COOKUs  VOYAGE


162


1769.

June.


Wednef.  28.


flock.  When  our  fupper  was  ready,  we  were  conducted  into
that  part  of  the  houfe  where  Wiverou  was  fitting,  in  order  to
eat  it  ;  Mathiabo  fupped  with  us,  and  Wiverou  calling  for  his
fupper  at  the  fame  time,  we  eat  our  meal  very  fociably,  and
with  great  good-humour.  When  it  was  over,  we  began  to
enquire  where  we  were  to  fleep,  and  a  part  of  the  houfe
was  fhewn  us,  of  which  we  were  told  we  might  take  poffef-
fion  for  that  purpofe.  We  then  fent  for  our  cloaks,  and  Mr.
Banks  began  to  undrefs,  as  his  cuftom  was,  and,  with  a  pre¬
caution  which  he  had  been  taught  by  the  lofs  of  the  jackets
at  Atahourou,  fent  his  clothes  aboard  the  boat,  propoling  to
cover  himfelf  with  a  piece  of  Indian  cloth.  When  Mathiabo
perceived  what  was  doing,  he  alfo  pretended  to  want  a
cloak ;  and,  as  he  had  behaved  very  well,  and  done  us  fome
fervice,  a  cloak  was  ordered  for  him.  We  lay  down,  and
obferved  that  Mathiabo  was  not  with  us ;  but  we  fuppofed
that  he  was  gone  to  bathe,  as  the  Indians  always  do  before
they  fleep.  We  had  not  waited  long,  however,  when  an  In¬
dian,  who  was  a  ftranger  to  us,  came  and  told  Mr.  Banks,
that  the  cloak  and  Mathiabo  had  difappeared  together.  This
man  had  fo  far  gained  our  confidence,  that  we  did  not  at  fir  if
believe  the  report ;  but  it  being  foon  after  confirmed  by
Tuahow,  our  own  Indian,  we  knew  no  time  was  to  be  loll.
As  it  was  impofiible  for  us  to  purfue  the  thief  with  any  hope
of  luccefs,  without  the  alfiftance  of  the  people  about  us,  Mr.
Banks  darted  up,  and  telling  our  cafe,  required  them  to  re¬
cover  the  cloak;  and  to  enforce  his  requifition,  fhewed  one
of  his  pocket  piftols,  which  he  always  kept  about  him..
Upon  the  fight  of  the  piftol,  the  whole  company  took  the
alarm,  and,  inftead  of  affifiing  to  catch  the  thief,  or  recover
what  had  been  ftolen,  began  with  great  precipitation  to  leave
the  place;  one  of  them,  however,  was  feized;  upon  which
he  immediately  offered  to.dire.df  the  chace:  I  fet  out  there--

fore;


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


/


I63


fore  with  Mr.  Banks,  and  though  we  ran  all  the  way,  the  1769.
alarm  had  got  before  us,  for  in  about  ten  minutes  we  met  a
man  bringing  back  the  cloak,  which  the  thief  had  relin-  Wcdnef*2i
qu iilied  in  great  terror;  and  as  we  did  not  then  think  fit  to
continue  the  purfuit,  he  made  his  efcape.  When  we  returned,
we  found  the  houfe,  in  which  there  had  been  between  two
and  three  hundred  people,  entirely  deferted.  It  being,
however,  foon  known  that  we  had  no  refen tment  againd
any  body  but  Mathiabo,  the  Chief  Wiverou,  our  hod,  with
his  wife  and  many  others,  returned,  and  took  up  their  lodg¬
ing  with  us  for  the  night.  In  this  place,  however,  we  were
dedined  to  more  confufion  and  trouble,  for  about  five  o’clock
in  the  morning  our  fentry  alarmed  us,  with  an  account  that
the  boat  was  milling:  he  had  feen  her,  he  faid,  about  half
an  hour  before,  at  her  grappling,  which  was  not  above  fifty
yards  from  the  fhore ;  but  upon  hearing  the  found  of  oars,
he  had  looked  out  again,  and  could  fee  nothing  of  her.

At  this  account  we  flarted  up  greatly  alarmed,  and  ran  to
the  water  fide :  the  morning  was  clear  and  flar  light,  fo  that

we  could  fee  to  a  confiderable  difiance,  but  there  was  no  ap-

-  ,  *  '  (*

pearance  of  the  boat.  Our  fituation  was  now  fuch  as  might
juftify  the  mofl  terrifying  apprehenfions ;  as  it  was  a  dead
calm,  and  we  could  not  therefore  fuppofe  her  to  have
broken  from  her  grappling,  we  had  great  reafon  to  fear  that
the  Indians  had  attacked  her,  and  finding  the  people  afleep,
had  fucceeded  in  their  enterprize :  we  were  but  four,  with
only  one  mufquet  and  two  pocket  piflols,  without  a  fpare
ball  or  charge  of  powder  for  either.  In  this  date  of  anxiety
and  didrefs  we  remained  a  confiderable  time,  expedling  the
Indians  every  moment  to  improve  their  advantage,  when,  to
our  unfpeakable  fatisfa<dion,  we  faw  the  boat  return,  which
had  been  driven  from  her  grappling  by  the  tide;  a  cir-

Y  2  cumdance


s64  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

June9'  curaftance  t0  which,  in  our  confufion  and  furprife,  we  did
c — not  advert.

Thuxfday  29.  As  foon  as  the  boat  returned,  we  got  our  breakfaft,  and

were  impatient  to  leave  the  place,  left  fome  other  vexatious
accident  fhould  befal  us.  It  is  fituated  on  the  north  fide  of
Tiarrabou,  the  fouth  eaft  peninfula,  or  divifion,  of  the
illand,  and  at  the  diftance  of  about  five  miles  fouth  eaft  from
the  ifthmus,  having  a  large  and  commodious  harbour,  infe-
rAoi  to  none  in  the  ifland,  about  which  the  land  is  very  rich
m  pi  oh  uce.  Notwithftanding  we  had  had  little  communica¬
tion  with  this  divifion,  the  inhabitants  every  where  received
us  in  a  friendly  manner ;  we  found  the  whole  of  it  fertile
and  populous,  and,  to  all  appearance,  in  a  more  flourifhing

ftate  than  Opouieonu,  though  it  is  not  above  one  fourth  part
as  large.

4

The  next  diftricl  in  which  we  landed,  was  the  laft  in  Ti¬
arrabou,  and  governed  by  a  Chief,  whofe  name  we  under-
ftood  to  be  Omoe.  Omoe  was  building  a  houfe,  and  being
therefore  very  defirous  of  procuring  a  hatcher,  he  would
have  been  glad  to  have  purchafed  one  with  any  thing  that
ne  had  in  his  poheflion  ;  it  happened,  however,  rather  unfor¬
tunately  for  him  and  us,  that  we  had  not  one  hatchet  left  in
the  boat.  We  offered  to  trade  with  nails,  but  he  would  not
part  with  any  thing  in  exchange  for  them ;  we  therefore  re-
imbarked,  and  put  off  our  boat,  but  the  Chief  being  unwil¬
ling  to  relinquifh  all  hope  of  obtaining  fomething  from  us
that  would  be  of  ufe  to  him,  embarked  in  a  canoe,  with  his
wife  Whanno-ouda,  and  followed  us.  After  fome  time
we  took  them  into  the  boat,  and  when  we  had  rowed  about
a  league,  they  defired  we  would  put  afhore:  we  immediately
complied  with  his  requeft,  and  found  fome  of  his  people

7  who


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


who  had  brought  down  a  very  large  hog.  We  were  as  un¬
willing  to  lofe  the  hog,  as  the  Chief  was  to  part  with  us,  and
it  was  indeed  worth  the  belt  axe  we  had  in  the  fliip }  we  there¬
fore  hit  upon  an  expedient,  and  told  him,  that  if  he  would
bring  his  hog  to  the  fort  at  Matavai,  the  Indian  name  for
Port  Royal  bay,  he  fhould  have  a  large  axe,  and  a  nail  into
the  bargain,  for  his  trouble.  To  this  propofal,  after  having
confulted  with  his  wife,  he  agreed,  and  gave  us  a  large  piece
of  his  country  cloth  as  a  pledge  that  he  would  perform  his
agreement,  which,  however,  he  never  did.


1769.

June.

' - - J

Thurfday.  29*


At  this  place  we  faw  a  very  lingular  curiofity :  it  was  the
figure  of  a  man,  conftru6ted  of  bafket  work,  rudely  made,
but  not  ill  defigned  ;  it  was  fomething  more  than  feven  feet
high,  and  rather  too  bulky  in  proportion  to  its  height.  The
wicker  fkeleton  was  completely  covered  with  feathers,
which  were  white  where  the  fkin  was  to  appear,  and  black  in
the  parts  which  it  is  their  cuftom  to  paint  or  llain,  and  upon
the  head,  where  there  was  to  be  a  reprefentation  of  hair:
upon  the  head  alfo  were  four  protuberances,  three  in  front  and
one  behind,  which  we  fhould  have  called  horns,  but  which
the  Indians  dignified  with  the  name  of  Tate  Ete,  little
men.  The  image  was  called  Manioe,  and  was  faid  to  be
the  only  one  of  the  kind  in  Otaheite.  They  attempted  to
give  us  an  explanation  of  its  ufe  and  defign,  but  we  had  not
then  acquired  enough  of  their  language  to  underfland  them..
We  learnt,  however*  afterwards,  that  it  was  a  reprefentation
of  Mauwe,  one  of  their  Eatuas,  or  gods  of  the  fecond  clafs.


After  having  fettled  our  affairs  with  Oraoe,  we  proceeded
on  our  return,  and  foon  reached  Opoureonu,  the  north-well
peninfula.  After  rowing  a  few  miles,  we  went  on  fhore
again,  but  the  only  thing  we  faw  worth  notice,  was  a  repc-
fitory  for  the  dead,  uncommonly  decorated;  the  pavement

w as.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1 66


juuf  was  extremely  neat,  and  upon  it  was  raifed  a  pyramid,  about

' - * - /  five  feet  high,  which  was  intirely  covered  with  the  fruits  of

Thurfday  29.  .  v  ,  ■

two  plants,  peculiar  to  the  country.  Near  the  pyramid  was
a  fmall  image  of  flone,  of  very  rude  workmanfhip,  and  the
firfl  inflance  of  carving  in  flone  that  we  had  feen  among  tliefe
people.  They  appeared  to  fet  a  high  value  upon  it,  for  it
was  covered  from  the  weather  by  a  fhed,  that  had  been
erected  on  purpofe.

We  proceeded  in  the  boat,  and  paffed  through  the  only
harbour,  on  the  fouth  fide  of  Opoureonu,  that  is  fit  for  flip¬
ping.  It  is  fituated  about  five  miles  to  the  weflward  of  the
iflhmus,  between  two  fmall  iflands  that  lie  near  the  fliore,
and  about  a  mile  diflant  from  each  other,  and  affords  good
anchorage  in  eleven  and  twelve  fathom  water.  We  were
now  not  far  from  the  diftridt  called  Paparra,  which  belonged
to  our  friends  Oamo  and  Oberea,  where  we  propofed  to  fleep.
We  went  on  fliore  about  an  hour  before  night,  and  found
that  they  were  both  abfent,  having  left  their  habitations  to
pay  us  a  vifit  at  Matavai :  this,  however,  did  not  alter  our
purpofe,  we  took  up  our  quarters  at  the  houfe  of  Oberea,
which,  though  fmall,  was  very  neat,  and  at  this  time  had
no  inhabitant  but  her  father,  who  received  us  with  looks
that  bid  us  welcome.  Having  taken  poffeflion,  we  were
willing  to  improve  the  little  day-light  that  was  left  us,  and
therefore  walked  out  to  a  point,  upon  which  we  had  feen,  at
a  diflance,  trees  that  are  here  called  Etoa,  which  generally
diftinguifli  the  places  where  thefe  people  bury  the  bones  of
their  dead :  their  name  for  fuch  burying-grounds,  which  are
alfo  places  of  worfhip,  is  Mor  ai.  We  were  foon  ftruck  with
the  fight  of  an  enormous  pile,  which,  we  were  told,  was
the  Morai  of  Oamo  and  Oberea,  and  the  principal  piece  of
Indian  architecture  in  the  ifland.  It  was  a  pile  of  flone
work,  raifed  pyramidically,  upon  an  oblong  bafe,  or  fquare,

1  two


j


two  hundred  and  fixty-feven  feet  long,  and  eiglity-feven
wide.  It  was  built  like  the  fmall  pyramidal  mounts  upon
which  we  fometimes  fix  the  pillar  of  a  fun-dial,  where  each
fide  is  a  flight  of  fteps ;  the  fleps,  however,  at  the  fides,  were
broader  than  thofe  at  the  ends,  fo  that  it  terminated  not  in  a
fquare  of  the  fame  figure  with  the  bafe,  but  in  a  ridge,  like
the  roof  of  a  houfe :  there  were  eleven  of  thefe  fleps,  each  of
which  was  four  feet  high,  fo  that  the  height  of  the  pile  was
forty-four  feet ;  each  ftep  was  formed  of  one  courfe  of  white
coral  ftone,  which  was  neatly  fquared  and  polifhed,  the  reft
of  the  mafs,  for  there  was  no  hollow  within,  confifted  of
round  pebbles,  which,  from  the  regularity  of  their  figure,
feemed  to  have  been  wrought.  Some  of  the  coral  ftones
were  very  large ;  we  meafured  one  of  them,  and  found  it
three  feet  and  an  half  by  two  feet  and  an  half.  The  foun¬
dation  was  of  rock  ftones,  which  were  alfo  fquared  ;  and  one
of  them  meafured  four  feet  feven  inches  by  two  feet  four.
Such  a  ftruCture,  raifed  without  the  afliftance  of  iron  tools  to
fliape  the  ftones,  or  mortar  to  join  them,  ftruck  us  with
aftonifhment :  it  feemed  to  be  as  compact  and  firm  as  it  could
have  been  made  by  any  workman  in  Europe,  except  that
the  fteps,  which  range  along  its  greateft  length,  are  not  per¬
fectly  ftrait,  but  fink  in  a  kind  of  hollow  in  the  middle,  fo
that  the  whole  furface,  from  end  to  end,  is  not  a  right  line,
but  a  curve.  The  quarry  ftones,  as  we  faw  no  quarry  in  the
neighbourhood,  muft  have  been  brought  from  a  confiderable
diftance ;  and  there  is  no  method  of  conveyance  here  but  by
hand :  the  coral  muft  alfo  have  been  fifhed  from  under  the
water,  where,  though  it  may  be  found  in  plenty,  it  lies  at  a
confiderable  depth,  never  lefs  than  three  feet.  Both  the
rock,  ftone  and  the  coral  could  be  fquared  only  by  tools
made  of  the  fame  fubftance,  which  muft  have  been  a  work,
of  incr.edihle.  labour.;  but  the  polifliing  was  more  eafiily

effected  i


1769.

June.

Thurfday  29.


*68  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

'&  effe<a:ed  by  means  of  the  fharp  coral  fand,  which  is'found

,}—■ - 1  every  where  upon  the  fea-lhore  in  great  abundance.  In  the

middle  of  the  top  flood  the  image  of  a  bird,  carved  in  wood ;
and  near  it  lay  the  broken  one  of  a  fifh,  carved  in  flone;
The  whole  of  this  pyramid  made  part  of  one  fide  of  a  fpa-
cious  area  or  fquare,  nearly  of  equal  fides,  being  three  hun¬
dred  and  fixty  feet  by  three  hundred  and  fifty-four,  which
was  walled  in  with  flone,  and  paved  with  flat  flones  in  its
whole  extent ;  though  there  were  growing  in  it,  notwith-
flanding  the  pavement,  feveral  of  the  trees  which  they  call
Etoa,  and  plantains.  About  an  hundred  yards  to  the  well  of
this  building,  was  another  paved  area  or  court,  in  which  were
feveral  final  1  flages  raifed  on  wooden  pillars,  about  feven  feet
high,  which  are  called  by  the  Indians  Evuattas ,  and  feem  to
be  a  kind  of  altars,  as  upon  thefe  are  placed  provifions  of  all
kinds  as  offerings  to  their  gods  ;  we  have  fince  feen  whole
hogs  placed  upon  them,  and  we  found  here  the  fculls  of
above  fifty,  befides  the  fculls  of  a  great  number  of  dogs.

The  principal  objed  of  ambition  among  thefe  people  is  to
have  a  magnificent  Morai,  and  this  was  a  flriking  memorial
oi  the  rank  and  power  of  Oberea.  It  has  been  remarked,
that  we  did  not  find  her  invefted  with  the  fame  authority
that  fhe  exercifed  when  the  Dolphin  was  at  this  place,  and
we  now  learnt  the  reafon  of  it.  Our  way  from  her  houfe  to
the  Morai  lay  along  the  fea  fide,  and  we  obferved  every
where  under  our  feet  a  great  number  of  Human  bones,
chiefly  ribs  and  vertebras.  Upon  enquiring  into  the  caufe  of
1°  fingular  an  appearance,  we  were  told,  that  in  the  then  lad
month  of  Oivaraheiv ,  which  anfwered  to  our  December,  1768,
about  four  or  five  months  before  our  arrival,  the  people  of
liarrabou,  the  S.  E.  peninfula  which  we  had  jufl  vifited,
made  a  defeent  at  this  place,  and  killed  a  great  number  of
people,  whofe  bones  were  thofe  that  we  faw  upon  the  fhore:

that,


1769.

June.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.  169

that,  upon  this  occafion,  Oberea,  and  Oarrio,  who  then  admi-
niftered  the  government  for  his  fon,  had  fled  to  the  moun¬
tains  ;  and  that  the  conquerors  burnt  all  the  houfes,  which  Thurfday  2ij%
were  very  large,  and  carried  away  the  hogs  and  what  other
animals  they  found.  We  learnt  alfo,  that  the  turkey  and
goofe,  which  we  had  feen  when  we  were  with  Mathiabo,  the
ftealer  of  cloaks,  were  among  the  fpoils  ;  this  accounted  for
their  being  found  among  people  with  whom  the  Dolphin
had  little  or  no  communication  ;  and  upon  mentioning  the
jaw-bones,  which  we  had  feen  hanging  from  a  board  in  a
long  houfe,  we  were  told,  that  they  alfo  had  been  carried
away  as  trophies,  the  people  here  carrying  away  the  jaw¬
bones  of  their  enemies,  as  the  Indians  of  North  America  do
the  fcalps.

After  having  thus  gratified  our  curiofity,  we  returned  to
our  quarters,  where  we  palled  the  night  in  perfect  fecurity
and  quiet.  By  the  next  evening  we  arrived  at  Atahourou,  Friday  30?
the  refidence  of  our  friend  Tootahah,  where,  the  laft  time
we  paded  the  night  under  his  protection,  we  had  been  ob+
liged  to  leave  the  bell  part  of  our  clothes  behind  us.  This
adventure,  however,  feemed  now  to  be  forgotten  on  both
fides.  Our  friends  received  us  with  great  pleafure,  and  gave
us  a  good  fupper  and  a  good  lodging,  where  we  fullered

neither  lofs  or  dilturbance.

/  ,

The  next  day,  Saturday,  July  the  ill,  we  got  back  to  our  juiy.
fort  at  Matavai,  having  found  the  circuit  of  the  illand,  in-  Saturduy  u
eluding  both  peninfulas,  to  be  about  thirty  leagues.  Upon
our  complaining  of  the  want  of  bread-fruit,  we  were  told,
that  the  produce  of  the  laft  feafon  was  nearly  exhaufted ;  and
that  what  was  feen  fprouting  upon  the  trees,  would  not  be  fit
to  ufe  in  lefs  than  three  months;  this  accounted  for  our  hav^
ing  been  able  to  procure  fo  little  of  it  in  our  route.

Vol.  II.  Z


While


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

While  the  bread-fruit  is  ripening  upon  the  flats,  the  in¬
habitants  are  fupplied  in  fome  meafure  from  the  trees  which
they  have  planted  upon  the  hills  to  preferve  a  fuccehion  %
but  the  quantity  is  not  fufiicient  to  prevent  fcarcity :  they
live  therefore  upon  the  four  pafte  which  they  call  Mahie,
upon  wild  plantains,  and  ahee-nuts,  which  at  this  time  are
in  perfection.  How  it  happened  that  the  Dolphin,  which
was  here  at  this  feafon,  found  fuch  plenty  of  bread-fruit
upon  the  trees,  I  cannot  tell,  except  the  feafon  in  which  they
ripen  varies.

At  our  return,  our  Indian  friends  crouded  about  us,  and
none  of  them  came  empty-handed.  Though  I  had  deter¬
mined  to  reffore  the  canoes  which  had  been  detained  to
their  owners,  it  had  not  yet  been  done  ;  but  I  now  releafed
them  as  they  were  applied  for.  Upon  this  occafion  I  could
not  but  remark  with  concern,  that  thefe  people  were  capable
of  pra&iling  petty  frauds  againft  each  other,  with  a  delibe¬
rate  difhonefty,  which  gave  me  a  much  worfe  opinion  of
them  than  I  had  ever  entertained  from  the  robberies  they
committed  under  the  flrong  temptation  to  which  a  fudden
opportunity  of  enriching  themfelves  with  the  ineftimable
metal  and  manufactures  of  Europe  expofed  them*

Among  others  who  applied  to  me  for  the  releafe  of  a  ca*
noe,  was  one  Potattow,  a  man  of  fome  confequence,  well
known  to  us  all.  I  confented,  fuppofmg  the  veffel  to  be  his
own,  or  that  he  applied  on  the  behalf  of  a  friend  :  he  went
immediately  to  the  beach,  and  took  pofleffion  of  one  of  the
boats,  which,  with  the  affiftance  of  his  people,  he  began  to
carry  off.  Upon  this,  however,  it  was  eagerly  claimed  by  the
right  owners,  who,  fupported  by  the  other  Indians,  clamour-
oufly  reproached  him  for  invading  their  property,  and  pre¬
pared  to  take  the  canoe  from  him  by  force.  Upon  this,  he

defired


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


171


defired  to  be  heard,  and  told  them,  that  the  canoe  did,  in-  176 9.
deed,  once  belong  to  thofe  who  claimed  it ;  but  that  I,  hav-  ■ /V  ,  *
ing  feized  it  as  a  forfeit,  had  fold  it  to  him  for  a  pig.  This  Saturday  u
filenced  the  clamour,  the  owners,  knowing  that  from  my
power  there  was  no  appeal,  acquiefced;  and  Potattow  would
have  carried  off  his  prize,  if  the  difpute  had  not  fortunately
been  overheard  by  fome  of  our  people  who  reported  it  to  me.

I  gave  orders  immediately  that  the  Indians  fhould  be  unde¬
ceived  ;  upon  which  the  right  owners  took  pofTeffion  of  their
canoe,  and  Potattow  was  fo  confcious  of  his  guilt,  that  nei¬
ther  he  nor  his  wife,  who  was  privy  to  his  knavery,  could
look  us  in  the  face  for  fome  time  afterwards,,


r  •


CHAP,


V


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


C  H  A  P.  XVI.

An  Expedition  of  Mr .  Banks  to  trace  the  River:  Marks  of
fubt  erroneous  Fire :  Preparations  for  leaving  the  If  and :

An  Account  of  Tupia.

/"AN  the  3d,  Mr.  Banks  fet  out  early  in  the  morning,  with
fome  Indian  guides,  to  trace  our  river  up  the  vallev
from  which  it  iffues,  and  examine  how  far  it’s  banks  were
inhabited.  For  about  fix  miles  they  met  with  houfes,  not  far
diftant  from  each  other,  on  each  fide  of  the  river,  and  the
valley  was  every  where  about  four  hundred  yards  wide  from
the  foot  of  the  hill  on  one  fide,  to  the  foot  of  that  on  the
other ;  but  they  were  now  fhewn  a  houfe  which  they  were
told  was  the  laft  that  they  would  fee.  When  they  came  up
to  it,  the  matter  of  it  offered  them  refrelhments  of  cocoa
nuts  and  other  fruit,  of  which  they  accepted ,  after  a  fliort
flay,  they  walked  forward  for  a  confiderable  time ;  in  bad
way  it  is  not  eafy  to  compute  diftances,  but  they  imagined
that  they  had  walked  about  fix  miles  farther,  following  the*
courfe  of  the  river,  when  they  frequently  patted  under  vaults
oimed  by  fragments  of  the  rock,  in  which  they  were  told,
people  who  were  benighted  frequently  patted  the  night
Soon  after  they  found  the  river  banked  by  fteep  rocks,  from
which  a  cafcade,  falling  with  great  violence,  formed  a  pool
o  cep,  that  the  Indians  faid  they  could  not  pafs  it.  They
feemed,  indeed,  not  much  to  be  acquainted  with  the  valley
beyond  this  place,  their  bulinefs  lying  chiefly  upon  the  dc-

clivity


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


U3


%


clivity  of  the  rocks  on  each  fide,  and  the  plains  which  ex¬
tended  on  their  fummits,  where  they  found  plenty  of  a  wild
plantain,  which  they  called  Vae,  The  way  up  thefe  rocks
from  the  banks  of  the  river  was  in  every  refpedt  dreadful  5
the  fides  were  nearly  perpendicular,  and  in  fome  places  one
hundred  feet  high ;  they  were  alfo  rendered  exceeding  flip-
pery  by  the  water  of  innumerable  fprings  which  iffued  from
the  fiffiires  on  the  furface :  yet  up  thefe  precipices  away  was
to  be  traced  by  a  fucceflion  of  long  pieces  of  the  bark  of  the
Hibifcus  tiliaceus,  which  ferved  as  a  rope  for  the  climber  to  take
hold  of,  and  affifted  him  in  fcrambling  from  one  ledge  to
another,  though  upon  thefe  ledges  there  was  footing  only  for
an  Indian  or  a  goat.  One  of  thefe  ropes  was  nearly  thirty
feet  in  length,  and  their  guides  offered  to  aflifl  them  in
mounting  this  pafs,  but  recommended  another  at  a  little  dif-
tance  lower  down,  as  lefs  difficult  and  dangerous.  They  took
a  view  of  this  “  better  way,”  but  found  it  fo  bad  that  they
did  not  to  chufe  to  attempt  it,  as  there  was  nothing  at  the
top  to  reward  their  toil  and  hazard  but  a  grove  of  the  wild
plantain  or  Vae  tree,  which  they  had  often  feen  before.

During  this  excurfion,  Mr.  Banks  had  an  excellent  oppor¬
tunity  to  examine  the  rocks,  which  were  almofl  every  where
naked,  for  minerals  ;  but  he  found  not  the  leaft  appearance
of  any.  The  ftones  every  where,  like  thofe  of  Madeira,
fhewed  manifeft  tokens  of  having  been  burnt ;  nor  is  there
a  fingle  fpecimen  of  any  flone,  among  all  thofe  that  were
colle&ed  in  the  ifland,  upon  which  there  are  not  manifeft
and  indubitable  marks  of  fire ;  except  perhaps  fome  fmall
pieces  of  the  hatchet-ftone,  and  even  of  that,  other  fragments
were  colle&ed  which  are  burnt  almofl  to  a  pumice.  Traces
of  fire  are  alfo  manifeft  in  the  very  clay  upon  the  hills ;  and
it  may,  therefore,,  not  unreafonably  be  fuppofed,  that  this,
and  the  neighbouring  iflands,  are  either  fhattered  remains

of


1769.

July.

^  —  v  -*  J

Monday  3,


*74


LIEUTENANT  C 0 OK’s  VOYAGE


i769-  of  a  continent,  which  fome  have  fuppofed  to  be  neceflary  in
t  — 1-'  >  this  part  of  the  globe,  to  preferve  an  equilibrium  of  its  parts,
Monday  which  were  left  behind  when  the  reft  funk  by  the  mining
of  a  fubterraneous  fire,  fo  as  to  give  a  paffage  to  the  fea  over
it ;  or  were  torn  from  rocks,  which,  from  the  creation  of  the
world,  had  been  the  bed  of  the  fea,  and  thrown  up  in  heaps,
to  a  height  which  the  waters  never  reach.  One  or  other
of  thefe  fuppofitions  will  perhaps  be  thought  the  more  pro¬
bable,  as  the  water  does  not  gradually  grow  fhallow  as  the
fhore  is  approached,  and  the  iflands  are  almoft  every  where
furrounded  by  reefs,  which  appear  to  be  rude  and  broken3
as  fome  violent  concuffion  would  naturally  leave  the  folid
fubftance  of  the  earth.  It  may  alfo  be  remarked  upon  this
occafion,  that  the  moft  probable  caufe  of  earthquakes  feems
to  be  the  fudden  rufhing  in  of  water  upon  fome  vaft  mafs  of
fubterraneous  fire,  by  the  inftantaneous  rarefaction  of  which
into  vapour,  the  mine  is  fprung,  and  various  fubftances,  in
all  ftages  of  vitrification,  with  fhells,  and  other  marine  pro¬
ductions,  that  are  now  found  foftil,  and  the  ftrata  that  co¬
vered  the  furnace,  are  thrown  up ;  while  tliofe  parts  of  the
land  which  were  fupported  upon  the  broken  fhell  give  way,
and  fink  into  the  gulph.  With  this  theory  the  phenomena  of
all  earthquakes  feem  to  agree;  pools  of  water  are  frequently
left  where  land  has  fubfided,  and  various  fubftances,  which
manifeftly  appear  to  have  fuffered  by  the  aCtion  of  fire,  are
thrown  up.  It  is  indeed  true,  that  fire  cannot  iubfift  with¬
out  air ;  but  this  cannot  be  urged  againft  there  being  fire
below  that  part  of  the  earth  which  forms  the  bed  of  the  fea ;
becaufe  there  may  be  innumerable  fiffures  by  which  a  com¬
munication  between  tliofe  parts  and  the  external  air  may  be
kept  up,  even  upon  the  higheft  mountains,  and  at  the  great-
eft  diftance  from  the  fea°£hore.


.3


On


ROUND  THE  WORLD.  m

On  the  4th,  Mr.  Banks  employed  himfelf  in  planting  a  1769,
great  quantity  of  the  feeds  of  water-melons,  oranges,  le-  v  — .L_»
mons,  limes,  and  other  plants  and  trees  which  be  had  col-  acuay4'
levied  at  Rio  de  Janeiro.  For  thefe  he  prepared  ground  on
each  fide  of  the  fort,  with  as  many  varieties  of  foil  as  he
eould  chufe  ;  and  there  is  little  doubt  but  that  they  will  fuc-
ceed.  He  alfo  gave  liberally  of  thefe  feeds  to  the  Indians,  and.
planted  many  of  them  in  the  woods :  fome  of  the  melon  feeds
having  been  planted  foon  after  our  arrival,  the  natives
Ihewed  him  feveral  of  the  plants  which  appeared  to  be  in
the  mod  dourifhing  condition,  and  were  continually  afking,
him  for  more.

We  now  began  to  prepare  for  our  departure,  by  bending
the  fails  and  performing  other  neceffary  operations  on  board
the  Blip,  our  water  being  already  on  board,  and  the  provi-
lions  examined.  In  the  mean  time  we  had  another  vifit  from
Oamo,  Oberea,  and  their  fon  and  daughter ;  the  Indians  ex-
prefling  their  refpedt  by  uncovering  the  upper  parts  of  their
body  as  they  had  done  before.  The  daughter,  whofe  name
we  underftood  to  be  To  1  mat  a,  was  very  defirous  to  fee  the
fort,  but  her  father  would  by  no  means  fuffer  her  to  come  in.

Tearee,  the  fon  of  Waheatua,  the  lovereign.  of  Tiarrabou,
the  fouth  eaft  peninfula,  was  alfo  with  us  at  this  time ;  and  we
received  intelligence  of  the  landing  of  another  gueft,  whofe
company  was  neither  expedled  nor  dcfircd:  this  was  no  other
than  the  ingenious  gentleman  who  contrived  to  deal  our
quadrant.  We  were  told,  that  he  intended  to  try  his  fortune
again  in  the  night ;  but  the  Indians  ail  offered  very  zealoufly
to  afilft  us  againfl  him,  defiring  that,  for  this  purpofe,  they

might  be  permitted  to  lie  in  the  fort.  This  had  fo  good1
an  effedl,  that  the  thief  relinquifhed  his  enterprize  in  de-
fpair.


*76  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

juiy9.‘  0il  the  7th>  the  carpenters  were  employed  in  taking  down
FridI7~~'  the  gates  and  Pallifadoes  of  our  little  fortification,  for  fire-
J7'  wood  on  board  the  flvip ;  and  one  of  the  Indians  had  dexte¬
rity  enough  to  Heal  the  ftaple  and  hook  upon  which  the  gate
turned :  he  was  immediately  purfued,  and  after  a  chace  of
fix  miles,  he  appeared  to ‘have  been  palled,  having  concealed
himfelf  among  fome  rulhcs  in  the  brook  ;  the  rulhes  were
fearched,  and  though  the  thief  had  efcaped,  a  fcraper  was
found  which  had  been  flolen  from  the  Ihip  fometime  before ;

and  foon  after  our  old  friend  Tubourai  Tamaide  brought  us
the  ftaple.

fX3  9?'  °n  the  8th  and  9th>  we  continued  to  difmantle  our  fort,
and  our  friends  Hill  flocked  about  us  ;  fome,  I  believe,  forty
at  the  approach  of  our  departure,  and  others  defirous  to
make  as  much  as  they  could  of  us  while  we  ftaid.

We  were  in  hopes  that  we  fhould  now  leave  the  ifland,
without  giving  or  receiving  any  other  offence ;  but  it  un¬
fortunately  happened  otherwife.  Two  foreign  feamen  hav¬
ing  been  out  with  my  permiffion,  one  of  them  was  robbed
of  his  knife,  and  endeavouring  to  recover  it,  probably  with
circumftances  of  great  provocation,  the  Indians  attacked  him
and  dangeroufly  wounded  him  with  a  done  ;  they  wounded
his  companion  alfo  flightly  in  the  head,  and  then  fled  into
the  mountains.  As  I  fhould  have  been  forry  to  take  any  far¬
ther  notice  of  the  affair,  I  was  not  difpleafed  that  the  offen¬
ders  had  efcaned  ;  but  I  was  immediately  involved  in  a  quar¬
rel  which  I  very  much  regretted,  and  which  yet  it  was  not
poffible  to  avoid.

In  the  middle  of  the  night  between  the  8th  and  9th,  Cle¬
ment  Webb  and  Samuel  Gibfon,  two  of  the  marines,  both
young  men,  went  privately  from  the  fort,  and  in  the  morn¬
ing  weie  not  to  be  found.  As  publick  notice  had  been  given,

9  that


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


that  all  hands  were  to  go  on  board  on  the  next  day,  and  that  1769.
the  fliip  would  fail  on  the  morrow  of  that  day  or  the  day  fol-  .  Ju<ly‘  *
lowing,  I  began  to  fear  that  the  abfentees  intended  to  Ray  Sunday  s*
behind.  I  knew  that  I  could  take  no  effectual  Reps  to  re¬
cover  them,  without  endangering  the  harmony  and  good¬
will  which  at  prefent  fubfiRed  among  us  ;  and,  therefore,
determined  to  wait  a  day  for  the  chance  of  their  return.

On  Monday  morning  the  10th,  the  marines,  to.  my  great  Monday  10.
concern,  not  being  returned,  an  enquiry  was  made  after
them  of  the  Indians,  who  frankly  told  us,  that  they  did  not
intend  to  return,  and  had  taken  refuge  in  the  mountains,
where  it  was  impoflible  for  our  people  to  find  them.  They
were  then  requefied  to  aflifi  in  the  fearch,  and  after  fome  de¬
liberation,  two  of  them  undertook  to  condudt  fuch  perfons
as  I  Riould  think  proper  to  fend  after  them  to  the  place  of
their  retreat.  As  they  were  known  to  be  without  arms,  I
thought  two  would  be  fufficient,  and  accordingly  difpatched
a  petty  officer,  and  the  corporal  of  the  marines,  with  the  In¬
dian  guides,  to  fetch  them  back.  As  the  recovery  of  thefe
men  was  a  matter  of  great  importance,  as  I  had  no  time  to
lofe,  and  as  the  Indians  fpoke  doubtfully  of  their  return,
telling  us,  that  they  had  each  of  them  taken  a  wife,  and
were  become  inhabitants  of  the  country,  it  was  intimated  to
feveral  of  the  Chiefs  who  were  in  the  fort  with  their  women,
among  whom  were  Tubourai  Tamaide,  Tomio,  and  Oberea,
that  they  would  not  be  permitted  to  leave  it  till  our  deferters
were  brought  back.  This  precaution  I  thought  the  more
necefiary,  as,  by  concealing  them  a  few  days,  they  might
compel  me  to  go  without  them ;  and  I  had  the  pleafure  to
obferve,  that  they  received  the  intimation  with  very  little
figns  either  of  fear  or  difcontent ;  alluring  me  that  my  people
Riould  be  fecured  and  fent  back  as  foon  as  poffible.  While
this  was  doing  at  the  fort,  I  fent  Mr.JHicks  in  the  pinnace  to

Vol.  II,  A  a  fetch


J


17&

1769.

July-

' - - - /

Monday  10.


Tuefday  11.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

fetch  Tootahah  on  board  the  fhip,  which  he  did,  without
alarming  either  him  or  his  people.  If  the  Indian  guides-
proved  faithful  and  in  earned:,  I  had  reafon  to  expedf  the  re¬
turn  of  my  people  with  the  deferters  before  evening.  Being
difappointed,  my  fufpicions  increafed  and  night  coming
on,  I  thought  it  was  not  fafe  to  let  the  people  whom  I  had
detained  as  hoftages  continue  at  the  fort,-  and  I  therefore
ordered  Tubourai  Tamaide,  Oberea,  and  fome  others,  to  be
taken  on  board  the  fhip.  This  fpread  a  general  alarm,  and
feveral  of  them,  efpecially  the  women,  exprefled  their  ap-
prehenfions  with  great  emotion  and  many  tears  when  they
were  put  into  the  boat.  I  went  on  board  with  them,  and
Mr.  Banks  remained  on  fhore,  with  fome  others  whom  I
thought  it  of  lefs  confequence  to  fecure.

About  nine  o’clock,  Webb  was  brought  back  by  fome  of
the  natives,  who  declared,  that  Gibfon,  and  the  petty  officer
and  corporal,  would  be  detained  till  Tootahah  fhould  be  fet
at  liberty.  The  tables  were  now  turned  upon  ipe;  but  I
had  proceeded  too  far  to  retreat.  I  immediately  difpatched
Mr.  Hicks  in  the  long-boat,  with  a  ftrong  party  of  men,  to
refcue  the  prifoners,  and  told  Tootahah  that  it  behoved
him-  to  fend  fome  of  his  people  with  them,  with  orders  to
afford  them  effectual  affiflance,  and  to  demand  the  releafe  of
my  men  in  his  name,  for  that  I  fhould  exped  him  to  an-
fwer  for  the  contrary.  He  readily  complied ;  this  party  re¬
covered  my  men  without  the  leafl  oppofition;  and  about
feven  o’clock  in  the  morning,  returned  with  them  to  the
lhip,  though  they  had  not  been  able  to  recover  the  arms
which  had  been  taken  from  them  when  they  were  feized  :
thefe,  however,  were  brought  on  board  in  lefs  than  half  an
hour,  and  the  Chiefs  were  immediately  fet  at  liberty.

When  I  queftioned  the  petty  officer  concerning  what  had
happened  on  fliore,  he  told  me,  that  neither  the  natives  who
2


went


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

went  with  him,  nor  thofe  whom  they  met  in  their  way,
would  give  them  any  intelligence  of  the  deferters ;  but,  on
the  contrary,  became  very  troubtefome :  that,  as  he  was  re¬
turning  for  further  orders  to  the  fliip,  he  and  his  comrade
were  fuddenly  feized  by  a  number  of  armed  men,  who
having  learnt  that  Tootahah  was  confined,  had  concealed
themfelves  in  a  wood  for  that  purpofe,  and,  who  having
taken  them  at  a  difadvantage,  forced  their  weapons  out  of
their  hands,  and  declared,  that  they  would  detain  them  till
their  Chief  fhould  be  fet  at  liberty.  He  faid,  however,  that
the  Indians  were  not  unanimous  in  this  meafure;  that
fomc  were  for  fetting  them  at  liberty,  and  others  for  detain¬
ing  them:  that  an  eager  difpute  enfued,  and  that  from
words  they  came  to  blows,  but  that  the  party  for  detaining
them  at  length  prevailed :  that  foon  after,  Webb  and  Gibfon
were  brought  in  by  a  party  of  the  natives,  as  prifoners,  that
they  alfo  might  be  fecured  as  hoftages  for  the  Chief ;  but  that
it  was  after  fome  debate  refolved  to  fend  Webb  to  inform  me
of  their  refolution,  to  allure  me  that  his  companions  were
fafe,  and  dire(5t  me  where  I  might  fend  my  anfwer.  Thus
it  appears  that  whatever  were  the  difadvantages  of  feizing
the  Chiefs,  I  fhould  never  have  recovered  my  men  by  any
other  method.  When  the  Chiefs  were  fet  on  fhore  from  the
fhip,  thofe  at  the  fort  were  alfo  fet  at  liberty,  and,  after
Raying  with  Mr.  Banks  about  an  hour,  they  all  went  away.
Upon  this  occafion,  as  they  had  done  upon  another  of  the
fame  kind,  they  exprelfed  their  joy  by  an  undeferved  libera¬
lity,  firongly  urging  us  to  accept  of  four  hogs.  Thefe  we
abfolutely  refufed  as  a  piefent,  and  they  as  abfolutely  re-
fufing  to  be  paid  for  them,  the  hogs  did  not  change  mailers.
Upon  examining  the  deferters,  we  found  that  the  account
which  the  Indians  had  given  of  them  was  true:  they  had
firongly  attached  themfelves  to  two  girls,  and  it  was  their

A  a  q  -  intention


179

1769.

July.


Tuefday  i-i.


i8o


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

1769.  intention  to  conceal  themfelyes  till  the  fliip  had  failed,  and

’imSTTr'  takC  UP  the‘r  relidence  uPon  the  ifland.  This  night  every
thing  was  got  off  from  the  fliore,  and  every  body  11c nt  on
board.

Among  the  natives  who  were  almoft  conilantly  with  us,
was  Tupia,  whofe  name  has  been  often  mentioned  in  this
nairative.  fie  had  been,  as-I  have  before  obferved,  the  firfl
niinifter  of  Oberea,  when  lire  was  in  the  height  of  her
power:  he  was  alfo  the  chief  Tahowa  or  prieft  of  the  ifland,
confequently  well  acquainted  with  the  religion  of  the  coun¬
try,  as  well  with  refpedt  to  its  ceremonies  as  principles.  He
had  alfo  great  experience  and  knowlege  in  navigation,  and
was  particularly  acquainted  with  the  number  and  fituation
of  the  neighbouring  iflands.  This  man  had  often  expreffed

Wcdaef.  ,2.  a  defire  to  go  with  us,  and  on  the  rath  in  the  morning,
having  with  the  other  natives  left  us  the  day  before,  Ire
came  on  board,  with  a  boy  about  thirteen  years  of  age,  his
fervant,  and:  urged  us  to  let  him  proceed  with  us  on  our
voyage.  To. have  fuch  a  perfon  on  board,  was  certainly  de¬
niable  foi  many  lealons :  by  learning  his  language,  and
teaching  him  ours,  we  Ihould  be  able  to  acquire  a  much
better  knowlege  of  the  cuftoms,  policy,  and  religion  of  the
people,  than  our  fhort  flay  among  them  could  give  us,  I
therefore  gladly  agreed  to  receive  them  on  board:  As  we
were  prevented  from  failing  to-day,  by  having  found  it  ne-
ceffary  to  make  new  flocks  to  our  fmall  and  beft  bower  an¬
chors,  the  old  ones  having  been  totally  deftroyed  by  the
worms,  Tupia  faid,  he  would  go  once  more  on  fhore,  and:
make  a  fignal  for  the  boat  to  fetch  him  off  in  the  evening.
He  went  accordingly,  and  took  with  him  a  miniature  pidlure
of  Mr.  Banks’s,  to  fhcw  his  friends,  and  feveral  little  things
to  give  them  as  parting  prefents,


After


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


181


1769.

July.

' - - 7

Wednef.  sz.


After  dinner,  Mr.  Banks  being  defirous  to  procure  a  draw¬
ing  of  the  Morai  belonging  toTootahah  at  Eparre,  I  attended
him  thither,  accompanied  by  Dr.  Solander,  in  the  pinnace.

As  foon  as  we  landed,  many  of  our  friends  came  to  meet  us,
though  fome  abfented  themfelves  in  refentment  of  what  had
happened  the  day  before.  We  immediately  proceeded  to
Tootahah’s  houfe,  were  we  were  joined  by  Oberea,  with
feveral  others  who  had  not  come  out  to  meet  us,  and  a  per¬
fect  reconciliation  was  foon  brought  about';  in  conference
of  which  they  promifed  to  vifit  us  early  the  next  day,  to  take  a
laft  farewcl  of  us,  as  we  told  them  wTe  fhould  certainly  fet  fail  ..
in  the  afternoon.  At  this  place  alfo  we  found  Tupia,  who
returned  with  us,  and  flept  this  night  on  board  the  fhip  for
the  firft  time.

On  the  next  morning,  Thurfday  the  13th  of  July,  the  fhip  Thurfdayij*
was  very  early  crouded  with  our  friends,  and  furrounded  by
a  multitude  of  canoes,  which  were  filled  with  the  natives  of
an  inferior  clafs.  Between  eleven  and  twelve  we  weighed
anchor,  and  as  foon  as  the  fhip  was  under  fail,  the  Indians
on  board  took  their  leaves,  and  wept,  with  a  decent  and
filent  forrow,  in  which  there  was  fomething  very  ftriking
and  tender:  the  people  in  the  canoes,  on  the  contrary,
feemed  to  vie  with  each  other  in  the  loudnefs  of  their  la¬
mentations,  which  we  confidered  rather  as  affectation  than,
grief.  Tupia  fufiained  himfelf  in  this  fcene  with  a  firmnefs
and  refolution  truly  admirable :  he  wept  indeed,  but  the
effort  that  he  made  to  conceal  his  tears,  concurred,,  with*
them,  to  do  him  honour.  He  fent  his  laft  prefent,  a  Ihirt,
by  Otlieothea*  to  Potomai,  Tootahah’s  favourite  miflrefsj
and  then  went  with  Mr.  Banks  to  the  maft-head,  waving  to
the  canoes  as  long  as  they  continued  in  fight.


9


Thus


l


102


LIEUTENANT  COOKES  VOYAGE


1 769-  Thus  we  took  leave  of  Otaheite,  and  its  inhabitants,  after

_ i  a  flay  of  juft  three  months  ;  for  much  the  greater  part  of  the

lixurfday  13.  t*me  we  iivcd  together  in  the  moft  cordial  friendihip,  and  a

perpetual  reciprocation  of  good  offices.  The  accidental  dif¬
ferences  which  now  and  then  happened,  could  not  be  more
fincerely  regretted  on  their  part  than  they  were  on  ours :  the
principal  caufes  were  fuch  as  neceffarily  refulted  from  our
fituation  and  circumftances,  in  conjunction  with  the  infir¬
mities  of  human  nature,  from  our  not  being  able  perfectly
to  underhand  each  other,  and  from  the  difpofition  of  the  in¬
habitants  to  theft,  which  we  could  not  at  all  times  bear  with
or  prevent.  They  had  not,  however,  except  in  one  inftancej
been  attended  with  any  fatal  confequence  j  and  to  that  acci¬
dent  were  owing  the  mcafures  that  I  took  to  prevent  others
of  the'  fame  kind.  I  hoped,  indeed,  to  have  availed  myfelf
of  the  impreflion  which  had  been  made  upon  them  by  the
lives  that  had  been  facrificed  in  their  conteft  with  the  Dol¬
phin,  fo  as  that  the  intercourfe  between  us  fhould  have  been
carried  on  wholly  without  bloodfhed ;  and  by  this  hope  all
my  mcafures  were  directed  during  the  whole  of  my  conti¬
nuance  at  the  ifland,  and  I  fincerely  wifh,  that  whoever  fhall
next  vifit  it,  may  be  (till  more  fortunate.  Our  traftick  here  was
carried  on  with  as  much  order  as  in  the  beft  regulated  mar¬
ket  in  Europe.  It  was  managed  principally  by  Mr.  Banks,
who  was  indefatigable  in  procuring  provifion  and  refrefh-
ments  while  they  were  to  be  had  ■,  but  during  the  latter  part
of  our  time  they  became  fcarce,  partly  by  the  increafed  con-
fumption  at  the  fort  and  fhip,  and  partly  by  the  coming  on
of  the  fcafon  in  which  cocoa-nuts  and  bread-fruit  fail.  All
kind  of  fruit  we  purchafed  for  beads  and  nails,  but  no  nails
lefs  than  fortypenny  were  current :  after  a  very  fhort  time  we
could  never  get  a  pig  of  more  than  ten  or  twelve  pounds,  for

lefs


1


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


1S3


lefs  than  a  hatchet ;  becaufe,  though  thefe  people  fet  a  high
value  upon  fpike  nails,  yet  thefe  being  an  article  with
which  many  people  in  the  fhip  were  provided,  the  women
found  a  much  more  eafy  way  of  procuring  them  than  by
bringing  down  provifions.

The  bell  articles  for  traffick  here  are  axes,  hatchets,
fpikes,  large  nails,  looking-glades,  knives,  and  beads,  for
fome  of  which,  every  thing  that  the  natives  have  may  be
procured.  They  are  indeed  fond  of  fine  linen  cloth,  both
white  and  printed  ;  but  an  ax  worth  half  a  crown,  will  fetch;
more  than  a  piece  of  cloth  worth  twenty  {hillings.


/


C  H  A  P.


1769.

July*

v  *y  *■  »i  t

Thurfday  1.3*.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


CHAP.  XVII.

A  particular  Defcription  of  the  IJland  •  its  Produce  and
Inhabitants  \  their  Drefs ,  Habitations ,  Food,
domejlic  Life  and  Amufements .

WE  found  the  longitude  of  Port-Royal  bay,  in  this
ifland,  as  fettled  by^  Captain  Wallis,  who  difcovered
it  on  the  9th  of  June  1767,  to  be  within  half  a  degree  of  the
truth.  We  found  Point  Venus,  the  northern  extremity  of
the  ifland,  and  the  eaftern  point  of  the  bay,  to  lie  in  the
longitude  of  1490  30'  this  being  the  mean  refult  of  a  great
number  of  obfervations  made  upon  the  fpot.  The  ifland  is
furrounded  by  a  reef  of  coral  rock,  which  forms  feveral  ex¬
cellent  bays  and  harbours,  fome  of  which  have  been  parti¬
cularly  defcribed,  where  there  is  room  and  depth  of  water
for  any  number  of  the  largeft  fliips.  Port-Royal  bay,  called
by  the  natives  Matavai,  which  is  not  inferior  to  any  in  Ota-
heite,  may  eafily  be  known  by  a  very  high  mountain  in  the
middle  of  the  ifland,  which  bears  due  fouth  from  Point
Venus.  To  fail  into  it,  either  keep  the  weft  point  of  the  reef
that  lies  before  Point  Venus,  clofe  on  board,  or  give  it  a
birth  of  near  half  a  mile,  in  order  to  avoid  a  fmall  fhoal  of
coral  rocks,  on  which  there  is  but  two  fathom  and  an  half  of
water.  The  beft  anchoring  is  on  the  eaftern  fide  of  the  bay,
where  there  is  flxteen  and  fourteen  fathom  upon  an  oufey
bottom.  The  fhore  of  the  bay  is  a  fine  fandy  beach,  behind
which  runs  a  river  of  frefli  water,  fo  that  any  number  of
fhips  may  water  here  without  incommoding  each  other ;  but
the  only  wood  for  firing,  upon  the  whole  ifland,  is  that  of

fruit


N?8


••


'  *<  ...  '


''  •


"k  '

i  »•-  ^  i .


•4*'  ■  .•  . '  j.  *


/  •  •  *


\


■


-,<•  v-  ■  .

.  *.


.


•*  •  ‘


'

•  ~  .

-  <  .  .  '

■  r  V-l  :  -  ’

..  '  \


-


• f

.  Vi  ••  j  ■■


'


N?12.


fruit  trees,  which  mud  be  purchafed  of  the  natives,  or  all
hope  of  living  upon  .good  terms  with  them  given  up.  There
are  fome  harbours  to  the  weftward  of  this  bay  which  have
not  been  mentioned,  but,  as  they  are  contiguous  to  it,  and
laid  down  in  the  plan,  a  defcription  of  them  is  unneceflary.

The  face  of  the  country,  except  that  part  of  it  which  bor¬
ders  upon  the  fea,  is  very  uneven ;  it  rifes  in  ridges  that
run  up  into  the  middle  of  the  ifland,  and  there  form  moun¬
tains,  which  may  be  feen  at  the  difiance  of  fixty  miles:  be¬
tween  the  foot  of  thefe  ridges  and  the  fea,  is  a  border  of  low
land,  furrounding  the  whole  ifland,  except  in  a  few  places
where  the  ridges  rife  directly  from  the  fea :  the  border  of  low
land  is  in  different  parts  of  different  breadths,  but  no  where"
more  than  a  mile  and  a  half.  The  foil,  except  upon  the  very,
tops  of  the  ridges,  is  extremely  rich  and  fertile,  watered  by
a  great  number  of  rivulets  of  excellent  water,  and  covered
with  fruit  trees  of  various  kinds,  fome  of  which  are  of  a
fiately  growth  and  thick  foliage,  fo  as  to  form  one  continued
wood ;  and  even  the  tops  of  the  ridges,  though  in  general
they  are  bare,  and  burnt  up  by  the  fun,  are,  in  fome  parts,
not  without  their  produce.

The  low  land  that  lies  between  the  foot  of  the  ridges:  and
the  fea,  and  fome  of  the  vallies,  are  the  only  parts  of  the
illand  that  are  inhabited,  and  here  it  is  populous  ;  the  houfcs
do  not  form  villages  or  towns,  but  are  ranged  along  the
whole  border  at  the  diflance  of  about  fifty  yards  from  each
other,  with  little  plantations  of  plantains,  the  tree  which/
furnifhes  them  with  cloth.  The  whole  ifland,  according  to
Tupia’s  account,  who  certainly  knew,  could  furnifh  fix
thoufand  feven  hundred  and  eighty  fighting  men,  from
which  the  number  of  inhabitants  may  cafily  be  computed.

Vol,  II.  B  b  The'


m


1769*

* — * —

Produce.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

The  produce  of  this  ifland  is  bread-fruit,  cocoa-nuts,  ba-  •
nanas,  of  thirteen  forts,  the  bed  we  had  ever  eaten ;  plan¬
tains  ;  a  fruit  not  unlike  an  apple,  which,  when  ripe,  is  very
pleafant  jfweet  potatoes,  yams,  cocoas,  a  kind  of  Arums,  a  fruit
known  here  by  the  name  of  Jambu,  and  reckoned  mod  deli¬
cious;  fugar  cane,  which  the  inhabitants  eat  raw;  a  root  oF
the  falop  kind,  called  by  the  inhabitants  Pea  ;  a  plant  called
Elhee>  of  which  the  root  only  is  eaten;  a. fruit  that  grows  in
a  pod,  like  that  of  a  large  kidney-bean,  which,  when  it  is
roafted,  eats  very  much  like  a  chefnut,  by  the  natives  called
j4)tee ;  a  tree  called  JVharray  called  in  the  Ead  Indies  Pandanes^
Which  produces  fruit,  fomething  like  the  pine-apple  ;  afhrub
called  Nona  ;  the  Morinda ,  which  alfo  produces  fruit ;  a  fpecies,
of  fern;,  of  which  the  root  is  eaten,  and  fometimes  the
leaves  ;  and  a  plant,  called  Thcve,  of  which  the  root  alfo  is
eaten.:  but  the  fruits  of. the  Nano,  the  fern,  and  the  Theve y.
are- eaten  only  by  the  inferior  people,  and  im  times  of  fear*
city.  All  thefe,  which  ferve  the  inhabitants  for  food,  the
earth  produces  fpontaneoufly,  or  with  fo  little  culture,  that
they  feem  to  be  exempted  from,  the  fird  general  curfe,  that
u  man  fhould  eat  his  bread  in  the  fweat  of  his  brow.”  They
have  alfo  the  Chinefe  paper  mulberry,  moms  papyri/era^,
which  they  call  Jouta\  a  tree  refembling  the  wild  fig-tree  of
the  Wed  Indies;  another  fpecies  of  dg,  which  they  call  Matte  \
the  cordia  febejiina  orient  alls  y.  which  they  call  Eton  ;.  a  kind  of
Gyperus  grafs,  which  they  call  Moo  s  a  fpecies  of  tourntfortia,
which?  they  call  Taheinoo ;  another  of  the  convolvulus  poluce. ;
which  they  call  Eurhe\  the  /planum  centifoliunvy  which  they  calf
Ebooas  the  calophyllum  mophylum,  which  they  call-  Tamannu  ;  the
hibifeus *  t  iliac eusy  called  Poerou,  a  frutefeent  nettle ;  the  urtica
argenteay  call td  Eroiua;  with  many  other  plants  which  cannot
here  be  particularly  mentioned:  thofe  that  have  been  named
already,  will  be  referred  to  in  the  fubfequent  part  of  this  work.

They


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


They  have  no  European  fruit,  garden  fluff,  pulfe,  or  le¬
gumes,  nor  grain  of  any  kind.

Of  tame  animals  they  have  only  hogs,  dogs,  and  poultry  *
neither  is  there  a  wild  animal  in  the  ifland,  except  ducks,
pigeons,  paroquets,  with  a  few  other  birds,  and  rats,  there
being  no  other  quadruped,  nor  any  ferpent.  But  the  fea
fupplies  them  with  great  variety  of  moft  excellent  fifh,  to
eat  which  is  their  chief  luxury,  and  to  catch  it  their  prin¬
cipal  labour.


As  to  the  people  they  are  of  the  largeft  fize  of  Europeans.
The  men  are  tall,  ftrong,  well-limbed,  and  finely  fhaped.
The  talleft  that  we  faw  was  a  man  upon  a  neighbouring
ifland,  called  Huaheine,  who  meafured  fix  feet  three  inches
and  an  half.  The  women  of  the  fuperior  rank  are  alfo  in
general  above  our  middle  ftature,  but  thofe  of  the  inferior
clafs  are  rather  below  it,  and  fome  of  them  are  very  fmall.
This  defedl  in  fize  probably  proceeds  from  their  early  com¬
merce  with  men,  the  only  thing  in  which  they  differ  from
their  fuperiors,  that  could  poflibly  affedt  their  growth.


Their  natural  complexion  is  that  kind  of  clear  olive,  or
Brunette ,  which  many  people  in  Europe  prefer  to  the  fineft
white  and  red.  In  thofe  that  are  expofed  to  the  wind  and
fun,  it  is  confiderably  deepened,  but  in  others  that  live  under
fhelter,  efpecially  the  fuperior  clafs  of  women,  it  continues
of  its  native  hue,  and  the  fkin  is  moft  delicately  fmooth  and
foft ;  they  have  no  tint  in  their  cheeks,  which  we  diftinguifh
by  the  name  of  colour.  The  fhape  of  the  face  is  comely,
the  cheek  bones  are  not  high,  neither  are  the  eyes  hollow,
nor  the  brow  prominent :  the  only  feature  that  does  not  cor-
refpond  with  our  ideas  of  beauty  is  the  nofe,  which,  in  ge¬
neral,  is  fomewhat  flat;  but  their  eyes,  efpecially  thofe  of
the  women,  are  full  of  expreflion,  fometimes  fparkling  with

B  b  2  fire.


iSS

fc


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

2^9^  fire,  and  fom  etim.es  melting  with  foftnefs ;  their  teeth  alfo
are,  aknoft  without  exception,  mod  beautifully  even  and
white,  and  their  breath  perfectly  without  taint.

The  hair  is  almoft  univerfally  black,  and  rather  coarfc  ;
the  men  have  beards  which  they  wear  in  many  fafhions,
always,  however,  plucking  out  great  part  of  them,  and  keep¬
ing  the  red  perfecTly  clean  and  neat.  Both  fexes  alfo  eradi¬
cate  every  hair  from  under  their  arms,  and  accufed  us  of
gieat  uncleanlinefs  for  not  doing  the  fame.  In  their  motions
mere  is  at  once  vigour  and  eafe  ;  their  walk  is  graceful,
tneii  depot tment  liberal,  and  their  behaviour  to  drangers
and  to  each  other  affable  and  courteous.  In  their  difpofitions
alfo",  they  feemed  to  be  brave,  open,  and  candid,  without
either  fufpicion  or  treachery,  cruelty  or  revenge  ;  fo  that  we
placed  the  fame  confidence  in  them  as  in  our  bed  friends,
many  of  us,  particularly  Mr.  Banks,  deeping  frequently  in
their  houfes  in  the  woods,  without  a  companion,  and  confe-
quently  wholly  in  their  power.  They  were,  however,  all
thieves  ;  and  when  that  is  allowed,  they  need  not  much  fear
a  competition  with  the  people  of  any  other  nation  upon
earth.  During  our  day  in  this  idand  we  faw  about  five  or  fix
perfons,  like  one  that  was  met  by  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Soun¬
der  on  the  24th  of  April,  in  their  walk  to  the  eadward,  whofe
ikins  were  of  a  dead  white,  like  the  nofe  of  a  white  horfe;
with  white  hair,  beard,  brows,  and  eye-ladies ;  red,  tender
eyes ;  a  fllort  fight,  and  feurfy  fkins,  covered  with  a  kind  of
white  down  ;  but  we  found  that  no  two  of  thefe  belonged  to
the  fame  family,  and  therefore  concluded,  that  they  were  not
a  fpecies,  but  unhappy  individuals,  rendered  anomalous  by
difeafe.

It  is  a  cuflom  in  mod  countries  where  the  inhabitants  have
long  hair,  for  the  men  to  cut  it  fhort  and  the, women  to  pride

them-


©refs,


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


ifi

themfelves  in  its  length.  Here,  however,  the  contrary  cuf-  1769.
tom  prevails  ;  the  women  always  cut  it  fhort  round  their
ears,  and  the  men,  except  the  fifhers,  who  are  almoft  conti¬
nually  in  the  water,  fuffer  it  to  flow  in  large  waves  over
their  fhoulders,  or  tie  it  up  in  a  bunch  on  the  top  of  their
heads.

They  have  a  cuflom  alfo  of  anointing  their  heads,  with
what  they  call  Monoe ,  an  oil  cxprefled  from  the  cocoa-nut,  in
which  fome  fweet  herbs  or  flowers  have  been  infufed:  as  the
oil  is  generally  rancid,  the  fmell  is  at  firfl  very  difagreeable  to
a  European ;  and  as  they  live  in  a  hot  country,  and  have  no
fuch  thing  as  a  comb,  they  are  not  able  to  keep  their  heads
free  from  lice,  which  the  children  and  common  people  fome-
times  pick  out  and  eat :  a  hateful  cuflom,  wholly  different
from  their  manners  in  every  other  particular ;  for  they  are
delicate  and  cleanly  almofl  without  example,  and  thofe  to
whom  we  diflributed  combs,  foon  delivered  themfelves  from
vermin,  with  a  diligence  which  fhowed  that  they  were  not
more  odious  to  us  than  to  them.

They  have  a  cuflom  of  flaining  their  bodies,  nearly  in  the
fame  manner  as  is  pradtifed  in  many  other  parts  of  the
world,  which  they  call  Tat  towing*  They  prick  the  fkin,  fo  as.
juft  not  to  fetch  blood,  with  a  fmall  inftrument,  fomething:
in  the  form,  of  a  hoe  ;  that  part  which  anfwers  to  the  blade
is  made  of  a  bone  or  fhell,  feraped  very  thin,  and  is  from  a<
quarter  of  an  inch  to  an  inch  and  a  half  wide  ;  the  edge  is<
cut  into  (harp  teeth  or  points,  from  the  number  of  three  to
twenty,  according  to  its  fizc:  when  this  is  to  be  ufed,  they
dip  the  teeth  into  a  mixture  of  a  kind  of  lamp-black,  formed:*
of  the  fmoke  that  rifes  from  an  oily  nut  which  they  burn)
inftead.of  candles,  and  water;  the  teeth,  thus  prepared,  are
placed,  upon  the  fkin,  and  the  handle  to  which  they  are  faf-

tened;.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


*769*  tened  being  flruck,  by  quick  fmart  blows,  with  a  flick  fitted
to  the  purpofe,  they  pierce  it,  and  at  the  fame  time  carry
into  the  pun&ure  the  black  compofition,  which  leaves  an  in¬
delible  flain.  The  operation  is  painful,  and  it  is  fome  days
before  the  wounds  are  healed.  It  is  performed  upon  the
youth  of  both  fexes  when  they  are  about  twelve  or  fourteen
years  of  age,  on  feveral  parts  of  the  body,  and  in  various
figures,  according  to  the  fancy  of  the  parent,  or  perhaps  the
rank  of  the  party.  The  women  are  generally  marked  with
this  flain,  in  the  form  of  a  Z,  on  every  joint  of  their  fingers
and  toes,  and  frequently  round  the  outfide  of  their  feet;  the
men  are  alfo  marked  with  the  fame  figure,  and  both  men
and  women  have  fquares,  circles,  crefcents,  and  ill-defigned
reprefentations  of  men,  birds,  or  dogs,  and  various  other
devices  impreffed  upon  their  legs  and  arms,  fome  of  which
we  were  told  had  fignifications,  though  we  could  never  learn
what  they  were.  But  the  part  on  which  thefe  ornaments  are
lavifhed  with  the  greatefl  profufion,  is  the  breech :  this,  in
both  fexes,  is  covered  with  a  deep  black ;  above  which,  arches
are  drawn  one  over  another  as  high  as  the  fhort  ribs.  They
are  often  a  quarter  of  an  inch  broad,  and  the  edges  are  not
flrait  lines,  but  indented.  Thefe  arches  are  their  pride,  and
are  fliewn  both  by  men  and  women  with  a  mixture  of  oflen-
tation  and  pleafure  ;  whether  as  an  ornament,  or  a  proof  of
their  fortitude  and  refolution  in  bearing  pain,  we  could  not
determine.  The  face  in  general  is  left  unmarked  ;  for  we
faw  but  one  inflance  to  the  contrary.  Some  old  men  had  the
greatefl  part  of  their  bodies  covered  with  large  patches  of
black,  deeply  indented  at  the  edges,  like  a  rude  imitation  of
flame  ;  but  we  were  told,  that  they  came  from  a  low  ifland
called  Noouoora,  and  were  not  natives  of  Otaheite.

Mr.  Banks  faw  the  operation  of  tatto'wing  performed  upon
die  backfide  of  a  girl  about  thirteen  years  old.  The  inflru-

mcnt


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


19  r

ment  ufed  upon  this  occafion  had  thirty  teeth,  and  every  i769*
droke,  of  which  at  lead  a  hundred  were  made  in  a  minute*
drew  an  ichor  or  ferum  a  little  tinged  with  blood.  The  girl
bore  it  with  mod:  doicat  refolution  for  about  a  quarter  of  an
hour ;  but  the  pain  of  fo  many  hundred  punctures  as  Ihe
had  received  in  that  time  then  became  intolerable :  fhe  firft
complained  in  murmurs,  then  wept,  and  at  lad  burft  into
loud  lamentations,  earneftly  imploring  the  operator  to  defift.

He  was,  however,  inexorable ;  and  when  fhe  began  to
llruggle,  fhe  was  held  down  by  two  women,  who  fometimes
foothed  and  fometimes  chid  her,  and  now  and  then,  when
fhe  was  mod  unruly,  gave  her  a  fmart  blow.  Mr.  Banks
daid  in  a  neighbouring  houfe  an  hour,  and  the  operation
was  not  over  when  he  went  away;  yet  it  was  performed  but

1  '  ^

upon  one  fide,  the  other  having  been  done  fometime  before  ;
and  the  arches  upon  the  loins,  in  which  they  mod  pride
tliemfelves,  and  which  give  more  pain  than  all  the  red,  were
dill  to  be  done.

It  is  drange  that  thefe  people  fliould  value  tliemfelves  upon
what  is  no  didinftion ;  for  1  never  faw  a  native  of  this  idand,
either  man  or  woman,  in  a  date  of  maturity,  in  whom  thefe
marks  were  wanting :  podibly  they  may  have  their  rife  in
fuperdition,  efpecially  as  they  produce  no  vidble  advantage,
and  are  not  made  without  great  pain  ;  but  though  we  en~
quired  of  many  hundreds,  we  could  never  get  any  account  of
the  matter.

Their  clothing  confids  of  cloth  or  matting  of  different
kinds,  which  will,  be  deferibed  among  their  other  manufac¬
tures.  The  cloth,  which  will  not  bear  \yetting,  they  wear  in
dry  weather,  and  the  matting  when  it  rains  ;  they  are  put
on  in  many  different  ways,  juft  as  their  fancy  leads  them  ;
for  in  their  garments  nothing  is  cut  into  fhape,  nor  are  any

3  two


*92  LIEUTENANT  cook’s  VOYAGE

two  Pieces  fewed  together.  The  drefs  of  the  better  fort  of
women  confifts  of  three  or  four  pieces  :  one  piece,  about  two
yaids  wide  and  eleven  yards  long,  they  wrap  feveral  times
round  thcii  waift,  fo  as  to  hang  down  like  a  petticoat  as  low
as  the  middle  of  the  leg,  and  this  they  call  Pcirou  .*  two  or
three  other  pieces,  about  two  yards  and  an  half  long  and  one
wide,  each  having  a  hole  cut  in  the  middle,  they  place  one
upon  another,  and  then  putting  the  head  through  the  holes,
they  bring  the  long  ends  down  before  and  behind ;  the
others  remain  open  at  the  fides,  and  give  liberty  to  the  arms :
this,  which  they  call  the  Tebuta,  is  gathered  round  the  waift,
and  confined  with  a  girdle  or  fafli  of  thinner  cloth,  which  is
long  enough  to  go  many  times  round  them,  and  exactly  re-
fembles  the  garment  worn  by  the  inhabitants  of  Peru  and
Chili,  which  the  Spaniards  call  Poncho.  The  drefs  of  the
men  is  the  fame,  except  that  inftead  of  fuffering  the  cloth
that  is  wound  about  the  hips  to  hang  down  like  a  petticoat,
they  bring  it  between  their  legs  fo  as  to  have  fome  refem-
blance  to  breeches,  and  it  is  then  called  Maro.  This  is  the
diefs  of  all  ranks  of  people,  and  being  univerfally  the  fame
as  to  form,  the  gentlemen  and  ladies  diftinguifli  themfelves
from  the  lower  people  by  the  quantity  ;  fome  of  them  will
wrap  round  them  feveral  pieces  of  cloth,  eight  or  ten  yards
long,  and  two  or  three  broad  ;  and  fome  throw  a  large  piece
loofely  over  their  flioulders  in  the  manner  of  a  cloak,  or  per¬
haps  two  pieces,  if  they  are  very  great  perfonages,  and  are
defirous  to  appear  in  ftate.  The  inferior  fort,  who  have  only
a  fmall  allowance  of  cloth  from  the  tribes  or  families  to
which  they  belong,  are  obliged  to  be  more  thinly  dad.  In
the  heat  of  the  day  they  appear  almoft  naked,  the  women
having  only  a  fcanty  petticoat,  and  the  men  nothing  but  the
falh  that  is  paired  between  their  legs  and  fattened  round  the
waift.  As  finery  1S  always  troublefome,  and  particularly  in

a  hot


i


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

a  hot  country,  where  it  confifts  in  putting  one  covering  upon
another,  the  women  of  rank  always  uncover  themfelves  as
low  as  the  waifl  in  the  evening,  throwing  off  all  that  they
wear  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  with  the  fame  negligence
and  eafe  as  our  ladies  would  lay  by  a  cardinal  or  double
handkerchief.  And  the  Chiefs,  even  when  they  vilited  us,
though  they  had  as  much  cloth  round  their  middle  as  would
clothe  a  dozen  people,  had  frequently  the  reft  of  the  body
quite  naked.

Upon  their  legs  and  feet  they  wear  no  covering ;  but  they
fhade  their  faces  from  the  fun  with  little  bonnets,  either  of
matting  or  of  cocoa-nut  leaves,  which  they  make  occaftonally
in  a  few  minutes.  This,  however,  is  not  all  their  head-
drefs ;  the  women  fometimes  wear  little  turbans,  and  fome-
times  a  drefs  which  they  value  much  more,  and  which,  in¬
deed,  is  much  more  becoming,  called  Tomou  ;  the  Tomou  con¬
fifts  of  human  hair,  plaited  in  threads,  fcarcely  thicker  than
fewing  filk.  Mr.  Banks  has  pieces  of  it  above  a  mile  in
length,  without  a  knot.  Thefe  they  wind  round  the  head  in
fuch  a  manner  as  produces  a  very  pretty  efFecft,  and  in  a  very
great  quantity ;  for  I  have  feen  five  or  fix  fuch  pieces  wound
about  the  head  of  one  woman:  among  thefe  threads  they  ftick
flowers  of  various  kinds,  particularly  the  cape-jeflamine,  of
which  they  have  great  plenty,  as  it  is  always  planted  near
their  houfes.  The  men  fometimes  ftick  the  tail  feather  of
the  Tropic-bird  upright  in  their  hair,  which,  as  I  have  ob-
ferved  before,  is  often  tied  in  a  bunch  upon  the  top  of  their
heads:  fometimes  they  wear  a  kind  of  whimfical  garland,
made  of  flowers  of  various  kinds,  ftuck  into  a  piece  of  the
rind  of  a  plantain  j  or  of  fcarlet  peas,  ftuck  with  gum  upon
a  piece  of  wood :  and  fometimes  they  wear  a  kind  of  wig,
made  of  the  hair  of  men  or  dogs,  or  perhaps  of  cocoa-nut
firings,  woven  upon  one  thread,  which  is  tied  under  their
Vo l.  II.  C  c  hair,


\


19 5

x76 9-


4  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

.  1769-_f  hair,  fo  that  thefe  artificial  honours  of  their  head  may  hang
down  behind.  Their  perfonal  ornaments,  befides  flowers,
are  few ;  both  lexes  wear  ear-rings,  but  they  are  placed  only
on  one  fide :  when  we  came  they  confifted  pf  fmall  pieces
of  fhell,  ftone,  berries,  red  peas,  or  fome  fmall  pearls,  three
in  a  firing;  but  our  beads  very  foon  fupplanted  them’all.

'  The  children  go  quite  naked ;  the  girls  till  they  are  three
or  foui  years  old,  and  the  boys  till  they  are  fix  or  feven.

Houfe.  The  houfes,  or  rather  dwellings  of  thefe  people  have  been
Occafionally  mentioned  before :  they  are  all  built  in  the
wood,  between  the  fea  and  the  mountains,  and  no  more
ground  is  cleared  for  each  houfe,  than  juft  fuflicient  to  pre¬
vent  the  dropping  of  the  branches  from  rotting  the  thatch
.with  which  they  are  covered;  from  the  houfe,  therefore,  the
inhabitant  fteps  immediately  under  the  fhade,  which  is  the
moft  delightful  that  can  be  imagined.  It  confifts  of  groves
of  bread-fruit  and  cocoa-nuts,  without  underwood,  which
are  interfered,  in  all  directions,  by  the  paths  that  lead  from
one  houfe  to  the  other.  Nothing  can  be  more  grateful  than
this  fh adorn  fo  warm  a  climate,  nor  any  thing  more  beauti-
u  t  lan  thefe  walks.  As  there  is  no  underwood,  the  Ihade
cools  without  impeding  the  air  ;  and  the  houfes,  having  no
walls,  receive  the  gale  from  whatever  point  it  blows.  I  fhall
now  give  a  particular  defcription  of  a  houfe  of  a  middling
fize,  from  which,  as  the  ftruccture  is  univerfally  the  fame,  a

perfed  idea  may  be  formed,  both  of  thofe  that  are  bmoer
and  thofe  that  are  lefs.  1

The  ground  which  it  covers  is  an  oblong  fquare,  four  and
twenty  feet  long,  and  eleven  wide  ;  over  this  a  roof  is  raifed
upon  three  rows  of  pillars  or  polls,  parallel  to  each  other,’
one  on  each  fide,  and  the  other  in  the  middle.  This  roof
confifts  of  two  flat  fides  inclining  to  each  other,  and  termi-

nating


I


I


V


JR

N.°io


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


/


I95


nating  in  a  ridge,  exactly  like  the  roofs  of  our  thatched  1769.
houfes  in  England.  The  utmoft  height  within  is  about  nine  '  v
feet,  and  the  eaves  on  each  fide  reach  to  within  about  three
feet  and  an  half  of  the  ground  :  below  this,  and  through  the
whole  height  at  each  end,  it  is  open,  no  part  of  it  being  in-
clofed  with  a  wall.  The  roof  is  thatched  with  palm-leaves,
and  the  floor  is  covered,  fome  inches  deep,  with  foft  hay  ;
over  this  are  laid  mats,  fo  that  the  whole  is  one  cufhion,
upon  which  they  fit  in  the  day,  and  fleep  in  the  night.  In
fome  houfes,  however,  there  is  one  ftool,  which  is  wholly
appropriated  to  the  mailer  of  the  family ;  befides  this,  they
have  no  furniture,  except  a  few  little  blocks  of  wood,  the
upper  fide  of  which  is  hollowed  into  a  curve,  and  which
ferve  them  for  pillows.

The  houfe  is  indeed  principally  ufed  as  a  dormitory  ;  for,
except  it  rains,  they  eat  in  the  open  air,  under  the  fhade  of
the  next  tree.  The  clothes  that  they  wear  in  the  day,  ferve
them  for  covering  in  the  night ;  the  floor  is  the  common  bed
of  the  whole  houfehold,  and  is  not  divided  by  any  parti¬
tion.  The  mafler  of  the  houfe  and  his  wife  fleep  in  the
middle,  next  to  them  the  married  people,  next  to  them  the
unmarried  women,  and  next  to  them,  at  a  little  diflance,  the
unmarried  men ;  the  fervants,  or  Toutous ,  as  they  are  called,
fleep  in  the  open  air,  except  it  rains,  and  in  that  cafe  they
come  juft  within  the  fhed.

There  are,  however,  houfes  of  another  kind,  belonging  to
the  Chiefs,  in  which  there  is  fome  degree  of  privacy.  Thefe
are  much  fmaller,  and  fo  conftrudled  as  to  be  carried  about
in  their  canoes  from  place  to  place,  and  fet  up  occafionally,
like  a  tent;  they  arc  inclofed  on  the  fides  with  cocoa-nut
leaves,  but  not  fo  clofe  as  to  exclude  the  air,  and  the  Chief
and  his  wife  fleep  in  them  alone.  •  4

There


*


C  c  2,


igf)


1769.

-V—


Food,


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

I  here  are  houfes  alfo  of  a  much  larger  fize,  not  built  ei¬
ther  for  the  accommodation  of  a  fmgle  Chief,  or  a  Tingle  fa¬
mily  i  but  as  common  receptacles  for  all  the  people  of  a
diftriefh  Some  of  them  are  two  hundred  feet  long,  thirty
broad,  and,  under  the  ridge,  twenty  feet  high ;  thefe  are
built  and  maintained  at  the  common  expence  of  the  diftrift
for  the  accommodation  of  which  they  are  intended;  and
have  on  one  fide  of  them  a  large  area,  inclofed  with  low  pal-
lifadoes.

Thefe  houfes,  like  thofe  of  feparate  families,  have  no
walls.  Privacy,  indeed,  is  little  wanted  among  people  who
have  not  even  the  idea  of  indecency,  and  who  gratify  every
appetite  and  paflion  before  witnelfes,  with  no  more  fenfe  of
impropriety  than  we  feel  when  we  fatisfy  our  hunger  at  a
focial  board  with  our  family  or  friends.  Thofe  who  have
no  idea  of  indecency  with  refpeft  to  a&ions,  can  have  none
with  refpeft  to  words  ;  it  is,  therefore,  fcarcely  neceflary  to
obferve,  that,  in  the  converfation  of  thefe  people,  that  which
is  the  principal  fource  of  their  pleafure,  is  always  the  prin¬
cipal  topic ;  and  that  every  thing  is  mentioned  without  any
xeftraint  or  emotion,  and  in  the  moll  direcSt  terms,  by  both
fexes.

Of  the  food  eaten  here  the  greater  part  is  vegetable.  Here
aie  no  tame  animals  except  hogs,  dogs,  and  poultry,  as  I
have  obferved  before,  and  thefe  are  by  no  means  plenty.
When  a  Chief  kills  a  hog,  it  is  almoft  equally  divided  among
his  dependants  ;  and  as  they  are  very  numerous,  the  lhare  of
each  individual  at  thefe  fealls,  which  are  not  frequent,  mull
necelfarily  be  fmall.  Dogs  and  fowls  fall  fomewhat  more
frequently  to  the  lhare  of  the  common  people.  I  cannot
much  commend  the  flavour  of  their  fowls ;  but  we  all  agreed,
that  a  South  Sea  dog  was  little  inferior  to  an  Englilh  lamb  [

their


/


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


197


<  their  excellence  is  probably  owing  to  their  being  kept  up,
and  fed  wholly  upon  vegetables.  The  fea  affords  them  a
great  variety  of  fifh.  The  fmaller  fifh,  when  they  catch  any,
are  generally  eaten  raw,  as  we  eat  oyflers  ;  and  nothing  that
the  fea  produces  comes  amifs  to  them:  they  are  fond  of  lob-
flers,  crabs,  and  other  fhell-fifh,  which  are  found  upon  the
coaft ;  and  they  will  eat  not  only  fea-infe&s,  but  what  the
feamen  call  Blubbers ,  though  fome  of  them  are  fo  tough,  that
they  are  obliged  to  fuffer  them  to  become  putrid  before  they
can  be  chewed.  Of  the  many  vegetables  that  have  been  men-
tioned  already  as  ferving  them  for  food,  the  principal  is  the
bread-fruit,  to  procure  which  cofts  them  no  trouble  or  labour
but  climbing  a  tree :  the  tree  which  produces  it,  does  not  indeed
fhoot  up  fpontaneoufly ;  but  if  a  man  plants  ten  of  them  in
his  lifetime,  which  he  may  do  in  about  an  hour,  he  will  as
completely  fulfil  his  duty  to  his  own  and  future  genera¬
tions,  as  the  native  of  our  lefs  temperate  climate  can  do  by
ploughing  in  the  cold  of  winter,  and  reaping  in  the  fum-
mer’s  heat,  as  often  as  thefe  feafons  return  ;  even  if,  after  he
has  procured  bread  for  his  prefent  houfehold,  he  fhould  con¬
vert  a  furplus  into  money,  and  lay  it  up  for  his  children.

It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the  bread-fruit  is  not  always  in  fea-
fon  ;  but  cocoa-nuts,  bananas,  plantains,  and  a  great  variety
of  other  fruits,  fupply  the  deficiency.

It  may  well  be  fuppofed,  that  cookery  is  but  little  ftudied
by  thefe  people  as  an  art ;  and,  indeed,  they  have  but  two
ways  of  applying  fire  to  drefs  their  food,  broiling  and  bak¬
ing  ;  the  operation  of  broiling  is  fo  fimple  that  it  requires  no
defcription,  and  their  baking  has  been  defcribed  already,
(page  152.)  in  the  account  of  an  entertainment  prepared
for  us  by  Tupia.  Hogs,  and  large  fifh,  are  extremely  well
drefTed  in  the  fame  manner;  and,  in  our  opinion,  were  more

juicy


1769.

-  j


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


juicy  and  more  equally  done  than  by  any  art  of  cookery  now
pra&ifed  in  Europe.  Bread-fruit  is  alfo  cooked  in  an  oven
of  the  fame  kind,  which  renders  it  foft,  and  fomething  like
a  boiled  potatoe ;  not  quite  fo  farinaceous  as  a  good  one,  but
more  fo  than  thofe  of  the  middling  fort.

Of  the  bread-fruit  they  alfo  make  three  difhes,  by  putting
either  water  or  the  milk  of  the  cocoa-nut  to  it,  then  beating
it  to  a  pafte  with  a  ftone  peftle,  and  afterwards  mixing  it
with  ripe  plantains,  bananas,  or  the  four  pafte  which  they
call  Mahie.

The  mahie,  which  has  been  mentioned  as  a  fuccedaneum
for  ripe  bread-fruit,  before  the  feafon  for  gathering  a  frefh
crop  comes  on,  is  thus  made  :

The  fruit  is  gathered  juft  before  it  is  perfectly  ripe,  and
being  laid  in  heaps,  is  clofely  covered  with  leaves ;  in  this
ftate  it  undergoes  a  fermentation,  and  becomes  difagreeably
lweet :  the  core  is  then  taken  out  entire,  which  is  done  by
gently  pulling  the  ftalk,  and  the  reft  of  the  fruit  is  thrown
into  a  hole  which  is  dug  for  that  purpofe,  generally  in  the
houfes,  and  neatly  lined  in  the  bottom  and  fides  with  grafs  ;
the  whole  is  then  covered  with  leaves,  and  heavy  ftones  laid
upon  them :  in  this  ftate  it  undergoes  a  fecond  fermentation,
and  becomes  four,  after  which  it  will  fuffer  no  change  for
many  months :  it  is  taken  out  of  the  hole  as  it  is  wanted  for
ufe,  and  being  made  into  balls,  it  is  wrapped  up  in  leaves
and  baked  ;  after  it  is  drefted,  it  will  keep  five  or  fix  weeks.
It  is  eaten  both  cold  and  hot,  and  the  natives  feldom  make  a
meal  without  it,  though  to  us  the  tafte  was  as  difagreeable
as  that  of  a  pickled  olive  generally  is  the  firft  time  it  is
eaten.

As  the  making  of  this  mahie  depends,  like  brewing,  upon
fermentation,  fo,.  like  brewing,  it  fometimes  fails,  without
2  '  their


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


J99

their  being  able  to  afcertain  the  caufe ;  it  is  very  natural,  1769.
therefore,  that  the  making  it  fhould  be  connected  with  fu-  '
perftitious  notions  and  ceremonies.  It  generally  falls  to  the
Jot  of  the  old  women,  who  will  fufFer  no  creature  to  touch

any  thing  belonging  to  it,  but  thofe  whom  they  employ  as

»  -

afliftants,  nor  even  to  go  imo  that  part  of  the  houfe  where  the
operation  is  carrying  on.  Mr.  Banks  happened  to  fpoil  a  large
quantity  of  it  only  by  inadvertently  touching  a  leaf  which  lay
upon  it.  The  old  woman,  who  then  prefided  over  thefe  myfte-
ries,  told  him,  that  the  procefs  would  fail ;  and  immediately
uncovered  the  hole  in  a  fit  of  vexation  and  defpair.  Mr.  Banks
regretted  the  mifchief  he  had  done,  but  was  fomewhat  con-
foled  by  the  opportunity  which  it  gave  him  of  examining;
die  preparation,  which  perhaps,  but  for  fuch  an  accident,,
would  never  have  offered.

Such  is  their  food,  to  which  falt-water  is  the  univerfal
iauce,  no  meal  being  eaten  without  it :  thofe  who  live  near
the  fea  have  it  fetched  as  it  is  wanted ;  thofe  who  live  at
fome  difiance  keep  it  in  large  bamboos,  which  are  fet  up  in
their  houfes,  for  ufe.  Salt-water,  however,  is  not  their  only
fauce  ;  they  make  another  of  the  kernels  of  cocoa-nuts,
which  being  fermented  till  they  difiolve  into  a  pafie  fome¬
what  refembling  butter,  are  beaten  up  with  falt-water.  The
flavour  of  this  is  very  firong,  and  was,  when  we  firfl:  tafted
it,  exceedingly  naufeous  ;  a  little  ufe,  however,  reconciled
fome  of  us  to  it  fo  much,  that  they  preferred  it  to  our  own
fauces,  efpecially  with  fifh.  The  natives  feemed  to  confider
it  as  a  dainty,  and  do  not  ufe  it  at  their  common  meals  ;  pof-
fibly,  becaufe  they  think  it  ill  management  to  ufe  cocoa-nuts
fo  lavifhly,  or  perhaps,  when  we  were  at  the  ifland,  they
were  fcarcely  ripe  enough  for  the  purpofe.

For  drink,  they  have  in  general  nothing  but  water,  or  the
juice  of  the  cocoa-nut  $  the  art  of  producing  liquors  that  in¬
toxicate,,


200

17^9*


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

toxicate,  by  fermentation,  being  happily  unknown  among
them ;  neither  have  they  any  narcotic  which  they  chew,  as
the  natives  of  fome  other  countries  do  opium,  beetle-root,
and  tobacco.  Some  of  them  drank  freely  of  our  liquors,  and
in  a  few  inflances  became  very  drunk ;  but  the  perfons  to
whom  this  happened  were  fo  far  from  defiring  to  repeat  the
debauch,  that  they  would  never  touch  any  of  our  liquors  after¬
wards.  We  were  however  informed,  that  they  became  drunk
by  drinking  a  juice  that  is  expreiTed  from  the  leaves  of  a  plant
which  they  call  Ava  Ava.  This  plant  was  not  in  feafon  when
we  were  there,  fo  that  we  faw  no  inflances  of  its  effects;  and
as  they  confidered  drunkennefs  as  a  difgrace,  they  probably
would  have  concealed  from  us  any  inflances  which  might
have  happened  during  our  flay.  This  vice  is  almofl  peculiar
to  the  Chiefs,  and  confiderable  perfons,  who  vie  with  each
other  in  drinking  the  greatefl  number  of  draughts,  each
draught  being  about  a  pint.  They  keep  this  intoxicating
juice  with  great  care  from  their  women.

Table  they  have  none  ;  but  their  apparatus  for  eating  is
fet  out  with  great  neatnefs,  though  the  articles  are  too  fimple
and  too  few  to  allow  any  thing  for  fhow:  and  they  commonly
eat  alone ;  but  when  a  flranger  happens  to  vifit  them,  he  fome-
times  makes  a  fecond  in  their  mefs.  Of  the  meal  of  one  of
their  principal  people  I  fliall  give  a  particular  defcription.

He  fits  down  under  the  fliade  of  the  next  tree,  or  on  the
lhady  fide  of  his  houfe,  and  a  large  quantity  of  leaves,  either
of  the  bread-fruit  or  banana,  are  neatly  fpread  before  him
upon  the  ground  as  a  table-cloth  ;  a  bafket  is  then  fet  by  him
that  contains  his  provifion,  which,  if  fifh  or  flefh,  is  ready
dreffed,  and  wrapped  up  in  leaves,  and  two  cocoa-nut  fhells,
one  full  of  fait  water  and  the  other  of  frefh :  his  attendants,
which  are  not  few,  feat  themfelves  round  him,  and  when  all
is  ready,  he  begins  by  wafhing  his  hands  and  his  mouth

thoroughly


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


20!


thoroughly  with  the  frefh-water,  and  this  he  repeats  aim  oil
continually  throughout  the  whole  meal ;  he  then  takes  part
of  his  provifion  out  of  the  bailee t,  which  generally  confifts
of  a  fmall  fifh  or  two,  two  or  three  bread-fruits,  fourteen
or  fifteen  ripe  bananas,  or  fix  or  feven  apples :  he  firft  takes
half  a  bread-fruit,  peels  off  the  rind,  and  takes  out  the  core
with  his  nails;  of  this  he  puts  as  much  into  his  mouth  as  it
can  hold,  and  while  he  chews  it,  takes  the  fiffi  out  of  the
leaves,  and  breaks  one  of  them  into  the  fait  water,  placing
the  other,  and  what  remains  of  the  bread-fruit,  upon  the
leaves  that  have  been  fpread  before  him.  When  this  is  done,
he  takes  up  a  fmall  piece  of  the  fifh  that  has  been  broken
into  the  falt-water,  with  all  the  fingers  of  one  hand,  and
fucks  it  into  his  mouth,  fo  as  to  get  with  it  as  much  of  the
falt-water  as  poffible :  in  the  fame  manner  he  takes  the  reff
by  different  morfels,  and  between  each,  at  lead  very  fre¬
quently,  takes  a  fmall  fup  of  the  falt-water,  either  out  of  the
cocoa-nut  fhell,  or  the  palm  of  his  hand  :  in  the  mean
time  one  of  his  attendants  has  prepared  a  young  cocoa-nut,
by  peeling  off  the  outer  rind  with  his  teeth,  an  operation
which  to  an  European  appears  very  furprifing ;  but  it  de¬
pends  fo  much  upon  flight,  that  many  of  us  were  able  to  do
it  before  we  left  the  ifland,  and  fome  that  could  fcarcely
crack  a  filbert :  the  matter,  when  he  chufes  to  drink,  takes
the  cocoa-nut  thus  prepared,  and  boring  a  hole  through  the
fhell  with  his  finger,  or  breaking  it  with  a  done,  he  fucks
out  the  liquor.  When  he  has  eaten  his  bread-fruit  and  fifh,
he  begins  with  his  plantains,  one  of  which  makes  but  a
mouthful,  though  it  be  as  big  as  a  black-pudding ;  if  in-
flead  of  plantains  he  has  apples,  he  never  tattes  them  till
they  have  been  pared  ;  to  do  this  a  fhell  is  picked  up  from
the  ground,  where  they  are  always  in  plenty,  and  tolled  to
him  by  an  attendant:  he  immediately  begins  to  cut  or  fcrape
Vol.  II.  D  d  off


.1769.


202


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


1769-  off  the  rind,  but  fo  awkwardly  that  great  part  of  the  fruii
is  wafted.  If,  inftead  of  fifh,  he  has  flefh,  he  muft  have  fome
fuccedaneum  for  a  knife  to  divide  it ;  and  for  this  purpofe  a
piece  of  bamboo  is  toffed  to  him,  of  which  he  makes  the  ne-
ceffary  implement  by  fplitting  it  tranfverfely  with  his  nail.
While  all  this  has  been  doing,  fome  of  his  attendants  have
been  employed  in  beating  bread-fruit  with  a  ftone  peftle
upon  a  block  of  wood;  by  being  beaten  in  this  manner,  and
fprinkled  from  time  to  time  with  water,  it  is  reduced  to  the
confidence  of  a  foft  pafte,  and  is  then  put  into  a  veftel  forne-
what  like  a  butcher’s  tray,  and  either  made  up  alone,  or
mixed  with  banana  or  mahie,  according  to  the  tafte  of  the
mafter,  by  pouring  water  upon  it  by  degrees  and  fqueezing
it  often  through  the  hand :  under  this  operation  it  acquires
the  confidence  of  a  thick  cuftard,  and  a  large  cocoa-nut  Ihell
full  of  it  being  fet  before  him,  he  ftps  it  as  we  fhould  do  a
jelly  if  we  had  no  fpoon  to  take  it  from  the  glafs  :  the  meal
is  then  ftnifhed  by  again  wafhing  his  hands  and  his  mouth.
After  which  the  cocoa-nut  fhells  are  cleaned,  and  every  tiling
that  is  left  is  replaced  in  the  bafket.

The  quantity  of  food  which  thefe  people  eat  at  a  meal  is
prodigious:  I  have  feen  one  man  devour  two  or  three  fillies
as  big  as  a  perch  ;  three  bread-fruits,  each  bigger  than  two
ftfts;  fourteen  or  fifteen  plantains  or  bananas,  each  of  them
fix  or  feven  inches  long,  and  four  or  five  round  ;  and  near  a
quart  of  the  pounded  bread-fruit,  which  is  as  fubftantial  as
the  thickeft  unbaked  cuftard.  This  is  fo  extraordinary  that
I  fcarcely  expert  to  be  believed;  and  I  would  not  have  related
it  upon  my  own  fingle  teftimony,  but  Mr.  Banks,  Dr.  Solan-
der,  and  moft  of  the  other  Gentlemen,  have  had  ocular  de-
monftration  of  its  truth,  and  know  that  I  mention  them  upon
the  occafion.


It


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


203

It  is  very  wonderful,  that  thefe  people,  who  are  remark-  1769.
&bly  fond  of  fociety,  and  particularly  that  of  their  women,
fhould  exclude  its  pleafures  from  the  table,  where  among
all  other  nations,  whether  civil  or  favage,  they  have  been
principally  enjoyed.  How  a  meal,  which  every  where  elfe
brings  families  and  friends  together,  came  to  feparate  them
here,  we  often  enquired,  but  could  never  learn.  They  eat
alone,  they  faid,  beoaufe  it  was  right ;  but  why  it  was  right
to  eat  alone,  they  never  attempted  to  tell  us  :  fuch,  however,
was  the  force  of  habit,  that  they  expreffed  the  ftrongeft  dif-
like,  and  even  difguft,  at  our  eating  in  fociety,  efpecially
with  our  women,  and  of  the  fame  victuals.  At  fird,  we
thought  this  drange  Angularity  arofe  from  fome  fuperdi-
tious  opinion;  but  they  condantly  affirmed  the  contrary.

We  obferved  alfo  fome  caprices  in  the  cullom,  for  which  we
could  as  little  account  as  for  the  cullom  itfelf.  We  could
never  prevail  with  any  of  the  women  to  partake  of  the  vic¬
tuals  at  our  table  when  we  were  dining  in  company  ;  yet
they  would  go,  five  or  fix  together,  into  the  fervants  apart¬
ments,  and  there  eat  very  heartily  of  whatever  they  coulc!

And,  of  which  I  have  before  given  a  particular  indance  ;  nor
were  they  in  the  lead  difconcerted  if  we  came  in  while  they
were  doing  it.  When  any  of  us  have  been  alone  with  a  wo¬
man,  fhe  has  fometimes  eaten  in  our  company  ;  but  then
fhe  has  expreffed  the  greated  unwillingnefs  that  it  fhould  be
known,  and  always  extorted  the  dronged  promifes  of  fe-
crecy.

Among  themfelves,  even  two  brothers  and  two  fiders  have
each  their  feparate  bafkets,  with  providon  and  the  apparatus
of  their  meal.  When  they  fird  vidted  us  at  our  tents,  each
brought  his  baihet  with  him  ;  and  when  we  fat  down  to
table,  they  would  go  out,  fit  down  upon  the  ground,  at  two
or  three  yards  didance  from  each  other,  and  turning  their

D  d  2  faces


£04


*76$-

% — ' V —


Domefliclife,
and  amufe-
jnents.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

faces  different  ways,  take  their  repaft  without  interchanging
a  Angle  word.

The  women  not  only  abflain  from  eating  with  the  men,
and  of  the  fame  victuals,  but  even  have  their  victuals  fepa-
rately  prepared  by  boys  kept  for  that  purpofe,  who  depofit  it
in  a  feparate  died,  and  attend  them  with  it  at  their  meals.

But  though  they  would  not  eat  with  us  or  with  each  other,
they  have  often  alked  us  to  eat  with  them,  when  we  have
vilited  thofe  with  whom  we  were  particularly  acquainted  at
their  houfes  ;  and  we  have  often  upon  fuch  occafions  eaten
out  of  the  fame  bafket,  and  drunk  out  of  the  fame  cup.  The
elder  women,  however,  always  appeared  to  be  offended  at
this  liberty ;  and  if  we  happened  to  touch  their  victuals,  or
even  the  bafket  that  contained  it,  would  throw  it  away..

After  meals,  and  in  the  heat  of  the  day,  the  middle-aged
people  of  the  better  fort  generally  deep  ;  they  are  indeed  ex¬
tremely  indolent,  and  deeping  and  eating  is  almod  all  that
they  do.  Thofe  that  are  older  are  lefs  drowzy,  and  the  boys

and  girls  are  kept  awake  by  the  natural  activity  and  fpriaht-
linefs  of  their  age.

Their  amufements  have  occafionally  been  mentioned  in:
my  account  of  the  incidents  that  happened  during  our  refi-
dence  in  this  ifland,  particularly  rtiulic,  dancing,  wreftling,
and  diooting  with  the  bow;  they  alfo  fometimes  vie  with
each  other  in  throwing  a  lance.  As  diooting  is  not  at  a  mark,
but  for  didancc ;  throwing  the  lance  is  not  for  diftance,  but
at  a  mark :  the  weapon  is  about  nine  feet  long,  the  mark  is
the  bole  of  a  plantain,  and  the  didance  about  twenty  yards.

Their  only  mufical  indruments  are  dutes  and  drums  ;  the
flutes  are  made  of  a  hollow  bamboo  about  a  foot  long,  and,
as  has  been  obferved  before,  have  only  two  dops,  and  con¬
i',  qutntly  but  four  notes,  out  of  which  they  feem  hitherto  to

have


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


2<*S

have  formed  but  one  tune ;  to  thefe  flops  they  apply  the  1769.
fore  finger  of  the  left  hand  and  the  middle  finger  of  the  -1

right.

The  drum  is  made  of  a  hollow  block  of  wood,  of  a  cylin¬
drical  form,  folid  at  one  end,  and  covered  at  the  other  with
fhark’s  fkin :  thefe  they  beat  not  with  flicks,  but  their  hands ;
and  they  know  how  to  tune  two  drums  of  different  notes
into  concord.  They  have  alfo  an  expedient  to  bring  the
flutes  that  play  together  into  unifon,  which  is  to  roll  up  a
leaf  fo  as  to  flip  over  the  end  of  the  fhortefl,  like  our  Aiding
tubes  for  telefcopes,  which  they  move  up  or  down  till  the
purpofe  is  anfwered,  of  which  they  feem  to  judge  by  their
ear  with  great  nicety.

To  thefe  inflruments  they  ling  ;  and,  as  I  have  obferved
before,  their  fongs  are  often  extempore :  they  call  every  two
verfes  or  couplet  a  fong,  Pehay ;  they  are  generally,  though
not  always  in  rhime  ;  and  when  pronounced  by  the  natives,
we  could  difeover  that  they  were  metre.  Mr.  Banks  took
great  pains  to  write  down  fome  of  them  which  were  made
upon  our  arrival,  as  nearly  as  he  could  exprefs  their  founds
by  combinations  of  our  letters  ;  but  when  we  read  them,  not

having  their  accent,  we  could  fcarcely  make  them  either

*  «

metre  or  rhime.  The  Reader  will  eafily  perceive  that  they
are  of  very  different  ftrueflure.

Tede  pahai  de  parow-a

Ha  maru  no  mina.

E  pah  ah  Tayo  malama  tai  ya
No  Tabane  tonatou  whannomi  va;

;  .  >  «■  y

.  *  *  *  ,  •  1  '

^  •  ’  *  ■  •  1  \  J

E  Turai  eattu  terara  patee  whennua  toai
Ino  o  maio  Pretane  to  wliennuaia  no  Tute.


Of


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

r  r-  ^

Of  thcfe  verfes  our  knowlegc  of  the  language  is  too  ini-
perfect  to  attempt  a  tranflation.  They  frequently  amiife
tliemfelves  by  fmging  fuch  couplets  as  thefe  when  diey  are
alone,  or  with  their  families,  efpecially  after  it  is  dark  5  for
though  they  need  no -fires, 'they  are  not  without  the  comfort
of  artificial  light  between  funfet  and  bed-time.  Their  candles
are  made  of  the  kernels  of  a  kind  of  oily  nut,  which  they
Hick  one  over  another  upon  a  fkewer  that  is  thruft  through
the  middle  of  them  ;  the  upper  one  being  lighted,  burns
down  to  the  fecond,  at  the  fame  time  confuming  that  part
of  the  fkewer  which  goes  through  it ;  the  fecond  taking  fire
burns  in  the  fame  manner  down  to  the  third,  and  fo  of  the
reft :  fome  of  thefe  candles  will  burn  a  confiderable  time,
and  they  give  a  very  tolerable  light.  They  do  not  often  -fit
up  above  an  hour  after  it  is  dark 4  but  when  they  have  ftran-
gers  who  fleep  in  the  lioufe,  they  generally  keep  a  light
burning  all  night,  pollibly  as  a  check  upon  fuch  of  the
women  as  they  wifh  not  to  honour  them  with  their  favours.

Of  their  itinerary  concerts  I  need  add  nothing  to  what  has
been  faid  already  ;  efpecially  as  I  fhall  have  occafton,  more
particularly,  to  mention  them  when  I  relate  o.ur  adventures
upon  another  ifland.

In  other  countries,  the  girls  and  unmarried  women  are
fuppofed  to  be  wholly  ignorant  of  what  others  upon  fome
occafions  may  appear  to  know;  and  their  conduct  and  con-
verfation  are  confequently  reftrained  within  narrower  bounds,
and  kept  at  a  more  remote  diftance  from  whatever  relates  to
a  connexion  with  the  other  fex :  but  here,  it  is  juft  contrary.
Among  other  diverfions,  there  is  a  dance,  called  Timorodee ,
which  is  performed  by  young  girls,  whenever  eight  or  ten
of  them  can  be  collected  together,  confifting  of  motions  and
geftures  beyond  imagination  wanton,  in  the  practice  of  which

5  they


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


207


they  are  brought  up  from  their  earliefl  childhood,  accom-  1769*
panied  by  words,  which,  if  it  were  poffible,  would  more  ex¬
plicitly  convey  the  fame  ideas*  In  thefe  dances  they  keep
time  with  an  exaffnefs  which  is  fcarcely  excelled  by  the  bed
performers  upon  the  ftages  of  Europe.  But  the  practice
which  is  allowed  to  the  virgin,  is  prohibited  to  the  woman
from  the  moment  that  fhe  has  put  thefe  hopeful  lc lions  in
practice,  and  realized  the  fymbols  of  the  dance.

It  cannot  be  fuppofed  that,  among  thefe  people,  chaflity  is
held  in  much  eftimation.  It  might  be  expedted  that  fillers  and
daughters  would  be  offered  to  ftrangers,  either  as  a  courtefy,
or  for  reward  5  and  that  breaches  of  conjugal  fidelity,  even
in  the  wife,  fhould  not  be  other-wife,  punifhed  than  by  a  few
hard  words,  or  perhaps  a  flight  beating,  as  indeed  is  the  cafe^
but  there  is  a  fcale  in  diffolute  fenfuality,  which  thefe  people
have  afeended,  wholly  unknown  to  every  other  nation  whofe
manners  have  been  recorded  from  the  beginning  of  the
world  to  the  prefent  hour,  and  which  no  imagination  could
poilibly  conceive.

A  very  considerable  number  of  the  principal  people  of  Ota-
heite,  of  both  fexes,  have  formed  themfelves  into  a  fociety*
in  which  every  woman  is  common  to  every  man ;  thus  fe~
curing  a  perpetual  variety  as  often  as  their  inclination
prompts  them  to  feek  it,  which  is  fo  frequent,  that  the  fame
man  and  woman  feldom  cohabit  together  more  than  two  or
three  days..

Thefe  focieties  are  diftinguifhed  by  the  name  of  Arreoy ;
and  the  members  have  meetings,  at  which  no  other  is  pre¬
fent,  where  the  men  amufe  themfelves  by  wreflling,  and  the
women,  notwithflanding  their  occafional  connection  with
different  men,  dance  the  Timorodee  in  all  its  latitude,  as  an
incitement  to:  defires  which  it  is  faid  are  frequently  gratified

upon


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

upon  the  fpot.  This  however  is  comparatively  nothing.  If
any  of  the  women  happen  to  be  with  child,  which  in  this
manner  of  life  happens  lefs  frequently  than  if  they  were  to
cohabit  only  with  one  man,  the  poor  infant  is  fmotherecl  the
moment  it  is  born,  that  it  may  be  no  incumbrance  to  the  fa¬
ther,  nor  interrupt  the  mother  in  the  pleafures  of  her  diabo¬
lical  profiitutibn.  It  fometimes  indeed  happens,  that  the
paffion  which  prompts  a  woman  to  enter  into  this  fociety,  is
fur  mounted  when  fhe  becomes  a  mother,  by  that  inflin&ive
affection  which  Nature  has  given  to  all  creatures  for  the  pre-
fervation  of  their  offspring  ;  but  even  in  this  cafe,  fhe  is  not
permitted  to  fpare  the  life  of  her  infant,  except  fhe  can  find
a  man  who  will  patronife  it  as  his  child :  if  this  can  be  done,
the  murder  is  prevented  ;  but  both  the  man  and  woman,
being  deemed  by  this  aft  to  have  appropriated  each  other,
are  ejefted  from  the  community,  and  forfeit  all  claim  to  the
piivileges  and  pleafures  of  Arreoy  for  the  future;  the  woman
iiom  that  time  being  diftinguifhed  by  the  term  Whanno'wno'w ,
“  bearer  of  children,”  which  is  here  a  term  of  reproach  ;
though  none  can  be  more  honourable  in  the  eflimation  of
wifdom  and  humanity,  of  right  reafon,  and  every  paffion
that  diftinguifhes  the  man  from  the  brute.

It  is  not  fit  that  a  practice  fo  horrid  and  fo  flrange  fhould
be  imputed  to  human  beings  upon  flight  evidence,  but  I
nave  iuch  as  abundantly  juflifies  me  in  the  account  I  have
gi\en.  The  people  themfelves  are  fo  far  from  concealing
their  conneftion  with  fuch  a  fociety  as  a  difgrace,  that  they
boaft  of  it  as  a  privilege ;  and  both  myfelf  and  Mr.  Banks,
\\  nen  particular  perfons  have  been  pointed  out  to  us  as  mem¬
bers  of  the  Arreoy,  have  queftioned  them  about  it,  and  re¬
ceived  the  account  that  has  been  here  given  from  their  own
bps,  They  have  acknowledged,  that  they  had  long  been  of

3  *  this


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


this  accurfed  fociety,  that  they  belonged  to  it  at  that  time,
and  that  feveral  of  their  children  had  been  fmt  to  death.

But  I  mull  not  conclude  my  account  of  the  domeflic  life  of
thefe  people  without  mentioning  their  perfonal  cleanlinefs.
If  that  which  leflens  the  good  of  life  and  increafes  the  evil
is  vice,  furely  cleanlinefs  is  a  virtue  :  the  want  of  it  tends  to.
deftroy  both  beauty  and  health,  and  mingles  difgtfid  with
our  bell  pleafures.  The  natives  of  Otaheite,  both  men  and
women,  conftantly  wafh  their  whole  bodies  in  running  wa¬
ter  three  times  every  day ;  once  as  foon  as  they  rife  in  the
morning,  once  at  noon,  and  again  before  they  deep  at  night,
whether  the  fea  or  river  is  near  them  or  at  a  diftance.  I  have
already  obferved,  that  they  wafh  not  only  the  mouth,  but
the  hands  at  their  meals,  almoft  between  every  morfel ;  and
their  clothes,  as  well  as  their  perfons,  are  kept  without  fpot
or  (lain  *,  fo  that  in  a  large  company  of  thefe  people,  nothing
is  fuffered  but  heat,  which,  perhaps,  is  more  than  can  be  faid
of  the  polited  adembly  in  Europe.


Vol.  II.


E  e  C  H  A  P.


z  to


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


CHAP.  XVlir.


Of  the  Manufactures >  Boats ,  and  Navigation  of  Otaheite .


V  neceffity  is  r^e  mother  of  invention,  it  cannot  be  fup-
pofed  to  have  been  much  exerted  where  the  liberality  of
Nature  has  rendered  the  diligence  of  Art  almoft  fuperfluous ;
yet  there  are  many  indances  both  of  ingenuity  and  labour
among  thefe  people,  which,  confidcring  the  want  of  metal
for  tools,  do  honour  to  both.


Manufac¬

tures,


Their  principal  manufacture  is  their  cloth,  in  the  mak¬
ing  and  dying  of  which  I  think  there  are  fome  particulars
which  may  indrucT  even  the  artificers  of  Great  Britain,  and
for  that  reafon  my  defcription  will  be  more  minute.


Their  cloth  is  of  three  kinds }  and  it  is  made  of  the  bark
of  three  different  trees,  the  Chinefe  paper  mulberry,  the
bread-fruit  tree,  and  the  tree  which  refembles  the  wild  fig-
tree  of  the  Weft  Indies.


The  fined  and  whited  is  made  of  the  paper  mulberry,
Aouta  ;  this  is  worn  chiefly  by  the  principal  people,  and  when
it  is  dyed  red  takes  a  better  colour.  A  fecond  fort,  inferior
inwhitenefs  and  foftnefs,  is  made  of  the  bread-fruit  tree,
Ooroo ,  and  worn  chiefly  by  the  inferior  people  j  and  a  third
of  the  tree  that  refembles  the  fig,  which  is  coarfe  and  harfh,
and  of  the  colour  of  the  darked  brown  paper:  this,  though
it  is  lefs  pleafing  both  to  the  eye  and  the  touch,  is  the  mod
valuable,  becaufe  it  refids  water,  which  the  other  two  forts
will  not.  Of  this,  which  is  the  mod  rare  as  well  as  the  mod

ufeful,


i


ufeful,  the  greater  part  is  perfumed,  and  worn  by  the  Chiefs
as  a  morning  drefs.

All  thefe  trfces  are  propagated  with  great  care,  particularly
the  mulberry,  which  covers  the  larged  part  of  the  culti¬
vated  land,  and  is  not  fit  for  ufe  after  two  or  three  year’s
growth,  when  it  is  about  fix  or  eight  feet  high,  and  fome-
what  thicker  than  a  man’s  thumb ;  its  excellence  is  to  be
thin,  flrait,  tall,  and  without  branches :  the  lower  leaves,
therefore,  are  carefully  plucked  off,  with  their  germs,  as
often  as  there  is  any  appearance  of  their  producing  a
branch.

But  though  the  cloth  made  of  thefe  three  trees  is  different,
it  is  all  manufactured  in  the  fame  manner ;  I  fhall,  there¬
fore,  defcribe  the  procefs  only  in  the  fine  fort,  that  is  made  of
the  mulberry.  When  the  trees  are  of  a  proper  fize,  they  are
drawn  up,  and  dripped  of  their  branches,  after  which  the
roots  and  tops  are  cut  off ;  the  bark  of  thefe  rods  being  then
flit  up  longitudinally  is  eafily  drawn  off,  and,  when  a  proper
quantity  has  been  procured,  it  is  carried  down  to  fome  run¬
ning  water,  in  which  it  is  depofited  to  foak,  and  fecured  from
floating  away  by  heavy  dones  :  when  it  is  fuppofed  to  be
fufficiently  foftened,  the  women  fervants  go  down  to  the
brook,  and  dripping  themfelves,  fit  down  in  the  water,  to
feparate  the  inner  bark  from  the  green  part  on  the  outfide ;
to  do  this  they  place  the  under  fide  upon  a  dat  fmooth  board,
and  with  the  fhell  which  our  dealers  call  Tyger’s  tongue,
Tellina  gargadla ,  ferape  it  very  carefully,  dipping  it  conti¬
nually  in  the  water  till  nothing  remains  but  the  fine  fibres
of  the  inner  coat.  Being  thus  prepared  in  the  afternoon,
they  are  fpread  out  upon  plantain  leaves  in  the  evening ;  and
in  this  part  of  the  work  there  appears  to  be  fome  difficulty,
as  the  midrefs  of  the  family  always  fuperintends  the  doing

E  e  2  of


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

of  it :  they  are  placed  in  lengths  of  about  eleven  or  twelve
yards,  one  by  the  fide  of  another,  till  they  are  about  a  foot
broad,  and  two  or  three  layers  are  alfo  laid  one  upon  the
other  t  care  is  taken  that  the  cloth  lhall  be  in  all  parts  of  an
equal  thicknefs,  fo  that  if  the  bark  happens  to  be  thinner  in
any  particular  part  of  one  layer  than  the  reft,  a  piece  that  is
fomewhat  thicker  is  picked  out  to  be  laid  over  it  in  the  next.
In  this  ftate  it  remains  till  the  morning,  when  great  part  of
the  water  which  it  contained  when  it  was  laid  out,  is  either-
drained  off  or  evaporated,  and  the  feveral  fibres  adhere  to¬
gether,  fo  as  that  the  whole  may  be  raifed  from  the  ground
in  one  piece.

*  •

It  is  then  taken  away,  and  laid  upon  the  fmooth  fide  of  a
long  piece  of  wood,  prepared  for  the  purpofe,  and  beaten  by
the  women  fervants,  with  indruments  about  a  foot  long  and
three  inches  thick,  made  of  a  hard  wood  which  they  call
Etoci.  The  fhape  of  this  indrument  is  not  unlike  a  fquare
razor  drop,  only  that  the  handle  is  longer,  and  each  of  its
four  fides  or  faces  is  marked,  lengthways,  with  fmall  grooves,
01  tui lows,  of  different  degrees  of  finenefs  ;  thofe  on  one
iide  being  of  a  width  and  depth  fuflicient  to  receive  a  fmall
packthread,  and  the  others  finer  in  a  regular  gradation,  fo
that  the  laft  are  not  more  than  equal  to  fewingfilk.

They  beat  it  fir  ft  with  the  coarfefl  fide  of  this  mallet,  keep¬
ing  time  like  our  fmiths  ;  it  fpreads  very  fall  under  the
drokes,  cliiedy  however  in  the  breadth,  and  the  grooves  in
the  mallet  mark  it  with  the  appearance  of  threads  ;  it  is  fuc-
ccdively  beaten  with  the  other  ddes,  lad  with  the  dned,  and
is  then  fit  for  ufe.  Sometimes,  however,  it  is  made  dill
thinner,  by  beating  it  with  the  dned  dde  of  the  mallet,  after
it  has  been  feveral  times  doubled:  it  is  then  called  Hoboo ,  and
is  almod  as  thin  as  a  mudin  j  it  becomes  very  white  by  bein g

bleached


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

I  '

bleached  in  the  air,  but  is  made  dill  whiter  and  fofter  by
being  wafhed  and  beaten  again  after  it  has  been  worn.

Of  this  cloth  there  arc  feveral  forts,  of  different  degrees  of
finenefs,  in  proportion  as  it  is  more  or  lefs  beaten  without
being  doubled :  the  other  cloth  alfo  differs  in  proportion  as
it  is  beaten  ;  but  they  differ  from  each  other  in  confequence
of  the  different  materials  of  which  they  are  made.  The  bark
of  the  bread-fruit  is  not  taken  till  the  trees  are  confiderably
longer  and  thicker  than  thofe  of  the  fig;  the  procefs  after¬
wards  is  the  fame.

When  cloth  is  to  be  wafhed  after  it  has  been  wrorn,  it  is
taken  down  to  the  brook,  and  left  to  foak,  being  kept  faff  to
the  bottom,  as  at  firfl,  by  a  flone  ;  it  is  then  gently  wrung
or  fqueezed  ;  and  fometimes  feveral  pieces  of  it  are  laid  one
upon  another,  and  beaten  together  with  the  coarfefi  fide  of
the  mallet,  and  they  are  then  equal  in  thicknefs  to  broad¬
cloth,  and  much  more  foft  and  agreeable  to  the  touch,  after
they  have  been  a  little  while  in  ufe,  though,  when  they  come
immediately  from  the  mallet,  they  feel  as  if  they  had  been
fiarched.  This  cloth  fometimes  breaks  in  the  beating,  but.
is  eafily  repaired  by  palling  on  a  patch  with  a  gluten  that  is
prepared  from  the  root  of  the  Pea ,  which  is  done  fo  nicely
that  it  cannot  be  difcovered.  The  women  alfo  employ  them-
felves  in  removing  blemiflies  of  every  kind,  as  our  ladies
do  in  needle-work  or  knotting ;  fometimes  when  their  work,
is  intended  to  be  very  fine,  they  will  pafte  an  entire  covering
of  lioboo  over  the  whole.  The  principal  excellencies  of  this
cloth  are  its  coolnefs  and  foftnefs  ;  and  its  imperfections,  its
being  pervious  to  water  like  paper,  and  almofl  as  eafily  torn.

The  colours  with  which  they  die  this  cloth  are  principally
red  and  yellow.  The  red  is  exceedingly  beautiful,  and  I
may  venture  to  fay,  a  brighter  and  more  delicate  colour  than

7  any


213

1769.

■  —y—  ■<?


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

i

,  any  we  have  in  Europe ;  that  which  approaches  neareft  is
our  full  fcarlet,  and  the  belt  imitation  which  Mr.  Banks’s  na¬
tural  hillory  painter  could  produce,  was  by  a  mixture  of  ver¬
milion  and  carmine.  The  yellow  is  alfo  a  bright  colour,  but
we  have  many  as  good.

The  red  colour  is  produced  by  the  mixture  of  the  juices  of
two  vegetables,  neither  of  which  feparately  has  the  leafl  ten¬
dency  to  that  hue.  One  is  a  fpecies  of  fig,  called  here  Matte,
and  the  other  the  Cordia  Sebejlina ,  or  Eton  ;  of  the  fig  the  fruit
is  ufed,  and  of  the  Cordia  the  leaves.

The  fruit  of  the  fig  is  about  as  big  as  a  rounceval  pea,  or
very  fmall  goofeberry ;  and  each  of  them,  upon  breaking  off
the  flalk  very  clofe,  produces  one  drop  of  a  milky  liquor,  re-’
fembling  the  juice  of  our  figs,  of  which  the  tree  is  indeed
a  fpecies.  This  liquor  the  women  collect  into  a  fmall  quan¬
tity  of  cocoa-nut  water :  to  prepare  a  gill  of  cocoa-nut  water
will  require  between  three  and  four  quarts  of  thefe  little
figs.  When  a  fufficient  quantity  is  prepared,  the  leaves  of  the
Etou  are  well  wetted  in  it,  and  then  laid  upon  a  plantain  leaf,
where  they  are  turned  about  till  they  become  more  and  more
flaccid,  and  then  they  are  gently  fqueezed,  gradually  increaf-
ing  the  prelfure,  but  fo  as  not  to  break  them ;  as  the  flacci-
dity  increafes,  and  they  become  fpungy,  they  are  fupplied
with  more  of  the  liquor ;  in  about  five  minutes  the  colour
begins  to  appear  upon  the  veins  of  the  leaves,  and  in  about
ten  or  a  little  more,  they  are  perfectly  faturated  with  it:
they  are  then  fqueezed,  with  as  much  force  as  can  be  ap¬
plied,  and  the  liquor  flrained  at  the  fame  time  that  it  is  ex-
prefled.

For  this  purpofe,  the  boys  prepare  a  large  quantity  of  the
Moo,  by  drawing  it  between  their  teeth,  or  two  little  flicks,
till  it  h  freed  from  the  green  bark  and  the  branny  fubflance

that


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

that  lies  under  it,  and  a  thin  web  of  the  fibres  only  remains ;
in  this  the  leaves  of  the  Etou  are  inveloped,  and  through
thefe  tine  juice  which  they  contain  is  ftrained  as  it  is  forced
out.  As  the  leaves  are  not  fucculent,  little  more  juice  is  prefled
out  of  them  than  they  have  imbibed  :  when  they  have  been
once  emptied,  they  are  filled  again,  and  again  prefled  till  the
quality  which  tin&ures  the  liquor  as  it  pafles  through  them
is  exhaufled,  they  are  then  thrown  away ;  but  the  Moo,
being  deeply  flaincd  with  the  colour,  is  preferved,  as  a  brufh
to  lay  the  dye  upon  the  cloth.

The  exprefled  liquor  is  always  received  into  fmall  cups
made  of  the  plantain  leaf,  whether  from  a  notion  that  it  has
any  quality  favourable  to  the  colour,  or  from  the  facility
with  which  it  is  procured,  and  the  convenience  of  fmall  vef-
fels  to  diftribute  it  among  the  artificers,  I  do  not  know.

Of  the  thin  cloth  they  feldom  dye  more  than  the  edges,
but  the  thick  cloth  is  coloured  through  the  whole  furface
the  liquor  is  indeed  ufed  rather  as  a  pigment  than  a  dye,  for
a  coat  of  it  is  laid  upon  one  fide  only,  with  the  fibres  of  the
Moo ;  and  though  I  have  feen  of  the  thia  cloth  that  has
appeared  to  have  been  foaked  in  the  liquor,  the  colour  has
not  had  the  fame  richnefs  and  lufire,  as  when  it  has  been
applied  in  the  other  manner.

Though  the  leaf  of  the  Etou  is  generally  ufed  in  this  pro-
cefs,  and  probably  produces  the  fineft  colour;  yet  the  juice
of  the  figs  will  produce  a  red  by  a  mixture  with  the  fpecies
of  Tournefortia,  which  they  call  Taheinoo ,  the  Pohuc ,  the
Eurhe  or  Convolvulus  Brafillenfis ,  and  a  fpecies  of  Solanum
called  Ebooa  ;  from  the  ufe  of  thefe  different  plants,  or  from
different  proportions  of  the  materials,  many  varieties  are  ob-
obfervable  in  the  colours  of  their  cloth,  feme  of  which  are
confpicuoufly  fuperior  to  others.

‘  '  8  The


2I£

1769.

- V - l


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

The  beauty,  however,  of  the  bell  is  not  permanent ;  but
it  is  probable  that  fome  method  might  be  found  to  fix  it,  if
proper  experiments  were  made,  and  perhaps  to  fearch  for
latent  qualities,  which  may  be  brought  out  by  the  mixture  of
one  vegetable  juice  with  another,  would  not  be  an  unprofit¬
able  employment  :  our  prefent  moil  valuable  dyes  afford  fuf-
ficient  encouragement  to  the  attempt ;  for  by  the  mere  in-
fpeftion  of  indico,  woad,  dyer’s  weed,  and  mofl  of  the
leaves  which  are  ufed  for  the  like  purpofes,  the  colours
which  they  yield  could  never  be  difcovered.  Of  this  Indian
red  I  fhall  only  add,  that  the  women  who  have  been  employed
in  preparing  or  ufing  it,  carefully  preferve  the  colour  upon

their  fingers  and  nails,  where  it  appears  in  its  utmofl  beauty,
as  a  great  ornament.

The  yellow  is  made  of  the  bark  of  the  root  of  the  Morinda
citrifoha ,  called  Nono ,  by  fcraping  and  infufing  it  in  water ;
after  Handing  fome  time,  the  water  is  {trained  and  ufed  as  a
dye,  the  cloth  being  dipped  into  it.  The  Morinda,  of  which
this  is  a  fpecies,  feems  to  be  a  good  fubjecT  for  examination
with  a  view  to  dyeing.  Brown,  in  his  hifiory  of  Jamaica,
mentions  three  fpecies  of  it,  which  he  fays  are  ufed  to
dye  brown;  and  Rumphius  fays  of  the  Bancuda Augujlifolia,
which  is  nearly  allied  to  our  Nono,  that  it  is  ufed  by  the  in¬
habitants  of  the  Eafl-Indian  iflands,  as  a  fixing  drug  for  red
colours,  with  which  it  particularly  agrees.

The  inhabitants  of  this  ifland  alfo  dye  yellow  with  the
fruit  of  the  Tamanu;  but  how  the  colour  is  extracted,  we
had  no  opportunity  to  difcover.  They  have  alfo  a  prepara¬
tion  with  which  they  die  brown  and  black ;  but  thefe  co¬
lours  are  fo  indifferent,  that  the  method  of  preparing  them
did  not  excite  our  curiofity.

✓

Another


ROUND  THE  WORLD*


S17


Another  confiderable  manufa&urc  is  matting  of  various
kinds ;  fome  of  which  is  finer,  and  better  in  every  refpecSf,
than  any  we  have  in  Europe :  the  coarfer  fort  ferves  them  to
fleep  upon,  and  the  finer  to  wear  in  wet  weather.  With  the

1  •  ,

fine,  of  which  there  are  alfo  two  forts,  much  pains  is  taken,
efpecially  with  that  made  of  the  bark  of  the  Poerou,  the  Hi -
bifcus  tiliaccus  of  Linnseus,  fome  of  which  is  as  fine  as  a
coarfe  cloth :  the  other  fort,  which  is  flill  more  beautiful,
they  call  Vanne ;  it  is  white,  glolfy,  and  fhining,  and  is  made
of  the  leaves  of  their  Wharrou,  a  fpecies  of  the  Fandanus ,  of
which  we  had  no  opportunity  to  fee  either  the  flowers  or
fruit:  they  have  other  matts,  or  as  they  call  them  Moeas ,  to
fit  or  to  fleep  upon,  which  are  formed  of  a  great  variety  of
rufhes  and  grafs,  and  which  they  make,  as  they  do  every
thing  elfe  that  is  plaited,  with  amazing  facility  and  dif-
patcli.


They  are  alfo  very  dexterous  in  making  bafket  and  wicker¬
work;  their  bafkets  are  of  a  thoufand  different  patterns,
many  of  them  exceedingly  neat ;  and  the  making  them  is  an
art  that  every  one  prachifes,  both  men  and  women :  they
make  occafional  bafkets  and  panniers  of  the  cocoa-nut  leaf
in  a  few  minutes,  and  the  women  who  vifited  us  early  in  a
morning  ufed  to  fend,  as  foon  as  the  fun  was  high,  for  a  few
of  the  leaves,  of  which  they  made  little  bonnets  to  fliade
their  faces,  at  fo  fmall  an  expence  of  time  and  trouble,  that,
when  the  fun  was  again  low  in  the  evening,  they  ufed  to
throw  them  away.  Thefe  bonnets,  however,  did  not  cover
the  head,  but  confided  only  of  a  band  that  went  round  its
and  a  fliade  that  projected  from  the  forehead.

0' .  j  t  i  c  K

.  ■.  t*  j.

Of  the  bark  of  the  Poerou  they  make  ropes  and  lines,  from'
the  thicknefs  of  an  inch  to  the  fize  of  . a  fmall  packthread:
^ ol.  II.  E  f  with

»  A  m


LIEUTENANT  COOK's  VOYAGE

.  17_6_9-_,  with  ,hcfe  they  make  nets  for  filhing :  of  the  fibres  of  the
cocoa-nut  they  make  thread,  for  fattening  together  the  feve-
rai  parts  of  their  canoes,  and  belts,  either  round  or  flat,
twitted  or  plaited  ;  and  of  the  bark  of  the  Eroiva,  a  kind  of
nettle  which  grows  in  the  mountains,  and  is  therefore  rather
fcarce,  they  make  the  beft  filhing  lines  in  the  world :  with  thefe
they  hold  the  ftrongeft  and  moft  active  fifli,  fuch  as  Bonetas
and  Albicores,  which  would  fnap  our  ftrongeft  filk  lines  in
a  minute,  though  they  are  twice  as  thick.

They  make  alfo  a  kind  of  feine,  of  a  coarfe  broad  grafs,  the
blades  of  which  are  like  flags :  thefe  they  twill  and  tie  to¬
gether  in  a  loofe  manner,  till  the  net,  which  is  about  as  wide
as  a  large  fack,  is  from  fixty  to  eighty  fathom  long :  this
they  haul  in  Ihoal  fmooth  water,  and  its  own  weight  keeps

it  fo  clofe  to  the  ground  that  fcarcely  a  Angle  fifh  can
efcape.

In  every  expedient,  indeed,  for  taking  fifh,  they  are  exceed¬
ingly  ingenious  j  they  make  harpoons  of  cane,  and  point  them
with  hard  wood,  which  in  their  hands  ftrike  fifh  more  ef-
fe<5tually,  than  thofe  which  are  headed  with  iron  can  do  in
ours,  fetting  afide  the  advantage  of  ours  being  fattened  to  a
line,  fo  that  the  fifh  is  fecured  if  the  hook  takes  place,
though  it  does  not  mortally  wound  him.

Of  fifh-hooks  they  have  two  forts,  admirably  adapted  in
their  conftru&ion  as  well  to  the  purpofe  they  are  to  anfwer,
as  to  the  materials  of  which  they  are  made.  One  of  thefe,
which  they  call  JVittee  Witteet  is  ufed  for  towing.  The  fhank  is
made  of  mother  of  pearl,  the  moft  glofty  that  can  be  got :  the
mfide,  which  is  naturally  the  brighteft,.is  put  behind.  To  thefe
hooks  a  tuft  of  white  dog’s  or  hog’s  hair  is  fixed,  fo  as  fome-
what  to  refemble  the  tail  of  a  fifh ;  thefe  implements,  there*

fore, ,


i


round  the  would.


tip


fore,  are  both  hook  and  bait,  and  ‘are  rife'd  with  a  rod  of
bamboo,  and  line  of  Erowa.  The  fiflier,'  to1  fecure  his  fiic-
cefs,  watches  the  flight  of  the  birds  which  Conftantly  attend
the  Bonetas  when  they  fwirn  in  fhoals,  by  which  he  directs
his  canoe,  and  when  he  has  the  advantage  of  thefe  guides,
he  feldom  returns  without  a  prize.


1769.


The  other  kind  of  hook  is  alfo  made  of  mother  of  pearl,
or  fome  other  hard  fhell :  they  cannot  make  them  bearded
like  our  hooks ;  but  to  effeCt  the  fame  purpofe,  they  make
the  point  turn  inwards.  Thefe  are  made  of  all  fizes,  and  ufed
to  catch  various  kinds  of  fifh,  with  great  fuccefs.  The  man¬
ner  of  making  them  is  very  fimple,  and  every  fifherman  is
his  own  artificer :  the  fhell  is  firft  cut  into  fquare  pieces,  by
the  edge  of  another  fhell,  and  wrought  into  a  form  corre-
fponding  with  the  outline  of  the  hook  by  pieces  of  coral,
which  are  fufficiently  rough  to  perform  the  office  of  a  file  ;
a  hole  is  then  bored  in  the  middle,  the  drill  being  no  other
than  the  firft  flone  they  pick  up  that  has  a  fharp  corner  :  this
they  fix  into  the  end  of  a  piece  of  bamboo,  and  turn  it  be¬
tween  the  hands  like  a  chocolate  mill ;  when  the  fhell  is  per¬
forated,  and  the  hole  fufficiently  wide,  a  fmall  file  of  coral  is
introduced,  by  the  application  of  which  the  hook  is  in  a  fhort
time  completed,  few  cofling  the  artificer  more  time  than  a
quarter  of  an  hour.


Of  their  mafonry,  carving,  and  architecture,  the  Reader
has  already  formed  fome  idea  from  the  account  that  has  been
given  of  the  Morais,  or  repofitories  of  the  dead :  the  other
moft  important  article  of  building  and  carving  is  their  boats;  Boats,
and  perhaps,  to  fabricate  one  of  their  principal  veffels  with
their  tools,  is  as  great  a  work,  as  to  build  a  Britifh  man  of
war  with  ours.  '


F  f  2


They


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

''  /

"  .»  ■  .  ,  .  %  *  »

They  have  an  adze  of  flone ;  a  chiffel,  or  gouge,  of  bone;
generally  that  of  a  man’s  arm  between  the  wrift  and  elbow  y
a  rafp  of  coral ;  and  the  fkin  of  a  fling-ray,  with  coral  fand ,
as  a  file  or  polifher.

This  is  a  complete  catalogue  of  their  tools,  and  with  thefe
they  build  houfes,  conflrudt  canoes,  hew  flone,  and  fell,
cleave,  carve,  and  polifh  timber.

The  flone  which  makes  the  blade  of  their  adzes  is  a  kind
of  Bafaltes,  of  a  blackifh  or  grey  colour,  not  very  hard,  but  of
confiderable  toughnefs :  they  are  formed  of  different  fizes  ;
fome,  that  are  intended  for  felling,  weigh  from  fix  to  eight
pounds ;  others,  that  are  ufed  for  carving,  not  more  than  fo
many  ounces ;  but  it  is  neceffary  to  flaarpen  both  almofl  every
minute  ;  for  which  purpofe,  a  flone  and  a  cocoa-nut  flielf
full  of  water  are  always  at  hand.

Their  greatefl  exploit,-  to  which  thefe  tools  are  lefs  equal
than  to  any  other,  is  felling  a  tree :  this  requires  many  hands,
and  the  conflant  labour  of  feveral  days.  When  it  is  down,
they  fplit  it,  with  the  grain,-  into  planks  from  three  to  four
inches  thick,  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  tree*
many  of  which  are*  eight  feet  in  the  girt,  and  forty  to  the
branches,  and  nearly  of  the  fame  thicknefs  throughout*  The
tree  generally  ufed  is  in  their  language  called  Avie,  the  flein.
of  which  is  tall  and  flrait  ^  though  fome  of  the  fmaller  boats
are  made  of  the  bread-fruit  tree,  which  is  a  light  fpongy
wood,  and  eafily  wrought.  They  fmooth  the  plank  very  ex-
peditioufly  and  dexteroufly  with  their  adzes,  and  can  take  off
a  thin  coat  fiom  a  whole  plank  without  miffing  a  flroke.
As  they  have  not  the  art  of  warping  a  plank,  every  part  of
the  canoe,  whether  hollow  or  flat,  is  fhaped  by  hand/


The


ROUND  THE  wW  O  R  L  D.


22  r


The  canoes,  or  boats,  which  are  ufed  by  the  inhabitants
of  this  and  the  neighbouring  iflands,  may  be  divided  into
two  general  claffes;  one  of  which  they  call  Ivahahs ,  the  other
Pahies y  .  *  _  '  , '

The  Ivahah  is  ufed  for  fhort  excurfions  to  fea,  and  is  wall-
fided  and  flat-bottomed ;  the  Pahie  for  longer  voyages,  and  is*
bow-fided  and  fharp-bottomed.  The  Ivahahs  are  all  of  the
fame  figure,  bur  of  different  fizes,  and  ufed  for  different
purpofes :  their  length  is  from  feventy-two  feet  to- ten,  but
the  breadth  is  by  no  means  in  proportion  ;  for  thofe  of  ten
feet  are  about  a  foot  wide,  and  thofe  of  more  than  feventy
are  fcarcely  two.  There  is  the  fighting  Ivahah,  the  fifhing
Ivahah,  and  the  travelling  Ivahah;  for  fome  of  thefe  go  from
one  ifland  to  another.  The  fighting  Ivahah  is  by  far  the.
longed,  and  the. head  and  flern  are  confiderably  raifed  above,
the  body,  .in  a  femicircular  form  ;  particularly  the  flern y
which  is  fometimes  feventeen  or  eighteen  feet  high,  though
the  boat  itfelf  is  fcarcely  three.  Thefe  never  go  to  fea  Angle  5,
but  are  faflened  together,  fide  by  fide,  at  the  diflance  of  about,
three  feet,  by  flrong  poles  of  wood,  which  are  laid  acrofs.
them  and  lafhed  to  the  gunwales.  Upon  thefe,  in  the  fore¬
part,  a  flage  or  platform  is  raifed,  about  ten  or  twelve  feet,
long,  and  fomewhat  wider  than  the  boats,  which  is  fupported.
by  pillars  about  fix  feet  high :  upon  this  flage  fiand  the  fight¬
ing  men,  whofe  miflile  weapons  are  flings  and  fpears  ;  foiy
among  other  Angularities  in  the  manners  of  thefe  people,,
their  bows  and  arrows  are  ufed  only  for  diverfion,  as  we

r  •  •  i  -  «-  «•.  V.  A.  '  •  .  A.  ..  >  •.  »  4  r  .  '  ^  .  •  ‘  ■*  ••  •  t  -  4  -  -  •’

throw  quoits:  below  thefe  flages  fit  the  rowers,- who  receive-
from  them  thofe  that  are  wounded,  and  furnifli  frefh  men-
to  afeend  in  their  room.  Some  of  thefe  have  a  platform  of
bamboos  or  other  light  wood,-  through  their  whole  length,
and  confiderably  broader,  by  means  of  which  they  will  carry

a  great


1769.

_


■522


1769.


LIEUTENANT  .C.OOK’s  VOYAGE

L\  ■  '  K  O  n?

a  great  number  of  men  ;  but  we  faw  only  one  fitted  in  this
manner.

-ompl  i:ri£  ; h/7£lti-07  bnslh  moil  gnio;;  r  v."  '-;.v  r.

The  fifhing  Ivahahs  vary  in  length  from  about  forty  feet

to  the  fmalleft  fize,  which  is  about  ten ;  all  that  are  of  the
length  of  twenty-five  feet  and  upwards,  of  whatever  fort,
occafionally  carry  fail.  The  travelling  Ivahah  is  always
double,  and  furnifhed  with  a  fmall  neat  houfe  about  five  or
fix  feet  broad,  and  fix  or  feven  feet  long,  which  is  fattened
upon  the  fore-part  for  the  convenience  of  the  principal
people,  who  fit  in  them  by  day,  and  fieep  in  them  at  night.
The  fifhing  Ivahahs  are  fometimes  joined  together,  and
have  a  houfe  on  board  ;  but  this  is  not  common.


Thofe  which  are  fhorter  than  five  and  twenty  feet,  feldom
or  never  carry  fail  ;  and,  though  the  ttern  rifes  about  four  or

five  feet,  have  a  flat  head,  and  a  board  that  projects  for¬
ward  about  four  feet.


The  Pahie  is  alfo  of  different  fizes,  from  fixty  to  thirty  feet
long ;  but,  like  the  Ivahah,  is  very  narrow.  One  that  I  mea-
fured  was  fifty-one  feet  long,  and  only  one  foot  and  a  half
wide  at  the  top.  In  the  widefi  part,  it  was  about  three  feet;  and
this  is  the  general- proportion.  It  does  not,  however,  widen
by  a  gradual  fwell }  but  the  fides  being  ftrait,  and  parallel,
for  a  little  way  below  the  gunwale,  it  fwells  abruptly,  and
draws  to  a  ridge  at  th$  bottom  ;  fo  that  a  tranfverfe  fedlion
of  it  has  fomewhat  the  appearance  of  the  mark  upon  cards
called  a  Spade,  the  whole  being  much  wider  in  proportion  to
its  length.  Thefe,like  thelargettlvahahs,  are  ufedfor  fighting;
but  principally  for  long  voyages.  The  fighting  Pahie,  which
is  the  largeft,  is  fitted  with  the  ftage  or  platform,  which  is
proportionably  larger  than  thofe  of  the  Ivahah,  as  their  form
enables  them  to  fuflain  a  much  greater  weight.  Thofe  that
are  ufed  for  failing  are  generally  double  ;  and  the  middle


fize


1


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


22g;


.  -  •  ■ .  -  .

fize  are  fa-id  to  be  the  bett  fea-boats.  They  are  fometimes
out  a  month  together,  going  from  ifland  to  ifland ;  and  fome¬
times,  as  we  were  credibly  informed,  they  are  a  fortnight
or  twenty  days  at  fea,  and  could  keep  it  lqnger  if  they  had
more  {towage  for  provitions,  and  conveniencies  to  hold  frefh
water.

When  any  of  thefe  boats  carry  fail  tingle,  they  make  ufe
of  a  log  of  wood  which  is  fattened  to  the  end  of  two  poles
that  lie  crofs  the  vetTel,  and  projedl  from  fix  to  ten  feet,  ac¬
cording  to  the  tize  of  the  vetTel,  beyond  its  tide,  fomewhat
like  what  is  ufed  by  the  flying  Proa  of  the  Ladrone  Itlands,
and  called  in  the  Account  of  Lord  Anfon’s  Voyage,  an  Out¬
rigger.  To  this  outrigger  the  throuds  are  fattened,  and  it  is
effentially  neceflary  in  trimming  the  boat  when  it  blows
frefh.

Some  of  them  have  one  matt,  and  Tome  two;  they  are
made  of  a  Tingle  flick,  and  when  the  length  of  the  canoe
is  thirty  feet,  that  of  the  matt  is  fomewhat  lefs  than  five  and
twenty ;  it  is  fixed  to  a  frame  that  is  above  the  canoe,  and
receives  a  fail  of  matting  about  one  third  longer  than  itfelf :
the  fail  is  pointed  at  the  top,  fquare  at  the  bottom,  and  cur¬
ved  at  the  fide  ;  fomewhat  refembling  what  we  call  a  fhoul-
der  of  mutton  fail;  and  ufe  for  boats  belonging  to  men  of
war:  it  is  placed  in  a  frame  of  wood,  which  furrounds  it  on
every  fide,  and  has  no  contrivance  either  for  reefing  or  furl¬
ing  ;  fo  that,  if  either  fhould  become  neceflary,  it  mutt  be
cut  away,  which,  however,  in-  thefe  equal  climates'  can  fel-
dom  happen..  At  the  top  of  the  matt  are  fattened  ornaments
of  feathers,  which  are  placed  inclining  obliquely  forwards  ;
the  thape  and  petition;  of  which  will  be  conceived  at  once
from  the  figure,  in  one  of  the  cuts.


1769.


t


The  oars  or  paddles  that  are  ufed  with  thefe  boats,  have  a
long  handle  and  a  flat  blade,  not  unlike  a  baker’s  peel.  Of
thefe  every  perfon  in  the  boat  lias  one,  except  thofe  that  fit
under  the  awning;  and  they  pufhlier  forward  with  them  at  a
good  rate.  Thefe  boats,  however,  admit  fo  much  water  at  the
Teams,  that  one  perfon  at  lead  is  continually  employed  in
throwing  it  out.  The  only  thing  in  which  they  excel  is
landing,  and  putting  off  from  the  fhore  in  a  furf :  by  their
great  length  and  high  fterns  they  land  dry,  when  our  boats
could  Scarcely  land  at  all ;  and  have  the  fame  advantages  in
putting  off  by  the  height  of  the  head.

The  Ivahahs  are  the  only  boats  that  are  ufed  by  the  inha¬
bitants  of  Otaheite.;  but  we  faw  feveral  Pahies  that  came
from  other  iflands.  Of  one  of  thefe  I  Shall  give  the  exaff
dimensions  from  a  careful  admeafurement,  and  then  parti¬
cularly  defcribe  the  manner  in  which  they  are  built.


/  '  -  *

Extreme  length  from  flem  to  ftern,  not  reckoning
the  bending  up  of  either  -

Breadth  in  the  clear  of  the  top  forward

>  •  ■

Breadth  in  the  midfhips  -
Breadth  aft  -  -

In  the  bilge  forward  -

In  the  midfhips  •-
Aft

Depth  in  the  midfhips

Height  from  the  ground  on  which  fhe  flood
Height  of  her  head  from  the  ground,  without  the
figure  -  -  -  -  -

Height  of  the  figure
Height  of  the  Bern  from  the  ground

Height  of  the  figure  :  t  t


Feet.  Inches,


Sl

I

1

-  I

-  2
-  2
-  2

-  3

-  3

4
o
8

2


o

2

6

3
8

ii

9

4
6

4

ii

9

o


A
.  &


To


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


225


To  illuRrate  my  description  of  the
vefTels  are  built,  it  will  be  necellary
to  refer  to  the  figure ;  in  which  a  a
is  the  firft  feam,  b  b  the  fecond,  and
c  c  the  third.

The  firR  Rage  or  keel,  under  a  a ,  is  made  of  a  tree  hol¬
lowed  out  like  a  trough ;  for  which  the  longefl  trees  are
chofen  that  can  be  got,  fo  that  there  are  never  more  than
three  in  the  whole  length:  the  next  Rage,  under  bb ,  is  form¬
ed  of  Rrait  plank,  about  four  feet  long,  fifteen  inches  broad,
and  two  inches  thick :  the  third  Rage,  under  cc>  is,  like  the
bottom  made  of  trunks,  hollowed  into  its  bilging  form ;  the
laR  is  alfo  cut  out  of  trunks,  fo  that  the  moulding  is  of  one
piece  with  the  upright.  To  form  thefe  parts  feparately,  with¬
out  faw,  plane,  duffel,  or  any  other  iron  tool,  may  well  be
thought  no  eafy  talk ;  but  the  great  difficulty  is  to  join  them
together.

When  all  the  parts  are  prepared,  the  keel  is  laid  upon
blocks,  and  the  planks  being  fupported  by  Ranchions,  are
fewed  or  clamped  together  with  Rrong  thongs  of  plait¬
ing,  which  are  paffed  feveral  times  through  holes  that  are
bored  with  a  gouge  or  auger  of  bone,  that  has  been  deferibed
already ;  and  the  nicety  with  which  this  is  done,  may  be  in¬
ferred  from  their  being  fufficiently  water-tight  for  ufe  with¬
out  caulking.  As  the  plaiting  foon  rots  in  the  water,  it  is
renewed  at  leaR  once  a-year  ;  in  order  to  which,  the  veffel  is
taken  entirely  to  pieces.  The  head  and  Rern  are  rude  with
refped  to  the  defign ;  but  very  neatly  finilhed,  and  poliihed
to  the  highefi  degree.

Thefe  Pahies  are  kept  with  great  care,  in  a  kind  of  houfe
built  on  purpofe  for  their  reception  ;  the  houfes  are  formed
of  poles  fet  upright  in  the  ground,  the  tops  of  which

Vol.IL  Gg  are


anner  in  which  thefe  1769.


ai6


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1769.


are  drawn  towards  each  other,  and  fattened  together  with
their  ttrongett  cord,  fo  as  to  form  a  kind  of  Gothic  arch,
which  is  completely  thatched  quite  to  the  ground,  being
open  only  at  the  ends ;  they  are  fometimes  fifty  or  ttxty  paces,
long.


As  conne&ed  with  the  navigation  of  thefe  people,  I  fhall
mention  their  wonderful  fagacity  in  foretelling  the  weather,
at  leatt  the  quarter  from  which  the  wind  fhall  blow  at  a  fu¬
ture  time ;  they  have  feveral  ways  of  doing  this,  of  which
however  I  know  but  one.  They  fay,  that  the  Milky- way  is
always  curved  laterally ;  but  fometimes  in  one  direction,
and  fometimes  in  another:  and  that  this  curvature  is  the  ef¬
fect  of  its  being  already  a£ted  upon  by  the  wind,  and  its
hollow  part  therefore  towards  it ;  fo  that,  if  the  fame  curva¬
ture  continues  a  night,  a  correfpondingwind  certainly  blows
the  next  day.  Of  their  rules,  I  fhall  not  pretend  to  judge;
but  I  know  that,  by  whatever  means,  they  can  predict  the
weather,  at  leatt  the  wind,  with  much  greater  certainty  than
we  can.

In  their  longer  voyages,  they  fleer  by  the  fun  in  the  day,,
and  in  the  night  by  the  ftars  ;  all  of  which  they  dittinguifh
feparately  by  names,  and  know  in  what  part  of  the  heavens
they  will  appear  in  any  of  the  months  during  which  they
are  vittble  in  their  horizon ;  they  alfo  know  the  time  of  their
annual  appearing  and  difappearing  with  more  precifion  than
will  eafily  be  believed  by  an  European  aftronomer.


CHAP.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


CHAP.  XIX.

,  *

%

Of  the  Divifon  of  Time  in  Otaheite  ;  Numeration ,  Com¬
putation  of  Dijlance,  Language ,  Dfeafes ,  Difpofal  of
the  Dead \  Religion ,  War ,  ?apons ,  ara/  Government ;

fome  general  Obfervations  for  the  Ufe  of  future
Navigators .

WE  were  not  able  to  acquire  a  perfect  idea  of  their  1769.

method  of  dividing  time  ;  but  obferved,  that  in
fpeaking  of  it,  either  pafi  or  to  come,  they  never  ufed  any
term  but  Malama ,  which  lignifies  Moon.  Of  thefe  moons
they  count  thirteen,  and  then  begin  again ;  which  is  a  de-
monftration  that  they  have  a  notion  of  the  folar  year :  but
how  they  compute  their  months  fo  that  thirteen  of  them
fhall  be  commenfurate  with  the  year,  we  could  not  difco-
ver;  for  they  fay  that  each  month  has  twenty-nine  days,
including  one  in  which  the  moon  is  not  vifible.  They  have
names  for  them  feparately,  and  have  frequently  told  us  the
fruits  that  would  be  in  feafon,  and  the  weather  that  would
prevail,  in  each  of  them ;  and  they  have  indeed  a  name  for
them  collectively,  though  they  ufe  it  only  when  they  fpeak
of  the  myfteries  of  their  religion.

Every  day  is  fubdivided  into  twelve  parts,  each  of  two
hours,  of  which  fix  belong  to  the  day,  and  fix  to  the  night.

At  thefe  divifions  they  guefs  pretty  nearly  by  the  height  of
the  fun  while  he  is  above  the  horizon ;  but  there  are  few  of
them  that  can  guefs  at  them,  when  he  is  below  it,  by  the
ftars.


Gg  2


In


228


1769.

t - „ — .

Numbers,,


Language.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

,  In  numeration  they  proceed  from  one  to  ten,  the  num¬
ber  of  fingers  on  both  hands  ;  and  though  they  have  for
each  number  a  different  name,  they  generally  take  hold
of  their  fingers  one  by  one,  fluffing  from  one  hand  to  the
other  till  they  come  to  the  number  they  want  to  exprefs
And  in  other  inftances,  we  obferved  that,  when  they  were
converting  with  each  other,  they  joined  figns  to  their  words,

which  were  fo  expreflive  that  a  ftranger  might  eafilv  anme-
hend  their  meaning.  /  1  P

In  counting  from  ten  they  repeat  the  name  of  that  num-
ber,  and  add  the  word  more ;  ten,  and  one  more,  is  eleven
ten,  and  two  more,  twelve;  and  fo  of  the  reft,  as  we  fay  one
and  twenty,  two  and  twenty.  When  they  come  to  ten  and
ten  more,  they  have  a  new  denomination,  as  we  fay  a  fcore;
and  by  thefe  fcores  they  count  till  they  get  ten  of  them'
when  they  have  a  denomination  for  two  hundred;  and  we
never  could  difcover  that  they  had  any  denomination  to  ex¬
prefs  a  greater  number:  neither,  indeed,  do  they  feem  to
want  any;  for  ten  of  thefe  amount  to  two  thoufand,  a
greater  number  than  they  can  ever  apply.

In  meafuring  difiance  they  are  much  more  deficient  than,
in  computing  numbers,  having  but  one  term  which  anfwers
to  fathom;  when  they  fpeak  of  difiances  from  place  to
place,  they  exprefs  it,  like  the  Afiatics,  by  the  time  that  is
required  to  pafs  it.

Their  language  is  foft  and  melodious  ;  it  abounds  with
vowels,  and  we  eafily  learnt  to  pronounce  it :  but  found  it
exceedingly  difficult  to  teach  them  to  pronounce  a  fingle
word  of  ours ;  probably  not  only  from  its  abounding  in  con-
fonants,  but.  from  fome  peculiarity  in  its  firudture  ;  for  Spa-
niffi  and  Italian  words,  if  ending  in  a  vowel,  they  pro¬
nounced  with  great  facility.


Whether


round  the  world.


229-


Whether  it  is  copious,  we  were  not  fufficiently  acquainted
with  it  to  know ;  but  it  is  certainly  very  imperfect,  for  it  is
almoft  totally  without  inflexion,  both  of  nouns  and  verbs.
Few  of  the  nouns  have  more  than  one  cafe,  and  few  of  the
verbs  more  than  one  tenfe  ;  yet  we  found  no  great  difficulty
in  making  ourfelves  mutually  underftood,  however  flrange
it  may  appear  in  fpeculation*

They  have,  however,  certain  affixa ,  which,  though  but  few
in  number,  are  very  ufeful  to  them,  and  puzzled  us  ex¬
tremely.  One  afks  another,  Harre  hea  ?  “  Where  are  you
“  going  ?”  the  other  anfwers  Ivahinera^  “  To  my  wives
upon  which  the  firfl:  repeating  the  anfwer  interrogatively,
“  To  your  wives  is  anfwered,  Ivahinereira ;  “  Yes,  I  am  going;
“■  to  my  wives/’  Here  the  fuffixa  era  and  dr  a  fave  feveral
words  to  both  parties.

I  have  inferted  a  few  of  their  words,  from  which  perhaps
fome  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  language.


Pupo;

the-  head.

Oporema,

the  hand.

Ahewh,

the  nofe.

Manneow,

the  fingers.

Roourou,

the  hair .

Mieu,

the  nails..

Outou,

the  mouth .

Touhe,.

the  buttocks .

Niheo,

the  teeth .

Hoouhah,,

the  thighs ..

Arrero,

the  tongue .

Avia,

the  legs..

Meu-eumi,

the  heard.

Tapoa,

the  feet.

Tiarraboa,

the  throat .

Booa, ,

a  hog..

Tuamo,

the  JJooulders .

Moa,

a  fowl.

Tuahy

the  hack .

,  *  •  ■  w

Euree,

r  a.  dog.

Oama,

the  hreafi .

Eure-eure,

iron .

Eu,

the  nipples.

Ooroo,

breadfruit „

Oboo*.  <

the  belly.

Hearee,

cocoa-nuts..

Rema,

the  arm .

Mia,.

bananas .

_  ■»  *

Vaee,

1769..

—* V— 1  ill


23®

t

1769:

< - * - -


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


Vaee,

< wild  plantains .  Eupea,

a  net.

Poe,

beads.  Mahanna,

the  fun.

Poe  matawewwe,  pearl.  Malama,

the  moon .

Ahou,

a  garment.  Whettu,

a  flar.

Avee,

a  fruit  like  apples.  Whettu-euphe,

a  comet .

Ahee,  another  like  chefnuts .  Erai,

the  fky.

Ewharre,

a  houfe.  Eatta,

a  cloud.

Whennua,

a  high  ijland.  Miti,

good.

Motu,

a  low  ijland.  Eno,

bad.

To  to.

blood.  A,

yes.

Aeve,

bone .  Ima,

no.

Aeo,

jlejh .  Paree,

ugly.

Mae,

fat .  Paroree,

hungry.

Tuea,

lean.  Pi  a.

full .

Huru-huru,

hair.  Timahah,

heavy.

Eraow,

a  tree.  Mama,

light.

Ama,

a  branch.  Poto,

Jhorf.

Tiale,

a  flower.  Roa,

tall .

Huero,

fruit .  Nehenne,

fweet .

Etummoo,

the  flem.  Mala-mala,

bitter.

Aaa,

the  root.  Whanno,

to  go  far.

Eiherre,

herbaceous  plants.  Harre,

to  go.

Ooopa,

a  pigeon .  Arrea,

to  flay .

Avigae,

a  paroquet .  Enoho,

to  remain.

A-a,

another  fpecies.  Rohe  rohe,

to  be  tired.

Mannn,

a  bird .  Maa,

to  eat.

Mora,

a  duck.  Inoo,

to  drink.

Mattow,

a  fl/h-hook.  Ete,

to  underfland.

Toura,

a  rope .  Warrick),

to  fleal.

Mow,

a  flo ark.  Worridde,

to  be  angry.

Mahi-mahi,

.  a  dolphin .  Teparahi,

to  beat.

Mattera,

a  fijhing-rod.

<  -  *  <

%

Among

ROUND  THE  WORLD.


231


Among  people  whofe  food  is  fo  fimple,  and  who  in  gene¬
ral  are  feldom  drunk,  it  is  fcarcely  neceffary  to  fay,  that
there  are  but  few  difeafes  ;  we  faw  no  critical  difeafe  during
our  flay  upon  the  ifland,  and  but  few  inflances  of  ficknefs,
which  were  accidental  fits  of  the  colic.  The  natives,  how¬
ever,  are  afllidied  with  the  eryfipelas,  and  cutaneous  erup¬
tions  of  the  fcaly  kind,  very  nearly  approaching  to  a  leprofy..
Thofe  in  whom  this  diftemper  was  far  advanced,  lived  in  a
Rate  of  feclufion  from  all  fociety,  each  in  a  fmall  houfe  built
upon  fome  unfrequented  fpot,  where  they  were  fupplied
with  provifions :  but  whether  they  had  any  hope  of  relief,,
or  languifhed  out  the  remainder  of  their  lives  in  folitude
and  defpair,  we  could  not  learn.  We  obferved  alfo  a  few
who  had  ulcers  upon  different  parts  of  their  bodies,  fome
of  which  had  a  very  virulent  appearance  ;  yet  they  feemed
not  much  to  be  regarded  by  thofe  who  were  affl  idled  with
them,  for  they  were  left  intirely  without  application  even  to
keep  off  the  flies.

Where  intemperance  produces  no  difeafes,  there  will  be
no  phyficians  by  profeflion ;  yet  where  there  is  fufferance,
there  will  always  be  attempts  to  relieve ;  and  where  the
caufe  of  the  mifchief  and  the  remedy  are  alike  unknown,
thefe  will  naturally  be  diredled  by  fuperflition :  thus  it  hap¬
pens,  that  in  this  country,  and  in  all  others  which  are  not
further  injured  by  luxury,  or  improved  by  knowlege,  the
management  of  the  lick  falls  to  the  lot  of  the  pried.  The
method  of  cure  that  is  pradlifed  by  the  priefls  of  Otaheite,
confifls  chiefly  ofprayers  and  ceremonies.  When  he  vifits  his
patient  he  repeats  certain  fentences,  which  appear  to  be  fet
forms  contrived  for  the  occafion,  and  at  the  fame  time  plaits
the  leaves,  of  the  cocoa-nut  into  different  figures  very  neatly ;
fome  of  thefe  he  fallens  to  the  fingers  and  toes  of  the  fick,

%  and


ij69.
- *

Difeafess


23  2

1769.

\ - —


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

j  anc'  °^ten  leaves  behind  him  a  few  branches  of  the  thefpecia
pcpulnca,  which  they  call  E'midho:  thefe  ceremonies  are  re¬
peated  till  the  patient  recovers  or  dies.  If  he  recovers,  they
fay  the  remedies  cured  him,  if  he  dies,  they  fay  the  difeafe
was  incurable,  in  which  perhaps  they  do  not  much  differ
from  the  cuftom  of  other  countries.

If  we  judged  of  their  fkill  in  furgery  from  the  dread¬
ful  fears  which  we  fometimes  faw,  we  fhould  have  fuppofed
it  to  be  much  fuperior  to  the  art  not  only  of  their  phyficians,
but  of  ouis.  We  faw  one  man  whofe  face  was  almoft  intirely
deftroyed,  his  nofe,  including  the  bone,  was  perfectly  flat,
and  one  cheek  and  one  eye  were  fo  beaten  in,  that  the  hollow
would  almoft  receive  a  man  s  fill,  yet  no  ulcer  remained ;
and  our  companion,  Tupia,  had  been  pierced  quite  through
his  body  by  a  fpear  headed  with  the  bone  of  the  fting-ray,
the  weapon  having  entered  his  back,  and  come  out  juft
under  his  breaft ;  but  except  in  reducing  diflocations  and
fractures,  the  beft  furgeon  can  contribute  very  little  to  the
cure  of  a  wound  >  the  blood  itfelf  is  the  beft  vulnerary  bal-
fam,  and  when  the  juices  of  the  body  are  pure,  and  the  pa¬
tient  is  temperate,  nothing  more  is  neceflary  as  an  aid  to

Nature  in  the  cure  of  the  worft  wound,  than  the  keeping  it
clean.

Their  commerce  with  the  inhabitants  of  Europe  has,  how¬
ever,  already  entailed  upon  them  that  dreadful  curfe  which
avenged  the  inhumanities  committed  by  the  Spaniards  in
America,  the  venereal  difeafe.  As  it  is  certain  that  no  Euro¬
pean  veftel  befides  our  own,  except  the  Dolphin,  and  the  two
that  were  under  the  command  of  Monf.  Bougainville,  ever
vifited  this  ifland,  it  muft  have  been  brought  either  by  one  of
them  or  by  us.  That  it  was  not  brought  by  the  Dolphin,

Captain  Wallis  has  demonftrated  in  the  account  of  her

*  *

b  voyage,


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


voyage,  [vol.I.  p.  489,  490.]  and  nothing  is  more  certain  than
that  when  we  arrived  it  had  made  mod  dreadful  ravages  in  the
ifland.  One  of  our  people  contra6led  it  within  five  days  after
we  went  on  fhore,  and  by  the  enquiries  among  the  natives,
which  this  occaftoned,  we  learnt,  when  we  came  to  underdand
a  little  of  theirlanguage,  that  it  had  been  brought  by  the  vef-
fels  which  had  been  there  about  fifteen  months  before  us,  and
had  lain  on  the  ead  fide  of  the  ifland.  They  didinguifhed  it
by  a  name  of  the  fame  import  with  rottennefs ,  but  of  a  more
extenfive  fignification,  and  defcribed,  in  the  mod  pathetic
terms,  the  fufferings  of  the  fird  vi&ims  to  its  rage,  and  told
us  that  it  caufed  the  hair  and  the  nails  to  fall  off,  and  the
flefh  to  rot  from  the  bones :  that  it  fpread  a  univerfal  terror
and  condernation  among  them,  fo  that  the  Tick  were  aban¬
doned  by  their  neared  relations,  led  the  calamity  fliould
fpread  by  contagion,  and  left  to  perifh  alone  in  fuch  miferv
as  till  then  had  never  been  known  among  them.  We  had
fome  reafon,  however,  to  hope  that  they  had  found  out  a
Specific  to  cure  it:  during  our  day  upon  the  idand  we  faw
none  in  whom  it  had  made  a  great  progrefs,  and  one  who
went  from  us  infected,  returned  after  a  fhort  time  in  perfect
health  ;  and  by  this  it  appeared  either  that  the  difeafe  had
cured  itfelf,  or  that  they  were  not  unacquainted  with  the
virtues  of  fimples,  nor  implicit  dupes  to  the  fuperditious
follies  of  their  prieds.  We  endeavoured  to  learn  the  medi¬
cal  qualities  which  they  imputed  to  their  plants,  but  our
knowlege  of  their  language  was  too  imperfect  for  us  to
fucceed.  If  we  could  have  learnt  their  fpecidc  for  the  vene¬
real  difeafe,  if  fuch  they  have,  it  would  have  been  of  great
advantage  to  us,  for  when  we  left  the  ifland  it  had  been  con*
traefted  by  more  than  half  the  people  on  board  the  fhip.

It  is  impofTible  but  that,  in  relating  incidents,  many  parti¬
culars  with  refpeed  to  the  cufloms,  opinions,  and  works  of

Vql.  II.  H  h  •  thefe


234

1769.

< - -  ■■  —  l

Difpofal  of
Pead.


LIEUTENANT  COOK's  VOYAGE

thefe  people  fhould  be  anticipated;  to  avoid  repetition,
therefore,  I  fhall  only  fupply  deficiencies.  Of  the  manner
of  difpofmg  of  their  dead,  much  has  been  faid  already.  I
muft  more  explicitly  obferve  that  there  are  two  places  in
which  the  dead  are  depolited ;  one  a  kind  of  filed,  where  the
fielh  is  fuffered  to  putrefy;  the  other  an  enclofure,  with
ere<5tions  of  ftone,  where  the  bones  are  afterwards  buried.
The  fheds  are  called  Tupapow,  and  the  enclofures  Morai.
The  Morais  are  alfo  places  of  worfhip.

As  foon  as  a  native  of  Otaheite  is  known  to  be  dead,  the
houfe  is  filled  with  relations,  who  deplore  their  lofs,  fome  by
loud  lamentations,  and  fome  by  lefs  clamorous,  but  more
genuine  expreflions  of  grief.  Thofe  who  are  in  the  neared
degree  of  kindred,  and  are  really  affefted  by  the  event,  are
filent ;  the  reft  are  one  moment  uttering  paftionate  exclam  a- .
tions  in  a  chorus,  and  the  next  laughing  and  talking  without
the  leaft  appearance  of  concern.  In  this  manner  the  re¬
mainder  of  the  day  on  which  they  aftemble  is  fpent,  and  all
the  fucceeding  night.  On  the  next  morning  the  body  i3
fhrouded  in  their  cloth,  and  conveyed  to  the  fea  fide  upon  a
bier,  which  the  bearers  fupport  upon  their  fhoulders,  at¬
tended  by  the  prieft,  who  having  prayed  over  the  body,  re¬
peats  his  fentences  during  the  proceftion:  when  it  arrives  at
the  water’s  edge,  it  is  fet  down  upon  the  beach;  the  prieft
renews  his  prayers,  and  taking  up  fome  of  the  water  in  his
hands,  fprinkles  it  towards  the  body,  but  not  upon  it.  It  is
then  carried  back  forty  or  fifty  yards,  and  foon  after  brought
again  to  the  beach,  where  the  prayers  and  fprinkling  are  re¬
peated  :  it  is  thus  removed  backwards  and  forwards  feveral
times,  and  while  thefe  ceremonies  have  been  performing  a
houfe  has  been  built,  and  a  fmall  fpace  of  ground  railed  in.
In  the  center  of  this  houfe,  or  Tupapow,  polls  are  fet  up  to
fupport  the  bier,  which  is  at  length  conveyed  thither,  and

placed


WTPVbollett  jcufe.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.  '  23 y

placed  upon  it,  and  here  the  body  remains  to  putrify  till  the  »^9-  ,
flefli  is  wholly  wafted  from  the  bones.

Thefe  houfes  of  corruption  are  of  a  fize  proportioned  to
the  rank  of  the  perfon  whofe  body  they  are  to  contain ;  thofe
allotted  to  the  lower  clafs  are  juft  iufficient  to  cover  the  bier,
and  have  no  railing  round  them.  The  largeft  we  ever  faw
was  eleven  yards  long,  and  fuch  as  thefe  are  ornamented
according  to  the  abilities  and  inclination  of  the  furviving
kindred,  who  never  fail  to  lay  a  profufion  of  good  cloth
about  the  body,  and  fometimes  almoft  cover  the  outfide  of
the  houfe.  Garlands  of  the  fruit  of  the  palm-nut  or  panda -
nus,  and  cocoa  leaves,  twilled  by  the  priefts  in  myfterious
knots,  with  a  plant  called  by  them  Ethee  no  Moral,  which  is
particularly  confecrafed  to  funereal  folemnities,  are  depofited
about  the  place ;  provilion  and  water  are  alfo  left  at  a  little
diftance,  of  which,  and  of  other  decorations,  a  more  parti¬
cular  defcription  has  been  given  already.

As  foon  as  the  body  is  depofited  in  the  Tupapow,  the
mourning  is  renewed.  The  women  affemble,  and  are  led
to  the  door  by  the  neareft  relation,  who  ftrikes  a  lhark’s
tooth  feveral  times  into  the  crown  of  her  head :  the  blood
copioufly  follows,  and  is  carefully  received  upon  pieces  of
linen,  which  are  thrown  under  the  bier.  The  reft  of  the
women  follow  this  example,  and  the  ceremony  is  repeated
at  the  interval  of  two  or  three  days,  as  long  as  the  zeal  and
forrow  of  the  parties  hold  out.  The  tears  alfo  which  are
fhed  upon  thefe  occafions,  are  received  upon  pieces  of  cloth,
and  offered  as  oblations  to  the  dead :  fomc  of  the  younger
people  cut  off  their  hair,  and  that  is  thrown  under  the  bier
with  the  other  offerings.  This  cuftom  is  founded  upon  a
notion  that  the  foul  of  the  deceafed,  which  they  believe  to
exift  in  a  feparate  ftate,  is  hovering  about  the  place  where

H  h  a  tIle


236


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

>r  f  5  y/  >f  ;  :

the  body  is  depofited :  that  it  obferves  the  a&ions  of  the  fur-

vivors,  and  is  gratified  by  fuc'h  teftimonies  of  their  affcflion
and  grief.

Two  or  three  days  after  thefe  ceremonies  have  been  com¬
menced  by  the  women,  during  which  the  men  feem  to  be
wholly  infenfible  of  their  lofs,  they  alfo  begin  to  perform
their  part.  The  neared  relations  take  it  in  turn  to  afliime  the
drefs,  and  perform  the  office  which  have  already  been  par¬
ticularly  defcribed  in  the  account  of  Tubourai  Tamaide’s
'  acded  as  chief  mourner  to  an  old  woman,  his  rela¬

tion,  who  died  while  we  were  in  the  ifland.  One  part  of  the
ceremony,  however,  which  accounts  for  the  running  away
of  the  people  as  foon  as  this  proceffion  is  in  fight,  has  not
been  mentioned.  The  chief  mourner  carries  in  his  hand  a
long  flat  flick,  the  edge  of  which  is  fet  with  fhark’s  teeth,
and  in  a  phrenzy,  which  his  grief  is  fuppofed  to  have  in-
fpired 7  he  runs  at  all  he  fees,  and  if  any  of  them  happen  to
be  overtaken,  he  flrikes  them  mod  unmercifully  with  this
indented  cudgel,  which  cannot  fail  to  wound  them  in  a  dan¬
gerous  manner.

Thefe  proceflions  continue  at  certain  intervals  for  five
moons,  but  are  lefs  and  lefs  frequent,  by  a  gradual  diminu¬
tion,  as  the  end  of  that  time  approaches.  When  it  is  ex¬
pired,  what  remains  of  the  body  is  taken  down  from  the
biei,  and  the  bones  having  been  fcraped  and  waflied  very
clean,  are  buried,  according  to  the  rank  of  the  perfon,  either
within  or  without  aMorair  if  the  deceafed  was  an  Earee,  or
Chief,  his  fkull  is  not  buried  with  the  reft  of  the  bones,  but
is  wrapped  up  in  fine  cloth,  and  put  in  a  kind  of  box  made
foi  that  purpofe,  which  is  alfo  placed  in  the  Morai.  This
coder  is  called  Ewharre  note  Orometua, ,  the  houfe  of  a  teacher
or  mafter.  After  this  the  mourning  ceafes,  except  fome  of

the


23  7


ROUND  THE  WORLD;

the  women  continue  to  be  really  afflicfted  for  the  Iofs,  and  in  1769.
that  cafe  they  will  fometimes  fuddenly  wound  themfelves  ' —
with  the  fhark’s  tooth  wherever  they  happen  to  be :  this  per¬
haps  will  account  for  the'paflion  of  grief  in  which  Terapo
wounded  herfelf  at  the  fort;  fome  accidental  circumftance
might  forcibly  revive  the  remembrance  of  a  friend  or  rela¬
tion  whom  flie  had  loft,  with  a  pungency  of  regret  and  ten-  '
dernefs  which  forced  a  vent  by  tears,  and  prompted  her  ts>
a  repetition  of  the  funereal  rite.

The  ceremonies,  however,  do  not  ceafe  with  the  mourn¬
ing:  prayers  are  Hill  faid  by  the  pried,  who  is  well  paid  by
the  furviving  relations,  and  offerings  made  at  the  Morai*

Some  of  the  things,  which  from  time  to  ,time  are  depodted
theie,  are  emblematical :  a  young  plantain  reprefents  the
deceafed,  and  the  bunch  of  feathers  the  deity  who  is  in¬
voked.  The  pried  places  himfelf  over-againd  the  fymbol  of
the  God,  accompanied  by  fome  of  the  relations,  who  are
furnifhed  with  a  fmall  offering,  and  repeats  his  oraifon  in  a
fet  form,  confiding  of  feparate  fen  fences ;  at  the  fame  time
weaving  the  leaves  of  the  cocoa-nut  into  different  forms
which  he  afterwards  depofits  upon  the  ground  where  the
bones  have  been  interred  ;  the  deity  is  then  addreffed  by  a
fhrill  fcreech,  which  is  ufed  only  upon  that  occadon.  When
the  pried  retires,  the  tuft  of  feathers  is  removed,  and  the
providons  left  to  putrify,  or  be  devoured  by  the  ratSi

Of  the  religion  of  thefe  people,  we  were  not  able  to  ac-  Rein™
quire  any  clear  and  confident  knowleger  we  found  it  like
the  religion  of  mod  other  countries,  involved  in  mydery,
and  perplexed  with  apparent  inconddences.  The  religious
language  is  alfo  here,  as  it  is  in  China,  different  from  that
which  is  ufed  in  common ;  fo  that  Tupia,  who  took  great
pains,  to  indrud  us,  having  no  words  to  exprefs  his  mean¬
ing


g  LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

1769.  ing  which  we  underftood,  gave  us  le&ures  to  very  little
- - -  purpofe :  what  we  learnt,  however,  I  will  relate  with  as

much  perfpicuity  as  1  can.

Nothing  is  more  obvious  to  a  rational  being,  however  ig¬
norant  or  ftupid,  than  that  the  univerfe  and  its  various  parts,
as  far  as  they  fall  under  his  notice,  were  produced  by  fome
agent  inconceivably  more  powerful  than  himfelf;  and  no¬
thing  is  more  difficult  to  be  conceived,  even  by  the  moft  fa-
gacious  and  knowing,  than  the  production  of  them  from
nothing,  which  among  us  is  expreffied  by  the  word  Creation .
It  is  natural  therefore,  as  no  Being  apparently  capable  of
producing  the  univerfe  is  to  be  feen,  that  he  ffiould  be
fuppofed  to  refide  in  fome  diftant  part  of  it,  or  to  be  in
his  nature  invifible,  and  that  he  ffiould  have  originally
produced  all  that  now  exifts  in  a  manner  fimilar  to  that  in
which  nature  is  renovated  by  the  fucceffion  of  one  genera.-
tion  to  another;  but  the  idea  of  procreation  includes  in  it
that  of  two  perfons,  and  from  the  conjunction  of  twoperfons
tliefe  people  imagine  every  thing  in  the  univerfe  either  01  i-
ginally  or  derivatively  to  proceed.

The  Supreme  Deity,  one  of  thefe  two  firft  beings,  they

call  Taroataihetoomoo,  and  the  other,  whom  they  fuppofe

to  have  been  a  rock,  Tefapa.  A  daughter  of  thefe  was

Tet  t  o  w m  at  at  a  yo,  the  year,  or  thirteen  months  collectively,

which  they  never  name  but  upon  this  occafion,  and  ffie,  by

the  common  father,  produced  the  months,  and  the  months*

by  conjunction  with  each  other,  the  days:  the  ftars  they

fuppofe  partly  to  be  the  immediate  offspring  of  the  firft  pair,

arnd  partly  to  have  increased  among  tliemfelvcs  ;  and  they  have

the;  fame  notion  with  refpeft  to  the  different  fpeciesof  plants.

Among  other  progeny  of  Taroataihetoomoo  and  Tepapa,

they  fuppofe  an  inferior  race  of  deities  whom  they  call
7  -  Eatuas.


round  the  world.


Eatuas.  Two  of  thefe  Eatuas,  they  fay,  at  fome  remote  pe-  t  *769-
riod  of  time,  inhabited  the  earth,  and  were  the  parents  of
the  firft  man.  When  this  man,  their  common  anceflor,  was
born,  they  fay  that  he  was  round  like  a  ball,  but  that  his
mother,  with  great  care,  drew  out  his  limbs,  and  having  at
length  moulded  him  into  his  prefent  form,  Ihe  called  him
Eothe,  which  fignifies  jinijlxd .  That  being  prompted  by
the  univerfal  inftintf:  to  propagate  his  kind,  and  being  able
to  find  no  female  but  his  mother,  he  begot  upon  her  a
daughter,  and  upon  the  daughter  other  daughters  for  feveral
generations,  before  there  was  a  fon;  a  fon,  however,  being
at  length  born,  he,  by  the  affiftance  of  his  fillers,  peopled
the  world.

Befides  their  daughterTettowmatatayo,  the  firfl  progenitors
of  nature  had  a  fon  whom  they  called  Take.  Taroatai-
hetoomoo,  the  Supreme  Deity,  they  emphatically  flile  the
caufer of  earthquakes;  but  their  prayers  are  more  generally
addrefled  to  Tane,  whom  they  fuppofe  to  take  a  greater  part
in  the  affairs  of  mankind.

Their  fubordinate  deities  or  Eatuas,  which  are  numerous,
are  of  both  fexes :  the  male  are  worfhipped  by  the  men,  and
the  female  by  the  women;  and  each  have  Mora  is  to  which
the  other  fex  is  not  admitted,  though  they  have  alfo  Morais
common  to  both.  Men  perform  the  office  of  priefl  to  both
fexes,  but  each  fex  has  its  priefls,  for  thofe  who  officiate  for
one  fex,  do  not  officiate  for  the  other.

They  believe  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  at  leaf!  its
exitlenqe  in  a  feparate  date,  and  that  there  are  two  fitu-
ations  of  different  degrees  of  happinefs,  fomewhat  ana-
logous  to  our  heaven  and  hell :  the  fuperior  fituation  they
call  Tavirua  Verai ,  the  other  Tiahoboo.  They  do  not,  how¬
ever,  confider  them  as  places  of  reward  and  puniffimerJt,,

•  r  but


L  I  E  U  TENANT  C  O  OK’s  VOYAGE

but  as  receptacles  for  different  daffies ;  the  firft,  for  their
Chiefs  and  principal  people,  the  other  for  thofe  of  inferior
rank,  for  they  do  not  fuppofe  that  their  addons  here  in  tile
leaf!  influence  their  future  ftate,  or  indeed  that  they  come
under  the  cognizance  of  their  deities  at  all.  Their  religion,
therefore,  if  it  has  no  influence  upon  their  morals,  is  at°leaft
difinterefted;  and  their  expreffions  of  adoration  and  reve¬
rence,  whether  by  words  or  actions,  arife  only  from  a
humble  fenfe  of  their  own  inferiority,  and  the  ineffable  ex¬
cellence  of  divine  perfedion.

The  charader  of  the  pried  or  Tahowa,  is  hereditary :  the
clafs  is  numerous,  and  confifts  of  all  ranks  of  people;  the
chief,  however,  is  generally  the  younger  brother  of  a  good
family,  and  is  refpeded  in  a  degree  next  to  their  kings.  Of
the  little  knowlege  that  is  poilefled  in  this  country,  the
priefls  have  the  greatefl  fhare  ;  but  it  confifts  principally  in
an  acquaintance  with  the  names  and  ranks  of  the  different
Eatuas  or  fubordinate  divinities,  and  the  opinions  concerning
the  origin  of  things,  which  have  been  tradicionally  preferved
among  the  order  in  detached  fentences,  of  which  fome  will
repeat  an  incredible  number,  though  but  very  few  of  the
words  that  are  ufed  in  their  common  dialed  occur  in  them.

The  priefls,  however,  are  fuperior  to  the  reft  of  the  people
in  the  knowlege  of  navigation  and  aftronomy,  and  indeed
the  name  Tahowa  flgnifies  nothing  more  than  a  man  of
knowlege*  As  there  are  priefls  of  every  clafs,  they  officiate
only  among  that  clafs  to  which  they  belong :  the  prieft  of
the  inferior  clafs  is  never  called  upon  by  thofe  of  fuperior
rank,  nor  will  the  prieft  of  the  fuperior  rank  officiate  for  any
of  the  inferior  clafs.

Maniage  in  this  ifland,  as  appeared  to  us,  is  nothing  more
than  an  agreement  between  the  man  and  woman,  with

which


4


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


24!


which  the  priefl  has  no  concern.  Where  it  is  contracted  it
appears  to  be  pretty  well  kept,  though  fometimes  the  parties
feparate  by  mutual  confent,  and  in  that  cafe  a  divorce  takes
place  with  as  little  trouble  as  the  marriage.

f  +  *

But  though  the  prieflhood  has  laid  the  people  under  no
tax  for  a  nuptial  benediction,  there  are  two  operations  which
it  has  appropriated,  and  from  which  it  derives  confiderable
advantages.  One  is  tattowing ,  and  the  other  circumcifion,
though  neither  of  them  have  any  connexion  with  religion.
The  tattowing  has  been  defcribed  already.  Circumcifion
has  been  adopted  merely  from  motives  of  cleanlinefs;  it
cannot  indeed  properly  be  called  circumcifion,  becaufe  the
prepuce  is  not  mutilated  by  a  circular  wound,  but  only  flit
through  the  upper  part  to  prevent  its  contracting  over  the
glam.  As  neither  of  thefe  can  be  performed  by  any  but  a
priefl,  and  as  to  be  without  either  is  the  greateft  difgrace,
they  may  be  confidered  as  a  claim  to  furplice  fees  like  our
marriages  and  chriflenings,  which  are  cheerfully  and  libe¬
rally  paid,  not  according  to  any  fettled  flipend,  but  the  rank
and  abilities  of  the  parties  or  their  friends.

The  Morai,  as  has  already  been  obferved,  is  at  once  a
burying  ground  and  a  place  of  worfiiip,  and  in  this  parti¬
cular  our  churches  too  much  referable  it.  The  Indian,  how¬
ever,  approaches  his  Morai  with  a  reverence  and  humility
that  difgraces  the  chriftian,  not  becaufe  he  holds  any  thing
facred  that  is  there,  but  becaufe  he  there  worfhips  an  invi-
fible  divinity,  for  whom,  though  he  neither  hopes  for  reward,
nor  fears  punifhment,  at  his  hand,  he  always  exprefies  the
profoundefl  homage  and  mofl  humble  adoration.  I  have  al¬
ready  given  a  very  particular  deferiprion  both  of  the  Morais
and  the  altars  that  arc  placed  near  them.  When  an  Indian  is

Vol.  II-  I  i  about


1769.

— - - '


242  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

,  ll€*  _t  about  to  worfhip  at  the  Morai,  or  brings  his  offering  to  the
altar,  he  always  uncovers  his  body  to  the  wafte,  and  his
looks  and  attitude  are  fuch  as  fufficiently  exprefs  a  corre-

fponding  difpofttion  of  mind.

It  did  not  appear  to  us  that  thefe  people  are,  in  any  in-
fiance,  guilty  of  idolatiy  \  at  leaf!  they  do  not  worfhip  any
thing  that  is  the  work  of  their  hands,  nor  any  vifible  part  of
the  creation.  This  ifland  indeed,  and  the  reft  that  lie  near
it,  have  a  particular  bird,  fome  a  heron,  and  others  a
king  s  ft  flier,  to  which  they  pay  a  peculiar  regard,  and  con¬
cerning  which  they  have  fome  fuperftitious  notions  with
refpect  to  good  and  bad  fortune,  as  we  have  of  the  fwallow
and  robin-red-breaft,  giving  them  the  name  of  Eatua,  and
by  no  means  killing  or  molefting  them ;  yet  they  never
addrefs  a  petition  to  them,  or  approach  them  with  any  adt
of  adoration.

Government.  Though  I  dare  not  affert  that  thefe  people,  to  whom  the
art  of  writing,  and  confequently  the  recording  of  laws,  are
utterly  unknown,  live  under  a  regular  form  of  govern¬
ment  ;  yet  a  fubordination  is  eftablifhed  among  them,  that
greatly  refembles  the  early  ftate  of  every  nation  in  Europe
under  the  feudal  fyftem,  which  fecured  liberty  in  the  moft
licentious  excefs  to  a  few,  and  entailed  the  moft  abjedt  flavery
upon  the  reft.

Their  orders  are,  Earee  rahie ,  which  anfwers  to  king ;  Earee
baron ;  Manahouni ,  vaftal  $  and  Toutou ,  villain.  The  Earee
rahie,  of  which  there  are  two  in  this  ifland,  one  being  the
fovereign  of  each  of  the  peninfulas  of  which  it  conftfts,  is
treated  with  great  refpedl  by  all  ranks,  but  did  not  appear  to
us  to  be  invefted  with  fo  much  power  as  was  exercifed  by  the
Earees  in  their  own  diftridls ;  nor  indeed  did  we,  as  I  have

before


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


before  obferved,  once  fee  the  fovereign  of  Obereonoo,  while  *7^9-
we  were  in  the  ifland.  The  Earees  are  lords  of  one  or  more
of  the  diftricits  into  which  each  of  the  peninfulas  is  divided,
of  which  there  may  be  about  one  hundred  in  the  whole
ifland  ;  and  they  parcel  our  their  territories  to  the  Manahou-
nies,  who  cultivate  each  his  part  which  he  holds  under  the
baron.  The  lowed;  clafs,  called  Toutous,  feem  to  be  nearly
under  the  fame  circumftances  as  the  villains  in  feudal  go¬
vernments:  thefe  do  all  the  laborious  work,  they  cultivate  the
land  under  the  Manahounies,  who  are  only  nominal  culti¬
vators  for  the  lord,  they  fetch  wood  and  water,  and,  under
the  direction  of  the  miflrefs  of  the  family,  drefs  the  victuals  $
they  alfo  catch  the  fifh.


Each  of  the  Earees  keeps  a  kind  of  court,  and  has  a  great
number  of  attendants,  chiefly  the  younger  brothers  of  their
own  tribe ;  and  among  thefe  fome  hold  particular  offices,
but  of  what  nature  exactly  we  could  not  tell.  One  was  called


the  Eozva  no  PEaree ,  and  another  the  JVhanno  no  PEaree ,  and
thefe  were  frequently  difpatched  to  us  with  meflages.  Of
all  the  courts  of  thefe  Earees,  that  of  Tootahah  was  the  mod
fplcndid,  as  indeed  might  reafonahly  be  expelled,  becaufe
he  adminiflered  the  government  for  Outou,  his  nephew,  who
was  Earee  rahie  of  Obereonoo,  and  lived  upon  his  eflate.
The  child  of  the  baron  or  Earee,  as  well  as  of  the  fovereign
or  Earee  rahie,  fucceeds  to  the  title  and  honours  of  the  father
as  foon  as  it  is  born :  fo  that  a  baron,  who  was  yefterdav
called  Earee,  and  was  approached  with  the  ceremony  of
lowering  the  garments,  fo  as  to  uncover  the  upper  part  of
the  body,  is  to-day,  if  his  wife  was  lail  night  delivered  of  a


child,  reduced  to  the  rank  of  a  private  man,  all  marks  of
rcfpect  being  transferred  to  the  child,  if  it  is  fuflered  to  live,

I  i  2


though


t


244

1769.

U— vr—

t

War.


Weapons,


LIEUTENANT  COOR’s  VOYAGE

though  the  father  Hill  continues  pofleffor  and  adminiflrator
of  his  eflate:  probably  this  cuflom  has  its  fhare,  among
other  inducements,  in  forming  the  focieties  called  Arreoy.

If  a  general  attack  happens  to  be  made  upon  the  ifland,
every  diflridt  under  the  command  of  an  Earee,  is  obliged  to
furnifh  its  proportion  of  foldiers  for  the  common  defence.
The  nuihber  furnifhed  by  the  principal  diflri&s,  which  Tupia
recollected,  when  added  together,  amounted,  as  I  have  ob-
ferved  before,  to  fix  thoufand  fix  hundred  and  eighty.

Upon  fuch  occafions,  the  united  force  of  the  whole  ifland
is  commanded  in  chief  by  the  Earee  rahie.  Private  dif¬
ferences  between  two  Earees,  are  decided  by  their  own
people,  without  at  all  diflurbing  the  general  tranquillity.

Their  weapons  are  flings,  which  they  ufe  with  great  dex¬
terity,  pikes  headed  with  the  flings  of  fling-rays,  and  clubsr
of  about  fix  or  feven  feet  long,  made  of  a  very  hard  heavy
wood.  Thus  armed,  they  are  faid  to  fight  with  great  ob-
flinacy,  which  is  the  more  likely  to  be  true,  as  it  is  certain
that  they  give  no  quarter  to  either  man,  woman,  or  child,
who  is  fo  unfortunate  as  to  fall  into  their  hands  during  the
battle,  or  for  fome  hours  afterwards,  till  their  paflion,  which
is  always  violent,  though  not  lafling,  has  fubfided.

The  Earee  rahie  of  Obereonoo,  while  we  were  here,  was
in  perfe&  amity  with  the  Earee  rahie  of  Tiarreboo,  the
other  peninfula,  though  he  took  himfelf  the  title  of  king  of
the  whole  ifland :  this,  however,  produced  no  more  jealoufy
in  the  other  fovereign,  than  the  title  of  king  of  France
aflumed  by  our  fovereign,  does  in  his  molt  Chriflian  Ma-
jefly.

In  a  government  fo  rude,  it  cannot  be  expected  that  diflri-
butive  juflice  fhould  be  regularly  adminiflered,  and  indeed

where


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

m  I

where  there  is  fo  little  oppofition  of  intereft,  in  confequence
of  the  facility  with  which  every  appetite  and  pafiion  is  gra¬
tified,  there  can  be  but  few  crimes.  There  is  nothing  like
money,  the  common  medium  by  which  every  want  and
every  wifii  is  fuppofed  to  be  gratified  by  thofe  who  do  not
poffefs  it ;  there  is  no  apparently  permanent  good  which
either  fraud  or  force  can  unlawfully  obtain  ;  and  when  all
the  crimes  that  are  committed  by  the  inhabitants  of  civilized
countries,  to  get  money,  are  fet  out  of  the  account,  not
many  will  remain:  add  to  this,  that  where  the  commerce
with  woman  is  reftrained  by  no  law,  men  will  feldom  be
under  any  temptation  to  commit  adultery,  efpecially  as  one
wojnan  is  always  lefs  preferred  to  another,  where  they  are
lefs  diftinguifhed  by  perfonal  decorations,  and  the  adventi¬
tious  circumftances  which  are  produced  by  the  varieties  of
art,  and  the  refinements  of  fentiment.  That  they  are
thieves  is  true ;  but  as  among  thefe  people  no  man  can  be
much  injured  or  benefited  by  theft,  it  is  not  necefiary  to  re-
firain  it  by  fuch  punifhments,  as  in  other  countries  are  abfo-
Iutely  necefiary  to  the  very  exiftence  of  civil  fociety.  Tupia?>
however,  tells  us,  that  adultery  is  fometimes  committed  as
well  as  theft.  In  all  cafes  where  an  injury  has  been  com¬
mitted,  the  punifhment  of  the  offender  lies  with  the  fuf-
ferer:  adultery,  if  the  parties  are  caught  in  the  fadt,  is
fometimes  punifhed  with  death  in  the  firft  ardour  of  refent-
ment ;  but  without  circumfiances  of  immediate  provocation*
the  female  finner  feldom  fuffers  more  than  a  beating.  As
punifhment,  however,  is  enforced  by  no  law,  nor  taken  into
the  hand  of  any  magiftrate,  it  is  not  often  inflicted,  except
the  injured  party  is  the  ftrongefi: ;  though  the  Chiefs  do
,  fometimes  punifh  their  immediate  dependents,  for  faults
committed  againfl  each  other,  and  even  the  dependents  of

2  others,


24S

1769.

— >


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

,  others,  if  they  are  accufed  of  any  offence  committed  in  their
diflricft.

Having  now  given  the  befl  defcription  that  I  can  of  the
ifland  in  its  prefent  ftate,  and  of  the  people,  with  their  cuf-
toms  and  manners,  language  and  arts,  I  fliall  only  add  a
few  general  obfervations,  which  may  be  of  ufe  to  future  na¬
vigators,  if  any  of  the  fhips  of  Great  Britain  fhould  receive
oideis  to  vifit  it.  As  it  produces  nothing  that  appears  to  be
convertible  into  an  article  of  trade,  and  can  be  ufeful  only  by
affording  refrefhments  to  /hipping  in  their  paffage  through
thefe  feas,  it  might  be  made  to  anfwer  this  purpofe  in  a
much  greater  degree,  by  tranfporting  thither  fheep,  goats,
and  horned  cattle,  with  European  garden-fluff,  and  other
ufeful  vegetables,  which  there  is  the  greateft  reafon  to  fup-
pofe  will  flourifh  in  fo  fine  a  climate,  and  fo  rich  a  foil.

Though  this,  and  the  neighbouring  iflands  lie  within  the
tropick  of  Capricorn,  yet  the  heat  is  not  troublefome,  nor
did  the  winds  blow  conflantly  from  the  eafl.  We  had  fre¬
quently  a  frefh  gale  from  the  S.  W.  for  two  or  three  days,
and  fometimes,  though  very  feldom,  from  theN.  W.  Tupia
leported,  that  fouth  weflerly  winds  prevail  in  October,  No¬
vember,  and  December,  and  we  have  no  doubt  of  the  fad.
When  the  winds  are  variable,  they  are  always  accompanied
by  a  fwell  from  the  S.  W.  or  W.  S.  W. ;  there  is  alfo  a  fweli
from  the  fame  points  when  it  is  calm,  and  the  atmofphere
loaded  with  clouds,  which  is  a  fure  indication  that  the  winds

aie  variable,  or  weflerly  out  at  fea,  for  with  the  fettled  trade-
wind  the  weather  is  dear.

The  meeting  with  weflerly  winds,  within  the  general  li¬
mns  of  the  eaftern  trade,  has  induced  fome  navigators  to
fup pofe  that  they  were  near  fome  large  track  of  land,  of
which,  however,  I  think  they  are  no  indication,

7


It


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


247

It  has  been  found,  both  by  us  and  the  Dolphin,  that  the  1769.
trade-wind,  in  thefe  parts,  does  not  extend  farther  to  the
fouth  than  twenty  degrees,  beyond  which,  we  generally
found  a  gale  from  the  weft  ward  ;  and  it  is  reafonable  to
fuppofe,  that  when  thefe  winds  blow  ltrong,  they  will  drive
back  the  eaflerly  wind,  and  confequently  incroach  upon  the
limits  within  which  they  conftantly  blow,  and  thus  necef-
farily  produce  variable  winds,  as  either  happens  to  prevail,
and  a  fouth  wefterly  fwell.  This  fuppofition  is  the  more
probable,  as  it  is  wrell  known  that  the  trade-winds  blow  but
faintly  for  fome  diftance  within  their  limits,  and  therefore
may  be  more  ealily  flopped  or  repelled  by  a  wind  in  the  con¬
trary  direction  :  it  is  alfo  well  known,  that  the  limits  of  the
trade-winds  vary  not  only  at  different  feafons  of  the  year,
but  fometimes  at  the  fame  feafon,  in  different  years.

There  is  therefore  no  reafon  to  fuppofe  that  fouth  wefterly
winds,  within  thefe  limits,  are  caufed  by  the  vicinity  of
large  traces  of  land,  efpecially  as  they  are  always  accom¬
panied  with  a  large  fwell,  in  the  fame  direction  in  which
they  blow ;  and  we  find  a  much  greater  furf  beating  upon
the  fliores  of  the  fouth  weft  fide  of  the  iflands  that  are  fitu-
ated  juft  within  the  limits  of  the  trade-wind,  than  upon  any
other  part  of  them.

The  tides  about  thefe  iflands,  are  perhaps  as  inconfiderable
as  in  any  part  of  the  world.  A  fouth  or  S.  by  W.  moon,  makes
high  water  in  the  bay  of  Matavai  at  Otaheite  ;  but  the  water

very  feldom  rifes  perpendicularly  above  ten  or  twelve
inches.

The  variation  of  the  compafs,  I  found  to  be  40  46' Eafterly,
this  being  the  refult  of  a  great  number  of  trials  made  with
four  of  Dr.  Knight’s  needles,  adapted  to  azimuth  compafles,

Thefe


24$


'LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


]_I76g‘  ,  Thcfc  compaffes  I  thought  the  beft  that  could  be  procured
yet,  when  applied  to  the  meridian  line,  I  found  them  to
differ  not  only  one  from  another,  fometimes  a  degree  and  an  ,
half,  but  the  fame  needle,  half  a  degree  from  itfelf  in  dif¬
ferent  trials  made  on  the  fame  day ;  and  I  do  not  remember
that  I  have  ever  found  two  needles  which  exactly  agreed  at
the  fame  time  and  place,  though  I  have  often  found  the  fame
needle  agree  with  itfelf,  in  feveral  trials  made  one  after  the
other.  This  imperfection  of  the  needle,  however,  is  of  no
confequence  to  navigation,  as  the  variation  can  always  be
found  to  a  degree  of  accuracy,  more  than  fuflicient  for  all
nautical  purpofes.


CHAP.


16°  15


M  A  IT  R  IT  A


car


16-30.


Weft  Longitude  from  tlie  Meridian  of  Greenwich

3o


<nUMyfLilc

Tarawa

tSfaTcluntwii'  L>&/


o


Oaccfato  !//%■  I

Pvrare  //ti  Q  C?v£

«U*  X  ji


V*  -aL'i,  '

Taa/raa  /  ^Qp  'f§p

'

f e  a  vatu1*

.,,  i  V


cV  .1


i‘%.  Otu//ae//aley

Hfs

+  *Y

*  "030  LAB  ORA

'ffcy

(i«A  Tv


S',  *  ^  V

x  *  ** *  *  r.
rW  ~


•Uihtnil .


OtahU

'4  >


OherW


/'x  >)j

Tan  (<>a:p  %

laito  f


T\onrfiei

Jt


’*!.  i,  51

-criAV

«**■  W?

Ov0  *  *


:#>


*'  „

«/

F  4

|16 1 V$/ienruuua

1  •©/

oOhamene  Ilarb.


7.


Al^w/W/V/,

v  i1


15


V

7  aAonm&eAT:

-for


- IP  M

Oliamaneno  Hafb.w  ^

O to  re  a  IW'\  -  -

$  *  :


7\ .  OActaic' I.

%

‘$jjj£\Taft  u  awe  I .

*  Vf  •

\*  *%Tamau T.


\

Motw  arm  %T:  "x

m  *1

Te t or o a  H  **  _ 11

7?  anna
roatnaroKV
Maarahai

1  \y  J

k


is -If
20 .

29  «  '  \< ^

Mw7cV^PoaHa^b'

17  '.*  «r>\>

,^s>  '  V*lo

nfoo27^

kSw**'*7-


v  ,4  virvvC

3°/*  A
XW  4®

'/  ***  a>


r^-r

^ouHarb.

^la  Harb.


—  H”  "70  wwjnenn’wrwxmt

Well  Longitude  from  the  Meridian  of  Greenwich  .


151


oo


A  II  T


OF  THE


SOCIETY  I  SEE  S


kJ  *


is c  overe


Ji  Y


Lie  ut  .  J .  <7  77  g>a“ ,

176,9.


Variation  ofthr  (bmpa/s  6° o  E .


°^arre

l*rb/?r

/•*;'’

if  48

v;;'  17

HuaheiAI


O tiharrc  raa


00


Scale  of  Miles


Point  Venus


r  i

K*#  ■  .,,

S^l('  Tr<  ■<  ■  11/1/  *


Owharre  Harbour


Huaheine


Matavia  Bay

IN

OTAHEITE  .


4


Ohamaneno  Harbour


Tahow/ioi’


Ttimou  /.


-^dOpun/n/I:


yatmng

Plan


[;:r;;:;:;::i;;i:nn


liimiiiiillliiiimii


*  fcn/c  of  1  Ceapjue


/


I


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

<


CHAP.'  XX.


24  9


A  Defcription  of  fever al  other  Iflands  in  the  Neighbourhood
of  Otaheite ,  with  various  Incidents  \  a  dramatic  Enter¬
tainment ;  and  many  Particulars  relative  to  the  Cuftoms
and  Manners  of  the  Inhabitants .


f\  F  T  E  R  parting  with  our  friends,  we  made  an  eafy  fail,
d  -*■  with  gentle  breezes  and  clear  weather,  and  were  in¬
formed  by  Tupia,  that  four  of  the  neighbouring  iflands,
which  he  diflinguifhed  by  the  names  of  Huaheine
Ulietea,  Otaha,  and  Bolabola,  lay  at  the  diftance  of
between  one  and  two  days  fail  from  Otaheite;  and  that  hogs,
fowls,  and  other  refrefhments,  with  which  we  had  of  late
been  but  fparingly  fupplietf,  were  there  to  be  procured  in
great  plenty ;  but  having  difcovered  from  the  hills  of  Ota¬
heite,  an  ifland  lying  to  the  northward,  which  he  called
Tethuroa,  I  determined  firft  to  ftand  that  way,  to  take  a
nearer  view  of  it.  It  lies  N.  7  W.  diftant  eight  leagues  from
the  northern  extremity  of  Otaheite,  upon  which  we  had  ob-
ferved  the  tranfit,  and  to  which  we  had,  for  that  reafon,
given  the  name  of  Point  Venus.  We  found  it  to  be  a  fmall
low  ifland,  and  were  told  by  Tupia,  that  it  had  no  fettled
inhabitants,  but  was  occafionally  vifited  by  the  inhabitants
of  Otaheite,  who  fometimes  went  thither  for  a  few  days  to
fifli ;  we  therefore  determined  to  fpend  no  more  time  in  a
farther  examination  of  it,  but  to  go  in  fearch  of  Huaheine
and  Ulietea,  which  he  defcribed  to  be  well  peopled,  and  as
large  as  Otaheite.


1769.

July.


Thurfday  13,


VOL.  II.


K  k


At


N


250


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


17,69*  At  fix  o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  14th,  the  weflermofl

July.  0

part  of  Ei meo,  or  York  Ifland,  bore  S.  E.  7S.  and  the  body

Friday  14.

of  Otaheite  E.  7  S.  At  noon,  the  body  of  York  Ifland  bore
E.  by  S.  7  S.  and  Port-Royal  bay,,  at  Otaheit.e,  S.  70°  4 5  E.
diflant  61  miles,  and  an  ifland  which  we  took  to  be  Saun¬
ders’s  Ifland,  called  by  the  natives  Tapoamanao,  bore-
S.  S.  W.  We  alfo  faw  land  bearing  N.  W.  4.  W.  which  Tupia
faid  was  Huaheine;

Saturday  15.  On  the  15th,  it  was  hazy,  with  light  breezes  and  calms
fucceeding  each  other,  fo  that  we  could  fee  no  land,  and.
made  but  little  way.  Our  Indian,  Tupia,  often  prayed
for  a  wind  to  his  god  Tane,  and  as  often  boafled  of  his  fuc-
cefs,  which  indeed  he  took  a  very  effedtual  method  to  fecure,
for  he  never  began  his  addrefs  to  Tane,  till  he  faw  a  breeze
fo  near  that  he  knew  it  muff  reach  the  fhip  before  his  oraifon
was  well  over.


Sunday  16.


Huaheme.


On  the  16th,  we  had  a  gentle  breeze  ;  and  in  the  morning
about  eight  o’clock,  being  dole  in  with  the  north  well  part
of  the  ifland  Huaheine,  we  founded,  but  had  no  bottom  with
80  fathom.  Some  canoes  very  foon  came  off,  but  the  people
feemed  afraid,  and  kept  at  a  diflance  till  they  difcovered  Tu¬
pia,  and  then  they  ventured  nearer.  In  one  of  the  canoes
that  came  up  to  the  fhip’s  fide,  was  the  king  of  the  ifland  and
his  wife.  Upon  alfurances  of  friendfhip,  frequently  and
earneflly  repeated,  their  Majeflies  and  fome  others  came  on
board.  At  flrlt  they  were  flruck  with  aflonifhment,  and.
wondered  at  every  thing  that  was  fhewn  them ;  yet  they
made  no  enquiries,  and  feeming  to  be  fatisfled  with  what
was  offered  to  their  notice,  they  made  no  fearch  after  other
objeds  of  curiofity,  with  which  it  was  natural  to  fuppofe  a
building  of  fuch  novelty  and  magnitude  as  the  fhip  muft
abound.  After  fome  time,  they  became  more  familiar.  I


was


HOUND  THE  WORLD.


/


was  criven  to  underftand,  that  the  name  of  the  king  was  *769-
o  July*

Oree,  and  he  propofed,  as  a  mark  of  amity,  that  we  fhould  -

exchange  names.  To  this  I  readily  confented  ;  and  he  was
Cookee,  for  fo  he  pronounced  my  name,  and  I  was  Oree,  for
the  reft  of  the  time  we  were  together.  We  found  thefe
people  to  be  very  nearly  the  fame  with  thofe  of  Otaheite,  in
perfon,  drefs,  language,  and  every  other  circumftance,  ex¬
cept,  if  Tupia  might  be  believed,  that  they  would  not  fteal.


Soon  after  dinner,  we  came  to  an  anchor,  in  a  fmall  but
excellent  harbour  on  the  weft  fide  of  the  ifland,  which  the
Natives  call  Owharre,  in  eighteen  fathom  water,  clear
ground,  and  fecure  from  all  winds.  I  went  immediately  a-
ihore,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Banks,  Dr.  Solander,  Mr.  Monk-
lioufe,  Tupia,  King  Cookee,  and  fome  other  of  the  natives
who  had  been  on  board  ever  fince  the  morning.  The  mo¬
ment  we  landed  Tupia  ftripped  himfelf  as  low  as  the  waift,
and  defircd  Mr.  Monkhoufe  to  do  the  fame :  he  then  fat
down  before  a  great  number  of  the  natives,  who  were  col¬
lected  together  in  a  large  houfe  or  fixed ;  for  here,  as  well  as
at  Otaheite,  a  houfe  conftfts  only  of  a  roof  fupported  upon
poles ;  the  reft  of  us,  by  his  defire,  ftanding  behind.  He
then  began  a  fpeecli  or  prayer  which  lafted  about  a  quarter
of  an  hour,  the  King  who  flood  over  againft  him  every  now
and  then  anfwering  in  what  appeared  to  be  fet  refponfes.  In
the  courfe  of  this  harangue  he  delivered  at  different  times
two  handkerchiefs,  a  black  filk  neckcloth,  fome  beads,  two
fmall  bunches  of  feathers,  anu  fome  plantains,  as  prefents  to
their  Eatua,  or  God.  In  return  for  thefe,  he  received  for  our
Eatua*  a  hog,  fome  young  plantains,  and  two  fmall  bunches
of  feathers,  which  he  ordered  to  be  carried  on  board  the
fhip.  After  thefe  ceremonies,  which  we  fuppofed  to  be  the
ratification  of  a  treaty  between  us,  every  one  was  difmiffcd

K  k  2  to


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


2^2

ynf 9-  to  go  whither  he  pleafed  ;  and  Tupia  immediately  repaired

j  to  offer  his  oblations  at  one  of  the  Morals.

Monday  i7.  The  next  morning,  we  went  on  fhore  again,  and  walked
np  the  hills,  where  the  productions  were  exactly  the  fame
as  thofe  of  Otaheite,  except  that  the  rocks  and  clay  appeared
to  be  more  burnt.  The  houfes  were  neat,  and  the  boat-
houies  remarkably  large ;  one  that  we  meafured  was  fifty
paces  long,  ten  broad,  and  twenty-four  feet  high ;  the  whole
formed  a  pointed  arch,  like  thofe  of  our  old  cathedrals,
which  was  fupported  on  one  fide  by  twenty-fix,  and  on  the
other  by  thirty  pillars,  or  rather  polls,  about  two  feet  high,
and  one  thick,  upon  mod  of  which  were  rudely  carved  the
heads  of  men,  and  feveral  fanciful  devices,  not  altogether
unlike  thofe  which  we  fome  times  fee  printed  from  wooden
blocks,  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  old  books.  The  plains,
or  flat  part  of  the  country,  abounded  in  bread-fruit,  and
cocoa-nut  trees  ;  in  fome  places,  however,  there  were  fait
fwamps  and  lagoons,  which  would  produce  neither.

T uefday  18.  We  went  again  a-fhore  on  the  i8th,  and  would  have  taken

the  advantage  of  Tupia’s  company,  in  our  perambulation  j
but  he  was  too  much  engaged  with  his  friends  :  we  took
however  his  boy,  whofe  name  was  Tayeto,  and  Mr.  Banks
went  to  take  a  farther  view  of  what  had  much  engaged  hi3
attention  before  ;  it  was  a  kind  of  chefl  or  ark,  the  lid  of
which  was  nicely  fewed  on,  and  thatched  very  neatly
with  palm-nut  leaves:  it  was  fixed  upon  two  poles,  and  fup¬
ported  on  little  arches  of  wTood,  very  neatly  carved  ;  the  ufe
of  the  poles  feemed  to  be  to  remove  it  from  place  to  place,  in
the  manner  of  our  fedan  chairs  :  in  one  end  of  it  was  a  fquare
hole,  in  the  middle  of  which  was  a  ring  touching  the  fides,
and  leaving  the  angles  open,  fo  as  to  form  a  round  hole
within  a  fquare  one.  The  firfi  time  Mr.  Banks  faw  this  cof¬
fer,


mrooHe/t  scuty


X !’  G


ROUND  THE  WORLD:


2  £3


fer,  the  aperture  at  the  end  was  Hopped  with  a  piece  of  cloth,  1769.

which,  lead  he  fhould  give  offence,  he  left  untouched;  pro-  < _ _ >

bably  there  was  then  fomething  within,  but  now  the  cloth  Tuclday
was  taken  away,  and,  upon  looking  into  it,  it  was  found
empty.  The  general  refemblance  between  this  repofitory
and  the  Ark  of  the  Lord  among  the  Jews  is  remarkable;  but
it  is  Hill  more  remarkable,  that  upon  enquiring  of  the  boy
what  it  was  called,  he  faid,  Euuharre  no  Eatua,  the  houfe  of  the
God:  he  could  however  give  no  account  of  its  Signification  or
ufe.  We  had  commenced  a  kind  of  trade  with  the  natives,
but  it  went  on  flowly ;  for  when  any  thing  was  offered,  not
one  of  them  would  take  it  upon  his  own  judgment,  but  col¬
lected  the  opinions  of  twenty  or  thirty  people,  which  could
not  be  done  without  great  lofs  of  time.  We  got,  however,
eleven  pigs,  and  determined  to  try  for  more  the.  next  day.


The  next  day,  therefore,  we  brought  out  fome  hatchets,  Wedaef.  19,
for  which  we  hoped  we  fhould  have  had  no  occafion,  upon
an  ifland  which  no  European  had  ever  vifited  before.  Thefe
procured  us  three  very  large  hogs  ;  and  as  we  propofed  to
fail  in  the  afternoon,  King  Oree  and  feveral  others  came  on.
board  to  take  their  leave.  To  the  King  I  gave  a  fmall  plate
of  pewter,  on  which  was  flamped  this  infcription,  “  His  Bri-
“  tannic  Majefly’s  jfhip,  Endeavour,  Lieutenant  Cook  Com-
“  mander,  16th  July  1769,  Huaheine.”  I  gave  him  alfo
fome  medals  or  counters,  refembling  the  coin  of  England,
ftruck  in  the  year  1761,  with  fome  other  prefents ;  and  he
promifed  that  with  none  of  thefe,  particularly  the  plate,  he
would  ever  part.  I  thought  it  as  lading  a  teftimony  of  our
having  firH  difcovered  this  ifland,  as  any  we  could  leave  be¬
hind  ;  and  having  difmiifed  our  vifitors  well  fatisfied,  and  in
great  good-humour,  we  fct  fail,  about  half  an  hour  after  two
in  the  afternoon. .


The.'


*54


1769.

July-

V - - - -

Wednef.  1


1


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

The  ifland  of  Huaheine,  or  Huahene,  is  fituated  in  the  la-
;  titude  of  16°  43'  S.  and  longitude  150°  52' W.  from  Green¬
wich  :  it  is  diflant  from  Otaheite  about  thirty-one  leagues,
in  the  direction  of  N.  58  W.  and  is  about  feven  leagues  in
compafs.  Its  furface  is  hilly  and  uneven,  and  it  has  a  fafe
and  commodious  harbour.  The  harbour,  which  is  called  by
the  natives  Owalle,  oeOwharre,  Lies  on  the  well  fide,  un¬
der  the  northermofl  high  land,  and  within  the  north  end  of
the  reef,  which  lies  along  that  fide  of  the  ifland ;  there  are
two  inlets  or  openings,  by  which  it  may  be  entered,  through
•the  reef,  about  a  mile  and  a  half  diflant  from  each  other ;
the  fouthermoft  is  the  wideft,  and  on  the  fouth  fide  of  it  lies
a  very  fmall  fandy  ifland.

Huaheine  feems  to  be  a  month  forwarder  in  its  produc¬
tions  than  Otaheite,  as  we  found  the  cocoa-nuts  full  of  ker¬
nel,  and  fome  of  the  new  bread-fruit  fit  to  eat.  Of  the  cocoa-
nuts  the  inhabitants  make  a  food  which  they  call  Poe,  by
mixing  them  with  yams  ;  they  fcrape  both  fine,  and  having
incorporated  the  powder,  they  put  it  into  a  wooden  trough,
with  a  number  of  hot  Hones,  by  which  an  oily  kind  of  hafty
pudding  is  made,  that  our  people  reliflied  very  well,  efpe-
cially  when  it  was  fryed.  Mr.  Banks  found  not  more  than
eleven  or  twelve  new  plants ;  but  he  obferved  fome  infecfls,
and  a  fpecies  of  fcorpion  which  he  had  not  leen  before.

The  inhabitants  fecm  to  be  larger  made,  and  more  flout,
than  thofe  of  Otaheite.  Mr.  Banks  meafured  one  of  the  men,
and  found  him  to  be  fix  feet  three  inches  and  an  half  high;
yet  they  are  fo  lazy,  that  he  could  not  perfuade  any  of  them
to  go  up  the  hills  with  him  :  they  laid,  if  they  were  to  at¬
tempt  it,  the  fatigue  would  kill  them.  The  women  were
very  fair,  more  fo  than  thofe  of  Otaheite ;  and  in  general,
.we  thought  them  more  handfome,  though  none  that  were

equal


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


255'

equal  to-fome  individuals.  Both  fexes  feemed  to  be  lefs  timid,  1769-
and  lefs  curious :  it  has  been  obferved,  that  they  made  no  < — — /
enquiries  on  board  the  fhip;  and  when  we  fired  a  gun,  they  Wednef' I9*
were  frighted  indeed,  but  they  did  not  fall  down,  as  our
friends  at  Otaheite  confiantly  did  when  we  firfi  came  among
them.  For  this  difference,  however,  we  can  eafily  account
upon  other  principles  ;  the  people  at  Huaheine  had  not  feen
the  Dolphin,  thofe  at  Otaheite  had.  In  one,  the  report  of  a
gun  was  connected  with  the  idea  of  inftant  definition  ;  to
the  other,  there  was  nothing  dreadful  in  it  but  the  appear¬
ance  and  the  found,  as  they  had  never  experienced  its  power
of  difpenfing  death.

While  we  were  on  fhore,  we  found  that  Tupia  had  com¬
mended  them  beyond  their  merit,  when  he  faid  that  they
would  not  fieal ;  for  one  of  them  was  detected  in  the  fact.  But
when  he  was  feized  by  the  hair,  the  refi,  inftead  of  running
away,  as  the  people  at  Otaheite  would  have  done,  gathered
round,  and  enquired  what  provocation  had  been  given:  but
this  alfomay  be  accounted  for  without  giving  them  credit  for  *
fuperior  courage;  they  had  no  experience  of  the  confequence
of  European  refentment,  which,  the  people  at  Otaheite  had
in  many  infiances  purchafed  with  life.  It  muft  however  be
acknowledged,  to  their  honour,  that  when  they  underfiood
what  had  happened,  they  fhowed  firong  figns  of  difappro-
bation,  and  prefcribed  a  good  beating  for  the  thief,  which
was  immediately  admin iftered.

We  now  made  fail  for  the  ifland  of  Ulietea,  which  lies  Ulleteas
S.  W.  by  W.  diftant  feven  or  eight  leagues  from  Huaheine,
and  at  half  an  hour  after  fix  in  the  evening  we  were  within
three  leagues  of  the  fhore,  on  the  eaftern  fide.  We  flood  off-
and  on  all  night,  and  when  the  day  broke  the  next  morning,  Thurfday  2a
we  flood  in  for  the  fhore  :  we.  foon  after  difcovered- an  open-

6  ing;


I


LIEUTENANT  cook’s  VOYAGE

')u\t  ing  in  the  reef  which  lies  before  the  illancl,  within  which

- '  Tupia  told  us  there  was  a  good  harbour.  I  did  not.  how-

ever,  implicitly  take  his  word  ;  but  fent  the  matter  out  in
the  pinnace  to  examine  it :  he  foon  made  the  fignal  for  the
fhip  to  follow;  we  accordingly  flood  in,  and  anchored  in  two
and  twenty  fathom,  with  foft  ground.

The  natives  foon  came  of!  to  us  in  two  canoes,  each  of
which  brought  a  woman  and  a  pig.  The  woman  we  fup-
pofed  was  a  mark  of  confidence,  and  the  pig  was  a  prefent ;
we  received  both  with  proper  acknowledgments,  and  com¬
plimented  each  of  the  ladies  with  a  fpike  nail  and  fome
beads,  much  to  their  fatisfa&ion.  We  were  told  by  Tupia,
who  has  always  expreffed  much  fear  of  the  men  of  Bola-
bola,  that  they  have  made  a  conquefl  of  this  ifland ;  and
that,  if  we  remain  here,  they  will  certainly  come  down  to¬
morrow,  and  fight  us.  We  determined,  therefore,  to  go  on
fliore  without  delay,  while  the  day  was  our  own.

I  landed  in  company  with  Mr.  Banks,  Dr.  Solander,  and
the  other  Gentlemen,  Tupia  being  alfo  of  the  party.  He  in¬
troduced  us  by  repeating  the  ceremonies  which  he  had  per¬
formed  at  Huaheine,  after  which  I  hoifled  an  Englifh  jack,
and  took  poffeffion  of  this  and  the  three  neighbouring  iflands,
Huaheine,  Otaha,  and  Bolabola,  which  were  all  in  fight,  in
tnc  name  of  his  Britannic  Majefly,  After  this,  we  took  a
walk  to  a  great  Morai,  called  Tapodeboatea.  We  found  it
very  different  from  thofe  of  Otaheite  ;  for  it  confided  only  of
four  walls,  about  eight  feet  high,  of  coral  flones,  fome  of
which  were  of  an  immenfe  fize,  -inclofing  an  area  of  about
five  and  twenty  yards  fquare,  which  was  filled  up  with
fmallei  flones :  upon  the  top  of  it  many  planks  were  fet  up
an  end,  which  were  carved  in  their  whole  length :  at  a  little
alliance  we  iound  an  altar,  or  Ewhatta,  upon  which  lay  the

latt


round  the  world.


laft  oblation  or  facrifice,  a  hog  of  about  eighty  pounds  '7j9
weight  which  had  been  offered  whole,  and  very  nicely
roaffed.  Here  were  alfo  four  or  five  Ewharre-no-Eatua,  or
houfes  of  God,  to  which  carriage  poles  were  fitted,  like  that
which  we  had  fecn  at  Huaheinc.  One  of  .theie  Mr.  Banks  ex¬
amined  by  putting  his  hand  into  it,  and  found  a  parcel  about
five  feet  long  and  one  thick,  wrapped  up  in  matts :  he  bioke
a  way  through  feveral  of  thefe  matts  with  his  fingers,  but
at  length  came  to  one  which  was  made  of  the  fibres  of  the
cocoa-nut,  fo  firmly  plaited  together  that  he  found  it  impof-
fible  to  tear  it,  and  therefore  was  forced  to  defift;  efpecially
as  he  perceived,  that  what  he  had  done  already  gave  great
offence  to  our  new  friends.  From  hence  we  went  to  a  long
houfe,  not  far  diflant,  where  among  rolls  of  cloth,  and  fe¬
veral  other  things,  we  faw  the  model  of  a  canoe,  about  three
feet  long,  to  which  were  tied  eight  human  jaw-bones :  we
had  already  learnt  that  thefe,  like  fealps  among  the  Indians
of  North  America,  were  trophies  of  war.  Tupia  affirmed
that  they  were  the  jaw-bones  of  the  natives  of  this  ifland ;  if
fo,  they  might  have  been  hung  up,  with  the  model  or  a  ca¬
noe,  as  a  fymbol  of  invafion,  by  the  warriors  of  Bolabola,  as

a  memorial  of  their  conqueff.

Night  now  came  on  apace,  but  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solan-
der  continued  their  walk  along  the  fhore,  and  at  a  little  dis¬
tance  faw  another  Ewharre-no-Eatua,  and  a  tree  of  the  fig
kind,  the  fame  as  that  which  Mr.  Green  had  feen  at  Otaheite,
in  great  perfection,  the  trunk,  or  rather  congeries  of  the
,  roots  of  which  was  forty-two  paces  in  circumference.

On  the  21  ft,  having  difpatched  the  Mailer  in  the  long-boat  Friday  21.
to  examine  the  eoaft  of  the  fouth  part  of  the  ifland,  and  one
of  the  Mates  in  the  yawl,  to  found  the  harbour  where  the
fhip  lay,  I  went  myfelf  in  the  pinnace,  to  furvey  that  pare

Vol.  II.  L 1  of


25%  LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


1769.
J  uly.


Friday  21.


of  the  ifland  which  lies  to  the  north.  Mr.  Banks  and  the
Gentlemen  were  again  on  fliore,  trading  with  the  natives,  and
examining  the  produces  and  curiofities  of  the  country  ;  they
law  nothing,  however,  worthy  notice,  but  fome  more  jaw¬
bones,  of  which  they  made  no  doubt  but  that  the  account
they  had  heard  was  true.


Sunday^2.2*  ,  °n  the  22d  and  23d’  having  ftrong  gales  and  hazey  wea-
Monday  24.  ther,  I  did  not  think  it  fafe  to  put  to  fea ;  but  on  the  24th,

though  the  wind  was  ftill  variable,  I  got  under  fail," and
plyed  to  the  northward  within  the  reef,  with  a  view  to  go
out  at  a  wider  opening  than  that  by  which  I  had  entered;  in
doing  this,  however,  I  was  unexpectedly  in  the  molt  immi¬
nent  danger  of  linking  on  the  rock :  the  Mailer,  whom  I  had
ordered  to  keep  continually  founding  in  the  chains,  fuddenly
called  out,  “  two  fathom.”  This  alarmed  me,  for  though  I
knew  the  Hup  drew  at  leaf  fourteen  feet,  and  that  therefore
it  was  impolfible  fuch  a  lhoal  Ihould  be  under  her  keel;  yet
the  Mailer  was  either  miftaken,  or  Ihe  went  along  the  edo-e
of  a  coral  rock,  many  of  which,  in  the  neighbourhood  of
thefc  iflands,  are  as  fteep  as  a  wall.

This  harbour  or  bay  is  called  by  the  natives  Oopoa,  and
taken  in  its  gieateft  extent,  it  is  capable  of  holding  any  num-
ber  of  fhipping.  It  extends  almoft  the  whole  length  of  the  eafl
fide  of  the  ifland,  and  is  defended  from  the  fea  by  a  reef  of
coral  rocks  :  the  fouthermofl:  opening  in  this  reef,  or  chan¬
nel  into  the  harbour,  by  which  we  entered,  is  little  more
than  a  cable’s  length  wide ;  it  lies  off  the  eaftermoft  point  of
the  ifland,  and  may  be  known  by  another  fmall  woody
ifland,  which  lies  a  little  to  the  fouth  eaft  of  it,  called  by  the
people  here  Oatara.  Between  three  and  four  miles  north
weft  from  this  ifland  lie  two  other  iflets,  in  the  fame  direc¬
tion  as  the  reef,  of  which  they  are  a  part,  called  Opururu

A  and


Opururu.


round  the  world.  25!

and  Tamou  ;  between  thefe  lies  the  other  channel  into  the  1769.

harbour,  through  which  I  went  out,  and  which  is  a  full  quar-  _ ,

ter  of  a  mile  wide.  Still  farther  to  the  north  weft  are  fome  2  f

other  fmall  iflands,  near  which  I  am  told  there  is  another
fmall  channel  into  the  harbour ;  but  this  I  know  only  by
report.

The  principal  refrefliments  that  are  to  be  procured  at  this
part  of  the  iftand  are,  plantains,  cocoa-nuts,  yams,  hogs,  and
fowls ;  the  hogs  and  fowls,  however,  are  fcarce ;  and  the
country,  where  we  faw  it,  is  neither  fo  populous,  nor  fo  rich
in  produce  as  Otaheite,  or  even  Huaheine.  Wood  and  wa¬
ter  may  alfo  be  procured  here ;  but  the  water  cannot  conve¬
niently  be  got  at.


We  were  now  again  at  fea,  without  having  received  any
interruption  from  the  hoftile  inhabitants  of  Bolabola,  whom,
notwithftanding  the  fears  of  Tupia,  we  intended  to  vifit.  At
four  o’clock  in  the  afternoon  of  the  25th,  we  were  within  a  Tuefda y  25,
league  of  Otaha,  which  bore  N.  77  W.  To  the  northward  of
the  fouth  end  of  that  iftand,  on  the  eaft  fide  of  it,  and  fome-
thing  more  than  a  mile  from  the  fhore,  lie  two  fmall  iflands,
called  Toahoutu  and  Whennuaia  ;  between  which,  Tupia  Toahoutu.

/*  1  •  /  ,  1  •  1  1  1  Whennuaia.

lays,  there  is  a  channel  into  a  very  good  harbour,  which  lies
within  the  reef,  and  appearances  confirmed  his  report.

As  I  difeovered  a  broad  channel  between  Otaha  and  Bola¬
bola,  I  determined  rather  to  go  through  it,  than  run  to  the
northward  of  all  5  but  the  wind  being  right  a-head,  I  got  no
ground.

Between  five  and  fix  in  the  evening  of  the  26th,  as  I  was  w<?dnef.  26.
{landing  to  the  northward,  I  difeovered  a  fmall  low  iftand,
lying  N.  by  W.  or  N.N.  W.  diftant  four  or  five  leagues  from
Bolabola.  We  were  told  by  Tupia  that  the  name  of  this

L 1  2  iftand


$6  o


1769.

July.

Tubai.


Thurfday  27


Friday  28.
©£atia.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

ifland  is  Tubai  ;  that  it  produces  nothing  but  cocoa-nuts,  and
is  inhabited  only  by  three  families';  though  it  is  vifited  by
the  inhabitants  of  the  neighbouring  iflands,  who  refort  thi¬
ther  to  catch  fifh,  with  which  the  coaft  abounds.

•  '  t  ,  .  .  V  T  r  .  -

On  the  27th,  about  noon,  the  peak  of  Bolabola  bore
N.  2 s  W.  and  the  north  end  of  Otaha,  N.  80  W.  diftanf  three
leagues.  The  wind  continued  contrary  all  this  day  and  the
night  following.  On  the  28th,  at  fix  in  the  morning,  we  were
near  the  entrance  of  the  harbour  on  the  eafl  fide  of  Otaha

•  *  5

which  has  been  juft  mentioned  ;  and  finding  that  it  might
be  examined  without  lofing  time,  I  fent  away  the  Mafter  in
the  long-boat,  with  orders  to  found  it ;  and,  if  the  wind  did
not  fhift  in  our  favour,  to  land  upon  the  ifland,  and  traffic
with  the  natives  for  fuch  refrefhments  as  were  to  be  had.  In
this  boat  went  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  who  landed  upon
the  ifland,  and  before  night  purchafed  three  hogs,  twenty-
one  fowls,  and  as  many  yams  and  plantains  as  the  boat
would  hold.  Plantains  we  thought  a  more  ufeful  re-
frefhment  even  than  pork  j  for  they  were  boiled  and  ferved
to  the  Blip’s  company  as  bread,  and  were  now  the  more  ac¬
ceptable  as  our  bread  was  fo  full  of  vermin,  that  notwith¬
standing  all  po  Bible  care,  we  had  Sometimes  twenty  of  them
m  our  mouths  at  a  time,  every  one  of  which  tailed  as  hot  as
muftavd.  The  ifland  feemed  to  be  more  barren  than  Ulietea,
but  the  produce  was  of  the  fame  kind'.  The  people  alfo  exatftly
re  fend  bled  thofe  that  we  had  feen  at  the  other  iflands  ;  they
were  not  numerous,  but  they  flocked  about  the  boat  where-
ever  file  went  from  all  quarters,  bringing  with  them  what¬
ever  they  had  to  fell.  They  paid  the  ftrangers,  of  whom  they
had  received  an  account  from  Tupia,  the  fame  compliment
which  they  ufed  towards  their  own  Kings,  uncovering  their
fhoulders,  and  wrapping  their  garments  round  their  breafts ;
hi  •  and


20 1


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

and  were  fo  folicitous  to  prevent  its  being  neglected  by  any  yj9-
of  their  people,  that  a  man  was  fent  with  them,  who  called  — >

out  to  every  one'they  met,  telling  him  what  they  were,  and  "  "y
what  he  was  to  do.

In  the  mean  time,  I  kept  plying  off  and  on,  waiting  for
the  boat’s  return  ;  at  half  an  hour  after  five,  not  feeing  any
thing  of  her,  I  fired  a  gun,  and  after  it  was  dark  hoilted  a
light ;  at  half  an  hour  after  eight,  we  heard  the  report  of  a
mufquet,  which  we  anfwered  with  a  gun,  and  foon  after  the
boat  came  on  board.  The  Mailer  reported,  that  the  harbour
was  fafe  and  commodious,  with  good  anchorage  from
twenty-five  to  fixteen  fathom  water,  clear  ground.

As  foon  as  the  boat  was  hoified  in,  I  made  fail  to  the  noith-
ward,  and  at  eight  o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  29th,  we  Saturday  29:
were  clofe  under  the  Peak  of  Bolabola,  which  was  high,
rude,  and  craggy.  As  the  ifland  was  altogether  inacceflible
in  this  part,  and  we  found  it  lixipoilible  to  wcathei  it,  we
tacked  and  Hood  off,  then  tacked  again,  and  after  many  ti  ips
did  not  weather  the  foutli  end  of  it  till  twelve  o’clock  at
ni'dit.  At  eight  o’clock  the  next  morning,  we  difcovered  an  Sunday  30,,.
ifland,  which  bore  from  us  N.  63°  W.  di-flan  t  about  eight
leagues  5  at  the  fame  time  the  Peak  of  Bolabola  001  e  N.  E.
diftant  three  or  four  leagues.  This  ifland  Tupia  called  Mau-  Maurua,
ru-a,  and  faid  that  it  was  fmall,  wholly  furrounded  by  a  reef,
and  without  any  harbour  for  fliipping  ;  but  inhabited,  and
bearing  the  fame  produce  as  the  neighbouiing  iflands .  the
middle  of  it  rifes  in  a  high -.round .hill.,  that  may  be  feen  at
the  diftance  of  ten  leagues.

When  we  were  off  Bolabola,  we  faw  but  few  people  on.
the  fhore,  and  were  told  by  Tupia  that  many  of  the  inhabi¬
tants  were  gone  to  Ulieteav  In  the  afternoon  we  found  our—

fclves  nearly  the  length  of  the.fouth  end  of  Ulietea,  and  to

wind*-


262


I769-

July.


Auguft,
Tuefday  i.


,Wednef.  2.


LIEUTENANT  .COOK’S  VOYAGE

windward  of  fome  harbours  that  lay  on  the  weft  fide  of  this

s'^TT  !fland’  n  Into  one  of  thefe  harbours,  though  we  had  before
been  afliore  on  the  other  fide  of  the  ifland,  I  intended  to  put

in  order  to  flop  a  leak  which  we  had  fprung  in  the  powder
room,  and  to  take  in  more  ballaft,  as  I  found  the  Ihip  too
light  to  carry  fail  upon  a  wind.  As  the  wind  was  right
againft  us,  we  plied  off  one  of  the  harbours,  and  about  three
o  clock  in  the  afternoon  on  the  ,ft  of  Auguft,  we  came  to  an
anchor  in  the  entrance  of  the  channel  leading  into  it  in  four¬
teen  fathom  water,  being  prevented  from  working  in  bv  a
tide  which  fet  very  ftrong  out.  We  then  carried  out  the
kedge-anchor,  in  order  to  warp  into  the  harbour ;  but  when
this  was  done,  we  could  not  trip  the  bower-anchor  with  all
the  purchafe  we  could  make  ;  we  were  therefore  obliged  to
he  llill  all  night,  and  in  the  morning,  when  the  tide  turned
the  fliip  going  over  the  anchor,  it  tripped  of  itfelf,  and  we
warped  the  Ihip  into  a  proper  birth  with  eafe,  and  moored
m  twenty-eight  fathom,  with  a  fandy  bottom.  While  this
was  doing  many  of  the  natives  came  off  to  us  with  hogs
fowls,  and  plantains,  which  they  parted  with  at  an  eafy  rate!

When  the  Ihip  was  fecured,  I  went  on  fliore  to  look  for  a

proper  place  to  get  ballaft  and  water,  both  which  I  found  in
a  very  convenient  fituation.

This  day  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  fpent  on  fhore  very
much  to  their  fatisfaffion ;  every  body  feemed  to  fear  and
refpcct  them,  placing  in  them  at  the  fame  time  the  utmoft
confidence,  behaving  as  if  confeious  that  they  poffeffed  the
power  of  domg  them  mifehief,  without  any  propenfity  to
make  nfe  of  it  Men,  women  and  children  crowded  round
,  ’  and  followed  thena  wherever  they  went ;  but  none  of

'h“  >'«  >=«  incivility,  on  ihe

whenever  there  happened  to  be  dir,  or  water  in  the  way,  the

men


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


263

men  vied  with  each  other  to  carry  them  over  on  their  backs.  1769.
They  were  conducted  to  the  lioufes  of  the  principal  people,  ,
and  were  received  in  a  manner  altogether  new :  the  people,  Wcdnef* 2'
who  followed  them  while  they  were  in  their  way,  ruflied
forward  as  foon  as  they  came  to  a  houfe,  and  went  haftily  in
before  them,  leaving  however  a  lane  fufficiently  wide  for
them  to  pafs.  When  they  entered,  they  found  thofe  who  had
preceded  them  ranged  on  each  fide  of  a  long  matt,  which  was
fpread  upon  the  ground,  and  at  the  farther  end  of  which  fat
the  family  :  in  the  lirR  houfe  they  entered  they  found
fome  very  young  women  or  children,  drefTed  with  the  utmoft
neatnefs,  who  kept  their  Ration,  expecting  the  Grangers  to
come  up  to  them  and  make  them  prefents,  which  they  did
with  the  greateft  pleafure;  for  prettier  children  or  better
drefTed  they  had  never  feen.  One  of  them  was  a  girl  about
fix  years  old  ;  her  gown,  or  upper  garment,  was  red ;  a  large
quantity  of  plaited  hair  was  wound  round  her  head,  the  or¬
nament  to  which  they  give  the  name  of  Tamou,  and  which
they  value  more  than  any  thing  they  pofTefs.  She  fat  at  the
tipper  end  of  a  matt  thirty  feet  long,  upon  which  none  of  the
fpe£tators  prefumed  to  feta  foot,  notwithllanding  the  crowd;
and  fhe  leaned  upon  the  arm  of  a  well-looking  woman  about
thirty,  who  was  probably  her  nurfe.  Our  Gentlemen  walked
up  to  her,  and  as  foon  as  they  approached,  Ihe  flretched  out
her  hand  to  receive  the  beads  which  they  offered  her,  and
no  Princefs  in  Europe  could  have  done  it  with  a  better  grace.

The  people  were  fo  much  gratified  by  the  prefents  which
were  made  to  thefe  girls,  that  when  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  So-
lander  returned  they  feemed  attentive  to  nothing  but  how  to
oblige  them ;  and  in  one  of  the  houfes  they  were,  by  order
of  the  mailer,  entertained  with  a  dance,  different  from  any
that  they  had  feen.  It  was  performed  by  one  man,  who  put

upon


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


xH

J 769-  upon  his  head  a  large  cylindrical  piece  of  wicker-work,  or  .

Augult.  -

v — — }  balker,  about  four  feet  long  and  eight  inches  in  diameter,
which  was  faced  with  feathers,  placed  perpendicularly,  with
the  tops  bending  forwards,  and  edged  round  with  fhark’s
teeth,  and  the  tail  feathers  of  Tropic  birds :  when  he  had
put  on  this  head-drefs,  which  is  called  a  Who iv,  he  began  to
dance,  moving  dowly,  and  often  turning  his  head  fo  as  that
the  top  of  his  high  wicker-cap  deferibed  a  circle,  and  fome-
times  throwing  it  fo  near  the  faces  of  the  fpe&ators  as  to
make  them  dart  back :  this  was  held  among  them  as  a  very
good  joke,  and  never  failed  to  produce  a  peal  of  laughter,
efpecially  when  it  was  played  off  upon  one  of  the  Grangers.

Thurfday  3,  On  the  ^  we  v/ent  along  the  Hiore  to  the  northward,
which  was  in  a  direction  oppofite  to  that  of  the  route  Mr.
Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  had  taken  the  day  before,  with  ade-
fign  to  purchafe  flock,  which  we  always  found  the  people
more  ready  to  part  with,  and  at  a  more  eafy  price,  at  their
houfes  than  at  the  market.  In  the  courfe  of  our  walk  we
met  with  a  company  of  dancers,  who  detained  us  two  hours,
and  during  all  that  time  afforded  us  great  entertainment.
The  company  confided  of  two  women  dancers,  and  fix  men,
with  three  drums ;  we  were  informed  by  Tupia,  that  they
were  fome  of  the  mod  confiderable  people  of  the  idand,  and
that  though  they  were  continually  going  from  place  to  place,
they  did  not,  like  the  little  drolling  companies  of  Otaheite,
take  any  gratuity  from  the  fpedlators.  The  women  had  upon
their  heads  a  confiderable  quantity  of  Tamou,  or  plaited
hair,  which  was  brought  feveral  times  round  the  head,  and
adorned  in  many  parts  with  the  dowers  of  the  cape-jeffa-
mine,  which  were  duck  in  with  much  tade,  and  made  a
head-drefs  truly  elegant.  Their  necks,  fhouldcrs,  and  arms
were  naked ;  fo  were  the  breads  allb  as  low  as  the  parting  of

the


fCflj  3  4  jrSggg^>8.  •Jg

i  /j  aJ&jiMouiStylf


‘EVV-wl
sk**: —


WmSw


N?7


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

the  arms  below  that,  they  were  covered  with  black  cloth,
which  fet  clofe  to  the  body  ;  at  the  fide  of  each  bread:,, next
the  arm,  was  placed  a  fmall  plume  of  black  feathers,  much
in  the  fame  manner  as  our  ladies  now  wear  their  nofegays  or
Bouquets',  upon  their  hips  relied  a  quantity  of  cloth  plaited
very  full,  which  reached  up  to  the  bread,  and  fell  down
below  into  long  petticoats,  which  quite  concealed  their  feet,
and  which  they  managed  with  as  much  dexterity  as  our
opera  dancers  could  have  done:  the  plaits  above  the  waid
were  brown  and  white  alternately,  the  petticoats  below  were
all  white.

In  this  drefs  they  advanced  fideways  in  a  meafured  dep,
keeping  excellent  time  to  the  drums,  which  beat  brifkly  and
loud  ;  foon  after  they  began  to  fhake  their  hips,  giving  the
folds  of  cloth  that  lay  upon  them  a  very  quick  motion,
which  was  in  fome  degree  continued  through  the  whole
dance,  though  the  body  was  thrown  into  various  podures,
fometimes  danding,  fometimes  fitting,  and  fometimes  red¬
ing  on  their  knees  and  elbows,  the  fingers  alfo  being  moved
at  the  fame  time  with  a  quicknefs  fcarcely  to  be  imagined.
Much  of  the  dexterity  of  the  dancers,  however,  and  the  en¬
tertainment  of  the  fpedlators,  confided  in  the  wantonnefs
of  their  attitudes  and  gedures,  which  was,  indeed,  fuch  as
exceeds'  all  defcription.

f  *■  »•  ••fc  •  -  T  *  *  -  *  «

One  of  thefe  girls  had  in  her  ear  three  pearls ;  one  of  them
was  very  large,  but  fo  foul  that  it  was  of  little  value  ;  the
other  two  were  as  big  as  a  middling  pea  ;  thefe  were  clear,
and  of  a  good  colour  and  fhape,  though  fpoiled  by  the  dril¬
ling.  Mr.  Banks  would  fain  have  purchafed  them,  and
offered  the  owner  any  thing  die  would  afk  for  them,  but  die
could  not  be  perfuaded  to  part  with  them  at  any  price :  he
tempted  her  with  the  value  of  four  hogs,  and  whatever  elfe

Vol.  II,  M  m  die


265

1769.

Auguft.

V— - - - >

Thurfday  3.


z6G


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1769.

Augult.


Thurfday  3.


Friday  4.


Saturday  5.


fhe  fhould  chufe,  but  without  fuccefs  ;  and  indeed  they  fet
a  value  upon  their  pearls  very  nearly  equal  to  what  they
would  fetch  among  us,  except  they  could  be  procured  before
they  are  drilled.

Between  the  dances  of  the  women,  the  men  performed  a
kind  of  dramatic  interlude,  in  which  there  was  dialogue  as
well  as  dancing;  but  we  were  not  fufficiently  acquainted
with  their  language  to  underdand  the  fubjedt.

On  the  4th,  fome  of  our  gentlemen  faw  a  much  more  re¬
gular  entertainment  of  the  dramatic  kind,  which  was  divided
into  four  adls.

Tupia  had  often  told  us  that  he  had  large  pofTeflions  in
this  ifiand,  which  had  been  taken  away  from  him  by  the
inhabitants  of  Bolabola,  and  he  now  pointed  them  out  in
the  very  bay  where  the  fhip  was  at  anchor.  Upon  our  going
on  fhore,  this  was  confirmed  by  the  inhabitants,  who  fhewed
us  feveral  didridts  or  Whennuas,  which  they  acknowledged
to  be  his  right.

On  the  5th,  I  received  a  prefent  of  three  hogs,  fome  fowls*
feveral  pieces  of  cloth,  the  larged  we  had  feen,  being  fifty
yards  long,  which  they  unfolded  and  difplayed  fo  as  to  make
the  greated  fhow  podible;  and  a  confiderable  quantity  of
plantains,  cocoa  nuts,  and  other  refrefhments,  from  Opoony,
the  formidable  king,  or,  in  the  language  of  the  country^
Earee  rahie,  of  Bolabola,  with  a  mefiage  that  he  was  at  this
time  upon  the  ifiand,  and  that  the  next  day  he  intended  to
pay  me  a  vifit.

In  the  mean  time  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  went  upon
the  hills,  accompanied  by  feveral  of  the  Indians,  who  con-
dudted  them  by  excellent  paths,  to  fuch  a  height,  that  they
plainly  faw  the  other  fide  of  the  ifiand,  and  the  pafiage
through  which  the  fhip  had  palled  the  reef  between  the  little
illands  of  Opururu  and  Tamou,  when  we  landed  upon  it  the

fird


round  the  world.


367


0  v

iirfl  time.  As  they  were  returning,  they  faw  the  Indians  ^769*

exercidng  themfelves  at  what  they  call  Erowhaw,  which  is  ^ - * -

nothing  more  than  pitching  a  kind  of  light  lance,  headed  Salurda>  5#
with  hard  wood,  at  a  mark :  in  this  amufement,  though  they
feem  very  fond  of  it,  they  do  not  excel,  for  not  above  one  in
twelve  {truck  the  mark,  which  was  the  bole  of  a  plantain
tree,  at  about  twenty  yards  diltance.

On  the  6th,  we  all  (laid  at  home,  expecting  the  vifit  of  the  s^day  6.
great  king,  but  we  were  difappointed ;  we  had,  however,
much  more  agreeable  company,  for  he  fent  three  very  pretty
girls  to  demand  fomething  in  return  for  his  prefent :  perhaps
he  was  unwilling  to  trull  himfelf  on  board  the  lliip,  or  per¬
haps  he  thought  his  melTengers  would  procure  a  more  valu-
able  return  for  his  hogs  and  poultry  than  he  could  himfelf;
be  that  as  it  may,  we  did  not  regret  his  abfence,  nor.  his
melTengers  their  vifit.

In  the  afternoon,  as  the  great  king  would  not  come  to  us,
we  determined  to  go  to  the  great  king.  As  he  was  lord  of
the  Bolabola  men,  the  conquerors  of  this,  and  the  terror  of
all  the  other  idands,  we  expedted  to  fee  a  Chief  young  and
vigorous,  with  an  intelligent  countenance,  and  an  enter-  ,
priling  fpirit:  we  found,  however,  a  pool  feeble  wietch,
withered  and  decrepit,  half  blind  with  age,  and  fo  duggiin
and  ftupid  that  he  appeared  fcarcely  to  have  undemanding
enough  left  to  know  that  it  was  probable  we  Ihould  be  gi  ci¬
tified  either  by  hogs  or  women.  He  did  not  receive  us
fitting,  or  with  any  date  or  formality  as  the  other  Chiefs  had
done :  we  made  him  our  prefent,  which  he  accepted,  and
gave  a  hog  in  return.  We  had  learnt  that  his  principal  red-
dence  was  at  Otaha  ;  and  upon  our  telling  him  that  we  in¬
tended  to  go  thither  in  our  boats  the  next  morning,  and  that

Mm2


S68


1769.

Auguft.


Monday  7.


Tuefday  8.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

we  fliould  be  glad  to  have  him  along  with  us,  he  promifed
J  to  be  of  the  party.

Early  in  the  morning,  therefore,  I  fet  out  both  with  the
pinnace  and  long-boat  for  Otaha,  having  fome  of  the  gentle¬
men  with  me  ;  and  in  our  way  we  called  upon  Opoony,  who
was  in  his  canoe,  ready  to  join  us.  As  foon  as  we  landed  at
Otaha,  I  made  him  a  prefent  of  an  ax,  which  I  thought
might  induce  him  to  encourage  his  fubje&s  to  bring  us  fuch
provifion  as  we  wanted  ;  but  in  this  we  found  ourfelves  fadly
difappointed,  for  after  flaying  with  him  till  noon,  we  left
him  without  being  able  to  procure  a  fingle  article.  I  then
proceeded  to  the  north  point  of  the  ifland,  in  the  pinnace*
having  fent  the  long-boat  another  way.  As  I  went  along  I
picked  up  half  a  dozen  hogs,  as  many  fowls,  and  fome  plan¬
tains  and  yams.  Having  viewed  and  fketched  the  harbour
on  this  fide  of  the  ifland,  I  made  the  bed  of  my  way  back,
with  the  long-boat,  which  joined  me  foon  after  it  was  dark  j
and  about  ten  o'clock  at  night  we  got  on  board  the  fhip.

In  this  excurfion  Mr.  Banks  was  not  with  us ;  he  fpent  the
morning  on  board  the  fhip,  trading  with  the  natives,  who
came  off  in  their  canoes,  for  provifions  and  curiofities  ;  and
in  the  afternoon  he  went  on  fliore  with  his  draughtfman,  to
fketch  the  dreffes  of  the  dancers  which  he  had  feen  a  day  or
two  before.  He  found  the  company  exactly  the  fame,  ex¬
cept  that  another  woman  had  been  added  to  it:  the  dancing
alfo  of  the  women  was  the  fame,  but  the  interludes  of  the
men  were  fomewhat  varied ;  he  faw  five  or  fix  performed,
which  were  different  from  each  other,  and  very  much  re-
fembled  the  drama  of  our  flage  dances.  The  next  day,  he
went  afhore  again,  with  Dr.  Solander,  and  they  directed
their  courfe  towards  the  dancing  company,  which.,  from  the

6  time


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


2%

time  of  our  fecond  landing,  had  gradually  moved  about  176 9.
two  leagues  in  their  courfe  round  the  illand.  They  faw  1  Aug_1'^
more  dancing  and  more  interludes,  the  interludes  ftill  vary-  Tuefday  s’
ing  from  each  other :  in  one  of  them  the  performers,  who
were  all  men,  were  divided  into  two  parties,  which  were
didinguilhed  from  each  other  by  the  colour  of  their  cloaths,
one  being  brown,  and  the  other  white.  The  brown  party
reprefented  a  mailer  and  fervants,  and  the  white  party  a
company  of  thieves  :  the  mailer  gave  a  bafket  of  meat  to  the
rell  of  his  party,  with  a  qharge  to  take  care  of  it:  the  dance
of  the  white  party  confided  of  feveral  expedients  to  deal  if,
and  that  of  the  brown  party  in  preventing  their  fuccefs.

After  fome  time,  thofe  who  had  charge  of  the  bafket  placed
themfelves  round  it,  upon  the  ground,  and  leaning  upon  it,
appeared  to  go  to  deep ;  the  others,  improving  this  opportu¬
nity,  came  gently  upon  them,  and  lifting  them  up  from  the
bafket,  carried  off  their  prize:  the  deepers  foon  after  awak¬
ing,  miffed  their  bafket,  but  prefently  fell  a  dancing,  without
any  farther  regarding  their  lofs ;  fo  that  the  dramatic  adlion  of
this  dance  was,  according  to  the  fevered  laws  of  criticifm,
one,  and  our  lovers  of  fimplicity  would  here  have  been  gra¬
tified  with  an  entertainment  perfectly  fuited  to  the  chadity
of  their  fade.

4  *  -  .  I

On  the  gth,  having  fpent  the  morning  in  trading  with  the  Wednef.  9...
canoes,  we  took  the  opportunity  of  a  breeze,  which  fprung
up  at  Ead,  and  having  dopped  our  leak,  and  got  the  f re  da
dock  which  we  had  purchafed  on  board,  we  failed  out  of  the
harbour.  When  we  were  failing  away,  Tupia  drongly
urged  me  to  fire  a  fhot  towards  Bolabola,  poffibly  as  a  mark
of  his  refentment,  and  to  Ihew  the  power  of  his  new  allies  :
in  this  I  thought  proper  to  gratify  him,  though  we  were
feven  leagues  didant.


While


*7®


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1769.

.Auguft.

Wednef.  9.


Society

lilaads


While  we  were  about  thefe  iflands,  we  expended  very
little  of  the  fhip’s  provifions,  and  were  very  plentifully  fup-
plied  with  hogs,  fowls,  plantains  and  yams,  which  we
hoped  would  have  been  of  great  ufe  to  us  in  our  courfe  to  the
fouthward ;  but  the  hogs  would  not  eat  European  grain  of
any  kind,  pulfe,  or  bread-dull,  fo  that  we  could  not  preferve
them  alive ;  and  the  fowls  were  all  very  foon  feized  with  a
difeafe  that  affe&ed  the  head  fo,  that  they  continued  to  hold
it  down  between  their  legs  till  they  died  :  much  dependence
therefore  mull  not  be  placed  in  live  flock  taken  on  board  at
thefe  places,  at  leall  not  till  a  dilcovery  is  made  of  fome  food
that  the  hogs  will  eat,  and  fome  remedy  for  the  difeafe  of
the  poultry.

Having  been  necefTarily  detained  at  Ulietea  fo  long,  by  the
carpenters  in  Hopping  our  leak,  we  determined  to  give  up
our  defign  of  going  on  fhore  at  Bolabola,  efpecially  as  it  ap¬
peared  to  be  difficult  of  accefs.

To  thefe  fix  iflands,  Ulietea,  Otaha,  Bolabola,  Huaheine,
Tubai,  and  Maurua,  as  they  lie  contiguous  to  each  other,  I
gave  the  names  of  Society  Islands,  but  did  not  think  it
proper  to  diflinguifh  them  feparately  by  any  other  names
than  thofe  by  which  they  were  known  to  the  natives.

They  are  fituated  between  the  latitude  of  1 6°  id  and  i6°
55'  S.  and  between  the  longitude  of  150°  57'  and  152°  W.  from
the  meridian  of  Greenwich.  Ulietea  and  Otaha  lie  within
about  two  miles  of  each  other, ,  and  are  both  inclofed  within
one  reef  of  coral  rocks,  fo  that  there  is  no  paffiage  for  fhip-
ping  between  them.  This  reef  forms  feveral  excellent  har¬
bours  ;  the  entrances  into  them,  indeed,  are  but  narrow,
yet  when  a  ffiip  is  once  in,  nothing  can  hurt  her.  The  har¬
bours  on  the  eall  fide  have  been  deferibed  already  j  and  on
the  well  fide  of  Ulietea,  which  is  the  larged  of  the  two,  there

arc


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

-  <b

are  three.  The  northermoft,  in  which  we  lay,  is  called
Oh  am  an  e  no:  the  channel  leading  into  it  is  about  a  quarter
of  a  mile  wide,  and  lies  between  two  low  fandy  iflands,
which  are  the  northermoft  on  this  fide  ;  between,  or  juft
within  the  two  iflands,  there  is  good  anchorage  in  twenty-
eight  fathom,  foft  ground.  This  harbour,  though  fmall,  is
preferable  to  the  others,  becaufe  it  is  fituated  in  the  moft
fertile  part  of  the  ifland,  and  where  frefh  water  is  ealily  to
be  got.  The  other  two  harbours  lie  to  the  fouthward  of
this,  and  not  far  from  the  fouth  end  of  the  ifland :  in  both
of  them  there  is  good  anchorage,  with  ten,  twelve,  and
^fourteen  fathom.  They  are  eafily  known  by  three  fmall
woody  iflands  at  their  entrance.  The  fouthermofl  of  thefe
two  harbours  lies  within,  and  to  the  fouthward  of  the  fouth-
ermoft  of  thefe  iflands,  and  the  other,  lies  between  the  two
northermoft.  I  was  told  that  there  were  more  harbours  at
the  fouth  end  of  this  ifland,  but  I  did  not  examine  whether

the  report  was-  true..

✓  •*

Otaha  affords  two  very  good  harbours,  one  on  the  eaft
fide,  and  the  other  on  the  weft.  That  on  the  eaft  fide  is
called  Ohamene,.  and  has  been  mentioned  already ;  the  other
is  called  Oherurua,  and  lies  about  the  middle  of  the  fouth
weft  fide  of  the  ifland  ;  it  is  pretty  large,  and  affords  good
anchorage  in  twenty  and  twenty-five  fathom,  nor  is  there
any  want  of  frefh  water.  The  breach  in  the  reef,  that  forms
a  channel  into  this  harbour,  is  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile
broad,  and  like  all  the  reft  is  very  fteep  on  both  fides  ;  in  ge¬
neral  there  is  no  danger  here  but  what  is  vifible.

The*  ifland  of  Bolabola  lies  N.  W.  and  by  W.  from  Otaha,
diftant  about  four  leagues ;  it  is  furrounded  by  a  reef  of
rocks,  and  feveral  fmall  iflands,  in  compafs  together  about
eight  leagues.  1  was  told,  that  on  the  fouth  weft  fide  of

5  the


271

1769.

Auguft.

< -

Wednef.  9.


Sunday  13
Cheteroa.


272  LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

*

AU7gu9ii  ^anc*  there  is  a  channel  through  the  reef  into  a  very

good  harbour,  but  I  did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  examine
ir,  for  the  reafons  that  have  been  juft  afligned.  This  ifland
is  rendered  very  remarkable  by  a  high  craggy  hill,  which  ap¬
pears  to  be  almoft  perpendicular,  and  terminates  at  the  top
in  two  peaks,  one  higher  than  the  other.

The  land  of  Ulietea  and  Otaha  is  hilly,  broken,  and  irre¬
gular,  except  on  the  fea  coaft,  yet  the  hills  look  green  and
pleafant,  and  are  in  many  places  clothed  with  wood.  The
feveral  particulars  in  which  thefe  iftands  and  their  inhabit¬
ants  differ  from  what  we  had  obferved  at  Otaheite,  have  been
mentioned  in  the  courfe  of  the  narrative.

We  purfued  our  courfe  without  any  event  worthy  of  note
till  the  13th,  about  noon,  when  we  faw  land  bearing  S.E.
which  Tupia  told  us  was  an  ifland  called  Oheteroa.  About
fix  in  the  evening,  we  were  within  two  or  three  leagues  of
it,  upon  which  I  fhortened  fail,  and  flood  off  and  on  all
Monday  14.  night :  the  next  morning  flood  in  for  the  land.  We  ran  to
leeward  of  the  ifland,  keeping  clofe  in  fhore,  and  faw  feve¬
ral  of  the  natives,  though  in  no  great  numbers,  upon  the
beach.  At  nine  o’clock  I  fent  Mr.  Gore,  one  of  my  Lieute¬
nants,  in  the  pinnace,  to  endeavour  to  land  upon  the  ifland,
and  learn  from  the  natives  whether  there  was  anchorage  in
a  bay  then  in  fight,  and  what  land  lay  farther  to  the  fouth.
ward.  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  accompanied  Mr.  Gore  in
this  expedition,  and  as  they  thought  Tupia  might  be  ufeful,
they  took  him  with  them.

As  the  boat  approached  the  fhore,  thofe  on  board  perceived
the  natives  to  be  armed  with  long  lahces ;  as  they  did  not
intend  to  land  till  they  got  round  a  point  which  run  out  at  a
little  diftance,  they  flood  along  the  coaft,  and  the  natives
therefore  very  probably  thought  they  were  afraid  of  them.

They


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


*73


They  had  now  got  together  to  the  number  of  about  fixty,  and
all  of  them  fat  down  upon  the  fhore,  except  two,  who  were
difpatched  forward  to  obferve  the  motions  of  thofe  in  the
boat.  Thefe  men,  after  walking  a-breaft  of  her  fome  time,
at  length  leaped  into  the  water,  and  fwam  towards  her,  but
were  foon  left  behind ;  two  more  then  appeared,  and  at¬
tempted  to  board  her  in  the  fame  manner,  but  they  alfo  were
foon  left  behind  ;  a  fifth  man  then  ran  forward  alone,  and
having  got  a  good  way  a-head  of  the  boat  before  he  took  to
the  water,  eafily  reached  her.  Mr.  Banks  urged  the  officer
to  take  him  in,  thinking  it  a  good  opportunity  to  get  the
confidence  and  good-will  of  a  people,  who  then  certainly
looked  upon  them  as  enemies,  but  he  obftinately  refufed  :
this  man  therefore  was  left  behind  like  the  others,  and  fo
was  a  fixth,  who  followed  him.


1769:

Auguft.

Monday  14.


When  the  boat  had  got  round  the  point,  fhe  perceived  that
all  her  followers  had  defifted  from  the  purfuit :  fhe  now
opened  a  large  bay,  at  the  bottom  of  which  appeared  another
body  of  men,  armed  with  long  lances  like  the  firft.  Here
our  people  prepared  to  land,  and  pufhed  towards  the  fhore,  a
canoe  at  the  fame  time  putting  off  to  meet  them.  As  foon  as
it  came  near  them,  they  lay  upon  their  oars,  and  calling  out
to  them,  told  them  that  they  were  friends,  and  that  if  they
would  come  up  they  would  give  them  nails,  which  were
held  up  for  them  to  fee :  after  fome  hefitation  they  came  up
to  the  boat’s  fiern,  and  took  fome  nails  that  were  offered
them  with  great  feeming  fatisfadlion ;  but  in  lefs.  than  a  mi¬
nute  they  appeared  to  have  formed  a  defign  of  boarding  the
boat,  and  making  her  their  prize :  three  of  them  fuddenly
leaped  into  it,  and  the  others  brought  up  the  canoe,  which
the  motion  in  quitting  her  had  thrown  off  a  little,  manifeftly
with  a  defign  to  fellow  their  affociates,  and  fupport  them  in
Yol.  II.  N  n  thair


274


LIEUTENANT  COOK*s  VOYAGE

August,  attempt.  The  firfl  that  boarded  the  boat,  entered  ciofe-

toMr*  Banks>  and  inftantly  fnatched  his  powder-horn  out  of
his  pocket:  Mr.  Banks  feized  it,,  and  with  fome  difficulty
wrenched  it  out  of  his  hand,  at  the  fame  time  preffing  againfc
his  breafl  in  order  to  force  him  over-board,  but  he  was  too*
ftiong  for  him,  and  kept  his  place  :  the  officer  then  fnapped
his  piece,  but  it  miffied  fire,  upon  which  he  ordered  fome  of
the  people  to*  fire  over  their  heads;  two  pieces  were  accord¬
ingly  difcharged,  upon  which  they  all  inftantly  leaped  into
the  water:  one  of  the  people,  either  from  cowardice  or  cru¬
elty,  or  both,  levelled  a  third  piece  at  one  of  them  as  he  was
fwimming  away,  and  the  ball  grazed  his  forehead  ^  happily,
however,  the  wound  was.  very  flight,  for  he  recovered  the’
canoe,  and  flood  up  in  her  as  adfive  and  vigorous  as  the  reft.
The  canoe  immediately  flood  in  for  the  fhore,  where  a  great
number  of  people,  not  lefs  than  two  hundred,  were  now
aflembled.  The  boat  alfo  puflied  in,  but  found  the  land
guarded  all  round  with  a  fhoal,  upon  which  the  fea  broke
with  a  confiderable  furf ;  it  was  therefore  thought  advifable
by  the  officer  to  proceed  along  fliore  in  fearch  of  a  more
convenient  landing-place :  in  the  mean  time  the  people  on
board  faw  the  canoe  go  on  fliore,  and  the  natives  gather  ea-
geny  round  her  to  enquire  the  particulars  of  what  had  hap¬
pened.  Soon  after,  a  Angle  man  ran  along  the  fhore,  armed
with  his  lance,  and  when  he  came  a-breaft  of  the  boat  he
began  to  dance,  brandifh  his  weapon,  and  call  out  in  a  very
fhnll  tone,  which  Tupia  faid  was  a  deflance  from  the  people.
The  boat  continued  to  row  along  the  fhore,  and  the  cham¬
pion  followed  it,  repeating  his  deflance  by  his  voice  and  his
geflures;  but  no  better  landing-place  being  found  than  that
where  the  canoe  had  put  the  natives  on  fhore,  the  officer
turned  back  with  a,  view  to  attempt  it  there,  hoping,  that  if


ROUND  THE  WORLD.  375’

it  Ihould  not  be  practicable,  the  people  would  come  to  a  con-
fprence  either  on  the  fhoals  or  in  their  canoes,  and  that  a  < - — J

.  Monday  14.

treaty  of  peace  might  be  concluded  with  them.

As  the  boat  rowed  {lowly  along  the  fhore  back  again,  an¬
other  champion  came  down,  {homing  defiance,  and  bran-
difhing  his  lance :  his  appeara'nce  was  more  formidable  than
that  of  the  other,  for  he  wore  a  large  cap  made  of  the  tail
feathers  of  the  tropic  bird,  and  his  body  was  covered  with
Rripes  of  different  coloured  cloth,  yellow,  red,  and  brown.

This  gentleman  alfo  danced,  but  with  much  more  nimble-
nefs  and  dexterity  than  the  firft  j  our  people  therefore,  con-
fidering  his  agility  and  his  drefs,  diftinguifhed  him  by  the
name  of  Harlequin.  Soon  after  a  more  grave  and  elderly
man  came  down  to  the  beach,  and  hailing  the  people  in  the
boat,  enquired  who  they  were,  and  from  whence  they  came ;

Tupia  anfwered  in  their  own  language,  from  Otaheite  :  the
three  natives  then  walked  peaceably  along  the  {hore  till  they
came  to  a  fhoal,  upon  which  a  few  people  were  collected ;
here  they  {lopped,  and  after  a  fhort  conference,  they  all  be¬
gan  to  pray  very  loud:  Tupia  made  his  refponfes,  but  con¬
tinued  to  tell  us  that  they  were  not  our  friends.  When  their
prayer,  or  as  they  call  it,  their  Poorah ,  was  over,  our  people
entered  into  a  parley  with  them,  telling  them,  that  if  they
would  lay  by  their  lances  and  clubs,  for  fome  had  one  and
fome  the  other,  they  would  come  on  fhore,  and  trade  with
them  for  whatever  they  would  bring :  they  agreed,  but  it
was  only  upon  condition  that  we  would  leave  behind  us  0111
mufquets:  this  was  a  condition  which,  however  equitable  it
might  appear,  could  not  be  complied  with,  nor  indeed  would
it  have  put  the  two  parties  upon  an  equality,  except  their
numbers  had  been  equal.  Here  then  the  negociation  feemed
to  be  at  an  end ;  but  in  a  little  time  they  ventured  to  come
nearer  to  the  boat,  and  at  laft  came  near  enough  to  trade,

N  n  2  which


*7&  LIEUTENANT  COOKfs  VOYAGE

iuguft.  whidl  they  did  veiT  fairly,  for  a  fmall  quantity  of  their
cloth  and  fome  of  their  weapons  ;  but  as  they  gave  our
people  no  hope  of  provifions,  nor  indeed  any  thing  elfe  ex¬
cept  they  would  venture  through  a  narrow  channel  to  the  .
fhore,  which,  all  circumftances  confidered,  they  did  not
think  it  prudent  to  do,  they  put  off  the  boat  and  left  them.

With  the  fhip  and  the  boat  we  had  now  made  the  circuit
of  the  ifland,  and  finding  that  there  was  neither  harbour  nor
anchorage  about  iff  and  that  the  hofiile  difpofition  of  the
people  would  render  landing  impracticable,  without  blood-
llied,  I  determined  not  to  attempt  it,  having  no  motive  that
could  jufiify  the  rifle  of  life.

The  bay  which  the  boat  entered  lies  on  the  weft  fide  of
the  ifland,  the  bottom  was  foul  and  rocky,  but  the  water  fo
clear  that  it  could  plainly  be  feen  at  the  depth  of  five  and;
twenty  fathgm,  which  is  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet..

Tliis  ifland  is  fituated  in  the  latitude  of  220  27' S.  and  in  the
longitude  of  150°  47' W.  from  the  meridian  of  Greenwich.

It  is  thirteen  miles  in  circuit,  and  rather  high  than  low,  but
neither  populous  nor  fertile  in  proportion  to  the  other  iflands
tiiciL  we  had  feen  in  thefe  leas.  The  chief  produce  feems  to
be  the  tree  of  which  they  make  their  weapons,  called  in  their
language  Etoa ;  many  plantations  of  it  were  feen  along  the
iiioie,  which  is  not  furrounded,  like  the  neighbouring
ifland  s,  by  a  reef.

The  people  feemed  to  be  lufly  and  well-made,  rather
browner  than  thofe  we  had  left:  under  their  arm-pits  they
had  black  marks  about  as  broad  as  the  hand,  the  edges  of
which  formed  not  a  flrait  but  an  indented  line;  they  had
ado  ciiclesof  the  fame  colour,  but  not  fo  broad,  round  their

arms  and  legs,  but  were  not  marked  on  any  other  part  of
the  bodv.

4


Their


4


ROUND  THE  WORLD.  277

Their  drefs  was  very  different  from  any  thatwc  had  feen  r769-
before,  as  well  as  the  cloth  of  which  it  was  made.  The  cloth  « — A—

was  of  the  fame  materials  as  that  which  is  worn  in  the  other  Monda>  H*

♦

iflands,  and  moll  of  that  which  was  feen  by  our  people  was
dyed  of  a  bright  but  deep  yellow,  and  covered  on  the  outfide
with  a  compofition  like  varnifh,  which  was  either  red,  or  of
a  dark  lead-colour  ;  over  this  ground  it  was  agaii%  painted  in
ftripes  of  many  different  patterns,  with  wonderful  regularity,
in  the  manner  of  our  ftriped  filks  in  England ;  the  cloth  that
was  painted  red  was  hriped  with  black,  and  that  which  was
painted  lead-colour  with  white.  Their  habit  was  a  fhort
jacket  of  this  cloth,  which  reached-  about  as  low  as  their
knees  y  it  was  of  one  piece,  and  had  no  other  making  than  a
hole  in  the  middle  of  it,  ditched  round  with  long  ditches^
in  which  it  differed  from  all  that  we  had  feen  before1
through  this  hole  the  head  was  put,  and  what  hung  down
was  condned  to  their  bodies  by  a  piece  of  yellow  cloth  or
fafh,  which  pading  round  the  neck  behind,  was  eroded
upon  the  bread,  and  then  collected  round  the  waid  like  a
belt,  which  paffed  over  another  belt  of  red  cloth,  fo  that
they  made  a  very  gay  and  warlike  appearance ;  fome  had
caps  of  the  feathers  of  the  tropic  bird,  which  have  been  be¬
fore  deferibed,  and  fome  had  a  piece  of  white  or  lead-co¬
loured  cloth  wound  about  the  head  like  a  fmall  turban,
which  our  people  thought  more  becoming.

Their  arms  were  long  lances,  made  of  the  Etoa,  the  wood
of  which  is  very  hard ;  they  were  well  polidied  and
fharpened  at  one  end:  fome  were  near  twenty  feet  longs
though  not  more  than  three  dngers  thick :  they  had  alfo  a
weapon  which  was  both  club  and  pike,  made  of  the  fame

wood,  about  feven  feet  long ;  this  alfo  was  well  polifhed,

•  ■  »  *

and  fharpened  at  one  end  into  a  broad  point.  As  a  guard

again  ft


278  LIEUTENANT  COOR’s-VOYAGE

llgui.  aSainfl  thefe  weapons,  when  they  attack  each  other,  they
^7^.  have  matts  folded  UP  many  times,  which  they  place  under
their  clothes  from  the  neck  to  the  waift:  the  weapons  them*
Pelves  indeed  are  capable  of  much  lefs  mifchief  than  thofe  of
the  fame  kind  which  we  faw  at  the  other  iflands,  for  the
lances  were  there  pointed  with  the  fharp  bone  of  the  fling,
ray  that  is,  called  the  fling,  and  the  pikes  were  of  much
greater  weight.  The  other  things  that  we  faw  here  were  all
Superior  in  their  kind  to  any  we  had  feen  before ;  the  cloth  was
,Ji  a  fcettei  colour  in  the  dye,  and  painted  with  greater  neat-
nefs  and  tafte ;  the  clubs  were  better  cut  and  polifhed,  and
the  canoe,  though  a  fmall  one,  was  very  rich  in  ornament,
and  the  carving  was  executed  in  a  better  manner:  among
other  decorations  peculiar  to  this  canoe,  was  a  line  of  fmall
white  feathers,  which  hung  from  the  head  and  flern  on  the
outfide,  and  which,  when  we  faw  them,  were  thoroughly
wetted  by  the  fpray.

Tupia  told  us,  that  there  were  feveral  iflands  lying  at  dif¬
ferent  diftances  and  in  different  directions  from  this,  be¬
tween  the  fouth  and  the  north  weft  ;  and  that  at  the  diftance
of  three  days  fail  to  the  north  eaft,  there  was  an  ifland  called
Manua,  bird-ifland:  he  feemed,  however,  moft  deflrous
that  we  fhould  fail  to  the  weftward,  and  defcribed  feveral
iflands  in  that  direction  which  he  faid  he  had  vifited :  he  told
us  that  he  had  been  ten  or  twelve  days  in  going  thither,  and
thirty  in  coming  back,  and  that  the  Pahie  in  which  he  had
made  the  voyage,  failed  much  fafter  than  the  fhip :  reckon-
ing  his  Pahie  therefore  to  go  at  the  rate  of  forty  leagues  a
day,  which  from  my  own  obfervation  I  have  great  reafon  to
think  thefe  boats  will  do,  it  would  make  four  hundred
leagues  in  ten  days,  which  I  compute  to  be  the  diftance  of
Bofcawen  and  Keppel’s  Iflands,  dil'covered  by  Captain  Wallis,

6  weftward


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


2/9


weftward  of  Ulietea,  and  therefore  think  it  very  probable  that
they  were  the  iftands  he  had  vilited.  The  fartheft  ifland  that
he  knew  any  thing  of  to  the  fouthward,  he  faid,  lay  at  the
diftance  of  about  two  days  fail  from  Oteroah,  and  was  called
Moutou;  but  he  faid  that  his  father  had  told  him  there
were  iflands  to  the  fouthward  of  that:  upon  the  whole,  I
was  determined  to  Rand  fouthward  in  fearch  of  a  continent3
but  to  fpend  no  time  in  fearching  for  iilands,  if  we  did  not.
happen  to  fall  in  with,  them  during  our  courfe.


AN


/


1769.

Auguft.

^  9

Monday  14,


.


'

\


.


>-


■

r*  “  Firt  t'  n  '  '  -V  or


'■  ’*0  ..  1  T  <:/.

-


'

-  -  -  -  it  V  J  i  :  -w  -  ,  &l:i  ?:  ,  .  L.  i  ■  M  '

-  -  S-I:  r:ocri  ;  er  : "J

-

.  ■  ..  .  •


v-  .


.

'

'■  •


,  .  "  V

♦  .  ..


'


»

.  1


v  '


■  ’

.

“ '


V


*

.  *  •  '  -

.


'  .


K  *-

■

.  •

■

.  .


.


*  -  •

,*{*  r>  •»


4f  r..  'f


4  /$

4f  .y.  y


e.y

«  ‘  y  (it


White  111'1

,'uj

ToJ^si^-^10150^

*  U  *  V*  **'>«■"

WL.111J

^  .  C* ' '  '-T7j<7  T»f

'  '^y>-0’  t  its


T^SAL/

fj/  f  •  T urnag-ain


2  AV


/


E  xr  L  X  X  A  T I  O  X.


-IS


-3«


;>('.EaST

'■EaiHtt.


►  3^


•-r.;^. ...  v-  ^  m  f  r  «'  •

A  1**1  a gi  ^ ‘  •  /  J  .

V  '  X  .  .SpunD'es-  Ifl.

^  W  ^ans'^ipPovr.nTY n ay  Wi2?  0


.*5"  AfU>-

l-l  **
V


*  Z*  o  K/7/1;  ye  &  sir  r'  :3a

orTAONKROA,^  J'4e  l,ab1''  Kn<1  F»r>-L->.Hl

Egy-  !Z‘i  -a  u:

WVvttua- nintli  *

.,  WnmgVicks

„<5;'p  AY  /  ?

■V "  ,2 /.-'i

?  S  ,,  // ;/  Table  cape

K  'f^l'4  T<rak‘iko

/  \  , J  A.V’  T  eahotvraj

/  '/l^7

••

e"/'  '4-  toE
<?:'rv  4is

.  .  (’.  Kjujva  ptek S

/iwr*r

"i  '  -A  f  ^ - 7 -

:  ■**  Ut  /

><v.  1  r  ‘  /

/

‘A“  Uln.fk  Head

sii


34


A  A/ c^Af  A ■/// /titc.i  .//C ■//'./  ///(' <///y/.)  >/ ri/i/c 0 ,  '.-/-

/ //tc ^ty/a'tu  (Mt/i\v//,AAc  aA^iA/i  t’^  U'a/f-p

at  ^tt A / ft  rut .

t !/A’  Utt^tna/t  i/ //,  a' A 1>^  ///<•  A I’tt.iA,  //>/,!  ttfA
/ccst  atcft/nrct/ .

-£  t/t/crr  //if  .  /A// .  'A/Aw/.

a.  /ioc/a  .t/our  //it Apr.

f  /utc/ts  u  ju/r  /l/i/pr .

hir.  Sic.  •  //ct/’.'  /Ac  Aottt/ut/t  As  .if  Irrstf/ctt  ,
at  L/XyrccA  it/ti/  /AAtttuApj.

*  '■!//  ( tw/'ci  X//‘tn‘/ ,  /Ate  fV'/w/ i.A/iAc  <'(>///(  -.  t  .t//'t>//y
/// '  frwtt-  //ae  •  A'/a /////> ar a/,  ti/Af/ <?rt  /Ar  ////y.*  //a*’

(/Ay/A'  fii/t/ .'/'„// ,  //vw  A,/  .//fy/f  -  frt/A’/'  fi/tYf/  // .  -
//  C'/pc/' .


36


37


3cV


3/;


-So


41


-IS


SO


- -AS


:  30


-30


--30


-is


-30


-30


!(>'..  31E

I.oiip tude  Wfft  from  the  Meridian  of  Greenwich


i  Ur.-. .  |  ■ . . .  | . .

rr..kt  rq—  ^

1

\  ./

-

IS  IS  30  A

II  w  A)

Is  3°  IS

3  /()

45  50  15  45  50  /$

2  ’9

Is  30  '3

0  /c?

II  t  1  l  1  ^

*3  30  is  ;  -is  s«  is

()  f3  S  f$

--^^zpzrzp-z
ts  .V  IS

7  /<?

0  A?

43  30  'S

5  AV

^y7-,.\..  .■[... 3

44  50  /,;

4  /S)

3  /<?

TPr

2  /S

/

A  N


ACCOUNT

O  F  A

VOYAGE  round  the  WORLD-

BOOK  II.

CHAP.  I.

I*he  Pajfage  from  Oteroah  to  New  Zealand ;  Incidents
which  happened  on  going  a-jhore  there ,  and  while  the

Ship  lay  in  Poverty  Bay .

if

WE  failed  from  Oteroah  on  the  15th  of  Auguft,  and  on
Friday  the  25th  we  celebrated  the  anniverfary  of  our
leaving  England,  by  taking  a  Chefhire  cheefe  from  a  locker,
•where  it  had  been  carefully  treafured  up  for  this  occalion^
and  tapping  a  calk  of  porter,  which  proved  to  be  very  good
and  in  excellent  order.  On  the  29th,  one  of  the  failors  got
fo  drunk,  that  the  next  morning  he  died:  we  thought  at  firll
that  he  could  not  have  come  honellly  by  the  liquor,  but  we
afterwards  learnt  that  the  boatfwain,  whofe  mate  he  was*
had  in  mere  good-nature  given  him  part  of  a  bottle  of  rum.

On  the  30th  we  faw  the  comet;  at  one  o’clock  in  the  morn¬
ing  it  was  a  little  above  the  horizon  in  the  ealtern  part  of
the  heavens ;  at  about  half  an  hour  after  four  it  palfed  the
meridian,  and  its  tail  fubtended  an  angle  of  forty-two  de-
Vol.  II.  O  o  grees.


1769.

Auguft.

U—v - -/

Tuefday  15.
Friday  25.


Wedncf.  30.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


582


176*9.

Augulh

Wednef,  30,


September.
Friday  1,


Saturday  2.
Sunday  3.


Tuefday  19.
Sunday  24.


Wednef.  27.


Thurfday  2&.

Friday  29.

O&ober.
Sunday  1.


grees.  Our  latitude  was  38°  20'  S.  our  longitude,  by  log,
1 470  6'  W.  and  the  variation  of  the  needle,  by  the  azimuth,
7?  9'  E.  Among  others  that  obferved  the  comet,  was  Tupia,
who  inflantly  cried  out,  that  as  foon  as  it  fhould  be  feen  by
the  people  of  Bolabola,  they  would  kill  the  inhabitants  of
Ulietea,  who  would  with  the  utmofl  precipitation  fly  to  the
mountains.


9W


acre


'/jib  .rrjff  f  dw  hv--  "  -  ■  :-i  ■

On  the  1  fl  of  September,  being  in  the  latitude  of  40 0  22'S.
and  longitude  1740  29'  W.  and  there  not  being  any  figns  of
land,  with  a  heavy  fea  from  the  weflward,  and  ftrong  gales,
I  wore,  and  flood  back  to  the  northward,  fearing  that  we
might  receive  fuch  damage  in  our  fails  and  rigging,  as
would  hinder  the  profecution  of  the  voyage.


On  the  next  day,  there  being  flrong  gales  to  the  weflward,
I  brought  to,  with  the  fhip’s  head  to  the  northward ;  but  in
the  morning  of  the  3d,  the  wind  being  more  moderate,  we
loofened  the  reef  of  the  main-fail,  fet  the  top-fails*  and  plied
to  the  weflward.


•  We  continued  our  courfe  till  the  19th,  when  our  latitude
being  290  and  our  longitude  1590  29',  we  obferved  the  vari¬
ation  to  be  8°  32'  E.  On  the  24th,  being  in  latitude  330  18',
longitude  162°  5 1',  we  obferved  a  fmall  piece  of  fea  weed,  and
a  piece  of  wood  covered  with  barnacles ;  the  variation  here
was  io°  48"  E.

On  the  27th,  being  in  latitude  28°  59',  longitude  169°  5',  we
faw  a  feal  afleep  upon  the  water,  and  feveral  bunches  of  fea
weed.  The  next  day  we  faw  more  fea  weed  in  bunches,  and
on  the  29th,  a  bird,  which  we  thought  a  land  bird;  it  fome-
what  refembled  a  fnipe,  but  had  a  fhort  bill.  On  the  ift  of
October,  we  faw  birds  innumerable,  and  another  feal  afleep
upon  the  water;  it  is  a  general  opinion  that  feals  never  go

out  of  foundings,  or  far  from  land,  but  thofe  that  we  faw  in

thefe


I


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

thefe  feas  prove  the  contrary.  Rock-weed  is,  however,  a
certain  indication  that  land  is  not  far  didant.  The  next  day,
it  being  calm,  we  hoifled  out  the  boat,  to  try  whether  there
was  a  current,  but  found  none.  Our  latitude  was  37 0  io',
longitude  1720  54'  W.  On  the  3d,  being  in  latitude  36°  36',
longitude  1730  27',  we  took  up  more  fea-weed,  and  another
piece  of  wood  covered  with  barnacles.  The  next  day  we
faw  two  more  feals,  and  a  brown  bird,  about  as  big  as  a
raven,  with  fome  white  feathers  under  the  wing.  Mr.  Gore
told  us,  that  birds  of  this  kind  were  feen  in  great  numbers
about  Falkland’s  Iflands,  and  our  people  gave  the;n  the  name
of  Port-Egmont  hens.

On  the  5th,  we  thought  the  water  changed  colour,  but
upon  calling  the  lead,  had  no  ground  with  1S0  fathom.  In
the  evening  of  this  day,  the  variation  was  iq°  50' E.  and
while  we  were  going  nine  leagues  it  encreafed  to  14°  2'.

*  .  r  »

On  the  next  day,  Friday,  October  the  6th,  we  faw  land  from
the  mad-head,  bearing  W.  by  N.  and  Rood  diredlly  for  it ;  in
the  evening  it  could  juft  be  difcerned  from  the  deck,  and
appeared  large.  The  variation  this  day  was,  by  azimuth
and  amplitude,  150  4  4  E.  and  by  obfervation  made  of  the-
fun  and  moon,  the  longitude  of  the  fhip  appeared  to  be
1800  5/  W.  and  by  the  medium  of  this  and  fubfequent  ob-
fervations,  there  appeared  to  be  an  error  in  the  fhip’s  account
of  longitude  during  her  run  from  Otaheite  of  30  16',  fhe
being  fo  much  to  the  wedward  of  the  longitude  refulting
from  the  log.  At  midnight,  I  brought  to  and  founded,  but
had  no  ground  with  one  hundred  and  feventy  fathom.

On  the  7th,  it  fell  calm,  we  therefore  approached  the  land
dowly,  and  in  the  afternoon,  when  a  breeze  lprung  up,  we
were  dill  didant  feven  or  eight  leagues.  It  appeared  dill
larger  as  it  was  more  diftincdly  feen,  with  four  or  five  ranges

O  o  2  of


283


1769.

Odlober.

Monday  2*


Tuefday  3.
Wednef,  4.


Thurfday  5.


Friday  6,


Saturday  7.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


of  hills,  riling  one  over  the  other,  and  a  chain  of  mountains
above  all,  which  appeared  to  be  of  an  enormous  height.
This  land  became  the  fubjedf  of  much  eager  converfation ;
but  the  general  opinion  feemed  to  be  that  we  had  found  the
Terra  auft rails  incognita l  About  five  o’clock  we  faw  the  open¬
ing  of  a  bay,  which  feemed  to  run  pretty  far  inland,  upon
which  we  hauled  our  wind*  and  Hood  in  for  it ;  we  alfo  faw
fmoke  afcending  from  different  places  on  Ihore.  When  night
came  on,  however,  we  kept  plying  off  and  on  till  day-light,
when  we  found  ourfelves  to  the  leeward  of  the  bay,  the
wind  being  at  north :  we  could  now  perceive  that  the  hills
were  cloathed  with  wood,  and  that  fome  of  the  trees  in  the
valleys  were  very  large.  By  noon  we  fetched  in  with  the
fouth  well  point ;  but  not  being  able  to  weather  it,  tacked
and  flood  off:  at  this  time  we  faw  feveral  canoes  Handing
crofs  the  bay,  which  in  a  little  time  made  to  Ihore,  without
feeming  to  take  the  leaf!  notice  of  the  Ihip ;  we  alfo  faw  fome
houfes,  which  appeared  to  be  fmall,  but  neat;  and  near  one
of  them  a  confiderable  number  of  the  people  colledled  to¬
gether,  who  were  fitting  upon  the  beach,  and  who,  we
thought,  were  the  fame  that  we  had  feen  in  the  canoes.  Upon
a  fmall  peninfula,  at  the  north  eall  head,  we  could  plainly
perceive  a  pretty  high  andregnlar  paling,  which  inclofed  the
whole  top  of  a  hill ;  this  was  alfo  the  fubje<5t  of  much  fpecir
lation,  fome  fuppofing  it  to  be  a  park  of  deer,  others  an  inclo-
fure  for  oxen  and  Iheep.  About  four  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,
we  anchored  on  the  north  well  fide  of  the  bay,  before  the
entrance  of  a  fmall  river,  in  ten  fathom  water,  with  a  fine
fandy  bottom,  and  at  about  half  a  league  from  the  Ihore.
The  fides  of  the  bay  are  white  cliffs  of  a  great  height ;  the
middle  is  low  land,  with  hills  gradually  rifing  behind,  one
towering  above  another,  and  terminating  in  the  chain  of
mountains  which  appeared  to  be  far  inland.


In


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


-85


In  the  evening  I  went  on  fliore,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Banks
and  Dr.  Solander,  with  the  pinnace  and  yawl,  and  a  party  of
men.  We  landed  abreaft  of  the  fhip,  on  the  eaft  fide  of  the
river,  which  was  here  about  forty  yards  broad ;  but  feeing
fome  natives  on  the  well  fide  whom  I/wifhed  to  fpeak  with,
and  finding  the  river  not  fordable,  I  ordered  the  yawl  in  to
carry  us  over,  and  left  the!  pinnace  at  the  entrance.  When
we  came  near  the  place  where -the  people  were  aflembled,
they  all  ran  away ;  however,  we  landed,  and  leaving  four
boys  to  take  care  of  the  yawl,  we  walked  up  to  fome  huts
which  were  about  two  or  three  hundred  yards  from  the
water-fide.  When  we  had  got  fome  diftance  from  the  boat,  four
men,  armed  with  long  lances,  ruflied  out  of  the  woods,  and
running  up  to  attack  the  boat,  would  certainly  have  cut  her
off,  if  the  people  in  the  pinnace  had  not  difcovered  them,
and  called  to  the  boys  to  drop  down  the  fire  am :  the  boys
infiantly  obeyed  ;  but  being  clofely  purfued  by  the  Indians,
the  Cockfwairi  of  the  pinnace,  who  had  the  charge  of  the
boats,  fired  a  mufquet  over  their  heads ;  at  this  they  hopped
and  looked  round  them,  but  in  a  few  minutes  renewed  the
purfuit,  brandilhing  their  lances  in  a  threatening  manner:
the  Cockfwain  then  fired  a  fecond  mufquet  over  their  heads,
but  of  this  they  took  no  notice  ;  and  one  of  them  lifting  up
his  fpear  to  dart  it  at  the  boat,  another  piece  was  fired,  which-
fhot  him  dead.  When  he  fell,  the  other  three  hood  motion-
lefs  for  fome  minutes,  as  if  petrified  with  aftonilhment ;  as
foon  as  they  recovered,  they  went  back,  dragging  after  them
the  dead  body,  which  however  they  foon  left,  that  it  might
not  incumber  their  flight.  At  the  report  of  the  firfi  mufquet
we  drew  together,  having  firaggled  to  a  little  difiance  from
each  other,  and  made  the  beft  of  our  way  back  to  the  boat ;
and  eroding  the  river,  we  foon  faw  the  Indian  lying  dead
upon  the  ground.  Uponrt  examining  the  bodyti>y%found

o  that


1769.

October.

y — -v — j

Sunday  8.


LIEUTENANT  GOOK’s  VOYAGE

that  he  had  been  fhot  through  the  heart:  he  was  a  man  of
the  middle  fize  and  flature  ;  his  complexion  was  brown,  but
nday8%  not  very  dark;  and  one  fide  of  liis  face  was  tattowed  in
fpiral  lines  of  a  very  regular  figure  :  he  was  covered  with  a
fine  cloth,  of  a  manufacture  altogether  new  to  us,  and  it  was
tied  on  exactly  according  to  the  reprefentation  in  Valentyn’s
Account  of  Abel  Tafman’s  Voyage,  vol.  iii.  part  2.  page  50.
his  hair  alfo  was  tied  in  a  knot  on  the  top  of  his  head,  but
had  no  feather  in  it.  We  returned  immediately  to  the  fhip,
where  we  could  hear  the  people  on  fhore  talking  with  great
earneftnefs,  and  in  a  very  loud  tone,  probably  about  what
had  happened,  and  what  fhould  be  done.

Monday  9.  In  the  morning,  we  faw  feveral  of  the  natives  where  they
had  been  feen  the  night  before,  and  fome  walking  with  a
quick  pace  towards  the  place  where  we  had  landed,  moft  of
them  unarmed ;  but  three  or  four  with  long  pikes  in  their
hands.  As  I  was  defirous  to  eftablifh  an  intercourfe  with
them,  I  ordered  three  boats  to  be  manned  with  feamen  and
marines,  and  proceeded  towards  the  fhore,  accompanied
by  Mr.  Banks,  Dr.  Solander,  the  other  Gentlemen,  and  Tu-
pia  ;  about  fifty  of  them  feemed  to  wait  for  our  landing,  on
the  oppofite  fide  of  the  river,  which  we  thought  a  fign  of
fear,  and  feated  themfelves  upon  the  ground :  at  firft,  there¬
fore,  myfelf,  with  only  Mr.  Banks,  Dr.  Solander,  and  Tupia,
landed  from  the  little  boat,  and  advanced  towards  them  ;  but
,  we  had  not  proceeded  many  paces  before  they  all  flatted  up,

and  every  man  produced  either  a  long  pike,  or  a  fmall  wea¬
pon  of  green  Talc,  extremely  well  polifhed,  about  a  foot
long,  and  thick  enough  to  weigh  four  or  five  pounds  : '  Tu-
pia  called  to  them  in  the  language  of  Otaheite  ;  but  they
anfwered  only  by  flouriihing  their  weapons,  and  making
figns  to  us  to  depart;  a  mufquet  was  then  fired  wide  of  them,
and  the  ball  firuck  the  water,  the  river  being  flill  between  us ;

2  they


2$(I

1769.

October.


/


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

they  faw  the  effect,  and  defided  from  their  threats  ;  but  we
thought  it  prudent  to  retreat  till  the  marines  could  be  landed.
This  was  foon  done;  and  they  marched,  with  a  jack  carried
before  them,  to  a  little  bank,  about  fifty  yards  from  the
water-fide ;  here  they  were  drawn  up,  and  I  again  advanced,
with  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander ;  Tupia,  Mr.  Green,  and
Mr.  Monkhoufe,  being  with  us.  Tupia  was  again  directed
to  fpeak  to  them,  and  it  was  with  great  pleafure  that  we
perceived  he  was  perfectly  underdood,  he  and  the  natives
fpeaking  only  different  dialers  of  the  fame  language.  He
told  them  that  we  wanted  provifion  and  water,  and  would
give  them  iron  in  exchange,  the  properties  of  which  he  ex¬
plained  as  well  as  he  was  able.  They  were  willing  to  trade,
and  defired  that  we  would  come  over  to  them  for  that  pui^
pofe  :  to  this  we  confented,  provided  they  would  lay  by  their
arms ;  which,  however,  they  could  by  no  means  be  per-
fuaded  to  do.  During  this  Converfation,  Tupia  warned  us  to
be  upon  our  guard,  for  that  they  were  not  our  friends :  we
then  preffed  them  in  our  turn  to  come  over  to  us ;  and  at  lad
one  of  them  dripped  himfelf,  and  fwam  over  without  his
arms  :  he  was  almod  immediately  followed  by  two  more,
and  foon  after  by  mod  of  the  red,  to  the  number  of  twenty
or  thirty  ;  but  thefe  brought  their  arms  with  them.  We
made  them  all  prefents  of  iron  and  beads  ;  but  they  feemed
to  fet  little  value  upon  either,  particularly  the  iron,  not  hav¬
ing  the  lead  idea  of  its  ufe ;  fo  that  we  got  nothing  in  return
but  a  few  feathers :  they  offered  indeed  to  exchange  their
arms  for  ours,  and,  when  we  refufed,  made  many  attempts
to  fnatch  them  out  of  our  hands.  As  foon  as  they  came  over,
Tupia  repeated  his  declaration,  that  they  were  not  our
friends,  and  again  warned  us  to  be  upon  our  guard  ;  their
attempts  to  fnatch  our  weapons,  therefore,  did  not  fucceed  ;
and  we  gave  them  to  underdand  by  Tupia,  that  we  fhould


287

1769.

Oftober.

’ - v - •

Monday  9..


*8S


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1769.

O&ober.
Monday  9.


be  obliged  to  kill  them  if  they  offered  any  farther  violence.
In  a  few  minutes,  however,  Mr.  Green  happening  to  turn
about,  one  of  them  fnatched  away  his  hanger,  and  retiring
to  a  little  diftance,  waved  it  round  his  head,  with  a  fhout  of
exultation  :  the  reft  now  began  to  be  extremely  infolent,  and
we  faw  more  coming  to  join  them  from  the  oppofite  fide  of
the  river.  It  was  therefore  become  necefiary  to  reprefs  them,
and  Mr.  Banks  fired  at  the  man  who  had  taken  the  hanger
with  fmall  fhot,  at  the  diftance  of  about  fifteen  yards :  when
the  fhot  ftruck  him,  he  ceafed  his  cry ;  butinftead  of  return¬
ing  the  hanger,  continued  to  flourifh  it  over  his  head,  at  the
fame  time  flowly  retreating  to  a  greater  diftance.  Mr.  Monk-
houfe  feeing  this,  fired  at  him  with  ball,  and  he  inftantly
dropped.  Upon  this  the  main  body,  who  had  retired  to  a
rock  in  the  middle  of  the  river  upon  the  firft  difcharge,  be¬
gan  to  return ;  two  that  were  near  to  the  man  who  had  been
killed,  ran  up  to  the  body,  one  feized  his  weapon  of  green
Talc,  and  the  other  endeavoured  tofecure  the  hanger,  which
Mr.  Monkhoufe  had  but  juft  time  to  prevent.  As  all  that  had
retired  to  the  rock  were  now  advancing,  three  of  us  dif-
charged  our  pieces,  loaded  only  with  fmall  fhot,  upon  which
they  fwam  back  for  the  fhore  ;  and  we  perceived,  upon  their
landing,  that  two  or  three  of  them  were  wounded.  They
retired  flowly  up  the  country,  and  we  reimbarked  in  our
boats.

As  we  had  unhappily  experienced  that  nothing  was  to  be
done  with  thefe  people  at  this  place,  and  finding  the  water
in  the  river  to  be  fait,  I  proceeded  in  the  boats  round  the
head  of  the  bay  in  fearch  of  frefh  water,  and  with  a  defign,
if  poflible,  to  furprife  fome  of  the  natives,  and  take  them  on
board,  where  by  kind  treatment  and  prefents  I  might  obtain
their  friendfhip,  and  by  their  means  eflablifh  an  amicable
correfpondence  with  their  countrymen.


To


289


\


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


To  my  great  regret,  I  found  no  place  where  I  could  land,  17^
a  dangerous  furf  every  where  beating  upon  the  fliore  ;  but  I
faw  two  canoes  coming  in  from  the  fea,  one  under  fail,  and
the  other  worked  with  paddles.  I  thought  this  a  favourable
opportunity  to  get  fome  of  the  people  into  my  poffeflion
without  mifchief,  as  thofe  in  the  canoe  were  probably  fiflier-
men  and  without  arms,  and  I  had  three  boats  full  of  men.

I  therefore  difpofed  the  boats  fo  as  moll  effectually  to  inter¬
cept  them  in  their  way  to  the  fliore ;  the  people  in  the  canoe
that  was  paddled  perceived  us  fo  foon,  that  by  making  to
the  neareft  land  with  their  utmoft  ffrength,  they  efcaped  us  5
the  other  failed  on  till  fhe  was  in  the  midft  of  us,  without
difcerning  what  we  were;  but  the  moment  fhe  difcovered
us,  the  people  on  board  (truck  their  fail,  and  took  to  their
paddles,  which  they  plied  fo  brifkly  that  fhe  out-ran  the  boat.

They  were  however  within  hearing,  and  Tupia  called  out
to  them  to  come  along  fide,  and  promifed  for  us  that  they
ihould  come  to  no  hurt :  they  chofe,  however,  rather  to  trull
to  their  paddles  than  our  promifes,  and  continued  to  make
from  us  with  all  their  power.  I  then  ordered  a  mufcjuet  to
be  fired  over  their  heads,  as  the  leafl  exceptionable  expedient
to  accomplifli  my  defign,  hoping  it  would  either  make  them
furrender  or  leap  into  the  water.  Upon  the  difcharge  of  the
piece,  they  ceafed  paddling ;  and  all  of  them,  being  feven
in  number,  began  to  {trip,  as  we  imagined  to.  jump  over¬
board  ;  but  it  happened  otherwife.  They  immediately
formed  a  refolution  not  to  fly,  but  to  fight ;  and  when  the
boat  came  up,  they  began  the  attack  with  their  paddles,  and
with  ffones  and  other  offenfive  weapons  that  were  in  the
boat,  fo  vigoroully,  that  we  were  obliged  to  fire  upon  them
in  our  own  defence  :  four  were  unhappily  killed,  and  the
other  three  who  were  boys,  the  elded  about  nineteen,  and
the  youngeft  about  eleven,  inflantly  leaped  into  the  water;

Vol.  II.  Pp  the


LIEUTENANT  COOK'S  VOYAGE

the  deleft  fwam  with  great  vigour,  and  refitted  the  attempts
of  our  people  to  take  him  into  the  boat  by  every  effort  that
he  could  make :  he  was  however  at  laft  overpowered,  and
the  other  two  were  taken  up  with  lefs  difficulty.  I  am  cen-
feious  that  the  feeling  of  every  reader  of  humanity  will  cen-
hire  me  for  having  fired  upon  thefe  unhappy  people,  and  it
is  impoflible  that,  upon  a  calm  review,  I  fhould  approve  it
myfelf.  They  certainly  did  not  deferve  death  for  not  chufing
to  confide  in  my  promifes ;  or  not  confenting  to  come  on
board  my  boat,  even  if  they  had  apprehended  no  danger ;
but  the  nature  of  my  fervice  required  me  to  obtain  a  know*
lege  of  their  country,  which  I  could  no  otherwife  effed  than
by  forcing  my  way  into  it  in  a  hofiile  manner,  or  gaining
admiflion  through  the  confidence  and  good-will  of  the  people.

I  had  already  tried  the  power  of  prefen ts  without  effe6i;  and
I  was  now  prompted,  by  my  defire  to  avoid  further  hoflili-
ties,  to  get  fome  of  them  on  board,  as  the  only  method  left
of  convincing  them  that  we  intended  them  no  harm,  and
had  it  in  our  power  to  contribute  to  their  gratification  and
convenience.  Thus  far  my  intentions  certainly  were  not  cri¬
minal  ;  and  though  in  the  conteff,  which  I  had  not  the  lead
reafon  to  expecd,  our  victory  might  have  been  complete  with¬
out  fo  great  an  expence  of  life  ;  yet  in  fuch  fituations,  when
the  command  to  fire  has  been  given,  no  man  can  redrain  its
excefs,  or  preferibe  its  effect.

As  foon  as  the  poor  Wretches  whom  we  had  taken  oqt  of
the  water  were  in  the  boat,  they  fquatted  down,  expelling
no  doubt  indantly  to  be  put  to  death :  we  made  hade  to  con¬
vince  them  of  the  contrary,  by  every  method  in  our  power  j
we  furnifhed  them  with  clothes,  and  gave  them  every  other
tedimony  of  kindnefs  that  could  remove  their  fears  and  en¬
gage  their  good-will.  Thofe  who  are  acquainted  with  hu¬
man  nature  will  not  wonder,  that  the  fudden  joy  of  thefe
<  young


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


young  favagcs  at  being  unexpectedly  delivered  from  the  fear  1769.
of  death,  and  kindly  treated  by  thofe  whom  they  fuppofed
would  have  been  their  inftant  executioners,  furmounted  Monday  y’
their  concern  for  the  friends  they  had  loft,  and  was  ftrongly
expreffed  in  their  countenances  and  behaviour.  Before  we
reached  the  fhip,  their  fufpicions  and  fears  being  wholly
removed,  they  appeared  to  be  not  only  reconciled  to  their
Situation  but  in  high  fpirits,  and  upon  being  offered  fome
bread  when  they  came  on  board,  they  devoured  it  with  a
voracious  appetite.  They  anfwered  and  afked  many  ques¬
tions,  with  great  appearance  of  pleafure  and  curiofity  ;  and
when  our  dinner  came,  they  expreffed  an  inclination  to  tafte
every  thing  that  they  faw :  they  feemed  bell  pleafed  with  the
fait  pork,  though  we  had  other  proviflons  upon  the  table*

At  fun-fet,  they  eat  another  meal  with  great  eagernefs,  each
devouring  a  large  quantity  of  bread,  and  drinking  above  a
quart  of  water.  We  then  made  them  beds  upon  the  lockers,
and  they  went  to  deep  with  great  feeming  content.  In  the
night,  however,  the  tumult  of  their  minds  having  fubfided,
and  given  way  to  reflection,  they  fighed  often  and  loud.  Tu-
pia,  who  was  always  upon  the  watch  to  comfort  them,  got
up,  and  by  foothing  and  encouragement  made  them  not
only  eafy  but  cheerful ;  their  cheerfulnefs  was  encouraged
fo  that  they  fung  a  fong  with  a  degree  of  tafte  that  Surprised
us :  the  tune  was  Solemn  and  flow,  like  thofe  of  our  Pfalms,
containing  many  notes  and  Semitones.  Their  countenances
were  intelligent  and  expreflive,  and  the  middlemoft,  who
feemed  to  be  about  fifteen,  had  an  opennefs  in  his  afpedt,
and  an  cafe  in  his  deportment  which  were  very  ftriking  :  we
found  that  the  two  eldeft  were  brothers,  and  that  their
names  were  Taaiiourange  and  Koikerange;  the  name  of
the  youngeft  was  Maragovete.  As  we  were  returning  to
the  fhip,  after  having  taken  thefe  boys  into  the  boat,  wc

P  p  2  picked


\


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


picked  up  a  large  piece  of  pummice  ftone  floating  upon  the
water  ;  a  fure  fign  that  there  either  is,  or  has  been  a  volcano
in  this  neighbourhood-

In  the  morning,  they  all  feemed  to  be  cheerful',  and  eat
another  enormous  meal ;  after  this  we  drefled  them,  and
adorned  them  with  bracelets,  anclets,  and  necklaces,  after
their  own  fafhion,  and  the  boat  being  hoifted  out,  they  were
told  that  we  were  going  to  fet  them  afliore  :  this  produced  a
tranfport  of  joy;  but  upon  perceiving  that  we  made  towards
our  firft  landing-place  near  the  river,  their  countenances
changed,  and  they  entreated  with  great  earneftnefs  that  they
might  not  be  fet  afliore  at  that  place,  becaufe  they  faid,  it
was  inhabited  by  their  enemies,  who  would  kill  them  and
eat  them.  This  was  a  great  difappointment to  me;  becaufe
I  hoped  the  report  and  appearance  of  the  boys  would  procure
a  favourable  reception  for  ourfelves.  I  had  already  fent  an
officer  on  fhore  with  the  marines  and  a  party  of  men  to  cut
wood,  and  I  was  determined  to  land  near  the  place;  not
however  to  abandon  the  boys,  if,  when  we  got  afliore,  they
fhould  be  unwilling  to  leave  us ;  but  to  fend  a  boat  with
them  in  the  evening  to  that  part  of  the  bay  to  which  they
pointed,  and  which  they  called  their  home.  Mr.  Banks,  Dr.
Solander  and  Tupia  were  with  me,  and  upon  our  landing
with  the  boys,  and  eroding  the  river,  they  feemed  at  fir  ft  to
be  unwilling  to  leave  us  ;  but  at  length  they  fuddenly
changed  their  mind,,  and,  though  not  without  a  manifeft
ftruggle,  and  fome  tears,  they  took  their  leave :  when  they
were  gone,  we  proceeded  along  a  fwamp,  with  a  defign  to
flioot  fome  ducks,  of  which  we  faw  great  plenty,  and  four
of  the  marines  attended  us,  walking  abreaft  of  us  upon  a
bank  that  overlooked  the  country.  After  we  had  advanced
about  a  mile,  thefe  men  called  out  to  us  and  told  us,  that  a
large  body  of  the  Indians  was  in  fight,  and  advancing  at  a

6  great


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


great  rate.  Upon  receiving  this  intelligence,  we  drew  to-  1769-
gether,  and  refolved  to  make  the  bed  of  our  way  to  the  t
boats;  we  had  fcarcely  begun  to  put  this  into  execution,  Tuefday  io*
when  the  three  Indian  boys  darted  fuddenly  from  fome
bufhes,  where  they  had  concealed  themfelves,  and  again
claimed  our  protection :  we  readily  received  them,  and  re¬
pairing  to  the  beach  as  the  cleared  place,  we  walked  brilkly
towards  the  boats.  The  Indians  were  in  two  bodies ;  one  ran
along  the  bank  which  had  been  quitted  by  the  marines,  the
other  fetched  a  compafs  by  the  fwamp  fo  that  we  could  not  fee
them:  when  they  perceived  that  we  had  formed  into  one  body,
they  dackened  their  pace ;  but  dill  followed  us  in  a  gentle  walk  •
that  they  dackened  their  pace,  was  for  us,  as  well  as  for  them,
a  fortunate  circumdance ;  for  when  we  came  to  the  dde  of  the
river,  where  we  expeCtcd  to  find  the  boats  that  were  to  carry
us  over  to  the  wooders,  we  found  the  pinnace  at  lead  a  mile*
from  her  dation,  having  been  fent  to  pick  up  a  bird  which
had  been  fhot  by  the  officer  on  fhore,  and- the  little  boat  was
obliged  to  make  three  trips  before  we  could  all  get  over  to
the  red  of  the  party.  As  foon  as  we  were  drawn  up  on  the
other  fide,  the  Indians  came  down,  not  in  a  body  as  we  ex^-
peCted,  but  by  two  or  three  at  a  time,  all  armed,  and  in  a
ffiort  time  their  number  increafed  to  about  two  hundred  :  as
we  now  defpaired  of  making  peace  with  them,  feeing  that
the  dread  of  our  fmali  arms  did  not  keep  them  at  a  didancc,
and  that  the  ffiip  was  too  far  off  to  reach  the  place  with  a>
fhot,  we  refolved  to  re-imbark,  led  our  day  fhould  imbroil
us  in  another  quarrel,  and  cod  more  of  the  Indians  their
lives.  We  therefore  advanced  towards  the  pinnace  which
was  now  returning,  when  one  of  the  boys  fuddenly  cried
out,  that  his  uncle  was  among  the  people  who  had  marched
down  to  us,  and  defined  us  to  day  and  talk  with  them  .*  we
complied,  and  a  parley  immediately  commenced  between

them  3


*  -  ,  •  ,  i  j  \

294  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

t  I

cl^b'  t^em  ^nd  Tupia  ;  during  which  the  boys  held  up  eveiy
thing  we  had  given  them  as  tokens  of  our  kindnefs  and  li-

1  ue‘^ay  berality ;  but  neither  would  either  of  the  boys  fwim  over  to
them,  or  any  of  them  to  the  boys.  The  body  of  the  man
who  had  been  killed  the  day  before,  hill  lay  expofed  upon
the  beach  ;  the  boys  feeing  it  lie  very  near  us,  went  up  to  it,
and  covered  it  with  fome  of  the  clothes  that  we  had  given
them ;  and  foon  after  a  fingie  man,  unarmed,  who  proved
to  be  the  uncle  of  Maragovete,  the  youngefl  of  the  bovs,
fwam  over  to  us,  bringing  in  his  hand  a  green  branch,
which  we  fuppofed,  as  well  here  as  at  Otaheite,  to  be  an
emblem  of  peace.  We  received  his  branch  by  the  hands  of
1  upia,  to  whom  he  gave  it,  and  made  him  many  prefents  ;
we  alfo  invited  him  to  go  on  board  the  fliip,  but  he  declined
it;  we  therefore  left  him,  and  expedted  that  his  nephew,  and
the  two  other  young  Indians  would  have  ftaid  with  him,  but
to  our  great  furprize,  they  chofe  rather  to  go  with  us.  As
foon  as  we  had  retired,  he  went  and  gathered  another  green
branch,  and  with  this  in  his  hand,  he  approached  the  dead
body  which  the  youth  had  covered  with  part  of  his  clothes,
walking  Tideways,  with  many  ceremonies,  and  then  throw¬
ing  it  towards  him.  When  this  was  done,  he  returned  to
his  companions,  who  had  fat  down  upon  the  fand  to  obferve
the  ifliie  of  his  negotiation  :  they  immediately  gathered
round  him,  and  continued  in  a  body  above  an  hour,  without
feeming  to  take  any  farther  notice  of  us.  We  were  more
curious  than  they,  and  obferving  them  with  our  glades  from
on  board  the  fliip,  we  faw  fome  of  them  crofs  the  river  upon
a  kind  of  raft,  or  catamarine,  and  four  of  them  carry  off
the  dead  body  which  had  been  covered  by  the  boy,  and  over
which  his  uncle  had  performed  the  ceremony  of  the  branch,
upon  a  kind  of  bier,  between  four  men :  the  other  body  was
dill  differed  to  remain  where  it  had  been  firft  left.


5


After


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


2  95


1769.

October.


After  dinner,  I  directed  Tupia  to  afk  the  boys,  if  they  had

now  any  objection  to  going  afhore,  where  we  had  left  their  _ _ _ _

uncle,  the  body  having  been  carried  off,  which  we  under-  Tuefday  10
Rood  was  a  ratification  of  peace  r  they  faid,  they  had  not;  and
the  boat  being  ordered,  they  went  into  it  with  great  alacrity:
when  the  boat,  in  which  I  had  fent  two  midfhipmen,  came
to  land,  they  went  willingly  afliore ;  but  foon  after  fhe  put
off,  they  returned  to  the  rocks,  and  wading  into  the  water,
earneftly  entreated  to  be  taken  on  board  again ;  but  the
people  in  the  boat,  having  pofitive  orders  to  leave  them,  could
not  comply.  We  were  very  attentive  to  \vhat  happened  on
fhore,  and  keeping  a  confiant  watch  with  our  glades,  we  faw
a  man  pafs  the  river  upon  another  raft,  and  fetch  them  to  a
place  where  forty  or  fifty  of  the  natives  were  afiembled,  who
clofed  round  them,  and  continued  in  the  fame  place  till  fun-
fct :  upon  looking  again,  when  we  faw  them  in  motion,  we
could  plainly  diftinguifh  our  three  prifoners,  who  feparated  •
themfelves  from  the  reft,  came  down  to  the  beach,  and  hav¬
ing  waved  their  hands  three  times  towards  the  fhip,  ran
nimbly  back  and  joined  their  companions,  who  walked  lei¬
surely  away  towards  that  part  which  the  boys  had  pointed
to  as  their  dwelling-place  ;  we  had  therefore  the  greatefl'
reafon  to  believe  that  no  mifchief  would  happen  to  them,
efpecially  as  we  perceived  that  they  went  off'  in  the  clothes
we  had  given  them.

After  it  was  dark,  loud  voices  were  heard  on  fhore  in  the

bottom  of  the  bay  as  ufual,  of  which  we  could  never  learn
the  meaning.


CHAP,


2f)6


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


I769.

Oftober.

' —

Wednef.  1 1.


CHAP.  II.

«  /

A  Defcription  of  Poverty  Bay ,  and  the  Face  of  the  adjacent
Country .  7 he  Range  from  thence  to  Cape  cTurnagainy

arid  back  to  Tolaga ;  with  fome  Account  of  the  People
and  the  Country and  fever a  l  Incidents  that  happened  on
that  Part  of  the  Goaf .

nr 'HE  next  morning,  at  fix  o’clock,  we  weighed,  and  flood
JL  away  from  this  unfortunate  and  inhofpitable  place,  to
which  I  gave  the  name  of  Poverty  Bay,  and  which  by  the
natives  is  called  Taoneroa  or  Long  Sand,  as  it  did  not  af¬
ford  us  a  fingle  article  that  we  wanted  except  a  little  wood.
It  lies  in  latitude  38°  42  S.  and  longitude  1810  36'  W. ;  it  is
in  the  form  of  an  horfe-fhoe,  and  is  known  by  an  ifland
lying  clofe  under  the  north  eafl  point :  the  two  points  which
form  the  entrance  are  high,  with  fleep  white  cliffs,  and  lie
a  league  and  a  half  or  two  leagues  from  each  other,  N.E.  by  E.
and  S.  W.  by  W.  :  the  depth  of  water  in  the  bay  is  from
twelve  to  five  fathom,  with  a  fandy  bottom  and  good  an¬
chorage  ;  but  the  fituation  is  open  to  the  wind  between  the
fouth  and  eafl :  boats  can  go  in  and  out  of  the  river  at  any
time  of  the  tide  in  fine  weather ;  but  as  there  is  a  bar  at  the
entrance,  no  boat  can  go  either  in  or  out  when  the  fea  runs
high:  the  bed  place  to  attempt  it,  is  on  the  north  eafl  fide,
and  it  is  there  practicable  when  it  is  not  fo  in  any  other  part.
The  fhore  of  the  bay,  a  little  within  its  entrance,  is  a  low
flat  fand  ;  behind  which,  at  a  fmall  diflance,  the  face  of  the
country  is  finely  diverfified  by  hills  and  valleys,  all  clothed

with


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


29*

with  wood,  and  covered  with  verdure.  The  country  alfo  1769-
appears  to  be  well  inhabited,  efpecially  in  the  valleys  leading
up  from  the  bay,  where  we  daily  faw  fmoke  rifing  in  clouds  Vednef‘11'
one  behind  another  to  a  great  diftance,  till  the  view  ter¬
minated  in  mountains  of  a  ftupendous  height.

1  ....  *

The  fouth  weft  point  of  the  bay  I  named  Young  Nick's
Head,  after  Nicholas  Young,  the  boy  who  firft  faw  the  land;
at  noon,  it  bore  N.W.  by  W.  diftant  about  three  or  four
leagues,  and  we  were  then  about  three  miles  from  the  fhore.

The  main  land  extended  from  N.  E.  by  N.  to  fouth,  and  I
propofed  to  follow  the  direction  of  the  coaft  to  the  fouth-
ward  as  far  as  the  latitude  of  40  or  41  *,  and  then,  if  I  met
with  no  encouragement  to  proceed  farther,  to  return  to  the
northward.

In  the  afternoon  we  lay  becalmed,  which  the  people  on
fhore  perceiving,  feveral  canoes  put  off,  and  came  within
lefs  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  the  veftel ;  but  could  not  be
perfuaded  to  come  nearer,  though  Tupia  exerted  all  the
powers  of  his  lungs  and  his  eloquence  upon  the  occalion,
fhouting,  and  promifing  that  they  fhould  not  be  hurt.  Ano¬
ther  canoe  was  now  feen  coming  from  Poverty  Bay,  with
only  four  people  on  board,  one  of  whom  we  well  remem¬
bered  to  have  feen  in  our  firft  interview  upon  the  rock.  This
canoe,  without  flopping  or  taking  the  leaf!  notice  of  the
others,  came  directly  alongfide  of  the  fhip,  and  with  very
little  perfuafion,  we  got  the  Indians  on  board.  Their  example
was  foon  followed  by  the  reft,  and  we  had  about  us  feven
canoes,  and  about  fifty  men.  We  made  them  all  prefents
with  a  liberal  hand ;  notwithftanding  which,  they  were  fb
defirous  to  have  more  of  our  commodities,  that  they  fold  us
every  thing  they  had,  even  the  clothes  from  their  backs,  and
the  paddles  from  their  boats.  There  were  but  two  weapons

Vol.  II.  -  Qjl  among


LIEUTENANT


COOK’S  VOYAGE


oo^b'  among  them,  thefe  were  the  inflruments  of  green  talc,  which

< - were  fhaped  fomewliat  like  a  pointed  battledore,  with  afhort

Wednef.  liandle  and  fharp  edges;  they  were  called  Patoo-Patoo,  and
.were  well  contrived  for  clofe-fighting,  as  they  would  cer¬
tainly  fplit  the  thickeft  fcull  at  a  fmgle  blow.

When  thefe  people  had  recovered  from  the  firft  imprefiions
of  fear,  which  notwithflanding  their  refolution  in  coming  on
board,  had  manifefliy  thrown  them  into  fome  confufion,  we
enquired  after  our  poor  boys.  The  man  who  firft  came  on
board  immediately  anfwered,  that  they  were  unhurt  and  at
home ;  adding,  that  he  had  been  induced  to  venture  on  board
by  the  account  which  they  had  given  him  of  the  kindnefs
with  which  they  had  been  treated,  and  the  wonders  that  were
contained  in  the  fhip.

While  they  were  on  board  they  fhewed  every  fign  of  friend-
fhip,  and  invited  us  very  cordially  to  go  back  to  our  old  bay,
or  to  a  fmall  cove  which  they  pointed  out,  that  was  not  quite
fo  far  off;  but  I  chofe  rather  to  profecute  my  difcoveries  than
go  back,  having  reafon  to  hope  that  I  fhould  find  a  better
harbour  than  any  I  had  yet  feen.


About  an  hour  before  fun-fet,  the  canoes  put  off  from  the
fhip  with  the  few  paddles  they  had  referved,  which  were
fcarcely  fufficient  to  fet  them  on  fhore;  but  by  fome  means
or  other  three  of  their  people  were  left  behind :  as  foon  as
we  difcovered  it,  we  hailed  them ;  but  not  one  of  them  would
return  to  take  them  on  board:  this  greatly  furprifed  us;  but
we  were  furprifed  ftill  more  to  obferve  that  the  deferted  In¬
dians  did  not  feem  at  all  uneafy  at  their  fituation,  but  enter¬
tained  us  with  dancing  and  finging  after  their  manner,  eat
their  fuppers,  and  went  quietly  to  bed.


A  light


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


A  light  breeze  fpringing  up  foon  after  it  was  dark,  wc  176 9.

fleered  along  the  fhorc  under  an  eafy  fail  till  midnight,  and  *  .-,-1  j
then  brought  to,  foon  after  which  it  fell  calm;  we  were  now  ^eune1,  lu
fome  leagues  diftant  from  the  place  where  the  canoes  had
left  us,  and  at  day-break,  when  the  Indians  perceived  it,
they  were  feized  with  confternation  and  terror,  and  lamented
their  fituation  in  loud  complaints,  with  geRures  of  defpair-
and  many  tears.  Tupia,  with  great  difficulty,  pacified  them;
and  about  feven  o’clock  in  the  morning,  a  light  breeze  Thurfdayi*.
fpringing  up,  we  continued  to  Rand  fouth.weR  along  the
fhore.  Fortunately  for  our  poor  Indians,  two  canoes  came
off  about  this  time,  and  made  towards  the  fhip:  they  Ropped,
however,  at  a  little  diRance,  and  fecmed  unwilling  to  truR
themfelves  nearer.  Our  Indians  were  greatly  agitated  in
this  Rate  of  uncertainty,  and  urged  their  fellows  to  come
alon glide  of  the  fhip,  both  by  their  voice  and  geRures,  with
the  utmoR  eagernefs  and  impatience.  Tupia  interpreted
what  they  faid,  and  we  were  much  furprifed  to  find,  that,
among  other  arguments,  they  affined  the  people  in  the  ca¬
noes,  we  did  not  eat  men.  We  now  began  ferioufly  to  be¬
lieve  that  this  horrid  cuflom  prevailed  among  them  ;  for
what  the  boys  had  faid,  we  confidered  as  a  mere  hyperboli¬
cal  expreffion  of  their  fear.  One  of  the  canoes,  at  length,
ventured  to  come  under  the  fhip’s  fide  ;  and  an  old  man
came  on  board,  who  feemed  to  be  a  Chief  from  the  finery  of
his  garment,  and  the  fuperiority  of  his  weapon,  which  was
a  Patoo-Patoo,  made  of  bone,  that,  as  he  faid,  had  belonged
to  a  whale.  He  Raid  on  board  but  a  fhort  time,  and  when
he  went  away,  he  took  with  him  our  guefis,  very  much  to
the  fatisfaCtion  both  of  them  and  us.


At  the  time  when  we  failed,  we  were  abrcafi  of  a  point,
from  which  the  land  trends  S.S.  W.  and  which,  on  account

Qjq  q  of


3  co


LIEUTENANT  COOR’s  VOYAGE


i769-  of  its  figure,  I  called  Cape  Table.  This  point  lies  feven

October.  ,  *

v- — leagues  to  the  iouthward  of  Poverty  Bay,  in  latitude  390  7S.
/  bujfday  an^  longitude  1B10  36  W. :  it  is  of  a  confiderable  height,
makes  in  a  fharp  angle,  and  appears  to  be  quite  flat  at  the
top.

I  •'  ,  X  ’  *

In  fleering  along  the  fliore  to  the  fouthward  of  the  Cape,
at  the  diflance  of  two  or  three  miles,  our  foundings  were
from  twenty  to  thirty  fathom,  having  a  chain  of  rocks  be¬
tween  us  and  the  fhore,  which  appeared  at  different  heights
above  the  water.

At  noon,  Cape  Table  bore  N.  20  E.  diflant  about  four

leagues,  and  a  fmall  ifland,  which  was  the  fouthermoff  land

/»

in  fight,  bore  S.  70  W.  at  the  diftance  of  about  three  miles,
ifland  of  This  ifland,  which  the  natives  call  Teahowray,  I  named  the
Island  of  Portland,  from  its  very  great  refemblance  to
Portland  in  the  Englifh  Channel :  it  lies  about  a  mile  from
a  point  on  the  main ;  but  there  appears  to  be  a  ridge  of
rocks,  extending  nearly,  if  not  quite,  from  one  to  the  other.
N.  57  E.  two  miles  from  the  fouth  point  of  Portland,  lies  a
funken  rock,  upon  which  the  fea  breaks  with  great  violence.
We  pafled  between  this  rock  and  the  land,  having  from
feventeen  to  twenty  fathom.

In  failing  along  the  fliore,  we  faw  the  natives  affembled
in  great  numbers  as  well  upon  Portland  Ifland  as  the  main:
we  could  alfo  diftinguifh  feveral  fpots  of  ground  that  were
cultivated ;  fome  feemed  to  be  frefh  turned  up,  and  lay  in
furrows  like  ploughed  land,  and  fome  had  plants  upon  them
in  different  flages  of  their  growth.  We  faw  alfo  in  two
places,  high  rails  upon  the  ridges  of  hills,  like  what  we  had
feen  upon  the  peninfula  at  the  north  eafl  head  of  Poverty
bay :  as  they  were  ranged  in  lines  only,  and  not  fo  as  to  en-
2  clofe


clofe  an  area,  we  could  not  guefs  at  their  ufe,  and  therefore  *7e9-

'  Ottober.

fuppofed  they  might  be  the  work  of  fuperftition.  » - - - •

rr  Thurfday  I2i

About  noon  another  canoe  appeared,  in  which  were  four
men ;  fhe  came  within  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  us,  where
the  people  on  board  feemed  to  perform  divers  ceremonies:
one  of  them,  who  was  in  the  bow,  fometimes  feemed  to  alk
and  to  offer  peace,  and  fometimes  to  threaten  war,  by  bran¬
dishing  a  weapon  that  he  held  in  his  hand :  fometimes  alfo
he  danced,  and  fometimes  he  fung.  Tupia  talked  much  to
him,  but  could  not  perfuade  him  to  come  to  the  Ship.

Between  one  and  two  o’clock  we  difcovered  land  to  the
weftward  of  Portland,  extending  to  the  fouthward  as  far  as
we  could  fee ;  and  as  the  Ship  was  hauling  round  the  fouth
end  of  the  ifland,  fhe  fuddenly  fell  into  fhoal  water  and
broken  ground:  we  had  indeed  always  feven  fathom  or
more,  but  the  foundings  were  never  twice  the  fame,  jump¬
ing  at  once  from  feven  fathom  to  eleven ;  in  a  Short  time,
however,  we  got  clear  of  all  danger,  and  had  again  deep
water  under  us.

At  this  time  the  iiland  lay  within  a  mile  of  us,  making  in
white  cliffs,  and  a  long  Spit  of  low  land  running  from  it  to¬
wards  the  main.  On  the  fides  of  thefe  cliffs  fat  vafl  numbers
of  people,  looking  at  us  with  a  fixed  attention,  and  it  is  pro¬
bable  that  they  perceived  fome  appearance  of  hurry  and
confufion  on  board,  and  fome  irregularity  in  the  working
of  the  fhip,  while  we  were  getting  clear  of  the  Shallow  water
and  broken  ground,  from  which  they  might  infer  that  we
were  alarmed  or  in  diftrefs;  we  thought  that  they  wifhed  to
take  advantage  of  our  Situation,  for  five  canoes  were  put  off
with  the  utmofl  expedition,  full  of  men,  and  well  armed:
they  came  fo  near,  and  Shewed  fo  hoflile  a  difpofition  by
fhouting,  brandifhing  their  lances,  and  ufing  threatening

geflures,


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


3°  *


1769.

Oftober.

1 — — -v -

ThuHcUy  1 2.


geflures,  that  we  were  in  fome  pain  for  our  fmall  boat,
which  was  flill  employed  in  founding:  a  mufket  was  there¬
fore  fired  over  them,  but  finding  it  did  them  no  harm,  they
feemed  rather  to  be  provoked  than  intimidated,  and  I  there¬
fore  fired  a  four  pounder,  charged  with  grape-fhot,  wide  of
•them:  this  had  a  better  effect;  upon  the  report  of  the  piece
they  all  rofe  up  and  fhouted,  but  inflead  of  continuing  the
chace,  drew  altogether,  and  after  a  fhort  confultation,  went
quietly  away.


Having  got  round  Portland,  we  hauled  in  for  the  land
N.  W.  having  a  gentle  breeze  at  N.  E.  which  about  five  o’clock
died  away,  and  obliged  us  to  anchor;  we  had  one  and  twenty
fathom,  with  a  fine  fandy  bottom:  the  fouth  point  of  Port¬
land  bore  S.  E.  fS.  didant  about  two  leagues,  and  a  low
point  on  the  main  bore  N.  4  £.:  in  the  fame  direction  with
this  low  point,  there  runs  a  deep  bay,  behind  the  land  of
which  Cape  Table  is  the  extremity,  fo  as  to  make  this  land
a  penmfula,  leaving  only  a  low  narrow  neck  between  that
and  the  main.  Of  this  penmfula,  which  the  natives  calf

Terakaco,  Cape  Table  is  the  north  point,  and  Portland  the
fouth.

While  we  lay  at  anchor,  two  more  canoes  came  off  to  us,
one  armed,  and  the  other  a  fmall  fifning-boat,  with  only
four  men  in  her;  they  came  fo  near  that  they  entered
into  converfation  with  Tupia ;  they  anfwered  all  the  quedions
that  he  afkcd  them  with  great  civility,  but  could  not  be  per—
fuaded  to  come  on  board ;  they  came  near  enough,  how¬
ever,  to  receive  feveral  prefents  that  were  thrown  to  them
from  the  fhip,  with  which  they  feemed  much  pleafed,  and
went  away.  During  the  night  many  fires  were  kept  upon
flxOi e,  probably  to  fhew  us  that  the  inhabitants  were  too
much  upon  their  guard  to  be  furprized.


About


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


303


About  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  13th,  a  breeze
fpringing  up  northerly,  we  weighed,  and  fleered  in  for  the
land.  The  fhore  here  forms  a  large  bay,  of  which  Portland
is  the  north  eaft  point,  and  the  bay  that  runs  behind  Gape
Table  an  arm.  This  arm  1  had  a  great  inclination  to  ex¬
amine,  becaufe  there  appeared  to  be  fafe  anchorage  in  it,  but
not  being  Pure  of  that,  and  the  wind  being  right  an  end,  I
was  unwilling  to  fpare  the  time.  Four  and  twenty  fathom
was  the  greatefl  depth  within  Portland,  but  the  ground  was
every  where  clear.  The  land  near  the  fhore  is  of  a  moderate
height,  with  white  cliffs  and  fandy  beaches  ;  within,  it  rifes
into  mountains,  and  upon  the  whole  the  furface  is  hilly,  for
the  mofl  part  covered  with  wood,  and  to  appearance  pleafant
and  fertile.  In  the  morning  nine  canoes  came  after  the  fhip,
but  whether  with  peaceable  or  hoflile  intentions  we  could
not  tell,  for  we  foon  left  them  behind  us.

In  the  evening  we  flood  in  for  a  place  that  had  the  appear¬
ance  of  an  opening,  but  found  no  harbour  ;  we  therefore
flood  out  again,  and  were  foon  followed  by  a  large  canoe,
with  eighteen  or  twenty  men,  all  armed,  who,  though  they
could  not  reach  us,  fhouted  defiance,  and  brand ifhed  their
weapons,  with  many  gefiures  of  menace  and  infult.

In  the  morning  we  had  a  view  of  the  mountains  inland,
upon  which  the  fnow  was  flill  lying:  the  country  near  the
fhore  was  low  and  unfit  for  culture,  but  in  one  place  we  per¬
ceived  a  patch  of  fomewhat  yellow,  which  had  greatly  the
appearance  of  a  corn  field,  yet  was  probably  nothing  more
than  fome  deadflaggs,  which  are  not  uncommon  in  fwampy
places :  at  fome  diflance  we  law  groves  of  trees,  which  ap¬
peared  high  and  tapering,  and  being  not  above  two  leagues
from  the  fouth  weft  cod  of  the  great  bay,  in  which  we  had
been  coafting  for  the  two  laft  days,  I  hoifted  out  the  pinnace

4  .  and


1769.

Oiicber.

V - - - 1

Friday  13.  *


Saturday  14.


I


304  LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

ofiott  and  long'boat  to  fearch  for  frelh  water ;  but  juft  as  they
— y — '  were  about  to  put  off,  we  faw  feveral  boats  full  of  neoDle
coming  from  the  fhore,  and  therefore  I  did  not  think  it  fafe
for  them  to  leave  the  fhip.  About  ten  o'clock,  five  of  thefe
boats  having  drawn  together,  as  if  to  hold  a  confutation,
made  towards  the  fhip,  having  on  board  between  eighty  and
ninety  men,  and  four  more  followed  at  fome  difiance,  as  if
to  fuftain  the  attack :  when  the  firft  five  came  within  about
a  hundred  yards  of  the  fhip,  they  began  to  fing  their  war
fong,  and  brandifhing  their  pikes,  prepared  for  an  engage¬
ment.  We  had  now  no  time  to  lofe,  for  if  we  could  not  pre¬
vent  the  attack,  we  fhould  come  under  the  unhappy  necefiity
of  ufing  our  fire-arms  againft  them,  which  we  were  very  de-
firous  to  avoid.  Tupia  was  therefore  ordered  to  acquaint
them  that  we  had  weapons  which,  like  thunder,  would
deftroy  them  in  a  moment ;  that  we  would  immediately  con¬
vince  them  of  their  power  by  directing  their  efFedf  fo  that
they  fhould  not  be  hurt;  but  that  if  they  perfifted  in  any
hofiile  attempt,  we  fhould  be  obliged  to  ufe  them  for  our
defence :  a  four  pounder,  loaded  with  grape-fhot,  was  then
difcliarged  wide  of  them,  which  produced  the  defired  effect'
the  report,  the  flafh,  and  above  all,  the  fhot,  which  fpread
very  far  in  the  water,  fo  intimidated  them,  that  they  began
to  paddle  away  with  all  their  might:  Tupia,  however,  call¬
ing  aftei  them,  and  alluring  them  that  if  they  would  come
unarmed,  they  fhould  be  kindly  received ;  the  people  in  one
of  the  boats  put  their  arms  on  board  of  another,  and  came
under  the  fliip’s  fiern ;  we  made  them  feveral  prefents,  and
fhould  certainly  have  prevailed  upon  them  to  come  on  board,
if  the  othei  canoes  had  not  come  up,  and  again  threatened
us,  by  fhouting  and  brandifhing  their  weapons:  at  this  the
people  who  had  come  to  the  fhip  unarmed,  expreficd  great
difpleafure,  and  foon  after  they  all  went  away.


In


round  the  world.


3  OS


In  the  afternoon  we  Rood  over  to  the  fouth  point  of  the  ^69.

bay,  but  not  reaching  it  before  it  was  dark,  we  flood  off  and  \ - - — \j

on  all  night.  At  eight  the  next  morning,  being  a-breafl  of  Sunday  z5.
the  point,  feveral  fifhing  boats  came  off  to  us,  and  fold  us
fome  {linking  fifh :  it  was  the  befl  they  had,  and  we  were
willing  to  trade  with  them  upon  any  terms:  thefe  people
behaved  very  well,  and  we  fliould  have  parted  good  friends
if  it  had  not  been  for  a  large  canoe,  with  two  and  twenty
armed  men  on  board,  which  came  boldly  up  along  fide  of
the  fliip.  We  foon  faw  that  this  boat  had  nothing  for  traf-
fick,  yet  we  gave  them  two  or  three  pieces  of  cloth,  an  article
which  they  feemed  very  fond  of.  I  obferved  that  one  man
had  a  black  fkin  thrown  over  him,  fomewhat  refembling
that  of  a  bear,  and  being  defirous  to  know  what  animal  was
its  firfl  owner,  I  offered  him  for  it  a  piece  of  red  baize*
and  he  feemed  greatly  pleafed  with  the  bargain,  imme¬
diately  pulling  off  the  fkin,  and  holding  it  up  in  the  boat ;
he  would  not,  however,  part  with  it  till  he  had  the  cloth  in
his  pofTeffion,  and  as  there  could  be  no  transfer'of  property,
if  with  equal  caution  I  had  infilled  upon  the  fame  condi¬
tion,  I  ordered  the  cloth  to  be  handed  down  to  him,  upon
which,  with  amazing  coolnefs,  inflead  of  fending  up  the
fkin,  he  began  to  pack  up  both  that  and  the  baize,  which  he
had  received  as  the  purchafe  of  it,  in  a  bafket,  without  pay¬
ing  the  leafl  regard  to  my  demand  or  remonflrances,  and
foon  after,  with  the  fifhing  boats,  put  off  from  the  fliip;
when  they  were  at  fome  diflance,  they  drew  together,  and
after  a  fhort  confultation  returned;  the  fifhermen  offered
more  fifh,  which,  though  good  for  nothing,  was  purchafcd,  •
and  trade  was  again  renewed.  Among  others  who  were
placed  over  the  fhip’s  fide  to  hand  up  what  we  bought,  was
little  Tayeto,  Tupia’s  boy ;  and  one  of  the  Indians,  watching

%  i

his  opportunity,  fuddenly  feized  him,  and  dragged  him
Vol.  II.  R  r  down


S°6

I769*

Odober.

< - „ -

Sunday  15.


Ilavike’sEay.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

•  down  into*  the  canoe;  two  of  them  held  him  down  in  the
fore  part  of  it,  and  the  others,  with  great  a&ivity,  paddled
her  ofF,  the  red  of  the  canoes,  following  as  fad  as  they  could:
upon  this  the  marines,  who  were  under  arms  upon  deck,
were  ordered  to  fire.  The  fhot  was  dire&ed  to  that  part  of
the  canoe  which  was  farthed  from  the  boy,  and  rather  wide
of  her,  being  willing  rather  to  mifs  the  rowers  than  to  hurt
him:  it  happened,  however,  that  one  man  dropped,  upon
which  the  others  quitted  their  hold  of  the  boy,  who  indantly
leaped  into  the  water,  and  fwam  towards  the  fhip ;  the  large
canoe  immediately  pulled  round  and  followed  him,  but
fome  mufquets,  and  a  great  gun  being  fired  at  her,  fhe  de-
fided  from  the  purfuit.  The  fhip  being  brought  to,  a  boat
was  lowered,  and  the  poor  boy  taken  up  unhurt,  though  fo
terrified  that  for  a  time  he  feemed  to  be  deprived  of  his
fenfes.  Some  of  the  gentlemen  who  traced  the  canoes  tofhore
with  their  glafies,  faid,  that  they  faw  three  men  carried  up

the  beach,  who  appeared  to  be  either  dead  or  wholly  difabled
by  their  wounds.

-10  the  cape  off  which  this  unhappy  tranfaftion  happened,

1  gave  the  name  of  Cape  Kidnappers.  It  lies  in  latitude  390
43  >  an(l  longitude  182°  2±'  W.  and  is  rendered  remarkable  by
two  white  rocks  like  hay  fiacks,  and  the  high  white  cliffs  on
each  fide.  It  lies  S.  W.  by  W.  diflant  thirteen  leagues  from
the  ifle  of  Portland  ;  and  between  them  is  the  bay  of  which
it  is  the  fouth  point,  and  which,  in  honour  of  Sir  Edward
Hawke,  then  Firft  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  I  called  Hawke’s
Bay.  We  found  in  it  from  twenty- four  to  feven  fathom,
and  good  anchorage.  From  Cape  Kidnappers  the  land
trends  S.  S.  W.  and  in  this  direction  we  made  our  run  along
the  fhore,  keeping  at  about  a  league  difiance,,  with  a  fieady
breeze  and  clear  weather,

M


1


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


As  foon  as  Tayeto  recovered  from  his  fright,  he  brought  a  *7^9-

...  rr  •  O&ober.

fifli  to  Tupia,  and  told  him,  that  he  intended  it  as  an  ottering  < — ^ — r
to  his  Eatua,  or  god,  in  gratitude  for  hisefcape;  Tupia  com-  Sundayij’
mended  his  piety,  and  ordered  him  to  throw  the  fifli.  into  the
fea,  which  was  accordingly  done.

About  two  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  paffed  a  fmall  but
high  white  ifland,  lying  clofe  to  the  fhore,  upon  which  we
faw  many  houfes,  boats,  and  people.  The  people  we  con¬
cluded  to  be  fhhers,  becaufe  the  ifland  was  totally  barren ;
we  faw  feveral  people  alfo  on  fhore,  in  a  fmall  bay  upon
the  main,  within  the  ifland.  At  eleven,  we  brought  to  till  Monday  16.
day-light,  and  then  made  fail  to  the  fouthward,  along  the
fhore.  About  feven  o’clock  we  paft  a  high  point  of  land,
which  lies  S.  S.  W.  twelve  leagues  from  Cape  Kidnappers:
from  this  point  the  land  trends  three-fourths  of  a  point  more
to  the  weflward ;  at  ten,  we  faw  more  land  open  to  the  fouth¬
ward,  and  at  noon,  the  fouthermofl  land  that  was  in  fight,
bore  S.  39W.  diflant  eight  or  ten  leagues,  and  a  high  bluff
head,  with  yellowifh  cliffs,  bore  W.  diflant  about  two
miles ;  the  depth  of  water  was  thirty-two  fathom.

In  the  afternoon  we  had  a  frefli  breeze  at  weft,  and  during
the  night  variable  light  airs  and  calms:  in  the  morning  a  Tuefdayiy.
gentle  breeze  fprung  up  between  the  N.  W.  and  N.  E.  and
having  till  now  flood  to  the  fouthward,  without  feeing  any
probability  of  meeting  with  a  harbour,  and  the  country  ma-
nifeflly  altering  for  the  worfe,  I  thought  that  Handing  farther
in  that  direction  would  be  attended  with  no  advantage,  but
on  the  contrary  would  be  a  lofs  of  time  that  might  be  em¬
ployed  with  a  better  profpedt  of  fuccefs  in  examining  the
coaft  to  the  northward;  about  one,  therefore,  in  the  after¬
noon,  I  tacked,  and  flood  north,  with  a  frefh  breeze  at  well.

The  high  bluff  head,  with  yellowifh  cliffs,  which  we  were

II  r  2  a-brcafl


308


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1769.

O&ober.

L. .  —  - -

Tuefday  17.


Wednef.  18.


Terakako.'


I


a-breaft  of  at  noon,  I  called  Cape  Turnagain,  becaufe  here
we  turned  back.  It  lies  in  latitude  40°  34/  S.  longitude  182°
S5  W.  diflant  eighteen  leagues  S.  S.  W.  and  S.  S.  W.  ;W.  from
Cape  Kidnappers.  The  land  between  them  is  of  a  very-  un¬
equal  height ;  in  fome  places  it  is  lofty  next  the  fea  with
white  cliffs,  in  others  low,  with  fandy  beaches  :.-the  face  of
the  country  is  not  fo  well  clothed  with  wood  as  it  is  about
Hawke’s  bay,  but  looks  more  like  our  high  downs  in  Eng¬
land:  it  is,  however,  to  all  appearance,  well  inhabited,  for
as  we  flood  along  the  fliore,  we  faw  feveral  villages,  not  only
in  the  vallies,  but  on  the  tops  and  fides  of  the  hills,  and
fmoke  in  many  other  places.  The  ridge  of  mountains
which  has  been  mentioned  before,  extends  to  the  fouthward
farther  than  we  could  fee,  and  was  then  every  where  che¬
quered  with  fnow.  At  night  we  faw  two  fires  inland,  fo
very  large,  that  we  concluded  they  mufl  have  been  made  to
clear  the  land  for  tillage ;  but  however  that  be,  they  are  a
demonflration  that  the  part  of  the  country  where  they  ap¬
peared  is  inhabited.

On  the  1 8th,  at  four  o’clock  in  the  morning,  Cape  Kid¬
nappers  bore  N.  32  W.  diflant  two  leagues:  in  this  fituation
we  had  fixty-two  fathom,  and  when  the  Cape  bore  W.  by  N.
diflant  three  or  four  leagues,  we  had  forty-five  fathom :  in
the  mid-way  between  the  ifle  of  Portland  and  the  Cape  we
had  fixty-five  fathom.  In  the  evening,  being  a-breafl  of  the
peninfula  within  Portland  ifland,  called  Terakako,  a  canoe
came  off  from  that  Ihore,  and  with  much  difficulty  overtook
the  fhip  ;  there  were  on  board  five  people,  two  of  whom
appeared  to  be  Chiefs,  and  the  other  three  fervants:  the
Chiefs,  with  very  little  invitation  came  on  board,  and  ordered
the  reft  to  remain  in  their  canoe.  We  treated  them  with
great  kindnefs,  and  they  were  not  backward  in  expreffing
2  their


ROUND  THE  WORLD.  309

their  fatisfaftion;  they  went  down  into  the  cabbin,  and  '769-
after  a  fhort  time  told  us  that  they  had  determined  not  to  go  — v- — »
on  fhore  till  the  next  morning.  As  the  deeping  on  board  Wednef,,8‘
was  an  honour  which  we  neither  expedled  nor  defired,  I  re-
monftrated  flrongly  againft  it,  and  told  them,  that  on  their
account  it  would  not  be  proper,  as  the  fhip  would  probably
be  at  a  great  diftance  from  where  fhe  was  then,  the  next
morning:  they  perfifted,  however,  in  their  refolution,  and
as  I  found  it  impoflible  to  get  rid  of  them  without  turning
them  by  force  out  of  the  fhip,  I  complied:  as  a  proper  pre¬
caution,  however,  I  propofed  to  take  their  fervants  alfo  on
board,  and  hoift  their  canoe  into  the  fhip ;  they  made  no  ob¬
jection,  and  this  was  accordingly  done.  The  countenance
of  one  of  thefe  Chiefs  was  the  mod  open  and  ingenuous  of
all  I  have  ever  feen,  and  I  very  foon  gave  up  every  fufpicion
of  his  having  any  finifler  defign:  they  both  examined  every
thing  they  faw  with  great  curiofity  and  attention,  and  re¬
ceived  very  thankfully  fuch  little  prefents  as  we  made  them ;
neither  of  them,  however,  could  be  perfuaded  either  to  eat
or  drink,  but  their  fervants  devoured  every  thing  they  could
'  v  get  with  great  voracity.  We  found  that  thefe  men  had  heard
of  our  kindnefs  and  liberality  to  the  natives  who  had  been
on  board  before,  yet  we  thought  the  confidence  they  placed
in  us,  an  extraordinary  inftance  of  their  fortitude.  At  night
I  brought  to  till  day-light,  and  then  made  fail;  at  feven  in  Thurfdayi*?.
the  morning,  I  brought  to  again  under  Cape  Table,  and  fent
away  our  guefls  with  their  canoe,  who  exprefled  fome  fur-
prife  at  feeing  themfelves  fo  far  from  home,  but  landed
a-breaflof  the  fhip.  At  this  time  I  faw  other  canoes  putting
off  from  the  fhore,  but  I  flood  away  to  the  northward  with¬
out  waiting  for  their  coming  up.

About  three,  I  pafTed  a  remarkable  head  land,  which  I
called  Gable-End-Foreland,  from  the  very  great  likenefs


31°  LIEUTENANT  COOK'S  VOYAGE

oaober.  of  the  white  cliff  at  tlle  Poinf’  t0  the  gable-end  of  a  houfe :
iC  is  not  more  remarkabIe  for  its  figure,  than  for  a  rock
which  rifes  like  a  fpire  at  a  little  diftance.  It  lies  from  Cape
Table  N.  24  E.  diftant  about  twelve  leagues.  The  fhore  be¬
tween  them  forms  a  bay,  within  which  lies  Poverty  bay,  at
the  diftance  of  four  leagues  from  the  head  land,  and  eight
from  the  Cape.  At  this  place  three  canoes  came  off  to  us,
and  one  man  came  on  board ;  we  gave  him  fome  trifles,  and
he  foon  returned  to  his  boat,  which,  with  all  the*  reft,
dropped  a-ftern.

Friday  2o.  In  the  morning  I  made  fail  in  fliore,  In  order  to  look  into
two  bays,  which  appeared  about  two  leagues  to  the  north¬
ward  of  the  Foreland;  the  fouthermoft  I  could  not  fetch,  but
I  anchored  in  the  other  about  eleven  o’clock.

Into  this  bay  we  were  invited  by  the  people  on  board  many
canoes,  who  pointed  to  a  place  where  they  faid  there  was
plenty  of  frefh  water:  I  did  not  find  fo  good  a  fhelter  from
the  fea  as  I  expected,  but  the  natives  who  came  about  u^
appearing  to  be  of  a  friendly  difpofition,  I  was  determined
to  try  whether  I  could  not  get  fome  knowlege  of  the  country
here  before  I  proceeded  farther  to  the  northward.

In  one  of  the  canoes  that  came  about  us  as  foon  as  we  an¬
chored,  we  faw  two  men,  who  by  their  habits  appeared  to  be
Chiefs :  one  of  them  was  drefled  in  a  jacket,  which  was  or¬
namented,  after  their  manner,  with  dog’s  Ikin  ;  the  jacket  of
the  other  was  almoft  covered  with  fmall  tufts  of  red  feathers.
Thefe  men  I  invited  on  board,  and  they  entered  the  fhip  with
very  little  hefitation:  I  gave  each  of  them  about  four  yards
of  linen,  and  a  fpike  nail ;  with  the  linen  they  were  much
pleafed,  but  feemed  to  let  no  value  upon  the  nail.  We  per¬
ceived  that  they  knew  what  had  happened  in  Poverty  bay,
and  we  had  therefore  no  reafon  to  doubt  but  that  they  would

behave


I


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

behave  peaceably;  however,  for  further  fecurity,  Tupia
was  ordered  to  tell  them  for  what  purpofe  we  came  thither,
and  to  affine  them  that  we  would  offer  them  no  injury,  if
they  offered  none  to  us.  In  the  mean  time  thofe  who  re¬
mained  in  the  canoes  traded  with  our  people  very  fairly  for
what  they  happened  to  have  with  them :  the  Chiefs,  who
were  old  men,  flaid  with  us  till  we  had  dined,  and  about  two
o’clock  I  put  off  with  the  boats,  manned  and  armed,  in  order
to  go  on  fhore  in  fearch  of  water,  and  the  two  Chiefs  went
into  the  boat  with  me;  The  afternoon  was  tempeduous,
with  much  rain,  and  the  furf  every  where  ran  fo  high,  that
although  we  rowed  almofl  round  the  bay,  we  found  no  place
where  wTe  could  land :  I  determined  therefore  to  return  to
the  fhip,  which  being  intimated  to  the  Chiefs,  they  called
to  the  people  on  fhore,  and  ordered  a  canoe  to  be  fent  off  for
themfelves  ;  this  was  accordingly  done,  and  they  left  us,
promifmg  to  come  on  board  again  in  the  morning,  and  bring
us  fome  fifh  and  fweet  potatoes.

In  the  evening,  the  weather  having  become  fair  and  mo¬
derate,  the  boats  were  again  ordered  out,  and  I  landed,  ac¬
companied  by  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander.  We  were  received
with  great  expreffions  of  friendfhip  by  the  natives,  who  be¬
haved  with  a  fcrupulous  attention  not  to  give  offence.  In.
particular,  they  took  care  not  to  appear  in  great  bodies :  one
family,  or  the  inhabitants  of  two  or  three  houfes  only,  were
generally  placed  together,  to  the  number  of  fifteen  or
twenty,  confiding  of  men,  women,  and  children.  Lhefe
little  companies  fat  upon  the  ground,  not  advancing  towards
us,  but  inviting  us  to  them,  by  a  kind  of  beckon,  moving
one  hand  towards  the  bread'.  We  made  them  feveral  little
prefents  ;  and  in  our  walk  round  the  bay  found  two  final!
dreams  of  frefh  water.  This  convenience,  and  the  friendly

behaviour  of  the  people,  determined  me  to  day  at  lead  a

day*


3ir

1769.

Odtober.
— - - ^

Friday  20.


312  LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

oaobt.  day’  that  1  miSht  fil1  fome  of  mY  empty  calks,  and  give  Mr.

- - - — '  Banks  an  opportunity  of  examining  the  natural  produce  of

the  country.

Saturday  *i.  in  the  morning  of  the  21ft,  I  fent  Lieutenant  Gore  on
fliore,  to  fuperintend  the  watering,  with  a  ftrong  party  of
men ;  and  they  were  foon  followed  by  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.
Solander,  with  Tupia,  Tayeto,  and  four  others.

♦The  natives  fat  by  our  people,  and  feemed  pleafed  to  ob~
ferve  them ;  but  did  not  intermix  with  them :  they  traded
howevei ,  chiefly  for  cloth,  and  after  a  fhort  time  applied  to
theii  ordinary  occupations,  as  if  no  firanger  had  been
among  them.  In  the  forenoon,  feveral  of  their  boats  went
out  a  fifhing,  and  at  dinner  time  every  one  repaired  to  his
refpedive  dwelling ;  from  which,  after  a  certain  time,  he
.  returned.  Thefe  fair  appearances  encouraged  Mr.  Banks
and  Dr.  Solander  to  range  the  bay  with  very  little  precaution,
where  they  found  many  plants,  and  fhot  fome  birds  of  ex-
quifite  beauty.  In  their  walk,  they  vifited  feveral  houfes  of
the  natives,  and  faw  fomething  of  their  manner  of  life  ;  for
they  fhowed,  without  any  referve,  every  thing  which  the
Gentlemen  defired  to  fee.  They  were  fometimes  found  at
their  meals,  which  the  approach  of  the  Grangers  never  in¬
terrupted.  Their  food  at  this  feafon  confided  of  fifh,  with
which,  inftead  of  bread,  they  eat  the  root  of  a  kind  of  fern,
very  like  that  which  grows  upon  our  commons  in  England.
Thefe  loots  they  fcorch  over  the  fire,  and  then  beat  with  a
dick,  till  the  bark  and  dry  outfide  fall  off ;  what  remains  is
a  foft  fubftance,  fomewhat  clammy  and  fweet,  not  unpleaf-
ing  to  the  tafie,  but  mixed  with  three  or  four  times  its  quan¬
tity  of  firings  and  fibres,  which  are  very  difagreeable ;  thefe
weie  fwal lowed  by  fome,  but  fpit  out  by  the  far  greater
number,  who  had  bafkets  under  them  to  receive  the  rejeded

part


part  of  wliat  had  been  chewed,  which  had  an  appearance
very  like  that  of  tobacco  in  the  fame  date.  In  other  feafons
they  have  certainly  plenty  of  excellent  vegetables ;  but  no
tame  animals  were  feen  among  them  except  dogs,  which
were  very  fmall  and  ugly.  Mr.  Banks  faw  fome  of  their
plantations,  where  the  ground  was  as  well  broken  down  and
tilled  as  even  in  the  gardens  of  the  mod  curious  people
among  us :  in  thefe  fpots  were  fweet  potatoes,  coccos  or
eddas,  which  are  well  known  and  much  edeemed  both  in
the  Ead  and  Wed  Indies,  and  fome  gourds :  the  fweet  po¬
tatoes  were  planted  in  fmall  hills,  fome  ranged  in  rows,  and
others  in  quincunx,  all  laid  by  a  line  with  the  greated  regu¬
larity  :  the  coccos  were  planted  upon  dat  land,  but  none  of
them  yet  appeared  aboveground;  and  the  gourds  were  fet
in  fmall  hollows,  or  didies,  much  as  in  England.  Thefe
plantations  were  of  different  extent,  from  one  or  two  acres
to  ten:  taken  together,  there  appeared  to  be  from  150  to
200  acres  in  cultivation  in  the  whole  bay,  though  we  never
faw  an  hundred  people.  Each  didrift  was  fenced  in,  gene¬
rally  with  reeds,  which  were  placed  fo  clofe  together  that
there  was  fcarcely  room  for  a  moufe  to  creep  between.

The  women  were  plain,  and  made  themfelves  more  fo  by
painting  their  faces  with  red  ocre  and  oil,  which  being  ge¬
nerally  frefh  and  wet  upon  their  cheeks  and  foreheads,  was
eafily  transferred  to  the  nofes  of  thofe  who  thought  fit  to
falute  them ;  and  that  they  were  not  wholly  averfe  to  fuch
familiarity,  the  nofes  of  feveral  of  our  people  drongly  tedi-
fied:  they  were,  however,  as  great  coquets  as  any  of  the
mod  fafhionable  ladies  in  Europe,  and  the  young  ones  as
fkittifh  as  an  unbroken  filly :  each  of  them  wore  a  petticoat,
under  which  there  was  a  girdle,  made  of  the  blades  of  grafs
highly  perfumed,  and  to  the  girdle  was  fadened  a  fmall
bunch  of  the  leaves  of  fome  fragrant  plant,  which  ferved

Vol.  II.  S  f  their


3'4


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1769.

O&ober.


their  modefiy  as  its  innermoft  veil.  The  faces  of  the  men


were  not  fo  generally  painted,  yet  we  faw  one  whofe  whole

*

body,  and  even  his  garments,  were  rubbed  over  with  dry
ocre,  of  which  he  kept  a  piece  conftantly  in  his  hand,  and
was  every  minute  renewing  the  decoration  in  one  part  or  an¬
other,  where  he  fuppofed  it  was  become  deficient.  In  per-
fonal  delicacy  they  were  not  equal  to  our  friends  at  Ota-
heite,  for  the  coldnefs  of  the  climate  did  not  invite  them  fo
often  to  bathe;  but  we  faw  among  them  one  infiance  of
cleanlinefs  in  which  they  exceeded  them,  and  of  which  per¬
haps  there  is  no  example  in  any  other  Indian  nation.  Every
houfe,  or  every  little  duller  of  three  or  four  houfes,  was
furnifhed  with  a  privy,  fo  that  the  ground  was  every  where
clean.  The  offals  of  their  food,  and  other  litter,  were  alfo
piled  up  in  regular  dunghills,  which  probably  they  made
ufe  of  at  a  proper  time  for  manure.

In  this  decent  article  of  civil  ceconomy  they  were  before¬
hand  with  one  of  the  molt  confiderable  nations  of  Europe,
for  I  am  credibly  informed,  that,  till  the  year  1 760,  there  was
no  fuch  thing  as  a  privy  in  Madrid,  the  metropolis  of  Spain,
though  it  is  plentifully  fupplied  with  water.  Before  that
time  it  was  the  univerfal  pradlice  to  throw  the  ordure  out  of
the  window's,  during  the  night,  into  the  fireet,  where  num¬
bers  of  men  were  employed  to  remove  it,  with  Ihovels,  from
the  upper  parts  of  the  city  to  the  lower,  where  it  lay  till  it
was  dry,  and  was  then  carried  away  in  carts,  and  depofited
without  the  gates.  His  prefent  Catholic  Majefty,  having  de¬
termined  to  free  his  capital  from  fo  grofs  a  nuifance,  ordered,
by  proclamation,  that  the  proprietor  of  every  houfe  fhould
build  a  privy,  and  that  finks,  drains,  and  common- fewers
fhould  be  made  at  the  public  expence.  The  Spaniards,
though  long  accufiomed  to  an  arbitrary  government,  re¬
lented  this  proclamation  with  great  fpirit,  as  an  infringe-


8


menc


3*5


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

ment  of  the  common  rights  of  mankind,  and  made  a  vigo-  QUjj ^
rous  ftruggle  again!!  its  being  carried  into  execution.  Every
clafs  devifed  fome  objection  againft  it,  but  the  phyftcians  bid
the  faireft  to  intereft  the  king  in  the  preservation  of  the  an¬
cient  privileges  of  his  people  ;  for  they  remonftrated  that  if
i:he  filth  was  not,  as  ufual,  thrown  into  the  Streets,  a  fatal
ficknefs  would  probably  enfue,  becaufe  the  putrefcent  par¬
ticles  of  the  air,  which  fuch  filth  attracted,  would  then  be
imbibed  by  the  human  body.  But  this  expedient,  with  every
other  that  could  be  thought  of,  proved  unfuccefsful,  and
the  popular  difcontent  then  ran  fo  high  that  it  was  very  near
producing  an  infurrecftion ;  his  majefty,  however,  at  length
prevailed,  and  Madrid  is  now  as  clear  as  moft  of  the  confi-
derable  cities  in  Europe.  But  many  of  the  citizens,  pro¬
bably  upon  the  principles  advanced  by  their  pliyficians,  that
heaps  of  filth  prevent  deleterious  particles  of  air  from  fixing
upon  neighbouring  fubftances,  have,  to  keep  their  food
wholefome,  conftrutfted  their  privies  by  the  kitchen  fire.

In  the  evening,  all  our  boats  being  employed  in  carrying
the  water  on  board,  and  Mr.  Banks  and  his  company  finding
it  probable  that  they  Should  be  left  on  Shore  alter  it  was
dark,  by  which  much  time  would  be  loft,  which  they  were
impatient  to  employ  in  putting  the  plants  they  had  gathered
in  order,  they  applied  to  the  Indians  for  a  paSTage  in  one  of
their  canoes:  they  immediately  confented,  and  a  canoe  was
launched  for  their  ufe.  They  went  all  on  board,  being  eight
in  number,  but  not  being  ufed  to  a  veflel  that  required  lo
even  a  balance,  they  unfortunately  overfet  her  in  the  furf :
no  life  however  was  loft,  but  it  was  thought  advifable  that
half  of  them  Should  wait  for  another  turn.  Mr.  Banks,  Dr.
Solander,  Tupia,  and  Tayeto  embarked  again,  and  without
any  farther  accident  arrived  Safely  at  the  Ship,  well  pleafed
with  the  good-nature  of  their  Indian  friends,  who  cheer-

s  f  2  Sully


3i6


1769.

October.


Saturday  2 1


Sunday  22.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

4

x ully  undertook  to  carry  them  a  fecond  time,  after  having
experienced  how  unfit  a  freight  they  were  for  fuch  a  veil'd.

While  thefe  gentlemen  were  on  ffiore,  feveral  of  the  na¬
tives  went  off  to  the  fhip,  and  trafficked,  by  exchanging  their
cloth  for  that  of  Otaheite :  of  this  barter  they  were  for  fome
time  very  fond,  preferring  the  Indian  cloth  to  that  of  Europe;
but  before  night  it  decreafed  in,  its  value  five  hundred  per
cent.  Many  of  thefe  Indians  I  took  on  board,  and  ffiewed
them  the  ffiip  and  her  apparatus,  at  which  they  exprefied
equal  fatisfadlion  and  aftonifhment.

As  I  found  it  exceedingly  difficult  to  get  water  on  board  on
account  of  the  furf,  I  determined  to  fiay  no  longer  at  this
place;  on  the  next  morning  therefore,  about  five  o’clock,  I
weighed  anchor  and  put  to  fea.

Tins  bay,  which  is  called  by  the  natives  Tegadoo,  lies
in  tne  latitude  of  38°  io'  S.,  but  as  it  has  nothing  to  recom¬
mend  it,  a  defcription  of  it  is  unnecdTary.

From  this  bay  I  intended  to  Hand  on  to  the  northward,  but
the  wind  being  right  againfi  me,  I  could  make  no  way.
While.  I  was  beating  about  to  windward,  fome  of  the  natives
came  on  board,  and  told  me,  that  in  a  bay  which  lay  a  little
to  the  fouthward,  being  the  fame  that  I  could  not  fetch
the  day  I  put  into  Tegadoo,  there  was  excellent  water,  where
the  boats  might  land  without  a  furf.  I  thought  it  better
thcicfore  to  put  into  this  bay,  where  I  might  complete  my
water,  and  form  farther  connexions  with,  the  Indians,  than
to  keep  the  fea.  With  this  view  I  bore  up  for  it,  and  fent  in
two  boats,  manned  and  armed,  to  examine  the  watering-
place,  who  confirming  the, report  of  the  Indians  at  their  re¬
turn,  I  came  to  an  anchor  about  one  o'clock,  in  eleven  fa¬
thom  water,  with  a  fine  fandy  bottom,  the  north  point  of  the
bay  N.  by  E.  and  the  fouth  point  S.  E.  The  watering-place,

,  -  which


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


3*7


which  was  in  a  fmall  cove  a  little  within  the  fouth  point  of  1769-

the  bay,  bore  S.  by  E.  diflant  about  a  mile.  Many  canoes  < _ _ L,

came  immediately  off  from  the  fhore,  and  all  traded  very  ho-  Sunda>
neftly  for  Otaheite  cloth  and  glafs  bottles,  of  which  they
were  immoderately  fond.

•  .  ♦  »  "  >  *  •  *  *• '

In  the  afternoon  of  the  23d,  as  foon  as  the  fhip  was  moored,  Monday- 2*-..
I  went  on  fhore  to  examine  the  watering-place,  accompanied
by  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander:  the  boat  landed  in  the  cove,
without  the  leaf!  furf ;  the  water  was  excellent,  and  conve¬
niently  fituated  ;  there  was  plenty  of  wood  clofe  to  high-
water  mark,  and  the  difpofition  of  the  people  was  in  every
refpedl  fuch  as  we  could  wifh.

Having,  with  Mr.  Green,  taken  feveral  obfervations  of  the
fun  and  moon,  the  mean  refult  of  them  gave  i8oQ  47'  W.
longitude  ;  but,  as  all  the  obfervations  made  before  exceeded
thefe,  I  have  laid  down  the  coafl  from  the  mean  of  the
whole.  At  noon,  I  took  the  fun’s  meridian  altitude  with  an
agronomical  quadrant,  which  was  fet  up  at  the  watering-
place,  and  found  the  latitude  to  be  38°  22'  24".

On  the  24th,  early  in  the  morning,  I  fent  Lieutenant  Gore  Tuefday  24.
on  fhore,  to  fuperintend  the  cutting. of  wood  and  filling  of
water,  with  a  fufficient  number  of  men  for  both  purpofes,
and  all  the  marines  as  a  guard.  After  breakfafl,  I  went  on
fhore  myfelf,  and  continued  there  the  whole  day.

Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  alfo  went  on  fliore  to  gather
plants,  and  in  their  walks  faw  feveral  things  worthy  of  no¬
tice.  They  met  with  many  houfes  in  thevallies  that  feemed
to  be  wholly  deferted,  the  people  living  on  the  ridges  of  the
hills  in  a  kind  of  fheds  very  flightly  built.  As  they  were
advancing  in  one  of  thefe  vallies,  the  hills  on  each  fide  of
which  were  very  deep,  they  were  fuddenly  ftruck  with  the
fight  of  a  very  extraordinary  natural  curiofity.  It  was  a  rock,

perforated!


3 1 8


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1769.

Cdober.

' - - - »

Tuefday  24..


perforated  through  its  whole  fubftance,  fo  as  to  form  a  rude
but  flupendous  arch  or  cavern,  opening  dire&ly  to  the  fea  ;
this  aperture  was  feventy-five  feet  long,  twenty-feven  broad,
and  five  and  forty  high,  commanding  a  view  of  the  bay  and
the  hills  on  the  other  fide,  which  were  feen  through  it,  and,
opening  at  once  upon  the  view,  produced  an  effect  far  fupe-
rior  to  any  of  the  contrivances  of  art.

As  they  were  returning  to  the  watering-place  in  the  even¬
ing,  they  met  an  old  man,  who  detained  them  fome  time  by
fhowing  them  the  military  exercifes  of  the  country  with  the
lance  and  Patoo-Patoo,  which  are  all  the  weapons  in  ufe.
The  lance  is  from  ten  to  fourteen  feet  long,  made  of  a  very
hard  wood,  and  fharp  at  both  ends:  the  Patoo-Patoo  has  been
deferibed  already,  it  is  about  a  foot  long,  made  of  Talc  or
bone,  with  fharp  edges,  and  ufed  as  a  battle-axe.  A  poll  or
flake  was  fet  up  as  his  enemy,  to  which  he  advanced  with  a
moil  furious  afpedl,  brandifhing  his  lance,  which  he  grafped
with  great  firmnefs ;  when  it  was  fuppofed  to  have  been
pierced  by  his  lance,  he  ran  at  it  with  his  Patoo-Patoo,  and
falling  upon  the  upper  end  of  it,  which  was  to  reprefent  his
adverfary’s  head,  he  laid  on  with  great  vehemence,  flriking
many  blows,  any  one  of  which  would  probably  have  fplit  the
fcull  of  an  ox.  From  our  champion’s  falling  upon  his  mock
enemy  with  the  Patoo-Patoo,  after  he  was  fuppofed  to  have
been  pierced  with  the  lance,  our  Gentlemen  inferred,  that  in
the  battles  of  this  country  there  is  no  quarter.

This  afternoon,  we  fet  up  the  armourer’s  forge,  to  repair
the  biaces  of  the  tiller  which  had  been  broken,  and  went  on
getting  our  wood  and  water,  without  fuffering  the  lead  mo-
leflation  from  the  natives ;  who  came  down  with  different

forts  of  fifh,  which  we  purchafed  with  cloth,  beads,  and  glafs
bottles,  as  ufual.


On


mm,


mi&m

mgm®»

mmm


^v-.'Cv-.'iVv'.f.'


sSIpiI


iiS^MBilll

lliSiilliliili

^  «-; '  ’,  *f,  *  i  ^  i'.*<r,^f \ '  *  f?  !.[■  ii-j  f& ; « . ;  <*.-


moMSM

W&B0&%


fSiiiiil^

7#  :/if  v7,V


((WWW?


pnK


Mini's  a

BBSS?

Sv.ws.;

KtcaVv


\unmat


iii'fft**sr  »  gfjilYJv'.  — _

■i  1  n,/r,  r  tiH

(MSKSaSlSKSS^?^;**


rjisfjy.5


"  ■  ^IfiSSF*** ** *  *

AW v*-wv/  *•■
v  -  wVA  Mwmkei
r’0v?*V£/JJ**3»v

:»!''E  V  M.\W'7  c  v
■  v -c v*-"-S  *  '•-  •\.\-tri


■fcVt


'


*  •


.  ....

.

I  .


■  /  ,  .  •  .  >•;'  j:!i*

'  •  ...


-

•  ;  * ..  .  •  ■  •  ;  *}

.

,  '  N  *'  ■

'  •  •  .  •

•  '


•  1  •


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


3T9


On  the  25th,  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  went  again  on
fhore;  and  while  they  were  fearching  for  plants,  Tupia  Raid
with  the  waterers  :  among  other  Indians  who  came  down  to
them,  was  a  prieft,  with  whom  Tupia  entered  into  a  very
learned  converfation.  In  their  notions  of  religion  they
feerned  to  agree  very  well,  which  is  not  often  the  cafe  be¬
tween  learned  divines  on  our  fide  of  the  ocean:  Tupia,  how¬
ever,  feerned  to  have  the  moll  knowlege,  and  he  was  lillened
to  with  great  deference  and  attention  by  the  other.  In  the
courfe  of  this  converfation,  after  the  important  points  of  di¬
vinity  had  been  fettled,  Tupia  enquired  if  it  was  their  prac¬
tice  to  eat  men,  to  which  they  anfwered  in  the  affirmative  ;
but  faid  that  they  eat  only  their  enemies  who  were  flain  in
battle.  /

On  the  26th,  it  rained  all  day,  fo  that  none  of  us  could  go  Thurfday
afhore  and  very  few  of  the  Indians  came  either  to  the  wa¬
tering-place  or  the  fhip.

On  the  27th,  I  went  with  Dr.  Solander  to  examine  the  bot-  Friday  2 7.
tom  of  the  bay ;  but  though  we  went  afhore  at  two  places,
we  met  with  little  worth  notice.  The  people  behaved  very
civilly,  fhewing  us  every  thing  that  we  expreRed  a  delire  to
fee.  Among  other  trilling  curiolities  which  Dr.  Solander
purchafed  of  them,  was  a  boy’s  top,  lhaped  exadlly  like
tliofe  which  children  play  with  in  England  ;  and  they  made
figns,  that  to  make  it  fpin  it  was  to  be  whipped.  Mr.  Banks
in  the  mean  time  went  afhore  at  the  watering-place,  and
climbed  a  hill  which  Rood  at  a  little  diftance  to  fee  a  fence  of
poles,  which  we  had  obferved  from  the  fhip,  and  which  had
been  much  the  fubjecT  of  fpeculation.  The  hill  was  ex¬
tremely  Reep,  and  rendered  almoR  inacceffible  by  wood;  yet
he  reached  the  place,  near  which  he  found  many  houfes
that  for  fome  reafon  had  been  deferted  by  their  inhabitants.

The


1769/

October.


Wednef.  25.


320


i76g.

Odlober.

\ — - -

Friday  27.


Saturday  28.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

The  poles  appeared  to  be  about  fixteen  feet  high ;  they  were
placed  in  two  rows,  with  a  fpacc  of  about  fix  feet  between
them,  and  the  poles  in  each  row  were  about  ten  feet  didant
from  each  other.  The  lane  between  them  was  covered  by
flicks,  that  were  fet  up  doping  towards  each  other  from  the
top  of  the  poles  on  each  fide,  like  the  roof  of  a  houfe.  This
rail-work,  with  a  ditch  that  was  parallel  to  it,  was  carried
about  a  hundred  yards  down  the  hill  in  a  kind  of  curve ;
but  for  what  purpofe  we  could  not  guefs.

The  Indians,  at  the  watering-place,  at  our  requefl,  enter¬
tained  us  with  their  war-fong,  in  which  the  women  joined,
with  the  moft  horrid  diflortions  of  countenance,  rolling  their
eyes,  thrufling  out  their  tongues,  and  often  heaving  loud
and  deep  fighs ;  though  all  was  done  in  very  good  time.

On  the  28th,  we  went  afliore  upon  an  idand  that  lies  to  the
left  hand  of  the  entrance  of  the  bay,  where  we  faw  the
laigeft  canoe  that  we  had  yet  met  with  :  fhe  was  fixty-eight
feet  and  a  half  long,  five  broad,  and  three  feet  fix  high  ;  fhe
had  a  fharp  bottom,  confiding  of  three  trunks  of  trees  hol¬
lowed,  of  which  that  in  the  middle  was  the  longed :  the  fide
planks  weie  fixty-two  feet  long  in  one  piece,  and  were  not
defpicably  carved  in  bas  relief ;  the  head  alfo  was  adorned
with  caiving  dill  more  richly.  Upon  this  idand  there  was  a
larger  houfe  than  any  we  had  yet  feen ;  but  it  feemed  un-
finifhed  and  was  full  of  chips.  The  wood  work  was  fquared
io  even  and  fmooth,  that  we  made  no  doubt  of  their  having
among  them  \ery  fharp  tools.  The  fides  of  the  pods  were
carved  in  a  maderly  dile,  though  after  their  whimfical  fade,
which  feems  to  prefer  fpiral  lines  and  didorted  faces  :  as
thefe  carved  pods  appeared  to  have  been  brought  from  fome

othei  place,  fuch  work  is  probably  of  great  value  among
them.


At


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


O  I
►  *


At  four  o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  29th,  having  got  on  1769.

,  October.

board  our  wood  and  water,  and  a  large  luppiy  of  excellent  > - - —

celery,  with  which  the  country  abounds,  and  which  proved  Suud‘iy  29’
a  powerful  antifcorbutic,  I  unmoored  and  put  to  fea.

This  bay  is  called  by  the  natives  Tolaga  ;  it  is  moderately
large,  and  has  from  feven  to  thirteen  fathom,  with  a  clean
fandy  bottom  and  good  anchorage  ;  and  is  flackered  from  all
winds  except  the  north  eafh  It  lies  in  latitude  38°  2i'S.  and
four  leagues  and  an  half  to  the  north  of  Gable-end  Foreland.

On  the  fouth  point  lies  a  fmall  but  high  ifland,  fo  near  the
main  as  not  to  be  diftinguifhed  from  it.  Clofc  to  the  north
end  of  the  ifland,  at  the  entrance  into  the  bay,  are  two  high
rocks  ;  one  is  round  like  a  corn-flack,  but  the  other  is  long,
and  perforated  in  feveral  places  fo  that  the  openings  appear
like  the  arches  of  a  bridge.  Within  thefe  rocks  is  the  cove
where  we  cut  wood,  and  filled  our  water-cafks.  Off  the
north  point  of  the  bay  is  a  pretty  high  rocky  ifland ;  and
about  a  mile  without  it,  are  fome  rocks  and  breakers.  The
variation  of  the  compafs  here  is  14*  31' E.  and  the  tide  flows
at  the  full  and  change  of  the  moon,  about  fix  o’clock,  and
rifes  and  falls  perpendicularly  from  five  to  fix  feet :  whether
the  flood  comes  from  the  fouthward  or  the  northward  I  have
not  been  able  to  determine.

We  got  nothing  here  by  traffic  but  a  few  fifli,  and  fomc
fweet  potatoes,  except  a  few  trifles,  which  we  confidered
merely  as  curiofities.  We  faw  no  four-footed  animals,  nor
the  appearance  of  any,  either  tame  or  wild,  except  dogs
and  rats,  and  thefe  were  very  fcarce :  the  people  eat  the
dogs,  like  our  friends  at  Gtaheite;  and  adorn  their  gar¬
ments  with  the  fans,  as  wc  do  ours  with  fur  and  ermine.  I
climbed  many  of  the  hills,  hoping  to  get  a  view  of  the  coun¬
try,  but  I  could  fee  nothing  from  the  top  except  higher

Vol.  II.  T  t  hills,


3-2  Lieutenant  cook's  voyage

GftSr.  hills>  *n  a  boundlefs  lueceffion.  The  ridges  of  thefe  hills
sztfr*  produCG  little  belldes  fem  T  but  the  Tides  are  mofl  luxuriantly
y  29'  clothed  with  wood,  and  verdure  of  various  kinds,  with  little
plantations  intermixed.  In  the  woods,  we  found  trees  of
above  twenty  different  forts,  and  carried  fpecimens  of  each
on  board  ;  but  there  was  no  body  among  us  to  whom  they
weie  not  altogether  unknown.  The  tree  which  we  cut  for
bring  was  fomewhat  like  our  maple,  and  yielded  a  whitifh
gum.  We  found  another  fort  of  it  of  a  deep  yellow,,  which
we  thought  might  be  ufeful  in  dying.  We  found  alfo  one
cabbage  tree,  which  we  cut  down  for  the  cabbages.  The
country  abounds  with  plants,  and  the  woods  with  birds,  in
an  endlefs  variety,  exquifitely  beautiful,  and  of  which  none
of  us  had  the  lead  knowlege.  The  foil  both  of  the  hills  and
valleys  is  light  and  Tandy,  and  very  fit  for  the  production  of
all  kinds  of  roots  $  though  we  faw  none  except  fweet  pota¬
toes  and  yams.


V


.  -


i


C  H  A  P,


Cavalle  I


BAY  or  I  SLAMS


MEW  ZEALAND


Pat . ss.  ls'.S.

L  o  ncr.  oW.


Mercury  Ill e s


MERCURY


Court


PTOb


Loner,. 181


and


.Sparing's  I?


45


Co


^  sc
c
p>
h-

0


ft

%

0*5

^  65


o

^7


45


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


CHAP.  III.

r  -f  f

The  Range  from  Tolaga  to  Mercury  Bay ,  with  an  Account
of  many  Incidents  that  happened  both  on  board  and  ajhore  ;

A  Defcription  of  fever al  Views  exhibited  by  the  Country ,
and  of  the  Heppahs ,  or  fortified  Villages  of  the  Inha¬
bitants ,

ON  Monday  the  30th,  about  half  an  hour  after  one  o’clock,  ,  ?6g

having  made  fail  again  to  the  northward  for  about  ten  cwober.
hours,  with  a  light  breeze,  I  hauled  round  a  fmall  ifland  Monday  30.
which  lay  eafl  one  mile  from  the  north  eafl  point  of  the
land:  from  this  place  I  found  the  land  trend  away  N.W.  by  W.
and  W.  N.  W.  as  far  as  I  could  fee,  this  point  being  the  eaft*
ermofl  land  on  the  whole  coaft.  I  gave  it  the  name  of  East
Cape,  and  I  called  the  ifland  that  lies  off  it  East  Island  ;  it
is  of  a  fmall  circuit,  high  and  round,  and  appears  white  and
barren:  the  Cape  is  high,  with  white  cliffs,  and  lies  in  lati¬
tude  370  42"  30  S.  and  longitude  1810  W.  The  land  from
Tolaga  Bay  to  Eafl  Cape  is  of  a  moderate,  but  unequal
height,  forming  feveral  fmall  bays,  in  which  are  fandy
beaches :  of  the  inland  country  we  could  not  fee  much,  the
weather  being  cloudy  and  hazey.  The  foundings  were  from,
twenty  to  thirty  fathom  at  the  diftance  of  about  a  league
from  the  fhore,  After  we  had  rounded  the  Cape,  we  faw  in
our  run  along  the  fhore  a  great  number  of  villages,  and
much  cultivated  land ;  the  country  in  general  appeared  more
fertile  than  before,  and  was  low  near  the  fca,  but  hilly
within.  At  fix  in  the  evening,  being  four  leagues  to  the
weftward  of  Eafl  Cape,  we  paffed  a  bay  which  was  fir  ft  dif-

T  t  2  covered


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


■  769*  covered  by  Lieutenant  Hicks,  and  which  therefore  I  called

October.  .

' — — Hicks’s  Bay.  At  eight  in  the  evening,  being  eight  leagues  to
Monday  3o.  ^  we  ft  ward  of  the  Cape,  and  three  or  fbur  miles  from  the
fhore,  I  fhortened  fail  and  brought  to  for  the  night,  having
at  this  time  a  frefh  gale  at  S.  S.E.  and  fqually;  but  it  foon
Tuefday  3 t .  became  moderate,  and  at  two  in  the  morning,  we  made  fail
again  to  the  S.  W.  as  the  land  now  trended  ;  and  at  eight
o’clock  in  the  morning,  faw  land,  which  made  like  an  iftand,
bearing  weft,  the  fouth  weftermoft  part  of  the  main  bearing
fouth  weft ;  and  about  nine  no  lefs  than  five  canoes  came
off,  in  which  were  more  than  forty  men,  all  armed
with  their  country  pikes  and  battle-axes,  fhouting,  and
threatening  an  attack  :  this  gave  us  great  uneafinefs,  and
was  indeed  what  we  did  not  exped ;  for  we  hoped,  that  the
report  both  of  our  power  and  clemency  had  fpread  to  a
greater  extent.  When  one  of  thefe  canoes  had  almoft  reached
the  fhip,  another,  of  an  immenfe  fize,  the  largeft  we  had
yet  feen,  crowded  with  people  who  were  alfo  armed,  put  off
from  the  fhore,  and  came  up  at  a  great  rate ;  as  it  approach¬
ed  it  received  fignals  from  the  canoe  that  was  neareft  to  the
fhip,  and  we  could  fee  that  it  had  fixteen  paddles  on  a  fide,
beftde  people  that  fat,  and  others  that  flood  in  a  row  from  ftem
to  ftern,  being  in  all  about  fixty  men  :  as  they  made  di redly
to  the  fhip,  we  were  defirous  of  preventing  an  attack,  by
fhowing  what  we  could  do;  and  therefore  fired  a  gun,  loaded
with  grape-fhot,  ahead  of  them :  this  made  them  flop,  but
not  retreat ;  a  round  fhot  was  then  fired  over  them,  and
upon  feeing  it  fall,  they  feized  their  paddles  and  made  to¬
wards  the  fhore  with  fuch  precipitation  that  they  feemed
fcarcely  to  allow  themfelves  time  to  breathe.  In  the  evening,
three  or  four  more  canoes  came  off  unarmed;  but  they
would  not  venture  within  a  mufquet  fhot  of  the  veffel.  The
cape,  off  which  we  had  been  threatened  with  hoftilitics,  I

called,


ROUND  THE  WORLD,  325

called,  from  the  hafty  retreat  of  the  enemy,  Cape  Runaway.

It  lies  in  latitude  370  32';  longitude  1810  48'.  In  this  day’s
run,  we  found  that  the  land,  which  made  like  an  ifland  in
the  morning,  bearing  weft,  was  fo;  and  we  gave  it  the  name
"of  White  Island.

At  day-break,  on  the  firft  of  November,  we  counted  no  lefs  ^ranter,
than  five  and  forty  canoes  that  were  coming  from  the  fliore
towards  the  fhip:  feven  of  them  came  up  with  us,^  and  after
fome  conversation  with  Tupia,  fold  us  fome  lobfiers  and
mufcles,  and  two  conger  eels*  Thefe  people  traded  pretty
fairly  :  but  when  they  were  gone,  fome  others  came  off  from
another  place,  who  began  alfo  to  trade  fairly ;  but  after  fome
time  they  took  what  was  handed  down  to  them,  without
making  any  return ;  one  of  them  who  had  done  fo,  upon
being  threatened,  began  to  laugh,  and  with  many  maiks  of
derifion  fet  us  at  defiance,  at  the  fame  time  putting  off  the
canoe  from  the  fhip :  a  mufquet  was  then  fired  over  his  head,
which  brought  him  back  in  a  more  ferious  mood,  and  trade
went  on  with  great  regularity.  At  length,  when  the  cabbin
and  gun-room  had  got  as  much  as  they  wanted,  the  men
were  allowed  to  come  to  the  gang-way,  and  trade  for  thenm
felves.  Unhappily  the  fame  care  was  not  taken  to  prevent
frauds  as  had  been  taken  before,  fo  that  the  Indians,  finding
that  they  could  cheat  with  impunity,  grew  infolent  again,
and  proceeded  to  take  greater  liberties.  One  of  the  canoes,.

*  having  fold  every  thing  on  board,  pulled  forward,  and  the
people  that  were  in  her  feeing  fome  linen  hang  over  the
fhip’s  fide  to  dry,  one  of  them,  without  any  ceremony,  un¬
tied  it,  and  put  it  up  in  his  bundle:  he  was  immediately
called  to,  and  required  to  return  it;  inftead  of  which,  he  let
his  canoe  drop  a  flern,  and  laughed  at  us:  a  mufquet  was
fired  over  his  head,  which  did  not  put  a  flop  to  his  miith

another  was  then  fired  at  him  with  fmall  (hot,  which  ftruck

him:


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


769.

ember.


him  upon  the  back ;  he  ftirunk  a  little  when  the  fhot  hit
icf.  .1,  *  *  but  did  not  regard  it  more  than  one  of  our  men  would

have  done  the  ftroke  of  a  rattan :  he  continued  with  great
compofure  to  pack  up  the  linen  that  he  had  ftolen.  All  the
canoes  now  dropped  aftern  about  a  hundred  yards,  and  all
fet  up  their  fong  of  defiance,  which  they  continued  till  the
fhip  was  aidant  from  them  about  four  hundred  yards.  As
they  leemed  to  have  no  defign  to  attack  us,  I  was  not  wil¬
ling  to  do  them  any  hurt ;  yet  I  thought  their  going  off  in  a
bravado  might  have  a  bad  effed  when  it  ilrould  be  reported
alhore.  To  fhow  them  therefore  that  they  were  Hill  in  out-
power,  though  very  much  beyond  the  reach  of  any  miffile
weapon  with  which  they  were  acquainted,  I  gave  the  fhip  a
yaw-,  and  fired  a  four  pounder  fo  as  to  pafs  near  them.  The
fhot  happened  to  ftrike  the  water,  and  rife  feveral  times  at
a  great  diftance  beyond  the  canoes :  this  ilruck  them  with

terror,  and  they  paddled  away  without  once  looking  behind
them.


About  two  in  the  afternoon,  we' faw  a  pretty  high  ifland
bearing  weft  from  us ;  and  at  five,  faw  more  iflands  and
rocks  to  the  weftward  of  that.  We  hauled  our  wind  in  or¬
der  to  go  without  them,  but  could  not  weather  them  before
u  was  dark.  I  therefore  bore  up,  and  ran  between  them  and
tac  main.  At  feven,  I  was  clofe  under  the  firft,  from  which
a  large  double  canoe,  or  rather  two  canoes  lafhed  together
at  the  diftance  of  about  a  foot,  and  covered  with  boards  fo  as
make  a  deck,  put  off,  and  made  fail  for  the  fhip:  this  was
the  firft  veflel  of  the  kind  that  we  had  feen  fince  we  left  the
South  Sea  iflands.  When  fhe  came  near,  the  people  on  board
entered  very  freely  into  converfation  with  Tupia,  and  we
thought  fliowed  a  friendly  difpofition  ;  but  when  it  was  juft
dark,  they  ran  their  canoe  clofe  to  the  fliip’s  fide,  and  threw
m  a  volley  of  ftones,  after  which  they  paddled  alhore.


We


HOUND  THE  WORLD.  327?

We  learnt  from  Tupia,  that  the  people  in  the  canoe  called  1 769-

.  .  November.

rlie  ifland  which  we  were  under  Mowtohora  ;  it  is  but  of  a  — v—
fmall  circuit,  though  high,  and  lies  fix  miles  from  the  main  j  e  “e  ’ *'
on  the  fouth  fide  is  anchorage  in  fourteen  fathom  water.

Upon  the  main  land  S.W.  by  W.  of  this  ifland,  and  appa^
rently  at  no  great  diftance  from  the  fea,  is  a  high  round
mountain,  which  I  called' Mount  Edgecombe  :  it  hands  in  the
middle  of  a  large  plain,  and  is  therefore  the  more  confpi-
cuous;  latitude  37 0  59-',  longitude  193°  7'.-

In  handing  wehward,  we  fuddenly  flioaled  our  water  from
feventeen  to  ten  fathom  ;  and  knowing  that  we  were  not  far
from  the  fmall  iflands  and  rocks  which  we  had  feen  before
dark,  and  which  I  intended  to  have  pahed  before  I  brought
to  for  the  night,  I  thought  it  more  prudent  to  tack,  and  fpend
the  night  under  Mowtohora1,  where  I  knew  there  was  no-
danger..  It  was  indeed  happy  for  us  that  we  did  fo ;  for  in
the  morning,  after  we  had  made  fail  to  the  wehward,  we  Thurfday  2s..
difcovered,  ahead  of  us,  feveral  rocks,  fome  of  which  were
level  with  the  furface  of  the  water,  and  fome  below  it :  they
lay  N.  N.  E.  from  Mount  Edgecombe,  one  league  and  a  half
dihant  from  the  ifland  Mowtohora,  and  about  nine  miles
from  the  main..  We  pahed  between  thefe  rocks  and  the  main,,
having  from  ten  to  feven  fathom  water.

This  morning,  rhany  canoes  and  much  people  were  feem
along  the  fhore  ;  feveral  of  the  canoes  followed  us,  but  none
of  them  could  reach  us,  except  one  with  a  fail,  which  proved
to  be  the  fame  that  had  pelted  us  the  night  before.  The
people  on  board  again  entered  into  converfation  with  Tupia;
but  we  expected  another  volley  of  their  ammunition,,  which*
was  not  indeed  dangerous  to  any  thing  but  the  cabbin  win*
dows.  They  continued  abreafl  of  the  fliip  about  an  homy
and  behaved  very  peaceably  5  but  at  laft  the  falute  which  we

expelled  i


/


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1765.

November.


Thurfiiay  2.


expected  was  given  ;  we  returned  it  by  firing  amufquet  over
them,  and  they  immediately  dropped  a-ftern  and  left  us,
perhaps  rather  fatisfied  with  having  given  a  ted  of  their  cou¬
rage  by  twice  infulting  a  vefTel  fo  much  fuperior  to  their
own,  than  intimidated  by  the  fhot.


At  ha  if  an  hour  after  ten,  we  paffed  between  a  low  flat  ifland
and  the  main:  the  diflance  from  one  to  the  other  was  about
fom  miles,  and  the  depth  of  water  from  ten  to  twelve  fa¬
thom..  The  main  land  between  this  flat  ifland  and  Mowto-
hoia  is  of  a  moderate  height,  but  level,  pretty  clear  of
wood,  and  full  of  plantations  and  villages.  The  villages,
which  were  larger  than  any  we  had  yet  feen,  were  built
upon  eminences  near  the  fea,  and  fortified  on  the  land  fide
by  a  bank  and  ditch,  with  a  high  paling  within  it,  which  was
carried  all  round :  befide  a  bank,  ditch,  and  pallifadoes,  fome
of  them  appeared  to  have  out-works.  Tupia  had  a  notion
that  the  fmall  inclofures  of  pallifadoes,  and  a  ditch  that  we
had  feen  before,  were  Morais  or  places  of  worfhip;  but  we
were  of  opinion  that  they  were  forts,  and  concluded  that
thefe  people  had  neighbouring  enemies,  and  were  always
expofed  to  hoftile  attacks.

At  two  o  clock  we  palled  a  fmall  high  ifland,  lying  four
mdes  from  a  high  round  head  upon  the  main.  From  this
head  the  land  trends  N.  W.  as  far  as  can  be  feen,  and  has  a
rugged  aqd  hilly  appearance.  As  the  weather  was  hazy,
and  the  wind  blew  frefh  on  the  fhore,  we  hauled  ofF  for  the
weathermofl  ifland  in  fight,  which  bore  from  us  N.  N.  E.
diflant  about  fix  or  feven  leagues..

Under  this  ifland,  which  I  have  called  the  Mayor,  we
Friday  3.  H>cnt  the  night.  At  feven  :n  the  morning  it  bore  S.  47  E.

diflant  fix  leagues,  and  a  duller  of  fmall  iflands  and  rocks
bore  N.  t  E.  diflant  one  league,  to  which  I  gave  the  name  of

3  the


/


V


ROUND  THE  WORLD;

the  Court  of  Aldermen.  They  lie  in  the  compafs  of  about
half  a  league  every  way,  and  five  leagues  from  the  main,,
between  which  and  them  lie  other  ifiands,  moft  of  them
barren  rocks,  of  which  there  is  great  variety:  fome  of  them
are  as  fmall  in  compafs  as  the  Monument  of  London,  but  rife
to  a  much  greater  height,  and  fome  of  them  are  inhabited.
They  lie  in  latitude  36°  57',  and  at  noon  bore  S.  60  E.  difiant
three  or  four  leagues  ;  and  a  rock  like  a  caftle,  lying  not  far
from  the  main,  bore  N.  40  W.  at  the  diftance  of  one  league.
The  country  that  we  palled  the  night  before,  appeared  to  be
well  inhabited,  many  towns  were  in  fight,  and  fome  hun¬
dreds  of  large  canoes  lay  under  them  upon  the  beach ;  but
this  day,  after  having  failed  about  fifteen  leagues,  it  ap¬
peared  to  be  barren  and  defolate.  As  far  as  we  had  yet
coafted  this  country  from  Cape  Turnagain,  the  people  ac¬
knowledged  one  Chief,  whom  they  called  Ter atu,  and  to
whofe  refidence  they  pointed,  in  a  direction  that  we  thought
to  be  very  far  inland,  but  afterwards  found  to  be  otherwife.

About  one  o’clock  three  canoes  came  off  to  us  from  the
main,  with  one  and  twenty  men  on  board.  The  conftruc-
tion  of  thefe  veflels  appeared  to  be  more  fimple  than  that  of
any  we  had  feen,  they  being  nothing  more  than  trunks  of  a
fingle  tree  hollowed  by  fire,  without  any  convenience  or  or¬
nament.  The  people  on  board  were  ahnofl  naked,  and  ap¬
peared  to  be  of  a  browner  complexion;  yet  naked  and
defpicable  as  they  were,  they  fung  their  fong  of  defiance,
and  feemed  to  denounce  againfi:  us  inevitable  deftru£tion :
they  remained,  however,  fome  time  out  of  fiones  throw,
andj^tnen  venturing  nearer,  with  lefs  appearance  of  hoftility,
one  of  our  men  went  to  the  fhip  fide,  and  was  about  to  hand
thefia  a  rope  ;  this  courtefy,  however,  they  thought  fit  to  re¬
turn  by  throwing  a  lance  at  him,  which  having  milled  him,
fVoL.  II,  U  u  they


1769.

November.

V - - J

Friday  3,


330


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

November.  the^  immediately  threw  another  into  the  fhip :  upon  this  a
v—v - -  mufquet  was  fired  over  them,  which  at  once  lent  them

rndav  3.

away.  f

About  two,  we  faw  a  large  opening,  or  inlet,  for  which
we  bore  up ;  we  had  now  forty-one  fathom  water,  which-
gradually  decreafed  to  nine,  at  which  time  wc  were  one
mile  and  an  half  didant  from  a  high  towered  rock  which  lay
near  the  fouth  point  of  the  inlet :  this  rock,  and  the  norther-

mod  of  the  Court  of  Aldermen  being  in  one,  bearing  S.  6 i  E.

*

About  feven  in  the  evening  we  anchored  in  feven  fathom,
a  little  within  the  fouth  entrance  of  the  bay :  to  this  place
we  were  accompanied  by  feveral  canoes  and  people  like
thofe  we  had  feen  lad,  and  for  fome  time  they  behaved
very  civilly.  While  they  were  hovering  about  us,  a  bird  was
fhot  from  the  fhip,  as  it  was  fwimming  upon  the  water:  at
this  they  fhewed  lefs  furprize  than  we  expected,  and  taking
up  the  bird,  they  tied  it  to  a  fifhing  line  that  was  towing  a-
dern  ;  as  an  acknowledgment  for  this  favour  we  gave  them  a
piece  of  cloth :  but  notwithdanding  this  effetd  of  our  fire¬
arms,  and  this  interchange  of  civilities,  as  foon  as  it  grew
dark  they  fung  their  war  fong,  and  attempted  to  tow  away
the  buoy  of  the  anchor.  Two  or  three  mufkets  were  then
fired  over  them,  but  this  feemed  rather  to  make  them  angry
than  afraid,  and  they  went  away,  threatening  that  to-mor¬
row  they  would  return  with  more  force,  and  be  the  death  of
us  all ;  at  the  fame  time  fendingoff  a  boat,  which  they  told
us  was  going  to  another  part  of  the  bay  for  abidance.

There  was  fome  appearance  of  generofity,  as  well  as  cou¬
rage,  in  acquainting  us  with  the  time  when  they  intended
to  make  their  attack,  but  they  forfeited  all  credit  which  this
procured  them,  by  coming  fecretly  upon  us  in  the  night,

when


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


when  they  certainly  hoped  to  find  us  afleep :  upon  approach-  1769.
ing  the  fhip  they  found  themfelves  mifiaken,  and  therefore  tNovembe^
retired  without  fpeaking  a  word,  fuppofing  that  they  were  Fnday3'
too  early  ;  after  fome  time  they  came  a  fecond  time,  and
being  again  difappointed,  they  retired  as  filently  as  before.

In  the  morning,  at  day-break,  they  prepared  to  effect  by  Saturday*,
force  what  they  had  in  vain  attempted  by  Health  and  artifice:
no  lefs  than  twelve  canoes  came  againfl  us,  with  about  a
hundred  and  fifty  men,  all  armed  with  pikes,  lances,  and
Hones.  As  they  could  do  nothing  till  they  came  very  near
the  fhip,  Tupia  was  ordered  to  expoHuIate  with  them,  and  if
poffible  divert  them  from  their  purpofe :  during  the  conver-
fation  they  appeared  to  be  fometimes  friendly  and  fometime&
otherwife  ;  at  length,  however,  they  began  to  trade,  and  we
offered  to  purchafe  their  weapons,  which  fome  of  them  con-
fented  to  fell:  they  fold  two  very  fairly,  but  having  received
what  iiad  been  agreed  upon  for  the  purchafe  of  a  third,  they
refufed  to  fend  it  up,  but  offered  it  for  a  fecond  price ;  a
fecond  was  fent  down,  but  the  weapon  was  Hill  detained,
and  a  demand  made  of  a  third ;  this  being  refufed  with
fome  exprelfions  of  difpleafure  and  refentment,  the  offender,
with  many  ludicrous  tokens  of  contempt  and  defiance,  pad-
died  his  canoe  off  a  few  yards  from  the  fhip.  As  I  intended
to  continue  in  this  place  five  or  fix  days,  in  order  to  make  an
obfervation  of  the  tranfit  of  Mercury,  it  was  abfolutely  ne-
ceffary,  in  order  to  prevent  future  mifehief,  to  fhew  thefe
people  that  we  were  not  to  be  treated  ill  with  impunity ;  fome
fmall  fhot  were  therefore  fired  at  the  thief,  and  a  muiket
ball  through  the  bottom  of  his  boat:  upon  this  it  was  pad-
died  to  about  a  hundred  yards  dillance,  and  to  our  great  fur-
prize  the  people  in  the  other  canoes  took  not  the  leafi  notice
of  their  wounded  companion,  though  he  bled  very  much
but  returned  to  the  ihip,  and  continued  to  trade  with  the

U  11  2  moH


33*


LIEUTENANT  COOK's  VOYAGE


1769.

November.


Saturday  4.


moft  perfect  indifference  and  unconcern,  'ffiey  fold  us
many  more  of  their  weapons  without  making  any  other
attempt  to  defraud  us,  for  a  confiderabLe  time at  lad,  how¬
ever,  one  of  them  thought  fit  to  paddle  away  with  two  dif¬
ferent  pieces  of  cloth  which  had  been  given  for  the  fame
weapon :  when  he  had  got  about  an  hundred  yards  diftance,,
and  thought  himfelf  feeure  of  his  prize,  a  mulket  was  fired
after  him,  which  fortunately  firuck  the  boat  juft  at  the  wa¬
ter’s  edge,  and  made  two  holes  in  her  fide  ;  this  only  incited
them  to  ply  their  paddles  with  greater  activity,  and  the  reft
of  the  canoes  alfo  made  off  with  the  utmoft  expedition.  As
the  laft  proof  of  our  fuperiority  therefore,  we  fired  a  round
fhot  over  them,  and  not  a  boat  flopped  till  they  got  on  fhore.


About  ten  o*clock,  I  went  with  two  boats  to  found  the

♦

bay,  and  look  out  for  a  more  convenient  anchoring-place,,
the  Mafter  being  in  one  boat  and  myfeif  in  the  other.  We
pulled  fir  ft  over  to  the  north  fhore,  from  which  fome  canoes
came  out  to  meet  us ;  as  we  advanced,  however,  they  re¬
tired,  inviting  us  to  follow  them:  but,  feeing  them  all
armed,  I  did  not  think  it  proper  to  comply,  but  went  towards
the  head  of  the  bay,  where  I  obferved  a  village  upon  a  very
high  point,  fortified  in  the  manner  that  has  been  already
described,  and  having  fixed  upon  an  anchoring-place  not  far
from  where  the  fhip  lay,  I  returned  on  board.


At  three  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  I  weighed,  run  in  nearer
to  the  fhore,  and  anchored  in  four  fathom  and  an  half
Water,  with  a  foft  fandy  bottom,  the  fouth  point  of  the  bay
bearing  E.  diftant  one  mile,  and  a  river  which  the  boats  can
enter  at  low  water  S.  S.  E.  diftant  a  mile  and  an  half.

Sunday  5,  In  the  morning,  the  natives  came  off  again  to  the  fhip
and  we  had  the  fatisfadlion  to  obferve  that  their  behaviour
was  very  different  from  what  it  had  been  yefterday :  among
4  thecpL


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


them  was  an  old  man,  whom  we  had  before  remarked  for  i7*9-
liis  prudence  and  honedy:  his  name  was  Toiava,  and  he
feemed  to  be  a  perfon  of  a  fuperior  rank ;  in  the  tranfa&ions  Sunday  s’
of  yederday  morning  he  had  behaved  with  great  propriety
and  good  fenfe,  lying  in  a  fmall  canoe,  always  near  the  fhip,
and  treating  thofe  on  board  as  if  he  neither  intended  a  fraud
nor  fufpedled  an  injury:  with  fome  perfualion  this  man  and
another  came  on  board,  and  ventured  into  the  cabin,  where
I  prefented  each  of  them  with  a  piece  of  Englifh  cloth  and
fome  fpike  nails.  They  told  ns  that  the  Indians  were  now
very  much  afraid  of  us,  and  on  our  part  we  promifed  friend-
fhip  if  they  would  behave  peaceably,  defiring  only  to  pur-
chafe  what  they  had  to  fell  upon  their  own  terms.

After  the  natives  had  left  us,  I  went  with  the  pinnace  and
long-boat  into  the  river  with  a  defign  to  haul  the  feine,  and
fent  the  Mailer  in  the  yawl  to  found  the  bay  and  dredge  for
filh.  The  Indians  who  were  on  one  fide  of  the  river,  expref-
fed  their  friendlhip  by  all  the  ligns  they  could  devife,  beck¬
oning  us  to  land  among  them ;  but  we  chofe  to  go  alhore  on
the  other  fide,  as  the  lituation  was  more  convenient  for
hauling  the  feine  and  fhooting  birds,  of  which  we  faw  great
numbers  of  various  kinds:  the  Indians  with  much  perfua-
fion,  about  noon,  ventured  over  to  us.  With  the  feine  we
had  very  little  fuccefs,  catching  only  a  few  mullets,  neither
did*we  get  any  thing  by  the  trawl  or  the  dredge,  except  a
few  fhells  ;  but  we  Ihot  feveral  birds,  mod  of  them  refem-
bling  fea-pies,  except  that  they  had  black  plumage,  and

red  bills  and  feet.  While  we  were  abfent  with  otfr  guns,  the

*  %  &

people  who  llaid  by  the  boats  faw  two  of  the  Indians  quarrel
and  light:  they  began  the  battle  with  their  lances,  but  fome
old  men  interpofed  and  took  them  away,  leaving  them  to
decide  the  difference,  like  Englifhmen,  with  their  fids :  they

boxed  with  great  vigour  and  obdinacy  for  fome  time,  but  by

degrees


LIEUTENANT  COOKAs  VOYAGE

-  -  '  V  «k  -  "  *

November.  deSrees  a11  retired  behind  a  little  hill,  fo  that  our  people
v - - — ’  could  not  fee  the  event  of  the  combat.

Monday  6.  jn  the  morning  the  long-boat  was  fent  again  to  traul  in  the

bay,  and  an  officer,  with  the  marines.,  and  a  party  of  men
to  cut  wood  and  haul  the  feme.  The  Indians  on  fhore  ap¬
peared  very  peaceable  and  fubmiffive,  and  we  had  rcafon  to
believe  that  their  habitations  were  at  a  confiderable  difiance,
for  we  law  no  houfes,  and  found  that  they  flept  under  the
bufhes :  the  bay  is  probably  a  place  to  which  they  frequently
refort  in  parties  to  gather  fhell-fifh,  of  which  it  affords  in¬
credible  plenty,  for  wherever  we  went,  whether  upon  the
hills  or  in  the  vallies,  the  woods  or  the  plains,  we  faw  vafi
heaps  of  fhells,  often  many  waggon  loads  together,  fome
appearing  to  be  very  old,  and  others  recent.  We  faw  no
cultivation  in  this  place,  which  had  a  defolate  and  barren
appearance;  the  tops  of  the  hills  were  green,  but  nothing
grew  there  except  a  large  kind  of  fern,  the  roots  of  which
the  natives  had  got  together  in  large  quantities,  in  order  to
carry  away  with  them.  In  the  evening  Mr.  Banks  walked
up  the  river,  which  at  the  mouth  looked  fine  and  broad,  but
at  the  difiance  of  about  two  miles  was  not  deep  enough  to
coyer  the  foot ;  and  the  country  inland  was  fiill  more  barren
than. at  tne  lea- fide.  The  feine  and  dredge  were  not  more
fuccefsful  to-day  than  yefterday,  but  the  Indians  in  fome
meafure  compenfated  for  the  difappointment  by  bringing  us
feveral  bafkets  of  fifh,  fome  dry,  and  fome  frefh  drefied;  it
was  not  indeed  of  the  heft,  but  I  ordered  it. all  to  be  bought
for  the  encouragement  of  trade.

Tuefday  7.  On  the  7th,  the  weather  was  fo  bad  that  none  of  us  left  the
fnip,  nor  did  any  of  the  Indians  come  on  board.

Wednef.  8.  On  the  8th,  I  fent  a  party  of  men  on  fhore  to  wood  and
water;  and  in  the  mean  time  many  canoes  came  off,  in  one

5  of


ROUND  THE  WORLD.  ^

ef  which  was  our  friend  Toiava;  foon  after  he  was  alongfide  1769-.
of  the  fhip,  lie  faw  two  canoes  coming  from  the  oppofite  fide  1Novembeij
of  the  bay,  upon  which  he  halted  back  again  to  the  fhore  Wsdnef' s*
with  all  his  canoes,  telling  us  that  he  was  afraid  of  the  peo¬
ple  who  were  coming :  this  was  a  farther  proof  that  tile
people  of  this  country  were  perpetually  committing  hoftili-
ties  againlt  each  other.  In  a  fhort  time,  however,  he  re¬
turned,  having  difcovered  that  the  people  who  had  alarmed
him  were  not  the  fame  that  he  had  fuppofed.  The  natives
that  came  to  the  fhip  this  morning  fold  us,  for  a  few  pieces
of  cloth,  as  much  fifh  of  the  mackrel  kind  as  ferved  the
whole  fhip’s  company,  and  they  were  as  good  as  ever  were
eaten.  At  noon,  this  day,  I  obferved  the  fun’s  meridional
zenith  diftance  by  an  aflronomical  quadrant,  which  gave  the
latitude  36°  47'  43"  within  the fouth  entrance  of  the  bay,

Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  went  on  fhore  and  collected  a
great  variety  of  plants,  altogether  unknown,  and  not  return¬
ing  till  the  evening,  had  an  opportunity  of  obferving  in  what
manner  the  Indians  difpofed  themfelves  to  pafs  the  night.

They  had  no  fhelter  but  a  few  fhrubs :  the  women  and  the
children  were  ranged  innermolt,  or  farthefl  from  the  fea  5
the  meu  fay  in  a  kind  of  half  circle  round  them,  and  their
arms  were  fet  up  againlt  the  trees  clofe  by  them,  in  a  man-r
ner  which  fhowed  that  they  were  afraid  of  an  attack  by  fome
enemy  not  fur  diltant.  It  was  alfo  difcovered  that  they  ac¬
knowledged  neither  Teratu,  nor  any  other  perfon  as  their
king:  as  in  this  particular  they  differed  from  all  the  people
that  we  had  feen  upon  other  parts  of  the  coafl,  we  thought
it  polhble  that  they  might  be  a  fet  of  outlaws,  in  a  flate  of
rebellion  againfl  Teratu,  and  in  that  cafe  they  might  have
no  fettled  habitations,  or  cultivated.  land  in  any  part  of  the
country.


On


LIEUTENANT  OOOK’s  VOYAGE

On  the  9th,  at  day-break,  a  great  number  of  canoes  came
on  board,  loaded  with  mackrel  of  two  forts,  one  exactly  the
fame  with  thofe  caught  in  England,  and  the  other  fomewhat
different:  we  imagined  the  people  had  taken  a  large  fhoal,
and  brought  us  an  overplus  which  they  could  not  confume  •
for  they  fold  them  at  a  very  low  rate.  They  were,  however,'
very  welcome  to  us  ;  at  eight  o’clock,  the  ffiip  had  more  fifh
on  board  than  all  her  people  could  eat  in  three  days ;  and
before  night,  the  quantity  was  fo  much  increafed,  that  every

man  who  could  get  fait,  cured  as  many  as  would  laft  him  a
month.

After  an  early  breakfafl,  I  went  afhore,  with  Mr.  Green  and
proper  inflruments,  to  obferve  the  tranfit  of  Mercury,  Mr.
Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  being  of  the  party;  the  weather  had
foi  forne  time  been  very  thick,  with  much  rain,  but  this
day  was  fo  favourable  that  not  a  cloud  intervened  during
the  whole  tranfit.  The  obfervation  of  the  ingrefs  was  made
by  Mr.  Green  alone,  while  I  was  employed  in  taking  the
fun  s  altitude  to  afcertain  the  time.  It  came  on  at  7h  2c/
appaient  time  :  according  to  Mr.  Green’s  obfervation,  the  in¬
ternal  contadt  was  at  iah  8'  58",  the  external  at  i2h  9'  55"p. M.
And  according  to  mine,  the  internal  contadl  was  at  12*8'  54',
and  the  external  12  y  48  ;  the  latitude  of  the  place  of  ob¬
fervation  was  30°  48'  si'-  The  latitude  obferved  at  noon  was
36°  48'  28".  The  mean  of  this  and  yefierday’s  obfervation
gives  36°  48'  si"  S.  the  latitude  of  the  place  of  obfervation  ;
the  variation  of  the  compafs  was  1 1 0  9'  E.

About  noon,  we  were  alarmed  by  the  firing  of  a  great  gun
fiom  the  fhip ;  Mr.  Gore,  my  Second  Lieutenant,  was  at  this
time  commanding  officer  on  board,  and  the  account  that  he
gave  was  this.  While  fome  fmall  canoes  were  trading  with
me  people,  two  very  large  ones  came  up,  full  of  men,  one

of


336

1769,
November.
C.  /

Thurfday  9.


R  OUND  Til  E  W  Q  II  L  D.


337


of  them  having  on  board  forty-feven,  all  armed  with  pikes,
darts,  and  ftones,  and  apparently  with  a  hoftile  intention :
they  appeared  to  be  Grangers,  and  to  be  rather  confcious  of
fuperiority  over  us  by  their  numbers,  than  afraid  of  any
weapons  which  could  give  us  the  fuperiority  over  them:  no
attack  however  was  made  ;  probably  becaufe  they  learnt
from  the  people  in  the  other  canoes,  with  whom  they  imme¬
diately  entered  into  conference,  what  kind  of  an  enemy  they
had  to  deal  with :  after  a  little  time,  they  began  to  trade,
fome  of  them  offering  their  arms,  and  one  of  them  a  fquare
piece  of  cloth,  which  makes  a  part  of  their  drefs,  called  a
Haaho'w ;  feveral  of  the  weapons  were  purchafed,  and  Mr.
Gore  having  agreed  for  a  Haahow,  fent  down  the  price,
which  was  a  piece  of  Britifh  cloth,  and  expected  his  pur-
chafe:  but  the  Indian,  as  foon  as  he  had  got  Mr.  Gore’s  cloth
in  his  poffeffion,  refufed  to  part  with  his  own,  and  put  off
the  canoe :  upon  being  threatened  for  this  fraud5  he  and  his
companions  began  to  ling  their  war  fong  in  defiance,  and
lhook  their  paddles  :  flill  however  they  began  no  attack,  only
defying  Mr.  Gore  to  take  any  remedy  in  his  power,  which
fo  provoked  him  that  he  levelled  a  mufquet  loaded  with  ball
at  the  offender,  while  he  was  holding  the  cloth  in  his  hand,
and  fliot  him  dead.  It  would  have  been  happy,  if  the  effect
of  a  few  fmall  fliot  had  been  tried  upon  this  occafion,  which

upon  fome  others  had  been  fuccefsful.

-

When  the  Indian  dropped,  all  the  canoes  put  off  to  fome
diflance  ;  but  as  they  did  not  go  away,  it  was  thought  they
might  Hill  meditate  an  attack.  To  fecure  therefore  a  fafe
paffage  for  the  boat,  which  it  was  neceffary  to  fend  on  fhore,
a  round  fhot  was  fired  over  their  heads,  which  effectually
anfwered  the  purpofe,  and  put  them  all  to  flight.  When  an
account  of  what  had  happened  was  brought  afliore,  our  In-

Vol.II.  Xx  dians


1769.

November.


Thurfday  9.,'


*


33s

I769.

November.

C  ~~ .  ~  f

Thurfday  9.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

dians  were  alarmed,  and  drawing  all  together,  retreated  in  a
body.  After  afhort  time,  however,  they  returned,  having  heard
a  more  particular  account  of  the  affair ;  and  intimated  that

they  thought  the  man  who  had  been  killed  deferved  his  fate.

»

A  little  before  funfet  the  Indians  retired  to  eat  their  fupper,
and  we  went  with  them  to  be  fpedtators  of  the  repafl ;  it
confided  of  fifh  of  different  kinds,  among  which  were  lob-
ders,  and  fome  birds,  of  a  fpecies  unknown  to  us:  thefe  were
either  roafled  or  baked  ;  to  road  them,  they  fadened  them
upon  a  fmall  dick,  which  was  duck  up  in  the  ground,  in¬
clining  towards  their  fire  ;  and  to  bake  them,  they  put  them
into  a  hole  in  the  ground  with  hot  dones,  in  the  fame  man¬
ner  as  the  people  of  Otaheite.

Among  the  natives  that  were  aflembled  upon  this  occafion,
we  faw  a  woman,  who,  after  their  manner,  was  mourning
for  the  death  of  her  relation  :  fhe  fat  upon  the  ground  near
the  red,  who,  one  only  excepted,  feemed  not  at  all  to  regard
her:  the  tears  condantly  trickled  down  her  cheeks,  and  fhe
repeated  in  a  low,  but  very  mournful  voice,  words,  which
even  Tupia  did  not  at  all  underdand:  at  the  end  of  every
fentence  fhe  cut  her  arms,  her  face,  or  her  bread  with  a  fhell
that  fhe  held  in  her  hand,  fo  that  fhe  was  almod  covered
with  blood,  and  was  indeed  one  of  the  mod  adeeming  fpec-
tacles  that  can  be  conceived.  The  cuts,  however,  did  not
appear  to  be  fo  deep  as  are  fometimes  made  upon  fimilar  oc-
cafions,  if  we  may  judge  by  the  fears  which  we  faw  upon
the  arms,  thighs,  breads,  and  cheeks  of  many  of  them,
which  we  were  told  were  the  remains  of  wounds  which
they  had  inflicted  upon  themfelves  as  tedimonies  of  their
affetdion  and  forrow.

The  next  day,  I  went  with  two  boats,  accompanied  by  Mr.
Banks  and  the  other  Gentlemen,  to  examine  a  large  river

that


Friday  10.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


$39


that  empties  itfelf  into  the  head  of  the  bay.  We  rowed  about  ^  i769-

four  or  five  miles  up,  and  could  have  gone  much  farther  if  v - v - /

the  weather  had  been  favourable.  It  was  here  wider  than  at  Fru‘ay  IC’
the  mouth,  and  divided  into  many  fireams  by  fmall  flat
iflands,  which  are  covered  with  mangroves,  and  overflowed
at  high  water.  From  thefe  trees  exudes  a  vifcous  fubflance
which  very  much  refembles  refin  :  we  found  it  firfi  in  fmall
lumps  upon  the  fea  beach,  and  now  faw  it  flicking  to  the
trees,  by  which  we  knew  whence  it  came.  We  landed  on
the  eaft  fide  of  the  river,  where  we  faw  a  tree  upon  which  fe¬
ver  a  1  fliags  had  built  their  nefts,  and  here  therefore  we  de¬
termined  to  dine  ;  twenty  of  the  fliags  were  foon  killed,  and
being  broiled  upon  the  fpot,  afforded  us  an  excellent  meal.

We  then  went  upon  the  hills  from  whence  I  thought  I  faw
the  head  of  the  river.  The  fliore  on  each  fide,  as  well  as  the
iflands  in  the  middle,  were  covered  with  mangroves  ;  and
the  fand-banks  abounded  in  cockles  and  clams :  in  many
places  there  were  rock  oyffers,  and  every  where  plenty  of
wild  fowl,  principally  fhags,  ducks,  curlieus,  and  the  fea-
pie,  that  has  been  defcribed  before.  We  alfo  faw  fiffi  in  the
river,  but  of  what  kind  we  could  not  difcover :  the  country
on  the  eaft  fide  of  this  river  is  for  the  moft  part  barren,  and
deftitute  of  wood  ;  but  on  the  weft  it  has  a  better  afpe£t,  and
in  fome  places  is  adorned  with  trees,  but  has  in  no  part  the
appearance  of  cultivation.  In  the  entrance  of  the  river,  and
for  two  or  three  miles  up,  there  is  good  anchoring  in  four
and  five  fathom  water,  and  places  very  convenient  for  lay¬
ing  a  veflel  on  fliore,  where  the  tide  rifes  and  falls  feven  feet
at  the  full  and  change  of  the  moon.  Wc.  could  not  deter¬
mine,  whether  any  confiderablc  ftream  of  frefh  water  came
into  this  river  out  of  the  country  ;  but  we  faw  a  number  of
fmall  rivulets  iffiie  from  the  adjacent  hills.  Near  the  mouth
of  this  river,  on  the  eaft  fide,  we  found  a  little  Indian  village,

X  x  3  ‘  o  -confining


K


'340


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  "VOYAGE


i7&9'  confifting  of  fmall  temporary  fheds,  where  we  landed,  and

November.

y- — v — u  were  received  by  the  people  with  the  utmoft  kindnefs  and

1  ,ldo>  '  ‘  hofpitality :  they  treated  us  with  a  flat  fhell-fifh  of  a  moft  de¬
licious  tafie,  fomewhat  like  a  cockle,  which  we  eat  hot  from
the  coals.  Near  this  place  is  a  high  point  or  peninfula,  pre¬
ceding  into  the  river,  and  upon  it  are  the  remains  of  a  fort,
which  they  call  Eppah  or  Heppah *  The  beft  engineer  in  Eu¬
rope  could  not  have  chofen  a  fltuation  better  adapted  to  en¬
able  a  fmall  number  to  defend  themfelves  again  A  a  greater.
The  Aeepnels  of  the  cliffs  renders  it  wholly  inacceflible  from
the  water  which  inclofes  it  on  three  Tides  ;  and,  to  the  land*
it  is  fortified  by  a  ditch,  and  a  bank  raffed  on  the  infide :
from  the  top  of  the  bank  to  the  bottom  of  the  ditch,  is  two
and  twenty  feet;  the  ditch  on  the  outfide  is  fourteen  feet
deep,  and  its  breadth  is  in  proportion.  The  whole  feemed
to  have  been  executed  with  great  judgment ;  and  there  had
been  a  row  of  pickets  or  pallifadoes,  both  on  the  top  of  the
bank  and  along  the  brink  of  the  ditch  on  the  outfide  ;  thofe
on  the  outfide  had  been  driven  very  deep  into  the  ground,
and  were  inclined  towards  the  ditch,  fo  as  to  project  over  it;
but  of  thefe  the  thickefi  pofis  only  were  left,  and  upon  them,
there  were  evident  marks  of  fire,  fo  that  the  place  had  pro¬
bably  been  taken  and  defiroyed  by  an  enemy.  If  any  oc-
*  cafion  lhould  make  it  neceffary  for  a  fliip  to  winter  here,  or
flay  any  time,  tents  might  be  built  in  this  place,  which  is
fufficiently  fpacious,  with  great  convenience,  and  might  eafily
be  made  impregnable  to  the  whole  country.

Saturday  ii.  the  eleventh,  there  was  fo  much  wind  and  rain  that

no  canoe  came  off ;  but  the  long-boat  was  fent  to  fetch  oyf-
ters  from  one  of  the  beds  which  had  been  difeovered  the  day
before  :  the  boat  foon  returned,  deeply  laden,  and  the  oyflers,
which  were  as  good  as  ever  came  from  Colchefier,  and  about
the  fame  fize,  were  laid  down  under  the  booms,  and  the*

6  flhip’s


*


&  '  :•


'


__  Z  ■"


-


.


,

■ .  ' .  • .  ,

■  '  v.  .  •  ■

■  .  -  ■  *

-  \  .  ‘

-  ■  ••  •


.

> 1.0.  •


.  t


>\  r


:N?i8.


I


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

fliip’s  company  did  nothing  but  eat  them  from  the  time  they
came  on  board  till  night,  when,  as  may  reafonably  be  fup-
pofed,  great  part  of  them  were  expended ;  this,  however,
gave  us  no  concern,  as  we  knew  that  not  the  boat  only,  but

the  fhip,  might  have  been  loaded,  almofl  in  one  tide,,  as  the
beds  are  dry  at  half  ebb.

In  the  morning  of  Sunday  the  12th,  two  canoes  came  off  Sunday  12.
full  of  people  whom  we  had  never  feen  before,  but  who  ap-  *
p eared'  to  have  heard  of  us  by  the  caution  which  they  ufed
in  approaching  us.  As  we  invited  them  to  come  alongside
with  all  the  tokens  of  friendfhip  that  we  could  fhew,  they
ventured  up,  and  two  of  them  came  on  board ;  the  reft
traded  very  fairly  for  what  they  had1:  a  fmall  canoe  alfo
came  from  the  other  fide  of  the  bay,  and  fold  us  fome  very
large  fifh,  which  they  gave  us  to  underhand  they  would
have  brought  yefterday,  having  caught  them  the  day  before,
but  that  the  wind  was  fo  high  they  could  not  venture
to  fea.

After  breakfah,  I  went  with  the  pinnace  and  yawl,  accom¬
panied  by  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  over  to  the  north  fide
of  the  bay,  to  take  a  view  of  the  country,  and  two  fortified
villages  which  we  had  difeovered  at  a  diftance.  We  landed
near  the  fmalleft  of  them,  the  fituation  of  which  was  the
mofl  beautifully  romantic  that  can  be  imagined  ;  it  was  built
upon  a  fmall  rock;,  detached  from  the  main,  and  furrounded
at  high  water.  The  whole  body  of  this  rock  was  perforated
by  an  hollow  or  arch,  which  poilefled  much: the  largeft  part
of  it ;  the  top  of  the  arch  was  above  fixty  feet  perpendicular-
above  the  fea,  which  at  high  water  flowed  through  the  bot¬
tom  ox  ii :  t;ie  whole  fummit  of  the  rock  above  the  arch  was  f
fenced  lound  after  their  manner;  but  the  area  was  not  larg$
enouga  to  contain  more  than  five  or  fix  houfes :  it  was  accef-

\  fibie.


34*

XT1769’

JNovember.


Saturday  i


$4*

*769-

November.

u  . — v - 1

Sunday  12,


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

I  ,  <•  r  .  /

fible  only  by  one  very  narrow  and  deep  path,  by  which  the
inhabitants,  at  our  approach,  came  down,  and  invited  us  into
the  place ;  but  we  refufed,  intending  to  vifit  a  much  more
condderable  fort  of  the  fame  kind  at  about  a  mile’s  diflancc.
We  made  fome  prefents  however  to  the  women,  and  in  the
mean  time  we  faw  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  which  we
were  going  to,  coming  towards  us  in  a  body,  men,  women,
and  children,  to  the  number  of  about  one  hundred  :  when
they  came  near  enough  to  be  heard,  they  waved  their  hands
and  called  out  Horomcii ;  after  which  they  fat  down  among  the
bufhes  near  the  beach :  thefe  ceremonies  we  were  told  were
certain  figns  of  their  friendly  difpodtion.  We  advanced  to
the  place  where  they  were  fitting,  and  when  we  came  up,
made  them  a  few  prefents,  and  afked  leave  to  vilit  their
Heppah;  they  confented  with  joy  in  their  countenances,  and
immediately  led  the  way.  It  is  called  Wharretouwa,  and
is  fituated  upon  a  high  promontory  or  point,  which  projects
into  the  fea,  on  the  north  fide,  and  near  the  head  of  the  bay:
two  fides  of  it  are  wafhed  by  the  fea,  and  thefe  are  altogether
inacceflible  *,  two  other  fides  are  to  the  land:  up  one  of  them,
which  is  very  fteep,  lies  the  avenue  from  the  beach ;  the
other  is  flat  and  open  to  the  country  upon  the  hill,  which  is
a  narrow  ridge :  the  whole  is  inclofed  by  a  pallifade  about
ten  feet  high,  confiding  of  ftrong  pales  bound  together  with
withes.  The  weak  fide  next  the  land  is  alfo  defended  by  a
double  ditch,  the  innermoft  of  which  has  a  bank  and  an  ad¬
ditional  pallifade  ;  the  inner  pallifades  are  upon  the  bank
next  the  town,  but  at  fuch  a  didance  from  the  top  of  the
bank  as  to  leave  room  for  men  to  walk  and  ufe  their  arms,
between  them  and  the  inner  ditch :  the  outermod  pallifades
are  between  the  two  ditches,  and  driven  obliquely  into
the  ground,  fo  that  their  upper  ends  incline  over  the  in¬
ner  ditch:  the  depth  of  this  ditch,  from  the  bottom  to

the


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


3  43


the  top  or  crown  of  the  bank,  is  four  and  twenty  feet.  1769.
Clofe  within  the  innermofl  pallifade  is  a  Rage,  twenty  »  —  -
feet  high,  forty  feet  long,  and  fix  broad ;  it  is  fupported  Surday  12#
by  flrong  polls,  and  is  intended  as  a  Ration  for  thofe  who
defend  the  place,  from  which  they  may  annoy  the  af-
failants  by  darts  and  Rones,  heaps  of  which  lay  ready  for
ufe.  Another  Rage  of  the  fame  kind  commands  the  Reep
avenue  from  the  beach,  and  Rands  alfo  within  the  pallifade;
on  this  fide  of  the  hill  there  are  fome  little  outworks  and
huts,  not  intended  as  advanced  pofls,  but  as  the  habitations
of  people  who  for  want  of  room  could  not  be  accommodated
within  the  works,  but  who  were,  notwithflanding,  defirous
of  placing  themfelves  under  their  protection.  The  pallifades,
as  has  been  obferved  already,  run  round  the  whole  brow  of
the  hill,  as  well  towards  the  fea  as  towards  the  land;  but
the  ground  within  having  originally  been  a  mount,  they
have  reduced  it  not  to  one  level,  but  to  feveral,  rifing  in
Rages  one  above  the  other,  like  an  amphitheatre,  each  of
which  is  inclofed  within  its  feparate  pallifade  ;  they  com¬
municate  with  each  other  by  narrow  lanes,  which  might
eafily  be  flopped  up,  fo  that  if  an  enemy  fhould  force  the '
outward  pallifade,  he  would  have  others  to  carry  before  the
place  could  be  wholly  reduced,  fuppofing  thefe  places  to  be
obfiinately  defended  one  after  the  other.  The  only  entrance
is  by  a  narrow  paflage,  about  twelve  feet  long,  communi¬
cating  with  the  Reep  afcent  from  the  beach :  it  pa  Res  under
one  of  the  fighting  Rages,  and  though  we  faw  nothing  like
a  door  or  gateway,  it  may  be  eafily  barricaded  in  a  manner
that  will  make  the  forcing  it  a  very  dangerous  and  diflicuk
undertaking.  Upon  the  whole,  this  muR  be  confidered  as  a
place  of  great  Rrength,  in  which  a  fmall  number  of  refolute
men  may  defend  themfelves  againfl  all  the  force  which  a
people  with  no  other  arms  than  thofe  that  are  in  ufe  here

3  could


344

1769.

November.
Sunday  12.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

-could  bring  againft  it.  It  feemed  to  be  well  furnilhed  for  a
1  fege  with  every  thing  but  water ;  we  faw  great  quantities
of  fern  root,  which  they  eat  as  bread,  and  dried  fifh  piled  up
in  heaps  ;  but  we  could  not  perceive  that  they  had  any  frefli
water  nearer  than  a  brook,  which  runs  clofe  under  the  foot
of  the  hill:  whether  they  have  any  means  of  getting  it  from
•this  place  during  a  fiege,  or  whether  they  have  any  method
of  doring  it  within  the  works  in  gourds  or  other  veflels,  wt
could  not  learn;  fome  refource  they  certainly  have  with
refpecT  to  this  article,  an  indifpenfable  neceflary  of  life,  for
.other wife  the  laying  up  dry  provifions  could  anfwer  no  pur-  "
pofe.  Upon  our  exprefling  a  defire  to  fee  their  method  of
attack  and  defence,  one  of  the  young  men  mounted  a  fight>
ing  flage,  which  they  call  Porava ,  and  another  went  into  the
ditch:  both  he  that  was  to  defend  the  place,  and  he  that  was
to  aflault  it,  fung  the  war-fong,  and  danced  with  the  fame
frightful  gediculations  that  we  had  feen  ufed  in  more  ferious
circumflances,  to  work  themfelves  up  into  a  degree  of  that
mechanical  fury,  which,  among  all  uncivilized  nations,  is
the  neceflary  prelude  to  a  battle;  for  difpaflionate  courage,
a  drength  of  mind  that  can  furmount  the  fenfe  of  danger,
without  a  flow  of  animal  fpirits  by  which  it  is  extinguilhed,
feems  to  be  the  prerogative  of  thofe  who  have  projects  of
more  lading  importance,  and  a  keener  fenfe  of  honour  and
dilgrace,  than  can  be  formed  or  felt  by  men  who  have  few
pains  or  pleafures  befides  thofe  of  mere  animal  life,  and
fcarcely  any  purpofe  but  to  provide  for  the  day  that  is  palling
over  them,  to  obtain  plunder,  or  revenge  an  inful t:  they
will  march  again  A  each  other  indeed  in  cool  blood,  though
they  find  it  neceflary  to  work  themfelves  into  paflion  before
they  engage  ;  as  among  us  there  have  been  many  indances
of  people  who  have  deliberately  made  themfelves  drunk,
that  they  might  execute  a  project  which  they  formed  when

they


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


they  were  fober,  but  which,  while  they  continued  fo,  they
did  not  dare  to  undertake.

On  the  fide  of  the  hill,  near  this  inclofure,  we  faw  about
half  an  acre  planted  with  gourds  and  fweet  potatoes,  which  was
the  only  cultivation  in  the  bay :  under  the  foot  of  the  point
upon  which  this  fortification  Hands,  are  two  rocks,  one  juft
broken  off  from  the  main,  and  the  other  not  perfectly  de¬
tached  from  it :  they  are  both  fmall,  and  feem  more  proper
for  the  habitations  of  birds  than  men ;  yet  there  are  lioufes
and  places  of  defence  upon  each  of  them.  And  we  faw
many  other  works  of  the  fame  kind  upon  fmall  iflands,
rocks,  and  ridges  of  hills,  on  different  parts  of  the  coaft,  be-
fides  many  fortified  towns,  which  appeared  to  be  much  fupe-
rior  to  this.

The  perpetual  hoftility  in  which  thefe  poor  favages,  who
have  made  every  village  a  fort,  niuft  neceftarily  live,  will
account  for  there  being  fo  little  of  their  land  in  a  ftate  of
cultivation ;  and,  as  mifehiefs  very  often  reciprocally  pro¬
duce  each  other,  it  may  perhaps  appear,  that  there  being  fo
little  land  in  a  ftate  of  cultivation,  will  account  for  their  living
in  perpetual  hoftility.  But  it  is  very  ftrange,  that  the  fame
invention  and  diligence  which  have  been  ufed  in  the  con-
ftrueftion  of  places  fo  admirably  adapted  to  defence,  almoft
without  tools,  fliould  not,  when  urged  by  the  fame  neceflity,
have  furniflied  them  with  a  fingle  miftile  weapon  except  the
lance,  which  is  thrown  by  hand :  they  have  no  contrivance
like  a  bow  to  difeharge  a  dart,  nor  any  thing  like  a  fling  to
aftift  them  in  throwing  a  ftone;  which  is  the  more  furprif-
ing,  as  the  invention  of  flings,  and  bows  and  arrows,  is  much
more  obvious  than  of  the  works  which  thefe  people  com
ftrutffc,  and  both  thefe  weapons  are  found  among  much  ruder
nations,  and  in  almoft  every  other  part  of  the  world.  Befides

Vol.1L  Yy  the


1769.
November.
< - - - »

Sunday  it.


346


1769.

November.
Sunday  12.


Wednef.  15.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

the  long  lance  and  Patoo-Patoo,  which  have  been  mentioned
already,  they  have  a  flaff  about  five  feet  long,  fometimes.
Pointed,  like  a  Serjeant’s  halberd,  fometimes  only  tapering
to  a  point  at  one  end,  and  having  the  other  end  broad,  and
fhaped  fomewhat  like  the  blade  of  an  oar.  They  have  alfo
another  weapon,  about  a  foot  fhorter  than  thefe,  pointed  at
one  end,  and  at  the  other  fhaped  like  an  axe.  The  points
of  their  long  lances  are  barbed,  and  they  handle  them  with
fuch  firength  and  agility,  that  we  can  match  them  with  no.
weapon  but  a  loaded  mufquet.

After  taking  a  flight  view  of  the  country,  and  loading
both  the  boats  with  celery,  which  we  found  in  great  plenty
near  the  beach,  we  returned  from  our  excurfion,  and  about
five  o’clock  in  the  evening  got  on  board  the  Ihip.

On  the  15th,  I  failed  out  of  the  bay,  and  at  the  fame  time
had  feveial  canoes  on  board,  in  one  of  which  was  our  friend
Toiava,  who  faid,  that  as  foon  as  we  were  gone  he  mull  re-
paii  to  his  Heppah  or  fort,  becaufe  the  friends  of  the  man
who  had  been  fliot  by  Mr.  Gore  on  the  Sth,  had  threatened
to  revenge  his  death  upon  him,  whom  they  had  reproached
as  being  our  friend.  Off  the  north  point  of  the  bay,  I  faw
a  great  number  of  iflands,  of  various  extent,  which  lay  flut¬
tered  to  the  north  weft,  in  a  direction  parallel  with  the  main
as  far  as  I  could  fee.  I  fleered  north  eaft  for  the  north  eaft-
ermoft  of  thefe  iflands  j  but  the  wind  coming  to  the  north
weft,  I  was  obliged  to  ftand  out  to  fea.

To  the  bay  which  we  had  now  left  I  gave  the  name  of
Mercury  Bay,  on  account  of  the  obfervation  which  we  had
mace  there  of  the  tranfit  of  that  planet  over  the  fun.  It  lies
in  latitude  36°  4 7  S. ;  and  in  the  longitude  of  184°  4'  \y. :
there  are  feveral  iflands  lying  both  to  the  fouthward  and
northward  of  it>  and  a  fmall  ifland  or  rock  in  the  middle  of

the


HOUND  m'E  WORLD,


the  entrance:  within  this  ifland  the  depth  of  water  no  where


exceeds  nine  fathom :  the  bed  anchoring  is  in  a  Tandy  bay,
which  lies  juft  within  the  fouth  head,  in  five  and  four  fa¬
thom,  bringing  a  high  tower  or  rock,  which  lies  without  the
head,  in  one  with  the  head,  or  juft  fhut  in  behind  it.  This
place  is  very  convenient  both  for  wooding  and  watering,  and
in  the  river  there  is  an  immenfe  quantity  of  oyfters  and
other  fhell-fHh :  I  have  for  this  reafon  given  it  the  name  of
Cyst  er  River.  But  for  a  fllip  that  wants  to  ftay  here  any
time,  the  belt  and  fafeft  place  is  in.  the  river  at  the  head  of
the  bay  ;  which,  from  the  number  of  mangrove  trees  about
it,  I  have  called  Mangrove  River.  To  fail  into  this  river,
the  fouth  fhore  muft  be  kept  all  the  way  on  board.  The
country  on  the  eaft  fide  of  the  river  and  bay  is  very  barren,
its  only  produce  being  fern,  and  a  few  other  plants  that
will  grow  in  a  poor  foil.  The  land  on  the  north  weft  fide
is  covered  with  wood,  and  the  foil  being  much  more  fertile*
would  doubtlefs  produce  all  the  neceffaries  of  life  with  pro¬
per  cultivation :  it  is  not  however  fo  fertile  as  the  lands
that  we  have  feen  to  the  fouthward  ;  nor  do  the  inhabitants,
though  numerous,  make  fo  good  an  appearance  :  they  have
no  plantations  ;  their  canoes  are  mean,  and  without  orna¬
ment  ;  they  fleep  in  the  open  air ;  and  fay,  that  Teratu,
wliofe  fovereignty  they  do  not  acknowledge*  if  he  was  to
come  among  them,  would  kill  them.  This  favoured  our
opinion  of  their  being  outlaws  ;  yet  they  told  us,  that  they
had  Heppahs  or  ftrong  holds,  to  which  they  retired  in  time
of  imminent  danger.


We  found,  thrown  upon  the  Ihore,  in  feveral  parts  of  this
bay,  great  quantities  of  iron-fand,  which  is  brought  down
by  every  little  rivulet  of  frefh  water  that  finds  its  way  from
the  country  >  which  is  a  demonftration  that  there  is  ore  of

Y  y  2  that


Hi

November.

^ - -

Wednef,  15,


348

1769,

November.

‘i - — /

Wednef.  15.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

that  metal  not  far  inland :  yet  neither  the  inhabitants  of  this
place,  or  any  other  part  of  the  coaft  that  we  have  feen,  know
the  ufe  of  iron,  or  fet  the  leaft  value  upon  it  j  all  of  them
preferring-the  molt  worthlefs  and  ufelefs  trifle,  not  only  to  a
nail,  but  to  any  tool  of  that  metal.

t

Before  we  left  the  bay,  we  cut  upon  one  of  the  trees  near
the  watering-place  the  Blip’s  name,  and  that  of  the  Com¬
mander,  with  the  date  of  the  year  and  month  when  we
weie  there ;  and,  after  difplaying  the  Englifh  colours,  I  took
a  formal  pofleffion  of  it  in  the  name  of  his  Britannic  Majefty
King  George  the  Third,


C  H  A  P.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


349


CHAP.  IV.

*The  Range  from  Mercury  Bay  to  the  Bay  of  Ifl'ands  :  Art
Expedition  up  the  River  Thames:  Some  Account  of  the
Indians  who  inhabit  its  Banks ,  and  the  fine  Timber  that
grows  there:  Several  Interviews  with  the  Natives  on
different  Parts  of  the  Coaft ,  and  a  Skirmifh  with  them
upon  an  IJland

I  Continued  plying  to  windward  two  days  to  get  under  the
land,  and  on  the  18th,  about  feven  in  the  morning,  we
were  abreaft  of  a  very  confpicuous  promontory,  being  then
in  latitude  36°  2.6',  and  in  the  direction  of  N.  48  W.  from  the
north  head  of  Mercury  Bay  or  Point  Mercury,  which  was
diftant  nine  leagues:  upon  this  point  hood  many  people,  who
feemed  to  take  little  notice  of  us,  but  talked  together  with
gieat  eameftnefs.  In  about  half  an  hour,  feveral  canoes  put
off  from  different  places,  and  came  towards  the  fhip ;  upon
which  the  people  on  the  point  alfo  launched  a  canoe,  and
about  twenty  of  them  came  in  her  up  with  the  others.  When
two  of  thefe  canoes,  in  which  there  might  be  about  fixty
men,  came  near  enough  to  make  themfelves  heard,  they
fung  their  war-fong ;  but  feeing  that  we  took  little  notice
of  it,.  they  threw  a  few  hones  at  us,  and  then  rowed  off  to¬
wards  the  fhore.  We  hoped  that  we  had  now  done  with
them,  but  in  a  fhort  time  they  returned,  as  if  with  a  fixed
refolution  to  provoke  us  into  a  battle,  animating  themfelves
by  their  fong  as  they  had  done  before.  Tupia,  without  any

directions


1769^

November;.

■  II  —  /

Saturday  i8v


LIEUTENANT  C'OOK’s  VOYAGE


i769.

November.

' - - - >

Saturday  18.


*


directions  from  us,  went  to  the  poop,  and  began  to  expoflu-
late :  he  told  them,  that  we  had  weapons  which  would  de¬
ft  roy  them  in  a  moment ;  and  that,  if  they  ventured  to  at¬
tack  us,  we  fhould  be  obliged  to  ufe  them.  Upon  this,  they
llourifhcd  their  weapons,  and  cried  out,  in  their  language,
“  Come  on  fhore,  and  we  will  kill  you  all:”  Well,  faid  Tu-
pia,  but  why  fhould  you  moled  us  while  we  are  at  fea  ?  as
we  do  not  wifh  to  fight,  we  lhall  not  accept  your  challenge
to  come  on  fhore ;  and  here  there  is  no  pretence  for  a  quar¬
rel,  the  fea  being  no  more  your  property  than  the  fhip.  This
eloquence  of  Tupia,  though  it  greatly  furprifed  us,  having
given  him  no  hints  for  the  arguments  he  ufed,  had  no  effect
upon  our  enemies,  who  very  foon  renewed  their  battery  :  a
mufquet  was  then  fired  through  one  of  their  boats,  and  this
was  an  argument  of  fufficient  weight,  for  they  immediately
fell  aflern  and  left  us.


From  the  point,  of  which  we  were  now  abreafl,  the  land
trends  W.  4.  S.  near  a  league,  and  then  S.  S.  E.  as  far  as  we
could  fee  ;  and,  befides  the  iflands  that  lay  without  us,  we
could  fee  land  round  by  the  S.  W.  as  far  as  the  N.  W. ;  but
whether  this  was  the  main  or  iflands,  we  could  not  then  de¬
termine:  the  fear  of  lofing  the  main,  however,  made  me  re-
lolve  to  follow  its  direction.  With  this  view,  1  hauled  round
the  point  and  fleered  to  the  fouth ward,  but  there  being  light
airs  all  round  the  compafs,  we  made  but  little  progrefs.

About  one  o’clock,  a  breeze  fprung  up  at  eafl,  which  after¬
wards  came  to  N.E.  and  we  fleered  along  the  fhore  S.  by  E.
and  S.  S.  E.  having  from  twenty-five  to  eighteen  fathom.

At  about  half  an  hour  after  feven  in  the  evening,  having
run  feven  or  eight  leagues  fince  noon,  I  anchored  in  twenty-
three  fathom,  not  chufing  to  run  any  farther  in  the  dark,  as
I  had  now  land  on  both  fides,  forming  the  entrance  of  a

5  flreight,


ROUND  THE  WORLD;

'  \


33 1


freight,  bay,  or  river,  lying  S.  by  E.  for  on  that  point  we
could  fee  no  land.


1769.

.November.


At  day-break,  on  the  19th,  the  wind  being  {till  favourable,  Sundays
we  weighed  and  flood  with  an  eafy  fail  up  the  inlet,  keeping
neareft  to  the  eaft  fide.  In  a  fhort  time,  two  large  canoes
came  off  to  us  from  the  fhore ;  the  people  on  board  faid,  that
they  knewToiava  very  well,  and  called  Tupia  by  his  name.

I  invited  fomc  of  them  on  board  j  and  as  they  knew  they  had
nothing  to  fear  from  us,  while  they  behaved  honeflly  and
peaceably,  they  immediately  complied:  I  made  each  of  them
fome  prefents,  and  difmiffed  them  much  gratified.  Other
canoes  afterwards  came  up  to  us  from  a  different  fide  of  the;
bay  ;  and  the  people  on  board  of  thefe  alfo  mentioned  the
name  of  Toiava,  and  fent  a  young  man  into  the  fhip,  who
told  us  he  was  his  grandfon,  and  he  alfo  was  difmiffed  with;
a  prefent.

After  having  run  about  five  leagues  from  the  place  where
we  had  anchored  the  night  before,  our  depth  of  water  gra¬
dually  decreafed  to  fix  fathom  ;  and  not  chufing  to  go  into
lefs,  as  it  was  tide  of  flood,  and  the  wind  blew  right  up  the
inlet,  I  came  to  an  anchor  about  the  middle  of  the  channel*-,
which  is  near  eleven  miles  over ;  after  which  I  fent  two
boats  out  to  found,  one  on  one  fide,  and  the  other  on  the

t

other.

The  boats  not  having  found  above  three  feet  more  water*
than  we  were  now  in,  I  determined  to  go  no  farther  with
the  fhip,.  but  to  examine  the  head  of  the  bay  in  the"  boats  ;
for,  as  it  appeared  to  run  a  good  way  inland,  I  thought  this
a  favourable  opportunity  to  examine  the  interior  part  of  the
country,  and  its  produce.

At  day-break,  therefore,  I  fet  out  in  the  pinnace  and  long-  Monday  soi
Doat,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Banks,  Dr.  Solander,  and  Tupia  1

and


352  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

November.  anc*  we  ^OUI1(^ tlie  *n*et  enc*  in  a  river,  about  nine  miles  above
the^P:  into  this  river  we  entered  with  the  firfh  of  the
flood,  and  within  three  miles  found  the  water  perfectly  frefli.
Before  we  had  proceeded  more  than  one  third  of  that  dis¬
tance,  we  found  an  Indian  town,  which  was  built  upon  a
a^fmall  bank  of  dry  fand,  but  intirely  furrounded  by  a  deep
mud,  which  poflibly  the  inhabitants  might  confider  as  a  de¬
fence.  Thefe  people,  as  foon  as  they  faw  us,  thronged  to
the  banks,  and  invited  us  on  fhore.  We  accepted  the  invi¬
tation,  and  made  them  a  vifit  notwithftanding  the  mud.  They
received  us  with  open  arms,  having  heard  of  us  from  our
good  old  friend  Toiava ;  but  our  flay  could  not  be  long,  as
we  had  other  objedls  of  curiofity  in  view.  We  proceeded  up
the  river  till  near  noon,  when  we  were  fourteen  miles  with¬
in  its  entrance  ;  and  then,  finding  the  face  of  the  country  to
continue  nearly  the  fame,  without  any  alteration  in  the
courfe  of  the  flream,  which  we  had  no  hope  of  tracing  to
its  fource,  we  landed  on  the  well  fide,  to  take  a  view  of  the
lofty  trees  which  everywhere  adorned  its  banks.  They  were
of  a  kind  that  we  had  feen  before,  though  only  at  a  didance,
both  in  Poverty  Bay  and  Hawke’s  Bay.  Before  we  had  walked
an  hundred  yards  into  the  wood,  we  met  with  one  of  them
which  was  nineteen  feet  eight  inches  in  the  girt,  at  the
height  of  fix  feet  above  the  ground :  having  a  quadrant  with
me,  I  meafured  its  height  from  the  root  to  the  firfl  branch,
and  found  it  to  be  eighty-nine  feet :  it  was  as  flrait  as  an  ar¬
row,  and  tapered  but  very  little  in  proportion  to  its  height ;
fo  that  I  judged  there  were  three  hundred  and  fifty-fix  feet
of  folid  timber  in  it,  exclulive  of  the  branches.  As  we  ad¬
vanced,  we  faw  many  others  that  were  dill  larger;  we  cut
down  a  young  one,  and  the  wood  proved  heavy  and  folid,
not  fit  for  mads,  but  fuch  as  would  make  the  fined  plank  in
the  world.  Our  carpenter,  who  was  with  us,  faid  that  the

timber


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


353

•  jf

timber  refembled  that  of  the  pitch-pine,  which  is  lightened  1769.
by  tapping ;  and  poflibly  fome  fuch  method  might  be  found  ZZ
to  lighten  thefe,  and  they  would  then  be  fuch  mails  as  no  Monday
country  in  Europe  can  produce.  As  the  wood  was  fwampy,
we  could  not  range  far;  but  we  found  many  Rout  trees  of
other  kinds,  all  of  them  utterly  unknown  to  us,  fpecimens
of  which  we  brought  away.

The  river  at  this  height  is  as  broad  as  the  Thames  at
Greenwich,  and  the  tide  of  flood  as  flrong ;  it  is  not  indeed
quite  fo  deep,  but  has  water  enough  for  veflels  of  more  than
a  middle  flze,  and  a  bottom  of  mud,  fo  foft  that  nothing
could  take  damage  by  running  aihore.

About  three  o’clock,  we  reimbarked,  in  order  to  return
with  the  firft  of  the  ebb,  and  named  the  river  the  Thames,
it  having  fome  refemblance  to  our  own  river  of  that  name.

In  our  return,  the  inhabitants  of  the  village  where  we  had
been  aihore,  feeing  us  take  another  channel,  came  off  to  us
in  their  canoes,  and  trafficked  with  us  in  the  moil  friendly
manner,  till  they  had  difpofed  of  the  few  trifles  they  had.

The  tide  of  ebb  juft  carried  us  out  of  the  narrow  part  of  the
river,  into  the  channel  that  run  up  from  the  fea,  before  it
was  dark  ;  and'  we  pulled  hard  to  reach  the  fhip,  but  meet¬
ing  the  flood,  and  a  flrong  breeze  at  N.  N.  W.  with  fhowers
of  rain,  we  were  obliged  to  deiift ;  and  about  midnight,  we
run  under  the  land,  and  came  to  a  grappling,  where  we
took  fuch  reft  as  our  fituation  would  admit.  At  break  of  Tuefday  iU
day,  we  fet  forward  again,  and  it  was  paft  feven  o’clock  be¬
fore  we  reached  the  fhip.  We  were  all  extremely  tired,  but
thought  ourfelves  happy  to  be  on  board  ;  for  before  nine  it
blew  fo  hard  that  the  boat  could  not  have  rowed  ahead,  and
muft  therefore  either  have  gone  afhore,  or  taken  fhelter
under  it.

Vol.  H.  Z  z  About


1


35*


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1769.
November,
■  ■  »—■/*"  "  "

Tuefday  21

VVednef.  22


About  three  o’clock,  having  the  tide  of  ebb,  we  took  up
'  our  anchor,  made  fail,  and  plied  down  the  river  till  eight  in
the  evening,  when  we  came  to  an  anchor  again :  early  in  the
,  morning  we  made  fail  with  the  firft  ebb,  and  kept  plying
till  the  flood  obliged  us  once  more  to  come  to  an  anchor.  As
we  had  now  only  a  light  breeze,  I  went  in  the  pinnace,  ac¬
companied  by  Dr.  Solander,  to  the  weflern  fhore ;  but  I  faw
nothing  worthy  of  notice.

When  I  left  the  fhip,  many  canoes  were  about  it ;  Mr.
Banks  therefore  chofe  to  flay  on  board,  and  traffic  with  the
'  natives  :  they  bartered  their  clothes  and  arms,  chiefly  for
paper,  and  behaved  with  great  friendfhip  and  honefly.  But
while  fome  of  them  were  below  with  Mr.  Banks,  a  young  man
who  was  upon  the  deck  Bole  a  half  minute  glafs  which  was
in  the  binacle,  and  was  detected  jufl  as  he  was  carrying  it  off.
Mr.  Hicks,  who  was  commanding  officer  on  board,  took  it
into  his  head  to  punifli  him,  by  giving  him  twelve  lafhes1
with  a  cat-o ’nine-tails ;  and  accordingly  ordered  him  to  be
taken  to  the  gang-way,  and  tied  up  to  the  fhrouds.  When
the  other  Indians  who  were  on  board  faw  him  feized,  they
attempted  to  refcue  him ;  and  being  refilled,  called  for  their
arms,  which  were  handed  up  from  the  canoes,  and  the  peo¬
ple  of  one  of  them  attempted  to  come  up  the  Blip’s  fide.
The  tumult  was  heard  by  Mr.  Banks,  who,  with  Tupia,  came
haflily  upon  the  deck  to  fee  what  had  happened.  The  In¬
dians  immediately  ran  to  Tupia,  who,  finding  Mr.  Hicks  in-*
exorable,  could  only  allure  them,  that  nothing  was  intended
againfl  the  life  of  their  companion ;  but  that  it  was  necef-
fary  he  fhould  fuffer  fome  punifhment  for  his  offence,  which
being  explained  to  them,  they  feemed  to  be  fatisfied.  The
punifhment  was  then  inflidled,  and  as  foon  as  the  criminal
was  unbound,  an  old  man  among  the  fpe&ators,  who  was

fuppofed


3  55


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


1769.

November.


fuppofed  to  be  his  father,  gave  him  a  hearty  beating,  and
fent  him  down  into  his  canoe.  All  the  canoes  then  dropped  _y_
a-ftern,  and  the  people  faid  that  they  were  afraid  to  come  Wtdnef- 22/
any  more  near  the  fhip :  after  much  perfuafion,  however,
they  ventured  back  again,  but  their  cheerful  confidence  was
at  an  end,  and  their  flay  was  fhort  ;  they  promifed  indeed,
at  their  departure,  to  return  with  fome  fifh,  but  we  faw  no
more  of  them.

On  the  23d,  the  wind  being  contrary,  we  kept  plying  Thursday 2 j.
down  the  river,  and  at  feven  in  the  evening,  got  without  the
N.  W.  point  of  the  iflands  lying  on  the  weft  fide  of  it.  The  $
weather  being  bad,  night  coming  on,  and  having  land  on
every  fide  of  us,  I  thought  it  moft  advifable  to  tack,  and
ftretch  in  under  the  point,  where  we  anchored  in  nineteen
fathom.  At  five  in  the  morning,  of  the  24th,  we  weighed,  May  24,.
and  made  fail  to  the  N.  W.  under  our  courfes  and  double
reefed  top-fails,  the  wind  being  at  S.  W.  by  W.  and  W.  S.  W.
a  ftrong  gale  and  fqually.  As  the  gale  would  not  permit  us
to  come  near  the  land,  we  had  but  a  flight  and  diftant  view
of  it  from  the  time  when  we  got  under  fail  till  noon,  during
a  run  of  twelve  leagues,  but  we  never  once  loft  fight  of  it.

At  this  time,  our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  36°  15' 20",
we  were  not  above  two  miles  from  a  point  of  land  on  the
main,  and  three  leagues  and  an  half  from  a  very  high  ifland,
which  bore  N.  E.  by  E. :  in  this  fituation  we  had  twenty-fix
fathom  water:  the  fartheft  point  on  the  main  that  we  could
fee  bore  N.  \V.  but  we  could  perceive  feveral  fmall  iflands
lying  to  the  north  of  that  dire&ion.  The  point  of  land  of
which  we  were  now  a-breaft,  and  which  I  called  Point
Rodney,  is  the  N.  W.  extremity  of  the  river  Thames;  for
under  that  name  I  comprehend  the  deep  bay  which  termi¬
nates  in  the  frefh  water  ftream,  and  the  N.  E.  extremity  is
the  promontory  which  we  pafied  when  we  entered  it,  and

Z  z  2  which


-  *  4


3 56  •

I769.

November

1 - „ — ^

Friday  24.


4

LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

♦

which  I  called  Cape  Colville,  in  honour  of  the  Right  Ho-
j  nourable  Lord  Colville.

/

Cape  Colville  lies  in  latitude  36°  26',  longitude  1940  27';  it
rifes  direCtly  from  the  fea  to  a  confiderable  height,  and  is
remarkable  for  a  lofty  rock,  which  Rands  to  the  pitch  of  the
point,  and  may  be  diRinguifhcd  at  a  very  great  diRance.
From  the  fouth  point  of  this  Cape  the  river  runs  in  a  direct
line  S.  by  E.  and  is  no  where  lefs  than  three  leagues  broad
for  the  diRance  of  fourteen  leagues  above  the  Cape,  and
there  it  is  contracted  to  a  narrow  Rream,  but  continues  the
fame  courfe  through  a  low  flat  country,  or  broad  valley,
which  lies  parallel  with  the  fea  coafl,  and  the  end  of  which
we  could  not  fee.  On  the  eafl  fide  of  the  broad  part  of  this
river  the  land  is  tolerably  high  and  hilly  ;  on  the  wefl  fide  it
is  rather  low,  but  the  whole  is  covered  with  verdure  and
wood,  and  has  the  appearance  of  great  fertility,  though
there  were  but  a  few  fmall  fpots  which  had  been  cultivated.
At  the  entrance  of  the  narrow  part  of  the  river  the  land  is
covered  with  mangroves  and  other  fhrubs;  but  farther,
there  are  immenfe  woods  of  perhaps  the  fineR  timber  in  the
world,  of  which  fome  account  has  already  been  given :  in
fevcral  places  the  wood  extends  to  the  very  edge  of  the
water,  and  where  it  is  at  a  little  diRance,  the  intermediate
ipace  is  marfhy,  like  fome  parts  of  the  banks  of  the  Thames
m  England- it  is  probable  that  the  river  contains  plenty  of
hih,  for  we  faw  poles  Ruck  up  in  many  places  to  fet  nets  for
catching  them,  but  of  what  kinds  I  do  not  know.  The
greatefl  depth  of  water  that  we  found  in  this  river  was  fix  and;
twenty  fathom,  which  gradually  decreafed  to  one  fathom
and  ail  half :  in  the  mouth  of  the  frefh  water  Rream  it  is
nom  fotFi  to  three  fathom,  but  there  are"  large  flats  and  fand
banks  lying  before  it.  A  fhip  of  moderate  draught  may,,
notwithflanding,  go  a  long,  way  up  this  river  with  a  flowing

tide,

1


I


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

\

tide,  for  it  rifes  perpendicularly  near  ten  feet,  and  at  the  full
and  change  of  the  moon,  it  is  high  water  about  nine  o’clock.

Six  leagues  within  Cape  Colville,  under  the  eaflern  fhore,
are  feveral  frnall  iflands,  which,  together  with  the  main,  feem
to  form  good  harbours  ;  and  oppoflce  to  thefe  iflands,  under
the  weftern  fhore,  lie  other  iflands,  by  which  it  is  alfo  pro¬
bable  that  good  harbours  may  be  formed:  but  if  there  are
no  harbours  about  this  river,  there  is  good  anchoring  in
every  part  of  it  where  the  depth  of  water  is  fuflicient,  for  it
is  defended  from  the  fea  by  a  chain  of  iflands  of  different  ex-~
tent,  which  lie  crofs  the  mouth  of  it,  and  which  I  have,  for
that  reafon,  called  Barrier  Islands:  they  flretch  N.  W.  and
S.  E.  ten  leagues.  The  fouth  end  of  the  chain  lies  N.  E.  be¬
tween  two  and  three  leagues  from  Cape  Colville ;  and  the

north  end  lies  N.  E.  four  leagues  and  an  half  from  Point

/

Rodney.  Point  Rodney  lies  W.  N.  W.  nine  leagues  from  Cape
Colville,  in  latitude  36°  15' S.  longitude  184°  53' W.

The  natives  redding  about  this  river  do  not  appear  to  be
numerous,  confidering  the  great  extent  of  the  country.  But
they  are  a  flrong,  well-made,  and  a&ive  people,  and  all  of
them  paint  their  bodies  with  red  oker  and  oil  from  head  to
foot,  which  we  had  not  feen  before.  Their  canoes  were
large*  and  well  built,  and  adorned  with  carving,  in  as  good
a  tafte  as  any  that  we  had  feen  upon  the  coaft.

*  t

We  continued  to  fland  along  the  fhore  till  night,  with  the
main  land  on  one  fide,  and  iflands  on  the  other,  and  then
anchored  in  a  bay,  with  fourteen  fathom  and  a  fandy  bottom.
We  had  no  fooner  come  to  an  anchor,  than  we  tried  our
lines,  and  in  a  fliort  time  caught  near  one  hundred  flflv
which  the  people  called  Sea-bream  ;  they  weighed -  from  fix
to  eight  pounds  a  piece,  and  confequently  would  fupply  the
whole  fhip’s  company  with  food  for  two  days.  From  the

fuccefs:


3S7

1769.

November.

^  -  "'V

Friday  24.


3SS

1769.

November.

V— — ~v  —  ■  *J

Friday  24..


Saturday  25.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

fuccefs  of  our  lines  here,  we  called  the  place  Bream  Bay:
the  two  points  that  form  it  lie  north  and  fouth,  five  leagues,
from  each  other ;  it  is  every  where  of  a  good  breadth,  and
between  three  and  four  leagues  deep:  at  the  bottom  of  it
there  appears  to  be  a  river  of  frefh  water.  The  north  head
of  the  bay,  called  Bream  Head,  is  highland,  and  remark¬
able  for  feveral  pointed  rocks,  which  hand  in  a  range  upon
the  top  of  it :  it  may  alfo  be  known  by  fome  fmall  iflands
which  lie  before  it,  called  the  Hen  and  Chickens,  one  of
which  is  high,  and  terminates  in  two  peaks.  It  lies  in  lati¬
tude  350  4 6'  S.,  and  at  the  diflance  of  feventeen  leagues  and
an  half  from  Cape  Colville,  in  the  direction  of  N.  41  W.

The  land  between  Point  Rodney  and  Bream  Head,  an  ex¬
tent  of  ten  leagues,  is  low,  and  wooded  in  tufts,  with  white
fand  banks  between  the  fea  and  the  firm  land.  We  faw  no
inhabitants,  but  many  fires  in  the  night ;  and  where  there
are  fires,  there  are  always  people.

At  day-break,  on  the  25th,  we  left  the  bay,  and  fleered
along  fliore  to  the  northward:  we  found  the  variation  of
the  compafs  to  be  12°  42' E.  At  noon,  our  latitude  was  36°
36'  S.,  Bream  Head  bore  fouth,  diflant  ten  miles  ;  and  we
faw  fome  fmall  iflands,  to  which  I  gave  the  name  of  the  Poor
Knights,  at  N.  E.  by  N.  diflant  three  leagues;  the  norther-
mofl  land  in  fight  bore  N.  N.  W. :  we  were  in  this  place  at  the
diflance  of  two  miles  from  the  fliore,  and  had  twenty-fix  fa¬
thom  water.

The  country  appeared  low,  but  well  covered  with  wood  :
we  faw  fome  draggling  lioufes,  three  or  four  fortified  towns,
and  near  them  a  large  quantity  of  cultivated  land.

In  the  evening,  feven  large  canoes  came  off  to  us,  with
about  two  hundred  men  :  fome  of  them  came  on  board,  and
faid  that  they  had  heard  of  us.  To  two  of  them,  who  ap¬
peared


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


i


259


peered  to  be  Chiefs,  I  gave  prefents;  but  when  thefe  were
gone  out  of  the  fhip,  the  others  became  exceedingly  trouble-
fome.  Some  of  thofe  in  the  canoes  began  to  trade,  and,  ac¬
cording  to  their  cuftom,  to  cheat,  by  refilling  to  deliver
what  had  been  bought,  after  they  had  received  the  price:
among  thefe  was  one  who  had  received  an  old  pair  of  black
breeches,  which,  upon  a  few  fmall  ihot  being  fired  at  him,
he  threw  into  the  fea.  All  the  boats  foon  after  paddled  off  to
fome  diftance,  and  when  they  thought  they  were  out  of
reach,  they  began  to  defy  us,  by  finging  their  fong  and
brandifhing  their  weapons.  We  thought  it  advifable  to  in¬
timidate  them,  as  well  for  their  fakes  as  our  own,  and
therefore  fired  firfl  fome  fmall  arms,  and  then  round  fhot
over  their  heads ;  the  laft  put  them  in  a  terrible  fright,
though  they  received  no  damage,  except  by  over-heating
themfelves  in  paddling  away,  which  they  did  with  aftonifh-
ing  expedition.

In  the  night  we  had  variable  light  airs  ;  but  towards  the
morning  a  breeze  fprung  up  at  S.  and  afterwards  at  S.  E.
with  which  we  proceeded  fiowly  to  the  northward,  along
the  fhore.

Between  fix  and  feven  o'clock  two  canoes  came  off,  and
told  us  that  they  had  heard  of  yefterday’s  adventure,  not-
withflanding  which  the  people  came  on  board,  and  traded
very  quietly  and  honeflly  for  whatever  they  had :  foon  after
two  canoes  came  off  from  a  more  diftant  part  of  the  fhore  ;
thefe  were  of  a  much  larger  fize,  and  full  of  people :  when
they  came  near,  they  called  off'  the  other  canoes  which  were
along  fide  of  the  fhip,  and  after  a  fhort  conference  they  all
came  up  together.  The  firangers  appeared  to  be  perfons  of
a  fuperior  rank ;  their  canoes  were  well  carved  with  many
ornaments,  and  they  had  with  them  a  great  variety  of  wea-

8  *  pons :


1769.

November.

V - v - '

Saturday  25.


Sunday  269


I


4


s6o

1769.
November.
' - - - -

Sunday  26.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

pons :  they  had  patoo-patoos  both  of  Hone  and  whalebone,
upon  which  they  appeared  to  fet  a  great  value  j  they  had  alfo
ribs  of  whale,  of  which  we  had  before  feen  imitations  in
wood,  carved  and  adorned  with  tufts  of  dog’s  hair.  Their
complexions  were  browner  than  thofe  of  the  people  we  had
feen  to  the  fouthward,  and  their  bodies  and  faces  were  more
marked  with  the  black  {tains  which  they  call  Amoco :  they
had  a  broad  fpiral  on  each  buttock ;  and  the  thighs  of  many
of  them  were  almoft  intirely  black,  fome  narrow  lines  only
being  left  untouched,  fo  that  at  firft  fight  they  appeared  to
wear  ftriped  breeches.  With  refpeft  to  the  Amoco,  every
different  tribe  feemed  to  have  a  different  cuftom,  for  all  the
men,  in  fome  canoes,  feemed  to  be  almoft  covered  with  it,
and  thofe  in  others  had  fcarcely  a  ftain,  except  on  the  lips,
which  were  black  in  all  of  them  without  a  fingle  exception.
Thefe  gentlemen,  for  a  long  time,  refufed  to  part  with  any
of  their  weapons,  whatever  was  offered  for  them;  at  lafl,
however,  one  of  them  produced  a  piece  of  talc,  wrought
into  the  fhape  of  an  ax,  and  agreed  to  fell  it  for  a  piece  of
cloth:  the  cloth  was  handed  over  the  fhip’s  fide,  but  his  ho¬
nour  immediately  put  off  his  canoe  with  the  ax.  We  had
recourfe  to  our  ufual  expedient,  and  fired  a  mufket  ball  over
the  canoe,  upon  which  it  put  back  to  the  fhip,  and  the
piece  of  cloth  was  returned  ;  all  the  boats  then  went  afliore,
without  offering  any  further  intcrcourfe.

At  noon,  the  main  land  extended  from  S.  by  E.  to  N.  W.
by  W.  a  remarkable  point  of  land  bearing  W.  diflant  four  or
five  miles ;  at  three  we  paffed  it,  and  I  gave  it  the  name  of
Gape  Bret,  in  honour  of  Sir  Piercy.  The  land  of  this  Cape
is  confiderably  higher  than  any  part  of  the  adjacent  coaft :  at
the  point  of  it,  is  a  high  round  hillock,  and  N.  E.  by  N.  at  the
diflance  of  about  a  mile,  is  a  fmall  high  ifland  or  rock,
which,  like  feveral  that  have  already  been  defcribed,  was

perforated


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


361


perforated  quite  through,  fo  as  to  appear  like  the  arch  of  a
bridge.  This  Cape,  or  at  lead:  fome  part  of  it,  is  by  the  na¬
tives  called  Motugogogo,  and  it  lies  in  latitude  350  io'3o"S.
longitude  185°  2 s'  W.  On  the  weft  fide  of  it  is  a  large  and
pretty  deep  bay,  lying  in  S.  W.  by  W.  in  which  there  appeared
to  be  feveral  fmall  iflands:  the  point  that  forms  the  N.  W
entrance,  lies  W.  ~  N.  at  the  diftance  of  three  or  four  leagues
from  Cape  Bret,  and  I  diftinguifhed  it  by  the  name  of  Point
Pococke.  On  the  weft  fide  of  the  bay  we  faw  feveral  vil¬
lages,  both  upon  iftands  and  the  main,  and  feveral  very  large
canoes  came  off  to  us,  full  of  people,  who  made  a  better  ap¬
pearance  than  any  we  had  feen  yet :  they  were  all  ftout  and
well-made;  their  hair,  which  was  black,  was  tied  up  in  a
bunch  on  the  crown  of  their  heads,  and  ftuck  with  white
feathers.  In  each  of  the  canoes  were  two  or  three  Chiefs,
whofe  habits  were  of  the  beft  fort  of  cloth,  and  covered  with
dog’s  fkin,  fo  as  to  make  an  agreeable  appearance :  moft  of
thefe  people  were  marked  with  the  Amoco,  like  thofe  who
had  been  alongfide  of  us  before:  their  manner  of  trading
was  alfo  equally  fraudulent;  and  the  officers  neglecting
either  to  punifh  or  fright  them,  one  of  the  midfhipmen  who
had  been  defrauded  in  his  bargain,  had  recourfe,  for  re¬
venge,  to  an.  expedient  which  was  equally  ludicrous  and
fevere:  he  got  a  fifhing  line,  and  when  the  man  who  had
cheated  him  was  clofe  under  the  fhip’s  fide  in  his  canoe,  he
heaved  the  lead  with  fo  good  an  aim  that  the  hook  caught
him  by  the  backfide  ;  he  then  pulled  the  line,  and  the  man
holding  back,  the  hook  broke  in  the  fhank,  and  the  beard
was  left  flicking  in  the  flefh.


t769.

November,


Sundr.y  26.


During  the  courfe  of  this  day,  though  we  did  not  range
more  than  fix  or  eight  leagues  of  the  coaft,  we  had  along¬
fide  and  on  board  the  fhip  between  four  and  five  hundred  of

Vol.  II.  3  A  the


LIEUTENANT  CO  OK’s  VOYAGE


3  62

November  the  natives>  is  a  proof  that  this  part  of  the  country  is

,»-v -  well  inhabited.

Monday  27.  At  eight  o’clock  the  next  morning,  we  were  within  a  mile
of  a  group  of  illands  which  lie  clofe  under  the  main,  at  the
diftance  of  two  and  twenty  miles  from  Cape  Bret,  in  the  di¬
rection  of  N.  W.  by  W.  7  W.  At  this  place,  having  but  little
wind,  we  lay  about  two  hours,  during  which  time  feveral
canoes  came  off,  and  fold  us  fome  fifh,  which  we  called  Ca~
valles,  and  for  that  reafon  I  gave  the  fame  name  to  the
iflands.  Thefe  people  were  very  infolent,  frequently  threat¬
ening  us,  even  while  they  were  felling  their  fifli ;  and  when
fome  more  canoes  came  up,  they  began  to  pelt  us  with
Hones.  Some  fmall  ftiot  were  then  fired,  and  hit  one  of  them
while  he  had  a  ftone  in  his  hand,  in  the  very  aClion  of  throw¬
ing  it  into  the  ftiip :  they  did  not,  however,  defift,  till  fome
others  had  been  wounded,  and  then  they  went  away,  and
we  Hood  off  to  fea.

The  wind  being  dire&ly  againft  us,  we  kept  plying  to

Wnsf.  29.  windward  till  the  29th,  when  we  had  rather  loft  than  gained
ground ;  I  therefore  bore  up  for  a  bay  which  lies  to  the  weft-
ward  of  Cape  Bret ;  at  this  time  it  was  about  two  leagues  to
leeward  of  us  ;  and  at  about  eleven  o’clock  we  anchored
under  the  fouth  weft  fide  of  one  of  the  many  iflands  which
line  it  on  the  fouth  eaft,  in  four  fathom  and  an  half  water ;
we  fhoaled  our  water  to  this  depth  all  at  once,  and  if  this
had  not  happened  I  Ihould  not  have  come  to  an  anchor  fo
(bon.  The  Matter  was  immediately  fent  out  with  two  boats
to  found,  and  he  foon  difcovered  that  we  had  got  upon  a
bank,  which  runs  out  from  the  north  weft  end  of  the  iflaiid,

and  that  on  the  outfide  of  it  there  was  from  eight  to  ten.
fathom.

lUi


4


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


In  the  meantime  thfcimives,vto;the  number  of  near  four
hundred,. crouded  upon  us  in  their  canoes,  and  fome  of  them
were  admitted  on  board:  to  one,  who  feemed  to  be  a, Chief,
J  gave  a  piece  of  broad  cloth,  and  diftributed  fome  trifling
^refents  among  the  reft.  I  perceived  that  fome  of  thcfe
people  had  been  about  the  fhip  when  fhe  was  off  at  fca,  and
that.they  knew  the  power  of  our  fire-arms,  for  the  very  fight
of  a  gun  threw  them  into  manifeft  confufion:  under  this
impreflion  they  traded  very  fairly ;  but  the  people  in  one  of
the  canoes  took  the  opportunity  of  our  being  at  dinner  to
tow  away  our  buoy :  a  mufket  was  fired  over  them  without
effe<5f;,  we  then  endeavoured  to  reach  them  with  fome  fmall
{hot,  but  they  were  too  far  off:  by  this  time  they  had  got  the
buoy  into  their  canoe,  and  we  were  obliged  to  fire  a  mufket
at  them  with  ball:  this  hit  one  of  them,  and  they  immedi¬
ately  threw  the  buoy  over  board:  a  round  fhot  was  then  fired
over  them,  which  ftruck  the  water  and  went  afhore.  Two
or  three  of  the  canoes  immediately  landed  their  people,  who
ran  about  the  beach,  as  we  imagined,  in  fearch  of  the  ball.
Tupia  called  to  them,  and  allured  them  that  while  they  were
honeft  they  fhould  be  fafe,  and  with  a  little  perfuafion  many
of  them  returned  to  the  fhip,  and  their  behaviour  was  fuch
as  left  us  no  reafon  to  fufpe&  that  they  intended  to  give  us
any  farther  trouble.

After  the  fhip  was  removed  into  deeper  water,  and  pro¬
perly  fecured,  I  went  with  the  pinnace  and  yawl,  manned
and  armed,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,
knd  landed  upon  the  ifland,  which  was  about  three  quarters
of  a  mile  diftant:  we  obferved  that  the  canoes  which  were
about  the  fliip,  did  not  follow  us  upon  our  leaving  her,  which
we  thought  a  good  fign  ;  but  we  had  no  fooner  landed  than
they  crouded  to  different  parts  of  the  ifland  and  came  on
fhore.  We  were  in  a  little  cove,  and  in  a  few  minutes  were
"&'  *■  3  A  2  furrounded


1769.

N-ovenUer.


Wed  Be i.  2


364


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

November.  furrounded  hY  two  or  three  hundred  people,  fome  rufhing
from  behind  the  heads  of  the  cove,  and  others  appearing  on
the  tops  of  the  hills :  they  were  all  armed,  but  they  came  on
in  fo  confufed  and  ftraggling  a  manner  that  we  fcarcely  fuf-
pefted  they  meant  us  any  harm,  and  we  were  determined
that  lioftiljties  Ihould  not  begin  on  our  part.  We  marched
towards  them,  and  then  drew  a  line  upon  the  fand  between
them  and  us,  which  we  gave  them  to  underfland  they  were
not  to  pafs :  at  firft  they  continued  quiet,  but  their  weapons
were  held  ready  to  ftrike,  and  they  feemed  to  be  rather  irre-
folute  than  peaceable.  While  we  remained  in  this  date  of
fufpenfe,  another  party  of  Indians  came  up,  and  now  grow¬
ing  more  bold  as  their  number  increafed,  they  began  the
dance  and  fong,  which  are  their  preludes  to  a  battle :  Hill,
however,  they  delayed  the  attack,  but  a  party  ran  to  each  of
our  boats,  and  attempted  to  draw  them  on  Ihore ;  this  feemed
to  be  the  fignal,  foi  the  people  about  us  at  the  fame  time
began  to  prefs  in  upon  our  line:  our  fituation  was  now  be¬
come  too  critical  for  us  to  remain  longer  inactive,  I  therefore
difcharged  my  mulket,  which  was  loaded  with  fmall  Ihot,
at  one  of  the  forwarded,  and  Mr.  Banks  and  two  of  the  men
fired  immediately  afterwards :  this  made  them  fall  back  in
fome  confufion,  but  one  of  the  Chiefs,  who  was  at  the  dif-
tance  ol  about  twenty  yards,  rallied  them,  and  running  for¬
ward  waving  his  patoo-patoo,  and  calling  loudly  to  his*
companions,  led  them  to  the  charge.  Dr.  Solander,  whofe
-  piece  was  not  yet  difcharged,  fired  at  this  champion,  who
Hopped  fliort  upon  feeling  the  fliot,  and  then  ran  away  with
the  reft:  they  did  not  however  difperfe,  but  got  together
upon  a  riling  ground,  and  feemed  only  to  want  fome  leader
of  refolution  to  renew  their  attack.  As  they  were  now  be¬
yond  the  reach  of  fmall  Ihot,  we  fired  with  ball,  but  as  none
of  them  took  place  they  ftill  continued  in  a  body,  and  in

this


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


3^5


this  fituation  we  remained  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour:  in
the  mean  time  the  (hip,  from  whence  a  much  greater  num¬
ber  of  Indians  were  feen  than  could  be  difcovered  in  our  fitu-
ation,  brought  her  broad-fide  to  bear,  and  intirely  difperfed
them,  by  firing  a  few  fhot  over  their  heads.  In  this  fkirmifh
only  two  of  the  Indians  were  hurt  with  the  fmall  fhot,  and
not  a  fingle  life  was  loft,  which  would  not  have  been  the
cafe  if  I  had  not  reftrained  the  men,  who,  either  from  fear
or  the  love  of  mifchief,  fhewed  as  much  impatience  to
deftroy  them  as  a  fportfman  to  kill  his  game.  When  we
were  in  quiet  pofieflion  of  our  cove,  we  laid  down  our  arms
and  began  to  gather  celery,  which  grew  here  in  great
plenty :  after  a  little  time  we  recollected  to  have  feen  fome
of  the  people  hide  themfelves  in  a  cave  of  one  of  the  rocks,
we  therefore  went  towards  the  place,  when  an  old  Indian,
who  proved  to  be  the  Chief  that  I  had  prefented  with  a  piece
of  broad  cloth  in  the  morning,  came  out  with  his  wife  and
his  brother,  and  in  a  fupplicating  pofture  put  themfelves
under  our  protection.  We  fpoke  kindly  to  them,  and  the
old  man  then  told  us  that  he  had  another  brother,  who  was
one  of  thofe  that  had  been  wounded  by  the  fmall  fhot,  and
enquired  with  much  folicitude  and  concern  if  he  would  die.
We  allured  him  that  he  would  not,  and  at  the  fame  time  put
into  his  hand  both  a  mufket  ball  and  fome  fmall  fhot,  telling
him,  that  thofe  only  who  were  wounded  with  the  ball  would
die,  and  that  the  others  would  recovery  at  the  fame  time
alluring  him,  that  if  we  were  attacked  again,  we  fhould
certainly  defend  ourfelves  with  the  ball,  which  would
wound  them  mortally.  Having  now  taken  courage,  they
came  and  fat  down  by  us,  and  as  tokens  of  our  perfect
amity,  we  made  them  prefents  of  fuch  trifles  as  we  hap¬
pened  to  have  about  us.


1769.

November.

' - - - J

Wednef.  29*


Soon


366

1769.

November,
v -

Wedaef.  29.


Thurfday  30.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

Soon  after  we  re-imbarked  in  our  boats,  and  having  rowed
to  another  cove  in  the  fame  ifland,  climbed  a  neighbouring
hill,  which  commanded  the  country  to  a  confiderable
didance.  The  profpeft  was  very  uncommon  and  romantic,
confiding  of  innumerable  iflands,  which  formed  as  many
harbours,  where  the  water  was  as  fmooth,  as  a  mill-pool :  we
faw  alfo  many  towns,  fcattered  houfes,  and  plantations,  the
country  being  much  more  populous  than  any  we  had  feen.
One  of  the  towns  was  very  near  us,  from  which  many  of
the  Indians  advanced,  taking  great  pains  to  fhew  us  that
they  were  unarmed,  and  in  their  gedures  and  countenances
exprefling  great  meeknefs  and  humility.  In  the  mean  time
fome  of  our  people,  who,  when  the  Indians  were  to  be  pu~
nifhed  for  a  fraud,  aflumed  the  inexorable  juflice  of  a  Ly-
curgus,  thought  fit  to  break  into  one  of  their  plantations,
and  dig  up  fome  potatoes :  for  this  offence  I  ordered  each  of
them  to  be  punifhed  with  twelve  lafhes,  after  which  two  of
them  were  difcharged ;  but  the  third,  infifling  that  it  was  no
crime  in  an  Englifliman  to  plunder  an  Indian  plantation,
though  it  was  a  crime  in  an  Indian  to  defraud  an  Englifli¬
man  of  a  nail,  I  ordered  him  back  into  his  confinement,
from  which  I  would  not  releafe  him  till  he  had  received  fix
lafhes  more.

On  the  30th,  there  being  a  dead  calm,  and  no  probability
of  our  getting  to  fea,  I  fent  the  Mader,  with  two  boats  to
found  the  harbour ;  and  all  the  forenoon  had  feveral  canoes
about  the  fhip,  who  traded  in  a  very  fair  and  friendly  man¬
ner.  In  the  evening  we  went  afhore  upon  the  main,  where
the  people  received  us  very  cordially ;  but  we  found  nothing-
worthy  of  notice.

In  this  bay  we  were  detained  by  contrary  winds  and  calms
feveral  days,  during  which  time  our  intercourfc  with  the

natives


3^7


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

natives  was  continued  in  the  moll  peaceable  and  friendly
manner,  they  being  frequently  about  the  fliip,  and  we
afhore,  both  upon  the  iflands  and  the  main.  In  one  of  our
vifits  to  the  continent,  an  old  man  fhewed  us  the  inflrument
they  ufe  in  Raining  their  bodies,  which  exactly  refembled
thofe  that  were  employed  for  the  fame  purpofe  at  Otaheite.
We  faw  alfo  the  man  who  was  wounded  in  attempting  to
Real  our  buoy :  the  ball  had  palled  through  the  flefhy  part  of
his  arm,  and  grazed  his  bread ;  but  the  wound,  under  the
care  of  Nature,  the  befl  furgeon,  and  a  fimple  diet,  the  befl
nurfe,  was  in  a  good  Rate,  and  feemed  to  give  the  patient
neither  pain  nor  apprehenfion.  We  faw  alfo  the  brother  of
our  old  Chief,  who  had  been  wounded  with  fmall  Riot  in
our  Ikirmifli:  they  had  Rruck  his  thigh  obliquely,  and
though  feveral  of  them  were  Rill  in  the  flefh,  the  wound
feemed  to*  be  attended  with  neither  danger  nor  pain.  We
found  among  their  plantations  the  morns  papyrtfera ,  of  which
thefe  people,  as  well  as  thofe  of  Otaheite,  make  cloth ;  but
here  the  plant  feems  to  be  rare,  and  we  faw  no  pieces  of  the
cloth  large  enough  for  any  ufe  but  to  wear  by  way  of  orna¬
ment  in  their  ears.

Having  one  day  landed  in  a  very  diRant  part  of  the  bay,
the  people  immediately  fled,  except  one  old  man,  who  ac~
companied  us  wherever  we  went,  and  feemed  much  pleafed
with  the  little  prefents  we  made  him.  We  came  at  lafl  to  a
little  fort,  built  upon  a  fmall  rock,  which  at  high  water  was
furrounded  by  the  fea,  and  acceflible  only  by  a  ladder:  we
perceived  that  he  eyed  us  with  a  kind  of  refllefs  folicitude  as
we  approached  it,  and  upon  our  exprefling  a  defire  to  enter
it,  he  told  us  that  his  wife  was  there:  he  faw  that  our  curi-
ofity  was  not  diminifhed  by  this  intelligence,  and  after  fome
hefitation,.  he  faid,  if  we  would  promife  to  offer  no  indecency
he  would  accompany  us :  our  promife  was  readily  given*
ii  and


«


1769.

November.

—  t

Thurfday  30.


3G3  LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

Koveniber.  alld  he  mullcdiat<dy  led  the  way.  The  ladder  confided  of
1  £pS  faflened  to  a  P°le>  but  we  found  the  afcent  both  diffi¬
cult  and  dangerous.  When  we  entered  we  found  three
women,  who,  the  moment  they  faw  us,  burft  into  tears  of
terror  and  furprize:  fome  kind  words  and  a  few  prefents
foon  removed  their  apprehenlions,  and  put  them  into  good
humour.  We  examined  the  houfe  of  our  old  friend,  and  by
his  intereft  two  others,  which  were  all  that  the  fortification
contained,  and  having  diftributed  a  few  more  prefents,  we
parted  with  mutual  fausfaction.

c?  At  f°Ur  °’dock  in  the  morning  of  the  5th  of  December,  we
weighed,  with  a  light  breeze,  but  it  being  variable  with  fre¬
quent  calms,  we  made  little  way.  We  kept  turning  out  of
the  bay  till  the  afternoon,  and  about  ten  o’clock  we  were
fuddenly  becalmed,  fo  that  the  ffiip  would  neither  wear  nor
flay,  and  the  tide  or  current  fetting  ftrong,  ffie  drove
towards  land  fo  fail,  that  before  any  meafures  could  be
taken  for  her  fecurity  flic  was  within  a  cable’s  length  of  the
breakers:  we  had  thirteen  fathom  water,  but  the  ground
was  fo  foul  that  we  did  not  dare  to  drop  our  anchor ;  the
pinnace  therefore  was  immediately  hoifled  out  to  take  the
ffiip  in  tow,  and  the  men,  fenfible  of  their  danger,  exerting
themfelves  to  the  utmofi,  and  a  faint  breeze  fpringing  up  ofF
the  land,  we  perceived  with  unfpeakable  joy  that  ffie  made
head  way,  after  having  been  fo  near  the  ffiore  that  Tupia,
who  was  not  fenfible  of  our  hair’s  breadth  efcape,  was  at
thia  very  time  converfing  with  the  people  upon  the  beach,
whole  voices  were  diftinftly  heard,  notwithftanding  the  roar
of  the  breakers.  We  now  thought  all  danger  was  over,  but
about  an  hour  afterwards,  juft  as  the  man  in  the  chains  had
cried  “  feventeen  fathom,”  the  ffiip  ftruck.  The  ffiock  threw
us  all  into  the  utmoft  confternation ;  Mr.  Banks,  who  had  un-
drclled  himfelf  and  was  ftepping  into  bed,  ran  haftily  up  to

®  .  the


HOUND  THE  WORLD.

the  deck,  and  the  man  in  the  chains  called  out  “  five  fa¬
thom  by  this  time,  the  rock  on  which  we  had  ftruck  being
to  windward,  the  Ihip  went  off  without  having  received  the
leaf!  damage,  and  the  water  very  foon  deepened  to  twenty
fathom.

Thij  lock  lies  half  a  mile  W.  N.  W.  of  the  northermoft  or
outermoft  ifland  on  the  fouth  eaft  fide  of  the  bay.  We  had
light  airs  from  the  land,  with  calms,  till  nine  o’clock  the
next  morning,  when  we  got  out  of  the  bay,  and  a  breeze
Springing  up  at  N.  N.  W.  we  flood  out  to  fea.

This  bay,  as  I  have  before  obferved,  lies  on  the  weft  fide
of  Cape  Bret,  and  I  named  it  the  Bay  or  Islands,  from  the
gieat  number  of  iflands  which  line  its  fhores,  and  form
ieveral  harbours  equally  fafe  and  commodious,  where  there
is  room  and  depth  for  any  number  of  fhipping.  That  in
which  we  lay  is  on  the  fouth  weft  fide  of  the  fouth  wefter-
moft  ifland,  called  Matuaro,  on  the  fouth  eaft  fide  of  the
bay.  I  have  made  no  accurate  furvey  of  this  bay,  being  dif-
couraged  by  the  time  it  would  coft  me ;  I  thought  alfo  that  it
was  fuihcient  to  be  able  to  affirm  that  it  afforded  us  good  an¬
chorage,  and  refrelhment  of  every  kind.  It  was  not  the
feafon  for  roots,  but  we  had  plenty  of  fifh,  moft  of  which,
however,  we  purchafed  of  the  natives,  for  we  could  catch
very  little  ourfelves  either  with  net  or  line.  When  we
fhewed  the  natives  our  feine,  which  is  fuch  as  the  King’s
flups  are  generally  furnifned  with,  they  laughed  at  it,  and
in  triumph  produced  their  own,  which  was  indeed  of  an
enormous  fize,  and  made  of  a  kind  of  grafs,  which  is  very
ftrong:  it  was  five  fathom  deep,  and  by  the  room  it  took  up,
it  coulcj^  not  be  lefs  than  three  or  four  hundred  fathom  long.
Fiihing  Teems  indeed  to  be  the  chief  bufinefs  of  life  in  this
patt  ot  the  country;  we  faw  about  all  their  towns  a  great

VoL’  lr’  3  B  number


369

1769.

December.

' - - —

Tuefday  5.


Wednef.  6,


37°


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


1769.

December.

' . .  \t

Wedaef.  6.


number  of  nets,  laid  in  heaps  like  hay-cocks,  and  covered
with  a  thatch  to  keep  them  from  the  weather,  and  we  fcarcely
entered  a  houfe  where  fome  of  the  people  were  not  employed
in  making  them.  The  fifh  we  procured  here  were  fharks*
fling-rays,  fea-bream,  mullet,  mackrel,  and  fome  others.

The  inhabitants  in  this  bay  are  far  more  numerous  than  in
any  other  part  of  the  country  that  we  had  before  vifited ;  it
did  not  appear  to  us  that  they  were  united  under  one  head,,
and  though  their  towns  were  fortified,  they  feemed  to  live
together  in  perfeft  amity.

It  is  high  water  in  this  bay  at  the  full  and  change  of  the
moon,  about  eight  o’clock,  and  the  tide  then  rifes  from
fix  to  eight  feet  perpendicularly.  It  appears,  from  fuch  ob~
fervations  as  I  was  able  to  make  of  the  tides  upon  the  fea-
coafi,  that  the  flood  comes  from  the  fouthward ;  and  I  have
reafon  to  think  that  there  is  a  current  which  comes  from  the
weftward,  and  fets  along  the  fhore  to  the  S.  E.  or  S.  S.  E.  as
the  land  happens  to  lie.


/


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


CHAP.  V.

Range  from  the  Bay  of  Ifands  round  North  Cape  to  £$ueen
Charlottes  Sound  \  and  a  Defcription  of  that  Part  of

the  Coajl ,

ON  Thurfday  the  7th  of  December,  at  noon,  Cape  Bret  _ *769«

'  .  ,  December.

bore  S.  S.  E.  f  E.  diftant  ten  miles,  and  our  latitude,  by  < - *

obfervation,  was  340  59'  S.  5  foon  after  we  made  feveral  ob-  Thurfda?7*
fervations  of  the  fun  and  moon,  the  refult  of  which  made
our  longitude  185°  36' W.  The  wind  being  againft  us,  we
had  made  but  little  way.  In  the  afternoon,  we  flood  in
fliore,  and  fetched  clofe  under  the  Cavalles,  from  which
iilands  the  main  trends  W.  by  N. :  feveral  canoes  put  off  and
followed  us,  but  a  light  breeze  fpringing  up,  I  did  not  chufe
to  wait  for  them.  I  kept  Handing  to  the  W.  N.  W.  and  N.  W.
till  the  next  morning  ten  o’clock,  when  I  tacked  and  flood  Friday  s.
in  for  the  fhore,  from  which  we  were  about  five  leagues
diftant.  At  noon,  the  weftermoft  land  in  fight  bore  W.  by  S.
and  was  about  four  leagues  diftant.  In  the  afternoon,  we
had  a  gentle  breeze  to  the  weft,  which  in  the  evening  came
to  the  fouth,  and  continuing  fo  all  night,  by  day-light  Saturday  9.
brought  us  pretty  well  in  with  the  land,  feven  leagues  to  the
weft  ward  of  the  Cavalles,  where  we  found  a  deep  bay  run¬
ning  in  S.W.byW.  and  W.S.W.  the  bottom  of  which  wc
could  but  juft  fee,  and  there  the  land  appeared  to  be  low  and
level.  To  this  bay,  which  I  called  Doubtless  Bay,  the  en¬
trance  is  formed  by  two  points,  which  lie  W.  N.  W.  and
E.  S.  E.  and  are  five  miles  diftant  from  each  other.  The

3  B  2  wind


372


LIEUTENANT  COOK's  VOYAGE


1769.
December.
I - - -

Saturday  9.


wind  not  permitting  us  to  look  in  here,  we  fleered  for  the
weftermoft  land  in  fight,  which  bore  from  us  W.  N.  W.  about
three  leagues,  but  before  we  got  the  length  of  it  it  fell
calm.


While  we  lay  becalmed,  feveral  canoes  came  off  to  us,  but
the  people  having  heard  of  our  guns,  it  was  not  without
great  difficulty  that  they  were  perfuaded  to  come  under  our
hern:  after  having  bought  fome  of  their  cloaths,  as  well  as
their  fifh,  we  began  to  make  enquiries  concerning  their
country,  and  learnt,:  by  the  help  of  Tupia,  that,  at  the  dis¬
tance  of  three  days  rowing  in  their  canoes,  at  a  place  called
Moore-whennua,  the  land  would  take  a  ffiort  turn  to  the
Southward,  and  from  thence  extend  no  more  to  the  weh.
This  place  we  concluded  to  be  the  land  discovered  by  Taf-
man,  which  he  called  Cape  Maria  van  Diemen,  and  find¬
ing  thefe  people  fo  intelligent,  we  inquired  farther,  if  they
knew  of  any  country  befides  their  own :  they  anfwered,  that
they  never  had  vifited  any  other,  but  that  their  anceftors  had
told  them,  that  to  the  N.W.  by  N.  or  N.  N.  W.  there  was  a
country  of  great  extent,  called  Ulimaroa,  to  which  Some
people  had  failed  in  a  very  large  canoe ;  that  only  part  of
them  returned,  and  reported,  that  after  a  pafiage  of  a  month
they  had  Seen  a  country  where  the  people  eat  hogs.  Tupia
then  enquired  whether  thefe  adventurers  brought  any  hogs
with  them  when  they  returned-,  they  Said  No:  then,  replied
Tupia,  your  flory  is  certainly  falfe,  for  it  cannot  be  believed
that  men  who  came  back  from  an  expedition  without  ho^s,
had  ever  vifited  a  country  where  hogs  were  to  be  procured.
It  is  however  remarkable,  notwithstanding  the  fhrewdnefs
of  Tupia  s  objection,  that  when  they  mentioned  hogs  it  was
not  by  defer! ption  but  by  name,  calling  them  Booak,  the
name  which  is  given  them  in  the  South-Sea  iflands;  but  if

the


ROUJSfD  THE  WORLD.


373


the  animal  had  been  wholly  unknown  to  them,  and  they  had
had  no  communication  with  people  to  whom  it  was  known,
they  could  not  poftibly  have  been  acquainted  with  the  name.


1769.

December.


Saturday.  9.


About  ten  o’clock  at  night,  a  breeze  fprung  up  at  W.  N.  W.
with  which  we  Hood  off  north ;  and  at  noon  the  next  day,  the  Sunday  xc*
Cavalles  bore  S.  E.  by  E.  diflant  eight  leagues  ;  the  entrance
of  Doubtlefs  Bay  S.  by  W.  diflant  three  leagues ;  and  the
north  weft  extremity  of  the  land  in  fight,  which  we  judged
to  be  the  main,  bore  N.  W.  by  W. :  our  latitude  by  obferva-
tion  was  340  44  S.  In  the  evening,  we  found  the  variation
to  be  120  4b  E.  by  the  azimuth,  and  120  40'  by  the  ampli¬
tude.


Early  in  the  morning,  we  flood  in  with  the  land,  feven'  Monday  u
leagues  to  the  weftward  of  Doubtlefs  Bay,  the  bottom  of
which  is  not  far  diflant  from  the  bottom  of  another  large
bay,  which  the  fhore  forms  at  this  place,  being  feparated
only  by  a  low  neck  of  land,  which  juts  out  into  a  peninfula*
that  I  have  called  Knucklt  Point.  About  the  middle  of  this
bay,  which  we  called  Sandy  Bay,  is  a  high  mountain,  Hand¬
ing  upon  a  diflant  fhore,  to  which  I  gave  the  name  of  Mount
Camel.  The  latitude  here  is  340  5b  S.  and  longitude-
1860  50'.  We  had  twenty-four  and  twenty-five  fathom  wa¬
ter,  with  a  good  bottom  ;  but  there  feems  to  be  nothing  in
this  bay  that  can  induce  a  fhip  to  put  into  it;  for  the  land
about  it  is  utterly  barren  and  defolate,  and,  except  Mount
Camel,  the  fituation  is  low :  the  foil  appears  to  be  nothing,
but  white  fand,  thrown  up  in  low  irregular  hills  and  narrow
ridges,  lying  parallel  with  the  fhore.  But  barren  and  defo¬
late  as  this  place  is,  it  is  not  without  inhabitants  :  we  faw
one  village  on  the  weft  fide  of  Mount  Camel,  and  another
on  the  eaft  fide ;  we  faw  alfo  five  canoes  full  of  people,  who-
pulled  after  the  fhip,  but  could  not  come  up  with  us.  At


nine:


574


1769.

December.


Monday  11.


Tuefday  12.


Wednef.  13.


Thurfday  14.


LIEUTENANT  COOK'S  VOYAGE

nine  o’clock,  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the  northward  ;  and  at
noon,  the  Cavalles  bore  S.  E.  by  E.  diflant  thirteen  leagues ;
the  north  extremity  of  the  land  in  fight,  making  like  an
ifland,  bore  N.  W.  ~  N.  diflant  nine  leagues  ;  and  Mount  Ca¬
mel  bore  S.W.  by  S.  diftance  fix  leagues.

The  wind  being  contrary,  we  kept  plying  northward  till
five  o’clock  in  the  evening  of  the  isth,  when,  having  made
very  little  way,  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the  N.  E.  being  two
leagues  to  the  northward  of  Mount  Camel,  and  about  a  mile
and  a  half  from  the  fhore,  in  which  fituation  we  had  two
and  twenty  fathom  water.

At  ten,  it  began  to  blow  and  rain,  which  brought  us  under
double  reefed  topfails ;  at  twelve,  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the
weflward  till  feven  the  next  morning,  when  we  tacked  and
flood  again  to  the  N.  E.  being  about  a  mile  to  windward  of
the  place  where  we  tacked  lafl  night.  Soon  after  it  blew
very  hard  at  N.  N.W.  with  heavy  fqualls  and  much  rain,
which  brought  us  under  our  courfes,  and  fplit  the  maintop-
fail  ;  fo  that  we  were  obliged  to  unbend  it  and  bend  ano¬
ther  :  at  ten,  it  became  more  moderate,  and  we  fet  the  top-
fails,  double  reefed  :  at  noon,  having  ilrong  gales  and  heavy
weather,  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the  weflward,  and  had  no
land  in  fight  for  the  firfl  time  fince  we  had  been  upon  this
coafl.

We  had  now  flrong  gales  at  W.  and  W.  S.W. ;  and  at  half
an  hour  pafl  three  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the  northward.
Soon  after,  a  fmall  ifland  lying  off  Knuckle  Point  bore  S.^W.
diflant  half  a  league.  In  the  evening,  having  fplit  the  fore
and  mizen  topfails,  we  brought  the  fhip  under  her  courfes  ;
and  at  midnight,  we  wore,  and  flood  to  the  fouthward  till
five  in  the  morning;  when  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the  N.W.
and  faw  land  bearing  fouth,  at  the  diflance  of  eight  or  nine

2  leagues ;


575


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


leagues ;  by  this  we  difcovered  that  we  had  fallen  much  to
the  leeward  fince  yefterday  morning.  At  noon,  our  latitude
by  obfervation  was  340  6'  S.j  and  the  fame  land  which  we
had  feen  before  to  the  N.  W.  now  bore  S.  W.  and  appeared  to
be  the  northern  extremity  of  the  country.  We  had  a  large
fwell  rolling  in  from  the  weft  ward,  and  therefore  concluded


1769.

December,


Thurfday  14*


that  we  were  not  covered  by  any  land  in  that  quarter.  At
eight  in  the  evening,  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the  weftward,
with  as  much  fail  as  we  could  bear  ;  and  at  noon  the  next  Friday  -is>
day,  we  were  in  latitude  34*  10',  longitude  185°  45'  W.  and
by  eftimation  about  feventeen  leagues  from  the  land,  not-
withftanding  our  utmoft  endeavours  to  keep  in  with  it.

On  the  1 6th,  at  fix  in  the  morning,  we  faw  land  from  the  Saturday  ®6u
maft-head,  bearing  S,  S.W. ;  and  at  noon  it  bore  S.  by  W.
diftant  fourteen  leagues  :  while  we  were  {landing  in  for  the
fhore  we  founded  feveral  times,  but  had  no  ground  with
ninety  fathom.  At  eight,  we  tacked  in  a  hundred  and  eight
fathom,  at  about  three  or  four  miles  from  the  fhore,  which
was  the  fame  point  of  land  that  we  had  to  the  N.W.  before
we  were  blown  off.  At  noon  it  bore  S.  W.  diftant  about  three


miles  ;  Mount  Camel  bore  S.  by  E.  diftant  about  eleven
ieagues,  and  the  weftermoft  land  in  fight  bore  S.  75  W.;  the
latitude  by  obfervation  was  34°  20'  S.  At  four  o’clock,  we
tacked  and  flood  in  fhore,  in  doing  which,  we  met  with  a
ftrong  rippling,  and  the  fhip  fell  fail  to  leewardr  which  we
imputed  to  a  current  fetting  eaft.  At  eight,  we  tacked  and
flood  off  till  eight  the  next  morning ;  when  we  tacked  and  Sunday  17.
flood  in,  being  about  ten  leagues  from  the  land:  at  noon,  the
point  of  land  which  we  were  near  the  day  before,  bore  S.S.W.
diftant  five  leagues.  The  wind  ftill  continued  at  weft  j  and
at  feven  o’clock,  we  tacked  in  thirty-five  fathom,  when  the
point  of  land  which  has  been  mentioned  before,  bore  N.W.
by  N.  diftant  four  or  five  miles ;  fo  that  we  had  not  gained

one


37^:  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

’  *  >  /  .

December.  °11C  illch  t0  windward  the  Iad  twenty-four  hours,  which
' — confirmed  our  opinion  that  there  was  a  current  to  the  nft

Sunday  17.  ,  .  ^

ward.  The  point  of  land  I  called  North  Gape,  it  being  the
northern  extremity  of  this  country.  It  lies  in  latitude
340  22  S.  longitude  i86°  55  W.  and  thirty-one  leagues  dis¬
tant  from  Cape  Bret,  in  the  direction  of  N.  63  W,  It  forms
the  north  point  of  Sandy  Bay,  and  is  a  peninfula  jutting  out
N.  E.  about  two  miles,  and  terminating  in  a  bluff  head  that
_  is  flat  at  the  top.  The  ifthmus  which  joins  this  head  to  the
main  land  is  very  low,  and  for  that  reafon  the  land  of  the
Cape,  from  fcveral  lituations,  has  the  appearance  of  an
ifland..  It  is  dill  more  remarkable  when  it  is  feen  from  the
fouthward,  by  the  appearance  of  a  high  round  illand  at  the
S.E.  point  of  the  Cape  ;  but  this  allb  is  a  deception  ;  for
what  appears  to  be  an  illand  is  a  round  hill,  joined  to  the
Cape  by  a  low  narrow  neck  of  land.  Upon  the  Cape  we  faw
a  Hippah  or  village,  and  a  few  inhabitants ;  and  on  the  fouth
ealt  fide  of  it  there  appears  to  be  anchorage,  and  good  fhel-
ter  from  the  fouth  well  and  north  weft  winds.

Thurfciay  2..  We  continued  to  Hand  off  and  on,  makings.  W.  till  noon
on  the  2 1 11,  when  North  Cape  bore  S.  39  E.  dillant  thirty-eight
Saturday  23.  leagues.  Our  fituation  varied  only  a  few  leagues  till  the  2^d
when,  about  feven  o’clock  in  the  evening,  we  law  land  from
Sunday  24.  the  mall-head,  bearing  S.  4  E.  At  eleven  the  next  morning,  we
faw  it  again,  bearing  S.S.E.  at  the  diftance  of  eight  leagues  •
we  now  Hood  to  the  S.  W. ;  and  at  four  o’clock,  the  land  bore
S.  E.  by  S.  dillant  four  leagues,  and  proved  to  be  a  fmall
illand,  with  other  illands  or  rocks,  dill  fmaller,  lying  off  the
fouth  well  end  of  it,  and  another  lying  off  the  north  ead
end,  which  were  difeovered  by  Tafman  and  called  the  Three
Kings.  The  principal  idand  lies  in  latitude  340  12'  S.  longi¬
tude  187  48  W.  and  didant  fourteen  or  fifteen  leagues  from
North  Cape,  in  the  direction  of  W.  14  N.  At  midnight,  we

6  ,  -  tacked


oo  W eft  from  Gfeemvich


N  kw  Zealand


Sotted


*  MoLaara


ae  2  Bi-others


Cloudy  Bar


mm'tif


oo  Welt  from  Greenwich


1  vv\\\\\\\m\


m\\\\\\\\\\\\v


\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\A  I


k\\\\\\\m\\\i


\\\\\\\\v\\\\\\v  l


!  \N\\V^\\Vv\Vt\\\V  I


<VXV\C^\\\\\NI


i  \m\m\\v«\\


\\\w\w


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


377


tacked  and  flood  to  the  N.  E.  till  fix  the  next  morning,  which
was  Chriflmas  day,  when  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the  fouth-
ward.  At  noon,  the  Three  Kings  bore  E.  8  N.  diflant  five  or
fix  leagues.  The  variation  this  morning  by  the  azimuth
was  n°  25'  E.


■  1769.
December.


Monday  25.


On  the  26th,  we  flood  to  the  fouthward  clofe  upon  a  wind ;  Tuefday  26.
and  at  noon,  were  in  latitude  35 0  10"  S.  longitude  188 3  20'  W.
the  Three  Kings  bearing  N.  26  W.  diflant  twenty-two  leagues.

In  this  fituation  we  had  no  land  in  fight ;  and  yet,  by  obfer-
vation,  we  were  in  the  latitude  of  the  Bay  of  Iflands;  and  by
my  reckoning  but  twenty  leagues  to  the  weflward  of  North
Cape :  from  whence  it  appears,  that  the  northern  part  of  this
ifland  is  very  narrow ;  for  otherwife  we  mufl  have  feen  fome
part  of  the  well  fide  of  it.  We  flood  to  the  fouthward  till
twelve  at  night,  and  then  tacked  and  flood  to  the  north¬
ward.

At  four  o’clock  in  the  morning,  the  wind  frefliened,  and  wednef.  27.
at  nine,  blew  a  florm ;  fo  that  we  were  obliged  to  bring  the
Blip  to  under  her  mainfail.  Our  courfe  made  good  between
noon  this  day  and  yeflerday  was  S.S.  W.  4  W.  diflance  eleven
miles.  The  Three  Kings  bore  N.  27  E.  diflant  feventy-feven
miles.  The  gale  continued  all  this  day,  and  till  two  the
next  morning,  when  it  fell,  and  began  to  veer  to  the  fouth-  Thurfdayag,
ward  and  S.  W.  where  it  fixed  about  four,  when  we  made  fail
and  fleered  eafl  in  for  the  land,  under  the  fore-fail  and  main-
fail  ;  but  the  wind  then  rifing,  and  by  eight  o’clock  being
increafed  to  a  hurricane,  with  a  prodigious  fea,  we  were
obliged  to  take  in  the  main-fail ;  we  then  wore  the  fhip,  and
brought  her  to  with  her  head  to  the  north  weft.  At  noon
the  gale  was  fomewliat  abated,  but  we  had  Bill  heavy
fqualls.  Our  courfe  made  good  this  day,  was  north,  a  little
eafterly,  twenty-nine  miles;  latitude  by  account  34°  50'S.

Vol.  II.  3  C  longitude


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


373

*

1769.  longitude  1880  27'  W. ;  the  Three  Kings  bore  N.  41  E.  diflant

December.  rr

' - - *  fifty-two  miles.  At  feven  o’clock  in  the  evening,  the  wind

Thurfday  28.  bdng  at  s  w_  and  S.w.  by  W.  with  hard  fqualls,  we  wore

Friday  29.  and  lay  on  the  other  tack  ;  and  at  fix  the  next  morning  fpread
more  fail.  Our  courfe  and  diftance  fince  yefterday  was
E.  by  N.  twenty-nine  miles.  In  the  afternoon,  we  had  hard
fqualls  at  S.  W. ;  and  at  eight  in  the  evening,  wore  and  flood
Saturday  30.  to  the  N.  W.  till  five  the  next  morning  ;  and  then  wore  and
flood  to  the  S.  E.  At  fix,  we  faw  the  land  bearing  N.  E.  dis¬
tant  about  fix  leagues,  which  we  judged  to  be  Cape  Maria
Van  Diemen ,  and  which  correfponded  with  the  account  that
had  been  given  of  it  by  the  Indians.  At  midnight  we  wore
Sunday  21.  and  flood  to  the  S.  E.  And  on  the  next  day  at  noon,  Cape
Maria  Van  Diemen  bore  N.  E.  by  N.  diflant  about  five  leagues.
At  feven  in  the  evening,  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the  weflward,
with  a  moderate  breeze  at  S.W.  by  S.  and  S.W.  Mount  Ca¬
mel  then  bore  N.  83  E.  and  the  northermofl  land,  or  Cape
Maria  Van  Diemen,  N.  by  W. ;  we  were  now  diflant  from  the
nearefl  land  about  three  leagues,  where  we  had  fomething
more  than  forty  fathom  water;  and  it  mull  be  remarked,  that
Mount  Camel,  which  when  feen  on  the  other  fide  did  not  feem
to  be  more  than  one  mile  from  the  fea,  feemed  to  be  but  little
more  when  feen  from  this  fide ;  which  is  a  demonflration
that  the  land  here  cannot  be  more  than  two  or  three  miles
broad,  or  from  fea  to  fea.

1770.  At  fix  o’clock  in  the  morning  of  January  the  ill,  1770,
Monday^'.  be*ng  New-year’s  Day,  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the  eaflward*.

the  Three  Kings  bearing  N.  W.  by  N.  At  noon,  we  tacked
again,  and  flood  to  the  weflward,  being  in  latitude  340  37'  S.
the  1  hree  Kings  bearing  N.  W.  by  N.  at  the  diflance  of  ten
or  eleven  leagues;  and  Cape  Maria  Van  Diemen  N.  31  E.  dif-
tant  about  four  leagues  and  an  half:  in  this  fituation  we  had
fifty-four  fathom  water.

6


During


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


379

During  this  part  of  our  navigation  two  particulars  are  177°*
very  remarkable;  in  latitude  35 °  S.  and  in  the  midft  of  fum-  —
mer,  I  met  with  a  gale  of  wind,  which  for  its  ftrength  and  Monday  **
continuance  was  fuch  as  I  had  fcarcely  ever  been  in  before,
and  we  were  three  weeks  in  getting  ten  leagues  to  the  weft-
ward,  and  five  weeks  in  getting  fifty  leagues,  for  at  this
time  it  was  fo  long  fince  we  palled  Cape  Bret.  During  the
gale,  we  were  happily  at  a  confiderable  diftance  from  the
land,  otherwife  it  is  highly  probable  that  we  fhould  never
have  returned  to  relate  our  adventures.

At  five  o’clock  in  the  evening,  having  a  frefli  breeze  to
the  weftward,  we  tacked  and  flood  to  the  fouthward :  at  this
time  North  Cape  bore  E.  N.  and  juft  open  of  a  point  that
lies  three  leagues  W.  by  N.  from  it.

This  Cape,  as  I  have  obferved  before,  is  the  northermoft
extremity  of  this  country,  and  the  eaftermoft  point  of  a  pe-
ninfula,  which  runs  out  N.  W.  and  N.  W.  by  N.  feventeen  or
eighteen  leagues,  and  of  which  Cape  Maria  Van  Diemen  is  the
weftermoft  point.  Cape  Maria  lies  in  latitude  340  30'S,  lon¬
gitude  187°  1 8'  W. ;  and  from  this  point  the  land  trends
away  S.  E.  by  S.  and  S.  E.  beyond  Mount  Camel,  and  is
every  where  a  barren  fhore,  confiding  of  banks  of  white
fand.

On  the  ad,  at  noon,  we  were  in  latitude  350  17'  S.  and  Cape  Tuefday  2;
Maria  bore  north,  diftant  about  fixteen  leagues,  as  near  as
we  could  guefs ;  for  we  had  no  land  in  fight,  and  did  not
•dare  to  go  nearer,  as  a  frefh  gale  blew  right  on  fhore,  with
a  rolling  fea.  The  wind  continued  at  W.S.  W.  and  S.  W,
with  frequent  fqualls  ;  in  the  evening  we  fhortened  fail,  and
at  midnight  tacked,  and  made  a  trip  to  the  N.W.  till  two  in
the  morning,  when  we  wore  and  flood  to  the  fouthward.  At  wednef,  3;
break  of  day,  we  made  fail,  and  edged  away,  in  order  to  make

3C  2  lands


380

1770.

January.
' -

Wednef.  3.


Thujfday  4.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE

V

land ;  and  at  ten  o’clock,  we  faw  it,  bearing  N.W.  It  ap¬
peared  to  be  high,  and  at  noon  extended  from  N.  to  E.  N,  E.
diftant  by  eftimation  eight  or  ten  leagues.  Cape  Maria  then
bore  N.  20  30'  W.  diftant  thirty-three  leagues ;  our  latitude  by
obfervation  was  3 6°  2'S.  About  feven  o’clock  in  the  evening,
we  were  within  ftx  leagues  of  it ;  but  having  a  frefh  gale
upon  it,  with  a  rolling  fea,  we  hauled  our  wind  to  the  S.  E.
and  kept  on  that  courfe  clofe  upon  the  wind  all  night,  found¬
ing  feveral  times,  but  having  no  ground  with  one  hundred,
and  one  hundred  and  ten  fathom.

At  eight  o’clock  the  next  morning,  we  were  about  five
leagues  from  the  land,  and  off  a  place  which  lies  in  latitude
36°  2 s'  and  had  the  appearance  of  a  bay  or  inlet.  It  bore
eaft;  and  in  order  to  fee  more  of  it,  we  kept  on  our  courfe
till  eleven  o’clock,  when  we  were  not  more  than  three  leagues
from  it,  and  then  difcovered  that  it  was  neither  inlet  nor
bay,  but  a  tradf  of  low  land,  bounded  by  higher  lands  on
each  fide,  which  produced  the  deception.  At  this  time,  we
tacked  and  flood  to  the  N.W.  j  and  at  noon,  the  land  was  not
diftant  more  than  three  or  four  leagues.  We  were  now  in
latitude  36°  31"  S.  longitude  183°  50' W.  Cape  Maria  bore
N.  25  W.  diftant  forty-four  leagues  and  an  half;  fo  that  the
coaft  muft  be  almoft  ftrait  in  the  direction  of  S.  S.E.  ~  E.  and
N.N.  W.  4  W.  nearly.  In  about  latitude  350  45'  is  fome  high
land  adjoining  to  the  fea;  to  the  fouthward  of  which  th$
fhore  is  alfo  high,  and  has  the  moft  defolate  and  inhofpi-
table  appearance  that  can  be  imagined.  Nothing  is  to  be
feen  but  hills  of  fand,  on  which  there  is  fcarcely  a  blade  of
verdure ;  and  a  vaft  fea,  impelled  by  the  wefterly  winds,
breaking  upon  it  in  a  dreadful  furf,  renders  it  not  only  for¬
lorn,  but  frightful ;  complicating  the  idea  of  danger  with
defolation,  and  imprefting  the  mind  at  once  with  a  fenfe  of

mifery


round  the  WORLD.


38-'


mifery  and  death.  From  this  place  I  fleered  to  the  north-
ward,  refolvinsr  never  more  to  come  within  the  fame  diftance  * - '

VVtLA  ’  0  Thurfday^.

of  the  coaft,  except  the  wind  fhould  be  very  favourable  in¬
deed.  I  flood  under  a  frefh  fail  all  the  day,  hoping  to  get  an
offing  by  the  next  noon,  and  we  made  good  a  courfe  of  a
hundred  and  two  miles  N.  38  W.  Our  latitude  by  obferva-
tion  was  350  io'S. ;  and  Cape  Maria  bore  N.  10  E.  diftance
forty-one  miles.  In  the  night,  the  wind  fhifted  from  S.  W.
by  S.  to  S.  and  blew  frefh.  Our  courfe  to  the  noon  of  the  Friday  c.
5th  was  N.  75  W.  diftance  eight  miles.

At  day-break  on  the  6th,  we  faw  the  land  which  we  took  Saturday  6.
to  be  Cape  Maria,  bearing  N.  N.  E.  diftant  eight  or  nine
leagues:  and  on  the  7th,  in  the  afternoon,  the  land  bore  Sunday 7.
eaft :  and  fome  time  after,  we  difcovered  a  turtle  upon  the
water ;  but  being  awake,  it  dived  inftantly,  fo  that  we  could
not  take  it.  At  noon,  the  high  land,  which  has  juft  been
mentioned,  extended  from  N.  to  E.  at  the  diftance  of  five  or
fix  leagues  ;  and  in  two  places,  a  fiat  gave  it  the  appearance
of  a  bay  or  inlet.  The  courfe  that  we  made  good  the  laft
four  and  twenty  hours  was  S.  33  E.  fifty-three  miles  ;  Cape
Maria  bearing  N.  25  W.  diftant  thirty  leagues.

We  failed  within  fight  of  land  all  this  day,  with  gentle
gales  between  the  N.  E.  and  N.  W. ;  and  by  the  next  noon  Monday  &
had  failed  fixty-nine  miles,  in  the  direction  of  S.  37  E. ;  our
latitude  by  obfervation  was  36°  39  S.  The  land  which  on
the  4th  we  had  taken  for  a  bay,  now  bore  N.  E.  by  N.  diftant
five  leagues  and  an  half;  and  Cape  Maria  N.  29  W.  forty-
feven  leagues.

On  the  9th,  we  continued  a  fouth  eaft  courfe  till  eight  Tuefuay 9,
o’clock  in  the  evening,  having  run  feven  leagues  fince  noon,
with  the  wind  at  N.  N.  E.  and  N.  and  being  within  three  or
four  leagues  of  the  land,  which  appeared  to  be  low  and

fancly,

8


/


382


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


January  fan(ty.  I  then  fleered  S.  E.  by  S.  in  a  direction  parallel  with

V. — - -  the  coafl,  having  from  forty-eight  to  thirty-four  fathom  wa-

Wednef.  10.  ter,  with  a  black  fandy  bottom.  At  day-break  the  next  morn¬
ing,  we  found  ourfelves  between  two  and  three  leagues  from
the  land,  which  began  to  have  a  better  appearance,  rifing  in
gentle  flopes,  and  being  covered  with  trees  and  herbage.
We  faw  a  fmoke  and  a  few  houfes,  but  it  appeared  to  be  but
thinly  inhabited.  At  feven  o’clock,  we  fleered  S.  by  E.  and
afterwards  S.  by  W.  the  land  lying  in  that  direction.  At
nine,  we  were  abreafl  of  a  point  which  rifes  with  an  eafy
afcent  from  the  fea  to  a  confiderable  height  :  this  point,
which  lies  in  latitude  370  43',  I  named  Woody  Head.  About
eleven  miles  from  this  Head,  in  the  direction  of  S.W.  4  W.
lies  a  very  fmall  ifland,  upon  which  we  faw  a  great  number
of  garments,  and  which  we  therefore  called  Gannet  Island.
At  noon,  a  high  craggy  point  bore  E.  N.  E.  diflant  about  a
league  and  a  half,  to  which  I  gave  the  name  of  Albetross
Point:  it  lies  in  latitude  .38°  4'  S.  longitude  184°  42' W.;
and  is  diflant  feven  leagues  in  the  direction  of  S.  17  W.  from
Woody  Head.  On  the  north  fide  of  this  point  the  fhore  forms
a  bay,  in  which  there  appears  to  be  anchorage  and  fhelter
for  fhipping.  Our  courfe  and  diflance  for  the  lafl  twenty-
four  hours  was  S.  37  E.  fixty-nine  miles  5  and  at  noon  this
day  Cape  Maria  bore  N.  30  W.  diflant  eighty-two  leagues.
Between  twelve  and  one,  the  wind  fhifted  at  once  from
N.  N. E.  to  S.  S.W.  with  which  wTe  flood  to  the  weftward  till
four  o’clock  in  the  afternoon;  and  then  tacked,  and  flood
again  in  fhore  till  feven ;  when  we  tacked  again  and  flood
to  the  weftward,  having  but  little  wind.  At  this  time,  Albe-
trofs  Point  bore  N.  E.  diflant  near  two  leagues,  and  the
fouthermofl  land  in  fight  bore  S.  S.  W.  4  W.  being  a  very  high
mountain,  and  in  appearance  greatly  refembling  the  Pike  of
Teneriffe.  In  this  fituation  we  had  thirty  fathom  water,  and

having


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


3%

having  but  little  wind  all  night,  we  tacked  about  four  in  the  17  7°*

morning,  and  flood  in  for  the  fhore.  Soon  after,  it  fell  calm ;  ,  Januair-f
and  being  in  forty-two  fathom  water,  the  people  caught  a  ThurfdaylIV
few  fea-bream.  At  eleven,  a  light  breeze  fprung  up  from
the  weft,  and  we  made  fail  to  the  fouthward.  We  continued
to  fleer  S.  by  W.  and  S.  S.  W.  along  the  fhore,  at  the  diftance
of  about  four  leagues  with  gentle  breezes  from  between
N.  W.  and  N.  N.  E.  At  feven  in  the  evening,  we  faw  the  top
of  the  Peak  to  the  fouthward,  above  the  clouds  which  con¬
cealed  it  below.  And  at  this  time,  the  fouthermoft  land  in
fight  bore  S.  by  W.  the  variation,  by  feveral  azimuths  which
were  taken  both  in  the  morning  and  the  evening,  appeared
to  be  140  1  s'  eafterly.

At  noon  on  the  12th,  we  were  diflant  about  three  leagues  Friday  12^
from  the  fhore  which  lies  under  the  Peak,  but  the  Peak  it-
felf  was  wholly  concealed  by  clouds:  we  judged  it  to  bear
about  S.  S.  E. ;  and  forne  very  remarkable  peaked  iflands,
which  lay  under  the  fhore,  bore  E.  S.  E.  diflant  three  or  four
leagues.  At  feven  in  the  evening  we  founded,  and  had
forty-two  fathom,  being  diflant  from  the  fhore  between  two-
and  three  leagues :  we  judged  the  Peak  to  bear  eaft ;  and
after  it  was  dark,  we  faw  fires  upon  the  fhore.

At  five  o’clock  in  the  morning  we  faw,  for  a  few  minutes,  Saturday  1  %
the  fummit  of  the  Peak,  towering  above  the  clouds,  and
covered  with  fnow.  It  now  bore  N.  E. ;  it  lies-  in  latitude
390  16'  S.  longitude  185°  15' W.  ;  and  I  named  it  Mount
Egmont,  in  honour  of  the  Earl.  It  feems  to  have  a  large
bafe,  and  to  rife  with  a  gradual  afcent ;  it  lies  near  the  fea,
and  is  furrounded  by  a  flat  country,  of  a  pleafant  appear¬
ance,  being  clothed  with  verdure  and  wood,  which  renders
it  the  more  confpicuous,  and  the  fhore  under  it  forms  a
large  cape,  which  I  have  named  Cape  Egmont.  It  lies

S.  S.W,.


3^4


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

<770-  S.SAV. i.\V.  twenty-feven  leagues  diftant  from  Albetrofs Point.

- - - — and  on  the  north  fide  of  it  are  two  fmall  iflands,  which  lie  near

"  Ja>  13‘  a  remarkable  point  on  the  main,  that  rifes  to  a  confiderable
height  in  the  form  of  a  fugar-loaf.  To  the  fouthward  of  the
Cape,  the  land  trends  away  S.E.  by  E.  and  S.S.  E.  and  feems
to  be  every  where  a  bold  fhore.  At  noon.  Cape  Egmont  bore
about  N.E. ;  and  in  this  direction,  at  about  four  leagues  from
the  fhore,  we  had  forty  fathom  of  water.  The  wind  during
the  reft  of  the  day  was  from  W.  to  N.  W.  by  W.  and  we  con¬
tinued  to  fleer  along  the  fhore  S.  S.  E.  and  S.  E.  by  E.  keep¬
ing  at  the  diftance  of  between  two  and  three  leagues.  At
half  an  hour  after  feven,  we  had  another  tranfient  view  of
Mount  Edgcombe,  which  bore  N.  17  W.  diftant  about  ten
leagues.

Sunday  i4.  At  five  the  next  morning,  we  fleered  S.  E.  by  S.  the  coaft
inclining  more  foutherly ;  and  in  about  half  an  hour,  we
faw  land  bearing  S.  W.  by  S.  for  which  we  hauled  up.  At
noon  the  north  well  extremity  of  the  land  in  fight  bore
S.  63  W.  and  fome  high  land,  which  had  the  appearance  of
an  ifland  lying  under  the  main,  bore  S.S.  E.  diftant  five
leagues.  We  were  now  in  a  bay,  the  bottom  of  which  bear¬
ing  fouth  we  could  not  fee,  though  it  was  clear  in  that  quar¬
ter.  Our  latitude  by  obfervation  was  49°  27'  S.  longitude
184°  39'  W.  At  eight  in  the  evening,  we  were  within  two
leagues  of  the  land  which  we  had  difcovered  in  the  morn¬
ing,  having  run  ten  leagues  fincc  noon  :  the  land  which  then
bore  S.  63  W.  now  bore  N.  39  W.  at  the  diftance  of  feven  or
eight  leagues,  and  had  the  appearance  of  an  ifland.  Between
this  land  and  Cape  Egmont  lies  the  bay,  the  weft  fide  of
which  was  our  fituation  at  this  time,  and  the  land  here  is  of
a  confiderable  height,  and  diverfified  by  hill  and  valley.


CHAP.


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


38  5


CHAP.  VI.

TrcmfaElions  in  ^ueen  Charlotte  s  Sound :  Pajfage  through
the  Streight  which  divides  the  two  IJlands>  and  back  to
Cape  Turn  again  :  Horrid  Cufiom  of  the  Inhabit  ants  :
Remarkable  Melody  of  Birds  :  A  Viftt  to  a  Hep  pah ,  and
many  other  Particulars .

THE  fhore  at  this  place  feemed  to  form  feveral  bays,  into  I770>
one  of  which  I  propofed  to  carry  the  fhip,  which  was  t
become  very  foul,  in  order  to  careen  her,  and  at  the  fame  Sunday  l4.
time  repair  fome  defers,  and  recruit  our  wood  and  water.

With  this  view,  I  kept  plying  on  and  off  all  night,  having
from  eighty  to  fixty-three  fathom.  At  day- break  the  next
morning,  I  hood  for  an  inlet  which  runs  in  S.  W. ;  and  at  Monday  1$,
eight  1  got  within  the  entrance,  which  may  be  known  by  a
reef  of  rocks,  ftretching  from  the  north  weft  point,  and  fome
rocky  iflands  which  lie  off  the  fouth  eaft  point.  At  nine
o’clock,  there  being  little  wind,  and  what  there  was  being
variable,  we  were  carried  by  the  tide  or  current  within  two
cables’  length  of  the  north  weft  fhore,  where  we  had  fifty-four
fathom  water,  but  by  the  help  of  our  boats  we  got  clear,
juft  at  this  time  we  faw  a  fea-lion  rife  twice  near  the  fliore^
the  head  of  which  exactly  refembled  that  of  the  male  which
has  been  defcribed  in  the  Account  of  Lord  Anfon’s  Voyage.

We  alfo  faw  fome  of  the  natives  in  a  canoe  crofs  the  bay,  and
a  village  fituated  upon  the  point  of  an  ifland  which  lies  feven
or  eight  miles  within  the  entrance.  At-  noon,  we  were  the
length  of  this  ifland,  but  there  being  little  wind,  the  boats
Vol.  II.  3  D  were


,  *\

o86  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  voyage

January.  were  ordcred  a]lead  to  tow.  About  one  o’clock,  wc  hauled

ijZ&Txj!  Cl°fe  r°Und  the  fouth  weft  end  of  the  ifland  i  and  the  inha¬
bitants  of  the  village  which  was  built  upon  it,  were  imme¬
diately  up  in  arms.  About  two,  we  anchored  in  a  very  fafe
and  convenient  cove,  on  the  north  well  fide  of  the  bay,  and
facing  the  fouth  weft  end  of  the  ifland,  in  eleven,  fathom
water,  with  foft  ground,  and  moored  with  the  ftream  anchor.

4  /  \  ,  •

We  were  about  four  long  cannon*  fhot  diftant  from  the
the  village  or  Fleppah,  from  which  four  canoes  were  imme¬
diately  difpatched,  as  we  imagined  to  reconnoitre,  and  if
they  fhould  find  themfelves  able,  to  take  us.  The  men
were  all  well  armed,  and  dreffed  nearly  as  they  are  re*
prefented  in  the  figure  published  by  Tafman ;  two  corners
of  the  cloth  which  they  wrapped  round  the  body  were  paired
over  the  fhoulders  from  behind,  and  being  brought  down  ta
the  upper  edge  of  it  before,  were  made  fall  to  it  juft  under
the  breaft ;  but  few,,  or  none,  had  feathers  in  their  hair.
They  rowed  round  the  fhip  feveral  times,  with  their  ufuaL
tokens  of  menace  and  defiance,  and  at  laft  began  the  aftault
by  throwing  fome  ftones :  Tupia  expoftulated  with  them,
but  apparently  to  very  little  purpofe ;  and  we  began  to  fear
that  they  would  oblige  us  to  fire  at  them,  when  a  very  old
man  in  one  of  the  boats  exprefted  a  defire  of  coming  on
board.  We  gladly  encouraged  him  in  his  defign,  a  rope  was
thrown  into  his  canoe,  and  fhe  was  immediately  alongfide
of  the  fhip  :  the  old  man  rofe  up,  and  prepared  to  come  up
the  fhip’s  fide,  upon  which  all  the  reft  expoftulated  with
great  vehemence  againft  the  attempt,  and  at  laft  laid  hold  of
him,  and  held  him  back :  he  adhered  however  to  his  purpofe
with  a  calm  but  fteady  perfeverance,  and  having  at  lengths
difengaged  himfelf,  he  came  on  board.  We  received  him
with  all  pofiible  expreffions  of  friendfhip  and  kindnefs,  and

after


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


387


'alter  fome  time  difmifted  him,  with  many  prefents  to  his  1770.
companions.  As  foon  as  he  was  returned  on  board  his  ca-  *
noe,  the  people  in  all  the  reft  began  to  dance,  but  whether  Monday  Is#
as  a  token  of  enmity  or  friendfhip  we  could  not  certainly
determine,  for  we  had  feen  them  dance  in  a  difpofition  both
for  peace  and  war.  In  a  fhort  time,  however,  they  retired
to  their  fort,  and  foon  after  I  went  on  fhore,  with  moft  of
the  gentlemen,  at  the  bottom  of  the  cove,  a-breaft  of  the
fiiip.  .

We  found  a  fine  ftream  of  excellent  water,  and  wood  in
the  greateft  plenty,  for  the  land  here  was  one  foreft,  of  vaft
extent.  As  we  brought  the  feine  with  us,  we  hauled  it  once
or  twice,  and  with  fuch  fuccefs  that  we  caught  near  three
hundred  weight  of  fifli  of  different  forts,  which  was  equally
diftributed  among  the  fhip’s  company.

At  day-break,  while  we  were  bufy  in  careening  the  fhip,  TWday  16.
three  canoes  came  off  to  us,  having  on  board  above  a  hun¬
dred  men,  befides  feveral  of  their  women,  which  we  were
pleafed  to  fee,  as  in  general  it  is  a  fign  of  peace;  but  they
foon  afterwards  became  very  troublefome,  and  gave  us  rea-
fon  to  apprehend  fome  mifchief  from  them  to  the  people
that  were  in  our  boats  alongfide  the  fhip.  While  we  were
in  this  fituation,  the  long-boat  was  fent  afhore  with  fome
water  calks,  and  fome  of  the  canoes  attempting  to  follow
her,  we  found  it  neceftary  to  intimidate  them  by  firing  fome
fmall  fhot :  we  were  at  fuch  a  diftance  that  it  was  impofiible
to  hurt  them,  yet  our  reproof  had  its  effecT,  and  they  defifted
from  the  purfuit.  They  had  fome  filh  in  their  canoes  which
they  now  offered  to  fell,  and  which,  though  it  flunk,  we
confented  to  buy :  for  this  purpofe  a  man  in  a  fmall  boat  was
lent  among  them,  and  they  traded  for  fome  time  very  fairly.

At  length,  however,  one  of  them  watching  his  opportunity,

3  D  a  fnatched


3 LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

Jan7ua?y.  fnatched  at  fome  paper  which  our  market-man  held  in  his
T hand’  and  itj  immediately  put  himfelf  in  a  pofture

of  defence,  flourifhing  his  patoo-patoo,  and  making  fhow  as
if  he  was  about  to  ftrike  j  fome  fmali  fhot  were  then  fired  at
him  from  the  fhip,  a  few  of  which  flruck  him  upon  the
knee :  this  put  an  end  to  our  trade,  but  the  Indians  fiill  con¬
tinued  near  the  fhip,  rowing  round  her  many  times,  and
converfing  with  Tupia,  chiefly  concerning  the  traditions
they  had  among  them  with  refped  to  the  antiquities  of  their
country.  To  this  fubjeft  they  were  led  by  the  enquiries
which  Tupia  had  been  directed  to  make,  whether  they  had
ever  feen  fuch  a  veflel  as  ours,  or  had  ever  heard  that  any
fuch  had  been  upon  their  coaft.  Thefe  enquiries  were  all
anfwered  in  the  negative,  fo  that  tradition  has  preferved
among  them  no  memorial  of  Tafman;  though,  by  an  ob-
fervation  made  this  day,  we  find  that  we  are  only  fifteen
miles  fouth  of  Murderer’s  bay,  our  latitude  being  41^5'  32",
and  Murderer’s  bay,  according  to  his  account,  being  40°  50'.

The  women  in  thefe  canoes,  and  fome  of  the  men,  had  a
head-drefs  which  we  had  not  before  feen.  It  confided  of  a
bunch  of  black  feathers,  made  up  in  a  round  form,  and  tied
upon  the  top  of  the  head,  which  it  intirely  covered,  and
made  it  twice  as  high,  to  appearance,  as  it  was  in  reality.

After  dinner,  I  went  in  the  pinnace  with  Mr.  Banks,  Dr.
Solander,  Tupia,  and  fome  others,  into  another  cove,  about
two  miles  diftant  from  that  in  which  the  fhip  lay:  in  our
way  we  faw  fomething  floating  upon  the  water,  which  we
took  for  a  dead  feal,  but  upon  rowing  up  to  it,  found  it  to
be  the  body  of  a  woman,  which  to  all  appearance  had  been
dead  fome  days.  We  proceeded  to  our  cove,  where  we  went
on  fhore,  and  found  a  fmali  family  of  Indians,  who  ap¬
peared  to  be  greatly  terrified  at  our  approach,  and  all  ran

2  away


ROUND  THE  WORLD.

i

away  except  one.  A  converfation  between  this  perfon  and
Tupia  foon  brought  back  the  reft,  except  an  old  man  and  a
child,  who  ftill  kept  aloof,  but  ftood  peeping  at  us  from  the
woods.  Of  thefe  people,  our  curiofity  naturally  led  us  to
enquire  after  the  body  of  the  woman  which  we  had  feen
floating  upon  the  water :  and  they  acquainted  us,  by  Tupia,
that  fhe  was  a  relation,  who  had  died  a  natural  death ;  and
that,  according  to  their  cuftom,  they  had  tied  a  ftone  to  the
body,  and  thrown  it  into  the  fea,  which  ftone,  they  fup-
pofed,  had  by  fome  accident  been  difengaged.

This  family,  when  we  came  on  fhore,  was  employed  in
drefling  fome  proviftons:  the  body  of  a  dog  was  at  this  time
buried  in  their  oven,  and  many  provifion  bafkets  ftood  near
it.  Having  caft  our  eyes  carelefsly  into  one  of  thefe,  as  we
palled  it,  we  faw  two  bones  pretty  cleanly  picked,  which
did  not  feem  to  be  the  bones  of  a  dog,  and  which,  upon  a
nearer  examination,  we  difeovered  to  be  thofe  of  a  human-
body.  At  this  fight  we  were  ftruck  with  horror,  though  it  was
only  a  confirmation  of  what  we  had  heard  many  times  fince
we  arrived  upon  this  coaft.  As  we  could  have  no  doubt  but
the  bones  were  human,  neither  could  we  have  any  doubt
but  that  the  flefh  which  covered  them  had  been  eaten.  They
were  found  in  a  provifion  bafket ;  the  flefh  that  remained
appeared  manifeftly  to  have  been  drefled  by  fire,  and  in  the
griftles  at  the  end,  were  the  marks  of  the  teeth  which  had
gnawed  them:  to  put  an  end  however  to  conjecture,  founded
upon  circumftances  and  appearances,  we  directed  Tupia  to
afk  what  bones  they  were  ;  and  the  Indians,  without  the
leaft  hefitation,  anfwered,  the  bones  of  a  man :  they  were
then  alked  what  was  become  of  the  flefh,  and  they  replied
that  they  had  eaten  it ;  but,  faid  Tupia,  why  did  you  not  eat
the  body  of  the  woman  which  we  faw  floating  upon  the
water:  the  woman,  faid  they,  died  of  difeafe ;  befides,  fhe


389

1770.

January.

Tuefday  t6.


was


35*  LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

January.  was  our  reIation>  and  we  cat  only  the  bodies  of  our  enemies,
who  are  killed  in  battle.  'Upon  enquiry  who  the  man  was

whofe  bones  we  had  found,  they  told  us,  that  about  five
days  before,  a  boat  belonging  to  their  enemies  came  into  the
bay,  with  many  perfons  on  board,  and  that  this  man  was
one  of  feven  whom  they  had  killed.  Though  ftronger  evi¬
dence  of  this  horrid  practice  prevailing  among  the  inhabit¬
ants  of  this  coaft  will  fcarcely  be  required,  we  have  ftill
ftronger  to  give.  One  of  us  alked  if  they  had  any  human
bones  with  the  flefli  remaining  upon  them,  and  upon  their
anfwering  us  that  all  had  been  eaten,  we  affefted  to  difbe-
lieve  that  the  bones  were  human,  and  faid  that  they  were
the  bones  of  a  dog ;  upon  which  one  of  the  Indians  with
fome  eagernefs  took  hold  of  his  own  fore-arm,  and  thrufting
it  towards  us,  faid,  that  the  bone  which  Mr.  Banks  held  in
his  hand  had  belonged  to  that  part  of  a  human  body;  at
the  fame  time,  to  convince  us  that  the  flefli  had  been  eaten,
he  took  hold  of  his  own  arm  with  his  teeth,  and  made  fliew
of  eating :  he  alfo  bit  and  gnawed  the  bone  which  Mr.  Banks
had  taken,  drawing  it  through  his  mouth,  and  fliewing,  by
figns,  that  it  had  afforded  a  delicious  repaft ;  the  bone  was
then  returned  to  Mr.  Banks,  and  he  brought  it  away  with
hull.  Among  the  perfons  of  this  family,  there  was  a  woman
who  had  her  arms,  legs,  and  thighs  frightfully  cut  in  feve--
ral  places ;  and  we  were  told  that  fhe  had  inflidled  the
wounds  upon  herfelf,  in  token  of  her  grief  for  the  lofs  of
her  hufband,  who  had  been  lately  killed  and  eaten  by  their

enemies,  who  had  come  from  fome  place  to  the  eaftward,
towards  which  the  Indians  pointed.

The. fliip  lay  at  the  diftance  of  fomewhat  lefs  than  a  quar-
Wedner.  ,7.  ter  of  a  mile  from  the  Ihore,  and  in  the  morning  we  were
awakened  by  the  finging  of  the  birds  :  the  number  was  in-
ctedible,  and  they  feemed  to  ftrain  their  throats  in  emulation

„  of


ROUND  THE  WORLD;

of  each  other.  This  wild  melody  was  infinitely  fuperior  to
any  that  we  had  ever  heard  of  the  fame  kind  ;  it  fecmed  to
be  like  fmall  bells,  molt  exquifitely  tuned,  and  perhaps  the
difiance,  and  the  water  between,  might  be  no  fmall  advan¬
tage  to  the  found.  Upon  enquiry,  we  were  informed  that
the  birds  here  always  began  to  fing  about  two  hours  after"
midnight,  and  continuing  their  mufick  till  fun-rife,  were,
like  our  nightingales,  filent  the  reft  of  the  day.  In  the  fore¬
noon,  a  fmall  canoe  came  off  from  the  Indian  village  to  the
Ihip,  and  among  thofe  that  were  in  it,  was  the  old  man  who
had  firft  come  on  board  at  our  arrival  in  the  bay.  As  foon
as  it  came  alongfide,  Tupia  renewed  the  converfation,  that
had  pafted  the  day  before,  concerning  their  practice  of  eating
human  flelh,  during  which  they  repeated  what  they  had
told  us  already:  but,  faid  Tupia,  where  are  the  heads?  do
you  eat  them  too  ?  Of  the  heads,  faid  the  old  man,  we  eat
only  the  brains-,  and  the  next  time  I  come  I  will  bring  fome
of  them  to  convince  you  that  what  we  have  told  you  is
truth.  After  fome  farther  converfation  between  thefe  people
and  Tupia,.  they  told  him  that  they  expecfted  their  enemies
to  come  very  fhortly,  to  revenge  the  death  of  the  feven  men

whom  they  had  killed  and  eaten.

*  '  ♦

On  the  r8th,  the  Indians  were  more  quiet  thanufual,  no
canoe  came  near  the  Ihip,  nor  did  we  fee  one  of  them  moving
on  the  fhore,  their  filhing,  and  other  ufual  occupations
being  totally  fiifpended.  We  thought  they  expeefted  an
attack  on  this  day,  and  therefore  attended  more  diligently  to
what  paffed  on  fhore ;  but  we  faw  nothing  to  gratify  our
curiofity.

After  breakfaft,  we  went  out  in  the  pinnace,,  to  take  a
view  of  the  bay,  which  was  of  vaft  extent,  and  eonfifted  of
numberlefs  fmall  harbours  and  coves,  in  every  direction  :  we

7  confined


S9r

1770.

January.

^  ~  ~  1  *  ••

Wednef.  1 7;


Thnrfday  18.


392


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

January  con^ne^  onr  excurfion,  however,  to  the  weftern  fide,  and
^  the  country  being  an  impenetrable  foreft  where  we  landed,
ihurfdayi?.  we  cou|j  fee  nothing  worthy  of  n0tice.;  we  killed,  however,

a  good  number  of  fhaggs,  which  we  faw  fitting  upon  their
nefls  in  the  trees,  and  which,  whether  roafted  or  ftewed,  we
eonfidered  as  very  good  provifion.  As  we  were  returning,
we  faw  a  fingle  man  in  a  canoe  fifhing ;  we  rowed  up  to
him,  and  to  our  great  furprize  he  took  not  the  lead;  notice
of  us,  but  even  when  we  were  alongfide  of  him,  continued
to  follow  his  occupation,  without  adverting  to  us  any  more
than  if  we  had  been  invifible.  He  did  not,  however,  appear
to  be  either  fullen  or  fiupid:  we  requefied  him  to  draw  up
his  net,  that  we  might  examine  it,  and  he  readily  complied  :
it  was  of  a  circular  form,  extended  by  two  hoops,  and  about
feven  or  eight  feet  in  diameter  :  the  top  was  open,  and  fea-
ears  were  faftened  to  the  bottom  as  a  bait :  this  he  let  down
fo  as  to  lie  upon  the  ground,  and  when  he  thought  fifh
enough  were  atfembled  over  it,  he  drew  it  up  by  a  very
gentle  and  even  motion,  fo  that  the  fifh  rofe  with  it,  fcarcely
fenfible  that  they  were  lifted,  till  they  came  very  rear  the
furface  of  the  water,  and  then  were  brought  out  in  the  net
by  a  fudden  jerk.  By  this  fimple  method  he  had  caught
abundance  of  fifh,  and  indeed  they  are  fo  plenty  in  this  bay,
that  the  catching  them  requires  neither  much  labour  nor
art.

This  day,  fome  of  our  people  found  in  the  fkirts  of  the
wood,  near  a  hole  or  oven,  three  human  hip-bones,  which
they  brought  on  board  ;  a  farther  proof  that  thefe  people  eat
human  flefh:  Mr.  Monkhoufe,  our  Surgeon,  alfo  brought  on
board,  from  a  place  where  he  faw  many  deferted  houfes,  the
hair  of  a  man’s  head,  which  he  had  found,  among  many
'  other  things,  tied  up  to  the  branches  of  trees.


In


I


m


HOUND  THE  WORLD.


In  the  morning  of  the  19th,  we  fet  up  the  armourer’s
forge  to  repair  the  braces  of  the  tiller,  and  other  iron-work,
all  hands  on  board  being  Rill  bufy  in  careening,  and  other
neceflary  operations  about  the  veflel :  this  day,  fome  Indians
came  on  board  from  another  part  of  the  bay,  where  they
faid  there  was  a  town  which  we  had  not  feen:  they  brought
plenty  of  fifh,  which  they  fold  for  nails,  having  now  ac¬
quired  fome  notion  of  their  ufe ;  and  in  this  traffick  no  un¬
fair  pratflice  was  attempted.


1770,

January.

Friday  19.


In  the  morning  of  the  20th,  our  old  man  kept  his  promife,  Saturday  29;
and  brought  on  board  four  of  the  heads  of  the  feven  people
who  had  been  fo  much  the  fubjetfl  of  our  enquiries  :  the  hair
and  flefh  were  entire,  but  we  perceived  that  the  brains  had
been  extra<51ed ;  the  flefh  was  foft,  but  had  by  fome  method
been  preferved  from  putrefaction,  for  it  had  no  difagreeable
fmell.  Mr.  Banks  purchafed  one  of  them,  but  they  fold  it
with  great  relutflance,  and  could  not  by  any  means  be  pre¬
vailed  upon  to  part  with  a  fecond;  probably  they  may  be
preferved  as  trophies,  like  the  fealps  in  America,  and  the
jaw-bones  in  the  iflands  of  the  South  Seas.  Upon  examining
the  head  which  had  been  bought  by  Mr.  Banks,  we  perceived
that  it  had  received  a  blow  upon  the  temples,  which  had
fraeftured  the  fkull.  This  day  we  made  another  excurfion  in
the  pinnace,  to  furvey  the  bay,  but  we  found  no  flat  large
enough  for  a  potatoe  garden,  nor  could  we  difeover  the  lead
appearance  of  cultivation:  we  met  not  a  Angle  Indian,  but
found  an  excellent  harbour;  and  about  eight  o’clock  in  the
evening  returned  on  board  the  fhip.


On  the  21  A,  Mr.  Eanks  and  Dr.  Solandcr  went  a  flfhing  ?,,nd„v  ,:f

m  *

with  hook  and  line,  and  caught  an  immenfe  quantity  every
where  upon  the  rocks,  in  between  four  and  flve  fathom
wTater:  the  feine  was  hauled  every  night,  and  feldom  failed
Vol.  IL  3  E  to


394


LIEUTENANT  COOK’S  VOYAGE


>77°-

January.
Sunday  21.


Monday  22.


to  fupply  the  whole  Blip’s  company  with  as  much  fifh  as  thejr
could  eat.  This  day  all  the  people  had  leave  to  go  on  fhore-
at  the  watering-place,  and  divert  themfelves  as  they  fhould
think  proper.

- '  .  1  '

In  the  morning  of  the  23d,  I  fet  out  again  in  the  pinnace,
accompanied  by  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  with  a  defign
to  examine  the  head  of  the  inlet,  but  after  rowing  about  four
or  five  leagues  without  fo  much  as  coming  in  fight  of  it,  the
wind  being  contrary,  and  the  day  half  fpent,  we  went  on
ihore  on  the  fouth  eaft  fide,  to  try  what  might  be  difcoverecl
from  the  hills.

Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  immediately  employed  them-
felves  in  botanizing  near  the  beach,  and  I,  taking  a  feaman
with  me,  afeended  one  of  the  hills:  when  I  reached  the
fummit,  I  found  a  view  of  the  inlet  intercepted  by  hills,
which  in  that  direction  rofe  ftill  higher,  and  which  were-
rendered  inaccefiible  by  impenetrable  w7oods ;  I  was,  how¬
ever,  abundantly  compenfated  for  my  labour,  for  I  faw  the
fea  on  the  eafiern  fide  of  the  country,  and  a  pafiage  leading
from  it  to  that  on  the  weft,  a  little  to  the  eaft  ward  of  the  en¬
trance  of  the  inlet  where  the  fhip  now  lay.  The  main  land
which  lay  on  the  fouth  eaft  fide  of  this  inlet,  appeared  to  be
a  narrow  ridge  of  very  high  hills,  and  to  form  part  of  the
fouth  weft  fide  of  the  ftreight ;  the  land  on  the  oppofite  fide
appeared  to  trend  away  eaft  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach  5
and  to  the  fouth  eaft  there  appeared  to  be  an  opening  to  the
fea,  which  wafhed  the  eaftern  coaft :  on  the  eaft  fide  of  the
inlet  alfo  I  faw  fome  iflands  which  I  had  before  taken  to  be
part  of  the  main  land.  Having  made  this  difeovery,  I  dc-
feended  the  hill,  and  as  foon  as  we  had  taken  fome  refrefli-
ment,  we  fet  out  on  our  return  to  the  fhip.  In  our  way,  we
examined  the  harbours  and  coves  which  lie  behind  the

iflands


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


395


Elands  that  I  had  difcovered  from  the  hill ;  and  in  this  rout  »77°*

January.

we  faw  an  old  village,  in  which  there  were  many  hotifes  v _

that  feemed  to  have  been  long  deferted:  wealfo  faw  another  Mcnu“y  22*
village  which  was  inhabited,  but  the  day  was  too  far  fpent
for  us  to  vifit  it,  and  we  therefore  made  the  bed  of  our  way
to  the  fhip,  which  we  reached  between  eight  and  nine  o’clock
at  night.

The  23d  I  employed  in  carrying  on  a  furvey  of  the  place ;  Tuefday  23.
and  upon  one  of  the  ifland s  where  I  landed,  I  faw  many
houfes  which  feemed  to  have  been  long  deferted,  and  no  ap¬
pearance  of  any  inhabitant.

On  the  24th,  we  went  to  vifit  our  friends  at  the  Hippah  or  Wednef.^x,
village  on  the  point  of  the  ifland  near  the  fhip’s  ftation,  who
had  come  off  to  us  on  our  fuff  arrival  in  the  bay.  They  re¬
ceived  us  with  the  utmoft  confidence  and  civility,  {hewing  us
every  part  of  their  habitations,  which  were  commodious  and
neat.  The  ifland  or  rock  on  which  this  town  is  fituated,  is

r

divided  from  the  main  by  a  breach  or  fiffure  fo  narrow,  that
a  man  might  almofl  leap  from  one  to  the  other:  the  fides  of
it  are  every  where  fo  fteep  as  to  render  the  artificial  fortifica¬
tion  of  thefe  people  almofl  unneceffary:  there  was,  how¬
ever,  one  flight  pallifade,  and  one  fmall  fighting-flage,  to¬
wards  that  part  of  the  rock  where  accefs  was  leaft  difficult.

The  people  here  brought  us  out  fcveral  human  bones,  the
flefli  of  which  they  had  eaten,  and  offered  them  to  fale ;  for
the  curiofity  of  thofe  among  us  who  had  purchafed  them  as
memorials  of  the  horrid  practice  which  many,  notwithfland-
ing  the  reports  of  travellers,  have  profeffed  not  to  believe,
had  rendered  them  a  kind  of  article  of  trade.  In  one  part  of
this  village  we  obferved,  not  without  fome  furprize,  a  crofs
♦exactly  like  that  of  a  crucifix ;  it  was  adorned  with  feathers,

3  E  2  and


S96


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOTAG'E


r77°.

January.


'VVednef.  24.


and  upon  our  enquiring  for  what  purpofe  it  had  been  fet  up,,
we  were  told  that  it  was  a  monument  for  a  man  who  was
dead:  we  had  before  underftood  that  their  dead  were  not  bu¬
ried,  but  thrown  into  the  fea ;  but  to  our  enquiry  how  the
body  of  the  man  had  been  difpofed  of,  to-whofe  memory
this  crofs  had  been  erected,  they  refufed  to  anfwer.


When  we  left  thefe  people,  we  went  to  the  other  end  of
the  idand,  and  there  taking  water,  croffed  over  to  the  main,
where  we  faw  feveral  houfes,  but  no  inhabitants,  except  a:
few  in  fome  draggling  canoes,,  that  feemed  to  be  fifhin g..
After  viewing  this  place,  we  returned  on  board  the  fhip  to
dinner.


During  our  vifit  to  the  Indians  this  day,  Tupia  being  al¬
ways  of  our  party,  they  had  been  obferved  to  be  continually
talking  of  guns,  and  fhooting  people:  for  this  fubjeCt  o£
their  converfation  we  could  not  at  all  account;  and  it  had
ib  much  engaged  our  attention,  that  we  talked  of  it  all  the
way  back,  and  even  after  we  got  on  board  thefhip:  we  had
perplexed  ourfelves  with  various  conjectures,  which  were  all
given  up  in  their  turn ;  but.  now  we  learnt,  that  on  the
2 id  one  of  our  officers,  upon  pretence  of  going  out  to  fiffi,
had  rowed  up  to  the  Hippah,  and  that  two  or  three  canoes
coming  off  towards  his  boat,  his  fears  fuggeded  that  an.
attack  was  intended,  in  confequence  of  which  three  mufkets
were  fired,  one  with  fmall  fhot,  and  two  with  ball,,  at  the
Indians,  who  retired  with  the  utmod  precipitation,  having
probably  come  out  with  friendly  intentions,  for  fuch  their
behaviour  both  before  and  afterwards  exprefied,  and  having,
no  reafon  to  expert  fuch  treatment  from  people  who  had  al¬
ways  behaved  to  them  not  only  with  humanity,  but  kind-

nefs,  and  to  whom  they  were  not  confcious  of  having  given
offence.


On


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


397


On  the  25th,  I  made  another  excurfion  along  the  coaft,  in  177°-
the  pinnace,  towards  the  mouth  of  the  inlet,  accompanied  by
Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  and  going  on  fhore  at  a  little  Thurftkiy25
cove,  to  fhoot  fhaggs,  we  fell  in  with  a  large  family  of  In¬
dians,  whole  cuftom  it  is  to  difperfe-  themfelves  among  the
different  creeks  and  coves,  where  fifh  is  to  be  procured  in
the  greateft  plenty,  leaving  a  few  only  in  the  Hippah,  to
which  the  reft  repair  in  times  of  danger.  Some  of  thefe
people  came  out  a  good  way  to  meet  us,  and  gave  us  an  in¬
vitation  to  go  with  them  to  the  reft  of  their  party,  which  we
readily  accepted.  We  found  a.  company  of  about  thirty^
men,  women,  and  children,  who  received  us  with  ail  pof-
ftble  demonftrations  of  friendfhip:  we  diftributed  among
them  a  few  ribands  and  beads,  and  in  return,  received  the
kiffes  and  embraces  of  both  fexes,  both  young  and  old:  they
gave  us  alfo  fome  fifh,  and  after  a  little  time  we  returned,,
much  pleafed  with  our  new  acquaintance,

In  the  morning  of  the  26th,  X  went  again  out  in  the  boat,  Friday  26,  ■
with  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  and  entered  one  of  the
bays,  which  lie  on  the  eaft  fide  of  the  inlet,  in  order  to  get
another  fighr  of  the  ftreight,  which  palled  between  the
eaftern  and  weftern  feas.  For  this  purpofe,  having  landed  at
a  convenient  place,  we  climbed  a  hill  of  very  confiderable
height,  from  which  we  had  a  full  view  of  it,  with  the  land
on  the  oppofite  fhore,  which  we  judged  to  be  about  four
leagues  diftant;  but  as  it  was  hazey  in  the  horizon,  we
could  not  fee  far  to  the  fouth  eaft :  I  refolved  however  to
fearch  the  paffage  with  the  fhip,  as  foon  as  I  fhould  put  to
fea.  Upon  the  top  of  this  hill  we  found  a  parcel  of  loofe
ftones,  with  which  we  erecfted  a  pyramid,  and  left  in  it  fome
mufket  balls,  fmall  fhot,  beads,  and  other  things,  which  we*
happened  to  have  about  us,  that  were  likely  to  ftand  the  teft
of  time,  and  not  being  of  Indian  workmanfhip,  would  con-
i  ,  vince


3.98


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


IT!  a.
Januarv
- - - .

f /iday  26.


Saturday  27,
Sunday  28.


Monday  29.


vince  any  European  who  ffiould  come  to  the  place  and  pull
if  down,  that  other  natives  of  Europe  had  been  there  before
him.  When  this  was  done,  we  descended  the  hili,  and  made
a  comfortable  meal  of  the  ffiaggs  and  fiih  which  our  guns  and
lines  had  procured  us,  and  which  were  dreffed  by  the  boat’s
crew  in  a  place  that  we  had  appointed :  in  this  place  we
found  another  Indian  family,  who  received  us,  as  ufual
with  ftrong  expreffions  of  kindneis  and  pleafure,  ffiewing  us*
where  to  procure  water,  and  doing  us  fuch  other  good  offices
as  were  in  their  power.  From  this  place  we  went  to  the
town,  of  which  the  Indians  had  told  us;  who  vifited  us  on
the  19th:  this,  like  that  which  we  had  feen  before,  was
built  upon  a  fmall  ifland  or  rock,  lo  difficult  of  accefs,  that
we  gratified  our  curiofity  at  the  rifk  of  our  necks.  The  In¬
dians  here  alio  received  us  with  open  arms,  carried  us  to
every  part  of  the  place,  and  ffiewed  us  all  that  it  contained:
this  town,  like  the  other,  confi fled  of  between  eighty  and  an
hundred  houfes,  and  had  only  one  fighting-flage.  We  hap¬
pened  to  have  with  us  a  few  nails  and  ribands,  and  fome
paper,  with  which  our  guefls  were  fo  gratified,  that  at  our
coming  away  they  filled  our  boat  with  dried  ffih,  of  which
we  perceived  they  had  laid  up  great  quantities.

The  27th  and  28th  were  fpent  in  refitting  the  ffiip  for  the
fea,  fixing  a  tranfom  for  the  tiller,  getting  flones  on  board  to
put  into  the  bottom  of  the  bread-room,  to  bring  the  ffiip
more  by  the  flern,  in  repairing  the  calks,  and  catching  fiffi.

On  the  29th,  we  received  a  vifit  from  our  old  man,  whofe
name  we  found  to  be  Topaa,  and  three  other  natives,  with
whomTupia  had  much  converfation.  The  old  man  told  us,
that  one  of  the  men  who  had  been  fired  upon  by  the  officer
who  had  vifited  their  Hippah,  under  pretence  of  fifhing,  was
dead  ;  but  to  my  great  comfort  I  afterwards  difcovered  that
this  report  was  not  true,  and  that  if  Topaa’s  difcourfes  were

6  taken


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


399


taken  literally,  they  would  frequently  lead  us  into  miflakes.  *770.

January.

Mr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  were  feveral  times  on  fhore  U , — 3

during  the  lafl  two  or  three  days,  not  without  fuccefs,  but  Wouda>  2?‘
greatly  circumfcribed  in  their  walks  by  climbers  of  a  molt
luxuriant  growth,  which  were  fo  interwoven  together,  as  to
fill  up  the  fpace  between  the  trees  about  which  they  grew,
and  render  the  woods  altogether  impaffable.  This  day  alfo-
I  went  on  fhore  again  myfelf,  upon  the  weflern  point  of  the
inlet,  and  from  a  hill  of  conftderable  height,  I  had  a  view
of  the  coafl  to  the  N.  W.  The  fanned  land  I  could  fee  in
that  quarter,  was  an  ifland  which  has  been  mentioned  be¬
fore,  at  the  diflance  of  about  ten  leagues,  lying  not  far  from
the  main:  between  this  ifland  and  the  place  where  I- flood,  I
difcovered,  clofe  under  the  fhore,  feveral  other  iflands,  form¬
ing  many  bays,  in  which  there  appeared  to  be  good  an¬
chorage  for  (liipping.  After  I  had  fet  off  the  different  points
for  my  furvey,  I  eretfced  another  pile  of  Hones,  in  which  I
le  t  a  piece  of  filver  coin,  with  fome  mufket  bails  and  beads,,
and  a  piece  of  an  old  pendant  living  on  the  top.  In  my  re¬
turn  to  the  fliip,  I  made  a  vifu  to  feveral  of  the  natives,,
whom  I  faw  along  the  fhore,.  and  purchafed  afmall  quantity
of  fifh.  -  '

On  the  30th,  early  in  the  morning,  I  fent  a  boat  to  one  of  Tuefday  30,
the  iflands  for  celery,  and  while  the  people  were  gathering
it,  about  twenty  of  the  natives,  men,  women,  and  children,
landed  near  fome  empty  huts:  as  foon  as  they  were  on
fhore,  five  or  fix  of  the  women  fat  down  upon  the  ground
together,  and  began  to  cut  their  legs,  arms,  and  faces,  with
fhells,  and  fliarp  pieces  of  talc  or  jafper,  in  a  terrible  man¬
ner.  Our  people  underflood  that  their  hufbands  had  lately
been  killed  by  their  enemies  ;  but  while  they  were  perform*
ing  this  horrid  ceremony,  the  men  fet  about  repairing  the
huts,  with  the  utinoft  negligence  and  unconcern.


The


400


LIEUTENANT  *C0  0K5s  VOYAGE


1770*

January.
T-ncfday  30.


The  carpenter  having  prepared  two  pods  to  be  left  as  me¬
morials  of  our  having  vifited  this  place,  I  ordered  them  to  be
infcribed  with  the  fhip’s  name,  and  the  year  and  month ;  one
of  them  I  fet  up  at  the  watering-place,  hoifting  the  Union
flag  upon  the  top  of  it ;  and  the  other  I  carried  over  to  the
Aland  that  lies  neareft  to  the  fea,  called  by  the  natives  Mo-
tuara.  1  went  flrfl  to  the  village  or  Hippah,  accompanied
by  Mr.  Monkhoufe  and  Tupia,  where  I  met  with  our  old
man,  and  told  him  and  feveral  others,  by  means  of  Tupia,
that  we  were  come  to  fet  up  a  mark  upon  the  ifland,  in  order  to
fhow  to  any  other  fhip  which  fhould  happen  to  come  thither,
that  we  had  been  there  before.  To  this  they  readily  con-
fented,  and  pro  mi  fed  that  they  never  would  pull  it  down:  I
then  gave  fomcthing  to  every  one  prefent;  and  to  the  old
man!  gave  a  filver  threepence,  dated  1736,  and  fomefpike
nails,  with  the  king’s  broad  arrow  cut  deep  upon  them  ;
things  which  I  thought  mofl  likely  to  remain  long  among
•them  :  I  then  took  the  poll  to  the  higheft  part  of  the  ifland,
and  al  ter  fixing  it  firmly  in  the  ground,  I  hoifled  upon  it  the
•Union-flag,  and  honoured  this  inlet  with  the  name  of  Queen
Charlotte’s  Sound,  at  the  fame  time  taking  formal  pof-
feflion  of  this  and  the  adjacent  country,  in  the  name  and  for
the  ufe  of  his  Majefly  King  George  the  Third.  We  then
drank  a  bottle  of  wine  to  her  Majefly ’s  health,  and  gave  the
bottle  to  the  old  man  who  had  attended  us  up  the  hill,  and
who  was  mightily  delighted  with  his  prefent.

While -the  poft  was  fetting  up,  we  enquired  of  the  old  man
concerning  the  pallage  into  the  eaflern  fea,  the  exiflence  of
which  he  confirmed  ;  and  then  afked  him  about  the  land  to
the  S.  W.  of  the  -fireight,  where  we  were  then  fituated:  this
iand,  he  faid,  conflfled  of  two  Whennuas  or  iflands,  which
might  be  .circumnavigated  in  a  few  days,  and  which  he
cax.td  I  ovy  Poenammoo  5  the  literal  tranflation  of  -this  word

4  is,


#


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


4°*.


is  the  water  of  green  talc:”  and  probably  if  we  had  under¬
flood  him  better,  we  fhould  have  found  that  Tovy  Poenammoo
was  the  name  of  fome  particular  place  where  they  got  the
green  talc  or  ilone  of  which  they  make  their  ornaments  and
tools,  and  not  a  general  name  for  the  whole  fouthern  diftridl:
he  faid,  there  was  alfo  a  third  Whennua,  on  the  eaft  fide  of
the  {height,  the  circumnavigation  of  which  would  take  up
many  moons :  this  he  called  Eaheinomauwe  ;  and  to  the
land  on  the  borders  of  the  {height  he  gave  the  name  of
Tiera  Witte.  Having  fet  up  our  poll,  and  procured  this
intelligence,  we  returned  on  board  the  {hip,  and  brought
the  old  man  with  us,  who  was  attended  by  his  canoe,  in
which,  after  dinner,  he  returned  home.


1770.

January.

< _ _ f

Tuefday  30.


On  the  31R,  having  completed  our  wooding,  and  filled  all  Wednef.  31.
our  water  calks,  I  fent  out  two  parties,  one  to  cut  and  make
brooms,  and  another  to  catch  fifh.  In  the  evening,  we  had
a  firong  gale  from  the  N.  W.  with  fuch  a  heavy  rain  that  our
little  wild  muficians  on  fhore  lufpended  their  fong,  which
till  now  we  had  conftantly  heard  during  the  night,  with  a
pleafure  which  it  was  impoffible  to  lofe  without  regret.

On  the  ill,  the  gale  increafed  to  a  fiorm,  with  heavy  gulls  -fhurfda^i*.
from  the  high  land,  one  of  which  broke  the  hawfer,  that
we  had  fattened  to  the  fhore,  and  obliged  us  to  let  go  another
anchor.  Towards  midnight,  the  gale  became  more  mode¬
rate,  but  the  rain  continued  with  fuch  violence,  that  the
brook  which  had  fupplied  us  with  water  overflowed  its
banks,  and  carried  away  ten  {mail  calks  which  had  been
left  there  full  of  water,  and  notwithftanding  we  fearched  the
whole  cove,  we  could  never  recover  one  of  them.

On  the  3d,  as  I  intended  to  fail  the  firtt  opportunity,  I  went  Saturday  3.
over  to  the  Hippah  on  the  eaft  fide  of  the  Sound,  and  pur-
chafed  a  confiderable  quantity  of  fplit  and  half-dried  filh,  for

Vol.  II.  3  E  fea


402


LIEUTENANT  C O OK's  VOYAGE


i'77°*  feu  flores.  The  people  here  confirmed  all  that  the  old  man'

Feoruary.  .  in*

i '  had  told  us  concerning  the  ftreight  and  the  country,  and
about  noon  I  took  leave  of  them:  fome  of  them  feemed  to
be  forry,  and  others  glad,  that  we  were  going:  the  filli
which  I  had  bought  they  fold  freely,  but  there  were  fome
who  fhewed  manifeft  figns  of  difapprobation.'  As  we  re¬
turned  to  the  {hip,  fome  of  us  made  an  excurfion  along  the
fhore  to  the  northward,  to  traffick  with  the  natives  for  a  far¬
ther  fupply  of  fifii ;  in  which,  however,  they  had  no  great
fuccefs.  In  the  evening,  we  got  every  thing  off  from  the
Ihore,  as  X  intended  to  fail  in  the  morning,  but  the  wind
would  not  permit..

Sunday  4.  On  the  4th,  while  we  were  waiting  for  a  wind,  we  amufed
ourfelves  by  fifhing,  and  gathering  fhells  and  feeds  of  various

Monday  5.  kinds :  and  early  in  the  morning  of  the  5th,  we  call  off  the
hawfer,  hove  fhort  on  the  bower,  and  carried  the  kedge
anchor  out  in  order  to  warp  the  fhip  out  of  the  cove,  which
having  done  about  two  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  hove
up  the  anchor  and  got  under  fail but  the  wind  foon  fail¬
ing,  we  were  obliged  to  come  to  an  anchor  again  a  little
above  Motuara.  When  we  were  under  fail,  our  old  man
Topaa  came  on  board  to  take  his  leave  of  us,  and  as  we  were
{till  defirous  of  making  farther  enquiries  whether  any  me¬
mory  of  Tafman  had  been  preferved  among  thefe  people,
Tupia  was  directed  to  afk  him  whether  he  had  ever  heard
that  fuch  a  velfel  as  ours  had  before  vifited  the  country.  To
this  he  replied  in  the  negative,  but  faid,  that  his  anceftors
had  told  him  there  had  once  come  to  this  place  a  fmall  veffel,
from  a  diftant  country,  called  Ulimaroa,  in  which  were
four  men,  who,  upon  their  coming  on  fhore,  were  all
killed :  upon  being  alked  where  this  diftant  land  lay,  he
pointed  to  the  northward.  Of  Ulimaroa  we  had  heard  fome4
thing  before,  from  the  people  about  the  Bay  of  Iflands,  who
4  faid


HOUND  THE  WORLD.


4°3'

fold  that  their  anceftors  had  vifited  it;  and  Tupia  had  alfo  1770.
talked  to  us  of  Ulimaroa,  concerning  which  he  had  fome  ,Icb_r^r>\
confufed  traditionary  notions,  not  very  different  from  thofe  Mon4ay  5*
of  our  old  man,  fo  that  we  could  draw  no  certain  conclufion
from  the  accounts  of  either.

Soon  after  the  fhip  came  to  an  anchor  the  fecond  time,  Mr.

Banks  and  Dr.  Solander  went  on  fhore,  to  fee  if  any  gleanings
of  natural  knowlege  remained,  and  by  accident  fell  in  with
the  moft  agreeable  Indian  family  they  had  feen,  which
afforded  them  a  better  opportunity  of  remarking  the  per-
fonal  fubordination  among  thefe  people,  than  had  before
offered.  The  principal  perfons  were  a  widow,  and  a  pretty
boy  about  ten  years  old:  the  widow  was  mourning  for  her
hufband  with  tears  of  blood,  according  to  their  cuflom,  and
the  child,  by  the  death  of  its  father,  was  become  proprietor
of  the  land  where  we  had  cut  our  wood.  The  mother  and
the  fon  were  fitting  upon  matts,  and  the  reft  of  the  family,
to  the  number  of  fixteen  or  feventeen,  of  both  fexes,  fat
round  them  in  the  open  air,  for  they  did  not  appear  to  have
any  houfe,  or  other  fhelter  from  the  weather,  the  inclemen¬
cies  of  which,  cuftom  has  probably  enabled  them  to  endure
without  any  lafting  inconvenience.  Their  whole  behaviour
was  affable,  obliging,  and  unfufpicious ;  they  prefented  each
perfon  with  fifh,  and  a  brand  of  fire  to  drefs  it,  and  prcffed
them  many  times  to  ftay  till  the  morning,  which  they  would
certainly  have  done  if  they  had  not  expected  the  fhip  to  fail,
greatly  regretting  that  they  had  not  become  acquainted  with
them  fooner,  as  they  made  no  doubt  but  that  more  knowlege
of  the  manners  and  difpofition  of  the  inhabitants  of  this
country  would  have  been  obtained  from  them  in  a  day,  than
they  had  yet  been  able  to  acquire  during  our  whole  ftay  upon
the  coaft.

•  •  i

.3  F  *  On


)


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


404

1770.  On  the  6th,  about  fix  o’clock  in  the  morning,  a  light  breeze
^Ftbruary^  fprurng  Up  at  north,  and  we  again  got  under  fail,  but  the
Tuciday  6.  wjn(j  proving  variable,  we  reached  no  farther  than  juft  with'
out  Motuara;  in  the  afternoon,  however,  a  more  fteady  gale
at  N.  by  W.  fet  us  clear  of  the  Sound,  which  I  fhall  now
defcribe.

The  entrance  of  Queen  Charlotte’s  Sound  is  fituated  in  la¬
titude  41 0  S.  longitude  184°  45'  W.  and  near  the  middle  of
the  fouth  weft  fide  of  the  ftreight  in  which  it  lies.  The  land
of  the  fouth  eaft  head  of  the  Sound,  called  by  the  natives
Koamaroo,  off  which  lie  two  fmall  iftands  and  fome  rocks,
makes  the  narroweft  part  of  the  ftreight.  From  the  north
weft  head  a  reef  of  rocks  runs  out  about  two  miles,  in  the
direction  of  N.  E.  by  N. ;  part  of  which  is  above  the  water,
and  part  below.  By  this  account  of  the  heads,  the  Sound
will  be  fufficiently  known:  at  the  entrance,  it  is  three  leagues
broad,  and  lies  in  S.W.  by  S. S.W.  and  W.S.W.  at  leaft  ten
leagues,  and  is  a  collection  of  fome  of  the  fineft  harbours  in
the  world,  as  will  appear  from  the  plan,  which  is  laid  down
with  all  the  accuracy  that  time  and  circumftances  would  ad¬
mit.  The  land  forming  the  harbour  or  cove  in  which  we
lay,  is  called  by  the  natives  Tot arranue  ?  the  harbour  itfelfy
which  I  called  Ship  Cove,  is  not  inferior  to  any  in  the  Sound,
either  for  convenience  or  fafety :  it  lies  on  the  weft  fide  of
the  Sound,  and  is  the  fouthermoft  of  three  coves,  that  are
fituated  within  the  ifland  of  Motuara,  which  bears  eaft  of  it.
Ship  Cove  may  be  entered,  either  between  Motuara  and  a
long  ifland,  called  by  the  natives  Hamote,  or  between  Mo¬
tuara  and  the  weftern  fhore.  In  the  laft  of  thefe  channels
are  two  ledges  of  rocks,  three  fathom  under  water,  which
may  eafily  be  known  by  the  fea-weed  that  grows  upon  them.
In  failing  either  in  or  out  of  the  Sound,  with  little  wind,  at¬
tention


/


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


405

tendon  mud  be  had  to  the  tides,  which  flow  about  nine  or  1770.
ten  o’clock  at  the  full  and  change  of  the  moon,  and  rife  and  v_— ^-1 it
fall  between  feven  and  eight  feet  perpendicularly.  The  flood  Tuefday  6*
comes  in  through  theftreiglit  from  the  S.  E.  and  fetsflrongly
over  upon  the  north  w’efl  head,  and  the  reef  that  lies  off  it :
the  ebb  fets  with  {till  greater  rapidity  to  the  S.  E.  over  upon*
the  rocks  and  iflands  that  lie  off  the  fouth  eaft  head.  The
variation  of  the  compafs  we  found  from  good  obfervation  ta

be  130  s'  E-

The  land  about  this  found,  which  is  of  fuch  a  height  that
we  faw  it  at  the  diflance  of  twenty  leagues,  confifls  wholly
of  high  hills  and  deep  vallies,  well  flored  with  a  variety  of
excellent  timber,  fit  for  all  purpofes  except  mads,  for  which
it  is  too  hard  and  heavy.  The  fea  abounds  with  a  variety  of
fifli,  fo  that  without  going  out  of  the  cove  where  we  lay,  we
caught  every  day,  with  the  feine  and  hooks  and  lines,  a  quan¬
tity  fufficient  to  ferve  the  whole  {hip’s  company :  and  along
the  fliore  we  found  plenty  of  {hags,  and  a  few  other  fpecies
of  wild-fowl,  which  thofe  who  have  long  lived  upon  fait
provifions  will  not  think  defpicable  food.

The  number  of  inhabitants  fcarcely  exceeds  four  hundred*
and  they  live  difperfed  along  the  fliores,  where  their  foody
confiding  of  fifli  and  fern  roots,  is  mod  eafily  procured ;  for
we  faw  no  cultivated  ground.  Upon  any  appearance  of  dan¬
ger,  they  retire  to  their  Hippahs,  or  forts  j  in  this  fituation
we  found  them,  and  in  this  fituation  they  continued  for  fome
time  after  our  arrival.  In  comparifon  of  the  inhabitants  of
other  parts  of  this  country,  they  are  poor,  and  their  canoes
are  without  ornament :  the  little  traffic  we  had  with  them
was  wholly  for  fifli,  and  indeed  they  had  fcarcely  any  thing
elfe  to  difpofe  of.  They  feemed,  however,  to  have  fome
knowlege  of  iron,  which  the  inhabitants  of  fome  other  parts

had


406

1770.

February.


Tucfdey  6.


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

had  not ;  for  they  willingly  took  nails  for  their  fifh,  and
1  fometimes  feemed  to  prefer  it  to  every  thing  elfe  that  we
■could  offer,  which  had  not  always  been  the  cafe.  They  were
at  firft  very  fond  of  paper;  but  when  they  found  that  it  was
fpoiled  by  being  wet,  they  would  not  take  it:  neither  did
they  fet  much  value  upon  the  cloth  of  Otaheite  ;  but  Englifh
broad  cloth,  and  red  kerfey,  were  in  high  eftimation ;  which
Viewed  that  they  had  fenfe  enough  to  appretiate  the  com¬
modities  which  we  offered  by  their  ufe,  which  is  more  than
could  be  faid  of  fome  of  their  neighbours,  who  made  a
much  better  appearance.  Their  drefs  has  been  mentioned
already,  particularly  their  large  round  head-dreffes  of  fea¬
thers,  which  were  far  from  being  unbecoming.

As  foon  as  we  got  out  of  the  Sound,  I  flood  over  to  the
eaflward,  in  order  to  get  the  (height  well  open  before  the
ude  of  ebb  came  on.  At  feven  in  the  evening,  the  two
(mail  i (lands  which  lie  off  Cape  Koamaroo,  the  fouth  eafl
head  of  Queen  Charlotte’s  Sound,  bore  eafl,  diflant  about  four
miles:  at  this  time  it  was  nearly  calm,  and  the  tide  of  ebb
fetting  out,  we  were,  in  a  very  fliort  time,  carried  by  the  ra¬
pidity  of  the  dream  clofe  upon  one  of  the  idands,  which  was
a  rock  riling  almod  perpendicularly  out  of  the  fea:  we  per¬
ceived  our  danger  increafe  every  moment,  and  had  but  one
expedient  to  prevent  our  being  dafhed  to  pieces,  the  fuccefs
of  which  a  few  minutes  would  determine.  We  were  now
within  little  more  than  a  cablets  length  of  the  rock,  and  had
more  than  feventy-five  fathom  water ;  but  upon  dropping
an  anchor,  and  veering  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  fathom
of  cable,  the  fhip  was  happily  brought  up :  this,  however,
would  not  have  laved  us,  if  the  tide  which  fet  S.  by  E.  had
not,  upon  meeting  with  the  ifland,  changed  i;s  direction
to  S.  E.  and  carried  us  beyond  the  firft  point.  In  this
Situation,  we  were  not  above  two  cables’  length  from  the

rocks ;


/


ROUND  THE  WORLD,


4°7


rocks;  and  here  we  remained  in  the  drength  of  the  tide,  1770.
which  fet  to  the  S.  E.  after  the  rate  of  at  leafl  five  miles  an  1  Fe^ry]
hour,  from  a  little  after  feven  till  near  midnight,  when  the  Tuefday  6r
tide  abated,  and  we  began  to  heave.  By  three  in  the  morn-  Wedaef.7.
ing  the  anchor  was  at  the  bows,  and  having  a  light  breeze
at  N.  W.  we  made  fail  for  the  eaflern  fhore ;  but  the  tide
being  againfl  us,  we  made  but  little  way :  the  wind  however
afterwards  frefhened,  and  came  to  N.  and  N.  E.  with  which,
and  the  tide  of  ebb,  we  were  in  a  fhort  time  hurried  through
the  narrowed  part  of  the  dreight,  and  then  flood  away  for
the  fouthermofl  land  we  had  in  fight.,,  which  bore  from  us
S.  by  W.  Over  this  land  appeared  a  mountain  of  flupendous
height,  which  was  covered  with  fnow.


The  narrowed  part  of  the  dreight,  through  which  we  had
been  driven  with  fuch  rapidity,  lies  between  Cape  Tiera-
witte,  on  the  coad  of  Eaheinomauwe,  and  Cape  Koamaroo  :
the  didance  between  them  I  judged  to  be  between  four  or
five  leagues,  and  notwithdanding  the  tide,  now  its  drength
is  known,  may  be  pafTed  without  much  danger,  ft  is  how¬
ever  fafed  to*  keep  on  the  north  ead  fhore,  for  on  that  fide
there  appeared  to  be  nothing  to  fear;  but  on  the  other  fhore
there  are  not  only  the  idands  and  rocks  which  lie  off  Cape
Koamaroo,.  but  a  reef  of  rocks  dretching  from  thefe  idands
fix  or  feven  miles  to  the  fouthward,  at  the  didance  of  two  or
three  miles  from  the  fhore,  which  I  had  difeovered  from  the
hill  when  I  took  my  fecond  view  of  the  dreight  from  the
ead  to  the  wedern  fea.  The  length  of  the  dreight  we  had
pafifed  I  fhall  not  pretend  to  adign,  but  fome  judgment  may
be  formed  of  it  from  a  view  of  the  chart.

About  nine  leagues  north  from  Cape  Tierawitte,  and  un¬
der  the  fame  fhore,  is  a  high  and  remarkable  ifland  which
may  be  didin&ly  feen  from  Queen  Charlotte’s  Sound,  from

,  which


/


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE


which  it  is  diftant  about  fix  or  fcven  leagues.  This  ifland,
which  was  noticed  when  we  palled  it  on  the  14th  of  January,
I  have  called  Entry  Isle.

On  the  eaft  fide  of  Cape  Tierawitte,  the  land  trends  away
S.  E.  by  E.  about  eight  leagues,  where  it  ends  in  a  point,  and
is  the  fouthermofl  land  on  Eaheinomauwe.  To  this  point  I
have  given  the  name  of  Cape  Palliser,  in  honour  of  my
worthy  friend  Captain  Pallifer.  It  lies  in  latitude  41 0  34  S.
longitude  183°  58'  W.  and  bore  from  us  this  day  at  noonS.  79  E.
diflan  t  about  thirteen  leagues,  the  Ihip  being  then  in  the  la¬
titude  of  41 0  27'  S. ;  Koamaroo  at  the  fame  time  bearing
N.  4.  E.  diftant  feven  or  eight  leagues.  The  fouthermofl
land  in  fight  bore  S.  16  W.  and  the  fnowy  mountain  S.  W.
At  this  time  we  were  about  three  leagues  from  the  ffiore,
and  abreaft  of  a  deep  bay  or  inlet,  to  which  I  gave  the  name
of  Cloudy  Bay,  and  at  the  bottom  of  which  there  appeared
low  land  covered  with  tall  trees.

At  three  o’clock  in  the  afternoon  we  were  abreafl  of  the
fouthermofl  point  of  land  that  we  had  feen  at  noon,  which
I  called  Cape  Cam  peel;  it  lies  S.  by  W.  diflant  between
twelve  and  thirteen  leagues  from  Gape  Koamaroo,  in  lati¬
tude  41 0  44'  S.  longitude  183*  45'  W. ;  and  with  Cape  Pallifer
forms  the  fouthern  entrance  of  the  ftreight,  the  diflance  be¬
tween  them  being  between  thirteen  and  fourteen  leagues
W.  by  S.  and  E.  by  N.

From  this  Cape  we  fleered  along  the  ffiore  S.W.  by  S.  till
eight  o’clock  in  the  evening,  when  the  wind  died  away.
About  half  an  hour  afterwards,  however,  a  frelh  breeze
fprung  up  at  S.  W.  and  I  put  the  ffiip  right  before  it.  My
reafon  for  this,  was  a  notion  which  fome  of  the  officers  had
jufl  flarted,  that  Eahienomauwe  was  not  an  ifland,  and  that
the  land  might  flreteh  away  to  the  S.  E,  from  between  Cape

5  Turnagain


ROUND  THE  WORLD.


409


1770.

February.

Wednef.  7.


Turnagain  and  Cape  Pallifer,  there  being  a  fpace  of  between
twelve  and  fifteen  leagues  that  we  had  not  feen.  I  had  in¬
deed  the  Pronged  convi&ion  that  they  were  miftaken,  not
only  from  what  I  had  feen  the  firfl  time  d  difeovered  the
freight,  but  from  many  other  concurrent  tedimonies  that
the  land  in  quedion  was  an  ifland  ;  but  being  refolved  to
leave  no  podibility  of  doubt  with  refped  to  an  objeefl  of  fuch
importance,  I  took  the  opportunity  of  the  wind’s  fluffing,  to
fl and  eadward,  and  accordingly  deered  N.  E.  by  E.  all  the
night.  At  nine  o’clock  in  the  morning  we  were  abread  of  Thurfdays.
Cape  Pallifer,  and  found  the  land  trend  away  N.  E.  towards
Cape  Turnagain,  which  I  reckoned  to  be  diflant  about  twenty-
fix  leagues:  however,  as  the  weather  was  hazy,  fo  as  to
prevent  our  feeing  above  four  or  five  leagues,  I  dill  kept
flanding  to  the  N.  E.  with  a  light  breeze  at  fouth ;  and  at
noon  Cape  Pallifer  bore  N.  72  W.  diflant  about  three  leagues.


About  three  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  three  canoes  came
up  to  the  fhip  with  between  thirty  and  forty  people
on  board,  who  had  been  pulling  after  us  with  great  la¬
bour  and  perfeverance  for  fome  time :  they  appeared  to  be
more  cleanly,  and  a  better  clafs,  than  any  we  had  met
with  fince  we  left  the  Bay  of  Iflands,  and  their  canoes  were
alfo  diflinguifhed  by  the  fame  ornaments  which  we  had  feen
upon  the  northerly  part  of  the  coad.  They  came  on  board
with  very  little  invitation  j  and  their  behaviour  was  courteous
and  friendly:  upon  receiving  prefents  from  us,  they  made
us  prefents  in  return,  which  had  not  been  done  by  any  of
the  natives  that  we  had  feen  before.  We  foon  perceived  that
our  gueds  had  heard  of  us,  for  as  foon  as  they  came  on
board,  they  afked  for  Who w,  the  name  by  which  nails  were
known  among  the  people  with  whom  we  had  trafficked:  but
though  they  had  heard  of  nails,  it  was  plain  they  had  feen
Vol.  II.  -  3G  none;


4io


LIEUTENANT  COOK’s  VOYAGE

February.  n0nC  ’  for  when  nails  were  Sivcn  them,  they  afked  Tupia

mTT  what  they  were'  The  term  Who'w'  indeed-  conveyed  to  them
ay  *  the  idea  not  of  their  quality,  but  only  of  their  ufe  ;  for  it  is

the  fame  by  which  they  diftinguifh  a  tool,  commonly  made
of  bone,  which  they  ufe  both  as  an  augur  and  a  chifTel.
However,  their  knowing  that  we  had  Wbow  to  fell,  was  a
proof  that  their  connections  extended  as  far  north  as  Cape
Kidnappers,  which  was  diftant  no  lefs  than  forty-five  leagues ;
for  that  was  the  fouthermoft  place  on  this  fide  the  coafl
where  we  had  had  any  traffic  with  the  natives.  It  is  alfo
piooable,  that  the  littic  knowlege  which  the  inhabitants  of
Queen  Charlotte’s  Sound  had  of  iron,  they  obtained  from
their  neighbours  at  Tierawitte ;  for  we  had  no  reafon  to
think  that  the  inhabitants  of  any  part  of  this  coaft  had  the
leaf;  knowlege  of  iron  or  its  ufe  before  we  came  among  them,
efpecially  as  when  it  was  firfi  offered  they  feemed  to  dif-
regard  it  as  of  no  value.  W t  thought  it  probable,  that  we
were  now  once  more  in  the  territories  of  Teratu ;  but  upon
enquiring  of  thefe  people,  they  faid  that  he  was  not  their
King.  After  a  Ihort  time,  they  went  away,  much  gratified
with  the  prefents  that  we  had  made  them  j  and  we  purfued
our  courfe  along  the  fhore  to  the  N.  E.  till  eleven  o’clock  the
Friday  9.  next  morning.  About  this  time,  the  weather  happening  to
clear  up,  we  faw  Cape  Turnagain,  bearing  N.  by  E.  4  E.  at
the  diftance  of  about  feven  leagues  :  I  then  called  the  officers
upon  deck,  and  afked  them,  whether  they  were  not  now
fatisfied,  that  Eahienomauwe  was  an  ifland  ;  they  readily
anfwered  in  the  affirmative,  and  all  doubts  being  now  re¬
moved,  we  hauled  our  wind  to  the  eaftward.


*


END  OF  THE  SECOND  VOLUME.


V


.


t


,  .  .  /
\.'  .  \  f

**  »

'v.  \  -  *•

4


i


7


I


f


V.


/


f


\


l\  •


/


/  v


I


/


/


\


*


i


''V


i


t


•  s


*


4^  .


b


■


\


*


>


t


\


'

"


v  :V


V


K


/


\


/


•  /


\


4


