Source note (Tower of Babel staging): John Hawkesworth, An Account of the Voyages undertaken by the order of His present Majesty (London: W. Strahan & T. Cadell, 1773), Vol. I. Text from Internet Archive item accountofvoyages01hawk (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

^Aqp^ 


^'    ^-'^ 


\rrv 


r 


/'. 


^«S 


jfr:. 


yy 


\ 


"^-'V. 


.^  W-  V.  >^ 


UNIVERSITY  OF   PITTSBURGH 

^fe-- 

^M  -^ 

^ros^l|l^r 

Dar 

ington  Alemorial  Liibrary 

AN 

ACCOUNT 

O  F     T  H  E 

VOYAGES 

UNDERTAKEN    BY    THE 

ORDER    OF    HIS    PRESENT   MAJESTY 

FOR     MAKING 

Difcoveries  in  the  Southern  Hemifphere, 

And  fuccefllvely  performed  by 


COMMODORE   BYRON, 
CAPTAIN   WALLIS, 


CAPTAIN   CARTERET, 
And  CAPTAIN    COOK, 


In  the  DOLPHIN,   theSWALLOW,    and  the  E  ND  E  AV  O  UR  : 

Drawn  up 

From  the  Journals  which  were  kept  by  the  feveral  Commanders, 

And  from  the  Papers  of  JOSEPH    BANKS,    Efq; 

By   JOHN    HAWKESWORTH,  LL.D. 

IN    THREE    VOLUMES. 

Illuftrated  with  CUTS,  and  a  great  Variety  of  CHARTS  and  MAPS  relative  ta 
Countries  now  firft  difcovered,  or  hitherto  but  imperfeftly  known. 

VOL.     I. 


LONDON; 

Printed  for  W.  STRAHAN;    and  T.  CADELL  in  the  Strand. 
MDCCLXXiri. 


TO     THE 


K     I    N    a 


S  I  R, 

AFTER  the  great  improvements  that 
^  ^  have  been  made  in  Navigation  lince  the 
difcovery  of  America,  it  may  well  be  thought 
ftrange  that  a  very  confiderable  part  of  the 
globe  on  which  we  live  Ihould  ftill  have  remain- 
ed unknown  j  that  it  ihould  ftill  have  been  the 
fubjedl  of  fpeculation,  whether  a  great  portion 
of  the  Southern  Hemifphere  is  land  or  water  j 
and,  even  where  land  had  been  difcovered,  that 

A  2  neither 


DEDICATION. 

neither  its  extent  nor  figure  fhould  have  been 
afcertained.  But  the  caufe  has  probably  been, 
that  fovereign  Princes  have  feldom  any  other 
motive  for  attempting  the  difcovery  of  new 
countries  than  to  conquer  them,  that  the  ad- 
vantages of  conquering  countries  which  muft 
firfl:  be  difcovered  are  remote  and  uncertain, 
and  that  ambition  has  always  found  objects 
nearer  home. 

It  is  the  diftinauifliing  chara^teriftic  of  Your 
Majefty  to  a6l  from  more  liberal  motives  ^  and 
having  the  heft  fleet,  and  the  braveft  as  well 
as  moft  able  navigators  in  Europe,  Your 
Majefty  has,  not  with  a  view  to  the  acquifition 
of  treafure,  or  the  extent  of  dominion,  but  the 
improvement  of  commerce  and  the  increafe 
and  diffufion  of  knowlege,  undertaken  what 
has  fo  long  been  negle6led ;  and  under  Your 
Majefty's  aufpices,  in  little  more  than  feven 
years,  difcoveries  have  been  made  far  greater 
than  thofe  of  all  the  navigators  in  the  world 
8  col- 


DEDICATION. 

collectively,  from  the  expedition  of  Columbus 
to  the  prefent  time. 

To  have  been  appointed  to  record  them, 
and  permitted  to  infcribe  the  narrative  to  Your 
Majefty,  is  an  honour,  the  fenfe  of  which  will 
always  be  retained  with  the  warmeft  gratitude^ 
by 

YOUR  MAJESTY'S 
Moll  faithful, 

and  moft  obliged 

Bromley,  Kent, 
ift  May  1773. 

Subjed  and  Servant, 


JOHN    HAWKESWORTIi, 


CONTENTS 

O  F    T  H  E 

FIRST        VOLUME. 

General  Introduction.  Page  i 

4n  Explanation  of  the  Nauticnl  Termt  mt  generally  mderftood -which 
occur  in  this  Work.  xxiii 

A  Defcription  of  the  Cuts.  xxxt 

COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE. 
C  H  A  P.    I. 

The  PaJJagefro7n  the  Downs  to  Rio  de  Janeiro.  % 

CHAP.     II. 

Paffage  from  Rio  de  Janeiro  to  Port  Deftre  i  ivith  fome  Defcription 
of  that  Place.  g 

CHAP.     III. 

Courfefrom  Port  Deftre^  in  Search  of  Pepys'  Ifland^  and  after-wards 
to  the  Coqft  of  Patagonia^  with  a  Defcription  of  the  Inhabitants. 

CHAP.     IV. 

Pajage  up  the  Streight  of  Magellan^  to  Port  Famine ;  ivith  fome. 
Account  of  that  Harbour^  and  the  adjacent  Coaji.  33. 

CHAP.     V. 

The  Cotirfe  hack  from  Port  Famine  to  Falkland's  Ifi-ands^  ivith  fome: 
Account  of  the  Country.  ^i 

2  G  H  A  P. 


€    O    N    T    E    N    T    S. 

CHAP.     VT. 

Jlje  Pjjage  through  the  Streight  of  Magellan  as  far  as  Cape  Monday  y 
n.vhh  a  Defcriptlon  of  fever  al  Bays  and  Ifarbours,  formed  by  the 
Coafl  on  each  Side.  58 

C  II  A  P.    VII. 

The  Paffagefrom  Cape  Monday^  in  the  Streight  ofMagcllan^  into  the 

South  Seas  ;  ivith  fome  general  Remarks  on  the  Navigation  of  that 

Streight.  JS 

CHAP.    VIII. 

The  Run  from  the  JVefern  Entrance  of  the  Streight  of  Magellan,  to 
ihe  I/lands  of  Dif appointment.  86 

CHAP.    IX. 

The  Difcovery  of  King  George^ s  I/lands,  'with  a  Defcription  of  therriy 
and  an  Account  offeveral  Incidents  that  happened  there.  97 

CHAP.     X. 

The  Run  from  King  George's  Iflands  to  the  I/lands  of  Say  pan,  Tinian, 
and  Aguigan  ;  tuith  an  Account  offeveral  Iflands  that  ivere  dif- 
covered  in  that  Track.  107 

CHAP.    XI. 

The  Arrival  of  the  Dolphin  and  Tamar  at  Tinian,  a  Defcription  of 

the  prefent  Condition  of  that  Ifland,  4ind  an  Account  of  the  TranJaC' 

tions  there.  11 S 

CHAP.     XII. 

The  Run  from  Tinian  to  Pulo  Timoan,  ivith  fome  Account  of  that 
Jf/landy  its  Inhabitants  and  Produilions,  and  thence  to  Batavia. 

CHAP.     XIII. 

Tranfaflions  at  Bat/^via^  aiid  Departure  from  that  Place.  131 

CHAP    XIV. 

ll.ie  Paffagefrom  Batavia  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  from  thence 
to  England.  135 

CAPTAIN 


CONTENTS, 
CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE. 

C  H  A  P.    I. 

The  PaJJhge  to  the  Coajl  of  Patagonia,  iv'ith  fome  Account  of  the 
Natives.  363 

C  H  A  P.    II. 

The  Pajfage  through  the  Str eight  of  Magellan.,  ivith  fome  further 
Account  of  the  Patagonians,  and  a  Defcription  of  the  Coajl  on  each 
Side,  uiul  id  rabubuaMtt.  "ilQ 

CHAP.    III. 

A  particular  Account  of  the  Places  in  ivhich  ive  anchored  during  our 
Pajfage  through  the  Streight.,  and  of  the  Shoals  and  Rocks  that 
He  near  them^  /  I  q 

CHAP.    IV. 

*The  PaJJagefrom  the  Str eight  of  Magellan,  to  King  George  the  Third's 
Jfland,  called  Otaheite,  in  the  South  Sea,  ivith  an  Account  of  the 
Difco'very  of  fever al  other  Iflands,  and  a  Defcription  of  their  In- 
habitants, ^jg 

*  C  H  A  P.    V. 

■  r 
An  Account  of  the  Difcovery  of  King  George  the  Third's  Ifland,  or 
Otaheite,  and  offeveral  Incidents  ivhich  happened  both  on  board 
the  Ship,  and  on  Shore.  40  , 

CHAP.     VI. 

The  Sickfent  on  Shore,  and  a  regular  Trade  eflablifhed  ivith  the  Na- 
tives ;  fome  Account  of  their  CharaEler  and  Manners,  of  their  Vifits 
on  board  the  Ship,  and  a  Variety  of  Incidents  that  happened  during 
this  Intercourfe,  .^. 

Vol.  i.  a       .  CHAP, 


CONTENTS. 

CHAP.     VII. 

An  Adtount  of  an  Expedition  to  difcover  the  inland  Part  of  the  Courts 
try,  and  otir  other  TranfaBions^,  till  we  quitted  the  I/land  to  con- 
tinue our  Voyage.  472 

CHAP.    VIII. 

A  more  particular  Account  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Otaheite,  and  of 
their  dome/lie  Life,  Manners ^  and  Arts.  480 

CHAP-     TX. 

Pajagefrom  Otahciic  to  Timan,  ivith  fome  Account  of  fever  al  other 
Iflands  that  -were  difcovered  in  the  South  Seas.  45^0; 

CHAP.    XI  *. 

Sotne  Account  of  the  prefent  State  of  the  I/land  ofTinian,  and  our  Etn- 
ployinent  there;  ivith  ivhat  happened  in  the  Run  from  thence  to 
Batavia.  49^ 

CHAP.    XII. 

TranfaBions  at  Batavia,  and  an  Account  of  the  Paffagefrom  thence 
to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  507 

CHAP.     XIII. 

An  Account  of  our  TranfaElions  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope^  and  of  the 
Return  of  the  Dolphin  to  England.  513 

CAPTAIN  CARTERET'S  VOYAGE. 

CHAP.  I. 

The  Run  from  Plytnouth  to  Madeira,  and  from  thence  through  the 
St r eight  of  Magellan .  5  25 

•  The  tenth  Chaptef  is  by  miftake  numbaed  XI. 

CHAP. 


CONTENTS, 


CHAP.     11. 


The  Taffage  from  Cape  Pillar,  at  theWeJiern  Entrance  of  the  Streight 
of  Magellan^  to  Mafafiiero-,  ivithfome  Account  of  that  I/land.  537 

CHAP.     IK. 

The  Paffage  from  Mafafuero  to  ^leen  Charlotte's  Iflands ;  fever al 
Mifiakes  corrected  concerning  Davis's  Land.,  and  an  Account  of 
fomejmall  IJlands,  fuppofed  to  be  the  fame  that  voerefeen  by  ^liros. 

557 
'^  H  A  P.    IV. 

An  Account  of  the  Dlfcovery  of  ^leen  Charlotte's  J/land,  with  a 
Defcription  of  them  and  their  InbabitantSi  ci,nd  of  vohat  happened 
at  Egmont  Ifland.  ^6§ 

CHAP.     V. 

Departure  from  Egmont  Ifland,  and  Paffage  to  Nova  Britannia  ;  with 
n  Defcription  offeveral  other  Iflands,  and  their  Inhabitants.      584 

CHAP.    VI. 

Dlfcovery  of  a  Streight  dividing  the  Land  called  Nova  Britannia 
into  tivo  Iflands,  with  a  Defcription  of  fever  al  fmall  Iflands  that 
lie  in  the  Paffage,  and  the  Land  on  each  fide,  with  the  Inhabitants. 

595 
CHAP.    VII. 

The  Paffage  from  Saint  George's  Channel  to  the  Ifland  of  Mindanao^ 
with  an  Account  of  many  Iflands  that  were  fen,  and  Incidents  that 
happened  by  the  Way.  6q2 

CHAP,     VIII. 

Some  Account  of  the  Coafl  of  Mindanao,  and  the  Iflands  near  it,  in 
which  fever  al  Mifiakes  of  Dampier  are  correal  ed.  611 

a  2  CHAP. 


CONTENTS, 

C  H  A  P.    IX. 

The  P  off  age  from  Mindanao  to  the  I/land  of  Celebes,  ivith  apartteulay 

Account  of  the  Streight  of  Macaffar^  in  ivhich  many  Errors  are 

corre£led.  6zz 

CHAP.     X. 

Tranfa^iions  off  MacaJJ'ar^  and  the  Paffage  thence  to  Bonthain.       630 

CHAP,     XI. 

TranfaBions  at  Bonthain^  'while  theVeffelivas'uoaittng  for  aWindto 
carry  her  to  Batavia,  ivith  fo7Jie  Account  of  ^J^"  PIt-p,  the  Town 
of  Macajfar,  and  the  adjacei^^  ^'^''■^^f^J-  %8 

CHAP.     XII. 

P  of  age  from  Bonthain  Bay,  in  the  Ifland  of  Celebes,  to  Batavia : 
TranfaSlions  there^  and  the  Voyage  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to 
England.  ^49 


GENERAL 


1 


GENERAL    INTRODUCTION. 


HIS  Majefly,  foon  after  his  acceffion  to  the  crown, 
formed  a  defign  of  fending  out  veffels  for  making 
difcoveries  of  countries  hitherto  unknown,  and  in  the  year 
1764,  the  kingdom  being  then  in  a  Hate  of  profound  peace, 
he  proceeaed  to  put  it  into  execution.  The  Dolphin  and 
the  Tamar  were  difpatched  under  rhe  command  of  Commo- 
dore Byron,  and  the  befl  account  of  his  Majefty's  motives 
and  defign  that  can  be  given,  will  be  found  in  the  following 
preamble  to  Commodore  Byron's  inflru(5lions,  which  are 
dated  the  17th  of  June  in  that  year. 

"  Whereas  nothing  can  redound  more  to  the  honour  of 
«  this  nation,  as  a  maritime  power,  to  the  dignity  of  the 
•*  Crown  of  Great  Britain,  and  to  the  advancement  of  the 
*^  trade  and  navigation  thereof,  than  to  make  difcoveries  of 
"  counti-ies  hitherto  unknown  ;  and  whereas  there  is  reafon 
"  to  believe  that  lands  and  iflands  of  great  extent,  hitherto 
"  unvifited  by  any  European  power,  may  be  found  in  the 
«'  Atlantic  Ocean,  between  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  the 
"  Magellanic  Streighr,  within  the  latitudes  convenient  for  na- 
**  vigation,  and  in  climates  adapted  to  the  produce  of  com- 
«  modities  ufeful  in  commerce ;  and  whereas  his  Majefty's 
"  iflands  called  Pepys'  Ifland,  and  Falkland's  Iflands,  lying 
"  within  the  faid  tracfi:,  notwithftanding  their  having  been 
"  firft   difcovered  and  vifited   by  Britifli  navigators,    have 
«'  never  yet  been  fo  fufficieutly  furveyed  as  that  an  accurate 
♦*  judgment  may  De  formed  of  their  coalls  and  produdl ;  his 

"  Majefly 


GENERAL    INTRODUCTION. 

"  Majefty  taking  the  premifes  into  confideration,  and  con- 
"  ceiving  no  conjundlure  fo  proper  for  an  enterprize  of  this 
"  nature,  as  a  time  of  profound  peace,  which  his  kingdoms 
"  at  prefent  happily  enjoy,  has  thought  fit  that  it  fliould 
"  now  be  undertaken." 

The  Dolphin  was  a  man  of  war  of  the  fixth  rate,  mounting 
twenty-four  guns:  her  complement  was  150  men,  with  three 
Lieutenants,  and  thirty-feven  petty  officers. 

The  Tamar  was  a  floop,  mounting  fixteen  guns :  her  com- 
plement was  ninety  men,  with  three  Lieutenants,  and  two 
and  twenty  petty  officers,  and  the  command  o£  her  was 
given  to  Captain  Mouat. 

Commodore  Byron  returned  in  the  month  of  May  in  the 
year  i7<^6,  and  in  the  month  of  Auguft  following,  the  Dolphin 
was  again  fent  out,  under  the  command  of  Captain  Wallis, 
with  the  Swallow,  commanded  by  Captain  Carteret,  in  pro- 
fecution  of  the  fame  general  defign  of  making  difcovei-ies  in 
the  fouthern  hemifphere.  The  equipment  of  the  Dolphin 
was  the  fame  as  before.  The  Swallow  was  a  floop  mount- 
ing fourteen  guns ;  her  complement  was  ninety  men,  with 
one  Lieutenant,  and  twenty-two  petty  officers. 

Thefe  vefTels  proceeded  together  till  they  came  within 
fight  of  the  South  Sea,  at  the  weftern  entrance  of  the  Streight 
of  Magellan,  and  from  thence  returned  by  different  routs  to 
England. 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  year  1767,  it  was  refolved,  by  the 
Royal  Society,  that  it  would  be  proper  to  fend  perfons  into 
fome  part  of  the  South  Sea  to  obfcrvc  a  tranfit  of  the  planet 
Venus  over  the  fun's  difk,  which,  according  to  aftrono- 
mical  calculation,  would  happen  in  the  year  1769;  and  that 
the  iflands  called  Marquefas  de  Mendoza,  or  thofe  of  Rotter- 
dam 


GENERAL    INTRODUCTION. 

dam  or  Amfterdam,  were  the  properefl:  places  then  known  for 
making  fuch  obfervation. 

In  confequence  of  thefe  refolutions,  it  was  recommended 
to  his  Majefty,  in.  a  memorial  from  the  Society,  dated  Fe- 
bruary 1768,  that  he  would  be  pleafed  to  order  fuch  an  ob- 
fervation to  be  made  ;  upon  which  his  Majefty  fignified  to  the 
Lords  Commiflioners  of  the  Admiralty  his  pleafure  that  a  flaip 
fliould  be  provided  to  carry  fuch  obfervers  as  the  Society 
fhould  think  fit  to  the  South  Seas  ;  and  in  the  beginning  of 
April  following  the  Society  received  a  letter  from  the  Secre- 
tary of  the  Admiralty,  informing  them  that  a  bark  of  three 
hundred  and  levemy  ton  shad  been  taken  up  for  that  purpofe. 
This  veflel  was  called  the  Endeavour,  and  the  command  of  her 
given  to  Lieutenant  James  Cook,  a  gentleman  of  undoubted 
abilities  in  aftronomy  and  navigation,  who  was  foon  after, 
by  the  Royal  Society,  appointed,  with  Mr.  Charles  Green,  a. 
gentleman  who  had  long  been  affiftant  to  Dr.  Bradley  at  the 
Royal  Obfervatory  at  Greenwich,  to  obferve  the  tranfit. 

"While  this  vefTel  was  getting  ready  for  her  expedition, 
Captain  Wallis  returned ;  and  it  having  been  recommended 
to  him  by  Lord  Morton,  when  he  went  out,  to  fix  on  a 
proper  place  for  this  aftronomical  obfervation,  he,  by  letter, 
dated  on  board  the  Dolphin,  the  i8th  of  May  1768,  the  day 
before  he  landed  at  Haftings,  mentioned  Port  Royal  harbour, 
in  an  ifland  which  he  had  difcovered,  then  called  George's 
Ifland,  and  fmce  Otaheite:  the  Royal  Society  therefore,  by 
letter,  dated  the  beginning  of  June,  in  anfwer  to  an  applica- 
tion from  the  Admiralty  to  be  informed  whither  they  would 
have  their  obfervers  fent,  made  choice  of  that  place. 

The  Endeavour  had  been  built  for  the  coal  trade,  and  a 

veffel  of  that  conftrucflion  was  preferred  for  many  reafons, 

particularly  becaufe  ihe  was  what  the  failors  call  a  good  fea 

6  boat 


iv  GENERAL    INTRODUCTION. 

boat,  was  more  roomy,  would  take  and  lie  on  the  ground 
better,  and  might  be  navigated  by  fev^rer  men  than  other 
vef][els  of  the  fame  burden. 

Her  complement  of  officers  and  men  was  Lieutenant 
Cook  the  Commander,  with  two  Lieutenants  under  him, 
a  Mafler  and  boatfv/ain,  with  each  two  mates,  a  furgeon  and 
carpenter,  with  each  one  mate,  a  gunner,  a  cook,  a  clerk 
,  and  fteward,  two  quarter-mafters,  an  armourer,  a  fail- 
maker,  three  midfhipmen,  forty-one  able  feamen,  twelve 
marines,  and  nine  fervants,  in  all  eighty-four  perfons, 
belides  the  Commander:  fhe  was  vicTtualled  for  eighteen 
months,  and  took  on  board  ten  mrriagc  and  twelve  fwivel 
guns,  with  good  Hore  of  ammunition  and  other  neceflaries. 
The  Endeavour  alfo,  after  the  aftronomical  obfervation  (hould 
be  made,  was  ordered  to  profecute  the  defign  of  making  dif- 
coveries  in  the  South  Seas.  What  was  effecfted  by  thefe  vef- 
fels  in  their  feveral  voyages,  will  appear  in  the  courfe  of  this 
work,  of  which  it  is  now  neceflary  to  give  fome  account. 

It  is  drawn  up  from  the  journals  that  were  kept  by  the 
Commanders  of  the  feveral  fhips,  which  were  put  into  my 
hands  by  the  Lords  Commiffioners  of  the  Admiralty  for  that 
purpofe :  and,  with  refpecSt  to  the  voyage  of  the  Endeavour, 
from  other  papers  equally  authentic  ;  an  affiftance  which  I 
have  acknowledged  in  an  introdudlion  to  the  account  of  her 
voyage. 

When  I  firfl  undertook  the  work,  it  was  debated,  whether 
it  fhould  be  written  in  the  firfl  or  third  perfon  :  it  was  rea- 
dily acknowledged  on  all  hands,  that  a  narrative  in  the  firfl: 
perfon  would,  by  bringing  the  Adventurer  and  the  Reader 
nearer  together,  without  the  intervention  of  a  ftranger, 
more  ftrongly  excite  an  intereft,  and  confequently  afford 
more  entertainment;  but  it  was  objeded,  that  if  it  was 
5  written 


GENERAL    INTRODUCTION. 

written  in  the  name  of  the  feveral  Commanders,  I  could  ex- 
hibit only  a  naked  narrative,  without  any  opinion  or  fenti- 
ment  of  my  own,  however  fair  the  occafion,  and  without 
noting  the  fimilitude  or  diffimilitiide  between  the  opinions, 
cuftoms,  or  manners  of  the  people  now  firft  difcovered,  and 
thofe  of  nations  that  have  been  long  known,  or  remarking 
on  any  other  incident  or  particular  that  might  occur.  In 
anfwer  to  this  objeflion,  however,  it  was  faid,  that  as  the 
manufcript  would  be  fubmitted  to  the  Gentlemen  in  whofe 
names  it  would  be  written,  fuppofing  the  narrative  to  be  in 
the  firft  perfon,  and  nothing  publifhed  without  their  appro- 
bation, it  would  fignify  little  who  conceived  the  fentiments 
that  fhould  be  exprefTed,  and  therefore  I  might  ftill  be  at 
liberty  to  exprefs  my  own.  In  this  opinion  all  parties  ac- 
quiefced,  and  it  was  determined  that  the  narrative  fhould 
be  written  in  the  lirfl  perfon,  and  that  I  might  notwithfland- 
ing  interfperfe  fuch  fentiments  and  obfervations  as  my  fub- 
jedt  fhould  fuggeft :  they  are  not  indeed  numerous,  and 
when  they  occur,  are  always  curfory  and  fliort ;  for  nothing 
would  have  been  more  abfurd  than  to  interrupt  an  intereft- 
ing  narrative,  or  new  defcriptions,  by  hypothefis  and  difTer- 
tation.  They  will  however  be  found  mofl  frequent  in  the 
account  of  the  voyage  of  the  Endeavour,  and  the  principal 
reafon  is,  that  although  it  flands  laft  in  the  feries,  great  part 
of  It  was  printed  before  the  others  were  written,  fo  that  fe- 
veral remarks,  which  would  naturally  have  been  fuggefled 
by  the  incidents  and  defcriptions  that  would  have  occurred 
in  the  preceding  voyages,  were  anticipated  by  iimilar  inci- 
dents and  defcriptions  which  occurred  in  this. 

Some  particulars  that  are  related  in  one  voyage  will  per- 
haps appear  to  be  repeated  in  another,  as  they  would  necef- 
farily  have  been  if  the  feveral  Commanders  had  written  the 
account  of  their  voyages  themfelves  ;  for  a  digeft  could  not 

Vol.  I.  b  have 


GENERAL    INTRODUCTION. 

have  been  made  of  the  whole,  without  invading  the  right 
of  each  navigator  to  appropriate  the  relation  of  what  he 
had  fccn  :  thcfe  repetitions  however  taken  together  will  be 
found  to  fill  but  a  few  pages  of  the  book. 

That  no  doubt  might  remain  of  the  fidelity  with  which  I 
l.ave  related  the  events  recorded  in  my  materials,  the  manu- 
icript  account  of  each  voyage  was  read  to  the  refpecTiivc 
Commanders  at  the  Admiralty,  by  the  appointment  of  Lord 
■Sandwich,  who  was  himfelf  pre  fen  t  during  much  the  great- 
cfl;  part  of  the  time.     The  account  of  the  voyage  of  the  En- 
deavour was  alfo  read  to  IMr.  Banks  and  Dr.  Solander,  in 
whofe  hands,  as  well  as  in  thofe  of  Captain  Cook,  the  manu- 
fcript  was  left  for  a  confiderable  time  after  the  reading. 
Commodore  Byron  alfo,  Captain  Wallis  and  Captain  Carteret, 
had  the  manufcripts  of  their  refpciftive  voyages  to  perufe, 
after  they  had  been  read  at  the  Admiralty  in  their  prefence, 
and  fuch  emendations  as  they  fuggefted  were   made.     In 
order  thus  to  authenticate  the  voyage  of  Captain  Cook,  the 
account  of  it  was  firfl:  written,  becaufe  it  was  expelled  when 
his  journal  was  put  into  my  hands,  that  he  would  have 
failed  on  the  voyage  he  is  now  making   in  lefs  than  five 
months. 

It  will  probably  be  thought  by  many  Readers,  that  I  have 
related  the  nautical  events  too  minutely  ;  but  it  muft  be  re- 
membered, that  minutely  to  relate  thefe  events  was  the 
great  object  of  the  work.  It  was  in  particular  thought  ne- 
ceflary  to  infert  the  fituation  of  the  Ihip  at  different  hours  of 
the  day,  with  the  bearings  of  diilcrcnt  parts  of  the  land 
while  flie  was  navigating  feas,  and  examining  fliorcs  tliat 
hitherto  have  been  altogether  unknown,  in  order  to  afcer- 
tain  her  track  more  minutely  than  coi;Id  be  done  in  any 
chart,  however  large  the  fcalc,  aiiil  to  defcribc  with  critical 

exacftncfs 


GENERAL    INTRODUCTION  yil 

exa^nefs  tlie  bays,  headlands,  and  other  iiTCgularities  ol 
thecoafl;  the  appearance  .of  the  country,  its  hills,  vallics, 
mountains,  and  woods,,  v/ith  the  depth  of  water,  an.d  every 
other  particular  that  might  enable  future  navigators  cafily 
to  find,  and.fafely  to  vifit  every  part  of  it.  I  was  not  indeed 
myfelf  fufficiently  apprifed  of  the  minurenefs  that  was  nc- 
ccflary  iii  this  part  of  the  work,  fo  that  I  was  obliged  to  make 
many  additions  to  it,  after  I  had  prepared  niy  manufcripr. 
It  is  however  hoped,  that  thofe  who  read  merely  for  enter- 
tainment will  be  compenfated  by  the  defcription  of  coun- 
tries •which  no  European  had  before  vifited,  and  manners 
which  in  many  inftances  exhibit  a  new  picture  of  human 
life.  In  this  part,  the  relation  of  little  circumftances  re- 
quires no  apology,  for  it  is  from  little  circumftances  that  the 
relation  of  great  events  derives  its  power  over  the  mind.  An' 
account  that  ten  thoufand  men  periilied  in  a  battle,  that* 
twice  the  number  were  fwallowed  up  by  an  earthquake,  or- 
that  a  whole  nation  was  fwept  away  by  a  peftilence,  is  read 
in  the  naked  brevity  of  an  index,  without  the  leaft  emotion,- 
by  thofe  who  feel  therafelves  llrongly  interefted  even  for 
Pamela,  the  imaginary  heroine  of  a  novel  that  is  remarkable 
for  the  enumeration  of  particulars  in  themfelves  fo  trilling, 
that  we  almoft  wonder  how  they  could  occur  to  the  author's 
mind. 

This  work  is  illuftratcd  and  adorned  by  a  great  mimbcr 
of  cuts,  from  which  every  clafs  of  readers,  whether  their 
objed  is  knowlege  or  plcafure,  will  find  equal  advantage, 
afs' they  confift  not  only  of  maps  and  charts,  drawn  wifii 
great  fkill  and  attention,  but  of  views  and  figures,  defigned 
and  executed  by  the  beft  artifts  in  this  country. 

,  The  mofl  efi'edluai  way  to  prevent  obfcurity  and  confufioni 

in  relating  events,  is  to  range  them  in  order  of  time,  which 

b  8  however 


viii  GENERAL    IN  T  RODUCTIO^f 

however  cannot  be  done  in  an  unbroken  feries  when  the 
compHcated  and  mukifarious  objedls  of  hiftory  are  to  be  re- 
corded ;  but  as  each  of  the  narra rives  in  this  work  is  a  fingle- 
thread,  the  tranfadlions  of  every  day  are  fet  down  in  a  regu- 
lar fuccefllon,  and  the  time  noted.in  th€  margin. 

Great  care  has  been  taken  to  make  the  charts  and  the 
nautical  part  of  the  narrative  coincide ;  if  there  fhould^  be 
any  difference,  which  it  is  hoped  will  not  be  the  cafe,  the 
charts  are  to  be  confided  in,  as  of  unquellionable  authority.. 
By  the  charts^  as  well  as  by  the  narrative,  efpecially  by  that: 
on  which  the  tracks  of  the  feveral  vefTels  are  marke-d,  it  will  be^ 
feen  how  far  the  exiftence  or  non  exiftence  of  a  fouthern  con- 
tinent is  already  afcertaincd,  and  whatlandhas  in  the  courfe of 
thefe  voyages  been  firfl  difcovered.  The  charts  alfo  will  at 
one  view  prevent  any  miftake  which  might  arife  from  the 
fame  name  having  been  given  to  different  iilands  by  the. 
feveral  Commanders  in  thefe  voyages,  without  the  trouble 
of  comparing  the  latitudes  and  longitudes  ailigned  them  in 
the  narrative. 

As  it  is  but  a  very  few  years  lince  the  exiftence  of  a  race.' 
of  msn  above  the  common  ftature  upon  the  coaft  of  Patago- 
nia, was  the  fubjecfl  of  eager  difpute  among  all  ranks  of 
people  in  this  country,  I  have  brought  together  the  whole 
of  the  evidence  on  the  queftion,  as  I  find  it  in  a  colle(flion  of 
voyages  lately  printed  in  France,  under  the  titlp  of  "  Hiftoire 
des  Navigationes  aux  Terres  Auftrales." 

"  It  muft  be  acknowledged,  that  the  contrariety  of  the  re- 
ports that  have  been  made,  by  ocular  witneffes,  concerning 
a  facfl  eafy  to  be  determined,  does  not  deviate  lefs  from  the 
common  courfe  of  things  than  the  gigantic  ftature  of  the 
people  in  queftion.     It  appears,  that  during  an  hundred 

years. 


GENERAL     INTRODUCTION.  ii 

years,  almoft  all  navigators,  of  whatever  country,  agree  in 
affirming  the  exiftence  of  a  race  of  giants  upon  the  coaft  of 
Patagonia  j  and  that  during  another  century,  the  much 
greater  number  agree  in  denying  the  fad,  treating  their 
predeceflbrs  as  idle  fabulifts,  and  imputing  their  reports 
either  to  the  terror  which  the  rude  fiercenefs  of  a  favage 
people  infpired,  or  to  the  natural  propenfity  of  mankind  to 
afTume  importance,  by  pretending  to  have  feen  wonderful 
things.  That  men  have  a  ftrange  propenfity  to  the  marvelous ^ 
cannot  be  denied,  nor  that  fear  naturally- magnifies  its  objecfti. 
but  though  it  be  allowed  that  the  accounts  of  the  Patagonians 
have  in  fome  inflances  been  exaggei*ated,  it  is  certain,  that 
all  who  have  affirmed  their  ftature  to  be  gigantic,  were  not 
under  the  influence  of  fear  j  and  it  is  very  ftrange,  that  na- 
tions who  have  an  hereditary  hatred  to  each  other,  and  an 
acknowledged  oppofition  of  intereft, .  fliould  agree  in  alTert-- 
ingan  evident  falfehood. 

"  In  the  firft  place,  it  is  well  known  to  have  been  an  opinion" 
long  efl:abliflied,.both  in  our  ancient  world  and  in  America,, 
that  there  was  once  a  race  of  giants  upon  earth  who  diftin-- 
guifhed  themfelves  by  violence  and  guilt. 

"  Barbenais  was  told  by  the  inhabitants  of'  South  Americay- 
that  a  deluge  having  laid  Peru  under  water,  the  Indians  re^- 
tired  to  the  mountains  till  the  flood  fhould  fubfide,  and  that 
when  they  came  again  down  to  the  plain,  they  found  there 
men  of  an  enormous  ftature,  who  attacked  them  with  great 
ferocity,  killing  many,  and  driving  the  reft  to  the  caves  of 
the  rocks  ;  but  that  having  continued  in  their  hiding 
places  many  years,  they  faw  in  the  air  a  young  man  who 
deftroyed  the  giants  by  thunderbolts,  and  thus  reftored  to 
them  the  pofleffion  of  their  country.   His  guides  alfo  ihowed 

him 


i  GENERAL    INTRODUCTION. 

>iiiii  many  marks  upon  a  rock  which  they  laid  were  im- 
jnclled  by  the  thunderbolts,  and  many  bones  of  an  extraor- 
dinary llze,  whicli  they  believed  to  be  remains  of  the  giants; 
but  they  did  not  pretend  to  know  when  the  deluge  hap- 
pened. 

*'  TheYnca  GarcilalTo  de  la  Vega,  in  hishiflory  of  Peru,  re- 
lates, t]iat  according  to  a  tradition  univerfally  received,  a  num- 
PcJro  de        ber  of  velTels  or'junks  came  to  Point  Saint  Helena  with  acom- 
^rVarcf-*    panv  of  giants  on  board,  of  a  ftaturc  fo  enormous  that  tlie 
IrifrL-r"' hV    natives  of  the  country  were  not  higher  than  their  knees :  that 
9.  chap.  9.     their  eyes  were  as  broad  as  the  bottom  of  a  plate,  and  their 
limbs  proportionably  large :  that  fome  of  them  were  naked,  and 
others  llightly  covered  with  the  flcins  of  beads.     That  when 
they  came  on  fliore,  they  dug  a  pit  of  an  aftonifliing  depth 
in  the  rock,  and  each  of  them  confuming  as  much  provi- 
fions  as  would  be  fufficient  for  fifty  men,  the  country  was 
foon  cxhaufted,  and  they  were  obliged  to  live  upon  fifli :  that 
they  feized  the  women  of  the  country,  to  whom  their  bru- 
tality was  fatal,   and  afterwards  giving  themfelves  up  to 
worfe  vices,   the  whole  race  was   deftroyed  by  fire  from 
heaven,  which  however  left  their  bones  unconfumed,  as  a 
lafting  memorial  of  Divine  vengeance.  Bones  of  an  amazing 
fize  are  faid  to  have  been  found  in  this  country,  and  frag- 
ments of  teeth,  which,  if  they  were   whole,   mull   have 
weighed  half  a  pound. 

"  Thofc  who  wifli  to  know  all  the  particulars  of  thefe 
American  traditions  may  fatisfy  their  curioftty  by  reading  Tor- 
qucmado,  lib.  i.  chap.  13  and  14.  where  they  will  find  that 
theie  fables  are  very  fimilar  to  thofc  relative  to  the  fame 
fubjcct  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  The  bjnes,  faid  to  have 
been  the  bones  of  giants,  which  have  been  found  in  Amc- 
8  I'ica, 


GENERAL    INTRODUCTION.  xi 

rica,  and  which  were  fliewn  at  Mexico  and  other  places  in 
the  year  1550,  are  probably  the  bones  of  ibme  animal  un- 
known ;  and  indeed  nothing  lels  than  the  fight  of  fuch  a 
race  of  human  beings,  or  of  an  entire  fkelcton,  can  be  ad-s 
mitted  as  a  proof  of  their  exiflence.  Turner,  the  naturalift, 
reports,  that  in  the  year  1610,  the  thigh  bone  of  a  man  was 
jQiewn  in  London,  who  muft  have  been  of  an  enormous  fize  ; 
but  this  teflimony  is  not  decifive,  though  the  author  adds, 
that  he  had  himfelf  feen  near  the  river  Plata,  upon  the  coaft 
of  Brafil,  a  race  of  giants  who  went  ftark  naked ;  that  the 
hinder  part  of  their  heads  was  flat,  and  not  round ;  that  the, 
women  had  long  black  hair,  as  coarfe  as  a  horfe's  mane  y. 
that  the  men  were  excellent  archers,  and,  befides  their  bow 
and  arrows,  carried  two  maffive  balls  or  bullets,  each  faflened 
to  one  end  of  a  thong,  a  weapon  which  they  ufed  with  great 
dexterity  and  force,  either  by  ilriking  with  it,  or  throwing 
it  like  a  ftone  from  a  lling.  One  of  thefe  giants,  he  fays, 
was  twelve  feet  high ;  but  acknowledges  that  he  faw  no 
other  fo  tall. 

'■'  Of  this  fad  there  are  other  ocular  witnefles  who  perhaps 
may  be  thought  more  worthy  of  credit;  among  the  Spa- 
niards, Magellan,  Loaifa,  Sarmicnto,  and  Nodal ;  among  the 
Englifh,  Cavendifh,  Hawkins,  and  Knivet ;  among  the  Dutcli, 
Sebald,  de  Noorr,  le  Maire,  and  Spilberg ;  and  among  the 
French,  thofe  who  went  in  the  expedition  from  Marfcilfes, 
and  Saint  Maloes.  Thofe  who  bear  tcftimony  to  tlic  con- 
trary, are  Winter,  the  Dutch  Adriiiral  Hermite,  Froger  in^de 
Gennes's  narrative,  and  Sir  John  Narborough.  Winter,  afiCF 
having  himfelf  feen  the  inhabitants  of  Patagonia,  fays  ia 
dircd  terms,  that  the  accounts  of  theii'  being  gi^ints  are 
fallchoods  invented  by  the  Spaniards;  and  it  mufl  be'con- 
felTed  that  the  teiUmony.  of  thefe  navigators  at  leaft  counteiv 

balances 


^i  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION. 

balances  the  evidence  on  the  other  fide,  efpecially  as  they 
were  bed  acquainted  v/ith  the  Streight  of  Magellan,  and  the 
neighbouring  country.  -Such  navigators  as  have  vifited  this 
Country,  and  are  filent  virith  refpedt  to  the  llature  of  the  in- 
habitants, particularly  Sir  Francis  Drake,  muft  be  confidered 
as  witneffes  againfl  the  fa(5b  in  queftion  ;  for  their  filence 
■is  a  proof  that  they  faw  nothing  extraordinary.  It  muft  how- 
ever be  '^bferved,  in  the  firft  place,  that  the  greater  part  of 
;thofe  who  hold  the  affirmative  in  this  queftion,  fpeak  of 
people  that  inhabited  the  defert  coaft  of  Patagonia  to  the 
eaft  and  weft;  and  that,  on  the  contrary,  thofe  who  hold 
the  negative,  fpeak  of  thofe  v^rho  inhabit  the  Streight  upon 
tthe  fides  of  the  utmoft  point  of  America  to  the  north  and 
fouth.  The  nations  of  thefe  two  diftri<Sts  are  certainly  not 
the  fame  ;  and  if  the  firft  have  fometimes  been  feen  in  the 
Streight,  it  cannot  be  thought  ftrange,  confidering  how  fhort 
the  diftance  is  from  Port  Saint  Julian,  which  appears  to 
be  their  ordinary  habitation.  Magellan,  and  his  people 
faw  them  there  very  often,  and  trafficked  with  them 
fometimes  on  board  his  fliips,  and  fometimes  on  fhore  . 
nor  was  this  all,  he  feized  two  of  them,  and  kept  them  prN 
foners  in  his  veftel,  one  of  whom  was  baptized  fome  time 
before  his  death,  and  taught  feveral  words  of  his.  language 
to  Pigafette,  who  formed  them  into  a  little  didionary^:  thefe 
are  fa<fts  than  which  nothiiag  can  be  more  pofitive,  or  lefs 
fubjeft  to  illufion. 

"  I  affirm,  fays  Knivct,  that  when  I  was  at  Port  Defire  I 
meafured  feveral  dead  bodies  that  1  found  buried  there, 
which  were  from  fourteen  to  fixteen  fpans  high,  and  faw 
tracks  in  the  fand  which  muft  have  been  left  by  people  of 
nearly  the  fame  ftature.  I  have  alfo  frequently  feen  at  Bra- 
zil, one  of  the  Patagonians  who  had  been  tak^n  at  Port  Saint 
3  Julian, 


GENERAL    INTRODUCTION.  xiu 

Julian,  and  though  he  was  but  a  youth,  he  nieafured  no 
lefs  than  thirteen  fpans  :  and  our  EngUfh  prifoners  at  Brazil 
have  aflured  me  that  they  had  feen  many  men  of  the  fame 
ftature  upon  the  coafts  of  the  ftreight."  Sebald  de  Wert 
fiiys,  that  when  he  was  in  the  Streight,  he  faw  giants  of  the 
fame  bulk,  who  tore  up  trees  by  the  roots,  that  were  a  fpan 
in  diameter,  with  great  facility ;  he  alfo  faw  women  that 
were  gigantic,  and  others  of  the  common  llature.  Oliver 
de  Noort  reports,  that  he  faw  favages  of  a  gigantic  llature  at 
Port  Defu-e,  but  does  not  call  them  giants :  that  he  took  fix 
of  them  prifoners,  and  carried  them  on  board  his  Ihip,  one 
of  whom  afterwards  told  him  that  the  country  was  inhabited 
.by  many  different  nations,  four  of  which  were  of  the  ordi- 
nary flature  ;  but  that  farther  within  the  land,  in  a  territory 
called  Com,  there  was  a  gigantic  people,  diftinguiflied  by  the 
name  of  Tiremencn,  who  were  continually  making  war 
upon  the  other  nations.  Spilberg  relates,  that  he  faw  a 
man  of  an  extraordinary  llature  upon  the  coaftof  Terra  del 
Puego,  but  that  the  fepukhres  which  he  found,  had  re- 
ceived men  of  the  common  height.  Aris-Glafz,  who  was 
on  board  La  Maire's  fleet  in  the  characSter  of  Commiflary,  a 
.man  well  worthy  of  credit,  declares,  that  having  vifited  the 
fepukhres  which  he  difcovered  upon  the  coaft  of  Patagonia, 
he  found  the  bones  of  men  who  were  between  ten  and  eleven 
feet  high,  which  convinced  him  that  the  reports  of  former 
navigators  were  true  ;  and  here  it  mud  be  confeffed  tliat  the 
examination  was  made  in  cold  blood,  when  it  cannot  be  pre- 
tended that  the  objecft  was  magnified  by  fear.  Some  others, 
.particularly  Nodal  and  Sir  Richard  Hawkins,  content  them- 
felves  with  faying  that  thefe  favages  were  a  head  taller  than 
the  inhabitants  of  Europe,  and  of  fuch  a  flature  that  the 
people  on  board  their  veffels  called  them  giants.  Such  is  the 
.-evidence  of  pall  times ;  wefhall  now  conlider  that  of  the  age 
Vol.  L  c  in 


5iv  GENERAL   INTRODUCTION. 

in  which  we  live.    In  1704,  the  Captains  Harrington  and 
Carman,   who  commanded  two  French  vefTels,   one  from 
Saint  Maloes,  and  the  other  from  Marfeilles,  faw  at  one 
time  feven  of  thefe  giants  in  PolFeJlion  Bay,  at  another  time 
fix,  and  at  a  third  time  they  had  an  interview  with  a  com- 
pany of  more  than  four  hundred  men,  part  of  whom  were 
gigantic,  and  part  of  the  common  flature.    That  Harring- 
ton and  Carman  reported  this  facH:,  is  attefted  by  M.  Frezier, 
fuperintendant  of  the  fortifications  of  Bretagne,  a  man  well 
known,  and  univerfally  elleemed.    Frezier  never  faw  any 
of  thefe  favages  himfelf,    but  he   fays,   that   being  upon 
the  coaft  of  Chili,  Don  Pedro  Molina,  Governor  of  the  ille  of 
Chiloe,  and  many  other  eye-witnelles,  told  him,  that  there 
was  at  a  confiderable  diftance  within  the  country,  an  Indian 
nation,    called  by  their  neighbours  Caueohiiesy    who  fome- 
times  came  down  to  the  Spanifli  fettlements,  that  were  more 
than  nine  feet  high,  and  were  the  fame  race  with  the  Pata- 
gonians  who  live  on  the  eaftern  coaft,  and  have  been  men- 
tioned in  former  relations.    We  are  told  by  Reaveneau  de 
LufTan,  that  the  Spaniards  who  live  upon  the  fea  coaft  in  South 
America,  report  that  certain  white  Indians  inhabit  part  of  Chili^ 
with  whom  they  are  always  at  war :  that  they  are  of  an  enor- 
mous bulk  and  ftature,  and  that  whenever  they  take  a  Spa- 
niard prifoner,  they  force  up  the  breaft-bone,  as  they  would 
the  fhcll  of  a  tortoife,  and  tear  out  his  heart,    Narborough, 
on  the  contrary,  though  he  agrees  that  the  Indians  who  in- 
habit the  mountains  near  the  Spanifli  fettlements  at  Chili, 
and  perpetually  commit  hoftilities  againft  them,  are  tallj 
exprefsly  denies  that  their  ftature  is  gigantic.    He  had  often, 
meafured  the  flculls  a«d  the  prints  of  the  feet  of  the  favages 
on  the  coafts  of  the  Streight  of  Magellan,  which,  he  fays, 
were  of  the  common  fize :  he  had  alfo  feveral  times  feen  nu- 
merous companies  of  them  even  at  Port  Saint  Julian,  and 

ihefe 


GENERAL   INTRODUCTION. 

thefe  he  declares  not  to  be  taller  or  bigger  than  other  men. 
Narborough  is  certainly  a  credible  witnefs,  and  his  evidence 
is  diredly  to  the  point:  it  is  confirmed  by  that  of  L'Hermite, 
who  fays,  that  the  people  he  faw  upon  the  coaft  of  Terra  del 
Fuego,  though  they  were  robuft  and  well-proportioned, 
were  not  larger  than  the  inhabitants  of  Europe ;  and  laftly, 
M.  de  Gennes  bears  teftimony  that  none  of  the  people  he  faw 
at  Port  Famine  were  fix  feet  high. 

"  Thofe  who  diligently  confider  thefe  different  relations  will 
find  reafon  to  believe,  that  all  the  parties  have  fpoken  truth, 
each  of  them  faithfully  reporting  what  he  faw,  and  there- 
fore that  the  exiftence  of  a  gigantic  race  in  thefe  parts  is  a 
real  fad,  not  to  be  queftioned  merely  becaufe  they  were  not 
feen  by  every  mariner  that  vifited  the  country. 

*'  It  appears  to  be  well  eftablilhed,  that  the  inhabitants  of 
the  two  borders  of  the  Streight  are  of  the  common  ftature  ; 
and  that  the  race  diftinguifhed  by  the  name  of  Patagonians, 
made  their  conftant  refidence  upon  the  defart  coafts,  either 
in  fome  miferable  hovels  in  the  depth  of  the  woods,  or  in 
fome  caverns  of  the  rocks,  fcarcely  acceffible  to  any  but 
themfelves :  and  it  appears  from  the  account  of  Oliver  de 
Noort,  that  when  the  Streight  began  to  be  frequented  by 
European  vefTels,  they  hid  themfelves  as  foon  as  the  fhips 
were  in  fight,  which  accounts  both  for  their  not  being  feen, 
and  for  the  recent  marks  of  inhabitants  upon  a  coaft  that 
appeared  to  be  defart.  Perhaps  the  frequent  appearance  of 
our  fhips  upon  this  coaft,  at  lengdi  determined  them  to  quit 
it  as  a  fettled  habitation,  returning  only  at  particular  feafons 
of  the  year,  and  taking  up  their  conftant  refidence  in  the  in- 
terior part  of  the  country.  Lord  Anfon  was  of  opinion,  that 
jhey  refided  ftatedly  on  the  weftern  fide  of  the  Cordeliers, 

c  2  and 


xvi  GENERAL    INTRODUCTION. 

and  vifited  the  eaftern  fide  occafionally,  but  not  often :  fo 
that  if  they  have  been  rarely  feen  by  the  vefTels  which  have 
touched  at  the  coaft  of  Patagonia  for  the  laft  hundred  years,, 
the  reafon  probably  is,  that  being,  like  other  Indian  nations, 
ilefirous  to  conceal  themfelves  from  llrangers,  they  re- 
tired to  the  mountains.  It  is  indeed  to  be  regretted,  that 
no  fkeleton  of  thefe  people  has  been  brought  into  Europe  ; 
and  it  may  at  firft  feem  ftrange,  that  no  fuch  evidence  of 
their  uncommon  flature  fhould  have  been  produced,  as  it 
is  known  that  feveral  of  them  who  had  been  made  prifoners 
by  the  Commanders  of  European  veflels,  died  on  board  foon 
after  they  came  into  a  hot  climate  ;  but  the  wonder  wiH 
ceafe,  when  it  is  confidered  that  all  mariners  have  a  fuper- 
Ilitious  opinion  that  the  cumpafs  will  not  traverfe  if  there  is 
a  dead  body  on  board  the  veiTel."  Upon  the  whole,  it  may 
reafonably  be  prefumcd,  that  the  concurrent  teftimony  of  late 
navigators,  particularly  Commodore  Byron,  Captain  Wallis, 
and  Captain  Carteret,  Gentlemen  of  unq.uellionable  veracity, 
who>are  Hill  living,  and  who  not  only  faw  and  converfed  with 
thefe  people,  but  meafured  them,  will  put  an  end  to  all  the 
doubts  that,  have  been  hitherto  entertained  of  their  exig- 
ence. 

Elaving  thus  brought  together  the  whole  of  the  evidence  ■ 
for  and  againft  a  fact  which  has  long  been  the  object  bo«h  • 
of  popular  and  philofophical  curiofity,  1  Ihall  not  anticipate 
any  opinion  that  the  Reader  may  form  concerning  future 
navigations  in  the  track  which  has  been  defcribed  by  aay 
of  the  vcffels  whofc  voyages  are  here  related,  CAcept  that  al- 
though it  is  the  opinion  of  Commodore  Byron,  who  fpent 
feven  weeks  and  two  days  in  paffing  through  tlie  Streightof 
Magellan,  that  it  may  be  paflcd  in  three  weeks  at  tl^e  pro- 
per fcafon  ;  yet  the  paflage  cofl  Captain  Wailis  near  four 

months, 


GENERAL    INTRODUCTION. 

months,  though  he  performed  it  precifely  at  the  time  re- 
eommended  by  the  Commodore,  having  reached  the  eallern 
entrance  about  the  middle  of  December. 

I  cannot  however  difmifs  my  Readers  to  the  following- 
narratives,  without  expreffing  the  regret  witli  which  I  have 
recorded  the  deftruftion  of  poor  naked  favages,  by  our  fire- 
arms, in  the  courfe  of  thefe  expeditions,  when  they  endea- 
voured to  reprefs  the  invaders  of  their  country ;  a  regret 
which  I  am  confident  my  Readers  v^rill  participate  with  me  : 
this  however  appears  to  be  an  evil  which,  if  difcoveries  of 
new  countries  are  attempted,  cannot  be  avoided :  refiftance 
willalways- be  made,  and  if  thofe  who  refifl  are  not  over- 
powered; the  attempt  muft  berelinquiflied.  It  may  perhaps 
be  faid,  that  theexpence  of  life  upon  thefe  occafions  is  more 
than  is  necellary  to  convince  the  natives  that  further  conteft 
is  hopelefs,  and  perhaps  this  may  fometimes  have  been  true*: 
but  it  muft  be  confidered,  that  if  fuch  expeditions  are  under- 
taken, the  execution  of  them  mud  be  intruded  to  perfons 
not  exempt  from  human  frailty  ;  to  men  who  are  liable  to 
provocation  by-  fudden  injury,  to  unpremeditated  violence 
by  fudden  dangei-,  to  error  by  the  defca  of  judgment  or  the 
ftrength  of  paflion,  and  always  difpofed  to  transfer  laws  by 
which  they  are  bound  themfelvcs,  to  others  wlio  are  not  fub- 
jed  to  their  obligation ;  fo  that  every  excefs  thus  produced: 
is  alfo  an  inevitable  evil. 

If  it  fhould  be.  faid,  that  fuppofing  thefe  mifchiefs  to  he 
inevitable  in  attempting  difcoveries,  difcoveries  ought  not  to  • 
be  attempted;   it  muft  be  confidered,  that  upon  the  only 
principles  on  which  this  opinion  can  be  fupported,  the  rifk  . 
of  life,  for  advantages  of  the  fame  kind  with  thofe  propofed : 
in  difcovering.  new  countries,  is  in  every  other  infiance  un- 
lawful.    If  it  is  not  lawful  to  put  the  life  of  an  Indian,  in . 
9  hazard,, 


XVit. 


xviu  GENERAL    INTRODUCTION, 

hazard,  by  an  attempt  to  examine  the  country  in  which  he 
lives,  with  a  view  to  increafe  commerce  or  knowlege  ;  it  is 
not  lawful  to  riik  the  life  of  our  own  people  in  carrying  on 
commerce  with  countries  already  known.     If  it  be  faid  that 
the  ri£k  of  life  in  our  own  people  is  voluntary,  and  that  the 
Indian  is  brought  into  danger  without  his  confent,  the  con- 
fequence  will  flill  follow ;  for  it  is  univerfally  agreed,  at 
leail  upon  the  principles  of  Chriflianity,  that  men  have  no 
more  right  over  their  own  lives  than  over  the  lives  of  others, 
and  fuicide  being  deemed  the  worft  fpecies  of  murder,  a 
man  muft  be  proportionably  criminal  in  expofing  his  own 
life,  for  any  purpofe  that  would  not  juftify  his  expofing  the 
life  of  another.    If  the  gratification  of  artificial  wants,  or  the 
increafe  of  knowlege,  are  juftifiable  caufes  for  the  rifk  of  life, 
the  landing  by  force  on  a  newly  difcovered  country,  in  or- 
der to  examine  its  produce,  may  be  juflified;  if  not,  every 
trade  and  profeflion  that  expofcs  life  for  advantages  of  the 
■  fame  kind  is  unlawful ;  and  by  what  trade  or  profeffion  is 
not  life  expofcd  ?  Let  us  examine  all  the  multitudes  that  art 
has  employed,  from  the  refiner  who  fweats  at  the  furnace  to 
the  fedentary  artificer  who  grows  pale  at  the  loom,  and  per- 
haps none  can  be  found  in  which  life  is  not  in  fome  degree 
facrificed  to  the  artificial  neceffities  of  civil  fociety.    But  will 
it  therefore  be  faid,  that  civil  fociety,  to  which  this  facrifice 
is  made,  is  for  that  reafon  a  combination  contrary  to  the 
great  original  principles  of  morality,  which  are  the  bafis  of 
all  duty  ?  Will  it  be  faid,  that  to  exercife  the  faculties  which 
are  the  diftinguifhing  characfleriftics  of  our  nature  is  unna- 
tural ?   and  that  being  endowed  with  the  various  powers 
which  in  civil  focieties  only  can  be  brought  into  a6lion,  it 
was  incongruous  to  the  will  of  our  Creator  that  any  fuch 
fociety  fliould  be  formed,  and  that  it  would  be  pleafing  to 
him  if,  dill  continuing  in  a  favagc  (late,  thefc  powers  fliould 

4  lie 


GENERAL    INTRODUCTION.  xix: 

lie  torpid  in  our  nature,  like  life  in  an  embrio,  during  the 
whole  of  our  exiftence  ?  This  furely  muft  appear  extrava- 
gant and  abfurd  in  the  highell  degree,  efpecially  as  it  muft' 
be  allowed,  that  although  commerce  and  arts  in  feme  in- 
ftances  expofe  life,  in  others  they  preferve  it  ;■  they  fupply 
the  wants  of  Nature,  without  rapine  and  violence,  and  by 
producing  a  common  intereft,  they  prevent  the  inhabitants 
of  the  fame  country  from  being  divided  into  different  clans, 
which  among  favages  are  almoft  perpetually  committing  hof- 
tilities  againft  each  other,  with  a  ferocious  cruelty  which  is  not 
to  be  found  where  civil  government  and  literary  knowlege' 
have  meliorated  the  manners  of  mankind.  Upon  the  whole, 
therefore,  it  feems  reafonable  to  conclude,  that  the  increafe 
of  knowlege  and  commerce  are  ultimarely  common  bene- 
fits ;  and  that  the  lofs  of  life  which  happens  in  the  attempt,,, 
is  among  the  partial  evils  which  terminate  in  general  good. 

I  have  now  only  to  requeft  of  fuch  of  my  Readers  as  may 
be  difpofed  to  cenfure  me  for  not  having  attributed  any  of 
the  critical  cfcapes  from  danger  that  I  have  recorded,  to  the 
particular  interpofition  of  Providence,  that  they  would,  in 
this  particular,  allow  me  the  right  of  private  judgment?- 
which  I  claim  with  the  greater  confidence,  as  the  very  fame 
principle  which  would' have- determined  them  to  have  done 
it,  has  determined  me  to  the  contrary.  As- 1  firmly  believe 
the  divine  precept  delivered  by  the  Author  of  Chriftianity, 
•*  there  is  not  a  fparrow  falls  to  the  ground  without  my  Fa- 
ther," and  cannot  admit  the  agency  of  chance  in  the  govern- 
ment of  the  world,  rmuftneceflarily  refer  every  event  to  one: 
caufe,  as  well  the  danger  as  the  efcape,  as  well  the  fufferings 
as  the  enjoyments  of  life:  and  for  this  opinion,  I  have,  among 
©ther  refpe(5table  authorities,  that  of  the  Bible.  Shall  we,  fays- 
Job,  "  receive  good  from  the  hand  of  God  and  fhall  we  not  re- 
-cei^e  evil  .^"TheSupreme  Being  is  equally  wife  and  benevolient.' 

in 


ix  GENERAL    INTRODUCTION. 

iii  tlie  difpenfation  of  both  evil  and  good,  as  means  of  efTed- 
ing  ultimate  purpofes  worthy  of  .his  ineffable  perfections;  fo 
that  whether  we  confider  ourfelves  as  chrilUans  or  philofo- 
phers,  we  mufl  acknowledge  that  he  deferves  blelling  not 
more  when  he  gives  than  when  he  takes  away.  If  the  fall 
of  a  fparrow,  as  well  as  its  prefervation,  is  imputed  to  pro- 
vidence, why  not  the  fall  as  well  as  the  prefervation  of  a 
man  ?  and  why  lliould  we  attribute  to  Providence  only  what 
appears  to  be  good  in  its  immediate  cfTedf,  when  we  fuppofe 
that  the  whole  concatenation  of  events,  whether  the  pre- 
fervation or  deftruction  of  particular  parts,  tends  ultimately 
to  the  good. of  the  whole  ?  The  fame  voice  comniiflions  the 
winds  to  plough  up  the  deep,  which  at  the  appointed  time  re- 
bukes them,  faying,  "  Peace,  beitill."  If  the  adorable  Author 
and  Freferver  of  Nature  was  fuch  a  being  as  Baal  is  repre- 
fented  to  have  been  by  the  prophet,  when  he  derided  his  wor- 
fliippers;  if  he  was  fometimes  on  a  journey,  and  fometiraes 
afleep,  we  might  with  propriety  fay  .that  a  fire  happened  t® 
lii-eak  out,  or  a  ftormtojife,  but  that  by  the  interpofition  of 
providence  life  was  prefcrved,  expjeffions  which  imply  thai: 
the  mifchicf  had  one  origin,  and  the  remedy  another ;  biu 
fuch  language  certainly  derogates  from  the  honoiu'  of  the 
great  Univerfal  Caufe,  who,  acfting  through  all  duration,  and 
lubfifting  in  all  fpacc,  filis  immenfity  with  his  prefencc,  and 
eternity  with  his  power. 

It  will  perhaps  be  faid,  that  in  particular  inftances  cvii 
ncceiTarily  refults  from  that  conflitution  of  things  which  is 
heft  upon  the  whole,  and  that  Providence  occafionally  inter- 
feres, and  fupplies  the  defeats  of  the  conflitution  in  thcfe 
particulars  :  but  this  notion  will  appear  not  to  be  fupported 
,bv  thofc -facts  which  are  faid  to  be  providential ;  it  will  al- 
-wavs  be  found  that  Providence  interpofcs  too  late,  and  only 
:j»oderates  the  mifcliief  which  it  might  have  .prevented.  But 

wlio 


GENERAL    INTRODUCTION.  xxi 

who  can  fuppofe  an  extraordinary  interpofition  of  Providence 
to  fupply  particular  defeds  in  the  conflitution  of  nature, 
who  fees  thofe  defeds  fupplied  but  in  part  ?  It  is  true  that 
when  the  Endeavour  was  upon  the  rock  off  the  coaft  of  New 
Holland,  the  wind  ceafed,  and  that  otherwife  fhe  mull  have 
been  beaten  to  pieces  ;  but  either  the  fubfiding  of  the  wind 
was  a  mere  natural  event  or  not ;  if  it  was  a  natural  event, 
providence  is  out  of  the  quellion,  at  leaft  we  can  with  no 
more  propriety  fay  that  providentially  the  wind  ceafed,  than 
that  providentially  the  fun  rofe  in  the  morning.  If  it  was 
not  a  mere  natural  event,  but  produced  by  an  extraordinary 
interpofition,  corredling  a  defed  in  the  conflitution  of  nature, 
tending  to  mifchief,  it  will  lie  upon  thofe  who  maintain  the 
pofition,  to  fhew,  why  an  extraordinary  interpofition  did  not 
take  place  rather  to  prevent  the  fhip's  Uriking,  than  to  pre- 
vent her  being  beaten  to  pieces  after  fhe  had  llruck  :  a  very 
flight  impulfe  upon  the  fhip's  courfe  would  have  caufed  her 
to  fleer  clear  of  the  rock,  and  if  all  things  were  not  equally 
eafy  to  Omnipotence,  we  fhould  fay  that  this  might  have 
been  done  with  lefs  difficulty  than  a  calm  could  be  produced 
by  fufpending  the  general  laws  of  Nature  which  had 
brought  on  the  gale. 

I  have,  however,  paid  my  homage  to  the  Supreme  Being, 
confonant  to  my  own  ideas  of  his  agency  and  perfedions  j 
and  thofe  who  are  of  opinion  that  my  notions  are  erroneous, 
mufl  allow,  that  he  who  does  what  he  thinks  to  be  right, 
and  abflains  from  what  he  thinks  to  be  wrong,  acquits  him- 
felf  equally  of  moral  obligation,  whether  his  opinions  are 
falfe  or  true. 


Vol.  I.  d  AN 


A  N 
EXPLANATION  of  the  NAUTICAL   TERMS 

not  generally  underftood  which  occur  in  this  Work, 

A. 

ABACK,  the  fituatlon  of  the  fails  when  their  furfaces  are  flatted 
agalnft  the  mafts  by  the  force  of  the  wind.  The  fails  are  fald  to 
be  taken  aback,  when  they  are  brought  into  this  fituation,  either  by  a 
fudden  change  of  the  wind,  or  by  an  alteration  in  the  flilp's  courfe. 
They  are  laid  aback,  to  efled  an  immediate  retreat,  without  turning  to 
the  right  or  left ;  in  order  to  avoid  fonie  danger. 
ABAFT,  the  hinder  part  of  a  fliip. 
AFT,  behind,  or  near  the  ftern  of  the  fhip. 

ANCHOR,  the  principal  are  the  fheet  anchor,  the  beft  bower  and  the 
fmall  bower,  fo  called  from  their  fituation  in  the  fliip's  bows.  The  fmaller 
anchors,  are  the  ftream  anchor,  the  kedge  anchor,  and  the  grappling. 

AWNING,  a  canopy  of  canvafs  extending  over  the  decks  of  a  fhip 
in  hot  weather. 

AZIMUTH-CoMPAss,  an  inftrument  employed  to  difcover  the  mag- 
netical  azimuth  or  amplitude  of  any  heavenly  objeifl.  This  operation 
is  performed  at  fea,  to  find  the  exad;  variation  of  the  magnetical  needle, 

B. 
To  BALANCE,   to  contrad  a  fail  into  a  narrower  compafs,   in  a 
ftorm,  by  retrenching  or  folding  up  a  part  of  it  at  one  corner. 

BEAMS,  ftrong  thick  pieces  of  timbei",  firetching  acrofs  the  ihip 
from  fide  to  fide,  to  fupport  the  decks,  and  retain  the  fides  at  their  pro- 
per diftance.     On  the  -weather  beam,  is  on  the  weather  fide  of  the  fhip. 

To  BELAY,  to  faften  a  rope  by  winding  it  feveral  times  round  a 
cleat,  belaying-pin,  or  kevel. 

BENDING  a  fail,  fafteaing  it  to  its  yard  or  ftay. 
BIGHT,  the  double  part  of  a  rope  when  it  is  folded,  in  contradiflinc- 
tlon  to  the  end. 

Bight,  is  alfo  a  fmall  bay  between  two  points  of  land. 
BULGE,  or  Bilge,  that  part  of  the  floor  of  a  fhip,  on  either  fide  of 
the  keel,  which  approaches  nearer  to  an  horizontal  than  to  a  perpendi- 

d  2  '  cular 


xxi^  AN  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NAUTICAL  TERMS. 

cular  direction,  and  on  which  the  Ihip  would  reft  if  laid  on  the  ground  : 
or  more  particularly,  thofe  parts  of  the  bottom  which  are  oppofite  to  the 
heads  of  the  floor-timbers  amidfhips  on  each  fide  of  the  keel.  Hence, 
when  a  fliip  receives  a  frafture  in  this  place,  Ihe  is  faid  to  be  bilged. 

BIRTH,  the  ftation  in  which  a  Ihip  rides  at  anchor. 

Birth,  alfo  fignifies  the  room  or  apartment  where  any  particular 
number  of  the  officers  or  Ihip's  company  ufually  mefs  and  refide. 

BOARD,  the  line  over  which  the  fliip  runs  between  tack  and  tack^ 
when  fhe  is  turning  to  windward,  or  failing  againft  the  dIre<?lion  of  the 
wind. 

BOW,  the  rounding  part  of  a  flilp's  fide  forward,  beginning  at  the- 
place  where  the  planks  arch  inwards,  and  terminating  where  they  clofe- 
at  tlie  ftem  or  prow. 

BREAKERS,  billows  that  break  violently  over  rocks  lying  under  tlie 
furface  of  the  fea. 

To  BRING-TO,  to  check  the  courfe  of  a  fhip  when  fhe  is  advancing,, 
by  arranging  the  fails  in  fuch  a  manner  as  that  they  Ihall  counter-a6t  each 
other,  and  prevent  her  either  from  retreating  or  moving  forward.  In 
this  fituation  the  Ihip  is  faid  to  lie-by,  or  lie-to. 

BULK-HEADS,  certain  partitions,  or  walls,  built  up  in  feveral 
places  of  a  fliip  between  two  decks,  either  lengthways  or  acrofs,  to  form 
and  feparate  the  various  apartments. 

BUOY,  a  fort  of  clofe  cafk,  or  block  of  wood,  faftened  by  a  rope  to 
the  anchor,  to  determine  the  place  where  the  anchor  is  fituated. 

C. 

CABhE' s-kngth,  a  hvmdred  and  twenty-fathom. 

CAP,  a  ftrong,  thick  block  of  wood,  ufed  to  confine  two  mafis  to- 
gether, when  the  one  is  erefted  at  the  head  of  the  other,  in  order  to 
lengthen  it.  It  is  for  this  purpofe  farnilhed  with  two  holes  perpendicu- 
lar to  it's  length  and  breadth,  and  parallel  to  Its  thicknefs ;  one  of  thefe- 
is  fquare,  and  the  other  round';  the  former  being  folidly  fixed  upon. the 
tipper-end  of  the  lower-mafl,  M'hllfl  the  latter  receives  the  mart  em- 
ployed to  lengthen  it,  and  fecures  it  in  this  pofition. 

CAPSTERN,    or  Capstan,    a  firong,    mafiy  column   of    timber, 

formed  like  a  truncated  cone,  and  having  its  upper  extremity  pierced 

with  a  number  of  holes  to  receive  the  bars  or  levers.     It  is  let  down  per- 

6  pcndicularly 


AN  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NAUTICAL  TERMS.  ^x^. 

pendlcularly  through  the  decks  of  a  flilp,  and  is  fixed  In  fuch  manner, 
that  the  men,  by  turning  it  horizontally  with  their  bars,  may  perform 
SHiy  work,  which  requires  an  extraordinary  effort. 

CASTING,  the  motion  of  falling  off,  fo  as  to  bring  the  direftlon  of 
the  wind  on  either  fide  of  the  Ihip  after  it  had  blown  for  fome  time  right 
a-head. 

CHAINS,  flrong  links  or  plates  of  iron,  the  lower  ends  of  which  are 
bolted  through  the  fliip's  fide  to  the  timbers.  They  are  placed  at  fhort 
diftances  from  each  other  on  the  fhip's  outfide,  as  being  ufed  to  contain 
the  blocks  called  dead-eyes,  by  which  the  Jhrouds  of  tlie  mails  are  ex- 
tended. 

CHEEKS  of  the  maft,  the  faces  or  projeding  parts  on  each  fide  of  the 
mafts,  ufed  to  fuftain  the  frame  of  the  top,  together  with  the  top-maft, 
which  refts  immediately  upon  them. 

CLAWING,  or  Clawing-off,  the  ad  of  heating  or  turning  to  wind' 
ward  from  a  lee  fhore,  fo  as  to  acquire  a  fufficient  dlftance  from  it,  to 
efcape  the  dangers  of  fhipwreck. 

CLEATS,  pieces  of  wood  of  different  fliapes,  ufed  occafionally  to 
faften  ropes  upon  in  a  fhip. 

CLENCH,  or  Clinch,  that  part  of  a  cable,  or  other  rope,  which  is 
faflened  to  the  ring  of  the  anchor. 

CLOSE  upon  a  wind,  or  Close-hauled,  the  general  arrangement 
or  trim  of  a  llilp's  fails,  when  fte  endeavours  to  make  a  progrefs  in  the 
nearefl:  direction  poffiblc  towards  that  point  of  the  compafs  from  which 
the  wind  blows. 

To  CLEW,  or  Clue-up,  to  trufs  the  fails  up  to  the  yards  by  tackles 
fattened  to  their  lower  corners,  called  their  clues. 

COCKSWAIN,  or  CoxE^J■,  the  officer  who  manages  and  fleers  a  boat, 
and  has  the  command  of  the  boat's  crew. 

COMPANION,  a  fort  of  wooden  porch  placed  over  the  entrance  or 
flair  cafe  of  the  mafler's  cabin  In  a  merchant-fhip. 

COURSES,  a  name  by  which  the  principal  fails  of  a  fhIp  are  ufually 
dlflinguiihed,  viz..  the  main-fail,  fore-fail,  and  mizen. 

CRANK,  the  quality  of  a  fhip  which  for  want  of  a  fufficient  quantity- 
of  ballaji.  or  cargo.  Is  rendered  incapable  of  carrying  fail  without  being.; 
expofed  to  the  danger  of  overturning. 


AN  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NAUTICAL  TERMS. 

D. 

/•/fl/J-DECK,  a  fpace  under  the  quarter-deck,  of  a  fliip  of  war,  con- 
tained between  the  foremoft  bulkhead  of  the  Jleerage  and  the  fore-part  of 
the  quarter-deck. 

DRIVING,  the  ftate  of  being  carried  at  random  along  the  furface  of 
the  water,  by  a  florni  or  current :  it  is  generally  exprefled  of  a  lliip  when 
broken  loofe  froiu  her  anchors  or  moorings. 

E. 

Tb  EDGE  away,  to  decline  gradually  from  tlie  fliore,  or  from  the 
line  of  the  courfe  which  the  Ihip  formerly  fleered. 

F. 

FALL,  the  loofe  end  of  a  tackle ;  or  that  part  upon  which  thr  people 
pull,  or  holft,  to  produce  the  required  eiTe6l. 

To  FILL,  to  brace  the  fails  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  that  the  wind,  en- 
tering their  cavities  from  behind,  dilates  them  fo  as  to  advance  the  fhip 
in  her  courfe. 

FISH,  is  a  long  piece  of  oak,  convex  on  one  fide,  and  concave  on 
the  other.  It  is  ufcd  to  faften  upon  the  outfide  of  the  lower  mafls,  as  an 
additional  fecurity,  to  ftrengthen  them  when  It  becomes  neceflary  to 
carry  an  extraordinary  prelTure  of  fail.  The  fillies  are  alfo  employed  for 
the  fame  purpofe  on  any  yard,  which  happens  to  be  fprung  or  fra^^tured. 

FLAW,  a  fuddeu  breeze,  or  guft  of  wind. 

FLOOR,  the  bottom  of  a  Ibip. 

FOOT  of  a  fail,  lower  edge  or  bottom. 

FooT-ROPE,  the  rope  to  which  the  foot  of  a  fail  is  fewed. 

FORE,  all  that  part  of  a  fhip's  frame  and  machinery  which  lies  near 
the  head. 

G. 

GAFF,  a  fort  of  boom  or  pole,  ufcd  to  extend  the  upper  edge  of  the 
mlzen.  The  foremoft,  or  inner  extremity  of  it,  is  furnilhed  with  two 
cheeks  forming  afemicircle,  which  inclofe  the  after  part  of  the  mafl  fo  as 
to  confine  the  gaff  clofe  to  its  refpei5Iive  mart  whilft  the  fail  is  hoifting 
or  lowering. 

GANGWAY,  a  narrow  platform,  or  range  of  planks,  laid  horizontally 
along  the  upper  part  of  a  Ihip's  fide,  from  the  quarter-deck  to  the  fore- 
caftle,  for  the  convenience  of  walking  more  cxpeditioufly  fore  and  aft, 
than  by  defcending  into  the  waift. 

Gangway, 


AN  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NAUTICAL  TERMS. 

Gangway,  is  alfo  that  part  of  a  fhlp's  fide,  both  within  and  without, 
by  which  the  pafTengers  enter  and  depart.  It  is  for  this  purpofe  provided 
with  a  fufficient  number  of  fteps,  or  cleats,  nailed  upon  the  fhip's  fide, 
nearly  as  low  as  the  furface  of  the  water  ;  and  fometimes  furnillied  with 
a  railed  accommodation-ladder,  whole  lower  end  projeds  from  the  fhip's 
fide,  being  fecured  in  this  pofition  by  iron  braces,^  fo  as  to  render  the 
afcent  and  defcent  convenient. 

GRAPPLING,  a  fmall  anchor,  fitted  with  four  or  five  flukes  or  claws^, 
commonly  ufed  to  ride  a  boat  or  other  fmall  vefieL. 

GUNNEL,  or  Gunwale,  the  upper  edge  of  a  fhip's  fide. 

H. 

HANDING  the  fails,  rolling  them  up  clofe  to  the  yard  or  maft  to 
which  they  belong. 

HAMMACOES,  the  fame  with  hammoc. 

To  HAUL,  an  expreffion  peculiar  to  feamcn,  Impljing  to  pull  a  finefe 
rope,  without  the  affiftance  of  blocks,  or  other  mechanical  powers. 

To  Haul  the  wind,  to  direcl  the  Ihip's  courfe  nearer  to  that  point  o£ 
the  compafs  from  which  the  wind  arifes. 

HAWSER,  a  large  rope  which  Holds  the  middle  degree  between  thcL 
cabk  and  tow-line. 

HEAVlNG-_y7/or/,  is  the  drawing  fo  much  of  the  cable  into  the  fliip, 
by  means  of  the  capftern  or  windlafs,  as  that  by  advancing,  fhe  will  be 
almoft  perpendicularly  above  the  anchor,  and  in  a  proper  fituation  ta 
fet  fail. 

HEAVit^G-taught,  the  a£i  of  heaving  about  the  capftern,  till  the  rope- 
applied  thereto  becomes  ftreight  and  ready  for  adion. 

To  HEEL,  to  ftoop  or  incline  to  either  fide^ 

HUMMOCK,  a  little  hill. 

JERI^ED,  cured  with  fait. 

GIB,  or  JiB-BooM,  a  boom  run  out  from  the  extremity  of  the  bow- 
fprit,  parallel  to  its  length,  and  lerving  to  extend  the  bottom  of  thejib,, 
and  the  ftay  of  the  fore-top-gallant-maft. 

K. 
KEDGE,  a  fmall  anchor,  ufed  to  keep  a  fhip  ffeady  whilft  fhe  rides  in^ 
a  harbQur  or  river, 

9.-  Ealfe 


AN  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NAUTICAL  TERMS. 

Falfe  KEEL,  a  ftrong,  thick  piece  of  timber,  bolted  to  the  inain  keel 
to  preferve  its  lower-fide. 

KNEE,  a  crooked  piece  of  timber,  having  two  branches  or  arms  and 
generally  ufed  to  connect  the  beams  of  a  fliip  with  her  fides  or  timbers. 

L. 

LAGOON,  a  lake. 

LARBOARD,  the  left  fide  of  a  fliip  when  the  eye  of  a  fpeflator  is 
direfted  forward. 

LASHING,  a  piece  of  rope  employed  to  faflen  or  fecure  any  move- 
able body  in  a  fhip,  or  about  h6r  mafts,  fails,  and  rigging:  alfo  the  aft 
of  fattening  or  fecuring  any  thing  by  means  of  the  rope  ufed  for  this 
purpofe. 

LOG,  a  machine  ufed  to  meafure  the  fhip's  head-way,  or  the  rate  of 
her  velocity  as  fhe  advances  through  the  fea.  It  is  compofed  of  a  reel 
and  line,  to  which  is  fixed  a  fmall  piece  of  wood,  forming  the  quadrant 
■of  a  circle.  The  term  log  however  is  more  particularly  applied  to  the 
latter.  The  log,  is  generally  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  thick,  and  five 
or  fix  inches  from  the  angular  point  to  the  circumference.  It  is  ba- 
lanced by  a  thin  plate  of  lead,  nailed  upon  the  arch,  fo  as  to  fwim  per- 
pendicularly in  the  water,  with  about  -i  imprefled  under  the  furface.  The 
line  is  fattened  to  the  log  by  means  of  two  legs,  one  of  which  paiTes 
through  a  hole  at  the  corner,  and  is  knotted  on  the  oppofite  fide ;  whilfl: 
the  other  leg  is  attached  to  the  arch  by  a  pin,  fixed  in  another  hole,  fo  as 
to  draw  out  occafionally.  By  thefe  legs  the  log  is  hung  in  equilibrio, 
and  the  line,  which  is  united  to  it,  is  divided  into  certain  fpaces,  which 
arc  in  proportion  to  an  equal  number  of  geographical  miles,  as  a  half 
minute  or  quarter  minute  is  to  an  hour  of  time. 

LUG -SAIL,  a  fquare  fail,  hoifted  occafionally  on  the  matt  of  a  boat, 
or  fmall  veffel,  upon  a  yard  which  hangs  nearly  at  right  angles  with  the 
matt. 

M. 
To  MAKE  the  land,  is  to  difcovcr  it  from  a  dittant  fituation,  in  con- 
fcquence  of  approaching  it  after  a  fca-voyagc. 

MIZEN,  the  aftermofi  or  hindmoft  of  the  fixed  falls  of  a  fliip. 

MOORING, 


AN  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NAUTICAL  TERMS.  xxi* 

MOORING,  the  a(51:  of  confining  and  fecuring  a  fhip  in  a  particular 
ftatlon,  by  chains  or  cables,  which  are  either  faftened  to  the  adjacent 
iliore,  or  to  anchors  in  the  bottom. 

N. 

NEAPED*  the  fituation  of  a  fhip  which  is  left  aground  on  the  height 
of  a  fpring-tide,  fo  that  fhe  cannot  be  floated  off  till  the  return  of  the. 
next  fpring. 

a- 

OFFING,  implIes^  out  at  fea ;  or-  at  a  competent  diflance  from  the.- 
fhore,  and  generally  out  of  anchor-ground. 

OPEN,  is  expreffed  of  any  diftant  objefl,  to  which  the  fight  or  paG- 
iage  is  not  intercepted  by  fomething  lying,  or  coming  between.  Thus, 
to  be  open  with  any  place,  is  to  be  oppofite  to  it ;  as.  the.  entry  of  a 
porti  road,  or  haven.. 

OVER-HAULING,    the  aft  of  opening  and  extending  the  feveral' 
parts  of  a  tackle,  or  other  affemblage  of  ropes,  communicating  with 
blocks,  or  dead-eyes.     It  is  ufed  to  remove  thofe  blocks  to  a  fufficient 
diftance  from  each  other,  that  they  maybe  again  placed,  in  a  ftate  of.' 
adion,  fo  as -to  produce  the  efFeft  required. 

P. 

PAINTER,  a  rope  employed  to  faften  a  boat  either  alongfide  of  ther-.- 
fliip  to  which  fhe  belongs,,  or  to  fome  wharf  or  key. 

PALM  of  the  anchor,  the  fame  with  Euke,  the  broad  barbed  ends  of 
the  two  arms  atth&bottom  of  the  fhank. 

PARCELING, .  certain  long  narrow  Hips  of  canvas,  daubed  with  tar^. 
and  frequently  bound  about  a  rope,  ia  the  fame  manner  as  bandages  are 
applied  to  a  broken  limb  in  furgery. 

To  PAY,  to  daub  or  anoint  the  furface  of  any  body,  in  order  to  pre-- 
ferve.it  from  the  injuries  of  the  water  and  weather,  &c. 

PORTS,  the  embrafures  cr  openings  in-  the  fide  of  a  fhip  of  war, 
wherein   the  artillery  is  ranged  in  battery  upoa  the  decks  above  and:: 
below. 

Half-ports,  are  what  flops  that  part  of  the. port  which  when  the. 
gun  is  pufhed  out  is  left  open» 

PURCHASE,  any  mechanical  power  employed  In  raifing  or  remov»- 
ing  heavy  bodies,  or  in  fixing  or  extending  the  fhip's  rigging. 

Vol.  L  e  C^ 


XXX  AN  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NAUTICAL  TERMS. 

Q. 

QUARTER,  that  part  of  a  Ihip's  fide  which  lies  towards  the  flern. 

Quarter-cloths,  long  pieces  of  painted  canvas,  extended  on  the- 
outfide  of  the  quarter-neting  from  the  upper-part  of  the  gallery  to  the 
gangway. 

R. 

RANGE,  a  fufficient  length  of  the  cable,  drawn  up  on  the  deck,  be- 
fore the  anchor  is  caft  loofe  from  the  bow,  to  let  it  fink  to  the  bottom, 
without  being  interrupted,  that  the  flukes  may  be  forced  the  deeper  into 
the  ground,  by  the  additional  weight  which  the  anchor  acquires  In 
linking. 

REEF,  a  certain  portion  of  a  fall,  comprehended  between  the  top  or 
bottom,  and  a  row  of  eyelet-holes  parallel  thereto. 

To  Reef,  is  to  reduce  the  furface  of  the  fail  In  proportion  to  the  in- 
creafe  of  the  wind. 

Reef  alfo  Implies  a  chain  of  rocks,  lying  near  the  furface  of  the  water. 

RIGING,  a  general  name  given  to  all  the  ropes  employed  to  fupport 
the  mafts ;  and  to  extend  or  reduce  the  fails,  or  arange  them  to  the 
difpofition  of  the  wind. 

RIGHTING,  the  z£t  of  reftoring  a  Ihip  to  her  uprlglit  pofition,  after 
ihe  has  been  laid  on  a  careen.  A  fhip  is  alio  faid  to  right  at  fea  when  flie 
rifes,  with  her  mafts  eretSed,  after  having  been  preft  down  on  one  fide 
by  the  effort  of  her  fails,  or  a  heavy  fquall  of  wind. 

S. 

SCARFING,  when  two  pieces  of  timber  are  to  be  joined  together  by 
the  ends,  If  the  ends  are  cut  fquare,  another  piece  is  laid  upon,  and 
fattened  to  both,  and  this  is  called  fcarfing. 

SETING,  the  ad  of  obferving  the  fituatlon  of  any  diftant  objei?^  by 
the  compafs,  In  order  to  difcover  the  angle  which  it  makes  with  the 
ncareft  meridian. 

SHEET,  a  rope  fattened  to  one  or  both  the  lower  corners  of  a  fiiil 
to  extend  and  retain  It  In  a  particular  ftation. 

SHROUDS,  a  range  of  large  ropes  extended  from  the  matt-heads  to 
the  right  and  left  fide  of  the  Ihip,  to  fupport  the  mafts,  and  enable  them 
to  carry  fail. 

2  SKIDS, 


AN  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NAUTICAL  TERMS.  xxxi 

SKIDS,  or  Skeeds,  are  long  compaffing  pieces  of  timber,  formed  fp 
as  to  anfwer  the  vertical  curve  of  a  Ihlp's  fide.  They  are  notched  below 
fo  as  to  fit  clofely  upon  the  wales ;  and  as  they  are  intended  to  preferve 
the  planks  of  the  fide,  when  any  weighty  body  is  hoifted  or  lowered, 
they  extend  from  the  main  wale  to  the  top  of  the  fide ;  and  they  are  re- 
tained in  this  pofition  by  bolts  or  fpike-nalls. 

SPRING,  a  crack  or  breach  running  tranfverfely  or  obliquely  through 
any  part  of  a  maft  or  yard,  fo  as  to  render  it  unfafe  to  carry  the  ufual 
quantity  of  fail  thereon. 

Spring  is  alfo  a  rope  paffed  out  of  one  extremity  of  a  fhip  and  at- 
tached to  a  cable  proceeding  from  the  other,  when  fhe  lies  at  anchor.  It 
is  ufually  done  to  bring  the  fhip's  broad-fide,  or  battery  ef  cannon,  to 
bear  upon  fome  diftant  object. 

SPRITSAIL,  a  fail  attached  to  a  yard  which  hangs  under  the  bowfprlt. 

SQUALL,  a  fudden  and  violent  blaft  of  wind,  nfually  occafioned  by 
the  interruption  and  reverberation  of  the  wind  from  high  mountains. 

STANCHION,  a  fort  of  fmall  pillar  of  wood  or  iron  ufed  for  various 
purpofes  in  a  ftilp  ;  as  to  fupport  the  decks,  the  quarter-rails,  the  netings, 
and  awnings. 

STANDING,  the  movement  by  which  a  fhip  advances  towards  »• 
certain  objeft,  or  departs  from  it. 

STARBOARD,  the  right  fide  of  a  fhip  when  the  eye  of  the  fpeaator 
is  dire<^ed  forward. 

To  STAY,  the  fame  as  to  tack ;  the  contrary  to  wear,  which  fee ; 
hence  the  phrafe  to  mifs  flays,  when  fhe  fails  in  the  operation. 

STIFF,  the  quality  by  which  a  fhip  is  enabled  to  carry  a.  fufficient 
quantity  of  fail,  without  hazard  of  overfetting. 

STREAKS,  orSTRAKES,  the  uniform  ranges  of  planks  on  the  bot- 
tom and  fides  of  a  fhip. 

To  STRIKE,  to  run  afhore,  or  to  beai  upon  the  ground  in  paffing 
©ver  a  bank  or  fhallow. 

STUDDING-SAILS,  certain  light  fails  extended,  in  moderate  and; 
fteady  breezes,  beyond  the  fkirts  of  the  principal  fails,  wiere  they  ap-- 
pear  as  wings  upon  the  yard-arms. 

c  4  SURE,. 


AN  EXPLANATION  GF  THE  NAUTICAL  TERMS. 

'SURF,  the  fwell  of  the  fca  which  breaks  upon  the  ihore,  or  any 
Tock  lying  near  the  furface  of  the  water. 

•SWEEPING,  the  aft  of  dragging  tlie  bight,  or  loofe  part  of  a  fmall 
rope,  along  tlie  furface  of  the  ground,  in  a  harbour  or  road,  in  order  to 
hook  and  recover  fome  anchor,  wreck,  -or  other  material,  funk  at  the 
bottom.  It  is  performed  by  fattening  the  two  ends  of  this  rope  to  the 
fides  of  two  boats  which  are  abreaft  of  each  other,  at  fome  diftance.  To 
the  middle  of  the  rope  are  fufpended  two  cannon  Ibot,  or  fomething 
which  weighs  heavy,  in  order  to  fink  it  to  tlie  ground  :  fo  that,  as  the 
boats  advance  by  rowing  ahead,  the  rope  drags  along  the  bottom,  to 
liook  any  thing  for  which  they  arefcarclilng. 

SWEEPS,  arc  long  oars  fomctlmes.ufed  on  board  a  flilp  to  pull  her 

jTound. 

T. 

TACK,  a  rope  ufed  to  confine  the  foremoft  loweft-cornevs  of  the 
<ourfes  and  Jiay-faih  in  a  fixed  pofition,  when  the  wind  crofles  the  fhip's 
courfe  obliquely. 

Tack-chain  plates,  ftrong  links  or  plates  of  iron,  the  lower  ends  of 
which  are  bolted  through  the  fhip's  fide  to  the  timbers,  for  the  purpofe 
of  holding  the  rope  called  a  tack. 

Ma  I  n-Tack,  the  tack  of  the  main-fail. 

TAFFAREL,  the  upper  part  of  a  fhip's  flern,  fbeing  a  curved  piece  of 
-.wood,  ufually  ornamented  with  fculpture. 

TAUGHT,  the  flate  of  being  extended  or  flretched  out.  It  is  ufually 
applied  to  a  rope  or  fail,  in  oppofitlon  tOiflack. 

TENDING,  the  movement  by  which  a;fliip  turns  or  fwlngs  round  her 
anchor  in  a  tide-way,  at  the  beginning  of  the  flood  or  ebb. 

THWART,  -the  feat. or  bench  of  a  boat  whereon  the  rowers  fit  to  ma- 
jiage  the  oars. 

TILER,  the  bar  or  lever  employed  to  turn  the  rudder  In  fleering. 

TIMBERS,  the  ribs  of  a  flilp. 

TRANSOMS,  certain  beams  or  timbers  extended  acrofs  thtjiern-foji 
xii  a  fliip  to  fortify  her  after-part,  and  give  it  the  figure  moft  fuitable  to 
ilhe  fcrvice  for  which  flic  is  calculated. 

TRUSSEL 


AN  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NAUTICAL  TERMS.  xxxia 

TRUSSEL  or  TRESTLE-TREES,  two  ftrong  bars  of  timber  fixed 
horizontally  on  the  oppofite  fides  of  the  lower  maft-head,  to  fupport  the 
frame  of  the  top,  and  the  weight  of  the  top-maft. 

TRIM,  the  flate  or  difpofition  by  which  a  fhip  is  befl:  calculated  for 
the  feveral  purpofes  of  navigation. 

To  TREND,  to  run  off  in  a  certain  diref^ion. 

TRIPING,  the  movement  by  which  an  anchor  is  loofened  from  the 
bottom  by  its  cable  or  buoy-ropes. 

V. 

VEERING,  the  fame  as  wearing,  which  fee. 

Ta  Veer  aivay  the  cable.  Is  to  ilackcn  it,  that  it  may  run  out  of  the  fhip. 

W. 

WAKE,  the  print  or  track  impreffed  by  the  courfe  of  a  fhip  on  the 
furface  of  the  water. 

WALES,  an  aflemblage  of  flrong  planks  extending  along  a  Ihip's  fide, 
throughout  her  whole  length,  at  different  heights,  and  ferving  to  rein- 
force the  decks,  and  form  the  curves  by  which  the  veffel  appears  light 
and  graceful  on  the  water. 

WARP,  a  fmall  rope  employed  cccafionally  to  remove  a  ftiip  from 
one  place  to  another,  in  a  port,  road  or  river.    And  hence 

To  Warp,  Is  to  change  the  fituation  of  a  fhip,  by  pulling  her  from 
one  part  of  a  harbour,  &c.  to  fome  other,  by  means  of  warps. 

WASH-BOARD,  a  broad  thin  plank  fixed  occafionally  on  the  top  of 
■a  boat's  fide,  fo  as  to  raife  it,  and  be  removed  at  pleafure.  It  is  ufed 
to  prevent  the  fea  from  breaking  into  the  veffel,  particularly  when  the 
furface  is  rough. 

To  WEATHER,  is  to  fail  to  windward  of  fome  Ihip,  bank,  or  head- 
land. 

To  WEAR,  the  fame  as  to  veer,  to  perform  the  operation  by  which  a 
Ihip,  in  changing  her  courfe  from  one  board  to  the  other,  turns  her  flcrn 
•to  windward ;  it  is  the  oppofite  to  tacking,  in  which  the  head  is  turned 
to  the  windward  and  the  ftern  to  the  leeward. 

WINDLASS,  a  machine  ufed  in  merchant-fhips  to  heave  up  the  an- 
chors. It  is  a  large  cylindrical  piece  of  timber,  fupported  at  the  two 
9  ends 


xxxiv  AN  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NAUTICAL  TERMS. 

ends  by  two  frames  of  wood,  placed  on  the  oppofite  fides  of  the  deck 
near  the  fore-maft,  and  Is  turned  about  as  upon  an  axis,  by  levers  called 
handfpecs  which  are  for  this  purpofe  thruft  into  holes  bored  through  the 
body  of  the  machine. 

WOOLDING,  the  z&.  of  winding  a  piece  of  rope  about  a  maft  or 
yard,  to  fupport  it  in  a  place  where  it  may  have  been  fjhed  or  fcarfed  ;  or 
when  it  is  compofed  of  feveral  pieces  united  into  one  folid. 

Y. 

YARD,  a  long  piece  of  timber  fufpended  upon  the  mails  of  a  fhip. 
to  extend  the  fails  to  the  wind. 

YAW,  the  movement  by  which  a  fhIp  deviates  from  the  line  of  her 
courfe  towards  the  right  or  left  in  fleering. 


^   d£- 


A 
DESCRIPTION    of   the    CUTS. 

I.  A  view  of  thd"  Indians  of  Terra  del  Fuego  in  their  hut. 

II.  A  view  of  Matavia  Bay  in  Otaheite  ;  called  by  Captain  Wallis,  Port 
Royal  Harbour  in  King  George  the  Third's  Ifland.  The  view  is  taken 
from  One  Tree  Hill,  and  the  tree  is  a  new  fpecies  of  the  Erythrina. 

III.  A  view  in  the  Ifland  of  Ulietea,  with  a  double  canoe  and  a  boat-houfe. 

IV.  A  view  of  the  Ifland  of  Otaheite,  with  feveral  veflels  of  that  ifland. 

V.  A  view  in  the  Ifland  of  Otaheite ;  with  the  houfe  or  flied  called  Tu- 
papow,  under  which  the  dead  are  depofited,  and  a  reprefentation  of 
the  perfon  who  perfornas  the  principal  part  in  the  funeral  ceremony  in 
his  peculiar  drefe ;  with  a  man  climbing  the  bread-fruit  tree  to  get  out 
of  his  way. 

VI.  A  view  in  the  Ifland  of  Huaheine;  with  the  Ewharra  no  Eatua,  or 
Houfe  of  God ;  a  fmall  altar  with  its  offering ;  and  a  tree  called 
Owharra  with  which  the  houfes  are  thatched. 

VII.  A  view  of  the  infide  of  a  houfe  in  the  Ifland  of  Ulietea,  with  the 
reprefentation  of  a  dance  to  the  mufic  of  the  country. 

VIII.  A  military  gorget  worn  in  the  South  Sea  Iflands. 

IX.  The  firft  two  figures,  reckoning  from  the  left  hand,  are  chifl"cls  or 
gouges ;  the  third  an  adze  of  the  fmaller  kind;  the  fourth,  the  inftru-* 
raent  with  which  the  bread-fruit  is  beaten  into  pafte ;  the  fifth,  the 
nafal  flute ;  the  fixth,  a  thatching  needle ;  the  feventh,  the  inflrument 
ufed  for  beating  the  cloth,  over  which  is  a  fquare  reprefenting  the  end 
of  it,  to  fliew  the  different  fize  of  the  grooves  on  the  four  fides,  the 
number  of  which  is  exprefled  in  figures. 

X.  The  firfl:  figure,  reckoning  from  the  left  hand,  is  an  adze  of  the 
larger  fize;  the  fecond  and  thii-d  are  different  reprefentatlons  of  the 
upper  part  of  it,  to  fhew  the  manner  of  tying  the  Hone  to  the  handle; 
tlie  fmaller  figures  are  tattowing  inftruments,  to  pierce  the  ikin,  of  dif- 
ferent fizes  with  and  without  their  handles ;  the  laft  is  the  inflrument 
with  which  they  are  ftruck  for  that  purpofe. 

XL 


xxxvl  A    DESCRIPTION    OF    THE    CUTS, 

XI.  A  branch  of  the  bread-fruit  tree  with  the  fruit. 

XII.  The  middle  figure  reprefents  a  fly-flap  of  the  Ifland  Ohiteroa  ;  the 
two  fide  figures,  handles  of  the  fame  inftruments  made  in  Otaheite. 

N.B.  the  figures  in  the  plates  IX.  X.  and  XII.  are  according  to  a 
fcale  of  one  third  of  an  inch  to  an  inch.  ^ 

XIII.  The  head  of  a  New  Zealander,  with  a  comb  in  his  hair,  an  orna- 
ment of  green  ftone  in  his  ear,  and  another  of  a  fifh's  tooth  round  his 
neck. 

XIV.  Bludgeons,  ufed  as  weapons  by  the  New  Zealanders,  and  called 
Patoo-patoos,  as  feen  on  the  fide,  the  edge,  and  tlie  end.  They  are  from 
fourteen  to  eighteen  inches  long,  and  broad  and  thick  in  prnpm-tion. 

XV.  A  cheft  of  New  Zealand,  as  a  fpecimen  nf  the  carving  of  that  country. 

XVI.  A  war  canoe  of  New  Zealand,  with  a  view  of  Gable  End  Foreland. 

XVII.  A  view  of  a  perforated  rock  in  Tolaga  Bay  in  New  Zealand. 

XVIII.  A  fortLficJ  to>Tii  <ji  v:iU5t,  wctllcd  a  Hippah,  bmlt  on  a  perforated 
rock  at  Tolaga  in  New  Zealand. 

XIX.  A  view  of  Endeavour  River,  on  the  coaft  of  New  Holland,  where 
the  fhip  was  laid  on  fliore,  in  order  to  repair  the  damage  which  fhe 
received  on  the  rock. 

XX.  An  animal  found  on  the  coaft  of  New  Holland  called  Kanguroo. 

XXI.  A  reprefentation  of  the  interview  between  Commodore  Byron  and 
the  Patagonians. 

XXII.  A  reprefentation  of  the  attack  of  Captain  Wallis  in  the  Dolphin 
by  the  natives  of  Otaheite. 

XXIII.  A  reprefentation  of  the  furrender  of  the  ifland  of  Otalieite  to 
Captain  Wallis  by  the  fuppofed  Queen  Obcrea. 


ERRATUM. 
Vol.  I.  page  5^4.  line  18.  for  /,  read  ha 

A  1% 


DIRECTION 


FOR    PLACING    THE 


CUTS      AND      CHARTS. 


V  O  L  U  M  E      I. 

CHART  of  part  of  the  South  Seas,  fhewing  the  Track  and  Difcoveries 

made  by  all  the  fhips,  -  -  To  front  the  Title-page. 

Chart  of  the  Streight  of  Magellan,  "' 

Chart  of  Port  Famine,  Wood's  Bay,  Port 

Gallant  and  Fortefcue  Bay,  and  Cordes's 

Bay  and  Harbour, 
Chart  of  Saint  David's  Cove,  Ifland  Bay,  . 

Swallow  Harbour,  Puzzling  Bay,  Cape  )>To  front  Commodore  Byron's  Voyage. 

Providence,    Cape  Upright  Bay,     and 

Dolphin  Bay,  I 

Chart  of  Elizabeth  Bay,  Saint  David's  Bay,  j 

and  from  York  River  to  Three  Ifland  I 

Bay  and  Harbour,  j 

No.  23.  facing  -  ...  Pgge  27 

A  chart  of  Hawkins's  Maiden  Land,  and  Falkland'^s  Sound,  to  face  Ch.  V.  41 
No.  21.  facing  -  .  .  44^ 

No.  22.  to  face  -  -  .  ^^i 

Views  of  Sir  Charles  Saunders's  Ifland,  Ofnaburg  Ifland,  Bofcawen's 


Ifland,  Admiral  Keppel's  Ifland,  and  Wallis's  Ifland, 
Chart  of  Coco's  Ifland,  and  Tray  tor's  Ifland,  to  face 
Chart  of  Wallis's  Ifland,  to  f?.ce 
View  of  the  N.W.  fide  of  Mafafuero,  to  face 
A  chare  and  views  of  Pitcairn's  Ifland,  to  face 

Vo...  I.  f 


491 
492 
496 

553 
561. 

Queen 


DIRECTIONS  FOR  PLACING  THE  CUTS  AND  CHARTS. 

Qiieen  Charlotte's  Iflands,  to  face  -  _  -  568 

Ihe  north  fide  of  the  largeft  of  Queen  Charlotte's  iflands,  Swallow 

Bay,  and  Byron's  Harbour,  to  face  -  -  -  577 

Nova  Hibernia,   with  a  view  of  the  Ifland  of  Saint  "John,  and  fix 

others,  to  face  -  -  --  -  588 
A  chart  of  Captain  Carteret's  Difcoveries  at  New  Britain,  to  face  595 
Three  views  of  the  Admiralty  IQes,  and  fome  others,  to  face  -  605 
A  dangerous  (hoal,  Jofeph  Freewell's  Ifland,  and  the  fouth  end  of  Min- 
danao, to  face  -  ...  609 
A  Draught  of  Bonthain  Bay,               •-                    -                 -  6^'/ 

VOLUME      II. 

A  view  of  part  of  the  N.E.  fide  of  Terra  del  Fuego,  with  three  other 
views,  a  Plan  of  Succefs  Bay  in  Streight  la  Maire,  and  a  chart  of 
tlie  S.E.  part  of  Terra  del  Fuego,  -  -  3^ 

No.  I.  facing  -  -  z  '  55 

Chart  of  the  Ifland  of  Otaheite,  z  '79 

>  facing  -  •  -  6O 

No.  II. J 

No.  4.  facing  -  •  -  -  184 

No.  8.    7  ^    .  o 

\  facing  -  -  -  -.105 

No.  12.3 

No.  10.  facing                 -  -                 •                         -              191 

No.  9.  facing                 -  -                 -                 -               -         212 

No.  5.  facing             -  .                   _                     -               234 

Chart  of  the  Society  Iflands,  -                 -                 -           "j 

Matavai  Bay  in  Otdheite,    Ohameneno  Harbour  in  Ulietea,    Ow- ; 

harra  Harbour  in  Huahcine,  and  Oopoa  Harbour  in  Ulietea,      j 

Chart  of  all  the  Iflands,          .  -                  -               -             J 

No.  6.  facing                 .  -                         -                            252 

No.  3.  facing                  -  -                                     -                258 

Nc»  7.  f^.cir.g                  -  -                 -                  -                  -         265 

Chart  of  New  Zealand,  facing  Book  II.  Chap.  i.  -                  281 

No.  17.  facing            -  -                         -                   -             318 

8  River 


DIRECTIONS  FOR  PLACING  THE  CUTS  AND  CHARTS. 

River  Thames,  and  Mercury  Bay  in  New  Zealand,  Bay  of  Iflands,  and 

Tolaga  Bay,  -  -  -  *  3^3 

No,  18.  facing  -  -  ;:  341 

Chart  of  Cook's  Streight  in  New  Zealand,  facing  ^  385 

VOLUME      III. 

No.  13.  facing  -  -  ^  z         45 j 

°* '^'{facing  =  •  -  -         463 

No.  16.^  ^ 

No.  14.  facing  -  .  -  :  465 

A  chart  of  New  South  Wales  on  the  eaft  coaft  of  New  Holland,  -j 

Entrance  of  Endeavour  River  in  New  South  Wales,  and  Botany  C  481 

Bay,  facing  -  -  .  -  J 

No.  19.  facing  -  -  ^  .        g^y 

No.  20.  facing  ,  _  _  .  ^Si 

Chart  ot  part  of  the  coaft  of  New  South  Wales  from  Cape  Tribula- 
tion to  Endeavour  Streight,       -  -  -  589 


C^  The  Second  Volume  ends  at  page         -  -  -        410 

and  Vol.  3d.  begins  at  page  -  -  -411 


Errata  in  the  Dcfcription  of   the  Cuts. 

For  Plate  XXI.  read  Plate  XXIII, 
For  XXII.  read  XXI. 
For  XXI [J,  read  XXIf, 


C  ii.i  n  r 

iiflln- 

STJlA^(;^T^^  or  Ma€:ella;y, 

in  «4>irl,  iiir  liijtrfnl 

Tin:  Oitsi:iiy.iri('Xs  .i\i>l>i.sffiv]:/tii:s, 


<'»|,'"llvr.i,i,Cui)':'1\Uli»ii"'l<'!'p 


Terra.       d    e     i.        Y     v    e     o     o 


F  jt  o  3r    Y  o  n   K    :b  ^4.Y 


S  C^l  L  E       o  jp        31 1  X  J:  S. 


u^     i...^..f'  =qs; 


AN 

ACCOUNT 

O  F     A 

VOYAGE  round  the  WORLD, 

IN    THE   YEARS 
MDCCLXIV,    MDCCLXV,   and   MDCCLXVI. 

By  the   Honourable    Commodore    BYRON, 
In  his  Majefty's  Ship  the  Dolphin. 


Vol.  I. 


CHAP.     I. 

The  Pajfage  from  the  Downs  to  Rio  de  Janeiro, 

[The  longitude  in  this  voyage  is  reckoned  from  the  meridian  of  London^ 
weft  to  180  degrees,  and  eaft  afterwards.] 

ON  the  aift  of  Jnne  17^4,  I  failed  from  the  Downs,  with       1764. 
his  Majefty's  fliip  the  Dolphin,  and  the  Tamar  frigate,  \     -  "^'   j 
which  I  had  received  orders  to  take  under  my  command:  as  ^i^^'^iayzi. 
I  was  coming  down  the  river,  the  Dolphin  got  a-ground ;  I 
therefore  put  into  Plymouth,  where  flie  was  docked,   but 
did  not  appear  to  have  received  any  damage.     At  this  place 
we  changed  fome  of  our  men,  and  having  paid  the  people 
two  months  wages  in  advance,  I  hoifted  the  broad  pendant,        Tuiy. 
and  failed  again  on  the  3d  of  July ;  on  the  4th  we  were  off  Wednef.  4* 
the  Lizard,  and  made  the  beft  of  our  way  with  a  fine  breeze, 
but  had  the  mortification  to  find  the  Tamar  a  very  heavy 
failer.    In  the  night  of  Friday  the  6th,  the  officer  of  the  firil  f"day  6. 
watch  faw  either  a  fliip  on  fire,  or  an  extraordinary  pheno- 
menon which  greatly  refembled  it,  at  fome  diftance :  it  con- 
tinued to  blaze  for  about  half  an  hour,  and  then  difappeared- 
hi  the  evening  of  Thurfday,  July  the  12th,  we  faw  the  rocks  Thurfday  t2. 
near  the  ifland  of  Madeira,  which  our  people  call  the  De- 
ferters ;  from  defertes,  a  name  which  has  been  given  them 
from  their  barren  and  defolate  appearance:  the  next  day  we  Friday  13. 
flood  in  for  the  road  of  Funchiale,  where,  about  three  o'clock 
in  the  afternoon,  we  came  to  an  anchor.     In  the  morning  of 
Saturday  the  14th,  I  waited  upon  the  Governor,  who  re-  Saturday  14, 
ceived  me  with  great  politenefs,  and  faluted  me  with  eleven 

B  2  guns^ 


COMMODORE   BYRON's    VOYAGE 


1764. 

Jdy. 
Sunday  15. 


Thiirfday  19. 
Saturday  21. 


Thurfday  26, 


Friday  27. 


Saturday  28. 
Sunday  29. 
Monday  30. 


guns,  which  I  returned  from  the  Ihip.  The  next  day,  he 
returned  my  vifit  at  the  houfe  of  the  Conful,  upon  which  I 
faluted  him  with  eleven  guns,  which  he  returned  from  the 
fort.  I  found  here  his  Majefty's  fhip  the  Crown,  and  the 
Ferret  floop,  who  alfo  faluted  the  broad  pendant. 

Having  completed  our  water,  and  procured  all  the  refrefli- 
ment  I  was  able  for  the  companies  of  both  the  fliips,  every 
man  having  twenty  pounds  weight  of  onions  for  his  fea, 
flock,  we  Aveighed  anchor  on  Thurfday  the  19th,  and  pro- 
ceeded on  our  voyage.  On  Saturday  the  21  ft,  we  made  the 
ifland  of  Palma,  one  oC  ilie  uanaries,  and  foon  after  ex- 
amining our  water,  we  found  it  would  be  neceflary  to  touch 
at  one  of  the  Cape  de  Verd  iflands  for  a  frefh  fupply.  During 
the  whole  of  our  courfe  from  the  Lizard,  we  obferved  that 
no  fifh  followed  the  fliip,  which  I  judged  to  be  owing  to  her 
being  flieathed  with  copper.  By  the  26th,  our  water  was 
become  foul,  and  flunk  intolerably,  but  we  purified  it  with 
a  machine,  which  had  been  put  on  board  for  that  purpofe:  it 
was  a  kind  of  ventilator,  by  which  air  was  forced  through 
the  water  in  a  continued  ftream,,  as  long  as  it  was  necef- 
fary. 

hi  the  morning  of  the  27th,  we  made  the  ifland  of  Sal,  one 
of  the  Cape  de  Verds,  and  feeing  feveral  turtle  upon  the 
water,  we  hoifted  out  our  jolly  boat,  and  attempted  to  flrike 
them,  but  they  all  went  down  before  our  people  could  come 
within  reach  of  them.  On  the  morning  of  the  28th,  we 
were  very  near  the  ifland  of  Bona  Vifta,  the  next  day  ofl?"  the 
Ifle  of  May,  and  on  Monday  the  30th,  we  came  to  an  anchor 
in  Port  Praya  bay.  The  rainy  feafon  was  already  fet  in, 
which  renders  this  place  very  unfafe ;  a  large  fwell  that 
rolls  in  from  the  fouthward,  makes  a  frightful  furf  upon 
the  fliorc,  and  there  is  reafon  every  hour  to  exped  a  tornado, 

of 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  5 

of  which,  as  it  is  very  violent,  and  blows  dire6lly  in,  the       ^jH- 
confequences  are  likely  to  be  fatal ;  fo  that  after  the  15th  of   ^-— -v, ' 

^  .  „      -         .  Monday  30. 

Auguft  no  fliip  comes  hither  till  the  rainy  feafon  is  over, 
which  happens  in  November;  for  this  reafon  I  made  all 
poffible  hafte  to  fill  my  water  and  get  away.  I  procm-ed 
three  bullocks  for  the  people,  but  they  were  little  better 
than  carrion,  and  the  weather  was  fo  hot,  that  the  fiefli 
flunk  in  a  few  hours  after  they  were  killed. 
On  Thurfday  the  2d  of  Auguff,  we  got  again  under  fail,      Auguft.' 

,   .  V  •    1      Thurfday  z;. 

With  a  large  cargo  of  fowls,  lean  goats,  and  monkies,  wnicii 
the  people  contrived  ro  procure  for  old  fhirts,  jackets,  and 
other  articles  of  the  like  kind.  The  intolerable  hear,  and 
almofl  incelTant  rain,  very  foon  affeifted  our  health,  and  the 
men  began  to  fall  down  in  fevers,  notwithftanding  all  my 
attention  and  diligence  to  make  them  fliift  themfelves  before 
they  llept,  when  they  were  wer. 

On  Wednefday  the  8th,   the  Tamar  fired  a  gun,   upon  Wedne/^gj. 
■which  we  Ihortened  fail  till  fhe  came  up:  we  found  that 
flie   had   fuifered  no   damage  but   the   carrying   away   of 
her  top-fail-yard  ;  however,  as  we  were  obliged  to  make  an 
eafy  fail  till  fhe  had  got  up  another,  and  the  windfeemed  to 
be  coming  again  to  the  fouthward,  we  loft  a  good  deal  of 
way.    We  continued,  to  our  great  mortification,  to  obferve 
that  no  fifla  would  come  near  enough  to  our  copper  bottom? 
for  us  to  ftrike,  though  we  faw  the  fea  as  it  were  quickened ^ 
with  them  at  a  little  diftance.    Ships  in  thefe  hot  latitudes 
generally  take  fifti  in  plenty,. but,  except  fliarks,  we  were  not: 
able  to  catch  one. 

No  event  worthy  of  notice  happened  till  Tuefday  the  nth    September." 
of  September,  when,  about  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  '^"^''^^y"* 
we  faw  Cape  Frio,  on  the  coaft  of  Brazil ;  and  about  noon 
©n. Thurfday  the  13th,  we  anchored  in  eighteen  fathom,  in  Thurfday  130 

£■:  the: 


6  co;mmodore  byron's  voyage 

1764-       the  great  Road  of  Rio  de  Janeiro.    The  city,  which  is  large, 

September.  , 

^ — .. — '  and  makes  a  handfome  appearance,  is  governed  by  the 
ay '3'  y^f-gj-Qy  Qf  Brazil,  who  is  perhaps,  in  faft,  as  abfolute  a 
fovereign  as  any  upon  earth.  When  I  vifited  him,  he  re- 
<:eived  me  in  great  form  j  above  fixty  officers  were  drawn  up 
before  the  palace,  as  well  as  a  captain's  guard,  who  were 
men  of  a  good  appearance,  and  extremely  well  clothed :  his 
Excellency,  with  a  number  of  perfons  of  the  firll  diflin(5lion, 
belonging  to  the  place,  met  me  at  the  head  of  the  flairs, 
upon  which  fifteen  guns  were  fired  from  the  neareft  port : 
we  then  entered  the  room  of  ftate.  nnd  aftci  cunverfing  about 
a  quarter  of  an  hour,  in  French,  I  took  my  leave,  and  was 
difmifled  with  the  fame  form  that  had  been  ufed  at  my  re- 
ception. He  offered  to  return  my  vifit  at  a  houfe  which  I 
had  hired  on  fhore,  but  this  I  declined,  and  foon  after  he  re- 
turned it  on  board. 

The  people  in  my  own  fliip,  who  had  as  much  frefli  meat 
and  greens  as  they  could  eat  every  day,  were  very  healthy, 
but  there  being  many  fick  on  board  the  Tamar,  I  procured  a 
place  for  them  on  fliore,  where  they  foon  recovered.  I  alfo 
engaged  a  number  of  Portuguefe  caulkers,  as  the  feams  of 
both  the  fliips  were  very  open,  who,  after  having  worked 
fome  time,  rendered  them  perfeftly  tight. 

While  we  lay  here,  Lord  Clive,    in  the  Kent  Indiaman, 

came  to  the  port.     This  fliip  had  failed  from  England  a 

month  before  us,  and  had  not  touched  any  where,  yet  flie 

came  in  a  month  after  us  ;  fo  that  her  pafTage  was  jufl  two 

months  longer  than  ours,  notwithftanding  the  time  \vc  loil 

in  waiting  for  the  Tamar,  which,  though  the  Dolphin  was 

by  no  mcims  a  good  failer,  failed  fo  much  worfe,  that  we 

feldom  fpread  more  than  half  our  canvas.     The  Kent  had 

many  of  her  people  down  in  the  fcurvy. 

2  -  On 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  J 

On  Tuefday  the  i6th  of  Odober,  we  weighed  anchor,  being      17^4. 

Ottober. 

impatient  to  get  to  fea,  for  the  heat  here  was  intolerable ;  v— v^— ./ 
but  we  lay  four  or  five  days  above  tlie  bar,  waiting  for  the  "^  ay  i  .. 
land  breeze  to  carry  us  out,  for  there  is  no  getting  out  with 
the  fea  breeze,  and  the  entrance  between  the  two  firft  forts 
is  fo  narrow,  and  fo  great  a  fea  breaks  in  upon  them,  that  it 
was  not  without  much  danger  and  difficulty  we  got  out  at 
lafl,  and  if  we  had  followed  the  advice  of  the  Portuguefe 
pilot,  we  had  certainly  loft  the  fhip.  As  this  narrative  is 
publiflied  for  the  advantage  of  future  navigators,  particu- 
larly tKofe  of  nnr  own  uatiou,  it  is  alfo  neceffary  I  fhould  ob- 
ferve,  that  the  Portuguefe  here,  carj.7ing  on  a  great  trade, 
make  it  their  bufinefs  to  attend  every  time  a  boat  comes  on 
fliore,  and  pradtife  every  artifice  in  their  power  to  entice 
away  the  crew :  if  other  methods  do  not  fucceed,  they  make 
them  drunk,  and  immediately  fend  them  up  the  country, 
taking  effecflual  care  to  prevent  their  return,  till  the  fliip  to 
which  they  belong  has  left  the  place  ;  by  this  pradice  I  lofi; 
five  of  my  men,  and  the  Tamar  nine :  mine  I  never  reco- 
vered, but  the  Tamar  had  the  good  fortune  to  learn  where 
her's  were  detained,  and  by  fending  out  a  party  in  the  night,,, 
furprifed  them,  and  brought  them  back. 


CHAP. 


COMMODORE   BYRON's    VOYAGE 


T7&4. 

Oaober. 
Monday  22. 


fsidonday  2c 


Tucfday  3c. 


CHAP.     II. 

Pajfage  from  Rio  de  'Janeiro  to  Port  Dejire ;  with  feme 

Defer iption  of  that  Place, 

ON  Monday  the  izd,  being  now  once  more  at  fea,  I 
called  all  hands  upon  deck,  and  informed  them,  that 
I  was  not,  as  they  imagined,  bound  imrnodiatdy  cu  ilic  Eaft 
Indies,  but  upon  certam  difcoveries,  which  it  was  thought 
might  be  of  great  importance  to  our  country,  in  confidera- 
tion  of  which,  the  Lords  Commiffioners  of  the  Admiralty  had 
been  pleafed  to  promife  them  double  pay,  and  feveral  other 
advantages,  if.during  the  voyage  they  fliould  behave  to  my 
facisfacftion.  They  all  exprefled  the  greatefl  joy  imaginable 
upon  theoGcafion,  'and  afTured  me,  that  there  was  no  danger 
or  difficulty  that  they  would  not  with  the  utmoft  cheerful- 
nefs  undergo  in  the  fervice  of  their  country,  nor  any  order 
that  I  could  give  them  which  they  would  not  implicitly  and 
zealoufly  obey. 

We  continued  our  courfe  till  Monday  the  29th,  having 
frequently  hard  gales  with  fudden  gufts,  which  obliged  us 
to  ftrike  our  top-gallant-mafts,  and  get  up  our  flumps ;  but 
this  day  it  blew  a  ftorm,  with  a  terrible  fea,  and  the  fhip 
laboured  fo  much,  that,  to  eafe  her,  I  ordered  the  two  fore- 
mofl,  and  two  aftermoft  guns  to  be  thrown  overboard:  the 
gale  continued  with  nearly  equal  violence  all  the  reft  of  the 
day,  and  all  night,  fo  that  we  were  obliged  to  lie  to  under  a 
double-reefed  main  fail ;  but  in  the  morning,  it  being  more 
moderate,  and  veering  from  N.  W.  to  S.  by  W.  we  made  fail 
again,  and  ftocd  to  the  weftward.  We  were  now  in  lati- 
tude 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  9 

tude  ^5°  50' S.  and  found  the  .weather  as  cold  as  it  is  at  the       ^7^4- 

fame  feafon  in  England,  although  the  month  of  November   < > 1 

here  is  a  fpring  month,  anfw^ring  to  our  May,  and  we  were  "*"  ^^  ^*° 
near  twenty  degrees  nearer  the  line:  to  us,  who  within  little 
more  than  a  week  had  fuftered  intolerable  heat,  this  change 
was  moft  feverely  felt :  and  the  men,  who  fuppofing  they  were 
to  continue  in  a  hot  climate  during  the  whole  voyage,  had 
contrived  to  fell  not  only  all  their  warm  clothes,  but  their 
bedding,  at  the  different  ports  where  we  had  touched,  now 
applied  in  great  diftrefs  for  flops,  and  were  all  furniflied  for 
the  climate. 

On  Friday  the  2d  of  November,  after  adminiftering  the  November. 
proper  oath  to  the  Lieutenants  of  both  fliips,  I  delivered  ^"'"^''y  ^^ 
them  their  commiffions  ;  for  till  this  time  they  a6led  only 
under  verbal  orders  from  me,  and  expected  to  receive  their 
commiffions  in  India,  whither  they  imagined  we  were  bound. 
We  now  began  to  fee  a  great  number  of  birds  about  the 
fliip,  many  of  them  very  large,  of  which  fome  were  brown 
and  white,  and  fome  black :  there  were  among  them  large 
flocks  of  pintadoes,  which  are  foraewhat  larger  than  a 
pigeon,  and  fpotted  with  black  and  white.  On  the  4th,  we  Sunday  4, 
faw  a  great  quantity  of  rock  weed,  and  feveral  feals :  our 
latitude  was  38°  53'  S.,  longitude  51'^  W. ;  the  variation 
13^  E. :  the  prevailing  winds  here  were  wefterly,  fo  that  be- 
ing continually  driven  to  the  eaflward,  we  forefaw  that  it 
would  not  be  eafy  to  get  in  with  the  coaft  of  Patagonia.  On 
the  loth,  we  obferved  the  water  to  change  colour,  but  we  Saturday  10. 
had  no  ground  with  one  hundred  and  forty  fathom:  our  la- 
titude was  now  41^  16'  S. ;  our  longitude  55"  if  W. ;  the  va- 
riation was  18°  20'  E.  The  next  day  we  flood  in  for  the  land 
till  eight  in  the  evening,  when  we  had  ground  of  red  fand 
with  forty-five  fathom.  We  fleered  S.  W.  by  W.  all  night, 
'     Vol.  L    ^  C  and 


lo  COMMODORE    BY  RON'S    VOYAGE 

17^4'      and  the  next  morning  had  fifty-tw©  fathom  with  the  fame 
«_— -v-^J   ground:  our  latitude  was  4^°  34  S.,  longitude  jS"!/ W.;  the 

Sunday  1 1.  .      .  „   ,  t- 

vanation  1 1  °  4  E. 

Monday  12.  On  Monday  the  12  th,  about  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon, 
as  I  was  walking  on  the  quarter-deck,  all  the  people  upon  the 
forecaftle  called  out  at  once  "Land  right  ahead;"  it  was  then 
very  black  almoft  round  the  horizon,  and  we  had  had  much 
thunder  and  lightning ;  I  looked  forward  under  the  forefail, 
and  upon  the  lee  bow,  and  faw  what  at  firfl  appeared  to  be  an 
iiland,  rifing  in  two  rude  craggy  hills,  but  upon  looking  to 
leeward  I  faw  land  joining  to  it,  and  running  a  long  way 
,to  the  fouth  eail:  we  were  then  fleering  S.W.  and  I  fent 
officers  to  the  maft-head  to  look  out  upon  the  weather  beam, 
and  they  called  out  that  they  faw  land  alfo  a  great  way  to 
the  windward.  I  immediately  brought  to,  and  founded  ;  we 
liad  ftill  fifty-two  fathom,  but  I  thought  that  we  were  em- 
bayed, and  rather  wiflied  than  hoped  that  we  fliould  get 
clear  before  night.  We  made  fail  and  fleered  E.  S.  E.  the 
land  Hill  having  the  fame  appearance,  and  the  hills  looking 
blue,  as  they  generally  do  at  a  little  diflance  in  dark  rainy 
weather,  and  now  many  of  the  people  faid  that  they  faw 
the  fea  break  upon  the  fandy  beaches  ;  but  having  Iteered 
out  for  about  an  hour,  what  we  had  taken  for  land,  vanifhed 
all  at  once,  and  to  our  great  aftonifhment  appeared  to  have 
been  a  fog-bank.  Though  I  had  been  almoft  continually  at  fea 
for  feven  and  twenty  years,  I  had  never  feen  fuch  a  deception 
before ;  others  however  have  been  equally  deceived  ;  for  the 
mailer  of  a  fliip,  not  long  fince,  made  oath,  that  he  had  feen 
an  iiland  between  the  weft  end  of  Ireland  and  Newfound- 
land, and  even  diftinguifhed  the  trees  that  grew  upon  it. 
Yet  it  is  certain  that  no  fuch  ifland  exifts,  at  leaft  it  could 
never  be  found,  though  fcvcral  fliips  were  afterwards  fent 

out 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ii 

out  on  purpofe  to  feek  it.  And  I  am  fure,  that  if  the  weather    ^^  1764- 

■*■        ■*■  November. 

had  not  cleared  up  foon  enough  for  us  to  fee  what  we  had  < — -^ — » 
taken  for  land  difappear,  every  man  on  board  would  freely 
have  made  oath,  that  land  had  been  difcovered  in  this  litua- 
tion.   Our  latitude  this  day  was  43''  46'  S.,  longitude  60°  5'  W.; 
and  the  variation  19°  30'  E. 

The  next  day,  at  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  the  wea-  Tuefday  13. 
ther  being  extremely  fine,  the  wind  fhifted  at  once  to  the 
S.  W.  and  began  to  blow  frefli,  the  Iky  at  the  fame  time  be- 
coming black  to  windward :  in  a  fev/  minutes  all  the  people 
that  were  upon  the  decic  were  alarmed  with  a  fudden  and 
unufual  noife,  like  the  breaking  of  the  fea  upon  the  fliorc. 
I  ordered  the  topfails  to  be  handed  immediately ;  but  before 
it  could  be  done,  I  faw  the  fea  approaching  at  fome  diftance, 
in  vail  billows  covered  with  foam ;  I  called  to  the  people  to 
hawl  up  the  forefail,  and  let  go  the  main  fheet  inftantly ; 
for  I  was  perfuaded  that  if  we  had  any  fail  out  when  the 
gufl  reached  us,  we  fhould  either  be  overfet,  or  lofe  all  our 
mafts.  It  reached  us  however  before  we  could  raife  the 
main  tack,  and  laid  us  upon  our  beam  ends  :  the  main  tack 
was  then  cut,  for  it  was  become  impoffible  to  cafl  it  off;  and 
the  main  flieet  ftruck  down  the  Firft  Lieutenant,  bruifed  him 
dreadfully,  and  beat  out  three  of  his  teeth :  the  main  top- 
fail,  which  was  not  quite  handed,  was  fplit  to  pieces.  If 
this  fquall,  which  came  on  with  lefs  warning  and  more  vio- 
lence than  any  I  had  ever  feen,  had  taken  us  in  the  night,  I 
think  the  fhlp  mull  have  been  lofl.  When  it  came  on  we 
obferved  feveral  hundred  of  birds  flying  before  it,  which  ex- 
prefled  their  terror  by  loud  fhrieks  ;  it  laded  about  twenty 
minutes,  and  then  gradually  fubfided.  The  Tamar  fplit  her 
main  fail,  but  as  flie  was  to  leeward  of  us,  flie  had  more 
time  to  prepare.     In  a  fliort  time  it  began  to  blow  very  hard 

C  2  again, 


12  COMMODORE    BYRON's   VOYAGE 

1764;.       again,  fo  that  we  reefed  our  main  fail,  and  lay  to  under  it 

November.        ,,        .     ,  .  .  1       i        i  i      1 

V ,, /   all  night.    As  morning  approached,  the  gale  became  more 

f&  ne.  14.   jjjQjjgp^^g^  Ij^j.  ^g  j^^(j  £|-j^  ^  great  fea,  and  the  wind  fliifting 

to  S.  by  W.  we  flood  to  the  weftward  under  our  courfes. 
Soon  after  it  was  light,  the  fea  appeared  as  red  as  blood, 
being  covered  with  a  fmall  fhell-fifh  of  that  colour,  fome- 
what  refembling  our  crayfifh,  but  lefs,  of  which  we  took 
up  great  quantities  in  bafkets. 

At  half  an  hour  pafbfour  in  the  morning  of  Thurfday  the 
ihmfda)'i5.  15th  of  November,  we  faw  land,  which  had  the  appearance 
of  an  ifland  about  eight-  nr  nine  leagues  long,  there  being 
no  land  in  fight  either  to  the  northward  or  fouthward, 
though  by  the  charts  it  lliould  be  Cape  Saint  Helena,  which 
proje6ts  from  the  coafl  to  a  conliderable  diftance,  and  forms 
two  bays,  one  to  the  north,  and  the  other  to  tlie  fouth.  As 
the  v/eather  was  very  fine,  I  tacked  and  flood  in  for  it  about 
ten  o'clock ;  but  as  there  were  many  funken  rocks  at  about 
tv.'o  leagues  diftance  from  it,  upon  which  the  fea  broke  very 
high,  and  the  wind  feemed  to  be  gradually  dying  away,  I 
tacked  again  and  flood  off.  The  land  appeared  to  be  barren 
and  rocky,  v/ithout  either  tree  or  bufh :  when  I  was  nearefl 
to  it  1  founded  and  had  forty-five  fathom,  with  black  muddy 
ground.  'lO  my  great  misfortune,  my  three  Lieutenants 
and  the  Mafter  were  at  this  time  fo  ill  as  to  be  incapable  of 
duty,  though  the  reft  of  the  Ihip's  company  were  in  good 
health.  Our  latitude  was  45*^  21'  S.,  longitude  63°  a'W.  j  the 
variation  19"  41'  E. 

Fnrfav  )&  The  next  day  I  fliaped  my  courfe  by  the  chart  in  the  ac-- 

couni  of  Lord  Anfon's  voyage,  for  Cape  Blanco.  In  the  even- 
ing it  blew  extremely  hard  at  S.  W.  by  S.  fo  that  we  brought 

Saturday  17.  to  for  the  night  under  our  main  fail.  In  the  morning  w€ 
made  fail  again,  but  we  had  a  great  feaj  and  although  it 

was 


JIOUND    THE    WORLD.  i- 

was  now  almoft  midfummer  in  thefe  parts,  the  weather  was,       1764. 

November. 

in  every  refped:,  much  worfe  than  it  is  in  the  Bay  of  Bifcay   > > 

at  the  depth  of  winter.  About  fix  in  the  evening,  having  ^''"^  ^^'^' 
carried  all  the  fail  I  could,  we  made  land,  bearing  about 
S.  S.  W.  which  as  we  had  a  good  obfervation  of  the  fun,  we 
knew  to  be  Cape  Blanco  ;  but  it  now  began  to  blow  with 
more  violence  than  ever,  and  the  ftorm  continued  all  night, 
with  a  fea  that  was  continually  breaking  over  us,  fo  that  the 
fliip  laboured  very  much.  At  four  in  .  the  morning,  we  Sunday  isj- 
founded  and  had  forty  fathom,  with  rocky  ground  ;  having 
flood  oiF  in  the  njght,  wc  now  worc  and  flood  in  again,  the 
florm  ftill  continuing  with  hail  and  fnow:  and  about  fix 
o'clock  we  faw  the  land  again,  bearing  S.  VV.  by  W.  The 
Ihip  was  now  fo  light,  that  in  a  gale  of  wind  fhe  drove  bo- 
dily to  leeward  ;  fo  that  I  was  very  folicitous  to  get  into  Port 
Deflre,  that  L  might  put  her  hold  in  order,  and  take  in  fuffi- 
cient  ballaft,  to  avoid  the  danger  of  being  caught  upon  a  Ice 
ftiore  in  her  prefent  trim.  We  fleered  in  for  the  land  with 
the  wind  at  N. E.  and  in  the  evening  brought  to;  but  the 
wind  coming  to  the  weftwardi  we  were  driven  off  in  the  ■ 
night.  At  feven  the  next  morning,  we  flood  in  again,  Monday  ic. 
fleering  S.  W.  by  S.  by  the  compafs,  and  foon  perceived  the 
fea  to  break  right  ahead  of  us;  we  immediately  founded, 
and  flioaled  our  water  from  thirteen  to  feven  fathom,  foon 
after  deepening  it  again  from  feventeen  to  forty-two;  fo  that 
we  went  over  the  end  of  a  flioal,  which  a  little  farther  to  the 
northward  might  have  been  fatal  to  us.  Cape  Blanco  at  this 
time  bore  W.  S.  W.4  S.  diftant  four  leagues:  but  we  were 
flill  at  a  lofs  for  Port  Defire,  it  being  impoffible  that  any  de». 
fcription  fhould  be  more  confufed  than  that  which  Sir  John 
Narborough  has  given  of  this  harbour.  I  flood  into  a  bay- 
to  the  fouthward  of  the  Gape.,  as  he  directs,  but  could  find 
no  fuch  place ;  I  therefore  flood  along  the  fliore  to  the  foutk'i- 

■ward-,.-, 


14  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 


Monday  ly. 


i7''4-      ward,  the  wind  blowing  off  the  land  very  hard,  and  faw  fe- 

November.  '^  ■' 

veral  large  columns  of  fmoke  rifmg  in  many  places,  but  no 
tree  or  bufii,  the  country  refembling  in  appearance  the  bar- 
ren downs  of  England.  We  obferved  alfo  that  the  water  was 
frequently  very  fliallow  at  the  diftance  of  feven  or  eight 
miles  from  the  fliore,  for  we  had  many  times  not  more  than 
ten  fathom. 

We  continued  to  ftand  along  the  Ihore  all  day  as  near  as 
poffible,  and  in  the  evening  we  faw  an  illand  at  the  diftance 

Taefday  20.  of  about  fix  leagues ;  in  the  morning  we  ftood  in  for  it,  and 
found  that  it  correfponded  with  Narborough's  dcfcrlption  of 
Penguin  illand.  As  Port  Delire  is  faid  to  lie  about  three 
leagues  north  weft  of  this  ifland,  I  fent  the  boat  to  look  for 
it,  land  when  Ihe  returned,  having  found  it,  I  ftood  in  for  the 
land.  There  were  thoufands  of  feals  r.ad  penguins  about 
the  fhip,  and  near  Penguin  Illand  fever al  liiialler  iftands,  or 
rather  rocks.  In  the  evening,  we  faw  a  remarkable  rock, 
rifmg  from  the  water  like  a  ftceple,  on  the  Ibuth  fide  of  the 
entrance  of  Port  Delire  ;  this  rock  is  an  excellent  mark  to 
know  the  harbour,  which  it  would  otherwife  be  difficult  to 
find.  At  night,  there  being  little  wind,  we  anchored  at  the 
diftance  of  four  or  five  miles  from  the  fhore  ;  and  in  the 

v^ednef.  21.  moming,  with  a  breeze  from  the  land,  we  turned  up  the 
harbour's  mouth ;  we  found  it  very  narrow,  with  many 
rocks  and  flioals  about  it,  and  the  moft  rapid  tide  I  had  ever 
known.  I  came  to  an  anchor  off  the  harbour  in  nine  fa- 
thom, the  entrance  of  the  river  being  open,  and  bearing 
W.S.W. ;  Penguin  Ifland  S.  E.  ^  E.  diftant  about  three  leagues  j 
the  Steeple  rock  S.  W.  by  W. ;  the  northermoft  land  N.  N.  W.; 
and  two  rocks,  which  are  covered  at  half  tide,  and  lie  at  the 
fouthermoft  extremity  of  a  reef  which  runs  from  the  fame 
land,  N,  E.  by  N.  I  mention  all  thefe  bearings  particularly, 
bccaufe  I  think  it  may  be  of  importance  to  future  navigators, 

efpecially 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  i  j 

efpecially  as  the  defcriptions  that  have  been  given  of  this       1764. 
place,  by  the  few  who  have  ah"eady  vifited  ir,  are  extremely    i~_„_^ 
defedlive.    The  wind  blew  very  hard  the  greater  part  of  this   ^^'^"^^*  ^'' 
day,  and  there  ran  an  ugly  fea  where  we  were  ftationed,  yet 
I  ordered  out  two  boats  to  found  the  harbour,  and  attended 
in  my  own  boat  myfelf.    We  found  it  very  narrow  for  near 
two  miles,  with  a  tide  running  at  the  rate  of  eight  miles  an 
hour:  we  found  alfo  many  rocks  and  flioals,  but  all  the 
danger  fhows  itfelf  above  water.  When  we  came  to  the  fliore, 
I  landed,  and  walked  a  little  way  into  the  country,  which  as 
far  as  1  could  fee  was  all  downs,  without  a  fingle  tree  or 
flirnb.    We  faw  the  dung  of  many  beafls,  and  had  a  glimpfe 
of  four,  which  ran  away  as  foon  as  we  came  in  fight,  fo  that 
we  could  not  certainly  determine  what  they  were ;  but  v/e 
believed  them  to  be  Guanicoes,  many  of  which  we  after- 
wards faw  come  down  to  the  water  fide  :  they  refemble  our 
deer,  but  are  much  larger,  the  height  of  fome  being  not  lefs 
than  thirteen  hands  ;    they  are  very  fhy,  and  very  fwift. 
After  I  returned  to  my  boat,  I  went  farther  up  the  harbour, 
and  landed  upon  an  ifland  that  was  covered  with  feals,  of 
which  we  killed  above  fifty,  and  among  them  many  that 
were  larger  than  a  bullock,  having  before  half  loaded  our 
boat  with  diiferent  kinds  of  birds,  of  which,  and  feals,  there 
are  enough  to  fupply  the  navy  of  England.     Among  the. 
birds  one  was  very  remarkable :  the  head  refembled  that  of 
an  eagle,  except  that  it  had  a  large  comb  upon  it  j  round 
the  neck  there  was  a  white  rulf,  exacfliy  refembling  a  lady's 
tippet ;  the  feathers  on  the  back  were  as  black  as  jer,  and  as 
bright  as  the  iinefl  poliOa  could  render  that  mineral :  the  legs 
were  remarkably  ftrong  and  large,    the  talons    were   like 
thofe  of  an  eagle,  except  that  they  were  not  fo  Iharp,    and 
the  wings,  when  they  were  extended,  meafuredj  from  poinc 
to  point,  no  lefs  than  twelve  feet» 

•  The 
2. 


i6  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

17&4.  The  Tamar  worked  into  the  harbour  with  the  tide  of 

Novembar.      „  1  n      •  i 

«. .^- — t   flood,  but  I  kept  my  flation  with  the  Dolphin  till  I  fhould 

have  a  leading  wind,  and  the  wind  Hiifting  to  the  eaflward, 
I  weighed  about  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  intending  to 
go  up  with  the  evening  flood:  before  I  could  get  under  fail, 
however,  the  wind  iliifted  again  to  N.  W.  byN. ;  and  it  being 
low  water,  the  lliip  lying  but  jufl  within  the  harbour,  and 
there  being  no  tide  to  affiil  us,  we  were  obliged  to  anchor 
near  the  fouth  fliore.  The  wind  came  off  the  land  in  very 
hard  flaws,  a.nd  in  a  fliort  time,  our  anchor  coming  home, 
the  fhip  tailed  on  fliore  againll  a  fteep  gravelly  beach.  The 
anchoring  ground  indeed  as  far  as  we  had  yet  founded  was 
bad.  being  very  hard;  fo  that,  in  this  fituation,  if  the  wind 
blows  frefh,  there  is  always  the  greateft  reafon  to  fear  that 
the  anchor  fhould  come  home  before  the  fhip  can  be  brought 
up.  While  we  were  on  fliore,  it  began  to  blow  very  hard, 
and  the  tide  running  like  a  fluice,  it  was  with  the  utmofl 
difficulty  that  we  could  carry  an  anchor  out  to  heave  us  off; 
however,  after  about  four  hours  hard  labour,  this  was  ef- 
fected, and  the  fliip  floated  in  the  ftream.  As  there  was  only 
about  fix  or  {even  feet  of  the  after  part  of  her  that  touched 
the  ground,  there  was  reafon  to  hope  that  flie  had  fuffered 
no  damage ;  however,  I  determined  to  unhang  the  rudder, 
that  it  might  be  examined. 

Thurfday22.  During  all  this  night  and  the  next  morning  the  wind  blew 
with  great  violence ;  we  had  let  go  our  beft  bower  anchor 
when  we  were  near  the  fhore,  in  hopes  it  would  have 
brought  us  up,  and  had  not  yet  been  able  to  weigh  it.  We 
now  rode  in  a  very  difagreeable  fituation  with  our  fmall 
bower,  and  that  unfortunately  came  home  again:  we  there- 
fore got  a  hawfer  out  of  the  Tamar,  wlio  lay  in  the  flream, 
and  after  weighing  the  fmall  bower,  we  got  out  by  her  afTift- 

ance, 


ROUND    fHE    WORLD.  ,y 

ance,  and  then  dropped  it  again,  moft  ardently  vvifhing  for       1764. 
fair  weather,  that  we  might  get  the  fhip  properly  moored.       .  °''""^^^; 

Thurfday  z2. 

The  next  day  we  founded  the  harbour  higher  up,  and  Fridays?, 
found  the  ground  fofter,  and  the  water  not  fo  deep;  yet  the 
wind  continued  to  blow  fo  hard  that  we  could  not  venture 
to  change  our  ftation.  We  had  found  a  fmall  fpring  of  wa- 
ter about  half  a  mile  inland,  upon  the  north  fide  of  the  bay, 
but  it  had  a  brackifli  tafte  ;  I  had  alfo  made  another  excur- 
fion  of  feveral  miles  into  the  country,  which  I  found  barren 
and  defolate,  in  every  diredlion,  as  far  as  the  eye  could 
reach.  We  had  ieen  many  guanicoes  at  a  diftance,  but  we 
could  not  get  near  enough  to  have  a  fhot  at  them;  w€ 
tracked  bealts  of  feveral  kinds  in  the  foil,  near  a  pond  of 
fait  water,  and  among  them  a  very  large  tyger :  we  found 
alfo  a  neft  of  oilriches  eggs,  which  we  eat,  and  thought  very 
good.  It  is  probable  that  all  the  animals  which  had  left 
marks  of  their  feet  near  the  fait  pond,  drank  the  water,  and 
indeed  we  faw  no  frefh  water  for  them.  The  fpring  that  we 
had  found,  which  was  not  perfectly  frefh,  v/as  the  only  one 
of  the  kind  that  we  had  been  able  to  difcover  ;  and  for  that 
We  had  been  obliged  to  dig,  there  being  no  appearance  of 
it  except  a  flight  moifture  of  the  ground. 

On  the  24th,  upon  flack  water,  we  carried  both  the  fliips  Saturday  24. 
lligher  up  and  moored  them  :  the  extreme  points  of  the  har- 
bour's mouth  at  low  water  bore  from  E.  by  S.  i.  S.  to  K. ;  and 
the  Steeple  rock  S.E.  4  E.  We  liad  here,  at  low  water,  but 
fix  fathom ;  but  at  fpring  tides  the  water  rifes  no  lefs  than 
four  fathom  and  an  half,  which  is  {even  and  twenty  feet 
The  tide  indeed  in  this  place  is  fuch  as  perhaps  it  is  not  in 
any  other.  It  happened  by  fonie  accident  that  one  of  out- 
men  fell  overboard  ;  the  boats  were  all  alongfide,  and  the 
man-was  an  exceeding  good  fwimmer,  yet  before  any  aflift- 

VoL.  I.  D  ance 


i8  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

»764-      ance  could  be  fent  after  him,  the  rapidity  of  the  ftream  had 

V , J   hurried  him  almoft  out  of  fight ;  we  had  however  at  laft  the 

a'»r  ay  24-  gQQjj  fortune  to  fave  him.  This  day  I  was  again  on  fhore,  and 
walked  fix  or  feven  miles  up  the  country:  I  faw  feveral  hares 
as  large  as  a  fawn ;  I  fhot  one  of  them  which  weighed  more 
than  fix  and  twenty  pounds,  and  if  I  had  had  a  good  greyhound, 
I  dare  fay  the  fliip's  company  might  have  lived  upon  hare  two 
days  in  the  week.  In  the  mean  time  the  people  on  board 
were  bufy  in  getting  up  all  the  cables  upon  deck,  and  clear- 
ing the  hold,  that  a  proper  quantity  of  ballaft  might  be 
taken  in,  and  the  guns  lowered  into  u,  except  a  few  which 
it  might  be  thought  necefTary  to  keep  above. 

Sunday  25,        On  the  25th,  I  went  a  good  way  up  the  harbour  in  the 
boat,  and  having  landed  on  the  north  fide,  we  foon  after 
found  an  old  oar  of  a  very  fingular  make,  and  the  barrel  of 
a  mufquet,  with  the  King's  broad  arrow  upon  it.     The  muf- 
quet  barrel  had  fuffered  fo  much  from  the  weather,  that  it 
might  be  crumbled  into  dull  between  the  fingers :  I  ima- 
gined it  had  been  left  there  by  the  Wager's  people,  or  per- 
liaps  by  Sir  John  Narborough.    Hitherto  we  had  found  no 
kind  of  vegetables  except  a  fpccies  of  wild  peas;  but  though 
we  had  feen  no  inhabitants,  we  faw  places  where  they  had 
made  their  fires,  whicli  however  did  not  appear  to  be  recent. 
While  we  were  on  Ihore  we  fliot  fomc  wild  ducks,  and  a 
hare  ;  the  hare  ran  two  miles  after  he  was  wounded,  though 
it  appeared  when  he  was  taken  up  that  a  ball  had  pafiTed 
quite  through  his  body.     I  went  this  day  many  miles  up  the 
country,  and  had  a  long  chace  after  one  of  the  guanicoes, 
which  was  the  largeft  we  had  feen :  he  frequently  Hopped 
to  look  at  us,  when  he  had  left  us  at  a  good  diflance  behind, 
and  made  a  noifc  that  refembled  the  neighing  of  a  hoi-fe ; 
but  when  we  came  pretty  near  him  he  fet  out  again,  and  at 

laft, 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


19 


laft,  my  dog  being  fo  tired  that  he  could  not  run  him  any  1764. 
longer,  he  got  quite  away  from  us,  and  we  faw  him  no  _!!!!L!Ii 
more.  We  lliot  a  hare  however,  and  a  httlc  ugly  animal  ^'^"'^''^  '''" 
which  flunk  fo  intolerably  that  none  of  us  could  go  near 
him.  The  flefli  of  the  hares  here  is  as  white  as  fnow,  and 
nothing  can  be  better  tailed.  A  Serjeant  of  marines,  and 
fome  others  who  were  on  fhore  at  another  part  of  the  bay, 
had  better  fuccefs  than  fell  to  our  fliarc,  for  they  killed  two 
old  guanicoes  and  a  fawn ;  they  were  however  obliged  to 
leave  them  where  they  fell,  not  being  able  to  bring  them 
down  to  the  water  fide,  near  fix  miles,  without  farther  affift- 
ance,  though  they  were  but  half  the  weight  of  thofe  that 
are  mentioned  by  Sir  John  Narborough ;  fome  however  I 
faw  which  could  not  weigh  lefs  than  feven  or  eight  and 
thirty  ftone,  which  is  about  three  hundred  pounds.  When 
we  returned  in  the  evening  it  blew  very  hard,  and  the  deck 
being  fo  full  of  lumber  that  we  could  not  hoift  the  boats  in, 
we  moored  them  aftern.  About  midnight,  the  llorm  conti- 
nuing, our  fix  oared  cutter  filled  with  water  and  broke 
adrift ;  the  boat-keeper,  by  whofe  negledl  this  accident  hap- 
pened, being  on  board  her,  very  narrowly  efcaped  drowning 
by  catching  hold  of  the  flern  ladder.  As  it  was  tide  of  flood 
when  fhe  went  from  the  fhip,  we  knew  that  fhe  mull  drive 
up  the  harbour ;  yet  as  the  lofs  of  her  would  be  an  irreme- 
diable misfortune,  I  fuffered  much  anxiety  till  I  could  fend 
after  her  in  the  morning,  and  it  was  then  fome  hours  before  Monday  z'o, 
flie  was  brought  back,  having  driven  many  miles  with  the 
flream.  In  the  mean  time,  I  fent  another  party  to  fetch 
the  guanicoes  which  our  people  had  fliot  the  night  before  j 
but  they  found  nothing  left  except  the  bones,  the  tygers 
having  eaten  the  flefli,  and  even  cracked  the  bones  of  the 
limbs  to  come  at  the  marrow.  Several  of  our  people  had 
been  fifteen  miles  up  the  country  in  fearch  of  frefli  water, 

D  2  but 


20 


COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 


1764. 

November. 


Moftday  26. 


Tuefday  27. 


but  could  not  find  the  leaft  rill:  we  had  funk  feveral  v/ells 
to  a  confiderable  depth  where  the  ground  appeared  moift, 
but  upon  vifiting  them,  I  had  the  mortification  to  find  that, 
all  together,  they  would  not  yield  more  than  thirty  gallons  in 
twenty-four  hours :  this  was  a  difcouraging  circumflance, 
efpecially  as  our  people,  among  other  expedients,  had  watch- 
ed the  guanicoes,  and  feen  them  drink  at  the  fait  ponds, 
therefore  determined  to  leave  the  place  as  foon  as  the  Ihip 
could  be  goz  into  a  little  order,  and  the  fix  oared  cutter  re- 
paired, which  had  been  hauled  up  upon  the  beach  for  that 
purpofe. 

On  the  27th,  fome  of  our  people,  who  had  been  afliore  on- 
the  north  fide  of  the  bay  to  try  for  more  guanicoes,  found 
the  fcull  and  bones  of  a  man,  which  they  brought  off  with 
them,  and  one  young  guanicoe  alive,  which  we  all  agreed 
was  one  of  the  moil  beautiful  creatures  we  had  ever  feen : 
it  foon  grew  very  tame,  and  would  fuck  our  fingers  like  a 
calf ;  but,  notwithflanding  all  our  care  and  contrivances  to 
feed  it,  it  died  in  a  few  days.  In  the  afternoon  of  this  day 
it  blew  fo  hard  that  I  was  obliged  to  keep  a  confiderable 
number  of  hands  continually  by  the  fheet  anchor,  as  there 
was  too  much  reafon  to  fear  that  our  cables  would  part, 
which  however  did  not  happen.  In  the  mean  time,  fome  of 
our  people  that  were  on  Ihore  with  the  carpenters,  who 
were  repairing  the  cutter  on  the  fouth  fide  of  the  bay,  found 
two  more  fprings  of  tolerable  water  about  two  miles  from 
the  beach,  in  a  diredl  line  from  the  fliip's  flation.  To  thefe 
Wednef.  iS.  fprings  I  fent  twenty  hands  early  in  the  morning  with  fome 
fmall  calks  called  Barecas,  and  in  a  few  turns  they  brought 
on  board  a  tun  of  water,  of  which  we  began  to  be  in  great 
want.  In  the  mean  time,  I  went  myfelf  about  twelve  miles 
■up  the  river  in  my  boat,  and  the  weather  then  growing  bad, 
7  I  went 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  ar 


November. 
Wednef.  28. 


I  went  on  fhore  :  the  river,  as  far  as  I  could  fee,  was  very  1764 
broad  ;  there  were  in  it  a  number  of  iflands,  fome  of 
which  were  very  large,  and  1  make  no  doubt  but  that  it 
penetrates  the  country  for  fome  hundreds  of  miles.  It  was 
upon  one  of  the  iflands  that  I  went  on  fhore,  and  I  found 
there  fuch  a  number  of  birds,  that  when  they  rofe  they 
literally  darkened  the  fky,  and  we  could  not  walk  a  ftep 
without  treading  upon  their  eggs.  As  they  kept  hovering 
over  our  heads  at  a  little  dillance,  the  men  knocked  down 
many  of  them  with  Hones  and  fl;icks,  and  carried  off  feveral 
hundreds  of  their  eggs.  After  fome  time,  I  left  the  ifland' 
and  landed  upon  the  main,  where  our  men  dreffed  and  eat 
their  eggs,  though  there  were  young  birds  in  moft  of 
them.  I  faw  no  traces  of  inhabitants  on  either  fide  of  the 
river,  but  great  numbers  of  guanicoes,  in  herds  of  fixty 
or  feventy  together:  they  would  not  however  fuffer  us  to 
approach  them,  but  flood  and  gazed  at  us  from  the  hills.. 
In  this  excurfion  the  Surgeon,  who  was  of  my  party,  fhOD 
a  tyger-cat,  a  fmall  but  very  fierce  animal ;  for  though, 
it  was  much  wounded,  it  maintained  a  very  fharp  contefl: 
with  my  dog  for  a  confiderable  time  before  it  was  killed;. 

On  the  29th,  we  completed  our  ballaft,  which,  the  ftrength  Thurfdayzjj 
of  the  tide,  and  the  conflant  gales  of  wind  rendered  a  very 
difficult  and  laborious  talk :  we  alfo  got  on  board  another 
ton  of  water.    On  the  morning  of  the  30th,  the  weather  Friday  30.. 
was  fo  bad  that  we  could  not  fend  a  boat  on  Ihore ;   but 
employed  all  hands  on  board  in  fetting  up  the  rigging.     It 
grew  more  moderate  however  about  noon,  and  I  then  fent 
a  boat  to  procure  more  water.     The   two  men  who  firfl 
came  up  to  the  well  found  there  a  large  tyger  lying  upon  the-- 
ground  ;  having  gazed  at  each  other  fome  time,  the  menj 
■who  had  no  fire-arms,  feeing  the.  beaft  treat  them  with  as 

muchi 


22 


COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 


1764. 

November. 
Thurfday  30, 


December. 
Saturday  i. 


Wednef.  5. 


much  contemptuous  negledt  as  the  lion  did  the  knight  of 
La  Mancha,  began  to  throw  ftones  at  him :  of  this  infult 
however  he  did  not  deign  to  take  the  leaft  notice,  but  conti- 
nued ftretched  upon  the  ground  in  great  tranquiUiiy  till  the 
reft  of  the  party  came  up,  and  then  he  very  leifurely  rofe 
and  walked  away. 

On  the  lU  of  December,  our  cutter  being  thoroughly  re- 
paired, we  took  her  on  board,  but  the  weather  was  fo  bad 
that  we  could  not  get  oiF  any  water :  the  next  day  we  ftruck 
the  tents  which  had  been  fet  up  at  the  watering-place,  and 
got  all  ready  for  fea.  The  two  wells  from  which  wc  got 
our  water  bear  about  S.S.E.  of  the  Steeple  rock,  from  which 
they  are  diftant  about  two  miles  and  an  half;  but  I  fixed  a 
mark  near  them,  that  they  might  be  ftill  more  eafily  found 
than  by  their  bearings.  During  our  ftay  in  this  harbour,  we 
founded  every  part  of  it  with  great  care,  as  high  as  a  fhip 
could  go,  and  found  that  there  is  no  danger  but  what  may  be 
feen  at  low  water;  fo  that  nowfrefli  water  is  found,  though 
at  fome  diftance  from  the  beach,  it  would  be  a  very  conve- 
nient place  for  fhips  to  touch  at,  if  it  were  not  for  the  rapi- 
dity of  the  tide.  The  country  about  the  bay  abounds  with 
guanicoes,  and  a  great  variety  of  wild  fowl,  particularly 
ducks,  geefe,  widgeon,  and  fea-pies,  befides  many  others 
for  which  we  have  no  name.  Here  is  alfo  fuch  plenty  of 
excellent  mufcles,  that  a  boat  may  be  loaded  with  them 
every  time  it  is  low  water.  Wood  indeed  is  fcarce,  however 
in  fome  parts  of  this  coaft  there  are  bufhes,  which  in  a  cafe 
of  neceflity  might  produce  a  tolerable  fupply  of  fuel. 

On  Wednefday  the  5th  of  December,  I  unmoored,  in  order 
to  get  out,  but  the  beft  bower  came  up  foul,  and  before  we 
could  heave  fhort  upon  the  fmall  bower,  the  tide  of  ebb 
made  ilrong  •,  for  at  this  place  Hack  water  fcarcely  continues 

ten 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  S3 


ten  minutes ;  fo  that  we  were  obliged  to  wait  till  it  fhould    ^^*764. 
be  low  water.     Between  five  and  fix  in  the  evening,  we 
weighed,   and   fleered  out  E.  N.  E.  with  a  frefli  gale  at 
N.N.W. 


December. 
Wednef.  5. 


CHAP.       III. 

Courfi  from  Fort  Defire^  in  Search  of  Pepys  IJlandy  and 

afterwards  to  the  Coaji  of  Patagonia^   with  a 

Defcription  of  the  Inhabitants » 

AS  foon  as  we  were  out  of  the  bay,  we  lleered  for  Pepys' 
Illand,  which  is  faid  to  lie  in  latitude  47^  S.  Our  lati- 
tude was  now  47^  22' S.,  longitude  6^'^  49' W.;  Port  Defire 
bore  S.  66  W.  dillant  twenty-three  leagues  ;  and  Pepys' 
Ifland,  according  to  Halley's  Chart,  E.  l  N.  diftant  thirty- 
four  leagues.    The  variation  here  was  19'  E. 

We  continued  our  courfe  the  next  day  with  a  pleafant  gale  TharHay  6. 
and  fine  weather,  fo  that  we  began  to  think  that  this  part 
of  the  world  was  not  wholly  without  a  fummer.  On  the 
7th,  I  found  myfelf  much  farther  to  the  northward  than  I  Friday  7. 
expeded,  and  therefore  fuppofed  the  fhip's  way  had  been 
influenced  by  a  current.  I  had  now  made  eighty  degrees 
calling,  which  is  the  diHance  from  the  main  at  which  Pepys' 
Ifland  is  placed  in  Halley's  chart,  but  unhappily  we  have  no 
certain  account  of  the  place.  The  only  perfon  who  pretends 
to  have  feen  it,  is  Cowley,  the  account  of  whofe  voyage  is 
now  before  me ;  and  all  he  fays  of  its  fltuation  is,  that  it  lies 
in  latitude  47  S. ;  for  he  fays  nothing  of  its  longitude :  lie 
fays,  indeed,  that  it  has  a  fine  harbour ;  but  he  adds,  that 
8  the 


24 


COMMODORE   BYRON's   VOYAGE 


1764. 

December. 
Friday  7. 


Saturday  8. 


Sunday  9, 


Monday  10. 


Tucfdny  11, 


the  wind  blew  fo  hard  he  could  not  get  into  it,  and  that 
he  therefore  flood  away  to  the  fouthward.  At  this  time  I 
alfo  was  (leering  fouthward }  for  the  weather  being  extremely 
fine,  I  could  fee  very  far  to  the  northward  of  the  fituation  in 
which  it  is  laid  down.  As  I  fuppofed  it  mull  lie  to  the  eaft- 
ward  of  us,  if  indeed  it  had  any  exiftence,  I  made  the  Ta- 
mar's  fignal  to  fpread  early  in  the  afternoon ;  and  as  the 
weather  continued  to  be  very  clear,  we  could  fee,  between 
us,  at  leaft  twenty  leagues.  We  fleered  S.  E.  by  the  com- 
pafs,  and  at  night  brought  to,  being  by  my  account  in  lati- 
tude 47  °  18'  S.  The  next  morning  it  blew  very  hard  at  N.  W. 
by  N.  and  I  fliil  thought  the  ifland  might  lie  to  the  eaftwardj 
I  therefore  intended  to  fland  about  thirty  leagues  that  way, 
and  if  I  found  no  ifland,  to  return  into  the  latitude  of  47 
again.  But  a  hard  gale  coming  on,  with  a  great  fea,  I 
brought  to  about  fix  o*clock  in  the  evening  under  the  main- 
fail  ;  and  at  fix  o'clock  the  next  morning,  the  wind  being  at 
W.  S.  W.  we  made  fail  again  under  our  courfes  to  the  north- 
ward. I  now  judged  myfelf  to  be  about  fixteen  leagues  to 
the  eaflward  of  the  track  I  had  run  before  :  Port  Defire  bore 
S.  80°  53'  W.  diftant  ninety-four  leagues  ;  and  in  this  fitua- 
tion I  faw  a  great  quantity  of  rock-weed,  and  many  birds. 
We  continued  to  fland  to  the  northward  the  next  day  under 
Our  courfes,  with  a  hard  gale  from  S.  W.  to  N.  W.  and  a 
great  fea.  At  night,  being  in  latitude  46°  50  S.,  I  wore  fliip, 
and  flood  in  to  the  weflward  again,  our  fliips  having  fpread 
every  day  as  far  as  they  could  be  feen  b)^  each  other :  and 
on  the  1 1  th  at  noon,  being  now  certain  that  there  could  be 
no  fuch  illand  as  is  mentioned  by  Cowley,  and  laid  down  by 
Plalley  under  the  name  of  Pcpys'  Ifland,  I  refolved  to  fland 
in  for  the  main,  and  take  in  wood  and  water,  of  which  both 
fhips  were  in  great  want,  at  the  firfl  convenient  place  I  could 

find, 


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  25 

4ind,  efpecially  as  the  feafon  was  advancing  veiy  faft,  and       ^iH- 

11  •  ^     r  T>  t  .        .  .  Deceniter. 

we  had  no  time  to  loie.     From  this  time  we  eontiniued  to   < - 

haul  in  for  the  land  as  the  winds  would  permit,  and  kept  a  '^"^^'^■'^  '"^ 
look-out  for  the  iflands  of  Sebald  de  Wert,  which,  by  all 
the  charts  we  had  on  board,  could  not  be  far  from  our  track : 
a  great  number  of  birds  were  every  day  about  the  fhip,  and 
large  whales  were  continually  fwiraming  by  her.  The 
weather  in  general  was  fine,  but  very  cold,  and  we  all 
agreed,  notwithftanding  the  hope  we  had  once  formed,  that 
the  only  difference  between  the  middle  of  fummer  here,  * 

and  the  middle  of  winter  in  England,  lies  in  the  length  of 
the  days.  On  Saturday  the  15th,  being  in  latitude  50°  33' S.  Saturday  ij. 
longitude  66°  59'  W.  we  were  overtaken  about  fix  in  the  even- 
ing by  the  hardeft  gale  at  S.  W.  that  I  was  ever  in,  with  a  fea 
flill  higher  than  any  I  had  feen  in  going  round  Cape  Horn 
with  Lord  Anfon :  I  expe(5ted  every  moment  that  it  would 
fill  us,  our  fliip  being  much  too  deep  waifted  for  fuch  a 
voyage :  it  would  have  been  fafeft  to  put  before  it  under  our 
bare  poles,  but  our  ftock  of  frefli  water  was  not  fufficienr, 
and  I  was  afraid  of  being  driven  fo  far  off  the  land  as  not  to 
be  able  to  recover  it  before  the  whole  was  exhaufted ;  we 
therefore  lay  to  under  a  balanced  mizen,  and  fliipped  many 
heavy  feas,  though  we  found  our  fkreen  bulk-heads  of  in- 
finite fervice. 

The  ftorm  continued  with  unabated  violence  the  whole  Sunday  1 5. 
nigbt,  but  about  eight  in  the  morning,  began  to  fubfide. 
At  ten,  we  made  fail  under  our  courfes,  and  continued  to 
fteer  for  the  land  till  Tuefday  the  i8th,  when,  at  four  in  the  Tuefdiy  1$. 
morning,  we  faw  it  from  the  mafl-head.  Our  latitude  was 
now  5 1 "  8'  S.  our  longitude  71^4'  W.  and  Cape  Virgin  Mary, 
the  north  entrance  of  the  ftreight  of  Magellan,  bore  S.  19° 
50' W.  diftant  nineteen  leagues.  As  we  had  little  or  no 
wind,  we  could  not  get  in  with  the  land   this  day ;    the 

Vol.  L  E  next 


26  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

176+.  next  morning,  however,  it  being  northerly,  I  flood  in  to  a. 
t  --  _if  deep  bay,  at  the  bottom  of  which  there  appeared  to  be  a 
"^ '  '^'  harbour,  but  I  found  it  barred,  the  fea  breaking  quite  from 
one  fide  of  it  to  the  other  ;  and  at  low  water  I  could  perceive 
that  it  was  rocky,  and  almofl  all  dry :  the  water  was  flioal 
at  a  good  diftance  from  it,  and  I  was  in  fix  fathom  before  I 
flood  out  again.  In  this  place  there  feemed  to  be  plenty  of 
fiih,  and  we  faw  many  porpoifes  fwimming  after  them,  that 
were  as  white  as  fnow,  with  black,  fpots  ;  a  very  uncommon 
and  beautiful  fight-  The  land  here  has  the  fame  appearance 
as  about  Port  Defire,  all  downs,  without  a  fingle  tree. 

ThurMayzo.  At  break  of  day,  on  the  20th,  we  were  off  Cape  Faic- 
weather,  which  bore  about  weft  at  the  diftance  of  four 
leagues,  and  we  had  here  but  thirteen  fathom  water,  fo  that 
it  appears  neceffary  to  give  that  Cape  a  good  birth.  From 
this  place  I  ran  clofe  in  Ihore  to  Cape  Virgin  Mary,  but! 
found  the  coaft  to  lie  S.  S.  E..  very  different  from  Sir  John 
Narborough's  defcription,  and  a  long  fpit  of  fand  running 
to  the  fouthward  of  the  Cape  for  above  a  league:  in  the 
evening- 1  worked  up  clofe  to  this  fpit  of  fand,  having  feen 
many  guanicoes  feeding  in  tire  vallies  as  we  went  along, 
and  a  great  fmoke  all  the  afternoon,  about  four  or  five 
leagues  up  the  ftreighr,  upon  the  north  fliore.  At  this  place 
I  came  to  an  anchor  in  fifteen  fathom  water,  but  the  Tamatr 
was  fo  far  to  leeward,  that  flie  could  not  fetch  the  anchoring 
ground,  and  therefore  kept  under  v/ay  all  night. 

Friday  21.  The  next  morning,  at  day-break,  Fgot  again  under  fail, 

and  feeing  the  fame  fmoke  that  I  had  obferved  the  day  be- 
fore, I  flood  in  for  it,  and  anchored  about  two  miles  from  the 
fliore.  This  is  the  place  where  the  crew  of  the  Wager,  as 
they  were  pafDng  the  Strcight  in  their  boat,  after  the  lols  of 
the  veflel,  faw  a  number  of  horfcmen,  who  waved  what  ap- 
3  peared 


1<[?'23- 


N?  23. 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  27 

peared  to  be  white  handkerchiefs,  inviting  them  to  come       176+- 

J-,  t  •    1      1  in  %  December. 

on  more,  which  they  were  very  deurous  to  have  done,  but   ' >r— ^ 

it  blew  fo  hard  that  they  were  obUged  to  ftand  out  to  fea.  "  ^^^'' 
Bulkeley,  the  Gunner  of  the  Wager,  who  has  pubhfhed 
fome  account  of  her  voyage,  fays,  that  they  were  in  doubt 
whether  thefe  people  were  Europeans  who  had  been  fliip- 
wrecked  upon  the  coaft,  or  native  inhabitants  of  the  coun- 
try about  the  river  Gallagoes.  Juft  as  we  came  to  an  anchor, 
I  faw  with  my  glafs  exadly  what  was  feen  by  the  people  in 
the  Wager,  a  number  of  horfemen  riding  backward  and 
forward,  directly  abreaft  of  the  fliip,  and  waving  fome  what 
white,  tiv)  ail  iiivitation  to  x^ic  to  comp  OH  fliorc.  As  I  was 
very  defirous  to  know  what  thefe  people  were,  I  ordered  out 
my  twelve  oar'd  boat,  and  went  towards  the  beach,  with 
Mr.  Marfliall,  my  Second  Lieutenant,  and  a  party  of  men, 
very  well  armed;  Mr.  Gumming,  my  Firil  Lieutenant,  fol- 
lowing in  the  fix  oar'd  cutter.  When  we  came  within  a 
Uttle  diftance  of  the  fhore,  we  faw,  as  near  as  I  can  guefs, 
about  five  hundred  people,  fome  on  foot,  but  the  greater 
part  on  horfeback :  they  drew  up  upon  a  fl:oney  fpit,  which 
ran  a  good  way  into  the  fea,  and  upon  which  it  was  very 
bad  landing,  for  the  water  was  fliallow,  and  the  ftones  very 
large.  The  people  on  fliore  kept  waving  and  hallooing, 
which,  as  we  underflood,  were  invitations  to  land ;  I  could 
not  perceive  that  they  had  any  weapons  among  them,  how- 
ever I  made  figns  that  they  fliould  retire  to  a  little  diftance, 
with  which  they  immediately  complied :  they  continued  to 
{liout  with  great  vociferation,  and  in  a  fliort  time  we  landed, 
though  not  without  great  difficulty,  moft  of  the  boat's  crew 
being  up  to  the  middle  in  water.  I  drew  up  my  people 
upon  the  beach,  with  my  officers  at  their  head,  and  gave 
orders  that  none  of  them  fliould  move  from  that  flation,  till 
I  ftiQuld  either  call  or  beckon  to  them.    I  then  went  forward 

E  2  alone, 


aS  COMMODOUE    BVRON's    VOYAGE 

1764.      alone,  towards  the  Indians,  but  perceiving  that  they  retired" 
k_— ,— J   as  I  advanced,  I  made  figns  that  one  of  them  fhould  come 
"  ^^^'"      near:  as  it  happened,  my  fignals  were  underftood,  and  one 
of  them,    who  afterwards  appeared  to  be  a  Chief,    came 
towards  me:  he  was  of  a  gigantic  flature,  and  feemed  to 
reahze  the  tales  of  monfters  in  a  human  fliape:  he  had  the 
fkin  of  fome  wild  beaft  thrown  over  his  fhoulders,   as  a 
Scotch  Highlander  wears  his  plaid,  and  was  painted  fo  as  to 
make  the  mofl  hideous  appearance  I  ever  beheld:  round  one 
eye  was  a  large  circle  of  white,  a  circle  of  black  furrounded 
the  other,  and  the  reft  of  his  face  was  ftreaked  with  paint 
of  different  colours  ;  i  tlid  not  nicafurc  him,  trui  if  I  may 
judge  of  his  height  by  the  proportion  of  his  ftature  to  myown, 
it  could  not  be  much  lefs  than  feven  feet.    When  this  fright- 
ful Coloffus  came  up,  we  muttered  fomewhat  to  each  other 
as  a  falutation,  and  I  then  walked  with  him  towards  his 
companions,  to  whom,    as  I  advanced,   I  made  figns  that 
they  fhould  fit  down,  and  they  all  readily  complied :  there 
were  among  them  many  women,  who  feemed  to  be  pro- 
portionably  large ;  and  few  of  the  men  were  lefs  than  the 
Chief  who  had  come  forward  to  meet  me.     I  had  heard  their 
voices  very  loud  at  a  diftance,  and  when  I  came  near,  I  per- 
ceived a  good  number  of  very  old  men,  who  were  chanting 
ibme  unintelligible  words  in  the  moft  doleful  cadence  I  ever 
heard,  with  an  air  of  ferious  folemnity,  which  inclined  me 
to  think  that  it  was  a  religious  ceremony:  they  were  all 
painted  and  clothed  nearly  in  the  fame  manners  the  circles 
round  the  two  eyes  were  in  no  inftance  of  one  colour,  but 
they  were  not  vmiverfally  black  and  white,  fome  being  white 
and  red,  and  fome  red  and  black ;  their  teeth  were  as  white 
as   ivory,    remarkably  even  and  well  fet ;    but  except  the 
fkins,  which  they  wore  with  ihe  hair  inwards,  moft  of  them 
v/crc  naked,  a  few  only  having  upon  their  legs  a  kind  of 
1  boot, 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  29 


Friday  zi. 


boor,  with  a  fhort  pointed  ftick  faftened  to  each  heel,  which    ^'7^4-- 

^  December. 

ferved  as  a  fpur.    Having  looked  round  upon  thefe  enormous 
goblins  with  no  fmall  aftonifhment,  and  with  fome  difficulty 
made  thofe  that  were  ilill  galloping  up  fit  down  with  the 
reft,  I  took  out  a  quantity  of  yellow  and  white  beads,  which 
I  diftributed  among  them,  and  which  they  received  with 
very  ftrong  expreffions  of  pleafure:  I  then  took  out  a  whole 
piece  of  green  filk  riband,  and  giving  the  end  of  it  into  the 
hands  of  one  of  them,  I  made  the  perfon  that  fat  next  take 
hold  of  it,  and  fo  on  as  far  as  it  would  reach :  all  this  while 
they  fat  very  quietly,  nor  did  any  of  thofe  that  held  the 
riband  attempt  lu  puH  it  from,  the  i-eft,  though  I  perceived 
that  they  were  ftill  more  delighted  with  it,  than  with  the 
beads.    While  the  riband  was  thus  extended,  I  took  out  a 
pair  of  fciiTars,  and  cut  it  between  each  two  of  the  Indians 
that  held  it,  fo  that  I  left  about  a  yard  in  the  pofTeffion  of 
every  one,  which  I  afterwards  tied  about  their  heads,  where 
they  fuffered  it  to  remain  without  fo  much  as  touching  it 
while  I  was  with  them.    Their  peaceable  and  orderly  beha-- 
viour  on  this  occafion  certainly  did  them  honour,  efpecially 
as  my  prefents  could  not  extend  to  the  whole  company: 
neither  impatience  to  fhare  the  new  finery,  nor  curiofity  to 
gain  a  nearer  view  of  me  and  what  I  was  doing,  brought 
any  one  of  them  from  the  ftation  that  I  had  allotted  him.    It 
would  be  very  natural  for  thofe  who  have  read  Gay's  fables, 
if  they  form  an  idea  of  an  Indian  almoft  naked,'  returning 
to  his  fellows  in  the  woods  adorned  with  European  trinkets, 
to  think  of  the  monkey  that  had  feen  the  world ;  3'et  before 
we  defpife  their  fondnefs  for  glafs,    beads,   ribands,    and 
other  things,  which  among  us  are  held  in  no  eflimation,  we 
Ihould  confider  that,  in  themfelves,  the  ornaments  of  favage 
and  civil  life  are  equal,  and  that  thofe  who  live  nearly  in  a^ 
ftate  of  nature,  have  nothing  that  refembles  glafs,  fo  much 

as 


30  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 


December. 
Friday  21. 


■cemt'er  ^^  ^^^^^  rcfembles  a  diamond ;  the  value  which  we  fet  upon 
a  diamond,  therefore,  is  more  capricious  than  the  value 
which  they  fet  upon  glafs.  The  love  of  ornament  feems  to 
be  a  univerfal  principle  in  human  nature,  and  the  fplendid 
tranfparency  of  glafs,  and  the^  regular  figure  of  a  bead,  are 
among  the  qualities  that  by  the  conftitution  of  ournature 
excite  pleafmg  ideas ;  and  although  in  one  of  thefe  qualities 
the  diamond  excels  glafs,  its  value  is  much  more  than  in 
proportion  to  the  difference:  the  pleafure  which  it  gives 
among  us  is,  principally,  by  conferring  diftindtion,  and 
gratifying  vanity,  which  is  independant  of  natural  tafte,  that 

is  gratified  by  certain   hues   and   figures,   to    which  fur   chat 

reafon  we  give  the  name  of  beauty;  it  muft  be  remembered 
alfo,  that  an  Indian  is  more  diftinguiflied  by  a  glafs  button 
or  a  bead,  than  any  individual  among  us  by  a  diamond, 
though  perhaps  the  fame  facrifice  is  not  made  to  his  vanity, 
as  the  pofleffion  of  his  finery  is  rather  a  teftimony  of  his 
good  fortune,  than  of  his  influence  or  power  in  confequencc 
of  his  having  what,  as  the  common  medium  of  all  earthly 
pofleffions,  is  fuppofed  to  confer  virtual  fuperiority,  and  in- 
trinfic  advantage.  The  people,  however,  whom  I  had  now 
adorned,  were  not  wholly  ftrangers  to  European  commodi- 
ties, for  upon  a  clofer  attention,  I  perceived  among  them  one 
woman  who  had  bracelets  either  of  brafs,  or  very  pale  gold, 
upon  her  arms,  and  fome  beads  of  blue  glafs,  llrung  upon 
two  long  queues  of  hair,  which  being  parted  at  the  top, 
hung  down  over  each  fhoulder  before  her:  flie  was  of  a 
m.oft  enormous  fize,  and  her  face  was,  if  poffible,  more 
frightfully  painted  than  the  refl.  I  had  a  great  defire  to 
learn  where  fhe  got  her  beads  and  bracelets,  and  enquired 
by  all  the  figns  I  could  dcvifc,  but  found  it  irapolllble  to 
make  myfelf  underftood.  One  of  the  men  fhewed  me  the 
bowl  of  a  tobacco  pipe,  which  was  made  of  a  red  earth,  but 

I  foon 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  3-1 

I  foon  found  that  they  had  no  tobacco  among  them ;  and    j^^^^^^^ 
this  perfon  made  me  underftand  that  he  wanted  fome:  upon   v_.__. — ^> 

.  ,        Friday  2 J,- 

this  I  beckoned  to  my  people,  who  remamed  upon  the 
beach,  "drawn  up  as  I  had  left  them,  and  three  or  four  of 
them  ran  forward,  imagining  that  I  wanted  them.  The 
Indians,  who,  as  I  had  obferved,  kept  their  eyes  almoftcori- 
tinually  upon  them,  no  fooner  faw  fome  of  them  advance, 
than  they  all  rofe  up  with  a  great  clamour,  and  were  leaving 
the  place,  as  I  fuppofed  to  get  their  arms,  which  were  pro- 
bably left  at  a  little  diflance:  to  prevent  mifchief,  therefore, 
and  put  an  end  to  the  alarm,  which  had  thus  accidentally 

been    fprcad   aiiiong    them,    I   ran   to  meet    the   people   wllO  ' 

were,  in  confequence  of  my  fignal,  coming  from  the  beach, 
and  as  foon  as  I  was  within  hearing  I  hallooed  to  them,  and 
told  them  that  1  would  have  only  one  come  up  with  all  the 
tobacco  that  he  could  colledt  from  the  reft.  As  foon  as  the 
Indians  faw  this,  they  recovered  from  their  furprize,  and- 
every  one  returned  to  his  ftation,  except  a  very  old  man,, 
who  came  up  to  me,  and  fung  a  long  fong,  which  I  much  re- 
gretted my  not  being  able  to  underftand:  before  the  fong 
was  well  finiflied,  Mr.  Gumming  came  up  with  the  tobacco, 
and  I  could  not  but  fmile  at  the  aftonifhraent  which  I  faw 
exprefled  in  his  countenance,  upon  perceiving  himfelf, 
though  fix  feet  two  inches  high,  become  at  once  a  pigmy  . 
among  giants ;  for  thefe  people  may  indeed  more  propexly 
be  called  giants  than  tall  men:  of  the  few  among  us -who 
are  full  fix  feet  high,  fcarcely  any  are  broad  and  mufcular  " 
in  proportion  to  their  ftature,  but  look  rather  like  men  of " 
the  common  bulk,  run  up  accidentally  to  an  unufual 
height;  and  a  man  who  ihould  meafure  only  fix  feet  two 
inches,  and  equally  exceed  a  ftout  well-fet  man  of  the  com- 
mon ftature  in  breadth  and  mufcle,  would  ftrike  us  rather  as 
being  of  a  gigantic  race,  than  as  an  individual  accidentally 

anomalous  5 


32  COMMODORE    BYRON's   VOYAGE 

1764-      anomalous;  our  fenfations  therefore,  upon  feeing  five  hun- 

December 

« . — '■>  dred  people,  the  fliorteft  of  whom  were  at  leaft  four  inches 

ri  ay zi.  ^.^jj^j.^  ^^^  bulky  in  proportion,  may  be  eafily  imagined. 
After  I  had  prefented  the  tobacco,  four  or  five  of  the  chief 
men  came  up  to  me,  and,  as  I  underilood  by  the  figns  they 
made,  wanted  me  to  mount  one  of  the  horfes,  and  go  with 
them  to  their  habitations,  but  as  it  would  upon  every  ac- 
count have  been  imprudent  to  comply,  I  made  figns  in  re- 
turn that  I  muft  go  back  to  the  fliip;  at  this  they  exprelled 
great  concern,  and  fat  down  in  their  ilations  again.  During 
our  pantomimic"»l  conference,  an  old  man  often  laid  his 
head  down  upon  the  flones,  and  fliuctiug  his  eyes  fur  about 
half  a  minute,  afterwards  pointed  firil  to  his  mouth,  and 
then  to  the  hills,  meaning,  as  I  imagined,  that  if  I  would 
Hay  with  them  till  the  morning,  they  would  furnifli  me 
with  feme  provifions,  but  this  offer  I  was  obliged  to  decline. 
When  I  left  them,  not  one  of  them  offered  to  follow  us,  but 
as  long  as  I  could  fee  them,  continued  to  fit  quietly  in  their 
places.  I  obferved  that  they  had  with  them  a  great  number 
of  dogs,  with  which  I  fuppofe  they  chafe  the  wild  animals 
which  ferve  them  for  food.  The  horfes  were  not  large,  nor 
in  good  cafe,  yet  they  appeared  to  be  nimble,  and  well 
broken.  The  bridle  was  a  leathern  thong,  with  a  fmall 
piece  of  wood  that  ferved  for  a  bit,  and  the  faddlcs  refem- 
bled  the  pads  that  are  in  ufe  among  the  country  people  in 
England.  The  women  rode  aftride,  and  both  men  and 
women  without  fiirrups ;  yet  they  gallopped  fearlefsly  over 
the  fpit  upon  which  we  landed,  the  floncs  of  which  were 
large,  loofe,  and  fiippery. 


CHAP. 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


C  H  A  P.      IV. 

Pajfage  up  the  S freight  of  Magellan,  to  Port  Famine-, 
with  fome  Account  of  that  Harbour^  and  the  adjacent 
Coaf, 


s 


OON  after  I  returned  on  board,  I  got  underway,  and      1764- 

December. 

worked  up  the  Streight,  which  is  here  about  nine  leagues  <-; — . ' 

broad,  with  the  nooa,  hul  nvIlIi  a  view  to  pafs  through  it,  but  "  ^^  *'" 
in  fearch  of  fome  place  whei-e  I  might  get  a  fupply  of  wood 
and  water,  not  chuiing  to  truft  wholly  to  the  finding  of 
Falkland's  Iflands,  which  I  determined  afterwards  to  feek. 
About  eight  in  the  evening,  the  tide  of  ebb  beginning  to 
make,  I  anchored  in  five  and  twenty  fathom.  Point  PofTef- 
fion  bore  N.  N.  E.  at  about  three  miles  diftance,  and  fome  re- 
markable hummocks  on  the  north,  which  Bulkeley,  from 
their  appearance,  has  called  the  Afles  Ears,  W.  7  N. 

At  three  in  the  morning,  of  the  asd,  we  weighed  with  Saturday  22, 
the  wind  at  E.  and  fleered  S.  W.  by  W.  about  twelve  miles. 
During  this  courfe  we  went  over  a  bank,  of  which  no  notice 
has  hitherto  been  taken :  at  one  time  we  had  but  fix  fathom 
and  a  half,  but  in  two  or  three  calls  we  had  thirteen.  When 
our  water  was  flialloweft,  the  Afles  Ears  bore  N.  W.  by  W. 
t  W.  diftant  three  leagues,  and  the  north  point  of  the  firft 
Narrow  W.  by  S.  diftant  between  five  and  fix  miles.  We 
then  fleered  S.  W.  by  S.  near  fix  miles  to  the  entrance  of  the 
firfl  Narrow,  and  afterwards  S.  S.  W.  about  fix  miles,  which 
brought  us  through:  the  tide  here  was  fo  flrong,  that  the 
paflage  was  very  rapid.    During  this  courfe  we  faw  a  fingle 

Vol.  I.  F  Indian 


34  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1 764-      Indian  upon  the  fouth  fliore,  who  kept  waving  to  us  as  long 

\ 'j  as  we  were  in  fight:  we  faw  alfo  fome  guanicoes  upon  ilie 

atur  ay  22.  j^^j|g^  though  Wood,  in  the  account  of  his  voyage,  fays  there 
were  none  upon  that  fhore.  As  foon  as  we  had  palTed  the 
firft  Narrow,  we  entered  a  httle  fea,  for  we  did  not  come 
in  fight  of  the  entrance  of  the  fecond  Narrow  till  we  had 
run  two  leagues.  The  diftance  from  the  firft  to  the  fecond 
Narrow  is  about  eight  leagues,  and  the  courfe  S.  W.  by  W. 
The  land  is  very  high  on  the  north  fide  of  the  fecond  Narrow, 
which  continues  for  about  five  leagues,  and  we  fleered 
thi-ough  it  S.  "W.  t  W.  with  foundings  from  twenty  to  five 
and  twenty  fathom:  we  went  out  of  the  wpfl-  ^nd  of  this 
Narrow  about  noon,  and  fi:eered  fouth  about  three  leagues 
for  Elizabeth's  ifland ;  but  the  wind  then  coming  right 
againft  us,  we  anchored  in  feven  fathom.  The  ifland  bore 
S.  S.  E.  diflant  about  a  mile,  and  Bartholomew's  Ifland  bore 
E.  S.  E.  In  the  evening,  fix  Indians  upon  the  Ifland  came 
down  to  the  water  fide,  and  continued  waving  and  hallooing 
to  us  for  a  long  time  ;  but  as  my  'people  wanted  reft,  I  was 
unwilling  to  employ  them  in  hoifting  out  a  boat,  and  the 
Indians  feeing  their  labour  fruitlefs,  at  length  went  away. 
While  we  were  fleering  from  Point  Pofi^eflion  to  the  firfl 
Narrow,  the  flood  fet  to  the  fouthward,  but  as  foon  as  we 
entered  the  Narrow,  it  fet  ftrongly  over  to  the  north  fhore : 
it  flows  here  at  the  full  and  change  of  the  moon  about  ten 
o'clock.  Between  the  firft  and  the  fecond  Narrow  the  flood 
fets  to  the  S,  W.  and  the  ebb  to  the  N.  E. :  after  the  weft  end 
of  the  fecond  Narrow  is  paft,  the  courfe,  with  a  leading 
wind,  is  S.  by  E.  three  leagues.  Between  the  iflands  of 
Elizabeth  and  Saint  Bartholomew,  the  channel  is  about  half 
a  mile  over,  and  the  water  is  deep :  we  found  the  flood  fet 
very  ftrongly  to  the  fouthward,  with  a  great  rippling,  but 

round  the  Iflands  the  tides  fet  many  diifercnt  ways. 

In 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  55 

In  the  morning  of  the  23d,  we  weighed  with  the  wind  at  1764- 
S.  by  W.  and  worked  between  Elizabeth  and  Bartholomew's  v_-v~-j 
ifland:  before  the  tide  was  fpent,  we  got  over  upon  the  north  ^""  *^  ^^* 
ftiore,  and  anchored  in  ten  fathom.  Saint  George's  Ifland 
then  bore  N.  E.  by  N.  diftant  three  leagues  ;  a  point  of  land, 
which  I  called  Porpois  Point,  N.  by  W.  diftant  about  five 
miles  ;  and  the  fouthermoft  land  S.  by  E.  diftant  about  two 
miles.  In  the  evening,  we  weighed  and  fleered  S.  by  E. 
about  five  miles  along  the  north  fliore,  at  about  one  mile's 
diftance,  with  regular  foundings,  from  feven  to  thirteen  fa- 
thom, and  every  where  good  ground.  At  ten  o'clock  at 
night,  wp  nnrhored  in  thirteen  fathom  ;  Sandy  Point  then 
bearing  S.  by  E.  diftant  four  miles;  Porpois  Point  W. N.W. 
three  leagues  ;  and  Saint  George's  Ifland  N.E.  four  leagues. 
All  along  this  fhore  the  flood  fets  to  the  fouthward ;  at  the 
full  and  change  of  the  moon,  it  flows  about  eleven  o'clock, 
and  the  water  rifes  about  fifteen  feet. 

The  next  morning,  I  went  out  in  my  boat  in  fearch  of  Monday  24. 
Frefli  Water  Bay ;  I  landed  with  my  Second  Lieutenant  upon 
Sandy  Point,  and  having  fent  the  boat  along  the  fliore,  we 
walked  abreaft  of  her.  Upon  the  Point  we  found  plenty  of 
wood,  and  very  good  water,  and  for  four  or  five  miles 
the  fliore  was  exceedingly  pleafant.  Over  the  Point  there 
is  a  fine  level  country,  with  a  foil  that,  to  all  appearance,  is 
extremely  rich  ;  for  the  ground  was  covered  with  flowers  of 
various  kinds,  that  perfumed  the  air  with  their  fragrance ;  and 
among  them  there  were  berries,  almoft  innumerable,  where 
the  bloflbms  had  been  flied :  we  obferved  that  the  grafs  was 
very  good,  and  that  it  was  intermixed  with  a  great  number  of 
peas  in  bloflbm.  Among  this  luxuriance  of  herbage  we  faw 
many  hundreds  of  birds  feeding,  which  from  their  form, 
and  the  uncommon  beauty  of  their  plumage,  we  called 

F  2  painted 


3^  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1764.  painted  geefe.  We  walked  more  than  twelve  miles,  and 
»,_  !-,"L!^  found  great  plenty  of  fine  frefli  water,  but  not  the  bay  that 
Monday  24.  ^g  fought ;  for  v/c  faw  no  part  of  the  fliore,  in  all  our 
walk  from  Sandy  Point,  where  a  boat  could  land  without  the 
utmoft  hazard,  the  water  being  every  where  fhoal,  and  the 
fea  breaking  very  high.  We  fell  in  with  a  great  number  of 
the  huts  or  wigwams  of  the  Indians,  which  appeared  to 
have  been  very  lately  deferted,  for  in  fome  of  them  the  fires 
which  they  had  kindled  were  fcarcely  extinguifhed ;  they 
were  in  little  recefles  of  the  woods,  and  always  clofe  to  frefli 
water,  hi  many  places  we  found  plenty  of  wild  celery,  and 
a  variety  of  plants,  which  probably  would  he  of  great 
benefit  to  feamcn  after  a  long  voyage.  In  the  evening,  we 
walked  back  again,  and  found  the  fliips  at  anchor  in  Sandy 
Point  Bay,  at  the  diftance  of  about  half  a  mile  from  the 
fliore.  The  keen  air  of  this  place  made  our  people  fo  vora- 
cioufly  hungry  that  they  could  have  eaten  three  times  their 
allowance ;  I  was  therefore  very  glad  to  find  fome  of  them 
employed  in  hauling  the  feine,  and  others  on  fliore  with  their 
guns :  fixty  very  large  mullets  were  jufl  taken  with  the  feine, 
as  I  came  up;,  and  the  gunners  had  good  fport,  for  the 
place  abounded  with  geefe,  teale,  fnipes,  and  other  birds,, 
that  were  excellent  food. 
Tiiefday  25.  On  the  25th,  Chriftmas  day,  we  obferved  by  two  altitudes,, 
and  found  the  latitude  of  Sandy  Point  to  be  53"  lo'S.  At 
eight  in  the  morning,  we  weighed,  and  having  failed  five 
leagues  from  Sandy  Point,  in  the  diredlion  of  S.  by  E.  4  E. 
we  anchored  again  in  thirty-two  fathom,  about  a  mile  from 
the  fliore  ;  the  fouth  point  of  Frefli  Water  Bay  then  bearing, 
N.N.W.  diftant  about  four  miles  -,  and  the  fouthermoft  land 
8.  E.  by  S.  As  we  failed  along  the  fliore,  at  about  two  miles 
diftance,  we  had  no  ground  with  fixty  fathom ;  but  at  the 
diftance  of  one  mile,  we  had  from  twenty  to  thirty- two  fa- 

6  thomi 


HOUND    THE    WORLD.  37 

tliom.    At  the  full  and  change  of  the  moon,  the  tide  flows       1764. 
off  Frefli  Water  Bay  at  twelve  o'clock,  j  it  runs  but  little,  yet  <_     ,, .     v 
flows  very  much  by  the  fhore.  Tuefday  25. 

On  the  26th,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  weighed,  Wednef.ze. 
•with  the  wind  at  E.  N.  E.  and  fleered  S.  S.E.  for  Port  Famine. 
At  noon,  St.  Anne's  Point,  which  is  the  northermoft  point  of 
that  port,  bore  S.  by  E.  4  E.  diftant  three  leagues.  Along 
this  lliore,  at  the  diftance  of  two  or  three  miles,  we  had 
very  deep  water  j  but  within  a  mile  had  ground  with 
twenty-five  or  thirty  fathom.  From  St.  Anne's  Point  a  reef 
of  rocks  runs  out  S.  E.  by  E.  about  two  miles ;  and  at  the 
diftance  of  two  caDlcb  itngdi  fiom  thlc  reef  the  water  will 
fuddenly  fhoal  from  fixty-five  to  thirty-five  and  twenty  fa- 
thom. The  Point  itfelf  is  very  fleep,  fo  that  there  is  no 
founding  till  it  is  approached  very  near,  and  great  care  muft 
be  taken  in  flanding  into  Port  Famine,  efpecially  if  the  fhip 
is  as  far  fouthward  as  Sedger  river ;  for  the  water  will  fhoal 
at  once  from  thirty  to  twenty,  fifteen,  and  twelve  fathom ;. 
and  at  about  two  cables  length  farther  in,  at  more  than  a 
mile  from  the  fhore,  there  is  but  nine  feet  water,  when  the 
tide  is  out.  By  hauling  clofe  round  St.  Anne's  Point,  found- 
ings will  foon  be  got ;  and  as  the  water  flioals  very  fafl,  it  is 
not  fafe  to  go  farther  in,  when  there  is  no  more  than  {even 
fathom ;  the  flreight  here  is  not  more  than  four  leagues 
wide. 

The  next  day  at  noon,  having  had  little  wind,  and  calms,  Thurfdayz^,. 
we  anchored  in  Port  Famine,  clofe  to  the  fhore,  and  found 
our  fituation  very  fafe  and  convenient :  we  had  flicker  from 
all  winds  except  the  S.  E.  which  feldom  blows,  and  if  a- fhip- 
fhould  be  driven  afhore  in  the  bottom  of  the  bay,  fhe  could 
receive  no  damage,  for  it  is  all  fine  foft  ground.  We  founds 
drift  wood  here  fuificient  to  have  furniflied  a  thoufand  fail,. 


38  COMMODORE    BYRON'S    VOYAGE 

1764-       fo  that  we  had  no  need  to  take  the  trouble  of  cutting  green. 

December.  ,  r  rt     i  •  • 

« »    The  water  ot  Sedger  river  is  excellent,  but  the  boats  cannot 

ay  27-  ggj  -j^  j^jj  about  two  hours  flood,  becaufe  at  low  water  it  is 
very  Ihallow  for  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile.  I  went  up 
it  about  four  miles  in  my  boat,  and  the  fallen  trees  then 
rendered  it  impoffible  to  go  farther :  I  found  it,  indeed,  not 
only  difficult  but  dangerous  to  get  up  thus  far.  The  flream 
is  very  rapid,  and  many  flumps  of  trees  lie  hidden  under 
it :  one  of  thefe  made  its  way  through  the  bottom  of 
my  boat,  and  in  an  inftant  llie  was  full  of  water.  We  got 
on  lliore  as  well  as  we  could;  and  afterwards,  with  great 
difficulty,  hauled  her  up  upon  the  fide  of  the  river  •  here 
we  contrived  to  Itop  the  hole  in  her  bottom,  fo  as  that  we 
made  a  Ihift  to  get  her  down  to  the  river's  mouth,  where  fhe 
was  foon  properly  repaired  by  the  carpenter.  On  each  fide 
of  this  river  there  are  the  finefl  trees  I  ever  faw,  and  I  make 
no  doubt  but  that  they  would  fupply  the  Britifh  navy  with 
tlie  beft  mails  in  the  world.  Some  of  them  are  of  a  great 
height,  and  more  than  eight  feet  in  diameter,  which  is  pro- 
portionably  more  than  eight  yards  in  circumference  ;  fo 
that  four  men,  joining  hand  in  hand,  could  not  compafs 
them :  among  others,  we  found  the  pepper  tree,  or  winter's 
bark,  in  great  plenty.  Among  thefe  woods,  notwithllanding 
the  coldnefs  of  the  climate,  there  are  innumerable  parrots, 
and  other  birds  of  the  mofl  beautiful  plumage.  I  fliot  every 
day  geefe  and  ducks  enough  to  ferve  my  own  table  and  fe- 
veral  others,  and  every  body  on  board  might  have  done  the 
fame :  we  had  indeed  great  plenty  of  frelh  provifions  of  all 
kinds ;  for  we  caught  as  much  fifh  every  day  as  ferved  the 
companies  of  both  fhips.  As  I  was  much  on  fliore  here,  I 
tracked  many  wild  beafls  in  the  fand,  but  never  faw  one  ; 
we  alfo  found  many  huts  or  wigwams,  but  never  met  with 
an  Indian.  The  country  between  this  Fort  and  Cape  For- 
ward, 

8  . 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


S9 


ward,  which  is  diflaat  about  four  leagues,  is  extremely  fine;       1764. 

the  foil  appears  to  be  very  good,  and  there  are  no  lefs  than    < ^.Jj 

three  pretty  large  rivei's,  befides  feveral  brooks.  urf  ayz;. 

While  we  lay  here,  I  went  one  day  to  Cape  Forward,  and 
when  I  fet  out  I  intended  to  have  gone  farther;  but  the  wea- 
ther became  fo  bad,  with  heavy  rain,  that  we  were  glad  to 
flop  there,  and  make  a  great  fire  to  dry  our  clothes,  which 
were  wet  through.     From  the  place  where  we  flopped,  the 
Indians  had  been  gone  fo  lately,  that  the  wood,  which  lay- 
half  burnt,  where  they  had  made  their  fire,  was  flill  warm  j 
and  foon   after  our  fire  was  kindled,    we  perceived  that 
another  was  Kinditd  dire<ftly  oppolitp  to  it,  on  the  Terra 
del  Fuego  fhore  ;   probably  as  a  fignal,  which,  if  we  had 
been  Indians,  we  fhould  have  underflood.    After  we  were 
dried  and  refrefhed  at  our  fire,   the  rain   having  abated, 
I  walked  crofs  the  Cape,  to  fee  how  the  Streight  ran,  which, 
I  found    to    be    about  W.  N.  W.      The  hills,   as    far  as    I 
could  fee,  were  of  an  immenfe  height,  very  craggy,   and 
covered  with  fnow  quite  from  the  fummit  to  the  bafe.     I 
made  alfo  another  excurfion  along  the  fhore  to  the  north- 
ward, and  found  the  country  for  many  miles  exceedingly 
pleafant,  the  ground  being,  in  many  places,  covered  with 
flowers,  which  were  not  inferior  to  thofe  that  are  commonly 
found  in  our  gardens,  either  in  beauty  or  fragrance  ;  and^if 
it  were  not  for  the  feverity  of  the  cold  in  winter,  this  coun- 
try might,  in  my  opinion,  be  made,  by  cultivation,  one  of 
the  fineft  in  the  world.    I  had  fet  up  a  fmall  tent  at  the  bot- 
tom of  this  bay,  clofe  to  a  little  rivulet,  and  juft  at  the  Ikirts 
of  a  wood,  foon  after  the  fliip  came  to  an  anchor,  where 
three  men  were  employed  in  wafliing  :  they  flept  on  fhore  y 
but  foon  after  funfet  were  awakened  out  of  their  firfl  flecp 
by  the  roaring  of  fome  wild  beafls,  which  the  darknefs  of 
the  night,  and  the  folitarinefs  of  their  fituation  in  this  path- 
left 


40  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1764.      lefs  defart,  rendered  horrid  beyond  imagination :  the  tone 

December. 

V; — , f  was  hollow  and  deep,  fo  that  the  hearts,  of  whatever  kind, 

^y^'-  were  certainly  large,  and  the  poor  fellows  perceived  that 
they  drew  nearer  and  nearer,  as  the  found  every  minute  be- 
came more  loud.  From  this  time  fleep  was  renounced  for  the 
night,  a  large  fire  was  immediately  kindled,  and  a  conftant 
blaze  kept  up :  this  prevented  the  beafts  from  invading  the 
tent ;  but  they  continued  to  prowl  round  it  at  a  little  diflance, 
with  incelTant  bowlings,  till  the  day  broke,  and  then,  to  the 
great  comfort  of  the  affrighted  failors,  they  difappeared. 

At  this  place,  not  far  from  where  the  fhip  lay,  there  is  a 
hill  that  has  been  rlparerl  of  -wood,  nnd  wc  fuppofed  tins  to 
be  the  fpot  where  the  Spaniards  formerly  had  a  fettlement*. 
One  of  the  men,  as  he  was  pafling  over  this  hill,  perceived 
that,  in  a  particular  part,  the  ground  returned  the  found  of  his 
foot,  as  if  it  was  hollow :  he  therefore  repaffed  it  feveral  times, 
and  finding  the  efFe(5l  ftill  the  fame,  he  conceived  a  ftrong 
notion  that  fomething  was  buried  there ;  when  he  came  on 
board,  he  related  what  he  had  remarked  to  me,  and  I  went 
myfelf  to  the  fpot,  with  a  fmall  party,  f urniflied  with  fpades 
and  pickaxes,  and  faw  the  fpot  opened  to  a  confiderable 
depth,  but  we  found  nothing,  nor  did  there  appear  to  be  any 
hollow  or  vault  as  was  expedled.  As  we  were  returning 
through  the  woods,  we  found  two  very  large  flvuUs,  which, 
by  the  teeth,  appeared  to  have  belonged  to  fome  beafts  of 
prey,  but  of  what  kind  we  could  not  guefs. 
January.  Haviug  coutinucd  here  till  Friday  the  4th  of  January,  and 
completed  the  wood  and  water  of  both  fliips,  for  which 
purpofe  I  had  entered  the  Streight,  I  determined  to  fteer  back 
again  in  fearch  of  Falkland's  Illands. 

*  See  fome  account  of  this  fettlement  in  the  Voyage  of  Captain  Wallis,  chap.  iii. 
p.  411. 

CHAP. 


f  riday  4. 


'f^i""" 


.0 


A  Chart  of 

HI  AWKIW  S  's   M  AIBEN-LAJVIJ, 

DisccH'crct/  by  S'^Richa?'/^  Hawlans  in  jat.i 

and 

Falkland  SoirwB, 

so  called  by  CajD^Jobn  Sbvng 
of  the  Farewell   from  X.ondon 

wibo  Sailed  through  // 
in  J  689. 


"Jli^^m^I^ands 


'\ 


•^ 


"55."^- 


n 


"j"-^ 


JLAIVJ), 
J"  en  JS7'i 


^^ 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


4? 


CHAP.     V. 

The  Courfe  hack  from  Port  Famine  to  Falkla?2d's  Ijlands^ 
with  fome  Account  of  the  Country, 

'E  weighed  anchor  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,       j.g^^ 
and  worked  to  windward  out  of  the  harbour:  the     January. 
wind  continued  contrary  at  N.  N.  E.  till  about  one  o'clock  Friday  4. 
the  next  day,  when  it  fhif ted  to  W.  S.  W.  and  blew  a  frefli  Saturday  j. 
gale.    We  fleered  N.  W.  by  N.  four  leagues,  and  then  three 
leagues  north,  between  Elizabeth  and  Bartholomew  iflands: 
we  then  fleered  from  the  iflands  N.  by  E.  three  leagues,  to 
the  fecond  Narrow  ;  and  fleered  through  N.  E.  1  E.  continu- 
ing the  fame  courfe  from  the  fecond  Narrow  to  the  firfl, 
which  was  a  run  of  eight  leagues.    As  the  wind  ftill  conti- 
nued to  blow  frefh,  we  fleered  through  the  firfl  Narrow 
againfl  the  flood,  in  the  dire<5lion  of  N.  N.  E. ;  but  about  ten 
o'clock  at  night,  the  wind  dying  away,  the  flood  fet  us  back 
again  into  the  entrance  of  the  firfl  Narrow,  where  we  were 
obliged  to  anchor,  iu  forty  fathom,  within  two  cables  length 
of  the  fhore.    The  tide  flows  here,  at  the  full  and  change  of 
the  moon,  about  two  o'clock,  and  runs  full  fix  knots  an 
hour. 

At  one  o'clock  the  next  morning,  we  weighed,  with  a  light  Sunday  6. 
northerly  breeze ;  and  about  three,  we  palfed  the  firfl  Nar- 
row a  fecond  time.  Having  now  feen  the  Ihip  fafe  through, 
and  being  quite  exhaufted  with  fatigue,  as  I  had  been  upon 
the  deck  all  the  preceding  day,  and  all  night,  I  went  into  my 
cabbin  to  get  fome  reft.    I  lay  down,  and  foon  fell  afleep  ; 

Vol.  I.  G  ■  but 


^2  COMMODORE     BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765.  but  in  lefs  tlian  half  an  hour,  I  was  awakened  by  the  beat- 
v_!1!!^ZL>  ing  of  the  flaip  upon  a  bank  :  I  inftantly  llarted  up,  and  ran 
Sunday  ,  -^pQj^  j-j^g  dcck,  wherc  I  foon  found  that  we  had  grounded 
upon  a  hard  fand.  It  was  happy  for  us,  that  at  this  time  it 
was  ftark  calm  ;  and  I  immediately  ordered  out  the  boats 
to  carry  an  anchor  aftern,  where  the  water  was  deepefl :  the 
anchor  took  the  ground,  but  before  we  could  wori:  the  cap- 
flern,  in  order  to  heave  the  fhip  off  to  it,  fhe  went  ofF,  by 
the  mere  riling  of  the  tide.  It  happened  fortunately  to  be 
jufl  low  water  when  fhe  went  aground,  and  there  was  fifteen 
feet  forward,  and  fix  fathom  a  very  little  way  aftern.  The 
Mafter  told  me,  that  at  the  laft  caft  of  the  lead,  before  we 
were  aground,  he  had  thirteen  fathom ;  fo  that  the  water 
ihoaled  at  once  no  lefs  than  fixty-three  feet. 

This  bank,  which  has  not  been  mentioned  by  any  navi- 
gator who  has  paired  the  Streight,  is  extremely  dangerous  ; 
cfpecially  as  it  lies  dire^lly  in  the  fair  way  between  Cape 
Virgin  Mary  and  the  firft  Narrow,  and  juft  in  the  middle  be- 
tween the  fouth  and  north  fhores.  It  is  more  than  two 
leagues  long,  and  full  as  broad ;  in  many  places  alfo  it  is 
very  fteep.  When  we  were  upon  it,  Point  PolTellion  bore 
N.  E.  diftant  three  leagues;  and  the  entrance  of  the  narrow 
S.  W.  diftant  two  leagues.  I  afterwards  faw  many  parts  of  it 
dry,  and  the  fea  breaking  very  high  over  other  parts  of  it, 
where  the  water  was  fhallow.  A  fhip  that  lliould  ground 
upon  this  flioal  in  a  gale  of  wind,  would  probably  be  very 
foon  beaten  to  pieces. 

About  fix  o'clock  in  the  mornings  we  anchored  in  fifteen 
fathom,  the  llioal  bearing  N.  N.  \V.  ~  W.  at  the  diftance  of 
about  half  a  mile.  At  noon,  we  weighed  with  a  light  breeze 
at  N.  E.  and  worked  with  the  ebb  tide  till  two,  but  finding 
the  water  flioal,  we  anchored  again  in  fix  fathom  and  an 

half. 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  43 

half,  at  about  the  diilance  of  half  a  mile  from  the  fouth  fide       1765- 
of  the  ilioal.      The  AfTcs   Ears   then   bearing  N.W.  byW.   J^^~Lt 
diftant  four  leagues,  and  the  fouth  point  of  the  entrance  of    ""  ^^  ' 
the  firft  Narrow  W.  S.  W.  diftant  about  three  leagues.     At  this 
time  the  opening  of  the  Narrow  was  lliut  in,  and  upon 
fending  out  the  boats  to  found,  they  difcovered  a  channel 
between  the  fhoal  and  the  fouth  fhore  of  the  Streight.    The 
Tamar  in  the  mean  time,  as  fhe  was  endeavouring  to  come 
near  us,  was  very  near  going  on  iliore,  having  once  got  into 
three  fathom,  but  foon  after  came  to  an  anchor  in  the  chan- 
nel between  the  fhoal  and  the  north  fhore. 

The  next  morning,  about  eight  o'clock,  we  weighed,  with  Mcnday;, 
little  wind  at  W.  S.  W.  and  fleered  about  half  a  mile  S.  E.  by  £• 
when,  having  deepened  our  water  to  thirteen  fathom,  we 
fleered  between  the  E.  and  E.  N.  E.  along  the  fouth  fide  of 
the  flioal,  at  the  diftance  of  about  feven  miles  from  the  fouth 
fliore,  keeping  two  boats  at  fome  diilance,  one  on  each  bow, 
to  found.  The  depth  of  water  was  very  irregular,  varying 
continually  between  nine  and  fifteen  fathom ;  and  upon 
hauling  nearer  to  the  flioal,  we  had  very  foon  no  more  than 
feven  fathom :  the  boats  went  over  a  bank,  upon  which  they 
had  fix  fathom  and  an  half;  it  being  then  low  water,  but 
within  the  bank  they  had  thirteen  fathom.  At  noon,  we 
were  to  the  eaftward  of  the  fhoal,  and  as  we  hauled  over  to 
the  north  fliore,  we  foon  deepened  our  water  to  twenty 
fathom.  Point  PolTeflion  at  this  time  bore  N.  N.  W.  diftant 
between  four  and  five  leagues,  the  AfTes  Ears  W.  N.  W.  diftant 
fix  leagues,  and  Cape  Virgin  Mary  N.  E.  i-  E.  diftant  about 
feven  leagues.  From  this  fituation  we  fteered  N.  E.  by  E.  for 
the  fouth  end  of  the  fpit  which  runs  to  the  fouthward  of  the 
Cape,  and  had  no  foundings  with  five  and  twenty  fathom. 
At  four  in  the  afternoon.  Cape  Virgin  Mary  bore  N.  E.  and 
the  fouth  end  of  the  fpit  N.  E.  by  E.  diftant  three  leagues.   At 

G  2  eight 


44  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765.  eight  the  next  morning,  the  Cape  bore  N.  by  W.  diftant  two 
^Muary^  Icagucs.  Our  latitude  was  51'  50',  and  our  foundings  were 
Tue  day  8.  ^j^^^j^  ^j^^  twelve  fathoHi.  We  now  brought  to  for  the 
Tamar,  who  had  come  through  the  north  channel,  and  was 
fome  leagues  aftern  of  us,  and  while  we  were  waiting  for 
her  coming  up,  the  officer  of  the  watch  informed  me  that 
the  head  of  the  main-mall  was  fprung:  I  immediately  went 
up  to  look  at  it  myfelf,  and  found  it  fplit  almofl  in  a  flrait 
line  perpendicularly  for  a  confiderable  length,  but  I  could 
not  difcover  exaftly  how  far  the  filTure  went,  for  the  cheeks 
that  were  upon  the  mall.  We  imagined  this  to  have  hap- 
pened in  the  very  hard  gale  that  had  overtaken  us  fome  time 
before,  but  as  it  was  of  more  importance  to  contrive  how  to 
repair  the  damage,  than  difcover  how  it  happened,  we  im- 
mediately put  on  a  ftrong  fifh,  and  woolded  it  fo  well,  that 
we  had  reafon  to  hope  the  mall  would  be  as  ferviceable  as 
ever.  Cape  Virgin  Mary  now  bore  S.  62  W.  diftant  twenty- 
one  leagues,  and  our  latitude  was  51°  50' S.,  longitude  6<f 
56'  W. ;  the  variation  20°  E. 

Wednef.  9.  On  the  9th,  having  failed  S.  67  E.  our  latitude  was  52°  8'  S, 
our  longitude  68°  31'  W.  and  Cape  Virgin  Mary  bore  S.  83 
W.  diftant  thirty-three  leagues. 

Thurfday  lo,  Ou  the  loth,  thcrc  having  been  little  wind  for  the  laft 
twenty-four  hours,  between  the  north  and  call,  with  thick 
foggy  weather,  our  courfe  was  N.  18  W.  for  thirty-nine 
miles.  Our  latitude  was  51''  31' S.  longitude  68°  44  W.; 
variation  20°  E.  and  Cape  Virgin  Mary  bore  S.  60  W.  diftant 
thirty-three  leagues. 

Fiiday  I  J,  On  the  nth,  we  had  ftrong  gales  at  S.  W.  with  a  great  fea  ; 
our  courfe  was  N.  87  E.  for  ninety-nine  miles.  Our  latitude 
was  51°  24  S.  longitude  66*^  10' W.  Cape  Virgin  Mary  bore 
S.  73°  8'  W.  diftant  fixty-five  leagues,  and  Cape  Fairweather 

6  W.  2  S. 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  -4^, 

W.  2  S.  diftant  feventy  leagues  ;  the  variation  was  now  19°  E.       1765. 

January. 

About  feven  in  the  evening,  I  thought  I  faw  land  a-head  of  v.. — ,,-«_j 
us,  but  the  Tamar  being  fome  leagues  a-flern,  I  wore  fhip,  "  ^^  "* 
and  made  an  eafy  fail  off:  the  next  morning,  at  break  of  Satardayi^, 
day,  I  flood  in  again,  the  wind  having  fhifted  in  the  night 
to  N.  W.  and  about  four  o'clock,  I  recovered  fight  of  the 
land  a-head,  which  had  the  appearance  of  three  iflands :  I 
imagined  they  might  be  the  iflands  of  Sebald  de  Wert,  but 
intending  to  fl:and  between  them,  I  found  that  the  land 
which  had  appeared  to  be  feparated,  was  joined  by  fome 
very  low  ground,  which  formed  a  deep  bay.  As  foon  as  I 
had  made  this  difcovery,  1  tacked  and  flood  out  again,  and 
at  the  fame  time  faw  land  a  great  way  to  the  fouthward, 
which  I  made  no  doubt  was  the  fame  that  is  mentioned  in 
the  charts  by  the  name  of  the  New  Iflands.  As  I  was  haul- 
ing out  of  this  bay,  I  faw  a  long,  low  flioal  of  rocks, 
ftretching  out  for  more  than  a  league  to  the  northward  of 
us,  and  another  of  the  fame  kind  lying  between  that  and 
what  we  had  taken  for  the  northermofl:  of  De  Wert's  iflands. 
This  land,  except  the  low  part,  which  is  not  feen  till  it  is 
approached  near,  confifls  of  high,  craggy,  barren  rocks, 
which  in  appearance  very  much  refemble  Staten  Land. 
When  I  had  got  fo  near  as  to  difcover  the  low  land,  I  was 
quite  embayed,  and  if  it  had  blown  hard  at  S.  W.  fo  great  a 
fea  muft  have  rolled  in  here  as  would  have  rendered  it 
almoft  impofllble  to  claw  off  the  fliore  ;  all  fhips,  therefore^ 
that  may  hereafter  navigate  thefe  parts,  fhould  avoid  falling 
in  with  it.  The  feals  and  birds  here  are  innumerable ;  we 
faw  alfo  many  whales  fpouting  about  us,  feveral  of  which 
were  of  an  enormous  fize.  Our  latitude  now  was  51*^  27'  S., 
longitude  6^'  54  W.  5  the  variation  was  23°  30' E.  In  the 
evening  we  brought  to,  and  at  day-break  the  next  morning,  Sunday  i-^, 
flood  in  for  the  north  part  of  the  ifiand  by  the  coaft  of  which 

we- 


46 


COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 


Sunday 


Monday  14. 


Tucfday  i  J. 


we  had  been  embayed:  when  we  had  got  about  four  miles 
to  the  eaftward,  it  fell  calm,  and  rained  with  great  violence, 
during  which  there  arofe  fuch  a  fwell  as  I  never  remember 
to  have  feen :  it  came  from  the  weftward,  and  ran  fo  quick 
and  fo  high,  that  I  expe6led  every  moment  it  would  break  = 
it  fet  us  very  fail  towards  the  fhore,  which  is  as  dangerous 
as  any  in  the  world,  and  I  could  fee  the  furge  breaking  at 
fome  diftance  from  it,  mountains  high:  happily  for  us  a 
frefh  gale  fprung  up  at  fouth  eaft,  with  which,  to  our  great 
joy,  we  were  able  to  ftand  off;  audit  behoves  whoever  fhall 
afterwards  come  this  way,  to  give  the  north  part  of  this 
ifland  a  good  birth.  After  I  had  got  to  fome  diftance,  the 
weather  being  thick,  and  it  raining  very  hard,  I  brought  to. 
Our  latitude  was  now  ji''  S.  and  longitude  63°  22  W. 

On  Monday  the  14th,  the  weather  having  cleared  up,  and 
the  wind  fliiftedto  the  S.  S.  W.  we  lleered  along  the  fliore 
S.  E.  by  E.  four  miles,  and  faw  a  low  flat  ifland  full  of  high 
tufts  of  grafs,   refembling  buflies,    bearing  fouth,    at  the 
diftance  of  two  or  three  leagues,  the  northcrmoft  land  at 
the  fame  time  bearing  weft,  diftant  about  fix  leagues :  we 
had  here  thirty-eight  fathom,  with  rocky  ground.     We  con- 
tinued our  courfe  along  the  fliore  fix  leagues  farther,  and 
then  faw  a  low  rocky  ifland  bearing  S.  E.  by  E.  diftan:  about 
five  miles:    here  we  brought  to,  and   having  founded,  we 
shad  forty  fathom  water,  with  a  bottom  of  white  fand.    This 
ifland  is  about  three  leagues  diftant  from  the  land  we  were 
coafting,    which  here  forms  a  very  deep  bay,    and  bears 
E.  by  N.  of  the  other  ifland  on  which  we  had  feen  the  long 
tufts  of  grafs:  we  faw  the  fea  break  at  a  good  diftance  from 
the  fliore,  and  during  the  night  ftood  ofl^  and  on.     The  next 
morning  at  three  o'clock  we  made  fail,  and  ftood  in  for  the 
land  to  look  for  a  harbour.     At  fix,  the  eaft  end  of  the  rocky 
ifland  bore  W.  S.  W.  diftant  about  three  miles,  and  our  found- 
2  ings 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  47 

ings  then  were  fixteen  fathom,  with  rocky  ground,  but  1765- 
when  we  got  within  the  ifland  we  had  twenty  fathom,  with  ■_  -.-  1» 
fine  white  fand.  The  coaft  from  this  rocky  ifland  lies  '^'^^^^^^  '5' 
E.  by  S.  diftant  about  feven  or  eight  leagues,  where  there 
are  two  low  iflands,  which  make  the  eaftermoft  land  in 
fight.  At  eight  o'clock  we  faw  an  opening,  which  had  the 
appearance  of  an  harbour,  bearing  E.  S.  E.  and  being  be- 
tween two  and  three  leagues  diftant.  Upon  this  difcovery 
we  brought  to,  and  fent  a  boat  from  each  of  the  fhips  to  ex- 
amine the  opening;  but  it  beginning  to  blow  very  hard  fooh 
after,  and  the  weather  growing  thick,  with  heavy  rain,  we 
were  obliged  to  fland  out  to  fea  with  both  the  fhips,  and  it 
was  not  without  great  difficulty  that  we  cleared  the  two 
rocky  iflands  which  were  to  the  eaftward  of  us.  We  had 
now  a  great  fea,  and  I  began  to  be  under  much  concern  left 
we  ftiould  be  blown  off,  and  our  people  in  the  boats 
left  behind:  however,  about  three  in  the  afternoon,  the 
weather  clearing  up,  I  tacked  and  fi:ood  in  again,  and  pre- 
fently  after  had  the  fatisfatSlion  to  fee  one  of  the  boats, 
though  it  was  a  long  way  to  leeward  of  us.  I  immediately 
bore  down  to  her,  and  found  her  to  be  the  Tamar's  boat, 
v;ith  Mr.  Hindman,  the  Second  Lieutenant,  on  board,  who- 
having  been  on  fliore  in  the  opening,  had  ventured  off,  not- 
withftanding  the  great  fea  and  bad  weather,  to  inform  me 
that  he  had  found  a  fine  harbour:  we  immediately  ftood  in 
for  it,  and  found  it  equally  beyond  his  report  and  our  ex- 
pecftations:  the  entrance  is  about  a  mile  over,  and  every  part 
of  it  is  perfectly  fafe,  the  depth  of  water,  clofe  to  the  fhore, 
being  from  ten  to  feven  fathom.  We  found  this  harbour  ta 
confift  of  two  little  bays  on  the  ftarboard  fide,  where  fhips 
may  anchor  in  great  fafety,  and  in  each  of  which  there  is  a 
fine  rivulet  of  frefli  water.  Soon  after  we  entered  an  har- 
bour of  much  greater  extent,  v^hich  I  called  Port  Egmont, 

in 


48  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765.  in  honour  of  the  earl,  who  was  then  Firft  Lord  of  the  Ad- 
■  J^""^'"^"  ,  mu"ahy ;  and  I  think  it  is  one  of  the  fineft  harbours  in  the 
Tuefday  ij.  ^^^j.^^^  'pj^g  mouth  of  it  is  S.  E.  diftant  feven  leagues  from 
the  low  rocky  ifland,  which  is  a  good  mark  to  know  it  by : 
within  the  ifland,  and  at  the  diflance  of  about  two  miles 
from  the  fliore,  there  is  between  feventeen  and  eighteen 
fathom  water ;  and  about  three  leagues  to  the  w^eflward  of 
the  harbour,  there  is  a  remarkable  white  fandy  beach,  off 
which  a  ftiip  may  anchor  till  there  is  an  opportunity  to  run 
in.  In  flanding  in  for  this  fandy  beach,  the  two  low  rocky 
iflands,  which  we  found  it  difficult  to  clear  when  the  weather 
obliged  us  to  ftand  off,  appear  to  the  eallward,  and  Port 
Egmont  is  about  fixteen  leagues  from  the  north  end  of  thefe 
iflands.  We  moored  in  ten  fathom,  with  fine  holding 
ground.  The  northermofl:  point  of  the  weftern  fliore  was 
difliant  two  miles  and  an  half,  the  watering-place  on  that 
fhore  bore  W.  N.  \V.  ±  W.  and  was  diftant  half  a  mile,  and 
the  iflands  on  the  eafl:  fide  bore  E.  by  S.  and  were  diftant 
four  miles.  The  whole  navy  of  England  might  ride  here 
in  perfedl  fecurity  from  all  winds.  Soon  after  the  fliip  came 
to  an  anchor,  the  other  boat  which  had  remained  on  fliore 
when  Mr.  Hindman  put  off,  came  on  .board.  In  the  fouth- 
ermoft  part  of  the  harbour  there  are  feveral  iflands,  but 
there  is  no  paffage  out  for  a  fliip ;  I  went,  however,  through 
in  my  boat,  about  feven  leagues  diftant  from  where  the  fliip 
lay,  and  entered  a  large  found,  which  is  too  much  expofcd 
to  a  wefterly  wind  for  fliips  to  lie  in  it  fafely ;  and  the 
Mafter  of  the  Tamar,  who  liad  been  round  in  her  boat,  and 
entered  tliis  found  from  v^'ithout,  reported  that  many  flioals 
lay  ofl^  it,  fo  that  if  the  harbour  was  ever  fo  good,  it  would 
not  be  prudent  to  attempt  getting  in.  In  every  part  of  Port 
Egmont  there  is  frefli  water  in  the  greateft  plenty,  and 
geefe,  ducks,  fnipes,  and  other  birds  are  fo  numerous  that 

our 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.      "  49 

our  people  grew  tired  of  them:  it  was  a  common  thing  for       '765- 

a  boat  to  bring  off  fixty  or  feventy  fine  geefe,  without  ex-   < ,~.1j 

pending  a  fingle  charge  of  powder  and  fhot,  for  the  men 
knocked  down  as  many  as  they  pleafed  with  Hones :  wood 
however,  is  wanting  here,  except  a  Uttle  that  is  found  adrift 
along  the  llaore,  which  I  imagined  came  from  the  Streight 
of  Magellan.  Among  other  i"efrelhments,  which  are  in  the 
higheft  degree  falutary  to  thofe  who  have  contracfled  fcorbu- 
tic  diforders,  during  a  long  voyage,  here  are  wild  celery, 
and  wood  forrel,  in  the  greateft  abundance  -,  nor  is  there  any 
want  of  muflels,  clams,  cockles,  and  limpets  :  the  feals  and 
penguins  are  innumerable,  fo  that  it  is  impoffible  to  walk 
upon  the  beach  without  firll  driving  them  away :  and  the 
coaft  abounds  with  fea  lions,  many  of  which  are  of  an  enor- 
mous fize.  We  found  this  animal  very  formidable ;  I  was 
once  attacked  by  one  of  them  very  unexpeifledly,  and  it  was 
with  the  utmofl  difficulty  that  I  could  difengage  myfelf  from, 
him :  at  other  times  we  had  many  battles  with  them,  and  it 
has  fometimes  afforded  a  dozen  of  us  an  hour's  work  to  dif- 
patch  one  of  them ;  I  had  with  me  a  very  fine  maftifiT  dog, 
and  a  bite  of  one  of  thefe  creatures  almoft  tore  him  to  pieces. 
Nor  were  thefe  the  only  dangerous  animals  that  we  found 
here,  for  the  Matter  having  been  fent  out  one  day  to  found 
the  coaft  upon  the  fouth  fhore,  reported,  at  his  return,  that 
four  creatures  of  great  fiercenefs,  refembling  wolves,  ran  up 
to  their  bellies  in  the  water  to  attack  the  people  in  his  boat, 
and  that  as  they  happened  to  have  no  fire-arms  with  them, 
they  had  immediately  put  the  boat  off  into  deep  water.  The 
next  morning  after  this  happened,  I  went  upon  the  fouthern 
Ihore  myfelf,  where  we  found  one  of  the  largeft  fea  lions  I 
had  ever  feent  as  the  boat's  crew  were  now  well  armed, 
they  immediately  engaged  him,  and  during  the  conteft  one 
of  the  other  animals  was  feen  running  towards  us :  he  was 
Vol.  I.  H  fired 


5° 


COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 


1765'  fired  at  before  he  came  up,  and  was  prefently  killed,  though 
^anuar  ^  ^  aftcrwards  wifhed  that  we  had  endeavoured  to  take  him; 
alive,  which,  if  we  had  been  aware  of  his  attack,  I  dare  fay 
might  eafily  have  been  done.  When  any  of  thefe  creatures 
got  fight  of  our  people,  though  at  ever  fo  great  a  diftance^ 
tliey  ran  dire<5lly  at  them;  and  no  lefs  than  five  of  them 
were  killed  this  day.  They  were  always  called  wolves  by 
the  (hip's  company,  but  except  in  their  fize,  and  the  fhape 
of  the  tail,  I  think  they  bore  a  greater  referablance  to  a  fox. 
They  are  as  big  as  a  middle-fized  maftiff,  and  their  fangs 
are  remarkably  long  and  fliarp.  There  are  great  numbers 
of  them  upon  this  coafl,  though  it  is  not  perhaps  eafy  to 
"uefs  how  they  firft  came  hither,  for  thefe  iflands  are  at 
leaft  one  hundred  leagues  diftant  from  the  main:  they 
burrow  in  the  ground  like  a  fox,  and  we  have  frequently 
feen  pieces  of  feal  which  they  have  mangled,  and  the  Ikins 
of  penguins,  lie  fcattered  about  the  mouth  of  their  holes. 
To  get  rid  of  thefe  creatures,  our  people  fet  fire  to  the  grafs,  fo 
that  the  country  was  in  a  blaze  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach, 
for  feveral  days,  and  we  could  fee  them  running  in  great 
numbers  to  feek  other  quarters.  I  dug  holes  in  many  places, 
about  two  feet  deep,  to  examine  the  foil,  which  I  found  firft 
a  black  mould,  and  then  a  light  clay.  While  we  lay  here, 
we  fet  up  the  armourer's  forge  on  fhore,  and  completed  a 
great  deal  of  iron  work  that  was  much  wanted.  Our  people 
had  every  morning  an  excellent  breakfaft  made  of  portable 
foup,  and  wild  celery,  thickened  with  oatmeal :  neither  was 
our  attention  confined  wholly  to  ourfelves,  for  the  Surgeon 
of  the  Tamar  furroxmded  a  piece  of  ground  near  the  water- 
ing-place with  a  fence  of  turf,  and  planted  it  with  many 
efculent  vegetables  as  a  garden,  for  the  benefit  of  thofe  who 
might  hereafter  come  to  this  place.  Of  this  harbour,  and 
all  the  neighbouring  illands,  I  took  pofiTeflion  for  his  Majefty 

King 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  gi 

King  George  the  Third  of  Great  Britain,  by  the  name  of      J7^5- 
Falkland's  Islands;   and  there  is  I  think  httle  reafon  to         ,  '  \ 
doubt  that  they  are  the  fame  land  to  which  Cowley  gave 
the  name  of  Pepys's  Ifland. 

In  the  printed  account  of  Cowley's  voyage,  he  fays,  "  we 
*'  held  our  courfe  S.  W.  till  we  came  into  the  latitude  of 
*'  forty-fe'ven  degrees,  where  we  faw  land,  the  fame  being 
*'  an  ifland,  not  before  known,  lying  to  the  ivejiivard  of  us  : 
"  it  was  not  inhabited,  and  I  gave  it  the  name  of  Pepys's 
*'  Island.  We  found  it  a  very  commodious  place  for  fhips 
*'  to  water  at,  and  take  in  woodt  and  it  has  a  very  good  har~ 
*'  hour,  nvhere  a  thoufand  fail  of  Jhips  tnay  fafely  ride.  Here  is 
*'  great  plenty  of  foivls,  and,  we  judge,  abundance  of  fifh, 
"  by  reafon  of  the  grounds  being  nothing  but  rocks  and 
*'  fands." 

To  this  account  there  is  annexed  a  reprefentation  of  Pepys's 
Ifland,  in  which  names  are  given  to  feveral  points  and  head 
lands,  and  the  harbour  is  called  Admiralty  Bay ;  yet  it  ap- 
pears that  Cowley  had  only  a  diftant  view  of  it,  for  he  im- 
mediately adds,  "  the  wind  being  fo  extraordinary  high  that 
"  we  could  not  get  into  it  to  water,  we  flood  to  the  fouth- 
*'  ward,  fhaping  our  courfe  S.  S.  W.  till  we  came  into  the 
♦'  latitude  of  53 ;''  and  though  he  fays  that  "  it  was  com- 
"  modious  to  take  in  wood,"  and  it  is  known  that  there  is 
no  wood  on  Falkland's  Iflands,  Pepys's  Ifland  and  Falkland's 
Iflands  may  notwithftanding  be  the  fame ;  for  upon  Falk- 
land's Iflands  there  are  immenfe  quantities  of  flags  with 
narrow  leaves,  reeds  and  rulhes  which  grow  in  clufters, 
fo  as  to  form  buflies  about  three  feet  high,  and  then 
fhoot  about  fix  or  feven  feet  higher:  thefe  at  a  diftance 
have  greatly  the  appearance  of  wood,  and  were  taken 
for  wood  by  the  French,   who    landed  there  in  the  year 

H  2  1764, 


52  COMMODORE    BYRON's   VOYAGE 

1765'  1764,  as  appears  by  Pernetty's  account  of  their  voyage; 
•v.,  ^"""^1/  It  has  been  fuggefted  that  the  latitude  of  Pepys's  Illand 
might,  in  the  M.  S.  from  which  the  account  of  Cow- 
ley's voyage  was  printed,  be  exprefled  in  figures,  which, 
if  ill  made,  might  equally  refemble  forty-feven,  and  fifty- 
one  j  and  therefore  as  there  is  no  iiland  in  thefe  feas  in  lati- 
tude forty-feven,  and  as  Falkland's  Illands  lie  nearly  in 
fifty-one,  that  fifty-one  might  reafonably  be  concluded  to 
be  the  number  for  which  the  figures  were  intended  to 
ftand:  recourfe  therefore  was  had  to  the  Britifh  Mufseum, 
and  a  manufcript  journal  of  Cowley's  was  there  found.  In 
this  manufcript  no  mention  is  made  of  an  ifland  not  before 
known,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  Pepys's  Illand,  but 
land  is  mentioned  in  latitude  forty-feven  degrees,  forty 
minutes,  exprefled  in  words  at  length,  which  exacflly 
anfwers  to  the  defcription  of  what  is  called  Pepys's  Ifland  in 
the  printed  account,  and  which  here,  he  fays,  he  fuppofed 
to  be  the  iflands  of  Sebald  de  Wert.  This  part  of  the  manu- 
fcript is  in  the  following  words :  "  January  1683,  This  month 
"  wee  were  in  the  latitude  oi  forty-fea'ven  degrees  and  forty 
"  minnetts,  where  wee  efpyed  an  ifland  bearing  ivcjl  from 
"  us,  wee  having  the  wind  at  eaft  north  eaft,  wee  bore  away 
•'  for  it,  it  being  too  late  for  us  to  goe  on  flioare,  wee  lay 
"  by  all  night.  The  ifland  feemed  very  pleafant  to  the  eye, 
*'  -with  many  ivoods,  I  may  as  well  fay  the  whole  land  was 
"  woods.  There  being  a  rock  lying  above  water  to  the  eaft- 
*'  ward  of  it,  where  an  innumerable  company  of  foivles,  being 
*'  of  the  bignefl^e  of  a  fmall  goofe,  which  fowles  would 
*'  ftrike  at  our  men  as  they  were  aloft:  fome  of  them  wee 
*'  killed  and  eat :  they  feemed  to  us  very  good,  only  tafted 
*'  fomewhat  fiflily.  I  failed  along  that  ifland  to  the  fouth- 
*'  ward,  and  about  the  fouth  weft  fide  of  the  ifland  there 
*'  feemed  to  me  to  be  a  good  place  for  £hipps  to  ride ;  I 

"  would 


ROUND   THE   WORLD.  $$ 

"  would  have  had  the  boat  out  to  have  gone  into  the  har-       1765- 

n  11  11  January. 

**  hour,  but  the  wind  blew  frelh  and  they  would  not  agree   <».-,~  »> 

*'  to  go  with  it.      Sailing  a  litle  further,  keeping  the  lead, 

"  and  having  fix  and  twenty,  and  feaven  and  twenty  fathoms 

"  water,   untill  wee  came  to  a  place  where  wee  faw  the 

"  weeds  ride,    having  the  lead  againe,    found  but  feaven 

•'  fathoms  water.      Fearing  danger  went  about  the  fliipp 

"  there,  were  then  fearefull  to  flay  by  the  land  any  longer,. 

"  it  being  all  rocky  ground,  but  the  harbour  feemed  to  be  a  good 

"  place  for  Jhipps  to  ride  there  ;  in  the  ifland  feeming  likewife 

"  to  have  water  enough,  there  feemed  to  me  to  be  harbour 

"  fof  fi'^^  hundred  fade  of  Jloipps.    The  going  in  but  narrow, 

*'  and  the  north  fide  of  the  entrance  Ihallow  water  that  I 

"  could  fee,  but  I  verily  believe  that  there  is  water  enough 

*'  for  any  fhipp  to  goe  in  on  the  fouth  fide,  for  there  cannot 

"  be  fo  great  a  lack  of  water,  but  muft  needs  fcowre  a  chan- 

*'  nell  away  at  the  ebbe  deepe  enough  for  fliipping  to  goe 

"  in.     I  would  have  had  them  flood  upon  a  wind  all  night, 

*'  but  they  told  me  they  were  not  come  out  to  goe  upon  dif- 

**  covery.      Wee  faw  likewife  another  ifland  by  this  that 

"  night,    which  made  me  thinke  them  to  be  the  Sibble 

"  D'wards. 

"  The'farae  night  wee  fleered  our  courfe  ngaine  ivefl  fouth 
'*  nvefi^  which  was  but  our  fouth  weft,  the  compafTe  having 
*'  two  and  tvv'enty  degrees  variation  caftwardly,  keeping 
"  that  courfe  till  wee  came  in  the  latitude  of  three  and  ffty- 
*'  degrees." 

In  both  the  printed  and  manufcript  account,  this  land  is 
iiiid  to  lie  in  latitude  forty-feven,  to  be  fituated  to  the  weft- 
ward  of  the  fliip  when  firft  difcovered,  to  appear  woody,  to 
have  an  harbour  where  a  great  number  of  fhips  might  ride 
in  fafety,  and  to  be  frequented  by  innumerable  birds.    Id 

appears 


^^  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765.  appears  alfo  by  both  accounts,  that  the  weather  prevented 
\J^^^21j  his  going  on  fliore,  and  that  he  fleered  from  it  W.  S.  W.  till 
he  came  into  latitude  fifty-three:  there  can  therefore  be  little 
doubt  but  that  Cowley  gave  the  name  of  Pepys's  Illand  after 
he  came  home,  to  what  he  really  fuppofed  to  be  the  ifland 
of  Sebald  de  Wert,  for  which  it  is  not  difficult  to  affign  feve- 
ral  reafons  ;  and  though  the  fuppofition  of  a  miftake  of  the 
figures  does  not  appear  to  be  well  grounded,  yet,  there 
being  no  land  in  forty-feven,  the  evidence  that  what  Cowley 
faw  was  Falkland's  Iflands,  is  very  llrong.  The  delcription 
of  the  country  agrees  in  almofl;  every  particular,  and  even 
the  map  is  of  the  fame  general  figure,  with  a  ftreight  run- 
ning up  the  middle.  The  chart  of  Falkland's  that  accom- 
panies this  narrative,  was  laid  down  from  the  journals  and 
drawings  of  Captain  Macbride,  who  was  difpatched  thither 
after  my  return,  and  circumnavigated  the  whole  coaft:  the 
two  principal  iflands  were  probably  called  Falkland's  Iflands 
by  Strong,  about  the  year  i68y,  as  he  is  known  to  have 
given  the  name  of  Falkland's  Sound  to  part  of  the  flreight 
which  divides  them.  The  journal  of  this  navigator  is 
ftill  unprinted  in  the  Britifli  Mufeum.  The  firfl  who  faw 
thefe  iflands  is  fuppofed  to  be  Captain  Davies,  the  aflociate 
-of  Cavcndifli,  in  1592.  In  1594,  Sir  Pvichard  Hawkins  fiiw 
I  land,  fuppofed  to  be  the  fame,  and  in  h.onour  of  his  miftjcfs. 

Queen  Elizabeth,  called  them  Hawkins's  Maiden  Land. 
Long  afterwards,  they  were  fecn  by  fome  French  Oiips  from 
Saint  Malces,  and  Frezier,  probably  for  that  reafon,  called 
them  the  Malouins,  a  name  which  has  been  fince  adopted 
by  the  Spaniards. 

Having  continued  in  the  harbour  which  I  had  called  Port 

Sunday  27.     Egmout  till  Sunday  the  27th  of  January,  we  failed  iigaia  at 

.ei^^ht  o'clock  in  the  morning  with  the  wind  at  S.  S.  W. ;   but 

3  we 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  s$ 

we  were  fcarcely  got  out  of  the  Port  before  it  began  to  blow      1765- 

very  hard,  and  the  weather  became  fo  thick  that  we  could   \ , — Ij 

not  fee  the  rocky  iflands.  I  now  moll  heartily  wilhed  my-  ''""''^^  ^'^' 
felf  again  at  anchor  in  the  harbour  we  had  quitted  ;  but  in 
a  fhort  time  we  had  the  fatisfadlion  to  fee  the  weather  be- 
come clear,  though  it  continued  to  blow  very  hard  the  whole 
day.  At  nine  the  entrance  of  Port  Egmont  harbour  bore 
E.  S  E.  dillant  two  leagues ;  the  two  low  iflands  to  the  north- 
ward E.  by  N.  diftant  between  three  and  four  miles;  and  the 
Rocky  ifland  \V.  ^  N.  diftant  four  leagues.  At  ten  the  two 
low  iflands  bore  S.  S.  E.  diftant  four  or  five  miles;  and  we 
then  fteered  along  the  fhore  eaft  by  the  compafs,  and  after 
having  run  about  five  leagues,  we  faw  a  remarkable  head- 
land, with  a  rock  at  a  little  diftance  from  it,  bearing  E.  S.  E. 
4.  E.  diftant  three  leagues.  This  head-land  I  called  Cape 
Tamar.  Having  continued  the  fame  courfe  five  leagues 
farther,  we  faw  a  rock  about  five  miles  from  the  main  bear- 
ing N.  E,  at  the  diftance  of  four  or  five  leagues  :  this  rock  I 
called  the  Edistone,  and  then  fteered  between  it  and  a  re- 
markable head-land  which  I  called  Cape  Dolphin,  in  the 
direction  of  E.N.E.  five  leagues  farther.  From  Cape  Tamar 
to  Cape  Dolphin,  a  diftance  of  about  eight  leagues,  the  land 
forms,  what  I  thought,  a  deep  found,  and  called  Carlisle 
Sound,  but  what  has  fince  appeared  to  be  the  northern- 
entrance  of  the  Streight  between  the  two  principal  iflands. 
In  the  part  that  I  fuppofed  to  be  the  bottom  of  the  found, 
we  faw  an  opening,  which  had  the  appearance  of  a  harbour. 
From  Cape  Dolphin  we  fteered  along  the  fhore  E.  J.  N.  fixteen  - 
leagues,  to  a  low  flat  cape  or  head-land,  and  then  brought- 
to.  In  this  day's  run  the  land,  for  the  moft  part,  refembled 
the  eaft  fide  of  the  coaft'of  Patagonia,  not  having  fo  much 
as  a  fingle  tree,  or  even  a  bufli,  being  all  downs,  with  here 
and  there  a  few  of  the  high  tufts  of  grafs  that  we  had  feen 

at 


$6  COMMODORE   BYRON's    VOYAGE 

^7^5-  at  Port  Egmont;  and  in  this  account  I  am  fure  I  am  not 
'^ — . — '-J  mifta-ken,  for  I  frequently  failed  within  two  miles  of  the 
un  ay  27,    ^^^^.^  .  ^q  jj^^(.  j^£  tlicrc  had  been  a  flirub  as  big  as  a  goofe- 

berry  bufli,  I  fhould  have  feen  it.   During  the  night  we  had 

forty  fathom  v/ater  with  rocky  ground. 

Monday  28.  The  next  morning,  at  four  o'clock,  we  made  fail,  the  low 
flat  cape  then  bearing  S.  E.  by  E.  diflant  five  leagues  :  at  half 
an  hour  after  five  it  bore  S.S.E.  diftant  two  leagues;  and  wc 
then  fleered  from  it  E.  S,  E.  five  leagues,  to  three  low  rocky 
iflands  which  lie  about  two  miles  from  the  main.  From 
thefe  iflands  we  fleered  S.S.  E.  four  leagues,  to  two  other  low 
iflands,  which  lie  at  the  diftance  of  about  one  mile  from  the 
main.  Between  thefe  iflands  the  land  forms  a  very  deep 
found,  which  I  called  Berkeley's  Sound,  hi  the  fouth  part 
of  this  found  there  is  an  opening,  which  has  the  appearance 
of  a  harbour ;  and  about  three  or  four  miles  to  the  fouth- 
ward  of  the  fouth  point  of  it,  at  the  diflance  of  about  four 
miles  from  the  main,  fome  rocks  appear  above  the  water, 
upon  which  the  fea  breaks  very  high,  there  being  here  a 
great  fwell  from  the  fouthward.  When  we  were  abreaft  of 
thefe  breakers,  we  fleered  S.W.  by  S.  about  two  leagues, 
when  the  fouthermoft  land  in  fight,  which  I  took  to  be  the 
fouthermoft  part  of  Falkland's  Iflands,  bore  W.  S.  W.  dif- 
tant five  leagues.  The  coaft  now  began  to  be  very  dange- 
rous, there  being,  in  all  directions,  rocks  and  breakers  at  a 
great  diftance  from  the  fliore.  The  country  alfo  inland  had 
a  more  rude  and  defolate  appearance  ;  the  high  ground,  as 
far  as  we  could  fee,  being  all  barren,  craggy  rocks,  very 
much  refcmbling  that  part  of  Terra  del  Fuego  which  lies 
near  Cape  Horn.  As  the  fea  now  rofe  every  moment,  I  was 
afraid  of  being  caught  here  upon  a  lee  flaore,  in  which  cafe 
there  would  have  been  very  little  chance  of  my  getting  off, 
6  and 


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  sf 

and  therefore  I  tacked  and  flood  to  the  northward  j  the  lati-      i;^?. 

January, 

tude  of  the  fouthermoft  point  in  fight  being  about  52°  3'  S.   < .^— / 

As  we  had  now  run  no  lefs  than  feventy  leagues  along  °"  ''>  ^  * 
the  coafl  of  this  illand  it  muft  certainly  be  of  very  confide- 
rable  extent.  It  has  been  faid  by  fome  former  navigators  to 
be  about  two  hundred  miles  in  circumference,  but  I  made 
no  doubt  of  its  being  nearer  feven.  Having  hauled  the 
wind,  I  flood  to  the  northward  about  noon ;  the  entrance  of 
Berkeley's  Sound  at  three  o'clock  bore  S.  W.  by  W.  diflant 
about  fix  leagues.  At  eight  in  evening,  the  wind  fliifting  to 
the  5.  W.  we  ftood  to  the  weftward. 


Vol.  I.  I  CHAP. 


58 


COMMODORE   BYRON^s   VOYAGE 


C  H  A  P.    VI. 

7^e  Pajfage  through  'the  S'tr eight  of  Magellan  as  far  as 
Cape  Monday i  with  a  Defcription  of  feveral  Bays  and 
Harhoursy  formed  by  the  Coafi  on  each  Side* 


February. 
Wednef.  6. 


w 


Thurfdayj. 


E  continued  to  make  fail  for  Port  Defire  till  Wednef- 
day  the  6th  of  February,  when  about  one  o'clock  in 
the  afternoon  we  faw  land,  and  flood  in  for  the  Port.  During 
the  run  from  Falkland's  Iflands  to  this  place,  the  number  of 
■whales  about  the  fhip  was  fo  great  as  to  render  the  naviga- 
tion dangerous ;  we  were  very  near  ftriking  upon  one,  and 
another  blew  the  water  in  upon  the  quarter  deck :  they  were 
much  larger  than  any  we  had  feen.  As  we  were  Handing 
in  for  Port  Defire,  we  faw  the  Florida^  a  ftore-lhip  that  we  ex- 
pected from  England  j.  and  at  four  we  came  to  an  anchor  off 
the  harbour's  mouth. 

The  next  morning,  Mr.  Dean,  the  Mafter  of  the  ftore-fhip,. 
came  on  board  j  and  finding  from  his  report  that  his  fore- 
mail  was  fprung,  and  his  fliip  little  better  than  a  wreck,  I 
determined  to  go  into  the  harbour,  and  try  to  unload  her 
there,  although  the  narrownefs  of  the  place,  and  the  rapi- 
dity of  the  tides,  render  it  a  very  dangerous  fituation.  We 
got  in  in  the  evening,  but  it  blowing  very  hard  in  the  night, 
both  the  Tamar  and  the  fl:ore-fliip  made  fignals  of  diftrefs  ;  I 
immediately  fent  my  boats  to  their  afiiftance,  who  found 
that,  notwithftanding  they  were  moored,  they  had  been 
driven  up  the  harbour,  and  were  in  the  greateft  danger  of 
7  being 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  ^f 

being  on  fhore.  They  were  a;ot  off,  not  without  great  difficul-      1765- 

.  February. 

ty,  and  the  very  next  night  they  drove  again,  and  were  again  < — >— — > 
faved  by  the  fame  efforts,  from  the  fame  danger.  As  I  now  ""  '^'' 
found  that  the  ftore-fhip  was  continually  driving  about  the 
harbour,  and  every  moment  in  danger  of  being  loft,  I  gave  up, 
with  whatever  reluctance,  my  defign  of  taking  the  provifions 
out  of  her,  and  fent  all  our  carpenters  on  board,  to  fifh  the 
maft,  and  make  fuch  other  repairs  as  they  could.  I  alfo  lent 
her  my  forge  to  complete  fuch  iron  work  as  they  wanted, 
and  determined,  the  moment  flie  was  in  a  condition  to  put 
to  fea,  to  take  her  with  us  into  the  Streight  of  Magellan,  and 
unload  her  there.  While  this  was  doing.  Captain  Mouat, 
who  commanded  the  Tamar,  informed  me  that  his  rudder 
was  fprung,  and  that  he  had  reafon  to  fear  it  would  in  a 
fhort  time  become  wholly  unferviceable.  Upon  this  I  or- 
dered the  carpenter  of  the  Dolphin  on  board  the  Tamar,  to 
examine  the  rudder,  and  he  reported  it  to  be  fo  bad  that  in 
his  opinion  the  veflel  could  not  proceed  in  her  voyage  with- 
out a  new  one.  A  new  one  however  it  was  not  in  our 
power  to  procure  at  this  place,  and  I  therefore  defired  Cap- 
tain Mouat  to  get  his  forge  on  fliore,  and  fecure  his  rudder 
with  iron  clamps  in  the  beft  manner  he  could,  hoping  that 
in  the  Streight  a  piece  of  timber  might  be  found  which 
would  furnifh  him  with  a  better. 

On  Wednefday  the  13th,  the  ftore-fliip  being  ready  for  fea,  wednef.  rj. 
1  put  on  board  her  one  of  my  petty  officers,  who  was  well 
acquainted  with  the  Streight,  and  three  or  four  of  my  fea- 
men  to  afTifl  in  navigating  her  ;  I  alfo  lent  her  two  of  my 
boats,  and  took  thofe  belonging  to  her,  which  were  flaved, 
on  board  to  get  tliem  repaired,  and  then  I  ordered  her 
Mafter,  to  put  to  fea  directly,  and  make  the  beft  of  his 
way  to  Port  Famine;   though  I  did  not  doubt  but  thati 

I  2  fhould 


6o  COMMODORE   BYRON's   VOYAGE 

1765-      fhould  come  up  with  her  long  before  fhe  got  thither,  as  I 
<  .^-"-.^   intended  to  follow  her  as  foon  as  the  Tamar  was  ready,  and 
WtdMf.  13,    ^^p^^jj^  Mouat  had  told  me  that,  the  rudder  having  been 
patched  together  by  the  joint  labour  and  fkill  of  the  carpen- 
ter and  fmith,  he  fhould  be  in  a  condition  to  proceed  with 
me  the  next  morning. 

Thurfday  14.  The  ucxt  momiug  we  accordingly  put  to  fea,  and  a  few 
hours  afterwards  being  abreafl  of  Penguin  Ifland,  we  faw 
the  ftore-fhip  a  long  way  to  the  eaftward. 

Suiwdayis.  On  Saturday  the  i6th,  about  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
we  faw  Cape  Fairweather  bearing  W.  S.  W.  at  the  diftance  of 
five  or  fix  leagues ;  and  at  nine,  we  faw  a  flrange  fail  to  the 
N.W.  Handing  after  us. 

Sundny  17.  On  the  17th,  at  fix  in  the  morning,  Cape  Virgin  Mary 
bearing  fouth,  diftant  five  miles,  we  hauled  in  for  the 
Streight,  and  the  flrange  ftiip  ftill  followed  us. 

Mondav  1 3,  O^  ^^^^  ^S'^^^  we  pafled  the  firfl:  Narrow,  and  as  I  perceived 
the  flrange  lliip  to  have  fhaped  the  fame  courfe  that  we  had, 
from  the  time  fhe  had  firfl  feen  us,  fliortening  or  making 
fail  as  we  did,  flae  became  the  fubjedl  of  much  fpeculation  j 
and  as  I  was  obliged,  after  I  had  got  through  the  firfl  Narrow, 
to  bring  to  for  the  flore-fliip,  which  was  a  great  way  aflern,  I 
imagined  "fhe  would  fpcak  with  us,  and  therefore  I  put  the 
fhip  in  the  befl  order  I  could.  As  foon  as  he  had  pafTed  the 
Narrow,  and  faw  me  lying  to,  he  did  the  fame  about  four 
miles  to  windward  of  me.  hi  this  fituation  we  remained  till 
night  came  on,  and  the  tide  fetting  us  over  to  the  fouth 
fhore,  we  came  to  an  anchor  ;  the  wind  however  fliifted  be- 
fore morning,  and  at  day-break  I  faw  our  fatellite  at  anchor 
about  three  leagues  to  leeward  of  us.  As  it  was  then  tide  of 
flood,  I  thought  of  working  through  the  fecond  Narrow ;. 

but 


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  62 

but  feeing  the  flranger  get  under  way,  and  work  up  towards  1765. 
us,  I  ran  diredlly  over  into  Gregory  Bay,  and  brought  the  ■-  ^  "^'^^'j 
fliip  to  an  anchor,  with  a  fpring  upon  our  cable:  I  alfo  got  ^°^'^^^  '^' 
eight  of  our  guns,  which  were  all  we  could  get  at,  out  of  the 
hold,  and  brought  them  over  on  one  fide.  In  the  mean  time 
the  fhip  continued  to  work  up  towards  us,  and  various  were 
our  conjedtures  about  her,  for  flie  fhowed  no  colours,  nei- 
ther did  we.  It  happened  about  this  time  that  the  llore-lhip, 
as  flie  was  endeavouring  to  come  to  an  anchor  near  us,  ran 
aground;  upon  which  the  flranger  came  to  an  anchor  a  little 
way  aftern,  at  the  fame  time  hoifting  French  colours,  and 
fending  his  launch,  and  another  boat,  with  an  anchor  to 
affift  her.  Still  however  I  fhowed  no  colours,  but  fent  my 
own  boats,  and  a  boat  of  the  Tamar's,  to  affift  the  ftore-fliipj. 
giving  orders  at  the  fame  time  to  the  officers,  not  to  fuffer 
the  French  boats  to  come  on  board  her,  but  to  thank  them 
in  polite  terms  for  the  affiftance  they  intended.  Thefe  or- 
ders were  pun(rtually  obeyed,  and  with  the  affiftance  of  our 
own  boats  only,  the  ftore-fhip  was  foon  after  got  off:  my 
people  reported  that  the  French  fliip  was  full  of  men,  and, 
feemed  to  have  a  great  number  of  officers  on  board. 

At  fix  o'clock  in  the  evening,  I  made  the  fignal  and 
weighed ;  we  worked  through  the  fecond  Narrow,  and  at 
ten  o'clock  paffed  the  weft  end  of  it:  at  eleven,  we  anchored 
in  feven  fathom  off  Elizabeth's  Iftand  ;  and  the  French  ffiip 
at  the  fame  time  anchored  in  a  bad  fituation,  to  the  fouth*. 
ward  of  Saint  Bartholomew's  Ifland,  which  convinced  me 
that  flie  was  not  acquainted  with  the  channel,. 

At  fix  a^clock  the  next  morning,  I  weighed  and  failed  be-  Tuefday  lo,. 
tween  Elizabeth  and  Bartholomew  Iftands,  with  the  wind  at 
N.  W.  and  after  fleering  S.  S.  W.  five  or  fix  miles,  we  croffed: 
a  bank,   where  among  the  weeds  we  had  feven  fathom 

1  water,. 


^2 


COMMODORE   BYRON's    VOYAGE 


1765. 

February. 
Tnefday  19. 


WeJnef.  20. 


Monday  25. 


water.  This  bank  lies  W.  S.  W.  five  or  fix  miles  from  the 
middle  of  George's  Ifland,  and  it  is  faid  in  feme  former  ac- 
counts that  in  many  places  there  is  not  three  fathom  water 
upon  it :  the  danger  here  therefore  is  confiderable,  and  to 
avoid  it,  it  is  neceflary  to  keep  near  Elizabeth's  Ifland  till  the 
weftem  fliore  is  but  at  a  fhort  diftance,  and  then  a  fouthem 
courfe  may  be  fleered  with  great  fafety,  till  the  reef,  which 
lies  about  four  miles  to  the  northward  of  Saint  Anne's  Point, 
is  in  fight.  At  noon  this  day,  the  north  point  of  Frelh  Water 
Bay  bore  W.  by  N, ;  and  Saint  Anne's  Point  S.  by  E.  i  E.  The 
French  fhip  ftill  fleered  after  us,  and  we  imagined  that  fhe 
was  either  from  Falkland's  Iflands,  where  the  French  had 
then  a  fettlement,  to  get  wood,  or  upon  a  furvey  of  the 
Streight.  The  remaining  part  of  this  day,  and  the  next 
morning,  we  had  variable  winds  with  calms  ;  in  the  after- 
noon therefore  I  hoifted  out  the  boats,  and  towed  round 
Saint  Anne's  Point  into  Port  Famine:  at  fix  in  the  evening  we 
anchored,  and  foon  after  the  French  fliip  pafTed  by  us  to  the 
fouthward. 

Here  we  continued  till  Monday  the  25th,  when  both  the 

Dolphin  and  Tamar  having  taken  out  of  the  ftore-fliip  as 

much   provifion   as  they  could   flow,    I    gave   the    Mafter 

of  her,    orders  to  return  to  England  as  foon  as  he  could 

get  ready,  and  with; the  Tamar  failed  from  Port  Famine, 

intending  to  pufh  through  the  Streight  before  the  feafon 

ftiould  be  too  far  advanced.    At  noon,  we  were  three  leagues 

diftant  from  Saint  Anne's  Point,  which  bore  N.  W.  and  three 

or  four  miles  diflant  from  Point  Shutup,  which  bore  S.  S.W. 

Point  Shutup  bears  from  Saint  Anne's  Point  S.  ^E.  by  the 

compafs,  and  they  are  about  four  or  five  leagues  afunder. 

Between  thcfe  two  Points  there  is  a  flat  Ihoal,  which  runs 

from  Port  Famine  before  Scdger  river,  and  three  or  four 

miles  to  the  fouthward. 

We 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  65, 

We  fleered  S.  S.  W.  with  little  wind,  along  the  fliore,  from      1765. 
Point  Shutup  towards  Cape  Forward ;  and  about  three  o'clock   ul-l!!!21f 
in  the  afternoon  we  palled  by  the  French  ftiip,  which  we  ^°'^^^^^^° 
faw  in  a  little  cove,  about  two  leagues  to  the  fouthward  of 
Point  Shutup.     She  had  hauled  her  ftern  clofe  into  the 
woods,  and  we  could  fee  large  piles  of  the  wood  which  fhe 
had  cut  down,  lying  on  each  fide  of  her  ;.  fo  that  I  made  no 
doubt  of  her  having  been  fent  out  to  procure  that  necelTary 
for  their  new  fettlement,  though  1  could  not  conceive  why 
they  fliould  have  come  fo  far  into  the  Streight  for  that  pur- 
pofe.    After  my-return  to  England,  I  learnt  that  this  veflel 
was  the  Eagle,  commanded  by  M.  Bougainville,  and  that 
her  bufinefs  in  the  Streight  was,  as  I  conjetT:ured,  to  cut 
wood,  for  the  French  fettlement  in  Falkland's  Illands.    From 
Cape  Shutup  to  Cape  Forward   the  courfe  by  compafs  is 
S.  W.  by  S. ;  and  the  diflance  is  feven  leagues.     At  eight 
o'clock  in  the  evening,  Cape  Forward  bore  N.  W.  t  W.  and 
was  diftant  about  a  mile,  and  we  brought  to  for  the  night. 
This  part  of  the  Streight  is  about  eight  miles  over,  and  off 
the  Cape  we  had  forty  fathom  within  half  a  cable's  length 
of  the  fliore.    About  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  made  Tuefday  %€, 
fail ;  and  at  eight,  having  had  light  airs  almoft  quite  round 
the  compafs.  Cape  Forward  bore  N.  E.  by  E.  diftant  about 
four  miles  ;  and  Cape  Holland  W.  N.W.  ^  W.  diftant  about 
five  leagues.    At  ten  we  had  frefli  gales  at  W.  N.W.  and  at 
intervals  fudden  fqualls,  fo  violent  as  to  oblige  us  to  clew  all 
up  every  time  they  came  on.    We  kept  however  working  to 
windward,  and  looking  out  for  an  anchoring-place,  endea- 
vouring at  the  fame  time  to  reach  a  bay  about  two  leagues 
to  the  weftward  of  Cape  Forward.    At  five  o'clock  I  fent  a 
boat  with  an  officer  into  this  bay  to  found,  who  finding  it 
fit  for  our  purpofe,  we  entered  it,  and  about  fix  o'clock  an-» 
chored  in  nine  fathom :  Cape  Forward  bore  E.  i  S.  diftant 

five- 


54  COMMODORE    BYRON'S    VOYAGE 

1765.      five  miles ;  a  fmall  iiland  which  lies  in  the  middle  of  the 
^!l^ll!!21.   bay,  and  is  about  a  mile  diilant  from  the  fliore,  W.  by  S, 
Tuefday  26.   j^0g^j^^   about  half  a  mile  ;   and  a  rivulet  of  frefli   water 
N.  W.  by  W.  diilant  three  quarters  of  a  mile. 

Wednef.  27.  At  fix  o'clock  the  next  morning,  w^e  weighed  and  conti- 
nued our  courfe  through  the  Streight :  from  Cape  Holland 
to  Cape  Gallant,  which  are  diilant  about  eight  leagues,  the 
coaft  lies  W.  4  S.  by  the  compafs  :  Cape  Gallant  is  very  high 
and  fteep,  and  between  this  and  Cape  Holland  lies  a  reach 
about  three  leagues  over,  called  Englifh  Reach.  About  five 
miles  fouth  of  Cape  Gallant  lies  a  large  ifland,  called  Charles's 
Ifland,  which  it  is  necefiary  to  keep  to  the  northward  of:  we 
failed  along  the  north  fhore  of  it,  at  about  two  miles  dif- 
tance,  and  fometimes  much  lefs.  A  little  to  the  eaftward  of 
Cape  Holland  is  a  fair  fandy  bay,  called  Wood's  Bay,  in 
which  there  is  good  anchoring.  The  mountains  on  each 
fide  the  Streight  are,  I  think,  higher,  and  of  a  more  defolate 
appearance,  than  any  other  in  the  world  ;  except  perhaps  the 
Cordeliers,  both  being  rude,  craggy,  and  fteep,  and  covered 
with  fnow  from  the  top  to  the  bottom. 

From  Cape  Gallant  to  Pafiage  Point,  which  are  diftant 
about  three  leagues,  the  coaft  lies  W,  by  N.  by  compafs. 
PafTage  Point  is  the  eaft  point  of  Elizabeth's  bay,  and  is  low 
land,  with  a  rock  lying  off  it.  Between  this  and  Cape  Gal- 
lant there  are  feveral  iflands,  fome  of  them  are  very  fmall ; 
"but  the  eaftermoft,  which  is  Charles's  Ifland,  that  has  been 
juft  mentioned,  is  two  leagues  long ;  the  next  is  called  Mon- 
mouth's Ifland,  and  the  weftermofl,  Rupert's  Ifland :  Rupert's 
Ifland  lies  S.  by  E.  of  Point  Pafl!age.  Thefe  iflands  make  the 
Streight  narrow ;  between  Point  Pafl^age  and  Rupert's  Ifland 
it  is  not  more  than  two  miles  over,  and  it  is  neceflfary  to  go 
to  the  northward  of  them  all,  keeping  the  north  fhore  on 

board : 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  6j 

board :  we  failed  within  two  cables'  length  of  it,  and  had  no       *765. 

ground  with  forty  fathom.     At  fix  in  the  evening,  the  wind   > .— -1/ 

fhifted  to  the  weftward,  upon  which  we  flood  in  for  Eliza-  "^  *  ''* 
beth's  Bay,  and  anchored  in  ten  fathom  with  very  good 
ground ;  the  befl  anchoring  however  is  in  thirteen  fathom, 
for  there  was  but  three  or  four  fathom  about  a  cable's  length 
withinr  us.  In  this  Bay  there  is  a  good  rivulet  of  frelh  wa- 
ter. We  found  the  flood  here  fet  very  flrong  to  the  eaftward ; 
and  according  to  our  calculation,  it  flows  at  the  full  and 
change  of  the  moon  about  twelve  o'clock.  We  found  the 
variation  two  points  eafterly. 

At  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  of  Thurfday  the  28th,  the  Thurfdayzg. 
wind  being  between  the  N.  W.  and  W.  with  frefh  gales  and 
fqualls,  we  made  the  fignal  to  weigh,  and  juft  as  we  had  got 
the  fliip  over  the  anchor,  a  violent  guft  brought  it  home ;  the 
ihip  immediately  drove  into  flioal  water,  within  two  cables' 
length  of  the  fliore,  upon  which  we  let  go  the  fmall  bower  in 
four  fathom,  and  had  but  three  fathom  under  our  ftern  :  the 
ftream  anchor  was  carried  out  with  all  poflible  expedition, 
and  by  applying  a  purchafe  to  the  capftern,  the  fliip  was 
drawn  towards  it:  we  then  heaved  up  both  the  bower  an- 
chors, flipt  the  flream  cable,  and  with  the  gibb  and  ftay-fails 
ran  out  into  ten  fathom,  and  anchored  with  the  befl  bower 
exadtly  in  the  fituation  from  which  we  had  been  driven. 

At  five  o'clock  the  next  morning,  the  wind  being  northerly,  March, 
and  the  weather  moderate,  we  weighed  again,  and  at  feven 
paflcd  Mufcle  bay,  which  lies  on  the  fouthern  fliore,  about  a 
league  to  the  weftward  of  Elizabeth's  Bay.  At  eight,  we 
were  abrcaft  of  Bachelor's  River,  which  is  on  the  north  fhore, 
.about  two  leagues  W.  by  N.  from  Elizabeth's  Bay.  At  nine, 
we  pafTed  St.  Jcrom's  Sound,  the  entrance  of  which  is  about 
a  league  from  Bachelor's  River:  when  St.  Jerom's  Sound 

Vol.  I.  K  was 


0  COMMODORE  BYRON's   VOYAGE 

>7^.  was  open,  it  bore  N.  W.  We  then  fteered  W.  S.  W.  by  the 
t_  ^'-,'_/  compafs  for  Cape  Qyod,  which  is  three  leagues  diflant  from 
Friday  i.  ^j^^  fouthermoft  point  of  the  Sound.  Between  EHzabeth 
Bay  and  Cape  Quod,  is  a  reach  about  four  miles  over,  called 
Crooked  Reach.  At  the  entrance  of  Jerom's  Sound,  on  the 
north  fide,  we  faw  three  or  four  fires,  and  foon  afterwards, 
perceived  two  or  three  canoes  paddling  after  us.  At  noon, 
Cape  Quod  bore  W.  S.  W.  t  W.  diftant  four  or  five  miles,  and 
foon  after,  having  light  airs  and  calms,  we  drove  to  the  eaft- 
ward  with  the  flood  tide;  in  the  mean  time  the  canoes  came 
up,  and  after  having  paddled  about  us  forae  time,  one  of  them 
had  the  refolution  to  come  on  board.  The  canoe  was  of 
bark,  very  ill  made,  and  the  people  on  board,  which  were 
four  men,  two  women,  and  a  boy,  were  the  pooreft  wretches 
I  had  ever  feen.  They  were  all  naked,  except  a  ftinking 
feal  fkin  that  was  thrown  loofely  over  their  Ihoulders ;  they 
were  armed,  however,  with  bows  and  arrows,  which  they 
readily  gave  me  in  return  for  a  few  beads,  and  other  trifles. 
The  arrows  were  made  of  a  reed,  and  pointed  with  a  green 
ftone:  they  were  about  two  feet  long,  and  the  bows  were 
three  feet :  the  cord  of  the  bow  was  the  dried  gut  of  fome 
animal.  In  the  evening,  we  anchored  abreaft  of  Bachelor's 
River,  in  fourteen  fathom.  The  entrance  of  the  River  bore 
N.  by  E.  diftant  one  mile,  and  the  northermoft  point  of  Saint 
Jerom's  Sound  W.  N.  W.  diftant  three  miles.  About  three 
quarters  of  a  mile  eaftward  of  Bachelor's  River,  is  a  flioal, 
upon  which  there  is  not  more  than  fix  feet  water  when  the 
tide  is  out :  it  is  diftant  about  half  a  mile  from  the  ihore, 
and  may  be  known  by  the  weeds  that  are  upon  it.  The  tide 
flows  here,  at  the  full  and  change  of  the  moon,  about  one 
o'clock.  Soon  after  we  were  at  anchor,  feveral  Indians  came 
on  board  us,  and  I  made  them  all  prefents  of  beads,  ribands, 
and  other  trifles,  with  which  they  appeared  to  be  greatly 
4  delighted. 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  ^ 

delighted.    This  vifit  I  returned  by  going  on  fhoref  amot>g      1765. 
them,  taking  only  a  few  people  with  me  in  my  jolly  boar,  »     'T  '  ^ 
that  I  might  not  alarm  them  by  numbers.    They  received  us    ^"''^  ^' 
with  great  expreffions  of  kindnefs,  and  to  make  us  welcome, 
they  brought  us  fome  berries  which  they  had  gathered  for 
that  purpofe,  and  which,  with  a  few  mufcles,  feem  to  be  a 
principal  part,  if  not  the  whole  of  their  fubfiftence. 

At  five  o'clock,  in  the  morning  of  the  2d,  we  weighed,  Saturday  e. 
and  towed  with  the  tide,  but  at  ten,  having  no  wind,  and 
finding  that  we  drove  again  to  the  eaftward,  we  anchored, 
with  the  ftream  anchor  in  fifteen  fathom,  upon  a  bank 
which  lies  about  half  a  mile  from  the  north  Ihore:  after 
veering  about  two-thirds  of  a  cable,  we  had  five  and  forty 
fathom  along-fide,  and  ftill  deeper  water  at  a  little  diflance. 
The  fouth  point  of  Saint  Jerom's  Sound  bore  N.  N.  E.  diftant 
two  miles,  and  Cape  Quod  W.  S.  W.  diftant  about  eight  miles. 
From  the  fouth  point  of  Saint  Jerom's  Sound,  to  Cape  Quod, 
is  three  leagues,  in  the  direction  of  S.  W.  by  W.  The  tides 
in  this  Reach  are  exceedingly  flrong,  though  very  irregular  •' 
we  found  them  fet  to  the  eaftward  from  nine  o'clock  in  the 
morning  till  five  o'clock  the  next  morning,  and  the  other 
four  hours,  from  five  to  nine,  they  fet  to  the  weftward.  At 
twelve  o'clock  at  night,  it  began  to  blow  very  hard  at 
W.  N.  W.  and  at  two  in  the  morning,  the  Ihip  drove  off  the  5:undaj  3. 
bank:  we  immediately  hove  the  anchor  up,  and  found  both 
the  flukes  broken  off:  till  three  o'clock  we  had  no  ground, 
and  then  we  drove  into  fixteen  fathom,  at  the  entrance  of 
Saint  Jerom's  Sound;  as  it  ftill  blew  a  ftorni,  we  imme- 
diately let  go  the  beft  bower,  and  veered  to  half  a  cable. 
The  anchor  brought  the  fliip  up  at  fo  critical  a  moment,  that 
we  had  but  five  fathom,  and  even  that  depth  was  among 
breakers.  We  let  go  the  fmall  bower  under  foot,  and  at 
five,  finding  the  tide  fet  to  the  weftward,  and  the  weather 

K  2  more 


,68 


COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 


1765. 

March. 
Sunday  3. 


Monday  4. 


Taefday  5. 


more  moderate,  we  got  up  both  the  anchors,  and  kept 
working  to  windward.  At  ten,  we  found  the  tide  fetting 
again  ftrongly  to  the  eaftward,  and  we  therefore  fent  the 
boat  back  to  feek  for  an  anchoring-place,  which  Ihe  found 
in  a  bay  on  the  north  fhore,  about  four  miles  to  the  eaftward 
of  Cape  Quod,  and  a  Httle  way  within  fome  fmall  illands: 
we  endeavoured  to  get  into  this  bay,  but  the  tide  rufhed  out 
of  it  with  fuch  violence,  that  we  found  it  impoffible,  and  at 
noon,  bore  away  for  York  Road,  at  the  entrance  of  Bache- 
lor's River,  where  we  anchored  about  an  hour  afterwards. 

At  fix  o'clock  the  next  morning,  we  weighed,  and  worked 
with  the  tide,  which  fet  the  fame  as  the  day  before,  but  we 
could  not  gain  an  anchoring-place,  fo  that  at  noon  we  bore 
away  for  York  Road  again.  I  took  this  opportunity  to  go  up 
Bachelor's  River  in  my  jolly  boat,  as  high  as  I  could,  which 
was  about  four  miles :  in  fome  places  I  found  it  very  wide 
and  deep,  and  the  water  was  good,  but  near  the  mouth  it  is 
fo  fhallow  at  low  water,  that  even  a  fmall  boat  cannot  get 
into  it. 

At  fix  o'clock  on  the  j'th,  we  weighed  again,  and  at  eight, 
it  being  ftark  calm,  we  fent  the  boats  a-head  to  tow;  at 
eleven,  however,  the  tide  fet  fo  ftrong  from  the  weftward, 
that  we  could  not  gain  the  bay  on  the  north  fliore,  which 
the  boat  had  found  for  us  on  the  4th,  and  which  was  an  ex- 
cellent harbour,  fit  to  receive  five  or  fix  fail :  we  were  there- 
fore obliged  to  anchor  upon  a  bank,  in  forty- five  fathom, 
with  the  ftream  anchor,  Cape  Quod  bearing  W.S.  W.  diftant 
five  or  fix  miles,  the  fouth  point  of  the  ifland  that  lies  to  the 
eaft  of  the  Cape,  being  jufl:  in  one  with  the  pitch  of  it,  and  a 
remarkable  ftone  patch  on  the  north  fhore  bearing  N.  t  W. 
diftant  half  a  mile.  Clofe  to  the  fliore  here,  the  depth  of 
water  was  feventy-five  fathom.  As  foon  as  we  were  at  an- 
chor. 


ROUNDTHE    WORLD.  6q 

chor,  I  fent  an  officer  to  the  weftward  to  look  out  for  a  har-      ^l(>5- 

N-arch, 

bour,  but  he  did  not  fucceed.    It  was  calm  the  reft  of  the  « ^-^. 

day,  and  all  night,  the  tide  fetting  to  the  eaftward  from  the     "'  ^^  ^* 
time  we  anchored  till  fix  o'clock  the  next  morning,  when  wednef.  6. 
we  weighed,  and  were  towed  by  the  boats  to  the  weftward. 
At  eight,  a  frefh  breeze  fprung  up  at  W.  S.  W.  and  W.  and  at 
noon,  Cape  Quod  bore  E.  by  S.  at  the  diftance  of  about  five 
miles.     In  this  fituation  I  fent  the  boats  out  again  to  look 
for  an  anchoring-place,  and  about  noon,  by  their  direcflion, 
we  anchored  in  a  little  bay  on  the  fouth  fliore,  oppofite  to 
Cape  Quod,    in  five  and  twenty  fathom,   with  very  good 
ground.    A  fmall  rocky  ifland  bore  W.  by  N.  at  the  diftance 
of  about  two  cables'  length,  the  eaftermoft  point  E.  t  S.  and 
Cape  Quod  N.  E.  by  N.  diftant  about  three  miles :   in  this 
place  we  had  fhell-fifli  of  various  kinds  in  great  plenty.  The 
Tamar,  not  being  able  to  work  up  to  us,  anchored  about 
two  o'clock  in  the  bay  on  the  north  fhore,  about  fix  miles  to 
the  eaftward  of  Cape  Quod,  which  has  been  mentioned  al- 
ready.     During  the  night,  it  was  ftark  calm,   but  in  the 
morning,    having  little  airs  of  wind  wefterly,    I  weighed  Thurfday^^ 
about  eight  o'clock,  and  worked  with  the  tide.    At  noon. 
Cape  Quod   bore  E.  by  S.   diftant  between  two  and  three 
leagues,  and  Cape  Monday,  which  is  the  weftermoft  land 
in  fight  on  the  fouth  fliore,  W.  by  N.  diftant  about  ten  or 
eleven  leagues.    This  part  of  the  Streight  lies  \V.  N.  W.  7  W. 
by  the  compafs,  and  is  but  four  miles  over;  fo  that  the 
craggy  mountains  wliich  bound  it  on  each  fide,  towering 
above  the  clouds,  and  covered  with  everlafting  fnow,  give  it 
the  moft  dreary  and  defolate  appearance  that  can  be  ima- 
gined.    The  tides  here  are  not  very  ftrong ;  the  ebb  fets  to 
the  weftward,  but  with  an  irregularity  for  which  it  is  very 
difficult  to  account.    About  one  o'clock,  the  Tamar  anchored 
in  the  bay  on  the  fouih  fliore,  oppofite  to  Cape  Quod,  which 

we 


70  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

176?.      we  had  juft  left,  and  we  Gontinued  working  to  windward 

I !!_1j  till  feven  in  the  evening,  when  we  anchored  in  a  fmall  bay 

Thurfday  7.  ^^  ^j^^  nortli  fliore,  about  five  leagues  to  the  weftward  of 
Gape  Quod,  with  very  good  ground.  This  bay  may  be 
'  known  by  two  large  rocks  that  appear  above  water,  and  a 
low  point  which  makes  the  eaft  part  of  the  bay.  The  an- 
choring-place  is  between  the  two  rocks,  the  eaftermoft  bear- 
ing N.  E.  7  E.  diftant  about  two  cables'  length,  and  the 
weflermoll,  which  is  near  the  point,  W.  N.  W.  t  W,  at  about 
the  fame  diftance :  there  is  alfo  a  fmall  rock  which  fhows 
itfelf  among  the  weeds  at  low  water,  and  bears  E.  7  N. 
diftant  about  two  cables'  length.  If  there  are  more  fliips 
than  one,  they  may  anchor  farther  out  in  deeper  water. 
During  the  night  it  was  calm,  and  the  weather  became  very 
Friday  8.  foggy  ;  but  about  ten  in  the  morning  it  cleared  up,  and  I 
went  on  fliore.  I  found  abundance  of  fliell-fifli,  but  faw  no 
traces  of  people.  In  the  afternoon,  while  the  people  were 
filling  water,  I  went  up  a  deep  lagoon,  which  lies  juft  round 
the  weftermoft  rock :  at  the  head  of  it  I  found  a  very  fine  fall 
of  water,  and  on  the  eaft  fide  feveral  little  coves,  where  fliips 
©f  the  greateft  draught  may  lie  in  perfeifl  fecurity.  We  faw 
nothing  elfe  worthy  of  notice,  and  therefore,  having  filled 
our  boat  with  very  large  mufcles,  we  returned. 

Saturday  9.  At  fcvcn  o'clock  the  next  morning,  we  weighed  and  towed 
out  of  the  bay,  and  at  eight,  faw  the  Tamar  very  far  aftern, 
fleering  after  us.  At  noon,  we  had  little  wind  at  E.  N.  E.  but 
at  five  o'clock,  it  fliifted  to  W.  N.  W.  and  blew  frefli.  At  fix, 
we  were  abrealt  of  Cape  Monday,  and  at  fix  the  next  morn- 
Sunday  10.  ing.  Cape  Upright  bore  E.  by  S.  diftant  three  leagues.  From 
Cape  Monday  to  Cape  Upriglit,  which  are  both  on  the  fouth 
fliore,  and  diftant  from  each  other  about  five  leagues,  the 
courfe  is  W.  by  N.  by  the  compafs :  the  fliore  on  each  fide  is 
rocky,  with  broken  ground.    At  about  half  an  hour  after 

feven, 


HOTJND    THE   WORLD.  ft 

feven,  we  had  a  very  hard  fquall,  and  the  weather  being      1765- 

then  exceedingly  thick,    we  fuddenly  perceived  a  reef  of  > Lj 

rocks  clofe  under  our  lee  bow,  upon  which  the  fea  broke  ""  ^^  *°* 
very  high :  we  had  but  juft  time  to  tack  clear  of  them,  and 
if  the  Ihip  had  mifTed  Hays,  every  foul  on  board  mull  in- 
evitably have  perifhed.  Thefe  rocks  lie  at  a  great  diftance 
from  the  fouth  fliore,  and  are  about  three  leagues  to  the 
north  of  Cape  Upright.  At  nine,  the  weather  cleared  a 
little,  and  we  faw  the  entrance  of  Long  Reach,  upon  which 
we  bore  away,  keeping  neareft  the  fouth  fliore,  in  hopes  of 
finding  an  anchoring-place.  At  ten,  we  had  ftrong  gales  and 
thick  weather,  with  hard  rain,  and  at  noon,  we  were  again 
abreaft  of  Cape  Monday,  but  could  find  no  anchoring-place> 
which,  however,  we  continued  to  feek,  fiill  fleering  along 
the  fouth  fhore,  and  were  foon  after  joined  by  the  Tamar, 
who  had  been  fix  or  feven  leagues  to  the  eaflward  of  us  all 
night.  At  fix  in  the  evening,  we  anchored  in  a  deep  bay, 
about  three  leagues  to  the  eaftward  of  Cape  Monday:  we  let 
go  the  anchor  in  five  and  twenty  fathom,  near  an  ifland  in 
the  bottom  of  the  bay ;  but  before  we  could  bring  up  the 
Ihip,  we  were  driven  off,  and  the  anchor  took  the  ground  in 
about  fifty  fathom.  The  extream  points  of  the  bay  bore 
from  N.  W.  to  N,  E.  by  E.  and  the  ifland  W.  7  S. :  we  veered 
to  a  whole  cable,  and  the  anchor  was  about  a  cable's  length 
from  the  neareft  fliore.  In  the  night,  we  had  frefli  gales 
wefterly,  with  fudden  fqualls  and  hard  rain ;  but  in  the 
morning,  the  weather  became  more  moderate,  though  it  Monday  u, 
was  ftill  thick,  and  the  rain  continued.  As  a  great  fwell  fet 
into  this  place,  and  broke  very  high  upon  the  rocks,  near 
which  we  lay,  I  got  up  the  anchor,  and  warped  the  fliip  to 
a  bank  where  the  Tamar  was  riding :  we  let  go  our  anchor 
in  fourteen  fathom,  and  moored  with  the  ftream  anchor  to 
the  eailwardi  in  forty-five  fathom.    In  the  bottom  of  thi& 

bay 


75  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

i?^?'      bay  there  is  a  bafon,  at  the  entrance  of  which  there  is  but 
t_ — .— _;  three  fathom  and  an  half  at  low  water,  but  within  there  is 
'°"  ^^ '  ■    ten  fathom,  and  room  enough  for  fix  or  feven  fail  to  lie 
where  no  wind  can  hurt  them. 

We  continued  here  till  Friday  the  15th,  and  during  all  that 
time  had  one  continued  ftorm,  with  impenetrable  fogs,  and 
Tnefday  12.  inccfTant  rain.  On  the  12th,  I  fent  out  the  boat,  with  an 
officer,  to  look  for  harbours  on  the  fouthern  flrore:  the  boat 
Thurfday  14.  was  abfcnt  till  the  14th,  and  then  returned,  with  an  account 
that  there  were  five  bays  between  the  fhip's  ftation  and  Cape 
Upright,  where  we  might  anchor  in  great  fafety.  The  offi- 
cer told  me,  that  near  Cape  Upright  he  had  fallen  in  with  a 
few  Indians,  who  had  given  him  a  dog,  and  that  one  of  the 
women  had  offered  him  a  child  which  was  fucking  at  her 
breaft.  It  is  fcarcely  necelTary  to  fay  that  he  refufed  it,  but 
the  offer  feems  to  degrade  thefe  poor  forlorn  favages  more 
than  any  thing  in  their  appearance  or  manner  of  life:  it 
muft  be  a  ftrange  depravity  of  nature  that  leaves  them  defti- 
tute  of  affetftion  for  their  offspring,  or  a  moft  deplorable 
fituation  that  imprefles  neceffitics  upon  them  by  which  it  is 
furmounted.  Some  hills,  which,  when  we  firft  came  to  this 
place,  had  no  fnow  upon  them,  were  now  covered,  and  the 
winter  of  this  dreary  and  inhofpitable  region  feemed  to  have 
fet  in  at  once :  the  poor  feamen  not  only  fuffered  much  by 
the  cold,  but  had  fcarcely  ever  a  dry  thread  about  them :  I 
therefore  diftributed  among  the  crews  of  both  the  fhips,  not 
excepting  the  officers,  two  bales  of  a  thick  woollen  fluff, 
called  Fearnought,  which  is  provided  by  the  government, 
fo  that  every  body  on  board  had  now  a  warm  jacket,  which 
at  this  time  was  found  both  comfortable  and  falutary. 

FriJay  15.         At  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  15th,  we  weighed 
and  made  fail,  and  at  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  were 

once 


ROUND    THE    WORLD,  73 

once  more  abreaft  of  Cape  Monday,  and  at  five,  we  anchored       1765. 
in  a  bay  on  the  eail  fide  of  it.    The  pitch  of  the  Cape  bore  . 

N.  W.  diftant  half  a  mile,  and  the  extream  points  of  the  bay  ^"^^^  ''^" 
from  E.  toN.byW.     We  lay  at  about  half  a  cable's  length 
from  the  neareft  fliore,  which  was  a  low  ifland  between  the 
Ihip  and  the  Cape. 

At  fix  o'clock  the  nest  morning,  we  weighed,  and  found  Saturday  i6. 
that  the  palm  was  gone  from  the  fmall  bower  anchor.  The 
wind  was  at  W.  N.  W.  with  hard  rain :  at  eight  o'clock,  we 
found  a  ftrong  current  fetting  us  to  the  eailward,  and  at 
noon,  Cape  Monday  boreW.  N.  W.  diftant  two  miles.  The 
Tamar  being  to  windward  of  us,  fetched  into  the  bay,  and 
anchored  again.  We  continued  to  lofe  ground  upon  every 
tack,  and  therefore,  at  two  o'clock,  anchored  upon  the 
fouthern  fliore  in  fixteen  fathom,  about  five  miles  to  the  eaft- 
ward  of  Cape  Monday.  At  three,  however,  I  weighed  again, 
for  the  boat  having  founded  round  the  fliip,  found  the 
ground  rocky.  The  wind  was  N.  W.  with  hard  rain,  and 
we  continued  working  all  the  reft  of  the  day,  and  all  night, 
every  man  on  board  being  upon  deck  the  whole  time,  and 
every  one  wet  to  the  fkin,  for  the  rain,  or  rather  flieets  of 
water  that  came  down,  did  not  ceafe  a  moment. 

In  the  morning,  we  had  again  the  mortification  to  find  Sunday  i* 
that,  notwithftanding  all  our  labour,  we  had  loli  ground 
upon  every  tack,  in  confequence  of  the  current,  which  con- 
tinued to  fet  with  great  force  to  the  eaftward.  At  eight 
o'clock,  we  bore  away,  and  at  nine,  anchored  in  the  fame 
bay  from  which  we  failed  on  the  15th. 

The  wind  continued  W.  and  W.  N.  W.  without  any  tide  to 
the  weftward,  all  the  i8th  and  19th,  and  the  weather  was  Monday  iS. 
exceedingly  bad,  with  hard  fqualls  and  heavy  rain.     In  the  '^"^''^^y  '9- 
mean  time  I  liad  fent  an  officer  with  a  boat  to  found  a  bay 

Vol.  I.  L  on 


74  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765-      on  the  north  fliore,  but  he  found  no  anchorage  in  it.    On  the- 

March,  " 

« . — -^    20th,  at  fix  o'clock  in  the  mornine,  a  hard  fquall  comin? 

Wednef.  zr.  ^  ° 

on,  the  ihip  drove,  and  brought  the  anchor  off  the  bank  into 
forty  fathom,  but  by  heaving  up  the  bower,  and  carrying 
out  the  kedge  anchor,  we  got  the  fliip  on  the  bank  again. 

Thurfdayzi.  At  eight,  the  day  following,  though  the  wind  was  from 
W.  N.  W.  to  S.  W.  we  weighed,  and  once  more  flood  out  of 
the  bay ;  the  current  flill  fet  very  flrongly  to  the  eaflward, 
but  at  noon,  we  found  that  we  had  gained  about  a  mile  and 
a  half  in  a  contrary  direction.  The  wind  now  became  vari- 
able, from  S.  W.  to  N.  W.  and  at  five  in  the  afternoon,  the 
ihip  had  gained  about  four  miles  to  the  weftward ;  but  not 
being  able  to  find  an  anchoring-place,  and  the  wind  dying 
away,  we  drove  again  very  faft  to  the  eaft ward  with  the  cur-^ 
rent.  At  fix,  however,  we  anchored  in  forty  fathom,  with 
very  good  ground,  in  a  bay  about  two  miles  to  the  vveflward 
of  that  from  which  we  failed  in  the  morning.  A  fwell  rolled 
in  here  all  night,  fo  that  our  fituation  was  by  no  means  de- 
firable,  and  therefore,  although  the  wind  was  ftill  at 
W.S.  W.  we  weighed  and  made  fail  about  eight  o'clock  the 

Iriday22.  next  day  :  we  had  flill  incefTant  rain,  fo  that  the  people  were 
continually  wet,  which  was  a  great  aggravation  of  their  fa- 
tigue ;  yet  they  were  ilill  cheerful,  and,  what  was  yet  lefs. 
to  be  expected,  flill  healthy.  This  day,  to  our  great  joy,  we 
found  the  current  fetting  to  the  w^eflward,  and  we  gained 
ground  very  faft.  At  fix  in  the  evenings  we  anchored  in  the 
bay  on  the  eaft  fide  of  Cape  Monday,  where  the  Tamar  lay 
in  eighteen  fathom,  the  pitch  of  the  Cape  bearing  W.  by  N^ 
diftant  half  a  mile.  We  found  this  place  very  fafe,  the 
ground  being  excellent,  and  there  being  room  enough  for 
two  or  three  Ihips  of  the  line  to  moor* 


CHAP. 


ROUND    THE    WORLD, 


CHAP.      VII. 

The  Pajjage  from  Cape  Monday y  in  the  Streigbt  of  Ma- 
gellan^  into  the  South  Seas ;  with  fome  general  Remarks 
on  the  Navigation  of  that  Streight, 


75 


A 


T  eight  the  next  morning  we  weighed,  and  foon  after       1765, 


March. 


we  made  fail  opened  the  South  Sea,  from  which  fuch 
a  fwell  rolled  in  upon  us  as  I  have  feldom  feen.  At  four  ^*'"^'^*y  ^3. 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  anchored  in  a  very  good  bay, 
with  a  deep  found  at  the  bottom,  by  which  it  may  be 
known,  about  a  league  to  the  eaftward  of  Cape  Upright,  in 
fourteen  fathom.  The  extream  point  of  the  bay  bore  from 
N.  W.  to  N.  E.  by  E.  and  Cape  Upright  W.  N.  W.  about  a 
cable's  length  to  the  eaftward  of  a  low  ifland  which  makes 
the  bay. 

At  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  24th,  I  fent  a  boat,  Sunday  24; 
with  an  officer  from  each  fhip,  to  look  for  anchoring-places 
to  the  weftward ;  but  at  four  in  the  afternoon  they  returned, 
without  having  been  able  to  get  round  Cape  Upright. 

The  next  morning  I  fent  the  boats  again  to  the  weftward,  Monda  2 
and  about  fix  in  the  evening  they  returned,  having  been 
about  fous^  leagues,  and  found  two  anchoring-places,  but 
neither  of  them  were  very  good.  We  made  fail,  however, 
about  eight  in  the  forenoon  of  the  next  day,  and  at  tliree  TaMny  z&s, 
Cape  Upright  bore  E.  S.  E.  diftant  about  three  leagues,  a  re- 
markable cape  on  the  north  fhore  at  the  fame  time  bearing 
N.  E.  diftant  four  or  five  miles.  This  cape,  which  is  very 
lofty  and  fteep,  lies  N.  N.  W.  by  compafs  from  Cape  Upright, 

La  ac 


76  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 


1765.  at  the  diftance  of  about  three  leagues.  The  fouth  fhore  in 
._'T''  '  this  place  had  a  very  bad  appearance,  many  funken  rocks 
Tuefday  26.  jyjj^g  about  it  to  a  confidcrable  diftance,  upon  •which  the  fea 
breaks  very  high.  At  four  the  weather  became  very  thick, 
and  in  lefs  than  half  an  hour  we  faw  the  fouth  fliore  at  the 
diftance  of  about  a  mile,  but  could  get  no  anchoring-place  ; 
we  therefore  tacked,  and  flood  over  to  the  north  fliore.  Ac 
half  an  hour  after  fix  I  made  the  Tamar's  fignal  to  come 
under  our  ftern,  and  ordered  her  to  keep  ahead  of  us  all 
night,  and  to  fhow  lights,  and  fire  a  gun  every  time  fhe 
changed  her  tack.  At  feven,  it  cleared  up  for  a  moment 
juft  to  fliow  us  the  north  fliore,  bearing  W.  by  N. ;  we  tacked 
immediately,  and  at  eight  the  wind  fhifted  from  N.  N.  W.  to 
W.N.W.  and  blew  with  great  violence.  Our  fituation  was 
now  very  alarming ;  the  ftorm  increafed  every  minute,  the 
weather  was  extremely  thick,  the  rain  feemed  to  threaten 
another  deluge,  we  had  a  long  dark  night  before  us,  we 
were  in  a  narrow  channel,  and  furrounded  on  every  fide  by 
rocks  and  breakers.  We  attempted  to  clew  up  the  mizen- 
topfail,  but  before  this  fervice  could  be  done  it  was  blown 
all  to  rags :  we  then  brought  to,  with  the  main  and  fore-top- 
fail  clofe  reefed,  and  upon  the  cap,  keeping  the  fliip's  head 
to  the  fouth  weft ;  but  there  being  a  prodigious  fea,  it  broke 
over  us  fo  often  that  the  whole  deck  was  almoft  continually 
under  water.  At  nine,  by  an  accidental  breaking  of  the  fog^ 
we  faw  the  high  Cape  on  the  north  fliore  that  has  been  juft 
mentioned,  bearing  eaft,  at  about  a  mile  diftance,  but  had 
entirely  loft  fight  of  the  Tamar.  At  half  an  hour  after  three 
Wfdnef.  27.  ill  ^^^^  morning,  we  fuddenly  perceived  ourfelves  clofe  to  a 
high  land  on  the  fouth  fliore,  upon  which  we  wore,  and 
brought  to  to  the  northward.  The  gale  ftill  continued,  if 
poffible,  with  increafing  violence,  and  the  rain  poured  down 
in  torrents,  fo  that  we  were,  in  a  manner,  immcrfed  in  wa- 
ter, 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  y; 

ter,  and  expetSled  every  moment  to  be  among  the  breakers.  1765. 
;  The  long  wifhed-for  day  at  length  broke,  but  the  weather  ■  ^^T^'  ■ 
was  Hill  fo  thick  that  no  land  was  to  be  feen,  though  we  ^^'^"^^-  ^^• 
knew  it  could  not  be  far  diftant,  till  after  fix,  when  we  faw 
the  fouth  fhore  at  about  the  diflance  of  two  miles ;  and  foOn 
after,  to  our  great  fatisfadtion,  we  faw  the  Tamar :  at  this 
time  Cape  Monday  bore  S.E.  diftant  about  four  miles,  and 
the  violence  of  the  gale  not  abating,  we  bore  away.  About 
feven,  both  dips  came  to  an  anchor  in  the  bay  which  lies  to 
the  eaftward  of  Cape  Monday,  notwithftanding  the  fea  that 
rolled  in  ;  for  we  were  glad  to  get  anchorage  any  where. 
We  had  now  been  twice  within  four  leagues  of  Tuefday's 
Bay,  at  the  weftern  entrance  of  the  Streight,  and  had  been 
twice  driven  back  ten  or  twelve  leagues  by  fuch  ftorms  as 
we  had  now  juft  experienced.  When  the  feafon  is  fo  far  ad- 
vanced as  it  was  when  we  attempted  the  pafTage  of  this 
Streight,  it  is  a  moft  difficult  and  dangerous  undertaking,  as. 
it  blows  a  hurricane  inceflantly  night  and  day,  and  the  rain 
is  as  violent  and  conftant  as  the  wind,  with  fuch  fogs  as 
often  render  it  impoffible  to  difcover  any  objedt  at  the  dif- 
tance  of  twice  the  fhip's  length.  This  day  our  beft  bower 
cable  being  quite  rubbed  to  pieces,  we  cut  it  into  junk,  and 
bent  a  new  one,  which  we  rounded  with  old  rigging  eight 
fathom  from  the  anchor. 

In  the  afternoon  of  the  day  following,  the  Tamar  parted  Thurfdayzs. 
a  new  beft  bower  cable,  it  being  cut  by  the  rock,  and  drove 
over  to  the  eaft  fide  of  the  bay,  where  (hQ  was  brought  up  at 
a  very  little  diftance  from  fome  rocks,   againft  which  ilie 
muft  otherwife  have  been  dallied  to  pieces. 

At  feven  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  29th,  we  weighed  FHday  zg,. 
and  found  our  fmall  bower  cable  very  much  rubbed  by  the 
foul  ground,  fo  that  we  were  obliged  to  cut  no  lefs  than  fix 

2  and 


7?  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765,  and  twenty  fathom  of  it  off,  and  bend  it  again.  In  about 
^_  -^.'^--  '_.  half  an  hour,  the  Tamar,  being  very  near  the  rocks,  and 
"  ^^  ^^'  not  being  able  to  purchafe  her  anchor,  made  fignals  of  dif- 
trefs.  I  was  therefore  obliged  to  ftand  into  the  bay  again, 
and  having  anchored,  I  fcnt  hawfers  on  board  the  Tamar, 
and  heaved  her  up  while  fhe  purchafed  her  anchor,  after 
which  we  heaved  her  to  windward,  and  at  noon,  being  got 
into  a  proper  birth,  flie  anchored  again.  We  continued  in 
Saturday  30.  our  ftatiou  all  night,  and  the  next  morning  a  gale  came  on 
at  W.  N.W.  which  was  Hill  more  violent  than  any  that  had 
preceded  it ;  the  water  was  torn  up  all  round  us,  and  carried 
much  higher  than  the  mafts  heads,  a  dreadful  fea  at  the 
fame  time  rolling  in ;  fo  that,  knowing  the  ground  to  be 
foul,  we  were  in  conftant  apprehenfion  of  parting  our  cables, 
in  which  cafe  we  mull  have  been  almoft  inflantly  daflied  to 
atoms  againft  the  rocks  that  were  jufl:  to  leeward  of  us,  and 
upon  which  the  fea  broke  with  inconceivable  fury,  and  a 
noife  not  lefs  loud  than  thunder.  We  lowered  all  the  main 
and  fore  yards,  let  go  the  fraall  bower,  veered  a  cable  and 
an  half  on  the  beft  bower,  and  having  bent  the  flieet  cable, 
flood  by  the  anchor  all  the  reft  of  the  day,  and  till  midnight, 
the  fea  often  breaking  half-way  up  our  main  fhrouds.  About 
Sunday  31.  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  moming,  the  weather  became  fomewhat  more 
moderate,  but  continued  to  be  very  dark,  rainy,  and  tempef- 
tuous,  till  midnight,  when  the  wind  fliifted  to  the  S.  W.  and 
foon  afterwards  it  became  comparatively  calm  and  clear. 

April.  The  next  Hiorning,  which  was  the  firft  of  April,  we  had  a 

Monday  I.  ^^^^  Calm,  with  now  and  then  fome  light  airs  from  the 
eaftward  ;  but  the  weather  was  again  thick  with  hard  rain, 
and  we  found  a  current  fetting  ftrongly  to  the  eaftward.  At 
four  o'clock  we  got  up  the  lower  yards,  unbent  the  fheet 
cable,  and  weighed  the  fmall  bower ;  at  eight  we  weighed 
4  the 


n 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 

the  befl  bower,  and  found  the  cable  very  much  rubbed  in       1765. 
feveral  places,  which  we  conlidered  as  a  great  misfortune,    \.J^I!^1^ 
it  being  a  fine  new  cable,  which  never  had  been  wet  before.  ^""'^^^  '* 
At  eleven,  we  hove  fhort  on  the  ftream  anchor ;  but  foon 
after,  it  being  calm,  and  a  thick  fog  coming  on  with  hard 
rain,  we  veered  away  the  flream  cable,  and  with  a  warp  to 
the  Tamar,  heaved  the  jQiip  upon  the  bank  again,  and  let  go 
the  fmall  bower  in  two  and  twenty  fathom. 

At  fix  in  the  evening,  we  had  ftrong  gales  at  W.  N.  W. 
with  violent  fqualls  and  much  rain,  and  continued  in  our 
ftation  till  the  morning  of  the  3d,  when  I  fent  the  Tamar's  wednef.  3.. 
boat,  with  an  officer  from  each  fliip,  to  the  weftward,  in 
fearch  of  anchoring-places  on  the  fouth  fliore ;  and  at  the 
fame  time  I  fent  my  own  cutter  with  an  offi^cer  to  fcek  an- 
choring-places on  the  north  fliore. 

The  cutter  returned  the  next  morning  at  fix  o'clock,  hav-  Thurfday^^ 
ing  been  about  five  leagues  to  the  weftward  upon  the  north 
fliore,  and  found  two  anchoring-places.  7  he  officer  reported,. 
that  having  been  on  fhore,  he  had  fallen  in  with  fome  hi- 
dians,  who  had  with  them  a  canoe  of  a  conftrudion  verv 
difl^erent  from  any  that  they  had  feen  in  the  Streight  before; 
this  vefiTel  confifted  of  planks  fewed  together,  but  all  the 
others  were  nothing  more  than  the  bark  of  large  trees,  tied 
together  at  the  ends,  and  kept  open  by  fliort  pieces  of  wood,. 
which  were  thruft  in  tranfverfely  between  the  two  fides,  like 
the  boats  which  children  make  of  a  bean  fliell.  The  people,. 
he  faid,  were  the  neareft  to  brutes  in  their  manner  and  ap- 
pearance of  any  he  had  feen :  they  were,  like  fome  which 
we  had  met  with  before,  quite  naked,  notwithflanding  rhe 
feverity  of  the  weather,  except  part  of  a  feal  fkin  which 
was  thrown  over  their  fhoulders  ;  and  they  eat  their  food,, 
which  was  fuch  as  no  other  animal  but  a  hog  would  touch,. 

witliout 


So  COMMODORE    BYRON's   VOYAGE 

1765.      without  any  drefling :  they  had  with  them  a  large  piece  of 

I !ZJ_->  whale  blubber,  which  Hunk  intolerably,  and  one  of  them 

ui"  374.  j.^^,^  ^^  ^^  pieces  with  his  teeth,  and  gave  it  about  to  the  reft, 
who  devoured  it  with  the  voracity  of  a  wild  beaft.  They 
did  not  however  look  upon  what  they  faw  in  the  pofleffion 
of  our  people  with  indifference  ;  for  while  one  of  them  was 
afleep,  they  cut  off  the  hinder  part  of  his  jacket  with  a  fharp 
flint  which  they  ufe  as  a  knife. 

About  eight  o'clock,  we  made  fail,  and  found  little  or  no 
current.  At  noon,  Cape  Upright  bore  W.  S.W.  diftant  three 
leagues  ;  and  at  fix  in  the  evening,  we  anchored  in  the  bay, 
on  the  fouthern  fliore,  which  lies  about  a  league  to  the  eaft- 
ward  of  the  Cape,  and  had  fifteen  fathom  water. 

While  we  were  lying  here,  and  taking  in  wood  and  water, 
feven  or  eight  Indians  in  a  canoe  came  round  the  wellern 
point  of  the  bay,  and  having  landed  oppofite  to  the  fliip, 
made  a  fire.  We  invited  them  to  come  on  board  by  all  the 
figns  we  could  devife,  but  without  fuccefs  ;  I  therefore  took 
the  jolly  boat,  and  went  on  fliore  to  them.  I  introduced 
myfelf  by  making  them  prefents  of  fcveral  trifles,  with 
which  they  feemed  to  be  much  gratified,  and  we  became 
very  intimate  in  a  few  minutes :  after  we  had  fpent  fome 
time  together,  I  fent  away  my  people,  in  the  boat,  for  fome 
bread,  and  remained  on  fhore  with  them  alone.  When  the 
boat  returned  with  the  bread,  I  divided  it  among  them,  and 
I  remarked  with  equal  pleafure  and  furprife,  that  if  a  bit  of 
the  bifcuit  happened  to  fall,  not  one  of  them  offered  to 
touch  it  till  I  gave  my  confent.  hi  the  mean  time  fome  of 
my  people  were  cutting  a  little  grafs  for  two  or  three  fliccp 
which  I  had  flill  left  on  board,  and  at  length  the  Indians 
perceiving  what  they  were  doing,  ran  immediately,  and 
tearing  up  all  the  weeds  they  could  get,  carried  them  to  the 

boat, 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  8 

boat,  which  in  a  very  fliort  time  was  filled  almoft  up  to  her  1765. 
gunwale.  I  was  much  gratified  by  this  token  of  their  good-  c__^!1Lj 
will,  and  I  could  perceive  that  they  were  pleafed  with  the  '^''"''^^y*- 
pleafure  that  I  exprefied  upon  the  occafion  :  they  had  indeed 
taken  fuch  a  fancy  to  us,  that  when  I  returned  on  board  the 
boat,  they  all  got  into  their  canoe,  and  followed  me.  When 
we  came  near  the  fhip,  however,  they  flopped,  and  gazed  at 
her  as  if  held  in  furprife  by  a  mixture  of  aftonifhment  and 
terror;  but  at  laft,  though  not  without  fome  difficulty,  I  pre- 
vailed upon  four  or  five  of  them  to  venture  on  board.  As 
foon  as  they  entered  the  fhip  I  made  them  feveral  prefents, 
and  in  a  very  little  time  they  appeared  to  be  perfe(5tly  at 
eafe.  As  I  was  very  defirous  to  entertain  them,  one  of  the 
midfhipmen  played  upon  the  violin,  and  fome  of  my  people 
danced  ;  at  this  they  were  fo  much  delighted,  and  fo  impa- 
tient to  fhow  their  gratitude,  that  one  of  them  went  over  the 
fliip's  fide  into  the  canoe,  and  fetched  up  a  feal  fkin  bag  of 
red  paint,  and  immediately  fmeared  the  fiddler's  face  all 
over  with  it :  he  was  very  defirous  to  pay  me  the  fame  com- 
pliment, which  however  I  thought  fit  to  decline ;  but  he 
made  many  very  vigorous  effi)rts  to  get  the  better  of  my  mo- 
defty,  and  it  was  not  without  fome  difficulty  that  I  defended 
myfelf  from  receiving  the  honour  he  defigned  me  in  my  own 
defpight.  After  having  diverted  and  entertained  them  feve- 
ral hours,  I  intimated  that  it  would  be  proper  for  them  to  go 
on  fhore  ;  but  their  attachment  was  i'uch,  that  it  was  by  no 
means  an  eafy  matter  to  get  them  out  of  the  fliip.  Their 
canoe  was  not  of  bark,  but  of  planks  fewed  together. 

On  Sunday  the  7th,   at  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  Simda'- 
weighed,  with  a  moderate  breeze  at  E.  N.  E.  and  fine  wea- 
ther.   At  feven,  we  were  abreaft  of  Cape  Upright ;  and  at 
noon,  it  bore  £.S.  E.  diftant  four  leagues :  foon  after  we  tried 

Vol.  I.  ,  M  the 


82  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765,      the  current,  and  found  it  fet  to  the  eaftward  at  the  rate  of  a 
^_  -^" '  J  knot  and  an  half  an  hour.     At  three  it  fell  calm,  and  the 
Sunday  7.      current  driving  us  to  the  eaftward  very  faft,  we  dropped  an 
anchor,  which  before  it  took  the  ground  was  in  one  hun- 
dred and  twenty  fathom. 

This  day,  and  not  before,  the  Tamar's  boat  returned  from 
the  weftward  :  fhe  had  been  within  two  or  three  leagues  of 
Cape  Pillar,  and  had  found  feveral  very  good  anchoring- 
places  on  the  fouth  fliore. 

ivienday  8.         •^^  ^"^^  o'clock  the  next  morning,  having  a  frefli  gale  at 
weft,  we  weighed,  notwithftanding  the  weather  was  thick, 
and  made  fail ;  at  eleven  it  blew  very  hard,  with  violent  rain 
and  a  great  fea,  and  as  we  perceived  that  we  rather  loft  than 
gained  ground,  we  ftood  in  for  a  bay  on  the  fouth  fhore, 
about  four  leagues  to  the  weftward  of  Cape  Upright,  and 
anchored  in  twenty  fathom  :  the  ground  was  not  good,  but 
in  other  refpeds  this  was  one  of  the  beft  harbours  that  we 
had  met  with  in  the  Streight,  for  it  was  impoffible  that  any 
wind  Ihould  hurt  us.     There  being  lefs  wind  in  the  after- 
noon, and  it  inclining  a  little  towards  the  fouth,  we  un- 
moored at  two,  and  at  four,  the  wind  having  then  come 
round  to  the  S.  S.  E.  and  being    a  moderate    breeze,    we 
weighed  and  fteered  to  the  weftward  :  we  made  about  two 
leagues  and  an  half,    but  night  then  coming  on,  we  an- 
chored, not  without  great  difficulty,  in  a  very  good  bay  on 
the  fouth  fhore  in  twenty  fathom.     As  very  violent  gufts 
came  from  the  land,  we  were  very  near  being  driven  off  be- 
fore we  could  let  go  an  anchor,  and  if  we  had  not  at  laft 
fucceeded  we  muft  have  pafTed  a  dreadful  night  in  the 
Streight ;  for  it  blew  a  hurricane  from  the  time  we  came  to 
an  anchor  till  the  morning,  with  violent  rain,  which  was 
fometiraes  intermingled  with  fnow. 

At 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ^3 

At  fix  o'clock,  the  wind  being  Hill  frefli  and  fqually  at  176;. 
S.  S.  E.  we  weighed  and  fleered  W.  by  N.  along  the  fouth  ^_.  ■-^.-'  j 
fliore.  At  eleven,  we  were  abreafl  of  Cape  Pillar,  which  by  ^"^  ^^^  ^* 
compafs  is  about  fourteen  leagues  W.  4-  N.  from  Cape  Up- 
right. Cape  Pillar  may  be  known  by  a  large  gap  upon  the 
top,  and  when  it  bears  W.S.W.  an  ifland  appears  off  it  which 
has  en  appearance  fomewhat  like  a  hay-ltack,  and  about 
which  lie  feveral  rocks.  The  Streight  to  the  eaftward  of  the 
Cape  is  between  feven  and  eight  leagues  over ;  the  land  on 
each  fide  is  of  a  moderate  height,  but  it  is  lowed  on  the 
north  fliore,  the  fouth  fliore  being  much  the  boldeft,  though 
both  are  craggy  and  broken.  Weftniinfter  Ifland  is  nearer 
to  the  north  than  the  fouth  fliore;  and,  by  the  compafs,  lies 
N.  E.  from  Cape  Pillar.  The  land  on  the  north  fliore,  near 
the  weft  end  of  the  Streight,  makes  in  many  iflands  and 
rocks,  upon  which  the  fea  breaks  in  a  tremendous  manner. 
The  land  about  Cape  Vidlory  is  diftant  from  Cape  Pillar 
about  ten  or  eleven  leagues,  in  the  direction  of  N.  W.  by  N. 
From  the  Cape  weftward,  the  coaft  trends  S.  S.  \V.  ~  W.  to 
Cape  Defeada,  a  low  point,  off  which  lie  innumerable 
rocks  and  breakers.  About  four  leagues  W.  S.W.  from  Cape 
Defeada  lie  fome  dangerous  rocks,  called  by  Sir  John  Nar- 
borough  the  Judges,  upon  which  a  mountainous  furf  al- 
ways breaks  with  inconceivable  fury.  Four  fniall  iflands, 
called  the  Iflands  of  Direction,  are  diftant  from  Cape  Pillar 
about  eight  leagues,  in  the  diredion  of  N.W.  by  W.  When 
we  were  off  this  Cape  it  was  ftark  calm ;  but  I  never  faw 
fuch  a  fwell  as  rolled  in  here,  nor  fuch  a  furge  as  broke  on 
each  fliore.  I  expedled  every  moment  that  the  wind  would 
fpring  up  from  its  ufual  quarter,  and  that  the  beft  which 
could  happen  to  us  would  be  to  be  driven  many  leagues  up 
the  Streight  again.    Contrary  however  to  all  expe(5tation,  a 

M  2  fiae 


54  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765.  fine  fleady  gale  fprung  up  at  S.  E.  to  which  I  fpread  all  the 
.  ^^'\^'  f  fail  that  it  was  poffible  for  the  fhip  to  bear,  and  ran  off 
Tuefday  9.  fj-Q^Q  this  frightful  and  defolate  coaft  at  the  rate  of  nine 
miles  an  hour ;  fo  that  by  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  we 
had  left  it  twenty  leagues  behind  us.  And  now  to  make  the 
Ihip  as  ftifF  as  poffible,  I  knocked  down  our  after  bulk-head, 
and  got  two  of  the  boats  under  the  half-deck,  I  alfo  placed 
my  twelve  oared  cutter  under  the  boom  ;  fo  that  we  had  no- 
thing upon  the  fkids  but  the  jolly  boat ;  and  the  alteration 
which  this  made  in  the  velTel  is  inconceivable  :  for  the 
weight  of  the  boats  upon  the  fkids  made  her  crank,  and  in 
a  great  fea  they  were  alfo  in  danger  of  being  loft. 

It  is  probable,  that  whoever  fliall  read  this  account  of  the 
difficulties  and  dangers  which  attended  our  pafTage  through 
the  Streight  of  Magellan,  will  conclude,  that  it  ought  never 
to  be  attempted  again ;  but  that  all  fhips  which  fliall  here- 
after fail  a  weftern  courfe  from  Europe  into  the  South  Seas 
ought  to  go  round  Cape  Horn.  I,  however,  who  have  been, 
twice  round  Cape  Horn,  am  of  a  different  opinion.  I  think 
that  at  a  proper  feafon  of  the  year,  not  only  a  fingle  veffel, 
but  a  large  fquadron  might  pafs  the  Streight  in  lefs  than 
three  weeks  -,  and  I  think,  to  take  the  proper  feafon,  they 
fliould  be  at  the  eaftern  entrance  fome  time  in  the  month  of 
December.  One  great  advantage  of  this  paffage,  is  the  faci- 
lity with  which  fifli  is  almoft  every  where  to  be  procured,^ 
with  wild  celery,  fcurvy-grafs,  berries,  and  many  other 
vegetables  in  great  abundance ;  for  to  this  I  impute  the 
heathinefs  of  my  fliip's  company,  not  a  fingle  man  being 
affefted  with  the  fcurvy  in  the  flighteft  degree,  nor  upon 
the  fick  lift  for  any  other  diforder,  notwithftanding  the 
hardfliip  and  labour  which  they  endured  in  the  paffage, 
which  coft  us  feven  weeks  and  two  days,  as  we  entered 

4  t^e 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ^s 

the  Streight  on  Sunday  the  17th  of  February,  and  quitted  it       ^J^S- 

on  Tuefday  the  9th  of  April.    Wood  and  water  are  alfo  to  < .——", 

be  procured  almoft  at  every  anchoring-place  beyond  Frefh  "  ^^ 
Water  Bay.  Our  fuiFerings  I  impute  wholly  to  our  pafling 
the  Streight  juft  as  the  fun  approached  the  equinox,  when, 
in  this  high  latitude,  the  worft  weather  was  to  be  expeded ; 
and  indeed  the  weather  we  had  was  dreadful  beyond  alii 
defcription. 


CHAP. 


^6  COMMODORE    BYRON^    VOYAGE 


CHAP.     VIII. 

77je  Run  from  the  Weftern  Entra?2Ce  of  the  Streight  of 
Magellan y  to  the  Iflands  of  Difappointment, 


H 


AVING  cleared  the  Streight,  we  purfued  our  courfe 
to  the  weftward,  as  appears  by  the  track  in  the  chart, 
Friday  26.  till  Friday,  April  the  26th,  when  we  discovered  the  ifland  of 
Mafafuero  bearing  W.  N.  W.  7  W.  diftant  about  fixteen 
leagues ;  but  as  to  the  northward  it  was  hazey,  the  ifland 
of  Don  Juan  Fernandes  was  not  in  fight.  During  this  run, 
the  variation  had  gradually  decreafed  from  22^  to  9"  36'  E. 

We  bore  away  for  Mafafuero,  and  at  fun-fet,  being  within 
about  fevcn  leagues  of  it,  we  brought  to,  and  afterwards 
Saturday  27.  kept  the  wind  all  night.  At  day-break  the  next  day,  we 
bore  away  again  for  the  ifland,  at  the  fame  time  fending  an 
officer,  with  a  boat  from  each  fliip,  to  found  the  eaftern  fide 
of  it.  About  noon,  the  middle  of  the  ifland  bore  W.  diftant 
about  three  miles,  and  as  I  faw  the  boats  run  along  the 
fhore,  without  being  able  to  land  any  where  for  the  furf,  I 
bore  down  to  the  north  part  of  the  ifland,  off  which  a  reef 
runs  for  the  diftance  of  about  two  miles,  and  lay  by  for 
them.  This  ifland  is  very  high,  and  the  greater  part  of  it  is 
covered  with  wood  ;  but  towards  the  north  end,  where  I 
lay,  fome  fpots  feemed  to  have  been  cleared,  upon  which 
great  numbers  of  goats  were  feeding,  and  they  had  a  green 
and  pleafant  appearance.  When  the  boats  returned,  the 
officer  informed  me  that  he  had  found  a  bank,  on  the  eafl: 
fide  of  the  ifland  ncareft  to  the  fouth  point,  at  a  confiderable 
diflance  from  the  ffiore,  where  we  might  anchor,  and  op- 
U  pofite 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  87 

pofite  to  which  there  was  a  fine  fall  of  frefh  water ;  but       1765. 
near  the  north  point,  he  faid,  he  could  find  no  anchorage.    ..  "^^-'-f 
The  boats  brought  oflF  a  great  quantity  of  very  fine  fifh>  ^""'"'^^y  '7- 
which  they  had  caught  with  hook  and  line  near  the  fhore  j 
and  as  foon  as  we  had  taken  them  on  board,  which  was  late 
in  the  afternoon,  we  made  fail,  and  worked  to  windward  in 
the  night. 

At  feven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  anchored  with  the  Sunday  2S, 
fmall  bower,  on  the  bank  which  the  boats  had  difcovered, 
in  twenty-four  fathom,  with  black  fandy  ground.  The  ex- 
tream  points  bore  from  S.  to  N.  W.  and  the  fall  of  water  bore 
S.  S.  W.  diftant  about  a  mile  from  the  fhip's  ftation.  This 
part  of  the  ifland  lies  north  and  fouth,  and  is  about  four 
miles  long :  the  foundings  are  very  regular,  from  twenty  to 
fifteen  fathom,  within  two  cables'  length  of  the  fhore.  Soon 
after  we  were  come  to  an  anchor,  I  fent  out  the  boats  to  en- 
deavour to  get  fome  wood  and  water,  but  as  I  obferved  the 
Ihore  to  be  rocky,  and  a  furf  to  break  with  great  violence 
upon  it,  I  ordered  all  the  men  to  put  on  cork  jackets,  which 
had  been  fent  with  us  to  be  made  ufe  of  upon  fuch  occafions. 
By  the  help  of  thefe  jackets,  which  not  only  aflifted  the  men 
in  fwimming,  but  prevented  their  being  bruifed  againft  the 
rocks,  we  got  off  a  confiderable  quantity  of  water  and  wood, 
which,  without  fuch  affiflance,  we  could  not  have  done: 
there  was,  however,  another  fpecies  of  danger  here,  againft 
which  cork  jackets  afforded  no  defence,  for  the  fea  abounded 
with  fharks  of  an  enormous  fize,  which,  when  they  faw  a 
man  in  the  water,  would  dart  into  the  very  furf  to  feize 
him:  our  people,  however,  happily  efcaped  them,  though 
they  were  many  times  very  near :  one  of  them,  which  was 
upwards  of  twenty  feet  long,  came  clofe  to  one  of  the  boats 
that  was  watering,  and  having  feized  a  large  feal,  inftantly 
devoured  it  at  one  mouthful ;    and  I  myfelf  faw  another 

of 


88  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765-      of  nearly  the  fame  fize,  do  the  fame  thing  under  the  (hip's 

' J  ftern.     Our  people  killed  and  fent  off  feveral  of  the  goats, 

^  *  *  which  we  thought  as  good  as  the  befl  venifon  in  England  j 
and  I  obferved,  that  one  of  them  appeared  to  have  been 
caught  and  marked,  its  right  ear  being  flit  in  a  manner  that 
could  not  have  happened  by  accident.  We  had  alfo  lifh  in 
fuch  plenty,  that  one  boat  would,  with  hooks  and  lines, 
catch,  in  a  few  hours,  as  much  as  would  ferve  a  large  fliip's 
company  two  days :  they  were  of  various  forts,  all  excellent 
in  their  kind,  and  many  of  them  weighed  from  twenty  to 
thirty  pounds. 

This  evening,  the  furf  running  very  high,  the  gunner 
and  one  of  the  feamen  who  were  on  fhore  with  the  water- 
ers,  were  afraid  to  venture  off,  and  the  boat  therefore,  when 
fhe  came  on  board  the  laft  time,  left  them  behind  her. 

Monday  zq.  The  ncxt  day  we  found  a  more  convenient  watering-place, 
about  a  mile  and  a  half  to  the  northward  of  the  fliip,  and 
about  the  middle-way  between  the  north  and  fouth  points  of 
the  ifland,  there  being  at  this  place  lefs  furf  than  where  the 
boats  firft  went  on  fliore.  The  tide  here  fet  twelve  hours  to  the 
northward,  and  twelve  to  the  fouthward,  which  we  found 
very  convenient,  for  as  the  wind  was  foutherly,  with  a  great 
fwell,  the  boats  could  not  otherwife  have  got  on  board  with 
their  water.  We  got  off  ten  tons  of  water  from  the  new 
watering-place  this  day,  and  in  the  afternoon,  I  fent  a  boat 
to  fetch  off  the  gunner  and  feaman,  who  had  been  left  on 
fhore  at  the  old  watering-place  the  night  before ;  but  the 
furf  was  ilill  fo  great,  that  the  feaman,  who  could  not 
fwim,  was  afraid  to  venture :  he  was  therefore  again  left 
behind,  and  the  gunner  fl:ayed  with  him. 

As  foon  as  this  was  reported  to  me,  I  fent  another  boat  to 
inform  them  that  as,  by  the  appearances  of  the  weather, 

there 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  89 

there  was  reafon  to  believe  it  would  foon  blow  hard,  I  was      J 7 65. 
afraid  I  might  be  driven  ofF  the  bank  in  the  night,  the  con-  c_l^i_» 
fequence  of  which  would  be  that  they  mufl  be  left  behind  '^^^"'^"^  ^^' 
upon  the  ifland.     When  the  boat  came  to  the  furf,    tlie 
people  on  board  delivered  my  mefTage,   upon   which  the 
gunner  fwam  through  the  furf,  and  got  on  board  her;  but 
the  feaman,  though  he  had  a  cork  jacket  on,  faid  he  was 
fure  he  fliould  be  drow^ned  if  he  attempted  to  get  off  to  the 
boat,  and  that,   chufmg  rather  to  die  a  natural  death,  he 
was  determined  at  all  events  to  remain  upon  the  ifland  :  he 
then  took  an  affecftionate  leave  of  the  people,  wifliing  them 
all  happinefs,  and  the  people  on  board  returned  his  good 
wiflies.     One  of  the  midlhipmen,  however,  jufl  as  the  boat 
■was  about  to  return,  took  the  end  of  a  rope  in  his  hand, 
jumped  into  the  fea,    and  fwam  through  the  furf  to  the 
beach,   where  poor  John  flill  continued  ruminating  upon 
his  fituation,  in  a  dejected  attitude,  and  with  a  mofl  difcon- 
folate  length  of  countenance.     The  midfhipman  began  to 
expoflulate  with  him  upon  the  flrange  refolution  he  had. 
taken,  and  in  the  mean  time  having  made  a  running  knot 
in  his  rope,  he  dexteroufly  contrived  to  throw  it  round  his 
body,  calling  out  to  his  companions  in  the  boat,  who  had 
hold  of  the  other  end  of  it,  to  haul  away ;  they  inftantly 
took  the  hint,  and  the  poor  feceder  was  very  foon  dragged 
through  the  furf  into  the  boat:  he  had,  however,  fwallowed 
fo  great  a  quantity  of  water,  that  hs  was  to  all  appearance 
dead,  but  being  held  up  by  the  heels,  he  foon  recovered  his 
fpeech  and  motion,  and  was  perfe<5lly  well  the  next  day.   In 
the  evening,    I  removed  Captain  Mouat  from  the  Tamar, 
and  appointed  him  Captain  of  the  Dolphin,  under  me ;  Mr. 
Gumming,  my  Firft  Lieutenant,  I  appointed  Captain  of  the 
Tamar,  taking  Mr.  Carteret,  her  Firft  Lieutenant,  on  board 
Vol.  I.  N  in 


90 


COMMODORE    BYRON' s    VOYAGE 


May. 
Wednef.  I. 
Thurfday  2 


Thurfday  g. 


1765.      in  his  room,  and  ojave  Mr.  Kendal,  one  of  the  mates  of  the 

April.  ,         .  „ 

u— ^^ »   Dolphin,  a  commimon  as  Second  Lieutenant  of  the  Tamar. 

Tucfdayso,  On  the  soth,  at  feven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  weighed, 
and  fleered  to  the  northward,  along  the  eaft  and  north  eaft 
fide  of  the  ifland,  but  could  find  no  anchoring-place ;  we 
bore  away  therefore,  with  a  frefh  gale  at  S.  E.  and  hazey 
weather,  and  at  noon,  the  middle  of  the  ifland  was  dillant 
eight  leagues,  in  the  diredlion  of  S.  S.  E.  I  continued  to  fleer 
N.  3°  W.  the  next  day,  and  at  noon  on  the  ad  of  May,  I  changed 
my  courfe,  and  fleered  W.  intending,  if  pofTible,  to  make  the 
land,  which  is  called  Davis's  Land  in  the  charts,  and  is  laid 
down  in  latitude  27°  30' S.  and  about  five  hundred  leagues 
wefl  of  Copiapo  in  Chili  j  but  on  the  9th,  finding  little 
profpedl  of  getting  to  the  weflward,  in  the  latitude  which  I 
at  firfl  propofed,  being  then  in  latitude  26°  46'  S.,  longitude 
94°  45' W.  and  having  a  great  run  to  make,  I  determined  to 
fleer  a  north  wefl  courfe  till  I  got  the  true  trade-wind,  and 
then  to  fland  to  the  weflward  till  I  fhould  fall  in  with  Solo- 
mon's Iflands,  if  any  fuch  there  were,  or  make  fome  new 
difcovery. 

Friday  lo.  On  the  loth,  we  faw  feveral  dolphins  and  bonettas  about 
Saturday  II.  the  fliip,  and  the  next  day  fome  ftraggling  birds,  which 
were  brown  on  the  back  and  the  upper  part  of  their  wings, 
and  white  on  the  refl  of  the  body,  with  a  fliort  beak,  and  a 
fliort  pointed  tail.  The  variation  was  now  decreafcd  to  4° 
45'  E.  our  latitude  was  24°  30' S.  our  longitude  97°  45' W. 

Tuefday  14.  On  the  14th,  wc  faw  feveral  grampufes,  and  more  of  the 
birds  which  have  jufl  been  defcribed,  fo  that,  imagining  we 
might  be  near  fome  land,  we  kept  a  good  look-out,  but 
faw  nothing.  In  latitude  23^  2'S.  longitude  101°  28'  W.  the 
variation,  by  azimuth,  was  3°  20' E. 

a  On 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ^  91 

On  the  morning  of  the  i6th,  we  faw  two  very  remarkable       1765. 
birds;  they  flew  yery  high,  were  as  large  as  geefe,  and  all    (__3;_, 
over  as  white  as  fnow,  except  their  legs,  which  were  black:  '^^'"^'"'^^'y  "^• 
I  now  began  to  imagine  that  I  had  pafTed  fome  land,    or 
iflands,  which  lay  to  the  fouthward  of  us,  for  the  laft  night 
we  obferved,  that,  although  we  had  generally  a  great  fwell 
from  that  quarter,  the  water  became  quite  fmooth  for  a  few 
hours,  after  which  the  fwell  returned. 

On  the  22d,  being  in  latitude  20"  52' S.,  longitude  115^  Wednef.  22. 
38'  W.  with  a  faint  breeze  at  E.  S.  E.  we  had  fo  great  a  fwell 
from  the  fouthward,  that  we  were  in  perpetual  danger  of 
our  mafts  rolling  over  the  fhip's  fide,  fo  that  I  was  obliged 
to  haul  more  to  the  northward,  as  well  to  eafe  the  fliip,  as 
in  hopes  of  getting  the  true  trade-wind,  which  we  had  not 
yet ;  and  now  to  my  great  concern  fome  of  my  befl  men 
began  to  complain  of  the  fcurvy.  This  day,  for  the  firft 
time,  we  caught  two  bonettas;  we  alfo  faw  feveral  tropic 
birds  about  the  fliip,  and  obferved  that  they  were  larger 
than  any  we  had  feen  before;  their  whole  plumage  was 
white,  and  they  had  two  long  feathers  in  the  tail.  The  va- 
riation now  had  changed  its  diredlion,  and  was  19' W. 

On  the  26th,  we  faw  two  larg.e  birds  about  the  fliip,  Sunday  26. 
which  were  all  black,  except  the  neck  and  the  beak,  which 
were  white;  they  had  long  wings,  and  long  feathers  in 
their  tail,  yet  we  obferved  that  they  flew  heavily,  and  there- 
fore imagined  that  they  were  of  a  fpecies  which  did  not 
ufually  fly  far  from  the  fliore.  I  had  flattered  myfelf,  that, 
before  we  had  run  fix  degrees  to  the  northward  of  Mafa- 
f  uero,  we  fhould  have  found  a  fettled  trade-wind  to  the  S.  E. 
but  the  winds  flill  continued  to  the  north,  though  we  had  a 
mountainous  fwell  from  the  S.  W.  Our  latitude  was  now 
16°  55' S.,  longitude  127^  55' W.  and  here  the  needle,  at  this 
time,  had  no  variation. 

N  2  On 


g2  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765.  On  the  qSth,  -we  fav/  two  fine  large  birds  about  the  il:iip, 

^- I  one  of  which  was  brown  and  white,  and  the  other  black 

Tucfday28.  ^^^  white ;  they  wanted  much  to  fettle  upon  the  yards,  but 
the  working  of  the  fliip  frighted  them. 

Friday  31.  On  the  3 1  ft,  the  wind  fhifted  from  N.  by  W.  to  N.  W.  by  W. 
and  the  number  of  birds  that  were  now  about  the  fliip  was 
very  great ;  from  thefe  circumftances,  and  our  having  loit 
the  great  fouth  weft  fwcll,  I  imagined  fome  land  to  be  near, 
and  we  looked  out  for  it  with  great  diligence,  for  our  people 
began  now  to  fall  down  with  the  fcurvy  very  faft. 

June.  We  faw  no  land  however  till  one  o'clock  in  the  morning 

f"ciay  7.  qP  Friday  the  7th  of  June,  when  we  were  in  latitude  14^  5'S., 
longitude  144''  58'  W. ;  and  obferved  the  variation  to  be 
4°  30'  E.  After  making  the  land,  I  hauled  upon  a  v/ind  un^- 
der  an  eafy  fail  till  the  morning,  and  then  a  low  fmall 
ifland  bore  from  us  W.  S.W.  at  the.  diftance  of  about  two 
leagues.  In  a  very  Ihort  time  we  faw  another  ifland  to 
windward  of  us,  bearing  E.  S.E.  diftant  between  three  and 
four  leagues:  this  appeared  to  be  much  larger  than  that 
which  we  firft  difcovered,  and  we  muft  have  pafTed  very 
near  it  in  the  night. 

I  flood  for  the  fmall  ifland,  which  as  wc  drew  near  it  had 
a  moft  beautiful  appearance  ;  it  was  furrounded  by  a  beach 
of  the  fineft  white  fand,  and  within,  it  was  covered  with 
tall  trees,  which  extended  their  fliade  to  a  great  diftance,  and 
formed  the  moft  delightful  groves  that  can  be  imagined, 
without  vmderv/ood.  We  judged  this  ifland  to  be  about  live 
miles  in  circumference,  and  from  each  end  of  it  we  faw  a 
fpit  running  out  into  the  fea,  upon  which  the  furge  broke 
with  great  fury ;  there  was  alfo  a  great  furf  all  round  it. 
We  foon  perceived  that  it  was  inhabited  ;  for  many  of  tl>€ 
natives  appeared  upon  the  beach,  with  fpears  in  their  hands 

that 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  t 

tiiat  were  at  lead  fixteen  feet  long.    They  prefently  made      '7^5' 

feveral  large  fires,  which  we  fuppofed  to  be  a  fignal ;  for  wc   < k^ 

immediately  perceived  feveral  fires  upon  the  larger  ifland     "  ^^ ' ' 
that  was  to  windward  of  us,  by  which  we  knew  that  alfo 
to  be  inhabited.     I  fent  the  boat  with  an  officer  to  look 
for  an  anchoring-place,  who,  to  our  great  regret  and  difap- 
poimraent,  returned  with  an  account  that  he  had  been  all 
round  the  ifland,  and  that  no  bottom  could  be  found  within 
lefs  than  a  cable's  length  of  the  fbore,  which  was  furrounded 
clofe  to  the  beach  with  a  fteep  coral  rock.    The  fcurvy  by 
this  time  had  made  dreadful  havock  among  us,  many  of 
my  befl:  men  being  now  confined  to  their  hammocks  ;   the 
poor  wretches  who  were  able  to  crawl  upon  the  deck,  flood 
gazing  at  this  little  paradife  which  Nature  had  forbidden 
them  to  enter,  with  fenfations  which  cannot  eafily  be  con- 
ceived ;  they  faw  cocoa-nuts  in  great  abundance,  the  milk 
of  which  is  perhaps  the  mofl:  powerful  antifcorbutic  in  ths 
world:  they  had  reafon  to  fuppofe  that  there  were  limes, 
bananas,  and  other  fruits  which  are  generally  found  be-^ 
tween  the  tropics ;  and  to  increafe  their  mortification  they 
faw  the  fhells  of  -many  turtle  fcattered  about  the  fhore. 
TJiefe  refrefhments,  indeed,  for  want  of.  which  they  wera    , 
languifliing   to  death,   were   as   effectually    beyond    theip 
reach  as  if  there  had. been  half  the  circumference  of  the 
world  between  them;  yet  their  being  in  fight,  was  no  in- 
confiderable  increafe  of  the  difl;refs  which  they  fufFered  by 
the  want  of  them..  Their  fituation  in  itfelf  indeed  was  no  ■ 
worfe  than  it  would  have  been  if  the  obflacle  to  their  wiflies 
had  been  diflance,  and  not  a. reef  of  rocks;  and  both  being 
alike  infuperable,  a  Being,  wholly  under  the  influence  of - 
reafon,  would,  by  both,  have  been  equally  affecfled  ;  but  this 
is  a  fituation,  among  many  others,  that  may  be  remarked  - 
by  a  diligent  obferver,  in  which  reafon  cannot  preferve  man.- 

kind ; 


^4  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765.  kind  from  the  power  which  fancy  is  perpetually  exerting  to 
■  "^  -'  _|i  aggravate  the  calamities  of  life.  When  I  knew  the  found- 
fnday  7.  ings,  I  could  not  forbear  ftanding  clofe  round  the  illand  with 
the  lliip,  though  I  alfo  knew  it  was  impoffible  to  procure 
any  of  the  refrefliments  which  it  produced.  The  natives  ran 
along  the  fliore  abreaft  of  the  fliip,  lliouting  and  dancing;  they 
alfo  frequently  brandiflied  their  long  fpears,  and  then  threw 
themfelves  backward,  and  lay  a  few  minutes  motionlefs,  as 
if  they  had  been  dead :  this  we  underftood  as  a  menace  that 
they  would  kill  us,  if  we  ventured  to  go  on  fhore.  As  we 
were  failing  along  the  coafl,  we  took  notice  that  in  one 
place  the  natives  had  fixed  upright  in  the  fand  two  fpears,  to 
the  top  of  which  they  had  faflened  feveral  things  that  flut- 
tered in  the  air,  and  that  fome  of  them  were  every  moment 
kneeling  down  before  them,  as  we  fuppofed,  invoking  the 
affiftance  of  fome  invilible  Being  to  defend  them  againft 
us.  While  I  was  thus  circumnavigating  the  ifland  with  the 
fliip,  I  fent  the  boats  out  again  to  found,  and  when  they 
came  near  the  fhore,  the  Indians  fet  up  one  of  the  moft  hi- 
deous yells  I  Iiad  ever  heard,  pointing  at  the  fame  time  to 
their  fpears,  and  poifmg  in  their  hands  large  flones  which 
they  took  up  from  the  beach.  Our  men  on  the  contrary 
made  all  the  figns  of  amity  and  good-will  that  they  could 
devife,  and  at  the  fame  time  threw  them  bread  and  many 
other  things,  none  of  which  they  vouchfafed  fo  much  as  to 
touch,  but  with  great  expedition  hauled  five  or  fix  large 
canoes,  which  we  faw  lying  upon  the  beach,  up  into  the 
•wood.  When  this  was  done,  they  waded  into  the  water, 
and  feemed  to  watch  for  an  opportunity  of  laying  hold  of 
the  boat,  that  they  might  drag  her  on  fliore  :  the  people  on 
board  her,  apprehending  that  this  was  their  defign,  and  that 
if  they  got  them  on  fliore  they  would  certainly  put  them  to 
death,  were  very  impatient  to  be  before-hand  with  them, 

and 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  pj 

and  would  fain  have  fired  upon  them;  but  the  officer  on    "  1765- 
board,  having  no  permiffion  from  me  to  commit  any  hofti-  .■     ""-  _f 
lities,  reftrained  them.    I  ihould  indeed  have  thought  my-    ^'"^^^7.- 
felf  at  liberty  to  have  obtained  by  force  the  refrefliments, 
for  want  of  which  our  people  were  dying,  if  it  had  been 
poffible  to  have  come  to  an  anchor,  fuppoling  we  could  not 
have  made  thefe  poor  favages  our  friends ;    but  nothing 
could  juftify  the  taking  away  their  lives  for  a  mere  imagi- 
nary or  intentional  injury,  without  procuring  the  leaft  ad- 
vantage to  ourfelves.     They  were  of  a  deep  copper  colour,, 
exceedingly  flout  and  well  limbed,  and  remarkably  nimble 
and  adlive,  for  I  never  faw  men  run  fo  fafl  in  my  life.   This 
ifland  lies  in  latitude  14^  5'S.,  longitude  145^  4  W.  from 
the  meridian  of  London.     As  the  boats  reported  a  fecond 
time  that  there  was  no  anchoring  ground  about  this  ifland, , 
I  determined  to  work  up  to  the  other,  which  was  accord-- 
ingly  done  all  the  reil  of  the  day  and  the  following  night. 

At  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  8th,  we  brought  to  Saturday^;. 
on  the  well  fide  of  it>  at  the  diftance  of  about  three  quarters 
of  a  mile  from  the  fhore,  but  we  had  no  foundings  with 
one  hundred  and  forty  fathom  of  line.     We  now  perceived, 
feveral  other  low  iflands,  or  rather  peninfulas,  moft  of  them 
being  joined  one  to  the  other  by  a  neck  of  land,  very  nar- 
row, and  almofl  level  with  the  furface  of  the  water,  which 
breaks  high  over  it.    In  approaching  tliefe  iflands  the  cocoa- 
nut  trees  are  firfl;  difcovcred,  as  they  are  higher  than  any, 
part  of  the  furface.    I  fent  a  boat  with  an  officer  from  each 
Ihip  to  found  the  lee-fide  of  thefe  iflands  for  an  anchoring— 
place ;  and  as  foon  as  they  left  the  fhip,  I  faw  the  Indians 
run  down  to  the  beach  in  great  numbers,  armed  with  long 
fpears  and  clubs :  they  kept  abreaft  of  the  boats  as  they 
went  founding  along  the  fhore,  and  ufed  many  threatening  ; 

geflures 


fi  COMMODORE   BYRON's    VOYAGE 

■1765.      geflures  to  prevent  their  landing,  I  therefore  fired  a  nine 

I ^  ■_;   pound  fliot  from  the  fhip  over  their  heads,  upon  which  they 

"  ^y  '  ran  into  the  woods  with  great  precipitation.  At  ten  o'clock 
the  boats  returned,  but  could  get  no  foundings  clofe  in  with 
the  furf,  which  broke  very  high  upon  the  fhore.  The 
middle  of  thisclufter  of  iflands  lies  in  latitude  14"  jo'S.,  lon- 
gitude 144*  52' W.;  the  variation  of  the  compafs  was  here 
4°  30' E. 

At  half  an  hour  after  ten,  we  bore  away  and  made  fail  to 
the  weftward,  finding  it  impollible  to  procure  at  thefe  iflands 
any  refreftiment  for  our  fick,  whofe  fituation  was  becoming 
more  deplorable  every  hour,  and  I  therefore  called  them  the 
Islands  of  Disappointment. 


CHAP, 


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  -  ?7 


CHAP.      IX. 

The  Difcovery  of  King  Georges  IJlands^  with  a  Defcrip* 

tion  of  them^  and  an  Account  of  fever al  Incidents 

that  happened  there, 

AT  half  an  hour  after  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of      1765. 
the  9th,  we  faw  land  again,  bearing  W.  S.  W.  at  the  ,   ■'^"!'_f. 
diftance  of  fix  or  feven  leagues  ;  and  at  feven  we  brought  to  2""<*^>'  9- 
for  the  night.    In  the  morning,  being  within  three  miles  Monday  .,. 
of  the  ihore,  we  difcovered  it  to  be  a  long  low  ifland,  with  a 
white  beach,  of  a  pleafant  appearance,  full  of  cocoa-nut  and 
otheinecs,  and  fuiiounded  with  a  rock  of  red  coral.     We 
flood  along  the  north  eaft  fide  of  it,  within  half  a  mile  of 
the  fliore ;  and  the  favages,  as  foon  as  they  faw  us,  made 
great  fires,  as  we  fuppofed,  to  alarm  the  diftant  inhabitants 
of  the  ifland,  and  ran  along  the  beach,  abreaft  of  the  fhip 
in  great  numbers,  armed  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  natives 
of  the  Iflands  of  Difappointment.    Over  the  land  on  this  fide 
of  the  ifland  we  could  fee  a  large  lake  of  fait  water,  or  la- 
goon, which  appeared  to  be  two  or  three  leagues  wide,  and 
to  reach  within  a  fmall  difliance  of  the  oppofite  fhore.    Into 
this  lagoon  we  faw  a  fmall  inlet  about  a  league  from  the 
fouth  wefl;  point,  off  which  we  brought  to.    At  this  place 
the  natives  have  built  a  little  town,  under  the  fliade  of  a 
fine  grove  of  cocoa-nut  trees.     I  immediately  fent  off  the 
boats,  with  an  officer  in  eachi  to  found ;  but  they  could  find 
no  anchorage,  the  fliore  being  every  where  as  fieep  as  a 
wall,  except  at  the  very  mouth  of  the  inlet,  which  was 
Vol.  I.  O  fcarcely 


0  COMMODORE   BYRON's   VOYAGE 

1765-  fcarcely  a  lhip*s  length  wide,  and  there  they  had  thirteen 
■  "°^'  '  fathom,  with  a  bottom  of  coral  rock.  We  Hood  clofe  in 
Monday  10.  ^.^j^  ^-^^  fliips,  and  faw  hundreds  of  the  favagea,  ranged  in 
very  good  order,  and  landing  up  to  their  waifts  in  water  -, 
they  were  all  armed  in  the  fame  manner  as  thofe  that  we 
had  feen  at  the  other  iflands,  and  one  of  them  carried  a 
piece  of  mat  fattened  to  the  top  of  a  pole,  which  we  ima- 
gined was  an  enfign.  They  made  a  moll  hideous  and  incef- 
fant  noife,  and  in  a  fliort  time  many  large  canoes  came 
down  the  lake  to  join  th^m.  Our  boats  were  Hill  out,  and 
the  people  on  board  them  made  all  the  ligns  of  friendfliip 
that  they  could  invent,  upon  which  fome  of  the  canoes  came 
through  the  inlet  and  drew  near  them.  We  now  began  to 
hope  that  a  friendly  intercourfe  might  be  eilabliflied  ;  but 
we  foon  difcovered  that  the  Indians  had  no  other  defign  than 
to  haul  the  boats  on  fliore :  many  of  them  leaped  off  the 
rocks,  and  fwam  to  them ;  and  one  of  them  got  into  that 
which  belonged  to  the  Tamar,  and  in  the  twinkling  of  an. 
eye  feized  a  feaman's  jacket,  and  jumping  overboard  with 
it,  never  once  appeared  above  water  till  he  was  clofe  in 
fliore  among  his  companions.  Another  of  them  got  hold  of 
a  midfhipman's  hat,  but  not  knowing  how  to  take  it  off,  he 
pulled  it  downward  inftead  of  lifting  it  up;  fo  that  the 
owner  had  time  to  prevent  its  being  taken  away,  otherwife 
it  would  probably  have  difappeared  as  fuddenly  as  the 
jacket  J  our  men  bore  all  this  with  much  patience,  and  the 
hidians  feemed  to  triumph  in  their  impunity. 

About  noon,  finding  there  was  no  anchorage  here,  I  bore 
away  and  fleered  along  the  fliore  to  the  weilerraoil  point  of 
the  ifland :  the  boats  immediately  followed  us,  and  kept 
founding  clofe  to  the  beach,  but  could  get  no  ground. 

When 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  9? 

When  we  came  to  the  weftermoft  point  of  this  ifland,  we      1765. 

June. 

faw  another,  bearing  S.  W.  by  W.  about  four  leagues  diftant.   < . — -/ 

We  were  at  this  time  about  a  league  beyond  the  inlet  where  °"  ^^  '°* 
we  had  left  the  natives,  but  they  were  not  fatisfied  with 
having  got  rid  of  us  quietly  ;  for  I  now  perceived  two  large 
double  canoes  failing  after  the  Ihip,  with  about  thirty  men 
in  each,  all  armed  after  the  manner  of  their  country.  The 
boats  were  a  good  way  to  leeward  of  us,  and  the  canoes» 
palling  between  the  fliip  and  the  fliore,  feemed  very  eagerly 
to  give  them  chace.  Upon  this  I  made  the  fignal  for  the 
boats  to  fpeak  with  the  canoes,  and  as  foon  as  they  per- 
ceived it,  they  turned,  and  made  towards  the  Indians,  who 
feeing  this,  were  feized  with  a  fudden  pannic,  and  imme- 
diately hauling  down  their  fails,  paddled  back  again  at  a 
furprifing  rate.  Our  boats  however  came  up  with  them ;  but 
notwithftanding  the  dreadful  furf  that  broke  upon  the  fhore, 
the  canoes  pufhed  through  it,  and  the  Indians  immediately 
hauled  them  up  upon  the  beach.  Our  boats  followed  them, 
and  the  Indians,  dreading  an  invalion  of  their  coaft,  prepared 
to  defend  it  with  clubs  and  flones,  upon  which  our  men 
fired,  and  killed  two  or  three  of  them :  one  of  them  received 
three  balls  which  went  quite  through  his  body  ;  yet  he  af- 
terwards took  up  a  large  flone,  and  died  in  the  a6lion  of 
throwing  it  againft  his  enemy.  This  man  fell  clofe  to  our 
boats,  fo  that  the  Indians  who  remained  unhurt  did  not 
dare  to  attempt  the  carrying  off  his  body,  which  gave  us  an 
opportunity  to  examine  it ;  but  they  carried  off  the  reft  of 
their  dead,  and  made  the  beft  of  their  way  back  to  their 
companions  at  the  inlet.  Our  boats  then  returned,  and 
brought  off  the  two  canoes  which  they  had  purfued.  One 
of  them  was  thirty-two  feet  long,  and  the  other  fomewhat 
lefs,  but  they  were  both  of  a  very  curious  conftrudion,  and 

O  2  mufl: 


ioo  COMMODORE    BYRON's  VOYAGE 


June, 
Monday  lo. 


i7'55-  mufl  have  coft  thofe  who  made  them  infinite  labour.  They 
confifted  of  planks  exceedingly  well  wrought,  and  in  many 
places  adorned  with  carving ;  thefe  planks  were  fcwed  to- 
gether, and  over  every  feam  there  was  a  ftrip  of  tortoife- 
fliell,  very  artificially  faftened,  to  keep  out  the  weather:  their 
bottoms  were  as  Iharp  as  a  wedge,  and  they  were  very  nar- 
row; and  therefore  two  of  them  were  joined  laterally  to- 
gether by  a  couple  of  ftrong  fpars,  fo  that  there  was  a  fpace 
of  about  fix  or  eight  feet  between  them:  a  maft  was  hoifted 
in  each  of  them,  and  the  fail  was  fpread  between  the  mails : 
the  fail,  which  I  preferved,  and  which  is  now  in  my  poITef- 
fion,  is  made  of  matting,  and  is  as  neat  a  piece  of  work  as 
ever  I  faw :  their  paddles  were  very  curious,  and  their  cord- 
age was  as  good  and  as  well  laid  as  any  in  England,  though 
it  appeared  to  be  made  of  the  outer  covering  of  the  cocoa- 
nut.  When  thefe  vefTels  fail,  feveral  men  fit  upon  the  fpars 
which  hold  the  canoes  together. 

As  the  furf  which  broke  very  high  upon  the  fhore  ren- 
dered it  impoflible  to  procure  refrefhments  for  the  fick  in 
this  part  of  the  ifland,  I  hauled  the  wind,  and  worked  back 
to  the  inlet,  being  determined  to  try  once  more  what  could 
be  done  there. 

I  recovered  that  ftation  in  the  afternoon,  and  immediately 
fent  the  boats  to  found  the  inlet  again,  but  they  confirmed 
the  account  which  had  been  made  before,  that  it  afforded 
no  anchorage  for  a  fhip.  While  the  boats  were  abfent,  I  ob- 
ferved  a  great  number  of  the  natives  upon  the  point  near 
the  fpot  where  we  had  left  them  in  the  morning,  and  they 
feemcd  to  be  very  bufy  in  loading  a  great  number  of  large 
canoes  which  lay  clofe  to  the  beach.  As  I  thought  they  might 
be  troublefome,  and  was  unwilling  that  they  fhould  fufFer 
8  by 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  loi 

by  another  unequal  contefl  with  our  people,  I  fired  a  (hot      1765. 
over  their  heads  which  produced  the  effect  I  intended,  for  ■_    -,_'  _, 
they  all  difappeared  in  a  moment.  Monday  10. 

Jufl:  before  the  evening  clofed  in,  our  boats  landed,  and 
got  a  few  cocoa-nuts  which  they  brought  off,  but  faw  none 
of  the  inhabitants.  In  the  night,  durmg  v/hich  we  had  rain 
and  hard  fqualls,  I  flood  off  and  on  with  the  fliips,  and  at 
feven  o'clock  in  the  morning  brought  to  off  the  inlet.  I  im-  Tuefday  u. 
mediately  fent  the  boats  on  fhore  in  fearch  of  refrefhments» 
and  made  all  the  men  who  were  not  fo  ill  of  the  fcurvy  as 
to  be  laid  up,  go  in  them ;  I  alfo  went  on  fhore  myfelf,  and 
continued  there  the  whole  day.  We  faw  many  houfes  or 
wigwams  of  the  natives,  but  they  were  totally  deferted, 
except  by  the  dogs,  who  kept  an  incefTant  howling  from  the 
time  we  came  on  fhore  till  we  returned  to  the  fhip :  they 
were  low  mean  hovels,  thatched  with  cocoa-nut  branches ; 
but  they  were  moft  delightfully  fituated  in  a  fine  grove  of 
{lately  trees,  many  of  which  were  the  cocoa-nut,  and  many 
fuch  as  we  were  utterly  unacquainted  with.  The  cocoa- 
nut  trees  feem  to  furnifh  them  with  almofl  all  the  necefla- 
ries  of  life ;  particularly  food,  fails,  cordage,  timber,  and 
vefTels  to  hold  water;  fo  that  probably  thefe  people  always 
fix  their  habitations  where  the  trees  abound.  We  obferved 
the  fhore  to  be  covered  with  coral,  and  the  fhells  of  very 
large  pearl  oyflers  -,  fo  that  I  make  no  doubt  but  that  as  pro- 
fitable a  pearl  fifhery  might  be  eftablifhed  here  as  any  in  the 
world.  We  faw  but  little  of  the  people,  except  at  a  diflance; 
we  could  however  perceive  that  the  women  had  a  piece  of 
cloth  of  fome  kind,  probably  fabricated  of  the  fame  fluff  as 
their  fail,  hanging  from  the  waift  as  law  as  the  knee  ;  the 
men  were  naked. 

Our 


101!  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

^7^5-  Our  people,  in  rummaging  fome  of  the  huts,  found  the 

June.  o      o 

' . ;   carved  head  of  a  rudder,  which  had  manifeftly  belonged  to 

a  Dutch  longboat,  and  was  very  old  and  worm-eaten.  They 
found  alfo  a  piece  of  hammered-jron,  a  piece  of  brafs,  and 
fome  fmall  iron  tools,  which  the  anceftors  of  the  prefent  in- 
habitants of  this  place  probably  obtained  from  the  Dutch 
Ihip  to  which  the  longboat  had  belonged,  all  which  I 
brought  away  with  me.  Whether  thefe  people  found  means 
to  cut  off  the  Ihip,  or  whether  fhe  was  loft  upon  the  illand 
or  after  flie  left  it,  cannot  be  known ;  but  there  is  reafon  to 
believe  that  flie  never  returned  to  Europe,  becaufe  no  ac- 
count of  her  voyage,  or  of  any  difcoveries  that  fhe  made,  is 
extant.  If  the  fliip  failed  from  this  place  in  fafety,  it  is  not 
perhaps  eafy  to  account  for  her  leaving  the  rudder  of  her 
longboat  behind  her  j  and  if  fhe  was  cut  off  by  the  natives, 
there  muft  be  much  more  confiderable  remains  of  her  in  the 
ifland,  efpecially  of  her  iron- work,  upon  which  all  Indian  na- 
tions, who  have  no  metal,  fet  the  higheft  value  ;  we  had  no 
opportunities  however  to  examine  this  matter  farther.  The 
hammered- iron,  brafs,  and  iron  tools,  I  brought  away  with 
me ;  but  we  found  a  tool  exadlly  in  the  form  of  a  carpen- 
ter's adze,  the  blade  of  which  was  a  pearl  oyfter-fhell ;  pof- 
fibly  this  might  have  been  made  in  imitation  of  an  adze 
which  had  belonged  to  the  carpenter  of  the  Dutch  fliip,  for 
among  the  tools  that  I  brought  away  there  was  one  which 
feemed  to  be  the  remains  of  fuch  an  implement,  though  it 
was  worn  away  almoft  to  nothing. 

Clofe  to  the  houfes  of  thefe  people,  we  faw  buildings  of 
another  kind,  which  appeared  to  be  burying- places,  and 
from  which  we  judged  that  they  had  great  veneration  for 
their  dead.  They  were  fituated  under  lofty  trees,  that  gave 
a  thick  fliade ;  the  lides  and  tops  were  of  flone;  and  in  their 
6  figure 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  103 

figure  they  fomewhat  refembled  the  fquare  tombs,  with  a      1765' 
flat  top,  which  are  always  to  be  found  in  our  country  church-  « — .^-i.^ 
yards.    Near  thefe  buildings  we  found  many  neat  boxes  full     "^  ^^  "* 
of  human  bones,  and  upon  the  branches  of  the  trees  which 
fhaded  them,  hung  a  great  number  of  the  heads  and  bones 
of  turtle,  and  a  variety  of  iifli,  inclofed  in  a  kind  of  bafket- 
work  of  reeds:  fome  of  the  fifh  we  took  down,  and  found 
that  nothing  remained  but  the  ikin  and  the  teeth  ;  the  bones 
and  entrails  feemed  to  have  been  extra(5led,  and  the  mufcular 
flefli  dried  away. 

We  fent  off  feveral  boat-loads  of  cocoa-nuts,  and  a  great 
quantity  of  feurvy-grafs,  with  which  the  illand  is  covered  * 
refrefhments  which  were  of  infinite  fervice  to  us,  as  by  this 
time  I  believe  there  was  not  a  man  among  us  wholly  un- 
touched by  the  fcurvy. 

The  frefh  water  here  is  very  good,  but  it  is  fcarce ;  the 
wells  which  fupply  the  natives  are  fo  fmall,  that  when  two^ 
or  three  cocoa-nut  fhells^  have  been  filled  from  them,  they 
are  dry  for  a  few  minutes  j  but  as  they  prefently  fill  again, 
if  a  little  pains  were  taken  to  enlarge  them,  they  would 
abundantly  fupply  any  fliip  with  water. 

We  faw  no  venomous  creature  here ;  but  the  flies  were  an 
intolerable  torment,  they  covered  us  from  head  to  foot,  and- 
filled  not  only  the  boat,  but  the  fliips.  We  faw  great  num- 
bers of  parrots  and  parroquets,  and  feveral  other  birds  which^ 
were  altogether  unknown  to  us ;  we  faw  alfo  a  beautiful^ 
kind  of  dove,  fo  tame  that  fome  of  them  frequently  came 
clofe  to  us,  and  even  followed  us  into  the  Indian  huts. 

All  this  day  the  natives  kept  themfelves  clofely  concealed^, 
and  did  not  even  make  a  fmoke  upon  any  part  of  the  iflands 
as  far  as  we  could  fee  j  probably  fearing  that  a  fmoke  might 

difcover 


I04  COMMODORE    BYRON*s   VOYAGE 

1765.      difcover  the  place  of  their  retreat.    In  the  evening,  we  all 
»— — i!^^lw  returned  on  board  the  fhip. 

Tuefday  11. 

This  part  of  the  ifland  lies  in  latitude  14^*  S5>'S.,  longitude 
148°  50' W.  and  after  I  got  on  board,  I  hauled  a  little  way 
farther  from  the  fhore,  intending  to  vifit  the  other  ifland  in 
the  morning,  which  had  been  feen  to  the  weflward  of  that 
before  which  the  ftiip  lay,  and  which  is  diftant  about  fixty- 
nine  leagues  from  the  Iflands  of  Difappointment?,  in  the  di- 
redion  of  W.  t  S. 

Wednef.  12.  The  next  morning,  at  fix  o'clock,  I  made  fail  for  the  ifland 
which  I  intended  to  vifit,  and  when  I  reached  it,  I  fl^eered 
S.  W.  by  W.  clofe  along  the  north  eaft  fide  of  it,  but  could 
get  no  foundings :  this  fide  is  about  fix  or  feven  leagues  long, 
and  the  whole  makes  much  the  fame  appearance  as  the 
other,  having  a  large  fait  water  lake  in  the  middle  of  it.  As 
foon  as  the  fliip  came  in  fight,  the  natives  ran  down  to  the 
beach  in  great  numbers :  they  were  armed  in  the  fame  man- 
ner as  thofe  that  we  had  feen  upon  the  other  ifland,  and  kept 
abreaft  of  the  fhip  for  feveral  leagues.  As  the  heat  of  this 
.  climate  is  very  great,  they  feemed  to  fuffer  much  by  run- 
ning fo  far  in  the  fun,  for  they  fometimes  plunged  into  the 
fea,  and  fometimes  fell  flat  upon  the  fand,  that  the  furf 
might  break  over  them,  after  which  they  renewed  the  race 
with  great  vigour.  Our  boats  were  at  this  time  founding 
along  the  fliore,  as  ufual,  but  I  had  given  ftri6t  orders  to  the 
officers  who  commanded  them  never  to  moleft  the  natives, 
except  it  fliould  become  abfolutely  necefl^ary  for  their  own 
defence,  but  to  try  all  pofllble  means  to  obtain  their  confi- 
dence and  good-will :  our  people  therefore  went  as  near  to 
the  fliorc  as  they  durft  for  the  furf,  and  made  figns  that 
they  wanted  water ;  the  hidians  readily  underftood  them, 
and  direded  them  to  run  down  farther  along  the  Ihore, 

which 


June. 
VVednef.  I*. 


R  0  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  lo^ 

which  they  did,  till  they  came  abreaft  of  fuch  a  rlufter  of  «765. 
houfes  as  we  had  juft  left  upon  the  other  iiland  ;  to  this  place 
the  Indians  flill  followed  them,  and  were  there  joined  by 
many  others :  the  boats  immediately  hauled  clofe  into  the 
furf,  and  we  brought  to,  with  the  fhips,  at  a  little  diflance 
from  the  Ihore,  upon  which  a  ftout  old  man,  with  a  long 
white  beard,  that  gave  him  a  very  venerable  appearance, 
came  down  from  the  houfes  to  the  beach.  He  was  attended 
by  a  young  man,  and  appeared  to  have  the  authority  of  a 
Chief  or  King:  the  reft  of  the  Indians,  at  a  fignal  which  he 
made,  retired  to  a  little  diftance,  and  he  then  advanced  quite 
to  the  water's  edge ;  in  one  hand  he  held  the  green  branch 
of  a  tree,  and  in  the  other  he  grafped  his  beard,  which  he 
prefled  to  his  bofom  ;  in  this  attitude  he  mad€  a  long  oration, 
or  rather  fong,  for  it  had  a  mufical  cadence  which  was  by 
^lo  means  difagreeable.  We  regretted  infinitely  that  we 
could  not  underfland  what  he  faid  to  us,  and  not  lefs  that  he 
could  not  underftand  any  thing  which  we  fhould  fay  to 
him;  to  fhew  our  good-will,  however,  we  threw  him  fome 
trifling  prefents,  while  he  was  yet  fpeaking,  but  he  would 
neither  touch  them  himfelf,  nor  fuffer  them  to  be  touched 
by  others  till  he  had  done :  he  then  walked  into  the  water, 
and  threw  our  people  the  green  branch,  after  which  he  took 
up  the  things  which  had  been  thrown  from  the  boats.  Every 
thing  now  having  a  friendly  appearance,  our  people  made 
figns  that  they  fhould  lay  down  their  arms,  and  moftof  them 
having  complied,  one  of  the  midfliipmen,  encouraged  by 
this  teftimony  of  confidence  and  friendfliip,  leaped  out  of 
the  boat  with  his  clothes  on,  and  fwam  through  the  furf  to 
the  fhore.  The  Indians  immediately  gathered  round  him, 
and  began  to  examine  his  clothes  with  great  curiofity ;  they 
feemed  particularly  to  admire  his  waiftcoat,  and  being 
willing  to  gratify  his  new  friends,  he  took  it  off,  and  pre- 
Voi.  I.  P  fented 


io6  COxMMODOUE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 


June 
V/ednef,  12 


1765.  fented  it  to  them;  this  courtefy,  however,  produced  a  dif- 
agreeable  effefl,  for  he  had  no  fooner  given  away  his 
waiftcoat,  than  one  of  the  hidians  very  ingenioufly  untied 
his  cravat,  and  the  next  moment  fnatched  it  from  his  neck, 
and  ran  away  with  it.  Our  adventurer,  therefore,  to  pre- 
vent his  being  flripped  by  piece-meal,  made  the  befl  of  his 
way  back  again  to  the  boat .-  ftill,  however,  we  were  upon 
good  terms,  and  feveral  of  the  Indians  fwam  off  to  our 
people,  fome  of  them  bringing  a  cocoa-nut,  and  others  a 
little  frelh  water  in  a  cocoa-nut  flaell.  But  the  principal 
obje(5l  of  our  boats,  was  to  obtain  fome  pearls;  and  the 
men,  to  affift  them  in  explaining  their  meaning,  had  taken 
with  them  fome  of  the  pearl  oyfter  fhells  which  they  had 
found  in  great  numbers  upon  the  coaft;  but  all  their  en- 
deavours were  inefTecftual,  for  they  could  not,  even  with 
this  affiftance,  at  all  make  themfelves  underftood.  It  is 
indeed  probable  that  we  fhould  have  fucceeded  better,  if  an 
intercourfe  of  any  kind  could  have  been  eftabliflied  between 
us,  but  it  was  our  misfortune  that  no  anchorage  could  be 
found  for  the  fhips.  As  all  Indians  are  fond  of  beads,  "it  can 
fcarcely  be  fuppofed  that  the  pearls,  which  the  oyfters  at 
this  place  contained,  were  overlooked  by  the  natives,  and  it 
is  more  than  probable  that  if  we  could  have  continued  here 
a  few  weeks,  we  might  have  obtained  fome  of  great  value  in 
exchange  for  nails,  hatchets,  and  bill-hooks,  upon  -yvhich 
the  natives,  with  more  reafon,  fet  a  much  higher  value- 
We  obferved,  that  in  the  lake,  or  lagoon,  there  were  two  or 
three  very  large  vefTels,  one  of  which  had  two  mafts,  and 
fome  cordage  aloft  to  fupport  them. 

K.  George's       To  thefc  two  iflands,  I  gave  the  name  of  King  George's 
jfiaiids.         Islands,  in  honour  of  his  Majefty.      That  which  we  lad 

vifited,  lies  in  latitude  14°  41' S.,  longitude  149"  Jj'W. ;  the 

variation  of  the  compafs  here  was  5-  E. 

CHAP. 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  0  R  L  D.  loj 


C  H  A  P.     X. 

'The  Rim  from   King   George  s    Ijlands   to   the   Ijlaiids  of 
Saypaftj   Tinian^    and  Agnigan  ;   is^nth  an    Account   of 
fever al  Jfands  that  were  dif covered  in  that  Track. 


J  u  ne. 
Thurfday  13. 


WE  purfued  our  courfe  to  the  weflward  the  fame  day,  '^7^^ 
and  the  next,  about  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon, 
we  faw  land  again,  bearing  S.  S.  W.  diflant  about  fix  leagues. 
"We  immediately  flood  for  it,  and  found  it  to  be  a  low  and 
very  narrow  ifland,  lying  eaft  and  weft:  we  ran  along  the 
fouth  fide  of  it,  which  had  a  green  and  pleafant  appearance, 
but  a  dreadful  furf  breaks  upon  every  part  of  it,  with  foul 
ground  at  fome  diftance,  and  many  rocks  and  fmall  iflands 
fcattered  at  about  three  leagues  from  the  fliore.  We  found 
it  about  twenty  leagues  in  length,  and  it  appeared  to  abound 
with  inhabitants,  though  we  could  get  only  a  tranfient 
glance  of  them  as  we  palled  along.  To  this  place  I  gave  the 
name  of  the  Prince  OF  Wales's  Island.  It  lies  in  latitude  Princcof 
15°  S.  and  the  weftermoft  end  of  it  in  longitude  151°  53' W.  ]fla,jd/ 
It  is  diftant  from  King  George's  Iflands  about  eight  and  forty 
leagwes,  in  the  diredion  of  S.  80  W. ;  the  variation  here  was 

From  the  weflern  extremity  of  this  ifland,  we  fleered  N. 
82  W.  and  at  noon  ou  the  i6th,  were  in  latitude  14"  28  S.,  Sunday  16 
longitude  156°  23' W.;  the  variation  being  7°  40' E.  The 
wind  was  now  eafterly,  and  we  had  again  the  fame  moun- 
tainous fwell  from  the  fouthward  that  we  had  before  we 
made  the  Iflands  of  Diredion,  and  which,  from  that  time  to 

P  2  this 


io8 


COMMODORE    BYRON*s    VOYAGE 


176?. 

June. 
Sunday  16. 


this  day  we  had  loft:  when  we  loft  that  fwell,  and  for  fome 
days  before,  we  faw  vaft  flocks  of  birds,  which  we  obferved 
always  took  their  flight  to  the  fouthward  when  evening  was 
coming  on.  Thefe  appearances  perfuaded  me  that  there 
was  land  in  the  fame  direcfhion,  and  I  am  of  opinion,  that  if 
the  winds  had  not  failed  me  in  the  higher  latitudes,  I  fliould 
have  fallen  in  with  it:  I  would  indeed  at  this  time  have 
hauled  away  to  the  fouthward,  and  attempted  the  difcovery, 
if  our  people  had  been  healthy,  for  having  obferved  that  all 
the  iflands  we  had  feen  were  full  of  inhabitants,  I  was  ftill 
more  confirmed  in  my  opinion  ;  as  I  could  account  for  their 
being  peopled  only  by  fuppofing  a  chain  of  iflands  reaching 
to  a  continent ;  but  the  ficknefs  of  the  crews,  in  both  fliips, 
was  an  infuperable  impediment. 

Monday  17.  The  ucxt  day,  we  again  faw  many  birds  of  various  forts 
about  the  fliip,  and  therefore  fuppofed  that  fome  other  ifland 
was  not  far  diftant,  for  the  fwell  continuing,  I  concluded 
that  the  land  was  not  of  very  great  extent:  I  proceeded,  how- 
ever, with  caution,  for  the  illands  in  this  part  of  the  ocean 
render  the  navigation  very  dangerous,  they  being  fo  low, 
that  a  fliip  may  be  clofe  in  with  them  before  they  are  feen. 
We  faw  nothing,  however,  on  the  iStli,  the  19th,  nor  the 
20th,  during  v;hich  we  continued  to  fleer  the  fame  courfe, 
though  the  birds  flill  continued  about  the  veflel  in  great 
numbers.  Our  latitude  was  now  13''  33'S.,  longitude  167° 
47' W.  The  Prince  of  Wales's  Ifland  was  diflant  three  hun- 
dred and  thirteen  leagues,  and  the  variation  of  the  needle 

Tiid^yzi.  was  9°  15' E.  The  next  morning,  about  feven  o'clock,  we 
difcovered  a  moft  dangerous  reef  of  breakers,  bearing 
S.  S.  W.  and  not  farther  diftant  than  a  fingic  league.  In 
about  half  an  hour  afterwards,  land  was  feen  from  the 
maft-head,  bearing  W.  N.  W.  and  diftant  about  eight  leagues : 
it  had  the  appearance  of  three  iflands,  with  rocks  and  broken 
3  ground 


TueCJay  i?. 
Wtdnef.  19 
Thwrlday  ic 


Friday  zi. 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  lo^ 

ground  between  them.  The  fouth  eaft  fide  of  thefe  iflands 
lies  N.  E.  by  N.  and  S.  W.  byS.  and  is  about  three  leagues  in 
length  between  the  extream  points,  from  both  which  a  reef 
runs  out,  upon  which  the  fea  breaks  to  a  tremendous  height. 
We  failed  round  the  north  end,  and  upon  the  north  weft 
and  weft  fide,  faw  innumerable  rocks  and  flioals,  which 
ftretched  near  two  leagues  into  the  fea,  and  were  extremely 
dangerous.  The  iflands  themfelves  had  a  more  fertile  and 
beautiful  appearance  than  any  we  had  feen  before,  and,  like 
the  reft,  fwarmed  with  people,  whofe  habitations  we  faw 
ftanding  in  clufters  all  along  the  coaft.  We  faw  alfo  a  large 
vefTel  under  fail,  at  a  little  diftance  from  the  fhore;  but  to 
our  unfpeakable  regret  we  were  obliged  to  leave  the  place 
without  farther  examination,  for  it  was  furrounded  in  every 
diredlion  by  rocks  and  breakers,  which  rendered  the  hazard 
more  than  equivalent  to  every  advantage  we  might  procure. 
At  this  time,  I  took  thefe  for  part  of  the  iflands  called  Solo- 
mon's Iflands,  and  was  in  hopes  that  I  fliould  fall  in  with 
others  of  them,  in  fome  of  which  we  might  find  an  harbour. 

The  reef  of  rocks  which  we  firft  faw  as  we  approached 
thefe  iflands,  lies  in  latitude  io°  15'  S.,  longitude  169°  28' W. 
and  it  bears  from  Prince  of  Wales's  Ifland  N.  76°  48'  W. 
diftant  352  leagues.  The  iflands  bear  from  the  reef  W.  N.W. 
diftant  nine  leagues:  I  called  them  the  Islands  of  Dancer, 
and  fleered  from  them  N.  W.  by  W.  allowing  for  the  vari- 
ation. 

After  having  feen  the  breakers  foon  after  it  was  light  in 
the  morning,  I  told  my  officers  that  I  apprehended  we  fliould 
have  frequent  alarms  in  the  night ;  at  night,  therefore, 
every  body  was  upon  the  watch,  which  a  very  hard  fquall  of 
wind,  with  rain,  rendered  the  more  necefl^ary.  About  nine 
o'clock,  having  juft  gone  down  into  my  cabbin,  I  heard  a 

great 


no  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765.  great  noife  above,  and  when  I  enquired  what  was  the  mat- 
«- — — _>  tcr,  I  was  told  that  the  Tamar,  who  was  ahead,  had  fired  a 
"  *^^'"  gun,  and  that  our  people  faw  breakers  to  leeward:  Iran 
inftantly  upon  deck,  and  foon  perceived  that  what  had  been 
taken  for  breakers  was  nothing  more  than  the  undulating 
reflecflion  of  the  moon,  which  was  going  down,  and  flaone 
faintly  from  behind  a  cloud  in  the  horizon  ;  we  therefore 
bore  away  after  the  Tamar,  but  did  not  get  fight  of  her  till 
an  hour  afterwards. 

Monday  2|.  Nothing  worthy  of  notice  happened  till  Monday  the  24th, 
when,  about  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  difcovered  an- 
other ifland,  bearing  S.  S.  W.  diflant  about  feven  or  eigbt 
leagues:  we  fleered  for  it,  and  found  it  to  be  low,  but 
covered  with  wood,  among  which  were  cocoa-nut  trees  in 
great  abundance.  It  had  a  pleafant  appearance,  and  a  large 
lake  in  the  middle,  like  King  George's  Illand :  it  is  near 
thirty  miles  in  circumference,  a  dreadful  fea  breaks  upon 
almoft  every  part  of  the  coaft,  and  a  great  deal  of  foul 
ground  lies  about  it.  We  failed  quite  round  it,  and  when 
we  were  on  the  Ice-fide,  fent  out  boats  to  found,  in  hopes  of 
finding  anchorage :  no  foundings,  however,  were  to  be  got 
near  the  fliore,  but  I  fent  the  boats  out  a  fecond  time, 
with  orders  to  land,  if  it  were  pollible,  and  procure  fome 
refrefhments  for  tlie  fick:  they  landed  with  great  difficulty, 
and  brought  olF  about  two  hundred  cocoa-nuts,  which,  to 
perfons  in  our  circumftances,  were  an  inellimable  treafurc. 
The  people  who  were  on  fliore,  reported  that  there  were  no 
figns  of  its  having  ever  been  inliabited,  but  that  they  found 
thoufands  of  fea  fowl  fitting  upon  their  neds,  which  were 
built  in  high  trees:  thefe  birds  were  fo  tame  that  they  fuf- 
fered  themfelves  to  be  knocked  down  without  leaving  their 
nefls :  the  ground  was  covered  with  land  crabs,  but  our 
people  faw  no  other  animal.  At  firil  I  was  inclined  to  be- 
y  licve 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  in 

lieve  that  this  ifland  was  the  fame  that  in  the  Neptune  Fran-      Jy^s- 

pis  is  called  Mahuta,  and  laid  down  about  a  degree  to  the    < < 

eaflward  of  the  great  illand  of  Saint  Elizabeth,  which  is  the      ^"  ^^  ^^* 
principal  of  the  Solomon's  Illands ;    but  being  afterwards 
convinced  of  the  contrary,  I  called  it  the  Duke  of  York's  Duke  of 
Island,  in  honour  of  his  late  Royal  Highnefs,  and  I  am  of  iVan'd! 
opinion  that  we  were  the  firft  human  beings  who  ever  faw 
it.     There  is  indeed  great  reafon  to  believe  that  there  is  no 
good  authority  for  laying  down  Solomon's  lilands  in  the  fitu- 
ation  that  is  affigned  to  them  by  the  French :  the  only  perfon 
who  has  pretended  to  have  feen  them  is  Quiros,  and  I  doubt 
whether  he  left  behind  him  any  account  of  them  by  which 
they  might  be  found  by  future  navigators. 

We  continued  our  courfe  till  the  29th,  in  the  track  of  thefe  Saturday  25. 
illands,  and  being  then  ten  degrees  to  the  weflward  of  their 
fituation  in  the  chart,  Avithout  having  feen  any  thing  of 
them,  I  hauled  to  the  northward,  in  order  to  crofs  the  equi- 
noxial,  and  afterwards  fhape  my  courfe  for  the  Ladrone 
Illands,  which,  though  a  long  run,  I  hoped  to  accomplifii 
before  I  Ihould  be  diftrelTed  for  water,  notwithftanding  it 
now  began  to  fall  fliort.  Our  latitude,  this  day,  was  8° 
13'  S.,  longitude  176'^  20'  E.  and  the  variation  was  10°  lo'E. 

On  Tuefday  the  2d  of  July,  we  again  faw  many  birds  J"'/* 
about  the  fliip,  and  at  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  dif- 
covered  an  ifland  bearing  north,  and  diftant  about  fix 
leagues:  we  flood  for  it  till  funfet,  when  it  was  diflant 
about  four  leagues,  and  then  kept  off  and  on  for  the  night. 
In  the  morning,  we  found  it  a  low  fiat  ifland,  of  a  mofl  de-  vve-^nef  3, 
lightful  appearance,  and  full  of  wood,  among  which  the 
cocoa-nut  tree  was  very  confpicuous:  we  faw,  however,  to 
our  great  regret,  much  foul  ground  about  it,  upon  which 
the  fea  broke  with  a  dreadful  furf.    We  fleered  along  the 

fouth 


112  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

T^s-      fouth  weft  fide  of  it,  which  we  judged  to  be  about  four 

July. 

« ^»j   leagaes  in  length,  and  foon  perceived  not  only  that  it  was 

^  "^ '  ^'  inhabited,  but  very  populous  ;  for  prefently  after  the  fhip 
came  in  fight,  we  faw  at  leaft  a  thoufand  of  the  natives 
affembled  upon  the  beach,  and  in  a  very  fhort  time  more 
than  fixty  canoes,  or  rather  proas,  put  off  from  the  fhore, 
and  made  towards  us.  We  lay  by  to  receive  them,  and 
they  were  very  foon  ranged  in  a  circle  round  us.  Thefc  vef- 
fels  were  very  neatly  made,  and  fo  clean  that  they  appeared 
to  be  quite  new:  none  of  them  had  fewer  than  three  perfons 
on  board,  nor  any  of  them  more  than  fix.  After  thefe 
hidians  had  gazed  at  us  fome  time,  one  of  them  fuddcnly 
jumped  out  of  his  proa,  fwam  to  the  fliip,  and  ran  up  the 
fide  like  a  cat :  as  foon  as  he  had  ftepped  over  the  gunwale, 
he  fat  down  upon  it,  and  burft  into  a  violent  fit  of  laughter, 
then  ftarted  up,  and  ran  all  over  the  fhip,  attempting  to 
ileal  whatever  he  could  lay  his  hands  upon,  but  without 
fuccefs,  for  being  ftark  naked,  it  was  impoffiblc  to  conceal 
his  booty  for  a  moment.  Our  feamen  put  him  on  a  jacket 
and  trowfers,  which  produced  great  merriment,  for  he  had 
all  the  geftures  of  a  monkey  newly  drefled ;  we  alfo  gave 
him  bread,  which  he  eat  with  a  voracious  appetite,  and 
after  having  played  a  thoufand  antic  tricks,  he  leaped  over- 
board, jacket  and  trowfers  and  all,  and  fwam  back  again  to 
his  proa;  after  this  feveral  others  fwam  to  the  fl^iip,  ran  up 
the  fide  to  the  gun-room  ports,  and  having  crept  in,  fnatchcd 
up  whatever  lay  in  their  reach,  and  immediately  leaped 
again  into  the  fea,  and  fwam  away  at  a  great  rate,  though 
fome  of  them,  having  both  hands  full,  held  up  their  arms 
quite  out  of  the  wat^r,  to  prevent  their  plunder  from  being 
fpoiled.  Thefe  people  are  tall,  well  proportioned,  and  clean- 
iimbed:  their  fkin  is  a  bright  copper  colour,  their  features 
are  fxtreznely  good,  and  there  is  a  mixture  of  intrepidity 

and 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  113 

and  cheerfulnefs  in  their  countenances  that  is  very  ftriking.  »765- 
They  have  long  black  hair,  which  fome  of  them  wore  tied  v_— ^X-j 
up  behind  in  a  great  bunch,  others  in  three  knots :  fome  of  ^  "^ '  ^' 
them  had  long  beards,  fome  only  whifkers,  and  fome  nothing 
more  than  a  fmall  tuft  at  the  point  of  the  chin.  They  were 
all  of  them  ftark  naked,  except  their  ornaments,  which  con- 
fided of  fliells,  very  prettily  difpofed  and  ftrung  together, 
and  were  worn  round  their  necks,  wrifts,  and  waifts:  all 
their  ears  were  bored,  but  they  had  no  ornaments  in  them 
when  we  faw  therii :  fuch  ornaments  as  they  wear,  when 
they  wear  any,  are  probably  very  heavy,  for  their  ears  hang 
down  almoft  to  their  flioulders,  and  fome  of  them  were 
quite  fplit  through.  One  of  thefe  men,  who  appeared  to  be  a 
perfon  of  fome  confequence,  had  a  firing  of  human  teeth 
about  his  waift,  which  was  probably  a  trophy  of  his  military 
prowefs,  for  he  would  not  part  with  it  in  exchange  for  any 
thing  that  I  could  offer  him.  Some  of  them  were  unarmed, 
but  others  had  one  of  the  mofl  dangerous  weapons  I  had 
ever  feen :  it  was  a  kind  of  fpear,  very  broad  at  the  end,  and 
fluck  full  of  fhark's  teeth,  which  are  as  fharp  as  a  lancet,  at 
the  fides,  for  about  three  feet  of  its  length.  We  fhewed 
them  fome  cocoa-nuts,  and  made  figns  that  we  wanted 
more  ;  but  inftead  of  giving  any  intimation  that  they  could 
fupply  us,  they  endeavoured  to  take  away  thofe  we  had. 

I  fent  out  the  boats  to  found  foon  after  we  brought  to  ofTthe 
ifland,  and  when  they  came  back,  they  reported  that  there 
was  ground  at  the  depth  of  thirty  fathom.,  within  two  cables' 
length  of  the  fliore;  but  as  the  bottom  was  coral  rock,  and 
the  foundings  much  too  near  the  breakers  for  a  fliip  to  lie  in 
fafety,  I  was  obliged  again  to  make  fail,  without  procuring 
any  refrefhments  for  the  fick.  This  ifland,  to  which  my 
officers  gave  the  name  of  Byron's   Island,    lies   in  lati-  uiZV 

Vol.  I.  Q^  tude 


114  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765-       tude  I"  18' S.,  longitude  173°  46' E. ;   the  variation  of  the 
\ ,-J.^   compafs  here,  was  one  point  E. 

Wednef.  3. 

In  our  courfe  from  this  place,  we  faw,  for  feveral  days, 
abundance  of  fifh,  but  we  could  take  only  fharks,  which 
were  become  a  good  difh  even  at  my  own  table.  Many  of 
the  people  now  began  to  fall  down  with  fluxes,  which  the 
Surgeon  imputed  to  the  exceffive  heat,  and  almoll  perpetual 
rains. 
Sunday  21.  By  tlic  2ift,  all  our  cocoa-nuts  being  expended,  our  people 
began  to  fall  down  again  with  the  fcurvy.  The  effedl  of 
thefe  nuts  alone,  in  checking  this  difeafe,  is  aflonifliing : 
many  whofe  limbs  were  become  as  black  as  ink,  who  could 
not  move  without  the  affiflance  of  two  men,  and  who,  befides 
total  debility,  fuffered  excruciating  pain,  were  in  a  few 
days,  by  eating  thefe  nuts,  although  at  fea,  fo  far  recovered 
as  to  do  their  duty,  and  could  even  go  aloft  as  well  as  they 
did  before  the  diftemper  feized  them.  For  feveral  days, 
about  this  time,  we  had  only  faint  breezes,  with  fmooth 
water,  fo  that  we  made  but  little  way,  and  as  we  were  now 
not  far  from  the  Ladrone  Iflands,  where  we  hoped  fome  re- 
frefhments  might  be  procured,  we  mod  ardently  wifhed  for 
a  frefli  gale,  efpecially  as  the  heat  was  ftill  intolerable,  the 
glafs  for  a  long  time  having  never  been  lower  than  eighty- 
one,  but  often  up  to  eighty-four;  and  I  am  of  opinion  that 
this  is  the  hottefl,  the  longeft,  and  moll  dangerous  run  that 
ever  was  made. 

On  the  loth,  we  were  in  latitude  13°  9'N.,  longitude  ijS*' 

Monday  22.    5°  E.,  and  ou  the  22d,  in  latitude  14^  25'  N.,  longitude  15;^^ 

1 1'  E.  during  which  time  we  had  a  northerly  current.     Being 

now  nearly  in  the  latitude  of  Tinian,  I  fliapcd  my  courfe  for 

that  illand. 

CHAP. 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  115 


c  H  A  P.    xr. 

The  Arrival  of  the  Dolphin  and  Tafnar  at  Tiniany  a  De~ 
fcription  of  the  prefent  Condition  of  that  Iflandy  and  an 
Account  of  the  TranfaSiions  there. 


o 


N  the  28th,  we  faw  a  great  number  of  birds  about      ,75^, 
the  Ihip,  which  continued  till  the  30th,  when  about  .    -'"|^'    . 
two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  we  faw  land,  bearing  W.  -i  N.  ^""'^,^5'  ^^• 

'  °  ^  Tuefday  30. 

which  proved  to  be  the  illands  Saypan,  Tinian,  and  Aigui- 
gan.  At  funfet,  the  extremes  of  them  bore  from  N.  W.  i.  N. 
weftward  to  S.  W. ;  and  the  three  iflands  had  the  appearance 
of  one.  At  feven,  we  hauled  the  wind,  and  flood  off  and  on 
all  night ;  and  at  fix  the  next  morning,  the  extremes  of  the  Wednef.  31^ 
illands,  which  flill  made  in  one,  bore  from  N.  W.  by  N.  to 
S.  W.  by  S.  diftant  five  leagues.  The  eaft  fide  of  thefe  iflands 
lies  N.  E.  by  N.  and  S.W,  by  S,  Saypan  is  the  northermoft; 
and  from  the  north  eaft  point  of  that  ifland  to  the  fouth 
weft  point  of  Aiguigan,  the  diftance  is  about  feventeen 
leagues.  Thefe  three  iflands  are  between  two  and  three 
leagues  diftant  from  each  other ;  Saypan  is  the  largeft,  and 
Aiguigan,  which  is  high  and  round,  the  fmalleft.  We  fleered 
along  the  eaft  fide  of  them,  and  at  noon  hauled  round  the 
fouth  point  of  Tinian,  between  that  ifland  and  Aiguigan, 
and  anchored  at  the  fouth  weft  end  of  it,  in  fixteen  fathom 
water,  with  a  bottom  of  hard  fand  and  coral  rock,  oppofite 
to  a  white  fandy  bay,  about  a  mile  and  a  quarter  from  the 
Chore,  and  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  from  a  reef  of 
rocks  that  lies  at  a  good  diftance  from  the  fliore,  in  the  very 

0^3  fpot 


n6  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765'      fpot  where  Lord  Anfon  lay  in  the  Centurion.    The  water  at 
^_  -.-'  _i    this  place  is  fo  very  clear  that  the  bottom  is  plainly  to  be, 
vvednef.  31.    ^^^^  ^^  ^j^^  depth  of  four  and  twenty  fathom,  which  is  no 
lefs  than  one  hundred  and  forty-four  feet. 

As  foon  as  the  fliip  was  fecured,  I  went  on  fliore^  to  fix 
upon  a  place  where  tents  might  be  eredted  for  the  fick, 
which  were  now  very  numerous  ;  not  a  fingle  man  being 
wholly  free  from  the  fcurvy,  and  many  in  the  laft  ftage  of  it. 
We  found  feveral  huts  which  had  been  left  by  the  Spaniards 
and  Indians  the  year  before  j  for  this  year  none  of  them  had 
as  yet  been  at  the  place,  por  was  it  probable  that  they 
fliould  come  for  fome  months,  the  fun  being  now  almoft 
vertical,  and  the  rainy  feafon  fet  in.  After  I  had  fixed  upon 
a  fpot  for  the  tents,  fix  or  feven  of  us  endeavoured  to  puflx 
through  the  woods,  that  we  might  come  at  the  beautiful 
lawns  and  meadows  of  which  the^-e  is  fo  luxuriant  a  de- 
fcription  in  the  Account  of  Lord  Anfon's.  Voyage,  and  if 
poffible  kill  fome  cattle.  The  trees  flood  fb  thick,  and  the 
place  was  fo  overgrown  with  underwood,  that  we  could  not 
fee  three  yards  before  us,  we  therefore  were  obliged  to  keep 
continually  hallooing  to  each  other,  to  prevent  our  being 
feparately  loft  in  this  tracklefs  wildernefs.  As  the  weather 
was  intolerably  hot,  we  had  nothing  on  befides  our  Ihoes, 
except  our  fliirts  and  trowfers,  ancj  thefe  were  in  a  very 
fliort  time  torn  all  to  rags  by  the  buflies  and  brambles  }  at 
laft,  however,  with  incredible  difficulty  and  labour,  we  got 
through  ;  but,  to  our  great  furprife  and  difappointment,  we 
found  the  country  very  different  from  the  account  we  had 
read  of  it :  the  lawns  were  entirely  overgrown  with  a  ftub- 
born  kind  of  reed  or  brufli,  in  many  places  higher  than  our 
heads,  and  no  where  lower  than  our  middles,  which  conti- 
nually entangled  our  legs,  and  cut  us  like  whipcord ;  our 
2  ftockings 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  tij 

{lockings  perhaps  might  have  fufFered  ftill  more,  but  we       »76s« 
wore  none.    During  this  march  we  were  alfo  covered  with   '      .    _»■ 
flies  from  head  to  foot,  and  whenever  we  offered  to  fpeak     ^  "*  •  3*' 
we  were  fure  of  having  a  mouthful,  many  of  which  never 
failed  to  get  down  our  throats.     After  we  had  walked  about 
three  or  four  miles,  we  got  fight  of  a  bull,  which  we  killed, 
ajxd  a  little  before  night  got  back  to  tlie  beach,  as  wet  as  if 
we  had  been  dipt  in  water,  and  fo  fatigued  that  we  were 
fcarcely  able  to  fland.    We  immediately  fent  out  a  party  to 
fetch  the  bull,  and  found  that  during  our  excurfion  fome 
tents,  had  been  got  up,  and  the  fick  brought  on  fliore. 

The  next  day  our  people  were  employed  in  fetting  up  jh^'iia'^i, 
more  tents,  getting  the  water-cafks  on  Ihore,  and  clearing 
the  well  at  which  they  were  to  be  filled.  This  well  I  ima- 
gined to  be  the  fame  that  the  Centurion  watered  at ;  but  it 
was  the  worn;  that  we  had  met  with  during  the  voyage,  for 
the  water  was  not  only  brackiih,  but  full  of  worms.  The 
Road  alfo  where  the  (hips  lay  was  a  dangerous  fituation  at 
this  feafon,  for  the  bottom  is  hard  fand  and  large  coral 
rocks,  and  the  anchor  having  no  hold  in  the  fand,  is  in  per- 
petual danger  of  being  cut  to  pieces  by  the  coral ;  tO'  pre- 
vent which  as  much  as  poilible,  I  rounded  the  cables,  and 
buoyed  them  up  with  empty  water  calks.  Another  precau- 
tion alfo  was  taught  me  by  experience,  for  at  firfl  I  moored, 
but  finding  the  cables  much  damaged,  I  refolved  to  lie  fingle 
for  the  future,  that  by  veering  away  or  heaving  in,  as  we 
fliould  have  more  or  lefs  wind,  we  might  always  keep  them 
from  being  flack,  and  confeqvi^ntly  from  rubbing,  and  this 
expedient  fucceed-ed  to  my  wifh.  At  the  full  and  change  of 
the  moon,  a  prodigious  fwell  tumbles  in  here,  fo  that  I 
never  faw  fliips  at  anchor  roll  fo  much  as  ours  did  while  we 
lay  here ,  and  it  once  drove  in  from  the  weftward  with  fuch 

violence. 


ii8  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765.      violence,  and  broke  fo  high  upon  the  reef,  that  I  was  ob- 

'1-  -"-!-  L'   liged  to  put  to  fea  for  a  week  ;  for  if  our  cable  had  parted 

in  the  night,  and  the  wind  had  been  upon  the  fliore,  which 

fometimes  happens  for  two  or  three  days  together,  the  fliip 

mull  inevitably  have  been  loft  upon  the  rocks.    - 

As  I  was  myfelf  very  ill  with  the  fcurvy,  I  ordered  a  tent 
to  be  pitched  for  me,  and  took  up  my  refidence  on  Ihore  ; 
where  we  alfo  eredled  the  armourer's  forge,  and  began  to 
repair  the  iron-work  of  both  the  fhips.  I  foon  found  that 
the  ifland  produced  limes,  four  oranges,  cocoa-nuts,  bread- 
fruit *,  guavas,  and  paupaus  in  great  abundance  ;  but  we 
found  no  water-melons,  fcurvy-grafs,  or  forrel. 

Notwithftanding  the  fatigue  and  diftrefs  that  we  had  en- 
dured, and  the  various  climates  we  had  pafTed  through,  nei- 
ther of  the  fhips  had  yet  loft  a  fmgle  man  fmce  their  failing 
from  England ;  but  while  we  lay  here  two  died  of  fevers,  a 
difeafe  with  which  many  werefeized,  though  we  all  recovered 
very  faft  from  the  fcurvy.  I  am  indeed  of  opinion  that  this  is 
one  of  the  moft  unhealthy  fpots  in  the  world,  at  leaft  during 
the  feafon  in  which  we  were  here.  The  rains  were  violent, 
and  almoft  incelTant,  and  the  heat  was  fo  great  as  to  threaten 
us  with  fufFocation.  The  thermometer,  which  was  kept  on 
board  the  fliip,  generally  flood  at  eighty-fix,  which  is  but 
nine  degrees  lefs  than  the  heat  of  the  blood  at  the  heart; 
and  if  it  had  been  on  fliore  it  would  have  rifen  much 
higher.  I  had  been  upon  the  coaft  of  Guinea,  in  the  Weft 
Indies,  and  upon  the  ifland  of  Saint  Thomas,  which  is  un- 
der the  Line,  but  I  had  never  felt  any  fuch  heat  as  I  felt 
here.  Befides  the  inconvenience  which  we  fufFered  from 
tlie  weather,  we  were  incefl'antly  tormented  by  the  flies  in  the 

*  See  a  particular  defcriptlon  of  the  bread-fruit,  vol.  ii.  p.  80. 

day, 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  119 

day,  and  by  the  mufquitos  in  the  night.  The  ifland  alfo  1765- 
fwarms  with  centipieds  and  fcorpions,  and  a  large  black  ant,  1  -^-"'^ 
fcarcely  inferior  to  either  in  the  malignity  of  its  bite.  Be- 
fides  thefe,  there  were  venomous  infedls  without  number, 
altogether  unknown  to  us,  by  which  many  of  us  fuffered 
fo  feverely,  that  we  were  afraid  to  lie  down  in  our  beds  i 
nor  were  thofe  on  board  in  a  much  better  fituation  than 
thofe  on  fliore,  for  great  numbers  of  thefe  creatures  being 
carried  into  the  fliip  with  the  wood,  they  took  poiTeffion  of 
every  birth,  and  left  the  poor  feamen  no  place  of  reft  either 
below  or  upon  the  deck. 

As  foon  as  we  were  fettled  in  our  new  habitations,  I  fent 
out  parties  to  difcover  the  haunts  of  the  cattle,  fome  of 
which  were  found,  but  at  a  great  diftance  fi-om  the  tents, 
and  the  beafts  were  fo  fhy  that  it  was  very  difficult  to  get  a- 
fliot  at  them.  Some  of  the  parties  which,  when  their  haunts 
had  been  discovered ,  were  fent  out  to  kill  them,  were  abfent 
three  days  and  nights  before  they  could  fucceed  -,  and  when 
a  bullock  had  been  dragged  feven  or  eight  miles  through 
fuch  woods  and  lawns  as  have  juft  been  defcribed,  to  the 
tents,  it  was  generally  full  of  fly-blows,  and  flunk  fo  as  to 
be  unfit  for  ufe :  nor  was  this  the  worft,  for  the  fatigue  of 
the  men  in  bringing  down  the  carcafs,  and  the  intolerable 
heat  they  fuflered  from  the  climate  and  the  labour,  fre- 
quently brought  on  fevers  which  laid  them  up.  Poultry 
however  we  procured  upon  eafier  terms :  there  was  great 
plenty  of  birds,  and  they  v/ere  eafily  killed  ;  but  the  flefli  of 
■the  beft  of  them  was  very  illtafled,  and  fuch  was  the  heat 
of  the  climate  that  within  an  hour  after  they  were  killed 
it  was  as  green  as  grafs,  and  fwarmed  with  maggots.  Our 
principal  refource  for  frefli  meat,  was  the  v^rild  hog,  with, 
which  the  ifland  abounds.     Thefe  creatures  are  very  fierce, 

and 


120  COMMODORE    BYRON's   VOYAGE 

tjf)5.      and  fome  of  them  fo  large  that  a  carcafs  frequently  weighed 


Augulf 


two  hundred  pounds.  We  killed  them  without  much  diffi- 
culty, but  a  Black  belonging  to  the  Tamar  contrived  a  me- 
thod to  fnare  them,  fo  that  we  took  great  numbers  of  them 
alive,  which  was  an  unfpeakable  advantage ;  for  it  not  only 
enfurcd  our  eating  the  flefh  while  it  was  fweet,  but  enabled 
us  to  fend  a  good  number  of  them  on  board  as  fea-ftores. 

In  the  mean  time  we  were  very  defirous  of  procuring 
fome  beef  in  an  eatable  ftate,  with  lefs  rilk  and  labour,  and 
Mr.  Gore,  one  of  our  Mates,  at  laft,  difcovered  a  pleafant  fpot 
upon  the  north  weft  part  of  the  ifland,  where  cattle  were  in 
great  plenty,  and  whence  they  might  be  brought  to  the 
tents  by  fea.  To  this  place  therefore  I  difpatched  a  party, 
with  a  tent  for  their  accommodation,  and  fent  the  boats 
every  day  to  fetch  what  they  fhould  kill ;  fometimes  how- 
ever there  broke  fuch  a  fea  upon  the  rocks  that  it  was  ira- 
poffible  to  approach  them,  and  the  Tamar's  boat  unhappily 
loft  three  of  her  beft  men  by  attempting  it.  We  were  now> 
upon  the  whole,  pretty  well  fupplied  with  provifions,  efpe- 
cially  as  we  baked  frefh  bread  every  day  for  the  fick ;  and 
the  fatigue  of  our  people  being  lefs,  there  were  fewer  ill 
with  the  fever:  but  feveral  of  them  were  fo  much  difor- 
dered  by  eating  of  a  very  fine  looking  fifh  which  we  caught 
here,  that  their  recovery  was  for  a  long  time  doubtful. 
The  Author  of  the  Account  of  Lord  Anfon's  Voyage  fays, 
that  the  people  on  board  the  Centurion  thought  it  prudent 
to  abftain  from  fifli,  as  the  few  which  they  cauglit  at  their ' 
firft  arrival  furfeited  thofe  who  eat  of  them.  But  not  attend-  ' 
ing  fufficiently  to  this  caution,  and  too  haftily  taking  the 
•wovd  furfdit  in  its  literal  and  common  acceptation,  we  ima- 
gined that  thofe  who  tafted  the  fifh  when  Lord  Anfon  firft 
came  hither,  were  made  fick  merely  by  eating  too  much ; 

whereas, 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  t2i 

whereas,  if  that  had  been  the  cafe,  there  would  have  been       »76s> 
no  reafon  for  totally  abflaining  afterwards,  but  only  eating  ■     "f"  '  ' 
temperately.     We  however  bought  our  knowlege  by  experi- 
ence, which  we  might  have  had  cheaper';   for  though  all 
our  people  who  tailed  this  fifh,  eat  fparingly,  they  were  all 
foon  afterwards  dangeroufly  ill. 

Befides  the  fruit  that  has  been  mentioned  already,  this 
ifland  produces  cotton  and  indigo  in  abundance,  and  would 
certainly  be  of  great  value  if  it  was  fituated  in  the  Weft  In- 
dies. The  Surgeon  of  the  Tamar  enclofed  a  large  fpot  of 
ground  here,  and  made  a  very  pretty  garden ;  but  we  did 
not  flay  long  enough  to  derive  any  advantage  from  it. 

While  we  lay  here,  I  fent  the  Tamar  to  examine  the  ifland 
of  Say  pan,  which  is  much  larger  than  Tinian,  rifes  higher, 
and,  in  my  opinion,  has  a  much  pleafanter  appearance.  She 
anchored  to  the  leeward  of  it,  at  the  diflance  of  a  mile 
from  the  fhore,  and  in  about  ten  fathom  water,  with  much 
the  fame  kind  of  ground  as  we  had  in  the  road  of  Tinian. 
Her  people  landed  upon  a  fine  fandy  beach  which  is  fix  or 
feven  miles  long,  and  walked  up  into  the  woods,  where  they 
faw  many  trees  which  were  very  fit  for  topmafts.  They  fav/ 
no  fowls,  nor  any  tracks  of  cattle  ;  but  of  hogs  and  guani- 
coes  there  was  plenty.  They  found  no  frefh  water  near  the 
beach,  but  faw  a  large  pond  inland,  which  they  did  not  ex- 
amine. They  faw  large  heaps  of  pearl  oyfter-fliells  thrown 
up  together,  and  other  figns  of  people  having  been  there 
not  long  before :  pofTibly  the  Spaniards  may  go  thither  at 
fome  feafons  of  the  year,  and  carry  on  a  pearl  fifhery.  They 
alfo  faw  many  of  thofe  fquare  pyramidal  pillars  which  are 
to  be  found  at  Tinian,  and  which  are  particularly  defcribed 
in  the  Account  of  Lord  Anfon's  Voyage. 

Vol.  L  R  On 


133 


COMMODORE     BYRON's    VOYAGE 


1765. 

September. 
Monday  30. 


Oaober. 
Tuefday  1. 


Wednef.  2. 

Thurfday  3,- 


On  Monday  the  30th  of  September,  having  now  been  here 
nine  weeks,  and  our  lick  being  pretty  well  recovered,  I  ordered 
the  tents  to  be  ftruck,  and  with  the  forge  and  oven  carried 
back  to  the  fhip ;  I  alfo  laid  in  about  two  thoufand  cocoa- 
nuts,  which'  I  had  experienced  to  be  fo  powerful  a  remedy 
for  the  fcurvy,  and  the  next  day  I  weighed,  hoping  that  be- 
fore we  fliould  get  the  length  of  the  Baihe  Iflands,  the  N.  E. 
monfoon  would  be  fet  in.  I  flood  along  the  fhore  to  take  in 
the  beef-hunters  ;  but  we  had  very  little  wind  this  day  and 
the  next  till  the  evening,  when  it  came  to  the  weftward  and 
blew  frefh  :  I  then  flood  to  the  northward  till  the  morning 
of  the  3d,  when  we  made  Anatacan,  an  ifland  that  is  re- 
markable high,  and  the  fame  that  was  firfl  fallen  in  with 
by  Lord  Anfon. 


CHAP. 


i 


ROUND   THE   WORLD. 


CHAP.     XII. 

^be  Run  from  Tinian  to  Pulo  Timoany  with  fome  Account 

of  that  Ifiandy  its  Inhabitants  and  ProduSiionSy 

and  thence  to  Batavia. 


iZi 


W 


E  continued  our  courfe  till  Thurfday  the  loth,  when       1765.' 


Oftober. 


being  in  latitude  18*^  33'  N.,  longitude  136°  5c/  E.  we 
found  the  fhip  two  and  twenty  miles  to  the  fouthward  of  her  '^''"'^'^^y  "°- 
account,  which  muft  have  been  the  effeft  of  a  llrong  current 
in  that  dired:ion.  The  variation  here  was  5*^  10'  E.  and  for 
fome  time  we  found  it  regularly  decreafing,  fo  that  on  the 
19th,  being  in  latitude  21'  10'  N.,  longitude  124°  17'E.  the 
needle  pointed  due  north. 

On  the  18th,  we  had  found  the  (hip  eighteen  miles  to  the  Fnday  18. 
northward  of  her  account,  and  faw  feveral  land  birds  about 
the  fliip,  which  appeared  to  be  very  much  tired :  we  caught 
one  as  it  was  refting  upon  the  booms,  and  found  it  very  re- 
markable. It  was  about  as  big  as  a  goofe,  and  all  over  as 
white  as  fnow,  except  the  legs  and  beak  which  were  black; 
the  beak  was  curved,  and  of  fo  great  a  length  and  thicknefs, 
that  it  is  not  eafy  to  conceive  how  the  mufcles  of  the  neck, 
which  was  about  a  foot  long  and  as  fmall  as  that  of  a  crane, 
could  fnpport  it.  We  kept  it  about  four  months  upon  bif- 
cuit  and  water,  but  it  then  died,  apparently  for  want  of 
npurifhment,  being  almofl  as  light  as  a  bladder.  It  was 
very  different  from  every  fpecies  of  the  Toucan  that  is  re- 
prefented  by  Edwards,  and  I  believe  has  never  been  de- 

P«.  2  fcribed. 


X24  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

17^5'      fcribed.    Thefe  birds  appeared  to  have  been  blown  off  fome 
\_  ^-  Lr   ifland  to  the  northward  of  us,  that  is  not  laid  down  in  the 

Friday  |8.  u       . 

'  charts. 

TueiHay  22,  The  needle  continued  to  point  due  north  till  the  22d» 
when,  at  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning,  Grafton's  Ifland,  the 
northerraoft  of  the  Baflie  Iflands  bore  fouth,  diftant  fix 
leagues.  As  I  had  defigned  to  touch  at  thefe  iflands,  I  flood 
for  that  in  fight  j  but  as  the  navigation  from  hence  to  the 
Streight  of  Banca  is  very  dangerous,  and  we  had  now  both 
a  fine  morning  and  a  fine  gale,  I  thought  it  befl  to  proceed 
on  our  way,  and  therefore  fleered  weflward  again.  The 
principal  of  thefe  iflands  are  five  in  number,  and  by  a  good 
obfervation  Grafton's  Ifland  lies  in  latitude  21°  8'  N.,  longi- 
tude 118°  14  E.  The  variation  of  the  compafs  was  now 
1°  30'  W. 

Thurfday24.  On  the  24th,  being  in  latitude  16"  59'  N.,  longitude 
ris'^  I'E.  we  kept  a  good  look-out  for  the  Triangles,  which 
lie  without  the  north  end  of  the  Prafil,  and  form  a  moll 

Wednef.30.  dangerous  fhoal.  On  the  30th,  we  faw  feveral  trees  and 
large  bamboos  floating  about  the  fliip,  and  upon  founding 
had  three  and  twenty  fathom,  with  dark  brown  fand,  and 
fraall  pieces  of  fliells.     Our  latitude  was  now  7^17'  N.,  lon- 

Thorfdiy3i.  gitudc  104-  21'  E.  ;  the  variation  was  30'  W.  The  next  day 
we  found  the  fliip  ihineen  miles  to  the  northv/ard  of  her 
account,  which  we  judged  to  be  the  efTecT;  of  a  current ;  and 

Saturday  2.  on  the  sd  of  Novcmber,  we  found  her  thirty-eight  miles  to  the 
fouthward  of  her  account.  Our  latitude  by  obfervation  was 
3°  54'  N.,  longitude  103°  20'  E.  We  had  here  foundings  at 
forty-two  and  forty-three  fathom,  with  foft  mud. 

Sundays.  At  fcvcu  o'clock  the  ncxt  morning,  we  faw  the  ifland  of 

Timoan,  bearing  S.  W.  by  W.  diftant  about  twelve  leagues. 
As  Dampier  has  mentioned  Pulo  Timoan  as  a  place  where 

fome 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  125 

fome  refrefhments  are  to  be  procured,   I  endeavoured  to      1765- 
touch  there,  having  lived  upon  fait  provifions,  which  were   '      .J 
now  become  bad  ever  fince  we  were  at  Tinian ;  but  light    ^"  ^^  ^' 
airs,  calms,  and  a  foutherly  current,  prevented  our  coming 
to  an  anchor  till  late  in  the  evening  of  the  5th.    We  had  Tuefday  5, 
lixteen  fathom  at  about  the  diftance  of  two  miles  from  the 
fhore,  in  a  bay  on  the  eaft  fide  of  the  iiland: 

The  next  day  I  landed  to  fee  what  was  to  be  got,  and  Wednef.  6, 
found  the  inhabitants,  who  are  Malays,  a  furly  infolent  fet 
of  people.  As  foon  as  they  faw  us  approaching  the  fliore, 
they  came  down  to  the  beach  in  great  numbers,  having  a 
long  knife  in  oae  hand,  a  fpear  headed  with  iron  in  the 
other,  and  a  creffit  or  dagger  by  their  fide.  We  went  on 
Ihore,  however,  notwithftanding  thefe  hoflile  appearances, 
and  a  treaty  foon  commenced  between  us ;  but  all  we  could 
procure,  was  about  a  dozen  of  fowls,  and  a  goat  and  kid. 
We  had  oiFered  them  knives,,  hatchets,  bill  hooks,  and  other 
things  of  the  fame  kind ;  but  thefe  they  refufed  with  great 
contempt,  and  demanded  rupees  :  as  we  had  no  rupees,  we 
were  at  firil  much  at  a  lofs  how  to  pay  for  our  purchafe ; 
but  at  laft  we  bethought  ourfelves  of  fome  pocket  handker- 
chiefs, and  thefe  they  vouchfafed  to  accept,  though  they 
would  take  only  the  beft. 

Thefe  people  are  of  a  fmall  flature,  but  extremely  well 
made,  and  of  a  dark  copper  coloui-.  We  faw  among  them' 
one  old  man  who  was  drefled  fomewhat  in  the  manner  of 
the  Perfians  ;  but  all  the  reft  were  naked,  except  a  handker- 
chief, which  they  wore  as  a  kind  of  turban  upon  their 
heads,  and  fome  pieces  of  cloth  which  were  faflened  with  a 
filver  plate  or  clafp  round  their  middles.  We  faw  none  of 
their  women,  and  probably  fome  care  was  taken  to  keep 
them  out  of  our  fight.     The  habitations  are  very  neatly 

built 


.12(5  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 


•  November 
Wednef.  6. 


1765.  built  of  flit  bamboo,  and  are  raifed  upon  pofts  about  eight 
feet  from  the  ground.  Their  boats  are  alfo  well  made,  and 
we  faw  fome  of  a  large  lize,  in  which  we  fuppofed  that  they 
carried  on  a  trade  to  Malacca. 

The  ifland  is  mountainous  and  woody,  but  we  found  it 
pleafant  when  we  were  afhore ;  it  produces  the  cabbage  and 
cocoa-nut  tree  in  great  plenty,  but  the  natives  did  not  chufe 
to  let  us  have  any  of  the  fruit.     We  faw  alfo  fome  rice 
grounds,  but  what  other  vegetable  produftions  Nature  has 
favoured  them  with,  we  had  no  opportunity  to  learn,  as  we 
itaid  here  but  two  nights  and  one  day.     In  the  bay  where 
the  fhip  rode  there  is  excellent  fifhing,  though  the  furf  runs 
very  high  :  we  hauled  our  feinewith  great  fuccefs,  but  could 
eafily  perceive  that  it  gave  umbrage  to  the  inhabitants,  who 
confider  all  the  fiili  about  thefe  iflands  as  their  own.    There 
are  two  fine  rivers  that  run  into  this  bay,  and  the  water  is 
excellent :  it  was  indeed  fo  much  better  than  what  we  had 
on  board,    that  I  filled  as  many  caflcs  with  it  as   loaded 
the  boat  twice.     While  we  lay  here,  fome  of  the  natives 
brought  down  an  animal  which  had  the  body  of  a  hare, 
and  the  legs  of  a  deer ;  one  of  our  officers  bought  it,  and 
wc  fhould  have  been  glad  to  have  kept  it  alive,  but  it  was 
impoffible  for  us  to  procure  for  it  fuch  food  as  it  would  eat ; 
it  was  therefore  killed,  and  we  found  it  very  good  food.    All 
tlie  while  we  lay  here,  v/e  had  the  moft  violent  thunder, 
lightning  and  rain,  that  I  had  ever  known  ;    and  finding 
that  nothing  more  was  to  be  procured,  we  failed  again  on 
Thurfday;.    Tlvurfday  morning,  with  a  fine  breeze  off  the  land.     In  the 
afternoon,  we  tried  the  current,  and  found  it  fet  S.  E.  at  the 
rate  of  a  mile  an  hour.     The  variation  here   was  38   W. 
We  certainly  made  this  palTage  at  an  improper  feafon  of  the 
year  ;  for  after  we  came  into  the  latitude  of  Pulo  Condore, 

we 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  127 

we  had  nothing  but  light  airs,  calms,  and  tornados,  with       1765. 
Tiolent  rain,  thunder  and  lightning.  v , — i 

At  feven  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  Sunday  the  loth,  we  Sunday  lo. 
faw  the  eaft  end  of  the  ifland  of  Lingen,  bearing  S.  W.  by  W. 
diftant  eleven  or  twelve  leagues.  The  current  fet  E.S.  E.  at 
the  rate  of  a  mile  an  hour.  At  noon,  it  fell  calm,  and  I 
anchored  with  the  kedge  in  twenty  fathom.  At  one  o'clock, 
^the  weather  having  cleared  up,  v/e  faw  a  fmall  illand  bear- 
ing S.  W.  7  S.  diftant  ten  or  eleven  leagues. 

At  one  o'clock  the  next  morning,  we  weighed  and  made  Monday  xi. 
fail ;  and  at  fix,  the  fmall  ifland  bore  W.  S.  W.  diftant  about 
feven  leagues,  and  fome  very  fmall  iflands,  which  we  fup- 
pofed  to  be  Domines  iflands,  W.  4.  N.  diftant  about  feven  or 
eight  leagues,  a  remarkable  double  peak  on  the  ifland  of 
Lingen,  bearing  at  fame  time  W.  by  N.  diftant  about  ten  or 
twelve  kagues.  Our  latitude  by  obfervation  was  now 
18'  S.  The  latitude  of  the  eaft  end  of  Lingen  is  10'  S.,  lon- 
gitude 105"  15'  E.  Pulo  Taya  bears  from  it  nearly  S.  by  W. 
and  is  diftant  about  twelve  leagues. 

At  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  Tuefday  the  12th,  we  Tu€fdayi2. 
faw  a  fmall  Chinefe  junk  to  the  north  eaft  ;  and  at  feven  the 
next  morning  a  fmall  ifland,  called  Pulo  Tote,  bearing 
S.  E.  by  E.  diftant  about  twelve  leagues.  A  little  to  the 
northward  of  Pulo  Taya  is  a  very  fmall  ifland,  called  Pulo 
Toupoa. 

The  next  day,  at  four  in  the  afternoon,  there  being  no  Wednef.  13. 
wind,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  fourteen  fathom  with  fofc 
ground,  Pulo  Taya  bearing  N.  W.  diftant  about  feven 
leagues.  We  tried  the  current,  and  found  it  fet  E.  by  S.  at 
the  rate  of  two  knots  two  fathom  an  hour.  We  faw  a  floop 
at  anchor  about  four  miles  from  us,  which  hoifted  Dutch 

colours. 


;iz8  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

v6.s.       colours.      In  the  night,  we  had  violent  rain,   with  hard 

<_ ^, )   fqualls,  during  one  of  which  we  parted  the  ftream  cable, 

■ '^'  and  therefore  let  go  the  fmall  bower.  At  eight  in  the 
Thurfdayi4.  moming,  the  wind  became  moderate  and  variable,  from 
N.  N.  W.  to  W.  S.  W.  We  got  out  our  longboat  and  weighed 
the  ftream  anchor,  and  at  nine  made  fail.  We  found  the 
current  ftill  very  ftrong  to  the  eaftward;  and  at  two,  we 
anchored  again  in  fourteen  fathom,  Pulo  Taya  bearing 
N.  W.  T  N.  diftant  between  feven  and  eight  leagues.  The 
vefTel  which  we  had  feen  the  day  before  under  Dutch  co- 
lours, ftill  lying  at  anchor  in  the  fame  place,  I  fent  a  boat 
with  an  officer  to  fpeak  with  her :  the  officer  v/as  received 
on  board  with  great  civility;  but  was  extremely  furprifed  to 
find  that  he  could  not  make  himfelf  underftood,  for  the 
people  on  board  were  Malays,  without  a  fingle  white  man 
among  them :  they  made  tea  for  our  men  immediately,  and 
behaved  with  great  chearfulnefs  and  hofpitality.  The  vefTcl 
was  of  a  very  fmgular  conftrucftion ;  her  deck  was  of  flit 
bamboo,  and  fhe  was  fleered,  not  by  a  rudder,  but  by  two 
large  pieces  of  timber,  one  upon  each  quarter. 

Friday  15.  The  ncxt  morning,  at  fix  o'clock,  we  weighed  and  made 

fail:  at  two,  Monopin  Hill  bore  S.  by  E.  diflant  about  ten 
or  eleven  leagues,  and  had  the  appearance  of  a  fmali  ifland. 
It  bears  S.  by  W.  from  the  feven  iflands,  and  is  diflant 
from  them  about  twelve  leagues:  its  latitude  is  2°  South. 
From  the  feven  iflands  we  fleered  S.  W.  by  S.  and  had  re- 
gular foundings  from  twelve  to  feven  fathom,  and  foon 
after  faw  the  coaft  of  Sumatra,  bearing  from  W.  S.  W.  to 
W.  by  N.  at  the  diftance  of  about  feven  leagues.     In  tlic 

Saturday  16.  cveuing,  wc  anchored  in  feven  fathom  ;  and  the  next  morn- 
ing at  four,  we  made  fail  again,  and  continued  our  courfe 
S.  by  E.  till  tlie  peak  of  Monopin  Kill  bore  eaft,  and  Bata- 
6  carang 


R  O  U  N  D    THE    W  O  R  L  D. 

carang  Point:,  on  the  Sumatra  fliore,  S.  W.  to  avoid  a  Ihoal, 
called  Frederick  Hendhck,  which  is  about  mid-way  between 
the  Banca  and  Sumatra  fliore  :  the  foundings  were  thirteen 
and  fourteen  fathom.  We  then  fleered  E.  S.  E.  and  kept 
ijiid-channel  to  avoid  the  banks  of  Palambam  River,  and 
that  which  lies  off  the  weftermoft  point  of  Banca.  Wiien 
we  were  abreaft  of  Palambam  River,  we  regularly  flioaled 
our  water  from  fourteen  to  feven  fathom  ;  and  when  we 
had  pafTed  it,  we  deepened  it  again  to  fifteen  and  fixteen 
fathom.  We  continued  to  fteer  E.  S.E.  between  the  Third 
and  Fourth  Points  of  Sumatra,  which  are  about  ten  leagues 
diftant  from  each  other:  the  foundings,  neareft  to  the  Su- 
matra fliore,  were  all  along  from  eleven  to  thirteen  fathom; 
and  the  high  land  of  Queda  Banca  appeared  over  the  Third 
Poin^  of  Sumatra,  bearing  E. S.E.  From  the  Third  Point  to 
the  l^econd,  the  courfe  is  S.E.  by  S.  at  the  diftance  of  about 
eleven  or  twelve  leagues.  The  high  land  of  Queda  Banca, 
and  the  Second  Point  of  Sumatra  bear  E.N,  E.  and  W.  S.W. 
of  each  other.  The  Streight  is  about  five  leagues  over,  and 
in  the  mid-channel  there  is  twenty-four  fathom.  At  fix 
o'clock  in  the  evening,  we  anchored  in  thirteen  fathom ; 
Monopin  Hill  bearing  N.  4  W. ;  and  the  Third  Point  of  Su- 
matra, S.  E.  by  E.  diftant  between  two  and  three  leagues. 
Many  fmall  vefl^els  were  in  fight,  and  moft  of  them  hoifted 
Dutch  colours.  In  the  night  we  had  frefli  gales  and  fqualls, 
with  thunder  and  lightning,  and  hard  rain;  but,  as  our 
•ables  were  good,  we  were  in  no  danger,  for  in  this  place 
the  anchor  is  buried  in  a  ftifF  clay. 

In  the  morning  the  current  or  tide  fet  to  the  S.  E.  at  the  Sunday  i 
rate  of  three  knots  ;  at  five  we  weighed,  with  a  moderate- 
gale  at  weft  and  hazey  weather,  and  in  the  night  the  tide 
fhifted,  and  ran  as  ftrongly  to  the  N.  W. ;  fo  that  it  ebbs  and 
flows  here  twelve  hours. 

Vol.  I.  S  Oa 


13©  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

^»765-  On  the  19th,  we  fpoke  with  an  Englifti  fnow,  belonging 

«-*-v — '>   to  the  Eaft  India  Company,  which  was  bound  from  Bencoo- 
ay  19.  j^^  ^^  Malacca  and  Bengal.    We  had  now  nothing  to  eat 
but  the  ftiip's  provifions,  which  were  become  very  bad,  for 
all  our  beef  and  pork  flunk  intolerably,  and  our  bread  was 
rotten  and  full  of  worms  ;    but  as  foon  as  the  Mafter  of 
this  fnow  learnt  our  lituation,   he  generoufly  fent  me  a 
flieep,  a  dozen  fowls,  and  a  turtle,  which  I  verily  believe 
was  half  his  flock,  befides  two  gallons  of  arrack,  and  would 
accept  nothing  but  our  thanks  in  return.    It  is  with  great 
pleafure  that  I  pay  this  tribute  to  his  liberality,  and  am  very 
fbrry  that  I  cannot  recolle<5t  his  name,  or  the  name  of  his 
vefTel.     In  the  afternoon,  we  worked  round  the  Firfl  Point 
of  Sumatra,  and  our  foundings  on  the  north-fide,  at  the  dif- 
tance  of  about  a-  mtle  and  a  half  from  the  fhore,  were  four- 
teen fathom.     At  half  an  hour  after  three  we  anchored,  and' 
fent  a  boat  to  found  for  the  flioals  which  lie  to  the  north- 
ward of  the  ifland  called  Lafipara,  which  bore  from  us 
S.  E.  by  S.  diflant  about  fix  leagues.   Little  wind,  and  a  flrong 
tide  of  flood  to  the  northward,  prevented  our  working  be- 
tween thefe  fhoal's  and  the  coafl  of  Sumatra  till  the  after- 
Wednef. 20.   noon  of  the  twentieth:  the  foundings  were  very  regular, 
being  nine  or  ten  fathom  as  we  flood  over  to  the  ifland,  and' 
five  or  fix  when  we  fiood  over  to  Sumatra.    As^  this  Streight 
has  been  often  navigated,  and  is  well  known,  it  is  not  ne- 
celTary  to  infert  all  the  particulars  of  our  pafTage  through  it ; 
I  fhall  therefore  only  fay,  that  at  fix  o'clock  in  the  evening- 
Taefdayz;.   of  Tucfday  the  27th,  we  fleered  between  the  iflands  Edam 
and  Horn,  and  entered  the  road  of  Batavia.     At  eight,  we 
anchored  without  the  fhips,  Onrufl  bearing  W.N.W.  diflant 
five  or  fix  miles. 

CHAP. 


Wedncf.  28, 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  131 

CHAP.    xiir. 

TranfaSiiom  at  Bataviay  and  Departure  from  that  Place. 

THE  next  day,  which  by  our  account  was  the  28th,  1765. 
but  by  the  account  of  the  Dutch  at  this  place,  was  the  *..°''t'"  "-■• 
29th,  we  having  loft  a  day  by  having  fleered  weftward  a 
year,  we  anchored  nearer  to  the  town,  and  faluted  the  water 
fort  with  eleven  guns,  which  were  returned.  We  found 
here  above  a  hundred  fail  great  and  fmall,  and  among 
others,  a  large  Englifh  fhip  belonging  to  Bombay,  which 
faluted  us  with  thirteen  guns. 

There  is  always  lying  here  a  Dutch  Commodore  belonging 
to  the  Company,  who,  among  his  countrymen,  is  a  perfon 
of  very  great  confequence.  This  gentleman  thought  fit  to 
fend  his  boat  on  board  of  me,  with  only  the  cockfwain  in 
her,  who  was  a  very  dirty  ragged  fellow :  as  foon  as  he  was 
brought  to  me,  he  afked  whence  I  came,  whither  I  was 
bound,  and  many  other  queftions,  which  I  thought  equally 
impertinent,  at  the  fame  time  pulling  out  a  book,  and  pea 
and  ink,  that  he  might  fet  down  the  anfwers  j  but  as  I  was 
impatient  to  fave  him  this  trouble,  he  was  defired  imme- 
diately to  walk  over  the  fhip's  fide,  and  put  off  his  boat, 
with  which  he  was  gracioufly  pleafed  to  comply. 

When  we  came  to  this  place,  we  had  not  one  man  fick  in 
either  of  the  fhips ;  but  as  I  knew  it  to  be  more  unhealthy 
than  any  other  part  of  the  Eaft  Indies,  as  the  rainy  feafoq. 
was  at  hand,  and  arrack  was  to  be  procured  in  great  plenty 
I  determined  to  make  my  flay  here  as  Ihort  as  poflible.  I 
went  on  fliore  to  wait  upon  the  Dutch  Governor,  but  was 

S  2  told 


igi  COMMoSORE    BYRON'S    VOYAGE 

1765.  told  that  he  was  at  his  country  houfe,  about  four  miles 
^ovem^er.^  diftaiit  froiu  the  town.  I  met  however  with  an  officer,  called 
a  {hebander,  who  is  a  kind  of  mailer  of  the  ceremonies,  and 
he  acqiiainted  me,  that  if  I  chofe  to  go  to  the  Governor 
immediately,  rather  than  wait  for  his  coming  to  town,  he 
would  attend  me ;  I  accepted  his  offer,  and  we  fet  out  to- 
gether in  his  chariot.  The  Governor  received  me  with  great 
politenefs,  and  told  me,  that  I  might  either  take  a  houfe  in 
any  part  of  the  city  that  I  fhould  like^  or  be  provided  with 
lodgings  at  the  hotel.  This  hotel  is  a  licenfed  lodging- 
houfe,  the  only  one  in  the  place,  and  kept  by  a  Frenchman* 
an  artful  fellow,  who  is  put  in  by  the  Governor  himfelf.  It 
has  indeed  more  the  appearance  of  a  pyalace  than  a  houfe  of 
entertainment,  being  the  mofl  magnificent  building  in  Ba- 
tavia ;  nor  would  a  fmall  edifice  anfwer  the  purpofe,  for  as 
there  is  a  penalty  of  five  hundred  dollars  upon  any  perfon  in 
the  city  who  fhall  fufFer  a  flrahger  to  lleep  a  fin'gle  night  at 
his  houfe,  the  ftrangers  who  make  it  their  refidence  are  never 
few:  all  the  houfes  indeed  have  a  ftately  appearance  on  the 
outfide,  and  are  elegantly  fitted  up  within,  and  we  were  "told 
that  the  Chinefe,  of  whom  there  are  great  numbers  at  this 
j^lace,  wei'e  the  architecfts.  The  city  is  large,  and  the  ftreets 
well  laid  out,  but  they  have  greatly  the  appearance  of  thofe 
in  the  cities  of  Holland,  for  a  canal  runs  through  moft  of 
them,  with  a  row  of  trees  planted  on  each  fide:  this  is  con- 
Vehfent  for  the  merchants,  who  have  every  thing  brought 
up  to  their  own  doors  by  water,  but  it  probably  contributes 
to  the  unhealthinefs  of  the  place ;  the  canal,  indeed,  as  the 
city  is  built  in  a  fwamp,  might  be  necefi^ary  as  a  drain,  but 
the  ti'ees,  though  they  have  a  pleafant  appearance,  muft 
certainly  prevent  the  noxious  vapours  that  are  perpetually 
arifing,  fr6m  being  difperfed,  by  obllruc^ing  the  circulation 
of  the  air. 

4  The 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


155 


The  number  of  people  here  is  incredible,  and  they  are  of  1765. 
almoft  every  nation  in  the  world,  Dutch,  Portuguefe,  Chi-  ■.°^^.'"  ^ 
nefe,  Perfians,  Moors,  Malays,  Javanefe,  and  many  others: 
the  Chinefe,  however,  have  a  large  town  to  themfelves, 
without  the  walls,  and  carry  on  a  confidcrable  trade,  for 
they  have  annually  ten  or  twelve  large  junks  from  China; 
and  to  thefe  the  opulence  of  the  Dutch  at  Batavia  is  in  a 
great  meafure  owing.  The  beef  here  is  bad,  and  the  mutton  ' 
fCarce,  but  the  poultry  and  iifh  arc  excellent  and  in  great 
plenty.  Here  are  alfo  the  greateft  variety  and  abundance  of 
the  fineft  fruit  in  the  world,  but  the  mufquitos,  centipiedsr 
fcorpions,  and  other  noxious  vermin,  which  are  innu- 
merable, prevent  all  enjoyment,  and  e^'en  reft,  as  well  by 
night  as  by  day.  The  roads,  for  many  miles  about  the  city, 
are  as  good  as  any  in  Engla.id :  they  are  very  broad,  and  by 
the  fide  of  them  runs  a  canal,  fliaded  by  tall  trees,  which  is 
navigable  for  veflels  of  a  very  large  fize :  on  the  other  fide 
of  the  canal  are  gardens,  of  a  very  pleafant  appearance,  and 
country  houfes  of  the  citizens,  where  they  fpend  as  much  of 
their  time  as  poffible,  the  fituation  being  lefs  unwholefome 
than  the  city;  and  there  are  fo  few  of  them  who  do  not  keep 
a  carriage,  that  it  is  almoft  a  difgrace  to  be  feen  on  foor. 

At  this  place  I  continued  from  the  28th  of  November  to  the    December. 
loth  of  December,   when,   having  procured  what  refrefh-     °"   ^  "^" 
ments  I  could  for  my  people,  and  taken  on  board  a  fufficient 
quantity  of  rice  and  arrack,    to  fervc   for  the  reft  of  tlie 
voyage,  I  weighed  anchor  and  made  fail.     The  fort  liiluted 
me  with  eleven  guns,  and  the  Dutch  Commodore  with  thir- 
teen, which  I  returned  ;  we  were  faluted  alfo  by  the  Englifla 
fhip.     We  worked  down  to  Prince's  Illand,  in  the  Streight  of 
Sunda,  and  came  to  an  anchor  there  on  the   14th.     In  this  Friday  14. 
pafTage,  the  boats  came  off  to  us  from  the  Java  fhore,  and 
fupplied  us  with  turtle  in  fuch  plenty,  that  neither  of  the 

jQiips* 


134  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

17^5-  fliips*  companies  eat  any  thing  clfe.  We  lay  at  Prince's 
»  — 'j  Ifland  till  the  19th,  and  during  all  that  time  we  fubilfted 
^  "^  ■  '^"  wholly  upon  the  fame  food,  which  was  procured  from  the 
inhabitants  at  a  very  reafonable  rate.  Having  now  taken 
on  board  as  much  wood  and  water  as  we  could  ftow,  we 
weighed,  and  got  without  Java  Head  before  night :  but  by 
this  time  a  dangerous  putrid  fever  had  broken  out  among 
us ;  three  of  my  people  had  died,  and  many  others  now  lay 
in  fo  dangerous  a  condition  that  there  were  little  hopes  of 
their  recovery:  we  did  not,  however,  bury  one  at  Batavia 
which,  notwithftanding  our  flay  was  fo  fliort,  was  thought 
to  be  a  very  extraordinary  inllance  of  good  fortune ;  and  our 
fick  gradually  recovered  after  we  had  been  a  week  or  two  at 
fea. 


CHAP. 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  13^ 


CHAP.     XIV. 

The  Pajfage  from  Batavia  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope^  and 
from  thence  to  England, 

WE  continued  our  courfe,  without  any  event  worthy  of      1766. 
notice,  except  that  one  of.  my  beft  men  unhappily  fell  ,  ^J"^*;^ 
overboard  and  was  drowned,  till  Monday  the  loth  of  February,  Monday  10. 
when,  at  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  faw  the  coaft  of 
Africa,,  bearing  from  N.  N.W.  to  N.  E.  diftant  about  feven 
leagues:   it  made  in  feveral  high  hills,    and  white  fandy-^ 
cliffs,  and  its  latitude  was  34.*'  1 5'  S.,  longitude  2 1  °  45'  E. ;  the 
variation  here  was  22°  W.  and  our  depth  of  water  fifty-three 
fathom,  with  a,  bottom  of  coarfe  brown  fand. 

I  flood  in  for  the  land,  and  when  I  was  within  about  two^ 
leagues  of  it,  I  faw  a  great  fmoke  rifing  from  a  fandy  beach^ 
I  imagined  the  fmoke  to  be  made  by  the  Hottentots ;  yet  I. 
was  aftonifhed  at  their  chufing  this  part  of  the  coaft  fortheir. 
relidence,  for  it  confifted  of  nothing  but  fand  banks  as  far 
as  we  could  fee,  without  the  leaft  bufli  or  a  fmgle  blade  o£ 
verdure,  and  fo  heavy  a  fea  broke  upon,  the  coaft,  that  it. 
was  impoffible  to  catch  any  filh. 

On  Wednefday  the  12th,  at  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  Wednef.  u. 
we  were  abreaft  of  Cape  Lagullas,  from  which  the  coaft  lies 
W.  N.  W.  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  which  is  diftant  about 
thirty  leagues.    The  next  day,  we  pafled  between  Penguin  Thurfday*3.; 
6  Ifland 


,3<5  COMMODORE    BYRON's    VOYAGE 

1765-  Ifland  and  Green  Point,  and  worked  into  Table  Bay  with 
v_l-I!!21f  our  top-fails  clofe  reefed,  there  being  a  llrong  gale,  with 
Thurfdayij.  j^^^^  fqualls  at  S.  S.  E.  At  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon, 
we  anchored,  and  faluted  the  fort,  which  was  returned. 
The  Dutch  told  me,  that  none  of  their  fhips  could  have 
worked  in  in  fuch  a  gale  of  wind,  and  that  we  feemed  to 
come  in  fafter  than  they  were  generally  able  to  do  when  the 
wind  was  fair. 

Friday  14.  The  ncxt  morning,  I  waited  upon  the  Governor,  who  had 

fent  his  coach  and  fix  to  the  water-fide  for  me.  He  is  an  old 
man,  but  is  a  favourite  with  all  ranks  of  people  :  he  received 
me  with  the  greateft  politenefs,  and  not  only  offered  me  the 
Company's  houfe  in  the  garden  for  my  refidence  while  I 
Ihould  continue  at  the  Cape,  but  his  coach  whenever  I 
fliould  think  fit  to  ufe  it.  As  I  was  one  day  at  dinner  with 
him,  and  fome  other  gentlemen,  I  took  occafion  to  mention 
the  fmoke  that  I  had  feen  upon  one  of  the  fandy  beaches  on 
a  defolate  part  of  the  coaft,  and  the  furprife  with  which  it 
had  ilruck  me :  they  then  told  me  that  another  fliip,  fome 
time  before,  had  fallen  in  with  that  part  of  the  coaft,  and 
had  feen  large  fmokes  as  I  had  done,  although  the  place  was 
uninhabited,  and  fuppofed  to  be  an  ifland :  to  account  for 
the  fmokes,  however,  they  told  me  alfo,  that  two  Dutch  Eaft 
Indiamen  had,  about  two  years  before,  failed  from  Batavia 
for  the  Cape,  and  had  never  afterwards  been  heard  of ;  and 
it  was  fuppofed  that  one  or  both  of  them  had  been  fhip- 
wrecked  there,  and  that  the  fmokes  which  had  been  feen, 
were  made  by  fome  of  the  unfortunate  crew:  they  added, 
that  they  had  more  than  once  fcnt  out  veffels  to  look  for 
them,  but  that  there  broke  fo  dreadful  a  fea  upon  the  coaft, 
they  were  obliged  to  return  without  attempting  to  go  on 

fliore. 


ROUND  the;  would.  137 

fhore.    When  I  heard  this  melancholy  account,  I  could  only     ^  V*^*** 

'  ^         February. 

regret  that  I  had  not  known  it  before,  for  I  would  then  cer-  < ^- — ' 

tainly  have  made  every  effort  in  my  power  to  have  found 
thefe  unhappy  wretches,  and  taken  them  from  a  place  where 
now,  in  all  probabiHty,  they  rnuft  miferably  pcrifli. 

The  Cape  is  certainly  a  moft  excellent  place  for  fhips  to 
touch  at^  it  is  a  healthy  climate,  a  fine  country,  and 
abounds  with  refrelliments  of  every  kind.  The  Company's 
garden  is  a  delightful  fpot,  and  at  the  end  of  it  there  is  a 
paddock  belonging  to  the  Governor,  in  which  are  kept  a 
great  number  of  rare  and  curious  animals,  and  among 
others,  when  I  was  there,  were  three  fine  oftriclies,  and 
four  zebras  of  an  uncommon  fize.  I  gave  all  the  people 
leave  to  go  on  fhore  by  turns,  and  they  always  contrived  to 
get  very  drunk  with  Cape  wine  before  they  came  back. 
Many  fliips  came  in  while  we  lay  here ;  fome  were  Dutch, 
fome  French,  fome  Danes,  but  all  were  outward  bound. 

Having  continued  here  three  weeks,  and  during  that  time 
refrefhed  our  men,  and  completed  our  water,  I  took  leave  of     March. 
the  good  old  Governor  on  the  6th  of  March,  and  on  the  7th,  ^^ridl'^^^' 
failed  out  of  the  bay,  with  a  fine  breeze  at  S.  E. 

On  Sunday  the  i6th,  at  fix  in  the  morning,  we  faw  the  Sunday  j6w 
rfiand  of  Saint  Helena,  bearing  W.  by  N.  at  the  diflance  of 
about  fixteen  leagues,  and  about  noon,  a  large  fliip,  which 
Ihewed  French  colours.  We  purfued  our  courfe,  and  a  few 
days  afterwards,  as  we  were  failing  with  a  fine  gale,  and  at 
a  great  diflance  from  land,  the  fhip  fuddcnly  received  a  rude 
fhock,  as  if  fhe  had  ftruck  the  ground:  this  inftantly 
brought  all  who  were  below  upon  the  deck  in  great  con- 
fternation,  and  upon  looking  out  we  faw  the  water,  to  a 
very  large  extent,  tinged  with  blood  ;  this  put  an  end  to  our 

Vol.  I.  T— Z  z  fears. 


138 


COMMODORE    BYRON'^s    VOYAGE 


1766. 

March. 
Sunday  16. 


Tuefday  25. 


April. 
Tuefday  1. 


fears,  and  we  concluded  that  we  muil  have  ftruck  either  a 
whale  or  a  grampus,  from  which  the  fliip  was  not  likely  to 
receive  much  damage,  nor  in  fa(ft  did  flae  receive  any. 
About  this  time  alfo  we  had  the  misfortune  to  bury  our  car- 
penter's mare,  a  very  ingenious  and  diligent  young  man, 
who  had  never  been  well  after  our  leaving  Batavia. 

On  the  25th,  we  crofTed  the  equator,  in  longitude  17^  10' W. 
and  the  next  morning,  Captain  Gumming  came  on  board, 
and  informed  me  that  the  Tamar's  three  lower  rudder  braces 
on  the  ftern  were  broken  off,  which  rendered  the  rudder 
unfcrviceable.  I  immediately  fent  the  carpenter  on  board, 
who  found  the  condition  of  the  braces  even  worfe  than  had 
been  reported,  fo  that  the  rudder  could  not  pollibly  be  new 
hung;  he  therefore  went  to  work  upon  a  machine,  like  that 
which  had  been  fixed  to  the  Ipfwich,  and  by  which  flie  was 
fleered  home  :  this  machine  in  about  five  days  he  completed, 
and  with  fome  little  alterations  of  his  own,  it  was  an  excellent 
piece  of  work.  The  Tamar  fleered  very  well  with  it,  but 
thinking  that  it  might  not  be  fufficient  to  fecure  her  in  bad 
weather,  or  upon  a  lee  fhore,  I  ordered  Captain  Cumming  to 
run  down  to  Antigua,  that  he  might  there  heave  the  (hip 
down,  and  get  the  rudder  new  hung,  with  a  frefli  fct  of 
braces  which  he  had  with  him  for  that  purpofe ;  for  the 
braces  with  which  the  fliip  went  out,  being  of  iron,  were 
not  expe<5ted  to  laft  as  long  as  our's,  the  lower  ones,  with 
the  fheathing,  being  of  copper. 

Purfuant  to  thefe  orders,  the  Tamar  parted  company  witli 
us  on  the  ift  of  April,  and  fleered  for  the  Caribbce  Iflands. 
When  we  came  into  latitude  34°  N.,  longitude  ^s°  W.  we 
had  ftrong  gales  from  W.  S.  W.  to  W.  N.  W.  with  a  great  fea, 
which  broke  over  us  continually  for  fix  days  fucceflively,  and 
3  run 


ROUND    THE    WORLD,  139-3^0 

run  us  into  latitude  48^  N.,  longitude  14°  W.    On  the  7th  of       17^6. 
May,  at  feven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  made  the  Iflands  of  »-   -^  ■■  -ij 
Scilly,  having  been  juft  nine  weeks  commg  from  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope,  and  fomewhat  more  than  two  and  twenty 
months  upon  the  voyage ;  the  9th,  the  fhip  came  to  anchor  Saturday  9. 
in  the  Downs,  and  on  the  fame  day  I  landed  at  Deal,  and  fet 
out  for  London. 


A  N 


A  N 

ACCOUNT 

O  F     A 

VOYAGE  round  the  WORLD, 

IN    THE    YEARS 
MDCCLXVI,  MDCCLXVII,  and  MDCCLXVIII. 

By    SAMUEL    W  A  L  L  I  S,    Efq; 

Gommander  of  his  Majefty's  Ship  the  Dolphin. 


Vol.  I.  A  a  a 


C  H  A  p.     I. 

The  Pajfage  to  the  coaji  of  Patagonia^  %vithfo7ne  account 
of  the  Natives. 

[The  longitude  in  this  voyage  is  reckoned  from  the  meridian  of  London.] 

HAVING  received  my  commiffion,  which  was  dated 
the  igth  of  June  1766,   I  went  on  board  the   fame 
day,   hoilled  the  pendant,   and  began  to  enter  fea- 
men,  but,  according  to  my  orders,  took  no  boys  either  for 
myfelf  or  any  of  the  officers. 

The  fhip  was  fitted  for  the  fea  with  all  poflible  expe- 
dition,  during  which  the  articles  of  war,   and  the  a(5l  of 
parliament  were  read  to  the  fhip's  company :  on  the  26th  of  Sat.  July  26, 
July  we  failed  down  the  river,  and  on  the  16th  of  Auguft,  Sat.  Aug.i6. 
,at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,   anchored  in   Plymouth 
Sound. 

On  the  1 9th  I  received  my  failing  orders,  with  direcTiions  Tuefday  19. 
to  take  the  Swallow  iloop,  and  the  Prince  Frederick  ftore- 
fliip  under  my  command:  and  this  day  I  took  on  board, 
among  other  things,  three  thoufand  weight  of  portable 
foup,  and  a  bale  of  cork  jackeb.  Every  part  of  the  fhip 
was  filled  with  ftores  and  neceflaries  of  various  kinds,  even 
to  the  fteerage  and  fiate-room,  which  were  allotted  to  the 
flops  and  portable  foup.  The  furgeon  offered  to  purchafe 
an  extraordinary  quantity  of  medicines,  and  medical  ne- 
ceflaries, which,  as  the  Hiip's  company  might  become  fickly, 

A  a  a  2  he 


S64 


(Captain  wallis's  voyage 


J  766. 

Auguft. 


Friday  22. 


September, 

Sunday  7. 


Mjnday  S, 


Friday  12, 


he  faid  would  in  that  cafe  be  of  great  fervice,  if  room  could 
be  found  to  flow  them  in  ;  I  therefore  gave  him  leave  to  put 
them  into  my  cabbin,  the  only  place  in  the  fhip  where  they 
could  be  received,  as  they  confifted  of  three  large  boxes. 

On  the  22d,  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  I  weighed 
and  made  fail  in  company  with  the  Swallow  and  Prince 
Frederick,  and  had  foon  the  mortification  to  find  that  the 
Swallow  was  a  very  bad  failer. 

We  proceeded  in  our  voyage,  without  any  remarkable  in- 
cident, till  Sunday  the  feventh  of  September,  when,  about 
eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  faw  the  ifland  of  Porto 
Santo,  bearing  weft;  and  about  noon  faw  the  eaft-end  of 
the  ifland  of  Madeira. 

About  five  o'clock  we  ran  between  this  end  of  the  ifland 
and  the  Deferters.  On  the  fide  next  the  Deferters  is  a  low 
flat  ifland,  and  near  it  a  needle  rock ;  the  fide  next  to  Ma- 
deira is  full  of  broken  rocks,  and  for  that  reafon  it  is  not 
fafe  to  come  within  lefs  than  two  miles  of  it. 

At  fix  in  the  evening  we  anchored  in  Madeira  Road,  about 
two-thirds  of  a  mile  from  the  fliore,  in  24  fathom  with  a 
muddy  bottom:  about  eight  the  Swallow  and  Prince  Frederick  . 
alfo  came  to  an  anchor ;  and  I  fent  an  oflicer  on  fhore  to  the- 
Governor,  to  let  him  know  that  I  would  falute  hinij  if  he 
would  return  an  equal  number  of  guns,,  which  he  promifedr 
to  do ;  the  next  morning  therefore,  at  fix  o'clock,  I  faluted 
him  with  thirteen  guns,  and  he  returned  thirteen  as  he  had. 
promifed. 

Having  taken  in  a  proper  quantity  of  water  at  this  place, 
with  four  pipes  and  ten  puncheons  of  wine,  fome  frefh 
beef,  and  a  large  quantity  of  onions,  we  v/eighed  anchor  on 
the  12th,  and  continued  our  voyage. 

At 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  365 

•    At  fix -o'clock  in  the  morning,  of  Tuefday  the  16th,  we       1766. 
faw  the  ifland  of  Pahna,  and  found  the  fliip  15  miles  to  the    <_Z.^^!Ui 
fouthward  of  her  reckoning.     As  we  were  failing  along  this     "^  ^^ ' 
ifland,  at  the  rate  of  no  lefs  than  eight  miles  an  hour,  with 
the  wind  at  eaft,  it  died  away  at  once  ;  fo  that  within  Icfs 
than  two  minutes  the  fliip  had  no  motion,  though  we  were 
at  leaft  four  leagues  diftant  from  the  fliore.     Palma  lies  in 
lat.  28°  40'  N.  long.  17°  48'  W. 

On  the  20th  we  tried  the  current,  and  found  it  fet  S.  W,  Saturday  20, 
"by  W.  one  mile  an  hour :  this  day  we  faw  two  herons  flying 
to  the  eaftward,  and  a  great  number  of  bonettos  about  the 
Ihip,  of  which  we  caught  eight- 

In  the  night  between  the  2iil  and  22d  we  loft  our  com-  Sunday  zt. 
panion  the  Sv/allow,  and  about  eight  in  the  morning  we  faw  ^°"^^y  ^^^ 
the  ifland  of  Sal,  bearing  S.  2.  W. ;  at.  noon  it  bore  S.  i-  W. 
diftant  8  leagues ;  and  at  noon  on  the  23d,   the  neareft  land   Tuefday-z-s. 
of  the  ifland  of  Boriavifta  bore  from  S.  to  W.  S.  W.  diftant 
feven  or  eigh.t  miles,  the  eaft-end,  at  the  fame  time,  bearing 
W.  diftant  two  leagues,     hi  this  fituation  we  founded,  and 
had  only  15  fathom,  with  rocky  ground;  at  the  fame  time 
we  faw  a  very  great  rippling,   whict  we  fuppofed    to  be 
caufed  by  a  reef,  ftretching  off  the  point  about  E.  S.  E.  three 
miles,    and  breakers  without  us,    diftant  alfo  about   three- 
miles  in   the    diredlion  of  S.  K     We  fleered   between  the 
rippling  and  the  breakers,    but  after  hauling  the  fliip  off 
about  half  amile,  we  had  no  foundings.     The  Prince  Fre- 
derick paflTed  very  near  the  breakers,  in  the  S.  E.  but  had 
no  foundings  ;  yet  thefe  breakers  are  fuppofed  to  be  dan- 
gerous.    The  middle  of  the  ifle  of  Sal  is  in  lat.   16°  55' N. 
long.  21°  59' W.J   the  middle  of  Bonavifta  is  in  lat,  i6<'  10' 

long.  23°  W.. 

Cm 


366 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


1766. 

September. 
Wedn.  34. 


Thurf.  25. 


On  the  next  day,  at  fix  in  the  morning;. the  ifle  of  May 
bore  from  W.  to  S.  W.  fix  leagues  ;  and  foon  after  the 
Swallow  again  joined  company.  At  half  an  hour  after  10 
the  weft-end  of  the  ifle  of  May  bore  north  at  the  diftance  of 
five  miles,  and  we  found  a  current  here,  fetting  to  the  fouth- 
ward  at  the  rate  of  twenty  miles  in  four  and  twenty  hours. 
The  latitude  of  this  ifland  is  15°  10'  N.  longitude  22*^  25'  W. 

At  noon  the  fouth-end  of  the  ifland  St.  Tago  bore  S.  W.  by 
W.  diftant  four  leagues  ;  and  the  north-end  N.  W.  diftant  five 
leagues.  At  half  an  hour  after  three  we  anchored  in  Port 
Praya,  in  that  ifland,  in  company  with  the  Swallow  and 
Prince  Frederick,  in  eight  fathom  water,  upon  fandy  ground. 
We  had  much  rain  and  lightning  in  the  night,  and  early  in 
the  morning  Ifent  to  the  commanding-ofl&cer  at  the  fort,  for 
leave  to  get  off  fome  water,  and  other  refrefliments,  which 
he  granted. 

We  foon  learnt  that  this  was  the  fickly  feafon,  and  that 
the  rains  were  fo  great  as  to  render  it  extremely  difficult  to 
get  any  thing  down  from  the  country  to  the  fliips :  it  hap- 
pened alfo,  unfortunately,  that  the  fmall-pox,  which  is  ex- 
tremely fatal  here,  was  at  this  time  epidemic  ;  fo  that  I  per- 
mitted no  man  to  go  afliore  who  had  not  had  that  diftemper, 
and  I  would  not  fuffer  even  thofe  that  had  to  go  into  any 
houfe. 

V/e  procured,  however,  a  fupply  of  water  and  fome  cattle 
from  the  fliore,  and  caught  abundance  of  fifli  with  the  feine, 
which  was  hauled  twice  every  day :  we  found  alfo  in  the 
valley  where  we  got  our  water,  a  kind  of  large  purflain, 
growing  wild  in  amazing  quantities :  this  was  a  moft  wel- 
come refrefliment  both  raw  as  a  fallad,  and  boiled  with  the 
2  broth 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ^67 

broth  and  peafe  ;   and  when  we  left  the  place  we  carried       1766. 

,        r  ■  r  1  September, 

away  enough  or  it  to  lerve  us  a  week.  (.  -^~_/ 

On  the  s8th,  at  half  an  hour  after  twelve  we  weighed  and  Sunday  28. 
put  to  fea;  at  half  an  hour  after  fix  in  the  evening  the  peak 
of  Fuegobore  W.  N.  W.  diftant  12  leagues,  and  in  the  night 
the  burning  mountain  was  very  vifible. 

This  day  I  ordered  hooks  and  lines  to  be  ferved  to  all  the 
Ihip's  company,  that  they  might  catch  fifh  for  themfelves ; 
but  at  the  fame  time  I  alfo  ordered  that  no  man  fliould  keep 
his  fiih  more  than  four  and  twenty  hours  before  it  was  eaten, 
for  I  had  obferved  that  ftale,  and  even  dried  fifli,  had  made 
the  people  fickly,  and  tainted  the  air  in  the  fliip. 

On  the  firft  of  Odober,  in  lat,  10°  37'  N.  we  loft  the  true     oaober, 

Wednef.  I. 

trade-wind,  and  had  only  light  and  variable  gales ;  and  this 
day  we  found  that  the  fliip  was  fet  twelve  miles  to  the  north- 
ward by  a  currfent ;  on  the  third  we  found  a  current  run  S.  Friday  3. 
by  E.  at  the  rate  of  fix  fathom  an  hour,  or  about  twenty 
miles  and  a  half  a  day  :  on  the  feventh  we  found  the  fliip  Tuefday  7. 
19  miles  to  the  fouthward  of  her  reckoning. 

On  the  20th,  our  butter  and  cheefe  being  all  expended,  we  Monday  ;o» 
began  to  ferve  the  fhip's  company  with  oil,  and  I  gave  orders 
that  they  fhould  alfo  be  ferved  with  muftard  and  vinegar 
once  a  fortnight  during  the  reft  of  the  voyage. 

On  the  22d  we  faw  an  incredible  number  of  birds,  and  Wednef.  z2» 
among  the   reft  a  man  of  war  bird,  which  inclined  us  to 
think  that  fome  land  was  not  more  than  60  leagues  diftant  : 
this  day  we  crofted  the  equator  in  longitude  23"  40'  W. 

On  the  24th  I  ordered  the  fliip's  company  to  be  ferved  with  Friday  24. 
brandy,  and  referved  the  wine  for  the  fick  and  convalefcent. 
On  the  26th  the  Prince  Frederick  made  fignals  of  diftrefs,  Sunday  z':'^ 
upon  which  we  bore  down  to  her,  and  found  that  flic  had 
*  carried 


368 


1766. 

Oaober. 


Monday  27, 


■November. 
Saturday  8. 


Tuefday  1 1. 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

carried  away  her  fore-top-fail-yard.  To  fupply  this  lofs  we 
gave  her  our  fprit-fail-top-fail-yard,  which  we.  could  fpare, 
and  Ihe  hoifled  it  immediately. 

On  the  27th  fhe  again  made  fignals  of  diftrefs,  upon  which 
I  brought  to,  and  fent  the  carpenter  on  board  her,  who  re- 
turned with  an  account  that  Ihe  had  fprung  a  leakimder  the 
larboard  cheek  forward,  and  that  it  was  impoffible  to  do 
any  thing  to  it  till  we  had  better  weather.  Upon  fpeaking 
with  Lieutenant  Brine,  who  commanded  her,  he  informed 
nie  that  his  crew  were  fickly ;  that  the  fatigue  of  working  the 
pumps,  and  conftantly  Handing  by  the  fails,  had  worn  them 
down ;  that  their  provifions  were  not  good,  that  they  had 
nothing  to  drink  but  water,  and  that  he  feared  it  would 
be  impoffible  for  him  to  keep  company  with  me  except  I 
could  fpare  him  fome  affiftance.  For  the  badnefs  of  their 
provifion  I  had  no  remedy,  but  I  fent  on  boacd  a  carpenter 
and  fix  feamen  to  affift  in  pumping  and  working  the  fliip. 

On  the  eighth  of  November,  being  in  latitude  25°  52'  S. 
longitude  39°  38'  we  founded  with  160  fathom,  but  had  no 
ground :  on  the  ninth,  having  feen  a  great  number  of  birds, 
called  albatrofTes,  we  founded  again  with  180  fathom,  but 
had  no  ground. 

On  the  nth,  having  by  fignal  brought  the  ftore-fhip  under 
our  ftern,  I  fent  the  carpenter,  with  proper  affiftants,  on 
board  to  flop  the  leak ;  but  they  found  that  very  little  could 
be  done :  we  then  compleated  our  provifions,  and  thofe  of 
the  Swallow,  from  her  ftores,  and  put  on  board  her  all 
our  flaves,  iron  hoops,  and  empty  oil  jars.  The  next  day 
I  fent  a  carpenter  and  fix  feamen  to  relieve  the  men  that 
had  been  fent  to  affift  her  on  the  27th  of  Odober,  who, 
by  this  time,  began  to  fuffer  much  by  their  fatigue.  Several 
of  her  crew  having  the  appearance  of  the  fcurvy,  I  fent 
1  the 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  569 

the  fur9:eon  on  board  her  with  fome  medicines  for  the  fick.    ,,  "V^^^. 

°  November. 

This  day,  having  feen  fome  albatrofles,  turtles,  and  weeds,   " r-—': 

we  founded,  but  had  no  ground  with  180  fathom. 

On  the  1 2th,  being  now  in  latitude  30  fouth,  we  began  to  Wednef.  12. 
find  it  very  cold  ;  we  therefore  got  up  our  quarter  cloths, 
and  fitted  them  to  their  proper  places,  and  the  feamcn  put 
on  their  thick  jackets.     This  day  we  faw  a  turtle,  and  feveral 
albatroffes,  but  ftill  had  no  ground  with  180  fathom. 

We  continued  to  fee  weeds  and  birds  on  board  the  fhip, 
but  had  no  ground  till  the    i8th,   when  we  found  a  foft  Tuefday  18. 
muddy  bottom  at  the  depth  of  54  fathom.     We  were  now  in 
lat.  35°  40'  S.  long.  49°  54'  W. ;  and  this  was  the  firfl  found- 
ing we  had  after  our  coming  upon  the  coaft  of  Brazil. 

On  the  19th,  about  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  we  faw  Wedcef.  15. 
a  meteor  of  a  very  extraordinary  appearance  in  the  north- 
eaft,  which,  foon  after  we  had  obferved  it,  flew  off  in  a  ho- 
rizontal line  to  the  fouth-weft,  with  amazing  rapidity:  it 
was  near  a  minute  in  its  progrefs,  and  it  left  a  train  of  light 
behind  it  fo  ftrong,  that  the  deck  was  not  lefs  illuminated 
than  at  noon-day.  This  day  we  faw  a  great  number  of  feals 
about  the  fhip,  and  had  foundings  at  55  fathom,  with  a 
muddy  bottom.  The  next  day  the  feals  continued,  and  we  Thurfdayaa. 
had  foundings  at  53  fathom,  with  a  dark  coloured  fand; 
upon  which  we  bent  our  cables. 

On  the  21ft:  we  had  no  ground  with  150  fathom.     Our  Friday  21. 
lat.  at  noon  was  ^j^  40'  S.  long.  51°  24' W. 

On  the  2 2d  we  had  foundings  again  at  70  fathom,  with  Saturday  22. 
a  dark  brown  fand,  and  faw  many  whales  and  feals  about 
the  fliip,    with  a  great  number  of  butterflies,    and  birds, 
among  which  were  fnipes  and  plover.      Our  lat.  at  noon 
was  38^  ^^  long.  56^^  47'  W. 

Vol.  I.  B  b  b  Our 


37°  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


Monday  8. 


Our  foundings  continued  from  40  to  70  fathom,  till  the 
eighth  of  December,  when,  about  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
we  faw  land  bearing  from  S.  W.  to  W.  by  S.  and  appearing 
like  many  fmall  iflands.  At  noon  it  bore  from  W.  by  S. 
to  S.  S.  W.  dillant  8  leagues;  our  latitude  then  being  47" 
1 6'  S.  long.  64.^  58'  W.  About  three  o'clock  Cape  Blanco  bore 
W.  N.  W.  diftant  fix  leagues,  and  a  remarkable  double  faddle 
W,  S.  W.  diflant  about  three  leagues.  We  had  now  found- 
ings from  20  to  r  6  fathom,  fometimes  with  coarfe  fand  and 
gravel,  fometimes  with  fmall  black  ftones  and  fliells.  At 
>  eight  in  the  evening  the  Tower  rock  at  Port  Defire  bore  S.  W. 

by  W.  diflant  about  three  leagues  ;  and  the  extreams  of  the 
land  from  S.  by  E.  to  N.  W.  by  N.  At  nine,  Penguin  Ifland 
bore  S.  W.  by  W.  4  W.  diftant  two  leagues ;  and  at  four  o'clock 
Tuefday  9.  ill  tlic  moming  of  the  ninth,  the  land  feen  from  the  mail- 
head  bore  from  S.  W.  to  W.  by  N. 

At  noon  Penguin  ifland  bore  S.  by  E.  diftant  57  miles  j 
our  latitude  being  48^^  56'  S.  longitude  6^°  6'  W.  This  day 
wc  faw  fuch  a  quantity  of  red  flirimps  about  the  fliip,  that 
the  fea  was  coloured  with  them. 

wednef.  lo.  At  noon  the  next  day,  Wednefday  the  icth,  the  extreams 
of  the  land  bore  from  S.  W.  to  N.  W.  and  Wood's  Mount, 
near  the  entrance  of  Saint  Julian's,  bore  S.  W.  by  W.  diftant 
three  or  four  leagues.  Our  latitude  was  49°  16'  S.  our  lon- 
gitude 66°  48'  W. ;  and  our  foundings  were  from  40  to  45 
fathom,  fometimes  fine  fand,  fometimes  foft  mud. 

Thurfday.i.  At  noou,  ou  Tliurfday  the  nth,  Penguin  ifland  bore 
N.  N.  E.  diftant  58  leagues.  Our  latitude  was  50^  48'  S. 
our  longitude  67^  10  W. 

Saturday  13.        Wc  contiiiucd  our  courfc  till  Saturday  the  13th,    when 

our  latitude  being  50°  34  S.  and  our  longitude  68°  !$'  W- 

2  the 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  371 

the  extreams  of  the  land  bore  from  N.  4.  E.  to  S.  S.  W.  •- W.    ^^7^^- 

December. 

and  the  fliip  was  about  five   or  fix  miles  diflant  from  the    u— v-~-^, 
ihore.     Cape  Beachy-head,  the  northermoil  cape,  was  found 
to  lie  in  latitude  50^^  i6'S.  and  Cape  Fair  weather,  the  fouth- 
ermoll  cape,  in  latitude  50°  50'  S. 

On  Sunday  the  14th,  at  four  in  the  morning,  Cape  Beachy-  Sunday  14. 
head  bore  N.  W.  i-  N.  diflant  about  eight  leagues ;  and  at 
noon,  our  latitude  being  50^'  52'  S.  and  longitude  68"  lo'W. 
Penguin  ifland  bore  N.  35°  E.  diftant  68  leagues.  We  were 
fix  leagues  from  the  fliore,  and  the  extreams  of  the  land 
were  from  N.  W.  to  W.  S.  W. 

At  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  of  Monday  the  15th,  Monday  if, 
being  about  fix  miles  from  the  fliore,  the  extreams  of  the  land 
bore  from  S.  by  E.  to  N.  by  E.  and  the  entrance  of  the  river 
Saint  Croix  S.  W.  4^  W.  We  had  20  fathom  quite  crofs  the 
opening,  the  diftance  from  point  to  point  being  about  feven 
miles,  and  afterwards  keeping  at  the  diflance  of  about  four 
miles  from  each  cape,  we  had  from  22  to  24  fathom.  The 
land  on  the  north  fliore  is  high,  and  appears  in  three  capes; 
"that  on  the  fouth  fhore  is  low  and  flat.  At  feven  in  the  eve- 
ning, Cape  Fair  weather  bore  S.  W.  4.  S.  diflant  about  four 
leagues,  a  low  point  running  out  from  it  S.S.  W.  i-  W.  We 
flood  off  and  on  all  night,  and  had  from  30  to  22  fathom 
water,  with  a  bottom  of  fand  and  mud.  At  feven  the  next 
morning,  Tuefday  the  16th,  we  flioaled  gradually  into  12  Tuefdayi6. 
fathom,  with  a  bottom  of  fine  fand,  and  foon  after  into  fix : 
we  then  hauled  ofFS.  E.  by  S.  fomewhat  more  than  a  mile  ; 
then  fleered  eaft  five  miles,  then  E.  byN.  and  deepened  into 
12  fathom.  Cape  Fairweather  at  this  time  bore  W.  J.  S. 
diflant  four  leagues,  and  the  northermoft  extremity  of  the 
land  W.  N.  W.  When  v/e  firfl  came  into  fhoal  water.  Cape 
Fairweather  bore  W.  4  N.  and  a  low  point  without  it  W.  S.  W. 

B  b  b  3  diitant 


373  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1766.       diftant  about  four  miles.     At  noon  Cape  Fairweather  bore 

December.  ■,   n  r~       1  ii 

^— =v '   W.  N.  W.  -1  W.  diftant  fix  leagues,   and  a  large  hummock 

S.  W.  t  W.  diftant  feven  leagues.     At  this  time  our  lat.  was 
51°  52' S.  long.  68°  W. 

At  one  o'clock,  being  about  two  leagues  diftant  from  the 
flaore.  the  extreams  of  three  remarkable  round  hills  bore 
from  S.  W.  by  W.  to  W.  S.  W.  At  four,  Cape  Virgin  Mary 
bore  S.  E.  by  S.  diftant  about  four  leagues.  At  eight,  we  were 
very  near  the  Cape,  and  upon  the  point  of  it  faw  feveral  men 
riding,  who  made  ligns  for  us  to  come  on  fliore.  In  about 
half  an  hour  we  anchored  in  a  bay,  clofe  under  the  fouth  fide 
of  the  Cape,  in  ten  fathom  water,  with  a  gravelly  bottom. 
The  Swallow  and  ftore-fhip  anchored  foon  after  between  us 
and  the  Cape,  which  then  bore  N.  by  W.  i.  W.  and  a  low 
fandy  point  like  Dungenefs  S.  by  W.  From  the  Cape  there 
runs  a  flioal,  to  the  diftance  of  about  half  a  league,  which, 
may  be  eafily  known  by  the  weeds  that  are  upon  it.  We 
found  it  bigh  water  at  half  an  hour  after  eleven,  and  tlie  tide 
rofe  twenty  foot. 

The  natives  continued  abreaft  of  the  fhip  all  night,  making 
feveral  great  fires,  and  frequently  Ihouting  very  loud.  As 
Wednef.  17.  foon  as  it  was  light,  on  Wednefday  morning  the  17th,  we 
faw  great  numbers  of  them  in  motion,  who.  made  figns  for 
us  to  land.  About  five  o'clock  I  made  the  fignal  for  the 
boats  belonging  to  the  Swallow  and  the  Prince  Frederick  to 
come  on  board,  and  in  the  mean  time  hoifted  out  our  own. 
Thefe  boats  being  all  manned  and  armed,  I  took  a  party  of 
marines,  and  rowed  towards  the  fliore,  having  left  orders 
with  the  mafter  to  bring  the  fhip's  broad-fiJe  to  bear  upon 
the  landing  place,  and  to  keep  the  guns  loaded  with  round 
fliot.  We  reached  the  beach  about  fix  o'clock,  and  before 
we  went  from  the  boat,  I  made  figns  to  the  natives  to  retire 

to 


ROUND    THE    WORLD; 


373 


to  fome  diftance:  they  immediately  complied,  and  I  then  1766. 
landed  with  the  captain  of  the  Swallow,  and  feveral  of  the  >  -.-  Ir 
Gllicers :  the  marines  were  drawn  up,  and  the  boats  were  ^^'^"*^'  '^' 
brought  to  a  grappling  near  the  fhore.  I  then  made  figns  to 
the  natives  to  come  near,  and  directed  them  to  fit  down  in 
a  femicircle,  which  they  did  with  great  order  and  chearful- 
nefs.  When  this  was  done,  I  diftributed  among  them  feve- 
ral knives,  fcifTars,  buttons,  beads,  combs,  and  other  toys, 
particularly  fome  ribands  to  the  women,  which  they  re- 
ceived with  a  very  becoming  mixture  of  pleafure  and  refpecft.. 
Having  diftributed  my  prefents,  I  endeavoured  to  make 
them  underfland  that  I  had  other  things  which  I  would  part 
with,  but  for  which  I  expe<5led  fomewhat  in  return.  I 
fliewed  them  fome  hatchets  and  bill-hooks,  and  pointed  to 
fome  guanicoes,  which  happened  to  be  near,  and  fome 
oftriches  which  I  faw  dead  among  them  ;  making  figns  at 
the  fame  time  that  I  v/anted  to  eat  -,  but  they  either  could 
not,  or  would  not  underfland  me :  for  though  they  feemed 
very  defirous  of  the  hatchets  and  the  bill-hooks,  they  did  not 
give  the  leafl  intimation  that  they  would  part  with  any  pro- 
vifions ;  no  traffick  th-erefore  was  carried  on  between  us. 

Each  of  thefe  people,  both  men  and  women,  had  a  horfe, 
with  a  decent  faddle,  ftirrups,  and  bridle.  The  men  had 
•wooden  fpurs,  except  one,  who  had  a  large  pair  of  fuch  as 
are  worn  in  Spain,  brafs  ftirrups,  and  a  Spanifh  cimeter,. 
without  a  fcabbard  ;  but  notwithftanding  thefe  diftindions, 
he  did  not  appear  to  have  any  authority  over  the  reft :  the 
women  had  no  fpiurs.  The  horfes  appeared  to  be  well 
made,  and  nimble,  and  were  about  14  hands  high.  The 
people  had  alfo  many  dogs  with  them,  which,  as  well  as 
the.  horfes,  appeared  to  be  of  a  Spanifh  breed. 

As 


374  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


Wednef,  17. 


1766.  As  I  had  two  nieafuring  rods  with  me,  we  went  round 

December. 

and  mcafured  thofe  that  appeared  to  be  tailed  among  them. 
One  of  thefe  was  fix  feet  feven  inches  high,  feveral  more 
were  fix  feet  five,  and  fix  feet  fix  inches  ;  but  the  ftature  of 
the  greater  part  of  them  was  from  five  feet  ten  to  fix  feet. 
Their  complexion  is  a  dark  copper  colour,  like  that  of  the 
Indians  in  North  America  ;  their  hair  is  firait,  and  nearly 
as  harfli  as  hog's  bridles  :  it  is  tied  back  with  a  cotton  firing, 
but  neither  fex  wears  any  head-drefs.  They  are  well  made, 
robufl,  and  boney  ;  but  their  hands  and  feet  are  remarkably 
fmall.  They  are  cloathcd  with  the  Ikins  of  the  guanico, 
fewed  together  into  pieces  about  fix  foot  long,  and  five  wide  : 
thefe  are  wrapped  round  the  body,  and  faftened  with  a 
girdle,  with  the  hairy  fide  inwards  ;  fome  of  them  had  alfo 
what  the  Spaniards  have  called  a /)««t:Z?o,  a  fquare  piece  of  cloth 
made  of  the  downy  hair  of  the  guanico,  through  which  a 
hole  being  cut  for  the  head,  the  red:  hangs  round  them 
about  as  low  as  the  knee.  The  guanico  is  an  animal  that  in 
fize,  make,  and  colour,  refembles  a  deer,  but  it  has  a  hump 
on  its  back,  and  no  horns.  Thefe  people  wear  alio  a  kind  of 
drawers,  which  they  pull  up  very  tight,  and  bufldns,  which 
reach  from  the  mid-leg  to  the  indep  before,  and  behind  are 
brought  under  the  heel;  the  red  of  the  foot  is  v/itliout  any 
covering.  We  obferved  that  feveral  of  the  men  had  a  red 
circle  painted  round  the  left  eye,  and  that  others  were 
painted  on  their  arms,  and  on  dilFcrcnt  parts  of  the  face  ; 
the  eye-lids  of  all  the  young  women  were  painted  black. 
They  talked  much,  and  fome  of  them  called  out  Ca-pi-ta-ne  ; 
but  when  they  were  fpoken  to  in  Spanilh,  Portuguefc, 
French,  and  Dutch,  they  made  no  reply.  Of  their  own  lan- 
guage we  could  didinguifli  only  one  word,  which  was 
chevoiv :  we  fuppofcd  it  to  be  a  falutation,  as  they   ahvays 

pronounced 


R  OUND    THE    WORLD.  375 

pronounced  it  when  they  lliook  hands  with  us,  and  when,       1766. 

December. 

by  iigns,  they  allced  us  to  give  them  any  thing.     When  they    v ^.— _/ 

were  fpoken  to  in  EngUfli,  they  repeated  the  words  after  us         "  •  ?• 

as  plainly  as  we  could  do  ;  and  they  foon  got  by  heart  the 

words  "  Engliflimen  come   on  fliore."      Every  one  had  a 

miffile  weapon  of  a  fmgular  kind,  tucked  into  the  girdle. 

It  confifted  of  two  round  ftones,  covered  with  leather,  each 

weighing  about  a  pound,  which  were  faftened  to  the  two 

ends  of  a  firing  about  eight  feet  long.     This  is  ufed  as  a 

fling,    one  flone  being  kept  in  the  hand,    and  the  other 

whirled  round  the  head  till  it  is  fuppofed  to  have  acquired 

fufficient  force,   and  then  difcharged  at  the  objecTr.      They 

are  fo  expert  in  the  management  of  this  double-headed  fliot, 

that  they  will  hit  a  mark,  not  bigger  than  a  fliilling,  with 

both  the  flones,  at  the  diftance  of  fifteen  yards ;  it  is  not 

their  cuilom,  however,    to  ftrike  either  the  guanico  or  the 

oilrich  v/ith  them  in  the  chace,  but  they  difcharge  them  fo 

that  the  cord  comes  againffc  the  legs  of  the  oftrich,  or  two  of 

the  legs  of  the  guanico,  and  is  twifted  round  them  by  the 

force  and  fwing  of  the  balls,  fo  that  the  animal  being  unable 

to  run,  becomes  an  eafy  prey  to  the  hunter. 

While  we  flayed  on  fliore,  we  faw  them  eat  fome  of  their 
flefh  meat  raw,  particularly  the  paunch  of  an  oftrich,  with- 
out any  other  preparation  or  cleaning  than  jufl  turning  it 
infide  out,  and  fhaking  it.  We  obferved  among  them  feveral 
beads,  fuch  as  I  gave  them,  and  two  pieces  of  red  baize, 
v/hich  we  fuppofed  had  been  left  there,  or  in  the  neighbour- 
ing country,  by  Commodore  Byron. 

After  Iliad  fpent  about  four  hours  with  thefe  people,  I  made 
figns  to  them  that  I  was  going  on  board,  and  that  I  would 
take  fome  of  them  with  me  if  they  were  delirous  to  go.  As 
foon  as  I  had  made  myfelf  underflood,  above  an  hundred 

eagerly 


57^  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


Wednef.  17. 


^1766.       eagerly  offered  to  vifit  the  fhip ;  but  I  did  not  cliufe  to  in- 

December.  >-'        ^  ± 

dulge  more  than  eight  of  the  number.  They  jumped  into 
the  boats  with  the  joy  and  alacrity  of  children  going  to 
a  fair,  and  having  no  intention  of  mifchief  againft  us,  had 
not  the  leaft  fufpicion  that  we  intended  any  mifchief  againfl 
them.  They  fung  feveral  of  their  country  fongs  while  they 
•were  in  the  boat,  and  when  they  came  on  board  did  not  ex- 
prefs  either  the  curiofity  or  wonder  which  the  multiplicity  of 
obje(5LS,  to  them  equally  flrange  and  llupendous,  that  at 
once  prefented  themfelves,  might  be  fuppofed  to  excite.  I 
took  them  doAvn  into  the  cabbin,  where  they  looked  about 
them  with  an  unaccountable  indifference,  till  one  of  them 
happened  to  call  his  eyes  upon  a  looking-glafs  :  this  however 
excited  no  more  aftonifliment  than  the  prodigies  which  offer 
themfelves  to  our  imagination  in  a  dream,  when  we  con- 
verfe  with  the  dead,  fly  in  the  air,  and  walk  upon  the  fea, 
without  reflecting  that  the  laws  of  nature  are  violated ;  but 
it  afforded  them  infinite  diverfion  :  they  advanced,  retreated, 
and  played  a  thoufand  tricks  before  it,  laughing  violently, 
and  talking  with  great  emphafls  to  each'other.  I  gave  them 
fome  beef,  pork,  bifcuit,  and  other  articles  of  the  fhip's  pro- 
vifions  :  they  eat,  indifcriminately,  whatever  was  offered  to 
them,  but  they  would  drink  nothing  but  water.  From  the 
cabbin  I  carried  them  all  over  the  fliip,  but  they  looked  at 
nothing  with  much  attention,  except  the  animals  which  we 
had  on  board  as  live  fl;ock  :  they  examined  the  hogs  and  llieep 
with  fome  cuiiofity,  and  were  exceedingly  delighted  with 
the  Guinea  hens  and  turkies  ;  they  did  not  feem  to  defire  any 
thing  that  they  faw  except  oiu'  apparel,  and  only  one  of 
them,  an  old  man,  afked  for  tliat :  we  gratified  him  with  a 
pair  of  fhoes  and  buckles,  and  to  each  of  the  others  I  gave  a 
canvas  bag,  in  which  I  put  fome  needles  ready  threaded,  a 
few  flips  of  cloth,  a  knife,  a  pair  of  fciffars,  fome  twine,  a 

3  few 


ROUND   THX    WORLD.  377 


Wedaef.  17. 


few  beads,  a  comb,  and  a  lookinsr-fflafs,  with  fome  new  fix-    ^^766. 

'-'  ^  December. 

pences  and  halfpence,  through  which  a  hole  had  been 
drilled,  that  was  fitted  with  a  riband  to  hang  round  the 
neck.  We  offered  them  fome  leaves  of  tobacco,  rolled  up 
into  what  are  called  fegars,  and  they  fmoked  a  little,  but 
did  not  feem  fond  of  it.  I  fhowed  them  the  great  guns,  but 
they  did  not  appear  to  have  any  notion  of  their  ufe.  After  I 
had  carried  them  through  the  fliip,  I  ordered  the  marines  to 
be  drawn  up,  and  go  through  part  of  their  exercife.  When 
the  firfl  volley  was  fired,  they  were  flruck  with  aflonifliment 
and  terror ;  the  old  man  in  particular,  threw  himfelf  down 
upon  the  deck,  pointed  to  the  mufkets,  and  then  llriking  his 
breafl  with  his  hand,  lay  fome  time  motionlefs,  with  his 
eyes  fhut :  by  this  we  fuppofed  he  intended  to  fhew  us  that 
he  was  not  unacquainted  with  fire-arms,  and  their  fatal 
efTecfl.  The  reft  feeing  our  people  merry,  and  finding  them- 
felves  unhurt,  foon  refumed  their  cheerfulnefs  and  good 
humour,  and  heard  the  fecond  and  third  volley  fired  without 
much  emotion ;  but  the  old  man  continued  proftrate  upon  the 
deck  fome  time,  and  never  recovered  his  fpirits  till  the  firing 
was  over.  About  noon,  the  tide  being  out,  I  acquainted 
them  by  figns  that  the  fliip  was  proceeding  farther,  and  that 
they  muft  go  on  fhore :  this  I  foon  perceived  they  were  very 
unwilling  to  do ;  all  however,  except  the  old  man  and  one 
more,  were  got  into  the  boat  without  much  difficulty;  but 
thefe  Hopped  at  the  gang-way,  where  the  old  man  turned 
about,  and  went  aft  to  the  companion  ladder,  where  he 
flood  fome  time  without  fpeaking  a  word ;  he  then  uttered 
what  we  fuppofed  to  be  a  prayer;  for  he  many  times  lifted 
up  his  hands  and  his  eyes  to  the  heavens,  and  fpoke  in  a 
manner  and  tone  very  different  from  what  we  had  obfcrved 
in  their  converfation :  his  oraifon  feemcd  to  be  rather  fung 
than  faid,  fo  that  we  found  it  impoflible  to  diftinguifh  one 
Vol.  I.  C  c  c  word 


378  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1766.      ^n•->,d  from  another.     When  I  asain  intimated  that  it  was 

December. 

».„  .^  _;  proper  for  him  to  go  into  the  boat,  he  pointed  to  the  fun^ 
^"  and  then  moving  his  hand  round  to  the  weft,  he  paufed, 
looked  in  my  face,  laughed,  and  pointed  to  the  fhore:  by 
this  it  was  eafy  to  underftand  that  he  wiflied  to  ftay  onboard 
till  fun-fet,  and  I  took  no  little  pains  to  convince  him  that 
we  could  not  ftay  fo  long  upon  that  part  of  the  coaft,  before 
he  could  be  prevailed  upon  to  go  into  the  boat;  at  length 
however  he  went  over  the  Ihip's  lide  with  his  companion, 
and  when  the  boat  put  off  they  all  began  to  fmg,  and  con-« 
tinned  their  merriment  till  they  got  on  fhore.  When  they 
landed,  great  numbers  of  thofe  on  fhore  preffed  eagerly  to 
get  into  the  boat ;  but  the  officer  on  board,  having  politive 
orders  to  bring  none  of  them  off,  prevented  them,  though 
not  without  great  difficulty,  and  apparently  to  their  extream 
mortification  and  difappointment. 

When  the  boat  returned  on  board,  I  fent  her  off  again 
with  the  mafter,  to  found  the  Ihoal  that  runs  off  from  the 
point :  he  found  it  about  three  miles  broad  from  north  to 
fouth,  and  that  to  avoid  it,  it  was  neceffary  to  keep  four 
miles  off  the  Cape,  in  twelve  or  thirteen  fathom  water. 


CHAP. 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  379 


CHAP.     II. 

The  Pajfage  through  the  Streight  of  Magellan^  with  fame 
further  account  of  the  Patagonians,  and  a  defcription  of 
the  Coafl  on  each  fde,  and  its  Inhabitants, 


Wednef.  17. 


ABOUT  one  o'clock,  on  Wednefday  the  1 7th  of  Decern-  ^l^^^^^^ 
ber,  I  made  the  fignal  and  weighed,  ordering  the 
Swallow  to  go  a-head,  and  the  ftore-fhip  to  bring  up  the 
rear.  The  wind  was  right  againft  us,  and  blew  frefli,  fo 
that  we  were  obliged  to  turn  into  the  Streight  of  Magellan 
with  the  flood-tide,  between  Cape  Virgin  Mary  and  the 
Sandy  Point  that  referable s  Dungenefs.  When  we  got 
a-breaft  of  this  Point,  we  flood  clofe  into  the  fliore,  where 
we  faw  two  guanicoes,  and  many  of  the  natives  on  horfe- 
back,  who  feemed  to  be  in  purfuit  of  them:  when  the 
horfemen  came  near,  they  ran  up  the  country  at  a  great  rate, 
and  were  purfued  by  the  hunters,  with  their  flings  in  their 
hands  ready  for  the  cafl: ;  but  neither  of  them  was  taken 
while  they  were  within  the  reach  of  our  fight. 

When  we  got  about  two  leagues  to  the  wefl  of  Dungenefs, 
and  were  flanding  off  fliore,  we  fell  in  with  a  fhoal  upon 
which  we  had  but  feven  fathom  water  at  half  flood:  this 
obliged  us  to  make  fliort  tacks,  and  keep  continually  heav- 
ing the  lead.  At  half  an  hour  after  eight  in  the  evening 
we  anchored  about  three  miles  from  the  fhore,  in  20  fa- 
thom, with  a  muddy  bottom :  Cape  Virgin  Mary  then  bear- 
ing N.  E.  by  E.  -1  E.J  Point  PofTeffion  W.  i  S.  at  the  diflance 
of  about  five  leagues. 

G  c  c  2  About 


38o  CAPTAIN   WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1766.  About  half  an  hour  after  we  had  caft  anchor,  the  natives 

made  fcveral  hirge  fires  a-breafl  of  the  fhip,  and  at  break  of 
day  we  faw  about  four  hundred  of  them  encamped  in  a  fine 
green  valley,  between  two  hills,  with  their  horfes  feeding 
befide  them.  About  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  tide 
being  done,  we  got  again  under  fail:  it's  courfe  here  is 
from  eafl;  to  weft ;  it  rifes  and  falls  thirty  feet,  and  its 
ftrength  is  equal  to  about  three  knots  an  hour.  About  noon 
there  being  little  wind,  and  the  ebb  running  with  great 
force,  the  Swallow,  who  was  a-head,  made  the  fignal  and 
came  to  an  anchor  ;  upon  which  I  did  the  fame,  and  fo  did 
the  ftore-fhip,  that  was  a-fl:ern. 

As  we  faw  great  numbers  of  the  natives  on  horfeback 
a-breafl  of  the  fhip,  and  as  Captain  Carteret  informed  me  that 
this  was  the  place  where  Commodore  Byron  had  the  confe- 
rence with  the  tall  men,  I  fent  the  lieutenants  of  the  Swal- 
low and  the  ftore-fliip  to  the  fhore,  but  with  orders  not  to- 
land,  as  the  fhips  were  at  too  great  a  diftance  to  prote(5t 
them.'  When  thefe  gentlemen  returned,  they  told  me  that 
the  boat  having  lain  upon  her  oars  very  near  the  beach,  the 
natives  came  down  in  great  numbers,  whom  they  knew  to 
be  the  fame  pe.rfons  they  had  feen  the  day  before,  with  many 
others,  particularly  women  and  children ;  that  when  they 
perceived  our  people  had  no  defign  to  land,  they  feemed  to 
be  greatly  difappointed,  and  thofewhoJiad  been  on  board 
the  fliip  waded  oflf  to  the  boat,  making  figns  for  it  to  ad* 
vance,  and  pronouncing  the  words  they  had  been  taught, 
•'  Engliflimen  come  on  fliore,"  very  loud,  many  times  ;  that 
when  they  found  they  could  not  get  the  people  to  land,  they 
would  fain  have  got  into  the  boat,  and  that  it  was  with  great 
difficulty  they  were  prevented.    That  they  prefented  them 

with 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  381 

with  fome  bread,  tobacco,  and  a  few  toys,  pointin?  at  the    _  1766- 

'  .  .  December. 

fame  time  to  fome  guanicoes  and  oftriches,  and  making  u— v— / 
figns  that  they  wanted  them  as  provifions,  but  that  they 
could  not  make  themfelves  underftood  ;  that  finding  they 
could  obtain  no  refrefliment,  they  rowed  along  the  fliore  in 
fearch  of  frefli  water,  but  that  feeing  no  appearance  of  a  ri- 
vulet, they  returned  on  board. 

At  fix  o'clock  the  next  morning,  we  weighed,  the  Swallow  Friday  rg. 
being  Hill  a-head,  and  at  noon  we  anchored  in  PoiTeflion 
bay,  having  twelve  fathom,  with  a  clean  fandy  bottom. 
Point  Pofleffion  at  this  time  bore  Eaft,  diftant  three  leagues  ; 
the  AlTes  Ears  weft,  and  the  entrance  of  the  N^arrows  S.  W.  7  W. : 
the  bottom  of  the  bay,  which  was  the  neareft  land  to  the 
ihip,  was  dillant  about  three  miles.  We  faw  a  great  num- 
ber of  Indians  upon  the  Point,  and  at  night,  large  fires  on 
the  Terra  del  Fuegofhore. 

From  this  time,  to  the  aad,  we  had  ftrong  gales  and  heavy  Monday  22* 
feas,  fo  that  we  got  on  but  ilowly  ;  and  we  now  anchored  in 
18  fathom,  with  a  muddy  bottom.  The  Afi^es  Ears  bore  N. 
W.  by  W.  7  W.  Point  Pofleffion  N.  E.  by  E.  and  the  point  of 
the  Narrows,  on  the  fouth  fide,  S.  S.  W.  diftant  between  three 
and  four  leagues.  In  this  fituation,  our  longitude,  by  ob- 
fcrvation,  was  70"  20'  W.  latitude  52°  30'  S.  The  tide  here 
fets  S.E.  by  S.  and  N.E.  by  N.  at  the  rate  of  about  three 
knots  an  hour;  the  water  rifes  four  and  twenty  feet,  and  at 
this  time  it  was  high  water  at  four  in  the  morning. 

In  the  morning  of  the  23d,  we  made  fail,  turning  to  wind-  Tuefday  25, 
ward,  but  the  tide  was  fo  ftrong,  that  the  Swallow  was  fet 
one  way,  the  Dolphin  another,  and  the  ftore-fhip  a  third : 
there  was  a  frefli  breeze,  but  not  one  of  the  veflels  would 
anfwer  her  helm.  We  had  various  foundings,  and  faw  the 
ripphng  in  the  middle  ground:    in  thefe  circumftances, 

3  fome  times 


382 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's   VOYAGE 


1766. 

December. 


Taefday  23. 


Wednef.  24. 


fometimes  backing,  fometimes  filling,  we  entered  the  firft 
Narrows.  About  fix  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  tide  being 
done,  we  anchored  on  the  fouth  fhore,  in  40  fathom,  with 
a  fandy  bottom ;  the  Swallow  anchored  on  the  north  fhore, 
and- the  flore-fhip  not  a  cable's  length  from  a  fand  bank, 
about  two  miles  to  the  eaflward.  The  flreight  here  is  only- 
three  miles  wide,  and  at  midnight,  the  tide  being  flack,  we 
weighed  and  towed  the  fhip  through.  A  breeze  fprung  up 
foon  afterwards,  which  continued  till  feven  in  the  morning, 
and  then  died  away.  We  fleered  from  the  firfl  Narrows  to 
the  fecond  S.  W.  and  had  ig  fathom,  with  a  muddy  bottom. 
At  eight  we  anchored  two  leagues  from  the  fliore,  in  24  fa- 
thom, Cape  Gregory  bearing  W.  7  N.  and  Sweepflakes  Fore- 
land S.  W.  1  W.  The  tide  here  ran  feven  knots  an  hour,  and 
fuch  bores  fometimes  came  down,  with  immenfe  quantities 
of  weeds,  that  we  expe<5led  every  moment  to  be  adrift. 
Thurfdayz5.  The  ncxt  day,  being  Chriftmas  day,  we  failed  through  the 
fecond  Narrows.  In  turning  through  this  part  of  the 
Streight  we  had  12  fathom  within  half  a  mile  of  the  fliore 
on  each  fide,  and  in  the  middle  17  fathom,  22  fathom,  and 
no  ground.  At  five  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  fliip  fuddenly 
fhoaled  from  17  fathom  to  5,  St.  Bartholomew's  ifland  then 
bearing  S.  i-  W.  diflant  between  three  and  four  miles,  and 
Elizabeth  illand  S.  S.  W.  1  W.  diflant  five  or  fix  miles.  About 
half  an  hour  after  eight  o'clock,  the  weather  being  rainy 
and  tempefluous,  we  anchored  under  Elizabeth  ifland  in 
24  fathom,  with  hard  gravelly  ground.  Upon  this  ifland 
we  found  great  quantities  of  celery,  which,  by  the  direc- 
tion of  the  furgeon,  was  given  to  the  people,  with  boiled 
wheat  and  portable  foup,  for  breakfafl  every  morning.  Some 
of  the  officers  who  went  afliore  with  their  guns,  faw  two 
fmall  dogs,  and  feveral  places  where  fires  had  been  recently 

made, 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  3% 

made,  with  many  frefh  fhells  of  mufcles  and  limpets  lying  ^^^^7^6.^^ 

about  them :  they  faw  alfo  feveral  wigwams  or  huts,  conlift-  \ , — j. 

ing  of  young  trees,  which,  being  fharpened  at  one  end,  and 
thruft  into  the  ground  in  a  circular  form,  the  other  ends 
were  brought  to  meet,  and  faftened  together  at  the  topj 
but  they  faw  none  of  the  natives. 

From  this  place  we  faw  many  high  mountains,  bearing 
from  S.  to  W.  S.  W.;  feveral  parts  of  the  fummits  were  co- 
vered with  fnow,  though  it  was  the  midll  of  fummer  in  this 
part  of  the  world :  they  were  clothed  with  wood  about  three 
parts  of  their  height,  and  above  with  herbage,  except  where 
the  fnow  was  not  yet  melted.  This  was  the  firft  place  where 
we  had  feen  wood  in  all  South  America. 

At  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  26th,  we  weighed,  F^'^ay  z5i, 
and  having  a  fair  wind,  were  a-breaft  of  the  north  end  of 
Elizabeth's  iiland  at  three :  at  half  an  hour  after  five,  being 
about  mid-way  between  Elizabeth's  ifland  and  St.  George's 
ifland,  we  fuddenly  ihoaled  our  water  from  17  fathom  to 
fix:  we  ftruck  the  ground  once,  but  the  next  cafl  had  no 
bottom  with  20  fathom.  When  we  were  upon  this  fhoal. 
Cape  Porpoife  bore  W.  S.  W.  4  W.  the  fouth-end  of  Elizabeth's 
ifland  W.  N.  W.  7  W.  diftant  three  leagues,  and  the  fouth-end 
of  Saint  George's  ifland  N.  E.  diftant  four  leagues.  The 
flore-fhip,  which  was  about  half  a  league  to  the  fouthward 
of  us,  had  once  no  more  than  four  fathom,  and  for  a  con- 
fiderable  time  not  feven ;  the  Swallow,  which  was  three  or 
four  miles  to  the  fouthward,  had  deep  water,  for  fhe  kept 
near  to  St.  George's  ifland.  In  my  opinion  it  is  fafeft  to  run 
down  from  the  north-end  of  Elizabeth's  ifland,  about  two  or 
three  miles  from  the  fhore,  and  fo  on  all  the  way  to  Port 
Famine.  At  noon,  a  low  point  bore  E.  7  N.  Frefh-water  Bay 
S.  W.  ^  W.  At  this  time  we  were  about  three  miles  diftant 
2  from 


384  CAPTAIN   WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1766.      from  the  north  fliore,  and  had  no  ground  with  80  fathom, 
y— >, — 1   Our  longitude,  by  obfervation,  which  was  made  over  the 

"  ay  2  .     £j^Qg^|^  ^^g^g  ^jO  ^o^ .  OMX  latitude  ^^i"  i^'  S* 

About  four  o'clock  we  anchored  in  Port  Famine  Bay,  in 
13  fathom,  and  there  being  little  wind,  fent  all  the  boats, 
and  towed  in  the  Swallow  and  Prince  Frederick. 

Saturday  27.  The  next  morning,  the  weather  teing  fqually,  we  warped 
the  fhip  farther  into  the  harbour,  and  moored  her  with  a 
cable  each  way  in  nine  fathom.  I  then  fent  a  party  of 
m-en  to  pitch  two  large  tents  in  th-e  bottom  of  the  bay,  for 
the  lick,  the  wooders,  and  the  fail-makers,  who  were  foon 
after  fent  on  fhore  with  the  furgeon,  the  gunner,  and  fome 
midfhipmen.  Cape  St.  Anne  now  bore  N.  E.  by  E.  diilant 
three  quarters  of  a  mile,  and  Sedger  River  S.  f  W. 

Sunday  2g.  Qn  the  28th  we  unbent  all  the  fails,  and  fent  them  on 
Ihore  to  be  repaired,  ere(?led  tents  upon  the  banks  of  Sedger 
River,  and  fent  all  the  empty  cafl^s  on  Ihore,  with  the  coopers 
to  trim  them,  and  a  mate  and  ten  men  to  wafh  and  fill  them. 
We  alfo  hauled  the  feine,  and  caught  fifli  in  great  plenty : 
fome  of  them  refembled  a  mullet,  but  the  flefh  was  very  foft; 
and  among  them  were  a  few  fmelts,  fome  of  which  were 
twenty  inches  long,  and  weighed  four  and  twenty  ounces. 

During  our  whole  ftay  in  this  place,  we  caught  fifh 
enough  to  furnifh  one  meal  a  day  both  for  the  fick  and  the 
well:  we  found  alfo  great  plenty  of  celery  and  pea-tops, 
which  were  boiled  with  the  peafe  and  portable  foup :  befides 
thefe,  we  gathered  great  quantities  of  fruit  that  refembled 
the  cranberry,  and  the  leaves  of  a  flirub  fomewhat  like  our 
thorn,  which  were  remarkably  four.  When  we  arrived,  all 
our  people  began  to  look  pale  and  meagre ;  many  had  the 
fcurvy  to  a  great  degree,  and  upon  others  there  were  ma- 
nifell  figns  of  its  approach ;  yet  in  a  fortnight  there  was  not 

a  fcor- 


KOUNDTHEWORLD.  385 

a  fcorbutic  perfon  in  either  of  the  fhips.   Their  recovery  was       i/^^- 
efFeifted  by  their  being  on  ftiore,  eating  plenty  of  vegetables,   l  -.-i^j- 
being  obUged  to  wafh  their  apparel,  and  keep  their  perfons 
clean  by  daily  bathing  in  the  fea. 

The  next  day  we  fet  up  the  forge  on  fliore  ;  and  from  this  Monday  29. 
time,  the  armourers,  carpenters,  and  the  reft  of  the  people 
were  employed  in  refitting  the  fhip,  and  making  her  ready 
for  the  fea. 

In  the  mean  time,  a  confiderable  quantity  of  wood  was 
cut,  and  put  on  board  the  ftore-fhip,  to  be  fent  to  Falkland's 
iflandj  and  as  1  well  knew  there  was  no  wood  growing 
there,  I  caufed  fome  thoufands  of  young  trees  to  be  care- 
fully taken  up  with  their  roots,  and  a  proper  quantity  of 
earth ;  and  packing  them  in  the  beft  manner  I  could,  I  put 
them  alfo  on  board  the  ftore-lhip,  with  orders  to  deliver 
them  to  the  commanding  officer  at  Port  Egmont,  and  to  fail 
for  that  place  with  the  firft  fair  wind,  putting  on  board  two 
of  my  feamen,  who  being  in  an  ill  ftate  of  health  when  they 
firft  came  on  board,  were  now  altogether  unfit  to  proceed  in 
the  voyage. 

On  Wednefday  the  14th  of  January,  we  got  all  our  people  1767, 
and  tents  on  board ;  having  taken  in  feventy-five  tons  of  wednd'.'-Vi 
water  from  the  fliore,  and  twelve  months  provifions  of  all 
kinds,  at  whole  allowance,  for  ourfelves,  and  ten  months 
for  the  Swallow,  from  on  board  the  ftore-fhip,  I  fent  the 
mafter  in  the  cutter,  which  was  victualed  for  a  week,  to 
look  out  for  anchoring  places  on  the  north  fliore  of  the 
Streight. 

After  feveral  attempts  to  fail,  the  weather  obliged  iis  to  Saturday  17; 
continue  in  our  old  ftation  till  Saturday  the  17th,  when  the 
Prince  Frederick  Vidlualer  failed  for  Falkland's  ifland,  and 

Vol.  I,  D  d  d  the 


|86  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's   VOYAGE 

1767-      the  mailer  returned  from  his  expedition.    The  mailer  re- 

January. 

V— -V '   ported  that  he  had  found  four  places,  m  which  there  was^ 

good  anchorage,  between  the  place  where  we  lay  and  Cape 
Froward :  that  he  had  been  an  fliore  at  feveral  places,  where 
he  had  found  plenty  of  wood  and  water  clofe  to  the  beach^ 
with  abundance  of  cranberries  and  wild  celery.  He  reported 
alfo,  that  he  had  feen  a  great  number  of  currant  bufhes  full 
of  fruit,  though  none  of  it  was  ripe,  and  a  great  variety  of 
beautiful  fhrubs  in  full  bloflbm,  bearing  flowers  of  different 
colours,  particularly  red,  purple,  yellow,  and  white,  befides 
great  plenty  of  the  winter's  bark»  a  grateful  fpice  which  is. 
well  known  to  the  botanifts  of  Europe.  He  fhot  feveral  wild 
ducks,  geefe,  gulls,  a  hawk,  and  two  or  three  of  the  birds- 
which  the  failors  call  a  Race-Horfe. 

Sunday  18.  At  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  Sunday  the  i8th,  we 
.  made  fail,  and  at  noon,  being  about  two  miles  from  the 
fhore,  Cape  Froward  bore  N.  by  E.  a  bluff  point  N.  N.  W.  and 
Cape  Holland  W.  i.  S.  Our  latitude  at  this  place,  by  obfer- 
vation,  was  54«>  3'  S.  and  we  found  the  Streight  to  be  about 
fix  miles  wide.  Soon  after  I  fent  a  boat  into  Snug  bay,  to  lie 
at  the  anchoring  place,  but  the  wind  coming  from  the  land, 
I  flood  off  again  all  night;  and  at  a  mile  from  the  fhore,  we 
had  no  ground  with  140  fathom. 

Monday  igi  In  the  momiug  of  Monday  the  19th,  the  Swallow  having, 
made  the  fignal  for  anchoring  under  Cape  Holland,  we  ran 
in,  and  anchored  in  10  fathom,  with  a  clear  fandy  bottom^ 
Upon  fending  the  boats  out  to  found,  we  difcovered  that  we 
were  very  near  a  reef  of  rocks  ;  we  therefore  tripped  the  an- 
chor, and  dropped  farther  out,  where  we  had  12  fathom, 
and  were  about  half  a  mile  from  the  Ihore,  juft  oppofite  to  a 
large  ilream  of  water  which  falls  with  great  rapidity  from 

the 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  387 

the  mountains,  for  the  land  here  is  of  a  flupendous  height.       ^^7' 

Cape  Holland  bore  W.  S.  W.  7  "W.  diflant  two  miles,  and  Cape    « ,~-J 

FrowardE.    Our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  S3°  58' S. 

The  next  morning  we  got  off  fome  water,  and  great  Tuefday  20, 
plenty  of  wild  celery,  but  could  get  no  fifh,  except  a  few 
mufcles.  I  fent  off  the  boats  to  found,  and  found  that  there 
was  good  anchorage  at  about  half  a  mile  from  the  fhore, 
quite  from  the  Cape  to  four  miles  below  it ;  and  clofe  by  the 
Cape  a  good  harbour,  where  a  Ihip  might  refrefh  with  more 
fafety  than  at  Port  Famine,  and  avail  herfelf  of  a  large  river 
of  frefh  water,  with  plenty  of  wood,  celery,  and  berries  ; 
though  the  place  affords  no  fifli  except  mufcles. 

Having  completed  our  wood  and  water,  we  failed  from  Thurf.  iti 
this  place  on  the  22d,  about  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon. 
At  nine  in  the  evening,  the  Ihip  being  about  two  miles 
diflant  from  the  fhore.  Cape  Gallant  bore  W.  i  N.  diflant 
two  leagues,  Cape  Holland  E.  by  N.  diflant  fix  leagues ;  Cape 
Gallant  and  Cape  Holland  being  nearly  in  one :  a  white  patch 
in  Monmouth's  ifland  bore  S.  S,  W.  iW.  Rupert's  ifland 
\V.  S.  W.  At  this  place  the  Streight  is  not  more  than  five 
miles  over ;  and  we  found  a  tide  which  produced  a  very  un- 
ufual  effed,  for  it  became  impofTible  to  keep  the  fhip's  head 
upon  any  point. 

At  fix  the  next  morning,  the  Swallow  made  the  fignal  for  Friday  23. 
having  found  anchorage  ;  and  at  eight  we  anchored  in  a  bay 
under  Cape  Gallant,  in  10  fathom,  with  a  muddy  bottom. 
The  eafl  point  of  Cape  Gallant  bore  S.  W.  by  W.  i-  W.  the  ex- 
tream  point  of  the-eaflermofl  land  E.  by  S*  a  point  making 
the  mouth  of  a  river  N.  by  W.  and  the  white  patch  on 
Charles's  ifland  S.  W.  The  boats  being  fent  out  to  found, 
found  good  anchorage  every  where,  except  within  two 
cables  length  S.  W.  of  the  fhip,    where  it  was  coral,  and 

D  d  d  2  deepened' 


3S8  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

jllmr'y.  ^^^V^^^'^  to  1 6  fathoiTi.  In  the  afternoon  I  fent  out  the  mafler 
*  ->»-^  to  examine  the  bay  and  a  large  lagoon  ;  and  he  reported  that 
the  lagoon  was  the  mofl  commodious  harbour  we  had  yet 
feen  in  the  Streight,  having  five  fathom  at  the  entrance,  and 
from  four  to  five  in  tlie  middle  ;  that  it  was  capable  of  re- 
ceiving a  great  number  of  veiTels,  had  three  large  frelh 
water  rivers,  and  plenty  of  wood  and  celery.  We  had  here 
the  misfortune  to  have  a  feine  fpoiled,  by  being  entangled 
with  the  wood  that  lies  funk  at  the  mouth  of  thefe  rivers ; 
but  though  we  caught  but  little  fifh,  we  had  an  incredible 
number  of  wild  ducks,  which  we  found  a  very  good  fucce- 
daneum. 

The  mountains  are  here  very  lofty,  and  the  mafter  of  the 
Swallow  climbed  one  of  the  higheft,  hoping  that  from  the 
fummit  he  fhould  obtain  a  fight  of  the  South  Sea ;  but  he 
found  his  view  intercepted  by  mountains  Hill  higher  on  the 
fouthern  fhore:  before  he  defcended,  however,  he  ereded 
a  pyramid,  within  which  he  depofited  a  bottle  containing  a 
fhilling,  and  a  paper  on  which  was  written  the  fliip's  name 
and  the  date  of  the  year ;  a  memorial  which  pollibly  may 
remain  there  as  long  as  the  world  endures. 

Saturday  24.  In  the  moming  of  the  24th  we  took  two  boats  and  ex- 
amined Cordes  bay,  which  we  found  very  much  inferior  to 
that  in  which  the  fliip  lay ;  it  had  indeed  a  larger  lagoon, 
but  the  entrance  of  it  was  very  narrow,  and  barred  by  a 
fhoal,  on  which  there  was  not  fufllicient  depth  of  water  for  a 
fhip  of  burden  to  float:  the  entrance  of  the  bay  alfo  was 
rocky,  and  within  it  the  ground  was  foul. 

•  In  this  place  we  faw  an  animal  that  refembled  an  afs,  but 
it  had  a  cloven  hoof,  as  we  difcovered  afterwards  by  tracking 
it,  and  was  as  fwift  as  a  deer.  This  was  the  firfl  animal  we 
had  feen  in  the  Streight,  except  at  the  entrance,  where  we 

found 
3 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  S&9 

found  the  guanicoes  that  we  would  fain  have  trafficked  for       1767; 

January. 

With  the  hidians.    We  mot  at  this  creature,  but  we  could    u.- .,~.^ 
not  hit  it ;  probably  it  is  altogether  unknown  to  the  natura- 
lills  of  Europe; 

The  country  about  this  place  has  the  moft  dreary  and  for- 
lorn appearance  that  can  be  imagined ;  the  mountains  on 
each  fide  the  Streight  are  of  an  immenfe  height :  about  one 
fourth  of  the  afcent  is  covered  with  trees  of  a  confiderable 
fize ;  in  the  fpace  from  thence  to  the  middle  of  the  mountain 
there  is  nothing  but  withered  Ihrubs ;  above  thefe  are  patches 
of  fnow,  and  fragments  of  broken  rock;  and  the  fummit 
is  altogether  rude  and  naked,  towering  above  the  clouds  in 
vaft  crags  that  are  piled  upon  each  other,  and  look  like  the 
ruins  of  Nature  devoted  to  everlafting  fterility  and  defolation. 

We  went  over  in  two  boats  to  the  Royal  lilands,  and 
founded,  but  found  no  bottom  :  a  very  rapid  tide  fet  through 
wherever  there  was  an  opening ;  and  they  cannot  be  ap- 
proached by  Ihipping  without  the  moft  imminent  danger. 
Whoever  navigates  this  part  of  the  Streight,  fliould  keep  the 
north  Ihore  clofe  on  board  all  the  way,  and  not  venture 
more  than  a  mile  from  it  till  the  Royal  Iflands  are  pafled; 
The  current  fets  eafterly  through  the  whole  four  and  twenty 
hours,  and  the  indraught  Ihould  by  all  means  be  avoided. 
The  latitude  of  Cape  Gallant  road  is  ^^^^  50'  S. 

We  continued  in  this  ftation,  taking  in  wood  and  water, 
and  gathering  mufcles  and  herbs,  till  the  morning  of  the  Tuefday27i. 
27th,  when  a  boat  that  had  been  fent  to  try  the  current,  re- 
turned with  an  account  that  it  fet  nearly  at  the  rate  of  two 
miles  an  hour,  but  that  the  wind  being  northerly,  we  might 
probably  get  round  to  Elizabeth  bay  or  York  road  before 
night ;  we  therefore  weighed  with  all  expedition.  At  noon 
on  the  28th,  the  weft  point  of  Cape  Gallant  bore  W.  N.  W.  Wednef.  2S,. 

diftant 


390  CAPTAIN   WALLIS*s    VOYAGE 

1767-      diflant  half  a  mile,  and  the  white  patch  on  Charles's'  ifland 

January.  * 

*— V '  S.  E.  by  S.     We  had  frelh  gales  and  heavy  flaws  oiFthe  land; 

and  at  two  o'clock  the  weft  point  of  Cape  Gallant  bore  E. 
diftant  three  leagues,  and  York  Point  W.  N.  W.  dillant  five 
leagues.  At  five,  we  opened  York  road,  the  Point  bearing 
N.  W.  at  the  diflance  of  half  a  mile :  at  this  time  the  fliip 
was  taken  a-back,  and  a  ftrong  current  with  a  heavy  fquall 
drove  us  fo  far  to  leeward,  that  it  was  with  great  difficulty 
we  got  into  Elizabeth  bay,  and  anchored  in  12  fathom  near 
a  river.  The  Swallow  being  at  anchor  off  the  point  of  the 
bay,  and  very  near  the  rocks,  I  fent  all  the  boats  with  an- 
chors and  haufers  to  her  affiftance,  and  at  laft  flie  was 
happily  warped  to  windv/ard  into  good  anchorage.  York 
Point  now  bore  W.  by  N.  a  fhoal  with  weeds  upon  it  W.  N.  W. 
at  the  diftance  of  a  cable's  length,  Point  Pafiage  S.  E.  7  E* 
diftant  half  a  mile,  a  rock  near  Rupert's  ifle  S.  7  E.  and  a  ri- 
vulet on  the  bay  N.  E.  by  E.  diftant  about  three  cable's 
length.  Soon  after  fun-fet  we  faw  a  great  fmoke  on  the 
fouthern  flaore,  and  another  on  Prince  Rupert's  ifland. 

Thurfdayzg.  Early  in  the  morning  I  fent  the  boats  on  fliore  for  water, 
and  foon  after  our  people  landed,  three  canoes  put  oft"  from 
the  fouth  fhore,  and  landed  fixteen  of  the  natives  on  the  eaft 
point  of  the  bay.  When  they  came  within  about  a  hundred 
yards  of  our  people  they  ftopt,  called  out,  and  made  figns  of 
friendfliip ;  our  people  did  the  fame,  fhewing  them  fome 
beads  and  other  toys.  At  this  they  feemed  pleafcd,  and  be- 
gan to  flioiu ;  our  people  imitated  the  noife  they  made,  and 
Ihoutcd  in  return :  the  Indians  then  advanced,  ftill  fliouting 
and  laughing  very  loud.  When  the  parties  met  they  fhook 
hands,  and  our  men  prefented  the  hidians  with  feveral  of 
the  toys  v/hich  tliey  had  fliewn  them  at  a  diftance.  TJiey 
were  covered  with  feal  fliins,  which  ftunk  abominably,  and 
fome  of  them  were  eating  the  rotten  flcfli  and  blubber  rav/, 

with 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  391 

with  a  keen  appetite  and  great  feeming  fatisfac^Ion.    Their       1767- 

complexion  was  the  fame  as  that  of  the  people  we  had  feen   » » ' 

before,  but  they  were  low  of  ftature,  the  talleft  of  them  not  ""^  *^  ^^' 
being  more  than  five  foot  fix :  they  appeared  to  be  perifhing 
with  cold,  and  immediately  kindled  feveral  fires.  How  they 
fiibfifl  in  winter,  it  is  not  perhaps  eafy  to  guefs,  for  the  wea- 
ther v/as  at  this  time  fa  fevere,  that  we  had  frequent  falls  of 
fnow.  They  were  armed  with  bows,  arrows,  and  javelins  : 
the  arrows  and  javelins  were  pointed  with  flint,  which  was 
wrought  into  the  lliape  of  a  ferpent's  tongue ;  and  they  dif- 
charged  both  with  great  force  and  dexterity,  fcarce  ever  fail- 
ing to  hit  a  mark  at  a  conllderable  diflance.  To  kindle  a  fire 
they  flrike  a  pebble  againfl  a  piece  of  mundic,  holding  under 
it,  to  eatch  the  fparks,  fome  mofs  or  down,  mixed  with  a 
whitifh  earth,  which  takes  fire  like  tinder:  they  then  take 
fome  dry  grafs,  of  which  there  is  every  where  plenty,  and 
putting  the  lighted  mofs  into  it,  wave  it  to  and  fro,  and  in 
about  a  minute  it  blazes. 

When  the  boat  returned  fhe  brought  three  of  them  on 
board  the  fhip,  but  they  feemed  to  regard  nothing  with  any 
degree  of  curiofity  except  our  cloaths  and  a  looking-glafs  ; 
the  looking-glafs  afforded  them  as  much  diverfion  as  it  had 
done  the  Patagonians,  and  it  feemed  to  furprize  them  more : 
when  they  firfl  peeped  into  it  they  ftarted  back,  firfl  looking 
at  us,  and  then  at  each  other ;  they  then  took  another  peep, 
as  it  were  by  flealth,  flarting  back  as  before,  and  then 
eagerly  looking  behind  it:  when  by  degrees  they  became 
familiar  with  it,  they  fmiled,  and  feeing  the  image  fmile  in 
return,  they  were  exceedingly  delighted,  and  burft  into  fits 
of  the  moft  violent  laughter.  They  left  this  however,  and 
every  thing  elfe,  with  perfe(5t  indifference,  the  little  they 
pofTefTed  being  to  all  appearance  equal  to  their  defires.  They 

eat 


392  CAPTAIN   WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1767.       eat  whatever  was  given  them,  but  would  drink  nothing  but 
w — ^ — J   water. 

"When  they  left  the  Ihip  I  went  on  flaore  with  them,  and 
by  this  time  feveral  of  their  wives  and  children  were  come 
to  the  watering-place.  I  diftributed  fome  trinkets  among 
them,  with  which  they  feemed  pleafed  for  a  moment,  and 
tliey  gave  us  fome  of  their  arms  in  return;  they  gave  us  alfo 
feveral  pieces  of  mundic,  fuch  as  is  found  in  the  tin  mines 
of  Cornwall :  they  made  us  underlland  that  they  found  it 
in  the  mountains,  where  there  are  probably  mines  of  tin, 
and  perhaps  of  more  valuable  metal.  As  this  feems  to  be 
the  moft  dreary  and  inhofpitable  country  in  the  world,  not 
excepting  the  worft  parts  of  Sweden  and  Norway,  the  people 
feem  to  be  the  loweft  and  moll  deplorable  of  all  human 
beings.  Their  perfecfl  indifference  to  every  thing  they  faw, 
which  marked  the  difparity  between  our  flate  and  their 
own,  though  it  may  preferve  them  from  the  regret  and 
anguilh  of  unfatisfied  defires,  feems,  notwithftanding,  to 
imply  a  defe6t  in  their  nature  j  for  thofe  who  are  fatisfied 
with  the  gratifications  of  a  brute,  can  have  little  pretenfion 
to  the  prerogatives  of  men.  When  they  left  us  and  em- 
barked in  their  canoes,  they  hoifted  a  feal  flcin  for  a  fail,  and 
fleered  for  the  fouthern  fhore,  where  we  faw  many  of  their 
hovels  ;  and  we  remarked  that  not  one  of  them  looked  be- 
hind, either  at  us  or  at  the  Ihip,  fo  little  impreflion  had  the 
wonders  they  had  fcen  made  upon  their  minds,  and  fo  much 
did  they  appear  to  be  abforbed  in  the  prefcnt,  without  any 
habitual  exercife  of  their  power  to  refle(5l  upon  the  paft. 
Tuefdayj.  In  this  ftation  we  continued  till  Tuefday  the  3d  of  Fe- 
bruary. At  about  half  an  hour  paft  twelve  we  weighed,  and 
in  a  fudden  fquall  were  taken  a-back,  fo  as  that  both  fliips 
were  in  tlie  moft  imminent  danger  of  being  driven  afliore 

on 


HOUND    THE    WORLD.  ^^^ 

on  a  reef  of  rocks ;  the  wind  however  fuddenly  fliifted,  and  tySy. 
we  happily  got  off  without  damage.  At  five  o'clock  in  the  i  ^  '•"^'•y^ 
afternoon,  the  tide  being  done,  and  the  wind  coming  about  '^'^^^'^^^  ^' 
to  the  weft,  we  bore  away  for  York  road,  and  at  length  an- 
chored in  it:  the  Swallow  at  the  fame  time  being  very  near 
Ifland  bay,  under  Cape  Quod,  endeavoured  to  get  in  there, 
but  was  by  the  tide  obliged  to  return  to  York  road.  In  this 
fituation  Cape  Quod  bore  \V.  t  S.  diilant  19  miles,  York  Point 
E.  S.  E.  diftant  one  mile.  Bachelor's  River  N.  N.  W.  three 
quarters  of  a  mile,  the  entrance  of  Jerom's  Sound  N.  W.  by 
W.  and  a  fmall  ifland  on  the  fouth  fhore  Ww  by  S.  We  found 
the  tide  here  very  rapid  and  uncertain ;  in  the  ftream  it  ge- 
nerally fet  to  the  eaftward,  but  it  fometimes,  though  rarely, 
fet  weftward  fix  hours  together.  This  evening  we  faw  five 
Indian  canoes  come  out  of  Bachelor's  River,  and  go  up  Je- 
rom's Sound. 

In  the  morning,  the  boats  which  I  had  fent  out  to  found  Wednef.  +, 
both  the  fhores  of  the  Streight  and  all  parts  of  the  bay,  re- 
turned with  an  account  that  there  was  good  anchorage  with- 
in Jerom's  Sound,  and  all  the  way  thither  fi-om  the  fhip's 
ftation  at  the  diftance  of  about  half  a  mile  from  the  Ihore ; 
alfo  between  Elizabeth  and  York  Point,  near  York  Point,  at 
the  diftance  of  a  cable  and  a  half's  length  from  the  weeds, 
in  16  fathom  with  a  muddy  bottom.  There  were  alfo  feveral 
places  under  the  iflands  on  the  fouth  fliore  where  a  fhip 
might  anchor  ;  but  the  force  and  uncertainty  of  the  tides, 
and  the  heavy  gufts  of  wind  that  came  off  the  high  lands, 
by  which  thefe  fituations  were  furrounded,  rendered  them 
unfafe.  Soon  after  the  boats  returned,  I  put  frefh  hands 
into  them  and  went  myfelf  up  Bachelor's  River:  we  found  a 
bar  at  the  entrance,  which  at  certain  times  of  the  tide  rauft 
be  dangerous.  We  hauled  the  feine,  and  fliould  have 
caught  plenty  of  fifli  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  weeds  and 

Vol.  I.  E  e  e  Humps 


3^4  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1767-       flumps  of  trees  at  the  bottom  of  the  river.    We  then  went 

February,  -^  .  c      i  •  v 

u.— ,.^-/  alliore,  where  we  faw  many  wigwams  or  the  natives,  and 
feveral  of  their  dogs,  who,  as  foon  as  we  came  in  fight,  ran 
away.  We  alfo  faw  fome  oftriches,  but  they  were  beyond 
the  reach  of  our  pieces :  we  gathered  mufcles,  Urapets,  fea- 
eggs,  celery,  and  nettles  in  great  abundance.  About  three 
miles  up  this  river,  on  the  weft  fide,  between  Mount  Mifery 
and  another  mountain  of  a  ftupendous  height,  there  is  a  ca- 
taract which  has  a  very  ftriking  appearance  :  it  is  precipitated 
from  an  elevation  of  above  four  hundred  yards ;  half  the 
way  it  rolls  over  a  very  fteep  declivity,  and  the  other  half  is 
a  perpendicular  fall.  The  found  of  this  cataradt  is  not  lefs 
awful  than  the  fight. 

Saturday  14.  hi  this  placc,  contrary  wiuds  detained  us  till  10  o'clock  in, 
the  morning  of  Saturday  the  14th,  when  we  weighed,  and 
in  half  an  hour  the  current  fet  the  fhip  towards  Bachelor's 
River :  we  then  put  her  in  ftays,  and  while  fhe  was  coming 
about,  which  flie  was  long  in  doing,  we  drove  over  a  fhoal 
where  we  had  little  more  than  16  feet  water  with  rocky 
ground  ;  fo  that  our  danger  was  very  great,  for  the  fhip 
drew  16  feet  9  inches  aft,  and  15  feet  one  inch  forward: 
as  foon  as  the  fhip  gathered  way,  we  happily  deepened  into 
three  fathom  ;  within  two  cables'  length  we  had  five,  and  in 
a  very  fhort  time  we  got  into  deep  water.  We  continued 
plying  to  windward  till  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  and 
then  finding  that  we  had  loft  ground,  we  returned  to  our 
ftation,  and  again  anchored  in  York  road. 

Tiiefday  17.  Hcrc  wc  remained  till  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the 
17th,  Avhen  wc  weighed,  and  towed  out  of  the  road.  At 
nine,  though  v/c  had  a  fine  breeze  at  weft,  the  fliip  was  car- 
ried with  great  violence  by  a  current  towards  the  fouth  fliorc: 
jhe  boats  were  all  towing  a-!itad,  and  the  fails  afleep,  yet  we 
2  drove 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  3P5 

drove  fo  clofe  to  the  rock,  that  the  oars  of  the  boats  were  1767. 
entangled  in  the  weeds.  In  this  manner  we  were  hurried  ,  ^_'"^-^ 
along  near  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  expecfting  every  mo-  '^^^^'^^y'7- 
jnent  to  be  dafhed  to  pieces  againft  the  cliff,  from  which  we 
were  feldom  farther  than  a  fhip's  length,  and  very  often  not 
half  fo  much.  We  founded  on  both  fides,  and  found  that 
next  the  fhore  we  had  from  14  to  20  fathom,  and  on  the 
other  fide  of  the  fliip  no  bottom :  as  all  our  efforts  were  in- 
effedlual,  we  refigned  ourfelves  to  our  fate,  and  waited  the 
event  in  a  ftate  of  fufpenfe  very  little  different  from  defpair. 
At  length,  however,  we  opened  Saint  David's  Sound,  and  a 
current  that  ruflied  out  of  it  fet  us  into  the  mid-channel. 
During  all  this  time  the  Swallow  was  on  the  north  fhore, 
and  confequently  could  know  nothing  of  our  danger  till  it 
was  pall.  We  now  fent  the  boats  out  to  look  for  an  anchor- 
ing place  ;  and  at  noon  Cape  Quod  bore  N.  N.  E.  and  Saint 
David's  head  S.  E. 

About  one  o'clock  the  boats  returned,  having  found  an 
anchoring  place  in  a  fmall  bay,  to  which  we  gave  the  name 
of  Butler's  bay,  it  having  been  difcovered  by  Mr.  Butler  one 
of  the  mates.  It  lies  to  the  weft  of  Rider's  bay  on  the  fouth 
fhore  of  the  Streight,  which  is  here  about  two  miles  wide. 
We  ran  in  with  the  tide  which  fet  fafl  to  the  weflward,  and 
anchored  in  16  fathom  water.  The  extreams  of  the  bay 
from  W.  by  N.  to  N.  7  W.  are  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  afun- 
der;  a  fmall  rivulet,  at  the  diftance  of  fomewhat  lefs  than 
two  cables'  length,  bore  S.  7  W.  and  Cape  Quod  N.  at  the 
diftance  of  four  miles.  At  this  time  the  Swallow  Was  at  an- 
chor in  Ifland  bay  on  the  north  fliore,  at  about  fix  miles 
diftance. 

I  now  fent  all  the  boats  out  to  found  round  the  fliip  and 

in  the  neighbouring  bays ;  and  they  returned  with  an  ac- 

E  e  e  2  count 


396  CAPTAIN    WALL  I  S's    VOYAGE 

1767-       count  that  they  could  find  noplace  fit  to  receive  the  fliip>> 
^ejuar  .^    i-^q[(Iiqy:  could  any  fuch  place  be  found  between  Cape  Quodi 

and  Cape  Notch. 
Friday  20.  In  tliis  placc  we  remained  tiU  Friday  the  20th,  when  about 
noon  the  clouds  gathered  very  thick  to  the  weftward,  and 
before  one  it  blew  a  florm,  with  fuch  rain  and  hail  as  we 
had  fcarcely  ever  feen.  We  immediately  ftruck  the  yards 
and  top-mafts,  and  having  run  out  two  haufers  to  a  rock, 
we  hove  the  Ihip  up  to  it :  we  then  let  go  the  fmall  bowery 
and  veered  away,  and  brought  both  cables  a~head ;  at  the 
fame  time  we  carried  out  two  more  haufers,  and  made  thera 
faffi  to  two  other  rocks,  making  ufe  of  every  expedient  in' 
our  power  to  keep  the  fhip  fteady.  The  gale  continued  to 
iiicreafe  till  fix  o'clock  in  the  evening,  and  to  our  great 
aftonifhment  the  fea  broke  quite  over  the  fore-caftle  in  upon- 
the  quarter-deck,  which,  confidering  the  narrownefs  of  the 
Streight,  and  the  fmallnefs  of  the  bay  in  which  we  were 
llationed,.  might  well  have  been  thought  impofTible.  Our 
danger  here  was  very  great,  for  if  the  cables  had  parted,  as 
we  could  not  run  out  with  a  fail,  and  as  we  had  not  room  to 
bring  the  fhip  up  with  any  other  anchor,  we  mufl  have  been 
dalhed  to  pieces  in  a  few  minutes,  and  in  fuch  a  fituation  it  is 
highly  probable  that  every  foul  would  immediately  have  pe- 
riflied  ;  however,  by  eight  o'clock  the  gale  was  become  fome- 
what  more  moderate,  and  gradually  decreafing  during  the 
Saturday  21.  night,  wc  had  tolerable  weather  the  next  morning.  Upon 
heaving  the  anchoi',  we  had  the  fatisfadlion  to  find  that  our 
cable  was  found,  tliough  our  haufers  were  much  rubbed  by 
the  rocks,  notwithflanding  they  were  parcelled  with  old  ham- 
macoes,  and  other  things.  The  firll  thing  I  did  after  perform- 
ing the  nccefTary  operations  about  the  fhip,  was  to  fend  a 
boat  to  the  Swallow  to  enquire  how  fhe  had  fared  during  the 
gale :  the  boat  returned  with  an  account  that  flie  had  felt  but 

little 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


597- 


Httle  of  the  gale,  but  that  flie  had  been  very  near  being  loft,  in       '  767- 

pulliing  through  the  Illands  two  days  before,  by  the  rapidity   \ , 1> 

of  the  tide :  that  notwithftanding  an  akeration  which  had  been  ^^'"'■^^^  "' 
made  in  her  rudder,  Ihe  fleered  and  worked  fo  ill,  that  every 
time  they  got  under  way  they  were  apprehenfive  that  fhe 
could  never  fafely  be  brought  to  an  anchor  again  ;  I  was 
therefore  requefledr  in  the  name  of  the  captain,  to  confider 
that  fhe  could  be  of  very  little  fervice  to  the  expedition,  and 
to  direcT:  what  I  thought  would  be  beft  for  the  fervice.  I 
anfwered,  that  as  the  Lords  of  the  Admiralty  had  appointed 
her  to  accompany  the  Dolphin,  fhe  muft  continue  to  do  it  as- 
long  as  it  was  poffible ;  that  as  her  condition  rendered  her  a 
bad  failer,  I  would  wait  her  time,  and  attend  her  motions, 
and  that  if  any  difafter  fliould  happen  to  either  of  us,  the; 
other  fliould  be  ready  to  afford  fuch  afiiftance  as  might  be- 
in  her  power. 

We  continued  here  eight  days,  during  which  time  we* 
completed  our  wood  and  water,  dried  our  fails,  and  fent 
great  part  of  the  fliip's  company  on  fhore,  to  wafh  their 
cloathes  and  ftretch  their  legs,  which  was  the  more  neceflary^ 
as  the  cold,  fnowy,  and  tempefluous  weather  had  confined 
diem  too  much  below.  We  caught  mufcles  and  limpets,  and 
gathered  celery  and  nettles  in  great  abundance.  The  muf- 
cles were  the  largeft  we  had  ever  feen,  many  of  them  being: 
from  five  to  fix  inches  long :  we  caught  alfo  great  plenty  of 
a  fine,  firm,  red  fifh,  not  unlike  a  gurnet,  moft  of  which; 
were  from  four  to  five  pounds  weight.  At  the  fame  time,, 
we  made  it  part  of  the  employment  of  every  day  to  try  the 
current,  which  we  found  conftantly  fetting  to  the  eaftward. 

The  mafter  having  been  fent  out  to  look  for  anchoring-; 
places,  returned  with  an  account  that  he  could  find  no  fhelter,, 
except  near  the  fhore,  where  it  fhould  not  be  fought  but  in> 

cafes 


3# 

1767. 

February. 
Saturday  zi. 


March. 
Sunday  i. 


CAPTAIN    WALLlS's    VOYAGE 

cafes  of  the  moft  preffing  neceflity.  He  landed  upon  a  large 
ifland  on  the  north  fide  of  Snow  Sound,  and  being  almoft 
perifhed  with  cold,  the  firft  thing  he  did  was  to  make  a  large 
fire,  with  fome  fmall  trees  which  he  found  upon  the  fpot. 
He  then  climbed  one  of  the  rocky  mountains,  with  Mr, 
Pickerfgill,  a  midfliipman,  and  one  of  the  feamen,  to  take  a 
view  of  the  Streight,  and  the  difmal  regions  that  furround 
it.  He  found  the  entrance  of  the  Sound  to  be  full  as  broad 
as  feveral  parts  of  the  Streight,  and  to  grow  but  very  little 
narrower,  for  feveral  miles  in  land  on  the  Terra  del  Fuego 
fide.  The  country  on  the  fouth  of  it  was  Hill  more  dreary 
and  horrid  than  any  he  had  yet  feen :  it  confifted  of  craggy 
mountains,  much  higher  than  the  clouds,  that  were  alto- 
gether naked  from  the  bafe  to  the  fummit,  there  not  being 
a  fingle  flirub,  nor  even  a  blade  of  grafs  to  be  feen  upon 
them ;  nor  were  the  vallies  between  them  lefs  defolate, 
being  intirely  covered  with  deep  beds  of  fnow,  except  here 
and  there  where  it  had  been  waflied  away,  or  converted  into 
ice,  by  the  torrents  which  were  precipitated  from  the  filTures 
and  crags  of  the  mountain  above,  where  the  fnow  had  been 
diiTolved ;  and  even  thefe  vallies,  in  the  patches  that  were 
tree  from  fnow,  were  as  deftitute  of  verdure  as  the  rocks 
between  which  they  lay. 

On  Sunday  the  firft  of  March,  at  half  an  hour  after  four 
o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  faw  the  Swallow  under  fail,  on 
the  north  fhore  of  Cape  Quod.  At  feven  we  weighed,  and 
flood  out  of  Butler's  bay,  but  it  falling  calm  foon  afterwards, 
the  boats  were  obliged  to  take  the  vellel  in  tow,  having  with 
much  difiiculty  kept  clear  of  the  rocks:  the  paflage  being 
very  narrow,  we  fent  the  boats,  about  noon,  to  feck  for 
anchorage  on  the  north  fliore.  At  this  time,  Cape  Notch 
bore  W.  by  N.  {-  N.  diftant  between  three  and  four  leagues, 
and  Cape  Quod  E.  i  N.  diftant  three  leagues. 

About 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


399 


About  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  there  being  Httle       ^7^7- 

Ivlsrch 

wind,  we  anchored,  with  the  Swallow,  under  the  north  \_  .-  _ 
fliore,  in  a  fmall  bay,  where  there  is  a  high,  fteep,  rocky- 
mountain,  the  top  of  which  refembles  the  head  of  a  lion, 
for  which  reafon  we  called  the  bay  Lion's  Cove.  We  had 
here  40  fathom,  with  deep  water  clofe  to  the  Ihore,  and  at 
half  a  cable's  length  without  the  fhip,  no  ground.  We  fent 
the  boats  to  the  weftward  in  fearch  of  anchoring  places,  and 
at  midnight  they  returned  with  an  account  that  there  was 
an  indifferent  bay  at  the  diflance  of  about  four  miles,  and 
that  Goodluck  bay  was  three  leagues  to  the  weftward. 

At  half  an  hour  after  12  the  next  day,  the  wind  being  Mondays. 
northerly,  we  made  fail  from  Lion's  Cove,  and  at  five  an- 
chored in  Good  Luck  bay,  at  the  diflance  of  about  half  a 
cable's  length  from  the  rocks,  in  28  fathom  water.  A 
rocky  illand  at  the  weft  extremity  of  the  bay  bore  N.W.  by 
W.  diftant  about. a  cable's  length  and  a  half,  and  a  low 
point,  which  makes  the  eaftern  extremity  of  the  bay,  bore 
E.  S,  E.  diftant  about  a  mile.  Between  this  point  and  the 
Hiip,  there  were  many  Ihoals,  and  in  the  bottom  of  the  bay 
two  rocks,  the  largeft  of  which  bore  N.  E.  by  N.  the  fmalleft 
N.  by  E.  From  thefe  rocks,  flioals  run  out  to  the  S.  E. 
which  may  be  known  by  the  weeds  that  are  upon  them  ;  the 
fliip  was  within  a  cable's  length  of  them  :  when  fhe  fwung 
with  her  ftern  in  fliore,  we  had  16  fathom,  with  coral 
rock ;  when  flie  fwung  off,  we  had  50  fathom,  with  fandy 
ground.  Cape  Notch  bore  from  us  W.  by  S.  ^  W.  diftant 
about  one  league  ;  and  in  the  intermediate  fpace  there  was 
a  large  lagoon  which  we  could  not  found,  the  wind  blowing 
too  hard  all  the  while  we  lay  here.  After  we  had  moored  the 
fliip,  we  fent  two  boats  to  affift  the  Swallow,  and  one  to  look 
out  for  anchorage  beyond  Cape  Notch.  The  boats  that  were 
fent  to  aflift  the  Swallow,  towed  her  into  a  fmall  bay,  where, 

as 


'40& 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


1767.       as  the  wind  was  foutherly,  and  blew  frefh,  ftie  was  in  great 
^  Marc^.  ^   danger,  for  the  Cove  was  not  only  fmall,  but  full  of  rocks, 
and  open  to  the  fouth-eafterly  winds. 

Tuefdays.  All  the  day  following,  and  all  the  night,  we  had  hard 
gales,  with  a  great  fea,  and  much  hail  and  rain.  The  next 
Wednef.  4.  nioming  wc  had  gulls  fo  violent,  that  it  was  impoflible  to 
fland  the  deck ;  they  brought  whole  flieets  of  water  all  the 
way  from  Cape  Notch,  which  was  a  league  diftant,  quite 
over  the  deck.  They  did  not  lafl:  more  than  a  minute,  but 
were  fo  frequent,  that  the  cables  were  kept  in  a  conflant 
ttrain,  and  there  was  the  greatefl  reafon  to  fear  that  they 
would  give  way.  It  was  a  general  opinion  that  the  Swallow 
could  not  poffibly  ride  it  out,  and  fome  of  the  men  were  fo 
ftrongly  prepoiTelTed  with  the  notion  of  her  being  loft,  that 
they  fancied  they  faw  fome  of  her  people  coming  over  the 
rocks  towards  our  fhip.  The  weather  continued  fo  bad,  till 
Saturday  7,  Saturday  the  feventh,  that  we  could  fend  no  boat  to  enquire 
after  her ;  but  the  gale  being  then  more  moderate,  a  boat 
was  difpatched  about  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  which, 
about  the  fame  hour  in  the  afternoon,  returned  with  an  ac- 
count that  the  fhip  was  fafe,  but  that  the  fatigue  of  the  peo- 
ple had  been  incredible,  the  whole  crew  having  been  upon 
the  deck  near  three  days  and  three  nights.  At  midnight  the 
gufts  returned,  though  not  with  equal  violence,  with  hail, 
fleet  and  fnow.  The  weather  being  now  extremely  cold,  and 
Sundays,  the  pcoplc  ucvcr  dry,  I  got  up,  the  next  morning,  eleven 
bales  of  thick  woollen  fluff,  called  Fearnought,  which  is 
provided  by  the  government,  and  fet  all  the  taylors  to  work 
to  make  them  into  jackets,  of  which  every  man  in  the  fliip 
had  one. 

lordered  thefe  jackets  to  be  made  very  large,  allowing,  one 
with  another,  two  yards  and  thirty-four  inches  of  the  cloth 

to 


ROUND   THE   WORLD.  401 

to  each  jacket.    T  fent  alfo  feven  bales  of  the  fame  cloth  to      }l^\- 

1  1  •      1  r         March. 

the  Swallow,  which  made  every  man  on  board  a  jacket  of  v_— , — j 
the  fame  kind ;  and  I  cut  up  three  bales  of  finer  cloth,  and 
made  jackets  for  the  officers  of  both  fliips,  which  I  had  the 
pleafure  to  find  were  very  acceptable. 

In  this  fituation  we  were  obliged  to  continue  a  week, 
during  which  time,  I  put  both  my  own  fhip,  and  the  Swal- 
low, upon  two- thirds  allowance,  except  brandy  ;  but  conti- 
nued the  breakfaft  as  long  as  greens  and  water  were  plenty. 

On  Sunday  the  15th,  about  noon,  we  faw  the  Swallow  Sunday  u-. 
under  fail,  and  it  being  calm,  we  fent  our  launch  to  affift 
iteer.  In  the  evening  the  launch  returned,  having  towed  her 
into  a  very  good  harbour  on  the  fouth  fhore,  oppofite  to 
where  we  lay.  The  account  that  we  received  of  this  har- 
bour, determined  us  to  get  into  it  as  foon  as  poflible ;  the 
next  morning  therefore,  at  eight  o'clock,  we  failed  from 
Good  Luck  bay,  and  thought  ourfelves  happy  to  get  fafe  out 
of  it.  When  we  got  a-breaft  of  the  harbour  where  the  Swal- 
low lay,  we  fired  feveral  guns,  as  fignals  for  her  boats  to  ' 
affift  us  in  getting  in ;  and  in  a  fhort  time  the  matter  came 
on  board  us,  and  piloted  us  to  a  very  commodious  ftation, 
where  we  anchored  in  28  fathom,  with  a  muddy  bottom. 
This  harbour,  which  is  flickered  from  all  winds,  and  excel- 
lent in  every  refpecT:,  we  called  Swallow  Harbour.  There 
are  two  channels  into  it,  which  are  both  narrow,  but  not 
dangerous,  as  the  rocks  are  eafily  difcovered  by  the  weeds 
that  grow  upon  them. 

At  nine  o'clock  the  next  morning,  the  wind  coming  eaft-  Monday  16, 
erly,  we  weighed,  and  failed  from  Swallow  harbour.     At 
noon  we  took  the  Swallow  in  tow,  but  at  five  there  being 
little  wind,  we  caft  off  the  tow.    At  eight  in  the  evening, 
the  boats  which  had  been  fent  out  to  look  for  anchorage, 

Vol.  I,  F  f  f  returned 


403  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

I767-  *    returned  with  an  account  that  they  could  find  none  :  at  nine 
,^__,-.-  _'   we  had  frefti  gales,  and  at  midnight  Cape  Upright  bore 

s.  s.wtw. 

Tuefday  17.  ^t  fevcn  the  next  morning,  we  took  the  Swallow  again  in 
tow,  but  was  again  obliged  to  call  her  off  and  tack,  as  the 
weather  became  very  thick,  with  a  great  fwell,  and  we  faw 
land  clofe  under  our  lee.  As  no  place  for  anchorage  could 
be  found,  Captain  Carteret  advifed  me  to  bear  away  for  Up- 
right bay,  to  which  I  confented ;  and  as  he  was  acquainted 
with  the  place,  he  went  a-head:  the  boats  were  ordered  to- 
go  between  him  and  the  Ihore,  and  we  followed.  At  eleven, 
o'clock,  there  being  little  wind,  we  opened  a  large  lagoon, 
and  a  current  fetting  ftrongly  into  it,  the  Swallow  was  driven 
among  the  breakers  clofe  upon  the  lee  lliore  :  to  aggravate 
the  misfortune,  the  weather  v/as  very  hazey,  there  was  no 
anchorage,  and  the  furf  ran  very  high.  In  this  dreadful 
fituation  flie  made  fignals  of  diftrefs,  and  we  immediately 
fent  our  launch,  and  other  boats,  to  her  affiftance:  the 
boats  took  her  in  tow,  but  their  utmoft  efforts  to  fave  her 
would  have  been  ineffedlual,  if  a  breeze  had  not  fuddenly 
come  down  from  a  mountain,  and  wafted  her  off. 

As  a  great  fwell  came  on  about  noon,  we  hauled  over  to 
the  north  fhore.  We  foon  found  ourfelves  furrounded  with 
iflands,  but  the  fog  was  fo  thick,  that  we  knew  not  where 
we  were,  nor  which  way  to  lleer.  Among  thefe  illands  the 
boats  were  fent  to  call  the  lead,  but  no  anchorage  was  to  be 
found  ;  we  then  conjeiflured  that  we  were  in  the  bay  of 
iflands,  and  that  we  had  no  chance  to  efcape  lliipwreck,  but 
by  hauling  diredly  out :  this,  however,  was  no  eafy  talk, 
for  I  was  obliged  to  tack,  almofl  continually,  to  weather 
fome  illand  or  rock.  At  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  it 
happily  cleared  up  for  a  minute,  jull  to  fliew  us  Cape  Up- 
right, 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  403 

right,  for  which  we  diredly  fleered,  and  at  half  an  hour  *  1767- 
after  five  ancliored,  with  the  Swallow,  in  the  bay.  When  »> — ,—1-/ 
we  dropped  the  anchor,  we  were  in  24  fathom,  and  after 
we  had  veered  away  a  whole  cable,  in  46,  with  a  muddy 
bottom.  In  this  fituation,  a  high  bluff  on  the  north  fhore 
bore  N.  W.  1 N.  diftant  five  leagues,  and  a  fmall  ifland  within 
us  S.  by  E.  7  E.  Soon  after  we  had  anchored,  the  Swallow 
drove  to  leeward,  notwithftanding  fhe  had  two  anchors 
a-head,  but  was  at  laft  brought  up,  in  70  fathom,  about  a 
cable's  length  a-ftern  of  us.  At  four  o'clock  in  the  morning 
I  fent  the  boats,  with  a  confiderable  number  of  men,  and 
fome  haufers  and  anchors,  on  board  her,  to  weigh  her  an- 
chors, and  warp  her  up  to  windward.  When  her  beft  bower 
anchor  was  weighed,  it  was  found  entangled  with  the  fmall 
one ;  I  therefore  found  it  neceflTary  to  fend  the  ftream  cable 
on  board,  and  the  fliip  was  hung  up  by  it.  To  clear  her 
anchors,  and  warp  her  into  a  proper  birth,  coft  us  the  whole 
day,  and  was  not  at  laft  effedled  without  the  utmoft  difficulty 
and  labour. 

On  the  18th  we  had  frefh  breezes,  and  fent  the  boats  to  Wednef.  18. 
found  crofs  the  Streight.  Within  half  a  mile  of  the  fliip, 
they  had  40,  45,  jo,  70,  100  fathom,  and  then  had  no 
groimd,  till  within  a  cable's  length  of  the  lee  fliore,  where 
they  had  90  fathom.  We  now  moored  the  fliip  in  78  fa- 
thom, with  the  ftream  anchor. 

The  next  morning,  while  our  people  were  employed  in  Thurfdayig 
getting  wood  and  water,  and  gathering  celery  and  mufcles, 
two  canoes,  full  of  Indians,  came  along  iide  of  the  fliip. 
They  had  much  the  fame  appearance  as  the  poor  wretches 
whom  we  had  fcen  before  in  Elizabeth's  bay.  They  had  on 
board  fome  feal's  flefli,  blubber,  and  penguins,  all  which 
they  eat  raw.    Some  of  our  people,  who  were  fifliing  with  a 

F  f  f  2  hook 


4Q4  CAPTAIN   WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


March. 
Thurfday  1 9 


1767'  Iiook  and  line,  gave  one  of  them  a  fifli,  fomewhac  bigger 
than  a  herring,  aUve,  juft  as  it  came  out  of  tlie  water.  The 
Indian  took  it  haftily,  as  a  dog  would  take  a  bone,  and  inflantly 
killed  it,  by  giving  it  a  bite  near  the  gills :  he  then  pro- 
ceeded to  eat  it,  beginning  with  the  head,  and  going  on  to 
the  tail,  without  reje(5ling  either  the  bones,  fins,  fcales,  or 
entrails.  They  eat  every  thing  that  was  given  them,  indif- 
ferently, whether  fait  or  frefh,  drelTed  or  raw,  but  would 
drink  nothing  but  water.  They  fhivered  with  cold,  yet  had. 
nothing  to  cover  them  but  a  feal  fldn;  thrown  loofely  over 
their  fhoulders,  which  did  not  reach  to  their  middle ;  and 
we  obferved,  that  when  they  were  rowing,  they  threw  even; 
this  by,  and  fat  Hark  naked.  They  had  with  them  fome  ja- 
velins, rudely  pointed  with  bone,  which  they  ufed  to  llrike 
feals,  fifli,  and  penguins,  and  we  obferved  that  one  of  them 
had  a  piece  of  iron,  about  the  fize  of  a  common  chilTel, 
which  was  fattened  to  a  piece  of  wood,  and  feemed  to  be  in- 
tended rather  for  a  tool  than  a  weapon.  They  had  all  fore 
eyes,  which  we  imputed  to  their  fitting  over  the  fmoke  of 
their  fires,  and  they  fmelt  more  ofFenfively  than  a  fox,, 
which  perhaps  was  in  part  owing  to  their  diet,  and  in  part; 
to  their  nallinefs.  Their  canoes  were  about  fifteen  foot  long,, 
three  broad,  and  nearly  three  deep:  they  were  made  of  the 
bark  of  trees,  fewn  together,  either  with  the  finews  of  fome- 
beaft,  or  thongs  cut  out  of  a  hide.  Some  kind  of  rufli  was 
laid  into  the  feams,  and  the  outfide  was  fmeared  with  a 
refin,  or  gum,  which  prevented  the  water  from  foaking  into 
the  bark.  Fifteen  flender  branches,  bent  into  an  arch,  were 
fewed  tranfverfely  to  the  bottom  and  fides,  and  fome  ftrait 
pieces  were  placed  crofs  the  top,  from  gunwale  to  gunwale, 
and  fecurely  laftied  at  each  end :  upon  the  whole,  however, 
it  was  poorly  made,  nor  had  thefe  people  any  thing  among 
them  in  which  there  was  the  leaft  appearance  of  ingenuity. 

I  gave 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  405 

!!  Q-ave  them  a  hatchet  or  two,  with  feme  beads,  and  a  few       »767. 

<=>  March. 

Other  toys,  with  which  they  went  away  to  the  fouthward,  ' , ' 

;  r    1  Thurfdayig,- 

and  we  law  no  more  or  them. 

While  we  lay  here,  we  fent  out  the  boats,  as  tifual,  in 
fearch  of  anchoring  places,  and  having  been  10  leagues  to 
the  weftward,  they  found  but  two :  one  was  to  the  weftward 
of  Cape  Upright,  in  the  Bay  of  Illands,  but  was  very  diffi- 
cult to  enter  and  get  out  of ;-  the  other  was  called  Dolphin 
bay,  at  10  leagues  diftance,  which  was  a  good  harbour,  withi 
even  ground  in  all  parts.  They  faw  feveral  fmall  coves,, 
which  were  all  dangerous,  as  in  them  it  would  be  neceflary 
to  let  go  the  anchor  within  half  a  cable's  length  of  a  lee: 
fliore,  and  Heady  the  fhip  with  halfers  fallened  to  the  rocks- 
The  people  belonging  to  one  of  the  boats,  fpent  anight  upon 
an  ifland,  upon  which,  while  they  were  there,  fix  canoes 
landed  about  thirty  Indians.  The  Indians  ran  immediately, 
to  the  boat,  and  were  carrying  away  every  thing  they  found; 
in  her:  our  people  difcovered  what  they  were  doing,  juft 
time  enough  to  prevent  them.  As  foon  as  they  found  them- 
felves  oppofed,  they  went  to  their  canoes,  and  armed  them- 
felves  with  long  poles,  and  javelins  pointed  with  the  bones 
of  fifli.  They  did  not  begin  an  attack,  but  flood  in  a- 
threatening  manner :  our  people,  who  were  two  and  twenty 
in  number,  acfted  only  on  the  defenfive,  and  by  parting  with 
a  few  trifles  to  them,  they  became  friends,  and  behaved^ 
peaceably  the  reft  of  the  time  they  flaid. 

For  many  days,  we  had  hail,  lightning,  rain,  and  hard; 
gales,  with  a  heavy  fea,  fo  that  we  thought  it  impofliblefor 
the  fliip  to  hold,  though  flie  had  two  anchors  a-head,  and. 
two  cables  an  end.  The  men,  however,  were  fent  fre- 
quently on. fliore  for  exercife,  which  contributed  greatly  to. 

their 


4o6 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


jn(>7'  their  health,  and  procured  an  almoft  conftant  fupply  of 
*  >  '  mufcles  and  greens.  Among  other  damages  that  we  had 
fuftained,  our  fire-place  was  broken  to  pieces,  we  therefore 
found  it  neceflary  to  fet  up  the  forge,  and  employ  the  ar- 
mourers to  make  a  new  back;  we  alfo  made  lime  of  burnt 
fliells,  and  once  more  put  it  into  a  ufeful  condition. 

Monday  30.  On  Monday  the  30th,  we  had  the  firfl  interval  of  moderate 
weather,  and  we  improved  it  in  drying  the  fails,  which, 
though  much  mildewed,  we  had  not  before  been  able  to 
loofe,  for  fear  of  fetting  the  fhip  adrift:  we  alfo  aired  the 
fpare  fails,  which  we  found  much  injured  by  the  rats,  and 
employed  the  fail-makers  to  mend  them.  Captain  Carteret 
having  reprefented  that  his  fire-place,  as  well  as  ours,  had 
been  broken  to  pieces,  our  armourers  made  him  alfo  a  new 
back,  and  fet  it  up  with  lime  that  we  made  upon  the  fpot, 
in  the  fame  manner  as  had  been  done  on  board  our  own 
fliip.  This  day  we  faw  feveral  canoes,  full  of  Indians,  put 
to  fhore  on  the  eaft  fide  of  the  bay,  and  the  next  morning 
feveral  of  them  came  on  board,  and  proved  to  be  the  fame 
that  our  people,  who  were  out  in  the  boat,  had  met  with  on 
fhore.  They  behaved  very  peaceably,  and  we  difmifled 
them  with  a  few  toys,  as  ufual. 

The  day  following,  feveral  other  Indians  came  off  to  the 
fliip,  and  brought  with  them  fome  of  the  birds  called  Race- 
Horfcs.  Our  people  purchafed  the  birds  for  a  few  trifles, 
and  I  made  them  a  prefent  of  feveral  hatchets  and  knives. 

On  Thurfday,  the  fecond  of  April,  the  mafler  of  the  Swal- 
low, who  had  been  fent  out  to  feek  for  anchoring  places, 
returned,  and  reported  that  he  had  found  three  on  the  north 
fhore,  which  were  very  good;  one  about  four  miles  to  the 
eaftward  of  Cape  Providence,  another  under  the  call  fide  of 

Cape 


Tuefday  3  ^. 


/pril. 
W«dner.  I. 


Thurfda  }  2. 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  407 

Cape  Tamer,  and  the  third  about  four  miles  to  the  eaftward       ly^y* 

.  April. 

of  it ;  but  he  faid  that  he  found  no  place  to  anchor  m  under   ^^ — .— » 
Cape  Providence,  the  ground  being  rocky.  "'  /^  ^" 

This  day  two  canoes  came  on  board,  with  four  men  and 
three  young  children  in  each.  The  men  were  fomewhat 
more  decently  drefled  than  thofe  that  we  had  feen  before^ 
but  the  children  were  Hark  naked.  They  were  fomewhat 
fairer  than  the  men,  who  feemed  to  pay  a  very  tender  atten- 
tion to  them,  efpecially  in  lifting  them  in  and  out  of  the  ca- 
noes. To  thefe  young  vifitors  I  gave  necklaces  and  bracelets, 
with  which  they  feemed  mightily  pleafed.  It  happened 
that  while  fome  of  thefe  people  were  on  board,  and  the  reft 
waiting  in  their  canoes  by  the  fhip^s  fide,  the  boat  was  fent 
on  fliore  for  wood  and  water.  The  Indians  who  were  in  the 
canoes,  kept  their  eyes  fixed  upon  the  boat  while  flie  was 
manning,  and  the  moment  Ihe  put  off  from  the  fhip,  they 
called  out  with  great  vocifei'ation  to  thofe  that  were  oa 
board,  who  feemed  to  be  much  alarmed,  and  haflily  hand- 
ing down  the  children,  leaped  into  their  canoes,  without 
uttering  a  word.  None  of  us  could  guefs  at  the  caufe  of  this 
fudden  emotion,,  but  we  faw  the  men  in  the  canoes  pull 
after  the  boat  with  all  their  might,  hallooing  and  fhouting. 
with  great  appearance  of  perturbation  and  diflrefs.  The 
boat  outrowed  them,  and  when  fhe  came  near  the  fhore,. 
the  people  on  board  difcovered  fome  women  gathering 
mufcles  among  the  rocks.  This  at  once  explained  the  my- 
flery ;  the  poor  Indians  were  afraid  that  the  flrangers,  either 
by  force  or  favour,  fhould  violate  the  prerogative  of  a  huf- 
band,  of  which  they  feemed  to  be  more  jealous  than  the  na- 
tives of  fome  other  countries,  who  in  their  appearance  are 
lefs  favage  and  fordid.  Our  people,  to  make  them  eafy, 
immediately  lay  upon  their  oars,  and  fufTered  the  canoes  to 
pafs  them.  The  Indians,  however,  Hill  continued  to  call 
2  0Ut 


4o8  CAPTAIN    WALL  I  S's    VOYAGE 

1767'      out  to  their  women,  till  they  took  the  alarm  and  ran  out  of 

April. 

u.  -w"  -^  "ght,  and  as  foon  as  they  got  to  land,  drew  their  canoes 
upon  the  beach,  and  followed  them  with  the  utmoft  expe- 
dition. 

Sundays.  Wc  Continued  daily  to  gather  mufcles  till  the  5th,  when 
feveral  of  the  people  being  feized  with  fluxes,  the  furgeon 
defired  that  no  more  mufcles  might  be  brought  into  the  fhip. 

Friday  lo.  Tlie  wcathcr  being  Hill  tempefluous  and  unfettled,  we  re» 

mained  at  anchor  till  10  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  Friday 
the  loth,  and  then,  in  company  with  the  Swallow,  we  made 
fail.  At  noon.  Cape  Providence  bore  N.  N.  W.  diftant  four 
or  five  miles;  at  four  in  the  afternoon  Cape  Tamer  bore 
N.  W.  by  W.  1 W.  diftant  three  leagues.  Cape  Upright  E.  S.  E. 
i-S.  diftant  three  leagues,  and  Cape  Pillar  W.  diftant  10 
leagues.     We  fleered  about  W.  ~N.  all  night,    and   at  fix 

Saturday  11.  o'clock  in  the  morning,  had  run  eight  and  thirty  miles  by 
the  log.  At  this  time  Cape  Pillar  bore  S.  W.  diftant  half  a 
mile,  and  the  Swallow  was  about  three  miles  a-ftern  of  us. 
At  this  time  there  being  but  little  wmd,  we  were  obliged  to 
make  all  the  fail  we  could,  to  get  without  the  Streight's 
mouth.  At  1 1  o'clock  I  would  have  fliortened  fail  for  the 
Swallow,  but  it  was  not  in  my  power,  for  as  a  current  fet  us 
ilrongly  down  upon  the  Ifles  of  Direcftion,  and  the  wind 
came  to  the  weft,  it  became  abfolutely  neceflfary  for  me  to 
carry  fail,  that  I  might  clear  them.  Soon  after  wc  loft  fight 
of  the  Swallow,  and  never  faw  her  afterwards.  At  firft  I  was 
inclined  to  have  gone  back  into  the  Streight,  but  a  fog 
coming  on,  and  the  fea  rifing  very  faft,  we  were  all  of  opi- 
nion that  it  was  indifpenfibly  ncccflary  to  get  an  ofHng  as 
foon  as  pofllblc;  for  except  we  prefled  the  fliip  with  fail,  be- 
fore the  fea  rofe  too  high,  it  would  be  impradticable  either 
to  v/eather  Terra  del  Fuego  on  one  tack,  or  Cape  VicT:ory  on 

3  the 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    \V  O  R  L  D.  409. 

the  other.    At  noon,  the  lllands  of  DirecTfcion  bore  N.  2r'W.       ^767. 

,  April. 

diftant  three  leagues,  Saint  Paul's  cupola  and  Cape  Vicftory   ' . 1 

in  one,  N.  diftant  feven  leagues,  and  Cape  Pillar  E.  diftant 
fix  leagues. 

Our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  was  52°  38'  and  we  cora- 
pured  our  longitude  to  be  76°  W. 

Thus  we  quitted  a  dreary  and  inhofpitable  region,  where 
we  were  in  almoft  perpetual  danger  of  fliipwreck  for  near 
four  months,  having  entered  the  Streight  on  the  17th  of  De- 
cember T766,  and  quitted  it  on  the  nth  of  April  1767;  a 
region  where,  in  the  midft  of  fummer,  the  weather  v/as 
cold,  gloomy,  and  tempeftuous,  where  the  profpeds  had 
more  the  appearance  of  a  chaos  than  of  Nature,  and  where; 
tor  the  moft  part,  the  valiies  were  without  herbage,  and  the 
lulls  without  woodi. 


Vol.  r.  ,  Gt  g  g  CHAP. 


410  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's   VOYAGE 


C  HAP.     III. 

A  particular  Account  of  the  Places  in  which  we  anchored 
during  our  Paffage  through  the  Streight,  and  of  the 
Shoals  and  Rocks  that  lie  near  them. 

AVING  cleared  the  Streight,  we  fleered  a  weftern 
courfe.  But  before  I  continue  the  narrative  of  our 
Toyage,  I  lliall  give  a  more  particular  account  of  the  feveral 
places  where  we  anchored,  plans  of  which  are  depofited  in 
the  Admiralty  Office  for  the  ufe  of  future  navigators,  with 
the  flioals  and  rocks  that  lie  near  them,  the  latitude,  longi- 
tude, tides,  and  variation  of  the  compafs. 

I.  CAPE  VIRGIN  MARY.  Thebay  under  this  Cape  is  a 
good  harbour,  when  the  wind  is  weflerly.  There  is  a  flioal 
lying  off  the  Cape,  but  that  may  eafdy  be  known  by  the 
rock  weed  that  grows  upon  it:  the  Cape  is  a  fleep  white 
cliff,  not  unlike  the  South  Foreland.  Its  latitude,  by  obfer- 
vation,  is  52°  24' S.  and  its  longitude,  by  account,  68"  22' W. 
The  variation  of  the  needle,  by  the  medium  of  five  azimuths 
and  one  amplitude,  was  24"  30'  E.  In  this  place  Vv'e  faw  no 
appearance  either  of  wood  or  water.  We  anchored  in  10  fa- 
thom, with  coarfe  fandy  ground,  about  a  mile  from  the 
iliore,  Cape  Virgin  Mary  bearing  N.  by  W.  v  W.  diftant  about 
two  miles,  and  Dungenefs  Point  S.  S.  W.  diflant  fotu'  miles. 
We  anchored  here  on  the  17th  of  December,  and  failed  the 
next  day.  There  is  good  landing,  on  a  fine  fandy  beach,  all 
along  the  fliore, 

II.  POSSESSION  BAY.  In  failing  into  this  bay,  it  is  ne- 
^ccflary  to  give  the  point  a  good  birth,  bccaufe  there  is  a  reef 

.that 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  411 

that  runs  right  off  it  about  a  fhort  mile.  The  foundings  are 
very  irregular  all  over  the  bay,  but  the  ground  is  every 
where  a  fine  foft  mud  and  clay,  fo  that  the  cables  can  come 
to  no  damage.  The  Point  lies  in  latitude  52°  23'  S.  longitude, 
by  account,  6S°  57' W.:  the  variation  is  tw^o  points  eaflerly. 
In  the  bay  the  tide  rifes  and  falls  between  four  and  five  fa- 
thom, and  runs  at  the  rate  of  about  a  mile  an  hour ;  in  the 
mid-channel  without  the  bay,  it  runs  nearly  three  miles  an 
hour,  hi  this  place  we  faw  no  appearance  either  of  wood  or 
water.  The  landing  appeared  to  be  good,  but  we  did  not 
go  on  lliore.  We  anchored  here  on  the  19th  of  December, 
and  failed  again  on  the  zzd. 

III.  PORT  FAMINE.  At  this  place,  the  Spaniards,  in. 
the  year  1581,  built  a  town,  which  they  called  Phillippeville^. 
and  left  in  it  a  colony,  confifting  of  400  perfons.  When  our 
celebrated  navigator,  Cavendifli,  arrived  here  in  1587,  he 
found  one  of  thefe  unhappy  wretches,  the  only  one  that  re- 
mained, upon  the  beach  :  they  had  all  periflied  for  want  of 
fubfiflence,  except  twenty-four;  twenty-three  of  thefe  fet  out 
for  the  river  Plata,  and  were  never  afterwards  heard  of. 
This  man,  whofe  name  was  Hernando,  was  brought  to 
England  by  Cavendifli,  who  called  the  place  where  he  had 
taken  him  up.  Port  Famine.  It  is  a  very  fine  ba}'',  in  which 
there  is  room  and  conveniency  for  many  fliips  to  moor  in 
great  fafety.  V,^e  moored  in  nine  fathom,  having  brought 
Cape  St.  Anne  N.  E.  by  E.  and  Sedger  River  S.  7  W.  which 
perhaps  is  the  beft  fituation,  though  the  whole  bay  is  good 
ground.  In  this  place  there  is  very  good  wooding  and  watering ; 
we  caught  many  fine  fmali  fifli  with  a  hook  and  line  off  the 
fhip's  fide,  and  hauled  the  feine  with  great  fucccfs,  in  a  fine 
fandy  bay,  a  little  to  the  fouthward  of  Sedger  River:  we  alfo 
fliot  a  great  number  of  birds,  of  various  kinds,  particularly 
gcefe,  ducks,  teal,  fnipes,  plover,  and  racc-horfes,  and  we 
G  g  g  3  found 


412  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

found  wild  celery  in  great  plenty.  The  latitude  of  this  place 
is  53*'  42' S.  longitude,  by  obfervation,  71°  28' W.j  the  vari- 
ation is  two  points  eafterly.  We  anchored  here  the  27th  of 
December  1766,  and  failed  again  the  i8th  of  January  1767. 

IV.  CAPE  HOLLAND  BAY.  There  is  no  danger  in 
failing  into  this  bay,  and  there  is  good  anchoring  ground  in 
every  part  of  it.  We  lay  at  about  three  cables'  length  from 
the.  fliore,  in  10  fathom,  the  ground  coarfe  fand  and  fliells. 
Cape  Holland  bearing  W.  S.  W.  7  W.  diftant  three  miles,  Cape 
Froward  a  little  to  the  N.  of  the  E.  Right  a-breaft  of  the 
fhip  there  was  a  very  fine  rivulet,  and  clofe  under  Cape 
Holland  a  large  river,  navigable  for  boats  many  miles :  the 
fhore  alfo  affords  fire  wood  in  great  plenty.  We  found 
abundance  of  wild  celery  and  cranberries,  mufcles  and  lim- 
pets, but  caught  very  little  fifh,  either  with  hook  and  hne, 
or  the  feine.  We  killed  fome  geefe,  ducks,  teal,  and  race- 
horfes,  but  they  were  not  plenty.  This  bay  lies  in  latitude 
-53^  57'  S.  longitude,  by  account,  yi'^  34  W. ;  the  variation  is 
two  points  eafterly.  The  water  rofe  about  eight  feet ;  wc 
found,  however,  no  regular  tide,  but  for  the  moft  part  a 
ftrong  current  fetting  to  the  eaftward.  We  anchored  here  on 
the  19th  of  January,  and  failed  again  on  the  23  d. 

V.  CAPE  GALLLANT  BAY.  In  this  bay,  which  may 
be  entered  with  great  fafety,  there  is  a  fine  large  lagoon, 
where  a  fleet  of  Ihips  may  moor  in  perfed  fecurity.  There 
is  a  depth  of  four  fathom  in  every  part  of  it,  with  a  foft 
muddy  ground.  In  the  bay,  the  beft  anchoring  is  on  the 
eaft  fide,  where  there  is  from  fix  to  ten  fathom.  Here  is 
good  watering  from  two  rivers,  and  plenty  of  wood.  The 
lagoon  abounded  with  wild  fowl,  and  we  found  wild  celery, 
jnufcles,  and  limpets  in  plenty.  We  did  not  haul  the  feine, 
having  torn  one  to  pieces,  and  the  other  being  unpacked, 

3  ^^^t 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  413 

but  if  we  had,  there  is  reafon  to  believe  that  we  fliould  have 
been  well  fupplied  with  fifh.  The  landing  is  good.  The 
latitude  of  the  bay  and  lagoon  is  53^  50'  S.  longitude,  by  ac- 
count, 73°  9'W. ;  the  variation  is  two  points  eafterly.  I  ob- 
ferved  the  water  to  rife  and  fall  about  nine  feet,  but  the  tide 
was  very  irregular.  We  anchored  here  the  23d  of  January, 
and  failed  again  the  28th. 

VI.  ELIZABETH'S  BAY.  At  the  entrance  of  this  bay 
there  are  two  fmall  reefs,  which  appear  above  water.  The 
moft  dangerous  lies  off  the  eafl  point  of  the  bay,  but  this 
may  ealily  be  avoided,  by  keeping  at  the  diftance  of  about 
two  cables'  length  from  the  point.  There  is  good  landing 
all  round  the  bay,  but  it  is  much  expofed  to  the  wefterly 
winds.  The  beft  place  for  anchoring  is  Paflage  Point,  at  half 
a  mile  diftance,  bearing  S.  E.  and  the  river  bearing  N.  E. 
by  E.  diftant  three  cables'  length ;  in  this  fituation,  a  bank 
or  fhoal,  which  may  be  known  by  the  weeds,  bears  W.  N.  W. 
diftant  a  cable's  length:  the  ground  is  coarfe  fand,  with 
fhells.  Sufficient  wood  is  to  be  procured  here  for  the  ufe  of 
fhips,  and  there  is  good  watering  at  a  fmall  river.  We 
found  a  little  celery  and  a  few  cranberries,  but  neither  fifli 
nor  fowl.  The  latitude  of  this  place  is  53^  43' S.  the  longi- 
tude, by  account,  73°  24' W. ;  the  variation  is  two  points 
eafterly.  We  anchored  here  the  20th  of  January,  and  failed 
the  4th  of  February. 

Vn.  YORK  ROAD.  The  only  danger  of  failing  into  the 
bay,  that  is  formed  by  two  points  in  this  road,  arifes  from  a 
reef  that  runs  off  to  about  a  cable's  length  from  the  weftern 
point,  which  once  known,  may  be  eafily  avoided.  To  an- 
chor in  this  bay,  it  is  fafeft  to  bring  York  Point  E.  S.  E.  Ba-  , 
chelor's  Pviver  N.  by  W.  i.  W.  the  weft  point  of  the  bay  or  reef 
N.  W.  7  W.  and  St.  Jerom's  Sound  W.  N.  W.  at  the  diftance  of 

half 


41^  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

half  a  mile  from  the  fliorc.  There  is  good  watering  about  a; 
mile  up  Bachelor's  River,  and  good  wooding  all  round  the 
bay,  where  the  landing  alfo  is,  in  all  parts,  very  good.  We 
found  plenty  of  celery,  cranberries,  mufcles,  and  limpets, 
many  wild  fowl,  and  fome  fifli,  but  not  enough  to  fupply 
the  fiiip's  company  with  a  fredi  meal.  The  latitude  here  is 
55^  39  S-  longitude,  by  account,  73"  52  W. ;  the  variation  two 
points  eafterly.  The  water  rifes  and  falls  about  eight  feet, 
but  the  tide  is  irregular.  The  mailer,  who  crolTed  the 
Streight  many  times  to  examine  the  bays,  frequently  found 
the  current  fetting  in  three  different  diredlions.  We  anchored 
here  on  the  4th  of  February,  and  failed  again  the  nth. 

VIII.  BUTLER'S  BAY.  This  is  a  fmall  bay,  intirely  fur- 
rounded  by  rocks,  fo  that  no  fliip  fhould  anchor  here  if  fhe 
can  poffibly  avoid  it.  We  found,  however,  fuflScient  wood 
and  water  to  keep  up  our  flock,  mufcles  and  limpets  in 
plenty,  fome  good  rock-fifli,  and  a  few  wild  fowl,  but  celery 
and  cranberries  were  very  fcarce.  This  bay  lies  in  latitude 
53^  37' S.  longitude,  by  account,  74°  9'W.;  the  variation  is 
two  points  eafterly.  The  water  rifes  and  falls  here  about  four 
feet,  but  the  currait  always  fets  to  the  eaftward.  We  an- 
chored here  the  18th  of  February,  and  failed  the  ift  of- 
March. 

IX.  LION  COVE.  This  is  a  fmall  bay,  and  furroundcd 
by  rocks.  The  water  is  deep,  but  the  ground  is  good.  It  is 
not  a  bad  place  for  one  fliip,  nor  a  good  one  for  two.  Here 
is  good  watering  up  a  fmall  creek,  but  no  wood.  There  is 
good  landing  at  the  watering-place,  but  no  where  elfe.  We 
found  no  refrcfliment  but  a  few  mufcles,  limpets,  androck- 
fifh,  with  a  little  celery.  The  latitude  is  ^s''  26'  S.  longitude, 
by  account,  74"  25'  W. ;  the  variation  was  two  points  eafterly. 
Tlie  water,  as  far  as  we  could  judge  by  the  appearance  of 

the 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  41^- 

the  rocks,  rifes  and  falls  about  five  feet,  and  the  current  fets 
at  the  rate  of  about  two  knots  an  hour.  We  anchored  here 
on  the  2d  of  March,  and  failed  the  next  day. 

,  X.  GOOD-LUCK  BAY.  This  is  a  fmall  bay,  and  like 
feveral  others  in  "this  Straight,  intirely  furrounded  by  rocks. 
The  ground  is  very  coarfe,  and  the  cable  of  our  bed  bower 
anchor  was  fo  much  rubbed,  that  we  were  obliged  to  con- 
demn it,  and  bend  a  new  one.  At  this  place  there  is  a  little 
wood,  and  plenty  of  good  water,  but  the  rocks  render  it 
very  difficult  of  accefs.  No  man  that  fees  this  part  of  the 
coaft,  can  expecfl  to  find  any  kind  of  refrefliment  upon  it  y 
and  indeed  we  caught  nothing  except  a  few  rock-fifii,  with 
hook  and  line.  There  may  be  circumftances  in  which  it 
may  be  good  luck  to  get  into  this  bay,  but  we  thought  it  very 
good  luck  to  get  out  of  it.  It  lies  in  latitude  53"  23' S.  lon- 
gitude, by  account,  74°33'W. ;  the  variation  is  tv/o  points 
eafterly.  The  water  rifes  and  falls  bctv^^een  three  and  four 
feet,  though  whenever  we  had  an  opportunity  of  trying  the 
current,  we  found  it  run  eafterly.  We  anchored  here  the 
3d  of  March,  and  failed  the  15th. 

XI.  SWALLOW  HARBOUR.  This  harbour,  when  once 
entered,  is  very  fafe,  being  flieltered  from  all  winds,  but 
the  entrance  is  narrow  and  rocky  ;  the  rocks,  however,  may 
be  eafily  avoided  by  keeping  a  good  look-out,  as  there  are 
large  bunches  of  rock-weed  upon  them  all.  We  found  here 
a  fufficient  fupply  of  wood  and  water,  the  wood  hovvrcver  was 
very  fmall.  As  the  water  is  conftantly  fmooth  here,  the 
landing  is  everywhere  good;  but  we  found  no  fupply  of 
provifions,  except  a  few  mufcles  and  rock-filli.  The  moun- 
tains round  it  have. the  moft  horrid  appearance,  and  feem  to 
be  altogether  deferted  by  every  thing  that  has  life.  The  la- 
titude is  S3°  29'  S.  the  longitude,  by  s^count,  74°  35' W.;  tlic 
■4  variation 


41$  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

variation  is  two  points  eafterly,  and  the  tide  rifes  and  falia 
between  four  and  five  feet.  We  anchored  here  the  15th  o£ 
March,  and  left  the  place  the  next  day. 

XII.  UPRIGHT  BAY.  This  bay  may  be  fafely  entered, 
as  there  is  no  obftrudlion  but  what  is  above  water.  The 
wood  here  is  very  fmall,  but  we  found  fufficient  to  keep  up 
our  ftock.  The  water  is  excellent,  and  in  great  plenty.  As 
to  provifions,  we  got  only  a  few  wild  fowl,  rock-fiflies,.  and 
mufcles.  The  landing  is  bad^  The  latitude  of  this  place,  is 
53"  8' S.  longitude  75°  35'W.;  the  variation  two  points  eaft- 
erly. The  water  rifes  and  falls  about  five  feet,,  but  the  tide 
or  current  is  very  irregular.  We  anchored  here  on  the  1 8tli 
of  March,  and  failed  again  on  the  loth  of  April. 

There  are  three  very  good  bays  a  little  beyond  Cape  Shut^ 
up,  which  we  called  River  bay,  Lodging  bay,  and  Walt 
Lis's  BAY.     Wallis's  bay  is  the  beft. 

About  half  way  between  Elizabeth's  bay  and  York  road; 
lies  Mufcle  bay,  where  there  is  very  good  anchorage  with  a 
wefterly  wind.  There  is  alfo  a  bay,  with  good  anchorage, 
oppofite  to  York  road,  and  another  to  the  eaftward  of  Cape 
Crofs-tide,  but  this  will  hold  only  a  fingle  fliip.  Between 
Cape  Crofs  and  Saint  David's  Head,  hes  Saint  David's  Sounds 
on  the  fouth  fide  of  which  we  found  a  bank  of  coarfe  fand 
and  fhells,  with  a  depth  of  water  from  19  to  30  fathom, 
where  a  fliip  might  anchor  in  cafe  of  neceffity;  and  the 
Mafter  of  the  Swallow  found  a  very  good  fmall  bay  a  little  to 
the  eaftward  of  Saint  David's  Head.  A  little  to  the  eaftward 
of  Cape  Quod,  lies  Ifland  bay,  where  the  Swallow  lay  fome 
time,  but  it  is  by  no  means  an  eligible  fituation.  The  ground 
of  Chance  bay  is  very  rocky  and  uneven,  and  for  that  reafon 
fliould  be  avoided- 

As 


Latitude 
52^28' 

52  35 


ROUND   THE   WORLD. 

As  all  the  violent  gales  by  which  we  fuffered  in  this  navi- 
gation, ble\y  from  the  weftward,  it  is  proper  to  fland  about 
a  hundred  leagues  or  more  to  the  weftward,  after  failing 
out  of  the  Streight,  that  the  fliip  may  not  be  endangered  on 
a  lee  fhore,  which  at  prefent  is  wholly  unknown. 

The  following  table  fliews  the  courfes  and  diftances,  from 
point  to  point,  in  the  Streight  of  Magellan,  bycompafs, 

Courfes  and  Dijiances  from  Point  to  Pointy  in  the  Streight  of 
Magellan,  by  Compafs. 

Cape  Virgin  Mary  lies  in  latitude  52°  24'  S.  and  longitude  68'^  22'  W. 

From 

Cape  Virgin  Mary  to  Dungenefs  Point 

Dungenefs  Point  to  Point  Poffeffion         — 

Point  Pofleffion  to  the  S.  fide  of  the  ift  Narrows 

The  N.  to  the  S.  end  of  the  Narrows  — 

The  S.  end  of  the  Narrows  to  Cape  Gregory 

Cape  Gregory  to  Swcepftakes  Foreland       — 

Cape  Gregory  to  Dolphin's  Foreland  — 

Dolphin's  Foreland  to  the  N.  end  of  Elizabeth's 
ifland  —  —  — 

The  N.  end  of  Elizabeth's  ifland  to  St.  Bartho- 
lomew's Ifland         —         —  — 

The  N.  end  of  Elizabeth's  ifland  to  St.  George's 
Ifland  —  —  — 

TheN.  end  of  Elizabeth's  ifland  to  Porpufs  Point 

Porpufs  Point  to  Frefli-water  bay         — 

FrelTi-water  bay  to  Cape  St.  Ann,  or  Port  Famine 

Cape  St.  Ann  to  the  entry  of  a  great  found  on 
the  fouth  Ihore  —  —         — 

Cape  St.  Ann  to  Cape  Shut-up  — 

Cape  Shut-up  to  Dolphin's  ifland  — 

Dolphin's  ifland  to  Cape  Froward,  the  fouther 
moft  in  all  America  —  — 

Cape  Froward  to  Snug  bay  Point         

Snug  bay  Point  to  Cape  Holland  — ■ 

Vol.  I.  II  h  h 


417 


Courfes 

S.  by  W.  — 
W.  4  S.  _ 
S.  W.  4  S. 

s.  s.  w.    — 

W.  S.  W.  4  w. 

S.  30"  w. 

s.  w.  t  w. 
s.  t  w.    — 

E.  N.  E.     — 

S.  E.       — 
S.  by  W.    — 
S.  t  E.      — 
S.  S.  E.  J,  E. 

N.  E.      — 
S.  by  E.      — 
S,  S.  W.      ~ 

S.  47  \V.    — 

W  t  N.       _ 
W.  bv  S.    —     i 


Mil 

5 
18 

27 
9 

25 

I2J 
i 

14 


52  39 


12 

22  r 


nr 


52 

43 

52 

56 

52 

56 

53 

6 

53 

42 

53 

54 

53 

59 

54 

3 

bl 

57 

Long. 

68°  28 

68  57 

69  38 

70  31 


7°  53 


71  17 


71 


71  32 
71  41 

71  59 


4iS 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


From 
Cape  Holland  to  Cape  Gallant 
Cape  Gallant  to  Elizabeth  bay 
Elizabeth's  bay  to  York  Point 
York  road  to  Cape  Crofs-tide 
York  road  to  Cape  Quod 
Cape  Quod  to  St.  David's  Head 
Cape  Quod  to  Butler's  bay 
Cape  Quod  to  Chance  bay 
Cape  Quod  to  Great  Muflel  bay 
Cape  Quod  to  Snow  Sound 
Cape  Quod  to  Lion's  Cove 
.Lion's  Cove  to  Good-Luck  bay 
Cape  Quod  to  Cape  Notch 
Cape  Notch  to  Swallow  harbour 
Cape  Notch  to  Pifs-pot  bay 
Cape  Notch  to  Cape  Monday 
Cape  Monday  to  Cape  Upright 
Cape  Monday  to  a  great  Sound  on 

the  N.  fhore         

Cape  Upright  to  Cape  Providence 
Cape  Upright  to  Cape  Tamer 
Cape  Upright  to  Cape  Pillar 
Cape  Pillar  to  Weftminfter  ifland 
Cape  Pillar  to  Cape  Vi(f\ory 
Cape  Pillar  to  the  111''  cf  Diredion 


W. 
W. 


Courfes 

w.  t  s. 

W.  N.  W. : 
W.  N.  W.  - 
W.  iS.  — 
\V.  t  S.  — 
S.  E.  — 

S.  7  W.  — 
S.  S.  W.  — 
S.  W.  7  S.  — 

w.  s.  w.  t  w. 
W.  N.  w.  4  w, 
W.  N.  W.  i  W. 
W.  N.  W.  4  W. 
S.  S.  E.       — 

w.  is.     — 

w.  —  — 
W. by  N.   — 

N.      

N.  by  W.tW. 
N.W.byW.tW. 

W.  t  N.     — 
N.  E.  7  N.  — 
N.  W.  4  N..  — 
\V.  N.  W.     — 


Milei 
21-i 

64 

lO 

21 

41 

4 

5 
6 

ID 

12 

6 

21 

7 
23 
28 

13 

7 

9 

18 

50 
15 
28 

3 


Latitude 

Long.  ^ 

53°  50' 

73°    9 

53  43 

73  24 

53  39 

73  32 

53  33 

74     6 

53  37 

74     9 

53  26 

74  25 

53  23 

74  33 

53  22 

74.  36 

53  29 

74  36 

53  12 

75  20 

53     6 

75  38 

52  57 

75  37 

52  43 

76  52 

52  27 

77  19 

CHAP. 


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  419 


CHAP.     IV. 

7%e  Pajfage  from  the  Streight  of  Mageliajt^  to  King 
George  the  Third's  Ifla?i.d^  called  Otaheite^  in  the  South 
Sea^  with  aji  account  of  the  Difcovery  of  federal  other 
IJlandsy  and  a  defcription  of  their  Inhabitants. 


A 


S  we    continued   our  courfe  to  the  weflward,    after       1767. 

April. 


having  cleared  the  Streight,  we  faw  a  great  number 
of  gannets,  fheerwaters,  pintado  birds,  and  many  others,  Sunday  12. 
about  the  fliip,  and  had  for  the  mofl  part  flrong  gales, 
hazy  weather,  and  heavy  feas,  fo  that  we  were  frequently 
brought  under  our  courfes,  and  there  was  not  a  dry  place  in 
the  fhip  for  fome  weeks  together. 

At  eight  in  the  morning  of  the  2  2d,  we  had  an  obferva-  Wednef.  iti 
tion,  by  which  we  found  our  longitude  to  be  95''  46'  W.  and 
at  noon,   our  latitude  was  42°  24  S.  and  the  variation,   by 
azimuth,  11''  6'  E. 

By  the  24th,  the  men  began  to  fall  down  very  fafl  in  colds  Friday  24. 
and  fevers,  in  confequence  of  the  upper  works  being  open, 
and  their  cloaths  and  beds  continually  wet. 

On  the  26th,  at  four  in  the  afternoon,  the  variation,  by  azi-  Sunday  26. 
muth,  was  lo*^  20' E.  and  at  fix  in  the  morning  of  the  next  Monday  27. 
day,  it  was  9°  8' E.     Our  latitude,  on  the  S7th  at  noon,  was 
36°  54' S.  our  longitude,  by  account,  100^  W.     This  day,  the 
weather  being  moderate  and  fair,  we  dried  all  the  people's 
cloaths,  and  got  the  lick  upon  deck,  to  whom  we  gave  falop, 

H  h  h  2  and 


420  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

ApH^i".       ^"^  wheat  boiled  with  portable  foup,   every  morning  for 
*— --,^- — '    breakfaft,  and  all  the  fhip's  company  had  as  much  vinegar 
and  muftard  as  they  could  ufe ;  portable  foup  was  alfo  con- 
ftantly  boiled  in  their  peafe  and  oatmeal. 

The  hard  gales,  with  frequent  and  violent  fqualls,  and  a 
heavy  fea,  foon  returned,  and  continued  with  very  little  in- 
termiifion.  The  (hip  pitched  fo  much,  that  we  were  afraid 
fhe  would  carry  away  her  malls,  and  the  men  were  again 
wet  in  their  beds. 

TRurfdayjop.  On  the  30th,  the  variation,  by  azimuth,  was  8°  30'  E.  our 
latitude  was  32''  50';  longitude,  by  account,  loo'W.  I  began 
now  to  keep  the  fhip  to  the  northward,  as  we  had  no  chance 
.  of  getting  welling  in  this  latitude  j  and  the  furgeon  was  of 
opinion,  that  in  a  little  time  the  lick  would  fo  much  in- 
creafe,  that  we  Ihould  want  hands  to  work  the  Ihip,  if  we 
eould  not  get  into  better  weather. 

On  the  third  of  May,  about  four  in  the  afternoon,  we  had 
an  obfervation  of  the  fun  and  moon,  by  which  we  found  our 
longitude  ro  be  96'  26'  W.  the  variation  by  the  azimuth  was 
5**  44'  E.  at  fix  in  the  evening,  and  at  fix  the  next  morning,  it 
was  5°  58' E.  Our  latitude,  this  day  at  noon,  was  38°  20' S. 
At  four  in  the  afternoon  we  had  feveral  obfervations  for  the 
longitude,  and  found  it  to  be  96°  21'  W. ;  at  feven  in  the  eve- 
ning, the  variation  was  6°4o'E.  by  the  azimuth,  and  the 
next  morning  at  10  it  was,  by  amplitude,  5°  48'  E.;  at  three 
in  the  afternoon,  the  variation,  by  amplitude,  was  7'  40' E. 
This  day  we  faw  a  tropic  bird. 

At  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning,  of  Friday  the  eighth  of 
May,  the  variation  of  the  needle,  by  amplitude,  was  7°  ir  E. 
hi  the  afternoon  we  faw  feveral  fheerwaters  and  fea  fwal- 
lows.    At  eight  in  the  morning  of  the  $)th,  the  variation  by 

azimuth 


May^ 
Sunday  3 


Monday  4. 


'I'uefday  5, 


Friday  8. 


'Saturday  9. 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  421 

a^i'muth  was  6^  34' E.  and  in  the  morning  of  the  nth,  by       i?^;* 

May. 

azimuth  and  amplitude,  it  was  4°  40'  E.    Our  latitude  was   « , > 

27°  28'  S.  longitude,  by  account,  106*  W,  This  day,  and  the  °"  ^^  "* 
next,  we  faw  feveral  fea  fwallows,  flieerwaters,  and  por-  Tiirfdayi2, 
poifes,  about  the  fhip. 

On  the  14th  of  May,  the  variation,  by  four  azimuths,  was  Thurfdayi4, 
2°  E.  About  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  faw  a  large 
flock  of  brown  birds,  flying  to  the  eaftward,  and  fomething 
which  had  the  appearance  of  high  land,  in  the  fame  quar- 
ter. We  bore  away  for  it  till  fun-fet,  and  itftill  having  the 
fame  appearance,  we  continued  our  courfe ;  but  at  two  in 
the  morning,  having  run  1 8  leagues  without  making  it,  we 
hauled  the  wind,  and  at  day-light  nothing  was  to  be  feen. 
We  had  now  the  fatisfadtion  to  find  our  ailing  people  mend 
apace.  Our  latitude  was  34°  50'  S.  our  longitude,  by  ac- 
count, 106°  W.  During  all  this  time,  we  were  looking  out 
for  the  Swallow. 

At  four  in  the  afternoon  of  the  i  dth,  the  variation,  by  azi-  Saturday  i6i- 
muth  and  amplitude,  was  6°  E.  and  at  fix  the  next  morning, 
by  four  azimuths,  it  was  3*  20'. 

The  carpenters  were  now  employed  in  caulking  the  upper 
works  of  the  fhip,  and  repairing  and  painting  the  boats,  -'.nd 
on  the  1 8th,  I  gave  a  fheep  among  the  people  that  were  fick  Monday  1 8; 
and  recovering. 

On  Wednefday  the  20th,  we  found  our  longitude,  by  ob-  wednef.  zoj. 
fervation,  to  be  106°  47' W.  and  our  latitude  20°  52' S.     The 
next  day  we  faw  feveral  flying  fifh,  which  were  the  firft  we  Thurfdayzr, 
had  feen  in  thefe  feas. 

On  the  22d,  our  longitude,  by  obfervarion,  was  iii'*  W.  Friday  22, 
and  our  latitude  20°  18'  S.  and  this  day  we  faw  fome  bonet- 
t€es,  dolphins,  and  tropic  birds. 

The 


42* 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS^    VOYAGE 


1767; 

May. 


Tuefday  e6, 

ThurfdayzS 
Friday  29. 


fianday  31. 


June. 
Monday  i. 


Wedncf. 


The  people  who  had  been  recovering  from  colds  and 
fevers,  now  began  to  fall  down  in  the  fcurvy,  upon  which, 
at  the  furgeoa's  reprefcntation,  wine  was  ferved  to  them: 
wort  was  alio  made  for  them  of  malt,  and  each  man  had 
half  a  pint  of  pickled  cabbage  every  day.  The  variation 
from  4  to  5  E. 

On  the  26th  we  faw  two  grampufes ;  on  the  28th  we  faw 
another,  and  the  next  day  feveral  birds,  among  which  was 
one  about  the  fize  of  a  fwallow,  which  fome  of  us  thought 
was  a  land  bird. 

Our  men  now  began  to  look  very  pale  and  iickly,  and  to 
fall  down  very  fad  in  the  fcurvy,  notwithilanding  all  our 
care  and  attention  to  prevent  ir.  They  had  vinegar  and 
muftard  without  limitation,  wine  inilead  of  fpirits,  fweet 
wort  and  falop.  Portable  foup  was  Hill  conftantly  boiled  in 
their  peas  and  oatmeal ;  their  birth  and  cloaths  were  kept 
perfedly  clean;  the  hammocks  were  conftantly  brought 
upon  the  deck  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  carried 
down  at  four  in  the  afternoon.  Some  of  the  beds  and  ham- 
mocks were  waflied  every  day  ;  the  water  was  rendered 
wholefome  by  ventilation,  and  every  part  between  decks 
frequently  waflied  with  vinegar. 

On  Sunday  the  31  ft  of  May,  our  longitude,  by  obfervation, 
was  127°  45'  W.  our  latitude  29°  38' S.  and  the  variation,  by 
azimuth  and  amplitude,  5°  9'  E. 

The  next  day,  at  three  in  the  afternoon,  our  longitude,  by 
obfervation,  was  129"  15' W.  and  our  latitude  19'  34' S.  We 
had  fqually  weather,  witli  much  lightning  and  rain,  and 
faw  feveral  men  of  war  birds. 

On  the  3d,  we  faw  feveral  gannets,  which,  with  the  uncer- 
tainty of  the  wcatl.cr,  inclined  us  to  hope  that  land  was  not 

very 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  423 

very  far  diftant.    The  next  day  a  turtle  fwam  clofe  by  the       1767. 

fhip ;  on  the  5th  we  faw  many  birds,  which  confirmed  our  " .-1— / 

hope  that  fome  place  of  rcfrefhment  was  near,  and  at  1 1  Friday  5!  '^' 
o'clock  in  the  forenoon  of  the  6th,  Jonathan  Puller,  a  fea-  ^-^ti^rday  6, 
man,  called  out  from  the  maft-head,  "  Land  in  the  W.  N.  W." 
At  noon  it  was  feen  plainly  from  the  deck,  and  found  to  be  a 
low  ifland,  at  about  five  or  fix  leagues  diftance.  The  joy 
which  every  one  on  board  felt  at  this  difcovery,  can  be  con- 
ceived by  thofe  only  who  have  experienced  the  danger,  fickr 
nefs>  and  fatigue  of  fuch  a  voyage  as  we  had  performed. 

When  we  were  within  about  five  miles  of  this  ifland,  wc 
faw  another,  bearing  N.  W.  by  W.    About  three  o'clock  in 
the  afternoon,  being  very  near  the  ifland  that  was  firll  dif- 
covered,  we  brought  to,  and  I  fent  Mr.  Furneaux,  my  fecond 
lieutenant,  my  firft  lieutenant  being  very  ill,  with  the  boats 
manned  and  armed,  to  the  fliore.     As  he  approached  it,  we 
faw  two  canoea  put  off,  and  paddle  away  with  great  expe- 
dition towards  the  ifi.and  that  lay   to  leeward.     At  feven 
m  the  evening  the  boats  returned,  and  brought  with  them- 
feveral  cocoa  nuts,  and  a  confiderable  quantity  of  fcurvy- 
grafs  ;  they  brought  alfo  fome  fifli  hooks,  that  were  made  of 
oyfier-fhclls,    and  fome  of  tlie  fhells  of  which  they  were 
made.     They  reported  that  they  had  feen  none  of  tlie  inhar 
bitants,  but  had  vifited  three  huts,  or  rather  flieds,  confifi- 
ing  only  of  a  roof,  neatly  thatched  with  cocoa  nut  and  palm- 
leaves,  fupported  upon  polls,  and  open  all  round.     They  faw 
alfo  feveral  canoes  building,  but  found  no  frefli  water,  nor 
any  fruit  but  cocoa  nuts.     They  founded,  but  foimd  no  an- 
chorage, and  it  was  with  great  difficulty  that  they  got  on 
fhore,  as  the  furf  ran  very  high.    Having  received  this  ac- 
count, I  Hood  off  and  on  all  night,  and  early  the  next  morn-  whitfundiy. 
ing  I  fent  the  boats   out  again  to  found,    with  orders,    if        ''' 
pofilble,  to  find  a  place  where  the  Ihip  might  come  to  an 

anchor  J 
3 


424 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


1767. 

June. 

Whitfunday 
7- 


Whitfun- 
iXand* 


anchor ;  but  at  11  o'clock  they  returned,  with  no  better  fuc- 
cefs  than  before.  The  people  told  me  that  the  whole  iiland 
was  furrounded  by  a  reef,  and  that  although  on  the  weather 
fide  of  the  iiland  there  was  an  opening  through  it,  into  a 
large  bafon,  that  extended  to  the  middle  of  the  ifland,  yet 
they  found  it  fo  full  of  breakers,  that  they  could  not  venture 
in;  neither  indeed  had  they  been  able  to  land  on  any  part  of 
the  ifland,  the  furf  running  ftill  higher  than  it  had  done  the 
day  before.  As  it  would  therefore  anfwer  no  purpofe  to  con- 
tinue here,  I  hoifted  the  boats  in,  and  ftood  away  for  the 
other  ifland,  which  bore  S.  22°  E.  diftant  about  four  leagues. 
The  ifland  which  I  now  quitted,  having  been  diicovered  on 
Whitfun-eve,  I  called  it  Whitsun  Island.  It  is  about  four 
miles  long,  and  three  wide.  Its  latitude  is  19°  26'  S.  and  its 
longitude,  by  obfervation,  137°  56' W. 

When  we  came  under  the  lee  of  the  other  ifland,  I  fent 
Lieutenant  Furneaux,  with  the  boats  manned  and  armed,  to 
the  fhore,  where  I  faw  about  fifty  of  the  natives  armed  with 
long  pikes,  and  feveral  of  them  running  about  with  fire- 
brands in  their  hands.  I  ordered  Mr.  Furneaux  to  go  to  that 
part  of  the  beach  where  we  faw  the  people,  and  endeavour 
to  traffick  with  them  for  fruit  and  water,  or  whatever  elfe 
might  be  ufeful ;  at  the  fame  time,  being  particularly  careful 
to  give  them  no  offence.  I  ordered  him  alfo  to  employ  the 
boats  in  founding  for  anchorage.  About  feven  o'clock  he 
returned,  and  told  me  that  he  could  find  no  ground  with  the 
line,  till  he  came  within  half  a  cable's  length  of  the  fhore, 
and  that  there  it  confifted  of  fharp  rocks,  and  lay  very  deep. 

As  the  boat  approached  the  fliore,  the  Indians  thronged 
down  towards  the  beach,  and  put  themfelves  upon  tlicir 
guard  with  their  long  pikes,  as  if  to  difpute  the  landing. 
Our  men  then  lay  upon  their  oars,  and  made  iigns  of  friend- 

fliij), 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  425 

ihip,  fliewing  at  the  fame  time  feveral  ftrings  of  beads,  1767- 
ribands,  knives,  and  other  trinkets.  The  Indians  ftill  made  l__!^!!1_; 
figns  to  our  people  that  they  fliould  depart,  but  at  the  fame  "^']"'^»y 
time  eyed  the  trinkets  with  a  kind  of  wifliful  curiofity. 
Soon  after  fome  of  them  advanced  a  few  ileps  into  the  fea, 
and  our  people  making  figns  that  they  wanted  cocoa  nuts 
and  water,  fome  of  them  brought  down  a  fmall  quantity  of 
both,  and  ventured  to  hand  them  into  the  boat:  the  water 
was  in  cocoa  nut-lliells,  and  the  fruit  was  ftripped  of  its  out- 
ward covering,  which  is  probably  u fed  for  various  purpofes. 
For  this  fupply  they  were  paid  with  the  trinkets  that  had 
been  fhewed  them,  and  fome  nails,  upon  which  they  feemed 
to  fet  a  much  greater  value.  During  this  traffick,  one  of 
the  Indians  found  means  to  ileal  a  filk  handkerchief,  in 
which  fome  of  our  fmall  merchandize  was  wrapped  up,  and 
carried  it  clear  off,  with  its  contents,  fo  dexteroufly,  that 
no  body  obferved  him.  Our  people  made  figns  that  a  hand- 
kerchief had  been  ftolen,  but  they  either  could  not,  or 
would  not  underftand  them.  The  boat  continued  about  the 
beach,  foimding  for  anchorage,  till  it  was  dark ;  and  having 
many  times  endeavoured  to  perfuade  the  natives  to  bring 
down  fome  fcurvy-grafs,  without  fuccefs,  flie  returned  on 
board. 

I  flood  off  and  on  with  the  fliip  all  night,  and  as  foon  as  Monday  t, 
the  day  broke,  I  fent  the  boats  a^gain,  with  orders  to  make 
a  landing,  but  without  giving  any  offence  to  the  natives, 
that  could  poffibly  be  avoided.  When  our  boats  came  near 
the  fliore,  the  officer  was  greatly  furprifed  to  fee  feven  large 
canoes,  with  two  ftout  marts  in  each,  lying  juft  in  the  furf, 
with  all  the  inhabitants  upon  the  beach,  ready  to  embark. 
They  made  figns  to  our  people  to  go  higher  up;  they  readily 
complied,  and  as  foon  as  they  went  afhore,  all  the  Indians 
embarked,  and  failed  away  to  the  weftward,  being  joined 

Vol.  I.  I  i  i  by 


426 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


1767. 

June. 

Monday  8. 


Queen  Char- 
lotte's Ifland, 


by  two  other  canoes  at  the  wefl  end  of  the  ifland.  Abouc 
noon,  the  boats  returned,  laden  with  cocoa  nuts,  pahn  nuts, 
and  fcurvy-grafs.  Mr.  Furneaux,  who  commanded  the  ex- 
pedition, told  me  that  the  hidians  had  left  nothing  behind 
them  but  four  or  five  canoes.  He  found  a  well  of  very 
good  water,  and  defcribed  the  ifland  as  being  fandy  and 
level,  full  of  trees,  but  without  underwood,  and  abounding 
with  fcurvy-grafs.  The  canoes,  which  fleered  about  W.  S.  W. 
as  long  as  they  could  be  feen  from  the  maft-head,  appeared 
to  be  about  thirty  feet  long,  four  feet  broad,  and  three  and 
an  half  deep.  Two  of  thefe  being  brought  along  fide  of  each 
other,  were  faftened  together,  at  the  diftance  of  about  three- 
feet  afunder,  by  crofs  beams,  paffing  from  the  larboard 
gunwale  of  one,  to  the  ftarboard  gunwale  of  the  other,  in 
the  middle  and  near  to  each  end. 

The  inhabitants  of  this  ifland  were  of  a  middle  ftature,  and 
dark  complexion,  with  long  black  hair,  which  hung  loofe 
over  their  fhoulders.  The  men  were  well  made,  and  the  wo- 
men handfome.  Their  cloathing  was  a  kind  of  coarfe  cloth  or 
matting,  which  was  faftened  about  their  middle,  and  feemed 
capable  of  being  brought  up  round  their  flioulders. 

In  the  afternoon,  I  fent  Lieutenant  Furneaux  with  the 
boats  again  on  fliore.  He  had  with  him  a  mate  and  twenty- 
men,  who  were  to  make  a  rolling  way  for  getting  the  caflcs 
down  to  the  beach  from  the  well.  I  gave  orders  that  he 
fliould  take  pofleflion  of  the  ifland,  in  the  name  of  King 
George  the  Third,  and  give  it  the  name  of  Queen  Char- 
lotte's Island,  in  honour  of  her  Majefty.  The  boats  re- 
turned freighted  with  cocoa  nuts  and  fcurvy-grafs,  and  the 
officer  told  me  that  he  had  found  two  more  wells  of  good 
water,  not  far  from  the  beach.  I  was  at  this  time  very  ill, 
yet  I  went  afliore  with  the  Surgeon,  and  fevcral  of  the  people, 

who 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  427 

who  were  enfeebled  by  the  fcurvy,  to  take  a  walk.    I  found       1767. 

the  wells  fo  convenient,  that  I  left  the  mate  and  twenty  men    s. ^-l_i 

on  fliore  to  fill  water,  and  ordered  a  week's  provifions  to  be  °"  *^  ' 
fent  them  from  the  fhip,  they  being  already  furnifhed  with 
arms  and  ammunition.  In  the  evening  I  returned  on  board, 
with  the  Surgeon  and  the  fick,  leaving  only  the  waterers  on 
fliore.  As  we  had  not  been  able  to  find  any  anchorage,  I 
Hood  off  and  on  all  night. 

In  the  morning,  I  fent  all  the  empty  water  calks  on  Tuefdayg; 
fliore :  the  Surgeon  and  the  fick  were  alfo  fent  for  the  benefit 
of  another  airing,  but  I  gave  them  fi:ri(5t  orders  that  they 
fliould  keep  near  the  water-fide,  and  in  the  Ihade  ;  that  they 
fliould  not  pull  down  or  injure  any  of  the  lioufes,  nor,  for 
the  fake  of  the  fruit,  deflroy  the  cocoa  trees,  which  I  ap- 
pointed proper  perfons  to  climb.  At  noon,  the  rolling-way 
being  made,  the  cutter  returned  laden  with  water,  but  it 
was  with  great  difficulty  got  off  the  beach,  as  it  is  all  rock, 
and  the  furf  that  breaks  upon  it,  is  often  very  great.  At 
four,  I  received  another  boat-load  of  water,  and  a  frefli 
fupply  of  cocoa  nuts,  palm  nuts,  and  fcurvy-grafs  ;  the  Sur- 
geon alfo  returned  with  the  fick  men,  who  received  much 
benefit  from  their  walk.  The  next  morning,  as  foon  as  it  Wednef.  10. 
was  light,  I  difpatched  orders  to  the  mate,  to  fend  all  the 
water  that  was  filled  on  board,  and  to  be  ready  to  come  off 
with  his  people  when  the  boats  fliould  return  again,  bi-ing- 
ing  with  them  as  many  cocoa  nuts,  and  as  much  fcurvy- 
grafs  as  they  could  procure.  About  eight  o'clock,  all  the 
boats  and  people  came  on  board,  with  the  water  and  refrefli- 
ments,  but  the  cutter,  in  coming  off,  fhipped  a  fca,  which 
almoll  filled  her  with  water :  the  barge  was  happily  near 
enough  to  afllft  her,  by  taking  great  part  of  her  crew  on 
board,  while  the  reft  freed  her,  v/ithout  any  other  damage 
than  the  lofs  of  the  cocoa  nuts,  and  greens  that  were  oa 

I  i  i  2  board. 


428  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

'7^7'       board.     At  noon,  I  hoifted  the  boats  in,  and  there  being  s: 

1 X— '    great  fea,  with  a  dreadful  furf  rolling  in  upon  the  fhors, 

and  no  anchorage,  I  thought  it  prudent  to  leave  this  place,, 
with  fuch  refrefhments  as  we  had  got.  The  people  who 
had  refided  on  fliore,  faw  no  appearance  of  metal  of  any- 
kind,  but  feveral  tools,  which  were  made  of  Ihells  and 
Hones,  fharpened  and  fitted  into  handles,  like  adzes,  chiflels, 
and  awls.  They  faw  feveral  canoes  building,  which  are 
formed  of  planks,  fewed  together,  and  fattened  to  feveral* 
fmall  timbers,  that  pafs  tranfverfely  along  the  bottom  and 
tip  the  fides.  They  faw  feveral  repofitories  of  the  dead,  in 
which  the  body  was  left  to  putrefy  under  a  canopy,  and  not, 
put  into  the  ground. 

When  we  failed,  we  left  a  union  jack  flying  upon  ths 
ifland,  with  the  fhip's  name,  the  time  of  our  being  here, 
and  an  account  of  our  taking  pofTeffion  of  this  place,  and 
Whitfun  Ifland,  in  the  name  of  his  Britannic  Majefty,  cut 
on  a  piece  of  wood»  and  in  the  bark  of  feveral  trees.  We  alfo 
left  fome  hatchets,  nails,  glafs  bottles,  beads,  Ihillings,  fix- 
pences,  and  halfpence,  as  prefents  to  the  natives,  and  an 
atonement  for  the  difturbance  we  had  given  them.  Queen 
Charlotte's  Ifland  is  about  fix  miles  long,  and  one  mile  wide, 
lies  in  latitude  I  y°  i8'S.  longitude,  byobfervation,  138*  4'W.- 
and  we  foimd  the  variation  here  to  be  4°  46'  E. 

We  made  fail  wirh  a  fine  breeze,  and  about  one  o'clock, 
faw  an  ifland  W.  by  S.  Queen  Charlotte's  Ifland,  at  this  time 
bearing  E.  by  N.  diftant  15  miles.  At  half  an  hour  after 
three,  we  were  within  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  of  the 
eaft  end  of  the  ifland,  and  ran  clofe  along  the  fhore,  but  had 
no  foundings.  The  eafl:  and  weft  ends  are  joined  to  each 
other  by  a  reef  of  rocks,  over  which  the  fea  breaks  into  a 
lagoon,  in  the  middle  of  the  ifland,  which,  therefore,  had 

3  ^^^ 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  429 

tlie  appearance  of  two  iflands,  and  feemed  to  be  about  fix      1767. 
miles  long,  and  four  broad.    The  whole  of  it  is  low  land,   ■_  -T- .-f 
full  of  treeS)  but  we  faw  not  a  fingle  cocoa  nut,  nor  any  huts  : 
we  found,  however,  at  the  weflermoll  end,  all  the  canoes 
and  people  who  had  fled,    at  our  approach,    from  Queen 
Charlotte's   llland,     and  fome  mox-e.      We   counted   eight 
double  canoes,  and  about  fourfcore  people,  men,  women, 
and  children.     The  canoes  were  drawn  upon  the  beach,  the 
women  and  children  were  placed  near  them,  and  the  men 
advanced  with  their  pikes  and  firebrands,  making  a  great 
noife,  and  dancing  in  a  llrange  manner.     We  obferved  that 
this  ifland  was  fandy,  and  that  under  the  trees  there  was  no 
verdure.     As  the  fitiore  was  every  where  rocky,  as  there  was 
no  anchorage,  and  as  we  had  no  profpeft  of  obtaining  any 
refrefhment  here,   I  fet  fail  at  fix  o'clock  in  the  evening, 
from  this  ifland,    to  which  I  gave  the  name  of  Egmont  Egmont 
Island,  in  honour  of  the  Earl  of  Egmont,  who  was  then     ^"  ' 
firft  Lord  of  the  Admiralty.     It  lies  in  latitude  19°  20' S.  lon- 
gitude, by  obfervation,  1 38 "  30'  W., 

At  one  o'clock,  on  the  nth,  we  faw  an  ifland  in  the  Thurfdayn* 
W.  S.  W.  and  flood  for  it.  At  four  in  the  afternoon,  we  were 
within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  the  lliore,  and  ran  along  it, 
founding  continually,,  but  could  get  no  ground.  It  is  fur- 
rounded  on  every  fide  by  rocks,  on  which  the  fea  breaks 
very  high.  It  is  full  of  trees,  but  not  one  cocoa  nut,  and 
has  much  the  fame  appearance  with  Egmont  ifland,  but  is 
much  narrower.  Among  the  rocks,  at  the  weft  end,  we 
faw  about  fixteen  of  rhe  natives,  but  no  canoes :  they  carried 
long  pikes  or  poles  in  their  hands,  and  feemed  to  be,  in 
every  refpecT;,  the  fame  kind  of  people  that  we  had  feeit 
before.  As  nothing  was  to  be  had  here,  and  it  blew  very 
hard,  I  made  fail  till  eight  in  the  evening,  and  then  brought 
to.    To  this  ifland,  which  is  about  fix  miles  long,  and  from. 

one. 


430 


Friday  1 2. 


Ciimberland 
Jiland. 


Saturday  13. 


Prince  Wil- 
liam Henry's 
Ulaad. 


W«dnef.  17. 


CAPTAIN   WALLIS^    VOYAGE 

one  mile  to  one  quarter  of  a  mile  broad,  I  gave  the  name  of 
Gloucester  Island,  in  honour  of  his  Royal  Highnefs  the 
Duke.  It  lies  in  latitude  19°  ii'S.  and  longitude,  by  obfer- 
vation,  140''  4'  W. 

At  five  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  made  fail,  and  foon 
after  faw  another  ifland.  At  1  o  o'clock,  the  weather  being 
tempeftuous,  with  much  rain,  we  faw  a  long  reef,  with 
breakers  on  each  fide  of  the  ifland,  and  therefore  brought 
the  Ihip  to,  with  her  head  off  the  fliore.  To  this  ifland, 
which  lies  in  latitude  19°  18' S.  longitude,  by  obfervation, 
140"  36'  W.  I  gave  the  name  of  Cumberland  Island,  in 
honour  of  his  Royal  Highnefs  the  Duke.  It  lies  low,  and  is 
about  the  fame  fize  as  Queen  Charlotte's  Ifland.  We  found 
the  variation  of  the  needle  here  to  be  7°  10'  E.  As  I  had  no 
hope  of  finding  any  refrefliment  here,  I  flood  on  to  the  wefl;- 
ward. 

At  day-break,  on  Saturday  the  13th,  we  faw  another 
fmall  low  ifland,  in  the  N.  N.  W.  right  to  windward.  It  had 
the  appearance  of  fmall  flat  keys.  This  place  I  called  Prince 
William  Henry's  Island,  in  honour  of  his  Majefty's  third 
fon.  It  lies  in  latitude  19°  S.  longitude,  by  obfervation, 
141°  6' W.  I  made  no  flay  here,  hoping,  that  to  the  weft- 
ward  I  fliould  find  higher  land,  where  the  fhip  might  come 
to  an  anchor,  and  fuch  refrefliments  as  we  wanted  be  pro- 
cured. 

Soon  after  day-light,  on  the  17th,  we  faw  land  bearing 
W.  by  N.  and  making  in  a  fmall  round  hummock.  At 
noon,  wlien  it  bore  N.  64  W.  diftant  about  five  leagues,  its 
appearance  greatly  refcmbled  the  Mewftone  in  Plymouth 
Sound,  but  it  fcemed  to  be  much  larger.  We  found  the 
fhip  this  day,  20  miles  to  the  northward  of  her  reckoning, 
which  I  imputed  to  a  great  S.  W.  fwell. 

2  At 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  431, 

At  five  in  the  evening,  this  iiland  bore  N.  W.  diftant  about       17^7- 
eight  miles.     I  then  hauled  the  wind,  and  Hood  on  and  ofF  (__l!!!L_». 
all  night.     At  ten,  we  faw  a  light  upon  the  fliore,  which,  ^^'^"*^"  '7* 
though    the  ifland  was  fmall,    proved    that    it   was     in- 
habited, and  gave  us  hopes  that  we  fhould  find  anchorage 
near  it.    We  obferved  with  great  pleafure,  that  the  land  was 
very  high,  and  covered  with  cocoa  trees ;  a  fure  fign  that 
there  was  water. 

The  next  morning,  I  fent  Lieutenant  Furneaux  to  the  Thurfdayi?^ 
fhore,  with  the  boats  manned  and  armed,  and  all  kinds  of 
trinkets,  to  eftablifla  a  traffick  with  the  natives,  for  fuch  re- 
frefhment  as  the  place  would  afford.  I  gave  him  orders  alfc 
to  find,  if  poffible,  an  anchoring  place  for  the  fliip.  While 
we  were  getting  out  the  boats,  feveral  canoes  put  off  from 
the  ifland,  but  as  foon  as  the  people  on  board  faw  them  make 
towards  the  fhore,  they  put  back.  At  noon,  the  boats  re- 
turned, and  brought  with  them  a  pig  and  a  cock,  with  a  few^ 
plantains  and  cocoa  nuts.  Mr.  Furneaux  reported,  that  he 
had  feen  at  lead  an  hundred  of  the  inhabitants,  and  believed 
there  were  many  more  upon  the  ifland ;  but  that  having 
been  all  round  it,  h^  could  find  no  anchorage,  nor  fcarcely 
a  landing-place  for  the  boat.  When  he  reached  the  fliore, 
he  came  to  a  grapling,  and  threw  a  warp  to  the  Indians  upon 
the  beach,  who  caught  it  and  held  it  fall.  He  then  began 
to  converfe  v/ith  them  by  figns,  and  obferved  that  they  had- 
no  weapon  among  them,  but  that  fome  of  them  had  white 
flicks,  which  feemed  to  be  enfigns  of  authority,  as  the 
people  who  bore  them  kept  the  reft  of  the  natives  back.  In 
return  for  the  pig  and  the  cock,  he  gave  them  fome  beads,  a. 
looking-glafs,  a  few  combs,  with  feveral  other  trinkets,  and 
a  hatchet.  The  women,  who  had  been  kept  at  a  diftance,. 
as  foon  as  they  faw  the  trinkets,  ran  down  in  a  croud  to  the 
beach,  with  great  eagernefs,  but  were  foon  driven  away  by 

tlie 


43^ 

Jib-]. 

June. 
Tkurfday  li. 


Ofnaburgh 
lil»nd. 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

the  men,  at  which  they  exprefled  much  difappomtment  and 
vexation.  While  this  traffick  was  carrying  on,  a  man  came 
fecretly  round  a  rock,  and  diving  down,  took  up  the  boat's 
grapphng,  and  at  the  fame  time,  the  people  on  fliore  who 
held  the  warp,  made  an  effort  to  draw  her  into  the  furf.  As 
foon  as  this  was  perceived  by  the  people  on  board,  they 
fired  a  mufket  over  the  man's  head  who  had  taken  up  the 
■grappling,  upon  which  he  inftantly  let  it  go,  with  marks  of 
great  terror  and  aftonilhment ;  the  people  on  fliore  alfo  let 
go  the  rope.  The  boats  after  this,  lay  fome  time  upon  their 
oars,  but  the  officer  finding  that  he  could  get  nothing  more, 
returned  on  board.  Mr.  Furneaux  told  me  that  both  the 
men  and  women  were  cloathed,  and  he  brought  a  piece  of 
their  cloth  away  with  him.  The  inhabitants  appeared  to 
him  to  be  more  numerous  than  the  iiland  could  fupport, 
and  for  this  reafon,  efpecially  as  he  faw  fome  large  double 
canoes  upon  the  beach,  he  imagined  there  were  iflands  of 
larger  extent,  not  far  diflant,  where  refrefliments  in  greater 
plenty  might  be  procured,  and  hoped  that  they  might  be  lefs 
difficult  of  accefs.  As  I  thought  this  a  reafonable  conjedture, 
I  hoiftcd  in  the  boats,  and  determined  to  run  farther  to  the 
weflward.  To  this  place,  which  is  nearly  circular,  and 
about  two  miles  over,  I  gave  the  name  of  Osnaburgh 
Island,  in  honour  of  Prince  Frederick,  who  is  bifhop  of 
that  fee.  It  lies  in  latitude  17*^  51'S.  and  longitude  147^  30' 
W.;  the  variation  here  was  ^^  10' E. 


CHAP. 


I 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  433 


C  H  A  P.     V. 

An  Account  of  the  Difcovery  of  King  George  the  Third's 
IJlandj  or  Otaheite^  a7id  of  fever  al  Incidents  which  hap- 
pened both  on  board  the  Shipy  and  on  Shore ^ 

AT  two  o'clock,  the  fame  day,  we  bore  away,  and  in       1767,. 
about  half  an  hour,  difcovered  very  high  land  in. the    y_^^X  j 
W.  S.  W.    At  feven  in  the  evening,  Ofnaburgh  Ifland  bore  Thurfday  is 
E.  N.  E.  and  the  new  difcovered  land,  from  W.  N.  W.  to  W. 
by  S.     As  the  weather  was  thick  and  fqually,  we  brought  to 
for  the  night,  or  at  leaft  till  the  fog  fiiould  break  away.     At 
two  in  the  morning,  it  being  very  clear,  we  made  fail  again ;  Friday  ig., 
at  d^y-break  we  faw  the  land,  at,  about  five  leagues  diftance, 
and  fleered  diredly  for  it ;  but  at  eight  o'clock,  when  we 
were  clofe  under  it,  the  fog  obliged  us  again  to  lie  to,  and 
when  it  cleared  away,  we  were  much  furprifed  to  find  our- 
felves  furrounded  by  fome  hundreds  of  canoes.     They  were, 
of  different  fizes,  and  had  on  board  different  numbers,  from:, 
one  to  ten,  fo  that  in  all  of  them  together,  there  could  not: 
be  lefs  than  eight  hundred  people.     When  they  came  within, 
piflol  fhot  of  the  fhip,  they  lay  by,  gazing  at  us  with  great, 
aftonifhment,  and  by  turns  conferring  with  each  other.     In 
the  mean  time  we  fhewed  them  trinkets  of  various  kinds, 
and  invited  them  on  board.     Soon  after,  they  drew  together, 
and  held  a  kind  of  council,  to  determine  what  fhould  be. 
done :  then  they  all  paddled  round  the  fhip,  making  figns 
of  friendfhip,  and  one  of  them  holding  up  a  branch  of  the, 
plantain  tree,  made  a  fpeech  that  lafted  near  a  quarter  of  an 
Vol.  I.  K  k  k  hour, 


^31  CAPTAIN    WALLIS^s    VOYAGE 

1767-      hour,  and  then  threw  it  into  the  fea.     Soon  after,  as  we 

June.  f.    .         .         , 

(__ — ,. — 1  continued  to  make  ligns  or  invitation,  a  fine,  flout,  lively 
'^"  ^^  ^'  young  man  ventured  on  board:  he  came  up  by  the  mizen 
chains,  and  jumped  out  of  the  fhrouds  upon  the  top  of  tlie 
awning.  We  made  figns  to  him  to  come  down  upon  the 
quarter-deck,  and  handed  up  forae  trinkets  to  him:  he 
looked  pleafed,  but  would  accept  of  nothing  till  fume  of  the 
Indians  came  along  fide,  and  after  much  talk,  threw  a  few 
branches  of  plantain  tree  on  board  the  fliip.  He  then  ac- 
cepted our  prefents,  and  feveral  others  very  foon  came  on 
board,  at  different  parts  of  the  fhip,  not  knowing  the  proper 
entrance.  As  one  of  thefe  Indians  was  Handing  near  the 
gang-way,  on  the  larboard  fide  of  the  quarter-deck,  one  of 
our  goats  butted  him  upon  the  haunches :  being  furprifed  at 
the  blow,  he  turned  haftily  about,  and  faw  the  goat  raifed 
upon  his  hind-legs,  ready  to  repeat  the  blow.  The  appear- 
ance of  this  animal,  fo  different  from  any  he  had  ever  feen, 
ftruck  him  with  fuch  terror,  that  he  inftantly  leaped  over 
board  ;  and  all  the  reft,  upon  feeing  what  had  happened, 
followed  his  example  with  the  utmoft  precipitation :  they 
recovered  however,  in  a  fliort  time,  from  their  fright,  and 
returned  on  board.  After  having  a  little  reconciled  them  to 
our  goats  and  fheep,  I  fliewed  them  our  hogs  and  poultry, 
and  they  immediately  made  figns  that  -they  had  fuch  ani- 
mals as  thefe.  I  then  diftributed  trinkets  and  nails  among 
them,  and  made  figns  that  they  flioukl  go  on  fliore  and 
bring  us  fome  of  their  hogs,  fowls  and  fruit,  but  they  did 
not  feem  to  underftand  my  meaning :  they  were,  in  the 
mean  time,  watching  an  opportunity  to  fteal  fome  of  the 
things  that  happened  to  lie  in  their  way,  but  we  generally 
dete^led  them  in  the  attempt.  At  laft,  however,  one  of  the 
midfliipmen  happened  to  come  where  they  were  ftanding, 
with  a  new  laced  hat  upon  his  head,  and  began  to  talk  to 

one 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  435 

one  of  them  by  figns:  while  he  was  thus  engaged,  anodier       i767« 
•of  them  came  behind  him,  and  fuddenly  fnatching  off  the    ■_.     -  _f 
hat,  leaped  over  the  tafFarel  into  the  fea,  and  fwam  away  ^'"^^^  '^" 
with  it. 

As  we  had  no  anchorage  here,  we  flood  along  the  fhore, 
fending  the  boats   at  the   fame   time  to  found    at  a  lefs 
diftance.    As  none  of  thefe  canoes  had  fails,  they  could  not 
keep  up  with  us,  and  therefore  foon  paddled  back  towards 
the  fhore.    The  country  has  the  moft  delightful  and  roman- 
tic appearance  that  can  be  imagined:  towards  the  fea  it  is 
level,  and  is  covered  with  fruit  trees  of  various  kinds,  par- 
ticularly the  cocoa  nut.     Among  thefe  are  the  houfes  of  the 
inhabitants,    confifting  only  of  a  roof,    and  at  a  diflance 
having  greatly  the  appearance  of  a  long  barn.   The  country 
within,  at  about  the  diftance  of  three  miles,  rifes  into  lofty 
hills,  that  are  crowned  with  wood,  and  terminate  in  peaks, 
from  which  large  rivers  are  precipitated  into  the  fea.    We 
faw  no  fhoals,    but  found  the  ifland  fkirted  by  a  reef  of 
rocks,  through  which  there  are  feveral  openings  into  deep 
water.     About  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  brought 
to,  a-breaft  of  a  large  bay,  where  there  was  an  appearance 
of  anchorage.    The  boats  were  immediately  fent  to  found  it, 
and  while  they  were  thus  employed,    I  obferved  a  great 
number  of  canoes  gather  round  them.    I  fufpecHred  that  the 
Indians  had  a  delign  to  attack  them,    and  as  I  was  very 
defirous  to  prevent  mifchief,  I  made  the  fignal  for  the  boats 
to  come  aboard,   and  at  the  fame  time,    to  intimidate  the 
Indians,  I  fired  a  nine  pounder  over  their  heads.    As  foon  as 
the  cutter  began  to  ftand  towards  the  fhip,  the  Indians  in 
their  canoes,  though  they  had  been  ftartled  by  the  thunder 
of  our  nine  pounder,   endeavoured  to  cut  her  off;     The  boar, 
however,  failing  fafter  than  the  canoes  could  paddle,  foon 
got  clear  of  thofe  that  were  about  her;  but  fome  others,  that 

K  k  k  2  were 


436  C  A  P  T  A  1  N    W  A  L  L  I  5'  s    V  O  Y  A  G  E 

1767.       were  full  of  men,  way-laid  her  in  her  courfe,  and  threw 

u — , 1   feveral  flones  into  her,  which  wounded  fome  of  the  people. 

"^  '^'  Upon  this,  the  officer  on  board  fired  a  mufquet,  loaded  with 
buck-fliot,  at  tlie  man  who  threw  the  firil  Hone,  and 
wounded  him  in  the  flioulder.  The  reft  of  the  people  in 
tlie  canoes,  as  foon  as  they  perceived  their  companion 
wounded,  leapt  into  the  fea,  and  the  other  canoes  paddled 
away,  in  great  terror  and  confufion.  As  foon  as  the  boats 
reached  the  fhip,  they  were  hoilledon  board,  and  juft  as  fhe 
was  about  to  ftand  on,  we  obfcrved  a  large  canoe,  under 
fail,  making  after  us.  As  I  thought  flie  might  have  fome 
Chief  on  board,  or  might  have  been  difpatched  to  bring  me 
a  mefTage  from  fome  Chief,  I  determined  to  wait  for  her. 
She  failed  very  faft,  and  was  foon  along  fide  of  the  fliip,  but 
we  did  not  obferve  among  thofe  on  board,  any  one  that 
feemed  to  have  an  authority  over  the  reft.  One  of  them, 
however,  ftood  up,  and  having  made  a  fpeech,  which  con- 
tinued about  five  minutes,  threw  on  board  a  branch  of  the 
plantain  tree.  We  underftood  this  to  be  a  token  of  peace, 
and  we  returned  it,  by  handing  over  one  of  the  branches  of 
plantain  that  had  been  left  on  board  by  our  firft  vifitors: 
with  this  and  fome  toys,  that  were  afterwards  prefented  to 
him,  he  appeared  to  be  much  gratified,  and  after  a  fhort 
time,  v/ent  away. 

The  officers  who  had  been  fenr  out  with  the  boats,  in- 
formed me  that  they  had  foimded  clofe  to  the  reef,  and 
found  as  great  a  depth  of  water  as  at  tlie  other  iflands  :  how- 
ever, as  1  was  now  on  the  weather  fide  of  the  ifland,  I  had 
reafon  to  expe<5t  anchorage  in  running  to  leeward.  I  therefore 
took  this  courfe,  but  finding  breakers  that  ran  oft" to  a  great 
diftance  from  tlie  fouth-end  of  the  iftand,  I  hauled  the  wind, 
and  continued  turning  to  windv^rard  all  night,  in  order  to 
run  down  on  the  eaft  fide  of  the  ifland. 

At 


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  437 


Saturday  20', 


At  five  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  made  fail,  the  land 
Bearing  N.  W.  byW.  diftant  10  leagues;  and  there  feemed 
to  be  land  five  leagues  beyond  it,  to  the  N.  E.  ;  a  re- 
markable peak,  like  a  fugar  loaf,  bore  N.  N.  E.  when  we 
were  about  two  leagues  from  the  Ihore,  which  afforded  a 
moft  dehghtful  profped,  and  was  full  of  houfes  and  inha- 
bitants. We  faw  feveral  large  canoes  near  the  fliore,  under 
fail,  but  they  did  not  fteer  towards  the  fhip.  At  noon,  we  were 
within  two  or  three  miles  of  the  iiland,  and  it  then  bore 
from  S.  i.  W.  to  N.  W.  by  W.  We  continued  our  courfe  along 
the  Ihore,  fometimes  at  the  diilance  of  half  a  mile,  and 
fometimes  at  the  diftance  of  four  or  five  miles,  but  hitherto 
had  got  no  foundings.  At  fix  o'clock  in  the  evening,  we 
were  a-breall  of  a  fine  river,  and  the  coaft  having  a  better 
appearance  here  than  in  any  other  part  that  we  had  feen,  I 
determined  to  ftand  off  and  on  all  night,  and  try  for  anchor- 
age in  the  morning.  As  foon  as  it  was  dark,  we  faw  a 
great  number  of  lights  all  along  the  fliore.  At  day-break,  Si^ndayai, 
we  fent  out  the  boats  to  found,  and  foon  after,  they  made 
the  fignal  for  20  fathom.  This  produced  an  univcrfal  joy, 
which  it  is  not  eafy  to  defcribe,  and  we  immediately  ran  in, 
and  came  to  an  anchor  in  17  fathom,  with  a  clear  fandy 
bottom.  We  lay  about  a  mile  dillant  from  the  fhore,  oppo- 
fite  to  a  fine  run  of  water;  the  extreams  of  the  land  bearing 
from  E.S.  E.  to  N.  W.  by  W.  As  foon  as  we  had  fecured  the 
fliip,  I  fent  the  boats  to  -found  along  the  coaff,  and  look  at 
the  place  where  we  faw  the  water.  At  this  time,  a  con- 
fiderable  number  of  canoes  came  off  to  the  fhip,  and 
brought  with  them  hogs,  fowls,  and  fruit  in  great  plenty, 
■which  we  purchafed  for  trinkets  and  nails.  But  when  the 
boats  made  towards  the  fhore,  the  canoes,  moll  of  which 
were  double,  and  very  large,  failed  after  them.  At  firfl 
they  kept  at  a  diftance,  but  as  the  boats  approached  the 
-j.  fhore. 


438  CAPTAIN    WALLIS^s    VOYAGE 

1767-  fliore,  they  grew  bolder,  and  atlaft  three  of  the  largefl  ran 
■_  -"-  -J  at  the  cutter,  ftaved  in  her  quarter,  and  carried  away  her 
Sunday  21.  Qut-riggcr,  the  hidians  preparing  at  the  fame  time  to  board 
her,  with  their  clubs  and  paddles  in  their  hands.  Our 
people  being  thus  prefTed,  were  obliged  to  fire,  by  which 
one  of  the  aflailants  was  killed,  and  another  much  wounded. 
Upon  receiving  the  fliot,  they  both  fell  overboard,  and  all 
the  people  who  were  in  the  fame  canoe,  inftantly  leaped 
into  the  fea  after  them:  the  other  two  canoes  dropped 
a-ftern,  and  our  boats  went  on  without  any  farther  interrup- 
tion. As  foon  as  the  Indians,  who  were  in  the  water,  faw 
that  the  boats  flood  on  without  attempting  to  do  them  any 
farther  hurt,  they  recovered  their  canoe,  and  hauled  in 
their  wounded  companions.  They  fet  them  both  upon  their 
feet  to  fee  if  they  could  fland,  and  finding  they  could  nor, 
they  tried  whether  they  could  fit  upright :  one  of  them 
could,  and  him  they  fupported  in  that  poflure,  but  perceiv- 
ing that  the  other  was  quite  dead,  they  laid  the  body  along 
at  the  bottom  of  the  canoe.  After  this  fome  of  the  canoes 
went  alhore,  and  others  returned  again  to  the  lliip  to 
traffick,  which  is  a  proof  that  our  conduft  had  convinced 
them  that  while  they  behaved  peaceably  they  had  nothing 
to  fear,  and  that  they  were  confcious  they  had  brought  the 
mifchief  which  had  juft  happened  upon  themfelves. 

The  boats  continued  founding  till  noon,  when  they  re- 
turned with  an  account  that  the  ground  was  very  clear;  that 
it  v/as  at  the  depth  of  five  fathom,  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
of  the  Iliorc,  but  that  thei'e  was  a  very  great  furf  where  wc 
had  {^z\\  the  water.  The  officers  told  me,  that  the  inhabitants 
fv/armed  upon  the  beach,  and  that  many  of  them  fwam  olT 
to  the  boat  with  fruit,  and  bamboos  filled  with  water.  They 
faid  that  they  were  very  importunate  with  them  to  come  on 
Ihore,    particularly  the  women,    who  came  down   to  the 

beach, 


ROUND   THE   WORLD.  439 


une. 


Sunday  21. 


Beach,   and   ftripping  themfelves  naked,    endeavoured  to       ^J^j. 
allure  them  by  many  wanton  geftures,  the  meaning  of  which 
could  not  poffibly  be  miilaken.    At  this  time,  however,  our 
people  refilled  the  temptation. 

In  the  afternoon,  I  fent  the  boats  again  to  the  fhore,  with 
fome  barecas,  or  fmall  cafks,  which  are  filled  at  the  head, 
and  have  a  handle  by  which  they  are  carried,  to  endeavour 
to  procure  fome  water,  of  which  we  began  to  be  in  great 
want.  In  the  mean  time,  many  of  the  canoes  continued 
about  the  fliip,  but  the  Indians  had  been  guilty  of  fo  many 
thefts,  that  I  would  not  fuffer  any  more  of  them  to  come  on 
board. 

At  five  in  the  evening,  the  boats  returned  with  only  two 
barecas  of  water,  which  the  natives  had  filled  for  them ;  and 
as  a  compenfation  for  their  trouble,  they  thought  fit  to  detain 
all  the  refi:.  Our  people,  who  did  not  leave  their  boat,  tried 
every  expedient  they  could  think  of  to  induce  the  Indians  to 
return  their  water  vefilels,  but  without  fuccefs;  and  the 
Indians,  in  their  turn,  were  very  preffing  for  our  people  to 
come  on  fliore,' which  they  thought  it  prudent  to  decline. 
There  were  many  thoufands  of  the  inhabitants  of  both  fexes, 
and  a  great  number  of  children  on  the  beach,  when  our 
boats  came  away. 

The  next  morning,  I  fent  the  boats  on  fhore  again  for  Mouday  isi. 
water,  with  nails,  hatchets,  and  fuch  other  things  as  I  thought 
moll  likely  to  gain  the  friendfhip  of  the  inhabitants.  In  the 
mean  time,  a  great  number  of  canoes  came  off  to  the  fhip, 
with  bread-fruit*,  plantains,  a  fruit  refembling  an  apple 
only  better,  fowls,  and  hogs,  which  we  purchafed  with 
beads,  nails,  knives,  and  other  articles  of  the  like  kind,  fo 

*  See  a  defcription  of  this  fruit  in- the  Account  of  the  Voyage  of  the  Endeavour. 

2  that 


440  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

17^7'      that  wc  procured  pork  enough  to  ferve  the  fhip's  company 
< — v.-l«j    two  days,  at  a  pound  a  man. 

When  the  boats  returned,  they  brought  us  only  a  few 
-  caUbalhcs  of  water,  for  the  number  of  people  on  the  beach 
was  fo  great,  that  they  would  not  venture  to  land,  though 
the  yoiuig  women  repeated  the  allurements  which  they  had 
praiSlilcd  the  day  before,  with  ftill  more  wanton,  and,  if 
ixjlliblc,  lefs  equivocal  geftures.  Fruit  and  provifions  of 
various  kinds  were  brought  down  and  ranged  upon  the 
beach,  of  which  our  people  were  alfo  invited  to  partake,  as 
an  additional  inducement  for  them  to  leave  the  boat.  They 
continued,  however,  inexorable,  and  fliewing  the  Indians 
the  barecas  on  board,  made  figns  that  they  fhould  bring 
down  thofe  which  had  been  detained  the  day  before :  to  this 
the  Indians  were  inexorable  in  their  turn,  and  our  people 
tlicreforc  weighed  their  grapplings,  and  founded  all  round 
the  place,  to  fee  wlicthcr  the  Ihip  could  come  in  near  enough 
to  cover  the  waterers,  in  which  cafe  they  might  venture  on 
fhorc,  in  defiance  of  the  whole  ifland.  When  they  put  oiF, 
the  women  pelted  them  with  apples  and  bananas,  fliouting, 
and  fhewing  every  mark  of  derifion  and  contempt  that 
they  could  devife.  They  reported,  that  the  Ihip  might  ride 
in  four  fathom  water,  with  fandy  ground,  at  two  cables' 
length  from  the  lliore,  and  in  five  fathom  water  at  three 
cables'  length.  The  wind  here  blew  right  along  the  fhore, 
raifing  a  great  furf  on  the  fide  of  the  vefFel,  and  on  the 
beach. 

Tu€fday23.  '^^  day-brcak,  the  next  morning,  we  weighed,  with  a 
defign  to  anchor  off  the  watering-place.  As  we  were  ftand- 
ing  off,  to  get  farther  to  windward,  we  difcovered  a  bay 
about  fix  or  eight  miles  to  leeward,  over  the  land,  from  the 

mail'- 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  441 

maft-head,  and  immediately  bore  away  for  it,  fending  the  1767. 
boats  a-head  to  found.  At  nine  o'clock,  the  boats  making  v___!i!l>-; 
the  fignal  for  12  fathom,  we  hauled  round  a  reef,  and  flood  '^"^^'^^y*^' 
in,  with  a  delign  to  come  to  an  anchor;  but  when  we  came 
near  the  boats,  one  of  which  was  on  each  bow,  the  fliip 
llruck.  Her  head  continued  immoveable,  but  her  ilern  was 
free;  and,  upon  calling  the  lead,  we  found  the  depth  of 
water,  upon  the  reef  or  Ihoal,  to  be  from  1 7  fathom  to  two 
and  a  half:  we  clewed  all  up  as  fall  as  poffible,  and  cleared 
the  flaip  of  what  lumber  there  happened  to  be  upon  the 
deck,  at  the  fame  time  getting  out  the  long-boat,  with  the 
flream  and  kedge  anchors,  the  ftream  cable  and  haufer,  in 
order  to  carry  them  without  the  reef,  that  when  they  had 
taken  ground,  the  fhip  might  be  drawn  off  towards  them, 
by  applying  a  great  force  to  the  capllern,  but  unhappily 
without  the  reef  we  had  no  bottom.  Our  condition  was 
now  very  alarming,  the  fliip  continued  beating  againft  the 
rock  with  great  force,  and  we  were  furrounded  by  many 
hundred  canoes,  full  of  men :  they  did  not,  however, 
attempt  to  come  on  board  us,  but  feemed  to  wait  in  ex- 
pe6tation  of  our  fhipwreck.  In  the  anxiety  and  terror  of 
fuch  a  lituation  we  continued  near  an  hour,  without  being 
able  to  do  any  thing  for  our  deliverance,  except  Having  fome 
water  cafks  in  the  fore-hold,  when  a  breeze  happily  fpring- 
ing  up  from  the  fhore,  the  fliip's  head  fwung  off.  We 
immediately  preffed  her  with  all  the  fail  we  could  make ; 
upon  which  fhe  began  to  move,  and  was  very  foon  once 
more  in  deep  water. 

We  now  flood  off,  and  the  boats  being  fent  to  leeward, 
found  that  the  reef  ran  down  to  the  weflward  about  a  mile 
and  a  half,  and  that  beyond  it  there  was  a  very  good  har- 
bour, llie  mailer,  after  having  placed  a  boat  at  the  end  of  the 
reef,  and  furnifhed  the  long-boat  with  anchor  and  haufers. 

Vol.  I.  L  1  1  and 


442  CAPTAIN    WALLIS^s    VOYAGE 


1  J  n 


I'usiday  23 


1/^7-  and  a  guard  to  defend  her  from  an  attack  of  the  Indiansv 
came  on  board,  and  piloted  the  fliip  romid  the  reef  into  the 
harbour,  where,  about  twelve  o'clock,  flie  came  to  an  an- 
chor in  17  fatlrom  water,  with  a  fine  bottom  of  black  fand. 

The  place  where  the  fliip  flruck  appeared,  upon  farther 
examination,  to  be  a  reef  of  fliarp  coral  rock,  with  very  un- 
equal foundings,  from  fix  fathom  to  two;  and  it  happened 
unfortunately  to  lie  between  the  two  boats  that  were  placed 
as  a  direction  to  the  fhip,  the  weathermoft  boat  having  12 
fathom,  and  the  leewardmoft  nine.  The  wind  frefhened 
almoft  as  foon  as  we  got  off,  and  though  it  foon  became 
calm  again,  the  furf  ran  fo  high,  and  broke  with  fuch  vio- 
lence upon  the  rock,  that  if  the  fhip  had  continued  fafl:  half 
an  hour  longer,  fhe  mufl  inevitably  have  been  beaten  to 
pieces.  Upon  examining  her  bottom,  we  could  not  dif- 
cover  that  flie  had  received  any  damage,  except  that  a 
fmall  piece  was  beaten  off  the  bottom  of  the  rudder.  She 
did  not  appear  to  admit  any  water,  but  the  trufsle-trees,  at 
the  head  of  all  the  mafts,  were  broken  fhort,  which  we 
fuppofed  to  have  happened  while  fhe  was  beating  againft 
the  rock.  Our  boats  loft  their  grapplings  upon  the  reef,  but 
as  we  had  reafon  to  hope  that  the  fhip  was  found,  they  gave 
us  very  little  concern.  As  foon  as  the  fliip  was  fecured,  I 
fent  the  mailer,  with  all  the  boats  manned  and  armed,  to 
found  the  upper  part  of  the  bay,  that  if  he  found  good  an- 
chorage we  might  warp  the  fhip  up  within  the  reef,  and 
anchor  her  in  fafety.  The  weather  was  now  very  pleafanr, 
a  great  number  of  canoes  were  upon  the  reef,  and  the  fhore 
■was  crouded  with  people. 

About  four  in  the  afternoon  the  matter  returned,  and 
reported,  that  there  was  every  where  good  anchorage ;  I 
therefore  determined  to  warp  the  fhip  up  the  bay  early  in 

4  the 


JLJiooJccT.n-uIp. 

IN?21. 


X?21. 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  443 

the  morning,  and  in  the  mean  time,  T  put  the  people  at  four       «767- 

June, 

watches,  one  watch  to  be  always  under  arms ;  loaded  and   < .— -jf 

primed  all  the  guns,  fixed  mufquetoons  in  all  the  boats,  and  "^  ^^  "^^ 
ordered  all  the  people  who  were  not  upon  the  watch,  to  re- 
pair to  the  quarters  alllgned  them,  at  a  moment's  warning 
there  being  a  great  number  of  canoes,  fome  of  them  very- 
large,  and  full  of  men,  hovering  upon  the  fliore,  and  many 
fmaller  venturing  to  the  fliip,  with  hogs,  fowls,  aiwl  fruit, 
which  we  purchafed  of  them,  much  to  the  fatisf action  of 
both  parties ;  and  at  fun-fet,  all  the  canoes  rowed  in  to  the 
fhore. 

At  fix  o'clock  the  next  morning,  we  began  to  warp  the  Wednef.  t^ 
fhip  up  the  harbour,  and  foon  after,  a  great  number  of 
canoes  came  under  h«r  ftern.  As  I  perceived  that  they  had 
hogs,  fowls,  and  fruit  on  board,  I  ordered  the  gunner,  and 
two  midfhipmen,  to  purchafe  them  for  knives,  nails,  beads, 
and  other  trinkets,  at  the  fame  time  prohibiting  the  trade 
to  all  otlier  perfons  on  board.  By  eight  o'clock,  the  number 
of  canoes  was  greatly  increafed,  and  thofe  that  came  laft  up 
were  double,  of  a  very  large  fize,  with  twelve  or  fifteen  flout 
men  in  each.  I  obferved,  with  fome  concern,  that  they  ap- 
peared to  be  furnifhed  rather  for  war  than  trade,  having 
very  little  on  board  except  round  pebble  flones;  I  therefore 
fent  for  Mr.  Furneaux,  my  firft  lieutenant  being  llili  very 
ill,  and  ordered  him  to  keep  the  fourth  watch  conflantly  at 
their  arms,  while  the  reft  of  the  people  were  warping  the 
Ihip.  In  the  mean  time  more  canoes  were  continually 
coming  off  from  the  fhore,  which  were  freighted  very  dif- 
ferently from  the  reft,  for  they  had  on  board  a  number  of 
women  who  wer-e  placed  in  a  row,  and  who,  when  they 
came  near  the  fhip,  made  all  the  wanton  geftures  that  can 
be  conceived.  While  theCs  ladies  were  pra6tifing  their  al- 
Im'ements,   tlie  large  canoes,  which  were  freighted  with 

L  1 1  2  ftoncs. 


444  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1 767'  Hones,  drew  together  very  clofe  round  the  ftiip,  fome  of  the 
» — .-Lj  men  on  board  finging  in  a  hoarfe  voice,  fome  blowing 
e  ne .  24.  ^Qj^^|^g^  ^^^  fome  playing  on  a  flute.  After  fome  time,  a 
man  who  fat  upon  a  canopy  that  was  fixed  on  one  of  the 
large  double  canoes,  made  figns  that  he  wiftied  to  come  up 
to  the  fliip's  fide  ;  I  immediately  intimated  my  confent,  and 
when  he  came  along  lide,  he  gave  one  of  the  men  a  bunch 
of  red  and  yellow  feathers,  making  figns  that  he  fhould 
carry  it  to  me.  I  received  it  with  expreffions  of  amity,  and 
immediately  got  fome  trinkets  to  prefent  him  in  return,  but 
to  my  great  furprife  he  had  put  off  to  a  little  diflance  from 
the  fliip,  and  upon  his  throwing  up  the  branch  of  a  cocoa- 
nut  tree,  there  was  an  univerfal  fhout  from  all  the  canoes, 
which  at  once  moved  towards  the  fliip,  and  a  fliower  of 
flones  was  poured  into  her  on  every  fide.  As  an  attack  was 
now  begun,  in  which  our  arms  only  could  render  us  fupe- 
rior  to  the  multitude  that  aflailed  us,  efpecially  as  great  part 
of  the  flaip's  company  was  in  a  fick  and  feeble  condition,  I 
ordered  the  guard  to  fire ;  two  of  the  quarter-deck  guns, 
•which  I  had  loaded  with  fmall  fhot,  were  alfo  fired  nearly  at 
the  fame  time,  and  the  Indians  appeared  to  be  thrown  into 
fome  confufion:  in  a  few  minutes,  however,  they  renewed 
the  attack,  and  all  our  people  that  were  able  to  come  upon 
deck,  having  by  this  time  got  to  their  quarters,  I  ordered 
them  to  fire  the  great  guns,  and  to  play  fome  of  them  con- 
ftantly  at  a  place  on  Ihore,  where  a  great  number  of  canoes 
were  Hill  taking  in  men,  and  pufliing  ofif  towards  the  fliip 
■with  the  utnioft  expedition.  When  the  great  guns  began  to 
fire,  there  were  not  lefs  than  three  hundred  canoes  about 
the  fliip,  having  on  board  at  leafl  two  thoufand  menj  many 
thoufands  were  alfo  upon  the  fhore,  and  more  canoes  coming 
from  every  quarter :  the  firing,  however,  foon  drove  away 
the  canoes  that  were  about  the  fliip,  and  put  a  flop  to  the 

2  coming 


Wednef.  2j^ 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  445 

coming  ofF  of  others.  As  foon  as  I  faw  fome  of  them  re-  |76^ 
treating,  and  the  reft  quiet,  I  ordered  the  firing  to  ceafe,  ^'- 
hoping  that  they  were  fufficiently  convinced  of  our  fuperi- 
ority,  not  to  renew  the  conteft.  In  this,  however,  I  was 
unhappily  miftaken  :  a  great  number  of  the  canoes  that  had 
been  difperfed,  foon  drew  together  again,  and  lay  fome 
time  on  their  paddles,  looking  at  the  Ihip  from  the  diftance 
of  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  and  thgn  fuddenly  hoifting 
white  ftreamers,  pulled  towards  the  fhip's  ftern,  and  began 
again  to  throw  ftones,  with  great  force  and  dexterity,  by  the 
help  of  flings,  from  a  confiderable  diftance:  each  of  thefe 
ftones  weighed  about  two  pounds,  and  many  of  them 
wounded  the  people  on  board,  who  would  have  fufFered 
much  more,  if  an  awning  had  not  been  fpread  over  the 
whole  deck  to  keep  out  the  fun,  and  the  hammocks  placed 
in  the  nettings.  At  the  fame  time  feveral  canoes,  well 
manned,  were  making  towards  the  fliip's  bow,  having 
probably  taken  notice  that  no  fliot  had  been  fired  from 
this  part :  I  therefore  ordered  fome  guns  forward,  to  be 
well  pointed  and  fired  at  thefe  canoes ;  at  the  fame  time 
running  out  two  guns  abaft,  and  pointing  them  well 
at  the  canoes  that  were  making  the  attack.  Among  the 
canoes  that  were  coming  toward  the  bow,  there  was  one 
which  appeared  to  have  fome  Chief  on  board,  as  it  was  by 
fignals  made  from  her,  that  the  others  had  been  called  to- 
gether :  it  happened  that  a  fliot,  fired  from  the  guns  for- 
ward, hit  this  canoe  fo  full  as  to  cut  it  afimder.  As  foon  as. 
this  was  obferved  by  the  reft,  they  difperfed  with  fuch  hafte 
that  in  half  an  hour  there  was  not  a  fingle  canoe  to  be  fecn  > 
the  people  alfo  who  had  crouded  the  fliore,  immediately  fled 
over  the  hills  with  ihe  utmoft  precipitation. 

Having  now  no  reafon  to  fear  any  further  interruption,. 
we  warped  the  fl^iip  up  the  harbour,  and  by  noon,  we  were 

not 


44^  C  APT  AIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

I7&7-  not  more  than  half  a  mile  from  the  iipper  part  of  the  bay, 
<_■■, — '.u  within  lefs  than  two  cables'  length  of  a  fine  river,  and  about 
"  "^  ■  ^'^'  two  and  a  half  of  the  reef.  We  had  here  nine  fathom 
water,  and  clofe  to  the  fhore  there  were  five.  We  moored 
the  fliip,  and  carried  out  the  ftream-anchor,  with  the  two 
iliroud  haufers,  for  a  fpring,  to  keep  the  fhip's  broad-fide 
a-breaft  of  the  river ;  we  alfo  got  up  and  mounted  the  eight 
guns  which  had  been  put  into  the  hold.  As  foon  as  this 
was  done,  the  boats  were  employed  in  founding  all  round 
the  bay,  and  in  examining  the  Ihore  where  any  of  the  in- 
habitants appeared,  in  order  to  difcover,  whether  it  was  pro- 
l)at)l€  that  they  would  give  us  any  further  difturbance.  All 
Thurfday  25.  the  aftcrnoon,  and  part  of  the  next  morning,  was  fpent  in 
this  fervice ;  and  about^  noon,  the  mailer  returned,  with  a 
tolerable  furvey  of  the  place,  and  reported,  that  there  were 
no  canoes  in  fight ;  that  there  was  good  landing  on  every 
part  of  the  beach  ;  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  bay  from 
which  danger  could  be  apprehended,  except  the  reef,  and 
fome  rocks  at  the  upper  eml,  which  appeared  above  water ; 
and  that  the  river,  though  it  emptied  itfelf  on  the  other  fide 
of  the  point,  was  frefli  water. 

Soon  after  the  mafter  had  brought  me  this  account,  I  fent 
Mr.  Furneaux  again,  with  all  the  boats  manned  and  armed, 
tlie  marines  being  alfo  put  on  board,  with  orders  to  land 
oppofite  to  our  ftation,  and  fecure  himfelf,  under  cover  of 
the  boats  and  the  lliip,  in  the  cleareft  ground  he  could  find. 
About  two  o'clock  the  boats  landed  without  any  oppofition, 
and  Mr.  Furneaux  ftuck  up  a  ftaflf,  upon  which  he  hoifted  a 
pendant,  turned  a  turf,  and  took  pofTeflion  of  the  ifland  in 
ins  Majefiy's  name,  in  honour  of  whom  he  called  it  King 
Geouce  the  Third's  Island:  he  then  went  to  the  river, 
and  tailed  the  water,  which  he  found  excellent,  and  mixing 
ibmc  of  it  with  rum,  £very  man  drank  his  Majefiy's  health. 

While 


ROUND    THE    WORLC.  447 

Wliile  he  was  at  the  river,  which  was  about  twelve  yards       '^^7- 

June. 

wide,  and  fordable,  he  faw  two  old  men  on  the  oppofite  fide    < 1 

of  it,  who  perceiving  that  they  were  difcovered,  put  them- 
felves  in  a  fupplicatory  pofture,  and  feemed  to  be  in  great 
terror  and  confufion.  Mr.  Furneaux  made  figns  that  they 
flaould  come  over  the  river,  and  one  of  them  complied.. 
When  he  landed,  he  came  forward,  creeping  upon  his  hand3 
and  knees,  but  Mr.  Furneaux  raifed  him  up,  and  while  he 
flood  ti'embling,  iliewed  him  fome  of  the  ilones  that  v/ere 
thrown  at  the  fhip,  and  endeavoured  to  make  him  apprehend 
that  if  the  natives  attempted  no  mifchief  ag.ainft  us,  we 
Ihould  do  no  harm  to  them.  He  ordered  two  of  the  water 
caflis  to  be  filled,  to  fliew  the  Indian  that  we  wanted  water, 
and  produced  fome  hatchets,  and  other  things,  to  intimate 
that  he  wiflied  to  trade  for  provilions.  The  old  man,  during 
this  pantomimical  converfation,  in  fome  degree  recovered 
his  fpirits;  and  Mr.  Furneaux,  to  confirm  his  profefilons  of 
friendfhip,  gave  him  a  hatchet,  fome  nails,  beads,  and 
other  trifles;  after  which  he  reimbarked  on  board  the  boats, 
and  left  the  pendant  flying.  As  foon  as  the  boats  w€re  put 
off,  the  old  man  went  up  to  the  pendant,  and  danced  round 
it  a  confiderable  time:  he  then  retired,  but  foon  after  re- 
turned with  fome  green  boughs,  which  he  threw  down,  and 
retired  a  fecond  time :  it  was  not  long,  however,  before  he 
appeared  again,  with  about  a  dozen  of  the  inhabitants,  and 
putting  themfelves  in  a  fupplicating  pofture,  they  ail  ap->- 
proached  the  pendant  in  a  flow  pace,  but  the  wind  happenings, 
to  move  it,  when  they  were  got  clofe  to  it,  rhey  fuddenly 
retreated  with  the  greateft  precipitation.  After  ftanding, 
fome  time  at  a  diftance,  and  gazing  at  it,  they  went  away, 
but  in  a  Ihort  time  came  back,  with  two  large  hogs  alive, 
which  they  laid  down  at  the  foot  of  the  ftafl',  and  at  length 
taking  courage,  they  began  to  dance.  When  they  had  per- 
formed 


448  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1767.  formed  this  ceremony,  they  brought  the  hogs  down  to  the 
._  ^""!'  _.  water  fide,  launched  a  canoe,  and  put  them  on  board.  The 
'Jhurfdayas.  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^j^^  j^^^  ^  j^^.^^  whitc  beard,  then  embarked  with 

them  alone,  and  brought  them  to  the  fliip :  when  he  came 
along  fide,^he  made  a  fet  fpeech,  and  afterwards  handed  in 
feveral  green  plantain  leaves,  one  by  one,  uttering  a  fen- 
tence,  in  a  foleran  flow  tone,  with  each  of  them  as  he  de- 
livered  it;  after  this  he  fent  on  board  the  two  hogs,  and 
then  turning  round,  pointed  to  the  land.  I  ordered  fome 
prefents  to  be  given  him,  but  he  would  accept  of  nothing  ; 
and  foon  after  put  off  his  canoe,  and  went  on  fliore. 

At  night,  foon  after  it  was  dark,  we  heard  the  noife  of 
many  drums,  with  conchs,  and  other  wind  inftruments,  and 
Friday  26.  faw  a  multitude  of  lights  all  along  the  coaft.  At  fix  in  the 
morning,  feeing  none  of  the  natives  on  fhore,  and  obferving 
that  the  pendant  was  taken  away,  which  probably  they  had 
learnt  to  defpife,  as  the  frogs  in  the  fable  did  King  Log,  I 
ordered  the  lieutenant  to  take  a  guard  on  fhore,  and  if  all 
was  well,  to  fend  off,  that  we  might  begin  watering:  in  a 
iliort  time  I  had  the  fatisfacftion  to  find  that  he  had  fent  off 
for  water  czik's,  and  by  eight  o'clock,  we  had  four  tons  of 
water  on  board.  While  our  people  were  employed  in  filling 
the  caflcs,  feveral  of  the  natives  appeared  on  the  oppofite  fide 
of  the  river,  with  the  old  man  whom  the  officer  had  feen 
the  day  before ;  and  foon  after  he  came  over,  and  brought 
■with  him  a  little  fruit,  and  a  few  fowls,  which  were  alfo  fent 
off  to  the  fliip.  At  this  time,  having  been  very  ill  for  near 
a  fortnight,  I  was  fo  weak  that  I  could  fcarcely  crawl 
about ;  however,  I  employed  my  glafTcs  to  fee  what  was 
doing  on  fliore.  At  near  half  an  hour  after  eight  o'clock,  I 
perceived  a  multitude  of  the  natives  coming  over  a  hill  at 
about  the  diftance  of  a  mile,  and  at  the  fame  time  a  great 
number  of  canoes  making  round  the  weilcrn  point,    and 

keeping 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  44^ 

keeping  clofe  along  the  fhore.  I  then  looked  at  the  Water-  '767- 
ing-place,  and  faw  at  the  back  of  it,  where  it  was  clear,  a  t^^-v-w 
very  numerous  party  of  the  natives  creeping  along  behind  "  ^^  *  ' 
the  bufhes  ;  I  faW  alfo  many  thoufands  in  the  woods,  pufli- 
ing  along  towards  the  watering-place,  and  canoes  coming 
very  fall  round  the  other  point  of  the  bay  to  the  eaftward. 
Being  alarmed  at  thefe  appearances,  I  difpatched  a  boat,  to 
acquaint  the  officer  on  fhore  with  what  I  had  feen,  and  ordef 
him  immediately  to  come  on  board  with  his  men,  and 
leave  the  calks  behind  him:  he  had,  however,  difcovered 
his  danger,  and  embarked  before  the  boat  reached  himi 
Having  perceived  the  Indians  that  were  creeping  towai'ds 
him  under  flielter  of  the  wood,  he  immediately  difpatch- 
ed the  old  man  to  them,  making  figns  that  they  fhould 
keep  at  a  diftance,  and  that  he  wanted  nothing  but  water. 
As  foon  as  they  perceived  that  they  were  difcovered,  they 
began  to  ihout,  and  advanced  with  greater  fpeed.  The  of- 
ficer immediately  repaired  to  the  boats  with  his  people,  and 
the  Indians,  in  the  mean  time  having  crolTed  the  river,  took 
pofleffion  of  the  water  cafks,  with  great  appearance  of  exulta- 
tion and  joy.  The  canoes  now  pulled  along  the  fhore,  to- 
wards the  place,  with  the  utmoft  expedition,  all  the  people 
on  land  keeping  pace  with  them,  except  a  multitude  of 
women  and  children,  who  feated  themfelves  upon  a  hill 
which  overlooked  the  bay  and  the  beach.  The  canoes  from 
each  point  of  the  bajy,  as  they  drew  nearer  to  that  part  of  it 
where  the  fhip  was  at  anchor,  put  on  fhore,  and  took  in 
more  men,  who  had  great  bags  in  their  hands,  which  after- 
wards appeared  to  be  filled  with  flones.  All  the  canoes  that 
had  come  round  the  points,  and  many  others  that  had  put 
off  from  the  fhore  within  the  bay,  now  made  towards  the 
fhip,  fo  that  I  had  no  doubt  but  that  they  intended  to  try 
Vol.  I.  M  m  m  their 


45«> 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


j-'^r.       their  fortune  in  a  fecond  attack.     As  to  Ihorten  the  conteft 
^_J^",!l_^   would  cerrajnly  iefTen  the  mirchief,  I  determined  to  make 
Friday  .6.      ^j^j^  ailiou  dccifive,  and  put  an  end  ro  hoftillties  at  once;  I 
therefore  ordered  the  people,  ^vho  were  all  at  their  quarters, 
to  fire  firft  upon  the  canoes  which  were  drawn  together  in 
groups:  this  was  immediately  done  fo  effedlually,  that  thofe 
which  were  to  the  weftward  made  towards  the  fhore  as  fall 
as  poffible,  and  thofe  to  the  eailward,   getting  round  the 
reef,  were  foon  beyond  the  reach  of  our  guns.    I  then  di- 
re(5led  the  fire  into  the  wood  in  different  parts,  which  foon 
drove  the  Indians  out  of  it,  who  ran  up  the  hill  where  the 
women  and  children  had  feated  themfelves  to  fee  the  battle. 
Upon    this   hill  there  were    now   feveral   thoufands    who 
thought   themfelves  in  perfedl  fecurity;   but  to  convince 
them  of  the  contrary,  and  hoping  that  when  they  faw  the 
fhot  fall  much  farther  than  they  could  think  poflible,  they 
would  fuppofe  it  could  reach  them  at  any  diftance,  I  ordered 
fome  of  the  guns  to  be  let  down  as  low  as  they  would  admit, 
and  fired  four  fhot  towards  them.    Two  of  the  balls  fell  clofe 
by  a  tree  where  a  great  number  of  thefe  people  were  fitting, 
and  ftruck  them  with  fuch  terror  and  confl:ernation,  that  in 
lefs  than  two  minutes  not  one  of  them  was  to  be  feen. 
Having  thus  cleared  the  coaft,  I  manned  and  armed  the 
boats,  and  putting  a  flrong  guard  on  board,  I  fent  all  the 
carpenters  with  their  axes,    and  ordered  them  to  deftroy 
every  canoe  that  had  been  run  afhore.    Before  noon,  this 
fervice  was    cfTedlually   performed,    and  more   than  fifty 
canoes,    many  of  which  were  fixty  feet  long,    and  three 
broad,    and  lathed  together,  were  cut  to  pieces.     Nothing 
was  found  in  them  but  fiones  and  flings,  except  a  little  fruit, 
and  a  few  fowls  and  hogs,  which  were  on  board  two  or 
three  canoes  of  a  inuch  fmaller  fize. 

At 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  451 

At  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  about  ten  of  the  natives       ^1^7- 

June. 

came  out  of  the  wood  with  green  boughs  in  their  hands,  <- — , — j 
which  they  ftuck  up  near  the  water  lide,  and  retired.  After 
a  fhort  time,  they  appeared  again,  and  brought  with  them 
feveral  hogs,  with  their  legs  tied,  which  they  placed  near 
the  green  boughs,  and  retired  a  fecond  time.  After  this 
they  brought  down  feveral  more  hogs,  and  fome  dogs,  with 
their  fore  legs  tied  over  their  heads,  and  going  again  into 
the  woods,  brought  back  feveral  bundles  of  the  cloth  which 
they  ufe  for  apparel,  and  which  has  fome  refemblance  to 
Indian  paper.  Thefe  they  placed  upon  the  beach,  and  called 
to  us  on  board  to  fetch  them  away.  As  we  were  at  the 
diftance  of  about  three  cables'  length,  we  could  not  then 
perfecflly  difcover  of  what  this  peace-offering  confifted :  we 
gueffed  at  the  hogs  and  the  cloth,  but  feeing  the  dogs,  with 
their  fore  legs  appearing  over  the  hinder  part  of  the  neck* 
rife  up  feveral  times,  and  run  a  little  way  in  an  ereft 
pofture,  we  took  them  for  fome  ftrange  unknown  animal, 
and  were  very  impatient  to  have  a  nearer  view  of  them. 
The  boat  was  therefore  fent  on  Ihore  with  all  expedition, 
and  our  wonder  was  foon  at  an  end.  Our  people  found  nine 
good  hogs,  befides  the  dogs  and  the  cloth :  the  hogs  were 
brought  off,  but  the  dogs  were  turned  loofe,  and  with  the 
cloth  left  behind.  In  return  for  the  hogs,  our  people  left 
upon  the  fhore  fome  hatchets,  nails,  and  other  things, 
making  figns  to  fome  of  the  Indians  who  were  in  fight,  to 
take  them  away  with  their  cloth.  Soon  after  the  boat  had 
come  on  board,  the  Indians  brought  down  two  more  hogs, 
and  called  to  us  to  fetch  them ;  the  boat  therefore  returned, 
and  fetched  off  the  two  hogs,  but  ftill  left  the  cloth,  though 
the  Indians  made  figns  that  we  fhould  take  it.  Our  people 
reported,  that  they  had  not  touched  any  of  the  things  which 
M  m  m  2  they 


452  CAFTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

i7<7.  tliey  had  left  upon  the  beach  for  them,  and  fomebody  fug- 
t.  ""-  _j  gelling  that  they  would  not  take  our  offering  becaufe  we 
f iiday  36.    j^^^  ^^j.  a^;(,gpj^e(i  their  cloth,  I  gave  orders  that  it  ftiould  be 

fetched  away.    The  event  proved  that  the  conjecfture  was 

true,  for  the  moment  the  boat  had  taken  the  cloth  on  board, 

the  Indians  came  down,  and  with  every  poflible  demonftra- 

tion  of  joy,  carried  away  all  I  had  fent  them  into  the  wood. 

Our  boats  then  went  to  the  watering-place,  and  filled  and 

brought  off  all  the  calks,  to  the  amount  of  about  fix  tons. 

"We  found  that  they  had  fuffered  no  injury  while  they  had 

been  in  the  polTefTion  of    the  Indians,    but  fome  leathern 

buckets  and  funnels  which  had  been  taken  away  with  the 

calks,  were  not  returned. 

Saturday :;.       The  ne:xt  morning  I  fent  the  boats  on  Ihore,  with  a  guard, 

to  fill  fome  more  calks  with  water,  and  foon  after  the  people 

were  on  fhore,  the  fame  old  man  who  had  come  over  the 

river  to  them  the  firft  day,  came  again  to  the  farther  fide  of 

it,   where  he  made  a   long  fpeech,    and  then  croffed  the 

water.      When  he  came  up  to  the  waterers,    the   officer 

fliewcd  him  the  flones  that  were  piled  up  like  cannon  balls 

upon  the  fhore,  and  had  been  brought  thither  fince  our  firft 

landing,  and  fome  of  the  bags  that  had  been  taken  out  of 

the  canoes  which  I  had  ordered  to  be  deftroyed,  filled  with 

Hones,  and  endeavoured  to  make  him  underlland  that  the 

Indians  had  been  the  aggrefTors,  and  that  the  mifchief  we 

liad  done  them  was  in  our  own  defence.     The  old  man 

feemed  to  apprehend  his  meaning,  but  not  to  admit  it :  he 

immediately  made  a  fpeech  to  the  people,  pointing  to  the 

flones,  flings,  and  bags,  with  great  emotion,  and  fometimes 

his  looks,  geftures,    and  voice  were  fo  furious  as  to  be 

frightful.    His  paffions,  however,  fubfided  by  degrees,  and 

the  officer,  who  to  his  great  regret  could  not  underftand  one 

word 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ^  45a 

word  of  all  that  he  had  faid,  endeavoured  to  convince  him,       1767* 
by  all  the  figns  he  could  devife,  that  we  wifhed  to  live  in   »      ,    _f 
friendfhip  with  them,  and  were  difpbfed  to  fliew  them  every    ""^  *^  ^^' 
mark  of  kindnefs  in  our  power..    He  then  fhook  hands  with 
him,  and  embraced  him,  giving  him  at  the  fame  time  feve- 
ral  fuch  trinkets  as  he  thought  would  be  moft  acceptable. 
He  contrived  alfo  to  make  the  old  man  underftand  that  we 
wifhed  to  traffick  for  provifions,  that  the  Indians  fhould  not 
come  down  in  great  numbers,  and  that  they  fhould  keep  on 
one  fide  of  the  river  and  we  on  the  other.    After  this  the  old 
man  went  away  with  great  appearance  of  fatisfa<5lion,  and 
before  noon  a  trade  was  eftablifhed,  which  furniXhed  us  with 
hogs,  fowls,  and  fruit  in  great  abundance,  fo  that  all  the 
ihip's  company,  whether  fick  or  well,  had  as  much  as  they 
could  ufe. 


CHAP. 


454  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


CHAP.     VI. 

'TJje  Sick  Jent  on  Shore^  and  a  regular  Trade  ejiablifjjed 
with  the  Natives  ;  fome  Account  of  their  CharaSier  and 
Manners^  of  their  Fifits  on  board  the  Ship^  and  a 
Variety  of  Incidents  that  happened  during  this  Inter- 
courfe. 


1767.  "j^yfATTERS  being  thus  happily  fettled,  I  fent  the  Sur- 
,  J^"^  ,  X  ▼  X  geon,  with  the  Second  Lieutenant,  to  examine  the 
Saturday  zy.  countiy,  and  fix  upon  fome  place  where  the  lick  might  take 
up  their  refidence  on  fliore.  When  they  returned,  they  faid, 
that  with  refped  to  health  and  convenience,  all  the  places 
that  they  had  feen  upon  the  ifland  feemed  to  be  equally 
proper ;  but  that  with  rcfpedl  to  fafety,  they  could  recom- 
mend none  but  the  watering-place,  as  they  would  be  there 
under  the  proted;ion  of  the  fliip  and  the  guard,  and  would 
eafdy  be  prevented  from  flraggling  into  the  country,  and 
brought  off  to  their  meals.  To  the  watering  place  therefore 
I  fent  them,  with  thofe  that  were  employed  in  filling  the 
cafks,  and  appointed  the  gunner  to  command  the  party  that 
was  to  be  their  guard.  A  tent  was  ere<^ed  for  them  as  a 
fhelter  both  from  the  fun  and  the  rain,  and  the  Surgeon  was 
fent  to  fuperintend  their  condu6l,  and  give  his  advice  if  it 
fliould  be  wanted.  It  happened  that  walking  out  with  his 
gun,  after  he  had  feen  the  lick  properly  difpofed  of  in  the 
tent,  a  wild  duck  flew  over  his  head,  which  he  fliot,  and  it 
f<;ll  dead  among  fome  of  the  natives  who  were  on  the  other 
fide  of  the  river-      This  threw    them  into  a  panic,    and 

they 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  45^ 

they  all  ran  away:  when  they  got  to  fome  diftance  they       ^7^7- 

Hopped,  and  he  made  figns  to  them  to  bring  the  duck  over:   > <r-^—' 

this  one  of  tiiem  at  laff  ventured  to  do,  and,  pale  and  trem-  *""^  *^  ^^* 
bling,  laid  it  down  at  his  feet.  Several  other  ducks  happen- 
ing at  the  inftant  to  fly  over  the  fpot  where  they  were 
Handing,  he  fired  again,  and  fortunately  brought  down 
three  more.  This  incident  gave  the  natives  fuch  a  dread  of 
a  gun,  that  if  a  mufquet  was  pointed  at  a  thoufand  of  them, 
they  would  all  run  away  like  a  flock  of  Iheep ;  and  probably 
the  eafe  with  which  they  were  afterwards  kept  at  a  diftance, 
and  their  orderly  behaviour  in  their  traffick,  was  in  a  great 
meafure  owing  to  their  having  upon  this  occafion  feen  the 
inftrument  of  which  before  they  had  only  felt  the  eflre(5ls. 

As  I  forefaw  that  a  private  traffick  would  probably  com- 
mence between  fuch  of  our  people  as  were  on  fhore,  and  the 
natives,  and  that  if  it  was  left  to  their  own  caprice,  perpetual 
quarrels  and  mifchief  would  enfue,  I  ordered  that  all  mat- 
ters of  traffick  fliould  be  tranfadted  by  the  gunner,  on  behalf 
of  both  parties,  and  I  dire(51:ed  him  to  fee  that  no  injury  was 
done  to  the  natives,  either  by  violence  or  fraud,  and  by  all 
poffible  means  to  attach  the  old  man  to  his  intereft.  This 
fervice  he  performed  with  great  diligence  and  fidelity,  nor 
did  he  negledl  to  complain  of  thofe  who  tranfgrefi^ed  roy 
orders,  which  was  of  infinite  advantage  to  all  parties ;  for  as^ 
I  punifhed  the  firft  offenders  with  a  necefiary  fcverity,  man^r 
irregularities,  that  would  otherwife  have  produced  the  ra'oft 
difagreeable  confequences,  were  prevented :  we  were  alfo' 
indebted  for  many  advantages  to  the  old  man,  whofe  cau- 
tion kept  our  people  perpetually  upon  their  guard,  and 
foon  brought  back  thofe  who  ftraggted  from  the  party."  The 
natives  would  indeed  fometimes  pilfer,  but  by  the  terror  of 
a  gun,  without  ufing  it,  he  always  found  means  to  make 
them  bring  back  what  was  flolen.  A  fellow  had  one  day  tlie 
2  dexterity 


45S  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1767^      dexterity  and  addrefs  to  crofs  the  river  unperceived,  and  fleal 
' . '   a  hatchet;  the  gunner,  as  foon  as  he  miffed  it,  made  the  old 

Saturday  z"'^ 

man  underftand  what  had  happened,  and  got  his  party- 
ready,  as  if  he  would  have  gone  into  the  woods  after  the 
thief:  the  old  man,  however,  made  figns  that  he  would  fave 
him  the  trouble,  and  immediately  fetting  off,  returned  in  a 
very  fliort  time  with  the  hatchet.  The  gunner  then  infifted 
that  the  offender  fhould  be  delivered  up,  and  with  this  alfo 
the  old  man,  though  not  without  great  relucStance,  com- 
plied. When  the  fellow  was  brought  down,  the  gunner 
knew  him  to  be  an  old  offender,  and  therefore  fent  him  pri- 
foner  on  board.  I  had  no  intention  to  punifli  him  otherwife, 
than  by  the  fear  of  punifhment,  and  therefore,  after  great 
entreaty  and  interceflion,  I  gave  him  his  liberty,  and  fenc 
him  on  Ihore.  When  the  natives  faw  him  return  in  fafety, 
it  is  hard  to  fay  whether  their  aflonifliment  or  joy  was 
greateft;  they  received  him  with  univerfal  acclamations^ 
and  immediately  carried  him  off  into  the  woods :  the  next 
day,  however,  he  returned,  and  as  a  propitiation  to  the 
gunner,  he  brought  him  a  confiderable  quantity  of  bread- 
fruit, and  a  large  hog,  ready  roalled. 

At  this  time,  the  people  on  board  were  employed  ia 
caulking  and  painting  the  weather-work,  over-hauling  the 
rigging,  flowing  the  hold,  and  doing  other  neceffary  bufi- 
nefs,  but  my  diforder,  which  was  a  bilious  cholic,  increafed 
fo  much,  that  this  day  I  was  obliged  to  take  to  my  bed  ;  my 
Firft  Lieutenant  alfo  Hill  continued  very  ill,  and  the  Purfer 
was  incapable  of  his  duty.  The  whole  command  devolved 
upon  Mr.  Furneaux,  the  Second  Lieutenant,  to  whom  I  gave 
general  diredlions,  and  recommended  a  particular  attention 
to  the  people  on  fliore.  I  alfo  ordered  that  fruit  and  freffi 
provifions  fhould  be  ferved  to  the  fliip's  company  as  long  as 
tlicy  coul,d  be  procured,  and  that  the  boats  fliould  never  be 
3  abfent 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  457 

abfent  from  the  fliip  after  fun-fet.    Thefe  direc5lions  were      '767. 

June. 

fulfilled  with  fuch  prudence  and  puncSluaiity,  that  during  all   ' -—j 

my  ficknefs  I  was  not  troubled  with  any  bufmefs,  nor  had 
the  mortification  to  hear  a  fingle  complaint  or  appeal.  The 
men  were  conllantly  ferved  with  frefli  pork,  fowls,  and 
fruit,  in  fuch  plenty,  that  when  I  left  my  bed,  after  having 
been  confined  to  it  near  a  fortnight,  my  fhip's  company 
looked  fo  frefli  and  healthy,  that  1  could  fcarcely  believe  them 
to  be  the  fame  people. 

Sunday  the  28th  was  marked  by  no  incident ;  but  on  Mon*  Sunday  28. 
day  the  29th,  one  of  the  gunner's  party  found  a  piece  of  Monday  29, 
faltpetre  near  as  big  as  an  Q.gg.  As  this  was  an  objeft  of 
equal  curiofity  and  importance,  diligent  enquiry  was  im- 
mediately made  from  whence  it  came.  The  furgeon  alked 
every  one  of  the  people  on  fliore,  feparately,  whether  he  had 
brought  it  from  the  fliip ;  every  one  on  board  alfo  was  afked 
whether  he  had  carried  it  on  fliore,  but  all  declared  that 
they  had  never  had  fuch  a  thing  in  their  pofi!efIion.  Appli- 
cation was  then  made  to  the  natives,  but  the  meaning  of 
both  parties  was  fo  imperfe6lly  conveyed  by  figns,  that 
nothing  could  be  learnt  of  them  about  it :  during  our 
whole  flay  here,  however,  we  faw  no  more  than  this  one 
piece. 

While  the  gunner  was  trafficking  for  provifions  on  flaore, 
we  fometimes  hauled  the  feine,  but  we  caught  no  filh  ;  we 
alfo  frequently  trawled,  but  with  no  better  fuccefs :  the  dif- 
appointment,  however,  was  not  felt,  for  the  produce  of  the 
■ifland  enabled  our  people  to  "  fare  fumptuoufly  every  day." 

All  matters  continued  in  the  fame  fituation  till  the  2d  of       juiy. 
July,  when  our  old  man  being  abfent,  the  fupply  of  frefli      "^'^/^^ 
provifions  and  fruit  fell  fliort ;  we  had,  however,  enough  to 

Vol.  I.  N  n  n  ferve 


458  CAPTAIN    WALLlS»s    VOYAGE 

1767.      ferve  mofl  of  the  mefles,  referving  plenty  for  the  fick  and 
^  -.—   I   convalefcent. 

Friday  5.  On  the  3d,  wc  hecled  the  fliip,  and  looked  at  her  bottom, 
which  we  found  as  clean  as  when  fhe  came  out  of  dock,  and 
to  our  great  fatisfadlion,  as  found.  During  all  this  time, 
none  of  the  natives  camenear  our  boats,  or  thefliip,  in  their 
canoes.  This  day,  about  noon,  we  caught  a  very  large 
fliark,  and  when  the  boats  went  to  fetch  the  people  on 
board  to  dinner,  we  fent  it  on  fhore.  When  the  boats  were 
putting  off  again,  the  gunner  feeing  fome  of  the  natives  on 
the  other  fide  of  the  river,  beckoned  them  to  come  over; 
they  immediately  complied,  and  he  gave  them  the  (hark, 
which  they  foon  cut  to  pieces,  and  carried  away  with  great 
appearance  of  fatisfadlion. 

Sunday  5.  On  Sunday  the  5th,  the  old  man  returned  to  the  market- 
tent,  and  made  the  gunner  underftand  that  he  had  been  up 
the  country,  to  prevail  upon  the  people  to  bring  down  their 
hogs,  poultry,  and  fruit,  of  which  the  parts  near  the  water- 
ing-place were  now  nearly  exhaufted.  The  good  effedls  of 
his  expedition  foon  appeared,  for  feveral  Indians,  whom  our 
people  had  never  feen  before,  came  in  with  fome  hogs  that 
were  larger  than  any  that  had  been  yet  brought  to  market. 
In  the  mean  time,  the  old  man  ventured  off  in  his  canoe,  to 
the  fhip,  and  brought  with  him,  as  a  prefent  to  me,  a  hog 
ready  roafted.  I  was  much  pleafed  with  his  attention  and 
liberality,  and  gave  him,  in  return  for  his  hog,  an  iron  pot, 
a  looking-glafs,  a  drinking-glafs,  and  feveral  other  things, 
which  no  man  in  the  ifland  was  in  poffefRon  of  but  himfelf. 

While  our  people  were  on  fliore,  feveral  young  women 
were  permitted  to  crofs  the  river,  who,  though  they  were 
not  averfe  to  the  granting  of  perfonal  favours,  knew  the 

value 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


459 


July. 
Sunday  5, 


value  of  them  too  well  not  to  ftipulate  for  a  confideration:  '767 
the  price,  indeed,  was  not  great,  yet  it  was  fuch  as  our  men 
were  not  always  able  to  pay,  and  under  this  temptation  they 
ftole  nails  and  other  iron  from  the  fliip.  The  nails  that  we 
brought  for  traffick,  were  not  always  in  their  reach,  and 
therefore  they  drew  feveral  out  of  different  parts  of  the  vef- 
fel,  particularly  thofe  that  faftened  the  cleats  to  the  fliip's 
fide.  This  was  producTtive  of  a  double  mifchief ;  damage  to 
the  fhip,  and  a  confiderable  rife  at  market.  When  the  gun- 
ner offered,  as  ufual,  fmall  nails  for  hogs  of  a  middling  fize, 
the  natives  refufed  to  take  them,  and  produced  large  fpikes, 
intimating  that  they  expected  fuch  nails  as  thefe.  A  moil 
diligent  enquiry  was  fet  on  foot  to  difcover  the  offenders, 
but  all  to  no  purpofe ;  and  though  a  large  reward  was 
offered  to  procure  intelligence,  none  was  obtained.  I  was 
mortified  at  the  difappointment,  but  I  was  ftill  more  morti- 
fied at  a  fraud  which  I  found  fome  of  our  people  had  prac- 
tifed  upon  the  natives.  When  no  nails  were  to  be  procured, 
they  had  ftolen  lead,  and  cut  it  up  in  the  fliape  of  nails. 
Many  of  the  natives  who  had  been  paid  with  this  bafe  mo- 
ney, brought  their  leaden  nails,  with  great  fimplicity,  to  the 
gunner,  and  requefled  him  to  give  them  iron  in  their  Head. 
With  this  requeft,  liowever  reafonabic,  he  could  not  com- 
ply; becaufe,  by  rendering  lead  current,  it  would  have  en- 
couraged the  flealing  it,  and  the  market  would  have  been 
as  effecflually  fpoiled  by  thofe  who  could  not  procure  nails, 
as  by  thofe  who  could  ;  it  was  therefore  neceffary,  upon 
every  account,  to  render  this  leaden  currency  of  no  value, 
though  for  our  honour  I  fliould  have  been  glad  to  have  called 
it  in. 

On  Tuefday  the  7th,  I  fent  one  of  the  mates,  with  thirty  Tuefday;, 
men,  to  a  village  at  a  little  diflance  from  the  market,'  hoping 

N  n  n  2  that 


4<5a  CAPTAIN   WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1767.       that  refrefliments  might  there  be  bought  at  the  original 

« l^Il t   price  ;  but  here  they  were  obliged  to  give  flill  more  than  at 

Tiie  ay  7.  ^^^^  -water-fide.  In  the  mean  time,  being  this  day  able  to  get 
up  for  the  firll  time,  and  the  weather  being  fine,  I  went  into 
a  boat,  and  rowed  about  four  miles  down  the  coaft.  I  found 
the  country  populous,  and  pleafant  in  the  higheft  degree, 
and  faw  many  canoes  on  the  fliore ;  but  not  one  came  off  to 
us,  nor  did  the  people  feem  to  take  the  leafl  notice  cxf  us  as 
we  paffed  along.    About  noon  I  returned  to  the  fliip. 

The  commerce  which  our  men  had  found  means  to  efta- 
blifh  with  the  women  of  the  ifland,  rendered  them  much 
lefs  obedient  to  the  orders  that  had  been  given  for  the  regu- 
lation of  their  condu6l  on  fhore,  than  they  were  at  firfl.  I 
found  it  necelTary  therefore,  to  read  the  articles  of  war,  and 
1  puniflicd  James  Prodlor,  the  corporal  of  marines,  who  had 
not  only  quitted  his  ilation,  and  infulted  the  officer,  but 
Itruck  the  Mailer  at  Arms  fuch  a  blow  as  brought  him  to 
the  ground. 
>Vednef.  8.  The  ucxt  day,  I  fent  a  party  up  the  country  to  cut  wood,, 
and  they  met  with  fome  of  the  natives,  who  treated  them 
with  great  kindnefs  and  hofpicality.  Several  of  thefe 
friendly  Indians  came  on  board  in  our  boat,  and  feemed, 
both  by  their  drefs  and  behaviour,  to  be  of  a  fuperior  rank. 
To  thefe  people  I  paid  a  particular  attention,  and  to  difcover 
what  prefent  would  moft  gratify  them,  I  laid  down  before 
them  a  Johannes,  a  guinea,  a  crown  piece,  a  Spanifli  dollar, 
a  few  fliillings,  fome  new  halfpence,  and  two  large  nails, 
making  figns  that  they  fliould  take  what  they  liked  beft. 
The  nails  were  firft  feized,  with  great  eagernefs,  and  then  a 
few  of  the  halfpence,  but  the  filver  and  gold  lay  negletT:ed. 
Having  prefented  them,  therefore,  with  fome  nails  and 
halfpence,  1  fent  them  on  Ihore  fuperlatively  happy. 

o  From 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  461 

From  this  time,  our  market  was  very  ill  fiipplied,  the       1767. 

July. 

Indians  refufing  to  fell  provifions  at  the  ufual  price,  and    \ — . » 

making  figns  for  large  nails.  It  was  now  thought  neceflary 
to  look  more  diligently  about  the  fhip,  to  difcover  what 
nails  had  been  drawn ;  and  it  was  foon  found  that  all  the 
belaying  cleats  had  been  ripped  off,  and  that  there  was 
fcarcely  one  of  the  hammock  nails  left.  All  hands  were 
now  ordered  up,  and  I  pra(5lifed  every  artifice  I  could  think 
of  to  difcover  the  thieves,  but  without  fuccefs.  I  then  told 
them  that  till  the  thieves  were  difcovered,  not  a  fingle  man 
fliould  go  on  lliore  :  this  however  produced  no  effed,  except 
that  Procflor,  the  corporal,  behaved  in  a  m.utinous  manner, 
for  which  he  was  inflantly  puniflied. 

On  Saturday  the  nth,  in  the  afternoon,  the  gunner  came  Saturday  ir. 
on  board  with  a  tall  woman,  who  feemed  to  be  about  five 
and  forty  years  of  age,  of  a  pleafing  countenance  and  ma- 
jellic  deportment.  He  told  me  that  flie  was  but  juft  come 
into  that  part  of  the  country,  and  that  feeing  great  refpe(n: 
paid  her  by  the  reft  of  the  natives,  he  had  made  her  fome 
prefents ;  in  return  for  which  fhe  had  invited  him  to  her 
houfe,  which  was  about  two  miles  up  the  valley,  and  given- 
him  fome  large  hogs  ;  after  which  fhe  returned  with  him  to 
the  watering-place,  and  expreffed  a  defire  to  go  on  board  the 
fhip,  in  which  he  had  thought  it  proper,  on  all  accounts, 
that  flie  fliould  be  gratified.  She  feemed  to  be  under  no 
reftraint,  either  from  diffidence  or  fear,  when  fhe  firft  came 
into  the  fliip ;  and  flie  behaved,  all  tlie  while  flie  was  on 
board,  with  an  eafy  freedom,  that  always  diftinguiflies  con^ 
fcious  fuperiority  and  habitual  command.  I  gave  her  a 
large  blue  mantle,  that  reached  from  her  flioulders  to  her 
feet,  which  I  threw  over  her,  and  tied  on  with  ribands ;  I 
gave  her  alfo  a  looking-glafs,  beads  of  feveral  forts,  and. 
many  other  things,  of  which  flie  accepted  with  a  very  good 

grace. 


46t  CAPTAIN    WALLIS»s   VOYAGE 

1767.      grace,  and  much  pleafure.    She  took  notice  that  I  had  been 

July.  , 

\ , 1   ill,  and  pointed  to  the  fhore.    I  underflood  that  Ihe  meant  I 

aur  ay  i.  ^^^^j^  g^  thither  to  perfedl  my  recovery,  and  I  made  figns 
that  I  would  go  thither  the  next  morning.  When  fhe  inti- 
mated an  inclination  to  return,  I  ordered  the  gunner  to  go 
with  her,  who,  having  fet  her  on  fhore,  attended  her  to  her 
habitation,  which  he  defcribed  as  being  very  large  and  well 
built.  He  faid,  that  in  this  houfe  (he  had  many  guards  and 
domefticks,  and  that  flie  had  another  at  a  little  difcance, 
which  was  enclofed  in  lattice- work. 

Sunday  12.  The  next  morning  I  went,  on  fliore  for  the  firft  time,  and 
my  princefs,  or  rather  queen,  for  fuch  by  her  authority  fhe 
appeared  to  be,  foon  after  came  to  me,  followed  by  many  of 
her  attendants.  As  fhe  perceived  that  my  diforder  had  left 
me  very  weak,  flie  ordered  her  people  to  take  mc  in  their 
arms,  and  carry  me  not  only  over  the  river,  but  all  the  way 
to  her  houfe ;  and  obferving  that  fome  of  the  people  who 
were  with  me,  particularly  the  Firfl  Lieutenant  and  Purfer, 
had  alfo  been  fick,  flae  caufed  them  alfo  to  be  carried  in  the 
fame  manner,  and  a  guard,  which  1  had  ordered  out  upon 
the  occafion,  followed,  hi  our  way,  a  vail  multitude 
crouded  about  us,  but  upon  her  waving  her  hand,  without 
fpeaking  a  word,  they  withdrew,  and  left  us  a  free  pafTage. 
When  we  approached  near  her  houfe,  a  great  number  of 
both  fcxes  came  out  to  meet  her:  thefe  fhe  prefented  to  me, 
after  having  intimated  by  figns  that  they  were  her  relations, 
and  taking  hold  of  my  hand,  fhe  made  them  kifs  it.  We 
then  entered  the  houfe,  which  covered  a  piece  of  ground 
327  feet  long,  and  42  feet  broad.  It  confifted  of  a  roof, 
thatched  with  pahn  leaves,  and  raifed  vipon  39  pillars  on 
each  fide,  and  14  in  the  middle.  The  ridge  of  the  thatch, 
on  the  infidc,  was  30  feet  high,  and  the  fides  of  tlie  houfe, 
to  the  Qdge  of  the  roof,  were  12  feet  high  5  all  below  the 

roof 


"':^v 


' -^   si  &--  >?  /K  -^  ;^>^  ^' 


53 


,///,.,-/,„v.^. 

N922. 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  4^ 

roof  being  open.    As  foon  as  we  entered  the  houfe,  fhe       ^y^y- 
made  us  fit  down,  and  then  calling  four  young  girls,  fhe    ' — -* 

^       .  .  Sunday  iZi 

affifted  them  to  take  off  my  fhoes,  draw  down  my  ttockmgs, 
and  pull  off  my  coat,  and  then  directed  them  to  fmooth 
down  the  fkin,  and  gently  chafe  it  with  their  hands:  the 
fame  operation  was  alfo  performed  upon  the  Firft  Lieutenant 
and  the  Purfer,  but  upon  none  of  thofe  who  appeared  to  be 
in  health.  While  this  was  doing,  our  Surgeon,  who  had 
walked  till  he  was  very  warm,  took  oiF  his  wig  to  cool  and 
refrefh  himfelf :  a  fudden  exclamation  of  one  of  the  Indians 
who  faw  it,  drew  the  attention  of  the  reft,  and  in  a  moment 
every  eye  was  fixed  upon  the  prodigy,  and  every  operation 
was  fufpended:  the  whole  afl^embly  flood  fome  time  motion- 
lefs,  in  filent  aftonifhment,  which  could  not  have  been  more 
flrongly  exprefifed  if  they  had  difcovered  that  our  friend's 
limbs  had  been  fcrewed  on  to  the  trunk ;  in  a  fliort  time, 
however,  the  young  women  who  were  chafing  us,  refumed 
their  employment,  and  having  continued  it  for  about  half 
an  hour,  they  drefied  us  again,  but  in  this  they  were,  as 
may  eafily  be  imagined,  very  aukward ;  I  found  great  bene- 
fit, however,  from  the  chafing,  and  fo  did  the  Lieutenant 
and  Purfer.  After  a  little  time,  our  generous  benefacftrefs 
ordered  fome  bales  of  Indian  cloth  to  be  brought  out,  with 
which  fhe  clothed  me,  and  all  that  were  with  me,  accord-, 
ing  to  the  fafliion  of  the  country.  At  firft  I  declined  the  ac- 
ceptance of  this  favour,  but  being  unwilling  not  to  feem 
pleafed  with  what  was  intended  to  pleafe  me,  I  acquiefced. 
When  we  went  away,  (he  ordered  a  very  large  fow,  big  with 
young,  to  be  taken  down  to  the  boat,  and  accompanied  us 
thither  herfelf.  She  had  given  directions  to  her  people  to 
carry  me,  as  they  had  done  when  I  came,  but  as  I  chofe 
rather  to  walk,  flie  took  me  by  the  arm,  and  whenever  we 
came  to  a  plafli  of  water  or  dirr,  fhe  lifted  me  over  with  as 
2  little 


464  CAPTAIN    WALLlS's    VOYAGE 

1767.      little  trouble  as  it  would  have  coft  me  to  have  lifted  over  a 
uilL-;  child  if  I  had  been  well. 

Monday  13.  The  ncxt  morning  I  fent  her  by  the  gunner,  fix  hatchets, 
fix  bill-hooks,  and  feveral  other  things ;  and  when  he  re- 
turned, he  told  me  that  he  found  her  giving  an  entertain- 
ment to  a  great  number  of  people,  which,  he  fuppofed, 
could  not  be  lefs  than  a  thoufand.  The  meffes  were  all 
brought  to  her  by  the  fervants  that  prepared  them,  the 
meat  being  put  into  the  fhells  of  cocoa  nuts,  and  the  fliells 
into  wooden  trays,  fomewhat  like  thofe  ufed  by  our  but- 
chers, and  flie  diftributed  them  with  her  own  hands  to  the 
guells,  who  were  feated  in  rows  round  the  great  houfe. 
When  this  was  done,  (he  fat  down  herfelf,  upon  a  place 
fomewhat  elevated  above  the  reft,  and  two  women,  placing 
themfelves  one  on  each  fide  of  her,  fed  her,  fhe  opening  her 
mouth  as  they  brought  their  hands  up  with  the  food. 
When  lire  faw  the  gunner,  fhe  ordered  a  mefs  for  him ;  he 
could  not  certainly  tell  what  it  was,  but  he  believed  it  to  be 
fowl  picked  fmall,  with  apples  cut  among  it,  and  feafoned 
with  fait  water ;  it  was,  however,  very  well  tafted.  She  ac- 
cepted the  things  that  I  fent  her,  and  feemed  to  be  much 
pleafed  with  them.  After  this  correfpondence  was  efta- 
blifhed  with  the  queen,  provifions  of  every  kind  became 
much  more  plenty  at  market ;  but  though  fowls  and  hogs 
were  every  day  brought  in,  we  were  flill  obliged  to  pay 
more  for  them  than  at  the  firft,  the  market  having  been 
fpoiled  by  the  nails  which  our  men  had  ftolen  and  given  to 
the  women ;  1  therefore  gave  orders  that  every  man  fhould 
be  fearched  before  he  went  on  fliore,  and  that  no  woman 
fhould  be  fuffered  to  crofs  the  river. 

Tufifday  14.       On  the  14th,  the  gunner  being  on  fliore  to  trade,  per- 
ceived an  old  woman  on  the  other  fide  of  the  river,  weeping 
3  bitterly: 


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  465 

bitterly:  when  flie  faw  that  fhe  had  drawn  his  attention  1767. 
upon  her,  fhe  fent  a  young  man,  who  flood  by  her,  over  <— "Jl^ 
the  river  to  him,  with  a  branch  of  the  plantain  tree  in  his  "*  ^^  *""* 
hand.  When  he  came  up,  he  made  a  long  fpeech,  and  then 
laid  down  his  bough  at  the  gunner's  feet :  after  this  he  went 
back  and  brought  over  the  old  woman,  another  man  at  the 
fame  time  bringing  over  two  large  fat  hogs.  The  woman 
looked  round  upon  our  people  with  great  attention,  fixing 
her  eyes  fometimes  upon  one,  and  foraetinies  upon  another, 
and  at  lafl  burfl  into  tears.  The  young  man  who  brought 
her  over  the  river,  perceiving  the  gunner's  concern  and 
aftonilhment,  made  another  fpeech,  longer  than  the  firfl- 
flill,  however,  the  woman's  diftrefs  was  a  myftery,  but  at 
length  fhe  made  him  underftand  that  her  hufband,  and 
three  of  her  fons,  had  been  killed  in  the  attack  of  the  fhip. 
During  this  explanation,  fhe  was  fo  aiFeded  that  at  lafl  fhe 
funk  down  unable  to  fpeak,  and  the  two  young  men,  who 
endeavoured  to  fupport  her,  appeared  to  be  nearly  in  the 
fame  condition :  they  were  probably  two  more  of  her  fons, 
or  fome  very  near  relations.  The  gunner  did  all  in  his 
power  to  footh  and  comfort  her,  and  when  fhe  had  in  fome 
meafure  recovered  her  recolledtion,  fhe  ordered  the  two 
hogs  to  be  delivered  to  him,  and  gave  him  her  hand  in 
token  of  friendfliip,  but  would  accept  nothing  in  return, 
though  he  offered  her  ten  times  as  much  as  would  have 
purchafed  the  hogs  at  market. 

The  next  morning,  I  fent  the  Second  Lieutenant,  with  all  Wednef.  ij. 
the  boats,  and  fixty  men,  to  the  weflward,  to  look  at  the  coun- 
try, and  try  what  was  to  be  got.  About  noon  he  returned, 
having  marched  along  the  fliore  near  fix  miles.  He  found 
the  country  very  pleafant  and  populous,  and  abounding  as 
well  with  hogs  and  fowls,  as  fruit,  and  other  vegetables  of 
various  kinds.    The  inhabitants  offered  him  no  molellation, 

Vol.  L  O  0  o  but 


466  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1767.      but  did  not  feem  willing  to  part  with  any  of  theprovifions 
^_     -    ■   which  our  people  were  moft  defirous  to  purchafe :  they  gave 
■©■edaef.-is.   ^jjgj^^  howevcr,   a  few  cocoa-nuts  and  plantains,   and  at 
length  fold  them  nine  hogs  and  a  few  fowls.     The  Lieu- 
tenant was  of  opinion,  that  they  might  be  brought  to  trade 
freely  by  degrees,  but  the  diftance  from  the  fhip  was  fo 
great,  that  too  many  men  would  be  neceflary  for  a  guard. 
He  faw  a  great  number  of  very  large  canoes  upon  the  beach, 
and  fome  that  were  building.    He  obferved  that  all  their 
tools  were  made  of  flone,  Ihells,  and  bone,  and  very  juftly 
inferred,  that  they  had  no  metal  of  any  kind.     He  found 
no  quadrupeds  among  them,   befides  hogs  and  dogs,   nor 
any  earthen  vefTel,  fo  that  all  their  food  is  either  baked  or 
roafted.    Having  no  veffel  in  which  water  could  be  fubjedled 
to  the  aftion  of  fire,  they  had  no  more  idea  that  it  could  be 
made  hot,  than  that  it  could  be  made  folid.    As  the  queen 
was  one  morning  at  breakfaft  with  us  on  board  the  fliip, 
one  of  her  attendants,  a  man  of  fome  note,  and  one  of  thofe 
that  we  thought  were  priefts,  faw  the  Surgeon  fill  the  tea- 
pot by  turning  the  cock  of  an  urn  that  flood  upon  the  table : 
having  remarked  this  with  great  curiofity  and  attention,  he 
prefently  turned  the  cock,  and  received  the  water  upon  his 
hand :  as  foon  as  he  felt  himfelf  fealded,  he  roared  out,  and 
began  to  dance  about  the  cabbin  with  the  moft  extravagant 
and  ridiculous  expreffions  of  pain  and  aftonifliment:    the 
other  Indians,  not  being  able  to  conceive  what  was  the  mat- 
ter with  him,  flood  flaring  at  him  in  amaze,  and  not  with- 
out fome  mixture  of  terror.    The  Surgeon,  however,  wha 
had  innocently  been  the  caufe  of  the  mifchief,  applied  a  re- 
medy, though  it  was  fome  time  before  the  poor  fellow  was 
eafy. 
iiurfdayiff.      On  Thurfday  the  16th,  Mr.  Furneaux,   my  Second  Lieu- 
tenant, was  taken  very  ill,  which  diftrelTed  me  greatly,  as 

ih€ 


ROUND  THE   WORLD.  467 

the.Firfl:  Lieutenant  was  not  yet  recovered,  and  I  was  ftill  in       »767- 
a  very  weak  flate  myfelf :  I  was  this  day  alfo  obliged  once   v_ — „_«_# 
more  to  punifli  Prodor,  the  corporal  of  marines,  for  muti-      ""^  '^^'  ' 
nous  behaviour.    The  queen  had  now  been  abfent  feveral 
days,  but  the  natives  made  us  underlland,  by  figns,  that  the 
next  day  Ihe  would  be  with  us  again. 

Accordingly  the  next  morning  fhe  came   down  to  the  Friday  17. 
beach,  and  foon  after  a  great  number  of  people,  whom  we 
had  never  feen  before,  brought  to  market  provifions  of  every 
kind ;  and  the  gunner  fent  off  fourteen  hogs,  and  fruit  in 
great  plenty. 

In  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day,  the  queen  came  on  Saturday  is, 
board,  with  a  prefent  of  two  large  hogs,  for  fhe  never  con- 
defcended  to  barter,  and  in  the  evening  fhe  returned  on 
ihore.  I  fent  a  prefent  with  her,  by  the  Mafter,  and  as  foon 
as  they  landed,  fhe  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  having  made 
a  long  fpeech  to  the  people  that  flocked  round  them,  fhe  led 
him  to  herhoufe,  where  fhe  clothed  him,  as  fhe  had  before 
done  me,  according  to  the  fafhion  of  the  country. 

The  next  morning,  he  fent  off  a  greater  quantity  of  flock  Sunday  19. 
than  we  had  ever  procured  in  one  day  before ;  it  confifled  of 
forty-eight  hogs  and  pigs,  four  dozen  of  fowls,  with  bread- 
fruit,   bananas,    apples,    and  cocoa-nuts,    almofl  without 
number. 

On  the  20th,  we  continued  to  trade  with  good  fuccefs,  but  Monday  20. 
in  the  afternoon  it  was  difcovered  that  Francis  Pinckney, 
one  of  the  feamen,  had  drawn  the  cleats  to  which  the  main 
fheet  was  belayed,  and,  after  ftealing  the  fpikes,  thrown 
them  over  board.  Having  fecured  the  offender,  I  called  all 
the  people  together  upon  the  deck,  and  after  taking  fome 
pains  to  explain  his  crime,  with  all  its  aggravations,  I 
ordered  that  he  fhould  be  whipped  with  nettles  while  he  ran 

O  o  o  2  the 


4^8 


CAPTAIN   WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


1767. 
July. 

Monday  20. 


Tsefday  ai. 


the  gauntlet  thrice  round  the  deck :  my  rhetoric,  however, 
had  very  little  effedl,  for  moft  of  the  crew  being  equally  cri- 
minal with  himfelf,  he  was  handled  fo  tenderly,  that  others 
were  rather  encouraged  to  repeat  the  offence  by  the  hope  of 
impunity,  than  deterred  by  the  fear  of  punifliment.  To 
preferve  the  fhip,  therefore,  from  being  pulled  to  pieces, 
and  the  price  of  refrefliments  from  being  raifed  fo  high  as 
foon  to  exhauft  our  articles  of  trade,  I  ordered  that  no  man, 
except  the  wooders  and  waterers,  with  their  guard,  Ihould 
be  permitted  to  go  on  Ihore. 

On  the  2 1  ft,  the  queen  came  again  on  board,  and  brought 
feveral  large  hogs  as  a  prefent,  for  which,  as  ufual,  £he 
would  accept  of  no  return.  When  flie  was  about  to  leave 
the  Ihip,  flie  exprefled  a  defire  that  I  fhould  go  on  Ihore 
With  her,  to  which  I  confented,  taking  feveral  of  the  officers 
with  me.  When  we  arrived  at  her  houfe,  Ihe  made  us  all 
lit  down,  and  taking  off  my  hat,  fhe  tied  to  it  a  bunch  or 
tuft  of  feathers  of  various  colours,  fuch  as  I  had  feen  no 
perfon  on  fhore  wear  but  herfelf,  which  produced  by  no 
means  a  difagreeable  effect:.  She  alfo  tied  round  my  hat, 
and  the  hats  of  thofe  who  were  with  me,  wreaths  of  braided 
or  plaited  hair,  and  gave  us  to  underftand  that  both  the  hair 
and  workmanfhip  were  her  own:  fhe  alfo  prefented  us  with 
fome  matts,  that  were  very  curioufly  wrought.  In  the  eve- 
ning flie  accompanied  us  back  to  the  beach,  and  when  we 
were  getting  into  the.  boat,  fhe  put  on  board  a  fine  large 
fow,  big  with  young,  and  a  great  quantity  of  fruit.  As  we 
were  parting,  I  made  figns  that  I  fliould  quit  the  ifland  in 
feven  days:  fhe  immediately  comprehended  my  meaning, 
and  made  figns  that  1  fhould  ftay  twenty  days  ;  that  I  fhould 
go  two  days  journey  into  the  country,  flay  there  a  few  days, 
bring  down  plenty  of  hogs  and  poultry,  and  after  that  leave 
tlic  ifland.  1  again  made  figns  that  I  mufl  go  in  feven  days ; 
2-  upon 


ROUND   THE   WORLD.  4<59 

upon  which  fhe  burft  into  tears,  and  it  was  not  without      ^y^T' 
great  difficulty  that  fhe  was  pacified.  ^— - — -» 

The  next  morning,  the  gunner  fent  off  no  lefs  than  twenty  Wednef.  zz* 
hogs,  with  great  plenty  of  fruit.  Our  decks  were  now  quite 
full  of  hogs  and  poultry,  of  which  we  killed  only  the  fmall 
ones,,  and  kept  the  others  for  fea  ftores;  we  found,  how- 
ever, to  our  great  mortification,  that  neither  the  fowls  nor 
the  hogs  could,  without  great  difficulty,  be  brought  to  eat 
any  thing  but  fruit,  which  made  it  necefifary  to  kill  them 
fafter  than  we  fhould  otherwife  have  done :  two,  however,  a 
boar  and  a  fow,  were  brought  alive  to  England,  of  which  I 
made  a  prefent  to  Mr.  Stephens,  Secretary  to  the  Admiralty  ; 
the  fow  afterwards  died  in  pigging,  but  the  boar  is  ftill  alive. 

On  the  23d,  we  had  very  heavy  rain,  with  a  fl:orm  of  wind  Thurfday  23^ 
that  blew  down  feveral  trees  on  fliore,  though  very  little  of 
it  was  felt  where  the  Ihip  lay. 

The  next  day,  I  fent  the  old  man,  who  had  been  of  great  Friday  24. 
fervice  to  the  gunner  at  the  market-tent,  another  iron  pot, 
fome  hatchets  and  bills,  and  a  piece  of  cloth.  I  alfo  fent  the 
queen  two  turkies,  two  geefe,  three  Guinea  hens,  a  cat  big 
with  kitten,  fome  china,  looking-glafifes,  glafs  bottks, 
fhirts,  needles,  thread,  cloth,  ribands,  peas,  fome  fmall 
white  kidney  beans,  called  callivances,  and  about  fixteen 
different  fores  of  garden  feeds,  and  a  fliovel,  befides  a  con- 
fiderable  quantity  of  cutlery  wares,  confifting  of  knives, 
fcilfars,  bill-hooks,  and  other  things.  We  had  already 
planted  feveral  forts  of  the  garden  feeds,  and  fome  peas  in 
feveral  places,  and  had  the  pleafure  to  fee  them  come  up  in 
a  very  flourilhing  Hate,  yet  there  were  no  remains  of  them 
when  Captain  Cook  left  the  ifland.  I  fent  her  alfo  two  iroa 
pots,  and  a  few  fpoons.  In  return  for  thefe  things,  the  gua- 
ner  brought  off  eighteen  hogs,  and  fome  fruit. 

In 


470  CAP'^AIN   WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1767'  In  the  morning  of  the  a5th,  I  ordered  Mr.  Gore,  one  of 

i__llZl_j  the  mates,  with  all  the  marines,  forty-  feamen,  and  four 
Saturday  25.  ^lidlhipmen,  to  go  up  the  valley  by  the  river  as  high  as  they 
could,  and  examine  the  foil  and  produce  of  the  country, 
noting  the  trees  and  plants  which  they  fhould  find,  and 
when  they  faw  any  ftream  from  the  mountains,  to  trace  it 
to  its  fource,  and  obferve  whether  it  was  tindured  with  any 
mineral  or  ore.  I  cautioned  them  alfo  to  keep  continually 
upon  their  guard  againft  the  natives,  and  direded  them  to 
make  a  fire,  as  a  fignal,  if  they  fhould  be  attacked.  At  the 
fame  time,  I  took  a  guard  on  fliore,  and  eredled  a  tent  on  a 
point  of  land,  to  obferve  an  eclipfe  of  the  fun,  which,  the 
morning  being  very  clear,  was  done  with  great  accuracy. 

Hours.      Min,     Seconds. 

The  immerfion  began,  by  true  time,  at        6        j-r        50 
The  emerlion,  by  true  time,  was  at  810 

The  duration  of  the  eclipfe  was  -         i  9        10 

The  latitude  of  the  point,  on  which  the  obfervation  was 
made,  was  17°  30'  S.  the  fun's  declination  was  19"  40' N.  and 
the  variation  of  the  needle  5^  36'  E. 

After  the  obfervation  was  taken,  I  went  to  the  queen's 
houfe,  and  fliewed  her  the  telefcope,  which  was  a  refledtor. 
After  flie  had  admired  its  flrucT:ure,  I  endeavoured  to  make 
her  comprehend  its  ufe,  and  fixing  it  fo  as  to  command 
feveral  diftant  objecSts,  witli  which  fhe  was  well  acquainted, 
but  which  could  not  be  diflinguiflied  with  the  naked  eye,  I 
made  her  look  through  it.  As  foon  as  flie  faw  them,  flie 
flarted  back  with  aflonifliment,  and  directing  her  eye  as  t?ie 
glafs  was  pointed,  flood  feme  time  motionlefs  and  filent ; 
flie  then  looked  through  the  glafs  again,  and  again  fought 
in  vain,  with  the  naked  eye,  for  the  objeds  which  it  difco- 
vered.  As  they  by  turns  vanifhed  and  re-appeared,  her 
I  counte- 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  47I 

countenance  and  eeftures  exprefTed  a  mixture  of  wonder  ^1^7- 
and  delight  which  no  language  can  defcrib-:  When  the  i— "w— ~/ 
glafs  was  removed,  I  invited  her,  and  feveral  of  the  Chiefs 
that  were  with  her,  to  go  with  me  on  board  the  fhip,  in 
which  I  had  a  view  to  the  fecurity  of  the  party  that  I  had 
fent  out ;  for  I  thought  that  while  the  queen,  and  the  prin- 
cipal people  were  known  to  be  in  my  power,  nothing  would 
be  attempted  againft  any  perfon  belonging  to  the  fhip  on 
Ihore.  When  we  got  on  board,  I  ordered  a  good  dinner 
for  their  entertainment,  but  the  queen  would  neither  eat  nor 
drink ;  the  people  that  were  with  her  eat  very  heartily  of 
whatever  was  fet  before  them,  but  would  drink  only  plain 
water. 

In  the  evening  our  people  returned  from  their  excurfion, 
and  came  down  to  the  beach,  upon  which  I  put  the  queen 
and  her  attendants  into  the  boats,  and  fent  them  on  fhore. 
As  Ihe  was  going  over  the  fhip's  fide,  £he  alked,  by  figns, 
whether  I  Hill  perfifted  in  my  refolution  of  leaving  the  ifland 
at  the  time  I  had  fixed ;  and  when  I  made  her  underftand 
that  it  was  impoffible  I  fliould  ftay  longer,  Ihe  expreffed  her 
regret  by  a  flood  of  tears,  which  for  a  while  took  away  her 
fpeech.  As  foon  as  her  paffion  fubfided,  flie  told  me  that 
flie  would  come  on  board  again  the  next  day  j  and  thus  we 
parted. 


CHAP. 


47*  CAPTAIN   WALLIS's   VOYAGE 


CHAP.     VII. 

An  Account  of  an  Expedition  to  difcover  the  inland  Part 
of  the  Country  J  and  our  other  TranfaSiions^  till  we  quitted 
the  Ifland  to  continue  our  Voyage, 


>7^'         /V  FTER  the  mate  came  on  board,  he  gave  me  a  written 
t_  -"■-',_;    ^^J^  account  of  his  expedition,  to  the  following  efFedl: 

"  At  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  of  Saturday  the  25th  of 
June,  I  landed,  with  four  midfhipmen,  a  ferjeant  and  twelve 
marines,  and  twenty-four  feamen,  all  armed,  befides  four 
who  carried  hatchets  and  other  articles  of  traffick,  and  four 
who  were  loaded  with  ammunition  and  provifions,  the  reft 
being  left  with  the  boat :  every  man  had  his  day's  allowance 
of  brandy,  and  the  hatchet  men  two  fmall  kegs,  to  give  out 
when  I  fliould  think  proper. 

"  As  foon  as  I  got  on  Ihore,  I  called  upon  our  old  man, 
and  took  him  with  us:  we  then  followed  the  courle  of  the 
river  in  two  parties,  one  marching  on  each  fide.  For  the  firft 
two  miles  it  flowed  through  a  valley  of  confiderable  width, 
in  which  were  many  habitations,  with  gardens  walled  in, 
and  abundance  of  hogs,  poultry,  and  fruit;  the  foil  here 
feemed  to  be  a  rich  fat  earth,  and  was  of  a  blackifh  colour. 
After  this  the  valley  became  very  narrow,  and  the  ground 
rifing  abruptly  on  one  fide  of  the  river,  we  were  all  obliged 
to  march  on  the  other.  Where  the  ftream  was  precipitated 
from  the  hills,  channels  had  been  cut  to  lead  the  water  into 
gardens  and  plantations  of  fruit  trees:  in  thefe  gardens  we 
found  an  herb  which  had  never  been  brought  down  to  the 

water- 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  473 

water-fide,  and  which  we  perceived  the  inhabitants  eat  raw.       i?^;- 

I  tafted  it,  and  found  it  pleafant,  its  flavour  fomewhat  re-   ' .-^ 

fembling  that  of  the  Wefl  Indian  fpinnage,  called  Calleloor,    *'"  *^  "^' 
though  its  leaf  was  very  different.    The  ground  was  fenced 
oiFfo  as  to  make  a  very  pretty  appearance;  the  breadfruit 
and  apple  trees  were  planted  in  rows  on  the  declivity  of  the 
hills,  and  the  cocoa  nut  and  plantain,  which  require  more 
moifture,  on  the  level  ground :  under  the  trees,  both  on  the 
fides  and  at  the  foot  of  the  hills,  there  was  very  good  grafs, 
but  no  underwood.    As  we  advanced,  the  windings  of  the 
Jiream  became  innumerable,  the  hills  on  each  fide  fwelled 
into  mountains,  and  vafl  crags  every  where  proje(5ted  over 
our  heads.      Travelling  now  became   difficult,    and  when 
•we  had  proceeded  about  four  miles,  the  road  for  the  laft 
mile  having  been  very  bad,  we  fat  down  to  reft  ourfelves, 
and  take  the  refrefhment  of  our  breakfaft ;  we  ranged  our- 
felves upon  the  ground  under  a  large  apple  tree,  in  a  very 
pleafant  fpot  -,  but  jufl  as  we  were  about  to  begin  our  repafl, 
we  were  fuddenly  alarmed  by  a  confufed  found  of  many 
voices,  and  a  great  Ihouting,  and  prefently  afterwards  faw  a 
multitude  of   men,    women,    and  children  upon   the  hill 
above  us ;  our  old  man  feeing  us  rife  haftily,  and  look  to 
our  arms,  beckoned  to  us  to  fit  ftill,  and  immediately  went 
■up  to  the  people  that  had  furprifed  us.     As  foon  as  he  joined 
them  they  were  filent,  and  foon  after  difappeared ;  in  a  fhort 
time,  however,   they  returned,  and  brought  with  them  a 
large  hog  ready  roafled,  with  plenty  of  bread-fruit,  yams, 
and  other  refreshments,  which  they  gave  to  the  old  man, 
who  diftributed  them  among  our  people.     In  return  for  this 
■treat,  I  gave  them  fome  nails,  buttons,  and  other  things, 
•with  which  they  were  greatly  delighted.     After  this  we 
proceeded  \ip  the  valley  as  far  as  we  could,  fearching  all  the 
runs  of  water,  and  all  the  places  where  water  had  run,  for 
Vol.  I,  P  P  P  appearances 


474 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


•1767-      appearances  of  metal  or  ore,  but  could  find  none,  except 
u,i^lllj   what  I  have  brought  back  with  me.    I  fhewed  all  the  people 
Saturday  25.   ^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  with,  the  piccc  of  faltpctre  which  had  been 
picked  up  in  the  ifland,  and  which  I  had  taken  with  me  for 
that  purpofe,  but  none  of  them  took  any  notice  of  it,  nor 
could  1  learn  from  them  any  thing  about  it.    The  old  man 
began  now  to  be  weary,  and  there  being  a  mountain  before 
us,  he  made  figns  that  he  would  go  home:  before  he  left  us, 
however,  he  made  the  people  who  had  fo  liberally  fupplied 
us  with  provifions,    take  the  baggage,  with  the  fruit  that 
had  not  been  eaten,  and  fome  cocoa  nut-fhcUs  full  of  frefli 
water,  and  made  figns  that  they  fhould  follow  us  up  the  fide 
of  the  mountain.    As  foon  as  he  was  gone,  they  gathered 
.  green  branches  from  the  neighbouring  trees,  and  with  many 
ceremonies,  of  which  we  did  not  know  the  meaning,  laid 
them  down  before  us:    after  this  they   took  fome   fmall 
berries  with  which  they  painted  themfelves  red,  and  the 
,  bark  of  a  tree  that  contained  a  yellow  juice,  with  which 
they  fl;ained  their  garments  in  different  parts.     We  began  to 
climb  the  mountain  while  our  old  man  was  Hill  in  fight, 
and  he,  perceiving  that  we  made  our  way  with  difficulty 
through  the  weeds  and  brufh-wood,  which  grew  very  thick, 
turned  back,  and  faid  fomething  to  the  natives  in  a  firm 
loud  tone  j  upon  which  twenty  or  thirty  of  the  men  went 
before  us,  and  cleared  us  a  very  good  path  ;  they  alfo  re- 
freflied  us  with  water  and  fruit  as  we  went  along,    and 
aflifted  us  to  climb  the   moil  difficult   places,    which  we 
fliould  otherwife  have  found  altogether  impra<fticable.     We 
began  to  afcend  this  hill  at  the  diftance  of  about  fix  miles 
from  the  place  where  we  landed,  and  I  reckoned  the  top  of 
it  to  be  near  a  mile  above  the  river  that  runs  through  the 
valley  below.     When  we  arrived  at  the  fummit,  we  again 
fat  down  to  reft  and  refrelli  ourfclves.     While  we  were 
8.  climbing 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  4^^ 

climbing  we  flattered  ourfelves  that  from  the  top  we  fhould  1767. 
command  the  whole  ifland,  but  we  now  faw  mountains  «___!jL_/- 
before  us  fo  much  higher  than  our  fituation,  that  with  ^""'■'^^>'*s* 
refped  to  them  we  appeared  to  be  in  a  valley ;  towards  the 
fhip  indeed  the  view  was  enchanting:  the  lides  of  the  hills 
were  beautifully  clothed  with  wood,  villages  were  every 
where  interfperfed,  and  the  vallies  between  them  afforded  a 
ftill  richer  profpedt ;  the  houfes  fl;ood  thicker,  and  the  ver- 
dure was  more  luxuriant.  We  faw  very  few  habitations 
above  us,  but  difcovered  fmoke  in  many  places  afcending 
from  between  the  higheft  hills  that  were  in  fight,  and  there- 
fore I  conje<5ture  that  the  moll  elevated  parts  of  the  country 
are  by  no  means  without  inhabitants.  As  we  afcended  the 
mountain,  we  faw  many  fprings  gufli  from  filTures  on  the 
fide  of  it,  and  when  we  had  reached  the  fummit,  we  found 
many  houfes  that  we  did  not  difcover  as  we  palled  them. 
No  part  of  thefe  mountains  is  naked ;  the  fummits  of  the 
higheft  that  we  could  fee  were  crowned  with  wood,  but  of 
what  kind  I  know  not :  thofe  that  were  of  the  fame  height 
with  that  which  we  had  climbed,  were  woody  on  the  fides, 
but  on  the  fummit  were  rocky  and  covered  with  fern.  Upon 
the  flats  that  appeared  below  thefe,  there  grew  a  fedgy  kind 
of  grafs  and  weeds :  in  general  the  foil  here,  as  well  as  in 
the  valley,  feemed  to  be  rich.  We  faw  feveral  bulhes  of 
fugar-cane,  which  was  very  large  and  very  good,  growing 
wild,  without  the  leafl  culture.  I  likewife  found  ginger  and 
turmerick,  and  have  brought  famples  of  both,  but  could 
not  procure  feeds  of  any  tree,  moft  of  them  being  in 
blofl^Dm.  After  traverfing  the  top  of  this  mountain  to  a  good 
diftance,  I  found  a  tree  exactly  like  a  fern,  except  that  it  was 
14  or  15  feet  high.     This  tree  I  cut  down,  and  found  the  in-  ; 

fide  of  it  alfo  like  a  fern :  I  would  have  brought  a  piece  of  it 
with  me,  but  found  it  too  cumberfome,  and  I  knew  not 

P  p  p  2  what 


^^6  CAPTAIN   WALLIS's   VOYAGE 

1767.  what  difficulties  we  might  meet  with  before  we  got  back  to 
.  ■^"'^'  .  the  fliip,  which  we  judged  to  be  now  at  a  great  diftance. 
€aurday25.  ^^^^  having  again  recruited  our  ilrength  by  refrefliment 
and  reft,  we  began  to  defcend  the  mountain,  being  ftill 
attended  by  the  people  to  whofe  care  we  had  been  recom- 
mended by  our  old  man.  We  kept  our  general  diredion  to- 
wards the  fhip,  but  fometimes  deviated  a  little  to  the  right 
and  left  in  the  plains  and  vallies,  when  we  faw  any  houfes 
that  were  pleafantly  fituated)  the  inhabitants  being  every 
where  ready  to  accommodate  us  with  whatever  they  had. 
We  faw  no  beaft,  except  a  few  hogs,  nor  any  birds,  ex- 
cept parrots,  parroquets,  and  green  doves;  by  the  river, 
however,  there  was  plenty  of  ducks,  and  every  place  that 
was  planted  and  cultivated,  appeared  to  flourifli  with  great 
luxuriance,  though  in  the  midft  of  what  had  the  appearance 
of  barren  ground.  I  planted  the  ftones  of  peaches,  cherries, 
and  plums,  with  a  great  variety  of  garden  feeds,  where  I 
thought  it  \yas  moft  probable  that  they  would  thrive,  and 
limes,  lemons,  and  oranges,  in  fituations  which  refembled 
thofe  in  v/hich  they  are  found  in  the  Weft  Indies.  In  the 
afternoon,  we  arrived  at  a  very  pleafant  fpot,  within  about 
three  miles  of  the  fliip,  w^here  we  procured  two  hogs  and 
fome  fowls,  which  the  natives  dreiTed  for  us  very  well,  and 
with  great  expedition.  Here  we  continued  till  the  cool  of 
the  evening,  and  then  made  the  beft  of  our  way  for  the  fhip, 
having  liberally  rewarded  our  guides,  and  the  people  who 
had  provided  us  fo  good  a  dinner.  Our  men  behaved 
through  the  whole  day  with  the  grcateft  decency  and  order, 
and  we  parted  with  our  Indian  friends  in  perfect  good-hu- 
mour with  each  other." 

$unday  26.        About  lo  o'clock,  the  next  morning,  the  queen  came  on 

board  according  to  her  promife,  with  a  prefent  of  hogs  and 

fowls,  but  went  on  fhore  again  foon  afterwards.    This  day, 

3  tli^ 


HOUND    THE    WORLD.  '477 

the  Gunner  fent  off  near  thirty  hogs,  with  great  plenty  of      ^y^?- 
fowls  and  fruit.     We  completed  our  wood  and  water,  and   <— v — -j 
got  all  ready  for  fea.    More  inhabitants  came  down  to  the 
beach,  from  the  inland  country,  than  we  had  feen  before, 
and  many  of  them  appeared,  by  the  refpe(ft  that  was  paid 
them,  to  be  of  a  fuperior  rank.    About  three  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon,  the  queen  came  again  down  to  the  beach,  very 
well  drefTed,  and  followed  by  a  great  number  of  people. 
Having  crofTed  the  river  with  her  attendants  and  our  ojd 
man,  fhe  came  once  more  on  board  the  fhip.    She  brought 
with  her  fome  very  fine  fruit,  and  renewed  her  folicitation, 
that  I  would  ilay  ten  days  longer,  with  great  earneftnefs, 
intimating  that  ilie  would  go  into  the  country,  and  bring 
me  plenty  of  hogs,  fowls,  and  fruit.    I  endeavoured  to  ex- 
prefs  a  proper  fenfe  of  her  kindnefs  and  bounty,  but  alTured 
her  that  I  fhould  certainly  fail  the  next  morning.    This,  as 
ufual,  threw  her  into  tears,  and  after  Ihe  recovered,  fhe  en- 
quired by  figns  when  I  fhould  return :  I  endeavoured  to  ex- 
prefs  fifty  days,  and  fhe  made  figns  for  thirty :  but  the  fign 
for  fifty  being  conflantly  repeated,    fhe  feemed  fatisfied. 
She  flayed  on  board  till  night,  and  it  was  then  with  the 
greatefl  difficulty  that  fhe  could  be  prevailed  upon  to  go  on 
fhore.     When  flie  was  told  that  the  boat  was  ready,  fhe 
threw  herfelf  down  upon  the  arm-chefl,  and  wept  a  long  time 
with  an  excefs  of  paffion  that  could  not  be  pacified ;  at  lafl, 
however,  though  with  the  greatefl  relu(5lance,  fhe  went  into 
the  boat,  and  was  followed  by  her  attendants  and  the  old 
man.    The  old  man  had  often  intimated  that  his  fon,  a  lad: 
about  fourteen  years  of  age,  fhould  go  with  us,  and  the  boy 
feemed  to  be  willing:  he  had,  however,  now  difappeared 
for  two  days ;  I  enquired  after  him  when  I  firfl  miffed  him, 
and  the  old  man  gave  me  to  underfland  that  he  was  gone 
into  the  country  to  fee  his  friends,  and  would  return  time 

enough 


478  C  APTAI  N    WALLIS's    VO  YAGE 


1767-      enough  to  go  with  us ;  but  I  have  reafon  to  thmk  that,  when 

July. 

the  time  drew  near,  the  father's  courage  failed,  and  that  to 
keep  his  child  he  fecreted  him  till  the  fliip  was  gone,  for  we 
never  faw  him  afterwards. 


£undily  zO 


Monday  27.  At  break  of  day,  on  Monday  the  27th,  we  unmoored,  and 
at  the  fame  time  I  fent  the  barge  and  cutter  to  fill  the  few 
water-caflvS  that  were  now  empty.  When  they  came  near 
tlie  fliore,  they  faw,  to  their  great  furprife,  the  whole  beach 
covered  with  inhabitants,  and  having  fome  doubt  whether  it 
would  be  prudent  to  venture  themfelves  among  fuch  a  mul- 
titude, they  were  about  to  pull  back  again  for  the  fliip.  As 
foon  as  this  was  perceived  from  the  fhore,  the  queen  came 
forward,  and  beckoned  them ;  at  the  fame  time  guefling  the 
reafon  of  what  had  happened,  fhe  made  the  natives  retire  to 
the  other  fide  of  the  river :  the  boats  then  proceeded  to  the 
lliore,  and  filled  the  caflcs,  in  the  mean  time  fhe  put  fome 
hogs  and  fruit  on  board,  and  when  they  were  putting  off 
would  fain  have  returned  with  them  to  the  fhip.  The  offi- 
cer, however,  who  had  received  orders  to  bring  off  none  of 
the  natives,  would  not  permit  her ;  upon  which  fhe  prefently 
launched  a  double  canoe,  and  was  rowed  off  by  her  own 
people.  Her  canoe  was  immediately  followed  by  fifteen  or 
fixteen  more,  and  ail  of  them  came  up  to  the  fliip.  The 
queen  came  on  board,  but  not  being  able  to  fpeak,  fhe  fat 
down  and  gave  vent  to  her  paflion  by  weeping.  After  flie 
had  been  on  board  about  an  hour,  a  breeze  fpringing  up, 
we  weighed  anchor  and  made  fail.  Finding  it  now  neceffary 
to  return  into  her  canoe,  flie  embraced  us  all  in  the  mofl 
affe<5tionate  manner,  and  with  many  tears ;  all  her  attend- 
ants alfo  expreffcd  great  forrow  at  our  departure.  Soon  after 
it  fell  calm,  and  I  fent  the  boats  a-head  to  tow,  upon  which 
all  the  canoes  returned  to  the  fhip,  and  that  which  had  the 
queen  on  board  came  up  to  the  gun-room  port,  where  her 

people 


R  0  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  479 

people  made  it  fail.    In  a  few  minutes  fhe  came  into  the       1767. 
bow  of  her  canoe,  where  flae  fat  weeping  with  inconfolable  ■      /'    r 
forrow.     I  gave  her  many  things  which  I  thought  would  be  ^^"""^^^  -''• 
of  great  ufe  to  her,  and  fome  for  ornament ;  fhe  filently  ac- 
cepted of  all,  but  took  little  notice  of  any  thing.     Abom  10 
o'clock  we  were  got  without  the  reef,  and  a  frefli  breeze 
fpringing  up,  our  Indian  friends,  and  particularly  the  queen, 
once  more  bade  us  farewel,  with  fuch  tendernefs  of  affec- 
tion and  grief,  as  filled  both  my  heart  and  my  eyes. 

At  noon,  the  harbour  from  which  we  failed  bore  S.  E.  7  E. 
diftant  about  twelve  miles.    It  lies  in  latitude  17"  30'  S,  lon- 
gitude 150°  W.  and  I  gave  it  the  name  of  Port  Royal  Har- 
.  bour. 


CHAP. 


*4^  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


CHAP.     Vlil. 

A  more  particular  Account  of  the  Inhahita7tts  of  Otahe'ittt 
and  of  their  domefiic  Life y  Ma7J7iers,  and  Arts, 

HAVIN  G  lain  off  this  iflandfrom  the  24th  of  June  to  the 
27th  of  July,  I  fhall  now  give  the  beft  account  of  its 
-n  3727.  jj^j-^^i^^j-^j^fg^  with  their  manners  and  arts,  that  I  can;  but 
having  been  in  a  very  bad  ftate  of  health  the  whole  time, 
and  for  great  part  of  it  confined  to  my  bed,  it  will  of  necef- 
fity  be  much  lefs  accurate  and  particular  than  I  might  other- 
wife  have  made  it. 

The  inhabitants  of  this  ifland  are  a  ftout,  well-made, 
aiflive,  and  comely  people.  The  ftature  of  the  men,  in  ge- 
neral, is  from  five  feet  feven  to  five  feet  ten  inches,  though 
a  few  individuals  are  taller,  and  a  few  fhorter  ;  that  of  the 
women  from  five  feet  to  five  feet  fix.  The  complexion  of 
the  men  is  tawney,  but  thofe  that  go  upon  the  water  are 
much  redder  than  thofe  who  live  on  fhore.  Their  hair  in 
general  is  black,  but  in  fome  it  is  brown,  in  fome  red,  and 
in  others  flaxen,  which  is  remarkable,  becaufe  the  hair  of 
all  other  natives  of  Afia,  Africa,  and  America,  is  black,  with- 
out a  fingle  exception.  It  is  generally  tied  up,  either  in  one 
bunch,  in  the  middle  of  the  head,  or  in  two,  one  on  each 
fide,  but  {"ome  wear  it  loofe,  and  it  then  curls  very  ftrongly : 
in  the  children  of  both  fexes  it  is  generally  flaxen.  They 
have  no  combs,  yet  their  hair  is  very  neatly  drefl^ed,  and 
thofe  who  had  combs  from  us,  made  good  ufe  of  them.  It  is 
a  univerfal  cuftom  to  anoint  the  head  with  cocoa-nut  oil,  in 

which 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  481 

which  a  root  has  been  fcraped  that  fmells  fomething  like       1767- 
rofes.    The  women  are  all  handfome,  and  fome  of  them,   c — , — **, 
extremely    beautiful.     Chaftity  does  not  feem  to  be  con- 
lidered  as  a  virtue  among  them,  for  they  not  only  readily 
and  openly  trafficked  with  our  people  for  perfonal  favours, 
but  were  brought  down  by  their  fathers  and  brothers  for 
that  purpofe :  they  were,  however,  confcious  of  the  value  of 
beauty,  and  the  lize  of  the  nail  that  was  demanded  for  the 
enjoyment  of  the  lady,   was  always  in  proportion  to  her 
charms.    The  men  who  came  down  to  the  fide  of  the  river, 
at  the  fame  time  that  they  prefented  the  girl,  fliewed  a  ftick 
of  the  lize  of  the  nail  that  was  to  be  her  price,  and  if  our 
people  agreed,  fhe  was  fent  over  to  them,  for  the  men  were 
not  permitted  to  crofs  the  river.     This  commerce  was  car- 
ried on  a  conliderable  time  before  the  officers  difcovered  it, 
for  while  fome  llraggled  a  little  way  to  receive  the  lady,  the 
others  kept  a  look-out.    When  I  was  acquainted  with  it,  I 
no  longer  wondered  that  the  fhip  was  in  danger  of  being 
pulled  to  pieces  for  the  nails  and  iron  that  held  her  together, 
which  I  had  before  puzzled  myfelf  to  account  for  in  vain, 
the  whole  fliip's  company  having  daily  as  much  frelh  pro- 
vifion  and  fruit  as  they  could  eat.    Both  men  and  women 
are  not  only  decently  but  gracefully  clothed,  in  a  kind  of 
white  cloth,  that  is  made  of  the  bark  of  a  fhrub,  and  very 
much  refembles  coarfe  China  paper.     Their  drefs  confiils  of 
two  pieces  of  this  cloth:  one  of  them,  a  hole  having  been 
made  in  the  middle  to  put  the  head  through,  hangs  down 
from  the  flioulders  to  the  mid-leg  before  and  behind ;  an- 
other piece,  which  is  between  four  and  live  yards  long,  and 
about  one  yard  broad,  they  wrap  round  the  body  in  a  very 
eafy  manner.     This  cloth  is  not  woven,  but  is  made,  like 
paper,  of  the  macerated  fibres  of  an  inner  bark,  fpread  out 
and  beaten  together.    Their  ornaments  are  feathers,  flowers, 
Vjol.  I.  Q^q  q  pieces 


482  '    CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1767-  pieces  of  fliells,  and  pearls:  the  pearls  are  worn  chiefly  by 
t^_~J-l.  _i  the  women,  from  whom  I  purchafed  about  two  dozen  of  a 
fmall  fize :  they  were  of  a  good  colour,  but  were  all  fpoiled 
by  boring.  Mr.  Furneaux  faw  feveral  in  his  excurfion  to  the 
weft,  but  he  could  purchafe  none  with  any  thing  he  had  to 
offer.  I  obferved,  that  it  was  here  a  univerfal  cuftom  both 
for  men  and  women  to  have  the  hinder  part  of  their  thighs 
and  loins  marked  very  thick  with  black  lines  in  various 
forms.  Thefe  marks  were  made  by  ftriking  the  teeth  of  an 
inftrument,  fomewhat  like  a  comb,  juft  through  the  fkin, 
and  rubbing  into  the  pun(5lures  a  kind  of  pafte  made  of  foot 
and  oil,  which  leaves  an  indelible  ftain.  The  boys  and  girls 
under  twelve  years  of  age,  are  not  marked ;  but  we  ob- 
ferved a  few  of  the  men  whofe  legs  were  marked  in  che- 
quers by  the  fame  method,  and  they  appeared  to  be  perfons 
of  fuperior  rank  and  authority.  One  of  the  principal  attend- 
ants upon  the  queen,  appeared  much  more  difpofed  to  imi- 
tate our  manners  than  the  reft ;  and  our  people,  with  whom 
he  foon  became  a  favourite,  diftinguifhed  him  by  the  name 
of  Jonathan.  This  man,  Mr.  Furneaux  clothed  completely 
in  an  Englifh  drefs,  and  it  fat  very  eafy  upon  him.  Our 
officers  were  always  carried  on  fhore,  it  being  fhoal  water 
where  we  landed,  and  Jonathan,  affuming  new  ftate  with 
his  new  finery,  made  fome  of  his  people  carry  him  on  fliore 
in  the  fame  manner.  He  very  foon  attempted  to  ufe  a  knife 
and  fork  at  his  meals,  but  at  firft,  when  he  had  ftuck  a  mor- 
fel  upon  his  fork,  and  tried  to  feed  himfelf  with  that  inftru- 
ment, he  could  not  guide  it,  but  by  the  mere  force  of  habit 
his  hand  came  to  his  mouth,  and  the  vi6tuals  at  the  end  of 
the  fork  went  away  to  his  ear. 

Their  food  confifts  of  pork,  poultry,  dog's  flefh,  and  fifli, 
brcad-fruir,  bananas,  plantains,  yams,  apples,  and  a  four 
fruit  which,  though  not  pleafant  by  itfelf,  gives  an  agree- 
able 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  483 

able  relifh  to  roafted  bread-fruit,  with  which  it  is  frequently  \1^7. 
beaten  up.  They  have  abundance  of  rats,  but,  as  far  as  I  v — ^— ^ 
could  difcover,  tliefe  make  no  part  of  their  food.  The  river 
affords  them  good  mullet,  but  they  are  neither  large  nor  in 
plenty.  They  find  conchs,  mufcles,  and  other  fliell-fifli  on 
the  reef,  which  they  gather  at  low  water,  and  eat  raw  with 
bread-fruit  before  they  come  on  Ihore.  They  have  alfo  very 
fine  cray-fi£h,  and  they  catch  with  lines,  and  hooks  of 
mother  of  pearl,  at  a  little  diftance  from  the  fliore,  parrot- 
fifh,  groopers,  and  many  other  forts,  of  which  they  are  fo 
fond  that  we  could  feldom  prevail  upon  them  to  fell  us  a 
few  at  any  price.  They  have  alfo  nets  of  an  enormous  fize, 
with  very  fmall  meflies,  and  with  thefe  they  catch  abun- 
dance of  fmall  fifh  about  the  fize  of  fardines  ;  but  while  they 
were  ufing  both  nets  and  lines  with  great  fuccefs,  we  could 
not  catch  a  fingle  fifh  with  either.  We  procured  fome  of 
their  hooks  and  lines,  but  for  want  of  their  art  we  were  flill 
difappointed. 

The  manner  in  which  they  drefs  their  food  is  this :  they 
kindle  a  fire  by  rubbing  the  end  of  one  piece  of  dry  wood 
upon  the  fide  of  another,  in  the  fame  manner  as  our  carpen- 
ters whet  a  chiffel ;  then  they  dig  a  pit  about  half  a  foot  deep, 
and  two  or  three  yards  in  circumference:  they  pave  the 
bottom  with  large  pebble  Hones,  which  they  lay  down  very 
fmooth  and  even,  and  then  kindle  a  fii-e  in  it  with  dry  wood, 
leaves,  and  the  huflcs  of  the  cocoa-nut.  When  the  ilones 
are  fufficiently  heated,  they  take  out  the  embers,  and  rake 
up  the  afhes  on  every  fide ;  then  they  cover  the  ftones  with  a 
layer  of  green  cocoa-nut- tree  leaves,  and  wrap  up  the  animal 
that  is  to  be  dreffed  in  the  leaves  of  the  plantain ;  if  it  is  a 
fmall  hog  they  wrap  it  up  whole,  if  a  large  one  they  fplit  it. 
When  it  is  placed  in  the  pit,  they  cover  it  with  the  hot  em- 
bers, and  lay  upon  them  bread-fruit  and  yams,  which  are 
Q^q  q  2  alfo 


484  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

i'67-  alfo  wrapped  up  in  the  leaves  of  the  plantain ;  over  thefe 
.« — ^^  they  fpread  the  remainder  of  the  embers,  mixing  among 
them  fome  of  the  hot  ftones,  with  more  cocoa-nut-tree 
leaves  upon  them,  and  then  clofe  all  up  with  earth,  fo  that 
the  heat  is  kept  in.  After  a  time  proportioned  to  the  fize  of 
what  is  dreffing,  the  oven  is  opened,  and  the  meat  taken 
out,  which  is  tender,  full  of  gravy,  and,  in  my  opinion, 
better  in  every  refpecH:  than  when  it  is  drefled  any  other  way. 
Excepting  the  fruit,  they  have  no  fauce  but  fait  water,  nor 
any  knives  but  fhells,  with  which  they  carve  very  dexte- 
roufly,  always  cutting  from  them.  It  is  irapoffible  to 
defcribe  the  afloniflament  they  exprefled  when  they  faw  the 
Gunner,  who,  while  he  kept  the  market,  ufed  to  dine  on 
fhore,  drefs  his  pork  and  poultry  by  boiling  them  in  a  pot, 
having,  as  I  have  before  obferved,  no  velTel  that  would  bear 
the  fire,  they  had  no  idea  of  hot  water  or  its  effeifts:  but 
from  the  time  that  the  old  man  was  in  poiTeffion  of  an  ixon 
pot,  he  and  his  friends  eat  boiled  meat  every  day.  The  iroa 
pots  which  I  afterwards  gave  to  the  queen,  and  feveral  of 
the  Chiefs,  were  alfo  in  conftant  ufe,  and  brought  as  many 
people  together,  as  a  monfter  or  a  puppet-fhow  in  a  country 
fair.  They  appeared  to  have  no  liquor  for  drinking  buc 
water,  and  to  be  happily  ignorant  of  the  art  of  fermenting 
the  juice  of  any  vegetable,  fo  as  to  give  it  an  intoxicating 
quality :  they  have,  as  has  been  already  obferved,  the  fugar- 
cane,  but  they  feemed  to  make  no  other  ufe  of  it  than  to 
chew,  which  they  do  not  do  habitually,  but  only  break  a 
piece  off  when  they  happen  to  pafs  by  a  place  where  it  is 
growing. 

Of  their  domeflic  life  and  amufements,  we  had  not  fufli- 
cient  opportunity  to  obtain  much  knowlege,  but  they  appear 
fometimes  to  have  wars  with  each  other,  not  only  from  their 
weapons,  but  the  fears  with  which  many  of  them  were 

marked. 


ROUND    THE    world;  485- 

marked,  and  fome  of  which  appeared  to  be  the  remains  of       »7^7' 

very  confiderable  wounds,  made  with  ftones,  bludgeons,  or   y — v — -»- 

fome  other  obtufe  weapon :  by  thefe  fears  alfo  they  appear  to 

be  no  inconfiderable  proficients  in  furgery,  of  which  indeed 

we  happened  to  have  more  diredt  evidence.    One  of  our  fea- 

mien,  when  he  was  on  jQiore,  run  a  large  fplinter  into  his 

foot,  and  the  Surgeon  being  on  board,  one  of  his  comrades 

endeavoured  to   take  it  out  with  a  penknife ;    but  after 

putting  the  poor  fellow  to  a  good  deal  of  pain,  was  obliged 

to  give  it  over.    Our  good  old  hidian,  who  happened  to  be 

prefent,  then  called  over  one  of  his  countrymen  that  was 

flanding  on  the  oppofite  fide  of  the  river,  who  having  looked 

at  the  feaman's  foot,  went  immediately  down  to  the  beach, 

and  taking  up  a  fhell,  broke  it  to  a  point  with  his  teeth  ;  with 

this  inilrument,  in  little  more  than  a  minute,  he  laid  open 

the  place,  and  extradled  the  fplinter  ;  in  the  mean  time  the 

old  man,  who,  as  foon  as  he  had  called  the  other  over,  went  a 

little  way  into  the  wood,  xeturned  with  fome  gum,  which 

he  applied  to  the  wound  upon  a  piece  of  the  cloth  that  was 

wrapped  round  him,  and  in  two  days  time  it  was  perfe(5lly 

healed.     We  afterwards  learned  that  this  gum  was  produced 

by  the  apple  tree,  and  our  Surgeon  procured  fome  of  it,  and 

ufed  it  as  a  vulnerary  balfam  with  great  fuccefs. 

The  habitations  of  thefe  happy  people  I  have  defcribed 
already  •,  and  befides  thefe,  we  faw  feveral  fheds  inclofed 
within  a  wall,  on  the  outiide  of  which  there  were  fevera;l 
uncouth  figures  of  men,  women,  hogs,  and  dogs,  carved  on 
pofls,  that  were  driven  into  the  ground.  Several  of  the  na- 
tives were  from  time  to  time  feen  to  enter  thefe  places,  with 
a  flow  pace  and  dejecfled  countenance,  from,  which  we  con^ 
jedlured  that  they  were  repofitories  of  the  dead.  The  area 
within  the  walls  of  thefe  places,  was  generally  well  paved 

witlij 


4B^  CAPTAIN   WALLIS's   VOYAGE 

1767-      with  large  round  ftones,  but  it  appeared  not  to  be  much 

^  -_-'-  ..   trodden,  for  the  grafs  every  where  grew  up  between  them. 

I  endeavoured,  with  particular  attention,  to  difcover  whether 

they  had  a  religious  worfhip  among  them,  but  never  could 

•find  the  leaft  traces  of  any. 

The  boats  or  canoes  of  thefe  people,  are  of  three  different 
forts.  Some  are  made  out  of  a  iingle  tree,  and  carry  from 
two  to  fix  men :  thefe  are  ufed  chiefly  for  fifhing,  and  we 
conftantly  faw  many  of  them  bufy  upon  the  reef:  fome 
"were  conftru<5ted  of  planks,  very  dexteroufly  fewed  together : 
thefe  were  of  different  fizes,  and  would  carry  from  ten  to 
forty  *iriien.  Two  of  them  were  generally  lafhed  together, 
and  two  malls  fet  up  between  them ;  if  they  were  fingle, 
they  had  an  out-rigger  on  one  fide,  and  only  one  maft  in  the 
middle.  With  thefe  vefTels  they  fail  far  beyond  the  fight  of 
land,  probably  to  other  iflands,  and  bring  home  plantains, 
bananas,  and  yams,  which  feem  alfo  to  be  more  plenty 
upon  other  parts  of  this  ifland,  than  that  off  which  the  fhip 
lay.  A  third  fort  feem  to  be  intended  principally  for  plea- 
fure  and  fhow :  they  are  veiy  large,  but  have  no  fail,  and  in 
ihape  refemble  the  gondolas  of  Venice:  the  middle  is 
covered  with  a  large  awning,  and  fome  of  the  people  fit 
upon  it,  fome  under  it.  None  of  thefe  velfels  came  near  the 
fhip,  except  on  the  firfl  and  fecond  day  after  our  arrival ;  but 
we  faw,  three  or  four  times  a  week,  a  proceifion  of  eight  or 
ten  of  them  pafling  at  a  diflance,  with  flreamers  flying,  and 
a  great  number  of  fmall  canoes  attending  them,  while  many 
•hundreds  of  people  ran  abreafl  of  them  along  the  fliore. 
They  generally  rowed  to  the  outward  point  of  a  reef  which 
lay  about  four  miles  to  the  weftward  of  us,  where  they 
flayed  about  an  hour,  and  then  returned.  Thefe  procef- 
fions,  however,  are  never  made  but  in  fine  weather,  and  all 

the 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  4^7 

the  people  on  board  are  drelTed ;  though  in  the  other  canoes  ^7^7' 
they  have  only  a  piece  of  cloth  wrapped  round  their  middle,  u-,-..^ 
Thofe  who  rowed  and  fleered  were  drefled  in  white ;  thofe 
who  fat  upon  the  awning  and  under  it  in  white  and  red,  and 
two  men  who  were  mounted  on  the  prow  of  each  velTel, 
were  drelTed  in  red  only.  We  fometimes  went  out  to  obferve 
them  in  our  boats,  and  though  we  were  never  nearer  than  a 
mile,  we  faw  them  with  our  glafles  as  diftindly  as  if  we  had 
been  upon  the  fpot. 

The  plank  of  which  thefe  veflels  are  conftruded,  is  made 
by  fplitting  a  tree,  with  the  grain,  into  as  many  thin  pieces^ 
as  they  can.  They  firft  fell  the  tree  with  a  kind  of  hatchet^ 
or  adze,  made  of  a  tough  greenifli  kind  of  ftone,  very  dex-  - 

teroufly  iitted  into  a  handle  ;  it  is  then  cut  into  fuch  lengths 
as  are  required  for  the  plank,  one  end  of  which  is  heated 
till  it  begins  to  crack,  and  then  with  wedges  of  hard  wood 
they  fplit  it  down :  fome  of  thefe  planks  are  two  feet  broad, 
and  from  15  to  20  feet  long.  The  fides  are  fmoothed  with 
adzes  of  the  fame  materials  and  conftrudlion,  but  of  a 
fmaller  fize.  Six  or  eight  men  are  fometimes  at  work  upon 
the  fame  plank  together,  and,  as  their  tools  prefently  lofe 
their  edge,  every  man  has  by  him  a  cocoa  nut-fhell  filled 
with  water,  and  a  flat  flone,  with  which  he  fharpens  his 
adze  almoft  every  minute.  Thefe  planks  are  generally 
brought  to  the  thicknefs  of  about  an  inch,  and  are  after- 
wards fitted  to  the  boat  with  the  fame  exadlnefs  that  v/ould 
be  expelled  from  an  expert  joiner.  To  faften  thefe  plank^ 
together,  holes  are  bored  with  a  piece  of  bone  that  is  fixed 
into  a  flick  for  that  purpofe,  a  ufe  to  which  our  nails  were 
afterwards  applied  with  great  advantage,  and  through  thefe 
holes  a  kind  of  plaited  cordage  is  pafi!ed,  fo  as  to  hold  the 
planks  flrongly  together :  the  feams  are  caulked  with  dried 
rulhes,  and  the  whole  outfide  of  the  velTel  is  paid  with  a- 
2  gummy 


48S  CAPTAIN    WALLIS^s    VOYAGE 

1767.      gummy  juice,  which  fome  of  their  trees  produce  in  great 

< r-~'   plenty,  and  which  is  a  very  good  fuccedaneum  for  pitch. 

The  wood  which  they  ufe  for  their  large  canoes,  is  that 
of  the  apple  tree,  which  grows  very  tall  and  llrait.  Several 
of  them  that  we  meafured,  were  near  eight  feet  in  the 
girth,  and  from  20  to  40  to  the  branches,  with  very  little  di- 
minution in  the  fize.  Our  carpenter  faid,  that  in  other 
refpe(fts  it  was  not  a  good  wood  for  the  purpofe,  being  very 
light.  The  fmall  canoes  are  nothing  more  than  the  hol- 
lowed trunk  of  the  bread-fruit  tree,  which  is  ftill  more  light 
and  fpongy.  The  trunk  of  the  bread-fruit  tree  is  fix  feet  in 
girth,  and  about  20  feet  to  the  branches. 

Their  principal  weapons  are  Hones,  thrown  either  with 
the  hand  or  fling,  and  bludgeons ;  for  though  they  have 
bows  and  arrows,  the  arrows  are  only  fit  to  knock  down  a 
bird,  none  of  them  being  pointed,  but  headed  only  with  a 
round  ftone. 

I  did  not  fee  one  turtle  all  the  while  I  lay  off  this  ifland, 
but  upon  fliewing  fome  fmall  ones  which  I  brought  from 
Queen  Charlotte's  Ifland,  to  the  inhabitants,  they  made  figns 
that  they  had  them  of  a  much  larger  fize.  I  very  much  re- 
gretted my  having  loft  our  he-goat,  which  died  foon  after 
we  left  Saint  lago,  and  that  neither  of  our  flie-goats,  of 
which  we  had  two,  were  with  kid.  If  the  he-goat  had  lived, 
I  would  have  put  them  all  on  fliore  at  this  place,  and  I 
would  have  left  a  fhe-goat  here  if  either  of  them  had  been 
with  kid;  and  I  doubt  not,  but  that  in  a  few  years  they  would 
have  flocked  the  ifland. 

The  climate  here  appears  to  be  very  good,  and  the  ifland 
to  be  one  of  the  moft  healthy  as  well  as  delightful  fpots  in 
the  world.  We  faw  no  appearance  of  difeafe  among  the  in- 
habitants.   The  hills  are  covered  with  wood,  and  the  vallies 

4  with 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


489 


with  herbage ;  and  the  air  in  general  is  fo  pure,  that,  not-       1767. 
•withftanding  the  heat,  our  flefli  meat  kept  very  well  two  ■    ^"'^' 
days,  and  our  fifh  one.    We  met  with  no  frog,  toad,  fcor- 
pion,  centipied,  or  ferpent  of  any  kind :  and  the  only  trouble- 
fome  infedts  that  we  faw  were  ants,  of  which  there  were  but 
few. 

The  fouth-eaft  part  of  the  illand  feems  to  be  better  culti- 
vated and  inhabited  than  where  we  lay,  for  we  faw  every 
day  boats  come  round  from  thence  laden  with  plantains  and 
other  fruit,  and  we  always  found  greater  plenty,  and  a  lower 
price,  foon  after  their  arrival,  than  before. 

The  tide  rifes  and  falls  very  little,  and  being  governed  by 
the  winds,  is  very  uncertain ;  though  they  generally  blow  from 
the  E.  to  the  S.  S.  E.  and  for  the  moft  part  a  pleafant  breeze. 

The  benefit  that  we  received  while  we  lay  off  this  ifland, 
with  refpecH:  to  the  health  of  the  fhip's  company,  was  beyond 
our  mofl  fanguine  expedlations,  for  we  had  not  now  an  in- 
valid on  board,  except  the  two  Lieutenants  and  myfelf,  and 
we  were  recovering,  though  flill  in  a  very  feeble  condition. 

It  is  certain  that  none  of  our  people  contracted  the  venereal 
difeafe  here,  and  therefore,  as  they  had  free  commerce 
with  great  numbers  of  the  women,  there  is  the  greatefl  pro- 
bability that  it  was  not  then  known  in  the  country.  It  was 
however,  found  here  by  Captain  Cook,  in  the  Endeavour, 
and  as  no  European  vefTel  is  known  to  have  vifited  this  ifland 
before  Captain  Cook's  arrival,  but  the  Dolphin,  and  the 
Boudeufe  and  Etoil,  commanded  by  M.  Bougainville,  the  re- 
proach of  having  contaminated  v/ich  that  dreadful  peft,  a 
race  of  happy  people,  to  whom  its  miferies  had  till  then 
been  unknown,  muft  be  due  either  to  him  or  to  me,  to  Eng- 
land or  to  France ;  and  I  think  myfelf  happy  to  be  able  to 
exculpate  myfelf  and  my  country  beyond  the  poflibility  of 
doubt. 

Vol.  L  R  r  r  It 


490 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


1767.  It  is  well  known,  that  the  Surgeon  on  board  his  Majefty's 

_  ".---^    Clips  keeps  a  lift  of  the  perfons  who  are  fick  on  board,  Ipe- 
cifying  their  difeafes,  and  the  times  when  they  came  under 
his  care,  and  when  they  were  difcharged.     It  happened  that 
I  was  once  at  the  pay-table  on  board  a  ftiipf  when  feveral  Tail- 
ors objefted  to  the  payment  of  the  Surgeon,  alleging,  that 
although  he  had  difcharged  them  from  the  lift,  and  reported 
them  to  be  cured,  yet  their  cure  was  incomplete.     From  this 
time,  it  has  been  my  conftant  praftice  when  the  Surgeon  re- 
ported a  man  to  be  cured,  who  had  been  upon  the  fick  lift, 
to  call  the  man  before  me,  and  afk  him  whether  the  report 
was  true :  if  he  alleged  that  any  fymptoms  of  his  complaint 
remained,  I  continued  him  upon  the  lift ;  if  not,  I  required 
him,  as  a  confirmation  of  the  Surgeon's  report,  to  fign  the 
book,  which  was  always  done  in  my  prefence.    A  copy  of 
the  fick  lift  on  board  the  Dolphin,  during  this  voyage,  figned 
by  every  man  in  my  prefence,  when  he  was  difcharged  well, 
in  confirmation  of  the  Surgeon's  report,  written  in  my  own 
hand,  and  confirmed  by  my  affidavit,  I  have  depofited  in  the 
Admiralty;  by  which  it  appears,  that  the  laft  man  on  board 
the  fliip,  in  her  voyage  outward,  who  was  upon  the  fick  lift; 
for  the  venereal  difeafe,  except  one  who  was  fent  to  England 
in  the  Store  fliip,  was  difcharged  cured,  and  figned  the  book 
on  the  27th  of  December  1766,  near  fix  months  before  our 
arrival  at  Otaheite,  which  was  on  the  19th  of  June  1767 ;  and 
that  the  firft  man  who  was  upon  the  lift  for  that  difeafe,  in 
our  return  home,  was  entered  on  the  a6th  of  February  1768, 
.fix  months  after  we  left  the  iftand,  which  was  on  the  s6th  of 
July  1767,  fo  that  the  fhip's  company  was  intirely  free  four- 
teen months  within  one  day,  the  very  middle  of  which  time 
we  fpent  at  Otaheite ;  and  the  man  who  was  firft  entered  as  a 
venereal  patient,  on  our  return  home,  was  known  to  have 
contracted  the  difeafe  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  where  we 

then  lay. 

CHAP. 


Boseawens  Illand  Zafi^ude  15  {,0  Ji  u/ifz^i lu/  1J4  jo 


u 


**•  J* 


\Jin  Keppils  riUuid  y^rf/?/^/<y/   77    -f^    S(  it-iJi  L  ruflf?u/f  JJ4     j      W(  > t  0/  T t?/idv7v . 


Wallis  s  Illaiid,Z<zAi*((/«!  7j   /i>',  S  oiU/i  ,l,o}iijUude  lid  -  zo  IVeot  o^  LondnfV  . 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  491 

CHAP.     IX A- liar.  ,v. 

JPaffage  from  Otaheite  to  'Tinianywithfome  Accoimt  ofjeveml 
J  . .  other  IJlands  that  were  dif covered  in  the  South  Seas^      •. 


H 


AVING   made  fail   from  King  George  the  Third's,       lytj. 

July. 


Ifland,  we  proceeded  along  the  fliore  of  the  Duke  of 
York's  Ifland,  at  the  diftanceof  about  two  miles.  There  ap-  °"  *^^'' 
peared  to  be  good  bays  in  every  part  of  it,  and  in  the  middle 
a  fine  harbour ;  but  I  did  not  think  it  wprth  while  to  ^o  on 
lliore.  .  The  middle  and  weft  end  is  very  mountainous,  the 
eaft  end  is  lower,  and  the  coaft  juft  within  the  beach  is  covered 
with  cocoa-nut,  bread-fruit,  apple,  and  plantain  trees. 

At  day-light,  the  next  morning,  we  faw  land,  for  which  Tuefday  zs. 
•we  made  fail,  and  ran  along  the  lee-fide  of  it.  On  the  wea- 
ther-fide there  were  very  great  breakers,  and  the  lee-fide  was 
rocky,  but  in  many  places  there  appeared  to  be  good  an- 
chorage. We  faw  but  few  inhabitants,  and  they  appeared 
to  live  in  a  manner  very  different  from  thofe  of  King 
George's  Ifland,  their  habitations  being  only  fmall  huts. 
We  faw  many  cocoa-nut  and  orh^t  trees  upon  the  fliore ;  but 
all  of  them  had  their  heads  blown  away,'  probably  in  a  hur- 
ricane. This  ifland  is  about  fix  miles  long,  and  has  a  moun- 
tain of  confiderable  height  in  the  middle,  which  feems  to  be 
fei'tile.    It  lies  in  latitude  17°  38' S.  and  longitude,  by  our  ' 

laft  obfervation,    151°  4  W.  and  I   called  it  Sir   Charles  sirCharies 

Saunders's 
bAUNDERS  S  Island.  '  '     ifland. 

On  the  29th,  the  variation  of  the  compafs,  by  azimuth,  Wednef.  29. 
was  7°  52'  E. ;  and  early  the  next  morning,  at  day-break,  we  Thurfdayso. 
faw  land  bearing  from  N.  by  E.  toN.  W.     We  flood  for  it, 
but  could  find  no  anchorage,  the  whole  ifland  being  fiir- 

R  r  r  2  rounded 


493'         CAPTAIN  WALLIS'3  VOYAGE 

rounded  by  breakers.  We  faw  fmoke  in  two  places,  but  no 
inhabitants.  A  few  cocoa-nut  trees  were  growing  on  the 
lee-part  of  it,  and  I  called  it  Lord  How's  Island.  It  is  about 
ten  miles  long,  and  four  broad,  and  lies  in  latitude  i6°  46' S. 
longitude,  by  obfervation,  154°  13' W. 

In  the  afternoon,  we  faw  land  bearing  W.  by  N.  and  flood 
for  it.  At  five  o'clock,  we  faw  breakers  running  a  great 
way  out  to  the  fouthward,  and  foon  after,  low  land  to  the 
S.  W.  and  breakers  all  about  it  in  every  diredion. 

We  turned  to  windward  all  night,  and  as  foon  as  it  was 
light,  crowded  fail  to  get  round  thefe  flioals.  At  nine  we 
Sciiiyiflands.  got  round  them,  and  named  them  Scilly  Islands.  They 
are  a  group  of  iflands  or  fhoals  extremely  dangerous  ;  for  in 
the  night,  however  clear  the  weather,  and  by  day,  if  it  is 
hazey,  a  fliip  may  run  upon  them  without  feeing  land. 
They  lie  in  latitude  16°  38' S.  longitude  iss''  3o"W. 

Augud.  We  continued  to  fleer  our  courfe  weflward,  till  day-break 
on  the  13th  of  Auguft,  when  we  faw  land  bearing  W.  by  S, 
and  hauled  towards  it.  At  1 1  o'clock  in  the  forenoon,  we 
fa-w  more  land  in  the  W.  S.  W.  At  noon,  the  firfl  land  that 
we  faw,  which  proved  to  be  an  ifland,  bore  W.  i-  S.  diflant 
about  five  leagues,  and  had  the  appearance  of  a  fugar  loaf; 
the  middle  of  the  other  land,  which  was  alfo  an  ifland,  and 
appeared  in  a  peak,  bore  W.  S.  W.  diflant  fix  leagues.  To  the 
firfl,  which  is  nearly  circular,  and  three  miles  over,  I  gave 
Bofcawen's     the  name  of  Boscawen's  Island;  and  the  other,  which  is 

Wand.  ' 

Keppei's  ifle.  thrcc  milcs  and  a  half  long,  and  two  broad,  I  called  Kep pel's 
Isle.  Port  Royal  at  this  time  bore  E,  4"  10'  S.  diflant  478 
leagues. 

At  two  o'clock,  being  about  two  miles  diflant  from  Bof- 
cawen's  Ifland,  we  faw  feveral  of  the  inhabitants  ;  but  Kep- 
pei's Ifle  being  to  windward,  and  appearing  more  likely  to 
afford  us  anchorage,  we  hauled  up  for  it.    At  fix,  it  was  not 

more 


# 


nOUNDTHEWORLD.  493 

more  than  a  mile  and  an  half  diftant,  and,  with  our  glafles,  1767. 

-we  faw  many  of  the  inhabitants  upon  the  beach ;  but  there  t    1^^  '_, 

being  breakers  at  a  confiderable  diftance  from  the  ftiore,  we  '^^"'^^'^^y'3» 
ftood  off  and  on  all  night. 

At  four  o'clock  the  next  morning,  we  fent  off  the  boats  to  Friday  14- 
found,  and  vifit  the  ifland  ;  and  as  foon  as  it  was  light,  wc 
ran  down  and  lay  over-againfl  the  middle  of  it.  At  noon, 
the  boats  returned,  and  reported  that  they  had  run  within  a 
cable's  length  of  the  ifland,  but  could  find  no  ground :  that 
feeing  a  reef  of  rocks  lie  off  it,  they  had  hauled  round  it, 
and  got  into  a  large  deep  bay  which  was  full  of  rocks :  that 
they  then  founded  without  the  bay,  and  found  anchorage 
from  14  to  20  fathom,  with  a  bottom  of  fand  and  coral:  that 
afterwards  they  went  again  into  the  bay,  and  found  a  rivu- 
let of  giod  water,  but  the  fhore  being  rocky,  went  in  fearch 
of  a  better  landing-place,  which  they  found  about  half  a 
mile  farther,  and  went  afhore.  They  reported  alfo,  that 
from  the  water  to  this  landing-place,  a  good  rolling-way 
might  be  made  for  fupplying  the  fliip,  but  that  a  ftrong 
guard  would  be  neceffary,  to  prevent  moleflation  from  the 
inhabitants.  They  faw  no  hogs,  but  brought  off  two  fowls 
and  fome  cocoa-nuts,  plantains  and  bananas.  While  the 
boats  were  on  fhore,  two  canoes  came  up  to  them  with  fix 
men :  they  feemed  to  be  peaceably  inclined,  and  were  much 
the  fame  kind  of  people  as  the  inhabitants  of  King  George's 
Ifland,  but  they  were  clothed  in  a  kind  of  matting,  and  the 
firft  joint  of  their  little  fingers  had  heen  taken  off;  at  the 
fame  time  about  fifty  more  came  down  from  the  country,  to 
within  about  an  hundred  yards  of  them,  but  would  advance 
no  farther.  When  our  people  had  made  what  obfervations 
they  could,  they  put  off,  and  three  of  the  natives  from  the 
canoes  came  into  one  of  the  boats,  but  whenfhe  got  about 
half  a  mile  from  the  fhore,  they  all  fuddenly  jumped  over- 
board and  fwam  back  again. 

Having 


494 


CAPTAIN   WALLIS's   VOYAGE 


i-76t.  Having  received  this  account,'  I  confidered  that  the  water- 

^_ ^y^'_;  ing  here  would  be  tedious,  and  attended  with  great  fatigue / 
Friday  1 4.  jj^j^,-  jj-  ^y^s  now  the  depth  of  winter  in  the  fouthern  hemi- 
fphere,  that  the  flilp  was  leaky,  that  the  rudder  ftiook  the 
ftern  very  much,  and  that  what  other  damage  fhe  might 
have  received  in  her  bottom  could  not  be  known.  That  for 
thefe  reafons,  ftie  was  very  unfit  for  the  bad  weather  which 
Ihe  would  certainly  meet  with  either  in  going  round  Cape 
Horn,  or  through  the  Streight  of  Magellan:  that  if  fhe 
fliould  get  fafely  through  the  Streight,  or  round  the  Cape, 
it  would  be  abfolutely  necefTary  for  her  to  refrefli  in  fome 
port,  but  in  that  cafe  no  port  would  be  in  her  reach;  I 
therefore  determined  to  make  the  befl  of  my  way  to 
Tinian,  Batavia,  and  fo  to  Europe  by  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope.  By  this  rout,  as  far  as  we  could  judge,  w'^.-fliould 
fooner  be  at  home  ;  and  if  the  fhip  fhould  prove  not  to  be  in 
a  condition  to  make  the  whole  voyage,  we  fhould  ftill  fave 
our  lives,  as  from  this  place  to  Batavia  we  fhould  probably 
have  a  calm  fea,  and  be  not  far  from  a  port. 

In  confequence  of  this  refolution,  at  noon  I  bore  away, 
and  pafTed  Bofcawen's  Ifland  without  vifiting  it.  It  is  a  high 
round  ifland,  abounding  in  wood,  and  full  of  people ;  but 
Ivcppel's  Ifle  is  by  far  the  largefl  and  the  beft  of  the  two. 

Bofcawen's  Ifland  lies  in  latitude  15^  50' S.  longitude  175** 
W.  and  Keppel's  Ifle  in  latitude  15''  55'  S.  longitude  175°  3' W. 

We  continued  a  \V.  N.  W.  courfe  till  10  o'clock  in  the 
Sun  ay  1  .  j-jQorning  of  Sunday  the  i6th,  when  we  faw  land  bearing 
N.  by  E.  and  hauled  up  for  ir.  At  noon,  we  were  within 
three  leagues  of  it :  the  land  within  fhore  appeared  to  be 
high,  but  at  the  water-fide  it  was  low,  and  had  a  pleafant 
appearance  ;  the  whole  fecmed  to  be  furroiuidcd  by  reefs, 
that  ran  two  or  three  miles  into  the  fca.  As  we  failed 
along  the  fliorc,  which  was  covered  with  cocoa-nut  trees, 
7  we. 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ^gs 

we  faw  a  few  huts,  and  fmoke  in  feveral  parts  up  the  coun-      1767- 
try.    Soon  after  we  hauled  without  a  reef  of  rocks,  to  get   »    -,    '_} 
round  the  lee-fide  of  the  ifland,  and  at  the  fame  time  fent  out    ''"  ^>"  • 
the  boats  to  found,  and  examine  the  coaft. 

The  boats  rowed  clofe  along  the  Ihore,  and  found  it  rocky, 
v/ith  trees  growing  clofe  down  to  the  water-lide.  Thefe 
trees  were  of  different  forts,  many  of  them  very  large,  but 
had  no  fruit :  on  the  lee-fide,  however,  there  were  a  few 
cocoa-nuts,  but  not  a  fingle  habitation  was  to  be  feen. 
They  difcovered  feveral  fraall  rills  of  water,  which,  by 
clearing,  might  have  been  made  to  run  in  a  larger  dream. 
Soon  after  they  had  got  clofe  to  the  fliore,  feveral  canoes 
came  up  to  them,  each  having  fix  or  eight  men  on  board. 
They  appeared  to  be  a  robuft,  acSbive  people,  and  were  quite 
naked,  except  a  kind  of  mat  that  was  v/rapped  round  their 
middle.  They  were  armed  with  large  maces  or  clubs,  fucli 
as  Hercules  is  reprefented  with,  two  of  which  they  fold  to 
the  Matter  for  a  nail  or  two,  and  fome  trinkets.  As  our 
people  had  feen  no  animal,  either  bird  or  bead,  except  fea- 
fowl,  they  were  very  defirous  to  learn  of  the  natives  whether 
they  had  either,  but  could  not  make  themfelves  underftood. 
It  appears  that  during  this  conference,  a  defign  was  formed 
to  feize  our  cutter,  for  one  of  the  Indians  fuddenly  laid  hold 
of  her  painter,  and  hauled  her  upon  the  rocks.  Our  people 
endeavoured,  in  vain,  to  make  them  defift,  till  they  fired  a 
mufket  crofs  the  nofe  of  the  man  that  was  mofl  a6live  in  the 
mifchief.  No  hurt  was  done  ;  but  the  fire  and  report  fo  af- 
frighted them,  that  they  made  off  with  great  precipitation*. 
Both  our  boats  then  put  off,  but  the  water  had  fallen  fo  fud- 
denly that  they  found  it  very  difficult  to  get  back  to  the  fhip;; 
for  when  they  came  into  deep  water  they  found  the  points  o£ 
rocks  Handing  up,  and  the  whole  reef,  except  in  one  part,, 
was  now  dry,  and  a  great  fea  broke  over  it.  The  Indians 
probably  perceived,  their  diftrefs,  for  they  turned  back,  and 

followed. 


496  CAPTAIN   WALLIS's   VOYAGE 


1767-      followed  them  in  their  canoes  all  along  the  reef  till  they  got 
<— V — t   to  the  breach,  and  then  feeing  them  clear,  and  making  way 
faft  towards  the  fliip,  they  returned. 

About  fix  in  the  evening,  it  being  then  dark,  the  boats  re- 
turned, and  the  Mafler  told  me,  that  all  within  the  reef  was 
rocky,  but  that  in  two  or  three  places,  at  about  two 
cables'  length  without  it,  there  was  anchorage  in  18,  14,  and 
12  fathom,  upon  fand  and  coral.  The  breach  in  the  reef  he 
found  to  be  about  60  fathom  broad,  and  here,  if  prefled  by 
neceffity,  he  faid  a  fhip  might  anchor  or  moor  in  8  fathom ; 
but  that  it  would  not  be  fafe  to  moor  with  a  greater  length 
than  half  a  cable. 

When  I  had  hoifted  the  boats  in,  I  ran  down  foin-  miles  to 

leeward,  where  we  lay  till  the  morning ;  and  then,  finding 

that  the  current  had  fet  us  out  of  fight  of  the  ifland,  I  made 

fail.     The  officers  did  me  the  honour  to  call  this  ifland  after 

Waiiis's         my  name.    Wallis's  Island  lies  in  latitude  13*^  i8'  S.  longi- 

^'^"'"'-  tudei77°W. 

As  the  latitudes  and  longitudes  of  all  thefe  iflands  are  ac- 
curately laid  down,  and  plans  of  them  delivered  in  to  tlve 
Admiralty,  it  will  be  eafy  for  any  fhip,  that  Ihall  hereafter 
navigate  thefe  feas,  to  find  any  of  them,  either  to  refrefh  or 
to  make  farther  difcovcries  of  their  produce. 

I  thought  it  very  remarkable,  that  although  we  found  no 
kind  of  metal  in  any  of  thefe  iflands,  yet  the  inhabitants  of 
all  of  them,  the  moment  they  got  a  piece  of  iron  in  their 
poflcflion,  began  to  fharpcn  it,  but  made  no  fuch  attempt 
on  brafs  or  copper. 

We  continued  to  fleer  N.  wefterly,  and  many  birds  were 
Friday  2?.  fiom  time  to  time  fcen  about  the  fliip  till  the  28th,  when 
her  longitude  being,  by  obfervation,  187"  24' W.  we  crolFed 
the  line  into  North  latitude.  Among  the  birds  that  came 
about  the  fliip,  one  which  we  caught  exacTily  refem- 
bled  a  dove  in  fizc,  Ihape,  and  colour.  It  had  red  legs, 
s  and 


ROtTND   THE   WORLD.  497 

and  was  web-footed.    We  alfo  faw  feveral  plantain  leaves,       »767- 

*■  Auguft. 

and  cocoa-nuts,  pafs  by  the  fliip.  ' ^ » 

On  Saturday  the  29th,  about  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  Saturday  19. 
being  in  latitude  2*  50' N.  longitude  188°  W.  we  crofled  a 
great  rippling,  which  ilretched  from  the  N.  E.  to  the  S.  W. 
as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach  from  the  maft-head.  We 
founded,  but  had  no  bottom  with  a  line  of  two  hundred 
fathoms. 

On  Thurfday  the  3d  of  September,  at  five  o'clock  in  the  September. 
morning,  we  faw  land  bearing  E.  N.  E.  diftant  about  five  "^  ^^  ^" 
miles:  in  about  half  an  hour  we  faw  more  land  in  the  N.  W. 
and  at  fix,  faw  in  the  N.  E.  an  Indian  proa,  fuch  as  is 
defcribed  in  the  account  of  Lord  Anfon's  voyage.  Perceiv- 
ing that  flie  flood  towards  us,  we  hoifted  Spanifh  colours ; 
but  when  flie  came  within  about  two  miles  of  us,  flie 
tacked,  and  flood  from  us  to  the  N.  N.  W.  and  in  a  fliort 
time  was  out  of  fight. 

At  eight  o'clock,  the  iflands  which  I  judged  to  be  two  of 
the  Pifcadores,  bore  from  S.  W.  by  W.  to  W.  and  to  wind- 
ward, from  N.  by  E.  to  N.  E.  and  had  the  appearance  of 
fmall  flat  keys.  They  were  diflant  about  three  leagues  j  but 
many  others,  much  farther  off",  were  in  fight.  The  latitude 
of  one  of  thofe  iflands  is  11°  N.  longitude  igz°  ^o'W.;  and 
the  other  11"^  20' N.  longitude  192°  58' W. 

On  the  7th,  we  faw  a  curlieu  and  a  pewit,  and  on  the  j>th  Monday  7; 
we  caught  a  land-bird,  very  much  refembling  a  ftarling. 

On  the  17th,  we  faw  two  gannets,  and  judged  iheifland  Thufd  y-;. 
of  Tinian  to  bear  Weft,  at  about  one  and  thirty  leagues 
diftance;  our  latitude  being  15°  N.  and  our  longitude  2i2» 
30'  W.     At  fix  o'clock,  the  next  morning,  we  faw  the  ifland  Pridiy  is, 
of  Saypan,  bearing  W.  by  N.  diftant  about  ten  leagues.    In 

Vol.  I.  S  f  f  the 


^g8  CAPTAIN    WALLlS's    VOYAGE 

1767-  the  afternoon,  we  faw  Tinian,  and  made  fail  for  the  road; 
C!!!!!!^  where,  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning,  of  Saturday  the  19th, 
Saturday  .9.   ^^^  came  to  an  anchor  in  two  and  twenty  fathom,  fandy 

ground,  at  about  a  mile  diftant  from  the  Ihore,  and  half  a 

mile  from  the  reef. 


C  H  A  P.     XI. 

Some  Accoimt  of  the  frefent  State  of  the  IJland  of  Tiniany 
and  our  Employ me7it  there  ;  with  what  happejied  in  the 
Run  from  thence  to  Batavia. 


N 


S  foon  as  the  fhip  was  fecured,  I  fent  the  boats  on  fliore 
to  eredl  tents,  and  bring  off  fome  refrefliments  ;  and 
about  noon  they  returned,  with  fome  cocoa-nuts,  limes,  and 
oranges. 

In  the  evening,  the  tents  being  eredled,  I  fent  the  Sur- 
geon, and  all  the  invalids  on  fhore,  with  two  months  pro- 
vifions,  of  every  kind,  for  forty  men,  the  fmith's  forge,  and 
a  chefl  of  carpenter's  tools..  I  then  landed  myfelf,  with  the 
Firft  Lieutenant,  both  of  us  being  in  a  very  fickly  condition, 
taking  with  us  alfo  a  mate,  and  twelve  men,  to  go  up  the 
country  and  hunt  for  cattle. 
Sunday  20.  When  we  firft  came  to  an  anchor,  the  North  part  of  the 
bay  bore  N.  39°  W.  Cocoa  Point  N.  7"  W.  the  landing-place 
N.E.  by  N.  and  the  fouth  end  of  the  ifland  S.  28'' E.;  but 
,  next  morning,  the  Maftcr  having  founded  all  the  bay,  and 

being  of  opinion  that  there  was  a  better  lituation  to  the 
fouthward,  we  warped  the  (hip  a  little  way  up,  and  moored 
with  a  cable  each  way. 

At 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


499 


At  fix  in  the  evenin?,  the  hunters  brought  in  a  fine  youngr       '767- 

,,,         „  ri,  ,  J  C3      September. 

bull,  or  near  tour  hundred  weight:  part  of  it  we  kept  on    « ^ > 

fhore,  and  fent  the  reft  on  board,  with  bread-fruit,  limes,    ""  *^  ^°' 
and  oranges. 

Early  the  next  morning,  the  carpenters  were  fet  at  work  Monday  zu 
to  caulk  the  fhip  all  over,  and  put  every  thing  in  repair  as 
far  as  poffible.  All  the  fails  were  alfo  got  on  fliore,  and  the 
fail-makers  employed  to  mend  them  :  the  armourers  at  the 
fame  time  were  bufy  in  repairing  the  iron-work,  and 
making  new  chains  for  the  rudder.  The  number  of  people 
now  on  fhore,  fick  and  well,  was  fifty-three. 

hi  this  place  we  got  beef,  pork,  poultry,  papaw  apples, 
bread-fruit,  limes,  oranges,  and  every  refrefliment  that  is 
mentioned  in  the  account  of  Lord  Anfon's  voyage.  The  fick 
began  to  recover  from  the  day  they  firft  went  on  fliore :  the 
air,  however,  was  fo  different  here  from  what  we  found  it 
in  King  George's  Ifland,  that  flefli  meat,  which  there  kept 
fweet  two  days,  could  here  be  fcarcely  kept  fvv^eet  one.  There 
had  been  many  cocoa-nut  trees  near  the  landing-place,  but 
they  had  been  all  waftefuUy  cut  down  for  the  fruit,  and  none 
being  grown  up  in  their  Head,  we  were  forced  to  go  three 
miles  into  the  country  before  a  fingle  nut  could  be  procured. 
The  hunters  alfo  fufiered  incredible  fatigue,  for  they  were 
frequently  obliged  to  go  ten  or  twelve  miles  through  one 
continued  thicket,  and  the  cattle  were  lb  wild  that  it  was 
very  difficult  to  come  near  them,  fo  that  I  was  obliged  to  re- 
lieve one  party  by  another;  and  ir^being  reported  that  cattle 
were  more  plenty  at  the  North  eud  of  the  ifland,  but  that  the 
hunters  being  quite  exhaufted  with  fatigue  when  they  got 
thither,  were  not  able  to  kill  them,  much  lefs  to  bring  them 
down,  I  fent  Mr.  Gore,  with  fourteen  men,  to  eftablifli 
themfelves  in  that  part  of  the  ifland,  and  ordered  that  a  boat 
fliQuld  go  every  morning,  at  day-break,   to  bring  in  what 

S  f  f  «  they 


^oo  CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1767.       they  fhould  kill.     In  the  mean  time,  the  fliip  was  laid  by 
C!^!L!1/    the  ftern  to  get  at  fome  of  the  copper  fheathing  which  had 
Monday  21.    ^^^^  much  tom;  and  in  repairing  the  copper,  the  carpenter 
difcovered  and  flopped  a  large  leak  under  the  lining  of  the 
knee  of  the  head,  by  which  we  had  reafon  to  hope  mofl  of 
the  water  that  the  velTel  had  lately  admitted  in  bad  wea- 
ther,  came  in.     During  our  flay  here,   I  ordered  all   the 
oaober.      people  on  fliore  by  turns,  and  by  the  15th  of  Odlober,  all 
Thurfdayi5.  ^|^^  ^^^j,  being  recovcred,    our  wood  and  water  completed, 
and  the  fhip  made  fit  for  the  fea,  we  got  every  thing  off  the 
Ihore,  and  embarked  all  our  men  from  the  watering-place, 
each  having,  at  leaft,  five  hundred  limes,  and  there  being 
feveral  tubs   full  on   the  quarter-deck,    for  every  one   to 
fqueezQ  into  his  water  as  he  Ihould  think  fit. 

priJay  16.  At  break  of  day,  on  Friday  the  i6th,  we  weighed,  and 

failed  out  of  the  bay,  fending  the  boats  at  the  fame  time  to 
the  North  end  of  the  ifland,  to  bring  off  Mr.  Gore  and  his 
hunters.  At  noon,  we  received  them  and  their  tents  on 
board,  with  a  fine  large  bull  which  they  had  juft  killed. 

While  we  lay  at  anchor  in  this  place,  we  had  many  obfer- 
vations  for  the  latitude  and  longitude,  from  which  we  drew 
up  the  following  table : 

•  Latitude  of  the  fhip,  as  fhe  lay  at  anchor  14°  55' N.  long.  214°  15'W. 

Latitude  of  the  watering-place      -     -     -  14     59  N. 

Longitude  of  the  body,  of  Tinian      -     -  214  W. 

Longitude  of  Tinian  Road     ----  214       8W. 

Medium  of  longitude,  obferved  at  Tinian  214       7 

We  continued  a  weflerly  courfe,  inclining  fomewhat  to 

Wednef.  2..    thc  North,   till  the  21ft,  when,  Tinian  bearing  S.  7i''4o'E. 

Thurfday22.  diftaut  277  Icagucs,  we  faw  many  birds;  and  the  next  day, 

faw  three  refembling  gannets,  of  the  fame  kind  that  we  had 

fecn  when  we  were  within  about  thirty  leagues  of  Tinian. 

A  On 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  501 

On  the  23d,  we  had  much  thunder,  hghrning,  and  rain,       1767. 
with  flrong  gales  and  a  great  fea.     The  fliip  laboured  very   ■      °  "jf 
much,  and  the  rudder  being  loofe  again,  fhook  the  ftern  as  ^"''""^^^ 
much  as  ever.      The  next  day,  we  faw  feveral  fmall  land  Saturday  24, 
birds,  and  the  gales  continuing,  we  fplit  the  gib  and  main- 
top-mafl-ftay-fail ;  the  wind  increafed  all  the  remainder  of 
the  day,  and  all  night,  and  on  Sunday  it  blew  a  florm.    The  Sunday  2^. 
fore-fail  and  mizen-fail  were  torn  to  pieces,  and  loil;  and 
having  bent  others,  we  wore  and  flood  under  a  reefed  fore- 
fail,  and  balanced  miz.en.    We  had  the  mortification  to  find 
the  ftiip  admit  more  water  than  ufuaL    We  got  the  top-gal- 
lant mafls  down  upon  the  deck,  and  took  the  gib-boom  in  ;- 
foon  after  which  a  fea  firuck  the  fliip  upon  the  bow,  and 
wafhed  away  the  round-houfes,    with  all  the  rails  of  the 
head,  and  every  thing  that  was  upon  the  fore-caflle:  we 
were,  however,  obliged  to  carry  as  much  fail  as  the  fliip 
would  bear,  being,  by  Lord  Anfon's  account,  very  near  the 
Bafhee  Iflands,  and,  by  Mr.  Byron's,  not  more  than  thirty 
leagues,  with  a  lee-fhore. 

The  next  morning,  we  faw  feveral  ducks  and  fhags,  fome  Monday  26. 
fmall  land  birds,  and  a  great  number  of  horfe-flies  about  the 
fliip;  but  had  no  ground  with  160  fathom.  The  inceflTant 
and  heavy  rain  had  kept  every  man  on  board  conftamly  wet 
to  the  ikin  for  more  than  two  days  and  two  nights  ;  the  wea- 
ther was  Hill  very  dark,  and  the  fea  was  continually  break- 
ing over  the  fhip. 

On  the  27th,  the  darknefs,  rain,  and  tempefl  continuing,  Tuefday  27, 
a  mountainous  fea  that  broke  over  us,  ftaved  all  the  half- 
ports  to  pieces  on  the  ftarboard-fide,  broke  all  the  iron  flan- 
chions  on  the  gunwale,  waflied  the  boat  off  the  fkids,  and 
carried  many  things  overboard.  We  had,  however,  thia 
day,  a  gleam  of  funfliine,  fufficient  to  determine  our  lati*- 

tudCj 


502 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


1767- 

Oaober. 


Wednef.  28. 


November. 
Tuefday  3. 


tude,  which  we  found  to  be  20°  50'  N.  and  the  fhip  appeared 
to  be  fifty  minutes  North  of  her  reckoning. 

The  weather  now  became  more  moderate.  At  noon,  on 
the  28th,  we  altered  our  courfe,  fleering  S.  by  W. ;  and  at 
half  an  hour  after  one,  we  faw  the  Bafliee  Iflands  bearing 
from  S.  by  E.  to  S.  S,  E.  diftant  about  fix  leagues.  Thefe 
iflands  are  all  high,  but  the  northermoft  is  higher  than  the 
refl.  By  an  obfervation  made  this  day,  we  found  Grafton 
Ifland  to  lie  in  the  longitude  of  239°  W.  and  in  latitude  of 
21°  4' N.  At  midnight,  the  weather  being  very  dark,  with 
fudden  gufts  of  wind,  we  miffed  Edmund  Morgan,  a  marine 
taylor,  whom  we  fuppofed  to  have  fallen  overboard,  having 
reafon  to  fear  that  he  had  drunk  more  than  his  allowance. 

From  this  time,  to  the  3d  of  November,  we  found  the  fhip 
every  day  from  ten  to  fifteen  miles  North  of  her  reckoning. 
The  day  before  we  had  fcen  feveral  gannets ;  but  upon 
founding  many  times  during  the  day  and  the  next  night,  we 
had  no  ground  with  160  fathom.  This  morning,  at  feven 
o'clock,  we  faw  a  ledge  of  breakers  bearing  S.  W.  at  the 
diitance  of  about  three  miles  :  we  hauled  off  from  them, 
and  at  eleven  faw  more  breakers  bearing  S.  W.  by  S.  diflant 
about  five  mules.  At  noon,  we  hauled  off  the  eaft  end  of 
them,  from  which  we  were  not  diflant  more  than  a  quarter 
of  a  mile. 

The  firft  fiioal  lies  in  latitude  11°  8' N. ;  longitude,  from 
Balhee  Iflands,  8°  W. 

The  fecond  flioal  lies  in  latitude  10°  46'  N. ;  longitude  of  the 
N.  E.  end,  from  Bafhee  Iflands,  8°  13'W. 

We  faw  much  foul  ground  to  the  S.  and  S.  S.  E.  but  had  no 
bottom  with  150  fathom.  Before  one,  however,  we  faw 
flaoal  water  on  the  larboard  bow,  and  Handing  from  it,  pafTed 

another 
8 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


503 


another  ledge  at  two.    At  three,  we  faw  a  low  fandy  point,       17^7- 
which  I  called  Sandy  Isle,  bearing  N.  7  E.  diftant  about  two   «    -.-  Jf 
miles.     At  jfive,  we  faw  a  fmall  ifland,  which  I  called  Small  sandyTfle.' 
Key,   bearing  N. byE,  diftant  about  five  miles;    and  foon  ^'"^'i^^/- 
after,  another  larger,  which  I  called  Long  Island,  beyond  it.  Longiaand. 
At  fix  in  the  evening,  the  largeft  ifland  being  diftant  between 
two  and  three  leagues,  we  brought  to,  and  flood  oiF  and  on 
from  mid-night  till  break  of  day,  continually  founding,  but 
having  no  ground. 

At  feven  in  the  morning,  of  Wednefday  the  4th,  we  faw  Wednef.  4. 
another  ifland,  which  I  called  New  Island,  bearing  S.  E.  by  E.  New  ifland. 
and  a  large  reef  of  rocks  bearing  S.  4-  W.  diftant  fix  miles. 
At  ten,  we  faw  breakers  from  W.  S.  W.  to  W.  by  N.  At  noon, 
the  Nbrth  end  of  the  great  reef  bore  S.  E.  by  E.  diftant  two 
leagues,  and  another  reef  bore  W.  N.  W.  at  about  the  fame 
diftance. 

The  latitudes  and  longitudes  of  thefe  iflands  and  fhoals, 
appear  by  the  following  table : 

Sandy  Ifle  -  _  -  -  ■ 
Small  Key  _  -  -  - 
Long  Ifland  -  -  -  _  . 
New  Ifland  -  _  _  -  , 
Firft  Shoal  -  .  .  -  . 
Second  Shoal  -        -         _ 

Third  Shoal        .        -        _        - 

Soon  after  we  faw  another  reef  in  latitude  10^  1^',  longi- 
tude 248". 

The  next  day,  we  found  the  fhip,  which  had  for  fome  time  xhurfday  5. 
been  to  the  northward  of  her  reckoning,  eight  miles  to  the 
fouthward. 

We 


Lat. 

N. 

Long 

.W. 

10" 

40' 

247° 

12' 

10 

37 

247 

16 

10 

20 

247 

24 

TO 

10 

247 

40 

10 

H 

247 

36 

10 

4 

247 

4S 

10 

5 

247 

50 

504 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


1767. 

November. 
Saturday'  7. 


Sunday  8> 
Tuefday  ir. 

Friday  13. 
Monday  i6> 

Ttfcfday  17. 


We  continued  our  courfe,  often  founding,  but  finding  no 
bottom.  On  the  7tli,  we  pafTed  through  feveral  ripplings  of  a 
current,  and  faw  great  quantities  of  drift-wood,  cocoa-nut 
leaves,  things  hke  concvsof  firs,  and  weed,  which  fwam  in  a 
ilream  N.  E.  and  S.  W.  We  had  now  foundings  at  fixty-five 
fathom,  with  brown  fand,  fmall  fliells,  and  fi:ones ;  and  at 
noon,  found  the  fliip  again  to  the  northward  of  her  reckon- 
ing ten  miles,  and  had  decreafed  our  foundings  to  twenty- 
eight  fathom,  with  the  fame  ground.  Our  latitude  was 
8*^36'N.  longitude  253°  W.  At  two  o'clock,  we  faw  the 
ifland  of  Condore,  from  the  mail-head,  bearing  W.  7  N.  At 
four,  we  had  ground  with  twenty  fathom;  the  i/land 
bearing  from  W.  to  N.  W.  by  W.  diftant  about  thirteen 
leagues,  and  having  the  appearance  of  high  hummocks. 
The  latitude  of  this  ifland  is  8''  40' N.;  longitude,  by  our 
reckoning,  254°  15'. 

We  now  altered  our  courfe  ;  and  the  next  morning,  I  took 
from  the  petty  officers  and  feamen,  all  the  log  and  journal 
books  relative  to  the  voyage. 

On  the  loth,  being  in  latitude  5°  20' N.  longitude  255°  W. 
we  found  a  current  fetting  four  fathom  an  hour  S.  by  W.j 
and  during  our  courfe  to  the  iflands  Timoun,  Aros,  and 
Pefang,  which  we  faw  about  fix  in  the  afternoon  of  the 
13  th,  we  were  every  day  from  ten  to  twenty  miles  fouth- 
ward  of  our  reckoning. 

On  th€  16th,  at  ten  in  the  moi'ning,  we  croflcd  the  line 
again  into  South  latitude,  in  longitude  255*^ ;  and  foon  after 
we  faw  two  iflands,  one  bearing  S.  by  E.  diftant  five  leagues, 
the  other  S.  by  W.  diftant  feven  leagues. 

The  next  morning,  the  weather  became  very  dark  and 
tempeftuous,  with  heavy  rainj  we  therefore  clewed  all  up, 

and 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ^05 

■and  lay  by  till  -we  could  fee  about  us.     The  two  iflan^s     ^ty^l- 
proved  to  be  Pulo  Tote,  and  Pulo  Wefte  ;  and  having  made   <      ^     .'/ 
fail  till  one  o'clock,   we  faw  the  Seven  hiands.    We  con- 
tinued our  courfe  till  two  the  next  morning,  the  weather  Wednef.  18. 
being  very  dark,  with  heavy  fqualls  of  wind,   and  much 
lightning  and  rain.    While  one  of  thefe  blafts  was  blowing 
with  all  its  violence,  and  the  darknefs  was  fo  thick  that  we 
could  not  fee  from  one  part  of  the  fhip  to  the  other,  we  fud- 
denly  difcovered,  by  a  flafh  of  lightning,  a  large  velTel  clofe 
aboard  of  us.    The  fteerfman  inftantly  put  the  helm  a-lee, 
and  the  fhip  anfwering  her  rudder,   we  juft  cleared  each 
other.     This  was  the  firfl;  fhip  we  had  feen  fince  we  parted 
with  the  Swallow ;  and  it  blew  fo  hard,  that  not  being  able 
to  underftand  any  thing  that  was  faid,  we  could  not  learn  to 
what  nation  fhe  belonged. 

At  fix,  the  weather  having  cleared  up,  we  faw  a  fail  at  an- 
-chor  in  the  E.  S.  E. ;  and  at  noon,  we  faw  laijd  in  the  W.  N^ 
W.  which  proved  to  be  Pulo  Taya,  Pulo  Tote  bearing  S.  ^f  E. 
Pulo  Wefte  S.  13°  E.  At  fix  in  the  evening,  we  anchored  in 
fifteen  fathom,  with  fandy  ground  ;  and  obferved  a  current 
running  E.  N.  E.  at  the  rate  of  five  fathom  an  hour. 

At  fix  in  the  morning,  we  weighed  and  made  fail,  and  Tharfdayig. 
foon  after  faw  two  veflels  a-head ;  but  at  fix  in  the  evening, 
finding  that  we  loft  much  ground,  we  came  again  to  an  an- 
chor in  fifteen  fathom,  with  a  fine  fandy  bottom. 

At  fra  o'clock  the  next  morning,  the  current  being  flack,  Friday  20. 
we  hove  fhort  on  the  fmall  bower,  which  foon  after  parted 
at  a  third  from  the  clench.  We  immediately  took  in  the 
cable,  and  perceived  that,  although  we  had  founded  with  great 
care  before  we  anchored,  and  found  the  bottom  clear,  it  had 
been  cut  through  by  the  rocks.    After  fome  time,  the  cur- 

VoL.  I.  T  t  t  rent 


'So6 


CAPTAIN   WALLIS's   VOYAGE 


1767. 

November 


Friday  20. 


rent  becoming  ftrong,  a  frefh  gale  fpringing  up,  and  the 
fhip  being  a  great  way  to  the  leeward,  I  made  fail,  in  hopes 
to  get  up  and  recover  the  anchor  j  but  I  found  at  laft  that  it 
was  impoflible,  without  anchoring  again ;  and  being  afraid  of 
the  confequences  of  doing  that  in  foul  ground,  I  determined 
to  fland  on,  efpecially  as  the  weather  was  become  fqually. 

Saturday  21.  We  wcrc,  howcver,  able  to  make  very  little  way  till  the 
next  day,  when,  about  three  in  the  afternoon,  we  faw  Mo- 
nopin  Hill  bearing  S.  4  E.  and  advancing  very  little,  faw  the 

Sunday  2j.  coaft  of  Sumatra  at  half  an  hour  after  fix  the  next  morning. 
We  continued  to  fuflfer  great  delay  by  currents  and  calms, 

Monday  30.  but  ou  Monday  the  30th  of  November,  we  anchored  in  Ba-» 
tavia  Road. 


CHAP. 


ROUNDTHEWORLD,  507 


CHAP.     XIL 

TrafifaBions  at  Batavia,   and  an  Account  of  the  Pa]Jag&. 
from  thence  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope, 


w 


E  found  here  fourteen  fail  of  Dutch  Eaft  India  fliips,       1767 


December. 


a  great  number  of  fmall  vefTels,  and  his  Majefty's 
fhip  the  Falmouth,  lying  upon  the  mud  in  a  rotten  con- 
dition. 

I  fent  an  officer  on  fhore,  to  acquaint  the  Governor  of  our 
arrival,  to  obtain  his  permiffion  to  purchafe  refrefliments,  and 
to  tell  him  that  I  would  falute  him,  if  he  would  engage  to  re- 
turn an  equal  number  of  guns.  The  Governor  readily  agreed; 
and  at  fun-rife,  on  Tuefday  the  ift  of  December,  I  faluted  Tusfdayi; 
him  with  thirteen  guns,  which  he  returned  with  fourteen 
from  the  fort.  Soon  after,  the  Purfer  fent  off  feme  frefli 
beef,  and  plenty  of  vegetables,  which  I  ordered  to  be  ferved 
immediately  -,  at  the  fame  time  I  called  the  fliip's  company 
together,  and  told  them  that  I  would  not  fuffer  any  liquor  to 
come  on  board,  and  would  feverely  punifli  thofe  who  flaould 
attempt  to  bring  any:  and  I  took  fome  pains  to  reconcile 
them  to  this  regulation,  by  affuring  them  that  in  this  coun- 
try intemperance  would  inevitably  deflroy  them.  As  a  fur- 
ther prefervative,  I  fuffered  not  a  man  to  go  on  fliore,  except 
thofe  who  were  upon  duty ;  and  took  care  that  none  even  of 
thefe  ftraggled  into  the  town. 

On  the  id,  I  fent  the  boatfwain  and  the  carpenter,  with  wednef.  2. 
the  carpenter  of  the  Falmouth,  to  look  at  fuchof  her  llores 
as  had  been  landed  at  Onruft,  with  orders,  that  if  any  were 

T  1 1  2  fit 


5o8  CAPTAIN   WALLIS»s    VOYAGE 

1767-      fit  for  our  ufe  they  fliould  be  bought.     At  their  return,  they 

« „ — J  informed  me  that  all  the  ftores  they  had  feen  were  rotten, 

^  "^  ■  ^'  and  imfit  for  ufe,  except  one  pair  of  tacks,  which  they 
brought  with  them:  the  mails,  yards,  and  cables  were  all 
dropping  to  .pieces,  and  even  the  iron  work  was  fo  rufty  that 
it  was  worth  nothing.  They  alfo  went  on  board  the  Fal- 
mouth to  examine  her  hulk,  and  found  her  in  fo  fhattered  a 
condition,  that  in  their  opinion  fhe  could  not  be  kept  to- 
gether during  the  nest  monfoon.  Many  of  her  ports  were 
v/allied  into  one,  the  ilern-poft  was  quite  decayed,  and  there 
was  no  place  in  her  where  a  man  could  be  Iheltered  from  the 
weather.  The  few  people  who  belonged  to  her  were  in  as 
bad  a  date  as  their  veffel,  being  quite  broken  and  worn- 
down,  and  expesfting  to  be  drowned  as  foon  as  the  monfoon- 
fliould  fet  in. 

Among  other  neceffaries,  we  were  in  want  of  an  anchor, 
having  loll  two,  and  of  three  inch  rope  for  rounding  the 
cables';  but  the  officers  whom  I  had  fent  to  procure  thefe 
articles,  reported,  that  the  price  which  had  been  demanded 
for  them  was  fo  exorbitant,  that  they  had  not  agreed  to  give 
Saturdays,  it.  On  Saturday  the  5th,  therefore,  I  went  on  fhore  myfelf, 
for  the  firfh  time,  and  vifited  the  different  ftorehoufes  and 
arfenals,  but  found  it  i  mpoffible  to  make  a  better  bargain 
than  my  officers.  I  fufpe(5led  that  the  dealers  took  advan- 
tage of  our  apparent  neceffity,  and  fuppoling  that  we  could 
not  fail  without  what  we  had  offered  to  purchafe,  determined 
to  extort  from  us  more  than  four  times  its  value.  I  v/as, 
however,  refolved  to  make  any  Ihift  rather  than  fubmit  to 
what  I  thought  a  fliameful  impofition,  and  therefore  told 
them  that  I  fhould  certainly  fail  on  the  next  Tuefday  ;  that 
if  they  would  agree  to  my  terms  in  the  mean  time,  I  would 
take  the  things  I  had  treated  for  j  if  not,  that  I  would  fail 
without  them. 

Soon 


HOUND    THE    WORLD.  509 

Soon  after  I  returned  on  board,  I  received  a  petition  from  ^^'^y- 

'  December. 

the  Warrant-Officers  of  the  Falmouth,    reprefenting,    that 


there  was  nothing  for  them  to  look  after :  that  the  Gunner  *  ""^  ^^ ' 
kad  been  long  dead,  and  his  ilores  fpoiled,  particularly  the 
powder,  which,  by  order  of  the  Dutch,  had  been  throv/n 
into  the  fea ;  that  the  boatfwain,  by  vexation  and  dillrefs, 
had  loll  his  fenfes,  and  was  then  a  deplorable  objecT:  in  a 
Dutch  hofpital :  that  all  his  {lores  had  been  long  fpoiled  and 
rotten,  the  roof  of  the  ilorehoufe  having  fallen  in  during  a 
wet  monfoon,  and  left  them  expofed  many  months,  all  en- 
deavours to  procure  another  place  to  put  them  in  being  in- 
effeftual :  that  the  carpenter  was  in  a  dying  condition,  and 
the  cook  a  wounded  cripple.  For  thefe  reafons,  they  re- 
quelled  that  I  would  rake  them  home,  or  at  leafl  difmifs 
them  from  their  charge.  It  was  with  the  greateft  regret  and 
companion  that  I  told  thefe  unhappy  people  it  was  not  in 
ray  power  to  relieve  them,  and  that  as  they  had  received 
charge  of  fcores,  they  mufl  wait  orders  from  home.  They 
replied,  that  they  had  never  received  a  fingle  order  from 
England  fince  they  had  been  left  here,  and  earneilly  in- 
treated  that  I  would  make  their  diftrefs  known,  that  it  might 
be  relieved.  They  had,  they  faid,  ten  years  pay  due,  in  the 
expe(5tation  of  which  they  were  grown  old,  and  which  now 
they  would  be  content  to  forfeit,  and  go  home  fweepers, 
rather  than  continue  to  fufFer  themiferies  of  their  prefent 
fituation,  which  w^re  indeed  very  great.  They  were  nor 
fuffered  to  fpend  a  fmgle  night  on  fliore,  whatever  was  their 
condition,  and  when  they  were  fick,  no  one  viiited  them  oa^ 
board;  they  were,  belides,  robbed  by  the  Malays,  and  in 
perpetual  dread  of  being  deftroyed  by  them,  as  they  had 
a  fhort  time  before  burnt  the  Siam  prize.  I  alTured  them 
that  I  would  do  my  utmofl  to  procure  them  relief,  and  they 
left  me  with  tears  in  their  eyes* 

5  ^^ 


510  CAPTAIN    WALLIS»s    VOYAGE 

1767.  As  I  heard  nothing  more  of  the  anchor  and  rope  for  which 

^^jcem^  I  had  been  in  treaty,  I  made  all  ready  for  fea.  The  fliip's 
Saturday  5.  company  had  continued  healthy  and  fober,  and  been  ferved 
with  frefli  beef  every  day,  from  the  time  of  our  firft  coming 
to  an  anchor  in  the  Road ;  we  had  alfo  fome  beef,  and  a  live 
ox,  to  carry  out  with  us.  We  had  now  only  one  man  upon 
the  fick  lift,  except  a  feaman,  who  had  been  afflicted  with 
rheumatic  pains  ever  {ince  our  leaving  the  Streight  of  Ma- 
gellan :  and  at  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning,  of  Tuefday  the 
Tuefday  8.     8th  of  December,  after  a  ftay  of  juft  one  week,  we  fet  fail. 

Friday  11.  On  the  1 1  til,  at  noon,  we  were  ofFa  fmall  ifland  called  the 
Cap,  between  the  coafts  of  Sumatra  and  Java,  and  feveral  of 

Saturday  12.  our  people  fell  down  with  colds  and  fluxes.  The  next  day,  a 
Dutch  boat  came  on  board,  and  fold  us  fome  turtle,  vtdiich 
was  ferved  to  the  fhip's  company.  At  night,  being  at  the 
diftance  of  about  two  miles  from  the  Java  fhore,  we  faw  an 
incredible  number  of  lights  upon  the  beach,  which  we  fup- 
pofed  were  intended  to  draw  the  fifli  near  it,  as  we  had  feen 
the  fame  appearance  at  other  places. 

Monday  14.  On  Mouday  tlic  i4th,  we  anchored  off  Prince's  Ifland,  and 
Tuefday  5.    bcgau  to  take  in  wood  and  water.    The  next  morning,  the 

natives  came  in  with  turtle,  poultry,  and  hog-deer,  which 

we  bought  at  a  reafonable  price.  We  continued  here,  fitting 
Saturday  19.   ^^c  fliip  for  the  fea,  till  the  ipth,  during  which  time  many 

of  the  people  began  to  complain  of  intermitting  diforders, 
Sunday  20.     fomcthiog  like  an  ague.    At  fix  o'clock  the  next  morning, 

having  completed  our  wood,  and  taken  on  board  feventy-fix 

tons  of  water,  we  made  fail. 

While  we  lay  here,  one  of  the  feamen  fell  from  the  main 

yard  into  the  barge,  which  lay  along  fide  the  fliip.    His 

body  was  dreadfully  bruifed,  and  many  of  his  bones  were 

Jbroken :  it  happened  alfo,  that  in  his  fall  he  Ilruck  two  other 

7  men, 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  511 

men,  one  of  whom  was  fo  much  hurt  that  he  continued    ^'767. 

December. 


Thurfday  24. 


I'peechlefs  till  the  24th,  and  then  died,  though  the  other  had 
only  one  of  his  toes  broken.  We  had  now  no  lefs  than  fixteen 
upon  the  lick  lift,  and  by  the  ift  of  January,   the  num-      January. 

,  .  Friday  i. 

ber  was  mcreafed  to  forty ;  we  had  buried  three,  among 
whom  was  the  Quarter-Mafter,  George  Lewis,  who  was  a 
diligent,  fober  man,  and  the  more  ufeful,  as  he  fpoke  both 
the  Spanifli  and  Portuguefe  languages.  The  difeafes  by 
which  we  fuffered,  were  fluxes,  and  fevers  of  the  putrid 
kind,  which  are  always  contagious,  and,  for  that  reafon 
alone,  would  be  more  fatal  on  board  a  fhip  than  any  other. 
The  Surgeon's  mate  was  very  foon  laid  up,  and  thofe  who 
were  appointed  to  attend  the  fick,  were  always  taken  ill  in  a 
day  or  two  after  they  had  been  upon  that  fervice.  To  re- 
medy this  evil,  as  much  as  it  was  in  my  power,  I  made  a 
very  large  birth  for  the  fick,  by  removing  a  great  number  of 
people  from  below  to  the  half  deck,  which  I  hung  with 
painted  canvafs,  keeping  it  conftantly  clean,  and  directing  it 
to  be  waflied  with  vinegar,  and  fumigated  once  or  twice  a 
day.  Our  water  was  well  tafted,  and  was  kept  conftantly 
ventilated ;  a  large  piece  of  iron  alfo,  ufed  for  the  melting 
of  tar,  and  called  a  loggerhead,  was  heated  red  hot,  and 
quenched  in  it  before  it  was  given  out  to  be  drank.  The 
fick  had  alfo  wine  inftead  of  grog,  and  falep  or  fago  every 
morning  for  breakfaft :  two  days  in  a  week  they  had  mutton 
broth,  and  had  a  fowl  or  two  given  them  on  the  inter- 
mediate days  ;  they  had,  befides,  plenty  of  rice  and  fugar, , 
and  frequently  malt  mefhed  ;  fo  that  perhaps  people  in  a. 
fickly  fliip  had  never  fo  many  refrefhments  before  :  the  Sur- 
geon alfo  was  indefatigable ;  yet,  with  all  thefe  advantages, . 
the  ficknefs  on  board  gained  ground.  In  the  mean  time,  to 
aggravate  our  misfortune,  the  (hip  made  more  than  three 

feet 


512 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE 


1768. 

January. 


Sunday  10, 


Sunday  17. 


Sunday  24. 


Tuefday'26. 
Wednef.  27. 


Saturday  30, 

February. 
Thurfday  4 


feet  water  in  a  watch ;  and  all  her  upper  works  were  veiy 
open  and  loofe. 

By  the  loth  of  January,  the  ficknefs  began,  in  feme  de- 
gree, to  abate,  but  more  than  half  the  company  were  fo 
feeble,  that  they  could  fcarrely  crawl  about.  On  this  day, 
being  in  latitude  22"  41' S.  longitude,  by  account,  300''  47' Wc 
w^e  faw  many  tropic  birds  about  tnc  Jhip. 

On  the  17th,  being  in  latitude  27°  32' S.  longitude  310°  36' 
W.  we  faw  feveral  ail  atroffes,  and  caught  feme  bonettas. 
The  fhip  was  this  day  ten  miles  to  the  fouthward  of  her 
account. 

On  the  24th,  in  latitude  33°  40' S.  longitude,  by  account, 
328*  17'  W.  we  met  with  a  violent  gale,  which  fplit  the  main- 
top-fail and  the  main-top  maft-ftay-fail  all  to  pieces.  The 
fea  broke  over  the  Ihip  in  a  dreadful  manner,  the  llarboard 
rudder-chain  was  broken,  and  many  of  the  booms  were 
wafhed  overboard.  During  the  llorm  we  faw  feveral  birds 
and  butterflies ;  and  our  firfl  attention,  after  it  fubfided,  was 
to  dry  the  bedding  of  the  lick :  at  the  fame  time,  every  one 
on  board  who  could  handle  a  needle  was  employed  in  re- 
pairing the  fails,  which  were  now  in  a  fliattered  condition. 

On  the  26th  and  27th,  being  in  latitude  34°  16',  and  be- 
calmed, we  had  feveral  obfervations,  by  which  we  deter- 
mined the  longitude  of  the  fliip  to  be  323°  30';  and  it 
appeared  that  we  were  feveral  degrees  to  the  Eaflward  of 
our  reckoning. 

At  fix  in  the  evening,  of  the  30th  of  January,  we  faw  land, 
and  on  the  4th  of  February,  we  anchored  in  Table  Bay,  at 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

Our  run  from  Prince's  Ifland  to  the  Cape  was,  by  our 
reckoning,  89  degrees  longitude,  which  makes  the  longitude 

of 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  513 

of  the  Cape  345°  W. ;  but  the  longitude  of  the  Cape  being,  by  »768. 

obfervation,  342°  4',  it  appeared  that  the  fliip  was  three  de-  v— v — j 
grees  to  the  Eaftward  of  her  reckoning. 


C  HAP.     XIIL 

'^^j^n  Account  of  our  TranfaBions  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hopey 
and  of  the  Return  of  the  Dolphin  to  England, 

AS  foon  as  the  fhip  was  at  anchor,  I  fent  an  officer  on 
fliore,  with  the  ufual  compHments  to  the  Governor, 
who  received  him  with  great  civility,  telling  him  that  we 
were  welcome  to  all  the  refrefliments  and  affiftance  that  the 
Cape  afforded,  and  that  he  would  return  our  falute  with  the 
fame  number  of  guns. 

We  found  riding  here  a  Dutch  Commodore,  with  lixteen 
fail  of  Dutch  Eafl  Indiamen,  a  French  Eafl  India  fliip,  and 
the  Admiral  Watfon,  Captain  Griffin,  an  Eaft  India  packet 
boat,  for  Bengal.  We  faluted  the  Governor  with  thirteen 
guns,  and  he  returned  the  fame  number ;  the  Admiral  Wat- 
fon faluted  us  with  eleven  guns,  and  we  returned  nine ;  the 
French  fhip  afterwards  faluted  us  with  nine  g;uns,  and  we 
returned  feven. 

Having  .got  off  fome  mutton  for  the  fhip's  company,  with 
plenty  of  greens,  I  fent  the  Surgeon  on  fhore  to  hire  quar- 
ters for  the  lick,  but  he  could  procure  none  for  lefs  than  two 
Ihillings  a  day,  and  a  flipulation  to  pay  more,  if  any  of 
them  fhould  take  the  fmall-pox,  which  was  then  in  almofi 
every  houfe,  in  proportion  to  the  malignity  of  the  difeafe. 

Vol.  I.  U  u  u  The 


^j^  CAPTAIN   WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1768.  The  firft  expence  being  great,  and  it  appearing,  upon  en- 
^ebf uary.  ^  ^^^jj^  tj^^t  many  of  our  people  had  never  had  the  fmall- 
pox,  fo  that  the  increafe  was  Hkely  to  be  confiderable,  befides 
the  danger,  I  requefted  the  Governor's  permiffion  to  QveO:  a 
tent  upon  a  fpacious  plain,  at  about  two  miles  diftance  from, 
the  town,  called  Green  Point,  and  to  fend  my  people  on 
fliore  thither  during  the  day,  under  the  care  of  an  officer,  to 
prevent  their  ftraggling.  This  permiffion  the  Governor  im- 
mediately granted,  and  gave  orders  that  they  ftiould  fuflfer 
no  moleftation. 

In  this  place,  therefore,  I  ordered  tents  to  be  eredled,  and 
the  Surgeon  and  his  mate,  with  proper  officers,  to  attend ; 
at  the  fame  time  llridlly  charging  that  no  man  fhould  be 
fuffisred  to  go  into  the  town,  and  that  no  liquor  fhould  be 
brought  to  the  tents.  All  the  fick,  except  two,  left  the  fliip 
early  in  the  morning,  with  their  provifions  and  firing  ;  and 
for  thofe  that  were  reduced  to  great  weaknefs,  I  ordered  the 
Surgeon  to  procure  fuch  extraordinary  provifions  as  he 
fiiould  think  proper,  particularly  milk,  though  it  was  fold 
at  an  exceffive  price.  About  fix  in  the  evening,  they  re- 
turned on  board,  and  feemed  to  be  greatly  refrefhed.  At 
the  fame  timie,  being  extremely  ill  myfelf,  I  was  obliged  to 
be  put  on  fhore,  and  carried  about  eight  miles  up  the  coun- 
try, where  I  continued  all  the  time  the  fhip  lay  here  ;  and 
when  fhe  was  ready  to  fail,  returned  on  board  without 
having  received  the  leaft  benefit. 

No  time,  however,  was  loft  in  refitting  the  veflcl :  the  fails 
were  all  unbent,  the  yards  and  top-mafts  ftruck,  the  forge 
was  fet  up,  the  carpenters  were  employed  in  caulking,  the 
fail  makers  in  mending  the  fails,  the  cooper  in  repairing  the 
cafks,  the  people  in  over-hauling  the  rigging,  and  the  boats 
in  filling  water. 

2  By 


Wednef.  ic 


HOUND    THE   WORLD.  ^rj 

By  the  loth  of  February,  the  heavy  work  being  nearly  ^768. 
difpatched,  twenty  of  the  men  who  had  had  the  fmall-pox,  ^^^"'^'^' 
were  permitted  to  go  afliore  at  the  town,  and  others,  who 
were  ftill  Hable  to  the  diftemper,  were  landed  at  fomc 
diftance,  with  orders  to  go  into  the  country,  and  return  in 
the  evening,  which  they  pundlually  obeyed:  this  liberty, 
therefore,  was  continued  to  them  all  the  while  the  veffel  lay 
at  this  port,  which  produced  fo  good  an  eifed,  that  the  Ihip's 
company,  except  the  fick,  who  recovered  very  fall,  had  a 
more  healthy  and  vigorous  appearance  than  when  they  left 
England.  We  purchafed  here  the  neceiTaries  that  we  endea- 
voured to  procure  at  Batavia,  at  a  reafonable  price,  befides 
/canvas  and  other  ftores  j  we  alfo  procured  frefli  water  by 
diftillation,  principally  to  fhew  the  captains  of  the  India- 
men,  and  their  officers,  that,  upon  an  emergency,  wholefome 
water  might  be  procured  at  fea.  At  five  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  we  put  fifty-fix  gallons  of  fait  water  into  the  ftill, 
at  feven  it  began  to  run,  and  in  about  five  hours  and  a  quar- 
ter afforded  us  fix  and  thirty  gallons  of  frefii  water,  at  an 
expence  of  nine  pounds  of  wood,  and  fixty-nine  pounds  of 
coals.  Thirteen  gallons  and  two  quarts  remained  in  the 
ilill,  and  that  which  came  off  had  no  ill  tafle,  nor,  as  we  had 
often  experienced,  any  hurtful  quality.  I  thought  the 
fliewing  this  experiment  of  the  more  confequence,  as  the 
being  able  to  allow  plenty  of  water  not  only  for  drink,  but 
for  boiling  any  kind  of  provifion,  and  even  for  making  tea 
and  coffee,  efpccially  during  long  voyages,  and  in  hot  cli- 
mates, conduces  greatly  to  health,  and  is  the  means  of  faving 
many  lives.  I  never  once  put  my  people  to  an  allowance  of 
water  during  this  whole  voyage,  always  ufmg  the  flillwhen 
we  were  reduced  to  five  and  forty  tons,  and  preferving  the 
rain  water  with  the  utmofl  diligence.  I  did  not,  however, 
allow  water  to  be  fetched  away  at  pleafure,  but  the  officer  of 
U  u  u  2  the 


^i<$  CAPTAIN    WALLIS^    VOYAGE 

3768.      the  watch  had  orders  to  give  fuch  as  hroiight  provifions  of 
' .  ^  7"*^^'  •   '^^Y  kind,  water  fufficient  to  drefs  it,  and  a  proper  quantity 
alfo  to  fuch  as  brought  tea  and  coffee. 

Thurfdayzj.  On  the  25th,  the  wood  and  Water  being  nearly  Completed, 
and  the  (hip  almoft  ready  for  the  fea,  I  ordered  every  body 
to  go  on  board,  and  the  fick  tents  to  be  brought  off;  the 
people  being  fo  well  recovered,  that  in  the  whole  fliip's  com- 
pany there  were  but  three  men  unable  to  do  duty,  and  hap^- 
pily,  fince  our  leaving  Batavia,  we  had  loft  but  three.  The  next 

Saturday'27.  ^^y^  ^^^^  ^^'^^  ^^y  following,  the  carpenters  finifhed  caulking 
all  the  out-works,  the  fore-caftle,  and  the  main-deck;  we 
got  all  our  bread  on  board  from  th€  fhore,  with  a  con- 
fiderable  quantity  of  ftraw,  and  thirty-four  flieep  for  fea- 
ftores.     In  the  mean  time  I  came  on  board,  and  having  un- 

Th^ffda'"'  nioored,  lay  waiting  for  a  wind  till  the  evening  of  Thurfday 
the  3d  of  March,  when  a  breeze  fpringing  up,  we  got  under 
fail.  While  we  were  on  fliore  at  Green  Point,  we  had  an 
opportunity  of  making  many  celeftial  obfervations,  by 
which,  we  determined  Table  Bay  to  lie  in  latitude  34°  2'S. 
longitude,  from  Greenwich,  18°  8' E.  The  variation  of  the 
needle,  at  this  place,  was  19°  30' W. 

Monday  7.  On  the  7th,  being  in  latitude  29°  5$'  S.  longitude,  by  ac- 
count, 347°  38'  the  lliip  was  eight  miles  to  the  Northward  of 
her  dead  reckoning. 

Sunday  13.  Ou  the  13th,  having  failed  weftward  360- degrees  from  the 
meridian  of  London,  we  had  loft  a  day ;  I  therefore  called 
the  latter  part  of  this  day  Monday,  March  14th. 

Wednef.  i6.  At  fix  o'clock  in  the  evening,  of  Wednefday  the  i-6th,  we 
faw  the  Iftand  of  Saint  Helena,  at  the  diftance  of  about  four- 

Thurfdayi;.  tccn  Icagucs  j  and  at  One  tlic  ucxt  moming,  brought  to.  At 
break  of  day,  we  made  fail  for  the  ifland,  and  at  nine,  an- 
chored in  the  bay.    The  fort  faluted  us  with  thirteen  guns, 

and 


ROUND    THE    WORLD;  51.7 

SHid-we  returned  the  fame  number.    We  found  ridinar  here  ^7^8. 

°  March. 

the  Northumberland  Indiaraan,.  Captain  Milford,    who  fa- 


-luted  us  with  eleven  guns,  and  we  returned  nine.    We  got  ^  ^' 

out  all  the  boats  as  foon  as  poffible,  and  fent  the  empty  caflcs 
to  be  filled  with  water ;  at  the  fame  time  feveral  of  the  people 
were  employed  to  g;ather  purflain,  which  grows  here  in 
great  plenty.  About  two  o'clock,  1  went  on  ihore  myfelf, 
and  was  fainted  by  the  fort  with  thirteen  guns,  which  I  re- 
turned. The  Governor  and  the  principal  gentlemen  of  the 
ifland  did  me  the  honour  to  meet  me  at  the  water-fide,  and 
having  conducted  me  to  the  fort,  told  me,  that  it  was  ex- 
pelled I  fhould  make  it  my  home  during  my  ftay. 

By  noon  the  next:  day,  our  water  was  completed,  and  the  Friday  18,, 
fliip  was  made  ready  for  fea;  foon  after,  flie  was  unmoored, 
to  take  advantage  of  the  firft  breeze,  and  at  five  in  the  after- 
noon^ I  returned  onboard.  Upon  my  leaving  the  fhore,  I 
was  faluted  with  thirteen  guns,  and  foon  after,  upon  getting 
underway,  I  was  faluted  with  thirteen  more,  both  which  I 
returned;  the  Northumberland  Indiaman  then  faluted  me 
with  thirteen  guns,  fo'  did  the  Ollerly,  which  arrived  here 
the  evening  before  I  made  fail,  and  I  returned  the  complin 
ment  with  the  fame  number. 

On  the  21ft,  in  the  evening,  we  faw  feveral men  of  war  ^fonday2Iv 
birds;  and  at  midnight,  heard  many  birds  about  the  fhip.  Tuefdayas^ 
At  five  o'clock  in  themornlng  of  the  23d,  we  faw  the  Ifland  WedneLzj^ 
of  Afcenfion;  and  at  eight,    difcovered  a  fhip  to  the  Eaft- 
ward,  who  brought  to,  and  hoifled  a  jack  at  her  main- top- 
mall-head,  upon  which  we  fhewed  our  colours,  and  fhe  then 
Hood  in  for  the  land  again.     We  ran  down  clofe  along  the 
north-eaft  fide  of  the  ifland,  and  looked  into. the  bay,  but 
feeing  no  Ihip  there,  and  it  blowing  a  ftifFgale,  I  made  the 
beft  of  my  way. 

On  Monday  the  28th,  we  crofled  the  equator,   and  got  MondaysSi 

again  into  North  latitude. 

6  Qa 


SiS  CAPTAIN   WALLIS's    VOYAGE 

1768.  On  Wednefday,  the  T3th  of  April,  we  pafled  a  great  quan- 

< V-'-;   tky  of  gulph  weed  j  and  on  the  17th,  we  pafled  a  great  deal 

Sunday  17.^*   Hiore.    On  the  1 9th,  we  faw  two  flocks  of  birds,  and  obferv- 

Tuefday  19.    ^^^  ^^^q  water  to  bc  difcoloured,    we  thought  the  ground 

might  be  reached,  but,  upon  founding,  could  find  no  bottom. 

Sunday  24.  At  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  Sunday  the  24th,  we 
faw  the  peak  of  the  Ifland  of  Pico  bearing  N.  N.  E.  at  the 
diftance  of  about  eighteen  leagues.  We  found,  by  obferva- 
tion,  thatFyal  lies  in  latitude  38°  20' N.  longitude  28°3o'W. 
from  London. 

May.  No  incident  worth  recording  happened  till  about  noon  on 

Wednef;  11.  tj^g  j  ui^  of  May,  when,  being  in  latitude  48'  44' N.  longi- 
tude 7°  i6'W.  we  faw  a  fliip  in  chace  of  a  floop,  at  which  flie 
fired  feveral  guns.  We  bore  away,  and  at  three,  fired  a  gun 
at  the  chace,  and  brought  her  to;  the  fliip  to  windward, 
being  near  the  chace,  immediately  fe.nt  a  boat  on  board  her, 
and  foon  after,  Captain  Hammond,  of  his  Majefty's  floop  the 
Savage,  came  on  board  of  me,  and  told  me  that  the  veflTel  he 
had  chaced,  when  he  firft  faw  her,  was  in  company  with  an 
Irifli  wherry,  and  that  as  foon  as  they  difcovered  him  to  be  a 
man  of  war,  they  took  different  ways ;  the  wherry  hauled 
the  wind,  and  the  other  veflTel  bore  away.  That  he  at  firft 
hauled  the  wind,  and  flood  after  the  wherry,  but  finding 
that  he  gained  no  ground,  he  bore  away  after  the  other 
veflTel,  which  probably  would  alfo  have  efcaped,  if  I  had  not 
flopped  her,  for  that  he  gained  very  little  ground  in  the 
chace.  She  appeared  to  be  laden  with  tea,  brandy,  and 
other  goods,  from  Rofcoe  in  France ;  and  though  flie  was 
fleering  a  fouth-weft  courfe,  pretended  to  be  bound  to  Ber- 
gen in  Norway.  She  belonged  to  Liverpool,  was  called  the 
Jenny,  and  commanded  by  one  Robert  Chriftian.  Her 
brandy  and  tea  were  in  fmali  kegs  and  bags ;  and  all  ap- 
pearances 


ROUND   THE   WORLD.  gt^ 

pearances  being  flrongly  againft  her,   I  detained  her,    in      »768. 
order  to  be  fent  to  England.  ■    -!-_f. 

At  half  an  hour  after  five,  on  the  13th,  we  faw  the  Iflands  Friday  13. 
o^Scilly ;  on  the  19th,  I  landed  at  Haftings  in  Suflex ;  and  Thnrfday  19, 
at  four  the  next  morning,  the  fliip  anchored  fafely  in  the  ^'^^^  y^o. 
Downs,   it  being  juft  637  days  fince  her  weighing  anchor 
in  Plymouth  Sound.    To  this  narrative,  I  have  only  to  add, 
that  the  objecfl  of  the  voyage  being  difcovery,  it  was  my 
conftant  pra(5tice,  during  the  whole  time  of  my  navigating 
thofe  parts  of  the  fea  which  are  not  perfecftly  known,  to  lie 
to  every  night,  and  make  fail  only  in  the  day,  that  nothing 
might  efcape  me. 


A  TABLE 


JT^^ 


CAPTAIN   WALLtS's   VOYAGE 


•2^1 


A: 


A 

B  ^Z 

OF    THE 


L 


Latitudes  and  the  Longitudes  Weft  of  London,  wltli  the  Variation  of  the 
Needle,  at  feveral  Ports,  and  Situations  at  Sea,  from  Obfervations  fnade'Oii;  board 
his  Majefty's  Ship  the  Dolphin  ;  and  her  Nautical  Reckoning  during  the  Voyage 
which  fhe  made  round  the  World. in  the  Years  1766,  1767,-  1768,  under  the 
Command  of  Captain  Samuel  Wallis, 


NAMES    of  PLACES, 

Time  when. 

Latitude  in. 

Longitude 
fuppofed. 

Longitude  obferv- 
ed  by  Dr.  Mafcu- 
line*s  Method. 

Variation, 

1766. 

Lizard         — 

Auguft  22. 

50" 

o'N. 

.  5° 

14'W. 

21°      O'W. 

Funchall  Road,  Madeira 

Sept.  8. 

32 

35  N. 

18 

0  W. 

16' 

40'W. 

14     ID  W. 

Port  Praja,  St.  Jaga 

Sept.  24. 

14 

53  N. 

23 

50  W. 

8   20  W. 

Port  Defire          —         — 

Dec.  8. 

47 

56  S. 

67 

20  W. 

66 

24  W. 

23   15  E. 

Cape  Virgin  Mary         • — 

Dec.  17. 

52 

24  S. 

70 

4  w. 

69 

6  W. 

23     0  E. 

Point  Poffeffion    —       — 

Dec.  23. 

52 

30  s. 

70 

1 1  w. 

69 

50  W. 

22  40  E. 

Point  Porpafs     —         — 

Dec.  26. 

53 

8  S. 

71 

0  w. 

71 

30  w. 

22  50  E. 

Port  Famine           —     — 

Dec.  27. 

1767. 

53 

43  S. 

7^ 

0  W. 

71 

32  w. 

22  30  E. 

Cape  Froward    —         — 

Jan.  19. 

54 

3S. 

22  40  E. 

Cape  Holland         —     — 

fan.  20. 

53 

58  S. 

22  40  E. 

Cape  Gallant         —      — 

Jan.   23. 

53 

50  s. 

22  40  E. 

York  Road         —         — 
Cape  Quod     —     —     — 

Feb.  4. 
Feb.  17. 

53 
53 

40  s. 
33  S. 

22   30  E. 
?2  35  E. 

Cape  Notch    —     —     — 

March  4. 

53 

22  s. 

23     0  E. 

Cape  Upright    —          — 

March  iS. 

53 

5S. 

22  40  E. 

Cape  Pillar         —         — 

April  1 1. 

52 

46  s. 

76 

0  W. 

23     0  E. 

At  Sea 

April  21. 

42 

30  s. 

96 

30  W. 

95 

46  w. 

12     0  E. 

At  Sea 

May  4. 

28 

I2S. 

99 

0  W. 

96 

30  w. 

6     0  E. 

At  Sea 

May  20. 

21 

oS. 

1 10 

0  W. 

106 

47  ^\''- 

5     0  E. 

At  Sea 

May  23. 

20 

20  s. 

ri6 

54  W. 

1 12 

6  W. 

5     0  E. 

At  Sea 

June  I. 

20 

38  s. 

132 

oW. 

127 

45  W. 

5     9  E- 

ROUND    T  H  E    WORLD. 


T  A  B  L  E  of  the  Latitudes  and  Longituives,  &c.  continued. 

NAMES    of  PLACES. 

Tim^  when. 

Latitude  in. 

Longitude 
fuppofed. 

ongifjjc  onffTv- 
i  bv  Pr.  M.fcu-        Variation, 
ine's  Method. 

1767. 

• 

At  Sea 

fune  3. 

[9°.  30'S. 

1 32"  30' w. 

129°  50  W.    5''4o'E. 

W'hitlunday  Iflaiid         — 

June  7. 

19  26  s. 

141     oW. 

137  5-6  W.    6     0  E 

Quee,n  Charlotte's  liland 

lune  8. 

19   i8  S. 

141     4  W. 

138  4W. 

5  20  E. 

Egmont  I  Hand      —      — 

June  1 1. 

19  20  S. 

141   27  W. 

138  30  w. 

6     0  E. 

D.  ofGlocefter's  Ifland 

]une  12. 

19  11  s. 

143     8W. 

140     6  W. 

7   10  E. 

D.  of  Cumberland's  Wand 

]une  1  3. 

19  18  s. 

143  44  W. 

140  34  W. 

7     0  E. 

PrInceWilllam  Henry's  111. 

June  I  3. 

19     0  S. 

144     4  W. 

141     6  W. 

7     0  E.    , 

Ofnaburgh  Ifland           — 

June  17. 

17  51  s. 

150  27  w. 

147   30 W. 

6     0  E. 

King  George  ?S.  E.  End 

June  19. 

17  48  s. 

151  30  w. 

149   15  W. 

6     0  E. 

IIId'sinandiN.W.End 

July  4- 

17  30  s. 

152     oW. 

1 50     0  W. 

5  30  E- 

Duke  of  York's  Ifland  — 

July  27. 

17  28  s. 

152  12  w. 

150  16  w. 

6     0  E. 

Sir  C.  Saunders's  Ifland 

July  28. 

17  28  s. 

153       2W. 

151  4W. 

6  30  E. 

Lord  Howe's  Ifland       — 

July  30. 

16  46  s. 

156  38  w. 

154  13  w. 

7  40  E. 

Scilly  Ifland           —      — 

July  31. 

16  28  s. 

157    22 W. 

I  SB  30  '^^'• 

8     0  E. 

Bofcawen's  Ifland           — 

Auguft  13. 

15  50  s. 

177  20  w. 

175  10  w. 

9     0  E. 

Auguftus  Kcppcl's  Ifland 

Auguft  13. 

15  53  S. 

177  23 w. 

175  13  w. 

10     0  E. 
10     0  E. 

Wallis's  Ifland        —     — 

Auguft  17. 

13   1 8  S. 

180     oW. 

177    0  w. 

Pifcadores  T^Soutli  End 

Sept.  3. 

11     0  N. 

195    0  w. 

192  30  w. 

10     0  E. 

Iflands    ^  North  End 

II   20  N. 

195  35  ^V. 

193    0  w. 

10     0 

Tinian         i —         ■ —   — 

Sept.  30. 

14  58  N. 

215  40  W. 

214  10  w. 

6  20  E. 

At  Sea           — 

oa.  17. 

16  10  N. 

218     oW. 

216  25  w. 

5  15  E. 

Grafton's  Ifland     —      — 

oa.  29. 

21     4N. 

241     0  w. 

239    0  w. 

I     3  W. 

Pulo  Aroe          —          — 

Nov.  15. 

2  28  N. 

258    0  w. 

255     0  w. 

I     oW. 

Lucipara — 

Nov.  26. 

4  10  s. 

254  46  w. 

None. 

Batavia         — 

Dec.  I. 

6     8  S. 

254  30  w. 

I  25\\r. 

Prince's  Ifland      —      — 

Dec.  16. 

1768. 

6  41  S. 

256    0  w. 

256  30 w. 

I    0  w. 

At  Sea            — 

Jan.  26. 

34  24  S. 

328    0  w. 

323  30  "^v. 

24     oW. 

\t  Sr-i 

Jan.   27. 

3.4  14  s. 

324     oW. 

323  13  w. 

24     oW. 

Cipe  of  Good  Hope      — 

Feb.  1 1 . 

34     0  S. 

345     oW. 

342     0  w. 

19  30  w. 

At  Sea             — 

March  15. 

16  44  s. 

3     c  W. 

2        0  W. 

13     oW. 

Vol.  L 

X  X  X 

FABLE 

522 


CAPTAIN    WALLIS's    VOYAGE. 


T  A  B  L  E  of  the  Latitudes  and  Longitudes,  &c.  concluded. 

NAMES 

of   PLACES, 

Time  when. 

Latitude  in. 

Longitude 
fuppofed. 

Longitude  obferv- 
ed  by  Dr.  Mafcu- 
line's  Method. 

Variation, 

1768. 

At  Sea 



March  15. 

i6*36'S. 

2°     o'W. 

2°    5'W. 

i2°5o'w. 

St.  Helena 



March  19. 

15  57  S. 

5  49  W. 

6  40  W. 

12    47  W. 

Afcenfion 



March  23. 

7  58  S. 

14  18  W. 

14    4W. 

9  53  W. 

At  Sea 



March  24. 

7  28  S. 

14  30  W. 

14  38  W. 

10    0  w. 

At  Sea 



April  8. 

15    4N. 

30    0  w. 

34  30  W. 

4  48  w. 

At  Sea 

_ 

April  1 1 . 

21  28  N. 

36     0  W. 

36  37  w. 

4  30  W. 

At  Sea 



April  21. 

33  65^- 

32    0  w. 

33     oW. 

II  34  w. 

At  Sea 

_ 

April  23, 

36  15 N. 

30     0  W. 

29  31  w. 

14  30  w. 

At  Sea 

_ 

May  10. 

49  43  N. 

6     oW. 

7  52  W. 

22     30  W. 

At  Sea 

— 

May  II. 

48  48  N. 

7  30  W. 

8   19  W. 



St.  Agnus's 

Light-houfe 

May  13. 

49  58 N. 

7  14  w. 

7     8  W. 

20    0  w. 

A  N 


AN 

ACCOUNT 

O  F    A 

VOYAGE  round  the  WORLD, 

IN    THE   YEARS 

MDCCLXVI,  MDCCLXVII,  MDCCLXVIII,  and  MDCCLXIX. 

By  PHILIP   CARTERET,  Efquire, 
Commander  of  his  Majcfty's  Sloop  the  Swallow. 


Xxx 


C  H  A  p.     I. 

I'ke  Run  from  Plymouth  to  Madeira^    and  from  thence 
through  the  Streighi  of  Magellan. 

(The  longitude  in  this  voyage  is  reckoned  from  London  weftward  to  1 8a, 
and  eafbvard  afterwards.] 


s 


OON  after  I  returned  from  a  voyage  round  the  world       1766. 


with  the  Honourable  Commodore  Byron,  I  was  appoint- 
ed to  the  command  of  his  Majelly's  Hoop  the  Swallow,  by 
a  Gommiffion  bearing  date  the  lil  of  July  1766 ;  the  Swallow 
then  lay  at  Chatham,  and  I  was  ordered,  to  fit  her.  out  with 
all  poflible  expedition.  She  was  an  old  fhip,  having  been  m 
the  fervice  thirty  years,  and  was  in  my  opinion  by  no  means 
fit  for  a  long  voyage,  having  only  a  flight  thin  flieath- 
ing  upon  her  bottom,  which  was  not  even  filled  with  nails 
to  fupply  the  want  of  a  covering  that  would  more  effcdually 
keep  out  tlie  worm.  I  had  been  given  to  underftand  that  I 
was  to  go  out  with,  the  Dolphin;  but  the  difparity  of  the  two 
jfhips,  and  the  difference  in  their  equipment,  made  me  think 
that  they  could  not  be  intended  for  tlie  fame  duty  ;  the  Dol- 
phin, which  was  Iheathed  with  copper,  being  fupplicd  witli 
every  thing  that  was  requifite  for  a  long  and  dangerous 
navigation ;  and  the  Swallow  having  only  a  fcanty  fupply 
of  common  necefiaries.  However,  I  ventured  to  apply  for  a 
forge,  fome  iron,  a  fmall  fkiff,   and  feveral  other  things 

which 


Auguft. 


53<5  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

which  I  knew  by  experience  would  be  of  the  utmoft  import- 
ance, if  it  was  intended  that  I  fliould  make  another  voyage 
round  the  world ;  but  I  was  told  that  the  vefTel  and  her 
equipment  were  very  fit  for  the  fervice  flie  was  to  perform, 
and  none  of  the  requiiites  for  which  I  applied  were  allowed 
me.  I  was  therefore  confirmed  in  my  opinion,  that,  if  the 
Dolphin  was  to  go  round  the  world,  it  could  never  be  in- 
tended that  I  fliould  go  farther  than  Falkland's  Iflands,  where 
the  Jafon,  a  fine  frigate,  which  was,  like  the  Dolphin, 
fheathed  with  copper,  and  amply  equipped,  would  fupply 
my  place.  I  was  however  deficient  in  junk,  an  article 
which  is  efTentially  necefTary  in  every  voyage,  and  for  this 
I  applied  when  I  got  to  Plymouth,  but  I  was  told  that  a  quan- 
tity fufiicient  for  both  the  fliips  had  been  put  on  board  the 
Dolphin. 

Friday  J 2.  On  Friday  the  sad  of  Augufl,  iy66y  the  fhip's  company 

having  the  evening  before  received  two  months  pay,  I 
weighed,  and  made  fail  from  Plymouth  found  in  company 
with  the  Dolphin,  under  the  command  of  Captain  Wallis, 
and  the  Prince  Frederic  flore-fhip,  commanded  by  Lieutenant 
se  tember  J^^^^^^  Brinc.  We  proceeded  together  without  any  remark- 
Sanday  7.  able  incident  till  the  7th  of  September,  when  we  came  to  an 
anchor  in  Madeira  road. 

While  I  lay  at  this  place,  not  being  yet  acquainted  ^ith 
my  deftination,  I  reprcfcnted  my  want  of  junk,  and  the  re- 
ply that  had  been  made  to  my  application  for  a  fupply  by 
the  commiilioncr  at  Plymouth,  in  a  letter  to  Captain  Wallis, 
who  fcnt  me  five  hundred  weight.  This  quantity  however 
was  fo  inadequate  to  my  wants,  that  I  was  foon  afterwards 
reduced  to  the  difagreeable  neceflity  of  cutting  off  fome  of 
my  cables  to  favc  my  rigging. 

On 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  527 

On  the  9th,  very  early  in  the  morning,  the  Lieutenant  ac-  1766, 
quainted  me  that,  in  the  night,  nine  of  my  bed  men  had  _L!.!L!!!/ 
fecretly  fet  off  from  the  fliip  to  fwim  on  Ihore,  having  ftrip-  ^"^  ^^  ^' 
ped  themfclves  naked  and  left  all  their  clothes  behind  them, 
raking  only  their  money,  which  they  had  fecured  in  a  hand- 
kerchief that  was  tied  round  their  waift ;  that  they  pro- 
ceeded together  till  they  came  very  near  the  furf,  which 
breaks  high  upon  the  fhore,  and  that  one  of  them,  being 
then  terrified  at  the  found,  had  fwum  back  again  to  the  fhip, 
and  been  taken  en  board,  but  that  the  reft  had  ventured 
through.  As  the  lofs  of  thefe  men  would  have  been  very 
fevcrely  felt,  I  immediately  fat  down  to  write  a  letter 
to  the  Conful,  entreating  his  affiftance  to  recover  them  y 
but,  before  I  had  finiflied  it,  he  fent  me  word,  that  all 
of  them  having,  to  the  great  aRonifhment  of  the  natives, 
been  found  naked  on  the  beach,  they  had  been  taken  into 
cuftody,  and  would  be  delivered  up  to  my  order.  The  boat 
was  difpatched  immediately,  and  as  foon  as  I  heard  they 
were  on  board,  I  went  upon  the  deck.  I  was  greatly  pleafed 
to  fee  a  contrition  in  their  countenances,  which  at  once  fe- 
cretly determined  me  not  to  inflidl  the  punifliment  by  which 
they  feeraed  moil  heartily  willing  to  expiate  their  fault ;  but 
I  afked  them  what  could  have  induced  them  to  quit  the  fliip, 
and  defert  the  fervice  of  their  country^  at  the  rifle  of  being 
devoured  by  fharks,  or  dafhed  to  pieces  by  the  furf  againft 
the  fhore.  They  anfwered,  that  though  they  had  indeed  ac 
fuch  rifles  ventured  to  fwim  on  fliore,  they  never  had  any  in- 
tention of  deferting  the  fliip,  which  they  were  determined; 
to  ftand  by  as  long  as  fhe  could  fwim ;  but  that  being  well 
aflured  they  were  going  a  long  voyage,  and  none  being  able 
to  tell  who  might  live,  or  who  might  die,  they  thought  it 
hard  not  to  have  an  opportunity  of  fpending  their  own  mo- 
ney, and  therefore  detecminedj  as  they  faid,  once  more  tD 

1  get 


528 


CAPTAIN^  CARTERET^s    VOYAGE 


1766.  get  a  fkinful  of  liquor,  and  then  fwim  back  to  the  fhip, 
September^  which  they  hoped  to  have  done  before  rhey  were  mifl'cd. 
Tucfday  9.  ^^  j  ^^^  refolvcd  to  remit  their  punifliment,  I  did  not  too 
feverely  fcrutinize  their  apology,  which  the  reft  of  the  fhip's 
company,  who  ftood  round  them,  feemed  very  much  to  ap- 
prove; but,  obferving  that  with  a  fkinful  of  liquor  they 
would  have  been  in  a  very  unfit  condition  to  fwim  through 
the  furf  to  the  fliip,  I  told  them  that  hoping  they  would  for 
the  future  expofe  their  lives  only  upon  more  important  oc- 
cafions,  and  that  their  conduct  would  thenceforward  giv€ 
me  no  caufe  of  complaint,  I  would  for  this  time  be  fatisfied 
with  the  fhame  and  regret  which  I  perceived  they  fuiFered 
from  a  fenfe  of  their  mifbehaviour :  I  then  admonifhed  them 
to  put  on  their  clothes,  and  lie  down,  as  I  was  confident  they 
wanted  reft ;  and  added,  that  as  I  might  poffibly  during  the 
courfeof  the  voyage  have  occafion  for  good  fwimmers,  I  was 
very  glad  that  I  knew  to  whom  I  might  apply.  Having  thus 
difmifiTed  thefe  honeft  fellows  from  their  fears,  I  was  in- 
finitely gratified  by  the  murmur  of  fatisfadion  which  in- 
fiantly  ran  through  the  fliip's  company  ;  and  was  after- 
wards amply  rewarded  for  my  lenity,  there  being  no  fer- 
vice  during  all  the  toils  and  dangers  of  the  voyage  which 
they  did  not  perform,  v/ith  a  zeal  and  alacrity  that  were 
much  to  their  honour  and  my  advantage,  as  an  example  to 
the  reft. 

Friday  12.  Wc  failed  again  on  the  12th,  and  I  was  then  firft  acquainted 

with  the  particulars  of  our  voyage  by  Captain  Wallis,  who 
gave  me  a  copy  of  his  inftruiflions,  and  appointed  Port  Fa- 
mine in  the  Streight  of  Magellan  to  be  the  place  of  rendez- 
vous, if  we  lliould  happen  to  be  feparated. 

I  was  now  convinced  that  I  had  been  fent  upon  a  fcrvice 

to  which  my  veflTel  and  her  equipment  were  by  no  means 

6  equal, 


ROUND     THE    WORLD. 


529 


equal,  but  1  determined  at  all  events  to  perform  it  in  the       '766. 

November. 

beft  manner  I  was  able.  v . — > 

We  proceeded  on  our  voyage  without  any  remarkable 
event  till  we  anchored  off  Cape  Virgin  Mary,  wliere  we  faw 
the  Patagonians,  of  which  I  have  given  fome  account  in  a 
letter  to  Dr.  Matty,  which  was  publiflied  in  the  fixtieth  vo- 
lume of  the  Tranfacflions  of  the  Royal  Society,  and  which  ic 
is  not  neceffary  here  to  repeat,  as  it  is  in  general  the  fame 
as  thofe  which  have  been  given  by  Commodore  Byron  and 
Captain  Wallis. 

When  we  entered  the  Streight,  I  was  ordered  to  keep 
ahead  of  the  Dolphin  and  the  ftorefliip,  to  pilot  them 
through  the  fhoals  ;  but  my  iliip  worked  fo  ill,  that  we 
could  but  very  feldom  make  her  tack  without  the  help  of  a 
boat  to  tow  her  round :  however,  with  much  labour,  and  at 
no  inconfiderable  rifk,  we  anchored  in  Port  Famine  on  Friday 
the  26th  of  December.  At  this  place  we  unhuns?  our  rud-  ^'^f  <^'ntcr, 
der,  and  added  a  piece  of  wood  to  it,  in  hopes  that  by  mak- 
ing it  broader,  we  fliould  obtain  fome  advantage  in  working 
the  fhip ;  in  which  however  wc  were  altogether  difap- 
pointed. 

After  many  difficulties  and  dangers,  we  got  into  Illand  1-67. 
Bay  on  the  17th  of  February ;  and  before  we  made  fail  again,  juefdaT' 
I  reprefented  the  condition  of  my  fhip  by  letter  to  Captain 
Wallis,  and  requefted  him  to  confider  what  was  bell  for  his 
Majefty's  fervice,  whether  flie  Ihould  be  difmilfed,  or  conti- 
nue the  voyage.  Captain  Wallis  replied,  that  as  the  Lords 
of  the  Admiralty  had  ordered  the  Swallow  on  this  fervice, 
with  the  nature  of  which  I  was  well  acquainted,  he  did  not 
think  himfelf  at  liberty  to  alter  her  deftmatioa. 

VoL.L  Yyy        ^  We 


530  CAPTAIN    CARTERET*s    VOYAGE 

We  continued  therefore  for  ibme  time  to  navigate  the 
Streight  together,  and  as  1  had  pafled  it  before,  I  was  or- 
dered to  keep  ahead  and  lead  the  way,  with  Hbcrty  to  an- 
chor and  weigh  when  I  thought  proper;  but  perceiving  that 
the  bad  failing  of  the  Swallow  would  fo  much  retard  the 
Dolphin  as  probably  to  make  her  lofe  the  feafon  for  getting 
into  high  fouthern  latitudes,  and  defeat  the  intention  of  the 
voyage,  I  propofed  to  Captain  Wallis,  that  he  fhould  lay 
the  Swallow  up  in  fome  cove  or  bay,  and  that  1  fliould 
attend  and  affift  him  with  her  boats  till  the  Streight  fhould 
be  paiTed,  which  would  probably  be  in  much  lefs  time  than 
if  he  continued  to  be  retarded  by  my  Ihip,  and  I  urged  as 
an  additional  advantage  that  he  might  complete  not  only 
his  ilock  of  provifions  and  llores,  but  his  company,  out  of 
her,  and  then  fend  her  back  to  England,  with  fuch  of  his 
crew  as  fickncfs  had  rendered  unfit  for  the  voyage :  propo- 
fmg  alfo,  that  in  m.y  way  home,  I  would  examine  the  eaflcrn 
coafl;  of  Patagonia,  or  attempt  fuch  other  difcoveries  as  he 
Ihould  think  proper.  If  this  was  not  approved,  and  my 
knowlege  of  the  South  Seas  was  thought  neceffary  to  the 
fuccefs  of  the  voyage,  I  offered  to  go  witli  him  oh  board  the 
Dolphin,  and  give  up  the  Swallow  to  be  commanded  by  his 
Firft  Lieutenant,  whofe  duty  I  would  perform  during  the 
reft  of  the  voyage,  or  to  make  the  voyage  myfelf  with  only 
the  Dolphin,  if  he  would  take  the  Sv/allow  back  to  Europe  ; 
but  Captain  Wallis  was  ftill  of  opinion  that  the  voyage  fliould 
be  profecuted  by  the  two  ihips  jointly,  purfuant  to  the  orders 
that  had  been  given. 

The  Swallow  was  now  become  fo  foul,  that  with  all  the 

fails  fhe  could  fet  Ihe  could  not  make  fo  much  way  as  the 

^  J,       Dolphin,  with  only  her  top- fails  and  a  reef  in  them:  wc 

Friday  10.      continucd  in  company,    however,    till  Friday   the  loth   of 

April, 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  531 

April,  when  the  weftern  entrance  of  the  Streight  was  open,      il^i- 
and  the  great  South  Sea  in  fight.     Hitherto  I  had,  purfuant  v_ — ^-L/ 
to  my  dire(5lions,  kept  ahead,  but  now  the  Dolphin  being    "  *^  ^°* 
nearly  abreaft  of  us,  fet  her  forefail,  which  foon  carried  her 
ahead  of  us  ;  and  before  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  as  fhc 
fliewed  no  lights,    we  lofl  fight  of  her.      We  had  a  fine 
eaftern  breeze,  of  which  we  made  the  beft  ufe  we  could 
during  the  night,  carrying  all  our  fmall  fails,  even  to  the 
top-gallant  ftudding  fails,    notwithftanding  the  danger   to 
■which  it  expofed  us  j  but  at  day-break  the  next  morning,  we  Saturday  n. 
could  but  juft  fee  the  Dolphin's  top-fails  above  the  horizon, 
we  could  perceive,  however,  that  flie  had  ftudding  fails  {g.i, 
and  at  nine  o'clock,  we  had  entirely  lofl  fight  of  her;  we 
judged  that  Ihe  was  then  clear  of  the  Streight's  mouth,  but 
we,  who  were  ftill  under  the  land,  had  but  light  and  va- 
riable airs.     From  this  time,  I  gave  up  all  hope  of  feeing  the 
Dolphin  again  till  we  fliould  arrive  in  England,  no  plan  of 
operation  having  been  fettled,  nor  any  place  of  rendezvous- 
appointed,  as  had  been  done  from  England  to  the  Streighr.- 
I  thought  myfelf  the  more  unfortunate  in  this  feparation,  as 
no  part  of  the  woollen  cloth,  linen,  beads,  fcifTars,  kniveSi 
and  other  cutlery-ware,  and  toys,  which  were  intended  for 
the  ufe  of  both  fhips,  and  were  fo  necefTary  to  obtain  re- 
frefliments  from  Indians,  had,  during  the  nine  months  we 
had  failed  together,  been  put  on  board  the  Sv/allow,  and  as 
we  were  not  provided  cither  with  a  forge  or  iron,  which 
many  circumftances  might  render  abfolutely  necefTary  to  the 
prefervation  of  the  fhip:  I  had  the  fatisfaeT:ion,  however,  to 
fee  no  marks  of  defpondency  among  my  people,  whom  I 
encouraged,  by  telling  them,  that  although  the  Dolphin  was 
the  beft  fhip,  I  did  not  doubt  but  that  I  fliould  find  more 
than  equivalent  advantages  in  their  courage,,  ability,   and 
goodcondud:. 

Y  y  y  ij  At 


5J2  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767-  At  noon,  this  day,  we  were  abreaft  of  Cape  Pillar,  when, 

■  .  r^   I  a  gale  fpringing  up  at  S.  W.  we  were  obliged  to  take  down 
Saturday  n.  ^^^,  {ii-i3.\l  fails,   recf  our  top-fails,   and  haul  clofe  to  the 
wind :  foon  after  it  frefhened  to  the  W.  S.  W.  blowing  right 
in  from  the  fea,  and  after  making  two  boards,  we  had  the 
mortification  to  find  that  we  could  not  weather  the  land  on 
cither  tack.     It  was  now  almoft  dark,  the  gale  increafed, 
driving  before  it  a  hollow  fwell,  and  a  fog  came  on,  with 
violent  rain ;  we  therefore  got  clofe  under  the  fouth  fhorc, 
and  fent  our  boat  a-head  to  find  out  Tuefday's  Bay,  which  is 
faid  by  Sir  John  Narborough  to  lie  about  four  leagues  within 
the  Streight,   or  to  find  out  any  other  place  in  which  we 
might  come  to  an  anchor.     At  five  o'clock,  we  could  not 
lee  the  land,   notwithllanding  its   extream  height,  though 
we  V7cre  within  lefs  than  half  a  mile  of  it^  and  at  fix,  the 
thicknefs  of  the  weather  having  rendered  the  night  fo  dark 
that  we  could  not  fee  half  the  Ihip's  length,  I  brought  to  for 
the  boat,  and  v/as  indeed,   with  good  reafon,   under  great 
concern  for  her  fafety:  wc  hoiflcd  lights,   and  every  now 
and  then  made  a  falfe  fire,  but  fi.ill  doubting  whether  they 
could  be  feen  through  the  fog  and  rain,  I  fired  a  gun  every 
half  hour,  and  at  lafl:  had  the  fatisfadion  to  take  her  on 
board,  though  flie  had  made  no  difcovery  cither  of  Tuefday's 
Bay,  or  any  other  anchoring-place.     We  made  fail  the  reft 
of  the  night,  endeavouring  to  keep  near  the  fouth  fliore, 
and  our  ground  to  the  weflward  as  much  as  pollible;  and  as 
Sunday  12.     foou  as  it  was  light  the  next  morning,  I  fent  the  Mafter  again 
out  in  the  cutter,  in  fearch  of  anchorage  on  the  fouth  fliore. 
1  waited  in  a  Hate  of  the  mod  painful  fufpenfe  for  her  return, 
till  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  fearing  that  we  fhould  be 
obliged  to  keep  out  in  this  dangerous   pafs  another  night, 
but  I  then  faw  her  founding  a  bay,  and  immediately  flood 
in  after  her  :  in  a  fliort  time  the  Mafier  came  on  board,  and 

to 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  S3 

to  our  unfpeakable  comfort,  reported  that  we  might  here  1767- 
come  fafely  to  an  anchor;  this,  with  the  help  of  our  boat,  <_  -,1'_ 
was  efFedted  about  fix  o'clock,  and  I  went  down  into  my  ^""'^*>"'- 
cabbin  to  take  fome  reft :  I  had,  however,  fcarcely  lain  down, 
before  I  was  alarmed  with  a  univerfal  fliout  and  tumult 
among  the  people,  all  that  were  below  running  haftily  upon 
the  deck,  and  joining  the  clamour  of  thofe  above:  I  inftantly 
ftarted  up,  imagining  that  a  guft  had  forced  the  fhip  from 
her  anchor,  and  that  flie  was  driving  out  of  the  bay,  but 
when  I  came  upon  the  deck,  I  heard  the  people  cry  out,  the 
Dolphin  !  the  Dolphin  !  in  a  tranfport  of  furprize  and  joy 
which  appeared  to  be  little  fliort  of  diftracflion:  a  few 
minutes,  however,  convinced  us  that  what  had  been  taken 
for  a  fail  was  nothing  more  than  the  water  which  had  been 
forced  up,  and  whirled  about  in  the  air,  by  one  of  the  violent 
gufts  that  were  continually  coming  off  the  high  land,  and 
which,  through  the  haze,  had  a  moft  deceitful  appearance. 
The  people  were  for  a  few  minutes  fomewhat  d^jedled  by 
their  difappointment,  but  before  I  went  down,  I  had  the 
pleafure  to  fee  their  ufual  fortitude  and  cheerfulnefs  return. 

The  little  bay  where  we  were  now  at  anchor,  lies  about 
three  leagues  E.  by  S.  from  Cape  Pillar:  it  is  the  firft  place 
which  has  any  appearance  of  a  bay  within  that  Cape,  and 
bears  S.  by  E.  about  four  leagues  from  the  illand  which  Sir 
John  Narborough  called  Weilrainfter  Hall,  from  its  refem- 
blance  to  that  building  in  a  diftant  view.  The  weftern  point 
of  this  bay  makes  a  very  remarkable  appearance,  being  a 
perpendicular  plane  like  the  wall  of  a  houle.  There  are 
three  iilands  about  two  cables'  length  within  its  entrance, 
and  within  thofe  iilands  a  very  good  harbour,  with  anchor- 
age in  between  twenty-five  and  thirty  fathom,  with  a  bottom 
of  foft  mud.  We  anchored  without  the  iflands,  the  pallage 
2  on 


jfS4  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.      on  each  iide  of  them  being  not  more  than  one-fourth  of  3 


April 


cable's  length  wide.  Our  little  bay  is  about  two  cables' 
length  broad,  the  points  bearing  eaft  and  weft  of  each 
other:  in  the  inner  part  there  is  from  fixteen  to  eighteen 
fathom,  but  where  we  lay  it  is  deeper;  we  had  one  anchor 
in  feventeen  fathom,  and  the  other  in  forty-five,  with  great 
over-falls  between  them,  and  rocks  in  feveral  places.  Here 
we  rode  oiu  a  very  hard  gale,  and  the  ground  being  ex- 
tremely uneven,  we  expected  our  cables  to  be  cut  in  two 
every  minute,  yet  when  we  weighed,  to  our  great  furprize, 
they  did  not  appear  to  have  been  rubbed  in  any  part,  though 
we  found  it  very  difficult  to  heave  them  clear  of  the  rocks. 
The  land  round  this  bay  and  harbour  is  all  high,  and  as  the 
current  fets  continually  into  it,  I  doubt  not  but  it  has  an- 
other communication  with  the  fea  to  the  fouth  of  Cape  De- 
feada.  The  Mailer  faid  he  went  up  it  four  miles  in  a  boat, 
and  could  not  then  be  above  four  miles  from  the  Weftern 
Ocean,  yet  I  (till  faw  a  wide  entrance  to  the  S.  W.  The  land- 
ing is  every  where  good,  there  is  plenty  of  wood  and  water, 
and  mufcles  and  wild  geefe  in  abundance. 

From  the  north  fhore  of  the  weftern  end  of  the  Streight  of 
Magellan,  which  lies  in  about  latitude  52°  7  S.  to  latitude 
48^,  the  land,  which  is  the  weftern  coaft  of  Patagonia,  runs 
nearly  north  and  fouth,  and  confifts  wholly  of  broken  iftands, 
among  which  are  thofe  tliat  Sharp  has  laid  down  by  the 
name  of  the  Duke  of  York's  Iftands ;  he  has  indeed  placed 
them  at  a  conftderable  diftance  from  the  coaft,  but  if  there 
had  been  many  iftands  in  that  fttuation,  it  is  impoftible  but 
that  the  Dolpliin,  the  Tamar,  or  the  Swallow,  rauft  have 
feen  them,  as  we  ran  near  their  fuppofed  meridian,  and  fo 
did  the  Dolphin  and  the  Tamar  the  laft  voyage.  Till  we 
came  into  this  latitude,  we  had  tolerable  weather,  and  little 

or 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  Id.  ^%s 


1767. 

April. 


or  no  current  in  any  diredtion,  but  when  wc  came  to  the 
northward  of  48°,  we  found  a  current  fetting  ftrongly  to  the 
north,  fo  that  probably  we  then  opened  the  great  bay,  which 
is  faid  to  be  ninety  leagues  deep.  We  found  here  a  vaft 
fwell  from  the  N.  \V.  and  the  winds  generally  blew  from  the 
fame  quarter;  yet  we  were  fet  every  day  twelve  or  fif teeft 
miles  to  the  northward  of  our  account. 

On  Wednefday  the  15th,  at  about  four  o'clock  in  the  Weduef.  i,. 
morning,  after  furmounting  many  dangers  and  difficulties, 
we  once  more  got  abreaft  of  Cape  Pillar,  with  a  light  breeze 
at  S.  E.  and  a  great  fwell.  Between  five  and  fix  o'clock,  juft 
as  we  opened  Cape  Defeada,  the  wind  fuddenly  Ihifted  to 
S.  and  S.  by  W.  and  blew  fo  hard  that  it  was  with  great  dif- 
ficulty we  could  carry  the  reefed  top-fails :  the  fudden 
changing  of  the  wind,  and  its  exceffive  violence,  produced  a 
fea  fo  dreadfully  hollow,  that  great  quantities  of  water  were 
thrown  in  upon  our  deck,  fo  that  we  were  in  the  utmofl 
danger  of  foundering;  yet  we  did  not  dare  to  fliorten  fail,  it 
being  necelTary  to  carry  all  we  could  fpread,  in  order  to 
weather  the  rocky  ifiands,  which  Sir  John  Narborough  has 
called  the  Ifiands  of  Direiftion,  for  we  could  not  now  run 
back  again  into  the  Streight,  without  falling  down  among 
the  broken  land,  and  incurring  the  dangers  of  the  northern 
fhore,  which  was  to  leeward;  towards  this  broken  land, 
however,  and  lee  fhore,  the  fhip  fettled  very  faft,  notwith- 
ftanding  our  utmoft  efforts :  in  this  prefiing  emergency  we 
were  obliged  to  fiave  all  the  water-cafks  upon  the  deck,  and 
between  decks,  to  clear  the  veffel,  and  to  make  her  cany 
better  fail,  and  at  length  happily  efcaped  the  danger  which 
threatened  us.  After  we  got  clear  of  thefe  ifiands,  and 
drew  off  from  the  Streight's  mouth  and  the  land,  we  found 

3  the 


^36  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.  the  fea  run  more  regularly  from  theS.  W.  and  the  wind 
.  _  ^"  '  .  loon  after  coming  from  S.  S.  W.  to  S.  S.  E.  we  had  by  noon 
wednef.  15.  ^^^  ^  pretty  good  offing,  about  nine  leagues  from  Cape  Vic- 
tory, which  is  on  the  north  fliore.  Thus  we  cleared  the 
weftern  entrance  of  this  Streight,  which,  in  my  opinion,  is 
too  dangerous  for  navigation ;  a  deliverance  which  happened 
in  the  very  crifis  of  our  fate,  for  almoft  immediately  after- 
wards the  wind  came  again  to  the  S.  W.  and  if  it  had  con- 
tinued in  that  quarter,  our  deilrudion  would  have  been 
inevitable. 


CHAP. 


ROUND    THE    WO  R  L  a  537 


CHAP.     II. 

Ihe  P  of  age  from  Cape  Pillar,  at  the  Wejiej-n  Entrance  of 
the  Streight  of  Magellan,  to  Mafafuero;  with  fome 
Account  of  that  Ifland, 


April. 
Wednef.  i ;. 


IT  O  O  K  my  departure  from  Cape  Pillar,  which  I  make  to  1767. 
lie  in  the  latitude  of  52*^  45'  S.,  and  in  the  longitude  •]^'^ 
10'  W.  of  the  meridian  of  London,  and  as  foon  as  I  got  clear 
of  the  Streight,  fleered  to  the  northward  along  the  coall  of 
Chili.  Upon  examining  what  quantity  of  frefli  water  we 
had  now  on  board,  1  found  that  it  amounted  only  to  between 
four  and  five  and  twenty  tons,  which  I  thought  not  fufficient 
for  fo  long  a  voyage  as  was  probably  before  us ;  I  therefore 
hauled  to  the  northward,  intending  to  make  the  ifland  of 
Juan  Fernandes,  or  Mafafuero,  that  we  might  increafe  our 
Hock  befoi-e  we  failed  to  the  weftward. 


Thurftiay  i6.' 


In  the  middle  of  the  night  of  the  16th,  we  had  the  wind 
firft  to  the  S.  S.  E.  and  then  to  the  S.  E,  with  which  we  kept 
away  N.  W.  and  N.  N.  W.  in  high  fpirits,  hoping  that  in  a 
Ihort  time  we  fliould  be  in  a  more  temperate  climate :  wc 
had  the  misfortune,  however,  very  foon  to  find  ourfelves 
difappointed,  for  on  the  i8th,  the  wind  came  to  the  N.  N.  W.  Saturday  i?. 
and  blew  direiily  from  the  point  upon  which  we  were 
Hearing.  We  had  now  got  about  a  hundred  leagues  from 
the  Streight's  mouth  ;  our  latitude  was  48°  39'  S.,  and  we 
were,  by  account,  4°33'W.  of  Cape  Pillar;  but  from  this 
time,  till  the  8th  of  May,  the  wind  continued  unfavourable, 
and  blew  a  continued  ftorm,  with  fudden  gufts  ftill  more 

Vol.  I,  Z  z  z  violent, 


53^    .  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767-      violent,  and  much  rain  and  hail,  or  rather  fragments  of  half 
>_  i.-'   >   melted  ice .-  at  intervals  alfo  we  had  thunder  and  lightning, 
Saturday  18   ^^^^^  dreadful  than  all  the  paft,  and  a  fea  which  frequently 
kid  the  whole  vefTel  under  water. 

From  the  time  of  our  clearing  the  Streight,  and  during 
our  paflage  along  this  coaft,  we  faw  a  great  number  of  fea 
birds,  particularly  albatrolTes,  gannets,  fli^erwaters,  and  a 
thick  lumpifh  bird,  about  as  big  as  a  large  pigeon,  which 
the  failors  call  a  Cape  of  Good  Hope  hen :  they  are  of  a  dark 
brown  or  blackifh  colour,  and  are  therefore  fometimes 
called  the  black  gull :  we  faw  alfo  a  great  many  pintado 
birds,  of  nearly  the  fame  fize,  which  are  prettily  fpotted 
with  black  and  white,  and  conilantly  on  the  wing,  though 
they  frequently  appear  as  if  they  were  walking  upon  the 
water,  like  the  peterels,  to  which  failors  have  given  the 
name  of  Mother  Carey's  chickens ;  and  we  faw  alfo  many 
of  thefe. 

Monday  ;-,  In  the  cvcning  of  Monday  the  aydi,  which  w-as  very  dark, 
as  we  were  ftanding  to  the  weilward  under  our  courfcs,  and 
a  clofe  reefed  top-fail,  the  wind,  in  a.  hard  fquall,  fuddenly 
lliifted,  and  took  the  veflel  right  ahead  j  the  violent  jerk 
with  which  the  fails  were  inflantly  thrown  a-back,  was  very 
near  carrying  the  mails  away  by  the  board,  and  overfetting 
the  fliip:  the  fails  being  at  this  time  extremely  wet,  and  the 
gale  in  the  higheft  degree  violent,  they  clung  fo  fall  to  the 
malls  and  rigging,  that  it  was  fcarcely  poffible  to  get  them 
either  up  or  down  ;  yet  by  the  dexterous  ad:ivity  of  our 
people,  we  got  the  main-fail  up,  clewed  up  the  main  top- 
full, and  got  the  Ihip's  head  round  without  receiving  much 
damage.  The  violence  of  the  wind  continued  feveral  hours> 
but  before  morning  it  veered  again  to  the  N.  W.  and  con- 

Wednef.  23.   tiuucd  in  that  quarter  till  the  afternoon  of  the  2C)th,  when 

it 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ^  39 

it  died  away,  and  we  had  a  dead  calm  for  fix  hours.    Durinsr      '7Sr> 

this  time  we  had  a  high  fea,  which  ran  in  great  confufion  ' r-_ — * 

from  all  quarters,  and  broke  againft  the  Ihip  in  a  ft  range  ^  "" '  ''^' 
manner,  making  her  roll  with  fo  violent  and  fudden  a 
motion,  that  I  expecfled  every  moment  to  lofe  our  mafls. 
The  wind  afterwards  fprung  up  at  W.  S.  W.  which  was  fair, 
and  we  carried  all  the  fail  we  could  fet  to  make  the  moft  of 
it.  It  blew  very  hard  in  this  direcSlion,  with  heavy  rain  for 
a  few  hours,  but  by  noon  on  the  30th,  it  returned  to  its  '-'iiurfdayj*. 
ufual  quarter,  the  N.  W.  and  was  fo  violent  as  to  bring  us 
again  under  our  courfes,  there  being  at  the  fame  time  a  pro- 
digious fwell,  which  frequently  broke  over  us.  At  five  p^-'^^"^', 
o'clock  the  next  morning,  as  we  were  lying  to  under  the 
reefed  main-fail  and  balanced  mizen,  a  vaft  fea  broke  over 
the  quarter  where  the  fliip's  oars  were  lafhed,  and  carried 
away  fix  of  them,  with  the  weather-cloth  ;  it  alfo  broke  the 
mizen  gaff  clofe  where  the  fail  was  reefed,  and  the  iron 
{trap  of  one  of  the  main  dead  eyes,  laying  the  whole  veiTel 
for  fome  time  under  water:  we  were  however  fortunate 
enough  to  haul  up  the  main  fail  without  fplitting,  though 
it  blew  a  hurricane,  and  a  deluge  of  rain,  or  rather  of  half 
melted  ice,  at  the  fiirae  time  poured  down  upon  us.  The 
wind  foon  after  fhifted  again  from  N.W.  to  S.  W.  and  for 
about  an  hour  blew,  if  polTible,  ftronger  than  ever.  This 
wind  made  the  fhip  come  up  with  her  head  right  againft  the 
vaft  fea  which  the  north  weft  wind  had  raifed,  and  at  every 
pitch  which  flie  made  againft  it,  the  end  of  the  bowfprit  v/as 
under  water,  and  the  furgc  broke  over  the  forecaftle  as  far 
aft  as  the  main-maft,  in  the  fame  manner  as  it  would  have 
broke  over  a  rock,  fo  that  there  was  the  greateft  rcafon  to 
apprehend  flie  would  foundei'.  With  all  her  defects  flie  was 
indeed  a  good  fea  boat,  and  if  flie  had  not,  it  would  have 
been  irapofTiblc  for  her  to  have  outlived  this  ftorm,  in  which, 
'      Z.  z  z  2  as 


J767. 

May. 
Friday  1. 


Saturday  2. 


Sun4ay  3. 


Monday  4. 


Tuefday  5. 


Wednef  6. 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

as  well  as  on  feveral  other  occafions,  we  experienced  the  be- 
nefit of  the  bulk-heads  which  we  had  fixed  on  the  fore-part 
of  the  half  deck,  and  to  the  after-part  of  the  forecaftle. 

Notwithftanding  this  wind  was  fair,  we  durft  not  venture 
to  put  the  fhip  before  it,  for  if  in  wearing,  any  of  thefe  enor- 
mous feas  had  broken  on  her  fide,  it  would  inevitably  have 
carried  away  all  before  it.  After  fome  time,  however,  it 
became  more  moderate,  and  we  then  got  up  our  yards  and 
made  fail,  fleering  N.  by  W. ;  and  now  the  men  having  been 
up  all  night,  and  being  wet  to  the  fkin,  I  ordered  every  one 
of  them  a  dram.  : 

By  the  next  morning,  the  2d  of  May,  the  wind  came  again 
to  the  N.W.  and  N.  N.  W.  but  by  this  time  we  had  got  down 
the  broken  mizen  gaff,  repaired  it  as  well  as  we  could,  got 
it  up  again  in  its  place,  and  bent  the  fail  to  it  j  but  we  now 
mofl  fenfibly  felt  the  want  of  a  forge  and  iron. 

On  the  3d,  at  day-break,  we  found  the  rudder-chain 
broken,  and  upon  this  occafion  we  again  mofl:  feelingly  re- 
gretted the  want  of  a  forge  j  we  made,  however,  the  befl; 
fhift  we  could,  and  the  next  day,  the  weather  being  more 
moderate,  though  the  wind  was  flill  contrary,  we  repaired 
our  rigging,  and  the  carpenters  fixed  a  new  dead  eye  where 
the  old  one  had  been  broken  ;  the  fail-maker  alfo  was  bufy 
in  mending  the  fails  that  had  been  fplit. 

On  the  5th,  we  were  again  brought  under  our  courfes  by 
a  hurricane  from  the  N.  by  W.  and  N.  N.W.  and  the  fliip  was 
toffed  about  with  fuch  violence  that  we  had  no  command  of 
her.  During  this  florm,  two  of  our  chain-plates  were 
broken,  and  we  continued  toiling  in  a  confufed  hollow  fca 
till  midnight,  when  a  light  gale  fprung  up  at  N.  W.  which 
foon  blew  very  hard ;  but  at  two  in  the  morning,  we  were 
again  taken  right  ahead  by  a  fudden  and  violent  fijuall  at 

weft, 


ROUND'  THE    WORLD.  541 

weft,  which  at  once  threw  all  our  fails  aback,  and  before  wfe      1767. 
could  gQt  the  fliip  round,  was  very  near  carrying  all  by  the   t_  -J-1  _, 
board.    With  this  gale  we  flood  north,  and  in  the  forenoon  ^^^"^"^  ^* 
the  carpenters  fixed  new  chain-plates  to  the  main  fhroudis, 
and  one  to  the  fore  fhrouds,  in  the  place  of  thofe  which  had 
been  broken  in  the  fquall  during  the  night.    This  was  an- 
other oGcafion  on  which  it  was  impoffible  not  to  regret  tha. 
want  of  a  forge  and  iron- 

The  gale  continued  in  this  diredlion  till  eight  in  the  morn-  Thurfday;; 
iiig  of  the  7th,  when  it  returned  to  the  N.W.  with  unfettled 
weather.    On  the  8th,  it  came  to  fouth»  and  this  was  a  fine  Friday  s. 
day,  the  firft  we  had  feen  after  our  leaving  the  Streight  of 
Magellan.     Our  latitude  at  noon  was  36"  39' S.,  and  we  were 
about  five  degrees  to  the  weftward  of  Cape  Pillar.    The  next  Saturday  9. 

"  ,  '^  Sunday  Jo. 

day  we  made  the  ifland  of  Mafafuero,  and  on  the  loth,  the 
ifland  of  Juan  Fernandes :  in  the  afternoon  we  got  clbfe  to 
the  eaftermoft  part  of  it,  and  foon  after  hauled  round  the 
north  end,  and  opened  Cumberland  Bay.  As  I  did  not  know 
that  the  Spaniards  had  fortified  this  ifland,  I  was  greatly 
furprized  to  fee  a  confiderable  number  of  men  about  the 
beach,  with  a  houfe  and  four  pieces  of  cannon  near  the 
water-fide,  and  a  fort  about  three  hundred  yards  farther 
from  the  fea,  juft  upon  the  rifing  of  the  hill,  with  Spanifh 
colours  flying  on  the  top  of  it.  This  fort,  which  is  faced: 
with  ftone,  has  eighteen,  or  twenty  embrafures,  and  within 
it  a  long  houfe,  which  I  fuppofed  to  be  barracks  for  the  gar- 
rifoft:  five  and  twenty  or  thirty  houfes  of  diflTerent  kinds 
are  fcattered  round  it,  and  we  faw  much  cattle  feeding  on 
the  brow  of  the  hills,  which  feemed  to  be  cultivated,  as 
many  fpots  were  divided  by  enclofures  from  each  other ;  we 
faw  alfo  two  large  boats  lying  on  the  beach.  The  gufts  of 
wind  which  came  right  out  of  this  bay,  prevented  my  going 
fo  near  as  I  intended,  for  they  were  fo  violent  as  to  oblige  us 
6  many 


^543  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S   TOYAGE 

1767-       many  times  to  let  fly  our  top-fail  fheets,  though  the  fails 

« —J  were  clofe  reefed ;  and  I  think  it  is  impoflible  to  work  a  (hip 

un  ay  ic.    ^^^^  ^^^.^  ^^_^  when  the  wind  blows  hard  from  the  fouth- 

ward.  As  we  flood  crofs  the  bay  to  the  weftward,  one  of 
the  boats  put  off  from  the  fliore,  and  rowed  towards  us  ;  but 
perceiving  that  the  gulls,  or  flaws,  made  us  lie  at  a  con- 
iiderable  diftance  from  the  land,  fhe  went  in  again.  We 
then  opened  Weft  Bay,  on  the  eaft  part  of  which,  clofe  to  the 
fea  fide,  is  a  fraall  houfe,  which  I  took  for  a  guard-houfe, 
and  two  pieces  of  cannon  mounted  upon  their  carriages, 
without  any  works  about  them.  We  now  wore,  and  flood 
again  for  Cumberland  Bay,  but  as  foon  as  we  opened  it,  the 
boat  again  put  ofl\,  and  made  towards  us :  as  the  hard  gufts 
would  not  permit  us  to  come  any  nearer  to  the  lai:id  than 
before,  we  flood  along  it  to  the  eaflward,  the  boat  flill 
making  after  us  till  flie  was  very  far  out  of  the  bay:  at 
■■'length  it  grew  dark,  and  we  loft  flght  of  her,  upon  which 
we  made  all  the  fail  we  could  to  the  eaftward. 

During  all  this  time  I  hoifted  no  colours,  having  none  but 
Englifli  on  board,  which  at  this  time  I  did  not  think  it  proper 
to  fliew. 

As  I  was  difappointed  of  wood  and  water  at  this  place, 
and  of  the  refrefhments,  of  which,  after  the  dangers  and 
fatigue  of  our  voyage  through  the  Streight,  and  our  palTage 
from  it,  we  flood  in  the  moft  prelling  need,  I  made  all  the 
Tuefday  12.  f^il  I  could  for  the  ifland  of  Mafafuero.  On  the  1  sth  of  May 
we  arrived  oif  the  fou:h  eaflermoft  part  of  it,  but  it  blowing 
hard,  witli  a  great  fea,  we  did  not  dare  to  come  near  it  on 
this  fide,  and  therefore  went  round  to  tlie  weft  fide,  where, 
in  the  evening,  we  caft  anchor  upon  an  excellent  bank,  fit 
to  receive  a  fleet  of  fliips,  which,  in  the  fummer,  might  ride 
here  witli  great  advantage.  I  fent  out  both  the  boats  to  en- 
I  dcavour 


ROUNDTHE    WORtD.  543 

deavour  to  get  fome  water,  but  they  found  it  impoffible  to       1767- 

land,  for  the  beach  is  rocky,  and  the  furf  at  this  time  was    < ^X— / 

fo  great,    that   the   fwimmers  could  not  get  through  the     "^' *y '^ 
breakers-:  this  was  the  more  mortifying^  as  we  faw  a  fine 
run  of  frefh  water  from  the  fliip,  with  plenty  of  trees  fit  for' 
fire-wood,  and  a  great  number  of  goats  upon  the  hills. 

The  next  morning,  as  foon  as  it  was  light,  I  fent  the  boats  Wednef.  13. 
out  again,  to  examine  any  place  where  they  could  get  on 
fhore.     They  returned  with  a  few  cafks  of  water,  which 
they  had  filled  at  a  fmall  rill,  and  reported,  that  the  wind' 
being  at  S.  E.  blew  fo  firong  on  the  eaft  fide  of  the  ifland, 
and  raifed  fo  great  a  fea,  that  they  could  not  come  near  the  • 
fliore. 

We  continued  here  till  the  15th,  at  day-break,  and  then,  FHday  15. 
the  weather  becoming  more  moderate,  we  weighed,  and  in 
the  evening,  juft  at  fun-fet,,  we  anchored  on  the  eaft  fide  of 
the  ifland,  in  the  fame  place  where  Commodore  Byron  had 
anchored  about  two  years  before.      We  loft  no  time,    but 
immediately  got  off  fifteen  cafks  of  water,  and  fent  a  num- 
ber of  men  on  fhore  with  others,  that  were  empty,  to  be 
fUled  againft  the  next  morning,, and  a  ftrong  party  to  cut 
wood:  but  it  happened  that  about  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  Saturday  i5.. 
a  hard  gale  of  wind  came  on  from  the  N.  W.  with  violent 
gufts  from  the  fliore,  which  drove  us  off  the  bank,  though 
we  had   two  anchors   ahead,    which   were   in   the   utmoft 
danger.of  being  loft  ;  we  got  them  up,  however,  with  great . 
difficulty,  and  immediately  fet  the  fails,  and  worked  under 
the  lee  of  the  ifland,  keeping  as  near  the  fliore  as  we  could ; 
the  weather  foon  afterwards  became  more  moderate^  fo  that, 
we  could  carry  double,  reefed. top-fails;  we  had  alfo  very 
fmooth. water,  yet  we  could  not  make  the  fhip  tack,  and. 
were  forced  to  wear  her  every  time  we  wanted  to  go  about, 

AU 


544  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S   VOYAGE 

1767-  At  day-break,  though  we  were  at  a  good  diftance  from 

.  ^-'  I  the  fliore,  I  fent  the  cutter  to  get  off  a  load  of  water,  before 
Saturday  16.  ^^^  furf  fliould  be  fo  great  upon  the  beach  as  to  prevent  her 
landing.  About  ten  o'clock,  the  wind  came  to  the  N.  N.  E. 
which  enabled  us  to  get  within  a  little  diftance  of  the  water- 
ing-place, and  we  might  have  recovered  our  anchoring 
ground  upon  the  bank  from  which  we  had  been  driven,  but 
the  weather  had  fo  bad  an  appearance,  and  the  gale  frefhened 
fp  faft,  that  we  did  not  think  it  prudent  to  venture:  we 
brought  to,  however,  as  near  the  fhore  as  poffible,  for  the 
advantage  of  fmooth  water  to  unload  the  cutter,  which  foon 
after  came  along-fide  with  twelve  cafks  of  water.  As  foon 
as  we  had  taken  thefe  on  board,  I  fent  the  cutter  again  for 
another  freight,  and  as  we  were  at  a  very  little  dillance  from 
land,  I  ventured  to  fend  our  long-boat,  a  clumfey,  heavy, 
four-oared  vefTel,  with  provifions  for  the  people  on  fhore, 
and  orders  to  bring  back  a  load  of  water,  if  fhe  could  get 
it:  as  foon  as  thefe  boats  were  difpatched,  we  made  a  tack 
off  to  keep  our  ground.  At  noon  it  blew  hard,  with  heavy 
rain  and  thick  weather,  and  at  one,  as  we  were  Handing  in 
again,  we  faw  the  boats  running  along  the  fliore,  for  the 
lee  part  of  the  ifland,  this  fide  being  open  to  the  wind ;  we 
therefore  followed  them,  and  brought  to  as  near  the  lliore 
as  poffible,  to  favour  their  coming  on  board:  they  prefently 
made  towards  us,  and  we  hoifted  them  in,  but  the  fea  was 
uow  rifen  fo  high,  that  in  doing  it  they  received  confiderable 
damage,  and  we  foon  learnt  that  they  found  the  furf  fo 
great  as  not  to  be  able  even  to  land  their  empty  water  cafks. 
We  continued  to  lie  to,  under  a  balanced  mizen,  off  the  Ice 
part  of  the  ifland  all  the  afternoon,  and  althougli  all  hands 
had  been  conflantly  employed  ever  fince  the  fliip  had  been 
'driven  off  her  anchoring  ground,  the  carpenters  worked  all 
night  in  repairing  the  boats. 

At 


ROUND   THE   WORLD.  54^ 

At  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  ifland  bore  weft  of  us,      1767. 
being  four  leagues  diftanr,  and  right  to  windward :  we  had   ■_     7'_' 
now  a  fine  gale  and  fmooth  water,  and  about  ten  o'clock.  ^""'^^*'  '^' 
we  fetched  very  near  to  the  fouth  part  of  it,  and  with  the 
help  of  the  boat  made  the  fhip  tack.    As  it  was  not  probable 
that  with  fuch  a  veffel  we  could  regain   the  anchoring- 
ground,  I  took  advantage  of  our  being  fo  near  the  fhore, 
though  at  a  good  diftance  from  the  watering-place,  to  fend 
the  cutter  for  another  load.    In  the  mean  time  I  flood  on 
and  off  with  the  fhip,  and  about  four  o'clock  in  the  after- 
noon the  cutter  brought  her  freight  of  water  on  board.    I 
enquired  of  the  Lieutenant  after  the  people  on  fhore,  and  he 
told  me,  that  the  violent  rain  which  had  fallen  in  the  night, 
had  fuddenly  brought  down  fuch  torrents  of  water  through 
the  hollow  or  gully  where  they  had  taken  up  their  flation, 
that  they  were  in  the  utmoft  danger  of  being  fwept  away 
before  it,  and  though  with  great  difficulty  they  faved  them- 
felves,  feveral  of  the  cafks  were  intirely  loft.   It  was  now  too 
late  for  the  boat  to  make  another  turn  to  the  place  where 
we  had  hitherto  got  our  water;  but  Mr.  Erafmus  Gower,  the 
Lieutenant,  whofe  diligence  and  ability  in  all  our  dangers 
and  diftrefs  I  cannot  fufficiently  commend,  having,  as  he 
returned  with  the  cutter,  obferved  that  many  runs  of  water 
had  been  made  by  the  night's  rain,  on  that  part  of  the  ifland 
which  was  neareft  to  us,  and  knowing  how  impatient  I  was 
of  delay,  offered  to  go  thither  with  the  boat,    and  fill  as 
many  cafks  as  fhe  could  bring  back.    I  gladly  accepted  this 
offer,  Mr.  Gower  went  away  in  the  boat,  and  in  the  mean 
time  I  made  a  tack  off  with  the  fhip ;  but  before  they  had 
been  gone  an  hour,  the  weather  began  to  grow  gloomy,  and 
the  wind  to  frefhen,  a  heavy  black  cloud  at  the  fame  time 
fettled  over  the  ifland  fo  as  to  hide  the  tops  of  the  hills,  and 
foon  after  it  began  to  thunder  and  lighten  at  a  dreadful 
Vol.  L  4  a  rate: 


^^^  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.      rate  :  as  thefe  appearances  were  very  threatening,  I  flood  in 
^__^^^   again  towards  the  ifland  in  hopes  of  meeting  with  the  boat ; 
Sunday  17.     -^^^  though  wc  ran  in  as  clofe  as  we  durft,  we  faw  nothing 
of  her.    In  the  mean  time  night  came  on,  which  the  thick- 
nefs  of  the  weather  rendered  extremely  dark,  the  gale  in- 
creafed,  and  it  began  to  rain  with  great  violence :  in  this 
fituation  I  lay  to  under  a  balanced  mizen,  firing  guns,  and 
burning  falfe  fires,  as  a  guide  to  the  boat ;  and  not  being 
able  to  account  for  her  delay,  I  fufFered  the  moft  diftrefsful 
anxiety,  and  had  indeed  but  too  much  reafon  to  fear  that 
ihe  was  loft.     About  feven  o'clock,  however,   to  my  un- 
fpcakable  fatisfa<5lion  fhe  came  fafe  alongfide,  and  as  I  had 
long  feen  a  ftorm  gathering,  which  I  expec5led  every  mo- 
ment to  burft  upon  us,  we  got  her  in  with  all  poffible  expe- 
dition.   It  was  indeed  happy  for  us  all  that  no  time  was  loft, 
for  before  fhe  could  be  got  into  her  place,  the  fquall  came 
on,  which  in  a  moment  laid  the  fliip  down  in  a  furprifmg 
manner,  and  broke  the  mizen  gaff  juft  where  the  fail  was 
reefed  ;  fo  that  if  another  minute  had  paiTed  before  the  boat 
had  been  got  in,  we  muft  inevitably  have  loft  her,  and  every 
foul  on  board  would  have  periflied.    This  wind  and  wea- 
ther continued  till  midnight,    when  it  became  fomewhat 
more  moderate,  fo  that  we  were  able  to  fet  our  courfes  and 
top-fails.     In  the  mean  time  I  had  enquired  of  Mr.  Gower 
how  it  came  to  be  fo  long  before  he  returned  to  the  fhip, 
and  he  told  me,  that  after  he  had  got  to  the  place  where  he 
intended  to  fill  the  caflis,  three  of  the  boat's  crew  had  fwum 
afliore  with  them  for  that  purpofe  ;  but  that  within  a  few 
minutes,  the  furf  had  rifen  fo  high,  and  broke  with  fuch 
fury  on  the  fliore,  that  it  was  impoflible  for  them  to  get 
back  to  the  boat :  that  being  unwilling  to  leave  them  behind, 
efpccially  as  they  were  ftark  naked,  he  had  waited  in  hopes 
that  an  opportunity  might  be  found  for  their  coming  on 
2  board  j 


Sunday  17. 


ROUND   THE   WORLD.  ^47^ 

board ;  but  that  being  intimidated  by  the  appearance  of  the  ^1^7' 
weather,  and  the  uncommon  darknefs  of  the  night,  he  had 
at  laft,  with  whatever  reludtance,  been  obhged  to  come  on 
board  without  them.  The  fituation  of  thefe  poor  fellows 
now  furniflied  another  fubjecSt  of  folicitude  and  anxiety ; 
they  were  naked,  upon  a  defolate  ifland,  at  a  great  diflance 
from  the  watering-place  where  their  fhip-mates  had  a  tent, 
without  food,  and  without  fhelter,  in  a  night  of  violent  and 
inceffant  rain,  with  fuch  thunder  and  lightning  as  in  Europe 
is  altogether  unknown.  In  the  evening  of  the  19th,  how- 
ever, I  had  the  fatisfadlion  to  receive  them  on  board,  artd  to 
hear  an  account  of  their  adventures  from  their  own  lips. 
As  long  as  it  was  light  they  flattered  themfelves,  like  their 
friends  in  the  boat,  that  they  fliould  find  an  opportunity  to 
return  on  board  her ;  but  afterwards  when  the  darknefs  of 
the  night  was  broken  only  by  the  flafhes  of  lightning,  and 
the  tempeft  became  every  moment  more  vioknt,  they  knew 
that  to  reach  the  boat  was  impoffible,  if  it  ftill  remained  in 
its  ftation ;  and  that  moil  probably  the  people  on  board  had 
provided  for  their  own  fafety,  by  returning  on  board  the 
Ihip:  to  reach  the  tent  of  their  fhip-mates,  during  the  dark- 
nefs and  temped,  was  equally  beyond  their  power,  and  they 
were  reduced  to  the  ncccflity  of  palling  fuch  a  night,  in 
fuch  a  place,  without  the  leaft  defence  againft  either  the 
rain  or  the  cold,  which  now  began  to  be  feverely  felt.  Ne- 
cellity  is  faid  to  be  ingenious,  and  they  contrived  to  pro- 
cure a  temporary  fuccedaneum  both  for  apparel  and  a  flied, 
by  lying  one  upon  another,  each  man  alternately  placing 
himfelf  between  the  other  two ;  in  this  fituation  it  may  eaf^ly 
be  believed  that  they  longed  moll  ardently  for  tlie  dawn,  and 
as  foon  as  it  appeared  they  fct  out  for  tlie  tent :  they  were 
obliged  however  to  make  their  way  along  the  lea  fliorc,  for 
the  inland  country  was  impaflablc ;  nor  was  this  the  word, 

/..  A  z  for 


^48         CAPTAIN  CARTERET'S  VOYAGE 

J  767.      for  they  were  frequently  flopped  by  high  fteep  bluff  points, 

\ ^-._,  which  they  were  obliged  to  fwim  round  at  a  confiderable 

£>iiday  17.  ^i{i^j^(>Q^  fQj.  if  they  had  not  taken  a  compafs,  they  would 
have  been  daflied  to  pieces  againft  the  rocks  by  the  furf, 
and  as  it  was,  they  were  every  moment  in  danger  of  being 
devoured  by  a  fhark.  About  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
however,  they  reached  the  tents,  almoft  periflied  with  hun- 
ger and  cold,  and  were  received  with  equal  furprife  and  joy 
by  their  fliip-mates,  who  immediately  fhared  with  them 
fuch  provifions  and  clothes  as  they  had.  When  they  came 
on  board,  I  gave  orders  that  they  fliould  have  fuch  refrefh- 
ments  as  were  proper,  and  remain  in  their  hammocks  the 
whole  night.  The  next  day  they  were  as  hearty  as  if  no- 
thing had  happened,  nor  did  they  fuffer  any  farther  incon- 
venience from  the  accident.  Thefe  were  three  of  the  honeft 
fellows  who  had  fwum  naked  from  the  fliip  at  the  ifland  of 
Madeira  to  get  a  fkinful  of  liquor.  I  now  return  to  my  nar- 
rative in  the  order  of  time. 

Monday  18.  ^^  ^^^  i8th,  the  wcathcr  was  moderate,  and  in  the  even- 
ing we  were  within  half  a  mile  of  the  anchoring-ground 
from  which  we  had  been  driven  ;  but  the  wind  fuddenly 
failing,  and  a  current  making  againft  us,  we  could  not 
reach  it :  we  took  advantage  however  of  being  fo  near  the 
waterer's  tent  to  fend  a  boat  on  fliore  to  enquire  after  the 
three  men  whofe  adventure  has  been  juft  related,  and  foon 
after  flie  brought  them  on  board.  The  carpenters  were  all 
this  time  employed  in  making  a  new  mizen-gafF,  out  of  a 
gib-boom,  and  in  the  mean  while  we  were  obliged  to  make 
fhift  with  the  old  one,  keeping  the  fail  balanced.     It  conti- 

Tucfday  19.   nucd  a  ftark  calm  all  the  night,  fo  that  in  the  morning  we 

found  the  current  and  the  fwell  had  driven  us  no  lefs  than 

nine  miles  from  the  land :  the  v/eather  however  being  good, 

8  I  fent 


ROUND   THE   WORLD.  549 

t  fent  the  cutter  for  a  load  of  water,  which  fhe  brought  on       17*7* 

May. 

board  about  one  o'clock.  Soon  after  a  breeze  fprung  up  at  v_— v— _* 
N.N.W.  and  as  we  now  approached  the  land  very  fail,  I  fent 
the  boat  on  fhore  again  for  water ;  it  happened  however 
that  before  we  could  reach  our  anchoring-ground,  it  again 
fell  calm,  and  we  were  again  kept  off  by  the  current:  the 
boat  in  the  mean  time,  as  fhe  rowed  along  the  fhore,  caught 
as  much  fifh  with  hook  and  line  as  ferved  all  the  fliip's 
company,  which  was  fome  alleviation  of  our  difappointment. 
At  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  it  began  again  to  blow 
hard  with  fudden  fqualls,  fo  that  we  pafled  another  toil- 
fome  and  dangerous  night.  In  the  morning,  having  a  ftiff  Wedaef.  20, 
gale  at  N.W.  we  made  towards  our  anchoring-ground  with 
all  the  fail  we  could  fpread,  and  happily  regained  it  about 
four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  we  anchored,  at  two 
cables'  length  from  the  beach,  in  eighteen  fathom,  with  a 
bottom  of  fine  fand,  and  moored  with  a  fmall  anchor  in 
fhore.  By  the  time  the  fhip  was  properly  fecured,  it  was  too 
late  to  proceed  with  our  watering ;  the  long-boat  however 
was  fent  along  the  fliore  to  fifh,  and  though  before  feven 
o'clock  it  blew  fo  hard  that  fhe  was  obliged  to  return,  fhe 
brought  fifh  enough  on  board  to  ferve  all  the  people.  In  the 
night  we  had  foul  weather,  with  hard  fqualls  and  much 
rain;  and  in  the  morning,  the  wind  blowing  with  great  Thurfdayjjv 
violence  along  the  fliore,  we  frequently  drove,  though  we 
had  not  lefs  than  two  hundred  fathom  of  cable  out ;  for  the 
bank  is  a  loofe  fine  fand  that  eafily  gives  way.  We  rode  out 
the  florm  however  without  damage,  but  the  rain  was  fo  vio- 
lent, and  the  fea  ran  fo  high,  that  nothing  could  be  done 
with  the  boats,  which  was  the  more  mortifying  as  it  was^ 
for  the  fake  of  completing  our  watering  that  we  had  en- 
dured almofl  incelTant  labour  for  five  days  and  nights  to  re- 
gain the  fituation  in  which  we  now  lay.    About  eight  in  the 

evenings 


550  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S   VOYAGE 

»767-      evening,  the  wind  became  more  moderate,  and  though  it 

< 7-^~i  was  then  too  late  to  fetch  off  any  water,  we  got  out  one  of 

Thurfdayzi.  ^^^  boats,  and  fent  three  men  on  fliore,  right  abreaft  of  the 
.  Ihip,  to  kill  feals,  and  make  oil  of  their  fat,  for  burning  in 
lamps  and  other  ufes  on  board  the  fhip. 
Friday  22.  The  wind  blew  very  hard  the  next  morning,  as  it  had 
done  all  night,  but  being  at  W.  N.W.  which  was  off  the 
land,  we  fent  the  boats  away  foon  after  it  was  light,  and 
about  ten,  they  returned  with  each  of  them  a  load  of  water, 
and  a  great  number  of  pintado  birds :  thefe  birds  they  got 
from  the  people  on  fhore,  who  told  them,  that  when  a  gale 
of  wind  happened  in  the  night  they  flew  fafter  into  their 
fire  than  they  could  well  take  them  out,  fo  that  during  the 
gale  of  the  laft  night,  they  got  no  lefs  than  feven  hundred 
of  them.  The  boats  were  employed  in  getting  water  on 
board  all  this  day,  although  the  furf  was  fo  great  that  feve- 
ral  of  the  cafks  were  ftaved  and  loft :  they  were  fent  out 
Saturday  23.  again  a  little  before  it  was  light  the  next  day,  and  by  feven 
o'clock  a  few  calks  only  were  wanting  to  complete  our  flock. 
The  threatening  appearances  of  the  weather  made  me  now 
very  impatient  to  get  the  people  on  board,  with  the  cafks 
that  were  ftill  at  the  watering-place  ;  as  foon  therefore  as 
|he  boats  were  cleared  of  their  loading,  I  difpatched  them 
again,  with  orders  to  bring  off  all  the  hands,  with  the 
tent,  and  every  thing  elfe  that  was  on  fliore,  with  all 
poffible  expedition.  From  this  time  the  wind  increafed, 
very  faft,  and  by  eleven  o'clock  it  blew  fo  hard,  with 
violent  gufts  from  the  land,  that  the  fliip  began  to  drive 
off  the  bank:  we  heaved  the  fmall  anchor  up,  and  got 
it  in  out  of  the  way  of  the  other ;  the  gale  ftill  increafed, 
but  as  it  was  right  off  the  land,  I  was  in  no  pain  about 
the  fhip,  which  continued  to  drive,  ftill  dragging  the  an- 
chor through  the  fand,  with  two  hundred  fathom  of  cable 

out ; 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ^^t 

out;  for  being  very  folicitous  to  give  the  boats  time  to  1767. 
bring  all  on  board  before  we  were  quite  off  the  bank,  I  uJi^L^ 
would  not  weigh.  At  two  o'clock,  however,  the  anchor  ^"""^^^  ^^' 
was  quite  off  the  ground,  and  the  fhip  was  in  deep  water ; 
we  were  now  therefore  obliged  to  bring  the  cable  to  the 
capftern,  and  with  great  difficulty  we  got  the  anchor  up. 
The  gufts  off  the  land  were  fo  violent  that,  not  daring  to 
fliow  any  canvas,  we  lay  to  under  our  bare  poles,  and  the 
water  was  frequently  torn  up,  and  whirled  round  in  the  air 
much  higher  than  our  mails  heads.  As  the  fhip  now  drove 
from  the  ifland  at  a  great  rate,  and  night  was  coming  on,  I 
began  to  be  in  great  pain  for  the  boats,  in  which,  belides  my 
Lieutenant,  there  were  eight  and  twenty  of  my  bell  men ;  but 
jull  in  the  dufk  of  the  evening,  I  perceived  one  of  them  fcud- 
ding  before  the  feas  and  making  towards  the  ihip :  this 
proved  to  be  the  longboat,  which  in  fpight  of  all  the  efforts 
of  thofe  on  board,  had  been  forced  from  her  grappling,  and 
driven  off  the  land.  We  took  the  befl  opportunity  that  of- 
fered to  get  her  on  board,  but  notwithflanding  all  our  care, 
llie  received  confiderable  damage  as  we  were  hoifling  her 
in.  She  had  on  board  ten  of  my  people,  who  informed  me, 
that  when  they  were  firft  driven  from  the  fhore,  they  had 
fome  fire  wood  on  board,  but  that  they  were  obliged  to 
throw  that,  and  every  thing  elfe,  into  the  fea,  to  lighten  the 
boat.  As  we  had  yet  feen  nothing  of  the  cutter,  and  had 
reafon  to  fear  that  flie  alfo,  with  the  tents,  and  the  other 
eighteen  people,  befides  the  Lieutenant,  had  been  driven  off 
the  ifland,  I  gave  her  up  for  loll ;  knowing  that  if  the  night, 
which  was  now  at  hand,  fliould  overtake  her  in  fuch  a  flormi 
flie  muft  inevitably  perifh.  It  was  however  poflible  that 
the  people  might  be  afhore,  and  therefore  that  if  the  boat 
fliould  be  loft,  they  might  ftill  be  preferved  -,  for  this  reafon, 
I  determined  to  regain  the  land  as  foon  as  poffible.  At  mid- 
night. 


C52  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

T767.  night,  the  weather  became  more  moderate,  fo  that  we  could 
'_  '^!-' ._'  carry  our  courfes  and  topfails,  and  at  four  o'clock  in  the 
s«'^diy  24.  j^^Q^.^jj-ig  ^Q  crowded  all  the  fail  we  could  make.  At  ten 
o'clock,  we  were  very  near  the  fliore  ;  to  our  great  concern, 
we  faw  nothing  of  the  cutter,  yet  we  continued  to  Hand  on 
till  about  noon,  when  we  happily  difcovered  her  at  a  grap- 
pling, clofe  under  the  land :  we  immediately  ran  to  our 
glafies,  by  the  help  of  which  we  faw  the  people  getting  into 
lier,  and  about  three  o'clock,  to  our  mutual  and  inexpref- 
fible  joy,  llie  came  fafe  on  board  with  all  her  people :  they 
were  however  fo  exhaufted  with  fatigue,  that  they  could 
fcarcely  get  up  the  fhip's  fide.  The  Lieutenant  told  me,  that 
the  night  before  he  had  attempted  to  come  off,  but  that  as 
foon  as  he  had  left  the  fhore,  a  fudden  fquall  fo  nearly  filled 
the  boat  with  water  that  flie  was  very  near  going  to  the 
bottom  ;  but  that  all  hands  bailing  with  the  utraofl  dili- 
gence and  adivity,  they  happily  cleared  her :  that  he  then 
made  for  the  land  again,  which,  with  the  utmoft  difficulty, 
he  regained,  and  having  left  a  fufficient  number  on  board 
the  boat,  to  watch  her,  and  keep  her  free  from  water,  he 
with  the  reft  of  the  people  went  on  fliore.  That  having 
paired  the  night  in  a  ftate  of  inexpreffible  anxiety  and  dif- 
trefs,  they  looked  out  for  the  fliip  with  the  firft  dawn  of  the 
morning,  and  feeing  nothing  of  her,  concluded  that  llie  had 
pcriflicd  in  the  ftorm,  which  they  had  never  feen  exceeded. 
Tiiey  did  not  however  fit  down  torpid  in  defpair,  but  began 
immediately  to  clear  the  ground  near  the  beach  of  bruflies 
and  weeds,  and  cut  down  feveral  trees  of  which  they  made 
rollers  to  afiifl  them  in  hauling  up  the  boat,  in  order  to  fe- 
cur€  her  j  intending,  as  they  had  no  hope  of  the  ftiip's  re- 
turn, to  wait  till  the  fummcr  fcafon,  and  then  attempt  to 
make  the  ifland  of  Juan  Fernandcs.  They  had  now  better 
hopes,  ?Lnd  all  fenfe  of  the  dangers  that  Avere  before  us 

was 


1  j*^.      a  \  f 


Mas-a-f  uera  learintrWW.  Jiscant aiou, 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


SS5 


was  for  a  while  obliterated  by  the  joy  of  our  efcape  from       '7''7- 
thofe  that  were  paft.  <— ^ 

From  the  i6th,  when  we  were  firft  driven  from  our  an- 
choring ground,  to  this  time,  we  fufFered  an  uninterrupted 
feries  of  danger,  fatigue,  and  misfortunes.  The  Ihip  worked 
and  failed  very  ill,  the  weather  was  dark  and  tempeftuous, 
with  thunder,  lightning,  and  rain,  and  the  boats,  which  I 
was  obliged  to  keep  always  employed,  even  when  we  were 
under  fail,  to  procure  us  water,  were  in  continual  danger  of 
being  loft,  as  well  by  the  hard  gales  which  conflantly  blew, 
as  by  the  fudden  gulls  which  frequently  rullied  upon  us 
with  a  violence  that  is  fcarcely  to  be  conceived.  This  diftrefs 
was  the  more  fevere  as  it  was  unexpected,  for  I  had  expe- 
rienced very  different  weather  in  thefe  parts  about  two  years 
before  with  Commodore  Byron.  It  has  generally  been 
thought,  that  upon  this  coafb  the  winds  are  conflantly  from 
the  S.  to  the  S.  W.  though  Frazicr  mentions  his  having  had 
ftrong  gales  and  high  feas  from  the  N.  N.  W.  and  N.  W 
quarter,  which  was  unhappily  my  cafe. 

Having  once  more  got  my  people  and  boats  fafe  on  board, 
I  made  ^fail  from  this  turbulent  climate,  and  thought  myfelf 
fortunate  not  to  have  left  any  thing  behind  me  except  the 
wood,  which  our  people  had  cut  for  firing. 

The  ifland  of  Mafafuero  lies  in  latitude  33°  45' S.,  longitude 
80°  4,6'  W.  of  London.  Its  fituation  is  weft-of  Juan  Fernandez, 
both  being  nearly  in  the  fame  latitude,  and  by  the  globe,  it  is 
diftant  about  thirty-one  leagues.  It  is  very  high  and  moun- 
tainous, and  at  a  diflance  appears  like  one  hill  or  rock :  it  is  of 
a  triangular  form,  and  about  feven  or  eight  leagues  in  cir- 
cumference. The  fouth  part,  which  we  faw  when  we  firfl 
made  the  iHand,  at  the  diflance  of  three  and  twenty  leagues. 

Vol.  I.  4  B  is 


5S4. 


CAPTAIN   CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


17^7'      is  much  the  higheft :  on  the  north  end  there  are  feveral  fpots 
-I-'  _.  of  clear  ground,  which  perhaps  might  admit  of  cukivation. 

The  author  of  the  account  of  Lord  Anfon's  voyage  men- 
tions only  one  part  of  this  illand  as  affording  anchorage, 
which  is  on  the  north  fide,  and  in  deep  water,  but  we  faw 
no  part  where  there  was  not  anchorage:  on  the  weft  fide  in 
particular  there  is  anchorage  at  about  a  mile  from  the  fliore 
in  twenty  fathom,  and  at  about  two  miles  and  a  half  in 
forty,  and  forty-five  fathom,  with  a  fine  black  fand  at  the 
bottom.  This  author  alfo  fays,  that  •'  there  is  a  reef  of  rocks 
running  off  the  eaftern  point  of  the  ifland  about  tv/o  miles  in 
length,  which  may  be  feen  by  the  fea'^s  breaking  over  them ;" 
but  in  this  he  is  miftaken,  there  is  no  reef  of  rocks,  or  ilioal 
running  off  the  eaftern  point,  but  there  is  a  reef  of  rocks 
and  fand  running  off  the  weftern  fide,  near  the  fouth  end  of 
it.  He  is  alfo  miftaken  as  to  the  diftance  of  this  ifland  from 
Juan  Fernandes,  and  its  diredion^  for  he  fays  the  diftance  is 
twenty-two  leagues,  and  the  direction  W.  by  S.,  but  we 
found  the  diftance  nearly  one-third  more,  and  the  dire(5lion 
is  due  weft,  for,  as  I  have  before  obferved,  the  latitude  of 
both  iflands  is  nearly  the  fame.  The  goats  that  he  mentions 
we  found  upon  it  in  the  fame  abundance,  and  equally  eafy 
to  be  caught. 

On  the  fouth  weft  point  of  the  ifland  there  is  a  remarkable 
rock,  with  a  hole  in  it,  which  is  a  good  mark  to  come  to  an 
anchor  on  the  weftern  fide,  where  there  is  the  beft  bank  of 
any  about  the  place.  About  a  mile  and  a  half  to  the  north- 
ward of  this  hole,  there  is  a  low  point  of  land,  and  from  this 
point  runs  the  reef  that  has  been  juft  mentioned,  in  the  di- 
re(5lion  of  W.  by  S.  to  the  diftance  of  about  three  quarters  of 
a  mile,  where  the  fea  continually  breaks  upon  it.  To  an- 
chor. 


M^ 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  jl j 

chor,  run  in  till  the  hole  in  the  rock  is  fliut  in,  about  a  1767. 
cable's  length  upon  this  low  point  of  land,  then  bearing 
S.  by  E.  i-  E.  and  anchor  in  twenty  and  twenty-two  fathom, 
fine  black  fand  and  fhells  :  there  is  anchorage  alfo  at  feveral 
places  on  the  other  fides  of  the  ifland,  particularly  off  the 
north  point,  in  fourteen  and  fifteen  fathom,  with  fine  fand. 

There  is  plenty  of  wood  and  water  all  round  the  ifland, 
but  they  are  not  to  be  procured  without  much  difficulty,  a 
great  quantity  of  ftones,  and  large  fragments  of  the  rock 
have  fallen  from  the  high  land  all  round  the  ifland,  and 
upon  thefe  there  breaks  fuch  a  furf  that  a  boat  cannot  fafely 
come  within  a  cable's  length  of  the  fhore  j  there  is  therefore 
no  landing  here  but  by  fwimming  from  the  boat,  and  then 
mooring  her  without  the  rocks,  nor  is  there  any  method  of 
getting  off  the  wood  and  water  but  by  hauling  them  to  the 
boat  with  ropes :  there  are  however  many  places  where  it 
would  be  very  eafy  to  make  a  commodious  landing  by  build- 
ing a  wharf,  whicii  it  would  be  worth  while  even  for  a 
fingle  fliip  to  do  if  flie  v^3.s  to  continue  any  time  at  the 
ifland. 

This  part  of  Mafafuero  is  a  very  good  place  for  refrelh- 
ment,  efpecially  in  the  fummer  feafon:  the  goats  have  been 
mentioned  already,  and  there  is  all  round  the  ifland  fuch 
plenty  of  fifli,  that  a  boat  may,  with  three  hooks  and  lines, 
catch  as  much  as  will  ferve  an  hundred  people:  among 
others  we  caught  excellent  coal  fifh,  cavallies,  cod,  hallibut, 
and  crayfifh.  We  took  a  king-fifher  that  weighed  cighty- 
feven  pounds,  and  was  five  feet  and  an  half  long,  and  the 
iharks  were  fo  ravenous,  that  when  we  were  founding  one 
of  them  fwallowed  the  lead,  by  which  we  hauled  him  above 
water,  but  as  he  then  difgorged  it,  we  lofl:  him.  The  feals 
were  fo  numerous,  that  I  verily  think  if  many  thoufands  of 

4B  2  them 


J56  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S   VOYAGE 

1767.  them  were  killed  in  a  night,  they  would  not  be  mifTed  in  the 
v,  -,-'_■  morning :  w^e  v;ere  obliged  to  kill  great  numbers  of  them, 
as,  when  we  walked  the  fiiore,  they  were  continually 
running  againft  us,  making  at  the  fame  time  a  moft  hor- 
rible noife.  Thefe  animals  yield  excellent  train  oil,  and 
their  hearts  and  plucks  are  very  good  eating,  being  in  taftc 
fomething  like  thofe  of  a  hog,  and  their  fkins  are  covered 
with  the  finefl  fur  I  ever  faw  of  the  kind.  There  are  many 
birds  here,  and  among  others  fome  very  large  hawks.  Of 
the  pintado  birds,  our  people,  as  I  have  before  obferved, 
caught  no  Icfs  than  feven  hundred  in  one  night.  We  had 
not  much  opportunity  to  examine  the  place  for  vegetable 
produtflions,  but  we  faw  feveral  leaves  of  the  mountain  cab- 
bage, which  is  a  proof  that  the  tree  grows  here. 


CHAP. 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  SS7 


CHAP.     in. 

Tie  Pajfage  from  Mafafuero  to  ^een  Charlottes  IJIands; 
fever  a  I  Miflahs  correBed  co?2Cernhjg  Davis's  Land,  and 
an  AccoujJt  offomefmall  Iflattdsy  fuppofed  to  be  the  fame 
■  that  werefee?t  by  ^uiros. 

WHEN  we  took  our  departure  from  Mafafuero,  we  bad  '^^y- 
a  great  fea  from  the  N.  W.  with  a  fwcU  of  long  "-— v — 
billows  from  the  fouriiward,  and  the  wind,  which  was  from 
the  S.  W.  to  the  W.  N,  W.  obliged  me  to  Hand  to  the  north- 
ward, in  hope  of  getting  the  fouth  eafl  trade-wind,  for  the 
fhip  was  fo  dull  a  failer,  that  there  was  no  making  her  go 
without  a  flrong  wind  in  her  favour.  Having  thus  run 
farther  to  the  northward  than  at  firft  I  intended,  and  finding 
myfelf  not  far  from  the  parallel  of  latitude  which  has  been 
affigned  to  two  illands  called  Saint  Ambrofe,  and  Saint  Felix 
or  Saint  Paul,  I  thought  I  fliould  perform,  an  acceptable  fer- 
vice  by  examining  if  they  were  fit  for  Ihi^ping  to  refrefli  at, 
efpecially  as  the  Spaniards  having  fortified  Juan  Fernandes, 
they  might  be  found  convenient  for  Great  Britain,  if  flie 
Ihould  hereafter  be  engaged  in  a  Spanifh  war.  Thefe  iflands 
are  laid  down  in  Green's  charts,  which  were  publiflied  in  the 
year  1753,  from  latitude  26°  20',  to  27° S.  and  from  I'^i.  to 
G^W.  of  Mafafuero  ;  I  therefore  hauled  up  with  a  defign  to 
keep  in  that  latitude,  but  foon  afterwards  confulting  Robert- 
fon's  Elements  of  Navigation,  I  found  the  illand  of  Saint 
Ambrofe  there  laid  down  in  latitude  25°  30' S.,  and  82"^  20' 
longitude  weft  of  London,  and  fuppofing  that  iflands  of  fo 

7  fmaJt 


'558  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.  fmall  an  extent,  might  be  laid  down  with  more  exadtnefs  in 
\„_«.^Il_j  this  work  than  in  the  chart,  I  bore  away  more  northward  for 
that  latitude;  the  event,  however,  proved  that  I  fliould  not 
have  trulled  him  fo  far:  I  miffed  the  iflands,  and  as  I  faw 
great  numbers  of  birds  and  fifh,^  v/hich  are  certain  indica- 
tions of  land  not  far  off,  there  is  the  greatcfl  reafon  to  con- 
clude that  I  went  to  the  northward  of  them.  I  am  forry  to 
fay  that  upon  a  farther  examination  of  Robertfon's  tables  of 
latitudes  and  longitudes,  I  found  them  erroneous  in  many 
particulars:  this  cenfure,  however,  if  I  had  not  thought  it 
neceflary  to  prevent  future  mifchief,  fhould  have  been  fup- 
preffed. 

Upon  examining  the  account  that  is  given  by  Wafer,  who 
'was  Surgeon  on  board  Captain  Davis's  fliip,  I  think  it  is  pro- 
bable that  thefe  two  iflands  are  the  land  that  Davis  fell  in 
with  in  his  way  to  the  fouthward  from  the  Gallapago  iflands, 
and  that  the  land  laid  down  in  all  the  fea  charts  under  the 
name  of  Davis's  Land,  has  no  exiftence,  notwithftanding 
what  is  faid  in  the  account  of  Roggewein's  voyage,  which 
was  made  in  1722,  of  land  that  they  called  Eaftern  Ifland, 
which  fome  have  imagined  to  be  a  confirmation  of  Davis's 
-difcovery,  and  the  fame  land  to  which  his  name  has  been 
given. 

It  is  manifcfl;  from  Wafer's  narrative,  that  little  credit  is 
jdue  to  the  account  kept  on  board  Davis's  fliip,  except  with 
refped  to  the  latitude,  for  he  acknowledges  that  they  had 
like  to  have  pcriflied  by  their  making  an  allowance  for  the 
variation  of  the  needle  wefl;ward,  inftead  of  eaftward:  he 
tells  us  alfo  that  they  fleered  S.  by  E.  7  E.  from  the  Gallapa- 
gos,  till  they  made  land  in  latitude  27°  20'  S.  but  it  is  evident 
that  fuch  a  courfe  would  carry  them  not  to  the  weflward  but 
10  the  eafl.ward  of  the  Gallapagos,  and  fet  them  at  about  the 

3  diftance 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  ^59 

diftance  of  two  hundred  leagues  from  Capiapo,  and  not  five       i?^;* 

May. 

hundred  leagues  as  he  has  alleged,  for  the  variation  here  is  <■-  ^  /, 
not  more  than  half  a  point  to  the  eaftward  now,  and  it  muft 
have  been  ftill  lefs  then,  it  having  been  increafing  to  the 
eaftward  on  all  this  coaft.  The  courfe  that  Davis  fleered 
therefore,  if  the  diftance  between  the  iflands  of  St.  Ambrofe 
and  St.  Felix,  and  the  Gallapagos,  as  laid  down  in  all  our 
fea  charts,  is  right,  muft  have  brought  him  within  fight  of 
St.  Ambrofe  and  St.  Felix,  when  he  had  run  the  diftance  he 
mentions.  The  truth  is,  that  if  there  had  been  any  fuch 
place  as  Davis's  Land  in  the  fituation  which  has  been  allotted, 
to  it  in  our  fea  charts,  I  muft  have  failed  over  it,  or  at  leaft 
have  feen  it,  as  will  appear  in  the  courfe  of  this  narrative. 

I  kept  between  the  latitude  25°  50'  and  25°  30',  in  fearcli 
of  the  iflands  I  intended  to  examine,  till  I  got  five  degrees  to 
the  weftward  of  our  departure,  and  then  feeing  no  land,  and 
the  birds  having  left  us,  I  hauled  more  to  the  fouthward^ 
and  got  into  latitude  27°  20'  S.  where  I  continued  till  we  got 
between  feventeen  and  eighteen  degrees  to  the  weftward  of 
our  departure,  hi  this  parallel  we  had  light  airs  and  foul 
winds,  v;ith  a  ftrong  northerly  current,  which  made  me 
conje(5lure  that  we  were  near  this  Davis's  Land,  for  which 
we  looked  out  with  great  diligence,  but  a  fair  wind  fpringing 
up  again,  we  fleered  weft  by  fouth,  which  gradually 
brought  us  into  the  latitude  of  28°  7  S.  fo  that  it  is  evident  I 
muft  have  failed  over  this  land,  or  at  leaft  have  feen  it  if 
there  had  been  any  fuch  place.  I  afterwards  kept  in  the  la- 
titude of  28°  for  forty  degrees  to  the  weftward  of  my  depar- 
ture, or,  according  to  my  account,  121  degrees  weft  of 
London,  this  being  the  higheft  fouth  latitude  the  winds  and 
weather  would  permit  me  to  keep,  fo  that  I  muft  have  gone 
to  the  fouthward  of  the  fituation  affigned  to  the  fuppofed  con- 
tinent called  Davis's  Land  in  all  our  charts. 

We 


^6o  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.  We  continued  our  fearch  till  Wednefday  the  17th  of  June, 

u— >^— w  when,  in  latitude  28°  S.,  longitude  ii2^W.  we  faw  many 
^  "^  ■ ''''  fea  birds,  which  flew  in  flocks,  and  fome  rock  weed,  which 
made  me  conjeAure  that  we  were  approaching,  or  had  pafTed 
by  fome  land.  At  this  time  the  wind  blew  hard  from  the 
northward,  which  made  a  great  fea,  but  we  had  notwith- 
ilanding  long  rolling  billows  from  the  fouthward,  fo  that 
whatever  land  was  in  that  quarter,  could  be  only  fmall 
rocky  iflands  ;  and  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  if  there  was 
land  at  all  it  was  to  the  northward,  poffibly  it  might  be 
Roggewein's  eallern  ifland,  which  he  has  placed  in  latitude 
27^8.  and  which  fome  geographers  have  fuppofed  to  be 
about  fcven  hundred  leagues  diftant  from  the  continent  of 
South  America,  if  indeed  any  credit  is  to  be  given  to  his 
account. 

It  was  now  the  depth  of  winter  in  thefe  parts,  and  we  had 
hard  gales  and  high  feas  that  frequently  brought  us  under 
our  courfes  and  low  fails :  the  winds  were  alfo  variable,  and 
though  we  were  near  the  tropic,  the  weather  was  dark, 
hazey,  and  cold,  with  frequent  thunder  and  lightning, 
licet  and  rain.  The  fun  was  above  the  horizon  about  ten 
hours  in  the  four  and  twenty,  but  we  frequently  palled 
many  days  together  without  feeing  him  j  and  the  weather 
was  fo  thick,  that  Vv^hen  he  was  below  the  horizon  the 
darknefs  was  dreadful :  the  gloominefs  of  the  weather  was 
indeed  not  only  a  difagi'ceable  but  a  moft  dangerous  cir- 
cumdance,  as  we  were  often  long  without  being  able  to 
make  an  obfervation,  and  were,  notwithftanding,  obliged  to 
carry  all  the  fail  we  could  fpread,  day  and  night,  our  Ihip 
being  fo  bad  a  failer,  and  our  voyage  fo  long,  to  prevent 
our  perifliing  by  hunger,  which,  with  all  its  concomitant 
liorrors,  would  othcrvvife  be  inevitable. 

We 


Coral  Rack 


M 


A  CHART  A:?^!)  VIEWS 
OF  PITCAIR?}  S    ISLAND. 

Latitude  M.oi . S . Loin/;; l:;:j'.  Jo W. 


A  -fMi:  of  I  Jtii 


Iieitn'iij  ^^I  W  ilistaiue  /,J  lem/u 


\± 


Jifannif  "H^y^  ///If/i/J/ir  t>  I'r  y  /iir<//jis' 


Veartm/  NN"W  i/istir/irf  ,-i  ^v/,///,'.v 


lalfflta  e^lwUrv  .^  _  ^- 


.ju.._--d^. A 


/,;//// ///T3. 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  561 

We  continued  our  courfe  weft  ward  till  the  evening  of  ^7^7- 
Thurfday  the  2d  of  July,  when  we  difcovered  land  to  the  « — -v-^ — ' 
northward  of  us.  Upon  approaching  it  the  next  day,  it  ap-  "  ^^  ^' 
peared  like  a  great  rock  rifing  out  of  the  fea :  it  was  not  more 
than  five  miles  in  circumference,  and  feemed  to  be  unin- 
habited ;  it  was,  however,  covered  with  trees,  and  we  faw 
a  fmall  ftream  of  frefh  water  running  down  one  fide  of  it. 
I  would  have  landed  upon  it,  but  the  furf,  which  at  this 
feafon  broke  upon  it  with  great  violence,  rendered  it  im- 
poffible.  I  got  foundings  on  the  weft  fide  of  it,  at  fomewhat 
lefs  than  a  mile  from  the  fhore,  in  twenty-five  fathom,  with 
a  bottom  of  coral  and  fand ;  and  it  is  probable  that  in  fine 
fummer  weather  landing  here  may  not  only  be  practicable 
but  eafy.  We  faw  a  great  number  of  fea  birds  hovering 
about  it,  at  fomewhat  lefs  than  a  mile  from  the  fliore,  and 
the  fea  here  feemed  to  have  fifli.  It  lies  in  latitude  20°  2''  S., 
longitude  133'  21'W.  and  about  a  thoufand  leagues  to  the 
weftward  of  the  continent  of  America.  It  is  fo  high  that  we 
faw  it  at  the  diftance  of  more  than  fifteen  leagues,  and  it 
having  been  difcovered  by  a  young  gentleman,  fon  to  Ma- 
jor Pitcairn  of  the  marines,  who  was  unfortunately  loft  in 
the  Aurora,  we  called  it  Pitcairn's  Island.  Pttcaim's 

lilaod. 

While  we  were  in  the  neighbourhood  of  this  ifland,  the 
weather  was  extremely  tempeftuous,  with  long  rolling  bil- 
lows from  the  fouthward,  larger  and  higher  than  any  I 
had  feen  before.  The  winds  were  variable,  but  blew  chiefly 
from  the  S.  S.  W.  W.  and  W.  N.  W.  We  had  very  feldom  a 
gale  to  the  eaftward,  fo  that  we  were  prevented  from  keep- 
ing in  a  high  fouth  latitude,  and  were  continually  driving  to 
the  northward. 

On    the    4th,   we  found    that   the   fhip    made    a    good  Saturday  4. 
deal  of  water,  for  having  been  fo  long  labouring  in  high 
Vol.  I.  4  C  and 


5^3 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


1767, 
July-  _ 

Saturday  4. 


Saturday  11. 


Ofnaburgh 
hland. 


Sunday  iz. 


and  turbulent  feas,  fhe  was  become  very  crazy ;  our  fails 
alfo  being  much  worn,  were  continually  fplitting,  fo  that  it 
was  become  neceflary  to  keep  the  fail-maker  conflantly  at 
work.  The  people  had  hitherto  enjoyed  good  health,  but 
they  now  began  to  be  affe«fted  with  the  fcurvy.  While  we 
were  in  the  Streight  of  Magellan,  I  caufed  a  little  awning  to 
be  made,  which  I  covered  with  a  clean  painted  canvas,  that 
had  been  allowed  me  for  a  floor-cloth  to  my  cabbin,  and 
with  this  we  caught  fo  much  rain  water,  with  but  little 
trouble  or  attendance,  that  the  people  were  never  put  to  a 
fliort  allowance  of  this  important  article :  the  awning  alfo 
afforded  fhelter  from  the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  and  to 
thefe  precautions  I  imputed  our  having  efcaped  the  fcurvy  fo 
long,  though  perhaps  it  was  in  fome  meafure  owing  to  the 
mixture  of  fpirit  of  vitriol  with  the  water  that  was  thus  pre- 
ferved,  our  Surgeon  putting  a  fmall  quantity  into  every  cafk 
when  it  was  filled  up. 

On  Saturday  the  nth,  we  difcovered  a  fmall,  low,  flat 
ifland,  which  appeared  to  be  almoft  level  with  the  water's 
edge,  and  was  covered  with  green  trees :  as  it  was  to  the 
fouth,  and  direflly  to  windward  of  us,  we  could  not  fetch  it. 
It  lies  in  latitude  22°  S.,  and  longitude  141°  34  W. ;  and  we 
called  it  the  Bishop  of  Osnaburgh's  Island,  in  honour  of 
his  Majefty's  fecond  fon*. 

On  the  1 2th,  we  fell  in  with  two  more  fmall  iflands, 
which  were  covered  with  green  trees,  but  appeared  to  be  un- 
inhabited. We  were  clofe  in  with  the  fouthermoft,  which 
proved  to  be  a  flip  of  land  in  the  form  of  a  half  moon,  low, 
flat,  and  fandy :  from  the  fouth  end  of  it  a  reef  runs  out  to 
the  diftance  of  about  half  a  mile,  on  which  the  fea  breaks 


*  There  is  another  ifland  of  this  name,  among  thofe  that  were  difcovered  by  Captain 

Wallis, 

with 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  563 

with  great  fury.     We  found  no  anchorage,  but  the  boat      n^?- 
landed.    It  had  a  pleafant  appearance,  but  afforded  neither  <     ".-  j 
vegetables  nor  water ;  there  were  however  many  birds  upon  ^"^  *'' '" 
it,  fo  tame  that  they  fuffered  themfelves  to  be  taken  by 
hand.    The  other  ifland  very  much  refcmbles  this,  and  is 
diftant  from  it  about  five  or  fix  leagues :  they  lie  W.  N.  W. 
and  E.  S.  E.  of  each  other.    One  of  them  is  in  latitude  20' 
38' S.,  longitude  146°  W.;  the  other  20®  34  S.,  longitude  146° 
15' W.  and  we   called  them  the  Duke    of   Gloucester's  Duke  of 
Islands;    the  variation  here  is  five  degrees  eaft.     Thefe  mands. 
iflands  are  probably  the  land  feen  by  Quiros,  as  the  fituation 
is  nearly  the  fame ;  but  if  not,  the  land  he  faw  could  not  be 
more  confiderable :  whatever  it  was  we  went  to  the  fouth- 
ward  of  it,  and  the  long  billows  we  had  here  convinced  us 
that  there  was  no  land  near  us  in  that  diredion.     The  wind 
here  being  to  the  caftward,  I  hauled  to  the  fouthward  again, 
and  the  next  day,  Monday  the  13th,  in  the  evening,  as  we  Monday  13. 
were   fleering  W.  S.  W.  we  obferved  that  we  lofl  the  long 
foutherly  billows,  and  that  we  got  them  again  at  feven  o'clock; 
the  next  day.    When  we  loft  them  we  were  in  latitude  21*^ 
7'S.,  longitude  147''  4' W.  and  when  we  got  them  again  we 
were  in  latitude  2 1  °  43'  S.,  longitude  149°  48'  W.  fo  that  I  ima- 
gine there  was  then  fome  land  to  the  fouthward,  not  far. diftant. 

From  this  time,  to  the  i6th,  the  winds  were  variable  from  Thurfday  i6. 
N.  E.  round  by  the  N.  the  N.  W.  and  S.  W.  and  blew  very 
hard,  with  violent  gufts,  one  of  which  was  very  near  being 
fatal  to  us,  with  thick  weather  and  hard  rain.  We  were 
then  in  latitude  22°  S.,  and  70°  30' W.  of  our  departure, 
where  we  found  the  variation  6"  30' E.  and  the  tempeftuous 
gales  were  fuccpcded  by  a  dead  calm.  After  fome  time, 
however,  thp  wind  fprung  up  again  at  weft,  and  at  length 
fettled  in  the  W.  S.  W.  which  foon  drove  us  again  to  the 
northward,  fo  that  on  the  20th  we  were  in  latitude  19°  S.,  Monday  20. 

4  C  2  longitude 


5:^4 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


1767.      longitude  75°  30' W.  of  our  departure:    the  variation  was 
J!X-^  here  6-  E. 

Wednef.  22.       On  the  2sd,  we  were  got  into  latitude   18°  S,  longitude 
161°  W.  which  was   about   one    thoufand  eight  hundred 
leagues  to  the  weflward  of  the  continent  of  America,  and  in 
all  this  track  we  had  no  indication  of  a  continent.    The  men 
now  began  to  be  very  fickly,  the  fcurvy  having  made  great 
progrefs  among  them,  and  as  I  found  that  all  my  endea- 
vours to  keep  in  a  high  fouthern  latitude  at  this  time,  were 
ineffe(5tual,  and  that  the  badnefs  of  the  weather,  the  vari- 
ablenefs  of  the  winds,  and  above  all  the  defers  of  the  fhip, 
rendered  our  progrefs  flow,  I  thought  it  abfolutely  neceflary 
to  fix  upon  that  courfe  which  was  moll  likely  to  preferve  the 
veflel  and  the  crew ;  inftead  therefore  of  attempting  to  return 
back  by  the  fouth  eaft,  in  which,  confidering  our  condition, 
and  the  advanced  feafon  of  the  year,  it  was  fcarcely  poflible 
that  we  fliould  fucceed,  I  bore  away  to  the  northward,  that 
I  might  get  into  the  trade-wind,  keeping  Hill  in  fuch  a  track 
as,  if  the  charts  were  to  be  trufted,  was  moft  likely  to  bring 
me  to  fome  ifland,  where  the  refrefhments  of  which  we 
Hood  fo  much  in  need  might  be  procured  ;  intending  then, 
if  the  ftiip  could  be  put  into  a  proper  condition,  to  have  pur- 
fued  the  voyage  to  the  fouthward,  when  the  fit  feafon  lliould 
return,  to  have  attempted  farther  difcoveries  in  this  track  j 
and,  if  I  Ihould  difcover  a  continent,  and  procure  a  fufficienc 
fupply  of  provifions  there,   to  keep  along  the  coaft  to  the 
fouthward  till  the  fun  had  crofled  the  equinodlial,  and  then, 
getting  into  a  high  fouthern  latitude,  either  have  gone  wefl 
about  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  or  returned  to  the  eaft- 
ward,   and  having  touched   at  Falkland's  Iflands   if  ne- 
ceflary,  made  the  bell  of  my  way  from  thence  back  to 
Europe. 

When 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  56s 

When  I  cjot  into  latitude  16°  S.  and  not  before,  I  found      '767. 

July, 

the  true  trade-wind ;  and  as  we  proceeded  to  the  north  weft,    v, — . — r 
and  the  northward,  we  found  the  variation  increafe  very 
fall;  for  when  we  had  advanced  to  latitude  18''  15' S.  and 
were  in  longitude  80°  ^  W.  of  our  departure,  it  was  7*^  30'  E. 
We  had  bad  weather,  with  hard  gales,  and  a  great  fea  from 
the  eaftward  till  the  25th,  when  being  in  latitude  12°  15'  S.  Saturday  25. 
we  faw  many  birds  flying  in  flocks,  and  fuppofed  ourfelves 
to  be  near  fome  land,  particularly  feveral  iflands  that  are 
laid  down  in  the  charts,  and  one  which  was  feen  by  Com- 
modore Byron  in  1765,  and  called  the  Ifland  of  Danger; 
none  of  thefe  iflands  however  could  we  fee.    At  this  time  it 
blew  fo  hard  that,  although  we  went  before  the  wind,  we 
were  obliged  to  reef  our  topfails,  and  the  weather  was  ftill 
very  thick  and  rainy.    The  next  morning,  being  in  latitude  Sunday  26. 
lo**  S.,  longitude  167^  W.  we  kept  nearly  in  the  fame  pa- 
rallel, in  hopes  to  have  fallen  in  with  fome  of  the  iflands 
called  Solomon's  Iflands,  this  being  the  latitude  in  which  the 
fouthermoft  of  them  is  laid  down.     We  had  here  the  trade 
wind  ftrong,  with  violent  fqualls  and  much  rain,  and  con- 
tinuing our  courfe  till  Monday  the  3d  of  Auguft,  we  were  MoJfy  3*. 
then  in  latitude   10"  18' S.,  longitude  by  account  177*  4  E.; 
our  diftance  weft  from  the  continent  of  America  about 
twenty-one  hundred  leagues,  and  we  were  five  degrees  to 
the  weftward  of  the  fituation  of  thofe  iflands  in  the  charts. 
It  was  not  our  good  fortune  however  to  fall  in  with  any 
land ;  probably  we  might  pafs  near  fome,  which  the  thick 
weather  prevented  our  feeing ;  for  in  this  run  great  num- 
bers of  fea-birds  were  often  about  the  fhip:  however,  as 
Commodore  Byron  in  his  laft  voyage  failed  over  the  north- 
ern limits  of  that  part  of  the  ocean  in  which  the  iflands  of 
Solomon  are  faid  to  lie,  and  as  I  failed  over  the  fouthern 
limits  without  feeing  them,  there  is  great  reafon  to  con- 
clude 


S66 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


1767. 

Auguft. 
Monday  3. 


Wednef.  5- 
Saturday  S. 


elude  that,  if  there  are  any  fuch  iflands,  theh-  fituation  in 
all  our  charts  is  erroneoufly  laid  down. 

From  the  latitude  14°  S.,  longitude  163°  46'W.  we  had  a 
flrong  gale  from  the  S.  E.  which  made  a  great  fea  after  us, 
and  from  that  time  I  did  not  obferve  the  long  billows  from 
the  fouthward  till  we  got  into  latitude  10"  18' S.,  longitude 
177^  30'  E.  and  then  it  returned  from  the  S.  W.  and  S.  S.  W. 
and  we  found  a  current  fetting  to  the  fouthward,  although 
a  current  in  the  contrary  direcTtion  had  attended  us  almoft 
all  the  way  from  the  Streight  of  Magellan;  I  conjecT:ured 
therefore  that  here  the  pafTage  opened  between  New  Zea- 
land and  New  Holland.  The  variation  here  was  11°  14'  E. 
On  the  5th,  being  in  latitude  ro^  4  S.,  longitude  175°  44  E. ; 
the  variation  was  11"  ij'  E. ;  and  on  the  8th,  in  latitude 
J 1°  S.,  longitude  171°  14'  E.  it  was  11°  "  E. 

About  this  time  we  found  our  flock  of  log-lines  nearly 
expended,  though  we  had  already  converted  all  our  fifhing 
lines  to  the  fame  ufe.  I  was  feme  time  in  great  perplexity 
how  to  fupply  this  defe<5l,  but  upon  a  very  diligent  enquiry 
found  that  we  had,  by  chance,  a  few  fathom  of  thick  untarred 
rope.  This,  which  in  our  fituation  was  an  ineftimable 
treafure,  I  ordered  to  be  untwifted ;  but  as  the  yarns  were 
found  to  be  too  thick  for  our  purpofe,  it  became  necefTary 
to  pick  them  into  oakham :  and  when  this  was  done,  the 
mod  diflicult  part  of  the  work  remained  ;  for  this  oakham 
could  not  be  fpun  into  yarn,  till,  by  combing,  it  was  brought 
into  hemp,  its  original  ftate.  This  was  not  feamen's  work, 
and  if  it  had,  we  iliouid  have  been  at  a  lofs  how  to  perform 
it  for  want  of  combs  ;  one  difficulty  therefore  rofe  upon 
another,  and  it  was  necefTary  to  make  combs,  before  we 
could  try  our  fkill  in  making  hemp.  Upon  this  trying  oc- 
cafion  we  were  again  fenfible  of  the  danger  to  which  we 
2  were 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ^Sy 

were  expDfed  by  the  want  of  a  forge :  neceflity,  however,       1767. 


the  fruitful  mother  of  invention,  fuggefted  an  expedient. 
The  armourer  was  fet  to  work  to  file  nails  down  to  a  fmooth 
point,  with  which  we  produced  a  tolerable  fuccedaneum. 
for  a  comb  ;  and  one  of  the  Quartermafters  was  found  fuf- 
ficiently  flcilled  in  the  ufe  of  this  inftrument  to  render  the 
oakham  fo  fmooth  and  even  that  we  contrived  to  fpin  it  into 
yarn,  as  fine  as  our  coarfe  implements  would  admit  j  and 
thus  we  made  tolerable  log-lines,  although  we  found  it 
much  more  difficult  than  to  make  cordage  of  our  old  cables, 
after  they  had  been  converted  into  junk,  which  was  an  ex- 
pedient that  we  had  been  obliged  to  pradife  long  before. 
We  had  alfo  long  before  ufed  all  our  fewing  fail  twine,  and 
if,  knowing  that  the  quantity  with  which  I  had  been  fupplied 
was  altogether  inadequate  to  the  wants  of  fuch  a  voyage,  I 
had  not  taken  the  whole  quantity  that  had  been  put  on. 
board  to  repair  the  feine  into  my  own  cuftody,  this  defi- 
ciency might  have  been  fatal  to  us  all. 


Augull. 


CHAP. 


^6S  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


CHAP.     IV. 

An  Account  ^f  the  Difcovery  of  ^een  Charlotte's  Ijlandsy 
with  a  Defcription  of  them  and  their  Inhabitants^  and 
of  what  happened  at  Egmont  If  and. 

,^5^       r-B-^HE  fcurvy  ftill  continued  to  make    great    progrefs 
.  ^"S"'^-  ,     X      among  us,  and  thofe  hands  that  were  not  rendered 
ufelefs  by  difeafe,   were  worn  down  by  exceffive  labour; 
our  vefTel,  which  at  bed  was  a  dull  failer,  had  been  long  in 
fo  bad  a  condition  that  fhe  would  not  work ;  and  on  the 
Monday  lo.    loth,    to  render  our  condition   ftill   more  diftrefsful  and 
alarming,  flie  fprung  a  leak  in  the  bows,  which  being  un- 
der water  it  was  impoffible  to  get  at  while  we  were  at  fea. 
Wednef.  12.  Such  was  our  fituation,  when  on  the  X2th,  at  break  of  day, 
we  difcovered  land :  the  fudden  tranfport  of  hope  and  joy 
which  this  infpired  can  perhaps  be  equalled  only  by  that 
which  a  criminal  feels  who  hears  the  cry  of  a  reprieve  at 
the  place  of  execution.    The  land  proved  to  be  a  clufter  of 
iflands,  of  which  I  counted  feven,  and  believe  there  were 
many  more.  We  kept  on  for  two  of  them,  which  were  right 
ahead  when  land  was  firft  difcovered,  and  feemed  to  lie 
clofe  together;  in  the  evening  we  anchored  on  the  north 
eaft  fide  of  one  of  them,  which  was  the  largeft  and  the 
higheft  of  the  two,   in  about  thirty  fathom,  with  a  good 
bottom,  and  at  the  diftance  of  about  three  cables'  length 
from  the  fliore.     We  foon  after  faw  too  of  the  natives,  who 
were  black,  with  woolly  heads,  and  ftark  naked ;  I  imme- 
diately fent   the   Matter  out  with  the  boat   to  fix  upon  a 
-8  watering- 


(towers  I 


Za/f.S.ScmOi 


Za/t,f.  5"   -Ima/J 


'~(  SlMSONE  I. 


Island 


li.nly   Sr,J/,f 


f^ 


AVVLCAWfl 


c.  Treti  nion 


Tyra-Bleys  Point      t^  _^  f^»  !v 


1.  ORl)    EeiMOl^  T  s  .<^ 


ISLATSID 


'J!X\  c  barrington 


CAI'E  liOIIAn  EA 


Cape  Pro by 


LOUT) Hon n  S 
ISZAXl) 

Nmw Jersey 


Lord  Ed<,<  oM/iEs  Ixl. 


Xetv S  IRK 


.\/;iI     ll.DEItVEY 


l\(il 

./"/'■■V/^- 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ^69 

watering-place,  and  fpeak  to  them,  but  they  difappeared  be-      1767. 
fore  flie  could  reach  the  fhore.   The  boat  foon  after  returned  L-l!fl!lj 
with  an  account  that  there  was  a  fine  run  of  frefli  water  ^'^'*"^'"- '  ** 
abreaft  of  the  fhip  and  clofe  to  the  beach,  but  that  the  whole 
country  in  that  part  being  an  almoft  impenetrable  foreft 
quite  to  the  water's  edge,  the  watering  would  be  very  diffi- 
cult, and  even  dangerous,  if  the  natives  flaould  come  down 
to  prevent  it :  that  there  were  no  efculent  vegetables,  for  the 
refrefhment  of  the  fick,  nor  any  habitations  as  far  as  the 
country  had  been  examined,  which  was  wild,  forlorn,  and 
mountainous. 

Having  confidered  this  account,  and  finding  that  a  fwell, 
which  came  round  the  eaflern  part  of  the  bay,  would  ren- 
der watering  troublefome  and  inconvenient,  exclufive  of  the 
danger  that  might  be  apprehended  from  the  natives,  if  they 
fhould  attack  us  from  ambuflies  in  the  wood,  I  determined 
to  try  whether  a  better  fituation  could  not  be  found. 

The  next  morning,  therefore,  as  foon  as  it  was  light,  I  Thurfday  13. 
difpatched  the  Mafter  with  fifteen  men  in  the  cutter,  v/ell 
armed  and  provided,  to  examine  the  coafl  to  the  weftward, 
our  prefent  fituation  being  on  the  lee  of  the  ifland,  for  a 
place  where  we  might  more  conveniently  be  fupplied  with 
wood  and  water,  and  at  the  fame  time  procure  fome  refrefh- 
nacnts  for  the  fick,  and  lay  the  fliip  by  tlie  fiern  to  examine 
and  flop  the  leak.  I  gave  him  fome  beads,  ribbons,  and 
other  trifles,  which  by  chance  I  happened  to  have  on  board, 
to  conciliate  the  good-will  of  the  natives,  if  he  flaould  hap- 
pen to  meet  with  any  of  them  ;  but  at  the  fame  time  en- 
joined him  to  run  no  riflv,  and  gave  him  particular  orders 
immediately  to  return  to  the  fliip  if  any  number  of  canoes 
fliould  approach  him  which  might  bring  on  hoftilities ;  and 
if  he  fliould  meet  the  Indians  in  fmall- parties,  either  at  fea 

Vol.  I,  4  D  or 


yip,  CAPTAIN    CARTERET^s    VOYAGE 

1767.  ornponfhore,  to  treat  them  with  all  poflible  kindnefs,  fo 
■  "^"S"*^'  ,  as  to  eftai)lifh  a  friendly  intercourfe  with  them ;  charging 
Thurfday,i3.  jjim,  ori;  no  acGount  to  leave  the  boat  himfelf,  nor  to  fuffer 
more  than  two  men  to  go  on  fliore  at  a  time,  while  the  reft 
flood  ready  for  their  defence;  recommending  to  him,  in  the 
ftrongeft  terms,  an  application  to  his  duty,  without  regard- 
ing any  other  objedl,  as  the  finding  a  proper  place  for  the 
ihip  was  of  the  utmoft  importance  to  us  all ;  and  conjuring 
him  to  return  as  foon  as  this  fervice  fliould  be  performed, 
with  all  poffible  fpeed. 

Soon  after  I  had  difpatched  the  cutter  on  this  expedition, 
I  fent  the  longboat  with  ten  men  on  board  well  aimed  to 
the  fliore,  who  before  eight  o'clock  brought  off  a  tun  of 
water.  About  nine,  I  fent  her  off  again,,  but  foon  after  fee- 
ing fome  of  the  natives  advancing  along  the  fliore  towards 
the  place  where  the  men  landed,  I  made  thefignal  for  them 
to  return,  not  knowing  to  what  number  they  would  be  ex^ 
pofed,  and  having  no  boat  to  fend  off  with  aiMance  if  they 
fliould  be  attacked. 

Our  men  had  not  long  returned  on  board,  when  we  faw  three 
of  the  natives  fit  down  under  the  trees  abreaft  of  the  fhip. 
As  they  continued  there  gazing  at  us  till  the  afternoon,  as 
ibon  as  the  cutter  came  in  fight,  not  caring  that  both, the . 
boats  fhould  be  abfent  at  the  fame  time,  I  fent  my  Lieute- 
nant in  the  longboat,  with  a  few  beads,  ribbons,  and  trin-i 
kets,  to  endeavour  to  eftablifli  fome  kind  of  intercourfe  with. 
them,  and  by  their  means  with  the  reft  of  the  inhabitants  j . 
thefe  men,  however,  before  the  boat  could  reach  the  fliore, 
quitted  their-  ftation,  and  proceeded  along  the,  beach.     As 
the  trees  would  foon  prevent  their  being  feen  by  our  people 
who  were  making  towards  the  land,  we  kept  our  eyes  fixed  ' 
Mpon  them  fi:om  the  fliip,  and  very  foon  perceived  that  they 

were 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


57-^ 


were  met  by  three  others.    After  fome  converfation,  the  fird 
three  went  on,  and  thofe  who  met  them  proceeded  towards 
the  boat  with  a  hafty  pace.    Upon  this  I  made  the  fignal  to  '^^■'''^'^^^ ''- 
the  Lieutenant  to  be  upon  his  guard,  and  as  foon  as  he  faw 
the  Indians,  obferving  that  there  were  no  more  than  three, 
he  backed  the  boat  in  to  the  Ihore,  and  making  ligns  of 
friendlhip,  held  up  to  them  the  beads  and  ribbons  which  I  had 
given  him  as  prefents,  our  people  at  the  fame  time  carefully 
concealing  their  arms.  The  Indians,  however,  taking  no  notice 
of  the  beads  and  ribbons,  refolutely  advanced  within  bow-fhor, 
and  then  fuddenly  difcharged  their  arrows,  which  happily 
went  over  the  boat  without  doing  any  mifchief ;  they  did 
not  prepare  for  a  fecond  difcharge,  but  inftantly  ran  away 
into  the  woods,  and  our  people  difcharged  fome  mufquecs 
after  them,  but  none  of  them  were  wounded  by  the  fliot. 
Soon  after  this  happened,  the  cutter  came  under  the  fhip's 
fide,  and  the  firft  perfon  that  I  particularly  noticed  was  the 
Matter,  with  three  arrows  flicking  in  his  body.     No  otiier 
evidence  was  neceflary  to  convidl  him  of  having  a6ted  con- 
trary to  my  orders,  which  appeared  indeed  more  fully  from 
his  own  account  of  the  matter,  which  it  is  reafonable  to 
fuppofe  was  as  favourable  to  himfelf  as  he  could  make  it. 
He  faid,  that  having  feen  fome  Indian  houfes  with  only  five 
or  fix  of  the  inhabitants,  at  a  place  about  fourteen  or  fifteen 
miles  to  the  weftward  of  the  fhip's  flation,  where  he  had 
founded  fome  bays,  he  came  to  a  grappling,  and  veered  the 
boat  to  the  beach,  where  he  landed  with  four  men,  armed 
with  mufquets  and  piftols :  that  the  Indians  at  firft  were 
afraid  of  him,  and  retired,  but  that  foon  after  they  came 
down  to  him,  and  he  gave  them  fome  beads  and  other 
trifles,  with  which  they  fecmed  to  be  much  pleafcd:  that  he 
then  made  figns  to  them  for  fome  cocoa-nuts,  which  they 
brought  him,  and  with  great  appearance  of  friendfliip  and 

4  D  a  hofpitality, 


572  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.  hofpirality,  gave  him  a  broiled  fifli  and  fome  boiled  yams : 
.•>..^^_>  that  he  then  proceeded  with  his  party  to  the  houfes,  which, 
^y  ^i-  i^Q  fg^i(j^  were  not  inore  than  fifteen  or  twenty  yards  from 
the  water  fide,  and  foon  after  faw  a  great  number  of  canoes 
coming  round  the  weftern  point  of  the  bay,  and  many  In- 
dians among  the  trees  :  that  being  alarmed  at  thefe  appear- 
ances, he  hailily  left  the  houfe  where  they  had  been  re- 
ceived, and  with  the  men,  made  the  beft  of  his  way  towards 
the  boat ;  but  that,  before  he  could  get  on  board,  the  In- 
dians attacked  as  well  thofe  that  were  with  him  as  thofe 
that  were  in  the  boat,  both  from  the  canoes  and  the  fliore. 
Their  number,  he  faid,  was  between  three  and  four  hundred ; 
their  weapons  were  bows  and  arrows,  the  bows  were  fix  feet 
five  inches  long,  and  the  arrows  four  feet  four,  which  they 
difcharged  in  platoons,  as  regularly  as  the  bell  difciplined 
troops  in  Europe  :  that  it  being  neceflary  to  defend  himfelf 
and  his  people  when  they  were  thus  attacked,  they  fired 
among  the  Indians  to  favour  their  getting  into  their  boat, 
and  did  great  execution,  killing  many  and  wounding  more  : 
that  they  were  not  however  difcouraged,  but  continued  to 
prefs  forward,  fi;ill  difcharging  their  arrows  by  platoons  in 
almoft  one  continued  flight :  that  the  grappling  being  foul, 
occafioned  a  delay  in  hauling  ofF  the  boat,  during  which 
time  he,  and  half  of  the  boat's  crew,  were  defperately 
wounded :  that  at  laft  they  cut  the  rope,  and  ran  off  under 
their  forefail,  flill  keeping  up  their  fire  with  blunderbufles, 
each  loaded  with  eight  or  ten  piftol  balls,  which  the  Indians 
returned  with  their  arrows,  thofe  oa  fliore  wading  after 
them  breafl:  high  into  the  fea :  when  they  had  got  clear  of 
thefe,  the  canoes  purfued  them  with  great  fortitude  and 
vigour,  till  one  of  them  was  funk,  and  the  numbers  on  board 
tlie  reft  greatly  reduced  by  the  fire,  and  then  they  returned 
to  the  fliore. 

4  i5uch 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


S7i 


Such  was  the  ftory  of  the  Mafter,  who,  with  three  of  my  1767. 
beft  feamen,  died  fome  time  afterwards  of  the  wounds  they  '_,-^-'__/ 
had  received ;  but  culpable  as  he  appears  to  have  been  by  his  '^^'"'^^^^  '3* 
own  account,  he  appears  to  have  been  Hill  more  fo  by  the 
teftimony  of  thofe  who  furvived  him.  They  faid,  that  the 
Indians  behaved  with  the  greateft  confidence  and  friendship 
till  he  gave  them  juft  caufe  of  offence,  by  ordering  the 
people  that  were  with  him,  who  had  been  regaled  in  one  of 
their  houfes,  to  cut  down  a  cocoa-nut  tree,  and  infifting 
upon  the  execution  of  his  order,  notwithftanding  the  dif- 
pleafure  which  the  Indians  flrongly  exprefTed  upon  the  oc- 
cafion  :  as  foon  as  the  tree  fell,  all  of  them  except  one,  who 
feemed  to  be  a  perfon  of  authority,  went  away ;  and  in  a 
ihort  time  a  great  number  of  them  were  obferved  to  draw 
together  into  a  body  among  the  trees,  by  a  Midfliipman 
who  was  one  of  the  party  that  were  on  fliore,  and  who  im- 
mediately acquainted  the  Mafter  with  what  he  had  feen,  and 
told  him,  that  from  the  behaviour  of  the  people  he  imagined 
an  attack  was  intended :  that  the  Mafter  made  light  of  the 
intelligence,  and  inftead  of  repairing  immediately  to  the 
boat,  as  he  was  urged  to  do,  fired  one  of  his  piftols  at  a 
mark:  that  the  hidian  who  had  till  that  time  continued  with 
them  then  left  them  abruptly,  and  joined  the  body  in  the 
wood :  that  the  Mafter,  even  after  this,  by  an  infatuation 
that  is  altogether  unaccountable,  continued  to  trifle  away 
his  time  on  fhore,  and  did  not  attempt  to  recover  the  boat 
till  the  attack  was  begun. 

As  the  expedition  to  find  a  better  place  for  the  fhip  had 
ilTued  thus  imhappily,  I  determined  to  try  what  could  be 
done,   where  we  lay ;    the   next   day  therefore,    the   fhip  Friday  14. 
was    brought    down    by   the  ftern,    as   far   as   we    could 
effedt  it,  and  the  carpenter,  the  only  one  of  the  crew  who 

was 


574^ 


1767. 

Augull. 


i  Friday 


!^4tarday  ij. 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S   VOYAGE 

was  in  tolerable  health,  caulked  the  bows,  as  far  down  as 
he  could  come  at  the  bottom;  and  though  he  did  not  quite 
Hop  the  leak,  he  very  much  reduced  it.  In  the  afternoon  a 
frefh  gale  fet  right  into  the  bay,  which  made  the  fliip  ride 
with  her  flern  very  near  the  fhore,  and  we  obferved  a  great 
number  of  the  natives  fculking  among  the  trees  upon  the 
beach,  who  probably  expedted  that  the  wind  would  have 
forced  the  fhip  on  fhore. 

The  next  morning,  the  weather  being  fine,  we  veered  the 
fhip  clofe  in  fhore,  with  a  fpring  upon  our  cable,  fo  that  we 
brought  our  broadfide  to  bear  upon  the  watering-place,  for 
the  protection  of  the  boats  that  were  to  be  employed  there. 
As  there  was  reafon  to  fuppofe  that  the  natives  whom  we 
had  feen  among  the  trees  the  night  before,  were  not  now 
far  diftant,  I  fired  a  couple  of  fhot  into  the  wood,  before  I 
fent  the  waterers  afhore ;  I  alfo  fent  the  Lieutenant  in  the 
cutter,  well  manned  and  armed,  with  the  boat  that  carried 
them,  and  ordered  him  and  his  people  to  keep  on  board, 
and  lie  clofe  to  the  beach  to  cover  the  watering-boat  while 
flie  was  loading,  and  to  keep  difcharging  mufquets  into  the 
wood  on  each  fide  of  the  party  that  were  filling  the  water. 
Thefe  orders  were  v/ell  executed,  the  beach  was  fleep,  fo 
that  the  boats  could  lie  clofe  to  the  people  that  were  at  work, 
and  the  Lieutenant  from  the  cutter  fired  three  or  four  vollies 
of  fmall  arms  into  the  woods  before  any  of  the  men  went 
on  fliore,  and  none  of  the  natives  appearing,  the  waterers 
landed  and  went  to  work.  But  notwithftanding  all  thefe 
•precautions,  before  they  had  been  on  fliore  a  quarter  of  an 
hour,  a  flight  of  arrows  was  difcharged  among  them,  one 
of  which  dangeroufly  wounded  a  man  that  was  filling  water 
in  the  breaft,  and  another  fluck  into  a  bareca  on  which  Mr. 
Pitcairn  was  fitting.    The  people  on  board  the  cutter  imme- 

I  diately 


ROUND    THE    WORLIT.  S7S 

diately  fired  feveral  vollies  of  fraall  arms  into  that  part  of      "T^;- 
the  wood  from  which  the  arrows  came,  and  I  recalled  the  ■     "f^"  '_p 
boats  that  I  might  more  effecftually  drive  the  Indians  from  ^^""^^"^  '^' 
their  ambufcades  with  grape-fhot  from  the  Ihip's  guns. 
When  the  boats  and  people  were  on  board;  we  began  to  fire, 
and  foon  after  faw  about  two  hundred  men  rulh  out  of  the 
woods,  and  run  along  the  beach  with  the  utmoft  precipita- 
tion.    We  judged-  the  coaft  to  be  now  effe<5lually  cleared, 
but  in  a  little  time  we  perceived  that  a  great  number  had 
got  together  on  the  weftermofl:  point  of  the  bay,  where  they 
probably  thought  themfelves  beyond  our  reach:   to  con- 
vince them  therefore  of  the  contrary,  I  ordered  a  gun  to  be 
fired  at  them  with  round  fliot ;   the  ball  juft  grazing  the 
water  rofe  again,   and  fell  in  the  middle  of  them,  upon  • 
which  they  difperfed  with- great  hurry  and  confufion,  and 
we  faw  no  more  of  them.     After  this  we  watered  without 
any  farther  moleftation,  but  all  the  while  our  boats  were  on 
fhore,  we  had  the  precaution  to  keep  firing  the  fhip's  guns 
into  the  wood  on  both  fides  of  them,  and  the  cutter  which 
lay  clofe  to  the  beach,  as  fhe  did  before,  kept  up  a  conilant 
fire  of  fmall  arms  in  platoons  at  the  fame  time.    As  we  faw 
none  of  the  natives  during  all  this  firing,  we  fhould  have 
thought  that  none  of  them  had  ventured  back  into  the  wood, . 
if  our  people  had  not  reported  that  they  heard  groans  from,^ 
feveral  parts  of  it,  like  thofe  of  dying  men. 

Hitherto,  though  I  had  been  long  ill  of  an  inflammatory, 
and  bilious  diforder,  I  had  been  able  to  keep  the  deck ;  but" 
this  evening,  the  fymptoms  became  fo  much  more  threaten- 
ing that  1  could  keep  up  no  longer,  and  I  was  for  fome  time 
afterwards  confined  to  my  bed.     The  Mafter  was  dying  of 
the  wounds  he  received  in  his  quarrel  with  the  Indians,  the 
Lieutenant  alfo  was  very  ill,!  the  Gunner  and  thirty  of  my- 
m.€n  incapable  of  duty^   among  whom  were  fevert  of  -  the. 

mofti 


_j76  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.      nioft  vigorous  and  healthy,  that  had  been  wounded  with  the 
■_  -".^- '  ;  Mailer,  and  three  of  them  mortally,  and  there  was  no  hope 
Saturday  1;.  ^^  obtaining  fuch  refrefliments  as  we  molt  needed  in  this 
place.      Thefe  were  difcouraging  circumftances,    and  not 
only  put  an  end  to  my  hopes  of  profecuting  the  voyage  far- 
ther to  the  fouthward,  but  greatly  difpirited  the  people  j  ex- 
cept myfelf,  the  Mailer,  and  the  Lieutenant,  there  was  no 
body  on  board  capable  of  navigating  the  Ihip  home ;  the 
Mailer  was  known  to  be  a  dying  man,  and  the  recovery  of  my- 
felf and  the  Lieutenant  was  very  doubtful.     I  would  however 
have  made  a  further  effort  to  obtain  refrefliments  here,  if  I 
had  been  furnilhed  with  any  toys,  iron  tools,  or  cutlery- 
ware,  which  might  have  enabled  me  to  recover  the  good- 
will of  the  natives,    and  ellablilh  a  traffic  with  them  for 
fuch  necelTaries  as  they  could  have  furnifhed  us  with  ;  but  I 
had  no  fuch  articles,  and  but  very  few  others  fit  for  an  In- 
dian trade,  and  not  being  in  a  condition  to  rifk  the  lofs  of 
any  more  of  the  few  men  who  were  capable  of  doing  duty,  I 
Monday  17.    wciglicd  auchor  at  day-break  on  Monday  the  17th,  and  Hood 
along  the  fliore  for  that  part  of  the  illand  to  which  I  had 
fcnt  the  cutter.     To  the  illand  I  had  given  the  name  of 
Egmont         Egmont  Island,  lu  houour  of  the  Earl;  it  certainly  is  the 
fame  to  which  the  Spaniards  have  given  the  name  of  Santa 
Cruz,  as  appears  by  the  accounts  which  their  writers  have 
given  of  it,  and  I  called  the  place  in  which  we  had  lain, 
Swallow  Bay.      From   the  eallermofl  point   of  this   bay, 
which  I  called  Swallow  Point,  to  the  north  call  point  of 
the  illand  which  I  called  Cape  Byron,  is  about  feven  miles 
call,  and  from  the  wellcrmoft  point  of  the  bay,  which  I 
called  Hanway's  Point,  to  Cape  Byron,  is  about  ten  or 
eleven  miles.     Between  Swallow  Point  and  Hanway's  Point, 
in  the  bottom  of  the  bay,  there  is  a  third  point,  which  does 
not  run  out  fo  far ;  and  a  little  to  the  wellward  of  this  point 

is 


Ifund. 


'J'/i,'M',-f/j  .'/,/,■  •y'dv  /,rn/,-sf  ,f  Qm-cn  (.' li;irli>lti-'.s  KImuls  ,i.i  i/ir/yn;//;;/ ruiiiu'/t,/  ,r/<'//,/  s/','/y  /i>  /•/',-  //,':s//,',f/;/. 


/■A-  S„,M  .<,',?,■  ,f„  VuU 


M" 


^as*-— 

'**-«««u 

^ 

3        3 

J>««ta.a*. 

■«*^ 

""-^ 

,J^^ 

'i» 

/ 

n 

# 

/ 

y 

3<' 

... 

■r     ; 

....... 

jy//,/ 

/ 

% 

.. 

if, 

.i 

):„T  s 

nn/ 

/ 

1 

j'' 

3.S 

s 

■W" 

A 

L 

L 

0 

■«r 

s 

H 

J 

1 

'■' 

, 

■S'c.iLK     ,f/'  Miles 


/> }■/;•  lis  J/,!/  /■(>///: 


/,M.U  A^::  ,:■',//. 


.i;-///'  ;'/■//,•  ,//,' 


'cv/.V  I/<r /■/'(' f//: 


Sft/f  i'/oitf  t',i//,- /m,;l/i 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  577 

is  the  bell  anchoring-place,  but  it  is  neceiTary  to  give  it       1767. 
birth,  as  the  ground  near  it  is  fhoaly.    When  we  were  at  »  '^"^"^'  , 
anchor  in  this  bay,  Swallow  Point  bore  E.  by  N.  and  Han-  ^^'^"^^y  '7- 
way's  Point  W.  N.  W.     From  this  Point  there  runs  a  reef,  on 
which  the  fea  breaks  very  high :  the  outer  part  of  this  reef 
bore  N.  W.  by  W.  and  an  ifland  which  has  the  appearance  of 
a  volcano,  was  juft  over  the  breakers.     Soon  after  we  had 
paired  Hanway's  Point,  we  faw  a  fmall  village,  which  Hands 
upon  the  beach,  and  is  furrounded  by  cocoa-nut  trees.    It  is 
fituated  in  a  bay  between  Hanway's  Point  and  another,  to 
which  I  gave  the  name  of  How's  Point.    The  dillance  from 
Hanway's  Point  to  How's  Point  is  between  four  and  five 
miles :  clofe  to  the  lliore  there  is  about  thirty  fathom  of  j  - 

water,  but  in  croffing  the  bay  at  the  dillance  of  about  two 
miles,  we  had  no  bottom.  Having  palTed  How's  Point,  we 
opened  another  bay,  or  harbour,  which  had  the  appearance 
of  a  deep  lagoon,  and  which  wc  called  Carlisle  Harbour. 
Over-againll  the  entrance  of  Carlille  Harbour,  and  north  of 
the  coall,  we  found  a  fmall  ifland,  which  we  called  Port- 
land's Island.  On  the  well  fide  of  this  ifland  there  is  a  reef 
of  rocks  that  runs  to  the  main,  the  palTage  into  the  harbour 
therefore  is  on  the  call  fide  of  it,  and  runs  in  and  out  E.  N.  E. 
and  W.  S.  W. :  it  is  about  two  cables'  length  wide,  and  has 
about  eight  fathom  water.  I  believe  the  harbour  within  it 
to  be  good,  but  a  Ihip  would  be  obliged  to  warp  both  in  and 
out,  and  would  after  all  be  in  danger  of  an  attack  by  the 
natives,  who  are  bold  even  to  temerity,  and  have  a  perfe- 
verance  which  is  not  common  among  undifciplined  favages. 
When  the  fliip  was  a  mile  ffom  the  fliore,  we  had  no  ground 
with  fifty  fathom.  About  four  or  five  miles  weft  from  Port- 
land's Ifland,  is  a  fine,  fmall,  round  harbour,  juft  big 
enough  to  receive  three  Ihips,  which  we  called  Byron's 
Harbour.  When  we  were  abreaft  of  the  entrance  of  it,  it 
Vol.  I.  4  E  bore 


^jS  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.  bore  from  us  S.  by  E.  7  E.  and  the  Volcano  Ifland  bore  N.  W. 
.  _  -^-  '_;  7  W.  Our  boat  entered  it,  and  found  two  runs  of  water,  one 
Monday  ly.  ^^^Q^  .^j^^j  j.|-jg  q^\-^qy  fait ;  by  the  run  of  fait  water  we  judged 
that  it  had  a  communication  with  Carlifle  Harbour.  When 
we  had  proceeded  about  three  leagues  from  the  harbour, 
we  opened  the  bay  where  the  cutter  had  been  attacked  by 
the  Indians,  to  which,  for  that  reafon,  we  gave  the  name  of 
Bloody  Bay.  In  this  Bay  is  a  fmall  rivulet  of  frefli  water, 
and  here  we  faw  many  houfes  regularly  built :  clofe  to  the 
water- fide  ilood  one  much  longer  than  any  of  the  reft,  which 
feemed  to  be  a  kind  of  common-hall,  or  council-houfe,  and 
was  neatly  built  and  thatched.  This  was  the  building  in 
which  our  people  had  been  received  who  were  on  fhore  here 
with  the  Mafter,  and  they  told  me  that  both  the  fides  and  floor 
were  lined  with  a  kind  of  fine  matting,  and  a  great  number 
of  arrows,  made  up  into  bundles,  were  hung  up  in  it  ready 
for  ufe.  They  told  me  alfo,  that  at  this  place  there  were 
many  gardens,  or  plantations,  which  were  enclofed  by  a 
fence  of  ftone,  and  planted  with  cocoa-nut  trees,  bananas, 
plantains,  yams,  and  other  vegetables :  the  cocoa-nut  trees 
we  faw  from  the  fliip,  in  great  numbers,  among  the  houfes 
of  the  village.  About  three  miles  to  the  weftward  of  this 
town,  we  faw  another  of  confiderable  extent,  in  the  front  of 
which,  next  to  the  water-fide,  there  was  a  breaft-work  of  ftone, 
about  four  feet  fix  inches  high,  not  in  a  ftrait  line,  but  in 
angles,  like  a  fortification ;  and  there  is  great  reafon  to  fuppofe, 
from  the  weapons  of  thefe  people,  and  their  military  courage, 
which  muft  in  great  meafure  be  the  efFe<5l  of  habit,  that  they 
have  frequent  wars  among  themfelves.  As  we  proceeded  weft- 
ward  from  this  place,  we  found,  at  the  diftance  of  two  or 
three  miles,  a  fmall  bight,  forming  a  kind  of  bay,  in  which 
a  river  empties  itfelf.  Upon  taking  a  view  of  this  river  from 
the  maft-hcad!,  it  appeared  to  run  very  far  into  the  country, 

5  and 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  579 

and  at  the  entrance,  at  leaft,  to  be  navigable  for  fmall  vef-      i?^;* 

Auguft. 

fels.     This  river  we  called  Granville's  River,  and  to  the    1-  -^ > 

weftward  of  it  is  a  point,  to  which  we  gave  the  name  of  °"^y''- 
Ferrers's  Point.  From  this  point  the  land  forms  a  large 
bay,  and  near  it  is  a  town  of  great  extent,  which  feemed  to 
fwarm  like  a  bee-hive:  an  incredible  multitude  came  out  of 
it  as  the  Ihip  pafled  by,  holding  fomething  in  their  hands 
which  looked  like  a  whifp  of  green  grafs,  with  which  they 
feemed  to  ilroke  each  other,  at  the  fame  time  dancing,  or 
running  in  a  ring.  About  feven  miles  to  the  weitward  of 
Point  Ferrers,  is  another,  that  was  called  Carteret  Point, 
from  which  a  reef  of  rocks,  that  appears  above  water,  runs 
out  to  the  diftance  of  about  a  cable's  length.  Upon  this 
point  we  faw  a  large  canoe,  with  an  awning  or  fliade  built 
over  it ;  and  a  little  to  the  weftward,  another  large  town, 
fronted,  and  probably  furrounded,  with  a  breaft-work  of 
flone  like  the  laft:  here  alfo  the  people  thronged  to  the 
beach  as  the  Ihip  was  paffing,  and  performed  the  fame  kind 
of  circular  dance.  After  a  little  time  they  launched  feveral 
canoes,  and  made  towards  us  ;  upon  which  we  lay  to,  that 
they  might  have  time  to  come  up,  and  we  conceived  great 
hopes  that  we  flaould  prevail  upon  them  to  come  on  board, 
but  when  they  came  near  enough  to  have  a  more  diftindt 
view  of  us,  they  lay  upon  their  paddles  and  gazed  at  us 
but  feemed  to  have  no  defign  of  advancing  farther,  and 
therefore  we  made  fail,  and  left  them  behind  us.  About 
half  a  mile  from  Carteret  Point,  we  had  fixty  fathom,  with  a 
bottom  of  fand  and  coral.  From  this  point  the  land  trends 
away  \V.  S.  W.  and  S.  W.  forming  a  deep  lagoon,  at  the 
mouth  of  which  lies  an  ifland,  that  with  the  main  forms  two 
entrances  into  it:  the  ifland  we  called  Trevanion's  Island* 
This  entrance  is  about  two  miles  wide,  and  the  lagoon,  if 
there  is  anchorage  in  it,  is  certainly  a  fine  harbour  for  fliip- 

4  E  2  ping. 


58o  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.  ping.  After  croffing  the  firft  entrance,  and  coming  ofF  the 
n_  "5!!.  '_f  north  weft  part  of  Trevanion's  Illand,  which  we  called  Cape 
Monday  17.  rp^^^y^j^ j^p^^  ^g  faw  a  great  rippling,  and  therefore  fent  the 
boat  off  to  found ;  we  had,  however,  no  bottom  with  fifty 
fathom,  the  rippling  being  caufed  only  by  the  meeting  of 
the  tides.  Having  hauled  round  this  Cape,  we  found  the 
land  trend  to  the  fouthward,  and  we  continued  to  ftand 
along  the  fliore,  till  we  opened  the  weftern  pafTage  into  the 
lagoon  between  Trevanion's  Ifland  and  the  main.  In  this 
place,  both  the  main  and  the  ifland  appeared  to  be  one  con- 
tinued town,  and  the  inhabitants  were  innumerable.  We 
fent  a  boat  to  examine  this  entrance  or  palTage,  and  found 
the  bottom  to  be  coral  and  rock,  with  very  irregular  found- 
ings over  it.  As  foon  as  the  natives  faw  the  boat  leave  the 
fhip,  they  fent  off  feveral  armed  canoes  to  attack  her :  the 
firft  that  came  w^ithin  bow-fhot  difcharged  her  arrows  at  the 
people  on  board,  who  being  ready,  fired  a  volley,  by  which 
one  of  the  Indians  was  killed,  and  another  wounded  j  at  the 
fame  time  we  fired  a  great  gun  from  the  fhip,  loaded  with 
grape-fhot,  among  them,  upon  which  they  all  pulled  back 
to  the  fhore  with  great  precipitation,  except  the  canoe  which 
began  the  attack,  and  that  being  fecured  by  the  boat's  crew, 
with  the  wounded  man  in  her,  was  brought  to  the  fhip.  I 
immediately  ordered  the  Indian  to  be  taken  on  board,  and 
the  Surgeon  to  examine  his  wounds:  it  appeared  that  one 
fliot  had  gone  through  his  head,  and  that  his  arm  was 
broken  by  another:  the  Surgeon  was  of  opinion  that  the 
wound  in  his  head  was  mortal,  I  therefore  ordered  him  to 
be  put  again  into  his  canoe,  and,  notwithftanding  his  con- 
dition, he  paddled  away  towards  the  fliore.  He  was  a  young 
man,  with  a  woolly  head,  like  that  of  the  negroes,  and  a 
fmall  beard,  but  he  was  well-featured,  and  not  fo  black  as 
the  natives  of  Guinea :  he  was  of  the  common  ftature,  and, 

like 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  581. 

like  all  the  reft  of  the  people  whom  we  had  fccn  upon  this       1767- 
iiland,  quite  naked.     His  canoe  was  very  fmall,  and  of  rude    «_  -%  -f 
workmanlhip,  being  nothing  more  than  part  of  the  trunk  of     °"  ^^  ^^' 
a  tree  made  hollow;    it  had,   however,   an  outrigger,  but 
none  of  them  had  fails. 

We  found  this  place  to  be  the  weftern  extremity  of  thd 
iiland  on  the  north  fide,  and  that  it  lay  in  exadly  the  fame 
latitude  as  the  eaftern  extremity  on  the  fame  fide.  The  dif- 
tance  between  them  is  about  fifty  miles  due  eaft  and  weft, 
and  a  ftrong  current  fets  weftward  along  the  fhore. 

I  was  ftill  confined  to  my  bed,  and  it  was  with  infinite  re- 
gret that  I  gave  up  the  hopes  of  obtaining  refrefliments  at 
this  place,  efpecially  as  our  people  told  me  they  faw 
hogs  and  poultry  in  great  plenty  as  we  failed  along  the  fhore, 
with  cocoa-nut  trees,  plantains,  bananas,  and  a  variety  of 
other  vegetable  produdtions,  which  would  foon  have  reftored 
to  us  the  health  and  vigour  we  had  loft,  by  the  fatigue  and 
liardfhips  of  a  long  voyage  ;  but  no  friendly  intercourfe  with 
the  natives  could  now  be  expe<5ted,  and  I  was  not  in  a  fitu- 
ation  to  obtain  what  I  wanted  by  force.  I  was  myfelf  dan- 
geroufly  ill,  great  part  of  my  crew,  as  I  have  already 
obferved,  was  difabled,  and  the  reft  difpirited  by  difappoint- 
ment  and  vexation,  and  if  the  men  had  been  all  in  health 
and  fpirits,  I  had  not  officers  to  lead  them  on  or  diredt  them, 
in  any  enterprize,  nor  even  to  fuperintend  the  duties  that 
were  to  be  performed  on  board  the  fhip.  Thefe  difadvan— 
tages,  which  prevented  my  obtaining  refrefhments  at  this 
iiland,  prevented  me  alfo  from  examining  the  reft  that  were 
near  it.  Our  little  ftrength  was  every  minute  becoming 
lefs ;  I  was  not  in  a  condition  to  purfue  the  voyage  to  the 
ibuthward,  and  was  in  danger  of  lofing  the  monfoon,  fo 
that  no  tiuie  was  now  to  be  loftj  I  therefore  gave  orders  to- 

fteer. 


582 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


lord  Hew'; 

]flaiid. 


1767.      fleer  northwaud,   hoping  to  refrefh  at  the  country  which 

\ , — L;   Dampier  has  called  I'iova  Britannia.     I  fliall,  however,  give 

on  ay  17.    ^j^^  ^^^  account  I  can  of  the  appearance  and  fituation  of  the 
iflands  that  I  left  behind  me. 

I  gave  the  general  name  of  Queen  Charlotte's  Islands 
to  the  whole  clufter,  as  well  to  thofe  that  I  did  not  fee 
didindtly,  as  to  thofe  that  I  did ;  and  I  gave  feveral  of  them 
particular  names  as  I  approached  them. 

To  the  fouthermoft  of  the  two,  which  when  we  firft  dif- 
covered  land  were  right  ahead,  I  gave  the  name  of  Lord 
How's  IsLAKD,  and  the  other  was  Egmont  Ifland,  of  which 
fome  account  has  already  been  given.  The  latitude  of  Lord 
How's  liland  is  11°  10' S,,  longitude  164°  43' E.:  the  latitude 
of  Cape  Byron,  the  north  eaft  point  of  Egmont  illand,  is  10" 
40' S.,  longitude  164°  49' E.  The  eaft  fides  of  thefe  two 
iilands,  which  lie  exad:ly  in  a  line  with  each  other,  about 
N.  by  W.  and  S.  by  E.  including  the  pafTage  between  them, 
extend  about  eleven  leagues,  and  the  pafTage  is  about  four 
miles  broad ;  both  of  them  appear  to  be  fertile,  and  have  a 
pleafant  appearance,  being  covered  with  tall  trees,  of  a 
beautiful  verdiu'e.  Lord  How's  Illand,  though  more  flat  and 
even  than  the  other,  is  notwithftanding  high  land.  About 
thirteen  leagues  W.  N.  W.  7  N.  by  compafs,  from  Cape  Byron, 
there  is  an  ifland  of  a  flupendous  height,  and  a  conical 
figure.  The  top  of  it  is  fhaped  like  a  funnel,  from  which 
we  faw  fmoke  ifTue,  though  no  flame ;  it  is,  however,  cer- 
tainly a  volcano,  and  therefoie  I  called  it  Volcano  Island. 
To  a  long  flat  ifland  that,  when  How's  and  Egmont's  Iflands 
were  right  ahead,  bore  N.  V/.  I  gave  the  name  of  Keppf.l's 
Island.  It  lies  in  latitude  10°  15' S.,  longitude,  by  account, 
165^^  4' E.  The  largeft  of  two  others  to  the  S.E.I  called 
Lord  EdgcoiMb's  Island,    the  fmall  one  I  called  Ourry's 

Island. 


Volcano 
Ifland. 


Kcppd's 
Ifland. 

Lord  Edg 

comb's 

Ifland. 

Ourry's 

Ifland, 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  583; 

Island.     Edgcomb's  Ifland  has  a  fine  pleafant  appearance,       1767. 
and  lies  in  latitude  11°  lo'S.,  longitude  165°  14'E.     The  la-    ■..   -^-,1/ 
titude  of  Ourry's  Ifland  is    ii*'  10' S.,  longitude   i65°ig'E. 
The  other  iflands,  of  which  there  were  feveral,  I  did  not 
particularly  name. 

The  inhabitants  of  Egmont  Ifland,  whofe  perfons  have 
been  defcribed  already,  are  extremely  nimble,  vigorous 
and  a6live,  and  feem  to  be  almoft  as  well  qualified  to  live  in 
the  water  as  upon  the  land,  for  they  were  in  and  out  of  their 
canoes  almofl  every  minute.  The  canoes  that  came  out 
againft  us  from  the  weft  end  of  the  ifland,  were  all  like  that 
which  our  people  brought  on  board,  and  might  probably, 
upon  occafion,  carry  about  a  dozen  men,  though  three  or 
four  manage  them  with  amazing  dexterity :  we  faw,  how- 
ever, others  of  a  large  fize  upon  the  beach,  with  awnings  or 
fhades  over  them. 

We  got  two  of  their  bows,  and  a  bundle  of  their  arrows?, 
from  the  canoe  that  was  taken  with  the  wounded  man  ;  and 
with  thefe  weapons  they  do  execution  at  an  incredible  dif- 
tance.  One  of  tliem  went  through  the  boat's  wafhboard^ 
and  dangeroully  wounded  a  midfliipman  in  the  thigh. 
Their  arrows  were  pointed  with  flint,  and  we  faw  among: 
them  no  appearance  of  any  metal.  The  country  in  general 
is  woody  and  mountainous,  with  many  vallies  intermixed; 
feveral  fmall  rivers  flow  from  the  interior  part  of  the  coun- 
try into  the  fea,  and  there  are  many  harbours  upon  the- 
coaft.    The  variation  here  was  about  ii"  15' E. 


C  H  A  F, 


584  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


C  H   A  P.      V. 

Departure  from  Egmont  IJlajid^  and  Pajfage  to  Nova  Bri- 
tannia ;  with  a  Defcription  of  fever al  other  Iflandsy  and 
their  Inhabitants, 

1767.       \X  7  E  made  fail  from  this  ifland  in  the  evening  of  Tuefday 
.     "^_"  'f      V  V     the  1 8th  of  Auguft,  with  a  frefh  trade-wind  from  the 
Tueiday  18.    gj^fl^^ard,  and  a  few  fqualls  at  times.   At  firfl  we  only  hauled 
up  W.  N.  W.  for  I  was  not  without  hope  of  falling  in  with 
fome  other  illands,  where  we  might  be  more  fortunate  than 
we  had  been  at  thofe  we  left,  before  we  got  the  length  of 
Nova  Britannia. 
Thurfday  20.      On  the  20th,  wc  difcovercd  a  fmall,  flat,  low  ifland,  and 
got  up  with  it  in  the  evening:  it  lies  in  latitude  7°  56' S., 
Gower's        lougitudc  158°  56' E.  and  I  gave  it  the  name  of  Gower's 
Island.    To  our  great  mortification  we  found  no  anchorage 
here,  and  could  procure  only  a  few  cocoa-nuts  from  the  in- 
habitants, who  v/ere  much  the  fame  kind  of  people  that  we 
had  feen  at  Ifle  Egmont,  in  exchange  for  nails,  and  fuch 
trifles  as  we  had ;  they  promifed,  by  figns,  to  bring  us  more 
the  next  day,  and  we  kept  off  and  on  all  night:  the  night 
Friday  21.      ^as  cxtrcmely  dark,  and  the  next  morning,  at'  day-break, 
we  found  that  a  current  had  fet  us  confiderably  to  the  fouth- 
ward  of  the  ifland,  and  brought  us  within  fight  of  two  more. 
They  were  fituated  nearly  eafl  and  wefl  of  each  other,  and 
were  diftant  about  two  miles.     That  to  the  eaftward  is  much 
simpfon's       the  fmallcft,    and  this  we  called  Simpson's  Island:   to  the 
Ifland,  other,  which  is  lofty,  and  has  a  ftately  appearance,  we  gave 

the 


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  585 

the  name  of  Carteret's  Island.  The  eaft  end  of  it  bears  J?^;. 
about  fouth  from  Gower's  Ifland,  and  the  diilance  between  '_r--t"-  '_- 
them  is  about  ten  or  eleven  leagues.  Carteret's  Ifland  lies  in  carrere*U^'' 
about  the  latitude  8'  26' S.,  longitude  159°  14-  E.  and  its  '^"^"^• 
length  from  eaft  to  weft  is  about  fix  leagues :  we  found  the 
variation  here  8°3o'E.  Both  thefe  iflands  were  right  to 
windward  of  us,  and  we  bore  down  to  Gower's  Ifland.  It  is 
about  two  leagues  and  a  half  long  on  the  weftern  fide,  which 
makes  in  bays :  the  whole  is  well  wooded,  and  many  of  the 
trees  are  cocoa-nut.  We  found  here  a  confiderable  number 
of  the  Indians,  with  two  boats  or  canoes,  which  we  fuppofed 
to  belong  to  Carteret's  Ifland,  and  to  have  brought  the  people 
hither  only  to  fifli.  We  fent  the  boat  on  fliore,  which  the 
natives  endeavoured  to  cut  off,  and  hoftilities  being  thus 
commenced,  we  feized  their  canoe,  in  which  we  found 
about  an  hundred  cocoa-nuts,  which  were  very  acceptable  5 
we  faw  fome  turtle  near  the  beach,  but  were  not  fortunate 
enough  to  take  any  of  them.  The  eanoe,  or  boat,  was  large 
enough  to  carry  eight  or  ten  men,  and  was  very  neatly 
built,  with  planks  well  jointed :  it  was  adorned  with  fliell- 
work,  and  figures  rudely  painted,  and  the  feams  were 
covered  with  a  fubftance  fomewhat  like  our  black  putty, 
but  it  appeared  to  me  to  be  of  a  better  confiftence.  The  people 
were  armed  with  bows,  arrows,  and  fpears ;  the  fpears  and 
arrows  were  pointed  with  flint.  By  fome  figns  which  they 
made,  pointing  to  our  mufkets,  we  imagined  they  were  noc 
wholly  unacquainted  with  fire-arms.  They  are  much  the 
fame  kind  of  people  as  we  had  feen  at  Egmont  Ifland,  and 
like  them,  were  quite  naked  5  but  their  canoes  were  of  a 
very  diflerent  ftru(5lure,  and  a  much  larger  fize,  though  we 
did  not  difcover  that  any  of  them  had  fails.  The  cocoa-nuts 
which  we  got  here,  and  at  Egmont  Ifland,  were  of  infinite 
advantage  to  the  fick. 
Vol.  I.  4  F  From 


^86  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.  From  the  time  of  our  leaving  Egmont  Ifland,  we  had  ob« 

,^Ji^l_L/  ferved  a  current  fetting  ilrongly  to  the  foiithward,  and  ire 
the  neighbourhood  of  thefe  iflands  we  found  its  force  greatly 
increafed  :  this  determined  me,  when  I  failed  from  Gower's 
Ifland,  to  fleer  N.  W.  fearing  we  might  otherwife  fall  in  with 
the  main  land  too  far  to  the  fouthward  j  for  if  we  had  got 
into  any  gulph  or  deep  bay,  our  crew  was  fo  fickly,  and  our 
fhip'  fo  bad,  that  it  would  have  been  impoflible  for  us  to 
have  got  out  again, 

Satajrday  sxi  About  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  22d,  as  we 
were  continuing  our  courfe  with  a  fine  frefli  gale,  Patrick 
Dwyer,  one  of  the  marines,  who  was  doing  fomething  over 
the  fhip's  quarter,  by  fome  accident  mifled  his  hold  and  fell 
into  the  fea ;  we  inftantly  threw  overboard  the  canoe  which 
we  had  feized  at  Gower's  ifland,  brought  the  fhip  to,  and 
hoifted  out  the  cutter  with  all  poflible  expedition,  but  the 
poor  fellow,  though  remarkably  ftrong  and  healthy,  funk 
at  once,  and  we  faw  him  no  more.  We  took  the  canoe  on 
board  again,  but  fhe  had  received  fo  much  damage  by  ftrik- 
ing  againft  one  of  the  guns,  as  the  people  were  hoifting  her 
overboard,  that  we  were  obliged  to  cut  her  up. 

Monc?r.y24.  ^^  the  night  of  Monday  the  24th,  we  fell  in  with  nine 
iflands  ;  they  ftretch  nearly  N.  W.  by  W.  and  S.  E.  by  E» 
about  fifteen  leagues,  and  lie  in  latitude  4°  36'  S.,  longitude 
154°  17'  E.  according  to  the  fliip's  account.  I  imagine  thefe 
to  be  the  iflands  which  are  called  Ohang  Java,  and  were 
difcovered  by  Tafman  ;  for  the  fltuation  anfwers  very  nearly 
to  their  place  in  the  French  chart,  which  in  the  year  1 756' 
was  corredlcd  for  the  King's  fliips.  The  other  iflands,, 
Carteret's,  Gower's,  and  Simpfon's,  I  believe  had  never 
been  feen  by  an  European  navigator  before.  There  is  cer- 
tainly much  land  in  this  part  of  die  ocean  not  yet  known. 
I  One. 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  587 

One  of  thcfe  iflands  is  of  confiderable  extent,  the  other      5767- 
^ight  are  fcarcely  better  than  large  rocks  -,  but  though  they    u— ^LL^ 
are  low  and  flat,   they  are  well   covered  with  wood,  and  '^°"'^'*y  ^"^ 
abound  with  inhabitants.  The  people  are  black,  and  woolly- 
headed,  like  the  Negroes  of  Africa  :  their  weapons  are  bows 
and  arrows  ;  and  they  have  large  canqes  which  they  navi- 
gate with  a  fail,  one  of  which  came  near  us,  but  would  not 
venture  on  board. 

We  went  to  the  northward  of  thefe  iflands,  and  fleered 
W.  by  S.  with  a  ftrong  fouth  weflerly  current.  At  eleven 
o'clock  at  night,  we  fell  in  with  another  ifland  of  a  confide- 
rable extent,  flat,  green,  and  of  a  pleafant  appearance ;  we 
faw  none  of  its  inhabitants,  but  it  appeared  by  the  many 
fires  which  we  faw  in  the  night  to  be  well  peopled.  It  lies 
in  latitude  4°  jo'S.  and  bears  wefl  fifteen  leagues  from  the 
northermofl  of  the  Nine  Iflands,  and  we  called  it  Sir  sirCharks 
Charles  HARD"i''s  Island.  ^f"""^!'^ 

illand. 

At  day-break  the  next  morning,  we  difcovered  another  Tuefday25. 
large  high  ifland,  which,  rifmg  in  three  confiderable  hills, 
had,  at  a  diflance,  the  appearance  of  three  iflands.     We 
gave  it  the  name  of  Winchelsea's  Island  ;  it  is  diftant  w^ncheifea's 
from  Sir  Charles  Hardy's  Ifland  about  ten  leagues,  in  the  ^'^'""'" 
dire<ftion  of  S.  by  E.     We  had  here  the  wind  fqually,  with 
•unfettled  weather,  and  a  very  flrong  weflerly  current. 

About  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  z6th,  we  faw  ano-  weJnef.  :6, 
ther  large  ifland  to  the  northward,  which  I  fuppofed  to  be 
the  fame  that  was  difcovered  by  Schouten,  and  called  the 
ifland  of  Saint  John.  Soon  after  we  faw  high  land  to  tlie 
weflward,  which  proved  to  be  Nova  Britannia,  and  as  we 
approached  it  we  found  a  very  flrong  S.  S.  weflerly  current, 
fetting  at  the  rate  of  no  lefs  than  thirty-two  miles  a  day. 
The  next  day,  having  only  light  winds,  a  north  weflerly  Thurfday27. 

4  F  2  current 


Wallis's 
2f.and. 


^88  CAPTAIN   CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.  current  fet  us  into  a  deep  bay  or  gulpli,  which  proved  to  be 
Auguft.^^  ^^^^^  which  Dampier  has  diftinguilhed  by  the  name  of  Saint 
George's  Bay. 

On  the  28th,  we  anchored  in  a  bay  near  a  little  ifland  at 
the  diftance  of  about  three  leagues  to  the  N.W.  of  Cape 
Saint  George,  which  was  called  Wai-lis's  Island.  I  found 
the  latitude  of  this  Cape  to  be  about  5°  S.  and  its  longitude 
by  account  158°  19'  E,  which  is  about  two  thoufand  five 
hundred  leagues  due  well  from  the  Continent  of  America, 
and  about  one  degree  and  an  half  more  to  the  eaflward  than 
its  place  in  the  French  chart  which  has  been  juft  mentioned. 
In  the  afternoon  I  fent  the  cutter  to  examine  the  coaft,  and 
the  other  boat  to  get  fome  cocoa-nuts,  and  hawl  the  feine. 
The  people  in  this  boat  caught  no  fifli,  but  they  brought  on 
board  about  an  hundred  and  fifty  cocoa-nuts,  which  were 
diftributed  to  the  men  at  the  furgeon's  difcretion.  We  had 
feen  fome  turtle  as  we  were  coming  into  the  bay,  and  hop- 
ing that  fome  of  them  might  repair  to  the  iiland  in  the 
night,  efpecially  as  it  was  fandy,  barren,  and  uninhabited, 
like  the  places  thefe  animals  moft  frequent,  I  fent  a  few  men 
Saturday  29.  on  fliorc  to  watch  for  them,  but  they  returned  in  the  morn- 
ing without  fuccefs. 

We  anchored  here  only  to  wait  till  the  boats.could  find  a: 
fit  place  for  our  purpofb,  and  feveral  very  good  harbours 
being  difcovered  not  far  diitant,  we  now  endeavoured  to^ 
weigh  anchor,  but,  with  the  united  ftrength  of  our  wholfr 
company,  were  not  able:  this  was  an  alarming  proof  of  our 
debility,  and  with  heavy  hearts  we  had  recourfe  to  an  addi*- 
tional  purchafe  ;  with  this  affiftance,  and  our  utmoft  effort?, 
we  got  the  anchor  juft  clear  of  the  bottom,  but  the  fhipcall- 
kig  in  fliore,  it  almoft  immediately  hooked  again  in  foul 
ground.     Our  talk  was  now  to  begin  again,  and  though  ail 

hands 


77m   I//fr//i/  <i/'  •:^\. \o\m  Ji,i/rr//('-  X.X.W. /C  /i;ig-t/es . 


^^'^^'^^iL^M^m^m^!- 


Capo  .S'.  Georiro,/'"'-^^-"   W./;\X.  S/."W.  <//'//////^  :S  /i-/ig-//i:' 


Cape  OxioviX.ir,//-uio-  .S.W.,/,//„//f  /S  /,; 


■<¥•"'/"', 


jT^mm^.^m^. 


-.^^n^^.:^ 


( 

apoBuUer.  ira^-ry/^-/;v^,/.S.S.WfW./o  .V.W.fyA^.  ,/,//„/,/  /„  or'/Z /l-ao-r/r.,-. 

...,#?»l^?I^^*^^^^*^^^Vfe^,^^^A:^ 

Lo 

■A    SoJidwiclis  Island    f/i//,i/i/  2  /rr^^)-w.v. 

-rt'^i^^ss^s^^SSS^^^SS^ifci:  ■■'i^''T;^**aitf?ftii 

.swm^s^f^tea^su. 

r/>f  :MolhiT  ,r//,/  lAVO  Bauo;lilei-s  ,  /mi/i/i/r  ^^V.  ,/,//„//^  j  /rno-u,:i- . 

Mothi-t 

-3  ^i      "^'1' 

N  O  T  A     H I BERN I  A 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  589 

hands  that  were  able  to  move  applied  their  utmoft  force,  the      i?^;. 

•whole  remaining  part  of  the  day,  with  the  greateft  purchafe   < ,— 1^ 

we  could  make,  we  were  not  able  to  ftir  it:  we  were  very  ^'""^  ^^^^* 
unwilling  to  cut  the  cable,  for  though  it  was  much 
worn,  we  could  at  this  time  ill  fuftain  the  lofs  of  it,  as 
we  intended  to  make  fmall  cord,  which  we  much  wanted, 
of  the  beft  part  of  it.  We  therefore,  with  whatever  reluc- 
tance, delifted  for  the  night,  and  the  next  day,  having  a  little  Sunday  30. 
recruited  our  Itrength,  we  were  more  fuccefsful ;  we  got  the 
anchor  up,  but  we  found  it  fo  much  injured  as  to  be  wholly 
unferviceable,  the  palm  being  broken. 

From  this  place  we  failed  to  a  little  cove  about  three  or 
four  miles  diftant,  to  which  we  gave  the  name  of  English 
Cove  :  here  we  anchored,  and  immediately  began  to  get 
wood  and  water,  which  we  found  in  great  plenty,  befides 
ballaft  ;  I  alfo  fent  the  boat  out  every  day  to  different  places 
with  the  feine,  but  though  there  was  plenty  of  fifh,  we  were 
able  to  catch  very  little ;  a  misfortune  which  was  probably 
owing  in  part  to  the  clearnefs  of  the  water,  in  part  to  the 
rockinefs  of  the  beach,  and  perhaps  in  fome  degree  alfo  to  our 
want  of  fkill:  we  plied  this  labour  day  and  night,  notwith- 
ftanding  the  want  of  fuccefs,  and  at  the  fame  time  had  re- 
courfe  to  the  hook  and  line,  but  to  our  great  mortification 
not  a  fingle  filh  would  take  the  bait.  We  faw  a  few  turtle, 
but  they  were  fo  fhy  that  we  could  not  catch  one  of  them  ;. 
here  therefore  we  were  condemned  to  the  curfe  of  TantaluSj, 
perpetually  in  the  fight  of  what  our  appetites  moft  importu* 
mately  craved,  and  perpetually  difappointed  in  our  attempts 
to  reach  it.  We  got,  however,  from  the  rocks- at»  low  watei^, 
a  few  rock  oyflers,  and  cocklts  of  a  very  large  fize ;.  and 
from  the  fhore  fome  cocoa-nuts,  and  the  upper  part  of  the- 
tree  that  bears  them,,  which  is  called  the  cabbage :  this-cab- 

bage-' 


59=3 


CAPTAIN  CARTERET'S  VOYAGE 


1767-  bage  is  a  white,  crifp,  jiiicy  fubftance,  which,  eaten  raw, 
_J!^L«;  taftes  fomewhat  like  a  chefnut,  but  when  boiled  is  fuperior 
to  the  beft  parfnip ;  we  cut  it  fmall  into  the  broth  that  we 
made  of  our  portable  foup,  which  was  afterwards  thickened 
with  oatmeal,  and  made  a  moft  comfortable  mefs  :  for  each 
of  thefe  cabbages  however  we  were  forced  to  cut  down  a 
tree,  and  it  was  with  great  regret  that  we  deftroyed,  in 
the  parent  Hock,  fo  much  fruit,  which  perhaps  is  the  moft 
powerful  antifcorbutic  in  the  world ;  but  neceffity  has  no 
law.  This  fupply  of  frefli  vegetables,  and  efpecially  the 
milk,  or  rather  the  water  of  the  nut,  recovered  our  fick  very 
faft.  They  alfo  received  great  benefit  and  pleafure  from  the 
fruit  of  a  tall  tree,  that  refembles  a  plum,  and  particularly 
that  which  in  the  Weft  Indies  is  called  the  Jamaica  plum ; 
our  men  gave  it  the  fame  name  ;  it  has  a  pleafant  tartifli 
tafte,  but  is  a  little  woody  probably  only  for,  want  of  cul- 
ture:  thefe  plums  were  not  plenty,  fo  that  having  the  two 
qualities  of  a  dainty,  fcarcity  and  excellence,  it  is  no  won- 
der that  they  were  held  in  the  higheft  eftimation. 

The  fhore  about  this  place  is  rocky,  and  the  country  high 
and  mountainous,  but  covered  with  trees  of  various  kinds, 
fome  of  which  are  of  an  enormous  growth,  and  probably 
would  be  ufeful  for  many  purpofes.  Among  others,  we 
found  the  nutmeg  tree  in  great  plenty,  and  I  gathered  a  few 
of  the  nuts,  but  they  were  not  ripe  :  they  did  not  indeed  ap- 
pear to  be  the  heft  fort,  but  perhaps  that  is  owing  partly  to 
their  growing  wild,  and  partly  to  their  being  too  much  in 
the  fhade  of  taller  trees.  The  cocoa-nut  tree  is  in  great  per- 
fection, but  does  not  abound.  Here  are,  I  believe,  all  the 
different  kinds  of  palm,  with  the  beetle-nut  tree,  various 
fpecies  of  the  aloe,  canes,  bamboos,  and  rattans,  with  many 
trees,  Ihrubs  and  plants  altogether  unknown  to  me ;  but  no 

efculent 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


591. 


cfculent  vegetable  of  any  kind.    The  woods  abound  with      »767. 
pigeons,  doves,  rooks,  parrots,  and  a  large  bird  with  black   <     "f"  1 
plumage,  that  makes  a  noife  fomewhat  like  the  barking  of 
a  dog;  with  many  others  which  I  can  neither  name  norde- 
fcribe.    Our  people  faw  no  quadruped  but  two  of  a  fmall 
iize  that  they  took  for  dogs ;  the  carpenter  and  another  man 
got  a  tranfient  glimpfe  of  them  in  the  woods  as  they  were 
cutting  fpars  for  the  fhip's  ufe,  and  faid  that  they  were  very 
wild,  and  ran  away  thfe  moment  they  faw  them  with  great 
fwiftnefs.    We  faw  centipieds,  fcorpions,  and  a  few  ferpents 
of  different  kinds  ;  but  no  inhabitants.     We  fell  in  however 
with  feveral  deferted  habitations,  and  by  the  Ihells  that  were 
fcattered  about  them,  and  feemed  not  long  to  have  been 
taken  out  of  the  water,  and  fome  flicks  half  burnt,  the  re- 
mains of  a  fire,  there  is  reafon  to  conclude  that  the  people 
had  but  juft  left  the  place  when  we  arrived.    If  we  may 
judge  of  the  people  by  that  which  had  been  their  dwelling, 
they  muft  ftand  low  even  in  the  fcale  of  favage  life  5  for  it 
was  the  moll  miferable  hovel  we  had  ever  feen. 

While  we  lay  here,  having  cleared  and  lightened  the  fliip, 
we  heeled  her  fo  as  to  come  at  her  leak,  which  the  carpen- 
ter flopped  as  well  as  he  could;  we  found:  the  llieathing 
greatly  decayed,  and  the  bottom  much  eaten  by  the  worms, 
but  we  payed  it  as  far  as  we  could  get  at  it  with  a  mixture 
of  hot  pitch  and  tar  boiled  together.  The  carpenter  alfo  cut 
down  many  fpars,  for  fludding-fail  booms,  having  but  few 
left  of  thofe  which  he  had  brought  from  England. 

Englifli  Cove  lies  N.  E.  i.  N.   three  or  four  miles  from 
Wallis's  Ifland;.  there  is  a  fmall  fhoal  on  the  flarboard  hand 
going  in,  which  will  be  eafily  feen  by  the  fea's  breaking, 
upon  it.    The  water  ebbs  and  flows  once  in  four  and  twenty    ^ 
hours  i  tlie  flood  came  in  about  nine:  or  ten  o'clock,  and  it 

was- 


Sgst  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S   VOYAGE 

1767-  was  high  water  between  three  and  four  in  the  afternoon, 
y  "f"  '  I  after  which  it  ebbed  all  night,  and  was  low  water  about  fix 
in  the  morning.  The  water  rifes  and  falls  between  eight  or 
nine  feet,  fometimes  more,  fometimes  lefs  ;  but  I  doubt 
whether  this  flu6l:uadon  is  not  rather  the  effe<ft  of  the  fea 
and  land  breeze,  than  of  a  regular  tide.  We  anchored  here 
with  our  beft  bower  in  twenty-feven  fathom  water,  with  a 
bottom  of  fand  and  mud  ;  we  veered  into  the  cove  a  cable 
and  a  half  from  the  anchor,  moored  head  and  flern  with 
the  ftream  anchor,  and  fteadied  with  hawfers  on  each  bow  j 
tlie  fliip  then  lay  in  ten  fathom,  at  the  diftance  of  a  cable's 
length  from  the  £hore  at  the  bottom  of  the  Cove,  Wallis's 
Point  bearing  S.  W.  7  S.  diftant  about  three  or  four  miles. 
At  this  place  there  is  plenty  of  excellent  wood  and  water, 
and  good  fliingle  ballaft.    The  variation  was  6  °  7  E. 

September.  On  Mouday  the  7th  of  September,  I  weighed  anchor,  but 
Jan  ay  7.  ^^f^^^Q  j  failed,  I  took  poiTeffion  of  this  country,  with  all  its 
iflands,  bays,  ports,  and  harbours,  for  his  Majelly  George 
the  Third,  King  of  Great  Britain ;  and  we  nailed  upon  a  high 
tree  a  piece  of  board,  faced  with  lead,  on  which  was  en- 
graved the  Englifli  Union,  with  the  name  of  the  fhip,  and 
her  Commander,  the  name  of  the  Cove,  and  the  time  of  her 
coming  in  and  failing  out  of  it.  While  we  lay  here,  I  fent 
the  boat  out  to  examine  the  harbours  upon  the  coaft,  from 
one  of  which  expeditions  flie  returned  with  a  load  of  cocoa- 
nuts,  which  file  procured  in  a  fine  little  harbour,  about  four 
leagues  W.  N.W.  from  the  ftation  we  were  in.  The  officer 
on  board  reported  that  the  trees  grew  where  he  had  gathered 
tlie  fruit  in  great  plenty  ;  but  as  he  had  obferved  that  feve- 
ral  of  them  were  marked,  and  that  there  were  many  huts 
of  the  natives  near  them,  I  did  not  think  it  proper  that  the 
boat  fliould  return :  but  the  refrefliment  which  now  offered 

was 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  593 

was  of  fuch  importance  to  the  lick,  that  I  determined  to  go  ^rf'T- 
into  the  harbour  with  the  Ihip,  and  place  her  fo  as  to  pro-  '"_!^^-"'-  "^- 
ted  the  men  who  fhould  be  employed  to  fell  the  trees,  and  ^°'^^^^  ^' 
cut  oiF  the  cabbages  and  the  fruit.  We  failed  from  Engliih 
Cove  with  the  land  breeze  early  in  the  morning,  and  in  the 
evening  fecured  the  fliip  abreaft  of  the  grove,  where  the 
cocoa-nuts  had  been  gathered,  and  at  very  little  diflance 
from  the  fliore.  Here  we  procured  above  a  thoufand  cocoa- 
nuts,  and  as  many  of  the  cabbages  as  we  could  ufe  while 
they  were  good,  and  I  would  have  ftaid  long  enough  to  have 
given  my  people  all  the  refrefliments  they  wanted,  but  the 
feafon  of  the  year  made  the  fliorteft  delay  dangerous.  There 
was  too  much  reafon  to  fuppofe  that  the  lives  of  all  on  board 
depended  upon  our  getting  to  Batavia  while  the  raonfoon 
continued  to  blow  from  the  eaftward ;  there  was  indeed 
time  enough  for  any  other  fliip  to  have  gone  three  times 
the  diftance,  but  I  knew  it  was  fcarcely  fufficient  for  the 
Swallow  in  her  prefent  condition  ;  and  that  if  we  fliould  be 
obliged  to  continue  here  another  feafon,  it  would  probably 
become  impoffible  to  navigate  her  at  all,  efpecially  as  flie 
had  but  a  lingle  flieathing,  and  her  bottom  was  not  filled 
with  nails,  fo  that  the  worms  would  have  eaten  through  it ; 
befides  that  our  provifion  would  long  before  that  time  have 
been  totally  exhaufted.  I  therefore  weighed  anchor  and 
quitted  this  ftation,  which  was  much  the  bell  that  had  been 
our  lot  during  the  whole  run  from  the  Streight  of  Magellan, 
on  the  9th  in  the  morning,  at  break  of  day,  with  a  light  wcdnef.  g. 
breeze  from  the  land. 

To  this  place  we  gave  the  name  of  Carteret's  Harbour; 
it  is  about  W.N.W.  four  leagues  from  Englilli  Cove,  and 
formed  by  two  iflands  and  the  mainj;  the  largeft,  which  is 
to  the  N.W.  we  called  Cocoa-nut  Island,  and  the  other,  Cocoa-nut 

Vol.  I.  4  G  '       which     *"  * 


594 
1767. 

September. 

Wednef.  9. 
If.and. 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

which  is  to  the  S.E.  we  called  Leigh's  Island.    Between 
thefe  two  iflands  there  is  flioal  water,  and  each  of  them 
forms  an  entrance  into  the  harbour ;  the  fouth  eaft  or  wea- 
ther entrance   is   formed    by   Leigh's   liland,   and  in  this 
there  is  a   rock  that  appears  above  water,   to  which  we 
gave  the  name  of  Booby  Rock  ;  the  pafTage  is  between  the 
rock  and  the  ifland,  nor  is  the  rock  dangerous,  there  being 
deep  water  clofe  to  it.     The  north  weft,  or  lee  entrance,  is 
formed  by  Cocoa-nut  Ifland,  and  this  is.jhe;^bell,'becaufe 
there  is  good  anchorage  in  it,  the  water  in  the  other  being 
too  deep :  v/e  entered  the  harbour  by  the  fouth  eaft  paftage, 
and  went  out  of  it  by  the  north  weft.    At  the  fouth  eaft  end 
of  the  harbour  there  is  a  large  cove,  which  is  fecure  from 
all  winds,  and  fit  to  haul  a  lliip  into.     Into  this  cove  a  river 
feemed  to  empty  itfelf,  but  our  boats  did  not  examine  it. 
In  the  north  v/cft  part  of  the  harbour  there  is  another  cove, 
which  our  boat  did  examine,  and  from  which  fhe  brought 
us  very  good  water :  this  alfo  is  fit  for  a  fliip  to  haul  into, 
and  very  convenient  for  wooding  and  watering :  Ihe  may  lie 
in  any  depth  from  thirty  to  five  fathom,  and  at  any  diftance 
from  the  fhore,  with  a  bottom  of  foft  mud.     The  harbour 
runs  about  S.  E.  by  S.  and  N.  W.  by  N.  and  is  about  three 
miles  long,  and  four  cables'  length  broad.     We  anchored 
in  thirty  fathom,  near  the  north  weft,  entrance,  and  abreaft 
of  the  trees  on  Cocoa-nut  Ifland. 


C  H  A  P. 


- JJL^^^L  ^--JE— I — t^,J-Jj|l-^^^i---^Jj^-l-^^L^,J-Jiu--t---^i-^■J  J:'lL^j^ j,^.^  ^-JJc — i^:i — i-J:^  _i —  u -^^'4i u \ ^-'■'-k-,.^„;;^^^Jai 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  595 


CHAP.     VL 

Difcovery  of  a  Streight  dividing  the  Land  called  Nova 
Britannia  into  two  IJlands,  with  a  Defcription  of  fever  al 
ftfiall  IJlands  that  lie  in  the  Paffage^  and  the  Land  on 
each  Side,  with  the  Inhabitants, 

WHEN  w€  got  about  four  leagues  ofF  the  land,  after  1767. 
leaving  this  harbour,  we  met  with  a  llrong  gale  at  ^^p^"^^*^ 
E.  S.  E.  a  dirc<5lion  juft  contrary  to  that  which  would  w**^"^^-  9- 
have  favoured  our  getting  round  the  land,  and  dou- 
bling Cape  Saint  Maria.  We  found  at  the  fame  time  a 
ftrong  current,  fetting  us  to  the  N.  W.  into  a  deep  bay  or 
gulph,  which  Dampier  calls  Saint  George's  Bay,  and  which 
lies  between  Cape  Saint  George  and  Cape  Orford.  As  it 
was  impoffible  to  get  round  the  land,  againft  both  the  wind 
and  current,  and  follow  the  track  of  Dampier,  I  was  under 
the  neceffity  of  attempting  a  palTage  to  the  weflward  by  this 
gulph,  and  the  current  gave  me  hopes  that  I  fliould  fucceed. 
When  I  had  got,  therefore,  about  five  miles  to  the  fouth  well; 
of  Cocoa-nut  Ifland,  I  fleered  to  the  N.  W,  and  the  N.  N.  W. 
as  the  land  trends,  and  had  foon  good  reafon  to  believe 
that  what  has  been  called  Saint  George's  Bay,  and  thought 
to  be  formed  by  two  points  of  the  fame  ifland,  was  indeed  a 
channel  between  two  iflands,  and  fo  the  event  proved  it 
to  be. 

Before  it  was  dark,  we  found  this  channel  divided  by  a 
pretty  large  ifland  which  I  called  the  Duke  of  York's  Island, 

4  G  2  and 


59^ 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


1767.       and  fome  fmaller  iflands  that  were  fcattered  about  it.    On 
.^^P'^'"'^"-,   the  fouthermoft  fide  of  the  main,  or  the  largeft  of  the  two 
Wednef.  9,     iflands  that  are  divided  by  the  channel  or  ftreight,  which  I 
left  in  pofleffion  of  its  ancient  name,.  New  Britain,  there  is 
fome  high  land,  and  three  remarkable  hills  clofe  to  each 
other,  which  I  called  the  Mother  and  Daughters,     The 
Mother  is  the  middlemoll  and  largefl,  and  behind  them  we 
faw  a  vaft  column  of  fmoke,  fo  that  probably  one  of  them 
is  a  volcano :  they  are  eafily  feen  in  clear  weather  at  the 
diflanceof  twenty  leagues,,  and  will  then,  by  tliofe  who  do 
not  know  them,  be  taken  for  iflands :  they  feem  to  lie  far 
inland,  and  the  Mother  bears  about  weft  from  the  Duke  of 
York's  Ifland,     To  the  eaft  of  thefe  hills  there  is  a  point 
making  like  a  cape  land,  which  I  called  Cape  Palliser; 
and     another    to    the    weftward,     which     I    called    Cape 
Stephens.     Cape  Stephens  is  the  northermoft  part  of  New 
Britain.     North  of  this  Cape  is  an  ifland,   which  I  called 
lOesfMan.     the  IsLE  OF  Man.     Capc  Pallifcr  and  Cape  Stephens  bear 
about  N.W.  and  S.  E.  of  each  other;    and  l?etwcen  them 
is  a  bay,   the   land  of  which  near  the  water-fide  is  low, 
plcafant,    and  level,    and  gradually  rifes,    as  it   retires  to- 
wards the  Mother  and  Daughters,  into  very  lofty  hills,  in 
general  covered  with  vaft  woods,  but  having  many  clear 
fpots  like  plantations  intermixed.     Upon  this  part  of  the 
country  we  faw  many  fires  in  the  night,  and  have  therefore 
reafon  to  fuppofe  that  it  is  well  inhabited.     The  Duke  of 
York's  Ifland  lies  between  the  two  points,  Cape  Pallifer  and 
Cape  Stephens.  As  it  was  not  fafe  tO-attempt  either  of  the  paf- 
fages  into  which  the  Streight  was  divided  by  this  ifland  in 
the  dark,  we  brought  to  for  the  night,  and  kept  founding, 
but  had  no  ground  with  one  hundred  and  forty  fathom. 
The  Streight  here,  including  the  two  paflages,  is  about  fif- 
teen leagues  broad.    The  land  of  the  Duke  of  York's  Ifland 

is 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  37 

is  level,  and  has  a  delightful  appearance :  inland  it  is  co-       1767. 
vered  with  lofty  woods,   and  near  the  water-fide  are  the    ^^I^H^lJli, 
houfes  of  the  natives,  which  Hand  not  far  from  each  other,  ^^"^"^^  ?• 
among  groves  of  cocoa-nut  trees,  fo  that  the  whole  forms 
a  profpe<5l  the  moft  beautiful  and  romantic  that  can  be  ima- 
gined.   We  faw  many  of  their  canoes,  which  are  very  neatly 
made,  and  in  the  morning,  foon  after  I  made  fail,  fome  of  Thurfdayioi 
them  came  off  towards  the  fhip;  but  as  we  had  a  frefh  gale 
at  that  time,  we  could  not  flay  for  them.    The  latitude  of 
this  ifland  is  4°  9' S.,  longitude   151^  20' E. ;  and  it  is  five 
and  twenty  leagues  diftant  from  Cape  George.     As  I  coafted 
not  New  Britain,  but  the  northermoft  coaft  of  the  Streight,  I 
palTed  through  the  paiTage  that  is  formed  by  that  eoaft,  and 
the  correfponding  fide  of  the  Duke  of  York's  Ifland,  which 
is  about  eight  leagues  broad,  and  may  be  confidered  as  the 
Firft  Narrow  of  the  Streight ;  and  then  fleering  N.W.  by  W, 
all  night,  we  found  at  day-break  that  we  had  lofl  fight  of  FHday n^ 
the  fouthermoft  ifland,    or  New  Britain,   and  having  now 
afcertained  the  fuppofed  bay  to  be  a  Streight,  I  called  it 
Saint  George's  Channel,  and  to  the  northern  ifland  I  gave  St.  George's 
the  name  of  Nova  HUbernia,  or  New  Ireland.     The  wea-  ^''^""^';  j 

,  ..^iv,    »n_a  .     IN ew  Ireland.. 

ther  being  hazey,  with  a  flrong  gale  and  fudden  gufts,  I 
continued  to  fleer  along,  the  coafl  of  New  Ireland  at  about 
the  diftance  of  fix  leagues  from  the  fliore,  till  I  came  off  the 
weft  end  of  it,  and  then,  altering  our  courfe,  I.  fleered 
W. N.W.  I  could  plainly  perceive,  that  we.  were  fet  along 
the  fhore  by  a  flrong  wefterly  current.  At  noon,  we  found, 
by  obfervation  that  we  were  much  to  the  northward  of  the 
log ;  but  as  it  was  impofTible.  the  current  could  fct  due 
north,  as  that  would  be  right  againft  the  land,  I  was  obliged, 
for  the  correction  of  my  account,  to  allow  no  lefs  than  four 
and  twenty  miles  W. N.W.  which  is  nearly  as  the  land  lies 
along  the  fhore.     At  this  time  we  h.id  about  half  a  point 

eafl 


598  CAPTAIN    CARTERET's    VOYAGE 

^1^1'      eaft  variation ;  and  at  night  we  difcovered  a  fine  large  ifland, 
».I!!!!!L!1/  forming  a  flreight  or  paflTage  with  New  Ireland.    As  it  was 
^'"^"^  "•     ygjy  dark  and  fqually,  with  rain,  we  brought  to,  not  know- 
ing to  what  danger  the  navigation  of  this  flreight  might 
expofe  us.     The  night  was  tempelluous,  with  much  thun- 
Satui-day  12.   dcr  and  lightning,  but  about  two  in  the  morning  the  wea-« 
ther  cleared :  the  gufts  fettled  into  a  light  breeze,  and  the 
the  moon   ihone  very  bright.     At  this  time  therefore  we 
made  fail  again,  and  found  a  ftrong  current  fetting  us  to 
the  weftward,  through  the  paifage  of  the  Second  Narrow, 
which  is  about  five  leagues  wide.     The  ifland,  which  has  a 
Sandwich      pleafant  appearance,  and  is  very  populous,  I  called  Sand- 
i^id-  wicH  Island,  in  honour  of  the  Earl,  now  Firll  Lord  of  the 

Admiralty:  it  is  larger  than  the  Duke  of  York's  Ifland,  and 
there  feems  to  be  fome  good  bays  and  harbours  upon  the 
coaft.  On  the  north  part  of  it  there  is  a  remarkable  peak, 
like  a  fugar  loaf;  and  oppofite  to  ir,  upon  the  coafl:  of  New 
Ireland,  there  is  juft  fuch  another:  they  are  diftant  about 
five  leagues,  in  the  direcftion  of  S.  by  E.  l  E.  and  N.  by  W. 
t.  W.  All  the  while  we  lay  to  off  this  ifland,  we  heard  an  in- 
cefl^unt  noife  in  the  night,  like  the  beating  of  a  drum :  and 
being  becalmed  juft  as  we  got  through  the  Streight,  ten 
canoes  put  off  from  New  Ireland,  with  about  one  hundred 
and  fifty  men  on  board,  and  rowed  towards  the  fhip  ;  they 
came  near  enough  to  exchange  fome  trifles  with  us,  wliich 
were  conveyed  at  the  end  of  a  long  flick,  but  none  of  them 
would  venture  on  board.  They  feemed  to  prefer  fuch  iron 
as  we  gave  them  to  every  thing  elfe,  though  none  of  it  was 
manufadlured  except  nails  ;  for,  as  I  obferved  before,  we 
had  no  cutlery  ware  on  board.  The  canoes  were  very  long 
and  very  narrow,  with  an  outrigger,  and  fome  of  them  were 
very  neatly  made :  one  of  them  could  not  be  lefs  than  ninety 
feet  long,  for  it  was  very  little  fliorter  than  the  Ihip ;  it  was, 
3  notwith- 


ROUND    THE   WORLD.  ^^^ 

notwithftanding,  formed  of  a  fingle  tree  ;  it  had  fome  1767. 
carved  ornaments  about  it,  and  was  rowed  or  paddled  by  <  ^^^T  ^''^ 
three  and  thirty  men :  we  faw  no  appearance  of  fails.  The  ^^'"^''"^  '^ 
people  are  black,  and  woolly-headed,  like  Negroes,  but  have 
not  the  flat  nofe  and  thick  lips  ;  and  we  thought  them  much 
the  fame  people  as  the  inhabitants  of  Egmont's  Ifland:  like 
them,  they  were  all  ftark  naked,  except  a  few  ornaments 
made  of  fliells  upon  their  arms  and  legs.  They  had,  how- 
ever, adopted  a  pradlice  without  which  none  of  our  belles 
and  beaus  are  fuppofed  to  be  completely  dreft,  for  the  hair, 
or  rather  the  wool  upon  their  heads,  was  very  abundantly 
powdered  with  white  powder :  the  fafliion  of  wearing  pow- 
der, therefore,  is  probably  of  higher  antiquity  than  it  is> 
generally  fuppofed  to  be,  as  well  as  of  more  extenfive  in- 
fluence ;  it  is  indeed  carried  farther  among  thefe  people  than 
among  any  of  the  inhabitants  of  Europe,  for  they  powder 
not  only  their  heads  but  their  beards  too.  Their  heads  how- 
ever were  decorated  v^ith  more  fliowy  ornaments,  for  I  ob- 
ferved  that  mofl  of  them.had,  juft  above  one  ear,.flucka  fea- 
ther, which  appeared  to  have  been  taken  from  the  tail  of 
the  common  dunghil  cock  ;  fo  that  thefe  gentlemen  p.rcnor 
without  poultry  for  their  table.  They  were  armed:  with- 
fpears,  and  long  flicks  or  poles,  like  the  quarter- ft'afi';  but 
we  did  not  fee  any  bows  and  arrows  among  them :  poflibly 
they  might  have  them  on  board,  and  think  proper  to  keep 
them  out  of  fight.  On  my  part,  I  kept,  every  body  at  their 
quarters  while  they  were  hovering  about  the  fliip,  and  I 
obferved  that  they  had  a  very  watchful  eye  upon,  our  guns, 
as  if  they  apprehended  danger  from  them  ;  fo  that  poflibly 
they  are  not  wholly  unacquainted  with  the  efl^eft  of  fire- 
arms. They  had  fifliing  nets  with. them,  which  as  well  as 
their  cordage,  feemed  to  be  very  well  made.    After  they  had. 

been 


6oo 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


1767. 

September. 
Saturday  iz. 


been  fome  time  with  us,  a  breeze  fprung  up,  and  they  re- 
turned to  the  fliore. 


The  peak  upon  Sandwich  Ifland  lies  in  latitude  2°  53' S., 
longitude  149°  17' £.  After  the  Indians  had  left  us,  we 
Ileered  nearly  weft,  and  foon  after  faw  a  point  of  land, 
which  proved  to  be  the  fouth  weft  extremity  of  New  Ireland, 
Cape  Byron,  fo  wliicli  I  gavc  the  name  of  Cape  Byron  :  it  lies  in  latitude 
2°  30' S.,  longitude  149"  2' E.  Over-againft  the  coaft  of 
New  Ireland,  to  the  weftward  of  Cape  Byron,  lies  a  fine 
large  iftand,  to  which  I  gave  the  name  of  New  Hanover. 
Between  this  iftand  and  New  Ireland,  there  is  a  ftreight  or 
paflage,  which  turns  away  to  the  N.  E.  In  this  pafTage  lie 
feveral  fmall  iflands,  upon  one  of  which  there  is  a  remark- 
able peak:  this  iftand  I  called  Byron's  Island,  and  the 
paftage,  or  ftreight,  I  called  Byron's  Streight.  The  land 
of  New  Hanover  is  high ;  it  is  finely  covered  with  trees, 
among  which  are  many  plantations,  and  the  whole  has  a 
moft  beautiful  appearance.  The  fouth  weft  point  of  it, 
which  is  a  high  bluft'  point,  I  called  Queen  Charlotte's 
Foreland,  in  honour  of  her  Majefty.  This  foreland,  and 
the  land  about  it,  is  rem.arkable  for  a  great  number  of  little 
hummocks  or  hills,  but  night  coming  on,  with  thick  wea- 
ther, hard  fqualls,  and  much  rain,  we  could  not  fee  more  of 
it  diftincSlly  enough  to  defcribe  its  appearance. 


Neiv  Han- 
over. 


Byron's 

Jlland. 


Sunday  ij. 


Duke  of  Port- 
lands Iflands. 


We  fteered  weftward  all  night,  and  in  the  morjijing,  the 
weather  being  ftill  thick,  our  view  of  New  Hanover  was 
very  imperfc6t ;  but  we  faw,  about  eight  leagues  to  the 
weftward  of  it,  fix  or  feven  fmall  iftands,  which  I  called  the 
Duke  of  Portland's  Islands,-  two  of  which  are  pretty 
large.  I  now  perceived  by  the  fwell  of  the  fea  that  we  were 
clear  of  all  the  land,  and  I  found  Saint  George's  Channel  to 

be 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  60^ 

be  a  much  better  and  lliorter  palTaffe,  whether  from  the  eafl-      1767- 

„     ,  September. 

ward  or  the  weftward,  than  round  all  the  land  and  iflands  to  ^- — ^ — j 
the  northward ;  the  diftrefs  therefore  which  pufhed  me  upon  ' "  *^  '^' 
this  difcovery,  may  probably  be,  in  its  confequences,  of 
great  advantage  to  future  navigators,  efpecially  as  there  can 
be  no  doubt  but  that  refrefliments  of  every  kind  may  ealily 
be  procured  from  the  natives  who  inhabit  either  of  the  coafls 
of  the  channel,  or  the  iflands  that  lie  near  them,  for  beads, 
ribands,  looking-glaiTes,  and  efpecially  iron  tools  and  cut- 
lery-ware, of  which  they  are  immoderately  fond,  and  with 
which,  to  our  great  misfortune,  we  were  not  furniflied. 

Queen  Charlotte's  Foreland,  the  fouth  weft  part  of  New 
Hanover,  lies  in  latitude  2°  29' S.,  longitude  148'  27' E.;  and 
the  middle  of  Portland's  Iflands  in  latitude  2°  27' S.,  longi- 
tude 148°  3'  E.  The  length  of  this  ftreight  or  channel,  from 
Cape  Saint  George  to  Cape  Byron,  the  foutli  weft  extremity 
of  New  h"eland,  is  above  eighty  leagues  ;  the  diftance  from 
Cape  Byron  to  Queen  Charlotte's  Foreland  is  about  twelve 
leagues,  and  from  the  Foreland  to  Portland's  Iflands  about 
eight  leagues  ;  fo  that  the  whole  length  of  Saint  George's 
Channel  is  about  one  hundred  leagues,  or  three  hundred 
miles. 

Though  we  cleared  the  Streight  in  the  morning  of  Sun- 
day the  13th  of  September,  we  had  no  obfervation  of  the' 
fun  till  the  15th,  which  I  could  not  but  greatly  regret,  as  it 
prevented  my  being  fo  exa<5l  in  my  latitude  and  longitude  as 
might  be  expedted.  The  defcription  alfo  of  the  country,  its 
produdiona  and  people,  would  have  been  much. more  full 
and  circumftantial,  if  I  had  not  been  fo  much  infeebled  and 
difpirited  by  flcknefs,  as  almoft  to  fmk  imder  the  duty  that 
for  want  of  officers  devolved  upon  me,  being  obliged,  when 
I  was  fcarcely  able  to  crawl,  to  keep  watch  and  watch,  and 

Vol.  L  4  H  fliare 


eoz  CAPTAIN   CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

i7^7>  {hare  other  duties  with  my  Lieutenant,  whofe  health  alfb> 

September.  .  . 

*— -V — »  was  greatly  impan-ed* 

Sanday  13. 


CHAP.     VIL 

The  Pajfage  from  Saint  George  s  Channel  to  the  IJtand  of 
Mindanao^  wkh  an  Accou?it  of  many  TJlands  that  were- 
fieny  and  Incidents  that  happened  by  the  Way, 

S  foon  as  we  had  cleared  Saint  George's  Channel,  we 
fleered  weftward,  and  the  next  day  we  difcovered  land 
bearing  W.  N.  W.  and  hauled  up  for  it;  it  proved  to  be  an 
iiland  of  confiderable  extent,  and  foon  afterwards  we  faw 
another  to  the  north  eaft  of  it,  but  this  appeared  to  be  little 
more  than  a  large  rock  above  water.  As  I  had  here  llrong 
currents,,  and  for  feveral  days  had  not  been  able  to  get  an 
obfervation  of  the  fun,  I  cannot  fo  exadlly  afcertain  the  fitu- 
ation  of  thefe  iflands  as  I  might  otherwife  have  done.  As  we 
proceeded  to  the  weftward,  we  difcovered  more  land,.  Gon- 
iifting  of  many  iflands  lying  to  the  foufhward  of  the  large 
one  which  we  had  firft  difcovered.  As  the  nights  were  now 
moonlight,  we  kept  on  till  eleven  o'clock,  and  the  Lieu- 
tenant, who  was  then  ofHcer  of  the  watch,  finding  that  the^ 
eourfe  we  were  fleering  would  carry  us  among  them,  and' 
not  being  willing  to  awaken  me  till  it  was  my  turn  to  watch, 
hauled  off  S.  by  E.  and  S.  S.  E.  I  came  upon  deck  about 
Tuefdayij.  midnight,  and  at  one  in  the  morning,  perceiving  that  we 
were  clear  of  them,  I  bore  away  again  to  the  weftward  with 
an  eafy  fail :  the  iflands,  however,  were  not  far  diftant,  and' 
about  fix  o'clock,  a  coniiderablc  number  of  canoes,  with 
feveral  hundred  people  on  board,  came  off,  and  paddlecE 

towarci 


•  -  ^  R  O  U  N  D   THE   WORLD.  6©^ 

toward  the  fliip:   one  of  them,  with  feven  men  on  boarij,       ^1^7- 

came  near  enough  to  hail  us,    and  made  us  feveral  figns   < !,'—"'"'/ 

which  we  could  not  perfedlly  underfland,  but  repeated,  as  ^'^^''^^^  *^'* 
near  as  we  could,  to  fliew  that  whatever  they  meant  to  us 
we  meant  to  them ;  however,  the  better  to  befpeak  their 
good-will,  and  invite  them  on  board,  we  held  up  to  them 
feveral  of  the  few  trifles  we  had :  upon  this  they  drew  nearer 
to  the  fhip,  and  I  flattered  myfelf  that  they  were  coming  on 
board ;  but  on  the  contrary,  as  foon  as  they  came  within 
reach  of  us  they  threw  their  lances,  with  great  force,  where 
we  flood  thickeft  upon  the  deck.    As  I  thought  it  better  to 
prevent  than  to  reprefs  a  general  attack,  in  which,  as  the 
number  would  be  more,  the  mifchief  v/ould  be  greater,  and 
having  now  no  doubt  of  their  hoftile   intentions,    I  fired 
fome  mufkets,  and  one  of  the  fwivel  guns,   upon  which, 
fome  of  them  being  killed  or  wounded,  they  rowed  off  and 
joined  the  other  canoes,  of  which  there  were  twelve  or  four- 
teen, with  feveral  hundred  men  on  board.     I  then  brought 
to,  waiting  for  the  iflTue,  and  had  the  fatisfacTiion  to  fee,  that, 
after  having  long  confulted  together,    they  made  for  the 
fliore :  that  I  might  ftill  farther  intimidate  them,  and  more 
efFedlually  prevent  their  return,  I  fired  a  round  fliot  from  one 
of  my  fix- pounders,  fo  as  to  fall  into  the  water  beyond  them : 
this  feemed  to  have  a  good  efFedl,  for  they  not  only  ufed 
their  paddles  more  nimbly,    but  hoifted  fail,  ftill  ftanding 
towards   the  Ihore.      Soon   after,    however,    feveral  more 
canoes  put  oS.  from  another  part  of  the  ifland,  and  came 
towards  us  very  faft  :  they  flopped  at  about  the  fame  diftance 
as  the  other  had  done,  and  one  of  them  alfo  in  the  fame 
manner  came  forward  :  to  the  people  on  board  this  vefl!el  we 
made  all  the  figns  of  friendfliip  we  could  devife,  iliewing 
them  every  thing  we  had  which  we  thought  would  pleafe 
them,  opening  our  arms,  and  inviting  them  on  board:  but 

4  H  2  our 


5o4  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.  our  rhetoric  was  to  no  efFed,  for  as  foon  as  they  came 
^septcmber.^  ^^^j^jj^  ^  ^.^^  of  f^g  {]^[p^  they  poured  in  a  fliower  of  darts 
Tuffdayij-.  j^nd  lances,  which,  however,  did  us  no  harm.  We  returned 
the  affauk  by  firing  fome  mulkets,  and  one  man  being  killed, 
the  reft  precipitately  leaped  into  the  fea,  and  fwimming  to 
the  others,  who  waited  at  a  diftance,  all  returned  together 
from  whence  they  came.  As  foon  as  the  canoe  was  deferted, 
we  got  out  our  boat  and  brought  it  on  board :  it  was  full 
fifty  feet  long,  though  one  of  the  imalleft  that  came  againfl 
us  ;  it  was  very  rudely  made  out  of  one  tree,  but  had  an 
outrigger.  We  found  in  it  fix  fine  fifh,^  and  a  turtle,  fome 
yams,  one  cocoa-nut,  and  a  bag  full  of  a  fmall  kind  of 
apple  or  plum,  of  a  fweetifh  tafte  and  farinaceous  fub- 
flance;  it  had  a  flattifli  kernel,  and  was  wholly  differenj- 
from  every  thing  we  have  feen  either  before  or  fincc :  it  was 
eatable  raw,  but  much  better  boiled,  or  roafted  in  the  em- 
bers: we  found  alfo  two  large  earthen  pots,  fliaped  fome- 
what  like  a  jug,  with  a  wide  mouth,  but  without  handles 
and  a  confiderable  quantity  of  matting,  which  thefe  people 
ufe  both  for  fails  and  awning,  fprcading  it  over  bent  flicks, 
much  in  the  fame  manner  as  tlie  tilts  of  the  London  wher- 
ries. From  the  contents  of  this  velTel  we  judged  that  it  had 
been  fifhing,  and  v/e  oblerved  that  the  people  had  a  fire  on 
board,  with  one  of  tlieir  pots  on  it,  in  which  they  were 
boiling  their  provifion.  When  we  had  fatisfied  our  curiofity 
by  examining  it,  we  cut  it  up  for  fire-wood. 

Thcfc  Indians  were  the  fame  kind  of  people  that  we  had  feen 
before  on  the  coall  of  New  Ireland,  and  at  Egmont  Ifland  : 
they  were  of  a  very  dark  copper  colour,  nearly  black,  with 
woolly  heads.  They  chew  beetle-nut,  and  go  quite  naked, 
except  the  rude  ornaments  of  fliells  llrmig  together,  which 
they  wear  round  their  legs  and  arms :  they  were  alfo  pow- 
4  d'ered: 


TliiioMfws  ofilu-  Jj>Mii;.ii.  rr  I.sj.jjs 


_ji^^^s^,gf;!m^^^^^^^^^^^S^^^^^S^^^Ss!^S!^^SsSS^SBs!ms»!=^ 


_^.^3!^>ese^ 


^■,f^^.  ./-^ 


a^^    .^_i«r?yp^??i^JR^  .^t^ 


jg^as'Sk, 


ssMSsaSaisaaai 


r,mJ//,„„h/m,  ::/"";,/>/,  llih,   ij/jj 


.TolcpliR-i-owilb  IslaiuU    ' 


^J„  ///„,„(/;,„  /niii,  //„■  ,mi/i  Mii/fllihrh-j 


Curj-raillll.ujilNE.i  Ji  . 


-SVvv,  „„/v  Ir,.,,,  //w  „„!//  I,,;,,/.  „-/j,- 

//„.~V,  „■„■„, /„/,,„  0.l„/„r,.-.  ,;{,-. 

.S!AiKlr..„,sHl:,ruls.  ' 

,\:k-i:.  yji.i„i:. 


//„^/u:asj,.:,,',„. 


ja.^r:-!  /.>/y» 


3T,v;£- 


f/  /'ni/>/  //.)/■  >///!//  hrfK/  V //ji.i  TVr/ 
'//.,c/v  Orfo/x'i-   n  '.'■  /-jO-. 
i-rciit  Hl;uid  XE.i  JC  . 


^Sn„  <>/i(\\f/-''/"  f/->f  "",'/''  /"''/'/.  /'■/./,■/■) 
//.,ls^y,  ,r  ,r,is  /„/.;■//  (>r/<i/>(/'  I.-..  /J^'J- 

S'  Aiiaic".sllhiii<ls. 


ROUND    THE    WORLD,  605 

dercd  like  our  laft  vifitors,  and  had,  befides,  thjeir  faces  painted       1767. 
with  white  llreaks  ;  but  I  did  not  obferve  that  they  had  any  v .  ^^-'t-  ^-'/ 
beards.    Their  lances  were  pointed  with  a  kind  of  bluilli  '^"*^'^^>' '5- 
flint. 

Having  difengaged  ourfelves  from  this  fierce  and  un- 
friendly people,  we  purfued  our  courfe  along  the  other 
iflands,  which  are  between  twenty  and  thirty  in  number, 
and  of  confiderable  extent ;  one  in  particular  would  alone 
make  a  large  kingdom.  I  called  them  the  Admiralty  Admiralty 
Islands,  and  fhould  have  been  glad  to  have  examined  them, 
if  my  fliip  had  been  in  a  better  condition,  and  I  had  been 
provided  with  fuch  articles  as  are  proper  for  an  Indian  trade, 
efpecially  as  their  appearance  is  very  inviting:  they  are 
clothed  with  the  moll  beautiful  verdure  j  the  woods  are 
lofty  and  luxuriant,  interfperfed  with  fpots  that  have  been 
cleared  for  plantations,  groves  of  cocoa-nut  trees,  and 
houfes  of  the  natives,  who  feem  to  be  very  numerous.  No- 
thing would  be  more  eafy  than  to  eftablilh  an  amicable  in- 
tercourfe  with  them,  as  they  would  foon  be  fenfible  that  our 
fuperiority  would  render  contefl:  vain,  and  traffic  advan- 
tageous. I  judge  the  middle  of  the  largeft  to  lie  in  latitude 
^  18' S.,  longitude  146"  44  E.  and  at  the  dillance  of  five  and 
thirty  leagues  from  Queen  Charlotte's  Foreland  in  Nev^r  Har 
nover,  in  the  diredlion  of  W.  t  N.  On  the  fouth  fide  of  this 
ifland,  there  is  a  fmall  one,  which  rifes  conically  in  a  high 
peak.  The  latitude  of  this  peak  is  2°  27' S.  and  it  lies  five 
degrees  and  an  half  weftward  of  Cape  Saint  George  in  New 
Ireland.  As  we  ran  along  the  fouth  fide  of  the  large  ifiand, 
we  found  it  to  be  eighteen  leagues  long,  in  the  diretftion  of 
eaft  and  weft  ;  how  far  it  runs  to  the  northward,  I  do  not 
know,  but  by  its  appearance  there  is  reafon  to  fuppofe  a 
very  confiderable  diftance.  I  think  it  probable,  in  the 
higheft  degree,  that  thefe  iflands  produce  many  valuable 

articles 


to6 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


1767. 

September. 


1  ueiday  15, 


Wednef.  16. 


articles  of  trade,  particularly  fpices,  efpecially  as  they  lie  in 
the  fame  climate  and  latitude  as  the  Malaccas,  and  as  I  found 
the  nutmeg-tree  in  a  foil  comparatively  rocky  and  barren 
upon  the  coaft  of  New  Ireland. 

Having  pafled  thefe  iflands,  we  continued  our  courfe 
W.  by  N.  with  a  fine  eaftern  breeze,  and  fmooth  water.  On 
the  1 6th  in  the  morning,  we  found  the  variation,  by  a  me- 
dium of  feveral  azimuths,  to  be  6°  30' E,  our  latitude  being 
2,°  19' S.,  and  our  longitude  145°  40' E.  by  obfervation.  I  was 
furprifed  to  find  the  variation  on  this  fide  the  land  of  New 
Britain  and  New  Ireland  fo  much,  as  we  had  found  it  gra- 
dually decreafing  during  our  progrefs  to  the  N.  W.  but  I  re- 
collecfled  that  about  two  years  before  I  had  found  nearly  the 
fame  variation  in  this  meridian,  about  the  ifland  of  Tinian. 

Saturday  19.  On  Saturday  evening  the  19th,  we  difcovered  two  fmall 
iflands,  both  low  land,  level,  and  green :  one  of  them  we 
fawonly  from  the  main-top-gallant-mafl  head;  this  I  called 
Durour's  Island.  Its  latitude  is  about  1°  14  or  i6'S.,  its 
longitude  143"^  21' E.  The  other  ifland,  which  I  called 
Matty's  Island,  we  coafted  during  the  night,  and  faw  the 
inhabitants,  in  great  numbers,  run  along  the  beach,  abreall 
of  the  fhip,  with  lights :  the  fide  along  which  we  failed 
feemed  to  be  about  fix  miles  in  length,  E.  by  N.  and  W.  by  S. 
As  it  was  dark  we  could  fee  no  more  of  it,  and  having  a  fine 
breeze,  which  we  could  not  afford  to  lofe,  we  kept  on.  Its 
latitude  is  about  i"  45' S.,  and  its  longitude  about  143''  2'  E. . 
the  variation  here  was  4,°  40' E.  and  we  found  a  ftrong  north 
wefterly  current.  We  had  now  frefli  gales  and  fqualls,  with 
rain,  the  wind  blowing  very  unfleadily  from  E.  S  E.  to 
E.N.  E.  till  the  2 2d,  when  it  became  variable.  Our  latitude 
was  then  53  S.,  longitude  140"  5'E.  j  the  variation  was  4"* 
40'  E, 

I  On 


Durour's 
Jiland. 


Matty's 
illand. 


Tuefday  221 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ^y 

On  the  24th,  we  faw  two  fmall  iflands  to  the  fouth  weft,       1767. 
but  it  being  calm,  with  light  airs,  and  a  ftrong  weiierly  cur-    t.^^-.-,!!^ 
rent,  we  could  not  get  nearer  to  them  than  four  or  five  '^^"''^^^H* 
leagues :  they  had  a  green,  pleafant  appearance,  and  were 
well  covex-ed  with  trees  j  but  whether  they  are  inhabited  I 
do  not  know.     They  run  about  N.  W.  by  W.  S.  E.  by  E.     One 
is  about  three  miles  long,  and  the  other  about  fix .-  the  paf- 
fage  between  them  appeared  to  be  about  two  miles  broad. 
They  lie  in  latitude  22' S.  longitude  138'' 39  E.  and  I  gave 
them  the  name  of  Stephens's  Islands.    We  kept  fleering 
N.  W.  by  W.  with  a  light  variable  v/ind,  and  a  flrong  north 
weft  current. 

On  the  25th,  we  faw  land  ahead,  which  proved  to  be  three  Friday  2j^ 
fmall  iflands ;  and  before  it  was  dark,  we  got  pretty  near 
them.    Several  canoes  foon  came  off,  filled  with  the  natives, 
who,  after  making  figns  of  peace,  came  on  board  without 
the  leaft  appearance  of  fear  or  diftruft :  they  had  nothing 
with  them  but  a  few  cocoa-nuts,  which  they  fold  with  great 
joy  for  a  few  pieces  of  an  iron  hoop ;  we  foon  found  that 
they  were  not  unacquainted  with  that  metal,  which  they 
Galled  Parram,  and  they  made  us  underftand,  by  figns,  that- 
a  fhip  like  ours  fometimes  touched  at  their  iflands  for  re- 
frefhment-     I  gave  one  of  them  three  pieces  of  an  old  iron 
hoop,  each  about  four  inches  long,  which  threw  him  into 
an  extafy  little  fhort  of  diftrac^ion :  1  could  not  but  fympa- 
thize  in  his  joy,   nor  obferve,  without  great  pleafure,   the 
changes  of  countenance,    and  extravagance  of  gefture,  by 
which  it  was  exprefTed.     All  thefe  people  indeed  appeared, 
to  be  more  fond  of  iron  than  any  we  had  feen  before,  and  I 
am  fure,  that  for  iron  tools,  we  might  have  purchafed  every 
thing  upon  the  iflands  which  we  could  have  brought  away,. 
They  are  of  the  Indian  copper  colour,  the  firil  of  that  com-- 

plexioji. 


5o8  CAPTAIN    CARTERET^    VOYAGE 

1767.       plexion  that  we  had  feen  in  thefc  parts,  with  fine  long  black 
.^Z^^^ll^;    hair,  and  little  beards,  for  we  obferved  that  they  were  con- 
^rid&y^i-      tinually  plucking  the  hair  from  their  chin  and  upper  lip  by 
the  roots.     Their  features  are  pleafing,  and  their  teeth  re- 
markably white  and  even :  they  were  of  the  common  flaturc, 
but  nimble,  vigorous,  and  a<5live  in  a  furprifing  degree,  run- 
ning up  to  the  maft-head  much  fafter  than  our  own  people. 
Their  difpofuion  was  free  and  open,    they  eat  and   drank 
whatever  was   given  them,    went  without   hefitation   into 
every  part  of  the  fliip,  and  were  as  familiar  and  merry  with 
the  -crew  as  if  they  had  been  of  long  and  intimate  acquaint- 
ance.    They  were  not,    like  the  people  on  all  the  other 
illands  that  we  had  vifited,  quite  naked,  though  they  had 
only  a  flight  covering  for  the  waift,  which  confided  of  a  nar- 
row piece  of  line  matting.     Their  canoes  were  very  well  and 
neatly  made,    having  a  hollow  tree  for  the  bottom,    and 
planks  for  the  fides,  with  a  fail  of  fine  matting,  and  an  out- 
rigger: their  ropes  and  netting  were  alfo  very  good.     They 
urged   us   flrongly  to  go  on   fliore,   offering    to   leave    an 
equal  number  of  their  own  people  behind,  as  a  pledge  of 
their  fafe  return  ;  and  indeed  I  would  gladly  have  confcnted 
if  it  had  been  in  my  power,  but  a  ftrong  wellerly  current 
hurried  me  to  fo  great  a  diftance,  that  I  had  no  opportunity 
to  fcek  for  anchorage,  and  night  coming  on,  we  purfued 
our  courfe.     When  our  vifitors  perceived  this,  one  of  them 
infiflcd  upon  going  with  us,  and,  notwithflanding  all  that  I 
and  his  companions  could  fay  or  do,  obftinately  refufcd  to 
go  on  fliore.     As  I  thought  it  poffible  that  this  man  might  be 
the  means  of  our  making  fome  ufeful  difcovery,  I  did  not 
put  him  aflaore  by  force,  but  indulged  him  in  his  dclire:  we 
learnt  from  him  that  there  were  other  illands  to  the  north- 
ward, the  inhabitants  of  which  he  faid  had  iron,  and  always 

killed 


ADangerous  Stoal  seen  Sej)l\' the  28,ij6j . 


Scale  of  wo  Mile 


WS^ 


#ft 


..^  ^ 


s^- 


^:  ■.'■-■  ■•"••Lvi 


:^ 


JofeptFreewills  Mauds. 


Entrance  for 
the  Canoes 


Mindanao 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  609 

killed  his  countrymen  when  they  could  catch  them  out  at      1767. 

fea.    It  was  with  great  concern  that  I  perceived  this  poor  ■  ^^^l""  "'' 

fellow,  whom  I  called  Jofeph  Freewill,  from  his  readinefs  to  ^""^^^  *^" 

go  with  us,  become  gradually  fickly  after  he  had  been  fome 

time  at  fea :  he  lived  till  I  got  to  the  iiland  of  Celebes,  and 

there  died.    As  the  iflands  from  which  I  had  taken  him  were 

very  fmall  and  low,  the  largeft  being  not  more  than  five 

miles  in  compafs,  I  was  furprifed  to  fee  with  how  many  of 

the  produdlions  of  Celebes  he  was  acquainted;  befide  the 

cocoa-nut  and  palm,  he  knew  the  beetle-nut  and  the  lime, 

and  the  moment  he  got  a  bread-fruit,  he  went  to  the  fire 

and  roailed  it  in  the  embers.    He  made  us  underftand  alfo, 

that  in  his  country  they  had  plenty  of  fifli,  and  turtle  in 

their  feafon.     It  is  however  very  probable,  notwithftanding 

the  number  of  people  who  fubfift  upon  thefe  iflands,  that 

they  have  no  frefh  water  but  what  falls  in  rain :  how  they 

catch  and  preferve  it,  I  had  no  opportunity  to  learn,  but  I 

never  met  with  a  fpring  in  a  fpot  fo  fmall  and  low,  and  in 

fuch  a  fpot  I  believe  no  fpring  was  ever  found.     The  largeft 

of  thefe  iflands,  which  the  natives  call  Pegan,  and  to  which 

I  gave  the  name  of  Freewill  Island,  lies  fifty  minutes  Freewill 

north  of  the  line,  and  in  137°  51'  eaft  longitude.     They  are 

all  furrounded  by  a  reef  of  rocks.     The  chart  of  thefe  iflands 

I  drew  from  the  Indians'  defcription,  who  delineated  them 

with  chalk  upon  the  deck,  and  afcertained  the  depth  of 

water  by  ftretching  his  arms  as  a  fathom. 

I  now  fleered  N.  W.  by  N.  to  get  from  under  the  fun,  and 
had  light  winds  at  E.  S.  E.  with  which  almoft  any  fhip  but 
the  Swallow  would  have  made  good  way,  but  with  every 
poflible  advantage  flie  went  at  a  heavy  rate.  We  now  found 
our  variation  begin  again  to  decreafe,  as  will  appear  by  the 
following  table : 

Vol.  I.  4  I  Latitude, 


Ifland. 


^10 

1767. 

Ssptember. 
Friday  25., 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


Maiiday;23, 


Oftober. 
Maaday  5. 


Monday  12. 


Current 
laaud. 


Latitude, 


Longitude  from  Qiieen 

Charlotte's  Fore-land^ 


Variation. 


40' s. 
Upon  the  line. 

30'  N. 
2«-  N. 
2^  50'  N.. 


9 

10 

II 

12 


36' W.  4^  40' E. 

40  W.  4     17  E. 

30  W.  3     10  E. 

40  W.  2     30  E. 

10  W.  2  E. 

On  the  28th,  being  in  latitude  2°53'N,  longitude  136°" 
10'  E.  we  fell  in  with  a  very  dangerous  flioal,  which  is  about 
eleven  or  twelve  miles  in  circuit,  and  furrounded  with 
fmall  flones  that  juft  fliew  themfelves  above  water.  We 
found  here  a  ftrong  northerly  current,  but  could  not  deter^. 
mine  whether  it  inclined  to  the  eaft  or  weft. 

In  the  evening,  we  difcovered  from  the  maft-head  another 
illand  to  the  fouthward  of  us :  the  eaft  end  of  it  feemed  to> 
rife  in  a  peak,  and  had  the  appearance  of  a  fail,  but  we  did> 
not  go  near  enough  to  fee  any  thing  of  it  from  the  deck.  I 
fuppofe  its  latitude  to  be  about  2°  50'N.,  and  its  longitude, 
eaftof.London,  about  is^**  10' E.. 

We  continued  to  have  a  current  to  the  northward,  till 
Monday  the  5th  of  0<flober,  when,  being  in  latitude  4°  30' N. 
I  found  it  foutherly,  and  very  ftrong.  I  had,  among  other 
deficiencies  and  misfortunes,  no  fmall  boat  on  board,  fo 
that  I  could  not  try  thefe  currents,  which  I  had  a  great  defire- 
to  do ;  but  I  am  of  opinion,  that  when  the  current  fet  fouth- 
ward it  inclined  to  the  eaft,  and  that  when  it  fet  northward; 
it  inclined  to  the  weft. 

Oil  Monday  the  i2tb,  we  difcovered  a  fmall  ifland  with 
trees  upon  it,    though,  fcarcely  bigger   than  a  rock,    and" 
I  called  it  Current  Island.      It  lies  in  latitude  4°  40' N., 
longitude  14°  24' W.  of  Queen  Charlotte's  Fore-land.     The 
next  day,    wc   difcovered  tvv©  other  fmall  iilands,    which 

I  called 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  6ir 

I  called  Saint  Andrew's  Islands:  they  lie  in  latitude 
5°  iS'N,  longitude  14°  47'W.  of  Queen  Charlotte's  Fore- 
land. I  called  the  fniall  ifland  Current  ifland,  becaufe  we 
had  here  a  foutherly  current  fo  ftrong  that  it  fet  us  from 
twenty-four  to  thirty  miles  fouthward  every  day,  bcfides  the 
difference  it  might  make  in  our  longitude.  The  wind  was 
now  variable,  blowing  by  turns  from  every  point  in  the 
compafs,  with  much  rain,  and  hard  fqualls.  On  Tuefday  Tuefdayao. 
the  20th,  being  in  latitude  8"  N.  it  blew  with  fuch  violence 
that  we  were  obliged  to  lie  to  fixty-four  hours.  This  gale, 
which  made  a  very  great  fea,  I  fuppofed  to  be  the  fhifting 
of  the  monfoon,  and  notwithftanding  the  foutherly  current, 
it  drove  us,  while  we  lay  to,  as  far  as  nine  degrees  north- 
ward. 


CHAP.     VIII. 

Some  Account  of  the  Coajl  of  Mindanao^  and  the  Ifands 
near  it^  in  which  feveral  Mijfakes  of  Dampier  are 
correSied. 


ON  the  26th,  we  difcovered  land  again,  but  not  being  able  Monday  26. 
to  make  an  obfervation,  we  could  afcertain  our  latitude 
and  longitude  only  by  our  dead  reckoning;  the  next  day,  how-  Tuefday  z/. 
ever,  was  more  favourable,  and  I  then  found  the  effe6l  of 
the  current  had  been  fo  great,  that  I  was  obliged  to  add  to 
the  log  S.W.  by  S.  no  lefs  than  64  miles  for  the  lafl  two 
days.  We  now  knew  that  the  land  we  had  feen  was  the 
north  eaft  part  of  the  ifland  of  Mindanao :  as  I  had  many  lick 
people  on  board,  and  was  in  the  moft  prcfling  need  of  re- 

4  I  2  frelhments, 


6l2 

1767. 

Oftober. 
Tuefday  27. 


November. 
Monday  2. 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S   VOYAGE 

frefliments,  I  determined  to  try  what  could  be  procured  in 
a  bay  which  Dampier  has  defcribed  as  lying  on  the  fouth 
eaft  part  of  the  ifland,  and  which,  he  fays,  furnifhed  him 
with  great  plenty  of  deer  from  a  favannah.  I  therefore 
coafted  that  fide  of  the  ifland,  and  that  1  might  be  fure  not 
to  mifs  the  bay,  I  fent  out  the  Lieutenant  with  the  boat  and 
a  proper  number  of  hands,  to  keep  in  fliore  ahead  of  the 
Ihip.  No  fuch  bay  however  was  to  be  found,  but  at  the  very 
fouthermoft  extremity  of  the  ifland  they  opened  a  little  nook 
at  the  bottom  of  which  was  a  town,  and  a  fort.  As  foon  as 
our  boat  was  difcovered  by  the  peopk  on  fhore,  they  fired 
a  great  gun,  and  fent  oflf  three  boats  or  canoes  full  of  people. 
As  the  Lieutenant  had  not  a  fufRcient  force  to  oppofe  them, 
he  immediately  made  towards  the  fhip,  and  the  canoes 
chaced  him  till  they  came  within  fight  of  her,  and  being 
then  over-matched  in  their  turn,  they  thought  fit  to  go 
back.  Being  thus  difappointed  in  my  fearch  of  Dampicr's 
Bay  and  Savannah,  I  would  have  anchored  off  this  town,  not- 
withflianding  thefe  hoftile  appearances,  if  it  had  not  been 
neceflary  firft  to  get  up  fome  guns  from  the  hold,  and  make 
a  few  neceflary  repairs  in  the  rigging ;  this  however  being 
the  cafe,  I  ran  a  little  to  the  eafl:ward,  where,  on  the  sd  of 
November,  I  came  to  an  anchor  in  a  little  bay,  having  a 
bottom  of  foft  mud,  and  feven  fathom  of  water,  at  the  dif- 
tance  of  a  cable's  length  from  the  fliore  ;  the  weftermoft 
point  of  the  bay  bore  W.S.W.  diftant  about  three  miles ; 
the  eaftermoft  point  E.  by  S.  diftant  about  one  mile  ;  a  river, 
which  empties  itfelf  into  the  bay,  about  N.  W.  and  the  peak 
of  an  ifland,  called  Hummock  Ifland,  S.  7°  E.  diftant  about 
five  leagues.  Before  it  was  dark  the  fame  day,  our  two  boats 
went  to  the  river,  and  brought  oflf  their  loads  of  water:  they 
faw  no  figns  of  inhabitants  where  they  were  on  fliore,  but 
we  obferved  a  canoe  come  round  the  weftermoft  point  of  the 

bay. 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  61$ 

bay,  which  we  fuppofed  had  been  difpatched  from  the  town,  1767. 
to  learn  what  we  were,  or  at  lead  to  fee  what  we  were  <_  -.-  j 
doing.  As  foon  as  I  difcovered  this  canoe,  I  hoifted  Enghfh  ^°'^^^^  '' 
colours,  and  was  not  without  hope  that  fhe  would  come  on 
board,  but  after  viewing  us  fome  time,  flae  returned.  As  we 
had  feen  no  inhabitants,  nor  any  figns  of  inhabitants,  where 
we  got  our  water,  I  intended  to  procure  a  further  fupply 
the  next  day  from  the  fame  place,  and  endeavour  alfo  to  re- 
cruit our  wood ;  but  about  nine  o'clock  at  night,  we  were 
fuddenly  furprifed  by  a  loud  noife  on  that  part  of  the  fhore 
which  was  abreaft  of  the  fliip :  it  was  made  by  a  great 
number  of  human  voices,  and  very  much  refembled  the 
war-whoop  of  the  American  Savages,  a  hideous  fhout  which 
they  give  at  the  moment  of  their  attack,  and  in  which  all 
who  have  heard  it  agree  there  is  fomething  inexpreffibly 
terrifying  and  horrid. 

As  I  was  now  farther  convinced  that  it  was  neceilary  to 
difpofe  of  our  little  force  to  the  greateft  advantage,  we  began 
the  next  day  by  getting  the  guns  up  from  the  hold,  and  Tuefday  3. 
making  the  necelTary  repairs  to  our  rigging.  At  eleven 
o'clock,  not  having  feen  any  thing  of  the  people,  who  had 
endeavoured  to  terrify  us  by  their  yells  in  the  night,  I  fent 
the  longboat  on  fhore  for  more  water  ;  but,  as  I  thought  it 
probable  that  they  might  have  concealed  themfelves  in 
the  woods,  I  kept  the  cutter  manned  and  armed,  with  the 
Lieutenant  on  board,  that  immediate  fuccour  might  be  fent 
to  the  waterers,  if  any  danger  fliould  threaten  them.  It 
foon  appeared  that  my  conje(5lures  were  well  founded,  for 
our  people  had  no  fooner  left  their  boat,  than  a  number  of 
armed  men  rufhed  out  of  the  woods,  one  of  whom  held  up 
fomewhat  white,  which  I  took  to  be  a  fignal  of  peace.  Upon 
this  occafion  I  was  again  fenfible  of  the  mortifying  defi- 
ciency in  the  fhip's  equipment,  which  I  had  fo  often  experi- 
enced 


gi.4  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

'il'^'T'  enced  before.  I  had  no  white  flag  on  board,  and  therefore, 
^  ovem  en  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^  expedient  in  ray  power,  I  ordered  the  Lieutenant, 
Tueiday  j.  ^^|-^qj^  J  fgj^j  qj-^  fhore  in  the  cutter,  to  difplay  one  of  my 
table-cloths :  as  foon  as  the  officer  landed,  the  ftandard- 
bearer  and  another  came  down  to  him  unarmed,  and  re- 
ceived him  with  great  appearance  of  fricndfiiip.  One  of 
them  addrefled  him  in  Dutch,  which  none  of  our  people 
underftood;  he  then  fpoke  a  few  words  in  Spanifh,  in  which 
one  of  the  perfons  of  the  cutter  was  a  conliderable  pro- 
ficient: the  Indian  however  fpoke  it  fo  very  imperfectly, 
that  it  was  with  great  difficulty,  and  by  the  help  of  many 
{igns,  he  made  liimfelf  underilood ;  poflibly  if  any  of  our 
people  had  fpoken  Dutch,  he  might  have  been  found  equally 
deficient  in  that  language.  He  afked  for  the  Captain  how- 
ever by  the  name  of  the  flcipper,  and  enquired  whether  we 
were  Hollanders  ;  whether  our  fhip  was  intended  for  mer- 
chandize or  for  war  ;  how  many  guns  and  men  flie  carried; 
and  whether  Ihe  had  been,  or  was  going  to  Batavia.  When 
we  had  fatisfied  him  in  all  thefc  particulars,  he  faid  that 
we  fhould  go  to  the  town,  and  that  he  would  introduce  us 
to  the  Governor,  whom  he  dillinguiflied  by  the  title  of 
Raja.  The  Lieutenant  then  told  him,  that  we  intended  to 
go  to  the  town,  but  that  we  were  in  immediate  want  of 
water,  and  therefore  defired  permiffion  to  fdl  fome  caflis ; 
he  alfo  requeflcd  that  the  people  who  v.'crc  armed  with 
bows  and  arrows  might  be  ordered  to  a  greater  diilancc. 
With  both  thefe  rcquifitions  the  Indian,  who  feemed  to  be 
invelled  with  confiderable  authority,  complied  ;  and  as  he 
feemed  to  take  particular  notice  of  a  fdk  handkerchief 
which  the  Lieutenant  had  tied  round  his  neck,  it  was  im- 
mediately prefented  to  him  ;  in  return  for  which  he  defired 
him  to  accept  a  kind  of  cravat,  made  of  coarfe  callico, 
which  was  tied  round  his  own,  his  drcfs  being  fomewhat 

after 


ROUND    THE    WORLD,  615 

after  the  Dutch  falhion.  After  this  interchange  of  cravats,  '767- 
he  enqiTired  of  the  officer  whether  the  fliip  was  furnifhed  v-^^!lil> 
with  any  articles  for  trade  ;  to  which  he  anfwered  that  Ihe  ^^^^^^^  ^' 
was  fufficiently  furniflied  to  trade  for  provifions,  but  nothing 
more:  the  Chief  repHed,  that  whatever  we  wanted  we  fhould 
have.  After  this  conference,  which  I  confidered  as  an  ear- 
neft  of  every  advantage  which  this  place  could  afTord  us, 
the  boats  returned  on  board  laden  with  water,  and  we  went 
cheerfully  on  with  our  bufinefs  on  board  the  fhip.  In  about 
two  hours,  however,  we  faw,  with  equal  furprife  and  con- 
cern, many  hundreds  of  armed  men,  porting  themfelves  in 
parties  at  different  places  among  the  trees,  upon  the  beach, 
abreaft  of  the  fhip;  their  weapons  were  mufquets,  bows 
and  arrows,  long  pikes  or  fpears,  broad  fwords,  a  kind  of 
hanger  called  a  crefs,  and'  targets :  we  obferved  alfo,  tliat 
they  hauled'  a  canoe,  which  lay  under  a  fhed  upon  the 
beach,  up  into  the  woods.  Thefe  were  not  friendly  appear- 
ances, and  they  were  fucceeded  by  others  that  were  ftill 
more  hoftile  ;  for  thefe  people  fpent  all  the  remainder  of  the 
day  in  entering  and  rufhing.  out  of  the  woods,  as  if  they 
had  been  making  fallies  to  attack  an  enemy;  fometimes 
fliooting  their  arrows,  and  throwing  their  lances  into  the 
water  towards  the  fliip;  and  fometimes  lifting  their  targets,- 
and  brandifhing  their,  fwords  at  us  in  a  menacing  mannen 
In  the  mean  time  we  were  not  idle  on  board:  we  got  up  our 
guns,  repaired  our  rigging,  and  put  every  thing  in  order- 
before  evening,  and  then,  being  ready  to  fail,  I  determined, 
if  poffible,  to  get  another  conference  with  the  people  on 
fhore,  and  learn  the  reafon  of  fo  fudden  and  unaccount- 
able a  change  of  behaviour.  The  Lieutenant  therefore  was 
again  difpatched,  and. as  a  teftimony  that  our  difpofition  was 
flill  peaceable,  the  table-cloth  was  again  difplayed  as  a  flag 
of  truce.    I  had  the  precaution,  however,  to  order  the  boat: 

JO, 


6i6  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.  to  a  part  of  the  beach  which  was  clear  of  wood,  that  the 
jjovember^  pcopk  on  board  might  not  be  Uable  to  mifchief  from  ene- 
Tuefday  3.  ^-^[qq  whom  they  could  not  fee  ;  I  alfo  ordered  that  nobody 
fhould  go  on  fliore.  When  the  Indians  faw  the  boat  come 
to  the  beach,  and  obferved  that  nobody  landed,  one  of  them 
came  out  of  the  wood  with  a  bow  and  arrows  in  his  hand, 
and  made  figns  for  the  boat  to  come  to  the  place  where  he 
ilood.  This  the  officer  very  prudently  declined,  as  he  would 
then  have  been  within  bow-fhot  of  an  ambufcade,  and  after 
waiting  fome  time,  and  finding  that  a  conference  could  be 
procured  upon  no  other  terms,  he  returned  back  to  the  fhip. 
It  was  certainly  in  my  power  to  have  deftroyed  many  of 
thefe  unfriendly  people,  by  firing  my  great  guns  into  the 
wood,  but  it  would  have  anfwered  no  good  purpofe :  we 
could  not  afterwards  have  procured  wood  and  water  here 
without  rifking  the  lofs  of  our  own  people,  and  I  flill  hoped 
that  refrefliment  might  be  procured  upon  friendly  terms  at 
the  town,  which,  now  I  was  in  a  condition  to  defend  myfelf 
againft  a  fudden  afTault,  I  refolved  to  vilit. 

Wednef.  4.  The  ncxt  morning  therefore,  as  foon  as  it  was  light,  I 
failed  from  this  place,  which  I  called  Deceitful  Bay,  with 
a  light  land  breeze,  and  betweeen  ten  and  eleven  o'clock  we 
got  off  the  bay  or  nook,  at  the  bottom  of  which  our  boats 
had  difcovered  the  town  and  fort.  It  happened  however 
that  jufi:  at  this  time  the  weather  became  thick,  with  heavy 
rain,  and  it  began  to  blow  hard  from  a  quarter  which  made 
the  land  here  a  lee  fliore  ;  this  obliged  me  to  fland  off,  and 
having  no  time  to  lofe,  I  flood  away  to  the  weflward  that  I 
might  reach  Batavia  before  the  feafon  was  pail. 

r  (hall  now  give  a  more  particular  account  of  our  navi- 
gating the  fea  that  waflies  the  coafls  of  this  ifland,  the  rather 
as  Dampier's  defcription  is  in  feveral  particulars  erroneous. 

2  Having 


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  617 

Having  feen  the  north  eaft  part  of  the  illand  on  the  1767. 
twenty-fixth  of  06tober,  without  certainly  knowing  whe-  >_°-,-  ^!^ 
ther  it  was  Mindanao  or  Saint  John's,  we  got  nearer  to  it  the 
next  day,  and  made  what  we  knew  to  be  Saint  Auguftina, 
the  fouth  eaftermoft  part  of  the  ifland,  which  rifes  in  little 
hummocks,  that  run  down  to  a  low  point  at  the  water's  edge  ; 
it  bears  N.  40  E.  at  the  diftance  of  two  and  twenty  leagues 
from  a  little  illand,  which  is  diftinguiflaed  from  the  other 
iflands  that  lie  off  the  fouthermoft  point  of  Mindanao  by  a 
hill  or  hummock,  and  which  for  that  reafon  I  called  Hum- 
mock Island.  All  this  land  is  very  high,  one  ridge  of 
mountains  rifmg  behind  another,  fo  that  at  a  great  diftance 
it  appears  not  like  one  ifland  but  feveral.  After  our  firfl; 
difcovery  of  the  ifland,  we  kept  turning  along  the  eaft  fide 
from  the  northward  to  Cape  Saint  Auguftina,  nearly  S.  by  W. 
i-W,  and  N.  by  E.  4  E.  for  about  twenty  leagues.  The 
wind  was  to  the  fouthward  along  the  fliore,  and  as  we  ap- 
proached the  land,  we  flood  in  for  an  opening  which  had 
the  appearance  of  a  good  bay,  where  we  intended  to  an- 
chor ;  but  we  found  that  it  was  too  deep  for  our  purpofe, 
and  that  fome  fhoals  rendered  the  entrance  of  it  dangerous. 
To  this  bay,  which  lies  about  eight  or  ten  leagues  N.  by  E. 
from  Cape  Saint  Auguftina,  the  fouth  eaft  extremity  of 
the  ifland,  I  gave  the  name  of  Disappointment  Bay, 
When  we  were  in  the  offing  ftanding  in  for  this  Bay,  we 
obferved  a  large  hummock,  which  had  the  appearance  of 
an  ifland,  but  which  I  believe  to  be  a  peninfula,  joined  by 
a  low  ifthmus  to  the  main  j  this  hummock  formed  the 
northermoft  part  of  the  entrance,  and  another  high  blulF 

* 

point  oppofite  to  it  formed  the  fouiliermoft  part ;  be- 
tween thefe  two  points  are  the  fhoals  that  have  been  men- 
tioned ;  and  feveral  fmall  iflands,  only  one  of  which  can  be 
feen  till  they  are  approached  very  near.  On  this  part  of  the 
Vol.  I.  4  K  coaft 


6i8  CAPTAIN    CARTERET»s    VOYAGE 

.1767-      coaft  we  faw  no  figns  of  inhabitants;  the  land  is  of  a  ftu- 

V ^ ')   pendous  height,  with  mountains  piled  upon  mountains  till 

the  fummits  are  hidden  in  the  clouds :  in  the  offing  there- 
fore it  is  almoft  impoflible  to  eftimate  its  diftance,  for  what 
appear  then  to  be  fmall  hillocks,  juft  emerging  from  the 
water,  in  comparifon  of  the  mountains  that  are  feen  over 
them,  fwell  into  high  hills  as  they  are  approached,  and  the 
diftance  is  found  to  be  thrice  as  much  as  it  was  imagined  ; 
perhaps  this  will  account  for  the  land  here  being  fo  ill  laid 
dov/n,  and  in  lituations  fo  very  different  as  it  appears  to  be  in 
all  our  Englifh  charts.  We  found  here  a  ftrong  current 
fetting  to  the  fouthward  along  the  fhore,  as  the  land  trended. 
The  high  land  that  is  to  the  nonh  of  Saint  Auguftina,  be- 
comes gradually  lower  towards  the  Cape,  a  low  flat  point  in 
which  it  terminates,  and  off  which,  at  a  very  little  diftance, 
lie  two  large  rocks.  Its  latitude  is  6°  i  j'  N.  and  the  longi.- 
tude  by  account  127''  20'  E. 

From  this  Cape  the  land  trends  away  W.  and  W.  by  S.  for 
fix  or  feven  leagues,  and  then  turns  up  to  the  N.  W.  making 
a  very  deep  bay,  the  bottom  of  which,  as  we  croffed  it  from 
Saint  Auguftina  to  the  high  land  on  the  other  fide,  which  is 
not  lefs  than  twelve  leagues,  we  could  not  fee.  The  coaft 
on  the  farther  fide  of  it,  coming  up  from  the  bottom,  trend' 
firft  to  the  S.  and  S.  S.  W.  and  then  to  the  S.  W.  by  W.  to- 
wards the  fouth  extremity  of  the  ifiand. 

Off  this  fouthern  extremity,  which  Dampier  calls  the 
fouth  eaft  by  miftake,  the  fouth  eaft  being  Saint  Auguftina^ 
at  the  diftance  of  five,  fix,  and  feven  leagues,  lie  ten  or  twelve 
iflands,  though  Dampier  fays  there  are  only  two,  and  that 
together  they  are  about  five  leagues  round.  The  iflands 
that  I  faw  could  not  be  contained  in  a  circuit  of  lefs  than; 
fifteen  leagues^  and  from  the  number  of  boats  that  I  faw 

among 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  619 

among  them  I  imagine  they  are  well  inhabited.   The  largeft     ^^7^1- 
of  thefe  lies  to  the  S.  W.  of  the  others,  and  makes  in  a  re-  u— ^ — -j 
markable  peak,  fo  that  it  is  firft  feen  in  coming  in  with  the 
land,  and  is  indeed  vifible  at  a  very  great  diftance.    Its  lati- 
tude I  make  5°  24  N.  and  its  longitude  by  account  126°  37' E. 
This  ifland,  which  I  called  Hummock  Island,  bears  from  Hammock 

lUand, 

Saint  Auguftina  S.  40  W.  at  the  diftance  of  between  twenty 
and  two  and  twenty  leagues  ;  and  from  the  fame  Cape,  the 
fouthermoft  part  of  the  ifland  Mindanao  bears  S.  W.  i  W.  at 
the  diftance  of  between  twenty-one  and  twenty-three 
leagues.  This  fouthermoft  extremity  confifts  of  three  or 
four  points,  which  bear  eaft  and  weft  of  each  other  for 
about  feven  miles.  They  lie  in  latitude  5°  34'  N.,  longitude 
126"^  25' E.  according  to  my  account.  The  variation  here 
was  one  point  eaft. 

I  pafTed  between  thefe  Iflands  and  the  main,  and  found 
the  pafTage  good,  the  current  fetting  to  the  weftward.  Dam- 
pier  has  placed  his  Bay  and  Savannah  four  leagues  N.  W. 
from  the  eaftermoft  ifland,  and  there  I  fought  it,  as  indeed 
I  did  on  all  the  S.  E.  part  of  the  ifland  till  we  came  to  the 
little  creek  which  ran  up  to  the  town. 

All  the  fouthern  part  of  Mindanao  is  extremely  pleafant 
with  many  fpots  where  the  woods  had  been  cleared  for 
plantations,  and  fine  lawns  of  a  beautiful  verdure  :  this  part 
alfo  is  well  inhabited,  as  well  as  the  neighbouring  iflands. 
Of  the  town  I  can  give  no  account,  as  the  weather  was  fo 
thick  that  I  could  not  fee  it  ;  neither  could  I  fufficiently  dif- 
tinguifli  the  land  to  fct  off  the  points,  at  which  I  was  not  a 
little  mortified. 

When  I  came  to  open  the  land  to  the  weftward  of  the 
fouthermoft  point,  I  found  it  trend  from  that  point  W.  N.  W. 
and  N.  W.  by  W.  forming  firft  a  point  at  the  diftance  of 

4  K  2  about 


620  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.  about  feven  or  eight  leagues,  and  then  a  very  deep  bay  run- 
.-  """I,'"  ^  ning  fo  far  in  to  the  N.  and  N.  E.  that  I  could  not  fee  the  bot- 
tom of  it.  The  weflermoft  point  of  this  bay  is  low,  but 
the  land  foon  rifes  again,  and  runs  along  to  the  N.  W.  by  W. 
which  feems  to  be  the  dire(flion  of  this  coaft,  from  the 
fouthermoil  point  of  the  iiland  towards  the  city  of  Min- 
danao. 

To  the  weilward  of  this  deep  bay,  the  land  is  all  flat,  and 
in  comparifon  of  the  other  parts  of  the  ifland,  but  thinly 
wooded.  Over  this  flat  appears  a  peak  of  fl:upendous  height, 
which  rifes  into  the  clouds  like  a  tower.  Between  the  en- 
trance of  this  bay  and  the  fouth  point  of  the  ifland  there  is 
another  very  high  hill,  the  top  of  which  has  the  funnel 
fhape  of  a  volcano,  but  I  did  not  perceive  that  it  emitted 
either  fire  or  fmoke.  It  is  pofllble  that  this  deep  bay  is  that 
which  Dampier  mentions,  and  that  it  is  mifplaced  by  an 
error  of  the  prefs  ;  for,  if  inftead  of  faying  it  bore  N.  W.  four 
leagues  from  the  eajiennojl  of  the  iflands,  he  had  faid  it  bore 
N.  VI.  fourteen  leagues  from  the  njoejlermojl  of  the  iflands,  it 
would  correfpond  well  with  his  defcription,  the  bearings 
being  the  fame,  and  the  land  on  the  eaft  fide  of  it  high,  and 
low  on  the  weft :  he  is  alfo  nearly  right  in  the  latitude  of 
his  iflands,  which  he  makes  5°  10'  N. ;  for  probably  fome 
parts  of  the  fouthermoft  of  them  may  lie  in  that  latitude  ; 
but  as  I  did  not  go  to  the  fouthward  of  them,  this  is  only 
conjetflure. 

Between  Hummock  Ifland,  which  is  the  largeft  and 
weflermoft  of  them,  and  the  iflands  to  the  eaftward  of  it, 
which  are  all  flat  and  even,  is  a  pafl"age  running  north  and 
fourh,  which  appears  to  be  clear.  The  north  eaftermoft  of 
thcie  iflands  is  fmall,  low,  and  flat,  with  a  white  fandy 
beach  all  round  it,  and  a  great  many  trees  in  the  middle. 

Eaft, 


i.cmber. 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  621. 

Eaft,  or  north  eaft  of  this  ifland,  there  are  flioals  and  break- 
ers ;  and  I  faw  no  other  appearance  of  danger  in  thefe  parts. 
Neither  did  I  fee  any  of  the  illands  which  are  mentiineu  hj 
Dampier,  and  laid  down  in  all  the  charts,  near  Mindanao  in 
the  offing :  perhaps  they  are  at  a  more  remote  diftaiite  than 
is  commonly  fuppofed  ;  for  v/ithout  great  attention  naviga- 
tors will  be  much  deceived  in  this  particular  by  the  height 
of  the  land,  as  I  have  obferved  already.  As  I  coafted  this 
ifland,  I  found  the  current  fet  very  flrong  to  the  fouthward 
along  the  fliore,  till  I  came  to  the  fouth  end  of  it,  where  I 
found  it  run  N.  W.  and  N.  W.  by  W.  which  is  nearly  as  the 
land  trends.  We  had  the  winds  commonly  from  S.  W.  to 
N.  W.  with  light  airs,  frequent  rain,  and  unlettled  wea- 
ther. 

We  now  bid  farewel  to  Mindanao  greatly  difappointed  in 
Gur  hope  of  obtaining  refrefliments,  which  at  firfl  the  in- 
habitants fo  readily  promifed  to  furnifii.  We  fufpe61:ed  that 
there  were  Dutchmen,  or  at  leaft  Dutch  partifans  in  the 
town  ;  and  that,  having  difcovered  us  to  be  Eng\[{h,  they 
had  difpatched  an  armed  party  to  prevent  our  having  any 
intercourfe  with  the  natives,  who  arrived  about  two  hours^ 
after  our  friendly  conference,  and  were  the  people  that  de- 
fied us  from  the  fliore. 


C  H  A  Pi 


Czz  CAPTAIN   CARTERET'S   VOYAGE 


CHAP.     IX. 

7'he  Paffagz  from  Mindanao  to  the  IJland  of  Celebes^ 
with  a  particular  Account  of  the  Streight  of  Macajfar^ 
in  which  many  Rrrors  are  correSied. 

^t'^^1'         a   FTER  leaving:  Mindanao,  I  Hood  to  the  weflward  for 

November.         /  %  "  ' 


Saturday  14. 


the  paflage  between  the  illands  of  Borneo  and  Cele- 
bes, called  the  Streight  of  MacafTar,  and  made  it  on  Satur- 
day the  fourteenth.  I  obferved,  that  during  the  whole  of 
this  run  we  had  a  ftrong  north  wefterly  current ;  but  that 
while  we  were  nearer  to  Mindanao  than  Celebes,  it  ran  ra- 
ther towards  the  north  than  the  weft ;  and  that  when  we 
came  nearer  to  Celebes  than  we  were  to  Mindanao,  it  ran 
rather  towards  the  weft  than  the  north.  The  land  of  Cele- 
bes on  the  north  end  runs  along  to  the  entrance  of  the 
paflage,  is  very  lofty,  and  feems  to  trend  away  about 
W.  by  S.  to  a  remarkable  point  in  the  paflage,  which  makes 
in  a  hummock,  and  which  at  firft  we  took  for  an  ifland.  I 
believe  it  to  be  the  fame  which  in  the  French  charts  is  called 
Stroomen  Point,  but  I  gave  it  the  name  of  Hummock  Point. 
Its  latitude  according  to  my  account  is  i°  20' N.,  longitude 
121°  39' E-;  and  it  is  a  good  mark  for  thofe  to  know  the 
paflage  that  fall  in  with  the  land  coming  from  the  eaftward, 
who,  if  poflible,  Ihould  always  make  this  fide  of  the  paflage. 
From  Hummock  Point  the  land  trends  more  away  to  the 
fouthward,  about  S.  W.  by  W.  and  to  the  fouthward  of  it 
there  is  a  deep  bay,  full  of  iflands  and  rocks,  which  ap- 
peared to  me  to  be  very  dangerous.  Juft  oflf  the  Point 
I  there 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  623 

there  are  two  rocks,  which,  though  they  are  above  water,      ^767. 
cannot  be  feen  from  a  fhip  till  flie  is  clofe  to  the  land.    To  v_!I^'^i 
the  eaftward  of  this  Point,  clofe  to  the  fliore,  are  two  iflands,  ^'""'^'^  '+• 
one  of  them  very  flat,  long,  and  even,  and  the  other  fwelling 
into  a  hill :  both  thefe  iflands,  as  well  as  the  adjacent  coun- 
try, are  well  covered  with  trees :  I  flood  clofe  in  a  little  to  the 
eaflward  of  them,  and  had  no  ground  with  an  hundred  fa- 
thom, within  half  a  mile  of  the  fhore,  which  feemed  to  be 
rocky.     A  little  to  the  weftward  of  thefe  iflands,  we  faw  no 
lefs  than  fixty  boats,  which  were  fifliing  on  fome  flioals  that 
lie  between  them  and  Hummock  Point.    This  part  of  the 
fhore  appeared  to  be  foul,  and  I  think  fhould  not  be  ap- 
proached without  great  caution.     In  this  place  I  found  the 
currents  various  and  uncertain,    fometimes  fetting  to  the 
fovithward,  and  fometimes  to  the  northward,  and  fometimes 
there  was  no  current  at  all ;  the  weather  alfo  was  very  un- 
fettled,  and  fo  was  the  wind  ;  it  blew,  however,  chiefly  to 
the  fouth  and  fouth  weft  quarter,  but  we  had  fometimes 
fudden  and  violent  gufts,    and  tornadoes  from  the  N.  W. 
with  thunder,  lightning,  and  rain :   thefe  generally  lafted 
about  an  hour,  when  they  were  fucceeded  by  a  dead  calm, 
and  the  wind  would  afterwards  fpring  up  frefh  from  the 
S.  W.  or  S.  S.  W.  which  was  right  againft  us,  and  blow  ftrong. 
From  thefe  appearances  I  conjectured  that  the  fhifting  feafon 
had  commenced,  and  that  the  weft  monfoon  would  foon  fet 
in.    The  fhip  failed  fo  ill  that  we  made  very  little  way  ;  we 
frequently  founded  in  this  pafTage,  but  could  get  no  ground. 

On  the  21ft  of  November,  as  we  were  ftanding  towards  Saturday.- a 
Borneo,  we  made  two  fmall  iflands,  which  I  judged  to  be 
the  fame  that  in  the  French  chart  are  called  Taba  Hands : 
they  are  very  fmall,  and  covered  with  trees.  By  my  ac- 
count, they  lie  in  latitude  i»  44  N.,  longitude  7°  32' W.  of 
the  fouth  end  of  Mindanao,  and  are  diftant  from  Hummock^ 


524.  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S  VOYAGE 

1767.  or  Stroomen  Point,  about  fifty-eight  leagues.  The  weather 
.  """t"  "'■  was  now  hazy,  but  happening  fuddenly  to  clear  up,  we  faw 
Saturday  21.  ^  {]^q^\^  wltli  breakers,  at  the  diftance  of  about  five  or  fix 
miles,  from  the  fouth  to  the  north  weft.  Off  the  north  end 
of  this  ihoal  we  faw  four  hummocks  clofe  together,  which 
we  took  for  fmall  iflands,  and  feven  more  from  the  S.  4.  W. 
to  the  W.  t  S. :  whether  thefe  are  really  iflands,  or  fome  hills 
on  the  ifland  of  Borneo,  I  could  not  determine.  This  flioal 
is  certainly  very  dangerous,  but  may  be  avoided  by  going  to 
the  weftward  of  Taba  Iflands,  where  the  pafl^ge  is  clear  and 
broad.  In  the  French  chart  of  Monfieur  D'Apres  de  Mande- 
viilette,  publiflied  in  1745",  two  flioals  are  laid  down,  to  the 
eaftward,  and  a  little  to  the  north  of  thefe  iflands:  one  of 
them  is  called  Va7i/oorif,  and  the  other,  on  which  are  placed 
two  iflands,  Harigs ;  but  thefe  Ihoals  and  iflands  have  cer- 
tainly no  exiftence,  as  I  turned  through  this  part  of  the  paf- 
fage  from  fide  to  fide,  and  failed  over  the  very  fpot  where 
they  are  fuppofed  to  lie.  In  the  fame  chart  feven  fmall 
iflands  are  alfo  laid  down  within  half  a  degree  to  the  north- 
ward of  the  line,  and  exactly  in  the  middle  of  the  narrowefl 
part  of  this  paflage ;  but  neither  have  thefe  iflands  any  exift. 
ence,  except  upon  paper,  though  I  believe  there  may  be 
fome  fmall  iflands  clofe  to  the  main  land  of  Borneo:  we 
thought  we  had  fcen  two,  which  we  took  to  be  thofc  that 
are  laid  down  in  the  charts  off  Porto  Tubo,  but  of  this  I  am 
not  certain.  The  fouthermoll  and  narrowefl  part  of  this 
paflage  is  about  eighteen  or  twenty  leagues  broad,  with 
high  lands  on  each  fide.  We  continued  labouring  in  it  till 
Friday  27.  {^g  27th,  bcforc  wc  croflcd  the  line,  fo  that  we  were  a  fort- 
night in  failing  eight  and  twenty  leagues,  the  diftance  from 
the  north  entrance  of  tlie  ftreight,  which  we  made  on  the 
i.;th.  After  we  got  to  the  fouthward  of  the  line,  we  found 
a  flight  current  letting  againft  us  to  the  northward,  which 
7  daily 


ROUNDTHEWORLD.  62J 

daily  increafed :  the  weather  was  ftill  unfettled,  with  much       »767. 

wet:  the  winds  were  chiefly  S.  W.  and  W.  S.  W.  and  very  fel-   ,  ""_""  ^'^ 

dona  farther  to  the  northward  than  W.  N.  W.  except  in  the    ^""^^^  *^' 

tornadoes,  which  grew  more  frequent  and  violent ;  and  by 

them  we  got  nothing  but  hard  labour,  as  they  obliged  us  to 

hand  all  our  fails,  which  indeed  with  our  utmoil  effort  we 

were  fcarcely  able  to  do,  our  debility  daily  increaling  by  the 

falling  fick  of  the  few  that  were  well,  or  the  death  of  fome 

among  the  many  that  were  lick.    Under  thefe  circumflances 

we  ufed  our  utmofl:  endeavours  to  get  hold  of  the  land  on 

the  Borneo  fide,  but  were  not  able,  and  continued  to  llruggle 

with  our  misfortunes  till  the  %d  of  December,  when  we  fell  J?^".?^"- 

"  Thurfday  3. 

in  with  the  fmall  iflands  and  fhoals  called  the  Little  Pater- 
nofters,  the  fouthermoft  of  which,  according  to  my  account, 
lies  in  latitude  2°  31'  S.  and  the  northermoft  in  2°  15' S.  the 
longitude  of  the  northermoft  I  made  117°  12' E.:  they  bear 
about  S.  E.  -i  S.  and  N.  W.  ^  N.  of  each  other,  diftant  eight 
leagues,  and  between  them  are  the  others ;  the  number  of 
the  whole  is  eight.  They  lie  very  near  the  Celebes  fide  of 
tlie  ftreight,  and  being  unable  either  to  weather  them,  or 
get  to  the  weftwardof  them,  we  were  obliged  to  go  between 
them  and  the  ifland.  We  had  here  tempeftuous  weather  and 
contrary  winds,  with  fudden  and  impetuous  gufts,  which, 
as  we  had  not  a  number  of  hands  fufficient  to  bend  the  fails, 
often  endangered  our  mafts  and  yards,  and  did  great  da- 
mage to  our  fails  and  rigging,  efpecially  at  this  time,  as  we 
were  obliged  to  carry  all  the  fail  we  could  to  prevent  our 
falling  into  a  deep  bight,  on  the  Celebes  fhore.  The  ravages 
of  the  fcurvy  were  now  univerfal,  there  not  being  one  indi- 
vidual among  us  that  was  free,  and  the  winds  and  currents 
being  fo  hard  againft  us,  that  we  could  neither  get  wefting 
nor  fouthing  to  reach  any  place  of  refrefhment ;  the  mind 
participated  in  the  fuiFerings  of  the  body,  and  a  univerfal 
Vol.  I.  4  L  defpondency 


6^6  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767-  defpondency  was  refleded  from  one  countenance  to  another, 
L  .-  _'  efpecially  among  thofe  who  were  not  able  to  come  upon  the 
deck.  In  this  deplorable  fituation  we  continued  till  the 
Thurfday  10.  lOth,  and  it  is  not  perhaps  very  eafy  for  the  moft  fertile 
imagination  to  conceive  by  what  our  danger  and  diftrefs 
could  poffibly  be  increafed ;  yet  debilitated,  fick,  and  dying 
as  we  were,  in  fight  of  land  that  we  could  not  reach,  and 
expofed  to  tempells  which  we  could  not  refift,  we  had  the 
additional  misfortune  to  be  attacked  by  a  pirate :  that  this 
unexpeded  mifchief  might  lofe  none  of  its  force,  it  hap- 
pened at  midnight,  when  the  darknefs  that  might  almoft  be 
felt  could  not  fail  to  co-operate  with  whatever  tended  to  pro- 
duce confufion  and  terror.  This  fudden  attack,  however, 
rather  rouzed  than  deprelTed  us,  and  though  our  enemy 
attempted  to  board  us,  before  we  could  have  the  leaft  appre- 
henlion  that  an  enemy  was  near,  we  defeated  his  purpofe : 
he  then  plied  us  with  what  we  fuppofed  to  be  fwivel-guns, 
and  fmall  arms,  very  brifkly ;  but  though  he  had  the  ftarc 
of  us,  we  foon  returned  his  falute  with  fuch  efFedt,  that 
fhortly  after  he  funk,  and  all  the  unhappy  wretches  on  board 
perifhed.  It  was  a  fmall  velTel,  but  of  what  country,  or 
how  manned,  it  was  impoffible  for  us  to  know.  The  Lieu- 
tenant, and  one  of  the  men,  were  wounded,  though  not 
dangeroufly ;  part  of  our  running  rigging  was  cut,  and  we 
received  fome  other  flight  damage.  We  knew  this  pirate  to 
be  a  vefTel  which  we  had  feen  in  the  dufk  of  the  evening, 
and  we  afterwards  learnt  that  flie  belonged  to  a  freebooter, 
who  had  more  than  thirty  fuch  vefTels  under  his  command. 
The  fmallnefs  of  our  vcfTel  encouraged  the  attack,  and  her 
flrength  being  fo  much  more  than  in  proportion  to  herfize, 
fuppofmg  her  a  merchantman,  rendered  it  fatal. 

Saturday  12.       O^i  Saturday  the  12th,    we  fell  in  with   the   dangerous 
Ihoals  called  the  S^era  Mondes,  and  had  the  mortification  to 

find 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  6zy 

find   that  the  wefterly  monfoon  was  now  let  in,    againfl      1767. 

which,  and  the  current,  it  was  impoffible  for  any  fhip  to   « ^ — -> 

get  as  far  weftward  as  Batavia.  As  it  was  now  neceflary  to  "'""^  ^^  '^* 
wait  till  the  return  of  the  eaftern  monfoon,  and  the  Ihifting 
of  the  current ;  as  we  had  buried  thirteen  of  our  crew,  and 
no  lefs  than  thirty  more  were  at  the  point  of  death  j  as  all 
the  petty  officers  were  among  the  fick,  and  the  Lieutenant 
and  myfelf,  who  did  all  duties,  in  a  feeble  condition ;  it  was 
impoffible  that  we  iliould  keep  the  fea,  and  we  had  no 
chance  of  preferving  thofe  who  were  ftill  alive,  but  by 
getting  on  fhore  at  fome  place,  where  reft  and  refrefhment 
might  be  procured ;  I  therefore  determined  that  I  would  take 
advantage  of  our  being  fo  far  to  the  fouthward,  and  endea- 
vour to  reach  Macaflar,  the  principal  fettlementof  the  Dutch 
upon  the  ifland  of  Celebes. 

The  next  day,  we  made  fome  iflands  which  lie  not  far  Sunday  ij. 
from  that  place,    and  faw,    what  fometimes  we  took  for 
flioals,  and  fometimes  for  boats,  with  men  on  board,  but 
what  afterwards  appeared  to  be  trees,  and  other  drift  floating 
about,   with  birds  fitting  upon  them ;  we  fuddenly  found 
ourfelves  twenty  miles  farther  to  the  fouthward  than  we 
expe(5led,  for  the  current,  which  had  for  fome  time  fet  us  to 
the  northward,    had  fet  us  to  the  fouthward  during  the 
night.    We  now  hauled  up  eaft,    and  E.  7  N.  intending  to 
have  gone  to  the  northward  of  a  flioal,  which  has  no  name 
in  our  Eaft  hidia  Pilot,  but  which  the  Dutch  call  the  Thumb: 
by  noon,  however,  we  found  ourfelves  upon  it,  our  water 
fliallowing  at  once  to  four  fathom,  with  rocky  ground.     We 
now  hauled  off  to  the  fouth  weft,    and  keeping  the  boat 
ahead  to  found,  ran  round  the  weft  fide  of  the  fhoal  in  ten 
and  twelve  fathom ;  our  water  deepening  when  we  hauled 
off  to  the  weft,  and  fliallowing  when  we  hauled  oiF  eaft. 

4  L  2  Our 


628  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

J 767*      Our  latitude,  by  obfervation,  when  we  were  upon  the  fhoaL 

Eecember.  n       /-     1 

— -, — i  was  5°  20  S.  and  the  northermoft  or  the  iflands,  called  the 
"  ^y '2'     Three  Brothers,  then  bore  S.  81  E.  at  the  diftance  of  five  or 
fix  leagues.    This  ifland  is,  in  the  Englifli  Pilot,  called  Don 
Dinanga,  but  by  the  Dutch  the  North  Brother. 

Between  the  Three  Brothers,  and  the  main  of  Celebes,  there 
is  another  ifland,  much  larger  than  either  of  them,  called  the 
Ifiand  of  Tonikiky ;  but  none  of  them  are  inhabited,  though 
there  are  a  few  huts  belonging  to  fifhermen  upon  them  all. 
The  paflage  between  the  Ihoal  and  this  ifland  is  clear  and 
good,  with  from  ten  to  thirteen  fathom,  and  a  fandy  bottom ; 
but  the  foundings  are  to  be  kept  on  the  fide  of  the  ifland  in 
twelve  fathom,  and  never  under  ten:  it  is,  however,  very 
difficult  and  dangerous  for  fhips  to  fall  in  with  the  land  this 
way  without  a  pilot  on  board,  for  there  are  many  fhoals  and 
rocks  under  water.  I  ran  in  by  a  chart  in  the  Englifh  Eafl: 
India  Pilot,  which  upon  the  whole  I  found  a  good  one, 
though  the  names  of  the  iflands,  points,  and  bays,  differ 
very  much  from  thofe  by  which  they  are  now  known. 
When  we  got  near  to  the  Celebes  fhore,  we  had  land  and 
fea  breezes,  which  obliged  us  to  edge  along  the  coafl:, 
though  our  ftrength  was  fo  much  reduced,  that  it  was  with 
the  utmofi;  difficulty  we  could  work  the  ftream  anchor. 

Tuefday  i;.  In  the  evening  of  Tuefday  the  15th,  we  anchored  at  about 
the  diftance  of  four  miles  from  the  town  of  Macaflar,  which, 
according  to  my  account,  lies  in  latitude  5°  10' or  5°  12' S., 
longitude  117°  28'  E.  having  fpent  no  lefs  than  five  and  thirty 
weeks  in  our  paflage  from  the  Sti  eight  of  Magellan. 

I  liave  been  the  more  particular  in  my  defcription  of  as 
much  as  I  faw  of  this  Streight,  becaufe  all  the  charts,  both 
Englifli  and  French,  that  I  confulted,  are  extremely  deficient 

and 


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  629 

and  erroneous,  and  becaufe  an  exadt  knowleee  of  it  may  be      ^767. 

_  ,  1  1        n  ■        ,  December. 

or  great  fervice  to  our  China  trade :  the  mips  by  which  that  < s,~.«^ 

trade  is  carried  on,  may  pafs  this  way  with  as  little  danger  "^  *^  '^* 
as  by  the  common  one,  which  lies  along  the  Praflel  fhoals ; 
and  when  they  mifs  their  paflage  to  China,  in  the  fouth  eaft 
monfoon,  and  lofe  the  feafon,  they  may  be  fure  of  a  clear 
channel  here,  and  fair  winds  at  W.  S.  W.  W.  and  round  to 
W.  N.  W.  in  November,  December,  and  the  four  following 
months :  I  am  alfo  of  opinion,  that  it  is  a  better  and  fhorrer 
way  to  go  to  the  N.  E.  and  eaftward  of  the  Phillipine  Iflands, 
than  to  thread  the  Moluccas,  or  coaft  New  Guinea,  where 
there  are  flioals,  currents,  and  innumerable  other  dangers, 
as  they  were  forced  to  do  when  the  French  were  cruizing  for 
them  in  the  common  paflage  during  the  laft  war. 


CHAP. 


6^0  CAPTAIN   CARTERET'S   VOYAGE 


CHAP.      X. 

T^ranfaSiions  off  Macaffar,    and   the   Paffage    thence   to 

Bonthain. 

,^67  ''■  ^HE  fame  night  that  we  came  to  an  anchor,  at  about 
^Decemben  j[  elcvcn  o'clock,  a  Dutchman  came  on  board,  who  had 
Tuefday  15.  \^^q^  difpatched  by  the  Governor,  to  learn  who  we  were. 
When  I  made  him  underftand  that  the  fhip  was  an  Enghfli 
man  of  war,  he  feemed  to  be  greatly  alarmed,  no  man  of 
war  belonging  to  the  King  of  Great  Britain  having  ever  been 
there  before,  and  I  could  not  by  any  means  perfuade  him  to 
leave  the  deck,  and  go  down  into  the  cabbinj  we  parted, 
however,  to  all  appearance,  good  friends. 
Wednef.  16.  The  next  morning,  at  break  of  day,  I  fent  the  Lieutenant 
to  the  town,  with  a  letter  to  the  Governor,  in  which  I  ac- 
quainted him  with  the  reafon  of  my  coming  thither,  and 
requefted  the  liberty  of  the  port  to  procure  refrelhments  for 
my  ftiip's  company,  who  were  in  a  dying  condition,  and 
fhelter  for  the  veflel  againft  the  approaching  florms,  till  the 
return  of  a  fit  feafon  for  failing  to  the  weflward.  I  ordered 
that  this  letter  fliould,  without  good  reafon  to  the  contrary, 
be  delivered  into  the  Governor's  own  hand ;  but  when  my 
officer  got  to  the  wharf  of  the  town,  neither  he  nor  any 
other  perfon  in  the  boat  was  fuffered  to  land.  Upon  his  re- 
fufal  to  deliver  the  letter  to  a  meflengcr,  the  Governor  was 
made  acquainted  with  it,  and  two  officers,  called  the  fhe- 
bander  and  the  fifcal,  were  fent  down  to  him,  who,  as  a 
reafon  why  he  could  not  deliver  the  letter  to  the  Governor 
himfelf,  pretended  that  he  was  fick,  and  faid,  that  they 
(>  came 


Wednef.  i6. 


ROUND   THE    WORLD.  6^1 

came  by  his  exprefs  order  to  fetch  it ;  upon  this  the  letter  1767- 
was  at  length  delivered  to  them,  and  they  went  away.  "^"^  "' 
While  they  were  gone,  the  officer  and  men  were  kept  on 
board  their  boat,  expofed  to  the  burning  heat  of  the  fun, 
which  was  almoft  vertical  at  noon,  and  none  of  the 
country  boats  were  fuffered  to  come  near  enough  to  fell 
them  any  refrefhment.  In  the  mean  time,  our  people  ob- 
ferved  a  great  hurry  and  buftle  on  fhore,  and  all  the  Hoops 
and  velTels  that  were  proper  for  war  were  fitted  out  with  the 
utmoft  expedition :  we  fhould,  however,  I  believe,  have  been 
an  overmatch  for  their  whole  fea  force,  if  all  our  people, 
had  been  well.  In  the  mean  time  I  intended  to  have  gone 
and  anchored  clofe  to  the  town,  but  now  the  boat  was  ab- 
fent,  our  united  ftrength  was  not  fufficient  to  weigh  the 
anchor,  though  a  fmall  one.  After  waiting  five  hours  in  the 
boat,  the  Lieutenant  was  told  that  the  Governor  had  ordered 
two  gentlemen  to  wait  upon  me  with  an  anfwer  to  my  let- 
ter. Soon  after  he  had  returned,  and  made  this  report,  the 
two  gentlemen  came  on  board,  and  we  afterwards  learnt 
that  one  of  them  was  an  enfign  of  the  garrifon,  named  Le 
Cerf,  and  the  other  Mr.  Douglas,  a  writer  of  the  Dutch  Eaft 
India  Company:  they  delivered  me  the  Governor's  letter, 
but  it  proved  to  be  written  in  Dutch,  a  language  which  not 
a  fingle  perfon  on  board  could  underftand :  the  two  gentle- 
men who  brought  it,  however,  both  fpoke  French,  and  one 
of  them  interpreted  the  contents  to  me  in  that  language 
The  purport  of  it  was  "  that  I  fliould  inflantly  depart  from* 
the  port,  without  coming  any  nearer  to  the  town ;.  that  I 
fliould  not  anchor  on  any  part  of  the  coaft,  or  permit  any  of 
my  people  to  land  in  any  place  that  was  under  his  jurifdic- 
tion."  Before  I  made  any  reply  to  this  letter,  I  fliewed  the 
gentlemen  who  brought  it  the  number  of  my  fick:  at  the 
fight  of  fo  many  unhappy  wretches,  who  were  dying  of  lan- 
guor 


632  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.  guor  and  difeafe,  they  feemcd  to  be  much  aflfedled,  and  I 
December.^  ^^^^  UFgcd  again  the  preffing  neceffity  I  was  under  of  pro- 
Wednef.i6.  ^^m-jng  refrcfliment,  to  which  they  had  been  witnefTes,  the 
cruelty  and  injuftice  of  refufing  to  lupply  me,  which  was 
not  only  contrary  to  treaty,  as  we  were  in'a  King's  fliip,  but 
to  the  laws  of  Nature  as  we  were  human  beings:  they 
fcemed  to  admit  the  force  of  this  reafoning,  but  they  had  a 
fliortand  final  anfwer  ready,  '*  that  they  had  abfolute  and  in- 
difpenfiblc  orders  from  their  mafters,  not  to  fufFer  any  fliip, 
of  whatever  nation,  to  flay  at  this  port,  and  that  thefe  orders 
they  muft  implicitly  obey."  To  this  I  replied,  that  perfons 
in  our  fituation  had  nothing  worfe  to  fear  tlian  what  they 
fufFered,  and  that  therefore  if  they  did  not  immediately 
allow  me  the  liberty  of  the  port,  to  purchafe  refrefliments, 
and  procure  Ihelter,  I  would,  as  foon  as  the  wind  would 
permit,  in  defiance  of  all  their  menaces,  and  all  their  force, 
go  and  anchor  clofe  to  the  town ;  that  if  at  laft  I  fhould  find 
myfelf  unable  to  compel  them  to  comply  with  requifitions, 
the  reafonablenefs  of  which  could  not  be  controverted,  I 
would  run  the  fhip  aground  under  their  walls,  and,  after 
felling  our  lives  as  dearly  as  we  could,  bring  upon  them  the 
difgrace  of  having  reduced  a  friend  and  ally  to  fo  dreadful 
an  extremity.  At  this  they  feemed  to  be  alarmed,  as  our 
fituation  alone  was  fufficient  to  convince  them  that  I  was  in 
earneft,  and  urged  me  with  great  emotion  to  remain  where 
I  was,  at  leafl  till  I  had  heard  again  from  the  Governor :  to 
this,  after  fome  altercation,  I  confented,  upon  condition 
that  I  heard  from  the  Governor  before  the  fea- breeze  fet  in 
the  n€xt  day- 

We  pafled  all  the  remainder  of  this  day,  and  all  the  night, 

in  a  ftate  of  anxiety,  not  unmixed  with  indignation,   that 

greatly  aggravated  our  diftrefs;    and  very  early   the  next 

Thurfdayi;.  momiug,    wc  had   the  mortification   to  fee  a  floop   that 

5  mounted 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  633 

mounted  eight  carriage-guns,  and  one  of  the  veflels  of  the       1767 

country,  fitted  out  for  war,  with  a  great  number  of  foldiers  j 

o\\  board,  come  from  the  town,  and  anchor  under  each  of  our  "'^  ^^  ''* 
bows.  I  immediately  fent  my  boat  to  fpeak  with  them,  but 
they  would  make  no  reply  to  any  thing  that  was  faid.  About 
noon,  the  fea  breeze  fet  in,  and  not  having  then  heard  again 
from  the  Governor,  I  got  under  fail,  and  proceeded  towards 
the  town,  according  to  my  declaration,  refolving,  if  the  vef* 
fels  that  had  anchored  under  our  bows,  fiiould  oppofe  us,  to 
repi'efs  force  with  force  as  far  as  we  were  able :  thefe  two 
vefTels,  however,  happily  both  for  us  and  for  them,  con- 
tented th^mfelves  with  weighing  anchor,  and  attending  our 
motions. 

Very  foon  after  we  had  got  under  fail,  a  handfome  veflel, 
with  a  band  of  mufick,  and  feveral  gentlemen  on  board, 
made  up  to  us,  and  told  us  that  they  were  fent  by  the  Go- 
vernor, but  could  not  come  aboard  if  we  did  not  drop  our 
anchor  again ;  our  anchor  therefore  was  immediately 
dropped,  and  the  gentlemen  came  on  board :  they  proved  to 
be  Mr.  Blydenburg,  the  fifcal,  Mr.  Voll,  the  fliebander,  an 
officer  called  the  licence  mafter,  or  mailer  of  the  port,  and 
Mr.  Douglas  the  writer,  who  has  been  mentioned  already^ 
They  exprefled  fome  furprize  at  my  having  got  under  fail, 
and  afked  me  what  I  intended  to  have  done  ;  I  told  them  that 
I  intended,  neither  more  nor  lefs  than  to  fulfill  the  declara- 
tions I  had  made  the  day  before;  that  juftified  by  the 
common  rights  of  mankind,  which  were  fuperior  to  every 
other  law,  I  would,  rather  than  have  put  again  to  fea,  where 
our  de{lru(flion  either  by  fhipwreck,  ficknefs,  or  famine* 
was  inevitable,  have  come  up  to  their  walls,  and  either  have 
compelled  them  to  furnifli  the  neceflaries  we  wanted,  or 
have  run  the  Oiip  on  fhore,  fince  it  was  better  to  perifli  at 
once  in  a  juft  conteft,  than  to  fuiFer  the  lingering  mifery  of 

Vol.  I.  4  M  anticipating 


634  CAPTAIN    CARTERET's    VOYAGE 

1767-  anticipating  the  perdition  that  we  could  not  avoid.  I  ob- 
CJI!!1— ^  ferved  alfo,  that  no  cirilized  people  had  ever  fufFered  even 
Thur  ay  17.  ^j^^  captives  of  War  to  perifli  for  want  of  the  necefTaries  of 
life,  much  lefs  the  fubjec^s  of  an  ally,  who  afked  nothing 
but  perraiffion  to  purchafe  food  with  their  money.  They 
readily  allowed  the  truth  of  all  I  had  faid,  but  fecmed  to 
think  I  had  been  too  haily :  I  then  obferved  that  I  had  waited 
the  full  time  of  my  ftipulation,  and  they  in  return  made 
fome  excufe  for  their  not  having  come  fooner,  telling  me, 
that,  as  a  proof  of  their  having  admitted  my  claim,  they 
had  brought  me  fuch  provifions  as  their  country  would 
afford.  Thefe  were  immediately  taken  on  board,  and  con- 
fined of  two  flieep,  an  elk  ready  killed,  and  a  few  fowls,. 
with  fome  vegetables  and  fruit.  This  moft  welcome  fupply 
was  divided  among  the  people,  and  that  moll  falutary,  and 
to  us  exquifite  dainty,  broth,  made  for  the  fick.  Another 
letter  from  the  Gtovernor  was  then  produced,  in  which,  to 
my  great  difappointment,  I  was  again  ordered  to  leave  the 
port,  and  to  jullify  the  order,  it  was  alleged,  that  to  fuffer 
a  fhip  of  any  nation  to  flay  and  trade  either  at  this  port,  or 
any  other  part  of  the  ifland,  was  contrary  to  the  agreement 
which  had  been  made  by  the  Eafl  India  Company  Avith  the 
native  Kings  and  Governors  of  the  country,  who  had  already 
exprefTed  fome  difpkafure  on  our  account ;  and  for  farther 
particulars  I  was  referred  to  the  gentlemen  that  brought  the 
letter,  whom  the  Governor  fliled  his  commilfaries.  To  thefe 
gentlemen  I  immediately  obferved,  that  no  flipulation  con- 
cerning trade  could  afTeA  us,  as  we  were  a  King's  fhip  ;  at 
the  fame  time  I  produced  my  commiffion,  it  not  being 
polTible  to  bring  under  the  article  of  trade  the  felling  us  food 
and  refrefliments  for  our  money,  without  theutmoll  violence 
to  language  and  common  fenfe.  After  this  they  made  me 
feveral  propofitioiis,  which  I  rejeded,  becaufe  my  departure 
1  from 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  63^ 

from  this  place,  before  the  return  of  the  feafon,  was  in-  '767 
eluded  in  them  all.  I  then  recurred  to  my  former  decla-  ^-,.—-1/ 
ration,  and  to  enforce  it,  fhewed  them  the  corpfe  of  a  man  '^''"'^"*>'  '7 
who  had  died  that  morning,  and  whofe  life  would  probably 
have  been  faved,  if  they  had  afforded  us  refrefliments  when 
we  firft  came  to  an  anchor  upon  their  coalt.  This  put  them 
to  a  Hand,  but  after  a  fliort  paufe,  they  enquired  very  par- 
ticularly whether  I  had  been  among  the  fpice  iflands ;  I  an- 
fwered  them  in  the  negative,  and  they  appeared  to  be  con- 
vinced that  I  fpoke  truth.  After  this  we  came  to  a  better 
underftanding,  and  they  told  me,  that  though  they  could 
not,  without  difobedience  to  the  mofl  direct  and  pofiiive 
orders  of  the  Company,  fuffer  us  to  remain  here,  yet  that  I 
was  welcome  to  go  to  a  little  bay  not  far  diftant,  where  I 
fhould  find  effeflual  fhelter  from  the  bad  monfoon,  and 
might  ere(5t  an  hofpital  for  my  fick,  affuring  me  at  the  fame 
time  that  provifion  and  refrefliments  were  more  plenty  there 
than  at  MacafTar,  from  whence,  whatever  elfe  I  wanted 
fliould  be  fent  me,  and  offering  me  a  good  pilot  to  carry  me 
to  my  ftation.  To  this  I  gladly  confented,  upon  condition 
that  what  they  had  offered  fliould  be  confirmed  to  me  by  the 
Governor  and  Council  of  MacafTar,  that  I  might  be  confidered 
as  under  the  protecftion  of  the  Dutch  nation,  and  that  no  vio- 
lence fliould  be  offei'ed  to  my  people :  for  all  this  they  en- 
gaged their  honour  on  behalf  of  the  Governor  and  Council, 
promifmg  me  the  affurance  I  had  required  on  the  next  day, 
and  requefting  that  in  the  mean  time  I  would  remain  v/here 
I  was.  I  then  enquired  why  the  two  vefFels  which  were  at 
anchor  under  our  bows  were  allotted  to  that  flation,  and 
they  told  me,  for  no  other  reafon  than  to  prevent  the  people 
of  the  country  from  offering  us  any  violence.  When  matters 
were  thus  far  fettled  between  us,  I  expreffcd  my  concern 
that,    except  a  glafs  of  wine,    I  could  prelcat  them  with 

4  M  3  nothing 


636  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1767.  nothing  better  then  bad  fait  meat,  and  bread  full  of  wea- 
v_!l!^Ll-'  vels,  upon  which  they  very  politely  defired  that  I  would 
Thiiriday  17.  pgj-jj^if  fhcir  fervants  to  bring  in  the  victuals  which  had  been 
dreffing  in  their  own  veflel ;  I  readily  confented,  and  a  very 
genteel  dinner  was  foon  ferved  up,  conlifling  of  fifli,  flefli, 
vegetables,  and  fruit.  It  is  with  the  greateft  pleafure  that  I 
take  this  opportunity  of  acknowledging  my  obligations  to 
thefe  Gentlemen  for  the  politenefs  and  humanity  of  their 
behaviour  in  their  private  capacity,  and  particularly  to  Mr. 
Douglas,  who  being  qualified  by  his  knowlege  of  the  French 
language  to  interpret  between  us,  undertook  that  office  with 
a  courrefy  and  politenefs  which  very  much  increafed  the 
value  of  the  favour.  After  this  we  parted,  and  at  their  leav- 
ing the  Ihip,  I  faluted  them  with  nine  guns. 

Friday  18.  The  ucxt  momiug  the  Shebander  was  fent  to  acquaint 

me,  that  the  Governor  and  Council  had  confirmed  the  en- 
gagement which  had  been  made  with  me  on  their  behalf. 
Every  thing  was  now  fettled  much  to  my  fatisfa6lion,  ex- 
cept the  procuring  money  for  my  bills  upon  the  govern- 
ment of  Great  Britain,  which  the  Shebander  faid  he  would 
folicit.  At  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  he  came  on  board 
again,  to  let  me  know  that  there  was  not  any  perfon  in  the 
town  who  had  money  to  remit  to  Eiirope,  and  that  there 
was  not  a  dollar  in  the  Company's  cheft.  I  anfwered,  that  as 
I  was  not  permitted  to  go  on  fhore  to  negociate  my  bills 
myfelf,  I  hoped  they  would  give  me  credit,  ofTering  him 
bills  for  any  debt  I  fliould  contracft,  or  to  pay  it  at  Batavia. 
To  this  the  Shebander  replied,  that  the  Refident  at  Bonthain, 
the  place  to  which  I  was  going,  would  receive  orders  to 
fupply  me  with  whatever  I  fhould  want,  and  would  be  glad 
to  take  my  bills  in  return,  as  he  had  money  to  remit,  and 
was  himfelf  to  go  to  Europe  the  next  feafon.     He  told  me 

alfo, 
7 


B  o s"  T  K.A IB'    Bay 

s-iliiii/ii/ ir/'07/f  3P  Lt'iuri/rx  /a  tin 

s  E  of  Macau  SAR  in  tin' 
rsLA:ND  of  Celebes. 

L,tt.3.,  :i~/-S!:' 


ivX'^ 


6 


7k 
7 


//„M„/i:/  AWS  f." '//s . , 


A  I)j-a7/«-ht  of 

B'OE'THAiE^   Eat 

x////ii/i/7 tfl'07/f  30  L('a(j^(/rs  /o  t/x' 

s  E,  of  Macassar  ni  tlw 
rsLA^ND  of  Celebes. 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  637 

alfo,  that  he  had  confiderable  property  in  England,  being  a      '^7^7- 

^  J.        1  cj  o  December. 

denifon  or  that  country;  "  and,  faid  the  Shebander,  he  has   >^ — .- — t 
"  alfo  money  in  my  hands,  with  which  I  will  purchafe  -fuch    "  ^^  ' 
*'  things  as  you  want  from  MacafTar,  and  fee  that  they  are 
"  fent  after  you."     Having  fpecified  what  thefe  articles  were 
to  be,  and  agreed  with  hina  for  the  quantity  and  the  price, 
we  parted. 

The  next  day,  in  the  afternoon,  I  received  a  letter,  figned  Saturday  19. 
by  the  Governor  and  Council  of  MacafTar,   containing  the 
reafons  why  I  was  fent  to  Bonthain,  and  confirming  the  ver- 
bal agreement  which  fubfifted  between  us. 

Soon  after,  the  Enfign  M.  le  Cerf,  the  Secretary  of  the 
Council,  and  a  pilot,  came  on  board  to  attend  us  to  Bon- 
thain. Le  Cerf  was  to  command  the  foldiers  who  were  on 
board  the  guard-boats  ;  and  the  Secretary,  as  we  afterwards 
difcovered,  was  to  be  a  check  upon  the  refident,  whofe 
name  was  Swellingrabel.  This  Gentleman's  father  died 
Second  Governor  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  where  he  mar- 
ried an  Englilli  lady  of  the  name  of  Fotbergill.  Mr.  Swel- 
lingrabel, the  Refident  here,  married  the  daughter  of  Cor- 
nelius Sinkclaar,  who  had  been  Governor  of  Macafiar,  and 
died  about  two  years  ago  in  England,  having  come  hither 
to  fee  fome  of  his  mother's  relations. 


C  H  A  Pi. 


638 


CAPTAIN  CARTERET^  VOYAGE 


c  H  A  P.    xr. 

^ranfaSimis  at  Bonihaifi,  while  the  VeJJel  was  waiting  for 
a  Wind  to  carry  her  to  Batavia^  with  fome  Account  of 
the  Placey  the  To^n  of  Macajfar^  and  the  adjacent 
Country. 


Sunday  2c.J 
Monday  21. 


THE  next  morning  at  day-break  we  failed,  and  the 
day  following  in  the  afternoon  we  anchored  in  Bon- 
thain  road  with  our  two  guard-boats,  which  were  immedi- 
ately moored  clofe  in  to  the  fliore,  to  prevent  the  country 
boats  from  coming  near  us,  and  our  boats  from  going  near 
them.  As  foon  as  I  arrived  at  this  place,  I  altered  our  reck- 
oning. I  had  loft  about  eighteen  hours,  in  coming  by  the 
weft,  and  the  Europeans  that  we  found  here  having  come 
by  the  eaft  had  gained  about  fix,  fo  that  the  difference  was 
juft  a  day. 

I  immediately  waited  upon  the  Refident,  Mr.  Swellingrabel, 
who  fpoke  Englifh  but  very  imperfe(ftly,  and  having  fettled 
with  him  all  matters  relating  to  money  and  provifions,  a 
houfe  was  allotted  me  near  the  fea-fide,  and  clofe  to  a  little 
pallifadoed  fort  of  eight  guns,  the  only  one  in  this  place, 
which  I  converted  into  an  hofpital,  under  the  direiftion  of  the 
Surgeon  ;  to  this  place  I  immediately  fent  all  the  people  who 
were  thought  incapable  of  recovering  on  board,  and  refcrvcd 
the  reft  as  a  fccurity  againft  accidents.  As  foon  as  our  people 
were  on  fliore,  a  guard  of  thirty-fix  private  men,  two  Ser- 
jeants, and  two  Corporals,  all  under  the  command  of  Enfign 

Le 


December. 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  63^ 

Le  Cerf,  was  fet  over  them  ;  and  none  of  them  were  fufFered    _  1767. 
to    go    more    than    tliirty    yards    from    the;  hofpital,    nor 
were  any  of  the   country  people   allowed   to  come  near 
enough  to  fell  them  any  thing  ;  fo  that  our  men  got  nothing 
of  them,  but  through  the  hands  of  the  Dutch  foldiers,  wha- 
abufcd  then'  power  very  fl-iam:cfally.     When  they  faw  any 
of  the  country  people  carrying  what  they  thought  our  inva- 
lids, would  purchafe,  they  firft  took  it  away,  and  then  afked 
the  price :  what  was  demanded  fignified  little,   the  foldier 
gave  what  he  thought  proper,  which  was  feldom  one  fourtb 
of  the  value;  and  if  the  countryman  ventured  to  exprefs  any 
difcontent,  he  gave  him  immediately  an  earneft  of  perfedt 
fatisfadion,  by  flourifliing  his  broad-fword  over  his  head ; 
this  was  always  fufRcient  to  filence  complaint,  and  fend  the 
fufFerer  quietly  away ;  after  which  the  foldier  fold  what  he 
had  thus  acquired  for  profit  of  fometimes  more  than  a  thou- 
fand  per  Cent.    This  behaviour  was  fo  cruel  to  the  natives^ 
and  fo  injurious  to  us,  that  I  ventured  to  complain  of  it  to 
the  Refident,  and  the  other  two  Gentlemen,  Le  Cerf  and  the 
Secretary.    The  Refident,^  with  becoming  fpirit,  reprimanded 
the  foldiers  ;  but  it  produced  fo  little  effecft  that  I  could  not 
help  entertaining  fufpicions  that  le  Cerf  connived  at  thefe 
pra<5tifes,  and  fliared  the  advantages  which  they  produced. 
I  fufpedled  him  alfo  of  felling  arrack  to  my  people,  of  which 
I  complained,   but  without  redrefs,   and  I  know  that  his 
Haves  were  employed  to  buy  things  at  the  market  which 
his  wife  afterwards  fold  to  us  for  more  than  twice  as  much; 
as  they  coft.  The  foldiers  were  indeed  guilty  of  many  other 
irregularities  :  it  was  the  duty  of  one  of  them  by  rotation, 
to  procure  the  day's  provifion  for  the  whole  guard,  a  fervice 
which  he  conftantly  performed  by  going  into  the  country 
with  his  mufquet  and  a  bag  ;  nor  was  the  honeft  providetor 
always  content  with  what  the  bag  would  contain,  for  one  o£ 

themj,. 


640 

1767. 

December. 


Saturday  26. 


Sunday  27. 


Monday  28. 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

them,  without  any  ceremony,  drove  down  a  young  buffalo 
that  belonged  to  fome  of  the  countiy  people,  and  his  com- 
rades not  having  wood  at  hand  to  drefs  it  when  it  was 
killed,  fupplicd  themfelves  by  pulling  down  ibme  of  the 
pallifadocs  of  the  fort.  When  this  was  reported  to  me,  I 
thought  it  fo  extraordinary  that  I  went  on  fhore  to  fee  the 
breach,  and  found  the  poor  black  people  repairing  it. 

On  the  26th,  a  floop  laden  with  rice  was  fent  out  from 
{his  place  in  order  to  land  her  cargo  at  Macaffar;  but  after 
having  attempted  it  three  days  fhe  was  forced  to  return. 
The  weather  was  now  exceedingly  tempeftuous,  and  all  na- 
vigation at  an  end  from  -call  to  v/eil  nil  the  return  of  the 
eaftcrn  monfoon.  On  the  fame  day  two  large  floops  that 
were  bound  to  the  eallward  anchored  here,  and  the  next 
morning  alfo  a  large  fbip  from  Batavia,  with  troops  on 
board  for  the  Banda  Iflands  j  but  none  of  the  crew  of  any 
of  thefe  velTels  were  fuffered  to  fpeak  to  any  of  our  people, 
our  boats  being  reftrained  fi-om  going  on  board  them,  and 
theirs  from  coming  on  board  us.  As  this  was  a  mortifying 
reflridfion  we  requefted  Mr.  Swellingrabel  to  buy  us  fome 
fait  meat  from  the  large  fliip  ;  and  he  was  fo  obliging  as  to 
procure  us  four  cafks  of  very  good  European  meat,  two  of 
pork  and  two  of  beef. 

On  the  28th  a  fleet  of  more  than  anliundred  fail  of  the  fmall 
country  velTels,  called  Proas,  anchored  here  j  their  burden 
is  from  twelve  to  eighteen  and  twenty  ton,  and  they  cany 
from  flxteen  to  twenty  men.  I  was  told  that  they  carried  on 
a  filliery  round  the  Illand,  going  out  with  one  monfoon,  and 
coming  back  with  the  other,  fo  as  always  to  keep  under  the 
lee  of  the  land :  the  fifh  was  fent  to  the  China  market, 
and  I  obferved  that  all  thefe  vefTcls  carried  Dutch  colours. 


No 


ROUND    THE    W  OR  LD.  641 

No  event  worthy  of  notice  happened  till  the  i8th  of  Ja-       »768. 

January. 

iiuary,  and  then  I  learnt  by  a  letter  from  MacafTar  that  the  <- — ^ — t 
Dolphin  had  been  at  Batavia.  On  the  28th  the  Secretary  of  Thurfday'zs. 
the  Council,  who  had  been  fent  hither  with  Le  Cerf,  as  we 
fuppofed  to  be  a  check  upon  the  Refident,  was  recalled  to  Ma- 
cafTar. By  this  time  our  carpenter,  having  in  a  great  degree 
recovered  his  health,  examined  the  fhate  of  our  vefTel,  and 
to  our  great  regret  flie  appeared  to  be  very  leaky:  our  main 
yard  alfo  was  found  not  only  to  be  fprung,  but  to  be  rotten 
and  unferviceable.  We  got  it  down  and  patched  it  up  as 
well  as  we  could,  without  either  iron  or  a  forge,  fo  that  we 
hoped  it  would  ferve  us  till  we  got  to  Batavia,  for  no  wood 
was  to  be  procured  here  of  which  a  new  one  could  be  made. 
To  our  leaks  very  little  could  be  done,  and  we  were  there- 
fore reduced  to  an  intire  dependance  upon  our  pumps. 

On  Friday  the  igth  of  February,  Le  Cerf,  the  military  of-     Febroaiy. 
ficer  who  commanded  the  foldiers  on  fliore,  was  recalled,  as    "  ^^  ^' 
it  was  faid,  to  fit  out  an  expedition  for  the  ifland  of  Bally ; 
on  the  7th  of  March,  the  largeft  of  our  guard-boats,  a  floop  Monday  7. 
about  forty-five  tons,  was  ordered  back  to  MacafTar  with 
part  of  the  foldiers  ;  and  on  the  gth^  the  Refident,  Mr.  Swel-  Wednef.  9. 
lingrabel,  received  a  letter  from  the  Governor  of  that  place, 
enquiring  when  I  lliould  fail  for  Batavia.     1  muft  confefs, 
that  I  was  furprifed  at  the  recal  of  the  officer  and  the  guard- 
boat  ;  but  I  was  much  more  furprifed  at  the  contents  of  the 
.Governor's  lettei%  becaufe  he  knew  that  it  was  impoflible  I 
fhould   fail  till  May,    as  the  eaftern   monfoon  wquld  not 
fooner  fet  in.     All  matters  however  remained  in  the  fame 
fituation  till  near  the  end  of  the  month,  when  fome  of  my 
people  took  notice,  that  for  a  fliort  time  pafl  a  fmall  canoe 
had  gone  round  us  feveral  times  at  difTerent  hours  of  the 
might,  and  had  4ifappeared  as  foon  as  thofe  on  board  pei> 

VoL.  I.  4  N  ceived 


<<42  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

I "67.       ceived  any  body  ftirring  in  the  fliip.     On  the  29l]i,  while 

( 1, l_y   thefe  tilings  were  the  fubje6ts  of  fpeculation,   one  of   my 

1  uefday  29.  Q^^-gj-g  ^y^Q  came  from  the  fhore  brought  me  a  letter,  which 
he  faid  had  been  delivered  to  him  by  a  black  man :  it  was 
dire6led,  "  To  the  Commander  of  the  Englifh  fhip  at  Bon- 
thyn."  That  the  Reader  may  underfland  this  letter,  it  is  ne- 
ceflary  to  acquaint  him,  that  the  ifland  of  Celebes  is  divided 
into  feveral  diilridls,  which  are  diftinc^  fovereignties  of  the 
native  Princes.  The  town  of  Macaflar  is  in  a  diftridl  called 
alfo  Macaflar,  or  Bony,  the  King  of  which  is  in  alliance  with 
the  Dutch,  who  have  been  many  times  repulfed  in  an  at- 
tempt to  reduce  other  parts  of  the  ifland,  one  of  which  is 
inhabited  by  a  people  called  Bugguefes,  and  another  is 
called  Waggs  or  Tofora.  The  town  of  Tofora  is  fortified 
with  cannon,  for  the  natives  had  been  long  furnilhed  with 
fire  arms  from  Europe,  before  the  Dutch  fettled  themfelves 
at  MacaflTur  in  the  room  of  the  Portuguefc. 

The  letter  acquainted  me,  that  a  defign  had  been  formed! 
by  the  Dutch,  in  conjunction  with  the  King  of  Bony,  to  cut 
us  off":  that  the  Dutch  however  were  not  to  appear  in  it : 
that  the  bufmefs  was  to  be  done  by  a  fon  of  the  King  of 
Bony,  who  was,  befides  a  gratuity  from  the  Dutch,  to  receive 
the  plunder  of  the  veflel  for  his  reward,  and  who,  with  eight 
hundred  men,  was  then  at  Bonthain  for  that  purpofe :  that 
the  motive  was  jealoufy  of  our  forming  a  connecT:ion  with 
the  Bugguefes,  and  other  people  of  the  country,  who  were 
at  enmity  with  the  Dutch  and  their  allies,  and  driving  them 
out  of  the  ifland  ;  or  at  Icafl:  a  fufpicion  that,  if  we  got  back 
to  England,  fome  projc6l  of  that  kind  might  be  founded 
upon  the  intelligence  we  fliould  give,  no  Englilh  man  of 
war,  as  I  have  already  obferved,  having  ever  been  known  to 
have  vifited  the  ifland  before. 

This 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


643 


This  letter  was  a  new  fubjed  of  furprife  and  fpcciilation. 
It  was  extremely  ill  written  with  refpe^ft  to  the  llyle  and 
manner,  yet  it  did  not  therefore  the  lefs  deferve  notice. 
How  far  the  intelligence  which  it  contained  was  true  or 
falfe,  I  was  utterly  unable  to  determine :  it  was  pollible 
that  the  writer  might  be  deceived  himfelf ;  it  was  alfo 
poffible,  that  he  might  have  fome  vievvr  in  wilfully  deccivino- 
me :  the  falfliood  might  procure  fome  lirtle  reward  for  the 
kindnefs  and  zeal  which  it  placed  to  his  account,  or  it  might 
give  him  an  importance  which  would  at  leall  be  a  gratifica- 
tion to  his  vanity.  It  behoved  me  however  to  take  the  fame 
meafures  as  if  I  had  known  it  to  be  true ;  and  I  mufl  con- 
fefs,  that  I  was  not  perfedlly  at  eafe  when  I  recoIIecT:ed  the 
recal  of  the  Secretary  and  Le  Cerf,  with  the  large  floop,  and 
part  of  the  foldiers,  who  were  faid  to  have  been  fent  hither 
for  no  other  reafon  than  to  guard  us  againft  the  infults  of 
the  country  people ;  tlie  afTembhng  an  armed  force  at  Ma- 
cafTar,  as  it  was  faid,  for  an  expedition  to  Bally ;  and  the  little 
canoe  that  we  had  feen  rowing  round  us  in  the  night,  not  to 
mention  the  Governor's  enquiry  by  letter,  when  we  intended 
to  leave  the  ifland.  However,  whether  either  our  intelli- 
gence or  conjectures  were  true  or  falfe,  we  immediatclv 
went  to  work:  we  rigged  the  fliip,  bent  tlie  fails,  unmoored, 
got  fprings  upon  our  cables,  loaded  all  our  guns,  and  barri- 
cadoed  the  deck.  At  night  every  body  ilept  under  arms,  and 
the  next  day  we  warped  the  veflel  farther  off  from  the  bot-  wednef.  ;o. 
torn  of  the  bay,  towards  the  eailern  fhore,  that  we  mip-ht 
have  more  room,  fixed  four  fwivel  guns  on  tlie  forepart  of 
the  quarter-deck,  and  took  every  other  meafure  tliat  ap- 
peared to  be  necelTary  for  our  defence. 

The  Refident,  Mr.  Swellingrabel,  was  at  this  time  abfent: 
twenty  miles  up  t!ie  country  upon  the  Company's  bufinefs, 
but  had  told  me,  that  he  flrould  certainly  rciurnon  the  ifl  of 

..  4  N  2  .  April, 


644 

1768. 

March. 
Thurfday  31 


April. 
Monday  4. 


Tuefday  5. 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

April,  a  day  which  I  now  expedted  with  great  impatience, 
efpecially  as  an  old  drunken  Serjeant  was  the  moll  refped:-. 
able  perfon  at  the  fort.  In  the  evening  of  the  31ft,  a  packet 
of  letters  for  him  arrived  here  from  MacalTar,  which  I  con- 
fidercd  as  a  good  omen,  and  a  pledge  of  his  return  at  the 
time  appointed  ;  but  I  conceived  very  different  fentiments 
when  I  learnt  that  they  were  fent  to  him.  I  did  not  fufpec^ 
that  he  was  privy  to  any  fuch  defign  as  had  been  intimated 
to  me  by  the  letter  ;  but  I  could  not  help  doubting,  whether 
he  was  not  kept  in  the  country  that  he  might  be  out  of  the 
way  when  it  fliould  be  executed.  In  thisftate  of  anxiety  and 
fufpenfe  I  fent  a  meffage  to  the  fort,  defiring  that  an  exprefs 
might  be  difpatched  to  him,  to  acquaint  him  that  I  wilhed 
to  fee  him  immediately  upon  bufinefs  of  great  importance, 
which  would  admit  of  no  delay.  Whether  my  meffage  was 
forwarded  to  him  or  not,  I  cannot  tell ;  but  having  waited 
till  the  4th  of  April,  without  having  feen  him  or  received  any 
anfwcr,  I  wrote  him  a  letter,  requefting  to  fpeak  with  him, 
in  the  moft  prefling  terms,  and  the  next  day  he  came  onboard. 
A  few  minutes  convinced  me  that  he  was  wholly  a  ftranger  to 
any  fuch  defign  as  I  had  been  made  to  apprehend ;  and  he 
was  clearly  of  opinion  that  no  fuch  defign  had  been  formed. 
He  faid,  indeed,  that  one  Tomilaly,  a  counfellor  or  minifter 
of  the  King  of  Bony,  had  lately  paid  him  a  vifit,  and  had 
not  well  accounted  for  his  being  in  this  part  of  the  coun- 
try ;  and,  at  my  requeft,  he  very  readily  undertook  to  make 
farther  enquiries  concerning  him  and  bis  people.  The  Refi- 
dent  and  his  attendants  took  notice  that  the  fhip  was  put 
into  a  ftate  of  defence,  and  that  every  thing  was  ready  for 
immediate  aftion  ;  and  he  told  us,  that  the  people  on  fhore 
had  acquainted  him,  before  he  came  on  board,  with  our  vi- 
gilance and  adlivity,  and  in  particular,  with  our  having  ex- 
ercifed  the  fliip's  company  at  fmall  arms  every  day.  I  in- 
5  formed 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  645 

formed  him,  that  we  fhould,  at  all  events,  continue  upon      1768. 

.our  guard,  which  he  leemed  to  approve,   and  we  parted   >. v — -* 

with  mutual  proteftations  of  friendfliip  and  good  faith.  "^  ^^ '' 
After  a  few  days,  he  fent  me  word  that  having  made  a  very 
ftrisfl  enquiry,  whether  any  other  perfons  belonging  to  the 
King  of  Bony  had  been  at  Bonthain,  he  had  been  credibly 
informed  that  one  of  the  Princes  of  that  kingdom  had  beea 
there  in  difguife;.  but  that  of  the  eight  hundred  men  who 
were  faid  in  my  intelligence  to  be  with  him,  he  could  find 
no  traces  ;  fo  that,  except  they  too,  like  the  troops  of  the 
King  of  Brentford,  were  an  army  in  difguife,  I  knew  that 
no  fuch  people  could  be  in- that  country. 

On  the  1 6th,  in  the  morning,  the  Relident  fent  me  word,  Saturday  16. 
that  M.  Le  Cerf  was  returned  from  MacafTar  with  another 
officer,  and  that  they  would  come  on  board  and  dine  with 
me.  When  dinner  was  over,  I  afked  Le  Cerf,  among  other 
converfation,  while  we  were  taking  our  wine,  what  was 
become  of  his  expedition  to  Bally,  to  which  he  anfwered 
drily,  that  it  was  laid  afide,  without  faying  any  thing  more 
upon  the  fubjedf.  On  the  23d,  he  returned  to  Macaffar  by 
fea,  and  the  other  officer,  who  was  alfo  an  enfign,  remained 
to  take  the  command  of  the  foldiers  that  were  ftill  left  at 
this  place. 

The  feafon  now  approached  in  which  navigation  to  the 
weftward  would  be  again  pradlicable,  which  gave  us  all 
great  pleafure ;  efpecially  as  putrid  difeafes  had  begun  to 
make  their  appearance  among  us,  and  a  putrid  fever  had 
carried  oif  one  of  our  people. 

On  the  7th  of  May,  the  Refident  gave  me  a  long  letter  „  ^^^^y- 
from  the  Governor  of  MacafTar,  which  was  written  in  Dutch, 
and  of  which  he  gave  me  the  befl  interpretation  he  was 

able. 


646  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1768.  able.  The  general  purport  of  it  was,  that  he  had  heard  a 
._  ^.^J'  ,  letter  had  been  fcnt  to  me,  charging  him,  in  conjundion 
Saturday  7.  ^^^^.j^  ^^^  king  of  Bony,  with  a  defign  to  cut  us  off:  that  the 
letter  was  altogether  falfe,  exculpating  himfelf  with  the 
moft  folemn  proteftations,  and  requiring  the  letter  to  be  de- 
livered up,  that  the  writer  might  be  brought  to  fuchpunifh- 
mcnt  as  he  deferved.  It  is  I'carcely  neceflary  to  fay  that  I 
did  not  deliver  up  the  letter,  becaufe  the  writer  would  cer- 
tainly have  been  punifhed  with  equal  feverity  whether  it 
was  true  or  falfe  ;  but  I  returned  the  Governor  a  polite  an- 
fwer,  in  which  I  juflified  the  meafures  I  had  taken,  without 
imputing  any  evil  defign  to  him  or  his  allies ;  and  indeed 
there  is  the  greatefl  reafon  to  believe,  that  there  was  not 
fufficient  ground  for  the  charge  contained  in  the  letter, 
though  it  is  not  equally  probable  that  the  writer  believed  it 
to  be  falfe. 

Sunday  22,  At  day-brcak  on  Sunday  the  2 2d  of  May,  we  failed  from 
this  place,  of  which,  and  of  the  town  of  MacafTar,  and  the 
adjacent  country,  1  fliall  fay  but  little,  there  being  many  ac- 
counts of  the  ifland  of  Celebes  and  its  inhabitants  already 
extant.  The  town  is  built  upon  a  kind  of  point  or  neck  of 
land,  and  is  watered  by  a  river  or  two  which  either  run 
through,  or  very  near  it.  It  fecras  to  be  large,  and  there  is 
water  for  a  ihip  to  come  v/ithin  half  cannon  fliot  of  the 
walls:  the  country  about  it  is  level,  and  has  a  moft  beauti- 
ful appearance  ;  it  abounds  with  plantations,  and  groves  of 
cocoa-nut  trees,  with  a  great  niuTiber  of  houfes  interfperfed, 
by  which  it  appears  to  abound  with  people.  At  a  diftance 
inland,  the  country  rifes  into  hills  of  a  great  height,  and 
becomes  rude  and  mountainous.  Tlie  town  lies  in  latitude 
5°  10',  or  5^  12' S.  and  longitude  by  account  117"  28'  E.  of 
London.  7 

Bonthain 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  (J47 

Bonthain  is  a  large  bay,  where  fhips  may  lie  in  perfe<5l  1768. 
fecurity  during  both  the  monfoons  :  the  foundings  are  good  i_J^5Lj 
and  regular,  and  the  bottom  foft  mud;  nor  is  there  any 
danger  coming  in,  but  a  ledge  of  rocks  which  are  above 
water,  and  are  a  good  mark  for  anchoring.  The  highePc 
land  in  fight  here  is  called  Bonthain  hill,  and  when  a  fhip 
is  in  the  offing  at  the  diftance  of  two  or  three  miles  from 
the  land,  flie  fliould  bring  this  hill  north,  or  N.  -L  \V.  and 
then  run  in  with  it  and  anchor.  We  lay  right  under  it,  at 
the  diftance  of  about  a  mile  from  the  fliore.  In  this  bav 
there  are  feveral  fmall  towns;  that  which  is  called  Bonthain 
lies  in  the  north  eaft  part  of  the  bay,  and  here  is  the  fmall 
pallifadoed  fort  that  has  been  mentioned  already,  on  which 
there  are  mounted  eight  guns  that  carry  a  ball  of  about 
eight  pounds  weight:  it  is  jufl  fufficient  to  keep  the  coun- 
try people  in  fubjeiftion,  and  is  intended  for  no  other  pur- 
pofe :  it  lies  on  the  fouth  fide  of  a  fmall  river,  and  there 
is  water  for  a  fliip  to  come  clofe  to  it.  The  Dutch  Refident 
has  the  command  of  the  place,  and  of  BuUocomba,  another 
town  which  lies  about  twenty  miles  farther  to  the  eaftward, 
where  there  is  fuch  another  fort,  and  a  few  foldiers,  who  at 
the  proper  feafon  are  employed  in  gathering  the  rice,  which 
the  people  pay  as  a  tax  to  the  Dutch. 

Wood  and  water  are  to  be  procured  here  in  great  plenty  ; 
we  cut  our  wood  near  the  river,  under  Bonthain  hill: 
our  water  was  procured  partly  from  that  river,  and  partly 
from  another;,  when  from  the  other,  our  boat  went  above 
the  fort  with  the  cafks  that  were  to  be  filled,  where  there  is 
a  good  rolling  way  ;  but  as  the  river  is  fmall,  and  has  a  bar,, 
the  boat,  after  it  is  loaded,  can  come  out  only  at  high  water..  " 
There  are  feveral  other  fmall  rivers  in  the  bay,  from  which 
water  may  be  got  upon  occafion. 

We 


648  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

176!?.  We  procured  plenty  of  frefli  provifions  all  the  while  we 

1^  -1-.  __f  Jay  here  at  a  reafonable  rate :  the  beef  is  excellent ;  but  it 
would  be  difficult  to  procure  enough  of  it  for  a  fquadron. 
Rice  may  be  had  in  any  quantity,  fo  may  fowls  and  fruit: 
there  are  alfo  abundance  of  wild  hogs  in  the  woods,  which 
may  be  purchafed  at  a  low  price,  as  the  natives,  being  Ma- 
hometans, never  eat  them.  Fifli  may  be  caught  with  the 
Jeine,  and  the  natives,  at  times,  fupplied  us  with  turtle.;  for 
this,  like  pork,  is  a  dainty  which  they  never  touch. 

Celebes  is  the  key  of  the  Molucca,  or  fpice  iflands,  which, 
whoever  is  in  poiTeiiion  of  it,  mult  nccefTarily  command : 
-moil  of  the  fliips  that  are  bound  to  them,  or  to  Banda,  touch 
.here,  and  always  go  between  this  ifland  and  that  of  Solayer. 
The  bullocks  here  are  the  breed  that  have  the  bunch  on  the 
back,  befxdes  which  the  illand  produces  horfes,  buffaloes, 
goats,  fheep,  and  deer.  The  arrack  and  fugar  that  are  con- 
fumed  here  are  brought  from  Batavia. 

The  latitude  of  Bonthain  hill  is  5°  30'  S.,  longitude  by  ac- 
count 117°  53' E.  The  variation  of  the  compafs  while  we 
were  here  was  i''  i6'W.  The  tides  are  very  irregular;  com- 
monly it  is  but  once  high  water  and  once  low  water  in  four 
and  twenty  hours,  and  there  is  feldom  fix  feet  difference 
between  them. 


CHAP. 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  649 


C  n   A  P.      XII. 

PaJJoge  from  Bonthain  Bay,  in  the  Ijlajid  of  Celebes,  t^ 
Batavia ;  Tra7ifaEiions  there,  and  the  Voyage  round  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  ILngland, 

7  H  EN  \vc  left  Bonthain  Bay,  we  kept  along  the  fliore,  ,.53^ 
at  the  diftance  of  two  or  three  miles,  till  evening^  '^^x-  ^ 
and  then  anchored  for  the  night,  in  the  pafTage  between  the  Sunday  22. 
two  iflands  of  Celebes  and  Tonikaky,  in  feven  fathom  and  a 
half,  with  a  bottom  of  foft  mud.  The  next  morning,  we  Monday  23. 
got  again  under  fail,  and  took  our  departure  from  Tonikaky, 
which,  according  to  my  account,  lies  in  latitude  5°3i'S, 
longitude  117°  17' E,;  the  variation  here  was  i"W.  We 
went  to  the  fouthward  of  Tonikaky,  and  flood  to  the  weft- 
ward.  About  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  were 
abreaft  of  the  eaftermoll  of  the  iflands  which  in  the  Dutch 
charts  are  called  Tonyn's  Iflands.  This  ifland  bore  from  us 
about  N.  by  W.  at  the  diftance  of  four  miles,  and  the  \v<io 
weftermoft  were  in  flght.  Thefe  three  iflands  make  a  kind  of 
right  angle  triangle  with  each  other:  the  diftance  between 
tlie  eaftermoft  and  weftermoft  is  about  eleven  miles,  and 
their  relative  bearings  are  very  nearly  eaft  and  weft.  The 
diftance  between  the  two  weftermoft  is  nearly  the  fame,  and 
they  bear  to  each  other  S.  by  E.  and  N.  by  W.  About  fix 
o'clock,  having  juft  founded,  and  got  no  ground,  we 
fuddenly  found  ourfelves  upon  a  flaoal,  with  not  three  fa- 
thom, and  the  water  being  fmooth  and  clear,  we  could  fee 
great  crags  of  coral  rocks  under  our  bottom:  we  imme- 
diately threw  all  the  fails  aback,  and  happily  got  oiFwith- 
VoL.  I.  4  O  out 


650  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1768.  out  damage:  we  had  juft  palled  over  the  eaftermoft  edge  of 
*- — . — J  it,  which  is  as  fteep  as  a  wall,  for  we  had  not  gone  back  two 
cables'  length  before  we  were  out  of  foundings  again.  At 
this  time,  we  had  the  two  weilermofl  of  the  Tonyn  Iflands  in 
one,  bearing  N.  by  W.  at  the  diftance  of  fomewhat  more 
than  four  miles  from  the  nearefl.  This  is  a  very  dangerous 
flioal,  and  is  not  laid  down  in  any  chart  that  I  have  feen:  it 
fecmed  to  extend  itfelf  to  the  fouthward  and  weftward,  all 
round  the  two  weftermoft  of  thefe  three  iflands,  for  near  fix 
miles,  but  about  the  eaftermoft  ifland  there  feemed  to  be  no 
danger;  there  was  alfo  a  clear  pafTage  between  this  ifland 
and  the  other  two.  The  latitude  of  the  eaftermoft  and  weft- 
ermoft  of  thcfe  iflands  is  5^  31' S.  The  eaftermoft  is  diftant 
thirty-four  miles  due  weft  from  Tonikaky,  and  the  wefter- 
mofl:  lies  ten  miles  farther. 
Wednef.  2;.  hi  the  affcrnoon  of  the  25th,  we  found  the  water  much 
difcoloured,  upon  which  we  founded,  and  had  five  and 
thirty  fathom,  with  foft  mud :  foon  after  we  went  over  the 
northermoft  part  of  a  fhoaJ,  and  had  no  more  than  ten  fa- 
thom, with  foft  mud.  In  this  place,  where  we  found  the 
water  flialloweft,  it  was  very  foul ;  it  feemed  to  be  ftili 
fliallower  to  the  fouthward,  but  to  the  northward  of  us  it 
appeared  to  be  clear.  "We  had  no  obfervation  this  day,  by 
which  I  could  afccrtain  the  latitude,  but  I  believe  this  to  be 
the  northermoft  part  of  the  flioals  that  lie  to  the  eaftward  of 
the  ifland  Madura,  and  in  the  Englifli  Eaft  India  Pilot  are 
called  Bralleron's  Shoals,  the  fame  which  in  the  Dutch 
charts  are  called  Kalcain's  Eylandens.  l^y  my  reckoning, 
the  part  that  we  went  over  lies  in  s'^  50  or  j^  53' S.  and  3" 
36'  to  the  weftward  of  the  ifland  Tonikaky,  or  S.  84°  27  W. 
diflancc  fixty-ninc  leagues.  At  eleven  o'clock  the  fame 
nighr,  we  faw,  to  the  northward  of  us,  the  fouthermoft  of 
the  iflands  Salonibo.     I  make  its  latitude  to  be  5°  33' S.  and 


R  O  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  651 

its  longitude  weft  of  Tonikaky  4°   4',    at   the   cUftance  of      '768, 
about  eighty-two  or  eighty-three  leagues.     It  bears  from  the  ^ — ^ — » 
laft  fhoal  N.  W.  by  W.  -i  W.  at  the  dillance  of  about  fourteen     '  '""' "  '^' 
leagues.     It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  hereabout,  off  the  ifland 
of  Madura,    the  winds  of  the  monfoons  are  commonly  a 
month  later  in  fettling  than  at  Celebes.     The  variation  here 
was  not  more  than  half  a  degree  weft,  and  we  found  the 
current,  which  before  fet  to  the  fouthward,  now  fetting  to 
the  N.  W. 

In  the  afternoon  of  the  26th,  we  faw  from  the  maft-head  Thurfday  24. 
the  ifland  of  Luback,  and  had  foundings  from  thirty- five  to 
forty  fathom,  with  a  bottom  of  bluifli  clay.  The  latitude  of 
this  ifland  is  5°  43' S.,  and  its  longitude,  s°  3^'  weft  of  To- 
nikaky, from  which  it  is  diftant  about  one  hundred  and 
twelve  leagues.  Its  diftance  weft  from  the  iflands  of  Sa- 
lombo,  is  thirty-one  leagues:  we  went  to  the  northward  of 
this  ifland,  and  foimd  a  current  fetting  to  the  W.N.W. 

In  the  evening  of  Sunday  the  29th,  we  Hiw  the  cluilcr  of  Sunday  29. 
fmall  iflands  called  Carimon-Java.     The  latitude  of  the  eafl- 
crmoft,  which  is  alfo  the  largeft,  is  5*^48'S.  and  its  longi- 
tudcj  weft  of  Tonikaky,  y°  52'.     From  this  ifland  it  is  diflant 
about  138  leagues,  and  forty-five  leagues  from  Luback. 

On  Thurfday  the  2d  of  June,  we  hauled  in  and  made  the  ^,  J"ne. 

■/  J  I  huilaay  z. 

land  of  Java,  which  proved  to  be  that  part  of  the  ifland 
which  makes  the  eaftermoft  point  of  the  bay  of  Batavia, 
called  Carawawang  Point.  When  we  firfl  got  fight  of  the 
land,  we  Iiad  gradually  dccreafed  our  foundings  from  forty 
to  eight  and  twenty  fathom,  with  a  bottom  of  bluifli  mud. 
As  we  fleered  along  the  fliore  for  Batavia,  we  dccreafed  them 
gradually,  ftill  farther,  to  thirteen  fatliom,  the  depth  in 
which,  night  coming  on,  we  anchored  near  the  two  fmall 
iflands  called  Leyden  and  Alkmar,  in  fight  of  Batavia;  and 

4  O  2  in  , 


65i  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1768.  in  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day,  we  anchored  in  the  Road, 
^  ^ne.^  which  is  fo  good  that  it  may  well  be  coniidered  as  an  har- 
^"  ^^  ^'  hour.  We  had  now  great  reafon  to  congratulate  ourfelves 
upon  our  fituation,  for  during  the  whole  of  our  paffage  from 
Celebes,  the  fliip  admitted  fo  much  water  by  her  leaks,  that 
it  was  all  we  could  do  to  keep  her  from  finking,  with  two 
pumps  conflantly  going. 

We  found  here  eleven  large  Dutch  fliips,  befides  fevcral 
that  were  lefs,  one  Spanifli  fliip,  a  Portuguefe  fnow,  and 
Saturday4.  fevcral  Chincfc  junks.  The  next  morning  we  faluted  the 
town  with  eleven  guns,  and  the  fame  number  was  returned. 
As  this  was  the  birth-day  of  his  Britannick  Majefly,  our  So- 
vereign, we  afterwards  fired  one  and  twenty  guns  more  on 
that  occafion.  We  found  the  variation  here  to  be  Icfs  than 
half  a  degree  to  the  wcftward. 

In  the  afternoon,  I  waited  upon  the  Governor,  and  ac- 
quainted him  with  the  condition  of  the  lliip,  dcliring  liberty 
to  repair  her  dcfci5ls,  to  which  he  replied,  that  I  muft  petition 
the  Council. 

Monday  6.  On  the  6th  thcrcforc,  which  was  Council-day,  I  addvcfled 
a  letter  to  the  Governor  and  Council,  fctting  forth  more  par- 
ticularly the  condition  of  the  fliip  ;  and  after  rcqucfting  leave 
to  repair  her,  I  added,  that  I  hopc-J  they  would  allow  me 
the  ufe  of  fuch  wharfs  and  {lorehoufes  as  fliould  be  nc- 

Tueiiiay  7.  cclTary.  In  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day,  the  Iliebander, 
with  Mr  Garrifon,  a  merchant  of  the  place,  as  interpreter, 
and  another  perfon,  came  to  me.  After  the  firll  compli- 
ments, the  fliebander  faid,  that  lie  was  fent  by  the  Governor 
and  Council  for  a  letter  which  they  had  heard  I  had  received 
when  I  was  at  Bonthain,  acquainting  me,  that  a  dcfign  had 
been  formed  to  cut  off  my  fliip,  tliiu  the  author  of  it,  who 
had  injured  both  nie,  and  their  nation,  in  the  perfon  of  the 
9  Governor 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  653 

Governor  of  that  place,  might  be  puniflied.  I  readily  ac-  1768. 
knowledged  that  I  had  received  fuch  information,  but  faid,  ,  ■'_""!•  _, 
that  I  had  never  told  any  body  it  v^as  by  letter.  The  llie-  ^"*^'^*^  ''* 
bander  then  afked  me  if  I  would  take  an  oath  that  I  had  re- 
ceived no  fuch  letter  as  he  had  been  direfted  to  demand  ;  to 
which  I  anfwered,  that  I  was  furprifed  at  the  quellion,  and 
defired,  that  if  the  Council  had  any  fuch  uncommon  requi- 
fition  to  make  of  me,  it  might  be  in  writing,  and  I  would 
give  fuch  reply,  as,  upon  mature  confideration,  I  fhould 
think  proper.  I  then  defired  to  know  what  anfwer  he  h?vd 
been  inftru(5ted  to  give  to  my  letter,  concerning  the  refitting 
of  the  fhip;  upon  which  he  told  me,  that  the  Council  had 
taken  offence  at  my  having  ufed  the  word  hope-,  and  not 
written  in  the  flile  of  requefl:,  which  had  been  invariably 
adopted  by  all  merchants  upon  the  like  occafion :  I  replied, 
that  no  offence  was  intended  on  my  part,  and  that  I  had  ufed 
the  firfl  words  v/hich  occurred  to  n^e,  as  proper  to  cxprefs 
my  meaning.  Thus  we  parted,  and  I  heard  nothing  more 
of  them  till  the  afternoon  of  the  9th,  when  the  fliebander,  Thurfdayg. 
and  the  fame  two  gentlemen,  came  to  me  a  fecond  time. 
The  fhebandcr  laid,  that  he  v/as  then  commifTioned  from 
tlie  council,  to  require  a  writing  under  my  hand,  fignifying 
that  I  believed  the  report  of  an  intention  formed  at  tlie  ifland 
of  Ce:ebcs  to  cut  off  my  (hip,  v^as  falfe  and  malicious,  faying 
that  he  hoped  I  had  a  better  opinion  of  the  Dutch  nation 
than  to  fuppofe  them  capable  of  f liffering  fo  execrable  a  facT: 
to  be  perpetrated  under  their  Government.  Mr.  Garrifon 
then  read  me  a  certificate,  which,  by  order  of  the  council, 
had  been  drawn  up  for  me  to  fign :  as,  whatever  was  my 
opinion,  I  did  not  think  it  advifable  to  fign  fuch  a  certi- 
ficate, efpecially  as  it  appeared  to  be  made  a  condition  of 
complying  with  my  requefl  by  the  delay  of  an  anfwer 
during  this  folkitation,  I  defired  the  fliebander  to  Ihew  me 

hi& 


6s4  CAPTAIN    CAUTERET's    VOYAGE 

1768.      his  authority  for  the  requifition  he  had  made:  he  replied, 

< ,r-^—j  that  he  had  no  teftimony  of  authority  but  the  notoriety  of 

^^^'  his  being  a  pubhc  officer,  and  the  evidence  of  the  gentlemen 
that  were  with  him,  confirming  his  own  declaration,  that  he 
afled  in  this  particular  by  the  exprefs  order  of  Council.  I 
then  repeated  my  requefl:,  that  v/hatever  the  Council  required 
of  me  might  be  given  me  in  writing,  that  the  fenfe  of  it 
might  be  fixed  and  certain,  and  that  I  might  have  time  to 
confider  of  my  reply  ;  but  he  gave  me  to  underfland  that  he 
could  not  do  this  without  an  order  from  the  Council,  and  I 
then  abfolutely  refufed  to  fign  the  paper,  at  the  fame  time 
defiring  an  anfwer  to  my  letter,  which  they  not  being  pre- 
pared to  give,  we  parted,  not  in  very  good  humour  with 
each  other. 
Wednef.  15.  After  this,  I  waited  in  a  fruitlefs  expectation  till  the  15th, 
when  the  fame  three  gentlemen  came  tome  the  third  time, 
and  faid  tliey  had  been  fent  to  tell  me  that  the  Council  hgd 
protefted  againd  my  l)eliaviour  at  MacafTar,  and  my  having 
refufed  to  fign  the  certificate  which  had  been  required  of  mc, 
as  an  infult  upon  them,  and  an  adt  of  injufuce  to  their  na- 
tion. I  replied,  that  I  v/as  not  confcious  of  having  in  any 
inftance  acfted  contrary  to  the  treaties  fubfifting  between  the 
two  kingdoms,  unworthy  of  mj  cliaradlcr  as  an  oflicer,  lio- 
noured  with  a  commiffion  of  his  Britannic  Majefty,  or  un- 
fuitable  to  the  truft  repofed  in  me,  though  I  did  not  think 
I  had  been  ufed  by  the  Governor  of  Macaflar  as  the  fubjedt 
of  a  friend  and  ally;  defiring  that  if  they  had  any  thing  to 
allege  againfl  me,  it  might  be  reduced  to  writing,  and  laid 
before  the  King  my  Maficr,  to  whom  alone  I  tliought  my- 
felf  amenable.  With  this  anfv^cr  they  again  departed,  and 
Thjrfday  i6,  the  ucxt  day,  having  not  yet  received  any  anfwer  to  my  let- 
ter, I  wrote  a  fecond,  dire(n:ed  like  the  firfi,  in  which  1  re- 
prefented  that  the  fliip's  leaks  were  every  dav  incrcafinir. 

and 
4 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  6^^ 

and  urged,  in  more  preffing  terms,    my  requeft  that  fhe      1768. 
might  be  repaired,  and  that  the  ufe  of  wharfs  and  ftore-  v_il"Zl_/ 
houfes  might  be  afforded  me.  '^''"''"''^'^  •^• 

On  the  1 8th,  the  fhebander  cam-e  again  to  me,  and  ac- Saturday  18. 
quainted  me,  that  the  Council  had  given  orders  for  the  re- 
pair of  the  fhip  at  Onruft,  and  as  there  was  no  ftore-houfe 
empty,  had  appointed  one  of  the  Company's  veiTels  to  attend 
me,  and  take  in  my  ftores.  I  enquired  whether  there  was 
not  an  anfwer  to  my  letter  in  writing ;  to  which  lie  anfwered 
in  the  negative,  adding,  that  it  was  not  ufual,  a  mcflage  by 
him,  or  fome  other  officer,  having  been  always  thought 
fufficient. 

After  this  I  was  fupplied,  for  my  money,  with  every  thing 
I  could  delire,  from  the  Company's  ftores,  without  any  fur- 
ther difficulty. 

A  pilot  was  ordered  to  attend  me,  and  on  the  22d,  we  an-  wcdnef.  zz. 
chored  at  Onruft,  where,  having  cleared  the  ffiip,  and  put 
her  ftores  on  board  the  Company's  veiTcl,  we  found  the  bow- 
fprit  and  cap,  as  well  as  the  main  yard,  rotten,  and  alto- 
gether unferviceable,  the  fhcathing  every  where  eaten  oiF 
by  the  worms,  and  the  main  planks  of  the  fhip's  bottom  fo 
much  damaged  and  decayed,  that  it  was  abfolutely  necelTary 
to  heave  her  down,  before  fhe  could  be  fufficiently  repaired 
to  fail  for  Europe ;  but  as  other  fhips  were  already  heaved 
down,  and  confequently  the  wharfs  at  this  time  pre-occu- 
pied,  the  carpenters  could  not  begin  their  work  till  the  24th  SundaVzV 
of  July. 

Under  the  hands  of  thefe  people  the  fliip  continued  till      Auguft. 
Tuefday  the  i6th  of  Auguft.     When  they  came  to  examine  '^"'^'^^  '^* 
her  bottom,  they  found  it  fo  bad  that  they  were  unanimoufly 
of  opinion  it  fliould  be  fliifted:  this,  however,  I  ftrenuoufly 
cppofed ;  I  knew  flie  was  an  old  lliip,  and  I  was  afraid  that 

if 


^^<f  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S   VOYAGE 

1/68.  if  her  bottom  was  opened  it  might  be  found  Hill  worfe  than 
v-l^!l^  it  was  thought,  and  poffibly  fo  bad  as  that,  like  tl:>e  Fal- 
Tuefday  16,  j^^q^^^j.,^  ^^^  might  be  condemned ;  I  therefore  deftred  that  a 
good  Iheathing  only  might  be  put  over  all ;  but  tlie  haivfe, 
or  mailer  carpenter,  would  not  confent,  except  I  would  cer- 
tify under  my  hand,  that  what  fliould  be  done  to  the  fhip 
was  not  according  to  his  judgment  but  my  own,  which  he 
faid  was  neccfiary  for  his  jufliucation,  if,  after  fuch  repairs 
only  as  I  thought  fit  to  direct  had  been  made,  the  fl:iip 
fliould  come  Ihort  of  her  port.  As  I  tlunight  this  a  reafon- 
able  propofition,  I  readily  complied;  but  as  I  was  now 
become  anfweo-able  for  the  fate  of  the  ihip,  1  had  her  care- 
fully examined  by  my  own  carpenter  and  his  mate,  myfelf 
and  officers  always  attending.  The  but  ends  of  the  planks 
that  joined  to  the  ftern  were  fo  open,  that  a  man's  hand 
might  be  thrufl  in  between ;  feven  chain-plates  were  broken 
and  decayed,  the  iron  work,  in  general,  was  in  a  very  bad 
ftate ;  feveral  of  the  knees  were  loofe,  and  fome  of  them 
were  broken. 

While  I  remained  here,  two  fliips  belonging  to  our  hidia 
Company  put  into  this  port,  and  we  found,  among  otlier 
private  lliips  from  India,  one  called  the  Dudly,  from  Bengal, 
which  had  proved  fo  leaky  that  it  was  impoflible  to  carry 
lier  back.  Application  had  been  made  to  the  Governor  and 
Council  for  leave  to  careen  her,  v/hich  had  been  granted  ; 
but  as  the  wharfs  had  been  kept  in  continual  ufe,  Ihe  had 
been  pvit  off  above  four  months.  The  Captain,  not  v/itliout 
reafon,  was  apprehenfive  that  he  might  be  kept  here  till  the 
worms  had  eaten  through  the  bottom  of  his  velTel,  and 
knowing  that  I  had  received  particular  civilities  from  Ad- 
miral Routing,  applied  to  me  to  intercede  for  him,  which  I 
was  very  happy  to  do  with  fuch  fuccefs,  that  a  wharf  v;as 
inimcdiately  allotted  her.     M.  Houcing  is  an  old  man,  and 

an 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  657 

an  Admiral  in  the  fcrvice  of  the  States,  with  the  rank  of      '768. 

Auguft. 

Commander  in  Chief  of  their  marine,  and  the  fhips  belong-  v,^— ^~— j 
ing  to  the  Company  in  India.  He  received  his  firft  maritime 
knowlege  on  board  an  Englifli  man  of  war,  fpeaks  Englifli 
and  French  extremely  well,  and  does  honour  to  the  fervice 
both  by  his  abilities  and  politenefs  :  he  was  fo  obliging  as  to 
give  mt  a  general  invitation  to  liis  table,  in  confequence  of 
which  I  was  often  with  him,  and  it  is  with  pleafure  that  I 
take  this  opportunity  of  making  a  public  acknowledgment 
of  the  favours  I  received  from  him,  and  bearing  this 
teftimony  to  his  public  and  private  mei'it :  he  was  indeed  the 
only  officer  belonging  to  the  Company  from  whom  I  received 
any  civility,  or  v/ith  whom  I  had  the  leaft  communication ; 
for  I  found  them,  in  general,  a  referved  and  fupercilious  fet 
of  people.  The  Governor,  although  the  fervant  of  a  repub- 
lic, takes  upon  himfelf  more  Hate,  in  fomc  particulars, 
than  any  fovereign  prince  in  Europe.  Whenever  he  goes 
abroad,  he  is  attended  by  a  party  of  horfe  guards,  and  two 
black  men  go  before  his  coach,  in  the  manner  of  running 
footmen,  each  having  a  large  cane  in  his  hand,  with  which 
they  not  only  clear  the  way,  but  feverely  chaftift:  all  who  do 
not  pay  the  homage  that  is  cxpedled  from  people  of  all 
ranks,  as  well  thofe  belonging  to  the  country  as  llrangers. 
Almofl  every  body  in  this  place  keeps  a  carriage,  which  is 
drav^n  by  two  horfes,  and  driven  by  a  man  upon  a  box,  like 
our  chariots,  but  is  open  in  front :  whoever,  in  fuch  a  car- 
riage, meets  the  Governor,  either  in  the  town  or  upon  the 
road,  is  expe6ted  not  only  to  draw  it  on  one  lide,  but  to  gee 
out  of  it,  and  make  a  mod  refpedful  obeifance  while  his 
Excellency's  coach  goes  by;  nor  mufl  any  carriage  that 
follows  him  drive  pafl  on  any  accoimt,  but  keep  behind 
him,  however  prefling  be  the  neceflity  for  hafte.  A  very 
mortifying  homage,  of  the  fame  kind,  is  alfo  exacted  by  the 
Vol.  I.  4  P  members 


(5j8  CAPTAIN    CARTERET^s    VOYAGE 

^7^8.      members  of  the  Council,  called  Edele  Heeren,  for  whoever 

Aogull.  n't 

u — . — -/  meets  them  is  obliged  to  itop  his  coach,  and,  though  not  ta 
get  out,  to  Hand  up  in  it,  and  make  his  reverence:  thefe 
Edele  Heeren  are  preceded  by  one  black  man  with  a  flick, 
nor  muft  any  perfon  prefume  to  pafs  their  carriage  any  more 
than  that  of  the  Governor.  Thefe  ceremonies  are  generally 
complied  with  by  the  Captains  of  Indiamen,  and  other 
trading  fhips  j  but  having  the  honour  to  bear  his  Majefty's. 
commiffion,  I  did  not  think  myfelf  at  liberty  to  pay  to  a 
Dutch  Governor,  any  homage  which  is  not  paid  to  my  owa 
Sovereign :  it  is,  however,  conftantly  required  of  the  King's 
officers  ;  and  two  or  three  days  after  I  came  hither,  the  land- 
lord of  the  hotel  where  I  lodged  told  me,  he  had  been  ordered 
by  the  fhebander  to  let  me  know  that  my  carriage,  as  well 
as  others,  mull  flop,  if  I  fhould  meet  the  Governor  or  any 
of  the  Council ;  but  I  defired  him  to  acquaint  the  fliebander 
that  I  could  not  confent  to  perform  any  fuch  ceremony? 
and  upon  his  intimating  fomewhat  about  the  black  men 
with  flicks,  I  told  him  that  if  any  infult  fliould  be  offered 
me,  I  knew  1k)w  to  defend  myfelf,  and  would  take  care  to  be 
upon  my  guard ;  at  the  fame  time  pointing  to  my  piUols, 
which  then  happened  to  lie  upon  the  table:  upon  this  he 
went  away,  and  about  three  hours  afterwards  he  returned, 
and  told  me  he  had  orders  from  the  Governor  to  acquaint  me 
that  I  might  do  as  I  pleafed.  The  hotel  at  which  I  refuled  is 
licenfed  by  the  Governor  and  Council,  and  all  flrangers  are 
obliged  to  take  up  their  abode  there,  except  officers  in  his 
Majcily's  fcrvice,  who  are  allowed  private  lodgings,  which, 
however,  I  did  not  chufe. 

At  this  place  I  continued  between  three  and  four  months, 
and  during  all  that  time  I  had  the  honour  to  fee  the  Gover- 
nor but  twice ;  the  firft  time  was  at  my  arrival,  when  I  waited 
upon  him  at  one  of  his  houfes,  a  little  way  in  the  country ; 

the 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  659 

the  next  was  in  town,  as  he  was  walking  before  his  houfe       1768. 

'  Auguft. 

there,   when  I   addrelled  him  upon  a  particular  occafion.   v > 

Soon  after  the  news  of  the  Prince  of  Orange's  marriage 
arrived  here,  he  gave  a  public  entertainment,  to  which  I 
had  the  honour  of  being  invited;  but  having  heard  that 
Commodore  Tinker,  upon  a  like  occalion,  finding  that  he 
was  to  be  placed  below  the  gentlemen  of  the  Dutch  Coun- 
cil, had  abruptly  left  the  room,  and  was  followed  by  all  the 
Captains  of  his  fquadron ;  and  being  willing  to  avoid  the 
difagreeable  dilemma  of  cither  fitting  below  the  Council,  or 
following  the  Commodore's  example,  I  applied  to  the  Gover- 
nor to  know  the  ftation  that  would  be  allotted  mc,  before  I 
accepted  his  invitation,  and  finding  that  I  could  not  be  per- 
mitted to  take  place  of  the  Council,  I  declined  it.  On  both 
thefe  occafions  I  fpoke  to  his  Excellency  by  an  Englifh  mer- 
chant, who  acT:ed  as  an  interpreter.  The  firft  time  he  had 
not  the  civility  to  offer  me  the  leaft  refrefhment,  nor  did  he 
the  lall  time  fo  much  as  afk  me  to  go  into  the  houfe. 

The  defe6ts  of  the  fliip  were  at  length  repaired,  much  to 
my  fatisfadtion,  and  I  thought  Ihe  might  then  fafely  proceed 
to  Europe,  though  the  Dutch  carpenters  were  of  a  different 
opinion.  The  proper  feafon  for  failing  was  not  yet  arrived, 
and  my  worthy  friend,  Admiral  Routing,  reprefented  that 
if  I  went  to  fea  before  the  proper  time,  I  fhould  meet  with 
fuch  weather  ofT  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  as  would  make  me 
repent  it ;  but  being  very  ill  myfelf,  and  the  people  being 
fickly,  I  thought  it  better  to  run  the  rifk  of  a  few  hard  gales 
off  the  Cape,  than  remain  longer  in  this  unhealthy  place, 
cfpecially  as  the  wefl  monfoon  was  fetting  in,  during  which 
the  mortality  here  is  yet  greater  than  at  other  times. 

On  Wednefday  the  15th  of  September,  therefore,  we  fet    September. 
fail  from  Onruft,  where  the  fhip  had  been  refitted,  without  ''^^^^^^-  's- 

4  P  2  returning, 


66o 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


1768. 

September. 
Wednef.  15. 


Monday  20. 


Friday  25. 


returning,  as  is  ufual,  into  Batavia  Road ;  and  as  I  was  not 
well,  I  fent  my  Lieutenant  to  take  leave  of  the  Governor  on 
my  behalf,  and  offer  my  fervice,  if  he  had  any  difpatches 
for  Europe.  It  was  happy  for  me  that  I  was  able  to  procure 
a  fupply  of  Englifh  feamen  here,  otherwife  I  fhould  not  at 
laft  have  been  able  to  bring  the  fliip  home,  for  I  had  now 
loft  no  lefs  than  four  and  twenty  of  the  hands  I  had  brought 
out  of  Europe,  and  had  four  and  twenty  more  fo  ill,  that 
feven  of  them  died  in  our  pafTage  to  the  Cape. 

On  the  20th,  we  anchored  on  the  fouth  eaft  fide  of  Prince's 
Ifland,  in  the  Streight  of  Sunda,  and  the  next  morning,  I 
fent  out  the  boats  for  wood  and  water :  of  water,  however, 
we  could  not  get  a  fufficient  quantity  to  complete  our  ftock, 
for  there  had  not  yet  been  rain  enough  to  fupply  the  fprings, 
the  wet  monfoon  having  but  juft  fet  in.  At  this  time  we  had 
the  wind  fo  frefh  from  the  fouth  eaft,  which  made  this  part 
of  the  ifland  a  lee  fliore,  that  I  could  not  get  under  fail  till 
the  25th,  when,  it  being  more  moderate,  we  weighed,  and 
worked  over  to  the  Java  Ihore.  In  the  evening,^  we  anchored 
in  a  bay  called  by  fome  New  Bay,  and  by  others  Canty  Bzy, 
which  is  formed  by  an  ifland  of  the  fame  name.  We  had 
fourteen  fathom  water,  with  a  fine  fandy  bottom.  The 
peak  of  Prince's  Ifland  bore  N.  13  W.  the  weftermoft  point  of 
New  Ifland  S.  82  W.  and  the  eaftermoft  point  of  Java  that  was 
in  fight,  N.  E.  Our  diftance  from  the  Java  fliore  was  about 
a  mile  and  a  quarter,  and  from  the  watering-place  a  mile 
and  an  half.  New  Bay  is  the  beft  place  for  wooding  and 
watering  of  any  in  thefe  parts:  the  water  is  extremely 
clear,  and  fo  good  that  I  made  my  people  flave  all  that 
we  had  taken  in  at  Batavia  and  Prince's  Ifland,  and  fupply  it 
from  this  place.  It  is  procured  from  a  fine  flrong  run  on 
tlie  Java  fhore,  which  falls  dov/n  from  ilie  land  into  the 
fca,  and  by  means  of  a  hoafe  it  may  be  laded  into  the  boats, 

and 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  -  665 

and  the  cafks  filled  without  putting  them  on  fhore,  which       1768. 

11  1  ,~  1  ,  •    .  September. 

renders  the  work  very  eaty  and  expeditious.    There  is  a  little   « v— —/ 

reef  of  rocks  within  which  the  boats  go,  and  lie  in  as  fmooth  '"  ^^^^* 
water,  and  as  effedlually  flieltered  from  any  fwell,  as  if  they 
were  in  a  mill-pond  ;  nor  does  the  reef  run  out  fo  far  as  tO' 
be  dangerous  to  Ihipping,  though  the  contrary  is  aflerted  in 
Herbert's  Diredtory ;  and  if  a  fhip,  when  lying  there,  fhould 
be  driven  from  her  anchors  by  a  wind  that  blows  upon  the 
fliore,  fhe  may,  with  the  greateft  eafe,  run  up  the  paflage 
between  New  Ifland  and  Java,  where  there  is  fufficient 
depth  of  water  for  the  largeft  vefTel,  and  a  harbour,  in. 
which,  being  land-locked,  flie  will  find  perfect  fecurity. 
Wood  raiay  be  had  any  where  either  upon  Java  or  New 
Illand,  neither  of  which,  in  this  part,  are  inhabited. 

Having  in  a  few  days  completed  our  wood  and  water,  we- 
weighed  and  fiiood  out  of  the  Streight  of  Sunda,  with  a  fine 
frelh  gale  at  South  Eaft,  which  did  not  leave  us  till  the  ifland 
of  Java  was  feven  hundred  leagues  behind  us. 

On  Monday  the  2qd  of  November,  we  difcovered  the  coafi:    November, 

„   .  Monday  2  V 

of  Africa ;  at  day-break  on  the  28th  we  made  the  Table  Saturday  iSv 
Land  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  the  fame  evening  an- 
chored in  the  bay.  We  found  here  only  a  Dutch  fliip  from 
Europe,  and  a  fnow  belonging  to  the  place,  which  however 
was  in  the  Company's  fervice,  for  the  inhabitants  are  not 
permitted  to  have  any  ihipping. 

Table  Bay  is  a  good  harbour  in  fummer,  but  not  in  winter  5; 
fo  that  the  Dutch  will  not  permit  any  of  their  vefi^els  to 
lie  here  longer  tlian  the  i5t'h  of  May,  which  anfwers  to  our 
November.  After  that  time,  all  fiiips  go  to  Falfe  Bay,  which 
is  Avell  fheltered  from  the  north  weft  winds,  which  blow 
here  with  great  violence* 

At 


6G2  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1768.  At  this  place  we  breathed  a  pare  air,  had  wholefome  food,, 
' , '  and  went  freely  about  ihe  counrry  which  is  extremely  plea- 

fant,  fo  that  I  began  to  think  myfeif  already  in  Europe.  We 
found  the  inhabitants  open,  hofpitable  and  polite,  there 
being  fcarcely  a  Gentleman  in  the  place,  either  in  a  public 
or  private  flation,  from  whom  I  did  not  receive  fome  civility; 
and  I  fliould  very  ill  deferve  the  favours  they  bellowed,  if  I 
did  not  particularly  mention  the  Firft  and  Second  Governor, 
and  the  Fifcal. 

1769.  The  recovery  of  my  people  made  it  neceflary  to  continue 
wednef.  6^     hcrc  till  the  6th  of  Januaiy  1769;  in  the  evening  of  this  day 

I  fet  fail,  and  before  it  was  dark  cleared  the  land. 

Wednef.  20.       Qu  the  20th,  aftcT  a  fine  and  pleafant  pafTage,  we  made  the 

ifland  of  Saint  Helena ;  and  fet  fail  again  on  the  morning  of  the 

Sunday  24.     24th.  At  midnight  on  the  30th,  we  made  the  north  eaft  part  of 

Saturday  30* 

the  Ifland  of  Afcenfion,  and  brought  to  till  day-light,  when  we 
ran  in  clofe  to  it.  I  fent  a  boat  out  to  difcover  the  anchoring- 
place  which  is  called  Crofs-hill  Bay,  while  we  kept  running 
along  the  north  eaft  and  north  fide  of  the  ifland,  till  we 
came  to  the  north  weft  extremity  of  it,  and  in  the  afternoon 
anchored  in  the  bay  we  fought.  The  way  to  find  this  place 
at  once,  is  to  bring  the  largeft  and  moft  confpicuous  hill 
upon  the  ifland  to  bear  S.  E. ;  when  the  fhip  is  in  this  pofi- 
tion,  the  Bay  will  be  open,  right  in  the  middle  between  two 
other  hills,  the  weftermoft  of  which  is  called  Crofs-hill,  and 
gives  name  to  the  Bay.  Upon  this  hill  there  is  a  flag-ftaff, 
which  if  a  fliip  brings  to  bear  S.  S.  E.  4  E.  or  S.  E.  by  E.  and 
runs  in,  keeping  it  fo  till  llae  is  in  ten  fathom  water,  flie 
will  be  in  the  beft  part  of  the  Bay.  In  our  run  along  the 
north  eaft  fide  of  the  ifland,  I  obferved  feveral  other  fmall 
fandy  bays,  in  fome  of  which  my  boat  found  good  anchor- 
age, 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


%: 


age,  and  faw  plenty  of  turtle,  though  they  are  not  fo  con-      1769. 
venient  as  this,  where  we  had  plenty  of  turtle  too.     The  ,  J^""^/-^ 
beach  here  is  a  fine  white  £and  ;  the  landing-place  is  at  fome  ^^""'''^y  30- 
rocks,  which  lie  about  the  middle  of  the  Bay,  and  may  be 
known  by  a  ladder  of  ropes  which  hangs  from  the  top  to 
mount  them  by.     In  the  evening  I  landed  a  few  men  to  turn 
the  turtle  that  fhould  come  on  fhore  during  the  night,  and 
in  the  morning  1  found  that  they  had  thus  fecured  no  lefs 
than  eighteen,  from  four  hundred  to  fix  hundred  weight 
each,  and  thefe  were  as  many  as  we  could  well  flow  on  the 
deck.    As  there  are  no  inhabitants  upon  this  ifland,  it  is  a 
cuftom  for  the  fliips  that  touch  at  it  to  leave  a  letter  in  a 
bottle,  with  their  names  and  deflination,  the  date,  and  a  few 
other  particulars.     We  complied  with  this  cuftom,  and  in 
the  evening  of  Monday  the  ill  of  February,  we  weighed  MondTy  u° 
anchor  and  fet  fail. 

On  Friday  the  19th,  we  difeovered  a  Ihipat  a  confiderable  Friday  ig. 
diftance  to  leeward  in  the  fouth  weft  quarter,  which  hoifted 
French  colours  ;  Ihe  continued  in  fight  all  day,  and  the  next 
morning  we  perceived  that  Ihe  had  greatly  outfailed  us 
during  the  night ;  fhe  made  a  tack  however  in  order  to  get 
farther  to  windward,  and  as  it  is.  not  ufual  for  fhips  to  turn 
to  windward  in  thefe  parts,  it  was  evident  that  fhe  had 
tacked  in  order  to  fpeak  with  us.  By  noon  fhe  was  near 
enough  to  hail  us,  and,  to  my  great  furprife,  made  ufe  both: 
of  my  name  and  that  of  the  fliip,  enquiring  after  my  health,, 
and  telling  me,  that  after  the  return  of  the  Dolphin  to  Eu- 
rope, it  was  believed  we  had  fuflfered  fhipwreck  in  the: 
Streight  of  Magellan,  and  that  two  fhips  had  been  fent  out 
in  queft  of  us.  I  afked,  in  my  turn,  who  it  was  that  was  fa 
well  acquainted  with  me  and  my  fhip,  and  with  the  opinions 
that  liad  been  formed  of  us  in  Europe  after  the  return  of  bur 
5  eora^ 


664  CAPTAIN    CARTERET's    VOYAGE 

1769-  .companion,  and  how  this  knowlege  had  been  acquired.  I 
^._.^iT^.  was  anfwered  tliat  the  fhip  which  hailed  us  was  in  the  fer- 
F"%  19.  ^^.^^^  ^£  ^Yi^  French  Eail  hidia  Company,  commanded  by  M. 
Bougainville  ;  that  (he  was  returning  to  England  from  the  Ifle 
of  France  ;  that  what  was  thought  of  the  Swallow  in  England, 
liad  been  learnt  from  the  French  Gazette  at  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  ;  and  that  we  were  known  to  be  that  vefTel  by  the  letter 
which  had  been  found  in  the  bottle  at  the  Ifland  of  Afcenfion  a 
few  days  after  we  had  left  that  place.  An  offer  was  then  made 
of  fupplying  me  with  refrefliments,  if  I  wanted  any,  and  I  was 
afked  if  i  had  any  letters  to  fend  to  France.  I  returned  thanks 
for  the  offer  of  refrefliments,  which  however  was  a  mere 
verbal  civility,  as  it  was  known  that  I  had  lately  failed  from 
the  places  where  M.  Bougainville  himfelf  had  been  fupplied ; 
but  I  faid  that  I  had  received  letters  for  France  from  fome 
Gentlemen  of  that  country  at  the  Cape,  and  if  he  would 
fend  his  boat  on  board  they  fhould  be  delivered  to  his  mef- 
fenger.  Thus  was  an  occafion  furnifhed  for  what  I  have 
reafon  to  believe  was  the  principal  obje<ft  of  M.  Bougainville 
in  fpeaking  with  us :  a  boat  was  immediately  fcnt  on  board, 
and  in  her  a  young  officer,  drefl  in  a  waiflcoat  and  trowfers  ; 
whether  he  was  thus  dreffed  by  defign  I  fliall  not  determine, 
but  I  foon  perceived  that  his  rank  was  much  fuperior  to  his 
appearance.  He  came  down  to  me  in  my  cabbin,  and  after 
the  ufual  compliments  had  pafTcd,  1  aflicd  him  how  he  came 
to  go  home  fo  foon  in  the  fcafon;  to  which  he  replied,  that 
there  had  been  fome  difagreemcnt  between  the  Governor 
and  inhabitants  of  the  Ifle  of  France,  and  that  he  had  been 
fcnt  home  in  haflc  with  difpatchcs :  this  flory  was  the  more 
plaufible,  as  1  had  heard  of  the  difpute  between  the  Gover- 
nor and  inhabitants  of  tlie  Ifle  of  France,  from  a  French 
Gcnilen^ian,  who  came  from  thence,  at  tl>c  Cape  of  Good 
3  Hope ; 


ROUND    THE    WORLD.  ^65 

Hope  ;  yet  I  was  not  perfeAIy  fatisfied :  for,  fuppofing  M.  '769. 
Bougainville  to  have  been  fent  in  hafte  to  Europe  with  dif-  ..^ly-'^Jy 
patches,  I  could  not  account  for  his  lofing  the  time  which  it  ^"'^**  ''" 
cofl  him  to  fpeak  with  me  ;  I  therefore  obferved  to  this 
Gentleman,  that  although  he  had  accounted  for  his  coming 
before  the  ufual  time  from  the  lile  of  France,  he  had  not  ac- 
counted for  his  coming  at  an  unufual  time  from  India, 
which  muft  have  been  the  cafe.  To  this,  however,  he  rea- 
dily replied,  that  they  had  made  only  a  fhort  trading  voyage 
on  the  weftern  coaft  of  Sumatra.  I  then  enquired,  what 
commodities  he  had  brought  from  thence  ;  and  he  anfwered, 
cocoa-nut  oil,  and  rattans :  but,  faid  I,  thefe  are  commodi- 
ties which  it  is  not  ufual  to  bring  into  Europe ;  it  is  true, 
faid  he,  but  thefe  commodities  we  left  at  the  Ifle  of 
!^rance,  the  oil  for  the  ufe  of  the  ifland,  and  the  rattans  for 
fliips  which  were  to  touch  there  in  their  way  to  China,  and 
in  exchange  we  took  in  another  freight  for  Europe  ;  this 
freight  I  think  he  faid  was  pepper,  and  his  whole  tale  being 
at  leaft  poflible,  I  aflied  him  no  more  queftions.  He  then 
toW  me,  he  had  heard  at  the  Cape,  that  I  had  been  with 
Commodore  Byron  at  Falkland's  Iflands  ;  and,  faid  he,  I  was 
on  board  the  French  fhip  that  met  you  in  the  Streight  of  Ma- 
gellan, which  muft  have  been  true,  for  he  mentioned  feveral 
incidents  that  it  was  otherwife  highly  improbable  he  fhould 
know,  particularly  the  ftore-lliip's  running  aground,  and 
many  of  the  difficulties  that  occurred  in  that  part  of  the 
Streight  which  we  pafled  together :  by  this  converfation  he 
contrived  to  introduce  feveral  enquiries,  concerning  the 
weftern  part  of  the  Streight,  the  time  it  coft  me  to  get 
through,  and  the  difficulties  of  the  navigation  ;  but  per- 
ceiving that  I  declined  giving  any  account  of  thefe  particu- 
lars, he  changed  his  fubjedl.  He  faid,  he  had  heard  that 
Vol.  L  4  Q^  wc 


(3^6  CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 

1769.  we  loft  an  officer  and  fome  men  in  an  engagement  with 
^-1-^^  the  Indians  ;  and  taking  notice  that  my  fhip  was  fmall,  and 
Fndny  .9.  ^  ^^^  failcr,  hc  infinuated  that  we  muft  have  fufFered  great 
hardfliip  in  fo  long  a  voyage  ;  but,  faid  he,  it  is  thought  to  be 
fafer  and  pleafanter  failing  in  the  South  Sea  than  any  where 
elfe.  As  I  perceived  that  he  waited  for  a  reply,  I  faid,  that 
the  great  ocean,  called  the  South  Sea,  extended  almoft  from 
one  pole  to  the  other ;  and  therefore,  although  that  part  of 
it  which  lay  between  the  Tropics  might  juftly  be  called  the 
Pacific,  on  account  of  the  trade-winds  that  blow  there  all 
the  year  ;  yet  without  the  Tropics,  on  either  fide,  the  winds 
were  variable,  and  the  feas  turbulent.  In  all  this  he  readily 
acquiefced,  and  finding  that  he  could  not  draw  from  me  any 
thing  to  fatisfy  his  curiofity,  by  ftarting  leading  fubjed:s  of 
converfation,  he  began  to  propofe  his  queftions  in  diredl 
terms,  and  defired  to  know  on  which  fide  the  equator  I  had 
crofled  the  South  Seas.  As  I  did  not  think  proper  to  anfwer 
this  queftion,  and  wiflied  to  prevent  others  of  the  fame  kind, 
I  rofe  up  fomewhat  abruptly,  and  I  believe  with  fome  marks 
of  difpleafure :  at  this  he  feemed  to  be  a  little  difconcerted, 
and  1  believe  was  about  to  make  an  apology  for  his  curio- 
fity, but  I  prevented  him,  by  defiring  that  he  would  make 
mj  compliments  to  his  Captain,  and  in  return  for  his  ob- 
liging civilities  prefent  him  with  one  of  the  arrows  that  had 
wounded  my  men,  which  I  immediately  went  into  my  bed- 
room to  fetch :  he  followed  me,  looking  about  him  with 
great  curiofity,  as  indeed  he  had  done  from  the  time  of  his 
firft  coming  on  board,  and  having  received  the  arrow,  he 
took  his  leave. 

After  he  was  gone,  and  we  had  made  fail,  I  went  upon 

the  deck,  where  my  Lieutenant  afked  me,  if  my  vifitor  had 

entertained  me  with  an  account  of  his  voyage.    This  led  me 

8  to 


R  0  U  N  D    T  H  E    W  O  R  L  D.  667 

to  tell  him  the  general  purport  of  our  convcrfation,  upon  '  769- 
which  he  affured  me  that  the  tale  I  had  heard  was  a  ficlion,  k_1I^ZI1j 
for,  fays  he,  the  boat's  crew  could  not  keep  their  fecret  fo  ^"  ^'  '■^' 
well  as  their  officer,  but  after  a  little  converfation  told  one 
of  our  people,  who  was  born  at  Quebec,  and  fpoke  French, 
that  they  had  been  round  the  globe  as  well  as  we.  Tliis 
naturally  excited  a  general  curiofity,  and  with  a  very  little 
difficulty  we  learnt  that  they  had  failed  from  Europe  in 
company  with  another  lliip,  which,  wanting  fome  repair, 
had  been  left  at  the  Ifle  of  France  ;  that  they  had  attempted 
to  pafs  the  Streight  of  Magellan  the  firft  fummer,  but  not 
being  able,  had  gone  back,  and  wintered  in  the  river  De  la 
Plata ;  that  the  fummer  afterwards  they  had  been  more  fuc- 
cefsful,  and  having  pafTed  the  Streight,  fpent  two  months  at 
th€  illand  of  Juan  Fernandes.  My  Lieutenant  told  me  alfo, 
that  a  boy  in  the  French  boat  faid  he  had  been  upon  that 
ifland  two  years,  and  that  while  he  was  there,  an  Englifli 
frigate  put  into  the  road,  but  did  not  anchor,  mentioning 
the  time  as  well  as  he  could  recollecH:,  by  which  it  appeared 
that  the  frigate  he  had  feen  was  the  Swallow.  On  the  boy's 
being  afked  how  he  came  to  be  fo  long  upon  the  ifland  of 
Juan  Fernandes,  he  faid  that  he  had  been  taken  upon  the 
Spanifli  coaft  in  the  Weft  Indies  in  a  fmuggling  party,  and 
fent  thither  by  the  Spaniards ;  but  that  by  the  French  fhip, 
in  whofe  boat  he  came  on  board  us,  having  touched  there, 
he  had  regained  his  liberty.  After  having  received  this  in- 
formation from  my  Lieutenant,  I  could  ealily  account  for 
M.  Bougainville's  having  made  a  tack  to  fpeak  to  me,  and 
for  the  converfation  and  behaviour  of  my  vilitor ;  but  I  was 
now  more  difpleafed  at  the  queftions  he  had  alked  me  than 
before,  for  if  it  was  improper  for  him  to  communicate  an 
account  of  his  voyage  to  me,  it  was  equally  improper  for  me 
to  communicate  an  account  of  my  voyage  to  him ;  and  I 

40^2  thought 


668  CAPTAIN    CARTERET's    VOYAGE 

1769-      thought  an  artful  attempt  to  draw  me  into  a  breach  of  my 

February.  .  ,   . ,        ,  . 

< — ^  obhgation  to  iccrecy,    while  he   impoied  upon  me   by   a 

"  ^^  '9'  fidtion  that  he  might  not  violate  his  own,  v/as  neither  liberal 
nor  juft.  As  what  the  boat's  crew  told  my  people,  differs  in 
feveral  particulars  from  the  account  printed  by  M.  Bougain- 
ville, I  lliali  not  pretend  to  determine  how  much  of  it  is 
true  ;  but  I  was  then  very  forry  that  the  Lieutenant  had  not 
communicated  to  me  the  intelligence  he  received,  fuch  as 
it  was,  before  my  gueil  left  me,  and  I  was  now  very  defirous 
to  fpeak  with  him  again,  but  this  was  impoffible ;  for  though 
the  French  fhip  was  foul  from  a  long  voyage,  and  we  had 
jufl  been  cleaned,  flic  fhot  by  us  as  if  we  had  been  at  anchor, 
•notwithftanding  we  had  a  fine  frefh  gale  and  all  our  fails  fct. 

Sundays"  C)n  the  7th  of  Marcli,  we  made  tlie  Weftern  Iflands,  and 

"went  between  Saint  Michael  and  Tercera ;  in  this  fituation 

we  found  the  variation  i^°  36'  W.  and  the  winds  began  to 

blow  from  the  S.  W.     The  gale,  as  we  got  farther  to  the 

Thurfdayu.  wcflward,  incrcafcd,  and  on  the  nth,  having  got  to  W.N. W. 

it  blew  very  hard,  with  a  great  fea  ;  we  fcudded  before  it 

with  the  forefail   only,   the  foot  rope  of  which  fuddenly 

breaking,  the  fail  blew  all  to  pieces,  before  we  could  get  the 

yard  down,  though  it  was  done  indantly.     This  obliged  us 

to  bring  the  fhip  to,  but  having,  with  all  poffible  expedition, 

bent  a  new  forefail,  and  .got  the  yard  up,  we  bore  away 

again  ;  this  was  the  laft  accident  that  happened  to  us  during 

Tucfday  i6.    the  voyagc.     On  the  16th,  being  in  latitude  49^  15'  N.  we 

Thurfdayis.  got  fouudings.     On  the  1 8th,  I  knew  by  the  depth  of  water 

that  we  were  in  the  Channel,  but  the  wind  being  to  the 

Friday  19.     nortliward,  we  could  not  make  land  till  the  next  day,  when 

Saturday  20.  wc  faw  the  Start  Point ;  and  on  the  20th,  to  our  great  joy, 

we  anchored  at  Spithead,  after  a  very  fine  paffage,  and  a  fair 

wind  all  the  way  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

A    TABLE 


ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


66c( 


T        A        B        L  E 

OF     THE 

VARIATION     of     the     COMPASS, 

As  obferved  on  board  of  the  Swallow,  in  her  Voyage  round  the  Globe^ 
in  the  Years  1766,  1767,  1768,  and  1769. 

N.  B.  The  days  of  the  month  In  this  Table,  are  not  by  the  Nautical  Account,  as  is 
the  cuftom  j  but,  for  the  convenience  of  thofe  that  are  not  ufed  to  that  way  of 
reckoning,  are  reduced  to  the  Civil  Account  :  A.M.  denotes,  that  the  obferva- 
tlon  was  made  In  the  forenoon,  and  P.M.  In  the  afternoon,  of  that  day  on  tlie 
noon  of  which  the  latitude  and  longitude  of  the  fhip  were  taken. 


TIME. 

Latitude  in  at 
Noon. 

Longitude  in 

at  Noon  from 

London. 

Vatiation. 

REMARKS; 

North. 

Wert. 

Weft. 

1766.  Auguft 

Englifh  Channel 

22° 

30 

1 

30.  P.M. 

45"   22' 

ly  i-j' 

20 

25    /From  the  Downs  to  the  Ifland  ofj 

Septem.   3.  P.M. 

38     36 

13    40 

19 

04  f                    Madeira. 

4.  A.  M. 

37     27 

14     12 

20 

17  J 

IHand  Madeira   -  - 

32     34 

16     35 

16 

CO 

' 

17.  A.M. 

24     33 

19    22 

13 

00 

21.  A.M. 

17     19 

22     19 

II 

14 

Tlic  ifland  of  Sill,  in  light,  S.  by  W,  ten  leaguer. 

22.  P.M. 

16     34 

22    29 

8 

20 

Was  th;n  between  the  Ifland  of  Sail  and  the  Ifland 
of  May. 

Porto  Praya     -     - 

15     00 

23    00 

8 

00 

Ifland  of  Saint  Jago. 

Oaober  10.  P.M. 

6     34 

21    41 

5 

36' 

. 

II.  P.M. 

6     40 

South. 

21     35 

6 

00 

22.  A.M. 

0      06 

25     °3 

6 

23 

On  the  paflage  from  the  Ifland  of 

25.  P.M. 

4     14 

27     23 

4 

30 

,      Saint  Jago  to  tlx  Streights  of 

27.  A.M.  ^ 

7     °3 

28     49 

3 

52 

Magellan. 

28.  P.M. 

8     46 

29     14 

I 

5° 

■    30.  P.M. 

10     57 

30     09 

0 

30 

31.  A.M. 

12     30 

30     30 

No 

var. 

' 

6-]0 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


A   T  A  B  L  E  of  the  Variation  of  the  Compass,  &c.  continued. 


TIME. 

Latitude  in  at 
Noon. 

Longitude  ir 

at  noon  fron 

London, 

Variation. 

REMARKS. 

I 

766. 

South. 

Weft. 

Eaft. 

Oaober 

31.  P.M. 

12^  56' 

30'    46 

1° 

24'' 

Novcm. 

\.  P.M. 

17    22 

32      09 

I 

40 

7.  A.M. 

23   54 

38       10 

4 

56 

P.M. 

5 

56 

8.  P.M. 

II.  A.M. 

25  49 
29   57 

.39     21 
42     27 

6 
8 

45 

50 

■  Coaft  of  Patagonia. 

15.  A.M. 

34   12 

46     41 

12 

00 

16.  A.M. 

34     3« 

47     58 

12 

36 

17.  A.M. 

34     46 

48     28 

13 

°3 

P.M. 

-     _     - 

_     -     - 

14 

20  _ 

,18.  A.M. 

35     37 

49     49 

14 

30  : 

■Soundings  54  f.ithoms  of  water,  with  a  bottom  of  fine 
black  fandf  rather  muddy. 

P.M. 
20.  P.M. 

^5 
15 

45 
33  i 

Ditto  depth  and  bottom. 

36    .67 

5.1     48 

Ditto  depth,  fine  (and,  but  not  fo  black,  with  fmall 
ftiellB. 

.21.  A.M. 

37    Ao 

,51     05 

J5 

52 

Had  no  bottom  with  So  fathoms  of  line, 

38     53 

53     12 

- 

Had  foundings  at  70  fathoms  water. 

40     34 

53    47 

-    • 

- 

No  bottom  with  90  fathoms  of  line. 

41     34,. 

55     39 

-    - 

- 

45  fathoms,  dark  brown  fandy  bottom. 

4*     57' 

56     06 

-    - 

- 

42  fathoms,  fine  grey  fand. 

41     06 

57     '18 

-    - 

- 

46  fathoms,  fine  dark  brown  fand. 

28.  A.M. 

41     14 

56     48 

19 

00  • 

'  39  fathoms  ditto  bottom,  here  we  caught  very  gooi 
filh  with  hooks  and  lines. 

29.  A.M. 

42     08 

58     41 

19 

02 

3*  fathoms  of  water,  with  ditto  bottom. 

P.M. 

-    -     - 

_     _     - 

'9 

45 

33  fathoms  depth. 

43     18 

58     56 

~ 

Depth  45  fathoms,  the  fame  bottom  ;  we  had  here  a 
calm,  and  we  caught  good  tiih. 

44     04 

58     53 

-    - 

- 

ja  fathoms  water,  the  fame  bottom. 

45     °o 

59     34 

-     - 

■    - 

53  fathoms,  fine  light  brown  fapJ. 

December  4.  P.M. 

47     00 

60     51 

20 

20 

47     J  5 

61        JO 

-     - 

- 

60  fathoms,  fine  dark  fand. 

5.  A.M. 

48     01 

61     28 

20 

40  . 

56  fathoms,  with  ditto  bottom,  and  grains  offpark- 
ling  ia^i  mixed  with  it. 

6.  A.M. 

47     35 

62     50 

20 

34 
1 

1  45  fathoms  of  water,  dark  fand,  with  fmall  ftones, 

47     3-^ 

63     08 

' 

■ 

( 

1      and  in  going  weft  about  10  miles,  we  had  ji  fa 
thorn,  a  bottom  of  fott  mud. 

ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


6/1 


A  TABLE  of  the  Variation  of  the  Compass,  8cc.  continued. 

TIME. 

Latitude  ilt  < 
Noon. 

Longitude  in 

at  Noon  fron 

London. 

1     Variation, 

REMARKS. 

1766. 

South. 

Well. 

Eaft. 

1 

December  7.  A.M. 

47''    14 

'   63°    37' 

Q           f  C  54  fathoms,  foft  mud,  with  foiall  (tones ;  at  this  time 
19       40    )      'he   land  was  feen  from  the  maft-heads,  fome- 
t      where  about  Cape  Blanco. 

8.  P.M. 

48     B4 

64      14 

20        30     j 

9.  A.M, 

49     12 

65      31 

20     35 

51     15 

66     02 

-    -    - 

53  fathoms,  dark  grey  fand,  with  fmall  ftones, 

17- 

Cape  Virgin  Mary,  Eaftermoft  entrance  of  the  Strelght. 

Magellan 

52     23  1  68     02 

22     50 

Elizabeth  Ifland 

22     36 

Port  Famine  -  - 

22     22 

Off  Cape  Froward 
York  Road  -     - 

22     10 
Ditto 

>In  the  Streights  of  Magellan. 

Swallow's  Harb.l 

Off  Cape  Notch  [• 

22       CO 

1767. 

OffCapeUprightJ 

Off  Cape  Pillar     - 

52     45 

75     1° 

21       50 

Weftermoft  entrance  of  the  Str. 

April  18.  P.M. 

49     18 

79     c6 

17       36" 

20.  A.M. 
26.   P.M. 

48     04 

45     57 

80  ^6 

81  22 

17       20 

r6     17 

^Coaft  of  Chili  in  the  South  Sea. 

28.  P.M. 

44    27 

81     24 

15     10 

May        -         \ 

33    40 
33     45 

78     52 
80    46 

II     00 

10     24 

Eaft  end  of  the  111.  Juan  Fernandes. 
Ifland  of  Maffafuero. 

28.  P.M. 

29    45 

79     50 

9     40  " 

31.  P.M. 

26     26 

82     15 

8     10 

June     I.  P.M. 

25  ,  51 

84     23 

8       8 

7.   P.M. 

27     23 

97     16 

5    45 

8.  A.M. 

27     20 

97     51 

5    45 

10.  A.M. 
12.  P.M. 

26     30 
26     53 

98     25 
100     21 

5    40  i 
4     13 

In  croffing  the  South  Sea. 

16.  P.M. 

28     II 

III     15 

2     00 

17.  A.M. 

28     04 

112     37 

1     51 

18.  P.M. 

28     07 

113     55 

2     00 

20.  A.M. 

28     04 

116     29 

2     09 

30.  P.M. 

26      GO 

130   bs 

2     32  _ 

, . 

(>-]Z 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


A  TABLE  of  the  Variation  of  the  Compass,  &c.  contimied. 

TIME, 

Latitude  in  at 
Noon. 

South. 

Longitude  in 

at  Noon  from 

London. 

Vaiiition. 

REMARKS. 

1767. 

Weft. 

Eaft. 

July  2.  P.M. 

0          / 
25        02 

133°    38' 

2°  46'~1  Off  Pitcairn's  Ifland. 

3- 

25        00 

136       16 

2     30 

4.  A.M. 

25        24 

137       18 

3     43 

5.  A.M. 

24       56 

137       23 

5     24 

6.  A.M. 

24        32 

138     3J 

4     16 

7.  A.M. 

24        10 

139    5S 

5     12 

P.M. 

8.  A.M. 

4  02 

5  56 

23       46 

139     65 

10.  P.M. 

21        38 

141     36 

4    20 

12.  A.M. 

20       36 

145     39 

4     40 

20       38 

146     00 

5     00 

13.  P.M. 

21       07 

147     44 

5    46 

15.  A.M. 

21       46 

150     50 

6     23 

16.  P.M. 

22       02 

151     09 

6     34 

19,  P.M. 

19       50 

153     59 

6    08 

20.  P.M. 

19       08 

156     15 

7     09   >Crofling  the  South  Sea. 

21.  P.M. 

18     43 

158     27 

7     38 

23.  P.M. 

16    22 

162     32 

6     05 

24.  P.M. 

14     19 

163     34 

6     29 

25.  A.M. 

12     13 

164     50 

9     30 

P.M. 

-    -    - 

-      _     - 

9     40 

26.  A.M. 

10    01 

166     52 

9     00 

28.  A.M. 

9     5° 

171     26 

9     04 

30.  A.M. 

9     50 

175     38 

9     32 

P.M. 
Auguft  I.  A.M. 

Q       00 

9     53 

179     33 

10    04 

Eaft. 

2.  A.M. 

10    09 

178     s^ 

10    30 

4.  A.M. 

10     22 

177      10 

10    54 

5.  A.M. 

10     35 

175      50 

1 1     14 

P.M. 

10  52 

11  17  ^ 

7.  P.M. 

10     52 

172      23 

ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


^73 


A  TABLE  of  the  Variation  of  the  Compass,  8cc.  continued. 


1767. 

Auguft  8.  P.M. 

9.  A.M. 

II.  P.M. 

Cape  Byron     -     - 

i8.   P.M. 

19.  P.M. 

20.  A.M. 

22.  P.M. 
24.  P.M. 
26.  P.M. 


latitude  ill  at 

Noon. 

Sol 

th. 

11° 

02' 

10 

56 

10 

49 

10 

40 

9 

58 

8 

62 

7 

53 

7 

56 

6 

24 

5 

07 

4 

46 

at  Noon  from 
London. 


171 
171 
167 

164 
162 
160 


Eaft, 
0 


158       56 
158      56 

157       32 
155      08 

153       17 

In  fight  and  on  the  weft  fide  of  Nova) 

Britannia  ) 

Cape  St.  George  -  I    5     00  I  152     19 

In  St.  George's  Channel 

Septem.  16.  A.M. 

19.  A.M. 

20.  P.M. 
111.  A.M. 

22.  P.M. 

23.  P.M. 

24.  P.M. 
27.  A.M. 

P.M. 

gdk  Af.M. 

Oaober  3.  A.M. 

P.  M. 

5.  P.M. 

6.  A.M. 

Vol.  L 


2 

19 

145 

31 

I 

57 

143 

28 

I 

45 

143 

02 

I 

33 

142 

22 

I 

20 

141 

29 

0 

52 

139 

56 

0 

05 

138 

56 

North. 

0 

05 

138 

41 

2 

^3 

136 

41 

2- 

S'' 

•136 

17 

4 

25 

134 

37 

4 

41 

132 

51' 

4 

31 

132 

39 

4 

21 

132 

45 

Variation. 

Eaft. 

10° 

27 

ID 

02 

ID 

38 

II 

GO 

8 

30 

8 

30 

8 

31 

8 

20 

7 

42 

6 

25 

7 

14 

6 

30 

5 

20 

4 

40 

6 

30- 

5 

26 

4 

40     , 

4 

40     , 

4 

54 

4 

30 

4 

J7 

REMARKS. 


N.  E.  end  of  Egmont,  one  of  the 
Charlotte  Iflands. 


Off  of  Carteret's  and  Gower's  Ifl.. 


Nova  Hibernxa, 
(Nova  Britannia. 

)    Hue  the  land  feemed  to  have  an  efTe^  on  th< 
t-  needle. 

Off  the  Admiralty  Iflands^ 


3     08   j  From  the  Admiralty  Iflands  to 
the  Ifland  Mindanao. 


2  30 
2  09 
a    00 


I  41 

3  09 

3  14 

3  10 

3  33- J 
R 


^74 


CAPTAIN  CARTERET'S  VOYAGE 


A   TABLE  of  the  Variation  of  the  Compass,  Sec.  continued. 

TIME, 

Latitude  in  at 
Noon. 

Longitude  in 

at  Noon  from 

London. 

Vatiation. 

REMARKS. 

1767. 

North. 

Fall 

. 

Eaft. 

~^- 

Oaober  8.  A.M. 

3"     53' 

134*^ 

13' 

3° 

3B'- 

9.  A.M. 

4     03 

134 

04 

3 

1 1 

• 

12.   P.M. 

4     49 

133 

42 

2 

19    1  From   the  Admiralty  Iilands  to 

13.  P.M. 

5     12 

133 

27 

2 

20 

the  Ifland  Mindanao. 

16.  A.M. 

5     64 

133 

10 

2 

34 

27.  P.M. 

6     35 

127 

56 

2 

10  - 

Cape  St.  Auguflain 

6     15 

11-1 

20 

I 

45 

Ifland  of  Mindana©. 

South  End 

5     34 

126 

25 

I 

20 

Off  the  Illand  Mindanao. 

Novem.  6.  A.M. 

5     34 

125 

40 

0 

48- 

, 

P.M. 

-     -     - 

-        - 

- 

0 

49 

7.  P.M. 

6     37 

125 

23 

0 

39 

8.  P.M. 

14.  A.M. 

5     30 
I     57 

124 
122 

41 
04 

0     50 
0     06 

Weft. 

From  the  Ifland  Mindanao  to 
the  Streights  of  Maccaffar. 

26.  P.M. 

0     04 

South. 

118 

15 

0 

19 

27.  A.M. 

0       14 

117 

45 

0 

12 

December  7. 

3     26 

116 

45 

0 

27  J 

Bonthain 

5     30 

117 

53 

1 

16 

At  the  Ifland  of  Celebes. 

Wand  Tonikaky  - 

5     31 

117 

17 

I 

00 

Off  the  S.E.  end  of  the  Ifland  Ce- 

1768. May  29.  P.M. 

5     29 

I  10 

23 

0 

56 

lebes. 

Ott"  Madura   - 

- 

0 

3" 

On  the  N.E.  part  of  the  Ifland 

Batavia     - 

- 

0 

25 

of  Java. 

Septcm.  30.  P.M. 

7     41 

lOI 

36 

0 

51" 

Oaobef     2.  P.  M. 

JO     37 

97 

19 

2 

06 

4.  P.M. 

12     13 

93 

56 

3 

12 

12.  P.M. 

19     50 

76 

40 

3 

30 

14.  P.M. 

15.  P.M. 
17.  A.M. 

21  47 

22  53 
24     23 

72 

70 
68 

47 

47 
02 

6 
8 
9 

26 
09 
36 

From  the  Streights  of  Sunda  to 
tlie  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

P.iM. 

_     -     _ 

_ 

- 

1 1 

20 

18.  P.M. 

25     08 

67 

21 

II 

50 

i 

19.  P.M. 

25     08 

67 

08 

12 

49. 

, 

ROUND    THE    WORLD. 


^75 


A   TABLE  of  the  Variation  of  the  Compass,  &c.  continued. 

TIME. 

Latitude  in  at    "-""Si'^J^  " 
Noon.          ^tNoonfron- 
London. 

Variation. 

REMARKS. 

1768. 

South. 

Eaft. 

Wert. 

Oaob.  20.  A.M. 

24°   59 

'  '^^^   35 

12°    54  1 

P.M. 

-    -    - 

-    -    . 

II       48 

24.  A.M. 

23     21 

64   31 

12     54 

25.  P.M. 

23     23 

63     35 

12     39 

26.  A.M. 

23     32 

62     43 

'3     42 

28.  P.M. 

24    52 

60     14 

16     10 

30.  P.M. 

25     40 

56     50 

18     18 

31.  P.M. 

26     31 

54    49 

18     24 

Novem.  i.  A.M. 

27     05 

52     57 

20       12 

P.M. 

3.  A.M. 

27     40 

50     55 

20       20 
20       58 

P.M. 

-     -    _ 

-     _    . 

21       23 

' 

4.  P.M. 

27     42 

50        ID 

21        15 

.  5-  P-M. 

27     44 

49     01 

21        09 

6.  P.M. 

28     58 

46     23 

22        38 

From  the  Strelghts  of  Sunda  to 

7.  A.M. 

29     59 

43     55 

24       40 

the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

P.M. 

24    55 

8.  P.M. 

30     12 

42     51 

25     39 

9.  A.M. 

30     19 

41     37 

25     50 

10.  P.M. 

30     37 

40    48 

25     32 

11.   A.M. 

33         07 

38     4/ 

z^      08 

12.  P.M. 

32     39 

37     17 

25     02 

13.  P.M. 

33     21 

35     27 

25     05 

19.  P.M. 

35     17 

28     38 

22     32 

20.  P.M. 

35    42 

27     22 

22     46 

21.  P.M. 

35    46 

27        CO 

22     18 

22.  P.M. 

35     04 

26     29 

22     50 

23.  P.M. 

34     57 

25   46 

21     39 

24.  P.M. 

34     52 

25    28 

21     44 

Cape  of  Good  Hope 

34     24 

18     30 

19     30  J 

1769.  Jan.  9.  P.M. 

30     37 

13   08 

19     20  J  From  t]ie  Cape  to  tlie  Ifland  of 

14.  P.M.    22     16  1 

4     52 

16193                  ^^'  Helena. 

9 

^76 


CAPTAIN    CARTERET'S    VOYAGE 


A  TABLE  of  the  Variation  of  the  Compass,  &c.  concluded. 

TIME. 

Lstitude  in  ai 
Noon. 

Longitude  in 

at  Noon  from 

London. 

Variation. 

REMARKS. 

1769. 

South. 

Eaft. 

Weft. 

Jan.  15.  P.M. 

21°    04' 

3°  64 

16       31 

^        18.  P.M. 

17      05 

0     10 

14       38 

From  the  Cape  to  the  Illand  of 

19.  P.M. 

16      06 

Weft. 
I       38 

13       46    . 

St.  Helena. 

25.  P.M. 

26.  P.M. 

14      22 
12       54 

7  04 

8  05 

12       30  ■ 
II      47 

From  the  Ifland  St.  Helena  to  the 

27.  P.M. 

I  I       36 

9     25 

II       40 

Illand  of  Afcenfion. 

28.  P.M. 

10       26 

10     36 

10      46 

Feb.  2.  P.M. 

6     45 

14    42 

9     34' 

3.  P.M. 

5    04 

15    45 

9     04 

4.  A.M. 

3     26 

16    49 

9     10 

5.  P.M. 

2     01 

17     34 

8     58 

6.  P.M. 

0     20 

North. 

18     27 

8     32 

7.  P.M. 

0      58 

19     24 

8     37 

8.  A.M., 

I      56 

20     16 

8     25 

10.  P.M. 

^     39 

28     58 

7     - 

. 

15.  P.M. 

6     38 

32     40 

4    35 

From  the  Ifland  of  Afcenfion  to 

16.  P.M. 

8     03 

24     18 

6     09 

England 

19.  P.M. 

12     06 

24     34 

6    48 

21.  P.M. 

M     39 

27     15 

6     12 

26.  A.M.' 

23     64 

28     15 

6     00 

Marcli  3.  P.M. 

32     33 

23     35 

13     26 

4.  A.M. 

34    02 

22     32 

13     43 

5.  P.M. 

35  v3o 

21     56 

14     53 

6.  A.M.' 

36    46 

21     23 

15     15 

P.M. 

-    -    . 

-    -    - 

14     58 

Between  the  inanJs  of  Tcrcera  1 

13     36 
16     46 

and  St.  Michael  ^ 
28.  P.M.  1  ^9     09     19     02 

•  Fiom  thi^  Day  til!  my  Arrival  in  Enjiand  the  «ea. 
1      ther  was  lb  bad  that  we  hid  no  opportunity  of 
L      jnalcing  any  obfcrvation  of  the  Variation* 

N.B.  The  ill  failing  of  ihc- Swallow  prevented  me  from  getting  a  fufficient  number  of  Soundings  to  make 

a  fcparate  Table. 

END   OF   THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


tTf-icRlJ\iGTON        -.„^«    .       ,  ,^. 

rr^K\c:eza\  /qti^-n\  i  °"^  Business  Park  Drive 

^9L  ,^^'^^^[19'^  Greensboro,  NC  27409 

C€I\JT€R.   INC.         -nfwAfi=uiii7 

Customer  Name    -Tie    (Jn^Mdi^.)^     oV     ^■'^'.■^of^^ 
SWO#    I31^a  Item#         /^ 

TREATMENT  PERFORMED 

TEJfFg^LOCK: 

0  Dr>'  cleaned  surface 

Q  Removed  tape  w  

Deacidified   D  aqueous/  Q  non-aqueous  w. 

D  Encapsulated  in  polyester  film 

Q'Mended  leaves/pages:    )Jo^\  -  ^eV     \;.  ^>ue 

n  Lined  with  ~ 


Bind'ng:  Housing 

U  Guarded  sections: D  Phase  box 

U  "^^^^  - n  Phase  box  Deluxe 

LJ  Rebound: □  Clamshell 

f4^ebacked:  1.^,^   ^  :^.^^^M_^^^tif  D  Portfolio 

epairedjoints:<;^^,r\   yco^r  Q  Pamphlet  Binder 


y^estored  ongmai  bindmg        '                 □  Polyester  film  jacket 
UK-onsolidated leather w     kIuqV    ft 


Date    ■'^P^'il  ,?ooq 
Conservator:    5^1;:^.^,    \^\.\>,cy. 


Revised  18  Jan  03 


'   :m.. 


v.,    '■\yir 


"      "^\     >,'■ 

,•**-.     % 


f-u 


...,■-■  "v 


.    '■( 


.^' 


V 


V-^ 


'■  .4 


