A Journey from Prince of Wales's Fort in Hudson's Bay to the Northern Ocean (Samuel Hearne, 1795)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1795 first edition (https://archive.org/details/journey-from-the-prince-of-wales-fort-in-hudsons-bay-to-the-northern-ocean.-hearne.-1795). Hearne's overland journey to the Coppermine River and the Arctic Ocean (1769–72) — the first European to reach the Arctic coast overland, with Matonabbee.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

t 


a 


= Ee 





i: 


ow, 


+ 














Ta face Page 1. 

































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































se tah 


Ie, 


ae wad 
S73 


Sai tS 


PIN St kei] 


ied} F 








‘ANORTH WEST ViEW of PRINCE of WALES’S FORT in HUDS ON'S BAY, NORTHAME RICA, by SAMS HEARNE, 1977 » 


London Published Jan! 1° 705, bv Cadell & Davies, SGU - 


A 


wee FR NE Lr 


FROM 


Prince of Wales’s Fort in Hudfon’s Bay, 


T O 


THE NORTHERN OCEAN. 


UNDERTAKEN 
BY ORDER OF THE HUDSON’s BAY COMPANY, 
FOR THE DISCOVERY 
OF COPPER MINES, A NORTH WEST PASSAGE, &e, 
Paetiice Yeats 1769; 770, 1771, & 1772. 





By SAMUEL HEARNE, 





GON. D ON 


Printed for A. Srranan and T. CapeLt: 
And Sold by T. Capzty Jun. and W. Davizs, (Succeffors to 
Mr. Capetz,) in the Strand. 


1795s 





httos ‘//archive.org/details/journeyfromprincOOhear_1 





TO 
SAMUEL WEG G, Efq. - Governor, 
sr JAMES WINTER LAKE, Deputy Governor, 
AND 


THE REST OF THE COMMITTEE 


OF THE HONOURABLE 


HUDSON’s BAY COMPANY. 





HONOURABLE SIRS, 


AS the following Journey was undertaken 

at your Requeft and Expence, I feel it no 
lefs my Duty than my Inclination to addrefs it 
to you; hoping that my humble Endeavours 
to relate, in a plain and unadorned Style, 


the various Circumftances and Remarks which 
6 occurred 


Wy DE D.1€ Agel Ogn. 


occurred during that Journey, will meet with 
your Approbation. 


Iam, with much Efteem and Gratitude, 
HONOURABLE SIRS, 
Your moft obedient, and 


moft obliged humble Servant, 


SAMUEL HEARNE. 


aee 8 6FCUA OE CUR 


R. Datrympxe, in one of his Pamphlets relating to 

Hud{fon’s Bay, has been fo very particular in his ob- 
fervations on my Journey, as to remark, that I have not 
explained the conftruction of the Quadrant which I had 
the misfortune to break in my fecond Journey to the 
North. It was a Hadley’s Quadrant, with a bubble at- 
tached°to it for an horizon, and made by Daniel Scatlif of 
Wapping. But as no inftrument on the fame principle 
could be procured when I was fetting out on my laft 
Journey, an old Elton’s Quadrant, which had been upwards 
of thirty years at the Fort, was the only inftrument I 
could then be provided with, in any refpe& proper for 


making obfervations with on the land. 


Mr. Dalrymple alfo obferves, that I only inferted in my 
laft Journal to the Company, one obfervation for the lati- 
tude, which may be true; but I had, neverthelefs, feveral 
others during that Journey, particularly at Snow-bird 
Lake, Thelwey-aza-yeth, and Clowey, exclufive of that 
mentioned in the Journal taken at Conge-cathawha- 
chaga. But when I was on that Journey, and for feveral 

a years 


v1 


PR ES? Ae re 


years after, I little thought that any remarks made in it 
would ever have attracted the notice of the Public: if I 
had, greater pains might and would have been taken to: 
render it more worthy of their attention than it now is. 
At that time my ideas and ambition extended no farther 
than to give my employers fuch an account of my pro- 
ceedings as might be fatistactory to them, and an{wer the 
purpofe which they had in view ; little thinking it would 
ever come under the in{pection of fo ingenious and inde- 
fatigable a geographer as Mr. Dalrymple muft be allowed 
to be. But as the cafe has turned out otherwife, I have 
at my leifure hours recopied all my Journals into one 
book, and in fome inftances added to the remarks I had 
before made; not fo much for the information of thofe 
who are critics in geography, as for the amufement of can- 
did and indulgent readers, who may perhaps feel them- 
{elves in fome meafure gratified, by having the face of a 
country brought to their view, which has hitherto been 
entirely unknown to every European except myfelf. Nor 
will, I flatter myfelf, a defcription of the modes of living, 
manners, and cuftoms of the natives, (which, though long 
known, have never been defcribed,} be lefs acceptable to. 
the curious. 


I cannnot help obferving, that I feel myfelf rather hure 
at Mr. Dalrymple’s rejeGting my latitude in fo peremptory 
a manner, and in fo great a proportion, as. he has done; 
becanfe, before I arrived at Conge-cathawhachaga, the 

Sun 


Rae FOE A Geek. 


Sun did not. fet during the whole night: a proof that I 
was then to the Northward of the Arétic Circle. IT may 
be allowed to add, that when I was at the Copper 
River, on the eighteenth of July, the Sun’s declination 
was but 21°, aid yet it was certainly fome height above 
the horizon at midnight; how much, as I did not shen 
remark, I will not zow take upon me to fay; but it proves 
that the latitude was confiderably more than Mr. Dal- 
rymple will admit of. His affertion, that no grafs is to 
be found on the (rocky) coaft of Greenland farther North 
than the latitude of 65°, is no proof there fhould not be 
any in a much higher latitude in the interior parts of North 
America. For, in the firft place, I think it:is more than 
probable, that the Copper River empties itfelf into a fort of 
inland Sea, or extenfive Bay, fomewhat like that of Hud- 
fon’s: and it is well known that no part of the coaft of 
Hud{fon’s Straits, nor thofe of Labradore, at leaft for fome 
degrees South of them, any more than the Eaft coaft of 
Hudion’s Bay, till we arrive near Whale River, have any 
trees on them; while the Weft coaft of the Bay in the: 
fame latitudes, is well clothed with timber. .Where then 
is the ground for fuch an affertion? Had Mr. Dalrymple 
confidered this circumftance only, I flatter myfelf he would 
not fo haftily have objeéted to woods and grafs being feen 
in fimilar fituations, though in a much higher latitude. 
Neither can the reafoning which Mr. Dalrymple derives from 
the error I committed in eftimating the diftance to Cum- 
berland Houfe, any way affect the queftion under con- 

a2 {ideration ; 


Vil 


Will 


PR EF FF BC EF 


fideration; becaufe that diftance being chiefly in longitude, 
I had no means of correéting it by an obfervation, which 
was not the cafe here. 


I do not by any means with to enter into a difpute with, 
or incur the difpleafure of Mr. Dalrymple; but thinking, 
as I do, that I have not been treated in fo liberal a manner 
as I ought to have been, he will excufe me for endeavour- 
ing to convince the Public that his objeétions are in a great 
meafure without foundation. And having done fo, I fhall 
quit the difagreeable fubjeét with declaring, that if any 
part of the following fheets fhould afford amufement to 
Mr. Dalrymple, or any other of my readers, it will be the 
higheft gratification I can receive, and the only recompence 
I defire to obtain for the hardfhips and fatigue which I un- 
derwent in procuring the information contained in them.. 


Being well affured that feveral learned and curious 
gentlemen are in poffeflion of manufcript copies of, or 
extracts from, my Journals, as well as copies of the Charts, 
I have been induced to make this copy as correct as pof- 
fible, and to publifh it; efpecially as I obferve that 
fcarcely any two of the publications that contain extraéts. 
from my Journals, agree in the dates when I arrived at, or 
departed from, particular places. To rectify thofe dif- 
agreements I applied to the Governor and Committee of 
the Hudfon’s Bay Company, for leave to perufe my original 
Journals. This was granted with the greateft affability 

I and 


Y eek St As. &. 


and politenefs ; as well as a fight of all my Charts relative 
to this Journey. With this affiftance I have been enabled 
to rectify fome inaccuracies that had, by trufting too much 
to memory, crept into this copy; and I now offer it to 
the Public under authentic dates and the beft authorities, 
however widely fome publications may differ from it. 


I have taken the liberty to expunge fome paflages which 
were inferted in the original copy, as being no ways 
interefting to the Public, and feveral others have under- 
gone great alterations; fo that, in fact, the whole may 
be faid to be new-modelled, by being blended with a va- 
riety of Remarks and Notes that were not inferted in the 
original copy, but which my long refidence in the country 
has enabled me to add. 


The account of the principal quadrupeds and birds that 


frequent thofe Northern regions in Summer, as well as 


thofe which never migrate, though not defcribed ina f{ci- © 


entific manner, may not be entirely unacceptable to the 
moft f{cientific zoologifts; and to thofe who are unac- 
quainted with the technical terms ufedin zoology, it may 
perhaps be more ufeful and entertaining, than if I had de- 
{cribed them in the moft claffical manner. But I muft 
not conclude this Preface, without acknowledging, in 
the moft ample manner, the affiftance I have received 
from the perufal of Mr. Pennant’s Arétic Zoology; which 
has enabled me to give feveral of the birds their proper 

| names ; 


1X 


P @R SE: OF en ee 


names; for thofe by which they are known in Hudfon’s 
Bay are purely Indian, and of courfe quite unknown to 
every European who has not refided in that country. 


To conclude, I cannot fufficiently regret the lofs of a 
confiderable Vocabulary of the Northern Indian Language, 
containing fixteen folio pages, which was lent to the late 
Mr. Hutchins, then Correfponding Secretary to the Com- 
pany, to copy for Captain Duncan, when he went on 
difcoveries to Hudfon’s Bay in the year one thoufand 
feven hundred and ninety. But Mr. Hutchins dying foon 
after, the Vocabulary was taken away with the reft of his 
effects, and cannot now be recovered; and memory, at 
this time, will by no means ferve to replace it, 


CO N- 


C OMS TE UN 6DT CSS; 





[XTRODUCTION. - - ~ Page xxi 


coed A. R. I. 
Tranfattions from my leaving Prince of Wales’s Fort on my firft Expe- 


dition, till our Arrival there again. 


Set off from the Fort; arrive at Po-co-thee-kif-co River.—One of the 
Northern Indians deferts.—-Crofs Seal River, and walk on the barren 
erounds.—Receive wrong information concerning the diftance of the woods. 
— Weather begins to be very cold, provifions all expended, and nothing 
to be got.—Strike to the Weftward, arrive at the woods, and kill three 
deer.—Set forward in the North Weft quarter, fee the tracks of mufk-oxen 
and deer, but killed none.—Very fhort of provifions.—Chawchinahaw wants 
us to return. — Neither he nor his crew contribute to our maintenance.—He 
influences feveral of the Indians to defert.—-Chawchinahaw and all his crew 
leave us.—Begin our return to the Factory; kill a few partridges, the firft 
meal we had had for feveral days.—Villany of one of the home Indians and 
his wife, who was a Northern Indian woman.—Arrive at Seal River, kill! 
two deer; partridges plenty.—Meet a ftrange Northern Indian, accompany 
him to his tent, ufage received there; my Indians affift in killing fome 


beaver.—Proceed toward home, and arrive at the Fort. : . 
ly 


Seti “A P. Ii. 


Tranfattions from our Arrival at the Factory, to my leaving it again, 
and during the Firft Part of my Second Fourney, till I had the mif- 
fortune to break the Quadrant. 


Jranfactions at the Factory. —Proceed on my fecond journey.——Arrive at Seal 
River.——Deer plentiful for fome time.—- Method of angling fifth under the ice. 
—Set our fifhing-nets.—-Method of fetting nets under the ice.—My guide 

. . propofes 


XU 


CO N ft HN TS 


propofes to ftay till the geefe fhould begin to fly; his reafons accepted.— 
Pitch our tent in the beft manner.—Method of pitching a tent in Winter.— 
Fifh plentiful for fome time; grow very fcarce; in great want of provifions. 
— Manner of employing my time.—My guide killed two deer.—Move to 
the place they were lying at; there kill feveral more deer, and three beavers. 
—Soon in want of provifions again.—Many Indians join us from the Wetft- 
ward.—We begin to move towards the barren ground.—Arrive at She-than- 
nee, there fuffer great diftrefs for want of provifions.—Indians kill two fwans 
and three geefe.—Geefe and other birds of paffage plentiful.—Leave She- 
than-nee, and arrive at Beralzone.—One of my companions guns burfts, and 
thatters his left hand.-—Leave Beralzone, and get on the barren ground, clear 
of all woods.—-Throw away our fledges and {now fhoes.—-Each perfon takes 
a load on his back; my part of the luggage.—Expofed to many hardfhips.— 
Several days without victuals. —Indians kill three mufk-oxen, but for want 
of fire are obliged to eat the meat raw.—Fine weather returns; make a fire; 
effects of long fafting; ftay a day or two to dry fome meat in the Sun.— 
Proceed to the Northward, and arrrive at Cathawhachaga; there find fome 
tents of Indians.—A. Northern Leader called Keelfhies meets us; fend a letter 
by him to the Governor.—Tranfactions at Cathawhachaga ; leave it and pro- 
ceed to the Northward.—Meet feveral Indians—My guide not willing to 
proceed ; his reafons for it Many more Indians join us.—Arrive at Doo- 
bant Whoie River.—-Manner of ferrying over rivers in the Northern Indian 
canoes.—No rivers in thofe parts in a ufeful direction for the natives. —Had 
nearly loft the quadrant and all the powder.—Some reflections on our fitua- 
tion, and conduét of the Indians—Find the quadrant, and part of the 
powder.—Obferve for the latitude.—Quadrant broke.—Refolve to return 


again to the Factory. - - Page 11 


Cay eel ule 


Tranfaétions from the Time the Quadrant was broken, till J arrived at 


the Laétory. 


Several ftrange Indians join us from tae Northward.—They plunder me of all 


I had; but did not plunder the Southern Indians.—IVy guide plundered.— 
We begin our return to the lactory.—Meet with other Indians, who join 
our company.-=Collect deer-fiins for clothing, but could not get them 

drefied, 


Gc CN TE Me YT S. “1 


dreffed.—Suffer much hardfhip from the want of tents and warm clothing.— 
Moft of the Indians leave us.——-Meet with Matonabbee.—Some account of 
him, and his behaviour to me and the Southern Indians.——We remain in his 
company fome time.—Hlis obfervations on my two unfuccefsful attempts.— 
We leave him, and proceed to a place to which he direéted us, in order to 
make fnow-fhoes and fledges.— Join Matonabbee again, and proceed towards 
the Factory in his company.—Ammunition runs fhort.—Myfelf and four 
Indians fet off poft for the Factory.—Much bewildered in a {now ftorm; my 
dog is frozen to death; we lie ina buth of willows.—Proceed on our journey.— 
Great difficulty in croffing a jumble of rocks.—Arrive at the Fort. Page 47 


Geni A P. by. 


Tranfattions during our Stay at Prince of Wales’s Fort, and the former 
Part of our third Expedition, till our Arrival at Clowey, where we 


built Canoes, in May 1771. 


Preparations for our departure.—Refule to take any of the home-guard Indians 
with me.—By fo doing, I offend the Governor.—Leave the Fort a third 
time.—My inftruCtions on this expedition.—Provifions of all kinds very 
fcarce.—Arrive at the woods, where we kill fome deer.—Arrive at Ifand 
Lake.—Matonabbee taken ill.—Some remarks thereon.—Join the remainder 
of the Indians’ families.—-Leave Ifland Lake.—Defcription thereof.—Deer 
plentiful.—Meet a ftrange Indian.—Alter our courfe from Weft North Weft 
to Weft by South.—-Crofs Cathawhachaga River, Coffed Lake, Snow- Bird 
Lake, and Pike Lake.—Arrive at a tent of ftrangers, who are employed in 
{naring deer in- a pound.—Defcription of a pound.—Method of proceed- 
ing.—Remarks thereon.—Proceed on our journey.—Meet with feveral 
parties of Indians; by one of whom I fenta letter to the Governor at Prince 
of Wales’s Fort.—Arrive at Thleweyazayeth.-Employment there.—Pro- 
ceed to the North North Weft and North.—Arrive at Clowey.—One of the 
Indian’s wives taken in labour.—-Remarks thereon.—Cuftoms obferved by 


the Northern Indians on thofe occafions. 5 - - 60 


b Col iar. 


XLV 


C O N © HEN TT oS 


GC hiya: iN: 


Tranfactions at Clowey, and on our Fourney, till our Arrival at the 


Copper-mune River. 


Several ftrange Indians join us.—Indians employed in building canoes; defcrip- 


tion and ufe of them.—More Indians join us, to the amount of fome hun- 
dreds. — Leave Clowey.-—Receive intelligence that Keelfhies was near us.—= 
Two young men difpatched for my letters and goods.—Arrive at Pefhew 
Lake; crofs part. of it, and make a large fmoke.—One of Matonabbee’s 
wives elopes:—-Some remarks on the natives. —Keelfhies joins us, and de- 
livers my letters, but the goods were all expended.—A Northern Indian 
wifhes to take one of Matonabbee’s wives from him; matters compromifed, 
but had like to have proved fatal to my progrefs.—Crofs Pefhew Lake, when 


JT make proper arrangements forthe remainder of my journey.—Many In- 


diens join our party, in order to make war on the Efquimaux at the Copper 
River.—Preparations made for that purpofe while at Clowey.—Proceed on 
our journey to the Nerth.-Some remarks on the way.—Crofs Cogead Lake 
on the ice.-—The fun did not fet.—Arrive at Congecathawhachaga.—Find 
feveral Copper Indians there.-—-Remarks and tranfactions during our ftay at 
Congecathawhachaga.—Proceed on our journey. — Weather very bad.—Ar- 
rive at the Stoney Mountains.—Some account of them.—Crofs part of Buf- 
falo Lake on the ice.—Saw many mufk-oxen.—Defcription of them.—-Went 
with fome Indians to view Grizzle-bear Hill.—-Join a ftrange Northern In- 
dian Leader, called O’lye, in company with fome Copper Indians. —Their 
behaviour to me.—Arrive at the Copper-mine River. - - Page 95 


CH AP. VI. 


Tranfattions at the Copper-mine River, and till we joined all the Women 


to the South of Cogead Lake. 


Some Copper Indians join us.—Indians fend three fpies down the river.—Be- 


gin my furvey.—Spies return, and give an account of five tents of Efqui- 
maux.—Indians confult the beft method to fteal on them in the night, and 


kill 


CaOmN TOE No Tf US. 


kill them while afleep.—Crofs the river.-— Proceedings of the Indians as they 
advance towards the Efquimaux tents.—-The Indians begin the maffacre 
while the poor Efquimaux are afleep, and flay them all.—Much affected at 
the fight of one young woman killed clofe to my feet.—The behaviour of 
the Indians on this occafion.—-Their brutifh treatment of the dead bodies.—~ 
Seven more tents feen on the oppofite fide of the river.—The Indians harafs 
them, till they Ay toa fhoal in the river for fafety.—Behaviour of the In- 
dians after killing thofe Efquimaux.—Crofs the river, and proceed to the’ 
tents on that fide.——Plunder their tents, and deftroy their utenfils.—Continue 
my furvey to the river’s mouth.—Remarks there.—Set out on my return.— 
Arrive at one of the Copper-mines.—Remarks on it.—-Many attempts made 
to induce the Copper Indians to carry their own goods to market.—Obftacles 
to it.—-Villariy and cruelty of Keeifhies to fome of thofe poor Indians.— 
Leave the Copper-mine, and walk at an amazing rate till we join the women, 
by the fide of Cogead Whoie.-—Much foot-foundered.—The appearance 
very alarming, but foon changes for the better.—-Proceed to the Southward, 
and join the remainder of the women and children.—Many other Indians 


arrive with them. - “ - - Page 145 


Cee A P. VIL. 


Remarks from the Time the Women foimed us till our Arrival at the 
Athapufcow Lake. 


Several of the Indians fick.—Method ufed by the conjurers to relieve one man, 
who recovers.—Matonabbee and his crew proceed to the South Weft.— 
Moft of the other Indians feparate, and go their refpective ways.—Pafs by 
White Stone Lake.—Many deer killed merely for their fkins.—Remarks 
thereon, and on the deer, refpecting feafons and places.—Arrive at Point 
Lake.—One of the Indian’s wives being fick, is left behind, to perifh above- 
ground.— Weather very bad, but deer plenty.—Stay fome time at Point 
Lake to dry meat, &c.—-Winter fet in.—Superftitious cuftoms obferved by 
my companions, after they had killed the Efquimaux at Copper River.— 
A violent gale of wind overfets my tent and breaks my quadrant.—Some 
Copper and Dog-ribbed Indians join us.-—Indians propofe to go to the Atha- 
pufcow Country to kill moofe.—-Leave Point Lake, and arrive at the wood’s © 
edge.—Arrive at Anawd Lake.—Tranfactions there.—Remarkable inftance 
of a man being cured of the palfy by the conjurers.—Leave Anawd Lake. 
——Arrive at the great Athapufcow Lake. < - ~ 189 


b 2 GH AP.. 


XV} 


Cc ON @ Re Fe 


C Hl xe P- VIE. 


Tranfactions and Remarks from our Arrival on the South Side of the 


 Athapufcow Lake, till our Arrival at Prince of Wales's Fort on: 
Churchill River. 


Crofs the Athapufcow Lake.—Defcription of it and its productions, as far as 


could be difcovered in Winter, when the fnow was on the ground.—Fifh 
found in the lake. —Defcription of the buffalo ;—of the moofe or elk, and 
the method of dreffing their fkins.—Find a woman alone that had not feen a 
human face for more than feven months.—Her account how fhe came to be 
in that fituation; and her curious method of procuring a livelihood.——Many 
of my Indians wreftled for her.—Arrive at the great Athapufcow River.— 
Walk along the fide of the River for feveral days, and then ftrike off to the 
Eaftward.—Difficulty in getting through the woods in many places.—~ 
Meet with fome ftrange Northern Indians on their return from the Fort.— 
Meet more ftrangers, whom my companions plundered, and from whom they 
took one of their young women.—Curious manner of life which thofe ftrangers 
lead, and the reafon they gave for roving fo far from their ufual refidence.— 
Leave the fine level country of the Athapufcows, andarrive at the Stony Hills 
of the Northern Indian Country.—Meet fome ftrange Northern Indians, 
one of whom carried a letter for me to Prince of Wales’s Fort in March one 
thoufand feven hundred and feventy-one, and now gave me an anfwer to it, 
dated twentieth of June following.—-Indians begin preparing wood-work and 
birch-rind for canoes.—-The equinoctial gale very fevere.—Indian method of 
running the moofe deer down by fpeed of foot.—Arrival at Theeleyaza 
River.—See fome ftrangers.—The brutality of my companions.—A tre- 
mendous gale and {now-drift.— Meet with more ftrangers ;—remarks on it,—- 
Leave all the elderly people and children, and proceed directly to the Fort.— 
Stop to build canoes, and then advance.—Several of the Indians die through 
hunger, and many others are obliged to decline the journey for want of am- 
munition.—A violent ftorm and inundation, that forced us to the.top of a 
high hill, where we fuffered great diftrefs for more than two days.— Kill fe- 


_ veral deer.—The Indians method of preferving the flefh without the affiftance 


of falt.—See feveral Indians that were going to Knapp’s Bay.—Game of all 
kinds remarkably plentiful—Arrive at the Factory. = Page 247 


9 | CHAP. 


CON TEN iT S. RVI 


CGC We A,» P.: IX. 


A foort Defcription of the Northern Indians, alfo a farther Account of 
their Country, Manufaétures, Cuftoms, &c. 


An account of the perfons and tempers of the Northern Indians.—-They poffefs 
a vreat deal of art and cunning.—-Are very guilty of fraud when in their 
power, and generally exact more for their furrs than any other tribe of In- 
dians.-—Always diffatisfied, yet have their good qualities.—The men in ge- 
neral jealous of their wives.—Their marriages.—Girls always betrothed 
when children, and their reafons for it—-Great care and confinement of 
young girls from the age of eight or nine years.» Divorces common among 
thofe people.-—The women are lefs prolific than in warmer countries.—Re- 
markable piece of fuperftition obferved by the women at particular periods. —~ 
Their art in making it an excufe for a temporary feparation from their huf- 
bands on. any little quarrel.—Reckoned very unclean on thofe occafions.— 
The Northern Indians frequently, for the want of firing, are obliged to eat 
their meat raw.——-Some through neceffity obliged to boil it in veffels made of 
the rind of the birch-tree.—A remarkable difh among thofe people.—The 
young animals always cut out of their dams eaten, and accounted a great 
delicacy. The parts of generation of all animals eat by the men and boys.— 
Manner of pafling their time, and method of killing deer in Summer with 
bows and arrows.—Their tents, dogs, fledges, &c.—Snow-fhoes.— Their 
partiality to domeftic vermin.—Utmoft. extent of the Northern Indian 
country.—Face of the country.—Species of fifh—A peculiar kind of mofs 
ufeful for the fupport. of man.—Northern Indian method of catching fith, 
either with hoaks or nets.—Ceremony obferved when two parties of thofe 
people meet.—Diverfions in common ufe.—A fingular diforder which 
attacks fome of thofe people.~Their fuperftition with refpeét to the death 
of their friends. —Ceremony obferved on thofe occafions.—Their ideas of 
the firft inhabitants of the world.—lNo form of religion among them.—Re- 

- marks on that circumftance.—The extreme mifery to which old age is ex- 
pofed.—Their opinion of the Aurora Borealis, c.—Some account of Ma- 
tonabbee, and his fervices to: his country, as well as to the Hudfon’s Bay 
Company.. - - : ‘ Page 304 


CGI FAA te. 


MVE 


CO NM Toba 


Ca Aaa oo 


An Account of the principal Quadrupeds found in the Northern Parts of Hud - 





fon’s Bay. The Buffalo, Moofe, Mufk-ox, Deer, and Beaver.—A ca- 
pital Miftake cleared up refpe&ting the We-was-kith. 

Animals with Canine Teeth. The Wolf—Foxes of various colours— 
Lynx, or Wild Cat— Polar, or White Bear—Black Bear—Brown Bear— 
Wolverene—Otter—Jackafh—W ejack—Skunk— Pine Martin—Ermine, or 
Stote. 

Animals with Cutting Teeth. The Mufk Beaver--Porcupine—Va- 
rying Hare—American Hare—Common Squirrel—Ground Squirrel—Mice 
of various Kinds, and the Caftor Beaver. 

The Pinnated Quadrupeds with fin-like Feet, found in Hudfon’s Bay, 
are but three in number, viz. the Warlus, or Sea- Horfe—Seal—and Sea- 
Unicorn. 








The Species of Fifh found in the Salt Water of Hudfon’s Bay are alfo few in 


number; being the Black ‘Whale—White Whale—Salmon—and Kepling. 
Shell-fifh, and empty Shells of feveral kinds, found on the Sea Coaft 
near Churchill River. 


Frogs of various fizes and colours ; alfo a great variety of Grubbs, and other 


Infects, always found ina frozen ftate during Winter, but when expofed to 
the heat of a flow fire, are foon re-animated. 


An Account of fome of the principal Birds found in the Northern Parts of 
_ Eludfon’s Bay ; as well thofe that only migrate there in Summer, as thofe 





that are known to brave the coldeft Winters : Eagles of various kinds— 
Hawks of various fizes and plumage—White or Snowy Owl—Gray or 
mottled Owl—Cob-a-dee-cooch—Raven—Cinerious Crow—Wood Pecker 
—Ruffed Groufe-—Pheafant—Wood Partridge—Willow Partridge—Rock 


. Partridge —Pigeon—Red-breafted Thrufh—Grofbeak—Snow Bunting— 


White-crowned Bunting—Lapland Finch, two forts—Lark—Titmoufe— 
Swallow—Martin—Hopping Crane—Brown Crane—Bitron—Carlow, two 
forts—Jack Snipe—Red Godwart—Plover—Black Gullemet — Northern 
Diver—Black-throated Diver—Red-throated Diver—White Gull—Grey 
Gull— Black-head—Pelican—Goofander—Swans of two fpecies--Common 

Grey 


ClVOM@N T EN T S. XIX 


Grey Goofe—Canada Goofe—White or Snow Goofe-—Blue Goofe— Horned 
. Wavy—Laughing Goofe—Barren Goofe—Brent Goofe—Dunter Goofe—— 
Bean Goole. 
The fpecies of Water-Fowl ufually called Duck, that refort to thofe Parts 
annually, are in great variety; but thofe that are moft efteemed are, the 
Mallard Duck—Long-tailed Duck—-Wigeon—and Teal. 


Of the Vegetable Productions as far North as Churchill River, particularly the 
moft ufeful; fuch as the Berry-bearing Bufhes, €c. Goofeberry—~Cran- 
berry—Heathberry——Dewater-berry-—Black Currans— J uniper~berry—Par- 
tridge-berry-——Strawberry—Eye-berry—Blue-berry—and a fmall fpecies of 
Hips. 

Burridge, Coltsfoot—Sorrel—Dandelion. 
Witfh-a-capucca—Jackafhey-puck—-Mofs of various forts—Grafs of {e- 
veral kinds—and Vetches. 





The Trees found fo far North near the Sea, confift only of Pines—Juni- | 
per—Small Poplar—Buth-willows—and Creeping Birch, - Page 358 


EF k 2a A. 


Page 66 line. 16, for no read.on. 
49 —— ult. for poleos read poles. 











39 2.25 dele we. 
Talal 12, for Athapufco read Athaputcew, 
202 ty for North Wek read South Wek. 


INTRODUCTION. 


FoR many years it was the opinion of all ranks of 

people, that the Hudfon’s Bay Company were averfe to 
making difcoveries of every kind; and being content 
with the profits of their fmall capital, as it was then 
called, did not want to increafe-their trade. What 
might have been the ideas of former members of the Com- 
pany refpecting the firft part of thefe charges I cannot fay, 
but I am well affured that they, as well as the prefent 
members, have always been ready to embrace every plau- 
fible plan for extending the trade. As a proof of this 
afiertion, I need only mention the vaft fums of money 
which they have expended at different times in endeavour- 
ing to eftablifh fifheries, though without fuccefs: and 
the following Journey, together with the various attempts 
made by Bean, Chriftopher, Johnfton, and Duncan, to 
find a North Weft paflage, are recent proofs that the pre- 
fent members are as defirous of making difcoveries, as they 
are of extending their trade. 


That air of myftery, and affcétation of fecrecy, perhaps, 
which formerly attended fome of the Company’s proceed~ 
ings in the Bay, might give rife to thofe conjectures ; and 
the unfounded affertions and unjuft afperfions of Dobbs, 

c Ellis, 


‘NIL 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ellis, Robfon, Dragge, and the American Traveller, the 
only Authors that have written on Hudfon’s Bay, and who 
have all, from motives of intereft or revenge, taken a 
particular pleafure in arraigning the conduét of the Com- 
pany, without having any real knowledge of their pro- 
ceedings, or any experience in their fervice, on which to 
found their charges, muft have contributed to confirm the 
public in that opinion. Moft of thofe Writers, however, 
advance fuch notorious abfurdities, that none except thofe 
who are already prejudiced againft the Company can give 
them credit *. 


Robfon, from his fix years refidence in Hudfon’s Bay and 
in the Company’s fervice, might naturally have been fup- 
pofed to know fomething of the climate and {oil immediately 
round the Faétories at which he refided; but the whole of 
his book is evidently written with prejudice, and dictated 
by a fpirit of revenge, becaufe his romantic and incon- 
fiftent {chemes were rejected by the Company.  Befides, 
it is well known that Robfon was no more than a tool in 


the hand of Mr. Dobbs. 


The American Traveller, though a more elegant writer, 
has ftill lefs claim to our indulgence, as his affertions are 


* Since the above was written, a Mr. Umfreville has publithed an account 
of Hudfon’s Bay, with the fame ill-nature as the former Authors; and for no 
other reafon than that of being difappointed in fucceeding to 4 command in 
the Bay, though there was no vacancy for him. 


a greater 


DNIPSs ODD CT VOW. 


a greater tax on our credulity. His faying that he dif- 
covered feveral large lumps of the fineft virgin copper *, is 
fuch a palpable falfehcod that it needs no refutation. No 
man, either Englith or Indian, ever found a bit of copper 
in that country to the South of the feventy-firft degree of 
latitude, unlefs it had been accidentally dropped by fome 
of the far Northern Indians in their way to the Com- 
pany s Factory. 


The natives who range over, rather than inhabit, the 
large track of land which lies. to the North of Churchill 
River, having repeatedly brought famples of copper to the 
Company’s Factory, many of our people conje€tured that 
it was found not far from our fettlements; and as the In- 
dians informed them that the mines were not very diftant 
from a large river, it was generally fuppofed that this river 
muft empty itfelf into Hudfon’s Bay; as they could by 
no means think that any fet of people, however wander- 
ing their manner of life might be, could ever traverfe fo 
large a track of country as to pafs the Northern boundary 
of that Bay, and particularly without the afliftance of 
water-carriage. The following Journal, however, will 
fhew how much thofe people have been miftaken, and 
prove alfo the improbability of putting their favourite 
{cheme of mining into practice. 


* American Traveller, page 23. 


Cc 3 The 


KUL 


XIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


The accounts of this grand River, which fome have 
turned into a Strait, together with the famples of copper, 
were brought to the Company’s Factory at Churchill River 
immediately after its .firft eftablifhment, in the year one 
thoufand feven hundred and fifteen; and it does not ap- 
pear that any attempts were made to difcover either the 
river or mines till the year one thoufand feven hundred and 
nineteen, when the Company fitted out a fhip, called the 
Albany Frigate, Captain George Barlow*, and a floop, 

called 


* Captain Barlow was Governor at Albany Fort when the French went 
over land from Canada to befiege itin 1704. The Canadians and their In- 
dian guides lurked in the neighbourhood of Albany for feveral days before 
they made the attack, and killed many of the cattle that were grazing in the 
marfhes. A faithful’ Home-Indian, who was on a hunting excurfion, difco- 
vering thofe ftrangers, and fuppofing them to be enemies, immediately returned 
‘to the Fort, and informed the Governor of the circumftance, who gave little 
credit to it. However, ‘every meafure was taken for the defence of the Fort, 
and orders were given to the Mafter of a floop that lay at fome diftance, to 
come to the Fort with all poffible expedition on hearing a gun fired. 


Accordingly, in the middle of the night, or rather in the morning, the 
French came before the Fort, marched up to the gate, and demanded en- 
trance. Mr. Barlow, who was then on the watch, told them, that the Governor 
was afleep, but he would get the keys immediately. ‘The French hearing this, 
expected no oppofition, and flocked up to the gate as clofe as they could ftand. 
Barlow took the advantage of this opportunity, and inftead of opening the 
gate, only opened two port holes, where two fix-pounders ftood loaded with 
grape fhot, which were inftantly fired. This difcharge killed great numbers of 
the French, and among them the Commander, who was an Irifhman. 


Such an unexpected reception made the remainder retire with great preci- 
pitation ; and the Mafter of the floop hearing the guns, made the beft of his 
way 


INTRODUCTION. 


called the Difcovery, Captain David Vaughan. The fole 


command of this expedition, however, was given to Mry 


James Knight, a man of great experience in the Com- 
pany’s fervice, who had been many years Governor at 
the different Factories in the Bay, and who had made 
the firft fettlement at Churchill River. Notwithftanding 
the experience Mr. Knight might have had of the Com- 
pany’s bufinefs, and his knowledge of thofe parts of the 
Bay where he had refided, it cannot be fuppofed he 
was well acquainted with the nature of the bufinefs in 
which he then engaged, having nothing to dire@ him but 
the flender and imperfeé& accounts which he had received 
from the Indians, who at that time were little known, 


and lefs underftood. 


way up to the Fort; but fome of the French who lay concealed under the 
banks of the river killed him, and all the boat’s crew. 


The French retired from this place with reluctance; for fome of them were 
heard fhooting in the neighbourhood of the Fort ten days after they were 
repulfed ; and one man in particular walked up and down the platform leading 
from the gate of the Fort to the Launch for a whole day. Mr. Fullarton, 
who was then Governor at Albany, fpoke to him in French, and offered him 
kind quarters if he chofe to accept them; but to thofe propofals he made 
no reply, and only fhook his head. Mr. Fullarton then told him, that unlefs 
he would refign himfelf up as a prifoner, he would moft affuredly fhoot him; 
on which the man advanced nearer the Fort, and Mr. Fullarton fhot him out 
of his chamber window. Perhaps the hardfhips this poor man expected to 
encounter in his return to Canada, made him prefer death; but his refufing to 
receive quarter from fo humane and generous an enemy as the Englifh, is 
aftonifhing. 

Thofe 


XXV 


NXVI 


INTR OD USG?T I OG 


Thofe difadvantages, added to his advanced age, he 
bcing then near eighty, by no means difcouraged this bold 
adventurer ; who was fo prepoffeffed of his fuccefs, and 
of the great advantage that would arife from his difco-~ 
verics, that he procured, and took with him, fome large 
iron-bound chefts, to hold gold duft and other valuables, 
which he fondly flattered himfelf were to be found in 
thofe parts, 


The firft paragraph of the Company’s Orders to Mr, 
Knight on this occafion appears to be as follows: 


‘¢ Jo Captain James Kwnicur. 


«SIR, 4th June, 1710. 
‘¢ From the experience we have had of your abilities 
‘© in the management of our affairs, we have, upon your 
‘< application to us, fitted out the Albany frigate, Captain 
‘© George Barlow, and the Difcovery, Captain David 
‘¢ Vaughan Commander, upon a difcovery to the North- 
‘¢ ward; and to that end have given you power and au- 
‘¢ thority to act and do all things relating to the faid 
voyage, the navigation of the faid fhip and floop only 
excepted ; and have given orders and inftructions to our 
{aid Commanders for that purpofe. 


Cm 


o 


i 


~ 


[ay 


€ 


é 


a) 


«You are, with the firft opportunity. of wind and 


‘< weather, to depart from Gravefend on your intended 


~~ 


** voyage, 


INTRODUCTION. 


“¢ voyage, and by God’s permiffion, to find out the Straits 
‘ of Anian, in order to difcover gold and other valuable 
‘© commodities to the Northward, &c. &c.” 


Mr. Knight foon left Gravefend, and proceeded on his 
voyage; but the fhip not returning to England that year, as 
was expected, it was Judged that fhe had wintered in Hud- 
fon’s Bay; and having on boarda good ftock of provifions, a 
houfe in frame, together with all neceffary mechanics, and 
a great affortment of trading goods, little or no thoughts 
were entertained of their not being in fafety: but as 
neither fhip nor floop returned to England in the follow- 
ing year, (one thoufand feven hundred and twenty,) the 
Company were much alarmed for their welfare; and, by 
their fhip which went to Churchill in the year one thoufand 
feven hundred and twenty-one, they fent orders for a 
floop called the Whale-Bone, John Scroggs Mafter, to go 
in fearch of them; but the fhip not arriving in Churchill 
till late in the year, thofe orders could not be put in exe- 
cution till the Summer following (one thoufand feven hun- 
dred and twenty-two). 


The North Weft coaft of Hudfon’s Bay being little 
known in thofe days, and Mr. Scroggs finding himfelf 
greatly embarrafled with fhoals and rocks, returned to 
Prince of Wales’s Fort without making any certain difco- 
very refpecting the above fhip or floop ; for all the marks 
he faw among the Efquimaux at Whale Cove {carcely 

5 amounted 


RXVI 


KX XVI 


INT RO Deel 108 


amounted to the f{poils which might have been made from 
a trifling accident, and confequently could not be con- 


fidered as figns of a total fhipwreck. 


The ftrong opinion which then prevailed in Europe re- 
fpeating the probability of a North Weft paflage by the 
way of Hudfon’s Bay, made many conjecture that Mefits. 
Knight and Barlow had found that paflage, and had gone 
through it into the South Sea, by the way of Cali- 
fornia. Many years elapfed without any other convincing 
proof occurring to the contrary, except that Middleton, 
Ellis, Bean, Chriftopher, and Johnfton, had not been able 
to find any fuch paffage. And notwithftanding a floop 
was annually fent to the Northward on difcovery, and to 
trade with the Efquimaux, it was the Summer of one 
thoufand feven hundred and fixty-feven, before we had 
pofitive proofs that poor Mr. Knight and Captain Barlow 
had been loft in Hudifon’s Bay. | 


The Company were now carrying on a black whale 
fifhery, and Marble Ifland was made the place of rendez- 
vous, not only on account of the commodioufnefs of the 
harbour, but becaufe it had been obferved that the whales 
were more plentiful about that ifland than on any 
other part of the coaft. This being the cafe, the boats, 
when on the look-out for fifh, had frequent occafion to 
row Clofe to the ifland, by which means they difcovered 
a new harbour near the Eaft end of it, at the head 


of 


— 


INTRODUCTION. 


ef which they found guns, anchors, cables, bricks, a 
{mith’s anvil, and many other articles, which the hand of 
time had not defaced, and which being of no ufe to 
the natives, or too heavy to be removed by them, had not 
been taken from the place in which they were originally 
laid. The remains of the houfe, though pulled to pieces 
by the Efquimaux for the wood and iron, are yet very plain 
to be feen, as alfo the hulls, or more properly fpeaking, the 
bottoms of the fhip and floop, which lie funk in about 
five fathoms water, toward the head of the harbour. 
The figure-head of the fhip, and alfo the guns, &’c. were 
fent home to the Company, and are certain proofs that 
Mefits. Knight and Barlow had been loft on that inhofpi- 
table ifland, where neither ftick nor {tump was to be feen, 
and which lies near fixteen miles from the main land. 
Indeed the main is little better, being a jumble of barren 
hills and rocks, deftitute of every kind of herbage except 
mofs and grafs; and at that part, the woods are feveral 
hundreds of miles from the fea-fide. 


In the Summer of one thoufand feven hundred and 
fixty-nine, while we were profecuting ‘the fifhery, we faw 
feveral Efquimaux at this new harbour; and perceiving 
that one or two cf them were greatly advanced in years, 
our curiofity was excited to afk chem fome queftions con- 
cerning the above fhip and floop, which we were the better 
enabled to do. by the affiftlance of an Eiqguimaux, who 


was then in the Company's fervice as a linguilt, and an- 


nually failed in one of their vefféls in that chara@er. The 


d account 


XX1X 


INTRODUCTION. 


account which we received from them was full, clear, 
and unreferved, and the fum of it was to the following 


pur por ue 


When the veflels arrived at this place (Marble Ifland) 
it was very late in the Fall, and in getting them into the 
harbour, the largeft received much damage; but on being 
fairly in, the Englifh began to build the houfe, their num- 
ber at that time feeming to be about fifty. As foon as the 
ice permitted, in the following Summer, (one thoufand 
feven hundred and twenty,) the Efquimaux paid them ano- 
ther vifit, by which time the number of the Englith was 
greatly reduced, and thofe that were living feemed very 
unhealthy. According to the account given by the Efqui- 
maux they were then very bufily employed, but about. 
what they could not eafily defcribe, probably in length- 
ening the long-boat ; for at a little diftance from the houfe 
there is now lying a great quantity of oak chips, which 
have been moft affuredly made by carpenters. 


Sicknefs and famine occafioned fuch havock among the 
Englifh, that by the fetting in of the fecond Winter their 
number was reduced to twenty. ‘That Winter (one thou- 
fand feven hundred and twenty) fome of the Efquimaux 
took up their abode on the oppofite fide of the harbour 


to that on which the Englifh had built their houfes *, and 
frequently 


* T have feen the remains of thofe houfes feveral times; they are on the 
Weit fide of the harbour, and in all probability will be difcernible for many years 
to come. 


Té 


INTRODUCTION. 


frequently fupplied them with fuch provifions as they 


had, which chiefly confifted of whale’s blubber and feal’s 


Alefh and train oil, When the Spring advanced, the Ef- 


quimaux went to the continent, and on their vifiting: 
Marble Ifland again, in the Summer of one thoufand feven 


hundred and twenty-one, they only found five of the 
Englifh alive, and thofe were in fuch diftrefs for pro- 
vifions that they eagerly eat the feal’s flefh and whale’s 


blubber quite raw, as they purchafed it from the natives.. 


This difordered them fo much, that three of them died in 
a few days, and the other two, though very weak, made 


a fhift tobury them. Thofe two furvived many days after 
the reft, and frequently went to the top of an adjacent rock, 


and earneftly looked to the South and Eaft, as if in expecta~ 
tion of fome veflels coming to their relief. After continu- 
ing there a confiderable time together, and nothing ap- 
pearing in fight, they fat down clofe together, and wept 


bitterly. At length-one-of the two died, and the other’s 
ftrength was fo far exhaulted, that he fell down and died 


alfo, in attempting to,dig a grave for his companion. ‘The 


It is rather furprifing, that neither Middleton, Ellis, Chriftopher, Johnfton, 
nor Garbet, who have all of them been at Marble Ifland, and fome of them 
often, ever difcovered this harbour; particularly the laft-mentioned gentleman, 
who actually failed quite round the ifland in a very fine pleafant day in the Sum- 
mer of 1766. But this difcovery was reférved fora Mr. Jofeph Stephens! a 
man of the leaft merit I ever knew, though he then had the command cf a 
veffel called the Succefs, employed in the whale-fifthery ; and in the year 1769, 
had the command of the Charlotte given to him, a fine brig of one hundred 
tons; when I was his mate. 

d 2 | . {culls 


KKXE > 


EXXU 


INTRODUCTION. 


{culls and other large bones of thofe two men are now 
lying above-ground clofe to the houfe. The longeft liver 
was, according to the Efquimaux account, always employed 
in working of iron into implements for them ; pagal 
he was the armourer, or {mith. 


Some Northern Indians who came to trade at Prince 
of Wales’s Fort in the Spring of the year one thoufand 
feven hundred and fixty-eight, brought farther accounts 
of the grand river, as it was called, and alfo feveral pieces 
of copper, as famples of the produce of the mine near 
it; which determined Mr. Norton, who was then Go- 
vernor at Churchill, to reprefent it to the Company as an 
affair worthy of their attention; and as he went that year 
to England, he had an opportunity of laying all the in- 
formation he had received before the Board, with his opi- 
nion thereon, and the plan which he thought moft likely 
to fucceed in the difcovery of thofe mines. In confe- 
quence of Mr. Norton’s reprefentations, the Committee re- 
folved to fend an intelligent perfon by land to obferve | 
the longitude and latitude of the river’s mouth, to make 
a chart of the country he might walk through, with fuch 
remarks as occurred to him during the Journey; when I 
was pitched on as a proper perfon to conduct the expe- 
dition. By the fhip that went to Churchill in the Sum- 
mer of one thoufand feven hundred and fixty-nine, the 
Company fent out fome aftronomical inftruments, very 
portable, and fit for fuch obfervations as they required me | 

Co 


INTRODUCTION. XXL 


to make, and at the fame time requefted me to undertake 


the Journey, promifing to allow me at my return, a gra- 
tuity proportionable to the trouble and fatigue I might 


undergo in the expedition or 


I did 


* The conditions offered me on this occafiom cannot be better expreffed 
than in the Company’s own words, which I havetranfcribed from their private 


letter to me, dated 25th May 1769. 


‘© Brom the good opinion we entertain of you, and Mr. Norton’s recom- 
‘¢ mendation, we have agreed to raife your wages to £ per annune for 
“© two years, and have placed you 1n our Council at Prince of Wales’s Fort ; 
«and we fhould have been ready to advancé you to the command of the 
Charlotte, according to your requeft, if a matter of more immediate confe- 
* quence had not intervened. 


€ 


nr 


«© Mr, Norton has propofed an inland Journey, far to the North.of Church 
ill, to promote an extenfion of our trade, as well as for the difcovery of 
« a North Weft Paffage, Copper Mines, &c.; and.as an undertaking of this 
“¢ nature requires the attention of a perfon capable of taking an obfervation. 
<< for determining the longitude and latitude, and alfo diftances, and the courfe 
“¢ of rivers and their depths, we have fixed upon you (e!pecially as it is re- 
prefented to us to be your own inclination) to conduct this Journey, with 
proper affiftants. | 


€ 


wr 


¢ 


“~ 


Cal 


¢ 


«© We therefore hope you will fecond our expectations in readily perform- 
ing this fervice, and upon your return we fhall willingly make you any ac- 
«« knowledgment fuitable to your trouble therein. 


€ 


nr 


«© We highly approve of your going in the Speedwell, to affift on the whale- 
fifhery laft year, and heartily with you health and fuccefs in the prefent ex- 


pedition. 


¢ 


rn 


g 


a, 


We remain your loving Friends, 


< BisyE Laxz, Dep. Gov. “< James WinTER Lake, 
“« Joun ANTHONY MERLE. ‘cc FIERMAN BERENS. 
‘© Robert MERRY, ‘¢ Jos—EPH SPURREL, 
“« SamueL WeEGe. ‘© James Fitz GERALD,” 


The 


SNXLV 


INTRODUCTION. 


‘I did not hefitate to comply with the requeft of the 


Company, and in the November following, when fome 


Northern Indians camé to trade, Mr. Norton, who was then 


returned to the command of Prince of Wales’s Fort, en- 


gaged fuch of them for my guides as he thought were moft 
likely to anfwer the purpofe ;, but none of them had been 
at this grand river. I was fitted out with every thing 


thought neceflary, and with ammunition to ferve two 
years. I was to be accompanied. by two of the Company’s 


fervants, two of the Home-guard * (Southern) Indians, 


The Company had no fooner perufed my Journals and Charts, than they , 
ordered a handfome fum to be placed to the credit of my account; and in the 


two firft paragraphs of their letter to me, dated 12th May 1773, they ex- 


prefs themfelves in the following words: 


<¢ Mr. SAMuvEL HEARNE, 


S05) lake 
“* Your letter of the 28th Auguft laft gave us the agreeable pleafure to hear 


A 


“€ of your fafe return to our Factory. Your Journal, and the two charts you 


a, 
Lat 


fent, fufficiently convinces us of your very judicious remarks. 


‘© We have maturely confidered your great affiduity in the various acci- 
‘* dents which occurred in your feveral Journies. We hereby return you our 
«© orateful thanks; and to manifeft our obligation we have confented to allow 


“ you a gratuity of £ for thofe fervices.” 


Asa farther proof of the Company’s being perfeétly fatisfied with my con- 
duct while on that Journey, the Committee unanimoufly appointed me Chief 
of Prince of Wales’s ort in the Summer of 1775; and Mr. Bibye Lake, who 
was then Governor, and feveral others of the Committee, honoured me with 
a regular correfpondence as long as they lived. 


* By the FHoome-guard Indians we are to underftand certain of the natives 
who are immediately employed under the protection of the Company’s fervants, 
refide on the plantation, and are employed in hunting for the Factory. - 


8 and 


INTRODUCTION. 


and a fufficient number of Northern Indians to carry 
and haul my baggage, provide for me, &c. But for the 
better ftating this arrangement, it will not be improper to 
infert my Inftru@tions, which, with fome occafional re- 
marks thereon, will throw much light on the following 
Journal, and be the beft method of proving how far thofe 
orders have been complied with, as well as fhew my rea- 
fons for neglecting fome parts as unneceflary, and the im— 
poflibility of putting other parts of them in execution. 


€¢ 


€¢ 


cc 


c¢ 


ce 


£6 


¢ 


wn 


©“ ORDERS aad INSTRUCTIONS for Mr 
‘ SamugeL Hearne, goimg on an Expedition by 
© Land towards sii een ude 70° Worth, in. 


aN 


“¢ order to gain a Knowledge of the Northern 


~ 


rT 


* 4769. 


Mr. Samurt Hearne, 
“STR, 


‘© Wuerzas the Honourable Hudion’s Bay Company- 


have been informed by the report from Indians, that 
there is a great probability of confiderable advan-. 


tages to be expected from a better knowledge of their 


country by us, than what hitherto has been obtained; 


and as it is the Company’s earneft defire to embrace. 
every circumftance that may tend to the benefit of the 


faid Company, or the Nation at large, they have re- 
queited you to condué this Expedition ; and as you 
.s have 


© Tudians Country, &c. on ” Bebalf of the Eo~- 
© nourable Fludfon’s Bay Company, in the Year 


REXV © 


SXMVI 


€¢ 


ee 


ce 


€¢ 


OC 


c¢ 


Ce 


ce 


£¢ 


€¢ 


ce 


ce 
cc 
4 
€¢ 
4 
€¢ 
ce 
€¢ 
c¢ 


é¢ 


cc 


INTRODUCTION. 


have readily confented to undertake the prefent Journey, 


you are hereby defired to proceed as foon as poflible, 
with William Ifbefter failor, and Thomas Merriman 
landfman, as companions, they both being willing to 
accompany you; alfo two of the Home-guard Southern 
Indians, who are to attend and aflift you during the 
Journey; and Captain Chawchinahaw, his Rieu 
Nabyah, and fix or eight of the beft Northern Indians 
we can procure, with a {mall part of their families, are 
to conduct you, provide for you, and afiift you and 
your companions in every thing that lays in their power, 
having particular orders fo to do. 


‘¢ gdly, Whereas you and your companions are well 
fitted-out with every thing we think neceffary, as alfo 


a fample of light trading goods; thefe you are to dil- 


pofe ot by way of prefents (and not by way of trade) 


to fuch far-off Indians as you may meet with, and to 
fmoke your Calimut * of Peace with their leaders, in 
order to eftablifh a friendfhip with them. You are alfo 


to perfuade them as much as poffible from going to war 


with each other, to encourage them to exert themfelves 
in procuring furrs and other articles for trade, and to 


affure them of good payment for them at a Com- 
pany S Factory. 


‘< It is fincerely recommen to,you and your compa- 
nions to treat the natives with civility, fo as not to give 


* The Calimut is a long ornamented ftem of .a pipe, much in ufe among all 
the tribes of Indians who know the ufe of tobacco. 


Jt is particularly ufed in 


all cafes of ceremony, .either in making war or peace ; at all public entertain- 
ments, orations, &c. 


‘¢ them 


INBFPRODUCTION. 


‘¢ them any room for complaint or difpuft, as they have 
‘“¢ flri&t orders not to give you the leaft offence, but are to 
‘¢ aid and affift you in any matter you may requeft of them 
‘¢ for the benefit of the undertaking. 


‘¢ If any Indians you may meet, that are coming to the 
«¢ Fort, fhould be willing to truft you with either food or 
‘¢ clothing, make your agreement for thofe commodities, 
‘¢ and by them fend me a letter, fpecifying the quantity 
‘¢ of each article, and they fhall be paid according to 
‘< your agreement. And, according to the Company’s or- 
‘< ders, you are to correfpond with me, or the Chief at 
‘¢ Prince of Wales’s Fort for the time being, at all oppor- 
‘“< tunities: And as you have mathematical inftruments 
‘ with you, you are to fend me, or the Chief for the 
‘< time being, an account of what latitude and longitude 
‘¢ you may be in at fuch and fuch periods, together with 
‘“< the heads of your proceedings; which accounts are to be 
‘< remitted to the Company by the return of their {hips *. 


‘¢ 3dly, The Indians who are now appointed your 
*¢ guides, are to conduct you to the borders of the Atha~ 
“¢ pufcow + Indians country, where Captain Matonabbee 


* No convenient opportunity offered during my laft Journey, except one, 
on the 22d March 1771; and as nothing material had happened during that 
part of my Journey, I thought there was not any neceffity for fending an ex- 
tract of my Journal; I ‘Wea 4 only fent a Letter to the Governor, informing 
him of my fituation with refpect to latitude and longitude, and fome account 
of the ufage which I received from the natives, &c. 

+ By miftake in my former Journal and Draft called Arathapefcow. 


€ Sat 


XKEVIE 


SEXVIIL 


c¢ 


a) 
a) 


€¢ 


€¢ 


c¢ 


¢¢ 


c¢ 


g¢ 


c¢ 


c¢ 


€¢ 


c¢ 


ae 
wr 


INTRODUCTION. 


is to meet you* in the Spring of one thoufand feven 
hundred and feventy, in order to conduct you to a river 
reprefented by the Indians to abound with copper ore, 
animals of the furr kind, &’¢. and which is faid to be 
fo far to the Northward, that in the middle of the 
Summer the Sun does not fet, and is fuppofed by the 
Indians to empty itfelf into fome ocean. ‘This river, 
which is called by the Northern Indians Neetha-fan- 
fan-dazey, or the Far Off Metal River, you are, if 

offible, to trace to the mouth, and there determine 
the latitude and longitude as near as you can; but 
more particularly fo if you find it navigable, and that 
a fettlement can be made there with any degree of 
fafety, or benefit to the Company. 


‘© Be careful to obferve what mines are near the river, 
what water there is at the river’s mouth, how far the 
woods are from the fea-fide, the courfe of the river, 
the nature of the foil, and the productions of it; and 
make any other remarks that you may think will be 
either neceflary or fatisfactory. And if the faid river 
be likely to be of any utility, take poffeflion of it on 
behalf of the Hudfon’s Bay Company, by cutting your 


* This was barely probable, as Matonabbee at that time had not any in- 


formation of this Journey being fet on foot, much lefs had he received orders 
to join me at the place and time here appointed; and had we accidentally met, 
he would by no means have undertaken the Journey without firft going to the 
Factory, and there making his agreement with the Governor; for no Indian is 
fond of performing any particular fervice forthe Englith, without firft knowing 
what is to be his reward. At the fame time, had I taken that rout on my out- 
fet, it would have carried me fome hundreds of miles out of my road. See 
my Track on the Map in the Winter 1770, and the Spring 1771. 


¢ name 


INTRODUCTION. 


““ name on fome of the rocks, as alfo the date of the 
*¢ year, month, &’c. * 


‘¢ When you attempt to trace this or any other river, 
«¢ be careful that the Indians are furnifhed with a fufficient 
<¢ number of canoes for trying the depth of water, the 
“< ftrength of the current, @c. If by any unforefeen 
“ accident or difafter you fhould not be able to reach the 
‘¢ before-mentioned river, it.is earneftly recommended to 
- you, if poflible, to know the event of Wager Strait +; 
‘¢ for it is reprefented by the laft difcoverers to terminate 
‘© in {mall rivers and lakes. See how far the woods are 
‘¢ from the navigable parts of it; and whether a fettle- 
‘¢ ment could with any propriety be madethere. If this 
‘© fhould prove unworthy of notice, you are to take the 
<¢ fame method with Baker’s Lake, which is the head of 


* I was not provided with inftruments for cutting on ftone; but for form- 
fake, I cut my name, date of the year, &c. on a piece of board that-had 
been one of the Indian’s targets, and placed it in a heap of ftones on a fmall 
eminence near the entrance of the river, on the South fide. 


+ There is certainly no harm in making out all Inftruétions in the fulleft 
manner, yet it muft be allowed that thofe two parts might have been omitted 
with great propriety; for as neither Middleton, Ellis, nor Chriftopher were 
able to penetrate far enough up thofe inlets to difcover any kind of herbage 
except mofs and grafs, much lefs woods, it was not likely thofe parts were fo 
materially altered for the better fince their times, as to make it worth my 
while to attempt a farther difcovery of them; and efpecially as I had an op- 
portunity, during my fecond Journey, of proving that the woods do not reach 
the fea-coaft by fome hundreds of miles in the parallel of Chefterfield’s Inlet. 
And as the edge of the woods to the Northward always tends to the Weftward, 
the diftance muft be greatly increafed in the latitude of Wager Strait. Thofe 
parts have long fince been vifited by the Company’s fervants, and are within 
the known limits of their Charter; confequently require no other form of 
poffeffion. 

ez ‘¢ Bowden's 


XEXKLY 


si 


INTRODUCTION. 


‘© Bowden’s or Chefterfield’s Inlet*; as alfo with an 
‘¢ other rivers you may meet with ; and if likely to be of 
‘“ any utility, you are to take poffeffion of them, as be- 
‘© fore mentioned, on the behalf of the Honourable Hud- 
‘¢ fon’s Bay Company. The draft of Bowden’s Inlet and 
‘< Wager Strait I fend with you, that you may have a better 
‘“< idea of thofe places, in cafe of your vifiting them. 


‘¢ athly, Another material point which is recommended 
‘¢ to you, is to find out, if you can, either by your own 
‘¢ travels, or by information from the Indians, whether 
‘¢ there isa paflage through this continent +. It will be 


* See the preceding Note. 

+ The Continent of America is much wider than many people imagine, 
particularly Robfon, who thought that the Pacific Ocean was but a few days 
journey from the Weft coaft of Hudfon’s Bay. This, however, is fo far from 
being the cafe, that when I was at my greateft Weftern diftance, upward of 
five hundred miles from Prince of Wales’s Fort, the natives, my guides, 
well knew that many tribes of Indians lay to the Weft of us, and they knew 
no end to the land in that direction; nor have J met with any Indians, either 
Northern or Southern, that ever had feen the fea to the Weftward. It is, 
indeed, well known to the intelligent and well-informed part of the Com- 
pany’s fervants, that an extenfive and numerous tribe of Indians, called 
E-arch-e-thinnews, whofe country lies far Weft of any of the Company’s or 
Canadian fettlements, muft have traffic with the Spaniards on the Weft fide of 
the Continent; becaufe fome of the Indians who formerly traded to York Fort, 
when at war with thofe people, frequentiy found faddles, bridles, mufkets, 
and many other articles, in their poffeflion, which were undoubtedly of Spanifh 
manufactory. 

I have feen feveral Indians who have been fo far Weft as to crofs the top of 
that immenfe chain of mountains which run from North to South of the con- 
tinent of America. Beyond thofe mountains all rivers run to the Weftward. 
T muft here obferve, that all the Indians [ ever heard relate their excurfions in 
that country, had invariably got fo far tothe South, that they did not experi- 
ence any Winter, nor the leaft appearance of either froft or fnow, though 
fometimes they have been abfent eighteen months, or two years. 


: CC very 


¢ 
cc 
cc 
c¢ 
€¢ 
C¢ 


ce 


CC 
CC 
c¢ 


ec 


66 
ra: 
CC 


Cé 


INTRODUCTION. 


very ufeful to clear up this point, if poffible, in order to. 


prevent farther doubts from arifing hereafter refpeéting 
a paflage out of Hudfon’s Bay * into the Weftern Ocean, 
as hath lately been reprefented by the American Tra- 
veller. The particulars of thofe remarks you are to 
infert in your Journal, to be remitted home to the 
Company. 


‘¢ Tf you fhould want any fupplies of ammunition, or 
other neceffaries, difpatch fome trufty Indians to the 
Fort with a letter, fpecifying the quantity of each 


_article, and appoint a place for the faid Indians to meet 


you again. 


‘¢ When on your return, if at a proper time of the 
year, and you fhould be near any of the harbours that 
are frequented by the brigantine Charlotte, or the floop 
Churchill, during their voyage to the Northward, and 
you fhould chufe to return in one of them, you are de- 
fired to make frequent {mokes as you approach thofe 
harbours, and they will endeavour to receive you by 
making fmokes in anfwer to yours; and as one thou- 
fand feven hundred and feventy-one will probably be the 
year in which you will return, theMafters of thofe veffels 
at that period {hall have particular orders on that head. 


* As toa paflage through the continent of America by the way of Hudfon’s 


Bay, it has fo long been exploded, notwithftanding what Mr. Ellis has urged 
in its favour, and the place it has found in the vifionary Map of the American 
Traveller, that any comment on it would be quite unneceflary. My latitude 
only will be a fufficient proof that no fch paffage is in exiftence, 


<¢ It 


sli 


«lit 


INTRODUCTION. 


¢ Tt will be pleafing to hear by the farft opportunity, in 
what latitude and longitude you meet the Leader Ma- 
“© tonabbee, and how far he thinks it is to the Copper- 
<¢ mine River, as alfo the probable time it may take be- 
fore you can return. But in cafe any thing fhould pre- 
‘¢ vent the faid Leader from joining yow, according to 
«© expectation, you are then to procure the beft Indians 
«© you can for your guides, and either add to, or diminifh, 
your number, as you may from time to time think moft 
neceflary for the good of the expedition. 


A 
tia) 


a) 


é 


rm 


~~ 


we 
ta) 


€ 


~~ 


‘© So I conclude, wifhing you and your companions 
“a continuance of health, together with a profperous 
‘¢ Journey, and a happy return in fafety. Amen. 


“ MOSES NORTON, Governor. 


“ Dated at Prince of Wales’s Fort, Churchill 
“© River, Hudfon’s Bay, North America, 
“ November 6th, 1769.” 


Ifbefter and Merriman, mentioned in my InftruGions, 
actually accompanied me during my firft fhort attempt ; 
but the Indians knowing them to be but common men, 
ufed them fo indifferently, particularly in fcarce times, 
that I was under fome apprehenfions of their being flarved 
to death, and I thought myfelf exceedingly happy when I 
got them fafe back to the Factory. This ~extraordinary 
behaviour of the Indians made me determine not to take 
any Europeans with me on my two laft expeditions. 


With 


INTRODUCTION. 


With regard to that part of my Inftructions which di- 
rects me to obferve the nature of the foil, the produdtions 
thereof, &¢. it muft be obferved, that during the whole 
time of my abfence from the Fort, I was invariably con- 
fined to ftony hills and barren plains all the Summer, and 
before we approached the woods in the Fall of the year, 
the ground was always covered with {now toa confiderable 
depth; fo that I never had an opportunity of feeing any 
of the fmall plants and fhrubs to the Weitward. But 
from appearances, and the flow and dwarty growth of the 


woods, &c. (except in the Athapufcow country,) there is. 


undoubtedly a greater fcarcity of vegetable produtions 
than at the Company’s moft Northern Settlement ; and to. 
the Eaftward of the woods, on the barren grounds, whce- 
ther hills or vallies, there is a total want of herbage, ex- 
cept mofs, on which the deer feed; a tew dwarf willows 
creep among the mofs; fome wifh-a-capucca and a little 
erafs may be feen here and there, but the latter is {carcely 
fuficient to ferve the geefe and other birds of paflage 
during their fhort ftay in thofe parts, though they are al- 
ways in a ftate of migration, except when they are breeding 
and in a moulting ftate. ; 


In confequence of my complying with the Company’s 
requeft, and undertaking this Journey, it 1s natural to fup- 
pole that every neceflary arrangement was made for the 
eafier keeping of my reckoning, &c. under the many in- 
conveniencies I muft be unavoidably obliged to labour 
in fuch an expedition. I drew a Map on a large {kin 
of parchment, that contained twelve degrees of latitude 


5 | North, 


x li. 


INTRODUCTION. 


North, and thirty degrees of longitude Weft, of Churchill 
Fa@ory, and fketched all the Weft coaft of the Bay on it, 
but left the interior parts blank, to be filled up during my 
Journey. I alfo prepared detached pieces on a much larger 
{cale for every degree of latitude and longitude contained. 
in the large Map. On thofe detached pieces I pricked off 
my daily courfes and diftance, and entered all lakes and 
rivers, &c. that I met with; endeavouring, by a fri 
enquiry of the natives, to find out the communication of 
one river with another, as alfo their connections with the 
many lakes with which that country abounds: and when 
opportunity offered, having corrected them by obferva- 
tions, Tentered them in the general Map. Thefe and fe- 
veral other neceflary preparations, for the eafier, readier, 
and more correctly keeping my Journal and Chart, were 
alfo adopted; but as to mylelf, little was required to be 
done, as the nature of travelling long journies in thofe 
countries will never admit of carrying even the moft com- 
mon article of clothing ; fo that the traveller is obliged 
to depend on the country he pafies through, for that article, 
as well as for provifions. Ammunition, ufeful iron-work, 
fome tobacco, a few knives, and other indifpenfable ar- 
ticles, make a fuflicient load for any one to carry that is 
going a journey likely to laft twenty months, or two years. 
As that was the cafe, I only took the fhirt and clothes I 
then had on, one fpare coat, a pair of drawers, and as 
much cloth as would make me two or three pair of Indian 
ftockings, which, together with a blanket for bedding, 
compofed the whole of my ftock of clothing. 


A JOUR. 



















wa? 


es ER ee ree Os SE Pw 


' 
f 
| 
i 
! 
| 
f 
1 
i 
i 
; 
i 
\ 
1 
[ 


® 
, 


reppamite Milt = 


~~ 
oS 
rn et ee oS Te i eT 
a ey 
' 


yy 
wr 


arse 





we ______ a 


aw. - ~~ 
narra 


. a—_ 
ee ae 


: at i. thuckyaverdt 
Arctic | Circle oa 


= Luke ‘A 
ocaesdeceeeee ae 1 te cecvenen nny piacere as So eon eee eee sa ee in 


tt LOR 


Paro a 





Ve? seeaytin © aes 
Ath 


> a. = —— <r 
a a ee ee ee 


om 


SS ' 0 Zo | 
41 4 
ee 


aM Ro Lt | 


er 








Se —— oa _——"} - 
ees — aren ee 


Gof 
i 


i 
|; 

a 
i 
i 


hirge Fhe Late 


aT “ +4 
i - BAN LLitl Feld Yi 
4 7% hithe 
q { e x SD Betortit Fatee 








(Vere > Ec aL 
a ee 
———— 


' 


<> - AT 
_ Cy eee 













| 
vit 
it { 
yplen¢ kc 
| 
ae fitted Lake 1 
ie Bn ecece necneeeecec eevee eensnennend ccereenaecoarenanenreccesienccaemene cranes) wanecerecenines cenanansa cont annaean nenenifecenereccnememencnaeatcceectaccareaceetaces wovoncnnneenenseceeceeanaceectacectaastefiencnnnneccenateamateestacteetaastiaeectaflga ners neem | |=) 
v t NS 
4 ' 
i a ’ oT, \ aS 
| | ‘ } = * 
- { | F A 
= * 
f | 
Wire a | ‘4 } 
a (Jer Vay, 
— a 






————— 


85 
gf ee ee 


a ~ ' Ee ) ' 
Fe Wide 
ee Se = es 
caliitiliny ALLLTTEARNES TR AGKS tu Sos 


- 


te fournrcs for lhe bevcory) ; | ys . : 
yy me ft ‘th OC Cg of Me | we : | 
1 { 4 ‘ y ; 
( COPPER MINE RivER,) 

TH Che Sears GIL; 71 anil ya Z 


: | 


LHLUDS@H S See a ( OMP. sue Jz 


Kw 7g WY 8 p 








anilerp lhe hielo of hn 











hoy iy Avert Lethe 


y 








| 
‘a 


ooo 
pats q 


CHee Lethe 





Rit hus filed E A 


Selby ZL. 


BE asin /. 


Sieh ere 


j >> heveds Bett’ 


ia atari, 


woe Bruyps But 


1 al ) te fe 
: | @ 
es | ss ‘= haa 

Y, i a \ 





| 
ee tl 
sf pm TE DSONS STRAITS I 












Wasnt Lethe od, 
1 id : 
ih Prep 






4 
v2 





Hwvp s 











Ree Werepeie 


uy" RAREAILA 


- v, 
/ ><> - agi : 
‘ bs : . ‘ 4 Ly 2 
Vere that -tiee RL 
are Gee * F 
papthin | | 
A 
¢ 





Lt Ne dsete Shes: 


} 
ph aeee 
ett 





} 
| - et | 
Sw 
: a q i, 
| * ae Pal Patil Seis 
Na 15 ¢ . 
< gs : ian 6 
| Onn’ Past 
* bs 2 
| . 
be 
| oo 
MARTEL. er’ 
vs! 
New Oiferrev R. “ | 
Ay | 
- 4 
| 
| 
ey = —" 
ia rv. P : ; : 











a ee 


bingrared br CtSeule ais, tori. 


1K 
Jo uRN EY 
TO THE 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 





CHAP. I 


‘Tranfaétions ‘from my leaving Prince of -Wales’s ‘Fort on 
my firft expedition, till our arrival there again. 


Set off from the Fort.—Arrive at Po-co-ree-ki iyf-co River.—One of the 
Northern Indiaus defert.—Crofs Seal River,.aud walk on the barren 
| grounds. —Receive wrong information concerning the diftance of the 
qwoods.—Weather begins to be very cold, provifions all expended, and 
nothing to be got.—sStrike to the Weftward, arrive at the woods, and 
kill three debe Set forward in the North Weft quarter, fee the tracks 
of mufk-oxen: and deer, but killed none.—Very fhort. of provifions.— 
Chawchinabaw wants us to return.—Neither he nor his crew -con- 
tribute. to our maintenance.—He injluences Jeveral of the Indians to 
_defert.—Chawehinahaw and all his crew leave us.——Begin our return 
to-the fattory; kill a few partridges, the firft meal we had bad for 
feveral days.—Villany of one of the home Indians and his wife, who 
aas a Northern Indian woman.—Arrive at Seal River, kill two deer ; 

 partridges plenty —Meet a ftrange Northern Indian, accompany him 

~ fo bis tent, ufage received there; my Indians affift in killing fome 


- beaver.—Proceed toward home, and arrive at the Fort. 


# AVING made every necefiary arrangement for my de- 1769. 
i & parture on the fixth of November, I took leave of the wKotne 
Selecnor, and my other friends, at Prince of Wales’s Fort, ts 


and began my-journey, under the falute of feven cannon. 
| The 





PY 
“ 


E700. 


ee | 
November. 


Sth. 


oth. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


The weather at that time being very mild, made it but 
indifferent hauling*, and all my crew being heavy laden,. 
occafioned us to make but fhort days journeys; how- 
ever, on the eighth, we crofled the North branch of 
Po-co-ree-kif-co River,, and that. night put up in a {mall 


tuft of woods, which is between it and Seal River. In 


the night, one of the Northern Indians. deferted; and as 
all the reft of my crew were heavy laden, I was under 


the neceffity of hauling the fledge he had left, which 


however was not very heavy, as it fcarcely exceeded fixty 


pounds. 


The weather ftill continued very fine and pleafant: we 
directed our courfe to the Weft North Weft, and early 
in the day croffled Seal River. In the courfe of this. 
day’s journey we met feveral Northern Indians, who were 
going to the factory with furs and venifon ; and as we had 
not killed any deer from our leaving the Fort, I got feveral: 
joints of venifon from thofe ftrangers, and gave them a: 
note on the Governor for payment, which — per- 
fedtly agreeable to all parties. 


When on the North Weft fide of Seal River, I afked 
Captain Chawchinahaw the diftance, and probable time 
it would take, before we could reach the main woods ; 
which he affured me would not exceed four or five days 
journey. This put both me and my companions in good 


* The colder the weather is, the eafier the fledges flide over the fnow. 


{pirits, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


{pirits, and we continued our courfe between the Weft 
by North and North Weft, in daily expe@ation of arriving 
at thofe woods, which we were told would furnifh us 
with every thing the country affords. Thefe accounts 
were fo far from being true, that after we had walked 
double the time here mentioned, no figns of woods were 
to be feen in the direction we were then fteering ; but 
we had frequently feen the looming of woods to the 


South Weft. 


The cold being now very intenfe, our {mall ftock of 
Englifh provifions all expended, and not the leaft thing 
to be got on the bleak hills we had for fome time been 
walking on, it became neceflary to ftrike more to the 
Weftward, which we accordingly did, and the next 
evening arrived at fome {mall patches of low fcrubby 
woods, where we faw the tracks of feveral deer, and 
killed a few partridges. The road we had traverfed 
for many days before, was in general fo rough and 
ftony, that our fledges were daily breaking; and to add 
to the inconveniency, the land was fo barren, as not to 
afford us materials for repairing them: but the few 
woods we now fell in with, amply fupplied us with necef— 
{aries for thofe repairs; and as we were then enabled each 
night to pitch proper tents, our lodging was much more 
comfortable than it had been for many nights before, 
while we were on the barren grounds, where, in gene- 
ral, we thought ourfelves well off if we could fcrape 


together as many fhrubs as would make a fire; but it 
1B ee was 


3 


1769. 


November. 


roth. 


4 
1769. 


i, 
November. 


ot. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


was {carcely ever in our power to make any other defence 
againft the weather, than by digging a hole in the fnow 
down to the mofs, wrapping ourfelves up in our clothing, 
and lying down in it, with our fledges fet up edgeways 
to windward. 


On the twenty-firft, we did not move; fo the Indian 
men went a hunting, and the women cut holes in the ice 
and caught a few fifth in a {mall lake, by the fide of 
which we had pitched our tents. At night the men re- 
turned with fome venifon, having killed three deer, which 
was without doubt very acceptable; but our number 
being great, and the Indians having fuch enormous fto- 
machs, very little was left but fragments after the two 
or three firft good meals. Having devoured the three 
deer, and given fome neceflary repairs to our {ledges and 
{now fhoes, which only took one day, we again proceeded 
on toward the North Weft by Weft and Weft North 
Welt, through low {icrubby pines, intermixed with fome 
dwarf larch, which is commonly called juniper in 
Hudfon’s Bay. In our road we frequently faw the tracks 
of deer, and many mufk-oxen, as they are called there; 
but none of my companions were fo fortunate as to: kill 
any of them: fo that a few partridges were all we could 
get to live on, and thofe were fo fcarce, that we feldom 
could kill as many as would amount to half a bird a day 
for each man ; which, confidering we had nothing elfe for 
the twenty-four hours, was in reality next to nothing. 


5 By 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


By this time I found that Captain Chawchinahaw had 
not the profperity of the undertaking at heart; he often 
painted the difficulties in the worft colours, ae every 
method to difhearten me and my European companions, 
and feveral times hinted his defire of our returning back 
to the factory: but finding I was determined to proceed, 
he took fuch methods as he thought would be moft 
likely to anfwer his end; one of wliich was, that of not 
adminiftering toward our fupport: fo that we were a 
confiderable time without any other fubfiftence, but what 
our two home-guard (Southern) Indians procured, and 
the little that Iand the two European men could kill; 
which was very difproportionate to our wants, as we had 
to provide for feveral women and children who were 
with us. 


Chawchinahaw finding that this kind of treatment 
was not likely to complete his defign, and that we were 
not to be ftarved into compliance, at length influenced 
feveral of the beft Northern Indians to defert in the 
night, who took with them feveral bags of my ammu- 


nition, fome pieces of iron work, fuch as hatchets,. ice 


chiffels, files, &c. as well as feveral other ufeful articles. 


When I became acquainted with this piece of vil- 
lany, I afked. Chawchinahaw the reafon of fuch beha- 


viour. ‘To which he anfwered, that he knew nothing of 


the affair: but as that was the cafe, it would not be 
prudent, 


e) 


1769. 
Cesena prince d 


November. 
26th. . 


29th. 


30th, 


§ 


1769.- 


— 
November. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


prudent, he faid, for us to proceed any farther ; adding, 
that he and all the reft of his countrymen were going 
to {trike off another way, in order to join the remainder 
of their wives and families: and after giving us a fhort 
account which way to fteer our courfe for the neareft 
part of Seal River, which he faid would be our beft 
way homeward, he and his crew delivered me moft 
of the things which they had in charge, packed up 
their awls, and fet out toward the South Weft, making 
the woods ring with their laughter, and left us to con- 
fider of our unhappy fituation, near two hundred miles 
from Prince of Wales’s Fort, all heavily laden, and our 
ftrength and fpirits greatly reduced by hunger and 


fatigue. 


Our fituation at that time, though very alarming, 
would not permit us to {pend much time in refledtion; 
fo we loaded our fledges to the beft advantage, (but were 
obliged to throw away fome bags of fhot and ball,) and 


immediately fet out on our return. In the courfe of the 


day’s walk we were fortunate enough to kill feveral par- 


tridges, for which we were all very thankful, as it was 
the firft meal we had had for feveral we indeed, 
for the five preceding days we had not killed as much 
as amounted to half a partridge for each man; and fome 
days had not a fingle mouthful. While we were 
in this diftrefs, the Northern Indians were by no means 
in want; for as they always walked foremoft, they 

had 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


had ten times the chance to kill partridges, rabbits, or 
any other thing which was to be met with, than we had. 
Befide this advantage, they had great ftocks of flour, 
eatmeal, and other Englifh provifions, which they had 
embezzled out of my ftock during the early part of the 
journey; and as one of my home Indians, called 
Mackachy, and his wife, who is a Northern Indian 
woman, always reforted to the Northern Indians tents, 
where they got amply fupplied with provifions when 
neither I nor my men had a fingle mouthful, I have great 
reafon to fufpe& they had a principal hand in the embezzle- 
ment: indeed, both the man and his wife were capable 
of committing any crime, however diabolical. 


This day we had fine pleafant weather for the feafon 
of the year: we fet out early in the morning, and arrived 
the fame day at Seal River, along which we continued our 
courfe for feveral days. In our way we killed plenty of 
partridges, and faw many deer; but the weather was 
fo remarkably ferene that the Indians only killed two 
of the latter. By this time game was become fo plen- 
tiful, that all apprehenfions of ftarving were laid afide; 
and though we were heavily laden, and travelled pretty 
good days journeys, yet as our {pirits were good, our 


firength gradually returned. 


In our courfe down Seal River we met a ftranger, 
a Northern Indian, on a hunting excurfion ; ; and though 


zr 


7 


1769. 


ee 
November. 


December 
ft, 


gtk. 


3 


1760. 
ee | 
December 
§th. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


he had not met with any fuccefs that day, yet he kindly 
invited us to his tent, faying he had plenty of venifon at 
my fervice; and told the Southern Indians, that as there 
were two or three beaver houfes near his tent, he fhould 
be glad of their affiftance in taking them, for there was 
only one man and three women at the tent. 


Though we were at that time far from being in want 
of provifions, yet we accepted his offer, and fet off with our 
new guide for his tent, which, by a comparative diftance, 
he told us, was not above five miles from the place where 
we met him, but we found it to be nearer fifteen; fo that 
it was the middle of the-night before ~we atttied at it. 
When we drew near the tent, the ufual fignal for the 
approach of ftrangers was given, by firing a gun or two, 
which was immediately anfwered by the man at the tent. 


On our arrival at the door, the good man of the houfe 


came out, fhook me by the hand, and welcomed us to his 
tent; but as it was too {mall to contain us all, he ordered 
his women to affift us in pitching our tent; and in the 
mean time invited me and as. many of ‘my crew as 
his little habitation could contain, and regaled us with 
the beft in the houfe. The pipe went round pretty 
britkly, and the converfation naturally turned on the treat- 
ment we had received from Chawchinahaw and his gang ; 
which was always anfwered by our hoft with, ‘Ah! if. 
‘¢ T had been there, it fhould not have been fo! when, 


notwithftanding his hofpitality on the prefent occafion, he . 
would 


NORTHERN  GQGEAN. 


would moft affuredly have aéted the fame part as the 
others had done, if he had been of the party. 


Having refrefhed ourfelves with a plentiful fupper, 
we took leave of our hoft for a while, and retired to 
our tent; but not without being made thoroughly fen- 
fible that many things would be expected from me, 
before I finally left them. 


Early in the morning, my Indians aflifted us in taking 
the -beaver houfes already mentioned; but the houfes 
being fmall, and fome of the beavers efcaping, they 
only killed fix, all of which were cooked the fame 
night, and voracioufly devoured under the denomination 
of a feaft. 1 alfo received from the Indians feveral 
joints of venifon, to the amount of at leaft two deer; 
but notwithftanding I was to pay for the whole, I found 
that Mackachy and his wife got all the prime parts of the 
meat; and on my mentioning :-1t to them, there was fo 
much clanfhip among them, that they preferred making 
a prefent of it to Mackachy, to felling it to me at double 
the price for which venifon fells in thofe parts: a 
fufficient proof of the fingular advantage which a native 
of this country has over an Englifhman, when at fuch 
a diftance from the Company's Fattories as to depend 
entirely on them for fubfiftence. - : 


C Whines 


9 
1769. 


December, 


Oth, 


10 


1709. 


A JOURNEY “SOR Ser 


Thinking I had made my flay here long enough, I 


December Gave orders to prepare for.our departure; and as I had 


oth. 


Sth. 


pirthalel plenty of meat for prefent ufe while we were 
at this tent, fo I likewife procured fuch a fupply to 
carry with us, as was likely to laft us to the Fort. 


Early in the morning we took a final leave of our 
hoft, and proceeded on our journey homewards. One 
of the ftrangers accompanied us, for which at firft I 
could not fee his motive; but foon after our arrival at 
the Factory, I found that the purport of his vifit was 
to be paid for the meat, faid to be given gratis to 
Mackachy while we were at his tent. The weather 
continued very fine, but extremely cold ; and during this 
part of my journey nothing material happened, till we 
arrived fafe at Prince of Wales’s Fort on the eleventh 
of December, to my own great mortification, and to 
the no fmall furprife of the Governor, who had placed 


great confidence in the abilities and condua& of 
Chawchinahaw. 


CHAP. 


ROR TFRERN OGEA N. 


CHAP. IL 


TranfaGtions from our arrivaMat the Factory, to my leaving 
it again, and during the firltpart of my fecond journey, 
till I had the misfortune to break the quadrant. 


Tranfattions at the Faltory.—-Proceed on my fecond journey.—Arrive at 
Seal River.—Deer plentiful for fome time.— Method of angling fifb 
under the ice.—Set our fifoing nets.—Method of Setting nets under the 
ice. —My guide propofes to fiay till the gecfe began to fly ; his reafous 
accepted.—Pitch our tent in the beft manner.—Method of pitching a 
tent in winter. —Fifh plentiful for fome time; grow very fcarce; in 
great want of provifions.—Manner of employing my time.— My guide 
killed two deer.—Move to the place they were lying at; there hill 
feveral more deer, and three beavers.—Soon in want of provifions 
again.—Many Indians join us from the Weftward.—We begin to move 

_ towards the barren ground.— Arrive at She-than-nee, and there fuffer 
great diftrefs for want of provifious.—Indians kill two fwans and three 
gecfe.—Geefe and other birds of paffage plentiful. — Leave She-than-nee, 
and arrive at Beralzone.—One of mycompanions guns burfts, and [batters 
his left hand.—Leave Beralzone, and get on the barren ground, clear 
of all woods.—Throw away our fledges and fnow fhoes.—Each perfon 
takes a load on his back; my part of the luggage.—Expofed to many 
hardfips.— Several days without vittuals.—Indians kill three miufe 
oxen, but for want of fire are obliged to eat the meat raw.— Fine 
weather returns ; make a fire; effects of long fafling ; flay a day or two 
to dry fome meat in the fun.— Proceed to the Northward, and arrive 
at Cathawhachaga ; there find fome tents of Indians—A Northern 
feader called Keelchies meets us; fend a letter by him to the Governor.— 
Tranfattions at Cathawhachaga ; leave it, and proceed to the Nortb- 


zvard.——Meet feveral Indians.— My guide not willing to proceca ; his 
G2 reafois 


tad 
ta 


JP 4 
Unnage. 


A jOURNEY “DOr Gir 


veafons for it.—Many more Indians join usx—Arrive at Doobaunt 
Whote River.— Maaner of ferrying over rivers in the Northern Indian 
canoes.—No rivers in thofe parts in a ufeful direction for the natives.— 
Had nearly loft the. quadrant and all the powder.—Some refletions on 
our fituation, and the conduct of the Indians.—Find the quadrant, and 
part of the powder.—Obferve for the latitude.— Quadrant broke.— 
Refolve to return again to the Faétory. 


te Slider my abfence from Prince of Wales’s 

Fort on my former journey, feveral Northern. 
Indians arrived in great diftrefs at the Factory, and were 
employed in fhooting partridges for the ufe of our 
people at the Fort. One of thofe Indians. called Con- 
ne-e-guefe faid, he had been very near to the famous 
river I was engaged to go in queft of. Accordingly 
Mr. Norton engaged him and two other Northern Indians 


‘to accompany me on this fecond attempt, but to avoid 


all incumbrances as much as poflible, it was thought 
advilable not to take any women*, that the Indians 
might have fewer to provide for. I would not permit 
any European to go with me, but two of the home- 
guard (Southern) Indian men were to accompany me as 
before. Indeed the Indians, both Northern and Southern, 
paid fo little attention to Ifbefter and Merriman on my 
former journey, particularly in times of {carcity, that 1 was 
determined not to take them with me in future; though 
the former was very defirous to accompany me again, 
and was well calculated to encounter the hardfhips of 


* "This was a propofal of the Governor’s, though he well knew we could not 
do without their affiftance, both for hauling our baggage, as well as dreffing 


{uch 


kins for clothing, pitching our tent, getting firing, Oc. 


NgOrks TAPE RE NPOCEAN. 


fuch an undertaking. Merriman was quite fick of fuch 
excurfions, and fo far from offering his fervice a fecond 
time, feemed to be very thankful that he was once more 
arrived in fafety among his friends; for before he got 
to‘the Factory he had contracted a matt violent cold. 


* 


Having come to the above refolutions, and finally de- 
termined on the number of Indians that were to accom- 
pany us, we were again fitted out with a large fupply of 
ammunition, and as many other ufeful articles as we 
could conveniently take with us, together with a {mall 
fample of light trading goods, for prefents to the Indians,. 
as before. 


My inftructions on this occafion amounted to no more 
than an order to proceed as faft as poflible ; and for my 
condué during the journey, I was referred to my former 
inftructions of November 6th, 1769. 


Every thing being in readinefs for our departure, 
on the twenty-third of February I began my fecond 
journey, accompanied by three Northern Indians and two 
of the home-guard (Southern) Indians. I took particular 
care, however, that Mackachy, though an excellent hunter, 
fhould not be of our party; as he had proved himéelf, 
during my former journey, to be a fly artful villain. 


The {now at this time was. fo deep on the top of 
the ramparts, that few of the cannon were to be {een, 
7 otherwife 


7: 


— 
Bebruary. 


23d. 


a + 
i770. 


L 
Febr wary. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


otherwife the Governor would have faluted me at my 
departure, as before; but as thofe honours could not 


poflibly be of any fervice to my expedition, I readily 


relinquifhed every thing of the kind; and‘in lieu of 
it, the Governor, officers, and people, infifted on giving 
me three cheers. 


After leaving the Factory, we continued our courfe in 
much the fame direétion as in my former journey, till 
we arrived at Seal River ; when, inftead of crofling it, and 
walking on the barren grounds as before, we followed the 
courfe of the river, except in two particular places, where 
the bends tended fo much to the South, that by croffing 
two necks of land not more than five or fix miles wide, 
we faved the walking of near twenty miles each time, and 
{till came to the main river again. 


The weather had been fo remarkably boifterous and 
changeable, that we were frequently obliged to continue 
two or three nights in the fame place. To make up for 
this inconveniency, deer were fo plentiful for the firft 
eight or ten days, that the Indians killed as many as was 
neceflary ; but we were all fo heavy laden that we could 
not pofiibly take much of the meat with us. This I foon 
perceived to be a great evil, which expofed us to fuch fre- 
quent inconveniences, that in cafe of not killing any thing 
for three or four days together, we were in great want of pro- 
vifions ; we feldom, however, went to bed entirely fupperlefs 


till 


NiO KR T RE Roby “EC FT AEN. 


till the eighth of March ; when though we had only walked 
about eight miles that morning, and expended all the 
remainder of the day in hunting, we could not pro. 
duce a fingle thing at night, not even a partridge! nor 
had we difcerned the track of any thing that day, which 
was likely to afford us hopes of better fuccefs in the 
morning. This being the cafe, we prepared fome hooks 
and lines ready to angle for fifh, as our tent was then. by 
the fide of a lake belonging to Seal River, which feemed 
by its fituation to afford fome profped of fuccefs. 


Early in the morning we took down our tent, and 
moved about five miles to the Weft by South, to a part 
of the lake that feemed more commodious for fifhing 
than that where we had been the night before. As 
foon as we arrived at this place, fome were immediately 
employed cutting holes in the ice, while others pitched 
the tent, got firewood, &c.; after which, for it was 
early in the morning, thofe who pitched the tent went 
a hunting, and at night one of them returned with 
a porcupine, while thofe who were angling caught feveral 


fine trout, which afforded us a plentiful fupper, and we 
had fome trifle left for break faft. | 


Angling for fifh under the ice in winter requires no 
other procefs, than cutting round holes in the ice from 
one to two feet diameter, and letting down a baited 
hook, which is always kept in motion, not only to 

prevent 


‘ ed] 


vs 


1770. 


ee | 
March 


Lale 


oth. 


16 A JOURNEY TO THE 


1770. prevent the water from freezing fo foon as it would do 
March if fuffered to remain quite fill, but becaufe it is found 
at the fame time to be a great means of alluring the faith 
to the hole; for it is always obferved that the fith in 
thofe parts will take a bait which is in motion, much — 
fooner than one that is at reft, 


roth. Early in the morning we again purfued our angling, 
and all the forenoon being expended without any fuccefs, 
we took down our tent and pitched it again about eight 
miles farther to the Weftward, on the fame lake, where 
we cut more holes in the ice for angling, and that 

zoth = night caught feveral fine pike. The next day we moved 
about five miles to the South Weft, down a {mall river, 
where we pitched our tent; and having fet four fifhing 
nets, in the courfe of the day we caught many fine fath, 
particularly pike, trout, tittymeg, and a coarfe kind of 
fith known in Hudfon’s Bay by the name of Methy*. 


To fet a net under the ice, it is firft neceflary to 
afcertain its exaét length, by ftretching it out upon the 
ice near the part propofed for fetting it. This being 
done, a number of round holes are cut in the ice, at ten 
or twelve feet diftance from each other, and as many in 
number-as will be fufficient to firetch the net at its full 
length. A line is then paffed under the ice, by means 


* The Methy are generally caught with a hook; and the beft time for tha 
fport is in the night; and if the nthe be dark, the better. 
A. of 


wh 


a 7 


NOR THE RN) O CLEA N. 


of along light pole, which is farft introduced at one of 
the end holes, and, by means of two forked fticks, this 
pole is eafily conducted, or paffed from one hole to another, 
under the ice, till it arrives at the laft. The pole is 
then taken out, and both ends of the line being properly 
fecured, is aiways ready for ufe. The net is made faft 
to one end of the line by one perfon, and hauled under 
the ice by a fecond; a large ftone is tied.to each of the 
lower corners, which ferves to keep the net expanded, and 
prevents it rifing from the bottom with every waft 
of the current. The Europeans fettled in Hudfon’s 
Bay proce¢d much in the fame manner, though they in 
general take much more pains; but the above method 
is found quite fufficient by the Indians. 


In order to fearch a net thus fet, the two end holes 
only are opened; the line is veered away by one perfon, 
and the net hauled from under the ice by another; after 
all the fifh are taken out, the net is eafily hauled back to 
its former ftation, and there fecured as before. 


As this place feemed likely to afford us a conftant 
fupply of fifh, my guide propofed to ftay here till the 
geefe began to fly, which in thofe Northern parts is 
feldom before the middle of May. His reafons for fo 
doing feemed well founded: ‘* The weather, he faid, 
“is at this time too cold to walk on the barren 
‘* grounds, and the woods from this part lead fo much 


D © tg. 


a7 


1770. 


Ne 
March. 


18 
1770. 


€—- eed 
March, 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


“‘ to the Weftward, that were we to continue travelling 
‘‘ in any tolerable fhelter, our courfe would not be 
‘¢ better than Weft South Weft, which would only be 
““ going out of our way; whereas, if we fhould remain 
“ here till the weather permit us to walk due North, 
“© over the barren grounds, we fhall then in one month 
‘S get farther advanced on our journey, than if we 
‘© were to continue travelling all the remainder of the 
‘© winter in the fweep of the woods.” 


Ca) 


Thefe reafons appeared to me very judicious, and as the 


‘plan feemed likely to be attended with little trouble, it 


met with my entire approbation. That being the cafe, 
we took additional pains in building our tent, and made 
it as commodious as the materials and fituation would 


admit. 


To pitch an Indian’s tent in winter, it is firft neceflary 
to fearch for a level piece of dry ground; which cannot 
be afcertained but by thrufting a ftick through the fnow 
down to the ground, all over the propofed part. When 
a convenient fpot is found, the fnow is then cleared away 
in a circular form to the very mofs; and when it is pro- 
pofed to remain more than a night or two in one place, the 
mofs is alfo cut up and removed, as it is very liable when 
dry to take fire, and occafion much trouble to the inha- 
bitants. A quantity of poles are then procured, which are 


generally proportioned both in number and length to the 
6 fize 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


fize of the tent cloth, and the number of perfons it is in- 
tended to contain. If one of the poles fhould not happen 
to be forked, two of them are tied together near the top, 
then raifed erect, and their buts or lower ends extended 
as wide as the propofed diameter of the tent; the other 
poles are then fet round at equal diftances from each 
other, and in fuch order, that their lower ends form a 
complete circle, which gives boundaries to the tent on 
all fides: the tent cloth is then faftened to a light pole, 
which is always raifed up and put round the poles from 
the weather fide, fo that the two edges that lap over and 
form the door are always tothe leeward. It muft be 
underftood that this method is only in ufe when the 
Indians are moving from place to place every day; for 
when they intend to continue any time in one place, they 
always make the door of their tent to face the South. 


The tent cloth is ufually of thin Moofe leather, dreffed 
and made by the Indians, and in fhape it nearly refembles 
a fan-mount inverted; fo that when the largeft curve 
inclofes the bottom of the poles, the fmaller one is 
always fufficient to cover the top; except a hole, which 
is defignedly left open to ferve the double purpofe of 


chimney and window. 


The fire is always made on the ground in the center, 
and the remainder of the floor, or bottom of the tent, is 
covered all over with fimall branches of the pine tree, 

D 2 which 


19 
177. 


March. 


ZO 


1770. 
March. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


which ferve both for feats and beds. A quantity of 
pine tops and branches are laid round the bottom of 
the poles on the outfide, over which the eves of the 
tent is ftaked down; a quantity of {now is then packed 
over all, which excludes great part of the external air, 
and contributes greatly to the warmth within. The 
tent here defcribed is fuch as is made ufe of by the 
Southern Indians, and the fame with which I was fur- 
nifhed at the Factory ; for that made ufe of by the North- 
ern Indians is made of different materials, and is of a 


quite different fhape, as fhall be defcribed hereafter. 


The fituation of our tent at this time was truly plea- 
fant, particularly for a {pring refidence; being on a {mall 
elevated point, which commanded an extenfive profpect 
over:a large lake, the fhores of which abounded with 
wood of different kinds, fuch as pine, larch, birch, and 
poplar; and in many places was beautifully contrafted 
with a variety of high hills, that fhewed their fnowy 
fummits above the talleft woods. About two hundred ~ 
yards from the tent was a fall, or rapid, which the 
fwiftnefs of the current prevents from freezing in the 
coldeft winters. At the bottom of this fall, which 
empties itfelf into the above lake, was a fine fheet of 
open water near a mile in length, and at leaft half a 
mile in breadth; by the margin of which we had our 
fifhing nets fet, all in open view from the tent. 


The 


NORTHERN OCEAN, 


The remaining part of this month pafied on without 
any interruption, or material occurrence, to difturb our 
repofe, worth relating; our fifhing nets provided us 
with daily food, and the Indians had too much phile- 
fophy about them to give themfelves much additional 
trouble; for during the whole time not one of them 
offered to look for a partridge, or any thing elfe which 


could yield a change of diet. 


As the time may now be fuppofed to have lain heavy 
on my hands, it may not be improper to inform the 
reader how I employed it. In the firft place, I em- 
braced every favourable opportunity of obferving the 
latitude of the place, the mean of which was 58° 46° 
30 North; and the longitude by account was 5° 57° 
Weft, from Prince of Wales’s Fort. I then corrected 
my reckoning from my laft obfervation; brought up 
my journal, and filled up my chart, to the place of our 
refidence. I built alfo fome traps, and caught a few 
martins; and by way of faving my ammunition, fet fome 
{nares for partridges. The former is performed by means 
of a few logs, fo arranged that when the martin attempts 
to take away the bait laid for him, he with very little 
ftruggle pulls down a {mall poft that fupports the whole 
weight of the trap; when, if the animal be not killed 
by the weight of the logs, he is confined till he be 
frozen to death, or killed by the hunter going his 
rounds. 


To 


21 


70. 


Kenn parece 
March, 


ae 


70. 
April. 


A JOURNEY T0 THE 


To fnare partridges requires no other procefs than 
making a few little hedges acrofs a creek, or a few fhort 
hedges projecting at right angles from the fide of an ifland 
of willows, -which thofe birds are found to frequent. 
Several openings muit be left in each hedge, to admit the 
birds to pafs through, and in each of them a fnare muft 
be fet; fo that when the partridges are hopping along the 
edge of the willows to feed, which is their ufual cuftom, 
fome of them foon get into the fnares, where they are 
confined till they are taken out. I have caught from 
three to ten partridges in a day by this fimple contri- 
vance; which requires no farther attendance than going 
round them night and morning. 


I have already obferved that nothing material happened 
to difturb our repofe till the firft of April, when to our 
great furprife the fifhing nets did not afford us a fingle 
fifh. Though fome of the preceding days had been 


pretty fuccefsful, yet my companions, like true Indians, 


feldom went to fleep till they had cleared the tent of. 


every article of provifion. As nothing was to be caught 
in the nets, we all went out to angle; but in this we 
were equally unfuccefsful, as we could not procure one 
fifh the whole day. This fudden change of circumftances 
alarmed one of my companions fo much, that he began 
to think of refuming the ufe of his gun, after having 
laid it by for near-a month. 


Earl y 


NORTHERN OCEAN, 


Early in the morning we arofe; when my guide Con- 
ne-e-~quefe went a hunting, and the reft attended the nets 
and hooks near home ;, but all with fuch bad fuccefs, that 
we could not procure enough in one day to ferve two men 
for a fupper. This, inftead of awakening the reft of 
my companions, fent them to fleep; and {fcarcely any 
of them had the prudence to look at the fifhing nets, 
though they were not more than two or three hundred 
yards from the tent door. 


My guide, who was a fiteady man, and an excellent 
hunter, having for many years been accuftomed to pro- 
vide for a large family, feemed by far the moft in- 
duftrious of all my crew; he clofely purfued his hunt- 
ing for feveral days, and feldom returned to the tent till 
after dark, while thofe at the tent pafied moft of their 
time in {moking and fleeping. 


Several days pafied without any figns of relief, till 
the roth, when my guide continued out longer than ordi- 
nary, which made us conjecture that he had met with 
{trangers, or feen fome deer, or other game, which occa- 
fioned his delay. We all therefore lay down to fleep, 
having had but little refrefhment for the three preceding 
days, except a pipe of tobacco and a draught of water ; 
even partridges had become fo fcarce that not one was 
to be got; the heavy thaws had driven them all out 
towards the barren grounds. About midnight, to our 

| | oreat 


23 


1770. 
April. 


ioth, 


24 


1770. 
April. 


ifthe 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


great joy, our hunter arrived, and brought with him 
the blood and fragments of two deer that he had 
killed. This unexpected fuccefs foon roufed the fleepers, 
who, in an inftant, were bufily employed in cooking a 
large kettle of broth, made with the blood, and fome fat 
and {craps of meat fhred {mall, boiled in it. - This might 
be reckoned a dainty difh at any time, but was more 
particularly fo in our prefent almoft famifhed condition. 


After partaking of this refrefhment, we refumed our 
reft, and early in the morning fet out in a body for the 
place where the deer were lying. As we intended to 
make our ftay but fhort, we left our tent ftanding, con- 
taining all our baggage. On our arrival at the place 
of deftination, fome were immediately employed in mak- 
ing a hut or barrocado with young pine trees; while 
one man fkinned the deer, the remainder went a hunting, 
and in the afternoon returned to the hut, after having 


killed two deer. 


Several days were now {pent in feafting and glut- 
tony; during which the Indians killed five more deer 
and three fine beavers; finding at laft, however, that 
there was little profpeé of procuring either more deer 
or beavers, we determined to return to our tent, with 
the remains of what we had already obtained. 


The flefh of thefe deer, though none of the largeft, 
might with frugality have ferved our {mall number, (being 
: only 


NOIR THLE RYN @C EA N. 


only fix) for fome time; but my companions, like other 
Indians, feafted day and night while it lafted; and were 
{fo indolent and unthinking, as not to attend properly to the 
fifhing-nets; fo that many fine fifth, which had beén en- 
tangled in the nets, were entirely fpoiled, and in about 
twelve or fourteen days we were nearly in as great diftrels 


for provifions as ever. 


During the courfe of our long inadtivity, Saw-fop-o- 
kifhac, commonly called Soffop, my principal Southern 
Indian, as he was cutting fome birch for fpoons, difhes, 
and other neceffary houfehold furniture, had the misfortune 
to cut his leg in fuch a manner as to be incapable of walk- 
ing; and the other Southern Indian, though a much 
younger man, was fo indolent as not to be of any fervice 
tome, except hauling part of our luggage, and eating up 
part of the provifions which had been provided by the 


more induftrious part of my companions, 


On the twenty-fourth, early in the day, a great body 
of Indians was feen to the South Weft, on the large lake 
by the fide of which our tent ftood. On their arrival at 
our tent we difcovered them to be the wives and families 
of the Northern Indian goofe-hunters, who were gone to 
Prince of Wales’s Fort to attend the feafon. They were 
bound toward the barren ground, there to wait the re- 
turn of their hufbands and relations from the Fort, after 


the termination of the goofe-feafon. 
E My 


a5 


1770. 


April. | 
a2. 


Sithe 


26 


770. 
Te nae 


April 
27th 


29th. 


May 


13th. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


My euide having for fome days paft determined to 
move toward the barren ground, this morning we took 
down our tent, packed up our luggage, and proceeded 
to the Eaftward in the fame track we came; but Soffop 
_ fo lame as to be obliged to be hauled on a fledge, 

I eafily prevailed on two of the Indians who had joined 
us on the 24th, and who were pues the fame road, 
to perform this fervice for him. 


After two days good walking in our old track, we ar- 
rived at a part of Seal River calledShe-than-nee, where 
we pitched our tent and fet both our fifhing-nets, intend- 
ing to ftay there till the geefe began to fy. Though we 
had feen feveral fwans and fome geefe flying to the North- 
ward, it was the thirteenth of May before we could 
procure any. On that day the Indians killed two fwans 
and three geefe. This in fome meafure alleviated our 
diftrefs, which at that time was very great; having had 
no other fubfiftence for five or fix days, than a few cran- 
berries, that we gathered from the dry ridges where the 
fnow was thawed away in fpots; for though we fet our 
ffhing-nets in the beft judged places, and angled at every 
part that was likely to afford fuccefs, we only caught 
three {mall fh during the whole time. Many of the 
Northern Indians, who had joined us on the 24th of 
April, remained in our company for fome time; and 
though I well knew they had had a plentiful winter, 
and had then good ftocks of dried meat by them, and 

were 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


were alfo acquainted with our diftrefs, they never gave 
me or my Southern companions the leaft fupply, although 
they had in fecret amply provided for our Northern 
guides. 


By the nineteenth, the geefe, fwans, ducks, gulls, and 
other birds of paffage, were fo plentiful, that we killed every 
day as many as were fufficient for our fupport; and having 
{topped a few days to recruit our fpirits alter fo long a 
faft, on the twenty-third we began once more to proceed 
toward the barren ground. Soflop having now perfedly 
recovered from his late misfortune, every thing feemed to 
have a favourable appearance; efpecially as my crew had 
been augmented to twelve perfons, by the addition of one 
of my guide’s wives, and five others, whom I had engaged 
to affift in carrying our luggage; and I well knew, from 
the feafon of the year, that hauling would foon be at an 
end for the fummer. | 


The thaws having been by this time fo great as to ren- 
der travelling in the woods almoft impra€ticable, we con- 
tinued our courfe to the Eaft on Seal River, about fixteen 
miles farther, when we came to a fmall river, and a 
firing of lakes connected with it, that tended to the 
North. 


The weather for fome time was remarkably fine and 
pleafant. Game of all kinds was exceedingly plentiful, 
E 2 and 


a 
a 


770+ 
May. 


roth. 


23d. 


7 


2§ 


1770+ 
ee ama ane d 


June. 


rGly 


ath. 


sth. 


6th. 


1oth. 


A\JOURNEY TO Wee 


and we continued our courfe to the Northward on the 
above river and lakes till the firft of June, when we ar- 
tived at a place called Beralzone. In our way thither, 
befide killing more geele than was neceffary, we fhot 
two deer. One of my companions had now the misfor- 
tune to fhatter his hand very much by the burfting of a 
gun; but as no bones were broken, I bound up the 
wound, and with the affiftance of fome of Turlington’s 
drops, yellow bafilicon, &c. which I had with me, foon 
reftored the ufe of his hand; fo that in a very fhort time 
he feemed to be out of all danger. 


After {topping a few days at Beralzone, to dry a little 


- venifon and a few geefe, we again proceeded to the North- 


ward on the barren ground; for on our leaving this place 
we foon got clear of all the woods. 


The {now was by this time fo foft as to render walking 
in fnow-fhoes very laborious ; and though the ground was 
bare in many places, yet at times, and in particular places, 
the {now-driits were fo deep, that we could not poflibly 
dowithout them. By the fixth, however, the thaws were 
fo general, and the fnows fo much melted, that as our 
{now-fhoes were attended with more trouble than fervice, 
we all confented to throw them away. ‘Tull the tenth, 
our fledges proved ferviceable, particularly in crofling lakes 
and ponds on the ice; but that mode of travelling now 


growing dangerous on account of the great thaws, we 
Q determined 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


determined to throw away our fledges, and every one to take 


a load on his back. 


This I found to be much harder work than the winter 
carriage, as my part of the luggage confifted of the fol- 
lowing articles, viz. the quadrant and its ftand, a trunk 
containing books, papers, &c. a land-compals, rd a large 
bag containing all my wearing apparel; alfo a hatchet, 
knives, files, &c. befide feveral {mall articles, intended 
for prefents to the natives. The aukwardnefs of my load, 
added to its great weight, which was upward of fixty 
pounds, and the exceflive heat of the weather, rendered 
walking the moft laborious tafk I had ever encountered ; 
and what confiderably increafed the hardfhip, was the bad- 
nefs of the road, and the coarfenefs of our lodging, being, on 
account of the want of proper tents, expofed to the utmoft 
feverity of the weather. The tent we had with us was not 
only too large, and unt for barren ground fervice, where 


no poles were to be got, but we had been obliged to cut ° 


it up for fhoes, and each perfon carried his own fhare. 
Indeed my guide behaved both negligently and ungene- 
roufly on this occafion; as he never made me, or my 
Southern Indians, acquainted with the nature of pi itching 
tents on the tren ground; which had he done, we 
could eafily have procured a fet of poles before we left the 
woods. He took care, however, to procure a fet for him-- 
felf and his wife; and when the tent was divided, though 


he made fhift to get a piece large enough to ferve him for 
a com- 


7 


1770. 
ae, 


ime. 


1770.~ 
Te an anes 


June. 


Pete 


A JOURNEY YO Pre 


a complete little tent, he never afked me or my Southern 
Indians to put our heads into it. 


Befide the inconvenience of being expofed to the open 


air, night and day, in all weathers, we experienced real. 


diftrefs from the want of victuals. When provifions were 
procured, it often happened that we could not make a 
fire, fo that we were obliged to eat the meat quite raw; 
which at firft, in the article of fith particularly, was as 
little relifhed by my Southern companions as myfelf. 


Notwithftanding thefe accumulated and complicated 
hard{hips, we continued in perfe& health and good fpirits; 
and my guide, though a perfect niggard of his provifions, 
efpecially in times of fcarcity, gave us the ftrongeft af- 
furance of foon arriving at a plentiful country, which 
would not only afford us a certain fupply of provifions, 
but where we fhould meet with other Indians, who pro- 
bably would be willing to carry part of our luggage. 
This news naturally gave us great confolation; for at that 
time the weight of our conftant loads was fo great, that 
when Providence threw any thing in our way, we could 
not carry above two days provilions with us, which 
indeed was the chief reafon of our being fo frequently 
in want. | : 


From the twenticth to the twenty-third we walked 
every day near twenty miles, without any other fubfiftence 
| than 


NOR PRE RN .~O CE AN. 


than a pipe of tobacco, and a drink of water when we 
pleated: even partridges and gulls, which fome time before 
were in great plenty, and eafily procured, were now fo 
{carce and fhy, that we could rarely get one; and as to 
geefe, ducks, &c. they had all flown to the Northward 
to breed and molt. 


Early in the morning of the twenty-third, we fet out as 
ufual, but had not walked above feven or eight miles be- 
fore we faw three mufk-oxen grazing by the fide of a fmall 
lake. ‘The Indians immediately went in purfuit of them ; 
and as fome of them were expert hunters, they foon killed 
the whole of them. This was no doubt very fortunate; 
but, to our great mortification, before we could get one 
of them fkinned, fuch a fall of rain came on, as to put 
it quite out of our power to makea fire; which, even in 
the fineft weather, could only be made of mofs, as we 
were near an hundred miles from any woods. This was 
poor comfort tor people who had not broke their fait for 
four or five days. Neceflity, however, has no law; and 
having been before initiated into the method of eating 
raw meat, we were the better prepared for this repaft: 
but this was by no means fo well relifhed, either by me 
or the Southern Indians, as either raw venifon or raw fith 
had been: for the fefh of the mufk-ox is not only coarfe 
and tough, but fmells and taftes fo ftrong of mufk as to 
make it very difagreeable when raw, though it is tolerable 
eating when properly cooked. ‘The weather continued fo 

remark- 


31 


1770. 
aw 


June. 


1770. 


June, 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


remarkably bad, accompanied with conftant heavy rain, 
fnow, and fleet, and our neceflities were fo great by 
the time the weather permitted us to make a fire, that we 
had nearly eat to the amount of one buffalo quite raw. 


Notwithftanding I muftered up all my philofophy on 
this occafion, yet I muft confefs that my fpirits began 
to fail me. Indeed our other misfortunes were greatly 
ageravated by the inclemency of the weather, which was 
not only cold, but fo very wet that for near three days 
and nights I had not one dry thread about me. When 
the fine weather returned, we made a fire, though it was 
only of mofs, as I have already obferved; and having 


got my cloaths dry, all things feemed likely to go on in 


the old channel, though that was indifferent enough ; but 


i endeavoured, like a failor after a ftorm, to forget paft 


snistortunes. 


Famed 


None of our natural wants, if we except thirft, are fo 


diftrefling, or hard to endure, as hunger; and in wan- 


dering fituations, like that which I now experienced, the 
hardfhip is greatly aggravated by the uncertainty with re- 
{pect to its duration, and the means moit proper to be 
ufed to remove it, as well as by the labour and fatigue we 


‘muft neceflarily undergo for that purpofe, and the difap- 


pointments which too frequently fruftrate our beft con- 
certed plans and moft ftrenuous exertions: it not only 


enfeebles the body, but depreffes the {pirits, in f{pite of 
‘every 


NORTHERN. O CweA N. 


every effort to prevent it. Befides, for want of action, the 
{tomach {o far lofes its digeftive powers, that after long faft- 
ing it refumes its office with pain and reluctance. During 


this journey I have too frequently experienced the dread-_ 


ful effects of this calamity, and more than once been re- 
duced to fo low a ftate by hunger and fatigue, that when 
Providence threw any thing in my way, my ftomach has 
icarcely been able to retain more than two or three ounces, 
without producing the moft oppreffive pain. Another 
difagreeable circumftance of long fafting is, the extreme 
difficulty and pain attending the natural evacuations for 
the farft time; and which is fo dreadful, that of it none 
but thofe who have experienced can have an adequate 


idea. 


To record in detail each day’s fare fince the com- 
mencement of this journey, would be little more than a 
dull repetition of the fame occurrences. A fufficient 
idea of it may be given in a few words, by obferving 
that it may juftly be faid to have been either all feaft- 
ing, or all famine: fometimes we had too much, feldom 
jaft enough, frequently too little, and often none at all. 
It will be only neceffary to fay that we have fafted many 
times two whole days and nights; twice upwards of 
three days ; and once, while at She-than-nee, near feven 
days, during which we tafted not a mouthful of any 
thing, except a few cranberries, water, {craps of old 
leather, and burnt bones. On thofe prefling occafions I 


have frequently feen the Indians examine their wardrobe, 
EF which 


ou 
1770. 


June. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


which confifted chiefly of fkin-clothing, and confider 
what part could beft be {pared ; fometimes a piece of an 
old, half-rotten deer fkin, and at others a pair of old 
fhoes, were facrificed to alleviate extreme hunger. The 
relation of fuch uncommon hardfhips may perhaps gain 
little credit in Europe; while thofe who are converfant 
with the hiftory of Hudfon’s Bay, and who are thoroughly 
acquainted with the diftrefs which the natives of the 
country about it frequently endure, may confider them as 
no. more than the common cccurrences of an Indian life, 


in which they are frequently driven to the neceffity of 
eating one another *, 


Knowing 


* Tt is the general opinion of the Southern Indians, that when any of their 
tribe have been driven to the neceffity of eating human flefh, they become fo 
fond of it, that no perfon is fafe in their company. And though it is well 
known they are never guilty of making this horrid repaft but when driven to 
it by neceffity, yet thofe who have made it are not only fhunned, but fo uni- 
verfally detefted by all who know them, that no Indians will tent with them, 
and they are frequently murdered flily. I have feen feveral of thofe poor 
wretches who, unfortunately for them, have come under the above defcrip- 
tion, and though they were perfons much efteemed before hunger had driven 
them to this act, were afterward fo univerfally defpifed and neglected, that a 
fmile never graced their countenances: deep melancholy has been feated on 
their brows, while the eye moft expreffively fpoke the dictates of the heart, 
and feemed to fay, ‘© Why do you defpife me for my misfortunes ? the period 
“ qs probably not far diftant, when you may be driven to the like neceffity !” 


In the Spring of the year 1775, when I was building Cumberland Houfe, 
an Indian, whofe name was Wapoos, came to the fettlement, at a time when 
fifteen tents of Indians were on the plantations: they examined him very 
minutely, and found he had come a confiderable way by himfelf without a 
oun, OF ammunition. This made many of them conjecture he had met with, 
znd killed, fome perfon by the way; and this was the more eafily credited, 


from 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


Knowing that our conftant loads would not permit us 
to carry much provifions with us, we agreed to continue 
a day or two to refrefh ourfelves, and to dry a little meat 
in the fun, as it thereby not only becomes more portable, 
but is always ready for ufe. On the twenty-fixth, all 
that remained of the mufk-ox flefh being properly 
dried and fit for carriage, we began to proceed on our 
journey Northward, and on the thirtieth of June arrived 
at a {mall river, called Cathawhachaga, which empties 
itfelf into a large lake called Yath-kyed-whoie, or White 


Snow Lake. Here we found feveral tents of Northern | 


Indians, who had been fome time employed {pearing deer 
in their canoes, as they croffed the above mentioned little 
river. Here alfo we met a Northern Indian Leader, or 
Captain, called Keelfhies, and a {mall party of his crew, 
who were bound to Prince of Wales’s Fort, with furs 


from the care he took to conceal a bag of provifions, which he had brought 
with him, in a lofty pine-tree near the houfe. 


Being a ftranger, I invited him in, though I faw he had nothing for trade ; 
and during that interview, fome of the Indian women examined his bag, and 
gave it as their opinion that the meat it contained was human flefh: in con- 
fequence, it was not without the interference of fome principal Indians, 
whofe liberality of fentiment was more extenfive than that in the others, 
the poor creature faved his life. Many of the men cleaned and loaded 
their guns; others had their bows and arrows ready ; and even the women 
took poffeffion of the hatchets, to kill this poor inoffenfive wretch, for no 


crime but that of travelling about two hundred miles by himfelf, unaMfifted 


by fire-arms for fupport in his journey. 


F 2 and 


35 
1770. 


june. 


26th. 


goth. 


36 


1770. 
= 


july. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


and other commodities for trade. When Keelfhies was 
made acquainted with the intent of my journey, he readily 
offered his fervice to bring me any thing from the Factory 
that we were likely to ftand in need of ; and though we 
were then in latitude 63° 4’ North, and longitude 7° 12” 
Weit from Churchill, yet he promifed to join us again, at 
a place appointed by my guide, by the fetting in of the 
Winter. In confequence of this offer, I looked over our 
ammunition and other articles; and finding that a little 
powder, fhot, tobacco, and a few knives, were likely to 
be of fervice before the journey could be completed, I 
determined to fend a letter to the governor of Prince of 
Wales’s Fort, to advife him of my fituation, and to defire 
him to fend by the bearer a certain quantity of the above 
articles; on which Keelfhies and his crew proceeded on 
their journey for the Factory the fame day. 


Cathawhachaga was the only river we had feen fince the 
breaking up of the ice that we could not ford; and as 
we had not any canoes with us, we were obliged to get 
ferried acrofs by the ftrange Indians. When we ar- 
rived on the North fide of this river, where the Indians. 
refided, my guide propofed to ftop fome time, to dry and 
pound fome meat to take with us; to which I readily con- 
fented. We alfo fet our fifhing-nets, and caught a con- 
fiderable Pai of very fine fith; fuch as tittemeg, 
barble, 


The 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 
The number of deer which croffed Cathawhachaga, 


during our ftay there, was by no means equal to our ex- 
pectations, and no more than juft fufficient to fupply our 
prefent wants ; fo that after waiting feveral days in fruit- 
lefs expeétation, we began to prepare for moving; and 
accordingly, on the fixth of July, we fet out, though 
we had not at that time as much victuals belonging to 
our company as would furnifh usa fupper. During our 


{tay here, we had each day got as much fath or flefh as was 


fufficient for prefent expenditure; but, being in hopes. 


of better times, faved none. 


Before we left Cathawhachaga, I made feveral obfervations 
for the latitude, and found it to be 63° 4’ North. TI alfo 


brought up my journal, and filled up my chart to that 


time. Every thing being now ready for our departure, 


my guide informed me that in a few days a canoe would 
be abfolutely neceflary, to enable us to crofs fome unford- 


able rivers which we fhould ‘meet, and could not avoid. 


This induced me to purchafe one at the ealy rate of a 
fingle knife, the full value of which did not exceed one 
penny. It. muit. be obferved, that the man who fold the 
canoe had no farther occafion for it, and was clad to take 
what he could get; but had he been thoroughly ac-. 
quainted: with our. neceflities, he moft affured! y would 
have had the conicience to have afked goods to the amount 
of ten beaver fkins at leaft.. 


7 | This. 


oi, 


1770. 
July. 


Oth. 


38 


1770. 
gen ey) 


July. 


oth. 


a7th. 


A JOWRINEY (TO “nines: 


This additional piece of luggage obliged me to engage 
another Indian; and we were lucky enough at that time 
to meet with a poor forlorn fellow, who was fond of the 
ofice, having never been in a much better ftate than that 
of a beaft of burthen. Thus, provided with a canoe, and 
a man to carry it, we left Cathawhachaga, as-has been 
obferved, on the fixth of July, and continued our courfe 
to the North by Weft, and North North Weft; and that 
night put up by the fide of a {mall bay of White Snow 
Lake, where we angled, and caught feveral fine trout, 
fome of which weighed not lefs than fourteen or fixteen 
pounds. Inthe night heavy rain came on, which con- 
tinued three days; but the ninth proving fine weather, 
and the fun .difplaying his beams very powerfully, we 
dried our clothes, and proceeded to the Northward. To- 
ward the evening, however, it began again to rain fo ex- 
ceffively, that it was with much difficulty we kept our 
powder and books dry. 


On the feventeenth, we faw many mufk-oxen, feveral of 
which the Indians killed ; when we agreed to ftay here a 
day or two, to dry and pound * fome of the carcafes to take 
with us. The flefh of any animal, when it is thus pre- 
pared, is not only hearty food, but is always ready for 


* To prepare meat in this manner, it requires no farther operation than 
cutting the lean parts of the animal into thin flices, and drying it in the fun, or 
by a flow fire, till, after beating it between two ftones, it 1s reduced to a coarfe 
powder. 


ule, 


NOR TH E RNP OGLE A N. 


ufe, and at the. fame time very portable. In moft parts 
of Hud{on’s Bay it is known by the name of Thew-hagon, 
but amonegft the Northern Indians it is called Achees. 


Having prepared as much dried flefh as we could tran{- 
port, we proceeded to the Northward; and at our de- 
parture left a great quantity of meat behind us, which 
we could neither eat nor carry away. ‘This was not 
the firft time we had fo done; and however wafteful 
it may appear, it is a practice fo common among all the 
Indian tribes, as to be thought nothing of. On. the 
twenty-fecond, we met feveral ftrangers, whom we joined 
in purfuit of the deer, &c. which were at this time fo 
plentiful, that we got every day a fufficient number for 
our fupport, and indced too frequently killed feveral 
merely for the tongues, marrow, and fat. 


After we had been fome time in company with thofe 
Indians, I found that my guide feemed to hefitate about 
proceeding any farther; and that he kept pitching his tent 
backward and forward, from place to place, after the 
deer, and the reft of the Indians. On my afking him his 
reafon for fo deing; he anfwered, that as the year was 
tco far advanced to admit of our arrival at the Copper- 
mine River that Summer, he thought it more advifable 
to pafs the Winter with fome of the Indians then in com- 
pany, and alleged that there could Ve no fear of our ar- 
riving at that river early in the Summer of one thou- 
fand feven hundred and feventy-one. As I could not 

pretend 


39 


1770. 
July. 


22d. 


40 


1770. 
Ree ened 
July. 


20m 


A JOURNEY TO "ier 


pretend to contradié& him, I was entirely reconciled to 
his propofal,; and accordingly we kept moving to the 
Weftward with the other Indians. In a few days, many 
others joined us from different quarters; fo that by the 
thirtieth of July we had in all above feventy tents, which 
did not contain lefs than fix hundred perfons. Indeed 
our encampment at night had the appearance of a {mall 
town; and in the morning, when we began to move, 
the whole ground (at leaft for a large fpace all round) 
feemed to be alive, with men, women, children, and 
dogs. ‘Though the land was entirely barren, and deftitute 
of every kind of herbage, except wifh-a-capucca* and 
mofs, yet the deer were fo numerous that the Indians 
not only killed as many as were fufhicient for our large 


number, but often feveral merely for the fkins, marrow, 


cc. and left the carcafes to rot, or to be devoured by the 
wolves, foxes, and other beafts of prey. 


In our way to the Weftward we came to feveral rivers, 


which, though fmall and of no note, were fo deep as 


not to be fordable, particularly Doo-baunt River +. On 
thofe occafions only, we had recourfe to our canoe, which, 


though of the common fize, was too {mall to carry more 
£ ) y 


* Wifh-a-capucca is the name given by the natives to a plant which is found 
all over the country bordering on Hudfon’s Bay; and an infufion of it ts ufed 
as tea by all the Europeans fettled in that country. 

+ This river, as well as all others deferving that appellation which I 
croffed during this part of my journey, ran to the Eaft and North Eaft; and 
both them and the ‘lakes were perfectly frefh, and inhabited by fith that are 


well known never to frequent falt water. 
than 


NORTHERN OCEAN, 


than two perfons; one of whom always lies down at full 
length for fear of making the canoe top-heavy, and the 
other fits on his heels and paddles. This method of fer- 
trying over rivers, though tedious, is the moft expeditious 
way thefe poor people can contrive; for they are fome- 
times obliged to carry their canoes one hundred and fity, 
or two hundred miles, without having occafion to make 
ule of them; yet at times they cannot do without them; 
and were they not very {mall and portable, it would be 
impoflible for one man to carry them, which they are 
oiten obliged to do, not only the diftance above mentioned, 


but even the whole Summer. 


The perfon I engaged at Cathawhachaga to carry my 
canoe proving too weak for the tafk, another of my crew 
was obliged to exchange loads with him, which feemed 
perfeGily agreeable to all parties; and as we walked but 
{hort days journies, and deer were very plentiful, al]! 
things went on very fmoothly. Nothing material happened 
till the eighth, when we were near lofing the quadrant and 
all our powder from the following circumflance: the fellow 
who had been releafed from carrying the canoe proving 
teo weak, as hath been already obferved, had, after the 
exchange, nothing to carry but my powder and his own 
trifles; the latter were indeed very inconfiderable, not equal 
in fize and weight to a foldier’s knapfack. “As I intended 
to have a little foort with the deer, and knowing his load 
to be much lighter than mine, I gave him the quadrant 


—G : and 


6th. 


eee 


42 


1770. 
Cee eraen pemercecas) 
Augult. 


A JOURNEY "TO Sate 


and ftand to carry, which he took without the leaft hefi- 
tation, or feeming ill-will. - Having thus eafed myfelf for 
the prefent of a heavy and cumberfome part of my load, 


I fet out early in the morning with fome of the Indian 


men; and after walking about eight or nine miles, faw, 
from the top of a high hill, a great number of deer feed- 
ing in a neighbouring valley ; on which we laid down our 
loads and erected a flag, as a fignal for the others to pitch 
their tents there for the night. We then purfued our hunt- 
ing, which proved very fuccefsful. At night, however, 
when we came to the hill where we had left our baggage, 
I found that only part of the Indians had arrived, and 
that the man who had been entrufted with my — and 
quadrant, had fet off another way, with a {mall party of 
Indians that had been in our company that morning. 
The evening being far advanced, we were obliged to defer 
going in fearch of him till the morning, and as his track 
could not be eafily difcovered in the Summer, the South- 
ern Indians, as well as myfelf, were very uneafy, fearing 
we had loft the powder, which was to provide us with 
food and raiment the remainder of our journey. ‘The very 
uncourteous behaviour of the Northern Indians then in 
company, gave me little hopes of receiving affiftance from 
them, -any longer than I had wherewithal to reward them 
for their trouble and expence ; for during the whole time 
I had been with them, not one of them had offered to give 
me the leaft morfel of victuals, without afking fomething in 
exchange, which, in general, was three times the value of 

what 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


what they could have got for the fame articles, had they car- 
ried them to the Factory, though feveral hundred miles 


diftant. 


So inconfiderate were thofe people, that wherever they 
met me, they always expected that I had a great affortment 
of goods to relieve their neceflities; as if I had brought 
the Company’s warehoufe with me. Some of them wanted 
guns; all wanted ammunition, iron-work, and tobacco; 
many were folicitous for medicine; and others preffed me 
for different articles of clothing: but when they found 
I had nothing to {pare, except a few nick-nacks and gew- 
gaws, they made no fcruple of pronouncing me a ‘* poor 
*< fervant, noways like the Governor at the Factory, who, 
‘“« they faid, they never faw, but he gave them fomething 
*< ufeful.”” It is fcarcely poffible to conceive any people 
fo void of common underftanding, as ‘to think that the 
fole intent of my undertaking this fatiguing journcy, was 
to carry a large aflortment of ufeful and heavy implements, 
to give to all that ftood in need of them; but many of 
them would afk me for what they wanted with the fame 
freedom, and apparently with the fame hopes of fuccefs, 
as if they had been at one of the Company’s Factories. 
Others, with an air of more generofity, ofered me furs 


to trade with at the fame ftandard as at the Factory; with-— 


out confidering how unlikely it was that I fhould increafe 
the enormous weight of my load with articles which could 
be of no more ufe to me in my prefent fituation than they 
were to themfelves. 


Cereal EE 


43 
E770. 


aS 
Auguit, 


44, 


1770. 
Auguft. 


oth. 


A JOURNEY TO, T te 


This unaccountable behaviour of the Indians occafioned 
much ferious reflection on my part; as it fhewed plainly 
how little I had to expe@ if I thouid, by any accident, 
be reduced to the neceflity of depending upon them for . 
fupport ; fo that, though I laid me down to reft, fleep 
was a ftranger to me that night. The following beau- 
tiful lines of Dr. Young I repeated above an hundred 
times : 


‘¢ Tired Nature’s fweet reftorer, balmy Sleep; 

«¢ Fie, like the world, his ready vifit pays 

c* Where fortune fmiles; the wretched he forfakes: 

«¢ Swift on his downy pinions flies from woe, - 

«© And lights on lids unfully’d with a tear.” Nicut THovcurs. 


After pafling the night in this melancholy manner, I 
cot up at day-break, and, with the two Southern Indians, 
fet out in queft of our deferter, Many hours elapfed 
in fruitlefs fearch after him, as we could not difcover 
a fingle track in the direction which we were informed he 
had taken. The day being almoft fpent without the leaft 
appearance cf fuccefs, I propofed repairing to the place 
where I had delivered the quadrant to him, in hopes of 
{eeing fome track in the mofs that might lead to the way 
the Indians were gone whom our deferter had accom- 
panied. On our arrival at that place, we found they had 
ftruck down toward a little river which they had croffed 
the morning before; and there, to our great joy, we found 
the quadrant and the bag of powder lying on the top of a 
high ftone, but not a human being was to be feen. On 

examining 


NORTHERN OCEAN, 


examining the powder, we found that the bag had been 
opened, and part of it taken out; but, notwithftanding 
our lofs was very confiderable, we returned with light 
hearts to the place at which we had been the night before, 
where we found our baggage fafe, but all the Indians 
gone: they had, however, been fo confiderate as to fet 
up marks to direct us what courfe to ftecr. By the time 
we had adjufted our bundles, the day was quite fpent; 
feeing, however, a {moke, or rather a fire, in the di- 
reGtion we were ordered to fteer, we bent our way 
towards it; and a little after ten o’clock at night came 
up with the main body of the Indians; when, after 
reirefhing ourfelves with a plentiful fupper, the firf 
morfel we had tafted that day, we retired to reft, which 
I at leaft enjoyed with better fucceis than the preceding 
night. 


In the morning of the eleventh we proceeded on to the 
Weft, and Weft by South; but onthe twelfth did not move. 
This gave us an opportunity of endeavouring to afcertain 
the latitude by a meridian altitude, when we found the 
place to be in 63° 10° North nearly. It proving rather 
cloudy about noon, though exceeding fine weather, I let 
the quadrant ftand, in order to obtain the latitude more 
exactly by two altitudes; but, to my great mortification, 
while I was eating my dinner, a fudden guft of wind 
blew it down; and as the ground where it ftood was. 

very’ 


170. 
Auguit, 


ht. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


4.6 
1770. very ftoney, the bubble, the fight-vane, and vernier, were 
Augut. entirely broke to pieces, which rendered the inftrument 


ufelefs. In confequence of this misfortune I refolved to 
return again to the Fort, though we were then in the la- 
titude of 63° 10° North, and about 10° 40 Weft longi- 


tude from Churchill River, 


CHAZ 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


Coble. Lil. 


Tranfactions from the Time the Quadrant was broken, 
till I arrived at the Factory. 


Several ftrange Indians join us from the Northward.—They plundered me 
of all I had; but did not plunder the Southern Indians.—My guide 
plundered.—We begin our return to the Fattory.—Meet with other 
Indians, who join our company.—Colledt deer-Skins for clothing, but 
could not get them dreffed.—Suffer much hardfbip from the want of 
tents and warm clothing.—Moft of the Indians leave us.— Meet with 
Matonabbee.—Some account of him, and lis behaviour to me and the 
Southern Indians.—We remain in bis company fome time.—Hs obferva- 
tions on my two unfuccefsful attempts.—We leave him, and proceed to a 
place to which he dtreéted us, in order to make fnow-/hoes and fledges. 
—Foin Matonabbee again, and proceed towards the Faétory in his com- 
pany.——Ammunition runs foort.—Myfelf and four Indians fet off poft far 
the Fattory.— Much bewildered in a fnow ftorm; my dog is frozen 
to death; we hein a bufb of willows.—Proceed on our journey.—-Great 


difficulty in croffing a jumble of rocks.— Arrive at the Fort. 


ye HE day after I had the misfortune to break the qua- 
drant, feveral Indians joined me from the Northward, 
fome of whom plundered me and my companions of 
almoft every ufeful article we had, among which was my 
gun; and notwithftanding we were then on the point of 
returning to the Factory, yet, as one of my companions’ 
guns was a little out of order, the lofs was likely ‘to be 
feverely 


j . 
h 
J 


4] 


or 
Qeeres one nt} 
Auguft 
13th, 


A$ 
1770. 
Auguft. 


A JOURNEY T OF ELE 


feverely felt; but it not being in my power to recover it 
again, we were obliged to reft contented. 


Nothing can exceed the cool deliberation of thofe vil. 
lains ; a committee of them entered my tent*. The 
ringleader feated himfelf on my left-hand. They frft 
begged me to lend them my fkipertogan + to fll a pipe of 
tobacco. After fmoking two or three pipes, they afked me 
for feveral articles which I had not, and among others for a 
pack of cards; but on my anf{wering that I had not any of the 
articles they mentioned, one of them put his hand on my 
baggage, and afked if it was mine. Before I could anfwer in 
the affirmative, he and the reft of his companions (fix in 
number) had all my treafure {pread on the ground. One 
took one thing, and another another, til at laft nothing 
was leit but the empty bag, which they permitted me to 
keep. At length,,confidering that, though I was going to 
the Factory, I fhould want a knife to cut my victuals, an 
aw] to mend my fhoes, and a needle to mend my other 
clothing, they readily gave me thefe articles, though not 
without making me underftand that I ought to look upon 


* This only confifted of three walking-fticks ftuck into the ground, and a 
blanket thrown over them. 


“t Skipertogan is a fmall bag that contains a flint and feel, alfo a pipe and 
tobacco, as well as touchwood, &c. for making a fire. Some of thefe bags 
may be called truly elegant; being richly ornamented with beads, porcupine- 
quills, morfe-hair, &c. a work always performed by the women; and they 
are, with much propriety, greatly efteemed by moft Europeans for the neat- 
nefs of their workmanfhip. 

2 | ut 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


it as a-great favour. Finding them poffeffed of fo much 
generofity, I ventured to folicit them for my razors; but 
thinking that one would be fufficient to fhave me during 
my paflage home, they made no {cruple to keep the 
other; luckily they chofe the worft. To complete their 
generofity, they permitted me to take as much foap as I 
thought would be fufficient to wafh and fhave me during 
the remainder of my journey to the Factory. 


They were more cautious in plundering the Southern 
Indians, as the relation of fuch outrages being com- 
mitted on them might occafion a war between the two 
nations; but they had nothing of that kind to dread from 
the Englifh. However, the Northern Indians had ad- 
drefs enough to talk my home-guard Indians out of all 
they had: fo that before we left them, they were as clean 
fwept as myfelf, excepting their guns, fome ammunition, 
an old hatchet, an ice-chiffel, and a file to fharpen 
them. 


It may probably be thought ftrange that my guide, who 
was a Northern Indian, fhould permit his countrymen to 
commit fuch outrages on thofe under his charge; but 
being a man of little note, he was fo far from being able 
to protect us, that he was obliged to fubmit to nearly the 
fame outrage himfelf. On this occafion he aflumed a 
great air of generofity; but the fact was, he gave freely 
what it was not in his power:to protect. 

H Early 


49 


1770. 
Augult. 


59 


I 770+ 
eee em aad 


Augult. 
roth, 


September, 


A JOURNEY DORE 


Early in the morning of the nineteenth, I fet out on my 
return, in company with feveral Northern Indians, who 
were bound to the Fatory with furrs and other commo- 
dities in trade. This morning the Indian who took my 
gun, returried it to me, it being of no ule to him, having 
no ammunition. The weather for fome time proved fine, 
and deer were very plentiful; but as tne above ravagers 
had materially lightened my load, by taking every thing 
from me, except the quadrant, books, &c. this part of 
my journey was the eafieft and moft pleafant of any 1 had 
experienced fince my leaving the Fort. In our way we 
frequently met with other Indians, fo that {carcely a day 
pafled without our feeing feveral fmokes made by other 
{trangers. Many of thofe we met joined our party, having 
furrs and other commodities for trade. 


The deer’s hair being now of a proper length for cloth- 
ing, it was neceflary, according to the cuftom, to procure 
as many of their fkins, while in feafon, as would make a 
a fuit of warm clothing for the Winter: and as each. 
grown perfon requires the prime parts of from eight to 
eleven of thofe fkins (in proportion to their fize) to make 
a complete fuit, it muift naturally be fuppofed that 
this addition to my burden was very confiderable. My 
load, however cumberfome and heavy, was yet very bear- 
able; but, after I had carried it feveral weeks, it proved 
of no fervice; fos we had not any women properly 
belonging to our company, confequently had not any 

perfon 


NOR TH ERIN” FOPrC UEAN, 


perfon to drefs them; and fo uncivil were the other In- 
dians, that they would neither exchange them for others 
of an inferior quality already drefled, nor permit their 
women to drefs them for us, under pretence that they 
were always employed in the like duty for themfelves and 
families, which was by no means the cafe; for many 
of them had fufficient time to have done every little 
fervice of that kind that we could have required of them. 
The truth was, they were too well informed ef my po- 
verty to do any acts of generofity, as they well knew I 
had it not then in my power to reward them for their 
trouble. I never faw a fet of people that poffefied fo 
little humanity, or that could view the diftreffes of their 
fellow-creatures with fo little feeling and unconcern; for 
though they feem to have a great affection for their wives 
and children, yet they will laugh at and ridicule the 
diftrefs of every other perfon who is not immediately re- 
lated to them. 


This behaviour of the Indians made our fituation very 
difagreeable ; for as the fall advanced, we began to feel 
the cold very feverely for want of proper clothing. We 
fuitered alfo greatly from the inclemency of the weather, 
as we had no tent to fhelter us. My guide was en- 
tirely exempted from all thofe inconveniences, having 
precured a good warm fuit of clothing; and, as one of 
his wives had long before joined our party, he was pro- 
vided with a tent, and every other neceflary confiftent 


H 2 with 


5 
1770. 


September, 


52 
49770. 


September 
15th. 


s7th, 


30th. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


with their manner of living: but the old fellow was fo 
far from interefting himfelf in our behalf, that he had, for 
fome time before, entirely withdrawn from our company 3; 
and though he then continued to carry the greateft part 
of our little remains of ammunition, yet he did not con~ 
tribute in the {malleft degree towards our fupport. As deer,, 
however, were in great plenty, I felt little or no inconve- 
nience from his neglect in this refpec. 


Provifions full continued very plentiful; which was 
a fingular piece of good fortune, and the only circum- 
fiance which at this time could contribute to our hap- 
pinefs or fafety; for notwithftanding the early feafon 
of the year, the weather was remarkably bad and feverely 
cold, at leaft it ‘appeared fo to us, probably from having 
no kind of fkin-clothing. In this forlorn ftate we con- 
tinued our courfe to the South Eaft; and, to add to the 
sloominefs of our fituation, moft of the Northern In- 
dians who had been in our company all the firft part 
of the fall, were by this time gone a-head, as we could 
not keep up with them for want of {now-{hoes.. 


In the evening of the twentieth, we were joined from the 
Weftward by a famous Leader, called Matonabbee, men- 
tioned in my inftructions; who, with his followers, or 
gang, was alfo going to Prince of Wales’s Fort, with 
furrs, and other articles for trade. This Leader, when a 


youth, refided feveral years at the above Fort, and was 
not 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


not only a perfect mafter of the Southern Indian language, 
but by being frequently with the Company’s fervants, had 
acquired feveral words of Englifh, and was one of the 
men who brought the lateft accounts of the Coppermine 
River; and it was on his information, added to that of 
one I-dot-le-ezey, ‘who is fince dead,) that this expedi- 
tion was fet on foot. 


The courteous behaviour of this ftranger ftruck me very 
 fenfibly. As foon as he was acquainted with our diftrefs, 
he got fuch fkins as we had with us dreffed for the South- 
ern Indians, and furnifhed me with a good warm {uit of 
otter and other fkins: but, as it was not in his power to 
provide us with fnow-fhoes, (being then on the barren 
eround,! he directed us to a little river which he knew, 
and where there was a fmall range of woods, which, 
though none of the beft, would, he faid, furnifh us with 
temporary {now-{hoes and fledges, that might materially 
aflift us during the remaining part of our journey. We 
{pent feveral nights in company with this Leader, though 
we advanced towards the Fort at the rate of ten or twelve 
miles a day ; and as provifions abounded, he made a grand 
feaft for me in the Southern Indian ftile, where there was 
plenty of good eating, and the whole concluded with fing- 
ing and dancing, after the Southern Indian ftyle and 
manner. In this amufement my home-guard Indians bore 
no inconfiderable part, as they were both men of fome 

8 coniequence 


53 


1770. 


September. 


Otober. 


Jaf 
1770. 


ee | 
October. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


confequence when at home, and well known to Matonab- 
bee: but among the other Northern Indians, to whom 
they were not known, they were held in no eftimation ; 
which indeed is not to be wondered at, when we confider 
that the value of a man among thofe people, is always pro- 
portioned to his abilities in hunting; and as my two In- 
dians had not exhibited any great talents that way, the 
Northern Indians fhéwed them as much refpedt as they do 
in common to thofe of very moderate talents among them- 
felves. 


During my converfation with this Leader, he afked me 
very ferioufly, If I would attempt another journey for the 
difcovery of the Copper-mines? And on my anfwering in 
the affirmative, provided I could get better guides than I 
had hitherto been furnifhed with, he faid he would readily 
engage in that fervice, provided the Governor at the Fort 
would employ him. In anfwer to this, I affured him his 
offer would be gladly accepted; and as I had already ex- 
perienced every hardfhip that was likely to accompany any 
future trial, T was determined to complete the difcovery, 
even at the rifque of life itfelf. Matonabbee affured me, 
that by the accounts received from his own countrymen, 
the Southern Indians, and myfelf, it was very probable I 
might not experience fo much hardfhip during the whole 
journey, as I had already felt, though fcarcely advanced 
one third part of the journey. 

He 


NOR TITEERN OCEAN. 


He attributed all our misfortunes to the mifcondud: of my 
guides, and the very plan we purfued, by the defire of the 
Governor, in not taking any women with us on this jour- 
ney, was, he faid, the principal thing that occafioned all 
our wants: ‘for, faid he, when all the men are heavy 
‘¢ Jaden, they can neither hunt nor travel to any confider- 
‘¢ able'diftance; and in cafe they meet with fuccefs in 
‘¢ hunting, who is to carry the produce of their labour ? 
*¢ Women, added he, were made for labour; one of 
“them can carry, or haul, as much as two men can do, 
‘«< ‘T hey alfo pitch our tents, make and mend our cloth- 
‘ing, keep us warm at night; and, in fad, there is 
“no fuch thing as travelling any confiderable diftance, 
“or for any length of time, in this country, without 
‘“< their affiftance.”” ‘‘ Women, faid he again, though 
‘““ they do every thing, are maintained at a trifling ex- 
“¢ pence ; ior as they always ftand cook, the very licking 
‘¢ of their fingers in fcarce times, is fufiicient for their 
*< fubfittence.” This, however odd it may appear, is but 
too true a defcription of the fituation ef women in this 
country: it is at leaft fo in appearance; for the women 
always carry the provifions, and it is more than probable 
they help themfelves when the men are not prefent. 


Early in the morning of the twenty-third, I fruck out 
of the road to the Eaftward, with my two companions 
and two or three Northern Indians, wmle Matonabbee and 
his crew continued their courfe to the Factory, promiling 


to 


5s 
ly 70. 


O€tober. 


23d. 


58 


1770. 
Oober. 
25th. 


November 
lit. 


A JOURNEY, TO TERE 


to walk fo flow that we might come up with them again; 
and in two days we arrived at the place to which we were 
directed. We went to work immediately in making fnow- 
{hoe frames and fledges; but notwithftanding our utmoft 
endeavours, we could not complete them in lefs than four 
days. On the firft of November we again proceeded on 
our journey toward the Factory; and on the fixth, came up 
with Matonabbee and his gang: after which we proceeded 
on together feveral days; when I found my new acquaint- 
ance, on all occafions, the moft fociable, kind, and fenfible 
Indian I had ever met with. He was a man well known, 
and, as an Indian, of univerfal knowledge, and gene- 


rally refpected. 


Deer proved pretty plentiful for fome time, but to my 
great furprife, when I wanted to give Matonabbee a little 
ammunition for his own ufe, I found that my guide, Con- 
Searle who had it all under hiscare, had fo embezzled 
or otherways expended it, that only ten balls and about 


three pounds of powder remained; fo that long before 


we arrived at the Fort we were dblibed to cut up an 
ice-chiffel into fquare lumps, as a fubftitute for ball, 
It is, however, rather dangerous firing lumps of iron 
out of fuch flight barrels as are brought to this part 
of the world for trade. Thefe, though light and 
handy, and of courfe well adapted for the ufe of both 
Enelifh and Indians in long journies, and of fofficient 
ftrength for leaden fhot or ball, are not {trong enough for 

this 


NiO T Hak RN © cC tea N. 


this kind of fhot; and ftrong fowling-pieces would not 
only be too heavy for the laborious ways of hunting in 
this country, but their bores being fo much larger, would 
require more than double the quantity of ammunition that 
{mall ones do; which, to Indians at leaft, muft be an 
object of no inconfiderable importance. | 


I kept company with Matonabbee till the twentieth, at 
which time the deer began to be fo fcarce that hardly a 
frefh track could be feen; and as we were then but a 
few days walk from the Fort, he advifed me to proceed 
on with all fpeed, while he and his companions followed 
at leifure. Accordingly, on the twenty-firft, I fet out 
_ polt-hafte, accompanied by one of the home-guard 
(Southern) Tribe, and three Northern Indians. That night 
we lay on the South fide of Ege River; but, long before 
day-break the next morning, the weather became fo bad, 
with a violent gale of wind from the North Weft, and 
fuch a drift ot fnow, that we could not have a bit of fire: 
and as no guod woods were near to afford us fhelter, we 
agreed to proceed on our way; efpecially as the wind 
was on our backs, and though the weather was bad near 
the furtace, we could frequently fee the moon, and fome- 
times the flars, to dire&t us in our courfe. In this fitua- 
tion we continued walking the whole day, and it was not 
till after ten at night that we could find the fmalleft tult 
of woods to put up in; for though we well knew we 
mutt have paffed by feveral hammocks of fhrubby woods 

| that 


November. 


20th. 


2ife 


November. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


that might have afforded us fome fhelter, yet the wind 
blew fo hard, and the {now drifted fo exceflively thick, that 
we could not fee ten yards before us the whole day. Be- 
tween feven and cight in the evening my dog, a valuable 
brute, was frozen to death; fo that his fledge, which was 
a very heavy one, I was obliged to haul. Between nine 
and ten at night we arrived at a {mall creek, on which we 
walked about three quarters of amile, when we came toa 
large tuft of tall willows, and two or three fets of old 
tent-poles. Being much jaded, we determined not to pro- 
ceed any farther that night; fo we went to work, and 
made the beft defence againft the weather that the fitua- 
tion of the place and our materials would admit. Our 
labour confifted only in digging a hole in the fnow, and 
fixing a few deer-fkins up to windward of us: but the 
moft difficult tafk was that of making a fire. When this 
was once accomplifhed, the old tent-poles amply fupplied 
us with fewel. By the time we had finifhed this bufinefs, 
the weather began to moderate, and the drift greatly to 
abate; fo that the moon and the Aurora Borealis fhone 
out with great {plendor, and there appeared every fymp- 
tom of the return of fine weather. After eating a plentiful 
fupper of venifon, therefore, of which we had a fufficient 
ftock to laft us to the Fort, we laid down and got a little 
fleep. The next day proving fine and clear, though ex- 
ceflively fharp, we proceeded on our journey early in the 
morning, and at night lay on the South Eaft fide of Seal 
River. We fhould have made a much longer day’s jour- 


ney, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


ney, had we not been greatly embarraffed at feiting out, 


ay, 
key 


ee 
by a jumble of rocks, which we could not avoid iS ithowe November. 


going greatly out of our way. Here I muft obferve, that 
we were more than fortunate in not attempting to leave 
the little creek where we had fixed our habitation the 
preceding night, as the {pot where we lay was not more 
than two or three miles diftant from this dangerous place ; 
in which, had we fallen in with it in the night, we muft 
Be voidebly have been bewildered, if we had not all 
perifhed ; as notwithftanding the advantage of a clear day, 
and having ufed every poffible precaution, it was with the 
utmoft difficulty that we crofled it without broken limbs. 
Indeed it would have been next to an impofiiility to 
have done it in the night. 


The twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth proved fine clear 
weather, though exceflively cold; and in the afternoon of 
the latter, we arrived at Prince of Wales’s Fort, after 
having been abfent eight months and twenty-two days, on 
a fruitlefs, or at keaft an unfuccefsful journey. 


i CHAP. 


24th, 


25th. 


6o 


1770. 
November 
28th. 





A JOURNEY TO THE 


Cc WH A EP ike 


Tranfactions during our Stay at Prince of Wales’s Fort, and 


the former Part of our third Expedition, till our Arrival 
at Clowey, where we built Canoes, in May 1771. 


Preparations for our departure.—Refufe to take any of the bome-guard 


Indians with me.—LBy fo doing, I offend the Governor.—Leave the Fort 
a third time.—IMy inftructions on this expedition.—Provifions of all 
kinds very fcarce.—Arrive at the woods, where we kill fome deer.—Ar- 
rive at land Lake-—Matonabbee taken ill_—sSome remarks thereon.— 
Foin the remainder of the Indians’ families.—Leave Hland Lake.—De- 
feription thercof.— Deer plentiful— Meet a firauge Indian.— Alter our 
courfe from Weft North Weft to Weft by South.—Crofs Cathawhachaga 
River, Coffed Lake, Snow-Bird Lake, and Pike Lake.-— Arrive at a tent 
of ftrangers, who are employed in fnaring deer in a pound.—Defcription 
of the pound.— Method of proceeding. —Remarks thereon.— Proceed on 
our journey.—Meet with feveral parties of Indians ; by one of whom 
I fent a Letter to the Governor at Prince. of Wales's Fort.—Arrive at 
T hleweyazaycth.— Employment there.— Proceed to the North North 
Weft and North.—<Arrive at Clowey.—One of the Indian's wives taken 
in labour. —Remarks thereon.—Cuftoms obferved by the Northern In- 
dians on thofe occafions. 


&N my arrival at the Fort, I informed the Governor, of 
" Matonabbee’s being fo near. On the twenty-eighth 


of November he arrived. Notwithftanding the many 
difficulties and hardfhips which I had undergone during 
my two unfuccefsful attempts, I was fo far from being 


folicited 


NeO RT BIBLE N O © 4 N. 


folicited on this occafion to undertake a third excurfion, 
that I willingly offered my fervice ; which was readily ac- 
cepted, as my abilities and approved courage, in perfe- 
vering under difficulties, were thought noways inferior to 


the tafk. 


I then determined to engage Matonabbee to be my 
guide; to which he readily confented, and with a freedom 
of {peech and correctnefs of language not commonly met 
with among Indians, not only pointed out the reafons 
which had occafioned all our misfortunes in my two former 
attempts, but defcribed the plan he intended to purfue ; 
which at the fame time that it was highly fatisfaGtory to me, 
did honour to his penetration and judgment ; as it proved 
him to be a man of extenfive obfervation with refpe& to 
times, feafons, and places; and well qualified to explain 
every thing that could contribute either to facilitate or re- 
tard the eafe or progrefs of travelling in thofe dreary parts 
of the world. 


Having engaged Matonabbee, therefore, as my guide, 


J began to make preparations for our departure; but Mr. 
Norton, the Governor, having been very fully occupied 
in trading with a large body of Indians, it was the feventh 
of December before I could obtain from him my difpatches. 
Jt may not be improper to obferve, that he again wanted 
to force fome of the home-guard Indians (who were 

his 


61 


1770. 
November. 


December 
athe 


62 


1770. 


| 
December. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


his own relations *) into our company, merely with a view 
that they might engrofs all the credit of taking care of 
me 


* Mr. Norton was an Indian; he was born at Prince of Wales’s Fort, but 
had been in England nine years, and confidering the fmall fum which was 
expended in his education, had made fome progrefs in literature. At his re- 
turn to Hudfon’s Bay he entered into all the abominable vices of his countrymen. 
He kept for his own ufe five or fix of the fineft Indian girls which he could 


‘telect; and notwithitanding his own uncommon propenfity to the fair fex, 


took every means in his power to prevent any European from having inter- 
courfe with the women of the country; for which purpofe he proceeded to 
the moft ridiculous length. To his own friends and country he was fo partial, 
that he fet more value on, and fhewed more refpect to one of their favourite 
dogs, than he ever did to his firit officer. Among his miferable and ignorant 
countrymen he paffed for a proficient in phyfic, and always kept a box of 


poifon, to adminifter to thofe who refufed him their wives or daughters. 


With all thefe bad qualities, no man took more pains to inculcate virtue, 
morality, and continence on cthers; always painting, in the moft odious co- 
Jours, the jealous and revengeful difpofition of the Indians, when any attempt 
was made to violate the chaftity of their wives or daughters. Lectures of this 


kind from a man of eftablifhed virtue might have had fome effect; but when 


they came from one who was known to live in open defiance of every law, 


human and divine, they were always heard with indignation, and confidered 
as the hypocritical cant of a felfifh debauchee, who wifhed to engrofs every 


woman in the ccuntry to himfelf. 


His apartments were not only convenient but elegant, and always crowded 
with favourite Indians: at night he locked the doors, and put the keys under 
his pillow; fo that in the morning his dining-room was generally, for the wane 
of neceffary conveniencies, worfe than a hog-ftye. As he advanced in years 
his jealoufy increafed, and he actually poifoned two of his women becaufe he 
thought them partial to other objects more fuitable to their ages. He was.a 
moft notorious fmugeler; but though he put many thoufands into the pockets 
ef the Captains, he feldom puta fhilling into his own. 


3 An 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


me during the journey: but I had found them of fo little 
ufe in my two former attempts, that I abfolutely refufed 
them; and by fo doing, offended Mr. Norton to fuch a 
degree, that neither time nor abfence could ever after- 


wards eradicate his diflike of me; fo that at my return he 
ufed every means in his power to treat me ill, and to 


render my life unhappy. However, to deal with candour 


on this occafion, it muft be acknowledged to his honour, 


that whatever our private animofities might have been, 


he did not fuffer them to interfere with public butinefs ; 
and I was fitted out with ammunition, and every other 
article which Matonabbee thought could be wanted. I 
was alfo furnifhed, as before, with a finall affortment 


of light trading goods, as prefents to the far diftant 


Indians. - 


At laft I fucceeded in obtaining my inftruGions, which 
were as follows : 





An inflammation in his bowels occafioned his death onthe 29th of De-. 
cember 1773; and though he died in the moft excruciating pain, he retained 
his jealoufy to the laft; for a few minutes before he Sepa ed; happening to fee 
an officer laying hold of the hand of one of his women who was ftanding by the 
fire, he bellowed out, in as loud a voice as his fituation would admit, “* God 
« qd——n you for a b h, if hve 7 knock out your brains.”’? A few minutes 
after making this elegant apoftrophe, he expired in the greateft agonies that 
can poflibly be conceived. 





This I declare to be the real character and manner of life of the late Mr... 
Moles Nerton, 


6. ORDERS. 


63 
1770. 


December. . 


64, 


1770. 
L 


December. 


é¢ 


€¢ 


c¢ 


c¢ 


CC 


€¢ 


c¢ 


¢ 


~*~ 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


“ Orpers azd Instructions for Mr. Samue. 

‘‘ Hearne, going on his third Expedition to the 
North of Churchill River, in queft of a North 
Weft Paffage, Copper Mines, or any other thing 
‘ that may be ferviceable to the Britifp Nation in 
‘ general, or the Hudfon’s Bay Company in par- 


ticular ; im the year 3770. 


~ 


¢ 


€¢ 


oN 


ON 


oN 
on 


co Mr. SaMuEL HEARNE, 
Sars: (hae 


‘© As you have offered your fervice a third time to go 
in fearch of the Copper Mine River, &c. and as Ma- 
tonabbee, a leading Indian, who has been at thofe 
parts, is willing to be your guide, we have accordingly 
engaged him for that fervice; but having no other 
inftrument on the fame conflruction with the quadrant 
you had the misfortune to break, we have furnifhed 
you with an Elton’s quadrant, being the moft proper 


infirument we can now procure for making obferva- 
tions on the land. 


‘© The above Leader, Matonabbee, and a few of his 
beft men, which he has felected for that purpofe, are 
to provide for you, affift you in all things, and con- 
duct you to the Copper Mine River; where you muft 


cc be 


€< 


c¢ 


& 


a) 


c¢ 


c¢ 


C¢ 


€¢ 


<¢ 


¢ 


on 


<¢ 


¢ 


&¢ 


£¢ 


K¢ 


NOR DT HEE REND OG ERAN. 


be careful to obferve the latitude and longitude, alfo 
the courfe of the river, the depth of the water, the 
fituation of the Copper Mines, &c. but your farft in- 
{ftructions, of November fixth, one thoufand feven hun- 
dred and fixty-nine, being fufhciently full, we refer 
you toevery part thereof for the better regulation of 
your conduct during this journey. 


‘< As you and your Indian companions are fitted out 
with every thing that we think is neceffary, (or at leaft 
as many ufeful articles as the nature of travelling in 
thofe parts will admit of,) you are hereby defired to 
proceed on your journey as foon as poflible ; and your. 
prefent guide has promifed to take great care of you, 
and conduct you out and home with all convenient 


{peed. 


*¢ T conclude with my beft wifhes for your health and 
happinels, together with a fuccefsful journey, and a 
quick return in.fafety. Amen. 


“¢ (Signed) Moses Norton, Governor. 


% Dated at Prince of Wales's Fort, 
“© =th December, 1770.” 


On the feventh of December I fet out on my third 


journey; and the weather, confidering the feafon of the 
year, was for fome days pretty mild. One of Matonab- 
bee’s wives being ill, occafioned us to walk fo flow, that 


K it 


65 


1770. 


December. 


sth, 


66 
1770. 


December. 


36th. 


A JOURNEY TO “item 


it was the thirteenth before we arrived at Seal River; at 
which time two men and their wives left us, whofe loads, 
when added to thofe of the remainder of my crew, madé 
a very material difference, efpecially as Matonabbee’s wife 


was fo ill as to be obliged to be hauled on a fledge. 


Finding deer and all other game very fcarce, and not 
knowing how long it might be before we could reach any 
place where they were in greater plenty, the Indians 
walked as far each day as their loads and other circum- 
{tances would conveniently permit. On the fixteenth, we 
arrived at Egg River, where Matonabbee and the reft of 
my crew had laid up fome provifions and other neceflaries,, 
when on their journey to the Fort. On going to the 
place where they thought the provifions had been care- 
fully fecured from all kinds of wild beafts, they had the 
mortification to find that fome of their countrymen, with 
whom the Governor had firft traded and difpatched from: 
the Fort, had robbed the ftore of every article, as well as: 
of fome of their moft ufeful implements. This lofs was 
more feverely felt, as there was a total want of every kind 
of game; and the Indians, not expecting to meet with 
fo great a difappointment, had not ufed that ceconomy in. 
the expenditure of the oatmeal and other provifions which 
they had received at the Fort, as they probably would have 
done, had they not relied firmly on finding a fupply at 
this place. This difappointment and lofs was borne by the. 
Indians with the greateft fortitude; and I did not hear 

ane 


N_@eR THER N, © Cee N. 


one of them breathe the leaft hint of revenge in cafe they 


67 
es? 


fhould ever difcover the offenders: the only effec it had meee ber, 


on them was, that of making them put the beft foot fore- 
moft. This was thought fo neceflary, that for fome time 
we walked every day from morning till night. The days, 
however, being fhort, our fledges heavy, and fome of the 
road very bad, our progrefs feldom exceeded fixteen or 
eighteen miles a day, and fome days we did not travel fo 


much. 


On the eighteenth, as we were continuing our courfe 
to the North Weft, up a {mall creek that empties itfelf 
into Ege River, we faw the tracks of many deer which 
had croffed that part a few days before; at that time there 
was not a frefh track to be feen: fome of the Indians, 
however, who had lately pafied that way, had killed 
more than they had occafion for, fo that feveral joints of 
good meat were found in their old tent-places; which, 
though only fufhcient for one good meal, were very ac- 
ceptable, as we had been in exceeding ftraitened circum- 
{tances for many days. 


On the nineteenth, we purfued our courfe in the 
North Weft quarter ; and, after leaving the above-men- 
tioned creek, traverfed a but entire barren ground, 
with empty bellies, till the twenty-feventh ; for though 
we arrived at fome woods on the twenty-fixth, and faw 
a few deer, four of which the Indians killed, hey were 

K 2 at 


8th, 


1oth.: 


arte 


68 


i 70. 


December. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


at fo great a diftance from the place on which we lay, that 
it was the twenty-feventh before the meat was brought 
to the tents. Here the Indians propofed to continue one 
day, under pretence of repairing their fledges and inow 
fhoes; but from the little attention th:y paid to thofe 
repairs, I was led to think that the want of food was the 
chief thing that detained them, as they never cealed 
eating the whole day. Indeed for many days before we 
had been in great want, and for the laft three days had 
not tafted a morfel of any thing, except a pipe of tobacco. 
and a drink of fnow water; and as we walked daily from 
morning till night, and were all heavy laden, our ftrength 
began to fail. I muft confefs that I never {pent fo dull a 
Chriftmas; and when I recolleéted the merry feafon which 
was then pafling, and refle@ed no the immenfe quantities, 
and great variety of delicacies which were then expend- 
ing in every part of Chriftendom, and that with a pro- 
fufion bordering on wafte, I could not refrain from wifhing. 
myfelf again in Europe, if it had been only to have had an 
opportunity of alleviating the extreme hunger which | 
{uffered with the refufe of the table of any one of my 
acquaintance. My Indians, however, ftill kept in good 
{pirits; and as we were then acrofs all the barren ground, 
and faw a few frefh tracks of deer, they began to think 
that the worflt of the road was over for that winter, and 
flattered me with the expeCation of foon meeting with 
deer and other game in greater plenty than we had done 
fince our departure from the Fort. 

It Early 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 69 


Early in the morning of the twenty-eighth, we again 1770. 
fet out, and direéted our courfe to the Weftward, through December 
thick fhrubby woods, confifting chiefly of il-fhaped . 
{tunted pines, with {mall dwarf junipers, intermixed here 
and there, particularly round the margins of ponds and 
{wamps, with dwarf willow bufhes; and among the rocks 


and fides of the hills were alfo fome fmall poplars. 


On the thirtieth, we arrived at the Eaft fide of Ifland on, 
Lake, where the Indians killed two large buck deer ; but 
the rutting feafon was fo lately over, that their flefh was 
only eatable by thofe who could not procure better food. 
Tn the evening, Matonabbee was taken very ul; and from the 
nature of his complaint, I judged his illnefs to have pro- 
ceeded from the enormous quantity of meat that he had 
eat on the twenty-feventh, as he had been indifpofed ever 
fince that time. Nothing is more common with thofe 

Indians, - after they have eat as much at a fitting as would 
ferve fix moderate men, than to find themfelves out of 
order; but not one of them can bear to hear that it is the 
effec of eating too much: in defence of which they fay, 
that the meaneft of the animal creation knows when 
hunger is fatisfied, and will leave off accordingly. This, 
however, is a falfe affertion, advanced knowingly in fup- 
port of an abfurd argument; for it is well known by them, 
as well as all the Southern Indians, that the black bear, 
who, for fize and the delicacy of its flefh, may juftly 


be called a refpectable animal, is fo far from knowing 
when 


70 


1770. 
Qi, 
. December. 


A JOURNEY! DT O@RErTE 


when its hunger is fatisfed, that, in the Summer, when 
the berries are ripe, it will gorge to fuch a degree, that it 
frequently, and even daily, vomits up great quantities of 
new-{wallowed fruit, before it has undergone any change 
in the ftomach, and immediately renews its repaft with as 
much eagernefs as before. 


Notwithftanding the Northern Indians are at times fo 
voracious, yet they bear hunger with a degree of fortitude 
which, as Mr. Ellis juftly obferves of the Southern Indians, 
‘Sis much eafier to admire, than to imitate.’’ I have 
more than once feen the Northern Indians, at the end of 
three or four days fafting, as merry and jocofe on the fub- 
ject, as if they had voluntarily impofed it on themfelves ; 
and would afk each other in the plaineft terms, and in the 
merrieft mood, If they had any inclination for an intrigue 
with a ftrange woman? I muft acknowledge that examples 
of this kind were of infinite fervice to me, as they tended 
to keep up-my fpirits on thofe occafions, with a degree of 
fortitude that would have been impoflible for me to have 
done had the Indians behaved in a contrary manner, and 
expreffed any apprehenfion of ftarving. 


Early in the morning of the thirty-frft, we con- 
tinued our journey, and walked about fourteen miles 
to the Weftward on Ifland Lake, where we fixed our 
refidence ; but Matonabbee was at this time fo ill as to 
be obliged to be hauled on a fledge the whole day. The 

next 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


next morning, however, he fo far recovered as to be ca- 
pable. of walking; when we proceeded on to the Welt 
and Weft by North, about fixteen miles farther on the 
fame Lake, till we arrived at two tents, which con~ 
tained the remainder of the wives and families of my 
guides, who had been waiting there for the return of their 
hufbands from the Fort. Here we found only two men, 
though there were upward of twenty women and child- 
ren; and as thofe two men had no gun or ammunition, 
they had no other methed of fupporting themfelves and the 
women, but by catching fifh, and f{naring a few rabbits : 
the latter were fearce, but the former were eafily caught in 
confiderable numbers either with nets or hooks. The 
fpecies of fifh generally caught in the nets are tittemeg, 
pike, and barble; and the only forts caught with hooks 
are trout, pike, burbut, and a fmall fith, erroneoufly 
called by the Englifh tench: the Southern Indians call it 
the toothed tittemeg, and the Northern Indians call it 
faint eah. ~ They are delicate eating; being nearly as frm 
as a perch, and generally very fat. ‘They feldom exceed 
a foot in length, and in fhape much refemble a gurnard, 
except that of having a very long broad fin on the back,. 
like a perch, but this fin is not armed with fimilar 
fpikes. The fcales are large, and of a footy brown. 
They are generally moft efteemed when broiled. or roafted. 
with the fcales on, of courfe the fkin is not eaten. 


AS 


(fe: 


1771. 
ee mn ame 


January 
ft. 


72 
177i. 


January 


ad. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


As the Captain [ Matonabbee] and one man were indif- 
pofed, we did not move on the fecond of January; but 
early in the morning of the third fet out, and walked 
about feven miles to the North Weftward, fave of which 
were on the above mentioned Lake; when the Indians 
having killed two deer, we put up for the night. 


Ifland Lake (near the center) is in latitude 60° 45° 
North, and 102° 25° Weft longitude, from London; and 
is, at the part we crofled, about thirty-five miles wide: 
but from the North Eaft to the South Weft it is much 
larger, and entirely full of iflands, fo near to each other 
as to make the whole Lake refemble a jumble of ferpentine 
rivers and creeks; and it is celebrated by the natives as 
abounding with great plenty of fine fh during the begin- 
ning of the Winter. At different parts of this Lake moft 
part of the wives and families of thofe Northern Indians 
who vifit Prince of Wales’s Fort in O&ober and Novem- 
ber generally refide, and wait for their return ; as there is 
little fear of their being in want of provifions, even with- 
out the affiftance of a gun and ammunition, which is a 
point of real confequence to them. The Lake is plenti- 
fully fupplied with water from feveral {mall rivulets and 
creeks which run into it at the South Weft end; and it 
empties itfelf by means.of other {mall rivers which run 
to the North Eaft, the principal of which is Nemace-a- 
{eepee-a-fith, or Little Fifh River. Many of the iflands, 

as 


Nad®O R TT AIESRN § OsCREPAgN. 


as well as the main land round this Lake, abound with 
dwarf woods, chiefly pines; but in fome parts intermixed 


with larch and {mall birch trees. The land, like all the: 


reft which lies to the North of Seal River, is hilly, and full 
of rocks; and though none ‘of the hills are high, yet as 
few of the woods grow on their fummits, they in general 
fhew their fnowy heads far above the woods which grow 
in the vallies, or thofe which are f{cattered about their fides. 


After leaving Ifland Lake, we continued our old courfe 
between the Weft and North Weft, and travelled at the 
eafy rate of eight or nine miles a day. Provifions of all 
kinds were fcarce till the fixteenth, when the Indians 
killed twelve deer. This induced us to put up, though 
early in the day; and finding great plenty of deer in the 
neighbourhood of our little encampment, it was agreed 
by all parties to remain a few days, in order to dry and 
pound fome meat to make it lighter for carriage. 


Having, by the twenty-fecond, provided a fufficient 
ftock of provifion, properly prepared, to carry with us, and 
repaired our fledges and fnow-fhoes, we again purfued our 
courfe in the North Weft quarter; and in the afternoon 
{poke with a ftranger, an Indian, who had one of Mato- 
nabbee’s wives under hiscare. He did not remain in our com- 
pany above an hour, as he only {moked part of a few pipes 
with his friends, and returned to his tent, which could not 


il be 


73 


1771. 
Se min ae 


January. 


#10 


74 


1771. 
| mained 


january. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


be far diftant from the place where we lay that night, as 
the woman and her two children joined us next morning, 
before we had taken down our tent and made ready for 
moving. Thofe people were the firft ftrangers whom we 
had met fince we left the Fort, though we had travelled 
feveral hundred miles; which is a proof that this part of 
the country is but thinly inhabited. It is a truth well 
known to the natives, and doubtlefs founded on experi- 
ence, that there are many very extenfive tracts of land 
in thofe parts, which are incapable of affording fupport to 
any number of the human race even during the fhort 
time they are pafling through them, in the capacity of 
migrants, from one place to another; much lefs are they 
capable of affording a conftant fupport to thofe who 
might wifh to make them their fixed refidence at any 
feafon of the year. It is true, that few rivers or lakes 
in thofe parts are entirely deftitute of fifh; but the un- 
certainty of meeting with a fufficient fupply for any con- 
fiderable time together, makes the natives very cautious 
how they put their whole dependance on that article, as it 
has too frequently been the means of many hundreds being 
{tarved to death. 


By the twenty-third, deer were fo plentiful that the In- 
dians feemed to think that, unlefs the feafon, contrary to 
expectation and general experience, fhould prove unfa- 
vourable, there would be no fear of our being in want of 

provifions 


N O Re SEE RON TO°CS SA WN. 


provifions during the reft of the Winter, as deer had always 
been known to be in great plenty in the direction which 
they intended to walk. 


On the third of February, we continued our courfe 
to the Weft by North and Weft North Weft, and were fo 
near the edge of the woods, that the barren ground was 
in fight to the Northward. As the woods trended away 
to the Weft, we were obliged to alter our courfe to Weft 
by South, for the fake of keeping among them, as well 
as the deer. In the courfe of this day’s walk we faw fe- 
veral ftrangers, fome of whom remained in our company, 
while others went on their refpective ways. 


On the fixth, we croffed the main branch of Catha- 
whachaga River; which, at that part, is about three quar- 
ters of a mile broad ; and after walking three miles farther, 
came to the fide of Cofled Whoie, or Partridge Lake; 
but the day being far {pent, and the weather excefflively 
cold, we put up for the night. : 

Early in the morning of the feventh, the weather being 
f{erene and clear, we fet out, and croffed the above mentioned 
Lake; which at that part is about fourteen miles wide; but 
from the South South Weft to North North Eaft is much 
larger. It is impoffible to defcribe the intenfenefs of the 


cold which we experienced this day; and the.difpatch we 


made in croffing the lake is almoft incredible, as it was 


L 2 performed 


73 


1771. 
ee mm anne, 


January. 


February. 
3d. 


6th. 


ath. 


70 


P77. 


February. 


AsJOURN EY | TOME 


performed by the greateft part of my crew in lefs than 
two hours; though fome of the women, who were heavy 
laden, took a much longer time. Several of the Indians 
were much frozen, but none of them more difagreeably fo 
than one of Matonabbee’s wives, whofe thighs and but- 
tocks were in a manner incrufted with froft; and when 
thawed, feveral blifters arofe, nearly as large as {heeps’ blad- 
ders. The pain the poor woman fuffered on this occafion 
was greatly aggravated by the laughter and jeering of her 
companions, who faid that fhe was rightly ferved for belt- 
ing her clothes fo high. - I muft acknowledge that I -was 
not in the number of thofe who pitied her, as I thought 
fhe took too much pains to fhew a clean heel and good 
leg ; her garters being always in fight, which, though by 
no means confidered here as bordering | on indecency, is 
by far too airy to withftand the rigorous-cold of a f- 
vere winter in a high Northern latitude. I doubt not 
that the laughter of her companions was excited by fimilar 


ideas. 


When we got on the Weft fide of Partridge Lake we 
continued our courfe for many days toward-the Weft by 
South and Weft South Weft; when deer were fo plentiful, 
and the Indians killed fuch vaft numbers, that notwith- 
ftanding we frequently remained three, four, or five days 
ine place, to eat up the fpoils of our hunting, yet at our 
departure we frequently left great quantities of good meat 
behind us, which we could neither eat nor carry with us. 


This 


NORTHERN OCEAN, 


This condué is the more excufable among people whofe 
wandering manner of life and contracted ideas make 
every thing appear to them as the effet of mere chance. 
The great uncertainty of their ever vifiting this or that 
part a fecond time, induces them to think there is nothing 
either wrong or improvident in living on the beft the 
country will afford, as they are pafling through it from 
place to place; and they feem willing that thofe who come 
after them fhould take their chance, as they have done. 


On the twenty-firft, we crofled The-whole-kyed 
Whoie, or Snowbird Lake, which at that part was about 
twelve or thirteen miles wide, though from North to South 
it is much larger. As deer were as plentiful as before, we 
expended much time in killing and eating them. This 
Matonabbee affured me was the beft way we could em- 
ploy ourfelves, as the feafon would by no means permit us 


to proceed in a direé line for the Copper-mine River ; but - 


when the Spring advanced, and the deer began to draw out 
to the barren ground, he would then, he faid, proceed in 
fuch a manner as to leave no room to doubt of our arrival] 
at the Copper-mine River in proper time. 


On the fecond of March, we lay by the fide of Whool- 
dyah’d Whoie or Pike Lake, and not far from Doo-baunt 
Whoie River. On the next day we began to crofs the above 
mentoned Lake, but after walking feven miles on it to the 
Weft South Weft, we arrived at a large tent of Northern 

Indians, 


77 


1771. 
ee em anne 


February. 


2ift. 


March 
2d. | 


3de 


78 


I 7 rs 
March. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


Indians, who had been living there from the beginning 
of the Winter, and had found a plentiful fubfiftence by 
catching deer ina pound. ‘This kind of employment is 
performed in the following manner: 


When the Indians defign to impound deer, they look 
out for one of the paths in which a number of them 
have trod, and which is obferved to be ftill frequented by 
them. When thefe paths crofs a lake, a wide river, or a 
barren plain, they are found to be much the beft for the 
purpofe; and if the path run through a clufter of woods, 
capable of affording materials for building the pound, it 
adds confiderably to the commodioufnefs of the fituation. 
The pound is built by making a ftrong fence with brufhy 
trees, without obferving any degree of regularity, and the 
work is continued to any extent, according to the pleafure 
of the builders. I have feen fome that were not lefs than 
a mile round, and am informed that there are others ftill 
more extenfive. The door, or entrance of the pound, 
is not larger than a common gate, and the infide is fo 
crowded with fmall counter-hedges as very much to re- 
femble a maze; in every opening of which they fet a {nare, 


made with thongs of parchment deer-fkins well twifted 


together, which are amazingly ftrong. One end of the 
{nare is ufually made faft to a growing pole; but if no 
one of a fufficient fize can be found near the place where 
the {nare is fet, a loofe pole is fubftituted in its room, which 
is always of fuch fize and length that a deer cannot drag it 


far 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


far before it gets entangled among the other woods, which 
are all left ftanding except what is found neceflary for 
making the fence, hedges, &c. 


The pound being thus prepared, a row of {mall brufh- 
wood is ftuck up in the {now on each fide the door or 
entrance; and thefe hedge-rows are continued along the 
open part of the lake, river, or plain, where neither flick 
nor ftump befides is to be feen, which makes them the 
more diftinétly obferved. Thefe poles, or brufh-wood, 
are generally placed at the diftance of fifteen or twenty 
yards from each other, and ranged in fuch a manner as to 
form two fides of a long acute angle, growing gradually 
wider in proportion to the diftance they extend from the 
entrance of the pound, which fometimes is not lefs than 
two or three miles; while the deer’s path is exadtly 
along the middle, between the two rows of brufh-wood. 


Indians employed on this fervice always pitch theirtent ~ 


on or near to an eminence that affords a commanding pro- 
{pect of the path leading to the pound; and when they 
fee any deer going that way, men, women, and child- 
ren walk along the lake or river-fide under cover of the 
woods, till they get behind them, then ftep forth to 
open view, and proceed towards the pound in the form 
of a crefcent. The poor timorous deer finding them- 


felves purfued, and at the fame time taking the two rows | 


of brufhy poleos to be two ranks of people ftationed 
3 to 


WS, 


1771. 
ceo tema) 


March. 


So 


1771. 
March. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


to prevent their pafling on either fide, run ftraight for- 
ward in the path till they get into the pound. The In- 
dians then clofe in, and block up the entrance with fome 
brufhy trees, that have been cut down and lie at. hand 
for that purpofe. The deer being thus enclofed, the 
women and children walk round the pound, to prevent 
them from breaking or jumping over the fence, while the 
men are employed {pearing fuch as are entangled in the 
{nares, and fhooting with bows and arrows thofe which 
remain loofe in the pound. 


This method of hunting, if it deferve the name, is fome- 
times fo fuccefsful, that many families fubfift by it with- 
out having occafion to move their tents above once or twice 
during the courfe of a whole winter; and when the 
Spring advances, both the deer and Indians draw out to 
the Eaftward, on the ground which is entirely barren, or 
at leaft what is fo called in thofe parts, as it neither pro- 
duces trees or fhrubs of any kind, fo that mofs and 
fome little grafs is all the herbage which is to be found on 
it. Such an eafy way of procuring a comfortable main- 
tenance in the Winter months, (which is by far the worft 
time of the year,) is wonderfully well adapted to the fup- 
port of the aged and infirm, but is too apt to occafion 
a habitual indolence .in the young and active, who fre- 
quently fpend a whole Winter in this indolent man- 
ner: and as thofe parts of the country are almoft def- 
titute of every animal of the furr kind, it cannot be fup- 


pofed 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


pofed that thofe who indulge themfelves in this indolent 
method of procuring food can be mafters of any thing 
for trade; whereas thofe who do not get their livelihood 
at fo eafy a rate, generally procure furrs enough during 
the Winter to purchafe a fufficient fupply of ammunition, 
and other European goods, to laft them another year. 
This is nearly the language of the more indulfirious among 
them, who, of courfe, are of moft importance and value 
to the Hudfon’s Bay Company, as it is from them the 
furrs are procured which compofe the greateft part of 
Churchill trade. But in my opinion, there cannot exift a 
ftronger proof that mankind was not created to enjoy hap- 
pinefs in this world, than the conduct of the miferable 
beings who inhabit this wretched part of it; as none but 
the aged and infirm, the women and children, a few of 
the more indolent and unambitious part of them, will 
fubmit to remain in the parts where food and clothing 
are procured in this eafy manner, becaufe no animals are 
produced there whofe furrs are valuable. And what do the 
more induftrious gain by giving themfelves all this addi- 
tional trouble? The real wants of thefe people are few, 
and eafily fupplied; a hatchet, an ice-chiffel, a file, and 
a knife, are all that is required to enable them, with a little 
induftry, to procure a comfortable livelihood; and thofe 
who endeavour to poflefs more, are always the moft un- 
happy, and may, in faét, be faid to be only flaves and 
carriers to the refit, whofe ambition never leads them 
te any thing beyond the means of procuring food 


M and 


Sy 


1771. 
March, 


§2 


1771. 
March. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


and clothing. It is true, the carriers pride themfelves 
much on the refpeét which is fhewn to them at the 
Factory ; to obtain which they frequently run great rifques 
of being ftarved to death in their way thither and back ; 
and all that they can poflibly get there for the furrs they 
procure after a year’s toil, feldom amounts to more than is 
fufficient to yield a. bare fubfiftence, and a few furrs for 
the enfuing year’s market; while thofe whom they call 
indolent and mean-fpirited live generally in a ftate of 
plenty, without trouble or rif{que; and confequently muft 
be the moft happy, and, in truth, the moft independent 
alfo. It muft be allowed that they are by far the greateft 
philofophers, as they never give themfelves the trouble to 
acquire what they can do well enough without. The 
deer they kill, furnifhes them with food, and a variety of 
warm and comfortable clothing, either with or without 
the hair, according as the feafons require; and it muft be 
very hard indeed, if they cannot get furrs enough in the 
courfe of two or three years, to purchafea hatchet, and fuch 
other edge-tools as are neceflary for their purpofe. In- 
deed, thofe who take no concern at all about procuring 
furrs, have generally an opportunity of providing them- 
felves with all their real wants from their more induftrious 
countrymen, in exchange for Praia, and ready-drefied 
ikins for clothing. 


It is undoubtedly the duty of every one of the Com- 
pany’s fervants to encourage a fpirit of induftry among 


the 


NOR THE RN OCHAN. 


the natives, and to ufe every means in their power to in- 
duce them to procure furrs and other coramodities for trade, 
by afluring them of a ready purchafe and good payment 
for every thing they bring to the Fa€tory: and I can truly 
fay, that this has ever been the grand obje& of my at- 
tention. But I muft at the fame time confefs, that fuch 
conduét is by no means for the real benefit of the poor 
Indians; it being well known that thofe who have the leaft 
intercourfe with the Factories, are by far the happieft. As 
their whole aim is to procure a comfortable fubfiftence, 
they take the moft prudent methods toaccomplifhit ; and 
by always following the lead of the deer, are feldom ex- 
pofed to the griping hand of famine, fo frequently felt by 
thofe who are called the annual traders. It is true, that 
there are few of the Indians, whofe manner of life I have 
juft defcribed, but have once in their lives at leaft vifited 
Prince of Wales’s Fort; and the hardfhips and dangers 
which moft of them experienced on thofe occafions, have 
left fuch a lafting impreffion on their minds, that nothing 


can induce them to repeat their vifits: nor is it, in faa, 


the intereft of the Company that people of this eafy turn, 
and who require only as much iron-work at a time as can 
be purchafed with three or four beaver fkins, and that 
only once in two or three years, fhould be invited to the 
Factories ; becaufe what they beg and fteal while there, 
is worth, in the way of trade, three times the quantity 
of furrs which they bring. - For this reafon, it is much 
more for the intereft of the Company that the an- 

M 2 nual 


83 


1771, 
ee | 
March. 


. 84 


I IJ) I. 
= 
March. 


athe 


A JOURNEY TO “Hiner 


nual traders fhould buy up all thofe fmall quantities of 
furrs, and bring them in their own name, than that a 
parcel of beggars fhould be encouraged to come to the 
Factory with fearcely as many furrs as will pay for the 
victuals they eat while they are on. the plantation. 


I have often heard it obferved, that the Indians who 
attend the deer-pounds might, in the courfe of a Win- 
ter, collect a vaft number of pelts, which would well 
deferve the attention of thofe who are called carriers or 
traders ; but it is a truth, though unknown to thofe fpe- 
culators, that the deer fkins at that feafon are not only as 
thin as a bladder, but are alfo full of warbles, which ren- 
der them of little or no value. Indeed, were they a more 
marketable commodity than they really are, the remote 
fituation of thofe pounds from the Company’s Fadtories, 
muft for ever be an unfurmountable barrier to the Indians. 
bringing any of thofe fkins to trade. The fame obfervation 
may be made of all the other Northern Indians, whofe chief 
fupport, the whole year round, is venifon ; but the want of 
heavy draught in Winter, and water-carriage in Summer, 
will not permit them to bring many deer fkins to market, 
not even thofe that are in feafon, and for which there has 
always been, great encouragement given. 


We ftopped only one night in company with the In- 
dians whom we met on Pike Lake, and in the morning 
of the fourth, proceeded to crofs the remainder of that 

Lake ; 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


Lake; but, though the weather was fine, and though 
the Lake was not more than twenty-feven miles broad at 
the place where we croffed it, yet the Indians loft fo much 
time at play, that it was the feventh before we arrived on 
the Weft fide of it. During the whole time we were 
croffing it, each night we found either points of land, or 
iflands, to put up in. On the eighth, we lay a little to 
the Eaft North Eaft of Black Bear Hill, where the In- 
dians killed two deer, which were the firft we had feen 
for ten days; but having plenty of dried meat and fat 
with us, we were by no means in want during any part 
of that time. On the ninth, we proceeded on our courfe 
to the Weftward, and foon met with as great plenty of 


deer as we had feen during any part of our journey;- 


which, no doubt, made things go on {mooth and eafy: 
and as the Spring advanced, the rigour of the Winter na- 
turally abated, fo that at times we had fine pleafant 
weather over-head, though it was never fo warm as to 
occafion any: thaw, unlefs in fuch places as lay expofed to 
the mid-day fun, and were fheltered from all the cold 


winds. 


On the nineteenth, as we were continuing our courfe to 
the Weft and Weft by South, we faw the tracks of feveral 
firangers; and on following the main path, we arrived 
that night at five tents of Northern Indians, who had re- 
fided there great part of the Winter, fnaring deer in the 


fame manner as thofe before mentioned. Indeed, it fhould 
feem. 


1771. 
March. 


7th, 


8th. 


oth. 


roth. 


$6 


a7 
March. 


2oth. 


23d. 


26th. 


A JOURNEY .T@ “tee 


feem that this, as well as fome other places, had been 
frequented more than once on this occafion ; for the wood 
that had been cut down for fewel, and other ufes, wasalmoft 
incredible. Before morning, the weather became fo bad, 
and the ftorm continued to rage with fuch violence, that we 
did not move for feveral days; and as fome of the Indians 
we met with at this place were going to Prince of Wales’s 
Fort in the Summer, I embraced the opportunity of fending 
by them a Letter to the Chief at that Fort, agreeably to the 
tenor of my inftructions. By fumming up my courfes and 
diftances from my laft obfervation, for the weather at that 
time would not permit me to obferve, I judged myfelf to 
be in latitude 61° 30° North, and about 19° 60’ of longi- 
tude to the Weft of Churchill River. This, and fome 
accounts of the ufage I received from the natives, with my 
opinion of the future fuccefs of the journey, formed the 
contents of my Letter. 


On the twenty-third, the weather became fine and mo- 
derate, fo we once more purfued our way, and the nex 
day, as well as on the twenty-fixth, faw feveral more 
tents of Northern Indians, who were employed in the 
fame manner as thofe we had formerly met; but fome of 
them having had bad fuccefs, and being relations or ac- 
quaintances of part of my crew, joined our company, and 
proceeded with us to the Weftward. Though the deer 
did not then keep regular paths, fo as to enable the In- 


dians to catch them in pounds, yet they were to be met 
2 with . 


NjO R TAHVE RON OCHOA N. 


with in great abundance in fcattered herds; fo that my 
companions killed as many as they pleafed with their 
guns. 


We ftill continued our courfe to the Weft and Weft by 
South, and on the eighth of April, arrived at a {mall 
Lake, called Thelewey-aza-yeth; but with what propriety 
it is fo called I cannot difcover, for the meaning of 
Thelewey-aza-yeth is Little Fifh Hill: probably fo called 
from a high hill which ftands on a long point near the 
Weft end of the Lake. On an ifland in this Lake we 
pitched our tents, and the Indians finding deer very nu- 
merous, determined to ftay here fome time, in order to 
dry and pound meat to take with us; for they well knew, 
by the feafon of the year, that the deer were then draw- 
ing out to the barren ground, and as the Indians propofed 
to walk due North on our leaving the Lake, it was un- 
certain when we fhould again meet with any more. As 
feveral Indians had during the Winter joined our party, 
our number had now increafed to feven tents, which in 
- the whole contained not lefs than feventy perfons. 


Agreeably to the Indians’ propofals we remained at 
Thelewey-aza-yeth ten days; during which time my 
companions were bufily employed (at their intervals 
from hunting) in preparing {mall ftaves of birch-wood, 
about one and a quarter inch fquare, and feven or eight. 


feet long. Thefe ferve as tent-poles all the Summer, 
while 


87 


1771. 
eee eee 


March. 


April 
Sth. 


1771. 
eae) 


Apri. 


r8th. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


while on the barren ground; and as the fall advances, are 
converted into {now-fhoe frames for Winter ufe. Birch- 
rind, together with timbers and other wood-work for 
building canoes, were alfo another object of the Indian’s 
attention while at this place; but as the canoes were not 
to be fet up till our arrival at Clowey, (which was many 
miles diftant,) all the wood-work was reduced to its pro- 
per fize, for the fake of making it light for carriage. 


As to myfelf, I had little to do, except to make a few 
obfervations for determining the latitude, bringing up my 
journal, and filling up my chart to the prefent time. I 
found the latitude of this place 61° 30° North, and its 
longitude, by my account, 19° Weft of Prince of Wales's 
Fort. 


Having a good ftock of dried provifions, and moft of 
the neceflary work for canoes all ready, on the eighteenth 
we moved about nine or ten miles to the North North 
Weft, and then came toa tent of Northern Indians who 
were tenting on the North fide of Thelewey-aza River. 
From thefe Indians Matonabbee purchafed another wife ; 
fo that he had now no lefs than feven, moft of whom 
would for fize have made good grenadiers. He prided 
himfelf much in the height and ftrength of his wives, and 
would frequently fay, few women would carry or haul 
heavier loads; and though they had, in general, a very maf- 
culine appearance, yet he preferred them to thofe of a 

more 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


more delicate form and moderate flature. In a country 
like this, where a partner in exceflive hard labour is the 
chief motive for the union, and the fofter endearments 
of a conjugal life are only confidered as a fecondary 
object, there feems to be great propriety in fuch a choice ; 
but if all the men were of this way of thinking, what 
would become of the greater part of the women, who in 


general are but of low ftature, and many of them of a moft — 


delicate make, though not of the exadteft proportion, or 
moft beautiful mould? Take them ina body, the women 
are as deftitute of real beauty as any nation I ever faw, 
though there are fome few of them, when young, who are 
tolerable; but the care of a family, added to their con- 
ftant hard labour, foon make the moft beautiful among 
them look old and wrinkled, even before they are thirty ; 
and feveral of the more ordinary ones at that age are perfeét 
antidotes to love and gallantry. This, however, does not 
render them lefs dear and valuable to their owners, which 
is a lucky circumftance for thofe women, and a certain 
proof ‘that there is no fuch thing as any rule or ftandard 
for beauty. Afk a Northern Indian, what is beauty? he 
we will anfwer, a broad flat face, {mall eyes, high cheek- 
bones, three or four broad black lines a-crofs each cheek, 
a low forehead, a large broad chin, a clumfy hook-nofe, 
a tawney hide, and breafts hanging down to the belt. 
Thofe beauties are greatly heightened, or at leaft rendered 
more valuable, when the poffeffor is capable of drefling 
all kinds of fkins, converting them into the different parts 

N of 


89 


1771. 
cera cen!) 


April. 


go 


Lage. 
ee ema aioe 
April. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


of their ciothing, and able to carry eight or ten * ftone 


in Summer, or haul a much greater weight in Winter. 
Thefe, and other fimilar accomplifhments, are all that 
are fought after, or expected, of a Northern Indian woman. 
As to their temper, it is of little confequence ; for the men 
have a wonderful facility in making the moft ftubborn 
comply with as much alacrity as could poffibly be expe@ed 
from thofe of the mildeft and moft obliging turn of mind;. 
fo that the only real difference is, the one obeys through fear, 
and the other complies cheerfully from a willing mind; both 
knowing that what is commanded muft be done. They 
dre, in fa&t, all kept at a great diftance, and the rank they 
hold in the opinion of the men cannot be better expreffed 
or explained, than by obferving the method of treating 
or ferving them at meals, which would appear very humi- 
liating, to an European woman, though cuftom makes it 
fit light on thofe whofe lot it is to bear it. It is neceflary 
to obferve, that when the men kill any large beaft, the 
women are always fent to bring it to the tent: when it is 
brought there, every operation it undergoes, fuch as f{plit- 
ting, drying, pounding, &c. is performed by the women. 
When any thing is to be prepared for eating, it is the 
women who cook it; and when it is done, the wives 
and daughters of the greateft Captains in the country are 
never ferved, till all the males, even thofe who are in the 
capacity of fervants, have eaten what they think proper ; 


* The ftone here meant is fourteen pounds, 


and 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


and in times of {carcity it is frequently their lot to be left 
without a fingle morfel. It is, however, natural to think 
they take the liberty of helping themfelves in fecret; but 
this muft be done with great prudence, as capital em- 
bezzlements of provifions in fuch times are looked on as 
affairs of real confequence, and frequently fubject them to 
a very fevere beating. If they are practifed by a woman 
whofe youth and inattention to domeftic concerns cannot 
plead in her favour, they will for ever be a blot in her 
charaéter, and few men will chufe to have her for a wife. 


Finding plenty of good birch growing by the fide of 
Theley-aza River, we remained there for a few days, in 
order to complete all the wood-work for the canoes, as 
well as for every other ufe for which we could poflibly 
want it on the barren ground, during our Summer’s 
cruife. On the twentieth, Matonabbee fent one of his 
brothers, and fome others, a-head, with birch-rind and 
wood-work for a canoe, and gave them orders to proceed 
to a {mall Lake near the barren ground called Clowey, 
where they were defired to make all poflible hafte in build- 


ing the canoe, that it might be ready on our arrival. 


Having finifhed fuch wood-work as the Indians thought 
would be neceflary, and having augmented our ftock 
of dried meat and fat, the twenty-firft was appointed 
for moving ; but one of the women having been taken 
in labour, and it being rather an extraordinary cafe, we 

N. 2 were 


gt 


171. 
April. 


20th. 


ye i. 
heen ened 


April. 


ANJOURNE Y TOME 


were detained more than two days. ‘The inftant, how- 
ever, the poor woman was delivered, which was not 
until fhe had fuffered all the pains ufually felt on thofe 
occafions for near fifty-two hours, the fignal was made 
formoving when the poor creature took her infant on 
her back and fet out with the reft of the company; 
and though another perfon had the humanity to haul 
her fledge for her, (for one day only,) fhe was obliged to 
carry a confiderable load befide her little charge, and was 
frequently obliged to wade knee-deep in water and wet 
fnow. Her very looks, exclufive of her moans, were a 
fufficient proof of the great pain fhe endured, infomuch 
that although fhe was a perfon I greatly difliked, her dif 
trefs at this time fo overcame my prejudice, that I never 
felt more for any of her fex in my life; indeed her fighs 
pierced me to the foul, and rendered me very miferable, 
as it was not in my power to relieve her. 


When a Northern Indian woman is taken in labour, 
a {mall tent is erected for her, at fuch a diftance from 
the other tents that her cries cannot eafily be heard, 
and the other women and young girls are her conftant 


‘yifitants: no male, except children in arms, ever offers 


to approach her. It is a circumftance perhaps to be la- 
mented, that thefe people never attempt to affift each 
other on thofe occafions, even in the moft critical cafes. 
This is in fome meafure owing to delicacy, but more. pro- 
bably to an opinion they entertain that nature is abun- 


dantly 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


 dantly fufficient to perform every thing required, without 
any external help whatever. When I informed them 
of the affiftance which European women derive from 
the fkill and attention of our midwives, they treated it 
with the utmoft contempt; ironically obferving, ‘* that 
‘© the many hump-backs, bandy-legs, and other deformi- 
“€ ties, fo frequent among the Englifh, were undoubtedly 
‘¢ owing to the great fkill of the perfons who aflifted in 
‘© bringing them into the world, and to the extraordinary 
“© care of their nurfes afterward.” 


A Northern Indian woman after child-birth is rec- 
koned unclean for a month or five weeks; during which 
time fhe always remains in a {mall tent placed at a little 
diftance from the others, with only a female acquaintance 
or two; and during the whole time the father never fees 
the child. Their reafon for this practice is, that children 
when firft born are fometimes not very fightly, having in 
general large heads, and but little hair, and are, moreover, 
often difcoloured by the force of the labour; fo that were 
the father to fee them to fuch great difadvantage, he might 
probably take a diflike to them, which never afterward 
could be removed. 


The names of the children are always given to them 
by the parents, or fome perfon near of kin. Thofe of the 
boys are various, and generally derived from fome place, 
feafon, or animal; the names of the girls are chiefly 


taken 


® 


93 


1771. 
(as yee! 


Apri. 


94 


1771. 
(een ee! 


April. 


23d. 


May 


A poWRNEY 'Tiol THE 


taken from fome part or property of a Martin; fuch 
as, the White Martin, the Black Martin, the Summer 
Martin, the Martin’s Head, the Martin’s Foot, the Martin’s 
Heart, the Martin’s Tail, &c. * 


On the twenty-third, as 1 hinted above, we began 
to move forward, and to fhape our courfe nearly North; 
but the weather was in general fo hot, and fo much fnow 
had, in confequence, been melted, as made it bad walking 
in fnow-fhoes, and fuch exceeding heavy hauling, that it 
was the third of May before we could arrive at Clowey, 
though the diftance was not above eighty-five miles from 
Thelewey-aza-yeth. In our way we crofied part of two 
{mall Lakes, called Tittameg Lake and Scartack Lake ; 


neither of which are of any note, though both abound 


with fine fifh. 


* Matonabbee had eight wives, and they were all called Martins. 


C HH Bee 


NOR TERN: © GC BAN. 


Pil ae? = \/, 


Tranfactions at Clowey, and on our Journey, till our 
Arrival at the Copper-mine River. 


Several flrange Indians join us.—Indians employed building canoes; de- 
feription and ufe of them.—IMore Indians join us, to the amount of 
fome hundreds.—Leave Clowey.—Receive intelligence that Keelfbies 
was near us-—Two young men difpatched for my letters and goods.— 
Arrive at Pefoew Lake; crofs part of it, and make a large /moke— 
One of Matonabbee’s wives elopes.—Some remarks ou the natives.—Keel- 
fhies joins us, and delivers my letters, but the goods were all expended. 
—< Northern Indian wifbes to take one of Matonabbee’s wives 
from him; matters compronufed, but had like to have proved fatal to 
my progre/s.—Crofs Pefbew Lake, when I make proper arrangements for 
the remainder of my journey.—Many Indians join our parity, in erder 
to make war on the Efquimaux at the Copper River.—Preparations 
made for that purpofe while at Clowey.—Proceed on our journey to the 

_ North.—Some remarks on the way.—Crofs Cogead Lake on the ice.— 
The Sun did not fet.—<Arrive at Congecathawhachaga.—Lfind feveral 
Copper Indians there.—Remarks and tranfactions during our flay ot 
Congecathawhachaga.—Proceed on our journey.—Weather very bad.— 
Arrive at the Stoney Mountains.—sSome account of them.—Crofs part 

of Buffalo Lake ou the ice.—Saw many mufk-oxen.—Defcripiion of 

them.—Went with fome Indians to view Grizzle-bear Hill_—Fein a 
Jirange Northern Indian Leader, called O’lye, in company with fome 
Copper Indians.—Their bebaviour to me—<Arrive at the Copper-mine 
River. 


; i ‘HE Lake Clowey is not much more than twelve 
miles broad in the wideft part. A {mall river which 
runs into it on the Weft fide, is faid by the Indians to 


join the Athapufcow Lake. 
2 On 


g6 


i775. 


May 
3d. 


79th. 


soth. 


20th. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


On our arrival at Clowey on the third of May, we 
found that the Captain’s brother, and thofe who were fent 
a-head with him from Theley-aza River, had only got 
there two days before us; and, on account of the weather, 
had not made the leaft stam in building the canoe, the 
plan of which they had taken with them. The fame day 
we got to Clowey feveral other Indians joined us from 
different quarters, with intent to build their canoes at the 
fame place. Some of thofe Indians had refided within 
four or five miles; to the South Eaft of Clowey all the 
Winter; and had procured a plentiful livelihood by 
fnaring Frcs in the manner which has been already ces 


{cribed. 


Immediately after our arrival at Clowey, the Indians 
began to build their canoes, and embraced every conve- 
nient opportunity for that purpofe: but as warm and dry 
weather only is fit for this bufinefs, which was by no 
means the cafe at prefent, it was the eighteenth of May . 
before the canoes belonging to my party could be com- 
pleted. On the nineteenth we agreed to proceed on our 
journey; but Matonabbee’s canoe meeting with fome 
damage, which took near a whole day to repair, we were 
detained till the twentieth. 


Thofe veffels, though made of the fame materials with 
the canoes of the Southern Indians, differ from them both 
in fhape and conftruGion ; they are alfo much {maller and 

: lighter, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


lighter; and though very flight and fimple in their con- 
ftruction, are neverthelefs the beft that could poflibly be 
contrived for the ufe of thofe poor people, who are fre- 
quently obliged to carry them a hundred, and fometimes 
a hundred and fifty miles ata time, without having occa~ 
fion to put them into the water. Indeed, the chief ufe of 
thefe canoes is to ferry over unfordable rivers; though 
fometimes, and at a few places, it muft be acknowledged, 
that they are of great fervice in killing deer, as they enable 
the Indians to crofs rivers and the narrow parts of lakes; 
they are alfo ufeful in killing fwans, geefe, ducks, &c. in 
the moulting feafon. 


All the tools ufed by an Indian in building his canoe, 
as well as in making his fnow-fhoes, and every other kind 
of wood-work, confift of a hatchet, a knife, a file, and 
an awl; in the ufe of which they are fo dextrous, that 
every thing they make is executed with a neatnefs not to 
be excelled by the moft expert mechanic, affifted with 
every tool he could with. 


In fhape the Northern Indian canoe bears fome refem- 
blance to a weaver’s fhuttle; being flat-bottomed, with 
ftraight upright fides, and fharp at each end; but the ftern 
is by far the wideft part, as there the baggage is generally 
laid, and occafionally a fecond perfon, who always lies down 
at full length in the bottom of the canoe. In this man- 
ner they carry one another acrofs rivers and the narrow 


© parts 


97 


77 t. 
M ay- 


98 


177 Lf. 
bee mead 


May. 


A ‘JOURNEY TO HE 


parts of lakes in thofe little veffels, which feldom exceed 
twelve or thirteen feet in length, and are from twenty 
inches to two feet broad in the wideft part. The head, 
or fore part, is unneceflarily long, and narrow; and 
is all covered over with bitch-bark, which adds confider- 
ably to the weight, without contributing to the burthen 
of the veffel. In general, thefe Indians make ufe of the 
fingle paddle, though a few have double ones, like the 
Efquimaux: the latter, however, are feldom ufed, but 
by thofe who lic in wait to kill deer as they crofs rivers 
and narrow lakes *. 


During our ftay at Clowey we were joined by upward 
of two hundred Indians from different quarters, moft of 
whom built canoes at this place; but as I was under the 
protection of a principal man, no one offered to moleft 


* See Plate IV. where Fig. A reprefents the bottom of the canoe, Fig. B 
being the fore-part. Fig. C is the complete frame of one before it is covered 
with the bark of the birch-tree: it is reprefented on an artificial bank, which 
the natives raife to build it on. Fig. D isan end-view of a fet of timbers, 
bent and lafhed in their proper fhape, and left to dry. Fig. E is the repre- 
fentation of a complete canoe. Fig. F reprefents one of their paddles. 
Fig. G a fpear with which they kill deer; and Fig. H, their mode of carrying 
the canoe. 


The following references are to the feveral parts of the canoe: Fig. C, 
1. The ftem. 2. The ftern-poft. 3. Two forked fticks fupporting the 
ftem and ftern-poft. 4. The gunwales. 5. Small rods placed between the 
timbers and birch-back that covers them. 6. The timbers. 7. The keelfon.. 
8. Large ftones placed there to keep the bottom fteady till the fides are 
fewed on. ; 


me, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


me, nor can I fay they were very clamorous for any thing 
Thad. This was undoubtedly owing to Matonabbee’s in- 
forming them of my true fituation; which was, that I 
had not, by any means, fufhicient neceffaries for myfelf, 
much lefs to give away. The few goods which I had with 
me were intended to be referved for the Copper and Dog- 
ribbed Indians, who never vifit the Company’s Faories. 
Tobacco was, however, always given away; for every one 
of any note, who joined us, expected to be treated with a few 
pipes, and on fome occafions it was {carcely poflible to getof® 
without prefenting a few inches * tothem; which, with 
the conftant fupplies which I was obliged to furnifh my 
own crew, decreafed that article of my ftock fo faft, that 
notwithftanding I had yet advanced fo {mall a part of my 
journey, more than one half of my ftore was expended. 
Gun-powder and hot alfo were articles commonly afked for 
by moft of the Indians we met; and in general thefe were 
dealt round to them with a liberal hand by my guide Ma- 
tonabbee. I muft, however, do him the juftice to ac- 
knowledge, that what he diftributed was all his own, 
which he had purchafed at the Factory; to my certain 
knowledge he bartered one hundred and fifty martins’ 
{kins for powder only ; befides a great number of beaver, 
and other furrs, for fhot, ball, iron-work, and tobacco, 
purpolely to give away among his countrymen; as he had 
certainly as many of thefe articles given to him as were, in 


* The tobacco ufed in Hudfon’s Bay is the Brafil tobacco; which is twifted 
into the form of a rope, of near an inch diameter, and then wound into a 
jarge roll; from which it is taken by meafures of length, for the natives. 


O 2 his 


$9 


7. 
(peer setae 


May. 


Ico 


77%. 
Keser otenncaansad 


May 
20th, 


22d. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


his opinion, fufficient for our fupport during our journey 
out and home. | 


Matonabbee’s canoe having been repaired, on the twen- 
tieth we left Clowey,. and proceeded Northward. That 
morning'a {mall gang of ftrangers joined us, who informed 
my guide, that Captain Keelfhies was within a day’s walk 
to the Southward. Keelfhies was the man by whom I had 
fent a letter to Prince of Wales’s Fort, from Catha- 
whachaga, in the beginning of July one thoufand feven 
hundred and feventy; but not long after that, having the 
misfortune to break my quadrant, I was obliged to return 
to tle Fort a fecond time; and though we faw many 
{mokes, and fpoke with feveral Indians on my return 
that year, yet he and I miffed each other on the barren 
ground, and I had not feen or heard: of him fince that time. 


As Matonabbee was defirous that I fhould receive my 
letters, and alfo the goods I had-written for, he difpatched. 
two ot his young men to bring them. We continued 
our journey to the Northward; and the next day 
faw feveral large fmokes at a great diftance to the Eaftward 
on the barren ground, which were fuppoled to: be made 
by fome parties of Indians bound to. Prince of Wales’s 
Fort with furrs. and other commodities for trade. 


On the twenty-fecond and twenty-third, we proceeded 
to the North, at the rate of fourteen or fifteen miles 
a~day; and in the evening of the latter, got clear of all 

tae 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


1or 


the woods, and lay on the barren ground. The fame  !771. 


evening the two young men who were fent for my let- 
ters, &c. returned, and told me that Keelfhies had pro- 
mifed to join us in a few days, and deliver the things to 
me with his own hand. 


The twenty-fourth proved bad and rainy weather, fo 
that we only walked about feven miles, when finding a 
few blafted ftumps of trees, we pitched our tents. It was 
well we did fo, for toward night we had exceflively bad 
weather, with loud thunder, ftrong lightning, and heavy 
rain, attended with a very hard gale of wind from the 
South Weft; toward the next morning, however, the 
wind veered round to the North Weft, and the weather 
became intenfely cold and frofty. We walked that day 
about eight miles to the Northward, when we were 
obliged to put up, being almoft benumbed with cold. 
There we found a few dry ftumps, as we had done the day 


before, which. ferved. us for fewel *.. 


The 


* T have obferved,. during my feveral journies in thofe parts, that all the way 
to the North of Seal River the edge of the wood is faced with old withered 
ftumps, and trees which have been blown down by. the wind. They are moftly 
ef the fort which is called here. Juniper, but.were feldom of any confiderable 
fize.. Thofe blafted trees are found in fome parts to extend to the diftance of 
twenty miles from the living woods, and detached patches of them are much 
farther oif ; which 1s a proof that.the cold has been increafing in thofe parts 
for fome ages. Indeed, fome of the older Northern Indians have affured me, 
that they. have heard their fathers and grandfathers fay, they remembered the 
greateft part of thofe places where the trees are now blafted and dead, in a 

flourifhing 


May. 


24th, ' 


nO 2, 


T7771. 


May 
26th. 
27th. 


eSch. 


A JOURNEY TO (THE 


The weather on the twenty-fixth was fo bad, with fhow 
and thick drifting fleet, that we did not move; but the 
next morning proving fine and pleafant, we dried our 
things, and walked about twelve miles to the Northward ; 
moft of the way on the ice of a fmall river which runs 
into Pefhew Lake*. We then faw a fmoke to the South- 
ward, which we judged to be made by Keelfhies, fo we 
put up for the night by the fide of the above-mentioned 
Lake, where I expected we fhould have waited for his 
arrival; but, to my great furprize, on the morrow we 
again fet forward, and walked twenty-two miles to the 
Northward on Pefhew Lake, and in the afternoon pitched 
our tents on an ifland, where, by my defire, the Indians 
made a large {moke, and propofed to ftay a day or two for 
Captain Keelfhies. | 


In the night, one of Matonabbee’s wives and another 
woman eloped: it was fuppofed they went off to the 
Eaftward, in order to meet their former hufbands, from 


flourifhing ftate ; and that they were remarkable for abounding with deer. It 
is a well-known fact, that many deer are fond of frequenting thofe plains 
where the juniper trees abound near barren grounds, particularly in fine wea- 
ther during the Winter; but in heavy gales of wind they either take fhelter in 
the thick woods, or go out on the open plains. The Indians, who never want 
a reafon for any thing, fay, that the deer quit the thin ftraggling woods during 
the high winds, becaufe the nodding of the trees, when at a confiderable dif- 
tance from each other, frightens them; but in the midft of a thick foreft, the 


‘conftant ruftling of the branches lulls them into fecurity, and renders them an 


eafy prey to a fkilful hunter. 


* Probably the fame with Partridge Lake in the Map. 
2 whom 








a eee 





To tace Luge od 























Reliorcnec 





A The Bottom of the Canoe. . 





B The hore part ; 





C The Frame, compleat } 





D A Set of Timbers bent and lashed in. their proper 
shape tor drying . 

BA Canoe compleat | 

F A Paddle . 

G A Spear to hill Dect with in the Water. 


H Lhe method of currying Ute Canoe in Summer 


London Pilished Find 1279 $. by Cadell §-Daries Siaul . 





Reference to the Skeleton . 
4 Lhe Stem, 
2 Jtern post . 
Jy liwe forked Sticks. supporting the Stam & Stern | 
& The Gunwalls , 
Sang Rod. placed betucen the hinbers & the Birchrind . 
The Timbers . 
The Kedsin 


SN & S 


Large Stones lo keep the Bottom steady, ull the Nidew 


are sewed ta - 


Needs seuty 6 782 Sa 





NOR THIE RN "OC EAI. 


whom they had been fometime before taken by force. 
This affair made more noife and buftle than I could 
have fuppofid; and Matonabbee feemed entirely difcon- 
certed, and quite inconfolable for the lofs of his wife. 
She was certainly by far the hand{omeft of all. his flock, 
of a moderate fize, and had a fair complexion ; fhe ap- 
parently poffeffed a mild temper, and very engaging man- 
ners. In fact, fhe feemed to have every good quality that 
could be expected in a Northern Indian woman, and that 
could render her an agreeable companion to an inhabit- 
ant of this part of the world. She had not, however, 
appeared happy in her late fituation; and chofe rather 
to be the fole wife of a fprightly young fellow of no 
note, (though very capable of maintaining her,) than to 
have the feventh or eighth fhare of the affection of the 
oreateft man in the country. I am forry to mention an 
incident which happened while we were building the 
canoes at Clowey, and which by no means does honour to 
Matonabbee: it is no lefs a crime than that of having ac- 
tually {tabbed the hufband of the above-mentioned girl in 
three places; and had it not been for timely affiftance, 
would certainly have murdered him, for no other reafon 
than becaufe the poor man had fpoken diftefpe@fully of 
him for having taken his wife away by. force. The cool 
deliberation with which Matonabbee committed this bloody 
action, convinced me it had been a long premeditated de- 
fen; for he no fooner heard of the man’s arrival, than 
he opened one of his wives’ bundles, and, with the greateft 

compolure, 


103 


177% 
May. 


104 


Wight 
———J 


Miay. 


A *)0'U RINEIN? 2° OTs 


compofure, took out a new long box-handled knife, went 
into the man’s tent, and, without any preface whatever, 
took him by the collar, and began to execute his horrid 
defion. The poor man anticipating his danger, fell on 
his face, and called for afliftance; but before any could 
be had he received three wounds in the back.  For- 
tunately for-him, they all happened on the fhoulder-blade, 
fo that ‘his life was fpared. When Matonabbee returned 
to his tent, after committing this horrid deed, he fat down 
as .compofedly as if nothing had happened, called: for 
water to wafh ‘his bloody. hands and knife, fmoked his 
pipe as ufual, feemed to be perfectly at eafe, and afked if 
I.did not think he had done right ? 


It has ever been the cuftom among thofe people for the 
men to wreftle for any woman to whom they are attached; 
and, of courfe, the ftrongeft party always carries of the 
prize. A weak man, unlefs he be a good hunter and well- 
beloved, is feldom permitted to keep a wife that a ftronger 
man thinks worth his notice: for atany time when the wives 
of thofe ftrong wreftlers are heavy-laden either with furrs 
or provifions, they make no fcruple of tearing any other 
man’s wife from his bofom, and making her bear a part 
of his luggage. This cuftom prevails throughout all their 
tribes, and caufes a great f{pirit of emulation among their 
youth, who are upon all occafions, from their childhood, 
trying their ftrength and {kill in wreftling. This enables 
them to protect their property, and particularly their wives, 

; 3 from 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


from the hands of thofe powerful ravifhers ; fome of whom 
make almoft a livelihood by taking what they pleafe from 
the weaker parties, without making them any return. 
Indeed, it is reprefented as an act of great generofity, if 
they condefcend to make an unequal exchange; as, in 
general, abufe and infult are the only return for the lofs 


which is fuftained. 


The way in which they tear the women and other pro- 
perty from one another, though it has-the appearance of the 
greateft brutality, can {carcely be called fighting. I never 
knew any of them receive the leaft hurt in thefe ren- 
contres ; the whole bufinefs confifts in hauling each other 
about by the hair-of the head; they are feldom known 
either to ftrike or kick-one another. ‘It is not’ uncomimon 
for.one of them to cut off his hair and to greafe his’ ears, 
immediately before the conteft begins. This, however, is 
done privately; and it is fometimes truly laughable, to 
fee-one of the parties ftrutting about with’an -air of great 
importance, and calling out, ‘‘ Where is‘he? Why does 
‘¢ he not come out ?’’ when the other will bolt out with 
a clean fhorned head and greafed ears, ‘rufh on his‘anta~ 
gonift, feize him by the hair, and though perhaps a 
much weaker man, foon drag him to the ground, while 
the ftronger is not able to lay hold on him. It is very 
frequent on thofe occafions for each party to have ‘f{pies, 
to watch the other’s motions, which puts them’more on 
a footing of equality. For want of ‘hair ‘to pull, they 

, feize 


roy 


1771. 
ee mm ane 


May. 


106 


7h. 
TViay. 


A>JOURNEY TO THE 


{eize each other about the wait, with legs wide extended, 
and try their ftrength, by endeavouring to vie who can 
firft throw the other down. 


On thefe wreftling occafions the ftanders-by never at- 
tempt to interfere in the conteit ; even one brother offers - 
not to affift another, unlefs it be with advice, which, as 
it is always delivered openly on the field during the con- 
teft, may, in faa, be faid to be equally favourable to 
both parties. It fometimes: happens that one of the 
wreftlers is fuperior in ftrength to the other; and if a 
woman be the caufe of the conteft, the weaker is fre- 
quently unwilling to yield, notwithftanding he is greatly 
overpowered. When this happens to be the cafe, the re- 
lations and friends, or other bye-flanders, will fometimes: 
join to perfuade the weaker combatant to give up the 
conteft, left, by continuing it, he fhould get bruifed 
and hurt, without the leaft probability of being able to 
protect what he is contending for. . I obferved that very 
few of thofe people were diffatisfied. with the wives which 
had fallen -to their lot, for whenever any confiderable 
number of them were in company,. fcarcely a day pafled. 
without fome overtures being made for contefts of this 
kind; and it was often very unpleafant to me,. to fee the 
object of the conteft fitting in penfive filence watching her 
fate, while her hufband and his rival were contending for 
the prize. -I have indeed not only felt pity for thofe poor 
wretched victims, but the utmoft indignation, when I 

have 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


have feen them won, perhaps, by a man whom they mor- 
tally hated. On thofe occafions their grief and reluctance 
to follow their new lord has been fo great, that the bufi- 
nefs has often ended in the greateft brutality; for, in the 
ftrugele, I have feen the poor girls ftripped quite naked, 
and carried by main -force to their new lodgings. At 
other times it was pleafant enough to fee a fine girl led off 
the field from a hufband fhe difliked, with a tear in one 


eye and a finger on the other: for cuftom, or delicacy. 


if you pleafe, has taught them to think it neceflary to 
whimper a little, let the change be ever fo much to their 
inclination. I have throughout this account given the 
women the appellation of girls, which is pretty applicable, 
as the objects of conteft are generally young, and without 
any family: few of the men chute to be at the trouble of 
maintaining other people’s children, except on particular 
occafions, which will be taken notice of hereafter. 


Some of the old men, who are famous on account of. 


their fuppofed fkill-in conjuration, have great influence in 


perfuading the rabble from committing thofe outrages 3 - 


but the humanity of thefe fages is feldom known to ex- 


tend beyond their own families. In defence of them they 


will exert their utmoft influence; but when their own 


relations are guilty of the fame crime, they feldom inter-° 
fere. This partial conduc creates fome fecret, and fe-. 


veral open enemies; but the generality of their neigh- 
bours are deterred, through fear or fuperftition, fron, exe- 
; | eae 9 cutins. 


107 


1771. 
eam ane 


108. 


TT 
Ca aay 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


cuting their revenge, and even. from talking difrefpedt- 
fully of them, unlefs.it be behind their backs ; which.is a: 
vice of which almoft every Indian in this country, without 
cxgHR HOY is ‘Su 


Notwithftanding the Northern Indians-are fo covetous, 
and pay fo little regard to private property as to take 
every advantage of bodily ftrength to rob their neighbours, 
not only. of. their goods, but-of their wives, yet they-are; 
in other refpects, the mildeft tribe, or nation, that is- to 
be found on the borders of Hudfon’s Bay: for- let their 
affronts or. lofles be ever fo great, they never will feek any 
other revenge than that of wreftling. As for murder, 
which is. fo common among all the tribes.of Southern In- 
dians, it is feldom heard of among them. A murderer is 
fhunned and. detefted by all the tribe, and is obliged to. 
wander up and down, forlorn and foralea even by his. 
own relations and former friends. In that refpeét a mur- 
derer may truly be compared to Cain, after he had killed 
his brother Abel. The cool reception he meets with by 
all who know him, occafions him to grow. melancholy, 
and he never leaves any place but the whole company fay, 
<t.There goes the murderer!’ The women, it is true, fome- 
times receive an,unlucky blow from their hufbands for 
mifbehaviour, which occafions their death; but this is 
thought nothing of: and for one man or woman to kill 
another out of revenge, or through jealoufy, or on any. 
other account, is fo extraordinary, that very few are now 

2 exifting 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


exifting who have been guilty of it. At the prefent mo- 
ment I know: not’one, befide Matonabbee, who ever made 
an attempt of that nature ; and he is, in every other refpedt, 
a man of fuch univerfal good fenfe, and, as an Indian, 
of fuch great humanity, that I am at a lofs how to account 
for his. having been guilty of fuch a crime, unlefs it be 
by his having lived among the Southern Indians fo long, as 
to become tainted with their blood-thirfty, revengeful, and 
vindictive difpofition. 


Early in the morning of the twenty-ninth, Captain 
Keelfhies joined us. He delivered: to me a packet of let- 
ters, and a two-quart keg of French brandy; but affured 
me,. that the powder, fhot, tobacco, knives, &c. which 
he received at the Fort for me, were all expended. He 
endeavoured to make fome apology for this, by faying, 
that fome of: his relations died in the Winter, and that he 
had, according to their cuftom, thrown all his own things 
away ; after which he was obliged to have recourfe to my 
ammunition: and other goods, to fupport himfelf and a: 
numerous family. The very affeCting manner in which 
he related this ftory, often crying like a child, was a great 
proof of his extreme forrow, which he withed to. per- 
fuade me arofe from the recolle@ion of -his having em~ 
bezzled fo much of my: property ; but £ was of a differ- 
ent opinion, and attributed his grief to arife from the 
remembrance of his deceafed relations. However,, as a: 
{mall recompence for my lofs, he prefented me with four- 

ready~ 


10g: 


leh 
Lgeonen -tmeranad) 


May. 


2 goth a 


Ve, 


aed. 
May. 


A JOURN ER! TO (Ree 


ready-drefled moofe-fkins, which was, he faid, the only 
retribution he could then make. The moofe-fkins, though 
not the twentieth part of the value of the goods which 
he had embezzled, were in reality more acceptable to _ 
me, than the ammunition and the other articles would 
have been, on account of their great ufe as fhoe-leather, 
which at that time was a very {carce article with us, 
whereas we had plenty of powder and fhot. 


On the fame day that Keelfhies joined us, an Indian 
man, who had been fome timé in our company, infifted on 
taking one of Matonabbee’s wives from him by force, un- 
lefs he complied with his demands, which were, that 
Matonabbee fhould give him a certain quantity of ammu- 
nition, fome pieces of iron-work, a kettle, and feveral 
other articles; every one of which, Matonabbee was obliged 
to deliver, or lofe the woman; for the other man far ex-° 
celled him in ftrength. Matonabbee was more exafperated 
on this occafion, as the fame man had fold him the woman 
no longer ago than the nineteenth of the preceding April. 
Having expended all the goods he then poffleffed, however, 
he was determined to make another bargain for her; and as 
fhe was what may be called a valuable woman in their 
eftimation ; that is, one who was not only tolerably per- 
fonable, but reckoned very fkilful in manufacturing the 
different kinds of leather, fkins, and furrs, and at the 
fame time very clever in the performance of every other 
domeftic duty required of the fex in this part of the 


world ; 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


world; Matonabbee was more unwilling to part with her, 
efpecially as he had fo lately fuffered a lofs of the fame 
kind. 


This difpute, which was after fome hours decided by 
words and prefents, had like to have proved fatal to my 
expedition ; for Matonabbee, who at that time thought 
himfelf as great a man as then lived, took this affront fo 
much to heart, efpecially as it was offered in my prefence, 


that he almoft determined not to proceed any ‘farther to- 


ward the Copper-mine River, and was on the point of 
friking off to the Weftward, with an intent to join the 
Athapufco Indians, and continue with them: he being 
perfectly well acquainted with all their leaders, and moft 
of the principal Indians of that country, from whom, 
during a former refidence among them of feveral years, he 
faid he had met with more civility than he ever did from. 
his own countrymen. As Matonabbee feemed refolutely 
bent on his defign, I had every reafon to think that my 
third expedition would prove equally unfuccefsful with. 
the two former. I was not, however, under the leaft ap- 


prehenfion for my own. fafety, as he promifed to take me. 


with him, and procure me a paffage to Prince of Wales’s. 


Fort, with fome of the Athapufcow Indians, who at that. 


time annually vifited the Factory in the way of trade. 


After waiting till I thought Matonabbee’s paflion had a. 


little abated, I ufed every argument of which I was mafter 
in favour of his proceeding on the journey; afluring him: 
| not. 


Irs 


1771. 
(eee eames 


May. 


Y2i2 


U77t. 
en aed 
May. 


aoth. 


3cth, 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


not only of the future efteem of the prefent Governor of 
Prince of Wales’s Fort, but alfo of that of all his fucceffors 
as long as he lived ; and that even the Hudfon’s Bay Com- 
pany themfelves would be ready to acknowledge his affi- 
duity and perfeverance, in conducting a bufinefs which had 
fo much the appearance of proving advantageous to them. 
After fome converfation of this kind, and a good deal of 
intreaty, he at length confented to proceed, and promifed 
to make all poffible hafte. Though it was then late in the 
afternoon, he gave orders for moving, .and accordingly we 
walked about feven miles that. night, and put up on ano- 
ther ifland in Pefhew Lake. The preceding afternoon 
the Indians had killed a few deer; but. our number was 
then fo great, that eight or ten deer would fearcely afford 
us all a tafte. Thefe deer were the firft we had:feen fince 
our leaving the neighbourhood | of Thelewey-aza-yeth ; fo 
that we had lived all the time on the dried meat which 
had been prepared before we left that place in April. 


The thirtieth proved bad, rainy weather; we walked, 
however, about ten miles to the Northward, when we 
arrived on the North fide of Pefhew Lake, and put up. 
Here Matonabbee immediately began to make every ne- 
ceflary arrangement for facilitating the execution of our 
defign ; and as he had promifed to make all poffible hafte, 
he thought it expedient to leave moft of his wives and all 
his childrcn in the care of forme Indians, then in our 
company, who had his orders to proceed to the North- 

ward 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


ward at their leifure; and who, at a particular place ap- 
pointed by him, were to wait our return from the Copper- 
mine River. Having formed this refolution, Matonabbee 
{elected two of his young wives who had no children, to 
accompany us; and in order to make their loads as light 
as poffible, it was agreed that we fhould not take more 
ammunition with us than was really neceffary for our fup- 
port, till we might expec again to join thofe Indians and 
the women and children. The fame meafures were alfo 
adopted by all the other Indians of my party; particu- 
larly thofe who had a plurality of wives, and a number of 


children. 


As thefe matters took fome time to adjuft, it was near - 


nine o’clock in the evening of the thirty-firft before we 
could fet out; and then it was with much difficulty 
that Matonabbee could perfuade his other wives from fol- 
lowing him, with their children and all their lumber ; for 
fuch was their unwillingnefs to be left behind, that he 
was obliged to ufe his authority before they would confent, 
confequently they parted in anger; and we no fooner began 
our march, than they fet up a moft woeful cry, and con- 
tinued to yell moft piteoufly as long as we were within 
hearing. ‘This mournful fcene had fo little effe@ on my 
party, that they walked away laughing, and as merry as 
ever. The tew who expreffed any regret at their de- 


parture from thofe whom they were to leave behind, con- ~ 


Q. fined 


113 


177%. 
coesemern pene sad 


May. 


gift. 


114 


1771. 
een aneee 


May. 


A J‘otutREN EP Y® Fr/0l Pree 


fined their regard wholly to their children, particularly to 
the youngeft, fcarcely ever mentioning their mother. 


Though it was fo late when we left the women, we 
walked about ten miles that night before we ftopped. In 
our way we faw many deer; feveral of which the Indians - 
killed. To talk of travelling and killing deer in the 
middle of the night, may at firft view have the appearance 
of romance; but our wonder will fpeedily abate, when it 
is confidered that we were then to the Northward of 64° of 
North latitude, and that, in confequence of it, though the 
Sun did not remain the whole night above the horizon, yet 
the time it remained below it was fo fhort, and its de- 
preflion even at midnight fo {mall at this feafon of the year, 
that the light, in clear weather, was quite fufficient for the 
purpofe both of walking, and hunting any kind of game. 


It fhould have been obferved, that during our ftay at 
Clowey a great number of Indians entered into a com- 
bination with thofe of my party to accompany us to the - 
Copper-mine River; and with no other intent than to 
murder the Ef{quimaux, who are underftood by the Copper 
Indians to frequent that river in confiderable numbers. 
This {cheme, notwithftanding the trouble and fatigue, 


as well as danger, with which it muft be obvioufly. at- 


tended, was neverthelefs fo univerfally approved by thofe 
people, that for fome time almoft every man who. joined 
us 


N-OPR Tih ER NYO CoB A N. 


us propofed to be of the party. Accordingly, each vo- 
lunteer, as well as thofe who were properly of my party, 
prepared a target, or fhield, before we left the woods of 
Clowey. Thole targets were compofed of thin boards, 
about three quarters of an inch thick, two feet broad, and 
three feet long ; and were intended to ward off the arrows 
of the Efquimaux. Notwithftanding thefe preparations, 
when we came to leave the women and children, as has 
been already mentioned, only fixty volunteers would go with 
us; the reft, who were nearly as many more, though they 
had all prepared targets, reflecting that they had a great 
diftance to walk, and that no advantage could be expected 
from the expedition, very prudently begged to be excufed, 
faying, that they could not be {pared for fo long a time 
from the maintenance of their wives and families; and 
particularly, as they did not fee any then in our company, 
who feemed willing to encumber themfelves with fuch a 
charge. This feemed to bea mere evafion, for I am clearly 
of opinion that poverty on one fide, and avarice.on the other, 
were the only impediments to their Joining our party; had 
they pofleffed as many European goods to fquander away 
among their countrymen as Matonabbee and thofe of my 
party did, in all probability many might have been found 


who would have been glad to have accompanied us. 


When I was acquainted with the intentions of my 
companions, and faw the warlike preparations that were 
carrying on, I endeavoured as much as poflible to perfuade 


Q 2 them 


Ss 


i771. 
May. 


116 


Te 7 i. 
May. 


June 
vit 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


them from putting their inhuman defign into execution ; 
but fo far were my intreaties from having the wifhed-for 
effect, that it was concluded I was actuated by cowardice; 
and they told me, with great marks of derifion, that I 
was afraid of the Efquimaux. As I knew my per- 
fonal fafety depended in a great meafure on the favourable 
opinion they entertained of me in this refpect, I was obliged 
to change my tone, and replied, that I did not care if they 
rendered the name and race of the Efquimaux extind ; 
adding at the fame time, that though I was no enemy 
to the Efquimaux, and did not fee the neceflity of attack~- 
ing them without caufe, yet if I fhould find it neceflary to 
do it, for the protection of any one of my company, my 
own fafety out of the queftion, fo far from being afraid of 
a poor defencelefs Efquimaux, whom I defpifed more than 


feared, nothing fhould be wanting on my part to proteé 


all who were with me. This declaration was received 
with great fatisfaGion; and I never afterwards ventured 
to interfere with any of their war-plans. Indeed, when I 
came to confider ferioufly, I faw evidently that it was the 
higheft folly for an individual like me, and in my fitua- 
tion, to attempt to turn the current of a national preju- 
dice which had fubfifted between thofe two nations from 
the earlieft periods, or at leaft as long as they had been 
acquainted with the exiftence of each other. 


Having got rid of all the women, children, dogs, heavy 
baggage, and other incumbrancés, on the firft of June we 


purfued 


NORM@WH EIR N OCAREIAN 


purfued our journey to the Northward with great {peed ; but 
the weather was in general fo precarious, and the fnow, 
fleet, and rain fo frequent, that notwithftanding we em- 
braced every opportunity which offered, it was the fix- 
teenth of June before we arrived in the latitude of 67° 30’, 
where Matonabbee had propofed that the women and 
children fhould wait our return from the Copper-mine 
River. | 


In our way hither we crofled feveral lakes on the ice; 
of which Thoy-noy-kyed Lake and Thoy-coy-lyned Lake 
were the principal. We alfo croffed a few inconfiderable 
creeks and rivers, which were only ufeful as they furnifhed 


a {mall fupply of fifh to the natives. ‘The weather, as I 


have before obferved, was in general difagreeable, with a | 


oreat deal of rain and fnow. To make up for that in- 
convenience, however, the deer were fo plentiful, that the 
Indians killed not only a fufficient quantity for our daily 
fupport, but frequently great numbers merely for the fat, 
marrow, and tongues. ‘To induce them to defift from 
this practice, I often interefted myfelf, and endeavoured, 
as much as poffible, to convince them in the cleareft 
terms of which I was mafter, of the great impropriety of 
fuch wafte; particularly at a time of the year when their 
fkins could not be of any ufe for clothing, and when the 
anxiety to proceed on our journey would not permit us to 
ftay long enough in one place to eat up half the fpoils of 


their hunting. As national cuftoms, however, are not ealily 
5] over- 


117 
177%. 


June. 


16th, 


x18 
Tage 


June. 


soth, 


22d. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


overcome, my remonftrances proved inefiectual; and I 


was always anfwered, that it was certainly right to kill 


plenty, and live on the beft, when and where it was to 
be got, for that it would be impoffible to do it where 
every thing was fcarce: and they infifted on it, that kill- 
ing plenty of deer and other game in one part of the 
country, could never make them fcarcer in another. In- 
deed, they were fo accuftomed to kill every thing that 
came within their reach, that few of them could pafs by 
a {mall bird’s neft, without flaying the young ones, or de- 
{troying the eggs. 


From the feventeenth to the twentieth, we walked be- 
tween feventy and eighty miles to the North Weft and 
North North Weft; the greater part of the way by Cogead 
Lake; but the Lake being then frozen, we croffed all the 
creeks and bays of it on the ice. 


On the twenty-frft we had bad rainy weather, with fo 
thick a fog that we could not fee our way: about ten 
o'clock at night, however, it became fine and clear, and 
the Sun fhone very bright; indeed it did not fet all that 
night, which was a convincing proof, without any obferva- _ 
tion, that we were then-confiderably to the North of the 
Arctic Polar Circle. | 


As foon as the fine weather began, we fet out and walked 
about feven or eight miles to the Northward, when we 
came 


N OFR Fie HERR No” OFG SE ARN. 


came to a branch of Conge-ca-tha-wha-chaga River ; on 
the North fide of which we found feveral Copper Indians, 
who were afiermbled, according to annual cuftom, to kill 
deer as they crofs the river in their little canoes. 


_ The ice being now broken up, we were, for the firft 
time this Summer, obliged to make ufe of our canoes to 
ferry acrofs the river ; Sich would have proved very te- 
dious, had it not been for the kindnefs of the Cop- 
per Indians, who fent all their canoes to our afliftance. 
Though our number was not much lefs than one hundred 
and fifty, we had only three canoes, and thofe being of 
the common fize, could only carry two perfons each, 
without baggage. It is true, when water is {mooth, 
and a raft of three or four of thefe canoes is well fecured 
by poles lafhed acrofs them, they will carry a much 
greater weight in proportion, and be much fafer, as there 
is {earcely a poffibility of their overfetting ; and this is the 
general mode adopted by the people of this country in.croff- 
ing rivers when they have more than one canoe with them. 


Having arrived on the North fide of this river, we 
found that Matonabbee, and feveral others in our com- 
pany, were perfonally acquainted with moft of the Copper 
Indians whom we found there. The latter feemed highly 
pleafed at the interview with our party, and endeavoured, 
by every means in their power,. to convince our company 
of their readinefs. to ferve us to.the utmoft; fo that by the 


time. 


LIQ 


177%. 
ean ane 


June. 


120 


7 jt 
runs 


June. 


A '"JFQ7U 1RUN | ESY et ONS BRED 


time we had Bot our tents pitched, the ftrangers had pro- 
vided a large quantity of dried meat and fat, by way of a 
feait, to which they invited moft of the principal Indians 
who accompanied me, as well as Matonabbee and myéfelf, 


who were prefented with fome of the very beft. 


It is natural to fuppofe, that immediately after our ar- 
rival the Copper Indians would be made acquainted with 
the nature and intention of our journey. ‘This was no fooner 
done than they: expreffed their entire approbation, and 


many ‘of them feemed willing and defirous of giving every 


afliftance ; particularly by lending us feveral canoes, which 
they affured us would be very ufeful in the remaining part 
of our journey, and contribute both to our eafe and dif- 
patch. It muft be obferved, that thefe canoes were not 
entirely entrufted to my crew, but carried by the owners 
themfelves who accompanied us; as it would have been 
very uncertain where to have found them at our return from 


the Copper River. 


Agreeably to my inftructions, I {moked my calumet, of 
peace with the principal of the Copper Indians, wha 
feemed highly pleafed on the occafion; and, from a 
converfation held on the fubje& of my journey, I found 
they were delighted with the hopes of having an Euro- 
pean fettlement in their neighbourhood, and feemed to 
have no idea that any impediment could bee fuch a 
{cheme from being carried into execution.. Climates and 

: f{eafons 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


feafons had no weight with them; nor could they fee 
where the difficulty lay in getting to them; for though 
they acknowledged that they had never feen the fea at the 
mouth of the Copper River clear of ice, yet they could 
fee nothing that fhould hinder a fhip from approaching it; 
and they innocently enough obferved, that the water was 
always fo {mooth between the ice and fhore, that even {mall 
boats might get there with great eafe and fafety. Howa 
fhip was to get between the ice and the fhore, never once 
occurred to them. 


Whether it was from real motives of hofpitality, or- 
from the great advantages which they expected to reap’ 


by my difcoveries, I know not; but I muft confels that 
their civility far exceeded what I could expect from fo un- 
civilized a tribe, and I was exceedingly forry that I had 
nothing of value to offer them. However, fuch articles 
as I had, I diftributed among them, and they were thank- 
fully received by them. Though they have fome European 
commodities among them, which they purchafe from 
the Northern Indians, the fame articles from the hands 
of an Englifhman were more prized. As I was the firft 
whom they had ever feen, and in all probability might be 
the lait, it was curious to fee how they flocked about 
me, and exprefied as much defire to examine me from top 
to toe, as an Huropean Naturalift would a non-defcript ani- 
mal. They, however, found and pronounced me to be 
a. perfect human being, except in the colour of my hair 

R and 


121 


1771. 
ann aemee 


June. 


122 


177i. 
oer toner) 


- June, 


23d. 


A JOURNEY! BO THe 


and eyes: the former, they faid, was like the ftained hair 
of a buffaloe’s tail, and the latter, being light, were 
like thofe of a gull. The whitenefs of my fkin alfo 
was, in their opinion, no ornament, as they faid it re- 
fembled meat which had been fodden in water till all 
the blood was extra@ed. On the whole, I was viewed as 
fo great a curiofity in this part of the world, that during 
my ftay there, whenever I combed my head, fome or other 
of them never failed to afk for the hairs that came off, 
which they carefully wrapped up, faying, ‘* When I fee 


“< you again, you fhall again fee your hair.” 


The day after our arrival at Congecathawhachaga, Ma- 
tonabbee difpatched his brother, and feveral Copper In- 
dians, to Copper-mine River, with orders to acquaint. 
any Indians they might meet, with the reafon of my vifit-. 
ing thofe parts, and alfo when they might probably ex- 
pec& us at that river. By the bearers of this meflage I 
fent a prefent of tobacco and fome other things, to in- 
duce any ftrangers they met to be ready to give us aflift- 
ance, either by advice, or in any other way which might 
be required. 


As Matonabbee and the other Indians thought it ad- 
vifable to leave all the women at this place, and pro- 
ceed to the Copper-mine River without them, it was’ 
thought neceflary to continue here a few days, to kill as 
many deer as would be fufficient for their fupport during 

our 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


our abfence. And notwithftanding deer were fo plenti- 
ful, yet our numbers were fo large, and our daily con- 
fumption was fo great, that feveral days elapfed before the 
men could provide the women with a fufficient quantity ; 
and then they had no other way of preferving it, than by 
cutting it in thin flices and drying it in the Sun. Meat, 
when thus prepared, is not only very portable, but palat- 
able; as all the blood and juices are {till remaining in the 
meat, it is very nourifhing and wholefome food; and may, 
with care, be kept a whole year without the leaft danger 
of fpoiling. It is neceflary, however, to air it frequently 
during the warm weather, otherwife it is liable to grow 
mouldy: but as.foon as the chill air of the fall begins, it 
requires no farther trouble till next Summer. 


We had not been many days at Congecathawhachaga 
before I had reafon to be greatly concerned at the beha- 
viour of feveral of my crew to the Copper Indians. They 
not only took many of their young women, furrs, and ready- 
drefled fkins for clothing, but alfo feveral of their bows and 
arrows, which were the only implements they had to pro- 
cure food and raiment, for the future fupport of themfelves, 
their wives, and families. It may probably be thought, 
that as thefe weapons are of fo fimple a form, and fo 
eafily conftructed, they might foon be replaced, without 
any other trouble or expence than a little labour; but 
this fuppofition can only hold good in places where proper 
materials are eafily procured, which was not the cafe here: 

R 2 if 


June. 


wa 


177%. 
(saxon ercunessd 


124 


1771. 
aeeypaes_! 


June. 


A JOURNEY TO’ Wee 


if it had, they would not have been an obje& of plunder. 
In the midft of a foreft of trees, the wood that would 
make a Northern Indian a bow and a few arrows, or in- 
deed a bow and arrows ready made, are not of much va~ 
lue; no more than the man’s trouble that makes them: 
but carry that bow and arrows feveral hundred miles from 
any woods and place where thofe are the only weapons in 
ufe, their intrinfic value will be found to increafe, in the 
fame proportion as the materials which are made are lefs 
attainable *. 


To do Matonabbee juftice on this occafion, I muft fay 
that he endeavoured as much as poflible to perfuade his 
countrymen from taking either furrs, clothing, or bows, 
from the Copper Indians, without making them fome 
fatisfa@tory return; but if he did not encourage, neither 
did he endeavour to hinder them from taking as many 
women as they pleafed. Indeed, the Copper Indian women 
feem to be muchefteemed by our Northern traders; for what 
reafon J] know not, as they are in reality the fame people 
in every refpe&t, and their language differs not fo much as 
the diale@&s of fome of the neareft counties in England do 
from each other. | 


It is not furprifing that a plurality of wives is cuf- 
tomary among thefe people, as it is fo well adapted to 


* See Poftlethwayt on the article of Labour. 
their 


NO R Troe RN O CoA N. 


their fituation and manner of life. In my opinion no 
race of people under the Sun have a greater occafion for 
fuch an indulgence. Their annual haunts, in queft of 
furrs, is fo remote from any European fettlement, as to 
render them the greateft travellers in the known world ; 
and as they have neither horfe nor water carriage, every 
good hunter is under the neceffity of having feveral perfons 
to affift in carrying his furrs to the Company’s Fort, as 
well as carrying back the European goods which he receives 


in exchange for them. No perfons in this country are fo. 
proper for this work as the women, becaufe they are 


inured to carry and haul heavy loads from their childhood, 
and to do all manner of drudgery ; fo that thofe men who 
are capable of providing for three, four, five, fix, or more 
women, generally find them humble and faithful fervants, 
affeGionate wives, and fond and indulgent mothers to their 
children. ‘Though cuftom makes this way of life fit appa- 
rently eafy on the generality of the women, and though, in 
general, the whole of their wants feem to be comprized in 
food and clothing only, yet nature at times gets the better 
of cuftom, and the fpirit of jealoufy makes its appearance 
among them: however, as the hufband is always arbi- 
trator, he foon fettles the bufinefs, though perhaps not 
always to the entire fatisfaction of the parties. 


Much does it redound to the honour of the Northern 
Indian women when I afhrm, that they are the mildeft 
and moft virtuous females I have feen in any part of North 

| America ; 


ras 


H77 1. 
Laan tarsal 
June. 


126 


ig. 
eee mn ames 


June. 


A JOURNEY Tie ewe 


America; though fome think this is more owing to habit, 
cuftom, and the fear of their hufbands, than from real 
inclination. It is undoubtedly well known that none can 
manage a Northern Indian woman fo well as a Northern 
Indian man; and when any of them have been permitted 
to remain at the Fort, they have, for the fake of gain, 
been eafily prevailed on to deviate from that charaéter ; 
and a few have, by degrees, become as abandoned as the 
Southern Indians, who are remarkable throughout all their 
tribes for being the moft debauched wretches under the 
Sun. So far from laying any reftraint on their fenfual ap- 
petites, as long as youth and inclination laft, they give 
themfelves up to all manner of even inceftuous debauchery ; 
and that in fo beaftly a manner when they are intoxicated, 
a ftate to which they are peculiarly addi@ed, that the brute 
creation are not lefs regardlefs of decency. I know that 
fome few Europeans, who have had little opportunity of 
feeing them, and of enquiring into their manners, have 
been very lavifh in their praife: but every one who has 
had much intercourfe with them, and penetration and in- 
duftry enough to ftudy their difpofitions, will agree, that 
no accomplifhments whatever in a man, is fufficient to con- 
ciliate ‘the affections,.or preferve the chaftity of a Southern 


Indian woman “*, 


The 


* Notwithftanding this is the general character of the Southern Indian 
women, as they are called on the coafts of Hudfon’s Bay, and who are the 
fame tribe with the Canadian Indians, I am happy to have it in my power to 
infert a few lines to the memory of one of them, whom I knew from her in- 

- fancy, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


The Northern Indian women are in general fo far from 
being like thofe I have above defcribed, that it is very 
uncom~ 





fancy, and who, I can truly affirm, was directly the reverfe of the picture I 
have drawn. 


Mary, the daughter of Moszs Norron, many years Chief at Prince of 
Wales’s Fort, in Hudfon’s Bay, though born and brought up in a country 
of all others the leaft favourable to virtue and virtuous principles, pofleffed 
them, and every other good and amiable quality, in a moft eminent degree. 


Without the affiftance of religion, and with no education but what fhe re- 
ceived among the diffolute natives of her country, fhe would have fhone witlz 
fuperior luftre in any other country: for, if an engaging perfon, gentle man- 
ners, an eafy freedom, arifing from a confcioufnefs of innocence, an amiable 
modefty, and an unrivalled delicacy of fentiment, are graces and virtues which 
render a woman lovely, none ever had greater pretenfions to general efteem 
and regard; while her benevolence, humanity, and fcrupulous adherence to 
truth and honefty, would have done honour to: the moft enlightened and de- 
vout Chriftian. 


Dutiful, obedient, and affectionate to her parents; fteady and faithful to her 
friends; grateful and humble to her benefactors; eafily forgiving and forget- 
ting injuries; careful not to offend any, and courteous and kind to all; fhe 
was, neverthelefs, fuffered to perifh by the rigours of cold and hunger, amidi 
her own relations, at a time when the eriping hand of famine was by no means 
feverely felt by any other member of their company; and it may truly be faid 
that fhe fella martyr to the principles of virtue. This happened in the Winter 
of the year 1782, after the French had deftroyed Prince of Wales’s Fort; at 
which time fhe was in the twenty-fecond year of her age. 


Human nature fhudders at the bare recital of fuch brutality, and reafon 
fhrinks from the tafk of accounting for the decrees of Providence on fuch oc- 
cafions as this: but they are the ftronge(ft affurances of a future ftate, fo in- 
finitely fuperior to the prefent, that the enjoyment of every pleafure in this 
world by the moft worthlefs and abandoned wretch, or the moft innocent and 

virtuous 


127 


1771. 
ame) 


June. 


128 


vig 1 


June. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


uncommon to hear of their ever being guilty of inconti- 


nency, not even thofe who are confined to the fixth or 
even eighth part of a man. 


It is true, that were I to form my opinion of thofe 
women from the behaviour of fuch as I have been more 
particularly acquainted with, I fhould have little reafon 
to fay much in their favour; but impartiality will not 





virtuous woman perifhing by the moft excruciating of all Ceaths, are matters 
equally indifferent. But, 


Peace to the afhes, and the virtuous mind, 

OF her who lived in peace with all mankind 5 
Learn’d from the heart, unknowing of difguife, 
Truth in her thoughts, and candour in her eyes ; 
Stranger alike to envy and to pride, 

Good fenfe her light, and Nature all her guide ; 
But now removed from all! the ills of life, 


Here refts the pleafing friend and faithful wife. WaAuLLerr. 


Her father was, undoubtedly, very blamable for bringing her up in the 
tender manner which he did, rendering her by that means not only incapable 
of bearing the fatigues and hardfhips which the reft of her countrywomen 
think little of, but of providing for herfelf. ‘This is, indeed, too frequent 
a practice among Europeans in that country, who bring up their children 
in fo indulgent a manner, that when they retire, and leave their offspring 
behind, they find themfelves fo helplefs, as to be unable to provide for the 
few wants to which they are fubject. The late Mr. Ferdinand Jacobs, many 
years Chief at York Fort, was the only perfon whom I ever knew that acted 
in a different manner; though no man could poffibly be fonder of his children 
in other refpects, yet as there were fome that he could not bring to England, 
he had them brought up entirely among the natives; fo that when he left the 


country, they fcarcely ever felt the lofs, though they regretted the abfence of 
a fond and indulgent parent. 


permit 
8 


NOR THERN FO CEA N. 


permit me to make a few of the worlt characters a ftandard 
for the general conduc of all of them. Indeed it is but 
reafonable to think that travellers and interlopers will be 
always ferved with the worft commodities, though perhaps 


they pay the beft price for what they have. 


It may appear ftrange, that while I am extolling the 
chaftity of the Northern Indian women, I fhould ac- 
knowledge that it is a very common cuftom among the 

xen of this country to exchange a night’s lodging with each 
other’s wives. But this is ‘fe far from being confidered as 
an act which is criminal, that itis efteemed by them as one 
of the ftrongeft ties of friendfhip between two families ; 
and in cafe of the death of either man, the other coniiders 
himfelf bound to fupport the children of the deceafed. 
Thofe people are fo far from viewing this engagement as a 
mere ceremony, like moft of our Chriftian’ eh ‘Pikers and 
god-mothers, who, notwithftanding their vows are made 
in the moft folemn manner, and in the prefence of both 
God and man, fearcely ever afterward remember what they 
have promifed, that there is not an inftance of a Northern 
Indian having once neglected the duty which he is fup- 
pofed to have taken upon himfelf to perform. The 
Southern Indians, -with all their bad qualities, are remark~ 
ably humane and charitable to the widows and children of 
departed friends; and as their fituation and manner of life 
enable them to do more acts of charity with lefs trouble 
5 than 


129 
7. 


June. 


£30 


177%. 


June. 


A JOURNEY Tho THe 


than falls to the lot of a Northern Indian, few widows or: 
orphans are ever unprovided for among them. 


Though the Northern Indian men make no fcruple of 
having two or three fifters for wives at one time, yet they- 
are very particular in obferving a proper diftance in the: 
confanguinity of thofe they admit to the above-mentioned 
intercourfe with their wives.. ‘The Southern Indians are 
lefs fcrupulous on thofe occafions ; among them it is not 
at all uncommon for one brother to make free with ano- 
ther brother’s wife or daughter *; but this is held in 
abhorrence by the Northern Indians.. | 


* Moft of the Southern Indians, as well the Athapufcow and Neheaway- 
tribes, are entirely without fcruple in this refpect. It is notorioufly known,. 
that many of them cohabit occafionally with their own mothers,. and frequently 
efpoufe their fifters and daughters. I have known feveral of them who, after: 
having lived in that ftate for fome time with their daughters, have given them: 
to their fons, and all parties been perfectly reconciled to it. 


In fa&t, notwithftanding the feverity of the climate, the licentioufnefs of 
the inhabitants cannot be exceeded by any of the Eaftern nations, whofe luxu- 
rious manner of life, and genial clime, feem more adapted to excite extraor= 
dinary paffions, than the fevere cold of the frigid Zone. 


It is true, that few of thofe who live under the immediate protection of the: 
Englifh ever take either their fifters or daughters for wives,.which is probably 
owing to the fear of incurring their difpleafure; but it is well known that 
acts of inceft too often take place among them, though perhaps not fo fre= 
quently as among the foreign Indians, 


By 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


By the time the Indians had killed as many deer as they 
thought would be fufficient for the fupport of the women 


during our abfence, it was the firft of July; and during ’ 


this time I had two good obfervations, both by meridional! 
and double altitudes ; the mean of which determined the 
latitude of Congecathawhachaga to be 68° 46° North; 
and its longitude, by account, was 24° 2° Weft from 
Prince of Wales’s Fort, or 118° 15° Weft of the meridian 
of London. 


On the fecond, the weather proved very bad, with much 
{now and fleet; about nine o'clock at night, however, it 
grew more moderate, and fomewhat clearer, fo that we fet 
out, and walked about ten miles to the North by Weft, 
when we lay down to take a little fleep. At our it. 
parture from Congecathawhachaga, feveral Indians who 
had entered the war-lift, rather chofe to ftay behind with 
the women; but their lofs was amply fupplied by Copper 
Indians, who accompanied us in the double capacity of 
guides and warriors. 


On the third the weather was equally bad with that of 
the preceding day; we made fhift, however, to walk ten 
or eleven miles in the fame direction we had done the day 
before, and at laft were obliged to put up, not being able 
to fee our way for {now and thick drift. By putting up, no 


more is to be underftood than that we got to leeward of a 
S 2 oreat 


131 


Ghae 
ST mana | 


July, 
i{t, 


2d, 


3d, 


Ath. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


ereat ftone, or into the crevices of the rocks, where we 
regaled ourfelves with fuch. provilions as we had brought 
with us, {moked our pipes, or went to. fleep,. till. the 
weather permitted us to proceed on our. journey.. 


On the fourth, we had: rather better weather, though 
conftant light fnow, which made it very difagreeable 
under foot. We neverthelefs walked twenty-feven miles 
to the North Weft, fourteen of which were on what the. 
Indians call the Stony Mountains; and furely no part of the 
world better deferves that name. On.our firft approaching 
thefe mountains, they appeared to be a confufed heap of 
ftones, utteily inacceffible to the foot of man: but having. 
fome Copper Indians with us who knew the beft road,. 
we made a tolerable fhift to get on, though not with— 
out being obliged frequently to crawl en. our hands 
and knees. Notwithftanding the intricacy of the road, 
there is a very vifible path the whole way acrofs thefe. 
mountains, even in the moft. dithcult parts: and alfo: 
on the fmooth rocks, and thofe parts.which-are capable. 
of receiving an impreffion, the path is as plain and well-. 
beaten, as any bye foot-path in England. By the fide of 
this path there are, in different parts, feveral large, flat,. 
or table ftones, which are covered. with many thoufands: 
of {mall pebbles. Thefe the Copper Indians fay have been: 
gradually increafed by paflengers going to and from. the 
mines ; and on its being obferved to us that it was the uni-. 

verfal 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


verfal cuftom for every one to add a {tone to the heap, 
each of us took up a {mall ftone in order to increafe the 


number, for good luck. 


Juift as we arrived at the foot of the Stony Mountains. 
three of the Indians turned back; faying, that from every: 


appearance, the remainder of the journey feemed likely to 


be attended with more trouble than would counterbalance | 


the pleafure they could ‘promife themfelves. by going to: 


war with the Efquimaux. 


On the fifth, as the weather was fo bad, with conftant 
{now, fleet, and rain, that we could not feu our way, we. 
did not offer to move: but the fixth proving moderate, 
and quite fair till.toward. noon,. we fet out in the morn-- 
ing, and walked about eleven miles to the North Weft ; 
when perceiving bad weather at hand, we began to lool 
out for fhelter among the rocks, as we had done the 


four preceding nights, having neither tents nor tent-. 


poles with us. The next morning fifteen more of the 


Indians deferted us, being’ quite fick of the road, and 


the uncommon badnefs of the weather. Indeed, though. 
—thefe people are all enured to hardfhips, yet their com-. 
plaint on the prefent occafion was not without reafon ;- 
for, from our leaving Congecathawhachaga we had-{carcely: 
a. dry garment of any, kind, or any thing to fkreen us: 
from the inclemency of the weather, except rocks. ands 
CAVES 3. 


"3 


> 


J 


171. 


quly. 


gthe - 


6thee 


5 34. 


177 he 
(eres =a 


July. 


A JOURNEY ITO Pie 


caves; the beft of which were but damp and unwholefome 
lodging. In fome the water was conftantly dropping 


from the rock that formed the roof, which made our 


place of retreat little better than the open air; and we 
had not been able to make one fpark of fire (except what 
was fufficient to light a pipe) from the time of our leay- 
ing the women on the fecond inftant ; it is true, in fome 
places there was a little mofs, but the conftant fleet and 


rain made it fo wet, as to render it as impoffible to fet fire 
to it as it would be to a wet {punge. 


We had no fooner entered our places of retreat, than we 


segaled ourfelves with fome raw venifon which the In- 


dians had killed that morning; the {mall ftock of dried 
provifions we took with us when we left the women being. 
now all expended. 


Agreeably to our expedtations, avery fudden and heavy 
gale of wind came on from the North Weft, attended 


with fo great a fall of {now, that the oldeft Indian in com- 


pany faid, he never faw it exceeded at any time of the year, 
much lefs in the middle of Summer. The gale was foon 
over, and by degrees it became a perfe& calm: but the flakes 
of {now were fo large as to furpafs all credibility, and fell 
in fuch vaft quantities, that though the fhower only lafted 
nine hours, we were in danger of being fmothered in our 
‘Caves. 


On 


NORTHERN OCEAN, 


On the feventh, we had a frefh breeze at North 
Weft, with fome flying fhowers of {mall rain, and at 
the fame time a conftant warm funfhine, which foon 
diffolved the greateft part of the new-fallen fnow. Early 
in the morning ‘we crawled out of our holes, which were 
on the North fide of the Stony Mountains, and walked 
about eighteen or twenty miles to the North Weft by 
Weft. In our way we croffed part of a large lake on 
the ice, which was then far from being broken up. This 


lake I diftinguifhed by the name of Buffalo, or Mufk-Ox. 
Lake, from the number of thofe animals that we found. 
grazing on the margin of it; many of which the In-- 
dians killed, but finding them lean, only took fome of | 
the bulls’ hides for fhoe-foals. At night the bad wea-. 
ther returned, with a ftrong gale of wind at North Eaft,,.. 


and very cold rain and fleet. 


This was the firft time we had feen any of. the-mufk-- 
oxen fince we left the Factory. It has been:obferved that’ 
we faw a great number of them in my. firft unfuccefsful’ 
attempt, : before I had got an hundred miles from the Fac~- 


tory; and indeed I once perceived.the.tracks of two of thofe 


animals within nine miles of Prince of Wales’s Fort. Great: 
numbers of them alfo were met with in my fecond journey to: 


the North: feveral of which my companions killed, par- 
ticularly on the feventeenth of. July. one thoufand feven 


hundred and feventy. ‘They are alfo found at times in. 


confiderable numbers near the fea-coaft.of Hudfon’s Bay,,.. 
4 : alk. 


135 


1771. 
hepeeer ceenncng) 


July 
athe. 


130 


177%. 


July. 


A JOURNEY TO Grn 


all the way from Knapp’s Bay to Wager Water, but are 


moft plentiful within the Arétic Circle. In thofe high 


Jatitudes I have frequently feen many herds of them in the 
ccourfe of a day’s walk, and fome of thofe herds did not 
-contain lefs than eighty or an hundred head. ‘The num- 


ber of bulls is very few in proportion to the cows; for 
it is rare to fee more than two or three full-grown bulls 


with the largeft herd: and from the number of the males 


that are found dead, the Indians are of opinion that they 
kill each other in contending for the females. In the 
rutting feafon they are fo jealous of the cows, that they 


run at either man or beaft who offers to approach them; 
and have been obferved to run and bellow even at ravens, 


and.other large birds, -which chanced to light near them. 
They delight in the -moft {tony and mountainous parts 
of the barren ground, and are feldom found at any great 
diftance from the woods. Though they are a beaft of 
gveat magnitude, and apparently of a very unwieldy in- 
active {tructure, yet:they climb the rocks with great eafe 


and agility, and are nearly as fure-footed as a goat; like 


it too, ‘they will feed on any thing; though they feem 


fondeft of grafs, yet in Winter, when that article cannot be 
had in fufficient quantity, they will eat mofs, or any other 
herbage they can find, as alfo the tops of willows and 
the tender branches of the pine tree. They take the bull 
in Auguft, .and bring forth their young the latter end of 


May, or beginning of June; zd they never have more 
than one at a time. | 


The. 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


The mufk-ox, when full grown, is as large as the ge- 
nerality, or at leaft as the middling fize, of Englifh black 
eattle *; but their legs, though large, are not fo long; 
nor is their tail longer than that of a bear; and, like the 
tail of that animal, it always bends. downward and in- 
ward, fo that it 1s entirely hid by the long hair of the 
rump and hind quarters: the hunch on their fhoulders is 
not large, being little more in proportion than that of a. 
deer: their hair is in fome parts very long, particularly 
on the belly, fides, and hind quarters; but the longeft 
hair about them, particularly the bulls, is under the throat, 
extending from the chin to the lower part of the cheft, 


between the fore-legs ; it there hangs down like a horfe’s. 


mane inverted, and is full.as. long, which makes the ani- 
mal have a moft formidable appearance. It is of the hair 
from. this part that the Efquimaux make their mufketto 


* Mr. Dragge fays, inhis Voyage, vol. il: p. 260, that the mufk-ox is lower 
than a deer, but larger as to belly and quarters; which is very far from the 
truth; they are of the fize I have here defcribed them, and the Indians always- 
eftimate the flefh of a full-grown cow to be equal in quantity to three deer. 
I am forry alfo to be obliged to contradict my friend Mr. Graham, who fays 
that the flefh of this animal 1s carried on fledges to Prince of Wales’s Fort, 
to the amount of three or four thoufand pounds annually. To the amount of 
near one thoufand pounds may have been purchafed from the natives in fome 
particular years, but it more frequently happens that not an ounce is brought 
one year out of five. In fact, it is by no means efteemed by the Company’s: 
fervants, and of courfe no-great encouragement is given to introduce it; but: 
if it had been otherwife, their general fituation is fo remote from the fettle- 
ment, that it would not be worth the Indians while to haul it to the Fort. So 
that, in fact, all that has ever been carried to Prince of Wales’s Port, has-moft’ 
affuredly- been killed out of a herd that has been accidentally found within a 
moderate diftance of the fettlkement; perhaps an hundred-miles, which is only 
thought a ftep by an Indian. 


T Wits, 


137 


1771, 
(egestas 


July.. 


£38 


L771. 
tig: 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


wigs, and not from the tail, -as is aflerted by Mr. Ellis *; 
their tails, and the hair which is on them, being too fhort 
for that purpofe. In Winter they are provided with a 
thick fine wool, or furr, that grows at the root of the long 
hair, and fhields them from the intenfe cold to which 
they are expofed during that feafon; but as the Summer 
advances, this furr loofens from the fkin, and, by fre- 
quently rolling themfelves on the ground, it works out 
to the end of the hair, and in time drops off, leaving 
little for their Summer clothing except the long hair. 
This feafon is fo fhort in thofe high latitudes, that the 
new fleece begins to appear, almoft as foon as the old one 
drops off; fo that by the time the cold becomes {fevere, 
they are again provided with a Winter-drefs. 


The fleth of the mufk-ox noways refembles that of the 
Weftern buffalo, but is more like that of the moofe or 
elk ; and the fat is of a clear white, flightly tinged with 
a light azure. The calves and young heifers are good 
eating; but the flefh of the bulls both fmells and taftes 
fo ftrong of mufk, as to render it very difagreeable: even 
the knife that cuts the flefh of an old bull will fmell fo 
{trong of mufk, that nothing but fcowring the blade quite 
bright can remove it, and the handle will retain the {cent 
for along time. Though no part of a bull is free from 
this fmell, yet the parts of generation, in particular the 


urethra, are by far the moft ftrongly impregnated. The 


* Voyage to Hudfon’s Bay, p. 232, 
| urine 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


urine itfelf muft contain this {cent in a very great degree ; 
for the fheaths of the bull’s pewis are corroded with a 
brown gummy fubftance, which is nearly as high-{cented 
with mufk as that faid to be produced by the civet cat; 
and after having been kept for feveral years, feems not to 


lofe any of its quality. 


On the eighth, the weather was fine and moderate, 
though not without forne fhowers of rain. Early in the 
morning we fet out, and walked eighteen miles to the 
Northward. The Indians killed fome deer; fo we put 
up by the fide of a fmall creek, that afforded a few wil- 
lows, with which we made a fire for the firft time fince 
our leaving Congecathawhachaga; confequently it was here 
that we cooked our firft meal for a whole week. This, 
as may naturally be fuppofed, was well relifhed by all 
parties, the Indians as well as myfelf. And as the Sun 
had, in the courfe of the day, dried our clothing, in fpite 
of the {mall fhowers of rain, we felt ourfelves more com- 
fortable than we had done fince we left the women. 
The place where we lay that night, is not far from 
Grizzled Bear Hill; which takes its name from the num- 
bers of thofe animals that are frequently known to refort 
thither for the purpofe of bringing forth their young in a 
cave that is found there. The wonderful defcription 
which the Copper Indians gave of this place exciting 
the curiofity of feveral of my companions as well as 
myfelf, we went to view it; but on.our arrival at it 

T 2 found 


139 


1771. 
(ecco atest 


July. 


8th, 


140 


_. 
ae Jaly. 


A JOURNEY YO? Tier 


found little worth remarking about it, being no more than 
a high lump of earth, of a loamy quality, of which 
kind there are feveral others in the fame neighbourhood, 
all ftanding in the middle of a large marfh, which makes 
them refemble fo many iflands ina lake. The fides of 
thefe hills are quite perpendicular; and the height of 
Grizzled Bear Hill, which is the largeft, is about twenty 
feet above the level ground that furrounds it. Their 
fummits are covered with a thick fod of mofs and long 
grafs, which in fome places projects over the edge; and 
as the fides are conftantly mouldering away, and wafhing 
down with every fhower of rain during the fhort Summer, 
they muft in time be levelled with the marfh in which 


they are fituated. At prefent thofe iflands, as I call 


them, are excellent places of retreat for the birds which — 
migrate there to breed; as they can bring forth their 
young in perfect fafety from every beaft except the Que- 
quehatch, which, from the fharpnefs of its claws and the 
amazing ftrength of its legs, is capable of afcending the 
moft difficult precipices. 


On the fide of the hill that I went to furvey, there is a 
large cave which penetrates a confiderable way into the rock, 


‘and may probably have been the work of the bears, as we 


could difcover vifible marks that fome of thofe beafts had 
been there that Spring. This, though deemed very cu- 
sious by fome of my companions, did not appear fo 
to me, as it neither engaged of attention, nor raifed my 


furprife, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


furprife, half fo much as the fight of the many hills and 
dry ridges on the Eaft fide of the marfh, which are turned 
ever like ploughed land by thofe animals, in fearching for 
oround-{guirrels, and perhaps mice, which conftitute a 
favourite part of their food. It is furprifing to fee the 
extent of their refearches in queft of thofe animals, 
and {till more to view the enormous {tones rolled out of 
their beds by the bears on thofe occafions. At firft I 
thought thefe long and deep furrows had been effected by 
lightning ; but the natives affured me they never knew 
any thing of the kind happen in thofe parts, and that it 
was entirely the work of the bears feeking for their prey. © 


On the ninth, the weather was moderate and cloudy, 
with fome fying fhowers of rain. We fet out early in the 
morning, and walked about forty miles to the North and 
North by Eaft. In our way we faw plenty of deer and 
mufk-oxen: feveral of the former the Indians killed, but 
a {mart fhower of rain coming on juft as we were going 
to put up, made the mofs fo wet as to render it impracti- 
cable to light a fre. The next day proving fine and 
clear, we fet out in the morning, and walked twenty 
miles to the North by Weft and North North Weft; but 
about noon the weather became fo hot and fuitry as to 
render walking very difagreeable; we therefore put up 
on the top of a high hill, and as the mofs was then dry, 
lighted a fire, and fhould have made~a comfortable 
meal, and been otherwife tolerably happy, had it not been 

i _ for 


VAY 


E771. 
July. 


oth. 


1Cthe 


142 


Nighi 
July. 


ith. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


for the mufkettoes, which were uncommonly numerous, 
and their flings almoft infufferable. The fame day Ma- 
tonabbee fent ‘feveral Indians a-head, with orders to pro- 
ceed to the Copper-mine River as faft as poffible, and ac- 
quaint any Indians they might meet, of our approach. By 


thofe Indians I alfo fent fome {mall prefents, as the fureft 


means to induce any ftrangers they found, to come to our 
ailiftance. 


The eleventh was hot and fultry, like the preceding 
day. In the morning we walked ten or eleven miles to 
the North Weft, and then met a Northern Indian Leader, 
called Oule-eye, and his family, who were, in company 
with feveral Copper Indians, killing deer with bows and 
arrows and {pears, as they crofled a little river, by the 


fide of which we put up, as did alfo the above-mentioned 


Indians *. ‘That afternoon I {moked my calumet of peace 
with thefe ftrangers, and found them a quite different fet 
of people, at leaft in principle, from thofe I had feen at 
Congecathawhachaga: for though they had great plenty 
of provifions, they neither offered me nor my companions 
a mouthful, and would, if they had been permitted, 
have taken the laft garment from off my back, and rob- 
bed me of every-article I pofleffed. Even my Northern 
companions could not help taking notice of fuch unac- 
countable behaviour. Nothing but their poverty pro- 


* This river runs nearly North Eat, and in all probability empties itfelf 


‘into the Northern Ocean, not far from the Copper River. 


tected 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


tected them from being plundered by thofe of my crew ; 
and had any of their women been worth notice, they 
would moft affuredly have been preffed into our fervice. 


The twelfth was fo exceedingly hot and fultry, that 
we did not move; but early in the morning of the thir- 
teenth, after my companions had taken what dry pro- 
vifions they chofe from our unfociable ftrangers, we fet 
out, and walked about fifteen or fixteen miles to the 
North and North by Eaft, in expectation of arriving at 
the Copper-mine River that day; but when we had 
reached the top of a long chain of hills, between which 
we were told the river ran, we found it to be no more 
than a branch of it which empties itfelf into the main 
tiver about forty miles from its influx into the fea, At 
that time all the Copper Indians were difpatched different 
ways, fo that there was not one in company who knew 
the fhorteft cut to the main river. Seeing fome woods to 
the Weftward, and judging that the current of the rivulet 
tan that way, we concluded that the main river lay in that 
direction, and was not very remote from our prefent fitu- 
ation. We therefore directed our courfe by the fide of it, 
when the Indians met with feveral very fine buck deer, 
which they deftroyed; and as that part we now traverfed 
afforded plenty of good fire-wood, we put up, and cooked 
the moft comfortable meal to which we had fat down for 
fome months. As fuch favourable opportunities of in- 
dulging the. appetite. happen but feldom, it is a general 

5 rule 


143 


177%. 


july. 


13th. 


144 


1771. 
(eneeneeren rome 


July. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


rule with the Indians, which we did not negle&, to exert 
every art in drefling our food which the moft refined {kill 
in Indian cookery has been able to invent, and which 
confifts chiefly in boiling, broiling, and roafting: but of 
all the difhes cooked by thofe people, a deeatee, as it is 
called in their language, is certainly the moft delicious, at 
leaft for a change, that can be prepared from a deer only, 
without any other ingredient. It is a kind of haggis, 
made with the blood, a good quantity of fat fhred fmall, 
fome of the tendereft of the flefh, together with the heart 
and lungs cut, or more commonly torn into {mall fhivers s. 
all which is put into the ftomach, and roafted, by be-. 
ing fufpended before the fire by a ftring. Care muft be 
taken that it does not get too much heat at firft, as the 
bag would thereby be liable to be burnt, and the contents. 
be let out. When it is fufficiently done, it will emit 
fieam, in the fame manner asa fowl or a joint of meat ; 
which is as much as to fay, Come, eat me now: and if it 
be taken in time, before the blood and other contents 
are too much done, it is certainly a moft delicious morfel,. 
even without pepper, falt, or any other feafoning.. 


After regaling ourfelves in the moft plentiful manner,. 
and taking a few hours reft, (for it was ‘almoft impoffible 
to fleep for the mufkettoes,) we once more fet forward, 
directing our courfe to the North Weft by Weft; and 
after walking about nine or ten miles, arrived at that 
long wifhed-tor fpot, the Copper-mine River. 


NORTHERN OCEAN, 


Sei A P. Ni, 


Tranfactions at the Copper-mine River, and till we joined. 
all the women to the South of Cogead Lake. 


Some Copper Indians join us.—Indians fend three fpies down the river.— 
Begin my furvey.—Spies return, and give an account of five tents of 
Efquimaux.—Indians confult the beft method to fteal on them in the 
night, and kill them while afleep.—Crofs the river.—Proceedings of 
the Indians as they advance towards the L/quimaux tentse——The Indians 
begin the maffacre while the poor Ef/quimaux are afleep, and flay them 
all— Much affetted at the fight of one young woman killed clofe to my 
feet.—The behaviour of the Indians on this occafion.—Their brutifb treat- 
ment of the dead bodies.—Seven more tents feen on the oppofite fide of the 
river.—TLhe Indians harafs them, till they fly to a fhoal in the river for 
Sofety.—Bebaviour of the Indians after killing thofe E/quimaux.—Crofs 
the river, and proceed to the tents on that fidee—Plunder their tents, 
and deftroy their utenfils.——Continue my furvey to the river's mouth.— 
Remarks there.—-Set out on my return.—Arrive at one of the Copper- 
mines.—Remarks on tt.—Many attempts made to induce the Copper 
Indians to carry ther own goods to market.—Obftacles to it.—Villany 
and cruelty of Keelfbies to fome of thofe poor Indians. —Leave the Copper- 
mine, and walk at au amazing rate till we join the women, by the fide 
of Cogead Whoie.—Much foot-foundered.—T he appearance very alarm- 
ing, but foon changes for the better—Proceed to the Southward, and 
join the remainder of the women and children.—Many other Indians 


arrive with them. 


WE had {carcely arrived at the Copper-mine River 
when four Copper Indians joined us, and brought 
with them two canoes. They had feen all the Indians who 


were fent from us at various times, except Matonabbee’s 
U brother, 


TA5 


146 


E771. 
| ee 
July. 


A JOURNEY ‘TO! Wee 


brother, and three others that were firft difpatched from 
Congecathawhachaga. 


On my arrival here I was not a little furprifed to find 
the river differ fo much from the defcription which the 
Indians had given of it at the Fadtory; for, inftead of 
being fo large as to be navigable for fhipping, as it 
had been reprefented by them, it was at that part {carcely 
navigable for an Indian canoe, being-no more than one 
hundred and eighty yards wide, every where full of fhoals, 
and no lefs than three falls were in fight at firft view. 


Near the water’s edge there is fome wood ; but not one 
tree grows on or near the top of the hills between which 
the riverruns. There appears to have been formerly a much 
greater quantity than there is at prefent; but the trees 
feem to have been fet on fire fome years ago, and, in con- 
fequence, there is at prefent ten {ticks lying on the ground, 
for one green one which is growing befide them. The 
whole timber appears to have been, even in its greateft pro- 
fperity, of fo crooked and dwarfifh a growth as to render 
it of little ufe for any purpofe but fire-wood. 


Soon after our arrival at the river-fide, three Indians 
were fent off as fpies, in order to fee if any Efquimaux 
were inhabiting the river-fide between us and the fea. 
After walking about three quarters of a mile by the fide 
of the river, we put up, when moft of the Indians went a 

. hunting, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


hunting, and killed feveral mufk-oxen and fome deer. 
They were employed all the remainder of the day and 
night in fplitting and drying the meat by the fre. As we 
were not then in want of provifions, and as deer and other 
animals were fo plentiful, that each day’s journey might 
have provided for itfelf, I was at a lofs to account for this 
unufual economy of my companions; but was foon in- 
formed, that thofe preparations were made with a view to 
have vituals enough ready-cooked to ferve us to the river’s 
mouth, without being obliged to kill any in our way, as 
the report of the guns, and the fmoke of the fires, would be 
liable to alarm the natives, if any fhould be near at hand, 
and give them an opportunity of efcaping. 


Early in the morning of the fifteenth, we fet out, when 
I immediately began my furvey, which I continued about 
ten miles down the river, till heavy rain coming on we 
were obliged to put up; and the place where we lay that 
night was the end, or edge of the woods, the whole fpace be- 
tween it and the fea being entirely barren hills and wideopen 
marfhes. In the courfe of this day’s furvey, I found the 
river as full of fhoals as the part which I had {een before ; 
and in many places it was fo greatly diminifhed in its width, 
that in.our way we pafied by two more capital fails. 


Early in the morning of the fixteenth, the weather 
being fine and pleafant, I again proceeded with my fur- 
vey, and continued it for ten miles farther down the river; 


U 2 but 


t47 
1771. 
july. 


{5th, 


16th 


A/' FOURNEY ITO “Tie 


but ftill found it the fame as before, being every where 
full of falls and fhoals. At this time Git being about 
noon) the three men who had been fent as {pies met us on 
their return, and informed my companions that five tents 
of Efquimaux were on the weft fide of the river. The 
fituation, they faid, was very convenient for furprifing 
them; and, according to their account, I judged it to 
be about twelve miles from the place we met the {pies. 
When the Indians received this intelligence, no farther 
attendance or attention was paid to my furvey, but their 
whole thoughts were immediately engaged in planning the 
beft method of attack, and how they might fteal on the 
poor Efquimaux the enfuing night, and kill them all 
while afleep. To accomplifh this bloody defign more 
effectually, the Indians thought it neceffary to crofs the 
river as foon as poflible ; and, by the account of the fpies, 
it appeared that no part was more convenient for the pur- 
pofe than that where we had met them, it being there 
very {mooth, and at a confiderable diftance from any fall, 
Accordingly, after the Indians had put all their guns, 
{fpears, targets, &c. in good order, we crofled the river, 
which took up fome time. 


When we arrived on the Weft fide of the river, each 
painted the front of his target or fhield; fome with the 
figure of the Sun, others with that of the Moon, feveral 
with different kinds of birds and beafts of prey, and many 
with the images of imaginary beings, which, accord~ 


ing 


N O BR OT tte eR NG §O CEEFA N: 


ing to their filly notions, are the inhabitants of the different 
Glements, Earth, Sea, Air, &c. 


On enquiring the reafon of their doing fo, I learned that 
each man painted his fhicld with the image of that being 
on which he relied moft for fuccefs in the intended en- 
gagement. Some were contented with a fingle reprefent- 
ation; while others, doubtful, as I fuppofe, of the quality 
and power of any fingle being, had their fhields covered 
to the very margin with a group of hieroglyphics quite 
unintelligible to every one except the painter. Indeed, 
from the hurry in which this bufinefs was neceflarily done, 
the want of every colour but red and black, and the 
deficiency of fkill in the artift, moft of thofe paintings 
had more the appearance of. a number of accidental 
blotches, than ‘‘ of any thing that is on the earth, or in 
‘¢ the water under the earth; and though fome few of 
them conveyed a tolerable idea of the thing intended, yet 
even thefe were many degrees worfe than our country fign+ 


paintings in England. 


When this piece of fuperftition was completed, we be- 
gan toadvance toward the Efquimaux tents; but were very 
careful to avoid crofling any hills, or talking loud, for fear 
of being feen or overheard by the inhabitants; by which 
means the diftance was not only much greater than it 
otherwife would have been, but, for the fake of keeping 


in the loweft grounds, we were obliged to walk through 
2 entire 


~ 


149 


ig 
July. 


{50 


rE] ile 
July, 


a ‘yloltu R NEEWY# Oro gee 


entire fwamps of {tiff marly clay, fometimes up to the 
knees. Our courfe, however, on this occafion, though 
very ferpentine, was not altogether fo remote from the 
river as entirely to exclude me from a view of it the whole 
way: on the contrary, feveral times (according to the 
fituation of the ground) we advanced fo near it, as to give 
me an opportunity of convincing myfelf that it was as 
unnavigable as it was in thofe parts which I had fur- 
veyed before, and which entirely correfponded with the 
accounts given of it by the fpies. 


It is perhaps worth remarking, that my crew, though an 
undifciplined rabble, and by no means accuftomed to war 
or command, feemingly acted on this horrid occafion with 
the utmoft uniformity of fentiment. There was not 
among them the leaft altercation or feparate opinion; all 
were united in the general -caufe, and as ready to follow 
where Matonabbee led, as he appeared to be ready to lead, 
according to the advice of an old Copper Indian, who had 
joined us on our firft arrival at the river where this bloody 


bufinefs was firft propofed. 


Never was reciprocity of intereft more generally regarded 
among a number of people, than it was on the prefent 
occafion by my crew, for not one was a moment in want 
of any thing that another could fpare; and. if ever the 
{pirit of difinterefted friendfhip expanded the heart of 
a Northern Indian, it was here exhibited in the moft ex- 


tenfive 


NORTHERN OCEAN, 


tenfive meaning of the word. Property of every kind 
that could be of general ufe now ceafed to be private, and 
every one who had any thing which came under that de- 
{eription, feemed proud of an opportunity of giving it, 
or lending it to thofe who had none, or were moft in 
want of it. 


The number of my crew was fo much greater than that 
which fave tents could contain, and the warlike manner 
in which they were equipped fo greatly fuperior to what 
could be expected of the poor Efquimaux, that no lefs 
than a total maflacre of every one of them was likely to be 
the cafe, unlefs Providence fhould work a miracle for their 
deliverance. 


The land was fo fituated that we walked under cover 
of the rocks and hills till we were within two hundred 
yards of the tents. There we lay in ambufh for fome 
time, watching the motions of the Ef{quimaux; and here 
the Indians would have advifed me to ftay till the fight was 
over, but to this I could by no means confent; for I con- 
fidered that when the Efquimaux came to be furprifed, 
they would try every way to efcape, and if they found me 
alone, not knowing me from an enemy, they would pro- 
bably proceed to violence againft me when no perfon was 
near to affift, For this reafon I determined to accompany 
them, telling them at the fame time, that I would not 
have any hand in the murder they were about to commit, 


unlefs. 


1g 


177%, 
July. 


152 


1771. 
ee em aiid 


July. 


A. JOURINE ¥ )3O rar 


unlefs I found it neceflary for my own fafety. The In- 
dians were not difpleafed at this propofal; one of them 
immediately fixed me a fpear, and another lent me a 
broad bayonet for my protection, but at that time I 
could not be provided with a target; nor did I want to be 
encumbered with fuch an unneceflary piece of lumber. 


While we lay in ambufh, the Indians performed the laft 
ceremonies which were thought neceflary before the en- 
gagement. Thefe chiefly confifted in painting their faces ; 
fome all black, fome all-red, and others with a mixture of 
the two; and to prevent their hair from blowing into their 


"eyes, it was either tied before and behind, and on both 


fides, or elfe cut fhort all round. The next thing they 
confidered was to make themfelves as light as poflible for 
running ; which they did, by pulling off their ftockings, 
and either cutting off the fleeves of their jackets, or roll- 
ing them up clofe to their arm-pits ; and though the muf- 
kettoes at that time were fo numerous as to furpafs all cre- 
bibility, yet fome of the Indians a@tually pulled off their 
jackets and entered the lifts quite naked, except their 
breech-cloths and fhoes. Fearing I might have occafion 
to run with the reft, I thought it alfo advifable to pull 
off my ftockings and cap, and to tie my hair as clofe up as 


poflible. 


By the time the Indians had made themfelves thus 
completely frightful, it was near one o'clock in the morn- 


Ing 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


ing of the feventeenth ; when finding all the Efquimaux 
quiet in their tents, they rufhed forth from their ambuf- 
cade, and fell on the poor unfufpedting creatures, unper- 
ceived till clofe at the very eves of their tents, when 
they foon began the bloody maffacre, while [ ftood neuter 
in the rear. . 


In a few feconds the horrible {cene commenced; it was 
{hocking beyond defcription ; the poor unhappy victims 
were furprifed in the midft of their fleep, and had neither 
time nor power to make any refiftance ; men, women, and 
children, in all upward of twenty, ran out of their tents 
ftark naked, and endeavoured to make their efcape; but 
the Indians having poffeflion of all the land-fide, to no 
place could they fly for fhelter. One alternative only remain- 
ed, that of jumping into the river; but, as none of them 
attempted it, they all fell a facrifice to Indian barbarity! 


The fhrieks and groans of the poor expiring wretches 
were truly dreadful; and my horror was much increafed at 


feeing a young girl, feemingly about eighteen years of age, 


killed fo near me, that when the firft {pear was fluck into 
her fide fhe fell down at my feet, and twifted round my 
legs, fo that it was with difficulty that I could difengage 
myfelf from her dying grafps. As two Indian men pur- 
fued this unfortunate victim, I folicited very hard for her 
life; but the murderers made no reply till they had 


ftuck. 


1771. 


July. 
17th. 


154. 


i7716 
July. 


A JOURNEY TO THE ” 


ftuck both their {pears through her body, and transfixed 
her to the ground. ‘They then looked me fternly in the 
face, and began to ridicule me, by afking if I wanted ‘an 
Efquimaux wife; and paid not the fmalleft regard to the 
fhrieks and agony of the poor wretch, who was twining 
round their {pears like an eel! Indeed, after receiving 
much abufive language from them on the occafion, I was 
at length obliged to defire that they would be more expe- 
ditious in difpatching their victim out of her mifery, other- 
wife I fhould be obliged, out of pity, to affift in the 
friendly office of putting an end to the exiftence of a fel- 
low-creature who was fo cruelly wounded. On this re- 
queft being made, one of the Indians haftily drew his 
{pear from the place where it was firft lodged, and pierced 
it through her breaft near the heart. The love of life, 
however, even in this moft miferable ftate, was fo predo- 
minant, that though this might juftly be called the moft 
merciful a& that could be done for the poor creature, it 
feemed to be unwelcome, for though much exhaufted by 
pain and lofs of blood, fhe made feveral efforts to ward off 
the friendly blow. My fituation: and the terror of my 
mind: at beholding this butchery, cannot eafily be con- 
ceived, much lefs defcribed; though I fummed up all the 
fortitude I was mafter of on the occafion, it was with 
difficulty that I could refrain from tears; and I am con- 
fident that my features muft have feelingly expreffed how 
fincerely I was affected at the barbarous fcene I then wit- 


nelicam 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


neffed ; even at this hour I cannot reflec&t on the tranf- 
actions of that horrid day without fhedding tears. 


The brutifh manner in which thefe favages ufed the’ 


bodies they had fo cruelly bereaved of life was fo fhock- 
ing, that it would be indecent to defcribe it; particularly 
their curiofity in examining, and the remarks they made, 
on the formation of the women; which, they pretended. 
to fay, differed materially from that of their own. For 
my own part I muft acknowledge, that however favour- 
able the opportunity for determining that point might 
have been, yet my thoughts at the time were too much 
agitated to admit of any fuch remarks; and I firmly be- 
lieve, that had there actually been as much difference be- 
tween them as there is faid to be between the Hottentots 
and thofe of Europe, it would not have been in my power 
to have marked the diftin@tion. I have reafon to think, 
however, that there is no ground for the affertion; and 
really believe that the declaration of the Indians on this 
occafion, was utterly void of truth, and proceeded only from 
the implacable hatred they bore to the whole tribe of 
people of whom I am {peaking. 


When the Indians had completed the murder of the 
poor Efquimaux, feven other tents on the Eaft fide the 
river immediately engaged their attention: very luckily, 
however, our canoes and baggage had been left at a 
little diftance up the river, fo that they*had no way of 

x 2 crofling 


156 


177%. 
eee mm ’ameee 


July. 


A JOURNEY TO (Seen 


croffing to get at them, The river at this part being 
little more than eighty yards wide, they began firing at 
them from the Weft fide. The poor Efquimaux on the 
oppofite fhore, though all up in arms, did not attempt to 
abandon their tents; and they were fo unacquainted with 
the nature of fire-arms, that when the bullets ftruck the 
eround, they ran in crowds to fee what was fent them, 
and feemed anxious to examine all the pieces of lead 
which they found flattened againft the rocks. At length 
one of the Ef{quimaux men was fhot in the calf of his leg, 
which put them in great confufion. They all imme- 
diately embarked in their little canoes, and paddled to a 
fhoal in the middle of the river, which being fomewhat 
more than a gun-fhot from any part of the fhore, put them 
out of the reach of our barbarians. 


When the favages difcovered that the furviving Ef{qui- 
maux had gained the fhore above mentioned, the Northern 
Indians began to plunder the tents of the deceafed of all 
the copper utenfils they could find; fuch as hatchets, bay- 
onets, knives, &c. after which they affembled on the top 
of an adjacent high hill, and ftanding all in a clufter, fo as 
to form a folid circle, with their {pears erect in the air, gave 
many fhouts of victory, conftantly clafhing their fpears 
againft each other, and frequently calling out sima/ 
tima*! by way ot derifion to the poor furviving Efgui- 


* Tima in the Efquimaux language is a friendly word Gmular to what cheer 2° 


1 max, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


maux, who were ftanding on the fhoal almoft knee-deep 
in water. After parading the hill for fome time, it was 
agreed to return up the river to the place where we had 
left our canoes and baggage, which was about half a 
mile diftant, and then to crofs the river again and plunder 
the feven tents on the Eaft fide. This refolution was im- 
mediately put in force; and as ferrying acrofs with only 


three or four canoes * took a confiderable time, and as. 


we were, from the crookednefs of the river and the 


form of the land, entirely under cover, feveral of the poor 


furviving Efquimaux, thinking probably that we were 
gone about our bufinefs, and meant to trouble them no 
more, had returned from the fhoal to their habitations. 


When we approached their tents, which we did under 


cover of the rocks, we found them bufily employed tying 
up bundles. Thefe the Indians feized with their ufual 
ferocity; on which, the Efquimaux having their canoes 
lying ready in the water, immediately embarked, and all 


of them got fafe to the former fhoal, except an old man, 


who was fo intent on collecting his things, that the In- 
dians coming upon him before he could reach his cance, 
he fell a facrifice to their fury: I verily believe not lefs than 
twenty had a hand in his death, as his whole body was like 
acullender. It is here neceflary to. obferve that the {pies, 


* When the fifteen Indians turned back at the Stony Mountains, they took 
two or three canoes with them; fome of our crew that were fent a-head as 
meffengers had not yet returned, which occafioned the number of our canoes ta 
be {fo {mall, 

when 


{57 


1771. 
Meet, —eernenes? 


July.. 


1771. 
July. 


158 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


when on the look-out, could not fee thefe feven tents, 
though clofe under them, as the bank, on which they 
ftood, f{tretched over them. 7 


It ought to have been mentioned in its proper place, 
that in making our retreat up the river, after killing the 
Efquimaux on the Weft fide, we faw an old woman fitting 
by the fide of the water, killing falmon, which lay at the 
foot of the fall as thick as a fhoal of herrings. Whether 
from the noife of the fall, or a natural defecét in the old 
woman’s hearing, it is hard to determine, but certain it is, 
fhe had no knowledge of the tragical {cene which had been 
fo lately tranfacted at the tents, though fhe was not more 
than two hundred yards from the place. When we firft per- 
ceived her, {he feemed perfectly at eafe, and was entirely 
furrounded with the produce of her labour. From her man- 
ner of behaviour, and the appearance of her eyes, which 
were as red as blood, it is more than probable that her 
fight was not very good; for fhe fcarcely difcerned that 
the Indians were enemies, till they were within twice the 
length of their {pears of her. It was in vain that the at- 
tempted to fly, for the wretches of my crew transfixed 
ner to the ground in a few feconds, and butchered her 
in the moft favage manner. There was fcarcely a man 
among them who had not a thruft at her with his fpear ; 
and many in doing this, aimed at torture, rather than 
immediate death, as they not only poked out her eyes, 

but 


NORTHERN OCEAN, 


but ftabbed her in many parts very remote from thofe 
which are vital. 


It may appear ftrange, that a perfon fuppofed to be 
almoft blind fhould be employed in the bufinefs of fifhing, 
and particularly with any degree of fuccefs; but when 
the multitude of fith is taken into the account, the won- 
der will ceafe. Indeed they were fo numerous at the foot 
of the fall, that when.a light pole, armed with a few fpikes, 
which was the inftrument the old woman ufed, was put 
under water, and hauled up with a jerk, it was fcarcely 
poffible to mifs them. Some of my Indians tried the 
method, for curiofity, with the old woman’s ftaff, anc: 
feldom got lefs than two at a jerk, fometimes three or 
four. Thofe fifth, though very fine, and beautifully red, 
are but {fmall, feldom weighing more (as near as I could 
judge) than fix or feven pounds, and in general much lefs. 
Their numbers at this place were almoft incredible, per- 
haps equa] to any thing that is related of the falmon in 
Kamfchatka, or any other part of the world. It does 
not appear that the Efquimaux have any othcr method of 
catching the fifth, unlefs it be by fpears and darts; for no 
appearance of nets was difcovered either at their tents, or 
on any part of the fhore. This is the cafe with all the 


Efquimaux on the Weft fide of Hudfon’s Bay; {pearing 


in Summer, and angling in Winter, are the only me- 


thods they have yet devifed. to catch fith, though at 


5, times: 


159 


GBS 
' 7 


July. 


160 


1771. 
Caceres Mates 


July. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


times their whole dependance for fupport is on that ar- 
ticle *, 
When 


* ‘When the Efquimaux who refide near Churchill River travel in Winter, 
i 1s always from lake to lake, or from river to river, where they have formed 
magazines of provifions, and heaps of mofs for firing. As fome of thofe 
places are at a confiderable diftance from each other, and fome of the lakes of 
confiderable width, they frequently pitch their tents on the ice, and inftead of 
having a fire, which the feverity of the climate fo much requires, they cut 
holes in the ice within their tents, and there fit and angle for fith; if they 
meet with any fuccefs, the fifh are eaten alive out of the water; and when 
they are thirfty, water, their ufual beverage, is at hand. 


When I firft entered into the employment of the Hudfon’s Bay Company, 
it was as Mate of one of their floops which was employed in trading with the 
Efquimaux; I had therefore frequent opportunities of obferving the mifer- 
able manner in which thofe people live. Inthe courfe of our trade with them 
we frequently purchafed feveral feal-fkin bags, which we fuppofed were full of 
oil; but on opening them have fometimes found great quantities of venifon, 
feals, and fea-horfe paws, as well as falmon; and as thefe were of no ufe to 
us, we always returned them to the Indians, who eagerly devoured them, though 


- fome of the articles had been perhaps a whole year in that ftate; and they 


feemed to exult greatly in having fo over-reached us in the way of trade, as 
to have fometimes one third of their bargain returned. 


This method of preferving their food, though it effectually guards it from 
the external air, and from the flies, does not prevent putrefaction entirely, 
though it renders its progrefs very flow. Pure train oil is of fuch a quality 
that it never freezes folid in the coldeft Winters; a happy circumftance 
for thofe people, who are condemned to live in the moft rigorous climate 
without the affiftance of fire. While thefe magazines laft, they have no- 
thing more to do when hunger affails them, but to open one of the bags, 
take out a fide of venifon, a few feals, fea-horfe paws, or fome half-rotten 
falmon, and without any preparation, fit down and make a meal; and the lake 
or river by which they pitch their tent, affords them water, which 1s their con- 
{tant drink. Befides the extraordinary food already mentioned, they have fe- 

veral 


N-OR THE RN +0 CCE AN. 


When the Indians had plundered the feven tents of all 
the copper utenfils, which feemed the only thing worth 
their 


veral other difhes equally difgufting to an European palate; I will only mention 
One, as it was more frequently part of their repaft when I vifited their tents, 
than any other, except fifh. The difh I allude to, is made of the raw liver of a 
deer, cut in fmall pieces of about an inch fquare, and mixed up with the con- 
tents of the {tomach of the fame animal; and the farther digeftion has taken place, 
the better it is fuited to their tafte. It is impoffible to defcribe or cconeive 
the pleafure they feem to enjoy when eating fuch unaccountable food: nay, I 
have even feen them eat whole handfuls of maggots that were produced in 
meat by fly-blows; and it is their conftant cuftom, when their nofes bleed by 
any accident, to lick their blood into their mouths, and fwallow it. Indeed, if 
we confider the inhofpitable part of the globe they are deftined to inhabit, and 
the great diftrefles to which they are frequently driven by hunger in confe- 
quence of it, we fhall no longer be furprifed at finding they can relifh any thing 
in common with the meaneft of the animal creation, but rather admire the 
wifdom and kindnefs of Providence in forming the palates and powers of all 
creatures in fuch a manner as isbeft adapted to the food, climate, and every 
other circumftance which may be incident to their refpective fituations. 


It is no lefs true, that thefe people, when I firft knew them, would not 
eat any of our provifions, fugar, raifins, figs, or even bread; for though 
fome of them would put a bit of it into their mouths, they foon fpit it our 
again with evident marks of diflike; fo that they had no-greater relifh for 
our food than we had for theirs. At prefent, however, they will eat any part 
ef our provifions, either frefh or falted; and fome of them will drink a draft 
of porter, or a little brandy and water; and they are now fo far civilized, and 
attached to the Englith, that I am perfuaded any of the Company’s fervants 
who could habituate themfelves to their diet and mannér of life, might now 
live as fecure under their protection, as under that of any of the tribes of In- 
dians who border on Fludfon’s Bay. 


They live in a ftate of perfect freedom; no one apparently claiming 
the fuperiority over, or acknowledging the leaft fubordination to another, 
ne a except 


164 


Wot. 
July. 


162 


1771. 
july. 


r7th. 


A JOURNEY? WO) sae 


their notice, they threw all the tents and tent-poles into 
the river, deftroyed a vaft quantity of dried falmon, mufk- 
oxen flefh, and other provifions; broke all the ftone 
kettles ; and, in fact, did all the mifchief they poffibly 
could to diflrefs the poor creatures they could not mur- 
der, and who were ftanding on the fhoal before men- 
tioned, obliged to’ be woeful fpectators of their great, or 
perhaps irreparable lofs. 


After the Indians had completed this piece of wanton- 
nefs we fat down, and made a good meal of frefh falmon, 


which were as numerous at the place where we now refted, 


as they were on the Weft fide of the river. When we had 
finifhed our meal, which was the firft we had enjoyed for 
many hours, the Indians told me that they were again ready 
to aflift me in making an end of my furvey. It was then 
about five o’clock in the morning of the feventeenth, the 
fea being in fight from the North Weft by Weft to the 
North Eaft, about eight miles diftant. I therefore fet in- 
{tantly about commencing my furvey, and purfued it to the 
mouth of the'river, which I found all the way fo full of 
fhoals and falls that it was not navigable even for a boat, 
and that it-emptied itfelf into the fea over a ridge or bar. 





except what is due from children to their parents, or fuch of their kin as take 
care of them when they are young and incapable of providing for themfelves. 
There 1s, however, reafon to think that, when grown up to manhood, they 
pay fome attention to the advice of the old men, on account of their ex- 


perience. 
2 The 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


The tide was then out; but I judged from the marks 
which I faw on the edge of the ice, that it flowed about 
twelve or fourteen feet, which will only reach a little way 
_ within the river's mouth. The tide being out, the water 
in the river was perfectly frefh; but I am certain of its 
being the fea, or fome branch of it, by the quantity of 
whalebone and feal-fkins which the Efquimaux had at 
their tents, and alfo by the number of feals which I faw on 
the ice. At the mouth of the river, the fea is full of iflands 
and fhoals, as faras I could fee with the affiftance of a good 
poeket telefcope. ‘The ice was not then broke up, but was 
melted away for about three quarters of a mile from the main 


fhore, and to a little diftance round the iflands and fhoals. | 


By the time I had completed this furvey, it was about 
one in the morning of the eighteenth; but in thofe high 
latitudes, and at this feafon of the year, the Sun is always 
at a good height above the horizon, fo that we had not only 
day-light, but fun-fhine the whole night: a thick fog and 
drizzling rain then came on, and finding that neither the 
river nor fea were likely to be of any ufe, I did not think 
it worth while to wait for fair weather to determine the 
latitude exa@tly by an obfervation; but by the extraordi- 
nary care I took in obferving the courfes and diftances 
when I walked from Congecathawhachaga, where I had 
two good obfervations,. the latitude may be depended upon 
within twenty miles at the utmoft. For the fake of form, 

| YOR however, 


163 


177%. 
July. 


18th. 


164 


1771, 


July. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


however, after having had fome-confultation with the In- 
dians, I ereéted a mark, and took poffeffion of the coaft, 
on behalf of the Hudfon’s Bay Company. 


Having finifhed this bufinefs, we fet out on our return, 


-and walked about twelve miles to the South by Eaft, 


when we ftopped and took a little fleep, which was the farft 
time that any of us had clofed our eyes from the fifteenth 
inftant, and it was now fix o’clock in the morning of the 


eighteenth. Here the Indians killed a mufk-ox, but the 


amofs being very wet, we could not make a fire, fo that we 


were obliged to eat the meat raw, which was intolerable, 


as it happened to be an old beat. . 


.. Before I proceed farther on my return, it may not be 


improper to give fome account of the river, and the country 
adjacent; its productions, and the animals which con- 


ftantly inhabit thofe dreary regions, as well as thofe that 


only migrate thither in Summer, in order to breed and 
rear their young, unmolefted by man. That I may do 
this. to better purpofe, it will be neceflary to go back to 
the place where I firft came to the river, which was about 
forty miles from its mouth. 


Befide the ftunted pines already mentioned, there are 
fome tufts of dwarf willows; plenty of Wifhacumpuckey, 
(as the Englifh call it, and which they ufe as tea); fome 

jacka-- 


To face Paae 104 


Plate if 







Vineteed re ee ~< — 2 - _ r —— a S - 
ae eee 
- a 


a 
ee. ui | | 
ee oy the ee. | 


COPPER -MINE RIVER, 
g arroyo /y y) 
AMOI L STE LAR NG 
“ a MMbizzt 


fe 
} 


af i 
; 


a “ey j i 
ae a el as a 


Sat wee, of P30 fee te, a.. 2 ond | ; . Oe meg ee ’ 




























“sy 


+h ee fd ’ r . : : —. 
3 ~ : By 0 Ey v 
ee ah a wy wae | WAS, me: a > a 


a aah mh Da fy: roe =. Cd toe 
Ng FS oar ae 4! Whee bunks 

mS j ry — a otite. o ee : MURS WF th 
BONA &€: oh ~ Ms i 4 ay oe eg Jr wo LO forge Dinh “ 






YD tine Uarty read 






ie) “be. S 
go a ’ %, mA West = = 
RL” ae x 
| — 8 PE 
x i es 
§ 





D al X we: 


: Alarshy Crt 




















Longitude 20.30, West of ‘Greenwich. 








Se - = _— , sWeele cculyy 792 Saran , 


A Seale 07’ English Sea ics, fo tow Deer 


hordeon, Published Jar 22795, by tideld & Davies Strnd , 








: -= 
7 
: 
I 
7 —_ 
- 
> - L 
. » 
>» 
‘ I 

= me he ' ; 

d 

1 

= 

re 

» J 

-_ f 
_ . , 
' 

i] * | 
‘N 
| 
7 ' aie ‘ 
=-_ ‘ 
- Uv 2 


NOR DBT ER Neer ove AN: 


jackafheypuck, which the natives ufe as tobacco; anda 
few cranberry and heathberry bufhes; but not the leaft 
appearance of any fruit. 


The woods grow gradually thinner and {maller as you 
approach the fea; and the laft little tuft of pines that I 
faw is about thirty miles from the mouth of the river, fo 
that we meet with nothing between that ppt and the fea- 
fide but barren hills and marthes. 


The general courfe of the river is about North by Eatt; 
but in fome places it is very: crooked, and its breadth 
varies from twenty yards to four or five hundred. The 
banks are in general a folid rock, both fides of which cor- 
tefpond fo exaétly with each other, as to leave no doubt 
that the channel of the river has been caufed by fome ter- 
rible convulfion of nature; and the ftream is fupplied by 
a variety of little rivulets, that rufh down the fides of the 
hills, occafioned chiefly by the melting of the fnow. Some of 
the Indians fay, that this river takes its rife from the North 
Welt fide of Large White Stone Lake, which is at the diftance 
of near three hundred miles on a ftraight line; but I can 
{carcely think that is the cafe, unlefs there be many. inter- 
vening lakes, which are fupplied by the vaft quantity of. 
water that is collected in fo great an extent of hilly and 


mountainous country: for were it otherwife, I fhould © 
y ) 


imagine that the multitude of {mall rivers, which muit 
empty themfelves into the main {tream in the courfe of fo 
great 


165 


IA. 
July. 


166 


1771. 
WV 


July. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


ereat a diftance, would have formed a much deeper 
and ftronger current than I difcovered, and occafioned 
an annual deluge at the breaking up of the ice in 
the Spring, of which there was not the leaft appear- 
ance, except at Bloody Fall, where the river was con- 
tracted to the breadth of about twenty yards. It was at 
the foot of this fall that my Indians killed the Efquimaux ; 
which was the reafon why I diftinguifhed it by that appel- 
lation. From this fall, which is about eight miles from 
the fea-fide, there are very few hills, and thofe not high. 
The land between them is a ftiff loam and clay, which, 


in fome parts, produces patches of pretty good grafs, and 


in others tallifh dwarf willows: at the foot of the hills 
alfo there is plenty of fine fcurvy-grafs. 


The Efquimaux at this river are but low in ftature, 
none exceeding the middle fize, and though broad fet, 
are neither well-made nor ftrong bodied. Their com- 
plexion is of a dirty copper colour; fome of the women, 
however, are more fair and ruddy. ‘Their drefs much re- 
fembles that of the Greenlanders in Davis’s Straits, except 
the women’s boots, which are not {tiffened out with whale- 
bone, and the tails of their jackets are not more than a 
foot long. 


Their arms and’ fifhing-tackle are bows and arrows, 
fpears, lances, darts, &c. which exaély refemble thofe 
made ufe of by the Efquimaux :in. Hudfon’s Straits, and 

which 


NOR T4L,£5E RN tO C'E AN, 
which have been well defcribed by Crantz*; but, for 


want of good edge-tools, are far inferior to Ry in wae 
manthip. Their arrows are either fhod with a triangular 
piece of black ftone, like flate, or a piece of sits at but 
moft commonly the former. 


The body of their canoes is on the fame conftru@tion 
as that of the other Efquimaux, and there is ne unneceflary 
prow-projection beyond the body of the veffel; thefe, 
like their arms and other utenfils, are, for the want of 
better tools, by no means fo neat as thofe I have feen in 
Hudfon’s Bay and Straits. The double-bladed paddle is 
in univerfal ufe.among all the tribes of this people. 


Their tents are made of parchment deer-fkins in the 
hair, and are pitched in a circular form, the fame as thofe 
of the Efquimaux in Hudfon’s Bay. Thefe tents are un- 
doubtedly no more than their Summer habitations, for I 
faw the remains of two miferable hovels, which, from the 
fituation, the ftructure, and the vaft quantity of bones, 
old fhoes, fcraps of fkins, and other rubbifh lying near 
them, had certainly been fome of their Winter retreats. 
Thefe houfes were fituated on the South fide of a hill; 
one half of them were under-ground, and the upper parts 
clofely fet round with poles, meeting at the top in a conical 
form, like their Summer-houfes or tents. Thefe tents, 


* See Hift, of Greenland, vol, i. p. 132—=156, 
when 


167 


1G 
July. 


168 


L771. 


July. 


A JOURNEY TO) (He 


when inhabited, had undoubtedly been covered with fkins; 
and in Winter entirely overfpread with the {now-drift, 
which muft have greatly contributed to their warmth. 
They were fo {mall, that they did not contain more than 
fix or eight perfons cate and even that number of any other. 
people ea have found them but miferable habitatien 


Their houfehold furniture chiefly confifts. of ee 
kettles, and wooden troughs of various fizes ; alfo dithes, 
fcoops, and fpoons, made of the buffalo or caret roe horns. 
Their kettles are formed of a pepper and falt coloured 
ftone; and though the texture appears to be very coarfe, 
and as porous as a drip-{tone, yet they are perfectly tight, 
and will found as clear as a China bowl. Some of thofe 
kettles are folarge as to be capable of containing five or fix 
gallons ; and though it is impoffible thefe poor people can 
perform this arduous work with any other tools than harder 
{tones, yet they are by far fu periog to.any that I had ever feen 
in -Hudfon’s Bay; every one of them being ornamented 
with neat mouldings round the mm, and fome of the large 
ones with a kind of flute-work at each corner. In fhape 
they were a long {quare, fomething wider at the top than 
bottom, like a ieee and {trong handles of the folid 
ftone were left at each end to Tift them up. 


"Their hatchets are. made off a thick lump of copper, , 
about Ave or fix inches long, ‘and from one and a half te 
two inches fquare ; they are bevelled away at one end like 

a mortice- 


NOR TWHERN OCEAN. 


mortice-chiflel. This is lafhed into the end of a piece of 
wood about twelve or fourteen inches long, in fuch a man- 
ner as to act like an adze: in general they are applied to 
the wood like a chiffel, and driven in with a heavy club, 
inftead of a mallet. Neither the weight of the tool nor 
the fharpnefs of the metal will admit of their being 
handled either as adze or axe, with any degree of fuccefs. 


The men’s bayonets and women’s knives are alfo made 
of copper; the former are in fhape like the ace of {pades, 
with the handle of deers horn a foot long, and the latter 
exactly refemble thofe defcribed by Crantz. Samples of 
both thefe implements I formerly fent home to James Fitz- 
gerald, Efq. then one of the Hudfon’s Bay Committee. 


Among all the fpoils of the twelve tents which my com- 
panions plundered, only two fmall pieces of iron were 


found; one of which was about an inch and a half © 


long, and three eighths of an inch broad, made into a 


woman’s knife; the other was barely an inch long, and a _ 


- quarter of an inch wide. This laft was rivetted into a 
piece of ivory, fo as to form a man’s knife, known in 
Hud{on’s Bay by the name of Mokeatoggan, and is the 
only inftrument ufed by them in fhaping all their wood- 
work. 


Thofe people had a fine and numerous breed of dogs, 


with fharp erect ears, fharp nofes, bufhy tails, &c. ex- 
L : actly 


169 


1771, 


July. 


J 


Ou 


170 


1771. 
July. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


actly like thofe feen among the Efquimaux in Hudfon’s 
Bay and Straits. They were all tethered to ftones, to pre- 
vent them, as I fuppofe, from eating the fith that were 
{pread all over the rocks to dry. I do not recolleé that 
my companions killed or hurt one of thofe animals; but 
after we had left the tents, they often wifhed they had 
taken fome of thofe fine dogs with them. 


Though the drefs, canoes, utenfils, and many other 
articles belonging to thefe people, are very fimilar to 
thofe of Hudfon’s Bay, yet there is one cuftom that pre- 
vails among them—namely, that of the men having all 
the hair of their heads pulled out by the roots—which 
pronounces them to be of a different tribe from any 
hitherto feen either on the coaft of Labradore, Hudfon’s 
Bay, or Davis's Straits. ‘The women wore their hair at 
full length, and exaétly in the fame ftile as all the other 


E{quimaux women do whom I have feen, | 


When at the fea-fide, (at the mouth of the Copper River, ) 
befides feeing many feals on the ice, I alfo obferved feveral 
flocks of fea-fowl flying about the fhores; fuch as, gulls, 
black-heads, loons, old wives, ha-ha-wie’s, dunter geefe, 
arctic gulls, and willicks. In the adjacent ponds alfo were 
fome {wans and geefe in a moulting ftate, and in the 
marfhes fome curlews and plover; plenty of hawks-eyes, 
(i. e. the green plover,) and fome yellow-legs ; alfo feveral 
other {mall birds, that vifit thofe Northern parts in the 


Spring 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


Spring to breed and moult, and which doubtlefs return 
Southward as the fall advances. My reafon for this conjec- 
ture is founded on a certain knowledge that all thofe birds 
migrate in Hudfon’s Bay; and it is but reafonable to think 
that they are lefs capable of withftanding the rigour of 
fuch a long and cold Winter as they muft neceffarily ex- 
perience in a country which is fo many degrees within the 
Arétic Circle, as that is where I now faw them. 


That the mufk-oxen, deer, bears, wolves, wolvarines, 
foxes, Alpine hares, white owls, ravens, partridges, ground- 
{guirrels, common fquirrels, ermins, mice, &c. are the 
conitant inhabitants of thofe parts, is not to be doubted. 
In many places, by the fides of the hills, where the fnow 


lay toa great depth, the dung of the mufk-oxen and deer 


was lying in fuch long and continued heaps, as clearly to 
point out that thofe places had been their much-frequented 
paths during the preceding Winter. There were alfo many 
other fimilar appearances on the hills, and other parts, where 
the {now was entirely thawed away, without any print of 
a foot being vifible in the mofs; which is a certain proof 
that thefe long ridges of dung muft have been dropped in 
the {now as the beafts were pafling and repafling over it 
in the Winter. There are likewife fimilar proofs that the 
Alpine hare and the partridge do not migrate, but remain 
there the whole year: the latter we found in confider- 
able flocks among the tufts of willows which grow near 
the fea, . | 


one It 


r71 


I771. 
em amen a 


jul Ye 


A JOURNEY TO T ter 


It is perhaps not generally known, even to the curious, 
therefore may not be unworthy of obfervation, that the 
dung of the mufk-ox, though fo large an animal, is not 
larger, and at the fame time fo near the {hape and colour 
of that of the Alpine hare, that the difference is not 
eafily diftinguifhed but by the natives, though in general 
the quantity may lead to a difcovery of the animal to 
which it belongs. 


I did not fee any birds peculiar to thofe parts, except 
what the Copper Indians call the ‘* Alarm Bird,” or 
‘¢ Bird of Warning.’ In fize and colour it refembles a 
Cobadekoock, and is of the owl genus. The name is faid 
to be well adapted to its qualities ; for when it perceives 
any people, or beaft, it direts its way towards them im- 
mediately, and after hovering over them fome time, flies 
round them in circles, or goes a-head in the fame di- 
rection in which they walk. They repeat their vifits fre- 
quently; and if they fee any other moving objects, fly al- 
ternately from one party to the other, hover over them 
for fome time, and make a loud {creaming noife, like 
the crying of a child. In this manner they are faid fome- 
times to follow paflengers a whole day. The Copper In- 
dians put great confidence in thofe birds, and fay they are 
frequently apprized by them of the approach of ftrangers, 
and conduéted by them to herds of deer and mufk-oxen; 
which, without their affiftance, in all probability, they 
never could have found. 


The 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


The Efquimaux feem not to have imbibed the fame 
opinion of thofe birds; for if they had, they muft have 
been apprized of our approach toward their tents, becaufe 
all the time the Indians lay in ambuth, (before they began 
the maflacre,) a large flock of thofe birds were continually 
flying about, and hovering alternately over them and the 
tents, making a noife fufficient to awaken any man out of 


the foundeft fleep. 


After a fleep of five or fix hours we once more fet out, and 
walked eighteen or nineteen miles to the South South Eaft, 
when we arrived at one of the copper mines, which hes, 
from the river's mouth about South South Eaft, diftant 
about twenty-nine or thirty miles.. 


This mine, if it deferve that appellation, is no more 


than an entire jumble of rocks and gravel, which has been 


rent many ways by an earthquake. Through thefe ruins 
there runs a {mall river; but no part of it, at the time I 
was there, was more than knee-deep. 


The Indians who were the occafion of my undertaking 
this journey, reprefented this mine to be fo rich and va- 
tuable, that if a factory were built at the river, a fhip 
might be ballafted with the oar, inftead of ftone; and 
that with the fame eafe and difpatch as is ane with 
{tones at Churchill River. By their account the hills were 
entirely compofed of that metal, all in handy lumps, like. 

a heap. 


173 


1771. 
bie 


July. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


a heap of pebbles. But their account differed fo much 
from the truth, that I and almoft all my companions ex- 
pended near four hours in fearch of fome of this metal, 
with fuch poor fuccefs, that among us all, only one piece 
of any fize could be found. This, however, was remark- 
ably good, and weighed above four pounds *. I believe the 
copper has formerly been in much greater plenty; for in 
many places, both on the furface and in the cavities and 
crevices of the rocks, the ftones are much tinged with 
verdigrife, 


{t may not be unworthy the notice of the curious, or 
undeferving a place in my Journal, to remark, that the 
Indians imagine that every bit of copper they find re- 
fembles fome object in nature; but by what I faw of the 
large piece, and fome fmaller ones which were found by 
my companions, it requires a great fhare of invention to 
make this out. I found that different people had dif- 
ferent ideas on the fubje&, for the large piece of copper 
above mentioned had not been found long before it had 
twenty different names. One faying that it refembled 
this animal, and another that it reprefented a particular 
part of another; at laft it was generally allowed to re- 
femble an Alpine hare couchant: for my part, I muft con- 
fefs that I could not fee it had the leaft refemblance to any 
thing to which they compared it. It would be endlefs to 


* This piece of Copper is now in the poffeffion of the Hudfon’s Bay 
<ompany. | 


enumerate 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


enumerate the different parts of a deer, and other ani- 
mals, which the Indians fay the beft pieces of copper re- 
femble: it may therefore be fufhcient to fay, that the 
largeft pieces, with the feweft branches and the leaft drofs, 
are the beft for their ufe; as by the help of fire, and two 
fiones, they can beat it out to any fhape they wih. 


Before Churchill River was fettled by the Hudfon’s Bay 
Company, which was not more than fifty years previous to 
this journey being undertaken, the Northern Indians had no 
other metal but copper among them, except a {mall quan- 
tity of iron-work, which a party of them who vifited York 
Fort about the year one thoufand feven hundred and thir- 
teen, or one thoufand feven hundred and fourteen, pur- 
chafed; and a few pieces of old iron found at Churchill 
River, which had undoubtedly been left there by Captain 
Monk. This being the cafe, numbers of them from all quar- 
ters ufed every Summer to refort to thefe hills in fearch 
of copper; of which they made hatchets, ice-chiffels, 
bayonets, knives, awls, arrow-heads, &c.* The many 


paths 


* There is a ftrange tradition among thofe people, that the firft perfon who 
difcovered thofe mines was a woman, and that fhe conducted them to the 
place for feveral years; but as fhe was the only woman in company, fome of 
the men took fuch liberties with her as made her vow revenge on them; and 
fhe is faidto have been a great conjurer. Accordingly when the men had 
loaded themfelves with copper, and were going to return, fhe refufed to ac- 
company them, and faid fhe would fit on the mine till fhe funk into the 
ground, and that the copper fhould fink with her. The next year, when the 
men went for more copper, they found her funk up to the waift, though ftul 

alive, 


&75 


177%. 
hoger meee 


July. 


176 


tj Le 
Sean ae 


July, 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


paths that had been beaten by the Indians on thefe oc- 
cafions, and which are yet, in many places, very perfed, 
efpecially on the dry ridges and hills, is furprifing ; in the 
vallies and marfhy grounds, however, they are moftly 
grown over with herbage, fo as not to be difcerned. 


The Copper Indians fet a great value on their native 
metal even to this day; and prefer it to iron, for almoft 
every ufe except that of a hatchet, a knife, and an awl: 
for thefe three neceflary implements, copper makes but a 
very poor fubftitute. When they exchange copper for 
iren-work with our trading Northern Indians, which is 
but feldom, the ftandard is an ice-chiffel of copper for 
an ice-chifflel of iron, or an ice-chiffel and a few arrow- 
heads of copper, for a half-worn hatchet ; but when they 
barter furrs with our Indians, the eftablifhed rule is to give 
ten times the price for every thing they purchafe that is 
given for them at the Company’s Fattory. Thus, a 
hatchet that is bought at the Faétory for one beaver-fkin, 
or one cat-fkin, or three ordinary martins’ fkins, is fold to 





alive, and the quantity of copper much decreafed; and on their repeating 
their vifit the year following, fhe had quite difappeared, and all the principal 
part.of the mine with her; fo that after that period nothing remained on the 
furface but a few fmall pieces, and thofe were fcattered at a confiderable dif- 
tance from each other. Before that period they fay the copper lay on the 
furface in fuch large heaps, that the Indians had nothing to do but turn it over, 
and pick fuch pieces as would beft fuit the different ufes for which they in- 
tended it. 

5 thofe 


N,G.R Tytl EL Rh We @ G EyAN. 


thofe people at the advanced price of one thoufand per 
cent. ; they alfo pay in proportion, for knives, and every 
other fmaller piece of iron-work. For a {mall brafs kettle 
of two pounds, or two pounds and a half weight, they 
pay fixty martins, or twenty beaver in other kinds of 
furrs*, If the kettles are not bruifed, or ill-ufed in any 
other refpeét, the Northern traders have the confcience at 
times to exact fomething more. It is at this extravagant 
price that all the Copper and Dog-ribbed Indians, who 
trafic with our -yearly traders, fupply themfelves with 
iron-work, &c. | 


From .thofe two tribes our Northern Indians ufed 
formerly to purchafe moft of the furrs they brought 
to the Company’s Factory; for their own country pro- 
duced very few of thofe articles, and being, at that time, 
at war with the Southern Indians, they were prevented 
from penetrating far enough backwards to meet with 
many animals of the furr kind; fo that deer-fkins, and 


* What is meant by Beaver in other kind of furrs, muft be underftood as 
follows: : For the eafier trading with the Indians, as well as for the more cor- 
rectly keeping their accounts, the Hudfon’s Bay Company have made a fiull- 
grown beaver-fkin the ftandard by which they rate all other furrs, according 
to their refpective values. Thus in feveral fpecies of furrs, one fkin is valued 
at the rate of four beaver fkins; fome at three, and others at two; whereas 
thofe of an inferior quality are rated at one; and thofe of ftill lefs value con- 
fidered fo inferior to that of a beaver, that from fix to twenty of their fins 
are only valued as equal to.one beaver fkin in.the way of trade, and do not 
fetch one-fourth of the price at the London market, In this manner the term 
«¢ Made Beaver”’ is to be underftood. 


Aa | fuch 


N77 


igi] 1. 
July. 


178 


1771. 
ee 


July. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


fuch furrs as they could extort from the Copper and Dog- 
ribbed Indians, compofed the whole of their trade ; which, 
on an average of many years, and indeed till very lately, 
feldom or ever exceeded fix thoufand Made Beaver 
per annum. 


At prefent happy it is for them, and greatly to the 
advantage of the Company, that they are in perfe& peace, 
and live in friendfhip with their Southern neighbours. 
The good effect of this harmony is already fo vifible, that 
within a few years the trade from that quarter has increafed 
many thoufands of Made Beaver annually; fome years 
even to the amount of eleven thoufand fkins*. Befide 


the 


* Since this Journal was written, the Northern Indians, by annually Vifiting 
their Southern friends, the Athapufcow Indians, have contraéted the fmall-pox, 
which has carried off nine-tenths of them, and particularly thofe people who 
compofed the trade at Churchill Factory. The few furvivors follow the ex- 
ample of their Southern neighbours, and all trade with the Canadians, who 
are fettled in the heart of the Athapufcow country: fo that a very few years 
has proved my fhort-fightednefs, and that it would have been. much more to 
the advantage of the Company, as well as have prevented the depopulation 
of the Northern Indian country, if they had ftill remained at war with the 
Southern tribes, and never attempted to better their fituation. At the fame 
time, it is impoffible to fay what increafe of trade might not, in time, have 
arifen from a conftant and regular traffic with the different tribes of Copper 
and Dog-ribbed Indians. But having been totally neglected. for feveral years, 
they have now funk into their original barbarifm and extreme indigence ; and 
a war has enfued between the two tribes, for the fake of the few remnants 
of iron-work which was left among them; and the Dog-ribbed Indians were 
fo numerous, and fo fuccefsful, as to deftroy almoft the whole race of the 
Copper Indians. 


While 


oO 


NGORTHERN OCEAN, 


the advantage arifing to the Company from this increafe, 
the poor Northern Indians reap innumerable benefits from 
a fine and plentiful country, with the produce of which 
they annually load themfelves for trade, without giving the 
leaft offence to the proper inhabitants. 


Several attempts have been made to induce the Copper 
and Dog-ribbed Indians to vifit the Company’s Fort at 
Churchill River, and for that purpofe many prefents have 
been fent, but they.never were attended with any fuccefs. 
And though feveral of the Copper Indians have vifited 
Churchill, in the capacity of fervants to the Northern 
Indians, and were generally fent back loaded with prefents 
for their countrymen, yet the Northern Indians always 
plundered them of the whole foon after they left the 
Fort. This kind of treatment, added to the many incon- 
veniéncies that attend fo long a journey, are great obftacles 
in their way; otherwife it would be as poflible for them 
to bring their own goods to market, as for the Northern In- 
dians to go fo far to purchafe them on their own account, 





While I was writing this Note, I was informed by fome Northern Indians, 
that the few which remain of the Copper tribe have found their way to one of 


the Canadian houfesin the Athapufcow Indians country, where they get fupplied _ 


with every thing at lefs, or about half the price they were formerly obliged to 
give; fo that the few furviving Northern Indians, as well as the Fludfon’s Bay 
Company, have now loft every fhadow of any future trade from that quarter, 


unlefs the Company will eftablifh a (2019 Now: with the Athapufcow country, 


and underfell the Canadians. 


Aa 2 | and 


ae 


1771. 
em ane 


July. 


180 


1771. 


july. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


and have the fame diftance to bring them as the firft pro- 
prietors would have had. But it is a political {cheme of 
our Northern traders to prevent fuch an intercourfe, as it 
would greatly leflen their confequence and emolument. 
Superftition, indeed, will, in all probability, be a lafting 
barrier againft thofe people ever having a fettled communi- 
cation with our Factory ; as few of them chufe to travel 
in countries fo remote from their own, under a pretence 
that the change of air and provifions (though exactly the 
fame to which they are accuftomed) are highly prejudicial 
to their health; and that not one out of three of thofe 
who have undertaken the journey, have ever lived to 
return. The firft of thefe reafons. is evidently no more 
than grofs fuperftition; and though the latter is but too 
true, it has always been owing to the treachery and cruelty 
of the Northern Indians, who took them under their pro- 
tection. 


. It is but a few years fince, that Captain Keelfhies, who: 
is frequently mentioned in this Journal, took twelve of 
thefe people under his charge, all heavy laden with the 
moft valuable furrs; and long before they arrived at the 
Fort, he and the reft of his crew had got all the furrs 
from them, in payment for provifions for their fupport, 
and obliged them to carry the furrs on their account. 


On their arrival at Prince of Wales’s Fort, Keelfhies 


laid claim to great merit for having brought thofe ftrangers, 
fo 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


fo richly laden, to the Faétory,. and affured the Governor 
that he might, in future, expect a great increafe in trade 
from that quarter, through his intereft and affiduity. One 
of the ftrangers was dubbed with the name of Captain, 
and treated accordingly, while at the Fort; that is, he 
was dreffed out in the beft manner; and at his departure, 
both himfelf and all his countrymen were loaded with 
prefents, in hopes that they would not only repeat the 
vifit themfelves, but by difplaying fo much generolity, 
many of their countrymen would be induced to accom- 


pany them. 


There feems to be great propriety in the conduct of the 
Governor * on this occafion; but however well-intended, 


it had quite the contrary effet, for Keelfhies and the reft 


of his execrable gang, not content with fharing all the 


furrs thofe poor people had carried to the Fort, deter- 
mined to get alfo all the European goods that had been 
given to them by the Governor. As neither Keelthies 
nor any of his gang had the courage to kill the Copper 


Indians, they concerted a deep-laid fcheme for their de- 


ftruction; which was to leave them on an ifland. With 
this view, when they got to the propofed {pot, the North- 


ern Indians took care to have all the baggage belonging to. 


the Copper Indians ferried acrofs to the main, and having 


ftripped them of fuch parts of their clothing as they 


* Mr. Mofes Norton.’ | 
thought 


131 


1771. 
July. 


182 


1771. 
ad 
July. 


A JOURNEW TO THE. 


thought worthy their notice, went off with all the canoes, 


leaving them all behind on the ifland, where they petifhed 


for want. When I was on my journey to the Fort in June one 
thoufand feven hundred and feventy-two, I faw the bones 
of thofe poor people, and had the foregoing account from 
my guide Matonabbee; but it was not made known to the 
Governor for fome years afterward, for fear of prejudicing 


him again{ft Keelfhies. 


A familar circumftance had nearly happened to a Copper 
Indian who accompanied me to the Fort in one thoufand. 
feven hundred and feventy-two: after we were all ferried 
acrof{s Seal River, and the poor man’s bundle of furrs on 
the South-fide, he was left alone on the oppofite fhore ; 
and no one except Matonabbee would go over for him. 
The wind at that time blew fo hard, that Matonabbee 
{tripped himfelf quite naked, to be ready for fwimming 
in cafe the canoe fhould overfet ; but he foon brought the 
Copper Indian fafe over, to the no {mall mortification of 
the wretch who had the charge of him, and who would 
gladly have poffeffed the bundle of furrs at the expence 
of the poor man’s life. 


When the Northern Indians returned from the FaCory 
that year, the above Copper Indian put himfelf under the 
protection of Matonabbee, who accompanied him as far 
North as the latitude 64°, where they faw fome Copper 
Indians, among whom was the young man’s father, into 

whofe 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


whofe hands Matonabbee delivered him in good health, 
with all his goods fafe, and in good order. _ 


Soon after we had left the Copper-mine, there came on 
a thick fog with rain, and at intervals heavy fhowers of 
fnow. This kind of weather continued for fome days; 
and at times it was fo thick, that we were obliged to 
{top for feveral hours together, as we were unable to 
fee our way, and the road was remarkably rocky and 
intricate. 7 


At three o’clock in the morning of the twenty-fecond, 
Matonabbee’s brother and one of the Copper Indians, 
who had been firft difpatched a-head from Congecatha- 
whachaga, overtook us. During their abfence they had 
not difcovered any Indians who could have been ferviceable 
to my expedition. They had, however, been at the Cop- 
per River, and feeing fome marks fet up there to dire& 
them to return, they had made the beft of their way, and 
had not flept from the time they left the river till they 
joined us, though the diftance was not lefs than a hundred 
miles. When they arrived we were afleep, but we foon 
awakened, and began to proceed on our journey. That 
day we walked forty-two miles; and in our way paffed 


Buffalo Lake: at night, we put up about the middle of 


the Stony Mountains. The weather was exceflively hot 
and fultry. 
The 


183 


1771. 
perm asec) 


July. 


22d. 


184. 
1771. 


July 
23s 


24th. 


A JOURNERW 0 “PH 


On the twenty-third, the weather continued. much the 
fame as on the preceding day. Early in the morning we 
fet out, and walked forty-five miles the firft day, during 
which the Indians killed feveral fine fat buck deer. 


About one o’clock in the morning of the twenty-fourth, 
we {topped and took a little refrefhment, as we had alfo 
done about noon the preceding day; but the Indians had 
been fo long from their wives and families, that they pro- 
mifed not to fleep till they faw them, efpecially as we were 
then in fight of the hills of Congecathawhachaga, where 
we had left the laft of them. After refting about an 
hour, we proceeded on our way, and at fix in the morning 
arrived at Congecathawhachaga; when, to our great difap- 
pointment, wefound that all our women had got fet acrofs 
the river before the Copper Indians left: that part; fo that 
when we arrived, not an Indian was to be found, except 
an old man -and his family, who had arrived in our ab- 
fence, and was waiting at the crofiing-place. with fome 
furrs for Matonabbee, who was: fo nearly related to the 
old man as to be his fon-in-law,-having one of his daughters 


‘for a wife. The old man had another with him, who 


was alfo offered to the great man, but not accepted. 


Our ftay at this place may be faid to have been of very 
fhort duration; for on fecing a large {moke tothe Southward, 


we immediately crofied the river, and walked towards it, 
| 6 when 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


when we found that the women had indeed been there 
fome days before, but were gone; and at their departure 


had fet the mofs on fire, which was then burning, and » 


occafioned the fmoke we: had feen. By this time the 
afternoon was far advanced; we purfued, however, our 
courfe in the dire@tion which the women took, for 
their track we could eafily difcover in the mofs. We 
had not gone far, before we faw another fmoke at a 
great diftance, for which’ we fhaped our courfe; and, 
notwithf{tanding we redoubled our pace, it was eleven 
o'clock at night before we reached it; when, to our 
great mortification, we found it to be the place where 
the women had flept the night before; having in the 
morning, at their departure, fet fire to nh mofs which 
was then burning. 


The Indians, finding that their wives were fo near as 
to be within one of their ordinary day’s walk, which fel- 
dom exceeded ten or twelve miles, determined not to 
reft till they had joined them. Accordingly we purfued 
our courfe, and about two o’clock in the morning of the 
the twenty-fifth, came up with fome of the women, who 
had then pitched their tents by the fade of Cogead Lake. 


From our leaving the Copper-mine River to this time we 
had travelled fo hard, and taken fo little reft by the way, 
that my feet and legs had {welled confiderably, and I had 
become quite {tiff at the ankles. In this fituation I had 

Bb fo 


185 


1771. 
aes 


July. 


25th. 


186 


July. 


Lie 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


fo little power to direct my feet when walking, that I 
frequently knocked them againft the ftones with fuch force, 
as not only to jar and diforder them, but my legs alfo; 


and the nails of my toes were bruifed to fuch a degree, 


that feveral of them feftered and dropped off. To add 
to this mifhap, the fkin was entirely chafed off from the 
tops of both my feet, and between every toe; fo that the 
fand and gravel, which I could by no means exclude, 
irritated the raw parts fo much, that for a whole day befpre 
we arrived at the women’s tents, I left the print of my feet 
in blood almoft at every ftep I took. Several of the In- 
dians began to complain that their feet alfo were fore; but, 
on examination, not one of them was the twentieth part in 
fo bad a itate as mine. 


This being the firft time I had been in fuch a fituation, 
or feen any body foot-foundered, I was much alarmed, 
and under great apprehenfions for the confequences. 
Though I was but little fatigued'in body, yet the excru- 
ciating, pain I fuffered when walking, had fuch an effeé: 
on my fpirits, that if the Indians had continued to travel 
two or three days longer at that unmerciful rate, I muft 
unavoidably have been left behind; for my feet were in 
many places quite honey-combed, by the dirt and gravel 
eating into the raw fleth, 


As foon as we arrived at the women’s tents, the 


firft thing I did, was to wafh and clean my feet in 
warm. 


h 


NOR T HER M OFC EAN. 


warm water; then I bathed the fwelled parts with {pirits 
of wine, and dreffed thofe that were raw with Turner’s 
cerate; foon after which I betook myfelf to reft. As we 
did not move on the following day, I perceived that 
the {welling abated, and the raw parts of my feet were 
not quite fo much inflamed. ‘This change for the better 
gave me the ftrongeft aflurance that reft was the principal 
thing wanted to effect a {peedy and complete cure of my 
painful, though in reality very fimple diforder, (foot-found- 
ering,) which I had before confidered to be an affair of the 
sreateft confequence. 


Reft, however, though effential to my f{peedy recovery, 
could not at this time be procured ; for as the Indians were 
defirous of joining the remainder of their wives and families 
as foon as poffible, they would not ftop even a fingle day ; 
fo that on the twenty-feventh we again began to move; 
and though they moved at the rate of eight or nine miles 
a day, it was with the utmoft difficulty that I could follow 
them. Indeed the weather proved remarkably tne and 
pleafant, and the ground was in general pretty dry, and free 
from ftones; which contributed greatly to my eafe in 
walking, and enabled me to keep up with the natives. 


On the thirty-firft of July, we arrived at the place 
where the wives and families of my companions had been 
ordered to wait our return from the Copper-mine River. 
Here we found feveral tents of Indians; but thofe be- 

Bit oe longing 


187 


{771\. 
ee ced 


July. 


27th. 


188 


1771. 
Se em ame 


July. 


Augu 
rate 
Sti. 


A JOURNEY TO PHE 


longing to Matonabbee, and fome others of my crew, had 
not arrived. We faw, however, a large fmoke to the 
Eaftward, which we fuppofed had been made by them, 
as no other Indians were expected from that quarter. 
Accordingly, the next morning, Matonabbee fent fome 
of his young men in queft of them, and on the fifth, 
they all joined us; when, contrary to expectation, a great 
number of other Indians were with them; in all, to the 
amount of more than forty tents. Among thofe In- 
dians, was the man who Matonabbee ftabbed when we 
were at Clowey. With the greateft fubmiflion, he led 
his wife to Matonabbee’s tent, fet her down by his fide, 
and retired, without faying a word. Matonabbee took no 
notice of her, though fhe was bathed in tears; and by de- 
erees, after reclining herfelf on her elbow for fome time, 
fhe lay down, and, fobbing, faid, /ee’d dinne, feed dinne ! 
which is, My hufband, my hufband! On which Mato- 
nabbee told her, that if fhe had refpec&ted him as fuch, 
fhe would not have runaway from him; and that fhe was 
at liberty to go where fhe pleafed. On which fhe got up, 
with feeming reluctance, though moft affuredly with a 
light heart, and returned to her former hufband’s tent. 


CH Age 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


Giz A P. VII. 


Remarks from the Time the Women joined us till our 
Arrival at the Athapufcow Lake. 


Several of the Indians fick.—Method ufed by the conjurers to relieve 
one man, who recovers.—Matonabbee and his crew proceed to the 
South Weft.—Moft of the other Indians feparate, and go their re- 
fpettive ways.—Pafs by White Stone Lake—Many deer killed merely 
for their fkins.—Remarks thereon, and on the deer, refpeGing feafons 
and places.—Arrive at Point Lake.—One of the Indian’s wives being 

fick, is left behind to perifo above-ground.—Weather very bad, but deer 
plenty.—Stay fJome time at Point Lake to dry meat, &c.—Winter fet 
in.—Superftitious cuftoms obferved by my companions, after they had 
killed the Efquimaux at Copper River-—A violent gale of wind over- 
Seis my tent and breaks my quadrant.—Sonie Copper and Dog-ribbed In- 
dians join us.—Indians propofe to go to the Athapufcow Country to kill 
moofe.—Leave Point Lake, and arrive at the wood’s edge.—Arrive at 
Anawd Lake.—Tranfaétions there-—Remarkable inftance of a man 


being cured of the palfey by the conjurers—Leave Anawd Lake.—<Ar- 
rive at the great Athapufcow Lake. 


ee of the Indians being very ill, the conjurers, 
who are always the doétors, and Pretend to perform 
great cures, began to try their fkill to effe& their re- 
covery. Here it is neceflary to remark, that they ufe no 
medicine either for internal or eternal complaints, but 
perform all their cures by charms. In ordinary cafes, 
fucking the part affected, blowing, and finging to it; 
haugh- 


7's 
Nn pened 


Auguit. 


—_ 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


haughing, fpitting, and at the fame time uttering a heap 
of unintelligible jargon, compofe the whole procefs of 
the cure. For fome inward complaints; fuch as, griping 
in the inteftines, difficulty of making water, &c, it 
is very common to fee thofe jugglers blowing into the 
azus, or into the parts adjacent, till their eyes are almoft 
fiarting out of their heads: and this operation is per- 
formed indifferently on all, without regard either to age 
or fex. The accumulation of fo large a quantity of 
wind is at times apt to occafion fome extraordinary emo- 
tions, which are not eafily fuppreffed by a fick perfon ; 
and as there is no vent for it but by the channel through 
which it was conveyed thither, it fometimes occafions an 
odd {cene between the doctor and his patient ; which I once 
wantonly called an engagement, but for which I was af- 


- terward exceedingly forry, as it highly offended feveral of 


the Indians ; particularly the juggler and the fick perfon, 
both of whom were men I much efteemed, and, except 
in that moment of levity, it had ever been no lefs my 
inclination than my intereft to fhew them every refpecdt 
that my fituation would admit. 

I have often admired the great pains thefe jugelers take to 
deceive their credulous countrymen, while at the fame time 
they are indefatigably induftrious and perfevering in their 
efforts to relieve them. Being naturally not very delicate, 
they frequently continue their windy procefs {fo long, that I 
have more than once feen the dodtor quit his patient with his | 
face and breaft in a very difagreeable condition. However 


3 | laugh- 


NTO RY BERN OCE AN. 


laughable this may appear to an European, cuftom makes 
it very indecent, in their opinion, to turn any thing of the 
kind to ridicule. 


When a friend for whom they have a particular regard 
is, as they fuppofe, dangeroufly il, befide the above 
methods, they have recourfe to another very extraordinary 
piece of fuperftition; which is no lefs than than that of 
pretending to {wallow hatchets, ice-chiffels, broad bayo- 
nets, knives, and the like; out of a fuperftitious notion 
that undertaking fuch defperate feats will have fome in- 
fluence in appeafing death, and procure a refpite for their 
patient. 


On fuch extraordinary occafions a conjuring-houfe is 
erected, by driving the ends of four long {mall fticks, or 
poles, into the ground at right angles, fo as to form a 
{quare of four, five, fix, or feven feet, as may be required. 
The tops of the poles are tied together, and all is clofe 
covered with a tent-cloth or other fkin, exa@ly in the 
fhape of a {mall fquare tent, except that there is no va- 
cancy left at the top to admit the light. In the middle 
of this houfe, or tent, the patient is laid, and is foon fol- 
lowed by the conjurer, or conjurers. Sometimes five 
or fix of them give their jcint-afliftance ; but before they 
enter, they ftrip themfelves quite naked, and as foon as 
they get into the houfe, the door being well clofed, they 


kneel round the fick perfon or perfons, and begin to fuck - 


and 


1g! 


1771. 
Se aa aa 


Augutt. 


192 
1771. 


Auguft. 


A JOURNEY TO Tree 


and blow at the parts affected, and then ina very fhort fpace 
of time fing and talk as if converfing with familiar fpirits, 
which they fay appear to them in the fhape of different 
beafts and birds of prey. When they have had fufficient 
conference with thofe neceflary agents, or fhadows, as 
they term them, they afk for the hatchet, bayonet, or the 
like, which is always prepared by another perfon, with 
a long firing faftened to it by the haft, for the conveni- 
ence of hauling it up again after they have fwallowed it; 
for they very wifely admit this to be a very neceffary pre- 
caution, as hard and compact bodies, fuch as iron and 
fteel, would be very difficult to digeft, even by the men 
who are enabled to {wallow them. Befides, as thofe tools 
are in themfelves very ufeful, and not always to be pro- 
cured, it would be very ungenerous in the conjurers to 
digeft them, when it is known that barely fwallowing 


them and hauling them up again is fully fufficient to an- 


{wer every purpofe that 1s expected from them. 


At the time when the forty and odd tents of Indians 
joined us, one man was fo dangeroufly ill, that it was 
thought neceffary the conjurers fhould ufe fome of thofe 
wonderful experiments for his recovery; one of them 
therefore immediately confented to fwallow a broad 
bayonet. Accordingly, a conjuring-houfe was ereéted in 
the manner above defcribed, into which the patient was 
conveyed, and he was foon followed by the.conjurer, who, 
after a long preparatory difcourfe, and the neceflary con- 


ference 


NOR TOH ER Ni @eOsCeE AgN. 


ference with his familiar fpirits, or fhadows, as they call 
them, advanced to the door and afked for the bayonet, 
which was then ready prepared, by having a ftring faftened 
to it, and a fhort piece of wood tied to the other end of 
the ftring, to prevent: him from {wallowing it. I could 
not help obferving that the length of the bit of wood was 
not more than the breadth of the bayonet: however, as 
it anfwered the intended purpofe, it did equally well as if 
it had been as long as a handfpike. 


Though I am not fo credulous as to believe that the 
conjurer abfolutely f{wallowed the bayonet, yet I muft ac- 
knowledge that in the twinkling of an eye he conveyed it 
to—God knows where; and the {mall piece of wood, or 
one exactly like it, was confined clofe to his teeth. He 
then paraded backward and forward before the conjuring- 
houfe for a fhort time, when he feigned to be greatly dif 
ordered in his {tomach and bowels; and, after making many 
wry faces, and groaning moft hideoufly, he put his bodyinto 
feveral diftorted attitudes, very fuitable to the occafion. He 
then returned to the door of the conjuring-houfe, and after 
making many ftrong efforts to vomit, by the help of the 
{tring he at length, and after tugging at it fome time, pro- 
duced the bayonet, which apparently he hauled out of his 
mouth, to the no {mall furprize of all prefent. He then 
looked round with an air of exultation, and ftrutted into 
the conjuring-houfe, where he renewed his incantations, 
and continued them without intermiflion twenty-four hours. 


Cc Though 


Oo 


Oe 
Auguft 
6th. 


194 


771. 
ee | 
Augutt. 


oth. 


soth—25th. 


A jJiO U'RIN B ve)? ORE 


Though I was not clofe to his elbow when he performed 
the above feat, yet I thought myfelf near enough (and I 
can affure my readers I was all attention) to have detected 
him. Indeed I muft confefs that it appeared to me to be 
a very nice piece of deception, efpecially as it was per- 
formed by a man quite naked. 


Not long after this flight-of-hand work was over, fome 
of the Indians afked me what I thought of it; to which 
I anfwered, that I was too far off to fee it fo plain as I 
could wifh; which indeed was no more than the ftricteft 
truth, becaufe I was not near enough to deteét the decep- 
tion. The fick man, however, foon recovered; and ina 


few days afterwards we left that place and proceeded to 
the South Weft. 


On the ninth of Auguft, we once more purfued our 
journey, and continued our courfe in the South Weft quar- 
ter, generally walking about feven or eight miles a day. 
Ail the Indians, however, who had been in our company, 
except twelve tents, {truck off different ways. As to 
myfelf, having had feveral days reft, my feet were com- 
pletely healed, though the fkin remained very tender for 


fome time. 


From the nineteenth to the twenty-fifth, we walked by 
the fide of Thaye-chuck-gyed Whoie, or Large White- 
{tone Lake, which is about forty miles long from the North 


Eait 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


-Eaft to the South Weft, but of very unequal breadth. A 


river from the North Weft fide of this lake is faid to run ° 


in a ferpentine manner a long way to the Weftward; and 
then tending to the Northward, compofes the main branch 
of the Copper-mine River, as has been already mentioned ; 
which may or may not be true. It is certain, however, 
that there are many rivulets which empty themfelves into 
this lake from the South Eaft; but as they are all {mall 
ftreams, they may probably be no more than what is fuf- 
ficient to fupply the conftant decreafe occafioned by the 
exhalations, which, during the fhort Summer, fo high a 
Northern latitude always affords. | 


Deer were very plentiful the whole way; the Indians 
killed great numbers of them daily, merely for. the fake of 
their fkins ; and at this time of the year their pelts are in 


good feafon, and the hair of a proper length for clothing. 


The great deftruction which is made of the deer in thofe 
parts at this feafon of the year only, is almoft incredible; and 
as they are never known to have more than one young one at 
atime, it-is wonderful they do not become {carce: but fo 
far is this from being the cafe, that the oldeft Northern In- 
dian in all their tribe will affirm that the deer are as plen- 
tiful now as they. ever have been; and though they are 
remarkably fcarce fome years near Churchill river, yet it 
is-faid, and-with great probability of truth, that they are 

OR more 


EoD 


1771. 
Keene ceil 


Auguft. 


196 


i771. 
Auguft. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


more plentiful in other parts of the country than they were- 
formerly. The fcarcity or abundance of thefe animals in 
different places at the fame feafon is caufed, in a great 
meafure, by the winds which prevail for fome time before ; 
for the deer are fuppofed by the natives to walk always in 
the dire@ion from which the wind blows, except when 
they migrate from Eaft to Weft, or from Weft to Eaft, in 
fearch of the oppofite fex, for the purpofe of propagating 
their f{pecies. | 


It requires the prime part of the fkins of from eight to 
ten deer to'make a complete fuit of warm clothing for a 
grown perfon during the Winter; all of which fhould, if 
poffible, be killed in the month of Auguft, or early in 
September; for after that time the hair is too long, and 
at the fame time fo loofe in the pelt, that it will drop off 
with the flighteft injury. 


Befide thefe fkins, which muft be in the hair, each per- 
fon requires feveral others to be dreffed into leather, for 
ftockings and fhoes, and light Summer clothing; {feveral 
more are alfo wanted in a parchment ftate, to make chew/la 
as they call it, or thongs to make netting for their fnow- 
fhoes, {nares for deer, fewing for their fledges, and, in 
fa&, for every other ufe where ftrings or lines of any kind 
are required: fo that each perfon, on an average, expends, 
in the courfe of a year, upwards of twenty deer fkins in 


clothing 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


clothing and other domeftic ufes, exclufive of tent cloths, 
bags, and many other things which it is impoffible to re- 
member, and unneceflary to enumerate. 


All fkins for the above-mentioned purpofes are, if pof® 
fible, procured between the beginning of Auguft and the 
middle of O&ober ; for when the rutting feafon is over, 
and the Winter fets in, the deer-fkins are not only 
very thin, but in general full of worms and warbles ; 
which render them of little ufe, unlefs it be to cut into 
fine thongs, of which they make fafhing-nets, and nets 
for the heels and toes of their {now-fhoes. Indeed the 
chief ufe that is made of them in Winter is for the 
purpofe of food; and really when the hair is properly 
taken off, and all the warbles are fqueezed out, if they are 
well-boiled, they are far from being difagreeable. The 
Indians, however, never could perfuade me to eat the 
warbles, of which fome of them are remarkably fond, 
particularly the children. They are always eaten raw 
and alive, outof the fkin; and are faid, by thofe who 
like them, to be as fine as goofeberries. But the very 
idea of eating fuch things, exclufive of their appearance, 
(many of them being as large as the firft joint of the 
little finger,) was quite fufficient to give me an un- 
alterable difguft to fuch a repaft; and when I acknow- 
ledge that the warbles out of the deers backs, and the do- 
metic lice, were the only two things I ever faw my com- 

panions 


So 


1771. 
Te am aumened 


Auguft. 


198 A JOURNEY TO THE 


177%. panions eat, of which I could not, or did not, partake, I 
ns 
‘Angut.  truft I fhall not be reckoned. over-delicate in my appetite. 


. The month of Odober is the rutting feafon with the 

“deer in thofe parts, and after the time of their courtfhip 
is over, the bucks feparate from the does; the former pro- 
ceed to the Weftward, to take fhelter in the woods ‘during 
the Winter, and the latter keep out in the*barren ground 
the whole year. This, though a general rule, is not with- 
out fome exceptions; for I have frequently feen many does 
in the woods, though they bore no proportion ‘to the 
number of bucks. This rule, therefore, only flands good 
tefpecting the deer to the North of Churchill River ; ‘for 
the deer to the Southward live promifcuoufly among the 
woods, as well as in the plains, and along the banks of 
rivers, lakes, &c. the whole year. 


The old buck’s horns are very large, with many 
branches, and always drop off in the month of Novem- 
ber, which is about the'time they begin to, approach the 
woods. This is undoubtedly wifely ordered by Provi- 
dence, the better to enable them to efcape from their ene- 
mies through the woods; otherwife they would become 
an eafy prey to wolves and other beafts, and be liable to 
get entangled among the trees, even in ranging about in 
fearch of food. The fame opinion may probably be ad- 
mitted of the Southern deer, which always refide- among 


the 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


the woods; but the Northern deer, though by far the 
f{malleft in this country, have much the largeft horns, and 
the branches are fo long, and at the fame time fpread fo 
wide, as to make them more liable to be entangled among 
the under-woods, than any other fpecies of deer that I 
have noticed. The young bucks in thofe parts do not 
fhed their horns fo foon as the old ones: I have frequently 
feen them killed at or near Chriftmas, and could difcover 
no appearance of their horns being loofe. The does do 
not fhed their horns till the Summer; fo that when the 
buck’s horns are ready to drop off, the horns of the does 
are all hairy, and fcarcely come to their full growth. 


The deer in thofe parts are generally in motion from 
Eaft to Weft, or from Weft to Eaft, according to the 
feafon, or the prevailing winds; and that is the principal 
reafon why the Northern Indians are always {hitting their 
{ftation. From November till May, the bucks continue 
to the Weitward, among the woods, when their horns be- 
gin to fprout; after which they proceed on to the Eaft- 
ward, to the barren grounds; and the does that have been 
on the barren ground all the Winter, are taught by inftiné 
to advance to the Weftward to meet them, in order to 
propagate their fpecies. Immediately after the rutting 
feafon is over, they feparate, as hath been mentioned above. 
The old vulgar faying, fo generally received among the 
lower clafs of people in Engiand, concerning the bucks 
fhedding their yards, or more properly the glands of the 

penis, 


199 


1771. 
en aie 


Auguft. 


200 


1771. 
(eran teens 


Auguil. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


penis, yearly, whether it be true in England or not, is cer- 
tainly not true in any of the countries bordering on Hud- 
fon’s Bay. A long refidence among the Indians has enabled 
me to confirm this affertion with great confidence, as I 
have feen deer killed every day throughout the year; and 
when I have mentioned this circumftance to the Indians, 
either Northern or Southern, they always affured me that 
they never obferved any fuch fymptoms. With equal truth 
I can affert, and that from ocular demonftration, that the 
animal which is called the Alpine Hare in Hudion’s Bay, 
actually undergoes fomething fimilar to that which is vul- 
garly afcribed to the Englifh deer. I have feen and handled 
feveral of them, who had been killed juft after they had 
coupled in the Spring, with the peni/es hanging out, dried 
up, and fhrivelled, like the navel-ftring of young animals ; 
and on examination I always found a paflage through them 
for the urine to pafs. I have thought proper to give this re- 
mark a place in my Journal, becaufe, in all probability, 
it is not generally known, even to thofe gentlemen who 
have made natural hiftory their chief ftudy; and if their 
refearches are of any real utility to mankind, it is furely to 
be regretted that Providence fhould have placed the greateft 
part of them too remote from want to be obliged to travel 
for ocular proofs of what they affert in their publica- 
tions; they are therefore wifely content to flay at home, 
and enjoy the bleflings with whicn they are endowed, 
refting fatisfied to colle& fuch information for their own 


amufement, and the gratification of the public, as thofe 
2 who 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


who are neceflitated to be travellers are able or willing to 
givethem. It is true, and I am forry it is fo, that I come 
under the latter defcription ; but hope I have not, or fhall 
not, inthe courfe of this Journal, advance any thing that 
will not ftand the teft of experiment, and the fkill of the 
moft competent judges. 


After leaving White Stone Lake, we continued our 
courfe in the South Weft quarter, feldom walking more 
than twelve miles a day, and frequently not half that 
diftance. | 


On the third of September, we arrived at a {mall river 
belonging to Point Lake, but the weather at this time 
proved fo boifterous, and there was fo much rain, {now, 


and froft, alternately, that we were obliged to wait {everal 


days before we could crofs it in our canoes ; and the water 
was too deep, and the current too rapid, to attempt ford- 
ing it. During this interruption, however, our time was 


not entirely loft, as deer were fo plentiful that the Indians 


killed numbers of them, as well for the fake of their fkins, 
as for their Hefh, which was at prefent in excellent order, 
and the fkins in proper feafon for the fundry ufes for which 
they are deftined. 


In the afternoon of the feventh, the weather became 
fine and moderate, when we all were ferried acrofs the 


river; and the next morning fhaped our courfe to the 
Dd North 


20% 


A 
(een pemsencist 


Augutt. 


September 
3d. 


“th. 


8th. 


202 A JOURNEY TO THE 


177!- North Weft, by the fide of Point Lake. After three days 
feepretiber. journey, which- only confifted of about eighteen miles,. 
we came toa few fmall fcrubby woods, which were the 
firft that we had feen from the twenty-fifth of May, ex- 

cept thofe we had perceived at the Copper-mine River. 


One of the Indian’s wives, who for fome time had 
been in a confumption, had for a few days paft become fo 
weak as to be incapable of travelling, which, among thofe 
people, is the moft deplorable ftate to which a. human: be- 
ing can poflibly be brought. Whether fhe had been given 
over by the doctors, or that it was for want of friends 
among them, I cannot teH, but certain it is, that no ex- 
pedients were taken for her recovery; fo that, without 
much ceremony, fhe was left unaflifted, to perifh above- 
oround.. 


Though this was the firft inftance of the kind I had 
feen, it is the common, and indeed the. conftant praétice 
of thofe Indians; for when a grown. perfon is. fo ill, efpe-. 
cially in the Summer, as not to be able to walk, and 
too heavy to be carried,. they. fay it is better to leave one 
who. is paft recovery, than for the whole family to fit 
down by them and ftarve to death; well knowing that 
they cannot be of any fervice to the afflicted. On thofe 
occafions, therefore, the friends or relations of the fick 
generally leave them fome victuals and water; and, if the 
fituation of the place will afford it, a little fring. When 

thofe 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


thofe articles are provided, the perfon to be left is ac- 
-quainted with the road which the others intend to go; 
and then, after covering them well up with deer fkins, 
&¥c. they take their leave, and walk away crying. 


Sometimes perfons thus left, recover ; and come up with 
their friends, or wander about till they meet with other 
Indians, whom they accompany till they again join 
their relations. Inftances of this kind are feldom known. 
The poor woman above mentioned, however, came up 
with us three feveral times, after having been left in 
the manner defcribed. At length, poor creature! fhe 


dropt behind, and no one attempted to go back in fearch 
of her. : | 


A cuftom apparently fo unnatural is perhaps not to be 
found among any other of the human race: if properly 
confidered, however, it may with juftice be afcribed to 
neceflity and felf-prefervation, rather than to the want of 
humanity and focial feeling, which ought to be the cha-~ 
racteriftic of men, as the nobleft part of the creation. 
Neceflity, added to national cuftom, contributes prin- 
cipally to make icenes of this kind lefs fhocking to thofe 
people, than they muft appear to the more civilized part 
of mankind. 


During the early part of September, the weather was in 
eeneral cold; with much fleet and fnow; which feemed to 
Dd 2 promife 


203 


1771. 
ee 
September. 


204 
177}. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


promife that the Winter would fet in early. Deer at this 


September. time being very plentiful, and the few woods we met with 


28th. 


goth. 


affording tent-poles and firing, the Indians propofed to 
remain where we were fome time, in order to drefs fkins, 
and provide our Winter clothing ; alfo to make {now-fhoes 
and temporary ficdges, as well as to prepare a large quan- 
tity of dried meat and fat to carry with us; for by the 
accounts of the Indians, they have always experienced a 
great {carcity of deer, and every other kind of game, in 
the direction they propofed we fhould go when we left 
Point Lake. 


‘Toward the middle of the month, the weather became 
quite mild and open, and continued fo till the end of it; 
but there was fo much conftant and incefiant rain, that it 
rotted moft of our tents. On the twenty-eighth, how- 
ever, the wind fettled in the North Weft quarter, when 
the weather grew fo cold, that by the thirtieth all the 
ponds, lakes, and other ftanding waters, were frozen over 
fo hard, that we were enabled to crofs them on the ice 
without danger. 


Among the various fuperftitious cuftoms of thofe people, 
it is worth remarking, and ought to have been mentioned 
in its proper place, that immediately after my companions 
had killed the Efquimaux at the Copper River, they con- 
fidered themfelves in a ftate of uncleannefs, +vhich induced 
them to practife fome very curious and unufual ceremonies.. 

10. In: 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


In the farft place, all who were abfolutely concerned in 
the murder were prohibited from cooking any kind of 
victuals, either for themfelves or others. As luckily there 
were two in company who had not fhed blood, they were 
employed always as cooks till we joined the women. This 
circumftance was exceedingly favourable on my fide; for 
had there been no perfons of the above defcription in 
company, that tafk, I was told, would have fallen on me; 
which would have been no lefs fatiguing and troublefome, 
than humiliating and vexatious. 


When the victuals were cooked, all the murderers 
took a kind of red earth, or oker, and painted all the 
{pace between the nofe and chin, as weil as the greater 
part of their cheeks, almoft to the ears, before they would 
tafte a bit, and would not drink out of any other difh, 
or fmoke out of any other pipe, but their own 3 and none of 
the others feemed willing to drink or {moke out of theirs. 


We had no fooner joined the women, at our return from 
the expedition, than there feemed to be an univerfal fpirit 
of emulation among them, vying who fhould frft make a 
fuit of ornaments for their hufbands, which confifted of 
bracelets for the wrifts, and a band for the forehead, com- 
pofed of porcupine quils and moofe-hair, curioufly wrought 
on leather. 


The cuftom of painting the mouth and part of the 
cheeks before each meal, and drinking and f{moking out 


of 


205 


1771. 
Te anaes 


September. 


206 


1771. 


aceon eee) 
September. 


O<ctober. 
6th. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


of their own utenfils, was ftriétly and invariably obferved, 
till the Winter began to fet in; and during the whole of 
that time they would never kifs any of their wives or 
children. They refrained alfo from eating many parts of 
the deer and other animals, particularly the head, entrails, 
and blood; and during their uncleannefs, their victuals 
were never fodden in water, but dried in the fun, eaten 
quite raw, or broiled, when a fire fit for the purpofe could 
be procured. 


When the time arrived that was to put an end to thefe 
ceremonies, the men, without a female being prefent, made 
a fire at fome diftance from the tents, intowhich they threw 
all their ornaments, pipe-ftems, and difhes, which were 
foon confumed to afhes ; after which a feaft was prepared, 
confifting of fuch articles as they had long been prchibited 
from eating; and when all was over, each man was at 
libery to eat, drink, and fmoke as he pleafed; and alfo 
to kifs his wives and children at difcretion, which they 
feemed to do with more raptures than I had ever known 
them do it either before or fince. 


Oéober came in very roughly, attended with heavy 
falls of fnow, and much drift. On the fixth at night, a 
heavy gale of wind from the North Weft put us in great 
diforder; for though the few woods we paffed had furnifhed 
us with tent-poles and fewel, yet they did not afford us 
the Jeaft fhelter whatever. The wind blew with fuch 

violence, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


violence, that in fpite of all our endeavours, it overfet 
feveral of the tents, and mine, among the reft, fhared the 
difafter, which I cannot fufficiently lament, as the but- 
ends of the weather tent-poles fell on the quadrant, 
and though it was in a {trong wainfcot cafe, two of the 
bubbles, the index, and feveral other parts were broken, 
which rendered it entirely ufelefs. This being the cafe, 
IT did not think it worth carriage, but broke it to pieces, 
and gave the brafs-work to the Indians, who cut it into 
fmall lumps, and made ufe of it inftead of ball. 


On the twenty-third of O&ober, feveral Copper and 
a few dog-ribbed Indians came to our tents Jaden with 
furrs, which they fold to fome of my crew for fuch iron- 
work as they had to give in exchange. This vifit, I af- 
terwards found, was by appointment of the Copper In- 
dians whom we had feen at Congecathawhachaga, and 
who, in their way to us, had met the Dog-ribbed Indians, 
who were alfo glad of fo favourable an opportunity of 
purchafing fome of thofe valuable articles, though at a 
very extravagant price: fof one of the Indians in my com- 
pany, though not properly of my party, got no lefs than 
forty beaver fkins, and fixty martins, for one piece of 
iron which he had ftole when he was laft at the Fort *.. 
One 
* The piece of iron above mentioned was the coulter of a new-fafhioned’ 


plough, invented by Captain John Fowler,. late Governor at Churchill River, 
with which he hada large piece of ground ploughed,. and afterwards fowed 


with. 


207 


1771. 
October. 


23d, 


208 


17716 
ee ame! 


October. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


One of thofe ftrangers had about forty beaver fkins, 
with which he intended to pay Matonabbee an old debt ; 
but one of the other Indians feized the whole, notwith- 
ftanding he knew it to be in fa& Matonabbee’s property. 
This treatment, together with many other infults, which 
he had received during my abode with him, made him re- 
new his old refolution of leaving his own country, and 
going to refide with the Athapufcow Indians. 


As the moft interefting part of my journey was now. 
over, I did not think it neceffary to interfere in his private 
affairs; and therefore did not endeavour to influence him 
either one way or the other: out of complaifance, there- 
fore, rather than any thing elfe, I told him, that I thought 
fuch. behaviour very uncourteous, efpecially in a man of 
his rank and dignity. As to the reafon of his determina- 
tion, I did not think it worth while to enquire into it; 
but, by his difcourfe with the other Indians, I foon un- 
derftood that they all intended to make an excurfion into 
the country of the Athapufcow Indians, in order to kill 
moofe and beaver. The former of thofe animals are 
never found in the Northern Indian territories; and the — 
latter are fo fcarce in thofe Northern parts, that during the 
whole Winter of one thoufand feven hundred and feventy, 


with oats: but the part being nothing but a hot burning fand, like the Spanith 
lines at Gibraltar, the fuccefs may eafily be guefled; which was, that it did 
not produce a fingle grain. 


I did 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


I did not fee more than two beaver houfes. Martins 
are alfo fearce in thofe parts; for during the above 
period, I donot think that more than fix or eight were 
killed by all the Indians in my company. ‘This exceed- 
ingly {mall number, among fo many people, may with 
sreat truth be attributed to the indolence of the Indians, 
and the wandering life which they lead, rather than to 
the great fcarcity of the martins. It is true, that our mov- 
ing fo frequently from place to place, did at times make 
it not an object worth while to build traps; but had they 
taken the advantage of all favourable opportunities, and 
been pofleffed of half the induftry of the Company’s fer- 
vants in the Bay, they might with great eafe have caught 
as many hundreds, if not fome thoufands; and when we 
confider the extent of ground which we walked over in 
that time, fuch a number would not have been any proof 
of the martins being very plentiful. 


Except a few martins; wolves, quiquehatches, foxes, 
and otters, are the chief furrs to be met with in thofe parts, 
and few of the Northern Indians chufe to kill either the 
wolf or the quiquehatch, under a notion that they are 
fomething more than common animals, Indeed, I have 
known fome of them fo bigotted to this opinion, that 
having by chance killed a quiquehatch by a gun which 
had been fet for a fox, they have left it where it was killed, 
and would not take off its fkin. Notwithftanding this 

Ene filly 


209 


I wie | i. 
October. 


210 


a7. 
October. 


30th. 


I 


sth. 


November 
it 


¢ 


A JOURNEY TO Fame 


filly notion, which is too frequently to be obferved among 
thofe people, it generally happens that there are fome in 
every gang who are lefs fcrupulous, fo that none of thofe 
furrs are ever left to rot; and even thofe who make a point 
of not killing the animals themfelves, are ready to receive 
their {kins from other Indians, and carry them to the Fort 
for trade. 


By the thirtieth of O&ober, all our clothing, fnow- 
{hoes, and temporary fledges, being completed, we once 
more began to prepare for moving; and on the following 
day fet out, and walked five or fix miles to the South- 
ward, : 


From the firft to the fifth of November we walked on. 
the ice of a large lake, which, though very confiderable 
both in length and breadth, is not diflinguifhed by any 


general name; on which account I gave it the name of 


No Name Lake. On the South fide of this lake we found 


fome wood, which was very acceptable, being the firft 
that we had feen fince we left Point Lake. | 


No Name Lake is about fifty miles long trom North to 
South, and, according to the accountof the Indians, is thirty- 
five miles wide from Eaft to Weft. It is faid to abound 
with fine fifh; but the weather at the time we croffed it 
was fo cold, as to render it impoflible to fit on the ice-any 


length 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


leneth of time to angle. A few exceedingly fine trout, 
and fome very large pike, however, were caught by my 
companions. | 


When we arrived on the South fide of the above lake, 


we fhaped our courfe to the South Weft; and though the. 


weather was in general very cold, yet as we every night 
found tufts of wood, in which we could pitch our tents, 
we were enabled to make a better defence againft the 
weather, than we had had it in our power to do for fome 
time pait. 


On the tenth of November, we arrived at the edge of 
of the main woods; at which time the Indians began to 
make proper fledges, fome fnow-fhoes, &c. after which 
we proceeded again to the South Weft. But deer and 
all other kinds of game were fo fcarce the whole way, that, 
except a few partridges, nothing was killed by any in com- 
pany: we had, neverthelefs, plenty of the provifion which 
had been prepared at Point Lake. 


On the twentieth of the fame month, we arrived at 
Anaw’d Whoie, or the Indian Lake. In our way we 
crofied part of Methy Lake, and walked near eighty miles 
on a {mall river belonging to it, which empties itfelf into 
the Great Athapufcow Lake *. While we were walking 


* The courfe of this river is nearly South Weft. 
Ke 2 Ont 


21it 


OAS 


November, 


rethe 


20th. 


21d 


1781, 


November. 


A JOURNEY TO Teer 


on the above little river, the Indians fet fifhing-nets under 
the ice every night; but their labour was attended with 
fo little fuccefs, that all they caught ferved only as a 
delicacy, or to make a little change in our diet. for the 
quantity was too trifling to occafion any confiderable faving 
of our other provifions. 


Anaw’d Lake, though fo {mall as not to exceed twenty 
miles wide in the broadeft part, is celebrated by the na- 
tives for abounding with plenty of ffh during the Winter; 
accordingly the Indians fet all their nets, which were not 
a few, and met with fuch fuccefs, that in about ten days. 
the roes only were as much as all the women could haul 
after them, 


Tittimeg and barble, with a few {mall pike, were the 
only fifh caught at this part; the roes of which, parti- 
cularly thofe of the tittimeg, are more efteemed by the 
Northern Indians, to take with them on a journey, than 
the fith itfelf; for about two pounds weight of thefe roes, 
when well bruifed, will make near four gallons of broth, 
as thick as common burgoe; and if. properly managed, 
will be as white as rice, which makes it very pleafing to 
the eye, and no lefs agreeable to the palate. 


The land round this lake is very hilly, though not 
mountainous, and chiefly confifts of rocks and locfe 


ftones; there muft, however, be a {mall portion of foil 
6 on 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


on the furface, as it is in moft parts well clothed with tall 
poplars, pines, fir, and birch; particularly in the vallies, 
where the poplars, pine, and birch feem to thrive beft, 
but the firs were as large, and in as flourifhing a ftate, on 
the very fummit of the hills, as in any other part. 


Rabbits were here fo plentiful, particularly on the South 


and South Eaft fide of the lake, that feveral of the In- 


dians caught twenty or thirty in a night with {nares; and 
the wood-partridges were fo numerous in the fir trees, and 
fo tame, that I have known an Indian kill near twenty of 
them in a day w'th his bow and arrows. The Northern 
Indians call this fpecies of the partridge Day ; and though 
their flefh is generally very black and bitter, occafioned 
by their feeding on the brufh of the fir tree, yet they 
make a variety, or change of diet, and are thought ex- 
ceedingly good, particularly by the natives, who, though 
capable of living fo hard, and at times eating very ungrate- 
ful food, are neverthelefs as fond of variety as any people 
whom I ever faw ; and will go as great lengths, according 
to their circumftances, to gratify their palates, as the 
sreateft epicure in England. As a proof of this affertion, 
I have frequently known Matonabbee, and others who 
could aitord it, for the fake of variety only, fend fome of 
their young men to kill a few partridges at the expence of 
more ammunition than would have killed deer fufficient 
to have maintained their families many days; whereas the 
partridges were always eaten up at one meal: and to 


heighten 


214 


1771, 


November. . 


ee) 


1771. 
creme erence 


Noveniber. 


A JOURNEW 8) Omen aap 


heighten the luxury on thefe occafions, the partridges are 
boiled in a kettle of fheer fat, which it muft be allowed 
renders them beyond all defcription finer favoured than 
when boiled in water or common broth. I have alfo eat 
deer-{kins boiled in fat, which were exceedingly good. 


As during our ftay at Anaw’d Lake feveral of the In- 
dians were fickly, the doors undertook to adminifter re- 
lief ; particularly to one man, who had been hauled on a 
fledge by his brother for two months. His diforder was 
the dead palfey, which affected one fide, from the crown 
of his head to the fole of his foot. Befides this dreadful 


diforder, he had fome inward complaints, with a total lofs 


of appetite; fo that he was reduced to a mere fkeleton, 
-and fo weak as to be f{earcely capable of fpeaking. In this 


deplorable condition, he was laid in the center of a large 


_ conjuring-houfe, made much after the manner as that 


which has been already defcribed. And that nothing 


might be wanting toward his recovery, the fame man who 
deceived me in {wallowing a bayonet in the Summer, now 
offered to fwallow a large piece of board, about the fize 
of a barrel-ftave, in order to effect his recovery. The 
piece of board was prepared by another man, and painted. 
according to the direction of the juggler, with a rude re- 
prefentation of fome beaft of prey on one fide, and on the 
reverfe was painted, according to their rude method, a re- 


femblance of the fky. 
Without 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


Without entering into a long detail of the preparations 
for this feat, I fhall at once proceed to obferve, that after 
the conjurer had held the neceflary conference with his 
invifible {pirits, or fhadows, he afked if I was prefent ; 
for he had heard of my faying that I did not fee him 
{wallow the bayonet fair: and on being an{wered in the 
afhrmative, he defired me to come nearer; on which the 
mob made a lane for me to pafs, and I advanced clofe to 
him, and found him ftanding at the conjuring-houfe door 
as naked as he was born. 


When the piece of board was delivered to him, he pro- 
pofed at firft only to fhove one-third of it down his throat, 
and then walk round the company afterward to fhove 
down another third; and fo proceed till he had fwallowed 
the whole, except a fmall piece of the end, which was 
left behind to haul it up again. When he put it to his 
mouth it apparently flipped down his throat like lightning, 
and only left about three inches fticking without his lips ; 
after walking backwards and forwards three times, he 
hauled it up again, and ran into the conjuring-houfe with 
great precipitation. This he did to all appearance with 
creat eafe and compofure; and notwithftanding I was all 
attention on the occafion, I could not dete& the deceit ; 
and as to the reality of its being a piece of wood that he 
pretended to {wallow, there is not the leaft reafon to doubt 
of it, for I had it in my hand, both before and imme-. 


diately after the ceremony. 
To 


215 


1771. 
Neen, neem! 


November. 


216 A JOURNEY TO THe 


ais To prevent a variety of opinions on this occafion, and 
November. to leffen the apparent magnitude of the miracle, as well 
as to give fome colour to my {cepticifm, which might 
otherwife perhaps appear ridiculous,- it is neceflary to ob- 

ferve, that this feat was performed in a dark and excef- 

fively cold night; and although there was a large fire at 

fome diftance, which reflected a good light, yet there was 

great room for collufion: for though the conjurer himfelf 

was quite naked, there were feveral of his fraternity well- 
clothed, who atterted him very clofe during the time of 

his attempting to {wallow the board, as well as at the time 


of his hauling it up again. 


For thefe reafons it is neceffary alfo to obferve, that on 
the day preceding the performance of this piece of decep- 
tion, in one of my hunting excurfions, I accidentally 
came acrofs the conjurer as he was fitting under a bufh, 
feveral miles from the tents, where he was bufily employed 
fhaping a piece of wood exattly like that part which ftuck 
out of his mouth after he had pretended to {wallow the - 
remainder of the piece. The fhape of the piece which I 
faw him making was this, ¥%/; which exactly refembled 
the forked end of the main piece, the fhape of which was 
this, [ [| [| '&. So that when his attendants had con- 
cealed the main piece, it was eafy for him to ftick the 
fmall point into his mouth, as it was reduced at the {mall 
end to a proper fize for the purpofe. 


Similar 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


Similar proofs may eafily be urged againft his fwallow- 
ing the bayonet in the Summer, as no perfon lefs ignorant 
than themfelves can poflibly place any belief in the reality 
of thofe feats; yet on the whole, they muft be allowed 
a confiderable fhare of dexterity in the performance of 
thofe tricks; and a wonderful dea] of perfeverance in what 
they do for the relief of thofe whom they undertake 
to cure. 


Not long after the above performance had taken place, 


217 


1771. 
t. 


oe a 
November. 


fome of the Indians began to afk me what I thought of - 


it. As I could not have any plea for faying that I was far 
off, and at the fame time not caring to affront them by 
hinting my fufpicions of the deceit, I was fome time at a 
lofs for an anfwer: I urged, however, the impoflibility 
of a man’s {wallowing a piece of wood, that was not only 
much longer than his whole back, but nearly twice as 
broad as he could extend his mouth. On which fome of 
them laughed at my ignorance, as they were pleafed to 
call it; and faid, that the fpirits in waiting fwallowed, or 
otherwife concealed, the ftick, and only left the forked end 
apparently fticking out of the conjurer’s mouth. My 
guide, Matonabbee, with all his other good fenfe, was fo 
bigotted to the reality of thofe performances, that he af- 
fured me in the ftrongeft terms, he had feen a man, who was 
then in company, fwallow a child’s cradle, with as much 
eafe as he could fold up a piece of paper, and put it into 


his mouth; and that when he hauled it up again, not the 
Ff mark 


218 


Mig tk 


November. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


mark of a tooth, or of any violence, was to be difcovered. 
about it. 


This ftory fo far exceeded the feats which I had feen 
with the bayonet and board, that, for the fake of keeping 
up the farce, I began to be very ingquifitive about the 
{pirits which appear to them on thofe occafions, and their 
form; when I was told that they appeared in various 
map es for almoft every conjurer had his peculiar attend- 

; but that the fpirit which attended the man who pre- 
nied to fwallow the piece of wood, they faid, generally 
appeared to him in the fhape of a cloud. This I thought 
very a-propos to the prefent occafion; and I muft confefs 
that I never had fo thick a cloud thrown before my eyes 
before or fince; and lad it not been by accident, that } 
faw him make a counterpart to the piece of wood faid to 
be fwallowed, I fhould have been ftill at a lofs how to ac- 
count for fo extraordinary a piece of deception, performed 
by a man who was entirely naked. © 


As foon as our conjurer had executed the above feat; 
and entered the conjuring-houfe, as already mentioned, 
five other men and an old woman, all of whom were great 
profeffors of that art, {tripped themfelves quite naked and 
followed him, when they foon began to fuck, blow, fing, 
and dance, round the poor paralytic; and continued fo to 
do for three days and four nights, without taking the leaft 
reft or refrefhment, not even fo much asa drop of water. 


When 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


When thefe poor deluding and deluded people came out of 
the conjuring-houfe, their mouths were fo parched with 
thirft as to be quite black, and their throats fo fore, that 


they were f{carcely able to articulate a fingle word, except 


thofe that ftand for yes and zo in their language. 


After fo long an abftinence they were very careful not 
to eat or drink too much at one time, particularly for the 
firft day ; and indeed fome of them, to appearance, were 
almoft as bad as the poor man they had been endeavouring 
to relieve. But great part of this was feigned; for they 
lay on their backs with their eyes fixed, as if in the ago- 
nies of death, and were treated like young children; one 
perfon fat conftantly by them, moiftening their mouths 
with fat, and now and then giving them a drop of water. 
At other times a fmall bit of meat was put into their 
mouths, or a pipe held for them to fmoke. This farce 
only lafted for the firft day; after which they feemed to 
be perfectly well, except the hoarfenefs, which continued 
for a confiderable time afterwards. And it is truly won- 
derful, though the ftri@eft truth, that when the poor fick 
man was taken from the conjuring-houfe, he had not only 
recovered his appetite to an amazing degree, but was able 
to move all the fingers and toes of the fide that had been 
fo long dead. In three weeks he recovered fo far as to be 
capable of walking, and at the end of fix weeks went a 
hunting for his family. He was one of the perfons * par- 

* His name was Cof-abyagh, the Northern Indian name for the Rock 


Partridge. 


Diet. 2 ticularly 


a id} 


Lt. 


ety pencaracag. eB 
November. 


2.20 
lo Ie 


November. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


ticularly engaged to provide for me during my journey ; 
and after his recovery from this dreadful diforder, accom- 
panied me back to Prince of Wales’s Fort in June one 
thoufand feven hundred and feventy-two; and fince that 
time he has frequently vifited the FaG@tory, though he never 
had a healthy look afterwards, and at times feemed troubled 
with a nervous complaint. It may be added, that he had 
been formerly of a remarkable lively difpofition ; but after 
his laft illnefs he always appeared thoughtful, fometimes 
gloomy, and, in faét, the diforder feemed to have changed 
his whole nature; for before that dreadful paralytic ftroke, 
he was diftinguifhed for his good-nature and benevolent 
difpofition ; was entirely free from every appearance of 
avarice; and the whole of his wifhes feemed confined 
within the narrow limits of poffefling as many goods as 
were abfolutely neceffary, with his own induftry, to enable 
him to fupport his family from feafon to feafon; but after 
this event, he was the moft fractious, quarrelfome, difcon- 
tented, and covetous wretch alive. 


Though the ordinary trick of thefe conjurers may be 
eafily detected, and juftly exploded, being no more than 


the tricks of common jugglers, yet the apparent good 


effe& of their labours on the fick and difeafed is not fo 
eafily accounted for. Perhaps the implicit confidence. 
placed in them by the fick may, at times, leave the mind 
fo perfedtly at reit, as to caufe the diforder to take a fa~ 
vourable turn; and a few fuccefstul cafes are quite fuf- 
ficient to eftablifh the doctor’s character and reputation : 
| @ But 


NeOR THER N OG EF AN, 


But how this confideration could operate in the cafe I have 
juft mentioned I am at a lofs to fay; fuch, however, was 
the fact, and I leave it to be accounted for by others. 


When thefe jugglers take a diflike to, and threaten a fecret 
revenge on any perfon, it often proves fatal to that perfon 5 
as, from a firm belief that the conjurer has power over his. 


life, he permits the very thoughts of it to prey on his | 


fpirits, till by degrees it brings on a diforder which puts 
an end to his exiftence *; and fometimes a threat of this 


kind 


* As a proof of this, Matonabbee, (who always thought me poffefied of 
this art,) on his arrival at Prince of Wales’s Fort in the Winter of 1778, 
informed me, that a man whom I had never feen but once, had treated him 
in fuch a manner that he was afraid of his life ; in confequence of which he 


preffed me very much to kill him, though I was then feveral hundreds of miles 


diftant. On which, to pleafe this great man to whom I owed fo much, and 
not expecting that any harm could poffibly arife from it, I drew a rough fketch 
of two human figures on a piece of paper, in the attitude of wreftling: in the 
hand of one of them, I drew the figure of a bayonet pointing to the breaft 
of the other. This is me, faid I to Matonabbee, pointing to the figure which 
was holding the bayonet; and the other, is your enemy. Oppofite to thofe 
fisures I drew a pine-tree, over which J placed a large human eye, and out 
of the tree projected a human hand. This paper I gave to Matonabbee, with 
inftru€tions to make it as publicly known as poffible. Sure enough, the fol- 
lowing year, when he came in to trade, he informed me that the man was 
dead, though at that time he was not lefs than three hundred miles from Prince 
Wales’s Fort. He affured me that the man was in perfect health when he 
heard of my defign againft him; but almoft immediately afterwards became 
quite gloomy, and refufing all kind of fuftenance, in a very few days died. 
After this | was frequently applied to on the fame account, both by Mato- 
nabbee and other leading Indians, but never thought proper to comply with 
their requefts; by which means I not only preferved the credit I gained on the 
firft attempt, but always kept them in awe, and in fome degree of refpe“t and 

obedience 


22 


1771. 


November. 


e222 


1771. 


November. 


December 


13th.” 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


kind caufes the death of a whole family ; and that without 


any blood being fhed, or the leaft apparent moleftation 
being offered to any of the parties. 


Having dried as many fifh and fifh-roes as we could con- 
veniently take with us, we once more packed up our 
{tores, and, on the firft day of December, fet out, and 
continued our courfe to the South Weft, leaving Anaw’d 
Lake on the South Weft. Several of the Indians being 
out of order, we made but fhort days journies. 


From the firft to the thirteenth, we walked along a courfe 
of {mall lakes, joined to each other by {mall rivers, or 
creeks, that have communication with Anaw’d Lake. 


In our way we caught daily a few fifth by angling, and 
faw many beaver houfes; but thefe were generally in fo 
difficult a fituation, and had fo many ftones in the com- 
pofition of them, that the Indians killed but few, and 
that at a great expence of labour and tools. 


On the thirteenth, one of the Indians killed two deer, 
which were the firft that we had feen fince the twentieth 


obedience to me. In fact, ftrange as it may appear, it is almoft abfolutely 
neceffary that the chiefs at this place fhould profefs fomething a little fuperna- 
tural, to be able to deal with thofe people. The circumftance here recorded 
is a fact well known to Mr. William Jefferfon, who fucceeded me at Churchill 
Factory, as well as to all the officers and many of the common men who were 
at Prince of Wales’s Fort at the time. 

of 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 223 


of OGober. So that during a period of near two months, —'77!. 
we had lived on the dried meat that we had prepared at ime 
Point Lake, and a few fifh; of which the latter was not 

very confiderable in quantity, except what was caught at 
Anaw’d Lake. It is true, we alfo caught a few rabbits, 

and at times the wood-partridges were fo plentiful, that 

the Indians killed confiderable numbers of them with their 

bows and arrows; but the number of mouths was fo great, 

that all which was caught from our leaving Point Lake, 
though, if enumerated, they might appear very confiderable, 

would not have afforded us all a bare fubfiftence; for though 

I and fome others experienced no real want, yet there 

were many in our company who could {carcely be faid to 

live, and would not have exifted at all, had it not been 

for the dry meat we had with us. 


When we left the above-mentioned lakes we fhaped a 
courfe more to the Southward, and on the twenty-fourth, Hii, 
arrived at the North fide of the great Athapufcow Lake. 
In our way we faw many Indian deer, and beaver were 
very plentiful, many of which the Indians killed; but 
the days were fo fhort, that the Sun only took a circuit of 
a few points of the compafs above the horizon, and did 
not, at its greateft altitude, rife half-way up the trees. 
The brilliancy of the Aurora Borealis, however, and. of 
the Stars, even without the affiftance of the Moon, made 
fome amends for that deficiency ; for it was frequently fo. 
light all night, that I could fee to read. a very {mall print. 

ive 


224 


1775. 
Tn amee 


December, 


A JOURNEY 0 (MRE 


The Indians make no difference between night and day 
when they are hunting of beaver; but thofle noéturnal 
lights are always found infufficient for the purpofe of 
hunting deer or moofe. | 


I do not remember to have met with any travellers into 
high Northern latitudes, who remarked their having heard 
the Northern Lights make any noife in the air as they vary 
their colours or pofition; which may probably be owing to 
the want of perfect filence at the time they made their ob- 
fervations on thofe meteors. I can pofitively affirm, that 
in ftill nights I have frequently heard them make a ruftling 
and crackling noife, like the waving of a large flag in a frefh 
gale of wind. ‘This is not peculiar to the place of which I 


am now writing, as I have heard the fame noife very plain at 


Churchill River; and in all probability it is only for want 
of attention that it has not been heard in every part of the 
Northern hemifphere where they have been known to fhine 
with any confiderable degree of luftre. It is, however, very 
probable that thefe lights are fometimes much nearer the 
Earth than they are at others, according to the ftate of 
the atmofphere, and this may have a great effe& on the 
found: but the truth or falfehood of this conje@ure I 
leave to the determinations of thofe who are better {killed 
in natural philofophy than I can pretend to be. 


Indian deer (the only {pecies found in thofe parts, ex- 
cept the moofe) are fo much larger than thofe which fre- 
quent 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


quent the barren grounds to the North of Churchill River, 
that a {mall doe is equal in fize to a Northern buck. The 
hair of the former is of a fandy red during the Winter ; 
and their horns, though much ftronger, are not fo long 
and branchy as are thofe of the latter kind. Neither 
is the flefh of thofe deer fo much efteemed by the North- 


ern Indians, as that of the {maller kind, which inhabit the 


more Eaftern and Northern parts of the country. Indeed, 
it muft be allowed to be much coarfer, and of a different 
flavour; inafmuch as the large Lincolnfhire mutton differs 
from grafs Jamb. I muft acknowledge, however, that I 
always thought it very good. ‘This is that fpecies of deer 


which are found fo plentiful near York Fort and Severn 


River. They are alfo at times found in confiderable num- 
bers near Churchill River; and I have feen them killed as 
far North, near the fea-fide, as Seal River: But the {mall 
Northern Indian deer are feldom known to crofs Churchill 
River, except in fome very extraordinary cold feafons, and 
when the Northern winds have prevailed much in the 
preceding fall; for thofe vifits are always made in the 
Winter. But though I own that the flefh of the large 
Southern deer is very good, I muft at the fame time con- 
fefs that the flefh of the {mall Northern deer, whether 
buck or doe, in their proper feafon, is by far more deli- 
cious, and the fineft I have ever eaten, either in this 
country or any other; and is of that peculiar quality, that 


it never cloys. I can affirm this from my own experience ;- 


Gg for, 


225 
i771. 


December, 


226 


1771. 


Becember. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


for, after living on it entirely, as it may be faid, for twelve 
or eighteen months fucceflively, I {carcely ever wifhed for 
a change of food; though when fith or fowl came in a my 
way, it was very a a 


The beaver being fo plentiful, the attention of my com- 
panions was chiefly engaged on them, as they not only 
furnifhed delicious food, but their fkins proved a valuable 
acquifition, being a principal article of trade, as well as 
a ferviceable one for clothing, &c. 


The fituation of the beaver-houfes-is various. Where 
the beavers are numerous they are found to: inhabit lakes, 
ponds, and rivers, as well as thofe narrow creeks which 
conneét the numerous lakes with which this country 
abounds; but the two latter are generally chofen by them 
when the depth of water and other circumftances are fuit-. 


able, as they have then the advantage of a current to 


convey wood and other neceflaries to their habitations, and 
becaufe, in general, they are more difficult to be taken, 
than thofe that are built in {tanding water. 


There is no one particular part of a lake,. pond, river, 
or creek, of which the beavers make choice for building 
their houfes on, in preference to another; for they fome- 
times build on points, fometimes in the hollow of a bay, 
and often on fmall iflands; they always chufe, however, 


thofe 


_ 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


thofe parts that have fuch a depth of water as will refift 
the froft in Winter, and prevent it from freezing to the 


bottom. 


The beaver that build their houfes in fmall rivers or 
creeks, in which the water is liable to be drained of when 
the back fupplies are dried up by the froft, are wonder- 
fully taught by inftin& to provide againft that evil, by 
making a dam quite acrofs the river, at a-convenient dif- 
tance from their houfes. This I look upon as the moft 
curious piece of workmanfhip that is performed by the 
beaver ; not fo much for the neatnefs of the work, as for 


its ftrength and real fervice; and at the fame time it. 


difcovers fuch a degree of fagacity and forelight in, the 
animal, of approaching evils, as is little inferior to that 
of the human fpecies, and is certainly peculiar to thoie 


animals. 


The beaver-dams differ in fhape according to the nature 
of the place in which they are built. If the water in the 
river or creek have but little motion, the dam is almoft 
ftraight ; but when the current is more rapid, it is always 
made with a confiderable curve, convex toward the ftream. 
The materials made ufe of in thofe dams are drift-wood, 
green willows, birch, and poplars, if they can be got; 
aifo mud and ftones, intermixed in fuch a manner as muit 
evidently contribute to the frength of the dam; but in 
thefe dams there is no other order or method obferved, ex- 


~G oe cept 


227 


771. 
ee | 
December. 


228 A JOURNEY TO THE 


1771. cept that of the work being carried on with a regular fweep, 
[ee r 
‘December. and all the parts being made of equal ftrength. 


In places which have been long frequented by beaver 
undifturbed, their dams, by frequent repairing, become a 
folid bank, capable of refifting a great force both of water 
and ice; and as the willow, poplar, and birch generally 
take root and fhoot up, they by degrees forma kind of 
recular-planted hedge, which I have feen in fome places 


fo tall, that birds have built their nefts among the 
branches. 


Though the beaver which build their houfes in lakes and 
other ftanding waters, may enjoy a fufficient quantity of 
their favourite element without the affiftance of a dam, 
the trouble of getting wood and other neceflaries to their 
habitations without the help of a current, muft in fome 
meafure counterbalance the other advantages which are 
reaped fsom fuch a fituation.; for it muft be obferved,. that 
the beaver which build in rivers and creeks, always cut their 
wood above their houfes, fo that the current, with little 
trouble, conveys it to the place required.. 


The beaver-houfes are built of the fame materials as 
their dams, and are always proportioned in fize to the 
number of inhabitants, which feldom exceed four old} 
and fix or eight young ones ;, though, by chance, I have 
{een above double that number. 


Thefe 


NORTHERN OCEAN: 
Thefe houfes, though not altogether unworthy of ad- 


miration, fall very fhort of the general defcription given 
of them; for inftead of order or regulation being ob- 
ferved in rearing them, they are of a much ruder ftruture 


than their dams. 


Thofe who have undertaken to defcribe the infide of 


beaver-houfes, as having feveral apartments appropriated to. 


various ufes; fuch as eating, fleeping, ftore-houfes for pro» 
vifions,-and one for their natural occafions, &c. mutt 
have been very little acquainted with the fubje&; or, 
which is ftill worfe, guilty of attempting to impofe on 
the credulous, by reprefenting the greatef{t falfehoods as 
real facts. Many years conftant refidence among the In- 
dians, during which I had an opportunity: of feeing feveral 
hundreds of thofe houfes, has. enabled me to affirm that 
every thing of the kind is entirely void of truth; for, 
notwithftanding the fagacity of thofe animals, it has never 
been obferved that they aim at any other. conveniencies 
in their houfes, than to have a dry place to lie on; and: 
there they ufually cat their viduals, which they occafion~ 
ally take out of the water. 


It frequently happens, that fome of the large: houfes 
are found to have one or more partitions, if they dcferve: 
that appellation; but that is no more.than a part of the 
main building, left by the fagacity of the beaver to fup- 
port the roof. On fuch. occafions it is common for thofe. 

different. 


‘2.29 


1771. 


December. 


| 236 


gt. 
December. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


different apartments, as fome are pleafed to call them, to 
have no communication with each other but by water; fo 
that in fa& they may be called double or treble houfes, 
rather than different apartments of the fame houfe. I 
have feen a large beaver-houfe built in a {mall ifland, that 
had near a dozen apartments under one roof: and,’ two or 


‘three of thefe only excepted, none of them had any com- 


munication with each-other but by water. As there were 
beaver enough to inhabit each apartment, it is more than 
probable that each family knew its own, and always en- 
tered at their own door, without having any farther con- 
neCtion with'their neighbours than a friendly intercourfe ; 


and to join their united labours in ereCting their {eparate ha- 


bitations, and building their dams where required. It is 
difficult to fay whether their intereft on other occafions 
was anyways reciprocal. The Indians of my party killed 
twelve old beaver, and twenty-five young and hali-grown 
ones out of the houfeabove mentioned; and on examination 
found that feveral had efcaped their vigilance, and could 
not be taken but at the expence of more trouble than 
would be fufficient to take double the number in a lefs 
difficult fituation *, 


Travellers who affert that the beaver have two doors to 
their houfes, one on the land-fide, and the other next the 


* The difficulty here alluded to, was the numberlefs vauits the beaver had 
an the fides of the pond, and the immenfe thicknefs of the houfe in fome 
parts. 

water, 


NORTHERN OCEAN 


‘water, feem to be lefs acquainted with thofe animals than 
others who affign them an elegant fuite of apartments. 
Such a proceeding would be quite contrary to their manner 
of life, and at the fame time would render their houfes of 
no ufe, either to protect them from their enemies, or guard. 
them againft the extreme cold 14 Winter. 


The quiquehatches, or wolvereens, are great enemies to’ 
the beaver ; and if there were a paflage into their houfes 


on the land-fide, would not leave one of them alive where-- 


ever they came. 


I cannot refrain from f{miling, when I read the accounts’ 


of different Authors who have written on the economy 
of thofe animals, as there feems to be a conteft between: 
them, who {hail moft exceed infi@ion. But the Compiler’ 
of the Wonders of Nature and Art feems, in my opinion; 
to have fucceeded beft in this refpe@; as he has not only 


colleéed all the fiGtions into which other writers on the 


fubje@ have run, but has fo greatiy improved on them, 
that little remains*to be added. to his account of the beaver,, 
befide a vocabulary of their language, a code of their laws,. 
and a fketch of their religion, to make it the moft com- 
plete natural hiftory of that animal which can poffibly be: 
offered to the public. 


There cannot: be a greater impofition, or indeed a 
proffer infult, on common underftanding, than the wifh. 


s - {Q: 


29% 


parle 


December.,.- 


232 


177 1. 


‘December. 


A -3 O U-RIN Euyy GO § Tee 


to make us believe the ftories of fome of the works afcribed 
to the beaver; and though it is not to be fuppofed that the 


compiler of a general work can be intimately acquainted 


with every fubje@ of which it may be neceffary to treat, 
yet a very moderate fhare of underftanding is furely fuf- 
ficient to guard him againft giving credit. to fuch mar- 
vellous tales, however fmoothly they may be told, or 
however boldly they may be afferted, by the romancing 
traveller. 


To deny that the beaver is poffefled of a very confider-- 


able degree of fagacity, would be as abfurd in me, as it is in 


thofe Authors who think they cannot allow them too much. 
I fhall willingly grant them their full fhare; but it is im- 
poffible for any one to conceive how, or by what means, 
a beaver, whofe full height when ftanding ere& does 
not exceed two feet and a half, or three feet at moft, and 
whofe fore-paws are not much larger than a half-crown 
piece, can ‘* drive ftakes as thick as a man’s leg into the 
‘* ground three or four feet deep.”” Their ‘* wattling thofe 
‘“¢ flakes with twigs,” is equally abfurd; and their ‘* plaif- 
‘tering the infide of their houfes with a compofition of 
<¢ mud and ftraw, and {wimming with mud and ftones on 
“ their tails,” are ftill more incredible. The form and 
fize of the animal, notwithftanding all its fagacity, will 
not admit of its performing fuch feats; and it would be 
as impoflible for a beaver to ufe its tailasa trowcl, except 
eon the furface of the ground on which it walks, as it | 

would 


“WOR UH Esk Wy gOvc EA N. 233 


would have been for Sir James Thornhill to have painted ae 
the dome of St. Paul’s cathedral without the afliftance of ine 
{caffolding. The joints of their tail will not admit of 

their turning it over their backs on any occafion what- 

ever, as it has a natural inclination to bend downwards; 

and it is not without fome confiderable exertion that they 

can keep it from trailing on the ground. This being the 

cafe, they cannot fit erect like a f{quirrel, which is thei 
common pofture ; particularly when eating, or when they 

are cleaning themfelves, as a cat or {quirrel does, without 
having their tails bent forward between their legs; and 
which may not improperly be-called their trencher, _ 


So far are the beaver from driving ftakes into the ground 
when building their houfes, that they lay moft of the wood 
crofswife, and nearly horizontal, and without any other 
order than that of leaving a hollow or cavity in the middle; 
when any unneceflary branches project inward, they cut 
them off with their teeth, and throw them in among the 
reft, to prevent the mud from falling through the roof. 
It is a miftaken notion, that the wood-work is firft com- 
pleted and then plaiftered ; for the whole of their houfes, 
as well as their dams, are from the foundation one mafs 
of wood and mud, mixed with ftones, if they can be pro- 
cured. The mud is always taken from the edge of- the 
bank, or the bottom of the creek or pond, near the door 
of the houfe; and though their fore-paws are fo {mall, 
yet it is held clofe up between them, under their throag, 

Hh that 


234 
771. 


Cd 
December. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


that they carry both mud and ftones; while they always 
drag the wood with their teeth. 


All their work is executed in the night; and they are 
fo expeditious in completing it, that in the courfe of one 
night I have known them to en collected as much mud at 
their houfes as to have amounted to fome thoufands of their 
little handfuls; and when any mixture of grafs or ftraw has 
appeared in it, it has been, moft affuredly, mere chance, 
owing tothe nature of the ground from which they had 
taken it. As to their defignedly making a compofition for 
that purpofe, it is entirely void of truth. 


It is a great piece of policy in thofe animals, to cover, or 
plaifter, as it is ufually called, the outfide of their houfes 
every fall with frefh mud, and as late as poffible in the 
Autumn, even when the froft becomes pretty fevere; as 
by this means it foon freezes as hard as a ftone, and pre- 
vents their common enemy, the quiquehatch, from dif- 
turbing them during the Winter. And as they are fre- 
quently feen to walk over their work, and fometimes to 
ceive a flap with their tail, particularly when plunging into 
the water, this has, without doubt, given rife to the vulgar 
opinion that they ufe their tails as a trowel, with which 
they plaifter their houfes ; whereas that flapping of the tail 
is no more than a cuftom, which they always preferve, 
even when they become tame and domeftic, and more par- 
ticularly fo when they are ftartled. 

e Their 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 235 


Their food chiefly confifts of a large root, fomething  !771- 
refembling a cabbage-ftalk, which grows at the bottom December, 
of the lakes and rivers. ‘They eat alfo the bark of trees, 
particularly that of the poplar, birch, and willow; but 
the ice preventing them from getting to the land in Winter, 
they have not any barks to feed upon during that {eafon, 
except that of fuch fticks as they cut down in Summer, 
and throw into the water oppofite the doors of their 
houfes; and as they generally eat a great deal, the roots 
above mentioned conftitute a chief part of their food during 
the Winter. In Summer they vary their diet, by eating 
various kinds of herbage, and fuch berries as grow near 
their haunts during that feafon. 


When the ice breaks up in the Spring, the beaver al- 
ways leave their houfes, and rove about the whole Sum- 
mer, probably in fearch of a more commodious fituation ; 
but in cafe of not fucceeding in their endeavours, they 
return again to their old habitations a little before the fall 
of the leaf, and lay in their Winter ftock of woods. 
They feldom begin to repair the houfes till the froft 
commences, and never finifh the outer-coat till the cold is 
pretty fevere, as hath been already mentioned. 


When they fhift their habitations, or when the increafe 
of their number renders it neceflary to make fome addition 
to their houfes, or to erect new ones, they begin felling 

Hh 2 Pe tite 


236 
77 


. December. 


A JOURN EY 9) OF Tae 


the wood for thefe purpofes early in the Summer, but 
feldom begin to build till the middle or latter end of 
Auguft, and never complete their houfes till the cold 
weather be fet in. | : 


Notwithftanding what has been fo repeatedly reported 
of thofe animals affembling in great bodies, and jointly 
erecting large towns, cities, and commonwealths, as they 
have fometimes been called, I am confident, from many 
circumftances, that even where the greateft numbers of 
beaver are fituated in the neighbourhood of each other, 
their labours are not carried on jointly in the ereGtion of 
their different habitations, nor have they any reciprocal 
intereft, except it be fuch as live immediately under the 
fame roof; and then it extends no farther than to build or 
keep a dam which is common to feveral houfes. In fuch 
cafes it is natural to think that every one who receives be- 
nefit from fuch dams, fhould affift in ere@ting it, being 
fenfible of its utility to all. 


Perfons who attempt to take beaver in Winter fhould 
be thoroughly acquainted with their manner of life, other- 
wife they will have endlefs trouble to effect their purpofe, 
and probably without fuccefs in the end ; becaufe they have 
always a number of holes in the banks, which ferve them as 


‘places of retreat when any injury is offered to their houfes; 


and in general it is in thofe holes that they are taken. 
When 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


When the beaver which are fituated in a {mall river or 
creck are to be taken, the Indians fometimes find it ne- 
ceflary to ftake the river acrofs, to prevent them from 
pafling ; after which, they endeavour to find out all their 
holes or places of retreat in the banks. This requires much 
practice and experience to accomplifh, and is performed in 
the following manner: Every man being furnifhed with 
an ice-chifel, lafhes it to the end of a.fmall ftaff about 
four or five feet long; he then walks along the edge of 
the banks, and keeps knocking his chifels againft the ice. 
Thofe who are well acquainted with that kind of work 
well know by the found of the ice when they are oppofite 
to any of the beavers’ holes or vaults. As foon as they 
fufpecét any, they cut a hole through the ice big enough to 
admit an old beaver; and in this manner proceed till they 
have found out all their places of retreat, or at leaft as 
many of them as poffible. While the principal men are 
thus employed, fome of the underftrappers, and the wo- 
men, are bufy in breaking open the houfe, which at times 
is no eafy tafk; for I have frequently known thefe houfes 
to be five and fix feet thick; and one in particular, was 


more than eight feet thick on the crown. When the beaver — 


find that their habitations are invaded, they fly to their 
holes in the banks for fhelter ; and on being perceived by 
the Indians, which is eafily done, by attending.to the 
motion of the water, they block up the entrance with 
{takes of wood, and then haul the beaver out of its hole, 
either by hand, if they can reach it, or with a large hock 

made 


“8 
ia. 


December. 


238 
177% 


December, 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


made for that purpofe, which is faftened to the a of a 
long ftick. 


In this kind of hunting, every man has the fole right 
to all the beaver caught by him in the holes or vaults; and 
as this is a conftant rule, each perfon takes care to mark 
fuch as he difcovers, by iticking up the branch of a tree, 
or fome other diftinguifhing poft, by which he may know 
them. All that are caught in the houfe alfo are the pro- 
perty of the perfon who finds it. 


The fame regulations are obferved, and the fame procefs 
ufed in taking beaver that are found in lakes and other 
{landing waters, except it be that of ftaking the lake 
acrofs, which would be both unnecefiary and impofiible. 
Taking beaver-houfes in thefe fituations is generally at- 
tended with lefs trouble and more fuccefs than in the 
former. 


The beaver is an animal which cannot keep under water 
Jong ata time; fo that when their houfes are broke open, 
and all their places of retreat difcovered, they have but 
one choice left, as it may be called, either to be taken in 
their houfes or their vaults: in general they prefer the 
latter ; for where there is one beaver caught in the houfe, 
many thoufands are taken in their vaults in the banks. 
Sometimes they are caught in nets, and in the Summer 
very frequently in traps. In Winter they are very fat and 

delicious ; 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


delicious; but the trouble of rearing their young, the 
thinnefs of their hair, and their conftantly roving from 
place to place, with the trouble they have in providing 
again{t the approach of Winter, generally keep them very 
poor during the Summer feafon, at which time their feth 
is but indifferent eating, and their fkins of fo little value, 
that the Indians generally finge them, even to the amount 
of many thoufands in one Summer. They have from two 
to five young, ata time. Mr. Dobbs, in his Account of 
Hudfon’s Bay, enumerates no lefs than eight different 
kinds of beaver; but it muft be underftood that they are 


all of one kind and fpecies: his diftin@ions arife wholly | 


from the different feafons of the year in which they are 
killed, and the different ufes to which their fkins are ap- 
plied, which is the fole reafon that they vary fo much in 
value. : 


Jofeph Lefranc, or Mr. Dobbs for him, fays, that 2 
good hunter can kill fix hundred beaver in one feafon, and 
can only carry one hundred to market. If that was 
really the cafe in Lefranc’s time, the canoes muft have 
been much fmaller than they are at prefent; for it is 
well known that the generality of the canoes which have 
vifited the Company’s Factories for the laft forty or fifty 
years, are capable of carrying three hundred beaver-fkins 
with great eafe, exclufive of the Indians luggage, pro- 
vifions, &c. 

Ke 


239 
177%. 
ow pmoeeed 


December. 


240 A JOURNEN?* OO Shue 


igi. If ever a particular Indian killed fix hundred beaver in 
Ba ber. one Winter, (which is rather to be doubted,) it is more 
than probable that many in his company did not kill 
twenty, and perhaps fome none at all; fo that by diftri- 
buting them among thofe who had bad fuccefs, and others 
who had no abilities for that kind of hunting, there would 
be no neceflity of leaving them to rot, or for finging them 
in the fire, as related by that Author. During my refi- 
dence among the Indians I have known fome individuals 
kill more beaver, and other heavy furrs, in the courfe of a 
Winter, than their wives could manage; but the overplus 
was never wantonly deftroyed, but always given to their 
relations, or to thofe who had been lefs fuccefsful; fo that 
the whole of the great hunters labours were always brought 
to the Factory. It is indeed too frequently a cuftom among 
the Southern Indians to finge many otters, as well as 
beaver ; but this is feldom done, except in Summer, when 
their fkins are of fo little value as to be fcarcely worth the 
duty ; on which account it has been always thought im- 
politic to encourage the natives to kill fuch valuable ani- 
mals at a time when their fkins are not in feafon. 


The white beaver, mentioned by Lefranc, are fo rare, that 
inftead of being ‘‘ blown upon by the Company’s Fa¢tors,”’ 
as he afferts, I rather doubt whether one-tenth of them ever 
faw one during the time of their refidence in this country. 
In the courfe of twenty years experience in the countries 

about 


N GER THEE RNP OC WAN. 


about Hudfon’s Bay, though I travelled fix hundred miles 
to the Weft of the fea-coait, I never faw but one white 
beaver-{kin, and it had many reddifh and brown hairs along 
the ridge of the back, and the fides and belly were of a 
gloffy filvery white. It was deemed by the Indians a 
great curiofity ; and I offered three times the ufual price 
for a few of them, if they could be got; but in the courfe 
of ten years that I remained there afterward, I could 
not procure another ; which is a convincing proof there 
is no fuch thing as a breed of that kind, and that a vari- 
ation from the ufual colour is very rare. 


Black beaver, and that of a beautiful glofs, are not un- 
common: perhaps they are more plentiful at Churchill 
than at any other Factory in the Bay ; but it is rare to get 
more than twelve or fifteen of their fkins in the courfe of 
one year’s trade. 


Lefranc, as an Indian, muft have known better than 
to have informed Mr. Dobbs that the beaver have from ten 
to fifteen young at a time; or if he did, he muft have 
deceived him wilfully: for the Indians, by killing them 
in all ftages of geftation, have abundant opportunities of 
afcertaining the ufual number of their offspring. I have 
feen fome hundreds of them killed at the feafons favour- 
able for thofe obfervations, and never could difcover more 
than fix young in one female, and that only in two in- 

i Ti {tances ; 


241 
i771. 


. December. 


242 
1771. 


December. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


ftances ; for the ufual number, as I have before obferved, 
is from two to five. 


Befides this unerring method of afcertaining the real 
number of young which any animal has at a time, there is 
another rule to go by, with refpect to the beaver, which 
experience has proved to the Indians never to vary or de- 
ceive them, that is by difleGion; for on examining the 
womb of a beaver, even at a time when not with young, 
there is always found a hardifh round knob for every young 
fhe had at the laft litter. This is a circumftance I have 
been particularly careful to examine, and can affirm it 
to be true, from real experience. 


Moft of the accounts, nay I may fay all the accounts 
now extant, refpecting the beaver, are taken from the 
authority of the French who have refided in Canada; but 
thofe accounts differ fo much from the real ftate and ceco- 
nomy of all the beaver to the North of that place, as to leave 
great room to fufpe& the truth of them altogether. In 
the firft place, the affertion that they have two doors to 
their houfes, one on the land-fide, and the other next the 
water, is, as I have before obferved, quite contrary to fac 
and common fenfe, as it would render their houfes of no 
ufe to them, either as places of fhelter from the incle- 
mency of the extreme cold in Winter, or as a retreat from 
their common enemy the quiquehatch. The only thing 

LO that 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


that could have made M. Du Pratz, and other French 
writers, conjecture that fuch a thing did exift, muft have 
been from having feen fome old beaver-houfes which had 
been taken by the Indians; for they are always obliged 
to make a hole in one fide of the houfe before they can 
drive them out; and it is more than probable that in fo 
mild a climate as Canada, the Indians do generally make 
thofe holes on the land-fide *, which without doubt gave 
rife to the fuggeftion. 


In refpe& to the beaver dunging in their houfes, as 
fome perfons affert, it is quite wrong, as they always 
plunge into the water to do it. Iam the better enabled 
to make this affertion, from having kept feveral of them 
till they became fo domefticated as to anfwer to their name, 
and follow thofe to whom they were accuitomed, in the 
fame manner as a dog would do; and they were as much 
pleafed at being fondled, as any animal Tever faw. I had 
a houfe built for them, and a {mall piece of water before 
the door, into which they always plunged when they 
wanted to eafe nature; and their dung being of a light 
fubftance, immediately rifes and ficats on the furface, 


* The Northern Indians think that the fagacity of the beaver direéts them to 
make that part of their houfe which fronts the North much thicker than any 
other part, with a view of defending themielves from the cold winds which ge- 
nerally blow from that quarter during the Winter; and for this reafon the 
Northern Indians generally break open that fide of the beaver-houfes which 
exactly front the South. 


li 2 then 


24.3 


1771. 
(enero ttetcaecad) 


December. 


244 
1771. 


December. 


A JOURNEY YO ) ere 


then feparates and fubfides to the bottom. When the 
Winter fets in fo as to freeze the water folid, they fill 
continue their cuftom of coming out of their houfe, and 
dunging and making water on the ice; and when the 
weather was fo cold that I was obliged to take them into 
my houfe, they always went into a large tub of water 
which I fet for that purpofe: fo that they made not the 
leaft dirt, though they were kept in my own fitting- 
room, where they were the conftant companions of the 
Indian women and children, and were fo fond of their 
company, that when the Indians were abfent for any con- 
fiderable time, the beaver difcovered great figns of un- 
eafinefs, and on their return fhewed equal marks of plea- 
fure, by fondling on them, crawling into their laps, lay- 
ing on their backs, fitting erect like a fquirrel, and be- 
having to them like children who fee their parents but 
feldom. In general, during the Winter they lived on the 


fame food as the women did, and were remarkably fond 


of rice and plum-pudding: they would eat partridges 
and frefh venifon very freely, but I never tried them with 
fifh, though I have heard they will at times prey on 
them. In fact, there are few of the granivorous animals 
that may not be brought to be carniverous. It is well 
known that our domeftic poultry will eat animal food: 
thoufands of geefe that come to London market are fat- 
tened on tallow-craps; and our horfes in Hud{fon’s Bay 
would not only eat all kinds of animal food, but alfo 
drink freely of the wafh, or pot-liquor, intended for the 

hogs. 


LN O8R TSH EPREN Se Ome ERAN: 


hogs. And we are aflured by the moft authentic Authors, 
that in Iceland, not only black cattle, but alfo the theep, 
are almoft entitely fed on fifh and fifh-bones during the 
Winter feafon. Even in the Ifles of Orknev, and that in 
Summer, the fheep attend the ebbing of the tide as re- 
gular as the E{guimaux curlew, and go down to the fhore 
which the tide has left, to feed on the fea-weed. This, 
however, is through neceflity ; for even the famous Ifland 
of Pomona * will not afford them an exiftence above high- 


water-mark, 


With refpect to the inferior, or flave-beaver, of which 
fome Authors fpeak, it is, in my opinion, very difficult 
for thofe who are beft acquainted with the economy of 
this animal to determine whether there are any that de- 
{erve that appellation or not. It fometimes happens, that 
a beaver is caught, which has but a very indifterent coat, 
and which has broad patches on the back, and fhouldérs 
almoft wholly without hair. This is the only foundation 
for aflerting that there is an inferior, or flave-beaver, 
among them. And when one of the above defcription is 
taken, it is perhaps too haftily inferred that the hair is 
worn off from thofe parts by carrying heavy loads: 
whereas it is moft probable that it is caufed by a diforder 
that attacks them fomewhat fimilar to the mange; for 


* This being the largeft of the Orkney Iflands, is called by the Inhabitants 


the Main Land. 
were 


December, 


246 
771. 


December. 


A JOURNEY TORMEE 


were that falling off of the hair occafioned by perform- 
ing extra labour, it is natural to think that inftances of 
it would be more frequent than there are; as it is rare to 
fee one of them in the courfe of feven or ten years. I 
have feen a whole houfe of thofe animals that had nothing 
on the furface of their bodies but the fine foft down; all 
the long hairs having molted of. This and every other 
deviation from the general run is undoubtedly owing to 
fome particular diforder. 


CHAP. 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


CHAP. Viil. 


Tranfactions and Remarks from our Arrival on the South | 
Side of the Athapufcow Lake, till our Arrival at 
Prince of Wales’s Fort on Churchill River. 


Crofs the Athapufcow Lake.—Defcription of it and its productions, as far 
as could be difcovered in Winter, when the {now was on the ground, 
Lifh found in the lake-—Defcripiion of the buffalo ;—of the moofe or 
elk, and the method of dreffing their fkins.—Find a woman alone that 
had not feen a human face for more than feven months.—Her account 
how fhe came to be in that fituation; and her curious method of pro- 
curing a liveliboodi—Many of my Indians wreftled for her.—<Arrive 
at the Great Athapufcow River.—Walk along the fide of the River for 
feveral days, and then firike off to the Eaftward.—Dificulty in getting 
through the woods in many places.—Meet with fome ftrauge Northern 
Indians on their return from the Fort.—Meet more firangers, whom my 
companions plundered, and from whom they took one of their young 
women-—-Curious manner of life which thofe firangers lead, and the 
reafon they gave for roving fo far from their ufual refidence.—Leave 
ihe fine level country of the Athapufcows, and arrive at the Stony Hills 
of the Northern Indian Country.—Meet fome firange Northern Indians, 
one of whom carried a letter for me to Prince of Wales’s Fort, in March 
one thoufand feven hundred and feventy-one, and now gave me an an- 
fwer to it, dated twentieth of Fune following.—Indians begin preparing 
wood-work and birch-rind for canoes. —T he equinoétial gale very fevere. 
—AIncian method of running the moofe deer down by fpeed of foot.— 
Arrival at Theeleyaza River.—See fome ftrangers.—The brutality of 
my companions.—d tremendous gale and fnrow-drift.—Meet with more 
Strangers ;--remarks on it.—Leave all the elderly people and children, 
| and 


to 


ae f 


17-72. 


January. 


oth. 


A FOURNEYW TO Sin 


and proceed direélly to the Fort.—Stop to build canoes, and then advance. 
—Several of the Indians die through hunger, and many others are 
obliged to decline the journey for want of ammunition. —A violent ftorim 
and inundation, that forced us to the top of a high hill, where we fuf- 
fered great diftrefs for more than two days.—Kill feveral deer.—The 


Indians method of preferving the flefh without the affiftance of falt.— 
See feveral Indians that were going to Knapp’s Bay.—Game of all kinds 
remarkably plentiful_—Arrive at the Faétory. 


F TER expending fome days in hunting beaver, we 

proceeded: to crofs the Athapufcow Lake; but as 

we had loft much time in hunting deer and beaver, which 

were very plentiful on fome of the iflands, it was the 
ninth of January before we arrived on the South fide. 


This lake, from the beft information which I could get 
from the natives, is about one hundred and twenty leagues 
long from Eaft to Weft, and twenty wide from North to 
South. The point where we croffed it is faid to be the 
narroweft. It is full of iflands; moft of which are clothed 
with fine tall poplars, birch, and pines, and are well 
{tocked with Indian deer. On fome of the large iflands 
we alfo found feveral beaver; but this muft be underftood 
only of fuch iflands as had large ponds in them; for not 
one beaver-houle was to be feen on the margin of any of 
them. 


The lake is ftored with great quantities of very fine 
fhifh ; particularly between the iilands, which in fome 
: parts 


e 





fo race Page 248 




















































































































: 























































































































































































































ashy aleg is nay 


ae. 








Sh as 


tts 


— = 


aT, fae) | 
thi ti 
oe er pat Srey NT fmm 


7a 


x 


a rot 


ot TR PRG pane, 


vk 


os cl 


4 
rN f 


eT Ly 


[senate ented Llad Lal 


reer tay 


FARA TETTT Me 


PETIT STERN err 


4 


PI Gre hy rience SEP tE 


PET ctr, 


agerrey aad! 


CORT 


en re 6006 5p rp 


4 we a 
puma TTT 
--~ 





head pega 
eas Ay ra y 


mean 
ane 


‘ 


*topererestrreay, 
0 wed 


ole eg am 


oie 


tie 


. 
F 
BA Ue a 4 ai 
NS etry, 
BRS asemn pete 


waite 


Apel 


. Snr 


TEATS MITE TAD 
¢ 





~~ 




















r 


J Saunders scuips 





the ATHAPUSCOW LAKE 


a 


By WV 


“TTR ARN. 


ms 
a 


by 5 


q 


mdialt 


ER VIEW 


A WINT 


SOUL. 


he Dares: 


22795, 4 A 


onde, Published San, 


oA 


























= 


NORTHERN OCEAN, 


parts are fo clole to each other as to form very narrow 
channels, Tike little rivers, in which I found (when 
angling for fifh) a confiderable current fetting to the 
Faftward. ~ 


The fifth that are common in this lake, as well as in 


moft of the other lakes in this country, are pike, trout, . 


perch, barble, tittameg, and methy; the two faft are 
names given by the natives to two {pecies of fifth which 
are found only in this country. Befides thefe, we alfo 
caught another kind of fifh, which is faid by the Northern 
Indians to be peculiar to this lake; at leaft none of the 
fame kind have been met with in any other. The body 
of this fifh much refembles a pike in fhape; but the 
fcales, which are very large and ftiff, are of a beautifully 
bright filver colour: the mouth is large, and fituated 
like that of a pike; but when open, much refembles that 
of a fturgeon; and though not provided with any teeth, 
takes a bait as ravenoufly as a pike or atrout. The fizes 
we caught were from two feet long to’four feet. Their 
flefh, though delicately white, is very foft, and has fo 
rank a tafte, that many of the Indians, except they are 
in abfolute want, will not eat it. ~The Northern Indians 
call this fifth Shees. The trout in this lake are of the 
largeft fize I ever faw: fome that were caught by my 
companions could not, I think, be lefs than thirty-fve 
or forty pounds weight. Pike are alfo of an incredible 
fize in this extenfive water; here they are feldom mo- 


K k Jefted, 


249 


¥772- 
ase aeenecsed 


January. 


250 


1772. 
Te mn amee 


January. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


lefted, and have multitudes of {maller fifh to prey upon. 
If I fay that I have feen fome of thefe fith that were up- 
wards of forty pounds weight, I am fure I do not exceed 
the truth. | 


Immediately on our arrival on the South fide of the- 
Athapufcow Lake, the fcene was agreeably altered, from 
an entire jumble of rocks and hills, for fuch is all the 
land on the North fide, to a fine level country, in 
which there was not a hill to be feen, or a ftone to be 
found: fo that fuch of my companions as had not brafs 


_ kettles, loaded their fledges with ftones from fome of the 


laft iflands, to boil their vi@tuals with in their birch-rind_ 
kettles, which will not admit of being expofed to the fire. 
They therefore heat {tones and drop them into the water 

in the kettle to make it boil. | 


Buffalo, moofe, and beaver were very plentiful; and 
we could difcover, in many parts through which we pafied, 
the tracks of martins, foxes, quiquehatches, and other 
animals of the furr kind; fo that they were by no means 
{carce: but my companions never gave themfelves.the leaft 
trouble to catch any of the three laft mentioned animals 3, 
for the buffalo, moofe, and beaver engaged all their at- 
tention; perhaps principally fo on account of the excel- 
Jency of their flefh; whereas the flefh of the fox and qui- 
guehatch are never eaten by: thofe people, except when. 
they are in the greateft diftrefs, and then merely to fave 

life.. 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


life. Their reafons for this fhall be given in a fubfequent 
part of my Journal. 


The buffalo in thofe parts, I think, are in general 
much larger than the Englifh black cattle; particularly 
the bulls, which, though they may not in reality be taller 
than the largeft fize of the Englifh oxen, yet to me 
always appeared to be much larger. In fad, they are fo 
heavy, that when fix or eight Indians are in company at 
the fkinning of a large bull, they never attempt to turn 
it over while entire, but when the upper fide is fkinned, 
they cut off the leg and fhoulder, rip up the belly, take 
out all the inteftines, cut off the head, and make it as 
light as poflible, before they turn it to fkin the under fide. 
The fkin is in fome places of an incredible thicknefs, par- 
_ticularly about the neck, where it often exceeds an inch. 
The horns are fhort, black, and almoft ftraight, but very 
thick at the roots or bafe. 


The head of an old bull is of a great fize and weight 
indeed: fome which I have feen were fo large, that I 
could not without difheulty lift them from the ground * ; 


* Ttis remarked by Mr. Catefby, in his defcription of this animal, that no 
man can lift one of their heads. - Thofe I faw in the Athapufcow country are 
fuch as I have defcribed; and I am affurred by the Company’s fervants, as well 
as the Indians who live near Hudfon’s Houfe, that the buffalos there are much 
fmaller; fo that the fpecies Mr. Catefby faw, or wrote of, muft have been 
much larger, or have had very large heads ; for it is well known that a man of 
any tolerable ftrength can lift two and a half, or three hundred pounds weight. 
I chink that the heads of his buffalos are too heavy for the bodies, as the bodies 
of thofe I faw in the Athapufcow country appear to have been of equal weight 


with his, 
Kk 2 | but 


act 


1772. 
em amme 


January. 


26 2 


Ti 2 
L—— ——-- 


January. 


A JOURNEY, TO THE 


but the heads of the cows are much {maller. Their tails 
are, in general, about a foot long, though fome appear to 
be, exclufive of the long brufh of hair at the end, longer. 
The hair on the tails of the bulls is generally of a fine 
glofly black ; but the brufh at the end of the cows’ tails 
is always of a rufty brown, probably owing to being 
ftained with their urine. 


The hair of the body is foft and curled, fomewhat 
approaching to wool; it is generally of a fandy brown, 
and of an equal length and thicknefs all over the body: 
but on the head and neck it is much longer than it is on © 
any other part. Ls 
- The Indians,. after reducing all the parts of the fkin to 
an equal thicknefs by fcraping, drefs them in the hair 
for clothing; when they are light, foft, warm, and durable. 
They alfo drefs fome of thofe fkins into leather without 
the hair, of which they make tents and fhoes; but the 
grain is remarkably open and {pungy, by no means equal 
in goodnefs to that of the fkin of the moofe : nor am I 
certain that the curriers or tanners in Europe could manu- 
faéture thefe fkins in fuch a manner as to render them of 
any confiderable value; for, to appearance, they are of the 
fame quality with the fkins of the mufk-ox, which are held 


in fo little eftimation in England, that when a number of 


them was fent home from Churchill Factory, the Company 
iffued out orders the year following, that unlefs they 
could be purchafed from the Indians at the rate of four 


{kins 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


fkins for one beaver, they would not anfwer the expence 


of fending home’; a ore proof of oe being of very 


little value. 


The buffalos chiefly delight in wide open plains, which 
in thofe parts produce very long coarfe grafs, or rather a 
kind of fmall flags and rufhes, upon which they feed; 
but when purfued they always take to the woods. They 
are of fuch an amazing firength, that when they fly 
through the woods from a purfuer, they frequently brufh 


down trees as thick as a man’s arm; and be the fnow ever 


fo deep, fuch is their ftrength and agility that they are © 


enabled to plunge through it fafter than the fwifteft Indian 


can run in fnow-fhoes. To this I have been an eye-wit- 


nefs many times, and once had the vanity to think that I 


could have kept pace with them; but though I was at 
that time celebrated for being particularly fleet of foot in 
fnow-{fhoes, I foon found that I was no match for the 
buffalos, notwithftanding they were then plunging through 
fuch deep fnow, that their bellies made a trench in it as 
large as if many heavy facks had been hauled through it. 
Of all the large beafts in thofe parts the buffalo is eafieft 
to kill, and the moofe are the moft dificult ; neither are 
the deer very eafy to come at, except in windy weather : 


indeed it requires much practice, and a great deal of pa- 


tience, to flay any of them, as they will by no means 
fuffer a direct approach, unlefs the hunter be entirely 
fheltered by woods or willows. The flefh of the burtalo 


a iS 


453 


L972. 


January... 


254 


1772.6 


January. 


A JOU RNERVP 7 6 Soe 


is exceedingly good eating; and fo entirely free from any 
difagreeable {mell or tafte, that it refembles beef as nearly 
as poflible: the flefh of the cows, when fome time gone 
with calf, is efteemed the fineft; and the young calves, 
cut out of their bellies, are reckoned a great delicacy in- 
deed. The hunch on their backs, or more properly on 
their fhoulders, is not a large flefhy lump, as fome fuppofe, 
but is occafioned by the bones that form the withers being 
continued to a greater length than in moft other animals. 
The flefh which furrounds this part being fo equally inter- 
mixed with fat and lean, is reckoned among the niceft 
bits. ‘The weight, however, is by no means equal to 
what has been commonly reported. The tongue is alfo 
very delicate; and what is moft extraordinary, when 
the beafts are in the pooreft ftate, which happens re- 
gularly at certain feafons, their tongues are then very fat 
and fine; fome fay, fatter than when they are in the’ 
beft order: the truth of which, I will not confirm. 
They are fo efteemed here, however, that many of them 
are brought down to the Company’s Fattery at York as 
prefents, and are efteemed a great luxury, probably for 
no other reafon but that they are far-fetched ; for they are 
by no means fo large, and I think them not fo fine, as a 
neat’s tongue in England. 


The moofe deer is alfo a large beaft, often exceeding the 
largeft horfe both in height and bulk; but the length of 
the legs, the bulk of the body, the fhortnefs of the neck, 


and 


NOR FHERN OCEAN. 


and the uncommon length of the head and ears, without 
any appearance of a tail, make them have a very aukward 
appearance. The males far exceed the females in fize, 
and differ from them in colour. ‘The hair of the male, 
which is long, hollow, and foft, like that of a deer, is 
at the points nearly black, but a little way under the fur- 
face it is of an afh-colour, and at the roots perfe@ly white. 
The hair of the female is of a fandy brown, and in fome 
parts, particularly under the throat, the belly, and the 
flank, is nearly white at the furface, and moft delicately 
fo at the root. 


Their legs are fo Jong, and their necks fo fhort, that 
they cannot graze on level ground like other animals, but 
are obliged to brouze on the tops of large plants and the 
leaves of trees during the Summer; and in Winter they 
always feed on the tops of willows, and the {mail branches 
of the birch-tree ; on which account they are never found 
during that feafon but in fuch places as can afford them a 
plentiful fupply of their favourite food: and though they 
have no fore-teeth in the upper-jaw, yet I have often {een 
willows and fmall birch-trees cropped by them, in the 
fame manner as if they had been cut by a gardener’s fheers, 
though fome of them were not {maller than common pipe- 
fiems ; they feem particularly partial to the red willow.. 


In Summer they are generally found to frequent: the 
banks of rivers and lakes, probably with no other view: 
; thar 


255 


i 72 


January. 


a6 


1772. 
ewan macand 


january. 


A 9 OUR NES! TO “THE 


than to have the beneft of getting into the water, to avoid 
the innumerable multitudes of mufkettos and other flies 
that pefter them exceedingly during that feafon, ‘There is 
alfo a variety of water-plants, of which the moofe are very 
fond, and which are adapted to their neceflities in a pecu- 
liar manner during the Summer feafon, as they can eafily 
brouze on them when nearly emerged in water, to avoid. 
the torment of the flies. 


The head of the moofe is, as I have obferved, remark- 
ably long and large, not very unlike that of a horfe; but 
the nofe and noftrils are at leaft twice as large. The ears 
are about a foot long, and large; and they always ftand 
erect. Their faculty of hearing is fuppofed to be more 
acute than either their fight or fcent ; which makes it very 
dificult to kill them, efpecially as the Indians in thofe 
parts have no other method of doing it but by creeping 
after them, among the trees and buthes, till they get within 
gun-fhot; taking care always to keep to leeward of the 
moofe, for fear of being overheard. In Summer, when 
they frequent the margins of rivers and lakes, they are 


_ often killed by the Indians in the water, while they are 


crofling rivers, or {wimming from the main to iflands, EP ec, 
When purfued in this manner, they are the moft inof- 
fenfive of all animals, never making any refiftance; and 
the young ones are fo fimple, that I remember to have feen 
an Indian paddle his canoe up to one of them, and take 
it by the poll without the leaft oppofition: the poor 

harmlefs 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


harmlefs animal feeming at the fame time as contented 
along-fide the canoe, as if {wimming by the fide of its 
dam, and looking up in our faces with the fame fearlefs 
innocence that a houfe-lamb would, making ufe of its 
fore-foot almoft every inftant to clear its eyes of muf- 
kettoes, which at that time were remarkably numerous. 


I have alfo feen women and boys kill the old moofe 
in this fituation, by knocking them on the head with a 
hatchet ; and in the Summer of one thoufand feven hun- 
dred and feventy-five, when I was on my paflage from 
Cumberland Houfe to York Fort, two boys killed a fine 
buck moofe in the water, by forcing a ftick up its funda- 
ment; for they had neither gun, bow, nor arrows with 
them. ‘The common deer are far more dangerous to ap- 
proach in canoes, as they kick up their hind legs with fuch 
violence as to endanger any birch-rind canoe that comes 
within their reach; for which reafon all the Indians who 
kill deer upon the water are provided with a long ftick that 
will reach far beyond the head of the canoe. 


The moofe are alfo the eafieft to tame and domefticate 
of any of the deer kind. I have repeatedly feen them at 
Churchill as tame as fheep *, and even more fo; for they 


* The moofe formerly fent to his Majefty was from that place. A young 


male was alfo put on board the fhip, but it died on the paflage, otherwife i 


is probable they might have propagated in this country. 


LA | would 


258 


i772. 
heen —eeeeeend 


January. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


would follow their keeper any diftance from home, and 
at his call return with him, without the leaft trouble, or 
ever offering to deviate from the path *. 


The flefh of the moofe is very good, though the grain 
is but coarfe, and it is much tougher than any other kind 
of venifon. The nofe is moft excellent, as is alfo the 
tongue, though by no means fo fat and delicate as that of 
the common deer. It is perhaps worth remarking, that 
the livers of the moofe are never found, not even at any 
time of the year; and, like the other deer, they have no 
gall. The fat of the inteftines is hard, like fuet; but all 
the external fat is foft, like that of a breaft of mutton, 
and when put into a bladder, is as fine as marrow. In 
this they differ from all the other fpecies of deer, of which 
the external fat is as hard as that of the kidnies. 


* Since the above was written, the fame Indian that brought all the above- 
mentioned young moofe to the Factory had, in the year 1777, two others, fo 
tame, that when on his paffage to Prince of Wales’s Fort in a canoe, the moofe 
always followed him along the bank of the river ; and at night, or on any other 
occafion when the Indians landed, the young moofe generally came and fondled 
onthem, inthe fame manner as the moft domeftic animal would have done, and 
never offered to {tray from the tents. Unfortunately, in croffing a deep bay in 
one of the lakes, (on a fine day,) all the Indians that were not interefted in the 
fafe-landing of thofe engaging creatures, paddled from point to point; and the 
man that owned them, not caring to go fo far about by himfelf, accompanied 
the others, in hopes they would follow him round as ufual; but at night the 
young moofe did not arrive; and as the howling of fome wolves was heard 


in that quarter, 1t was fuppofed they had been devoured by them, as they were 
never afterward feen. 


7 The 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


The moofe in all their actions and attitudes appear 
very uncouth, and when difturbed, never run, only make 
a kind of trot, which the length of their legs enables them 
to do with great {wiftnefs, and apparently with much eafe ; 
but were the country they inhabit free from under-wood, 
and dry under-foot, fo that horfemen and dogs might 
follow them, they would become an ealy prey, as they 
are both tender-footed and fhort-winded: But of this 
more hereafter *. | 


The fkins of the moofe, when drefled by the na- 
tives, make excellent tent-covers and fhoe-leather; and 
in fact every other part of their clothing. Thefe, like 
the fkins of the buffalo, are of very unequal thicknefs. 
Some of the Indian women, who are acquainted with 
the manufacture of them, will, by means of {craping, 
render them as even as a piece of thick cloth, and when 
well dreffed they are very foft; but not being dreffed in 
oil, they always grow hard after being wet, unlefs great 
care be taken to keep rubbing them all the time they are 
drying. The fame may be faid of all the Indian-drefled 
leather, except that of the wewafkifh, which will wafh as 
well as fhammoy-leather, and always preferve its foftnefs. 


= iru Pratz, in his defcription of this animal, fays, it is never found 
farther North than Cape Breton and Nova Scotia; but I have feen them in 
great numbers in the Athapufcow Country, which cannot be much fhort of 60° 
North latitude. 


L1 2 The 


ae 


1772. . 
 eeeceensien emetoncccarned 


January. 


260 


M72: 


a 
January. 


A JOURNEY TOME 


The female moofe never have any horns, but the males 
have them of a prodigious fize and weight, and very dif- 
ferent in fhape from thofe of the common deer. The 
extremity of each horn is palmated to the fize of a com- 
mon fhovel, from which a few fhort branches fhoot out ; 
and the fhaft of the horn is frequently as large as a com- 
mon man’s wrift. They fhed them annually like the com- 
mon deer. The horns of the moofe are frequently found 
to exceed fixty pounds weight; and their texture, though 
of a large fize and of fuch rapid growth, is much harder 
than any other fpecies of deer-horns in thofe parts. 


Though the flefh of the moofe is efteemed by moft 
Indians both for its flavour and fubftance, yet the North- 
ern Indians of my crew did not reckon either it or the 
flefh of the buffalo fubftantial food. This I fhould think 
entirely proceeded from prejudice, efpecially with refpec 
to the moofe; but the flefh of the buffalo, though fo fine 
to the eye, and pleafing to the tafte, is fo light and eafy 
of digeftion, as not to be deemed fubftantial food by any 
Indian in this country, either Northern or Southern. 
The moofe have from one to three young at a time, and 
generally bring them forth in the latter end of April, or 
beginning of May. 


Soon after our arrival on the South-fide of Athapufcow 


Lake, Matonabbee propofed continuing our courfe in the 
South 


NOR DH ERN] OCat A N. 


South Weft quarter, in hopes of meeting fome of the 
Athapufcow Indians; becaufe I wifhed, if poflible, to 
purchafe a tent, and other ready-drefied fkins from them ; 
as a fupply of thofe articles would at this time have been 
of material fervice to us, being in great want both of tents 
and fhoe-leather: and though my companions were daily 
killing either moofe or buffalo, the weather was fo ex- 
ceflively cold, as to render drefling their fkins not only 
very troublefome, but almoft impracticable, efpecially to 
the generality of the Northern Indians, who are not 
well acquainted with the manufacture of that kind of 


leather. 


To drefs thofe {kins according to the Indian method, a 
lather is made of the brains and fome of the fofteft fat or 
marrow of the animal, in which the fkin is well foaked, 
when it is taken out, and not only dried by the heat of a 
fire, but hung up in the {moke for feveral days; it is then 
taken down, and well foaked and wafhed in warm water, 
till the grain of the fkin is perfe@ly open, and has imbibed 
a fufficient quantity of water, after which it is taken out 
and wrung as dry as poflible, and then dried by the heat 
of a flow fire; care being taken to rub and ftretch it as 
long as any moifture remains in the fkin. By this fimple 
method, and by {craping them afterwards, fome of the 
moofe {kins are made very delicate both to the eye and the 


touch, 
| On 


2G1 


1772. 
Tee maine, 


January. 


262 


1772. 
(ere mena 


January 
Lith. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


On the eleventh of January, as fome of my companions 
were hunting, they faw the track of a ftrange fnow-thoe, 
which they followed; and at a confiderable diftance came 
to a little hut, where they difcovered a young woman 
fitting alone. As they found that fhe underftood their 
language, they brought her with them to the tents. On 
examination, fhe proved to be one of the Weftern Dog- 
ribbed Indians, who had been taken prifoner by the Atha- 
pufcow Indians in the Summer of one thoufand feven 
hundred and feventy; and in the following Summer, when 
the Indians that took her prifoner were near this part, fhe 
had eloped from them, with an intent to return to her own 
country ; but the diftance being fo great, and having, 
after fhe was taken prifoner, been carried in a canoe the 
whole way, the turnings and windings of the rivers and 
lakes were fo numerous, that fhe forgot the track ; fo the 
built the hut in which we found her, to proteét her from 
the weather during the Winter, and here fhe had refided 
from the farft fetting in of the fall. 


From her account of the moons paft fince her elope-. 
ment, it appeared that fhe had been near feven months 
without feeing a human face; during all which time fhe 
had feats herfelf very ie by {naring partridges, 
rabbits, and fquirrels; fhe had alfo killed two or three 
beaver, and fome porcupines. ‘That fhe did not feem to 
have been in want is evident, as fhe had a {mall flock of 


provifions 


NOOR Ten RNG "O°G ARN. 


provifions by her when fhe was difcovered; and was in 
good health and condition, and { think one of the fineft 
women, of areal Indian, that I have feen in any part of 
North America. 


The methods practifed by this poor creature to procure 
a livelihood were truly admirable, and are great proofs 
that neceflity is the real mother of invention. When 
the few deer-finews that fhe had an opportunity of taking 
with her were all expended in making fnares, and fewing 
her clothing, fhe had nothing to fupply their place but 
the finews of the rabbits legs and feet; thefe fhe twifted 
together for that purpofe with great dexterity and fuccefs. 
The rabbits, &c. which fhe caught in thofe f{nares, not 
only furnifhed her with a comfortable fubfiftence, but of 
the fkins fhe made a fuit of neat and warm clothing 
for the Winter. It is {carcely poffible to conceive that 
a perfon in her forlorn fituation could be fo compofed as 
to be capable of contriving or executing any thing that was 
not abfolutely neceflary to her exiftence; but there were 
fufficient proofs that fhe had extended her care much far- 
ther, as all her clothing, befide being calculated for real 
fervice, fhewed great tafte, and exhibited no little variety 
of ornament. The materials, though rude, were very curi- 
oufly wrought, and {fo judicioufly placed, as to make the 
whole of her garb have a very pleafing, though rather ro- 
mantic appearance. 


Her 


263 


17726 
ee ama ae 


January, 


204 


177 26 
Recaro! 


January. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


Her leifure hours from hunting had been employed 
in twifting the inner rind or bark of willows into {mall 
lines, like net-twine, of which fhe had fome hundred 
fathoms by her; with this fhe intended to make a fifhing- 
net as foon as the Spring advanced. It is of the inner 
bark of willows, twifted in this manner, that the Dog- 
ribbed Indians make their fifhing-nets; and they are much 
perferable to thofe made by the Northern Indians *. 


Five or fix inches of an iron hoop, made into a knife, 
and the fhank of an arrow-head of iron, which ferved her 
as an awl, were all the metals this poor woman had with 
her when fhe eloped ; and with thefe implements fhe had 
made herfelf complete fnow-fhoes, and feveral other ufeful 


articles. 


Her method of making a fire was equally fingular and 
curious, having no other materials for that purpofe than two 
hard fulphurous ftones. Thefe, by long friction and hard 
knocking, produced a few fparks, which at length commu- 
nicated to fome touchwood; but as this method was attend- 
ed with great trouble, and not always with fucceds, fhe did 


* The Northern Indians make their fifhing-nets with fmall thongs cut from: 
raw deer-fkins; which when dry appear very good, but after being foaked 
in water fome time, grow fo foft and flippery, that when large fith ftrike the 
net, the hitches are very apt to flip and let them efcape. Befide this incon- 
venience, they are very hable to rot, unlefs they be frequently taken out of the 
water and dried, 

not 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


not fufter her fire to go out all the Winter. Hence we 
may conclude that fhe had no idea of producing fire by 
friction, in the manner pra@tifed by the Efquimaux, and 
many other uncivilized nations; becaufe if fhe had, the 
above-mentioned precaution would have been unneceflary. 


The fingularity of the circumftance, the comelinefs of 
her perfon, and her approved accomplifhments, occafioned 
a {trong conteft between feveral of the Indians of my party, 
who fhould have her for a wife; and the poor girl was ac- 
tually won and loft at wreftling by near half a feore dif- 
ferent men the fame evening. My guide, Matonabbee, who 
at that time had no lefs than feven wives, all women grown, 
befides a young girl of eleven or twelve years old, would 
have put in for the prize alfo, had not one of his wives 
made him afhamed of it, by telling him that he had al- 
ready more wives than he could properly attend. This 
piece of fatire, however true, proved fatal to the poor 
girl who dared to make fo opena declaration ; for the great 
man, Matonabbee, who would willingly have been thought 
equal to eight or ten men in every refpect, took it as fuch 
an affront, that he fell on her with both hands and feet, 
and bruifed her to fuch a degree, that after lingering fome 
time fhe died. 


When the Athapufcow Indians took the above Doe- 
ribbed Indian woman prifoner, they, according to the uni- 
verfal cuftom of thofe favages, furprifed her and her party in 

Mm the 


265 
772. 


January. 


266 


1773. 


January. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


the night, and killed every foul in the tent, except herfelf 
and three other young women.. Among thofe whom they 
killed, were her father, mother, and hufband. Her young 
child, four or five months old,’ {he concealed in.a bundle 
of clothing, and teok with her undifcovered in the night. 
but when fhe arrived at the place where the Athapufcow- 
Indians had left their wives, (which-was not far diftant,): 
they began to examine her bundle, and finding the child; 
one of the women toak it from. her, and killed it on. 
the {pot, 


This laft piece of barbarity. gave her fuch.a difouft to: 
thofe Indians, that notwithftanding the man who took 
care of her treated her in. every refpect as his wife, and 
was, fhe faid,. remarkably kind to, and even fond of her.; 
fo far was fhe from being, able to reconcile herfelf to any 
of the tribe, that fhe rather chofe to expofe herfelf to 
mifery and. want, than live in eafe and affluence among 
perfons who had fo.cruelly murdered. her infant *, The 

poor 

* It-is too commonz-a cafe: with moft ofthe tribes of Southern Indians fot 
the women to defire their hufbands or friends, when going to war, to bring 
them a flave, that they may have the pleafure of killing it; and fome of thefe 


inhuman women ‘will’accompany their~hufbands, and murder the women and 
children as faft as their. hufbands do the men. 


When I was at Cumberland Houfe, (an inland fettlement that I eftablithed 
for the Hudfon’s Bay Company in the year 1774,) 1 was particularly ac- 
quainted with a very young lady. of this extraordinary turn; who, when I defired 
fome Indians that were going to war to bring me a young flave, which | 
intended to have brought up as a domeitic, Mifs was equally defirous that one 


might, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


poor woman’s relation of this fhocking ftory, which fhe 
delivered in a very affecting manner, only excited laughter 
among the favages of my party. 


In a converfation with this woman foon afterward, fhe 
told us, that her country lies fo far to the Weftward, that 


fhe had never feen iron, or any other kind of metal, till the. 


was taken prifoner. All of her tribe, the obferved, made 
their hatchets and ice-chifels of deer’s horns, and their 
knives of ftones and bones; that their arrows were fhod 
with a kind of flate, bones, and deer’s horns; and the 
inftruments which they employed to make their wood- 
work were nothing but beavers’ teeth. Though they 
had frequently heard of the ufeful materials which the 
nations or tribes to the Eaft of them were fupplied with 
from the Englifh, fo far were they from drawing nearer, 
to be in the way of trading for iron-work, &c. that they 
were obliged to retreat farther back, to avoid the Atha~ 
pufcow Indians, who made furprifing flaughter among 
them, both in Winter and Summer. 


On the fixteenth, as we were continuing our courfe in 
the South Weft quarter, we arrived at the grand Atha- 





might be brought to her, for the cruel purpofe ‘of murdering it. It is 
{carcely poffible to exprefs my aftonifhment, on hearing fuch an extraordinary 
requeft made by a young creature fcarcely fixteen years old; however, as 
foon as I recovered from my furprife, I ordered her to leave the fertlement, 
which fhe did, with thofe who were going to war; and it is therefore probable 
fhe might not be difappointed in her requeft. The next year I was ordered to 
the command of Prince of Wales’s Fort, and therefore never faw her afterward, 


Mm 2 pulcow 


267 


1772-6 
heer, attend! 


January. 


16th. 


308 


1772-6 
Geren recacamsd 


January. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


pufcow River, which at that part is about two miles. 
wide, and empties itfelf into the great lake of the fame 
name we had fo lately croffed, and which has been al- 


ready defcribed. 


The woods about this river, particularly the pines and 
poplars, are the talleft and ftouteft I have feen in any part 
of North America. ‘The birch alfo grows to a confider- 
able fize, and fome fpecies of the willow are likewife tall ; 
but none of them have any trunk, like thofe in England. 


The bank of the river in moft parts is very high, and 
in fome places not feds than a hundred feet above the or- 
dinary furface of the water. As the foil is of a loamy 
quality, it is very fubje& to moulder or wafh away by 
1eavy rains, even during the fhort Summer allotted to this 
part of the globe. ‘Fhe breaking up of the ice in the 
Spring is annually attended with a great deluge, when, Iam 
told, it is not uncommon to fee whole points of land wafhed. 
away by the inundations ; and as the wood grows clofe to 
the edge of the banks, vaft quantities of it are hurried 
down the ftream by the irrefiftible force of the water and 
ice, and conveyed into the great lake already mentioned ; on 
the fhores and iflands of which, there lies the greateft quan- 
tity of drift wood Tever faw. Some of this wood is large 
enough to make maits for the largeft fhips that are built. 
The banks of the river in general are fo itcep’as to be in- 
acceffible to either man or beaft, except in fome flacks, or: 
gulleys, that have’been wore down by heavy rains, back- 

waters, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


waters, or deluges; and even thofe flacks are, for the moft 
part, very dificult to afcend, on account of the number 
of large trees which lie in the way. 


There are feveral low iflands in this river, which are 
much frequented by the moofe, for the fake of the 
fine willows they produce, which furnifh them with a 
plentiful fupply of their favourite food during the Winter. 
Some of thofe iflands are alfo frequented by a number of 
rabbits; but as larger game could be procured in great 
plenty, thofe fmall animals were not deemed worthy our 
notice at prefent. 


Befide the grand river already mentioned, there are fe- 
veral others of lefs note, which empty themfelves into the 
great Athapufcow Lake: There are alfo feveral fmall 
rivers and creeks on the North Eaft fide of the Lake that 
carry of the fuperfluous waters, fome of which, after a 
variety of windings through the barren grounds to the 
North of Churchill River, are loft in the marthes and low 
srounds, while others, by means of many fmall chan- 
nels and rivulets, are difcharged into other rivers and 
lakes, and at laft, doubtlefs, find their way into Hudfon’s 
Bay. Thefe rivers, though numberiefs, are all fo full of 
fhoals and ftones, as not to be mE for an Indian 
canoe to any confiderable diftance; and if they were, it 
would be of littl or no ufe to the natives, as none 
of them lead within feveral hundred miles of Churchill 
River. 

Agree- 


269 


17726 
erences 


January: 


276 
a 


January. 


27the 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


Agreeably to Matonabbee’s propofal, we continued our 
courfe up the Athapufcow River for many days, and 
though we pafled feveral :parts which we well knew to 
have been the former Winter-haunts of the Athapufcow 
Indians, yet we could not fee the leaft trace of any of © 
them having been there that feafon. In the preceding Sum- 
mer, when they were in thofe parts, they had fet fire to’ 
the woods; and though many months had elapfed from 
that time till our arrival there, and notwithftanding the 
{now was then very deep, the mofs was ftill burning in 
many places, which at firft deceived us very much, as 
we took it for the fmoke of ftrange tents; but after going 
much out of our way, and fearching very diligently, we 
could not difcover the leaft track of a ftranger. 


Thus difappointed in our expectations of meeting the 
Southern Indians, it was refolved (in Council, as it may be 
called) to expend as much time in hunting buffalo, moofe, 
and beaver as we could, fo that-we might be able to reach 
Prince of Wales’s Fort a little before the ufual time of 
the fhips arrival from England. Accordingly, after having 
walked upwards of forty miles by the fide of Athapufcow 
River, on the twenty-feventh of January we ftruck off 
to the Eaftward, and left the River at that part where it 
begins to tend due South. 


In confequence of this determination of the Indians, 
we continued our courfe to the Eaftward; but as game 
of all kinds was very plentiful, we made but fhort days 

journies, 


N*O RET HE RNG 10%, EAN. 


journies, and often remained two or three days in one 
place, to eat up the {poils or produce of the chace. The 
woods through which we were to pafs were in many places 
fo thick, that it was neceffary to cut a path before the 
women could pafs with their {ledges ; and in other places 
fo much of the woods had formerly been fet on fire and 
burnt, that we were frequently obliged to walk farther 
than we otherwife fhould have done, before we could find 
ereen brufh: enough to floor our tents. 


From the fifteenth to the twenty-fourth of February, 
we walked along a fmall river that empties itfelf into 
the Lake Clowey, near the part where we built canoes 
in May one thoufand feven hundred and {feventy-one. 
This little river is that which we mentioned in the 
former part of this Journal, as having communication 
with. the Athapufcow Lake: but, from appearances, it is 
ef no confequence whence it takes its rife, or where it 
empties itfelf, as one half of it is nearly dry three-fourths 
of the year. The intervening ponds, however, having fuf- 
ficient depth of water, are, we may fuppofe, favourable 
fituations for beaver, as.many of. their houfes are to be 


found in thofe parts. 


On the twenty-fourth, a ftrange Northern Indian leader, 
called Thlew-fa-nell-ie, and feveral of his followers, joined 
us from the Eaftward.. This leader prefented Matonabbee 
and myfelf with a foot of tobacco each, and a two-quart 

Keg. 


~ 


271 


1772. 
eS em amend 


January. 


February 
roth——24th, 


the 


nm 
ja lad 


7 2 


February. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


keg of brandy, which he intended as a prefent for the 
Southern Indians; but being informed by my companions, 
that there was not the leaft probability of meeting any, he 
did not think it worth any farther carriage. The tobacco 
was indeed very acceptable, as our ftock of that article 
had been expended fome time. Having been fo long with- 
out tafting f{pirituous liquors, I would not partake of the - 
brandy, but left it entirely to the Indians, to whom, 
as they were numerous, it was fcarcely a tafte for each. 
Few of the Northern Indians are fond of {pirits, efpecially 
thofe who keep at a diftance from the Fort: fome who 
are near, and who ufually fhoot geefe for us in the Spring, 
will drink it at free coft as faft as the Southern Indians, 
but few of them are ever fo imprudent as to buy it. 


The little river lately mentioned, as well as the adjacent 
lakes and ponds, being well-ftocked with beaver, and the 
land abounding with moofe and buffalo, we were induced 
to make but flow progrefs in our journey. Many days 
were {pent in hunting, feafting, and drying a large quan- 
tity of flefh to take with us, particularly that of the buf- 
falo; for my companions knew by experience, that a few 
days walk to the Eaftward of our prefent fituation would 
bring us to a part where we fhould not fee any of thofe 
animals. | 


The ftrangers who had joined us on the twenty-fourth 
informed us, that all were well at Prince of Wales’s Fort 
13 | when 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


when they left it laft; which, according to their account 
of the Moons paft fince, muft have been about the fifth 
of November one thoufand feven hundred and feventy- 
one. Thefe ftrangers only remained in our company one 
night before the Leader and part of his crew left us, and 
proceeded on their journey to the North Weftward; but 
a few of them having procured fome furrs in the early part 
of the Winter, joined our party, with an intent to accom- 
pany us to the Factory. 


Having a good ftock of dried meat, fat, &c. prepared 
in the beft manner for carriage, on the twenty-eighth we 
{haped our courfe in the South Eaft quarter, and pro- 
ceeded at a much greater rate than we had lately done, 
as little or no time was now loft in hunting. The next 
day we faw the tracks of fome ftrangers ; and though I did 
not perceive any of them myfelf, fome of my companions 
were at the trouble of fearching for them, and finding 
them to be poor inoffenfive people, plundered them not 
only of the few furrs which they had, but took alfo one 
of their young women from them. | 


Every additional act of violence committed by my com- 
panions on the poor and diftrefled, ferved to increafe my 
indignation and diflike; this laft a&, however, difpleafed 
me more than all théir former actions, becaufe it was com- 
mitted on a fet of harmlefs creatures, whofe general man- 
ner of life renders them the moft fecluded from fociety of 


any of the human race. 
Non Matonabbee 


913 


1772, 
February. 


28th. 


274 
W772. 


A:|\ JOURNEY ITO Tar 


Matonabbee affured me, that for more than a generation 


February. paft one family only, as it may be called, (and to which 


’ 
{ 


the young men belonged who were plundered by my com- 
panions,) have taken up their Winter abode in thofe 
woods, which are fituated fo far on the barren ground 
as to be quite out of the track of any other Indians. 
From the beft accounts that I could collec, the latitude 
of this place muft be about 63;°, or 63° at leaft; the 


longitude is very uncertain. From my own experience 
I can affirm, that it is fome hundreds of miles both 


¥rom the fea-fide and the main woods to the Weftward. 
- Few of the trading Northern Indians have vifited this 


place ; but thofe who have, give a pleafing defcription of 


_ ft, all agreeing that it is fituated on the banks of a river 
~ which has communication with feveral fine lakes. As 


the current fets to the North Eaftward, .it empties itfelf, 
in all probability, into fome part of Hudion’s Bay ; and, 
from the latitude, no part feems more likely for this com- 
munication, than Baker’s Lake, at the head of Chefter- 
field’s inlet. This, however, is mere conjecture; nor 
is it of any confequence, as navigation on any of the 
rivers in thofe parts is not only impracticable, but would 
be alfo unprofitable, as.they do not lead into a country 
that produces any thing for trade, or that contains any 
inhabitants worth vifiting. 


The accounts given of this place, and the manner of 
lite of its inhabitants, would, if related at full length, 
filla volume: let it fuffice to obferve, that the fituation 


1S. 


NOR EHERN OCEAN. 


is faid to be remarkably favourable for every kind of game 
that the barren ground produces at the different feafons 
of the year; but the continuance of the game with 
them is in general uncertain, except that of fifh and par- 
tridges. That being the cafe, the few who compofe this 
little commonwealth, are, by long cuitom and the conftant 
example of their preahert poffefled of a provident turn 
of mind, with a degree of frugality unknown to every 
other tribe of Indians in this country except the Ef- 
quimaux. 


Deer is faid to vifit this part of the country in afto- 
nifhing numbers, both in Spring and Autumn, of which 
circumftances the inhabitants avail themfelves, by killing 


and drying as much of their flefh as poflible, particularly 


in the fall of the year; fo that they feldom are in want 


ef a good Winter’s {tock. 


Geefe, ducks, and fwans vifit here in great plenty 
during their migrations both in the Spring and Fall, and 
by much art, joined to an infurmountable patience, are 
caught in confiderable numbers in {nares *, and, with- 

out 


* To fhare fwans, geefe, or ducks, in the water, it requires no other procefs 
than to make a number of hedges, or fences, project into the water, at 
right angles, from the banks of ariver, lake,.or pond; for it is obferved that 
thofe birds generally fwim near the margin, for the benefit of feeding on the 
orafs, &c. Thofe fences are continued for fome diftance from the fhore, 
and feparated two or three yards from each other, fo that openings are 


lee fufficiently large to let the birds fwim through, In each of thofe open-. 


Nn 2 ings 


275 


17 72- 
Raceeneran pores 


February. 


276 


1772, 
February. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


out doubt, make avery pleafing change in the food. It 
is alfo reported, (though I confefs I doubt the truth of it,): 


ings a fnare is hung and faftened to a ftake, which the bird, when intangled, 
cannot drag from the bottom ; and to prevent the fnare from being wafted out 
of its proper place by the wind, it is fecured to the ftakes which tone the: 
opening, with tender grafs, which is eafily broken. 


This method, though it has the appearance of being very fimple, is never- 
thelefs attended with much trouble, particularly when we confider the {mall- 
nefs of their canoes, and the great inconveniency they labour under in per- 
forming works of this kind in the water. Many of the ftakes ufed on thofe: 
occafions are of a confiderable length and fize, and the fmall branches which 
form the principal part of the hedges, are not arranged without much caution, 
for fear of overfetting the canoes, particularly where the water is deep, as it 
is in fome of the lakes; and in many of the rivers the current is very {wift, 
which renders this bufinefs equally troublefome. When the lakes and rivers 
are fhallow, the natives are frequently at the pains to make fences from. fhore. 
to fhore. 


To {fnare thofe birds in their nefts requires a confiderable degree of art, 
and, as the natives fay, a great deal of cleanlinefs; for they have obferved, 
that when fnares have been fet by thofe whofe hands were not clean, the birds. 
would not go into the neft. 


Even the goofe, though fo fimple a bird, is notorioufly known to forfake. 
her eggs, if they are breathed on by the Indians. 


The fmaller fpecies of birds which make their neft in the ground, are by no. 
means fo delicate, of courfe lefs care is neceffary to {mare them. It has been. 
obferved that all birds which build in the ground go into their neft at one par- 
ticular fide, and out of it on the oppofite. The Indians, thoroughly convinced 
of this, always fet the inares on the fide on which the bird enters the neft;. 
and if care be taken in fetting them, feldom fail of feizing their object. 
For {mall birds, fuch as larks, and many others of equal fize, the Indians 
only ufe two or three hairs out of their head; but for larger birds, particu-_ 
larly fwans, geefe, and ducks, they make {nares of deer-finews, twifted like 
pacxthread, and occafionally of a fmall thong cut from a parchment deer- 
f{kin. 


I that 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


that a remarkable fpecies of partridges as large as Englifh 
fowls, are found in that part of the country only. Thofe, 
as well as the common partridges, it is faid, are killed in 
confiderable numbers, with {nares, as well. as with bows 


and arrows. 


The river and lakes near the little foreft where the 
family above mentioned had fixed their abode, abound with 


fine fifh, particularly trout and barble,. which are eafily 
caught ; the former with. hooks, and the latter in nets. In 
fact, I have not feen or heard of any part of this country 


which feems to poffefs half the advantages requifité for a. 
eonftant refidence, that. are afcribed to. this little {pot. 
The defcendents, however, of the prefent inhabitants muft 
in time evacuate it for want of wood, which is of fo flow 


a growth in.thofe regions, that what is ufed in one year, 
exclufive of what is cut down and carried away by the 


Efquimaux,. muft coft many. years to replace. 


It may probably be thought ftrange that any part of a 


community, apparently fo commodioufly fituated, and 


happy within themfelves, fhould be found at fo great a. 


diftance from the reft of their tribe, and indeed nothing. 


but neceffity could poffibly have urged them to undertake a. 
journey of fo many hundred miles as they have done; but 


no fituation is without its inconveniences, and.as their 
woods contain no birch-trees of fufficient fize, or per-. 


haps none of any fize, this party had.come fo far to the 
| Wetft~. 


aie | 


1772. 
February. . 


278 
ag 2. 


L—— +. 
February. 


A~ JOURNEN SO BE 


Weftward to procure birch-rind for making two canoes, 
and fome of the fungus that grows on the outfide of 
the birch-tree, which is ufed by all the Indians in 
thofe parts for tinder. There are two forts of thefe fun- 
gufes which grow on the birch-trees; one is hard, the ufe- 
ful part of which much refembles rhubarb; the other 
is foft and {mooth like velvet on the outfide, and. when 
laid on hot afhes for fome time, and well beaten be- 
tween two ftones, is fomething like fpunk. The former 
is called by the Northern Indians Jolt-thee, and is known 

all over the country bordering on Hudfon’s Bay by the 
name of Pefogan *, it being fo called by the Southern In- 


* The Indians, both Northern and Southern, have found by experience, 
that by boiling the pefogan in water for a confiderable time, the texture is fo 
much improved, that when thoroughly dried, fome parts of it will be nearly 
as foft as {punge. 


Some of thofe fungufes are as large as a man’s head; the outfide, which is 
very hard and black, and much indented with deep cracks, being of no ufe, 
is always chopped off with a hatchet. Befides the two forts of touchwood al- 
ready mentioned, there is another kind of it in thofe parts, tnat I think is in- 
finitely preferable to either. This is found in old decayed poplars, and lies in 
flakes of various fizes and thicknefs; fome is not thicker than fhamoy leather, 
others are as thick as a fhoe-fole. This, like the fungus of the birch-tree, is 
always moift when taken from the tree, but when dry, itis very foft and flex. 


ible, and takes fire readily from the fpark of a fteel; but it is much improved by 


being kept dry in a bag that has contained gunpowder. It is rather furprifing 
that the Indians, whofe mode of life I have juft been defcribing, have never 
acquired the method of making fire by friction, like the Efquimaux. It is 
alfo equally furprifing that they do not make ufe of flkin-canoes. Probably 
deer-{kins cannot be manufactured to withftand the water; for it 1s well known 
that the Efquimaux ufe always feal-fkins for that purpofe, though they are in 
the habit of killing great numbers of deer, 

. dians. 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


dians. The latter is only ufed by the Northern tribes, 
and is called by them Clalte-ad-dee. 


By the firft of March we began to leave the fine level 
country of the Athapufcows, and again to approach the 
ftony mountains or hills which bound the Northern In- 
dian country. Moofe and beaver ftill continued to be 
plentiful; but no buffaloes could be feen after the twenty- 
ninth of February. 


As we were continuing our courfe to the Eaft South 
Ea{t, on the fourteenth we difcovered the tracks of more 
{trangers, and the next day came up with them. Among 
thofe Indians was the man who had carried a letter for me 
in March one thoufand feven hundred and feventy-one, to 
the Chief at Prince of Wales’s Fort, and to which he had 
brought an anfwer, dated the twenty-firft of June. When 
this Indian received the letter from me, it was very un- 
certain what route we fhould take in our return from the 
Copper River, and, in all probability, he himfelf had 
not then determined on what fpot he would pafs the 
prefent Winter; confequently our meeting each other was 
merely accidental. 


Thefe Indians having obtained a few furrs in the courfe 
of the Winter, joined our party, which now confifted 
of twenty tents, containing in the whole about two hun- 


dred. 


279 
+772. 
March. 


rf. 


T4t Ite 


280 


17792. 
March. 


¢ 6th. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 
dred perfons ; and indeed our company had not been much 
lefs during the whole Winter. 


From the ftrangers who aft joined us we received fome 
ready-drefled moofe-fkins for tenting and fhoe-leather ; 
alfo fome other fkins for clothing, for all of which the 
Chief at the Factory was to pay on our arrival. 


I cannot fuficiently lament the lofs of my quadrant, as 
the want of it muft render the courfe of my journey 
from Point Lake, where it was broken, very uncertain ; 


and my watch ftopping while I was at the Athapufcow 


Lake, has contributed greatly to the misfortune, as I am 
now deprived of every means of eftimating the diftances 
which we walked with ‘any degree of accuracy, particu- 


larly in thick weather, when the Sun could not be feen. 


The Indians were employed at all convenient times 
in procuring birch-rind and making wood work ready 
for building canoes; alfo in preparing {mall ftaffs of 
birch-wood, to take with them on the barren ground, 
to ferve as tent-poles all the Summer; and which, as 
hath been already obferved, they convert into fnow- 
fhoe frames when the Winter fets in. Here it may 
be proper to obferve, that none of thofe incidental avo- 
cations interfere with, or retard the Indians in their 


journey; for they always take the advantage of every op- 


portunity 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


portunity which offers, as they pafs along, and when they 
fee a tree fit for their purpofe, cut it down, and either 
{trip off the bark, if that be what they want, or fplit the 
trunk in pieces; and after hewing it roughly with their 
hatchet, carry it to the tent, where in the evenings, or in 
the morning before they fet out, they reduce it with their 
knives to the fhape and fize which is required. 


Provifions being plentiful, and the weather fine, we 
advanced a little each day; and on the nineteenth took up 
our lodgings by the fide of Wholdyeah-chuck’d Whoie, 
or Large Pike Lake. In our way we crofied another {mall 
lake, where we caught fome trout by angling, and killed 
a few deer and one mooie. 


On the twentieth we croffed Large Pike Lake, which 
at that part was not more than feven miles wide; but from 
North North Weft to the South South Eaft is much longer. 
The next day we arrived at Bedodid Lake, which in ge- 


neral is not more than three miles wide, and in feveral 


places much lefs; but it is upward of forty miles long, 


which gives it the appearance of ariver. It is faid by the 
Indians to be fhut up on all fides, and entirely fur- 
rounded with high land, which produces vaft quantity 
of fir trees, but none of them grow to a great height in 
thofe parts: their branches, however, read Dder than 
thofe of firs of three times their height and thicknefs do 
in Europe; fo that they refemble an apple-tree in fhape, 

Oo | more 


28y 


7p 2 
eed 


March. 


Toth, 


20th, 


282 


1772. 
March. 


April 
ift 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


more than any fpecies of the pine. They feem rich in 
tar, as the wood of them will burn like a candle, and 
emit as ftrong a {mell, and as much black fmoke, as the 
ftaves of an old tar-barrel; for which reafon no Indians 
chufe to burn it in their tents, or even out of doors, for 
the purpofe of cooking their victuals. 


The thaws began now to be very confiderable, and the 
under-woods were fo thick in thefe parts as to render tra- 
velling through them very difficult ; we therefore took the 
advantage of walking on the ice of the above-mentioned 
Lake, which lay nearly in the direGtion of our courfe; 
but after proceeding about twenty-two miles on it, the 
Lake turned more toward the North, on which account 
we were obliged to leave it, ftriking off to the Eaftward ; 
and after walking fourteen miles farther, we arrived at 
Noo-fhetht Whoie, or the Hill-Ifland Lake, {o called from 
a very high ifland which ftands in it. 


From the twenty-eighth to the thirty-firft of March, 
we had fo hard a gale of wind from the South, as to ren- 
der walking on lakes or open plains quite impoflible, and 
the violence with which the trees were blown down made 
walking in the woods fomewhat dangerous; but though 
ieveral had narrow efcapes, no accident happened. 


From the middle to the latter end of March, and in 
the beginning of April, though the thaw was not general, 
7 yet 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


yet in the middle of the day it was very confiderable: it 
commonly froze hard in the nights; and the young men 
took the advantage of the mornings, when the fnow was 
hard crufted over, and ran down many moofe ; for in thofe 
fituations a man with a good pair of fnow-fhoes will 
{carcely make any impreflion on the fnow, while the 
-moofe, and even the deer, will break through it at every 
ftep up to the belly. Notwithftanding this, however, it is 
very feldom that the Indians attempt to run deer down. 
The moofe are fo tender-footed, and fo fhort-winded, that 
a good runner will generally tire them in lefs than a day, 


and:very frequently in fix or eight hours; though I have 


known fome of the Indians continue the chace for two 
days, before they could come up with, and kill the game. 
On thofe occafions the Indians, in general, only take with 
them a knife or bayonet, and a little bag containing a fet 
of fire-tackle, and are as lightly clothed as poflible; fome 
of them will carry a bow and two or three arrows, but I 
never knew any of them take a gun, unlefs fuch as had 
been blown or burfted, and the barrels cut quite fhort, 
which, when reduced to the leaft poffible fize to be ca- 
pable of doing any fervice, muft be too great a weight 
for a man to run with in his hand for fo many hours 
together. | 


When the poor moofe are incapable of making farther 
fpeed, they ftand and keep their purfuers at bay with 
Oo 2 their 


t> 
ee) 
aS 


17726 
A aed 


April, 


A JOURNEY TO eee 


their head and fore-feet; in the: ufe of which they are 
very dexterous, efpecially the latter; fo that the Indians 
who have neithera bow nor arrows, nor a fhort gun, 
with them, are generally obliged to lafh their knives or 
bayonets to the end of a long ftick, and ftab the moofe at 
a diftance. For want of this neceffary precaution, fome 
of the boys and fool-hardy young men, who have at- 
tempted to rufh in upon them, have frequently received 
fuch unlucky blows from their fore-feet, as to render their 
recovery very doubtful, | 


The flefh of the moofe, thus killed, is far from being 
well-tafted, and I fhould think muft be very unwhole- 
fome, from being over-heated; as by running fo many hours 
together, the animal muft have been in a violent fever ; 
the flefh being foft and clammy, muft have a very dif- 


agreeable tafte, neither refembling fifh, flefh, nor fowl *. 


The Southern Indians ufe dogs for this kind of hunt- 
ing, which makes it eafier and more expeditious ; but the 
Northern tribes having no dogs trained to that exercife, 
are under the neceflity of doing it themfelves. 


* Though I was a fwift runner in thofe days, I never accompanied the In- 
dians in one of thofe chaces, but have heard many of them fay, that after a 
long one, the moofe, when killed, did not produce more than a quart of blood, 
the remainder being all fettled in the flefh; which, in that ftate, mult be ten 
times worfe tafted, than the fpleen or milt of a bacon hog. 


On 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


On the feventh we croffed a part of Thee-lee-aza River : 
at which time the fmall Northern deer were remarkably 


plentiful, but the moofe began to be very fcarce, as none 
were killed after the third. | 


On the twelfth, we faw feveral fwans flying to the 
Northward ; they were the firft birds of paflage we had 
feen that Spring, except a few fnow-birds, which always 
precede the migrating birds, and confequently are with 
much propriety called the harbingers of Spring. The 
{wans alfo precede all the other {pecies of water-fowl, and 
migrate fo early in the feafon, that they find no open 
water but at the falls of rivers, where they are readily met, 
and fometimes fhot, in confiderable numbers. 


On the fourteenth, we arrived at another part of Thee- 
lee-aza River, and pitched our tents not far from fome 
families of ftrange Northern Indians, who had been there 
fome time {naring deer, and who were all fo poor as not 
to have one gun among them. 


The villains belonging to my crew were fo far from 
adminiftering to their relief, that they robbed them of al- 
moft every ufeful article in their poffeffion; and to com- 
plete their cruelty, the men joined themfelves in parties 
of fix, eight, or ten in a gang, and dragged feveral of 
their young women to a little diftance from their tents, 

where 


PS 


1772. 
mn aie 


April. 
7th. 


12th: 


14th, 


286 


1772. 
(on cael 


April. 


25th, 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


where they not only ravifhed them, but otherwife ill- 
treated them, and that in fo barbarous a manner, as to 
endanger the lives of one or two of them. Humanity 
on this, as well as on feveral other fimilar occafions during 
my refidence among thofe wretches, prompted me to up- 
braid them with their barbarity ; but fo far were my re- 
monftrances from having the defired effet, that they af- 
terwards made no fcruple of telling me in the plaineft 
terms, that if any female relation of mine had been there, 
fhe fhould have been ferved in the fame manner. 


Deer being plentiful, we remained at this place ten 
days, in order to dry and prepare a quantity of the flefh 
and fat to carry with us; as this was the laft time the In- 
dians expected to fee fuch plenty until they met them 
again on the barren ground. During our ftay here, the 
Indians completed the wood-work for their canoes, and 
procured all their Summer tent-poles, &c.; and while we 
were employed in this neceflary bufinefs, the thaw was 
fo great that the bare ground began to appear in many 
places, and the ice in the rivers, where the water was 
fhallow and the current rapid, began to break up; fo that 
we were in daily expectation of feeing geele, ducks, and 


other birds of paflage. 


On the twenty-fifth, the weather being cool and fa- 
vourable for travelling, we once more fet out, and that 


day 


NORTHERN OCEAN, 


day walked twenty miles to the Eaftward ; as fome of the 
women had not joined us, we did not move on the two 


following days. 


On the twenty-cighth, having once more muftered all 
our forces, early in the morning we fet out, and the next 
day pafled by Thleweyaza Yeth, the place at which we 
had prepared wood-work for canoes in the Spring one 
thoufand feven hundred and feventy-one. 


As the morning of the firft of May was exceedingly 
fine and pleafant, with a light air from the South, and a 
great thaw, we walked eight or nine miles to the Eaft by 


North, when a heavy fall of {now came on, which was. 


followed, or indeed more properly accompanied, by a 


hard gale of wind from the North Weft. At the time 


the bad weather began, we were on the top of a high bar- 


ren hill, a confiderable diftance from any woods: judging: 


it to be no more than a fquall, we fat down, in expecta~ 
tion of its foon pafling by. As the night, however, ad- 


vanced, the gale increaied to fuch a degree, that it was 
impoffible for a man to ftand upright; fo that we were 


obliged to lie down, without any other defence againft the 


weather, than putting our fledges and other lumber to: 


windward of us, which in reality was of no real fervice, 
as it only harboured a great drift of fnow, with which in 
fome places we were covered to the depth of two or three 


feet; and ‘as the night was not very cold, I found mylelf, 


ee and 


237 


17726 
en ae 


April, 


228th, 


I {tu 


288 


1772. 
May. 


od. 


3 


d, 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


and many others who were with me, long before morning 
in a puddle of water, occafioned by the heat of our bodies 
melting the fnow. 


The fecond proved fine pleafant weather, with warm 
funfhine. In the morning, having dried all our clothing, 
we proceeded on our journey. In the afternoon we arrived 
at the part at which my guide intended'’we fhould build 
our canoes; but having had fome difference with his 
countrymen, he altered his mind, and determined to pro- 
ceed to the Eafitward, as long as the feafon would permit, 
before he attempted to perform that duty. Accordingly, 
on the third, we purfued our way, and as that and the fol- 
lowing day were very cold, which made us walk brifkly, 
we were enabled to make good days’ journies; but the 
fifth was fo hot and fultry, that we only walked about 
thirteen miles in our old courfe to the Eaft by North, 
and then halted about three-quarters of a mile to the South 
of Black Bear Hill; a place which I had {een in the Spring 
of one thoufand feven hundred and feventy-one.. 


On the fixth, the weather was equally hot with the 
preceding day; in the morning, however, we moved on 
eleven miles to the Eaft, and then met feveral ftrange 
Indians, who informed us that a few others, who hada 
tolerable cargo of furrs, and were going to the Fadtory 
that Summer, were not far diftant. 


On 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


On receiving this intelligence, my guide, Matonabbee, 
fent a meffenger to defire their company. "This was foon 
complied With. as it 1s an univerfal practice with the In- 
dian Leaders, both Northern and Southern, when going 
to the Company’s Factory, to ufe their influence and 
intereft in canvafling for companions; as they find by 
experience that a large gang gains them much refpe&. 
Indeed, the generality of Europeans who refide in thofe 
parts, being utterly unacquainted with the manners and 
cuftoms of the Indians, have conceived fo high an opinion 
of thofe Leaders, and their authority, as to imagine that 
all who accompany them on thofe occafions are entirely 
devoted to their fervice and command all the year; but 
this is fo far from being the cafe, that the authority of 
thofe great men, when ai {ent from the Company’s Fac- 
tory, never ee beyond their own family; and the 
trifling refpect which is fhown them by their countrymen. 
during their refidence at the Factory, proceeds only from 
motives of intereft. 


The Leaders have a very difagreeable tafk to perform 
on thofe occafions ; for they are not only obliged to be the 
mouth-piece, but the beggars for all their friends and re- 
lations for whom they have a regard, as weil as for thofe 
whom at other times they have reafon to fear. Thole un- 
unwelcome commiffions, which are impofed on them by 
their followers, joined to their own defire of being thought 
men of great confequence and intereft with the Englith, 


Pp make 


239 


pry ie 


L7/ 26 


May. 


290 


1772. 


fay. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


make them very troublefome. And if a Governor deny 
™ them any thing which they afk, though it be only to give 
“away to the moft worthlefs of their gang, they immedi- 


ately turn fulky and impertinent to the higheft degree ; 


and however rational they may be at other times, are im- 
mediately divefted of every degree of reafon, and raife 
their demands to fo exorbitant a pitch, that after they 
have received to the amount of five times the value of 
all the furrs they themfelves have brought, they never 
ceafe begging during their ftay at the Factory ; and, after 


all, few of them go away thoroughly fatisfied *. 
After 


* Asa proof of this aflertion I take the liberty, though a little foreign to 
the narrative of my journey, to infert one inftance, out of many hundreds of 
the kind that happen at the different Factories in Hudfon’s Bay, but perhaps 
no where fo frequently asat Churchill. In October 1776, my old guide, Ma- 
tonabbee, came at the head of a large gang of Northern Indians, to trade at 
Prince of Wales’s Fort; at which time 4 had the honour to command it. 
When the ufual ceremonies had paffed, I dreffed him out as a Captain of the 
firft rank, and alfo clothed his fix wives from top to toe: after which, that is 
to fay, during his ftay at the Factory, which was ten days, he begged feven 
Neutenants’ coats, fifteen common coats, eighteen hats, eighteen fhirts, eight 
guns, one hundred and forty pounds weight of gunpowder, with fhot, ball, 
and flints in proportion; together with many hatchets, ice-chiffels, files, bayo- 
nets, knives, and a great quantity of tobacco, cloth, blankets, combs, looking- 
olafles, ftockings, handkerchiefs, 8c. befides numberlefs fmall articles, fuch 
as awls, needles, paint, fteels, &c. in all to the amount of upwards of feven 
hundred beaver in the way of trade, to give away among his followers. This 
was exclufive of his own prefent, which confifted of a variety of goods to 
the value of four hundred beaver more. But the moft extraordinary of his 
demands was twelve pounds of powder, twenty-eight pounds of fhot and ball, 
four pounds of tobacco, fome articles of clothing, and feveral pieces of iron- 
work, &c. to give to two men who had hauled his tent and other lumber the 

preceding 


NORTHERN O.OWWA N. 


After ftopping four days at this place, Matonabbee, and 
all the Indians who were to accompany me to the Fort, 
agreed to leave the elderly people and young children here, 
in the care of fome Indians who were capable of providing 
for them, and who had orders to proceed to a place called 
Cathawhachaga, on the barren grounds, and there wait 
the return of their relations from the Factory. Matters of 
this kind being fettled, apparently to the entire fatisfaction 
of all parties, we refumed our journey on the eleventh of 
May, and that at a much brifker pace than we could pro- 
bably have done when all the old people and young children 


were with us. In the afternoon of the fame day we met > 


fome other Northern Indians, who were alfo going to the 
Fort with furrs ; thofe joined our party, and at night we all 
pitched our tents by the fide of a river that empties itfelf 
into Doo-baunt Lake. This day all of us threw away 
our fnow-fhoes, as the ground was fo bare in moft places 
as not to require any fuch affiftance ; but fledges were oc~ 
cafionally ferviceable for fome time, particularly when we 
walked on the ice of rivers or lakes. 


preceding Winter. ‘This demand was fo very unreafonable, that I made fome 
{cruple, or at leaft hefitated to comply with it, hinting that he was the perfon 
who ought to fatisfy thofe men for their fervices; but I was foon anfwered, 
That he did not expect to have been denied fuch a trifle as that was; and for 
the future he would carry his goods where he could get his own price for 
them. On my afking him where that was ? he replied, in a very infolent tone, 
« To the Canadian Traders.’’ I was glad to comply with his demands; and 
I here infert the anecdote, as a fpecimen of an Indian’s confcience, 


Ppe The 


291 


1772. 
Se mane as 


May. 


rrth. 


292 


~ 


I772- 


May. 


rth, 


roth. 


te it, 


A JOURNEY TO’ THE 


The weather on the twelfth was fo exceedingly hot and 
fultry, and the water fo deep on the top of the ice of the 
above-mentioned river, as to render walking on it not 
only very troublefome, but dangerous; fo after advancing 
about five miles we pitched our tents, and the warm 
weather being likely to continue, the Indians immedi- 
ately began to build their canoes, which were com- 
pleted with fuch expedition, that in the afternoon of the 
eighteenth we again fet forward on our journey, but the 
day being pretty far fpent, we only walked about four 


miles, and put up for the night. 


The morning of the nineteenth was fine pleafant wea- 
ther; and as all the water was drained off from the top 
of the ice, it rendered walking on it both fafe and eafy ; 
accordingly we fet out pretty early, and that day walked 
upwards of twenty miles to the Eaft North Eaft on the 
above-mentioned. river. ‘The next day proved fo cold, that 
aiter walking about fifteen miles, we were obliged to put 
up; for having left Doo-baunt River, we were frequently 
obliged to wade above the knees through fwamps of mud, 
water, and wet fnow; which froze to our ftockings and 
fhoes in fuch a thick cruft, as not only rendered walking 
very laborious, but at the fame time fubjected us to the 
danger of having our legs and feet frozen. © 


The weather on the twenty-firft was more fevere than 
on the preceding day; but the fwamps and ponds being 


3 by 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


by that time frozen over, it was tolerable walking: .we 
proceeded therefore on our journey, but the wind blew. fo 
- frefh, that we had not walked fixteen miles, before we 
found that thofe who carried the canoes could not poffibly 
keep up with us, fo that we put up for the night. In the 
courfe of this day’s journey we crofled the North Weft Bay 
of Wholdyah’d Lake; which, at that part, is called by 
the Northern Indians A Naw-nee-tha’d Whoie. This 
day feveral of the Indians turned back, not being able to 
proceed for want of provifions. Game of all kinds indeed 
were fo {carce, that, except a few geefe, nothing had been 
killed by any of our party, from our leaving the women 
and children on the eleventh inftant, nor had we feen one 
deer the whole way. 


The twenty-fecond proved more moderate, when all 
our party having joined, we again advanced to the North 
Eaft, and after walking about thirteen miles, the Indian: 
killed four deer. Our number, however, had now fo 
increafed, that four fmall Northern deer would {fcarcely 
afford us all a fingle meal. 


The next day we continued our journey, generally 
walking in the North Eaft quarter; and on the twenty- 
fifth, croffed the North bay of They-hole-kye’d Whoie, 
or cnowllbird Lake; and at night got clear of all woods, 
and lay on the barren ground. The fame day {feveral of 


the Indians ftruck off another way, not being able to pro- 
ceed 


=- 


0 


1772. 
lace amrerecnnedl 


May. 


22d, 


29d: 


2cth, 


A JOURNEY FO “TSE 


ceed to the Fort for want of ammunition. As we had 
for fome days paft made good journies, and at the fame 
time were all heavy-laden, and in great diftrefs for pro- 
vifions, fome of my companions were fo weak as to be 
obliged to leave their bundles of furrs *; and many others 
were fo reduced as to be no longer capable of proceeding 
with us, having neither guns nor ammunition; fo that 
their whole dependence for fupport was on the fifth they 
might be abie to catch; and though fifh was pretty plen- 
tiful in moft of the rivers and lakes hereabout, yet they 
were not always to be depended on for fuch an immediate 


fupply of food as thofe poor people required. 


Though I had at this time a fufficient ftock of ammu- 
nition to ferve me and all my proper companions to the 
Fort, yet felf-prefervation being the firft law of Nature, 
it was thought advifable to referve the greateft part of it for 
our own ule; efpecially as geefe and other {maller birds 
were the only game now to be met with, and which, in 
times of {carcity, bears hard on the articles of powder and 
fhot. Indeed moft of the Indians who actually accompanied 
me the whole way to the Factory had fome little ammunition 
remaining, which enabled them to travel in times of real 
{carcity better than thofe whom we left behind; and though 


* All the furrs thus left were properly fecured in caves and crevices of the 
rocks, fo as to withftand any attempt that might be made on them by beafts of 
prey, and were well fhielded from the weather; fo that, in all probability, few 
of them were loft. 


we 


INGO) Roglg Tigi BR Neo GC ESAgN. 


we afflifted many of them, yet feveral of their women died 
for want. It is a melancholy truth, and a difgrace to the 
little humanity of which thofe people are pofleffed, to 
think, that in times of want the poor women always 
come off fhort; and when real diftrefs approaches, many 
of them are permitted to flarve, when the males are amply 


provided for. 


The twenty-fixth was fine and pleafant. In the morn- 
ing we fet out as ufual, and after walking about five miles, 
the Indians killed three deer ; as our numbers were greatly 
leffened, thefe ferved us for two or three meals, at a fma!l 
expence of ammunition. 


In continuing our courfe to the Eaftward, we croffed 
Cathawhachaga River, on the thirtieth of May, on the 
ice, which broke up foon after the laft perfon had crofled 
it. We had not been long on the Eaft fide of the river 
before we perceived bad weather near at hand, and began 
to make every preparation for it which our fituation would 
admit ; and that was but very indifferent, being on entire 
barren ground. It is true, we had complete fets of Sum- 
mer tent-poles, and fuch tent-cloths as are generally ufed 
by the Northern Indians in that fealon; thefe were ar- 
ranged in the beft manner, and in fuch places as were 
moft likely to afford us fhelter from the threatening ftorm. 
The rain foon began to defcend in fuch torrents as to make 


the river overflow to fuch a degree as {oon to convert our firft 
place 


26th. 


30th. 


june 
gd. 


Sth. 


A JOURNEY STO Ger 


place of retreat into an open fea, and oblige us in the 
middle of the night to affemble at the top of an adjacent 
hill, where the violence of the wind would not permit us 
to pitch a tent; fo that the only fhelter we could obtain 
was to take the tent-cloth about our fhoulders, and fit 
with our backs to the wind; and in this fituation we 
we were obliged to remain without the leaft refrefhment, 
till the morning of the third of June: in the courfe of 
which time the wind fhifted all round the compafs, but 
the bad weather ftill continued, fo that we were con- 


fiantly obliged to fhift our pofition as the wind changed. 


The weather now became more moderate, ‘though there 
was full a frefh gale from the North Weft, with hard 
froft and frequent fhowers of fnow. Early in the morn- 
ing, however, we proceeded on our journey, but the wet 
and cold I had experienced the two preceding days fo be- 
numbed my lower extremities, as to render walking for 
fome time very troublefome. In the courfe of this day’s 
journey we faw great numbers of geefe flying to the South- 
ward, a few of which we killed; but thefe were very 
difproportionate to the number of mouths we had to feed, 
and to make up for our long fafting. 


From that time to the eighth we killed every day as 
many geefe as were fufficient to preferve life; but on that 
day we perceived plenty of deer, five of which the In- 
dians killed, which put us all into good fpirits, and the — 


number 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


number of deer we then faw afforded great hopes of more 
plentiful times during the remainder of our journey. It 
is almoft needlefs to add, that people in our diftrefled fitu- 
ation expended a little time in eating, and flicing fome of 
the flefh ready for drying ; but the drying it occafioned 
no delay, as we faftened it on the tops of the women’s 
bundles, and dried it by the fun and wind while we were 
walking; and, ftrange as it may appear, meat thus~ pre- 
pared is not only very fubftantial food, but pleafant to 
the tafte, and generally much efteemed by the natives. 
For my own part I muft acknowledge, that it was not only 


agreeable to my palate, but after eating a meal of: it, I, 


have always found that I could travel longer without 
victuals, than after any other kind of food. All the 
dried meat prepared by the Southern Indians is _per- 
formed by expofing it to the heat of a large fre, which 
foon exhaufts all the fine juices from it, and when fuf- 
ficiently dry to prevent putrefaGtion, is no more to be com- 
pared with that cured by the Northern Indians in the Sun, 
or by the heat of a very flow fire, than meat that has been 
boiled down for the fake of the foup, is to that which 
is only fufhiciently boiled for eating: the latter has all 
the juices remaining, which, being eafily diffolved by the 
heat and moifture of the ftomach, proves a ftrong and 
nourifhing food; whereas the ra being entirely de- 
prived of thofe qualities, can by no means have an equal 
claim to that character. Moft of the Europeans, however, 
are fonder of it than they are of that cured by the North- 


Qq ern 


7 


1772. 
heen sees) 


June. 


bth. 


A JOURNEY TO "PHE 


ern Indians, The fame may be faid of the lean parts of 
the beaft, which are firft dried, and then reduced into 
a kind of powder. ‘That done by the Northern Indians is 
entirely free from {moke, and quite foft and mellow in the 
mouth ; whereas that which is prepared by the Southern 
tribes is generally as bitter as foot with {moke, and is as. 
hard as the {craps of horn, &c. which are burnt to make 
hardening for the cutlers. I never knew, that any Eu- 
ropean was fo fond of this as they are of that made by. 
the Northern Indians. 


On the ninth, as we were continuing our courfe to the 
Fa&tory, which then lay in the South Eaft quarter, we faw 
feveral {mokes to the North Eaft, and the fame day {poke 
with many Northern Indians, who were going to Knapp’s 
Bay to meet the Churchill floop. Several of thofe Indians 
had furrs with them, but having fome time before taken up 
goods on truft at Prince of Wales’s Fort, were taking that 
method to delay the payment of them. Defrauds of this. 
kind have been practifed by many of thofe people with 
ereat fuccefs, ever fince the furr-trade has been eftablifhed. 
with the Northern Indians at Knapp’s Bay; by which 
means debts to a confiderable amount are annually loft to 
the Company, as well as their Governor in the Bay. 


Being defirous of improving every opportunity that the 
fine weather afforded, we did not lofe much time in con- 
verfation with thofe Indians, but proceeded on our courfe 

x | to 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


to the South Eaft, while they continued theirs to the 
North Eaft. 


For many days after leaving thofe people, we had the 
good fortune to meet with plenty of provifions; and as 
the weather was for a long time remarkably fine and plea- 
fant, our circumftances were altered fo much for the better, 
that every thing feemed to contribute to our happinefs, 
as if defirous to make fome amends for the fevere hunger, 


cold, and exceflive hardfhips that we had fuffered long. 


before, and which had reduced us to the greateft mifery 
and want. 


Deer was fo plentiful great part of the way, that the 
Indians killed as many as were wanted, without going out 
of theirroad; and every lake and river to which we came 
feemed willing to give us a change of diet, by affording 
us plenty of the fineft fifth, which we caught either with 
hooks or nets. Geefe, partridges, gulls, and many other 
fowls, which are excellent eating, were alfo in fuch 
plenty, that it only required ammunition, in fkilful hands, 
to have procured as many of them as we could defire. 


The only inconvenience we now felt was from frequent 
{howers of heavy rain; but the intervals between thefe 
fhowers being very warm, and the Sun fhining bright, that 
difficulty was eafily overcome, efpecially as the belly was 
plentifully fupplied with excellent victuals, Indeed the 


Qq 2 | very 


7 


1772, 
neem, etemtnaead) 


June. 


300 


17726 
es rem any 


June. 


18th, 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


very thoughts of being once more arrived fo near home, 
made me capable of encountering every difficulty, even if 


it had been hunger itfelf in the moft formidable fhape. 


On the eighteenth, we arrived at Ege River, from 
which place, at the folicitation of my guide Matonab- 
bee, I fent a letter poft-hafte to the Chief at Prince of 
Wales’s Fort, advifing him of my being fo far advanced’ 
on my return T he weather at this time was very bad 
and rainy, which caufed us to lofe near a whole day; but 
upon the fine weather returning, we again proceeded at 
our ufual rate of eighteen or twenty miles a day, fome- 
times more or lefs, according as the road, the weather, 
and other circumftances, would admit. 


Deer now began to. be not quite fo plentiful as they had 
been, though we met with enough for prefent ufe, which 
was all we wanted, each perfon having as much dried meat 
as he could conveniently carry, befides his furrs and other 


neceflary baggage. 


Early in the morning of the twenty-fixth we arrived at 
Seal River *; but the wind blowing right up it, made 
fo: 


* Mr. Jeremie is very incorrect in his account of the fituation of this 
River, and its courfe. It is not éafy to guefs, whether the Copper or Dog- 
ribbed Indians be the nation he calls Plat/cotez de Chiens: if it be the former, 
he is much miftaken; for they have abundance of beaver, and other animals 
of the furr kind, in their country: andif the latter, he is equally wrong to 

affert 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


fo great a fea, that we were obliged to wait near ten hours 
before we could venture to crofs it in our little canoes. 
In 





affert that they have copper-miries in their country; for neither copper nor 
any other kind of metal is in ufe among them. 


Mr. Jeremie was not too modeft when he faid, (fee Dobbs’s Account of 
Hudfon’s Bay, p. 19.) “ he could not fay any thing pofitively in going farther 
“North ;” for in my opinion he never was fo far North or Weft as he pre- 
tends, otherwife he would have been more corre¢t in his defcription of. thofe 
parts.. 


The Strait he mentions 1s undoubjedly no other than what is now called 
Chefterfield’s Inlet, which, in fome late and cold feafons, ts not clear of ice 
the whole Summer: for I will affirm, that no Indian, either Northern or 
Southern, ever faw either Wager Water or Repulfe Bay, except the two men 
who accompanied Captain Middleton; and though thofe men were felected 
from fome hundreds for their. univerfal knowledge of thofe parts, yet they. 
knew nothing of the coaft fo far North as Marble Ifland. 


As a farther proof, that no Indians, except the Efquimaux, ever frequent 


fuch high latitudes, unlefs at a great diftance from the fea, I muft here mention, 
that fo late as the year 1763, when Captain Chriftopher went to furvey Chef- 
terfield’s Inlet, though he was. furnifhed with the moft intelligent and ex- 
perienced Northern Indians that could be found, they did not know an inch 
of the land to the North of Whale Cove. 


Mr, Jeremie is alfo as much miftaken in what he fays-concerning. Churchill 
River, as. he was in the direction of Seal River; for he fays that no woods 
were found but in fome iflands which lie about ten or twelve miles up the river. 
At the time he wrote, which was long before a fettlement was made there, 
wood was in great plenty on both fides the river; and that within five miles of 
where Prince of Wales’s Fort.now ftands. Butas to the iflands of which he 
fpeaks, if they ever exifted, they have of late years moft affuredly difappeared ; 
for. fince the Company have had a fettlement on that river, no one ever faw an 
ifland in it that produced timber, or wood of any.defcription, within forty 

miles 


301 


1772. 
beeoqaes ea) 


June. 


a | 
O 
tv 


1772s 


lite: 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


In the afternoon the weather grew more moderate, fo that 
we were enabled to ferry over the river; after which we 
refumed our journey, and at night pitched our tents in fome 
tufts of willows in fight of the woods of Po-co-thee-kis-co 
River, at which we arrived early in the morning of 
the twenty-eighth ; but the wind again blowing very hard 
in the North Eaft quarter, it was the afternoon of the 
twenty-ninth before we could attempt to crofs it. 


Juft at the time we were crofling the South branch of 
Po-co-thee-kis-co River, the Indians that were fent from 
Ege River with a letter to the Chief at Churchill, joined 
us on their return, and brought a little tobacco and fome 
other articles which I had defired. ‘Though it was late 
in the afternoon before we had all crofied the river, yet 
we walked that evening till after ten o’clock, and then 
put up on one of the Goofe-hunting Iflands, as they are 
generally called, about ten miles from the Factory. The 
next morning I arrived in good health at Prince of Wales’s 


Fort, after having been abfent eighteen months and twenty- 


miles of the Fort. But the great number of ftumps now remaining, from 
which, in all probability, the trees have been cut for firing, are fufficient to 
prove that when Churchill River was firft fettled, wood was then in great plenty ; 
but in the courfe of feventy-fix years refidence in one place, it is natural to 
fuppofe it was much thinned near the Settlement. Indeed for fome years paft 
common fewel is fo fcarce near that Factory, that it is the chief employsient 
of moft of the fervants for upward of feven months in the year, to procure as 


much wood as will fupply the fires for a Winter, and a little timber for neceflary 
repairs, 


three 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


three days on this laft expedition; but from my firft fet- 
ting out with Captain Chawchinaha, it was two years 
feven months and twenty-four days. 


Though my difcoveries are not likely to prove of any 
material advantage to the Nation at large, or indeed to 
the Hudfon’s Bay Company, yet I have the pleafure to 
think that I have fully complied with the orders of my 
Matters, and that it has put a final end to all difputes con- 
cerning a North Weft Paffage through Hudfon’s Bay. It 
will alfo wipe off, in fome meafure, the ill-grounded and 
unjuft afperfions of Dobbs, Ellis, Robfon, and the Ame- 
rican Traveller; who have all taken much pains to con- 
demn the conduct of the Hudfon’s Bay Company, as being 
averfe from difcoveries, and from enlarging their trade. 


393 


1772. 
banner poe 


June. 


304 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


C HAP. TS 


A fhort Defcription of the Northern Indians, alfo a 


farther Account of their Country, Manufactures, Cuf- 
toms, rc. 


An account of the perfons and tempers of the Northern Indians.—They 


pofefs a great deal of art and cunning.—Are very guilty of fraud 
when in their power, and generally exact more for their furrs than 
any other tribe of Indians.—Always adiffatisied, yet have their good 
gualities—The men in general jealous of their wives.—Their mar- 
riages.—Girls always betrothed when children, and their reafons for 
tt.—Great care and confinement of young girls from the age of eight or 
nine years old.—-Divorces common among thofe people.—The women are 
les prolific than in warmer countries.—Remarkable piece of fuperftition 
obferved by the women at particular periods.—Their art in making it 
an excufe for a temporary feparation from their hufbands on any Iitile 
guarrel.—Reckoned very unclean on thofe occafions—Lhe Northern 
L[idians frequently, for the want of firing, are obliged to eat their 
meat raw.—Some through neceffity obliged to boil it in veffels made of 
the rind of the birch-tree.—d remarkable difb among thofe people.— 


The young animals always cut out of their dams eaten, and accounted a 


great delicacy.—The paris of generation of all animals eat by the men 


and boys. —Manner of pafing their time, and method of killing deer in 
Summer with bows and arrows.—Their tents, dogs, fledges, &c.— 
Snow-/boes.—Their partiality to domeftic vermin.—Utmoft extent of 
the Northern Indian country.—LEace of the country.—Species of fifo.— 
A peculiar kind of mofs ufeful for the fupport of man.—Northern In- 
dian method of catching fifo, either with books or nets—Ceremony 
obferved when two parties of thofe people meet.—Diverfions in common ° 
ufe,—A fingular diforder which attacks fome of thofe people —Their 


fuper- 


NOR TEE RN Otek A.W. 


fuperfiition with refpet to the death of their friends.—Ceremony ob- 
ferved on thofe occafions.—Their ideas of the firft inbabitants of the 


world.—No form of religion among them.—Remarks on that circum- 


france.—The extreme mifery to which old age is expofed.—Their opinion 
of the Aurora Borealis, &c.—Some Account of Matonabbee, and his 


fervices to bis country, as well as to the Ludfon’s Bay Company. 


AS to the perfons of the Northern Indians, they are 
in general above the middle fize; well-proportioned, 
ftrong, and robuft, but not corpulent. They do not pof- 
fefs that activity of body, and livelinefs of difpofition, 
which are fo commonly met with among the other tribes 
of Indians who inhabit the Weft coaft of Hudfon’s Bay. 


Their complexion is fomewhat of the copper caft, in- 
clining rather toward a dingy brown; and their hair, like 
all the other tribes in India, is black, ftrong, and ftraight *, 
Few of the men have any beard; this feldom makes its 
appearance till they are arrived at middle-age, and then 
is by no means equal in quantity to what is obferved 
on the faces of the generality of Europeans; the little 
they have, however, is exceedingly {trong and briftly. 
Some of them take but little pains to eradicate their beards, 
though it is confidered as very unbecoming; and thofe 


* T have feen feveral of the Southern Indian men who were near fix feet 
high, preferve a fingle lock of their hair, that, when let down, would trail on 
the ground as they walked. This, however, is but feldom feen; and fome 


have fufpected it to be falfe: but I have examined the hair of feveral of them, * 


and found it to be real. 


Rr who 


39 


306 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


who do, have no other method than that of pulling it out 
by the roots betwen their fingers and the edge of a blunt 
knife. Neither fex have any hair under their armpits, and 
very little on any other part of the body, particularly the 
women; but on the place where Nature plants the hair, I 
never knew them attempt to eradicate it. 


Their features are peculiar, and different from any 


ether tribe in thofe parts; for they have very low fore- 


heads, {mall eyes, high cheek-bones, Roman nofes, full 
cheeks, and in general long broad chins. Though few of 
either fex are exempt from this national fet of features, 
yet Nature feems to be more {trict in her obfervance of it 
among the females, as they feldom vary fo much as the 
men. ‘Their fkins are foft, fmooth, and polifhed; and 
when they are drefled in clean clothing, they areas free 


from an offenfive {mell as any of the human race. 


Every tribe of Northern Indians, as well as the Copper 
and Dog-ribbed Indians, have three or four parallel black 
ftrokes marked on each cheek; which is performed by 
entering an awl or needle under the fkin, and, on drawing 
it out again, immediately rubbing powdered charcoal into 
the wound. 


Their difpofitions are in general morofe and covetous, 
and they feem to be entirely unacquainted even with the 
name of gratitude. They are for ever pleading poverty, 

iG | even . 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


even among themfelves ; and when they vifit the Factory; 
there is not one of them who has not a thoufand wants. 


When any real diftrefled objets prefent themfelves at the 
Company’s Factory, they are always relieved with victuals, 
clothes, medicines, and every other neceffary, gratis; and 
‘in return, they inftruct every one of their countrymen how 
to behave, in order to obtain the fame charity. Thus it 
is very common to fee both men and women come to the 
Fort half-naked, when either the fevere cold in Winter, 
or the extreme troublefomenefs of the flies in Summer, 
make it neceflary for every part to be covered. On thofe 
occafions they are feldom at a lofs for a plaufible ftory, 
which they relate as the occafion of their diftrefs, (whether 


real or pretended,) and never fail to interlard their hiftory | 


with plenty of fighs, groans, and tears, fometimes affect- 
ing to be lame, and even blind, in order to excite pity. 
Indeed, I know of no people that have more command of 
their paflions on fuch occafions; and in this refpedct the 
women exceed the men, as I can affirm with truth I have 
feen fome of them with one fide of the face bathed in 
tears, while the other has exhibited a fignificant f{mile. 
Falfe pretences for obtaining charity are fo common among 
thofe people, and fo often deteé&ted, that the Governor is 
frequently obliged to turn-a deaf ear to many who apply 
for relief; for if he did not, he might give away the whole 


of the _— s goods, and by degrees all the Northern 
Rr 2 tribe 


4°7 


308 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


tribe would make a trade ef begging, inftead of bringing 
furrs, to purchafe what they want. It may truly be faid, 
that they poflefs a confiderable degree of deceit, and are 
very complete adepts in the art of flattery, which they 
never {pare as long as they find that it conduces to their 
intereft, but nota moment longer, They take care always 
to feem attached to a new Governor, and flatter his pride, 
by telling him that they look up to him as the father of 
their tribe, on whom they can fafely place their depend- 
ance; and they never fail to depreciate the generofity of 
his predeceffor, however extenfive that might have been, 
however humane or difinterefted his condu&; and if af- 
perfing the old, and flattering the new Governor, has not 
the defired effect in a reafonable time, they reprefent him 
as the worft of characters, and tell him to his face-that he 
is one of the moft cruel of men; that he has no feeling for 
the diftrefies of their tribe, and that many have perifhed for 
want of proper affiftance, (which, if it be true, is only 
owing to want of humanity among themifelves,) and then 
they boaft of having received ten times the favours and pre- 
fents from his predeceffor. It is remarkable that thofe are 
moft lavifh in their praifes, who have never either deferved 
or received any favours from him. In time, however, this 
language alfo ceafes, and they are perfectly reconciled to 
the man whom they would willingly have made a fool, 
and fay, ‘fhe is no child, and not to be deceived by 
“c thems 


They 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 
They differ fo much from the reft of mankind, that harfh 


uncourteous ufage feems to agree better with the generality 
of them, particularly the lower clafs, than mild treat- 
ment; for if the leaft refpec&t be fhewn them, it makes 
them intolerably infolent; and though fome of their leaders 
may be exempt from this imputation, yet there are but 
few even of them who have fenfe enough to fet a proper 
value on the favours and indulgences which are granted to 
them while they remain at the Company’s Factories, or 
elfewhere within their territories. Experience has con- 
vinced me, that by keeping a Northern Indian at a dif- 
tance, he may be made ferviceable both to himfelf and the 
Company; but by giving him the leaft indulgence at the 
Factory, he will grow indolent, inactive, and trouble- 
fome, and only contrive methods to tax the generofity of 
an European. 


The greateft part of thefe people never fail to defraud 
Europeans whenever it is in their power, and take every 
method to over-reach them in the way of trade. They 
will difguife their perfons and change their names, in 
order to defraud them of their lawful debts, which they 
are fometimes permitted to contraé& at the Company’s 
Factory; and all debts that are outftanding at the fuc- 
ceffion of a new Governor are entirely loft, as they always 
declare, and bring plenty of witneffes to prove, that they 
were paid long before, but that their names had been for- 


gotten to be ftruck out of the book. 
10 Notwith- 


oo 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


Notwithftanding all thofe bad qualities, they are the 
mildeft tribe of Indians that trade at any of the Com- 
pany’s fettlements; and as the greateft part of them are 
never heated with liquor, are always in their fenfes, 
and never proceed to riot, or any violence beyond bad 
language. 


The men are in general very jealous of their wives, and 
IT make no doubt but the fame fpirit reigns among the 
women; but they are kept fo much in awe of their 
hufbands, that the liberty of thinking is the greateft pri- 
vilege they enjoy. The prefence of a Northern Indian 
man ftrikes a peculiar awe into his wives, as he always 
affumes the fame authority over them that the mafter of a 
family in Europe ufually does over his domeftic fervants. 


Their marriages are not attended with any ceremony ; 
all matches are made by the parents, or next of kin, 
On thofe occafions the women feem to have no choice, 
but implicitly obey the will of their parents, who al- 
ways endeavour to marry their daughters to thofe that 
feem moft likely to be capable of maintaining them, 
let their age, perfon, or difpofition be ever fo defpi-_ 
cable. 


The girls are always betrothed when children, but never 
to thofe of equal age, which is doubtlefs found policy with 
people in their fituation, where the exiftence of a family 


depends 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


depehds entirely on the abilities and induftry of a fingle 
man. Children, as they juftly obferve, are fo liable to 
alter in their manners and difpofition, that it is impoffible 
to judge from the actions of early youth what abilities they 
may poffefs when they arrive at puberty. For this rea- 
fon the girls are often fo difproportionably matched for 
age, that it is very common to fee men of thirty-five or 
forty years old have young girls of no more than ten or 
twelve, and fometimes much younger. From the early 
age of eight or nine years, they are prohibited by cuftom 
from joining in the moft innocent amufements with chil- 
dren of the oppofite fex; fo that when fitting in their 
tents, or even when travelling, they are watched and 
euarded with fuch an unremitting attention as cannot be 
exceeded by the moft rigid difcipline of an Englifh board- 
ing-fchool. Cuftom, however, and conftant example, 
make fuch uncommon reftraint and confinement fit light 
and eafy even on children, whofe tender ages feem better 
adapted to innocent and cheerful amufements, than to be 
cooped up by the fide of old women, and conftantly em- 
ployed in fcraping fkins, mending fhoes, and learning other 
domeftic duties neceffary in the care of a family. 


Notwithftanding thofe uncommon reftraints on the young 
girls, the condué of their parents is by no means uniform or 
confiftent with this plan; as they fet no bounds*to their 
converfation, but talk before them, and even to them, on 
the moft indelicate fubje@s. As their ears are accuftomed 

CO 


A JOUWRNEY ‘Tor ean 


to fuch language from their earlieft youth, this has by no 
means the fame effect on them, it would have on girls born 
and educated in a civilized country, where every care is 
taken to prevent their morals from being contaminated 
by obfcene converfation. The Southern Indians are 
Rill lefs delicate in converfation, in the prefence of their 


children. 


The women among the Northern Indians are in general 
more backward than the Southern Indian women; and 
though it is well known that neither tribe lofe any time, 
thofe early connedtions are feldom productive of children 


for fome years. 


Divorces are pretty common among the Northern In- 
dians ; fometimes for incontinency, but more frequently 
for want of what they deem neceflary accomplifhments, 
or for bad behaviour. This ceremony, in either cafe, 
confifts of neither more nor lefs than a good drubbing, 
and turning the woman out of doors; telling her to go 
to her paramour, or relations, according to the nature of 
her crime. 


Providence is very kind in caufing thefe people to be lefs 


prolific than the inhabitants of civilized nations ; it is very 


uncommon to fee one woman have more than five or fix 
children; and thefe are always born at fuch a diftance 


from one another, that the youngeft is generally two or 
three 


NTO RTH ERNTOCEAN. 


three years old before another is brought into the world. 
Their eafy births, and the ceremonies which take place 
on thofe occafions, have already been mentioned ; I fhall 
therefore only obferve here, that they make no ufe of 


cradles, like the Southern Indians, but only tie a lump 


of mofs between their legs; and always carry their chil- 
dren at their backs, next the fkin, till they are able to 
walk. Though their method of treating young children is 
in this re{pect the moft uncouth and awkward I ever faw, 
there are few among them that can be called deformed, 
and not one in fifty who is not bow-legged. 


There are certain periods at which they never permit the 
women to abide in the fame tent with their hufbands. At 


fuch times they are obliged to make a {mall hovel for | 


themfelves at fome diftance from the other tents. As this 
is an univerfal cuftom among all the tribes, it is alfoa 
piece of policy with the women, upon any difference with 
their hufbands, to make that an excufe for a temporary 
feparation, when, without any ceremony, they creep out (as 
is their ufual cuftom on thofe occafions) under the eves of 
that fide of the tent at which they happen to be fitting ; for 
at thofe times they are not permitted to goin or out through 
the door. This cuftom is fo generally prevalent among the 
women, that I have frequently known fome of the fulk 
dames leave their hufbands and tent for four or fave days at 
a time, and repeat the farce twice or thrice in a month, while 
the poor men have never fufpe&ted the deceit, or if they 
Sf | have, 


3%3 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


have, delicacy on their part has not permitted them to 
enquire into the matter. I have known ‘Matonabbee’s 
handfome wife, who eloped from him in May one thou- 
fand feven hundred and ifeventy-one, live thun-nardy, as 
as they call it, (that is, alone,) for feveral weeks together, 


under this pretence; but as a proof he had fome fufpi- 


cion, fhe was always carefully watched, to prevent her 
from giving her company toany other man. The South- 
ern Indians are alfo very delicate in this point ; for though 
they do not force their wives to build a feparate tent, they 
never lie under the fame clothes during this period. It 
is, however, equally true, that the young girls, when 
thofe fymptoms make their firft appearance, generally go 
a little diftance from the other tents for four or five days, 


‘and at their return wear a kind of veil or curtain, made 


of beads, for fome time after, as a mark of modefty ; as 
they are then confidered marriageable, and of courfe are 
called women, though fome at thofe periods are not more 
than thirteen, while others at the age of “fifteen or fixteen 
have been reckoned as children, though apparently aries 
at nearly their full growth. 


On thofe occafions a remarkable piece of fuperftition 
prevails among them ; women in this fituation are never 
permitted to walk on the ice of rivers or lakes, or near the 
part where the men are hunting beaver, or where a fith- 
ing-net is fet, for fear of averting their fuccefs. They 

are alfo prohibited at thofe times ‘from partaking of the 
head 


NORTHERN OCGEAN, 


head of any animal, and even from walking in, or crofling 
the track where the head of a deer, moofe, beaver, and 
many other animals, have lately been carried, either on 


a fledge or on the back. To be guilty of a violation 


of this cuftom is confidered as of the greateft importance; 
becaufe they firmly believe that it would be a means of 
preventing the hunter from having an n equal ade in. his 
future excurfions. 


‘Thofe poor people live in fuch an inhofpitable part of 
the globe, that for want of firing they are frequently 
obliged to eat their victuals quite raw, particularly in the 
Summer feafon, while on the barren ground; but early 
cuftom and frequent necefflity make this practice fo fa- 
miliar to them,- that fo far from finding any inconveni- 
ence arife from it, or having the leaft diflike to it, they 
frequently do it by choice, and particularly in the article 
of fifh; for when they do make a pretence of drefling 


it, they feldom warm it through. I have frequently - 


made one of a party who has fat round a frefh-killed deer, 
and aflifted in picking the bones quite clean, when I 
thought that the raw brains and many other parts were 
exceedingly good ; and, however ftrange it may appear, I 
muft beftow the fame epithet on half-raw fifh: even 
to this day I give the preference to trout, falmon, 
and the brown tittemeg, when they are not warm at the 
bone. 

Sf{2 The 


$755) 


316 


A JOURNEY TO THE. 


The extreme poverty of thofe Indians in general will 
not permit one half of them to purchafe brafs kettles from 
the Company; fo that they are {till under the neceflity of 
continuing their original mode of boiling their victuals in 
large upright veffels made of birch-rind. As thofe veffels 
will not admit of being expofed to the fire, the Indians, 
to fupply the defect, heat {tones red-hot and put them 
into the water, which foon occafions it to boil; and by 
having a conftant fucceflion of hot ftones, they may con- 
tinue the procefs as long as it is neceflary. This method. 
of cooking, though very expeditious, is attended with 
one great evil: the victuals which are thus prepared are 
full of fand; for the ftones thus heated, and then im- 
merged in the water, are not only liable to fhiver to pieces, 
but many of them being of a coarfe gritty nature, fall to 
a mafs of gravel in the kettle, which cannot be prevented 
from mixing with the victuals which are boiled init. Be- 
fides this, they have feveral other methods of preparing 
their food, fuch as roafting it by a ftring, broiling it, &e. ; 
but thefe need no farther defcription. 


The moft remarkable difh among them, as well as all 
the other tribes of Indians in thofe parts, both Northern 
and Southern, is blood mixed with the half-digefted food 
which is found in the deer’s ftomach or paunch, and 
boiled up with a fufficient quantity of water, to make it 
of the confiftence of peafe-pottage. Some fat and {craps 


of 


MOR TH ERIN OWE EA N, 
ef tender flefh are alfo fhred finall and boiled with ig, 


To render this difh more palatable, they have a method: 


of mixing the blood with the contents of the ftomach in 
the paunch itfelf, and hanging it up in the heat and {moke 
of the fire for feveral days; which puts the whole mafs 
into a flate of fermentation, and gives it fuch an agreeable 
acid tafte, that were it not for prejudice, it might be eaten. 


by thofe who have the niceft palates. It is true, fome. 
people with delicate tomachs would not be eafily perfuaded. 


to partake of this difh, efpecially if they faw it drefled ;. 
for moft of the fat which is boiled in it is firft chewed by, 


the men and boys, in order to break the globules that con-: 


tain the fat; by which means it all boils out, and mixes. 
with the broth: whereas, if it were permitted to remain as. 


it came from the knife, it would ftill be in lumps, like. 


fuet. To dojuftice, however, to their cleanlinefs-in this 
particular, I muft obferve, that they are very careful that 
neither old people with bad teeth, nor young children,, 
have any hand in preparing this difh. At firft, I muft 
acknowledge that I was rather fhy in partaking of this 


mefs, but when I was fufficiently convinced of the truth: 
of the above remark, I no longer made any feruple, but: 


always thought it exceedingly good.. 


The ftomach of no other large animal. befide’ the deer: 


is eaten by any of the Indians that border on Hudfon’s Bay.. 


In Winter, when the deer feed on fine white mofs, the. 


contents of the ftomach is fo. much efteemed by them,, 


that: 


347 


318 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


that I have often feen them fit round a deer where it was 
killed, and eat it warm out of the paunch. In Summer 
the deer feed more coarfely, and therefore this difh, if it 


deferve that appellation, is then not fo much in favour. 


The young calves, fawns, beaver, &'c. taken out of 
the bellies of their mothers, are reckoned moft delicate 
food ; and I am not the only European who heartily joins 
in pronouncing them the greateft dainties that can be eaten. 
Many gentlemen who have ferved with me at Churchill, 
as well as at York Fort, and the inland fettlements, will 
readily agree with me in afferting, that no one who ever got 
the better of prejudice fo far as to tafte of thofe young ani- 
mals, but has immediately become exceflively fond of them; 
and the fame may be faid of young geefe, ducks, & ec. in 
the fhell.” In faét, it is almoft,become a proverb in the 
Northern fettlements, that whoever wifhes to know what 
is good, muft live with the Indians. 

The parts of generation belonging to any beaft they kill, 
both male and female, are always eaten by the men and 
boys; and though thofe parts, particularly in the males, 
are generally very tough, they are not, on any account, to 
be cut with an edge-tocl, but torn to pieces with the 
teeth ; and when any part of them proves too tough to be 
mafticated, it is thrown into the fire and burnt. For 
the Indians believe firmly, that if a dog fhould eat any 
part of them, it would have the fame efeét on their 

7 fuccefs 


NOR AER N CCEA N. 


fuccefs in hunting, that a woman croffing their hunting- 
track at an improper period would have. The fame ill- 
fuccefs is fuppofed alfo to attend them if a woman eat any 


of thofe parts. 


They are alfo remarkably fond of the womb of the 
buffalo, elk, deer, Gc. which they eagerly devour with- 
out wafhing, or any other procefs but barely ftroking out 
the contents. This, in fome of the larger animals, and 


efpecially when they are fome time gone with young, needs. 
no defcription to make it fufhciently difgufting ; and yet © 


T have known fome in the Company's fervice remarkably 
fond of the difh, though I am not one of the number. 


The womb of the beaver and deer is well enough, but 


that of the moofe and buffalo is very rank, and truly 
difeufting *. 
Our 


* ‘The Indian method of preparing this unaccountable difh is by throwing 
the filthy bag acrofs a pole direétly over the fire, the fmoke of which, they 
fay, much improves it,, by taking off the original flavour; and when any 
of it is to be cooked, a large fat like: as mucli tripe, is cut off and boiled 
fora few minutes; but the many large nodes with which the infide of the 
womb is ftudded, make it abominable. Thefe nodes are as incapable of being: 
divefted of moifture as the fkin of a live eel; but when boiled, much re- 
femble, both in fhape and colour, the yolk of an egg, and are fo called by: 
the natives, and as eagerly devoured by them. 


The tripe of the buffalo is exceedingly good, and the Indian method.of 
cooking it infinitely fuperior to that praCtifed in Europe. When opportunity 
will permit, they wafh it tolerably clean in cold water, ftrip off all the honey- 


comb, and only boil it about half, or three-quarters of an hour: in that time 
1c 


oo 


320 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


Our Northern Indians who trade at the Factory, as well 
as all the Copper tribe, pafs their whole Summer on the 
barren ground, where they generally find plenty of deer ; 


and in fome of the rivers and lakes, a great abundance of 


fine fith. 


Their bows and arrows, though their original weapons, 
are, fince the introduction of fire-arms among them, be- 
come of little ufe, except in killing deer-as they walk or 
run through a narrow pafs prepared for their reception, 
where feveral Indians lie concealed for that purpofe. This 
method of hunting is only practicable in Summer, and on 
the barren ground, where they have an extenfive profped, 
and can fee the herds of deer at a great diftance, as well 
as difcover the nature of the country, and make every ne- 


itis Tufficiently done for eating; and though rather tougher than what is pre- 
pared in England, yet is exceedingly pleafant to the tafte, and muft be much 
more nourifhing than tripe that has been foked and fcrubbed in many hot - 
waters, and then boiled for ten or twelve hours. 


The leffer ftomach, or, as fome call it, the many-folds, either of buffalo, 
moofe, or deer, are ufually eat raw, and are very good; but that of the moofe,’ 
unlefs great care be taken in wafhing it, is rather bitter, owing to the nature 
of their food. 


The kidneys of both moofe and buffalo are ufually eat raw by the Southern 
Indians; for no fooner is one of thofe beafts killed, than the hunter rips up its 
belly, thrufts in his arm,’ fnatches out the kidneys, and eats them warm, be- 
fore the animal is quite dead. They alfo at times put their mouths to the 
wound the ball has made, and fuck the blood; which they fay quenches thirft, 
and is very nourifhing. 


ceflary 


NORTHERN OCEAN 


ceflary arrangement for driving them through the narrow 
defiles. This method of hunting is performed in the fol- 


lowing manner: 


When the Indians fee a herd of deer, and intend to hunt 
them with bows and arrows, they obferve which way the 
wind blows, and always get to leeward, for fear of being 
{melled by the deer. The next thing to which they at- 
tend, is to fearch for a convenient place to conceal thofe who 
are appointed to fhoot. This being done, a large bundle of 
fticks, like large ramrods, (which they carry with them the 
whole Summer for the purpofe,) are ranged in two ranks, 
fo as to form the two fides of a very acute angle, and 
the fticks placed at the diftance of fifteen or twenty 
yards from each other. When thofe neceflary arrange- 
ments are completed, the women and_ boys feparate into 
two parties, and: go round on both fides, till they form a 
crefcent at the back of the deer, which are drove right 
forward; and as each of the fticks has a fmall flag, or 
more properly a pendant, faftened to it, which is eafily 
waved to and fro by the wind, and a lump of mofs ftuck 
on each of their tops, the poor timorous deer, probably 
taking them for ranks of people, generally run ftraight 
forward between the two ranges of fticks, till they get 
among the Indians, who lie concealed in fmall circular 
fences, made with loofe ftones, mofs, &’c. When the deer 
approach very near, the Indians who are thus concealed 


fart up and {hoot ; butas the deer generally pafs along at 
a) t full 


Lp 


te 


A JOURNEY TO" Gain 


full foeed, few Indians have time to fhoot more than one 
or two arrows, unlefs the herd be very large. 


This method of hunting is not always attended with 
equal fuccefs; for fometimes after the Indians have been 
at the trouble of making places of fhelter, and arranging 
the flag-fticks, &c. the deer will make off another way; 
before the women and children can furround them. At 
other times I have feen eleven or twelve of them. killed 
with one volley of arrows; and if any gun-men attend on 
thofe occafions, they are always placed behind the other 
Indians, in order to pick up the deer that efcape the bow- 
men. By thefe means I have feen upwards of twenty fine 
deer killed at one broadfide, as it may be termed. 


Though the Northern Indians may be faid to kill a great 
number of deer in this manner during the Summer, yet 
they have fo far loft the art of fhooting with bows and 
arrows, that I never knew any oi them who could take 
thofe weapons only, and kill either deer, moofe, or buf- 
falc, in the common, wandering, and promifcuous method 
of hunting. The Southern Indians, though they have 
been much longer ufed to fire-arms, are far more expert 
with the bow and arrow, their original weapons. 


The tents made ufe of by thofe Indians, both in Sum- 
mer and Winter, are generally compofed of deer-fkins in 
the hair; and for convenience of carriage, are always 

: made 


NORTHERN. OCEAN. 


made in {mall pieces, feldom exceeding five buck-fkins in 
one piece. Thefe tents, as alfo their kettles, and fome 
other lumber, are always carried by dogs, which are 
trained to that fervice, and are very docile and traétable. 
Thofe animals are of various fizes and colours, but all of 
the fox and wolf breed, with fharp nofes, full bruthy 
tails, and fharp ears ftanding ere&. ‘They are of great 
courage when attacked, and bite fo fharp, that the {mallet 
cur among them will keep feveral of our largeft Englith 
dogs at bay, if he can get up inacorner. Thefe dogs 
are equally willing to haul in a fledge, but as few of the 
~ men will be at the trouble of making fledges for them, 
the poor women are obliged to content themfelves with 
leffening the bulk of their load, more than the weight, 
by making the dogs carry thefe articles only, which are 
always lafhed on their backs, much after the fame manner 
as packs are, or ufed formerly to be, on pack~horfes. 


In the fail of the year, and as the Winter advances, 
thofe people few the {kins of the deers legs together in 
the fhape of long portmanteaus, which, when hauled on 
the fnow as the hair lies, are as flippery as an otter, and 
ferve them as temporary fledges while on the barren 
ground; but when they arrive at any woods, they then 
make proper fledges, with thin boards of the larch-tree, 
generally known in Hudfon’s Bay by the name of 
Juniper. 


4 ele ig” Thole 


3 


2. 


324 


A JOURNEY TO "Yirer 


Thofe fledges are of various fizes, according to the 
firength of the perfons who are to haul them: fome I 
have feen were not lefs than twelve or fourteen feet long, 
and fifteen or fixteen inches wide, but in general they 
do not exceed eight or nine feet in length, and twelve 
or fourteen inches in breadth. 


' The boards of which thofe fledges are compofed are not 
more than a quarter of an inch thick, and feldom exceed 
five or fix inches in width; as broader would’be very un- 
handy for the Indians to work, who have no other tools 
than an ordinary knife, turned up a little at the point, 
from which it acquires the name of Bafe-hoth among the 
Northern Indians, but among the Southern tribes it is 
called Mo-co-togean. The: boards are fewed together 
with thongs of parchment deer-fkin, and feveral crofs bars 
of wood ate fewed on the upper fide, which ferves both 
to ftrengthen the fledge and fecure the ground-lafhing, to 
which the load is always faftened by other {maller thongs, 
or ftripes of leather. The head or fore-part of the fledge 
is turned up fo as to form a femi-circle, of at leaft fif- 
teen or twenty inches diameter. This prevents the car- 
riage from diving into light fnow, and enables it to flide 
over the inequalities and hard drifts of {now which are 
conftantly met with on the open plains and barren grounds. 
The trace or draught-line to thofe fledges is a double 
firing, or flip of leather, made faft to the head; and 
the bight is put acrofs the fhoulders of the perfon who 


A. hauls 


A 


NORTHERN OCEAN, 
hauls the fledge, fo as to reft againft the breaft. ‘This 


contrivance, though fo fimple, cannot be improved by the 
moft ingenious collar-maker in the world. 


Their fhow-thoes differ from all others made ufe of in: 
thofe parts; for though they are of the galley kind, that 
is, fharp-pointed before, yet they are always to be worn 
on one foot, and cannot be fhifted from fide to fide, like 
other fnow-fhoes; for this reafon the inner-fide of the 
frames are almoft ftraight, and the outer-fide has a very 
Jarze fweep. The frames are generally made of birch- 
wood, and the netting is compofed of thongs of deer- 
fkin, but their mode of filling that compartment where 


the foot refts, is quite different from that ufed among the 


Southern Indians, 


Their clothing, which chiefly confifts of deer fkins in the 
hair, makes them very fubject to be loufy ;. but that is fo. 


far from being thought a difgrace, that the beft among them 
amufe themfelves with catching and.eating thefe vermin ;. 
of which they are fo fond, that the produce of a loufy head 
or garment affords them not only pleafing amufement, but a 
delicious repaft. My old guide, Matonabbee, was fo re-~ 
markably fond of thofe little vermin, that he frequently 
fet five or fix of his {trapping wives to work to loufe their 
hairy deer-fkin fhifts, the produce of which being always. 
very confiderable, he eagerly received with both hands,. 


and licked them in as faft,.and with as good a grace, as. 
any 


A JOURNEY TO Te 


any European epicure would the mites in a cheefe. He 
often affured me that fuch amufement was not only very 
pleafing, but that the objects of the fearch were very good ; 
for which I gave him credit, telling him at the fame time, 
that though I endeavoured to habituate myfelf to every 
other part of their diet, yet as I was but a fojourner 
among them, I had no inclination to accuftom myfelf to 
fuch dainties as I could not procure in that part of the 
world where I was moft inclined to refide. 


The Southern Indians and Efquimaux are equally fond 
of thofe vermin, which are fo deteftable in the eyes of an 
European; nay, the latter have many other dainties of a 
fimilar kind ; for befide making ufe of train-oil as a cordial 
and as fauce to their meat, I have frequently feen them 
eat a whole handful of maggots that were produced in 
meat by fly-blows. It is their conftant cuftom to eat the 
filth that comes from the nofe; and when their nofes 
bleed «by accident, they always lick the blood into their 
mouths, and {wallow it. 


The track of land inhabited by the Northern Indians is 
very extenfive, reaching from the fifty-ninth to the fixty- 
eiehth degree of North latitude; and from’Eait to Weft 
is upward of five hundred miles wide. It is bounded by 
Churchill River on the South; the Athapufcow Indians’ 
Country on the Weft; the Dog-ribbed and Copper Indians 
Countsy on the North; and by Hudfon’s Bay on the Eaft. 

| The 


NORTHERN OCEAN 


The land throughout that whole track of country is {carce! y 
any thing but one folid mafs of rocks and ftones, and in 
mott parts very hilly, particularly to the Weftward, among 
the woods. ‘The furface, it is very true, is in aa places 
covered with a thin fod of mofs, intermixed with the roots 
of the Wee-fa-ca-pucca, cranberries, and a few other ins 
fignificant fhrubs and herbage ; but under it there is in ge- 
neral a total want of foil, capable of producing any thing 
except what is peculiar to the climate. Some of the 
marfhes, indeed, produce feveral kinds of grafs, the growth 
of which is amazingly rapid ; but this is dealt out with: 
fo {paring a’ hand as to be barely fufficient to ferve the 
geefe, fwans, and other birds of paflage, during their mi~ 


erations in the Spring and Fall, while they remain. in. a: 


moulting flate.. 


' ‘The many lakes and rivers with which this part of the 
country abounds, though they do not furnifh the natives 
with water-carriage, are yet of infinite advantage to them; 
as they afford’ great numbers of fifh, both in Summer and 
Winter. The only {pecies caught in thofe parts are trout, 
tittameg, (or tickomeg,) tench, two forts of barble, (called: 


by-the Southern Indians Na-may-pith,) burbot, pike, and. 


afew perch. ‘The four former are caught in all parts of 
this country, as well the woody as the barren; but. the 
three latter are only caught to the Weftward, in fuch lakes 
and rivers as are fituated among the woods:; and though 


fome of thofe rivers lead to fie barren sround, yet nis 


three: 


327 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


three laft mentioned {pecies of fifh are feldom caught 
beyond the edge of the woods, not even in the Summer 
{eafon. . 


There is a black, hard, crumply mofs, that grows on 
the rocks and large ftones in thofe parts, which is of in- 
finite fervice to the natives, as it fometimes furnifhes them 
with a temporary fubfiftence, when no animal food can 
‘be procured. This mofs, when boiled, turns toa gummy 
confiftence, and is more clammy in the mouth than fago ; 
it may, by adding either mofs or water, be made to almoft 
any confiftence. It is fo palatable, that all who tafte it 
generally grow fond of it. It is remarkably good and 
pleafing when ufed to thicken any kind of broth, -but it 
is generally moft efteemed when boiled in fifh-liquor. 


The only method pradiifed by thofe people to catch 
fith either in Winter or Summer, is by angling and fet-. 
ting nets; both of which methods is attended with much 
fuperftition, ceremony, and unneceflary trouble; but J 
will endeavour to, defcribe them in as plain and brief a 
a manner as poflible. : 


When they make a new fifhing-net, which is always. 
compofed of {mall thongs cut from raw deer-fkins, they 
take a number of birds bills and feet, and tie them, a little 
apart from each other, to the head and foot rope of the 
net, and at the four corners generally faften fome of the 
toes and jaws of the otters and jackafhes. The birds feet 

and 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


and bills made choice of on fuch occafions are generally 
thofe of the laughing goofe, wavey, (or white goofe,) 
gulls, loons, and black-heads; and unlefs fome or all 
of thefe be faftened to the net, they will not attempt 
to put it into the water, as they firmly believe it would 


not catch a fingle ffh. 


A net thus accoutred is fat for fetting whenever occafion 
requires, and opportunity offers; but the firft fith of 
whatever fpecies caught in it, are not to be fodden in the 
water, but broiled whole on the fire, and the fieth care- 
fully taken from the bones without diflocating one joint ; 
after which the bones are laid on the fire at full length 
and burnt. A ftria obfervance of thefe rules is fuppofed 
to be of the utmoft importance in promoting the future 
fuccefs of the new net; and a negle& of them would 
render it not worth a farthing *. 


When they fh in rivers, or narrow channels that join 
two lakes together, they could frequently, by tying two, 
three, or more nets together, fpread over the whole breadth 
of the channel, and intercept every fizable firth that 
pafied; but inftead of that, they fcatter the nets at a 


confiderable diftance from each other, from a fuperfti- 


* They frequently fell new nets, which have not been wet more than once 
or twice, becaufe they have not been fuccefsiul. Thofe nets, when foked in 
water, are eafily opened, and then make moft excellent heel and toe netting 
for fnow-fhoes. In general it.1s far fuperior to tie netting cut by the Southern 
Indian women, and 1s not larger than common net-twine. 


Uu tious 


3-9 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


tious notion, that were they kept clofe together, one net 
would be jealous of its neighbour, and by that means not 
one of them would catch a fingle fith. “ 


The methods ufed, and ftri@ly obferved, when angling, 
are equally abfurd as thofe I have eons for when 
they bait a hook, a compofition of four, fe or fixe 
ticles, by way of cer is concealed under the bait, which 
is always fewed round the hook. In fact, the only bait 
ufed by thofe people is in their opinion a compolition 
of charms, inclofed within a bit of fifh- -fkin, {0 as aie 
fome meafure to refemble a {mall fith. The things ufed 
by way of charm, are bits of beavers tails and fat, otter’s 
vents and teeth, mufk-rat’s guts and tails, loon’s vents, 
{quirrel’s tefticles, the cruddied milk taken out of the 
ftomach of fucking fawns and calves, human hair, and 
numberlefs other articles equally myles 


Every mafter of a family, and indeed almoft every other 
perfon, particularly the men, have a imall bundle of fuch — 
trafh, which they always carry with them, both in Sum- 
mer arid Winter; and without fome of thofe articles to 
put under their bait, few of them could be prevailed 
upon to put a hook into the water, being fully perfuaded 
that they may as well fit in the tent, as attempt to angle 
without fuch afliftance. They have alfo a notion that 
fifth of the fame {pecies inhabiting different parts of the 
country, are fond of different things; fo that almoft every 

4. lake 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


lake and river they arrive at, obliges them to alter the com- 
pofition of the charm. The Se rule is obferved on 
broiling the firft fruits of a new hook that is ufed for a 
new net; an old hook that has already been fuccefsful 
in ypatts large fifh is efteemed of more value, than a 
handful of new ones which have never been tried. 


Deer alfo, as well as fifh, are very numerous in many 
parts of this country; particularly to the North of the 
fixtieth degree of latitude. Alpine hares are in fome 
parts of the barren ground pretty plentiful, where alfo 
fome herds of mufk-oxen are to be met with; and to 
the Weftward, among the woods, there are com rabbits 
and partridges. With all thofe feeming fources of plenty, 
however, one half of the inhabitants, and perhaps the 
other half alfo, are frequently in danger of being ftarved 
to death, owing partly to their want of ceconomy; and 
-moft of thefe fcenes of diftrefs happen during their jour- 
nies to and from Prince of Wales’s Fort, the only place at 


which they trade. 


When Northern Indians are at the Factory, they are 
very liable to fteal any thing they think will be fervice- 
able; particularly iron hoops, fmall bolts, fpikes, car- 
penters tools, and, in fhort, all {mall pieces of iron-work 
which they can turn to advantage, either for their own 
ufe, or for the purpofe of trading with fuch of their 
countrymen as feldom vifit the Company’s Settlement : 

Uu 2 among 


332 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


among themfelves, however, the crime of theft is feldom 
heard of, : 


When two parties of thofe Indians meet, the ceremonies 
which pafs between them are quite different from thofe 
made ufe of in Europe on fimilar occafions; for when 
they advance within twenty or thirty yards of each other, 
they make.a full halt, and in general fit or lie down on 
the ground, and do not fpeak for fome minutes. At 


length one of them, generally an elderly man, if any be 


in company, breaks filence, by acquainting the other 
party with every misfortune that has befallen him and his 
companions from the laft time they had feen or heard of 
each other; andalfo of all deaths and other calamities that 
have befallen any other Indians during the fame period, at 
leaft as many particulars as have come to his knowledge. 


When the firft has finithed his oration, another aged 
orator (if there be any) belonging to the other party re- 
lates, in like manner, all the bad news that has come to 
his knowledge; and both parties never fail to plead po- 
verty and famine on all occafions. If thofe orations con- 
tain any news that in the leaft afieé the other party, it is not 
long before fome of them begin to figh and fob, and foon 


after break out into a loud ery, which is generally accom- 


_ panied by moft of the grown perfons of both fexes; and 


fometimes it is common to fee them all, men, women, 
and children, in one univerfal howl. The young girls, in 
particular, 


NOUR TAERN OC HA N. 


particular, are often very obliging on thofe occafions; for I 
never remember to have feen a crying match (as I called 
it) but the greateft part of the company affifted, although 
fome of = had no other reafon for it, but a of en 
their companions do the fame. When the firft tranfports 
of grief fubfade, they advance by degrees, and both parties 
mix with each other, the men always affociating with the 
men, and the women with the women. I they have 
any tobacco among them, the pipes are paffed round 
pretty freely, and the converfation foon becomes general. 
As they are on their firft meeting acquainted with all 
the bad news, they have by this time nothing left but 
good, which in general has fo far the predominance over the 
former, that in lefs than half an hour nothing but {miles 
and cheerfulnefs are to be feen in every face; and if they 
be not really in want, {mall prefents of provifions, am- 
munition, and other articles, often take place; fometimes 
merely as a gift, but more frequently by way of trying 
whether they cannot get a greater prefent. 


They have but few diverfions ; the chief is fhooting at 
a mark with bow and arrows ; and another out-door game, 
called Holl, which in fome meafure refembles playine with 
quoits ; only it is done with fhort clubs, {Harp at one end. 


They alfo amufe themifelves at times with dancing, which 


is always performed in the night. It is remarkable that 


thofe people, though a diftin& nation, have never adopted 
any mode of dancing of their own, or any fongs to whieh 


they 


m5 


C2 


(ee 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


they can dance; fo that when any thing of this kind is 
attempted, which is but feldom, they always endeavour 
to imitate either the Dog-ribbed or Southern Indians, but 
more commonly the former, as few of them are fufficiently 
acquainted either with the Southern Indian languaye, or 
their manner of dancing. The Dog-ribbed method is not 
very difficult to learn, as it only confifts in lifting the feet 
alternately from the ground in a very quick fucceflion, 
and as high as poflible, without moving the body, which 
fhould be kept quite ftill and motionlefs; the hands at the 
fame time being clofed, and held clofe to the breaft, and 
the head inclining forward. ‘This diverfion is always per- 
formed quite naked, except the breech-cloth, and at times 
that is alfo thrown off; and the dancers, who feldom ex- 
ceed three or four at a time, always fland clofe to the 
mufic. The mufic may, by flraining a point, be called 
both vocal and inftrumental, though both are fufficiently 
humble. The former is no more than a frequent repeti- 
tion of the words hee, hee, hee, ho, ho, ho, &c¢. which, 
by a more or lefs frequent repetition, dwelling longer on 
one word and fhorter on another, and raifing and lowering 
the voice, produce fomething like a tune, and has the de- 
fired effe@. This is always accompanied by a drum or 
tabor; and fometimes a kind of rattle is added, made 
with a piece of dried buffalo fkin, in fhape exa@ly like an 
oil-flafk, into which they put a few fhot or pebbles, 
which, when fhook about, produces mufic little inferior 
to the drum, though not fo loud. 


This 


NORTHERN OCEAN, 


This mode of dancing naked is performed only by the 
men; for when the women are ordered to dance, they al- 
ways exhibit without the tent, to mufic which is played 
within it; and though their method of dancing is perfe&ly 
decent, yet it has full lefs meaning and ation than that of 
the men: for a whole heap of them crowd together ina 
ftraight line, and juft fhuffle themfelves a little from right 
to left, and back again in the fame line, without lifting 
their feet from the ground; and when the mufic ftops, 
they all give a little bend of the body and knee, fomewhat 
like an awkward curtfey, and pronounce, in a little fhrill 
tone, h-e-e, h-o-o-o-e. 


Befide thefe diverfions, they have another fimple in- 
door game, which is that of taking a bit of wood, a 
button, or any other {mall thing, and after fhifting it 
from hand to hand feveral times, afking their antagonift, 
which hand it is in? When playing at this game, which 
only admits of two perfons, each of them have ten, fif- 
teen, or twenty {mall chips of wood, like matches; and 
when one of the players guefies right, he takes one of 
his antagonift’s fticks, and lays it to his own; and he that 
firft gets all the fticks from the other in that manner, is 
faid to win the game, which is generally for a fingle load 
of powder and {fhot, an arrow, or fome other thing of 
inconfiderable value. 


! 


The women never mix in any of their diverfions, not 
even in dancing ; for when that is required of them, they 
always 


oe) 


“5 


CY 


A JOURNEYS Wo wae 


always exhibit without the tent, as has been already ob- 
Served ; nor are they allowed to be prefent at a feaft. In- 
deed, the whole courfe of their lives is one continued 
-{cene of drudgery, vz. carrying and hauling heavy loads, 
dreffing fkins for clothing, curing their provifions, and prac- 
tifing other neceflary domeftic duties which are required in 
a family, without enjoying the leaft diverfion of any kind, 
or relaxation, on any occafion whatever; and except in the 
execution of thofe homely duties, in which they are al- 


ways inftructed from their infancy, their fenfes feem al- 


snoft as dull and frigid as the zone they inhabit. There 
are indeed fome exceptions to be met with among them, 
and I fuppofe it only requires indulgence and precept to 


make fome cf them as lofty and infolent as any women in 
the world. Though they wear their hair at full length, 


and never tie it up, like the Southern Indians ; and though 
not one in fifty of them is ever poffeffed of a comb, yet 
by a wonderful dexterity of the fingers, anda good deal 
of patience, they make fhift to ftroke it out fo as not to 
leave two hairs entangled ; but when their heads are in- 
fefted with vermin, from which very few of either fex are 
free, they mutually affift each other in keeping them 
under. 


A fcorbutic diforder, refembling the worft flage of the 
itch, confumptions, and fluxes, are their chief diforders. 
The firit of thefe, though very troublefome, is never 


“snown to prove fatal, unlefs it be accompanied with fome 


inward complaint; but the two latter, with a few acci- 


dents, 


‘NORTHERN OCEAN. 


‘dents, carries off great numbers of both fexes and all ages : 
indeed few of them live to any great age, probably owing 
to the great fatigue they undergo from their youth up, in 
procuring a fubfiftence for themfelves and their offspring. 


Though the fcorbutic diforder above mentioned does 
appear to be infectious, it is rare to fee one have it with- 
out the whole tent’s crew being’ more or lefs affected 
with it; but this is by no means a proof of its being 
contagious; I rather attribute it to the effects of fome 
bad water, or the unwholefomenefs of fome fifh they may 
catch in particular places, in the courfe of their wandering 
manner of life. Were it otherwife, a fingle family would 
in a fhort time communicate it to the whole tribe; but, 
on the contrary, the difeafe is never known to fpread. In 
the younger fort it always attacks the hands and feet, 
not even fparing the palms and foles. Thofe of riper 
years generally have it about the wrilts, infteps, and pol- 
teriors; and in the latter particularly, the blotches, or 
boils as they may juftly be called, are oiten as large as the 
top of a man’s thumb. ‘This diforder moft frequently 
makes its appearance in the Summer, while the Indians 
are out on the barren ground; and though it is by no 
means reckoned dangerous, yet it is fo obflinate, as not to 
yield to any medicine that has ever been applied to it while 
at the Company’s Fa@tory. And as the natives themfelves 
never make ufe of any medicines of their own preparing, 
Nature alone works the cure, which is never performed in 


X x hefs 


338 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


lefs than twelve or eighteen months ; and fome of them are: 
troubled with this difagreeable and loathfome diforder for 
years before they are perfectly cured, and then a dark 
livid mark remains on thofe parts of the fkin which have 
been affected, for many years afterwards, and in fome- 
during life. 


When any of the principal Northern Indians die, it is. 
generally believed that they areconjured to death, either by 
fome of their own countrymen, by fome of the Southern 


‘Indians, or by fome of the Efquimaux: too frequently 


the fufpicion falls on the latter tribe, which is the grand 
reafon of their never being at peace with thofe poor and 
diftreffed people. For fome time paft, however, thofe 
Efquimaux who trade with our floops at Knapp’s Bay, 
Navel’s Bay, and Whale Cove, are in perfec peace and’ 
friendfhip with the Northern Indians; which is entirely 
owing to the protection they have for feveral: years paft re- 
ceived from the Chiefs at the Company’s Fort at Churchill 
River *. But thofe af that tribe who live fo far to the 

North, 


* In the Summer of 1756, a party of Northern Indians lay in wait at 
Knapp’s Bay till the floop had failed out of the harbour, when they feil on the. 
poor Efquimaux, and killed every foul... Mr. John Bean, then Mafter of the 
floop, and fince Mafter of the Trinity yacht, with all his crew, heard the 
guns very plain; but did not know the meaning or reafon of it till the Sam- 
mer following, when: he found the fhocking remains of more than forty 
Efquimaux, who had been. murdered in that cowardly manner; and for. no. 
ether reafon but becaufe two principal Northern Indians had died in the 
preceding Winter. 


No 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


North, as not to have any intercourfe with our veffels, very 
often fall a facrifice to the fury and fuperftition of the 
| . Northern 


No Efquimaux were feen at Knapp’s Bay for feveral years after; and thofe 
who trade there at prefent have undoubtedly been drawn from the Northward, 
fince the above unhappy tranfaction; for the convenience of being nearer the 
woods, as well as being in the way of trading with the floop that calls there 
annually, It is to be hdped that the meafures taken by the Governors at 
Prince of Wales’s Fort of late years, will effectually prevent any fuch cala- 
mities happening in future, and by degrees be the means of bringing about a 
Jafting, friendly, and reciprocal intereft between the two nations. 


Notwithftanding the pacific and friendly terms which begin to dawn between 
thofe two tribes at Knapp’s Bay, Navel’s Bay, and Whale Cove, farther 
North hoftilities continue, and moft barbarous murders are perpetrated: and 
the only protection the Efquimaux have from the fury of their enemies, 1s their 
remote fituation inthe Winter, and their refiding chiefly on iflands and penin- 
fulas in Summer, which renders them lefs hable to be furprifed during that 


feafon. But even this fecluded life does not prevent the Northern Indians 


from haraffing them greatly, and at times they are fo clofely purfued as to be 
obliged to leave moft of their goods and utenfils to be deftroyed by their 
enemy; which muft be a great lofs, as thefe cannot be replaced but at the ex- 
pence of much time and labour; and the want of them ia the mean time mutt 
create much diftrefs both to themfelves and their families, as they can feldom 
procure any part of their livelihood without the afliftance of a confiderable 


apparatus. 

In 1756, the Efquimaux at Knapp’s Bay fent two of their youths to Prince 
of Wales’s Fort in the floop, and the Summer following they were carried 
back to their friends, loaded with prefents, and much pleafed with the treat- 
ment they received while at the Fort. In 1767, they again fent one from 


Knapp’s Bay and one from Whale Cove; and though during their ftay at the 


Fort they made a confiderable progrefs both in the Southern Indian and the 
Englifh languages, yet thofe intercourfes have not been any ways advantageous 


to the Company, by increafing the trade from that quarter. In fact, the only 
xX 2 fatisfaction 


339 


40 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


Northern Indians ; whoare by no. means a bold or warlike: 
people; nor can I think from experience, that they are par-- 
ticularly guilty of committing as of wanton cruelty on 
any other part of the human race befide the Efquimaux.. 


Their hearts, however, are in general fo unfufceptible of 
tendernefs, that they can view the deepeft diftrefs in thofe: 


who are not immediately related to them, without the leaft 
emotion ; not even half fo. much as the generality of man-- 
kind feel for the fufferings of the meaneft of the brute 
creation. I have been prefent when one of them, imitating 
the groans, diftorted features, and contracted pofition, of a: 


fatisfaction they have found for the great expence they have from time to time 
incurred, by introducing thofe ftrangers, is, that through the good conduct of” 
their upper fervants at Churchill River, they have at length fo far humanized the 
hearts of thofe two tribes, that at prefent they can meet each other in a friendly 


"manner; whereas, a few years fince, whenever they met, each party preme- . 


ditated the deftruction of the other; and what made their war more fhocking 
was, they never gave quarter: fo that the ftrongeft party always killed the 
weakeft, without fparing either man, woman, or child. 


It is but a few years ago that the floop’s crew who annually carried them 
all their wants, durit not venture on fnore among the Efquimaux unarmed, for 
fear of being murdered; but latterly they are fo civilized, that the Com- 
pany’s fervants vifit their tents with the greateft freedom and fafety, are 
always welcome, and defired to partake of fuch provifions as they have: and 
knowing now our averfion from train-oil, they take every means in their 
power to convince our people that the victuals prepared for them is entirely 
free from it. But the fmell of their tents, cooking-utenfils, and other furni- 
ture, 1s {carcely lefs offenfive than Greenland Dock. However, I have eaten 
both fifh and venifon cooked by them in fo cleanly a manner, that [ have re- 
lifhed them very much, and partaken of them with a good appetite. 


7 man 


NORTHERN OTCEAWN. 
man who had died in the moft excruciating pain, put the 
whole company, except myfelf, into the moft violent fit 
of laughter. 


The Northern Indians never bury their dead, but al- 
ways leave the bodies where they die, fo that they are fup- 
pofed to be devoured by beafts and birds of prey; for 
which reafon they will not eat foxes, wolves, ravens, &’c. 
unlefs it be through mere neceflity. 


The death of a near relation affe@s them fo fenfibly, 
that they rend all their cloths from their backs, and go 
naked, till fome perfons lefs afflicted relieve them. After 
the death of a father, mother, hufband, wife, fon, or 
brother, they mourn, as it may be called, for a whole 
year, which they meafure by the moons and feafons. 
Thofe mournful periods are not diftinguifhed by any par- 
ticular drefs, except that of cutting off the hair; and 
the ceremony confifts in almoit perpetually crying. Ee, 


when walking, as well as at all other intervals from fleep,. 


eating, and converfation, they make an odd howling 
noife, often repeating the relationfhip of the deceafed. 
But as this is. in a great meafure mere form and cuftom, 
fome of them have a method of foftening the harfhnefs of 
the notes, and bringing them out in a more mufical tone 
than that in which they fing their fongs. When they reflect 
ferioufly on the lofs of a good fied, erevers it has 


fuch an effect on them for the prefent, that they give an 
uncommon 


342 


A JOURNEY FO ae 


amcommon loofe to their grief. At thofe times they 
feem to fympathife (through cuftom) with each other’s 
afflictions fo much, that I have often feen feveral fcores 
of them crying in concert, when at the fame time not 
above half a dozen of them had any more reafon for fo 
deing than I had, unlefs it was to preferve the old cuftom, 
and keep the others in countenance. The women are re- 
markably obliging on fuch occafions; and as no reftric- 
tion is laid on them, they may with truth be faid to cry 
with all their might and main; but in common converfa- 
tion they are obliged to be very moderate. 


They have a tradition among them, that the firft per- 
fon upon earth was a woman, who, after having been 


fome time alone, in her refearches for berries, which 


was then her only food, found an animal like a dog, 
which followed her to the cave where fhe lived, and foon 
grew fond and domeftic. ‘This dog, they fay, had the 
art of transforming itfelf into the fhape of a handfome 
young man, which it frequently did at night, but as the 
day approached, always refumed its former fhape; fo 
that the woman looked on all that paffed on thofe occa- 
fions as dreams and delufions, ‘Thefe tranformations were 
foon productive of the confequences which at prefent 
generally follow fuch intimate connexions between the 
two fexes, and the mother of the world began to ad- 
vance in her pregnancy. 


Not 


NORTHERN OCEAN 
Not long after this happened, a man of fuch a furprifing 


height that his head reached up to the clouds, came to. 


level the land, which at that time was a very rude mafs ; 
and after he had done this, by the help of his walking- 
{tick he marked out all the lakes, ponds, and rivers, and 
immediatély. caufed them. to be filled with water. He 
then took the dog, and tore it to pieces; the guts-he threw 
into the lakes and rivers, commanding them to become 
the different kinds of fifh; the flefh he difperfed over 
the land, commanding it to become different kinds of 
beafts and land-animals; the fkin he alfo tore in {mall 
pieces, and threw it into the air, commanding it to become 
all kinds of birds; after which he gave the woman and 
her offspring full power to kill, eat, and never fpare, for 
that he had commanded them to multiply for her ufe 
in abundance. After this injunction, he returned to 
the place whence he came, and has not. been heard of 


fince.. 


Rexicion has not as yet begun to dawn among the 
Northern Indians; for though their conjurors do in- 


deed fing fongs, and make long fpeeches, to fome beafts 


and birds of prey, as alfo to imaginary beings, which. 


they fay affift them in performing cures on the fick;. 
yet they, as well as their credulous neighbours, are ut- 
terly deftitute of every idea of practical religion. It is 
true, fome of them will reprimand their youth for talking 

difre-. 


343 


344 


A JFOUWRNE WFO Viet 


difrefpe&tfully of particular ‘beafts and birds; but it is 
done with fo little energy, as to be often retorted back 
in derifion. Neither is this, nor their cuftom of not kill- 
ing wolves a quiquehatches, univerfally obferved, and 
thofe who do it can only be viewed with more pity and 
contempt than the others; for I always found it arofe 


merely from the greater stint of confidence which they 


had in the fupernatural power of their conjurors, which 


induced them to believe, that talking lightly or difrefpect- 


fully of any thing they feemed to approve, would mate- 
rially affect their health and happinefs in this-world: and 
ZT never found any of them-that -had the leaft idea of fu- 
turity. Matonabbee, without one exception, was a man 


of as clear ideas in other matters as any that I ever faw: 


he was not only a perfe& mafter of the Southern Indian 
language, and their belief, but could tell a better ftory of 


our Saviour’s birth and life, than one ‘half of thofe who 


call themfelves Chriftians ; yet he always declared to me, 
that neither he, nor any ; his countrymen, had an idea of 


a future ftate. Though he had been taught to look on 


things of this kind as ufelefs, his own good fenfe had 
taught him to be an advocate for univerfal toleration; and 
I have feen him feveral times affift at fome of the moft 
dacred rites performed by the Southern Indians, apparently 


with as much zeal, as if he had given as much credit to 


them as they did: and with the fame liberality of fenti- 
ment he would, I am perfuaded, have aflifted at the altar 


of | 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


of a Chriftian church, or in a Jewifh fynagogue; not with 
a view to reap any advantage himfelf, but merely, as he 
obferved, to affift others who believed in fuch ceremonies. 


Being thus deftitute of all religious control, thefe people 
have, to ufe Matonabbee’s own words, ‘‘ nothing to do but 
‘<¢ confult their own intereft, inclinations, and paflions; and 
“to pafs through this world with as much eafe and con- 


‘¢ tentment as poffible, without any hopes of reward, or 


‘¢ painful fear of punifhment, in the next.” In this ftate 
of mind they are, when: in profperity, the happieft of 
mortals; for nothing but perfonal or family calamities can 
difturb their tranquillity, while misfortunes of the leffer 
kind fit light on them. Like moft other uncivilized 
people, they bear bodily pain with great fortitude, though 
in that refpect I cannot think them equal to the Southern 
Indians. 


Old age is the greateft calamity that can befal a North- 
ern Indian; for when he is paft labour, he is negleéted, and 
treated with great difrefpeét, even by his own children. 
They not only ferve him laft at meals, but generally give 
him the coarfeft and worft of the victuals: and fuch 
of the fkins as they do not chufe to wear, are made 
up in the clumfieft manner into clothing for, their aged 
parents; who, as they had, in all probability, treated 
their fathers and mothers with the fame negledt, in 


Yy their 


346 


A JOURNEW TO "Tia 


their turns, fubmitted patiently to their lot, even with- 
out a murmur, knowing it to be the common misfor- 
tune attendant on old age; fo that they may be faid to, 
wait patiently for the melancholy hour when, being no 
longer capable of walking, they are to be left alone, to 
ftarve, and perifh for want. This, however fhocking and’ 
unnatural it may appear, is neverthelefs fo common, that, 

among thofe people, one half at leaft of the aged: perfons 
of both fexes.abfolutely. die in this miferable condition. 


The Northern Indians call the Aurora Borealis, Ed-thin; 
that is, Deer*: and when that meteor is very bright, 
they fay that deer is plentiful, in that part of the atmo- 
{phere; but they have never yet. extended their ideas fo. 
far as to entertain hopes of i en thofe celeftial animals. 


Befide this filly notion, they are very faperfttious With: 
re{pect to the exiftence of feveral kinds of fairies, called by 
them Nant-e-na, whom they frequently fay Clie fee, and. 
who are fuppofed by them to inhabit the different elements 


* Their ideas in this refpe€t are founded on a principle one would not: 
imagine. Experience has fhewn them, that when a hairy deer-fkin is brifkly 
ftroked with the hand in a dark night, it will emit. many fparks of eleétrical. 
fire, as the back of a cat will. The idea which the Southern Indians have of 
this meteor is equally romantic, though more pleafing, as they believe it: to be 
the fpirits of their departed friends dancing in the clouds; and when the 4urora 
Porealis 1s remarkably bright, at which time they vary moft in colour, form, 
and fituation, they fay, their deceafed friends are very merry. 

of 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 

of earth, fea, and air, according to their feveral qualities. 
To one or other of thofe fairies they ufually attribute any 
change.in their circumftances, either for the better or worfe; 
and as they are led into this way of thinking entirely by 
the art of the conjurors, there is no fuch thing as any ge- 
neral mode of belief; for thofe jugglers differ fo much from 
each other in their accounts of thefe beings, that thofe who 
believe ' any thing they fay, have little to do but change their 
opinions according to the will and caprice of the conjuror, 
who is almoft daily relating fome new whim, or extraor- 
dinary event, which, he fays, has been revealed to him in a 
dream, or by fome of his favourite fairies, when on a hunt- 
ing excurfion. 


y y ‘2 : Sorte 


347 


348 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


Some Account of Matonassns, and of the eminent Services 
which he rendered to his Country, as well as to the 
fludfon's Bay Company. . 


Maronazsze was the fon of a Northern Indian by a flave 
woman, who was formerly bought from fome Southern In- 
dians who came to Prince of Wales’s Fort with furrs, &¢. 
This match was made by Mr. Richard Norton, then Go- 
vernor, who detained them at and near the Fort, for the 
fame purpofe as he did thofe Indians called Home-guard. As: 
to Matonabbee’s real age, it is impoffible to be particular ; 
for the natives of thofe parts being utterly unacquainted 
with letters, or the ufe of hieroglyphics, though their 
memories are not lefs retentive than thofe of other nations,, 
cannot preferve and tranfmit to pofterity the exa& time 
when any particular event happens. Indeed, the utmoft 
extent of their chronology reaches no farther, than to fay,, 
My fon, or my daughter, was born in fuch a Governotr’s. 
time, and fuch an event happened during fuch a per- 
fon’s life-time (though, perhaps, he or fhe has been dead 
many years). However, according to appearance, and 
fome corroborating circumftances, Matonabbee was born: 
about the year one thoufand feven hundred and thirty-fix, 
or one thoufand feven hundred and thirty-feven ; and his 
father dying while he was young, the Governor took the 


boy, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


boy, and, according to the Indian cuftom, adopted him 
as his fon. 


Soon after the death of Matonabbee’s father, Mr. Norton 
went to England, and as the boy did not experience from 
his fucceflor the fame regard and attention which he had 
been accuftomed to receive from Mr. Norton, he was foon 
taken from the Factory by fome of his father’s relations, and 


continued with the Northern Indians till Mr. Ferdinand — 


Jacobs fucceeded to the command of Prince of Wales’s Fort, 
in the year one thoufand feven hundred and fifty-two; when 
out of regard to old Mr. Norton, (who was then dead,) 
Mr. Jacobs took the firft opportunity that offered to detain 
Matonabbee at the Factory, where he was for feveral years 
employed in the hunting-fervice with fome of the Com- 
pany’s fervants, particularly with the late Mr. Mofes Nor- 
ton *, (fon of the late Governor,) and Mr. Magnus John- 
fton-+. 


In the courfe of his long ftay at and near the Fort, it is 


nowonder that he fhould have become perfect matter of 


the Southern Indian language, and made fome progrefs in 
the Englifh. It was during this period, that he gained 
a knowledge of the Chriftian faith ; and he always. de- 
clared, that it was too deep and intricate for his compre- 
henfion. ‘Though he was a perfect bigot with refpect to. 


* Afterwards Governor, $ Mafter of the Churchill floop. 
i ‘ the 


oto 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


the arts and tricks of Indian jugglers, yet he could by no 
‘means be imprefled with a belief of any part of our reli- 
gion, nor of the religion of the Southern Indians, who 
have as firm a belief in a future ftate as any people under 
the Sun. He had fo much natural good fenfe and libe- 
rality of fentiment, however, as not to think that he had 
a right to ridicule any. particular fe@ on account of their 
religious opinions. On the contrary, he declared, that he 
held them all equally in efteem, but was determined, as 
he came into the world, fo he would go out of it, without 
profefling any religion at all. Notwithftanding his averfion 
from religion, I have met with few Chriftians who pof- 
feffled more good moral qualities, or fewer bad ones. 


It is impoflible for any man to have been more punéual 
in the performance of a promife than he was; his {crupulous 
adherence to truth and honefty would have done honour 
to the moft enlightened and devout Chriftian, while his 
benevolence and univerfal humanity to all the human 
race *, according to his abilities and manner of life, could 

not 


* IT muft here obferve, that when we went to war with the Efquimaux at 
the Copper River in July 1771, it was by no means his propofal: on the 
‘eontrary, he was forced into it by his countrymen. For I have heard him 
fay, that when he firft vifited that river, in company with I-dot-le-aza, 
they met with feveral Efquimaux; and fo far from killing them, were very 
friendly to them, and made them fmall prefents of fuch articles as they could 
beft fpare, and that would be of moft ufe tothem. It is more than probable 
that the two bits of iron found among the plunder while I was there, were 
part of thofe prefents. There were alfo a few long beads found among thofe 

people, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


not be exceeded. by the moft illuftrious perfonage now on 
record ; and to add to his other good qualities, he was the 
only Indian that I ever faw, except one,. who was not 


guilty of backbiting and flandering his neighbours. 


In ftature, Matonabbee was above the common fize, 
| being nearly fax feet high+; and, except that his neck was 
rather (though not much) too fhort, he was. one of the 
fineft and beft proportioned men that I ever. faw. In: 
complexion he was dark, like-the other Northern Indians, 
but his face was not disfigured by that. ridiculous cuftom. 
of marking the cheeks with three or four black lines. 
His features were regular and agreeable, and_yet fo ftrongly 
marked and expreflive, that they formed a complete index 
of his mind; which, as he never intended to deceive or 
diffemble, he never wifhed to conceal. In converfation 
he was eafy, lively, and agreeable, but exceedingly modeft. 


and at table, the noblenefs and' elegance of his manners’ 


might have been admired by the firft perfonages in the 
world; for to the vivacity of a Frenchman, and the 


people, but quite different from any that the Hudfon’s Bay Company had 
ever fent to the Bay: fo that the only probable way they. could have come by 
them, muft have been by an intercourfe with fome of their tribe, who had 
dealings with the Danes in Davis’s Straits. It 1s very. probable, however, 
they might have paffed through many hands before they reached this. remote 
place. . Had they had an immediate intercourfe with the Efquimaux in Davis’s 
Straits, it is natural to fuppofe that iron would not have been fo fcarce among 
them as it feemed to. be; indeed the diftance 1s too great to admit of it. 


+ I have feen two Northern Indians, who meafured: fix feet three inches ; 
and one, fix feet four inches.. 
z fincerity 


35F 


352 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


fincerity of an Englifhman, he added the gravity and 
noblenefs of a Turk ; all fo happily blended, as to render 
his company and converfation univerfally pleafing to thofe 
who underftood either the Northern or Southern Indian 
languages, the only languages in which he could converfe. 


He was remarkably fond of Spanifh wines, though he 
mever drank to excefs; and as he would not partake of 
{pirituous liquors, however fine in quality or plainly mixed, 
he was always mafter of himfelf. As no man is exempt 
feom frailties, it is natural to fuppofe thatasa man he had - 
his fhare; but the greateft with which I can charge him, 
is jealoufy, and that fometimes carried him beyond the 
bounds of humanity. 


In his early youth he difcovered talents equal to the 
ereateft tafk that could poffibly be expected from an In- 


dian. Accordingly Mr. Jacobs, then Governor at Prince 


of Wales’s Fort, engaged him, when but a youth, as an 
Ambaffador and Mediator between the Northern Indians 
and the Athapufcow Tribe, who till then had always been 
at war with each other. In the courfe of this embafly 
Matonabbee not only difcovered the moft brilliant and folid 
parts, but fhewed an extenfive knowledge of every ad- 
vantage that could arife to both nations from a total fup- 
preffion of hoftilities; and at times he difplayed fuch in- 
fiances of perfonal courage and magnanimity, as are rarely 
to be found among perfons of fuperior condition and rank. 


He 


NORFPHERN OCEAN. 


He had not penetrated far into the country of the Atha- 
pufcow Indians, before he came to feveral tents with in- 
habitants ; and there, to his great furprife, he found Cap- 
tain Keelfhies, (a perfon frequently mentioned in this 
Journal *,) who was then a prifoner, with all his family 
and fome of his friends, the fate of whom was then 
undetermined; but through the means of Matonabbee, 
though young enough to have been his fon, Keelfhies 
and a few others were releafed, with the lofs of his effe&s 
and all his wives, which were fix in number. Matonab- 
bee not only kept his ground after Keelfhies and his {mall 
party had been permitted to return, but made his way 
into the very heart of the Athapufcow country, in order 
to have a perfonal conference with all or moft of the 
principal inhabitants. The farther he advanced, the more 
occafion he had for intrepidity. At one time he came to 


five tents of thofe favages, which in the whole contained 


fixteen men, befides their wives, children, and fervants, 
while he himfelf was entirely alone, except one wife and 
a fervant boy. The Southern Indians, ever treacherous, 
and apparently the more kind when they are premedita- 
ting mifchief, feemed to give him a hearty welcome, ac- 
cepted the tenders of peace and reconciliation with appa- 
rent fatisfaction, and, as a mark of their approbation, 
each tent in rotation made a feaft, or entertainment, the 


* The fame perfon was at Prince of Wales’s Fort when the French arrived 
on the 8th of Auguft 1782, and faw them demolifh the Fort. 


7. fame 


cB: 


oot 


A JOURNEY TOTHE 


fame night, and invited him to partake; at the laft of 
which they had concerted a fcheme to murder him. He 
was, however, fo perfect a mafter of the Southern Indian 
language, that he foon difcovered their defign, and told 
them, he was not come in a hoftile manner, but if they 


attempted any thing of the kind he was determined to fell 


his life as dear as poflible. On hearing this, fome of 
them ordered that his fervant, gun, and {now-fhoes, (for 
it was Winter,) fhould be brought into the tent and fe- 
cured; but he f{prung from his feat, feized his gun and 
{now-{hoes, and went out of the tent, telling them, if 
they had an intention to moleft him, that was the proper 
place where he could {ee his enemy, and be under no 
apprehenfions of being fhot cowardly through the back. 
‘“ J am fure (faid he) of killing two or three of you, 
‘¢ and if you chufe to purchafe my life at that price, now 
‘‘ is the time; but if otherwife, let me depart without 


© any farther moleftation.”” They then told him he was 


at liberty to go, on condition of leaving his fervant; but to 
this he would not confent. He then rufhed into the tent 
and took his fervant by force from two men; when find- 
ing there was no appearance of farther danger, he fet 
out on his return to the frontiers of his own country, and 
from thence to the Factory. 


The year following he again vifited the Athapufcow 
country, accompanied by a confiderable number of chofen 
men 


> 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


men of his own nation, who were fo far fuperior to fuch 
{mall parties of the Southern Indians as they had met, 
that they commanded refpect wherever they came; and 
having traverfed the whole country, and converfed with all 
the principal men, peace and friendfhip were apparently 
re-eftablifhed. Accordingly, when the Spring advanced 
the Northern Indians began to difperfe, and draw out to 
the Eaftward on the barren ground; but Matonabbee, and a 
few others, chofe to pafs the Summer in the Athapufcow 


country. As foon as the Southern Indians were acquainted — 


with this defign, and. found the number of the Northern 
Indians fo reduced, a fuperior number of them dogged 
and haraffed them the whole Summer, with a view to 
furprife and kill them’ when afleep ; and with that view 
twice actually approached fo near their tents as fifty yards. 
But Matonabbee told them, as he‘had done when alone, 
that though there were but few of them, they were all 
determined to fell their lives as dear as poflible: on which 
the Southern Indians, without making any reply, retired ; 
for no Indians in this country have the courage to face 
their enemies when they find them apprized of their ap~ 
proach, and on their guard to receive them. 


Notwithftanding all thefe difcouragements and great 
dangers, Matonabbee perfevered with courage and refo- 
lution to vifit the Athapufcow Indians for feveral years 
fucceflively ; and at length, by an uniform difplay of his 


pacific difpofition, and by rendering a long train of good 
Le ofhices 


So) 


356 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


offices to thofe Indians, in return for their treachery 
and perfidy, he was fo happy as to be the fole inftrument 
of not only bringing about a lafting peace, but alfo of 
eftablifhing a trade and reciprocal intereft between the 
two nations. 


After having performed this great work, he was pre- 
vailed upon to vifit the Copper-mine River, in company 
with a famous leader, called I-dat-le-aza; and it was from 
the report of thofe two men, that a journey to that part 
was propofed to the Hudfon’s Bay Company by the late 
Mr. Mofes Norton, in one thoufand feven hundred and 
fixty-nine. In one thoufand feven hundred and feventy 


he was engaged as the principal guide on that expedition ; 


which he performed with greater punctuality, and more 
to my fatisfaction, than perhaps any other Indian in all that 
country would have done. At his return to the Fort in one 
thoufand feven hundred and feventy-two, he was made head 
of all the Northern Indian nation; and continued to render 
great fervices to the Company during his life, by bringing 
a greater quantity of furrs to their Factory at Churchill 
River, than any other Indian ever did, or ever willdo. His 
Jaft vifit to Prince of Wales’s Fort was in the Spring of one 
thoufand feven hundred and eighty-two, and he intended 
to have repeated it in the Winter following; but when — 
he heard that the French had deftroyed the Fort, and 

carried off all the Company’s fervants, he never afterwards 
reared his head, but took an opportunity, when no one 


fufpected 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 357 


fufpecéted his intention, to hang himfelf. This is the 
more to be wondered at, as he is the only Northern In- © 
dian who, that I ever heard, put an end to his own exift- 
ence. The death of this man was a great lofs to the 
Hudfon’s Bay Company, and was attended with a moft 
melancholy fcene; no lefs than the death of fix of his 
wives, and four children, all of whom were, ftarved to 
death the fame Winter, i one thoufand feven hundred 


and eighty-three. 


CHAP. 


358 A fPOoOURNREX Trop THE 


ew dln 2. Oe, 


An Account of the principal Quadrupeds found in the Northern Parts of 
Hudfon’s Bay. The Buffalo, Moofe, Mufk-ox, Deer, and Beaver. 
—A capital Miftake cleared up refpetting the We-was-kifb. 

Animals with Canine Teeth. The Wolf—Foxes of various ¢o- 
lours——Lynx, or Wild Cat—Polar, or White Bear—Black Bear— 
Brown Bear—Wolverene—Otier—fackafo—W cjack—Shkunk—Pine 
Martin---Ermine, or Stote. 

Animals with Cutting Teeth. The Mufk Beaver-—Porcupine— 
Varying Hare---American Hare—Common Squirrel—Ground Squirrel— 


Mice of various Kinds,—and the Caftor Beaver. 











The Pinnated Quadrupeds with finlike Feet, found in Hudfon's Bay, 
are but three in number, viz. the Warlus, or Sea-Horfe,—Seal,—and 
Sea-Unicorn. 





The Species of Fifh found in the Salt Water of Hudfon’s Bay are alfo few 
in number; being the Black Whale—White Whale—Salmon—and 
Kepling. | 

Shell-jifo, and empty Shells of feveral kinds, found on the Sea Coaft 


near Churchill River. 





Frogs of various fizes and colours ; alfoa great variety of Grubbs, and other 
hifects, always found in a frozen flate during Winter, but when ex- 
pofed to the heat of a flow fire, are foon re-animated. 





An Account of fome of the principal Birds found in the Northern Parts of 
Hudjon's Bay; as well thofe that only migrate there in Summer, as thofe 


that are known to brave the coldeft Winters: Eagles of various 
kinds 





Mi Ook Ta FR Ne? 108% EA WN, 
kinds—Hawks of various fizes and plumage—White or Snowy Owl--- 


—Gray or mottled Owl—Cob-a-dee-cooch—Raven—Cinerious Crow— 
Wood Pecker—Ruffed Groufe—Pheafant—Wood Partridge—Willow 
Partridge—Rock Partridge— Pigeon—Rea-breafted Thrufb---Grof- 
beak—Snow Bunting—White-crowned Bunting—Lapland Finch, two 
forts—Lark—T itmoufe—Swallow—Martin—Hopping Crane---Brown 
Crane—Litron—Carlow, two foris—Fack Snipe—Red Godwart--- 
Plover—Black Gullemet—Northern Diver—Black-throated Diver— 
Red-throated Diver—White Gull—Grey Gull—Black-head—Pellican--- 
Goofander —Swans of two fpecies—Conimon Grey Goofe—Canada Goofe 
—Winite or Snow Goofe—Llue Goofe—Horned Wavy—Laughing Goofe 
—Barren Goofe—BLrent Goofe—Dunier Goofe—Bean Goofe. 

The Species of Water-Fowl ufually called Duck, that refort to thofe 
Paris annually, are in great variety; but thofe that are moft efteemed 
are, the Mallard Duck,—Long-tailed Duck,—Wigeon, and Teal. 





Of the Vegetable Produétions as far North as Churchill River, particularly 
the moft ufeful; fuch as the Berry-bearing Bufbes, &c. Goofeberry 
— Cranberry — Heathberry — Dewater-berry—Black Currans—Funi- 
per-berry—FP artridge-berry—Strawberry — Eye-berry ---Blue-berry,— 
and a fmall fpectes of flips. 

Burridge—Coltsfoot—Sorrel---Dandehon, 
Wifb-a-capucca—Fackafbey-puck— Mofs of various foris—Gi ‘af of 
feveral kinds---and Veiches. 


The Trees found fo far North near the Sea, confift only of Pines— 
Funiper— Small Poplar—Bufb-willows —-and Creeping Birch. 





EFORE I conclude this Rak. it may not be im- 
proper to give a fhort account of the principal Animals 
that frequent the high Northern latitudes, though mott of 


them are found alfo far to the Southward, and confe- 
6. quently 


359 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


quently in much milder climates. The buffalo, mufk- 
ox, deer, and the moofe, have been already defcribed in 
this Journal. I fhall therefore only make a few remarks 
on the latter, in order to rectify a miftake, which, from 
wrong information, has crept into Mr. Pennant’s Arétic 
Zoology. In page 21 of that elegant work, he claffes the 
Moofe with the We-was-kifh, though it certainly has not 
any aflinity to it. 


The We-was-kifh, or as fome (though improperly) call 
it, the Wafkeffe, is quite a different animal from the moofe, 
being by no means fo large in fize. The horns of the We- 
was-kifh are fomething fimilar to thofe of the common deer, 
but are not palmated in any part. They ftand more up- 
right, have fewer branches, and want the brow-antler. The 
head of this animal is fo far from being like that of the 
Moofe, that the nofe is fharp, like the nofe of a fheep: 
indeed, the whole external appearance of the head is not 
very unlike that of an afs. The hair is ufually of a 
fandy red; and they are frequently called by the Englifh 
who vilit the interior parts of the country, red deer. 
Their flefh is tolerable eating; but the fat is as hard as 
tallow, and if eaten as hot as poffible, will yet chill in 
fo fhort a time, that it clogs the teeth, and fticks to the 
roof of the mouth, in fuch a manner as to-render it very 
difagreeable. In the Spring of one thoufand feven hun- 
dred and feventy-five, I had thirteen fledge-loads of this 
meat brought to Cumberland Houfe in one day, and alfo 
two of the heads of this animal unfkinned, but the horns 

were 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


were chopped off; a proof of their wearing them the 
whole Winter. They are the moft ftupid of all the deer 
kind, and frequently make a fhrill whiftling, and quiver- 
ing noife, not very unlike the braying of an afs, which 
direéts the hunter to the very {pot where they are. They 
generally keep in large herds, and when they find plenty 


of pafture, remain a long time in one place. Thofe deer | 


are feldom an object of chace with the Indians bordering 
on Bafquiau, except when moofe and other game fail. 
Their fkins, when drefled, very much refemble that of 
the moofe, though they are much thinner, and have this 
peculiar quality, that they will wafh as well as fhamoy 
leather ; whereas all the other leathers and pelts dreffed by 
the Indians, if they get wet, turn quite hard, unlefs great 
care be taken to keep conftantly rubbing them while 
drying. : | 


' The perfon who informed Mr. Pennant that the we- 
was-kifh and the moofe are the fame animal, never faw 
one of them; and the only reafon he had to fuppofe it, 
was the great refemblance of their fkins: yet it is rather 
firange, that fo indefatigable a collector of Natural Hiftory 
as the late Mr. Andrew Graham, fhould have omitted 
making particular enquiry about them: for any foreign 
Indian, particularly thofe that refide near Bafquiau, could 
eafily have convinced him to the contrary. 


2 A Animals 


we) 


Nese 


Wolves. 


A JOURNEY FO THE 


Animals with Canine Teeth, 


. Wotves are frequently met with in the countries Weft 
of Hudfon’s Bay, both on the barren grounds and among 
the woods, but they are not numerous; it is very uncom- 
mon to fee more than three or four of them in a herd. 
Thofe that keep to the Weftward, among the woods, are 
generally of the ufual colour, but the greateft part of 
thofe that are killed by the E{quimaux are perfectly white. 
All the wolves in Hudfon’s Bay are very fhy of the human 
race, yet when fharp fet, they frequently follow the In- 
dians for feveral days, but always keep at a diftance. 
They are great enemies to the Indian dogs, and frequently 
kill and eat thofe that are heavy loaded, and cannot 
keep up with the main body. The Northern Indians have 
formed ftrange ideas of this animal, as they think it does 
not eat its viduals raw; but by a fingular and wonderful 


fagacity, peculiar to itfelf, has a method of cooking them 


without fire. The females are much fwifter than the 
males; for which reafon the Indians, both Northern and 
Southern, are of opinion that they kill the greateft part of 
the game. ‘This cannot, however, always be the cafe; 
for to the North of Churchill they, in general, live a for- 
orn life all the Winter, and are feldom feen in pairs till 
the Spring, when they begin to couple; and generally 
keep in pairs all the Summer. ‘They always burrow under- 
ae to bring forth their young; and though it is na- 

10 tural 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


tural to fuppofe them very fierce at thofe times, yet I 
have frequently feen the Indians go to their denis, and take 
out the young ones and play with them. I never knew a 
Northern Indian hurt one of them: on the contrary, 
they always put them carefully into the den again; and I 
have fometimes feen them paint the faces of the young 
Wolves with vermillion, or red ochre. 


The Arctic Foxes are in fome years remarkably plen- 
tiful, but generally moft foon the barren ground, near the 
fea-coaft. Notwithftanding what has been faid of this 
animal only vifiting the fettlements once in five or feven 
years, I can affirm-there is not one year in twenty that 
they are not caught in greater or lefs numbers at Churchill ; 
and I have known that for three years running, not lefs 
than from two hundred to four hundred have been caught 
each year within thirty miles of the Fort. They always 
come from the North along the coaft, and generally make 
their appearance at Churchill about the middle of OGober, 


but their fkins are feldom in feafon till November; during. 
that time they are never molefted, but permitted to feed 


round the Fort, till by degrees they become almoft do- 
meftic. The great numbers of thofe animals that vifit 


Churchill River in fome years do not all come in a body,. 


as it would be impoffible for the fourth part of them to 
find fubfiftence by the way; but when they come near 
the Fort, the carcafles of dead whales lying along the 
fhores, and the fkin: and other offal, after boiling the oil, 

3A 2 afford 


363 


Foxes of 
various cOo-= 
lours. 


364 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


afiord them a plentiful repaft, and prove the means of 
keeping them about the Fort till, by frequent reinforce- 
ments from the Northward, their numbers are fo far in- 
creafed as almoft to exceed credibility. 

_ When their fkins are in feafon, a number of traps and 
cuns are fet, and the greateft part of them are caught in 
one month, though fome few are found during the whole 
Winter. I have frequently known near forty killed in one 
night within half a mile of Prince of Wales’s Fort; but 
this feldom happens after the firft or fecond night. When 
Churchill River is frozen over near the mouth, the greateft 
part of the furviving white Foxes crofs the river, and dire& 
their courfe to the Southward, and in fome years affemble 
in confiderable numbers at York Fort and Severn River. 
Whether they are all killed, or what becomes of thofe 
which efcape, is very uncertain; but it is well known 
that none of them ever migrate again to the Northward. 
Befides taking a trap fo freely, they are otherwife fo 
fimple, that I have feen them fhot off-hand while feed- 
ing, the fame as {parrows in a heap of chaff, fometimes 
two or three ata fhot. This fport is always moft fuccefsful: 
in moon-light nights; for in the day-time they generally 
keep in their holes among the rocks, and under the hol- 
low ice at high-water-mark. 

Thefe animals will prey on each other as readily as on: 
any other animals they find dead in a trap, or wounded 
by gun; which renders them fo deftructive, that I have 
known upwards of one hundred and twenty Foxes of dif- 

ferent 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


ferent colours eaten, and deftroyed in their traps by their 
comrades in the courfe of one Winter, within half a 
mile of the Fort. 

The Naturalifts feem ftill at a lofs to know their breed- 
ing-places, which are doubtlefs in every part of the coaft 
they frequent. Several of them breed near Churchill, 
and I have feen them in confiderable numbers all along the 
Weft coaft of Hudfon’s Bay, particularly at Cape Efqui- 


maux, Navel’s Bay, and Whale Cove, alfo on Marble 


Ifland; fo that with fome degree of confidence we may 
affirm, that they breed on every part of the coaft they in- 
habit during the Summer feafon. They generally have 
from three to five young at a litter; more I never faw 
with one old one. When young they are all over almoft 
of a footy black, but as the fall advances, the belly, fides, 
and tail turn to a light afh-colour; the back, legs, fome 
part of the face, and the tip of the tail, changes toa lead 
colour; but when the Winter fets in they become perfedlly 
white: the ridge of the back and the tip of the tail are the 
laft places that change to that-colour; and there are few 
of them which have not a few dark hairs at the tip of the 
tail all the Winter. If taken young, they are eafily do- 
mefticated in fome degree, but I never faw one that was 
fond of being careffed; and they are always impatient of 
confinement. 


| Wuite Foxes, when killed at any confiderable diftance 
». the fea coaft, (where they cannot poflibly get any 
thing 


365 


The White 
ORs. 


366 


The Lynx, 
or Wild Cat. 


The Polar 
or White 
Bear. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


thing to prey upon, except rabbits, mice, and partridges,} 
are far from being difagreeable eating. And on Marble 
Ifland I have fhot them when they were equal in flavour 
to a rabbit; probably owing to their feeding entirely on 
eges and young birds; but near Churchill River they 


are as rank as train-oil. 


The Lynx, or Witp Cat, is very f{carce to the North 
of Churchill; but is exactly the fame as thofe which are 
found in great plenty to the South Weft. I have obferved 
the tracks of this animal at Churchill, and feen them 
killed, and have eaten of their flefh in the neighbourhood 
of York Fort. The flefh is white, and nearly as good as 
that of a rabbit. They are, I think, much larger than 
that which is defcribed in the Arétic Zoology; they never 
approach near the fettlements in Hudfon’s Bay, and are 
very deftructive to rabbits: they feldom leave a place 
which is frequented by rabbits till they have nearly killed 
them all. 


The Potar or WuitTe Bzar, though common on the 
fea-coaft, is feldom found in its Winter retreats by any of 
our Northern Indians, except near Churchill River; nor 
do I fuppofe that the Efquimaux fee or kill any of them 
more frequently during that feafon; for in the courfe of 
many years refidence at Churchill River, I {carcely ever 
faw a Winter fkin brought from the Northward by the 
floop. Probably the Efquimaux, if they kill any, may 


referve 


N@ RR Pi Ee N PQGEA  N. 


referve the (kins for their own ufe; for at that feafon their 
hair is very long, with a thick bed of wool at the bottom, 
and they are remarkably clean and white. The Winter is 
the only feafon that fo oily a fkin as the Bear’s can pof- 
fibly be cleaned and dreffed by thofe people, without 
ereafing the hair, which is very unpleafant to them; for 
though they eat train-oil, &c. yet they are as careful as 
poflible to keep their clothes from being greafed with it. 
To drefs one of thofe greafy {kins in Winter, as foon as taken. 
from the beaft, it is ftretched out on a {mooth patch of 
{now, and there ftaked down, where it foon freezes as 
hard as a board: while in that ftate, the women fcrape 
off all the fat, till they come to the very roots of the hair. 
It is fometimes permitted to remain in that pofition for a 
confiderable time; and when taken from the fnow, is 
hung up in the open air. The more intenfe the froft, the 
greater is its drying quality; and by being wafted about 
by the wind, with a little fcraping, it in time becomes 
perfectly fupple, and both pelt and hair beautifully white. 
Drying deer, beaver, and otter fkins, in this manner render 
their pelts very white, but not fupple; probably owing 
to the clofe texture and thicknefs of their fkins: whereas 
the fkin of the bear, though fo large an animal, is re- 
markably thin and fpungy *. 

BLAck 


* It is rather fingular that the Polar Bears are feldom found on the land 
during the Winter, on which account it is fuppofed they go out on the ice, and 
keep near the edge of the water during that feafon, while the females that are 


pregnant feek fhelter at the fkirts of the woods, and dig themfelves dens in the 
| deepeit 


367 


368 


The Black 
Bear. 


A JOURN HEY (TO Tie 


Brack Bears are not very numerous to the North Weft 
of Churchill, ‘Their manner of life is the fame as the 
reft of the {pecies, though the face of the country they 





deepeft drifts of fnow they can find, where they remain in a ftate of inattivity, 
and without food, from the latter end of December or January, till the latter 
end of March; at which time they leave their dens, and bend their courfe to- 
wards the fea with their cubs; which, in general, are two in number. Not- 
withftanding the great magnitude of thofe animals when full grown, yet their 
young are not larger than rabbits, and when they leave their dens, in March, 
I have frequently feen them not larger than a white fox, and their fteps on the 
{now not bigger than a crown-piece, when thofe of their dam meafured near 
fifteen inches long, and nine inches broad. They propagate when young, or at 
leaft before they are half-grown; for I have killed young females not larger 
than a London calf, with milk in their teats; whereas fome of the full grown 
ones are heavier than the largeft of our common oxen. Indeed I was once 
at the killing of one, when one of its hind feet being cut off at the ankle, 
weighed fifty-four pounds. The males have a bone in their penis, as a dog 
has, and of courfe unite in copulation; but the time of their courtfhip is, I 
believe, not exactly known: probably it may be in July or Auguit, for at thofe 
times I have often been at the killing them, when the males were fo attached 
to their miftreffes, that after the female was killed, the male would put his 
two fore-paws over, and fuffer himfelf to be fhot before he would quit her. 
I have frequently feen and killed thofe animals near twelve leagues from the 
land; but as the Fall of the year advances, they are taught by inftiné to feek 
the fhore. Though fuch a tremendous animal, they are very fhy of coming 
near a man; but when clofely purfued in the water, they frequently attack the 
boat, feize the oars, and wreft them from the hands of the ftrongeft man, 
feeming defirous to get on board; but the people.on thofe occafions are always 
provided with fire-arms and hatchets, to prevent fuch an unwelcome vifit. 
The flefh of this animal, when killed in Winter, (if not too old,) 1s far from 
being unpleafant eating ; and the young cubs, in the Spring, are rather deli- © 
cate than otherwife. The tits of the females are only two in number, and are 
placed between the fore-legs. The beft Drawing of this Animal I have feen, 
3s that done by Mr. Webber, among the Plates of Cook’s laft Voyage. | 


inhabit, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


inhabit, differs widely from the more mild climates. In. 
Summer they proul about in fearch of berries, &c. and 
as the Winter approaches, retire to their dens, which are 
always under-ground; and generally, if not always, on the 
fide of a {mall hillock. The Bears that inhabit the South- 
ern parts of America are faid to take up their Winter 
abode in hollow trees; but I never faw any trees in my 
Northern travels, that could afford any fuch thelter. 

The places of retreat of thofe Bears that burrow under- 
sround are eafily difcovered in Winter, by the rime that 
hangs about the mouth of the den; for let the fnow be 
ever fo deep, the heat and breath of the animal prevents 
the mouth of the den from being entirely clofed up. They 
generally retire to their Winter-quarters before the fnow is of 
any confiderable depth, and never come abroad again (unlefs 
difturbed) till the thaws are confiderable, which in thofe 
high latitudes is feldom till the latter end of March, or 
the beginning of April; fo that the few Black Bears that 
inhabit thofe cold regions may be faid to fubfift for four 
months at leaft without food. I have been prefent at the 
killing two of them in Winter; and the Northern Indian 
method is fimilar to that faid to be in ufe among the 
Kamtichatkans ; for they always blocked up the mouth of 
the den with logs of wood, then broke open the top 
of it, and killed the animal either with a {pear or a 
gun; but the latter method is reckoned both cowardly 
and wafteful, as it is not poflible for the Bear either to 
make its efcape, or to do the Indians the leaft injury. 

oS. some- 


369 


wo 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


Sometimes they put a {nare about the Bear’s neck, and draw 
up his head clofe to the hole, and kill him with a hatchet. 
Though thofe animals are but fcarce to the North of 
Churchill, yet they are fo numerous between York Fort 
and Cumberland Houfe, that in one thoufand feven hun- 
dred and feventy-four I faw eleven killed in the courfe of 
one day’s-journey, but their Sefh was abominable. This 
was in the month of June, long before any fruit was ripe, 
for the want of which they then fed entirely on water in- 
fe&ts, which in fome of the lakes we crofied that day were 


in aftonifhing multitudes * 

The method by which ihe Bears catch thofe infeml is 
by {wimming with their mouths open, in the fame manner 
as the whales do, when feeding on the fea-{fpider. There 
was not one of the Bears killed that day, which had 
not its ftomach as full of thofe infects (only) as ever a 
hog’s was with grains, and when cut open, the ftench 
from them was intolerable. I have, however, eaten of 
fome killed at that early feafon which were very good ; 


* The infects here fpoken of are of two kinds; the one is nearly black, its 
fkin hard like a beetle, and not very unlike a grafshopper, and darts through 
the water with great eafe, and with fome degree of velocity. ‘The other fort 
is brown, has wings, and is as foft as the common cleg-fly. The latter are 
the moft numerous; and in fome of the lakes fuch quantities of them are 
forced into the bays in gales of wind, and there preffed together in fuch mul- 
titudes, that they are killed, and remain there a great nuifance; for I have 
feveral times, in my inland voyages from York Fort, found it fcarcely poffible 
to land in fome of thofe bays for the intolerable ftench of thofe infects, which 
in fome-places were lying in putrid maffes to the depth of two or three feet. 
It is more than probable, that the Bears occafionally feed on thefe dead infects. 


but 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


but they were found among the woods, far from the places 
where thofe infects haunt, and had fed on grafs and other 
herbage. After the middle of July, when the berries begin 
to ripen, they are excellent eating, and fo continue till 
January or February following; but late in the Spring 
they are, by long fafting, very poor and dry eating. 

The Southern Indians kill great numbers of thofe Bears 
at all feafons of the year; but no encouragement can pre- 
vent them from fingeing almoft every one that is in good 
condition: fo that the few fkins they do fave and bring 


to the market, are only of thofe which are fo poor that 


their flefh is not worth eating *, In fa@, the fkinning of 
a Bear {poils the meat thereof, as much as it would do to 
{kin a young porker, or a roafting pig. The fame may be 
faid of fwans (the fkins of which the Company have 
lately made an article of trade); otherwife thoufands of 
their fkins might be brought to market annually, by the 
Indians that trade with the Hudfon’s Bay Company’s fer- 
vants at the different fettlements about the Bay. 


Brown Bears are, I believe, never found in the North- 
Indian territories; but I faw the fkin of an enormous 


* It is common for the Southern Indians to tame and domefticate the young 
cubs; and they are frequently taken fo young that they cannot eat. On thofe 
occafions the Indians oblige their wives whohave milk in their breafts to fuckle 
them. And one of the Company’s fervants, whofe name is Ifaac Batt, wil- 
ling to be as great a brute as his Indian companions, abfolutely forced one of 
his wives, who had recently loft her infant, to fuckle a young Bear. 

2B 2 orizzled 


374 


The Brown 


Bear, 


£72 


The Wolve- 
rene, 


A JOURNEY TO TRIE 


grizzled Bear at the tents of the E{quimaux at the Copper 
River ; and many of them are faid to breed not very re- 
mote from that part. 


The Wotverene is common in the Northern regions, 
as far North as the Copper River, and perhaps farther. 
They are equally the inhabitants of woods and barren 
grounds ; for the Efquimaux to the North of Churchill 
kill many of them when their fkins are in excellent feafon: 
a proof of their being capable of braving the fevereft cold. 
They are very flow in their pace, but their wonderful fa- 
gacity, flrength, and acute fcent, make ample amends for 
that defect ; for they are feldom killed at any feafon when 
they do not prove very fat: a great proof of their being 
excellent providers. With refpedt to the fiercenefs of this 
animal which fome affert, I can fay little, but I know 
them to be beafts of great courage and refolution, for I 
once faw one of them take poffeflion of a deer that an In- 
dian had killed, and though the Indian advanced within 
twenty yards, he would not relinquifh his claim to it, but 
fuffered himfelf to be fhot ftanding on the deer. I once 
faw a fimilar inflance of a lynx, or wild cat, which alfo 
fuffered itfelf to be killed before it would relinquifh the 
prize. The Wolverenes have alfo frequently been feen to 
take a deer from a wolf before the latter had time to be- 
gin his repaft after killing it. Indeed their amazing 
{treneth, and the length and fharpnefs of their claws, 
render them capable of making a ftrong refiftance againft 

any 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


any other animal in thofe parts, the Bear not excepted. 
As a proof of their amazing ftrength, there was one at 
Churchill fome years fince, that overfet the greateft part of 
a large pile of wood, (containing a whole Winter’s firing, 
that meafured upwards of feventy yards round,) to get at. 
fome provifions that had been hid there by the Company’s 
fervants, when going to the Factory: to {pend the Chriftmas 
holidays. The fact was, this animal had been lurking 
about in the neighbourhood of their tent (which was about 
eight miles from the Factory) for fome weeks, and had 
committed many depredations on the game caught in their 
traps and {nares, as well as eaten many foxes that were killed 
by guns fet for that purpofe; but the Wolverene was 
too cunning to take either trap or gun himfelf. The 
people knowing the mifchievous difpofition of thofe ani- 
mals, took (as they thought) the moft effe@tual method 
to fecure the remains of their provifions, which they did 
not chufe to carry home, and accordingly tied it up in 
bundles and placed it on the top of the wood-pile, (about 
two. miles from their tent,) little thinking the Wolverene 
would find it out; but to their great furprife, when they 
returned to their tent after the holidays, they found the 
pile of wood in the ftate already mentioned, though fome 
of the trees that compofed it were as much as two men 
could catry. The only reafon the people could give for 
the animal doing fo much mifchief was, that in his at- 
tempting to carry off the booty, fome of the fmall parcels of. 


provifions had fallen down into the heart of the pile, and 
{ooner 


373 


Dit 


The Otter. 


A JOURNEY ‘TO °PRE 


fooner than lofe half his prize, he’ purfued the above 
method till he had accomplifhed his ends. The bags of 
flour, oatmeal, and peafe, though of no ule to him, 
he tore all to pieces, and fcattered the contents about 
on the fhow; but every bit of animal food, confifting 
of beef, pork, bacon, venifon, falt geefe, partridges, Sc. 
to a confiderable amount, he carried away. ‘Thefe ani- 
mals are great enemies to the Beaver, but the manner of 
life of the latter prevents them from falling into their 
clutches fo frequently as many other animals; they com- 
mit vaft depredations on the foxes during the Summer, 
while the young ones are {mall; their quick {cent directs 
them to their dens, and if the entrance be too {mall, their 
{trength enables them to widen it, and go in and kill the 
mother and all her cubs. In fad, they are the molt de- 
{tructive animals in this country *. 


Orrers are pretty plentiful in the rivers to the North 
of Churchill, as far as latitude 62°; farther North I do 
not recolle& to have feen any. In Winter they generally 
frequent thofe parts of rivers where there are falls or rapids, 
which do not freeze in the coldeft Winters; becaufe in 


* Mr. Graham fays they take their lodgings in the clefts of rocks, or in 
hollow trees. The former I acknowledge, but J] believe that neither Mr. 
Graham nor any of the Company’s fervants ever faw an inftance of the latter. 
In fact, during all my travels in the interior parts of Hudfon’s Bay, I never 
faw a hollow tree that was capable of affording fhelter to any larger animal than 
martins, jackafhes, or wejacks; much lefs the quiquehatch or bear, as fome 
have afferted. 


i fuch 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 
fuch fituations they are moft likely to find plenty of faith, 


and the open water gives them a free admiffion to the fhore, 
where they fometimes go to eat the fifh they have caught ; 
but moft commonly fit on the ice, or get on a great ftone 
in the river. They are frequently feen in the very depth 
of Winter at a confiderable diftance from any known 
open water, both in woods and on open plains, as well as. 
on the ice of large lakes; but it is not known what has. 
led them to fuch places: perhaps merely for amufement, 
for they are not known to kill any game on the land 
during that feafon. If purfued when among the woods 
in Winter, (where the {now is always light and deep,) 
they immediately dive, and make confiderable way under 
it, but are eafily traced by the motion of the {now above 


them, and foon overtaken. ' The Indians kill numbers of 


them with clubs, by tracing them in the fnow; but fome 


of the old ones are fo fierce when clofe purfued, that they 


turn and fly at their purfuer, and their bite is fo fevere that 
it is much dreaded by the Indians. Befides this method: 
of killing them, the Indians have another, which is equally 
fuccefstul; namely, by concealing themfelves within a 
reafonable gun-fhot of the Otters ufual landing-places, and 


waiting their coming out of the water. This method is. 


more generally practifed in moon-light nights. They alfo 
{hoot many of them as they are fporting in the water, and 
fome few are caught in traps. 

The Otters in this, as well as every other part of the: 


bay, vary in fize and colour, according to age and feafon.. . 


In. 


375 


376 


The Jack- 


ail. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


In Summer, when the hair is very fhort, they are al- 
moft black, but as the Winter advances, they turn to a 
beautiful dark auburn, except a {mall fpot under the chin, 
which is of afilver gray. This colour they retain all the 
Winter; but late in the Spring (though long before they 
fhed their coat) they.turn to a dull rufty brown; fo that 


a perfon who is acquainted with thofe changes can tell to 


a great nicety, by looking at the fkins, (when offered for 
fale,) the very time they were killed, and pay for them 
according to their value. The number of their young is 
various, from three to five or fix. They unite in copu- 
lation the fame as a dog, and fo do every other animal 
that has a bone in the penis. I will here enumerate all of 
that defcription that I know of in thofe parts, viz. bears 
of all forts, wolves, wolvereens, foxes, martins, otters, 
wejacks, jackafhes, fkunks, and ermines *. 


Jacxasu. This animal is certainly no other than the 
leffer Otter of Canada, as its colour, fize, and manner of 
life entirely correfpond with the defcription of that animal 
in Mr. Penant’s Ar&tic Zoology. ‘They, like the larger 
Otter, are frequently found in Winter feveral miles from 
any water, and are often caught in traps built for martins. 
They are fuppofed to prey on mice and partridges, the 
fame as the martin; but when by the fide of rivers or 


* The Otter is very fond of play; and one of their favourite paftimes is, 
to get on a high ridge of fnow, bend their fore-feet backward, and flide down 
the fide of it, fometimes to the diftance of twenty yards. 

creeks, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


creeks, they generally feed on fifth. They vary fo much 
in fize and colour, that it was very eafy for Mr. Pennant 
to have miftaken the {pecimen fent home for another ani- 
mal. They are the eafieft to tame and domefticate of any 
animal I know, except a large {pecies of field-mice, called 
the Hair-tailed Moufe ; for in a very fhort time they are fo 
fond, that it is fearcely poflible to keep them from climb- 
ing up one’s legs and body, and they never feel themfelves 
happier than when fitting on the fhoulder; but when 
angry, or frightened, (like the fkunk,) they emit a very dif- 
agreeable {mell. They fleep very much in the day, but 
prowl about and feed in the night; they are very fierce 
when at their meals, not fuffering thofe to whom they are 
moft attached to take itfromthem. I have kept feveral of 
them, but their over-fondnefs made them troublefome, as 
they were always in the way ; and their fo frequently emit- 


ting a difagreeable {mell, rendered them quite difgufting. 


Though the Weyacx * and Sxunx are never found. in 
the Northern Indian country, yet I cannot help obferving 
that the foetid {mell of the latter has not been much ex- 
ageerated by any Author. When I was at Cumberland 


* Mr. Graham afferts that this animal frequents the banks of creeks, and 
feeds on fifh; but thefe are by no means their ufual haunts. I have, however,, 
no doubt, but when they find fifh on the land, that they may eat it,, like other 
carnivorous animals; but they are as fhy of taking the water as a domettic cat. 
Fhey climb trees, and catch partridges, mice, and rabbits, with as much eafe 
asamartin. ‘They:are eafily tamed and domefticated, are very fond of tea- 
leaves, have a plealant mufky fmell, and are very playful. 


3G Houfe,, 


377, 


The We- 
jack, and 


Skunk 


The Pine 
Martin. 


The Ermiue, 
Or Stoic. 


A J@QRNEY HO Tepe 


Houfe, in the Fall of one thoufand feven hundred and 
feventy-four, fome Indians that were tenting on the plant- 
ation killed two of thofe animals, and made a feaft of 
them ; when the {pot where they were finged and eutted 
was fo impregnated with that naufeous fmell which they 
emit, that aftera whole Winter had elapfed, and the fnow 
had thawed away in the Spring, the fmell was fill into- 
lerable. Iam told, however, that the flefh is by no means 
tainted with the {mell, if care be taken in gutting, and 
taking out the bag that contains this furprifing effluvia, and 
which they have the power of emitting at pleafure; but 
I rather doubt their being capable of ejeGting their urine 
fo far asisreported; I do not think it is their urine which 
contains that peftilential effluvia, for if that was the cafe, 
all the country where they frequent would be fo fcented 
with it, that neither man nor beaft could live there with 
any degree of comfort. 


The Common Pine Martin is found in moft parts of 
this country, and though very {carce in what is abfolutely 
called the Northern Indian territory, yet by the Indians 
ftrolling toward the borders of the Southern Indian country, 
are killed in great numbers, and annually traded for at 
Churchill Faétory. 


The Ermine, or Store, is common in thofe parts, but 
cenerally more plentiful on the barren ground, and open 
plains or marfhes, than in the woods; probably owing to 


the 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


the mice being more numerous in the former fituations than 
in the latter. In Summer they are of a tawney brown, but 
in Winter of a delicate white all over, except the tip of 
the tail, which is of a gloffy black. They are, for their 
fize, the ftrongeft and moft courageous animal I know; 
as they not only kill partridges, but even attack rabbits 
with ereat fuccefs. They fometimes take up their abode in 
the out-offices and provifion-fheds belonging to the Fac- 
tories; and though they commit fome depredations, make 
ample amends by killing great numbers of mice, which 
are very numerous and deftructive at moft of the fettle- 
ments in the Bay. I have taken much pains to tame and 
domefticate this beautiful animal, but never could fuc- 
ceed ; for the longer I kept it the more reftlefs and im- 
patient it became. 


Animals with Cutting Teeth. 


The Musx Rat, or MusquasH; or, as. Naturalifts call 
it, the Musx Beaver; is common in thofe parts; generally 
frequenting ponds and deep fwamps that do not freeze 
dry in Winter. T he manner of life of this {pecies of ani- 
mals is peculiar, aud refembles that of the Beaver, as they 
are in fome refpects provident, and build houfes to. thelter 
themfelves from the inclemency of the cold in Winter; but 
inftead of making thofe houfes on the banks of ponds or 
{wamps, like the Beaver, they generally build them on the 
ice as foon as it is fkinned oven, and at a confiderable 

gC 2 diftance 


37S 


The Mufk 


at.. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


diftance from the fhore; always taking care to keep a hole 
open in the ice to admit them to dive for their food, which 
chiefly confifts of the roots of grafs: in the Southern 
parts of the country they feed much on a well-known 
root, called Calamus Aromaticus. The materials made 
ufe of in building their houfes are mud and grafs, which 
they fetch up from the bottom. It fometimes happens 
in very cold Winters, that the holes in their houfes freeze 
over, in f{pite of all their efforts to keep them open. When 
that is the cafe, and they have no provifions left in the 
houfe, the ftrongeft preys on the weakeft, till by degrees 
only one is left out of a whole lodge. Ihave feen feveral 
inftances fufhcient to confirm the truth of this affertion ; 
for when their houfes were broke open, the fkeletons of 
feven or eight have been found, and only one entire ani- | 
mal. Though they occafionally eat fifh and other animal 
food, yet in general they feed very clean, and when fat are 
good eating, particularly when nicely finged, fealded, and 
boiled. They are eafily tamed, and foon grow fond; are 
very cleanly and playful, and {mell exceedingly pleafant 
of mufk; but their refemblance to a Rat is fo great, that 
few are partial to them. Indeed the only difference be- 
tween them and a common Rat, exclufive of their fuperior 
fize, is, that their hind-feet are large and webbed, and 

the tail, inftead of being round, is Hat and fealy. 
Though I have before faid, that, the Mufk Beaver 
generally build their houfes on the ice, it is not always 
the cafe; for in the Southern parts of the country, par- 
ticularly 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


ticularly about Cumberland Hout, I have feen, in fome 
of the deep fwamps that were over-run with rufhes and 
long grafs, many {mall iflands that have been raifed by 
the siifetftry of thofe animals; on the tops of which they 
had built their houfes, like the beaver, fome of which were 
very large. The tops of thofe houfes are favourite breed- 


ing-places for the geefe, which bring forth their young 


brood there, without the fear of being molefted by foxes, 
or any other deftructive animal, except the Eagle. 


Porcurines are fo fcarce to the North of Churchili 
River, that I do not recolle& to have feen more than fix 
during almoft three years refidence among the Northern 
Indians. Mr. Pennant obferves in his Arctic Zoology, 
that they always have two at a time; one brought forth 
alive and the other ftill-born *; but I never faw an in- 
fiance of this kind, though in different parts of the coun- 
try I have feen them killed in all ftages of pregnancy. 
The flefh of the Porcupine is very delicious, and fo much 
efteemed by the Indians, that they think it the greateft 
luxury that their country affords. The quills are in great 
requeft among the women; who make them into a variety 
of ornaments, fuch as fhot-bags, belts, garters, bracelets, 
€&c. Their mode of copulation is fingular, for their 


* This information was given to Mr. Pennant from the authority of Mr. 
Graham; but the before-mentioned account of feeing them killed in all flages 
of pregnancy, when no fymptoms of that kind appeared, will, I hope, be 
fufficient to clear up that miftake, 


quills 


48a 


The Porcu- 
pine. 


382. 


Foxes of 
various Co- 
lours. 


Varying 
Hares. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


quills will not permit them to'perform that office in the 
ufual mode, like other quadrupeds. ‘To remedy this in- 
convenience, they fometimes lie on their fides, and meet 
in that manner; but the ufual mode is for the male to lie 
on his back, and the female to walk over him, (begin- 
ning at his head,) till the parts of generation come in 
contact. They are the moft forlorn animal I know; 
for in thofe parts of Hudfon’s Bay where they are moft 
numerous, it is not common to fee more than one in a 
place. They are fo remarkably flow and ftupid, that our 
Indians going with packets from Fort to Fort often fee 
them in the trees, but not having occafion for them at that 
time, leave them till their return; and fhould their abfence 
be a week or ten days, they are fure to find them within a 
mile of the place where they had feen them before. 


Foxes of various colours are not {carce in thofe parts ; 
but the natives living fuch a wandering life, feldom kill 
many. It is rather ftrange that no other f{pecies of Fox, 
except the white, are found at. any diftance from the 
woods on the barren ground ; for fo long as the trade has 
been eftablifhed with the Efquimaux to the North of 
Churchill, I do not recolle& that Foxes of any other co- 
lour than white were ever received from them. 


The Varyvinc Hares are numerous to the North of 
Churchill River, and extend as far as latitude 72° pro- 


bably farther. ‘They delight moft in rocky and ftony 


places, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


places, near the borders of woods; though many of them 
brave the coldeft Winters on entire barren ground. In Sum- 
mer they are nearly the colour of our Enelifh wild rabbit ; 
but in Winter affume a moft delicate white all over, except 
the tips of the ears, which are black. They are, when full 
grown and in good condition, very large, many of them 
weighing fourteen or fifteen.pounds; and if not too old, are 
good eating. In Winter they feed on long rye-grafs sd the 
tops of dwar! willows, but in Summer eat berries, and dif- 
ferent forts-of {mall herbage. They are frequently killed 
on the South-fide of Churchill River, and fevera! have been 
known to breed near the fettlement at that place.. They 
muft multiply very faft, for when we evacuated Prince of 
Wales’s Fort in one thoufand feven hundred and eighty- 
two, it was rare to fee one of them within twenty or thirty 
miles of that place; but at our return, in one thoufand 
feven hundred and eighty-three, we found them in fuch 
numbers, that it was common for one man to kill two or 
three in a day within -half a mile of the new fettlement. 


But partly, perhaps, from fo many being killed, and partly 
from the furvivors being fo frequently difturbed, they 
have fhifted their fituation, and are at prefent as fcarce near: 


the fettlement as ever. The Northern Indians purfue a 
fingular method in fhooting:thofe Hares; finding by long 
experience that thefe animals will not bear a direat ap- 
proach, when the Indians fee a hare fitting, they walk 


round it in circles, always drawing nearer at every revo-: 
lution, till by degrees they get within gun-fhot..: The: 


x middle 


oD 


383 


384. 


The Ame- 


sican Hare. 


A JOURWEY TrO Eee 


middle of the day, if it be clear weather, is the beft 
time to kill them in this manner; for before and after 
noon, the Sun’s altitude being fo fmall, makes a man’s 
fhadow fo long on the fnow, as to frighten the Hare be- 
fore he can approach near enough to kill it. The fame 
may be faid of deer when on open plains, who are fre- 
quently more frightened at the long fhadow than at the 
man himfelf. 


The American Hares, or, as they are called in Hudfon’s 
Bay, Rassirs, are not plentiful in the Eaftern parts of 
the Northern Indian country, not even in thofe parts that 
are fituated among.the woods; but to the Weftward, 
bordering on the Southern Indian country, they are in 
fome places pretty numerous, though by no means equal 
to what has been reported of them at York Fort, and fome 
other fettlements in the Bay. aa 

The furr of thofe animals, when killed. im the beft part 
of the feafon, was for many years entirely neglected by. 
the furriers; for fome time paft the Company have or- 
dered as many of their fkins to be fent home as can be 
procured; they are but of {mall value. 

The flefh of thofe Hares is generally more efteemed than 
that of the former. They are in feafon all the Winter ; 
and though they generally feed on the bruth of pine and: 
fir during that feafon, yet many of the Northern Indians 
eat the contents of the ftomach. They are feldom fought 
after in Summer, as in that feafon they are not efteemed 


good 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


good eating ; but as the Fall advances they are, by feed- 
ing on berries, Sc. moft excellent. In Spring they fhed 
their Winter coat, and during the Summer are nearly the 
colour of the Englith wild rabbit, but as the Winter ad- 
_ vances they become nearly white. In thick weather they 
are eafily fhot with the gun ; but the moft ufual method of 
killing them is by fnares, fet nearly in the manner defcribed 
by Dragge in the Firft Volume of his North Weit Paflage. 


The Common Squirrets are plentiful in the woody parts 
of this country, and are caught by the natives in confider- 


able numbers with fnares, while the boys kill many of 


them with blunt-headed arrows. The method of fnar- 
ing them is rather curious, though very fimple, as it con- 
fifts of nothing more than fetting a number of {nares all 
round the body of the tree in which they are feen, and ar; 
ranging them in fuch a manner that it is fcarcely pofflible 
for the {quirrels to defcend without being entangled in one 
of them. This is generally the amufement of the boys. 
Though fmall, and feldom fat, yet they are good eating. 


The beauty and delicacy of this animal induced me to 
attempt taming and domefticating fome of them, but with- 
out fuccefs; for though feveral of them were fo familiar as 
to take any thing out of my hand, and fit on the table where 
I was writing, and play with the pens, &c. yet they 
mever would bear to be handled, and were very mif- 
chievous; gnawing the chair-bottems, window-curtains, 
fafhes, &c. to pieces. They are an article of trade in the 

» 3D Company's 


385 


The Com- 
mon Oguirs 
rel, 


386 A JOURNEY @7T Om £F 


Company’s ftandard, but the greateft part of their fkins, 
being killed in Summer, are of very little value. 


Mange The Grounp SquirRELs are never found in the woody 
quirrel, ; 7 ° 

parts of North America, but are very plentiful on the 

barren ground, to the North of Churchill River, as far 

as the latitude 71°, and probably much farther. In fize 

they are equal to the American Grey Squirrel, though more 

beautiful in colour. They genezally burrow among the 

rocks and under great ftones, but fometimes on the fides 

ef fandy ridges; and are fo provident in laying up a 

Winter’s ftock during the Summer, that they are feldom 

{een on the furface of the fnow in Winter. They gene- 

rally feed on the tufts of grafs, the tender tops of dwasf 

willows, &c. and are for the moft part exceedingly fat, and 

good eating. They are eafily tamed, and foon grow fond; 

by degrees they will bear handling as well as a cat; are , 

exceeding cleanly, very playful, and by no means fo 

reftlefs and. impatient. of confinement. as. the Commoa 


Squirrel. 


Mics yo Mick are in great plenty and variety-in all parts of 
| Hudfon’s Bay; the marfhes being inhabited by one fpe- 
cies, and the dry ridges by another.. The Shrew Moufe is 

_ frequently. found. in Beaver houfes during Winter, where 

they not only find a,.warm habitation, but alfo pick up a 
comfortable livelihood from the fcraps left by the Beaver. 

Moft of the other. {pecies build or make nefts of dry grafs, 

of 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


of fuch a fize and thicknefs, that when covered with fnow, 
they muft be fuficiently warm. ‘They all feed on grafs 
in general, but will alfo eat animal food when they can 
get it. The Hair-tailed Moule is the largeft in the 
Northern parts of the Bay, being little inferior in fize to 
a common rat. ‘They always burrow under ftones, on dry 
ridges ; are very inoffenfive, and fo eafily tamed, that if 
taken when full-grown, fome of them will in a day or two 
be perfectly reconciled, and are fo fond of being handled, 
that they will creep about your neck, or into your bofom. 
In Summer they are grey, andin Winter change to white, 
but are by no means fo beautiful as a white ermine. At 
that feafon they are infefted with multitudes of {mall lice, 
not a fixth part fo large as the mites in a cheefe; in 
fact, they are fo fmall, that at farft fight they only ap- 
pear like reddifh-brown duft, but on clofer examination 
are all perceived in motion. In one large and beautiful ani- 
mal of this kind, caught in the depth of Winter, I found 
thofe little vermin fo numerous about it, that almoft 
every hair was covered with them as thick as ropes with 
onions, and when they approached near the ends of the 
hair they may be faid to change the moufe from white to 
a faint brown. At that time I had an excellent micro- 
{cope, and endeavoured to examine them, and to afcer- 
tain their form, but the weather was fo exceedingly cold, 
that the glaffes became damp with the moifture of my 
breath before I could get a fingle fight. The hind-feet 
of thefe Mice are exaétly like thofe of a Bear, and the 

210 fore~ 


337 


388 


The Wai- 
rus. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


fore-feet are armed with a horny fubftance, (that I never faw 
in any other fpecies of the Moufe,) which is wonderfully 
adapted for {craping away the ground where they with to 
take up their abode. They are plentiful on fome of the » 
ftony ridges near Churchill Faétory, but never approach 
the houfe, or any of the out-offices. From appearances 
they are very local, and feldom ftray far from their habi- 
tations even in Summer, and in Winter they are feldom 
feen on the furface of the fnow; a great proof of their 
being provident in Summer to lay by a ftock for that 
feafon. 


 Pinnated Quadrupeds. 


With refpeé& to the Pinnated Quadrupeds with fin-like 
feet, there are but few fpecies in Hudfon’s Bay. The 
Walrus, or Sea-Horfe, and Seals, are the only ones that 
I know. 


The Watrus are numerous about Merry and Jones’s 
Iflands, but more fo on a {mall ifland called Sea-Horfe 
Hand, that lies in the fair way going to Whale Cove. In 
July one thoufand feven hundred and fixty-feven, when on 
my voyage to the North of Churchill River, in pafi- 
ing Sea-Horfe Ifland, we faw fuch numbers of thofe ani- 
mals lying on the fhore, that when fome fwivel guns 
loaded with ball were fired among them, the whole 
beach feemed to be inmotion. The greateft part of them 
plunged into the water, and many of them fwam round 


7 the 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


the veflel within mufket-fhot. Every one on board ex- 
erted their fkill in killing them, but it was attended with 
fo little fuccefs, that the few which were killed funk to 
the bottom, and thofe which were mortally wounded made 
off out of our reach. | 

With what propriety thofe animals are called Horfes, } 


cannot fee; for there is not the leaft refemblance in any 


one part. Their bodies, fins, Gc. are exactly like thofe 
of an enormous Seal, and the head is not very unlike that 
animal, except that the nofe is much: broader, to give 
room for the two large tufks that project from the upper 
jaw. ‘Thofe tufks, and their red fparkling eyes, make 
them. have a very fierce and formidable appearance. 

They are generally found in confiderable numbers, 
which indicate their love of fociety; and their affeCion 
for each other is very apparent, as they always flock round: 
thofe that are wounded, and when they fink, accompany 
them to the bottom, but foon rife to the furface, and 
make a hideous roaring, and of all amphibious animals, 
they are at times the leaft fenfible of danger from man that 


I know. 

They often attack {mall boats merely through wanton- 
nefs, and not only put the people in great confufion, but 
fubje& them to great danger; for they always aim at 
ftlaving the boat with their tufks, or endeavour to get in, 
but are never known to hurt the people. In the year one 


thoufand feven hundred and fixty-fix fome of the floop’s 
crew, 


30 


A JOURNEY TO = meE 


crew, who annually fail to the North to trade with the 
Efquimaux, were attacked’ by a great number of thofe 
animals; and notwithftanding their utmoft endeavours to 
keep them off, one more daring than the reft, though a 
fmall one, got in over the ftern, and after fitting and leok- 
ing at the people fome time, he again plunged inte the 

water to his companions. At that inftant another, of an 
enormous fize, was getting in over the bow; and every 


other means proving ineffectual to prevent fuch an unwel- 


come vifit, the bowman took up a gun, loaded with 
goole-fhot, put the muzzle into the Horfe’s mouth, 
and fhot him dead; he immediately funk, and was fol- 
lowed by all his companions. ‘The people then made the 
beit of their way to the veffel, and juft arrived before the 
Sea-Horfes were ready to make their fecond attack, which 
in all probability might have been worfe than the firft, as 
they feemed much enraged at the lofs of their companion. 


Thofe animals are of various fizes, according to age 
and other circumftances; fome are not larger than an old 
Seal, but there are thofe among them that are not lefs than 
two ton weight. 


The fkin and teeth are the moft valuable parts to the 
natives; for the fat is hard and grifly, and the fleth coarfe, 
black, and tough. 


Thofe animals are feldom found on the continent which 
borders on Hudfon’s Bay, or far up, in bays, rivers, or 
inlets, but ufually ak hs {mall iflands, and fea-girt 


fhoals, 


NORTHERN  O-GeE ASN. 


foals, at fome diftance from the main land; but as thofe 
places are frozen over for many miles during Winter, it is 
natural to think they keep at the edge of the water among 
the driving ice during that feafon. They are fuppofed to 


feed chiefly on marine plants, and perhaps on fhell-fth,. 


for their excrement is exceedingly offentfive. 


Szaxs of various fizes and colours are common in moft 
parts of Hudfon’s Bay, but moft numerous to the North. 
Some of thofe animals are beautifully {peckled, black and 
white; others are of a dirty grey. ‘The former are ge- 
nerally fmall; but fome of the latter arrive at an amazing 
fize, and their fkins are of great ufe to the Efquimaux ; 
as it is of them they cover their canoes, make all their 
boot-legs and fhoes, befides many other parts of their 
elothing.. The Seal-fkins are alfo of great-ufe to thofe 
people as a fubftitute for cafks, to preferve oil, Gc. for 
Winter ufe; they are alfo blown full of wind and dried, 
and then ufed as buoys on the whale-fifhery. The flefh 
and fat of the Seal is alfo more efteemed by the Efqui- 
maux than thofe of any other marine. animal,. falmon not 


excepted z 


Befides thefe, the Sza-Unicorn is known to frequent 
Fludfon’s Bay and Straits, but I never faw one of them. 
Their horns are frequently purchafed from our friendly 
E{guimaux, who probably get them in the way of barter 
from thofe tribes that refide more.to the North; but I 


Never. 


391 


Seals, 


Sea- Unis - 
Corls 


“yp 
a 


Black 
“A liales 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


never could be informed by the natives whether their fkins 
are like thofe of the Whale, or hairy like thofe of the Seal ; 
I fuppofe the former. 





Species of Fifh. 


The Fith that inhabit the falt water of Hudfon’s Bay 
are but few :—the Black Whale, White Whale, Salmon, 
and a {mall fifh called Kepling, are the only fpecies of 
{ea-fifh in thofe parts *. 


The Brack Wua.e is fometimes found as far South as 
Churchill River, and I was prefent at the killing of three 
there; but this was in the courfe of twenty years. To 
the Northward, particularly near Marble Mand, they are 
more plentiful ; but notwithftanding the Company carried 
ona fifhery in that quarter, from the year one thoufand 
feven hundred and fixty-five till one thoufand feven hun- 
dred and feventy-two, they were fo far from making it 


_anfwer their expectations, that they funk upwards of 


twenty thoufand pounds; which is the lefs to be wondered 
at, when we confider the great inconveniencies and expences 


* In the Fall of the year 1768, a fine rock cod was drove on fhore ina 
high gale of wind, and was eaten at the Governor’s table; Mefirs. William 
Wales and Jofeph Dymond, who went out to obferve the tranfit of Venus which 
‘happened on the 3d of June 1769, partook of it ; but I never heard of one 
being caught with a hook, nor ever faw an entire fith of that defcription in thofe 
parts: their jaw-bones are, however, frequently found on the fhores. 


they 


NORTHERN} OCEAN. 


they laboured under in fuch an undertaking. For as it 
was impoflible to profecute it from England, all the people 
employed on that fervice were obliged to refide at their 
fettlement all the year at extravagant wages, exclufive of 
their maintenance. ‘The harpooners had no lefs than fifty 
pounds per annum f{tanding wages, and none of the crew 
lefs than from: fifteen to twenty-five pounds ; which, to- 
gether with the Captains falaries, wear and tear of their 
veffels, and other contingent expences, made it appear on 
calculation, that if there were a certainty of loading the 
vefiels every year, the Company could not clear themfelves. 
On the contrary, during the feven years they perfevered in 
that undertaking, only four Black Whales were taken near 
Marble Ifland; and, except one, they were fo fmall, that 
they would not have been deemed payable fifh in the 
Greenland fervice*. But the Hudfon’s Bay Company, 
with a liberality that.does honour to them, though per- 
fe&tly acquainted with the rules obferved in the Greenland 
fervice, gave the fame premium for a fucking fith, as for 
one of the greateft magnitude. 


Wuite Wuatss are very plentiful in thofe parts, par- 
ticularly from Chefterfield’s Inlet to York Fort, or Hay’s 


* T have heard that no Whale caught by our Greenland fhips is called a 
Pay-fifh; that is, that no emelument arifes to the harpooner that ftrikes i; 
unlefs the longeft blade of the bone, ufually called Whale-bone, meafures fix 
feet: whereas thofe killed in Hludion’s Bay feldom meafured more than four 
feet and an half. 


k | River, 


& 


Vhite 
Whale, 


vs 


Go 


A TOURNEY TO THE 


River, on the Weft fide of the Bay ; and from Cape Smith 
to Slude River on the Eaft fide. On the Welt coaft they 
are generally found in the greateft numbers at the mouths 
of the principal rivers; fuch as Seal River, Churchill, 

Port Nelfon, and Hay’s Rivers. ‘But the Eaft fide of the 
Bay not being fo well known, Whale River is the only | 
part they are known to frequent in very. confiderable num- 
bers. Someyears ago the Company had a fettlement at this 
river, called Richmond Fort; but all their endeavours to 
eftablifh a profitable fifhery here proved ineffectual, and 
the few Indians who reforted to it with furrs proving very 
inadequate to the expences, the Company determined to 
evacuate it. Accordingly, after keeping up this fettle- 
ment for upward of twelve years, and finking many thou- 
fands of pounds, they ordered it to be burnt, for the 
more eafily getting the {pikes and other iron-work. This 
was in the year one thoufand feven hundred and fifty- 

eight. ( 
At the old eftablifhed Fatories on the Weft fide of 
the Bay, the Company have been more fuccefsful in the 
White Whale fithery, particularly at Churchill, where fuch 
of the Company’s fervants as cannot be employed during 
that feafon to more benefit for the Company, are fent on 
that duty, and in fome fuccefsful years they fend home 
from eight to thirteen tons of fine oil. To encourage a 
fpirit of induftry among thofe employed on this fervice, 
the Company allows a gratuity, not only to.the harpoon- 
ers, but to every man that fails in the boats; and this 
2 gratuity 





NORTHERN OCEAN... 


gratuity is fo ample as to infpire them with emulation, 
as they well know that the more they kill, the greater will 
be their emolument. 


SALMON are in fome feafons very numerous on the North 
Weft fide of Hudfon’s Bay, particularly at Knapp’s Bay 


and Whale Cove. At the latter I once found them fo 


plentiful, that had we been provided with a fufficient 
number of nets, cafks, and’ falt, we might foon have 


loaded the veffel with them. But this is feldom the cafe, 


for’ in fome years they are fo fcarce, that it is with difh- 
culty a few meals‘of them can be procured during our ftay 
at thofe harbours. They are in fome years fo plentiful 
near Churchill River, that I have known upward of two 
hundred fine fifth taken out of four {mall nets in one tide 
within a quarter of a mile of the Fort ; but in other years 
they are fo fcarce, that barely that number have been 
taken in upward of twenty nets during the whole feafon, 


which generally begins the latter end of June, and ends 


about the middle or latter end of Auguft. 


Befide the fifh already mentioned, I know of no other 
that inhabits the falt water except the Keriine, which is 
a fmall fifh about the fize of a {melt, but moft excellent 
eating. In fome years they refort to the fhores near Church- 
ill River in fuch multitudes to fpawn, and fuch numbers 


of them are left dry among the rocks, as at times ta be’ 


35 2 quits 


Salmon. 


Kepling, 


Shell Pith. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


quite offenfive. In other feafons they are fo fcarce, that 
hardly a mea! can be procured. 

The fame remark may be made on almoft every {pecies 
of game, which conftitutes the greateft part of the fare 
of the people refiding in thofe parts. For inftance, in 
fome years, hundreds of deer may eafily be killed within a 
mile of York Fort; and in others, there is not one to be 
feen within twenty or thirty miles. One day thoufands and 
tens of thoufands of geefe are feen, but the next they all 
raife flight, and go to the North to breed. Salmon, as I 
have lately obferved, is fo plentiful in fome years at Church- 
ill River, that it might be procured in any quantity; at 
others, fo {carce as to be thought a great delicacy. 

In fact, after twenty years refidence in this country, I 
am perfuaded that whoever relies much on the produce of 
the different feafons, will frequently be deceived, and oc- 
cafionally expofe himfelf and men to great want. 

To remedy this evil, it is moft prudent for thofe in 
command to avail themfelves of plentiful feafons, and cure 


a fufficient quantity of the leaft perifhable food, parti- 
cularly geefe. 


Shell Fifh. 


SHELL Fisu of a variety of kinds are alfo found in fome 
parts of Hudfon’s Bay. Maufcles in particular are in great 
abundance on the rocky fhores near Churchill River, and 
what is vulgarly called the Periwinkle are very plentiful 


On 


NO R T HE BB Ne O8CeE AN. 


on the rocks which dry at low-water. Small Crabs and 
Star-fith are frequently thrown on the fhore by the furf in 
heavy gales of wind; and the empty fhells of Wilks, {mall 
Scallops, Cockles, and many other kinds, are to be found 
on the beaches in great plenty. The fame may be faid 
of the interior parts of the country, where the banks of the 
lakes and rivers abound with empty fhelis of various kinds; 
but the fifth themfelves have never been difcovered by the 
natives. 





Frogs, Grubs, and other Infeéts. 


Frogs of various colours are numerous in thofe parts 
as far North as the latitude 61°. They always frequent 
the margins of lakes, ponds, rivers, and {wamps: and as 
the Winter approaches, they burrow under the mols, at a 
confiderable diftance from the water, where they remain 
in a frozen ftate till the Spring. I have frequently {een 
them dug up with the mofs, (when pitching tents in Win- 
ter,) frozen as hard as ice: in which ftate the legs are as 
eafily broken off as a pipe-ftemn, without giving the leaft 
fenfation to the animal; but by wrapping them up in 
warm {fkins, and ae them to a flow fire, they foon 
recover life, and the mutilated animal gains its ufual 
activity ; but if they are permitted to freeze again, they 
are palt all recovery, and are never more known to come 
to life. ‘The fame may be faid of the various fpecies of 

Spiders, 


So) 


Frogs. 


398 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


et oa Spiders, and all the Grub kind, which are very numerous 


Eagles. 


in thofe parts. I have feen thoufands of them dug: up 
with the mofs, when we were pitching our tents in the 
Winter ; all of which were invariably enclofed in a thick 
web, which Nature teaches them to fpin on thofe occa- 
fions ; yet they were apparently all frozen. as hard as ice. 
The Si ane if let fall: from any height on a.hard. fub- 
ftance, would rebound like a grey pea; and all the Grub: 
kind are fo hard frozen as to be as eafily broken as a piece 
of ice of the fame fize; yet when expofed to a flow heat, 
even in the depth of Winter, they will foon come to life, 
and in a fhort time recover their ufual motions. 





Birds. 


The feathered creation that refort to thofe parts in. the 
different feafons are numerous, but fuch as brave the 
fevere Winter are but few in number, and {hall be parti- 
cularly noticed in their proper places. 


Eactes of feveral forts are found in the country bor- 
dering on Hudfon’s Bay during the Summer; but none, 
except the common brown Fifhing Eagle, ever frequent 
the Northern parts. They always make their appear- 
ance in thofe dreary regions about. the latter end of 
March or beginning of April, and build their nefts in 
lofty trees, in the crevices of inaccefiible rocks near the 


banks 


NOWTHE RN OtGeE AN. 


banks of rivers. They lay but two eggs, (which are 
-white,) and frequently bring but one young. ‘They ge- 
nerally feed on fifh, which they catch as they are fwim- 
ming near the furface; but they are very deftructive 
to the mufk rat and hares, as alfo to geefe and ducks, 
when in a moulting fate, and frequently kill young 
beaver. ‘Their nefts are very large, frequently fix feet in 
diameter ; and before their young can fly, are fo provi- 
dent, that the Indians frequently take a moft excellent 
meal of fifth, flefh, and fowl from their larder. Though 
they bring forth their young {fo early as the latter end of 
May, or the beginning of June, yet they never fly till 
September ; a little after which they migrate to the South- 
ward. They are the moft ravenous of any bird I know; 
for when kept in confinement, or in a tame flate as it 
may be called, I have known two of them eat more than 
a bufhel of fifhin a day. They are never known to breed 
on the barren grounds to the North of Churchill River, 
though many of the lakes and rivers in thofe parts abound. 
with variety of fifh. This is probably owing to the want 
of trees or high rocks to build in. The Northern Indians 
are very partial to the quill-feathers of the Eagle, as well as. 
to thofe of the hawk, to wing or plume their arrows with, 
out of a fuperftitious notion that they have a greater effect 
than if winged with the feathers of geefe, cranes, crows,. 
or other birds, that in fact would do equally as well. 
The fleth of the Eagle is ufually eaten by moft of the In- 
dians, but is always black, hard, and fifhy; even the 


young: 


Aco 


Tawks of 
various fizes. 


A JOWRNEY TOP ites 


young ones, when in a callow flate, though the fleth is 
delicate white, are fo rank as to render them very un- 
pleafant to fome perfons, except in times of neceffity. 


Hawks of various fizes and plumage frequent the dif- 
ferent parts of the country round Hudfon’s Bay during 
Summer, Some of thofe Hawks are fo large as to weigh 
three pounds, and others fo {mall as not to exceed five or 
fix ounces. But the weight of thofe, as well as every 
other fpecies of Birds, is no flandard for the Naturalift to 
oo by; for at different feafons, and when in want of food, 
they are often fcarcely half the weight they are when 
fat-and in good order. Notwithftanding the variety of 
Hawks that refort to thofe parts in Summer, I know but 
one {pecies that brave the intenfe cold of the long Winters 
to the North of Churchill River; and that is what Mr. 
Pennant calls the Sacre Falcon. They, like the other 
large foecies of Hawks, prey much on the white groufe 
or partridge, and alfo on the American hare, ufually 
called here Rabbits. They are always found to frequent 
thofe parts where partridges are plentiful, and are detefted 
by the fportfmen, as they generally drive all the game off 


. the ground near their tents; but, in return, they often drive 


thither frefh flocks of fome hundreds. Notwithftanding 
this, they fo frequently baulk thofe who are employed on 
the hunting fervice, that the Governors generally give a. 
reward of a quart of brandy for each of their heads. Their 
Heth is always caten by the Indians, and fometimes by the 

| Engl 





' NORTHERN OCEAN. 
Englifh; but it is always black, hard, and tough, and 
fometimes has a bitter tafte. 

The Indians are fond of taming thofe birds, and fre- 
quently keep them the whole Summer; but as the Winter 
approaches they generally take flight, and provide for them- 
felves. When at Cumberland Houfe I had one of them, 
of which my people were remarkably fond; and as it 
never wanted for food, would in all probability have re- 
mained with us all the Winter, had it not been killed by 
an Indian who did not know it to be tame. 


The beautiful fpecies of Wuitz or Snowy Owt is 
common in all parts of Hudfon’s Bay, as far North as the 
Copper-mine River. Thefe birds, when flying or fitting, 
appear very large, but when killed, feldom weigh more 
than three and a half, or four pounds, and fometimes 
fearcely half that weight. They generally feed on mice 
‘and partridges, and are at times known to kill rabbits. 
They are, like the hawk, very troublefome to the fportf- 
men; and, contrary to any other bird that I know, 
have a great propenfity to follow the report of a gun, 
and frequently follow the hunters (as they are ufually 
called in Hud{fon’s Bay) the whole day. On thofe occa- 
fions they ufually perch on high trees, and watch till a 
bird is killed, when they fkim down and carry it off before 
the hunter can get near it; but in return, the hnnters, 
when they fee them on the "watcll, frequently decoy them 
within gun-fhot, by throwing up a dead bird, which 

ar the 


4or 


White or 
Snowy Owl. 


402 


Grey or 
Mottled 
Owl. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


the Owl feldom refufes to accept; but the {portfman 
being fully provided for this vifit, and on his guard, ge- 
nerally fhoots them before they can carry off the partridge. 
They are, however, fo great a hindrance to thofe em- 
ployed on the hunting fervice, that the fame premium is 
given for one of their heads as for that of a hawk. 


In Winter they are frequently very fat, their flefh deli- 
cately white, and generally efteemed good eating, both by 
Englifh and Indians. Thofe Owls always make their nefts 
on the ground, generally lay from three to four eggs, but 
feldom hatch more than two; and in the extreme North 
the young ones do not fly till September. They never 
migrate, but brave the coldeft Winters, even on the bar- 
ren ground, far remote from any woods; and in thofe 
fituations perch on high rocks and ftones, and watch for 


their prey. 


The fpecies of Grey or MorrLep Ow1 are by no means 
fo numerous as the former, are fomething inferior in fize, 
and always frequent the woods. ‘They never go in fearch 
of their prey in the day-time, but perch on the tops. of 
lofty pines, and are eafily approached and fhot. Their 
food is generally known to be mice and {mall birds, yet 
their flefh is delicately white, and nearly as good as a 
barn-door fowl; of courfe it is much efteemed both 
by the Englifh and Indians. ‘This {pecies of Owl is called 
by the Southern Indians Ho-ho, and the former Wap-a- 
kee-thow. 


Befides 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 403 


Befides thofe two fpecies of Owls, there is another that Cob-a-dee- 
~ remains in Hudfon’s Bay all the year, and is called by the ae 
Indians Cos-a-pEsE-coocn. It is fo far inferior in fize to 

the two former, that it feldom weighs half a pound ; is of 

a mottled brown, the feathers long, and of a moft delicate 

foft and filky quality. In general this {pecies feed on mice, 

and birds they find dead; and are fo impudent at times, 

that they light on a partridge when killed by the hunter, 

but not being able to carry it off, are often obliged to 
relinquifh the prize. Like the White Owl, at times, 
though but feldom, they follow the report of a ‘gun, 

and by fo frequently fkimming round the fportfmen, 
frighten the game nearly as much as the hawk. They 
feldom go far from the woods, build in trees, and lay from 

two to four eggs. They are never fat, and their flefh is 
eaten only by the Indians. 


Ravens of a moft beautiful glofly black, richly tinged Ravens. 
with purple and violet colour, are the conftant inhabitants 
of Hudfon’s Bay; but are fo far inferior in fize to the 
Englifh Raven, that they are ufually called Crows. They 
build their nefts in lofty pine-trees, and generally lay four 
fpeckled eggs; they bring forth their young fo early as the 
latter end of May, or the beginning of June. In Summer 


_ many of them frequent the barren grounds, feveral hun- 


~ dred miles from any woods; probably invited there by the 
multitudes of deer and mufk-oxen that are killed by the 


Northern Indians during that feafon, merely for their 
WE 2 fkins, 


404 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


fkins, and who leave their flefh to rot, or be devoured by 
beafts or birds of prey. At thofe times they are very fat, 
and the flefh of the young ones is delicately white, and good 
eating. But in Winter they are, through neceflity, obliged 
to feed on a black mofs that grows on the pine-trees, alfo 
on deer’s dung, and excrements of other animals. It is 
true, they kill fome mice, which they find in the furface 
of the {now, and catch many wounded partridges and 
hares; in fome parts of the country they are a great nui- 
fance to the hunter, by eating the game that is either 
caught in {nares or traps. With all this afliftance, they 
are in general fo poor during the fevere cold in Winter, as 
to excite wonder how they poflibly can exift. 


Their faculty of {cent muft be very acute; for in the 
coldeft days in Winter, when every kind of effiuvia is al- 
moft inftantaneoufly deftroyed by the froft, I have fre- 
quently known buffaloes and other beafts killed where not 
one of thofe birds were feen; but in a few hours fcores of 
them would gather about the {pot to pick up the dung, 
blood, and other offal. An unarmed man may approach 
them very near when feeding, but they are fhy of thofe that 
have a gun; a great proof that they {mell the gunpowder. 
They are, however, frequently fhot by guns fet for foxes ; 
and fometimes caught in traps built for martins. Though, 
on the whole, they may be called a fhy bird, yet their. 
neceffities in Winter are fo great, that, like the White 
Owl, they frequently follow the report of a gun, keep. 
prudently at a diftance fromthe fport{man, and frequently 

carry 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


carry off many wounded birds. Their quills make moft 
excellent pens for drawing, or for ladies to write with. 


The Crnertous Crow, or, as it ts called by the South- 
ern Indians, Whifk-e-jonifh, by the Englifh Whifkey- 
jack, and by the Northern Indians Gee-za, but as fome 
pronounce it, and that with more propriety, Jee-za, 
though clafied among the Crows, is in reality fo {mall, 
as feldom to weigh three ounces; the plumage grey, 
the feathers very long, foft, and filky, and in general en- 
tirely unwebbed, and in fome parts much refembles hair. 
This bird is very familiar, and fond of frequenting habita- 
tions, either houfes or tents; and fo much given to pil- 
fering, that no kind of provifions it can come at, either 
frefh or falt, is fafe from its depredation. It is fo 
bold as to come into tents, and fit on the edge of the 
kettle when hanging over the fire, and fteal victuals out 
of the difhes. It is very troublefome to the hunters, both 
Enelifh and Indian, frequently following them a whole 
day; it will perch on a tree while the hunter is baiting his 
martin-traps, and as foon as his back is turned go and 
eat the baits. It is a kind of mock-bird, and of courfe 
has a variety of notes; it is eafily tamed, but never lives 
long in confinement. It is well known to be a pro- 
vident bird, laying up great quantities of berries in Sum- 
mer for a Winter ftock ; but its: natural propenfity to 


pilfer at all feafons makes it much detefted:both by the 
8 Englifh 


495 


Cinereous 
row... 


4.06 


W ood- 
pecker. 


Groule. 


A JOURNEY TO THHE 


Englifh and Indians. It builds its ‘neft in trees, exa@ly 
like that of the blackbird and thrufh; lays four blue 


eggs, but feldom brings more than three young ones. 


1 know of only one fort of Woop-recxer that frequents 
the remote Northern parts of Hudfon’s Bay; and this is dif- 
tinguifhed by Mr. Pennant by the name of the Golden 
Winged Bird; but to the South Weft that beautiful f{pecies of 
Wood-pecker with a fcarlet crown is very frequent. The 
manner of life of this {pecies is nearly alike, always build- 
ing their nefts in holes in trees, and feeding on worms 
and infects. They generally have from four to fix young 
atatime. They are faid to’ be very deftrudtive to fruit- 
trees that are raifed in gardens in the more Southern parts 
of America; but the want of thofe luxuries in Hudfon’s 
Bay renders them very harmlefs and inoffenfive birds. The 
red feathers of the Jarger fort, which frequent the interior 
and Southern parts of the Bay, are much valued by fome 
of the Indians, who ornament their pipe-ftems with them, 
and at times ufe them as ornaments to their children’s 
clothing. Neither of the two fpecies here mentioned ever 
migrate, but are conftant inhabitants of the different cli- 
mates in which they are found. 


There are feveral {pecies of Grousz in the different 
parts of Hudfon’s Bay; but two of the largeft, and one 
of them the moft beautiful, never reach fo far North 

as 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


as the latitude 59°: but as I have feen them in great 
plenty near Cumberland Houfe, I fhall take the liberty 


to defcribe them. 


The Rurrep Grouss. This is the moft beautiful of 
all that are claffed under that name. They are of a deli- 
cate brown, prettily variegated with black and white: 
tail large and long, like that of a hawk, which is ufually 
of an orange-colour, beautifully barred with black, cho- 
colate, and white; and the tail is frequently expanded 
like a fan. To add to their beauty, they have a ruff of 
glofiy black feathers, richly tinged with purple round the 
neck, which they can erect at pleafure: this they fre- 
quently do, but more particularly fo when they fpread 
their long tail, which gives them a noble appearance. In 
fize they exceed a partridge, but are inferior to a pheafant. 
In Winter they are ufually found perched on the branches 
of the pine-trees ; and in that feafon are fo tame as to be 
eafily approached, and of courfe readily {hot. 

They always make their nefts on the ground, generally 
at the root of a tree, and lay to the number of twelve or 
fourteen eggs. In fome of the Southern parts of America 
feveral attempts have been made to tame thofe beautiful 
birds, by taking their eggs and hatching them under do- 
meftic hens, but it was never crowned with fuccefs; for 
when but a few days old, they always make their efcape 
into the woods, where they probably pick up a fubfift- 


ence. Their flefh is delicately white and firm, and 
though 


407 


The Ruffeg 
Groufe. 


408 A JOURNEY? SiGe tT mie 


though they are feldom fat, they are always good eating, 
and are generally eftemed beft when larded and reafted, or 
nicely boiled with a bit of bacon. / 
There is fomething very remarkable in thofe birds, and 
I believe peculiar to themfelves, which is that of clap- 
ping their wings with fuch a force, that at half a mile 
diftance it refembles thunder. I have frequently heard 
them make that noife near Cumberland Houfe in the 
month of May, but it was always before Sun-trife, and 
a little after Sun-fet. It is faid by Mr. Barton and 
Le Hontan, that they never clap in this manner but in 
the Spring and Fall, and I muft acknowledge that I never 
heard them in Winter, though I have killed many of 
them in that feafon. The Indians informed me they never 
make that noife but when feeding, which is very probable ; 
for it is notorioufly known that all the fpecies of Groufe 
feed very early in the mornings, and late in the afternoons. 
‘This fpecies is called by fome of the Indians bordering on 
Hudfon’s Bay, Pus-pus-kee, and by others Pus-pus-cue.’ 
Se SHARP-TAILED Grovss, -or, as they are called in Hud- 
fon’s Bay, Pheafant. Thofe birds are always found in the 
Southern parts of the Bay, are very plentiful in the inte- 
tior parts of the country, and in fome Winters a few of 
them are fhot at York Fort, but never reach fo far North as 
Churchill. In colour they are not very unlike that of the 
Englifh hen pheafant; but the tail is fhort and pointed, 
like that of the common duck; and there is no perceiv- 


able 


[IN OCR aR oie i BN PORGEEPARN. 


able difference in plumage between the male and female. 
When full-grown, and in good condition, they frequently 
weigh two pounds, and though the flefh is dark, yet it 
is juicy, and always efteemed good eating, particularly 
when larded and roafted. In Summer they feed on berries, 
and in Winter on the tops of the dwarf birch and the buds 
of the poplar. In the Fall they are tolerably tame, but 
in the fevere cold more fhy ; frequently perch on the tops 
of the higheft poplars, out of moderate gun-fhot, and 
will not fuffer a near approach. They fometimes, when 
difturbed in this fituation, dive into the fnow; but the 
fportfman is equally baulked in his expectations, as they 
force their way fo faft under it ‘as to raife flight many yards 
diftant from the place they entered, and very frequently 
ina different direction to that from which the fportfman 
expects *. They, like the other. fpecies of groufe, make 
their nefts on the ground, and lay from ten to thirteen 
eggs. Like the Ruffed Groufe, they are not to be tamed, 
as many trials have been made. at York Fort, but without 
fucecfs ; for though they never made their efcape, yet they 
always died, probably for the want of proper food; for 
the hens that hatched them were equally fond of them, as 
they could poflibly have been had they been the produce 
of their own eggs. This {pecies of Groufe is called by 


the Southern Indians Aw-kis-cow. 


* This I affert from my own experience when at Cumberland Houfe. 


3G The 


409 


410 


Wood Par« 
tridge. 


A JOURNEY TO TEE 


The Woop Partripcss have acquired that name in 
Hudfon’s Bay from their always frequenting the forefts 
of pines and fir; and in Winter feeding on the bruth of 
thofe trees, though they are fondeft of the latter. This 
{pecies of Groufe is inferior in fize and beauty to the 
Ruffed, yet may be called a handfome bird; the plumage 
being of a handfome brown, elegantly {potted with white 
and black. ‘The tail-is long, and tipped with orange; and 
the legs are warmly covered with fhort feathers, but the 
feet are naked. They are generally in the extreme with 
refpect to fhynefs; fometimes not fuffering a man to come 
within two gun-fhots, and at others fo tame that the 
{port{man may kill ‘five or fix out of one tree without 
fhifting his ftation. They are feen in fome years in con- 
fiderable numbers near York Fort. They are very {carce at 
Churchill, though numerous in the interior parts, parti- 
cularly on the borders of the Athapufcow Indians country, 
where I have feen my Indian companions kill many of them 
with blunt-headed arrows. In Winter their flefh is 
black, hard, and bitter, probably owing to the refinous 
quality of their food during that feafon; but this is not 
obferved in the rabbits, though they feed exadtly in the 
fame manner in Winter: on the contrary, their flefh is 
efteemed more delicate than that of the Englifh rabbit. 
The Southern Indians call this {pecies of Partridge, Miftick~ 
a-pethow ; and the Northern Indians call it, Day. 


The 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


ALK 


The Wii.tow Partripess have a ftrong black bill, with Witiow 


{carlet eye-brows, very large and beautiful in the male, but 
lefs confpicuous in the female. In Summer they are brown, 
elegantly barred and mottled with orange, white, and 
black ; and at that feafon the males are very proud and 
handfome, but the females are lefs beautiful, being of one 
univerfal brown. As the Fall advances they change toa 
delicate white, except fourteen black feathers in the tail, 
which are alfo tipped with white; and their legs and feet, 
quite down to the nails, are warmly covered with feathers. 
In the latter end of September and beginning of Oétober 
they gather in flocks of fome hundreds, and proceed from 


the open plains and barren grounds, (where they ufually 


breed,) to the woods and brufh-willows, where they hord. 
together in a ftate of fociety, till difperfed by their com- 
mon enemies, the hawks, or hunters. They are by far the 
moft numerous of any of the Groufe {pecies that are found 
in Hudfon’s Bay; and in fome places, when permitted to 
remain undifturbed for a confiderable time, their number 
is frequently fo great, as almoft to exceed credibility. I 
fhall by no means exceed truth, if I affert that I have feen 
upward of four hundred in one flock near Churchill River; 
but the greateft number I ever faw was on the North fide 
of Port Nelfon River, when geturning with a packet in 
March one thoufand feven hundred and fixty-eight: at 
that time I faw thoufands flying to the North, and the 
whole furface of the fnow feemed to be in motion by thofe 
that were feeding on the tops of the fhort willows. Sir 

3G 2 Thomas 


Partridge, 


A12 


A JNU RN EY TOMiee Ee 


Thomas Button mentions, that when he wintered in Pore 
Nelfon River in one thoufand fix hundred and twelve, 
his crew killed eighteen hundred dozen of thofe birds, 
which I have no reafon to doubt; and Mr. jeremie, for 
merly Governor at York Fort, when that place was in the 
pofieflion of the French, and then called Fort Bourbon, 
afferts, that he and feventy-nine others eat no lefs than 
ninety thoufand partridges and twenty-nve thoufand hares 
in the courfe of one Winter; which, confidering the 
quantity of venifon, geefe, ducks, &c. enumerated in his 
account, that were killed that year, makes the number fo 
great, that it is fcarcely poflible to conceive what eighty 
men could do with them; for on calculation, ninety thou- 
fand partridges and twenty-five thoufand hares divided by 
eighty, amounts to no lefs than one thoufand one hundred 
and twenty-five partridges, and three hundred and twelve 
hares per man. ‘This is by far too great a quantity, par- 
ticularly when it is confidered that neither pattridges nor 
hares are in feafon, or can be procured in any numbers, 
more than feven months in the year... Forty thoufand par- 
tridges and five thoufand hares would, I think, be much 
nearer the truth, and will be found, on cal cules to be 


ample provifion for eighty men for feven months, exclufive 


of any change. The common weight of thofe birds is 
from eighteen to twenty-two ounces when firft killed; 
there are fome few that are nearly that weight when 
fit for the fpit, but they are fo f{carce as by no means to 
ferve as a flandard ; and as they always hord with the com- 


mon 


IN OFF TRHREDREN® O CE AN. 


mon fize, there is no room to fufpe& them of another 
fpecies. As all thofe over-grown partridges are notorioufly 
known to be males, it is more than probable-that they are 
imperfe&, and grow large and fat like capons; and every 
one that has had an opportunity of tafting thofe large 
partridges, will readily allow that they excel the common 
fort as much in flavour as they do in fize. It is remarked 
in thofe birds, as well as the Rock Partridge, that they are 
provided with additional clothing, as it may be called; 
for every feather, from the largeft to the fmalleft, except 
the quills and tail, are all double. The under-feather is 
foft and downy, fhooting from the fhaft of the larger; 
and is wonderfully adapted to their fituation, as they not 
only brave the coldeft Winters, but the fpecies now under 
confideration always burrow under the fnow at nights, and 
at day-light come forth to feed. In Winter they are al- 
ways found to frequent the banks of rivers and creeks, 
_ the fides of lakes and ponds, and the plains which abound 
with dwarf willows; for it is on the buds and tops of that 
tree they always feed during the Winter. In Summer they 
eat berries and {mall herbage. Their food in Winter being 
fo dry and harfh, makes it neceffary for them to fwallow 
a confiderable quantity of gravel to promote digeftion ; 
but the great depth of fnow renders it very. fcarce during 
that feafon. ‘The Indians having confidered this point, 
invented the method now in ufe among the Englifh, of 
catching them in nets by means of that fimple allurement, 
aheap.of gravel ‘The nets for this purpofe are from eight 

tc: 


Aly 


414 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


to twelve feet fquare, and are ftretched in a frame of 
wood, and ufually fet on the ice of rivers, creeks, ponds, 
and lakes, about one hundred yards from the willows, 
but in fome fituations not half that diftance. Under the 
center of the net a heap of {now is thrown up to the fize 
of one or two bufhels, and when well packed is covered 
with gravel. To fet the nets, when thus prepared, re- 
quires no other trouble than lifting up one fide of the 
frame, and fupporting it with two {mall props, about four 
feet long: a line is faftened to thofe props, and the other 
end being conveyed to the neighbouring willows, is always 
fo contrived that a man can get to it without being feen 
by the birds under the net. When every thing is thus 
prepared, the hunters have nothing to do but go into the 
adjacent willows and woods, and when they ftart game, 
endeavour to drive them into the net, which at times is 
no hard tafk, as they frequently run before them like 
chickens; and fometimes require no driving, for as foon 
as they fee the black heap of gravel on the white fhow 
they fly ftreight towards it. The hunter then goes to the 
end of the line to watch their motions, and when he fees 
there are as many about the gravel as the net can cover, 
or as many as are likely to go under at that time, with a 
fudden pull he hawls down the ftakes, and the net falls 
horizontally on the fnow, and enclofes the greateft part of 
the birds that are under it. The hunter then runs to the 
net as foon as poflible, and kills all the birds by biting 
them at the back of the head. He then fets up the net, 

takes 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


takes away all the dead game, and repeats the operation 
as often as he pleafes, or as long as the birds are in good 
humour. By this fimple contrivance I have known up- 
wards of three hundred partridges caught in one morning 
by three perfons ; and a much greater number might have 
been procured had it been thought neceflary. Early in 
the morning, juft at break of day, and early in the after- 
noon, is the beft time for this {fport. It is common to get 
from thirty to feventy at one hawl; and in the Winter of 
one thoufand feven hundred and eighty-fix, Mr. Prince, 
then Mafter of a floop at Churchill River, actually caught 
two hundred and four at two hawls. They are by no 
means equally plentiful every year; for in fome Winters 


I have known them fo fcarce, that it was impoffible to: 


catch any in nets, and all that could be procured with the 
gun would hardly afford one day’s allowance per week 
to the men during the feafon; but in the Winter one 
thoufand feven hundred and eighty-five, they were fo plen- 
titul near Churchill, and fuch numbers were brought to 
the Factory, that I gave upward of two thoufand to the 
hogs. In the latter’end of March, or the beginning of 
April, thofe birds begin to change from he ot to ve 
beautiful Summer plumage, and the firft brown feathers 
make their appearance on the neck*, and by degrees 


{pread 


* Mr. Dragee obferves, in his North Weft Pafflage, that when the par- 
tridges begin to change colour, the firft brown feathers appear in the rump; 


but this is fo far from being a general rule, that an experienced’ Hudfonian - 


muft {mile at the idea. That Mr. Dragge never faw an inftance of this kind 


I will not fay, but when Nature deviates fo far from its ufual courle, it is 
I undoubtedly 


415 


416 


Rock Par- 
tridges. 


A JOURNEY ‘TO THE 


{pread over the whole body; but their Summer drefs is 
{eldom complete till July. The feathers of thofe birds 
make excellent beds, and as they are the perquifite of the 
hunters, are ufually fold to the Captains and Mates of 
the Company’ fhips, at the eafy sate of three pence per 
pound. 


Rock Partripces. This fpecies of Groufe are in 
Winter of the fame colour as the former, but inferior in 
fize; being in general not more than two-thirds of the 
weight. They have a black line from the bill to the eye, 
and differ in nature and manner from the Willow Par- 
tridge. They never frequent the woods or willows, but 
brave the fevereft cold on the open plains. They always 
feed on the buds and tops of the dwarf birch, and after this 
repaft, generally fit on the high ridges of fnow, with their 
heads to windward. ‘They are never caught in nets, like 
the Willow Partridge; for when in want of gravel, their 
bills are of fuch an amazing ftrength, that they pick a fuf- 
ficient quantity out of the rocks. Befide, being fo much 
inferior in fize to the former fpecies, their flefh is by no 
means fo good, being black, hard, and bitter. They are 
in general, like the Wood Partridge, either exceeding wild 
or very tame; and when in the latter humour, I have 


undoubtedly owing to fome accident; and nothing is more likely than that the 
feathers of the bird Mr. Dragge had examined, had been ftruck off by a hawk ; 
and as the ulual feafon for changing their plumage was near, the Summer 
feathers fupplied their place; for out of the many hundreds of thoufands that 
I have feen killed, I never faw or heard of a fimilar inflance. 


known 


N Ook Tori RON, O8GiE ee N. 


known one man kill one hundred and twenty in a few 
hours; for as they ufually keep in large flocks, the fportf- 
men can frequently kill fix or eight ata fhot. Thefe, 
like the Willow Partridge, change their plumage in Sum- 
mer to a beautiful fpeckled brown; and at that feafon are 
fo hardy, that, unlefs fhot in the head or vitals, they will 
fly away with the greateft quantity of {hot of any bird I 
know. They difcover great fondnefs for their young; for 
during the time of incubation, they will frequently fuffer 
themfelves to be taken by hand off their eggs *. Pigeons 
of a fmall fize, not larger than a thrufh, are in fome 
Summers found as far North as Churchill River. The 
bill is of a flefh-colour, legs red, and the greateft part of 
the plumage of a light lilac or blufh. In the interior 
parts of the country they fly in large flocks, and perch 
on the poplar trees in fuch numbers that I have feen 
twelve of them killed at one fhot. They ufually feed on 


* Befides the birds already mentioned, which form a conftant difh at our 
tables in Hudfon’s Bay, during their refpective feafons, Mr. Jerome afferts, 
that during the time he was Governor at York Fort, the buftard was common. 
But fince that Fort was delivered up to the Englifh at the peace of Utrecht 
in 1713, none of the Company’s fervants have ever feen one of thofe birds: 
nor does it appear by all the Journals now in the poffeffion of the Hudfon’s 
Bay Company, that any fuch bird was ever feen in the moft Southern parts of 


the Bay, much lefs at York Fort, which is in the latitude 57° North; fo that _ 


a capital error, or a wilful defign to miflead, muft have taken place. Indeed, 
his account of the country immediately where he refided, and the productions 
of it, are fo erroneoufly ftated as to deferve no notice. His colleague, De le 
Potries, afferts the exiftence of the buftard in thofe parts, and with an equal 


regard to truth. 


gH ~ poplar 


~ 


417 


418 


Red-breaft- 
ed ‘Thruth. 


Grofbeak, 


A JOURNEY TO: THE 


poplar buds, and are good eating, though feldom fat. 
They build their nefts in trees, the fame as the Wood 
Pigeons do; never lay but two eggs, and are very {carce 
near the fea-coaft in the Northern parts of Hudfon’s Bay. 


The Rep-zreastep Turusues, commonly called in 
Hudfon’s Bay the Red Birds, but by fome the Black Birds, 
on account of their note, and by others the American 
Fieldfares ufually make their appearance at Churchill River 
about the middle of May, build their nefts of mud, like 
the Englifh Thrufh, and lay: four beautiful blue eggs. 
They have a very loud and pleafing note, which they ge- 
nerally exercife moft in the mornings and evenings, when 
perched on fome lofty tree near their neft; but when the 
young can fly they are filent, and migrate to the South 
early in the Fall. They are by no means numerous, and 
are generally feen inpairs; they are never fought after as 
an article of food, but when killed by the Indian boys, 
are efteemed good eating, though they always feed on 
worms and infects. 


Grosszak. Thefe gay birds vifit Churchill River in 
fome years fo early as the latter end of March, but are by 
no means plentiful; they are always feen in pairs, and 
generally feed on the buds of the poplar and willow. 
The male is in moft parts of its plumage of a beautiful 
crimfon, but the female of a dull dirty green. In form 
they much refemble the Englifh bullfinch, but are near 

double 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


double their fize. They build their nefts in trees, fome- 
times not far from the ground; lay four white eggs, and 
always hatch them in June. They are faid to have a 
pleafing note in Spring, though I never heard it, and are 
known to retire to the South early in the Fall. The 
Englifh refiding in Hudfon’s Bay generally call this bird 
the American Red Bird. 


Snow Buntines, univerfally known in Hud{fon’s Bay by 
the name of the Snow Birds, and in the Ifles of Orkney by 
the name of Snow Flakes, from their vifiting thofe parts 
in fuch numbers as to devour the grain as foon as fown, 
in-fome years are fo deftructive as to oblige the farmer 
to fow his fields a fecond, and occafionally a third time. 
Thefe birds make their appearance at the Northern {ettle- 
ments in the Bay about the latter end of May, or begin- 
ning of April, when they are very fat, and not infe- 
rior in flavour to an ortolan. On their firft arrival they 
generally feed on grafs-feeds, and are fond of frequenting 
dunghills, At that time they are eafily caught in great 
numbers under a net baited with groats or oatmeal; but 
as the Summer advances, they feed much on worms, 
and are then not fo much efteemed. ‘They fometimes 
fly in fuch large flocks, that I have killed upwards of 
‘twenty at one ,fhot, and have known others who have 
killed double that number. In the Spring their plumage 
is prettily variegated, black and white; but their Summer 
-drefs 7" be called elegant, though not gay.. They live 
3H 2a long 


419 


Snow 
Bunting. 


W hite- 


crowned 


Bunting, 


Lapland 
Finch. 


A JOURNEY Tio! @eee 


long in confinement, have naturally a pleafing note, and 
when in company with Canary birds foon imitate their 
jong. I have kept many of them in cages in the fame 
room with Canary birds, and always found they fung in 
Winter as well as in Summer; but even in confinement 
they change their plumage according to the feafon, the fame 
as in a wild ftate. This fpecies of bird feem fond of the 
coldeft regions, for as the Spring advances they fly fo far 
North that their breeding-places are not known to the 
inhabitants of Hudfon’s Bay. In Autumn they return to 
the South in large flocks, and are frequently fhot in con- 
fiderable numbers merely as a delicacy; at that feafon, 
however, they are by no means fo good as when they frft 
make their appearance in Spring. 


Wurte-crownep Buntinc. This fpecies is inferior in 
fize to the former, and feldom make their appearance till 
June. They breed in moft parts of the Bay, always 
make their nefts on the ground, at the root of a dwarf 
willow ora goofeberry-bufh. During the time their young 
are in a callow ftate they have a delightful note, but as 
foon as they are fledged they become filent, and retire to 
the South early in September. 


LapLtanD Fincn. ‘This bird is common on Hudfon’s 
Bay, and never migrates Southward in the coldeft Winters, 
During that feafon. it generally frequents the juniper plains, 
and feeds on me {mall buds.of that tree, alfo on grafs- 

feeds s 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


feeds but at the approach of Summer it flies ftill farther 
North to breed. <A variety of this bird is alfo common, 
and is beautifully marked with a red forehead and breaft. 
It is moft common in the Spring, and frequently caught 
in nets fet for the Snow Bunting ; and when kept in cages 
has a pleafing note, but feldom lives long in confinement, 
though it generally dies very fat. 


Larxs of a pretty variegated colour frequent thofe parts 
in Summer, and always make their appearance in May; 
build their nefts on the ground, ufually by the fide of a 
ftone at the root of a {mall bufh, lay four fpeckled eggs, 
and bring forth their young in June. At their firft ar- 
rival, and till the young can fly, the male is in full fong; 
and, like the fky-lark, foars toa great height, and gene- 
rally defcends.in a perpendicular direftion near‘ their neft. 
Pheir note is loud and agreeable, but confifts of little va- 
riety, and as foon as the young can fly they become filent, 
and retire to the Southward early in the Fall. They are 


impatient of confinement, never fing in that trates and: 


feldom live long. 


The Titmouse is ufually called in Hudfon’s Bay, Black- 
cap. This diminutive bird braves the coldeft Winter, and 
during that feafon feeds on the feeds of long rye-grafs, but 
in Summer on infects and berries. The Southern: Indians 
call this bird Kifs-kifs-hefhis, frony a twittering noife they 


make, which much refembles that word.in found:. 
SWALLOWS: 


42k 


Larks;. 


Titmoufes. 


422 


Swallows. 


Martins. 


Hooping 


Crane. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 

SwaLtows vifit thefe parts in confiderable numbers in 
Summer, and are very domeftic; building their nefts in 
neceflaries, ftables, and other out-offices that are much 
frequented. They: feldom make their appearance at 
Churchill River till June, and retire South early in Auguft. 
They, like the European Swallow, gather in large flocks 
on the day of their departure, make feveral revolutions 
round the breeding-places, and then take their leave till 


the next year. I donot recolleé& to have feen ney of thofe 
birds to the North of Seal River. 


Martins alfo vifit Hudfon’s Bay in great numbers, but 


feldom fo far North as Churchill River. They ufually 


make their nefts in holes formed in the fteep banks of 


rivers; and, like the Swallow, lay four or five fpeckled 


eggs; and retire Southward in Auguft. At the North- 


ern fettlements they are by no means fo domeftic as the 


Swallow. 


Hoortnc Crane. ‘This bird vifits- Hudfon’s Bay 
in the Spring, though not in great numbers. They 
are generally feen only in pairs, and that not very 
often. .It is a bird of confiderable fize, often equal to 
that of a good turkey, and the great length of the bill, 
neck, and legs, makes it meafure, from the bill to the 
toes, near fix feet in common, and fome much more. 
Its plumage is of a pure white, except the quill-feathers, 
which are black. the crown is covered with a red kin, 


thinly 


NORTHERN OCEAN 


chinly befet with black briftles, and the legs are large and 
black. It ufually frequents open {wamps, the fides ‘ion rivers, 
and the margins of lakes and ponds, feeds on frogs and 
{mall fifh, and efteemed good eating. The wing-bones 
of this bird are fo long and large, that 1 have known 


them made into flutes with tolerable fuccefs. It feldom: 
has more than two young,. and retires. Southward early in. 


the Fall. 


The Brown.Crane. This f{pecies-is far inferior in fize to 
the former, being feldom:three feet and a half in length, and 
on an average not-weighing feven pounds. ‘Their haunts 
and. manner of life are nearly the fame as that of the Hoop= 


ing Crane, and they never have more than two young, 
and thofe feldom fly till September. They are found far— 
ther North than the former, for I have killed feveral of 
them on Marble If{land, and have feen them on the Con-- 
tinent as high as the latitude 65°: They are generally 


efteemed. good eating, and, from the form of the body 


when fit for the fpit, they acquire the name of the North, 


Weft Turkey. There is.a circumftance refpecting this 
bird that is very peculiar; which is, that the gizard is 
larger than.that of a fwan, and remarkably fo in the young 
birds. The Brown Cranes are frequently feen in hot calm 
days to foar to an amazing height, always flying in. circles, 
till by degrees they are almoft out of fight, yet their note 
is fo loud, that the fportfman, before he fees their fitua- 
tion, ee fancies they are very near him. ‘They vifit 
Hudfon’s 


423 


Brown 
Crane... 


Bitterns, 


Curlew. 


A JOURNEW 40 Pees 


Hudfon’s Bay in far greater numbers than the former, and 
are very good eating. 


Birrerns are common at York Fort in Summer, but 
are feldom found fo far North as Churchill River. I have 
feen two {pecies of this bird; fome having afh-coloured 
legs, others with beautiful grafs-green legs, and very gay 
plumage. They always frequent marfhes and fwamps, 
alfo the banks of rivers that abound with reeds and long 
orafs. They generally feed on infects that are bred in the 
water, and probably on {mall frogs; and though feldom fat, 
they are generally good eating. They are by no means nu- 
merous even at York Fort, nor in faé& in the moft Southern 
parts of the Bay that I have vifited. , 


Curtews. ‘There are two {pecies of this bird which 
frequent the coafts of Hudfon’s Bay in great numbers 
during Summer, and breed in all parts of it as far North 
as the latitude 72°; the largeft of this fpecies is diftin+ 
guifhed by that great Naturalift Mr. Pennant, by the 
name of the E{quimaux Curlew. They always keep near 
the fea coaft; attend the ebbing of the tide, and are fre- 
quently found at low-water-mark in great numbers, 
where they feed on marine infects, which they find by the 
fides of ftones in great plenty; but at high-water they 
retire to the dry ridges and wait the receding cf the tide. 
They fly as fteady as a woaodcock, anf{wer to a whiftle that 


refembles their note ; lay long on their, wings, and are a’ 


moft 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


moft excellent fhot, and at times are delicious eating. 
The other fpecies of Curlew are in colour and fhape ex- 
actly like the former, though inferior in fize, and differ in 
their manner of life, as they never frequent the water’s- 
edge, but always keep among the rocks and dry ridges, 
and feed on berries and {mall infeéts. The flefh of this 
bird is generally more efteemed than that of the former, 
but they are by no means fo numerous. This {pecies of 
Curlew are feldom found farther North than Ege River, 


Jack Snirzs. . Thofe birds vifit Hudfon’s Bay in Sum- 
mer in confiderable numbers, but are feldom feen to the 
North of Whale Cove. They do not arrive till the ice of 
the rivers is broke up, and they retire to the South early in 
the Fall. During their flay, they always frequent marfhes 
near the fea coaft, and the fhores of great rivers. In man- 
ner and flight they exadétly refemble the European Jack 
Snipe; and when on the wing, fly at fuch a diftance from 
each other, that it is but feldom the beft fportfman can 
get more than one or two ata fhot. Their flefh is by 
no means fo delicate as that of the Englifh Snipe. 


Rep Gopwaits, ufually called at the Northern fettle- 
ments in Hudfon’s Bay, Plovers. Thofe birds vifit the 
fhores of that part in very large flocks, and ufually frequent 
the marfhes and the margins of ponds. They alfo fre- 
quently attend the tide, like the Efquimaux Curlews ; 
fly down to low-water-mark, and feed on a {mall fith, 

31 not 


Jack Snipes. 


Red God-« 
wait. 


426 


Spotted 


d<Sodwait. 


A JOURNEY! TO) Wines 


not much unlike a fhrimp; but as the tide flows, they retire 
to the marfhes. They fly in fuch large flocks, and fo 
clofe to each other, that I have often killed upwards of 
twelve at one fhot; and Mr. Atkinfon, long refident at 
York Fort, actually killed feventy-two at one fhot; but 
that was when the birds were fitting. Near Churchill 
River they are feldom fat, though tolerably flefhy, and 
are generally good eating. They ufually weigh from ten 
to thirteen ounces; the female is always larger than the 
male, and differs in colour, being of a much lighter brown. 
They retire to the South long before the froft com- 
MENCES ; he I have feen this bird as far North as the 
latitude 71° 50. 


SpoTTED Gopwait, known in Hudfon’s Bay by the 
name of Yellow Legs. This bird alfo vifits that country 
in.confiderable numbers, but more fo in the interior parts; 
and ufually frequents the flat muddy banks of rivers, In 


Summer it is generally very poor, but late in the Fall 


is, as it may be called, one lump of fat. This bird, 
with many others of the migratory tribe, I faw in con- 
fiderable numbers as far North as the latitude 71° 54°; and 


_ at York Fort I have known them fhot fo late as the latter 


end of Oétober: at which time they are in the greateft 
perfection, and moft delicious eating, more particularly 
fo when put into a bit of pafte, and boiled like an apple- 
dumpling ; for in fact they are generally too fat at that 
feafon to be eaten either roafted or boiled. 

HEsRIDAL 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


Hesripat Sanppipers, but more commonly known in 
Hudfon’s Bay by the Name of Whale Birds, on account 
of their feeding on the carcafes of thofe animals which fre- 
quently lie on the fhores, alfo on maggots that are produced. 
in them by fly-blows. Thefe birds frequent thofe parts 
in confiderable numbers, and always keep near the margin 
of the fea. They may, in fact, be called beautiful birds, 
though not gay in their plumage; they are ufually very fat, 
but even when farft killed they {mell and tafte fo much 
like train-oil as to render them by no means pleafing to 
the palate, yet they are frequently eaten by the Com- 
pany’s fervants. As the Summer advances they fly fo far 
North of Churchill River, that their. breeding-places are 
not known, though they remain at that part till the be- 
ginning of July, and return early in the Fall. They 
are by no means large birds, as they feldom weigh four 
ounces. The bill is black, plumage prettily variegated 
black and white, and the legs and feet are of a beautiful 
orange colour *. | 


PLovers, commonly called Hawk’s Eyes, from their 
watchfulnefs to prevent a’ near approach when fitting. When 
thefe birds are on the wing, they fly very {wift and irregu- 
Jar, particularly when fingle or in {mall flocks. At Church- 
ill River they are by no means numerous, but I have feen 
them in fuch large flocks at York Fort in the Fall of one 


* They exactly correfpond with the bird defcribed bv Mr. Pennant, except 
that they are much longer. 


ale thoufand 


427 


Hebridal 
Sandpipers. 


Plover. 


428 


Black Gul- 
lemots. 


A JOURNEY S08 tamer 


thoufand feven hundred and feventy-three, that Mr. Ferdi- 
nand Jacobs then Governor, Mr. Robert Body Surgeon, and 
myfelf, killed in one afternoon as many as two men could 
conveniently carry. They generally feed on infects, and are 
at all times good eating, but late in the Fall are moft ex- 
cellent. They are by no means equally plentiful in all 
years; and at the Northern fettlements in the Bay they are 
not claffed with thofe {pecies of game that add to the general 
ftock of provifions, being only killed as a luxury; but 
I am informed that at Albany Fort, feveral barrels of 
them are annually falted for Winter ufe, and are efteemed 
good eating. This bird during Summer reforts to the re- 
moteft Northern parts; for I have feen them at the Copper 
River, though in thofe dreary regions only in pairs. The 
young of thofe birds always leave their nefts as foon as 
hatched, and when but a few days old run very faft; 
at night, or in rainy weather, the old ones call them to- 
gether, and cover them with their wings, in n the fame man- 
ner as a hen does her chickens. 


Bracx Guiiemots, known in Hudfon’s Bay by the 
name of Sea Pigeons. Thofe birds frequent the fhores of 
Hudfon’s Bay and. Straits in confiderable numbers; but, 
more particularly the Northern parts, where they fly in 
large flocks; to the Southward they are only feen in 
pairs. They are of a fine black, but not glofly, with 
{carlet legs and feet; and the coverets of the wings are 
marked with white. They are in weight equal to a Widgeon,, 

though 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


though to appearance not fo large. They ufually make 
their nefts in the holes of rocks, and lay two white eggs, 
which are delicate eating, but not proportionably large for 
the fize of the bird. My friend Mr. Pennant fays, they 
brave the coldeft Winters in thofe parts, by keeping at 
the edge of the ice near the open water; but as the fea at 
that feafon is frozen over for feveral miles from the thore, 
I believe no one’s curiofity ever tempted him to confirm 
the truth of this; and it is well known they never make 
their appearance near the land after the froft becomes fevere. 


Nortuern Divers. Thefe birds, though common in 
Hudfon’s Bay, are by no means plentiful; they are 
feldom found near the fea coaft, but more frequently in 
frefh water lakes, and ufually in pairs. They build their 
nefts at the edge of {mall iflands, or the margins of ‘lakes 
or ponds; they lay only two eggs, and it is very com- 


mon to find only one pair and their young in one fheet 


of water; a great proof of their averfion to fociety. They 
are known in Hudfon’s Bay by the name of Loons. They 
differ in fpecies from the Black and Red throated Divers, 
having a large black bill near four inches long ; plumage on 
the back of a gloffy black, elegantly barred with white ; 
the belly of a filver white ; and they are fo large as at times 
to weigh fifteen or fixteen pounds. Their flefh is always 
black, hard, and a yet it is tae eaten by the 
Indians. 

10 Biack- 


429 


Northern 
Divers. 


430 A L.Q@URNEY) 1.6 VIeHeE 


ae BLACK-THROATED Divers. This {pecies are more beau- 


Divers. — tiful than the former; having a long white bill, plumage on 
the back and wings black, elegantly tinged with purple and 
green, and prettily marked with white fpots. In fize they 
are equal to the former; but are fo watchful as to dive at the 
flafh of a gun, and of courfe are feldom killed but when 
on the wing. Their flefh is equally black and fifhy with 
the former, but it is always eaten by the Indians. The 
{kins of thofe birds are very thick and ftrong, and they are 
frequently dreffed with the feathers on, and made into caps 
for the Indian men. The fkins of the Eagle and Raven, 
with their plumage complete, are alfo applied to that ufe, 
and are far from being an unbecoming head-drefs for ‘a 
favage. 


Redthroat- _ RED-THROATED Divers. This {pecies are alfo called 
Loons in Hudfon’s Bay ; but they are fo far inferior to the 
two former, that they feldom weigh more than three or 
four pounds. They, like the other fpecies of Loon, are ex- 
cellent divers; they always feed on fifh, and when in purfuit 
of their prey, are frequently entangled in fifhing-nets, fet at 
the mouths of creeks and {mall rivers. They are more nu- 
merous than either of the former, as they frequently fly 
in flocks; but like them make their nefts at the edge of 
the water, and only lay two eggs, which, though very 
rank and fifhy, are always eaten by Indians and Englith. 
The legs of thofe three fpecies of Loon are placed fo near 

the 


NORTHERN) OCEA.N. 


the rump as to be of no fervice to them on the land, as 
they are perfectly incapable of walking ; and when found 
in that fituation (which is but feldom) they are eafily taken, 
though they make a ftrong refiftance with their bill, which 
is very hard and fharp. 


Wuite Guiis. Thefe birds vifit Hudfon’s Bay in 
great numbers, both on the fea coafts and in the interior 
parts, and probably extend quite acrofs the continent of 
America. They generally make their appearance at 
Churchill River about the middle of May; build. their 
nefts on the iflands in lakes and rivers; lay two fpeckled 
eggs, and bring forth their young in June. Their eggs 
are generally efteemed good eating, as well as the flefh of 
thofe in the interior parts of the country, though they 
feed on fifh and carrion. They make their flay on Hud- 
fon’s Bay as long in the Fall as the froft will permit them 
to procure a livelihood. 


Grey Guuis. Thefe birds, though common, are by no 
means plentiful; and I never knew their breeding-places, 
as they feldom make their appearance at Churchill River till 
the Fall of the year, and remain there only till the ice be- 


431 


WhiteGulls. 


Grey Gulls. 


gins to be formed about the fhores. They feldom frequent - 


the interior parts of the country. They are not inferior in 
fize to the former, and in the Fall of the year are generally 


fat. The flefh is white and very good eating ; and, like 
| molt 


432 A JOURNEYITOl THE 


moft other Gulls, they are a moft excellent fhot when on 
the wing. 


Black Gulls. = Brack Guuus, ufually called in Hudfon’s Bay, Men of 
War, from their purfuing and taking the prey from a 
leffer {pecies of Gull, known in that country by the name 
of Black-head. In fize they are much.inferior to the 
two former fpecies; but, like them, always make their 
nefts on iflands, or at the margins of lakes or ponds; they 
lay only two eggs, and are found at a confiderable diftance 
from the fea coaft. The length of their wings is very great 
in proportion to the body; the tail is uniform, and the two 
middle feathers are four or five inches longer than the reft, 
Their eggs are always eaten, both by the Indians and Eng- 
lith ; but the bird itfelf is generally rejected, except when 
other provifions are’ very {carce. 


Slack-heads . Buacx-HEADs. ‘Thefe are the {malleft fpecies of Gull 
| that I know. They vifit the fea coaft of Hudfon’s Bay 
in fuch vaft numbers, that they are frequently feen in 

flocks of feveral hundreds; and I have known buthels of 

their eggs taken on an ifland of very {mall circumference. 

Thefe eggs are very delicate eating, the yolks being equal 

to that of a young pullet, and the whites of a femi-tran{ 

parent azure, but the bird itfelf is always fifhy. Their 

affection for their young is fo ftrong, that when any perfon 

attempts to rob their nefts, they fly at him, and fometimes 
approach — 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


approach fo near as to touch him with their pinions; and 
when they find their lofs, will frequently follow the plun- 
derer to a confiderable diftance, and exprefs their grief by 
making an unufual {creaming noife. 

This bird may be ranked with the elegant part of the 
feathered creation, though it is by nomeans gay. The bill, 
legs, and feet are of a rich fcarlet; crown black, and the 
remainder of the plumage of a light afh-colour, except 
~ the quill-feathers, which are prettily barred, and tipped 
with black, and the tail much forked. The flight, or 
extent of wing, in this bird, is very great, in proportion to 
the body. They are found as far North as has hitherto 
been vilited, but retire to the South early in the Fall. 


Peuicans. Thofe birds are numerous in the interior 
parts of the country, but never appear near the fea-coatt. 
They generally frequent large lakes, and always make 
their nefts on iflands. They are fo provident for their 
young, that great quantities of ffh lie rotting near their 
nefts, and emit fuch a horrid flench as to be {melt ata 
confiderable diftance. The flefh of the young Pelican is 
frequently eaten by the Indians; and as they are always 
very fat, great quantities of it is melted down, and pre- 
ferved in bladders for Winter ufe *, to mix with pounded 


fieth ; 


* Inthe Fall of 1774, when I firft fettled at Cumberland Hovfe, the 
Indians impofed on me and my people very much, by felling us Pelican fat 


for the fat of the black bear. Our knowledge of the delicacy of the latter 
avis induced 


433 


Pelicans, 


434 


Goofanders. 


A “JOURNEY Te? TEE 


flefh; but by keeping, it grows very rank. ‘The Pe- 
licans in thofe parts are about the fize of a common 
goofe; their plumage is of a delicate white, except the 
quill-feathers, which are black. The bill is near a foot 
long; and the bag, which reaches from the outer-end of 
the under-mandible to the breaft, is capable of containing 
upwards of three quarts. The fkins of thofe birds are 
thick and tough, and are frequently dreffed by the In- 
dians and converted into bags, but are never made into 
clothing, though their feathers are as hard, clofe, and 
durable, as thofe of a Loon. 


GoosanpErs, ufually, called in Hudfon’s Bay, Shell- 
drakes. Thole birds are very common on the fea-coatft, 
but in the interior parts fly in very large flocks. The 
bill is long and narrow, and toothed like a faw; and they 
have a tuft of feathers at the back of the head, which 
they can erect at pleafure. They are moft excellent 
divers, and fuch great deftroyers of fifth, that they are 
frequently obliged to vomit fome of them before they can 
take flight. Though not much larger than the Mallard 
Duck, they frequently {wallow fifh of fix or feven inches 


induced us to referve this fat for particular purpofes; but when we came to 
open the bladders, it was little fuperior to train oil, and was only eatable by a 
few of my crew, which at that time confifted only of eight Engines and 
two of the home Indians from York Fort. 

Cumberland Houfe was the firft inland fettlement the Company made from 
Hudfon’s Fort; and though begun on fo {mall a feale, yet upon it and Hudfon’s 
Houfe, which 1s fituated beyenuk it, upwards of feventy men were now employed. 


long 


NORTHERN Of CBESA N. 
~ long and proportionably thick. Thofe that frequent the 


interior parts of the country prey much on ‘crawfifh, 
which are very numerous in fome of the fhallow ftony 
rivers. In the Fall of the year they are very fat, and 
though they always feed on fifh, yet their flefh at that 
feafon is very good; and they remain in thofe parts as 
long as the ne ui permit them to procure a ib 


fiftence 


Swans. ‘Lhere are two {pecies of this bird that vifit 


Hudfon’s Bay in Summer ; and only differ in fize, as the 


plumage of both are perfectly white, with black bill and 
legs, The imaller fort are more frequent near the fea- 
coaft, but by no means plentiful, and are moft frequently 
feen in pairs, but fometimes fingle, probably owing to 
their mates having been killed on their paflage Nor th. 
Both fpecies ufually breed on the ilands which are in 
lakes ; and the eggs of the larger {pecies are fo big, that one 
of them is a fufficient meal for a moderate man, without 
bread, or any other addition. In the interior parts of the 
country the larger Swan precedes every other {pecies of 
water-fowl, and in fome years arrive fo early as the month 
of March, long before the ice of the rivers are broken up. 
At thofe times they always frequent the open waters of 
falls and rapids, where they are frequently {hot by the 
Indians in confiderable numbers. They ufually weigh 
upwards of thirty pounds, and the lefler {pecies from 
eighteen to twenty-four. The flefh of both are excellent 

Bgl eating, 


Swans. 


436 


A JOUR NE*Y "TF © Pieaer 


eating, and when roafted, is equal in flavour to young 
heifer-beef, and the cygnets are very delicate. 


Notwithftanding the fize of this bird, they are fo fwift. 
on the wing as to make them the moft difficult to fhoot 
of any bird I know, it being frequently necefiary to take 
fight ten or twelve feet before their bills. This, how- 
ever, is only when flying before the wind in a brifk gale, 
at which time they cannot fly at a lefs rate than an hun- 
dred miles an hour; but when flying acrofs the wind, or 
againft it, they make but a flow progrefs, and are then a 
noble fhot. In their moulting ftate they are not eafily 
taken, as their large feet, with the afliftance of their 
wings, enables them to run on the furface of the water as 
faft as an Indian canoe can be paddled, and therefore they 
are always obliged to be fhot; for by diving and other ma- 
neeuvres they render it impoffible to take them by hand. It 
has been faid that the Swans whiftle or fing before their 
death, and I have read fome elegant defcriptions of it in fome 
of the poets; but I have never heard any thing of the kind, 
though I have been at the deaths of feveral. It is true, 
in ferene evenings, after Sun-fet, I have heard them make 
a noife not very unlike that of a French-horn, but entirely 
divefted of every note that conftituted melody, and have 
often been forry to find it did not forebode their death. 
Mr. Lawfon, who, as Mr. Pennant juftly remarks, was no 
inaccurate obferver, properly enough calls the largeft {pecies 
Trumpeters, and the leffer, Hoopers. Some years ago, 
when I built Cumberland Houfe, the Indians killed thofe 

birds 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


birds in fuch numbers, that the down and quills might 
have been procured in confiderable quantities at a trifling 
expence ; but fince the depopulation of the natives by the 
fmali-pox, which has alfo driven the few furvivors to fre- 
quent other parts of the country, no advantage can be 
made of thofe articles, though of confiderable value in 
England *. 


Gezszt. There are no lefs than ten different {pecies 
of Geefe that frequent the various parts of Hudfon’s Bay 
during Summer, and are as follow: Firft, The Cowmon 
Grey Goofe. Second, The Canada Goole. Third, The 
White, or Snow Goofe, Fifth, The Blue Goofe. Sixth, 
The Laughing Goofe. Seventh, The Barren Goofe. 
Eighth, The Brent Goofe. Ninth, The Dunter; and 
Tenth, the Bean Goofe. 


Common Grey Goosz. This bird precedes every other 
fpecies of Goofe in thofe parts, and in fome forward 
Springs arrives at Churchill River fo early as the latter 


* Mr. Pennant, in treating of the Whiftling Swan, takes notice of the 
‘formation of the Windpipe; but on examination, the windpipes of both the 
fpecies which frequent Hud{on’s Bay are found to be exactly alike, though 
their note is quite different. ‘The breaft-bone of this bird is different from 
any other I have feen; for inftead of being fharp and folid, like that of a goofe, 
it is broad and hollow. Into this cavity the windpipe paffes from the valve, 
and reaching quite down to the abdomen, returns into the cheft, and joins the 
lungs. Neither of the fpecies of Swan that frequent Hudfon’s Bay are mute; 
but the note of the larger is much louder and harfher than that of the fmaller. 


end 


Se 


Geefe. 


Common 
Grey Goofe. 


439 


A. JOURN EY VE-OP Wie FE 


end of April, but more commonly from the eleventh to 
the fixteenth of May; and in one year it was the twenty- 
fixth of May before any Geefe made their appearance. 
At their firft arrival they generally come in pairs, and are 
fo fond of fociety, that they fly ftreight to the call that 
imitates their note; by which means they are eafily fhot. 
They breed in great numbers in the plains and marfhes 
near Churchill River; and in fome years the young ones 
can be taken in confiderable numbers, and are eafily tamed ; 
but will never learn to eat corn, unlefs fome of the old 
ones are taken with them, which is eafily done when in a 
moulting fate. On the ninth of Augutt one thoufand feven 
hundred and eighty-one, when I refided at Prince of 
Wales’s Fort, I fent fome Indians up Churchill River in 
canoes to procure fome of thofe Geefe, and in the after- 
noon they were feen coming down the river with a large 
flock before them; the young ones not more than half- 
grown, and the old ones fo far in a moulting ftate as not 
to be capable of flying; fo that, with the affiftance of 
the Englifh and the Indians then refiding on the plantation, 
the whole flock, to the amount of forty-one, was drove 
within the ftockade which inclofes the Fort, where they 
were fed and fattened for Winter ufe. Wild Geefe taken 
and tattened in this manner are much preferable to any 
tame Geefe in the world. When this fpecies of Geefe are 
full-grown. and in good condition, they often weigh twelve 
pounds, but more frequently much lefs. 


CANADA 


NIOPR 9H ER NY 10%C'ERK Ni" 


Canapa Goose, or Pifk-a-fith, as it is called by 
the Indians, as well as the Englifh in Hudfon’s Bay. 
This {pecies do not differ in plumage from the former, 
but are inferior in fize; the bill is much fmaller in pro- 
portion, and the flefh being much whiter, of courfe is 


more efteemed. They are by no means fo numerous as | 


the former, and generally fly far North to breed; but fome 
tew of their eggs are found near Churchill River. It is fel- 
dom that either of thefe {pecies lay more than four eggs ; 


but if not robbed, they ufually bring them all forth. 


Wuire or Snow Goose. ‘Thefe are the moft numerous 
of all the {pecies of birds that frequent the Northern parts of 
the Bay, andgenerally make their appearance about a week 
or ten days after the Common Grey Goofe. In the frit 
part of the feafon they come in fmall parties, but in the 
middle, and toward the latter end, they fy in fuch 
amazing flocks, that when they fettle in the marfhes to 
feed, the ground for a confiderable diftance appears like a 
field of fnow. When feeding in the fame marfh with the 
Grey Geefe, they never mix. Like the Grey Geefe, they fly 
to the call that refembles their note ; and in fome years are 
killed and falted in great numbers for Winter provifion ; 
they are almoft univerfally thought good eating, and will, 
if proper care be taken in curing them, continue good 
for eighteen months or two years. The Indians are far 
more expert in killing Geefe, as well as every other {pecies 
of game, than any European | ever faw in Hudfon’s Bay; 

10 for 


439 


Canada 
Goofe, 


White or 
Snow Goole. 


440 


A *y'oUlR NUEFY? /T%0 FRE 


for fome of them frequently kill upward of a hundred 
Geefe in a day, whereas the moft expert of the Englith 
think it a good day’s work to kill thirty. Some years 
back it was common for an Indian to kill from a thoufand 
to twelve hundred Geefe in one feafon; but latterly he 
is reckoned a good hunter that kills three hundred. This 


_is by no means owing to the degeneracy of the natives; 


for the Geefe of late years do not frequent thofe parts in 
fuch numbers as formerly. The general breeding-place 
of this bird is not known to any Indian in Hudfon’s Bay, 
not even to the Efquimaux who frequent the remoteft 
North. The general route they take in their return to the 
South in the Fall of the year, is equally unknown; for 
though fuch multitudes of them are feen at Churchill 
River in the Spring, and are frequently killed to the 
amount of five or fix thoufand; yet in the Fall of the 
year, feven or eight hundred is confidered a good hunt. 
At York Fort, though only two degrees South of Churchill 
River, the Geefe feafons flu€tuate fo much, that in fome 
Springs they. have falted forty hogfheads, and in others not 
more than one or two: and at Albany Fort, the Spring 
feafon is by no means to be depended on; but in the Fall 
they frequently falt fixty hogfheads of Geefe, befides great 
quantities of Plover. The retreat of thofe birds in Winter 
is equally unknown, as that of their breeding-places. I 
obferve in Mr. Pennant’s Arctic Zoology, that about Jakutz, 
and other parts of Siberia, they are caught in great numbers, 
both in nets and by decoying them into hovels; but if 


thefe 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


thefe are the fame birds, they muft at times vary as much 
in manner as they do in fituation; for in Hudfon’s Bay 
they are the fhyeft and moft watchful of all the fpecies of 
Geefe, never fuffering an open approach, not even within 
two or three gun-fhots: yet in fome of the rivers near 
Cumberland Houfe, and at Bafquiau, the Indians fre- 
quently kill twenty at one fhot; but this is only done in 
moon-light nights, when the Geefe are fitting on the mud, 
and the fport{men are perfectly concealed from their view. 
Though the plumage of thofe Geefe are perfectly white, 
except the quill-feathers, which are black, the fkin is 
of a dark lead-colour, and the flefh is excellent eating, 
either frefh or falt. They are much inferior in fize to 
the Common Grey Geefe, but equal to the Canada 
Geele. 


Buusz Geese. ‘This fpecies are of the fame fize as the 
Snow Geefe; and, like them, the bill and legs are of a 
deep flefh-colour, but the whole plumage is of a dirty 
blue, refembling old lead. The fkin, when ftripped of 
its feathers, is of the fame colour as the Snow Goofe, and 
they are equally good eating. This fpecies of Geefe 
are feldom feen to the North of Churchill River, and not 
very common at York Fort; but at Albany Fort they are 
more plentiful than the White or Snow Geefe. ‘Their 


breeding-places are as little known. to the moft accurate 
obferver as thofe of the Snow Geefe; for I never knew’ 


any of their eggs taken, and their Winter haunts have 
uk, hitherto 


Blue Geefe, 


442 


*Torned 
Wavey. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


hitherto been undifcovered. Thofe birds are frequently 
feen to lead a flock of the White ones; and, as they ge- 
nerally fly in angles, it is far from unpleafant to fee a 
bird of a different colour leading the van. The leader is 
generally the object of the firft {portiman who fires, which 
throws the whole flock into fuch confufion, that fome of 


the other hunters frequently kill fix or feven at a fhot. 


. Hornep Wavey. ‘This delicateand diminutive fpecies. 
of the Goofe is not much larger than the Mallard Duck. 
Its plumage is delicately white, except the quill-feathers, 
which are black. The bill is not more than an inch long, 
and at the bafe is ftudded round with lhttle knobs about 
the fize of peas, but more remarkably fo in the males. 
Both the bill and feet are of the fame colour with thofe of 
the Snow Goofe. ‘This fpecies is very fcarce at Churchill 
River, and I believe are never found at any of the South- 
ern fettlements ; but about two or three hundred miles to 
the North Weft of Churchill, I have feen them in as large 
flocks as the Common Wavey, or Snow Goofe. The fleth 
of this bird is exceedingly delicate; but they are fo {mall, 
that when I was on my journey to the North I eat two of 
them one night for fupper. I do not find this bird de- 
{cribed by my worthy friend Mr. Pennant in his Arctic Zoo- 
logy. Probably a fpecimen of it was not fent home, for 
the perfon that commanded at Prince of Wales’s Fort * at 


* Mr. Mofes Norton. 
the 


NQR Til E RNP OCC gE IA WN. 


the time the collection was making, did not pay any at- 
tention to it. 


Laucuinc Goosz. ‘This elegant fpecies has a white 
bill, and the legs and feet are of a fine yellow colour; 
the upper part of the plumage is brown, the breaft and 
belly white, the former prettily blotched with black. In 
fize they are equal to the Snow Goofe, and their fkins, 
when ftripped of their feathers, are delicately white, and 
the flefh excellent. They vifit Churchill River in very 
{mall numbers; but about two hundred miles to the North 
Welt of that river I have feen them fly in large flocks, 
like the Common Waveys, or Snow Geefe ; and near Cum- 
berland Houfe and Bafquiau they are found in fuch num- 
bers, that the Indians in moon-light nights frequently kill 
upwards of twenty at a fhot. Like the Horned Wavey, 
they never fly with the lead of the coaft, but are al- 
ways feen to come from the Weftward. Their general 
breeding-places are not known, though fome few of their 
egos are occafionally found to the North of Churchill; but 
I never heard any Indian fay that he had feen any eggs of 
the Horned Wavey: it is probable they retire to North 
Greenland to breed ; and their rout in the Fall of the year, 
as they return Southward, is equally unknown. They 
are, I believe, feldom feen on the coaft of Hudfon’s Bay 
to the Southward of latitude 59° North. 


22 BARREN 


443 


Laughing 


Goofe. 


444 A JOURNEY FO Tle 


iy Barren Geese. ‘Thefe are the largeft of all the fpecies 
of Geefe that frequent Hudfon’s Bay, as they frequently 
weigh fixteen or feventeen pounds. ‘They differ from the 
Common Grey Goofe in nothing but in fize, and in the 
head and breaft being tinged with a rufty brown. They 
never make their appearance in the Spring till the greateft 
part of the other fpecies of Geefe are flown Northward 
to breed, and many of them remain near Churchill River 
the whole Summer. This large fpecies are generally 
found to be males, and from the exceeding {mallnefs of 
their tefticles, they are, I fuppofe, incapable of propa- 
gating their {fpecies. I believe I can with truth fay, that I 
was the firft European who made that remark, though 
they had always been diftinguifhed by the name of the Bar- 
-ren Geefe ; for no other reafon than that of their not being 
known to breed. Their flefh is by no means unpleafant. 
‘though ‘always hard and tough; and their plumage is fo 
thick before they begin to moult, that one bird ufually 
produces a pound of fine feathers and down, of a furprifing 
elafticity. 


Brent Brent Geese. ‘This fpecies certainly breed in the re- 
ae moteft parts of the North, and feidom make their appear- 
ance at Churchill River till late in Auguft or September. 

The rout they take in Spring is unknown, and their breed~ 
ing-places have never been difcovered by any Indian in 
Hudfon’s Bay. When they make their appearance at 

6 Churchill 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


Churchill River, they always come from the North, fly 
near the margin of the coaft, and are never feen in the 
interior parts of the country. In fize they are larger than 
a Mallard Duck, but inferior to the Snow Goofe; and 
though their flefh appears delicate to the eye, it is not much 
efteemed. In fome years they pafs the mouth of Churchill 
River in prodigious numbers, and many of them are killed 
and ferved to the Company’s fervants as provifions ; but, 
as I have juft obferved, they are not much relifhed. When 
migrating to the South, they generally avail themfelves of 


a {trong North or North Wefterly wind, which makes. 
their flight fo fwift, that when I have killed four or five 


at a fhot, not one of them fell lefs than from twenty to 
fifty yards from the perpendicular fpot where they were 
killed. Like the White, or Snow Geefe, when in large 
flocks they fly in the fhape of a wedge, and make a 
great noife. Their flight is very irregular, fometimes 
being forty or fifty yards above the water, and in an in- 
ftant after they fkim clofe to the furface of it, and then 
rife again to a confiderable height ; fo that they may juftly 
be faid to fly in feftoons. 


The Duntzr Goofe, as it is called in Hudfon’s Bay, 
but which is certainly the Eider Duck. T hey are com- 
mon at the mouth of Churchill River as foon as the ice 
breaks up, but generally fly far North to breed; and the 
few that do remain near the fettlement are fo feattered 
among {mall iflands, and fea-girt rocks and thoals, as to 

| render 


44> 


Dunter 
Goofe. 


446 


Rean Goofe, 


Ducks 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


render it not worth while to attempt gathering their down. 
Their eggs, when found, are exceeding good eating; and 
in the Fall of the year the flefh is by no means unpleafant, 
though they are notorioufly known to feed on fifh. 


Bean Goost. ‘This fpecies is feldom found in any part 
of Hudfon’s Bay, as in all my travels I have only feen 
three that were killed. This bird never came under the 
infpection of Mr. Graham, or the late Mr. Hutchins, 
though they both contributed very largely to the collection 
fent home to the Royal Society *. 


Species of Water-Fowl. 


Ducks of various kinds are found in thofe parts during 
Summer; fome only frequenting the fea-coaft, while 
others vifit the interior parts of the country in aftonifhing 
numbers. The fpecies of this bird which is found moft 
commonly here are, the King Duck, Black Duck, Mallard 


* Jt is, however, no lefs true, that the late Mr. Humphry Martin, many 
years Governor of Albany Fort, fent home feveral hundred fpécimens of 
animals and plants to complete that collection; but by fome miftake, no- 
thing of the kind was placed to the credit of his account. Even my refpected 
friend Mr. Pennant, who with a candour that does him honour, has fo gene- 
roufly acknowledged his obligations to all to whom he thought he was indebted 
for information when he was writing his Arctic Zoology, (fee the Advertife- 
ment,) has, not mentioned his name; but I am fully perfuaded that it entirely 
proceeded from a want of knowing the perfon; and as Mr. Hutchins fuc- 
ceeded him at Albany in the year 1774, every thing that has been fent over 
from that part has been placed to his account. 


Duck, 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


Duck, Long-tailed Duck, Widgeon, and Teal. The two 
firft only vifit the fea-coaft, feed on fifhand fith-fpawn; and 
their flefh is by no means efteemed good, though their eges 
are not difagreeable. The Mallard and Long-tailed Duck 
vifit Hudfon’s Bay in great numbers, and extend from the 
fea-coaft to the remoteft Weftern parts, and near Cum- 


berland Houfe are found in vaft multitudes. At their firft 


arrival on the fea-coaft, they are exceeding good eating; but 


when in a moulting fate, though very fat, they are im ge- 


neral fo rank that few Europeans are fond of them. At 
thofe feafons the difference in flavour is eafily known by 


the colour of the fat; for when that is white, the fleth is 
moft affuredly good; but when it is yellow, or of ar 
orange colour, it isvery rank and fifhy. This difference is 


only peculiar to thofe that frequent and breed near the 
fea-coaft; for in the interior parts I never knew them 


killed but their flefh was very good; and the young Mal- 


lard Duck before it can fly is very fat, and moft deli- 
cate eating. The fame may be faid of the Long-tailed 
Duck. Neither of thofe fpecies lay more than fix or eight 


eges in common, and frequently bring them all forth. 


Wipcron. ‘This fpecies of Duck is very uncommon 
in Hudfon’s Bay ; ufually keeping in pairs, and being {fel- 
dom feen in flocks. They are by no means fo numerous 
as the two former; and are moft frequently {een: in rivers 
and marfhes near the fea-coaft. Their flefh is generally 


efteemed ; and the down of thofe I have examined:is little 


inferior in elafticity to that of the Eider, though much 
fhorter. 


Widgeons 


446 


Teal. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


fhorter. The fame may be faid of feveral other {pecies of 
Ducks that frequent thofe parts; but the impoflibility of 
collecting the down in any quantity, prevents it from be 
coming an article of trade. 


Tea. Like the Mallard, they are found in confider- 
able numbers near the fea-coaft; but are more plentiful 
in thé interior parts of the country, and fly in fuch large 
flocks that I have often killed twelve or fourteen at one 
fhot, and have feen both Englifh and Indians kill a much 
greater number. At their firft arrival they are but poor, 
though generally efteemed good eating. This diminutive 
Duck is by far the moft prolific of any I know that reforts 
to Hudion’s Bay; for I have often feen the old ones fwim- 


ming at the head of feventeen young, when not much 


larger than walnuts. This bird remains in thofe parts as 
long as the feafon will permit ; for in the year one thoufand 
feven hundred and feventy-five, in my paflage from Cum- 
berland Houfe to York Fort, I, as well as my Indian com- 
panions, killed them in the rivers we paffed through as 
late as the twentieth of O&ober. At thofe times they 
are entirely involved in fat, but delicately white, and may 
truly be called a great luxury. 


Befides the birds already defcribed, there is a great 
variety of others, both of land and water fowl, that fre- 
quent thofe parts in Summer; but thefe came not fo im- 
mediately under my infpection as thofe I have already 


defcribed. | 
of 


NORTHERN OCEAN, 


Of the V egetable Produ€tions. 


The vegetable produdtions of this country by no means 
engaged my attention fo much as the animal creation ; 
which is the lefs to be wondered at, as fo few of them 
are ufeful for the fupport of man. Yet I will endeavour 
to enumerate as many of them as I think are worth 


notice. 


The Gooseszrariss thrive beft in ftony and rocky ground, 
which lies open and much expofed to the Sun. But in 
thofe fituations few of the bufhes grow to any height, and 
{fpread along the ground like vines. The fruit is always 
moft plentiful and the fineft on the under-fide of the 
branches, probably owing to the reflected heat from the 
ftones and gravel, and from being fheltered from all cold 
winds and fog by the leaves. I never faw more than one 
{pecies of Goofeberry in any part of Hudfon’s Bay, which 
is the red one. When green, they make excellent pies or 
tarts; and when ripe are very pleafant eating, though by 
no means fo large as thofe produced in England. 


CRANBERRIES grow in great abundance near Churchill, 
and are not confined to any particular fituation, for they 
4M are 


449 


Goofe- 


berries. 


Cranberries, 


460 A JOURNEY. TO. THE 


are as common on open bleak plains and high rocks as 
among the woods. When carefully gathered in the Fall, 
in dry weather, and as carefully packed in cafks with 
moift fugar, they will keep for years, and are annually 
{ent to England in confiderable quantities as prefents, where 
they are much efteemed. When the: thips have remained 
in the Bay fo late that the Cranberries are ripe, fome of 


the Captains have carried them home in water with great 
fuccef{s, 


Heath- The Heatuserrizs are in fome years fo plentiful near 

pers Churchill, that it is impoflible to walk in many places 
without treading on thoufands and millions of them. 
They grow clofe to the ground, and are a favourite repaft 
of many birds that migrate to thofe parts in Summer, 
particularly the Grey’Goofe; on which account the In- 
dians diftinguifh them by the name of Nifhca-minnick, 
or the Grey Goofeberry. The juice of this berry makes 
an exceeding pleafant beverage, and the fruit itfelf would 
be more pleafing were it not for the number of {mall 
feeds it contains. 


Bethago- BETHAGO-TOMINICK, as it is called by the Indians, or the 
— Dewater-berry of Mr. Dragge. I have feen this berry as 
far North as Marble Ifland, and that in great abundance. 

It flourifhes beft, and is moft produétive, in fwampy 

bogey ground covered with mofs, and is feldom found 

among 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


among grafs. The plant itfelf is not very unlike that of 
a Strawberry, but the leaves are larger. Out of the center 
of the plant fhoots a fingle ftalk, fometimes to the height 
of feven or eight inches, and each plant only produces 
one berry, which at fome diftance refembles a Straw- 
berry; but on examination they have not that conical 
form; and many of them are only compofed of three or 
four lobes, while others confift of near twenty. The fla- 
vour of this berry is far from unpleafing, and it is 
eaten by our people in confiderable quantities during the 
feafon, (which is Auguft,) and, like all the other fruits 
in thofe parts, is fuppofed to be wholefome, and a great 
antifcorbutic. 


Currans, both red and black, are common about 
Churchill River, but the latter are far more plentiful than 
the former, and are very large and fine. The buthes 
on which thofe currans grow, frequently exceed three 
feet in height, and generally thrive beft in thofe parts 


that are moift but not fwampy. Small vallies between 


the rocks, at fome little diftance from the woods, are 
very favourable to them; and I have frequently obferved 
that the fruit produced in thofe fituations is larger and 
finer than that which is found in the woods. ‘Thofe 
berries have a very great effec: on fome people if eaten 
in any confiderable quantities, by acting as a very pow- 
erful purgative, and in fome as an emetic at the fame 

2M 2 time ; 


451 


€urrans. 


5% 


Juniper- 
berries. 


Straw- 
berries. 


A JOURNEY TO THE 


time ; but if mixed with Cranberries, they never have 
that effec. 


Juniper-Berrizs are frequently found near the new 
fettlement at Churchill River, but by no means in fuch 
plenty as in the more Southern and interior parts of the 
country. The bufh they grow on is fo fimilar to the 
creeping pine, that one half of the Company’s fervants 
refiding in Hudfon’s Bay do. not know one from the other: 
Like the Goofeberry bufhes in thofe parts, the fruit is 
always moft plentiful on the under-fide of the branches. 
They are not much efteemed either by the Indians or Eng- 
lifh, fo that the few that are made ufe of are generally 
infufed in brandy, by way of making a cordial, which i is. 


far from unpleafant *. 


STRAWBERRIES +, and thofe of a confiderable fize and 
excellent flavour, are found as far North as Churchill 
River; and what is moft remarkable, they are frequently ~ 
known to be more plentiful in fuch places as have formerly 
been fet on fre. ‘This is not peculiar to the Strawberry, 
but it is well known that in the interior parts of the coun- 
try, as well as at Albany and Moofe Forts, that after 


* The Indians call the Juniper-berry Caw-caw-cue-minick, or the Crow- 
berry. 
+ The Oteagh-minick of the Indians, is fo called,, becaufe it in fome meafure. 
sefembles a heart. 
e the 


WORTFHERN OCEAN: 


the ground, or more properly the under-wood and mofs, 
have been fet on fire, that Rafpberry-bufhes and Hips have 
fhot up in great numbers on {pots where nothing of the 
kind had ever been feen before. This is a phenomenon 
that is not eafily accounted for; but it is more than pro- 
bable that Nature wanted fome afliftance, and the mofs 
being all burnt away, not only admits the Sun to a& with 
more power, but the heat of the fire muft, in fome mea- 
fure, loofen the texture of the foil, fo as to admit the 
plants to fhoot up, after having been deep-rooted for 
many years without being able to force their way to the 
furface. 


Befides the Berries already mentioned, there are three 
others found as far North as Churchill; namely, what the 
Indians call the Eye-berry, and tie other two are termed 


Blue-berry and Partridge-berry by the Englifh. 


The Eysz-gerry grows much in the fame manner as the 
Strawberry, and though {maller, is infinitely fuperior in 
flavour. This berry is found in various fituations; but 
near Churchill River they are moft plentiful in {mall hol- 
lows among the rocks, which are fituated fome diftance 
from the woods; but they are never known to grow in 
{wampy ground, and I never faw them fo plentiful in any 
part of Hudfon’s Bay as about Churchill River. 


The 


453 


Eye-berrys 


454- 
Blue-berry. 


Partridge- 
berry. 


A FOURNEY TO) See 


The Biuz-Berry is about the fize of a Hurtleberry, 
and grows on bufhes which rife to eighteen inches or two 
feet, but in general are much lower. They are feldom 
ripe till September, at which time the leaves turn toa 
beautiful red; and the fruit, though fmall, have as fine a 
bloom as any plum, and are much efteemed for the plea- 
fantnefs of their flavour. 


The ParrripGe-zerry is nearly as large as the Cranberry 
imported from Newfoundland, and though of ‘a beautiful 
tran{fparentred, yet has a difagreeable tafte. Thefe berries are 
feldom taken, either by the Indians cr Englifh; and many 
of the latter call them Poifon-berries, but feveral birds are 
fond of them. They grow clofe to the ground, like the 
Cranberry, and the plant that produces them is not very 
unlike {mall fage, either in fhape or colour, but has none 
of its virtues. 


I had nearly forgotten another f{pecies of Berry, which is 
found on the dry ridges at Churchill in confiderable num- 
bers. In fize and colour they much refemble the Red 
Curran, and grow cn bufhes fo much like the Creeping 
Willow, that people of little obfervation fcarcely know 
the difference; particularly as all the fruit is on the un- 
der-fide of the branches, and entirely hid by the leaves. 
I never knew this Berry eaten but by a frolickfome In~ 
dian girl; and as it had no ill effe&t, it is a proof it is 

5 not 


PORTER N OCA N. 


not unwholefome, though exceedingly unpleafant to the 
palate, and not much lefs fo to the {mell. 


Hirs of a {mall fize, though but few in number, are 
alfo found on the banks of Churchill River, at fome dif- 
tance from the fea. But in the interior parts of the 
country they are frequently found in fuch vaft quantities, 
that at a diftance they make the {pots they grow on appear 
perfectly red. In the interior parts of Hudfon’s Bay they 
are as large as any I ever remember to. have feen, and 
when ripe, have a moft delightful bloom : but at that fea- 
fon there is fcarcely one in ten which he not a worm in 
it; and they frequently ad as a ftrong purgative. 


With refpeé& to the fmaller productions of the vege- 
table world, I am obliged to be in a great meafure filent, 
as the nature of my various occupations during ag a 


dence in this country gave me little leifure, and being 


unacquainted with botany, I viewed with inattention 
things that were not of immediate ufe: the few which 
follow are all that particularly engaged my attention. 


The Wisu-a-ca-pucca, which grows in moft parts of 


this country, is faid by fome Authors to have great me- 
dical virtues, applied, either inwardly as an alterative, or 
outwardly dried and pulverifed, to old fores and gan- 
grenes. The truth of this I much doubt, and could 

never 


45 3. 


Hips. 


W ifh-a-cas 


pucca, 


456 


yakathey- 


puck. 


Pofs. 


Grafs. 


A joURNE Y@ Wo "aoe 


niever think it had the leaft medical quality. It is, how- 
ever, much ufed by the lower clafs of the Company’s 
fervants as tea; and by fome is thought very pleafant. 
But the flower is by far the moft delicate, and if gathered 
at a proper time, and carefully dried in the fhade, will 
retain its flavour for many years, and make a far more 
pleafant beverage than the leaves. There are feveral 
fpecies of this plant, of which fome of the leaves are nearly 
as large as that of the Creeping Willow, while others are 
as {mall and narrow as that of the Rofemary, and much 
refembles it in colour; but all the fpecies have the fame 
{mell and favour. 


Jackasney-pucx. ‘This herb much refembles Creeping 
Box ; and is only ufed, either by the Indians or Englith, 
to mix with tobacco, which makes it fmoke mild and 
pleafant ; and would, I am perfuaded, be very acceptable 
to many {mokers in Enelaud, 


Moss of various forts and colours is plentiful enough 
in moft parts of this country, and is what the deer ufually 
feed on. 


Grass of feveral kinds is alfo found in thofe parts, 
and fome of it amazingly rapid of growth, particularly 
that which is there called Rye-grafs, and which, in our 
{hort Summer at Churchill, frequently grows to the height 

of 


NORTHERN OCEAN. 


of three feet. Another f{pecies of Grafs, which is produced 
in marfhes, and on the margins of lakes, ponds, and rivers, 
is particularly adapted for the fupport of the multitudes of 
the feathered creation which refort to thofe parts in Sum- 
mer. The Marfh Grafs at Churchill is of that peculiar 
nature, that where it is mowed one year, no crop can be 
procured the next Summer; whereas at York Fort, though 
the climate is not very different, they can get two crops, 
or harvefts, from the fame {pot in one Summer. Vetches 
are plentiful in fome parts as far North as Churchill River; 
and Burrage, Sorrel, and Coltsfoot, may be ranked among 
the ufeful plants. Dandelion is alfo plentiful at Churchill, 
and makes an early falad, long before any thing can be pro- 
duced in the gardens. 


In fac, notwithftanding the length of the Winter, 
the feverity of the cold, and the great f{earcity of vege- 
tables at this Northern fettlement, by proper attention to 
cleanlinefs, and keeping the people at reafonable exercile, 
I never had one man under me who had the leaft fymp- 
toms of the fcurvy; whereas at York Fort, Albany, and 
Moofe River, there were almoft annual complaints that one 


hali of the people were rendered incapable pf duty by that 
dreadful diforder. 


I do not with to lay claim to any merit on this occafion, 
but I carinot help obierving that, during ten years I -had 


3N the 


Oy) 


458 


Trees. 


A” § 0 WU REN the Yo. 


the command at Churchill River, only two men died of 
that diftemper, though my complement at times amounted 
in number to fifty-three. | 


The Foreft Trees that grow on this inhofpitable fpot 
are very few indeed; Pine, Juniper, {mall {cragoy Poplar, 
Creeping Birch, and Dwarf Willows, compofe the whole 
catalogue. Farther Weftward the Birch Tree is very plen- 
tiful; and in the Athapufcow country, the Pines, Larch, 
Poplar, and Birch, grow to a great fize; the Alder is 
alfo found there. | | 


tH EP BEND. 


The following BOOKS, printed for A. STRAWAN and 'T. Cader, 
are fold by T. CADELL Fun. and W.Davizs, (Sacceffors to Mr. 
CADELL,) 7 the Strand. 


tr An Account of the VoYAGEs undertaken by Order of his prefent 
Majefty, for making Difcoveries in the SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE, 
and fucceflively performed by Commodore Byron, Captain Wallis, 
Captain Carteret, and Captain Cook, in the Dolphin and Swallow, and 
the Endeavour: Drawn up from the Journals which were kept by the 
feveral Commanders, and from the Papers of Jofeph Banks Efquire, 
and Dr. Solander, by JOHN HawkeEswortu, LL.D. Hluftrated 
with Cuts, and a great variety of Charts and Maps, (in all, 52 Plates,) 
relative to the Countries now firit difcovered, or hitherto but im- 


perfeGly known. 3 Vols. 4to. Price 3/4 12s. 
*..* The fame Work in 4 Vols. 8vo. “14 8s. 


2, An Account of a VOYAGE towards the SouTH PoLg, and round 
the World, performed in his Majefty’s Ships the Refolution and 
Pevemtite, 1 the Years 1772, 1773, 1774, and 177¢: Written 
by JAmEs Coox, Cotnmander of the Refolution. In which is ine 
cluded Captain Furneaux’s Narrative of his Proceedings in the Ad- 
venture, during the Separation of the Ships. Elegantly printed in 
two Volumes Royal gto. iiluftrated with Maps and Charts, anda 
Variety of Portraits of Perfons, and Views of Places, drawn: during 
the Voyage by Mr. Hedges, and engraved by the moft eminent 
IMemers, Price 2/. 125, 


DIRECTIONS to the BINDER. 


- A PLAN exhibiting Mr. HEARNE’s Tracks in his two Journies for 
the Difcovery of the Copper Mine River, in the Years 1770, 
L771, ond ge, under the Dire&tion of the Hudfon’s Bay 


Company. - - - - To face the Title-page. 
Pirate I. A North Weft View of PRinczE oF WALES’s Fort in 
Hudfon’s Bay, North America. = - ‘ Yo face Page 1 
PLATE II. Indian Implements. “ “ To face P. 98 
PLraTeE III. Plan of the Copper MiNE RIVER. To face P. 164 
PLATETV. A Winter View in the ArTHAPUSCOW LAKE. 
To face P. 248 
PLATE V. Indian Implements. ~ = rs At the End. 


“PLATE VI, Plan of ALBANY RIVER in Hudfon’s Bay. ¢ the End. 
PLate VIL. Plan of Moose River in Hudfon’s Bay. - i the End. 
PLATE VIII. Plan of SLUDE RIVER. = = At the End, 


ft the end 







See Pages 7g & 1% 


* Sn Cliron a - . 










e Toft foot ; Wires wher, ifeot ies 


rf 


\ 
AY) 
SY 












7m 
lq. 3. gees 
eee C, nil 
® sgeesecceceaaass 4 heltl. VOL POUT, Jve Pave 9325 
gecspcassaeeess. ‘ 
L4 T4343 4 ies 
2 eoess 
7 2235 a 
* B25. 


2 
. of t / ledge Jee Lage 324 

















= 
= = —_<$$———_ _—_—— 
2 a = 
————— I = os 
~ = + a — = = 









: f. ella of . Boar oh pide 


See Pages 250 & yo 




















, 
= 
, —————— 
= 
. —— 
< - a 
—s : = — —— 
‘ = —— = 
a 

. - —— 


Avor/a vend! Joe of wand « 


Hondon, Published Jans 127795, 00 Cada & Bar wes, Strand 


SH deli, 





eo - ee Ur 








LV Of2 Fa SH ORF; 





at 
























a al 
ue “a < 











1 , ~~ 4 c Bax - tt as Sere Sets sVaeNY ars eal L . . 
—- 7 te b = Oe ee nppaies a J et ttttes - 
au _ *, : Rs . bs : -. - eens ie . anne rae re ) 
- Por Z ig - call te eee BO > > ¥ as Re il SS h Ch | canon t \ 
: L 4 ms BEER ” y .* . 
Ree sete ee ta ies A ss _*: ail ' a S —* ea . 4 aa or 
i — — | ; _ ort eK < CAO aes i £ “ ? 7 4 
rf = te ote a sett ea a OO ah Se 2 of 4 . o “., 
was = oe , 4 
Brushey Isle Bruchey 40-5 ieee aa ? 2a f = 
i 2 ee. E - 
| a Bi i oy IN 
* 
‘ 
S y a Ba ee 
’ 4 s f Tr . ; j a 
i; =a ‘ 7 North Sand s, 
; a \ “ae | a L ay rad 5 ; ‘ Ne 
. AN A = // 5 ca 3h 5 i = \ 
> ee, ui! Ane “4 “ nae 2 ee a 3 cel of = 
a gts i ai , 4 is . P 3 . 
sae ‘ if a D $ ate AQ : 
a o oat + rac TOR >” * Te fy = 
4 ; ' AN Rene sy 5 oe a mA = ; : 
oS oe g 3 neduels . ‘ ,. oa S 
ay. eA SNOUT Ye. e + . i g fe 
! * J ae ‘ ~ i = oe 
, 5 y, 
By 4 
b Ae 
ey ee 
=> es 
oe 
a | 54 Kathoms 
a C+ Alban ‘ Roads 
a al 
i yf 
Jeet ee ..4? ° $3 Fathoms 
=0 a) ¢ = 
; 2 va 
‘ a Pf 
f a S va 
oa) 
x; ve” 
ay 
; Little Rivers Arve Hummoch 
P Blur - - 
* 4. ~ 
SOUTH SHORE 
&, ‘ i — oo = » 





sie t 


yy) oo 
® bs, dla fo 


CILB. Ly} RIVER ) 
mHvupbs ON’ S BAY. 


: Latitude aes o. L2 _0O wWarth : 
= . og £ Me Yad 1 
Longttidi CORA nO ae frou Lotte . . 
, by. $.H1.1774. 





Gis ie 
a 


ee. THs Ce, vs tered clown ty ey nelical Conipafs. = Tho /hrev 
Gumouochs vf Nord or Aucpit eit ran Ce Mew tu cle pu - 
Meh over y Mic Factory « hhevd, ins 3, uh Al crdlipr, ca i a gool g 

ony ae py tack feenemock fear: Mee W/ ph (aa, Muny 


futile wie ¢. vee ga Shack for ee Che Shuoys. = 


London, Published Jan*1° 





ed 
sk A 2 i 





The autcermost Pont of Ce South Shore bears die South from Hit Ships Birth . 


A Seale of 6 Miles. 


ASP RTM INT 5 a * 
ed 


Pe 


2 3 J J 6 


Cock Lshbinev 


“19985, by Cadell & Davies, Saand . 


, 


-— oma aa * aoe | 










£7 Keele seulpl 352 Strame , 


























- 


Wareyv Creeks 


Barkers Creek 


+ 


sar 
+ + + a | 





: ; Sa oe { ve 
he Creut Motte e 7 ,.; ¥ 
ME fe wt ' - 
i 4 Ten This Ridge de at fow 
Se, A ' 


Ma. 
! 
a { Shi, t 




































































s] 
Za PRM ses 
na 51 LOSES 
Se 
e 3 
, Sets , 
1 : nag 
4% low Hater 2 
a 
A : y Fa, en: = 4 
OR Se See ee ee Se 
Conte Ns ca ‘ fe - Pa © Sy Nad 3 Beta re. sie 
§ a wMeeeS eel, ai 
3 ‘ q A en“ 
4 oe — 
: Hb, wai : : a. - a 
Ss eal) — F A | f = a e Sy 
sedis ar South Satut heat Bawgeu | | 3. eee Lie ‘ A. 
Waa p 4 : , 
t n 
\ 
4 areege £, =. : * | 
r Trapang | 
Tslana ' 
# J ; 
4! ¥. a 
\ = 1 
rf ‘i | » 
2 if 
. 1 
1 \ i 
4 ‘ 
ey tT Lin, Sint sams, i sy o ‘ 
mn-= i? -& Mn, Voapung Peer @ a 
¢ L a _ : 
4 Va! { 
¥ aol "7 
HUDSON S BAY, NORTH AMERICA, it 
ee 
o@ ; $ 5. 
yt : 
LUG3.N, Lon 63V rom London. ' . | 
by SH: AR ¢ 3 | | 
Me a! - 
Bedtked leur i‘ ! 
: eo ~ BY 7) Tp ye 12 4; 
| os a’ ee ee | a ec ere PSO _ ery 
t : 7 aie 1 -Sg ~ 4 
ASeale 07'73 Miles 
¢< 
2 —_ aamqumneaees: , = a Fn aE RR _ —— 
_ - = - = — ee ———— a ue a : NMeele, fel 3.52 Nira? 
; bs . a Fo + + 7 ' “ . 
: Leuden Lublished Fane 1705, bv Gute & Darvas, Stand. 
oe x 








alt He etud 
Llate tid 


as 





| Cape Hopg Isls 


es, 





Brie 35 
a rnsee 
earn eee 














- Be 4 4 
¢ ee ear Mai 
- i 2? ... Old fait Main House 
tre, ie A e 
. eR a Ee # “She - ; _* ‘ iv gt 


. ee : 
© North Wo ody ist 
+ i : 


* 
frre eet es ASE NSE) ber, ‘ a 
aor72 7 Ri, ee cre y 
a ~ fa noe Jan 
a rT > 
wroer 


' 1% 
i Lishing Coek 


Ma 





a4 





he 
rs 


SE, 
ie. 
Wee 


» 
“in te ke rk D, 

fe 2) y. 1 ’ ¢ (7 a 
OS brie Witter, gill 









op ped 












oy is ; \ 
‘ een obs + S a Nc 
Pr rah ia vee si fia Me : : : ce a “. 





eri 


The zrve7Pole Meds 


+ Pie 








A 


The eutcr Vole Island 


on 


7 
. 


me a Rie : + 0 N 
F > 4 Ry A 
fy be ca . : ag 


eres, 











{ 
i PS 
( 
Lhe brant Flovk er taexe Shoal} if ’ 
whith Prysat lou Nats: i iF & 
Wr oe 7 
yee meee TU i ; t. : 
rg oe . : % : 
yl pt ; — % ; 









apn? 


Fave 
" 
ail 


re 


Beaver 


Cerin: 





Creek & . a 
= 4 ’ +) ae / “yp * . 
mC * lg eo ee rs und till * fs a 
ay? ee fe. y 9 ie 
Sa bo ® 
_ iy 


i 


re 
ss 
&, 


A. a ‘y, 
‘. be ~ ‘ 
Lorcuptte Lill can be seen 0rT dre\, % oS 
Seals ona clear Day : 


es cae | me Vee 
> . . 7 
: 2 ‘ 
: a Re 


Scratch Point = a ¥ con oe 
oe . ie 


three temarkalle Lilly t ie 





> 


a Sgn 





5 
“i 
aa 
, 
‘ 


a ea wires gee ee ee 





F 
eo 
aR 
, eg 


ap 
tr 


Py 


~ ike 


eT SE 
Bh oes 


4 $ 
wtuch can be seen well at Sta x k y -o« 
z ot : % ove! 
4. | 


va ae 


ia cree eae, 
af 


= . 
: me *h 
) = i. & 
~ ies 
Cy “ty 
; | 
~ % 
) = : 
+ = x. 
. wn ye 
Ne amv’, Se 
— os hee rs 5 
? ‘ is 





: 
ow i, Me ci il 
¢ 4 ‘ me ba 
2. 20S te 2 
e* mE 
S, . g 
, . % 





= + 








ae = 


Lomten Publihedt heap pb ps, a - : == 


a 


7 Bs rele , 
At. fy tril TE Xs Dear Taw, Mftvestef . Viele Srige 252, Sert 


| 
| 
| 


t! 


“Kies 


=r 
