Charles William Heckethorn, The Secret Societies of All Ages and Countries (1875)
==========================================================================
Heckethorn's massive survey of secret societies — from the mysteries of antiquity through the Templars, Rosicrucians, and Freemasons. The Victorian classic of secret-society literature. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY


THIS BOOK IS ONE OF A
COLLECTION MADE BY

BlNNd LOEWY
1854-1919

AND BEQUEATHED TO
CORNELL UNIVERSITY


CORNELL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY


3 1924 092 567 050


The original of tliis book is in
tine Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


http://archive.org/details/cu31924092567050


THE SECRET SOCIETIES OP ALL. AGES
AND COUNTRIES.


Dalla straordinarieti degli effetti certo puo indursi la straordi-
narietk, la grandezza, 1' insistenza delle cagioni ; ma P intreccio e
r alterno prevalere di queste, 1' attrazione che esercitano, sfaggono
all' analisi. H mistero precinge la nottuma fecondazioue. Dai piii
disparati sentlmenti trae vigore la setta. Le materie plu preziose ed
iiisieme le meno elette concorrono a formare qnesto gigante, rifiisione
ciclopica e tetra di quanto s' agita, ribolle e schiuma nelle viscere
sociali. — G. De Casteo.

From the extraordinary nature of the effects we may infer the
extraordinary nature, grandeur, and permanency of the causes ; but
their connection, Tarying predominance, and mutual attraction, escape
all analysis. Mystery surrounds the obscure fecundation. Sects
draw vigour from the most opposite sentiments. The most exalted
as well as the meanest elements concur in forming this giant, a
Cyclopean and black fusion of all that seethes, boils, and ferments in
the social viscera.


THE SECRET SOCIETIES

OF ALL AGES AND
COUNTRIES.

BY

CHARLES WILLIAM HBCKETHORN.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. 1.


LONDON:

RICHARD BBNTLEY AND SON,

©ubIiajietB in aDrtiinatg to ftet JBlajestH,

NEW BURLINGTON STREET.

1875.


ANALYTICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS.

The numbers refer to the §.

VOLUME I.

REFACE xiii

INTRODUCTION.
1 . Intelligibility and nature of Secret Societies. ,
2. Classification of Secret Societies. 3. Re-
ligious .Sdoieties. 4. Political Societies. 5. Aims of Po-
litical Societies. 6. Religious Secret Societies. 7. Most
perfect human Type. 8. Causes of high mental Develop-
ment. 9. Primitive Culture. 10. True Doctrines of Na-
ture and Being. 11. Fundamental Principles of true
Knowledge possessed by the Ancients ; the Seven Properties
of Eternal Nature. 12. Key to Mystic Teaching. 13.
Mystic Teaching summarized. 14. How true Knowledge
came to be lost. 15. Original Spirit of the Mysteries and
Results of their Decay. 16. The Mysteries under their
Astronomical Aspect. 17. Astronomical Aspects continued.
18. Uniformity of Dogmas. 19. Secret Societies no lou-
, ger needed. .


vi Analytical Table of Contents.

Book I.
ANCIENT MYSTERIES.

I. MA.GI.— 20. Derivation of term Magus. 21. Antiquity of

the Magi. 22. Zoroaster. 23. Doctrine of Zoroaster. 24.
The Light worshipped. 25. Origin of the word Deus.
26. Mode of Initiation. 27. Myth of Kustam.

II. MiTHRAics. — 28. Mysteries of Mithras. 29. Origin of
Mithraic worship. 30. Dogmas. 31. Kites of Initiation.
32. Kites derived from Magism.

III. Bkahmins and Gymnosophists. — 33. Vulgar creed of
India. 34. Secret Doctrines. 35. Brahma and Buddha.
36. Asceticism. 37. Gynmosophists. 38. Places for
Celebrating Mysteries. 39. Initiation. 39a. Brahm and

' Brahma. 40. Ineffable Name Aum. 41. The Lingam.
42. The Lotos.

IV. Egyptian Mysteries. — 43. Antiquity of Egyptian Civi-
lization. 44. Temples of Ancient Egypt. 45. Egyptian
Priests and Kings. 46. Exoteric and Esoteric Doctrines.
47. Egyptian Mythology. 48. The Phoenix. 49. The
Cross. 50. Places of Initiation. 51. Process of Initia-
tion. 52. Mysteries of Serapis. 53. Mysteries of Osiris.
54. Isis.

V. Metamorphoses op the Legend of Isis. — 55. Spread
of Egyptian Mysteries. 56. Dionysiaca or Bacchic Mys-
teries. 57. Sabazian Mysteries. 58. Mysteries of the
Cabiri. 59. Eleusinian Mysteries. 60. Doors of Horn
and Ivory. 61. Suppression of Eleusinian Mysteries.
62. Thesmophoria. 63. Aim of Grecian Mysteries more
moral than religious.

VI. Chinese and Japanese Mysteries. — 64. Chinese Meta-
physics. 65. Introduction of Chinese Mysteries. 66.
Parallel between Buddhism and Roman Catholicism. 67.


Analytical Table of Contents. vii

Lau-Tze. 68. Modern Chiaese Societies. 69. Japanese
Mysteries. 70. Japanese Doctrines. 71. The Lama.

VII. Mexican and Peruvian Mtstebies. — 72. American
Aborigines. 73. Mexican Deities. 74. Cruelty of Mexi-
can Worship. 75. Initiation into Mysteries. 76. The
Greater Mysteries. 77. Human Sacrifices. 78. Clothing
in Bloody Skin. 79. Peruvian Mysteries.

Vni. Deuids. — 80. The Druids the Magi of the West.
81. Temples. 82. Places of Initiation. 83. Rites.
84. Doctrines. 85. Political and Judicial Power. 86.
Priestesses. 87. Abolition.

IX. Scandinavian Mysteries. — 88. Drottes. 89. Ritual.
90. Astronomical Meaning.


Book II.
EMANATIONISTS.

I. Cabala. — 91. Its Origin. 92. Its Progress. 93. Its Date.
94. Book of the Creation. 95. Different Kinds of Cabala.
96. Visions of Ezekiel. 97. The Creation out of Nothing.
98. Diffusion of Cabalistic Ideas. ^~

n. The Gnostics. — 99. Character of Gnosticism. 100. Doc-
trines. 101. Development of Gnosticism. 102. Spirit
of Gnosticism.

Book III.

RELIGION OF LOVE.

I. Sons of the Widow. — 103. Origin of Religion of Love.
104. Manes. 105. Manichaeism. 106. Life of Manes.
107. Progress of Manichaeism. 108. Doctrines. 109.
Spread of Religion of Love.


viii Analytical Table of Contents.

II. The Gat Science. — 110. Transition from Ancient to
Modern Initiations. 111. Spirit of Ancient Secret Socie-
ties. 112. Spirit of Modem Secret Societies. 113. Cause
and Progress of .Heresy. 114. Efforts and Influence of
Heretics. 115. The Albigenses. 116. Tenets of Albi-
genses. 117. Aims of Albigenses. 118. Religion of the
Troubadours. 119. Difficulty to understand the Trou-
badours. 120. Poetry of Troubadours. 121. Degrees
among Troubadours. 122. Courts of Love.

III. The Co"nsolation. — 123. Historical Notices. 124. Doc-
trines and Tenets.

IV. Chivalry. — ^125. Original Aim. 126. Knights the Mi-
litary Apostles of the Religion of Love. 127. Tenets and
Doctrines.


Book IV.
ISHMAELITES.

I. Lodge of Wisdom. — 128. Various Sects sprung from

Manichajism. 129. Secret Docti-ines of Islamism. 130.
Candidati. 131.' Cruelty of Babeck the Gay. 132. Ish-
maelites. 133. Teaching of the Lodge of Cairo. 134.
Progress of Doctrines.

II. Assassins. — 135. Foundation of Order. 136. Influence
of Hassan. 137. Catechism of the Order. 138. Devo-
tion of Followers. 139. The Imaginary Paradise. 140.
Sanguinai-y Character of Hassan. 141. Further Instances
of Devotion in Followers. 142. Christian Princes in
League with Assassins. 143. Extinction of -Sect.

III. Drdses. — 144. Origin of Sect. 145. Doctrines. 146
Recent Events.


Analytical Table of Contents. ix

Book V.

KNIGHTS TEMPLARS.

147. Foundation of Order. 148. Its Progress. 149. Account
of Commanderies. 150. Imputations against the Order.
151. Plots against the Order. 152. Attentions paid to
Grand Master Molay. 153. Charges against Templars.
154. Burning of Knights. 155. James de Molay burnt.
156. .Mysteries of the Knights Templars. 157. The
Temple and the Church. 158. The Temple the Symbol
of the Holy Spirit. 159. Doctrines. 160. Initiation.
161. Cursing and Spitting on the Cross. 162. The Tem-
plars the Opponents of the Pope. 163. Baphomet. 164.
Effects of the Downfall of the Knights, of the Temple.
165. Connexion with Freemasonry.

Book VI.
FREE JUDGES.

I. Holt Vehm. — 166. Origin and Objects of Institution.
167. Officers and Organization. 168. Language and Rules
of Initiated. 169. Procedure. 170. Execution of Sen-
tences. 171. Decay of the Institution. 172. Kissmg the
Virgin.

n. BeatiPaoli. — 173. Character of the Society. 174. Ten-
dencies and Tenets. 175. Account of Sicilian writer.

Book VII.

ALCHYMISTS.

I. Alchtmists. — 176. Astrology perhaps secret Heresy.
177. Process by which Astrology degenerated. 178.


X Analytical Table of Contents.

Scientific Value of Alchymy. 179. The Tincture. 180.
Aims of Alchymy. 181. History of Alchymy. 182.
Specimen of Alchymistio Language. 183. Personal Fate
of the Alchymists.
II. RosiCRuciANS. — 184. Merits of the Kosicrueia,ns. 185.
Origin of Society doubtful. 186. Origin of Name. 187.
Statements concerning themselves. 188. Poetical Fictions
of Rosicrucians. 189. Progress and Extinction of Eosi-
crucians. 190. Transition to Freemasons.


Book VIII.

FREEMASONS.

I. Legend op the Temple. — 191. Ancestry of Hiram Abiff.

192. Hiram, Solomon, and the Queen of Sheba.
rnr Origin. — Traditions.— 193. The First Masons. 194.
/ Periods of Freemasonry. 195. Freemasoniy derived from

"many sources.

{ III. Rites AND Customs. — 196. List of Rites. 197. Masonic
^' Customs. 198. Masonic Alphabet.

IV. The Lodge. — 199. Interior Arrangement of Lodge.
200. Modern Lodge. 201. Officers. 202. Opening the
Lodge.

V. Genuine and Spurious Masonry. — 203. Distinction
between Genuine and Spurious Masonry. 204. Some
Rites only deserve special mention.

VI. Ceremonies op Initiation. — 205. The Apprentice. 206.
Fellow-craft. 207. Master. Ceremony of Initiation and
Story of Hii-am's Murder. 208. The Legend Explained.
209. The Raising of Osii-is. 210. Blazing Star.

VII. Holt Rotal Arch. — 211. Officers. 212. Ceremonies.
213. Passing the Veils.

VIH. Grand elected Knight op Kadosh. — 214. The Term


Analytical Table of Contents. xi

Kadosh. 213. Reception into the Degree. 216. The
Mysterious Ladder. 217. The Seven Steps.

IX. Prince or Rose-Croix. — 218. Distinct from Rosioru-
cian, and has yarioua names. 219. Officers and Lodge.
220. Reception in the First Apartment. 221. Second
Apartment. 222. Reception in the Third Apartment.

X. Rites of Misraim and Memphis. — 223. Anomalies of
Rite of Misraim. 224. Organization. 223. History and
Constitution. 226. Rites and Ceremonies. 227. Rite of
Memphis.

XI. Modern Knights Templars. — 228. Origin. 229. Sup-
posititious List of Grand Masters. 230. Revival of the
Order. 231, The Levitioon. 232. Ceremonies of Initia-
tion.

XII. Freemasonry in England and Scotland. — 233.
Freemasonry in England. 234. Freemasonry in Scotland.
233. Modem Freemasonry.

Xm. Freemasonry in France. — 236. Introduction of Free-
masonry into France. 237. Chevalier Ramsay. 238.
Philosophipal Rites. 239. The Duke de Chartres.

XIV. Chapter of Clermont and the Strict Observance.
— 240. Jesuitical Influence. 241. The Strict Observance.

XV. Relaxed Observance. — 242. Organization of Re-
laxed Observance. 243. Disputes in German Lodges.
244. Rite of Zinnendorf. 245. African Architects.

XVI. Congress of Wjlhelmsbad. — 246. Various Con-
gresses. 247. Discussions at Wilhelmsbad. 248, Re-
sult of Convention.

XVn. Freemasonry and Napoleonism. — 249. Masonry
protected by Napoleon. 250. Spread of Masonry. 251.
Obsequiousness of Freemasonry. 232. Anti-Napoleonic
Freemasonry.

XVni. Freemasonry, the Restoration of the Second
Empire. — 253. The Society of "France Regenerated."
254. Priestly Opposition to Masonry. 255. Political In-


xii Analytical Table of Contents.

significance of Masonry. 256. Freemasonry and Napo-
leon III. 257. Jesuitical Manoeuvres.

XIX. Fbeemasonet in Italy. — 258. Whimsical Societies.
259. lUuminati in Italy. 260. Freemasonry at jS'aples.
261. Details of Document. 262. Freemasonry at Venice.
263. Abasement of Masonry under Napoleon. 264. The
Freemasonry of the Present in Italy. 265. Reform
needed.

XX. Cagliostko and Egyptian Masonry. — 266. Life of
Cagliostro. 267. Egyptian Eite. 268. Cagliostro's
Hydromancy.

XXI. Adoptive Masonbt. — 269. Historical Notice. 270.
Organization. 271. Jesuit Degrees.

XXII. Andkogynous Masonky. — 272. Origin and Tendency.
273. Earliest Androgynous Societies. 274. Other Andro-
gynous Societies. 275. Vicious Androgynous Societies.
276. Knights and Nymphs of the Hose. 277. Mason's
Daughter.

XXIII. PEKSEcnTioNs OP Feeemasoxby. — 278. Causes of
Persecution. 279. Instances of Persecution. 280. Anti-
Masonic Publications.

XXIV. Schismatic Eites and Sects. — 281. Schismatic
Rites and Sects. - 282. Ludicrous Degree.

XXV. Diffusion op the Obder. — 283. Freemasonrv in
Spain and Portugal. 284. Freemasonry in Russia. 285.
Freemasonry in Switzerland. 286. Freemasonry in Swe-
den and Poland. 287. Freemasonry in Holland and Ger-
many. 288. Freemasonry in Turkey, Asia, Africa, Oceania.
289. Freemasonry in America.

XXVI. Futility op Modern Freemasonry. — 290. Vain
Pretensions of Modern Masonry. 291. Vanity of Masonic
Ceremonial. 292. Masonry Diffuses no Knowledge. 293.
Is unfitted for the Task. 294. Decay of Freemasonry.
295. Masonic Literature.


PEBFACE.

\ OR many years the fascinating subject of
Secret Societies had engaged my atten-
tion^ and it had long been my intention
to collect in a comprehensive work all
the information that could be g'athered from numer-
ouSj often remote^ and sometimes almost inaccessible
sources, concerning one of the most curious phases
of the history of mankind — those secret organiza-
tions, religious, political, and social, which have
existed from the most remote ages down to the
present time. Before, however, I had arranged and
digested my materials, a review in the " Athenseum"
(No. 2196), directed my attention to the Italian
work " II Mondo Secreto," by Signer De Castro,
whom I have since then had the pleasure of meeting
at Milan. I procured the book, and intended at
first to give a translation of it, but though I began
as a translator, my labours speedily assumed a more
independent form. Much, I found, had to be omitted


xiv Preface.

from an original coloured by a certain political bias,
and somewhat too indulgent to various Italian
political sects, who, in many instances, were scarcely
more than hordes of brigands. Much, on the other
hand, had to be added from sources, chiefly English
and German, unknown to the Italian author ; much
had to be placed on a different basis and in another
light; and again, many societies not mentioned by
Signor De Castro had to be introduced to the reader,
such as the Garduna, the Chauffeurs, Fenians, Inter-
national, 0-Kee-Pa, Ku-Klux, Inquisition, Wahi-
bees ; so that, with these additions, and the amplificar
tions of sections in the original Italian, forming fre-
quently entirely new articles, the work, as it now is
presented to the English public, though in its frame-
work retaining much of its foreign prototype, may
yet claim the merit of being not only essentially
original, but the most comprehensive account of
Secret Societies extant in EngHsh, French, German,
or Italian, the leading languages of Europe; for
whatever has been written on the subject in any one
of them has been consulted and put under contribu-
tion. In English there is no work that can at aU
compete with it, for the small book published in
1836 by Charles Knight, and entitled, " Secret
Societies of the Middle Ages," embraces four
societies only.

Anxious to utilize my latest memoranda, I have
taken advantage of the MS. having for some time


Preface. xv

been in the publisher's hands, before the second
volume went to press, to insert several additional
sections, though at the expense of methodical
arrangement ; or to give supplemental details from
information collected during my recent twelve
months' wanderings in Italy, the country fo/r excel-
lence of secret societies.

The student who wishes for more ample informa-
tion will have to consult the lists of authorities given
at the head of each Book, as it was thought best
not to encumber the text with foot-notes, which
would have swelled the work to at least twice its
present extent. The reader may rest satisfied that
few statements are made which could not be sup-
ported by numerous and weighty authorities ; though
dealing as we do here with societies whose very
existence depended on secrecy, and which, therefore,
as a matter of policy, left behind them as little
documentary evidence as possible, the old distich
applies with peculiar force : — -

" What is hits is history,
And what is mist is mystery."

Again, bearing in mind that the imperative com-
pass of the work exacted a concise setting forth of
facts — ranging as the subject does over a surface so
yast — I have been careful to interrupt the narrative
only by such comments and reflections as would
seem almost indispensable for clearing up obscurities
or supplying missing historical links.


xvi Preface.

It may at first appear as if some societies nad
improperly been inserted in this work as " secret
societies ; the Freemasons, for instance. Members
of secret associations, it might be objected, are not
in the habit of proclaiming their membership to the
. world, but no Freemason is ashamed or, afraid of
avowing himself silch; nay, he is rather proud of
the fact, and given to proclaim it somewhat obtru-
sively ; yet the most rabid Celt, who wishes to have
a hand in the regeneration of his native land by
joining the Fenian brotherhood, has sense enough to
keep his affiliation a profound secret from the un-
initiated. But the rule I have followed in adopting
societies as " secret," was to include in my collection
all such as had or have "secret rites and ceremonies"
kept from the outer world, though the existence of
the society itself be no secret at all. In fact, no
association of men can for any length of time re-
main a secret, since however anxious the members
may 'be to shroud themselves in darkness, and
remain personally unknown, the purpose for which
they band together must always betray itself by
some overt acts ; and wherever there is an act, the
world surmises an agent ; and if none that is visible
can be found, a secret one is suspected. The Thugs,
for instance, had every desire to remain unknown ;
yet the fact of the existence of such a society was
suspected long before any of its members were dis-
covered. On the principle also of their being the


Preface. xvii

propounders of secret doctrines, or doctrines clothed
in language understood by the adepts alone, Alchy-
mists and Mystics have found places in this work ;
and the Inquisition, though a state tribunal, had its
secret agents and secret procedure, and may there-
fore justly be included in the category of Secret
Societies.

Secret Societies, religious and political, are again
springing iip on many sides : the religious may be
dismissed without comment, as they are generally
without any novelty or significance, but those that
have political objects ought not to be disregarded as
without importance. The International, Fenians,
Communists, Nihilists, Wahabees, are secretly aim-
ing at the overthrow of existing governments and
the present order of things. The murders of
Englishmen perpetrated by native Indians point
to the machinations of secret societies in British
Indi%. Before the outbreak of the great Indian
mutiny, English newspaper correspondents spoke
rather contemptuously of some religious ceremony
observed throughout British India of carrying small
loaves from village to village, but this ceremony
was the summons to the people to prepare for the
general rising ; hence the proceedings of the natives
should be closely watched.

The first volume and a portion of the second
having passed through the press while the author
was in Italy, the revisal of the last proofe had to be

I. b


xviii Preface.

confided to another hand; hence some errata will
be found in those portions of the work, an evil
almost unavoidable, under the circumstances, in a
text so full of proper names, whose correct spelling
frequently is scarcely fixed, and containing numer-
ous .quotations which could only be verified by
reference to the originals whence they were taken,
which in this case was clearly impossible. A list
of the more' important errata with their corrections
has been appended at the end of vol. ii.

For the sake of clearness and of facilitating
reference, the text has been divided throughout
into short sections with appropriate headings, and
numbered continuously.

November, 1874. »


INTRODUCTION.


" The cause which I knew not, I searched out."

Job xxix. 16.

" Ignis ubique latet, naturam amplectitur omnem ;
Cuncta parit, renovat, dividit, urit, alit."


INTRODUCTION.

1.

\ NTELLIQIBILITY and Nature of Secret
Societies. — For those true thinkers who
look upon history as a tissue of won-
drous design^ there is nothing accidental
in the life of the world. For them the appearance
and action of secret societies are no singular and
inexplicable phenomenon^ no transitory form, no
unexpected and fugitive effect, but the intelligible
and foreseen result of known causes.

Secret societies once were as necessary as open
societies ; the tree presupposes a root. Beside the
empire of Might, the idols of fortune, the fetishes
of superstition, there must in every age and state
have existed a place where the empire of Might was
at an end, where the idols were no longer wor-
shipped, where the fetishes were derided. Such a
place was the closet of the philosopher, the temple
of the priest, the subterranean cave of the sectary.


4 Secret Societies.

2. Glassifieation of Secret Societies. — Secret so-
cieties may be classed under the foUowing heads :
1. Eeligious: such as the Egyptian or Eleusinian
Mysteries. — 2. Military : Knights Templars. — 3.
Judiciary : Yehmgerichte. — 4. Scientific : Alchy-
mists. — 5. Civil: Freemasons. — 6, Political: Car-
bonari. But the line of division is not always
strictly defined; some that had scientific objects
combined theological dogmas therewith — as the
Rosicrucians, for instance ; and political societies
must necessarily influence civil life. We may
therefore more conveniently range secret societies
in the two comprehensive divisions of religious and
political. .

3. Religious Societies. — Religion has had its secret
societies from the most ancient times; they date,
in fact, from the period when the true religious know-
ledge — which, be it understood, consisted in the
knowledge of the constitution of the universe and
the Eternal Power that had produced, and the laws
that maintained it — possessed by the first men,
began to decay among the general mass of man-
kind. The genuine knowledge was to a great ex-
tent preserved in the ancient " Mysteries," though
even these were already a degree removed from the
first primeval native wisdom, since they repre-
sented only the type, instead of the archetype;
namely, the phenomena of outward temporal nature,
instead of the realities of the inward eternal nature,


Introduction. 5

of wHch this visible universe is the outward mani-
festation. Since the definition of this now recovered
genuine knowledge is necessary for understanding
much that was taught in the religious societies of
antiquity, we shall, further on, enter into fuller
details concerning it.

4. Political Societies. — Politically secret societies
were the provident temperers and safety-valves of
the present and the powerful levers of the future.
Without them the monologue of absolutism alone
would occupy the drama of history, Appearing more-
over without an aim, and producing no effect, if it
had not exercised the wiU of man by inducing re-
action and provoking resistance.

Every secret society is an act of reflection, there-
fore of conscience. For reflection, accumulated and
fixed, is conscience. In so far, secret societies are
in a certain manner the expression of conscience in
history. For every man has in himself a Something
which belongs to him, and which yet seems as if it
were not a thing within him, but, so to speak, with-
out him. This obscure Something is stronger than
he, and he cannot rebel against its dominion nor
withdraw himself or fly from its search. This part
of us is intangible ; the assassin's steel, the execu-
tioner's axe cannot reach it; allurements cannot
seduce, prayers cannot soften, threats cannot terrify
it. It creates in us a dualism, which makes itself
felt as remorse. When man is virtuous, he feels


6 Secret Societies.

himself one, at peace with himself; that obscure
Something does neither oppress nor torture him :
just as in physical nature the powers of man's body,
when working in harmony, are unfelt (11) ;. but
when his actions are evil, his better part rebels.
Now secret societies are the expression of this
dualism, reproduced on a grand scale in nations ;
they are that obscure Something of politics acting
in the public conscience, and producing a remorse,
which shows itself as " secret society," an avenging
and purif3dng remorse. It regenerates through
death, and brings forth Hght through fire, out of
darkness, according to eternal laws. No one discerns
it, yet every man may feel it. It may be compared
to an invisible star, whose light, however, reaches
us ; to the heat coming from a region where no
human foot will ever be placed, but which we feel,
and can demonstrate with the thermometer.

Indeed, one of the most obvious sentiments that
gives rise to secret societies is that of revenge, but
good and wise revenge, different from personal
rancour, unknown where popular interests are in
question ; that desires to punish institutions and not
individuals, to strike ideas and not men — the grand
collective revenge, the inheritance that fathers
transmit to their children, a pious legacy of love,
that sanctifies hatred and enlarges the responsibility
and character of man. For there is a legitimate
and necessary hatred, that of evil, which forms the


Introduction. 7

salvation of nations. Woe to the people that knows
not how to hate, because evil is intolerance, hypo-
crisy, superstition, slavery !

5. Aims of PoKtical Societies. — The aim of the
sectaries is the erection of the ideal temple of
progress ; to fecundate in the bosom of sleeping or
enslaved peoples the germs of a future liberty.
This glorious edifice, it is true, is not yet finished,
and perhaps never wiU be, but the attempt itself
invests secret societies with a moral grandeur;
whereas, without such aim, their struggle would be
debased into a paltry egotistical party-fight. It
also explains the existence of secret societies,
though it does not perhaps justify it. For if I
am asked to give my honest opinion, I do not
think that secret societies will ever accomplish
what they promise. As a lover of justice, I cannot
but approve of the theoretical striving after liberty
and equality ; but as a thinking being, judging by
the experience of the past and the nature of things,
in which good and evil must exist for ever, and
. for ever be at war, such striving must also for
ever remain without any adequate practical result.
The cause of liberty, indeed, may be, and often has
been — nay, is daily being — benefited ; but if uni-
versal, social, and political equality were established
to-day, it would scarcely last till to-morrow. It is un-
deniable, that as long as men have unequal gifts and
unequal passions, so long will equality among men


8 Secret Societies.

remain a dream. And it -would be difficult to name
any country that derived substantial and permanent
benefit from the operation of any secret political
society. In fact, neither of the two states enjoying the
greatest freedom, political and social, viz. England
and Switzerland, ever had any secret societies of
national comprehensiveness or historical importance.
It is true, when the Swiss in 1308 made themselves
free from the Austrian yoke, thirty men had formed
a pact to effect that deliverance ; they were con-
spirators, and even then their plans were greatly
modified by the conduct and death of Gessler. And
Tell did not kill the latter because he (Tell) was a
member of a secret society, and was bound to do so,
but because the Austrian governor had done hiTn
a personal wrong, by aiming at his child's life.

6. Religious Secret Societies.' — ^But the earliest
secret societies were not formed for political, so much
as for religious purposes, embracing every art and
science ; wherefore religion has truly been called the
archeology of human knowledge. Comparative
mythology reduces all the appareptly contradictory
and opposite creeds to one primeval, fundamental,
and true comprehension of nature and her laws ;
all the metamorphoses, appositions, and conver-
sations of one or more gods, recorded in the
sacred books of the Hindoos, Parsees, and other
nations, are indeed founded on simple physical
facts, disfigured and misrepresented, intentionally


Introduction. 9

or accidentally. The true comprehension of nature
was the prerogative of the moat highly developed
of all races of men (10), viz. the Aryan races,
whose seat was on the highest point of the moun-
tain region of Asia, to the north of the Hima-
layas. South of these lies the' Vale of Cashmere,
whose eternal spring, wonderful wealth of vege-
tation, and' general natural features, best adapt it
to represent the earthly paradise and the blissful
residence of the most highly favoured human
beings.

7. Most perfect human Type. — So highly favoured
precisely because nature in so favoured a spot could
only produce a superior type ; which being, as it
were, the quintessence of that copious nature, was
one with it, and therefore able to apprehend it
and its fulness. For as the powers of nature have
brought forth plants and animals of different
degrees of development and perfection, so they
have produced various types of men in various
stages of d,evelopment ; the most perfect being, as
already mentioned, the Aryan or Caucasian type,
the only one that has a history, and the only one
that deserves our attention, when inquiring into
the mental history of mankind. For even where
the Caucasian comes in contact and intermingles
with a dark race, as in India and Egypt, it is the
white man with whom the higher and historical
development begins.


10 Secret Societies.

8. Causes of high Mental Development. — I have
already stated that climatic and other outward
circumstances are favourable to high development.
This is universally known to be true of plants : but
man is only a plant endowed with consciousness
and mobility, and therefore it must be true of him ;
and, in fact, experience proves it. His organs, and
especially his brain, attain to the highest perfec-
tion, and therefore he is most fully able to appre-
hend nature and understand its working ; hence he
can never be an ignorant barbarian, and hence he
must from the very first have possessed a know-
ledge superior even to that he is now so proud of.
For, as I have shown elsewhere,"^ all barbarism
among white races is only the sequel of a perished
civilization. In the same publication^ I have also
demonstrated what this knowledge was, and how it
came to be partly lost or perverted. But as this work
would be incomplete without at least a portion of the
explanations given in that publication, I must quote
so much from those articles as will suffice to show
that man once possessed a true knowledge of nature
and her working, and that this is the reason why the
mysteries of the most distant nations had so much
in common dogmatically and ritually, and why in all
so much importance was attached to certain figures

' " Eectangular Eeview," vol. i. p. 404.
^ Ibid. p. 446.


Introduction. 1 1

and ideas, and why all were funereal. The sanctity-
attributed in all ages and all countries to the number
seven has not been correctly explained by any known
writer ; ^ the elucidations I shall oflfer on this point
will show that the conformityjvith each other of the
religious and scientific doctrines of nations far apart
must be due to their transmission from one common
source, though the enigmatical and mystical forms
in which this knowledge was preserved were
gradually taken for the facts themselves.

The reader will now see that these remarks, the
object of which he may not have perceived at first,
are not irrelevant; we cannot understand the
origin and meaning of what was taught in the
mysteries without a clear apprehension of man's
primitive culture and knowledge.

9. Primitive Culture. — From what precedes it
will be evident that I am no disciple of the school
that holds that man has raised himself from a state
of barbarism to his present civilization. No, I
belong to those who, at a distance of time which
startles thought, discern the light of a high mental
cidture and transcendent powers. As a rule, pre-
historic ages seem obscure, and men fancy that
at every retrogressive step they must enter into
greater darkness. But if we proceed with our eyes


1 Except, of course, the one from whom I derive my
information, Jacob Bbhme, concerning whom, see post.


12 Secret Societies.

open, the darkness recedes like the horizon as we
seem to approach it; new light is added to our
light, new suns are Kt up, new auroras arise before
us J the darkness, which is only light compacted,
is dissolved into its original, viz. light; and as
outwardness implies multiplicity, and inwardness
unity — there are many branches, but only one root
— so all religious creeds, even those most disguised
in absurd and debasing rites and superstitions, the
nearer we trace them to their source, appear in
greater and greater purity and nobility, with more
exalted views, doctrines and aims. For as Tegner


"... kanslan's grundton ar anda densamma."
The fundamental tone of feeling is ever the same.

And as the same poet expresses it, antiquity is

"... det Atlantis som gick under
Med hcigre kraft, med adlare begar.''

. . . That Atlantis, that perished
With higher powers and higher aims.

Thus the ethic odes of Buddha and Zoroaster
have been regarded as anticipations of the teaching
of Christianity ; so that even St. Augustin re-
marked : " What is now called the Christian reli-
gion existed among the ancients, and was not
absent from the beginning of the human race until
Christ came, from which time the true religion


Introduction. 13

which existed already began to be called Chris-
tian."

Again, through all the more elevated creeds
there were certain fundamental ideas which, differ-
ing and even sometimes distorted in form, may yet
in a certain sense be regarded as common to all.
Such were the belief in a Trinity; the dogma that the
"Logos," or omnific Word, created all things by
making the Nothing manifest ; the worship of
light ; the doctrine of regeneration by passing
through the fire, and others.

10. The true Doctrines of Nature and Being. —
But what was the knowledge on which the teaching
of the mysteries was founded ? It was no less
than that of the ground and geniture of aU things ;
the whole state, the rise, the workings, and the
progress of all nature (16), together with the unity
that pervades heaven and earth. A few years ago
this was proclaimed with great sound of trumpets
as a new discovery, although so ancient an author
as Homer speaks, in the 8th book of the " Iliad,"
of the golden chain connecting heaven and earth ;
the golden. chain of sympathy, the occult, all-per-
vading, aU-uniting influence, called by a variety
of names, such as anima mwndi, mercwrius philo-
sophorum, Jacob's ladder, the vital magnetic series,
the magician's fire, etc. This knowledge, in course
of time, and through man's love of change, was
gradually distorted by perverse interpretations,


14 Secret Societies.

and overlaid or embroidered, as it were, with
fanciful creations of man's own brain; and tbus
arose superstitious systems, which became the
creed of the unthinking crowd, and have not lost
their hold on the public mind, even to this day,
keeping in spiritual thraldom myriads who tremble
at a thousand phantoms conjured up by priestcraft
and their own ignorance, whilst

" Felix qui potuit rerum oognoscere causas ;
Atque metns omnes et inexorabile fatnim
Subjeoit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari."

11. Fundamental Principles of true Knowledge
possessed by the Ancients. — ^Prom what was taught
in the mysteries, we are justified in believing that
the first men knew what follows ; though the know-
ledge is already dimmed and perverted in the mys-
teries, the phenomena of outward nature only being
presented in them, instead of the inward spiritual
truths symbolized.

i. All around us we behold the evidences of a
life permeating all things ; we must needs, there-
fore, admit that there is a universal, aU-powerful,
all-sustaining life.

ii. Behind or above the primeval life which is
the basis of this system, may be beheld the " Un-
moved Mover," the only supernatural ens, who, by
the Word, or " Logos," has spoken forth all things
out of himself; which does not imply any pantheism.


Introduction. 15

for the words of the speaker^ though proceeding
from hinij are not the speaker himself.

iii. The universal life is eternal.

iv. Matter is eternal.

V. That matter is light.

vi. Whatsoever is outwardly manifest must have
existed ideally^ from all eternity, in an archetypal
figure, reflected in what Indian mythology calls the
mirror Jfa/a, whence are derived the terms "magus/'
"magia," "magic," ''image," "imagination," all
implying the fixing of the primeval, structureless,
living matter, in a form, figure, or creature. In
modem theosophy, the mirror Maja is called the
Eternal Mirror of Wonders, the Virgin Sophia,
ever bringing forth, yet ever a virgin — the analogue
of the Virgin Mary.

vii. The eternal life which thus manifests itself in
matter is an intelligent life, and this visible universe
is ruled by the same laws that rule the invisible
world of forces.

viii. These laws, according to which the life mani-
fests itself, are the seven properties of eternal
nature, six working properties, and the seventh, in
which the six, as it were, rest, or are combined into
perfect balance or harmony, i. e. paradise. These
seven properties, the foundation of all the septenary
numbers running through natural phenomena and
all ancient and modern knowledge, are — 1. Attrac-
tion ; 2. Re-action or Eepulsion; 3. Circulation;


16 Secret Societies.

4. Fire; 6. Light; 6. Sound; 7. Body, or compriaal
of all.

ix. This septenary is divisible into two ternaries
or poles, with the fire — symboHzed by a cross —
in the middle. These two poles constitute the
eternal dualism or antagonism in nature — the first
three forming matter or darkness, and producing
pain and anguish, i. e. heU, cosmically winter ; the
last three being filled with light and delight, i. e.
paradise, cosmically summer.

X. The fire is the great chymist, or purifier and
transmuter of nature, turning darkness into light.
Hence the excessive veneration and universal wor-
ship paid to it by ancient nations; the priests of
Zoroaster wearing a veil over their mouths for fear
of polluting the fire with their breath. By the fire
here of course is meant the empyrean, electric fire,
whose existence and nature were tolerably well
known to the ancients. They distinguished the
moving principle from the thing moved, and called
the former the igneous ether or spirit, the prin-
ciple of life, the Deity, You-piter, Vulcan, Phtha,
Kneph (18, 24) .

xi. All light is born out of darkness, and must
pass through the fire to arrive at the light ; there is
no other way but through darkness, or death, or
hell — an idea which we find enunciated and repre-
sented in all the mysteries. As Httle as a plant
can come forth into the beauty of blossoms, leaves.


Introduction. 17

and fruitj without having passed through the dark
state of the seed and being buried in the earth,
where it is chymically transmuted by the fire, so
little can the mind arrive at the fulness of know-
ledge and enlightenment without having passed
through a stage of self-darkening and imprison-
ment, in which it suffered torment, anguish — in
which it was as in a furnace, in the throes of
generation.

12. Key to Mystic Teaching. — ^That the first men
possessed the knowledge of the foregoing facts is
certain, not only from the positive and inferential
teachings of the mysteries, but also from the monu-
ments of antiquity, which in grandeur of concep-
tion and singleness of ideal aim, excel all that
modern art or industry, or even faith, has accom-
plished. By bearing this in mind, the reader will
get a deeper insight into the true meaning of the
dogmas of initiation, than was attainable by the
epopts themselves. He will also understand that
the reason why there was so much uniformity in
the teaching of the mysteries, was the fact that the
dogmas enunciated were explanations of universal
natural phenomena, alike in all parts of the earth.
In describing the ceremonies of initiation, I shall
therefore abstain from appending to them a com-
mentary or exegesis, but simply refer to the para-
graphs of this introduction, as to a key.

13. Mystic Teaching summa/rized. — It was theo-


18 Secret Societies.

logical, moral, and scientific. Tkeologically tte
initiated were shown the error of vulgar poly-
theism and taught the doctrine of the Unity and
of a future state of reward and punishment;
morally, the precepts were summed up in the words
of Christ : " Love thy neighbour as thyself," and in
those of Confucius : " If thou be doubtfal whether
an action be right or wrong, abstain from it alto-
gether ; " scientifically, the principles were such as
we have detailed above (11), with their natural and
necessary deductions, consequences and results.

14. Mow i/rue Knowledge came to he lost. — Though
I have already on several occasions (e. g. 10),
alluded to the fact that the true knowledge of
nature possessed by the first men had in course of
time become corrupted and intermixed with error,
it will not be amiss to show the process by which
this came to pass. It is weU known that the
oldest religious rites of which we have any written
records were Sabsean or Helio-Arkite. The sun,
moon and stars, however, to the true original
epopts were merely the outward manifestations
and symbol^ of the inward powers of the Eternal
Life. But such abstract truths could not be ren-
dered intelligible to the vulgar mind of the increas-
ing multitudes, necessarily more occupied with the
satisfaction of material wants ; and hence arose the
personification of the heavenly bodies and terrestrial
seasons depending on them. Gradually, what in the


Introduction. 1 9

first instance had been a mere human figure of a
symbol came to be looked upon as the representa-
tion of an individual being that had actually lived
on earth. Thus the sun to the primitive men was
the outward manifestation of the Eternal, all-sus-
taining, all-saving Life ; in different countries and
ages this power was personified under the names of
Chrisna, Fo, Osiris, Hermes, Hercules, and so on;
and eventually these latter were supposed to have
been men that really existed, and had been deified
on account of the benefits they had conferred on
mankind. The tombs of these supposed gods were
shown, such as the Great Pyramid, said to be the
tomb of Osiris ; feasts were celebrated, the object
of which seemed to be to renew every year the
grief occasioned by their loss. . The passing of the
sun through the signs of the Zodiac gave rise to
the myths of the incantations of Vishnu, the labours
of Hercules, &c., his apparent loss of power during
the winter season, and the restoration thereof at
the winter solstice, to the story of the death,
descent into hell, and resurrection of Osiris, and of
Mithras. In fact, what was pure nature-wisdom
in one age became mythology in the next, and
romance in the third, taking its characteristics
from the country where it prevailed. The number
seven being found everywhere, and the knowledge
that its prevalence was the necessary consequence
of the seven properties of nature being lost, it was


20 Secret Societies.

supposed to have reference only to the seven
planets then known.

15. Original Spirit of the Mysteries and Besults of
their Decay. — In the mysteries all was astronomical,
but a deeper meaning lay hid under the astro-
mical symbols. While bewailing the loss of the
sun the epopts were in reality mourning the loss of
that light whose influence is life ; whilst the working
of the elements according to the laws of elective
affinity produces only phenomena of decay and
death. The initiated strove to pass from under
the dominion of the bond-woman Night into the
glorious liberty of the free-woman -Sophia ; to be
mentally absorbed into the Deity, i. e. into the
Light. The dogmas of ancient nature- wisdom were
set before the pupil, but their understanding
had to arise as inspiration in his soul. It was not
the dead body of science that was surrendered to
the epopt, leaving it to chance whether it quickened
or not, but the living spirit itself was infused into
him. But for this reason, because more had to be
apprehended from within by iuspiration than from
without by oral instruction, the Mysteries gradually
decayed ; the ideal yielded to the realistic, and the
merely physical elements- — Sabseism and Arkism-*-
beoame their leading features. The frequent
emblems and mementos in the sanctuary of death
and resurrection, pointing to the mystery that the
moments of highest psychical enjoyment are the


Introduction. 21

most destructiye to bodily existence — i. e. that the
most intense delight is a glimpse of paradise — these
emblems and mementos eventually were applied
to outward nature only^ and their misapprehension
led to all the creeds or superstitions that have
filled the earth with crime and woe, sanguinary
warSj internecine cruelty, and_ persecution of every
kind. Blood-thirsty fanatics, disputing about words-
whose meaning they did not understand, maintain-
ing antagonistic dogmas, false on both sides, have
invented the most fiendish tortures to compel their
opponents to adopt their own views. While the two
Mahommedan sects of Omar and Ali wiU fight each
other to decide whether ablution ought to commence
at the wrist or the elbow, they wiU unite to slay or
to convert the Christians. Nay, even these latter,
divided into sects without number, have distin-
guished themselves by persecutions as cruel as any
ever practised by so-caUed pagan nations. Not
satisfied with attempting to exterminate by fire and
sword Turks and Jews, one Christian sect esta-
blished such a tribunal as the Inquisition; whilst
its opponents, scarcely less cruel, when they had
the power, deprived the Roman Catholics of their
civil rights, and occasionally executed them. Their
mutual hatred even attends them in their mis-
sionary efibrts — very poor in their results, in
spite of the sensational reports manufactured by
the societies at home for extracting money from the


22 Secret Societies.

public. To mention but one instance : a leading
missionary endeavoured to prejudice the Polyne-
sians in advance against some expected Roman
Catholic missionaries by translating Foxe's " Book
of Martyrs " into their language, and illustrating its
scenes by the aid of a magic-lantern.

16. The Mysteries under their Astronomical Aspect.
— But seeing that the mysteries, as they have come
down to us, and are still perpetuated, in a corrupted
and aimless manner, in Freemasonry, have chiefly
an astronomical bearing, a few general remarks on
the leading principles of all wiU save a deal of
needless repetition in describing them separately.

In the most ancient Indian creed we have the story
of the fall of mankind by tasting of the fruit of the tree
of knowledge and their consequent expulsion from
Paradise. And, read in its mysterious aiid astrono-
mical aspect, the narrative of the Fall, as given in
the Book of Genesis, would assume some such form
as the following. Adam, which does not mean an
individual, but the universal man, mankind, and his
companion Eve, which means life, having passed
spring and summer in the Garden of Eden, neces-
sarily reached the season when the serpent, Typhon
(47) , the symbol of winter, points out on the celestial
sphere that the reign of Evil, of winter, is approach-
ing. Allegorical science, which insinuated itself
everywhere, caused malum, "evil," also to mean an
"apple," the produce of autumn, which indicates that


Introduction. 23

the harvest is over, and that man in the sweat of his
brow must again till the earth. The cold season
comeSj and he must cover himself with the allegorical
fig-leaf. The sphere revolves, the man of the constel-
lation Bootesj the same as Adam, preceded by the
woman, the Virgin, carrying in her hand the autumnal
branch laden with fruit, seems to be allured or be-
guiled by her. A sacred bough or plant is intro-
duced into all the mysteries. We have the Indian
and Egyptian lotus, the fig-tree of Atys, the myrtle
of Venus, the mistletoe of the Druids, the golden
bough of Virgil, the rose-tree of Isis; — in the
" Golden Ass " Apuleius is restored to his natural
form by eating roses — the box of Palm- Sunday, and
the acacia of freemasonry. The bough in the opera
'' Eoberto il Diavolo " is the mystic bough of the
mysteries.

17. Astronomical Aspects continued. — The Mys-
teries funereal. — In all the mysteries we encounter
a god, a superior being, or an extraordinary man
suffering death to recommence a more glorious
existence ; everywhere the remembrance of a grand
and mournful event plunges the nations into grief
and mourning, immediately followed by the most
lively joy. Osiris is slain by Typhon, Uranus by
Saturn, Sousarman by Sudra, Adonis by a wild
boar ; Ormuzd is conquered by Ahrimanes ; Atys and
Mithras and Hercules kill themselves ; Abel is slain
by Cain, Balder by Loke, Bacchus by the giants ;


24 Secret Societies.

the Assyrians mourn the death of Thammuz, the
Scythians and Phoenicians that of Acmon^ all nature
that of the great Pan, the Freemasons that of Hiram,
and BO on. The origin of this universal belief has
already been pointed but.

18. Uniformity of Dogmas. — The doctrine of the
Unity and Trinity was inculcated in aU the mys-
teries > In many religious creeds we meet with a
kind of travesty of the Christian dogma, in which a
virgin is seen bringing forth a saviour, and yet ever
remaining a virgin (11). In the more outward sense,
that virgin is the Virgo of the zodiac, and the savi-
our brought forth is the sun (17) ; in the most inward
sense, it is the eternal ideal, wherein the eternal
life and intelligence, the power of electricity, and
the virtue of the tincture, the first the snstainer,
the latter the beautifier of apprehensible existence,
are, as it were, corporified in the countless creatures
that fill this universe — yea, ia the universe itself.
And the virgin remains a virgin, and her own nature
is not affected by it, just as the air briugs forth
sounds, the light colours, the mind ideas, without
any of them being intrinsically altered by the pro-
duction. ' We certainly do not find these principles
so fully and distinctly enunciated in the teaching of
the ancient mystagogues, but a primitive know-
ledge of them may be inferred from what they did
teach.

In all the mysteries, light was represented as


Introduction. 25

born out of darkness. Thus reappears the Deity
called now Maja Bhawanij now Kali, Isis, Ceres,
Proserpina; Persephone, the Queen of Heaven,
is the night from whose hosom issues life, into
which the life returns, a secret reunion of life and
death. She is, moreover, called the Rosy, and in
the German myths the Rosy is called the restoring
principle of life. She is not only the night, but, as
mother of the sun, she is also the aurora, behind
whom the stars are shining. When she symbolizes
the earth as Ceres, she is represented with ears
of corn. Like the sad Proserpina, she is beau-
tiful and lustrous, but also melancholy and black.
Thus she joins night with day, joy with sadness, the
sun with the moon, heat with humidity, the divine
with the human. The ancient Egyptians often repre-
sented the Deity by a black stone, and the black
stone Kadbah, worshipped by the Arabs, and which
is described as having originally been whiter than
snow, and more brilliant than the sun, embodies
the same idea, with the additional hint that light
was anterior to darkness. In aU the mysteries we
meet with the cross (49) as a symbol of purification
and salvation; the numbers three, four, and seven
were sacred; in most of the mythologies we meet
with two pillars ; mystic banquets were common to
all, as also the trials by fire, water, and air ; the
circle and triangle, single and double, everywhere
represented the dualism or polarity of nature ; in


26 Secret Societies.

all the initiations^ the aspirant represented the good
principle, the light, overcome by evil, the darkness ;
and his task was to regain his former supremacy, to
be born again or regenerated, by passing through
death and hell and their terrors, that were scenically
enacted during the neophyte's passage through
seven caves, or ascent of seven steps. AH this,
in its deepest meaning, represented the eternal
struggle of light to free itself from the encum-
brance of materiality it has put on in its pas-
sage through the seven properties of eternal na-
ture (11) ; and in its secondary meaning, when
the deeper one was lost to mankind, the progress
of the sun through the seven signs of the zodiac,
from Aries to Libra, as shown in Eoyal Arch
Masonry, and also in the ladder with seven
steps of the Knight of Kadosh. In all the mys-
teries the officers were the same, and personified
astronomical or cosmical phenomena ; in all, the
initiated recognized each other by signs and pass-
words ; in all, the conditions for initiation were the
same- — maturity of age and purity of conduct. If ero,
on this account, did not dare, when in Greece, to
offer himself as a candidate for initiation into the
Bleusinian mysteries. In many, the chief hiero-
phant was compelled to lead a retired life of per-
petual celibacy, that he might be entirely at liberty
to devote himself to the study and contemplation of
celestial things. And to accomplish this abstrac-


Introduction. 27

tion, it was customary for tlie priests, in the earlier
periods of their history, to mortify the flesh by the
use of certain herbs, which were reputed to possess
the virtue of repelling all passionate excitements;
to guard against which they even occasionally
adopted severer and more decided precautions.
In all countries where mysteries existed, initia-
tion came to be looked upon as much a necessity
as afterwards baptism among Christians ; which
ceremony, indeed, is one that had been practised in
all the mysteries. The initiated were called epopts,
i. e. those that see things as they are ; whilst
before they were called " mystes," meaning quite
the contrary. In all we find greater and less mys-
teries, an exoteric and an esoteric doctrine, and
three degrees. To betray the mysteries was every-
where considered infamous, and the heaviest penal-
ties were attached to it; hence also, in all initia-
tions, the candidate had to take the most terrible
oaths that he would keep the secrets entrusted to
him. Alcibiades was banished and consigned to the
Furies for having revealed the mysteries of Ceres ;
Prometheus, Tantalus, OEdipus, Orpheus, suffered
various punishments for the same reason.

19. Secret Societies no longer needed. — Thanks to
secret societies themselves, they are now no longer
needed, at least not in the realms of thought. In
politics, however, circumstances will arise in every
age to caU them into existence ; and though they


28 Secret Societies.

seldom attain their direct object^ yet are they not
without influence on the relations between ruler and
ruled, advantageously for the latter in the long run,
though not immediately. But thought, religious,
philosophical and political, is free — if not as yet in
every country^ it is so certainly in the lands inhabited
by the Saxon races. And though the bigot and the
fool would crush it, the former because it under-
mines his absolutism, and the latter because it in-
terferes with his ease, yet shall it only grow stronger
by the opposition. Science becomes the strong bul-
wark against the invasion of dogmatic absuacdities ;
and there is growing up a scientific church, wherein
knowledge, and not humility, labour, and not pen-
ance and fasting, are considered essentials. Various
phenomena in modern life are proofs of this. But
if man during ages of intellectual gloom annihilated
himself in behalf of the great deified All, he wUl
not, in better times, deny God what he owes Him ;
in his homage to God he studies and respects him-
self, destroys the fetishes, and combats for truth,
which is the word of God. He could not deny the
divine without denying himself.

In ancient times the mind rose from religion to
philosophy ; in our times, by a violent re-action, it
will ascend from philosophy to religion. And the
men whose religion is so arrived at, whose universal
sympathy has cast out fear — such men are the true
regenerators of mankind, and need neither secret


Introduction. 29

signs nor pasa-words to recognize each other; in
fact they are opposed to all such devices, because they
know that liberty consists in publicity. Wherever
liberty rules, secresy is no longer necessary to effect
any good and useful work ; once it needed secret so-
cieties in order to triumph, now it wants open union
to maintain itself. Not that the time is come when
every truth may be uttered without fear of calumny
and cavil and opposition, especially in religious
matters; far from it, as some recent notable in-
stances have shown. The words of Faust still have
their application : —

" Who dare call tKe child by its right name ?
The few that knew something of it,
And foolishly opened their hearts,
Bevealing to the vulgat crowd their views,
Were ever crucified or burnt."

Certes, bodily crucifying or burning are out of the
question now, but statecraft, and especially priest-
craft, stiU have a few thumbscrews and red-hot irons
to hold a man's hands or sear his reputation ; where-
fore, though I doubt the policy, and in most cases
the success, of secret association, yet I cannot with-
hold my tribute of admiration for those who have
acted or do act up to the words of the poet Lowell :

" They are slaves who dare not speak
Por the fallen and the weak ;
They are slaves who will not choose
Hatred, scoflBng, and abuse,


so


Secret Societies.


Rather than in silence shrink
From the truth they needs must think ;
They are the slaves who dare not be
In the right with two or three."


BOOK I.

ANCIENT MYSTERIES.

Of man's original relation to nature, whence we start, in
order to render the essentials of physical science and na-
ture comprehensible in their inmost depth, we find but ob-
scure hints. In the mysteries and the holy initiations of
those nations that as yet were nearest to the primeval people,
the mind apprehends a few scarcely intelligible sounds,
which, arising deep from the nature of our being, move it
mightily. How our hearts are wning by the mournful
sounds of the first human race and of nature ; how they
are stirred by an exalted nature- worship, and penetrated by
the breath of an eternal inspiration ! We shall hear that
suppressed sound from the temple of Isis, from the speaking
pillars of Ihot, in the hymns of the Egyptian priests. On
the lonely coast under the black rocks of Iceland the Edda
will convey to us a sound from the graves, and fancy shall
bring us face to face with those priests who by a stern silence
have concealed from future ages the holy science of their
worship. Tea, the eye shall yet discover the lost features
of the noble past in the altars of Mexico, and on the pyra-
mid which saw the blood and tears of thousands of human

victims.

V. Schubert.


33


ATJTHORITIES.

Syde. De Beligione Veterum Persarum. Oxford, 1700.
Anq'ueUl. Zend-Avesta; ouvrage de Zoroastre traduit.

Paris, 1771.
J. G. Rhode. Die heilige Sage. Frankfort on the Maine,

1820.
Wullers. Fragmente iiber die Religion Zoroasters. Bonn,

1831.
Oattaneo, 0. Le Origini Italiche illustrate coi libri sacri

deir antica Persia.
Be Hammer. Mem. sur le Culte de Mithra. Paris, 1833.
Mailer. Mithras. Wiesbaden,^ 1833.
Bichhorn. De Deo Sole Invicto Mithra.
Payne KrdgM. Inquiry into the Symbol Language.
Ch. Lassen. Gymnosophista. Bonn, 1832.
Windisahmann. De Theologumenis Vedantioorum. Bonn,

1833.
Golehrooke. Essay on the Philosophy of India. 1853.
Jones. Extracts from the Vedas.
lamhlichus. Tie Mysteriis ^gypt.
Saint-Viator. Mysteries of Antiquity. Ispahan, 1788.
Greuzer. Symbolik. Leipsic.
Fritcha/rd. Analysis of Egyptian Mythology.
S/itter. History of Ancient Philosophy.
Stuhr. Beligions-Systeme der Hell'enen.
Taylor. Dissertation on Eleusinian and Bacchic Mysteries.

London, 1770.
Schelling. TJeber die Gotter von Samothraoe.
Diogenes Laertius.
BoUn. Eecherohes sur les Initiations Anoiennes et

Modemes. Paris, 1779.
Owwarof. Essais sur les Mysteres ,d'Bleusis. Paris, 1816.

D


34 Secret Societies.

Mareoms et Movltet. L'Hierophante. Paris, 1839.

Bm-tli. Ueber die Drnidea. Brlau, 1826.

Friclcim. Oommentatio de Dniidis. Ulm, 1744.

Foroito. Prose Letterarie, vol. ii.

Higgins. Celtic Druids. London, 1829.

Lewis. Antiquities of the Hebrew Eepublic. London,

1724.
Jennings. Jewish Antiquities. London, 1766.
Meyer. Der Tempel Solomons. Berlin, 1830.
Fellows. The Mysteries of Freemasonry. London, 1860.
Oliver. Theocratic Philosophy. London, 1840.
Oliver. History of Initiation. London, 1829.
Mackey. Lexicon of Freemasonry, 1867.
Bredow. Handbuch der alten Geschichte. Altona, 1837.
Schubert. Nachtseite der Naturwissenschaft. Leipzig,

1860.
Lesley. Man's Origin. Philadelphia, 1868.
Faher. Mysteries of the Cabin. Oxford, 1803.
Faber. Horse Mosaics. Oxford, 1801.
Brassew. Collection de Documents, &o. Paris, 1861.
Volney. Euins of Empires.
Bagon. Cours Philosophique des Initiations Anciennes et

Modernes. Paris, 1841.
Fabre cT Olivet. La Langue Hebrai'que Eestituee. Paris,

1815.
Tylor. Primitive Culture. London, 1871.


THE MAGI.


20.
\EBIVATION of the term Magus.—
Magus is derived from Maja, the mirror
(11) wherein Brahm, according to In-
dian mythology, from all eternity be-
holds himself and all his power and wonders. Hence
also our terms magia, magic, image, imagination, all
implying the fixing in a form, figure or creature —
these words being synonymous — of the potencies
of the primeval, structureless, living matter. The
Magus therefore is one that makes the operations of
the Eternal Life his study.

21. Antiquity of the Magi. — The Magi, as the
ancient priests of Persia were called, did not con-
.stitute a doctrine or religion only ; they constituted
a monarchy — their power truly was that of kings.
And this fact is still commemorated by the circum-


36 Secret Societies.

stance that the Magi recorded to have been led by
the star to the cradle of Jesus are just as 'fre-
quently called kings as Magi. As sages, they
were kings in the sense of Horace :

" Ad summam, sapiens uno minor est Jove, dives.
Liber, honoratus, pulcher, rex denique regum."

Their pontifical reign preceded the ascendancy of
Assyria, Media, and Persia. Aristotle asserts it to
have been more ancierit than the foundation of the
kingdom of Egypt ; Plato, unable to reckon it by
years, computes it by myriads. At the present day
most writers agree in dating the rise of the reign of
the Magi five thousand years before the Trojan war.

22. Zoroaster. — The founder of the order was
Zoroaster, who was not, aa some will have it, a
contemporary of Darius, but lived nearly seventy
centuries before our era. Nor was his home in
India, but in Bactriana, which lies more to the
east, beyond the Caspian Sea, close to the moun-
tains of India, along the great rivers Oxus and
laxartes ; so that the Brahmins, or priests of India,
may be .called the descendants of the Magi.

23. Doctrine of Zoroaster. — His doctrine was the
most perfect and rational of all those that in ancient
times were the objects of initiation, and has more or
less survived in all successive theosophies. Traces
of it may be found in the ancient Zendavesta — not
the book now passing by that name, which is merely


Ancient Mysteries. 37

a kind of breviary — whicli entered into all the de-
tails of nature.

This doctrine is not the creed of the two opposite,
but equally powerful principles, as has been asserted ;
for Ahrimanes, the principle of evil, is not equal
with Oromazes, which is good. Evil is not uncreated
and eternal ; it is rather transitory and limited in
power. And Plutarch records an opinion, which anon
we shall see confirmed, that Ahrimanes and his angels
shall be annihilated — that dualism is not eternal;
its life is ia time, of which it constitutes the
grand drama, and in which it is the perennial
cause of motion and transformation. This is true
philosophy, and fully in accordance with the funda-
mental principles of nature (11) .

The Supreme Being, or Eternal Life, is elsewhere
called Time without limits, for no origin can be
assigned to him ; enshrined in his glory, and pos-
sessing properties and attributes inapprehensible by
our understanding, to him belongs silent adoration.

Creation had a beginning by means of emana-
tion. The first emanation from the Eternal was the
light, whence issued the King of Light, Oromazes.
By means of speech Oromazes created the pure
world, of which he is the preserver and judge.
Oromazes is a holy and celestial being, intelligence
and knowledge.

Oromazes, the first-born of Time without limits,
began by creating after his image and likeness.


38 Secret Societies.

six genii, called amshaspands, tliat surround his
throne, and are his messengers to the inferior spirits
and to men, being also to the latter types of purity
and perfection.

The second series of creations by Oromazes was
that of the twenty-eight izads, that watch over the
happiness, innocence and preservation of the world ;
models of virtue, iaterpreters of the prayers of men.

The third host of pure spirits is more numerous,
and forms that of the far oJiars, the thoughts of Oro-
mazes, or the ideas conceived by him before pro-
ceeding to the creation of things. Not only the faro-
hars of holy men and innocent infants stand before
Oromazes, but this latter himself has his farohar,
the personification of his wisdom and beneficent idea,
his reason, his logos. These spirits hover over the
head of every man ; and this idea passed over to the
Greeks and Romans, and we meet with it again in
the familiar spirit of Socrates, the evil genius of
Brutus, and the genius comes of Horace.

The threefold creation of good spirits was the
necessary consequence of the contemporaneous de-
velopment qf the principle of evil. The second-
born of the Eternal, Ahrimanes, emanated like
Oromazes from the primitive light, and was pure
like it, but being ambitious and haughty, he
became jealous. To punish him, the Supreme
Being condemned him to dwell for twelve thousand
years in the region of darkness, a time which was


Ancient Mysteries. 39

to be sufficient to end tlie strife between good and
evil; but Ahrimanes created countless evU genii,
tliat filled the earth with misery, disease and guilt.
The evil spirits are impurity, violence, covetous-
nesSj cruelty ; the demons of cold, hunger, poverty,
leanness, sterility, ignorance ; and the most per-
verse of all, Feetash, the demon of calur&ny.^

Oromazes, after a reign of three thousand years,
created the material world in six periods, in the
same order as they are found in Genesis, succes-
sively calling into existence the terrestrial light
(not to be confounded with the celestial) , the water,
the earth, plants, animals and man.* Ahrimanes
assisted in the formation of earth and water, be-
cause the darkness had already invaded those
elements, and Oromazes could not conceal them.
Ahrimanes also toot part in the creation and sub-
sequent corruption and destruction of man, whom
Oromazes had produced by an act of his wiU and
by the Word. Out of the seed of that being
Oromazes afterwards drew the first human pair,
Meshia and Meshiane ; but, Ahrimanes first seduced
the woman and then the man, leading them into
evil chiefly by the eating of certain fruits. And


^ All these traditions show already a very great de-
parture from, and decay of, the original knowledge pos-
sessed by the primitive men. See " Introduction."

^ Or rather a being compounded of a man and a bull.


40 Secret Societies.

not only did lie alter tlie nature of man, but also
tliat of animals, opposing insects, serpents, wolves,
and all kinds of vermin to the good animals, thus
spreading corruption over the face of the earth.
But Ahrimanes and his evil spirits are eventually
to be overcome and cast out from every place ; and
in the stern combat just and industrious men have
nothing to fear ; for according to Zoroaster, labour
is the exterminator of evil, and that man best obeys
the righteous judge of all who assiduously tills the
earth and causes it to bring forth harvests and
fruit-bearing trees. At the end of twelve thousand
years, when the earth shall cease to be afflicted by
the evils brought upon it by the spirits of darkness,
three prophets shall appear and assist man with
their power and knowledge, restoring the earth to
its pristine beauty, judging the good and the evil,
and conducting the first into a region of ineffable
bliss. Ahrimanes, and the captive demons and
men, shall be purified in a sea of liquid metal, and
the law of Oromazes shaU rule everywhere.

It is scarcely necessary to point out to the
reader the astronomical bearing of the theogony of
Zoroaster. The six good genii represent the six
summer months, while the evil genii stand for the
winter months. The twenty-eight izads are the
days of a lunar month. But theosophicaUy, the six
periods during which the imiverse was created
refer to the six working properties of nature.


Ancient Mysteries. 41

24. The Light worshipped. — We Bave seen that
Zoroaster taught light to be the first emanation of
the Eternal Life ; hence in the Parsee writings,
lightj the perennial flame, is the symbol of the
Deity or uncreated Life. Hence the Magi and
Parsees have been called fire-worshippers. But the
former saw and the latter see in the fire not a
divinity, but simply the cause of heat and motion,
thus anticipating the most recent discoveries of
physical science, or rather, remembering some of
the lost knowledge. The Parsees did not form
any God, to cd,ll him the one true God ; they did
not iavoke any authority extrinsic to life ; they
did not rely on any uncertain tradition ; but amidst
all the recondite forces of nature, they chose the
one' that governs them all, that reveals itself by the
most tremendous effects.

25. Origin of the word Deus, God. — In this sense
the Magi, as well' as the Chinese, had no theology,
or they had one that is distinguished from aU.
others. Those Magi that gave their name to occult
science (magic) performed no sorcery and believed
ia no miracles. In the bosom of Asiatic immo-
bility they did hot condemn motion, but rather

-considered it as the glorious symbol of the Eternal
Cause. Other castes aimed at impoverishing the
people and subjecting it to the yoke of ignorance
and superstition; but thanks to the Magi, the
Indian. Olympus, peopled with monstrous creatures.


42 Secret Societies.

gave place to tlie conception of the unity of Godj
which always indicates progress in the history of
thought. The text of the most ancient Zend
literature acknowledges but one creative ens of all
things, and his name, Dao, signifies "light" and
" wisdom/' and is explained by the root daer, " to
shine/' whence are derived aU such words as deus,
dies, &c. The conception of Deity indeed was pri-
marily that of the " bright one/' whence also the
Sanskrit dydus, "sky/' which led to so many mytho-
logical fables. But the original idea was founded
on a correct perception of the origin and nature of
things, for light is truly the substance of all
things ; all matter is only a compaction of light.
Thus the Magi founded a moral system and an
empire; they had a literature, a science and a
poetry. Five thousand years before the "Diad/'
they put forth the " Zendavesta," three grand
poems, the first ethical, the second military, and
the third scientific.

26. Mode of Initiation. — The candidate for initia-
tion was prepared by numerous lustrations with fire,
water, and honey. The number of probations he had
to pass through was very great, and ended with a
fast of fifty days' continuance. These trials had to
be endured in a subterranean cave, where he was
condemned to perpetual silence and total solitude.
This novitiate in some instances was attended with
fatal effects, in others the candidate became par-


Ancient Mysteries. 43

tially or wholly deranged; those who surmounted
the trials were eligible to the highest honours. At
the expiration of the novitiate, the candidate was
brought forth into the cavern of initiation, where
he was armed with enchanted armour by his guide,
who was the representative of Simorgh, a monstrous
griffin (27), and an important agent in the ma-
chinery of Persian mythology, and furnished with
talismans, that he might be ready to encounter all
the hideous monsters raised up by the evil spirits
to impede his progress. Introduced into an inner
apartment, he was purified with fire and water, and
put through the seven stages of initiation. First,-
he beheld a deep and dangerous vault froni the
precipice where he stood, into which a single false
step might throw him down to the " throne of
dreadful necessity," — the first three properties of
nature. Groping his way through the mazes of the
gloomy cavern, he soon beheld the sacred fire at
intervals flash through its recesses and illuminate
his path; he also heard the distant yelling of ra-
venous beasts — the roaring of lions, the howling of
wolves, the fierce and threatening bark of dogs.
But his attendant, who maintained a profound
silence, hurried him forward towards the quarter
whence these sounds proceeded, and at the sudden
opening of a door he found himself in a den of wild
beasts, dimly lighted with a single lamp. He was
immediately attacked by the initiated in the forms


44 Secret Societies.

of lions, tigers, wolves, griffins, and other monstrous
beasts, from whom he seldom escaped unhurt.
Thence he passed into another cavern, shrouded in
darkness, where he heard the terrific roaring of
thunder and saw vivid and continuous flashes of
lightning, which in streaming sheets of fire rendered
visible the flitting shades of avenging genii, re-
sentiQg his intrusion into their chosen abodes.
To restore the candidate a little, he was next con-
ducted into another apartment, where his excited
feelings were soothed with melodious music and the
flavour of grateful perfumes'. On his expressing his
readiness to proceed through the remaining ceremo-
nies, a signal was given by his conductor, and three
priests immediately made their appearance, one of
whom cast a living serpent into his bosom as a token
of regeneration (57); and, a private door having been
opened, there issued forth such howlings and cries
of lamentation and dismay, as struck him with
new and indescribable emotions of terror. On
turning his eyes to the place whence these noises
proceeded, he beheld exhibited in every appalling
form the torments of the wicked in Hades. Thus
he was passed through the devious labyrinth con-
sisting of seven spacious vaults, connected by wind-
ing galleries, each opening with a narrow stone por-
tal, the scene of some perilous adventure, until he
reached the Sacellum, or Holy of Holies, which
was brilliantly illuminated, and which sparkled


Ancient Mysteries. 45

witli gold and precious stones. A splendid sun
and starry system moved in accordance with deli-
cious music. The archimagus sat in the east on
a throne of burnished gold^ crowned with a rich
diadem decorated with myrtle-boughs^ and habited
in a tunic of bright cerulean hue ; round him were
assembled the preesules and dispensers of the mys-
teries. By these the novice was received with con-
gratulationSj and after having entered into the usual
engagements for keeping secret the rites of Zoro-
aster^ the sacred words were entrusted to him, of
which the Tetractys, or name of God^ was the chief.
The Tetractys of Pythagoras is analogous to the
Jewish TetragrammatoUj or name of the Deity in
four letters. The number four was considered the
' most perfect, because in the first four properties
of nature (11) are comprised and implied all the
rest ; wherefore also the first four numbers summed
up make up the decad, after which all is only repe-
tition.

27. Myth of Rustam. — This progress was deno-
minated ascending the ladder of perfection, and
from it has arisen the tale of Rustam, the Persian
Hercules, who, mounted on the monster Eakshi,
which is the Arabic name of Simorgh, undertakes
the conquest of Mazendaraun, celebrated as a per-
fect earthly paradise. Having amidst many dangers
fought his way along a road of seven stages, he
reaches the cavern of the White Giant, who smites


46 Secret Societies.

all that assail Mm witli blindness. But Eustam
overcomes hinij and ■with three drops of the giant's
blood restores sight to all his captives. The sym-
bolical three drops of blood had their counterparts
in all the mysteries of the ancient world. In Britain
the emblem was three drops of water ; in Mexico,
as in this legend, three drops of blood ; in India, a
belt composed of three triple threads ; in China, the
three strokes of the letter T, &c. The blindness
with which those who seek the giant are smitten,
of course refers to the emblematic mental blindness
of the aspirant to initiation.


II.


THE MITHRAICS.


28.
[TSTUBIES of Mithras.— JJ-pou the
trunk of a religion so spiritual and
hostile to idolatry^ which undertook
iconoclastic expeditions into Babylonia,
Assyria, Syria, and Lybia, which vindicated the pure
worship of God, destroying by means of the sword
of Cambyaes the Egyptian priesthood, which over-
threw the temples and idols of Greece, which gave
to the Israelites the Pharisees, which appears so
simple and pure as to have bestowed on the Parsees
the appellation of the Puritans of antiquity, and on
Cyrus that of the Anointed of the Lord — on this
trunk there were afterwards ingrafted idolatrous
branches, as perhaps the Brahminic, and certainly
the Mithraic worship, the origin of which latter
Dupuis places at 4,500 years before Christ.


48 Secret Societies.

29. Origin of Mithraic Worship. — Mithras is a
beneficent genius presiding over the sun, the most
powerful izad, invoked together with the sim, and
not at first confounded with it ; the chief mediator
and intercessor between Oromazes and man. But
in course of time the conception of this Mithras be-
came perverted, and he usurped the attributes of
divinity. Such usurpation of the rank of the supe-
rior Deity on the part of the inferior is of frequent
occurrence in mythology ; it suffices to refer to
Siva and Vishnu in India, Serapis in Egypt, Ju-
piter in Greece. The perversion was rendered easy
by confounding the symbol with the thing sym-
bolized, the genius of the sun with the sun itself,
which alone remained in the language, since the
modern Persian name of the sun (mihr) represents
the regular modification of the Zend Mithras.

The Persian Mithras must not be confounded with
that of India, for it is undoubted that another
Mithras, different from the Zendic, from the most
ancient times was the object of a special mysterious
worship, and that the initiated knew him as the sun.
Taking the letters of the Greek word " Meithras "
at their numerical value, we obtain the number 365,
the days of the year. The same holds good of
" Abraxas," the name which Basilides gave to the
Deity, and further of "Belenos," the name given
to the sun in Gaul.

30. Dogmas, Sj-c. — On the Mithraic monuments


Ancient Mysteries. 49

we find representations of the globe of the sun, the
club and bull, symbols of the highest truth, the
highest creative activity, the highest vital power.
Such a trinity agrees with that of Plato, which
consists of the Supreme Good, the "Word, and the
Soul of the World ; with that of Hermes Trisme-
gistus, consisting of Light, Intelligence, and Soul ;
with that of Porphyry, which consists of Father,
Word, and Supreme Soul.

According to Herodotus, Mithras became the
Mylitta of Babylon, the Assyrian Venus, to whom
was paid an obscene worship as to the female prin-
ciple of creation, the goddess of fecundity, of life ;
one perhaps with Anaitis, the Armenian goddess.

The worship of the Persian Mithras, or Apollo,
spread over Italy,' Gaul, Germany, Britain ; and ex-
piring polytheism opposed to the sun Christ, the
sun Mithras.

31. Rites of Initiation. — The sanctuaries of this
worship were always subterranean, and in each
sanctuary was placed a ladder with seven steps,
by which one ascended to the mansions of felicity.

1 Underneath the church of St. Clement, at Rome, a
singularly well-preserved temple of Mithras was discovered
some years ago. When the monk who had, on my visit to
Eome, shown me the church above, said that he would now
take me down to the pagan temple of Mithras, I could not
help saying to myself, " If you but knew it, Mithras is
above as well as below !"


50 Secret Societies.

The initiations into this degree were similar to
those detailed in the foregoing section, but, if pos-
sible, more severe than into any other, and few
passed through all the tests. The festival of the
god was held towards the middle of the month of
Mihr (October) , and the probationer had to undergo
long and severe trials before he was admitted to
the full knowledge of the mysteries.

The first degree was inaugurated with purifying
lustrations, and a sign was set on the neophyte's
brow, whilst he offered to the god a loaf and a cup
of water. A crown was presented to him on the
point of a sword, and he put it on his head saying,
" Mithras is my crown.''

In the second degree the aspirant put bn armour
to meet giants and monsters, and a Avild chase took
place in the subterranean caves. The priests and
officers of the temple, disguised as Hons, tigers,
leopards, bears, wolves, and other wild beasts,
attacked the candidate with fierce howHngs. In
these sham fights the aspirant ran great personal
danger, though sometimes the priests caught a
Tartar. Thus we are told that the Emperor Com-
modus on his initiation carried the joke too far,
and slew one of the priests who had assailed him
in the form of a wild beast.

In the next degree be put on a mantle on which
were painted the signs of the zodiac. A curtain
then concealed him from the sight of aU ; but this
being withdrawn, he appeared surrounded by


Ancient Mysteries. 51

frightful griffins. After passing through other
trials, if his courage did not fail him, he was hailed
as a " Lion of Mithras," in allusion to the zodiacal
sign in which the sun attained his greatest power.
We meet with the same idea in the degree of
Master Mason. The grand secret was- then im-
parted. What was it ? At this distance of time it
is difficult to decide, but we may assume that the
priests communicated to him the most authentic
sacerdotal traditions, the best accredited theories
concerning the origin of the universe,_and the attri-
butes, perfections, and works of Oromazes. In
fact, the Mithraic mysteries represent the progress
of darkness to light. According to Guignault,
Mithras is love ; with regard to the Eternal, he is
the son of mercy ; with regard to Oromazes and
AhrimaneSj the fire of love.

32. Rites derived from Magism. — This was not
the sole heresy, the only secret society that issued
from the womb of Magism ; and its rites gradually
became so corrupt as to serve as a cloak for the
most licentious practices, which were at length
sanctioned and even encouraged in the mysteries.
Further, it became an axiom in religion that the
offspring of a son and a mother was the best calcu-
lated for the office of a priest. Traces of Magism
are also found in the speculations of Manes, the
Eeligion of Love, and the secret history of the
Templars.


in.

BRAHMINS AND GYMNOSOPHISTS.

33.
; ULOAB Creed of India.— The Indian re-
ligion^ whetlier we look on it as an adul-
teration of Magisnij or as the common
trunk of all Asiatic theosophyj offers so
boundless a wealth of deities^ that no other in this
respect can approach it. This wealth is an iufal-
Kble sign of the mental poverty and grossness of
the people, who, ignorant of the laws of nature,
and terrified at its phenomena, acknowledged as
many supernatural beings as there were mysteries
for them. The Brahmins reckon up 300,000 gods
— a frightful host, that have kept Indian life servile
and stagnant, perpetuated the divisions of caste,
upheld ignorance, and weighed like an incubus on
the breasts of their deluded dupes, and turned
existence into a nightmare of grief and servitude.


Ancient Mysteries. 58

34. Secret Doctrines. — But in tlie secret sanctuary
these vain phantoms disappear, and the initiated
are taught to look upon them as countless accidents
and outward manifestations of the First Cause,
The Brahmins did not consider the people fit to
apprehend and preserve in its purity the religion of
the spirit, hence they veiled it in these figures, and
also invented a language incomprehensible to the
vulgar, but which the investigations of Oriental
scholars have enabled us to read, and to perceive
that the creed of India is one of the purest ever
known to man. Thus in the second chapter of the
first part of the "Vishnu Purana," it is written:
" God is without form, epithet, definition, or de-
scription ; free from defect, incapable of annihilation,
change, grief, or pain. We can only say that he, that
is, the Eternal Being, is God. Vulgar men think that
God is in the water ; the more enlightened, in celes-^
tial bodies; the ignorant, in wood and stone ; but the
wise, in the universal mind." The " Mahanirvana,''
says :-— " Numerous figures, corresponding with the
nature of divers powers and quality, were invented
for the benefit of those who are wanting in suffi-
cient understanding." Again, "We have no
notion of how the Eternal Being is to be described ;
he is above all the mind can apprehend, above
nature. . . . That Only One that was never defined
by any language, and gave to language all its
meaning, he is the Supreme Being . . and no


54 Secret Societies.

partial thing that man worships. . . This Being
extends over all things. He is mere spirit without
corporeal form ; without extension of any size, un-
impressionable, and without any organs ; he is pure,
perfect, omniscient, omnipresent, the ruler of the in-
tellect ... he is the soul of the whole universe."

35. Brahma and Buddha. — The polytheism of
India branched off into two great sects, — ^Budd-
hists and Brahminists, — each possessing distinctive
characteristics. Allusions to this separation are
found in the Legend of the Temple ; and there are
other divisions in theological nomenclature which
respectively refer to the traditions of those grand
sections. The Indians, the Greeks (except Pyth-
agoras, who was to some extent a Buddiist) , and
the Britons, were Brahminists ; whilst the Chiaese,
Japanese, Persians, and Saxons, were Buddhists.
The Buddhists were Magians, the Brahminists
Sabseans. The famous Buddhist doctrine of Nir-
VElna or Nihilism — so totally misapprehended, as
long as it was supposed to mean total annihilation —
is profoundly theosophicaJ, and really means the
perfect absorption into the Deity, though Buddha
does not allow of a personal god or creator. By
the Deity he means the light, the eternal liberty,
and therefore calls Nirvana the highest stage of
spiritual liberty and bHss. The individual soul, on
leaving the body in which it was imprisoned, re-
turns into the universal soul; just as the solar light.


Ancient Mysteries. 55

imprisoned in a piece of woodj when this is burnt,
returns into the uniyersal ocean of light. On this
doctrine was afterwards engrafted the false belief in
the metempsychosis, or transmigration of souls, and
the misanthropic system of self-renunciation, which,
in India, led to the self-torturings of fakirs and other
fanatics ; and which finds its analogies in Christian
communities in the asceticism of fasts, penances,
macerations, solitude, flagellation, and all the mad
practices of monks, anchorets, and other religious
zealots.

36. Asceticism. — This asceticism, founded on the
above notion, viz. that the Absolute or All is the
real existence, and that individual phenomena, espe-
cially matter in all its forms, are really nothing, i. e.
mere phantasms, and to be avoided, as increasing
the distance from- the Absolute, and that absorption
into the Deity is to be obtained, even in this life, by
the maceration of .the body, was and even now is
prevalent in India, where it was carried, in thou-
sands of instances, further than mere self-torture,
even to death. When, at the festival of the dread
goddess Bhovani, the wife of Siva, her ponder-
ous image was borne on a car, with cutting wheels,
to the Ganges, a crowd of frantic beings, wreathed
with flowers, joyous as if they went to the nuptial
altar, would cast themselves under the wheels of
the car, offering themselves, amidst the sounding of
trumpets, as voluntary sacrifices, to be cut to pieces


56 Secret Societies.

by the wheels. And in various sects asceticism has
led to the adoption of many strange practices. In
the " Contes de la Keine de Navarre" there is a
passage which at some length refers to a special
mode adopted by monks and other men for the
mortification of the flesh. Of such persons the
queen says: — "lis disent qu'il faut s'liabituer a
la chastete, et pour eprouver leurs forces Us parlent
aux plus belles, et a celles qu'ils aiment le plus, et en
haisaiit et touchant, Us eprouvent quits sont dans
une entiere mortification. Quand Us sentent que ce
plaisir les emeut. Us vivent dans la retrcdte, jeiinent
et se discipKnent, et quand Us ont mate leur chair en
-sorte que ni la conversation ni le haiser leur cau-
sent point d'emotion, Us essay ent la sotte tentation de
coucher ensemble, et de s'embrasser sans aucun desi/r
de volupte."

37. GymnosopMsts. — We have very few notices
of the Gymnosophists, the Magi. of Brahminism, the
most severe custodians of the primitive law, and
originally most free from imposture. They spread
over Africa ; and in Ethiopia they lived as solitaires,
and revived on the banks of the Nile many phases
of Asiatic theosophy. Priests-errant, they were re-
ported to carry with them a secret doctrine, of which
the simplicity of their lives and the purity of their
morals might be considered as the outward manifes-
tation; though ia after times they became one of
the most debauched and immoral sects in India.


Ancient Mysteries. 57

They went almost naked (hence their name —
yvfivoQ, naked ; ao^og, wise)^ and lived on herbs ;
but their own austerity did not render them harsh
towards other men, nor unjust as regarded other
common conditions of life. They beUeved in one
only Godj the immortality of the soul and its transr
migratiouj and when old age or disease prostrated
them, they ascended the funeral pile, deeming it
ignominious to let years or evils afflict them. Alex-
ander saw one of them close his life in this manner.

The priestly colleges of Ethiopia and Egypt
maintained constant relations. Osiris is an Ethi-
opian divinity. Every year the two families of
priests met on the boundaries of the two countries
to offer common sacrifices to Ammon, — another
name for Jupiter, — and celebrate the festival which
the Greeks called heliotrapeza, or Table of the Sun.
Amidst the predominant fetishism of Africa, pro-
duced partly by climate and partly by the same cir-
cumstances that gave rise to Indian fetishism, we
cannot help admiring that colony of thinkers which
long resisted the progress of despotism, and whose
destruction was the revenge of intolerance and
tyranny.

38. Places for celebrating Mysteries. — The mys-
teries, as in other countries, were celebrated in
subterranean caverns, here excavated in the solid
rock, and surpassing in grandeur of conception and
finish of execution anything to be seen elsewhere.


58 Secret Societies.

The temples of Eleptanta, Bllora, and Salsette, con-
sisting of large halls and palaces, chapels^ pagodas,
cells for thousands of priests and pilgrims, adorned
with pillars and columns, obelisks, bas-reliefs,
gigantic statues of deities, elephants and other
sacred animals, all carved out of the living rock, are
especially noteworthy. In the sacellum, only acces-
sible to the initiated, the supreme Deity was repre-
sented by the lingam, which was used more or less
by all ancient nations to represent his creative
power, though in India it was also typified by the
petal and calyx of the lotus.

39. Initiation. — The periods of initiation were
regulated by the increase and decrease of the moon,
and the mysteries were divided into four degrees,
and the candidate might be initiated into the first
at the early age of eight years. He was then
prepared by a Brahmin, who became his spiritual
guide for the second degree, the probationary cere-
monies of which consisted ia incessant occupation
in prayers, fastiugs, ablutions, and the study of as-
tronomy. In the hot season he sat exposed to five
fires, four blazing around him, with the sun above ;
in the rains he stood uncovered ; in the cold season
he wore wet clothing. To participate in the high
priAdleges which the mysteries were believed to con-
fer, he was sanctified by the sign of the cross, and
subjected to the probation of the pastos, the tomb of
the sun, the coffin of Hiram, darkness, hell, all sym-


Ancient Mysteries. 59

bolical of the first three properties (11) . ' Sis puri-
fication being completed, he was led at night to the,
cavern of initiation. This was brilliantly illuminated,
and there sat the three chief hierophants, in the
east, west and south, representing the gods Brahma,
Vishnu, Siva, surrounded by attendant myst-
agogues, dressed in appropriate vestments. The
initiation was begun by an apostrophe to the sun,
addressed by the name of Pooroosh, here meaning
the vital soul, or portion of the universal spirit of
Brahm ; and the candidate, after some further pre-
liminary ceremonies, was made to circumambulate
the cavern three times, and afterwards conducted
through seven dark caverns, during which period
the waitings of Mahadeva for the loss of Siva were
represented by dismal bowlings. The usual para-
phernalia of flashes of light, of dismal sounds and
horrid phantoms were produced to terrify and
confuse the aspirant. Having arrived at the last
cavern, the sacred conch was blown, the folding
doors thrown open, and the candidate was admitted
into an apartment filled with dazzling lights, orna-
mented with statues and emblematic figures richly
decorated with gems, and scented with the most
fragrant perfumes. This saceUum was inteijded to
represent Paradise, and was actually so called in
the temple of EUora. With eyes riveted on the
altar, the candidate was taught to expect the
descent of the Deity in the bright pyramidal fire


60 Secret Societies.

that blazed, upon it ; and in a moment of enthu-
siasm, thus artiScially produced, the candidate
might indeed persuade himself that he actually be-
held Brahma seated on the lotus, with his four heads
and arms, representing the four elements and. the four
quarters of the globe, and bearing in his hands the
emblems of eternity and. power, the circle and fire.

39a. Brahm and Brahma. — The reader wiU have
noticed in one case I say Brahm and. in the other
Brahma; the latter is the body of the former,
which is the Eternal Life. The terms corrrespond
with those of Abyssal Deity and Virgin Sophia of
Christian theosophy.

40. The ineffable name Aum.—The candidate
was now supposed to be regenerated, and was in-
vested with the white robe, tiara, and the sacred
belt ; a cross was marked on his forehead and a tan
(49) upon his breast; the salagram or marginal
black stone (18), to insure to him the perfection
of Vishnu, and the serpent stone, an antidote
against the bite of serpents, were delivered to him ;
and lastly, he was intrusted with the sacred name,
which signified the solar fire, and united in its
comprehensive meaning the great Trimurti, or com-
bined principle on which the existence of all things
is founded. This word was OM, or in a trUiteral
form AUM, to represent the creative, preserving,
and destroying power of the Deity, personified in
Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, the symbol of which was


Ancient Mysteries. 61

an equilateral triangle. To this name^ as the Royal
Arch Masons to that of labulon, they attributed
the most wonderful powers; and it could only be
the subject of silent but pleasing contemplation,
for its pronunciation was said to make earth
and heaven tremble, and even the angels of
heaven to quake with fear. The emblems around
and the aporreta of the mysteries were then
explained, and the candidate instructed that by
means of the knowledge of OM he was to become
one with the Deity. With the Persians the syllable
HOM meant the tree of Hfe, a tree and a man at
the same time, the dwelling-place of the soul of
Zoroaster ; and with them also, as with the Indians,
it was forbidden on pain of death to reveal it. In
this secret name, involving the rejection of poly-
theism, and comprising the knowledge of nature,
we have the golden thread that unites ancient and
modem secret societies.

41. The Lingam. — One of the emblems found in
the saceUum, and which in fact is found everywhere
on the walls of Indian temples, was the lingam,
which represented the male principle, and which
passed from India to Egypt, Greece and Scandi-
navia. The worship of this symbol could not but
lead to great abuses, especially as regarded the
gymnosophists .

42. The Lotus. — The lotus, the lily of the Nile,
held sacred also in Egypt, was the great vegetable


62 Secret Societies.

amulet of eastern nations. The Indian gods were
always represented as seated on it. It was an
emblem of the soul's freedom when liberated from
its earthly tabernacle, the body ; for it takes root in
the mud deposited at the bottom of a river, vege-
tates from the germ to a perfect plant, and after-
wards rising proudly above the waves, it floats iu
air, as if independent of any extraneous aid. It is
placed on a golden table, as the symbol of Siva, on
the top of Mount Menu, the holy mountain of
India, the centre of the earth, worshipped by Hiu-
doos, Tartars, Montchurians and Mongols. It is
supposed to be in Northern India, to have three
peaks, composed of gold, silver and iron, on which
reposes the trine deity Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva.
Geographically this mountain is evidently the table-
land of Tartary, whose southern boundary is formed
by the Himalayas. This custom of accounting a
three-peaked mountain holy was not confined to
India alone, but prevailed also among the Jews.
Thus Olivet, near Jerusalem, had three peaks, which
were accounted the residence of the Deity — Che-
mosh, Milcom, Ashtoreth (2 Kings xxiii. 13). In
Zechariah (xiv. 4) the feet of the Almighty are
placed on the two outer peaks of this mountain
during the threatened destruction of Jerusalem ;
while the mountain itself is made to split asunder
at the centre peak from east to west, leaving a great
valley between the divided parts.


ly.

EGYPTIAN MTSTEEIES.

43.
'NTIQUITY of Egyptian Oivilization. —
AH Egypt is an initiation. A long and
narrow strip of landj watered by im-
mense floods and surromided by immense
solitudes — such is Egypt. Very high and steep
rocks protected it from the incursions of the nomadic
tribeSj and thus a valley, a river, and a race sufficed
to create, if not the most ancient, at least one of the
most ancient and illustrious cultures, a world of
marvels, at a time when Europeans went naked,
and dyed their skins, as Caesar found the ancient
Britons, and when the Greeks, armed with bows
and arrows, led a nomadic existence. The Egyp-
tians, many thousand years before the Trojan war,
had invented writing, as is proved, for instance, by
the hieratic papyrus of the time of Eameses II., full
of recipes and directions for the treatment of a great


64 Secret Societies.

variety of diseases, and now in the Berlin Museum.
They also knew many comforts of life, which our
pride calls modern ; and the Greek writers, whom
the Egyptian priests called children, are full of
recollections of that mysterious land, recording the
father Nile, Thebes with its hundred gates, the
Pyramids, Lake Meroe, the Labyrinth, the Sphinx,
and the statue of Memnon saluting the rising sun.

44. Temples of Ancient Egypt. — Egyptian chron-
ology, the reproof and paragon of aU others, is
graven on imperishable monuments. But those
obelisks, sacred to the sun, by their conical form
like that of the flame ; those labyrinths, those human-
headed birds, typifying the intelligent soul; those
scarabei, signifying creative power ; those sphinxes,
representing force, the Hon or sun, and man ; those
serpents expressing Hfe and eternity (57) ; those
strange combinations of forms ; those hieroglyphics
— they long remained secrets for us, and perhaps
always were a secret for the Egyptian people that
in fear and silence erected the pyramids — aU these
symbols constituted the language of one of the
vastest and most elaborate secret societies that
ever existed. Penetrating into those gigantic
temples which seem the work of an extinct race,
different from ours, as fossil quadrupeds are dif-
ferent from those now living; traversing those
cloisters, which after many windings lead to the
innermost sanctuary, we are seized by a singular


Ancient Mysteries. 65

thought — that of the silence and solitude which
ever reigned within those edifices into which the
people were not allowed to penetrate ; only the few
were admitted, and we moderns are the first pro-
fane that have set foot within the hallowed pre-
cincts. LThe temple of Luxor is the vastest on
earth — six propylsea with long files of columns, and
colossi and obelisks and sphinxes ; six cloisters —
every new generation of kings for seventy centuries
added some new portion and inscribed on the walls
the history of its deeds, and every new addition
removed the faithful further from the seat of the
god; the marvel and mystery increased. /The sixth
propylseum is not finished; it is a chapter of history
broken off in the middle, and wiU never be com-
pleted. \The walls and pillars of the temples were
covered with religious and astronomical representa-
tions, and from the fact of many of these pictures
showing human beings in various states of suf-
fSring and under torture, it has been assumed that
the Egyptian ritual was cruel, like the Mexican (74,
77) ; but such is not the case ;rEh§ pictures are only
representations of the punishments said to be in-
flicted on the wicked in another lifeuZL

45. Egyptian Priests and JKwg's.— V-The priestly
caste, possessing all the learning, ruled first and
alone"! but in its own defence it armed a portion of
the population ; the rest it kept down by supersti-
tion, or disarmed and weakened it by corruption.


66 Secret Societies.

To Plato, who saw it from a distance, this govern-
ment seemed stupendous, and he idealized it ; it was
for him the " city of God," the pattern republic.
Nevertheless, as was inevitable, might rebelled
against doctrine, the soldiery broke the rein of the
priesthood, and by the side of the pontiffs arose the
kings, or to speak more correctly, the two series
proceeded in parallels ; that of the priests was not
set aside, it had its palaces, the temples, strong
like fortresses, along the Nile, which were at the
same time splendid' abodes, agricultural establish-
ments, commercial depots, and caravan stations;
its members appointed and ruled the kings them-
selves, regulating the most minute acts of their
daily conduct ; [they were the depositaries of the
highest oflBces, and as the learned savans, magis-
trates, and physicians, enjoyed the first honours!!
Their chief colleges were at Thebes, Memphis,
HeliopoHs, and Sa'is ; they possessed a great por-
tion of the land, which they caused to be cultivated ;
paid no taxes, but collected tithes. [They formed
indeed the elect, privileged, and only jfree portion of
the nationry

-46. Exoteric and Esoteric Doctrines. — The priests
were no followers of the idolatrous faith of the
people; but to have undeceived the latter would have
been dangerous for themselves. The true doctrine
of the unity of God, therefore, which was their secret,
was only imparted to those that after many trials


Ancient Mysteries. 67

had been initiated into the mysteries. Their doc-
trineSj like those of all other priesthoods, were
therefore exoteric and esoteric ; and the mysteries
were of two kinds, the greater and the less, the
former being the mysteries of Osiris and Serapis,
the latter those of Isis. The mysteries of Osiris
were celebrated at the autumnal equinox ; those of
Serapis at the summer solstice ; and those of Isis at
the vernal equinox.

47. Egyptian Mythology. — Though want of gpace
does not allow me fully to enter upon the vast sub-
ject of Egyptian mythology, yet a few words thereon
are necessary to render its bearing on the mysteries
clear, and also to show its connection with many of
the rites of modern freemasonry.

That all the symbols and ceremonies of all the
ancient creeds originally had a deep and universal
cosmic meaning has already been shown (9, 10) , but
at the time when the mysteries were most flourishing
that meaning was to a great extent lost, and a
merely astronomical one substituted for it, as will
be seen from the following explanations : —

[^siris, represented in Egypt by a sceptre sur-
mounted by an eye^ to signify him that rules and
sees, symbolizes the sun. He is killed by Typhon,
a serpent engendered by the mud of the Nile. But
Typhon is a transposition of Python, derived from the
Greek word 7ru9w, " to putrefy," and means nothing
else but the noxious vapours arising from steam-


68 Secret Societies.

ing mudj and thus concealing the sun ; wherefore in
the Greek mythology Apollo — another name, for the
sun — is said to have slain Python with his arrows,
that is to say^ dispelled the vapours by his rays.
Osiris having been kiUed by Python — to which,
however, the wider meaning of the sun's imaginary
disappearance, or death, during the winter season,
was attached — Isis, his wife, or the moon, goes in
search of him, and at last finds his body, cut into
fourteen pieces, that" is to say, into as many parts as
there are days between the full moon and the new ;
she collects all the pieces, with one important ex-
ception, for which she made a substitution which
gave rise to a worship resembling that of the Hngam
in India.

<^But although to the vulgar crowd Isis was only
the moon, to the initiated she was the Universal
Mother, the primordial harmony and beauty, called
in Egyptian " lophis," which the Greeks turned into
" Sophia," ^ whence the Virgin Sophia of theosophy.
Hence also the many names by which Isis was
known (54) , indicating the multifarious aspects sl^e
necessarily assumed. Her image was worshipped
at Sais under the emblem of "Isis veiled," with


' By a transposition of consonants, common enough in
the formation of new words ; Typhon from Python is an
instance already mentioned ; forma, from fjopcpti, is another.


Ancient Mysteries. 69

this inscription : — " I am all that has been, all that
is, and all that will be, and no mortal has drawn
aside my veil."

Apis, or the Bull, was an object of worship
throughout all the ancient world, because formerly
the zodiacal sign of the BuU opened the vernal
equinox (69).

48. The Phoenix. — The Egyptians began the year
with the rising of the dog-star or Sirius. But
making no allowance for the quarter of a day which
finishes the year, the civil year every four years
began one day too soon, and so the beginniag of
the year went successively through every one of
the days of the natural year in the space of four
times 365, which makes 1,460 years. They fancied
they blessed and made all the seasons to prosper by
making them thus to enjoy one after another the
feast of Isis, which was celebrated along with that
of Sirius, though it was frequently very remote from
that constellation; wherefore they introduced the
image of dogs, or even the real and living animals, pre-
ceding the chariots of Isis. When in the 1461st year
the feast again coincided with the rising of the star
Sirius, they looked upon it as a season of plenty,
and symbolized it by a bird of singular beauty,
which they called Phcenix [delicvis ahundcms) , say-
ing that it came to die upon the altar of the
sun, and that out of its ashes there arose a little


70 Secret Societies.

worm, that gave birth to a bird perfectly like the
preceding.

49. The Gross. — Among the astronomical sym-
bols we must not omit the Cross. This sign really
signifies the fire, as we have seen (11. ix.), but
in Egypt it was simply the Mlometer, consisting of
an upright pole with a cross-bar, that was raised or
lowered according to the swelling or decrease of
the river. It was frequently surmounted by a circle,
typifying the deity that governs this important
operation. Now, the overflow of the Nile was
considered the salvation of Egypt, and hence the
sign came to be looked upon with great veneration
and to have occult virtues attributed to it, such as
the power of averting evil ; wherefore the Egyptians
hung small figures of the cross, or rather the letter
T, with a ring attached to it, the crux ansata, round
the necks of their children and of sick persons ;
they applied it to the string or fiUets with which
they wrapped up their mummies, where we still
find it ; it became in fact an amulet {amolitio
malorum) . Other nations adopted the custom, and
hence the cross or the letter T, whereby it was
symbolized throughout the ancient world, was
supposed to be a sign or letter of more than ordi-
nary significance. In the mysteries, the crijix
ansata was the symbol of eternal life. But the
cross was worshipped as an astronomical sign in
other countries. We have seen that in India the


Ancient Mysteries. 71

Deophyte was sanctified by the sign of tlie cross
(39) , wliicli in most ancient nations was a symbol
of the universe^ pointing as it does to the four
quarters of the compass ; and the erection of temples
on the cruciform principle is as old as architecture
itself. The two great pagodas of Benares and
Mathura are erected in the form of vast crosses^ of
which each wing is equal in extent, as is also the
pyramidal temple of New Grange in Ireland. But
the older and deeper meaning of the cross is shown
in (11); it refers to the fire, and the double quality
everywhere observable in nature. The triple tau is
the Eoya,l Arch Mason^s badge.

60. Places of Initiation. — In Egypt and other
countries (India, Media, Persia, Mexico) the place
of initiation was a pyramid erected over subterra-
nean caverns. The pyramids, in fact, may be looked
upon, considering their size, shape, and solidity, as
artificial mountains, covering buried cities. Their
form not only symbolically represented the ascend-
ing flame, but also had a deeper origin in the conical
form, which is the primitive figure of all natural
products. And the Great Pyramid, the tomb of
Osiris, was erected in such a position and to such a
height, that at the spring and autumnal equinoxes
the sun would appear exactly at midday upon the
summit of the pyramid, seeming to rest upon this
immense pedestal, when his worshippers, extended
at the base, would contemplate the great Osiris as


72 Secret Societies.

well when lie descended into the tomb as when he
arose from it triumphant.

51. Process of Initiation. — The candidate, con-
ducted by a guide, was led to a deep, dark well or
shaft in the pyramid, and, provided with a torch, he
descended into it by means of a ladder aflBxed to
the side. Arrived at the bottom, he saw two doors
— one of them barred, the other yielding to the
touch of his hand. Passing through it, he beheld a
winding gallery, whilst the door behind him shut
with a clang that reverberated through the vaults.
Inscriptions Uke the following met his eye : " Whoso
shall pass along this road alone, and without looking
back, shall be purified by fire, water, and air ; and
overcoming the fear of death, shaU issue from the
bowels of the earth to the light of day, preparing his
soul to receive the mysteries of Isis." Proceeding
onward, the candidate arrived at another iron gate,
guarded by three armed men, whose shining helmets
were surmounted by emblematic animals, the Cer-
berus of Orpheus. Here the candidate had ofifered
to him the last chance of returning, if so incUned.
Electing to go forward, he underwent the trial by
fire, by passing through a haU. filled with inflam-
mable substances in a state of combustion, and
forming a bower of fire. The floor was covered with
a grating of red-hot iron bars, leaving, however,
narrow interstices where he mi^ht safi^ly place his
foot. Having surmounted this-obstacle, he has to

\


Ancient Mysteries. 73

encounter the trial by water. A wide and dark
canalj fed by the waters of the Nile, arrests his pro-
gress. Placing the flickering lamp upon his head,
he plunges into the canal, and swims to the opposite
bank, where the greatest trial, that by air, awaits
him. He lands upon a platform leading to an ivory
door, bounded by two walls of brass, into each of
which is inserted an immense wheel of the same
metal. He in vaia attempts to open the door,
when, espying two large iron rings affixed to it, he
takes hold of them ; but suddenly the platform sinks
from under him, a chilling blast of wind extinguishes
his lamp, the two brazen wheels revolve with for-
midable rapidity and stunning noise, whilst he
remains suspended by the two rings over the
fathomless abyss. But ere he is exhausted the
platform returns, the ivory door opens, and he sees
before him a magnificent temple, brilliantly illumi-
nated, and filled with the priests of Isis clothed in
the mystic insignia of their offices, the hierophant at
their head. But the ceremonies of initiation do not
cease here. The candidate is subject to a series of
fastings, which gradually increase for nine times
nine days. During this period a rigorous silence
is imposed upon him, which if he preserve in-
violate, he is at length fully initiated into the
esoteric doctrines of Isis. He is led before the
triple statue of Isis, Osiris, and Horus, — another
symbol of the sun, — where he swears never to


74 Secret Societies.

publish the things revealed to him in the sanctuary,
and first drinks the water of Lethe presented to
him by the high priest^ to forget all he ever heard in
his unregenerate state, and afterwards the water of
Mnemosyne, to remember all the lessons of wisdom
imparted to him in the mysteries. He is next
introduced into the most secret part of the ' sacred
edifice, where a priest instructs him in the appli-
cation of the symbols found therein. He is then
publicly announced as a person who has been
initiated into the mysteries of Isis — the first degree
of the Egyptian rites.

52. Mysteries of Serapis. — These constituted the
second degree. We know but little of them, and
Apuleius only slightly touches upon them. When
Theodosius destroyed the temple of Serapis there
were discovered subterraneous passages and engines
wherein and wherewith the priests tried the candi-
dates. Porphyry, in referring to the greater myste-
ries, quotes a fragment of Cheremones, an Egyptian
priest, which imparts an astronomical meaning to
the whole legend of Osiris, thus confirming what
has been said above. And Herodotus, in describing
the temple of Minerva, where the rites of Osiris
were celebrated, and speaking of a tomb placed in
the most secret recess, as in Christian churches
there are calvaries behind the altar, says : " It is
the tomb of a god whose name I dare not mention.''


Ancient Mysteries. 75

Calvary is derived from the Latin word ealvus, "bald/'
and figuratively ''arid," "dried up ;" pointing to the
decay of nature in the winter season.

53. Mysteries of Osiris. — These formed the third
degree, or summit of Egyptian initiation. In these
the legend of the murder of Osiris by his brother
Typhon was represented, and the god was per-
sonated by the candidate. (As we shall see here-
after, the Freemasons exactly copy this pro-
cedure in the master's degree, substituting for
Osiris, Hiram Abiff, one of the three grand masters
at the building of Solomon's temple.) The per-
fectly initiated candidate was called Al-om-jak, from
the name of the Deity (40), and the dogma of the
unity of God was the chief secret imparted to him.
How great and how dangerous a secret it was may
easily be seen when it is borne in mind that cen-
turies after the institution of the mysteries, Socrates
lost his Hfe for promulgating the same doctrine.

54. Isis.- — The many names assumed by Isis have
already been alluded to. She was also represented
with different emblems, aU betokening her manifold
characteristics. The lucid round, the snake, the
ears of com, and the sistrum represent the titular
deities of the Hecatsean (Hecate, Goddess of Night),
Bacchic, Eleusinian, and Ionic mysteries, that is,
the mystic rites in general for whose sake the alle-
gory was invented. The black palla in which she is


76 Secret Societies.

wrapped, embroidered with a silver moon and stars,
denotes the time in which the mysteries were cele-
brated, namely, in the dead of night. Her names,
to return to them, are given in the following words,
put into her mouth by Apuleius in his " Golden
Ass," which is a description of the mysteries under
the guise of a fable : — " Behold, Lucius, I, moved
by thy prayers, am present with thee ; I who am
nature, the parent of things, the queen of all the
elements, the primordial progeny of the ages, the
supreme of divinities, the sovereign of the spirits of
the dead, the first of the celestials, the first and
universal substance, the uniform and multiform
aspect of the uncreated essence ; I who rule by my
nod the luminous sumimits of the heavens, the
breezes of the sea, and the silence of the realms
beneath, and whose one divinity the whole orb of
the earth venerates under a manifold form, by dif-
ferent rites, and a variety of appellations. Hence
the early Phrygians call me Pessinuntica, mother
of the gods ; the Attic aborigines, Cecropian
Minerva; the floating Cyprians, Paphian Venus;
the arrow-bearing Cretans, Diana Dictynna ; the
three-tongued Sicilians, Stygian Proserpine ; and
the Eleusinians, the ancient goddess Ceres. Some
also call me Juno, others Bellona, others Hecate,
and others Rhamnusia. The Ethiopians, the Arii, and
the Egyptians, skilled in ancient learning, honour me


Ancient Mysteries. 77

with rites pecuKarly appropriatSj and call me by my
true name. Queen Isis." Prom this it is quite clear
that Isis was not simply the moon to the initiated.
In the sanctuary the multifarious forms are reduced
to unity; the many idols are reduced to the one
divinity^ i. e. primeval power and intelligence.


V.

MBTAMOEPHOSES OF THE LEGEND
OF ISIS.

55.
[PBEAD of Egyptian Mysteries. — The
irradiations of the mysteries of Egypt
shine through and animate the secret
doctrines of Phoenicia^ Asia Minora
Greece^ and Italy. Cadmus and Inachus brought
them into Greece at large, Orpheus into Thrace, Me-
lampus into Argos, TrophonioiS-iiitaJBoeotia, Minos ■
into Crete, Cinyras into Cyprus, and Erechthe us i nto
Athens. And asinEgyptthemysterieswerededicated
to Isis and Osiris, so in Samothrace they were sacred
to the mother of the gods, in "BoRntia. tp T^p.p.q Tvtih, in
Cyprus to Venus, in Crete to Jupiter, in Athena to
Ceres and Proserpine, in Amphissa to Castor and Pol-
lux, in Lemnos to Vulcan, and so to others in other
places ; but their end, as well as nature, was the same
in aU — to teach monotheism and a future state.


Ancient Mysteries. 79

56. Dionysiac or Bacchic Mysteries. — These were
divided into the greater and the less. The latter
were celebrated every year at the autumnal equinox,
and females were admitted to them, wearing the crea-
tive emblem suspended round their necks. They
ended with the sacrifice of an unclean animal, which
was eaten by the worshippers. Then aspirants and
initiated proceeded with sacred dances towards the
temple. The Canephoroi, carrying golden vases full
of the choicest fruits, were followed by the bearers
of the creative emblem, who were furnished with
long poles, and were crowned with ivy, a herb
sacred to Bacchus, or the sun personified. Now
came other celebrants habited as women, but per-
forming all the repulsive actions of drunken men.
The next night the ceremonies of initiation were
performed, in which the fable of Bacchus slain by
the Titans was scenically represented, the aspirant
acting the part of Bacchus.

The greater mysteries were celebrated every three
years at the vernal equinox, in the neighbourhood
of a marsh, like the festival of Sais, in Egypt. On
the night preceding the initiation, the spouse of the
hierophant sacrificed a ram. She represented the
spouse of Bacchus, and when seated as such on the
throne, the priests and initiated of both sexes ex-
claimed: " Hail, spouse, hail, new light ! " The aspi-
rant was purified by fire, water, and air, passing
through trials similar to those described elsewhere


80 Secret Societies.

[e. g. 39), and finally, was introduced into the sanc-
tuary crowned with myrtle and dressed in the skin
of a fawn. ■

57. Sahazian Mysteries. — Sabazius was a name
of Bacchus, probably derived from Siva or some
cognate form, whose astronomical meaning is the
planetary system of countless suns and stars. The
mysteries were performed at night, and represented
the amours of Jupiter, in the form of a serpent, and
Proserpina. A golden — others say a living — ser-
pent was introduced into the bosom of the candi-
date, who exclaimed, " Bvoe ! Sabai ! Bacchi ! Anes !
Attes ! Hues ! " Evoe or Eve in most languages
of antiquity meant both serpent and life ; a re-
collection of the name of Adam's wife, and the
origin of the serpent- worship of the ancient world.
When Moses lifted up a brazen serpent in the Wil-
derness, the afflicted Hebrews knew that it was a
sign of preservation. Sabai has already been ex-
plained; Hues and Attes were other names of
Bacchus. These mysteries continued to be cele-
brated to the last days of paganism, and in the days
of Domitian, 7,000 initiated were found in Eome
alone.

58. Mysteries of the Oahiri. — The name of the
Cabiri was derived originally from Phoenicia; the
word signifies " powerful." There were four gods —
Aschieros, Achiochersus, Achiochersa, and Camillus.
The last was slain by his three brothers, who carried


Ancient Mysteries. 81

away with them the reproductive organs ; and this
allegorical murder was celebrated in the secret rites.
Camillus is the same as Osirisj Adonis, and others,
all subject to the same mutilation, all symbolizing
the sun^s loss of generative power during winter.
The chief places for the celebration of these mys-
teries were the islands of Samothrace and Lemnos.
The priests were called Corybantes. There is much
perplexity connected with this subject; since, be-
sides what is mentioned above, the mysteries are
also said to have been instituted in honour of Atys,
the son of Cybele. Atys means the sun, and the
mysteries were celebrated at the vernal equinox,
and there cannot, therefore, be any doubt that, like
all the other mysteries in their period of decay, they
represented the enigmatical death of the sun in
winter and his regeneration in the spring. The
ceremonies lasted three days. The first day was one
of sadness : a cruciform pine with the image of Atys
attached to it was cut down, the mutilated body of
Atys having been discovered at the f6ot of such a
tree ; the second day was a day of trumpets, which
were blown to awaken the god from his deathlike
sleep ; and the third day, that of joy, was the day
of initiation and celebration of his return to life.

Y59. ^leusimoM Mysteries. — The Bleusinian mys-
teries were celebrated in honour of Ceres, the Isis
of Greece ; whilst Osiris appears as Proserpine— for
the death of Osiris and the carrying off of Proserpine


82 Secret Societies.

to the infernal regions symbolize tLe same thing, viz.
the sun's disappearance during the winter season.
The mysteries were originally celebrated only at
Bleusis, a town of Attica, but eventually extended
to Italy and even to Britain. Like aU other mys-
teries, they were divided into the greater and the
less, and the latter, Hke the Bacchic and Cabiric rites,
lasted nine days, and were merely preparatory, con-
sisting of lustrations and sacrifices. The cere-
monies of initiation iato the greater mysteries were
opened by the herald exclaiming : " Retire, ye
profane." The aspirant was presented naked, to
signify his total helplessness and dependence on
Providence. He was clothed with the skin of a
calf. An oath of secrecy was then administered,
and he was asked : " Have you eaten bread ?" The
reply was "No." Proserpine cannot return to the
earth because she has eaten of the fruit of the
infernal regions ; Adam faUs when he tastes of
earthly fruit. " I have drunk the sacred mixture, I
have been fed from the basket of Ceres; I have
laboured ; I have entered into the bed." That is to
say, he had been placed in the pastos, in which the
aspirant for initiation was immured during the
period of his probation (39). He was then made
to pass through a series of trials, similar in character
to those adopted ia other mysteries, after which he
was introduced into the ianer temple, where he
beheld the statue of the goddess Ceres, surrounded


Ancient Mysteries. 83

by a dazzling light. The candidate^ who had hereto-
fore been called a mystes, or novice, was now termed
epoptes, or eye-witness, and the secret doctrine was
revealed. The assembly was then closed with the
Sanscrit words, " Konx om pax," the meaning of
which is uncertain. According to Captain Wilford,
the words Candscha om Pacsha, of which the above
is a Greek corruption, are still used at the religious
meetings and ceremonies of the Brahmins — another
proof, if it were needed, that the mysteries are of
Eastern origin.

60. Doors of Horn and Ivory. — The sixth book of
the "^eneid," and the ''Golden Ass" of Apuleius,
contain descriptions of what passed in the celebration
of the Eleusroian mysteries. In the former work,
^neas and his guide/having finished their progress
through the infernal regions, are dismissed through
the ivory gate of dreams. But there was another
gate of horn through which the aspirant entered;
for all caverns of initiation had two gates ; one
called the descent to heU, the other the ascent of the
just. The ancient poets said that through the gate
of horn issued true visions, and through the gate of
ivory, false. I^ow from this, and the fact that
^neas and his guide issue through it, it has been
inferred by some critics that Virgil meant to intimate,
that all he had said concerning the infernal regions'
was to be considered a fable. But such could not be
the poet's intention; what he really implied was


84 Secret Societies.

that a future state was a real state, whilst the re-
presentations thereof in the mysteries were only-
shadows. The ivory gate itself was no other than
the sumptuous door of the temple through which the
initiated came out when the ceremony was over.

61. Swpjpression of Eleusinian Mysteries. — These
mysteries survived aU. others ; they shone with
great splendour when the secret worship of the
Cabiri, and even of Egypt, had already disappeared,
and were not suppressed until the year 396 of our
era by the pitiless Theodosius the Great, who, in his
zeal for the Christian religion, committed the greatest
cruelties against unbelievers.

62. The Thesmophoria. — The term signifies a
legislative festival, and refers specially to the sym-
bolic rites forming part of the festival consecrated
to Ceres, who was said to have given to the Greeks
sound laws founded on agriculture and property,
in memory of which, chosen women in the solemn
processions of the Thesmophoria carried at Bleusis
the tablets on which the laws were written ; hence
the name of the festival, which was one of legisla-
tion and semination. We have only fragmentary
notices concerning these festivals, though we derive
some information from -Aristophanes^ " Thesmopho-
riazusse," which, however, is very sUght, as it would
have been dangerous for him, in alluding to these
mysteries, to employ more than general and simple
designations. We discover, however, that they


Ancient Mysteries. 85

were- celebrated in the month of October, and lasted
three or four days. Females only took part in
them, and it was death for a man to enter the
temple. Every tribe of Athens chose two female^
born in. wedlock and married, and distinguished for
virtue. The men who possessed a capital of three
talents were compelled to give their wives the
money necessary to defray the cost of the festivals.
For nine days also there was to be total forbearance
between married couples ; for the Thesmophoria not
only had reference to agriculture, but also to the
more intimate relations between man and wife. As
Ceres or the Earth mourned for the absence of Pro-
serpine, or the Sun, so theAthenian women mourned
during the celebration for the absence of the light of
love ; and as Ceres is at length cheered up by the
homely beverage offered by Baubo, so a personage
called lambe, with absurd jokes and gross gestures,
restores the attendants to a more joyous mood.

63. Aim of Grecian Mysteries more Moral than
BeUgious. — The object of the initiation into the
mysteries of Greece was more moral than reUgious,
differing in this from the Indian and Egyptian
mysteries, that were religious, scientific, and political.
For at the time of their introduction into Greece
science had ceased to be the prerogative of the few ;
the political life of that country had stirred up the
energy of the people and made it the architect of its
own greatness. We therein behold already the dawn


86 Secret Societies.

of a new era j the decay of the ancient nature-worship,
and a tendency to, aijd endeavour on the part of
mankind after, inquiry and free striving, to overcome
natuxe ; which is diametrically opposed to the spirit
of antiquity, which consisted in the total resignation
and surrender of the individual to the influences of
the All.


VI.

CHINESE AND JAPANESE MYSTEEIES.

64.
iHINESE Metwphysics. — In Chinese cos-
mogony we discover traces of the once
universally prevailing knowledge of the
properties of eternal nature. Matter —
the first material principle — is assumed to act upon
itself J and thus to evolve the dual powers. This first
material principle is caUed Tai-Keik, and described
as the first hnk in the chain of causes ; it is the
utmost limit in the midst of iUimitablenesSj though
in the midst of nonentity there always existed an
infinite Le, or " principle of order." The Le is
called infinite, because it is impossible to represent
it by any figiire, since it is the " Eternal Nothing."
This undoubted fragmentary tradition of the most
ancient metaphysical system in the world has been
ridiculed by many modern writers ; but any reader


88 Secret Societies.

will see that, however imperfectly expressed, it is
the theosophic doctrine {11 ).

65. Introduction of Chinese Mysteries. — The Chi-
nese practised Buddhism in its most simple form,
and worshipped an invisible God, until a few cen-
turies before the Christian era. Prom the teaching
of Confucius, who Hved five centuries before that
era, it appears that in his time there were no mys-
teries; they only became necessary when the
Chinese became an idolatrous nation. The chief
end of initiation then was an absorption into the
deity 0-Mi-To Fo. Omito was derived from the
Sanscrit Armida, " immeasurable," and Fo was only
another name for Buddha. The letter Y repre-
sented the triune God, and was indeed the ineffable
name of the Deity, the Tetractys of Pythagoras, and
the Tetragrammaton of the Jews. The rainbow was
a celebrated symbol in the mysteries, for it typified
the re-appearance of the sun ; and this not only in
China, but even in Mexico (73).

66. Parallel between Buddhism and Roman
Catholicism. — The general resemblance between
Buddhism and Romanism is so marked that it is
acknowledged by the Romanists themselves, who
account for this fact by the supposition that Satan
counterfeited the true religion. This correspon-
dence holds in minute particulars. Both have a
supreme and infallible head, the ceHbacy of the
priesthood, monasteries and nunneries, prayers in an


Ancient Mysteries. 89

unkaown tongue, prayers to saints and intercessors,
and especially, and principally too, a^virgia with a
child ; also prayers for the dead, repetition of prayers
■with the' use of a rosary, works of merit and super-
erogation; self-imposed austerities and bodily in-
flictions ; a formal daily service consisting of chants,
burning of candles, sprinkling of holy water, bowings,
prostrations ; fast days and feast days, religious pro-
cessions, images and pictures and fabulous legends,
the worship of reHcs, the sacrament of confession,
purgatory, &c. In some respects their rites resem-
ble those of the Jews ; they propitiate the Supreme
Deity with the blood of buUs and goats, and also
offered holocausts. The resemblance is easily ac-
counted for. Romanism and some other creeds are
only modernized Buddhism ; and many religions are
but superstitious perversions of the knowledge of
natural phenomena. The tradition about Prester
John has its origin in this resemblance between Bud-
dhism and a corrupted Christianity. In the twelfth
century there was in China a great Mongol tribe pro-
fessing Buddhism, which by travellers was mistaken
for an Oriental Christian religion. The Nestorian
Christians, dwelling among the Mongols, called its .
head John the Priest, and hence arose the tradition
that in the heart of Asia there was a Christian
Church, whose po^es bore the title of Prester John.
67. I/au-Tze.- — Confucius was the religious law-
giver of China, but Lau-Tze was its philosopher.


90 Secret Societies.

He excelled the former in depth and independence
of thought. The word Lau, or Le, is difficult to
render ; the Chinese itself defines it as " a thing in-
definite, impalpable, and yet therein are forms."
Lau-Tze himself seems to make it equivalent to
" intelligence." His philosophy is peaceful and
loving, and ia this respect presents various com-
mendable points of resemblance to Christian doc-
trine.

68. Modern Chinese Societies. — The most noted
is that of Thian-ti-w^, or the Union of Heaven and
Earth, which has for its leading dogma the equality
of mankind, and the duty of the rich to share their
superfluity with the poor. The candidate, having
successfully passed through the most severe trials,
is conducted before the master, two members of the
order cross their swords over his head, and draw
blood from both, which they pour into the same
cup, — a sacramental drink, to which both put their
lips when the candidate has pronounced the oath.
This association is spread through the southern pro-
vinces of China and the island of Java. • In central
and northern China there are two other societies,
probably derived from the former, that of Pe-
Han-kiaOj or the Lotos, and that of Thian-H, or
Celestial Eeason. Henry Pottinger, in a despatch
to Lord Aberdeen (1843), alludes to a fourth, say-
ing : " The song being finished, Ke-Ying, the
Chinese commissioner, having taken from his arm


Ancient Mysteries. 91

a gold bracelet^ gave it to mej informing me^ at the
same time, that he had received it in his tender
youth from his father, and that it contained a mys-
terious legend, and that, by merely showing it, it
would ia aU parts of China assure me a fraternal re-
ception." Another society, formed at the beginning
of this century, is that of the " Triad," whose object
is to initiate the indolent and prejudiced Chinese
into Western civilization. The society of the "White
Waterbly,'^ whose chief could not be discovered by
the Chinese government, caused many and disas-
trous political disturbances.

69. Japanese Mysteries. — The Japanese held that
the world was enclosed in an egg before the creation,
which egg was broken by a bull — the ever-recurring
astronomical allegory, alluding to the Bull of the
zodiac, which in former times opened the seasons,
the vernal equinox. It is the same bull Apis which
Egypt adored (47), and which the Jews in the wilder-
ness worshipped as the golden calf; also the bull
which, sacrificed in the mysteries of Mithras, poured
out its blood to fertilize the earth. The Japanese
worshipped a deity who was styled the Son of the Un-
known God, considered the creator of sun and moon,,
and called Tensio-Dai-Sin. The aspirants for initia-
tion were conducted through artificial spheres,
formed of movable circles, representing the revolu-
tions of the planets. The mirror was a significant
emblem «f the all-seeing eye of their chief deity(ll).


92 Secret Societies.

In the closing ceremony of preparation the candi-
date wa^ enclosed in the pastes, the door of which
was said to be guarded by a terrible divinity, armed
with a drawn sword. During the course of his pro-
bation the aspirant sometimes acquired so high a
degree of enthusiasm as to refuse to quit his con-
finement in the pastes, and to remain there until
he literally perished of famine. To this voluntary
martyrdom was attached a promise of never-ending
happiness hereafter. Their creed indeed is Buddh-
ism, slightly modified. " Diabolo ecdesiam Ghristi
imitante ! " exclaimed Xavier on seeing how the
practices of the Japanese resembled those of the
Romanists in Europe ; and, as has been observed of
Buddhism ia China and Thibet, aU the practices of
the Japanese ritual are so tinged with the colour of
Romanism, that they might well justify the exclama-
tion of Xavier, who was neither a savant nor a
philosopher (66).

70. Japanese Doctrines. — The god Tensio-Dai-Sia
has twelve apostles, and the sun, the planetary hero,
fights with monsters and the elements. The minis-
ters of the Temple of the Sun wear tunics of the
colour of fire, and annually celebrate four festivals,
the third day of the third month, the fifth day of
the fifth, the seventh day of the seventh, and the
ninth day of the ninth month respectively ; and at
one of these festivals they represent a myth similar
to that of Adonis, and nature is personified by a


Ancient Mysteries. 93

priest dressed in many colours. The members of
this society are called Jammahos, and the initiated
are enjoined a long time to abstain from meat and
to prepare themselves by many pmifications.

71. The Lama. — The Grand Lama, the God of
Thibet, becomes incarnate in man ; thus much the
priests reveal to the people. But the true religion,
which consists of the doctrine of the supposed origin
of the world, is only made known in the almost
inaccessible mysteries. The man in whom the
Grand Lama has for the time become incarnate,
and who is the pontiff, is held in such veneration,
that the people eat pastiles, accounted sacred, and
made from the unclean remains of the food which
had contributed to the sustenan6e of his body.
This disgusting practice, however, with them is
simply the result of their belief in the metempsy-
chosis — parallel with the Indian doctrine of corrup-
tion and reproduction, symbolized by the use of
cowdung in the purification of the aspirant; and
its real meaning is to show that all the parts of
the universe are incessantly absorbed, and pass into
the substance of each other. It is upon the model
of the serpent who devours his tail.


vn.

MEXICAJSr AND PBRUVTAN MTSTBRIES.

72.
j MEBIGAN Aborigines. — Ethnologists
can tell us as yet nothing as to the
origia of the earliest iahabitants of the
American continent ; but if the reader
will accept the theory propounded ia the introduc-
tion to this work (6 — 9), he will be at no loss to
answer the question. As nature in Asia brought
forth the Caucasian races^ so in the western hemi-
sphere it gave birth to the various races peopling it.
That one of them was a highly civilized race in pre-
historic times is proved by the ruins of beautiful
cities discovered in Central America; and aU the
antiquarian remains show that the religion of Mexico
and Peru was substantially the same as that prac-
tised by the various nations of the East ; and natu-
rally so, for the moral and physical laws of the uni-


Ancient Mysteries. 95

verse are everywhere the same, and, working in the
same manner, produce the same results, only modi-
fied by climatic and local conditions.

73. Mexican Deities. — The religious system of the
Mexicans bore a character of dark and gloomy aus-
terity. They worshipped many deities, the chief of
which were Teotl, the iuvisible and supreme being ;
Virococha, the creator; VitzHputzli or Heritzilo-
pochtli, the god of mercy, to whom the most san-
guinary rites were offered (which proves that the
Mexican priests were quite as inconsistent in this
respect as the priestly bigots of Europe, who, iu
the name of the God of mercy, tortured, racked and
burnt millions that differed from whatever creed had
been set up as the orthodox and legalized one) ;
Tescalipuca, the god of vengeance ; Quetzalcoatl,
the Mexican Mercury, whose name signifies the
"serpent clothed with green feathers;" Mic-
tlaneiheratl, the goddess of heU.; Tlaloc-teatH, or
Neptune ; and Ixciana, or Venus. To VitzHputzH
was ascribed the renovation of the world, and his
name referred to the sun. He was said to be the
ofispring of a virgin, who was impregnated by a
plume of feathers, which descended from heaven
into her bosom, invested with all the colours of the
rainbow (65). He was represented in the figure of a
man, with a dread-inspiring aspect. He was seated on
a globe over a lofty altar, which was borne in proces-
„sion during the celebration of the mysteries. His


96 Secret Societies.

right hand grasped a snake, the symbol of life, and
representations of this reptile are found on all the
temples of Mexico and Peru. Traces of the serpent-
worship of the western world are also found in the
states of Ohio and Iowa, where serpent mounds,
formed of earth, 1,000 feet long or more, are stiU to
be found. The office of Tescalipuca was to punish
the sins of men by the iafliction of plagues, famine,
and pestilence. His anger could only be appeased
by human sacrifices — thousands of men were fre-
quently immolated to him ia one single day.

74. Cruelty of Mexican Worship. — The temples of
Mexico were full of horrible idols, which were aU
bathed and washed with human blood. The chapel
of VitzHputzli was decorated with the skulls of the
wretches that had been slaiu iu sacrifice ; the walls
and floor were inches thick with blood, and before
the image of the god might often be seen the stiU
palpitating hearts of the human victims offered up
to him, whose skins served the priests for garments.
This revolting custom, as a legend says, arose from
the fact that Tozi, the " Grand Mother," was of
human extraction. Vitzliputzli procured her divine
honours by enjoining the Mexicans to demand
her of her father for their queen ; this being done,
they also commanded him to put her to death, after-
wards to flay her, and to cover a young man with
her skin. It was in this manner she was stripped
of her humanity, to be placed among the gods.


Ancient Mysteries. 97

Another disgusting practice arising from this legend
■will be mentioned hereafter.

75. Initiatiofi. into Mysteries. — The candidate had
to undergo all the terrors^ sufferings, and penances
practised in the Eastern world. He was scourged
with knotted cords, his flesh was cut with knives, and
reeds put into the wounds, that the blood might be
seen to trickle more freely, or they were cauterized
■with red-hot cinders. Many perished under these
■trials. The lustrations were performed, not with
■water, but with blood, and the candidate's habit was
not white, but black, and before initiation he was
given a drink, which was said to dispel fear, which,
indeed, it may have done in some degree by disturb-
ing the brain. The candidate was then led into the
■dark caverns of initiation, excavated beneath the foun-
dations of the mighty pyramidal temple of Vitzliputzli
in Mexico, and passed through the mysteries which
symbolically represented the wanderings of their
^ods, i. e. the course of the sun through the signs
of the zodiac. The caverns were caUed " the path
of the dead." Everything that' could appal the
imagination and test his courage was made to appear
before him. Now he heard shrieks of despair and
the groans of the dying ; he was led past the dun-
geons where the human victims, being fattened for
sacrifice, were confined, and through caverns slippery
with half congealed blood; anon he met with the
quivering frame of the dying man, whose heart had

E


98 Secret Societies.

just been torn from his body and offered up to
their sanguinary god, and looking up he beheld in
the roof the orifice through which the victims had
been precipitated, for they were now immediately
under the altar of Vitzliputzli. At length, however,
he arrived at a narrow chasm or stone fissure, at the
e^d of this extensive range of caverns, through
which he was formally protruded, and received by a
shouting multitude as a person regenerated or bom
again. The females, divesting themselves of their
little clothing, danced in a state of nudity like the
frantic Bacchantes, and, having repeated the dance
three times, they gave themselves up to unbounded
licentiousness.

76. The Greater Mysteries. — But as with Eastern
nations, the Mexicans had, besides the general reli-
gious doctrines communicated to the initiated, an
esoteric doctrine, only attainable by the priests, and
not even by them until they had qualified themselves
for it by the sacrifice of a human victim. The most
ineffable degrees of knowledge were imparted to
them at midnight and under severe obligations,
whose disregard entailed death without remission.
The real doctrine taught was astronomical, and, like
the Eastern nations, they at their great festivals
lamented the disappearance of the sun, and rejoiced
at its re-appearance at the festival of the new fire,
as it was called. AH fire, even the sacred fire of the
temple, having been extiuguished, the population of


Ancient Mysteries. 99

Mexico^ with the priests at their head^ marched to a
hill near the city, where they waited till the Pleiades
ascended the middle of the sky, when they sacrificed
a human victim. The instrument made use of by
the priests to kindle the fire was placed on the
wound made in the breast of the prisoner destined
to be sacrificed; and, when the fire was kindled, the
body was placed on an enormous pile ready pre-
pared, and this latter set on fire. The new fire,
received with joyful shouts, was carried from village
to village ; where it was deposited in the temple,
whence it was distributed to every private dwelling.
When the sun appeared on the horizon the accla-
mations were renewed. The priests were further
taught the doctrine of immortality, of a triune deity,
of the original population, who — ^led by the god
VitzliputzH, holding in his hand a rod formed like a
serpent, and seated in a square ark — finally settled
upon a lake, abounding with the lotus,* where they
erected their tabernacle. This lake was the lake in
the midst of which the city of Mexico originally
stood.

77. Human Sacrifices. — No priest was to be fully
initiated into the mysteries of the Mexican religion
until he had saciificed a human victim. This hor-
rible rite, which the Spaniards, who conquered the
country, often saw performed on their own captive
countrymen, was thus performed: — The chief priest
carried ia his hand a large and sharp knife made of


100 Secret Societies.

flint ; another priest carried a collar of wood ; the
other four priests who assisted arranged themselves
adjoining the pyramidal stone, which had a convex
top, so that the man to be sacrificed, being laid
thereon on his back, was bent in such a manner that
the stomach separated upon the slightest incision of
the knife. Two priests seized hold of his feet and
two more of his hands, whilst the fifth fastened
round his neck the collar of wood. The high priest
then opened his stomach with the knife, and tearing
out his heart, held it up to the sun, and then threw
it before the idol in one of the chapels on the top of
the great pyramid where the rite was performed.
The body was finally cast down the steps that wound
all round the building. Forty or fifty victims were
thus sacrificed in a few hours. Prisoners of rank
or approved courage might escape this horrid death
by fighting six Mexican warriors in succession.
If they were successful their lives and liberty were
granted to them ; but if they fell under the strokes
of their adversaries they were dragged, dead or
living, to the sacrificial stone, and their hearts torn
out.

78. Clothing in Bloody Shins. — We have already
seen that the priests were clothed in the bloody
skins of their victims. The same horrid custom
was practised on other occasions. On certain
festivals they dressed a man in the bloody skin just
reeking from the body of a victim. Kings and


Ancient Mysteries. 101

grandees did not think it derogatory to their dignity
to disguise themselves in this manner^ and to run
up and down the streets, soliciting alms, which
were applied to pious purposes. This horrible
masquerade continued till the skin began to grow
putrid. On another festival they would slay
a woman and clothe a man with her skin, who thus
equipped, danced for two days together with the
rest of his feUow-citizens.

79. Peruvian Mysteries. — The Incas, or rulers of
Peru, boasted of their descent from the sun and
moon, which therefore were worshipped, as well as
the great god Pacha- Camac, whose very name was
so sacred that it was only communicated to the
imtiated. They also had an idol they termed Tanga-
tango, meaning " One in three and three in one."
Their secret mysteries, of which we know next to
nothing, were celebrated on their great annual
festival, held on the first day of the September
moon, the people watching all night until the rising
of the sun ; and when he appeared the eastern doors
of the great temple of Casco were thrown open, so
that the sun's radiance could illuminate his image in
gold placed opposite. The walls and ceiling of this
temple were aU covered over with gold plates,
and the figure of the sun, representing a round
face, surrounded with rays and flames, as modem
painters usually draw the sun, was of such a size as
almost to cover one side of the wall. It was.


102 Secret Societies.

moreover, double the thickness of the plates
covering the walls. The Virgins of the Sun, who,
like the Vestals of ancient Eome, had the keeping
of the sacred fire entrusted to them, and were
vowed to perpetual cehbacy, then walked round the
altar, whilst the priests expounded the mild and
equitable laws of Peru ; for, contrary to the practice
of their near neighbours, the Mexicans, the Peru-
vians had no sanguinary rites whatever, though
some Spanish writers, who, of course, could see no
good in non- Catholics and pagans, charged them
with sacrificing young children of from four to six
years old " in prodigious numbers," and also with
slaying virgins. The Spaniards, no doubt, alluded to
some iU- understood symbolical rite.


VIII.

THE DRUIDS.

80.
\HE Druids, the Magi of the West. — The
secret doctrines of the Druids were
much the same as those of the G-ymno-
sophists and Brahmins of India, the
Magi of Persia, the priests of Egypt, and of aU other
priests of antiquity. Like them, they had two sets of
religious doctrines, exoteric and esoteric. Their rites
were practised in Britain and Gaul, though they were
brought to a much greater perfection in the former
country, where the Isle of Anglesea was considered
their chief seat. The word Druid is generally sup-
posed to be derived from ^pvg, " an oak," which tree
was particularly sacred among them, though its
etymology may also be found in the Gaelic word
Druidh, "a, wise man'' or ''magician."

81. Temples. — Their temples, wherein the sacred


104 Secret Societies.

fire was preserved, were generally situate on emi-
nences and in dense groves of oaks, and assumed
various forms- — circular, because a circle was an em-
blem of the universe ; oval, in allusion to tlie mun-
dane egg, from which, according to the traditions of
many nations, the universe, or- according to others,
our first parents, issued ; serpentine, because a ser-
pent was the symbol of Hu, the Druidic Osiris;
cruciform, because a cross is an emblem of regenera-
tion (49) ; or winged, to represent the motion of the-
divine spirit. Their only canopy was the sky, and
they were constructed of unhewn stones, their num-
bers having reference to astronomical calculations.
In the centre was placed a stone of larger dimen-
sions than the others, and worshipped as the repre-
sentative of the Deity. The three principal temples
of this description in Britain were undoubtedly those
of Stonehenge and Abury in the south, and that of
Shap in Cumberland. Where stone was scarce, rude
banks of earth were substituted, and the temple was
formed of a high vallum and ditch. The most Hercu-
lean labours were performed in their construction ;
Stukeley says that it would cost, at the present
time, £20,000 to throw up such a mound as Silbury
HiU.

82. Places of Initiation. — The adytum or ark of
the mysteries was called a cromlech, and was used
as the sacred pastes, or place of regeneration. It
consisted of three upright stones, as supporters of


Ancient Mysteries. 105

a broad, flat stone laid across them on the top, so as
to form a small cell. Kit Cotey's House, in Kent,
was such a pastos. Considerable space, however,
was necessary for the machinery of iaitiation in its
largest and most comprehensive scale. Therefore,
the Coer Sidi, where the mysteries of Druidism were
performed, consisted of a range of buildings, adjoin-
ing the temple, contaiuing apartments of aU sizea,
cells, vaults, baths, and long and artfully-contrived
passages, with all the apparatus of terror used on
these occasions. Most frequently these places were
subterranean ; and many of the caverns in this
country were the scenes of Druidical initiation. The
stupendous grotto at Castleton, in Derbyshire, called
by Stukeley the Stygian Cave, as well as the giants'
caves at Luckington and Badminster, in Wilts, cer-
tainly were used for this purpose.

83. Bites. — The system of Druidism embraced
every religious and philosophical pursuit then known
iu these islands. The rites bore an undoubted refer-
ence to astronomical facts. Their chief deities are
reducible to two, — a male and a female, the great
father and mother, Hu and Ceridwen, distinguished
by the same characteristics as belonged to Osiris
and Isis, Bacchus and Ceres, or any other supreme
god and goddess representing the two principles of
all being. . The grand periods of initiation were
quarterly, and determined by the course of the sun,
and his arrival at the equinoctial and solstitial points.


106 Secret Societies.

But the time of annual celebration was May- eve,
when fires were kindled on all the cairns and crom-
lechs throughout the island, which burned all night
to introduce the sports of May-day, whence all the
national sports formerly or stiO. practised date then-
origin. Round these fires choral dances were per-
formed in honour of the sun, who, at this season,
was figuratively said to rise from his tomb. The
festival was licentious, and continued tiU. the luminary
had attained his meridian height, when priests and
attendants retired to the woods, where the most dis-
graceful orgies were perpetrated. But the solemn
initiations were performed at midnight, and con-
tained three degrees, the first or lowest being the
Eubates, the second the Bards, and the third the
Druids. The candidate was first placed in the
pastes bed, or coflSn, where his symbolical death
represented the death of Hu, or the sun ; and his
restoration in the third degree symbolized the restir-
rection of the sun. He had to undergo trials and
tests of courage similar to those practised in the
mysteries of other countries (e. g. 26), and which
therefore need not be detailed here.

The festival of the 25th of December was cele-
brated with great fires lighted on the tops of the hills,
to announce the birth-day of the god Sol. This
was the moment when, after the supposed winter
solstice, he began to increase, and gradually to ascend.
This festival indeed was kept not by the Druids


Ancient Mysteries. 107

only, but throughout the ancient world, from India
to Ultima Thule. The fires, of course, were typical
of the power and ardour of the sun, whilst the ever-
greens used on the occasion foreshadowed the re-
sults of the sun's renewed action on vegetation.
The festival of the summer solstice wa^ kept on the
24th of June. Both days are still kept as festivals
in the Christian church, the former as Christmas,
the latter as St. John's Day; because the early
Christians judiciously adopted not only the festival
days of the pagans, but also, so far as this could be
done with propriety, their mode of keeping them ;
substituting, however, a theological meaning for
astronomical allusions. The use of evergreens in
churches at Christmas time is the Christian per-
petuation of an ancient Druidio custom.

84. Docbrines. — The Druids taught the doctrine
of one supreme being, a future state of rewards and
punishments, the immortality of the soul and a
metempsychosis. It was a maxim with them that
water was the first principle of all things, and ex-
isted before the creation in unsullied purity (11),
which seems a contradiction to their other doctrine
that day was the offspring of night, because night
or chaos was in existence before day was created.
They taught that time was only an intercepted frag-
ment of eternity, and that there was an endless suc-
cession of worlds. In fact, their doctrines were
chiefly those of Pythagoras. They entertained


108 Secret Societies.

great veneration for the numbers three, seven, nine-
teen (the Metonic cycle), and one hundred and forty-
seven, produced by multiplying the square of seven
by three. They also practised vaticination, pre-
tending to predict future events from the flights
of birds, human sacrifices, by white horses, the
agitation of water, and lots. They seem, however,
to have possessed considerable scientific knowledge.
85. Political and Judicial Power. — Their authority
in many cases exceeded that of the monarch. They
were, of course, the sole interpreters of religion, and
consequently superintended aU sacrifices ; for no
private person was allowed to offer a sacrifice with-
out their sanction. They possessed the power of
excommunication, which was the most horrible pun-
ishment that could be inflicted next to that of death,
and from the effects of which the highest magistrate
was not exempt. The great council of the realm
was not competent to declare war or conclude peace
without their concurrence. They determined all
disputes by a final and unalterable decision, and had
the power of inflicting the punishment of death.
And, indeed, their altars streamed with the blood
of human victims. Holocausts of men, women, and
children, inclosed in large towers of wicker-work,
were sometimes sacrificed as a burnt- offering to
their superstitions, which were, at the same time, in-
tended to enhance the consideration of the priests, who
were an ambitious race delighting ia blood. The


Ancient Mysteries. 109

Druidsj it is said, preferred such as had been guilty
of theft, robbery, or other crimes, as most accept-
able to their gods ; but when there was a scarcity of
criminals, they made no scruple to supply then-
place with innocent persons. These dreadful sacri-
fices were offered by the Druids, for the pubKc, on
the eve of a dangerous war, or in the time of any
national calamity ; and also for particular persons
■of high rank, when they were afficted with any
•dangerous disease.

86. Priestesses. — The priestesses, clothed in white,
:and wearing a metal girdle, foretold the future from
the observation of natural phenomena, but more
•especially from human sacrifices. For them was
reserved the frightful task of putting to death the
prisoners taken in war, and individuals condemned
by the Druids ; and their auguries were drawn from
the manner in which the blood issued from the many
wounds inflicted, and also from the smoking entrails.
Many of these priestesses maiatained a perpetual
virginity, others gave themselves up to the most lux-
urious excesses. They dwelt on lonely rocks, beaten
by the waves of the ocean, which the mariners looked
upon as temples surrounded with unspeakable pro-
-digies. Thus the island of Sena or Liambis, The
Saints, near Ushant, was the residence of certain of
these priestesses, who delivered oracles to sailors ;
and there was no power that was not attributed to
them. Others, living near the mouth of the Loire,


110 Secret Societies.

once a year destroyed their temple, scattered its
materials, and, having collected others, built a new
one — of course a symbolical ceremony ; and if one
of the priestesses dropped any of the sacred mate-
rials, the others fell upon her with fierce yells, tore
her to pieces, and scattered her bleeding Hmbs.

87. Abolition. — As the Eomans gained ground in
these islands the power of the Druids gradually
declined; and they were finally assailed by Sue-
tonius PauHnus, governor of Britain under Ifero,
A. D. 61, in their stronghold, the Isle of Anglesey,
and entirely defeated, the conqueror consuming many
of them in the fires which they had kindled for
burning the Roman prisoners they had expected to
make — a very just retaliation upon these sanguinary
priests. But though their dominion was thus de-
stroyed, many of their reHgious practices continued
much longer ; and so late as the eleventh century,
in the reign of Canute, it was necessary to forbid
the people to worship the sun, moon, fires, etc.
Certainly many of the practices of the Druids are
stiU adhered to in Freemasonry; and some writers
on this order endeavour to show that it was esta-
bhshed soon after the edict of Canute, and that as
thereby the Druidical worship was prohibited in
toto, the strongest oaths were required to bind the
initiated to secresy.


IX.


SCAJSTDDSTAVIAlSr MYSTERIES.


88.
\B0TTE8.~The priests of Scandinavia
were named Drottes, and instituted by
Sigge, a Scythian prince, who is said
afterwards to have assumed the name of
Odin. Their number was twelve, who were alike
priests and judges ; and from this order proceeded-
the establishment of British juries. Their power was
extended to its utmost limits, by being allowed a
discretionary privilege of determiaing on the choice
of human victims for sacrifice, from which even the
monarch was not exempt — hence arose the necessityof
cultivating the goodwill of these sovereign pontiflFs ;
and as this order, like the IsraeUtish priesthood,
was restricted to one family, they became possessed
of unbounded wealth, and at last became so tyran-
nical as to be objects of terror to the whole com-


112 Secret Societies.

munity. Christianity, promising to relieve it from
this yoke, was hailed with enthusiasm; and the
inhabitants of Scandinavia, inspired with a thirst for
vengeance on account of accumulated arid long-con-
tinued suffering, retaliated with dreadful severity on
their persecutors, overthrowing the palaces and tem-
ples, the statues of their gods, and all the parapher-
nalia of Gothic superstition. Of this nothing re-
mains but a few cromlechs ; some stupendous monu-
ments of rough stone, which human fury cotdd not
destroy) certain ranges of caverns hewn out of the
solid rock ; and some natural grottos used for the
purpose of initiation.

89. Ritual. — The whole ritual had an astronomi-
cal bearing. The places of initiation, as in other
mysteries, were ia caverns, natural or artificial, and
the candidate had to, undergo trials as frightful
as the priests could render them. But instead
of having to pass through seven caves or pas-
sages, as in the Mithraic and other mysteries, he
descended through niiie — the square of the mystic
number three^subterranean passages, and he was
instructed to search for the body of Balder, the
Scandinavian Osiris, slain by Loke, the principle of
darkness, and to use his utmost endeavours to raise
him to life. To enter into particulars of the pro-
cess of initiation would involve the repetition of
what has been said before ; it may therefore suffice
to observe that the candidate on arriving at the


Ancient Mysteries. 113

saceUum had a solemn oath administered to him on
a naked sword, and ratified it by drinking mead
out of a human skull. The sacred sign of the cross
was impressed upon him, and a ring of magic
virtues, the gift of Balder the Good, delivered
to him.

90. Astronomical Meaning Demonstrated. — The
first canto of the Edda, which apparently contains a
description of the ceremonies performed on the
initiation of an aspirant, says that he seeks to know
the sciences possessed by the ^saa or gods. He
discovers a palace, whose roof of boundless dimen-
sions is covered with golden shields. He en-
counters a man engaged in launching upwards
seven flowers. Here we easily discover the astro-
nomical meaning : the palace is the world, the roof
the sky ; the golden shields are the stars, the seven
flowers the seven planets. The candidate is asked
what is his name, and replies Gangler, that is, the
wanderer, he that performs a revolution, distribut-
ing necessaries to- mankind ; for the candidate per-
sonates the sun. The palace is that of the king,
the epithet the ancient Mystagogues gave to the
head of the planetary system. Then he discovers
three seats; on the lowest is the king called Har, sub-
lime ; on the central one, Jafuhar, the equal of the
Sublime; on the highest Tredie, the number three.
These personages are those the neophyte beheld in
the Eleusinian initiation (59), the hierophant, the

I


114 Secret Societies.

daduchus or torchbearerj and the epibomite or at-
tendant on the altar ; those he sees in Freemasonry,
the master, and the senior and junior wardens, sym-
bolical personifications of the sun, moon, and
Demiurgus, or grand architect of the universe. But
the Scandinavian triad is usually represented by
Odin, the chief deity ; Thor, his first-bom, the re-
puted mediator between god and man, possessing
unlimited power over the universe, wherefore his
head was surrounded by a circle of twelve stars ;
and Freya, a hermaphrodite, adorned with a
variety of symbols significant of dominion over
love and marriage. In the instructions given to
the neophyte, he is told that the greatest and most
ancient of gods is called Alfader (the father of all) ,
and has twelve epithets, which recall the twelve
attributes of the sun, the twelve constellations, the
twelve superior gods of Egypt, Greece, and Rome.
Among the gods of the Scandinavian theogony
there is Balder the Good, whose story, as already
hinted above, formed the object of the initiatory
ceremonies. Balder is Mithras, the sun's love.
He foresees the danger that threatens him; he
dreams of it at night. The other gods of Val-
halla, the Scandinavian Olympus, to whom he
reveals his sad forebodings, reassure him, and to
guard against any harm befaUing him, exact an
oath from every thing in nature in his behalf, except
from the mistletoe, which was omitted on account


Ancient Mysteries. 115

of its apparently inoflEensive qualities. For an ex-
periment, and in sport, the gods cast at Balder all
kinds of missiles, witliout wounding him. Hoder
the blind (that is, Fate) , takes no part in the diver-
sion ; but Loke (the principle of evil, darkness, the
season of winter) places a sprig in the hands of
Hoder, and persuades him to cast it at the devoted
victim, who falls pierced with mortal wounds. For
this reason it was that this plant was gathered at
the winter solstice by the Druids of Scandinavia,
Gaul, and Britain, with a curved knife, whose form
symbolized the segment of the zodiacal circle dur-
ing which the murder of Balder took place. In
the Bdda of Snorro we have another legend of
Odin and Freya, the Scandinavian Isis or Venus,
giving an account of the wanderings of the latter in
search of the former, which, of course, have the same
astronomical meaning as the search of Isis for Osiris,
of Ceres for Proserpine, etc. One of the chief fes-
tivals in the year, a^ with the Druids, was the win-
ter solstice ; and this being the longest night in the
year, the Scandinavians assigned to it the formation
of the world from primeval darkness, and called it
"Mother Night." This festival was denominated
" Yule," an,d was a season of universal festivity.


BOOK II.

EMANATIONISTS.

" A shameful strife,

A glowing life,

I weave on the whirring loom of Time,

The living garment of the Deity."

Goethe, Faust.


AUTHOEITIES.

Knorr. Oabala Denudata. 1677.

Freystadi. Cabalistische Philosophie. Konigsberg, 1830.

Frank. La Cabala. Paris, 1843.

Miinster. Versuch iiber die Alterthiimer der Gnostiker.

Anspacb, 1790.
Schmidt. Ueber die Verwandtschaft der Gnostiscli-theo-

sophischen Lehren mit den Eeligions-Bystemen des

Orients. Leipsic, 1828.
Matter. Histoire critique du Gnosticisme. Paris, 1847.


THE CAEALA.


91.
[T8 Origin.- — The Cabala is the summary
of the labours of the sects of Judaism,
and is occupied in the mystical inter-
pretation of the Scriptures^ and in meta-
physical speculations concerning the Deity and the
worlds visible and invisible. The Jews say that it
was communicated to Moses by God Himself. Now,
although it is not at all improbable that Moses
did leave to his successors some secret doctrinesj
yet the fantastic doctrines of the Cabala con-
cerning angels and demons are purely Chaldean ; at
Babylon the Jews ingrafted on Monotheism the
doctrine of the Two Principles. Danielj the pontiff
of the Magi and prophet of the Jews, may be con-
sidered as the chieffounder of the Cabala, which was


120 Secret Societies.

conceived at Babylon, and received as the forbidden
fruit of the strange woman.

92. Its Progress. — The ancient Jews, indeed,
had some idea of angels, but did not ascribe to them
any particular functions, though to each patriarch
they assigned a special familiar spirit. The Alex-
andrian School made many additions to that foreign
importation ; Philo supplemented Daniel. The spe-
culative portion of the Cabala, whose foundation
consists in the doctrine of Emanation, was developed
in that School ; the philosophical systems of Pyth-
agoras and Plato were combined with Oriental philo-
sophy, and from these proceeded Gnosticism and
Neo-platonism.

93. Bate of Cabala. — The first documentary
promulgation of the Cabala may roughly be stated
to have taken place within the century before and
half a century after our era. The greater culture
of the Jewish people, the supreme tyranny of the
letter of the law and rabbinical minuteness, furthered
the spread of occult theology, whose chief text-books
are the " Sepher-yetzirah," or Book of the Creation,
probably by Akiba, and the " Zehar," the Book of
Light, by Simon-ben- Joachai, the St. Thomas of the
Cabala, whose work contains the sum of that obscure
and strange system.

94. The Booh of the Creation. — In this work
Adam considers the mystery of the universe. In
his monologue he declares the forces and powers of


Emanationists. 121

reason, which attempts to discover the bond which
unites in a common principle all the elements of
things ; and in this investigation he adopts a method
different from the Mosaic. He does not descend
from God to the creation, but, studying the imi-
verse, seeking the unity in variety and multiplicity,
the law in the phenomenon, he ascends from the
creation to God — a prolific method, but which leads
the Cabalists to seek fantastic analogies between
superior and inferior powers, between heaven and
earth, between the things and the signs of thought.
Hence arose all the arts of divination and conjura-
tion, and the most absurd superstitions. Accordiag
to cabalistic conception, the universe, which to Pyth-
agoras is a symbol of the mysterious virtues of num-
bers, is only a marvellous page on which all existing
things were written by the supreme artificer with
the first ten numbers and the twenty-two letters
of the Hebrew alphabet. The ten abstract numbers
are the general forms of things, the "^ supreme cate-,
gories of ideas." Thus, number one represents the
spirit of the living God, the universal generative
power ; number two is the breath of the animating
spirit; three is the aqueous, and four the igneous
principle. The imprint of the letters on the uni-
verse is indestructible, and is the only character
that can enable us to discover the Supreme Cause,
to recompose the name of God, the Logos, written
on the face of the world. Nor are all the letters


122 Secret Societies.

of equal virtue; three, called the mothers hare
the precedence, and refer to the triads found in
various physical and mental orders; seven others
are called double, because from them arise the things
constantly opposed to one another ; the remaining
twelve are called simple, and refer to twelve attri-
butes of man.

95. Different Kinds of Cabala. — It is of two
kinds, theoretical and practical. The latter is
engaged in the construction of talismans and amu-
lets, and is therefore' totally unworthy of our notice.
The theoretical is divided into the literal and dog-
matic. The dogmatic is the summary of the meta-
physical doctrines taught by the Cabalistic doctors.
The literal is a mystical mode of explaining sacred
things by a peculiar use of the letters of words.
This literal Cabala is again subdivided into three
branches, the first considering words according to
the numerical value of the letters composing them.
This branch is called Gematria, and for an example
of it the reader is referred to Mithras (29,) the
name of the sun, whose letters make up the number
365, the number of days during which the sun
performs his course. The second branch is called
Notaricon, and is a mode of constructing one word
out of the initials or finals of many. Thus, of the
sentence in Deut. xxx. 12, " "Who shall go up for
us to heaven?" in Hebrew noiawn dV nVp' 'o, the
initial letters of each word are taken to form the


Emanationists. 123

wordj nV'O, "circumcision." The third mode ia
called Temura, or permutation of letters, such as is
familiarly known as an anagram.

96. Visions of Hzekiel. — Cabalistic terms and
inventions, not destitute of poetic ideas, lent them-
selves to the requirements of the mystics, sectaries,
and alchymists. It suffices to consider that portion
of the system whose object is the study of the
visions of Ezekiel, to form an idea of the fantastic
and mythological wealth of the Cabala.

In the visions of Ezekiel God is seated on a
throne, surrounded with strange winged figures —
the man, the buU, the lion, and the eagle, four zodi-
acal signs, like "the glory which he saw by the river
of Chebar,^' that is, among the Chaldeans, famous
for their astronomical knowledge. The rabbis call
■the visions the description of the celestial car, and
discover therein profound mysteries. Maimonides
reduced those visions to the astronomical ideas of
his time ; the Cabala surrounded them with its innu-
merable hosts of angels. Besides the angels that
preside over the stars, elements, virtues, vices,
passions, the lower world is peopled by genii of both
sexes, holding a position between angels and men —
the elemental spirits of the Rosicrucians. The
good angels are under the command of Metatron,
also called Sar Happanim, the angel of the Divine
countenance. The evil angels are subject to Samuel,
or Satan, the angel of death. Besides the Indian


124 Secret Societies.

metempsycliosis the Cabalists admit another, which
they call " impregnation," consisting in a union of
several souls in one body, which takes place when
any soul needs the assistance of others to attain to
the beatific vision.

97. The Creation out of Nothing. — The primitive
Being is called the Ancient of Days, the ancient
Ring of Light, incomprehensible, infinite, eternal, a
closed eye. Before he manifested himself all things
were in him, and he was called The Nothing, the
Zero-world (9) . Before the creation of the world
the primitive light of God, Nothing, filled all, so that
there was no void; but when the Supreme Being
determined to manifest His perfections. He withdrew
into Himself, and let go forth the first emanation, a
ray of light, which is the cause and beginning of all
that exists, and combines the generative and con-
ceptive forces. He commenced by forming an im-
perceptible point, the point-world ; then with that
thought He constructed a holy and mysterious
form, and finally covered it with a rich vestment —
the universe. From the generative and conceptive
forces issued forth the first-born of God, the uni-
versal form, the creator, preserver, and animating
principle of the world, Adam Kadmon, called the
macrocosm ; whilst man, born out of and living in it,
and comprising, in fact, what the typical or celestial
man comprises potentially, is called the microcosm.
But before the Busoph or Infinite revealed Himself


Emdnationists. 125

in that form of the primitiye man, other emanations,
other worlds, had succeeded each other, which were
called " sparks," which grew fainter the more distant
they were from the centre of emanation. Around
Adam Kadmon were formed the countless circles of
posterior emanations, which are not beings having
a life of their own, but attributes of God, vessels of
omnipotence, types of creation. The ten emana-
tions from Adam Kadmon are called Sephiroth,
the " powers " of Philo, and the " aeons " of the
Gnostics.

98. Diffusion of Oabalistia Ideas. — Cabalistic ideas
spread far and wide. In the middle ages we meet
with them in a great number of strange practices
and ceremonies. I will here merely allude to one,
because it explains a sign stiU in use in many parts
of the Continent. The double triangle (18) was
regarded by the Jews as a cabalistic figure, to which
they attributed the power of averting fire. Hence
the German Jews in the middle ages placed it over
the entrances of aU their workshops and factories.
Its use was afterwards restricted to breweries. Now
it is the sign of beerhouses ; whilst the pine branch,
which is the ancient thyrsus, announces the sale of
wine.

Without specifying how much the philosophic
systems of Spinoza and Schelling are indebted to
them, and without speaking of the Hebrew sects
still existing — which ipay be considered as the


126 Secret Societies.

sequels of the Cabalistic school, and which include
that of the " New Saints," founded by Israel, called
the Thaumaturgist, in Podolia, in 1740, and that of
the " Zohariti," the Illuminated, founded by Jacob
Franck, who attempted, by a kind of philosophical
syncretism, to reconcile the ancient and the modern
revelation, — ^we meet with Cabalistic ideas in the
most lasting superstitions, in the Schools, Academies,
and Masonic Lodges. The rituals of the Mystics,
Freemasons, Illuminati, and Carbonari, abound
with them, as I shall successively point out.


II.


THE GNOSTICS.


99.
\HABAGTEE of Ghiosticism.— The lead-
ing ideas of Platonism are also found in
the tenets of the Gnostics, and they con-
tinued, during the second and third
centuries, the schools that raised a barrier between
recondite philosophy and vulgar superstition. Under
this aspect Gnosticism is the most universal heresy,
the mother of many posterior heresies, even of
Arianism, and reappears among the 3,lchymists,
mystics, and modern transcendentalists.

100 . Doctrines . — The Gnostics assumed an infinite,
invisible Being, an abyss of darkness, who, imable
to remain inactive, diffused himself in emanations,
decreasing in ■perfection the further they were re-
moved from the centre that produced them. They
had their grand triad, whose personifications,


128 Secret Societies.

Matter, the Demiurgus, and the Saviour, comprised
and represented the history of mankind and of the
world. The superior emanations, partakers of the
attributes of the Divine essence, are the " aeons,"
distributed in classes, according to symbolical num-
bers. Their union forms the "pleroma," or the ful-
ness of intelligence. The last and most imperfect
emanation of the pleroma, according to one of the
two grand divisions of Gnosticism, is the Demiurgus,
a balance of light and darkness, of strength and
weakness, who, without the concurrence of the un-
known Father, produces this world, there imprison-
ing the souls, for he is the primary evil, opposed to
the primary good. He encumbers the souls with
matter, from which they are redeemed by Christ, one
of the sublime powers of the pleroma, the Divine
thought, intelligence, the spirit. For humanity is
destined to raise itself again from the material to
the spiritual Hfe ; to free itself from nature, and to
govern it, and to live again in immortal beauty.

According to the other party of the Gnostics, the
Demiurgus was the representative and organ of the
highest God, who was placed by the Divine will
especially over the Jewish people, as their Jehovah.
Men are divided into three classes : the terrestrial
men, of the earth earthy, tied and bound by matter;
the spiritual men, the Pneumatikoi, who attain to
the Divine light ; the Psychikoi, who only rise up
to the Demiurgus. The Jews, subject to Jehovah,


The Gnostics. 129

were Psychikoi j the Pagans were Terrestrial men ;
the true Christians or Gnostics, Pneumatikoi.

101. Development of Gnosticism.—Simon Magus ;
Menander, his successor ; Cerinthus, the apostle of
the Millennium, and some others who lived in the
first century, are looked upon as the founders of
Gnosticism, which soon divided into as many sects
as there arose apostles. This may be called the
obscure period of Gnosticism. But at the begin-
ning of the second century the sect of Basilides of
Alexandria arose, and with it various centres of
Gnosticism in Egypt, Syria, Eome, Spain, &c.
Basilides assumed 365 aeons or cycles of creation,
which were expressed by the word ahraxas, whose
letters, according to their numerical value in Greek,
produce the number 365. By "abraxas" was meant,
in its deeper sense, the Supreme God; but the
reader will at once detect the astronomical bearing,
and remember the words Mithras and Belenus,
which also severally represent that number, and the
Supreme God, viz. the sun. Valentinus also is
a famous Gnostic, whose fundamental doctrine is
that all men shall be restored to their primeval
state of perfection ; that matter, the refuge of evil,
shall be consumed by fire, which is also the doc-
trine of Zoroaster, and that the spirits in perfect
maturity shall ascend into the pleroma, there to
enjoy all the delights of a perfect union with their
companions. Prom the Valentinians sprang the

K


130 Secret Societies.

Ophites, calling themselves so after the serpent that
by tempting Eve brought into the world the bles-
sings of knowledge ; and the Cainites, who main-
tained that Cain had been the first Gnostic in oppo-
sition to the blind, unreasoning faith of Abel, and
therefore persecuted by the Demiurgus, Jehovah.
The Antitacts (opponents to the* law), like the
Ishmaelites at a later period, taught their adepts
hatred against all positive religions and laws. The
Adamites looked upon marriage as the fruit of sin ;
they called their lascivious initiation " paradise ; "
held all indulgence in carnal delights lawful, and
advocated the abolition of dress. The Pepuzians
varied their initiations with the apparition of phan-
tasms, among whom was a woman crowned with the
sun and twelve stars, and having the moon under
her feet — the Isis of Egypt and the Ceres of Greece.
They found in the Apocalypse aU their initiatory
terminology. A Gnostic stone, represented in the
work of Chifflet, shows seven stars of equal size
with a larger one above ; these probably mean the
seven planets and the sun. There are, moreover,
figured on it a pair of compasses, a square, and
other geometrical emblems. Thus all religious
initiations are ever reducible to astronomy and
natural phenomena.

102. Spirit of Onosticism. — The widely opposite
ideas of polytheism, pantheism, monotheism, the
philosophical systems of Plato, Pythagoras, Hera-


The Gnostics. 131

clituSj together with the mysticism and demonology
that after the Jewish captivity created the Cabala —
all these went towards forming Gnosticism. And
the aristocracy of mind, powerful and numerous as
none had ever been before, that arose in the first
centuries of our era, even when adopting the new
faith, could not but loathe the thought of sharing it
completely with the crowd of freed and unfreed
slaves around them — -with the low and poor in
spirit! The exclpsiveness of Gnosticism was un-
doubtedly, next to the attractiveness of its dogmas,
one of the chief reasons of its rapid propagation
and its lasting influence on modern religious
systems.


BOOK III.

RELIGION OF LOVE.

Les croiseSj pendant leur sejour en Orient, ont etudie
toutes les variantes qui caraoteriserent les sectes chre-
tiennes. lis se sont attaches aux doctrines des gnosticiens
et des manicheens, qui leur paraissaient moins alterees que
celle des prStrea de Eome. — Eagon.


AUTHOEITIES.

Wolf. ManichEeismus ante Manichaeos. Hamburg, 1707.
Baur. Sur le Manicheisme des Cathares. Tubingen, 1831.
Millot. Vie des Troubadoiirs.
Fabre d' Olivet. Poesies occitaniques du xiil' siecle.

Paris, 1803.
Biez. Die Poesie der Troubadours. Zwickau, 1826.
Binawx. Les Trouveurs de la Handre et du Toumaisan.

Paris, 1839.
Hawiel. Histoire de la Poesie provengale.
Galvani. Osservazioni sulla Poesia de' Trovatori. Mo-

dena, 1839.
Schmidt. Geschichte der Albigenser.
Biisching. Eitterzeit und Eitterwesen. Leipsic, 1823.
Mills. History of Chivalry. London, 1825.
Aroux. Les Mysteres de la Ohevalerie. Paris, 1858.


I.


SONS OF THE WIDOW.


103.
IBIGIN of Religion of Love. — ^A Persian
slavBj whose powerful ' imagination
brought forth a desolating doctrinej
but extraordinary by originality of in-
vention and variety of episodes, three centuries
after the appearance of Christ, and when Orientalism
was on the point of disappearing from the West,
founded a theogony and instituted a ' sect which
revived Eastern influence in Europe, and by means
of the Crusades spread schism and revolt through-
out the Catholic world. The action of this rebel-
lious disciple of Zoroaster, of this restorer of the
ancient faith of the Magi, mixed with Christian
forms and Gnostic symbols, had an extension and
duration which, though called in doubt by the past,
modern criticism discovers in the intrinsic phi-


136 Secret Societies.

losopliy of a great part of the sects formed in the
bosom of Catholicism. At the head of this gigantic
movement of intelligence and conscience, which
devoted itself to the most singular superstitions in
order to shake off the yoke of Rome, are Gnosticism
and Manichseism, Oriental sects, the last and glorious
advance of a theogony, which, seeing the rule of so
large a portion of the earth pass away from itself,
undertook to recover it with mysteries and the
evocation of poetic phantoms.

104. Manes. — Manes, redeemed from slavery by
a rich Persian widow, whence he was called the
" son of the widow," and his disciples " sons of the
widow," of prepossessing aspect, learned in the
Alexandrian philosophy, initiated into the Mithraic
mysteries, traversed the regions of India, touched
on the confines of China, studied the evangelical
doctrines, and so lived in the midst of many
religious systems, deriving light from all, and
satisfied by none. He was born at a propitious
moment, and his temperament fitted him for ardu-
ous and fantastic undertakings and schemes.
Possessing great penetration and an inflexible wiU,
he comprehended the expansive force of Chris-
tianity, and resolved to profit thereby, masking
Gnostic and Cabalistic ideas under Christian names
and rites. In order to establish this Christian
revelation, he caUed himself the Paraclete an-
nounced by Christ to His disciples, attributing to


Sons of the Widow. 137

timself, in the Gnostic manner, a great superiority
over the Apostles, rejecting the Old Testament,
and allowing to the sages of the pagans a philo-
sophy superior to Judaism,

105. Manichceism. — The dismal conceptions of a
dualism, pure and simple, the eternity and absolute
evil of matter, the non-resurrection of the body,
the perpetuity of the principle of evil, — these preside
over the compound that took its name from him,
and confound Mithras with Christ, the Gospel with
the Zend-Avesta, Magism with Judaism. The
Unknown Father, the Infinite Being, of Zoroaster,
is entirely rejected by Manes, who divides the uni-
verse into two dominions, that of light, and that of
darkness, irreconcilable, whereof one is superior to
the other ; but, great difference, the first, instead
of conquering the latter into goodness, reduces it
to impotence, conquers, but does not subdue or
convince it. The God of light has innumerable
legions of combatants (aeons), at whose head are
twelve superior angels, corresponding with the
twelve signs of the zodiac. Satanic matter is
surrounded by a similar host, which, having been
captivated by the charms of the light, endeavours
to conquer it ; wherefore the head of the celestial
kingdom, in order to obviate this danger, infuses
life into a new power, and appoints it to watch
the frontiers of heaven. That power is called the
" Mother of Life," and is the soul of the world.


138 Secret Societies.

the " Divine," the primitive thought of the Supreme
EnSj the heavenly " Sophia" of the Gnostics. As
a direct emanation of the Eternal it is too pure to
unite with matter, but a son is born unto it, the
first man, who initiates the great struggle with the
demons. When the strength of the man fails him,
the " Living Spirit " comes to his assistance, and,
having led him back to the kingdom of hght, raises
above the world that part of the celestial soul not
contaminated by contact with the demons — a per-
fectly pure soul, the Redeemer, the Christ, who
attracts to Himself and frees from matter the Ught
and soul of the first man. In these abstruse doctrines
lies concealed the Mithraic worship of the sun. The
followers of Manes were divided into " Elect " and
" Listeners ; " the former had to renounce every
corporeal enjoyment, everything that can darken the
celestial light in us ; the second were less vigorously
treated. Both might attain immortality by means
of purification iu an ample lake placed in the moon
(the baptism of celestial water), and sanctification
in the solar fire (the baptism of celestial fire) , where
reside the Redeemer and the blessed spirits.

106. lAfe of Manes. — The career of Manes was
chequered and stormy, a foreshadowing of the
tempests that were to arise against his sect. After
having enjoyed the unstable favour of the Court,
and acquired the fame of a great physician, he found
himself unable to save the life of one of the sons of


Sons of the Widow. 139

the prince. He was consequently exiled, and roved
through Turkestan, Hindostan, and the Chinese
empire. He dwelt for one year in a cave, living on
herbs, during which time his followers, having re-
ceived no news from him, said that he had ascended
to heaven, and were believed, not only by the
" Listeners," but by the people. The new prince
recalled him to court, showered honours on him,
erected a sumptuous palace for him, and consulted
him on aU state affairs. But the successor of this
second prince made him pay dearly for this short
happiness, for he put him to a cruel death.

107. Progress of Manichceism. — The government
of the sect already existing with degrees, initiatory
rites, signs and pass-words, was continued by astute
chiefs, who more and more attracted to themselves
the Christians by the use of orthodox language,
Tna. Vin g them beUeve that their object was to recall
Christianity to its first purity. But the sect was
odious to the Church of Rome, because it had issued
from rival Persia ; and so for two hundred years it
was banished from the empire, and the Theodosian
Codex is full of laws against it. Towards the end
of the fourth century it spread in Africa and Spain.
It had peace and flourished under the mother of
the Emperor Anastasius (491-518) ; but Justin
renewed the persecution. Changing its name, seat,
and figurative language, it spread in Bulgaria, Lom-
bardy (Patarini) , France (Cathari, Albigenseg, &c.) ,


140 Secret Societies.

miited witli the Saracens and openly made war upon
the Emperor, and its followers perished by 'thou-
sands in battle and at .the stake ; and from its secular
trunk sprang the so-called heresies of the Hussites
and WyckUffiteSj which opened the way for Pro-
testantism. In those gloomy middle ages, in fact,
arose those countless legions of sectaries, bound by
a common pact, whose existence only then becomes
manifest when the sinister light of the burning pile
flashes through the darkness in which they conceal
themselves. The Freemasons undoubtedly, through
the Templars, inherited no small portion of their
ritual from them ; they were very numerous in all
the courts, and even in the dome of St. Peter, and
baptized in blood with new denominations and
ordinances.

108. Doctrines, — The sacred language of Mani-
chseism was most glowing, and founded on that
concert of voices and ideas, called in Pythagorean
phraseology the " harmony of the spheres," which
established a connection between the mystic degrees
and the figured spheres by means of conventional
terms and images ; and it is known that the Albi-
genses and Patarini recognized each other by signs.
A Provencal Patarino, who had fled to Italy in
1240, everywhere met with a friendly reception, -
revealing himself to the brethren by means of con-
ventional phrases. He everywhere found the sect
admirably organized, with churches, bishops, and


Sons of the Widow. 141

apostles of the most active propaganda, who over-
ran France, Germany, and England. The Mani-
chaean language, moreover, was ascetic, and loving,
and Christian ; but the neophyte, after having once
entered the sect, was carried beyond, and gradually
aKenated from the Papal Church. The mysteries
had two chief objects in view — that of leading the
neophyte, by first insensibly changing his former
opinions and dispositions, and then of gradually
instructing him in the conventional language, which,
being complicated and varied, required much study
and much time. But not all were admitted to the
highest degrees. Those that turned hack, or could
not renounce former ideas, remained always in the
Church, and were not introduced into the sanctuary.
These were simple Christians and sincere listeners,
who, out of zeal for reform, often encountered
death, as, for instance, the canons of Orleans, who
were condemned to the stake by King Eobert in
1022. But those who did not turn back were
initiated into all those things which it was im-
portant should be known to the most faithful mem-
bers of the sect. The destruction of Eome, and the
establishment of the heavenly Jerusalem spoken of
in the Apocalypse, were the chief objects aimed at.
109. Spread of Beligion of Love. — The religion
of love did not end with the massacre of the Alhi-
genses, nor were its last echoes the songs of the
troubadours ; for we meet with it in a German sect


142 Secret Societies.

which in 1550 pretended to receive a supernatural
light from the Holy Spirit. In Holland, also, a sect
of Christians arose in 1580, called the " Family of
Love," which spread to England, where it published
many books, and flourished about the time of
Cromwell, and seems to have had some connection
with the Puritans.


II.


THE GAY SCIENCE.


110.
\IiANSITION from Ancient to Modern
Initiations. — An order of facts now,
claims our attention which in a certain
manner signalizes the transition from
ancient to modern initiations. An extraordinary
phenomenon in social conditions becomes apparent,
so strikingly different from what we meet with in
antiquity as to present itself as a new starting
point, Hitherto we have seen the secret organizing
itself in the higher social classes, so as to deprive
the multitude of truths whose revelation could not
have taken place without injury and danger to the
hierarchy. At the base we find polytheism, super-
stition ; at the summit deism, rationalism, the most
abstract philosophy. Truly those peoples were to
be pitied, who, slaves of ignorance and corruption.


144 Secret Societies.

ereoted vdth their own hands the prisons of truth
and the temples of imposture^ who adored idols
and idolized form, superficiality, and appearance.

111. Spirit of Ancient Secret Societies. — The
secret societies of antiquity were theological, and
theology frequently inculcated superstition ; but in
the deepest recesses of the sanctuary there was a
place where it would laugh at itself and the deluded
people, and draw to itself the intelligences that re-
belled agaiast the servitude of fear, by initiating
them into the only "creed worthy of a free man. To
that theology, therefore, otherwise very learned and
not cruel, and that promoted art and science, much
may be forgiven, attributing perhaps not to base
calculation, but to sincere conviction and thought-
ful prudence, the dissimulation with which it con-
cealed the treasures of truth and knowledge, that
formed its power, glory, and, in a certain manner,
its privilege.

112. Spirit of Modern Societies. — In modem
times the high religious and political spheres have
no secrets, for they have no privilege of knowledge,
nor initiations which confer on those higher in
knowledge the right to sit on the seat of the mighty.

113. Cause and Progress of Heresy. — But the
pyramid was overthrown ; the lofty summit feU, and
the ample massive base became visible, and no one,
without being guilty of an anachronism and pre-
paring for himself bitter disappointments, can seek


The Gay Science. 145

the truth where there is but a delusive show of
truth. Whoever persists in making any menda-
cious, height the object of his ambition, removes his
eyes from the horizon which, lit up by the dawn,
casts light around his feet, while his head is yet in
darkness. Henceforth secret societies are popular
and religious, not in the sense of the constituted
and official church, but of a rebellious and sectarian
church ; and since at a period when the authority
of the church is paramount, and religion circulates
through an the veins of the state, no change can be
effected without heresy, so this must necessarily be
the first aspect of political and intellectual revolt.
This heresy makes use of the denial and rejection
of official dogmas in order to overthrow the hated
clerocracy, and to open for itself a road to civil
freedom.

114. Efforts and Infiuenae of Heretics. — The
Papacy was necessarily the first cradle of the new
conspirators, and from the heresies arose the sects,
of which none was more extensive and active than
the Albigenses. This great fact of opposition and
reaction has no parallel in antiquity, where the
very schools of philosophy adopted the forms of the
mysteries ; and it is a fact which imparts an im-
mense momentum to modern history, and surrounds
with lustre popular movements and personalities.
This great energy proceeded from heretical and
sectarian schools, and struggled in the dark to


146 Secret Societies.

conquer in the light. The sect of the Albigenses,
the offspring of Manichseism, fructified in its turn
the germs of the Templars and Eosicrucians, and of
all those associations that continued the struggle
and fought against ecclesiastical and civil oppression.

115. The Albigenses. — It is to be noticed that
the object of the Albigenses in so far differed from
that of all posterior sects, that its blows were in-
tended for Papal Rome alone ; and wholly Papal
was the revenge taken through the civil arm,
and with priestly rage. The Albigenses were the
'GhibeUines of France, and combined with all who
were opposed to Rome, especially with Frederick
II. and the Arragonese, in maintaining the rights of
kings against the pretensions of the Papal See.
Their doctrines had a special influence on the Uni-
versity of Bologna, wholly imperial ; Dante was im-
perialistic, tainted with that doctrine, and there-
fore hated by the Guelphs.

116. Tenets of Albigenses. — Toulouse was the Rome
of that church which had its pastors, bishops, pro-
vincial and general councils, like the official church,
and assembled under its banners the dissenters of a
great portion of Europe, all meditating the ruin of
Rome and the restoration of the kingdom of Jerusa-
lem. The rising in Provence gathered strength
from the circumstances in which it took place. The
Crusaders had revived eastern ManichEeism, placing
Europe in immediate contact with sophisticated


The Gay Science. 147

Greece, and Mahomedan and Pantheistic Asia.
The Bastj moreover, contributed Aristotle and hia
Arab commentators, to which must be added the
subtleties of the cabala and the materialism of ideas.
Philosophy, republicanism, and industry assailed the
Holy See. Various isolated rebellions had revealed
the general spirit, and wholesale slaughter had not
repressed it ; the rationalism of the Waldensea con-
nected itself with the German mysticism of the
Ehine and the Netherlands, where the operatives
rose against the counts and the bishops. Every
apostle that preached pure morality, the religion of
the spirit, the restoration ofthe primitive church,
found followers ; the century of Saint Louis is the
century of unbelief in the Church of Eome, and
the Impossibilia of Sigero foreshadowed those of
Strauss.

117. Aims of Alhigenses. — The heresy of the
Albigenses made such progress along the shores
of the Mediterranean that several countries seemed to
separate from Rome, whilst princes and emperors
openly favoured it. Not satisfied with already consi-
dering impious Rome overthrown, the Albigenses
suddenly turned towards the Crusaders, at first
looked at with indifference, hoping to make Jeru-
salem the glorious and powerful rival of Rome,
there to establish the seat of the Albigenses, to
restore the religion of love in its first home, to
found on earth the heavenly Jerusalem,, of which


148 Secret Societies.

Godfrey of Bouillon was proclaimed king. This
was the man who had carried fire and sword into
Rome, slain the anti-Offisar Rodolphe, "the king of
the priests," and thrust the Pope out of the holy-
city, deserving thereby, and by the hopes entertained
of him, the infinite praises for his piety, purity, and
chastity, bestowed on him by the troubadours, who
originally appeared in the first quarter of the twelfth
century, in the allegorical compositions known by
the name of the " Knight of the Swan." It was a
project which assigned an important part to the Tem-
plars, who perhaps were aware of and sharers in it.
118. Religion of the Troubadours. — Troubadours
and Albigenses drew closer together in persecution;
their friendship increased in the school of sorrow.
They sang and fought for one another, and their
songs expired on the blazing piles ; wherefore it
appears reasonable to consider the troubadours as
the organizers of that vast conspiracy directed against
the Church of Rome, the champions of a revolt
which had not for its guide and object material
interests and vulgar ambition, but a rehgion and a
polity of love. Here love is considered, not as an
affection which all more or less experience and un-
derstand, but as an art, a science, acquired by
means of the study and practice of sectarian rites
and laws ; and the artists under various names
appear scattered throughout many parts of Europe.
It is difficult, indeed, to determine the boundaries


The Gay Science. 149

witMn whiclL the Gay Science was diffused. The
singers of love are met with as the troubadours of
the Langue d'Oc and the Langue d'Oil, the minne-
sangers and minstrels.

119. Difficulty to understand the Troubadours. —
The singers of Provence — whose language was by
the Popes called the language of heresy — are nearly
unintelligible to us^ and we know not how to justify
the praises bestowed upon their poetry by such
men as DantOj Petrarchj Chaucer ; nor dare we,
since we do not understand their verses, call their
inspiration madness, nor deny them the success
they undoubtedly achieved. It appears more easy
and natural to think that those free champions of a
heresy who were not permitted clearly to express
their ideas, preferred the obscure turns of poetry and
Hght forms that concealed their thoughts, as the
sumptuous and festive courts of love perhaps con-
cealed the " Lodges " of the Albigenses from the
eyes of the Papal Inquisition. The same was done
for political purposes at various periods. Thus we
have Gringore's La Ohasse du Oerf des Gerfs (a pun
designating Pope Julius II., by allusion to the servus
servorvm) , in which that Pope is held up to ridicule.

120. Poetry of Troubadours. — Arnaldo DanieUo
was obscure even for his contemporaries ; according
to the Monk of Montaudon, " no one understands
his songs," and yet Dante and Petrarch praise him
above every other Provencal poet, calHng him the


150 Secret Societies.

" great Master of Love," perhaps a title of secta-
rian dignity, and extolling Ms style, whicli they
would not have done had they not been able to
decipher his meaning. The effusions of the Trou-
badours were always addressed to some lady, though
they dared not reveal her name; what Hugo de
Brunet says applies to all : " If I be asked to whom
my songs are addressed, I keep it a secret. I pre-
tend to such a one, but it is nothing of the kind."
The mistress invoked, there can be no doubt, like
Dante^s Beatrice, was the purified religion of love,
personified as the Virgin Sophia.

121. Degrees among Troubadours. — ^There were
four degrees, but the " Romance of the Rose "
divides them into four and three, producing again
the mystic number seven. This poem describes a
castle, surrounded with a sevenfold wall, which is
covered with emblematical figures, and no one was
admitted into the castle that could not explain their
mysterious meaning. The troubadours also had
their secret signs of recognition, and the "minstrels"
are supposed to have been so called because they
were the " ministers " of a secret worship.

122. Courts of Love. — I have already alluded to
these; they probably gave rise to the Lodges of
Adoption, the Knights and Wymphs of the Rose
&c. {which see) . The decrees pronounced therein
with pedantic proceedings, literally interpreted, are
frivolous or immoral; and therefore incompatible


The Gay Science.


151


with the morals and manners of the Albigenses,
which were on the whole pure and austere. The
.Courts of Lore may therefore have concealed far
sterner objects than the decision of questions of mere
gallantry ; and it is noticeable that these courts, as
well as the race of troubadours, become extinct with
the extinction of the Albigenses by the sword of
De Montfort and the fagots of the Inquisition.


III. ,

THE CONSOLATION.

123.
ISTOBIGAL Notices.— lUlj, though
watched by Rome, nay^ because watched,
supported the new doctrines. Milan
was one of the most active foci of the
Cathari; in 1166 that city was more heretical
than catholic. In 1150 there were Cathari at Flo-
rence, and the women especially were most energetic
in the dissemination of the dogmas of the sect
which became so powerful as to effect in the city
a revolution in favour of the GhibeUines. At
Orvieto Catharism prevailed in 1125, and was per-
secuted in 1163 ; the persecution was most fierce at
Verona, Ferrara, Modena, &o. In 1224 a great
number of these sectaries met in Calabria and
Naples, and even Rome was full of them. But
Lombardy and Tuscany were always the chief seats
of this revolt.

124. Doctrines and Tenets. — But we have only


The Consolation. 153

scanty notices of this sect^ becausOj unlike other
heretical associations, it sought to conceal its opera-
tions. It bore great resemblance to Manichseism
and the dogmas of the Albigenses, like which latter,
it concealed its doctrines not only from the world
at large, but even from its proselytes of inferior
degrees. They believed in the metempsychosis,
assuming that to attain to the Hght, seven such
transmigrations were required; but, as in other
cases, this was probably an emblematic manner of
speaking of the degrees of initiation. They had
communistic tendencies, and were averse to mar-
riage ; philanthropists, above all they led industrious
lives, combined saving habits with charity, founded
■schools and hospitals, crossed lands and seas to
make proselytes, denied to magistrates the right
of taking away Hfe, did not disapprove of suicide,
and preceded the Templars in their contempt of the
cross. They could not understand how Christians
could adore the instrument of the death of the Saviour,
and said that the cross was the figure of the beast
mentioned in the Apocalypse and an abomination
in a holy place. They performed their ceremonies
in woods, caverns, remote valleys ; wherefore those
belonging to this heresy and others deriving from
it could well answer the question : Where' did our
ancient brethren meet before there were any lodges ?
In every place. They were accused of strangling
or starving the dying, and of burning children;


154 Secret Societies.

charges also brought against the Mithraics, Christ-
ians, Gnostics, Jews, and quite recently against
the Irish Roman Catholics. The accusation, as in
the other cases, probably arose from some symbolical
sacrifice, literally interpreted by their opponents.
They had four sacraments, and the consolation con-
sisted in the imposition of hands, or baptism of
the Holy Spirit; which, bestowed only on adults,
remitted sins, imparted the consoling spirit, and
secured eternal salvation. During persecutions the
ceremonies were shortened and were held at night
and secretly; the lighted tapers symbolized the
baptism of fire. At the ceremony of initiation the
priest read the first eighteen verses of the gospel
of St. John, a custom stiU. practised in some masonic
degrees. In remembrance of his initiation the
novice received a garment made of fine linen and
wool, which he wore under his shirt ; the women a
girdle, which they also wore next to the skin just
under the bosom.


IV.


CHIVALEY.


125.
i^BIGINAL Aim. — An idea of conserva-
tion and propagandism produced the
association of the San Greal, whose
members professed to be in search of
the vase of truth, which once contained the blood
of the Eedeemer ; or, to leave metaphorical lan-
guage, to bring back the Christian Church to apo-
stoUc times, to the true observance of the precepts of
the gospel. At the Eound Table, a perfect figure,
which admitted neither of first nor of last, sat the
Knights, who did not attain to that rank and dis-
tinction but after many severe trials. Their de-
grees at first were three, which were afterwards
raised to seven, and finally, at the epoch of their
presumed fusion with the Albigenses, Templars and
Ghibellines, to thirty-three. The chief grades, how-
ever, may be said to have been — 1, Page ; 2, Squire;
3, Knight.


156 Secret Societies.

126. Knights the Military Apostles of the Religion
of Love.- — This association was above all a proud
family of apostles and missionaries of the Religion
of Love, military troubadours, who, under the stan-
dards of justice and right, fought against the mon-
strous abuses of the Theocratic regime, consoled the
" widow " — perhaps the Gnostic Churcli — protected
the " sons of the widow " — the followers of Manes
— and overthrew giants and dragons, inquisitors
and churchmen. The powerful voice of the furious
Eoland, which made breaches in the granite rocks
of the mountaius, is the voice of that so-called
heresy which found its way into Spain, thus antici-
pating the saying of Louis XIV., "There are no
longer any Pyrenees.^^ This may seem a startling
assertion, but it is nevertheless true. Of course I
do not now speak' of the chivalry of feudal times,
but of that which existed even before the eleventh
century, 'that issued from the womb of Manichseism
and Catharism, and was altogether hostile to Rome.
But even at that period the Papal church acted on
the principle afterwards so fully carried out by the
Jesuits, of directing what they could not suppress ;
and having nothing more to fear than spiritualism,
whether mystical, Platonic, or chivalric, Rome, in-
stead of opposing its current, cunningly turned it
into channels where, instead of being destructive to
the Papacy, it became of infinite advantage to it.

127. Tenets and Doctrines. — Those who com-


Chivalry. 157

posed the romances of the Ronad Table -and the San
Greal were well acquainted with the Gallic triads,
the mysteries of the theological doctrines of the
Bards and Celtic myths. These romances have their
origin in the phenomena of the natural world, and
the San Greal is only a diminutive Noah^s Ark.
From Chaucer's " Testament of Love," which seems
founded on the " Consolation of Philosophy," by
Boethius, it has been supposed that the love of
chivalry was the love of woman, in- its highest,
noblest, and most spiritualized aspect. But the
lady-love of the knight in the early period of chi-
valry was the Virgin Sophia, or philosophy personi-
fied. The phraseology employed in the rites of
initiation, the religious vows taken on that occasion,
the tonsure to which the knights submitted, with
many other circumstances, sufficiently indicate that
the love so constantly spoken of has no reference to
earthly love. This applies especially to the knights
who may be called Voluntary Knights, and whose
charter is the curious book called " Las Siete Parti-
das," by Alfonso, King of Castile and Leon. Their
statutes greatly resembled those of the Templars
and Hospitallers ; they were more than any other a
religious order, bound to very strict lives; their
clothes were of three colours, and^strange coinci-
dence — analogous with those with which Dante
beheld Beatrice clothed, and the three circles he
describes towards the end of " Paradise." They had


158 Secret Societies.

two meals a day, and drank only water, a regimen
scarcely fit for a militia whose duties were not
always spiritual; for, besides their special duties,
they were also subject to all the rules of chivalry,
and bound to protect the weak against the strong,
to restore peace where it had been disturbed, to
serve their body (the Lodge), and protect the
(evangelical) religioiL They are said to have
branded their right arms in sign of their fraternity;
but this is perhaps only a figure of the baptism of
fire and the Spirit, one of the most essential rites
of the Religion of Love.


BOOK IV.

ISHMAELITES.

And he will be a wild man ; Ms hand will be against
every man, and every man's hand against him.

Gen. xvi. 12.


AUTHORITIES.

Mahrizi. Description of Egypt and Cairo.

Saay. ChrestomatMe Arabe.

Pococke. Spec. Hist. Arab. Edit. WHte.

Ha/mmier. Origin, Power, and Eall of the Assassins.

Malcolm.. History of Persia.

Bousseau. Memoires snr lea Ismaelites.

Silv. de 8acy. Expose de la Eeligion des Druses. Paris

1838.
Wolff. Drusen und ibre Vorlaufer. London, 1856.


THE LODGE OF WISDOM.


128.
h.ABIOUS Sects sprung from Manichceism.
— Manichseisin was not the only secret
association that sprang from the initia-
tions of the Magi. In the seventh
century of our era we meet with similar societiesj
possessing an influence not limited to the regions in
which they arosOj variations of one single thought^
which aimed at combining the venerable doctrines
•of Zoroaster with Christian belief. Of these
societies or sects the following may be mentioned :
the followers of Keyoumerz ; the worshippers of
Servan, infinite time^ the creator and mover of all
things ; disciples of Zoroaster properly so called ; ,
Dualists ; Gnostics, admitting two principles, the
Father and the Son, at war and reconciled by a third
celestial power ; and lastly the followers of Mastek,
the most formidable and disastrous of all, preaching


162 Secret Societies.

universal equality and liberty^ the irresponsibility of
man, and tbe community of property and women.

129. Secret Doctrines of Islamism. — The Arabs
having rendered themselves masters of Persia, the
sects of that country set to work to spread them-
selves among Islamism, in order to undermine its
base. In Islamism even we find indications of an
exoteric and an esoteric doctrine. The punctuated
initials which Mahomet put at the head of each
chapter, according to Mahomedan teachers, contain
a profound secret, which it is a great crime to reveal.
The name mufti, which is equivalent to Icey, intimates
that the priests of Islamism are the living keys of
a secret doctrine. But the conquered revenged
themselves on the conquerors. The Persian sects
examined the Koran, pointed out its contradictions,
and denied its divine origin. And so there arose in
Islamism that movement, which attacks dogmas,
destroys faith, and substitutes for bhnd belief free
inquiry. False systems are fruitful in schisms. A
great and enduring harmony is impossible in error ; '
truth alone is one, but error has many forms.

130. The Candidati. — Prom among the many
sects which arose I will mention only one, that of
the Sefdd-Schamegan, the Candidati, or those clothed
in white, whose habitat was the Caucasus, and at
whose head was the Veiled Prophet. Hakem-ben-
Haschem wore a golden mask, and taught that God
put on a human form from the day He commanded ~


The Lodge of Wisdom. 163

the angels to adore the first ra&n, and that from the
same day the divine nature was transmitted from pro-
phet to prophet down to him ; that after death evil
men would pass iato beasts, whilst the good should
be received into God ; and he, who considered him-
self very good, in order that no trace should be found
of his body, and the people should think that, like
Romulus, he had ascended to heaven — threw himself
into a pit filled with corrosive matter, which con-
sumed him.

131. Cruelty of Babeck the Gay. — -The fury with
which the sects of Islam contested the government
of conscience and political power has scarcely a
parallel in the history of religion. Extermination
had no bounds. A revolutionary heresiarch, who
preached communism, Babeck the Gay, for twenty
years filled the caliphate of Bagdad with death and
ruin — a dismal gaiety ! A million of men are said
to have perished through him, and one of the ten
executioners he had in his pay boasted of having
slaughtered twenty thousand ; and he himself died
laughing by the hand of one of his colleagues. But
these murders were not all due to hostile religious
views ; political ambition had as great a share in
them. The caliphate, whose power was growing
from day to day, raised open and secret opponents,
and a violent reaction set in.

132. The Ishmaelites. — Egypt especially seems as
if predestined to be the birthplace of secret societies.


164 Secret Societies.

of priests, warriors, and fanatics. It is tlie region
of mysteries. The spreading light seems not to
affect it. Cairo has succeeded the ancient Memphis,
the doctrine of the Lodge of Wisdom that of the
Academy of HeliopoUsi 'Abdallah determined secretly
to oTerthrow the caUphate and to uphold the rights
of Mahomet the son of Ishmael, the descendant of
the prophet by Patima. The new sect succeeded
in delivering from prison Obeidallah, the pretended
descendant of Ishmael, and in placing him on the
throne of Mahdia, and subsequently one of his suc-
cessors on that of Cairo, thus subjecting Egypt to
the sway of the descendants of Fatima. The caliphs
of Egypt, more grateful than princes usually are,
favoured the doctrine that had gained them the
throne.

133. Teaching of the Lodge of Cairo. — The Boial-
Boat, or supreme missionary or judge, shared the
power with the prince. Meetings were held in the
Lodge of Cairo, which contained many books and
scientific instruments ; science was the professed
object, but the real aim was very different. The
course of instruction was divided into nine dearrees.
The first sought to inspire the pupil with doubts, and
with confidence in his teacher who was to solve them.
For this purpose captious questions were to show him
the absurdity of the literal sense of the Koran, and
obscure hints gave him to imderstand that under
that shell was hidden a sweet and nutritious kernel ;


The Lodge of Wisdom. 165

but the instruction went no further unless the pupil
bound himself by dreadful oaths to blind faith
in, and absolute obedience tOj his instructor. The
second inculcated the recognition of the imaums, or
directors, appointed by God as the fountains of every
kiad of knowledge. The third informed him of the
number of those blessed or holy imaums, and that
number was the mystical seven. The fourth informed
him that God had sent into the world seven legis-
lators, each of whom had seven coadjutors, and who
were called mutes^ 'v^hilst the legislators were called
spealceris. The fifth informed him that each of these
coadjutors had twelve apostles. The sixth placed
before the eyes of the adept, advanced so far, the
precepts of the Koran, and he was taught that all
the dogmas of religion ought to be subordinate to
the rule of philosophy ; he was also instructed in the
systems of Plato and Aristotle. The seventh degree
embraced mystical pantheism. The eighth again
brought before him the dogmatic precepts of the
Mahomedan law, estimating it at its just value.
The ninth degree, finally, as the necessary result of
all the former, taught that nothing was to be
believed, and that everything was lawful.

134. Progress of Doctrines. — These were the ends
aimed at — ^human responsibility and dignity were to
be annihilated ; the throne of the descendants of
Patima was to be surrounded with an army of
assassins, a formidable body-guard; a mysterious


166 Secret Societies.

militia was to be raised^ tliat should spread far and
wide the fame and terror of the caliphate of Cairo,
and inflict fatal blows on the abhorred rule of
Bagdad. The missionaries spread widely, and in
Arabia and Syria partisans were won, to whom the
designs of the order were unknown, but who had
with fearful solemnity sworn bbnd obedience.
The nocturnal labours of the Lodge of Cairo lasted
a century; and its doctrines, which ended with
denying aU truth, morality, and justice, necessarily
produced something very extraordinary. So ter-
rible a shock to the human conscience led to one
of those phenomena that leave a sanguinary and
indelible trace on the page of history.


II.


THE ASSASSINS.


135.
\OUNDATION of Order.— Only Arabia
and Syria could have been the theatre
of the dismal deeds of the " Old Man/'
or rather ''Lord of the Mountain."
Hassan Sabbah was one of the days or missionaries
of the School of Cairo, a man of adventurous spirit,
who, having greatly distinguished himself, acquired
much influence at Cairo. This influence, however,
excited the envy of others, who succeeded in
having him exiled. He had been put on board a
ship to take him out of the country, but a storm
arising, all considered themselves lost. But
Hassan, assuming an authoritative air, exclaimed,
"The Lord has promised me that no evil shall
befal me." Suddenly the storm abated, and the
sailors cried, " A miracle ! " and became his fol-
lowers. Hassan traversed Persia, preaching and
making proselytes, and having seized the fortress


168 Secret Societies.

of Alamutj on the borders of Irak and Dilem, whicli
he called the " House of Fortune/' he there estab-
lished his rule.

136. Influence of Hassan. — ^What kind of rale ?
The history of his time ia full of his name. Kings
in the very centre of Europe trembled at it ; his
powerful arm reached OTerywhere. Philip Augus-
tus of France was so afraid of him that he dared
not stir without his guard aroimd him ; and perhaps
the otherwise implacable Lord of the Mountain
forgave him because of his fear. At first he
showed no other intention but to increase the
sway of the caliphate of Cairo, but was not long
before throwing off the mask, because his fierce
character submitted with difficulty to cunning and
hypocrisy. He reduced the nine degrees into
which the adherents of the Lodge of Cairo were
divided to seven, placing himself at the head,
with the title of Seydna or Sidna, whence the
Spanish Gid, and the Italian Signore. The term
Assassins is a corruption of Hashishim, derived
from hashish (the hemp plant), with which the
chief intoxicated his followers when they entered
on some desperate enterprise.

137. Gatechism of the Order. — To regulate the
seven degrees he composed the Catechism of the
Order. The first degree recommended to the mis-
sionary attentively to watch the disposition of the
candidate, before admitting him to the order. The


The Assassins. 169

second impressed it upon him to gain the con-
fidence of the candidate, by flattering his inclina-
tions and passions ; the third, to involve him in
doubts and difficulties by showing him the absur-
dity of the Koran; the fourth, to exact from him
a solemn oath of fidelity and obedience, with a pro-
mise to lay his doubts before his instructor j and
the fifth, to show him that the most famous men of
Church and State belonged to the secret order.
The sixth, called " Confirmation,'" enjoined on the
instructor to examine the proselyte concerning the
whole preceding course, and firmly to establish him -
in it. The seventh finally, called the " Exposition
of the Allegory," gave the keys of the sect.

138. Devotion of Followers. — The followers were
divided into two great hosts, " self-sacrificers " and
" aspirants." The first, despising fatigues, dangers,
and tortures, joyfully gave their lives whenever it
pleased the great master, who required them either
to protect himself or to carry out his mandates of
death. The victim having been pointed out, the
faithful, clothed in a white tunic with a red sash,
the colours of innocence* and blood, went on their
mission, without being deterred by distance or
danger. Having found the person they sought,
they awaited the favourable moment for slaying
him ; and their daggers seldom missed their aim.
Conrad of Montferrat, having either quarrelled
with the Lord of the Mountain, or excited the


170 Secret Societies.

jealousy of some Christian princes who wished for
his removal, was one of the first victims of the sect.
Two Assassins allowed themselves to be baptized,
and placing themselves beside him, seemed only
intent on praying; but the favourable opportunity
presenting itself, they slew him, and one of them
took refuge in ,a church. But hearing that the
priuce had been carried off stiU alive, he again
forced his way into Montferrat's presence, and
stabbed him a second time ; and then expired,
without a complaint, amidst refined tortures.

139. The Imaginary Paradise. — How was such
devotion secured ? The story goes that whenever
the chief had need of a man to carry out any par-
ticularly dangerous enterprise, he had recourse to
the following stratagem : — In a province of Persia,
now named Sigistan, was the' famous vaUey Mule-
bat, containing the palace of Alladin, another name
of the Lord of the Mountain. This valley was a
most delightful spot, and so protected by high
mountains terminating in perpendicula,r cliffs, that
from them no one could enter the valley, and all
the ordinary approaches were guarded by strong
fortresses. The valley was cultivated as the most
luxurious gardens, with pavilions splendidly fur-
nished, their sole occupants being the most lovely
and charming women. The man selected by the lord
to perform the dangerous exploit was first made
drunk, and in this state carried into the valley.


The Assassins. 171

wliere he was left to roam whithersoever he pleased.
On coming to his senses sufficiently to appreciate
the beautiful scenery, and to enjoy the charms of
the sylph-like creatures, that kept him engaged all
the time in amorous dalliance, he was made to
believe that this was Elysium ; but ere he wearied .
or became satiated with love and wine, he was once
more made drunk, and in this state carried back to
his own home. When his services were required,
he was again sent for by the lord, who told him
that he had once permitted him to enjoy paradise,
and if he would do his bidding he could luxuriate
in the same delights for the rest of his life. The
dupe, believing that his master had the power to do
all this, was ready to commit whatever crime was
required of him.

140. Sanguinary Character of Hassan.— In that
inaccessible nest the vulture-soul of its master was
alone with his own ambition ; and the very solitude,
which constituted his power, must at times have
weighed heavy upon him. And so it is said that he
composed theological works, and gave himself up to
frequent religious exercises. And this need not sur-
prise us ; theological studies are no bar to ferocity,
and mystical gentleness is often found united with
sanguinary fury. But he killed with calculation, to
gain fame and power, to inspire fear and secure success .
A Persian caliph thought of attacking and dispersing
the sect, and found on his pillow a dagger and a


172 Secret Societies.

letter from Hassan, saying, " What tas been placed
beside thy head may be planted in thy heart." In
spite of years he remained sanguinary to the last.
With his own hand he killed his two sons : the one
for having slain a day, and the other for having
tasted wine. He did not design to found a dynasty,
or regular government, but an order, sect, or secret
society; and perhaps his sons perished in conse-
quence of badly disguising their desire to siicceed
him.

141 . Further Instances of Devotion in Followers. —
The obedience of the faithful did not cease with
Hassan's death, as the following will show. Henry,
Count of Champagne, had to pass close by the
territory of the Assassins ; one of the successors of
Hassan invited him to visit the fortress, which in-
vitation the count accepted. On making the round
of the towers, two of the " faithful," at a sign from
the "Lord," stabbed themselves to the heart, and
fell at the feet of the terrified count; whilst the
master coolly said, " Say but the word, and at a sign
from me you shall see them aU thus on the ground."
The Sultan having sent an ambassador to summon
the rebellious "Assassins to submission, the lord, in
the presence of the ambassador, said to one of
the faithful, " Kill thyself!" and he did it; and to
another, " Throw thyself from this tower ! " and he
hurled himself down. Then turning to the am-
bassador, he said, " Seventy thousand followers obey


The Assassins. 173

me in tlie same manner. This is my reply to your I
master." The only exaggeration in this is probably
in the number^ which by some writers is never
estimated above forty thousandj many of whom
moreover were not "faithful ones," but only aspi-
rants.

142. Christian Princes in league with Assassins.
— Several Christian princes were suspected of con-
niving at the deeds of the Assassins. Eichard of
England is one of them ; and it has been the loyal
task of BngKsh writers to free him from the charge
of having instigated the murder of that Conrad of
Montferrat spoken of above. There also existed for
a long time a rumour that Eichard had attempted the
Hfe of the Eang of France through Hassan and his
Assassins . The nephew of Barbarossa, Frederick II.,
was excommunicated by Innocent II. for having
caused the Duke of Bavaria to be slain by the
Assassins ; and Frederick II., in a letter to the King
of Bohemia, accuses the Duke of Austria of having
by similar agents attempted his hfe. Historians
also mention an Arab who, in 1158, was discovered
in the imperial camp at the siege of Milan, and on
the point of stabbing the emperor. Who had armed
that Assassin ? It is not known. Mutual distrust
existed amongst the rulers of Europe, and the power
of Hassan and his successors increased in accordance
with it.

143. Extinction of Sect. — There was a period when


174 Secret Societies.

a prior or lord, less corrupt or cruel than his prede-
cessors, attempted to restore the Ishinaelite faith and
to purge Alamat from the abominations that polluted
it; but it was either mere pretence, or he was un-
successful. His successors became only more fero-
cious. And it was only just that death should visit
those that sent forth decrees of death ; that suspicion
and treachery should pursue those who spread them
among men ; that crime should destroy what crime
had built up. The rock which was the chief resi-
dence of the Lords of the Mountain became the seat
of hatred and plotting. The fathers looked upon
their sons with jealous fear, and these impatiently
awaited the death of their parents. They avoided
one another, and, when obliged to meet, one would
wear under his clothes a coat of mail, and the other
redouble his guards. Parricide was punished with
parricide; and this implacable Nemesis filled with
horror and remorse the descendants of Hassan. The
cup of poison avenged the dagger. But the measure
was full ; the Mongolians, led by Prince Hulagu iu
1256, attacked and overthrew the Assassins, and the
world was delivered from the reproach which the
existence of such a sect had brought upon it.


III.

THE DRUSES.

144.
\EIOIN of Sect of Z>rMses.— The Ishmael-
ites of Egypt and Syria may be found even
to this day in some of the sects of Islam.
Their primitive physiognomy reveals
itself but faintly ; but their profile is seen in the
lineaments of some of the heretical families wander-
ing in the wilderness or on Mount Lebanon ; objects
of inquietude to the Turkish government, of wonder
to travellers^ and of study to science. Of these the
DruseSj living in northern Syria, and possessing
about forty towns and villages, are perhaps the
most remarkable. Their sect may be said to date its
rise from the supposed incarnation of God in Hakem
Biamr Allah, publicly announced at Cairo in 1029.
This Hakem was the sixth caliph of Egypt; and
Darazi, his confessor, took an active part in pro-
moting the imposture, which, however, was at first
so badly received that he was compelled to take


176 Secret Societies.

refuge in the deserts of Lebanon. Hamze, a Persian
mystic and vizier of Hakenij was inore successful,
and is considered the real founder of the sect,

145. Doctrines.— The Druses heHeve in the trans-
migration of souls ; but probably it is merely a figure,
as it was to the Pythagoreans. Hakem is their pro-
phet; and they have seven commandments, reh-
gious and moral. The first of these is veracity, by
which is understood faith in the unitarian religion
they profess, and the abhorrence of that lie which is
called polytheism, incredulity, error. To a brother
perfect truth and confidence are due ; but it is allow-
able, nay, a duty, to be false towards men of another
creed. The sect is divided into three degrees.
Profanes, Aspirants, and Wise. A Druse who has
entered the second, may return to the first degree,
but incurs death if he reveals what he has learned.
In their secret meetings they are supposed to worship
a calf's head ; but as their religious books are full of
denunciations against idolatry, and as they also com-
pare Judaism, Christianity, and Mahomedanism to a
calf, it is more probable that this effigy represents
the principle of falsehood and evil, Iblis, the rival
and enemy of Hakem. The Druses have also been
accused of licentious orgies ; but, according to the
evidence of resident Christians, a young Druse, as
soon as he is initiated, gives up all dissolute habits,
and becomes, at least in appearance, quite another
man, meriting, as in other initiations, the title of


The Druses. 177

" new born." They have a peculiar phraseology,
and recognize each other by enigmatic sentences.
They claim, in fact, some connection, with the Free-
masons, who have degrees called the " United
Druses," and " Commanders of Lebanon."

146. Recent Events. — Besides the forty towns and
villages occupied by the Druses exclusively, they
also divide possession of about four hundred towns
and villages more with the Maronites, who in 1860
provoked hostilities with the Druses, which ended in
much bloodshed. Since then the latter have been
placed under the protection of a governor appointed
by the Porte.


BOOK V,

KNIGHTS TEMPLARS.

The Templars were one of the most celebrated knightly
orders during the Crusades ; their whole iustitution, acts,
and tragical fate, are attractive to the feelings and the
fancy. — De Quincet.


AUTHOEITIES.

Dm Puy. Documents relating to the Trial of the Templars.

1660.
Nicolai. The Templars. 1780.
Moldenhauer. Proces-Verbal. 1791.
Bti Fwy. Condemnation of Templars. Brussels, 1713.
Eecherches Historiques sur les Templiers. Paris, 4835.
Ilichelet. History of France. Vol. IV.
James. Dark Scenes of History. London, 1850.


THE TEMPLARS.

147.
\OUNDATION of Order.— The Order of
the Knights of the Temple arose out
of the Crusades. In 1118 nine valiant
and pious knights formed themselves
into an association which united the characters of
the monk and the knight. They selected for their
patroness " La douce mere de Dieu," and bound
themselves to live according to the rules of St.
Augustine^ swearing to consecrate their swords^
arms, strength, and lives, to the defence of the
mysteries of the Christian faith; to pay absolute
• obedience to the Grand Master ; to encounter the
dangers of the seas and of War, whenever commanded,
and for the love of Christ ; and even when opposed
singly to three infidel foes not to retreat. They
also took upoi;! themselves the vows of chastity and
poverty, promised not to go over to any other
Order, nor to surrender any waU or foot of land.
King Baldwin II. assigned them a portion of his


182 Secret Societies.

palace, and, as it stood near the Churcli of the
TemplOj the abbot gave them a street leading from
it to the palace, and hence they styled themselves
" Soldiery of the Temple " {militia tempU) .

148. Progress of the Order. — The first nine years
which elapsed after the institution of the Order, the
Templars lived in great poverty ; Hugh des Payens
and Godfrey of St. Omer, the founders, had but one
war-horse between them, a fact commemorated on
the seal of the Order, which represents two knights
seated on one charger. Soon after. Pope Honorius
confirmed the Order, and appointed a white mantle
— to which Bugenius III. aflBxed a red cross on the
breast — to be the distinguishing dress of the Tem-
plars. The Order also assumed a banner formed of
cloth, striped white and black, caRed Beauseant (ia
old French a piebald horse) , which word became the
battle-cry of the knights. The banner bore a cross
and the inscription, " Non nobis, Domme, sed nomini
tuo da gloriam." Thenceforth many knights joined
the Order, and numerous powerful princes bestowed
considerable possessions upon it. Alfonso, king
of Arragon and Navarre, even appointed the Temp-
lars his heirs, though the country refused to ratify
the bequest. Thus they became the richest pro-
prietors in Europe, untU they possessed about nine
thousand commanderies, situated in various countries
of Europe and in Palestine, with an annual rental of
one hundred and twelve milHon francs.


The Templars. 183

149. AccountofCommanderies. — ^Theircommand-
eries were situate in their eastern and western pro-
vinces, the former embracing Jerusalem, Tripoli,
Antioch, Cyprus j the latter, Portugal, Castile and
Leon, Arragon, France, including Flanders and the
Netherlands, England, Ireland, Germany, Italy, and
SieUy. Whilst Jerusalem was in the hands of the
Christians, the chief seat of the Templars was in that
city ; afterwards it was transferred to Paris, where
they erected the large building until lately known
as the Temple. It was in this building that Philip
the Fair took refuge on the occasion of a riot which
took place in 1306, where the Templars protected
him until the fury of the people had calmed down.
The Knights, it is said, incautiously displayed to
the royal cupidity their immense treasures. On a
subsequent, but far more momentous rising, the
pile which served an ungrateful King for an asylum,
became the prison of an unfortunate successor ; re-
cently this memento of royal perfidy, and of an
avenging fate that struck the innocent, has been
levelled to the ground.

150. Imputations agmnst the Order. — Towards the
end of the twelfth century the Order counted about
thirty thousand members, mostly French, and the
Grand Master was generally chosen from among the
French. Through the great number of their affiliated
members they could raise a large army in any part
of the Eastern world; and their fleet monopolized


.184 Secret Societies.

the commerce of the Levant. Hence they departed
from their original humility and piety. Palestine
was lostj and they made no effort to recover it ; but
frequently drew the sword — ^which was only to be
used in the service of God, as they understood the
phrase — in the feuds and warfares of the countries
they inhabited. They became proud and arrogant.
When dyingj Richard Cceur de Lion said, " I leave
avarice to the Cistercian monks, luxuriousness to the
begging friars, pride to the Templars;" and yet
perhaps they only felt their own power. The
English Templars had dared to say to Henry ni.,
" You shall be king as long as you are just;" por-
tentous words which supplied matter for medita-
tion to that Philip of France who, like many other
princes, wished to be unjust with impunity. In
Castile, the Templars, Hospitallers, and Knights of
St. John, combined against the King himself.
Perhaps they aimed at universal dominion, or at the
establishment of a Western sovereignty, Hke the
Teutonic Knights of Prussia, the Hospitallers in
Malta, or the Jesuits in Paraguay ? But there is
scarcely any ground for these imputations, especially
the first, considering that the members of the Order
were scattered all over the earth, and might at the
utmost have attempted to seize the government of
some individual state, as that of Arragon for in-
stance ; but not to carry out a scheme for which
even the forces of Charlemagne had been inadequate.


Tlie Templars. 185

Accusations better founded -weve, that they had
disturbed the kingdom of Palestine by their rivak-y
with the Hospitallers ; had concluded leagues with
the infidels ; had made war upon Cyprus and
Antiochia; had dethroned the King of Jerusalem,
Henry II. ; had devastated Greece and Thrace ; had
refused to contribute to the ransom of Saint Louis ;
had declared for Arragon against Anjou — an un-
pardonable crime in the eyes of France — with many
other accusations. But their greatest crime was
that of being exceedingly wealthy ; their downfall
was therefore determined upon.

151. Plots against the Order. — Philip the Fair
had spent his last sou. The victory of Mons, worse
than a defeat, had ruined him. He was bound to
restore Guyenne, and was on the point of losing
Maiiders. Normandy had risen against a tax
which he had been, obliged to withdraw. The
people of the capital were so opposed to the govern-
ment, that it had been found necessary to prohibit
meetings of more than five persons. How was
money to be obtained under these circumstances ?
The Jews could give no more, because aU they had
had been extorted from them by fines, imprison-
ment, and torture. It was necessary to have re-
course to some grand confiscation, without dis-
gusting the classes on whom the royal power relied,
and leading them to believe, not that booty was
aimed at, but the punishment of evil doers, to the


186 Secret Societies.

greater glory of religion and the triumph of the
law. At the instigation of Philip the Fair libels
were published against the Order of the Knights
Templars, in which the most absurd charges were
made against the members, accusing them of heresy,
impiety, and worse crimes. Great weight was
attached to the statements made against the
Templars by two renegades of the Order, the
Florentine Roffi Dei, and the prior of Montfaucon,
which latter, having been condemned by the Grand
Master to imprisonment for life for his many crimes,
made his escape, and became the accuser of his
former brethren.

152. Atteniions paid to Grand Master. — Bertrand
de Got, who by the influence of the French King
had become Pope under the title of Clement V.,
was now urged by the former to fulfil the last of
the five conditions on which the King had enabled
him to ascend the chair of St. Peter. The first four
conditions had been named, but Philip had reserved
the naming of the fifth till the fit moment should
arrive ; and from his subsequent conduct there can
be no doubt that the destruction of the Order of
the Temple was the condition that was in the King's
mind when he thus alluded to it. The first step
was to get the Grand Master, James de Molay, into
his power. At the request of the Pope that he
would come to France to concert measures for the
recovery of the Holy Land, he left Cyprus and


The Templars. 187

came to Paris in 1307j accompanied by sixty
kniglits, and bringing witL. him 150,000 florins of
gold, and so much silver that it formed the lading
of twelve horses, which he deposited in the Temple
in that city. To luU him into false security,
the King, whose plan was not yet quite ripe for
execution, treated the Grand Master with the
greatest consideration, made him the godfather of
one of his sons, and chose him with some of the
most distinguished persons to carry the pall at the
funeral of his sister-in-law. The following day he
was arrested with all his suite, and letters having
in the meantime been sent to the King's officers in
the provinces on the 13th of October, 1307, to seize
upon aU the Templars, their houses and property
throughout the kingdom, many thousand members
of the Order, knights and serving brothers, were
thus made prisoners.

153. Oha/rges against the Templars. — The
Templars were accused of denying Christ, the
Virgin, and the Saints, and of spitting and
trampling on the cross ; of worshipping in a dark
cave an idol in the figure of a man covered with an
old human skin, and having two bright and lustrous
carbuncles for eyes j of anointing it with the fat of
young children roasted, of looking upon it as their
sovereign God ; of worshipping the devil in the
form of a cat; of burning the bodies of dead
Templars and giving the ashes to the younger


188 Secret Societies.

brethren to eat and drink mingled with their food.
They were charged with various unna,tural crimes,
frightful debaucheries, and superstitious abomina-
tions, such as only madmen could have been guilty
of. To make them confess these crimes they were
put to the torture, not only in France, but also in
England, for Edward II. leagued with Philip to
destroy the Order. Many knights in the agonies
of the torture confessed to the crimes they were
charged with, hundreds expired under it without
making any confession, many starved or killed
themselves in other ways in prison. The trial was
protracted for years ; the persecution extended to
other countries ; in Germany and Spain and Cyprus
the Order was acquitted of all guilt ; in Italy,
England, and France, however, their doom was
sealed, though for a moment there seemed a chance
of their escaping, for the Pope seeing that Philip
and Edward had seized all the money and estates
of the Templars, and seemed inclined to deprive
him of his share of the spoil, began to side with the
Order. But on some concessions being made to
him by the two Kings, he again supported them ;
though in the end we find him complaining of the
small share of the booty that came into his hands.

154. Burning of Knights. — The tedious progress
of the sham trial was occasionally enlivened by the
public execution of knights who refused to acknow-
ledge crimes of which they were not guilty. Fifty-


The Templars. 189

nine gallant knights were led forth, in one day to the
fields at the back of the nunnery of St. Antoine,
where stakes had been driven into the ground^ and
fagots and charcoal collected. The knights were
offered pardon if they would confess ; but they all
refused and were burned by slow fires. At Senlis
nine were burned, and many more in other places.
On all these occasions, as well as in the awful scenes
of the torture-chamberj the Dominican friars were
the mocking witnesses.

155. James de Malay. — The Grand Master re-
mained in prison five years and a half; and there is
no doubt that he was repeatedly put to the torture.
The confession he was said to have made was pro-
bably a forgery. Finally, on the 18th March, 1313,
he and Guy, the Grand Preceptor of the Order, were
burnt by a slow fixe on a small island in the Seine,
'between the royal gardens and the church of the
Hermit Brethren, where afterwards the statue of
Henry IV. was erected, both to the last moment
asserting the innocence of the Order.

156. Mysteries of the Knights Templars. — With-
out laying too much stress on confessions extorted
by violence, or denunciations proceeding from re-
venge, cupidity, and servility, it is manifest that the
Templars, in their ordinances, creed, and rites, had
something which was peculiar and secret, and totally
different from the statutes, opinions, and ceremo-
nies of other religio-military associations. Their


190 Secret Societies.

long sojourn in the East^ in tliat dangerous Palestine
which overflowed with schismatic Greeks and here-
tioSj whoj driven from Constantinople, took refuge
with the Arabs ; their rivalry with the Hospitallers ;
their contact with the Saracen element ; finally, the
loss of the Holy Land, which injured them in the
opinion of the world, and rendered their lives idle-
all these and many other circumstances would act on
this institution in an unforeseen manner, differing
from the tendencies of the original constitution, and
mi-ir up therewith ideas and practices little in accord-
ance with, nay, in total antagonism to, the orthodox
thought that had originated, animated, and strength-
ened this military brotherhood.

167. The Temple and the Church. — The very
name may in a certain manner point to a rebellious
ambition. Temple is a more august, a vaster and
more comprehensive denomination than that of
Church. The Temple is above the Church ; this
latter has a date of its foundation, a local habita-
tion ; the former has always existed. Churches
fall ; the Temple remains as a symbol of the parent-
age of religions, and the perpetuity of their spirit.
The Templars might thus consider themselves
as the priests of that religion, not transitory, but
permanent; and the aspirants could believe that
the Order constituting them the defenders of the
Temple, intended to initiate them into a second and
better Christianity, into a purer religion. Whilst


The Templars. 191

the Temple meant for the Christian the Holy Sepul-
chre, it recalled to the Mussulman the Temple of
Solomon; and the legend which referred to this
latter served as a bond to the rituals of the Free-
masons and other secret societies.

158. The Temple the Symbol of the Holy Spvtit. —
In another sense, the Church may be called the
house of Christ ; but the Temple is the house of the
Holy Spirit. It is that religion of the Spirit which
the Templars inherited from the Manichseans, from
the Albigenses, from the sectarian chivalry that had
preceded them. Defenders of the Sepulchre of
Christ, they remained faithful to their trust, but
considered that He had come on earth only to preach
in the name of the Eternal Spirit, to whom their
principal worship was addressed ; and, like the Gnos-
tics and Manichseans, they celebrated Pentecost rather
than Easter, because in the former the Divine Spirit
itself had descended and spread itself over the face
of the earth. This, in a certain sense, was an am-
plification, and in another a denial, of the Catholic
dogma. The Holy Spirit is the universal con-
science.

159. Doctrines of Templar s.-r-The initiatory prac-
tices, the monuments, even the trial, show this pre-
valence of the religion of the Spirit in the secret
doctrines of the Temple. The Templars drew a great
portion of their sectarian and heterodox tendencies
from the last epic cycle of the middle ages — from that


192 Secret Societies.

period in which chivalry, purified and organized,
became a pilgrimage in search of the San Greal, the
mystic cup that received the blood of the Saviour ;
from that epoch in which the East, in invasions,
armed and unarmed, with the science of the Arabs,
with poetry and heresies, had turned upon the
"West.

160. Initiation. — Much has been said about the
mode of initiation — that it took place at night in the
chapel, in the presence of the chapter, all strangers
being strictly excluded; that licentious rites attended
it, and that the candidate was compelled to deny,
curse, and spit upon the cross — that cross for which
they had shed so much of their own blood, sacrificed
so many of their own Hves. We have seen that this
was one of the chief accusations brought against the
Order. Was there any truth in it ? It seems most
probable there was ; but the practice may be ex-
plained as in the following paragraph.

161. Cursing and Spitting on the Cross Exjolained.
— Such a practice need not surprise us in an age
in which churches were turned into theatres, in
which sacred things were profaned by grotesque
representations, in which the ancient mysteries
were reproduced to do honour, in their way, to
Christ and the saints. The reader may also bear
in mind the extraordinary scenes afterwards repre-
sented in the Miracle Plays. Now the aspirant to
the Templar degree was at first introduced as a


The Templars. 193

sinner, a bad Christianj a renegado. He denied, in
fact, after the manner of St. Peter ; and the renuncia-
tion was frequently expressed by the odious act
of spitting on the cross. The fraternity under-
took to restore this renegado, to raise him all
the higher the greater his fall had been. Thus
at the Festival of the Idiots, the candidate pre-
. sented himself as it were in a state of imbecility
and of degradation, to be regenerated by the Church.
These comedies, rightly understood at first, were in
course of time falsely interpreted, scandalizing the
faithful, who had lost the key of the enigma. The
Templars had adopted similar ceremonies. They
were scions of the Cathari (123) and Manichseans.
Now the Cathari despised the cross (124), and con-
sidered it meritorious to tread it under foot. But
with the Templars this ceremony was symbolical,
as was abundantly proved during their trial ; and
had indeed reference to Peter's thrice-repeated
denial of Christ.

162. The Templars the Opponents of the Pope. —
But there may have been another and special reason
for introducing this ceremony, and ever keeping the
treachery of Peter before the mind of the members of
the Order. We have seen that the Templars, during
and in consequence of their sojourn in the Bast,
attached themselves to the doctrines of the Gnostics
and Manichseans, — as is sufficiently attested, were
'other proofs wanting, by the Gnostic and caba-

o


194 Secret Societies.

listic symbols discovered in and on the tombs of
Knights Templars, — which appeared to them less
perverted than those of the priests of Rome. They
also knew the bad success the proclamation of
Christ's death on the cross had had at Athens, in
consequence of JEschylus' tragedy, "Prometheus
Vinctus," wherein Oceanus denied his friend, when
God made him the sacrifice for the sins of man-
kind, just as Peter, who lived by the ocean, did
with regard to Christ. The Templars, therefore,
came to the conclusion that all these gods, de-
scended from the same origin, were only religious
and poetic figures of the sun ; and, seeing the bad
use made of the doctrines connected therewith by
the clergy, they renounced St. Peter, and became
Johannites, or followers of St. John. There was
thus a secret schism, and according to some writers,
it was this, together with the opposition to Roman
Catholicism which it implied, as weU. as their great
wealth, which was among the causes of their con-
demnation by the court of Rome.

163. Baphomet. — The above explanation may
also afibrd a clue to the meaning and name of the
idol the Templars were accused of worshipping.
This idol represented a man with a long white
beard, and the name given to it was Baphomet, a
name which has exercised the ingenuity of many
critics, but the only conclusions arrived at by any
of them as to its origin and meaning, and deserving


The Templars. 195

. consideratioiij are those of Kieolai, who assuines that
it was derived from (Sacpn^ fAijTio?, the ''baptism of
wisdom," and that the image, which sometimes had
three heads, represented God, the universal Father ;
and that of De Quincey, to which latter I myself
incHne, that the figure, sometimes represented
with two heads only, meant the two chiefs against
whom the Templars directed their hostility, viz.
the Pope and Mahomet, and in the name Baphomet
they intertwisted the names of both, by cutting off
the first two letters of Mahomet, and substituting
Bap or Pap, the first syllable of Papa. Thus by
this figure the Templars expressed their independ-
ence of the Church and the Church creed ; and an
initiated member was called a " friend of God, who
could speak with God, if he chose ; " that is, without
the intermediation of the Pope and the Church.
Hence it becomes sufficiently plain why the secret
w;as looked upon as inviolable, and was so well kept
that we can only conjecture its import.

164. Effects of the Downfal of the Knights of the
Temple. — With the Templars perished* a world ;
chivalry, the crusades, ended with them. Even the
Papacy received a tremendous shock. Symbolism
was deeply affected by it. A greedy and arid
trading spirit rose up. Mysticism, that had sent
sach a glow through past generations, found the
souls of men coldj ihcredulous. The reaction was
violent, and the Templars were the first to fall


196 Secret Societies.

under the rude blows of the West, that longed to
rebel against the Bast, by which it had hitherto been
in so many ways permeated, ruled, and oppressed.
165. Gonnemon mth Freemaso')vry. — The Free-
masons assert a connexion with the Templars ; and
there is a society calling themselves Templars
whose chief seat is at Paris, and whose branches
extend into. England and other countries. They
say that James de Moulay before his death appointed
a successor, and that since then there has been an
unbroken line of Grand Masters down to the pre-
sent time, a list of whichi is given by the Order of
the Temple at Paris. But true Freemasonry, of
which Freemasons, as a rule, know nothing, existed
before the Templars, as I shall show when speaking
of the Masonic Orders. A simple allusion to the
alleged connexion therefore is all that is needed
here.


BOOK VI.

FREE JUDGES.


AUTHORITIES.

Berck. Geschichte der westphalischen VehmgcricliLu.

Bremen, 1814.
KohlraviSch. Deutsche Geschiclite.
Wigani. Das Vehmgericht. Ham. 1825.
Koop. Verfassung der heimlichen GericMe. Gottingen,

1794.
Hiitter. Das Vehmgericht. Leipzig, 1798.
Troos. Sammlung mierkwiirdiger Urkunden fiir die

Geschichte des Vehmgerichts. 1826.
Usener. Die freien und heimlichen Gerichte Westphalens.

Frankfort, 1832.
Be Bock. Histoire du Tribunal Secret. Metz, 1801.
Memoirs of the Secret Societies of Italy. London, 1821.


I.

THE HOLY VEHM.

166.
IBIGIN and object of Instiiution. — In
this book we are introduced to an order
of secret societies altogether different
from preceding ones. Hitherto they
were religious or military in their leading features ;
but those we are now about to give an account of
were judicial in their operationsj and arose during
the period of violence and anarchy that distracted
the German empire after the outlawry of Henry the
Lion, somewhere about the middle of the thirteenth
century. The most important of these were the
secret tribunals of Westphalia, known by the name
of Vehm-Oerichte, or the Holy Vehm. The supreme
authority of the emperor had lost aU influence in the
country ; the imperial assizes were no longer held ;
might and violence took the place of right and
justice ; the feudal lords tyrannized over the people ;
whosoever dared, could. To seize the guilty, who-


200 Secret Societies.

ever they might be, to punish them before they were
aware of the blow with which they were threatened,
and thus to secure the chastisement of crime — such
was the object of the Westphalian judges, and thus
the existence of this secret society, the instrtanent
of public vengeance, is amply justified, and the
popular respect it enjoyed, and on which alone rested
its authority, explained.

167. Officers and Organization. — The Westphalia
of that period comprehended the country between
the Ehine and the Weser; its southern boundary was
formed by the mountains of Hesse, its northern, by
Friesland. Vehm or Fehm is according to Leibnitz
derived from fama, as the law founded on common
fame. But fern is an old German word, signifying
condemnation, which may be the proper radix, of
Vehm. These courts were also called Fehmding,
Freistuhle, " free courts," heimliche Gerichte, heim-
liche Achten, heimliche _ ieschlossene Achten, ''secret
courts," "free bann," and verhotene Gerichte, "prohi-
bited courts." No rank of life excluded a person from
the right of being initiated, and in a Vehmic code dis-
covered at Dortmund, and whose reading was forbid-
den to the profane under pain of death, three degrees
are mentioned ; the affiliated of the first were called
Stuhlherren, " lords justices;" those of the second,
Schoppen (scahini, echevins) j those of the third,
Frohnhoten, "messengers." Two courts were held,
an offenbares Ding, " open court," and the heimliche


The Holy Vehm. 201

Acht, " secret court." The members were called
■Wissende, " the knowing ones/' or the initiated.
The clergy, women and childrenj Jews and heathens,
and as it would appear the higher nobility, were
exempt from its jurisdiction. The courts took cog-
nizance of all offences against the Christian faith, the
Gospel, and the Ten Commandments.

168. Language and Rules of IniUated. — The
initiated had a secret language; at least we may
infer so from the initials S. S. S. G. G., found in
Vehmic writings preserred in the archives of
Herfort, in Westphalia, that have puzzled the
learned, and by some are explained as meaning,
Stock, Stein, Stride, Oras, Grein, stick, stone, cord,
grass, woe. At meals the members are said to have
recognized each other by turning the points of their
knives towards the edge, and the points of their
forks towards the centre, of the table. A horrible
death was prepared for a false brother, and the oaths
to be taken were as fearful as some prescribed ia
the higher degrees of Freemasonry. The affiliated
promised, among other things, to serve the secret
Vehm before anything that is illumined by the
sun or bathed by rain, or to be found between
heaven and earth ; not to inform any one of the sen-
tence passed against him; and to denounce, if neces-
sary, his parents and relations, calling down upon
himself, in case of perjury, the malediction of all, and
the punishment of being hanged seven feet higher


202 Secret Societies.

than all others. One form of oath, contained in the
archives of Dortmund, and which the candidate had to
pronounce kneeling, his head uncovered, and hold-
ing the forefinger and the middle finger of his right
hand upon the sword of the president, runs thus :
" I swear perpetual devotion to the secret tribunal j
to defend it against myself, against water, sun, moon
and stars, the leaves of the trees, all living beings ;
to uphold its judgments and promote their execution.
I promise moreover that neither pain, nor money,
nor parents, nor anything created by God, shall
render me perjured."

169. Procedure. — The first act of the procedure
of the Vehm was the accusation, made by a Frei-
schqppe. The person was then cited to appear ; if
not initiated, before the open court, and woe to the
disobedient ! The accused that belonged to the
order was at once condem.ned ; and the case of the
unaffiliated was transferred to the secret tribunal.
A summons was to be written on parchment and
sealed with at least seven seals ; six weeks and three
days were allowed for the first, six weeks for the
second, and six weeks and three days for the third.
When the residence of the accused was not known,
the summons was exhibited at a cross-road of his
supposed county, or placed at the foot of the statue
of some saint or affixed to the poor-box, not far from
some crucifix or humble wayside chapel. If the
accused was a knight, dweUing in his fortified


The Holy Vehm. 203

castle, the Schoppen were to introduce themselves
at night, under any pretence, into the most secret
chamber of the building and do their errand. But
sometimes it was considered sufficient to affix the
summons, and the coin that always accompanied it,
to the gate, to inform the sentinel of the fact that
the citation had been left, and to cut three chips
from the gate, to be taken to the Freigraf, as proofs.
If the accused appeared to none of the summonses,
he was sentenced in contumacia, according to the
laws laid down in the " Mirror of Saxony ; " the ac-
cuser had to bring forward seven witnesses, not to
the fact charged against the absent person, but to
testify to the well-known veracity of the accuser,
whereupon the charge was considered as proved, and
the Imperial ban was pronounced against the accused,
which was followed by speedy execution. The
sentence was one of outlawry, degradation, and
death; the neck of the convict was condemned to
, the halter, and his body to the birds and wild beasts ;
his goods and pstates were declared forfeited, his
wife a widow, and his children orphans. He was
declared /e/i-m&ar, i. e. punishable by the Vehm, and
any three initiated that met with him were at liberty,
nay, enjoined, to hang him on the nearest tree. If
the accused appeared before the court, which was
presided over by a count, who had on the table
before him a naked sword and a withy halter, he, as
weU as his accuser, could each bring thirty friends


, 204 Secret Societies.

as witnesses^ and be represented by their attorneys,
and also had the right of appeal to the general
chapter of the secret closed tribunal of the Imperial
chamber, generally held at Dortmund. When sen-
tence was once definitively spoken for death, the
culprit was hanged immediately.

170. Execution of Sentences. — Those condemned
in their absence, and who were pursued by at least a
hundred thousand persons, were generally unaware of
the fact. Every information thereof conveyed to him
was high treason, punishable by death ; the emperor
alone, was excepted from the law of secresy ; merely
to hint that " good bread might be eaten elsewhere,"
rendered the speaker liable to death for betraying
the secret. After the condemnation of the accused
a document bearing the seal of the count was given
to the accuser, to be used by him when claiming the
assistance of other members to carry out the sen-
tence), and aU the ioitiated were bound to grant
him theirs, were it even against their own parents.
A knife was stuck in the tree on which the person
had been hanged, to iadicate that he had suffered
death at the hands of the Holy Vehm. If the
victim resisted, he was slain with daggers ; but the
slayer left his weapon in the wound to convey the
same information,

171. Decay of the Institution. — These secret tri-
bunals inspired such terror that the citation by a
WestphaUan free count was even more dreaded


The Holy Vehm. 205

than that of the emperor. In 1470 three free counts
summoned the emperor himself to appear before
them^ threatening him with the usual course in case
of contumacy ; the emperor did not appear, but
pocketed the affiront. By the admission of improper
persons, and the abuse of the right of citation, the
institution — ^which in its time had been a corrective
of public injustice — gradually degenerated. The
tribunals were, indeed, reformed by Rupert; and
the Arensberg reformation and Osnaburgh regula-
tions modified some of the greatest abuses, and re-
stricted the power of the Vehm. Still it continued to
exist, and was never formally abolished. But the
excellent civil institutions of Maximilian and of
Charles V., the consequent decrease of the turbulent
and anarchic spirit, the introduction of the Eoman
law, the spread of the Protestant rehgion, conspired
to give men an aversion for what appeared now to
be a barbarous jurisdiction. Some of the courts
were abolished, exemptions and privileges against
them multiplied, and they were prohibited all sum-
mary proceedings. But a shadow of them remained,
and it was not till French legislation, in 1811, abol-
ished the last free court in the county of Miinstfer,
that they may be said to have ceased to exist. But
it is not many years since that certain citizens in
that locality assembled secretly every year, boasting
of their descent from the ancient free judges.

172. Kissing the Virgin. — There is a tradition


206 Secret Societies.

that one of the methods of putting to death persons
condemned to that fate by the secret tribunals was
the following : — The victim was told to go and kiss
the statue of the Virgin which stood in a subterra-
nean vault. The statue was of bronze and of gigantic
size. On approaching it^ so as to touch it, its front
opened with folding doors and displayed its interior
set full with sharp and long spikes and pointed blades.
The doors were similarly armed, and on each, about
the height of a man's head, was a spike longer than
the rest, the two spikes being intended when the
doors were shut to enter the eyes and destroy them.
The doors having thus opened, the victim by a secret
mechanism was drawn or pushed into the dreadfal
statue, and the doors closed upon him. There he
was cut and hacked by the knives and spikes,
and in about half a minute the floor on which he
stood — which was in reality a trap-door — opened,
and allowed him to fall through. But more horrible
torture awaited him ; for underneath the trap -door
were six large wooden cylinders, disposed in pairs
one below the other. There were thus three pairs.
The cylinders were furnished all round with sharp
blades ; the distance between the uppermost pair of
parallel cylinders was such that a human body could
just lie between them; the middle pair was closer
together, and the lowest very close. Beneath this
horrible apparatus was an opening in which could
be heard the rushing of water. The mechanism


The Holy Vehm. 207

that opened the doors of the statue also set in motion
the cylinders, which turned towards the inside.
Hence when the victim, already fearfully mangled
and blinded, fell through the trap-door he fell be-
tween the upper pair of cylinders and was thus drawn
in between them, his body being cut on all sides by
the knives set round the cyliciders. In this muti-
lated condition, the quivering mass feU between the
second and more closely approachjng pair of cylin-
ders, and was now actually hacked through and
through and thrown on the lowest and closest pair,
where it was reduced to small pieces which fell into
the brook below, and were carried away; thus
leaving no trace of the awful deed that had been
accomplished.


II.

THE BBATI PAOLI.

173.
lEABAOTEB of the Society. — The notices
I of this sectj which existed for many
years in Sicilyj are so scanty, that we
may form a high idea of the mystery ia
which it shrouded itself. It had spread not only over
the island, where it created traditional terror, hut
also over Calabria, where it was first discoyered,
and cruelly repressed and punished by the feuda-
tories, who saw their power assailed by it. A
popular institution, in opposition to the daily arro-
gance of baronial or kingly power, it knew not how
to restraiu itself within the prescribed limits, and
made itself guilty of reprehensible acts, so that it
was spoken of in various ways by its contemporarieB.
174. Tendencies and Tenets. — We have already
seen that it had connections with the Holy Vehm,
and its statutes were somewhat similar to this
tribunal ; but it is to be observed that it proceeded


The Beati Paoli. 209

from that spiritual movement whicli produced the
reaction of the Albigenses, the propaganda of the
Franciscans, and the reformatory asceticism of
the many heretics who roamed through Italy and the
rest of Europe, preaching opposition to Eome, and
organizing a crusade against the fastuous and cor-
rupt clerocracy. Among these heretics we must
remember the abbot Gioachimo, whose prophecies
and strange sayings reappear in the Evangelium
Sternum of John of Parma, a book which was one
of the text-books of the Sicilian judges. ' The
Evangelium, Mternum, a tissue of cabalistic and
Gnostic eccentricities, was, by the Beati Paoli, pre-
ferred to the Old and New Testaments ; they re-
nounced belief in duaHsm, and made God the
creator of evil and death — of evil, because he placed
the mystical apple in the mystical garden ; of death,
because he ordained the deluge, and destroyed
Sodom and Gomorrah.

175. Account of a Sicilian Writer. — Amidst the
general silence of historians, the account of a Sici-
lian writer, which was published only in 1840, and
is still generally unknown, may be considered the
only document concerning this family of Avengers,
who at the extreme end of Italy reproduced the
struggles and terrors of the Westphalian tribunals.
This writer says: — " In the year 1185, at the nup-
tials of the Princess Constance, daughter of the
first King Roger of Sicily, with Henry, afterwards


210 Secret Societies.

Henry VI.j Emperor of Germany, there was dia-
coTered the existence of a new and impious sect,
who called themselves the Avengers, and in their .
noctm-nal assemblies declared every crime lawful
committed on pretence of promoting the public
good. Of this we find an account in an ancient
writer, who does not enter into further details. The
King ordered strict inquiry to be made, and their
chief, Arinulfo di Ponte Corvo, having been arrested,
he was sentenced to be hanged with some of his
most guilty accomplices ; the less guilty were
branded with a red-hot iron. The belief exists
among the vulgar that this secret society of Aven-
gers stiU exists in Sicily and elsewhere, and is
known by the name of the Beati PaoH. Some
worthless persons even go so far as to commend the
impious institution. Its members abounded espe-
cially at Palermo, and Joseph Amatore, who was
hanged on Dec. 17, 1704, was one of them. Giro-
lamo Ammirata, comptroller of accounts, also be-
longed to this society, and suffered death on 27th
April, 1725. Most came to a bad end, if not by
the hands of justice, by the daggers of their asso-
ciates. The famous vetturino, Vito Vituzzo of
Palermo, was the last of the wretches forming the
society of the Beati PaoU. He escaped the gallows,
because he turned in time from his evil courses;
and thenceforward he passed all day in St. Mat-
thew's Church, whence he came to be known by the


The Beati Paoli. 211

Surname of the church, mouse. The preceptors and
masters of these vile men were heretics and apo-
states from the Minor Brethren of St. Prancisj who
pretended that the power of the pontiff and the
priesthood had been bestowed on them by an angelic
revelation. The house where they held their meet-
ings is still in existence in the street cZe' Canceddi,
and I paid it a visit. Through a gateway you pass
into a courtyard, under which is the vault where the
members met, and which receives its light through
a grating in the stone pavement. At the bottom of
the stairs is a stone altar, and at the side a small
dark chamber, with a stone table, on which were
•written the acts and sentences of these murderous
judges. The principal cave is pretty large, sur-
rounded with stone seats, and furnished with niches
and recesses where the arms were kept. The meet-
ings were held at night by candle, light. The de-
rivation of the name, the Beati Paoli (Blessed Pauls) ,
is unknown ; but I surmise that it was adopted by
the sect, because either the founder's name was
Paul, or that he assumed it as that of a saint who,
before his conversion, was a man of the sword, and,
imitating him, was, during the day, a Blessed Paul,
and at night at the head of a band of assassins, like
Paul persecuting the Christians." Such is the
author's account, which I have greatly abbre-
viated, omitting nearly all his invectives against
the sect, of which very little is known, and whose


212


Secret Societies.


existence evidently, in its day, was to some extent
beneficial ; for Sicilians, on suffering any injury or
loss, for which they cannot apply to justice, are
often heard to exclaim : — " Ah, if the Beati Paoli
were still in being ! "


BOOK VII.

ALCHYMISTS.

In our day men are only too much disposed to regard
the views of the disciples and followers of the Arabian
school, and of the late Alchymists, respecting transmuta-
tion of metals, as a mere hallucination of the human mind,
and, strangely enough, to lament it. But the idea of the
variable and changeable corresponds with universal ex-
perience, and always precedes that of the unchangeable.

LlEBIG.

The alchymist he had his gorgeous vision
Of boundless wealth and everlasting youth ;

He strove untiringly, with firm decision,
To turn his fancies into glorious truth.

Undaunted by the rabble's loud derision,
Condemning without reason, without ruth.

And though he never found the pearl he sought,

Yet many a secret gem to light he brought.


ATJTHOEITIBS.

Ledoux. Diotionnaire hermetique. Paris, 1696.

Clef du Grand (Euvre. Paris, 1776.

Goldenfalck. Anecdotes alchimiques. Lyons, 1783.

Schmieder. Geschiohte der Alchemie. Halle, 1832.

Kopp. Geschiclite der Ghemie. Leipsic, 1844.

Figmer. L'Alchimie et les Alchimistes. Paris, 1855.

Levi. La Clef des Grands Mysteres. Paris, 1861.

Lenglet du Fresnoy. Histoire de la Philosophie herme-
tique. Paris, 1742.

Suggestive Inquiry into the Hermetic Mystery. London,
1850.

Bohme. Works passim.

Fludd. Tractatus Theologo-Philosophicns. Oppenheim,
1617.

Neuhnsius. De Fratribus EossB-Crucis.

Semler. The Eosicrucians.

Mackey. Lexicon of Freemasonry.

Be Qvmcey. Works. Supplemental vol. London, 1871.


THE ALCHYMISTS.

176.
^STBOLOGT perhaps Secret Heresy. — The
mystic astronomy of ancient nations
produced judicial astrology^ which,
considered from this point of view, will
appear less absurd. It was the principal study of the
middle ages; and Rome was so violently opposed to
it because, perhaps, it was not only heresy, but a
wide-spread reaction against the Church of Eome.
It was chiefly cultivated by the Jews, and protected
by princes opposed to the papal supremacy. The
Church was not satisfied with burning the books,
but burned the writers; and the poor astrologers, who
spent their lives in the contemplation of the heavens,
mostly perished at the stake.

177. Process hy which Astrology degenerated. —
As it often happens that the latest disciples attach


216 Secret Societies.

tEemselves to the letter, understanding literally
what in the first instance was only a fiction, taking
the mask for a real face, so we may suppose astro-
logy to have degenerated and become false and
puerile. Hermes, the legislator of Egypt, who was
revealed in the Samothracian mysteries, and often
represented with a ram by his side — a constellation
initiating the new course of the equinoctial sun, the
conqueror of darkness — was revived in astrological
practice ; and a great number of astrological works,
the writings of Christian Gnostics and Neo-Plato-
nists, were attributed to him, and he was considered
the father of the art from him called hermetic, and
embracing astrology and alchymy, the rudimentary
efibrts of two sciences, which at first overawed igno-
rance by imposture, but, after labouring for centu-
ries in the dark, conquered for themselves glorious
thrones in human knowledge.

178. Scientific Value of Alchymy. — Though al-
chymy is no longer believed in as a true science, in
spite of the prophecy of Dr. Girtanner, of Gottingen,
that in the nineteenth century the transmutation of
metals will be generally known and practised, it wiE
never lose its power of awakening curiosity and
seducing the imagination. The aspect of the mar-
vellous which its doctrines assume, the strange re-
nown attaching to the memory of the adepts, and
the mixture of reality and ULusion, of truths and
chimeras which it presents, wiU always exercise a


The Alchymists. 217

powerful fascination upon many minds. And we
ought also to remember that every delusion that has
had a wide and enduring influence must have been
founded^ not on falsehood, but on misapprehended
truth. This aphorism is especially applicable to
Alchymy, which, in its origin, and even in its name,
is identical with chemistry, the syllable al being
merely the definite article of the Arabs. The re-
searches of the Alchymists for the discovery of the
means by which transmutation might be effected
were naturally suggested by the simplest experi-
ments in metallurgy and the amalgamation of
metals ; it is very probable that the first man who
inade brass thought that he had produced imperfect
gold.

179. The Tincture. — The transmutation of the '
base metal was to be effected by means of the trans-
muting tincture, which, however, was never found.
But it- exists for aU that ; it is the power that turns a
green stalk into a golden ear of corn, that fills the "
sour unripe apple with sweetness and aroma, that
has turned the lump of charcoal into a diamond.
All these are natural processes, which, being allowed
to go on, produce the above results. Now, aU base
metals may be said to be imperfect metals, whose
progress towards perfection has been arrested, the
active power of the tincture being shut up in them
in the first property of nature (11) . If a man could
take hold of the tincture universally diffused in


218 Secret Societies.

nature, and by its help assist the imprisoned tincture
in the metal to stir and become active, then the
transmutation into gold, or rather the manifestation
(11) of the hidden Hfe, could be effected. But
this power or tincture is so subtle that it cannot
possibly be apprehended ; yet the Alchymists
did not seek the non-existing, but only the unat-
tainable.

180. Aims of Alchymy. — The three great ends
pursued by Alchymy were the transmutation of base
metals into gold by means of the philosopher's
stone ; the discovery of the panacea, or universal
medicine, the elisir of HfeJ and the universal solvent,
which, being applied to any seed, should increase
its fecundity. AH these three objects are attain-
able by means of the tincture — a vital force, whose
body is electricity, by which the two latter aims
have to some extent been reached, for electricity
will both cure disease and promote the growth of
plants. Alchymy was then in the beginning the
search after means to raise matter up to its first
state, whence it was supposed to have fallen. Gold
was considered, as to matter, what the ether of the
eighth heaven was as to souls ; and the seven metals,
each called by the name of one of the seven planets,
the knowledge of the seven properties really implied
being lost — the Sun, gold j Moon, silver ; Saturn,
lead ; Venus, tin ; Mercury, iron ; Mars, mixed


The Alchymists. 219

metal; Jupiter, copper/ — formed the ascending
scale of purification, corresponding with the trials
of the seven caverns or steps. Alchymy was thus
either a bodily initiation, or an initiation into the
mysteries, a spiritual Alchymy; the one formed a
veil of the other, wherefore it often happened that
in workshops where the vulgar thought the adepts
occupied with handicraft operations, and nothing
sought but the metals of the golden age, in reality,
no other philosopher's stone was searched for than
the cubical stone of the temple of philosophy; in
fine, nothing was purified but the passions, men,
and not metals, being passed through the crucible.
Bohme, the greatest of mystics, has written largely
on the perfect analogy between the philosophical
work and spiritual regeneration.

181. Sistory of Alchymy. — Alchymy flourished
in Egypt at a very early age, and Solomon was said
to have practised it. Its golden age began with
the conquests of the Arabs in Asia and Africa, about
the time of the destruction of the Alexandrian
Library. The Saracens, credulous, and intimate
with the fables of talismans and celestial influences,
eagerly admitted the wonders of Alchymy. In the
splendid courts of AlmansorandHaroun al Easchid,

• New arrangement : Venus, copper ; Mercury, mixed
metal ; Mars, iron ; Jupiter, tin.


220 Secret Societies.

the professors of the hermetic art found patronage,
disciples, and emolument. Nevertheless, from the
above period until the eleventh century the only
alchymist of note is the Arabian Geber, whose proper
name was Abu Mussah Djafar al Sofi. His attempts
to transmute the base metals into gold led him to
several discoveries in chymistry and medicine. He
was also a famous astronomer, but — sic transit gloria
mundif- — he has descended to our times as the
founder of that jargon known by the name of gib-
berish ! The Crusaders brought the art to Europe,
and about the thirteenth century Albertus Magnus,
Eoger Bacon, and Raymond Lully appeared as its
revivers. Henry VI. of England engaged lords,
nobles, doctors, professors, and priests to pursue
the search after the philosopher's stone ; especially
the priests, who, says the king — (ironically ?) — ^having
the power to convert bread and wine into the body
and blood of Christ, may well convert an impure
into a perfect metal. The next man of note that
pretended to the possession of the lapis philoso-
phorum was Paracelsus, whose proper name was
Philip Aureolus Theophrastus Paracelsus Bom-
bagtus, of Hohenheim, and whom his followers called
" Prince of Physicians, Philosopher of Kre, the
Trismegistus of Switzerland, Reformer of Alchymis-
tical Philosophy, Nature's faithful Secretary, Master
■ of the Elixir of Life and Philosopher's Stone, Great
Monarch of Chymical Secrets." He introduced the


The Alchemists. 221

term aleahest (probably a corruption of the German
words "all geist," "all spirit ")j to express tlie
universal solvent. The Eosicrncians (184)^ of whom
Dr. Dee was the herald, next laid claim to alchy-
mistical secrets, and were, in fact, the descendants
' of the Alchymists ; and it is for this reason chiefly
that these latter have been introduced into this
work, though they cannot strictly be said to have
formed a secret society. The last of the English
Alchymists seems to have been a gentleman of the
name of Kellerman, who as lately as 1828 was living
at Lilley, a village between Luton and Hitchin.
There are, no doubt, at the present moment men
engaged in the search after the philosopher's stone ;
we patiently wait for their discoveries.

182. Specimen of Alchymistic Language. — After
Paracelsus the Alchymists divided into two classes :
those that pursued useful studies, and those that
took up the visionary fantastical side of Alchymy,
writing books of mystical trash which they fathered
on Hermes, Aristotle, Albertus Magnus, and others.
Their language is now unintelligible. One brief
specimen may suffice. The power of transmutation,
called the Green Lion, was to be obtained in the
' following manner : — " In the Green Lion's bed the
sun and moon are bom, they are married and beget
a king ; the king feeds on the lion's blood, which is
the king's father and mother, who are at the same
time his brother and sister. I fear I betray the


222 Secret Societies.

secret, which I promised my master to conceal in
dark speech from every one who does not know how
to rule the philosopher's fire." Our ancestors must
have had a great talent for finding out enigmas if
they were able to elicit a meaning from these mys-
terious directions; still the language was under-
stood by the adepts, and was only intended for them.
Many statements of mathematical formulae must
always appear pure gibberish to the uninitiated into
the higher science of numbers; still, these state-
ments enunciate truths well understood by the
mathematician. Thus, to give but one instance,
when Hermes Trismegistus, in one of the treatises
attributed to him, directs the adept to catch the
flying bird and to drown it, so that it fly no more,
the fixation of quicksilver by a combination with
gold is meant.

188. Personal Fate of the Alchymists. — The Alchy-
mists, though chemistry is greatly indebted to them,
and in their researches they stumbled on many a
valuable discovery, as a rule led but sad and chequered
Lives, and most of them died in the utmost poverty,
if no worse fate befell them. Thus one of the most
famous Alchymists, Bragadino, who lived in the last
quarter of the sixteenth century, who obtained large
sums of money for his pretended secret from the
Emperor of Germany, the Doge of Venice, and
other potentates, who boasted that Satan was his
slave — two ferocious black dogs that always ac-


The Alchymists.


223


companied him being demons — was at last hanged
at Mimichj the cheat with which he performed the
pretended transmutation having been discoTered.
The two dogs were shot under the gallows. But
even the honest Alchymists were doomed — ■

To lose good days that might be better spent*
To waste long nights in pensive discontent ;
To speed to-day, to be put back to-morrow,
To feed on hope, to pine with fear and sorrow ;
To fret their souls with crosses and with cares.
To eat their hearts through comfortless despairs.
Unhappy wights, born to disastrous end,
That do their lives in tedious tendance spend !


II.

EOSICRUCIANS.

184.
iEBITS of the Bosicrucians. — A halo of
poetic splendour surrounds the Order
of the Rosicrucians ; the magic lights
of fancy play around their graceful day-
dreams, while the mystery in which they shrouded
themselves lends an additional charm to their
history. But their brilliancy was that of a meteor.
It just flashed across the realms of imagination and
intellectj and Tanished for ever ; not, however,
without leaving behind some permanent and lovely
traces of its hasty passage, just as the momentary
ray of the sun, caught on the artist's lens, leaves a
lasting image on the sensitive paper. Poetry and
romance are deeply indebted to the Rosicrucians
for many a fascinating creation. The literature of
every European country contains hundreds of pleas-
ing fictions, whose machinery has been borrowed
from their system, of philosophy, though that itself


Rosicrucians. 225

has passed away; and it must be admitted that
many of their ideas are highly ingenious, and attain
to such heights of intellectual speculation as we
find to have been reached by the sophists of India.
Before their time, alchymy had sunk down, as a
rule, to a groTelling delusion, seeking but temporal
advantages and occupying itself with earthly dross
only ; the Rosicrucians spiritualized and refined it
by giving the chimerical search after the philoso-
pher's stone a nobler aim than the attainment of
wealth, namely, the opening of the spiritual eyes,
whereby man should.be able to see the supernal
world, and be filled with an inward light to illumine
his mind with true knowledge.

185. Origin of Society doubtful. — The society is
of very uncertain origin. It is aflBrmed by some
writers that from the fourteenth century there
existed a society of physicists and alchymists who
laboured in the search after the philosopher's stone ;
and a certain Mcolo Bamaud undertook journeys
through Germany and France for the purpose of
establishing a hermetic society. From the preface
of the work, " Echo of the Society of the Eosy
Cross," it moreover follows that in 1597 meetings
were held to institute a secret society for the promo-
tion of alchymy. Another indication of the actual
existence of such a society is found in 1610, when
the notary Haselmeyer pretended to have read in a
MS. the Fama Fraternitatis, comprising all the

Q


226 Secret Societies.

laws of the Order. Four years afterwards appeared
a small work, entitled " General Reformation of
the World/' which in fact contains the Fama Fra-
termtatis, where it is related that a German,
Christian Rosenkreuz, founded such a society in
the fourteenth century, after, having learnt the sub-
lime science in the East. Of him it is related, that
when, in 1378, he was travelling in Arabia, he was
called by name and greeted by some philosophers,
who had never before seen him; from them he learned
many secrets, among others that of prolonging life.
On his return he made many disciples, and died at
the age of 150 years, not because his strength
failed him, but because he was tired of life. In
1604 one of his disciples had his tomb opened, and
there found strange inscriptions and a MS. in
letters of gold. The grotto in which this tomb was
found, by the description given of it, strongly re-
minds us of the Mithraic Cave. Another work, the
"Confessio Fraternitatis Rosae Crucis," contains an
account of the object and spirit of the Order. It is
a mixture of absurdity and fanaticism, and the most
plausible solution is that the work is a satire on the
philosophical foUies of the time. It was written by
Valentine Andrea of Herrenberg. But as the
armorial bearings of the Andrea family were a St.
Andrew's cross and four roses, he may also have
meant to intimate that the Order of the Rosy Cross
was an Order founded by himself.


Rosicrucians. 227

186. Origin of Name. — The name is generally
derived from the supposed founder of the Order,
Eosenkreuz, Eose Cross, j but according to others
it is the compound of ros, dew, and erux, the cross.
Crux is supposed mystically to represent LUX, or
light, because the figure X exhibits the three letters
LVX j and light, in the opinion of the Rosicrucians,
is that which produces gold, whilst dew (ros) with
the alchymists was the most powerful solvent of
gold. Others say that the Order took its name
from the rose, and the epopt was called Rosa,
whilst their ritual affirmed that the rose is the
emblem of the Son of God, who by the Evangelist
is compared to that flower. But we have already
seen in the account of the Bleusinian Mysteries
what importance was attached to the rose, and that
Apuleius makes Lucius to be restored to his primitive
form by eating roses; and the '^Eomance of the
Eose'^ was considered by the Eosicrucians as one of
the most perfect specimens of Provencal literature,
and as the allegorical chef Slaemmre of their sect.
It is undeniable that this was coeval with chivalry,
and had from thenceforth a literature rich in works,
ia whose titles the word Rosa is incorporated; as
the Rosa Philosophorimb, of which no less than ten
occur in the ArUs AwriferoB quam Ohemiam voeant
(Basilea, 1610). The connection of the Rosicru-
cians with chivalry, the Troubadours, and the Albi-
genses, cannot be denied. Like these, they swore the


228 Secret Societies.

same hatred to Eome, like these they called Catholi-
cism the religion of hate. They solemnly declared
that the Pope was Antichrist, and rejected pontifical
and Mahomedan dogmas, styling them the beasts
of the East and West.

187. Statements concerning themselves. — They
pretended to feel neither hunger nor thirst, nor to
be subject to age or disease ; to possess the power of
commanding spirits and attracting pearls and pre-
cious stones, and of rendering themselves invisible.
They stated the aim of their society to be the resto-
ration of all the sciences and especially of medicine;
and by occult artifices to procure treasures and
riches sufB.cient to supply the rulers and idnga with
the necessary means for promoting the great re-
forms of society then needed. They were bound to
conform to five fundamental laws: 1. Gratuitously
to heal the sick. 2. To dress in the costume of
the country ia which they Hved. 3. To attend
every year the meeting of the Order. 4. When
dying to choose a successor. 5. To preserve the
secret one hundred years.

188. Poetical Fictions of Eosicrucians. — These are
best known from the work of Joseph Francis Borri,
a native of Milan. Having preached against the
abuses of the Papacy, and promulgated opiaions
which were deemed heretical, he was seized by
order of the Inquisition and condemned to perpetual
imprisonment. He died in the Castle of St.


Bosicrucians. 229

Angelo in 1695. The work referred to is entitled
" The Key of the Cabinet of Signer Borrij" and is
in substance nothing but the cabalistic romance
entitled " The Count de Gabalis/^ published in
1670 by the Abbe de Villars. What we gather
■from this work is, that the Rosicrucians discarded
for ever all the old tales of sorcery and witchcraft
and communion with the devil. They denied the
existence of incubi and succubi, and of all the
grotesque imps monkish brains had hatched and
superstitious nations beHeved in. Man, they said,
was surrounded by myriads of beautiful and bene-
ficent beings, all anxious to do him service. These
beings were the elemental spirits ; the air was
peopled with sylphs, the water with undines or
naiads, the earth with gnomes, and the fire with
salamanders. These the Rosicrucian could bind to
his service and imprison in a ring, a mirror, or a
stone, and compel to appear when called, and render
answers to such questions as he chose to put. All
these beings possessed great powers, and were un-
restrained by the barriers of space or matter. But
man was in one respect their superior : he had an
immortal soul, they had not. They could, however,
become sharers in man's immortality, if they could
inspire one of that race with the passion of love
towards them. On this notion is founded the
charming story of "Undine;" Shakespeare's Ariel
is a sylph ; the " Rape of the Lock," the Masque


230 Secret Societies.

of " Comus/' the poem of " Salamandrine/' all
owe their machinery to the poetic fancies of the
Eosicrucians. Among other things they taught
concerning the elemental spirits, they asserted that
they were composed of the purest particles of the
element they inhabited, and that in consequence of
having within them no antagonistic qualities, being
made of but one element (11) they could Kve for
thousands of years. The Eosicrucians further held
the doctrine of the signatura rerum, by which they
meant that everything in this visible world has
outwardly impressed on it its inward spiritual cha-
racter. Moreover they said that by the practice of
virtue man could even on earth obtain a glimpse of
the spiritual world, and above all things discover
the philosopher's stone, which however could not
be found except by the regenerate, for " it is in close
communion with the heavenly essence.'' According
to them the letters INEI, the sacred word of the
Order of Eose Croix, signified Igne Natura Be-
generando Integrat.

189. Progress and Extinction of Eosicrucians. —
After having excited much attention throughout
Germany, the Eosicrucians endeavoured to spread
their doctrines in France, but with little success.
In order to attract attention they secretly posted
certain notices in the streets of Paris, to this effect :
" We, the deputies of the College of the Eosy Cross,
visibly and invisibly dwell in the city. We teach


Rosicrucians. 231

without books or signs every language that can
draw men from mortal error," &c. &c. A work by
Gabriel Rainde gave them the final blow. Peter
Mormio, not having succeeded in reviving the
society in Holland, where it existed in 1622, pub-
lished at Leyden, in 1630, a work entitled Arcana
Natures Secretissima, wherein he reduced the secrets
of the brethren to three, viz. perpetual motion, the
transmutation of metals, and the universal medicine.
The German Rosicrucians always called themselves
the depositories and preservers of the Masonic
dogma, which they asserted to have been confided
to them by the BngUsh in the time of King Arthur.
Faithful to the Johannite tradition they called their
grand masters John I., John 11., and so on. At
first they had only three degrees besides the three
symboUo degrees of freemasonry. The sect was
also known in Sweden and Scotland, where it had
its own traditions, claiming to be descended from
the Alexandrian priesthood of Ormuzd, that em-
braced Christianity in consequence of the preaching
of St. Mark, founding the society of Ormuzd, or of
the " Sages of Light." This tradition is founded
on the Manichseism preserved among the Coptic
priests, and explains the seal impressed on the
ancient parchments of the Order, representing a
Kon placing his paw on a paper, on which is written
the fe,mous sentence, " Pax tibi, Marce EvcmgeUsta
meus ;" from which we might infer that Venice had


232 Secret Societies.

some connection with, tlie spreading of that tradition.
In fact, Nicolai tells us that at Venice and Mantua
there were Eosicrucians, connected with those of
Brfurtj LeipsiCj and Amsterdam. And we also
know that at Venice congresses of alchymists were
held ; and the connection between these latter and
the Rosicrucians has already heen pointed out.
N^evertheless the Scotch and Swedish Eosicrucians
called themselves the most ancient, and asserted
Edward, the son of Henry III., to have been initiated
into the Order in 1196, by Eaymond Lully, the
alchymist. The Fraternity of the Eosy Cross is
still flourishing in England, the members being
selected from the Masonic body ; it has a governing
Senate in London, with a Metropolitan College,
while Provincial Colleges are established at Bristol,
Manchester, Cambridge, Oxford, Edinburgh and
Glasgow.

190. Transition to Freemasons. — Prom the Tem-
plars and Rosicrucians the transition to the Free-
masons is easy. With these latter alchymy receives
a wholly symbolical explanation ; the philosopher's
stone is a figure of human perfectibility. In the
Masonic degree called the " Key of Masonry," or
" Knight of the Sun," and the work " The Blazing
Star," by Tschudi, we discover the parallel aims of
the two societies. From the " Blazing Star " I
extract the following portion of the ritual : " When
the hermetic philosophers speak of gold and


Rosicrucians. 233

silver, do they mean common gold and silver ? " — ,
" No, because common gold and silver are dead,
whilst the gold and silver of the philosophers are
full of life." — " What is the object of Masonic in-
quiries ? " — " The art of knowing how to render
perfect what nature has left imperfect in man/' —
" What is the object of philosophic inquiry ? " —
" The art of knowing how to render perfect what
nature has left imperfect in minerals, and to in-
crease the power of the philosopher's stone." — " Is
it the same stone whose symbol distinguishes our
first degrees ? " — " Yes, it is the same stone which
the Freemasons seek to polish." So also the
Phoenix is common to hermetic and Masonic initia-
tion, and the emblem of the new birth of the
neophyte. Now we have already seen the meaning
of this figure, and its connection with the sun.
We might multiply comparisons to strengthen the
parallelism between hidden arts and secret societies,
and trace back the hermetic art to the mysteries of
Mithras, where man is said to ascend to heaven
through seven steps or gates of lead, brass, copper,
iron, bronze, silver, and gold.


BOOK VIII.
FREEMASONS.

"Wtat mote it be ?

King Sewy FI. of Englamd.


AUTHOEITIBS.

-Alhm. Les Pranos-Magons. Paris, 1862.
Preston. Illustrations of Masonry.
Gadicke. Preimaurer Lexicon.
Machey. Lexicon of Freemasonry.
BeghelUwi. Esprit du Dogma de la Pranc-Magonnerie.
Bcwruel. Histoire du Jacobinisme.
BoWson. Proofs of a Conspiracy. London, 1799.
Lamrie. History of Freemasonry.
Keldmann. Les trois plus anoiens Monnm.ents de la Con-

fratemite magonnique allemande.
Lewmng. Encyclopaedie der Preimanrerei.
Bagon. Cours philosopHque des Initiations anciennes

et modernes. Paris, 1841.
Bermott. The AHman Eezon.
Oliver. Theocratic Philosophy of Freemasonry. London,

1840.
Pocket Companion of History of Freemasonry. London,

1764.
OUver. History of Initiations. London, 1829.
Eutchmson. Spirit of Freemasonry.
Oarlile. Manual of Freemasonry. London.
Fellows. Mysteries of Freemasonry. London, 1860.
Lenoir. La Prano-MaQonnerie rendue ^ sa veritable

Origine.
Olavel. Histoire pittoresque de la Franc-MaQOnnerie.

Paris, 1844.
Bagon. Le Tuilier General. Paris, 1861.
BSdares. Etudes sur les Trois Grades de la MaQonneiie.

Paris, 1859.
Eckert. Die Freimaurerei in ihrer wahren Bedentong.

Lifege, 1854.


Authorities. 237

Kwufmcmn et OJierpin. Histoire philosophique de la

Franc-Magonnerie. Lyons, 1850.
De la Tierce. Histoire des Franc-Magons. 1745.
De Widehind. Geschichte der Preimaurerei ia Deutsch-

land.
Lindner. Mac-Benach. Leipsic, 1819.
Bode. Einfluss der Freimaurer. Leipsic, 1788.
- R&gle magonnique S, rUsage des Loges reunies et recti-

fiees de Convent- General de Wilhelmsbad. Paris,

1829.
La Verite sur les Societes secretes en Allemagne. Paris,

1819.
Forgwme. De I'lnfluenoe de I'Esprit philosophique et de

celle des Societes secretes. Paris, 1858.
Mourner. De I'lnfluence attribuee aux Philosophes, airx

Francs-MaQons et aux Illumines sur la Kevolution de

France. Paris, 1801.
Vie de Joseph Balsamo. Paris, 1791.
Memoires authentiques pour servir k I'Histoire de Cagli-

ostro. Strasburg, 1786.
Scdnt-ffeUsB. Aventures de Cagliostro. Paris, 1854.
L' Adoption de la Magonnerie des Femmes. 1775.
8cmnt-Vidor. La Vraie Magonnerie d' Adoption. London,

1779.
Bagon. Manuel Complet de la Maponnerie des Dames.

Paris, 1860.
Procedures de I'lnquisition de Portugal centre les Francs-

Magons. 1740.
Eybert. Les Martyrs de la Franc-Magonnerie en Espagne.

Paris, 1854.
Levesque. Apergu g&n&al des prinoipales Sectes magon-

niques. Paris, 1821.
Dubreml. Histoire des Francs-Magons, Brussels, 1838.
Bedwrride. De I'Ordre magonnique de Misraim. Paris,

1845.


238 Secret Societies.

Vernhea. Defense de I'Ordre de Misraim.

Bairgmet. Discours but I'Histoire de I'Ordre du Temple.

1833.
Vassal. Oours oomplet de MaQonnerie. Paris, 1832.
Abraham. Miroir de la Verite.
Aaxvry. La Magonnerie dn Grand Orient de France.

Paris, 1857.
Baxot. Tableau historique, philosophique, et moral de la

Magonnerie en Prance.
La Madre loggia Dante Alighieri. Turin, 1863.
Programma Massonioo adottato daUa Massoneria. Italiana

Eicostituta. 1863.
Organisation du Travail par I'Liitiation magonnique.

Paris, 1844.
Marcomis. Table de la Loi des Prancs-Magons. Paris, 1862.
Preemasons' Quarterly Eeview. London.
MoreoM. L'TJnivers magonnique. Paris, 1837.
Buplads. La Vraie Lumiere ; Journal des Prancs-Magons.

Versailles, 1851-2.
Cherpin. Eevue magonnique. Lyons.
Feigne. Eevne magonnique. Paris.
J^^ge. Le Globe ; Archives generales des Sooietes secretes,

non politiques. Paris.
The Secrets of Freemasonry Eevealed. London, 1759.
A Master-Key to Freemasonry. London, 1760.
L'Ordre des Prancs-Magons trahi. Amsterdam, 1771.
Les plus secrets Mysteres de la Frano-Magonnerie. Jeru-
salem (Paris), 1774.
Fatti ed Argomenti intomo alia Massoneria. G«nova,

1862.
Masonry the same all over the World. Boston, 1830.


THE LEGEND OF THE TEMPLE.

191.
INGE8TBY of Hiram Abiff.— Solomon,
having determined on the erection of
the Temple, collected artificers, di-
vided them into companies, and put
them under the command of Adoniram or Hiram
Abiff, the architect sent to him by his friend and
ally Hiram, King of Tyre. According to mythical
tradition, the ancestry of the binlders of the mystical
temple was as follows : One of the Elohim, or primi-
tive genii, married Eve and had a son called Cain ;
whilst Jehovah or Adonai, another of the Elohim,
created Adam and united him with Eve to bring
forth the fanaily of Abel, to whom were subjected
the sons of Cain, as a punishment for the trans-
gression of Eve, Cain, though industriously cul-
tivating the soil, yet derived little produce from it,
whilst Abel leisurely tended his flocks. Adonai
rejjected ' the gifts and sacrifices of Cain, and


240 Secret Societies.

stirred up strife between the sons of fcte EloTiiTn,
generated out of fire, and the sons formed out of
the earth only. Cain killed Abel, and Adonai pur-
suing his sons, subjected to the sons of Abel the
noble family that invented the arts and dififiised
science. Enoch, a son of Cain, taught men to
hew stones, construct edifices, and form civil socie-
ties. Irad and Mehujael, his son and grandson,
set boundaries to the waters and fashioned cedars
into beams. Methusael, another of his descen-
dants, invented the sacred characters, the books of
Tau and the symbolic T, by which the workers
descended from the genii of fire recognized each
other. Lamech, whose prophecies are inexplicable
to the profane, was the father of Jabal, who first
taught men how to dress camels' skins ; of Jubal,
who discovered the harp; of Naamah, who discovered
the arts of spinning and weaving; of Tubal- Cain,
who first constructed a furnace, worked in metals,
and dug subterranean caves in the mountains to
save his race during the deluge; but it perished
nevertheless, and only Tubal- Cain and his son, the
sole survivors of the glorious and gigantic family,
came out alive. The wife of Ham, second son of
Noah, thought the son of Tubal-Cain handsomer
than the sons of men, and he became progenitor of
Nimrod, who taught his brethren the art of hunting,
and founded Babylon. Adoniram, the descendant
of Tubal-Cain, seemed called by God to lead the


The Legend of the Temple. 241

militia of the free men, connectiag the sons of fire
with the sons of thought, progress, and truth.

192. Hiram, Solomon, and the Queen of Sheba.
— By Hiram was erected a marvellous building,
the Temple of Solomon. He raised the golden
throne of Solomon, most beautifully wrought, and
built many other glorious edifices. But, melancholy
amidst all his greatness, he lived alone, understood
and loved by few, hated by many, and among others
by Solomon, envious of his genius and glory. Now
the fame of the wisdom of Solomon spread to the
remotest ends of the earth ; and Balkis, the Queen
of Sheba, came to Jerusalem, to greet- the great king
and behold the marvels of his reign. She found
Solomon seated on a throne of gilt cedar wood,
arrayed in cloth of gold, so that at first she seemed
to behold a statue of gold with hands of ivory.
Solomon received her with every kind of festive
preparation, and led her to behold his palace and
then the grand works of the temple ; and the queen
was lost in admiration. The king was captivated
by her beauty, and in a short time ofiered her his
hand, which the queen, pleased at having conquered
this proud heart, accepted. But on again visiting
the temple, she repeatedly desired to see the archi-
tect who had wrought such wondrous things.
Solomon delayed as long as possible presenting
Hiram Abiff to the queen, but at last he was obHged
to do so. The mysterious artificer was brought before

E


242 Secret Societies.

hev, and cast on the queen a look that penetrated
her very heart. Having recovered her composure,
she questioned and defended him against the iUwill
and rising j ealousy of the king . When she wished to
see the countless host of workmen that wrought at
the temple, Solomon protested the impossibility of
assembling them all at once; but Hiram, leaping on a
stone to be better seen, with his right hand described
in the air the symbolical Tau, and immediately the
men hastened from all parts of the works into the
presence of their master; at this the queen won-
dered greatly, and secretly repented of the promise
she had given the king, for she felt herself in love
with the mighty architect. Solomon set himself to
destroy this affection, and to prepare his rival's
humiliation and ruin. For this purpose, he employed
three fellow- crafts, envious of Hiram, because he
had refused to raise them to the degree of masters, on
account of their want of knowledge and their idleness.
They were Fanor, a Syrian and a mason ; Amru, a
Phoenician and a carpenter ; and Metusael, a He-
brew and a miner. The black envy of these three
projected that the casting of the brazen sea, which
was to raise the glory of Hiram to its utmost height,
should turn out a failure. A young workman,
Benoni, discovered the plot and revealed it to
Solomon, thinking that sufficient. The day for the
casting arrived, and Balkis was present. The doors
that restrained the molten metal were opened, and


The Legend of the Temple. 243

torrents of Kqind fire poured into the vast mould
wherein the brazen sea was to assume its form. But
the burning mass ran over the edges of the mould,
and flowed like lava over the adjacent places. The
terrified crowd fled from the advancing stream of
fire. Hiram, calm, like a god, endeavoured to arrest
its advance with ponderous columns of water, but
without success. The water and the fire mixed, and
the struggle was terrible ; the water rose ia dense
steam and fell down in the shape of fiery rain,
spreading terror and death. The dishonoured
artificer needed the sympathy of a faithful heart ; he
sought Benoni, but ia vain; the proud youth perished
in endeavouring to prevent the horrible catastrophe
when he found that Solomon had done nothing to
hinder it.

Hiram could not withdraw himself from the scene .
of his discomfiture. Oppressed with grief, he heeded
not the danger, he remembered not that this ocean of
fire might speedily engulph him ; he thought of the
Queen of Sheba, who came to admire and congratu-
late him on a great triumph, and who saw nothing
but a terrible disaster. Suddenly he heard a
strange voice coming from above, and crying,
" Hiram, Hiram, Hiram ! " He raised his eyes and
beheld a gigantic human figure. The, apparition
continued : " Come, my son, be without fear, I have
rendered thee incombustible ; cast thyself into the
flames." Hiram threw himself into the furnace.


244 Secret Societies.

and where others would have found death, he tasted
ineffable delights ; nor could he, drawn by an irresis-
tible force, leave it, and asked him that drew him
into the abyss : " Wlither do you take me ? " " Into
the centre of the earth, into the soul of the world,
into the kingdom of great Cain, where liberty reigns
with him. There the tyrannous envy of Adonai
ceases ; there can we, despising his anger, taste the
fruit of the tree of knowledge ; there is the home of
thy fathers." " Who then am I, and who art thou ? "
" I am the father of thy fathers, I am the son of
Lamech, I am Tubal- Cain."

Tubal- Cain introduced Hiram into the sanctuary of
fire, where he expounded to him the weakness of
Adonai and the base passions of that god, the enemy
of his own creatiu-e whom he condemned to the
inexorable law of death, to avenge the benefits the
genii of firje had bestowed on him. Hiram was led into
the presence of the author of his race, Cain. The
angel of light that begat Caiu was reflected in the
beauty of this son of love, whose noble and generous
mind roused the envy of Adonai. Cain related to
Hiram his experiences, sufferings, and misfortunes,
brought upon him by the implacable Adonai.
Presently he heard the voice of him who was the
offspring of Tubal- Caiu and his sister Naamah : "A son
shall be born unto thee whom thou shalt indeed not
see, but whose numerous descendants shall perpe-
tuate thy race, which, superior to that of Adam, shall


The Legend of the Temple. 245

acquire the empire of the world ; for many centuries
they shall consecrate their courage and genius to the
service of the ever ungratefulrace of Adam, but at last
the best shall become the strongest, and restore on the
earth the worship of fire. Thy sons, invincible in thy
name, shall destroy the power of kings, the ministers
of the Adonai's tyranny. Go, my son, the genii of
fire are with thee ! " Hiram was restored to the earth.
Tubal- Cain before quitting him gave him the hammer
with which he himself had wrought great things,
and said to him : " Thanks to this hammer and the
help of the genii of fire, thou shaltspeedily accomplish
the work left unfinished through man's stupidity
and malignity.'' Hiram did not hesitate to test
the wonderful efficacy of the precious instrument,
and the dawn saw the great mass of bronze cast.
The artist felt the most Hvely joy, the queen exulted.
The people came running up, astounded at this secret
power which in one night had repaired everything.

One day the queen, accompanied by her maids,
went beyond Jerusalem, and there encountered
Hiram, alone and thoughtful. The encounter was
decisive, they mutually confessed their love. Had-
Had, the bird who filled with the queen the office
of messenger of the genii of fire, seeing Hiram in
the air make the sign of the mystic T, flew around
his head and settled on his wrist. At this Sarahil,
the nurse of the queen, exclaimed : " The oracle is
fulfilled. Had-Had recognizes the husband which


246 Secret Societies.

the genii of fire destined for Balkis, whose love alone
she dare accept ! " They hesitated no longer, but
mutually pledged their vows, and deliberated how
Balkis could retract the promise given to the king.
Hiram was to be the first to quit Jerusalem; the
queen, impatient to rejoin him in Arabia, was to elude
the vigilance of the king, which she accomplished by
withdrawing from his finger, while he was overcome
with wine, the ring wherewith she had plighted her
troth to him. Solomon hinted to the fellow- crafts
that the removal of his rival, who refused to give
them the master's word, would be acceptable unto
himself; so when the architect came into the temple
he was assailed and slain by them. Before his
death, however, he had time to throw the golden
triangle which he wore round his neck, and on which
was engraven the master's word, into a deep well.
They wrapped up his body, carried it to a solitary
hiU and buried it, planting over the grave a sprig
of acacia.

Hiram not having made his appearance for seven
days, Solomon, against his incUnation, but to satisfy
the clamour of the people, was forced to have Tiim
searched for. The body was found by three masters,
and they, suspecting that he had been slain by the
three fellow-crafts for refusing them the master's
word, determined nevertheless for greater security
to change the word, and that the first word acci-
dentally uttered on raising the body should thence-


The Legend of the Temple. 247

forth, be the word. In the act of raising it, the skin
came off the body, so that one of the masters ex-
claimed " Macbenach ! " (the flesh is off the bones !)
and this word became the sacred word of the master's
degree. The three fellow-crafts were traced, but
rather than fall into the hands of their pursuers, they
committed suicide and their heads were brought to
Solomon. The triangle not having been found on
the body of Hiram it was sought for and at last dis-
covered in the well into whicb the architect had cast
it. The king caused it to be placed on a triangular
altar erected in a secret vault, built under the most
retired part of the temple. The triangle was further
concealed by a cubical stone, on which had been
inscribed the sacred law. The vault, the existence
of which was only known to the twenty- seven elect,
was then walled up.


II.


ORIGIN. TRADITIONS.


193.
HE First Masons. — AU nations^ aU states,
aU corporations, to increase their power
and deduce from above their raison
d'etre, attritute to themselves a very
ancient origin. This wish must be aU the stronger
in a society altogether ideal and moral, living the life
of principles, which needs rather to seem to be, not
coeval with, but anterior and superior to all others.
£_Hence the claim set up by Freemasonry of being,
not contemporary with the creation of man, but
with that of the world; because light was before
man, and prepared for him a suitable habitation,
and light is the scope and symbol of FreemasonryT]
Now in the Introduction (6, 7) I have stated that
there was from the very first appearance of man on
the earth a highly favoured and civilized race,
possessing a full knowledge of the laws and proper-
ties of nature, and which knowledge was embodied


Origin. Traditions. 249

in mystical figurea and schemes^ such as were
deemed appropriate emblems for its preservation
and propagation. These figures and schemes are
preserved in Masonry, though their meaning is no
longer understood by the fraternit^T] I shall en-
deavour in these pages as much as possible to teach
masons the real truths hidden under the symbols
and enigmatical forms, which without a key appear
but as absurd and debasing rites and ceremonies.
[The aim of all the secret societies of which accounts
have been as yet or will be given in this work,
except of those which were purely political, was to
preserve such knowledge as stiU survived, or to
fecovet what _had been lost.' And since Free-
masonry is, so to speak, the resume of the teachings
of aU those societies, dogmas in accordance with
one or mor& of those taught in the ancient mysteries
and other associations are to be found in Masonry ;
hence also it is impossible to attribute its origin to
one or other specific society preceding it. /]i^ree-
masonry is — or rather ought to be — the compen-
dium of aU primitive and accumulated human
knowledge.

194. Periods of Freemason/ry. — Masonic writers
generally divide the history of the Order into two
periods, the first comprising the time from its
assumed foundation to the begiuning of the last
century, during which the Order admitted only
masons, i.e. operative masons and artificers in


250 Secret Societies.

some way connected with architecture. The second
or present period^ they denominate the period of
Speculative Masonry^ when the Order no longer
chooses its members only amongst men engaged in
the raising of material structures, but receives into
its ranks all who are willing to assist in builduig a
spiritual temple, the temple of universal harmony
and knowledge. Yet persons not working masons
had ere then been admitted, for the records of a
Lodge at Warrington, as old as 1648, note the
admission of Colonel Mainwaring and the great
antiquary Ashmole. Charles I., Charles 11., and
James II. also were initiated. JjMSut from what has
been said above, it follows that true Masonry always
was speculative, and that to deduce its origin from
the ancient Dionysiac or any other kindred college
is sheer nonsense. The name ''masonic" was
adopted by the society on its reconstruction in the
last century, because the brotherhood of builders
who erected the magnificent ' cathedrals and other
buildings that arose during the middle ages, had
lodges, degrees, landmarks, secret signs, and pass-
words, such as the builders of the temple of Solomon
are said to have made use of. The Freemasons have
also frequently been said to be descended from the
Kiiights Templars, and thus to have for their object
to avenge the destruction of that Order, and so to
be dangerous to Church and State ; yet this asserv'
tion was repudiated as early as 1535 in the " Charter j


Origin. Traditions. 251

of Cologne," whet-ein the Masons call themselves
the Brethren of St. John, because St. John the
Baptist was the forerunner of the Light. According
to the same document the name of Freemasons was
first given to the Brethren chiefly iu Flanders,
because some of them, had been instrumental in
erecting iu the province of Haiaault hospitals for
persons suffering from St. Vitus' s dance. And
though some etymologists pretend the name to be
derived from massa, a club, with which the door-
keeper was armed to drive away uninitiated in-
truders, we can only grant this etymology on the
priaciple enunciated by Voltaire, that in etymology
vowels go for very little, and consonants for nothing
at all.

/, ~~195. Freemasonry derived from many Sowrces. —
,But considering that Freemasonry is a tree the roots
of which spread through so many soils, it follows that
traces thereof must be found in its fruit ; that its
language and ritual should retain much of the
I various sects and iastitutions it has passed through
(before arriving at their present state, and in
Masonry we meet with Indian, Egyptian, Jewish,
'and Christian ideas, terms, and symbols.


III.


RITES AND CUSTOMS.


196.

IIST of Bites. — Anciently, that is, before
the rise of modem Masonry at the be-
ginning of the last century, there was
but one rite, that of the " Ancient, Free
and Accepted Masons," or blue or symbolic Ma-
sonry ; but vanity, fancy or interest soon led to the
introduction of many new rites or modifications of
the three ancient degrees. The following are the
names of the rites now practised in Europe and
America : —

I. Tork Rite, or Craft Masonry, of which an
account will be given (205) . — In America it
consists of seven degrees : — The first three as in this
country; 4. Mark Master; 5. Past Master; 6.
Most Excellent Master ; 7. Holy Royal Arch. All
these also obtain in this country ; the Royal Arch,
being the most important, wiU be treated of in
full (211).


Rites and Customs. 253

II. French or Modern Eite. — It consists of seven
degrees : — The first threethe sameas in Craft Ma-
sonry; 4. Elect; 6. Scotch Master ; 6. Ejoight of
the Bast; 7. Eose Croix. They are all astro-
nomical.

III. Ancient and Accepted Scotch Eite. — It was
organized in its present form in France early in
the last centuryj though it deriyes its title from
the claim of its founders, that it was originally in-
stituted in Scotland. It is, next to the York rite,
the most widely diffused throughout the masonic
world. The administrative power is vested in
Supreme Grand Councils, and the rite consists of
thirty-three degrees, of which the 30th, Grand Elect
Knight of Kadosh, is the most interesting, and par-
ticulars of which will be given under a separate
head (214) .

IV. The Ancient and Primitive Eite of Masonry
or Order of Memphis : Privileges, Priaciples, and
Prerogatives. — The Ancient and Primitive Eite of
Masonry works thirty-three degrees, divided iato
three sections, embracing modern, chivalric, and
Egyptian Masonry, as the latter was worked on the
continent last century. The first section teaches
morality, symbols, and philosophical research ; and
contains the degrees to Eose Croix (11-18°). The
second section teaches science, philosophy, and
political myth, and developes the sympathetic senses ;
it contains the degrees of a senate of hermetic phi-


254 Secret Societies.

losophers to grand inspector (18-33") . Tte third
section contains tlie Egyptian degrees, and occupies
itself with high philosophy and religious myth. The
Order rewards merit by sis decorations : — 1st, The
Grand Star of Sinus ; 2nd, the Decoration of Alidee;
3rd, the Decoration of the Grand Comm.ander of the
third series ; 4th, the Lybic Chain ; 5th, the Deco-
ration of Bleusis ; 6th, the Star of Merit in bronze,
for the reward of literary merit and presence of mind
and bravery either in Masons or non-Masons. These
orders of chivalry, and aU other high degrees of
Masonry, are specially authorized by the laws of the
Grand Lodge of England in the "Articles of Union"
of 1813. The Order recognizes the degrees of all
other rites, when legitimately obtained, so that a
brother who has the Eose Croix, Kadosh, or Grand
Inspector, or any other degree analogous to this
rite under any other authority, may visit and par-
ticipate in the same degrees of ancient and primitive
~ Masonry.

It admits brethren of every and all political and
religious creeds, for by the American revision of
1865, the Hindoo, the Parsee, the Jew, the Trini-
tarian and Unitarian Christian, the Mahommedan,
&c., may attend its sublime ceremonies and lectures
without any sacrifice of principle or of private con-
vction, the rite breathing only pure Masonry —
charity, love, and mutual tolerance — whilst adoriag
the Sublime Architect of the Universe, inculcating


Rites und Customs. 255

the immortality of the soul, and endless happiness
for the good brother.

It embraces a far more extensive ritual of work-
able degrees than any other rite, every one of its
thirty-three degrees having its appropriate and
elaborate ceremonial easily arranged for conferment,
and its titles are purged of ridiculous pretensions.

Its government is strictly representative, as in
our own political constitution. The 32° and 31°
are the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th officers of the Chapter,
Senate, and Council, and form the Mystic Temple
and Judicial Tribunal, the presiding officer, or
Grand Master of Light, having the thirty-third de-
gree to enable him to represent the province in the
Sov. Sane. (33-95°) or ruling body.

The Order relies more fully upon masonic worth,
ability, and learning, than social standing and
mere monetary qualifications, and seeks to extend
masonic knowledge, justice, and morality. It
levies only a small capitation fee upon each member
admitted, to be hereafter devoted to charity and
good works.

It admits Master Masons only in good standing
under some constitutional Grand Lodge, and pro-
hibits all interference ,with Craft Masonry, upon
which its own thirty ceremonies form, and are in-
tended to constitute, the most valuable and learned
system of lectures extant ; cultivating charity, toler-
ance, and brotherly love in the Masonic Order, and


256 Secret Societies.

entering into no entangling alliances wliicli too often
prove their destruction.

Its watchword — Defence, not Defiance — main-
taining the individual right of any brother to join
any outside organization of Masonry suited to his
religious or political opinions, and protesting against
all interference of sectarian organizations.

V. Philosophic Scotch rite.

VI. Primitive Scotch rite, practised in Belgium.

VII. Ancient Reformed rite,
vni. Pessler's rite.

IX. Rite of the Grand Lodge of the Three Globes
at Berlin.

X. Rite of Perfection.

XI. Rite of Misraim (223) .

XII. Rite of the Order of the Temple.

XIII. Swedish rite.

XIV. Reformed rite.

XV. Schroeder's rite.

XVI. Rite of Swedenborg (see Book ix.) .

XVII. Rite of Zinnendorf. Count Zinnendorf,
physician of the emperor Charles VI., invented this
rite, which was a modification of the Eluminism of
Avignon, adding to it the mysteries of Sweden-
borg. His system consisted of seven degrees,
divided into three sections: 1. Blue Masonry; 2.
Red Masonry j 3. Capitular Masonry. The rite
was never introduced into this country.

197. Masonic Customs.-— Sonne masonic peculiari-
ties may conveniently be mentioned here. Free-


Rites and Customs. 257

masons frequently attend in great state at the
laying of the foundation stones of public buildings ;
they follow a master to the grave^ clothed with all
the paraphernalia of their respective degrees ; they ^
date from t he year o f Ught. The Knights oT'^Iog
Sun, flie 28th degree~of"^e'^cotch rite, acknow-
ledge no era, but always write their date with seven
noughtsj 0,000,000. No one can be admitted into
the masonic order before the age of 21, but an ex-
ception is mg-de in this country and in France in
favour of the sons of Masons, who may be initiated
at the age of eighteen. Such a person is called a
Lewis iu England, and a Louveteau in Prance. This
latter word signifies a young wolf; and the reader
will remember that in the mysteries of Isis the
candidate was made to wear the mask of a wolf's
head. Hence a wolf and a candidate in these
mysteries were synonymous. Macrobius, in his
" Saturnalia,'' says that the ancients perceived a rela-
tionship between the sun, the great symbol of those
mysteries, and a wolf; for as the flocks of sheep and
cattle disperse at the sight of the wolf, so the flocks
of stars disappear at the approach of the sun's light.
And in Greek Xuxoj means both the sun and a
wolf. There is a family of fellow-crafts that still
derive their name from this idea. The adoption
of the louvetecm into the lodge takes place with
a ceremony resembling that of baptism. The

s


258


Secret Societies.


temple is covered with flowers, incense is burnt,
and the godfather is enjoined not only to provide
for the bodily wants of the new-bom member, but
also to bring him up in the school of truth and
justice. The child receives a new name, generally
that of a virtue, such as Veracity, Devotion, Bene-
ficence ; the godfather pronounces for him the oath
of apprentice, in which degree he is received into
the Order, which, in case he should become an
orphan, supports and establishes him in Hfe.

198. Masonic Alphabet. — The masonic alphabet
preserves the angular character of primitive alphar
bets. Thirteen characters (9 -\- 4) compose the
masonic system of writing. Hence all the sounds
can only be represented by means of points, in the
following manner : —


a.l


B.3.


e-f


gr-n


i.l


mM


oj>


c[.r


s.t


The letter a is written I ; the same sign with
a dot in it. A, means 6. The sign ^ means m,
and with a dot ^ , v. Masonic ^ abbreviations
are always indicated by three dots, placed trian-
gularly; thus, brother is abbreviated B .-. Lodge
is written L .-. or Q.*.; in the plural LL .-. or
[5I.-. Our common alphabet has an equally simple


Eites and Customs.


259


origin, as well as the Arabic numerals ; they are all
contained in the figure —


A, bie7>QI, tZ, ido7-L]> E, R, G, H, I,

4 K L, M, N, a P. a K, X, T,

UV,X,Y, Z,a I, Z, 2, 4 b,

4. y, ^, ^.


IV.

THE LODGE.

199.
\NTEBIOB Arrangement of Lodge. — The
arrangement of the lodge varies and
■win vary according to periods and
degreeSj hut certain general rules are
always followed in its construction. In an ancient
French catechism the lodge is thus described : The
lodge must have a vaulted ceiling, painted blue and
covered with golden stars, to represent the heavens.
The floor is called a mosaic floor ; the term ''mosaic "
being derived from Moses ; i. e. " drawn from the
water," because by it§ variegated colours it repre-
sents the earth as covered with flowers again after
the withdrawal of the waters of the Nile. There are
three windows, — one east, one west, and a third
south. There must also be two or three ante-
chambers, so that the profane may catch no gHmpse
of what is going on in the lodge; and if some
stranger should nevertheless intrude, the master


The Lodge. 261

exclaims, " It rains ! " and the lodge is ipso facto
dissolyed. The lodge should be always hung with
black ; the brethren take their places according to
their rank ; the grand master in the east, the master
in the south, and the novices at the north. WTien
an apprentice is inade, the lodge is brightly illumi-
nated. The grand master, seated in his place, wears
on his neck, appended to a large ribbon, a small
square and compasses; before him stands a table
on which lie the Gospel of St. John and a small
hammer. At his side are the two stewards, the first
of whom wears a level and the second a plumb of
gold or silver. The masters and fellow-crafts stand
around with the apprentices, all wearing white aprons
of lamb's skin, and each carrying a naked sword.
On the floor are designed figures, representing the
steps that led to Solomon's temple, and the tiwo
pillars Jachin and Boaz, but which in reality sym-
bolize the summer and winter solstices, the piUars
of Hercules, the two pillars of Seth. Above are
seen the sun, moon, and a large star. In the midst
of the floor is a coffin, in which lies a man apparently
dead, with his face turned'u|)ward and covered with
his white apron smeared with blood, one hand resting
on his breast, and the other extended towards the
knee. In the corners of the room are substances
easily combustible, such as sulphur, to kindle a fire
instantaneously. This apparatus is somewhat altered
when a fellow-craft or a master is to be made.


262 Secret Societies.

200. Modern Lodge. — The modem lodge is a large
square hall, always, if possible, situated due east and
west. Upon a dais ascended by three steps, opposite
to the door of ingress, is seated the worshipM
master; the altar is placed in the centre on four
steps. A sky-blue canopy, dotted with stars, and
having above it the shining triangle with the sacred
name inscribed thereiu, covers the throne. To the
left of the canopy is seen the sun, and to the right
the moon. Another ornament is the blazing star,
and the point within a circle, symbolizing the sun
or the universe. A chest or ark also forms part of
the masonic furniture. It represents the ark that
was carried in the processions of ancient Egypt, and
contained seeds of various plants, a winnowing fan,
and Osiridis pudendum. To the west, at the sides
of the door of ingress, stand two pillars of bronze,
whose capitals represent pomegranates, and bearing
on their fronts the initials J. and B. (Jachin and
Boaz) . The senior and junior wardens sit near the
two columns, having before them a triangular table,
covered with masonic emblems. Around the lodge
there are ten other pillars connected by an architrave
with the two pillars above mentioned. On the altar
are placed a Bible, a square, a pair of compasses, and
swords J three candelabra with long tapers are placed,
one at the east at the foot of the steps, the second
at the west, near the first warden, and the third at
the south. The room is surrounded with benches


The Lodge. 263

for the members. In the lodges called Scotchj and
in English and American lodges, the canopy that
covers the master's throne is of crimson silk. In
the United States, the worshipful master wears a cap
adorned with black feathers and a large cockade of
the same colour. The senior and junior wardens
are seated in niches with fringed drapery, and
wear, like heralds, staves of ebony sculptured like
pillars.

201. Officers. — Besides the master and the
wardens, who are figuratively called the three lights,
the lodge has other officers — the orator, secretary,
treasurer, master of the ceremonies, keeper of the
seals, architect, steward, captain of the host, princi-
pal sojourner, inner and outer guard or tyler, and
others. Every official occupies a place assigned to
him, and has his proper jewels and badges, like the
Egyptian, Hebrew, and Greek priests. Thus beside
the jewels already mentioned, the treasurer wears
cross keys ; the secretary, cross pens ; the senior
■deacon, a square and compass, with a sun in the
centre ; the junior deacon, a square and compass,
with a moon in the centre ; the steward, a cornu-
copia ; the tyler, cross swords, &c. The names of
most of the officers sufficiently indicate their duties ;
those that do not will be explained as they>occur.

202. Openmg the Lodge. — The meetings are
generally held at night. The worshipful master,
striking the altar with his maUet, "opens the


264 Secret Societies.

labours/' and after having ascertained that the
lodge is tyledj he turns to the junior warden and
says: " Brother junior warden, your constant place
in the lodge ? " " In the south." " Why are you
placed there ? " " To mark the sun at its meridian,
to call the brethren from labour to refreshment, and
from refreshment to labour, that profit and pleasure
may be the result." " Brother senior warden, your
constant place in the lodge ? " " In the west."
"Why are you placed there ?" " To mark the setting
sun; to close the lodge by the command of the
worshipftd master, after seeing that every one has
his just dues.^' "Why is the master placed in the
east ? " " As the sun rises in the east to open and
enliven the day, so the worshipftil master is placed
in the east to open and enlighten his lodge, to
employ and instruct the brethren." " At what hour
are masons accustomed to begin their labours?"
" At mid-day." " What hour is it, brother junior
warden ? '' " It is mid-day." " Since this is the
hour, and all is proved right and just, I declare the
lodge open." The purely astronomical bearing of
all this is self-evident, but will be more folly dis-
cussed hereafter.


^^^^


GENUINE AND SPUEIOUS MASONET.

203.
f^ISTINGTION between Gewwine and Spu-
rious Masonry. — Modern Freemasonry
is divided into genuine and spurious. The
former embraces the degrees of Entered
Apprentice, Fellow- Craft, and Master Mason, which
are known by the comprehensive name of Sym-
bolic, and also of Blue Masonry, because the de-
corations are of that colour, which Blue Masonry
is the only Masonry acknowledged by the Grand
Lodge of England ; the latter term is applied to
aU other degrees. Without the Eoyal Arch degree
Blue Masonry is incomplete, for we have seen in
the Legend of the Temple that, through the murder
of Hiram, the master's word was lost j that word is
not recovered in the master's degree, its substitute
only being given ; hence that lost word is recovered
in the Eoyal Arch degree. Blue Masonry, in fact,
answers to the lesser mysteries of the ancients.


266 Secret Societies.

■wherein in reality nothing but the exoteric doctrines
were revealed ; whilst spurious Masonry^ or all sub-
sequent degrees — for no one can be initiated into
them who has not passed through the first three
degrees — answers to the greater mysteries.

204. Some Bites only deserve Special Mention. —
It would be an useless and unprofitable task to fully
detail all the ceremonies practised in the lodges of
Blue Masonry; and I shall, therefore, confine myself
to giving such particulars of the three degrees as
are most characteristic of the institution. As to
spurious Masonry, its almost countless degrees
form an incoherent medley of opposite principles,
founded chiefly on Christian traditions and institu-
tions, orders of knighthood, contested theological
opinions, historical events ; in fact, every important
event or institution has afforded models for masonic
mimicry. Of such as have been distinguished
either by a philosophical spirit or influential action
on the progress of mankind I shall speak at, some
length. The reader will, however, bear in mind
that the ceremonies vary in different lodges and
different countries, and that much that follows must
be taken as typical, being modified according to
local and other conditions and circumstances.


VI.


CEREMONIES OP INITIATION.


THE APPEENTICB, FELLOW- CEAFT, AND MASTER MASON.


205.
IEBEM0NIE8 of ImUaUon. The Appren-
tice. — The novice that is to be initiated
into the first or apprentice degree is
led into the lodge building by a stranger,
and introduced into a reinote chamber, where he is
left alone for a few minutes. He is then deprived of
all metal he has about him ; his right knee, and
sometimes his left side, are uncovered, and the
heel of his left shoe is trodden down. His eyes are
bandaged, and he is led into the closet of reflec-
tion, where he is told to stay without taking off
the bandage, until he hears three knocks. At the
signal, on uncovering his eyes he beholds on the
walls hung with black inscriptions Hke the following :
— " If idle curiosity draw thee hither, depart \" " If
thou be afraid of being enlightened concerning thy


268 Secret Societies.

errors^ it profits thee not to stay here." " If thou
value human distinctions, go hence ; here they are
not known." After a deal of palaver between the
brother who introduces the novice and the master,
the candidate, having his eyes again bandaged and
a cord passed round his neck, is introduced into
the middle of the brethren, his guide pointing a
naked sword to his breast. He is then questioned
as to his object in coming hither, and on answering
that he comes to' be initiated into the secrets of
Masonry, he is led out of the lodge and back again
to confuse him. A large square frame covered
with paper, such as circus-riders use, is then brought
forward and held by two brethren. The guide then
asks the master : " What shall we do with the pro-
fane ?" To which the master replies : " Shut him up
in the cave." Two brethren seize the postulant and
throw him through the paper-screen into the arms
of two other brethren who stand ready to receive
him. The folding doors, hitherto left open, are
then shut with great noise, and by means of an iron
ring and bar the closing with massive locks^ is
imitated, so that the candidate fancies himself shut
up in a dungeon. Some time then elapses iu sepul-
chral silence. All at once the master strikes a
smart blow, and orders the candidate to be placed
beside the junior warden, and to be made to kneel.
The master then addresses several questions to him,
and instructs him on his duties towards the Order.


Ceremonies of Initiation. 269

The candidate is then .offered a beverage, with the
iatimation that if any treason lurks in his heart,
the drink will turn to poison. The cup containiag
it has two compartments, the one holding sweet,
the other bitter water ; the candidate is then taught
to say : " I bind myself to the strict and rigorous
observance of the duties prescribed to Freemasons ;
and if ever I violate my oath" — (here his guide
puts the sweet water to his lips, and having
drunk some, the candidate continues) — " I consent
that the sweetness of this drink be turned into
bitterness, and that its salutary effect become for
me that of a subtle poison." The candidate is then
made to drink of the bitter water, whereupon the
master exclaims : "What do I see ? What means
the sudden alteration of your features ? Perhaps
your conscience belies your words ? Has the sweet
drink already turned bitter ? Away with the pro-
fane ! This oath is only a test ; the true one comes
after." The candidate persisting nevertheless in his
determination, he is led three times round the
lodge ; then he is dragged over broken chairs,
stools, and blocks of wood ; this trial over, he is told
to mount the " endless stairs," and having, as he
supposes, attained a great height, to cast himself
down, when he only falls a few feet. This trial
is accompanied by great noise, the brethren striking
on the attributes of the order they carry in then-
hands, and uttering all kinds of dismal shouts. As


270 Secret Societies.

a further trial, he is then passed through fire,
rendered harmless by well-known conjuring tricks ;
his arm is slightly pricked, and a gurgling noise
being produced by one of the brethren, the candi-
date fancies that he is losing much blood. Finally,
he takes the oath, the brethren standing around
him with drawn swords. The candidate is then led
between the two pillars, and the brethren place
their swords against his breast. The master of the
ceremonies loosens the bandage without taking it
off. Another brother holds before Tiim a lamp that
sheds a brilliant light. The m^aster resumes ;
" Brother senior warden, deem you the candidate
worthy of forming part of our society ? " " Yes."
" What do you ask for him ? " " Light." « Then
let there be Hght ! " The master gives three blows
with the maUet, and at the third the bandage is
taken off, and the candidate beholds the light,
which is to symbolize that which is to fill his under-
standing. The brethren drop their swords, and
the candidate is led to the altar, where he kneels,
whilst the master says : " In the name of the Grand
Architect of the universe, and by virtue of the
powers vested in me, I create and constitute thee
masonic apprentice and member of this lodge."
Then striking three blows with his mallet on the
blade of the sword, he raises the new brother, girds
him with the apron of white Iambus skin, gives him
a pair of white gloves to be worn in the lodge, and


Ceremonies of Initiation. 271

another to be given to the lady he esteems best.
He is then again led between the two pillars, and
received by the. brethren as one of them.

206. Geremonies of Imtiation. The Fellow- Or aft.
— The second degree of symbolic JFreemasonry
is that of fellow-craft. The apprentice, who aaka ,
for an increase of salary, is not conducted to the
lodge like the profane by an unknown brother,
nor are his eyes bandaged, because the Hght was
made for him, but moves towards the lodge hold-
ing in his hand a rule, one of whose ends he
rests on the left shoulder. Having reached the
door, he gives the apprentice's knock, and having
been admitted and declared the purpose for which
he comes, he .five times perambulates the lodge,
whereupon he is told by the master to perform his
last apprentice's work. He then pretends to square
the rough ashlar. After a deal of instruction, very
useless and pointless, he takes the oath, in which
he swears to keep the secrets entrusted to him.
Then there follows some more lecturing on the part
of the master, chiefly on geometry, for which
Masons profess a great regard, and to which the
letter G seen in the lodge within an irradiation or
star is said to refer.

207 . Ceremony of IniUaUon and Story of Mvram's
Murder. The Master Mason. — At the reception
of a master, the lodge or " middle chamber "
is draped with black, with death's heads, skele-


272 Secret Societies.

tons, and cross bones painted on the walls. A
taper of yellow wax, placed in the east, and
a dark lantern, formed of a skull having a light
within, which shines forth through the eye-holes,
placed on the altar of the most worshipful master,
give just sufficient light to reveal a coffin, wherein
the corpse is represented either by a lay-figure,
a serving brother, or the brother last made a
master. On the coffin is placed a sprig of acacia,
at its head is a square, and at its foot, towards the
east, an o^en compass. The masters are clothed in
black, and wear large azure sashes, on which are
represented masonic emblems, the sun, moon, and
seven stars. The object of the meeting is said to
be the finding of the word of the master that was
slain. The postulant for admission is introduced
after some preliminary ceremonies, having his two
arms, breasts, and knees bare, and both heels slip-
shod. He is told that the brethren assembled aire
mourning the death of their grand master, and
asked whether perhaps he was one of the mur-
derers ; at the same time he is shown the body or
figure in the coffin. Having declared his innocence
of any share in that crime, he is informed that he
will on this occasion have to enact the part of
Hiram (192), who was slain at the building of
Solomon's temple, and whose history he is about to
be told. The brother or figure in the coffin has in
the meantime been removed, so that when the


The Master Mason. 273

aspirant looks at it again, lie finds it empty. The
story of the murder of Hiram is then related. But
the deed is not, as in the Legend of the Temple
(192), attributed to Solomon's jealousy, but simply
to Hiram's refusal to communicate the master's
word to three fellow-crafts. The various incidents
of the story are scenicaUy enacted on the postulant.
"Hiram," the master contiuues, ''having entered the
temple at noon, the three assassins placed them-
selves at the east, west, and south doors, and Hiram
refusing to reveal the word, he who stood at the east
door cut Hiram across the throat with a twenty-four-
inch gauge. Hiram flew to the south door, where
he received similar treatment, and thence to the
west door, where he was struck on the head with a
gavel, which occasioned his death." The applicant,
* at this part of the recital, is informed that he too
must undergo trials, and is not to sink under the
influence of terror, though the hand of death be
upon him. He is then struck on the forehead and
thrown down, and shams a dead man. The master
continues : " The ruffians carried the body out at the
west door, and buried it at the side of a hiU " — ^here
the postulant is placed in the coffin — " in a grave,
on which they stuck a sprig of acacia to mark the
spot. Hiram not making his appearance as usual,
Solomon caused search to be made for him by
twelve trusty feUow-crafts that were sent out, three
east, three west, three south, and three north. Of

T


274 Secret Societies.

the three who went east^ one being weary, sat down
on the brow of a hill, to rest himself, and in rising
caught hold of a twig " — ^here a twig of that plant is
put into the hand of the aspirant lying in the coflBn
— " which coming up easily, showed that the ground
had been recently disturbed, and on digging he and
his companions found the body of Hiram. It was
in a mangled condition, having lain fourteen days,
whereupon one of those present exclaimed Mae-
benach ! which means ' the flesh is off the bones,'
or 'the brother is smitten,' and became the
master's word, as the former one was lost through
Hiram's death ; for though the other two masters,
Solomon, and Hiram king of Tyre, knew it, it
could only be communicated by the three grand
masters conjointly. The covering of the grave
being green moss and turf, other bystanders ex-*
claimed, Muscus domus, Dei gratia ! which accord-
ing to Masonry is, "Thanks be unto God, our
master has got a mossy house ! " The exclamation
shows that the Hebrew builders of Solomon's
temple possessed a faitiiliar knowledge of the Latin
tongue ! The body of Hirani could not be raised
by the apprentice's or fellow-craft's grip, but only
by the master's, or the lion's grip, as it is called.
AH this is then imitated by the master raising the
aspirant in the coffin, who is then told the word,
aigns, and grips, and takes the oath.

208. The Legend explained. — Taken literally, the


The Master Mason. 275

story of Hiram would offer nothing so extraordi-
nary as to deserve to be commemorated after three
thousand years throughout the world by solemn
rites and ceremonies. The death of an architect is
not so important a matter as to have more honour
paid to it than is shown to the memory of so many
philosophers and learned men who have lost their
lives in the cause of human progress. But history
knows nothing of him. His name is only mentioned
in the Bible^ and it is simply said of him that he
was a man of understanding and cunning in working
in brass. Tradition is equally silent concerning
him. He is remembered nowhere except in Free-
masonry ; the legend, in fact, is purely allegorical,
and may bear a twofold interpretation, cosmological
and astronomical.

Cosmologically, we find represented therein the
dualism of the two antagonistic powers, which is
the leading feature of aU Eastern initiations.- The
dramatic portion of the mysteries of antiquity is
always sustained by a deity or man who perishes as
the victim of an evil power, and rises again into a
more glorious existence. In the ancient mysteries,
we constantly meet with the record of a sad event,
a crime which plunges nations into strife and grief,
succeeded by joy and exultation.

Astronomically, again, the parallel is perfect, and
is in fact only another version of the legend of
Osiris. Hiram represents Osiris, i. e., the sun. The


276 Secret Societies.

assassins place themselves at the west, south, and
east doors, that is, the regions illuminated by the
sun ; they bury the body and mark the spot with
a sprig of acacia. Twelve persona play an im-
portant part in the tragedy, viz. the three murder-
ers (fellow-crafts), and nine masters. This num-
ber is a plain allusion to the twelve signs of the
zodiac, and the three murderers are the three inferior
signs of winter. Libra, Scorpio, and Sagittarius.
Hiram is slain at the west door, the smi descends
in the west. The acacia of Freemasonry is the
plant found in all the ancient solar allegories, and
symbolizing the new vegetation to be anticipated
by the sun's, resurrection. The acacia being
looked upon by the ancients as incorruptible, its
twigs were preferred for covering the body of the
god-man to the myrtle, laurel, and other plants
mentioned in the ancient mysteries. ' Hiram's body
is in a state of decay, having lain fourteen days;
the body of Osiris was cut into fourteen pieces (47) .
But according to other statements, the body was
found on the seventh day ; this would allude to the
resurrection of the sun, which actually takes place
in the seventh month after his passage through the
inferior signs, that passage which is called his descent
into hell. Hiram can only be raised by the lion's
grip. It is through the instrumentality of Leo
that Osiris is raised ; it is when the sun re-enters
that sign that he regains his former strength, that


The Master Mdson. 277

Hs restoration to life takes place. Masons in this
degree call themselves the " children of the widoWj"
the sun on descending into his tomb leaving nature
— ^of which Masons consider themselves the pupils
—a widow ; but the appellation may also have its
origin in the Manichsean sect, whose followers were
known as the " sons of the ■widow" (103) .

209. The Bcdsing of Osiris. — A painting . found
on an Egyptian mummy, now in Paris, represents
the death and resurrection of Osiris, and the be-
ginning, progress, and end of the inundation of the
Nile. The sign of the Lion is transformed into a
couch, upon which Osiris is laid out as dead ; under
the couch are four canopi or jars of various capaci-
ties, indicating the state of the Nile at different
periods. The first is terminated by the head of
Sirius, or the Dog- Star, which gives warning of the
approach of the overflow of the river ; the second
hj the head of the Hawk, the symbol of the Etesian
wind, which tends to swell the waters ; the third
by the head of a Heron, the sign of the south
wind, which contributes to propel the water into
the Mediterranean ; and the fourth by that of the
Virgin, which indicates that when the sun had
passed that sign the inundation would have nearly
.subsided. To the above is superadded a large
Anubis, who with an emphatic gesture, turning
towards Isis, who has an empty throne on her head,
intimates that the sun, by the aid of the Lion, had


278 Secret Societies.

cleared tte difficult pass of the tropic of Cancer,
and was now in tlie sign of tlie latter; and, although
in a state of exhaustion, would soon be in a con-
dition to proceed on his way to the south. The
empty throne is indicative of its being vacated by
the supposed death of Osiris. The reason why the
hawk represents the north wind is, because about
the summer solstice, when the wind blows from
north to south, the bird flies with the wind towards
the south. (Job xxxis. 26.) The heron signifies the
south wind, because this bird, living on the worms
hatched in the mud of the Nile, follows the course
of the river down to the sea, just as the south wind
does. To know the state of the Nile, and there-
fore their own personal prospects, the Egyptians
watched the birds ; hence among other nations, who
did not know the principle by which the Egyptians
went, arose divination by the flight of birds.^

210. The Blazing Star. — The representation of a


' Hamlet says, "I am but mad north-north-west; when
the wind is southerly I kuow a hawk from a hand-saw."
Thomas Oapell, the editor of the Oxford edition of Shake-
speare, changes "hand-saw" to "hernshaw," which renders
the passage intelligible ; for hernshaw is only another name
for the heron ; and Hamlet, though feigning madness, yet
claims sufiB.oient sanity to distinguish a hawk from a hern-
shaw, when the wind is southerly — that is, in the time of
the migration of the latter to the north — and when the
former is not to be seen.


The Master Mason. 279

blazing star found in every masonic lodge, and
wMch Masons declare to signify prudence^ — though
why a star should have such a meaning they
would be at a loss to tell — is the star Sirius, the
dog-star, mentioned above, the inundation of the
Nile occurring when the sun was under the stars
of the Lion. Near the stars of the Cancer, though
pretty far from the band of the Zodiac towards the
south, and a few weeks after their rising, the Egyp-
tians saw in the morning one of the most brilliant
stars in the whole heavens ascending the horizon.
It appeared a little before the rising of the sun;
they therefore pitched upon this star as the infalli-
ble sign of the sun's passing under the stars of
Leo, and the beginning of the inundation. As it
thus seemed to be on the watch and give warning,
they caUed it "Barker," "Anubis," " Thot," all
meaning the " dog." Its Hebrew name " Sihor" in
Greek became " Seirios," and in Latin " Sirius."
It taught the Egyptians the prudence of retiring
into the higher grounds ; and thus Masons, ignorant
of the origin of the symbols, yet give it its original
emblematic signification.


VII.


THE HOLY EOTAL AECH.


211.
IFFICEBS.—The members of this degree
are denominated "^compardons." There
are nine officers, the chief of whom (in
England) is Zernbhabel, a compound
word, meaning " the bright lord, the sun." He
rebuilds the temple, and therefore represents the sun
risen again. The next officer is Jeshua, the high
priest; the third, Haggai, the prophet. These three
compose the grand council. Principals and senior
and junior sojourners form the base ; B2!ra and Ne-
hemiah, senior and junior scribes, one on each side ;
janitor or tyler without the door. The compa-
nions assembled make up the sides of the arch,
representing the pillars Jachin and Boaz. In front
of the principals stands an altar, inscribed with
the names of Solomon, Hiram, King of Tyre, and
Hiram AbifiF.

210. Ceremonies. — On entering the chapter, the


The Holy Royal Arch. 281

companions give the sign of sorrowj in imitation of
the ancients mourning for the loss 'of Osiris. I^ine
companions must be present at the opening of a
royal arch chapter; not more nor less than three
are permitted to take this degree at the same time,
the two nimibers making up the twelve, the number
of zodiacal signs. The candidates are prepared by
tying a bandage over their eyes, and coiling a rope
seven times round fhe body of each, which unites
them together, with three feet of slack rope between
them. They then pass under the living arch, which
is made by the companions either joining their
hands and holding them up, or by holding their
rods or swords so as to resemble a gothic arch.
This part of the ceremony used to be attended in
some lodges with a deal of tomfoolery and rough
horse-play. The companions would drop down on
the candidates, who were obliged to support them-
selves on their hands and knees ; and if they went too
slowly, it was not unusual for one or more of the
companions to apply a sharp poiat to their bodies
to urge them on. Trials, such as the candidates
for initiation into the ancient mysteries had to go
through, were also imitated in the royal arch.
But few if any lodges now practise these tricks,
fit only for Christmas pantomimes. The candidates,
after taking the oath, declare that they come in
order to assist at the rebuilding of Solomon's temple,
whereupon they are furnished with pickaxes, shovels,
and crowbars, and retire. After a while, during


282 Secret Societies,

■whicli they are supposed to hare been at work and
to have made a discovery, they return, and state
that on digging for the new foundation they dis-
covered ' an underground vault, into which one of
them was let down, and found a scroll, which on
examination turns out to be the long-lost book of
the law. They set to work again, and discover
another vault, and under that a third. The sun
having now gained his meriddn height, darts his
rays to the centre, and shines on a white marble
pedestal, on which is a plate of gold. On this plate
is a double triangle, and within the triangles some
words they cannot understand ; they therefore take
the plate to Zerubbabel. There the whole mystery
of Masonry — as far as known to Masons — ^is un-
veiled ; what the Masons had long been in search
of is found, for the mysterious writing in a trian-
gular form is the long lost sacred word of the
Master Mason which Solomon and King Hiram
deposited there, as we have seen in the master's
degree (207). This word is the logos of Plato and
St. John, the omnific word ; but another compound
name, intended to bear the same import, is substi-
tuted by modern Masons. It is communicated to
the candidates in this way: — The three principals
and each three companions form the triangles, and
each of the three takes his left-hand companion by
the right-hand wrist, and his right-hand companion
by the left-hand wrist, forming two distinct triangles
with the hands, and a triangle with their right feet.


The Holy Eoyal Arch. 283

amounting to a triple triangle, and tlien pronounce
the foRowing words, each taking a line in turn : —

As we three did agree,

In peace, love, and unity,

The sacred word to keep,

So we three do agree.

In peace, love, and unity,

The sacred word to search,'

Until we three,

Or three such as we, shall agree

This royal arch chapter to close.

The right hands, still joined as a triangle, are
raised as high as possible, and the word given at
low breath in syllables, so that each companion has
to pronounce the whole word. It is not permitted to
utter this omnific word above the breath ; like the
name ''Jehovah" or "Oum,^^ it would shake heaven and
earth if pronounced aloud. Zerubbabel next makes
the new companions acquainted with the five signs
used in this degree, and invests them with the badges
of Eoyal Arch Masonry — the apron, sash, and jewel.
The character on the apron is the triple Tau, one of
the most ancient of emblems, and Masons call it the
emblem of emblems, " with a depth that reaches to
the creation of the world and all that is therein."
This triple Tau is a compound figure of three T's,
caUed' Tau in Greek. Now this Tau or T is the
figure of the old Egyptian kilometer, used to ascer-
tain the height of the inundation. It was a pole
crossed with one or more transverse pieces. As on
the inundation depended the subsistence, the life


284 Secret Societies.

of the inhabitants, the Nilometer became the sym-
bol of lifoj health, and prosperity, and was thought
to have the power of averting evil. It thence
became an amulet, and in this manner was intro-
duced among masonic symbols.

213. Passing the Veils. — In some chapters the
ceremony called " passing the veils" is omitted, but
to make the account of Royal Arch Masonry com-
plete I append it here. The candidate is intro-
duced blindfold, his knees bare, and his feet shp-
shod, with a cable-tow round his waist. The high-
priest reads Bxod. id. 1-6, and 13, 14, and the
candidate is informed that " I am that I am'^ is the
pass-word from the first to the second veil. He is
also shown a bush on fire. He is then led to the
second veil, which, on giving the pass-word, he
passes, and beholds the figure of a serpent and
Aaron's rod. The high-priest reads Exod. iv.
1-5, and the candidate is told to pick up the rod
cast down before him, that the act is the sign of
passing the second veil, and that the pass-words
are "Moses, Aaron, and Bleazar." He then passes
the guard of the third veil. The high-priest reads
Exod. iv. 6-9, and the candidate is informed that
the leprous hand and the pouring out of the water
are the signs of the third veil, and that " Holiness to
the Lord" are the pass- words to the sanctum sancto-
rum. He is shown the ark of the covenant, the
table of shew-bread, the burning incense, and
the candlestick with seven branches. Then follow


The Holy Royal Arch. 285

long lectures to explain the words and symbols^ but
their puerility may be inferred from the following
specimen : — " This triangle is also an emblem of
geometry. And here we find the most perfect
emblem of the science of agriculture ; not a partial
one like the Basilidean^ calculated for one particular
clime, but universal ; pointed out by a pair of com-
passes issuing from the centre of the sun, and sus-
pending a globe denoting the earth, and thereby
representing the influence of that luminary over
the creation, admonishing us to be careful to per-
form every operation in its proper season, that we
lose not the fruits of our labour." What a farmer
would say to, or what profit he could derive from,
this " universal science of agriculture," or whether
he needs the " admonishing" symbol, I am at a
loss to imagine. The triple Tau, according to the
lecture, means templum Hierosolymce, also clavis ad
ihescmrwrrh, res ipsa pretiosa, and several other
thiags equally true. "But," continues the lec-
turer, " these are all symbolical definitions of the
symbol, which is to be simply solved into an
emblem of science in the human mind, and is
the most ancient symbol of that kind, the proto-
type of the cross, and the first object in every
religion or human system of worship. This is
the grand secret of Masonry, which passes by
symbols from superstition to science." How far
all this is from the true meaning of the cross and
triple Tau may be seen by reference to (49).


VIII.

GRAND ELECT KNIGHT OF KADOSH.

214.
\nE Term Kadosh. — This degree, the
thirtieth of the ancient and accepted
Scotch ritCj contains a beautiful astro-
nomical allegory, and is probatly de-
rived from Egypt. The term Kadosh means " holy"
or " elect." (Every person in the East, preferred
to a post of honour, carried a staff, to indicate that
he was Kadosh, or elect, or that his person was
sacred; whence eventually the name came to be
applied to the staff itself, and hence the derivation
of caduceus, the staff of Mercury, the messenger
of the gods.)

215. Reception mto the Degree. — There are four
apartments; the initiation takes place in the fourth.
They symbolize the seasons. The first apartment
is hung with black, lit up by a solitary lamp of
triangular form and suspended to the vaulted ceil-
ing. It communicates with a kind of cave or closet


Grand Elect Knight of Kailosh. 287

of reflection, containing symbols of destruction and
death. The candidate, after having been left there
some timei, passes into the second apartment, which
is draped with white ; two altars occupy the centre;
on one is an urn filled with burning spirits of wine,
on the other a brazier with live coal and incense
beside it. The candidate now faces the sacrificing
priest, who addresses some words of admonition to
him, and having burnt some incense, directs him
to the third apartment. It is hung with blue,
and the vaulted ceiling covered with stars. Three
yellow tapers light up this room. This is the
areopagus. The candidate, having here given the
requisite explanation as to the sincerity of his in-
tentions and promises of secrecy, is introduced into
the fourth apartment, hung with red. At the east
is a throne surmoimted by a double eagle,, crowned,
with outspread wings and holding a sword in his
claw. In this room, lighted up with twelve yellow
tapers, the chapter takes the title of " senate/^ the
brethren are called "knights." In this room also
stands the mysterious ladder.

216. The Myst&rious Ladder. — It has seven steps,
which symbolize the sun's progress through the
seven signs of the zodiac from Aries to Libra both
inclusive. This the candidate ascends, receiving at
every step the explanation of its meaning from a
hierophant, who remains invisible to the candidate,
just as in the ancient mysteries the initiating priest


288 . Secret Societies.

remained concealed, and as Pytliagoras delivered
his instructions from behind a veil. When the
candidate has ascended the ladder, and is on the
last step, the ladder is lowered and he passes over
it, because he cannot retire the same way, as the
sun does not retrograde. He then reads the words
at the bottom of the ladder, Ne plus ultra. The
last degree manufactured is always the we plus ultra,
till somebody concocts one still more sublime, which
then is the ne plus ultra, tiU it is superseded by
another. What sublimity masonic degrees will
yet attain, and where they will stop, no one can
teU.

217. The Seven Steps. — The name of the first
step is Isedakah, which is defined " righteousness,"
alluding to the sun in the vernal equinox in the
month of March, when the days and nights are
equal all over the world, and the sun dispenses his
favours equally to aU.

The second step is Shor-laban, " white ox " figu-
ratively. This is the only step the definition of
which is literally true, which, as it might lead to a
clue to the meaning of the mysterious ladder, is thus
falsely denominated figurative. Taurus, the bull,
is the second sign of the zodiac, into which the sun
enters on the 21st April. His entry into this sign
is marked by the setting of Orion, who in mytho-
logical language is said to be in love with the
Pleiades ; and by the rising of the latter.


Grand Elect Knight of Kadosh. 289

The tliird step is called Mathoh, " sweetness." The
third sign is Gemini, into which the sun enters in
the pleasant month of May. " Canst thou hinder
the sweet influences of the Pleiades, or loose the
bands of Orion ?" (Job.) Now, the Pleiades were
denominated by the Romans Vergilice, from their
formerly rising when the spring commenced, and
their sweet influences blessed the year by the be-
ginning of spring.

The fourth step is Emunah, ''truth in disguise."
The fourth sign is Cancer, into which the sun enters
in June. Egypt at this period is enveloped in clouds
and dust, by which means the sun, which figura-
tively may be called truth, is obscured or dis-
guised.

The fifth step is Hamal saggi, " great labour." The
fifth sign is Leo. The great labour and difficulties
to which the sun was supposed to be subject in
passing this sign have already been alluded to
(209).

The sixth step is Sabhal, " burden or patience."
The sixth sign through which the sun passes is
Virgo, marked by the total disappearance of the
celestial Hydra, called the Hydra of Lema, from
whose head spring up the Great Dog and the
Crab. Hercules destroys the Hydra of Lerna,
but is annoyed by a sea-crab, which bites him in
the foot. Whenever Hercules lopped off one of the
monster's heads two others sprang up, so that his


290 SeQret Societies.

labour would have been endless, bad be not ordered
his companion lolas to sear the blood with fire.

The seventh step is named Gemunah, Binah,
JebvMah, "retribution, intelligence, prudence." The
seventh sign is Libra, into which the sun enters at
the commencement of autumn, iadicated by the
rising of the celestial Centaur, the same that treated
Hercules with hospitality. This constellation is re-
presented in the heavens with a flask fall of wine
and a thyrsus, ornamented with leaves and grapes,
the symbols of the products of the seasons. The
sun has now arrived at the autumnal equinox,
bringing in his train the fruits of the earth ; and
recompense is made to the husbandman in propor-
tion to his prudence and iuteUigence.

The ladder will remind the reader of the ladder
of the Indian mysteriesj of the ladder seen by
Jacobin his dream; the pyramids with seven steps';
and the seven caverns of various nations.


IX.


PEINOE OP ROSB-CROIX.


218.
\I8TINGT from Bosicrucian, and has
various Names. — Thisj the eighteenth
degree of the ancient and accepted
Scotch rite, is one of the most gene-
rally diffused of the higher degrees of Masonry.
It is often confounded with the cabalistic and
alchemistio sect of the Rosicrucians j but there is
a great distinction between the two. The name
is derived from the rose and the cross, and has no
connection with alchemy ; the import of the rose has
been given in another place. The origin of the
degree is involved in the greatest mystery, as
already pointed out. The degree is known by
various names, such as " Sovereign Princes of Eose-
Crois," " Princes of Rose- Croix de Heroden," and
sometimes " Eoiights of the Eagle and PeKcan."
It is considered the ne phbs ultra of Masonry, which
however is the case with several other degrees.


292 Secret Societies.

219. Officers and Lodges. — The presiding officer
is ycalled the " Ever Most Perfect Sovereign," and
the two wardens are styled " Most Excellent and
Perfect Brothers." The degree is conferred by a
body called a " Chapter of the Sovereign Princes
of Rose-Croixj" and in three apartments, the first
representing Mount Calvary, the second the site and
scene of the Eesurrection, and the third Hell. It
win therefore be seen that it is a purely Christian
degree, and therefore not genuine Masonry, but an
attempt to christianize Freemasonry. The first
apartment is hung with black, and lighted with
thirty-three lights upon three candlesticks of eleven
branches. Bach light is enclosed in a smaU tin
box, and issues its light through a hole of an inch
diameter. These lights denote the age of Christ.
In three angles of the room, north-east, south-east,
and south-west, are three pillars of the height of a
man, on the several chapiters of which are inscribed
the names of Faith, Hope, and Charity. Every lodge
has its picture descriptive of its form, and of the
proper place of its officers and emblems. On the
east, at the south and north angles, the sun and
moon and a sky- studded with stars are painted;
the clouds, very dark. An. eagle is seen beating
the air with his wings, as an emblem of the supreme
power. Besides other allegorical paintings, there
is also one of a cubic stone, sweating blood and
water. On the stone is a rose, and the letter J,


Prince of Bose- Croix. 293

which means the expiring Word. The space round
the picture^ representing the square of the lodge, is
filled with darkness, to represent what happened at
the crucifixion. Below it are all the ancient tools
of masonry, with the columns divided and broken
into many parts. Lower down is the TeU'of the
temple rent in twain. Before the master is a Kttle
table, Hghted by three lights, upon which the Gospel,
compasses, square, and triangle are placed. All the
brethren are clothed in black, with a black scarf
from the left shoulder to the right side. An apron,
white, bordered with black ; on the flap are a skull
and cross-bones, between three red roses; on the
apron is a globe surmounted by a serpent, and above
the letter J. The master and the other ofl&cers
wear on the neck a wide ribbon of black mohair,
from which hangs the jewel, a golden compass, sur-
mounted by a triple crown, with a cross between
the legs, its centre being occupied by a full-blown
rose ; at the foot of the cross is a pelican feeding
its young from its breast ; on the other side is an
eagle with wings displayed. The eagle is the
emblem of the sun, the "sun of righteousness;"
the pelican of course alludes to Christ shedding His
blood for the human race ; the cross and the rose
explain themselves.

220. Beeeption in the First ApaHmemt. — The
candidate is clothed in black, decorated with a red
ribbon, an apron doubled with the same colour, and


294 Secret Societies.

a sword and scarf. After much preliminary cere-
mony^ he is introduced into the apartment, and
told by the master that the word that is lost and
which he seeks cannot be given, because confusion
reigns among them, the veil of the temple is rent,
darkness covers the earth, the. tools are broken, &c. ;
but that he need not despair, as they wiU find out the
new law, that thereby they may recover the word.
He is then told to travel for thirty-three years.
The junior warden thereupon conducts him thirty-
three times round the lodge, poiating out to him
the three columns, telling him their names. Faith,
Hope, and Charity, and bidding him remember
them, as henceforth they must be his guides. After
a little more talk, he is made to kneel with his right
knee upon the Gospel and take the following oath :
" I promise by the same obligations I have taken
in the former degrees of Masonry never to reveal
the secrets of the Knight of the Eagle, under the
penalty of being for ever deprived of the true word ;
that a river of blood and water shall issue conti-
nually from my body, and under the penalty of
suffering anguish of soul, of being steeped in vine-
gar and gaU, of having on my head the most piercing
thorns, and of dying upon the cross ; so help me
the Grand Architect of the Universe." The candi-
date then receives the apron and sash, both symbols
of sorrow for the loss of the word. A dialogue
ensues, wherein the hope of finding the word is


Prince of Eose- Croix. 295

foreshadowed ; whereupon the master and brethren
proceed to the second apartment^ where they ex-
change their black aprons and sashes to take red
ones.

221. Second Apartment. — This apartment is hung
with tapestry ; three chandeliers, with thirty-three
hghtsj but without the boxeSj illuminate it. In
the east there is a cross surrounded with a glory
and a cloud ; upon the cross is a rose of paradise,
in the middle of which is the letter G. Below are
three squares, in which are three circles, having
three triangles, to form the summit, which is alle-
gorical of Mount Calvary, upon which the Grand
Architect of the Universe expired. Upon this
■summit is a blazing star with seven rays, and in
the middle of it the letter G again. The eagle and
pelican also re-appear here._ Below is the tomb.
In the lower part of the square are the compasses,,
drawing-board, crow, trowel, and square. The cubic
stone,* hammer, and other tools are also repre-
sented.

222. Beception in the Third Apartment. — But the
second point of reception takes place in a third
apartment, which is made as terrifying as possible,
to represent the torments of hell. It has seven
chandeliers with grey burning flambeaux, whose
mouths represent death's heads and cross-bones.
The walls are hung with tapestry, painted with
flames and figures of the damned. The candidate,


296 Secret Societies.

on presenting himself as a searcher of the lost
■word, has his sash and apron taken from him, as
not humble enough to qualify him for the task, and
is covered with a black cloth strewn with dirty
ashes, so that he can see nothing, and informed
that he will be led to the darkest of places, from
which the word must come forth triumphant to the
glory and advantage of Masonry. In this con-
dition he is led to a steep descent, up and down
which he is directed to travel, after which he is
conducted to the door, and has the black cloth
removed. Before hiTn stand three figures dressed
as devils. He then parades the room three times,
without pronouncing a word, in memory of the
descent into the dark places, which lasted three
days. He is then led to the door of the apartment,
covered with black cloth, and told that the horrors
through which he has passed are as nothing in
comparison with those through which he has yet
to pass ; therefore he is cautioned to summon aU
his fortitude. But in reality all the terrible trials
are over, for he is presently brought before the
master, who asks : "Whence come you?" "From
Judaea." — " Wiich way did you come ? " " By Naza-
reth." — " Of what tribe are you descended ? "
"Judah."— "Give me the four initials ?" "I.N.R.I."
— "What do these letters signify?" "Jesus of
Nazareth, King of the Jews." — "Brother, the
word is found; let him be restored to light."


Prince of Bose-Croix. 297

The junior warden quickly takes off the cloth,
and at the signal of the master all the brethren
clap their hands three times and give three
huzzas. The candidate is then taught the signs,
grips, and pass-word. The master then proceeds
to the instruction of the newly made Knight of the
Eagle or Prince Eose- Croix, which amounts to this,
that after the erection of Solomon's temple masons
began to neglect their la-bours, that then the cubical
stone, the corner-stone, began to sweat blood and
water, and was torn from the building and thrown
among the ruins of the decaying temple, and the
mystic rose sacrificed on a cross. Then masonry
was destroyed, the earth covered with darkness,
the tools of masonry broken. Then the blazing
star disappeared, and the word was lost. But
masons having learnt the three words. Faith, Hope,
and Charity, and following the new law, masonry
was restored, though masons no longer built mate-
rial edifices, but occupied themselves in spiritual
buildings. The mystic rose and blazing star were
restored to their former beauty and splendour.


THE EITBS OF MISRAIM AND
MEMPHIS.

223.

ANOMALIES of the Bite of Misraim.—
Another of those diversities^ which may
be called the constant attendants of
the life of vast associations, is the rite
of " Misraim." What chiefly distinguishes it from
other rites, and renders it totally different from
masonic institutions, is the supreme power given
to the heads, whose irremovability we have seen
abolished, in order to open the lodges to the forms
of genuine democracy. This rite is essentially
autocratic. One man, with the title of " Absolute
Sovereign Grand Master," rules the lodges, and is
irresponsible — an extraordinary anomaly in the.
bosom of a liberal society to behold a member
claiming that very absolute power against which
Freemasonry has been fighting for centuries !


Rites of Misraim and Memphis. 299

224. Organization. — The rite of Misraim was
founded at a time when there was already a question
of reducing the number of the Scotch rite of thirty-
three degreeSj practically reduced to five. Then
arose the rite of Misraim with ninety degrees,
arranged in four sections, viz. 1. Symbolic, 2.
Philosophic, 3. Mystical, 4. Cabalistic ; which were
divided into seventeen classes. The rites are a
medley of Scotch rites, Martinism, and Templar-
ism, and the absolute grand masters arrogate to
themselves the right of governing all masonic
lodges throughout the world. The foundations of
this system were laid at Milan in 1805, by several
Masons who had been refused admission into the
Supreme Grand Council. During the first year
and for some time after postulants were only ad-
mitted as far as the eighty- seventh degree; the
other three, complementing the system, embraced
the v/nknown superiors. Thus masonic degrees
often served as a mask for the most opposed indivi-
dualities, and unconsciously favoured the views and
schemes of astute diplomatists and ambitious
princes.

225. History and OonstituUon. — Prom Milan the
order spread into Dalmatia, the Ionian Islands, and
the Neapolitan territory, where it produced a total
reform in a chapter of Eosicrucians, the "Con-
cordia," estabhshed in the Abruzzi. It was not
till 1814 that the rite of Misraim was introduced


300 Secret Societies.

into France, where the pompous denominations of
its endless hierarchy met with no slight success.
Never had such titles been heard of in Masonry:
Supreme Commander of the Stars, Sovereign of
Sovereigns, Most High and Most Powerful Knight
of the Rainbow, Sovereign Grand Prince Hiram,
Sovereign Grand Princes, &c., these were some of
the titles assumed by the members. The trials of
initiation were long and difficult, and founded on
what is recorded of the Egyptian and Eleusinian
mysteries. In the first two sections the founders
of the rite seem to have attempted to bring to-
gether all the creeds and practices of Scotch
Masonry combined with the mysteries of Egypt;
and in the last two sections all the chemical and
cabalistic knowledge professed by the priests of that
country, reserving for the last three degrees the
supreme direction of the Order. Attempts were
made to introduce it into Belgium, Sweden, and
Switzerland, and also into Ireland, and latterly into
England ; but everywhere it is in a languishing
condition. The Grand Orient of Prance has never
recognized the rite as a part of Masonry, though
it has three lodges in Paris.

226. Rites and Geremonies. — The Order celebrates
two equinoctial festivals, the one called " The Ee-
awakening of Nature," and the other, " The Eepose
of Nature." In the sixty-ninth degree, designated
as "Knight of Khanuka, called Hynaroth," particular


Rites of Misraim and Memphis. 301

instructions are given as to man's- relation to the
Deity, and the cabalistic mediation of angels. In
the ninetieth and last degree, the lodge is opened
with the words " Peace to Men/' and the wish
that all men might become proselytes of reason and
true light. In this rite, altogether modern, we
meet with gnostic and cabalistic words and conceits
— a phenomenon which were impossible did not
gnostic ideas permeate aU the veins of the masonic
body.

227. Rite of Memphis. — It is a copy of the rite
of Misraim, and was founded at Paris in 1839, and
afterwards extended to Brussels and Marseilles.
It was composed of ninety-one degrees, arranged
in three sections and seven classes. A large
volume printed at Paris, with the ambitious title of
''The Sanctuary," gives an account of aU the
sections and their scope. The first section teaches
morality and explains -the symbols ; the second in-
structs in physical science, the philosophy of history,
and explains the poetical myths of antiquity, its
scope being to promote the study of causes and
origins. The third and last section exhausts the
story of the Order, and is occupied with high
philosophy, studying the religious myth at the
different epochs of mankind.


XI.


MODERN KNIGHTS TEMPLARS.


228.
IBIGIN. — We read that several lords of
the Court of Louis XIV.j including the
Duke de Gramontj the Marquis of
Biran, and Count Tallard, formed a
secret society, whose object was pleasure. The
society increased. Louis XTV., having been made
acquainted with its statutes, banished the members
of the Order, whose denomination was, " A slight
Resurrection of the Templars."

229. Supposititious List of Grand Masters. —
In 1705, Philip Duke of Orleans collected the re-
maining members of the society that had renounced
its first scope to cultivate politics. A Jesuit father,
Bonanni, a learned rogue, fabricated the famous list
of supposititious Grand Masters of the Temple
since Molay, beginning with his immediate suc-
cessor, Larmenius. No imposture was ever sus-


Modern Knights Templars. 303

tained with greater sagacity. The doCTiiiient
offered all the requisite chstracteristics of authen-
ticity, and was calculated to deceive the most ex-
perienced palaeologist. Its object was to connect
the new institution with the ancient Templars. To
render the deception more perfect, the volume con-
taining the false list was filled with minutes of
dehberations . at fictitious meetings under false
dates. Two members were even sent to Lisbon,
to obtaia if possible a document of legitimacy from
the " Knights of Christ," an Order supposed to
have been founded on the ruins of the Order of
the Temple. But the deputies were unmasked and
very badly received : one had to take refuge in
England, the other was transported to Africa, where
he died.

230. Revival of the Order. — But the society was
not discouraged ; it grew, and was probably the
same that concealed itself before the outbreak of
the revolution under the vulgar name of the Society
of the BulFs Head, and whose members were dis-
persed in 1792. At that period the Duke of Cosse-
Brissac was grand master. When on his way to
VersaiLLes with other prisoners, there to undergo
their trial, he was massacred, and Ledru, his
physician, obtained possession of the charter of
Larmenius and the MS. statutes of 1705. These
documents suggested to him the idea of reviving
the order ; Fabr^-Palaprat, a Freemason, was chosen


304 Secret Societies.

grand master. Every effort was made to create a
belief in the genuineness of tlie Order. The brothers
Fabr^j Arnal, and Leblond hunted up relics. The
shops of antiquaries supplied the sword^ mitre, and
helmet of Molay, and the faithful were shown his
bones withdrawn from the funeral pyre on which
he had been burned. As in the middle ages, the
society exacted that aspirants should be of noble
birth; such as were not were ennobled by the
society. Fourteen honest citizens of Troyes on one
occasion received patents of nobiHty and convincing
coats of arms.

231. The Leviticon. — The society was at &st
catholic, apostolic, Roman, and rejected Protestants;
but Fabre suddenly gave it an opposite tendency.
Having acquired a Greek MS. of the fifteenth cen-
tury, containing the Gospel of St. John, with read-
ings somewhat differing from the received version,
preceded by a kind of introduction or commentary,
called " Leviticon," he determined, towards 1815,
to apply its doctrines to the- society governed by
him, and thus to transform an association, hitherto
quite orthodox, into a schismatic sect. This Levi-
ticon is nothing but the well-known work with the
same title by the Greek monk, Nicephorus. He,
having been initiated into the mysteries of the
Sufites, who to this day, in the bosom of Mo-
hamedanism preserve the dismal doctrines of the
Ishmaelites of the lodge of Cairo (133), attempted


Modern Knights Templars. 305

to introduce these ideas into Christianity, and for
that purpose wrote the " Leviticon," which became
the Bible of a small number of sectaries ; but perse-
cution put an end to them. This singular MS. was
translated into French in 1822, and printed, with
modifications and interpolations, by Palaprat him-
self. This publication was the cause of a schism
ia the Order of the Temple. Those knights that
adopted its doctrines made them the basis of a
new liturgy, which they rendered pubHc in 1833 in
a kind of Johandite church ; but people only laughed
at it.

232. Ceremonies of Initiation. — The lodges in
this degree are called encampments, and the oflBcers
take their names from those that managed the
original institution of the Knights Templars. The
penal signs are the chin and beard sign and the
saw sign. The grand sign is indicative of the
death of Christ on the cross. There is a word, a
grip, and pass-words, which yary. The knights,
who are always addressed as " Sir Knights," wear
knightly costume, not omitting the sword. The
candidate for installation is "got up" as a pilgrim,
with sandals, mantle, staff, cross, scrip, and wallet,
a belt or cord round his waist, and in some encamp-
ments a burden on his back, which is made to fall off
at the sight of the cross. On his approach, an alarm
is sounded with a trumpet, and after a deal of pseudo-
military parley he is admitted, and a saw is applied


306 Secret Societies.

to his forehead by the second captain, whilst all the
Sir Knights are under arms. The candidate, being
prompted by the master of the ceremonies, declares
that he is a weary pilgrim, prepared to devote his
life to the service of the poor and sick, and to pro-
tect the holy sepulchre. After perambulating the
encampment seven times he repeats the oath, having
first put away the pilgrim^s staff and cross and
taken up a sword. In this oath he swears to defend
the sepulchre of our Lord Jesus Christ against all
Jews, Turks, infidels, heathens, and other opposers
of the Gospel. " If ever I wilfully violate this my
solemn compact,"" he continues, " as a Brother
Knight Templar, may my skull be sawn asunder
with a rough saw, my brains taken out and put in
a charger to be consumed by the scorching sun,
and my skuU in another charger, in commemoration
of St. John of Jerusalem, that first faithfdl soldier
and martyr of our Lord and Saviour. Furthermore,
may the soul that once inhabited this skull appear
against me in the day of judgment. So help me
God." A lighted taper is afterwards put into his
hand, and he circumambulates the encampment five
times "in solemn meditation;" and then kneebng
down is dubbed knight by the grand commander,
who says, " I hereby instal you a masonic kjiight
hospitaller of St. John of Jerusalem, Palestine,
Rhodes, and Malta, and also a Knight Templar."
The grand commander next clothes him with the


Modern Knights Templars. 307

mantle^ and invests him -with the apron, sash, and
jewelj and presents him with sword and shield. He
then teaches him the so-called Mediterranean pass-
word and sign. The motto of the Knight Templar
isj In hoc signo vinees. In some of the encampments
the following is the concluding part of the cere-
mony: — One of the equerries dressed as a cook,
with a white nightcap and apron and a large kitchen
knife in his hand, suddenly rushes in, and, kneeling
on one knee before the new Sir Knight, says, " Sir
Knight, I admonish you to be just, honourable, and
faithful to the Order, or I, the cook, will hack your
spurs from off your heels with my kitchen knife."
He then retires. Sometimes the spurs are hacked
off by another personage, namely the Commissioner
in Bankruptcy. Some few years ago an unfortunate
encampment pitched in Bedford Row, London.
Though the knights, no doubt, were very brave
agaiast Turks, infidels, and all that sort of gentry,
they could not face their creditors, who thereupon com-
pelled the Order to make its last stand in BasinghaU
Street — rather an inglorious end ; but, as one of the
counsel observed, the Sir Knighta were probably all
away in the Holy Land fighting for the recovery of
the Holy Sepulchre, and so their affairs at home fell
slightly into disorder.


XII.

FREEMASONEY IN ENGLAND AND
SCOTLAIfD.

233.

\BEI1MA80NRT in England. — The
authentic history of Freemasonry, i. e.
operative Masonry, in England dates
from Athelstan, from whom his brother
Edwin obtained a royal charter for the Masons, by
which they were empowered to meet annually in a
general assembly, and to have the right to regulate
their own Order. And, according to this charter,
the first Grand Lodge of England met at York in
926, when aU the writings and records extant, in
Greek, Latin, French, and other languages, were
collected ; and constitutions and charges in con-
formity with ancient usages, so far as they could be
gathered therefrom, were drawn up and adopted.
The Old York Masons were on that account held in
especial respect, and Blue or genuine Masonry is
still distinguished by the title of the York Rite.


Freemasonry in England and Scotland. 309

After the decease of Edwin, Athelstan himself pre-
sided over the lodges; and after his death, the
Masons in England were governed by Dunstan,
Archbishop of Canterbury in 960, and Edward the
Confessor in 1041. Down to the present time the
grand masters have been persons of royal blood,
sometimes the Mng himself. Till the beginning of
the last century, as already stated (194), they were
operative masons, and the monuments of their
activity are still found aU over the land in abbeys,
monasteries, cathedrals, hospitals, and other build-
ings of note. There were, indeed, periods when
the Order was persecuted by the state, but these
were neither so frequent nor so long as in other
countries.

234. Freemasonry in Scotland. — Tradition says
that on the destruction of the Order of Templars,
many of its members took refuge in Scotland, where
they incorporated themselves with the Freemasons,
under the protection of Eobert Bruce, who estab-
lished the chief seat of the order at Eil winning.
There is a degree of Prince of Rose- Croix de Hero-
den, or H&edom, as ii is called in French. This
Heroden, says an old MS. of the ancient Scotch
Rite, is a mountain situated in the north-west of
Scotland, where the fugitive Knights Templars found
a safe retreat ; and the modern Order of Rose- Croix
claims the kingdom of Scotland and Abbey of Kil-
winning as having once been its chief seat of govern-


310 , Secret Societies.

ment. By some writers, however, it is asserted that
the word H^rMom is simply a corruption of the
Latin expression hmredAwm, signifying " an heri-
tage," and alludes to the castle of St. Germain, the
residence of Charles Stuart the Pretender, to fur-
ther whose restoration the Order of Rose-Croix was
iavented. The subject is in a state of iuextricable
confusion, but scarcely worth the trouble of elucida-
tion. King Robert Bruce endeavoured, like other
princes before and after him, to secure for himself
the supreme direction of those associations, which,
though not hostile to the reigning power, could
by their organization become the foci of danger.
It is the common opinion that this king reserved
for himself and his successors the rank of grand
master of the whole Order, and especially of the
lodge of H^r^dom, which was afterwards transferred
to Edinburgh.

235. Modern Freemasonry. — At the beginning
of the last century the operative period of Masonry
may be said to have come to an end. In 1716, there
being then only four lodges existing in London, a pro-
position was made and agreed to that the privilege
of Masonry should no longer be restricted to opera-
tive masons — we have seen that it had ere then been
broken through (194) — but should extend to men of
various professions, provided they were regularly
initiated into the Order. Thus began the present era
of Masonry, retaining the original constitutions, the


Freemasonry in England and Scotland. 311

ancient landmarks, symbols, and ceremonies. The
society, proclaiming brotherly love, relief, and truth
as their guiding principles, obtained a wider field
for their operations, and more freedom in their
mode of action. But to what does this action
amount ? To eating, drinking, and mummery.
There is nothing in the history of modern Masonry,
in this country at least, that deserves to be re-
corded. The petty squabbles between Lodges and
Orders may help to fill masonic newspapers, bu*
for the world at large they have no interest ; and
as to any useful knowledge to be propagated by
Masons, that is pure delusion. Yet, considering
that the Order reckons its members by hundreds
of thousands, its pretensions and present condition
and prospects merit some consideration; and it
must be admitted that its charities are administered
on a somewhat munificent scale. In that respect
honour is due to the craft.


XIII.

FREEMASONRY IN FRANCE.

236.
{NTRODUOTION into Frcmce. — Free-
masonry was introduced into France,
by the partisans of James and the
Pretender, as a possible means of re-
seating the Stuart family on the English throne.
Not satisfied with turning masonic rites to un-
foreseen and Ulegitimate uses, new degrees were
added to those already existing, such as those of
"Irish Master," "Perfect Irish Master," and
" Puissant Irish Master," and by promises of the
revelation of great secrets and leading them to
believe that Freemasons were the successors of the
Knights Templars, the nobility of the kingdom
were attracted towards the Order and HberaUy
supported it with their means and influence. The
first lodge established in France was that of Dun-
kirk (1721), under the title of "Friendship and
Fraternity." The second, whose name has not


Freemasonry in France. 313

been handed down, was founded in Paris in 1725
by Lord Derwentwater. Other followers of the
Pretender established other lodges, of all which
Lord Derwentwater was the grand master, until
that nobleman lost his life for his devotion to the
cause of the Stuarts.

237. Chevalier Bamsay. — The Chevalier Ramsay,
also a devoted adherent of the house of Stuart,
endeavoured more effectually to carry out the views
of his predecessors, and in 1728 attempted iu Lon-
don to lay the basis of a masonic reform, according
to which the masonic legend referred to the violent
death of Charles L, while CromweU and his partisans
represented the assassins to be condemned in the
lodge. He therefore proposed to the Grand Lodge
of England to substitute in the place of the first
three degrees those of Scotch Mason, Novice, -and
Knight of the Temple, which he pretended to be
the only true and ancient ones, having their ad-
ministrative centre in the Lodge of St. Andrew at
Edinburgh. But the Grand Lodge at once rejected
his views, whose objects it perceived. Ramsay went
to Paris, where he met with great success. His
system gave rise to those higher degrees which have
since then been known by the name of the Ancient
Scotch Rite. Many of these innovations made up
for their want of consistency with masonic traditions
by splendour of external decorations and gorgeous-
ness of ceremonies. But the hautes grades of the


314 Secret Societies.

Prenolij and the philosophic degrees of the Ancient
Scotch Eite^ are not innovations^ but illustrations of
pure symbolic Masonry.

238. Philosophical Eites. — Philosophy indeed
began to insinuate itself into Masonry, simplifying
the rites and purifying its doctrines. Among the
philosophic degrees then introduced, that of the
" Knights of the Sun'^ is noteworthy. Its declared
scope was to advocate natural, in opposition to re-
vealed, religion. There is but one Hght in the lodge,
which shines from behind a globe of water, to repre-
sent the sun. It has some resemblance to the
" Sublime Knight Elected." But on the other hand,
by these innovations systems multiplied, and the
Order served as a pretext and defence of institu-
tions having no connection with Masonry. Cabala,
magic, conjuration, divination, alchemy, and demon-
ology, were taught in the lodges. These abuses led
to the establishment of an administrative centre at
Arras in 1747. Another was founded at Marseilles
in 1751. Three years afterwards the Chevalier de
Bonneville founded in Paris a chapter of the high
degrees, with the title, afterwards become famous,
of the " Chapter of, Clermont,'^ and lodged it in a
sumptuous palace built by him in a suburb of Paris.
The system adopted was to some extent that of
Ramsay. Another chapter, in opposition to his,
was founded in 1762, with the title of " Council
of the Knights of the Bast." In 1766, the Baron


Freemasonry in 'France. 315

Tsclmdy founded the Order of the " Blazing Star/'
in wMch ideas derived from the Temple and the
Jesuits were strangely intermingled.

239. The Duke de Ghartres. — Freemasonry in
Prance was not without iafluence on the Revolu-
tion. The Duke de Ghartres having been elected
grand master, all the lodges were united under
the Grand Orient ; hence the immense influence he
afterwards wielded. The mode of his initiation is
thus related : — ^Before becoming grand master he
was received into the degree of Knight of Kadosh.
Five brethren introduced him into a hall, repre-
senting a grotto strewn with human bones, and
lighted up with sepulchral lamps. In one of the
angles was a lay figure covered with royal insignia.
The introducers bade him lie down on the ground
like one dead, naming the degrees through which
he had already passed, and repeating the former
oaths. Afterwards, they extolled the degree into
which he was about to be received. Having bidden
him to rise, he was made to ascend a high ladder, and
to throw himself from the top. Having then armed
him with a dagger, they commanded him to strike
the crowned figure, and a liquid, resembling blood,
spurted from the wound over his hands and clothes.
He was then told to cut off the head of the figure.
Finally, he was informed that the bones with which
the cave was strewn came from the body of James
Molay, Grand Master of the Order of the Temple,


316 Secret Societies.

and that the man whom he had stabbed was Phihp
the Fair, King of Prance, The Grand Orient was
established in a mansion formerly belonging to the
Jesuits in Paris, and became a revolutionary centre.
The share the Grand Orient, the tool of the Duke
de Chartres, took in the events of the French Revo-
lution is matter of history.


XIV.

THE CHAPTBE OP CLBEMONT AND THE
STRICT OBSERVANCE.

240.
?ESUITIGAL Iw/wence. — Catholic cere-
monieSj unknown in ancient Freema-
sonry, were introduced from 1735 to
1740, in tlie Chapter of Clermontj so
called in honour of Louis of Bourbon, Prince of
Clermont, at the time grand master of the Order
in France. From that time, the influence of the
Jesuits on the fraternity made itself more and more
felt. The candidate was no longer received in a
lodge, but in the city of Jerusalem ; not the ideal
Jerusalem, but a clerical Jerusalem, typifying Rome.
The meetings were called Oapitula OanoTdcormn,
and a monkish language and asceticism prevailed
therein. In the statutes is seen the hand of James
Lainez, the second general of the Jesuits, and the
aim at universal empire betrays itself, for at the


318 Secret Societies.

reception of tlie sublime knights tlie last two
chapters of the Apocalypse are read to the candi-
date — a glowing picture of that universal monarchy
which the Jesuits hoped to establish. The sect
spread very rapidly, for when Baron Hunde came
to Paris in 1742, and was received into the highest
Jesuit degrees, he found on his return to Germany
that those degrees were already estabHshed in
Saxony and Thuringia, under the government of
Marshall, whose labours he undertook to promote.

241. The Strict Ohservance. — From the exertions
of these two men arose the "Eite of Strict Ob-
servance," which seemed also for a time intended
to favour the tragic hopes of the House of Stuart ;
for Marshall, having visited Paris in 1741, there
entered into close connection with Ramsay and the
other adherents of the exiled family. To farther
this object, Hunde mixed up with the rites of Cler-
mont what was known or supposed to be known of
the statutes of the Templars, and acting in concert
with Marshall, overran Germany with a sect of new
Templars, not to be confounded with the Templars
that afterwards joined the masonic fraternity.
But Hunde seems after aU to have rendered no
real services to the Stuarts ; though when Charles
Edward visited Germany, the sectaries received him
in the most gallant manner, promising him the most
extensive support, and asking of him titles and
estates in a kingdom which lie had yet to conquer.


The Chapter of Clermont. 319

Thus lie was brought to that state of mental in-
toxication which afterwards led him to make an
absurd entry into Rome, preceded by heralds who
proclaimed him king. Hunde seems, in the sad
story of the Stuarts, to have acted the part of a
speculator; and the rite of the Strict Observance,
permeated by the Jesuitical leaven, had probably
an aim very different from the re-establishment of
the proscribed dynasty. It is certain that at one
time the power of the New Templars was very
great, and prepared the way for the jQluminati.


XV.


THE EBLAXBD OBSERVAlfCE.


242.
\BGANIZATION of Relaxed Observance.
— In 1767, there arose at Vienna a
scMsm of the Strict Observance ; the
dissentients, who called themselves
" Clerks of the Relaxed Observance," declaring
that they alone possessed the secrets of the associa-
tion, and knew the place where were deposited the
splendid treasures of the Templars. They also
claimed precedence not only over the rite of Strict
Observance, but also over all Masonry. Their
promises and iastructions revolved around the
philosopher's stone, the government of spirits, and
the millennium. To be initiated it was necessary
to be a Roman Catholic, and to have passed through
all the degrees of the Strict Observance. The
members knew only their immediate heads ; but
Doctor Stark, of Konigsberg, a famous preacher,


The Relaxed Observance. 321

and Baron Eaven, of Mecklenburg, were well-
known chiefs of the association.

243. Disputes m German Lodges. — Before the
establishment of the Strict Observance various
German lodges had already introduced the Templar
system; hence disputes of aU kinds arose, and a
convention was held at Brunswick on May 22nd,
1775, to arrange the differences. Dr. Stark pre-
sented himself j he was a disciple of Schroepfer
and of Gugumos, who called himself high priest,
knight, prince, possessor of the philosopher's stone,
of the secret to evoke the spirits of the dead,
&c. Stark declared to the members of the con-
vention that he was called Archimedes ah aqwila
fulva, that he was chancellor of the Grand Chapter
of Scotland, and had been invited by the brethren
of that supreme body to instruct them in the true
principles of the order. But when he was asked
to produce his credentials, he refused. The Bruns-
wickers, however, thinking that the brethren of
Aberdeen might possess some secrets, sent a depu-
tation thither ; but the good folks of Aberdeen
knew even less than their German friends, for they
knew only the first three degrees. Stark, though
found out, was not to be put down, but wrote a
book, entitled ''The Coping Stone," in which he
represented the Strict Observance as hostile to re-
ligion, society, and the state.

244. Bite of Zmnendorf. — This was not the first


322 Secret Societies.

attack made on the system of Hunde. In 1766,
Count Zinnendorf, chief physician in the Prussian
army, who had been received into the Strict
Observance, was struck from the list of members
of the lodge of the Three Globes. In revenge, he
founded at Berlin and Potsdam lodges on the
Templar system, which, however, he soon aban-
doned, and composed a new rite, invented by him-
self, and consisting of seven degrees, which was
protected by Frederick the Great. The new order
made fierce and successful war both on the Strict
and the Relaxed Observance.

245. African Architects. — About 1765, Brother
Von Kopper instituted in Prussia, under the
auspices of Frederick II., the order of " African
Architects," who occupied themselves with historical
researches, mixing up therewith masonry and chi-
valry. The order was divided into eleven degrees.
They erected a vast building, which contained a
large library, a museum of natural history, and
a chemical laboratory. Until 1786, when it was
dissolved, the society awarded every year a gold
medal with fifty ducats to the author of the best
memoir on the history of Masonry. This was one
of the few rational masonic societies. The AMcan
Architects did not esteem decorations, aprons, col-
lars, jewels, &c. In their assemblies they read
essays, and communicated the results of their re-
searches. At their simple and decorous banquets


The Relaxed Observance.


323


instructiTe and scientifio diacoursea were delivered.
While tlieir iaitiationa were gratuitous, they gave
liberal aaaiatance to zealoua but needy brethren.
They published many important worka on Free-
masonry.


XVI.

THE CONGRESS OF WILHELMSBAD.

246.
\ABI0'n8 Congresses. — To put an end
to the munerous disputes raging among
masonic bodieSj various congresses were
held . In 1 7 7 8 J a congress was convened
at Lyons ; it lasted a monthj but was without result.
In 1785, another was held at Paris, but the time
was wasted in idle disputes with CagUostro. The
last and most important was that which assembled
at WUhelmsbad in 1782, under the presidency of
the Duke of Brunswick, who was anxious to end
the discord reigning among German Freemasons.
It was attended by masons from Europe, America,
and Asia. From an approximative estimate it
appears that there were then upwards of three
milHons of masons in the different parts of the
globe.

247. Discussions at Wilhelmshad. — The state-
ments contained in Dr. Stark's book, " The Coping


The Congress of Wilhelmsbad. -325

Stone'' (241) J concerning the influence of the
Jesuits in the masonic body, formed one of the
chief topics discussed. Some of the chiefs of the
Strict Observance produced considerable confusion
by being unable to give information concerning the
secrets of the high degrees, which they had pro-
fessed to know ; or to render an account of large
sums they had received on behalf of the order. The
main point was to settle whether Masonry was to
be considered as a continuation of the order of the
Templars, and whether the secrets of the sect were
to be sought for in the mCdern Templar degrees.
After thirty sittings, the answer was in the negative ;
the chiefs of the Strict Observance were defeated,
and the Duke of Brunswick suspended the order for
three years, from which blow it never recovered.
The Swedes professed to possess all the secrets;
the Duke of Brunswick hastened to TJpsala to learn
them, but found that the Swedes knew no more
than the Germans; whence new dissensions arose
between the masons of the two nations.

248. Besult of GonvenUon. — The only result of
the convention of Wilhelmsbad was the retention
of the three symbolical degrees, with the addition
of a new degree, that of the "Knight of Bene-
ficence." The Duke of Brunswick represented
the aristocratic element, and was thus opposed to
Masonry, which in its spirit is democratic. The
result of the congress strengthened the influence


326 Secret Societies.

of the duke 5 tence the opposition of Germany to
the principles of the French Eevolution, which broke
out soon after — an opposition which was like dis-
charging a rocket against a thunderbolt, but which
was carried to its height by the manifesto of the
Duke of Brunswick, so loudly praised by courtly
historians, and of which the German princes made
such good use as to induce the German confederacy
to surround France with a fiery line of deluded
patriotism. Freemasonry had been made the tool
and fool of prince- and priest-craft.


XVII.

MASONEY AND NAPOLEOlSriSM.

249.
'■^ASONBT protected by Napoleon. — With
renewed court frivolities and military
pomp, the theatrical spirit of Masonry
revived. The institution, so active be-
fore and during the Eevolution, because it was
governed by men who rightly understood and
worthily represented its principles, during the
empire fell into academic puerilities, servile com-
pliance, and endless squabbles. That period, which
masonic writers, attached to the latter and pleased
with its apparent splendour, call the most flourishing
of French Masonry, in the eyes of independent
judges appears as the least important and the least
honourable for the masonic order. Napoleon at first
intended to suppress Freemasonry, in which the
dreaded ideologists might easily find a refuge. The
representative system of the Grand Orient clashed
with his monarchical principles^ and the oligarchy of


328 Secret Societies.

the Scotch rite aroused his suspicions. The Parisian
lodges^ however, practised in the art of flattery,
prostrated themselves before the First Consul, pro-
strated themselves before the Emperor, and sued for
grace. The suspicions of Napoleon were not dis-
sipated ; but he perceived the policy of avoiding
violent measures, and of disciplining a body that
might turn against him. After considerable hesi-
tation, he declared in favour of the Grand Orient,
and the Scotch rite had to assume the second place.
A single word of Napoleon had done more to estab-
lish peace between them than all former machina-
tions. The Grand Orient became a court office,
and Masonry an army of employes. The Grand
Mastership was offered to Joseph Napoleon, who
accepted it, though never initiated into Freemasonry,
with the consent of his brother, who, however, for
greater security, insisted on having his trusty
arch-chancellor Cambaceres appointed Grand Master
Adjunct, to be in reality the only head of the order.
Gradually all the rites existing in France gave in
their adhesion to the imperial poHcy, electing Cam-
baceres as their chief dignitary, so that he eventually
possessed more masonic titles than any other man
before or after him. In 1805, he was made Grand
Master Adjunct of the Grand Orient j in 1806, Sove-
reign Grand Master of the Supreme Grand Council;
in the same year. Grand Master of the rite of Hero-
den of Kilwinning J in 1807, Supreme Head of the


Masonry and Napoleonism. 329

Frenoli rite ; in the same year. Grand Master of the
Philosophic Scotch rite; in 1808, Grand Master of
the order of Christ ; in 1809, National Grand Master
of the Knights of the Holy City; in the same year.
Protector of the High Philosophic Degrees.

250. Spread of Freemasonry. — But masonic dis-
putes soon again ran high. The arch-chancellor,
accustomed and attached to the usages and pomps
of courts, secretly gave the preference to the
Scotch rite with its high-sounding titles and gor-
geous ceremonies. The Grand Orient carried its
complaiats even to Napoleon, who grew weary of
these paltry farces — ^he who planned grand dramas ;
and at one time he had determined on abolishing
the order altogether, but Cambac^r^s succeeded in
arresting his purpose, showing him the dangers that
might ensue from its suppression — dangers which
must have appeared great, since Napoleon, who never
hesitated, hesitated then, and allowed another to alter
his views. Perhaps he recognized the necessity in
French society of a body of men who were free at
least in appearance, of a kind of political safety-
valve. The French had taken a liking to their
lodges, where they found a phantom of indepen-
dence, and might consider themselves on neutral
ground, so that a masonic writer could say: ''In
the bosom of Masonry there circulates a little of
that vital air so necessary to generous minds."
The Scotch rite, secretly protected, spread through-


330 Secret Societies.

out the Frencli departments and foreign countrieSj
and whilst the Grand Orient tried to suppress it,
andj to prevent innovations, elected a " Director
of Rites," the Supreme Grand Council established
itself at Milan, and elected Prince Eugene Grand
Master of the Grand Orient of Italy. The two
highest masonic authorities, which yet had the
same master in Camhacerea, and the same patron
in Napoleon, continued to combat each other with
as much fury as was shown in the struggle between
France and England. But having no public hfe, no
parliamentary debates, no opposition journals, the
greater part of the population took refuge in the
lodges, and every small town had its own. In 1812,
there existed one thousand and eighty-nine lodges,
all depending on the Grand Orient ; the army had
sixty-nine, and the lodge was opened and closed
with the cry, Vive I'Einpereur !

251. Obsequiousness of Freemasonry. — Ifapoleon,
unable and unwilling to suppress Freemasonry, em-
ployed it in the army, in the newly-occupied terri-
tories, and ia such as he intended to occupy. Im-
perial proselytism turned the lodges into schools of
Napoleonism. But one section of Masonry, under
the shadow of that protection, became the very con-
trary, anti- Napoleonic ; and not all the lodges closed
their accustomed labours with the cry of Vive
VEmpereur ! It is, however, quite certain that
Napoleon by means of the masonic society facili-


Masonry and Napoleonism. 331

tated or secured his conquests. Spain, Germanyj
and Italy were covered with lodges — antechambers,
more than any others, of prefectures and military
command — presided over and governed by soldiers.
The highest dignitaries of masonry at that period
were marshals, knights of the Legion of Honour,
nobles of ancient descent, senators, councillors, all
safe and trusty persons; a state that obeyed the
orders of Cambac^res, as he obeyed the orders
of Napoleon. Obsequiousness came near to the
ridiculous. The half-yearly words of command
of the Grand Orient retrace the history of Napo-
leonic progress. In 1800, '^Science and Peace j"
ia 1802, after Marengo, " Unity and Success j " in
1804, after the coronation, " Contentment' and
Greatness;" after the battle of Friedland, "Em-
peror and Confidence;" after the suppression of
the tribune, "Fidelity;" at the birth of the King
of Rome, "Posterity and Joy;^' at the departure
of the army of Russia, " Victory and Return." —
Terrible victory and unfortunate return !

262. Anti-Napoleordc Freemasonry. — Napoleon,
we have seen, made a league with Freemasonry, to
obtain its support. He is also said to have made
certaiu promises to it; but, as he failed to keep them,
the masons timaed against him, and had a large
share in his fall. This, however, is not very pro-
bable, and is attributing too much influence to an
order which had only recently recovered itself. Still


332 Secret Societies.

the anti- Napoleonic leaven fermented in the masonic
society. Sa-v&rj, the minister of police, was aware
of it in 1810, and wanted to apply to the secret
meetings of Freemasons the article of the penal code,
forbidding them ; but Cambac^r^s once more saved
the institution, which saved neither him nor his
patron. Freemasonry, if not by overt acts, at least
by its indifference, helped on the downfall of Napo-
leon. But it was not altogether inactive, for even
whilst the Napoleonic star illmnined almost alone
the political heavens of Europe, a masonic lodge
was formed whose object was the restoration of the
Bourbons, whose action may be proved by official
documents to have extended through the French
army, and led to the seditious movements of 1813.


XVIII.

PEBEMASONRY, THE EESTORATION AND
THE SECOND EMPIRE. *

253.

^SB Society of " France Begenerated." —
The Restoratiorij whose blindness was
only equalled by its mediocrity — which,
unable to create, proposed to itself to
destroy what even time respects, the memories and
glories of a people — could not please Freemasonry
much. Hostile to Napoleon in his last years, it
could not approve of the conduct of the new govern-
ment. At aU ievents,. the Freemasons held aloof,
though cynics might suggest that this was done
with a view of exacting better terms. In the mean-
while, a society was formed in Paris, which, as-
suming masonic forms and the title of ''France
Regenerated," became an instrument of espionage
and revenge in the hands of the new despot. But
the very government in whose favour it acted, found


334 Secret Societies.

it necessary witliiii a year from its foundation si-
lently to suppress it ; for it found the rabid zeal of
these adherents to be more injurious to its iaterests
than the open opposition of its avowed enemies.

264. Priestly Opposition to Masonry. — The ma-
sonic propaganda^ however, was actively carried on.
The priests, on their part, considered the moment
come for inaugurating an anti-masonic crusade.
Under Napoleon the priesthood could not breathp ;
the court was closed against it, except on grand
occasions, • when its presence was needed to add
outward pomp to imperial successes. As the masters
of ceremonies, the priests had ceased in France to
be the councillors and confessors of its rulers ; but
now they re-assumed those functions, and the masons
were at once recommended to the hatred of the king
and the mistrust of the public. They were repre-
sented as abettors of rationalism and regicide ; the
consequence was, that a great many lodges were
closed, though on the other hand the rite of Mis-
raim was established in Paris in 1816, whose mother
lodge was called the '^Eainbow,'' a presage of
serenity and calm, which, however, did not save the
society from police persecution. In 1821, this lodge
was closed, and not re-opened tiU 1830. Towards
the same time was founded the lodge of "Trino-
sophists." In 1821, the Supreme Grand Council
rose to the surface again, and with it the disputes
between it and the Grand Orient. To enter into


Freemasonry and the Second Empire. 335

their squabbles would be a sad waste of time, and I
therefore pass them over.

256. Political Insignificance of Masonry, — The
Freemasons are said to have brought about the
July revolution of 1830, but proofs are wanting,
and I think they may be absolved from that charge.
Modern Freemasonry is a very tame affair; and,
though very fond of being dressed up as knights,
masons, as a rule, are mere carpet-knights. Louis-
Philippe, who was placed on the throne by that revo-
lution, took the order under his protection and
appointed his son, the Duke of Orleans, Grand
Master. On the duke's death, in 1842, his brother,
the Duke de Nemours, succeeded him in the dig-
nity. In this latter year, the disputes between the
Grand Orient and the Supreme Grand Council were
amicably settled. Again we are told that at a
masonic congress held at Strasburg the founda-
tions of the revolution of 1848 were laid. It is
certain that Cavaignac, Lamartine, Ledru-Eollin,
Prudhon, Louis Blanc, Marrast, Vilain, Pyat, and a
great number of German republicans, attended that
congress ; but for this reason it cannot strictly be
called a masonic, it was rather a republican, meeting.
On the establishment of the Provisional Govern-
ment after the revolution of 1848, the Freemasons
gave in their adhesion to that government ; on which
occasion some high-flown speeches about liberty,
equality, and fraternity were made, and everybody


336 Secret Societies.

congratulated his neighbour that now the reign
of universal brotherhood had begun. But the
restoration of the empire, which followed soon
after, showed how idle aU this oratory had been,
and how the influence of Masonry in the great
affairs of the world really is nil.

266. Freemasomry and Napoleon III. — Again
the Napoleonic air wares around the Grand Orient.
The nephew showed himself from the first as hostile
to Freemasonry as his uncle had been; but the
decree prohibiting the French lodges from occu-
pying themselves with political questions, under
pain of the dissolution of the order, did not appear
until the 7th Sept., 1850. In January, 1852, some
superior members of the order proposed to offer
the dignity of Grand Master to Lucien Murai;, the
President's cousin. The proposal was unanimously
agreed to ; and on the 19th of the same month the
new Grand Master was acknowledged by all the
lodges. He held the office tiU 1861, when he was
obliged to resign, in consequence of the masonic
body having passed a vote of censure upon him for
his expressions iu favour of the temporal power of
the pope, uttered in the stormy discussion of the
French senate in the month of June of that year.
The Grand Orient was again all in confusion. Na-
poleon III. now interfered, especially as Prince
Napoleon was proposed for the office of Grand
Master; which excited the jealousy of the Mu-


Freemasonry and the Second Empire. 337

ratists, who published pamphlets of the most
Tituperative character against their adversaries, who
on their side replied with corresponding bitterness.
Napoleon imposed silence on the litigants, prohibited
attendance at lodges, promised that he himself
would appoint a Grand Master, and advised his
cousia to undertake a long voyage to the United
States. Deprived of the right of electing its own
chief, the autonomy of Freemasonry became an illu-
sion, its programme useless, and its mystery a farce.
In the meanwhile, the quarrels of the partizans of
the different candidates calmed down ; Prince Na-
poleon returned from America] Muxat resigned
himself to this defeat, as to others, and the emperor
forgot all about Freemasonry. At last, in January,
1862, there appeared a decree, appointing Marshal
Magnan to be Grand Master. A Marshal ! The
nephew, in this instance, as in many others, had
taken a leaf out of his uncle's book.

257. Jesuitical Ma/iioeuvres. — Napoleonic Free-
masonry, not entirely to lose its peculiar physi-
ognomy, ventured to change its institutions.- Je-
suitism cast loving eyes on it, and drew it towards
itself, as in the days of the Strict Observance.
Murat threw out his net, but was removed just when
it was most important for the interest of the Jesuits
that he should have remained. He proposed to
transform the French lodges — of which in 1852 there
were 325, whilst in 1861, only 269 could be found —

z


338 Secret Societies.

into societies of mutual succour, and to abandon or
submit the Mglier masonic sphere of morality and
humanity to the society, which in these last sixty
years has already overcome and incorporated the
whole Roman clergy, once its rivals, and by oblique
paths also many of the conservative sects of other
creeds. Murat did not succeed, but others may;
and though the masons say that Jesuitism shaU not
succeed, yet, how is Freemasonry, that professes to
meddle neither with poKtics nor religion, to coun-
teract the political and religious machinations of the
Jesuits ? And even if Freemasonry had the same
weapons, are there men among the order able to
wield them with the ability and fearlessness that
distinguish the followers of Loyola ? I fear not.


XIX.

FREBMASONEY IN ITALY.

258.
\HIM8I0AL Masonic SodeUes. — "We
tare but few notices of the early state
of Freemasonry in Italy, We are told
that in 1512 there was founded at
Florence a Society under the name of "■ The
Trowelj" composed of learned and literary men,
who indulged in all kinds of whimsical freaks, and
who may have served as prototypes to the Order of
" The Monks of the Screw,'' established towards
the end of the last century in Ireland. Thus at
one time they would meet in the lodge, dressed as
masons and labourers, and begin to erect an edifice
with trays full of macaroni and cheese, using spices
and bonbons for mortar, and rolls and cakes for
stones, and buildiag up the whole with aU kinds of
comestibles. And thus they went on, until a pre-
tended rain put an end to their labours. At
another time it was Ceres, who, in search of Proser-


340 Secret Societies.

pinBj invited the Brethren of the Trowel to accom-
pany her to the infernal regions. They foUowed
her through the mouth of a serpent into a dark
room, and' on Pluto iaviting them to the feast,
lights appeared, and the table was seen to be
covered with black, whilst the dishes on it were
foul and obscene animals, and bones of dead men,
served by devils carrying shovels. Finally aU this
vanished, and a choice banquet followed. This
Society of the Trowel was in existence in 1737.
The clergy endeavoured to suppress it ; and would
no doubt have succeeded, but for the accession
of Francis, Duke of Tuscany, who, as we have
seen, had been initiated in Holland, and who
set free aU the Freemasons that had been incar-
cerated, and protected the order. But the remem-
brance of that persecution is preserved in the
rituals, and in the degree of " Magus,'^ the costume
is that of the Holy Office, as other degrees com-
memorate the inquisitors of Portugal and Spain.

259. niuminati in Italy. — The sect of the lUu-
minati, of whom Count Filippo Strozzi was a warm
partisan, soon after spread through Italy, as well
as another order, affiliated with the niuminati, mys-
tical and alchymistical, and in opposition to the
Eosicrucians, called the " Initiated Brethren of
Asia," which had been founded at Vienna. It only
accepted candidates who had passed through the
first three degrees of the York rite. Like Egyptian


Freemasonry in Italy. 341

Masonry^ it worsHipped the Tetragrammaton, and
combined the deepest and most philosophical ideas
with the most childish superstitions.

260. Freemasonry at Naples. — In the kingdom
of Naples the masons amounted to many thousands.
An edict of Ohgiries III. (1751)^ and another of
Ferdinand IV. (1759), closed the lodges, but in a
short time they became a dead letter, and in vain did
the minister, Tanucci, hostile to the institution,
seek to revive them. The incident of a neophyte
dying a few days after his initiation gave a pretext
for fresh persecution. The masons, assembled at
a banquet, were arrested; and in vain did Levy, a
lawyer, undertake their defence. He was expelled
the kingdom ; his book in favour of the order was
publicly burnt by the executioner. But Queen
Caroline, having dismissed Tanucci, again sanc-
tioned masonic meetings, for which she received the
thanks of the Grand Orient of France. It would
seem, however, that in a very few years. Freema-
sonry again had to hide its head, for in 1767 we
hear of it as a " secret" society, whose existence
has just been discovered. The document which re-
cords this discovery puts the number of Free-
masons at 64,000, which probably is an exaggera-
tion ; stiU, among so excitable a population as that
of southern Italy, secret societies at all times found
plenty of proselytes.

261. Details of Bocmnent. — The document re-


342 Secret Societies.

ferred to says : — At last tlie great mine of the
Freemasons of Naples is discovered, of whom the
name, but not the secret, was knoTsn. Two cir-
cumstances are alleged by which the discovery was
brought about: — a dying man revealed all to his
confessor, that he should inform the king thereof;
a knight, who had been kept in great state by the
society, having had his pension withheld, betrayed
the Grand Master of the order to the king. This
Grand Master was the Duke of San Severo. The king
secretly sent a confidential officer with three dra-
goons to the duke's mansiouj with orders to seize
him before he had time to speak to any one, and
bring him to the palace. The order was carried
out ; but a few minutes after a fire broke out in the
duke's mansion, destroying his library, the real ob-
ject being, as is supposed, to bum all writings
having reference to Freemasonry. The fire was
extinguished, and the house guarded by troops.
The duke having been brought before the king,
openly declared the objects, system, seals, govern-
ment, and possessions of the order. He was sent
back to his palace, and there guarded by troops,
lest he should be killed by his former colleagues.
Freemasons have also been discovered at Florence,
and the Pope and the Emperor have sent thither
twenty-four theologisins to put a stop to the disorder.
The king acts with the greatest mercy towards
all implicated, to avoid the great dangers that might


Freemasonry in Italy. 343

ensue from a contrary course. He haa also ap-
pointed four persons of great standing to use the
best means to destroy so abominable a sect; and
has given notice to all the other sorereigns of Europe
of his discovery, and the abominable maxima of the
sect, calling upon them to assist in its suppression,
which it will be folly in them to refuse to do. For
the order does not count its members by thousands,
but by minions, especially among Jews and Pro-
testants. Their frightful maxims are only known
to the members of the fifth, sixth, and seventh
lodges, whilst those of the first three know nothing,
and those of the fourth act without knowing what
they do. They derive their origin from England,
and the founder of the sect was that infamous
Cromwell, first bishop, and then lover of Anne
Boleyn, and then beheaded for his crimes, called in
his day " the scourge of rulers." He left the order
an annual income of £10,000 sterling. It is divided
into seven lodges : the members of the seventh are
called Assessors ; of the sixth. Grand Masters ; of
the fifth. Architects; of the fourth. Executors
(here the secret ends) ; of the third, Euricori(!); of
the second and first. Novices and Proselytes. Their
infamous idea is based on the allegory of the temple
of Solomon, considered in its first splendour, and
then overthrown by the tyranny of the Assyrians,
and finally restored — thereby to signify the liberty
of man after the creation of the world, the tyranny


344 . Secret Societies.

of the priestliood, kings, and laws, and the re-estab-
lishment of that liberty. Then follow twelve
maxims, ia which these opinions and aims are more
fully expounded, from which it appears that they
were not very different from those of aU other re-
publican and advanced politicians.

262. Freemasomry at Venice. — The Freemasons
were at first tolerated at Venice, but in 1686 the go-
vernment suddenly took the alarm, and ordered the
closing of aU lodges, and banished the members;
but the decree was very leniently executed, and a
lodge of nobles having refased to obey, the magis-
trates entered it at a time when they knew no one
to be there. The furniture, ornaments, and jewels
were carried out and publicly burnt or dispersed,
but none of the brethren were in any way molested.
A lodge was re-established afterwards, which was
discovered in 1785, when aU its contents were again
burnt or otherwise destroyed. From the ritual,
which was found among the other effects, it appears
that the candidate for initiation was led, his eyes
being bandaged, from street to street, or canal to
canal, so as to prevent his tracing the locality, to
the Rio Marino, where he was first conducted into a
room hung with black, and illumined by a single
light ; there he was clothed in a long garment Kke
a winding sheet, but black ; he put on a cap some-
thing like a turban, and his hair was drawn over
his face, and in this elegant figure he was placed


Freemasonry in Italy. 345

before a looking-glass, covered with a black cur-
tain, under which were written the words, " If thou
hast true courage, and an honest desire to enter into
, the order, draw aside the curtain, and learn to know
thyself." He might then remove the bandage and
look at himself. He was then again blindfolded,
and placed in the middle of the room, while thirty
or forty members entered and began to fight with
swords. This was to try the candidate's courage,
who was himself slightly wounded. The bandage
was once more removed, and the wound dressed.
Then it was replaced, and the candidate taken to a
second apartment, hung with black and white, and
having in the middle a bed covered with a black
cloth, on the centre of which was a white cross, whilst
on either side was represented a white skeleton. The
candidate was laid on the bed, the bandage being
removed, and he was there left with two tapers,
the one white, the other yellow* After having been
left there for some time, the brethren entered in a
boisterous manner beating discordant drums. The
candidate was to show no sign of trepidation amidst
all these solemn (?) ceremonies ; and then the mem-
bers embraced him as a brother, and gave him the
name by which he was henceforth to be known in
the society.

263. Abatement under Napoleon.: — During the
reign of Napoleon I., numerous lodges were founded
throughout Italy; and it cannot be denied by the


346 Secret Societies.

greatest friends of tlie order that during that period
Freemasonry cut a most pitiful figure. For a so-
ciety that always boasted of its independence of,
and superiority to, all other earthly governments, to
forward addresses such as the following to Napo-
leouj seems something like self-abasement and
self-stultification : — " Napoleon ! thy philosophy
guarantees the toleration of our natural and divine
religion. We render thee honour worthy of thee
for it, and thou shalt find in us nothing but faithful
subjects, ever devoted to thy august person !"

264. The Freemasonry of the Present in Italy. —
Very little need or can be said as regards the active
proceedings of Italian Masonic lodges of the pre-
sent day, though they have been reconstituted and
united under one or two heads. But their programme
deserves attention, as pointing out those reforms,
needed not only iu Italy, but everywhere where
Freemasonry exists. The declared object, then, of
Italian Freemasonry is, the highest development of
universal philanthropy ; the iudependence and unity
of single nations, and fraternity among each other ;
the toleration of every religion, and absolute equality
of worship ; the moral and material progress of the
masses. It moreover declares itself independent of
every government, aflSrming that Italian Free-
masonry will not recognize any other sovereign
power on earth but right reason and universal con-
science. It further declares — and this deserves


Freemasonry in Italy. 34:7

particular attention — that Freemasonry is not to
consist in a mysterious symbolismj vain ceremonies^
or indefinite aspirations, •whicli cover the order with
ridicule. Again, Masonry being universal, essen-
tially human, it does not occupy itself vdth forms of
government, nor with transitory questions, but with
such as are permanent and general. In social re-
forms abstract theories, founded on mystical aspi-
rations, are to be avoided. The duty of labour
being the most essential in civil society. Free-
masonry is opposed to idleness. Religious ques-
tions are beyond the pale of Freemasonry. Human
conscience is in itself inviolable ; it has no concern
with any positive religion, but represents religion
itself in its essence. Devoted to the principle of
fraternity, it preaches universal toleration ; compre-
hends in its ritual many of the symbols of various
religions, as in its syncretism it chooses the purest
truths. Its creed consists in the worship of the
Divine, whose highest conception, withdrawn from
every priestly speculation, is that of the Great Archi-
tect of the Universe j and in faith in humanity, the
sole interpreter of the Divine in the world. As to
extrinsic modes of worship. Freemasonry neither
imposes nor recommends any, leaving to everyone
his free choice, until the day, perhaps not far dis-
tant, when aU men will be capable of worshipping
the Infinite in spirit and in truth, without inter-
mediaries and outward forms. And whilst man in


348 Secret Societies.

his secret relations to the Infinite fecundates the
religious thought, he iu his relations to the Uni-
verse fecundates the scientific thought. Science
is truth, and the most ancient cultus of Free-
masonry.

In determining the relations of the individual to
his equals. Freemasonry does not restrict itself to
recommending to do unto others what we wish
others would do unto us ; but inculcates to do good,
oppose evil, and not to submit to injustice in what-
soever form it presents itself. Freemasonry looks
forward to the day when the iron plates of the
"Monitor" and the "Merrimac" will be beaten
into steam-ploughs ; when man, redeemed by liberty
and science, shall enjoy the pure pleasures of intel-
ligence ; when peace, fertilised by the wealth and
strength now devoted to war, shall bring forth the
most beautiful fruit of the tree of life.

265. Reform needed. — Greatly therefore is the
academic puerility of rites to be regretted, which
drags back into the past an institution that ought
to launch forward iato the future. It is self-evident
that Freemasonry in this state cannot last — ^that a
reform is necessary ; and as De Castro, from whom
the above is taken, thinks that it would be an
honour to Italy to be the leader in such a reform,
it would be an honour to any country that initiated
it. Masonry ought not to be an ambulance, but a
vanguard. It is embarrassed by its excessive bag-


Freemasonry in Italy.


349


its superfluous symbols. Guarding secrets
universally known^ it cannot entertain secrets of
greater account. Forcing itself to beUeve itself
to be the sole depositary of widely-spread truths,
it deprives itself and the world of other truths. In
this perplexity and alternative of committing suicide
or being born anew, what will Masonry decide on ?


XX.


CAGLIOSTEO AND BGYPTIAJN" MASONRY.


266.
tlFH of OagUostro. — Joseph Balsamo, the
disciple and successor of St. Germain^
■who pretended at the court of Louis
XV. to have been the contemporary
of Charles Y., Francis I., and Christy and to possess
the elixir of life and many other secrets, had vaster
designs and a loftier ambition than his teacher, and
was one of the most active agents of Freemasonry
in France and the rest of Europe. ■ He was born at
Palermo in 1743, and educated at two convents in
that city, where he acquired some chemical know-
ledge. As a young man, he fell in with an Aime-
nian, or Greek, or Spaniard, called Althotas, a kind
of adventurer, who professed to possess the philo-
sopher's stone, with whom he led a roving Ufe for
a number of years. What became of Althotas at last
is not positively known. Balsamo at last found his
way to Rome, where he married the beautiful


Cagliostro and Egyptian Masonry. 351

Lorenza Feliciani, whom lie treated so badly, ttat
she escaped from him ; but he recovered her, and
acquired great influence over her by magnetically
operating upon her. There is no doubt that he
was a powerful magnetizer. Visiting Germany, he
was initiated into Freemasonry, in which he soon
began to take a prominent part. He also assumed
different titles, such as that of Marquis of Pelle-
griui, but the one he is best known by is that of
Count Cagliostro ; and by his astuteness, impudence,
and some lucky hits at prophesying, he acquired a
European notoriety and made many dupes, including
persons of the highest rank, especially in France,
where he founded many new Masonic lodges. He
was the author of a book called " The Eite of
Egyptian Masonry,^' which rite he established first
in Courland, and afterwards in Germany, France,
and England. After having been banished from
France, in consequence of his implication iu the affair
of the queen's necklace, and driven from England by
his creditors, he was induced by his wife, who was
weary of her wandering life, and anxious once more
to see her relations, to visit Eome, where he was
arrested on the charge of attempting to found a
Masonic lodge, agaiast which a papal bull had re-
cently been promulgated, and thrown iuto the castle
of St. Angelo, in 1789. He was condemned to
death, but the punishment was commuted to per-
petual imprisonment. His wife was shut up in a


352 Secret Societies.

convent, and died soon after. Having been trans-
ferred to tlie Castle of San Leo, he attempted to
strangle the monk sent to confess him, in the hope
of escapiag in his gown ; but the attempt failed, and
it is supposed that he died, a prisoner, in 1795.

267. The Egyptian Bite. — The Egyptian rite
invented by Cagliostro is a mixture of the sacred
and profane, of the serious and laughable; charla-
tanism is its prevailing feature. Having discovered
a MS. of George Cofton, in which was propounded
a singular scheme for the reform of Freemasonry in
an alchymistic and fantastic sense, Cagliostro founded
thereon the bases of his masonic system, taking
advantage of human credulity, enriching himself,
and at the same time seconding the action of other
secret societies. If there were not now believers
in spirit-rapping and table-turning, it would be
difficult to understand how Cagliostro succeeded
in gaining so many followers and so much wealth,
considering his vulgar tricks and shallow pretences.
He gave his dupes to understand that the scope of
Egyptian Masonry was to conduct men to perfection
by means of physical and moral regeneration ; assert-
ing that the former was infaUible through the prima
materia and the philosopher's stone, which assured
to man the strength of youth and immortaHty, and
that the second was to be achieved by the discovery
of a pentagon that would restore man to his primi-
tive innocence. This rite indeed is- a tissue of fa-


Cagliostro and Egyptian Masonry. 353

tuities it -would not be worth wliile to allude to, did
it not offer matter for study to the philosopher and
moralist. Cagliostro pretended that the rite had
been first founded by Enoch, remodelled by Elias,
and finally restored by the Grand Copt. Both men
and women were admitted into the lodges, though
the ceremonies for each were slightly different, and
the lodges for their reception entirely distinct. In
the reception of women, among other formalities
there was that of breathing into the face of the
neophyte, saying, " I breathe upon you this breath
to cause to germinate in you and grow in your
heart the truth we possess ; I breathe it into you to
strengthen ia you good intentions, and to confirm
you in the faith of your brothers and sisters. We
constitute you a legitimate daughter of true Egyp-
tian adoption and of this worshipfal lodge.^' One
of the lodges was called " Sinai," where the most
secret rites were performed ; another " Ararat," to
symbolize the rest reserved for masons only. Con-
cerning the pentagon, Cagliostro taught that it would
be given to the masters after forty days of inter-
course with the seven primitive angels, and that its
possessors would enjoy a physical regeneration for
5557 years, after which they would through gentle
sleep pass iato heaven. The pentagon had as much
success with the upper ten thousand of London,
Paris, and St. Petersburg, as the philosopher's stone
ever enjoyed; and large sums were given for a few

A A


354 Secret Societies.

grains of tlie rejuvenating prima materia. There
exists yet between Basle and Strasburg a sumptu-
ous Chinese temple, where the famous pentagon
was worshipped; and the lodge " Sinai" at Lyons
was as gorgeous as a palace.

268. GagUostro's Hydromamcy. — But beside ma-
sonic delusions, Cagliostro made use of the then
little understood wonders of magnetism to attract
adherents ; and as many persons are seduced by the
wine-cup, so he made dupes of many by means of
the water-bottle, which trick, as might be shown, was
very ancient, and consisted in divination by hydro-
mancy. A child, generally a little girl, was made to
look into a bottle of water, and see therein events,
past, present, and to come, the child having of course
been well tutored beforehand ; and as Cagliostro
was really a man of observation, he made many
shrewd guesses as to the future, and sometimes
fortune favoured him — as in the case of Schieffort,
one of the leaders of the Illuminati, who refused to
join the Egyptian rite, at which Cagliostro was so
incensed, that he caused the Httle g^l to see in the
decanter the exterminating angel, who declared that
in less than a month Schieffort would be punished.
Nofv it so happened that within that period Schief-
fort committed suicide, which of course gave an
immense lift to Cagliostro and his bottle. In this
respect indeed Cagliostro was a forerunner of our
modern spiritualists; and as he did not keep his


Cagliostro and Egyptian Masonry. 355

occult power a secret from allj but freely Gommuiii-
cated itj magical practices were thus introduced
into the lodges, wluch well serTed the purposes of
the astutOj but brought discredit on the institution.
And all this occurred at the period of the Encyclo-
pedists, and on the eve of mighty events !


XXI.


ADOPTIVE MASONET.


269.
[I8T0BIGAL Notice. — ^According to one
of tke fundamental laws of Masonry —
and a rule prevailiag in the greater
mysteries of antiquity — women cannot
be received into the order. Women cannot keep
secrets, at least so Milton says, through the mouth
of Dalila : —

" Granting, as I do, it was a weakness

In me, but incident to all our sex.

Curiosity, inquisitive, importune

Of secrets ; then with like infirmity

To publish them ; both common female faults."

But we have already seen that Cagliostro admitted
women to the Egyptian rite ; and when at the be-
ginning of the eighteenth century several associa-
tions sprang up in France, which in their external
aspect resembled Freemasonry, but did not exclude
women, the ladies naturally were loud in their praise


Adoptive Masonry. 357

of such institutionsj so that the masonic brother-
hood, seeing it was becoming unpopular^ had re-
course to the stratagem of establishing " adoptive"
lodges of women, so called because every such lodge
had finally to be adopted by some regulaj" masonic
lodge. The Grand Orient of France framed laws for
their government, and the first lodge of adoption was
opened in Paris in 1775, in which the Duchess of
Bourbon presided, and was initiated as Grand Mis-
tress of the rite. The Revolution checked the pro-
gress of this rite, but it was revived in 1805, when
the Empress Josephine presided over the " Loge
Imperiale d' Adoption des Francs- Chevaliers" at
Strasburg. Similar lodges spread oyer Europe,
Great Britain excepted; but they soon declined,
and are at present confined to the place of their
origin.

270. Organisation. — The rite consists of the same
degrees as those of genuine Masonry. Every sister,
being a dignitary, has beside her a masonic brother
holding the corresponding rank. Hence the officers
are a Grand Master and a Grand Mistress, an In-
spector and an Inspectress, a Depositor and a De-
positrix, a Conductor and a Conductress. The busi-
ness of the lodge is conducted by the, sisterhood,
the brethren only acting as their assistants ; but the
Grand Mistress has very little to say or to do, she
being only an honorary companion to the Grand
Master. The first, or apprentice's degree, is only


358 Secret Societies.

introductory; in the second, or companion, tte
scene of the temptation in Eden is emblematically
represented ; the building of the tower of Babel is
the subject of the mistress's degree; and ia the
fourth, or that of perfect mistress, the officers re-
present Moses, Aaron, and their wives, and the
ceremonies refer to the passage of the Israelites
through the wilderness, as a symbol of the passage
of men and women through this to another and
better life. The lodge room is tastefully decorated,
and divided by curtains into four compartments,
each representing one of the four quarters of the
globe, the eastern, or furthermost, representing
Asia, where there are two splendid thrones, de-
corated with gold fringe, for the Grand Master and
the Grand Mistress. The members sit on each side
in straight lines, the sisters in front and the bro-
thers behind them, the latter having swords in their
hands. All this pretty playing at masonry is na-
turally followed by a banquet, and on many occa-
sions by a baU. And a very proper sequel to pri-
vate theatricals ! At the banquets the members use
a symbolical language; thus the lodge-room is
called " Eden,'' the doors ''barriers," a glass is
called a " lamp," water " white oil," wine " red
on ;" to fill your glass is " to trim your lamp," &c.
271 . Jesuit Degrees. — The Jesuits, qui vont passer
leur nez partout, soon poked it into Adoptive Ma-
sonry — for to get hold of the women is to get hold


Adoptive Masonry. 359

of the better half of mankind — and founded new
lodges, or modified existing ones of that rite to
further their own purposes. Thus it is that a truly
monkish asceticism was introduced into some of
them, by the Jesuits divided into ten degrees ; and
we find such passages in the catedhism as these:
"Are you prepared, sister, to sacrifice life for the
good of the catholic, apostolic Roman Church V
The tenth or last degree was called the " Princess
of the Crown," and a great portion of the ritual
treats of the Queen of Sheba. This rite was
established in Saxony in 1779.


xxn.


ANDROGYNOUS MASONEY.


272.
l^BIGIN and Tendency. — Gallantry al-
ready makes its appearance in Adoptive
Masonry ; and this gallantry, which for
so many ages was the study of France,
and was there reduced to an ingenious art, manu-
factured on its own account rites and degrees that
were masonic in name only. Politics were de-
throned by amorous intrigues ; and the enumerators
of great effects sprung from trifling causes might in
this chapter of history find proofs of what a super-
ficial and accidental thing politics are, when not
governed by motives of high morality, nor watched
by the incorruptible national conscience. And
Androgynous Masonry did not always confine itself
to an interchange of compHments and the pursuit of
pleasure ; stUl, as a rule, its lodges for the initiation
of males and females — defended by some of their
advocates as founded on Bxod. xxxviii. 8 — are a


Androgynous Masonry. 361

•whimsical form of that court life which in France and
Italy had its poets and romancers; and which rose to
such a degree of imj^idence and scandal as to outrage
the modesty of citizens and popular virtue. It is a
page of that history of princely corruption, which
the French people at first read of with laughter,
then with astonishment, finally with indignation;
and which inspired it with those feelings which at
last found their vent in the excesses of the great
Eevolution. Every Revolution is a puritanical
movement, and the simple and neglected virtue of
the lowly-born avenges itself upon the pompous
vices of their superiors.

273. Earliest Androgynous Societies. — Some of
these were founded in France and elsewhere by an
idle, daring, and conquering soldiery. As their
type we may take the order of the " KJnights and
Ladies of Joy," founded with extraordinary success
at Paris in 1696, under the protection of Bacchus
and Venus, and whose printed statutes are still in
existence ; and that of the " Ladies of St. John of
Jerusalem," and the " Ladies of St. James of the
Sword and Calatrava." They, as it were, served as
models to the canonesses who till the end of the
last century brought courtly pomp and mundane
pleasures into the very cloisters of France, and
compelled austere moralists to excuse it by saying
that it was dans le gout de la nation.

274. Other Androgynous Societies. — In the order


362 Secret Societies.

of the " Companions of Penelope, or the Palladium
of LadieSj" whose statutes are said to hare been
drawn up by P^n^lon (with how jnuch truth is easily-
imagined) , the trials consist in showing the candi-
date that work is the palladium of women ; whence
we may assume the pursuits of this society to have
been very different from the equivocal occupations
of other orders. The order of the " Mopses" owed
its origin to a religious scruple. Pope Clement XII.
having issued^ in 1738, a Bull, condemning Free-
masonry, the Eoman CathoHcs, not wishing to de-
prive themselves of their fraternal meetings, insti-
tuted, under the above name (derived from the
German word Mops, a young mastiff, the symbol of
mutual fidelity), what was pretended to be a new
association, but what was in fact only Freemasonry
under another name. In 1776 the " Mopses" be-
came an androgynous order, admitting females to
all the offices, except that of Grand Master. There
was, however, a Grand Mistress also. In 1777 there
was established in Denmark the androgynous order
of the " Society of the Chain,^' to which belongs
the honour of having founded and of maintaining at
its own expense the Asylum for the BUnd at Copen-
hagen, the largest and best managed of similar
institutions in Europe. The order of " Perse-
verance," the date of whose foundation is unknown,
but which existed in Paris in 1777, and was sup-
ported by the most distinguished persons, had a


Androgynous Masonry. 363

laudable custom, which might be imitated by other
f societies, viz., to inscribe in a book, one of which is
still extant, the praiseworthy actions of the male and
female members of the association. But one of the
most deserving masonic androgynous institutions
was that of the " Sovereign Chapter of the Scotch
Ladies of France," founded in 1810, and divided
into lesser and greater mysteries, and whose in-
structions aimed chiefly at leading the neophyte
back to the occupations to which the state of society
called him or her. To provide food and work for
those wanting either, to afford them advice and
help, and save them from the cruel alternative of
crime — such was the scope of this socifety, which
lasted till the year 1828.

275. Vicious Androgynous Societies.- — The So-
ciety of the " Wood-store of the Globe and Glory "
was founded in 1747 by the Chevalier de BeauchSne,
a lively bqon companion, who was generally to be
found at an inn, where for very little money he con-
ferred all the masonic degrees of that time ; a man
whose worship would have shone by the great tun
of Heidelberg, or at the drinking bouts of German
students. The Wood-store was supposed to be in a
forest, and the meetings, which were much in vogue,
took place in a garden outside Paris, called " New
France," where assembled lords and clowns, ladies
and grisettes, indulging in the easy costumes and
manners of the country. Towards the middle of


364 Secret Societies.

the eighteentli century, there was established in
Britanny the order of the " Defoliators."

In the order of " PeUcity," instituted in Paris
in 1742, and divided into the four degrees of mid-
shipman, captain, chief of a squadron, and vice-
admiral, the emblems and terms were nautical:
sailors were its founders, and it excited so much
attention, that ia 1746 a satire, entitled, " The
Means of reaching the highest Eank in the Navy
without getting Wet," was published against it.
Its field of action was the field of love. A Grand
Orient was called the offing, the lodge the squadron,
and the sisters performed the fictitious voyage to the
island of Felicity sous la voile des freres et pilotees
par eux; and the candidate promised ''never to
receive a foreign ship into her port as long as a
ship of the order was anchored there."

The order of the " Lovers of Pleasure " was a
military institution, a pale revival of the cere-
monies of chivalry and the courts of love, impro-
vised in the French camp in Gallicia. From the
discourse of one of the orators we select the fol-
lowing passage : " Our scope is to embellish our
existence, always taking for our guide the words :
' Honour, Joy, and Delicacy.' Our scope, moreover,
is to be faithful to our country and the august
sovereign who fills the universe with his glorious
name, to serve a cause which ought to be grateful to
every gentle soul, that of protecting youth and inno-


Androgynous Masonry. 365

cence, and of establishing between flie ladies and
ourselves an eternal alliancOj cemented by the purest
friendship." This society, it is said, was much
favoured by Napoleon I., and hence we may infer
that its aim was not purely pleasure ; at all events
it is remarkable, that a society, having masonic
rites, should have given its services to the " august
sovereign" who had ji^at withdrawn his support
from genuine Freemasonry.

276. Knights and Nymphs of the Rose. — This
order was founded in Paris in 1778 by Chaumont,
private secretary to Louis-Philippe d' Orleans, to
please that prince. The chief lodge was held in
one of the famous petites maisons of that epoch.
. The great lords had lodges in their own houses.
The Hierophant, assisted by a deacon called " Senti-
ment," initiated the men, and the Grand Priestess,
assisted by the deaconess called "Discretion,'*
initiated the women. The age of admission for
knights was " the age to love," that of ladies, " the
age to please and to be loved." Love and mystery
were the programme of the order ; the lodge was
called the Temple of Love, which was beautifully
adorned with garlands of flowers and amorous
emblems and devices. The knights wore a crown
of myrtle, the nymphs a crown of roses. During
the time of initiation a dark lantern, held by the
nymph of Discretion, shed a dim light, but after-
wards the lodge was illuminated with numerous


366 Secret Societies.

wax candles. The aspiraiits, laden witli chains, to
symbolize the prejudices that kept them prisoners,
were asked, "What seek yon here?" To which
they replied, "Happiness." They were then
questioned as to their private opinion and conduct
in matters of gallantry, and made twice to traverse
the lodge over a path covered with love-knots,
whereupon the iron chains were taken off, and
garlands of flowers, called "chains of love," sub-
stituted. The candidates were then conducted
to the altar, where they took the oath of secresy;
and thence to the mysterious groves in the neigh-
bourhood of the Temple of Love, where incense
was offered up to Venus and her son. If it was a
knight who had been initiated, he exchanged his
crown of myrtle for the rose of the last initiated
nymph ; and if a nymph, she exchanged her rose
for the myrtle crown of Brother Sentiment. The
horrors of the Revolution scattered these knights
and nymphs, who, like thoughtless children, were
playing on a volcano.

277. Mason's Daughter. — This is an androgy-
nous degree invented in the Western States of
America, and given to master masons, their wives,
and unmarried sisters and daughters. It refers to
circumstances recorded in chapters xi. and xii. of
St. John's Gospel.


XXIII.


PBESECUTIONS OF FREEMASONRY.


278.
IAU8E8 of Persecution. — Tlie secresy
■with which the masonic brotherhood
has always surrounded its proceedings is
no doubt highly grateful to the mem-
bers, but it has its drawbacks. The outside world j
who cannot belieTC that masonic meetings, which
are so jealously guarded against the intrusion of
non-masons, have no other purpose than the re-
hearsal of a now totally useless and pointless ritual,
followed by conYiviality, naturally assume that there
must be something more behind ; and what seems
to fear the light is usually supposed to be evil.
Hence all governments, as long as they did not
know what modern Freemasonry really is, perse-
cuted and endeavoured to suppress it. But as soon
as they discovered its real scope and character, they
gave it their support, feeling quite convinced that
men who could find entertainment in the doings of


368 Secret Societies.

the lodges, would never, as it is popularly called,
set tlie Thames on fire. Thus one of the first per-
secutions against Freemasonry arose in Holland ia
1734. A crowd of ignorant fanatics, incited thereto
by the clergy, broke into a lodge at Amsterdam
and destroyed aU its furniture and ornaments; but
the town clerk having at the suggestion of the
order been initiated, the States-General, upon his
report, sanctioned the society, many of the chief
persons becoming members. Of course when lodges
were turned into political clubs, and the real busi-
ness of Masonry was cast aside for something more
serious, the matter assumed a very different aspect.
The persecutions here to be mentioned wiU there-
fore be such only as took place against Freemasonry,
legitimately so called-.

279. Instances of Persecution. — ^Pope Clement
XII., in 1737, issued a decree against the order,
which was followed by a more severe edict next
year, the punishment therein awarded for being
found guilty of practising Freemasonry being con-
fiscation and death, without hope of mercy. This was
a signal of persecution in the countries connected
with Eome. The parliament of Paris, however, re-
fused to register the papal BuU ; and an apology for
the order was published at Dublin. But Philip V. of
Spain declared the galleys for Hfe, or punishment of
death with torture to be the doom of Freemasons ; a
very large number of whom he caused to be arrested


Persecutions of Freemasonry. 369

and sentenced. Peter Torrubia, Grand Inquisitor
of Spain, having first made confession and received
absolution, entered the order for the express pur- ,
pose of betraying it. He joined in 1751, and made
himself acquainted with the entire ramifications of
the Craft ; and in consequence members of ninety-
seven lodges were seized and tortured on the rack.
Ferdinand VI. declared Freemasonry to be high
treason, and punishable with death. When the
French became masters of Spain, Freemasonry was
revived and openly practised, the members of the
Grand Lodge of Madrid meeting in the hall previ-
ously occupied by their arch-enemy the Inquisition.
With the return of Ferdinand VII., who re-esta-
blished the Inquisition, the exterminating process
recommenced. In 1814, twenty-five persons sus-)
pected of Freemasonry were dragged in chains to /
confinement ; but the subsequent arrests were so/
numerous that no correct account is obtainable, nor
can the ultimate fate of the accused be recorded.
In 1824, a law was promulgated, commanding all
masons to declare themselves, and deliver up aU
their papers and documents, under the penalty of
being declared traitors. The Minister of War, in
the same year, issued a proclamation, outlawing
every member of the craft, and in 1827 seven
members of a lodge in Granada were executed;
while in 1828, the tribunals of the same city
condemned the Marquis of Lavrillana and Cap-

B B


370 Secret Societies.

tain Alvarez to be beheaded for having founded a
lodge.

In 1735, several noble Portuguese instituted a
lodge at Lisbon, under the Grand Lodge of England,
of which George Gordon was Master ; but the priests
immediately determined on putting it down. One
of the best known victims of the Inquisition was
John Coustos, a native of Switzerland, who was
arrested iu 1743, and thrown into a subterranean
dungeon, where he was racked nine times in three
months for not revealing the secrets of Masonry.
He had, however, to appear in an auto-da-fe, and
was sentenced to five years' work as a galley slave ;
but the British Government claiming him as a sub-
ject, he was released before the term of his punish-
ment expired. Thirty- three years passed with-
out anything more being heard of Freemasonry in
Portugal ; but in 1776, two members of the craft
were arrested, and remained , upwards of fourteen
/ months in prison. In 1792, Queen Elizabeth or-
/ dered all Freemasons to be delivered over to the
y Inquisition; a very few families escaped to New
VYork, where they landed with the words. Asylum
qucerimus. Among their American brethren they
found not only an asylum, but a new home. The
French empire ushered in better days ; but with the
restoration of the old regime came the former preju-
dices and persecutions. In 1818, John VI. pro-
mulgated from the Brazils an edict against aU secret


Persecutions of Freemasonry. 371

societies, including Freemasonry; and again in
1823j a similar though, more stringent proclamation
appeared in Lisbon. The punishment of death
therein awarded has been reduced to fine and trans-
portation to Africa.

In Austria, the papal bulls provoked persecutions
and seizures ; hence arose the order of the Mopses
(274) , which spread through Holland, Belgium, and
France. In 1747, thirty masons were arrested and
imprisoned at Vienna. Maria Theresa, having been
unable to discover the secrets of the order, issued a
decree to arrest aU masons, but the measure was
finstratedbythe good sense of the Emperor Josephl.,
who was himself a mason, and therefore knew that
the pursuits of the order were innocent enough.
Francis II., at the Diet of Ratisbon in 1794, de-
manded the suppression of aU masonic societies
throughout Germany ; but Hanover, Brunswick, and
Prussia united with the smaller states in refusing
their assent.

The history of Freemasonry in Central Italy dur-
ing the last century and this, as may be supposed,
is a mere repetition of sufferings, persecutions, and
misfortunes; the members of the craft being con-
tinually under punishment, through the intolerance
of the priesthood and the interference of the civil
power.

But persecution was not confined to Catholic
countries. Even in Switzerland, the masons at one


372 Secret Societies.

time were persecuted. The Council of Berne, in
1745, passed a law with certain degrees of punish-
ment for members of lodges; which law was re-
newed in 1782. It is now abrogated. Frederick I.,
King of Sweden, a very few years after the intro-
duction (1736) of Freemasonry, forbade it under
penalty of death. At present the king is at the
head of the Swedish craft. The King Frederick
Augustus III. of Poland caused, in 1739, enact-
ments to be published, forbidding, under pain of
severe punishment, the practice of Freemasonry in
his kingdom. In 1757, the Synod of Stirling
adopted a resolution debarring all Freemasons from
the ordinances of religion. In 1799, Lord Eadnor
proposed in the English Parliament a bill against
secret societies, and especially against Freemasonry;
and a similar but equally fruitless attempt against
the order was made in 1814 by Lord Liverpool.
The Society is now acknowledged by law; the
Prince of Wales is one of its members, and is now
one of its Past Grand Masters.

280. Anti-Masonic Publications. — One of the
earliest English publications against Freemasonry
is " The Freemasons ; an Hudibrastic Poem," Lon-
don, 1723. It is written in the coarsest style of
invective, describing the masons as a drunken set
of revellers, practising aU kinds of filthy rites.
Several works of no literary merit appeared at
various intervals between 1726 and 1760, profess-
ing to reveal the masonic secrets, but their authors


Persecutions of Freemasonry. 373

evidently knew nothing of the craft. In 1768, a
rabid parson published a sermon, entitled "Ma-
sonry, the Way to Hell." It is beneath criticism.
Numerous works of a similar tendency, or pro-
fessing to reveal what masonry was, thenceforth
appeared at short intervals in England, France,
Germany, and Italy, such as " Les Plus Secrets
MystSres de la Ma9onnerie;" " Le Maschere
Strappate" (The Masks torn ofi) ; " The Veil Re-
moved, or the Secret of the Revolutions fostered
by Freemasomy •" Robison's " Proofs of a Conspi-
racy against all the Religions and Governments of
Europe carried on in the Secret Meetings of Free-
masons, Illuminati, and Reading Societies,^' a work
which must have astonished the masons not a little,
and for which they were no doubt in their hearts
very grateful to the author, for he makes the masons
out to be very terrible fellows indeed. Good easy
men, who only thought of enjoying their "beer
and 'baccy," and of going through a little mum-
mery, to find that they were, "unbeknown" to
themselves, very near upsetting all the thrones of
Europe ! The work of the Abb^ Barruel is of the
same stamp ; it is entitled : " M^moires pour servir
k I'Histoire du Jacobinisme," and is noteworthy for
nothing but absence of critical power and honesty
of statement. A great deal is now written against
Freemasonry; but the writers in most instances
know neither what Freemasonry is, nor what it
pretends to be.


xxrv.

SCHISMATIC EITES AND SECTS.

281. .
^CHISMATIG Bites and Sects.— The pre-
tended derivation o£ Freemasonry from
the Knights Templars lias already been
referred to ; but Masonry, the system,
not the name, existed before the Order of the Tem-
ple, and the Templars themselves had masonic rites
and degrees three hundred years before their
downfall. Those who, however, maintain the
above view say that the three assassins symbohze
the three betrayers of the order, and Hiram the
Grand Master Molay; and according to the ritual
of the Grand Lodge of the Three Globes, a Ger-
man degree, the lights around the coffin signify
the flames of the pile on which Molay was burnt.
To the Eosicrucians and to certain German lodges
Hiram is Christ, and the three assassins, Judas that
betrays, Peter that denies Him, and Thomas that
disbelieves His resurrection. The ancient Scotch
rite had its origin in other false accounts of the


Schismatic Rites and Sects. 375

rise of the order. In the last century schisms
without number arose in the masonic body. It
would be impossible in a work like this to name
them all ; a few only can be referred to. Out of
the non-masonic society of the Eosicrucians was
formed in 1777 an association, calling itself the
"Brothers of the Golden Eosy Cross." It was
very numerous in Germany, the Netherlands, and
Sweden. A second schism from the Eosicrucians
was the " Society of the Initiated Brothers of
Asia," which was originated in 1780, and whose
pursuits were those of alchemy. Its existence was
but brief. EolKng, a member, in 1787 published
in priut its laughable secrets. A lodge was founded
in 1768 by one Schroepfer in his own house, where
he conjured up ghosts ! The Eing of Saxony,
being incredulous, had him flogged as an impostor.
The charlatan disguised himself, assumed the title
of Count de Steinville, went to the Court of Dres-
den and frightened the king with horrible appari-
tions. This was his revenge, but the French
ambassador discovered the cheat. Schroepfer
escaped to Leipsic and began afresh his mum-
meries. But having promised his dupes more than
he could accomplish, he shot himself in the wood of
Eosenthal, near Leipzig. The " Moravian Brothers
of the Order of Eeligioua Freemasons, or Order of
the Mustard- Seed," was another German rite,
founded in 1739. Its mysteries were founded on


376 Secret Societies.

the passage in St. Mark iv., in which Christ com-
pares the kingdom of heaven to a grain of mustard-
seed. The brethren recognized each other by a
ring inscribed with the words : — " No one of ns
lives for himself." The jewel was a cross of gold,
surmounted by a mustard-plant with the words : —
"What was it before ? Nothing." Nearly all the
degrees of the Scotch rite are schismatic. In like
manner all the English and American orders of chi-
valry, and their conclaves and encampments, are
ridiculous parodies of ancient chivalry.

In 1758, Lacorne, a dancing master, and Pirlet^
a tailor, invented the degree of the " Council of the
Emperors of the Bast and West," whose members
assumed the titles of " Sovereign Prince Masons,
Substitutes General of the Royal Art, Grand Super-
intendents and Officers of the Grand and Sovereign
Lodge of St. John of Jerusalem." The ritual
consisted of twenty-five degrees, and as it was cal-
culated by its sounding titles and splendour of
ritual to flatter the vanity of the fidvolous, it was at
first very successfal ; and Lacorne conferred on one
of his creatures, a Hebrew, the degree of Inspector,
and sent him to America to spread the order there.
In 1797, other Jews added eight new degrees,
giving to this agglomeration of thirty-three pom-
pous degrees, the title of " Ancient and Accepted
Scotch Rite." The Grand Orient of France, seeing
its own influence declining, proposed advantageous


SchismatiG Rites and Sects. 377

and honourable terms to the Supreme Grand Coun-
cil, wliicli was at the head of the Scotch rite, and
an agreement was come to in 1804. The Grand
Orient retaining the first name, received into its
bosom the Supreme Grand Council and the rich
'American symboUsm. But the connection did not
prosper, and was dissolved in 1805. Again, what
is called Mark-Masonry in England is considered
spurious ; whilst in Scotland and Ireland it is held
to be an essential portion of Freemasonry, These
are curious anomalies.

282. "Ludicrous Degree. — The following lodge
was actually established about 1717. Some joyous
companions, having passed the degree of craft,
resolved to form a lodge for themselves. Aa none
of them knew the Master's part, they at once in-
vented and adopted a ritual which suited every
man's humour. Hence it was ordered that every
person during initiation should wear boots, spurs,
a sword, and spectacles. The apron was turned
upside down. To simplify the work of the lodge, they
abolished the practice of studying geometry — which
was sheer pretence, for the only geometry a mason
studies in the lodge is that mentioned by Hudibras :

" For he, by geometric scale,
Could take the size of pots of ale ;
Eesolve by sines and tangents straight,
If bread or butter wanted weight."

Some of the members proved that a good knife


378 Secret Societies.

and fork in the hands of a dexterous brother, over
proper materials, would give greater satisfaction
and add more to the rotundity of the lodge than
the best scale and compass in Europe ; adding that
a Une, a square, a parallelogram, a rhombus, a rhom-
boid, a triangle, a trapezium, a circle, a semi-circle,
a quadrant, a parabola, a hyperbola, a cube, a
parallelepipedon, a prism, a prismoid, a pyramid, a
cylinder, a curve, a cyKndroid, a sphere, a spheroid,
a paraboloid, a cycloid, a paracentric, fiiistmna,
segments, sectors, gnomons, pentagons, hexagons,
polygons, ellipses, and irregular figures of all. sorts,
might be drawn and represented upon bread, beef,
mutton, ham, fowls, pies, etc., as demonstratively
as upon sheets of paper or the tracing board, and
that the use of the globes might be taught and ex-
plained as clearly and briefly upon two bottles as
upon any twenty-eight inch spheres.


XXV.

DIFFUSION OF THE ORDER.

283.
\BEEMA80NBY in Spain and Poi-tu-
gal. — ^In 1726, the Grand Lodge of
England granted a patent for the esta-
blishment of a lodge at Gibraltar;
another was founded in the following year at Ma-
dridj whichj declaring itself independent of foreign
supervision, established lodges at Cadiz, Barcelona,
Valladolid, and other places. The Inquisition,
seeing the danger that threatened the Church,
fersecuted the order; hence the mystery that
surrounds the labours of the brotherhood in the
Iberian peninsula.

In Portugal, the first lodges were founded, not
under English, but under French auspices; but
English influence soon made itself felt in the esta-
blishment of additional lodges, though in great
aecresy ; which, however, did not save many Free-


380 Secret Societies.

masons from becoming the victims of the Inqui-
sition.

284. Freemasonry in Bussia. — In 1731, Free-
masonry dared to oppose itself to Russian despotism
which, not fearing and probahly despising it, did
not molest it. The times were unpropitious. The
sanguinary Biren ruled the Empress Anne, when
by ipeans of the amorous fascination he exercisec
upon her, he easily persuaded to commit all Idndi
of folly and cruelty ; and Masonry, though it knsTi
itself to be tolerated, yet did not feel secure, anc
cautiously kept itself in the background. In 1740
England founded a lodge at St. Petersburg, anc
sent thither a Grand Master. The order spread ii
the provinces, and in 1763 the lodge " G\io" wa
opened at Moscow. Catherine II. wished to knoT
its statutes, perceiving the advantage or ipjury the;
might bring to her government as she either pro
moted or persecuted the association. In the em
she determined to protect the order; and in
country where the court leads opinion, lodges soo:
become the fashion. But Masonry thus becomia|
the amusement of a wealthy nobility, it soon Ids
sight of its primitive objects. In no other countr
probably did the brotherhood possess such gorgeou
temples ; but, deprived of the vivifying and iavigc
rating air of liberty, its splendour could not save :
from a death of inanition.

286. Freemasonry in Switzerland. — English pre


Diffusion of the Order. 381

selytism, always the most activej established a lodge
at Geneva in 1737, whose first Grand Master was
George Hamilton. Two years afterwards, the
foreigners dwelling at Lausanne united and founded
the lodge called the " Perfect Union of Foreigners."
Lodges were also opened at Berne ; but the
mancBuvres of the Grand Lodges of the states sur-
rounding Switzerland introduced long and fierce
dissensions. In 1765, the Strict Observance founded
at Basle the lodge " Liberty, " which became the
mother-lodge of many others, and, calling itself
the " German Helvetic Directory," chose for its chief
the celebrated Lavater. Then followed suppres-
sions; but the order revived, and in 1844 the
different territorial Grand Lodges united into one
federal Grand Lodge, caUed "Alpina," which re-
vised the ancient statutes. The Swiss Freemasons
intend to erect a grand temple, which perhaps could
nowhere find a more fitting site than in a country
where four nations of diverse languages and races
dwell in perfect liberty,

286. Freemasowry in Sweden and Folcmd. — In
1748, Sweden already had many and flourishing
lodges. In 1754, was instituted the Grand Lodge
of Sweden, under a patent from the Grand Lodge
of Scotland; it afterwards declared its autonomy,
which has been recognized by aU the masonic
bodies of Europe.

Freemasonry, at first suppressed in Poland, was


382 Secret Societies.

revived under Stanislaus Augustus, and the auspices
of tlie Grand Orient of France, who estabUshec
lodges in various towns of that country. These
united in 1784 to form a Grand Orient, having its
seat at Warsaw.

287. Freemasonry in Holland amd Germany. — In
Holland the Freemasons opened, a lodge in 1731,
under the warrant of the Grand Lodge of England ;
it was, however, only what is called a lodge of emer-
gency, having been called to initiate the Duke of
Tuscany, afterwards Francis I., Emperor of Ger-
many. The first regular lodge was established at
the Hague in 1734, which, five years after, took the
name of " Mother-lodge." Numerous lodges were
opened throughout the country, and also in the
Dutch colonies ; and the Freemasons founded many
schools, with the avowed object of withdrawing
instruction from clerical influence.

In Germany lodges were numerous as early as
the middle of last century, so that in the present
one we have witnessed the centenaries of many of
them — as for instance, in 1887, of that of Hamburg ;
in 1840, of that of Berlin ; in 1841, of those of Bres-
lau, Baireuth, Leipzig, and many more.

288. Freemasonry in Turkey, Asia, Africa, and
Oceania. — The order also spread into Turkey, where,
however, as may be supposed, for a long time it
led but a harassed existence. Lodges were esta-
blished at Constantinople, Smyrna, and Aleppo j and


Diffusion of the Order. 383

it may be mentioned, as a fact in favour of Free-
masonry, that the Turkisli Freemasons are in a
more advanced state of civilization than is usual
among Orientals generally. They reject polygamy,
and at the Masonic banquets the women appear
unveiled ; so that whatever their western sisters
may have to say against Masonry, the women of
the Bast certainly are gainers by the introduction
of the order.

The most 'important masonic lodges of Asia are
in India; they are under the jurisdiction of the
Grand Lodges of England "and Scotland.

Freemasonry was introduced into Africa by the
establishment of a lodge at Cape Coast Castle in
1735. There are now lodges at the Cape of Good
Hope ; in the islands of Mauritius, Madagascar and
St. Helena ; and at Algiers, Tunis, Morocco, Cairo,
and Alexandria.

Lodges have existed since 1828 at Sydney, Mel-
bourne, Paramatta, and other places ; in aU about
two hundred.

289. Freemasowy in America. — ^The first lodge
established in Canada was at Cape Breton, in the
year 1745. Lodges existed from as early a period in
the West Indian Islands. On the establishment of
the Brazilian empire, a Grand Lodge was initiated ;
and in 1825 Don Pedro I. was elected its Grand
Master. In 1825, the Grand Lodge of Mexico was
instituted, where the Liberals and Federalists joined


384 Secret Societies.

the York rite, wMlst the Clerics, Monarchists, and
Centralizers adopted the Scotch rite ; the two par-
ties carrying on a relentless war. Texas, Venezuela,
and the turbulent republics of South America, all
had their masonic lodges, which were in many cases
political clubs in disguise.

The lodges in the territory now forming the
United States date as far back as 1729. Until the
close of the revolutionary war these were under the
jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of England ; but
almost every state of the Union now has its own
Grand Lodge, independent of all foreign power.


XXVI.


FUTILITY OF MODERN FEEEMASONRY.


290.
\AIN Pretensions of Modern Freemasonry.
—After this necessarily brief account
of Freemasonry, past and present, . the
question naturally suggests itself, What
is its present use ? Is it not an institution that
has outlived the object of its foundation ? Are its
pretensions not groundless, and its existence a
delusion and anachronism ? The answers to all
these questions must be unfavourable to Free-
masonry. Its present use is confined to that of any
other benefit society. It was founded in ages when
the possession of true religious and scientific know-
ledge was the privilege of the few, who made the
cultivation and propagation of such knowledge the
occupation of their lives. But now that knowledge is
the birthright of all, and may openly raise its head,
c c


386 Secret Societies.

a society that professes to keep science for the few
is but a retrograde institution.

291. Vanity of Masonic Ceremonial. — There are
thousands of excellent men who have never seen
the inside of a lodge, and yet are genuine Free-
masons, i. e. liberal-minded and enlightened men,
devoted to the study of nature and the progress of
mankind, moral and intellectual ; men devoid of all
political and religious prejudices, true cosmopoUtana.
And there are thousands who have passed through
every masonic degree, and yet are not masons;
men who take appearances for realities, the means
for the end, the ceremonies of the lodge for Free-
masonry. But the lodge with aU its symbols is
only the form of the masonic thought. In the pre-
sent age, however, this form, which was very suit-
able, nay, necessary, for the time when it was insti-
tuted, becomes an anachronism. The affectation
of possessing a secret is a childish and mischievous
weakness. The objects modern masons profess to
pursue are brotherly love, relief, and truth ; surely
the pursuit of these objects cannot need any secret
rites, traditions, and ceremonies. In spite of the
great parade made in masonic publications about
the science and learning peculiar to the craft, what
■ discovery of new scientific facts or principles can
masons claim for the order ? Nay, are well-known
and long- established truths familiar to them, and


Futility of Modern Freemasonry. 387

made the objects of study in the lodges ? Nothing
of the kind.

292. Masonry diffuses no knowledge. — We get
neither- science nor learning from a mason, as a
mason. The order, in fact, abjures religious and poli-
tical discussion, and yet it pretends that to it man-
kind is indebted for its progress, and that, were it
abolished, mental darkness would again overshadow
the world. But how is this progress to be effected,
if the chronic diseases in the existing religious
and political systems of the world are not to be
jneddled with ? As well might an association for
the advancement of learning abjure inquiry into
chemical and mechanical problems, and then boast
of the benefits it conferred on science ! It is Hamlet
with the part of Hamlet omitted. If then Masonry
wishes to live on, and be something more than a
society of Odd FeUows or Druids, new lodges must
be formed by educated men — not by the mere
, pubhcans and other tradesmen that now found
lodges to create a market for their goods — who
might do some good by teaching moral and natural
philosophy from a deeper ground than the scholastic
and .grossly material basis on which all teaching at
present is founded, and by rescuing science from the
degraded position of handmaiden to mere physical
comfort, into which modern materialism has forced
it. They might found Masonic Colleges, where the


388 Secret Societies.

night-side of physics and metaphysics, which is
the very mother of all Vax e tenebris, as the Masonic
motto has it, would be revealed to the properly
qualified student, who would thus be enabled to see
not only how a thing is, but why it is so.

293. Masonry is unfitted for the tash. — That is to
say, let such masonic societies be formed, if Masonry
can be shown to be a necessary institution, and
societies the best means for promoting the discovery
of truth, and the spread of knowledge.

But are societies the most suitable means for the
discovery of scientific or any other truths ? Learned
societies as a rule are merely mutual admiration
societies, diversified by occasional junketings under
pretence of the pursuit of knowledge. IHscoveries
are made by private individuals, whilst societies
simply seek to guide all the rills of knowledge into
their reservoir, to proclaim themselves the pos-
sessors of the treasures, the search after which, had
they been consulted beforehand, they would probably
have condemned or ridiculed. No invention or dis-
covery of any note can be named that owes its
existence to any society. Hence masonic societies
would do very little good. Besides the Free-
masons who are men of talent, are not such be-
cause they belong to the brotherhood, but in spite
of it. If the highest knowledge now possessed by
men were taught in the lodge, it would still be
knowledge not confined to masons, but diflPased


Futility of Modern Freemasonry. 389

among all studious men. Of course, if Masonry
had. the practical meaning which I theoretically
ascribe to it, then the case would be altered ; but
modern Masonry wiU never reach that standard
needed to make it reaUy the instructor of man-
kind.

294. Decay of Freemasonry. — Selfishness, an eye
to business, vanity, frivolity, gluttony, and a love
of ■mystery-m.ongering, concealed under the specious
.pretence of brotherly love and a longing for instruc-
tion — these are the motives that lead men into the
lodge. The facility and frequency with which'
worthless characters are received into the order;
the manner in which all its statutes are disregarded ;
the dislike with which every brother who insists on
reform is looked upon by the rest ; the difficulty of
expelling obnoxious members ; the introduction of
many spurious rites, and the deceptiveness of the
rites themselves, designed to excite curiosity without
ever satisfying it ; the puerility of the symbolism ;
the paltriness of the secret when revealed to the
candidate, and his iU-concealed disgust when at
last he gets behind the scenes and sees through the
rotten canvas that forms so beautiful a landscape in
front — aU these too plainly show that the lodge has
banished Freemasonry. And like monasticism or
chivalry, it is no longer wanted. Having no political
influence and no political aspirations, or, when it
has such aspirations revealing them by insane


390 Secret Societies.

excesses, sucli as the late citation before masonic
tribunals of Napoleon III., the Emperor of Germany,
the Crown Prince, the Pope, and Marshal Prim, by
French, Italian, and Spanish masons respectively,
and under the Grand Masterships of Cremieux,
Garibaldi, and others of the same revolutionary and
violent principles, and after a farcical sham trial,
condemning the accused so cited — to which sum-
mons of course they paid no attention — to death,
or in plain English, to assassination, a crime really
perpetrated on the person of Marshal Prim ; being
no longer even a secret society — for a society sanc-
tioned by the State, as Freemasonry is, cannot
be called a secret society ; having no industrial or
intellectual rallying-point^it must eventually die
from sheer inanition. It may prolong its existence
by getting rid of all the rites and ceremonies which
are neither simple nor grand, nor founded on any
authority or symbolic meaning, and by renouncing
the sUly pretence of secrets, and undertaking to
teach what I have sketched in various portions of
this work, concerning the origin and meaning of
Masonry and its symbols, illustrating its teaching
by the ornaments and practice of the lodges. This
seems to be the only ground on which Free-
masonry could claim to have its lease of existence,
as Freemasonry, renewed.

295. Masonic Literature. — It is almost absurd
to talk of masonic literature; it scarcely exists.


Futility of Modern Freemasonry. 391

Except the works written by Oliver, Mackay, Findel,
and Ragon, there is scarcely anything worth reading
about Freemasonry, of which a Freemason is the
author. The countless lectures by brethren, with
a few exceptions, consist of mere truisms and plati-
tudes, very much like twaddling sermons, published
by request. Its periodical literature — in this country
at all events — ^is essentially of the Grub Street kind,
consisting of mere trade-circulars, supported by-
puffing masonic tradesmen and vain officials, who
like to have their working in the lodge trumpeted
forth in this fashion : " The way in which he had
worked the ceremonies that evening was a great
teeat to the lodge." ''The W. M. proceeded to
instal him in that fluent and impressive manner for
which he is known," &c. &c. — or by brethren who
like to have their speeches or attempted speeches
recorded, in this style : " Brother W. felt a little
nervous, but hoped to be an ornament to the
lodge "(!) "^ Brother D. had presided at a dish,
and it had afforded him much satisfaction, inasmuch
as he had had it in his power to make some brethren
comfortable," &c. I am not inventing, but actually
copying from a masonic newspaper, and might fill
pages with siinilar stuff. All attempts permanently
to establish masonic periodicals of a higher order
have hitherto failed from want of encouragement.
The fact is, men of education take very little interest
in Masonry, for it has nothing to offer them in an


392 Secret Societies.

intellectual point of view; because even masons who
have attained to every ne plus ultra of the institu-
tion, know nothing of its origin and meaning. As
to masonic poetry, the poet laureate to Moses and
the Profits would not acknowledge one line of it ;
the bard Close would indignantly repudiate it.


END OF VOL. I.


CHISWICK PKESS : PRINTED BY WHITTINGUAM AND WILKINS,

TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE.
