dh. up 7332
<36605028330014
<36605028330014
Bayer. Staatsbibliothek
cn we
M6 nesrt04e o
Pete sean yusnunrannee
Ye OY) ey, ElI Mc y
: Pygant
FROM A PORTRAIT PAINTED AT
THE
AGE OF FORTY.
Py ws
" exunmarive “ee
f Re © ” at r
Ps new OF THE Moy ' i, meme
_ MISSION OF THE UNITED BRETHREN
_ AMONG ait ;
ey :
DELAWARE AND ‘MOHEGAN INDIANS, “me
FROM ITs COMMENCEMENT, IN THE YEAR 1740, TO THE
ve, CLOSE ge. THE YEAR 1808. ‘
a oe si
itn baad COMPRISING
‘tS ial ’ 3
ALL THI  R EMARKABLE INCIDENTS WHICH TOOK f
i sa our THEIR MISSIONARY STATIONS
«DURING THAT PERIOD, ~ £ gy Re
B- INTERSPERSED WITH 1s a.
' : te ;
_ ANECDOTES, HISTORICAL FACTS, SPEECHES OF IN- ; 4
° > AND OTHER INTERESTING MATTER. a .
P eee”
BY JOHN HECKEWELDER,
Who was many years in the service of that Mission. r
Sa ;
2 se ; ;
> ae 7 1
| Heck ocr obdey
PHILADELPHIA: a
‘ t2
PUBLISHED BY M‘CARTY & DAVIS. U vt ites
| Me : 1820, 5 Byrethven -
Po 1b /66 (262 BG
/ \
ae
EASTERN DISTRICT OF PENNSYLNANIA, to wit:

- BE it Remembered, That on the twenty-fourth day of July, in the


‘mentioned,’ and extending the benefits thereof to


eh halt forty-fifth year of the Independence of the United States of
x America, A. D. 1820, M‘Carty & Davis, of the said district,


ey
_ $= ©-S: & have deposited in this office the title of a book, the right
Bate. whereof they claim as proprietors, in the words following,
O wit: |


“A narrative of the mission of the United Brethren among the Dele-
“ware and Mohegan Indians, from its commenceinent, in the year
“* 1740, to the close of the year 1808. Comprising all the remarkable
“incidents whick took place at their miSsionary stations, during that

riod. Interspersed with anecdotes, historical facts, speeches of
ndians, and other interesting matter. By John Heckewelder, who
“* was many years in the service oft that mission.”
_ In conformity to the act of the Congress of the United States, entituled,
“ An Act for the encouragement of eseoing. by securing the copies of
maps, charts and books, to the authors an roprietors of such copies,
during the times therein mentioned.” And also to the act, entitled,
** An Act supplementary to an act, entitled, ‘ An Act for the encourage-


* ment of learning, by securing the copies of maps, charts and books to


the times therein
e arts of designing


the authors and proprietors of such copies, durin:


engraving, and etching historical and other prints.” :
D. CALDWELL,
Clerk of the Eastern District of Pennsylvania,


—-


ia@eriache
Srastsbjb! othe \
Miinchen


es
ees


THE frequent applications that have been foiade
to me, both verbally and by letters, within the last
thirty years ;. for “‘a faithful relation of all the re-
markable events that occurred at the missionary —
' Stations of the United Brethren, from the commence-
ment of missions among the northern Indians,—
bringing to view, the principal difficulties, that the
.. missionaries had laboured under—the obstacles thrown
in their way, while engaged in the laudable work of
instructing the Indians in the Christian doctrine—the
real, or assigned causes of such acts, as had a ten-
dency to discourage the measure, or proved an ob-
stacle towards propagating the Gospel among those
people, and the consequences resulting therefrom ;
together with the course the Christian Indians had
_ pursued, during persecutions, troubles, wars; &c.
has induced me to comprise all remarkable external


Feria “a :


«?


than by combining with it, subjects of a different na-
ite. ‘Nevertheless, the internal state of ‘the Indian
congregations at the time, and_at all periods, is as far
this narrative extends, sufficiently exhibited.


__Sertions that fe 3 sometimes ‘been made by indivi-
duals, either from ignorance, or malice; yet, apparent-
é oy ith intent to cast an odium on the character of the
> "PChristian Indians, whom paey call * Moravian In-

dians :”—I have written with’ the greater freedom, and
. related such incontrovertible facts, as appeared to me
necessary, for the impartial reader to know; assuring
him that I will vouch for the truth of what [have written.


Brethren among the North American Indians,” (from
which, several late writers on missions have copied into
hidltinorkcs ,) contains a most faithful account of the in-
- ternal state of this mission, comprehending nearly the
... > hy whole period ¢ of time, to which this narrative extends ;

while it is to be regretted, that from a want of materials

at the time he was writing, that part, relating to externals,
ee. is in some of its ore parts, found to be deficient.


‘; -
.
~ ,


¢ oe 3 since the facts to be related, would”
Gs be properly connected, and better understood,


_ Far from being deterred by the false reports and as-


“Loskiel’s history of the mission of the United


Loe *s B 4 > Wee Bite y es 5
Ses nes


+
at “%
Fer S


‘ t &
=n : “vTRopvcTio.


3 ; is: that some of the mosgpinceaiie
. of the amiissionaries, were lost during ‘calle
S, SO that the historian had it not always
power, to bring daily occurrences into proper’« be
ion; nor to state a number of facts of great impor-— :
ie; tance, well known to the writer of this work.
i em aa which bythe bem be- 2a a
will be found to ‘correspond i in its principal
: italia oskiel’s history—and from whietud have in
- Sinstances copied passages—nothing | is. F omisieay ~ he
may tend to throw light on any subject of importance, on ee me
so that the reader, will not only have — view of the . ee
_ situation, in which the Christian Indian congrégatiotis
were placed at all times—and more especially during the bs
_ time of the revolutionary wars; but will also be able eee
to make up his mind, whether the “ Moravian In- . a
dians,’’ as they are called, were deserving of the charges =
Ps laid against them, by ignoxant, evil minded, and de- ~ . $
signing men; or-had conducted themselves properly, ;
and acted at all times prudently, and with the caution, 5
which at that time was more particularly requisite.


~


‘The course which the missionaries, who dwelt with
the Indians, had to pursue, was plainly marked out to
them. They did not go among those people, for the sake —
of earthly gain; neither toserve aparty. Theirsole =
___ object was, that of bringing them the good tidings, .

¥ that Christ had come into this world—suffered and
died on the cross, for the sins of mankind—and to


a
eC .
>, A


-


"4 INTRODUCTION.


oe a | &.
“teach them ¢ the: vr to salvation. — this


x the God of Peace, who himself taP bec ced
Ssing on peace-makers;* and indeed, as" ; such
‘only, they were permitted by the nations, to dwell
ong them. »
‘ The Christian Indians under their care, obedient to
"Alte igotnmandment of God : “thou shaleig ot kill”—
“eat | adhering to the precepts of the me * as given
Eo, © Gal Christians, both by our Lord and master, and
Be ¥" byh his apostles—as also in conformity to the will of
e. . “the. chiefs and = council of the nation, who as ru-
ay. lers had power over them; and under whose: protec-
Re: t # tion they lived.; strove to live in peace with all man-
hee kind, of whatever nation or colour they might be :
eS > nay, they even sought to preserve lives from destruc-
ae tion, whenever they had it in their power, and acted
hak - "thus purely from principle,and by the impulse of the
| Christian spirit dwelling within them. They were howe-
ver, as this narrative will show, by the one side per-
‘secuted and distressed for doing what they considered
to be Christian duties ; while from the other side,
a great number of them, the one half women and chil-
dren, were barbarously murdered, under the false pre- a
tence, that they were enemies and warriors.


» Christian reader ! and all who wish the gospel to be * .
y iit; al


Ki, * St. Matnew's Game, chap. v. Preotd 9 ey
| eo.


‘a oe ee.
pa.


“ae pax
es. to the’ heathen’ nations ! Let, me é
you to keep in mind, that, while reading


are in a manner accompanying


z


a


. ip aus life, and had within ie. ee
their heathen friends and connexions. The particu 9

‘lars respe their. conversion and religious “exerci-

ses—the troubles, persecutions, and severe trials
as Christians had to endure—their patience, ae
tion and fortitude, under these trials, together with
their stedfastness and faith, not. only i in the hour
death, ona sick bed, but also under e mallet,* ad
Hinge didistelping knife, you. will. find» faithfully :d¢- %
picted, in“ Loskiels history of the mission of the ‘Uni-
ted Brethren, among the North American Indians.”

And let me assure all the honest and well meaning
who have suffered themselves to be deceived, in be-
ing Jed to believe, that the “ Moravian Indians,”
have walways been your enemies, and killed your
_ people while they lived on the Muskingum ;—I say,
_ jet me assure you, that you have been imposed upon.
Let me further inform you, that from early in the fall
of the year 1771, until late in the fall of the year

1786, lees with the exception of a few months, con-


a
Cees niet his own confession, knocked down fourteen of
_ these innocents at Gnadenhutten, with a bee ssf ’s mallet which he


ag at the place, ees é


=


ae
o


ae * & ie pavers.» 7s


iti * INTRODUCTION.
stanly with those, so falsely accused, Indians Ba *
- that so far from their joining in the war, they fol-
f agricultural pursuit, the whole time they
the Muskingum‘; and ‘whenever the had
St it in their. ‘power, to save the life of a poor prison-
“Jer, by petition or purchase, they did so, without
_ looking for any recompense. —They attended their
daily meetings regularly for devotion, both morn-
ing and evening,—kept the Sabbath day holy ; ; and.
lived in. peace to together, until their settlements were
ae’ broken up by a host. of Indian warriors from the side
x : of the Byitish—their property destroyed—their min-
ce,» leers taken prisoners; and with themselves forcibly
carried, or driven off to the barren plains of Upper
Sandusky, whence again, they were subsequently
driven, because they could not‘ be induced to join in
the war, and turn out to fight the American people.
‘Now reader! permit me to ask the following ques- —
tions. First : Can it be possible to believe, that these
Moravian Indians,” more than two thirds of whom _
were women and children, would have remained
where they were, the nearest neighbours to the-
white settlers on the Ohio, and the only Indians then
in the parts, if they had been enemies and warriors? _
Could they, as such, have considered themselves even
fora day in safety, where they were exposed to an attack
from the American side? Has it not been for more ~
» than halfa century, a ‘ known a a first


_ ES Cae,


4h


out against an enemy, is to remove Feit inilies — $
nd effects, out of the reach of their enemy? And°
t not known, at the time these “ Moravian In-
dians” resided on the Muskingum, that all ‘spoad In-
dians, who were engaged in the war, had moved back |
1¢ Sandusky’s ; a greater distance from the “Mo- —
towns,” than these were from the settlements
of the white people, on the Ohio river. a
Secondly. Would Christian missionaries, (and thidse o
with families and small children,) have chosen to stay ise
-—nay, thought themselves safe, in remaining with © ,
these Indians, if they had laid aside Christianity, and
turned warriors and murderers? I am positive, that ©
neither persuasion, nor any consideration whatever,
would have induced any one of us, to have remained
an hour longer with such a people, than absolute ne-


i. cessity required. Do not therefore assertions, which
declare the Christian, or ‘‘ Moravian” Indians, while f
living on the Muskingum, to have been “ enemies and
murderers,” tend to criminate their ministers also?
to brand them with infamy, in residing among a band i
a such men? :
| Thirdly. How do such accusations, and assertions
agree with the fact: that the remnant of these pretend- = x
| &::. “enemies and murderers,” (thé “‘ Moravian In- So


 *


dians ;”) after upwards of ninety of their number had
_ been murdered by Williamson’s party, did not turn


te . B . ”


‘. INTRODUCTION.


ey oui man, and take revenge on those white mur-
ies _derers ; but on the other hand chose to follow. their
_exiled ministers beyond lake. Erie, where they i in
_ could hear the gospel preached, and live in- c ule
ness and peace.


; com s The reader ofthis narrative, will in its alien place,

pe * _smeetwith a note, by which he will see, how completely a
Pe, one of this kind of impostors was in 1789, (in the pre.

— . sence of a minister of the gospel,) detected by the

writer of this narrative.

I have yet to take notice of a class of ee gene-
& rally known to us, by the name of “* backwoods men,”?
~~ many of whom acting up to a pretended belief; that
* _. “an Indian has no more soul than a buffalo 3? and that
ui es kill either, is the same thing; have from time

Wx” tw timé, by their conduct, brought, great trouble
are “had and bloodshed on the country. Such then, I wish
to caution, not to sport in that manner with | the


~ lives of God’s creatures. Have we not every reason
to believe on scripture authority, that God bestow-
ed souls on all men without regard to colour ur com-
plexion, ? Think ye then, of what you are doing by
holding forth such wicked language among yourselves,


and before your children, for the purpose of encoura-
ging murder! Believe, thata time will, come, when
you must account for such vile deeds! When
those who have fallen a sacrifice to your wickedness,
will be called torth in judgment against you} nay,
~* of 4


. haps never properly investigated, namely: ‘“ to. what
- cause, or causes it is to be ascribed, that hitherto, so


tive to draw his own conclusion; and the better


-


‘ghar
~


you!--will saysiwe. were taught by o r parents. to”


_disinclination in them, to change the life of the hunter,.


. way by the Indians, and the objections they assign, as


* ‘


4 INTRODUCTION. ™"
= x


when - your. own descendants: will | against


is !—we. were. told, when, we ene ig :
; at we had. done. a good act! cho gt ss
1 wilt beast, &c. . they 4? , :

There remains yet one piel to a os. upon s Tal- best
) the question which often has. been. ‘put Fil “
lich frequently has been discussed, 4 per-


little progress has been made in civilizing the Abori-
gines of this country ? and, whether it is owing to a


to that of | the. husbandman se whether it» proceeds _
from a ‘neglect on our side, in not aiding or properly
supporting the measure !”’

Being both from. shame and horror, Wevented from
expatiating on this subject; as it would lead to an
exposure of the who/e conduct of the white people, to-
wards such as Aad changed their mode, of life, and.
embraced Christianity. I leave the reader of this narra-


to enable him to doit, I have impartially, and fully
exhibited all the principal hindrances, thrown in the


gm against effecting this end.


This nar captegas written in the plainest style, so
that it oa be understood by all; my wish being, that


v


ee ae,
"INTRODUCTION. eid -


*


2 OP aii that class of people which I have

oe ¥ “above al uded to. So in relating Indian apecches) I
have given them: as they were spoken, withor
ing or modifying expressions, to suit our lang
I have only to add further, that the ‘nearer 5
presented, commences with the beginning of the mis-
sion of 1 the United Brethren among ‘the northern In-
_. dians, in 1740, and ends with the “year 1808, in
which the worthy senior vane #89 Zaiebler ge,


who had faithfully served: the Lord’s cause among the
“Indians for sixty-two years, departed this life, and of
» whom a striking likene: is prefixed as a frontispiece,
-to this work. rd Se ies.

| / 9 THE NARRATOR.


me ia - : on |
Dna. ; ws % i ! Ne
a 5 oie es 6 Mis, ol
Gee 1g yaaa Wstacs yo ae’ ‘nbs Ke, ap?


*
Pe
&


a*


oa
eae
Boe
XY a
~
. d .


Ba, e ENG,
Staatsbibliothek.:
Miinchen :


Bpiscopal ‘Church, called d Unitas ws


n about the year 1720,
‘Lord redlitce for the blessings  /
em, believed it to be their duty ©
ir best endeavor 0 propagate the eee
‘the heathen. _ sf
. quence of which, as early as the year 1732, By oA j
_ their mer 8 were sent to the Danish West fet: wi 9
India islands; and in the following year a mission :
was begun in Greenland. ” _
Since that time missions were estublifhed in Jemai- oe +
_ ¢a; Barbadoes; St. Christopher’s ; Antigua ; ; Terra i 3
Labrador among the Esquimaux ; at the Cape of Good % :
Hope among the Hottentots ; in Berbice and Surinam ’
in South America, and in some parts of North Ameri- __ 4
ca, nearly all of which have, under the blessing of
God, been continued to the present time. .
In the Year 1735, missionaries arrived in Georgia, : )


- ore: the
“BG titu t
* erg


to us


from E vith an intention to preach the gospel oS
to the Cree! indians : but these, after having been at
the expense of making improvements, were placed in Y.


A a} : ~ Ss
) , Ay Sx SA fia "§ ¢ : AF hy; vitae,
we 5 x ¢ - Be. ™


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


- ks eable situation, occasioned by the hos-
e disposition of their neighbours, the Spania
who were endeavouring to expel all the English fr
Georgia ; the result of which, was a war between Gre j
Britain and Spain, and the’breaking up of the settle
~ ment of the Brethren in 1739.
m thence


Tie missionaries and assistants, fl


» to Pennsylvania; where, under oe so gee
government, they hoped to mental
~» towards the conversion of the es in i oes parts. “e


Whilst those emi now out. a » were
. contemplating their future destiny, ev. Mr, .
: Whitefield, invited settle on a at ber ¥.
“tween sixty and toa north of Philadel a 2
/* which he had purchased, with the i tion of es a
“an ing on it a free school for negro ies, and where he
had already laid the foundation for a large stone house _
which the brethren were to erect for him, but which,
after having employed much: labour on it, they had to
sean unfinished, and withdraw from the land ; partly
because the Indians who were settled on the tract,
could not reconcile themselves to abandon such a
favourite spot, which they considered as not fairly
purchased of them, and had indeed manifested hostile
_ «intentions in case these should not withdraw from the
_ land—and partly because Mr. White


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.
Miditnlilincigvithenne of Philadelphia


_ sell to, the Brethren a tract of land in the forks of
Delaware avian incepenpoeinee ‘than, Mas © oy


“country inhabited by the’ lodians, they purchased, 7
built pecste on n it, and called the place Bethlehem. =
to support such missionaries as i Ee
m time to time among the Indians— _ ae
tirement for those worn down ay


e i ionally as an asylum3 »— - j
Sn mie purchase, which | 1
und fully answer the purpose. .


. Whitefield’s r m Georgia, in1743,
had gone on up ofhisintended
. nt, he offered the manor of that


_ place, together the unfinished building, to the “5
- Brethren forsale : and all the disputes with the Indians — a
— having previously been settled, partly by
aise,* and partly by treaty with the Five Na- |
tions, cts the manor, and finished the house. ii ea ‘i
In 1740, the first missionary was sent to visit the
Indians then residing in the provinces of New York ‘i
RO gestions) His instructions, were “not in
anywise to interfere with the labours of other mis- =)
lonaries or ministers, or cause any disturbance
but silently to observe whether any of 2M
re, by the grace of God, prepared | q


y one was to be found desirous of hearing; toshim


the heathen, ears to hear. the gone and. shea ts t
receive it.” ae!
* ‘With these instructions, “a missionary, Christian
re _ Henry Rauch, (a very amiable and piousr
b. otherwise knowing nothing of the pe

gi?


_. 4 assured of his call, he placed full confidence in God
i . that he would assist him, and lead him to those hea-
’  » then to whom hé was .


Ee » them, being an utter “met in the land ; but, being


accidently met with a missionary who had come di-
ov rectly from St. Thomas, and him introduced
~~ to some pious friends, of whom he expected to obtain
information respecting the heathen to whom he
was going ; ‘these however, far from encouraging
_ him to proceed in his laudable undertaking, rather
_ dissuaded him from it, representing those Indians as
a setof debauched beings, among whom no European
could dwell in safety ; and it so happening, that during
his stay at New York, an embassy to government


he had an opportunity of observing the opinion
of his pious friends verified; thes ians being
from day to day ina state of intoxication ; yet, at
length finding them tractable, he formed an ac-


if £ ia believe the word of life—that if even —


zan,) “2
he was to preach the gospel, non even where to find


. On his arrival at Ne , the 16th July, 1740, he |


arrived from the very people to whom he was going,


: St, Aan 2
oe — 4 pe, u
ae > 8 ot a +
eye a sin. Oe “ a


| | 4. | : |
HECKEWELDER’S re i: ae


quaintance” with them; and receiving an inv invitation, “a
pay them ‘a visit at their towns, he gladly accepted —

not in the least despairing that by preaching
the el to them, they might through the grace of .

. | God brought to the knowledge of pert bé- +
come new creatures. wy


[fe ee Zz. at Shekomeko, an Indian init
ing on Connecticut, near the the Stissik Moun-

tain, he began is missionary labours ; and, although Hs
-. sc a a were made by the white settlers to © *


the cause in which he was d,and notwithstand- © =
ie ing all the. obstacles and machinations which » uhey. ,
threw in his way, he, with Pwd perseverance, con- a
eee ” _ tinued preaching the gosp d had the satisfaction © {


that before the end of the year, it had moved.
| se hearts of ~ e brought them to a sense of — a #
| their depravity by nature ; and believing in the word, _ "
that Christ came into the world to bring sinners to re-
‘pentance, that they might be saved, they were consi-
dered as candidates for holy baptism—and beingfur- :
ther instructed in the Christian religion, the three first “*
were baptized on the 22d February, 1742; and before.
. the close of the year, twenty-six more were added to
that number. *
~ Meanwhile Count Zinzendorf, a German nobleman, |
his had been particularly instrumental in the restora-
tion of the church of Unitas-Fratrum, and by its mem- /
bers had been appointed the principal elder of that
society, had come over to this country with a view £;


aad
a3

=
yn


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


“By : 2,
a

4s see, <b: the Brethren’s establishments inPenn-

- ‘sylvania,. but also tobe a witness of the fruits of their


Sg is


labours among the heathen. Rejoicing at thei
cess, and finding that the harvest ofthe Lorde

“more hands, the missionary was supplied with ass assist-
* ants, and having made the proper regulations among
a them, so necessary in a Christian congregation, and
for the better keeping of order, some of the atepiceni:
were appointed to help them.


tlement on Kent river in Connecticut, (called by the


* were converted and supplied with missionaries, the ,
_ same as had taken place at Shekomeko; and having at
ae © each of these settlements built dbsetves a place of
worship, in which they daily met for divine service,


mencement of this mission, before their white neigh-


Me: bours began to trouble, and even to persecute them.


bracing the Christian religion; and that it would be
next to madness, to attempt to dwell among them.—
Now that it was manifest that a number of them’ had
embraced Christianity, and lead a Christian life, they
would not permit them to enjoy Christian privileges ;
every device was resorted to, to have these missiona-


ar


+ —


The light soon spread abroad: and at an Indian: set- —


they were happy. ¥.. 3
e, Three years had scarcély elapsed, from the com-
ee


In the beginning they had represented the Indians to
_ the missionaries as a race of savages, incapable of em- —


‘
/


natives Pachgatgoch, and by the whites, Scatticok)
consisting chiefly of the Wampano tribe, a number —


$'


fi


-mneERguenatie NARRATIVE.


ties bamished out of the country. fre: loss whites
ned in not having these Indians in their interest
der controul as. formerly, when they were ac-
to take unlawful liberties and advantages of
y defrauding them of their just due for |
by imposing liquor upon them, thereby encouraging 4
__ imtoxication for the sake of gain, was. considered by
pF te a 9 loss ; added to this, the Indian ¢on-
verts would frequently detect and reprimand offenders;
_ which these white men could not relish ; and ascrib-—
_ing the cause of the change in the life and morals of
_ those Indians, to the missionaries, they sought by
every stratagem to get rid of them, and some even
offered liquor to any Indian that would kill them.
. The next step which they took, was to charge the
b » | missionaries with being an evil minded, designing
people, and. disaffected to the govergment; in con-
, » sequence of which, they were ‘taken from one place
. to another to be examined; sometimes by a magistrate,
- at other times by ministers. ‘Two of them were kept
| |. for. some time at New Milford, while the others were
ordered to Peckipsi,* (Poughkeepsie) and there mal-
- treated ; until at length being brought before the guv-
 ernor of Connecticut, and by him examined, they were
deglared innocent and discharged.
But here the matter did not*rest. They were ac-
cused of ——"" papists and traitors; and in-


"' ig


¥ Petkipsi, the Indian name of the place.


4


as: ae 4 eae ee a ey oll


24 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


a ‘sulted , or as such.—It was said that they ©
were allied to the French in Canada, and fomented the |
disturbances which then had taken place—that # at they .
intended to furnish the Indians with arms ie
tion to fight the English. A clergyman in Dover chad
ee positively asserted in aletter thatthey were papists,and _
cE ~ 8 course could not be suffered to remain in the country.
ee ds . —Another person publicly declared, that the Brethren
; were in possession of three thousand stand of arms
for the use of those Indians, who would join the French,
and make inroads into Pennsylvania.
In consequence of these reports, the missionaries
& (who had already been dragged about the country from
one place to another for examination) were, on the’
_ 15th day of December, 1744, unexpectedly called on
by the sheriff, and three justices of the peace, who»
had come to Shekomeko for the purpose, inthe name |
of the governor and council of New York, to prohibit
___ all meetings of the Brethren ; at the same time, com-
; “a ? Br. manding the missionaries to appear at Roughheenn
9 the 17th of that month. - 5 a
_ During these troubles, and a few weeks previous _
to the sheriff’s announcing the prohibition of all —
meetings of the Brethren, the reverend Bishop Span-
_genberg, to whom the affairs of the Brethrengy =
‘North America had been committed by the Directors
of the society in Europe, arrived at New York; and
hearing of the situation in which the congregation at».
Shekomeko was placed, he immediately remised


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. ‘05


thither, much to the joy and comfort of his Hires
me ote and the Indian congregation. #

A h ' ugh the missionaries, wherever they had been
examined before courts or magistrates, had not only


always been honourably acquitted of the charges laid _
against them, but also such testimony given in their 5


favour by magistrates and others, of the good they were
doing among the Indians (and, as the justice of the
peace at Filkentown expressed himself, “that he must


acknowledge the mission in Shekomeko to be a work


of God, because, by the labour of the Brethren, the
most savage heathen had been so evidently changed,
that he, and many other Christians were put to shame,
by their godly walk and conversation” )—yet the ad-
versaries of the Brethren would continue to accuse


them; setting forth, that they were a dangerous peo- , >


Lad -and ought to be driven out of the country.
- That the Brethren were conscientiously scrupulous


o- taking an oath, was, with their accusers, a great
crime ; and they prevailed on the governor of New +:


York, to have them brought before him for examina-._ ¥


tion. Being arrived, the attention of the whole town —_
" was raised.—They were considered as disturbers of $e
the peace, and deserving of eitherimprisonment, whip- —


iene or banishment.—However a justice of the peace

" from Reinbeck, by whom these Brethren had some time
previously been examined, happening at this time
tobe in New York, publicly took their part, and affirm-
Hs D


oe:
7


i te ae


HECKEWELDER? S NARRATIVE.


among the Indians, was undeniable.” ui
-On the 11th of August they were onderediibe-
fore the governor and court, and separately examined,


examined before the council.—At length, on the
2ist, “they were «lischarged by the governor through
his secretary—permitted to go home and “ live accord-
ing to their religious tenets, in such manner that
‘no suspicions might arise concerning them.” And
to secure them against’a mob, they were furnished with
acertificate of their acquittalsby the governor.
_. Yet the senior missionary Buttner, who previous


‘ sie, had to obey the summons, though suffering much
_ in his health, which had been greatly impaired by the
troubles and hardships he had already endured—after
waiting and suffering with cold for several days, a
friend, who pitied his situation, urged the court to


f was already possessed of a certificate of dismission by
* the governor, he was permitted to depart without fur-
Be * ther examination. as of


mt


ate: - Although the governor of Sines York, had i in Au-


yet the enemies of the Brethren continued accusing
them, as being a suspicious people, who ought not to
be tolerated. That they would not swear, or make


ea att the good done by them (these gerne


: and on ‘the following day, they were in like manner -


_ bring his case on; when the court finding that, he


to this had been ordered to appear at Poughkeep-


gust preceding, permitted the missionaries to return _
home, and “live according’ to their religious tenets,”


’ WECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


to suspect them.’ Indeed, at that time, the laws of the
ountry required that every inhabitant should
aths, the one, “‘ that King George being the AL


' sovereign of the kingdom, he would not in any way


encourage the pretender”—the other, “that he re-
: jected transubstantiation—the worship of the Virgin


been delivered to the missionary. “

_ Although these oaths, in substance, contained no-
thing but what was consonant with the principles of
the Brethren, and to which they at any time would
have subscribed, yet for conscience sake they wished
to be excused trom swearing. They would notcon-
demn those who took a lawful oath; and would wil-


be lingly themselves submit to the punishment inflict-


© ed upon perjured persons, if they were found acting
» contrary to the asseveration made by yes or no.
- The assembly however, at the repeated calls and


their meeting in October, of that year, two acts ; by one


take the oaths of allegiance, and in case of refusal to
be compelled to leave the province;””—the other, “ posi-
tively prohibiting the Brethren to instruct the Indians.”
- The: Brethren, who now were like strangers in the
land, since they dare no more meet with their Indian
congregation for divine service, nor even abide with
them where they were, had to delay their departure


oath when required, was with many a sndlcs cause


demands of the adversaries of the Brethren, passed at —


of which ‘all suspicious persons were enjoined to —


Mary—purgatory,” &c. a copy of ‘which oaths had ©


ie
ee


igirk


=


a fd


Se ee


*


*


= 9 ae >


&


ogiy 9 aan On


_


i a as aT eg a y aoe we
ae :
; a
28 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


for a while, on account of the bad state of health of the
2 * senior ‘missionary, Gottlieb Buttner ; and who, on
ee: * the 23d of February, 1745, departed this life, ners
twenty-nine years. -

Of this worthy missionary it can iy be said, that

_ while he lived he livedunto the Lord; to serve him
was his greatest delight ; for the things of this world he
eared nothing ; being of a delicate constitution he could
not long endure such hardships and troubles as he
had been compelled to undergo, occasioned by the accu-
sations and evil reports which were spread throughout |
the country by the enemies of the Brethren against |
him, without sinking under the load. |
:

|

;


When near his end, the national assistants being -
assembled at his bed side, he exhorted them, with
__«, his dying lips, to abide faithful unto the Lord, to the
- end—then desiring them to sing some verses, he ex-

pired while they were singing.

The Indian converts having taken the burial du-

_ ties and ceremony upon themselves, since the white _

brethren (their teachers) dare not officiate ; they, :
to show their regard, purchased linens ; and having

_dressed his corps decently in white, interred. his re+

mains with christian solemnity in the burying ground _

at Shekomeko, watering his grave with their tears.
Soon after the burial, the christian Indians as-

» setmbled to consult on the measures to be taken,
since they were now to be left by themselves ; their
surviving teachers being compelled to leave them.


eee eee ee oe ae ene” 2 sod
sina Pigs Se ae


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


“Some were for following their teachers immediately
to Bethlehem, while others wished first to consult the
Bre ‘there on the subject; which latter proposal:
being adopted, the missionary Martin Mack, together |
with his wife, and the widow of the deceased, took a


final farewell of their congrégation, which was very” me


affecting on both a and then set out for Beth-
lehem. ‘

Arriving at Sopus, (or Esopus) they were detained

- by a justice of the peace, on account of a report that


and much mischief was dreaded, when, providentially,

Colonel Livingston arriving, he reprimanded the
justice severely for his conduct, and set themat liber.
ty. However the mob, although prevented from com-
mitting outrages, took the liberty of insulting them
as they passed in the street, loading them with curses
and other vile epithets.
Two Brethren from Bethlehem, David Zeisberger
and Christian Frederick Post, having at that time
been sent by the directors of the society to the Iro-


intent that the former should improve himselfin the
language, were, by means of enemies to missions
among Indians, who accused them of having treach-
erous views, urrested at Albany, and after much
_/ @buse, taken back to New York, and confined in prison;
where, after being detained seven weeks—during
which time they underwent frequent examinations—


they were traitors. The mob had already assembled


quoise country, the country of the Five Nations, with |


4 ie es
ind 4 it


~


Pe NARRATIVE.


at length were declared innocent and dismissed,
Clavie they again returned to Bethlehem.
AP Dn this occasion, the Brethren were willing to” as:
8 a as a leading cause of their being arrested, the —
then political conduct of the Five confederated Nations, —


“the Indians they were going to; who, at the time,
_ though then unknown to the ‘Brethgens were suspected


of having an eS to join the French, in a war


_ against the English nation. :


During the imprisonment of these Brethren, Mr.
Thomas Noble, a respectable merchant in New York, _
frequently visited them, he also furnished Pe
the whole time of their imprisonment, with provi-
sions and other necessaries. He also dispatched his
chief clerk, Mr. Henry Van Vleck, to Bethlehem, to
inform. the society of the calamities which hei be-
fallen their Brethren at that place. “fs

Among the many visits these Brethren received
while in prison, one in particular, from a New Eng-
land gentleman, deserves to be noticed. This gentle-
man, after looking at them with great earnestness. for
a while addressed them thus: ‘“ Though you are
unknown to me, yet I am fully convinced that the ac-
cusations brought against you, are false ; and I believe
that you suffer for Christ’s sake. I amamazed at your —
resignation ; but indeed it cannot but be a blessed sit-
uation to be imprisoned for Christ’s sake ; for all who
love the Lord Jesus, must expect to be hated. and. per- ~
secuted.”’ bits tr omin dotder |


Ss


 -Ithad always been a consolation to the Baltttien


worth and services they highly valued, praying to the ;


_ nies, they considered as flowing partly from ignorance


- all’ the Indians departed from that place, they frequently


# t uncKEWBLDEW's NARRATIVE


meet with friends, . and the more.so when, trou les:
befel them ; and they. never were without such, who


Lord to reward them. ‘The conduct of their adversa-


and, partly from self interest and malice.
_. From the time the Brethren left Shekomeko, Sala aes eRe,


received. visits from Bethlehem ;.but now the case was ~ 2
reversed ; for instead of the missionary preaching tothe
Indians, they attended the meetings of the latter, with ~
great satisfaction. In the last two years, during which
the Brethren had laboured among the Indians at this
place, sixty-two persons were baptized. ou Me
_ The congegations of Pachgatgoch and Wocliquét- oe
noch, in the province of Connecticut, were continued


for a. number of years ; and supplied with missionaries .
from Bethlehem.
7 ¢ ;
lows P . o.

Mp SNCs

We have next to take a view of the missionary ‘


labours of the Brethren in Pennsylvania and the west-

ern country, together with the situation of the chris- .
tian Indian congregations at different places ; but while
we at one time may rejoice at their success and pros- | ~ a
perity—admiring their steadiness and perseverance, q
eyen under a succession of troubles—we will finally


i. PS HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. :
= oS


: a iwhiclr befellithéinea0. \s


: to remark: that the Brethren, for sundry reasons,
had to take a different course to obtain permission to
reside among the Indians, and to preach the gospel

unto them, than they had done when they went to
preach to the Mohicans and Wampano tribes, in New
England and the province of New York. These lat-
ter were settled on. lands among the white people,
where no Indian nation could disturb them, nor force


the only difficulty they laboured under, was that the
white people wanted the lands they lived on, for them-
selves—while the Six Nations, under a pretence tHat
they had once conquered* and subdued the Delawares,
asserted that the whole country had thereby become
theirs, and therefore assumed the power of dictating
who. should, and whoshould not be permitted to dwell
ie therein. Be this as it may, it is certain, (and was well
known at the time) that these nations leagued together,
and were backed by the English ; and in consequence of
the authority which they exercised over the Delawares
and other nations and tribes, were generally consider-


; Sans ; Be is * See Heckewelder’s History of the Indian Nations, Chap. I.


sina titieiedt reason to lament the many ann:


PS ge To illustrate the succeeding pages, it is necessary


ed as the head of the whole; wherefore count Zinzen- -
dorf, while in this country, had, with the assistance of |
~~ *Conrad Weisser, esq. interpreter to the. government,


* them against their will to abandon their settlements ; —


" HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. - hak


aman who enjoyed the esteem of the Six Nations, fo


ed an acquaintance with a numerous embassy of aber


chiefs, and after signifying to them his wish to preach


the gospel to the Indians, received from them n fol-


lowing answer :
-» Brother ! you have made a long journey over the
seas to preach the gospel to the white people, and to
‘the Indians! You did not know that we were here, and
we knew nothing of you—This proceeds from above !
Come therefore to us, both you and your Brethren,
we bid you welcome among us; and take this fathom
ofwampum in confirmation of the truth of our words !”
This meeting at once laid the foundation of a good
understanding between the Brethren and the Six Na-
‘tions ; and also opened the door for preaching the
gospel to the Delawares, then nearest neighbours to
the Brethren, and to the white settlers generally.
Afterwards, when the Indians at Shekomeko had been
deprived of their teachers, and at length compelled
to leave that place, application was made tothe great
council at Onondago, for a place of refuge for these
emigrants ; and bishop Spangenberg accompanied by
two of his Brethren, and the government interpreter,
Conrad Weisser, esq. having undertaken the commis-
sion, and for the purpose repaired to that place, the
- covenant formerly made with count Zinzendorf was
with great solemnity renewed : these three Brethren
were adopted as their countrymen, each receiving a
E


a : ‘ ’ cy
34, HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


peculiar name*—and their proposal of removing the
congregation of believing Indians from the province
of New York to their country, was favourably re-
ceived.
The intention then was, of settling those onnigahedl
at Wyoming, but these could not consent to dwell at
so remote a place from the settlement of the Brethren.
They also objected on the ground, that this place
lay on the road of the warriors going to, and com-
ing from the Catawbas ;+ and,also otherwise abound-
ed with Indians whom they mistrusted—Besides
this, a war had also broke out between the English
and French nations, and they were already suspected
of inclining to side with the latter; which rumour
had spread such terror, particularly at Rinebeck,
that the inhabitants had demanded a warrant of the
justice, to go and kill all the Indians at Shekomeko.
Now, although the warrant was not granted, yet these
poor Indians saw the necessity of their leaving that
country and their possessions to the white people; and
that without any recompense whatever.
The directors of the society, seeing the imminent dan-
ger these Christian Indians were in, represented their
case to his excellencyGeorge Thomas, esq. then govern-
or of Pennsylvania ; who, thereupon ordered : “ that all |
Indians, who took refugein Pennsylvania, should be pro- f


signifying, on the frumpkin. "
y ; set A southern nation of Indians. 9


me"


* Bishop Spangenberg was called “‘ Tgirhitontie :” which signifieth
a row of trees ; and David Zeisberger they named “ Anausseracheri,”


i


Ws as : ve rc :
” HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 35


tected in the quiet practice of their religious profes-
sion,”—which being made known to them, the first
emigration, consisting of ten families, in all forty- -four
persons, took place injApril, 1748. . These arriving at
Bethlehem, were received with tenderness and com-
passion; and having built cottages in the vicinity of
the Brethren’s settlements, their morning and evening
prayers were regulated, and the service performed in
the Mohigan language. They also again partook
ofthe holy sacrament, which had not been adminis-
tered to them for a long time; since the Brethren had
been forbidden at their former place to instruct them
in mattengyof religion.

This small settlement they called “ Friedenshutten,”
(Tents of Peace,) but as the emigration continued,
it was doubted whether an Indian town} or settle-
ment could support itself so near Bethlehem ; where-
fore the Brethren purchased a tract of land beyond
the Blue mountain, at the junction of Mahony* creek
with the Lehigh, on which they were settled, built
a regular town anda chapel, and called the place Gna-
denhutten.

Thus an Indian congregation was established, and
other Indians arriving from Shekomeko and Pach-
gatgoch, all were delighted with the place; which
increased beyond expectation, and became the blessed
means of engaging the attention of the Delawares (the


* “ Mahony” signifieth a Deer’s Lick ; a place hei salty, or brackish
water i issues out of the earth, £


ye ee ee


$6." .. upcxewEnpEn’ S$ NARRATIVE. ‘


natives fob this partof the country) towards the gospel,
which was daily preached there: so that many of these
were converted, and added to-Christ’s flock.

Next to the regulations made with respect to the
preaching of the gospel and administering the sacra-
ments—the instruction to be given to the assistants,
in order to instil scriptural principles into their minds—
the education of the youth of both sexes, and the in-
struction of them in gospel truths, (for which pur-
pose several parts of Scripture had already been trans-
lated into the Mohigan language,) rules and orders
were also made and agreed to, and persons nominated
‘to watch over their due performance. © ©
For the convenience of the Indian congregation at
Gnadenhutten, the Brethren had laid out a farm, built
. mills, and placed a blacksmith, together with several .
other mechanics, on a spot of land on the opposite
side of the river, at the distance of about half a mile
from the Indian settlement ; which place bore the In-
dian name of Mahony, (in English, ‘ Deer lick,”) and 0
the inhabitants of this place had their daily meetings, —
the same as is customary in all the Brethren’s cone
gations.

At the particular request of a respectable chief of
the Six Nations, named Shikalimus, who resided at
Shamokin, in the capacity of an agent, to transact the
business between them and the government of Penn-
sylvania, and by whom the Brethren were held in high
estimation, ‘some Brethren, one of whom was a black-
smith, settled at that place in June, 1747; yet, previs a


et 'é .


“TRS


ous to their. ahing, there, the aan ‘had in infiengledd
the governor of Pennsylvania of the invitation and its
object, who readily granted them permission, on con-_
dition thatthe blacksmith should stay no longer
with'them, than they preserved their faith and friend-
ship with the English nation. The other Brethren.

gaged in visiting the Indians, residing both on
the North and the West branch of the Susquehanna,
and in Jearning their languages. ,

In the year 1747, the Brethren, by invitation, visit-
ed the Delaware Indians at their village, called Menio-
lagameka,* which lay at the foot of the Blue moun-
tain, on the north side, at the distance of about 20
miles from Bethlehem, and about 15 miles from Gna-
denhutten.—These Indians had frequently visited at
the latter place, where they heard the gospel preach-
ed; and now requested that the same might be
preached to them also; to which the Brethren readily
eonsented, and many of them were afterwards con-
verted, and enjoyed the benefit of a teacher and school-


_ master, until the year 1751, when the land they occu-
_ pied being sold, ne gene the — at Gna-


denhutten.

In July of this year, deputies from the Six Nations
having arrived at Philadelphia, for the purpose of es-
tablishing a firm alliance with the Pennsylvania gov-
ernment, the Brethren thought it a favourable oppor-


' *The wordimplies: a spot of rich land, amidst that which is bad or
barren. ;


Pin a ie eas eae
* ee . - e., . Se A
bd _ i. sg 7 :
38 7 $ NARRATIVE.
tunity for Racvi e covenant which they had
tered into with them sorte ‘years before ; ort
they met them for the purpose, were kindly received,
and invited to visit them in their country.
_ About this time the Brethren also paid a visit to the

Rey. David Brainard, missionary to the Indians in
“New Jersey; and rejoiced at the success with which
that faithful servant of God had been blessed in preach-
ing the gospel to the Indians ; and some time after this,
that worthy man, accompanied by some of his con-
verts, visited the Brethren both at Bethlehem and
Gnadenhutten, much to his satisfaction.

_ In September, 1749, the foundation for a new church
was laid at Gnadenhutten, the one erected in 1746
being too small, the Indian congregation consisting
now of 500 souls ; and schools for the children of bem .
sexes were put under proper regulations.

The prospect of bringing souls to Christ by the
preaching of the gospel of salvation, brightening more
and more, the Brethren were indefatigable in their
labours ; each striving to do his utmost for Christ’s
sake. Journeying at that time through wildernesses
and, swamps—suffering often from hunger, as well as
from heat and cold—and above all, when thoroughly
wet, from: a want of change of linen and other clothes,
(as such journeys were chiefly made on foot, with
scarcely any baggage,) bore hard on weakly constitu-
tions, and caused frequent sickness, sometimes ending
in death. This last had been the case with a most


2 U
Md 7


7,
worthy Sala! the Rev. bis]


inary talents and rie piety, Phagiag: bifiae
nasa into this. country by the directors of the society.
in Europe, for the general superintendance of the
internal concerns, of the a here, and who, on
seeing the prospect of the conversion of the heathen,


had devoted much of his time in visiting the scattered


Indian villages on the branches of the Susquehanna


' and elsewere, preaching the gospel with great freedom


wherever he came. During the four years he resided


in this country, he baptized eighty-nine Indians. His a


death was a great loss to the society generally. Two
other missionaries, one, John Hagen, and the ‘other,
David Bruce, had also departed this life within the
last two years, at their posts; the former at Shamo-
kin, on the Susquehanna, and the latter at Packgev;
goch, in New England.

Bishop Johannes de Wattewille, a much respected
character among the Brethren, who had come from


Europe to America in 1748, to hold a visitation at


Bethlehem, and the other settlements of the Brethren


ii this country, was much rejoiced at finding the


Indian congregation at Gnadenhutten, in such a pros-
‘perous state. He frequently visited not only this con-
gregation, but also those Indians who lived on the
Susquehanna, preaching the gospel wherever he
went. In October, 1749, he returned to Europe.
Until the year 1754, this Indian congregation had
enjoyed peace, and flourished beyond expectation ;


be 2


er


a
as
4
q


:E WELDER? s NARRATIVE.


previous , eae WeBitethren had. also Soniintiied
their visits among those Indians residing on both
branches of the Susquehanna, and in the country of
the Six Nations, hoping that these also would, ere
long, embrace Christianity ; but while they cherished — ;
these hopes, the mission at Gnadenhutten reccinaae ; «
severe check. An embassy of Indians, consisting of |
Shawanos and Nanticoks, had come to invite all the
Christian Indians to leave their present abode and
settle at Wyoming; where, in many respects, they
would’ find a more convenient place of abode than
near the settlements of the white people, and yet have
the same advantage of being instructed in Christianity ~
by the Brethren, since these would be permitted to
visit them at pleasure. At first the Christian Indians
did not pay much attention to their speech; nor had
they any inclination to exchange their fine settlement
for a wilderness ; but the Six Nations, who had formed
the scheme, and had only employed those tribes to
transact the business for them, that they might not
be suspected, (being at the time favourably disposed :
towards the French, although they wished to keep this

a secret,) on learning that the Christian Indians were
not inclined to obey, now spoke themselves, declar-
ing that if they did not hear what was said to them,
they would come themselves, and run a red hot poker


into their ears, to make them hear—(meaning thereby
r to say, that they would compel them to obey, and
| move to Wyoming.) ‘This harsh language struck


main. shod: remains whine they were, determining


not to leave t


ir settlement, except peee should be


fe compelled the by force. a
; Race Brethren, ‘awilling that these poor frightened
big . should be left withouta teacher, occasionally —


obtain this privilege, they had first to travel into the

country of the Six Nations, ens to their chigfs
for permission.

- It might appear strange to some, that the aad

could travel about in the Indian country without dis-

». covering the hostile disposition of the nations, towards

the English ; yet such was the case at the time ;

they kept their designs a profound secret, and it was

_ not until those Indians who had entered into the

French service, made a sally, and murdered fourteen

white people within five miles of Shamokin, where

the Brethren had a small mission, that they. were

aware of danger. But now the scene had began, bar-


} in other quarters, and it became evident that a cruel
Indian war would be the result of the influence the
| French had acquired among the Indians, and es-
pecially those of the Six Nations, who long since

had on all occasions, and particularly in war concerns,
| assumed an authority over many other nations, so
that they only had to dictate, and others to obey. All
Mepouriding nations,—not only those inhabiting Penn-
rr


t a missionary thither to exhort them ; but, evelt to:


barous murders were committed by the hostile Indians


Sines
oo eee ee


EWELDER’S NARRATIVE. fae
. : ae
-sylvania, but also those dwelling within the limits of
other provinces, and the adjacent country, together
with the Western, and Lake Indians, were called upon
by the Six Nations to join in the conflict ; and such
among these, as were averse to war, were threatened
with destruction, in case they did not join with chem.
Previous to hostilities being committed, unfavoura-
ble reports had been spread, by white people from
different quarters, against the Brethren ; and, various
were the accusations laid to their charge. By some
they were hated on.account of their religion, which —
- . was supposed to be tinctured with Catholicism—by
others they were censured for endeavouring to civi-
lize the savages, a race of beings, which, (in their
opinion) had no claim to Christianity, and whom. to
destroy, both root and branch, would not only be doing
God. a service, but also be the means of averting
his wrath which they otherwise might incur by
suffering them to live, they being the same as the
, Cananitesof old, an accursed race, who by God’s com-
_ -mand were to be destroyed.


The enmity of some was so inveterate, that they
ae sought nothing short of the total destruction of the
L Brethren ; and indeed, at that time, when the In-
dians had joined the French in their wars against
ee the English nation, seemed to favour their design;

the more so since the Brethren were known to labour

2 among the Indians. They were first accused of being

in the secret, next of being in league with the French,
» ®


,


% ee SNL


sil ne the Indiansiltte arm


d ammunition


set eet be


England, a lett f a treasonable nature had been
published, said ea copy of one intercepted on the
way from Quebec to Bethlehem, which letter stated ;
| **that by means of the Brethren having taken their


part, they would soon conquer the English.”* In Vir- -


ginia, a wicked man declared ata county court, before
upwards of 500 persons, “ that when he was in Canada,
every two weeks, regular intelligence had been sent
from Bethlehem.” In the Jerseys, public declaration.
was made by beat of drum, ‘ that Bethlehem should be
destroyed, and that a carnage should be made, such as
never had been heard of in North America before.’’*
Such reports as these were sufficient to rouse an

ignorant multitude to acts of violence, without reflect-


ing on the consequences, especially as some had al-


ready suffered in various ways by the hostile Indians,
and could not endure to see the Brethren, who in their
opinion were accessary to their misfortunes, dwell
unmolested—mobs were spoken of, and in some places
' ‘  gonsultations were held on the measures to be taken
_ fordestroying the Brethren’s settlements. Bishop
| . Spangenberg being at the time on a journey, while


entering a public house, was insulted, and threatened ©


with having his brains knocked out. At lengtha par-


‘


,* See Lockiel’s History, chapter xii.


to carry on their wars with the English. In New


ty of about one hundred men having united for the


purpose of raisill a sufi mob to carry their de-


ustxewatvxt sijfaunative™


signs into execution, came to Bethlehem, but the civil
treatment they met with there, cheer their resolu- _


‘tion for the time.


While affairs wore the appearance, as though the


inhabitants of Bethlehem, and also the Christian In- 4


dians at Gnadenhutten would ere long be murdered,
and their towns be laid in ashes, (as threatened by as-
sembling mobs), the settlement of the Brethren on
Mahony creek, abcut half a mile distant ‘from Gna:
denhutten, and separated from that place by the river
Leheigh, anda ridge of high land which runs between
the two places, was, while the white Brethren were
assembled at supper, (onthe 24thof November, 1755,)
suddenly attacked by the Indians in the French inter-
est, and eleven persons, namely, seven men, three
women, and one child of fifteen months old, murdered. :
Only two men, one woman and a boy, effected their |
escape, which was performed ina manner almost mi-
raculous.

The scene washorrid! At the barking of the dogs,
the door being opened, the Indians fired into: the
house, killing one man, and wounding several. \ Re-
tiring to the garret, after having first well secured and
barricaded the doors, the Indians set fire to the house,
keeping a watch at the front doors and windows.
Meanwhile, a man and his wife, and a boy, leaped out
of a window in the back part of the house, or rather
from the burning roof, all being in flames, and they


_ escape. Houses, stables, and the barn, well stocked
Es with grain and hay, were all soon in flames, and the


_ Brethren as “snakes in the grass, and in the French


FE “Hecxeweipe’s NARRATIVE.


escaped ; but as a fourth oi attempt, he
was seized alive, tomahawked, and scalped. Another


man, confined ickness in an out-house, found
means to get out at a back. window, and make his


cattle bellowing in the stables, contributed to increase /
the terror.
A’‘dreadful account of this melancholy event was
brought to Bethlehem some time after midnight, at .
which place the light of the burning buildings, al-
though nearly thirty miles distant, and with the ridge oe 3 4
of the Blue mountains between, was plainly seen. And — ‘a
now those desperadoes, who had come to destroy . ‘
Bethlehem, (a number of whom were yet in she neigh- ;
bourhood) were wanted as an escort to those Brethren s
and friends, who were willing to repair to the fatal
spot for the ptirpose of burying the dead, but their hail


_ courage failed them, and they could not be prevail-


ed on to expose themselvés to such danger. —
‘Melancholy as the event was to the Brethren, set-

ting aside ull losses in property, it eventually was

the means of saving Bethlehem and the Indian con-


—


—


gregation, from utter destruction. The very same
people, who but a few days since had denounced the


interest ;” now saw their error. Among the hundreds


of people, who from various parts of the country had
purposely come to learn the particulars, and many to


a .


aa oe ee ee a


46 HECKEWELDE | ae


- survey the desolated spdllbecing the mangled bodies
and bones, they shed tears ; and smiting their breasts
exclaimed, “* Ah! what guilt ee have brought |
on our heads, had we followed our designs of destroy-
ing the Brethren, on the bare supposition that they . |


ere our enemies.” ;

At the time the settlement on Mahony was destroy-
“ed, only a few of the Indian Brethren were at home,
” the greater part being dispersed in the woods, hunt-
ing ; it being the season for that occupation. These


Brethren were now sent for, and the whole body of
ge Indians were removed from Gnadenhutten
to Bethlehem ; while troops stationed at their forsaken
village, and who built a fort, were to protect the scat-
.  tered-settlers, and guard the Brethren’s mills, which
: were filled with grain, and the property of ithe Indians
from being destroyed.
| These troops however, unacquainted with Indian
manceuvres, had the misfortune to lose a number of
E their men before they had:been long stationed there ;.
ate for on the new-year’s day following, the savages had
E recourse to stratagem, in which they so well succeed-
, ed, that a number of men were cut off from the pro-
tection of the fort, and murdered.
These soldiers had been amusing themselves veiily


!
!
4


skating on the ice, the river being frozen over; when


lw at some distance higher up, where the river made a
bend, they espied two Indians, apparently amusing.
themselves in the same manner. Believing these al-
-a
i y


— >


ady in their ‘power, pr ee them, when on a »
sudden, a party. shal lay in ambush, ready to fall upon »
them, rushed forth from their hiding place, and put
them to death ;. the few who remained thought they — 3
were unable to defend themselves in the fort, and took.
flight, whereupon the savages, after seizing upon as
much property as they could carry off, set fire to the
fort; tothe houses of the Indians, and to the Brethren’s
mills; which was a considerable loss to the society,


and to the Christian Indians.


§
Much> of the grain with which the mills were ©
stored might have been taken away, had the Brethren _
preferred saving their property, to the lives of choir !
fellow creatures—the distressed white inhabitants of
that part of the country, who were anxious to be out
ofthe reach of the enemy. Thus,-at one time,


_ three waggons which were sent to bring grain from ee.


So


the mills, meeting with numbers of distressed people
fleeing from a cruel enemy, who had murdered some
of their families, and burnt down their houses, these
having escaped with their lives, and without cover-
ing, the Brethren humanely gave them the use of


ae. pe Be


their waggons, and brought them safe to Bethlehem.
Hundreds of distressed men, women and children,
who had fled from the savages, sought shelter at
the settlements of the Brethren, and as long as a
place could be found for them, they were protected ,
and fed.


“oe 2


HECKEWELDER’S NARRA


o£ alan people, at the time, wondered ’ ;
»  thren, especially after the losses they had sustained,
could feed and maintain such a nu of persons; for
though their loss was great in an. at the Gnaden-
hutten mills and barn, they besides lost upwards of a {
thousand bushels of wheat in another place; added ¥
_ to this, crops of grain had the year following been but _
small, on account of the long drought... However,
through a bounteous providence, they were often ré- .
lieved when they least expected it; and what gave
~ them particular satisfaction, was, their being enabled
give protection and sustenance to. many, who but )
recently, through ignorance, had calumniated We
nay threatened them with destruction.
r. Indeed it was generally believed, and atknowloiigel ;
a ¢ that had it not been for the Brethren’s settlements,
—- ® the whole country from the ridge of the Blue mountain
to Philadelphia, would have been laid waste. The mur-
ders committed, following in such quick succession,
. and often where least expected, struck the inhabitants
i ‘ with such terror, that they knew not where to fly for
safety. The determination of the Brethren to stand
their ground, and relying on the help of God to guard
against the worst, by securing the most open places
with stockades, erecting watch houses, and post
ing centinels where it was thought necessary, was
. to them salutary news, and many also offered their a
services.


: 7 2 2? . '
ECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. "49 8 :


‘It has been already Hille, that the first out:
rages committed by the Indian warriors,* were on set-
\v tlers about five *. from Shamokin, at which place
three Brethren, two in the capacity of missionaries, _
and one of them a blacksmith, resided at the time ; of .
these three, the two former had immediately, on the re+
port of this murder, fled to Bethlehem; but the smith,
determined not to desert, or leave his post without
orders from the directors of the society, remained
there, although his situation was exceedingly danger-
ous. The Shawano chief Paxinos, at Wyoming,
learning his situation by a message sent him “
Bishop Spangenberg, immediately dispatched his two —
sons to conduct him safe to Gnadenhutten, where he
arrived previous to the destruction of that place, and
from thence came to Bethlehem.
. Pennsylvania had, within the space of a few months,
been subjected to disasters hitherto unknown: its
whole frontier having been laid waste by the savages,


%


e


the people were compelled to fly in various directions

for safety.
_ The Indians, having early in the year 1756, began
to commit hostilities, the governor of Pennsylvania
i . thought proper, by proclamation, to declare war against
all Indian nations who should persist in so doing ;
offering one hundred and fifty dollars for every hostile


'
|
; * These warriors were of the Six Nations, and who began the war in


“
} v1

Pennsylvania, (see Heckewelder’s History of Indian Nations, Chap. XX. ® .

page 168 ; also Lockiel’s History, Chap. XII. F-

Z a G >=


ge ae ee would lay down the 8 to saat

_ sik of peace. An exception was however made,.
the proclamation, in favour of the Indians residing

: Bethlehem ; and further, the governor thought
proper to warn these, by a letter, not to stray far from
home, which advice was strictly attended to. >

_ The nations however were not yet disposed for —

~ -peace; neither would the Iroquoise suffer the Dela-~
"wares to treat for themselves. The writer of this
arrative was, afew years after the peace had been

Paper shown the spot, on the path leading from |
Menessink to Wyoming, where (as he was then

told by some of the’ Delaware Indians, ) the govern-_
ment messenger, Thomas Hill, was met by a party
_* of the Six Nations, and murdered, as they would not
permit the message to be taken to the Delawares on
Susquehanna. Murders were continued, and the
” 9 people were seen flying in various Te seek-

ing for places of safety.

Meanwhile the Christian Indians were of bial
‘service to the Brethren, in guarding them while at work

in the fields, and harvesting their crops of grainj@ —

and indeed the whole neighbourhood derived more, ;

or less benefit from their being there—since the inimi-

cal Indians dreaded coming too far into the settle-
ments, lest they should be discovered by the friend-


ly natives. They were also pres of service
ogg


Vj


’


eee.


J : ‘i Pe
ECE EWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


heiiedidins, when wseiliee person would» :
so dangerous a task. They had, since their _
“fom Gnadenhutten, principally established
themselves at Bethlehem ; yet, for the safety of
Brethren’s settlements at Nazareth, Gnadenthal,.
Christians’ Spring, some were kept at those places—
where, when their service in the fields, as guards, was
not wanted, the men would join in manual labour,
and the women would make baskets and brooms. ~
Wherever these were stationed, their missionaries =
were with them ; and they attended divine servic t
regularly and daily. That Indians could iehanle ee,
’ themselves from their nation ; could abandon their
wild and wandering friends and relatives, and become
so docile and civilized as to live content among the —
white people ; was a matter of astonishment to many
} whom this report had reached; and who, to satisfy
themselves as to the fact, purposely visited Bethle-
hem, to be eye witnesses thereof. |
_ At length, through the vigilance of the governor of
Pennsylvania, col. afterwards sir William Johnson, and
George Croghan, esq. (deputy agent for sir William,)
| «the Indians consented to attend a treaty to be holden
_ with them, but at no other place than at Bethlehem.
This treaty place was also approved of by the officers
of government, both parties placing great confidence
in the influence the Brethren would have in bringing
about a peace, on account of their integrity ; and it was


*


“Poses ar that 5 desisted from eas sotalol
™ e treaty therefore was held at Easton, on the yr
_ to which place, the captain that had headed the party,
ich the year preceding murdered the Brethren and
sisters on Mahony, was himself murdered by the Dela-
ware chief ‘Tadeuskund, with whom he had pro-
ed a. quarrel, by his high toned and whitit:
language.
_ After the treaty. was concluded, a great natal
of those Indians visited Bethlehem; and. being
ged on the opposite side of the river, the justice of
the peace of the place, Timothy Horsfield, esq. for
- safety sake examined every one strictly, as to his mo- —
tives for coming-here, and his intended stay, and also
maintained order amongst them. Of course these In-
_ dians were well treated and fed by the Brethren, and it
_ was hoped that the treaty would have the good. effect -
of uniting them ina lasting peace. es wrrsthf
_ But scarcely had they returned from this» tide
when new.scenes of murder* were committed on the
- south side of the Blue mountain, even to a great dis-
tance ; and, as a further proof that they were not satis
so enpiba at D4


* The writer of this Narrative hae been assured by creditable I

of the Delaware nation, that these murders had not been committed

any of thei? n nation, but by some individuals of the Five Nations ; for |

purpose of destroying the object of the treaty, and preventing an union

taking place between them, (the Delawares and the English nation,)
® which they feared would finally be accomplished,


.


F "-RECKEWELDER’s NARRATIVE,


fied, but tended to continue the war, they PT,
doned their habitations at Wyoming, and recede :
z, , a considerable signee higher up the on
i bilcteriver: OM 5 &
~ In November of the same year,(1756) the governor
Pennsylvania. honoured Bethlehem with a. visit ;
” and also visited the Christian Indiansiin their dwell-
ings, much to his satisfaction. =
The year 1757 commenced with similar troubles
to those of the preceding year; and,#though the chief,
of the hostile Indians showed a disposition towards a
peace, yet the nation was not of the same mind, con-_
sidering their grievances not adjusted to their wish.
\ A council being held with them at Lancaster, in April
of that year, they complained that the people at Beth-
lehem kept their relations and friends prisoners ;*
begging that these might be at liberty to remove to. |
_ Wyoming, which being made known to them (the
Christian Indians) they, so far from thinking of com-
plying with their desire, joined in petitioning the goy-
ernor to continue his protection toward them, which


being readily granted, they, by the advice of the Bre- . #3
_ thren, began to build themselves a new town within
two miles of Bethlehem, which place was called ”


Nain. ®%.
_ The French finding that the Delawares, in conse-


Vatids |

*. ‘They wished their relatives and seatirioe out of the settlements
‘of the white people ; as their being where they now were, was a check re
upon ‘them, in carrying on the war vigorously,


4: + ray


ee
4 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE:


aa id PF nies of the me" overtures for peace made to


oe ‘ a by the governor of Pennsylvania, began.to slack-
3 a nin the war, now advised them to leave this, coun- -
oe try and withdraw to the Ohio, where they might
ee join those of their nation who were there already,


ers against the English with better success. ire §
bai The government of Pennsylvania, both encouraged ~
d supported by the Friends, (otherwise called Quak-

.) were unwearied in their exertions to bring about |

a peace; but haying in vain sought for a proper and 4

trusty person to carry peace messages to the hos~
tile Indians on the Ohio, Christian Frederick Post, of :
Pe Bethlehem, a man of undaunted courage and enter- |
a prising spirit, and besides well acquainted with the
manners and customs of the Indians, was proposed :
and engaged in this service, making two jour-
nies to the hostile savages: in the first of which |
he was accompanied by two Delaware Indians, who
had. been under the protection of government for _
some time. | hg
Journies of that kind, and under existing cireum-


stances, were by many deemed. as rash and. impru-
dent undertakings. Post, however, was not dismayed,
but considered.the errand he was going on, a good
one.—Movyéd by charity, with a desire of being in-
strumental in putting a stop to murders, and the
effusion of human blood, and considering himself under
the protection of the Almighty, and of Him who in his
sermon on the mount had pronounced a blessing on all


/


“peace makers,’* he consulted not with flesh and


A Ole le


| HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. — *


.


blood; neither had entreaties, tending to dissuade him
from the undertaking, any effect. “Cheerful and un-
daunted, after taking a farewell of his Brethren at
Bethlehem, whose best wishes, both as to himself and
the laudable cause he had engaged in, he had been ast
sured of, hesat out with his two Indian guides to a


eountry, in which neither he nor any of the Brethrem


had ever been before—and to a savage people, who
had united with the French for the destruction of the —


English in this country; and after having faithfully _
performed the business entrusted to him by govern-


ment, and in which he even succeeded beyond expec-


tation, he returned, giving thanks and praises to the ~


Lord, who {as he expresses himself in his journal,)
‘¢ had preserved him through all the dangers and dif-
ficulties that he had been under.”

‘To, enumerate all the hardships, difficulties and
dangers, Frederick Post had been subjected to on
these journies, especially on the first, in the summer
of the year 1758, is at this time both impossible and
needless. ‘Suffice it to say, that what he intended the
public should know, was published in the year after,
in England, under the title of “Christian Frederick
Post’s Journal from Philadelphia to the"Ohio, ” &e,
His original manuscript journal, however, which had
for some time been placed in the hands of the writer


* Matthew, chapter v, ver. 9.


om


56 * HECKEWELDE R’S NARRATIVE. .


of this narrative, was far more interesting, and evinced
that few men would be found able to undergo the _
fatigues of a journey, bearing so hard on the constitu-
tion, or a mind to sustain such trials of adversity—at —
least not with that calmness with which Mi. Post en-
- dured it. hone
The English government having at length’ so. far
“succeeded towards establishing a peace with the hostile
P nations, and the French seeing themselves in a man-
ner deserted by them, evacuated Fort Du Quesne,
_ after destroying most of the works ; when the Eng-
"Tish. took possession, and having built a new pee
called it Fort Pitt. ‘ame


cursions which had for years together desolated the -
country, and distressed numbers of the inhabitants,
ceased in Pennsylvania and the neighbouring pro-
vinces, the war shifting to a different quarter, until a
peace between the two European powers was concladed.

With the prospect of a peace, the Christian In-
‘dians had, in 1757, begun their new settlement, call-
ed Nain, and in 1758 they completed all the’ pee


ie ry, together with a chapel, which was consecrated Ou
bast tober et of the same year. Those Indians who
A had b stationed at Nazareth and other places,
for ‘the protection of the Brethren’s settlement, now
joined their congregation again at Nain, which
place however increased so rapidly, that it was found


a
oe ae


From this time, the troubles and murderous ee. ig


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


& a
necessary to begin another establishment, and for ‘
that purpose, 1400 acres. of land were purchased by —
the Brethren, beyond the Blue mountain; a new

_ settlement was began with thirty baptized Indians of
thedDolanare. Nation, and the place called Wech- —

i Both “a congregations Pai se with: mis, ee

F siaiioiaed. schoolmasters, were so. prosperous

they became the admiration of visitors, some of whon

thought i it next to a miracle, that, by the light of the”

; gospel, a savage race shoulfBe brought to live togeth-

, er in peace and harmony, and above all devote them- s

selves to religion. ‘I'he people residing in the neigh-
bourhood of these places, were alsointimate with these

Indians, and both were serviceable to each other; one oe

| instance of which ishere inserted. In February of the i , fs

_ year 1761, a white man who had lost a child, came to a

Nain weeping, and begging that the Indian brethren

would assist him and his wife to search for his child, =

which had been missing since the day before ; several of :

the Indian brethren immediately went to the house of P

the parents, and discovered the footsteps of the child, 4

. and tracing the same for the distance of two miles,

' found the child in the woods, wrapped,up in its petti- |
coat, and shivering with cold. The joy she parents :
was so great, that they reported the cep einnce
wherever they went. To some of the white people, :
who had been in dread of the near settlement of 4
these Indians, this incident _was the means of making

‘ H ‘


-


é


=


mueerinaa £6 NARRATIVE.


them easy, and causing them to manciatan anaes :
~ good neighbours. - pees
In August of the year - 1761, mnie easy was —
held by the government of Pennsylvania, at Easton,
‘with deputies from many Indian tribes; after which
Tadeuskund, the head chief of the Delawares, with
a retinue of more than one hundred Indians, came to


ha” thlehem* on a visit ; and now the war being over,
a a who had been engaged in it, freely con-
Ee “tee people they had heretofore been acquainted with,
Ee _ that the Brethren’s settlements had been as astum-

bling block to them—that had it not been for these, .


. they would most assuredly have laid waste the whole
ccuntry, from the mountains to Philadelphia—that
many plans had been laid for destroying these settle-
ments—that they had approached several times for
the purpose, but the watchfulness of the Brethren,
and the recollection of their friends and relations (the

bi Christian Indians,) had always frustrated their designs ;

had they succeeded in persuading the Christian In-
dians to withdraw from the Brethren’s settlements, no
doubt but they would have carried’ their plans into
execution; but, whilst these resided among the white
people, they dare not venture to make the attempt,
partly from a fear that their own friends and relations
might finally be brought to join the white people


a

ed to their friends and relations, and to some white
.

|

:


* By an account kept, 652 Indians had visited Bethlehem in this year,


=


~ against them, or that the latter sibilant staniaiais


_» In the spring of the year 1762, the missionary Zeis- a


but in the fall of the year the flux broke out among


HECKEWELDER’S:


cre their relations, not being able to come at them.” ;
» A few months had scarcely elapsed after thesicon- ae
clusion of peace, when afresh murder was committed E ;
by a white. man on an Indian of good. character, in’
the Jerseys; in consequence of which, many white
settlers fled from their dwellings, fearing that this
murder might instigate the Indians to renew hoatili?
ties ; however, through the vigilance of governmen’
they were again pacified, and peace was preserv Pane 2g


berger, visited, by particular request, those Indians at.
Wyoming, who, previous to the commencement of sa
the war, had through fear, and the threats of the Six | .
Nations, suffered themselves to be drawn off from
Gnadenhutten.—These now wished to return again’;


them, and sending again for Zeisberger, he had the “


satisfaction to attend a number of them in their dying


moments, and saw them depart with cheerfulness, in ~~
reliance upon the death and merits of a crucified Sa- igi
viour.
_. Frederick Post, vege the preceding year had vised
the weste dians, living on the Muskingum, being 3
in great hopes that he would be able to introduce {
Christianity among them, the writer of this narrative, . a
by and with the consent of the Directors of the Society, hy


went with him as an assistant, principally however to


—— NARRATIVE.


tats their children to read and write. They set out
together early in March, travelling through a settled —
’ country of about one hundred and forty miles, without
” seeing much of waste that had been made by the In-
dians in the late war; but scarcely had they passed.
Shippensburg, when the scene changed—the ravages
committed by the Indians in that war, were now visi-
ble almost in evéry direction as they passed on. Farms
laying waste, with stacks of chimneys standing in the
lidst of. a heep of ashes, where the houses had been.
* bein down, presented a very gloomy appearance, and
caused serious reflections on the fate of many of those =
unfortunate inhabitants, whose lot ithad been to fall
under the war hatchet and scalping knife. Being, after -
a tedious and fatiguing journey arrived at Fort Pitt,
they were kindly received, and lodged with Messrs.
Davenport and M’Kinney, the only two gentlemen
who at that time had a tailing house, at the fort in
the point. tae
The commandant of the fort, colonel Bouquet; ~
together with captain Hutchins, as also the British
officers generally, admiring and approving of ‘the
undertaking, were no less active in rendering us such
assistance as lay in their power; and when arriving —
at the mouth of Big Beaver, where the Indian war
chief Pi eas tae? ore the white iti called
esigel


* The same man whose name in Post’s Journal is written * Coshgur)
. caukehlton.”


‘


|
|


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE:


white eyes,) resided, he also furnished us with neat ©
and presented us with a few fowls. Post had’already, —
the preceding year, built a house on the bank of ‘the =
tiver Muskingum, at the distance of about a mile from
the Indian village which lay to the south, across this
river ;. and at which village, at that time, the greatest
chiefs of the nation, both civil and military’ resided, — wre
with Tamaque (or King Beaver, as he was called by wi r
the white people,) at their head—all wifes: es i
came to see and welcome us. ~
‘Post, who had calculated on raising on the ground —
as much provision as should be wanted for our use,
set the hired man he had engaged for the purpose at
Pittsburg, to cutting down trees, where he intended
to make his corn-field, while he himself marked
out thrée acres of ground for this purpose. ‘Thé
Indians, alarmed at this, sent word to him to appear
before them at the council house on the next day, and
in the mean while desist from doing any further work


a 2


_on the premises. Appearing accordingly before them
on the day following, the speaker, in the name of the e
Council, delivered the following address : or
. “Brother! last year you asked our leave to come ‘


and live with us, for the purpose of instructing us and
our children, to which we consented ; and now being .
come on, we are glad to see you ! “at
“Brother! It appears to us that you must since
hanged your mind, for instead of instructing us

or children, you are cutting trees down on our 4


HECKE WEBER'S “NARRATIVE.


-byé’and bye another, and another, may come and do
the same ; and the next thing will be, that a fort will
be built for the protection of these intruders, and thus

ere we driven further back, as has been the case ever
since the white people first came into this country,

Say! do we not speak the truth ?”—In answer to
‘which address, Post delivered’ himself thus: 5 ©)»

‘¢ Brothers ! What you say I told you is true, with

_regard to my coming to live with you—namely, for

_ the purpose of instructing you ; but it is likewise true;
that an instructor must have something to live upon,
otherwise he cannot do his duty. Now, not wishing
to be a burden to you, so as to ask of you provision
for me to live upon, knowing that you have already
families to provide for, I thought of raising my own
bread, and believed that three acres of ground was
little enough for that. You will recollect that I said

to you last year, that I was a messenger from God,
and prompted by him to preach and make, known his


might be saved, and become inheritors of his heaven-
ly kingdom. Of your land I do not want one foot;
neither will my raising a sufficiency of corn and vege-
tables off of your land for me and my brother to sub-
sist on, give me or any other person a claim to #
jet land.”


=


land! you have marked out alarge spot of ground for
a plantation, as the white people do every where; and _


our country will be claimed by the white people, and.


| will to the Indians, (heathen) that they also, by faith,


screen anaasie: 63


Post having retired for the purpose of giving the
chiefs and council time to form an answer :—this
done, they again met, when the inatend thus address
ed him, (Post): Arad eipings :

© Brother! Nake: as you. have~ seianeadh more aii .
tinctly, we may perhaps be able to give you some ad- | - . "

E ‘vice. You say, ‘that you are come at the instigation _

of the great spirit, to teach and: to preach to us !’ so

also say the priests at Detroit, whom our Father, the
French, has sent among his Indian Children! Well,
this being the case, you, as a preacher, want no more

land than one of those do, who are content with a

garden lot, for to plant vegetables and pretty flowers —

| ve such asthe French priests also have, and of which
the white people are all fond.

Brother! As you are in the same station and

' employ with those preachers we allude to—and as ‘we

never saw any one of those cut down trees and till the

ground, to get a livelihood, we are inclined to


, _ think, and especially as these, without labouring hard, ; are
b "yet look well, that they have to look to another source :
than that of hard labour for their maintenance. And dey
we think that if, as you say, the great spirit wants you~ a
to preach to the Indians, he will cause the same to be /
done for you, as he causes to be done for those priests $ 3
we have seen at Detroit. We are agreed to give you =


a garden spot, even a larger spot of ground than those


a Detroit. _ It shall measure fifty steps (paces,)


way ; which, if it suits you, you are at liberty to


= 2 eae ae re be Ge ae


&


64 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


_ plant thereon what you please !”—which. st agree-

ing to, the: lot was on the following day stepped off by
captain Pipe, stakes drove in at the corners, and Post

_ told that now he might go on with his work again.

An Indian treaty being appointed | to be held

at Lancaster in the latter part of the summer, Mr.

Post was again applied to by the governor of Penn-

sylvania, to use his endeavours in bringing to. this

treaty many of the western Delawares, but above all __

King Beaver, and the great war chief Shingask* ;

(generally called by the white people, King Shingas.f)

the former of which, together with other heads of the

nation, accordingly went on with Mr. Post, but the

latter positively declared that he would not: go,

believing that the English only wanted to murder him

for the damage he had done them during the ‘late: war. a
Scarcely had six weeks elapsed from the time of

the departure of those who had gone on to the treaty, —

when it became known that the French had succeed- __

edin persuading the Indian nations, once more to try

their strength against the English. And it was fur"

' ot Ses |

ea Shingask” was his'proper name, which caetutel isa bog Coe

This man was the "Baeatest Delaware warrior of that time ; re

war exploits on record, they would form an interesting” document,

though a shocking one. Conecogeague. felt his strong arm sufficiently ©


to be convinced of that. His person was small, but in poi t of cot
and nya he was said never to pander been exceeded by any ‘one.
43B?


+ This war chief well rapa the high price that had been se
«alp by the governor of Pennsylvania.


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. —


ther added : that atreaty at this time would be of no |


effect; and that even Post would not be expen $
return to this place again.”

- The situation in which the writer of this was placed
at that time, became very precarious. I, howe-
ver, found means of sending a letter to Mr. Post


at Lancaster, and receiving an answer—and king
Beaver, shortly after arriving from the treaty,
who on learning what had been done in his ab- |


sence, and that a war seemed to be unavoida-
ble, he advised as Post did in his letter: that I should
leave the country while it was yet time, lest I should
fall a sacrifice ; which however, on account of bad


health at the time, was impossible for me to do, added |


to which, my horse had been stolen or lost.

Previous to the return of the Indians from the treaty
at Lancaster, the wife of captain Shingask had died,
and being comsidered a woman of note, the funeral
procession* was performed accordingly. Although
her complaint appeared to be no other than a fever,
yet Indian doctors made it out to be, that she had
been bewitched; when of course the conjurer took
the place of the physician for to cure her, and under
whose hands she died. )

After being again advised by. king Beaver (whom
I considered my true friend,) to retire while it was
yet pn I sat out with some traders in October, for


Stee funeral procession, Heckewelder’s py of Indian Nations,
er xxvii. -


~


I


r.
“
4


66 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


_ Pittsburg, and meeting on the way with the Indian


agent, captain Alexander M‘Kee, and Mr. Post, appri-
sed them of the times, and the war which was expect-
ed. The former was going out to receive and pro-
vide for the prisoners, promised to be given up at the
treaty ; and the latter considered himself safe under
the protection of the former, but both were disappoint-
ed in their views, M‘Kee returning without prisoners,
and Post only saving himself by flight through the
woods. Before the winter had passed over, murders
were committed on a number, of traders,’ in -"
part of the country. q
In the month of April, 1763,a melancholy event
took place at Wyoming, on Susquehannah, where the
principal chief of the Delawares, east of the moun-
~ tains, named Tadeuskund, was burnt to death in his
own house. Various. were the conjectures as to the
cause of his house taking fire ; but thesgeneral belief
was, that it had been a premeditated act, done with the
knowledge or consent of some of the men of the vil-
lage. It appeared probable, that to carry the resolu-
tion into effect, liquor had been brought into the vyil-
lage, it being known that this chief was fond of it,
who after having drank to excess, had retired to his
house to sleep ; but no sooner was this known, than .
the house was discovered in flames ; and, to prevent a
disclosure of the persons who had committed the


act, every house in the village was fired and ~
down to the ground, to make it appear as if a ger


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 67 7


conflagration had by accident taken place. Tadeus-

kund* had been a useful man in his place, and to the

nation he .belonged; but in the opinion of the Six
Nations, he assumed more authority than belonged
to him as a Delaware chief, and fearing that he might
not fall into their measures of joining in a new war
against the English, whey perhaps concerted the plan
of destroying him. .

_ As yet the tcoublies which early in the year ‘aaa
begun in the western country, had not reached the
eastern., The Susquehanna Indians travelled as
usual through the. setilements of the white people
without fear.—T he peace which had been enjoyed for
several years together, had in a manner done away
animosities formerly existing against the Indians ; and
the Christian Indians, both at Nain and Wequetank,
were in a prosperous state at the time, having built
for themselves and their missionaries convenient
dwelling. houses, enlarged the chapel at the former
place, and enjoyed the fruits of their agricultural la-
bours.. But in the fall of this year (1763,) the scene

suddenly changed. The intelligence received of hos-
tilities committed on the Lakes of Canada and Ohio
river, caused many to entertain fears, that a repetition
of the dreadful scenes of 1755, and the years following,
would take place..


e


* See sketch of Tadeuskund’s life, in Heckewelder’s account of Indian


ions, chapter xl, b
ae Pr
: aa


»
ia


#


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


Such accounts were eagerly caught at by fanatics,
to serve the doctrine they heretofore had held, viz:
that the Indians were the Canaanites, who by God’s


~ commandment were to be destroyed; and that this


not having been done by them at that time, the pre-
sent war might be considered as a just a
from God for their disobedience.* ao
The threats of these fanatics having reached the;
ears of the Christian Indians.at Nain and Wequetank,
they joined in an humble address to the governor of
Pennsylvania, testifying their abhorrence of the cru-
elties committed by their countrymen, and begging
his excellency’s protection ; to which the ysis
replied in a.most satisfactory manner. é
Soldiers being raised for the defence of the country,
it became necessary that the Christian Indians gene-
rally should wear a mark to distinguish them from
the enemy, lest some of them, while out on business,
might be taken for enemies, and be molested. owe
Yet the object of government in raising these
troops, was not that real danger already existed, but
for the purpose of making the minds of the people
easy, who seemed much alarmed at the reports of


‘murders committed by Indians, although they hap-


pened at the distance of some hundred miles, and to
be prepared, in case of an emergency, to protect and
guard all Indians passing and repassing on their law-


.


ag
*See Lockiel’s History. *


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


ful a either for the purpose of exchanging
their peltries for other necessaries, or otherwise com-
ing on business with the governor of Pennsylvania;
for with all the noise of real danger, the Brethren saw
as yet none, the Indians coming to them to trade,
conducting themselves in a peaceful and becoming
manner, not giving the least cause of alarm ; nay,
even the missionary Zeisberger, remained undisturbed,
and without the least knowledge of Indian hos-
tilities, at his post at Wyalusing on Susquehanna,
preaching the gospel with great freedom and success
to numbers, some of whom came froma great distance
to hear him. The Brethren, however, thought proper
to apprise him of the current reports, and the danger
he migh tsubject himself to by remaining there, at the
same time inviting him to return to Bethlehem.

As it sometimes happens, that from a want of au-
thority, energy, or inclination of the officer entrusted
with troops, acts are committed, not only dishonoura-
blé to such officer, but also highly injurious to the in-
habitants of a district, nay, often to the community at
large, so also here in the outset, an unjust and highly
criminal act—an act of murder—was committed on
harmless, inoffensive Indians, by the new levies ; and
that under the very eye of their commander. The
Indians who in t/is instance had fallen a sacrifice,
were Zachary, with his wife and a young child, and
another woman related to him; who all had come to


-_ a store for the purpose of exchanging their pletry *


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE,


for wearing apparel—not knowing at the time that the

_ soldiers who were in the house were drinking, (the —
storekeeper also trading in liquors.) These soldiers |
however, together with their officers, being in a high |
state of intoxication, fell upon these defenceless . ia
dians, and murdered* the whole of them.

The soldiers now. fearing that Zachary’s four ts
thers, who were living at Wequetank, might. revenge
his death, went to that place, forbidding any of those
Indians to hunt, and threatening to kill every Indian
they should meet with in the woods ; however, by the
repeated remonstrances of the missionary of this place,
captain, Wetterhold was at length seal on to de-
sist from the measure.

Although the party had nothing, to dread from, the il
Christian Indians, yet the act he had committed (or
suffered to be committed,) on these harmless, peacea- |
ble Indians, was of such a nature, that the nation, as
might be naturally expected, would sooner or later
take revenge. Well would it have been if the mat-
ter could have been adjusted, as thereby many lives
would have been saved; but as one licentious act left

unpunished, generally leads to another, so here a

“number of people embodied themselves, and, as an
armed mob, threatened that they would kill every In-
dian both at Wequetank and Nain, and that without
eyen consulting the government thereon.


(ay
* See Heckewelder’s History of Indian Nations, chap. xliv. p. 332, '


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


" Situated as the Christian Indiatis were, they relied
more on God for their preservation, than on man; yet
évery precaution was taken for their safety, and when
they had to go out’on their lawful pursuits, they were
supplied with passports—yet with all this, it was con-
sidered next to a miracle, when they returned to their
homes again. a,

After having passed nearly two months in this
situation, and frequently disturbed by false alarms,
the Brethren were, in the forenoon of the 8th of Oc-
tober, apprised that at the break of day on that morn-
‘ing, the house of a Mr. John Stinton,* about 8 miles
distant from Bethlehem, had been attacked by the
savages, and himself, together with captain Wetterhold,
his lieutenant, and several of the soldiers with them,
either killed or mortally wounded, these being lodged
in that house for the night.


Dreadful did this intelligence sound in the ears of |


every one that heard it; but to the Brethren it was
the more so, as no other Indians then lived in the parts,
but the Christian Indians, at the two above mentioned
places. During the day the people were continually
on the alert, seeking for further information on the
subject, and making report of what they had heard ; at
the same time proclaiming the number of hostile In-
dians to be very great—some saying hundreds, while
others would have their numbers considered by thou-


*See Heckewelder’s History of Indians, chapter liv.


o


72 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE,


sands. At length it was maliciously reported, and ;


spread throughout the neighbourhood, that the Chris-
tian Indians had been accomplices in the act, and that
one man in particular had been recognised by ‘the
woman of the house, and to whom she also had made
oath. ing

The wounded, among whom were the captain oud
his lieutenant, (both of whom howeverdied* of their
wounds) were as speedy as possible removed to Beth-
lehem, where every attention was paid them by the
surgeon and physician of the place. fo

Frequent enquiries were made of the Brethren in
their settlements in these parts, as to the measure
they meant to take for their own safety, and on their
advice the whole neighbourhood were disposed te
regulate themselves; these finding that the Brethren
would not quit the ground, they were also cnc
to stay.


However, insults and threats were renewed against


the Indians under the care of the Brethren, in conse-


quence of the oath which the woman before mention: —


ed had made. The mob presenting themselves be-
fore their village at Wequetank, and threatening to
murder them if they did not soon leave the place.


The missionary finding that intreaties made no effect —


on them, it became necessary that without loss of


*It will be recollected that it was captain Wetterhold’s party that


:


murdered the harmless Indians ; the same party happening to be at this


house while the’attack was made, and fell victims.


:


2 Jao >. “ee ok. eee as foe Wi ape 2. ee eee Sl hl
Sa ee ee, eae Rak gee oe a
7% RE oe et, ae ‘ae Paes
* . >. - “eye


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 73


time, this congregation should break up and retire to
Nazareth for safety: Ihe-white settlers in the neigh-


bourhood, not being of the mob party, regretted their


departure, believing that while the Christian Indians
continued to be their neighbours, they had nothing to
dread from the enemy, but when removed they
would be exposed to their attacks—(a very just ob-
servation,) but the waggons had arrived, and on the
eleventh day of October, the whole congregation sat
out, leaving their harvest and many of their cattle
behind. -

.. The governor being informed of this sudden flight,


requested that their missionary, the Rev. Bernhard’


Grube, would come to Philadelphia, that he might
learn from*him the particulars; and being convinced
of the untruth of the evil reports spread against the
~ Christian Indians, he delivered himself in a very res-
pectful manner on the subject of the Brethren’s mis-
sions among the Indians.


Whilst the party that threatened and persecuted


the Christian Indians in this quarter, were fabricating
additional falsehoods against them, with the view of


facilitating their destruction, the savages were pour: _


ing in from the Northward, and laying waste the set-
tlement of the New England people* at Wyoming.
These incursions were alleged by the above party, a$
a further reason why every Indian living ought to be


* These people were at that time considered by the Indians as in-
truders on their land, .
K


ge:


a


74 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.
cut off from the face of the earth. ‘The inhabitants
of Nain, little more than a mile distant from Bethle- —


hem, who for some time past dare not ventureto


that place on their lawful business, were not only
obliged to keep a watch both by day and night in their
town, but had even to place guards at their chapel
doors during service, from apprehension of being
surprised and murdered, while assembled for divine
worship. “ t
In this trying situation they had patiently to endure
four weeks, though suffering much by the cold at
nights. Every morning their joys were renewed at
seeing each other again, after the fears of the night.
Their hopes were, that government would commise-
rate their situation, and grant them protection. But
alas! on the 19th day of October, one of their number,
(Renatus,) an harmless Indian, and son of aged and


- venerable parents, was unexpectedly seized, as the


one‘sworn to have been of the murdering party, and
forthwith taken to Philadelphia and imprisoned. |
The government of Pennsylvania, however sensible
of the innocence of these Indians, and the falsity of
the reports, purposly propagated to enrage the people
against them, ordered all the baptized Indians from
both places to be brought to Philadelphia for protec-
tion. The Indian congregation being informed of the


orders, they could not refrain from weeping, consider-


ing that they were now to part from their dearest
friends and Brethren at Bethlehem; yet, resigned to —


S4 = , ot ) tee oe i ES fo Sey 4) SS Gh!) 2: « pane At
: . be Py sper 2 a)


are
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 75


the will of the Lord, and in the hope that they would
be permitted the benefit of their teachers, their minds
became easy. The sheriff of the county, John Jen-
nings, esq. a gentleman of affability, and high in the
esteem of those Indians, arrived by appointment to
take charge of, and safely conduct them to Philadel-
phia; they delivered to him their arms with great
composure, and on the 8th of November, after attend- |
inga farewell sermon, preached in the church at Beth-
lehem by the bishop, Peter Bochler, from Psalm’ 5th,
verse 8th. ‘‘make thy way straight before my face,”
taking a final leave of the inhabitants of the place,
they set out in waggons, accompanied by several of
their missionaries and other Brethren, exclusive of
those officers of government who had been appointed
to protect them on the way to that place; where, after
having suffered much on the journey, both by the in-
clemency of the weather, and from the insults and
threats thrown out against them by the inhabitants of
some places, who declared that hanging and burning
ought to be their doom, they arrived on the 11th
of the same month at Philadelphia.

_ Although, by order from the governor, they were to
be lodged in the barracks, yet the soldiers quartered


' therein refused them admittance. Thus, from ten


o’clock in the forenoon, to three in the afternoon,
they were detained in the street.

Meanwhile a great mob had assembled around them,
deriding, reviling, and charging them with all the out-


=
J


- 5


a


76 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE,


rages committed by the enemy, at the same time
threatening to kill them on the spot; to all which they
were silent, not uttering one word, but relying whole-
ly on the providence of God, Piorhom alone _—
afterwards ascribed their preservation.

The magistrates finding that the soldiers oneal
in refusing to admit them into the barracks, ordered
them to proceed ; and while passing through the city,
not knowing where they were going, nor what would
become of them, accompanitd by a thousand specta-
tors who were following in a tumultuous manner, un
til at length they arrived at Province Island, about six
miles below the city, where they settled themselves:


as well as circumstances would permit, in which the


missionaries assisted them, and held with them their
daily meetings. ‘ cng’

Several gentlemen in Philadelphia, especially those
of the Friends, (by some called Quakers. ) humanely en~
deavoured to render their situation ‘more agreeable.
Indeed this worthy class of citizens, did on all occa-
sions exert themselves in their behalf, both in protect-.
ing them against an infuriated mob, as also in reliev-


ing their wants. Oftentimes. since, these Indians


have been heard to say; that during their troubles, :


which lasted between one and two years, even ‘* the


sight of a Quaker made them feel happy.” fe


The village of Christian Indians at Wequetank,
was fired and burnt to the ground before its in-
habitants had reached Philadelphia ; while, at the


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 77


same time, some incendiary in the night set fire to the
oil mill in Bethlehem, which was likewise destroyed
and, but for the vigilance of the inhabitants of the
place,» the costly waterworks, which already were
in flames, would, together with other buildings, have.
shared the same fate.

» Towards the end of this month sdiletersines) John
Papunhank, an Indian, deservedly high in the esteem
of government, on account of his peaceable and friend-
ly disposition to the English, arrived with twenty-one
Indians, all of the Delaware Nation and averse to the
war, at Bethlehem, from Wyalusing on Susquehanna.
They were conducted to Philadelphia, and there
lodged with the Christian Indians.


Whilst the Brethren viewed with gratitude the be-
_neyolence of a humane governor, exerting himself ta


protect a persecuted congregation of Indians, together
with such of the nation who had fled from their sav-
age neighbours, to avoid being compelled to take up
the hatchet against their brethren, the English ; a party
of fifty-seven white people, bearing the name of Chris-


‘tians, ‘sat out from Paxton, to attack and destroy a


small settlement of peaceable and inoffensive Indians
in’Canestoga, near Lancaster, where they had resided
for more than a century; and whose ancestors had
been among those who had welcomed William Penn
on. his first arrival in this country ; presenting him at
the time with venison, &c.—'hese not happening to
beall at home at the time, some being scattered among


| “ . iw 77
& 7
E 78 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 1
' their white neighbours, they murdered those they


met with, to the number of fourteen persons, men,
women and children ; the rest learning what had be-
fallen their friends and relations, fled, by the advice
of their friendly neighbours, to Lancaster for protec-
tion, and were there placed in the gaol for safety—
pe where however this mob party, now under the name
F of Paxton boys, arrived ; and having broken open the
| door, entered, and most cruelly murdered every one
of them; although they begged on their knees: that.
their lives might be spared, they being real friends of :
the. English. The mob were so intoxicated with
their success, that after they had finished their inhu-
E* ' man butchery on those truly innocent Indians, they —
threw. their mangled bodies into the street* and
with a dreadful shout, as if they had gained a great
victory, threatened that the Indians. on Province
; . Island, (the Christian Indians, together with Papun- ;
hak’s peaceable party,) shouldsoon share the same fate. .
E ; Note. That there appeared to be something unac-
| countable in this affair, will be seen from .the follow-
| ing extract of a letter, addresséd to the writer of this
narrative, by a respectable and intelligent gentleman*
of Philadelphia. ‘There are,” (says he) “ few, if any
murders to be compared with the cruel murder com-
mitted on the Canestoga Indians in the gaol of Lan


1h ages


* So the public papers stated, but ought to be Prison Yard.


* William Henry, Esq. then an inhabitant of Lancaster.


o


Se a ee eee eo fe bp. 7 2. ee al + rs Se ~~ FS a | ee J i


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. . 79


Aton Er ee
ere ee.” a


caster in 1763, by the Paxton boys, (as they were then
called). From 15 to 20 Indians, as report stated, were
placed there for protection. A regiment of High- |
landers were at the time quartered at the barracks in.
; the town, and yet these murderers were permitted to
; break opeu the doors of the city gaol, and commit the
horrid deed. . The first notice [had of this affair, was
| that while at my father’s store, near the court house,
Isaw a number of people running down street towards
the gaol, which enticed me and other lads to follow
them. At about sixty or eighty yards from the gaol,
we met from 25 to 30 men, well mounted on horses,
and with rifles, tomahawks, and scalping knives, equip-


ped for murder. I ran into the prison yard, and there, “3
O what a horrid sight presented itself to my view ! !—
Near the back door of the prison, lay an old Indian
and his squaw, (wife) particularly well known and es-
teemed by the people of the town, on account of his
_ placid and friendly conduct. His name was Will
Sock ; across him and his squaw lay two children, of
about the age of three years, whose heads were split
| with the tomahawk, and their scalps all taken off.
| Towards the middle of the gaol yard, along the west 4
| _ side of the wall, lay a stout Indian, whom I particular- ~
-ly noticed to have been shot in the breast, his legs
were chopped with the tomahawk, his hands cut off,
and finally a rifle ball discharged in his mouth ; so that


i
|


+ ee


his head was blown to atoms, and the brains were
splashed against, and yet hanging to the wall, for three


‘80 - HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


or four feet around. This man’s hands and feet hadalso


_ been chopped off with a tomahawk. In: this manner :
lay the whole of them, men, women and» children, —
spread about the prison yard: Pe
ed—and cut to pieces.” rac
_ The governof ‘issued a precbatiieaiains cdaicoei these t
" outrages—forbidding, under the severest penalties, |
_ any one to molest the Indians on Province Island; and
offering a reward of two hundred pounds, to any one -


who should bring the two ringleaders of the above par:
ty to justice ; but it soon became evident that their
numbers was daily increasing, and that even in Phila-


delphia many were in secret connection with the ring= _


leaders, who. paid so little regard to government


orders at that time, that they not only publicly walked


the streets, but even presented themselves in front of
the governor’s house, deridingly bidding him defiance.

Every day fresh reports were raised or brought
into the city, of the intentions of the rioters; and it
was evidentthat they became daily more daring. When


therefore on the 29th day of December, intelligence __
was brought to Philadelphia, that a large party of the —


Paxton boys were on their march, to fall on and mur-
der the Christian Indians, the governor seeing no other
way of protecting them, sent them some large boats,


in which they were to embark and take flight.. They
having embarked and proceeded to Leach. Island, _
they were there overtaken by a messenger sent.to —


them by the governor, to inform them; that it having


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 81


proved to be a false alarm, they might a a
withal advising them to have their boats always in readi-
néss, and that he further would furnish them with
‘a guard. »

' But the government at the commencement of
the year 1764 received more certain intelligence :


concerning the murderous intentions of the rioters, and ® ann


resolved to conduct the persecuted congregation to a


place of more safety, by sending them under an escort
by way of New York to the English army, particular-
ly recommending them to sir William Johnson, Indi-
an agént for the crown of Great Britain.
These Indians were accordingly advised to hold
}: themselves in readiness, to set out ata moment’s warn-
ing; and on the’ 4th of January at midnight they left
Province Island, and were met below the city by two
gentlemen, (Lewis and Jacob Weiss) and by them con-
ducted almost unobserved through the city, to the
Brethren’s chapel ; where a number of Brethren and
friends had met to receive them, having also provid-
ed “a breakfast for them in the chapel. Here they
were visited by the commissary, Mr. Fox, who was so
struck at the sight of these poor emigrants, that he
immediately ordered a number of blankets to be dis-
tributed among them, and waggons being provided to
_ earry the aged, the blind, the sick, and the children, to-
gether with their baggage, they set aut, accompanied
by their missionaries. By this time, however, a crowd
of people had assembled, so that they could scarcely
L


* & F


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE,


F proceed, and by whom they were cursed and reviled
sin a dreadful manner, yet without receiving personal
| injury ; however captain Robertson, with the escort of


70 Highlanders falling in, the mob dispersed. Com-_
gee missary Fox, and Mr. Logan, went with them as far as
re “ Trenton, where the latter addressed them in the name

, Ps of the governor, respecting the murders committed

- on the innocent Conestoga Indians, signifying’ the

, + governor’s abhorrence of these acts ; at the same time
delivering two belts of Wampum, which by them

is were to be forwarded to the Iroquois, (the Six Nations).


With the one belt they were exhorted to lay ‘down
bye the hatchet and conclude a peace—they having began
fe the war without a cause—and with the other, the graves
of their murdered relations, the Conestoga Indians,
were to be covered, and the tears wiped from their
; eyes. i
‘The ene being delivered, andthe before men- ©
[: tioned gentlemen about to return, the Christian Indians
desired that their humble thanks might be presented to
| the governor, for the many favours they had received


now took charge of them, and provided every thing


during their troubles. The commissary, Mr, Epty,
>
; needful for their convenience on the road.


In passing through New Jersey, they were Pa

quently insulted by mob parties ; however théy reach-

} ed Amboy in safety, where two sloops lay in readi-
ness to carry them to New York, but at the moment.

Pe they were to embark, an express arrived from the,
governor of that place, strictly forbidding any ‘inde


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


from his setting foot on the New York — oe


tain Robertson being at the same time ordered by gene-


ral Gage to prevent them from proceding,—nay, even


the ferrymen were, by a severe wien prohibited_ to
cross the river with them.

As Mr. Epty, who immediately acipeniel an ex-
press with an account of these proceedings to the gov-
ernor of Pennsylvania, had to wait for further orders,


the Indians were lodged in the barracks at Amboy,


where they held their meetings in the usual order ;
and at which, frequently, a greater or less number of
the white people attended, much admiring their devo-
tion ;and were so delighted with their singing, that
they conceived a more favourable opinion of them—
nay, one off the soldiers exclaimed, ‘‘ would to God all
the white people were as good Christians as these In-
dians.”

. Having received orders from the governor to return
to Philadelphia, they set out with cheerfulness ; their
guard of Highlanders being here relieved by 170 men
from gen. Gage’s army, commanded by . captain
Schlosser,* one party led the van, and the other
brought up the rear.

» On their arrival at Philadelphia, January 24th, they
were lodged in the barracks, where they were guarded
both day and night. Nevertheless they met daily for
divine service. It was, however, not long before the


* An officer deservedly esteemed by all good men, for his hidinantty


and manly conduct, in protecting these persecuted Indians.


re ra


HECKEWELDER’ S NARRATIVE,


sturbed them so much, that it was ee


~ “cessary to double the guard; especially. as the ring-


‘ Jeaders of the before mentioned murderers, were at-
tempting by force to put their wicked designs into
execution, pretending that having been highly offend-
ed. by the proclamation lately issued by the governor,
_ they now would not rest until all these Indians were
delivered up to them. eae


Matters seemed drawing to a crisis. Certain.


information was received that large mobs were march-


ing towards Philadelphia, where numbers were .


ready to join them on their arrival, The magis-


trates were called on to do their duty; and there


appeared no other alternative, but that of repelling
force by force. Eight pieces of heavy ordnance-were


drawn up to.the barracks, and a rampart thrown up


in the middle of the square. The citizens, and even
many young Quakers took up arms, and ‘repaired to


the barracks to assist the soldiers in, defending the .


poor Indians, who, in haste, had already been removed


from the lower, into the upper part of the building; -


where, at midnight, the governor himself visited them,
bidding them to be of good cheer, and soothing their
fears by his condescending behaviour. Several :per-
sons of distinction likewise. came, and showed their
friendly disposition towards these Indians ; even: some
remained in the barracks, | ‘supposing they would be no
where more safe.
Intelligence having been received on the 4th of


-HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


Febilieppabihen ppeonctios the rioters, every | ;


tion-wassmade-to tecieve them.) ‘The whole town was


in an uproar, as the report of their guns was already _


heard. The soldiers became alarmed ;—the eigh- —
teen pounders were discharged, which terrified the
poor Indians, they never before having heard the re-
port of such guns. The rioters however did not
venture to approach, and the citizens again return-
edto their homes. | But in the night, between the 5th
and 6th, a report prevailing that the riuters were again
advancing, the whole town was in motion. The
church bells were rung—the streets illuminated—and
the inhabitants being awakened from their sleep, were
ordered ‘to attend at the town-house, where arms and


ammunition were distributed among them. Two |


companies of armed citizens repaired to the barracks,
and, in addition, four more cannon were mounted.
Thus the following day was spent in terror, and hour-
ly expectation of the rioters. The Indians, who were
sensible that these thirsted after their blood, consid-
‘ered themselvesas dovoted to slaughter ; and, though
they were very thankful for the spirited exertions of
the government, made in their behalf, and for their
defence, yet their strongest hope was placed in the
Lord—they saying : “ God can help us !”

~» At length certain information was recieved, that the
rioters, in consequence of the preparations made to
teceive them, had resolved to proceed no further.
Some gentlemen were deputed by government, to ask


=
Seas 36 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.
—— >.> ae *.
a hea what they had to complain of ; when, ~ =
fe _ insolent behaviour, they asserted that there were
, several murderers among these Indians, and demand-—
; ~ ed that these should be givenup. To convince them


of their error, one of their ringleaders was invited to
come into the barracks, and point such out; but not
finding any one whom he could charge with any crime,
ie the party gave out that the Quakers had. privately
ans °° taken six of the Christian Indians out of the barracks,
and hid them. This. being investigated, and also
proving false, the rioters (as they themselves de-
clared,) relinquished their design, and marched off. »
Although at first it was believed, that the only ob-
ject of the rioters was the destruction of all the In-
dians, under the idea that they were descendants of
the Canaanites, who, by God’s commandment, were to.
be cut off from the face of the earth ; itsoon became
evident that they aimed at nothing short of overturn-
ing the whole form of government. Their design ap-
pearing now to be; first to cause a general consterna- .
tion, thereby spreading devastation and misery over :
the country, and then to take the reins of government
into their own hands. ae


The Christian Indians however saw themselves de
livered from their enemies, and therefore offered up
praises and thanksgiving to God, that he had so: gra-
ciously defeated their designs; andynow people of
all ranks came to see the Indians, who were literally
become a spectacle to thousands. The public wor-


a


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. a


aie ‘the ieitlignagehens especially on Sundays, a.
tended by crowds of attentive hearers, among whom


were also some of the soldiers, who were glad to hear


the gospel: preached again, having been. deprived of i 2
this benefit for several years together. : ‘,
Four single Indian women, who had lived in the , F
single sisters’ house at Bethlehem for several years, z
but now not considered safe in that place, were con- Ae
ducted to the barracks; and their serene and modest : tr,
appearance caused them to be respected by all who # 3
saw them, even by the soldiery. In general, the latter 4
deserves this good testimony, that they always treated ee


the Christian Indians with kindness; and thé friendly | ve
Sty,

and. wise conduct of their officers, who kept strict ‘or- wre

der among the men, cannot be sufficiently praised.


* . Although government provided in the best manner


they could for these persecuted Indians, yet their
situation was a hard trial, and very afflicting to some
of them—nay, considered little short of imprisonment.
The high seasoned victuals did not agree with their
stomachs. They could have no bodily exercise ; the
men were deprived of the occupation they had been
brought up to—namely, that of hunting. Their living
so close together, seemed to them insupportable.
These, and other privations which they had to endure,
eaused some of them to become low spirited, and
they wished to be set at liberty.

To pave the way for a peace, they, with the consent
of government, sent John Papunhank, with one of


88 HECKEWELDER’S ra iid


their brethren, as messengers ét peace to th
Indians, to inform them that’ they were all ali 1
to desire them to lay down the hatchet. 9 5 oe
Encouraged by the reply to their connie
addressed government to escort them safely to the
frontiers, from whence they would find their way to
Sir William Johnson; but as the war still:continued; —
government would not grant the request. _ This re-
fusal increased their uneasiness ; nor was this all, for
as the summer advanced, fevers and the small-pox
broke out amongst them, which occasioned) much
dread and horror, so that many meditated their escape 5)
but, by the advice and perseverance of the missiona~
ries, who were unwearied in visiting and comforting
them, their uneasiness was changed into,a perfect re~
signation to the will of the Lord. To the sick, relief ~
was afforded by that benevolent and humane Friend,
Jacob Weiss, whom the Lord alone can reward for
his great attention and labours of love. ina” -
Fifty-six of the sick were released from all misery,
pain, and distress, by a most happy translation into
everlasting life. Most edifying was it to alb who had
visited them, to see with what resignation they bore
their sufferings, and their cheerfulness, in the hope of
soon seeing their Saviour, face to face. Their bodies
were interred in a burying ground, called Pottersfield»
Poor Renatus, who was in prison, on hearing of the
death of his beloved father, his wife, and his on
wept most bitterly. cog AD


'


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. ata


‘time howeyer had arrived when this afflicted
“was to be délivered from his bonds. During
eight months imprisonment, he spent most of his time.
in reading a hymn book. He had been frequent-
ly visited by the missionary, who had a particular re-
gard for him. He was now taken from his cell, and
sent to Easton under a guard, there to stand a trial for
the murder of Mr. Stinton, in the Irish settlement,
whose wife swore that it was him who perpetrated the
act. The missionaries of the place where he lived at
that time, together with other Brethren, were sum-
moned to attend at the trial. There were not wanting
enemies to the Brethren, who wished to have the poor
innocent Indian hung; every effort was made to have
him condemned. The rabble became impatient to
“Yearn the verdict, that they might afterwards witness
the execution of a “‘ Moravian” Indian ; however the
jury brought in their verdict of not guilty ; upon.
which the prisoner was immediately relieved from
confinement—yet on account of the mob, who were
enraged at his liberation, he had to be kept hidden
until night, when Mr. John Jones, a respectable
neighbour to Bethlehem, took him to his house, and
from thence had him safely conducted to Philadelphia.
It appeared that the object of the adversaries had
been, to cast a general odium on Indians, said to have
become Christians ; and to render the Brethren’s mis-
sions among these people, suspected.
On the 4th day of July, 1764, the Christian Indians
M


>
hina ays


3
an


ES


“ae 90 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.
iy .


in the barracks had the joy to see and embrace
beloved Renatus ; for whose deliverance they coul


sufficiently express their thankfulness to God, while


he, speaking out of the abundance of his heart, gave
glory to the Lord, his Redeemer.

In the autumn the Indians in the barracks made ano-
ther effort to procure their enlargements, and govern-
ment granted passports to some to go to the Susquehan-
na, but the propertime had not yet arrived for all to go,
as it was yet doubtful whether a peace would take


» place; negociations for the purpose were however


continued, and the Iroquois (the Six Nations,) being
atlength reconciled, they caused the other nations
also to lay down the hatchet. é

On the 4th of December, 1764, the same day on
which an account of a peace having been concluded.»
with the hostile nations was brought to Philadelphia,
a proclamation was published by government, that
forthwith all hostilities should cease. The joy the
Christian Indians manifested on the occasion, exceeded
all description.

All troubles being at'an end, the Indians were at —
liberty toleave the barracks, but where to go was
now the great question. The directors of the society
feared to advise them to re-occupy their former places,
which lay within the settlements of the whites; and
they themselves having witnessed the trouble and ill
will brought on the Brethren, in consequence of their
residing near them, determined to settle in their ow,


b


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


y. Government being informed of their resolu-
make their future situation agreeable, and themsel a
happy.—Mr. Fox even procured an order, by which
they were to be supplied with flour until their har-
vest of corn should be gathered and housed.

On the 18th of March these Indians delivered the
following address* to the governor of Pennsylvania:
_ “ We the Christian Indians, now residing in the bar-
racks, and intending to return with our wives and chil-


dren unto our own country, approach unto you to take


our leave, and toreturn unto you our most sincere
thanks. We acknowledge with unfeigned gratitude, the
great kindness and friendship you have shown unto us
during the late war. We were indeed in danger of our
lives, but you protected and defended us against our
enemies, so that we have lived in peace. As a father,
you have provided us with food. and raiment.—You
have nursed us in sickness, and buried our dead;
we have likewise heard, with joy, that you will in fu-
ture give us flour until our corn is ripe. We thank
you more particularly, that we have been allowed to
have our teachers with us during these heavy trials,
who have instructed us daily. in the word of God.
They have shown us the way to salvation, so that we
are now become acquainted with our Creator, and can
love allmen. We therefore greatly rejoice that our


* See Lockiel’s History, part II. chap, xvi.


_ afforded them every assistance in its power to ~


4 =. 02 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.
~ teachers, Schmick and Zeisberger go with us wie .
« Indian country, that they may continue to instruc
inthe: doctrine of salvation. Your kindness; protec-
tion and benevolence; will never be forgotten by us—
We shall bear. your goodnes in our hearts ; we ‘shall
speak of it to the other Indians—As long as we live.
we shall remain true friends to the English.—We also
beg permission to request of you, to give us: powder
and shot, that we may provide food on our journey—
Finally, we pray that God may bless you !—We the
underwritten do this in the name of all our eit
remaining your f aithful friends. et 4st
“ JOHN PAPUNHANK,
“JOSHUA ANTHONY, . —
. “SHEM EVANS.” ) 95» ‘
at
This address was graciously received ; and the | wiih
sionaries added their grateful thanks, both to the goy-
ernor and to Mr. Fox, who, as commissary for govern-
ment, had provided for these Indians during their #
troubles, with unwearied attention ; to which the latter
replied, ** I have willingly done what I could, know-
ing their innocence.”’—The Friends, otherwise c
Quakers, were not forgotten by the Christiandhidians
for their kindness towards them.—They showed their
gratitude to all their benefactors.—Their departure
from the city was peaceful, forgetting all past injuries.
Arriving at Bethlehem they were well received, and
rested for some time at Nain, their former place of


§


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 93° sulle


le when every thing being arranged for the jour-


ney, a farewell sermon was preached to them by their. .


old and much respected missionary, Grube, at which
a number of the Bethlehem congregation were present ;
when on the 3d of April they broke up, and in pass-
ing through Bethlehem took an affectionate leave of
all the inhabitants of the place, who were assembled
for that purpose.—The conductors appointed by goy-
ernment to escort them part of the way, were Mr.
Moore, a justice of the peace ; Mr. Ruchline, high
sheriff ; lieutenant Huntsecker, and Mr. Epty, gentle-
men whose names are here inserted with gratitude,
for their attention and kindness to those Indians.
Some Brethren from Bethlehem likewise accompanied
them until they had passed the frontier settlements :
the distance to which the waggons with the sick,
infirm, and the heavy baggage, had been ordered to
proceed.

_ Their route was through Nazareth, crossing the
Blue and Broad mountains, and the great Pine and
and Beach swamp, direct to Wyoming, from whence
the principal part of them went by water to Wyalu-
sing, accompanied by the two missionaries Schmick
and Zeisberger. During this journey, which was
very fatiguing, several departed this life, otherwise
they were of good cheer, cutting a path as they travel-
led, and met every evening around a fire for divine
service, and reached the place of their destination
‘after five weéks travelling.


tone


94 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


They next determined. upon a convenient sp fo a
» town, situate on the banks of the Susquehanna, about
one mile below Wyalusing creek ; where they, for the
present, erected temporary huts for themselves, but for
their missionaries they built a tolerable good log ~
house, and another for a meeting-house, and the place
was called Friedenshutten, (tents of peace).* It was
delightful to see with what cheerfulness they set to
work, at clearing. and fencing in ground to plant on.
Provisions being very scarce, they had, ina great mea-
sure, to look for a supply from the woods ; and, in addi-—
tion to what the hunter would procure in the meat
way, the women and children would dig wild potatoes,
and various other roots and plants, to serve as substi-
tutes both for bread and sauce. 2a
The welfare of the congregation much depended
on its internal regulations; and that subject claimed all
attention. Morning and evening mectings were daily
held when the weather permitted, and the S undays
were entirely devoted to solemn reflection and divine»
service. The sacraments were also administered at pro-
per seasons, and every regulation necessary for keep-
ing peace and good order, made and agreed to.
Thus situated, they were content and happy ; and
their numbers increasing, brightened their prospect
as tothe future. To promote their security, they soon,
after their arrival, sent a message with a string of Wam-
pum to the chief of the Cayugas, (who, as plenipotentia-
ry of the Six Nations, claimed the lordship or right


au


ae : — Sa ee 2a ee ae


f HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. __ 95


oyer all the lands on the Susquehanna,) to inform him


of their having settled on this spot with the approba-.


tion of the governor of Pennsylvania, and believing
that this ‘could not but meet their full approbation ;
but by the answer returned, this was not found to
be the case. The council of Onondago had indeed

- welcom@d them on their arrival in this country, but
objected to their living where they at present resided,
saying that the land they.had pitched upon had been
stained with blood ;* they therefore would advise them
to come and settle at the head of the Cayuga Lake ;
which answer not being pleasing to the Christian In-
dians, they, in return, replied after the oriental style,
leaving them to guess what they meant to do. They, in
fact, knew the Six Nations too well, to trust to their
word, and were not willing to be tools in their hands.
However, they afterwards thought proper to send a
deputation of Christian Indians, accompanied by: their
missionary Zeisberger, to explain matters tothe great
‘council, by which their objections were removed, and
they permitted to stay where they were, together with
their teachers.

The missionary Zeisberger, who many years since
had been adopted as a son in the family of a principal
chief of the Onandagoes, having more influence in
their councils, than the Delawares themselves, was


* “Stained with blood,”’,meaning the blood spilt indestroying the New


England Settlement at Wyoming.


>. =. . i i tee. — '*
eee *%
‘ ae =

96 ‘iccuioriy NARRATIVE.


always the first character sought for, to effect a set-
tlement, when matters of an unfavourable turena had
taken place between the two nations, In what he
said they placed full confidence ; and when he was
absent from treaties held with the white people, they
could not easily be reconciled, believing that his pre-
sence served asa check upon the interpreters, who
(as the Indians were apt to say,) would suffer them-
selves’ to be bribed—especially when purchases of
land were about being made from them. a

Towards the end of the second year of this new
settlement, the traders in liquor, both whites and Indians
came on with this article to exchange with the Chris-
tian Indians for their peltry ; they however determined
not to suffer the article to be sold in the town: these —
traders were ordered to depart, and never hereafter _
attempt to impose their liquor upon any of their peo-
ple, for, if they did, their kegs would be stoved to.
pieces. The Indians indeed went off peaceably, say-
ing that they never hereafter would come here with
that article ; while the white traders from Paxton (the
very people who were of the party that were going t to
murder these Indians while they were in the ie .
at Philadelphia, ) refused to take their liquor away ; §
ing that they had a right to sell liquor where, and
whom they pleased ; but the Indian Brethren, to whom
the police of the place was committed, remaining firm
by their resolution, they at length went off. with:

In other’ respects the settlement enjoyed perfect


ae


:


oS


‘tranquillity during the whole time of theie residence
there ; and increased so fast, that in 1767, their dean
ing-house ch too small to contain their number
—wherefore they built a large and spacious church, of
1 squared white pinet imber, shingle roofed, with a neat
cupola and bell on the top. And as they hoped they
would be permitted to remain in this place for a great
number of years, they did all their work in the best
manner possible, both in building and fencing, so that,
at this time there were forty well built houses of
spuared timber, and shingle roofed, in the village ;
and the gardens back of them were all in good clap-
board fence. _

The Indians who from time to time visited this
place, were of various tribes and nations; viz. Mo-
hawks, Mahicans, Wampanos, Cayugas, Senecas,
Onondagoes, Tutelas, Tuscororas, Delawares, and
Nanticoks. Famine at their respective homes, togeth-
er with the general report, that the Christian Indians
were hospitable, and at all times had plenty of pro-
visions—they being an industrious and agricultural
people, may be considered as one cause of these
frequent visits ; however, as most of them had heard


“the gospel preached while here, it was supposed that .


at least some of them might have also reaped a bless-

ing. Exclusive of visitors, travellers often passed

through their town, some of whom would make a halt

for a few days. Thus, at one time, seventy-five Tus-

corora Indians emigrating from North Carolina to join
N


t Bayerische

| Staatsbibliothek
4 i een
| ee dor


Oe Re gee


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. ae 97


”
. ote
*


~
a Ra 7 os
les Soa

= 3 re


es ; 2 e
: 98 ; | MbcxaWeLDER’s wannanives


~ ps. agentes in the country of. the Six Nations rested _
 on-their journey, and were well, provided for, during


their stay; while, at another time, en Nanticoks |
emigrating from the sea shore of M: wie moniont
ghree weeks with them... “ist s eral


In the fall of this year (1767,) the: ninsitiniens Zies:
berger, learning that some Indians living on the Alle-
ghany river were desirous of haying the gospel
; “preached to them, went thither, taking the national
~ assistant, Anthony, with him—and having spent some
time with them, preaching the gospel with great free-
dom, he returned. again on the 5th of November.
These peace messengers had suffered much on ,the
journey, in travelling through such. an extensive wil- :
derness, interspersed with rivers. and creeks, moun- :
tains'and swamps; yet they thought themselves well
rewarded, in having met with open ears to hear the
gospel. lagi
In the month of Taliccons of the year 1768, the
‘Christian Indians at Friedenshutten were not alittle —
disturbed by the intelligence brought to their village,
that a white man had murdered ten Indians near Sha-
mokin—namely, four men, four women, and two, chil-
dren. They apprehended that this unprovoked -act
of cruelty might rouse their nation to take revenge,
‘in which case another war would be brought on be-
tween the two nations. They were also greatly con-
cerned for the safety of their teachers, fearing that the.
relations of the slain, might, in their rage for revenge,


A
Pat coe he
# oy


HECKEWELDER’S Nawnatives ao (oe


fall upon henks yas, in such cases, any pasate ~- a
fair skin being within their reach, is apt to be madea_
sacrifice. — ‘They therefore kept a strict watch about
the persons of these, never leaving them exposed.
This dreadful event being made known to the gov-
ernor of Pennsylvania, and to Sir William Johnson,
the former immediately issued his proclamation, offer-


ing a reward of two hundred pounds, for apprehend-
ing the murderer of the ten Indians, promising to ~


punish him with death ; and this declaration, withtwo
strings of Wampum, he sent to be made known to all


the Indians living'on Susquehanna, requesting them, -


at the same: time, not to break the peace in conse-
quence of the murder. A message to the same effect,
was also» sent by the governor to the Christian In-
dians; with:a request that they should make it known
in public:assembly ; and soon after, a special message
was sent to the Christian Indians, from Sir William
Johnson, desiring, if they knew any of the. relations


_ of those persons murdered near Shamokin, to send


them to him, that he might wipe the tears.from their
eyes, comfort their afflicted hearts, and satisfy them


‘on account of their grievances. Sir William also in-


vited the chief of the Six Nations, and other tribes
of Indians living on Susquehanna, and:on the Ohio,
to an amicable conventions The Christian Indians
were also called on to send delegates; but having no
inclination. to interfere with political affairs, they gave
the Cayuga chief full commission to appear and treat


a “3
ae
cs te
we
i®
a
JP


100 ~—s HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


~ with the rest in their name, which act however of-:
* fended their Indian adversaries, and they took occa. .
“ sion to perplex the Christian Indians, by pretending:
that Sir William Johnson, and the whole assembly of
chiefs, would consider them as enemies for having te-
fused to send deputies, and that the consequence:
would be, that they. would be destroyed, and: their
settlement broke up. However, the fears entertained
_ on the occasion, were afterwards removed, on learning,
from good anthority, that Sir William, so far from
pe censuring them on account of their not attending these.
. councils, applauded their conduct, expressing the)
wish that many such Indian towns as Friedenshutten,
might be established in the country. 2) To aoh@np
Peace and friendship being again re-established be-»
tween the English and Indians, through ‘the exertions.
of Sir William Johnson, and the long existing dis-
putes between the Cherokees and the Six Nations, |
having at the same time been amicably. settled, all
fears of an Indian war vanished, and the minds of the
people were at ease. The (so called) king of the Chero-
kees, was conducted by the Oneida chief with great.
pomp through the country, of the Iroquois, (Six» Na+:
tions,) and also to Friedenshutten, where the latter,
in behalf of himself, and the great council of Ohonda-
go, applauded the inhabitants of the place, for having
invited teachers to come among them forthe purpose of
instructing them in the knowledge of God, their creators’
The joy felt by the Christian Indians at the res-


ux &


’ X
aie


‘i # aii


% = Lae Me
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 0


conidial ‘peace, was, however, somewhat lessened, by -
_ an unexpected account recieved some time after, that


the Six Nations had sold a large tract of country to the
English, in which their fine town i settlement, Fried-
enshutten, was included. They justly apprehended
that this would be the cause of new troubles, nor were
they mistaken, as will be seen in the sequel.

_ The missionary Zeisberger, and Senreman, as an.
assistant, together with three faithful families from


Friedenshutten, had, in the spring of this year (1768)


gone to the Alleghany river, and there establish-
ed anew mission settlement. They had, in going
there, taken every advantage of water navigation,
but at Tioga they were met by. an embassy of
twenty captains from the Six Nations, who, by a belt
of Wampum, bid them return, it not being agreeable
to them that they should proceed. They were made
sinsible of the error they had committed, by neglect-
ing first to inform the chiefs of the Six Nations of
their intentions ; of this duty they were now reminded.
The missionary promising them that nothing should
be wanting in yet doing what, by their usages, had
been omitted, they were at length permitted to pro-
ceed ; but the chiefs of the Six Nations were not so
easily pacified, they considered the act as degrading
them, or, as their having lost somewhat of their supe-
Fiority over the Delawares, and felt mortified for the


- moment. They however were at length pacified.


Zeisberger, on his arrival at the Alleghany, preached


* ee
oii “3
ae: 4

Fi a

gg +

‘§
i

4
F
& .
ig
*


, 102 naciewaebnn’é: warts


every day to the indiana, and it “Wecaiai or inenieieine :
his words had a good effect on many. They built
themselves a comfortable log house, on a convenient _
spot at a small distance from the Indian paint
which all who felt a desire to hear the gospel, resort-
ed. Learning among other things, from the mission:
ary, that stealing was a crime, and a sin, one man ap-
proached him very seriously, saying, that he never in
his life had been guilty of theft, except in two in+
stances, where he had stolen two sheep and a hen, the »
property of a white man.* Many unfavourable  re~
ports were soon spread, respecting the conduct of the
white people towards the Indians, since they had
come into the country, and predictions were circulated
what they would do to them, if they should get a foot-
ing in their country. Even the Seneca chief of Za-
neshio, became enraged at the Brethren’s settling here,
suspecting that other white people would shortly fol- _
low, build a fort, and take possession of their country.
By some, fears were entertained of their being made
slaves, should’ they tolerate a preacher from among
the white people, and suffer themselves to be instruct-
ed by him. Even the old women went about, pub-
licly complaining of the failure of many necessaries ‘of
life, and saying that the Indian corn was devoured by
worms—the game had begun to flee the country—that
aay
*It was a common saying with the Indians of the Moncey,tribe,


that stealing from white people was no crime, for that these had been
thieves upon them, ever since they first came into their country.


—


.ER’S NARRATIVE.


whighi ahey ascribed. to the Indians having changed


their ancient way of living, in consequence of what -


the white men had told them, and.this white preach-
er (Zeisberger,) was saying to them., The conjurer,
in turn,advised that the Indians should make sacrifices,
to appease the wrath of the Great Spirit, who was of-
fended by the presence of these white teachers, and


at the doctrine they preached. Secret messages were, aii
sent by the Six Nations, to these Indians, toridthem-
selyes:in the best possible manner of this white preach-


er, (Zeisberger,) either by banishing or killing him.
A distant heathen preacher sent a belt to the Monsey
chief, Allemewi, (who was a friend and warm defend-
er of the gospel)—declaring that if they adhered to
the doctrines preached by this white man, the sun
would burn up all the Indian corn in the land. Ano-
ther Indian coming forward, declared that several of
his nation having been on a visit to the king of En-
gland, he had cautioned the Indians not listen to the
doctrine of the Brethren, as thereby they would be


led straightway to hell.


~)Many other reports, tending to withdraw the at-
‘tention of the Indians from gospel truths, were. re-
sorted to ; among others, was that of Wangomend,
thitherto,a silent hearer, but now a preacher, who
pretended to have had a view of the heavens, and its
inhabitants—and endeavoured to persuade the Indians
to believe that, in the state they were ja by natufe, they


Dai.


iar bilberies ripened any more alll *


> ‘oe?


i ee


we.:


i. the Inidintin there was plende of | 5 9 shingle
while in that of the white people, there was a scar-

. City. And.as a last resort, the traders in liquor were
permitted to traffick in that article, it being expected —
that what the Indians would not venture to do, when
sober, might easily be effected, when in a state of in~
toxication. — < paenat

During all these threats ana troubles, many Indians —

eosin faithful ; and apprehending that. during a

. state of intoxication, the missionary might be mur-

_ dered, they endeavoured to prevent liquors being

brought into the settlements. » omit

As the’ Iroquois were continually ‘instigating the

Monseys to persevere in their scheme. of murdering

the missionaries, Zeisberger, with the iene

two deputies sent by the Monsey chief, Allemewi, —
made a second journey to the principal chief at Zomalpe.

his,* but this chief being from home at the time, the id

council could not determine on any thing ; however

the opinion they gave was favourable. io oa
The Indian preacher Wangomend, who now took. ¢
the lead of the adverse party, continuing to urge the

Indians to withdraw themselves from Zeisberger, and ;

_ the doctrine he preached, and become Ais hearers.

-- _He continued to impose on them his pretended

’ sights and visions, whereby it had been manifested yi


ae.


7


* By the white people called Chinosee.


ceptabl God. At one time he stated, that even
some white people,* who had heard the Indian preach- FE
ers, were convinced that the Indians had the true doc- :


_ presented atthe time, to leave the’ place until further
orders from the council of Onondago ;—and by another ‘3


- sins, ian ‘purging the body, and having feasts aid
i was the only doctrine’ pleasing and ac-


trine, and that they had resolved to os the same ui
inthe spring. =~ Ned ozoes a eee:


While hla iota the missionary, a
and’ troubling those Indians who were desirous of _ ss
hearing him, three Seneca chiefs arrived ; and having


learned that Zeisberger intended’ to move off with his
converts and hearers to a more convenient and quiet ;
place, they forbade him, bya black string of wampum


string, they laid an: injunction upon all the inhabi-


_ fants to refrain from going in future to hear Zeisberger’s
_ sérmons.—But this missionary, not easily frightened,
Stept boldly forward, and in the presence of these BR


chiefs, and that of the assembly, bore a powerful tes-
timony to the love of God revealed to man in Christ


_ Jesus our Lord ; after which the Monsey chief, Alimi,


returned.an answer to the speech of the Seneca chiefs,
informing them that they positively should leave this _ an


» place; with the missionary, and move toa more suita- ©

‘ble and quiet one, beyond the Alleghany river, ©

bescash they also carried ‘into effect in the spring of ’ i
* Traders.

O :


c : * ap soe >; hw ae > + a
= %: ea ¥ 4 is rs x = 3 pe


a ' - > woe As |
~ 7 , 4


106 | HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE, 3 ‘i
1769, by moving from’ Goschgoshing, bin English;
place of hogs,) to Lawunakhannek, (in English, middle
branch, or stream,) which place lay about fies aaa
to the southwest of the former place. oF eh Teepe
‘During a residence of nearly a year at the first men-
tioned place, they had suffered so much abuse by
means of Wangomend’s enmity, that it was astonish-
ing they held out so long. Nor was this all; many
= plots were laid for murdering Zeisberger, if they
ay could not otherwise get him away ; yet he with undaunt-
ed courage remained at his post, firmly -relying for
protection on Him, whom he was serving).
In the spring of the same year, 1769, a new. mission
establishment was begun at Sheshequon, an Indian -
settlement on Susquehanna, about thirty miles distant :
from -Friedenshutten, where the Brethren had fora.
long time been invited to settle, for the, purpose. of
preaching the gospel to them ;.and «to which \place "
numbers of the Delawares, from the country above,
came to hear the word of salvation, many of; whom _
were converted and added to Christ’s flock... - “able
At Friedenshutten* the glorious work .of God flou-—
rished throughout the whole year, and many of the
visitors were awakened from the sleep of sin, several —
of whom had formerly been noted transgressors.—
_ They had also received several visits from the. chiefs _
of different nations, which had the effect of -keep* i
ing up a good understanding between them); and


* Wyalusing, is the proper Indian name of this place.


a ae oe a Oa
: ' hed : =
‘Ses , a
4 « 4 cs
» ‘We! : :
‘ i> a4 . >
. rw ti»


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVEs 107


from, some of whom they learnt with certainty, that
the Six Nations, at the last treaty held at sir William
Johnsons, had actually sold the very land they lived on,
to the English ; although they had, in the year 1765,
formally granted and confirmed this district and spot
of land to the Christian Indians. P
On thisoccasion these Christian Indians sent depu- ’
_ ties to the governor of Pennsylvania, to consult him
on the subject, and, if possible, to obtaina confirma- _ a
tion of the above grant from him. His excellency ee ee
ge having received the deputies very kindly, returned =~
- by them his answer in writing, by which he promised r ;
that as a peaceable and quiet people, they should not .
be disturbed in their possesions ;. and that he had
given orders to the surveyor general, not to suffer any
lines to be run, within five miles of their town. He 4
also sent a favourable message, of the same import,
respecting the land on which the Christian Indian ©


village, Sheshequon, was built. a
L However, the confusion and troubles which the 4
missionaries apprehended would accrue in consequence
of the sale being made, soon became evident, by 3


some speculators laying claim by authority, or a pre-
tended authority, tothe very land these Indians lived
> on; setting, at the same time, surveyors they had
brought on for the purpose, torun lines through the

_ tract agreeable to their direction.
The Six Nations, after having treated these In-
dians so treacherously, in selling their land, next at-


i
b


. 3
108 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE, _


- tempted to unite them with other savage tribes on —


that the proposal they had made, was both void of
shonesty and common ‘sense. Shortly after, : they
- (the Six Nations) sent another message, with two *


9%


Susquehanna, for the purpose of drawing them, by de-
grees, nearer to themselves, so that they might have
them entirely under their control. In this view they
sent a message, in 1770, to the Christian, Indians,


‘
_ advising them to settle at or near Assinink, (in - |


English, the dig Rock,) which however was rejected :
with disdain ; while, at the same time, they were told


Spanish dollars, which their messengers were to de-
liver to the Christian Indians, as their share of the
money for the land sold by them to the English.*
But they returned the two dollars with this short
answer; ‘‘as we have sold no land, we can have no —
claim to this money, keep it for yourselves’’! |

At Goshgoshink, the Indian preacher Wenaomeialll
had gained a great ascendancy over his hearers, after
the Christian Indians had left that place ; yet it some-_
times happened, that in the midst of his joy, he had
the mortification to see some of his people leave him
and join the Christian Indians. a).

Among the numerous visitors which had come —
to see the new Christian Indian congregation at
Lawunakhannek, was a most distinguished character, ~


* By sending the two dollars to the Christian Indians, the Six. Nations
meant to say, that thus they had been cheated by the English in the
purchase made ; that for every five miles square they. received 2 dollars:


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. _ 109


named Gikhican, (in English, the stud, or foremost sight
ona gunbarrel.) This extraordinary man was, byall who
knew him, both admired and dreaded, on account of
his superior courage as a warrior—his talents in coun-
cil—and his unequalled manner of delivering himself
asa national orator, or speaker : he at that time being
first councellor to the chief of the Wolf tribe, Pakanke,
at Cascaski, (Cusheushke) on the Big Beaver.—This


Ohe,
oo! he


man, with the approbation of hischief and the coun-
cil, had undertaken to go purposely to Lawunakhan- tar a


nek, there to dispute with, and confound the missionary _
Zeisberger, on the doctrine he was preaching to the
Indians. Although he had thought himself armed at
all points, sufficiently to withstand any white preacher’s
doctrine, he had the good sense not to begin the con-
test, but suffer the missionary to preach as usual, until
he should be able to detect doctrinal errors. Having ©
attended the preachings of Zeisberger, for that pur-
pose, he was so struck with conviction of the truth of
what he heard, and feeling the power of the precious
word, that he, wherever he went, and on his return

. to Cusheushke, reported favourable of the missionary
and his converts; which was the reason that, in the
year following, they were invited to come and settle
in that country.

The declaration of this much admired man, effected
also a change in the minds and conduct of the chief
and council of Goshgoshink ; who now, instead of
forbidding their people to go to hear the misssonary


ce
110 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. _ Ba


preach, encouraged them to ‘go, the ‘consequence
of which was, that many went, heard and believed,
and joined the congregatiton at ‘Lawunakhannek ;
_ while Wangomand, the Indian preacher, finding him- .

_ self deserted by those who had hitherto supported him, -
now sought to gain the aun will of those he had
hitherto persecuted. ae |

~ The favourable change which had taken place since

_Glikhican had‘ been here, encouraged the congrega-
tion at Lawunakhannek, to build anew meeting-house,
b . sufficiently large to contain a great number of hearers +

‘ —and the hopes of a permanent peace added to their
he
)
F


happiness ; yet, as to the latter, they soon found them-

selves mistaken, for the Senecas, their neighbours,

and withal the most restless tribe of the Six Nations,

had sought quarrels both with the English and the

baw _  Cherokee-nation. Their complaint against the form-

er, was. that of having been cheated out of somuch
7 of their land ; and in their resentment, they declared —

| that to revenge the injustice done them, they ‘could

never do the English sufficient injury. They pre-

tended, that by the treaty concluded between ‘the

Six Nations and the Cherokees, ample satisfaction ~
had not been made them; and that, therefore, they a

would take it upon themselves to obtain it. Hay-
ing afterwards sent their warriors out against’ the- —
Cherokees, two of them fell into the hands of the lat- _
ter ; who, after upbraiding them for the faithlessness of
their nation, in not abiding by the conditions agreed —


-


P *y 7 re 5 wid : aie “¢ 9

EE CeO a oe

ge nese. ee.

_ HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. — #55 aa

upon.at the last: treaty—where both they-and the Six ; 4


Nations were to hold the peace belt fast with both :
their hands—they cut off the fingers from both the
_ prisoners’ hands, sending them home to their: chiefs
with thismessage; namely, “ we had concludeda peace
with each other, by which we both were to hold the
chain of friendship fast with both our hands. We he
done so; but as you did not, we conclude that you~
have no use for fingers, and therefore have cut them
off, to rid you of useless members.” ,
 Hostilities having commenced between these two o
nations, andthe Christian Indians wishing to with- = 4
3


draw from. their hostile neighbours, they accepted

the friendly offer so repeatedly made to them by the

chiefs of Cushcushke, to. come and settle on Big

Beaver river. Having, in ‘consequence, informed the

chiefs at Goschgoshink.of their intention, they had _

no objection to their going, only wishing that the mis-

sionary might forgive and forget past injuries commit- |
ed by them, which being readily agreed to, they parted ‘
as friends ; and being ready on the 17th day of April,

1770, set out in sixteen canoes,+ passing down the ;
Alleghany river to Pittsburg, thence down the Ohio
to Big Beaver, thence up the said river for about
twenty miles from the mouth, where they halted, and
-commenced making a settlement, calling the place
Langundowi oteey, (in English, Peace village; by
which name I shall call this place in the sequel). They
had met with no other difficulty on the voyage, except


© pee Oe ee i


112 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. e
® a delay of two days at the falls of Beaver, where they 7
+ had to drag their canoes, and carry their baggage a
* mile over land, but were met here by Giikhican, with
yy persons to help them. ou Searle


On the arrival of these Christian ledini choihelele
bouring Indians were astonished to see people of their
nation, differing so much in their manners and beha- —

- viour from themselves, ted to hear a doctrine prea
_ ed, they never before had heard. The chief came from
__ Kushkushke to welcome them ; but the scene was soon
a a _ changed, when he saw that his first counsellor, GiB.
— can, left him and joined the Christian Indians. _ he
~~, deed, he loss of this man was considered a wie
i to the whole nation. ¢ 4
While Pakanko, the chief, and Glikbixan) wereias
tending together on the propriety of such conduct,
a black belt of wampum, which had been brought on
. from the great council at Gekelemukpechink, (in En-—
ie glish, stl water,) was laid before the chief, conse
the following advice and notice ; namely, ‘that incon- —
sideration of an epidemical disease, which had raged
E among them for some time, carrying off great numbers —
of Delawares, and believed to have been broughton »
them by the power of witchcraft, some of the counsel-
( lors were of the opinion, that by embracing Christianity
. the contagion would cease. That therefore they were — :
unanimous, that this remedy should be resorted to; —
and that they hereby declared, that the word of God
should be received by them; and further, that who: —


oe ‘ -: —- =: - : & ao | “2
* usceewenpEn’s NARRATIVE. aaa


encisliiahd oppose the measure ace be scsi? -


ed anvenemy to the nation.” |


_ This resolute and sincere message, so favourable to


the cause of the Brethren, silenced their adversaries ; _. ieee
_ and was, in a great measure, the cause of the prosperity . “a
of the Brethren’s mission from that time forward. A i
misunderstanding, from a belief that the Christian In.


dians were averse to contribute to the support of th
affairs of the nation, being also removed, by their de
claring, “that though they never intended to interfere’ = oe
with state affairs, nor with wars, yet they would al-
ways be willing to bear their share of the public bur-
den for peace measures; and in fact towards all mea-
y ‘sures resorted to, and adopted for the welfare of the
| ‘mation—provided such measures had no tendency to .
L ‘molest either the white people, or any of the Indian
-nations.’? They openly declared : “ that the Brethren
should not only be tolerated throughout the nationy
and be at liberty to preach the gospel wherever they
pleased, but should likewise be considered as adopt-
ed into their family.”
-» Encouraged by this declaration, the new comers
| © seommenced building comfortable dwelling houses for
; - themselves, and a spacious chapel of squared timbers ;


and the inhabitants increasing in numbers, the mis-
‘sionary, a young man, and his wife, who for many years
had been in the service of the Brethren’s mission,
| both in Connecticut and Pennsylvania, being sent
PEP P.


F : é


=" Boe at
3 ® ; F a


a


114 HECKEWELDER’S capeaeive: .
for from their post on Susquehanna, arrived at this
place (Peace village,) in October of the year 1770. > *
The invitation given by the great council: at Ge-
kelemukpechink, extended not only to Zeisberger and.
the congregation settled on Beaver creek,’ but’a
deputation was also sent in the year 1771, to the
Christian Indian congregations at Wyalusing and Shes-
hequon, on the Susquehanna, inviting them to come
on with their teachers, and settle on the’ Muskingum,
(in English, E/k’s eyes,) where they would be received _
as friends, and have the choice of land, on which they
might live in peace and safety—and asa proof, that
by sending this message, no evil was intended, they
requested Zeisberger to’ certify their sincerity, bya
letter in his own hand writing, which being doné,
Wangomend immediately set out with’ the dispatches,
and having delivered the same to the Christian In-
~ dians at Friedenshutten (Wyalusing) and Sheshequon,
he received the short answer; “that they thanked
the chiefs on Muskingum for their kind interposition
in their behalf,* but that at present they were'too heavy
to rise—that when they should have lightened them-
selves, they would inform the chiefs and give them a.


‘decisive answer.” - “st I~.
Sometime after, the chief, Netawatwes repeated the ;


ovat


* Alluding to their being distressed by the Six Nations, who had sold


their land to the English. igen


+ Too heavy,” meaning they. had their whole harvest of corn-end=
vegetables on hand, it being the fall season.


LP


Po


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 115


invitationin a) more pressing manner, in which the
; Wyandots (whom the Delawares call their uncles,)
joined, assuring the Christian Indians that they would
give them sufficient land, and never sell the ground
under their-feet to the white — as the on Na-
tions had done to them.
The Brethren at Bethlehem ane imac to con-
sult with the Christian Indians on the subject, the
bishop, Nathaniel. Seidal, together with two directors
of the society from Europe, who at that time happened
to be ‘there, undertook the journey to Friedenshut-
ten, (Wyalusing,) and having hada consultation with
them on the subject, the final decision was postponed
toa future day; meanwhile, however, some families
who had signified a wish to agree to the proposal of
‘the chiefs, were. permitted to depart for that place,
that fall.

. The. two Brethren poi Europe, Gregor and—
Loretz, who had never before seen a congregation of
North. American Indians, were uncommonly. delight-
ed; they passed some days with them, during which
time they neglected no opportunity of seeing them
in their various occupations—their .meetings—and
conversing with them concerning their inward expe-
' yxience—also administering holy baptism to several,
who were desirous for it, had given proof of their sin-
cerity ; stood astonished, thanking the Lord for his
mercies and goodness, and praising his name for what
he had done to these heathen people.


o a? 7
+ Oey
"2 - i“ b 4


i ial


116 '  HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


The missionary Zeisberger, having in the summer


of the same year (1771,) been on a visit to Bethlehem,


now went himselfyaccompanied by the writer of this.
narrative, to Friedenshutten ; and having, with the In-
dians there, deliberated on the expediency. of their
continuing where they were, or of removing to some
other place, were unanimous in the: opinion—that as


these lands were sold, and the white people were be- _


coming troublesome—often imposing liquor on them


there was no prospect of their living in undisturbed _


peace—that they therefore would accept the: offer of
the chiefs on the Muskingum, and the next Spring
move thither in a body. heats


In September, the above mentioned onigsibopane


(Zeisberger,) returned to his post on Beaver creek,-
accompanied by the writer of this, who was to be an
assistant to him. During his four months abseneé,
some new members had joined the congregation;


while, on the other hand, new enemies had sprung up,


among whom was a new preacher, who had already
‘propagated such lies among the Indians, as he imagined
would sufficiently serve the purpose of having the
missionaries banished out of the country. Of Zeisber-


ger, he had said, that “it was well known among the —
white people, that he was a seducer of Indians, for


the purpose of having them transported as slaves,
where they would be harnessed to the plough, and
whipped to work, &c.” Added to this, there were
among the Indians, rumours of a war soon taking place,


|


ae te hers


sie f
Aten N,-
eee.


in consequence of several murders which had lately
been committed by white people, on harmless in-
offensive’ Indians, which a to hold out suf-
ficient provocation for this step. Indeed scattered
Indians living near to the Ohio river, were already
fleeing to the respective inland villages ; some threat-
ening to take revenge on the missionaries, they being


of the same colour as the murderers. At length li- _


quor being procured for the execution of their
diabolical design, obliged the Brethren to keep a
strong guard over their missionaries: the Indian sis-
ters having already flect to the woods for safety.

_ The storm however blew over ; and although some
could not be reconciled to the Brethrens being tole-
rated i in the country, others respected them, and en-


couraged one another to go and attend their meet-
. ings. Even the chief Pakanke, advised his own


children to go and hear the gospel preached, and
also to believe what they should hear.

The chiefs of Gekelemukpechink (distant about
ninety miles,) having early in the year 1772, with


great earnestness renewed the request, that the


Brethren might come to their quarter of the country,
Zeisberger with five Indian families, in all twenty-
eight persons, set out op the 14th of April for that


place, and arriving on May the 3d, at the spot, which


to them appeared to be most convenient and advanta-
geous for a missionary settlement ; they built tempora-
ry cabins, cleared land, and planted it—giving the


' HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. © 117


, a


there, by insinuating that all the land in that country


wars had been carried on. Say 2


# - :
118 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


place the name or Shoenbrun, (in English Pine Spring 5
and in the Indian language, Weelhick Thuppek;”) _
and here, as in their other missionary. establishments, -
they had daily meetings. ce aaa
Meanwhile the two congregations on Susquehanna
had been preparing for their emigration ; aud the Six
Nations now seeing they were in earnest to leave the,
country, became much displeased. They first attempt~
ed to discourage the Christian Indians. from. going


was stained with blood ;—that even the rivers were
of the colour of blood.*—Next they attempted, by
vords and promises, to remove, from the minds
se I dians, their former treachery towards them 5
they offered to unite with them, so that they would
be as though they were but one body ;—they hoped >
the little bird they had heard singing, had sung} to


xr Th


* Figurative saalongia when speaking of a bese g in which bloody :


+ The “ singing of a bird,” as the Indian phrase is, applies to all De.
accounts, sayings, or even messages, which do not appear to bear tl
stamp of authenticity. Now, although the message sent to the Chris
tian Indians, from the chief and great council of the Delawares, on the
Muskingum, for them to come into their country, was to its fullest
extent authentic ; yet the Six Nations, who would still be considered a8
the great head ot the whole, not being first consulted thereon, strove to ~
turn the whole proceedings of the Delawares into ridicule, as though
the great council of their nation, were no more than somany birds—
and their resolutions and messages to be considered as the song of
birds which had passed by.


at states pate ye
n year irae r had been exp
f of yererie: without ibe ae Beg


A!
their g 1 as ‘custom, Sem


any thent to ‘the place of their adlaernant,
sales arrived, they met for the last time in their
ees ‘to offer up thanks and praises to- the Lord,

for the ‘many favours and blessings received from
“Bim in this place ; and further to supplicate his. peace
and protection, “not only. ‘during the journey, but at,
‘times, and in all situations. And lastly, the Indians


Penk
s Be A


compense. The Friends (Quakers) od


120 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. *
having taken an affectionate leave of their tmuch
beloved teachers, the missionary Schmick, and ‘wife,
they set out, their number amounting to 241 pérsons, —
including the missionary Rothe, his wife and child,
who were to remain “with them wherever they went.
‘The journey was long, tedious and fatiguing, and —
proved a practical school of patience to the missiona-
ries with them. Some had set out by land with the
cattle; having, exclusive of horses for carrying the sick
and the baggage, seventy head of horned cattle to take ae
care of, while others took advantage of navigable rivers
and streams, as far as was practicable to proceed ; these
having th the charge of all bulky and- heavy” articles,
sucll oneph plough irons, harrow teeth, pick axés, alll
kinds of farming utensils and tools, iron pots and large
brass kettles, for the boiling of maple sugar, &c. as also
the provisions. The land travellers, however, had the
most difficult part to perform. For they often had to
penetrate with their cattle through incredible thick-
ets and swamps, wading through rivers and brocks,
erossing hills and mountains, enduring most tremen-
dous thunderstorms, and exposed to the bite oF ‘the
rattle snake, which in some particular places were very
numerous, and by which some horses were bitten,
and died—and, above all, suffering by the bite of F that
most tormenting insect, the sand-fly; which in some
places was so abundant, that they almost Reverie ®
fog in the air: such in particnlar was one c ie
to which the Indians, many years before, had given the


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. : 121


name of “ Ponks Uteney,”* which signifieth the habi-
tation of the sand fly, (or gnat). Not a moment’s rest was
to be expected at this place, otherwise than by kind-
ling fires throughout the camp, and sitting in the
smoke. Added to this, the travellers had unfortunately
taken the measles on the journey, of which many be-
came sick, especially of the children, several of whom
died, among the rest a poor cripple, ten or eleven years
old, who had been carried thus far in a basket by his
mother, on her back. Otherwise they were well sup-
plied, game being plenty in the woods: the hunters
haying killed upwards of one hundred deer in the
eight weeks they had been on the journey, '

On the 5th of August the first division, under the
direction of the rev. John ‘Ettwein, arrived at Peace
Village on Big Beayer, and some days after the other
division, with their missionary Rothe, and family, also
arrived, when thanks and praises were offered up to


the throne of grace for the protection granted them ~


in innumerable cases, and the dangers to which they
had been exposed—as also, for having granted them
mind and heart, to continue in love and peace
together. During the whole of the journey, meet-


* The Indian tradition, as related at the time, (1772,) runs thus; That
about thirty years before, an Indian hermit had dwelt there on a rock,
who being a magician, would appear to travellers and hunters in different
garbs, frightening some, and murdering others. ~ At length a valiant
chief surprised and killed him. Thus far, the Indians all say that the
story is true. But fabulous reports add, that the heroic chief having
burnt the hermit’s bones to ashes, he threw them into the air to be
blown off, but instead of this, the ashes turned into “Ponksak,” sand flies.


i ,
Ls


122 ” ‘HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. ‘i * x


ings were daily held by -the Jets of aime when
the weather permitted. <astet
_ Soon after the arrival of these emigrants, the rev.

John Ettwein, David Zeisberger, (who had, a few days
before, purposely come on to Peace village to meet ~~ f


the emigrants) and the writer of this narrative, together
with the greater part of the Indian Brethren and sisters _
who had come from Wyalusing and |Sheshequon, —

_ set out for Shonbrun, on Muskingum ; ‘and arriving
there on the 23d of the month of August, were all
highly pleased at seeing this new mission establish-
ment; but as it now becme necessary that the Bre-
thren and Christian Indians should inform the chiefs —
officially, at Gekelemukpechink, of the arrival of their —
friends and relatives from Susquehanna, they ap-
pointed a delegation for the purpose, choosing John —
Papunhank for their speaker. ‘They were well re- :
ceived by the chiefs and national council, and the
‘compliments usual on such occasions having been:
exchanged, they returned again.

During the stay of the rev. John Ettwein, the rules
of the congregation, as agreed to, and approved of by —
the national assistants, were read and accepted bythe _
whole congregation. They were as follows: 7

1, We will know of no other God, nor worship any
other, but him who has created us, and redeemed us _
with his most precious blood. ~ a

2. We will rest from all labour on Sundays, ind f
attend the usual meetings on that day for divine ser-
vice. rye


a
43
Be

j


>


x
f
i
a --


_


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


3.. We will honour father and mother, and support
them in age and distress.

4. Noone shall be permitted to dwell with us, with-
out the consent of our teachers.

5. No thieves, murderers, drunkards, ednlagaite and
ee a shall be suffered among us.

6. No one that attendeth dances, sacrifices, or hea-
thenish festivals, can live among us,

7. Noone using 7Trchappich (or witchcraft) in hunt-
ing, shall be suffered among us. :

8. We will renounce all juggles, lies, and deceits
of Satan.

9. We will be obedient to our teachers, and to the
helpers, (national assistants,) who are appointed to see
that good order be kept, both in and out of the town.

10. We will not be idle and lazy—nor tell lies of
one another—nor strike each other—we will live
peaceably together.

11. Whosoever does any ‘harm to another’s cattle,
goods or effects, &c. shall pay the damage.

12. A man shall have only one wife—love her and
provide for her, and the children. Likewise a woman
shall have but one husband, and be obedient unto him ;
she shall also take care of the children, and be cleanly
in all things.

13. We will not permit any rum, or spirituous li-
quor, to. be brought into our towns. If strangers or tra-
ders happen to bring any, the helpers (national assis-
tants) are to take it into their possession, and take care


, 124 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. |


ee ‘


not to deliver it to them until they set off again.
14. None of the inhabitants shall run in debt'with —
traders, nor receive goods on commission for traders,
without the consent of the national assistants.
_ 15. No one is to go on a journey. or, long hunt,
without informing the minister or stewards of. it. com |
16. Young people are notto marry without the con-
sent of their parents, and taking theiradvice. = |
17. If the stewards or helpers apply to the inhabi-
tants for assistance, in doing work for the benefit of
the place, such as building meetings and school houses,
clearing and fencing lands, &c. they are to be obedient.
18. Ail necessary contributions for the public,
ought cheerfully to be attended to. oangindar
" The above rules were made, and. adopted at
a time when there was a profound peace; when
however, six years afterwards, (during the revolutiona-
ry war,) individuals of the Delaware Nation took up .
the hatchet to join in the conflict, the national assist- ~
ants proposed and insisted on having the following i


additional rules added: namely, ie
19. No man inclining to go to war—which is the
shedding of blood, can remain among us. upg


0. Whosoever purchases goods or articles of wat-
riors, knowing at the time that such have been stolen
or plundered, must leave us. We look upon this —
as giving encouragement to murder and theft. ©

According to custom, these rules were, at the com- |
mencement of every year, read in public meeting;
and no new member, or applicant, could be permitted


,


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 125


to live in the congregation, without making a solemn
promise that he or she would strictly conform to
them: When any person residing in the congrega-
tion gave offence, or caused disturbance, it was the
duty of the national assistants, first to admonish such
person or persons in+a friendly manner; but where
“such admonition proved ineffectual, then to consult
together for the purpose of publicly putting him, her,
or them, out of the society, and dismissing such alto-
gether from the place. Next to these rules, other

‘necessary and proper regulations were made and
adopted; for instance, respecting the daily meet-

ings and the duty of church wardens, schools, at-
tending to visitors, and the attention to be paid to
the poor, sick and needy, or distressed—and also with
regard to contributions to be made from time to time
for the’ benefit of the congregation at large, as also
individuals in the same, unable to support themselves,
or furnish the necessary attire for the deceased, so
that the corpse of the poorest person in the commu-
nity was dressed as decent as the wealthy, &c.

The rev. John Ettwein having again returned to
Bethlehem, with the most sanguine hopes and pleas-
ing prospect of the future success of the mis-
sion, the new arrived emigrants went to work with
great cheerfulness in erecting houses, and preparing
grounds for planting, the next season. And that part
of the congregation of the Mohican tribe, which, in
order to procure provisions for the winter, had made


126 _ HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


a halt on Beaver creek, having now also come on,
they were advised to settle ten miles lower down. the
river, where they built a town, which they called
Gnadenhutten. :
The missionary Picinbistiaes accompanied we two
Indian Brethren, also paid a visit to the Shawanos, at
Waketameki, about fifty miles down the river, where
he was well received, and preached the gospel toa
number of attentive hearers. ;
The neighbouring Indians, having within the last
year become very troublesome to the Christian In-—
dians residing on Big Beaver; and when drunk, having
come on purpose to murder the missionary Rothe;
it became the wish of the inhabitants of the place to
leave this settlement entirely, and join their congrega-
tions on the Muskingum. Accordingly, on the 13th
of April, 1773, this handsome village was evacuated ;
one part of the congregation travelling across the
country by land, and the other divisions, accompanied
by the writer of this narrative, in twenty-two canoes,
loaded with the baggage, Indian corn, &c.. went by


water, first down the Big Beaver to the Ohio—thence -%


down that river to the mouth of the Muskingum
thence up that river, according to its course, near two 4
hundred miles, to Shonbrun, the place of destination.

Visitors were almost daily arriving from Gekele- —
muckpechink, (the seat of government,) and other ;
villages, to take a view of the Christian Indians’ settle- .
ment, and witness their industry, especially their —


he
b


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. . 127


‘buildings, and plouged grounds. Added to this, — _
as alfcuriosity, they were astonished to see such a * ell
number of their nation living so happily together, and va
putting their hands to manual labour. To all who ne
came to them, the gospel was preached, which was i


the cause of many joining the congregation, who be-
came faithful members, amongst whom was a celebrat- |
ed chief, named Echpalawahund, whose exemplary &
life, from the day of his conversion unto his death, i
was a happy example for the imitation of others.
A Cherokee Indian, who in the late war between |
- his nation and the Six Nations, had fallen a prison-
.er to the latter, but being afterwards liberated, also
joined the congregation some time in this year, and
together with his wife, was baptized. ~
Meanwhile the prospect bid fair towards the con-
version of the Delaware nation; occurrences had
taken place in different quarters, which, to appearance, »
threatened not only to check this prospect, but also
involve the nation in a war. Report stated, that the
Six Nations had sold a large tract of country lying
south of the river Ohio, and below the mouth of the
“Canhawa river, to the English. A country, (as the
saying among the western nations at. that time was,)
to which they had no possible claim, the land be-
longing to other nations; and further, that the white
people were already taking possession of it.
The Delaware nation, taught by sad experience to
mistrust the acts of the Six Nations, thought they


Saar i


einen atte |


128 (ts HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


could plainly see into the policy of this act, which


_(said they) was that of involving those tribes, who ac- —


tually did claim theselands, in a war with the Eng-
lish, whereby the former would be weakened, while


their (the Six Nations) power or authority, over a


other Indian nations, would be established.

Reports were also at this time in circulation, that
quarrels had arisen between several Indian nations;
and that, in some instances, acts of hostility had been
committed—likewise, that the Cherokees had de-
clared war against the Wawiachtenos, (by some called —
Weeas,) in which latter case, the Delawares being
grandfather to the two contending nations, were ap-
plied to as peacemakers between them. The Dela-
ware council, not being at the time possessed of the —
quantity of wampum beads requisite on the occasion,
applied to the Christian Indians for a contribution —
of this article, who freely gave them twelye fathom.
As soon as the belts were prepared, an embassy of ©
twelve men was sent to the Cherokee nation, with
proposals of peace, which were accepted. WA


Meanwhile the Christian Indians at both places, —


Shonbrun and Gnadenhutten, encouraged by their
increasing numbers, resolved to build at each of ©
these places a new chapel, both of which were fin- —
ished before the winter sat in. That at Shonbrun
was forty feet by thirty-six, and that at Gnadenhutten,
somewhat smaller. Both were built of squared tim-
bers, and shingle roofed, with a cupola and bell. The


a hil kg: Ss piel Wiha as , a8 Bod es See: Baie ee
. f y 4 = BY
LS ; one :


y HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. | . 129


towns being regularly laid out, the streets wide and
kept clean, and the cattle kept out by means of
fences, gave the whole a neat appearance, and ex-
cited the astonishment of all visitors. _

The Gnadenhutten congregation not ‘yet having
a resident minister, though frequently visited by a
missionay from Shonbrun, now sent several Indian
brethren to Bethlehem, to bring on their beloved for-
mer teacher, Schmick, and his wife, for whom they
already hac built a convenient house, and who arrived
on. the 18th of August i in that year, (1773).

. But as the making of new settlements in a wilder-
ness, is not only laborious to the undertakers, on ac-
count of so much necessary work crowding on their
hands, but is also. subject ‘to many inconveniences
and exposures, which produce injurious effects on the
constitution, in consequence of which, in the present in-


stance, many became sick, and some: died ;. among


the latter, was that venerable and distinguished
national assistant, Anthony. This man, aged 77 years,
had from the day of his baptism, in 1749, unto his death,
in 1773, lived asa‘true follower of Christ. Being well
versed in scripture, he was of great use, and a blessing


to hisnmation—having been instrumental towards the


conversion of many. For many years he had served

asa chapel interpreter of the missionaries, when di-

wine service was performed. On his death-bed, he

exhérted all who visited him, to abide in faith, cheer-

fully saying, that he would soon be with Jesus, his
R


27 &_ | ea


130 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


redeemer. His memory will remain precious with
all who knew him. seis poe

Before the end of this year, the missionary Zeis-
berger, paid a second visit to the Shawanese, at Wa-


katameki, where he was well received, and hoped he


would live to see this nation also embrace the iereck
to the salvation of their souls. Aveban

The year 1774 was a year of trial to the lidian congre-
gations, on account of a war which broke out between
the people of Virginia, and the Senecas and Shawanos
tribes of Indians ; in which, as it became well known,
the white people were the aggressors.—Of these lat-
ter, a number were settled on choice spots of land,
on the south side of the river Ohio, while the Indians
dwelt on the north side, then their territory. The
sale of the lands, below the Conhawa river, had open-
ed a wide field for speculation. The whole country
on the Ohio river, had already drawn the attention of
many persons from the neighbouring provinces ; who
generally forming themselves into parties, would rove
through the country in search of land, either to
settle on, or for speculation ; and some, careless of
watching over their’ conduct, or destitute of both
honour and humanity, would join a rabble, (a class of
people generally met with on the frontiers) who main-
tained, that to kill an Indian, was the same as killing
a bear ora buffalo, and would fire on Indians that
came across them by the way ;—nay, more, would de-


coy such as lived across the river, to come over, for the


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE, 131


purpose of joining them in hilarity ; and when these
complied, they fell on them. and murdered them.
‘Unfortunately, some of the murdered were of the
family of Logan,* anoted man among the Indians.


It is indiscribable, how enraged the relations of the


murdered became, on seeing such abominable acts
committed without cause, and even by some «white
men who had always pretended to be their friends.


The cries of the relations of the sufferers soon reached —


‘the ears of the respective nations to: whom they
belonged, and who quickly resolved to take revenge
on the long knives ;+ for (said they,) ‘‘ they are a bar-
barous people.” Some however, considering the
difficulty of meeting the perpetrators, proposed kill-
ing every white man then in their country, until
- they should believe themselves amply revenged for
the valuable lives lost by the long knife men, (Virgi-
nians). Nothing could equal the rage of the Senecas, in
particular ; and it was impossible to foresee where the
matter would end. Parties after parties came on—
the missionaries had to keep within their houses—
the enraged Indians insisted that every able man
should do his utmost to take revenge. They kept
on the look out for traders, to kill them, but these had
already generally fled the country, while some were


* See appendix to Mr. Jefferson’s Notes on Virginia, for particulars of


this man, and the murders. :


¢ So they call the people of Virginia.


iin sé


i 132 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


taken under protection by friendly Shawanese Indians,
who afterwards conducted them safely to Pittsburg.
These good people however, oh ! shameful to relate! -
were, on their return, waylaid, by some of those white

, : ag bouds—fired upon, and one man* shot in the .
breast; in which situation he, with his wound bleeding,
fortunately reached Shonbrun, where it was dressed,
and all possible attention paid him. $7 DANIEE
A Mr. John Jones, who followed trading, and: wis


E- at the time coming with two men in @ canoe up »
r the Muskingum, being ignorant of what had happened,
was happily apprised of his danger, and the risk he .


a


was running, by an Iudian woman, who discovering ‘
him, advised him, without a moment’s:delay, to leave
the canoe, and take the woods direct for Newcomers- —
town, where he would be safe. On the second day :
} _ of their travelling in this manner, having accidently

| hit upon the path leading to the Shawanese towns,

; at Waketameki, one of Joues’s men, feeling himself

80 fatigued by travelling in the woods, declared that he
would not leave the path again, and from which resolu-

tion he could not be persuaded. Scarcely had these

r two men got to the ridge, when they heard the sealp
; yell, in the direction they supposed the man to be. |
The fact was; a large party of Senecas, relations of
those who had been murdered on the Ohio, and now —
on their way to Wakelameki, meeting this man, :


*See Heckewelder’s History of Indian Nations, page 223.


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 133


murdered him; and in their rage, cut up the body and
stuck the pieces on the bushes, marching off in tri-
umph. Captain White Eyes, who lived some dis-
tance from the path, hearing the yell, ran instantly in.
that direction, where he found the mangled bod j
which he collected and buried. ‘The party however,
on returning the next day and finding what had been
done, tore up the grave, and scattered the pieces at |
a greater distance. White Eyes, now on the watch,
discovering what they were doing, repaired to the
_spot a'second time, and succeeding in finding every
part of the mangled body, carefully dug a grave in a
more secured’ place, and intered the whole.

‘Next a Mr. Duncan, well known to almost every
Indian in the parts, was sent out from Pittsburg, to en-
deavour to procure from the enemy a cessation of
hostilities, until government could hold a conference
with them. But before he reached Waketameki,
having captain White Eyes for his conductor, he was
fired wpon,* and had a very narrow escape. The

‘enemy now renewed their threats against the Dela-
wares—declaring that if they did not join in the con-
flict, they should pay for it. —

‘A report being in circulation, that the governort of
Virginia was marching troops against the enemy’s
towns on Sciota and Muskingum—and the inimical


" * See Heckewelder’s History of the Indian Nations, Chap. xxxviii.
é wire


t Lord Dunmore.


!


; >) 4
» 134 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


w _ Indians having, for the purpose of fighting them, all
moved westward of the Christian Indian towns, it was
thought a proper time to conduct the missionary
) Rothe, with his wife and child, to a place of more
j =. while the other missionaries were determined —
to hold out to the last. Accordingly the former were
taken to Pittsburg, from whence they proceeded to
_ Bethlehem ; while those remaining, together with the
Christian Indians, were holding themselves in readi-
ness to depart ahd proceed up the river to Cayahaga,
should the Virginian troops be beaten, which how-
ever was not the case—for after the battle at or near
the great Conhawa, the enemy sued for peace, promis-


i Sel


i a


ee Oe a eee


ing to deliver up all the prisoners in their possession.
In the course of the expedition, the Shawanese towns,
at Waketameki, had been destroyed by the white
troops; while the orders given by their commanders,
| were, not to pass through any of the Christian Indian
towns, nor in any manner to disturb those Indians. qf
On the joyful news of a peace being concluded be- __ :
tween the contending parties, the Christian Indians 7
set apart the 6th day of November, as a day of thanks-
giving and prayer, which was celebrated with solemni- |
ty ; offering up thanks and praises to the Lord, for his ;
gracious protection. ‘
The war being now ended, which, although of anieds

duration, was dreadful in its nature for the time IS,
lasted, the general wish of the Christian Indians was, ~
that a durable peace might follow.


-HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. — 135 gs


In other respects, this year (1774,) had_ been re- : ie
markable to the Christian Indians; First: the chiefs of =
the nation, both on the Muskingum, and at Cusch-
cushke, had unitedly agreed and declared, that ¢
Brethren should have full liberty to preach the gospel
to the nation, wherever they chose ; and this resolu-
tion they also made publicly known. And secondly :
these seeing that their friends and relations pursued
agriculture, and kept much cattle, they enlarged the
| tract of land first set apart for them, by moving their
| people off to a greater distance. And consulting their


Ss


‘©.


uncles, the Wyandots, on the subject, (they being the
nation from whom the Delawares had originally re-
ceived the land,) these. set apart, granted and con- _
firmed, all that country lying between Tuscorawas,
| (old town,) andthe great bend below Newcomers-town,
| a distance of upwards of thirty miles on the river,
and including the same to the. Christian Indians. “i
Two large belts of wampum were on this occasion
delivered by the Wyandots, and the chiefs of the Dela-
_ ware nation, to the Christian Indians, who, in return
thanked them for the gift, both verbally and by belts
and strings of wampum.

The peace and rest enjoyed by the Indian con-
gregation throughout the year 1775, was favourable
to visitors, who came in numbers to hear the gospel
preached ; so that the chapel at Shonbrun, although
large, was too small to contain them. The heathen
preacher, Wangomend, had also in this year come on


136 ' | HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


from -Goschgoshink, to see if he could succeed in
propagating his foolish doctrines; but the Indian
brethren bid him go to their children, baja
them.


Towards the fall of vhs year, two valuable, <i


and exemplary national assistants, departed this life ;
the one John Papunhank, a Delaware, and the other
Joshua, of the Mohican tribe. Both were, at their
respective places, wardens of the congregation ; the
former at Shonbrun, and the latter at Gnadenhutten.


Joshua was one of the first Indians baptized by wil


Brethren in 1742.*

Disputes having arisen between Great Britain wih
her North American colonies, and a congress being
chosen by the latter, it appointed commissioners,
to convene the northern and western nations at
Pittsburg, for the purpose of explaining the na-


ture of the dispute. to them,—and giving them~


their advice. As none of the missionaries were
present at the meetings, which were held in Octo-


ber and November, the following was the report — y


made by the chiefs, on their return to their respective
nations, viz : That the commissioners, after first hav-


ing informed them that disputes had arisen between —


the king of England and the people of this couitry—

and that their quarrelling with each other could not
ee ‘ Tce led

* For sketches of the lives of these truly Christian Indians, see Los-


kiel’s History of the Mission, part iii. pages 108—109, English edition’;
and German edition, pages 633-634.


a=
——-. =. w«


,
f
|


a]


sds ai aa oN oy oe ‘ates —_— i a


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. iS?


affect them in any wise, provided they did not interfere
and take a partin it; they next proceeded to state the


cause Fi whence the dispute had originated, calling
the same afamily dispute, a quarrel between a parent _


and his. child, which they described as filo


“Suppose a father had a little son whom he loved

indulged while young, but growing up to be a youth,
began to think of having some help from him; and
making up asmall pack, he bid him carry it for
him. The boy cheerfully takes this pack up, fol-
lowing his father with it. The father finding the
boy willing and obedient, continues in this way ; and
as the boy grows stronger, so the father makes the


pack in proportion larger—yet as long as the boy is


able to carry the pack, he dves so without grumbling.
At length however, the boy having arrived at man-
hood, while the father is making up the pack for
him, in comes a person of an evil disposition, and
learning who was to be the carrier of the pack,
advises the father to make it heavier, for surely
the son is able to carry a large pack. The father


_ listening rather to the bad adviser, than consulting his


own judgment, and the feelings of tenderness, follows
the advice of the hard hearted adviser, and makes
up aheavy load for his son to carry. The son,
now grown up, examining the weight of the load he
is to carry, addresses the parent in these words: ‘ Dear
father, this pack is too heavy for me to carry, do pray
lighten it; I am willing to do what I can, but am
s


2


ree 7 ie ES ‘see + =3 - . e) ee
; 7-> a : P (


138 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


unable to carry this load.’ The father’s heart hav-
ing by this time became hardened—and the bad ad-
viser calling to him, whip him if he disobeys, ‘and
refuses to carry the pack, now in a peremptory tone


_ orders his son to take up the pack and carry it off, or


will whip him; and already takes up a stick to
beat him. ‘So’! says the son, ‘am I to be served
thus, for not doing what I am unable to do! Well, if
entreaties avail nothing with you, father—and it is to
be decided by blows, whether or not I am able to
carry a pack so heavy, then I have no other choice
left me, but that of resisting your unreasonable de-
mand, by my strength; and thus, by striking each
other, learn who is the strongest.’”? Such (Indian re-
ports stated,) was the parable given them for the pur-
pose of explaining the nature of the dispute.


They further ‘reported, That. the commissioners


had told them, that as the dispute did not concern
them, it would be highly wrong in them, (the Ameri-
can people,) were they toask the aid of their Indian
brethren, in bringing the dispute between them and
the parent to a close; for, by so doing, they would be
made ‘parties to the quarrel, which might inyolye
them in difficulties and dangers—particularly as it
could not be foreseen in whose favour the quarrel
would terminate. That were they to ask the assist-
ance of their brethren, the Indians, and they together
should fail in gaining what they sought for, they
would have to suffer with their white brethren; and


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 139


80 vice versa the case would be, were they to join the
other'side. That therefore they would advise them
to sit still, until the contest should be overbe friends


to both sides, and not take wp the hatchet against _


either. For by taking the hatchet up to strike either
side; they must infallibly create to themselves an
enemy, who, should it so happen that he ‘became
the conqueror, would punish them—take their land
from them, &c.—And further : that as, in the course
of the war it might happen that their brethren, the
_ Americans, would not have it in their power ' to supply
them with all that they might want—they, not having
taken up arms against the British, would consequent-
ly’be supplied from that side, with such articles as

they stood in need of.—That their American bre-
- thren sought their welfare ; and having land enough
of their own, did not wish to deprive them. of
theirs, but sought to secure their constant friendship
as brothers, who had sprung up together from oné and
_ the same’ soil—T hat they wished to make them a great
_ people, and that they would do so to every nation arid
people that should take the advice herewith giver
them; yet that they must tell them, that whatever
nation should take up the hatchet and strike: them,
such nation must abide the consequence, should they,
the American people, become conquerors. Lastly, (the
reporters added,) that in consequence of the good
advice given them by their American brethren, the
chiefs of the Delawares, present at this treaty, had for


4


140 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


themselves, and in the name of the whole nation, de-
clared to the commissioners, that they would remain
neutral during the ‘“‘ contest between the parent and
the son, and not lift up the hatchet against either side.”
: About this time, while anumber of the Senecas*
were at Pittsburg, perhaps more for the purpose of
learning the disposition of the western nations, but
more particularly that of the Delawares, with regard
to the side they should take during the contest, they
had an opportunity of hearing captain White Eyes
deliver his sentiments, openly declaring in favour of
the American people and their cause ; which so cha-
grined them, that they thought proper to offera check
to his proceedings, by giving him, in a haughty tone,
a hint, intended to remind him what the Delaware
nation was in the eyes of the Six Nations, (meaning:
that it had no will of its own, but was subordinate
to the Six Nations) ; when captain White Eyes, long
since tired of this language, with his usual spirit,
and an air of disdain, rose and replied ; that “he well
knew that the Six. Nations considered his nation
as aconquered people—and their inferiors.” You
say (said he) that you had conquered met that
you had cut off my legs—had put a petticoat on


+ The Seneca tribe of the Six Nations, is the most warlike senieaiaa


t See Lockiel’s History of the Mission of the United'Brethren among
the North American Indians, chapter x. and Heckewelder’s History of
the Indian Nations, chapter i.


. .


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 14} -


‘ime, giving me a hoe and cornpounder in my hands,
saying ; ‘now woman! your business henceforward
shall be, to plant and hoe corn, and pound the same for


bread, for us men and warriors !’—Look (continued ~


White Eyes,) at my legs ! if, as you say, you had cut
cut them off, they have grown again to their proper
size !—the petticoat I have thrown away, and have put
on my proper dress !—the corn hoe and pounder I
have exchanged for these fire arms, and I declare that
lam aman !—Then waving his hand in the diréction
of the Alleghany river, he exclaimed, “and all the
country on the other side of that river is mine.”*

| “Perhaps so bold or daring an address was never
made, to any council of Indians, by an individual
chief. But it ought to be noticed, that White Eyes
had here spoken on the strength of what the commis-
sioners had said and promised at the treaty. In what
they had said, he, placed full confidence. He took it
for granted, that the Senecas would join the English
against the American people, and therefore lose the
_ land they had so artfully wrested from the Delawares ;
and, in the firm belief that his nation would keep the
peace, he had a right to lay a claim toit. Moreover,
his expectation went to this ; that should the Six Na-
tions, in consequence of the language he had made
use of to them, take up arms against his nation—they
being friends of the American people, and at peace


It must = aiid, that the Indian orators always speak in the
singular number, though meaning the nation.


%
142 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.
with—them, they would assist them in fighting” for


their just rights. : eke

The report of captain White Eyes’ declaration to
the Senecas, having become known to his nation,
some feared the consequence of such daring language,
to so proud and powerful a body as the Six Nations
combined, were, in comparison to them ; while others
were satisfied at his proceedings, having long wished
to resume their ancient station and character among


the Indian nations, so clandestinely wrested from


them, by the ancestors of these very people. This
circumstance was however the cause of a division
among them, in which the Monseys took’ the
lead. They pretended apprehensions, that the
Six Nations would resent the liberty White Eyes had
taken; and made this a pretence of withdrawing
themselves from the councils of thé Turtle, tribe, and
joining themselves to the Wolf tribe. Nor did the


Monsey chief, Newalike, rest until he had succeeded — ;


in detaching a number of their tribe from the Chris-
tian Indians at Schonbrun, who had taken it for grant-


ed, that their chief was secretly acquainted with some


evil which would befall the Delaware nation, and
therefore wished to remove them from danger. They
(the Monseys) retiring nearer to Lake Erie, took care
to have the Six Nations informed, that they did not
approve of what captain White Eyes had said. And


captain Pipe,* at the head of his tribe, was glad to see a


* This is the same capt. Pipe, whom.col, Bouquet, in- 1764, kept as a
hostage at Fort Pitt.


ce
;
a a 4 “a
> + Sa, aK
ey
sy of


wai : Brn


’
a


ere


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 143


breach made, of which White Eyes was to bear. the


blame. Pipe was an artful, cunning man. Ambitious |


and fond ef power, he endeavoured to create a) mis-
trust in the minds of individuals of the nation—per-
suading them to believe thattheir chief (White Eyes,)
had entered into secret engagements with the Ameri-
can people, for the purpose of having their young
people enslaved, while they (the chiefs) were to
reap the benefit thereof, and be lords over them.
Pipe’s place of residence was on Walhanding, about
fifteen miles from Goshochking, (forks of the Mus-
kingum.) Hitherto he had pretty regularly attended the
councils at the latter place, but now began to with-
draw, probably froma conviction that his intrigues
_ were known, and might one day be held up to him
by the chiefs, and he be obliged to render an ac-
count of his conduct. The peace chiefs however
pursued their usual course—their sole object being
the welfare of the nation.

In April, 1776, a third mission settlement was be-
gan with eight families, in all thirty-five. persons, un-
der their faithful leader, David Zeisberger, and the
writer of this narrative, as his assistant. They laid off
a town, within two miles of Goshochking, and called
it Lichtenau.. This place, in particular, had been
selected for them by the chiefs themselves, that they,
as well as their children, might have an opportunity
of hearing the gospel preached ; a wish which the


a, .


et 144 +  HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


le
I * old and principal chief, Netawatwees, had repeatedly
hy informed them of, both by public and private message.
' The Christian Indians had, since their first arrival
in this country, greatly increased ; and although a.
ce considerable number had within that time departed
4 this life, yet, at the close of the last year, their number |
amounted to four hundred and fourteen persons ; and at
Lichtenau, they were soon joined by new members,
viz. the above mentioned chief’s son and family, and
; . one of his nephews. The chief from Achsinink, (in
E English, solid rock,) on Hockhocking (place of bottle
ae shaped gourds,) called Welapachtschiechen,* otherwise
; named by the white people, captain Johny, a man
much esteemed by all who knew him, whether In-
dians or whites, likewise came on with his family,and
| joined the congregation, declining to act in the capa-
| city of a chief in future. Nothing deterred those who
believed they had an inward call, from joining the _
congregation. Nor had the troubles of the times
hitherto caused any inconvenience, with regard to
their spiritual course. - The schools for the children
were also, at the three settlements, kept up regularly,
in which a new spelling book, the composition of the
missionary Zeisberger, had been introduced.
Various were the messages and reports, brought
from,time to time to the great council of the Delaware
nation. One message, said to be sent from the king !


* The word signifieth erect posture.


a ar er


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. °* ae ae


of England, piltported 4 ‘that it was his Majesty’s ~ >.
| with and desire, “ that all the Indian nations might —
strictly adhere to the last articles of peace, and remain
quiet during the contest between the colonies and
the mother country.”—Next a message was received
from the congress, in Philadelphia, informing the na-
tions that they had appointed an agent with whom they
should correspond on affairs regarding the preser-
vation of peace, and not join with eitherside. Again
report stated, that the Six Nations would join the
English, against the American people ; and that the
Wyandots, and a part of the Shawanose, instigated by
the former, would do the same; but that the Dela-

J ware nation were not to be informed of their inten-
tions, until it should be too late for them (as peace-

| makers,*) to interfere, and prevent the scheme.
Nevertheless, the chief Netawatwes, together with
the chiefs White Eyes, Gelelemend, (alias Xillbuck,)

| Machingwi Puschiis, (alias the Big cat,) and others,
& did ‘every thing in their power to preserve peace


Z


- . among the nations, by sending embassies, and exhort-


‘ing them not to take up the hatchet, or to join either :
side ; to which, however, the Sandusky Wyandots ie;
insolently replied : “* that they advised their cousins ~


| (the Delawares) to keep good shoes in readiness for
_ to join the warriors.” This message being returned
tothem bythe Delaware council, with the admoni-


*See Lockiel’s History of the Mission, part I. chapter x. ; also, Hecke .
welder’s Historical Account of the Indian Nations, chapter i.


TS


bac $ T: fi oe. : , oe al = Paty = pl’


- a y
‘ Mane mH


=
a : 146 r MECKEWELDEN’S NARRATIVE.


. “2 Qe, 1, “ to sit down and reflect‘on the thisery: they had
s, ~ brought upon themselves, by taking an active part ©
in the late war between the English and the French ;”
3 they thought proper to send a message to the same
F purport, also to the chiefs of that nation, (the Wyan-
dots,) living in the vicinity of Detroit, advising that
ee one of these messengers, to be’sent with the message;
: should be selected from among their body. Having
accordingly arrived at the Huron village, below De-
' troit, they were told, that no message from them
Be (the Delaware council,) could belaid before them, ex-
is cept in the presence of the governor. Conscious as
_ to the powers coriferred on them, at the time they were,
k by the Five Nations, made and declared mediators
and peacemakers between the nations, they could not
f even have a doubt as to the legality of the message ;
: yet, scarcely had these deputies produced their peace
belts, when the governor laying hold of them, cut -
; them into pieces, and throwing these pieces at the
E feet of the deputies, commanded them to leave the '
bees place within half an hour, or abide the consequences; 4
' and captain White Eyes, who had been the principal
bearer of the message, was, after being first insulted,
told, “ that if he sat any value on his head, he must |
: begone instantly.”’*
I


Note: It not being the designof the writer of this narrative, hereto discuss
the propriety or impropriety of the conduct of the governor to these
messengers, he refers the reader to Heckewelder’s History of the rey
Nations, chapter xxi. headed “ Peage Messengers:”


i SE ae te Tt


*See Lockiel’s History, Part III. chapter vi:


"
* *


theyehiefs and council considered it in no other light,)


they. went fo Pittsburg to lay the case before their
agent, for the information of congress, who advised
them, together with all peaceably disposed Indians,
to come under their protection ; but, as sad experience
had taught them, by the murder of the Canestoga In-
dians in the very town of Lancaster; and the narrow


escape of the Christian Indians in the city of Philadel-


phia; from being murdered by the Paxton boys, no
chief would venture to make this proposal known to
his people. As to the safety of the missionaries, goy-


_ ernment.had advised them, through their agent, to


take refuge at Pittsburg; but they chose rather to


suffer whatever might befall them, than desert a people


committed to their care, and especially when they
were most in want of advice and consolation.

_. Although, by reports, all without the circle of the
peaceable Delawares, was bustle and confusion, on ac-
count of the different opinions which prevailed
amongst the chiefs ; yet no warrior had made his apr


pearance among their people. All the traders of


respectability had quitted the country, partly from
fear, or by the advice of government. On the 12th
of November, the Christian Indians were surprised
to see Matthew Elliot, a man known for many
years as a trader, now enter their town, with a num-
ber of horseloads of merchandize, a female Indian
companion, and a hired man, then on his way to the


af


ao bas dicenwiteneeiigeiarive.
| ae . pee ib *

a ‘Shewanese towns, on the Sciota. Nothing was more un-
k expected, than an attempt of the kind at this time;

and nothing could be more unpleasant and disagreea-

ble to the missionaries and Christian Indians, than

to be placed in the situation they now were, by Elliot’s

making a halt with them, as they might reasonably

suppose, that should any of the Sandusky warriors find

_ out that he was here, they might come, seize on his


ete 5 eis y ey


property, and perhaps murder him in the town; all
which was fréquently represented to him (Elliot)

Ke without effect. At length, tired of such remonstrances,

F he resolved to leave us on the next day, observe ~

ing, however, that, “in case our fears had been rea-.

lized, it would have been the duty of the Christian In-

. dians to have protected him.” He now moved on to
the old Wakelameki towns, a place which had long
been deserted by the Shawanese—from whence he
intended to proceed to the Sciota. The very next _
morning after he left the place, six Sandusky warriors


=


7,


were observed in the street, eagerly looking about
to discover the house the traders might be lodg-
ed at; stating that white’ people had come out from
Pittsburg, and must be somewhere in the neighbour-,
hood, which they had discovered by the tracks of
shodden horses, while crossing the path to go to
the Ohio. Being told by the inhabitants, that the
people they, sought for were not here, they, to con-
vince themselves of this, searched every house in
] the village ; when discovering, by the tracks of Elliott’s


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 149 — a


horses, the way they had gone, they followed them.
| It being evident, that as Elliot could. not effect his
escape—and probably, when. taken, both he and his
man might be put to death, the national assistants,
| from pure motives of humanity, dispatched two active
men, with a speech and string of wampum after them, |
praying that they might spare their lives. The speed re
the warriors had made in the pursuit, was such, that
| when the two Christian Indians came up with them,
both Elliot and his man, Michael Herbert, were al-
ready bound, and they dividing the spoil among them-
\ selves. The Brethren having delivered the message
intrusted to them, were in reply told by the warriors,
“that they ought not to interfere in their business, no
more. than, they (the warriors,) did with theirs. That
they followed the profession of war, when wars existed ;
whereas, they had adopted the religion of the white
people, and given themselves up to praying !—That
: they were sorry they had put themselves to so much
trouble, on account of a man who did not belong to
them ; yet, since they appeared so much interested for
him, and. his safety, they could assure them, that
neither he nor his fellow prisoner should be hurt ; and


for the trouble they had put themselves to, on his ac-
count, they would satisfy them out of the goods they
had taken with him,” which however they declined
to recieve ; saying, ‘that they would not participate
in a robbery.”


So pie a if see RO
Pe wae
is a a ” a
t uy 150 MECEEETLOREA TARRAI


_ Col. George Morgan* pn ay New Jersey,
SRR i in the preceding year, had been appointed by
Congress, agent for the western Indians, having occa-
- sion to come to their country on business with the
chiefs and council, visited the three Christian Indian


poe
Ee settlements, and expressed himself both astonished
} and delighted, in observing such order, regularity and
Py industry, at these places; wishing that all the Indians
F - might be brought to follow their example. - Wil-
be liam Edwards, having come from Bethlehem as an
assistant to the mission, the writer of this narrative
Bag returned to Shonbrun, to attend to the schools at %
ee that place. cme icdyaig
; _ With the year 17 77, the troubles increased : a part
of the Shawanese resolved to join the English in |
the war, although their chief still advised them to
remain at peace. The murder committed by the
' whites at Canhawa, on theirso much beloved and
j respected chief, the Cornstal/k, while he was there on
lg important business, could not so easily be forgotten.


The Indians, in this instance, were at a loss to deter- |
mine on whom the blame wa to be laid; whether %
the perpetrators of the act, or on their superiors, f


not using their authority in preventing it. Their ac-
cusations against the white people of the place, were
4 the more severe, as they had known the friendly dis-
[ e


* To this gentleman, the Delawares had given the name of Tamanend:
the highest honour they could confer. See Heckewelder’s Account of
' Indian Natiens, chap, xl. p. 298.


s NARRATIVE, 131 Me


— a

position of their ch ief towards them, and the impor- o aa

tant errand he had been on at the time. ~~
- Accounts were also reéeived, at the seat of the Dela-


ware government, that the Sandusky and Lake Indians *.
Were preparing to go to war in the spring; and that i
they threatened to’ kill every white man residing 89


among the Indians, who should not side with their
father, the English ; and next, every Indian that would
not join inthe war; which threats were well under-
stood to be levelled against the missionaries and the
Christian Indians, as also against all those who were
"inclined to’ peace. Yet, during all these commotions,
the chiefs of the Delawares remained firm; atid re-
solved not to interfere in the war between Ponphcree
and the colonies.
’ The line of conduct the Christian Indians cl their
missiofiaries were to follow, during the contest, was
plainly marked out to them, viz: They were subject-
éd to'the resolutions and decrees of those who had
invited them to come into their country, with the
promise of protection from their side : these alone had


z.. over them ;—and these had formerly declar-
, that they would


sp the peace at all hazards.
Added to this, an impression had for many years


rested on the minds of the national assistants, that for


: he


Indian converts to join in wars, would infallibly bring
them back into heathenism;—That God having given
the commandment to his people, “Thou shalt not
kill ;” it must be a great sin for such, unto whom this


the argument and- inpiieintes on ey minds of | wag
national assistants and Christian Indians ; and they


; _.were determined to put out of their fellowships, any,
| and every person, who should join in wars, and not
lee vi ea such to make a home with them. HiT Pag

be _ The Delaware chiefs, having at this time in their
oz possession, documents and vouchers, both in writing


and strings and belts of wampum, of all transactions
that had passed between their ancestors and the gov-
ernment. of Pennsylvania, from the time William


fp

I | Penn first arrived in the country, down to the present we.
BE. time ; had hitherto been in the habit of meeting, at

y a _ least once in every year, for the purpose of - re-


freshing their missionaries on the subject, by hear-
ing the contents ; as also, that of instructing one or
j more promising young men to learn by heart such
valuable documents, that they might not be lost to
future generations. In assembling for this purpose,
they chose to be by themselves in the woods, at a -
convenient spot, where no person. could interrupt =
‘them ; and when. any written documents were —
duced, they would req or the other of the
| _ Missionaries to attend, to read and interpret them—
b which service the missionaries always considered as .
t ‘their duty, and as an acknowledgement for their in+
dulgence in favouring the cause of the mission, Now .


when, with the times, a change had taken place in the
. . e
appointment of officers, with whom of course the
, chiefs would have intercourse—they not being ac-


gn to such officers or agents, with the figurative


gan. could not without. 2 as-
sistance understand the contents of their speeches ;
wherefore a.missionary was called upon, and requested
to explain, in writing, the meaning of these dark,
yet withal not unmeaning expressions, for to send


speech. The enemies of peace being informed of
‘those services, believed they had cause to charge the
‘tmissionaries as being accessary in keeping the Dela-
ware nation from joining in the war against the Ame-


rican people, or, in other words, "that they were act-


ing contrary to the British interest ; although it was
doing no more than what any person in their situa-
tion would consider his duty to do, nay it was an act
which they could not avoid performing. . ihn
. The principal Delaware chief, Netawatwees, who
had died at Pittsburg about the close of the last year,


» having on his death-bed declared, as his last will, that —


the gospel should be preached by the Brethren to his
nation, captain White Eyes, on.the occasion, took a
e newly published school books,


‘ iled by Zeisberger, in his hands, and addressing
himself in a very affec: Hin g manner to the council, con-
cluded in these words ; “* You have heard the last will
and testament of our beloved, departed chief: We
will pray to the Lord to have mercy on us, and reveal
his will, as herein written, to all now living, and to
our children’s children, yet unborn!”

U


“a Le


=? ]
Fk ays
; cg ‘


@ + eae


eae.”


oe


i


/


MO AR i a all Aldine icra:
; 5 es :


on a to commit sett and piste on the, —


frontier settlers, the Delaware council became-alarm- —
ed,'and concerned for the safety of the missiona-:


ries at Gnadenhutten and Shonbrun ; though they, at.
i the time, were not under any apprehension of danger.
‘The Wyandots being questioned by the Delaware


chiefs, what cause they had for taking up arms against
their American brethren, pleaded, in excuse, that they
had been compelled. thereto by their father, the Brit* -
ish; and that the Iroquois, (Six Nations,) together
with all the northern and western nations, had united - ¥
to fight the American people ; adding, that as all


these had joined for this purpose, they thought it


time for them (the Delawares) also to join «their
party, or at least to declare what side they favoured.
They promptly declared that they -would remain
neutral, and keep the peace. It struck them so, that
on their return they told the governor of Detroit, that ©
if he continued in this way, urging the Indians to: goto’
war, while he himself remained quiet at home, they
would throw down the war belt at his feet, whickil

had given them, and woul id. renew their friet


_ ship with the Delawares, and also enter into’ a cove- AS


nant with the Americans ; who had, from the begin=

ning, advised the nations to sit still, and take no: part. q

in the war,—and who, at this: time, still held forth

the same language to them.
The governor and chiefs of the Hurons, not; aha: ;


‘hend Bist covdnduce the Delaware 5
nation to be so firm in’ maintaining *peace, it was _
ascribed. to the influence the missionaries had in the 4


council of the nations: and it soon after appeared =
that schemes were laid-for the’ purpose of seizing 1
the missionaries, and bringing them to Detroit.

© The northern warriors being continually on the —
watch, for such white people who might venture out to 3


the Delaware towns, it was dangerous for any one to
attempt such a thing. Yet it so happened, that Mr. :
James O‘Harra,* who had come out. to Shonbrun on
business, was found out by some of these warriors,
eleven of whom were coming on to seize him; but
halting on their way, at an Indian eabin, nine miles dis-
tant, where the man and his sons, were equally friends
to the. Americans, the old man discovering their in-
_tentions,’ privately sent off in the night -one~ of
his'sons to. the writer of this narrative, with the fol-
lowing verbal message: My friend ! see that our white
friend, now at your village, be taken from thence
this night, and conducted to a place of safety, in the
ttlement of the white people ; and do not neglect
Bic. up to my message." Hear my son farther on
the: subject !”—The son giving the best assurance,
that at break of day the party would be here, for
the purpose of taking, and perhaps murdering Mr.
O‘Harra, he» was informed of it, and forthwith


o>
z


fas >


ats


* Since, General O‘Harra, now living at Pittsburg,


ae rrr <* Dale as
7 . <4 : ¥ ~~
vv .
. ‘ sd t
.


DY


¥

r %,
> 6
af


through the woods: to the Ohio r river, atid ide i


; across by. white people, living on the opposite shore.


The young man, who had, agreeable to his father’s:
instructions, immediately returned home, after deliv-
ering the message to, me, seeing them sometime. after
 Sinidaighe preparing to set off, for the purpose of exe-
cuting their design, questioned them as to their in-
tentions and finding that the supposition had been cor-

_ rect, he replied, ‘* your errand-will fail, for the white
man you are afteryis no more there, but has returned to.
Pittsburg. On being assured of this, they bent. ‘hed
eourse another way.

Within a fortnight after the above had taken mal
reports in succession were brought to Shonbrun, that
large parties were on their way to murder the missiona-_
ries; and the fear of many ofthe Christian Indiansatthis _
place was so great, that they could not content them- —
selves, unless they had placed them out of all danger.)
The missionaries, although unwilling to go, and not —
believing the danger so great as represented, yet
had to. submit, and were in the night taken. to
Gnadenhutten, from whence however the writer
of this returned again in the morning, and there find-
ing the Monsey chief, Newalike,; from Sandusky, pres-
sing those of his tribe to leave: the place, and. save
themselves, since ‘ all living here would soon be

* This Anthony, is the same man noticed in Heckewelder’s Account


ofthe Indian Nations, chapter xx. bearing then the name of Luke .
Holland:


Teas
ey ne ts;’hethought =

intaies: ae to inform ies scuilte missionary, Zeis- Pras ag
berger, at Lichtenaun, thirty: miles distant, ofthe mis- *
chief that was intended.by the Monsey chief, and “> a
i others from Sehdiskey.. The missionary, without de-. ‘
| layhaving come jon, and finding matters worse than
he had expected, made known in a public moaiignt |
that the place would. be) evacuated; inviting, at the
i same ‘time, all suchas had a desire to cleave to the
| Lord, and rely on his help, to get ready to. follow their
|
f


teachers : a last discourse was delivered, and conclud-

| ed bya fervent prayer. Next the chapel was pulled

| down, that it might not be made use of for heathenish

ei and the congregation left the place the
same day.

_ Shonbrun had been the snikcie and pecihiiniiad

town the Christian. Indians had hitherto built ;

" containing upwards of sixty dwelling houses, most of

_ twhich were of squared timbers. The street, fromeast

to west,» was long, and of aproper width ; from the % j

centre, where the chapel stood, another street run

off to the north. The inhabitants had, for the great-

est part, become husbandmen. ‘They had large fields

under good rail fences, well pailed gardens, and fine

. feuiéreess besides herds of cattle, horses and hogs.

‘The troubles rapidly increasing, and the nation

which had invited the Brethren (their teachers) into

the country being now much concerned for their safety,

lest they should be molested, and the blame laid upon


them, thought proper to Le Tamenend,
(col. George Morgan,) at » Pittsburg, on the: subject,


and take his advice, which was: * That they should


keep and protect these teachers from being molested,


they being sent by God to them.” They therefore
once more made known to the nations, that they in- ©

~ tended to preserve their neutrality : having received
the word.of God, and taken their white teachers un- _
der their protection. This message being sent in
April, 1777, to the Wyandots at Sandusky, by depu- —
ties selected from. among the chiefs. themselyes,
accompanied by two Indian brethren, from Lichtenau,


and having been well received, was also forwarded to
the governor at Detroit, for his approbation; when,
in June following, the answer returned, was \in:the
following words : “That they (the .Delawares), should


consider the missionaries as an invaluable treasure,


on account of the good they done among the Indians


—being the promoters of both their temporal es.


ritual welfare ; they therefore should deem themselves
fortunate in protecting these missionaries, and by,zi0,


means part with them!” vee oe
In the summer, the American people renewed their
attempts to incline the nations to peace, by -holding —


conferences with them; they had also appointed a
treaty to be held at Goschoshking, where. the sur-
rounding nations were to assemble ; but the Wyan-
dots, under the influence of the British, used their
endeavours to defeat their object, and a great body, of


: = os
them set out, at the ga, oie purest of mur 7 ;


dering the people on the frontiers.
Towards. the end of July, a treaty was siecle to


be held at Pittsburg, with the Senecas ; but this treaty -


was also frustrated, on account of a party of Americans


having fired on a body of Senecas, who were coming _
onto the treaty, and who thereby became enraged at


‘the white people, considering them as: traitors, 04

threatening them with revenge. — aS
Shortly -after this, an embassy of twenty Wyandots

arrived at Goschoshking, offering the war belt to the


. Delawares, three times successively, and demanding.


of them that they should join in the war against the
American people, all other nations having united to
fight them; but the Delawares stood firm, refused
to accept the belt, and resolved to be at peace, both
with the Americans and the English ; and, in answer,
sent a message to the half king of the Wyandots, to


d him,.“ that at the treaty of peace concluded at


the close of the last war, they had come to an agree-
ment, and faithfully promised not to make warany more
Upon 1 the white people, as long as the sun should
shine, and the rivers flow with water—That they,
the Delawares, had engaged to hold the chain of
friendship with oth their hands, and therefore had no
spare hand to take hold of a war belt.” As the Wy-
andot ambassadors returned home much dissatisfied
with this answer, it appeared very probable that the
nations might soon become outrageous, and commit


- . acts of hostel saithe elope nation generally ;
A. _ and the danger visibly increasing from day to, day, it
was considered advisable, while .it'was still practi¢a-
aby tee ~ ble, to remove those missionaries who had families,
‘ toa. place of safety. Accordingly the. missionaries
| a Schmick and Youngman, with their wives, were safely
jl a conducted to Pittsburg, from whence ee eh
a to Bethlehem. we
On the next day, initalbdieanien was rendbvaiiiaalan
hundred Wyandot warriors, headed by the half king
in person, were on their way to Lichtenau. ‘This in-
telligence was alarming to all; but as a means of ©
temporising with those savages on their arrival, it
was resolved to give them a kind reception, and feed
them well; which it was supposed might answer the
good purpose of saving the lives of the white. teachers
among them. .The party arrived, on the /8th\ day of
August, at Goshoshking, the seat of government, which
was two miles distant from Lichtenau, from which
ter place the Christian Indians took. provisions for
them, and addressing them in a very friendly speech,
we not omitting flattery, and making use of several strings
’ of wampum, the half king replied: ‘ that the words —
spoken to him by his cousins, had penetrated into
his heart, and that he would consult his war captains
on the subject ;” which being done, he delivered him-
self favourably in behalf of the Christian Indians and
their teachers; admonishing the former, “ to listen
to the latter, and obey them—to attend to their wor-


, would be done them.” : * a cS


to set of the moment he discovered ill intentions


_ Sionaries Zeisberger and Edwards; he shook hands


ships and fot inde adie with
cern them, and they néed not be afi that any haven


The Christian Indians, however, Hot ttusting tothe


fair speeches of this chief, (his intrigues being well


known to them,) had appointed a a runner, who was to” a
place himself at the door of the council hots, ready »


Spey


against the inhabitants of the place, when the whole “aK
congregation might embark in their canoes, which ae
were kept in readiness, to pass down the river
Muskingum. However, all ending well, the half king,
with his chief captains, and eighty-two of his war-
tiors, came to Lichtenau, and meeting with the mis-


with them, addressing them “ Father,” to which nt

they made a proper reply. The half king next sent “4
ssengers to Detroit, and to the chiefs of the Wyan- 0
s, hear that place, to inform them of the covenant —

made by him with the Christian Indians, and that he

and his warriors had acknowledged the white bre-

thren (the missionaries) to be their fathers ; and *

henceforth would consider them as such.

~ The two congregations, Lichtenau and Gnadenhut-


5


ten, about twenty-seven miles asunder, had now each


only one missionary left, and the prospect before them
was that of 4 succession of external troubles. Thesé
two Brethren had, however, made a covenant to re-
<i apace -


ie


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


main with their people, and peetecred suffering death,
rather than deserting their posts. ra :
From the time that the half king had declared. sb
Brethren as a useful people among his cousins, the
Delawares, and had assured them of his protection,


si he had kept a watchful eye over them; and although ©


himself and his nation were intent on fighting against
the American people, yet they avoided as much as.
possible coming near the settlements of the Christian
Indians, he frequently inquiring of them how his peo-
ple conducted themselves, when passing that way.
Providing food for so many warriors at a time,
was avery disagreeable business for the inhabi-
tants of Lichtenau, yet it could not be avoided, es-
pecially with the more northern Indians, who were
both noisy and mischievous, if not served with food.
Upon the whole, the quickest way to get rid of all war-
riors, is to give them a meals victuals, which is all they
want, and to refuse them this would be folly, as then
they would shoot cattle, and destroy the corn inthe
fields. >
The missionaries ot Christian Indians were not
without fears, that ill disposed persons on the Ameri-
can side might construe such acts, (unavoidable as
they were,) as furnishing the warriors with provision
for carrying on the war expeditions against them ; nor
were they mistaken in the supposition, as by some,
the Christian Indians had been branded with the name
of enemies to the American people, on that very ac-


agai ee. ee oe
a: ae. | ve
srcxeWanpin’s oeaeagiggm. : oar
—" |
count. The subjoined facts however will, itishoped, d
exonerate the Christian Medians of charges of this 3
kind. © , py ak


First. It is a settled point with Indian warriors, — “SA $a
that where begging or asking for provisions, is not oe
complied with, or refused to them, they may make e
free to take ; and where they do take, they destroy pu.
purposely, because the person who refuses toy give ee
them the provisions, appears in their eyes deqoid: of
hospitality,* and consequently devoid of feeling: an

» inhuman being. |
r » Secondly. No Indian warrior encumbers himself ” Ke
| with provisions, on going out against the enemy, or to
war: a few quarts of parched corn, finely pounded, ‘=
with a little sugar mixed therewith, will serve an In- y
dian for many days, and this is always prepared for
them at home, previous to their setting out ; and know-
img that wherever they are, they can get meat with
their guns, they take but little along with them. hea
Thirdly. Warriors are not always permitted to satis- =
fy their appetites, nor even to eat every kind of food.

_« They have:to regulate themselves by a prescription

given them by their captain, who has either received it

from an old veteran, or from a conjurer; even some-

times fasting is recommended ; and much (they say) de-
pends on their success in living up to the directions
| prescribed them.


y * See Heckewelder’s History: Sasi


“


oo. ees ee ee ee Seog ee
ee eo ge. Scam
: Be, ee. Sd =.
Na = > ig eee :
2 -. +


a ae  —_— ,
pe 164 — /HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE,
&

_

£


— “+ Fourthly, It is ab supposed by them, that when
they arrive in the ‘settlements of the white people,
_._ they will find provision, so as to satisfy their
* pi wants. vit :
*. . Now, what is the demand of the warrior on arriv~
ne _ ing at an Indian town on his way ? Nothing buta
; & meals victuals, if he should make a halt, which how-
Fae ever is seldom the case, and never, except he has
some particular business, or a speech to deliver to the
inhabitants of the place he has arrived at. A few
__ ears of Indian corn, a pumpkin, or a few squashes «
be given him, not only prevents his doing mischief, 9
+. as shooting down cattle and the like, but what is of
: ot greater consequence, that it gives you the liberty
_ of feeding their half starved prisoners, when on the
return ; nay more, your hospitality to them, is, in the
? eye of the warrior, of such consequence, that at the
supplication of the women, prisoners have not only
been protected against insults and blows, but have”
sometimes eyen been liberated, and again. restored
to their connexions. js hey?
In the autumn of this year (1777,) a report was
b circulated throughout the Indian country, that an
American general, hostile to all Indians, had taken
- _ the command at Pittsburg, and was already on his
march to Goshochking, On this report, Pipe’s party
' were on the alert ; he having declared that he would
F join the Wyandots in repelling them. Consternation.


; ‘ as


and fear had such an effeet on many, that they fled


Pa Se Pe Ses ae a
Ae 5 =r ne
got


‘i “ ; Pov De sy . ts se fry
F B) ba 2 ai F ‘
= on %, “29a ‘

: Re a


iemenetienie 165


__ aeross the river into the woods ; while others, though
disbelieving the report, had to.go with the rest, to avoid :
suspicion. Thus were the towns of Goshochking
and Lichtenau, evacuated for one night, wheninthe
morning theygereturned to their respective homes rei
again, on the report being found to have been false:
A similar report had nearly put them to flight a se- —
eond time, when fortunately an Indian messenger ar- *
rived with friendly speeches, both from the comman-

_ dant.and Indian agent, col. George Morgan, at Pitts-
burg, assuring the Delawares, that they had nothing
to fear from their side. * .

However, in the beginning of October, a party of
freebooters from. the Ohio settlements, in defiance —
of the commandant’siendeavours torestrainthem from xu Rat
it, crossed the Ohio, with intentions to destroy the '
peaceable Delaware settlements on the Muskingum;

being however timely discovered by a party of Wy-

“andots, headed by the half king, they were attacked = =,

Bay totally defeated.* \ *

_ This affair having taken place so shortly after —
peace messages had been received from Pittsburg, .
caused some consternation among many of the Dela-
wares ; and it was scarcely possible for the peaceable
chiefs to set the minds of their people at ease, and to
conyince them that there was noreal dangers, Indeed
those of Pipe’s party declared that they would hold


=
Ty


* See Lockiel, Part iii- chap, vii.


+ |e

3 4

. ¥ ¥
+


Sees: 2 tA. Saami oa ae _ ?


noe oS
166 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


themselves in readiness to meet any white people
who should be found coming out to morder’ their
women-and children. “ae
easy Zeisberger having the welfare of the nation, and
ed the safety of the Christian Indians, mucljat heart, now
__ senta serious remonstrance to the council of the Dela-

wares, positively declaring that the Christian Indians


ag would forsake the country, as soon as the nation
b should go to war; which declaration had such an effect,
that the chiefs from all places assembled to a general
F _ council, when on the 31st of October, the firm resolu-
| ” tion was taken, to preserve the peace and neutrality
'___ without exception, and at all hazards.


Notwithstanding the external troubles which. the
Christian Indians endured thrgifghout this year, in-
ternally they were in the full enjoyment of the bles-


ad _ sings and comforts that so abundantly flow to those :
who fear the Lord, and walk in his ways. The :
daily meetings were kept in their usual order, being
= - attended more or less by the neighbouring Delawares, _ ;
R of whom some felt the power of the gospel on their |
hearts, and were at their request admitted as members


of the congregation.

Early in the spring of 1778, the Wyandots and
Mingoes (Iroquois) began to commit hostilities against
the Amegican people, attacking, plundering, and mur-
dering them on their plantations ; and on’ returning,
would sometimes purposely pass with their prisoners
and scalps, through the peaceable Delaware Indian set-


=
a
“4


suai ao ee
bs ioe ‘ t%.. iY


a NARRATIVE. “167,
4


| tlement, in order to irritate or disturb the inhabitants,
| or if possible to draw the enemy, while in. pursuit,
on them, taking such to be the aggressors.—Yeton |
all occasions where they made a halt with their prison- ‘ee Si
ers, the. women of the village would take provision hs
tothe prisoners, and stand. by. them until they had
satisfied their hunger.

At one time, in this spring, a party of Shawanos
were discovered resting with their prisoners (an old
man and two youths,) at a spring about two miles dis-
tant from Lichtenau. The women of the town imme-
diately,collected provision, went and fed the poor half 4
starved creatures, and_ being particularly moved with
compassion for the old man, they made.an attempt to —— a
ransom him, but in this instance did not succeed, being ;
told that his destination had already been fixed,on.
However Providence had decreed otherwise, for after
some time, when they were on Sciota, deliberating on
the time and manner of putting him to death, a prisoner
girl, who had over heard them, took a bridle to him bid-
ding him to hasten toa certain spotin the woods, where
he. would meet with horses,.one of which he should
mount.and ride off. The man did so, and although
discovered and pursued, he escaped, and was acci-
dently found by two boys in the woods, eight miles
from Lichtenau, ten days after he had first started.
The boys who. found him,.reported the man as no
longer able to walk, and his horse quite worn down.
Of course this man was brought in by. the hospitable


oe 168 HECKEWELDENS NARRATIVE.
_.* and'sympathising Christian Indians, well taken cate
ii ing of, and after having gained sufficient strength, taken
fs os to Pittsburg. On his being brought to the mié- |
* a ie -sionaries’ house, he fell on his knees, exclaiming:
we " a _ “Merciful God ! be praised that thou hast brought me,
Pes ae a wretched creature, to a Christian people! If it be
thy will that I shall die in this place, oe it so, Lam
: happy and contented !” ;
C4 3 - While this poor man was on his fight, and quite
FF
b-


ue


lost in the woods, he accidentally had fell in’ with
. a Delaware Indian, who if hunting, having ‘caught
a large fish, which he had just roasted fore him-
self, he immediately gave it to this half starved white
man to eat, and’ besides, took him some miles distance
- through the woods, to put-him on’ the’ path, i man
being lost. tba
The chiefs and council of erulanbonieii as wep
tectors of the Christian Indians, wotld frequently
corisult the missionaries on matters necessary for the
preservation of peace. They had repeatedly declar-
ed that nothing should ‘withdraw their confidence
from: their American brethren ; who, together with
them, had sprung up from the same soil.—That their
brethren had told them, at the treaty at Pittsburg, not
to join either side with a hostile intention—not to go
to war against the English; no more than against -
them, and which language their American brethren
still held forth to then, while on the other hand the
b English, who called themsleves their fathers, were con- -


HECKEWELDER’S citi


tinually teazing them to takeupithe hatchet, and-kill 533
the Americans, their brethren. ”»—They (the chiefs
‘and council) called now again on the Christian Indi- _
ans, to. go hand in hand with them towards peace
measures, and in saving lives, ‘not in destroying them ; ae Ste
adding, “ you Christians are in possession of the great eT “a


book ; (the bible) do therefore in all matters as that "3
book tells you!” ase ;
.» Until of late, the missionaries seedilt not give me ¥
to-any. reports, (and many there were from time to ‘a


time,) which. stated, “ that the governor of. Detroit ~
was determined to compel all the Indians, be they ee
who they might, the Christian Indians no excepted,
to:turn out and fight the American people, (or rebels, _
ashe termed them,) and that he would even punish « ~
all such as did not obey his orders ;” but they were
‘sorry to see by a letter, which bore the signature of

the governor, that not only what they had heard on the

‘subject. proved. to be true, but that, if the threats
contained in his letter were carried into execution, all
missions amongst the Indians would at once be at
anend. . This letter was of sucha nature, that the
missionary Zeisberger, after perusal, thought prope
to commit it at once to the flames, and fervently to
pray to Almighty God, to avert such disasters from
his people., One hope however remained, which


‘was, that the letter, though having the signature of


the governor, eee reste be a forged one, and
St, Yee > baw bs. Yiaou


. ak bs ee =-— ba teatgee') el:


“170 WECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


By «written by one of the pean or subalterns in the In-
I dian country.» caro éepyrue. come
| Added to the above, an occurrence had tien asd }
_ which, of itself, was enough to break the hearts of the
‘missionaries, and especially that of the faithful and
pious servant of God, David Zeisberger. It was. the
unexpected arrival at Goschochking, of a number of
disaffected persons from Pittsburg, led on by Alexan- ~
ee der M‘Kee, Matthew Elliot, and Simon Girty, all
Re three, very suspicious and’ dangerous characters: the
first of whom had been an Indian agent of the British
* government, but permitted by the United States to'go
at large, ‘a parole.—The second was the same .
; *: person who, as noticed before, came into Lichte-
ie nau, in 1776, with a cargo of goods, and was taken pris-
oner at Waketameki, and subsequently brought ‘to
Detroit ; and had afterwards been heard. to -boast:of
the clandestine manner in which he had procured ‘his :
liberation from the British, though at the’same» time :
ee he had a British captain’s commission in his:pocket.
4 The third, Simon Girty, was a depraved wretch,
who formerly had been employed as an Indian interpre+
ter. These men, well known to the Indian nations, :
had, wherever they passed through Indian villages, 4
but particularly at Goshochking, propagated abomina-
ble falsehoods respecting the war, and the situation ate
the people were in beyond the mountains, “(in the
Atlantic States) ; adding : « That it was the determina-
tion of the American people, to kill and destroy the


a


- is : ¢ : : ‘ ;
_ ss HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 171.


whole Indian race, be they friends or foes, and pos-

_ sess themselves of their country; and that, at this
time; while they were embodying themselves for _
the purpose, they were preparing fine sounding — 4
‘speeches to deceive them, that they might with the Fea :
‘more. safety fall upon.and. murderthem. Thatnow
‘was; the time, and the only time, for all nations to rise,

and: turn out to.a man against these intruders, and not. |

_ even suffer them to cross the Ohio, but fall upon them RE


; where they should find them ; which if not done


without delay, their country -would..be- lost to them
forever !?s.... ie.
The consternation aieeedl among the on sa 4s
on hearing these reports, was, as might be expected,
very great, although captain, White Eyes, and other —
chiefs, would not give credit to reports of this kind,
especially coming from such characters; yet, as. the
snation had. been roused to commence war immedi-
ately-against the people of the United States, and he
(White: Eyes) well knew that his conduct in this af- bs
fair-would be closely watched by his. rival, captain
Pipe; on the Walhanding, he. called a general council
of the nation, in which he proposed to delay com-
mitting hostilities against the American people
for ten days, during which time they might obtain
smore certain information as to .the truth of the
sassertions -of these men, either,.from . Tamenend
(col. -Morgan,). or col. Gibson, or some other friend
of theirs, who would give them notice. Pipe, Se


HECKEWELDE R’S. NARRATIVE. ae


.. considering this a proper.time for placing White
___ Eyes. in the’ back ground, construed this wise


“= and prudent advice of his, as though he was ‘in
. “the secret, and now proposed to his own council,
a ‘ ae «“ to declare every man an enemy to the’ nation, that
_. should throw an obstacle in the way, that might tend.
to prevent the taking up arms immediatley against the
| American people.” White Eyes, seeing the blow
- aimed against himself, once more assembled his men, —
_ © and told: them : “ That if they.meant in earnest to go
_ out, (as he observed some of them were. preparing
to do,) they should not go without him: He had
Beta * bp _taken peace measures, in order to save the nation from
i: - utter destruction. But if they believed that he was
i _in the wrong, and gave more credit to vagabond
Re “~ fugitives, whom he knew to be such, than to himself, -
who was best acquainted with the real state of things,—
if they had determined to follow their advice, and.
it: go. out against the Americans, he would go out with
= them ; but not like the bear hunter, who sets the dogs _
onthe animal to be beaten about with hisypaws, while _
he keeps at a safe distance*—no ! he would himself
lead them on, place himself in the front, and be the —
Jirst who should fall. They only had to determine‘on —
what they meant to do, for his own mind was fully
made up not to survive his nation ; and he would not —
spend the remainder of a miserable life, in bewailing


*Here the blow aimed by capt. Pipe, at capt. White Eyes, reverts
back on Pipe. :
&


the total ‘destruction ‘ & a rele a8 = deserved


the ten days were expired, and many added, that they
never would go to war against the American ae
unless they had him for their leader.

-It'so happened that the Brethren in Bethlehem, to-
wards the latter end of February, of this year, (1778,)
feeling an uncommon anxiety for the fate of the mis-
‘sionaries ‘and Christian’ Indians on Muskingum, they
not having received a letter, or obtained any ac-


to’the writer of this narrative, who in the last summer
had come to Bethlehem ona visit, to proceed to Pitts-
burg for the purpose ; and if, when there, it was be-


post 'at Lichtenau, to which he readily agreed : brother
John’ Shabosh, who had been ‘prevented from re-
turning to ‘his family at Gnadenhutten, since August
last, would’cheerfully accompany him.

_ Some circumstances at that time making it necessa-
ry for: us to be furnished with a passport from the
highest authority, we waited on the president of con-
gress, Henry «REN esq. and rete on the secretary
: bad

a To Heckeweiter ’s ie of Indian Nations chap. xv. p. 139—140,
the remarkable part of White Eye’s address, where he quotes a bear


chase, was accidentally omitted ; this narrative not being in his hands at
the time. .


®


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. la


a better fate."* mr Ds alee Afi
This spirited address of White er had the def
sired effect: all declared that they would wait until —


count’ of them for the last six months, they applied


lieved to be practicable and safe, even to repair to his


i


fehtcot


bo


174 -HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE,


of war, Horatio Gates, aa that time were’ at
Yorktown, Pennsylvania, both which gentlemen spoke


_ very highly of the laudable undertaking the Bre-


_ thren were engaged in, of propagating the gospel


z among the Indians, for the purpose of bringing them


to embrace Christianity and become a civilized peo-
ple ; assuring us, that nothing should be wanting on
their part in lending aid, whenever in their .pow-
er, towards such a good work, and in granting us: pro-
tection when required ; adding, “that it had been
the wish of congress, from the beginning of the war.
between Great Britain and the colonies, that the In-
dian nations could be brought to see it their interest
to remain neutral during the contest, and not join
either side, as the only way for them to escape’ being
censured and hurt by either, and finally become a
happy people, and united with the white Christians.”

Being supplied with a passport to Pittsburg, we
pursued our journey, meeting with no difficulties


by the way, to that place, except the sight of so —


many deserted houses along the glades; on the doors
of which was written, either with chalk or» coal,
“good people, avoid this road, for the Indians are*out.
murdering us;” and again, as we drew: neater to


Pittsburg; the unfavourable account of the e


of M’Kee, Elliot, Girty, and others, from*the latter
place to the Indian country, for the purpose of in-


_ stigating the Indians to murder, as was generally ex-


» pected. ‘Indeed the gloomy countenances of all men,


gs
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 175


women and children, that we passed, singh fear—


nay, some families even — of een their farms F


and moving off. —


sie ienirene the consternation of the’ vena re
Pittsburg, and especially that of the commandant of
the place, col. Edward Hand, and col. John Gibson;
on whom all eyes were fixed with regard to future —


safety. Of those men who had eloped but a few days
since, the worst might reasonably be expected: their
disaffection to the United States—their disposition’ to
act hostilethe influence they would have over the
minds, at least of many of the poor Indians, and the
means they would have at command for the purpose


ofvenforcing: their evil designs, might “be ealeulated”


on with certainty. In vain had the commandant
sought -for a trusty runner, to carry’ out pacific
speeches to the peaceable Delawares: the risk of
going out at a time when it was known that the
war parties were out, and probably every path beset
by them, being thought too great. Even'the above


named gentlemen, with many others of the place,


however anxious they were that something might be


_ done to. prevent the Delawares from being deceived,


would» not ;venture to advise us to go at ‘this time ;
declaring» that if we should go, and — it must


_ be considered a miracle.


_ However, the matter appearing to us of the great-
est importance, we had given it a due consideration


of


during the night; the result of which was, that in our»


Pie Rie ie Ao ee 5. lea =


Wa i a  ) ee
vy & s* ra. ie. 4 =


, = &
| HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE


Hes, , view it appeared clear, that the preservation of the
_ Delaware nation, and the existence of our misison; —
depended on the nation being at peace, and, that
_a contrary course would tend to the. total ruin of
me wre a whole mission ;—that were we at this time to
neglect, or withdraw ourselves from performing.a
) service, nay a duty, in exposing the vile intentions
& ofa depraved set of beings, whose. evil designs


_ +


F were but too well known, we must become accounta-
3 ble to our God. Therefore, with entire reliance on
F the strong hand of Providence, we determined to go
,
,


=


at the hazard of our lives, or at least. make the
@eattempt.: > 2 ice r srevh vera re

Feo - “+. Accordingly in the morning we cael our resolu-
tion known to cols. Hand and. Gibson, whose best
wishes for our success, we were assured of ; and leaving
i our baggage behind, and turning a deaf ear. to -all en-
daa treaties of well meaning friends, who considered us
Pe as lost, if we went, we crossed the Alleghany: river,
andon the third day, at eleven o’clock at night, reach-
ial ed Gnadenhutten; after having at several times» nar-
; . rowly escaped falling in with war parties ; and indeed,
: ‘in one instance, while encamped on the Big Beaver, —
h near the mouth, where.a party of warriors.on that —
af _giight were murdering people on Rackoon creek, not
fe many miles distant from where we were, though at
ae: that time not known to us. We had travelled day
and night, only leaving our horses time to feed ; cross-

ed the Big Beaver, which overflowed its banks, on @


way we swam with our horses, and never attempted Sis


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE, 7 "aa
fle” had made’ of poles, other litgelctedis of the =


to kindle a fire; apprehensive of bei deren
the'warriors smelling the smoke. -

-\ When arrived within a few miles of errr :
“we distinctly heard the beat of a drum, and on draw-
ing’near, the war song sung to’ the beat of the drum, |
allwhich being in the direction the town lay, we natu-

‘tally concluded that the Christian Indians: must have x
moved off, wherefore we proceeded with caution, lest |
-We'should’fall into the worrior’s hands. However,the


_ <peoplebeing yet there, informed us, that those war-


riors we had heard, were Wyandots from Sandusky,
who arrived that evening, and were encamped on the =
‘Bluff two miles below the town, on the opposite side =
‘ofthe river, and who probably would the next tiorn-
ig; travel’along the path we had just come. é
- “Fatigued as we were; after our journey, and’ without id
‘one hour of sound sleep, F was now reqested by


the’ inhabitants of the place, men and women, not to *
“delay any time, ‘but to’ proceed’ on to Goschochking me
(ear thirty miles’ distant,) where all was bustle and 4


_ \@onfusion, and many preparing to go off to fight


‘the American people, in» consequence of the advice —
"given them ‘by those deserters, before named, who on
‘ee them, that the American people were em-

themselves at this time, for the purpose
- of killing every Indian they should meet with, be
“asu¢h; friend’ or foe; and further we were told, that
Z


= eg.
178 "HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


captain White Eyes had been threatened to be killed _ i:
if he persisted in vindicating the character of the |
erican people; many believing the stories. told
by M’Kee and his associates, and had in conse-

leh dllce already shaved their heads, ready to lay the
 plume* on, and turn out to war, as soon as the ten a
days which White Eyes bad desired them: to. wait
should be expired, and to-morrow. being .the ninth
iy day, and no message having yet arrived from their
ee friends at Pittsburg, they now were preparing to
a go—and further, that this place, Gnadenhutten, was
now breaking up for its inhabitants to join the congre-
» gation at Lichtenau, those deserters having assured
them, that they were not a.day safe, from an attack by
the. Americans, while they remained here... 5
Finding the matter so very pressing, and)even not.
admitting of a day’s delay, I consented, that after a
few hours rest and sleep, and furnished with a trusty
pus companion and fresh horse, I would proceed on, when
*. between three and four o’clock in the morning, the
F national assistant, John Martin, having called on me
. for the purpose, we set out, swimming. our, horses
across the Muskingum river, and taking a circuit
"through the woods in order to avoid the a o


<-
age pai
Be. Md plume distinguishes the warior, and is only laid on when he, is


going ,out to war, that tuft of hair on their heads, termed the
| ‘ being daubed over with tallow, the white plume from the head
; eagle, is stuck on, they say that this confers the courage of Portion
them, , Long feathers are only made use of as an ornament, ) oe


aL FF


Pe Ss Ee a ee
eee ae oe Be.

+ + ae

HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. ee


‘of the war party which was close to our path. . Ai a
ing by ten o’clock in the forenoon within sight of the =
‘town, a few yells were given by a person who had.
discovered us, intended to notify the nt
that a white man was coming, and which immediate: of 4
ly drew the whole body of Indians into the street; but — G
although I saluted them in passing them, not a single e
person returned the compliment, which, as my con-
“ductor observed, was no good omen. Even captain nay
:


White Eyes, and the other chiefs, who always had
‘befriended me, now stepped back when I reached out
my hand to them, which strange conduct however
did not dismay me, as I observed among the crowd
some men well known to me as spies of captain Pipe’s 7 io ee
‘watching the actions of these peace chiefs, where-
fore I was satisfied that the act of refusing me the =
hand, had been done from policy, and not fromany
ill will towards my person. Indeed in looking around, %
a thought I could read joy in the countenances of
many of them, in seeing me among them at so oe
‘eritical'a juncture, when they, but a few days before


_ had been told by those deserters, that me short 4


of their total destruction, had been resolved u ;
the “long knives” (the Virginians, or new Hee -

_ people). Yet as no one would reach out his hand to ‘a
“me, I inquired into the cause, when captain White _
Eyes boldly stepping forward, replied ; “ that by what
had been told them by those men (M’Kee and party)

» they no longer had a single friend among the Ameri-


Peet. 180 _HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


= eet ue! ; if therefore this be so, they must consider _
/ every white man who came to them from that side, as
~~ nemy, who only came to them to decieve them, |

— t them off their guard for the purpose of giving


prise.” I replied, that the imputation was unfounded,
i and that, were I not their friend, they never would

pas have seen me here. ‘Then, (continued. captain |
White Eyes) you will tell us the truth with regard to.


what I state to you!””—assuring him of thisjhe ima


he ; strong tone asked me: “are the American armies”
be. all cut to pieces by the English troops?.. Is general.


iif ashingtop killed? Is. there no. more.a congress, —


be = “and haye the English hung some of them, and taken _
the remainder to England to hang them there ?: Isthe
whole country beyond the mountains in the posses-

sion of the English ; and are the few thousand Ameri-_


uy cans who haye escaped them, now embodying them-
selves on this side of the mountains for the purpose
e of killing all the Indians.in this country, even our wo-


men and children? Now do not deceive. us,) but
speak the truth” (added he); ‘ is this. all true what T


afenly, that not one word of what he had just: now
» ‘told me was true, and holding out'to. him, as 1 had
done before, the friendly speeches sent by me. for.
them, » which he however as yet refused to. accept, I
thought by the countenances of most of the by stand-


ers, that I could perceive that. the moment, bid fair, 5


the enemy an. opportunity of taking them by sur- — |


‘to you?” I declared before. the whole as:


HECKEWELDE] p ae


_ for their. listening at sacle to the continigbahdgy
" speeches, and accidentally catching the eye of the
drummer, lL called to him to beat the drum
Assembly to meet for the purpose of. hearing w
their American. Brethren had to say to them! A fies: ae
generalsmile having taken place, White Eyes thought 6. ee
the fayourable moment arrived to put the question, |
and having addressed the assembly in these words:


“shall we my friends. and relatives listen once more Ba.
_ to those who call us their brethren ?” which question ‘
being loudly and as with one voice answered in the ‘J


affirmative, the drum was beat; and the whole body
quickly repairing to the spacious council house; the . __
‘speeches, all of which were of the most pacificnature — os a Ms
were) read ‘and interpreted to them, when captain
White Eyes rose, and in an elaborate address to the he
assembly, took. particular notice of the good disposi-
tion of the American people towards the Indians, ob-
serving, that they had never as yet, called on them to
fight the English, knowing that wars were destructive
7 to nations, ‘that those had from the beginning of the
if war, to the present time always advised them (th _ 4
fetipva) ieremain quiet, and not take up the hate
against either side. A newspaper, containing er
- capitulation of general Burgoyne’s army, being
enclosed in the packet, Captain White Eyes once ~
‘more rose up, and holding this paper unfolde: 1 with i
both. his hands, so that all could have a view of it, said
_ see my friends and relatives, this document contain-


‘162 . HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


Me


eth great events, not the song of a bird, but the,


Pca "then stepping up’ to me, he gave -me his
dj saying: ‘you are welcome with us Brother ;”
en every one present, followed his example ; after

which I proceeded with my conductor John Martin to '

Lichtenau, where, to the inexpressible joy of the vene-

rable missionary Zeisberger, and his congregation, we

related what had taken place, while they ‘on the
other hand assured us, that nothing could ‘have’ at
that time come more seasonable to save the nation,
and with it the mission, from utter peperee
than our arrival. ey lle

Captain White Eyes, although now emia


all anxiety respecting his nation, could not overlook


the imposition practised upon them by M‘Kee and his
associates. He therefore; on the next day, dispatched
runners to the Shawanese towns on the Sciota, where
these imposters were gone, with the following mes-
sage: viz. “ Grand children! ye Shawanese! some days


ago'a flock of birds, that had come on from the east,


lit at Goschochking, imposing a song of their’s upon


~us, which song had nigh proved our ruin !—Should


these birds, which on leaving us, took their flight to-


“) wards Sciota, endeavour to impose a ‘song on you


: -.. do not listen to them, for they lie!”


The mortification, however, which captain bie ese
in being again so sadly disappointed, was such as
be expected from so ambitiousa man. His ‘piel,
which during this critical time, he had kept: at Goschs,


: ochking for the purpose of, watching every’ act of


“Deen verified.
also


Se ed


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. | 183 widest 4


the .peaceable chiefs, had brought him the doleful : “s .
news, that all that White Eyes had presiinsd, sti Se


. The inhabitants of Gonieabiias Saning now
ialaida sie; congregation at Lichtenau, as that.
of, Shonbrun had done the preceding year, and — .
many, of the young. people of the Monsey tribe, 3
whom the Monsey chief had last spring persuaded to
go off with him to a place of safety, having also since %
returned, the town increased to a considerable size, 1a
and the chapel was necessarily enlarged. And as *
one tribe. of the Shawanos on Sciota, continued to be. “its “
averse to the war, these, at the invitation of the chiefs — ae
of Goshochking also came on and settled near them ;
from whence their chief, an amiable .young man,
frequently visited the missionaries at Lichtenau.

_ How happy would those peaceable disposed Indians ; .
have been, (which together amounted to some hun-
dreds . of souls, exclusive of the Christian Indians)
had they been let alone, and not continually harras-
sedand troubled by. others to join in murdering — ;


us
>


their fellow creatures. Even many of the warriors saw


and acknowledged the advantages those Indians had

over them, by not engaging in the war, but living by
hunting and tilling the ground, which gave them
plenty of allthey stood in need of, besides enjoying
the caresses of their children and friends. It was
Mot an uncommon thing to hear warriors pass severe


184 KEckEWELDER’s runhative,


S censures on their ayn and place ebay,
count the many valuable lives lost vitor ins
re 5, phen bag Swink Japt 8 em
: During the whole summer of 1778, 0 one ‘repélt suc-
_ egeded the other of the determination of the governor |
; of Detroit, to remove the missionaries from among the


ee Indians by one way or another; these having been


represented to him as the great obstacle in the way
of uniting all nations against the American people.
Unwilling, as the missionaries were, to give credit
to reports of such a nature, and especially when it was
added, that he had declared if he could’ not have
them brought to him alive, he would have their
scalps,—yet the chiefs of the nation, | considering
themselves responsible for the safety of the missiona-
ries since they had invited them to come into” their
country for the purpose of instructing them in'@hris-
tianity, now- most strenuously enjoined the duty of
protecting them, on the Christian Indians ; who ac-
cordingly most faithfully guarded’ them, both by’ day
and by night, especially when suspicious” characters
were discovered lurking in the neighbourhood. a
“That the governor, who in the preceding year had
advised the Delaware’ nation “ to consider the mis-
sionaries as an invaluable treasure on account 'of the’ >
good they had done among them, being'the promoters
both of their temporal and spiritual welfare, 8c. §
have changed his opinion respecting’ them was not
surprising. Atthat time Elliot could’ scarcely have!


HECKEWELDER ss N. ARRATIVE.


been known to the governor, he being, then a prisoner 4


means to insinuate himself, so that he led the gov
or to believe (as the tenor of his letter plainly show id)
_ that the missionaries among the Delawares, had been: P


- for the purpose of preventing the Indian’ nations from
joining the British against their “revolted subjects.” —
It also appears, from the subsequent acts of this man
(Elliot), that the breaking up of the Chirstian Indian
‘settlements on the Muskingum, had been contempla-
ted, and that M‘Kee, Girty and others, were only
wanted as associates, to stir up the Indian tribes aud


teachers. »

' When small war parties passed by, sales phe
caused more disturbance than, large bodies. The
former being insolent, and bent on mischief, if not
immediately served witha dish of victuals, would
cut down corn as they passed the fields, and shoot
hogs by the way. Large bodies, on the other hand,
would conduct themselves ina becoming manner, and —
keep good order, never making a halt in a village,
but would stop at some distance, sending one of their
number in to inform the inhabitants, that such a num-
ber of their friends, going to war (or returning, as the
case was,) had stopped at such aplace to refresh them-
selves, hoping that, perhaps these might find it conve-
‘nient to spare them a meals victuals ;—adding, that
2A


of the Indians, but being now liberated, he sec #


placed in the Indian country by the American congress, aa” ‘ a ae


° * os ‘ «.. 2, eae
nations, against the Christian Indians, and their ‘


ee


J


at


186 — HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.
*%


they need not be afraid ; that even a chicken of their’s


should not be hurt, &c.—Such a body (for instance,)


of ninety six in number, all chosen warriors, from the


3 Wyandot towns in the vicinity of Detroit, and headed


by the greatest war chief of the nation, being on their :


“way to makea stroke on the American people, on


the south side of the, Ohio river, having made a halt
within a quarter of a mile of Lichtenau, he senttone of
his captains into the village with the following mes-
sage :
“ Cousin! I am onmy way to war, with a great
body of men, but you need not be uneasy, as you


have nothing to fear from us. My motive for coming


this way is to shake hands, both with you and your


teachers, and to say something to you; for this pur-
pose we have made a halt some distance from your
village, while we wish to learn if it will be agreeable
to you, for some of us to go into your village for the
purpose above stated—and if you have a meals vic-
tuals to spare, my men will be thankful for it.”
Glickhican, (by baptism named Isaac—the same
person of whom frequent mention is made in this
narrative) being an old and _ particular friend of this
great war captain ; immediately ordered victuals to be
prepared and taken to the camp ; while he himself
went out to conduct the veteran chief into the town.
He soon returned with him and fifteen of his captains,
whom, according to their desire, he brought to-the
missionaries’ dwelling, The scene, of the advance”


. ,
~


z “°


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 187


of. these heroes, was indeed awful, but not dreadful,
as “might be sup posed,—they 1 moved on with a grave | ie | =
and regular pace, as though they were going toen- —s
ter a chapel ; all following the example of their chief,
they shook hands with each of the missionaries while _
pronouncing the words, “ Father! I thank the great ~ Kd i
spirit that he has preserved our lives fora happy ~ i
meetifig on this day !’—Being next taken by the na- _
tional assistants to the schoolhouse, where they were
served with victuals, the head chief addressed himself
to the following effect : x
“* Cousin ! although until now, I havenevercome
to see you, I am no stranger to you. I knew that ~ :
you had invited teachers to come among you, for the
purpose of instructing you in good — of all which
T highly approve.

“ Cousin ! Llove your teachers, the same as you ;
do: Itis happy for us, that such good men as your
teachers and our teachers* have come among us, to
instruct usin that which is good. Both your teachers
and our teachers possess the large book, in which the
will and commandments of God are written. We also
have a house in which we meet for prayers.”

« Cousin! you may perhaps be astonished at
hearing such words proceed from my lips, while” at
the same time you cannot but observe, that oi am


| * These Wyandots are instructed by a Roman Catholic priest, live
~ together, and have a chapel in their village.


188. HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE,


going on a warlike errand! but listen to me what I


_ say! Unpleasant as it is to me, to approach you in the


manner you see me; yet it is for your good and safe-


ty. You! Cousins, and your teachers, have many
¢ ‘ 4 i. e .
enemies. Frequent councils have been held, tending .

to your destruction.—I have often thought of you—


often wished that I could see you. I have this time
purposely taken my course this way to show my
warriors where you dwelt, that not only they may
not be led intoa mistake respecting you, but also warn
others from disturbing, or molesting my good cousins,
the Christian Indians, and their teachers.

** Cousin / continue’ always in the same. way you
now are, and you will fare well. Do not join in any
disputes, nor in wars, and the great spirit above will
protect you against all the plots of your adversaries.”

The war chief having finished his address, Isaac
Glickhican rose, and in behalf of the Christian In-
dians, returned the following answer : ;

** Uncle! You are welcome with sine sdalll words


proceed not from the lips only, but from the heart 5


therefore they are precious.


“ Uncle ! You applaud our living together for tie
purpose of being instructed in that which is good,


and in laying aside that which is bad—in not having


any thing to do with the disputes of others, nor with


wars.

“Uncle ! You love us, and since this is the case
the great spirit has directed your course this way
that you might see us, and we you.


eS


_ HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 189


_ “ Unele ! You say you have a teacher, the same as
we have, and that he likewise tells you what is good
and what is bad ; and who, like our teachers, is in pos-
session of the large book, wherein the commandments
of God are written.—I doubt, uncle, whether it be the ga
same book from which our teachers instruct us—In 3
the book which these have, God commands in one Hei
place  ‘ Thou shalt not kill.—And in another place,
he says : ‘ Love your enemies.’—nay, even ‘ pray for
them ’— Can it then be supposed, that God who
created man, should -not be offended, when these vs
destroy each other. Tae


ei


A
cS
pesto "
 ** Onele / at that time, when we were accomplices
together,* each of us strove to outdo the other, in | a
murdering human beings ; but then we knew no bet- sei
ter.—No body then told us that it was a sin to kill,
and that to kill man was forbidden by the creator of
men. -
“ Uncle ! yow and I were friends, when we both were ig
young, and have remained such to this day, when we
both are old. Let us do alike, and put away from us
what is bad, and forbidden by God. I mean the kill-
ing of God’s creatures!” (man). |
~The war chief having returnedto his camp for _
nearly an hour, now again returned, having but a sin-
gle young man with him, and requesting an audiance ~
of a few of the national assistants, of which Isaac


* Alluding to the wars between the English and French.


ee ee ee =. oy
e %.
s
190 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


Glickhican was to be one, . she addressed himself to


fe . them thus: baie
Hs i “« My cousin,* Ihave given your words a due con-
iF ‘ ee _Sideration, and now will open my heart to yous
F - “ Cousin / You have-spoken the truth, in saying that
“Bs God, who created man, cannot be pleased when these


ae _kill one another. So the teacher who instructs me,


likewise says.
“« Cousin ! I myself amaverse to war—to the killing


ey


of mankind, and had declined receiving the hatchet
; hitherto, although my father, (as he calls himself)
i threatened me, that if I did not receive the hatchet of __


him, for to kill the American people who were his
enemies, he would withhold from me, every mecessa-
F ry article both in the clothing way, and for support-
fe" ing myself and family with meat and provision. He
said that he would cause me to suffer for my obstinacy.
“ Cousin ! Place yourself in my situation, living at
the very door} of my father’s house. When, however, I
found that my father would compel me to receive the
hatchet, when he told me to kill a// the ‘ long knives?
(Americans) I should meet with, I said to him:
‘ Father ! only men in arms, not women and children!
PA to which, however, he replied : ‘ all! all.!—kill all}!
* Cousin! Think not that I am now on my way to


~


* Speeches are always addressed in the singular number.


+ Meaning, so near to him, that Iam dependant on him, he observing
‘ all my acts.


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 191


do what my father bid me do, no indeed not! I will |


tell you how I will act. I will march my men within
halfa day’s journey of the Ohio river, and from thence


send a select party off to take one. prisoner, whiclame oe
_ prisoner shall be taken to my father, with the charge


that he be not hurt, and with this I will return him
his hatchet again, which he had forced upon me.

. “Cousin ! Not a life shall be lost by my party, and in
ten days you shall see me here again, if the great
spirit spares my life so long.

“Cousin! Were I to follow my own inclinations, I
should forthwith return home from hére, without even
going any further, but on your account I must pro-
ceed and do something, lest you be charged by my
father with having dissuaded me from doing that


which he bid me-to do, and he become enraged
against you. No! no! you shall not suffer on my ac-
count. I act for myself.


“Cousin / I place the words I have spoken unto you
deep under ground ;* and on my return shall say more
to you.”

After taking a farewell, this chief with his young
man returned to the camp, which was broke up, and


. they proceeded on their expedition without a shout,


or the least noise, and returning in ten days precisely,
with a prisoner, encamped for about an hour on the
former spot, where they all, at his request, with his


. * Unider ground ; the meaning is, to keep what he had said a profound
secret—not divulge it.


te
4 5


— :


if


®
M:


-_S


fos


‘


aera, ¥ ie % =——s . = hes =r
sere ee eae pes a 2 ‘ fad ie
x5 Sy es “ . ee


* &
~

ae
“192 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


‘prisoner, were fed ; meanwhile, the chief with his young


- man, visited the missionaries for a few moments, and


afterwards had a conversation with his old friend,


Isaac Glickhican, mentioning a time when he would be


here again to see him, but never any more would he ap-
proach the place with implements of warin his hands.

Captain White Eyes, who had hitherto been so in-
defatigable in preserving the nation at peace, had, soon
after the disturbance caused by M’Kee and party, re-
tired to Pittsburg for the purpose of being nearer to
the Indian agent, and take his advice as circumstances


might require, ‘that the nation might, if possible, be


prevented from being dragged into the war. This
chief had a strong desire that his nation might be-
come a civilized people. A retrospect of the change


that had already taken place in the Christian Indians, —


who employed themselves principally in agricultural
pursuits, and some even being mechanics, gave him
the best hopes of the practicability of the measure;
a lively correspondence therefore, had for a long time
‘been kept up between this Indian agent and the Dela-
ware chiefs and council on the subject, when nothing
appeared to him wanting, to carry the measure into
effect, but a peace; the war then being the obstacle
to seeing his nation happy ; he became the more anxi-
ous to preserve his nation quiet, until a general peace
should take place; he however did not live to see
that day, for while accompanying general M’Intosh’s


SS


t


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.
army to Tuscorawas, where a fort* was to be built x
- for the protection of the peaceable Indians, and fron-
tier settlers, he took the small pox and died. ee
- The death of this great and useful, man, was severe: A fe
ly lamented by, and a great loss to the nation ; and oe
although his ambitious and political opponent, captain
Pipe, with an air of prophecy, uttered: “that the
great spirit had probably put him out of the way, that
~ the nation. might be saved :” it was not so considered :
by the faithful part. His death was according toIn- =
_ dian custom, made known to all the surrounding na- re
tions, even at some hundred miles distance, who all 1% 4
,in due time condoled the nation on the loss. The a” a
person on whom, by lineal decent, the station of head oe


- chieft of the nation devolved, being yet young in
years, the surviving chiefs Gelelemend, (alias Killbuck)
Machingwe Pushis, (alias large Cat) and Tetepachksi,
officiated in his stead, the two former of which kept
up a lively correspondence with colonel Broadhead, ‘
the then commandant, and their.agent, col. George


Morgan, on measures tending to preserve the peace ; :
and notwithstanding captain Pipe’s intrigues to de- ie
‘cieve them, and his threats and persecutions to bring a
them over to his political creed, they withstood him a

‘with firmness. . fs ,


“ #* The fort was built, and called Fort Laurens. ®


+ This young chief, fell a victim under Williamson, at the time the
peaceable Indians, near Pittsburg, were attacked in their camp by his
party, (1781).
2B


Eh. cae ;
Pa? oe HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.
m ‘i


- "Fhe winter season, during Indian wars, being the
only quiet and agreeable time in their country, as
Beet the warriors, from a fear of being traced by heir


_.- enemies, when snow is on the ground, prefer remain-
ing at home; the Christian Indian coniilllgnaera en
joyed perfect rest, being in no manner incommodated-
by them, nor even seeing any of them. The meetings
therefore, could be attended without disturbance;
sid 4 or interruption, and the schools being put under
‘ proper regulations, added to the happiness of the
oe parents, and made it delightful to hear the, voices»of
So many classes of old and young, raised in praises to
“the Lord, when assembled for that purposes
It had, however, during the winter of 177 8—79, been
f a7 taken into consideration, whether this large: congre-
- gation could, with propriety, be advised to remain to-
gether at this place tor another year;-and, whether


ti te De Oe —_


f

; . it would be proper at this present time, to advise, or

i even suffer such, as wished to return to their former

f settlements, so to do: with regard to the first point, |
F it was evident, that the inhabitants were too much
'


crowded and confined, and possessing a large stock in —
horses, horned cattle and hogs, they could not find
sufficient pasture, without going to a great distance, —
in consequence of which, many were lost, and with
he regard to the other suggestion, it was observed, that F
P the warriors from Sandusky, having within the last
_ twelve months, made their principal war path, pass
through all the Delaware towns, commencing at Gok-


he a
%


a
_ horing (the habitation of Owls) and ending with Lich*


. . a am
; HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE, ag


tenau (the whole a distance of between thirty and | __
forty miles) it might be expected that at one time or _
an other, the Americans, being in pursuit of war-
riors, who had committed murders on the south side a 4
of the Ohio, might, by. following the traces of them
along the path, be led straightway into Lichtenau, and
fall upon the Christian Indians, believing them to _
have been the aggressors. Upon the whole, it was
believed best, not to detain any one who wished to _
return to his former place of abode ; moreover, it was ee
believed, that very few, if any warriors continued to
pass through these forsaken towns, especially that oe ae)
‘Gnadenhutten ; as every house, hut and stable, to- ae
gether with all the fencing and palings, were in the a
same situation as at the time the place was evacuated 4
last year. Finally, it was agreed, that the former in-
habitants of Gnadenhutten should return to that place, .
with as many of the former inhabitants of Shon-
brun, as might choose to return thither, to builda new
town on a convenient spot, the old one being entirely *
destroyed. :
_ Accordingly, in April, 1779, the missionary Zeisber-
ger set out with a number of families, for the last :
~


*


mentioned place; while the missionary Edwards, re-
turned with his congregation to Gnadenhutten, all
in good spirits, travelling by land and by water to
their fovourite spots, believing themselves already
relieved from many inconveniences and troubles, —
caused by the warriors. eo... :


e
7


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


OTe te to the lot of the writer of this narrative to -
remain at Lichtenau, with the remainder of the con~
grégation somewhat longer, and he concluded to re-
main as long as it might be advisable, without running
any serious risk. Thus, there were once more three
missionary establishments on the river Muskingum,
the nearest of which was about thirty, and the most
is. remote (Shonbrun), about forty miles from Lichtenau.
During the whole of the first two years, there was
not a single instance of warriors passing through Gna-.
: ‘denhutten or Shonbrun, or their being otherwise in-
r ~ commoded by that class of people. They lived as
peaceably and contentedly together, as if they were the
_ only people in the country ; building houses, clearing és
and improving their lands, and meeting’ daily for
divine service.—Yet, on one account, the inhabitants of
Gnadenhutten were sufferers, and became somewhat
alarmed. Namely: -the frontier people of Virginia,
living on the Ohio below Wheeling, had fora long
time, and indeed, ever since the Christian Indians
first settled at that place, been in the habit of stealing
the Indians’ horses from the licks,* within a few miles
of the place ; and now, on learning that the Christian
Indians were again returned to their settlement, they
renewed this practice. Yet this was borne by the
sufferers with patience, in hopes, that after a general


, x
* To these licks, (as they are called) which contain water of a ‘salt-
ish of brackish nature, both horses and horn cattle resort during the
summer months,


—_ oo = rt


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


peace should take place, these horses. might, be,
through the influence of their agent, or by the civil
authority, recovered, in which hopes however, they 3 a
Ng mistaken, as the sequel will shew. 4

- AtLichtenau, the inhabitants were, with the com-
mencement of the spring of 1779, again. incom-
moded, by the northern warriors, frequently pass-


ing and repassing near, and sometimes through their ‘
village.—Nay, they became more insolent and mis-
ehievous. Knowing that captain Pipe was opposed
to the Goschochking chiefs and their measures, they
considered him as of their party: and although
he had not publicly joined them, they believed
he would soon do so. They also knew, that to
offend these chiefs, and such as adhered to them
or their peace measures, was pleasing to him, for 4
which reason many would purposely pass this way,
who otherwise would not have done so. However, %
the Christian Indians kept strict order, and no war- *
‘rior durst make a stay in the town; and it was
amusing to hear them at times, while passing by
to war, sing’ their farewell song,* which being more
the humble addresses and supplications to the great
spirit, than that of a proud high toned language,
is not so disgusting as might be supposed.

As the tribes and nations connected and in league
with the Delaware nation, had already sent condoling


4 i


.*See Heckewelder’s Account of Indian Nations, chapter xxvi.
page 204.


a = ee
ae. HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


‘speeches tothese on the death of their late chief Ne-


tawatwees.* (“ Nettowhatways”’)+ In like manner the
Cherokee nation for one, had also by deputation come ay


on, for the purpose of. condoling the nation on the
death of their chief Coguehagechton, (alias captain
White Eyes.) The deputation, consisting of fourteen
men, of whom two-were principal chiefs, “were ac-


= companied from their country to Goschochking, by _
a as a nephew of the late captain White Eye’s, who, soon
after the commencementof the American revolution
> uss, _had been, by the Delaware chiefs, dispatched: thither
for the purpose of using his endeavours, in keeping -
that nation at peace.—When this deputation had ar- —
rived within three miles of Goschochking, and within
one nile of Lichtenau, they made a_ halt for the pur-
pose of having the customary ceremony performed
on them, which being done by one of the councellors, |
from the village, who by an address and with a string
of wampum, drew the thorns and briars out of their


* Who died in the year 1776. $Me a. |

¢ The writer of col. Bouquet’s expedition against the Ohio Indians,
in 1764. Printed in Philadelphia, and reprinted in London, in 1766, — .
was sadly mistaken, when he asserts, at page > “that the col. had
deposed Wettowhatways, the chief of the Turtle tribe,” and that he
had “caused that tribe to choose another chief in his stead” This
“deposed” chief, held his high station after being “ deposed,” as
before, until his death in the fall of the year 1776, during which.
period of time, the writer of this narrative knew him personally, and to
be the same person here spoken of, See also Lockiel’s 's History of
the mission, part I. page 132—137, and throughout the bios to page
117 in chapter Ii.


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


legs and feet, healed the sores and bruises they * fe .
had received by hitting against logs; wiped the _ x",
dust and sweat off of their bodies; and cleansed bg se
their eyes and ears, so that they might both see and Be sy ‘,
hear well ; and finally, they anointed* all their joints, a
‘that their limbs might again become supple. They
were then served with victuals brought from Lichte- +
nau, and they continued there the remained of that day.
On the next morning, two of the counceilors from
Goschochking, deputed for the purpose, informed
the missionary and national assistants at Lichtenau, —
that by order of their chiefs, they were to cohduct the —
Cherokee deputation into their village, from whence,


i they expected that we would join in the procession to aie
be Goschochking, and there attend the condoling cere- .
i monies: all which being agreed to, these soon brought 5
5 them on, one leading them in front, and the other wr4
y bringing up the rear. o a”
P _ Arriving within about two hundred yards of the a


town, and in sight of it (all marching Indian file) they
‘fired off their pieces, which compliment was instantly
teturned by the young men of the town, drawn up for
the purpose ; x raising a melancholy song, they
they continued. singing, until they had reached the é
long house, purposely, built for their reception ; yet - aa
not without first having lodged their arms against
some trees they had passed, at a small distance from
thetown. Being seated on benches, prepared for the


\


* All which ceremonies are performed figuratively.


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. :


silence prevailed for about half an hour and all pres-
ent cast their eyes on the ground ; at length one. of


of sorrow, and in a low voice, with his eyes cast up
to heaven, spoke to the following effect : viz.

if _ “Qne morning, after having arisen from my sleep,
and according to my custom, I stepped out at the door
ba os to see what weather we had, I observed at one place
a in the horizon a dark cloud projecting above the


_ appearance, found myself mistaken, since it neither
disappeared, nor moved from the spot, as other clouds
do. Seeing the same cloud successively every morn-
ing, and that always in the same place, I began to
Ww think what could be the cause of this singular phe-
; nomenon; at length it struck me, that as the cloud

was lying in the direction that my grandfather dwelt,


| something might be the matter with him, which caus- |


ed him grief. Anxious to satisfy myself, I resolved to
go to my: grandfather, and see if any thing was the


ed the cloud to
be.—I arrived at my grandfather’s, whom I found
quite disconsolate, hanging his head, and the tears
running down his cheeks !—Casting my eyes around
in the hopes of discovering the cause of his grief,
I observed yonder, a dwelling closed up, and from


course in the direction I had ob


a deputies on the opposite side) a dead.


these chiefs, named the Crow, rose, and with an air -


trees ; and looking steadfastly for its movement or dis-


, matter with him. I oe went, steering a -


magrewerpEn’s NARRATIVE. a0 2


in another direction, I discovered an elevated spot
of fresh eartht on which nothing was seen growing
and here I found the cause of my grandfather’s grief.
No wonder he is so grieved !—No wonder he is
weeping and sobing with his eyes cast towards the
ground !—Even I cannot help weeping with my


not proceed for grief !””
“minutes, and as though deeply afflicted; he again
“ Grandfather ! Lift up your head and hear what your


grandchildren have to say to you!—These having
discovered the cause of your grief, it shall. be done


away ! See grandfather! I level the ground on yonder
‘ spot of yellow earth} and put leaves and brush there-


onto make it invisible! —I also sow seeds on that
spot,.so that both grass and trees may grow thereon !”?
(here handing the string to the Delaware chiefs in
succession) and taking up another, he continued :
Grandfather ! the seed which I had sown has already
taken root,; nay, the grass has already covered the
ground and the trees are growing !” (handing this
string likewise to the Delaware chief, and taking up
a third string of wampum, he added: “ Now my


* Meaning no person occupying the house, +The Grave.


2C


which “no smoke* appgared to ascend !looking


Here, after having seated himself for about twenty


" grandfather; seeing in what a situation he is !—I can-—


1 ade
rose, and receiving from the principle chief who was ~
seated by his side, a large string of wampum, said; —


ie


qe


aa HECKEWELDER’S NAR ee

“grandfather ! ! the cause of your grief i. siccunbaiiy
let “me dry up your tears! I wipe them from your
eyes !—I place your body, which by the weight of
grief and a heavy heart is leaning to one side, in its
proper posture ! Your eyes shall be henceforth. clear,
and your ears open as formerly ! The work is now
finished !” Handing this string likewise to the Dela-
ware chief, he now stepped forward to where. the
chief and his councellors were seated, and haying |


first shaken hands with these, he next shook hands


with all present, the whole embassy following his


“2 example. This being done, and all again seated as


ag if


“before, the Delaware chief Gelelemend, (alias ny, 7
buck) replied :

“Grand children ! you did not come here in vain!
You have performed a good work, in which the great
spirit assisted you! Your bare eaa: makes yes
welcome with him !”

The meeting} then broke up for the day, wail as
they intended paying a visit to the commandantat
Pittsburg, they produced the certificates and passports —
they had been furnished with, (by officers stationed .
near them) to learn, whether these be sufficient
to recommend them, as being at peace with the United _


‘States ; all which being confirmed, their minds were —


at ease. Hi
On the day following, the chiefs of both nations


)


* The Indian speeches are deliveredin the singular number.
+ The whole ceremony, took up nearly three hours.


 -


_ entered apni relating totheir national conn


_ the example of the Christian Indians, who by their


governor of Detroit,-who a short time before had


‘together with his officers, taken prisoner by an Ameri-


‘HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 208 .


and finally made a covenant, not to join in the
but to maintain the peace, while others of the Che-
rokee party, together with the two women who had
accompanied them to this place, exchanged sundry
articles they flad manufactured in their country, such —
as neat and curiously made tobacco pipe bowls, small
baskets made of cane, &e. for articles of equal ques
made by their grandfather the Delawares.

- It was pleasing to see so much respect paid to the,
memory of the departed chief of the nation—Indeed,
all the surrounding nations appeared to have been—
sensible of his worth ; while living, he oftenencouraged —
his people to adopt the way of living by agriculture,
and finally become civilized. His ideas were, that
unless the Indians changed their mode of living they
would in time dwindle to nothing, and to encourage
them towards such a change, he told them to take


industry, had every thing they could wishfor, and
never suffered from want. i
News being brought to Goschochking, that the


gone with troops to Port Vincennes, and was there,
can army under general Clarke, and by him taken to


Virginia. The peaceable Indians, and the missiona- :
ries, entertained a hope that the threats, so repeatedly ;


_ circulated through the country, and attributed to this 7


sae heal


HECKEWELDER’S NARRAT me -


; = would forthwith be at an oad They how-
ever found themselves mistaken, as it now became
more evident, that much had been laid to the charge
of this gentleman, of which he probably had no
knowledge, but which had been the work of M‘Kee,
Elliot and Girty.. These three men, Whose hostility
to the United States appeared to be unbounded, were
continually plotting the destruction of the Christian
Indians’ settlements, as the only means of drawing
the Delaware nation, and with these, the Christian In-
dians, into the war. . The missionaries, in particular,
were as a thorn in their eyes, being not only consid-
erd as the cause, that, the Delaware nation would not
join in the war ; but they also mistrusted them of in-
forming the American government, of the part they
were acting in the Indian country. i

At the very time that the governor was a prisoner
of general Clarke, a plot was laid at Sandusky, to take
off the missioary Zeisberger ;—or to bring in his
scalp; and Simon Girty had engaged to lead the par-
ty on for the purpose. Fortunately, there lived at the
time at Upper Sandusky, a trader, by the name of

Alexander M‘Cormick, well known tothe missionaries

for many years past, asa friend and admirer of mis-
sions among the Indians, who on learning the inten-
tion of this party, found means to inform the writer of
this, who lived at Lichteuau, of the plot, and at which
place, as it had happened, this very missionary at the
time, had come on a visit from Shonbrun, which —


HECK WELDER’S NARRATIVE. 205


the spies ofthe ‘Hostile party discovering ; they, t a
ensure his capture, waylaid the path on which Zeis-
berger must return. Two spirited, Indian brethren
of whom Isaac Glickhican was one, were selected
to conduct the missionary home by way of Gnaden-
hutten; with directions, however, to strengthen
the guard at that place, should it be thought ne-
cessary ; they left Lichtenau, when having scarcely
_ proceeded nine miles on the journey, all ofa sudden
the hostile party, consisting of eight Mingoes (ofthe __
Six Nations) and Simon Girty, the person who was to ; a:
\. point out to them the object they were come for, ae om
appeared before them on the path. At this critical as
moment, and while Girty was uttering to the captain of
the gang the words! “ this is the very man we are me
come for; now act agreeable to the promise you have .
made !”? two young Delawares, on their return from a
hunt, accidentally, and very fortunately, struck from
out of the woods, exactly on the path where these
were standing, and concluding from the words spoken
by Girty, as also by the appearance of the party, that F
' something bad was intended against the missionary ; ;
they boldly stepped froward, with their arms in readi- Grice
ness, to defend him, at the risk of their own lives; Bi,
which the captain observing, and justly conclud©
ing that the two other Delawares who, accompanied
the missionary, would join these against them, were .
they to make the attempt ; he, by a signal prudently
given, declined laying hands on him. The two .


ee ay


Finer


~~ arrival at Goschochking, what had transpire
that although they were none of the believing (Chris-
tian) Indians, yet they felt themselves interested in
saving the life of such a good man as this teacher
was ; even at the risk of perishing themselves in ~


4


the conflict.
‘The political division among the Bieluwibell caused
‘ by captain Pipe, increased to such a degree, that the
» peace chiefs of Goschochking, could plainly see that
all their endeavours to preserve the nation at peace, _


a would in the end fail. ‘These scarcely durst venture


to make a message from the American government ~
known,from appehension that Pipe on hearing it, would
place a false constriction thereon. He however, had not
as yet publicly declared that his object was to take a part
in the war, though he frequently had advised his party,
to hold themselves always in readiness, for turning
out at a moment’s warning, in defence of the nation,
should circumstances require it. He was inimical to
the object of those chiefs who were wishing to see
the nation become a civilized and agricultural people;
and, as it were, caught at every pretext that would
wc “serve his purpose in putting down the measures
& “taken by those for that purpose. Thus, when a_
young man of his tribe, who had received his educa- .
tion in Virginia, under the influence of Dr. Walker,
on his return into the Indian country in 1779, spread
_ unfavourable reports of the Virginian people; repre-


NS Ee


their eit, Ben negroes so unmercifully, &c. &c. Piy
would mockingly « enumerate such vicious and cruel acts, 7
as the benefits of, civilization. Again, he. could. at 7


the time, with truth, set forth the poverty of the i:
United States, in not having even a blanket, a shirt, a
or other article of Indian clothing to give to them in ee


exchange for their peltry; whereas, (said he) was it
t for the English, we would have to suffer, and per-
~ many of us perish for want. “ie a
_ Thus, by Pipe’s holding forth such language, many ie
(even averse to war,) were deceived ; and believed, that ee
in going over to him, they would be on the safe side.
This inviting language, had also caused a number ,of :
the Monseys at Sandusky to join his party, from 3
whose passion for war, it was evident, that, unless ‘
he submitted to their wishes, he would not be able to ‘.
keep up his popularity much longer; and indeed, a
before he was aware of it, he became convinced of >
this, as will be seen by the following occurrence ; viz.
the commissary from Fort Laurens, (a Mr. Sample,) ©


sd -
; who,had come on with some men from the garrison,
, | for the purpose of purchasing grain and other artic :


of the Delawares, at the forks of Muskingum, having (lar
pitched his tent opposite to the village, leaving one
of his men to take care of the camp and horses, had
scarcely crossed the Muskingum river, which lay be- ¥
tween his camp and the town, when the scalp yell !
was heard in the direction of his canip. The peoplagt


= town running to the bank, :


_ horses and plunder : but the perpetrators of the dee


off in triumph with the scalp of ‘haa 2
horses ; and the following morning, as another of his
men was returning frorfi Lichtenay, he was also fired —
at, out of the corn field adjoining the path—had his
arm broken, and was pursued almost to the town, be-
fore the inhabitants were aware of what had pass-
ed, or could relieve him. The -Delaware chiefs ~
indeed, had exerted themselves in recovering th


were not detected, they having precipitately fied, on
discovering the pursuers. ‘
Such acts, committed close to the place of the pr
cguncil fire of the nation, caused general consterna-
tion among the inhabitants, and spread a gloom on all
countenances. Pipe, being questioned:as to the acts
which had taken place, vindicated himself by saying,
“that it had been done without his knowledge, and
that he was sorry for it,” but this was not sufficient to
ease the minds of the chiefs on so serious a matter ;
and not only these, but the Christian Indians with


them, foresaw, that by a repetition of similar acts, the


council fire at this place (Goschochking) would be
0) luted, if not altogether extinguished,

_ That tribe of the Shawanese, which had within Re
last two years, joined themselves to the peaceable
Delawares, observing these proceedings now broke up ;
and returned again to Sciota; and the Christian In-


____dians also began to think of leaving their fine settle-
Ae


the Sendo warriors, now began to make a halt at


Pipe’s settlements, which place actually did, some- ‘ ;
time after, become the general rendezvous of the =
warriors. Fis :


Every preparation having been made during the
winter, to leave the place early in the spring, the
congregation met on the morning of the 3d day of

+ March (1780), once more to unite in thanks and praises

to the Lord, for all the blessings received from him,
during the five years this place had been occupied by

them, (the Christian Indians,) after which, the chapel
being pulled down, that it might not be applied to 3
heathenish purposes ; they set out by land and water,

and having proceeded upwards of twenty miles up i
the river, and to within six milesof Gnadenhutten,
they built a town, which they called Salem; and the

Brethren of the #wo towns above, (namely, Gnaden-

hutten and mat

ing to build the chapel, they worked together, with
uncommon cheerfulness and industry, so that on the

22d of May, the same was consecrated by the worth

senior missionary, Zeisberger, and the next day ty,


run) offering their services, in help-


Ty
a a NS


communicants partook of the holy sacrament, for the
firsttime, atthis place. Baptism was also administered
on the 28th, and it appeared as if new life had been
bestowed on the three congregations generally.
The building was forty feet by thirty-six, hand-
- somely put up, of hewed or squared timbers, with a ow 3
2D a 4


k
i
k ‘
a ,
&


©


cupola and bell, and all the dwwal
raised and completed by December. » The ‘peacéable
Indians from Goschochking and its neighbourhood,
who had frequented the meetings at Lichtenau, would
occasionally come from thence to hear the gospel
preached, notwithstanding the distance was more than
twenty miles.

During all the troubles that had befallen ce
Christian Indians, from the commencement of | the —
-war; many of the heathens joined them, and the
labourers being found insufficient to attend to all
the cares devolving on them, especially in that of
teaching the children; it was deemed proper at
this time, to encourage some assistants to repair to.
the mission. Some were accordingly sent, and
the venerable minister Grube, from Lititz in Penn- ~
sylvania, (who formerly had been a missionary to the
Delaware Indians,) willingly acc anied them to
the place of their destination. here being two
sisters for the service of the mission, in company,
some of the national assistants with their wives, went
to meet them at Pittsburg, for the purpose of assisting

cr on the way, and also, to guard them against
s unfriendly Indians, they might meet with ; when,
shameful to relate, while they met with a civil treat-

ment from all the Indians they had seen, they were on

-. the other hand pursued by some white people, who
a , fired into their camp, early on the second morn-
/of their journey ; but fortunately, without any one |


- weeks, during which time he made himself tho- iz


the shirt cfthasanGosal assistant Jones, who atthe
time was sitting close to the minister Grube. -
villains, after having fired into the camp, imme-
diately ran off; and it now appeared more necessary
to guard against attacks of white speeties than
from Indian warriors.

The rev. Grube, after an agreeable stay of seven


roughly acquainted with both the internal and exter- ae
nal state of the three Indian congregations ; returned, Sy
August 5th, with a heart filled with joy and gratitude

to our blessed Lord, for the abundant mercies be- a


stowed by him on this Indian flock. The advantage %


this worthy man had, of understanding the Delaware
language, gave him an opportunity of conversing with
them freely on all matters, but particularly respecting i
their religious exercises. | Brother Shabosh, who
accompanied him, on his journey home, returned in
November following, with Brother Michael Young,
who was sent from ROMA as another ce
is the mission.

» Having, in the preceding pages of this narrat
exhibited the precarious situation in which the Chr


beds.” 4 5 hase ; en. tires


1 * Iti isa fact, well known to many who have lived among the Indians,
that sometimes frontier white people haye dressed and blackened them-
selves to ees Indians, and attacked pEpha nal or frightened


bets
be
f
I
ai


tian Indians were placed by the exis
gether with the course they had taken, both for
their own preservation, and also for that of the Dela-
wit nation, unto whom they were ‘to look for pro~
tection: I have next tofollow up the subject, by rela-
ting the occurrences which happened from time to
time ; ending in the dissolution of the established
council of the nation in the country,—the destruction
of the Christian Indians’ settlements on the Musking-
um—the murder of upwards of ninety Christian In-
dians, and the removal of the missionaries from San-
dusky to Detroit, with the dispersion of the remainder
of the Indian converts :—trials, the most Ue:
and scenes unprecedented.

It appeared shortly after the Christian india had
moved away from Lichtenau, that captain Pipe, for
the purpose of destroying the whole system pursued
by the chiefs of Goschochking for the preservation of
peace, had taken measures to defeat all their endea-
yours for that purpose, and in consequence of his ma-
chinations, the chiefs had for their own: safety, to
withdraw themselves from their nations and take
ge at Pittsburg. Pipe, fearing the consequences


of this removal, withdrew also with his party, and


settled at Upper Sandusky near the residence, of the
half king of the Wyandots, with whom he had leagued
_for the purpose of carrying on the war against the
{ Inited vinnie with vigour. hn


Wk Ne ee


ER’S NARRATIVE. .


transacting at this e, without their circle——not a
single warrior having passed. through their towns,
since they had been settled where they now ~— 3
neither having heard any evil reports respecting t oo
selves, or their teachers, nor even apprehending, that | 4
during the calm they were enjoying, a storm was a
gathering ; were following their agricultural pursuits
with alacrity, and li¥ing in ‘all respects up to their ;
Christian profession. Yet, a storm had been gather- r


ingall this while, which will be taken notice of in its he
proper place. ; a

In March of the year 1781, one of the brethren fromi a
Salem, who had,returned from hunting’; made report, G


that within four or five miles ofthe place, he had dis-

covered asmall body of warriors in camp, who had

a prisoner, and, among the horses he had seen _

tied to the trees, was the horse of their teacher, So
which, together with other horses belonging to the
Christian Indians, had last year been stolen by
white people from the Ohio settlements. Mov- ¥
ed with compassion for the unfortunate prisoner,
the inhabitants of Salem, made a collection of
wampum and other articles, for. his redemption ; in a
which they succeeded to their wishes, and taking — % Be
him afterwards to Pittsburg, he was again restored
to his friends. They had also ransomed the mis-
sionary’s horse from these warriors, but they being
told on their arrival at Sandusky, that every article
taken from an enemy was a just prize, they returned _
and reclaimed the horse.


;


Shortly after this had take


214 HECKEWELDER’S NARI


at Sulem (the writer of this) received by an Indian
ss, a few lines written by col. Broadhead, stating |
that he was encamped with a body of troops (regulars =
and militia) on the opposite side of the river, a» few
miles below Salem ; requesting some articles of pro-
visions from the Christian Indians, and a visit by me
at his camp. The Indians of *the two nearest towns
complied immediately with his request, and I repaired’
to the camp, where he informed me, that being on an
expedition against a band of hostile Indians, at, or
hear the forks of the river ; he was anxious to know
before he proceded any further, whether any of the
Christian Indians, were out a hunting, or on business,
/in the direction he was going; being answered in
the negative, he declared that nothing would give
him greater pain, than to hear that any one of the
Moravian Indians had been molested by his troops,
as these Indians had conducted themselves, from
the commencement of the war, in a manner
did them honour. ‘That neither the English’ nor
the Americans, could with justice reproach them —
__ with improper conduct in their situation ; they having
always acted on the principles of humanity, and sought
the good and welfare of those nations who had opened
their arms to receive teachers among them for good
purposes, &c.” ce


Bn in whilst the col. was assuring me, that our


Indians had nothing to fear, an officer came with


4


WELDER’ s ‘NARRATIVE.


great wricecidgtec te quarter of the camp, and reported:


that a particular division of the militia, ‘ were prepar-
ing to break off for the purpose of destroying “a
ravian settlements up the river, and he feared
could not be restrained from so doing.” The col.
however, immediately took such measures as prevent-
ed them from carrying their wicked designs into exe-
cution ; and I take pleasure in n mentioning the name of
a col. Shepherd of Wheeling, who having the com-
mand of another division of the militia, would have
supported col. Broadhead in the measures he intended
to resort to, had the militia attempted to carry their
murderous designs into execution.

Shortly after the return of these troops to Pitts-
burg, as wo Indian brethren from Gnadenhutten,
were looking for their strayed horses, they were

met about twelve miles below Salem by eighty In-
dian warriors, who without ceremony took . them
prisoners, saying: “we do not intend to hurt you,
but the errand we are on requiring the. greatest se-
crecy, we. cannot set you at liberty, until we have
done what we intend to do.” Then taking a course


through the woods, until they had come within a


short distance of Gnadenhutten, they rested until
nearly break of day, guarding the brethren, that
they might not escape and give information of them.
The day approaching, they moved on, and having
surrounded the town completely, hailed the inhabit-


ants, to deliver into their hands the chief, Ci


os * . lies)


ie aie ie oe oo


er
Pa"


~~


~ 9 Q16 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


mend,* (alias Killbuck) with the other chiefs and
councellors: whom they must have either alive or
dead. The party being informed, that not one of
those they were in search of, were here at the time,
but had all gone to Pittsburg some time past; they
then searched every house, stable and cellar; and
being finally satisfied that they had been told the
truth, they demanded. that deputies, consisting of
the principle men of the three towns, should be


called together, to hear what they had to say to them.


The national assistants being sent for from Shonbrun
and Salem, Pachgantschihilas, the head war chief of


‘the Delaware Nation, addressed them in the follow-


ingsmanner :


“Friends and kinsmen! Listen to what 1 say ‘to ;


you! You see a great and powerful nation divided!
You see the father fighting against the son, and the
son against the father!—The father has called.on his
Indian children, to assist: him in punishing his chil-
dren, the Americans, who have become refractory !—


I took time to consider what I should do—whether —


or not I would recieve the hatchet of my father, to as-
sist him !—At first I looked upon it, as a family quar-
rel, in which I was not interested !—However, at


* Their object was, to take these off to a place where they would
have them under ¢Aeir control, and prevent them from governing the na-
tion while the war lasted ; it being a custom with the Indian Nations, that
as soon as the peace chief has gave his consent to war measures, his
office ceases, and the power is vested in the head captains of the nation,


_ until his services, in making peace, are again wanted. ¥


, ‘y fi
¥ “ Cte erence Seems ehighy


, a


HECKEWELDER’ Ss NARRATIVE. }


length igsappéared to me, that the father was in the
right; and his children deserved to be punished a


little !—That, this © ‘must be the case, I conclu
from the many cruel acts his offspring had comm


shooting at, and murdering without cause, men, wo-


at. all times had been frie


men and children !—Yes! —-—: irdering those, who


to them, and were


placed for protection under the roof of their fathers’


house*—the father himself peat centry} at the
door, at the time.

Friends and relatives ! Often has the father been
obliged to settle, and make amends for the wrongs


_ and, mischiefs done to us, by his refractory »chil-


dren,{ yet these do not grow better! No! they re-


main the same, and will continue to be so, as long as.


we have any land left us! Look .back: at the mur-
dets committed by the long knives (Virginians) on
many: of our relations, who lived peaceable neigh-
bours to them on the Ohio! . Did they not kill them


without theleast provocation ?—Are they, do you —


® Re,


* Alluding, to the Conestoga Indians, who, were Sacha for protectin,
in a | public building —(the jail) a mansion erected by authority, (by the


fathers’ orders).


“} Meaning the keeper of the jail, who is here considered as an officer
placed by the father (the government) forto guard and protect those
within,


+ Meaning the American people. wan


2E
#


é& “


d
from.time to time, on his Indian Children; in en-.
croaching on their lands, stealing their property, .


Tey


RE dle


218 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


better now than they were then ?—No, indeed not.
and many days are not elapsed since you had a num-
ber of these very men near your doors, who panted to
kill you, but fortunately were prevented from so doing —
by the great Sun,* who, at that time, had by the bese
spirit been ordained to protect you! — ny
“Friends and relatives! you love that which is
good, and wish to liven peace with all mankind, and
at a place where you may not be disturbed whilst
praying!—You are very right in this; and I “do
not reproach you in having made the choice !—But,
my friends and relatives! does the place you at pres-
ent are settled at, answer this purpose !—Do» you ‘not
live in the very road the contending’ parties pass
over when they go to fight each other !—Have you
not discovered the footsteps of the long knives, al-
most within sight of your towns, and seen the smoket
arising from their camps !—Should not this be suf-
ficient warning to you; and lead you to consult your
own safety! We have long since turned our faces
towards your habitations, in the expectation of seeing
you come from where you now are, tous where you
would be out of danger; but you-were so engaged
in praying, that you did not discover our anxiety
for your sakes !” ‘ i gages
“Friends and relatives !—Now listen to: me and
* The “ great sun,” is the name the Indians had given to col. Daniel
Broadhead.


+ Meaning the Militia camps, when col. Broadhead was out.


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. F 219°


hear what I have to say to you.—I am myself come
to bid you rise and go with me toa secure place!
Do not my friends, covet the land you now hold un-
der cultivation. I will conduct: you to a country*
equally good, where your fields shall yield you
abundant crops; and where your cattle shall find
sufficient pasture ; where there is plenty of game;
_ where your women and children, together with
yourselves, will live in peace and safety; where no
long knife shall ever molest you!—Nay! I will live
between you and them, and not-even suffer them. to
frighten you!—There, you can worship your God
without fear!—Here, where you are, you cannot do
this !—Think on what I have now said to you, and
believe, that if you stay where you now are, one
day or the other, the long knives,gwill in their
usual way, speak fine words to you, and at the same
time murder you !”’+

_ To'the above speech the Christian Indians, in he
course of an hour, replied : ‘ that they thanked their
friends and relations, for the affectionate and well
meaning address, delivered to them this day.—They,
however, were sorry to learn that their friends had
such a bad opinion of their white Brethren, the
Americans, who had sprung from the same soil with
them; thathitherto, they had found no cause to mis-


rad The Miami country.
+ See Heckewelder’sHistorical account of the Indian Nations, chap. iii.


a


Le ER Sn Pte ee


220 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


trust the sincerity of their American Brethren ; and
as they, (the Christian Indians) had never com-


. mitted a single hostile act against these; they saw


no cause for fearing any injury from them !—If their
friends: and relations really loved them as much —
as they pretended to do, they ought to avoid their
‘peaceable settlements altogether, when. going out for
the purpose of committing hostilties, or returning
from having done so; as nothing: would sooner draw
‘an. enemy upon them, than) their making their
war paths through their settlements, as had been
done whilst they lived at Lichtenau !—That they lived


very -happy at their. present settlement and): were :


at present much too heavy* to: think of rising » and
going with them !” ts

Pachgantschihilas, after having held a consultation
with his captains, then addressed the, Christian In-
dians in the following words : to wit, “re ae

‘“« My friends, ye believing (Christian) Indians 11
have paid attention to what you have. said—your


words proceed frum a good heart, a heart which can- —


not think bad of any one. Although) I am satisfied
with what I have heard from you, yet I differ from -
you in opinion! -I still believe, that the long knife
people will always remain the. same, until they ‘have
got all our land from us, and: we be left to‘perish} or
driven by them into the great Saltwater lake ! (the sea).


*«“Too heavy,” means too much Property, provisions, &c. on hand—
immoveable property. i


*


‘


_ After once more giving you the warning, not to suf-
_ fer-yourselves to be decieved by their fair words and
fine speeches, I wave sts —— and seta
another. »
~My friends, &c. when I fest spoke to you, I did
‘not intend to compel you, immediately to leave your
settlements !—No ! I had no such intention !—I meant
to apprise you of the danger you’ were in by living
here, and to’ advise you forthe best, and, in case you
should follow my advice, then to help you along !—
‘but, as the attachment for the place you now are liv-
‘ing at, keeps your eyes closed against seeing the dan-
ger that isso near you ; I will wave my first proposal,
and introduce another which I ask of you to agree to.
I say then friends and relatives !—Letevery one among
"you have his free will, either to go or stay !—Do
not hinder such as labour under the impulse of fear,
‘from retiring to a safe place, and I am satisfied !”—
Which proposal being immediately agreed to, the
‘council broke up, and the national assistants returned
‘to their respective homes.
_ The inhabitants of Salem, having on the follow-
‘ing morning received notice by a runner from Gna-
denhutten, that the whole body of warriors would
‘be; at ‘this place in the forenoon, where they ‘also
‘expected to meet with a kind reception; Isaac Glick-
hican went out to meet'them, whilst the women of
the place were preparing victuals for them. Con-
trary to the custom: of warriors when publicly ap-


¢


%
a


te


' HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 221


222 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. ae


proaching a town, neither a yell nor shout was heard.
Arriving at the centre of the village, and opposite: to
the chapel and missionary’s dwelling, Pachgantschi- q
hilas, the head: captain, ordered a halt, and having
drawn.up his men for the ——— addressed them
thus: | ofr Segan
“Friends, my warriors ! you sini on this. dni .
with me this town of believing (Christian). Indians,
hearken to what I say unto you. Warriors! ye young
menand ye aged! your behaviour, whilst‘we’ were at
Gnadenhutten, merits my approbation ; you conduct-
_ ed yourselves there as good and brave men ought to
do, innot insulting or disturbing’a people who wish
to be at peace with all mankind, and who have devo-
ted themselves toserve their God !—Look around you
ft my warriors, and you will discover in these your ye
R friends and relatives, the same inoffensive and hos-
pitable people ! —Their devotion (religion) requires
that they should be so.—The great book, (bible)
from which they are taught, contains nothing but
good things.—Look at that house (pointing to the
chapel) there our friends meet to pray.—See!
there lives their teacher.—We knew each other for
many years, and I shall pay hima visit—You my _ “
warriors, will now proceed to yonder grove of sugar
trees, where you will be served with victuals by our
friends of this place, after which you can visit ‘the
town. But my young warriors! do not carry your
arms with you when you come for the purpose of ©


=, ,


ils i al


Q ‘


. 8 :
Pn é - re


SReNa Ne Tee PET mnie ee ee ee wee ee ee


*


WECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE: 223


visiting, lest the women and children who are not
accustomed to visits of that kind, be frightened.—
Guard the camp in turn, lest the hogs and cattle that |
are running about, destroy something. Yousee what d
a stock of cows and hogs our friends have.-—You
will be served by our friends both with milk and pork.
Destroy nothing that belongs to our friends, no,
not éven one of their chickens !—Then turning his
face the other way, he said, unto you my friends, the
believing Indians, I shall say something afterwards.”
Orhis entering the missionary’s house, he by way
of introduction passed a compliment on me, referring
to our having been acquainted with each other at
Tuscorowas, nineteen years past; which compli- 4
ment was to be.considered in this instance, as con-
veying a wish to form an acquaintance between his
war captains and me, two of whom were Shawanese, a
and the other two, Delawares.—The national assist-
ants of the place, being also present, avery interesting
. conversation took place between the parties, during


«


\ which this head captain made the following remarks :
i viz.“ The Christian Indians were a happy peo-

E ple; and he would never trouble them on account of

|


their not joining in the war.—Indeed, they could not
with propriety join in wars, without first renouncing
praying (meaning Christianity.)—And every Indian,
or body of Indians, had aright to choose for them-
selves, whom they would serve !—For him, he had
hired himself to his father, the king of England,


‘ ?


ie


*


224. HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE: °


for the .purpose of fighting against his refractory: .
children, the, long knives ; whilst his friends and.
relations, the “Christian Indians, had hired them 4
selves to the great spirit, solely forthe purpose of
performing prayers !”” (meaning, attending to religion)
—He added, both were right in their way, though .
both employments could not .be connected: to-
gether! And only yesterday they were told, whilst |
at Gnadenhutten, that God had instructed all Chris-
tian people to dove their enemies—and even to pray,
for them !—These words, he added, were written in
the large book that contained the word’ and: coms,
mandments of God !—Now, how would: it. appear,
were we to compel our friends, wha» love and. pray.
for their enemies, to fight against them !—com~
pel them to act contrary. to what they believe to be
ce right !—force them to do. that by which they would:
incur the displeasure of the great spirit, and bring his: _
wrath upon them!—That it would. be» as: wrongam
him to compel the Christian Indians to quit praying —
peo and turn out to fight and kill people, as it would be im -
them to compel him to lay fighting aside, and turn to -


praying only!—He had often heard it»said, that
the believing Indians were slaves to their teachers, _
- and what these commanded them to do, they must do, :
however disagreeable to them !—Now, (said he) how.
can this be true, when every Indian is a free man, and
can go where he pleases !—Can the teacher stop him


from going away ?—No! he cannot !—well ! how can’


eli 905


?


* 24


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. | Po


he then be made a'slave by the teacher !—when we Lid
come here among our friends, we see how much they Ms
love their. teachers.—This looks well !—Continue my
friends (said he to the national assistants) in loving

your teachers, and in doing all good things ; and when
your friends and relations come to see you, satisfy 2
their hunger the same as you have done to us this day !”” ‘

. Having taken leave of all who were in the house, he
proceeded to the middle of the street, from whence he ak '
addressed, and thanked the inhabitants of the place Ps
for their hospitality, assuring them of his regard and .
good wishes for them, ‘adding : that “ if at any time »
they should hear it said, that Pachgantschihilas was
an enemy to the believing (Christian) Indians; they f
should consider such words as lies !””

» One family of old people, (Joseph SNopan andhis, =
wife) formerly belonging to the rev. missionary Brain- a
ard’s congregation in New Jersey, (with two aged wo- s
men, theirrelations,) accepted the offer of being taken
to a place of more safety, they expecting that the
whole congregation would soon follow them. The
former, although a friend to the white people gene-
rally, had during a long life, witnessed so many hein-
ous murders, committed by them on harmless Indians |
that he could not refrain giving some credit to what
this great chief had predicted, would one day befal the
Christian Indians,* were they to remain where they


* The sequel will show, that the predictions of this war chief were


correct.
™ 2F


i
i
5
6
i
Ss)
i
oo
ay
a
o


Se a eee ee ie eee ee ON
. hy ee
. % - .


226 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE> _


>


now were.—All being ready, the whole body of war-
riors moved towards their respective homes.
From this time forward, it became evident that
some underhanded work was carrying on among the
hostile Indians, to the prejudice of the Christian Indi-
ans on the Muskingum. Of Pachgantscihilas and
his party, nothing was to be feared. NeitHer was it
at this time supposed, that the half king of the Wy-
andots, after the fair promises he had previously made,
would so expose himself, as to show hostile intentions
against these Indians. Pipe, and the Monseys, were
those who were most.dreaded, and with whom M‘Kee,
Elliot and Girty had great influence. Frequently —
the attempts to murder the missionaries, at each of
the three settlements had failed. At Shonbrun, the .
missionary Senseman, who had gone into the field
for some greens, was providentially saved, by two
Brethren, coming up at the instant he was about be-
ing seized by an Indian enemy.—At Gnadenhutten the
missionaries Edwards and Young, were near being
shot by a white man, while they were planting potatoes
in the field ; and their lives were only saved by the
captain of the war party, whom this white man had join-
ed.*—The writer of this narrative, was at. two differ-
ent times waylaid, while returning from Gnadenhutt
to Salem ; at one time by an Indian laying behind a
logt by the way side, and who had already levelled


* See Heckewelder’s Historical Account of the Indian Naeee chap.
xliv. page 339. t Chapter xxxviii, - Page 275.


a +


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. ” 297.


his piece at him, and the other time from the same
Indian who lay concealed in the top of a tree, near the


~path he was to pass. Both times he was preserved


by Christian Indians, providentially coming to his re-
lief. Even an attempt was made by the same Indian


~ to break into his house and murder him, but he was


timely discovered by the people without, and prevent-
ed from carrying his designs into execution. This


‘Indian was the same person of whom notice has alrea-


dy been taken as having received his education in


- Virginia—and was also the same person from whom


the Christian Indians in March preceding had
purchased the prisoner, whom they set at liber-
ty. On being closely questioned by the nation-
al assistants respecting his attempt to take the
life of their teacher, he replied: -‘‘ that on his ar-
rival at Sandusky, without the prisoner he had ta-
ken, he was ubraided, and called the Salem white


‘man’s slave; whom fe must obey, the same, as he


had so often ‘told them, that the ‘negroes: in Virginia
must obey their white masters—and that by and bye
this Salem whiteman, would whip him also, if he did
not obey his commands.—That the demand made on


_ hinffor the prisoner, had been by the orders given by


this white teacher, and therefore, if he did not wish
to be considered by them, asa slave of that man,
he must go back and take him, or his scalp, in place
of the prisoner he had lost through him, &c. The
Christian Indians _ perceiving the error the man,
laboured under, thought proper to state the case


i eed


228 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. :


&


to him correctly, by means of. aspeech, to which a—
string of wampum as a voucher, was annexed 5, which,
with some presents in addition, served to prove that
the purchasing of his prisoner by them, had been
their own voluntary act, and done without the assist-
ance or interference of their teacher.—At another ~
time a dark looking Monsey, was on the point of
shooting me, but luckily prevented by another Indian
springing in between us; being questioned as to his
designs against me, he replied, that, the Monseys
had lost their fine country* by fraud} committedon —
them by people whose skin was of the colour of mine,
and he, therefore, was an avowed enemy to all: who :
had a white skin. a OSS
Early in the spring of this year, arid before any of ;
the before mentioned circumstances and troubles had
taken place, the missionary Zeisberger set out for Beth-
lehem, for the purpose of having an interview with
the Bishop, John Frederick Reichel, one of the gener-
al directors of the Brethren’s society. . This brother
having been deputed by the board of directors in
Europe to hold a visitation in all the Brethren’s con-
gregations in north. America, and of making him-
self acquainted with the state of the Brethren’s mis- ‘ ¥
sions among the Indians of that country ; had,
that purpose, invited the missionary to meet him at
Bethlehem in Pennsylvania; when having confer+


‘ c 42 p.
* The Minisink, together with their settlements in the forks. J Pahoa *


t Alluding to the long walk in the year 4737. ,; bd CHD


_—


i
|


wae Sgn re ee ne ee eee


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE, = § 229


red together—and made the necessary arrangements
for the better supplying each of the three Indian
congregations with missionaries and assistants, the
missionary and wife, accompanied by the missionary


Youngman: and wife, returned to his post at Shon- .


brun, where they arrived towards the end of July of
the same year. .

As the severe trials, and great anil which
this Indian congregation had yet to endure, came on
them like a torrent, and without their having the least
knowledge of what was passing among the warring In-
dians, or of the plot that had been laid for their des-
truction; this may perhaps be the proper place to re-
view the causes assigned by those who had devised


the measures, which led to those barbarous and ‘un- —


precedented acts, and the means that were taken to
ensure them success, im the execution of their designs.
_ From sources the most authentic, it was ascertained


_that, the new appointed commandant at Detroit ; (suc-


cessor to the late governor Hamilton, ‘then prisoner


. to the Americans :) had, as well as his predecessor,


been imposed upon, and made to believe that the

Se os A

missionaries among the Delawates, were sent by

epteress as spies among the Indians, for the purpose
ing on a correspondence with them, prejudi-

cial to the British interest, &c. To give their re-

ports a greater weight, these men, (known to be ene-


mies to the mission) persuaded both captain Pipe, of ~


the Delawares, and gad king, of the Wyandot na-


Boe,


230 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


+


tion, to join them in lodging complaints with te
commandant against the missionaries. ‘
These men, (M’Kee, Elliot and Simon Girty) had
long tried to instigate the Indians, to rid themselves
of the missionaries in one way or the other; even if
it were, by murdering them. We have already seen
in a preceding page, how Girty had conducted 4
murdering party to the Muskingum, for the purpose
of taking Zeisberger, or his*scalp. Finding however,
after all their’efforts, that they would not ‘succeed in
this way, they applied to the war council of the Six
Nations, to do the business, and for this purpose, the
Indian agent* (M’Kee) personally went to the” gene-
ral council ‘at Niagara. Although the greater part
of the ‘Six Nations were at that time in‘ the British
interest, yet, for political reasons, they did not wish
to commit the act imposed on fhem themselves; they —
therefore senta message to the Chippewas and Ottawas,
to this purport : “we herewith make youa present of
the Christian Indians on the Muskingum, to make
broth* of!” which words in the war phrase, signifies :
we give you the command, to put those people to death! —
These two Nation§, however, being a branch of the
Delaware family, and ranking as grand children to
them, declined the summons, saying: that “1 .eir
grandfather had done them no injury !” The same
message was next sent to the half king of the Hurons,
(Wyandots) who was nearly connected with the Six
* See Lockiel’s History of the misdage part, iii. chapix.


ol


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. . 231


Nations; but they would not accept the message, in the
form it was sent, and with its true meaning ; they
still wishing to be considered by their cousins (the
Delawares) ‘as guardians and protectors of the. Chris-
tian Indians; a title which they had assumed, on ac-
count of their considering themselves also as Christians,
a number of their tribe having in a manner joined
themselves to the Catholics, or at least attended mass,


- ‘wore beads, &c. Yet the half king, finally suffered him-
_ self to be persuaded by Elliot, captain Pipe and others


to take the lead in an expedition against the settle-
ments, under the promise, that the latter would be at
his side, with all his men, and act in concert with
him. Thus far agreed, invitations were sent to the
warriors residing in different parts of the country, and-
near Detroit, to meet at a certain time at Sandusky,
to a great war feast; when, the time: being come,
they were furnished by the instigators of the diabolic-
al plot with a large ox,* which being roasted entire,


they feasted on it; eating, dancing and. singing, each


in his turn, their war exploits; the British flag being
hoisted near them, as a proof, that the expedition
they were going on, was sanctioned by their father,
the British.; Being next served with ammunition


a other articles, by Elliot, they formed themselves
i


= °
© companies, and began their march, but where to,
and for what purpose, none except those who wergsin


the secret knew.


| # See Lockiel’s History _ mission, &c. part iii. chap. ix.


t So related by warriors note, who were present.


a =


i


°


232 | HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


This intended si poche against the Christian -
Indians; . ‘was kept so secret that the latter were
unacquainted with what was passing, until the war-
riors were at their \ very doors. On the afternoon of
the 10th ofAugust, the half king with an hundred
and forty armed men suddenly appeared before the
town of Salem, with British colours flying, and hav-
ing formed for themselves a large camp, the ‘colours
were set in the centré, where captain Elliot, with the


a half king, and Mr. M’Cormick, sew flag bei

f * their tents fixed. © bm o oR tains

i, Whilst the national assistant, Isaac Glickhican, “had
Be repaired to their camp, to learn what all this indicated,
i captain “Elliot came to the house of the missiona-
b ries (the writer of this narrative) “ to see how we all,
did,”’ (as he expressed himself). Enquiring of him,
what these warriors intended, he replied: that “ the


La half king had something to say to the Christian In-
dians ; but ‘what it was he could not ‘ell; as’ both
he and M’Cormick, had been compelled by the ‘chief,
to go with him, and attend at the meeting, ‘and hear
what he would say !”? On obserying to him, that the
men being armed, and having colours with them, I must
suspect them to be on a hostile expedition’; he*re-
ks, plied: “the Indians never go from home: 4
taking their arms with them.” Asking him, if
and Mr. M’Cormick could’ make it convenient, to
take a cup of tea with us this evening: he replied,
‘that it would entirely “_* pleasure of ©


oe


| = | an eel


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 233


- the half king, without whose permission neither of
them durst leave the camp, and although he believed
he might for himself, obtain this permission, yet as
M?Cormick had charge of the colours, he would have
to be at his post, until relieved by him, after which
he also might be permitted to call to see me.”
Isaac Glickhican, having by this time returned from
the camp, reported, that the half king requested an
audience at my house, having something to say to the
chief men of the place in my presence. After being
admitted, he, having first passed the usual saluta-
tion, addressed himself to me: “ Father!” and turn-
ing to the national assistants, continued, ‘‘and you
_ my Cousins !”—‘I am come to see you, and to say
something to you; and, as what I have to say, inter-
terest all my cousins at the three towns, I wish you to
appoint a place where you can all conveniently come
to hear me!—Fear no harm my cousins! I respect
you!”. The answer being immediately given, that as
_ Gnadenhutten lay in the centre, it would be the most
proper place for the purpose ; he again returned 'to his
quarters. Elliot having gone off with the chief,
M?’Cormick obtained permission to go to see me for
a few minutes. This good man, who had been com-
pelled against his will to join the party, did not leave
=. suspence, as to the object of the expedition,
‘and having disclosed to me their designs ; he exclaim-
ed : “O Mr. Heckewelder ! but for two or three wick-
ed men, you might remain where you are, and live
_ vile


234 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE,


happy. All the Indians respect you, and admire
your excellent regulations.—All unite that you are
a good, peaceable, and hospitable people! Neither
would the commandant at Detroit disturb you, but for


, and the, villain, who ran up to see you, under
the mask of friendship, who is at the head of the plot.
Nothing will serve him but your destruction. Mark
what I say!” On retiring, I enquired, whether: what
he now divulged to me, I was permitted to inform the
senior missionary Zeisberger of by letter; he replied,
“yes! but, between you two, it must be kept.a secret,
for should it be divulged, they would shoot me!” .
Elliot in the evening came to sup with us, and acted —
the complete hypocrite , speaking of old acquaintance ;
of services rendered him at different times, both in
health and sickness, prior to the war; he admired the
order and industry of the Christian Indians, and say-
ing: “that he believed, had the peace continued, we
would have brought over nearly the whole of the
Delaware Nation to our manner of living, &c. and to
complete his hypocrisy, he presented our child with
sundry articles of merchandize for clothing...»
It now became my duty to apprise the missionary —
Ziesberger, at Shonbrun, (distant fifteen miles) of what —
had passed in the course of this afternoon ; and that,
in consequence of this, I could not meet him
morrow to a conference, which had previously been
agreed upon by us. The reply which I recieved from
this faithful servant of Christ, was in these words: to
; .


- HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 235


wit, “It then has the appearance as if Satan is atin
about to make himself merry by troubling and persecut-
ing us! No wonder he grows angry when he seeshow
many of his subjects he looses, by our preaching the
gospel! His roaring however must not frighten us !
we have a heavenly father, without whose will he


dare not touch us! let us rely on him, who so often’


has delivered us from his machinations !””
~« The warriors, who were well supplied with pro-
Visions, at their camp, had not caused us the least
disturbance during the night, and having broke up
camp at ten o’clock in the morning, they passed
through, thie town in two divisions for Gnadenhutten,
- the first division consisting of footmen, and the other
mounted on horseback ; Elliot and the half king be-
ing in the centre with the British colours flying. .
On the same day, another body of forty men, of the
Monsey tribe arrived, who, being served likewise
with victuals, continued on to the same place, where,
within four days, upwards of three hundred warriors
had assembled, and which were of the foliowing tribes
and nations, viz. The Wyandots from upper San-
dusky, commanded by the half king*—others of the
‘same nation from Detroit and lower Sandusky, com-
janded by Kuhn, a head war chief of the latter place,
iptains' Pipe and Wingemund, Delaware war chiefs,


* "The Delawares call this half king by the name of “ Pomoacan,”
which in English is a sweet house. %


»


ee ee ee ee
he


>


236 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


_ with their men from Upper Sandusky. The Monsey
war chief with about forty men from the same place.
_ The two Shawanese captains, named by the traders
»-  Johnand Thomas Snake, with a few of theirmen from
Sciota. Several straggling Indians of the Mohegan,
and Ottawas tribes, and Elliot with his attendant
Michael Herbert, M’Cormick the bearer of the flag,
and lastly, a small train of invalid Wyandots, men and —
women with horses, who had come to.assist in —
ing off the booty. ists
For awhole week these warriors passed their time
in eating, drinking, and sleeping, except their head —
men, who daily sat in council, deliberatingyon the best
manner of carrying their designs into execution; when
on the 20th of the month (August,) the half king
made known, that on the morrow he wished to see
the principle men of the three towns, assembled,
to hear what he had to say to them. When, on
proper notification given, these had. arrived, he ad-
dressed them to the following purport, viz: ‘ That
he, for a long time, had been much concerned on ac-
count of his cousins, the believing Indians, as they
lived in a very dangerous place!—That they were sit-
ting between two powerful, angry gods,* who, with
their mouths wide open, were most ferociously 1
at each other!—that this being the case, they were
danger of being attacked and devoured; nay, even


|.
F
2
r
|


* Meaning the English and American armies fighting against each


other.
i *


—se _ ren ar tea ee
*) ho 5é 3 .


a


‘


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 237


ground to powder, by the teeth of one or the other of
them, or perhaps by both at the same time!—It
therefore was’not advisable for them to remain lon-
ger where they now were !—and he now called on
them to reflect on their situation, and the means to
save their lives, and those of their women and child-
ren, who must all perish if they remained here longer!
That he now took his cousins/by the hand, to lead
them to a place of safety.—And advised them not to
stand gazing at their crops in the fields, their houses,
and other property, but rise, take their teachers,
and he would lead them to a place where they
might worship their God as they -were accustomed
to do!—That they would find plenty of provisions
where he would take them to; and, besides «this,
their Father* at Detroit would also provide for them.
He added, that he had purposely come here to deliver
this message to his cousins, for their consideration !””
(Here handing a string of wampum to them.)

To ‘this: speech, the Christian Indians replied :
that they had listened with attention to what their
Uncle had said to them, but could not see the
danger they were said to be -in, by remaining
where they now were.—They being at peace with all
mankind; and having nothing to do with the war;
saw no cause of any body hurting them !—nothing
appeared to them dark} all being light around them !


* Meaning the British. + No danger.


—and they wished to remain where they were;
and enjoy peace, which they could not do were they
to live near them !—They added that they were ‘at


- present too heavy* to rise and go with them, but would


consider what he had said to- them, and return him
an answer between this time and spring!”
With this answer, not only the «half king, but
the greater part of the warriors, appeared-to be per-
fectly satisfied, declaring that it would be wrong to
compel their cousins, friends and relations, to move
from a favourite spot, where they had every thing
they could wish for, in abundance, and where’ they
lived so content and happy !—Besides this, they
considered it inconsistent with true policy, to distress
a people, who had treated them with somuch kind
ness and hospitality, since they had been here !—=
And to show further their disapprobation of the *pre-
ject, and in some measure retaliate on the personf
who devised it, they drew up with their arms, to
where the British colours were flying, discharging
their pieces at it, and would have shot it to’ rags,
had they not been prevented ; all which now gave
Mr. M‘Cormick an opportunity of peer: home,
taking the colours with him. J oa
Mortifying as this was to captain Elliot, he con-
tinued to urge captain Pipe and the half king, not to
_—
* Meaning they had much immoveable property. + Captain Elliot.


uuks 4
2
a cael


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


give up, but to have recourse to other, and more se-
vere measures : which advice, caused another weeks
consultation. In the interim, it had by.some means or
other been discovered, that two of the Christian In-
dian brethren were missing; and it being supposed
_ by the captains, that these were gone either. to Pitts-
burg, or some other fortification. onthe Ohio river
_ to draw a body. of troops. out, for the relief of the
Christian Indians, every path, leading to such places
was beset by some of their men ; when of course the
two missing brethren, fell into their hands‘on their
return home from Pittsburg. Having stripped them of
their clothes to search for letters, even examining the
barrels of their guns and their powder horns for the
same purpose, without discovering any thing. in
writing upon them, they took them along as prisoners,
but did not suffer them to be together, to prevent them
from forming a plan, which might defeat their object.
Being separately examined at Gnadenhutten in council,
‘by the half king, and nothing being found on them pre-
judicial to the war party, they were dismissed. - .
_ The fact was, these brethren had gone for no
her purpose to Pittsburg, than to inform the com-
‘smandant of that place, of the situation they were in—
also, that through him, the Brethren at Bethlehem
might be apprised of the danger they were in, and be
prepared to hear the worst. The message. they de-
livered, was verbal, and in these words: “We are


beset by ' of three hundred warriors of differ-


*


240 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


ent nations, who are determined on taking us away
from our, eaglements, on the Muskir
that if this cannot be affected b ‘fair


to our fate.” The two colonels, Broadhead and Gib-
son, enquiring of the messengers, if we expected an
armed force to come to our relief, were answered
in the negative ; and both these officers very properly
saw, that such a measure would not be wae: but
rather tend to our destruction.

In the second attempt made by the half If king < on mye
25th of August, to persuade the Christian Indians, to
leave their settlements, and go with him, he held —
a somewhat frightening language, saying: “ that,it
was impossible for us to escape the danger which
awaited us, in remaining here, that the Six Nations
would not suffer us to stay! That.the Chippewas
and Ottawas would fall upon us, and destroy us all!—
that even were. those nations to let us alone, still the
long knives (Virginians) would certainly one day fall _
upon and kill us; for that in these, there was m8,
sincerity, &c.” ;

To this speech the Christian Indians again re
strated, “that they bore too hard upon them, asto go.
at the present time, would reduce them to -misery! |
they having a large harvest out, some thousand bush-
els of corn besides vegetables of various kinds, which
would all be lost to them! and it appeared to them
ungeperous, to deprive their women and. children


:
a


with themselves of the necessaries of life, when zhey
saw no occasion | iy (to Esti Ae. half king
—Histened’ i silerice). ‘ag
; At this time it was believed) ene “had the half


king and captain Pipe been at liberty to act according


to their inclinations; they would have withdrawn
their men, they perceiving that they were in'the wrong.
The latter also knew that many of his men had pro-
tested against such proceedings, and even declared,
that they would not be idle’ spectators, if they saw
any of their friends, or even their teachers whom
they equally considered their friends, molested.—
Captain Elliot however, kept them alarmed; and
to cause a beginning to be made, pretended to be
under apprehensions, of an armed forcé of Virgi-
nians coming upon them, before they were awaré
of it; when, the rabble among them, taking the
hint, now began to’ commit outrages, by shootiig
fowls, hogs, and even horned cattle, as they were
passing by, or feeding within their reach. The
chiefs, on the other hand, had fallen on’ the’ strata-
gem of trying how it would work, upon the whole,
- were they to effect a division among the Christian In-
dians. Accordingly, the most artful of their party
were employed amongst the timid, and weaker class
of them, and having first impressed their minds with
the apprehension that, if they remained here longer,
they would assuredly be murdered: they next gave


them such an enchanting description of the country
‘- 2H |


REFS Coe ae F ae an ¢ S525
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 941 .


>


oe P tn Pe


.. 2
*
242 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


they intended to take them to, that they excited
a desire in them to be there already, and nothing
appeared to prevent their imme ia
the assurance that their teachers would go with
them; whilst others, more unguardedly would say :
“we look to our teachers ; what they do, we likewise


will do!”—which thoughtless expressions, although


they had meant no harm to their teachers, were


departure but, .


quickly considered as the rea/ cause why the Chris-


tian Indians would not go with them, and from this


time, the whole blame was laid on the missiona- —


ries, who now became the main object of the hatred
and resentment of the savages.
The situation therefore, in which the missionaries.
now were, was not only precarious, but dangerous.
The timid part. of the congregation, which were not
a tenth part of the whole, wished them to con-
sent to go with the savages, while all the others
declared, that they would rather die on the spot, than
plunge themselves with their families, in such misery.
Neither would they even listen tu the arguments which
their timid brethren made use of for the purpose of
bringing them over to their views; nay, they even
continued én their daily labour, of building and re-
pairing houses, setting fences, &c. And although the
enemy ascribed all this to the influence of the mis-
sionaries over their relatives (the Christian’ Indians :)
yet, the missionaries durst not venture to decide in be-
half of all, for fear of offending the one or the,other sides


ise teal


j


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 243


but thought it most prudent to await the issue, and not
go with the savages, u nless by compulsion ; that, should
the congregation k brought to distress and misery,
the missionaries might not be liable to blame and re-
proached on that accouif) =~ :

By this time the heads of the savages had held


_ several consultations on the best and surest’ mode of
" proceeding, to attain their object. One proposal was


that of killing the missionaries at once,—another,
that of killing at the same time the principal, or lead-
ing men of the Christian Indians. A sorcerer being
consulted, on each of these proposals, he so terrified


. them by his threats, they gave up the designs;


but what troubled them most, wasy their frequently
being told by some of their own party ; that the Chris-
tian Indians were so attached to their teachers, they
would never suffer violent hands to be laid on them, but


would defend them, even at the risk of their own lives.


_ Elliot, supposing the war chiefs were! wavering,
and likely to abandon the design altogether, now
thought of another, and last experiment, namely, he told
them, that they had already made the American people
their enemies, by fighting against them ; of course, from
these they never hereafter could expect any fa vours ;
and now, by not obeying their father’s commands, who
always had so abundantly supplied their wants, they
would create themselves another enemy. ‘hus be-
tween two powerful enemies, they, with their wives and
children, must eventually perish. ,He added, that he


veil they. would not, he wo
his horse, a | proceed on to Piher at Detroit,
when immeditely all connection b etween him and them
would, cease ; he considering them as his enemies !
he even pretended to set out immediately for Detroit,
which they perceiving, desired him to stay only a.
few days longer, andthey would do whathe wanted.

Accordingly they now for the last time, called on the
national assistants of the three towns, to come with
their teachers, once more to hear what they had to
say. While mounting my me at Salem, to go to
Gnadenhutten forthe purpose, Elliot’s attendant, who .
at the time was here, came up to me and whispered in
my ear, that he “‘ wished we could contrive our escape
tu the settlements, since nothing was more certain than,
if we went toGnadenhutten, we would be all taken
prisoners, or killed, before to-morrow night!” After
replying : that what he wished us to do, was out of our
power; Iasked him, whether the goods captain El-
liott had brought with him, were intended for re~
warding the warriors, when they had done the busi-~


TSF ’ = - 2 7 = Pas
i“ ei, ee a oe OR wae oe


‘ed; ‘| While we were packing up the goods (two
horse loads) I heard him say that with these goods he
expected to make the greatest speck he ever had made ;
that the Moravian Indians had at each of their towns
great stocks of horned cattle, whieh when once dis-


dee teh hie


> = ar


Bivsy.


ness he wanted them to do? To which he repli- q


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 245


se by the. maariors, he could purchase of them


ng ; (a ew di lars per head,) while he would
rty dollars ahead at Detroit.”


na our arrival at G de nhutten, Sep e ber 2d. we
plainly saw the change that had taken place since our
last meeting ; a great part of the warriors appearing
surly; and some impudent, as if ready for mischief.
The stench in the town, occasioned from the cattle they
had. shot down, was ost intolerable. Some. of the
savages, would, in passing:by the missionary’s ‘house,
wave their spears, and other weapons, as if they wish-
to frighten us, or perhaps to show as, that they were
ready for the job. At length the national assistants
were called to appear before the council, whenthe
half king demanded of them, a prompt answer in the
affirmative, or negative, whether they would go with
him ; to which they replied, thatythey should abide
by the answer given him, at the last meeting ;_ these
brethren were immediately dismissed. ’

The savages now went into secret council, sitting
close during the greater part of the night, when again
the proposal of murdering us, and destroying the
towns, was suggested, as the only means of detach-
ing their friends and relations, (the Christian Indians)
from the spot, (and the improvements on it,) to which
they had become so attached; yet, this proposal was also
rejected,—principally onthe ground, that the Christian
Indians, when driven to despair, might use their arms


* *
246 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


against them, and a general slaughter ensue, which
could anspcte } no purpose, bu
themselves Sef: ia rah oe

The missionaries, having ¢ ly on the morning of
the third of September, learnt by one of the national
assistants, (whose information came direct from a
trusty person, who had been admitted to the Secret
council of the last night) a been concluded
upon, plainly saw what awaited them, and. would. be
their: fate, in the course of the day. . Nevertheless,
the congregation met as usual, on this morning at
eight o’clock, for divine service, at which, exclusive
of the members of the congregation, a great number of


the"savages also attended; the chapel doors having


been thrown open, for the benefit of those without.


After the singing part was performed, in which the


whole congregation as with one voice had joined;
the missionary Zeisberger, took his text from the
fifty-fourth chapter of Isaiah, and eighth verse, and


delivered a most emphatic discourse on the-great love _


of God towards man, and the pains he takes to bring
sinners to repentance, and make thema happy people.
He took a general retrospect of the ways of the Lord
with his people from the beginning.—his deliver-


ing the children of Israel from’bondage ; and the means —


he made use of to make them a great and happy


people setting forth their happy state, while they con-


tinued to be obedient to his commandments ; and the
unhappy and wretched condition they at times brought


hat of destroying


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. S247


upon themselves by their disobedience,—by becom-

md jeal ous, murmuring and showing a
rebellious spirit ;— heir inclination to] leathenism,
and attempts to introduce idolatrous practices ; making
images to worship, instead of looking up to, and wor-
shiping that good and gracious God, who so miraculous-
ly had delivered them from slavery ;—was leading
them to a country far exceeding any they had seen
before :—supplying their wants abundantly from day
to day, and granting them strength and support ; all
which benefits they despised, depending on their own
strength, and listening to false prophets ;—shewing
ungratefulness, mistrust and even enmity against
their faithful leader Moses, whom God himself had
appointed, and who constantly had their welfare at
_ heart ; and had, by his supplication and tears, ap-
peased the Lord, when in his warth he had declared
that he would destroy them, &c.—Then turning ‘his
discourse to the present time—to the work of God
‘among the many heathen nations, as in Greenland,
Labrador, the cape of Good Hope, in the west India
islands—in South America, and where we were, from
which, altogether, thousands were already assembled
before the throne of. the Lord, glorifying his name ;
while thousands were at present yet beneath, under
his guidance, in the hopes of enjoying the same happi-
ness hereafter; and to which number wehere, through
his grace, also belonged !—And shall we (continued


the faithful missionary), we who have also been


i... a


darkness; never Sih ane disappointed in our ee
shall we forget all this !—Did we not frequently heat
the same threats ?—were we not told time after time,
what would be done to us, if we did not leave the:
habitations where we were, and go and live among the
heathen ; and did we obey them ?—and were we ever
molested by them on that account ?—No! and why ,
not! becausé we were united to put our frust in the
Lord, and depend on his protection'!—and why not
continue in the same faith !—why not place the same
trust in him, believe that he is both able and’ willing
to protect us at all times !— me we grown weaker


in faith instead of stronger ?—Shall we give the hea-


then cause to mock and laugh at us? saying = “ these’


pretend to believe what they beliéve not!—No! my


Brethren and sisters! we will not only abide in’ that


faith, which we through grace have received ; But we


will endeavour, to grow stronger therein event
death itself shall not rob us of this treasure. And
though in times of old, the Lord did sometimes hide


his.face” as it were, from his people—did ever per “


mit the heathen to chastise them a little, when they
had become indifferent, and disobedient towards him,


or departed from his ways : yet when they repented, —


?


then for their preservation, than to ee ue Hi im, who
hath all power, both on earth and in heaven : on Aim,
_whois able to withstand satan with his whole host, &c.
The missionary then concluded by saying: We are
now, my brethren and sisters, placed in a situation,
hitherto unparelleled !. Surrounded by a body of hea-

" then !—Some enemies to the gospel, who threaten
us, with taking our lives, if we do not go with them
and make them our near neighbours! Not being at
liberty to act for ourselves, we must submit to our
fate, and trust, that the Lord will still hold his hand
over us, and not forsake us !—We will remain quiet,
and abide the consequences, it not becoming children


of God to put themselves on a level with the heathen ©


in making use of weapons, for our defence! Neither
will we hate our enemies, on this account, who know
not what they are doing! We, as Christians will
pray for them, that the Lord may open their eyes,
and turn their hearts from all evil ways—perhaps we
may yet have the pleasure of seeing some of those,
who are now our enemies, repent and join themselves
to our flock.
_ © The universal attention, during the delivery of this
very remarkable digeour se, was truly striking. The
ai


with corrects 1ess bot the words. and  nihepaclal
what was spo en; delivered himself, in such an as-
tonishing and affecting manner, that the whole con-


gregation, and with these many of ESBS of the:


Delaware nation present were in tears. -


Nore. It is but proper to remark, that the icsaue
manner in which the missionaries, ‘were upon the ©
whole treated (as will be seen in the sequel), when
compared with the treatment other prisoners meet
with by warriors, may in a great measure, ‘if not
‘wholly, be ascribed to the charge given to the con-—


gregation, at the latter part of the discourse, whereby


the savages were satisfied, that they had nothing: to 4
dread from the Christian Indians, as they had so often _


been told, would be the case. And the soothing call of
the missionary, to his congregation, even to pray for


their enemies, did eventually satisfy. them, and put ~
their minds at ease ;—while to the congregation, —
the same was equally seasonable, as many, of the
brethren were ready to risk their lives in defending ’
their teachers, considering it a duty to protect them at a
all hazards. "Now, had the brethren been left to act as ye
they intended, what may be supposed’ would have


been the conseqence ? even the firing of a gun or
two, at such as laid hands onggeir teachers, would


.


4
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. x, OSE 4


have brought on a massacre on both sides, by: which
‘every missionary present must have falle 4) exclusive
of Christian Indians. —The murdexin sposition of
many of the savages, was evident in their untenances,
and it required but little provocation to excite it
into action.» ~ pa a

After service, several of bes savages who had been
present at the meeting, came and shook hands with
the missionaries, ‘signifying both friendship and com-
miseration for them, while others, principally Wyan-
dots and Monseys, would enter their house for the
purpose of. examining what it contained.


- About eleven o’clock in the forenoon, the town was
alarmed by the shrieks and yells of the savages, who
were all runing full speed towards the river, which led
us to believe that some outrage had already been


committed. However the alarm was occasioned by
captain Elliot’s ostler, who in watering a horse, had ~
fallen in deep water; the man in the fright, (occasion- —


ed principally by the yells of the savages, which made
- him forget himself) drew the reins so tight, that the
horse could not swim, but sunk with the rider. Two
- Ottaway Indians, quicker than other bystanders,
plunged into the river, and swimming to the spot,
extricated the man, who was hanging to the horse’s
neck, and brought both man and- horse to een
: though much exhausted.

’ Shortly aftemjive had dined, Zeisberger, ‘Senseman
and myself, walked behind the garden, towards the


Ries)


252 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.)


burying ground, where, after standing a few minutes;
with our faces ‘towards the town, the head captain of

sey , came i in great haste up to us, and ac-
ci berger in the words: “ wilt thow: devote:
thyself solely to the service of the Monseys, as their
teacher ?”—to which a quick reply being: made bya
bystander, that we being as one family, could not
separate: he stepped a few paces back, asia signal
for three Wyandots, who lay concealed close behind


the fence, and who inan instant rushed upon us, each —


taking his man prisoner, and immediately marched us


towards the camp, which was about one hundred —


yards distant, on the way to which an ugly looking
Wyandot, who ran up for the purpose, aimed several
blows. with his tomahawk at the head of Senseman,


who, however, by meansof his agility, escaped unhurt. |


We were straightway taken to captain Elliot’s camp
in the centre, as though we had been taken prison-
ers for him. y erg

Whether from political motives they: had done this
as meaning thereby to show, that they acted under
his (Elliot’s) orders, and solely for him’ (and that he


of course must reward them for it)—or ; whether they


thereby meant to proclaim to the Christian Indians


and us, that they were not to blame for what they had —


done, but the man under whose orders they had acted
was unknown to’ us. One thing however appeared
certain viz. that the act of bringing the prisoners di-


rect to Elliot, strengthened the beliefof us all thatit


a Se pe er ee ORR ee ee
in Sees
, @ you is
mY
x ;


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 253


was done by his. orders, moreover. it ‘so aided
or confounded him that he had not the
of words, to’ make a. table apology, a C
hypocrisy. . All be ld. do, was by
such things were not ee e co
ant at Detroit had not ordered it’ soothe things
were going the wrong way—that it had not been ex-
pected that they would treat us so roughly, that their
orders had been, to bring us off, but that Indians would
do things their own way, &c.—telling these men in
the Shawanese language, to take us 3 away to their
camp.


_» We were then taken to the line in dig: centre,


which divided the Wyandot and Delaware camps
from each other, and»the scalp yell was. sounded the
same as was done the instant we arrived at Elliot’s
tent, each of the men who had taken us, sounding a
yell for his man. Our being turned off by Elliot, upon
the hands of the .warriors put us now entirely into
their power—those men who. had taken, aud brought
usin, left us standing, and went their way, but the


_ “yells they had given, signifying as much as that, they


had done their part, roused the whole body, who in
an instant were up, with their arms in readiness, to


_ fire upon.us as soon as orders should be given for that


purpose. Yet withal, several of them appeared to be
panic struck, as it was expected, that the Christian
Indians would rise, and endeavour to rescue their
teachers.—A fter we had been standing a few minutes


aS ae


254. HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. car


in the manner they had placed us, several Wyandots
came up and stripped us of our best clothes, took our —
watches, buckels sleeve-buttons, &e. Next came up
a dark looking Monsey, and taking us, one after the
other, by. the hair of the head, shaking us with all his
force, said, (while in the act of shaking::) ** Quawan-
gomel: Nimat! which is: J salute thee my brother! —
then turning to me, he began to strip me of my shirt, *,
saying: “ Friend ! I am much in want of a shirt, and
must shave yours!” but before he had-effected’ his
purpose, a Delaware of. note belonging to the party,
seeing what he was about, ran up and pushing him
from me with force, said, ‘ coward! begone !: what _
harm have these people done you? you are always
foremost where there is no danger!” >: wee
We three prisoners were now in a install é
ted, David Zeisberger and myself were taken into cus-
tody by Kuhn,* the Wyandot war chief from Lower _
Sandusky, and Senseman was taken by the “notorious
war captain of the same nation, named Snip, from


Upper Sandusky, who immediately set about making a a ;
pair of stocks, for keeping him from running away, how: a d
ever by persuasion, and assuring him that he- would --
not attempt to escape, he relinquished his intention, > ? P
The huts we were placed in, were merely roofs of
bark placed on poles to keep the rain off from above, a
‘the sides and ends, being open’; in éach hut however, 7


iy ejead
For an account of this chief, see Heckewelder's History of Indian


Nations, pos Xviil. page 163.


HECKEWELDER’ S NARRATIVE. 255


about twenty-five men could lay dow#t to Pisin}


though on the bare ground. | We were ‘near enough
to speak to each other, but durst not vent rH ure, for fear


the warriors. might suspect us of consulting on the


_ manner of effecting our escape. Being near half an


hour in confinement; during which time there ap-
peared a great commotion among the savages ; we all
of a sudden heard the word given, to start, when in
an instant, about thirty armed Wyandots, commanded


_ by the war chief Kuhn, under a yulley of shrieks and
~ yells, set off for Salem. For oie:


is was a most
afflicting scene, knowing that their object must be,
the taking of my wife and child, together with bro-
ther Young; and that of robbing my house. The
anxiety I felt on this account, is indiscribable.

‘Near an hour had elapsed, before we knew what
had become of our fellow. labourer Edwards, whom
we had left in the house at the time we walked to the
back of the garden, from’ whence we had been taken
prisoners. He now came by himself, walking through
the warriors’ encampment, in search of us, and seeing


his fellow labourer Senseman by himself, he chose to


stay with him. It appeared that the Savages did not


intend making a prisoner of this brother, as his age


and appearance satisfied them, that he would not at-
tempt an escape. Edwards reported, that shortly


-after we had left the house, a number of warriors had


entered, and beginning to plunder, one of them ‘ina
friendly manner, had taken him by the hand, and led


~


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


street, saying, thathe cmibenieansniaii


to themes be i> 30 IST hoe) bognaed

The. evening drawing nigh, we were ignorant how _
we shouldstines during the night; ‘having neither
cloaths on our backs, nor a) single ‘blanket to wrap
ourselves in. Added ‘to this, the weather, which had |
been mild and clear in the forenoon; had. since be- »
come overcast with clouds, and) at intervals. a little
rain. However, the good Indian sisters had not forgot
us, they broug victuals: and blankets, to cover
us during the night. In the morning, when they —
brought our breakfast, they took the blankets. back
with them to prevent their being taken from us du
ring the day. They also remained with us whilst we


victuals if we were left alone.) 9 Yo ee

Gnadenhutten and Salem, being: situated on the
Muskingum, the bells, and barking of dogs, in’the
one place, could be distinctly heard at the other, dus
ring calm weather,’ particularly~ at Gnadeuhutten,
which lay on a high bluff: -This being a- very! close
and calm night, we, at our camps, distinctly heard


were ‘gone to that. place, and who had’ effected their
object, although the distance was between five and


triumph, from this expedition, renewed the scalp
whoop, it was heard, by those who had at our station, —


the house. again for all that was within it, belonged |


eat; apprehending that the Indians would’ take our


the scalp yell sounded, at Salem, by ‘the’ party who


six miles; yet, every time they, while returning in


eee a ee oS ot ee re rs . P24 a ee st, a oe ee Pe
F “ ’ 7 > > ¥
,? K
¥ by - m ‘
- ms
; ’ é ¢


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 257


who. sounded theirs in reply ; by which means, both


parties, although distant from each other, were in a
manner conveying intelligence, and congratulating
each other on their victories. The nearer those coming
from Salem, approached, the more terrible their yells
sounded to my ears. That three ‘persons had fallen
into their hands at Salem, the three yells they gave at
each time, confirmed; but whether they were alive,
or had been murdered by them, could not be known
until their arrival. What we call the scalp yell,
merely signifies the number of persons who have
fallen into their hands; not conveying the intelli-
gence whether they are dead or alive.* At length,
(near midnight,) the party arrived with Michael
Young, whom they placed aside of us. This brother,
on finding us also prisoners, addressed us thus:
** good evening my brethren! our earthly career ap-
pears to be near its end, and we on the borders of
eternity! Well, if they put us to death, we die ina
good cause !’’—then turning to me he added: your
wife and child are safe; the Indian sisters having beg-
ged the warriors, to place them under their care for
the night, they consented under a promise, that they
would bring them to Gnadenhutten. on the next day.

On Michael Young’s perceiving the savages
coming towards my house, (which, besides himself


contained my family,) he secured the door within.


*See Heckewelder’s History of the Indian Nations, chap. xxvii.


2K


ef


258 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


The Indians finding the door belted, loudly demand-
ed entrance, which not being complied with, they
broke it open with their war hatchets; and on enter-
ing, one man aimed a blow with his tomahawk, at bro-
ther Young’s head, which stroke however, was happily
prevented by Kuhn, tbe chief; who, at the instant, run
his arm under the shaft of the hatchet, pushing it out
of the direction it was aimed. They then took
this brother, together with my wife and child
prisoners, and placing them in the street, set guards
over them, while they were plundering the house;
and here, as they had done at Guadenhutten, they
emptied the feathers out of the beds, and the coffee,


they found in a bag, all into the street, in order to get


the tickens and bag, for other uses. '
During a long and dreadful night, whilei we were
lying. upon the bare sod, with our eyes steadfastly
fixed on the east, that we might catch the first glimpse
of the morning light to revive our drooping, spirits,
the sound of the scalp yell was heard to the north, in
the direction of Shonbrun, (though at a great distance,)
it not only checked our prospects, but brought the
whole body of savages into motion. That something


had taken place at Shonbrun, was our first conclusion. —


There it was, that the wives of Zeisberger and Sense-
man, (now prisoners) were left, together with the mis-


_sionary Youngman and his wife,.. The nearer the war


party drew, the greater was the commotion through-


_ out the warriors encampment; the scalp ‘yell being


Finailiedl


gaa ee a ae eS ee me oh van we ee oo aes
4 ; . iy *
‘ w
| 4
e+
|


: HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. '
sotinded, and resuunded from both sides, it seemed
to indicate, that when we were all brought together,
the scene would end in the massacre of the whole.
That many of the savages expected this, we were not
ignorant of, yet, under all these circumstances, and
trials, we were wholly resigned to the will of the Lord.

At length, after repeated yells from the two parties,
namely, from those coming, and those here, the
former arrived by water, with the missionary Young
man and wife, sisters Zeisberger and Senseman ; the
latter with her young babe, only four days old. Im-
mediately, asa welcome, the scalp yell was given ten
times, being intended for all the brethren and sis+
ters in the service of this mission, together with the
two children, which made that number, now prison-
ers with them. Yet, atthe: particular request of the
Indian women of the place, these latter were permit-
ted, to lodge at the house of brother Shabosh, though
not without having previously made a promise, that
they would be accountable for their not running away.
. ‘The brethren and sisters from Shonbrun, related,
that'late in the evening of yesterday, after they had
retired to bed,.a call. was made upon them from the


street, to open the door, to hear something © that —


dinterest. them... They being ignorant what, had
passéd at Gnadenhutten on that day, complied ; when


one* of the’ party addressed them thus : ‘Your friiends” :


-* This man was a noted villain of the Wyandot nation—and w ass hay yiwes
ted for his bad character, yet in chis instance, he was serving the }> arty,


5
be


Tee


260 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. ~


the teachers, are all prisoners, with the warriors ; and
inashort time, a large body of them will be here to
take you also, and to rob you of your property !—
We have therefore, thought fit to apprise you of the
danger you are in, at the same time making you the


offer, that if you will submit yourselves to our pro-_


tection, and deliver your ‘effects to us, we will not
suffer any person to molest you, or touch your pro-
perty.” ’ f Tt

The brethren considering them as friends, espe-
cially as they had a woman with them, who appeared
much concerned for their safety ; they complied, and
even helped to pack up their effects, but they were
undeceived when they saw them carrying their proper-
ty to a large canoe they had in readiness,—and were
commanded to go immediately with them, whether
they were willing or not. Pleading the case of the
missionary Senseman’s wife, she being delivered of a
child but three days before; they said that did not
make any difference, for she must-go with the rest,


and commanded her to rise immediately, as they want-


ed the bedding. Then, having emptied the feathers


into the street, and making an attempt likewise ~


to rob the church of the bell, candlesticks; &ce—=

(from doing which, they however were preven

by the Indian brethren ;) they now hurried th yas
_ their prisoners, to the river to embark. Thus, in a
dark 1night, with intervals of rain, they were taken
down the river to the mouth of still water creek, the


:
.


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 261


half of the way to Gnadenhutten, where they put up
for the night, the prisoners having nothing but the
ground to lie upon, and ~— any ae to cover
themselves.


The Indian sisters arriving about 10 piclock with |


my wife and child, from Salem, as they had promised
the preceding day, another opportunity was. affcrded


the warriors, of sounding their yells. The flood of:


tears shed by the former, on seeing the condition we
were in, caused such a sensation on both sides, that
Wwe were at a loss what to say to each other. The
good Indian sisters, by their supplications, procured
permission for my wife and child, to join the other
sisters, at Shabosh’s house.

The plunder brought from Salem on the last night
was divided among all the Indians belonging to our
camps. A young Wyandot, to whom a new castor
hat, a pair of stockings and a cravat were given, came
with these articles straightway game, and delivered
them up. I had frequently observed ff young man
casting looks of commiseration on us, and now recog-
nised him to be the same, who had accompanied the
great’ Wyandot chief* from Detroit, who paid us,
whilst at Lichtenau, such interesting visits, as have
already been noticed in this narrative.

‘The Christian Indians representing our condition


renege Pipe, in having no clothes on our bal


_*See for this Wyandot chief, Heckewelder’s History of the American, t


Indians, chapter xviii. and xliv. page 337.


aes =. SoS tee oe ree
, i


eo


cee HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.” ao


with the request that he would cause some of the
plundered articles to be restored to us, he immedi-


ately called on his people for the purpose, when: it


was found, that the Delawares had not participated
in the plunder, but that the Wyandots had been the
active body in distressing and plundering us. An.


old coat which they had cut off at the waist, was re~ °


turned to me and was very acceptable... =) 0)
Captain Elliot, who we ascertained, had fora trifle
bought up every pair of new shoes belonging to us;
could not be prevailed on to return even a single pair,
he declaring, that he did not know what had become
of them. This loss, was distressing to those among
us, who laboured under rheumatic: pains, = had to
guard against the damp and wet. 7 Te
A party of the Wyandots, who had gone to die
in the forenoon, now returned with .plenty ‘of honey,
some of which they set before us. They-had gone


there for the purposef searching my:-house once more —
for plunder, * of destroying my beehives, and -eut


ting up the cabbage heads, beets, &c. in the garden. »


About four o’clock in the afternoon:of the second
day of our captivity (September 4), the attention-of


of the savages was again directed to a quarter, from
whence the scalp yell was sounded ;.and which proved
to be a party of those warriors, who had «some
time before, been sent to the Ohio river, for the pur
pose of watching the motions of the’ Americans—and


were now on their return with a prisoner. This white


'


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 263


prisoner being brought within two or three yards of
us, to undergo an examination, we could distinctly


hear all that he reported, as also his answers to ques- —


tions put to him by captain Pipe and others. The
whole of his statement went to criminate the Chris-
tian Indians and their ministers, as being friendly dis-


posed to the people of the United States, and enemies.


to those Indians who warred against them. He added,
that they were the cause that they (the warriors) so
often failed in their attempts ; as these Moravian In-
dians, informed the people living on the Ohio river, of
every party of warriors that were coming against them :
-—that they had at present, sent word into the settle-
ment, that a large body of warriors were at their towns,
‘&e. ; all which we distinctly heard him say, and were
looking him full in the face while he spoke. Even


captain Pipe signified to him that the people he was


accusing, were now in his custody as prisoners; upon
hearing which, he now and then cast a glance around,
andalso upon us.

While this man was standing on the same spot,
‘captain Pipe called aloud to his men to rise and hear.
In an instant the whole body of warriors were on their


— legs, loading their pieces, as though they expected the
word “Fire” to be given. Pipe then pointing to the


man, and relating with some vehemence, what he had
accused the “ Moravian” (Christian) Indians and their
teachers of, concluded by saying: ‘“‘ but my warriors !
we have no orders to destroy them! we are.only to


oN
“4
:
‘gs
]
z
E
eo
ae


=


a oe


264 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


take them away from this place !—and whatever their
teachers have been guilty of—our father at Detroit, |
will best know in what manner to punish them !”—
The prisoner was then taken off without being in’ the
least insulted ;—his dress was the same, as other pris-
oners in a similar situation, just cae: to cover his
nakedness. F
Note. In the spring of the year 1789, while 1 (the
writer of this,) was, by invitation; at the house of Mr.
Barr, (a minister of the gospel at Pittsburg,) the sub-
ject of conversation turning on civilizing the Indians,
and the example of the Moravian (Christian) Indians
being introduced as satisfactory proof, that the measure
was practicable, &c.—a man* from the country, well
dressed stepped into the room where we were sitting,
and, on being informed by the minister, (who knew


him) that we were speaking of the Moravian Indians,


instantly took the thread, and ina most violent manner,
accused these ‘“‘ Moravian Indians,” as Ae called them,
of having been the most dangerous enemy the Unit-
ed States had in that quarter, during the revolutiona-
ry war; adding, that the killing of so many of them
at the Moravian towns, in the spring of the year 1782,
was a very good act, and it was to be regretted,
that their whole body, together with the white
men who lived with them, had not shared ‘the
same fate with the others. He added, that white


* The same person who had been brought in prisoner on the ‘seoma
day of our captivity.


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 265


people, who would liye with such murderers, as
these “ Moravian Indians” were, deserved no. better
treatment, let them be called ministers or other-
wise. He then added, that the Moravian Indians
had taken him prisoner in that war, and brought him
to their town, where, having stripped him naked,
they. abused him, and made him run the gauntlet,
beating him most ‘unmercifully, &e,

.. The man having proceeded thus far, in reporting
manifest falsehoods, I could not suffer the imposition
to. pass in. silence; therefore, stepping forward to
where he .was sitting, I asked him several questions,


' ‘respecting what he had said, to learn whether I had
understood him right... On. being satisfied on that


head, I put the question to him, in what. year, and
month, he had been taken, and to which of the Mo-
favian towns, he was taken a prisoner !—He replied,
that to the 4th day of September, in the year. 1781,
the. was, brought. to the middle Moravian town,
and there) treated by the ‘‘ Moravian Indians,” in


_ the manner. he related; which satisfied me, that I


was not mistaken in the man, whom I had at first
sight. recognized. I therefore, in the presence of


_ the minister, charged him with being an impostor ;


atthe same time, making myself known to him:

added, that I was one. of those ministers, whom

he. had seen at that time, prisoners, and lay close

to him when. he underwent an examination by cap-

tain Pipe, respecting the ‘* Moravian. Indians,” and
2L


266 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


their teachers; whom he accused of being “ ‘friends
to the American people, and enemies to the Indians,
who warred against them—that they, (the Moravian.
Indians,) gave warning to the people on the Ohio,
whenever a war party was going against them.?? _
Observing ‘to him, that he must have known at -
the time he was brought in, that the ‘Moravian
Indians,” were also prisoners to the great body of
warriors he saw there, and the questions put to him, .
by captain Pipe, respecting the ‘‘ Moravian Indians,”
afforded him sufficient opportunity to" know this, and
his answers to those questions, proved, he. did know
it, and that he himself had witnessed. the scene:
which followed, in consequence” of his testimony :
namely, when the whole body of warriors) flew to
their arms, to shoot us! .. ° th
The man appeared bundle struck, when’ he-was
told that I was on. the spot at the time. In» fact,
the story of his being. stripped naked, &c. was a
palpable falsehood. He was treated by’ them’ more
like a man favouring their cause, -and as such,taken —
immediately away. «tee
The minister being called out while I was speak-,
ing, he made an attempt to apologize, but turning my-
self from him, I declared, that avoided the company
of such men as he appeared to be. | After, he had with-
drawn, the minister observed to me, that he had many
times heard the Moravian Indians, charged with hay-
ing been, while they lived on the Muskingum, enemies
y


_


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 267


to the American people. leave it to the reader of this
narrative to decide on this improbable story.

» Expecting that the troubles of the day were now over,
our minds became easy, and we calculated on. enjoy-
ing some sleep, fot having closed our eyes during the
lastnight. . A circumstance, however, occurred in the
course of the day, (of which we had not the least
-knowledge,) and:which gave rise to another restless
night; viz.. . According to the custom of the savages,
they daily sent some of their young mén into the
woods, (where their horses were at pasture,) to examine
whether they were all there, or any missing. ‘This
time they missed captain Pipe’s famous riding horse,
the fleetest among the whole; and on enquiry, they
discovered that the horse was taken off by a woman,
who was gone to Pittsburg. After) much con-
sultation, who that person could: be, it -was. sup-
posed to have been. one of the wives of the missiona-
ries; who had gone to Pittsburg for the purpose of
urging troops, to come out to their relief, and the ,
idea was no sooner suggested, than the report was
circulated, that some of the missionaries’ wives had
disappeared. On this report, I was awakened in the
night by the war chief Kuhn, who demanded of
“me, what had. become of some of our women, for —
one or’more of them, had certainly gone off! As-
suring him, that this could not be the case, he com-
manded me to rise, and go immediately with him, to
where I supposed them to be, or he would not be-


af aa) ee ST! Ue | a ee


at:
*


268 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


lieve me, adding: “ You will find that at least one of
them is gone off,” and calling on another warrior, to
accompany him, we went to the house where they
lodged. The men, modestly stopping at the door of
the house, to which Ihad taken them. I then called; to
awaken the missionaries’ wives, desiring the men to
step into the house to satisfy themselves, that I:had
told them the truth! Kuhn replying, “that as he


saw all four, of them from where he stood, and had ~


heard theiidifferent voices, he must believe me!”


They then took me again to my quarters, and he return- —


ed to the council, (which was sitting,) to make report
of what he had seen and heard ; which perfectly satis-
fied them that we were all safe. af ea

The council however, still suspecting, that the mis-
sionaries had sent letters by some person, to solicit.
relief from Pittsburg, became so enraged, that they
again spoke of murdering us, which one of the Chris-
tian Indian women hearing, told her husband, that
yesterday in the forenoon, whilst she was getting
fire wood out of the woods, she had’ observed such a
young woman, sitting on a log weeping aloud, that
stepping up, to learn what occasioned her weeping,
she replied: that “the hard treatment those good
white people had met with by the warriors, had so
overwhelmed her with grief, that she could not sleep
last night; and that she never would be able to ‘forget
it!"—This being immediately made known to cap-
tain Pipe, he had the woman examined; and finding


Ad ie, oh ee he


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 269,


that this was the whole of what she knew respecting
the other, and that at the time, she did not suspect
that the other had any thing in view, (as many of our
Indian women had, on «the occasion, discovered the
same feelings,) they now sent spies to Salem, to en-
quire whether the woman alluded to was with her
mother, and if not, when she had been there last.
On being informed that she had left her. mother’s
house immediately, on learning what had been done
to the teachers of the Christian Indians, and did not
even intimate where she was going to: suspicion
fell on Isaac Glickhican* uncle of the woman,t that
he had sent’ her off privately. They were rejoiced,
to get a hold of this man, whom they both hated and
dreaded. Hating him, on account of his conversion ;
and dreading him as a man, who prior to his joining
the Christian Indians, had been, both in council and
‘in the field, superior to many of their ablest characters:
"Sixteen of the bravest Delawares were ordered on
an Expedition, to, take this (single) man—if possible
alive—if otherwise to bring his scalp—these with
shrieks and yells—all mounted’on horseback, gallop-
ed off for Salem; and in afew hours brought him,
with his hands tied on his back, to the half king;


r


_ ®The same man of whom frequent mention is made in this narrative ;
as also in Heckewelder’s Historical Account of Indian nations,


+ This young woman did not belong to the society, but had come here
on a visit to her mother, and other relatives.


270 Pa HECKEWELDER’ s dain


when, after a strict cumin being made, and his |
innocence fully. proved, he was. acquitted, although Na
loaded with enianeeet by his enemies, and the :
rabble. © i. het’ sonnet yy
., Onthe arrival of se aia ssReliins iad surround- a
ed the house, at such a-distance as they thought
would prevent his escaping them, but fearing to. en- |
ter, they watched for his coming out. Isaac’ seeing
them from the inside, stepped outy and addressed them
thus : “Friends! by your manoeuvres, I conclude:you
are come for me! if so, why do you hesitate ! obey
your orders! Iam ready to submit! you, appear to
dread Glickhican, as formerly known to you! yes!
there was a time, when I would haye scorned to haye —
been assailed in the manner you meditate ; but Lam
no more Glickhican*! I am Jsdae now, a believer
in the true and living God ;,and for lice vaceans
willing to suffer any thing—even » death !”— :
stepping up to them with his. hands -placed on his
back, he said, you want to tie me, and take me along,
do so.”—With trembling hands they. tied him, and
took him off.—In passing by our camp at Gnadenhut-
ten, while they were taking him tothe half king, he
addressed us : ‘‘ a good morning my brethren!”—to _
which we replied : ‘“‘ good morning fellow prisoner, be
of good cheer !”—“ Yes ! yes ! (said he: in reply) 1
am so.””— RO. a
“4


*“ Glickhican,” was his original Indian name, the word sre he ne
stud, or sight on a gun barrel.


Tin


> . as , 3
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. | QTE


Note. A gracious providence may be considered
as having overruled the good disposition, and first in-
tention of the commandant at Pittsburg ; who, on the
representation made to him by the woman, had atfirst,
resolyed ‘to senda strong force out to our relief, but
was afterwards induced to abandon the design, on the
supposition that it would be’ too late; or might fail


- inobtaining the desired object; which, no doubt ‘at


this time, would have been the ease, it not being an
easy matter ‘to’ attack “such a body of Indians by
surprise, as they have’ their spies aay watching the
movements of their enemy.

“The Indian brethren, ‘who, to-prevent suspicion,
had. hitherto very properly avoided visiting us while


‘under confinement, being not the less anxious’ to


learn our situation would, from day to day, send the
Sisters to the camps with victuals, tobacco &c. Phili-
pina, who had taken the lead in this service was never


“ata loss for assistants, to carrying out our breakfast


coffee, and other victuals, together with blankets for the


night, with all which’ we were abundantly supplied.
We had also, by the intercession of these sisters, ob-~


tained permission to visit our familes once a day, fora


quarter of an hour; yet, with the promise, that» we


would not run off with them ; and for which the Indi-


-ansisters, who were our conductors, had become res-


ponsible.
~ Our masters—(I mean those ii hadu us under their
custody) had by this time become somewhat sociable,


ra en ; a Oey > ee re a
ies fax POF
3 * id vy


Xl _
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


q
;
¢


peared asif. ‘ibe were dive or what they had done, and "
no doubt some felt so. —What incommoded us most. |
re was their custom of repeating the scalp yell so often, ’
for each of. their prisoners, during night..as well
as in the day time; but, this isa ge¢neraleustom
with them, and is continued, until the prisoner is: lib- ?-
erated, or killed.. Another very incommoding custom
they have, is that of,performing their war dances and
songs, during the night, near their: prisoners); all
which we had to endure, exclusive of being thereby
ji prevented from enjoying sleep. Otherwise the ad-
F dresses paid us by a jovial, and. probably harmless
f Ottawa Indian, who, having obtained. of the Wyandett _
warriors, sufficient of our clothes, to dress himself —
Bs: like a white man; and placing a white might cap on
his head, being mounted on a - horse, idee ;
through the camps, nodding to us,every time: hepen —


sed; caused much amusement through: the ¢

, 3 in some measure, to us also. ; so haat
a The national assistants of the place,’ had Aisha)
i waited with anxiety for the moment, when nei


with some prospect of success, (by supplication,) pro-
cure us our liberty. Marcus, . particularly, of the


e Mohagan tribe, possessing a soft and engaging ad-—
3 ef ' dress, gained so much influence with the Delaware —
chiefs, Pipe and Wingemund ; that they promised him, |
Pe . that if we should give them satisfactory answers to
bs a few questions they wished to ask, we sbouli ea


Se mes “34 a le —“ ts
- : . : tap
-
_ HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 278


liberty. Being shortly after _brought before the
chiefs for the purpose, (Elliot being present) questions
were put to us ; namely: “ Whether we were willing
to go with them to Sandusky ? Whether we would
also encourage our Indians to go with us ? and lastly :
Whether we would promise, that we would not run
away from them ?”—all which being answered to
their satisfaction, they declared us free to go and stay
with our families in the town. On my asking leave


to go to Salem on the following morning, to pro-'


vide for the reception of the Christian Indians,


who would follow in a day or two. Pipe replied :


** go !—and tell your people there, that they must
leave off working, and must get provision for the
journey ! for, when you come there, you will find
them building new houses, as though nothing was the
matter!” Kuhn and Snip, under whose custody we
were, being officially notified of our liberation, we


took lodging in the houses of our Indian Brethren,


who, together with the sisters and children came
towelcome us, with tears in their eyes.

On the next morning (the 7th), captain Elliot
called on me to ride with him to Salem, as was agreed
on the preceeding day. On our way thither, he took
much pains to remove from my mind, any unfavoura-
ble impression I might have of him, owing to his hay-
ing had any agency in the misfortunes, and treatment
we had met with. Not choosing to open my mind to
him on the subject, at this time, I barely observed :

2M


ae. aa


/


274 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. |


that I could not see into the heart of man, but that
there was a just God who could do this. vote hel

' On our, arrival at Salem, every soul wanneieil to
the village, ran to bid me welcome, many weep-
ing ; and the little children clung to me as though they
would not let me go again. Elliot, on seeing this,
either from conviction or shame, , turned aside, say-
ing, ‘ this is what I never would have expected to
witness!”——The sisters soon brought victuals, tea,
coffee, &c. each striving to excel the other, in acts of
kindness.—It was a hard task for me to make known
to the congregation, that we had all to go with the
warriors to Sandusky, and that it was only on our
promising that we would do so, that we had obtained
our liberty. ‘The national assistant, Samuel Moore,
had only this day finished shingling his new spacious
dwelling house, built of squared timbers. My house
and garden, made a very gloomy appearance, the
warriors having destroyed every thing they could lay
their hands on, both in the house and inthe garden. —

On the next day (September 8th), not only alk the


missionaries, with their families, but alsoa numberof —


the Christian Indians from Gnadenhutten and Shon-


brun, arrived here, some coming by land with the cat:


tle, and others by water with baggage and. proyisions,
and on the day following, the remainder of the breth-
ren and sisters, from both those places, came-‘on in
like manner. =
Our Indians had already, from the day we were


——eeeEeEeEOeeeEeEeEEEOeE——EE——E—E——=—=—_


€
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 275


made prisoners, prepared for the event, which now


- took place, they had buried all their heavy articles,


such as plough irons, harrow teeth, grubbing hoes,
cross cut and whip saws, pewter and kitchen articles,
&e. in the woods, which labour they had to do in
the night, ‘apprehensive of being discovered.—As
this is a general custom with Indians, when they
emigrate—The savages, now supposed this to have
been the case with the Christian “Indians. The
half king, therefore, with upwards of one hundred
of his men, suffered the Christian Indians to go
on without him, leaving them in the charge of cap-


‘tain Pipe and his men, whilst he searched the woods


-at both places, for buried or hidden articles, of which


they found much, by tracing the footsteps to the


places, where the articles were hidden, or buried.


The three congregations, being now assembled
at Salem, the gospel was again preached publicly ; a


 catechumen baptised ; and the holy sacrament admin-


istered to the communicants ; during which, a most
extraordinary sensation of the presence of the Lord,
comforted their hearts. All were exhorted to stand
firm, and show their faithfulness in the hours of trial
and temptation.

The Delawares, of the party under captain Pipe’s
command, (who were our guard,) conducted them-
selves in a becoming manner, both to us and our Indi-
ans, many of whom had also attended divine service,


276 | HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. ©


daily since we came here, but on the tenth the half
king with his host of plunderers arrived, who beha~
ved like madmen, yelling and shrieking through the
village—throwing down all the fences of the corn-
fields, and turning their horses in, as they had done
in both the other places—next killing hogs and poul-
try, &c. In short, they did every thing, that they
thought would injure the Inbabitants. Seeing it’ im-
possible for us to continue here longer, we signified
to captain Pipe our desire of going on; and all being
in readiness, we left the place the next day, being the
11th day of the month. etic eas

Never did the Christian Indians leave a country
with more regret. ‘The three beautiful settlements,
Gnadenhutten, Shonbrun, and Salem, were now to be


forsaken, together with many of their young cattle,


that were in the woods, with some hundred head


of hogs, and at least three hundred acres of corn, ripe


for harvesting, exclusive of a great quantity of old
corn, potatoes, turnips, cabbages, &c. were now lost


to them: together with books, that were burnt, many —


of which were for the instruction of the youth. Here


indeed was patience required, and ahope that the


Lord would be with them and grant them further
strength and fortititude, to overcome all difficulties
and dangers. ea

We continued travelling, some by land with the
cattle, and others by water, the Indians having up-
wards of twenty canoes loaded with provision and


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 277


sundries, with them. Arriving at Goschochking,
(forks of the Muskingum) on the third day, a halt was
ordered for the purpose of hunting a tamed buffaloe
cow, that belonged to, one of the party, and was
supposed to be inthe woods feeding with other tame
horn cattle; the hunters had scarcely been out a
quarter of an hour, when the buffaloe, coming to
the opposite side of the river to drink, was shot,
and the meat divided among the whole, we also re-
ceiving a share.

Elliot, who had travelled aids us thus far, now de-
parted with his attendant for Sciota, where his friend
and companion in mischief captain M‘Kee, was wait-
ing to learn of him the particulars of the expedition.
It had been frequently remarked by the Christian In-
dians, that. during the whole stay of Elliot among
them, which was full four weeks, he never was
seen outside of his tent, without having a drawn dag-
ger in his hand, and which those ascribed to his bad
heart. They had also learnt from their heathen rela-
tions, that he was the principal instigator of their suf-
ferings ; having continually importuned captain Pipe
and the half king, tolodge complaints with .the com-
mandant at Detroit against them and their teachers,
and insist on the removal, or destruction of us (the
Christian Indians). We thanked God, when Elliot
departed from us.

Our course was now up the Walhanding river
(otherwise called the white woman’s creek). But, the


278 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVES


river being at this season 1 low, and . “harrow
places obstructed by driftwood, the watermen had to
cut a passage, before they could pass on, which caus- —
ed us to move very slowly. ‘Those who travelled by
land, having their provisions in the canoes, were
frequently obliged to wait an hour, or longer, until
the canoes came up, which obliged us to mei
short journeys each day. COO, Ges SaaF
On the night of the 19th, we experienced a most
tremendous storm, accompanied by dreadful peals of
thunder; the flashes of lightening were so vivid, that
the whole horizon appeared in a blaze. It came on
with such rapidity, that we had scarcely time to pre-
serve ourselves from the falling trees. Never, per-
haps were men on land in amore dangerous situation,
from thunder storms, than we'were at this time; to
which the situation of the ground, marked out for us
by the savages to encamp on, added greatly. This
storm, which lasted some time, and during which
the rain fell in torrents, caused the water to run in
streams over the ground, on which we were, so that
we all, even the women with babes in their arms, had
to stand in the water, until it had flowed off. Every
fire in the camp, was either put out by the rain, or
washed away by the current. However, as soon as
the water had run off, new fires were kindled for us,
by the Indians. Dismal was the ‘prospect in the
morhing, to see so many large trees torn up by their
roots; while others, broken off at or near their tops,


ay oe


_ HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 279


were carried by the wind to some distance, some even
being lodged very near us. ‘Two of our best canoes,
the one remarkably large and heavy loaded, partly
with valuable articles belonging to the Indians, and
partly with our stock of provisions, had been crush-
ed to pieces, by large trees being blown down. upon
them, and every article lost. This loss was severely
felt by us; yet, we were thankful that no lives were
lost. '

The half king, who the day before had came up
with his men, from Salem, where he had remained
for the purpose of searching for hidden, and buried
property ; gave orders in the morning to lay by for the
day, for the purpose of drying our clothes and bagr
gage; and although we had not much to dry, yet we
were glad of a little rest.-—In the forenoon of this day,
he also sent off a party of his men, among whom
were his two sons, to make a stroke on the white set-
tlers on the Ohio river. While they were so proud-
ly walking through our camp, they were not aware of
what would befal them. They were defeated with
the loss of some of the party, among whom were the
half king’s two sons.

A singular occurrence took place, in the course of
the day, which, it was feared by some of us, would
be followed by serious consequences ; which, however
was not the case, viz: “Two of our young brethren,
Jacob and Peter; having taken a view into. the Wy-
andot camps, which was in the bottom lands above


of Pra
7 ’ al)
‘
ous L


280 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


us, saw a horse there, belonging to one of the |


missionaries, tied to a fence close by a hut, with
the saddle and bridle hanging on a pole. Feeling for
the proper owner of the horse, who had to travel on
foot, and enraged at seeing the wearing apparel of
their teachers, and of their wives and children, spread
on the bushes to dry; they took the’ resolution, to
take the horse, saddle and bridle, without ceremo:
ny; which they effected, by laying claim to the pro-
perty ; and from apprehension, that the horse might
be again taken, were he discovered in the possession
of the missionary who owned him, the brethren kept
him under their care, for the rest of the journey:
furnishing the missionary with one of their horses to
ride on. *

Continuing our journey for a number of days after
the manner we had done, we arrived at Gookhosing
(habitation of Owls) where we left the river, travelling
altogether by land across the country, for Upper San-
dusky; and suffered much on the way, through the
ill will of the Wyandots, who by this time had be-
come impatient to get home, and for that purpose
would in a manner drive us before them, whipping
the horses of the riders, so that sister Zeisberger was
twice thrown from the horse she rode; and Michael
Young, who was on foot, and lame at the time, re=
cieved a blow from one of them, while calling out to
us “ How! How!” which is: * along ! ‘along ?? We
were all very much fatigued this day, and as none of


25 NS RE eS SIR ae CMI SERRE Gs dk aa eld te ag


‘this time we could only conjecture w ‘ogcasion-


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 28h


caniRihinnstlbecen and sisters, were able to keep up


_ with us, they having very Mierrentiamaen


sides. their eattle to take care of; we felt uneasy, as
we had to pass the. night in the midst af a \ body of
savages, of whom we had no_ ee ie


4


ed the treatment, we. experienced from them; but,
we: afterwards learnt, that the news that was re-
cieved. the day before; of the defeat of the war party,


_ in which the two sons of the hall. nae were killed, was
most probably the cause. _ _ ed


_ Arriving at length on pe auth sae ‘of October,
the old Upper Sandusky town, which is on the east
branch of the river of that name, we were left there
by the half king and party, to shift for ourselves in
the best Manner we could: while they, together with
their horses, all which were heavy loaded with plun-
der, moyed nine orten miles farther towards theirhomes.

~The prospect of this dreary and barren country,
which had been described to us as a paradise, made
those of our people ashamed, whg had listened to the
favourable report the savages gave of it, while they
Were’ persuading them to leave their settlements


onthe Muskingum, and go with them thither, with


upwards of one. hundred head of horn. cattle, princi-

pally milch cows, and nearly a hundred head of horses.

We were at a loss to concieve how these could sup-

port themselves, during a-long winter, which had al-

ready set in. Having no time to loose, we Commen-
2N


282 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


ced building huts of logs, for the winter, and the dai-
ly meetings, were for the present, continued, in the
same manner as during our journey, namely’: seat-
ing ourselves, every evening, when the weather per-
mitted, round a fire in the open air; when a dis-
course, or short exhortation, was delivered, by one of
the ministers.. At times, some of the strolling sava-
ges would also attend, not. for the purpose of hear-
ing the gospel preached, but to. scoff and laugh
at us.

Every day now brought us new tronbles. The
cattle finding no good pasture, were continually at-
tempting to return, and therefore had to be watch-
ed. The milch cows failed for want of proper
feed ; and owing to this, many families, and especial-
ly those who had small children, suffered. Provisions
of all kinds were wanting, and when the women went
into the woods, or on the river banks, to look for, and
dig roots as a substitute, they either could not find
what they were in search of, or the ground. was too
hard frozen to get atthem. Corn was very scarce
throughout the country, and those who had the article,
asked a dollar for three of four quarts. Even the
timber for building was far off, for all the country, to
a great distance, was a barren prarie, with the excep-
tion of here and there a few scattered trees. The
pinching cold was severely felt by all those who were
in want of clothes and bedding, and this was particu-
larly the case with us.


HECKEWELDER’S ‘NARRATIVE. 288 |


Under the pressure of sufferings, we were ridiculed
and laughed at.—* Look !” (said the Monsey chief to
a Wyandot,) “look at these praying (Christian) In-
dians! who but the other day were ise: in affluence,
how they now creep about in the bushes, looking for
roots and berries to keep themselves from starving!
Well! they aré served right; for why should some
live better than others! we have now brought them
on a level with us!” Yet such sayings was not the
worst, but both captain Pipe and the half king boasted,
‘that they now had it in their power to compel the
Christian Indians to go to war with them, whenever
they chose to command them.” *

On the 23rd day of this month, (October) we learnt
from some of our brethren, who returned from
Bipe’s town with a small quantity of corn: that cap-
tain Elliot was now there ; and, as they had been told,
engaged with the chiefs in some private business.
We suspected the object of his visit, and indeed early


on the next day, two Delaware chiefs arrived with a


message, said to have been sent from the commandant
at Detroit, to the Delawares and Hurons (Wyandots),
and which they were to lay before us. This message,*
as delivered to us, was in the following words: viz.
‘* children! your father on the other side of lake Erie,
is glad to hear that you have brought the believing In-


* See this message in Lockiel’s History of the mission of the United
Brethren among the North American — part iii, chap. ix, page
164, London edition: ©


284 _ HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVEs


dians and their teachers, to Sandusky, for now all na-
tions may be united, and all obstacles removed; and
the little birds in the woods, cannot sing so, many
lies in your ears. Now the Virginians will sit in the
dark, and hear nothing more about us, from, which
we expect to derive. great advantages. I leave.it to
your discretion, to find a dwelling for the .believing
Indians, wherever you please. In a few daysa vessel
will arrive in the Miami from Detroit, with goods,
where your father will reward you well foryour servie
ces. But he requests that captain Pipe would. con+
duct the teachers (Missionaries) and some. of .the
chiefs of the believing Indians to him, as he wishes
to see and speak to them himself. He says; I know
better how to speak to them than you, for Lknow |
them, and can better provide for them,. having, plen- _
ty of every thing.” ( a 9 ee
Now, by the orders sent us from captain Pipe, we
white Brethren, were all to_go to Detroit, leaving our
families behind. ‘To this we did-not think. proper to —
accede ; neither would we consent, that the missiona>
ries should all go. The result.was,. that the Brethren
Zeisberger, Senseman, Edwards and. the writer of this
narrative, agreed to go, but that the Brethren Young-
man and Young, should remain at home, to attend to
the concerns of the congregation, and assistin providing
for our familfes in our absence ; and Wingemund, the
bearer of captain Pipe’s order to us, was requested
both to inform, and explain to him, what we had


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 285


resolved upon ; assuring him, that we “would be res-
ponsible for acting thus, and no blame should be laid
on him» bythe commandant at Detroit for not bring:
ing’ us all. And further, tha ould meet him
onthe morrow at his town. 9

» Accordingly on the morning of the 25th, we four,
together with several of our Indian Brethren, among
whom was» the “national “assistant - William Chel-
loway (who spoke goodBiglish) after taking ee
of our families, and the whole congregation, w

out’ knowing, whether we should ever see each
other again, set out for Detroit. Arriving Peat
town, ten miles distant, we were told, that he had
already gone on to the Miami river, to which place we


should follow him ; when reaching that place on the


27th we found him = intoxicated, and
such a great number « ken Indians about him,
that it was not advisable to approach him ; we there-


fore encamped some distance off. -


_ The intolerable noise of the drunken Indians, du-
ring'the night, the danger we hourly were in from
them, and the uncertainty when this drinking would
cease, caused serious reflections respecting ourselves,
considering the situation we were in. We had also
by this time learnt from good authority, that within
afew days, between four, and five hundred Indians
would arrive, in addition to those who were here al-
ready, and that the quantity of liquor ready for
them was great. Learning where Elliot was en-


+


a


286 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


camped, and that he was waiting for the arrival of the
vessel from Detroit with the goods for the Indians,
I went to him with one of our Indians, to see if we
could not be permitted to pursue our journey with-
out captain Pipe, as it was not likely that he would
quit drinking for some time. He replied, that we
“‘ durst not proceed without him, he, (Pipe) being
expressly named by the commandant, as the person
who was to bring us tohim !” Asking his permission
‘to put a few questions to him on the subject, I asked
first, if he expected we would live to see the command-
ant at Detroit, if we must wait for Pipe’s becoming
sufficiently sober, to go with us? and secondly, whether
he believed, that if the commandant could see the
situation we were placed in here, as he now saw it, he
would be indifferent, with regard to our safety 2—He
was much puzzled how to reply, but at length, on re-
flection, he said he believed we might go on without
Pipe, as we had some Indians with us, who would pro-
tect us from the insults of warriors of other nations. I
thanked him for the permission given, and returned
to our camp, where we got in readiness to go off imme-
diately. re
At the moment, we were mounting our horses. to
depart, an Indian express from Pipe’s town, came ri-
ding full speed, sounding the “ alarm yell,?* when
every Indian present, able to walk, moved on oper


?
* Alarm yell,see Heckewelder’s History of the Indian Nations, eo.
xxvii. page 210.


|


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 287


the news, and which turned out to be’a report brought


by a runner to Sandusky, “ that our brother She-


bosh, who with some of the Tudian Brethren, had
some days before gone to Shonbrun to fetch corn, for
their suffering families, had with them been taken by
a body of Americans, and killed, and that a large body
of Americans were, at this present time, on their
march to Sandusky for the purpose of surprising the


‘settlements at that place.’”— e os


. It appeared that these reports caused a great com-
motion among the Indians assembled here, some of
whom became very much enraged, and we taking
advantage of their confusion, departed; yet, it was
with heavy hearts, that we were proceeding in an


ae Se ee
Ba :


yy


“


i an wu
ed a ioe See


opposite direction from where we had left our fami-_


lies ; and had noother alternative left us, but to go to
Detroit.—The vessel containing the goods for the In-
dians, we saw sailing up the bay.

We found the roads round the head of the lake
(Erie) in many places most intolerable for travelling ;
such indeed, as we had never before seen. Mires,
and large swamps, not sufficiently frozen over to bear
our horses, who were continually breaking through,
and sometimes sinking belly deep into the mire,
which frequently obliged us to cut strong poles to
prize them out again. Deep creeks, (here called
rivers) were another obstacle to travelling, we having


to’ swim: our horses across, and where we could not


meet with a canoe for ourselves, we had to cross on


VA t me


 288- HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVES


‘ rafts, made of poles put together. —Bleak prairies, “in Ie


some places for miles ‘in length, over which: the cold
west, or north st wind was blowing in our faces, so =
that we scotaasdelly stand against it, and having but
few clothes on our backs, to preserve us from perish:
ing with cold, we would frequently walky:driving the
horses before us. The only comfortablehours we
shad during this whole jonrney; were, with the ex
ception ofithe last, the nights when we could get ine
to the woods, and'make large fires. At Brownstown, . af
(a Huron village), we stopped a short time to restyand
being informed that we might reach Detroit'that day;
we continued our journey.. But what a disappoint:
ment ! when we were within four miles of the town,
which we had in full view, we came *to a deep river,


~ called Rush, (properly Rouge)’and from where we hit


upon it, we had no means of crossing; nor could we
discover in any place either a raft for’ crossing nor a
house. Here we now were, on a bleak'point, atthe
junction of this with the Detroit river*where not a
stick of wood was to be found‘; and where*the cold
northwest wind, blowing over an extensive prairie, —
which lay at the back of us, came upon us with all —
its force, so that we had to-move about: the whole —
night, to keep ourselves alive. ° O how ‘we longed to
see the light of the morning! and how rejoiced were S
we when shortly after this appeared, we saw two large _
boats coming down the Detroit river, and making for
the river we were on, and the good people took us


aia oe


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 289


across. Now, after having passed a dreadful night,


we were approaching a fine town, in which we hoped.


to be so fortunate as to meet with some hospita-
ble person, who would furnish us with an early and
warm breakfast which we stood much in need of;
however, we finally found, that we had failed in


our calculation on this point ; for being arrived at the


west gate of the town, the centry would not suffer
“us to pass in, and we were obliged to stand on the draw-


bridge for along time, until the pleasure of the com- -


mandant, (who. resided at the east end of the town)
was known: when we were permitted to proceed ;
the cold wind blowing all this time with violence
upon us.

It being by this time known in the town, that the
Moravian missionaries were come on as prisoners ;
curiosity drew the inhabitants of the place into
the street, to see what kind of people we were.
The few clothes we. had on our backs, and these tat-
tered and torn, might have induced them to cast looks
of contempt upon us, but we did not find this to be the
case. We observed, that we were viewed with com-
misseration. After standing some time in the street,
opposite the dwelling of the commandant ; we were
brought in before him, where, with empty stomachs,
shivering with cold, worn down by the journey,
and not free from rheumatic pains ; we had again to
stand until we underwent a short examination.—
Being at length dismissed, Mr. Bawbee took us to

20


ae eee a te ee ee ee


bag “=
Pie. 3 9D, HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


_ the house of a private French family, which consisted =,


ke of Mr Tybout and wife (both elderly people,) and hay-
| ing nochildren. We were told by Mr. Bawbee, who _
Bs acted as an agent for the Indian department, that we
ie might make ourselves easy for the present—and were
me not forbidden to walk about. We soon found ourselyes


in a good birth, fer not only our landlord and his wife
3 were obliging and kind to us, but we found many
een here who befriended us,—even among the. officers
be “i themselves. In other circumstances than we at the
a time were, we might have: felt ourselves contented
gE and happy ; but, knowing that our families, were not
only suffering from .hunger and cold, but were also
kept continually, (on ouraccount) between hope. and,
. fear, and being so repeatedly told by the savages, that
we never would be permitted to return to them again,
added to which, the report we had heard while at the
Me rapids of ‘the Ohio, was still kept alive, by the Indi-
ans who. were daily coming in; all. which produ-
ced great mental anxiety to us: Happy were we
‘therefore, that the day had come, when our conduct
E : whilst among the Indians was to be inquired into, in
a public place ; and before a council, where the accu-
ser and the accused were to meet, face to face, These
were captain Pipe, and two of his principle councel-. #
lors, for whom the commandant had been long wait-. —


ing and who were now arrived, —
I . Accordingly,.on the 9th day of November, w we were
conducted to the council house, where we found the


HECKEWELDER’S'NARRATIVE. _ 291


commandant with Mr. Bawbee by his side, together


with other gentlemen, and a great number of Indi-
ans, with the Indian interpreters, seated, or standing


in their proper places—The Indians of the different


tribes were separately seated—some to the right of
the commandant, and the Delawares right before
him, with captain Pipe and his councellors in front.
We four missionaries were placed by ourselves, on a
bench to the left; a war chief, of each of the two
divisions of the Indians, was holding a stick, of three
or four feet long with scalps on it, which they had
- taken in their last excursions against the people of the
United States. : 4
' The council being opened, by the commandant sig-
-nifying to captain Pipe, that he might make his report :
he rose from his seat, holding a stick with two scalps
on it in his left hand, and addressed* the commandant
ina very remarkable and spirited manner, with respect
tothe present war; and that of their fathers (the Brit-
ish) having drawn their children (the Indians) into it,
&e. handing him, at the close of his speech, the scalps.
Having seated himself again, a war chief of the other


party rose in like manner with his scalp ; and after


concluding his address, he also handed it to the com-
+ mandant, who, as before; gave it to the interpreter,
standing behind him, to put aside. This business
being finished, the commandant addressed captain


* For this address, see Heckewelder’s Account of Indian Nations,
chapter xi.


aL ee


er


mr ¥


eS LS ———-) =e oS ou 7 = pS See ee
tyes” a - ‘as = c


292 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


Pipe to the following effect, viz. captain Pipe !
* You have for a long time lodged complaints with:
me, against certain white people among your na-
tion, and whom you call teachers to the believing In-
dians, who, as. you say, are friends tu the Americans,
and keep up a continual correspondence with them, ,


to the prejudice of your father’s* interest! You


having. so repeatedly accused: these teachers, and
desiring that I might remove them from among you;
I at length commanded you to take them, togeth-
er with the believing Indians, away from the Mus-
kingum, and bring them into your country; and
being since informed, that this had been done, I
ordered you to bring those teachers, together with
some of their principle men before me, that I might.
see and speak with them; since that time these men,
now sitting before you, have come in, and surrender-
ed themselves up to me, without,your being with them.
I now ask you, captain Pipe, if these men are those
of whom you so much complained ; and whom I order-
ed you to bring before me ? Pipe replying in the af
firmative, the commandant continued : “ Well, both
the accuser and the accused being present, it is but
fair, that the accused hear from the accuser, the com-
plaints he has againsthim ; I therefore desire you
to repeat what you have told me of these teachers,and
accused them’ of!” Pipe, standing at the time, now
turned to his councellors, telling them to get upon


* The British.


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 293


their legs and speak ; but finding them panic struck, he
appeared to be at a loss how to act—once more turn-
ing to them, he endeavoured to make them sensible
that this was the time to speak, and that the opportu-
nity now granted them, for that purpose, would be
_Jostto them for ever, if they spake not !—finally, see-
ing them hanging their heads, and remaining mute,
he boldly stood up, and defended the teachers against
the accusations brought against them, saying *
that “‘ they were good men; and, that he wished his
father (viz. the cammandant) to speak good words*
to them, for they were hist friends; and that he
would be sorry to see them treated ill and hard2’—
The commandant still persisting in having the call he
had made on captain Pipe, of repeating what he had
told him of those teachers now present; he became
greatly embarrassed, and casting another glance at his
frightened, and dejected councellors, who still were
hanging their heads; he did report—yet adding:
“ father! the teachers cannot be blamed for this ; for
living in our country where they had to do whatever
we required of them, they were compelled to act
as they did! They did not write letters (meaning
speeches) for themselves, but for us ! Zt am to blame!


eo:


* Meaning to treat them civily and kindly.


' + “ His friends,” meaning thereby to say: that they were by the na-
» tion generally, considered as well disposed to them—and sought the best’


+ Meaning the nation.


&


- 294


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


Z caused them to do what they did! ‘We urged them
to it, whilst they refused, telling us, that they did not
come here for the purpose of meddling with our affairs,
but for the spiritual good of the Indians !”” The com-
mandant then asking him, what he wished him to do
with us, whether he should send us out of the coun-
try, or permit us to return again to our families and


congregation ; he, contrary to what was expected, ad-
vised the commandant to suffer us to return to our .


homes. “ett

We being now questioned by this general officer, with
regard to our ordination and vocation; but particular-
ly with regard to our connection with the American
Congress—and whether we were dependant on that
body ? we answered: “that the Society to which we
belonged, had for upwards of thirty years, laboured
among the North American Indians, for the purpose
of bringing them over to Christianity.—That from the
commencement of our Missions, Missionaries had
been continually among them, who were sent by the
Bishops and Directors of our Church.—That Congress


indeed knew of our labouring among the Indians, for


the purpose already stated; but that they never had,
either directly or indirectly, interfered with our Mis-


sionary concerns: nor prescribed rules for us toact by.


That all we knew of the American congress, was : that
they wished all the Indians to be at peace and not take
part in the war on either side : but, follow the example
of their countrymen, the Christians Indians, and join


 —


|


.


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 295


them in becoming an ery anda naar staan ie


ple, &c.”


-. The commandant next stepping up to us, declared


us acquitted of the charges laid against us, assuring
us, at the same time “ that, he felt great satisfaction and
pleasure, in seeing our endeavours to civilize and
Christanize the Indians, and would cheerfully permit
us to return again to our congregation !”—All which
being interpreted to captain Pipe and his party, he next
‘turned to the national assistants, expressing his satisfac-
tion also in seeing them; admonishing them to con-
' tinue to obey their teachers, and not meddle with
wars, and taking them by the hand, promised. that
they should be furnished with some clothing. Fi-
nally having intimated that we should be furnished
with clothes and other necessary articles—and offer-
ing his-services whenever we should stand in need of
them, or his advice and assistance, he concluded by
saying ; that henceforth, we should have free access* to
him at his house, whenever we were desirous of see-
ing him.

On retiring from the council house, we were con-
gratulated by many respectable Inhabitants of the
place on our happy acquittal ; and the prospect of our


Ww — returning to our families, Even captain Pipe


+ *Papvions to the meeting on this day, we were not permitted to state
our grievances to the cammandant, either verbally or by petition. Mr.
Bawbee, having signified to us that we must patiently await the arrival
of captain Pipe, on which all depended.


ee Ce ee eee ee. as bal


a ad


296 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


himself, after asking our Indians, how they were sati-


fied with what he hadsaid: observed, that he knew


he had spoken the truth, and adding: “ I never wished
your teachers any harm, knowing that. they love
the Indians; but, I have all along been imposed on and
importuned to do what I did, by those who do not love
them ; and now, when these were to speak, they hung
their heads, leaving me to extricate myself, after telling
our father things they had dictated—and pebramacnee me
to tell him.” :
' Whilst the taylors was making clothes for us, we
were invited by our friends in town, to visits. One
merchant, shortly after our arrival at this place, re-
turned some new clothes belonging to one of us,
which he had purchased of one of the Indian warriors
who took us. Another trader who had purchased of
those warriors four silver watches, belonging to us,
had to deliver them up to the commandant, who
satisfied him, and gave them to usagain. This gener-
ous officer, also sent a barrel of pork, with some flour,
to Sandusky for us. aiabhL.
We were, upon the whole, thankful, that since God
had permitted the savages to lay hands on us, he also
had so directed their ways, that we did not fall a saeri-
fice to their vengeance, and that the disigns of those
who thought they were sure of seeing us banished
out of the country,—(and with us the preaching of
the gospel, also ;) were defeated from the very source
they had calculated on, that their wish would be effect-


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. , 297


ed. The commandant had, in our opinion, done no-


thing in this affair but what his duty required. - With
‘prudence, justice, and humanity for his guide—a wise


providence seemed to support him. Ona nearer ac-
quaintance with this general officer, we found him


an admirer and well. wisher to religious undertakings.
* He sympathised with us for our sufferings, which were


contrary to his orders, and declared that we were en-
gaged in a good cause. The passport given us by
him, at our departure, purported that we were “ per-
mitted to perform the functions of our office among
the Christian Indians without molestation.”

Being now well supplied with warm clothes and
blankets, both for ourselves and fellow labourers
at home, we took leave of our benefactor, Arent Schy-


ler de Peyster, major of the king’s 8th regiment and


commandant of Detroit and its dependencies, &e. In-
tending to set off early the next morning, we had the
mortification to find that the horses we had rode from
Sandusky to this place, were missing, though but the
evening before they were seen, together with the
horses our Indians had rode on. The supposition
was, that some person or persons, inimical to missions
among the Indians, had put our horses out of the way,


to prevent our returning to the Indian country again ;
as the Indians’ horses had not been taken off. Be


this as it may, the lost horses were never recovered ;


the commandant, however, obligingly furnished us
-with horses to travel home with.


2-P


-
<4


oe ee ae


se ? a >


~ 298 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


On the 14th of November we left Detroit, the

weather was cold,and the ground hard frozen,—meet>
ing Indians from Sandusky, on the road, they repeat-
ed the report of our people, who had gone to Shon-
brun to bring corn, having all been murdered by
the Virginians, which however was not the case ; for
captain Biggs, the generous and humane officer, com-*’
manding the party, on finding that they were not of
the enemy, but Christian Indians, did not suffer one
of them to be molested ; but took them to Pittsburg,
where they were kindly treated, and left to return to
their homes when they pleased.
_ When within one days journey of Sandusky, avery
deep snow fell, which made it difficult travelling. .
We however arrived there on the 22nd in the eve-
ning. The joy on both sides was great. Daily had
reports been brought here during our absence, that
the commandant at Detroit, had sent us ina vessel
down the Lake (Erie), never to return again.

Not being much troubled by the savages for some
time, we built a temporary meeting house, of long


poles. placed upon each other, between posts, the cre-
vices being filled up with moss (gathered from trees,)
‘instead of mortar; but in what manner to get a sup-
' ply of provisions, which we stood in need of, caused
many anxious reflections. Our good friend, M‘Cor-
} mick, had indeed entered into a contract, with a Mr.
Y Robbins, a trader at Lower Sandusky, for all the corn
he could purchase, but even there, (which was about


_ HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


forty miles distant) the article was scarce ; yet, the
supply we recieved through these good men, served
to keep us from starving. The Christmas  holydays,
notwithstanding our poverty, were celebrated with
cheerfulness and a blessing; and the year concluded
with thanks and praises to him who is ever the guar-
dian and Saviour of his people.

Little did the congregation imagine, when entering
the year 1782, that this would be the most trying
year for them; for, although put to great straits for
provisions, they trusted in the Lord, that he in due
time would relieve them. That they had a place of
worship, and could daily hear the gospel preached,
was to them a great consolation, in these days of trial ;
and seeing some, who but lately had joined the con-
gregation, call upon the Lord for mercy—and bapti-
zed in his name ; enlivened their hopes, that the Lord
would continue to be gracious and merciful to them.

Hitherto the Christian Indians, had suffered most
from a want of provisions ; but now, in the dead of the
winter, they also suffered severely from the cold, as,
towards the end of January, the cold during the nights,
became almost insupportable ; the more so, on account
of the smallness of our huts, not permitting the con-
venience of our having large fires made within them;
and even wood being scarce where we were. Our
houses having no flooring, whenever a thaw came on,
the water forcing passages through the earth, enteredin
such quantities that we scarcely could keep our feet


&


300 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


dry.. The cattle, finding no pasture in these dreary .
regions, and we not being able to procure any for
them ; now began to perish by hunger, and as provi-
sions for so many people, could not be had even for
money, famine took place, and the calamity became
general; many had now no other alternative but to
live on the carcases of the starved cattle, and in a few
instances, suckling babes perished for want of nourish-
ment from their mothers’ impoverished breasts. The
missionaries had, at this time, reduced their daily al-
lowance of provision for bread, to a pint of Indian
corn, per man, a day. Now and then Mr. M‘Cor-
mick sent them a leg of venison purchased of the
hunters. i

Yet, in this wretched situation, the hungry Wyan-
dots would often come in our huts, to see if there was
any victuals cooking, or ready cooked.. At one time,
just as my wife had set down to what was intended for
our dinner, the half king, Simon Girty, and ano-
ther, a Wyandot, entered my cabin, and seeing the vie-
tuals ready, without ceremony began eating ; when
one of the Indian Brethren coming in and seeing this,
reprimanded them for their impudence, saying : “* You
who have treated. my teachers so bad, now dare to
come here to live upon them !—You that told us at
Gnadenhutten, what a great plenty of provision you
had at Sandusky, and that we would find every thing
we could wish for when we came there, now comé to
us, to eat up the last morsel we have ! Have you no


. HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 301


shame ! If hunger pinches you, go out into the street
where you will find dead cattle, of which you may
eat as much as you please ; but keep away from our
teachers, for you have sufficiently shown by your be~
haviour to them, that you do not love them !”

At another time, -on a similar occasion, one of our


Indians said to the half king : ‘‘ When you came’ to -


Gnadenhutten with your men, we gave you not only
enough to eat, of such provisions as the Indians
generally make us of ; but we supplied you with any
thing you wished for, that. we had; bread, pork,
butter, milk, sugar, tea, chocolate, &c. You told us
to rise and go with you, and not to stand looking at
our. cornfields, for we would find with you enough
to live upon !—Now you have brought us hither, and
never once offered'us a single ear of corn! See! if
any one catches a. bird, or any other:creature, which
he wishes to keep alive, his first care is to get food
for the creature to feed on, that it may not starve !
Your conduct towards us, appears as if you had
brought us here for the purpose of starving us!”—
The fact was, that they themselves had scarcely any
thing to live upon.

The famine daily increasing—and the children cry-
ing for victuals, was more than the parents could en-
dure. These could not afford to pay atthe rate of
a dollar for two or three quarts of corn, which was the
price nowasked by those who had any. Therefore,
consulting with one another on measures to be taken


g: %. ¥ a ace wit <t tts ;
F- oy : 4


3 oy
7 a


le eal


=. oF


ail


302 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE,


for their relief; their deliberations closed with a reso-
lution, to look to no other quarter for corn, but to
their forsaken towns—and the plan being agreed upon
they informed the half king of their inteution, leaving
it at his option, whether or not, he chose to send a
guard with them, to keep them from “running away !”
which however he declined doing. They next made
their plan known to the missionaries, namely : that they
would proceed to their towns, and leave their families
some distance behind them, to whom they would bring
the corn from the fields, and who were to bury
it in holes* made in the ground for the purpose ; and
from which place they would fetch it, as it would be
wanted. The planbeingapproved of, they were de+
sired to conform thereto, as it was natural ‘to suppose
that the people from the American- side, would now
and then. take a look at the old towns, to see if any
warriors harboured there. Having taken an affec-
tionate leave, they set out in several divisions, of
about one hundred and fifty in number, men, women
and children ; each division intending to work upon
the corn which they had raised.

The missionaries were in hopes, that as the com-
mandant at Detroit, had favoured us with his passport
for our return, this would lead the hostile Indians to
reflection, and that they would conduct themselves


* These holes are made round, about three feet deep, narrower at
the top than at bottom, after the hole is dug, itis burnt out—set with
bark, and well covered after the corn is in.


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


better in future. We also now considered ourselves,
under the protection of the English government :
. but stillan. evil existed—every day it became more
evident, that the design of the enemies of the Brethren
and their preaching the gospel to the Indiams, remain-
ed the same, and nothing short of our being bagished
out of the country, would satisfy them. They would
say, that they wanted no prayer houses in their coun-
try, &c. Indeed their jealousy of us and the Christian
Indians, seemed daily to increase. They were sensi-
ble of what they had done; and how much they had
injured us, but having nothing of the Christian. spirit,
they could not think, that we could forgive them, but
supposed that we meditated revenge, and would one
day, draw an army of Virginians out, for the purpose of
destroying them. Already had the half king ascribed
the death of his two sons in the last fall, to the secret
intrigues of the people he had so distressed ; and he
lived in continual fear, lest the Christian Indians
would revenge the injuries they had suffered through
him, upon his own person.

Girty, (or captain Girty as he called himself)
an outcast among mankind—dwelling among the
Wyandots, and frequently going with them to war
against the people of the United States, would in-
stigate the former to do us all the mischief they
could ; and wasa principle in raising their suspicion
against us. This man (as we were informed from
good authority) came one day about that time to Mr.


304 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


M‘Cormick and requested him to write a letter for the
half king, the purportof which was: “ that the missiona-
ries at Sandusky, kept up a continual correspondence
with the Americans ; and received regularly, every
ten days, letters from Pittsburg; and that they were
endeavouring to. persuade the Virginians to destroy
the Wyandot nation, &c.’’——-That gentleman however,


enquiring of himas to the truth of what he wanted writ-


ten, and being answered, ‘that it made no difference to
him whether it was true or not :” and he peremptorily
declined writing falsehoods for him ; however, report
stated, that he had got the letter written by some other
person. A letter was, shortly after this, written for
the half king tothe commandant,* stating, “that he,
(the half king) would be uneasy in his mind, as long
as the teachers remained at Sandusky ; he fearing some
misfortune, and therefore requested the command-
ant to take them away as soon as possible ; but that if
he refused, he himself would know what to do !’—

This last letter had the desired effect, the comman-
dant well understanding, what was meant. to be. done
to us, in case we were not removed : he sent an answer
to the half king to that purpose, we however were en-
tirely ignorant, of what was intended, until on the first
day of March, a messenger, sent by the half king and
Simon Girty arrived, who by their order cited all the
teachers “ to appear before them to-morrow morning


at the house of M‘Cormick, there to hear a letter read


jc Stl
*See Lockiel’s History, part 3d, chapter x.


: HECKEWELDER’S ‘NARRATIVE. 305


written by the commandant at Detroit to the c.f king
and captain Girty respecting us.

We considered it unnecessary for all of us to go
so great a distance, for the purpose of hearing the
contents of a letter ; David Zeisberger, andthe writer
of this, concluded to go by themselves, and accord-
ingly we set off on foot early on the next morning, and
having waded the eight miles through the snow,
found the half king and Simon Girty already there,


waiting for us. The latter seeing but two, of us ar-


rive, impudently insulted us, for having disobeyed


’ their orders, to which we camly, and in a Civil
‘manner replied. After which, Girty having mounted


on a kind of stage, about six feet in height, he


took an open letter in one hand and a black string of
- wampum beads in the other, and addressed us with


an air of contempt in these words: “Gentlemen !


‘At length you have brought upon yourselves what


you have so long deserved, by means of your at-
tachment to the rebels! Your deeds are no more


‘bidden ! they are known to the commandant at De-


troit! hear this letter read, which is sent to the half
king! I will read it to you; No! take it and read
it yourselves—and look at this ! (holding up the string
of wampum) look well ! do you see that it is black ?*


‘The ‘cause of its being a black string instead of a


* See Heckewelder’s History of the Indian Nations, with regard to
the kind of wampum beads made use of, chapter vii. _


2Q


306 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


white one, you already know, so that I need not tell


you; mind ! itis sent with the letter!”


The contents of ‘the letter alluded to, were to this


effect :—‘* That in consequence of the half king’s re~ —


teachers from among the Christian Indians—and he
hereby did appoint captain Girty to bring them to
Detroit. That, in case Girty should be otherwise en-
gaged, he should appoint another fit person to bring
the teachers on. That should Girty, or any other
person bringing them in, want assistance, the half
king should help him !”

On those words, where the half king was called on
to render him assistance, if required, Girty laid a _par-
ticular stress—meaning thereby, to threaten us if we
refused to go, and saying (with aloud laugh) “ Gen-
tlemen! take notice ! the half king is to help me!” _

We saw nothing in this message that tended to
frighten us. That the wampum beads sent with
the speech of the commandant, were black, did
not surprise us in the least—nor was any thing
bad meant against us, by asking the assistance of
the half king in- bringing us to Detroit, if Girty
stood in need of it ; for the commandant had closed his
letter, or speech to them, with a special charge, “ not


_ to plunder us, nor otherwise to abuse us; neither


to suffer us to be plundered or abused by any person
whatsoever.”? ;
“Note. This narrative will afford the reader a fair


quest, the commandant had determined to remove the ___


= allel


HECKEWELDE R’S NARRATIVE: 307


opportunity to judge of the causes, why the introduc-
tion of Christianity, among the Indians, (which I
consider the forerunner towards their civilization) has
_ hitherto not succeeded to the extent which might have


been expected. Among the impediments, thrown in’


the way of those ministers, and pious characters, who
have devoted themselves to this service ; is the influ-
encewhich a set of white people, who from choice
(they wishing to be out of the reach of the civil law),
have settled among them; and who in times of
war are, improperly, employed as agents, emissaries,
or subalterns, to advise the Indians to desist for a
while from their ordinary occupations—(denounce a
certain nation, or class of people,) and assume a
|. hostile character against them—We are apt too to
pronounce against the probability of civilizing the
Indians, and it has frequently been asserted, ‘that
a white man will sooner become an Indian than an


Indian a white man!” That there are many white

_ people, to whom this is applicable, we are certain,
| and the example before us, as also others of the same
nature, as set forth in this narrative, prove that there

are white people, who by far, exceed the Indians. in
yillanous and cruel acts, advising and trying to per-
‘suade those Indians who have embraced Christianity

to desert the cause, ‘as not belonging to their sphere,”

-and of instigating the. savages, to-banish teachers of
religion out of their country, nay, even to destroy them.

Such people considering themselves authorised to do


y,
ip?


= Ga Pre Aish Oa a aias
Mig bP 22:


=


oh ee


308 Sp HECKE WELDER’S NARRATIVE.


any thing which may tend to favour the cause of their
employers—or, acting as though their powers were
unlimited, strive to their utmost to destroy all the good .
_which had been done among them in time of peace,
whether it tended to disseminate religious principles
amongst them, or to draw them gradually towards a
civilized life. Such were those persons, who (at the
commencement of the American revolution, and du»
ring its continuance) instigated the Indian tribes to
arm against the Christian Indians, and their teachers ; .
and who otherwise never would have acted the part’
they did, toa people whom they hitherto had, both be-—
friended atid respected, and whose mode of life they .
so much approved of. _ cdg vat

The consternation which was occasioned among
our people, on learning that their teachers were now
to be taken from them, was great; and nothing but
lamentations were heard throughout the village; and
during the short stay we had to make with them, our
grief was not less. Indeed, it was the most painful
occurrence which had befallen them ; so much so, that
both they and we lost appetite and sleep. Stephen, .
being immediately dispatched to the towns, where
our brethren and sisters were gathering corn, we were
in expectation of seeing them before our departure ;
but alas ! the day drawing near on which we must de-
part, and none of them arriving; we were much
troubled.

On the morning of the 13th of March, a Frenchman


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. . 309.


named Francis Levallie, from. Lower Sandusky, gave .


us notice, that Girty, who was. to have taken us ‘to


Detroit, having gone with a party of Wyandots to war —
_ against the Americans on the Ohio, had appointed


him to take his place in taking us to Detroit, and that
on the next day after to-morrow (the 15th) he would
be here again, to set out with us. A little conversa-


. tion with this man, satisfied us, that we had fallen in- —


to better hands. He told us : “ that Girty had order-
ed him, to drive us before him to Detroit, the same as
if we were cattle, and never make a halt for the pur-
pose of the women giving suck to their children.
That he should take us round the head of the lake
(Erie) and make us foot every step of the way,”—that
he however, would not do this, but would take us to
Lower Sandusky, and from that place send a runner
with a letter to the commandant at Detroit, represent-
ing our situation, and taking further orders. from him,
respecting us. p78

‘While We were preparing for the journéy, on the


next day and entertaining hopes, that some of our


brethren from Muskingum would arrive, the alarm
yeli* was sounded in the direction of the path they were
to pass on; and drawing nearer, the yell was perform-
edin such quick succession, that no doubt was left,
but that we would hear bad news; and which pro-
ved to be the case. On the arrival of a runner,


u4See Heckewelder’s History of Indian Nations, chap. xxvii. |


E


i.
oe
3
.
&


-


, ade oo ax ie oe


ye


&


 -. ao
-


pe ES 310- _ HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


_ who was a Sandusky warrior, (returning from ajwar

expedition against the people on the Ohio,) we learnt,
that while our Indians were gathering their corn, a
party of Virginians had come upon them, and made
them all prisoners; killing some and taken the re-

Bere mainder with them to Pittsburg.

This was bad news indeed, such as we did not ex-
pect to hear ; and yet, at this time, we did not hear the
worst, as it afterwards turned out to be ; but for us it


fa teats


ee | FY,


| was as much as we could bear. That we were to
part from our beloved Indian congregation, perhaps
- never to meet again, was alone a load almost too great
for us to bear, especially as we saw our people in
every direction weeping for grief on the occasion.
With the morning on the 15th, the day appointed
io for our departure ; our conductor, Mr. Levallie, arri- .
ved. Once more however, we assembled together in
the chapel, where our worthy brother Zeisberger, as
a tender father, exhorted the brethren and sisters, to
cleave close to the Lord, as they were now'to be sepa-
rated from their teachers. He kneeled down with the
congregation, giving thanks to the Lord, forall the
spiritual blessings received at his hand, praying fer-
'vently for them, and that they might be preserved in -
faith, and in the pure and. saving doctrine of Jesus
i Christ, and his atonement, till we should see each
‘other again, either here below, or before the throne
of the Lamb. After this we parted.
As the bloody catastrophe took place on the Mus-
j i é


>


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. . “Ot


kingum during the time we were waiting for our bre-
thren and sisters to come from thence ; I will break
off from the account of the journey we were entering
on, and relate the particulars of this horrid trans-


‘action, at the same time bringing into view, every


material circumstance connected therewith. -

It has already been stated above, that the Indians,
pressed by hunger, had gone to their forsaken
towns, to gather, and secure a quantity of corn,
that they might fetch the same from time to time, as
they wanted it; and that their intention had been, not


_ to encamp at, or near their old towns, but to leave
their families back in the woods, at a proper dis- |


tance, &c.—Being, however, met on the way by some
of the brethren, who had in the fall been taken
from Shonbrun to Pittsburg, and by them encouraged


_ to go direct to the towns, and work on their corn at


their leisure—there being not the least danger, that


any white people from the American side would mo-


lest them ; they, encouraged by so favourable a report,
and conscious that they in no one instance had done
the American people an injury (considering these al-
ways as their friends), were easily persuaded to
follow the advice given,them by their brethren ;“and
they had already been several weeks there, without
the least thought of danger, working both by day and
night in- gathering and husking corn, and. arietc
it in the woods.

Satisfied with what they had done, and at the point


;


* 312 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


* of their departure ; four Sandusky warriors (who on


their return from the Ohio: settlements, had encamp-
ed on a run some distance from Gnadenhutten,) gave

them notice, where they’had been; and added, that
having taken a woman and child prisoner, whom they
killed and impailed on this side of the Ohio river,
and supposing, that the white people in consequence


of what they had done, might make up.a party and


pursue them; they advised them to be on their guard,
and make off with themselves as soon as possible.’

This report becoming known among all our In- ©
dians, and they wishing to take the opinion of the
principal men at the three towns thereon, the nation-
al assistant Samuel, came from Shonbrun to Salem,
(where those from Gnadenhutten met them ;)
when, a general opinion prevailing, that there could
be no danger, if even white people should come: in
pursuit of those who had committed the murder, for
that these immediately would discover they were not
the hostile, but the Christian Indians, who they knew,
did not go to war from principle, considering the kill-
ing of man a great sin ; they concluded themselves
safe. Yet, as they had already secured as much ’corn
as they thought would servyg them for the season,
they made it publicly known, that all should: get
in readiness to go offon a certain day ; and Samuel;on


his return to Shonbrun from this meeting, reported,


that he was rejoiced at finding such love and har-
mony prevail among the brethren and sisters atthe


other two places.


aa id oe


| On the day our Indians, were bundling up


‘house, and about one hundred and fifty yards from the


. to-be>killed. . Seeing this act of theirs, he fled pre-


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. Py é ’

&

ir ;
packs, intending to set off on the next morning; a
party, of between one and two hundred white people,
from the Ohio settlements, made their appearance at
Gnadenhutten. They had already, when withina mile —
of'the place, met with Joseph Shabosh, son of our
brother Shabosh, (while he was catching his horses,)
and murdered him in a most cruel manner, notwith-
standing his telling them who he was, and that he
was a white man’s son, and begging them to spare his
life. Jatob, brother-in-law to young Shabosh, whilst
tying up his corn sacks, on the bank, at the sweat.


town, and thirty from the river; was the first person
who saw the party coming on, ‘between himself and
the river, and so near him that (as he expressed
himself), he might have seen the black in their eyes,
had they looked in the direction where he was stand-
ing: He even knew some of the men of the party,
tobe the same, who had taken the Christian Indians
from Shonbrun in the last fall, among whom both he
and young Shabosh were, and believing the good cap-
tain Biggs to be again with them, he was about hail-
ing them, when to his astonishment, they at that in-
stant, shot at one of the brethren who was just cross-
ing the river in a canoe, to go to the cornfield, and
who dropping down at the shot, Jacob supposed him


cipitately; and before they had turned their faces the
2R 2


lex


7" <a


eal)


314 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


é ; is
3 he.was, he was out of sight. Jacob might have


been the means of saving many lives, especially at
Salem, where his old father was ; but not having the
‘presence of mind, he ran several miles the contrary
way, and hid himself fora day andanight.
The murdering party, seeing most of the Indians
scattered over the corn field at wofk, (or preparing
for the journey) hailed them, as their “ friends and
brothers, who had purposely come out to -relieve
them, from the distress brought on them by the ene-
my, on account of their being friends to the Ameri+
can people.” The Christian Indians, not in the least
doubting their sincerity, walked up to them, and
thanked them, for being so kind, while the whites
again gave assurances that they would meet with
good treatment from them. ‘They then advised them
to discontinue their work, and cross over to the town,
in order to make the necessary arrangements, for the
journey, as they,intended taking them out of the reach
of their enemies, and where they would be ‘supplied
abundantly with all they stood in need of: all which)
was pleasing to them to hear. ; “~he ee
' During these transactions at Gnadenhutten, the na~
tional assistant, John Martin and hisson, were not
yet returned from the woods, from where they were
taking corn, to deposite it at some: distance; but on’
their return that day to the-field, they were not alittle
surprised, at seeing so many tracks of shodden horses,
and not a single ‘person remaining inthe field; where


|


; : HECKEWELDER’S NARMIATIVE.
uM


they had left them the day before, busily erhplya:
‘Not knowing the cause of this, he repaired to an ~_ :


eminence from where he had a full view of the town,
on the opposite side of the river; and there, seeing
the Indians and white people together, apparently
very sociable, some walking about, and others as if
@ngaged in friendly conversation, he sent his son


across to them, while he went to Salem, toinform the


brethren and sisters there, of what had taken place at
Gnadenhutten, giving it as his opinion, that perhaps
God had ordained it so, that they should not perish
in the barrens of Sandusky, and that these people
were sent to relieve them. After having held a con-
sultation with the brethren at that place, they united


. with him in opinion, and sent the two brethren Adam


\


and Henry with him to Gnadenhutten, for the purpose
of learning the true cause of the white people coming
out, concluding that, if it turned out as they expected
and wished, they would also join them. | They finding
‘every thing agreeable, they were not only satisfied
with what the white people had told them, but were
also urged by the brethren at this place, to join themin
going into the settlements of the white people, where
the brethren at Bethlehem, on a proper representation
being made, would cheerfully supply them with teach-
ers... The whites, encouraging them in these hopes,
mow appointed a body out of their number, to go with
the messengers to Salem to assist in bringing the in-
habitants, with their. effects, to Gnadenhutten. ee


315 sy


“Tar aLTe


i Fl il


¥ -


316 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. : 2
“The language of the white people, being the s Mn )


at Salem, as at Gnadenhutten; the brethren and


_ sisters were easily persuaded to go with them ; espe-
cially, as many of them professed to be very religious,


admiring their fine and spacious place of worship,
‘and discoursing constantly on religion, both here
and on the way to Gnadenhutten; frequently sa¥-
ing to the Indians: “you are indeed good Chris-
tians !” and made use of the same language to one
another in their hearing. Some of them, on leav-
ing Salem, set fire to the houses and church, which
was disapproved of by our Indians; they, however,
pretended that they meant no harm, but had merely
done it to deprive the enemy of a harbouring place. ©
Arriving at the river bank opposite Gnadenhutten
their eyes began. to open; but it was now. too late.
They discovered a spot in the sand, where to appear-
ance, a wounded Indian. had been weltering in his
blood, and near this, marks of blood on the canoe.
Poor creatures ! being disarmed ; as they, with those of
Gnadenhutten, had freely given up their guns, axes,
and knives, to those who had solemnly promised, that
on their arrival at Pittsburg, all should be returned to
them again. But had they even been in possession


of their arms, they could not consienciously, and pro-


bably, would not have attempted to resort to these in
their defence.—Being taken over to the town, O how
the prospect was changed ! The language now held
to them, was the reverse of what it had been’ at


317


ae


‘Sal 2m, and on the road hither.—The Grndenhinteen
~ brethren, sisters and children, were already confined for ee
_ the purpose of being put to death; > they were no ~
longer @ailled Christians as before, but warriors !—
the same language was also held to the Salem»Indi- —
ans,—all. were declared enemies and warriors, and
all they could offer in their defence, was of no avail.
They were further told : “ that the horses found’ with
them, had been taken from white people, they being
branded with letters, with which Indians were unac-
quainted ; that the axes found with them, had the
names of white people stamped upon them. Pewter
basins and spoons were stolen property ; the Indians |
making use of wooden bowls and spoons. Tea-ket-
tles, pots, cups and saucers, was also declared stolen
property. In short everything they possessed, was
said to have been taken from the white people whilst


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


at war with them ; and to this they would swear. Sa
_» How must those poor ‘creatures have felt abeing
sensible of their innocence ! They could have given 3
a satisfactory account of every article found in their i


possession, where, and from what trader or me-
echanic they had purchased it. As for the branding
irons, it was common among them, to get these


made by the smiths, with the initials of their names, ‘y
to enable them to know the horses and colts belong- i
‘ing»to each other. But, many of these accusers knew :


‘well, that the Christian Indians were becoming an
agricultural people—were making use of the plough,


318 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


faised large crops, and lived chiefly by the p md

of the field, and the cattle .they raised: — ‘That

more or less of them, could set a decent table ©
“to a stranger, furnished with bread, meat, but-
ter, cheese, milk, tea, coffee, chocolate, &c. together
with such other articles as the season afforded. Be-

- gides this, the Christian Indians were well known
by their dress, which was ‘plain and decent, no
sign of paint to be seen on their skin or clothes, they
wore no feathers about their heads, neither did they —
shave and trim them as every Indian warrior does ;
but wore their hair as the Christians did. These; with

— other marks on them; were alone sufficient to. prove

that they were not.warriors. But, the number of hor-

ses and other property which they possessed, was:an
object with these murderers, who. concluded, that—

“when they killed the Indians, the country would

be theirs; and the sooner this was done, the better!*”

Accordingly they told the poor creatures \that they

must die. A
Finding that all entreaties to save their ice

to no purpose—and that some, more’ bloodthirsty

than their comrades, “Were anxious: to begin’ upon
them, they united in begging a short. delay, that
they might prepare themselves for death—which re-
quest at length was granted. them. © Then asking
pardon for whatever offence they had given, or grief
they had occasioned to each other, they kneeled


wt


* The language of backwoods men. entice


oe a) er ee: ee a a Pegeu’t Bae


HECKEWELDER'S NARRATIVE. : 319
y , offering fervent prayers to God their Saviour an :
—and kissing one another, under a flood of tears ; a9
fully resigned to his will, they sang praises unto — e:
him, in the joyful hope, that they would soon be~ »


relieved from all pains, and join their redeemer in
everlasting bliss.

» During the time of their dcstotion; the murderers
were consulting on the manner, in which they would |
put them to death. Some were for setting fire to
the houses they were in, and burning them alive.
Others wanted to take their scalps home with them,
as a signal of victory ; while others remonstrated —)
against either of these plans, declaring, that they never “as
would be guilty of murdering a people, whose inno-
cence was so satisfactorily evinced, and.these. pro-
posed to set them at liberty, or, if they would not do
that ; at least to take them as prisoners, and deliver
them up to the proper authority ; but finding that
they could not prevail on these monsters to spare
their lives, they wrung their hands—and calling God
to witness, that they were innocent of-the blood of
these harmless Christian Indians, they withdrew to
some distance from the scene of slaughter.

. The murderers, impatient to make a_ beginning,
came again to them, while they were singing, and
enquiring whether they were now ready for dying,’
they wereanswered in the affirmative ; adding : “ that
they had commended their immortal souls to God,
who had given them the assurance in their hearts,


Cui.


ay e §
320 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


, would receive their souls :”’—On«


ty now taking up a cooper’s tnt orhiohilaly in the .
‘house (the ‘owner being a cooper) saying: how


exactly this will answer for the business,” he began
with Abraham,’ and continued. knocking down one
after the other, until he had counted fourteen, that he
had killed with hisown hands. He’ now handed the
instrument, to one of his fellow murderes, saying,
“my arm fails me! go on in the same way !-I»think
I have done pretty well!”* In another house, where
mostly women and. children were. confined, Judith, a
remarkably pious aged widow, was the first victim.
After they had finished the horrid deed, they retreated
to a small distance from the slaughter houses, but
after a while returning again to view the dead bodies;
and finding one of them, (Abel) although’ scalped and
mangled; attempting to raise himself from the floor,
‘they so renewed their blows upon him, that he- never
rose e again ; then having ‘set fire to the houses, they
went off, ee and le on’ pene ‘been so
victorious... 1 MD

The number of Christian Indhins vir
these miscreants, exceeded “ninety; all of ~whom,
except four,:were killed in’ the slaughter ‘houses.
The four, were young Shabosh, who was ‘killed
before the murderers reached the town, Jacob’ who
had been shot down in’ the canoe, ee


*So related by a lad who escaped out of this house, and who ys


stood English well—and confirmed by several of the party." tigate


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 321


, Paul and Anthony, who perceiving the mur-
lerers intentions, were shot down under the bank of
the river, whilst attempting to escape. )
Of the above number, sixty two were grown persons,
one third of whom were women; the remaining thirty
four were children. Five of the slain were respecta-
ble national assistants, viz Samuel Moore, Tobias,


Jonas, Isdac andJohn Martin. The two former, had -


been members of the pious.Missionary Brainard’s con-
gregation in New Jersey, and after his death, had


joined.themselves to the Christian Indians living on


the Susquehanna. The first, (Samuel) was a very
useful member of the church ; he had received his edu-
cation from or under Mr. Brainard, could read. well,
and understood the English language so well, that he
was for many years, and until his death an interpreter
| of the sermons preached. He was perhaps never


seen without being at some occupation. Of reading —


' he was very fond, especially in the bible or hymn
book. Tobias’ appearance alone, commanded reSpect :
he also led the life of a true Christian. The same may
be said of Jonas, and of Isaac Glickhican, the reader of
this narrative has already been informed, how useful a


he acted on all occasions, and how ready and fearless

he was in time of danger— how faithful to his teachers

and doubtless he would have risked his life for them if

‘occasion had required it. John Martin, one of the chapel

interpreters at Gnadenhutten, was an exemplary and
28


member of the.congregation he was—how prudently .


-


——— nr” Fy


— 322 HECKE =... ws WAMRAUIVE.


worthy man. Three of these five brethren were abo


sixty, and the other two about fifty years of age. Many
of the brethren and sisters who were murdered; were
born of Christian parents in the society, and were part of
those who in the years 1763 and 1764 had been taken
under the protection of the Pennsylvania government,
while the Paxton boys (as they called themselves)
daringly threatened to murder them. Here they
were now murdered! together with the children !—
the loving children !—who so harmoniously raised
their voices in the chapel—at their schools, and in
their parents houses, in singing praises to the Lord !—
those, whose tender years—innocent countenance,
and tears, made no impression on these pretended
white Christians, were all butchered with the rest. _
Two youths, each of them about fourteen or fifteen


_ years of age, who were shut up with the rest in the


houses where the murders were committed, most
miracuously escaped. ‘The one, (Thomas) thrown —
in the house where most of the men were, was
knocked down and scalped with the rest ; but after'a
while recovering, and looking around, he saw Abel
also scalped, and with the blood running down his
face, supporting himself with his hands against the
floor in order to rise. With great présence of mind


he quickly laid himself down again, as if he was


dead, thinking, that perhaps some of the murdeér-
ers might return again, to examine if all were really
dead ; scarcely had he jain a minute or two, when


i
Y
/
,


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 328


1 men: did come, who seeing Abel in this situa- :
tion they chopped his head with their hatchets, to pre-
vent his rising again, and having done this, they went
off to inform their comrades of the circumstance ; (as
the lad thought). Believing this the proper time for
him to attempt an escape, he crept over the dead
bodies to the door, still keeping himself in a posture
to be able to deceive them.a second time, should they
come again, when neither seeing or hearing any body
coming, and it beginning to be dusk, he quickly got
out at the door and went to the back side of the house,
where he hid himself until it was quite dark, when he
escaped ; taking a course through the woods for the
path leading to Sandusky. The other lad, who was in
the house where the women were, had found means to
raise a plank, which served as a trap door to the
cellar which was under the floor, where he and ano- ¢
ther lad who had followed him, lay concealed dur-
ing the time the butchery continued—the blood
from above running in streams through the crevi-
‘ces upon them, the planks being but loosely laid,
‘and not groved. Here waiting forthe dusk of the
evening to come on, that they might effect an es-


tape, they next attempted to get out through a small


hole, cut for a window, and through which, this boy,
though with difficulty, escaped ;’ but his comrade
being bulxier than he was, could not force himself
through, but. stuck fast, and as the boy supposed,
‘was burnt alive : as the observed both the slaughter


wo
;


8, HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


hevenes on fire, shortly after he left i sail These
boys, fortunate in escaping here, were equally s0,

in meeting together in the woods, and afterwards fal-

ling in with the Shonbrun Indians in their flight,

were joined by Jacob, before they reached Sandusky.

One little boy of eight years old; (named Benja-

min), was happily saved by a humane white man of

the party, who privately took him off to his home,

(where he raised him up toa man,) from whence he af-

terwards returned to the Indian country.

The providential escape of the Christian ndings
at Shonbrun, ten miles higher up the river, was re-
markable. Stephen, the Indian, whom.we on the
third of March, had dispatched from Sandusky to
give the brethren and sisters notice, that we were to
be removed from them ; being exhausted on his arri-
val at Shonbrun on the 6th—two other brethren were
sent with the message to Gnadenhutten and Salem.
While the brethren were travelling along the path
in conversation on the melancholy events which were
to take place, viz. (that their teachers were to be taken
from them,) they, to their surprise, discovered the
tracks of shodden horses, both on and beside the path,
and within one and two miles of the first mentioned
place (Gnadenhutten), to satisfy themselves of the
design of those who rode the horses, they cauti-.
ously followed the tracks, and had not, proceeded -
far, before they espied the dead and mangled body
of young Shabosh, with his scalp taken off! Al-—


&


body, or the mangled parts, and returning to Shons
brun, and reporting what they had discovered on
the road, and giving it as their opinion, that their
people at Gnadenhutten, probably had met with the


same treatment. It being supposed, that the mur-


derers would also come upon them, every prepara-
tion’ was made to fly as quick as possible, and al-
though Shonbrun lay on the opposite side of the river,


‘on which the murderers now were, and it would be ~


out of ‘their way to come here, yet, an opinion pre-
vailed, that to take flight to the east side, then cross
the river again above the mouth of sugar creek,
(five or six miles higher up the river) would form a
more secure barrier between them; they, in the eve-


ning all crossed to this side, and in the dark, proceed-
ing about two miles and a half, when.they madea _


halt, until the light of the morning would enable
them to travel again. Such was their hurry to get
out of the reach of the murdering party, that they for-
got to take the canoe with them at the time, and
work it up the river to the place where they meant to
cross, as without it they had no means of crossing
the river with their families, the waters being -high.
Very early next morning, before it was light, sevé-
ral of their men returned for the purpose, and
scarcely having worked the canoe 300 yards from
the town, and in sight of it, (it being day light), they


heard the trampling of horses feet down the river, —


ina


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. Bn


shocked at the sight, yet they — ‘thie?


ihe > ot


au “Se


with ee apparently looking about for Indians
and plunder. Having secured themselves with their
canoe, they watched the movements of the party ; par-
ticularly to.observe if they attempted to cross the river;
which however they could not do without swimming,
the water being very deep where they were. ‘They
had examined the woods round the town, to discover
the way the Indians had gone, but not discovering
what had become of them, they returned the same
way they came, taking with them such artidles, as
the Indians had left behind. wri 9? Holling


‘The Christian Indians were particularly thankful to


a kind providence, who had so. ordained it, that they
did not fali into the hands of these murderers.» Their
eyes seemed to have been closed, as they did not dis-
cover the men in the canoe, though full in sight of
them, and had they but crossed the river, they would
immediately have fell in their tracks, and come up
with them all in’a body, on an extensive prairie, and
no more than two miles and a half from where they
were looking for them. On their journey to Sandus-
ky the Indians endured many hardships; and havy-
ing ran off empty and even without a ‘sufficiency
of provisions for the journey, they suffered also “from
thunger, and one infant babe perished for want. of
nourishment from.the breast, before they reached the
place they were going to. pr cto TY
The murderers returned home in high spirits, «as
though they had gained a signal victory ; and straight-


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


Ly ‘proceeded eo Pittsburg ; where, on ho .
‘site side of the Ohio river, they attacked the io
of the peaceable Delaware chiefs, with a number of
friendly families, all under the protection of the Ame-


however the chief Gelelemend, (otherwise called Kil-
bock) and others, saved their lives by taking to the
river, and reaching the town.*
“Tt afterwards appeared from the New York news
: Soin (at that time published by the British,) in
which the Christian Indians are called ‘“* Moravian’


Indians, and represented in a very unfavourable light As


sent, from proceeding to Sandusky, to destroy the rem-


|
that the murderers had been prevented’ for the pre-
| nant of the congregation.” +


The account as it stood in the Pennsylvania gaz-

ette of April 17th, 1782, after giving an account of

_ the incursions of the Indians, adds : “‘ That the peo-
ple being greatly alarmed, and having received intel-
eens, that the Indian towns on the Muskingum,


f ‘* The foregoing account of this dreadful event, has been collected
partly from what the murderers on their return, and since, have related
to people in the country from whence they had gone out—partly by Ja-
cob and the two youths who had escaped (who all understood English) ;
I as also from the reports made by Samuel and others, of Shonbrun—and
Anthony and others, who were some of those who made their escape,
at the time the Delaware camps were attacked at Pittsburg—all’ of
whom agreed exactly as to the principal parts of their respective evi-
dence, And see Lockiel’s History, &c. part, iii. page 182.


+ See Lockiel’s History, &e, part iii. page 183.


rican government—killed a number, and among them —
a promising young chief—and wentoff. Fortunately —


ae i. %, ,
ee ee Rages Mt hee .


eS eee ee.


“?


“ ’ HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. i
ed a not moved as was reported ;—a Inumber of
properly provided, collected ‘and rendezvoused on
the Ohio, opposite the Mingo bottom, with a design
to surprise the above towns.—One hundred men swam
the river, and proceded to the towns on the Musking- —
um, where the Indians had collected a large quantity —
of provisions to. supply their. war parties. They ar-
rived at the town in the night undiscovered, attacked
the Indians in their cabbins, and so completely surpri-
sed them, that they killed and scalped upwards « of
ninety, but.a few making their escape ; about forty of
which were warriors, the rest old women and children.
- About eighty horses fell into their hands, which they
loaded with the plunder, the greatest, part furs: and
skins ; and returned to the sia without the se of a
man.” Togas
. The sayages making their ida on the oceasion,
wasdidse “We envied our friends and relations the
believing (Christian) Indians, who lived. so. happy;
enjoying peace, and having always plenty: of provi- .
sions; while wey who have taken a share in the war,
were under epptinual fears, both when out at. war, and


upon us, and besides this, we with our families
were always in a starving condition. As we could : not
bear to see our relations flourish, while we were “$0
niiserable, we. endeavoured therefore to draw. them
back into heathenism, and place them on a level with
us, the great spirit, who would not have it, put them


away from us.”
.


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


Inow sera the departure of the missionari
fasituic congregation at Upper Sandusky. Many of _
the brethren and sisters accompanied us part of ws
way, and some continued with us, until our arrival at
this place ; the sisters carrying our two small children
by turns on their backs, well secured in their blankets _ ie
from the wet and cold. Our conductor, Mr. Lavallie, “ <


seeing the senior misssionary Zeisberger, (at that
time, upwards of sixty years of age,) set out on foot,
took his own Tiding h horse to him, saying : “ No, mon-
sieur ! that will not do! here is my horse at your
service |?” Zeisberger replying: that he would try to s
walk along with the rest. ‘“ No!’ (said the Frenchy om f
man,) respect, both for your age; and the station you >
_ are in, demands this of me as a duty !” and walking
off, he took his post in the rear of us. It wasa most fa-
tiguing journey to us all, on account of the badness of
the roads; and particularly to those who were afflicted
big rheumatic pains.

_ Arriving at Lower Sandusky, after several ail tra-
yelling though the wilderness and swampy grounds ;
we were kindly recieved, by two English traders,
_ who resided about a mile from each other, with the
principal village of the Wyandots between them.
Mr, Arundle having a spacious house, took in those
who had families, while Mr. Robbins made the two
single brethren welcome at his house ; our conductor
lodging with the former. With the assistance of Mr,
Amundle, a letter was immediately written to the com-


2.T
Pe


/


- HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


_—-mandant 3 at Detroit, and sent a express, to inform him


 ofour arrival at this place, se forth our situation—
the impossibility of our travelling by land to Detroit,
- (as Girty had ordered it,) and hoping he would again
us with a boat, &c. ae
_ During stay of several weeks at this place, we were
‘provided with the best of provisions which were: to be
had; and had also the pleasure of being frequently
visited, by brethren and sisters from Upper Sandusky..
There we also recieved the particulars of what had
taken place at Gnadenhutten; and that our brethen, sis-
- ters, and children, had not been taken off as prisoners,


@- we had hitherto expected ; but were murdered ;


and brother Joshua, (whose two promising
daughters, between the age of fifteen and b= dig
were among the slain :) was himself the bearer to us”
of this melancholy affair. We grieved much for such
loving souls ; and assembling on the occasion, prayed
the church litany, wishing to be “ kept i in everlasting
fellowship with the church triumphant,” and with our
dear brethren, sisters, and the children, slain on ‘the
Muskingum; in firm persuasion, of again meeting to-
gether i in the presence of our Redeemer. ~

Although we did not experience want while ies
being well supplied with every thing we stood in need
of, by our benefactors, Arundel and Robbins ; and
also had the pleasure of visits from our brethren and
sisters; yet, our minds were not easy, on account of
our having to stay here so long. The Hurons,


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. .
Fg


(Wyondots,) had already, since \ we were here, raised a 4
report, that the believing Indians, had murdered some 's —e
of their women—enquiry, however, being made- with Pie bs
regard to the truth of this; they Were put to shame. Na
We sometimes wished to visit each other, at the two : =
houses where we were quartered, but the Indian village *
lying between the two points, there was some risk in ; pe
doing this; it was therefore seldom attempted. Yet ier


it so happened, that one day, when all appeared a agg
at, and about the village, I took a walk to Mr. Rob- ~ is
bins’ house, where the brethren, Young and Ed- : )


was sounded, at the same time, in two opposi
directions; and both war parties could, owing to =
the very high situation of the spot the house was on, i
be plainly seen, coming on with their prisoners and
scalps, though yet at a great distance: both parties hav-

ing prairie ground to travel on. Having asked Mr. Rob-
bins’ opinion, which would be the best for me to 10, : .
to go straightway home to my quarters, or wait until >
the storm was over, he advised the first; for me, it .
was fortunate that the situation of the village, pre- a
vented the inhabitants hearing the yells on the


wards were lodged; and while there, the scalp ae


- back: side, the way I was coming; while from the


other side, they not only heard the yells plainly, but f
also saw the party with their prisoners and scalps ad- oe
vancing, and knowing that they would be taken to |
the dwelling of the captain of the party, (but about :
fifteen yards beyond Mr. Arundel’s house,) they all — {


8


ae


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE,


_ speed from ‘the willis vo tiie them ; which
* gave me an opportunity of passing through ’the vil-
lage after they left it; and I had just reached:my lodg-
ings, when the patty, consisting of fourteen warriors,
with three prisoners, and some scalps, which «they
had taken at Fort M‘Intosh ; (they being om fatigue
while attacked and taken;) were ascending the bank
at the back side of the house we lodged in; and-from
whence these prisoners had to take their start, in run-
ning, what is generally called “ the gauntlet.”*—The


_ other party, who came on from the back side, having
none but scalps, stopped at the village, from where, as


the opposite side, the scalp yell. was sounded,


and resounded at intervals. ) Ore 7 eheliestb:


‘Scenes of this kind we could not help witnessing;
while we were here; yet we had to keep oursélves
in a manner close, until their pretended} rage:was over.
We had also by this time become uneasy, lest Girty
should find us still here, on his return from war,
knowing the orders he had given. to the Frenchman
respecting us. He did return, and behaved like amad-
man, on hearing that we were here, and that our con-
ductor had disobeyed his orders, and had sent a letter
to the commandantat Detroit respecting us. He flewat
the Frenchman, who was in the room adjoining ours,

why shape Das


* See Heckewelder’s Historical account at of the Indians, chapter segii.
page 200.
‘ao \$ ACs #bels
¢ They are apt, on such occasions, to, try ti to ‘ighten people, though -
they mean no harm to them. —


ap
-


3 inidaiforioasly;iiviking geititihy and threatening


.
HECKEWELDER’S “NARRATIVE. 333
oe


his head in too, for disobeying the orders he had gi ven. .
him. He swore the most horrid oaths respecting us,
and continued in that way until after midnight. . His
oaths were all to: the purport,“ that he never would.
leave: the house, until he had split our heads in two |
with his tomahawk, andmade our brains stick to the
walls of the room, in which we were !”—I omit the
names he called’ us by, and the words he “made
use of while swearing ; as: also ‘the »place he would


¢


that he would do to us.» He had somewhere 'procured.


liquor, and would, (as we were told by ‘those who were val


=) Never before,: did “any’’of “us, “hear * the’ like


"appeared like an host of evil spirits. He would some- F
_times come up to the bolted door between us and him, : ¥
‘thréatening to chop it in pieces, to ‘get’ atts.” No 7


place. This was joyful news ! and seeing the Jetter


near him) at every drink renew his: oaths, which he


go to, if he did not fulfil all which he had sworn — 4
tepeated until he fell asleep.» may ist 20 2ostond a


oaths; or known: any ‘body toravelike ‘him! “ He


Indian, we had ever seen drunk, would have ‘been'a
match for him. How we should escape the clutches
of this white beast in human form, no one could fore-
see. Yet at the proper time relief was at hand, for
on the morning at break of day and ‘while’ he still
was sleeping, two large flat bottomed boats arrived
‘from Detroit, for the “purpose of taking us. to .that


written by the commandant, to Mr. Arundle respect-
aA


4


334 -« HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


‘ing us, we were satisfied that wé would be relieved
from the hands of this wicked white savage, whose
equal, we were led to believe, was (pia not to


¢


be found among mankind.
The letter from the commandant—after first thank-
ing the gentlemen here, for their kindness tous ; next
requested them to inform him, if they knew any of the
persons, who had taken the liberty of insulting us,
either before or since we had arrived at this place,
and if so, to give him their names, that he might
punish them, &c!—That he had given strict orders
to the sergeant, who was to take us on, to treat us
kindly—not endanger our lives on the lake (Erie)
by sailing in stormy weather, nor even to proceed,
when he found that we consided it dangerous, or
showed marks of fear, and finally : that Francis La-
vallie, who had. brought us so carefully thus’ far,
should continue with us, till our arrival” at De-


troit ; and guard us against any insults, which might


be intended against us by Indians, &c.” | The -let-
ter being read to captain Girty* by Mr. Arundle,
in the morning : we saw no more of him while “here.
° On the morning of the 14th day of April, after a
stay of near four weeks at this place, we, after taking
an éffectionate leave of our humepe and boipiines


* This Girty j is the same, who in the: c spring of the year 178 vai
off from Pittsburg, with M‘Kee, Elliot, and others, and joined the In-
dians against the people of the United States, under a Cons oakces
the British government.. : .


9 a ot


adi


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 335


oe


hosts, Arundle and Robbins ; ; embarked in the boats,
with seven men of the kings’ rangers to each boat,
the one under the care of sergeant Race, and the
other under a corporal of the same name. .The
boats were either rowed or. put under sail, as the
wind was favourable ; but lying too in boisterous wea-
ther. We were on the whole voyage treated by the
boatsmen, with kindness ; and not an oath was heard
during the voyage. °
Being on the 20th landed at Détrair, we were for
the present lodged in a new room in the barracks,
where the commandant soon came to. see us, rejoi-
cing that we had escaped the dangers, that were hang-
_ing over our heads, while we remained at Sandusky ;
he having had the most authentic information to that
effect, and which was the sole cause of his having
taken us from that place.. He now left it entirely at
our option, to remain at Detroit, or be sent to Beth-
lehem, by way of the lakes, &c. meanwhile giving or-
ders, that we should be supplied with provisions, and
any other thing we might stand in need of. After a
few weeks, we moved into a newly finished house,
about one hundred yards from the town, where we
enjoyed more rest and quiet.

_ By an English trader, who had been at the Chris-
tian Indians’ village at Upper Sandusky since we
came away, we learnt ih pleasure, that those for-
saken Indians, frequently 1 met together for the purpose
of exhorting one another, to abide faithful—and to sing


rhe
Rie


, n 336 t? HECKRWELDER’S NARRATIVE: |


| ae
Bes
Ss

'
ke


of praises to the Lord, and that hehadseveral
times been at those. meetings, and was much. affecte¢
when he saw them weeping on. account of the,

of their teachers—Some few however, gave them


trouble and became _perfidious, in consequence sof
_ having been told, by the enemies of the gospel, that,


their teachers were the cause of all their misfortunes ;,
and even of their friends “and. countrymen. being
murdered. In these false reports; the white peo-
ple among them, Elliot and Girty,. had the great-
est share. Besides this, the half king of the Wy-
andots, was so incessantly tormented. by his, .evil


conscience, that he could not. rest, as long as any


Christian Indians were in his neighbourhood ; their
presence always reminding him of his treacherous®
behaviour towards them, and their teachers; and he
also feared, that they might take revenge upon him.
He therefore now sent a preremptory order to them
to depart from his country entirely. They obeyed,
and most of them proceeded forthe presentto: the
Sciota, while others stopped for a while, in the neigh=


bourhood at Pipestown—all however intending»to ~


meet together after some time on the Miami of, the
lake, and there establish themselves. » vi Deitel
_ From the time the Christian lhdiawhd were murder-
ed onthe Muskingum, the taveges had continually
kept spies out, to guard a t being surprised by


* The Hurons, or Wyandots are of the Iroquois, or Six Nation st
and in treachery the same. Sosay the Delaware. 8


“3


aaa


the Americans. ‘There was not a public place oda


_ Ohio, from Pittsburg to Grave creeks below Wheeling,


left unobserv Thus, when in May, two months
after the above murder was committed, the white


.Settlers were seen in agitation, asif preparing for


some enterprise ; the news was brought tothe towns,
and so, from day to day, until these had crossed the
Qhio river; and even their first place of encampment
on this side of that river, was reconnoitred. \ Nay,
they were even so early, in discovering the intentions
of a force collecting, that they urged the command-
ant at Detroit to assist them with troops, to join in
fighting them on their arrival ; and a body of the ran-
gers were in time enough at Sandusky, to meet and join
them, though they had to cross the lake and travel a
great distance into the country. The murdering par-
ty—for their famous commander Williamson was with
them again,—had taken a straight direction to the
Christian Indians’ village, at Upper Sandusky, but


_ finding’no “‘ Moravian” Indians there, they turned on


the path towards the towns of the savages, which was
exactly what the assembled warriors wished for ; and
these, having reached a certain spot in an open prairie,


where they had no. hiding places, while the former


were under cover’ of a grove of trees ; they engaged


_ them, compelling them to fights | And it was said that


they would have completely routed the whole of them,
—-(though by the papers they were said to have been
five hundred strong,) had it not been for the lateness

2U


" HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. | * 887 .


iy ee eh 5
ae FO i ee ee rs

e ear Se AE UF Eee
= roe = — i
/ <


338 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE:


of the day, and that the Indians were hourly in expecta-
tion of a large reinforcement from the Shawanese
towns. re f aie ¢ °

The plan now being, that they would surround them


USCS TS ae


- during the night, and at day break attack them from


all sides; they moved on at the proper time,»when
however, to their mortification, they discovered: that
the heroes had fled during the night; not choosing,
as it appeared, to stand an engagement with the kind
of “warriors” they met here. Some few; who were —
not awoke from their sleep when their comrades went
off, were found yet in that condition, lying in the high
grass. Many bundles of ropes, and ready made hal-
ters, to take off the plunder, and horses which would
fall into their hands, were collected in the. prai-
rie. It seemed, that they calculated on taking much
booty home with them, but finding themselves mis-
taken, they chose rather to loose their baggage, than


run the risk of loosing their lives. In the pursuit,


many were killed, and poor col. Crawford, together
with a doctor M‘Knight, had the misfortune to “be
taken prisoners.—“ Where is Williamson, the head
murderer?” was the call of the Indians from,every
quarter. They being told, that he had been one of
the first who fled from the ground, they cryed out;
“revenge ! revenge! on those we ‘have in’ our
power, for the murder of the Christian Indians on the
Muskingum, and our friends at Pittsburg !”—“ These
(said they to one another) have come out on a similar


SR at ae? Seteg et ae
£ . Ms eee ae -: en
a” 5 =


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 339


_ expedition, and with the same men who committed
that atrocious murder on our’ friends and relations,
to do the same to us, they are all alike !—they want
our country from us, and know no better way of
obtaining it, than by killing us first! for this very
reason they killed the believing Indians, and our roll Sei

tions at Pittsburg!”? They called aloud for the.
viving Christian Indians to come forward and take ea

yenge on these prisoners ; but they having removed,

_. their savage relations stepped forward in their stead.—

Phe fire was kindled, and poor Crawford tied to the

stake.—Torturing had not begun, when it occurred to
him, that he had one particular Indian friend, by name,
Wingemund—“ where is my friend Wingemund ?”
he called out—*I wish to see him!”—This Indian
chief being sent for, an interesting, and somewhat
affectionate conversation,* took place between them,
yet without producing the effect, the colonel had faint-
| ly calculated on; he hoping, that both by the influ-
| ence his Indian friend’ had’-with the nation, and the
intercession he would make in his behalf, his life \
might be saved, in which however he found him- “-
self "grievously mistaken; for at this time, or, as the $
case then stood, it was not in the power of any man,

_ oreven body of men, to save the life of one, who had :

' ‘Been of the party, and doomed to suffer in William- 1M

syed stead, who had ere He was told i the


eet


ix


os + Sec Heckewelder’s Account of Indian Nations, chap, xxx vii
page 281.


340 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE,


exasperated crowd, “ that he came out with the worst
kind of murderers, even such, as the Indians had not
amongst them. ‘Indians,’ (said they), “ kill their


’ enemies, but not their friends!) when they have once


reached out their hand to a prisoner, and called him


by the name, ‘friend!’ they do not afterwards kill


him! But how did you do to the believing Indians
on the Muskingum! Did you not. always: tell»them
that you were their firm friends; anddid you not,
when you lately came up to them, hail, and welcome
them as such ?-- You assured them of your friendship. to-.
wards them; telling them, that they need not fear any
harm from you! and what did you afterwards do?
Did you not then accuse them of being warriors, know:
ing at the time that they were not such ? Did they:run

Jrom you when they'saw you coming? Did :they-fire
a single shot at you ? Did you. ever, hear, warriors
pray to God, and sing praises to him as they) did ?


Could not the shrieks .and cries of the, innocent


little children, excite you to pity, and. to.save their
lives ; and if you would remove them, take them with

you as prisoners? No! it did not! You, who would —
have the Indians believe you were believers (Chris-


_ tians), because you have the great book »(the’ bible)


among you, are in your hearts murderers ! never would _
the believing Indians have done what you did, though
the great spirit never put this book into, their hands
as he did in yours; and further, taught you to read all
that he wanted you to do—and what was forbidden


epee NARRATIVE. 341°


by him, that you should not do ! These Indians how-
ever believed all that their teachers told them, of


‘what was written in the book, and believing it, strove


to.act accordingly! It was on account of the great
book you have, that these Indians ‘trusted so much to
what you toldthem! We knew you better than they
did !. We often warned them to beware of you,

your pretended friendship ;.but they would not be-
lieve us !—they believed nothing but good of you,


- and for this they paid with their lives!”


» This, was in substance what was spoken to the un-


fortunate sufferer, (colonel Crawford) previous to his


being put to the torture, to which he replied : “ that
he was not. an accomplice in that attrocious act.’’—
His being however, taken in company with the very
man who led the party on, and who was at the commit-


ting of that cruel act, was so much against him, that no ~
‘one would even listen to an apology. He was told


“that no man. on earth could save his life—not even
the king of England, were he here with all his treas-


ures. That the blood of those innocent Indians,


whom they had murdered, must be eetnerge in an ex-


-emplary manner.”


» There was. further, a circumstance much against
this unfortunate man, and which enraged the Indians
to a high degree. It was reported that the Indian

‘spies (who were sent to watch the movements of the


party,) had, on examining their camp on this @ide a ;


the Ohio, (after they had left it,) found on trees, p


342 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


ed for the purpose, the words written with coal, and
other mineral substances :* “No quarters to be given
to an Indian, whether man, woman, or child2?~ It was:
even said, that papers with these words written on


them were picked up in their — all which was’ suf-


ficient to enrage them. da a | theoreti |
- The torture Crawford saibniseticlaes was a double
one; during which, he was often mockingly asked,
how he felt; and whether they did aswell to him,
as he had done to the believing Indians ; they adding}
“ we have to learn barbarities of you white people !”
The other prisoner, (Dr. M‘Knight,) taken ‘at the
same time ; and who had been sentenced to have the
like torture inflicted on him at another placey was
committed to the custody of a Delaware Indian, nam-
ed Tuteleu, (a rough looking man, yet of an easy dis
position,) from whom the prisoner found means ‘of ef
fecting his escape, before they had reached the place
of his destination, and he arrived safe in the» settle-
ment of the white people, though much worn down


by hunger and fatigue. i a Bena
The before mentioned affair being concluded and
“A So ibe


* The Indians are in the practice of transcribing any thing written by
the white people on the trees, after first pealing, or stripping them of
the bark. They then transcribe the writing and take the Spy.) big
them to have it read by a person who can read. This work they do
so well, that it is perfectly legible. Itis done either with a coalon a
skin, ifa piece of bark, or the letters are scratched with a knifeor


flint. oigtgedtiois


a ee ee ae .


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. . 343


the Indians and rangers therein engaged, being again
returned to their respective homes; the commandant,
who kept in mind, our reply to his proposal, (of send-
ing us to Bethlehem,) which was, ‘that, both from
duty and affection, we could not resolve—nor did we
think ourselves permitted, in the hour of trial, to for-
sake. our scattered flock entirely :”” He now proposed:
to send: us safe to the Miami of the lake, where we aN
might gather our scattered people, and settle under |
his protection... We thanked him for the kind offer
he made us, observing however, “ that from all we had a
witnessed, while we were settled on the other side of
the lake, we thought we had.reason to believe, that
the same enemies to the gospel, who had _ hitherto
_ troubled and persecuted us, were still in that coun-
try, and probably would soon be with us again, should i
~ wecross the lake—and that, in making this observation,
we did not allude to Indian enemies only !”” He took
the hint, and replied : ‘‘ I understand you, and indeed.
believe youare right !””? From this time he sought in
good earnest, to accommodate and settle us at a place
_ on this side (Detroit side) of the lake, where our In-
dians could be with us, and out of the reach of all
danger from the war.


+ The commandant, having (after deans enquiry for

_ the purpose,) ascertained that the country on the river ”
Huron, about thirty miles north of Detroit, was in
b every respect favourable, offering every advantage
towards forming Indian settlements; he next sought


344 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


for, and obtained permission of the Chippewas, who
claimed the land, for us to settle thereon, until a peace
should take place ; and having done this, he advised
us, to send a message out to our Indians, to invite them
to come on; in which he also'assisted us.

Messages were therefore prepared and sent, both to
those who were fled to the Sciota, and those onthe
Miami of the lake. That in writing, sent by’ the
the commandant, (by a Frenchman,) to the first men-
tioned place, having come to Elliot’s hands, he’ did all
he could to dissuade’ our Indians from ever joining us
again. He added, “that whichever of them, should
be so foolish to go there, might rest assured, that the
Chippewas would kill them !” The verbal message
to our Indians on Miami, was sent by a Shawanese
Indian, who faithfully delivered it, encouraging the
Indians to whom the speech had been’ directed,
to accept the invitation ; the effect of which was: that
on the second day of July, we had the pleasure of
welcoming two families,—and shortly after, two others;
with whom, were the venerable national assistant
Abraham, who all erected huts near our dwelling, and
were supplied with provisions, out of the king’s stores.

On the arrival of these Indians, daily meetings were —
held, though for want of a convenient ‘place, they
‘were kept in the open air, when the weather permit-
ted; to which, some of the citizens, and the prisoners .
who were adjoining us, attended ; and who, declared
themselves happy, in having an opportunity of hearing


‘HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. ' 345


the gosp preached, there being no protestant minis-
ter in the place. They were also delighted with the
devotion of the Indian hearers, and their singing.
Children were also —— baptized se the sind
sionaries.

- While we were kee measures to remove withe
river Huron, and make a beginning with the twenty-
eight Christian Indians, now with us, we had the joy
to receive letters from our Brethren LaTrobe and
Wollin, in London, dated 19th and 20th of March
last (1782) and brought from thence by sir John John-
son, who was lately arrived.at Montreal; by which
it appeared, that the account of our being taken

. prisoners on the Muskingum, and led captives to
Sandusky, had reached England, through a Phila-
delphia newspaper. These Brethren, on receiving
the account, immediately took measures towards  re-

_lieving our wants, which they naturally supposed to
‘be great, (as indeed was the case,)—by procuring
permission from the members of the society, for the
propagation of the gospel among the heathen, to send

| aletter of credit in our favour, for one hundred pounds
sterling, toa trading house in Montreal. How thank-


ful we were to that society, and those Brethren for
R this valuable, and seasonable present, especially, as we
had now ina manner to begin in the world anew, not i
having sufficient clothes and bedding to secure our- = ;


' _ selves against’ the cold of this climate. Even the
‘commandant rejoiced with us, and i italia a way


2X


ss 2 Sd


346 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


to obtain the money, although, it would probably not
be before the. following spring; as the distance was
great, and no passage to Montreal during the winter
season. But Mr. John Askin, the gentleman to whom
the governor advised us to apply to procure the money,’
very generously offered to pay us the whole immedi-
ately, on our bare word, that sucha letter of credit
had been sent to the house in Montreal ; which he
accordingly did... . s Agi sol

The commandant, having also liberally. sesisial us
in various ways, furnishing us with proyisions, a boat,
a quantity of plank, together with some necessary
utensils, two milch cows and some _ horses; at the
same time, his kind lady, presented us with roots, and
an assortment of garcén seeds, &c. The Brethren,
Zeisberger and Youngman, with their wives, and the
single Brethren, Edwards and Young, set out with
nineteen of our Indians, on the 20th of July, for the new
place, and arrived there the next day in the evening,
while the missionaries, Senseman and Heckewelder,
(the writer of this,) with their families, and the remain-
der of the Christian Indians who had come on, re-
mained at Detroit, to attend to the concerns of the
reviving mission. The new place they were gone |
to, they called Gnadenhutten. The first meeting,
was held there on the evening of their arrival, when —
thanks and praises were offered to the Lord, for his
mercies—and his further blessing, assistance and
protection implored.


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 347


- The dispersed Christian Indians, kept coming in,
though but few at a time, as the nation to which they
belonged, attempted to resist their leaving the coun-
try ; considering those who went off, as lost to their
relations, and the nation. They had therefore to go
off privately, and during the night. Their departure


“occasioned disputes among the savages, one laying the
blame on the other, but they bore the hardest on those,
who were the instigators for removing the Christian
Indians from the Muskingum, and afterwards from
Sandusky. “We told you” (said they,) “that the be-
lieving Indians, would follow their teachers wherever

they went ; and you see, we told you the truth.”
On the 2ist. of September the communion was
held here for the first time, and on the 5th. of Novem-
| ber the Meeting-house was consecrated; fifty three
' Christian Indians being present. Proper arrange-
ments having been made at Detroit, for the reception
of all Christian Indians, who from time to time might
arrive, those Missionaries, who remained at Detroit,
had previous to this Meeting, joined the congregation

on the Huron river.

The Chippewas beginning to visit us, no pains
were spared by the national assistants, in preaching
the gospel to them ; but they were found to be a peo-
ple of little or no reflection, and who cared for nothing
but the daily calls of nature; and herein they are
even indolent; plant little, and live chiefly by hunt-

ing and fishing ; eating many things which a Dela-


348 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


wate or Shawanese Indian, would not relish. They
eat frogs, muskrats, dogs, &c. nay, even the flesh
of dead horses, the same as the Calmuc Tartar. |
The commandant, now colonel De Peyster, who so
kindly furnished us with the necessary provisions,
did the same, to all our Indians passing through De-
troit to join us, or otherwise coming on business.
He also took pleasure in informing us that, all he had
done for us, metthe approbation of the commander -
in chief, general Haldimand, in Lower Canada... __
This year, although closed with grief and sor-
row, on account of what befel the congregation, was
withal remarkable, in consequence of the deliverance,
of more than two thirds of the brethren, from the
hands of the destroyers; and the salvation of the mis-
sionaries, from the hands of the savages, all which we
humbly and thankfully ascribed, to the gracious. pro-
tection of a benign providence. —T
At the commencement of the year 1783, the Chris.
tian Indians, (with ourselves, ) were comfortably accom-
modated with dwellings; for having always heard of
the hard winters, or severity of the. climate during
that season of the year, we immediately built log «
houses ; and having finished them, we commenced
cutting down, and clearing the timber from. the
land, we intended to plant in thespring. The Indi-
ans also made a great quantity of maple sugar in the
spring, and at intervals canoes, baskets, bowls, ladles
and brooms, which they exchanged in the settlements


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


of the French Canadians, for provisions; game be-
ing plenty, they took what meat they could spare, to-


gether with their skins and furs, to Detroit, where


they exchanged. them for wearing apparel.
In July, we had the joy of hearing by the Brethren,
Shabosh and Wygand, who, (after.a journey of seven


weeks, ) arrived from Bethlehem, that peace was con-


cluded between Great Britain and the United States.
The first of these brethren, was one of those taken at
Shonbrun, late in the fall of 1781, by that humane
officer, Biggs, and who, immediately on their arrival


-at Pittsburg, went to Bethlehem, where he remained


ever since. The joy, on meeting his family there,


was great, though damped by reflecting on the bar- |


barous manner, in which his son Joseph was murder-


-ed-near Gnadenhutten, by Williamson’s party.


Although, we were contented and happy in our
situation ; yet, on account of so many of our Indians
being absent, we sometimes felt uneasy, especially,
when we heard how much they wished to be with
us, but were not suffered to go, by the savages living
near them. Some were gone to the Twichtwees,


(otherwise called. “‘ Miamis.”)—The country where


we were, was described to them, as a desolate, barren


country, where nothing, planted, would come to per-


fection, and the Chippewas were represented as an
illnatured and thievish race of Indians; and to make
the prospect in going still more unfavourable, they


349


LR ee ae ae ee
wae agree : : : yee FS


_ 350 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


~


were told, the English nation would soon treat them
in the same manner the Virginians had done, ©


However, three young brethren, took the resolu- —


tion of venturing a journey to us, in order to learn the
truth. They were so well pleased with what they
saw and heard, that two of them immediately return-
ed with the good news, and soon brought in forty-
three of our people in a body ; whom the commandant
kindly assisted on the way, with provisions.
~ The savages seeing the Christian Indians determin-
ed on leaving them, disregarding both persuasions
and even threats, now renewed their quarrelling
among themselves. The Wolf tribe, with captain
.Pipe at their head, who wrested the power of gov-
erning the nation, from the Turtle tribe, was accu-
sed both by the latter and the Turkey tribe, of being
incompetent to govern the nation, as nothing but dis-
asters had been brought upon them, from the time
he (Pipe) had usurped this power. They added,
that instead of pursuing the course which the Turtle
tribe had taken, who studied to spare and strengthen
the nation; they roused the neighbouring ~ na-
tions, and particularly the Wyandots, to join in di-
minishing and impoverishing them !—And Pavhgant-
scthillas,* the Delaware war chief on the Miami,


* This is the same great war chief, who in the'spring of the year 1781,
while at Gnadenhutten and Salem, with eighty of his warriors; had de-
livered himself so favourably with regard to the Christian Indians, and
the choice they had made of being instructed in Christianity; and


ee


>
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 351


(where a number of the Christian Indians resided,) be-


ing applied to by captain. Pipe, ‘ not to suffer the be-
lieving Indians to leave his territory,’ replied: that


“he never. would hinder any of them from going to —


their teachers!” and saying in his message to Pipe,
“why did you expel them? . Did I not tell you be-
forehand, that if you drove the teachers off, the be-
lieving Indians would follow them? but you would
not listen to me, and now we lose both! Who (said
this chief), is the- cause of all those disasters, which
have befallen these people! Zsay you /—you / who
threatened them with destruction ! you, who instigated
the Wyandots to act the treacherous part they did,
agreeing with them, that, asa recompense for their
services, they should be entitled to all the plunder
they could lay hold of !”

By the brethren Wygand and Young, males in Sep-
tember departed for Bethlehem, we, for the first time
since our captivity, in September 1781, had an oppor-
tunity of sending letters to Bethlehem, and other pla-
ces in the United States.

Although we planted for large corps of corn, that
we might be able to supply all our Indians who might
come in from time to time; yet, we were sadly dis-
appointed. Mistaking the climate of this country


for that on the Muskingum, we planted the wrong kind .


being at peace with all men, &c, declaring that he never would have a
hand in disturbing or distressing them.


*


352 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


of corn, which, when scarcely out of the milch, was


exposed to the hard frosts which set in, by which it _


was frozen, and when afterwards a thaw came on, it
rotted and had to be thrown away. This wasa great
disappointment, and we were apprehensive, that we
would be put to great suffering, fora season. . Other-
wise, the congregation was internally inahappy course:
all usual regulations, both as to the daily meetings—


' family exhortations, and visiting the sick, had, from


the beginning taken place ; and to see the happy, exit
of several, who departed this life ponarsss: this. as
was truly edifying. ener .

With the new year of 1784, the moulin eikdenelt
uncommonly boisterous, and the cold so very intense,


that rivers, creeks, and the lake St. Clair, were soon -


covered with ice, which from day to day became
thicker* and stronger. Next fell a snow of two feet
deep, and in a few days after, another of much great-
er depth, so that both together, measured full five
feet ona level How gloomy was the prospect before
us! Our Indians soon began to suffer, and we, ima
great measure, ‘with them. Grain was not only scarce
with us, but had become a scarce article throughout
the settlement of.the white people; (or French Cana-
dians), and the winter being through the whole coun-


try the same, those who had grain, would not part.


with any, but keep it to save themselves and their


*On measuring, the ice was found to be three-feet two inches thick
on the lake, at the distance of a mile from the shore. © m


all
Ss


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 353


cattle from starving.—Many emaciated countenances,
were asad token of the distress, of the poorer people.
The nearest settlements, were at the distance of twen-
ty miles from us. We had no stables as yet, for our
cattle, and what little fodder we had, was but indiffer-


ent, the frost, having been so hard before it was cut ©


and cured. When we cut trees down for fire wood,
the trunks were buried in the snow, which made it a
most laborious business, to procure this article.

» While relief, both for man and beast, seemed to be
out of our reach ; we were taught by the instinct of
our beasts, that much was to be found, almost at our
doors. That a wise and benign providence, had pro-
vided the means of subsistence, for all living creatures,
even in the cold and dreary regions of Canada, ap-
peared evident. Buried, as we almost were in the
snow, with the cattle standing close to our doors;


they would raise their heads towards the river, which


lay but a short distance from the village, as if they
wished to go there, and the Indians supposing this
was occasioned by their want of drink, melted snow
for them, to satisfy their thirst ;—seeing however,
that they still kept casting eager looks in the same
direction, and with their noses raised, as though they
smelt something, we were all at a loss to know the
cause. While this was the case, two deers, that
came down the river on the ice opposite the village,
were shot ; they being opened to see what they had
fed upon, it was found, that their stomachs were fill-
2¥


~


he


TS SS RS aS ee


Ps | HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. —


ed with the scrub grass,* (Equisetum hyemale.) The
Indians, attentive to the discovery, all joined in work=
ing a way for the cattle to get to the river, oron the
ice; as soon as this was effected, the cattle were
seen, ranging along the banks, where they found the


‘green scrub grass pasture in abundance, not only


along the river banks, but along the frozen ponds,
adjoining the same, where “ breeks,” or fie

dreds of acres of this grass was presented

The suffering Indians being by this, taught where the
deer where to be looked for, could now daily get as
much meat as they wanted , as by making themselves
rackets, they could walk over the snow without sink
ing; whilst the deer could not escape them, either
in the snow, or on the ice. It was indeed astonish:
ing, to see the meat that was daily brought in, and
we found, that during the three months that the snow
lay so deep, upwards of one hundred deer were taken
from the rush meadows and ‘the river; some of them
being run down, or caught by the dogs, were’ brought
alive to the village, and theré fed with the scrub
grass, gathered for the purpose, and finally, in the
‘spring, taken alive to Detroit, and sold. ced hye
\ Strange as it may appear, yet it isa fact ts that even


¥


*Scrub, and scour grass, so called, as it is made use of in scouring


“pewter, &c, ee


+). DRS
¢ The high winds i in Canada, which always cnctaill a fall of ear


blow all the | snow off of the. ice, whether it be frozen lakes, rivers


“ponds, 8&6. so that the deer and cattle can get at this food. <?


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. $55


our hogs lived chiefly upon those rushes, or the sap
or juice thereof, for after: chewing the stalks, until
they had drawn the juicy substance out, they would
drop the cud, and take a fresh bite. Both these and
the horned cattle, were not only saved from starving ©
during the winter, but were in fine order in the spring.
Even the fowls would eat it greedily, after being cut
up in small pieces of the size of a grain of Indian
corn ; and the Indians say, that, they lay more eggs
when fed with rushes, than when fed with corn ; but
to the horses, (who are equally;fond of it,) it pro-
ved fatal. A lean horse would get fat on them in ©
four or five weeks, but if left to feed.a few weeks lon-
ger, they would surely die. On examining into the
cause of this, it was discovered, that their stomachs
were cut up, or worn quite thin, and full of small
holes, like a sieve ; whereas, with horn cattle,* and
deer who chewed the cud, the roughness, or sharp-
ness of the grass had not this effect. We lost. two
thirds of our horses, before the discovery.was made.
\ By daily observation on the weather, from the be-
ginning of January, when the first snow fell, to the
beginning of March, there was not (during the whole


_ time,) more than four clear sunshine days, the. sky


*In November of the year following this, an Innkeeper of Detroit,


* sent about thirty head of very lean cattle, which had been brought in


from the United States, to the rush meadows, within three miles of our


village, and some salt to one of our people, to salt them once a week. -


These cattle, which had not once attempted to go off, were all, before
the winter was over, fit for the knife.


x =


356 ‘HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


being. daily, more or less overcast with either blue,
black or red flying clouds. During this time, the


snow had settled, and become so hard, that we could


walk over it; and by the second week in April, it had
so much diminished, that our Indians began to
manufacture maple sugar, of which, they in the course
of the season, made a considerable quantity. Shortly
after this, the river becoming clear of ice, they
caught fish in abundance; and after the snow had
gone off entirely, they gathered cranberries and crab
apples, and dug up wild potatoes.* They then be-.


gan to prepare the ground for tillage, (in the best |


manner they could,) taking care however, to procure
the kind of Indian corn for seed, that would ripen in
the country. iv PR oaep

Towards the end of May the commen of De-
troit, col. de Peyster, having informed us. by letter,
that he would shortly leave the place, ‘being appoint-
ed to the command at some other station ;.we present-
ed our friend and benefactor, our best thanks, for the
many useful services, he had rendered, both to us, and
our Indians; hoping, that the- Lord would reward
him. He assured us, “that he felt for our mis-
fortunes, in being so ill treated, both on the Mus-.
kingum and Sandusky, and that he saw no other
way of saving our lives, than by removing us en-


tirely from the Indian country—that since we ,


were here, he had with pleasure served and assisted


* Glydine Aspios.
at


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


us, whenever it was in his power; and thathe would
also recommend us, and our Indians to his succes-
sor, believing that we would likewise find a friend
in him!” | a
The British government, having appointed another :
governor for Upper Canada ; we waited on his excel- 2
lency, John Hay, esq. on his arrival at Detroit, and : ‘
were very politely received by him. This gentleman - s
informed us: “ that the late governor Hamilton and i:
himself, had been examined at home by the govern- m7
ment, respecting the very ill treatment we met with
from some British’ officers, * who, with a number of
Indian warriors, took us from our settlements on {
the Muskingum, plundering and robbing us, and 7
whose conduct was much censured !—that our. cap- a
tivity had made a great stir at home! That one of |
our bishops in England, had waited upon sir John
Johnson, (and governor Hamilton, also being pres-
- ent)}—for the purpose of representing the situation
of the Brethren’s mission among the North American


fallen them—and recommending them to their par-
ticular notice, and future protection, &c. Further, he
assured us, that government had taken measures,
respecting the Brethren’s missions among the Indians,
that they were in no wise to be molested, in their


Indians at this time, in consequence of what had be-


re UT ae, ee eo ae


* Matthew Elliot, called captain Elliot, was the only British officer, F
if he really was one, who took us off from the Muskingum.


f
|


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. |


labours amongst these people ; but on the other hand —
supported and protected ; and that already orders for
that purpose, had been sent out to all commanders of
posts, agents, &c. He assured us of his regard and
friendship ; and would gladly serve us\in any way,
when it was in his power :” but, to ourgrief, he,
in the summer, fell sick anddieds  )
- After the death of this governor, major William
Ancrum, was appointed commandant of this post, and
its dependences ; in whom we also found a real friend.
- The town of the Christian Indians, began and
builtin a wilderness, had by this time become a pleas-
ant place. The street having been laid out regularly,
and the houses well built, gave ita good appearance,
to which the adjoining cleared lands:and gardens, ad-
ded not a little. Every visitor from Detroit, report-
ing on his return what he had seen here, drew many
to the spot, to become also witnesses of the industry
of the Indians ; a spectacle, they had never before seen,
Even the commandant (major Ancrum) with two of
his officers, and our good friend Mr. John Askin,
came at one time on a visit to us. But what was
pleasing to the white visitors, was not; so to the
Chippewas, who were the owners of the land we liv-
ed on. These had long complained :of our remaining
so long on their land, ‘saying, it being now peace we
ought to go off, and live on land of our own, ad-
# ding that they wanted the land we lived on, for
their own use ; as this part of the country’ was one


. —-
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 359 +


of their best hunting grounds ; on which we had al-
ready killed too much of their game, &c.”—~The com-
mandant unto whom their complaints became known ;
took great pains to make their minds easy for a while


longer, butas all Indian nations, are very covetous


of their lands, knowing, that by loosing the land, they
also loose the game on it, accordingly they were con-
tinually urging the Christian Indians to go off—and to
show that they were in earnest about it, they made
use of threatening language, if we did not remove. —

The Christian Indians, could not blame the Chip-
pewas for wanting what was their own, but they at the
time were ata loss where to go to, if obliged to go off.
They had no inclination to cross the lake, and dwell


amongst a people, who had treated them so ill, and


sought their destruction. Neither was it at this time
advisable, to cross the lake (Erie) to settle in that
country, as the Indians there were far from being satis-
fied with the terms of peace, offered them by the


United States ;—they therefore requested the Chippe-


was, to permit them to stay only one year ery 5
which was granted.
» The crops having this season yieldéd abun


was, among other benefits, matter of praise and thanks:


giving, to the disposer of all good, who so manifest-
ly had supported the congregation throughout the
whole year ; although the prospect had been so gloomy
at the commencement of it.

“In May 1785, the missionaries Youngman and


a diet |


wo


+ 360 ‘HECKEWELDER’S | A


Senseman, returned with their ‘theit families to Bethle-
hem; it being ‘uncertain, when we could cross’ the
lake, to renee anew ee
country. 1 FARM nib Oi Lp sebahenea eae
~ During this year, we frequshidy “were visited by
Indians who were strangers to us; generally Dela~
wares and Mohegans. One time there arrived up-
wards of forty of them in a body, and#at ano~
ther time about the ‘same number, but mostly of.
the Nauticok tribe , all’ of whom behaved civilly, and
attended divine service during their stay.
‘Inthe winter following, when the rivers were co-
vered with ice, a great number of wolves came into
the parts, traversing the country.in packs, and attack-
ing every animal'they could meet. They came some-
times into our village, attacking and killing our‘hogs;
they would even sometimes seize the largest of them:
At one time they attacked and killed’ a Chippewa
man and his wife. Atanother time, one of our Indian
brethren, coming from Detroit on the ice, ‘was’ pur-
sued by a pack of those animals for several miles, but
he being furnished with skates, they could not come up .
with him. Many however were killed by our Indians,
who decoyed them to places where ‘they destroyed |
the selves. a Oi


HAS yee
Xe The Indians fasten a musket loaded with buck or swan shot, tothe
ground, at the end of, and close beside the trunk of a large Tong.
or fallen tree, with the muzzle fixed toward the other end, and
So as to point to the object intended, next a string or thin cord, measur-


HECKEWELDER’S, NARRATIVE. 36k


_. The Chippewas continuing in their determination,
that the Christian Indians should move off of their
land ; and the commandant, in. consequence, having.
advised the latter not to erect any more buildings,
or. clear any more land at this place; they had
no alternative, but to look fora place where they
could remove. to; and the Walhanding river on-
the south side of Erie, being spoken of, we thought
proper, previously to our crossing the. lake, to dis-


patch one ‘of the missionaries, with two or three,


ofour Indian brethren to, Pittsburg, there to learn
whether it would be advisable and. safe for us. to re-
turn, and settle on that river. . 3

_ Accordingly the missionary. Edwards, whe with
some of our Indians, had in. July last set out on. this
errand, were now returned, and brought us every in+


tox the exact distance,. from where the gun is tied downs to the far
end of the log or tree, and to which at the one end, a piece of meat is

fastened, while the other end is tied to the trigger. Then gath®

ering, or cutting small brush, they enclose’ the gun and line from
one end to the other—similar to a light brush fence, which is to
keep the animal from entering the enclosure, at any place from. the
side, which if not prevented, he, by touching the string with his ,
might cause the gun to go off to no purpose. If the log or tree,
side of which the line is, is not supposed to. be of sufficient height, to
prevent the wolf from leaping over, small brush is also laid throughout
on this log. The wolf in his range, getting the scent of the meat, and
coming up, seeks for an open place to come at it, which, being in front
of the muzzle of the gun, which has’ been cocked, the moment


_he lays hold of the meat, he draws the trigger and is,shot. I have


in the year 1773 seen sixteen heads of wolves which were killed i in this
manner, brought in, in the course of ten days.


22


at


tl
a


.


eye a


Ps
oe te


ate


“A
i o yan»


be,
f

ag
Fe


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


formation wished for ;—indeed, much mote than we
ever expected. By our letters from Bethlehém and
other places, we observed that congress had expressly
réserved, out of the land ceded to them by thé Indi=
ans at the late treaty ; the district formerly “occupied
by (and by Indian gift belongiig to) the Chiistiati
Indians for their use. And that the surveyor general
was to lay off this land for themi, (the Chiri8tiafi Indi-
ahs) a8 soon a8 it could be done. The same ifitelli-
gence we likewise found in Philadélphia newspapers
brought along, which being made kiown’ to the’ In-
dians, gave them joy. - (4 QTY
The missionaries, who had the best 6pporttinity’ of
learnirig the causes of the disturbances’ and wars
between the white people and the Indians, believed
this wise resolution of congress, would go a great
way in preventing bloodshed in future ; for, to them
it was well known, that whilst the white people were
not checked, from going on.in the same manner as
heretofore ; murdering Indians, breeding disturbances;
and thereby finally getting possession of theif lands :
there never could be a lasting peace. This resolu-
tion of congress was therefore, on the one hand a dis-
appointment to those who had murdered so’ many Of
thé Indians, with a view of becoming the possessors
of their land, while on the side of the Indians, it serv-
ed to convince them, that the government of the Uni-
ted States, were fiot adcessary to those murders, as -


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


they had so often been told by wicked and designing

men. Again, all the Indians became thereby satis-
fied, that congress were in earnest, and spak

the truth, when, at the commencement of the war,
they told them, that ,“‘all the Indian nations or
tribes who should sit still, not taking up the hatchet
against ahem during the qomtest, would be_consider-


and their offspring, if finally they should prove victo-
tious ; while those who had fought against them,
would loose their land, &c. ;
dn consequence of .the above favourable news,
laos preparation was made toleave the place in the
spring, and bend our course tothe Muskingum,
of which intention we also,informed the commandant,
major Ancrum, who, to favour our design, sent a for-
mal message to the Indian tribes on that side of the
dake, not to molest the believing Indians; when they
arrived there. 7
» However. attached we had become 1 to the leat we
lived at, yet to.be tenants.as it were on the “ land
of strangers,” was not agreeable to our Indians. We
were not once, during.the time we lived on th
called upon,to join in the war. Neither th he Bi
ish government, nor the Indians gaye us any ‘trou:
-ble on that account, but we lived as quiet and un-
disturbed, as if no war existed ;—and as long.as the —
Chippewas asked no more of us, than what fell .
in the provision way: they were served with pleas: —


364 . HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.
sure : but now a case occurred, which gave us all much


— -and caused us to wish ourselyes away with-
fi


further delay. There had, namely, within a year
past, been several attrocious murders* and ‘robberies
committed about Detroit, without any person being
able to discover, who the perpetrators of ‘the horrid
deeds were, although no pains were spared to find
them out. Every where, both in the town of Detroit,
and throughout the settlements the people werealarm-
ed, and struck with terror, many not ‘thinking them-
selves safe in their own houses, ‘especially at night.”
It being at length discovered, bya fresh attack made
onaMr. Jacobs, a trader and his ‘hands, ‘while on
their way to Sagina, about sixty miles distant'from’De-
troit and in'which Jacobs and one of his‘men lost'their
lives; that this gang of murderers, ‘consisted ofa
father and his two sons, one of whom however was
shot dead by Jacobs, after being ‘mortally wounded
himself. The commandant, immediately “sent forall
the chiefs of the Chippewas'to come ‘in, ‘whovon'their
arrival were told, that unless they-took, and delivered
up’ a him, the perpetrators of ‘these horrid ‘deeds;


Re


inites ied and until this was ‘done, some/of them


Py <a


must be retained'as hostages! Oe AR
The murderers learning, that their chiefs had be-
come responsible, for their being’ taken, and delivered


Reet eae:
*See Heckewelder’ s Account of Indian nations, chapter vii. age 8.


upto the commandant ; became’ more daring) devia:
ring; “that they neither feared their chiefs; seca
mandant, nor any other person, and would conti

in the same way, of murdering white people, without
respect to persons, and never suffer themselves to be
taken, but would kill every person, whether Indian or
white man,” who would — to lay hands —


‘them, &c.”’ Bs ae


<The chiefs, being losrvanlda on all parties.» to
rid ‘the country ‘of ‘those murderers, and seeing no
‘way of-accomplishing this, now applied to the Chris-
tian ‘Indians, to assist them, saying: “ that they, (the
Delawares,) being ‘their grandfather, would ‘not ‘be
‘suspected by them ! that:they might take them with-


‘out running any: risk !—and, should they even’ happen


‘to failin the attempt of taking them alive, they were


sat liberty to. stab. or shoot:them,” ‘giving also *at the


' Jagainst'the inclination of ‘the “Christian ‘India


‘time, a) minute description of ‘their persons, ‘that.


‘they might'be able to distinguish them from other


| Indians...


~ Such: an extraordinary demand, could not be admit-
ted. No nation would dare to interfere ‘in e Col

seerns of ‘another, and especially when mt rake rr
connected therewith. ‘The demand ‘was — so mu


they felt a disgust for the country and people in it ; and
wished themselves away immediately. Luckily, after


some time, the father.and his:surviving son, were by —


the art and cunning of a young white man, who had


HECKEWELDER °s NARRATIVE. 965 *


366° HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE,


worked himself into their confidence, conducted to
troit, when at.once all fears of | annette
away-* |. iS TOS: Fao
‘The debts, which is Christian lellesi necessarily
contracted, during the time they lived in Detroit and


the settlements, (and which amounted to a large sum,) —


were all discharged. For this they were*particularly


thankful, and under obligations to their good friend


Mr. John Askin at Detroit, who, in due. time, put
them in the way.of clearing themselves. of all, debts;
nanely, by raising as great a quantity of Indian. corn
as they could, for which he gave them a stipur


lated price, at their doors. Encouraged by this kind ©


offer, they strained every nerve, in enlarging. their
fields for the purpose, .besides making a number of
large trading canoes, which were also for the greater
part bespoke by. this gentleman,and some by others; so
that, when they came to wind up accounts,with their
creditors, they could not only pay off their debts, but


most of them had so much money left, that they could


‘purchase for themselves, cows and pigs,. onan
al at. Cayahaga. oi cretiny
earer the ,time.came, efor our sdepsiturntie
ries were propagated as to the danger we
would throw ourselves into, by returning into our
country, before a ,firm~ peace |had jbeen Ree


‘ as 15 Stil %


* Heckewelder’s Historical Account, &c. chap. vii.p. 96.
> 94! 7


eal
« &


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.’ “*


between the United States, and the Indian’ nations.
It was repeatedly said, and indeed with some truth;
that the Indians, were far from being satisfied with the
treaties which had been held with them, by commis-
sioners appointed by congress—and that a new war
would before long take place, &c. It appeared also


- that the peuple at Detroit; were of the same belief.


- Nevertheless, on the 20th of April, we met for the
last time in the chapel, to offer up prayers and prais-
es to'the Lord ; thanking him for alll benefits bestow-
ed, and mercies recieved from him in this place, and


praying for a continuance of the same, and his kind


protection ; after which, we set out in canoes for De-
troit, where, on our arrival we met with a kind recep-
tion, both from the commandant, and the inhabitants
of the place ; the former supplying us with provisions


during our stay of several days, as also with the ne-


cessary articles for the journey.
-* During our stay, a meeting was appointed, for


the Christian Indians to express their thanks to the .
Chippewa chiefs; their grandchildren; for ead


‘permitted them to dwell in their country, :
atime; and for the peace they enjoyec
therein. Asa token of their gratitude,”
‘s¢nted them with a large bunch of wampum, «
ing some thousand beads. One of the chiefs rising
from his seat, said in reply : “grandfather! I love


you, and would rather you would return again to the ©


Huron. river, and live with us!” which ‘reply was


i


, gt thal Liat i Ryne ve. ee


ee. PE a Oe Se romeo


368 §  |§ HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


well understood, as a bareygompliment, > (they, well —
knowing that they would not return;)a-friendly
leave was taken on both sides at parting. 9 6) ue
It was truly pleasing, to hear the merchants!,and-
other citizens of the place, speak. respectfully, of our
Indians ; calling them an orderly, industrious, honest
and Christian people ; and: os themselves sorry,
to see them depart. esistowarl:
Having taken leave of all friends, and in particular
of the commandant, major Ancrum, and of our-benefae-
tor Mr. John Askin, esq. whose many services, render-
ed both to the missionaries, and their Indians,’ will
never be forgotten ; we embarked on the 28th inst.on
board this gentleman’s two trading vessels, the Beaver,
and the Mackinaw, for Cayahaga, on the south side:of
lake Erie. Jedycy aabgbainte
The captains of these vessels, calculated oma
voyage of but a few days to Cayahaga”'river, where
we were to be landed, provided the wind was favoura-
ble, and the channel of the river as open’as it had —
been the last season. Dropping down» the: Detroit.
er, we anchored in the afternoon at the’ mouth; for
ig t; and being: early next ne undenean


a Here however, we had by high, and for the
greater part, contrary winds. and ‘stroms, today too,
for four successive weeks ; shifting our anchorage; ac-
cording to the wind, and when’ very stormy, “we ran
into Hope’s cove, or put in the bay. “Am attempt was


a ; 2


ams


| HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. : 369


at one time made, to get into the Cayahaga, but
found impracticable, at least for the Beaver, she draw-
ing more water than the Mackinaw, which was a
‘small flat bottomed vessel. It was also evident, from
the breakers at the mouth of the river, that the sand
from the blowing winds, which came from the oppo-
site shore, had in a great measure lodged itself in the
channel, and there being no other place, within a
great distance. where the vessel could anchor with
‘safety, we again returned to our former station. ;
_ Seeing no prospect of comingyto our journeys end
in this way : it was resolved that the Mackinaw should
take all our baggage, and a few of our people to Caya-
haga, and we be landed by the vessels’ boats on the
main shore opposite to these Islands, from whence we
would take our chance, in getting along. Being land-
ed at Rocky point, the Indians caught in the space of
about two hours, upwards of five hundred white fish,
that had retired during the high blowing wind, be-
tween Rocky island and the shore, where the water
was about two feet deap. The fish lay so geyded
together, that they were easily taken, by a kind o


—


scoop net, made of a piece of linen, fixed bet
— with a wide spreading fork. Some even made
“use of the shirt from their backs, tying up the col ;
and the sleeves, while the shirt tail was fastened fae :
hoop, made of a piece of grape vine; when, by dip-
‘ping, or drawing it under the fish, they would seldom
fail of taking several at a time; and as quick as the i
3A | |


a


370 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. _


fish were takén to shore, the women cleansed and
dryed — on scaffolds, over somes? made for the
purpose. a uy trent a
We afterwards made several canoes of the bark of
large Elm trees, which enabled some to ‘proceed ‘by
water, (whilst others travelled by land,) for the mouth
of the Cayahaga river, where the Mackinaw “as «to
await our arrival. ‘Those by land, found the journey —
very fatiguing, having to cross many gullies, rivulets, .
creeks, rivers, and swampy grounds; they not
a single horse to help them along ; whilst those by
water, (with whom the Writer of this narrative, with
his family were,) could frequently pass on under an
easy sail. Having arrived after several’ days ‘sailing,
at the rocky shore, which commences ‘about eight or
nine miles west of the mouth of the Cayahaga river;
we, in consequence of the frequent warnings given ‘us
at Detroit, not to risk running with ‘canoes, along
these rocks, as, if overtaken by a storm or high wind,
‘blowing from the opposite shore of the lake, we would
tel in an instant dashed to pieces against the rocks;
: a stop for the rest of the day,’ that we might
consider, on the best and safest way of pro-
¢ on the niorrow. ivnvedeae
By the time we had unloaded and secured our-ca-
rioes, by drawing them on the land, a number of Chip-
pewas, in their fine large birch bark canoes, (who
likewise were going to the Cayahaga ;) came up} they
seeing, that we lacked courage in venturing to pro-


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 371


ceed along this wall of rocks; endeavoured to per-
suade us to reload our canoes, and go» in company
with them to the mouth of that river, Saying, they
- would. pray to the great spirit, both. for themselves,
and for us, that we might safely pass this. dangerous
place ; which one of them having done, by casting his
eyes upwards, and making a short prayer, he next
took. his tobacco pouch up, when, haying taken a
hand full of Glecanecan (Indian tobacco,) out of it, he
cast,his eyes around from the north to the south, while
he was imploring the manitto (spirit) who governs the
winds, to prevent any storms from gathering or com-
ing upon them, until they were outof danger; he
threw the tobacco into the air, Then taking another
handful he said, “and thou, manitto of the waters, *
(spirit or God of the waters) deign that those do not
become turbulent and swallow us up; or dash us
against this wall of rocks !’’ and having ‘strewed this -
_ tobacco on the water : now, (said he) there is no more
danger !”” finding however, that we were not inclined
to accompany them, they set sail, and went on.
- In little more than an hour after these Chi
left us, a most tremendous thunder gust «
from the north west, which obliged us on the |,
quickly to shift our quarters from where we were, to
an open place, where no falling trees could reach us ;
asthey were blown down in every direction ; some
being tornup by the roots ; while others were broken
off near the tops. This rock wall, which we judged to


~ ’ tad eT ee ba a


yee


SS


372 ° -  HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.—


be between thirty and forty feet higer than the ‘level’
of the water—and on which we got by an easy ascent’
at its western extremity, trembled by the force with
which the dashing waves or swells ran against it,
which came rolling over a sea of at least forty miles’
in breadth, the water at every dash, flying high
above the wall. Dreadful indeed was the fore part of
the night, and not an eye was closed by sleep; but it —
having become calm on the land, after the storm had
abated, the swells on the lake also decre
a light southerly wind blowing about three k
in the morning, assisted in turning the swells ina di-

rection from the shore where we were. We had

during that night held several consultations, as to the


* manner of proceeding to the Cayahaga rivet where the


vessel lay, waiting our arrival. The Indians reported
it impossible for women with small children, to travel —
the distance by land. The wind at-break of day was
as favourable as could be wished for—a_ gentle side
wind blowing from the land and rocky shore.» The
canoe men full of courage, and being trusty hands,
iropatiently waited tor the word to be given for load-
ing the canoes and setting off. This being done at
day light, we embarked, and running under an‘easy
sail, first some distance into the lake, in order‘to have’
sea room, to run either way in case of an unfavoura>
ble wind rising ; we took our course for the mouth
of the river, far enough from the land to be out of
danger ; yet near enough to have a full view of this


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. | 373


natural phenomenon, the length of which is said to be
eight or nine miles : which distance we madietin one
hour aud thirty-five minutes. There appeared to be
in this wall, several different strata of stoné, and these
of various colours ; all ‘which lying horizontal, and so
nearly parrallel, that they in some places, greatly re-
sembled ‘the work of art. The wind continuing to
increase, at the time we were opposite to the east end
of this wall, and the breakers runuing out into the
lake to a great distance, from the mouth of the Caya- .
* a we thought it safest to run in to shore at E
this place, from which the land was low"and level for Cll
aaa

:


the last mile to the river. ‘The captain of the Mack- |
inaw, who, with his glass, had viewed our movements
with great anxiety, fearing we’ might attempt to make
the river through the breakers, when we infallibly
must have been wrecked and sunk, our canoe  be-


ing but small and too heavy laden ; rejoiced in seeing "
us run into shore at that place. He told us, that the
Chippewas the’day before, had fortunately, reached %


the rivers mouth, before the storm came on.
We now began to unload the vessel, althou;


land travellers, (who were the greatest body, were
not yet arrived ; which being finished, we commenced
making canoes out of large chestnut trees ; and ‘when
the land travellers arrived, they joined.us in the labour
with a cheerfulness not to be described. But the sea-
son being already too far advanced, to think of plant-
ing corn on our arrival at the Muskingum, it being


374


this day the 18th of June, we resolved to selecta
a place on this river, where we might’ plant some corn.
and vegetables, and found a suitable situation within
about adozen miles from the lake, where it appeared
there formerly was an Indian cornfield. Stopping
here with our canoes, we chose. the east side of the
river, for our encampment, and there built temporary
huts ; while on. the opposite side we prepared the —
ground for planting. It is indiscribable, how happy
these poor Indians. felt, on being rel
long a confinement, and again walking on ive
soil: for with all Indians, toglive upon nd of
strangers, or land belonging tomnother nation or tribe
than their own, it'is next to being in confinement. |
They now cheerfully went to work, meeting daily for
divine service, the same as they had done on the
whole journey, whether on board the vessel, or on the
land ; and always in the open air. ee
To push on to the Muskingum at onee, ait vit
on the land reserved for them by cofigress, was the
intention of the Christian Indians, at the outset of
their journey ; but we now saw, thata wise providence
decreed otherwise. The honorable William Henry,
esq. a member of congress at that time; and-a gentle-
man Who for many years past, had taken a particular
interest in the conversion of the Indians of this eoun-
try; but who had witnessed, scenes the most shock-
ing and cruel, which had been committed on the


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


_ harmless and inoffensive Indians, by unprincipled


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 375


vagabond white people, among whic are mur-
der*of the Conestoga Indians, and al ngratu-
lating us by letter, on the good disposition of congress,
‘in reserving for the Christian Indians their former
towns on the Muskingum, yet, gave it as his private
opinion: ‘that we would do well, not to be in too
great a hurry in settling on these lands, as he had a
bad opinion of the frontier white settlers, who had al-
- ane murdered a great part of the congregation, and
bably would at any time when they had an oppor-
unity, be ready to do the same to others of the com-
muni y, as these people sought to get the country to
themselves. He hoped congress would, before long,
pass and enforce such laws as would put an end to all
future encroachments* on Indian lands; as, unless


that was done, these intruders would keep the country


perpetually at war with the Indians. Congress how-
ever, who wished that the Indians would shortly set-
tle*on the land, ordered colonel Harmer, to deliver
them, on their calling on him at his post on the Ohio ;
five hundred bushels of corn, and one hundred blan-


kets ; which the Indians being informed of, they con-


sidered it as a token of the good disposition of that
honorable body towards them, and were thankful,
though it was out of their power, to go for the articles
at such a distance; they having no horses.

-! The honorable Gharles Thomson, esq.* Secretary of


* Tomohock improvements, (as they were called) made on Indian
lands, were then customary. Numbers of these were made on the
Christian Indians’ lands, after these were murdered.


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


_-congress* who was well known to be an admirer, and


well to the Brethren’s missions among the In-
dians: expressed himself in a. letter to the bishop .
Ettwein “ that he would deem himself happy, in, be-


ing instrumental, in saving the precious remnant of


the Indian congregation, and in promoting the gener-


al welfare of these poor people !’’—-He therefore ear- 4


nestly reccommended the cause of the Christian In-
dians, both to Mr. James White,* agent of Indian
affairs south of the Ohio, as also to gene’
Butler, agent for the northerndistrict, in,
Indians, were situated. The. latter gentler
previous to the war, been an eye witness to. the la-
bours of the Brethren among the Indians; and now
assured the missionaries by a letter, ‘‘ that he would
do every, thing in his power to serve, them ;,,and,to
promote the welfare of the mission in. rermee:
were engaged, &c. r otden awa

The Brethren in Bethlehem, were not. desea


guine in their wishes and expectations, of shortly see-
inga new missionary establishment, on the Musking-
um ; while tothe missionaries themselves, the prospect
seemed involved in a cloud of darkness ; or, for the
present, hidden from their eyes. The savages had
already signified their determination, not to suffer the
Christian Indians to go and live on the Muskingum
for the present, saying; that “ they cared nothing
for what ghe Americans said to the m at their late trea-


* See Lockiel. part 3d. page 216, ~


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 377


ties ; as they only reproached them for having j
the British in the war, and added that th


had forfeited all their lands, &c.””— This (said they)


we never did agree to, and therefore it will cause a


fresh struggle, before we so tamely give up !”

- Many other circumstances likewise proved, that as
yet, no settled peace was established, between the Uni-
ted States and the Indian nations. Reports stated,
mee veral Indians had been killed, since these trea-
a the American frontier militia had
reatened to kill every Indian who should attempt
to settle on the Muskingum, and that they would not
suffer the Christian Indians»to reoccupy the lands
they had formerly lived upon, &c.—Upon the whole,
it appeared evident to us, that our detention on the
lake, had eventually been the means of saving the con-
gregation, from being murdered by one or the other
party ; whereas here on Cayahaga, we were out of im-
mediate danger, and could easily cross the lake again,
should necessity compel us thereto.

! But, while the Christian Indians were flattering
themselves that they would be permitted to remain
on this river, until all differences between the Ameri-
can people, and the Indian nations, were brought. to a
close, and a firm and. durable peace established : they
learnt, by means of visiting friends and relations from
among the savages, that the chiefs of the nations,
were in close council, deliberating on the steps, pro-
per to be taken to meet the insults that had been of-

3B


378 §  HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. “oe
’


, at, andsince the treaty :—and to check


held to inne sameta Pei “the Indians shad no
longer any land which they could call their own,

they having forfeited their whole country by join-

ing the British against them,”—and indeed it
was not long before captain Pipe, sent a beltof wam- |
pum to the Christian Indians to inform them ;, “that
as appearances towards a peace were very :


and a new war would: probably break ou
believing Indians were not well situated ont
haga ; but in as much danger as ever of being surpri-
sed and murdered by the white people ;—he therefore
would remove them from where they were, and place
them at Petquotting,” (on the Huron rit ) and or- .
der that country to be cleared of the settlers who

were now on the land, to make room for them, where

they might always remain and live in peace and safes
ty! He said, he wished the believing (Christian)
Indians, to’consider him their sincere friend; and

therefore accept his invitation !??—our’ Indians, fear-

ing to return an answer that might give offence, or
create suspicion, chose rather to keep the belt in/their
possession, which would be the same‘as giving an an-


swer in the affirmative. “o , (ikaaees

ane se ante

* Meaning the surveyors that were out in every direction,’ surveying:
their lands for themselves. ir


TUS Sat


& % =
as — = a,
‘ HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 379
x d
'. Another message, although not sent by proper au-


“thority, was soon after this, brought or

believing Indians in pressing terms, to c nd live

at Safidusky: to which Bprever.a negative answer
was given.

Note. To afford the reader, an opportunity of learn-

+ ing the causes assigned by the Indian nations, of their

dissatisfaction, and hostile disposition towards the

_ people of the United States: I will follow up their

own way of reasoning, and the subjects they bring

into view. The greatest complaint they made against

the American people was: that “at treaties, they

charged them, with the injuries they had done to the

Americans ;, while they, (the Americans) neither

' gaid a word, nor would hear any thing about injuries

they had done to Indians! That, finally, they took

f their land (or country) from them, alledging to them,

| crimes which properly had been caused by, or com-

mitted by themselves. They alledged that the trea-

ties lately held with the nations, had been highly of-

fensive, they having been too hard dealt with! We

(said they) were addressed by the great men who

spoke to us, as if we had been a conquered people,

and who must, whether willing or not, submit to the

dictates of a proud conqueror !”—We were told,

“that by having embraced the cause of our father,.

the British, we had forfeited all our land;—had no

more a country, which we could call our own !—That

they had a right to take the whole of our lands at


a er ee | i‘


380. _HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE,  —_—>


it, out of ichatedoetadh would suffer us to!
id hunt on a part for a —-
(Then describing the lands they now: laid a clai ye:
_ The Indians further reported: ‘that the pie
* people, took their country from them, also on the
grounds, that they (the Indians) had been told. at the
treaty held at Pittsburg, at the commenceme of the |
war, that all those Indians who joined the British,
and took up arms against them, would loose their land
if they (the Americans) should become : the cong
ors !”,—-Here the Indiansobserve : *‘ that in the
tion, they could not have done otherwise, as, for all
their dependence for necessary articles of clothing,
&e, they had to look to the British alone, the Ameri-
cans having nothing to give, or to exchange for their
peltries , and besides, their father the British: compell-
ed them to side with them, saying, “ thatif they did
not, they would look upon them as enemies, and with-
hold every thing from them!”—They say further
“that those great men, who foretold, what would be
done with those who joined the British against them, .
at the same time, made a very fine promise, to all
those who did not join in the war, but did set quiet and
mind their own business at home; saying: that all
such, they would make to be, agreat and happy peo-
ple !’—Here (putting the question to one another, and
to the Christian Indians particularly) they asked : “ did
they speak the truth, or did they deceive us ?”_They
did decieve us; for those were.the very people they


go. ;
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 881


#
Sought to kill! they did kill upwards of one hundred —


oe our people, who n took up a si ele WV


against them, but remained quiet at home, planting


corn and vegetables, and praying; and not satisfied
with what they had done on the Muskingum, and at
Pittsburg, to those who befriended them ; they even
If ventured into our country at Sandusky, for the pur-
pose of killing the remainder of those, who had done,
as we all were bid to do!—did sit still!’’—Then_ go-
ing on, in enumerating the daily offences given, and
injuries done and doing them, they said: ‘ those very
people, have since the peace has been concluded,
been all over our country, deadening trees, and laying
poles across* each other on the ground, wherever
they found a spot of good land ; so-that, in whatever
_ direction we go to hunt, we meet with the like work
done by white’ people !—*‘ Now (said they,) does this
not plainly denote, that they mean. to take this very
land from us? Is it not evident, that they murdered
so many of our friends, for the purpose of: getting at
this land.—Go and examine your former towns on
the Muskingum,” (said they to the Christian Indians,)
‘and see what they have been doing there! You
will find in many places, trees deadened, and cut poles
laid across each other, by them !{ And do you really


* Making Tomohock improvements, thereby to hold such spot of land
to themselves, as was usual to do before the war.


+ This was found to be so, on the return of the Christian’ Indians to
Muskingum in the year 1798,


/- oe


382 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


we: a. ee ae
believe, that the’ people who have-done this, would —


, to sit down thefe again? No! i
Follow up (said they,) he rivers aad streams” which


fall into the Ohio, to fountain heads, and you”


will find the like work done !* Besides this, what
have they done to our persons, since they told us,
that now all was peace, inviting us to come am trade
with them again, there being stores open for us, for
that purpose, both at Pittsburg and fort Mac intosly
Did they not fall upon those of our people, w
taken their skins and pelt the latter pla
they were in the act of trading them away, -


several of them ?t+ Did we not receive but the other


day, an account of some Shawanos being murdered
on the Sciota!{—Are they not at this present time
scattered through our country, either stealing” our
horses, or robbing our hunting camp king the
skins away from the scaffolds,) while we are absent!
And shall we suffer such thieves and murderers to be
always our neighbours !—Let them go on in this way,


aro ci
* The writer of this, found this to be so, wherever he CAME, on sat


travelling through that country.


S


: ¢
tee


+ This was a most barbarous act. One of the Christian Indians Ww was
cat


killed at the time.


Pi- ey


$ See Lockiel’s History, part 3d. chap. xiii. their inl sated to be
ten.


§ Indeed the poor sufferers, sometimes applied to the missionaries
to assist them in recovering their property, but neither the Indian agents,
nor the civil authority could effect this, at.that time.


on


a r
_ HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 385


until they have extirpated us entirely, ~ & the


whole of our land !—Did not God create us as well as


the white peop Did he not place us on this land,
and give us strength and ability to defend ourselves
against any invader !—Does he not expect of us, that
we shall exert ourselves, in preserving that which he
gave to our forefathers, be r themselves and their
offspring for ever !—What nation’ of Indians, will


tamely submit, to be driven from their lands by ano-


ther nation !—is it not a rule with Indian nations, to
make prisoners of the inhabitants’ of another nation,


_ (to take their horses, guns, peltry, nay, every article


found upon them,) when such were only caught
hunting, in their territory! sending them home
naked, and: forbidding them ever to come again,
or they must abide the consequence !—~and have
wot such as did return, had their noses ‘and ears
cut off; and been told, that if they camea third
time, they would loose’ their heads !—Yes ! all this
had been done by the very nation,* adjoining us!—


- and shall we be driven among these, to be served


in the same manner! No nation. has_ suffered
what we have by the white people! We the Lenni
Lenape (Delawares) together with our numerous
train of connexions, (grand chiklren,) who at the time,
when the first white people came over the great salt


* The Potowatamos, see Heckewelder’s Hi8tory of Indian Nations,
chapter xix.


| aie
Mais:


>


Fe =F a eee se


ea
Pe J
,


ny


4


SF ee


aE


ay


and far to the east. We !—our forefathers received
the white people with kindness ! ! they gave then id


» need of for planting ; for t
selves !—but they are not satisfied with this ! when


Ag , :
384 | MECKEWELDED’S NARRATIVE, .
water lake to us, Hovsvedkt and welll in a," of all
the country lying on the sea shore far to the abetil


to live, and plant upon. We afterwards showed them
e always agreed to part with


people, as they stood in
ust live as well as our-


the same kindness !—
as much land to


we part witha large tract of our country to them they
do not begin at the one end, and continue settling
one adjoining the other, until the whole is settled
or occupied! No! ‘they’ scatter like’ the deer over
the whole tract—one here, and another there ; leav-
ing vast bodies of land laying waste, and then say to
us, that they must have more land, and if we are not.
quick in giving it to them, they take it, saying we will
have it !—and what are they doing at this present
time !—have they not their surveyors’ out almost in
every direction !* and are they not. building houses,
at the salt spring on the Big Beaver ; and ‘bringing
large iron Pots out to make salt on ourland, &e!”

Such was their language at that time, and» which
engaged the particular attention of all the Indian na-
tions residing in the country. The disappointment
they met with at the two first treaties, held with
them after peace had taken place between the con-.

” La Qe


* The seven Ranges, and donation lands, were then surveying.


tending powers. On account of their not being at


liberty to meet the American commissioners, with.
a speech, or address, which they had prepared —
Pyith so much care, for the occasion: gave them a


disgust for the whole.—They were not insensible,
that they had erred ; and that their American breth-
ren, had also just complai against them ; but they
thought, matters should a would have been, pro-
perly examined into,—properly weighed, and im-


partially decided. They had flattered themselves, |


that when once they should meet their American
brethren at a treaty, matters would soon be adjusted,
and that all that was past, would be buried in the
deep; and they again taken by the hand by their
American brethren, &c.

Of the manner in which the nations intended to
meet their American brethren, at a treaty, when. cal-
led upon for the purpose, the Christian Indians had
previously been informed of ; and the proposed ad-
dress, met their full approbation ; it containing in-
controvertible facts—the language not high toned,
yet energetic; and calculated to soften, or prepare
the heart for a kind reception, closing, with making
a present ofa large tract of land, to their Americana
brethren—and another very large tract of land, (in
both cases boundaries described) they wished to ex-
change with their American brethren for articles of
clothing, ‘‘ to cover the nakedness of themselves and


3-C


_ HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 385


a | no eT eae a eS oe


~


— rs er FS eS Oe
; : bs Ms, <se


386 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. |


families, occasioned by a want of the articles during»


the long contest,” as the intended speech expressed.
In addition to the pain it gave the
appointed with regard to the speech,


pretation of an article, contained in the ‘address of
the commissioners wh
them ; though at the time Me,


y preferred being silent


thereon, as the treaty was held at a fortified place.*¥—
The commigioners, intended to explain to the In-
"dian nations, “that by the treaty, between the Brit-


ish and the United States ; territorial lines had been


agreed upon between the parties; and that, according -
to these, the nations present, for the greater part, fell


within the territory and jurisdiction of ‘the United
States ;”” here however, it appeared, that either from
a wrong conception—or the want of proper words to
designate the true meaning of this. article, the inter-
preters had made use of the words “ right of soil,” —
instead of jurisdiction ; by which, the Indians were led
to believe, that the American people laid a claim to
every foot of the soil belonging to them, and  retur


ing home, under this wrong impression, the British— _
or their subordinate agents, strengthened and support-


ed them in this belief, which induced them to take
the resolution, to stand their ground as long as they
were able ; and if finally they must perish, they» still


ryiere


* See Heckewelder’s Historical Account, chapter xxii. page 177.


in being dis- ,
address .


intended to make; a mistake was made in. the inter- é


was highly offensive to


{


ne et


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 387


would have the consolation, that they had not lost
_ their country and lives through cowardice.

- They however, did not wish to commence;hostilities

ithout first giving warning. Surveyors, were order-
ed to desist surveying lands in their country, and a Mr.
Cibbs, placed by a company, (who laid a claim to the
land their works were on) to take care of the buil-
dings, iron pots, tools, &c. not attending to the warn-
ing given him, was murdered; the pots, they were
able to break, broken to pieces, and every saa des-
troyed.

The idea, of the Christian Indians settling on the
Muskingum, being of course given up until better
times ; the writer of this narrative, whose wife was
not ina condition to undergo the hardships and fa-
tigues which presented themselves to our view, took
his family, near the commencement of the winter, to
Bethlehem ; the missionaries Zeisberger and wife,
with Edwards alee: with the Indian congrega-
tion.

Thus were those poor Indians, who expected to
enjoy peace and rest; already under an apprehension


_that new troubles might befal them. Otherwise they


were cheerful—had built a convenient temporary
house of worship—and were, since they had crossed
the lake, joined by a number of their dispersed breth-
ren and sisters. Poor Thomas, the lad who was
scalped at the butchery of the Christian Indians at
Gnadenhutten, unfortunately was drowned ; while


eT ee Oc


388 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.’


fishing in the river. From the blows he received
on his head, previous to the scalping of him, he at
times became aflicted with violent pains, and a di
ness in his head, so much so, that sometimes —
would faint away. He was an excellent swimmer, but
a fit of dizziness, taking him unexpectedly, while in
a canoe by himself, he fellout and was drowned.
Some Indian corn, potatoes, pumpkins, beans, tur-
nips, &c. were raised here this season, although late
put into the ground ; and what was wanting in pro-—
visions, could be readily had from Messrs. Duncan |
and Wilson, who carried on a trade in articles of pro-
visions to Detroit, and had a store of flour, within a
few miles of where we were. The Brethren at Beth-
lehem, had also in August of this year, sent us arti-
cles of clothing, &c. for which we were very thankful.
Shortly after the commencement of the year 1787,
accounts were received from various quarters, that
the Christian Indians would not be permitted to stay
where they were at present ; and that they would
have to move nearer to the settlements of the savages.
The government of the United States, had also at this
time, advised the Christian Indians through general
Butler, agent of Indian affairs, not to move to ‘the I 1s-
kingum for the present, but to remain atC


The speech from captain Pipe, already taken notice of,

called on them to leave the Cayahaga and settle at

Petquotting.
Such was the state of things at that time ; and dis-


=e ee ee Lee ae ey eS eS
eee 3 ja E%,


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 389


couraging as it was, we durst not look upon the
| speeches sent to us, with indifference ; especially
what came from captain Pipe. Whilst the Christian
~~ Indians had this subject under consideration, the hos-
tile tribes were holding a great council at Sandusky ;
at which it was finally resolved, that a war with the —
United States, should commence, and that ifthe be- wy
lieving Indians would not decline going to the Mus- ia
kingum, they would force them to do so, and that
their teachers, should not be taken prisoners as
heretofore, but killed on the spot. A glimpse of
hope, however, yet remained, and induced them to
_ believe that a peace might yet take place. The
, Iroquois, (Six Nations) it was said, had sent a solemn
embassy* to all the western nations, but particularly
to the Shawanese, advising them to be at peace. A
report also circulated, that the commandant at Detroit, |
had persuaded nine or ten tribes of Indians, to keep
the peace, and that he even threatened such, as
“should commit hostilities against the United States.*
istian Indians, after mature deliberation on
hich had been sent to them, resolved :
spot of ground between Cayahaga and
ng, where they might live by themselves in :
nd quiet, without being interrupted by the g
4 savages ; and having for the purpose, examined the
country along the lake, they found a place, quite to
their mind.


* Lockiel’s History, part. iii. chap. xiii.


-, “= ; = y =f": a Le a ee .
_- : : a - ’


390 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. +


At this time, the following private message from a
friendly Delaware chief, was brought and delivered to
the missionary Zeisberger : ‘* Grandfather ! |
heard that you proposed going to live on the Muskit
gum, I would advise you not to go thither this spring !
I cannot* give you my reasons for so advising you ! nei-
ther can I say whether we shall have war or peace; but
so much I can say, that it is not the time yet to go there.
Do not think, that I wish to oppose your preaching
the word of God! (the gospel) to the Indians! I am
glad you do this, but I advise you not to go to the
Muskingum !”—This good -chiefs’ friendly message :
was well understood. Respecting the missionaries as
his friends, he warned them of the danger sie would
be in, in going there.

On the 19th of April, the Christian Indians” ict
their stay at this place, by offering up solemn prayer
and praise, in their chapel. They thanked the Lord


for all blessings, both internal and external, which he


had showered down upon them in this place; and


then set out in two parties, one by land, e other


by water. The latter was however, del
of days, on account of a dreadful storm
at the moment they were about to run o
Cayahaga river, into the lake ; the wind blowi
lently from the opposite side, on this shore. ” The ad
waves beat with such force against the natural wall of

stone or rocks, that the whole earth seemed to tremble;


>


+ Meaning that he durst not disclose, &c.


Sy


=a = = Ne ce —— Le - ““ ad
ii tea wed a eee SES |
. .. - Lea's .


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. — 391


i
|
|
|


|


and the travellers thanked God, that they at the time
were in the river in safety, and where they fur-
ther had the good fortune, to catch several hundred
een: large fish, by torch light; a fish called in
. this country the maskenuntschi, or maskenunge, and f
much resembling the pike. |
On the 24th of April, the land travellers, and on the ‘ -
day following, those who were gone by water, arri- r
ved at the place they had fixed upon, as their future — .
residence ; which was on a large creek, that emptied .
itself into the lake from the south, and where a fine
fertile spot was found, much resembling an orchard,
it being interspersed with crab apple, and plumb trees,
wild potatoes, (an article of food much valued by the
Indians,) were likewise found here in abundance. In
short, there was nothing wanting to encourage them
to form a regular settlement at this place, the which
they intended to do, should. they be permitted to re-
main here ; this however, was not the case, for on
the 27th, they were apprised, by a Delaware captain,
who was sent for the purpose; that they were not
by permitted to stay, but must proceed on to Sandusky,
t where a place, ten miles distant from the nearest
. habitation of Indians, was destined for. them to live
at! and where protection would be granted them ;— a
that, the orders he brought, were positive, and must
} be obeyed, without further consideration !—The cap- -
tain was further charged, with a separate méssage, to
Zeisberger, to this effect: ‘hear my friend, you my


f
F


$92 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


grandfather! I know that you have formerly been
adopted by our chiefs as a member of the nation! No
one shall hurt you, and you need not be afraid, or have
any scruples, about coming to live at Sandusky!” (dé
livering a string of wampum)—The answer given
to the above speech, was of course in the affirma-
tive ; yet, not without representing to the captain,
the malice, deceit, and treachery imposed upon them,
for these six or seven years past.

While preparing to leave this favourite niet Mi-
chael Young, who as before related had gone to Beth-
lehem, from Upper Canada, in 1783, now returned
again to resume his missionary station, and joining
the company, they continued their journey, as before,
some travelling by land, while others with the bag-
gage, went by water. Arriving at the Huron river,
which emptied itself into lake Erie, about thirty
miles to the eastward of Sandusky; they learnt from
good authority, that the message sent them by. the
savage chief, was not the truth, and that the’ place
allotted for them to live at, instead of ten, was but
two miles from the village of the savages; and that the
real intention of them was, to draw the Christian In- .
dians back into heathenism. The latter finding this
to be their object, resolved, not to go any further, for
the present ; but to remain where they were, in op-
position to the orders of the chiefs, let the conse-
quence be what it would.—After running their canoes
a few miles up the river, they, on ‘the 11th of May


. : 3 r
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


halted, and all hands turning out, both men and wo-


tier they errected for themselves, on the same oa
a sufficient number of small bark huts, ’ to lodge in;

and on the next day, sent a deputation to the chiefs,
giving their reason for what they had- done, on which
they were — to stay where they: were, for one


year, unmolested.
“~The village was afterwards built, on the east» side.


of a high bluff, and their corn fields were on the op- _


posite side. To this place, which they named New


Salem,’ the heathen. sometimes came to hear the
_ preaching of the gospel, some of whom also joined


the congregation, becoming steady members of the
church. One noted profligate; who’ in 1781, had
formed a plan against the lives of the missionaries,


and often laid in ambush to surprise them—was
among those new comers. Even.a Huron (Wyandot
’ Indian,) who had an invitation to become. a chief of


the nation, refused the offer, and joined the congrega-


tion. . They having here, as at all places where the
Brethren have missions, adopted such rules and regu-
_ dations, as tended both to their internal and external


happiness and welfare, they lived contented together,
within themselves ; yet, not without concern as to the


fate of the Indian nations, should they persist in their


hostile disposition towards the people of the United
States, as the present prospect evinced.
.» As these Indian nations, had on all occasions signi-


’ fied their. dissatisfaction, at the language held to


3D


F
'


ae
ae
& eS . f
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


them, at the treaty at fort Mac Intosh, in 1785.—~The
government of the United States, appointed another
treaty to be held with them in the fall of the year a
1788, at fort Harmer, (mouth of Muskingum).—To _
this treaty, they were long in coming, and such as
did attend, were, (except those of the Six Nations,
and a few Delawares) barely permitted to go ; or, sent


on to keep the United States from suspecting them,


they being at that time, engaged.at home;.in delibera-
ting on the manner of carrying on a war against the
United States. The Six Nations, who were present,
were brought on by the United States, for the purpose
of using their endeavours in bringing about a ‘peace
with the other nations, they being at peace with the
United States. At length a Pa was ane
January, 1789. J sheen

‘Four months after this treaty: was held, a


‘of this narrative, accompanied by» Abraham Steiner,


a member of the society, made a journey to Petquot-


“ting on the Huron river, where the Christian Indians


resided, for the purpose of learning the-disposition»of '
the Indian nations, and whether this would ‘be*a pro-
per time for a'surveyor to lay off the lands, ‘reserved
for the Christian Indians on ‘the. Muskingum; the
surveyors appointed for the purpose, being in‘readiness
to proceed to the spot. . Although all the Indians we
met, and had seen’ by the way, in going’ out,’ were
very friendly and: hospitable towards us, and* glad® to
see and converse with me, yet they assured’ us, that


ly the Shawanese, who had declared, that they never
would give up their lands so foolishly, &c.—The


Delawares, for the greater part, wished for a peace
very “much, that they might follow up their favourite a


occupation, (hunting) although their complaints against


the United States was the same as heretofore ; namely,
that at treaties they charged the Indians with what


they had suffered by them, and took their land from
them on that account: while they would not suffer
the Indians to state their grievances—or ‘“ stopped
up their ears, so that they might not hear what they
said, &c.”” The Christian Indians, though very anx-
ious for a peace, thought this very  distant,. they hav-
ing learnt that the hostile party were strengthening
themselves, more and more from day to day...

It was of course to be foreseen, that on the terms
insisted on, by the United States, they never would
conclude a peace, that would be durable. In their
councils, they were unanimous, on what they called
the main point, namely: “that at treaties, the griev-
ances from both sides ought to be heard, and brought
in contact, and when this was done, it would be found,
that the guilt of the American people would by far
everbalance theirs —They were made to ‘suffer, said
‘they, for siding with their father, (the British) in the


| HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE, ’ 395 _


_ they did not believe a surveyor would be safe, when
. seen doing such work in the country, for although they
had not been at the treaty themselves, they knew, the
nations were not disposed to keep the peace, especial-


a:
a
e
4
th


oe ee cee ee


Fr hae
} 2


wy ? ¥
Hae
396 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


war, although they were compelled thereto, while they
(the American people,) were continually harrassing
them, both in peace and war, by murdering their peo-.
ple, stealing from them—encroaching on their lands, —
and taking their game from them!~ They do ‘us al).
the harm they can (said they) and escaped  unpunish-
ed; for, we never yet heard of a white man being
punished for killing Indians ; we therefore must con-
clude, that neither murder nor theft, committed: on.
an Indian, is considered with them as acrime!”?. — °
Under the impression, that the American people —
sought their destruction, for the purpose of getting all
their land, the western, and a part of the northern In-
dians, entered into a formal league, to unite all their —
strength and forces, in compelling the people of the
United States, to keep within .certain bounds; ex-
pecting that their father, the British, at whose call —
they ‘had taken up arms against the United States in
the last war, would now at their call, turn out, and as-
sist them, until they should have fully obtained their
object. » LYagedagh
At their sittings in council, during the® winter of
1789—90, they came to the following resolutions:
First, ‘“‘to declare their case apublic grievance, ©
in which ail were concerned—that : therefore every
able bodied man, ought and should turn out, to assist
in repelling the enemy, who had come into their coun-
try, to take their.land from them. Secondly; That
the Christian Indians, and their teachers, should be


>


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 397


|


mise of being permitted to enjoy’at that place, all the
privileges they could wish for ; but having them once
‘there, they would compel them to fight by their sides,
and that death should be the punishment of all, who


refused to fight in this just cause of theirs. That, if


_ their teachers in any wiséthrew obstacles in the way,


by preventing the believing Indians, from joining them |


. in fighting for their country; they should instantly
be put to death,t and that this part of the speech be
kept a profound secret. Thirdly. That they no longer

would listen to any one, who might be sentt to them

_ from the American people, unless they first saw them


; Fortunately, the Christian Indians had real friends
; among the hostile Indians, who, on learning’ the
__ ttick to be played’ on them, gave them private’ noti¢e
‘thereof, that they might be on’their guard} when
the message should be brought to them. ‘The mis-
sionaries, seeing the inevitable ruin of their congre-


j e , . * Fort Wayne was aftewards built there. ~

de 7 That this really had been concluded on, was confirmed by a
I, Tuscarora Indian chief, who voluntarily, in the year 1793, called on
the writer of this narrative at Niagara, to inform him of the intrigue,
| he having been present when the resolution had been taken,


‘man, Truman and Hardin. See Heckewelder’s History of Indian


q 5 :

, "-$Therefore, they afterwards murdered the three messengers, Free-
.

nations, chap. xxi. page 173.


Oe ee ee Soe


removed from Petquotting to Kegeyunk,* with a pro-


*« moving back again, off of their land. wie


~


-@
398 ECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.»


gation, if they did not very soon retire, to some place,
where they would be out of the reach of the savages,
(without loss of time,) dispatched the missionary Ed-
o%. wards, with a couple of Indian brethren to Detroit,
Ws toa at to represent their situation to the British command-
ant; requesting, that he would grant them an assylum
r during’the time the. war ould last ; which being —
: readily agreed to, a vessel was engaged to be at their
j village, on the Huron river; ata stated time, to. take
r them off. . hy agra
| The savages, who by this time, had come’ on wink
ins message, for the Christian Indians to get’ in’ ‘rea
Re diness, and remove to Kegeyunk, were led to’ believe
Ee ‘that they would go with them; when unexpectedly
a vessel appeared in the river, and took them off;
landing them, after crossing the lake, above the mouth
j of Detroit river, where cleared lands were allotted
them, to plant corn on for the season ; they being
j here under the a of the British Govern-
ment. ey r . ae
The missionary Senseman, who in 1785, as already
f noticed, had taken his family from the Huron river
K in Canada, to Bethlehem ; being about this time,
} (April 1790) on his return to the congregation at
hs Petquotting, ran a great risk of falling into the enemy’s
hands, although at the time it was not known to him.
He fortunately arrived with his wife at Petquotting, to
jointhe congregation in their flight across the lake, In


i¢
t ‘


| 2a ;


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE, -: 399.


the service of this mission there were now four inch
ren and twosisters employed. >
The place. however, appointed, for the pee
abode of the Indian congregation, was not found to
answer all the ends wished for; the savages passing
and repassing by water, would frequently halt at their
settlement, and having liquor-with them, would get |
drunk, and become troublesome ; whilst some of their sa
white . neighbours-—more wicked and mischievous
than any Indians, would do all manner» of. injury
to one another, purposely to have the blame thrown
upon the Indians. The missionaries, becoming tired


of having such a set of people for their neighbours, _
stated the case to the commandant at Detroit, who, i
readily advised them to remove in the spring, to the »
river La Tranche, (now called the Thames) which a .


they gladly accepted; and moving to the place allot
them, they built a town, which they, called Fairfield.
. The depredations which were committed by the sav-
ages, for several years past, had at length induced
the United States, to march an army into their coun- af
try, with the view of chastising them, and bringing
them to a peace. Unfortunately however, both P
this expedition under general Harmer in 1790, and :
that the year following, under general St. Clair, fail-
ed.—Generals Scott and Wilkinson, had carried 7
their expeditions to the waters of the Wabash, with :
better success, and brought about) sixty women. and
children prisoners, to fort Washington ; which, of


400 — HECKEWELDER’S- NARRATIVE. a


course, would be a check on those nations, to whom

they belonged, against going to» war: but the» prin-
\eipal body of the warriors, held their rendezvous at, .

or near the Miamies.* There all. nations or) tribes, ©

Ps in league, would resort; and there it was, that a
number of British. emisaries, agents and subalterns,
of whom M‘Kee, Elliot and Girty were-a part, who
being influential among them, gave advice» and:in-
structions, how they were to act, (so that the spirit _
of animosity was kept alive with them,)jinyerderto
prevent a meeting of the parties, for the purpose of
adjusting matters, and concluding a peace, yj
After the two aforesaid expeditions had failed, little
hopes could be entertained, that the. combined:na+
tions, would be brought to a peace, until’ after: being
humbled; yet the executive of the United States,
. were not willing to resort to the severest measures,
Ma: they had first tried all possible lenient means,
believing, that if the nations were’at liberty to reflect


and act for themselves, there could be “no doubt in
obtaining this end, and the more so, as they’on’ their
Fo « part, were agreed, if possible, to conn

upon principles of justice:and humanity:* » 9% 90)
I SOE both in the ee the year 1792,
fi: ei not theme
i * This was the expression made use. of by. the secretary of war
ie


(general Knox) in his letter at the time sent by express to the w :
of this narrative ; on requesting him, to accompany, and assist as
dier general Rufus Putman, the commissioner srsdnes:% to treat with
the western Indians, on that mission. rosie rues pana aie


andythe summer of 1793, attempts were nae
bring the parties together at a conference, at such
places, as would be most suitable for the purpose.
The first embassy, under general Rufus.Putnam, who
was appointed a commissioner for the purpose,
though not succeeding as to the main object, yet was
the means of weakening, in agreat measure, the pow-
erful alliance; as some tribes were detached * from
the great body, by means of the prisoners. taken
from them, by Scott and Wilkinson, being now given
up to them again, under a promise, that they would
remain quiet, and take no further part in the. war.
The treaty held with the tribes alluded to, was
at port Vincennes on the Wabash river, to which


- place, the women and children, belonging to some


of these tribes, were brought for the purpose of de-
livering them up again. After the treaty was ended,
the chiefs of the nations were taken to the president
of the United States, then at Philadelphia. :

. The commissioners, appointed to the peace embas-
sy of 1793, were general Benjamin “Lincoln, colonel
Timothy Pickering, and Beverly Randolph, esq.


- The object was, to meet the Indian nations, at the


rapids of the Miami of the lake, where it was un-

derstood the great body of the ‘warriors were assem-

bled ;—and it was hoped,—that once met, face to

to face ata conference, matters might be adjusted, to

their satisfaction. But it was evident, that the Brit-

ish, (by their agents on that ground,) prevented this
3 E


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. - Di 5


.


.
—  -


a


A FS Ee
: :


ee


ny:


> =


402)
* etings which unquestionably was much to thewjins


jap yaad. ‘
(9) 4

PPS ¢
’


2.


ee


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. | Bd


jury of the poor deluded Indians. The commission-


ers indeed, spared no pains in#their attempt to bring”


them to a meeting, even, where they were encamped,
and the representation of the danger, they would ex-


pose themselves to, by meeting an enraged enemy,


and the certainty of their loosing their lives; if they
came amongst them, (as some ‘predicted ‘would «infal-
libly be the case) had no effect upon them.') Howe-
verall their endeavours to actain the so much wished
for meeting, proved ‘ineffectual. At length, by an
insolent speech, that was brought to the commission-
ers, as the sentiments of the council of thevsavages }
all hope of meeting them vanished, and the commis-
sioners returned them a short answer, to this purport:
“That they reminded. them of the pains the United
States had taken, to bring about a peace withithem,
but as they were inattentive: to their own * welfare,
and disappointed the United States, they must abide:
the consequences; and only blame themselves and
their advisers for future events.” ve 00, Spee

The writer of this, having been (by aletter from
general Knox, dated 19th March 1798) informed,
that the president requested him to accompany) the
commissioners, who were to negociate with the hos-
tile Indians, and being also on the spot, witnessed


the insolent manner in which this last speech was


both worded and delivered. -Even Simon Girty, who
together with Elliot were present at-its-delivery, sup-


{ ; ‘i


4


eek Denies Gin


es
ss HECK-EWELDER’S NARRATIVE,


through the under part of his nose crossways. It ap-
peared also, that Girty, (the interpreter of the mes-
sage,) had taken the liberty of adding the last sentence.


Two Delawares of note, who in the course of our stay
at the mouth of Detroit river, arrived with adepu- ,


tation, being questioned by me ; the reason why the


commissioners were not permitted to meet them on
the Miami, at their quarters ? replied: “all we can


say isthat we wish for peace ; but we cannot speak
further, our mouths being stopped up when we left
the council !”"—which was saying, that they had been
forbidden to disclose any of their secrets.

_ There were also six respectable members of the
society of friends*, on this embassy, who. volunta-
rily, andat their own expense, accompanied the com-
missioners, on this peace errand ;—and_ whose sole
object was, that of being instrumental in putting a
stop to the effusion of so much human blood. . The
disappointment therefore was, to us all, a distressing
one, and the poor savages some time after had to pay


dear, for having suffered themselvesjito be thus mis-
lead. : *

» While these friends, myself and several. more of
our company were at Detroit, awaiting the arrival of


the commissioners from Queenstown, I paid a visit of


this
* Their names were, John Parrish, William Savory, and John Elliot,


“of the city of Philadelphia. Jacod Lindlay, of Chester county, and


Foseph Moore and William Hartshorn, of New Jersey.


ee hisinsolence, by a quill or long feather run— ie :


Tah Cae ae
404 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. *


_ several days, to the Indian congregation at Fairfield,


on the Thames river, about seventy miles to the east
or north eastward of Detroit. The settlement was


only begun the preceding year; yet much labour was
’ already completed, : and the inhabitants lived very hap-


py, enjoying poate, as though there was no: wat.
Some good houses and a chapel, were already built,
and their corn and wheat fields, promised. according
to appearance, good crops. In provision however
they were deficient; not having the last year been
able to raise much, as the land was covered with
wood and brush which they were obliged to cut off.
The Friends, learning their situation, generously made:


them a present of one hundred dollars; to purchase:


provisions and other necessary articles; for which,
(by letter,) they returned their Mae 8
thanks. gi tetuerg
The savages, continuing their murderous incur-
sions into the settlements of the United: States ;
general Wayne, in August 1794, marched an army
into their country, and on the 20th of that» month,
in a general engagement at the rapids of the. Miami,
completely routéd them, which victory was the saluta-
ry meansof bringing on apeace with them, and which


was concluded, with all the hostile nations, on the 3d.


of August the following year. Bee ae
The Indians, now seeing and acknowledging their


error said : “ Since we would not listen to the mes--


sengers of peace, sent to us by the great general


ae ‘ ‘ ” * e- ‘ 4 ee 7. if
- hz z * . a
. :
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 405


Washington, but treated them contemptuously; he | : a
has sent out a Sukach-gook’?* (a black snake) among Ge 3
us, to punish us ; and this he has done !”” :

In the year 1797; the land that was granted to the
Christian Indians by the congress of the United States,
was by the surveyor general, Rufus Putnam, esq. sur-
veyed, and laid off in three separate tracts, of four
_ thousand acres each, including their former towns of wg
* Gnadenhutten, Salem and Shonbrun ; all on the Mus- Roe
. kingum river. The directors of the society, being
desirous, that this might be made known to the Chris- e
tian Indians at F airfield, in Upper Canada, that they, #
or some of them, might come on, and commence a
settlement on their land ; the writer of this narrative,
accompanied by the rev. Benjamin Mortimer, who
was appointed a missionary to the Indians, travelled ee.
together in the spring of 1798, by way of the Genes- .
see eOuntry, Black rock, Niagara, the Grand river, and |
the Pinery, in Upper Canada, to that place; where we
found the Indian congregation in a flourishing state,


and glad to learn, that congress was. so well disposed
towards them, and had granted them these lands:
on which, a number of them were willing to settle, in
the fall of the year.


* “ Sukach-gook” is the Delaware name for black snake, which they
called general Wayne by, saying: that he possessed all the art and
cunning of that reptile ; which was known to be the greatest destroyer

F of small birds and animals, of the snake tribe.


>


es. git te
| * i


“ ' Having made a weeks stay at cin al tate


with the aged missionary Edwards, and two young In-
dian brethren for the Muskingum, to begin a settle. _

ment at Gnadenhutten, and make the necessary pre-
paration, for the re n of those missionaries, and
Christian Indians, who were expected to come onin


the fall. . The rout we took to the place of our desti+


nation, was by Detrvit, Brownstown, the river Raison,
the Rapids of the Miami of the lake, Upper Sandusky,»
Owl creek, and Forks of the Muskingum.» |
Meeting with some Delaware Indians of my ac-
quaintance, at the rapids of Miami, one of them men-
tioned, the narrow escape he made, in the engagement
with the “ black snake,” at this place, and pointing to
the spotwhere he droppeddown in the high grass, while
the horsemen were in pursuit of him and others, said :_
“there it was, where the horsemen galloped almost
over me, in pursuit of those ahead, but thé®great


Spirit prevented them from seeing me, and their hor-


ses from treading on me!” vite he Dated

In our passage through the Upper Sandusky, Wy-
andot, and Delaware villages, the Indians were very
friendly to us ; declaring, that they were very glad of
the peace, and hoping that it would be of long dura-
tion ; but before we had left the last village, and while
they were in the act of extending their hospitality to
us, the alarm yell sounded bad news, at a distance;
which, when the runner came in, was reported to be:
that some white people had surprised an Indian hunt-


robbing afterwards the camp. . This news, as might be


expected, checked their joy, and cast a gloom on all


countenances, and on our arrival at Killbuck’s creek,
about five miles from the Forks of Muskingum, where
some Delawares had planted a field of corn, we found
that this bad news. was already known, with the ad+
dition: that, Thomas, White Eyes,who was educated,
‘at Princeton ‘college, in New Jersey, at the expense
of the government of the United States, during the
revolutionary war,) was also murdered’ by’ a white


man near Georgetown, on the Ohio. Another horrid


murder, though a year or two later, was. committed in
the New Connecticut reserve, by some white people,
on well known: quiet and frieridly Indians, who, con-
_ sidered themselves sake safe amongst their Ame-
rican Brethren. on

In October, the misionaries, Zeisberger and Morti-


mer, together with a number of the Christian Indians, .


from. Fairfield in Upper Canada, arrived. on the Mus-
kingum, and having laid off a village on the Shon-


brun tract, about seven miles from a Pampas _— ;


called it Goshen. Binh
_.° The Delawares residing on White river, (an arm of
the Wabash) having at several times, sent invitations
to the Christian Indians, to come with their teachers,
and make a ‘settlemnt near them, \that they also
might have an: opportunity of hearing the gospel
preached ; the Brethren Natuge and Luckenbach, from


ing camp on Sciota, and killed a woman and her child, + ®


of Christian Indians, among whom was Jos u
tional chapel interpreter, all from Goshen, were, in.
the spring of 1801, sent there for the purpose. They .
travelled together, eee part of the way by wa:
ter, first running down the Muskingum into the Ohio,
then down that river to the mouth of the Big ‘Miami,
then up that river a considerable distance toa point,
from whence they struck across the country, to the)
White rvier ; where, within a few miles of the Indian
settlements, they built themselves houses and huts,
and under flattering expectations, that many would
be brought over from heathenism,: to the knowledge
of Christ, by the preaching of the gospel, a mg
fully entered on their thissionary labours. — 4
With this mission, the Brethren did sisal
for, instead of gaining for the Lord, they lost. “It-be-
came more and more evident, that it was not the de-
sire of hearing the gospel, as they pretended in their
message, when giving the invitation, but ‘a scheme to
draw off all the Christian Indians, from the neighbour-
hood of the white people, and have them united with
themselves. The preaching however was continued,
for several years, when, unfortunately, both for them,
and the savages, an impostor arose, from: among the
Shawanos, who, pretending to be endowed with ‘the
gift of prophecy, causing such commotions among the,
Indians in that quarter, that it became unsafe for the


& ie Fr falpreys


‘--: HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


Breth remain there much longer, as nena aa


will show. -
. This. prophet,* (called Tecumseh) aishie the


course of his slaieionsial art and cunning, —


raised himself into such importa ce, that he became
the oracle of the day. His first discourses, like those


of his. predecessors, (who had also taken to preaching “> 3


and prophecying,) were intended to instigate the nations


against the white people, by causing them to reflect


on the past and happy time, they (or their forefathers)
lived in, previous to the coming of white people into
their country—pointing out the wretched state they
were brought to, by suffering themselves to be mis-
led and deceived, by those who sought nothing short
of their utter destruction, in order to get their whole
country to. themselves.—Hence, his advice was : “ that
they must entirely withdraw their affection from those
strangers ; leave them to their way of worship, while
they, (the Indians) must return to their ancient q
and customs, and worship the great spirit, in ee
ner their forefathers had done.”—He next observed :
that ‘‘ while the white people on the one hand were
seeking their destruction; they were destroying each
other, by witchcraft! and it was high time for a stop
to be put to the evil.—For having been left so long
unpunished, they had both become numerous, and
grown bold !—But, he however, being endowed with


* See Heckewelder’s Account of the Indians, chap. xxxix. page 292.
3F


ie


en


4 eu 410: ‘
© supernatural powers, that enabled him
every witch among them, would. point: them out, when
it would, become ‘theie Autye to sacrifice on the pile,
he should pronounce’ to —
be such, without regard to persons !), yy se
i The novel doctrine held forth by: this prophet, drew
* many to the spot to hear him, and.be witnesses to the
m actions of so extraordinary a character ;. little thinking
at the time, that when they were in his presence, they”
or some among them, would be on the verge of being
pronounced witches, and. conderhned, for execution.
Here was a wide field for this man, to exercise his _
authority, and gratify his ambition ; for he -who dared
. to question his authority, or the legality of his proceed-
ings, was sure to fall a victim.*—The credulous dis+
position, with regard to novelties, which is”
to the Indians, and especially with respect to witch-
craft; deprived many for the moment, of reflection: —
x hastened to the spot, for the purpose: of hear:
5, and seeing, who those were, that had been so
‘fatal to the nation, when, alas ! some of them were
finally pronounced to be witches, and-executed as suchs _
Amongst the many who were sacrificed as witches, -
by the orders of this pretended prophet, notice shall
be.taken of afew. The Delaware chief To


:
i vty ap


" * See Heckewelder’s Account of Indian nations, chap. xxxix P- a


t Tatapachkse, (properly) not “ Teta-boksk-ke,” as his name is ee
ed to Wayne’s treaty—this chief of the ‘Turtle tribe, was for many


Joshua, who had been sent for by their people, |


cor am “ Grand Glaize king ; being con-
demned to be burnt on the pile, was brought from
the village, where the great a was, to othe little
village of the Christian Indians, an

the same ; that the inhabitants mig

the act. After a large pile of sini was cut and heap-
ed up, they placed him bound upon it; giving him a
stroke or two with the tomohawk, and having kind-
| “led the fire under him ; they made themselves merry,
in having relieved the nation of a witch. ‘Then re-
turning, they all entered the missionary’s house, de-
_ manding something to eat, saying, they were hungry!
Dreadfulas the sight of these barbarians was to the
missionaries, they were obliged to comply ; when they
ate with as much composure, as if nothing had hap-
pened.. The missionaries, having in some measure
recovered from their first fright, nowenquiredofthem =
‘whether ‘they knew any thing of their brother =


swer some questions they had to put to him, |


. which he should be at liberty to return home aqui’; ag


but, as he had not yet returned, they felt anxious for


: *


_ years well known to the writer of this narrative, as a quiet, inoffensive,
and harmless man; he then beingya councellor of the nation, at Gosc-
hoschking. A vacancy being occasioned afterwards, by the death of
the young chief, of that tribe, whom Williamson’s party murdered near
Pittsburg, a and most of the tribe having fled to the westward; he was
nominated their chief, and while in that station, condemned)as a witch,

and put to death, He was about sixty years of age. :


“3 id ns


oa


at
Te a
At es)


eevee. RATIVE.


him, and therefore wished that they” een


arrival at the village, procure his liberation, he being
much wanted at home. They added, he being ‘a be-
lieving (Christian) n, had a to ‘do’ with
witchcraft, and, whatever aid of

designing men to the contrary, could 1 not be b true; &e!!”” ;
to which they replied: that “no ‘harm vas otwneMase
to him, and he would soon be at homie again?” on
that they felt somewhat easy ; yet, as he’ did not re +
turn, at the expected time, brother Luckenbach, took —


the resolution, to go to the ‘place, where ‘the great bo- ii


dy of savages were assembled, (which ‘were some miles

distant,) and try to bring him off; but, me

a person on the way, who came direct from there,'he—

was informed, that he was ‘too late, for that Joshua ‘had

been burnt to death on the pile, the day before.” /*
The grief the missionaries felt, on account of what

had befallen their brother ; was indiscribable. They


a on their knees, deeply afflicted; praying’ to


rd, ‘to avert all danger from them and their peo-—


ple, and take them under his gracious protection and —


that he also in his mercy, would cause’ ‘the works of
darkness, which at this present time, were so destruc-


tively carried on among the heathen; to cease, thatthe -


lives of those ignorant heathen’ might ‘bepresetved,


for the good purpose of turning them from aie hea- :
thenish ways unto him!”*) ©. i, td AS


|


i? by ic peepee
* Letter from the missionary Kluge, to the missionaries at Goshen. «


Ne “oe ed


hee “eck leit ih . F ee * ez bos ~
ey ye Sok! < de he B as Se <n >
‘ Pr Ae, . * ee’. 5 ae 4a
tg oe ?. \s: )
2 , : a 7S
ue al . ‘ a
— Soka y 2 3 1
F . 4
;


—— vs from the conduct of the savages, in
taking this chief through the Brethren’s settlement,

. and burning him so near their village, that this plan
had. been devised, for the nace drawing the. at-
tention of the missionaries and their Indians, to the
-act..they were committing here—while, forgetting
Joshua for the moment,» he at the same time, would


be executed, at the place they had come from, so |
that they would be too late, if they afterwards. came
to. look for him. . i eT. ce cad ey Fay
Joshua, before, and after being placed on the ek
ing pile, prayed most fervently, to God his. Saviour,
and continued either praying or singing praises to x
the Lord, until his strength was exhausted, and death
closed his careef. . One Indian from that quarter— ;
an acquaintance. and friend. of mine, who witnessed &
the scene, assured me.and others ; that “‘ our brother wf
Joshua, remained faithful to his. God .as Mie hife
Cy was in him. His prayers however were ina language
none of them could understand!’’—(probably in ss
German, in which language he was, well-versed). . oe
.. Note. This Indian, (Joshua) of the Mohegan ibs
was born in the year.1741. at Wachquetnach, an In-


dian. village, bordering. on the Connecticut river;;in oS
New; England, where the. brethren at that time» had “i
a mission ;, but. the white people, some time after, <a
becoming troublesome on account of the land: they “sien
occupied, which they wanted, and finally took from y

them.. The Indian converts, fifty four in number x


kK


=


biniiee their childreny nmi on gh et
the. Brethren, to Bethlehem in. Pennsylvania; and
afterwards Apter. tie tract. of land, purchased for —
them, about © twenty ven miles. distant oboe ‘that
place. Here they nen a town which


Gnadenhutten, (cabbins of Grace).—
the Indian Joshua, (who bore the. same name,)..was
one of the two first Indians, who. were. baptised at


Bethlehem in the 1742.. Count Zinzendorf himself,


together with the Missionary Buttner, officiating on
the occasion. ‘This Joshua, (the father) wasfrom the
time of his baptism, unto his death in 1773, a faith-
ful.and useful member of the church; being botha
national assistant, or warden, and also .interpreter*
of the sermons preached to the Indians—Joshua, the
the son, above alluded to, was brought up in the fear

of the Lord, and had from his childhood, been with-

in the pale of the society. - He had a genius for learn-


ing, both languages, and the mechanical arts; wasia
z00d cooper and carpenter ; could stock a gun nicely —


and no one excelled. him in building a handsome
canoe. Healso, with a little assistance from the mis~


sionary of the place where .he dwelt, (Wyalusing) ~
made a spinnet for the use of the congregation, and was


> chapel musician, while they resided there, having”
leapt nt to play’on this instrument, and the organ, at
the time when the Christian Indians were stationed


€ sce


' * See Lockiel’s History, part 3d. page 108 and 9 (English translation).


‘


== - wo


K) patina s* NARRATIVE.


> at! awa in the year 1756,—57, and 58, ating
the continuance of the war between the English and
French: He spoke both the English and German
well, and could write ppm: moarib! these lan-
guages, especially in the latter. ¢ was also. fond ‘of
teading, in the bible, hymn book, and other religious
books. The ‘murder of his two beloved and only


daughters, between the ages of fourteen and eighteen al


years, by Williamson’s party, at Gnadenhutten, on the
Muskingum, in 1782, was a hard stroke for him to
bear: Often, veFyuoften has he been seen shedding
pears, on this account, though he was never heard to
utiter a revengeful sentiment against the murder-
ers’: he however ‘could not conceal his astonishment,
that 2 people, who called themselves Christians, and
read the scriptures, which he supposed all white peo-
_ ple did, could commit such acts of barbarity, and
was firmly persuaded, that if all the Indians had
bible, and could read it, they would be’ a bett
ple. In later years, he served as‘a chapel interpr ry;
to the Christian Indian flock on the White river, until
the artful Shawanese prophet, T’ecumseh, who was
an enemy:to the preaching of the gospel to the Indi-
ans, declared him an associate in witchcraft ; which
brought him to the pile, on which he ended his life
as a Christian, his age being 65 years.
Another victim was, Ann Charity, an aged woman,
who from a child lived i in the congre gation, until the
dispersion of the Christian Indians, in the spring of


v4


i one
ae
ae ae


1782, when she was taken by: her eR to
the White river, to be out of the way of the murder-
ing gang of the white people, who had destroyed. ‘80!
many of their relations - already. S not
joined herself to the Christian Indians «
when the prophet pointed her out as a’


she was also put to death, and burnt on the pile.


This woman, having been, while a child; glagedti the
family of the missionary. Youngman, and

to all manner of labour in the house, belonging to wo-
men, she was particularly noticedyas an active indus-


trious woman, andadmired for her cleanliness, both in’
dress, and in household affairs. pea a


The prophet, who had given notice to the nei


bouring nations, that he would pay each of | them a


visit, for the purpose of pointing out the witches they
had amongst them ;_ had already began to issue or-
ders, for the execution of some individuals ata dis-
tance ;* he generally directed his shaft at those, who
were reported as placing no faith in his doctrine, or
considered him asa destroyer of Indians ; and also at
those, whom he knew to be friends of the white
people. However he did not succeed in all his schemes


and undertakings ; for one day, when in the he jae


of the exercise of his assumed power, he met. with a
spirited inferior chief, who defied him, boldly step-
ping up to him in a language, or expression he could

Yoh
* See Heckewelder’s Account of Indian nations, chapter KEXIX. >


HECKEWELDER’S ‘NARRATIVE. ty ;


.


ea eS ee eS eS ee ee eee eee eS Ser ae Bs fool Aes 2

; i ; = ; eo.

* ‘ es : *
\


x


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE: . 417


not'misunderstand, asked him, ifhe dared to accuse
him of witchcraft; he immediately became ‘sensible
that limits ‘were set) to his: power’ and proceedings.
On receiving this rebuke, he with great artifice resu- :
med the subject he “began > with, when’ he first enter-
ed on: preaching, namely ; by drawing a comparison a
between the state-of the Indians, previous to’ the .
white people coming amongst: them, and since these a
had mingled with them, exhorting the Indians, to ‘
abide by their mode of worshipping the great: re ore
and not adopt that of the white people. ;
_ The ‘missionaries, having no. prospect of success, |
by continuing to preach the gospel-to a people, who
either did not want to hear, or despised its broke. up
the settlement in 1806; and:returned to Bethlehem:

In the autumn of the year 1803, the bishop'George
Henry ‘Loskiel, late from Europe, and last from Beth-
lehem—author of the book entitled; ** History of the *
mission of the united brethren among the Indians in ‘
North America,” paid a visit to the Indian congrega-_ ;
_ ‘tion:at Goshen on: the Muskingum, to. which’ place : a
the’ missionary Schnall, from Fairfield in Upper Can- 4


ada; on previous notice being given him for the. pur-
pose, came alsosieIn'a conference on the state of the *
‘mission; it:was resolved : that another . mission set-
tlement should be commenced in the spring follow-
ing, at Petquotting, on the Huron river, (south side
of Lake Erie,) with a part of the Fairfield congrega-
tion ; which missionary ‘settlement, begun in 1804, — 3
3G


pad - : 5 - Ass -~


A418 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. Pt
7 oc . .


was again broke up in 1809, on account of the lands
on which they lived, being sold to white people, who
wanted to live there themselves. Two other di-
rectors. of the society, Charles van. Forrestier, from
Europe, and John G. Cunow, from Bethletiams visited
in the year 1807 the Brethren’s missionary eee
both in the state of Ohio, and in Upper Cana

In November 1808, the venerable missionary David
Zeisberger, aged eighty seven years and seven months,
departed this life at Goshen, on the Muskingum,
after which his faithful colleague, the reverend Ben-
jamin Mortimer, took charge of the congregation.

As with the death of the reverend David Zeisber-
ger, who entered into the service of this mission
shortly after its first commencement ; a period is clo-
sed, highly: interesting as to external incidents, and
occurrences, relating to the mission, and some of a
most extraordinary nature, which have been detailed
in this narrative ; it may be proper summarily to state,
that from the commencement of this mission among
the Mohicans, in New York and Connecticut states—in —
1740, and the Delawares in Pennsylvania, a year
later, unto the year 1808, inclusive, (a period of néar
seventy years,) between thirteen and »fourteen hun-
dred* souls, were baptized by the Brethren); of whom


Zw.
ae


* The exact number of baptisms, cannot well be ascertaigel, on ac-
count of \the loss of the church register book, taken by the warriors in
1781, but the number as to hundreds, is here not overrated, and sup-


posed to be nearest to fourteen hundred. ere


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 419
a cosiderable number departed this life, ih the Chris-
tian faith, rejoicing in the hope of soon being in the
presence of their Redeemer ; while others who were


living in the same faith, had been prematurely cut off


from the land of the living, by an inhuman lawless
band, (ashath been detailed in this narrative)—others
again, had on account of troubles, persecutions, and


wars, been compelled to resort to places of safety,


beyond the reach of their adversaries. The number
cf Christian Indians, under the special care of mis-
sionaries at these stations, exceeded two hundred
souls, at the time their much beloved senior mission-
ary Zeisberger, departed this life.

Exclusive of the ten brethren and sisters and one
child, who in November of the year 1755, were mur-
dered,* at theit station on Mahony, near the Chris-
tian Indian village, Gnadenhutten; six missionaries
have departed this life at their posts, namely: Gott-
lieb Buttner, in 1745 at Shecomeko, an Indian village,
then in the province of New York and bordering on
the Connecticut river. David Bruce, in 1749, ‘at
.Pachgatgoch, in Connecticut. John Hagen, about
the year 1750, at Shamokin, in Pennsylvania. Gott*
_ Job Senseman, in 1800, at Fairfield, in Upper Canada.
William Edwards, aged about seventy, in 1801, at


Goshen, on the Muskingum, and David Zeisberger, -


at the same place, in 1808 ; while at Bethlehem in the


* See Loskiel’s History of the mission, part 2d, chapter xii. page 166,


on


fo


=


.


me
eat


420 -——- HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


same year, the two venerable missionaries, Grubé'and
Youngman, were also called from hence to meet to-
gether in the presence of that Lord and Saviour,
whom they so faithfully served here below ; to receive
their reward of him. Lape tid oie
It is remarkable. that. these«last three aneaiae
missionaries, who at an early period of their lives,
had entered into that service with the resolution to
endure for Christ’s sake, all hardships, privations, per:
secutions and dangers. which might befal them—and
who indeed had, during long services, given proof
of their firmness, by the numerous hardships, and
trials they had endured, shouldlive to such advanced


ages, as they did, and therewith enjoy generally good


health to the last.—Bernhard Adam Grube, who had
been the first missionary to the Delawares, and spoke
their language well, died at Bethlehem on the 20th
of March 1808, aged ninety three years and: three


months.. John George Youngman, first a missionary —
to the Mohicans in Connecticut, and afterwards~ fora —


number of years, the same to the Delawares on the
Susquehannah, in. Pennsylvania, and in the western
country, died also at Bethlehem in July of the same
year, (1808,) aged eigty-eightyears and three months;


‘ and. David Zeisberger, (as, aforesaid,) died in Novem-


ber of the same year, at Goshen on the Muskingum,


aged eighty seven years and seven months. ...
As the names of all the Brethren, who had hitherto
been in the service of this mission, are inserted in


4


x


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 421


their proper places in “ Loskiel’s History of the Uni-—


ted Brethren among the North American Indians :”
I will only subjoin the names of such, as were actually
employed in the service at the close of this period of
the mission, 1808. These are, Benjamin Mortimer,
John Schnall, Abraham Luchkenbach, and Christian
Frederick Dencke, with their. wives, and Michael
Young, Benjamin Haven and John Joachim i oi
' single brethren.

The mission of the Brethren among the Cherokees,*
began in the spring of the year 1801, by. brother
Abraham Steiner of Salem, in North Carolina, and
was continued for a few years, by him, with the assis-
tance of Gottlieb Byhan, of the same place ; it was after-
wards supplied by brother John Gambolds, who
took charge of it, together with his faithful wife.
They are indefatigable in their labours, of making
known the gospel’ truths both to the natives, ‘and
~ others, who are inclined to hear it ; and of giving school
instruction to their children. It is pleasing to add,
that they have found sufficient reason to be thankful to
the Lord, for the blessing he has laid on their minis-
try. Otherwise this southern mission is, as to its ex-


* Privious to brother Steiner’s beginning a. mission. in the Cherokee
country, he, with brother Frederick Christian Von Schweintz, made
two journeys into that country, for the purpose of obtaining permission,
from the chiefs of the nation, to settle among them ; who, together
with the officers of government stationed in that country favoured the
design to his wishes.


oe


‘


e *
=.


“heer es cales aecie Tee lS


<e 5


+


Pod
422 HECKEWELDE R’s aca iat


,


_ternal concerns, unconnected withs the mission treat-
ed of in this narrative ; and is supplied by thé direc:
tors of the society in Salem, North Carolina

= ‘ ;

Asa brief relation of the life and character ‘of ‘the
late David Zeisberger, may be i interesting to the read-
er; I will conclude this narrative, with a few extracts,
from the writings of such persons, who served with
him in the same cause for a number of years. The
following article,* copied from the American register,
of vol. V. part I. for 1809, was written by. the rey.

Benjamin Mortimer, for the Pittsburg gazette, as an

obituary notice. Mr. Mortimer, had for the last nine

years, been constantly near the person of the deceased,
and preached his funeralsermon. = is
(The extract.) ‘‘ Died on the 17th of. ‘Naveniber,

1808, at Goshen, on the river Muskingum, state of

Ohio, the rev. David Zeisberger, senior missionary of

the United Brethren among the Indians, aged eighty-
seven years and seven months.” at

‘‘ He was a. native of Moravia, in Germany, from

' whence he emigrated with his parents at an early age

to Herrnhuth, in Upper Lusatia, for the sake of ob-

taining religious liberty. In 1738, he came to this
country, landed.in Georgia, where at that time, some


*The errata in this article, are necessarily here corrected by the
copyist.


! on ae oe ck ee Se Se eee ee eR
a Vy Page : “ =a zeae mn ws
Piss has + 4
‘ te, : ‘ » é
ae oat . Jie im ,
4 . a . : : : ;


*


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE, 423


of the United Breshien, had beguna instiendes mere-
ly for.the purpose of preaching the gospel to the
Creek nation.. From thence he removed to Pennsyl-
vania, and assisted at the commencement of the set-


tlements of Bethlehem and Nazareth. Ever since the .
year 1746, a period of sixty-two years, he has, with


few, and short intervals, been.a missionary among the
Indians, making himself master of sundry of their
languages.”
__. He was blessed with a-cool, active, intrepid spirit,
not appalled by any danger, or difficulties, and a sound
judgment, to discern the best means of meeting and
overcoming them. Having once devoted himself to
the service of God among the Indians, he ‘steadily,
from the most voluntary choice, and with the. purest


motives, pursued his object, namely, the glory of his


Redeemer, in the salvation of his fellow men, whom
he found sunk in heathenish darkness, and error.
Never was he so happy, as when he could believe, that
the souls to whom he preached, had sought and found
forgiveness of their sins, and could truly rejoice in
their Saviour; he then rejoiced with them, as if he
had gained the utmost object of his wishes, for with
the apostle Paul, he counted all things but lost, in
comparison of the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus.our Lord, and the being found in him,
(Phil. iii..8, 9) and it may truly be added, that the
gaining over one soul, to this excellent knowledge
and experience, was with him, of more estimation,


ad) ae he ar
¢ ~ we


A424, HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


than if he had acquired possession of the whole world.
His endeavours, for the conversion of ‘the Indians,
were crowned with very signal success, as'may be seen
at large in Loskiel’s history of the mission of the Uni-
ted Brethren, among the North American Indians,
“In the course of a long life, thus’spent among sava-
ges, he was, of course exposed to innumerable hard-
ships and privations. In addition to these, he had
at times to suffer much persecution, from the enemies
of the truth, and was frequently in imminent danger


of his life. Nothing, however, of this kind? di nay:


ed him for a moment, but only served to whet his
zeal; and he has, more than once had the pleasure to
baptize those of his converts, who had not long before
lifted up some weapon of death to destroy him. In
reliance upon his God, in whom alone he trusted, and
not in men, he had always good courage, in ‘the carry-
ing on of his work. At the same time, ‘he was of an
humble; meek spirit, and always thought lowly of
himself. Self was the least of all the considerations,


that occupied his mind-—universal love filled his bo- -


som. He was a most affectionate husband ; a faithful
and never failing friend; and every lineamént of his
character, shewed a sincere, upright, benevolent, and
generous soul, with perhaps as few blemishes, as can
be expected in the-best of men, on this side the grave.
This is no studied eulogium, to give an exalted
opinion of a much esteemed departed friend ; it is a
free description of that genuine worth, which every


/


HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


one well acquainted with Mr. Zeisberger, must have
_ perceived, and found in him, and which must there-.
fore long endear his memory among them.

“It deserves to be particularly noticed, that Mr.
Zeisberger, was probably one of the oldest white set-
tlers in the state of Ohio; and that perhaps, no man
had ever preached the gospel among the Indians for
such a long succession of years, and amidst so great
a variety of trials. In accommodating himself in this
state of things among them, it would be difficult to
recount his journeys, or, how often he had to change
his place of residence. In the last forty years of his
life, he never was, at any one time, six months absent
from his Indian flock, and during that long period,
he only paid two visits to his friends and acquaintan-
ces in the Atlantic States. His last journey to Bethle-_
hem, was in the year 1781, from which time, to his
death, (full twenty-seven years) he has continually
been, and dwelt with his Indian congregation, in the
western country, (and Upper Canada,) wherever their
respective settlements were.

“In the evening of his days, as his faculties began


to fail him, his desire to depart and be with Christ, .”


increased more and more. At the same time he
awaited the dissolution of his mortal frame, with an
uniform, calm, dignified resignation to the will of his
maker, and with the sure and certain hope, of leaving
this world for a better. His last words were, ‘‘ Lord
Jesus, I pray thee come, and take my spirit to thyself : ij
3H


ia


A426 HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE.


And again, “thou hast never yet forsaken me, in any —
trial: thou wilt not forsake me now.”—* A very res-


pectable company attended his funeral. The solemn


service was performed in the English, Delaware, and
German languages, to suit the different auditors. The
sermons were from Rev. xii. 11. and Prov. x. 7. A
summary written account of the principal occurrences
in his remarkable life, was communicated, and heard
with particular interest and attention. :
“Some interesting anecdotes might, if noishierys be
related of this worthy man, which alone, would estab-
lish his character, as an exemplary Christian, and faith:
ful follower of Jesus. Having. enlisted under the
banner of his divine master and redeemer—to serve
him, and his cause alone, he cared nothing for the
things of this world, being of opinion, that a servant
of Christ ought never to be shackled with earthly con-
cerns, nor attached to those things which are aa
ishable.” oe
Zeisberger would never consent to have his ‘name
put down on a salary list; or “become a hireling,” —
(ashe termed it) saying, thatalthough to some missiona-
ries a salary might be both agreeable and proper, yet
with him it would not be so, as he had, from the begin-
ing, devoted himself to the service of the Lord, among
the heathen, without any other view of a reward, than


euch as his Lord and master, should deign to. bestow


on him; well convinced, that if he proved faithful,
and deserving of remuneration, he would receive it,


‘especially, when he had finished his. earthly career,
and joined him, whom he had served here below !”


Though he coveted not the things of this world,

: % ‘ A os

but .was content with food and raiment alone; he
was not inclined to censure those who sought tu ac-


quire wealth. He only hoped, that the wealthy would


make such use of what they acquired, that it might


‘prove a blessing to them. How often have I ob-


served the smile on his countenance, and seen his
eyes glisten, when he, either witnessed, or learnt from
others,that a needy, or distressed person had been
relieved. :

Zeisberger was a man of small stature, yet well pro-
portioned, with a cheerful countenance, and endowed


with a good understanding, and sound oe


friend and benefactor to mankind, and justly belov
by all who knew him, with perhaps the exception of
those, who were enemies to the gospel which he
preached. His words were few, and never known
to be wasted at random or in an unprofitable manner.
Though he had so often been exposed to extreme
hardships and dangers of various kinds, yet he was
never known to complain of his situation, or utter
any expression of regret, that he had engaged ina
cause, with which such a number of privations, and
sufferings of the body were combined, but on the


contrary, bore whatever befel him with Christian


fortitude, and even with cheerfulness—plain yet clean- .
ly in his attire—regular in his*meals when attainable


=" =


; is - 2 : .
HECKEWELDER’S NARRATIVE. 427 ‘2


f

mS

>

Wea pee!

‘. oS
"a


ce
is


, Midge oe


yi
hie


Ce ge Se ee


¥


ae


* +


= am ‘spirituous liq rs ; wha taking as much manual exer-
at cise, as his time would allow ; these, wi » good |
constitution, may perhaps have been the means of
his generally enjoying good = aad ving
such an advanced age.
During the time of his being a missionary, he learns’
ed two different Indian languages ; the Onondago
(one of the idioms of the Six Nations) and the Dela-
ware, and understood other languages connected
with them. In the Onondago, he, about the year
‘1768, wrote and completed, two grammars, one
written in English, and the other in German, anda
copious dictionary, (German and Indian), containing
wards of one thousand seven hundred pages. In
> language of the Lenape, (or Delaware,) he pub-
. Pished j in the year 1776, his first edition of a spelling _
book, and 1806, his second edition enlarged. Two
other books were published by him in this language ~
the one sermons to children, and the other an hymn
book, containing about three hundred and sixty pages
- and. upwards of five hundred hymns, translated by
him, partly from the German, and partly‘from the
English hymn book, which is in use in the Brethren’s
congregations. In manuscript, he left a grammar of
tbe Delaware language, written in German, which has _
‘ately been translated into English, for the American
philosophical society by my much esteemed friend
Peter S. Du Ponceau, esq. of Philadelphia ; and also


a —
i p ee ee eee


ie Auxili


i Fselcinape'is Deore of Hao of tl eF 1
_ Gospels : the 3 plication of which, for the
of the en Indians, i is undertaken by the fem Me
ssionary Society of Bethlehem, aided ‘>. i
by voluntary personal contributions of friends and
well-wishers to the cause, of various denominations,
among whom the venerable president of the Ameri-
can bible society, Dr. Elias Boudino tands cons
spicuous. x


THE END.


{
Bayeriache
Steatsbibliothek
Minchen


: a = > % .
SRC ae i
v oF ~ Fy x


bitte fray


- 1 were oar "a ’ “thy
pitts % “a. ee


{
o


ERRATA.
_ Page A line 10 for Ruchline, read Kuchline.

3 2 for turena, read nature, — :

a 109 8 and 22 for Cusheushke, read Cusc’

\ 111 27 for oteey, read oteney. .
112 13 for he readthe.
113-26. for’ a young man, read Youngman,
151 22 for formerly, read formally, oe
152 15 for missionaries, read memories.
195 1 for horing, read- hoaing, oe word is Gokhosing.)
199 8 for remained, read re
235. last line of note, for ree a ‘sweat. “- ae
290 — 18 for Ohio, read Miami. :
320 baer and il ua Jacob who had been, read — whom Jacob


335% 3 ior tate, read Rau. ®
The name “ oki »” which ee occurs thrveghoutlill
should “ Loskiel.”


£
3


Bayerische. MDZ PiatlsterunysZentrun
‘atsBibliothel Digitale Bibliothek


Heckewelder, John G.,


‘Anarrative ofthe mission of the United Brethren among the Delaware and
Mohegan Indians from its commencement, in the year 1740, to the close of
the year 1808 ; comprising all the remarkable incidents which took place

at their missionary stations during that period ; Interspersed with
anecdotes, historical facts, speeches of Indians, and other interesting


Philadelphia 1820


Huef. 7326
urn:nbn:de:bvb:12-bsb10451085-6
