The Logic of Hegel
G. W. F. Hegel (William Wallace, trans.) (1874)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Hegel's Encyclopaedia Logic (1817) — the 'lesser Logic': being, essence, and notion in the system's first part. William Wallace's 1874 translation, the classic English Hegel.

========================================================================

UNIVERSITY  OF
ILLINOIS  L'PRARY
AT  UP:  ' .ovjPA
BOC. -,3


CENTRAL  CIRCULATION  AND  BOOKSTACKS

The  person  borrowing  this  material  is  re-
sponsible for  its  renewal  or  return  before
the  Latest  Date  stamped  below.  You  may
be  charged  a  minimum  fee  of  $75.00  for
each  non-returned  or  lost  item.

Th.ft,  mutilation,  «,  d.foc.m.nt  of  library  material,  ««„  b.
««u...  for  ,,ud.n,  dUcIplInary  action.  A.,  mat.ria.s  owned  by

*..»"„ TV  llino" Llbrary - '"• proi"rt* °< *•  *«"•

nol.  and  ar.  prot.et«l  by  Art.cl.  16B  of  ////no/.  Cr/mino/
law  ana  Procedure.

TO  RENfW,  CALL  (217)  333-8400

of  niinp,,  Librqry  af  UrbeBia-Champalgn


FEB  252001


When  renewing  by  phone,  write  new  due  date
below  previous  due  date.  LJ62


PUBLISHERS TO THE UNIVERSITY  OF


THE  LOGIC  OF  HEGEL

TRANSLATED FROM
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL SCIENCES

WITH

PROLEGOMENA

BY

WILLIAM WALLACE, M.A.

FELLOW  AND TUTOR OP MERTON COLLEGE, OXFORD


AT THE CLARENDON PRESS


[All  riyl'ts  reserved"]


PREFACE.


THE  '  Logic  of  Hegel '  is  a  name  which  may  be  given
to  two  separate  books.  O&e  of  these  is  the  '  Science
of  Logic '  (Wissenschaft  der  Logik),  first  published  in
three  volumes  (1812-1816),  while  its  author  was
schoolmaster  at  Nuremberg.  A  second  edition  was
on  its  way,  when  Hegel  was  suddenly  cut  off,  after
revising  the  first  volume  only.  In  the  '  Secret  of
Hegel,'  the  earlier  part  of  this  Logic  has  been  trans-
lated by  Dr.  Hutchison  Stirling,  with  whose  name
German  philosophy  is  chiefly  associated  in  this
country.

The  other  Logic,  of  which  the  present  work  is  a
translation,  forms  the  First  Part  in  the  '  Encyclopaedia
of  the  Philosophical  Sciences/  The  first  edition  of
the  Encyclopaedia  appeared  at  Heidelberg  in  1817;
the  second  in  1827  ;  and  the  third  in  1830.  It  is
well  to  bear  in  mind  that  these  dates  take  us  back
forty  or  fifty  years,  to  a  time  when  modern  science
and  Inductive  Logic  had  yet  to  win  their  laurels,  and
when  the  world  was  in  many  ways  different  from  what
it  is  now.  The  earliest  edition  of  the  Encyclopaedia
contained  the  pith  of  the  system.  The  subsequent


vi  PREFACE.

editions  brought  some  new  materials,  mainly  intended
to  smooth  over  and  explain  the  transitions  between
the  various  sections,  and  to  answer  the  objections  of
critics.  The  work  contained  a  synopsis  of  philosophy
in  the  form  of  paragraphs,  and  was  to  be  supplemented
by  the  viva  voce  remarks  of  the  lecturer.

The  present  volume  is  translated  from  the  edition
of  1 843,  forming  the  Sixth  Volume  in  Hegel's  Collected
Works.  It  consists  of  two  nearly  equal  portions.  One
half,  here  printed  in  more  open  type,  contains  Hegel's
Encyclopaedia,  with  all  the  author's  own  additions.
The  first  paragraph  under  each  number  marks  the
earliest  and  simplest  statement  of  the  first  edition.
The  other  half,  here  printed  in  closer  type,  is  made  up
of  the  notes  taken  in  lecture  by  the  editor  (Henning)
and  by  Professors  Hotho  and  Michelet.  These  notes
for  the  most  part  connect  the  several  sections,  rather
than  explain  their  statements.  Their  genuineness  is
vouched  for  by  their  being  almost  verbally  the  same
with  other  parts  of  Hegel's  own  writings.

The  difference  between  the  two  Logics  lies  mainly
in  the  greater  minuteness  and  detail  of  the  larger
work,  and  in  the  headings  and  arrangements  of  the
chapters.  Several  mathematical  questions  are  dis-
cussed in  the  first  volume  of  the  larger  Logic  at  a
disproportionate  length  :  and  in  the  second  volume
of  the  same  book  the  chapter  headed  '  Phenomenon '
(Erscheinung)  is  differently  divided  from  the  method
adopted  in  the  Encyclopaedia,  and  begins  with  'Ex-
istence.' These  arrangements  are  followed  in  the


PREFACE.  vii

modified  versions  of  the  Hegelian  Logic  which  have
been  made  by  Erdmann,  K.  Fischer,  and  Rosenkranz.

The  '  Science  of  Logic '  is  undoubtedly  the  more
comprehensive  and  valuable  work.  Its  length,  how-
ever, makes  the  study  of  it  a  formidable  undertaking.
Hegel,  be  it  added,  does  not  always  render  his  theory
more  obvious  to  apprehension  by  expanding  it  into  its
details.  To  many  eyes  the  depth  only  grows  deeper,
and  the  subtlety  more  subtle,  by  this  expansion.

The  translation  has  tried  to  keep  as  closely  as  pos-
sible to  the  meaning,  without  always  adhering  very
rigorously  to  the  words  of  the  original.  It  is,  however,
much  more  literal  in  the  later  and  systematic  part,
than  in  the  earlier  chapters.

The  Prolegomena  which  precede  the  translation  have
not  been  given  in  the  hope  or  with  the  intention  of
expounding  the  Hegelian  system.  They  merely  seek
to  remove  certain  obstacles,  and  to  render  Hegel  less
tantalizingly  hard  to  those  who  approach  him  for  the
first  time.  How  far  they  will  accomplish  this,  remains
to  be  seen.


OXFORD,
September,  1873.


/

CONTENTS.


PROLEGOMENA.

CHAPTER  I.

WHY  HEGEL  is  HARD  TO  UNDERSTAND


CHAPTER  II.

ENGLISH  PHILOSOPHY  AND  HEGEL


CHAPTER III.

HEGEL  AND  THEOLOGY


CHAPTER  IV.
IDEALISM  AND  REALISM


CHAPTER  V.

THE  SCIENCES  AND  PHILOSOPHY


CHAPTER  VI.

THE  GENESIS  OF  HEGELIANISM xliv

CHAPTER  VII.

KANT  AND  HIS  PROBLEM


CHAPTER VIII.
TRANSITION  FROM  KANT  TO  HEGEL Iviii

CHAPTER IX.
GENERAL  LAW  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY Ixiv


CONTENTS,


CHAPTER  X.

ABSTRACT  AND  CONCRETE  :  AND  THE  ORDINARY  LOGIC

CHAPTER  XI.
FROM  SENSE  TO  THOUGHT

CHAPTER XII.

FlGURATE OR PRESENTATIVE  THOUGHT


CHAPTER  XIII.

REASON  AND  THE  DIALECTIC  OF  UNDERSTANDING .

CHAPTER  XIV.
THOUGHT  PURE  AND  ENTIBE

CHAPTER  XV.

ABSOLUTE  AND  RELATIVE  :  OR  THE  CATEGORIES

CHAPTER  XVI.
THE  THREE  PARTS  OF  LOGIC

CHAPTER XVII.

THE  SEARCH  FOR  A  FIRST  PRINCIPLE

CHAPTER XVIII.
THE  LOGIC  OF  BEING

CHAPTER XIX.

ILLUSTRATION  FROM  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY .

CHAPTER XX.

THE  LOGIC  OF  ESSENCE  :  OR  RELATIVITY

CHAPTER XXI.

THE  LOGIC  OF  THE  NOTION  :  OR  DEVELOPMENT


PAOE

Ixxiii


Ixxx


Ixxxvii


cxiii


cxliv


el


clx


CHAPTER  XXII.
A  BRIEF  SUMMARY  OF  RESULTS clxxi

CHAPTER XXIII.
VOCABULARY  . clxxv


CONTENTS.


THE LOGIC OF HEGEL.


CHAPTER I.

PAGE

INTRODUCTION  . . .  , 1


CHAPTER II.
PRELIMINARY  NOTION • .25

CHAPTER  III.

FIRST  ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE  WORLD . . 50

CHAPTER  IV.

SECOND  ATTITUDE  OP  THOUGHT  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE  WORLD . .

1.  THE  EMPIRICAL  SCHOOL

2.  THE  CRITICAL  PHILOSOPHY

(a) Criticism  of  the  Theoretical  Faculty

(6) Criticism  of  the  Practical  Reason ......

(c) Criticism  of  the  Reflective  Power  of  Judgment ...

CHAPTER  V.

THIRD  ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE  WORLD. IMME-
DIATE OR  INTUITIVE  KNOWLEDGE 103

CHAPTER  VI.

THE  PROXIMATE  NOTION  OF  LOGIC  WITH  ITS  SUB-DIVISIONS . . . 122

CHAPTER  VII.

FIRST  SUB-DIVISION  OF  LOGIC. THE  DOCTRINE  OF  BEING . . .  133

A. — QUALITY.

(a) Being 135

(6) Being  Determinate 144

(c) Being-for-self 153

B. — QUANTITY.

(a) Mere  Quantity  . . . 159

(6) Quantum  (How  Much) 163

(c) Degree 165

C — MEASURE  .  ...  172


xii  CONTENTS.


CHAPTER VIII.

PACK

SECOND  SUB-DIVISION  OF  LOGIC. THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE  . . .178
A.— ESSENCE  AS  GROUND  OF  EXISTENCE.

(a)  The  primary  Characteristics  or  Categories  of  Reflection.

(a) Identity 183

(£) Difference 185

(•y) The  Ground 193

(b)  Existence 198

(c)  The  Thing 200

B. — APPEARANCE 205

(a)  The  World  of  Appearance  or  Phenomenal  World . . .  208

(b)  Content  and  Form 208

(c)  Ratio  (Relation) 211

C. — ACTUALITY 221

(a) Relation  of  Substantiality 235

(6) Relation  of  Causality 237

(c) Reciprocity  or  Action  and  Reaction . . . .f  .241


CHAPTER  IX.

THIBD  SUB-DIVISION  OF  LOGIC. THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION . .247

A. — THE  SUBJECTIVE  NOTION.

(a) The  Notion  as  Notion 251

(6) The  Judgment 256

(c) The  Syllogism 270

B.— THE  OBJECT 288

(a) Mechanism . .  290

(6) Chemism 294

(c) Teleology 296

C. — THE  IDEA 304

(a) Life 310

(6) Cognition  in  General 313

(c) The  Absolute  Idea 323

INDEX 329


PROLEGOMENA


CHAPTER I.

AVHY HEGEL IS HARD TO UNDERSTAND.

'THE  condemnation/  says  Hegel,  'which  a  great  man  lays
upon  the  world,  is  to  force  it  to  explain  him  V  The  greatness
of  Hegel,  if  it  be  measured  by  this  standard,  must  be  something
far  above  common.  Interpreters  of  his  system  have  contra-
dicted each  other,  almost  as  variously  as  the  several  com-
mentators on  the  Bible.  He  is  claimed  as  their  head  by
widely  different  schools  of  thought,  all  of  which  appeal  to  him
as  the  original  source  of  their  line  of  argument.  The  Right
wing,  and  the  Left,  as  well  as  the  Centre,  profess  to  be  the
genuine  descendants  of  the  prophet,  and  to  inherit  the  mantle
of  his  inspiration.  If  we  believe  one  side,  Hegel  is  only  to
be  rightly  appreciated  when  we  divest  his  teaching  of  every
shred  of  religion  and  orthodoxy  which  it  retains.  If  we
believe  another  class  of  expositors,  he  was  the  champion  of
Christianity.

These  contradictory  views  may  be  safely  left  to  abolish  each
other.  But  diversity  of  opinion  on  such  topics  is  neither
unnatural,  nor  unusual.  The  meaning  and  the  bearings  of  a
great  event,  or  a  great  character,  or  a  great  work  of  reasoned
thought,  will  be  estimated  and  explained  in  different  ways,
according  to  the  effect  they  produce  on  different  minds,  and
different  levels  of  life  and  society.  Those  effects,  perhaps,  will

1  Hegel's  Leben  (Rosenkranz),  p.  555.


xiv  PROLEGOMENA.  [i.

not  present  themselves  in  their  true  character,  until  long  after
the  original  excitement  has  passed  away.  To  some  minds,  the
chief  value  of  the  Hegelian  system  will  lie  in  its  vindication
of  the  truths  of  natural  and  revealed  religion,  and  in  the
agreement  of  the  elaborate  reasonings  of  the  philosopher  with
the  simple  aspirations  of  mankind  towards  higher  things.  To
others  that  system  will  have  most  interest  as  a  philosophical
history  of  thought, — an  exposition  of  that  organic  development
of  reason,  which  underlies  and  constitutes  all  the  varied  and
complex  movement  of  the  world.  To  a  third  class,  again,  it
may  seem  at  best  an  instrument  or  method  of  investigation,
stating  the  true  law  by  which  knowledge  proceeds  in  its
endeavour  to  comprehend  and  assimilate  existing  nature.

While  these  various  meanings  may  be  given  to  the  Hegelian
scheme  of  thought,  the  majority  of  the  world  either  pronounce
Hegel  to  be  altogether  unintelligible,  or  banish  him  to  the
limbo  of  a  priori  thinkers, — that  bourne  from  which  no  philoso-
pher returns.  To  argue  with  those  who  start  from  the  latter
conviction  would  be  an  ungrateful,  and  probably  a  superfluous
task.  Wisdom  is  justified,  we  may  be  sure,  of  all  her  children.
But  it  may  be  possible  to  admit  the  existence  of  difficulties,
and  agree  to  some  extent  with  those  who  complain  that  Hegel
is  impenetrable  and  hard  as  adamant.  There  can  be  no  doubt
of  the  forbidding  aspect  of  the  most  prominent  features  in  his
system.  He  is  hard  in  himself,  and  his  readers  find  him  hard.
His  style  is  not  of  the  best,  and  to  foreign  eyes  seems  unequal.
At  times  he  is  eloquent,  stirring,  and  striking  :  again  his  turns
are  harsh,  and  his  clauses  tiresome  to  disentangle  :  and  we  are
always  coming  upon  that  childlikeness  of  literary  manner,
which  English  taste  fancies  it  can  detect  in  some  of  the
greatest  works  of  German  genius.  There  are  faults  in  Hegel,
which  obscure  his  meaning :  but  more  obstacles  are  due  to
the  nature  of  the  work,  and  the  pre-occupations  of  our  minds.
There  is  something  in  him  which  fascinates  the  thinker,  and
which  inspires  a  sympathetic  student  with  the  vigour  and
the  hopefulness  of  the  spring-time.


i.J  THINKING  IN  VACUO.  xv

Perhaps  the  main  hindrance  in  the  way  of  a  clear  vision
is  the  contrast  which  Hegelian  philosophy  offers  to  our  ordinary
habits  of  mind.  Generally  speaking,  we  rest  contented  if  we
can  get  tolerably  near  our  object,  and  form  a  general  picture
of  it  to  set  before  our  selves.  It  might  almost  be  said  that
we  have  never  thought  of  such  a  thing  as  being  in  earnest
either  with  ouV  words  or  with  our  thoughts.  We  get  into
a  way  of  speaking  with  an  uncertain  latitude  of  meaning,
and  leave  a  good  deal  to  the  fellow-feeling  of  our  hearers,  who
are  expected  to  mend  what  is  defective  in  our  utterances.  For
most  of  us  the  place  of  exact  thought  is  supplied  by  metaphors
and  pictures,  by  mental  images,  and  figures  generalised  from
the  senses.  And  thus  it  happens,  that  when  we  come  upon
a  single  precise  and  definite  statement,  neither  exceeding  nor
falling  short  in  its  meaning,  we  are  thrown  out  of  our  reckon-
ing. Our  fancy  and  memory  have  nothing  left  for  them  to
do :  and,  as  fancy  and  memory  make  up  the  greater  part  in
what  we  loosely  call  thought,  our  powers  of  thought  seem  to
be  brought  to  a  standstill.  Those  who  crave  for  fluent  reading,
or  prefer  easy  writing,  something  within  the  pale  of  our  usual
mental  lines,  are  more  likely  to  find  what  they  seek  in  the
ten  partially  correct  and  approximate  ways  commonly  used  to
give  expression  to  a  truth,  than  in  the  one  simple  and  accurate
statement  of  the  thought.  We  prefer  a  familiar  name,  and
an  accustomed  image,  on  which  our  faculties  may  work.  But
in  the  atmosphere  of  Hegelian  thought,  we  feel  very  much
as  if  we  bad  been  lifted  into  a  vacuum,  where  we  cannot
breathe,  and  which  is  a  fit  habitation  for  unrecognisable  ghosts
only.

To  read  Hegel  reminds  us  of  the  process  we  have  to  go
through  in  trying  to  answer  a  riddle.  The  terms  of  the  pro-
blem to  be  solved  are  all  given  to  us :  the  features  of  the
object  are,  it  may  be,  fully  described :  and  yet  somehow  we
cannot  at  once  tell  what  it  is  all  about,  or  add  up  the  sum
of  which  we  have  the  several  items.  We  are  waiting  to  learn
the  subject  of  the  proposition,  of  which  all  these  statements


xvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [i.

may  be  regarded  as  the  predicates.  Something,  we  feel,  has
undoubtedly  been  said :  but  we  are  at  a  loss  to  see  what  it
has  been  said  about.  Our  mind  wanders  round  from  one
familiar  object  to  another,  and  tries  them  in  succession  to  see
whether  any  one  satisfies  the  several  points  in  the  state-
ment and  includes  them  all.  We  grope  here  and  there  for
something  we  are  acquainted  with,  in  which  the  bits  of  the
description  may  cohere,  and  get  a  unity  which  they  cannot
give  themselves.  When  once  we  have  hit  upon  the  right
object,  our  troubles  are  at  an  end :  and  the  empty  medium
is  now  peopled  with  a  creature  of  our  imagination.  We  have
reached  a  fixed  point  in  the  range  of  our  conceptions,  around
which  the  given  features  may  cluster.

All  this  trouble  caused  by  the  Hegelian  theory  of  what
philosophy  involves — viz.  a  construction  of  its  subject-matter,
is  saved  by  a  device  well-known  to  the  several  branches  of
Science.  It  is  the  way  with  them  to  assume  that  the  student
has  a  rough  general  image  of  the  objects  which  they  examine;
and  under  the  guidance,  or  with  the  help  of  this  generalised
image,  they  go  on  to  explain  and  describe  its  outlines  more
completely.  They  start  with  an  approximate  conception,  such
as  anybody  may  be  supposed  to  have ;  «and  this  they  seek  to
render  more  definite.  The  geologist,  for  example,  could  scarcely
teach  geology,  unless  he  could  pre-suppose  or  produce  some
acquaintance  on  the  part  of  his  pupils  with  what  Hume  would
have  called  an  c  impression '  or  an  '  idea '  of  the  rocks  and  for-
mations of  which  he  has  to  treat.  The  geometer  gives  a
short,  and,  as  it  were,  popular  explanation  of  the  sense  in
which  angles,  circles,  triangles,  &c.  are  to  be  understood :  and
then  by  the  aid  of  these  provisional  definitions  we  come  to  a
more  scientific  notion  of  the  same  terms.  The  third  book  of
Euclid,  for  example,  brings  before  us  a  clearer  notion  of  what
a  circle  is,  than  the  nominal  explanation  in  the  list  of  definitions.
By  means  of  these  temporary  aids,  or,  as  we  may  call  them,
leading-strings  for  the  intellect,  the  progress  of  the  ordinary
scientific  student  is  made  tolerably  easy.  But  in  philosophy,


i.]  WHAT'S  IN  A  NAME  ?  xvii

as  it  is  found  in  Hegel,  there  is  quite  another  way  of  working.
The  helps  in  question  are  absent :  and  until  it  be  seen  that
they  are  not  even  needed,  the  Hegelian  theory  will  remain
a  sealed  mystery.  For  that  which  the  first  glance  seemed  to
show  as  an  enigma,  is  only  the  plain  and  unambiguous  state-
ment of  thought.  Instead  of  casting  around  for  images  and
accustomed  names,  we  have  only  to  accept  the  several  terms
and  articles  in  the  development  of  thought  as  they  present
themselves.  These  terms  merely  require  to  be  apprehended.
They  stand  in  no  need  of  illustration,  or  of  light  from  our
experience.

Ordinary  knowledge  consists  in  referring  a  new  object  to
a  class  of  objects,  that  is  to  say,  to  a  generalised  image  with
which  we  are  already  acquainted.  It  is  not  so  much  cognition
as  re-cognition.  "  '  What  is  the  truth  ?  '  "  asked  Lady  Chettam
of  Mrs.  Cadwaliader  in  Middlemarch.  "  '  The  truth  ?  he  is  as
bad  as  the  wrong  physic — nasty  to  take,  and  sure  to  disagree/
'There  could  not  be  anything  worse  than  that/  said  Lady
Chettam,  with  so  vivid  a  conception  of  the  physic  that  she
seemed  to  have  learned  something  exact  about  Mr.  Casaubon's
disadvantages."  Once  we  have  referred  the  new  individual  to
a  familiar  category,  or  a  convenient  metaphor,  once  we  have
given  it  a  name,  and  introduced  it  into  the  society  of  our
mental  drawing-room,  we  are  satisfied.  We  have  put  a  fresh
object  in  its  appropriate  drawer  in  the  cabinet  of  our  ideas :
and  hence,  with  the  pride  of  a  collector,  we  can  calmly  call
it  our  own.  But  such  acquaintance,  proceeding  from  a  mingling
of  memory  and  naming,  is  not  the  same  thing  as  knowledge
in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term  J.  '  What  is  he?  Do  you  know
him  ? '  These  are  our  questions :  and  we  are  satisfied  when
we  learn  his  name  and  his  calling.  We  may  never  have  pene-
trated into  the  inner  nature  of  those  objects,  with  whose  tout
ensemble,  or  rough  outlines,  we  are  so  much  at  home,  that  we
fancy  ourselves  thoroughly  cognizant  of  them.  Classifications

1  '  Das  Bekannte  tiberhaupt  ist  darum,  weil  ea  bekannt  1st,  nicht  erkannt.'
Phenomenologie  des  Geistes,  p.  24.

b


xviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [i.

are  only  the  first  steps  in  science :  and  we  do  not  understand
a  thought  because  we  can  view  it  under  the  guise  of  some
of  its  illustrations.

In  the  case  of  the  English  reader  of  Hegel  some  peculiar
hindrances  spring  from  the  foreign  language.  In  strong  con-
trast to  most  of  the  well-known  German  philosophers,  he  may
be  said  to  write  in  the  popular  and  national  dialect  of  his
country.  Of  course  there  are  tones  and  shades  of  meaning
given  to  his  words  by  the  general  context  of  his  system.  But
upon  the  whole  he  did  what  he  promised  to  Voss.  In  a  letter
addressed  to  that  poet  from  Jena  in  1805,  he  says  of  his
projects :  '  Luther  has  made  the  Bible,  and  you  have  made
Homer  speak  German.  No  greater  gift  than  this  can  be  given
to  a  nation.  So  long  as  a  nation  does  not  know  a  noble
work  in  its  own  language,  it  is  still  barbarian,  and  does  not
regard  the  work  as  its  own.  Forget  these  two  examples,  and
I  may  describe  my  own  intention  as  an  attempt  to  teach
philosophy  to  speak  in  German  V

Hegel  is  unquestionably  par  excellence  the  philosopher  of  Ger-
many,— German  through  and  through.  For  philosophy,  though
the  common  birthright  of  full-grown  reason  in  all  ages  and
countries,  must  like  other  universal  and  cosmopolitan  in-
terests, such  as  the  State,  the  Arts,  or  the  Church,  submit
to  the  limits  and  peculiarities  imposed  upon  it  by  the  na-
tural divisions  of  race  and  language.  The  subtler  nuances,
as  well  as  the  coarser  differences  of  national  speech,  make
themselves  vividly  felt  in  the  systems  of  philosophy,  and
defy  translation.  If  Greek  philosophy  cannot,  no  more
can  German  philosophy  be  turned  into  a  body  of  English
thought  by  a  stroke  of  the  translator's  pen.  There  is  a  dif-
ference in  this  matter  between  the  sciences,  and  philosophy.
The  several  sciences  have  a  de-nationalised  and  humanitarian
character,  like  the  trades  and  industries  of  various  nations:
they  are  pretty  much  the  same  in  one  country  and  another.
But  in  the  political  body,  in  the  works  of  high  art,  and  in

1  Vermischte  Schriften,  vol.  II.  p.  474.


i.]  THE  RIGHTS  OF  COMMON  SPEECH.  xix

the  systems  of  philosophy,  the  whole  of  the  character  and
temperament  of  the  several  peoples  finds  its  expression,  and
stands  distinctly  marked,  in  a  shape  of  its  own.  If  the  form
of  German  polity  be  not  transferable  to  this  side  of  the  Channel,
no  more  will  German  philosophy.  Direct  utilisation  for  English
purposes  is  out  of  the  question :  the  circumstances  are  too
different.  But  the  study  of  the  great  works  of  foreign  thought
is  not  on  that  account  useless,  any  more  than  the  study  of
the  great  works  of  foreign  statesmanship.

Hegel  did  good  service,  at  least,  by  freeing  philosophy  from
that  aspect  of  an  imported  luxury,  which  it  usually  had, — as
if  it  were  an  exotic  plant  removed  from  the  bright  air  of
Greece  into  the  melancholy  mists  of  Western  Europe.  'We
have  still,'  he  says,  'to  break  down  the  partition  between  the
language  of  philosophy,  and  that  of  ordinary  consciousness :  we
have  to  overcome  the  reluctance  against  thinking  what  we
are  familiar  with  V  Philosophy  must  be  brought  face  to"
face  with  ordinary  life,  so  as  to  draw  its  strength  from  the
actual  and  living  present,  and  not  from  the  memories  or
traditions  of  the  past.  It  has  to  become  the  organised  and
completed  thinking  of  what  is  contained  blindly  and  vaguely
in  the  various  levels  of  popular  intelligence,  as  these  are  more  or
less  educated  and  ordered.  Perhaps  however  the  attempt  t"o"
philosophise  in  native  German  gives  rise  to  a  purism  of  language
which  is  quite  impossible  in  English,  with  its  double  sym-
pathies. Even  Hegel  seems  to  find  the  resources  of  German
occasionally  fail  him,  and  has  to  employ  the  corresponding  words
of  native  and  classical  origin  with  considerable  difference  of
meaning.  Sometimes,  too,  he  shows  a  tendency  to  etymologise
on  very  narrow  grounds,  and  to  do  something  very  like  playing
on  words.  But  it  was  a  great  thing  to  banish  a  pompous
and  aristocratic  dialect  from  philosophy,  and  to  lead  it  back
to  those  words  and  forms  of  speech,  which  are  in  at  least  a
silent  harmony  with  the  national  feeling.

1  Hegel's  Leben  (Rosenkrauz),  p.  552.

b  2


xx  PROLEGOMENA.  [11.

CHAPTEK II.

ENGLISH PHILOSOPHY AND HEGEL.

AT  the  present  day  in  England,  philosophy  is  either  ignored
altogether,  or  brought  down  to  the  level  of  a  special  branch
of  science,  if  it  be  not  rather  made  a  receptacle  for  the
principles  common  to  all  the  sciences.  The  favourite  term  for
those  researches,  which  are  directed  towards  the  objects  once  con-
sidered proper  to  philosophy,  is  now  Mental  and  Moral  Science.
The  old  name  is  in  certain  circles  restricted  to  denote  the
vague  and  irregular  speculations  of  those  thinkers,  who  either
lived  before  the  rise  of  exact  science,  or  who  acted  in  defiance
of  its  precepts  and  its  example.  One  large  and  influential  class
of  English  thinkers  inclines  to  sweep  philosophy  altogether
away,  as  equivalent  to  metaphysics  and  obsolete  forms  of  error;
and  upon  the  empty  site  thus  obtained  they  are  constructing
a  body  of  psychological  facts,  or  they  are  trying  to  arrange
and  codify  those  general  remarks  upon  the  general  procedure
of  the  sciences,  which  are  known  under  the  name  of  Inductive
Logic.  A  smaller,  but  not  less  vigorous,  class  of  philosophers
look  upon  their  business  as  an  extension  and  rounding  off
of  science,  as  the  complete  unification  of  knowledge.  The
first  is  the  school  best  known  by  the  names  of  Mr.  J.  S.  Mill
and  Mr.  Bain :  the  second  is  the  doctrine  of  Mr.  Herbert
Spencer.

If  we  look  to  history,  it  is  at  once  clear  that  philosophy
has  had  much  to  do  with  science.  In  their  earlier  stages  the
two  tendencies  of  thought  were  scarcely  distinguishable.  The
philosophers  of  Ionia  and  Magna  Graecia  were  also  the  scien-
tific teachers  of  their  time.  Their  fragmentary  remains  remind
us  at  times  of  the  modern  theories  of  geology  and  biology, —
at  other  times  of  the  teachings  of  idealism.  The  same  thing
is  comparatively  true  of  the  earlier  philosophers  of  Modern
Europe.  The  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries,  in  spite


ii.]  THE  EMANCIPATION  OF  PHILOSOPHY.  xxi

of  Bacon  and  Newton,  endeavoured  to  study  the  laws  of
mental  movement  by  a  method,  which  was  a  strange  mixture
of  empiricism  and  metaphysics.  They  attempted  to  apply  the
general  laws  of  thought  to  the  examination  of  the  special
phenomena  of  the  mind.  In  the  works  of  these  thinkers,  as
of  the  pre-Socratics,  one  element  may  be  styled  philosophical,
and  another  element  may  be  styled  scientific, — if  we  use  both
words  vaguely.  But  with  Socrates  in  the  ancient,  and  with
Kant  in  the  modern  epoch  of  philosophy,  the  boundary  between
the  two  regions  was  definitively  drawn.  The  distinction  was
in  the  first  place  achieved  by  turning  the  back  upon  science
and  popular  conceptions.  Socrates  withdrew  thought  from
disquisitions  concerning  the  nature  of  all  things,  and  fixed  it
upon  man,  and  the  state  of  man.  Kant  left  the  broad  fields
of  actually-attained  knowledge,  and  inquired  into  the  central
principle  on  which  the  acquisitions  of  science  were  founded.

The  change  thus  begun  was  not  unlike  that  which  Copernicus
effected  in  the  theory  of  Astronomy.  Human  thought,  either
in  the  actualised  form  of  the  State,  or  in  the  abstract  shape
of  the  Reason, — that  thought,  which  is  a  man's  true  world, —
was  made  the  pivot  around  which  the  system  of  the  sciences
might  turn.  In  the  contest,  which  according  to  Reid  prevails
between  Common  Sense  and  Philosophy,  the  presumptions  of
the  former  have  been  distinctly  reversed,  and  Kant,  like
Socrates,  has  shown  that  it  is  not  the  single  body  of  doctrine,
but  the  humanity,  the  moral  law,  the  thought,  which  under-
lies these  doctrines,  which  gives  the  real  resting-point  and  true
centre  of  movement.  But  this  negative  attitude  of  philosophy  to
the  sciences  is  only  the  beginning,  needed  to  secure  a  stand-
ing-ground. In  the  ancient  world  Aristotle,  and  in  the  modern
Hegel,  exhibit  the  movement  outwards  to  reconquer  the  uni-
verse, proceeding  from  that  principle  which  Socrates  and  Kant
had  emphasised  in  its  simpler  and  less  developed  aspect.

Mr.  Mill,  in  the  closing  chapter  of  his  Logic,  has  briefly
sketched  the  ideal  of  a  science  to  which  he  gives  the  name
of  Teleology,  corresponding  in  the  ethical  and  practical  sphere


xxii  PROLEGOMENA.  [n.

to  a  Philosophia  Prima,  or  Metaphysics,  in  the  theoretical.
This  ideal  and  ultimate  court  of  appeal  is  to  be  valid  in
Morality,  and  also  in  Prudence,  Policy,  and  Taste.  But  the
conception,  although  a  desirable  one,  falls  short  of  the  work
which  Hegel  assigns  to  philosophy.  What  he  intended  to
accomplish  with  detail  and  regular  evolution  was  not  a  system
of  principles  in  these  departments  of  action  only,  but  a  theory
of  the  thought  which  also  manifests  itself  in  Art,  Science,  and
Religion,  in  all  the  consciousness  of  ordinary  life,  and  in  the
movement  of  the  world.  Philosophy  ranges  over  the  whole
field  of  actuality,  or  existing  fact.  Abstract  principles  are
all  very  well  in  their  way :  but  they  are  not  philosophy.  If
the  world  in  its  historical  and  its  present  life  developes  into
endless  detail  in  regular  lines,  philosophy  must  equally  develope
the  narrowness  of  its  first  principles  into  the  plenitude  of  a
System, — into  what  Hegel  calls  the  Idea.  His  point  of  view
may  be  gathered  from  the  following  remarks  in  a  review  of
Hamann,  an  erratic  friend  and  contemporary  of  Kant's.  '  Ha-
mann  would  not  put  himself  to  the  trouble,  which  in  a  higher
sense  God  undertook.  The  ancient  philosophers  have  described
God  under  the  image  of  a  round  ball.  But  if  that  be  His
nature,  God  has  unfolded  it ;  and  in  the  actual  world  He  has
opened  the  closed  shell  of  truth  into  a  system  of  Nature,  into
a  State-system,  a  system  of  Law  and  Morality,  into  the  system
of  the  world's  history.  The  shut  fist  has  become  an  open
hand,  the  fingers  of  which  reach  out  to  lay  hold  of  man's
mind,  and  draw  it  to  Himself.  Nor  is  the  human  mind  a
mere  abstruse  intellect,  blindly  moving  within  its  own  secret
recesses.  It  is  no  mere  feeling  and  groping  about  in  a  vacuum,
but  an  intelligent  system  of  rational  organisation.  Of  that
system  Thought  is  the  summit  in  point  of  form  :  and  Thought
may  be  described  as  the  capability  of  surveying  on  its  surface
the  expanse  of.  Deity  unfolded,  or  rather  as  the  capability,  by
means  of  thinking  over  it,  of  entering  into  it,  and  then  when
the  entrance  has  been  secured,  of  thinking  over  God's  expansion
of  Himself.  To  take  this  trouble  is  the  express  duty  and  end


ii.]  PHILOSOPHY  NOT  REFORM.  xxiii

of  ends set  before the thinking  mind,  ever since God laid
aside  His  rolled-up  form,  and  revealed  Himself1.'

Enthusiastic  admirers  have  often  spoken,  as  if  the  salvation
of  the  time  could  only  come  from  the  Hegelian  philosophy.
'  Grasp  the  secret  of  Hegel,'  they  say,  '  and  you  will  find  a
cure  for  the  delusions  of  your  own  mind,  and  the  secret  which
is  to  set  right  the  wrongs  of  the  world/  These  high  claims
to  utility  were  never  made  by  Hegel  himself.  ^According  to '
him,  philosophy  can  produce  nothing  newj  /Practical  states-
men, and  theoretical  reformers,  may  do  their  best  to  correct
the  inequalities  of  the  world.  I  But  the  very  terms  in  which
Bacon  scornfully  depreciated  one  great  result  of  philosophy  are
to  be  accepted  in  their  literal  truth.  Like  a  virgin  consecrated
to  God,  she  bears  no  fruit2.  She  represents  the  spirit  of  the
world,  resting,  as  it  were,  when  one  step  in  the  progress  has
been  accomplished,  and  surveying  the  advance  which  has  been
made.  Nor  has  philosophy  the  vocation  to  edify  men,  and
so  to  take  the  place  of  religion  on  the  higher  levels  of  intellect.
It  does  not  profess  to  bring  into  being  that  which  ought  to
be,  but  is  not  as  yet.  It  sets  up  no  ideals,  which  must  wait
for  some  future  day  in  order  to  be  realised.  The  subject-matter
of  philosophy  is  that  which  is  always  realising  and  always
realised, — the  world  in  its  wholeness  as  it  is  and  has  been.  It
seeks  to  put  before  us,  and  embody  in  permanent  outlines,  the
universal  law  of  the  mind's  movement,  and  not  the  local,  tem-
porary, and  individual  acts  of  human  will.

Those  who  ask  philosophy  to  construe,  or  to  deduce  a  priori
a  single  blade  of  grass,  or  a  single  act  of  a  man,  must  not  be
grieved  if  their  request  sounds  absurd  and  meets  with  no
answer.  The  sphere  of  philosophy  is  the  Universal.  We  may
say,  if  we  like,  that  it  is  retrospective.  To  comprehend  the
universe  of  thought  in  all  its  formations  and  all  its  features,
to  reduce  the  solid  structures,  which  mind  has  created,  to
fluidity  and  transparency  in  the  pure  medium  of  thought,  to
set  free  the  fossilised  intelligence  which  the  great  magician

1  Vermischte  Schriften,  vol.  II.  p.  87.  *  De  Augm.  Scient.  III.  5.


xxiv  PROLEGOMENA.  [in.

who  wields  the  destinies  of  the  world  has  hidden  under  the
mask  of  Nature,  of  the  mind  of  man,  of  the  works  of  Art,  of
the  institutions  of  the  State  and  the  orders  of  Society,  and  of
religious  forms  and  Creeds : — such  is  the  complicated  prohlem
of  philosophy.  It  has  to  comprehend  the  world,  not  try  to
make  it  better.  If  it  were  the  purpose  of  philosophy  to  reform
and  improve  the  existing-  state  of  things,  it  comes  a  little  too
late  for  such  a  task.  '  As  the  thought  of  the  world,'  says  Hegel,
'  it  makes  its  first  appearance  at  a  time,  when  the  actual  fact
has  consummated  its  process  of  formation,  and  is  now  fully
matured.  This  is  the  doctrine  set  forth  by  the  notion  of
philosophy ;  but  it  is  also  the  teaching  of  history.  It  is  only
when  the  actual  world  has  reached  its  full  fruition  that  the
ideal  rises  to  confront  the  reality,  and  builds  up,  in  the  shape
of  an  intellectual  realm,  that  same  world  grasped  in  its  sub-
stantial being.  When  philosophy  paints  its  grey  in  grey,
some  one  shape  of  life  has  meanwhile  grown  old :  and  grey  in
grey,  though  it  brings  it  into  knowledge,  cannot  make  it
young  again.  The  owl  of  Minerva  does  not  start  upon  its
flight,  until  the  evening  twilight  has  begun  to  fall1/


CHAPTER  III.

HEGEL AND THEOLOGY.

EVEN  an  incidental  reader  of  Hegel  cannot  fail  to  be  struck
with  the  frequent  recurrence  of  the  name  of  God,  and  with
the  many  allusions  to  matters  not  generally  touched  upon,
unless  in  works  bearing  upon  religion.  There  were  two  ques-
tions which  seem  to  have  had  a  certain  fascination  for  Hegel.
One  of  them,  a  rather  unpromising  problem,  referred  to  the

1  Philosophic  des  Rechts,  p.  20.


in.]  PHILOSOPHY  AND  RELIGION.  xxv

distances  between  the  several  planets  in  the  solar  system,  and
the  law  regulating  these  intervals1.  The  other  and  more  in-
timate problem  turned  upon  the  value  of  the  proofs  usually
offered  in  support  of  the  being  of  God.  This  question  treated
of  the  matter  in  these  proofs,  as  distinguished  from  the  imperfect
manner  in  which  the  arguers  presented  it.  Again  and  again
in  his  Logic,  as  well  as  in  other  discussions  more  especially
devoted  to  it,  he  examines  this  problem.  His  persistence  in
this  direction  might  earn  for  him  that  title  of  '  Knight  of  the  1
Holy  Ghost/  by  which  Heine,  in  one  of  the  delightful  poems  '
of  his  '  Reisebilder,'  describes  himself  to  the  little  maiden  of
the  Harz  mountains.  The  poet  of  Love  and  of  Freedom  had
undoubted  rights  to  rank  among  the  sacred  band :  but  so
also  had  the  philosopher.  Like  the  Socrates  whom  Plato
describes  to  us,  he  seems  to  feel  that  he  has  been  commissioned
to  reveal  the  truth  of  God,  and  quicken  men  by  an  insight
into  the  right  wisdom.  Nowhere  in  the  modern  period  of  phi-
losophy has  the  same  high  spirit  breathed  in  the  utterances
of  a  thinker.  The  same  theme  is  claimed  as  the  common
heritage  of  philosophy  and  religion.  In  a  letter  to  Duboc 2,
the  father  of  a  modern  German  novelist,  Hegel  lets  us  see  how
important  this  aspect  of  his  system  was  to  himself.  He  had
been  asked  to  give  a  succinct  explanation  of  his  standing-
ground  :  and  his  answer  begins  by  pointing  out  that  philosophy
seeks  to  apprehend  by  means  of  thought  the  same  truth  which
the  religious  mind  has  by  faith.

Words  like  these  may  at  first  sight  suggest  the  bold  soaring
of  ancient  speculation  in  the  times  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,
or  even  the  theories  of  the  medieval  Schoolmen.  They  sound
as  if  he  proposed  to  do  for  the  modern  world,  and  in  the  full
light  of  modern  knowledge,  what  the  Schoolmen  tried  to  accom-
plish within  the  somewhat  narrow  conceptions  of  medieval
Christianity  and  Greek  logic.  Still  there  is  a  difference  between
the  two  cases.  While  the  Doctors  of  the  Church  derived
the  form  of  exposition,  and  the  matter  of  their  systems,  from
1  Hegel's  Leben,  p.  155.  2  Vermischte  Schriften,  vol.  II.  p.  520.


xxvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [in.

two  incompatible  sources,  the  modern  Scholastic  of  Hegel  claims
to  be  a  harmonious  unity,  body  finding  soul,  and  soul  giving
itself  body.  And  while  the  Hegelian  system  has  the  all-
embracing  and  encyclopaedic  character  by  which  Scholastic
thought  threw  its  arms  around  heaven  and  earth,  it  has  also
the  untrammelled  liberty  of  the  Greek  thinkers.  Hegel,  in
short,  is  a  synthesis  of  these  two  modes  of  speculation :  free  as
the  ancient,  and  comprehensive  as  the  modern.  His  theory  is
the  explication  of  God ;  but  of  God  in  the  actuality  and  pleni-
tude of  the  world,  and  not  as  a  transcendent  Being  in  the
solitude  of  a  world  beyond.

The  greatness  of  a  philosophy  is  its  power  of  comprehending
facts.  The  most  characteristic  fact  of  modern  times  is  Chris-
tianity. The  general  thought  and  action  of  the  civilised  world
lias  been  alternately  fascinated  and  repelled,  but  always  in-
fluenced, and  to  a  high  degree  permeated,  by  the  Christian
theory  of  life.  That  fact  is  the  key  to  the  secret  of  the  world, —
even  if  we  add,  as  some  will  prefer,  of  the  world  as  it  is  and
has  been.  And  therefore  the  Hegelian  system,  if  it  is  to  be
a  philosophy  at  all,  must  be  in  this  sense  Christian.  But
it  is  neither  a  critic,  nor  an  apologist  of  Christianity.  The
voice  of  philosophy  is  as  that  of  the  Jewish  doctor  of  the
Law  :  '  If  this  council  or  this  work  be  of  men,  it  will  come
to  nought :  but  if  it  be  of  God  ye  cannot  overthrow  it.'
Philosophy  examines  what  is,  and  not  what,  according  to  some
opinions,  ought  to  be.  Such  a  point  of  view  requires  no
discussion  of  the  '  How '  or  the  '  Why '  of  Christianity.  It
involves  no  inquiry  into  historical  documents,  nor  into  the
belief  in  miracles.

Again,  it  may  be  asked  in  what  sense  philosophy  has  to
deal  with  God  and  with  Truth.  These  two  terms  are  used
as  synonyms  in  Hegel.  All  the  objects  of  science,  all  the
terms  of  thought,  all  the  forms  of  life,  lead  out  of  themselves,
and  seek  for  a  centre  and  resting-point.  They  are  severally
inadequate  and  partial,  and  they  crave  adequacy  and  com-
pleteness. They  tend  to  organise  themselves,  and  so  to  constitute


in.]  THE  SCIENCE  OF  THINGS  DIVINE.  xxvii

a  system  or  universe;  and  in  this  tendency  to  unity  consists
their  truth.  Their  untruth  lies  in  isolation  and  pretended
independence.  This  completed  unity  in  which  all  things  receive
their  entireness,  and  become  adequate,  is  their  Truth :  and
that  Truth,  as  known  in  religious  language,  is  God.  Rightly
or  wrongly,  God  is  thus  interpreted  in  the  Logic  of  Hegel.

Such  a  position  must  seem  very  strange  to  one  who  is
familiar  only  with  the  soher  studies  of  English  philosophy.  In
whatever  else  the  leaders  of  the  several  schools  in  this  country
disagree,  they  are  all,  or  nearly  all,  at  one  in  hanishing  God  and
religion  to  a  world  beyond  the  present  sublunary  sphere,  to  an
inscrutable  region  beyond  the  scope  of  scientific  inquiry,  where
statements  may  be  made  at  will,  but  where  we  have  no  power
of  verifying  any  statement  whatever.  This  is  the  common
doctrine  of  Spencer  and  Mansel,  of  Hamilton  and  Mill.  Even
those  English  thinkers,  who  show  some  anxiety  to  support
what  is  at  present  called  Theism,  generally  rest  content  with
vindicating  for  the  mind  the  vague  perception  of  a  Being
beyond  us,  and  differing  from  us  incommensurably.  He  is
the  Unknown  Power,  felt  by  what  some  of  these  writers  call
intuition,  and  others  call  experience.  They  do  not  however
allow  to  knowledge  any  capacity  of  apprehending  in  detail
the  truths  which  belong  to  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  whole
teaching  of  Hegel  is  the  overthrow  of  the  limits  thus  set  to
religious  thought.  To  him  all  thought,  and  all  actuality,  when
it  is  grasped  by  knowledge,  is  from  man's  side,  an  exaltation
of  the  mind  towards  God :  while,  when  regarded  from  the
Divine  standing-point,  it  is  the  manifestation  of  His  own
nature  in  its  infinite  variety.

It  is  only  when  we  fix  our  eyes  clearly  on  these  general
features  in  his  speculation,  that  we  can  understand  why  he
places  the  maturity  of  ancient  philosophy  in  the  time  of
Plotinus  and  Proclus.  For  the  same  reason  he  gives  so  much
attention  to  the  religious  or  semi-religious  theories  of  Jacob
Bohme  and  of  Jacobi,  though  these  men  were  in  many  ways
so  unlike  himself.


xxviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [iv.

CHAPTER IV.

IDEALISM AND REALISM.

IT  is  hazardous  to  try  to  sum  up  the  Hegelian  philosophy  in
a  few  paragraphs.  Since  Aristotle  separated  philosophy  from
the  productive  arts,  it  need  scarcely  be.  repeated  that  the  result
of  a  philosophical  system  is  nothing  palpable  or  tangible, —
nothing  on  which  you  can  put  your  finger,  and  say  definitely :
Here  it  is.  The  point  of  the  philosopher's  remarks  lies  in
their  application.  The  statement  of  the  principle  or  tendency
of  a  philosophical  system  tells  not  what  that  system  is,  but
what  it  is  not.  It  marks  off  the  position  from  contiguous  points
of  view;  and  on  that  account  never  gets  beyond  the  border-
land, which  separates  that  system  from  something  else.  The
method  and  process  of  reasoning  is  as  essential  in  knowledge,
as  the  result  to  which  it  leads :  and  the  method  in  this  case
is  thoroughly  bound  up  with  the  subject-matter.  A  mere  ana-
lysis of  the  method,  therefore,  or  a  mere  record  of  the  purpose
and  outcome  of  the  system,  would  be,  the  one  as  well  as  the
other,  a  fruitless  labour,  and  come  to  nothing  but  words.  Thus
any  attempt  to  convey  a  glimpse  of  the  truth  in  a  few  sentences
and  in  large  outlines  seems  foreclosed.  The  theory  of  Hegel
has  an  abhorrence  of  mere  generalities,  of  abstractions  without
life  in  them,  or  growth  out  of  them.  His  principle  has  to
prove  and  verify  itself  to  be  true  and  adequate :  and  that
verification  fills  up  the  whole  circle  of  circles,  of  which  philosophy
is  said  to  consist.

It  seems  as  if  there  were  in  Hegel  two  distinct  habits  of
mind  which  the  world  rarely  sees  except  in  separation.  On
one  hand  there  is  a  sympathy  with  mystical  and  intuitional
minds,  with  the  upholders  of  immediate  knowledge  and  innate
ideas, — those  who  would  fain  lay  their  grasp  upon  the  whole
before  they  have  gone  through  the  drudgery  of  details.  On
the  other  hand,  there  is  a  strongly  rational  and  non-visionary


iv.]  CONTRASTS  IN  HEGEL.  xxix

intellect,  with  a  practical  and  realistic  bent,  and  the  full
scientific  spirit.  Looked  at  from  some  points  of  view,  Hegel
has  been  accused  of  dreaminess,  pietism,  and  mystical  theology.
His  merging  of  the  ordinary  contrasts  of  thought  in  a  completer
truth,  his  mixing  up  of  religious  with  logical  questions,  and
the  general  unfathomableness  of  his  doctrine,  all  seem  to  sup-
port such  a  charge.  Yet  all  this  is  not  inconsistent  with  a
rough  and  incisive  vigour  of  understanding,  a  plainness  of
reason,  and  a  certain  hardness  of  temperament.  This  philo-
sopher is  in  many  ways  not  distinguishable  from  the  ordinary
citizen.  He  is  contemptuous  towards  all  weakly  sentimentalism,
and  almost  brutal  in  his  emphasis  on  what  actually  is,  as  distinct
from  what  might  have  been  ;  and  keeps  his  household  accounts
as  carefully  as  the  average  head  of  a  family.  This  convergence
of  two  tendencies  of  thought  may  be  noticed  in  the  gradual
maturing  of  his  ideas.  In  the  period  of  his  '  Lehrjahre,'  or
apprenticeship,  from  1790  to  1800,  we  can  see  the  study  of
theology  in  the  earlier  part  of  that  time  at  Berne  succeeded  by
the  study  of  politics  and  philosophy  at  Frankfort-on-the-Main.

His  purpose  on  the  whole  may  be  termed  an  attempt  to
combine  breadth  with  depth,  the  intensity  of  the  mystic,  who
craves  for  union  with  Truth,  with  the  extended  range  and
explicitness  of  the  seekers  after  knowledge.  'The  depth  of
the  mind  is  only  so  deep  as  its  courage  to  expand  and  lose
itself  in  its  explication1.'  It  must  prove  its  profundity  by  the
ordered  fulness  of  the  knowledge  which  it  has  realised.  The
position  and  the  work  of  Hegel  will  not  be  intelligible  unless
we  keep  in  view  both  of  these  antagonistic  points.

On  the  one  hand  stands  the  tendency  to  apply  those  methods,
which  have  been  already  applied  with  brilliant  success  in  the
various  branches  of  science,  to  the  criticism  of  objects  which
do  not  in  the  first  instance  come  within  the  scope  of  these
sciences.  It  is  the  employment  of  hard  and  fast  lines  of  dis-
tinction, and  of  dogmatic  methods,  the  application  of  conditions
to  the  unconditioned;  and  its  final  outcome  is  a  sweeping
1  Phenomenologie  des  Geistes,  p.  9.


xxx  PROLEGOMENA.  [iv.

criticism  under  which  the  ordinary  ideas  of  morality  and
religion  are  found  to  fail.  Under  this  head  comes  the  ordinary
metaphysical  doctrine,  which  tries  to  bind  the  Absolute  in
words  ;  the  empiricism,  which  either  abolishes  the  super-sensible
altogether,  or  aims  at  making  it  conform  to  the  canons  of
science  :  and  the  Kantian  system,  which  shows  the.  insufficiency  of
both  these  methods,  but  has  nothing  better  of  its  own  to  offer1.

On  the  other  side  stands  the  claim  or  the  assurance  springing
from  an  immediate  and  native  union  with  eternal  Truth.  The
'  Faith '  of  Jacobi  and  the  '  Intellectual  Intuition  '  of  Schelling,
the  gift  of  genius  which  sees  the  truth  at  one  glance,  and
sees  it  whole, — the  prophetic  utterance  and  the  enthusiastic
vision  of  the  Infinite — were  to  some  extent  a  needful  reaction
against  the  dorninancy  of  the  abstracting  intellect,  revelling  in
distinctions,  conditions,  and  categories.  The  beginning  of
the  nineteenth  century  in  Germany,  as  well  as  in  England,
was  a  period  of  effervescence : — there  was  a  good  deal  of  fire,
but  perhaps  there  was  still  more  of  smoke.  Genius  was  exultant
in  its  aspirations  after  Freedom,  Truth,  and  Wisdom.  The
Romantic  School,  under  the  philosophical  patronage  of  Schel-
ling, counted  amongst  its  literary  chiefs  the  names  of  the
Schlegels,  of  Tieck,  Novalis,  and  perhaps  Richter.  The  world,
as  that  generation  dreamed,  was  to  be  made  young  again, —
not  by  drinking,  where  Wordsworth  led,  from  the  fresh  springs
of  nature, — but  by  an  elixir  distilled  from  the  withered  flowers
of  medieval  Catholicism  and  chivalry,  and  even  from  the  old
roots  of  primeval  wisdom.  The  good  old  times  of  faith  and
harmonious  beauty  were  to  be  brought  back  again  by  the
joint  labours  of  ideas  and  poetry.  To  that  period  of  incipient
and  darkling  energy  Hegel  stands  in  very  much  the  same
position  as  Luther  did  to  the  pre- Reformation  mystics,  to
Meister  Eckhart,  and  the  unknown  author  of  the  '  German
Theology/  It  was  from  this  side,  from  the  school  of  Genius  and
Romance  in  philosophy,  that  Hegel  was  proximately  driven,  not
into  sheer  re-action,  but  into  system,  development,  and  science.
1  Compare  pages  50-102  of  the  Logic.


iv.]  THE  AGE  OF  GENIUS.  xxxi

To  elevate  philosophy  from  a  love  of  wisdom  into  the  pos-
session of  real  wisdom,  into  a  system  and  a  science,  is  the
aim  which  he  distinctly  set  before  himself  from  the  beginning.
In  almost  every  work,  and  every  course  of  lectures,  whatever
be  their  subject,  he  cannot  let  slip  the  chance  of  an  attack
upon  the  mode  of  philosophising1,  which  substituted  the  strength
of  belief  or  conviction,  for  the  intervention  of  reasoning  and
argument.  There  may  have  been  a  strong  sympathy  in  him
with  the  end  which  these  German  Coleridges,  if  we  may  so
call  them,  had  in  view.  No  one  who  reads  his  criticism  of
Kant  can  miss  perceiving  his  bent  towards  the  Infinite.  But\
he  utterly  rejects  intuition,  or  the  direct  vision  of  truth,  as  1  •
a  means  to  this  end.  Whereas  these  advocates  of  Faith  either
disparage  science  as  a  limitation  to  the  spirit,  in  the  calm
trust  of  their  life  in  God,  or  yearn  throughout  life  for  a  peace
which  they  never  quite  reach,  Hegel  is  bent  upon  showing
men  that  the  Infinite  is  not  unknowable,  as  Kant  would  have
it,  and  yet  that  man  does  not,  as  Jacobi  would  have  it,  naturally
and  without  an  effort  know  the  things  of  God l.  He  will  prove
that  the  way  of  Truth  is  open,  and  prove  it  by  describing  in
detail  every  step  of  the  road.  Philosophy  for  him  must  be
reasoned  truth.  She  does  not  visit  favoured  ones  in  visions  of
the  night,  but  comes  to  all  who  win  her  by  patient  study.

'  For  those,'  he  says,  '  who  ask  for  a  royal  road  to  the  science,
no  more  convenient  directions  can  be  given  than  to  trust  to  their
own  sound  common  sense,  and,  if  they  wish  to  keep  up  with  the
age  and  with  philosophy,  to  read  the  reviews  criticising  philo-
sophical works,  and  perhaps  even  the  prefaces  and  the  first
paragraphs  in  these  works  themselves.  The  introductory  re-
marks state  the  general  and  fundamental  principles ;  and  the
reviews,  besides  their  historical  information,  contain  a  critical
estimate,  which,  from  the  very  fact  that  it  is  such,  is  beyond  and
above  what  it  criticises.  This  is  the  road  of  ordinary  men  :  and
it  may  be  traversed  in  a  dressing-gown.  The  other  way  is  the
way  of  intuition.  It  requires  you  to  don  the  vestments  of  the
*»  Compare  pages  103-121  of  the  Logic.


xxxii  PROLEGOMENA.  [iv.

high-priest.  Along  that  road  strides  the  ennobling  sentiment  of
the  Eternal,  the  True,  the  Infinite.  But  it  is  wrong  to  call  this
a  road.  These  grand  sentiments  find  themselves,  naturally  and
without  taking  a  single  step,  centred  in  the  very  sanctuary  of
truth.  So  mighty  is  genius  with  its  deep  original  ideas,  and  its
high  flashes  of  thought.  But  a  depth  like  this  is  not  enough  to
lay  bare  the  sources  of  true  being,  and  these  rockets  are  not  the
empyrean.  True  thoughts  and  scientific  insight  are  only  to  be
gained  by  the  labour  which  comprehends  and  grasps  its  object.
And  that  thorough  grasp  alone  can  produce  the  universality  of
science.  Contrasted  with  the  vulgar  vagueness  and  scantiness
of  common  sense,  that  universality  is  a  fully-formed  and  rounded
intellect;  and,  contrasted  with  an  aristocratical  universality  in
which  the  natural  gift  of  reason  has  been  spoilt  by  the  laziness
and  self-conceit  of  genius,  it  is  truth  put  in  possession  of  its
native  form,  and  thus  rendered  the  possible  property  of  every
self-conscious  reason l '.

This  hard  saying,  which  as  it  were  rung  the  knell  to  the
friendship  of  Hegel  with  his  great  contemporary  Schelling,  is
also  the  keynote  to  the  subsequent  work  of  the  philosopher.  In
Hegel  we  need  expect  no  brilliant  aperfus  of  genius,  no  intel-
lectual leger-de-main,  but  only  the  patient  unravelling  of  the
clue  of  thought  through  all  knots  and  intricacies :  a  deliberate
tracing  and  working-out  of  the  contradictions  and  mysteries  in
thought,  until  the  contradiction  and  the  mystery  disappear.
Perseverance  is  the  secret  of  Hegel.

This  characteristic  of  patient  work  is  seen,  for  example,  in  the
incessant  prosecution  of  hints  and  glimpses,  until  they  grew  into
systematic  and  rounded  outline.  Instead  of  vague  anticipations
and  guesses  at  truth,  fragments  of  insight,  his  years  of  philo-
sophic study  are  occupied  with  writing  and  re-writing  in  the
endeavour  to  clear  up  and  arrange  the  masses  of  his  ideas.
Essay  after  essay,  and  sketch  after  sketch  of  a  system,  succeed
each  other  amongst  his  papers.  His  first  great  work  was
published  in  his  37th  year,  after  six  years  spent  in  university

1  Phenomenologie  des  Geistes,  p.  54.


iv.]  FRAGMENTS  OF  HEGELIAN  METHOD. xxxiii

work  at  Jena.  The  notes  which  he  used  to  dictate  to  the  boys  in
the  Gymnasium  at  Nuremberg  some  years  afterwards  bear
evidence  of  constant  remodelling.

Such  insistance  in  tracing  every  suggestion  of  truth  to  its
place  in  the  universe  of  thought  is  the  peculiar  character
and  difficulty  of  Hegelian  argument.  Other  observers  have
now  and  again  noticed,  accentuated,  and,  it  may  be,  popu-
larised some  one  point  or  some  one  law  in  the  evolution  of  reason.
Here  and  there,  as  we  reflect,  we  are  all  forced  to  recognise  what
Hegel  termed  the  dialectical  nature  in  thought,  — the  tendency,
by  which  an  idea,  when  it  is  carried  to  extremes,  recoils  and
swings  round  to  the  opposite  pole.  We  cannot,  for  example,
study  the  history  of  ancient  thought  without  noting  this  pheno-
menon. Thus,  the  persistence  with  which  Plato  and  Aristotle
taught  and  enforced  the  doctrine  that  the  community  was  the
autocratic  master  of  the  several  citizens,  very  soon  issued  in  the
schools  of  Zeno  and  Epicurus,  teaching  the  rights  of  self-seeking
and  isolation,  or  the  equally  pernicious  selfishness  of  socialism.,
But  the  glimpse  of  an  indwelling  discord  in  the  terms,  by  which
we  argue,  is  soon  forgotten,  and  is  classed  under  the  head
of  accidents,  instead  of  being  referred  to  a  general  law.  Most  of
us  take  only  a  single  step  in  the  process,  and  when  we  have
overcome  the  seeming  absoluteness  of  one  idea,  we  are  content
and  even  eager  to  throw  ourselves  under  the  yoke  of  another,  not
less  one-sided  than  its  predecessor.  Sometimes  one  feels  tempted
to  say  that  the  course  of  human  thought  as  a  whole,  as  well  as
that  branch  of  it  termed  science,  exhibits  for  the  main  part  a
succession  of  illusions,  which  enclose  us  in  the  belief  that  some
idea  is  all-embracing  as  the  universe, — illusions,  from  which  the
mind  is  time  after  time  liberated,  only  in  a  little  while  to  sink
under  the  sway  of  some  partial  correction,  as  if  it  and  it  only
were  the  complete  truth.

Or,  again,  the  Positive  Philosophy  exhibits  as  one  of  its
features  an  emphatic  and  popular  statement  of  a  fallacy  much
discussed  in  Hegel.  One  of  the  best  deeds  of  that  school  has
been  to  protest  against  a  delusive  belief  in  certain  words  and


xxxiv  PROLEGOMENA.  [v.

notions ;  particularly  by  pointing  out  the  insufficiency  of  what
it  calls  metaphysical  terms,  i.  e.  those  abstract  entities  formed  by
reflective  thought,  which  are  little  else  than  a  double  of  the
phenomenon  they  are  intended  to  explain.  To  account  for  the
existence  of  insanity  by  an  assumed  basis  for  it  in  the  '  insane
neurosis,'  or  to  attribute  the  sleep  which  follows  a  dose  of  opium
to  the  soporific  virtues  of  the  drug,  are  somewhat  exaggerated
examples  of  the  metaphysical  intellect.  Positivism  in  its  logical
aspects  has  at  least  instilled  general  distrust  of  abstract  talk
about  essences,  and  laws,  and  forces,  and  causes,  whenever  they
claim  an  inherent  and  independent  value,  or  profess  to  be  more
than  a  reflex  of  sensation.  But  all  this  is  only  a  desultory  per-
ception, the  reflection  of  an  intelligent  observer.  When  we  come
to  Hegel,  the  Comtian  perception  of  the  danger  lying  in  the
terms  of  metaphysics  is  replaced  by  the  Second  Part  of  Logic,
the  Theory  of  Essential  Being,  of  substances,  causes,  forces,
essences,  matters,  in  their  essential  relativity.


CHAPTER  V.

THE SCIENCES AND PHILOSOPHY.

BY  asserting  the  rights  of  philosophy  against  the  dogmatism
of  Intuitional  theories,  and  by  maintaining  that  we  must  not
feel  the  truth,  with  our  eyes  as  it  were  closed,  but  must  open
them  full  upon  it,  Hegel  does  not  reduce  philosophy  to  the  level
of  one  of  the  finite  sciences.  The  name  '  finite,'  like  the  name
'  empirical,'  is  not  a  title  of  which  the  sciences  have  any  cause  to
be  ashamed.  They  are  called  empirical,  because  it  is  their  glory
and  their  strength  to  found  upon  experience.  They  are  called
finite,  because  they  have  a  fixed  object,  which  they  must  expect
and  cannot  alter ;  because  they  have  an  end  and  a  beginning, —


v.]  THE RISE OF  THE  SCIENCES.  xxxv

pre-supposing  something  where  they  begin,  and  leaving  some-
thing for  the  sciences  which  come  after.  Botany  rests  upon
the  researches  of  chemistry:  and  astronomy  hands  over  the
record  of  cosmical  movements  to  geology.  Science  is  inter-
linked with  science ;  and  each  of  them  is  a  fragment.  Nor  can
these  fragments  ever,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  make
up  a  whole  or  total.  They  have  broken  off,  sometimes  by
accident,  and  sometimes  for  convenience,  from  one  another.
The  sciences  have  budded  forth  here  and  there  upon  the  tree
of  popular  knowledge  and  ordinary  consciousness,  as  interest
drew  attention  closer  to  various  points  and  objects  in  the
world  surrounding  us.

Prosecute  the  popular  knowledge  about  any  point  far  enough,
substituting  completeness  and  accuracy  for  vagueness,  and
especially  giving  numerical  definiteness  in  weight,  size,  and
measure,  until  the  little  drop  of  fact  has  grown  into  an  ocean,
and  the  mere  germ  has  expanded  into  a  structure  with  complex
inter-connexion, — and  you  will  have  a  science.  By  its  point  of
origin  this  luminous  body  of  facts  is  united  to  the  great  circle
of  human  knowledge  and  ignorance :  but  the  part  very  soon
assumes  an  independence  of  its  own,  and  adopts  a  hostile  or
negative  attitude  towards  the  general  level  of  unsciemtific
opinion.  This  process  of  what  we  may,  from  the  vulgar  point  of
view,  call  abnormal  development,  is  repeated  irregularly  at  various
points  along  the  surface  of  ordinary  consciousness.  At  one  time
it  is  the  celestial  movements  calling  for  the  science  of  astronomy  :
at  another  the  divisions  of  the  soil  calling  for  the  geometrician.
Each  of  these  outgrowths  naturally  re-acts  and  modifies  the
whole  range  of  human  knowledge,  or  what  we  may  call  popular
science ;  and  thus,  while  keeping  up  its  own  life,  it  quickens  the
parent  stock  with  an  infusion  of  new  vigour,  and  raises  the
general  intelligence  to  a  higher  level  and  into  a  higher  element.

The  order  of  the  outcome  of  the  sciences  in  time,  therefore,
and  their  connexions  with  one  another,  cannot  be  explained  or
understood,  if  we  look  only  to  the  sciences  themselves.  We  must
first  of  all  descend  into  the  depths  of  natural  thought,  and  trace

c  2


xxxvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [v.

the  lines  which  unite  science  with  science  in  that  general  medium.
The  systematic  inter-dependence  of  the  sciences  must  he  chiefly
sought  for  in  the  workings  of  thought  as  a  whole  in  its  popular
phases,  and  in  the  action  and  reaction  of  that  general  human
thought  with  the  sciences, — those  masses  of  extended  knowledge
which  form  round  the  nuclei  here  and  there  presented  in  the
somewhat  attenuated  medium  of  popular  knowledge.  Thus,  hy
means  of  the  sciences  in  their  aggregate  action,  the  material  of
common  consciousness  is  extended  and  developed,  at  least  in
certain  parts,  though  the  extension  may  be  neither  consistent
nor  systematic.  But  so  long  as  this  work  is  incomplete,  so  long,
that  is  to  say,  as  every  point  in  the  line  of  popular  knowledge
has  not  received  its  due  elaboration  and  equal  study,  the  sciences
are  finite  :  they  merely  succeed  each  other  in  a  certain  imperfect
sequence,  or  exist  in  juxtaposition  :  but  they  do  not  form  a  total.
The  whole  of  scientific  knowledge  will  only  be  formed,  when
science  shall  be  as  completely  rounded  and  unified,  as  in  its  lower
sphere  and  more  inadequate  element  the  ordinary  consciousness
of  the  world  is  now, — when  the  isolations  of  the  sciences  shall
have  ceased,  and  they  have  re-created  in  all  its  details  the  theory
of  the  world.

Tfee  chief  point  about  the  method  of  science,  is  that  it  carries
out  thoroughly  and  with  settled  consciousness  the  same  methods
as  ordinary  or  unscientific  knowledge  (to  use  one  of  those
oxymorons  which  the  genius  of  English  allows).  The  method  of
the  science  is  but  the  method  of  ordinary  consciousness  pursued
knowingly,  steadily,  and  in  what,  with  future  explanations,  we
may  call  an  exaggerated  style.  The  great  principle  of  that
method,  by  which  its  results  are  gained,  is  analysis  and  ab-
straction, comparison  and  distinction.  Divide  et  impera  is  its
motto.  To  isolate  a  phenomenon  from  its  context, — to  penetrate
beneath  the  apparent  complexity,  which  time  and  custom  have
taught  ordinary  eyes  to  see  in  the  world,  to  the  underlying
simplicity  of  elements, — to  leave  everything  extraneous  out  of
sight, — to  abolish  the  teleology  which  imposes  an  alien  bond
upon  Nature, — and  to  take,  as  it  were,  one  thing  at  a  time:


v.]  THE  SWAY  OF  ANALYSIS.  xxxvii

tliat  is  the  problem  of  the  sciences.  And  to  accomplish  that
end  they  do  not  hesitate  to  break  the  charmed  link  which
in  common  vision  holds  the  world  tog-ether, — the  spiritual  har-
mony which  the  sense  of  beauty  finds  in  the  scene, — the  chain  of
cause  and  effect,  means  and  end,  which  reflection  has  thrown  from
thing  to  thing ;  and  finally  to  sever  the  connexion  by  which

'  the  whole  round  world  is  every  way
Bound  by  gold  chains  about  the  feet  of  God.'

Knowledge  is  power  ;  and  power  in  its  own  highest  form  is  seen
in  the  separations  made  by  the  abstracting  intellect.  To  divide
part  from  part,  and  then  to  give  the  severed  member  a  being  of
its  own,  is  the  tendency  of  scientific  thought.  The  sword  of  the
analyst  smites  asunder  the  cords  which  support  the  solid  fabric
of  our  ordinary  world  :  it  destroys  life,  and  yet  the  body  of  death
is  with  strange  power  retained,  as  if  it  were  alive.  Beauty,  and
unity,  and  connexion  fall  before  analysis  :  teleology  is  driven  out
by  mechanics,  dualism  by  monism ;  and  those  cobwebs  which  the
hoary  superstitions  of  thought  have  spun  over  the  face  of  nature
are  snapt  asunder  or  swept  away.

In  those  days  when  ancient,  or  for  that  matter,  modern
philosophy,  was  yet  in  unsuspecting  alliance  with  science,  while
thought,  as  the  phrase  is,  was  still  trammelled  by  metaphysics,
man  was  the  centre  and  keystone  of  the  Universe.  Man  was  the
measure  of  all  things  :

'  Man,  once  descried,  imprints  for  ever
His  presence  on  all  lifeless  things  :  the  winds
Are.  henceforth  voices,  wailing  or  a  shout,
A  querulous  mutter,  or  a  quick  gay  laugh  :
Never  a  senseless  gust,  now  man  is  born.'

To  the  extent  of  his  abilities  and  his  culture,  man  has  in  all  ages
had  to  read  himself  into  the  phenomena  external  to  him.  Such
readings  into  nature  were,  in  their  low  degree,  fetichism  and
anthropomorphism.  But  in  later  times,  when  the  sciences  had
emancipated  themselves  from  the  yoke  of  philosophy,  they  refused
to  borrow  any  such  help  in  reading  the  riddle  of  the  universe,  and
resolved  to  begin  ah  ovo,  from  the  atom  or  cell,  and  then  leave


xxxviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [v.

the  elements  to  work  out  their  own  devices.  Modern  science  in
so  doing  practises  the  lessons  learned  from  Spinoza  and  Hume.
The  former  teaches  that  all  conception  of  order  in  nature,  and
indeed  all  the  methods  by  which  nature  is  popularly  explained,
are  only  modes  of  our  imagination,  due  to  the  weakness  of
human  intellect1.  The  latter  points  out  that  all  connexions
between  things  are  solely  the  work  of  time  and  custom,  ac-
credited only  by  experience2.  There  must  be  no  pre-suppositions
allowed  in  the  studies  of  science,  no  help  derived  prematurely
from  the  later  terms  in  the  process.  Let  man,  it  is  said,  be
explained  by  those  laws,  and  by  the  action  of  those  primary
elements  which  build  up  every  other  part  of  nature  :  let  molecules
by  mechanical  union  construct  man,  body  and  soul,  and  then
construct  society.  The  elements  which  we  find  by  analysis  must
be  all  that  is  required  to  make  the  synthesis.  Thus  in  modern
times  science  carries  out,  fully  and  with  the  details  of  actual
knowledge  in  several  branches,  the  principles  of  the  atom  and
the  void,  which  Democritus  suggested,  but  could  not  verify  by
real  investigations.

The  scientific  spirit,  however,  the  spirit  of  analysis  and  ab-
straction (or  of '  Mediation  '  and  ( Reflection '),  is  not  confined  in
its  operations  to  the  physical  world.  The  criticism  of  ordinary
beliefs  and  conventions  has  been  applied — and  applied  at  an
earlier  period — to  what  has  been  called  the  Spiritual  world,  to
Art,  Religion,  Morality,  and  the  several  forms  of  human  Society.
Under  these  names  the  agency  of  ages,  by  their  individual
minds,  has  created  organic  systems,  unities  which  claim  to  be
permanent,  inviolable,  and  divine.  Such  unities  or  organic
structures  are  the  Family,  the  State,  the  works  of  Art,  the  forms,

1  Spinoza,  Ethica,  i.  36.  App. '  Quoniam  ea  nobis  prae  ceteris  grata  sunt  quae
facile  imaginari  possumus,  ideo  homines  ordinem  confvsioni  praeferunt :  quasi  ordo
aliquid  in  natura  praeter  respectum  ad  noslram  imaglnationem  esset.

'  Videmus  itaque  omnes  rationes  quibus  vulgus  sold  naturam  explicare,  modosesse
tantummodo  imaginandi.'

2  '  This  transition  of  thought  from  the  Cause  to  the  Effect  proceeds  not  from
Reason. It  derives  its  origin  altogether  from  Custom  and  Experience.' Hume,
Essay  V. (Enquiry  concerning  Human  Understanding.) '  All  inferences  from
Experience  therefore  are  effects  of  Custom.' (Ibid.)


v.]  THE  AGE  OF  CRITICISM.  xxxix

doctrines,  and  systems  of  Religion,  existing  and  recognised  in
ordinary  consciousness.  But  in  these  cases,  as  in  Nature,  the
reflective  principle  may  come  forward  and  ask  what  right  these
unities  have  to  exist.  This  is  the  question  which  the  'Ency-
clopedie,'  the  '  Aufklarung,'  the  Socialist  and  '  Freethinking '
theories,  raise  and  have  raised  in  the  last  century  and  the
present.  What  is  the  Family,  it  is  said,  but  a  fiction  or  con-
vention, which  is  used  to  give  a  decent,  but  somewhat  trans-
parent covering  to  a  certain  animal  appetite,  and  its  probable
consequences?  What  is  the  State,  and  what  is  Society,  but  a
fiction  or  compact,  by  which  the  weak  try  to  make  themselves
seem  strong,  and  the  unjust  seek  to  shelter  themselves  from  the
consequences  of  their  own  injustice  ?  What  is  Religion,  it  is  said,
but  a  delusion  springing  from  the  fears  and  weakness  of  the
crowd,  and  the  cunning  of  the  few,  which  men  have  fostered
until  it  has  wrapped  humanity  in  its  snaky  coils  ?  And  Poetry,
we  are  assured,  like  its  sister  Arts,  will  perish  and  its  illusions
fade  away,  when  Science,  now  in  the  cradle,  has  become  the
full-grown  Hercules.  As  for  Morality  and  Law,  and  the  like,
the  same  condemnation  has  been  prepared  from  of  old.  All  of
them,  it  is  said,  are  but  the  inventions  of  power  and  craft,  or  the
phantoms  of  human  imagination,  which  the  strength  of  positive
science  and  bare  facts  is  destined  in  no  long  time  to  dispel.

When  they  insisted  upon  a  severance  of  the  elements  in  the
vulgarly-accepted  unities  of  the  world,  Science  and  Freethink-
ing, like  Epicurus  in  an  older  day,  have  believed  that  they  were
liberating  the  world  from  its  various  superstitions,  from  the
bonds  which  instinct  and  custom  had  fastened  upon  things,  com-
bining them  into  systems  more  or  less  arbitrary.  They  both
deny  the  supremacy  and  reality  of  those  ideas  which  bind  into
one  what  have  separate  existences  of  their  own,  and  term  these
ideas  comprehensively  mysticism  and  metaphysics.  They  dis-
abuse us  of  spirits,  and  vital  forces,  and  divine  right  of  govern-
ments, and  final  causes,  et  hoc  genus  omne.  In  this  way  they
practically  assert  the  independence  of  man,  and  his  right  to
demand  satisfaction  for  the  questioning,  ground-seeking  faculty


xl  PROLEGOMENA.  [v.

of  his  nature.  But  while  they  do  so,  they  abolish  unity  out  of
the  world.  '  Phenomenalism/  as  this  mode  of  looking  at  things
has  been  called,  completely  puts  an  end  to  anything  like  phi-
losophy J.

To  some  extent  philosophy  returns  to  the  position  of  the
wider  consciousness,  to  the  general  belief  in  harmony  and  sym-
metry. It  reverts  to  the  unity  or  connexion,  which  the
natural  presumptions  of  mankind  find  in  the  picture  of  the
world.  The  intuitional  creed,  in  reaction  from  the  supposed
excesses  of  the  sciences,  simply  reverted  to  the  bare  re-state-
ment of  the  popular  creed.  If  science  e.g.  had  shown  that  the
perception  of  an  external  world  was  an  inference  resulting
through  a  series  of  intermediate  steps,  Reid  simply  denied  the
intermediation  by  appealing  to  Common  Sense,  and  Jacobi  by
invoking  Faith.  Conviction  and  natural  instinct  were  declared
to  counterbalance  the  abstractions  of  science.  But  philosophy
which  grasps  and  comprehends  existence  cannot  take  the  same
ground  as  the  intuitional  school,  or  neglect  the  testimony  of
science.  If  the  spiritual  unity  of  the  world  has  been  destroyed,
mere  assertion  that  we  feel  and  believe  that  it  still  subsists  will
not  do  much  good.  It  is  necessary  to  reconcile  the  contrast  be-
tween the  wholeness  of  the  natural  vision,  and  the  fragmentary,
but  in  its  fragments  elaborated,  result  of  science.

The  sciences  dissipate  fixed  ideas,  and  in  so  far  help  on  the
progress  of  humanity,  by  removing  one  apparent  barrier  after
another.  They  show  the  negative  aspect  of  those  unities  which
the  mind  necessarily  imposes.  But  it  is  reserved  for  philosophy
to  give  these  results  their  proper  place,  and  appreciate  the  whole
value  of  the  links  of  thought,  negative  as  well  as  positive.  And
thus  philosophy  gathers  up  the  fruit  of  scientific  research  into
the  total  development  of  humanity :  and  uses  the  very  work  of
science  to  fill  up  the  lacunae,  the  gaps,  which  popular  conscious-
ness bounds  over  unthinkingly  and  with  a  light  heart.  Phi-
losophy comes  to  sum  up  and  estimate  what  science  has  accom-
plished :  and  therein  is  as  it  were  the  spirit  of  the  world  taking
1  J.  Grote :  Exploratio  Philosophica.


v.]  THE UNITIES  OF  PHILOSOPHY.  xli

into  his  own  hand  the  acquisitions  won  by  the  more  audacious
and  self-willed  of  his  sons,  and  investing  them  in  the  common
store.  They  are  set  aside  and  preserved  there,  at  first  in  an
abstract  and  technical  form,  but  destined  soon  to  pass  into  the
possession  of  all,  and  form  that  mass  of  belief  and  instinctive  or
implanted  knowledge  whence  a  new  generation  will  draw  its
mental  supplies.  Each  great  philosophical  system  is  in  its  turn
set  aside.  It  leaves  the  professorial  chair,  and  spreads  into  the
common  life  of  men,  becoming  embodied  in  their  daily  beliefs, —
a  dead-looking  seed  of  thought,  from  which,  by  the  combined
agency  of  intelligent  experience  and  speculation,  a  new  phi-
losophy will  one  day  spring.

Philosophy  is  the  synthesis  of  science,  but  in  a  new  sphere,  a
higher  medium  not  recognised  by  the  sciences  themselves.  The
reconciliation  which  the  philosopher  believes  himself  to  accom-
plish between  ordinary  consciousness  and  science  is  identified
by  either  side  with  a  phase  of  its  antagonist  error.  Science
will  term  philosophy  a  modified  form  of  the  old  religious  super-
stition. The  popular  consciousness  of  truth,  and  especially
religion,  will  see  in  philosophy  only  a  repetition  or  an  aggra-
vation of  the  evils  of  science.  The  attempt  at  unity  will  not
approve  itself  to  either,  until  they  enter  upon  the  ground  which
philosophy  occupies,  and  move  in  that  element.  And  that
elevation  into  the  philosophic  ether  calls  for  a  tension  of
thought  which  is  the  sternest  labour  imposed  upon  man:  so
that  the  continuous  action  of  philosophising  has  been  often
styled  superhuman.  It  renders  proof  impossible  unless  for
those  who  are  willing  to  think  for  themselves.  Every  step
is  an  effort,  and  the  result,  apart  from  the  process  which  pro-
duced it,  vanishes  like  the  palace  in  the  fairy  tale.  It  is  com-
paratively easy  to  abstract,  to  leave  one  thing  after  another
out  of  sight,  to  isolate  an  element,  to  move  from  stationary
point  to  point,  instead  of  making  one  pass  into  another,  and
yet  not  lose  itself  in  that  absorption.  It  is  comparatively
easy  to  retire  upon  self,  to  reject  all  the  separations  and  gulfs
which  science  lays  bare,  and  to  cling  blindly  to  the  fact  of


xlii  PROLEGOMENA.  [v.

unity  which  the  natural  consciousness  feels  and  vouches  for.
The  former  is  the  general  attitude  of  science :  the  latter  is  the
general  attitude  of  much  popular  consciousness,  much  popular
religion,  and  much  so-called  philosophy.  /But  the  difficult  task
which  philosophy  imposes  is  to  unite  the  two  lines  of  action,
and  to  unite  them,  not  like  two  things  of  which  each  must
have  its  turn,  but  indissolubly  in  one  activity.

'The  whole  of  philosophy  is  nothing  but  the  study  of  the
specific  forms  or  types  of  unity1.'  There  are  many  species
and  grades  of  this  synthetic  unity.  They  are  not  merely  to
be  asserted  in  a  vague  way,  as  they  here  and  there  force  them-
selves upon  the  notice  of  the  popular  mind.  Philosophy  sees
in  that  unity  neither  an  ultimate  and  unanalysable  fact,  nor
a  deception,  but  a  growth,  a  revealing  or  unfolding,  which
issues  in  an  organism  or  system,  constructing  itself  more  and
more  completely  by  a  force  of  its  own.  This  system  formed
by  these  types  of  the  fundamental  unity  is  called  the  '  Idea,'
of  which  the  highest  law  is  development.  Philosophy  essays
to  do  for  this  connective  and  unifying  nature,  i.  e.  for  thought,
something  like  what  the  sciences  have  done  or  would  like  to  do
for  the  facts  of  sense  and  matter, — to  do  for  the  spiritual
binding-element  in  its  integrity,  what  is  being  done  for  the
several  facts  which  are  combined.  It  retraces  the  universe  of
thought  from  its  germinal  form,  where  it  seems,  as  it  were,  an
indecomposable  point,  to  the  fully  matured  system  or  organism,
and  shows  not  merely  that  one  phase  of  pure  thought  passes  into
another,  but  how  it  does  so,  and  yet  is  not  lost,  but  subsists
suspended  and  deprived  of  its  narrowness  in  the  maturer  phase.

But  it  goes  further  than  thus  to  develope  into  a  science  and
kingdom  of  Truth  the  natural  and  unreasoned  faith  in  unity
and  order.  The  fixed  points,  the  substantial  realities  of  the
physical  and  the  spiritual  world,  the  works  of  Nature  and  of
Mind,  between  which  the  connective  lines  seem  to  stretch,  are
deprived  of  their  fixity  and  stability.  The  so-called  '  reality '

1  Philosophic  der  Religion,  I.  p.  97.  'Die  ganze  Philosophic  ist  nichts  Anderes
als  das  Studium  der  Bestimmungen  der  Einheit."


v.]  THE PHILOSOPHICAL TRIAD.  xliii

of  these  objects  is  seen  to  be  due  to  an  indolence  of  thought,
which  has  become  habitual,  so  that  we  lose  sight  of  the  process
which  gave  them  being.  Their  reality  is,  in  short,  an  ab-
straction :  when  we  look  to  the  whole,  to  the  process  of  thought
in  large,  we  see  that  it  would  be  only  just  to  speak  of  their
ideality,  that  is  to  say,  their  inherence  in  a  system  or  total
theory,  on  which  they  depend.  Thus,  then,  the  so-called  things
of  Nature  and  Mind  are  to  be  set  forth  as  further  stages  in  the
evolution  of  the  Idea,  differing  in  degree  rather  than  in  kind.
Nature  and  Art,  Law  and  Morality,  only  repeat  the  same  organic
process  :  except  that  as  each  advance  is  made,  a  new  element  or
level  of  thought  is  produced,  a  higher  multiple,  in '  which  the
movement  of  reason  takes  place  with  larger  issues  and  more
complex  terms.  In  this  way  the  kingdoms  of  the  natural  and
mental  world,  with  all  their  provinces,  lose  their  inflexible  dis-
tinctions, and  become  pregnant  with  a  principle  of  life.

Thus  there  are  two  kingdoms  open  to  science  and  philosophy  :
the  kingdom  of  external  Nature,  and  the  kingdom  of  Mind.  In
both  of  these  there  is  a  certain  arrangement  and  system.  To
unravel  that  order  and  show  the  successive  steps  by  which  the
system  is  constituted  is  the  problem  of  Applied  Philosophy.  It
is  the  scope  of  the  Philosophy  of  Nature  and  the  Philosophy  of
Mind.  But  the  earlier  and  vital  problem  (and  that  which  is
the  especial  work  of  Hegel)  is  to  determine  this  order  in  it-
self in  its  native  medium  of  thought,  where  only  it  is  perfectly
clear,  transparent,  and  fluid :  the  system  of  the  increasing  com-
plexity of  thought,  as  a  world  of  abstract  or  pure  spirits,  where
matter  and  form,  as  commonly  understood,  coincide.  It  seeks
to  record  the  ranks  of  spiritual  hierarchy  in  which  the  pure  types
of  thought  are  ranged :  the  super-sensible  world  in  which  each
point  is  potentially  the  whole,  and  the  whole  is  nothing  unless
it  grasp  its  every  member  :  a  circle  of  circles,  of  which  each  is  a
total,  if  we  could  only  rest  there,  and  were  not  incessantly
driven  onwards  into  a  wider  range  of  thought.  In  this  organism
of  thought,  as  scientifically  displayed,  there  is  no  need  to  speak
of  the  question  of  time.  This  organism,  if  we  may  apply  the


xliv  PROLEGOMENA.  [vi.

imperfect  term  to  describe  the  Idea,  is  the  sphere  of  Logic :
which,  in  the  words  of  Hegel,  treats  of  the  pure  Idea,  of  the
Idea  in  the  abstract  medium  of  thought.


CHAPTER  VI.

THE GENESIS OF HEGELIANISM.

WE  have  seen  man  make  the  world  bend  to  his  wants  and
turn  it  into  his  property,  by  stamping  his  mark  upon  it.  On
the  world — and  to  that  extent  it  is  his  world — he  has  imposed
the  laws  of  his  own  thoughts  and  desires,  so  humanizing  it.
But  if  this  moulding  it  into  a  purpose,  and  so  unifying  it,  be
the  result  of  his  practical  operations  upon  nature,  it  is  no  less
the  instinctive  basis  of  his  theoretical  attitude  towards  it.  The
innate  tendency  of  the  human  mind  is  to  connect  and  set  in
relation, — to  connect,  it  may  be  erroneously,  or  without  proper
scrutiny,  or  under  the  influence  of  passions  or  prejudices, — but
at  any  rate  to  connect.  For,  as  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  and  many
others  are  never  weary  of  telling  us :  '  We  think  in  relations.
This  is  truly  the  form  of  all  thought :  and  if  there  are  any  other
forms  they  must  be  derived  from  this1.'  Man  used  to  be  de-
nned as  a  thinking  or  rational  animal :  which  means  that  man
is  a  connecting  and  relation-giving  animal ;  and  from  this
Aristotle's  definition,  making  him  out  to  be  a  '  political '  animal,
is  only  a  corollary,  most  applicable  in  the  region  of  Ethics.
Here  is  the  ultimate  point,  from  which  the  natural  conscious-

1  First  Principles,  p.  162.  It  may  be  as  well  to  remark  that  Relation  is  scarcely
an  adequate  description  of  the  nature  of  thought  as  a  whole.  We  shall  see  when
we  come  to  speak  of  the  theory  of  logic,  that  the  term  is  applicable — and  then
somewhat  imperfectly — only  to  the  second  phase  of  thought,  the  categories  of
reflection,  which  are  the  favourite  categories  of  science  and  popular  metaphysics.


vi.]  DOUBTS  RAISED  AGAINST  REASON.  xlv

ness,  and  the  energies  of  science,  art,  and  religion  equally  start
upon  their  special  missions.

The  more  we  become  acquainted  with  things,  so  long  at  least
as  we  keep  our  view  from  being  absorbed  in  one  point,  the  more
connexion  we  see.  But  two  things  may  happen.  Either  we
incline  to  let  the  fact  of  synthesis  drop  out  of  sight,  as  if  it  re-
quired no  further  study  or  notice,  and  we  regard  the  things  con-
nected as  exclusively  worth  attending  to.  We  use  general  and
half-explained  terms,  such  as  development,  evolution,  continuity,
as  bridges  from  one  thing  to  another,  without  giving  any  regard
to  the  means  of  locomotion  on  their  own  account.  Some  one
thing  is  the  product  of  something  else :  we  let  the  term  '  pro-
duct '  slip  out  of  the  proposition  as  unimportant :  and  then  read
the  statement  so  as  to  explain  the  one  thing  by  turning  it  into
the  other.  Things,  according  to  this  opinion,  are  all-important :
the  rest  is  mere  words.  These  relations  between  things  are
not  open  to  further  investigation  or  definition :  they  are  each  sui
generis,  or  peculiar :  and  we  must  be  content,  if  we  can  classify
them  in  some  approximate  way,  as  a  basis  for  our  subdivision  of
propositions.  This  is  certainly  one  way  of  getting  rid  of  Meta-
physics— for  the  time.  The  other  way  is  as  follows.  At  certain
points  when  we  stop  to  reflect  upon  the  partial  scene,  and  close
our  eyes  to  the  totality,  doubts  begin  to  arise,  whether  our
procedure  is  justified,  when  we  unify  and  combine  the  isolated
phenomena.  Have  we  any  right  to  throw  our  own  subjectivity,
the  laws  of  our  imagination  and  thought,  into  the  natural
world?  Would  it  not  be  more  proper  to  refrain  altogether
from  the  use  of  such  conceptions?

This  question  was  proposed  by  Hume  in  reference  to  some
special  forms  of  relation  or  unification,  particularly  that  of
causality.  Kant  endeavoured  to  return  a  comprehensive  answer.
His  answer  had  a  general  kinship  with  the  sceptical  solution
which  Hume  had  offered  of  his  own  doubts :  but  in  its  special
nature  it  was  considerably  different.  Kant  agreed  with  Hume
in  maintaining  that  the  forms  of  thought  could  lead  to  no
knowledge  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  things,  unless  they  were


xlvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [vi.

justified  and  supported  by  experience.  The  knowledge,  of
which  the  human  mind  is  susceptible,  is,  he  says,  indeed
objective,  because  it  is  valid  for  all  intelligence :  but  it  is
in  the  last  resort  still  subjective,  because  it  is  baffled  by  the
inaccessible  Thing-in-itself.  But  the  Kantian  solution  differed
from  that  of  Hume,  when  it  went  on  to  analyse  the  fact  of
these  relations  between  ideas,  and  to  draw  out  the  genealogical
table  of  those  forms  of  conception  which  form  our  native  intel-
lectual power.  Knowledge,  according  to  Kant's  view  of  its
nature,  is  the  meeting  of  two  elements,  one  of  which  comes
from  our  sensation,  and  the  other  from  our  understanding.
The  matter  of  sensation  conforms  to  certain  conditions,  which
are  known  in  the  most  general  terms  as  time  and  space.  The
contribution  of  our  understanding  is  more  strictly  formal,  giving
synthesis  and  arrangement  to  the  matter  of  sensation.  It  is
with  this  second  constituent  that  we  are  here  concerned.  Hume
had  said  that  our  attempts  at  a  synthesis  of  phenomena  were
mere  habits,  accruing  by  experience.  Kant  agreed,  and  only
held  that  our  actual  knowledge  necessarily  pre-supposed  these
forms  of  synthesis,  and  was  consequently  only  true  for  us,  but
not  for  the  things.  But  apart  from  that  result,  his  claim  to
remembrance  will  rest  upon  his  exposition  of  the  mind  as  the
form  of  forms,  the  region  of  intellectual  forms.  He  prepared
the  way  for  the  progress  of  philosophy  by  first  opening  up  the
field  of  logic  as  a  science  of  the  pure  intellect :  of  intellect  on  its
own  account,  and  not  a  mere  observer  of  other  things.  His  work
was  what  we  may  call  the  first  psychology  of  pure  thought.

But  the  system  as  presented  by  Kant  had  more  than  one
defect.  In  the  first  place,  the  table  of  the  categories  was  in-
complete. It  had  been  borrowed,  as  Kant  himself  tells  us,
from  the  old  logical  subdivision  of  judgments,  derived  more  or
less  directly  from  Aristotle  and  the  Schoolmen.  But  many
of  the  relations  occurring  in  ordinary  thought  could  not  be
reduced  to  any  of  the  twelve  forms,  without  doing  violence
to  them.  In  the  second  place,  the  classification  exhibited  no
principle  or  reason,  and  gave  ground  for  no  development.


vi.] SHORTCOMINGS  OF  KANT'S  CRITICISM. xlvii

That  there  should  be  four  fundamental  categories,  each  with
three  divisions,  making  twelve  in  all,  is  as  inexplicable  as  that
the  four  Athenian  tribes  of  early  times  should  form  twelve
Phratriai.  The  twelve  patriarchs  of  thought  stand  in  equal
authority,  with  little  or  no  bearing  upon  one  another.  We
have  here,  in  the  phrase  of  the  sciences,  an  artificial,  and  not  a
natural  classification  of  the  types  of  thought.  In  the  third  place,
the  question  was  taken  up  as  merely  psychological,  or  subjective,
concerning  the  constitution  of  the  human  mind  in  its  integrity
and  purity.  And  thus  the  Kantian  statement  breaks  itself,  as
we  should  now  say,  unnecessarily,  on  the  Thing-in-itself, — the
mysterious  world  in  its  unimpaired  and  unmodified  being,  which,
though  an  unknown  factor,  yet  enters  into  knowledge.

This  subjectivity,  artificiality,  and  imperfection  of  the  list,
are  faults  which  need  not  excite  much  wonder.  For  in  the
year  1781  we  are  in  the  days  when  the  '  Rights  of  Man,'  the
claims  of  the  individual  and  subjective  reason,  were  proclaimed!
with  more  emphasis  than  in  most  periods  of  history.  The'
'  Confessions '  of  Rousseau  were  only  one  illustrious  specimen
out  of  hundreds  of  autobiographies,  which  detailed  the  private^
and  personal  aspects  of  individual  life :  and  the  religious  world
was  at  the  same  time  filled  with  records  of  pious  experiences
and  with  the  minute  details  of  conversions.  It  was  a  time
utterly  wanting  in  a  true  sense  of  what  was  meant  by  nature
and  by  history.  It  had  not  that  historical  sense,  which  frees
a  man  from  the  limitations  of  his  own  particular  nature,  and
his  age :  and  thus  makes  it  at  least  possible  for  him  to  reach
what  is  universal  and  true.  Instead  of  historical  criticism,
the  method  of  what  is  sometimes  named  '  Advanced  Theology,'
was  in  this  period  properly  known  as  Rationalism1.  To
rationalise  meant  to  apply  the  canons  of  our  limited  enlighten-
ment to  the  unlimited  ranges  of  actuality.  In  these  circum-

1  Thus  in  a  modernisation  of  the  New  Testament,  concocted  by  Bahrdt,  a  person
of  some  notoriety  in  those  days,  Matth.  v.  4  ('  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn  :  for
they  shall  be  comforted ')  was  paraphrased  thus  :  '  Happy  those,  who  prefer  the
sweet  melancholy  of  virtue  to  the  pleasant  joys  of  sin.'


xlviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [vi.

stances  the  limitations  of  Kant's  '  Criticism  of  the  Pure  Reason '
are  explicable  enough.

In  Hegel  the  question  assumes  a  wider  scope,  and  receives
a  more  thorough-going  answer.  In  the  first  place  the  question
about  the  Categories  is  transferred  from  what  we  have  called
the  psychological,  to  what  Hegel  terms  the  logical,  sphere.  It
is  transferred,  to  quote  the  language  of  the  ancients  already
referred  to,  from  the  Reason  in  man  subjectively  considered
to  the  Reasonable  or  Intellectual  World ',  which  our  Reason,
as  it  were,  touches,  and  so  becomes  possessed  of  knowledge.
In  the  second  place,  the  Categories  become  a  vast  multitude.
The  intellectual  telescope  discovers  new  stars  behind  the  con-
stellations visible  to  the  naked  eye,  and  resolves  the  nebulae
of  thought  into  worlds  of  self-centred  intelligence.  There  is
no  longer  any  mystic  virtue  supposed  to  inhere  in  the  number
twelve.  The  modern  chemist  of  thought  vastly  amplifies  the
number  of  its  elementary  types  and  factors,  and  proves  that
many  of  the  old  Categories  are  neither  simple  nor  indecompos-
able. Thirdly,  there  is  a  systematic  development  or  process
which  links  the  Categories  together,  and  from  the  most  simple,
abstract,  and  inadequate,  brings  forth  the  most  complex  and
adequate.  Each  term  or  member  in  the  organism  of  thought
has  its  place  conditioned  by  all  the  others :  each  of  them
contains  the  germ,  or  the  ripe  fruit  of  another.

In  this  logical  view  of  the  Categories,  the  extension  of  their
limits,  and  the  drawing  closer  together  of  their  connexions,
we  may  see  in  a  very  general  way  the  advance  which  Hegel
makes  upon  Kant.  To  explain  how  he  came  to  make  that
step  would  be  a  very  valuable  matter  for  history  and  biography :
but  it  would  invol  ve  an  extensive  knowledge  of  the  scientific  life
in  the  end  of  the  last  century  and  the  beginning  of  the  present.
One  or  two  points  may  be  stated.  The  work  of  Or.  R.  Treviranus
on  '  Biology,  or  the  Philosophy  of  Animated  Nature/  of  which
the  first  three  volumes  appeared  between  the  years  1802  and
1805,  and  the  'Philosophic  Zoologique '  of  Jean  Lamarck,

1  From  the  vovs  as  the  TOTTOS  ISfSiv  or  elSos  tidwi',  to  the  Kuapos  voTjrtis.


vi.]  FIRST  GLIMPSES  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  xlix

published  in  1809,  were  almost  contemporaneous  with  the  first
great  work  of  Hegel's,  the  '  Phenomenology,'  which  appeared
in  1807.  In  these  two  works,  but  especially  in  that  of  Lamarck,
the  theory  of  the  descent  of  species  from  one  typical  kind  by
adaptation  and  inheritance  was  stated  in  a  comparatively
definite  and  systematic  form.  Besides  these,  the  'Metamorphoses
of  Plants'  had  shown  that  Goethe,  as  early  as  1790,  was
engaged  with  speculations,  which  in  more  modern  times  have
become  almost  solely  associated  with  the  name  of  Darwin.
All  of  these,  and  especially  the  essay  of  the  great  poet,  were
closely  studied  by  Hegel :  as  can  be  shown  by  the  detailed
analysis  of  Goethe's  work,  given  in  the  '  Philosophy  of  Nature 1,'
and  by  the  frequent  references  to  the  two  physiologists  in  the
appendices  to  the  later  sections  of  that  work.  The  theory  of
development  was,  to  use  a  common  phrase,  in  the  air :  it  in-
spired both  poetry  and  scientific  speculation  :  and  in  a  subtle
and  philosophic  form  it  was  applied  on  a  magnificent  scale  by
Hegel.  It  gives  the  theory  of  thought  as  a  process — a  develop-
ment which  knows  nothing  of  distinctions  between  past  and
future,  because  it  implies  an  eternal  present,  and  goes  on  sub
specie  aeterni.

It  is  also  to  be  remembered  that  between  Kant  and  Hegel
there  falls  the  rapid  and  vigorous  action  of  Fichte  and  of
Schelling's  earlier  period.  Fichte  had  applied  the  doctrine  of
Kant  in  the  regions  of  morality  and  religion:  Schelling  to
nature  and  history.  In  this  way  they  had  translated  the  theory
of  Pure  Reason  from  the  somewhat  narrowing  limits  of  the
human  mind  into  the  province  of  actuality  and  concrete  facts.
They  had  thus  practically  and  by  implication  overcome  the
subjectivity,  the  element  of  weakness  which  clung  to  the
Categories  of  Kant.  But  while  they  led  thought  forward
into  a  more  extended  and  complex  field,  and  paved  the  way
for  a  re-statement  of  the  problem  on  a  universal  ground,  they
did  not  add  much  to  the  foundation,  or  remedy  its  inadequacy.
Fichte,  by  showing  that  intelligence  is  an  act  rather  than

1  Natur-Philosophie,  p.  483.  (Encycl.  §  345.)
d


1  PROLEGOMENA.  [MI.

a  fact, — that  the  beginning  of  philosophy  was  the  postulate
'Think!' — that  the  thought  must  limit  itself  and  institute
distinctions,  and  that  the  Categories  issue  from  this  act  of
self-determination,  gave  some  more  unity  and  principle  to  the
Categories  than  Kant  had  done.  But  it  was  reserved  for
Hegel  to  set  the  problem  in  a  fuller  light.  And  he  was
enabled  to  do  so,  by  that  exhaustive  study  of  history  and  all
the  works  of  the  human  mind,  by  that  unwearied  endeavour
to  construe  his  thoughts  and  to  see  the  meaning  of  history,
which  marks  the  third  decennium  of  his  life.  These  researches
made  him  capable  of  substituting  for  the  vague  'Absolute,'
which  is  the  catch- word  of  the  philosophy  of  the  period,  the
completely-detailed  structure  of  the  Idea,  the  Intelligible  World
with  all  its  specific  types  and  the  process  on  which  they  depend :
even  as  Kant  had  translated  the  vague  and  abstract  term
'  Understanding '  into  the  articulated  scheme  of  his  twelve
Categories.


CHAPTER  VII.


KANT AND HIS PROBLEM.

THE  '  Criticism  of  the  Pure  Reason '  is  a  generalisation  of
the  problem  discussed  by  Hume.  The  question,  as  it  is  enter-
tained by  Kant,  is  conceived  in  the  wider  form  :  ( Is  a  science
of  Metaphysics  possible  ? '  or,  in  his  own  technical  language,
'  Are  synthetic  judgments  a  priori  possible  ?'  Hume  had  treated
his  question  on  the  '  relations  of  ideas '  in  their  bearing  upon
'  matters  of  fact/  mainly  with  reference  to  the  isolated  case  of
cause  and  effect:  but  Kant  extended  the  inquiry  so  as  to
comprise  all  those  connective  and  unifying  ideas,  of  which
Metaphysics  is  full,  and  which  it  employs  in  the  belief  that


vii.]  KANT  AND VOLTAIRE.  li

they  can  by  themselves  give  rise  to  real  knowledge  apart
from  experience.  On  that  employment  Kant  pronounces  judg-
ment in  the  following  terms.  So  far  as  our  several  experiences
go,  the  faculties  of  intellect,  i.e.  the  Categories  of  the  Under-
standing, find  their  proper  scope;  and  knowledge  results  from
the  united  action  of  the  senses  and  the  intellect.  But  each
single  experience,  and  the  collected  aggregate  of  these  ex-
periences, is  felt  to  fall  short  of  a  complete  total  :  and  yet  this
complete  total,  the  ultimate  unity,  is  itself  not  an  experience
at  all.  But,  if  it  be  no  object  of  experience,  it  is  still  an  idea
on  which  reason  is  inevitably  driven :  and  the  attempt  to
apprehend  it,  in  the  absence  of  experience,  gives  rise  to  the
problem  of  Metaphysics.  Everything,  however,  which  can  be
in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word  known,  must  be  perceived  in
space  and  time,  or,  in  other  words,  must  lie  open  to  experience.
Where  experience  ends,  human  reason  meets  a  barrier  which
checks  any  efficient  •  progress,  but  not  a  limit  which  it  feels
impossible  to  pass.  The  idea  of  completeness,  of  a  rounded
system,  or  unconditioned  unity,  is  still  left,  after  the  categories
of  the  understanding  have  done  their  best :  and  is  not  destroyed
although  its  realisation  or  explication  is  declared  to  be  im-
possible.

There  is  thus  left  unexplained  a  totality  which  encom-
passes all  the  single  members  of  experience — a  unity  of  which
the  several  categories  are  only  an  imperfect  collection  of
fragments  —  an  infinite  which  commands  and  regulates  the
finite  concepts  of  the  experiential  intellect.  But  in  the  region
of  rational  thought  there  is  no  objective  and  independent
standard  by  which  we  can  verify  the  conclusions  of  Reason.
There  are  no  definite  objects,  lying  beyond  the  borders  of  ex-
perience, towards  which  it  might  unerringly  turn ;  and  its
sole  authentic  use,  accordingly,  is  to  see  that  the  understanding
is  thorough  and  exact,  when  it  deals  in  the  co-ordination  of
experiences.  In  this  want  of  definite  objects,  Reason,  whenever
it  acts  for  itself,  can  only  fall  into  perpetual  contradictions
and  sophistries.  Pure  Reason,  therefore,  the  faculty  of  ideas,

d  2


lii  PROLEGOMENA.  [vn.

the  organon  of  Metaphysics,  does  not  of  itself  '  constitute '
knowledge,  but  merely  ( regulates '  the  action  of  the  under-
standing.

By  this  rigour  of  demonstration  Kant  dealt  a  deadly  blow,
as  it  seemed,  to  the  dogmatic  Metaphysics,  and  the  Deism  of
his  time.  Hume  had  shaken  the  certainty  of  Metaphysics  and
thrown  doubt  upon  Theology :  but  Kant  apparently  made  an
end  of  Metaphysics,  and  annihilated  Deistic  theology.  The
German  philosopher  did  thoroughly  and  with  systematic  demon-
stration what  Voltaire  did  with  literary  graces  and  not  without
the  witticisms  with  which  the  French  executioner  gives  the
coup  de  grace.  When  a  great  idea  had  been  degraded  into  a
vulgar  doctrine  and  travestied  in  common  reality,  the  Frenchman
met  its  inadequacies  with  graceful  satire,  and  showed  that
these  half-truths  were  not  eternal  verities.  The  German  made
a  theory  and  a  system  of  what  was  only  a  sally  of  criticism ;
and  rendered  the  criticism  wrong,  by  making  it  too  consistent
and  too  logical1.  Kant  argued  that  all  a  priori  exercise  of
reason,  apart  from  the  co-operation  of  the  senses  and  experience,
is  impossible  or  resultless.  Without  experience  reason  only
deceives  itself.  Such  is  the  outcome  of  the  Kantian  criticism,
and  upon  it,  as  if  it  were  a  rock,  rests  the  greater  part  of  the
advanced  opinion  of  the  present  time.  In  this,  as  in  many
other  points,  the"  philosopher  of  Konigsberg  has  anticipated  the
movement  of  modern  thought 2.

These  results  might  have  been  expected  to  issue  from  a
doctrine  of  the  mental  constitution,  which  in  its  English,
French,  and  German  teachers  had  always  considered  man  and
his  mind  in  the  abstract,  at  one  point  in  their  range  of
development,  apart  from  their  surroundings  and  their  antece-
dents,— in  short,  at  the  eighteenth-century  point  of  enlighten-
ment. Kant,  from  one  point  of  view,  may  be  said  to  have

1  Hegel's  Werke,  vol.  i.  p.  140.

a  And  for  this  reason  physicists  and  critics  are  recurring  to  Kant,  as  a  safe-
guard against  the  conclusions  of  later  German  philosophy.  Kant,  in  fact,  is  in  a
fair  way  to  become  the  philosopher  of  this  age.


vii.]  KANT  AND  LOCKE.  liii

done  systematically  and  consistently  what  the  English  school
of  Locke  had  done  partially,  i.e.  he  carried  out  an  individualist
psychology,  the  science  of  the  individual  mind,  to  its  con-
sequences1. In  his  own  words,  he  seeks  to  find  out  what
knowledge,  if  any,  can  be  had,  '  independently  of  experience
and  all  impressions  of  the  senses.'  The  mind,  or  faculty  of
thought,  is  to  be  analysed  in  abstracto,  as  it  were  in  a  vacuum,
with  all  its  actual  knowledge  extracted,  and  only  the  possibility
of  knowledge  left.

Aristotle,  who  saw  into  the  nature  of  abstract  entities,
remarked  that  the  mind  was  nothing  before  it  exercised
itself2.  The  mind,  and  the  same  is  the  case  with  everything
in  the  spiritual  sphere,  is  not  a  fixed  thing,  a  sort  of  ex-
ceedingly refined  substance,  which  we  can  lay  hold  of  without
further  trouble.  It  is  what  it  has  become,  or  what  it  makes
itself  to  be.  This  point,  that  'To  be'  =  'To  have  become,'  is
an  axiom  never  to  be  lost  sight  of  in  dealing  with  the  mind,
where  everything  must  be  thought  as  a  process.  It  is  easy
to  talk  of  and  to  analyse  conscience  and  freewill,  as  if  these
were  existing  things  in  a  sort  of  mental  space,  as  hard  to
miss  or  mistake  as  a  stone  and  an  orange.  One  asks  if  the
will  is  free  or  not,  as  glibly  as  one  might  ask  whether  an  orange
is  sweet;  and  the  answer  can  be  given  with  equal  ease,
affirmatively  or  negatively,  in  both  cases.  Everything  in  these
cases  depends  on  whether  the  will  has  made  itself  free  or  not,
whether  indeed  we  are  speaking  of  the  will  at  all.  To  ask
the  question  in  an  abstract  way,  taking  no  account  of  circum-
stances, is  one  of  those  temptations  which  lead  the  intellect
astray,  and  produces  only  confusion  and  wordy  war — as  the
greater  part  of  metaphysics  has  done.  The  mind  and  its
phenomena,  as  they  are  called,  cannot  be  dissected  with  the
same  calmness  of  analysis  as  other  substances  which  adapt
themselves  to  the  scalpel.

1  Hegel's  Werke,  vol.  i.  p.  31  :  '  Kant's  idealistische  Seite,  welche  clem  Subjecte
gewisse  Verhaltnisse,  die  Kategorien  heissen,  vindicirt,  ist  nichts  als  die  Erweiter.
uug  dcs  Lockeanismus.'  2  De  Anima,  III.  4.


liv  PROLEGOMENA.  [vii.

In  a  certain  cookery-book,  it  is  said,  the  recipe  for  making
hare-soup  begins  thus  :  '  First,  catch  your  hare.'  That  necessary
precaution  is  often  omitted  by  the  philosopher.  Bad  metaphysics
proceeds  as  if  the  hare  had  certainly  been  caught,  and  for  that
reason  the  result  of  all  its  manipulations  is  a  rather  watery
decoction.  True  philosophy  must  show  that  it  has  got  hold  of
what  it  means  to  discuss  :  it  has  to  construct  its  subject-matter :
and  it  constructs  it  by  tracing  every  step  and  movement  in  its
construction  shown  in  actual  history.  The  mind  is  what  it  has
been  made ;  and  to  see  what  it  is  we  must  consider  it  not  as
an  Alpha  and  Omega  of  research,  as  popular  conception  and
language  tend  to  represent  it,  but  in  the  elements  constituting
its  process,  in  the  fluidity  of  its  development.  We  must
penetrate  the  apparent  fixity  of  a  concept  or  term,  and  see
through  it  into  the  process  which  bears  it  into  being.  For,
otherwise  the  object  of  our  investigation  is  taken,  as  if  it  were
the  most  unmistakeable  thing  of  sense  and  fancy, — as  if  every-
body were  agreed  that  this  and  no  other  were  the  point  in
question.

But  in  this  matter  of  stability  and  the  reverse,  there  is  a
broad  distinction  between  the  natural  and  the  spiritual  world.
In  nature  every  step  in  the  organisation,  by  which  the  Cosmos  is
developed,  has  an  independent  existence  of  its  own :  and  the
lowest  formation  confronts  the  highest,  each  standing  by  itself
beside  the  other.  Matter  and  motion,  for  example,  are  not
merely  found  as  subordinate  elements  entering  into  the  making
of  a  plant  or  an  animal.  They  have  a  free  existence  of  their
own  :  and  the  free  existence  of  matter  in  motion  is  seen  in  the
shape  of  the  solar  system.  The  several  informations  of  the
senses,  again, — our  sensations, — are  thrown  backwards  and  out-
wards, and  exist  as  properties  of  bodies,  or  even  as  elements
of  which  bodies  are  said  to  be  composed.  But  the  specific
types  of  several  stages  of  integration  in  the  process  of  mind,
have  no  independent  existence  of  their  own,  and  are  not  other-
wise apparent  than  as  states  or  factors  entering  into,  and
merged  in,  the  higher  grades  of  development.  This  causes  a


vii.] THE  OBJECT  OF  SCIENCE  IS  A  PROCESS.  lv

peculiar  difficulty  in  the  study  of  mind.  We  cannot  seize  a
formation  in  an  independent  shape  of  its  own :  we  must  trace
it  in  the  growth  of  the  whole.  And  hence  when  we  accept  the
name,  such  as  mind,  conscience,  will,  &c.,  as  if  it  expressed
something1  specially  existent  in  a  free  shape  of  its  own,  we
make  an  assumption  which  it  is  impossible  to  justify.  We  are
reckoning  with  paper-money  which  belongs  to  no  recognised
currency,  and  may  be  stamped  as  the  dealer  wills.  The  conse-
quence is  that  the  thing  with  which  we  begin  our  examination
is  an  opaque  point, — a  mere  terminus  a  quo,  from  which  we
start  on  our  journey  of  explication,  leaving  the  terminus  itself
behind  us  unexplained.

The  mind  is  not  a  '  substance,'  but  a  '  subject.'  In  this  rather
tersely-put  formula  Hegel  emphasises  his  opposition  to  the  or-
dinary metaphysics.  The  constituents  of  mind  do  not  lie  side
by  side  tranquilly  co-existent,  like  the  sheep  beside  the  herbage
on  which  it  browses.  Their  existence  is  maintained  in  an  inward
movement,  by  which,  while  they  differentiate  themselves,  they
still  keep  up  an  identity.  In  our  investigations  we  cannot  begin
with  what  is  to  be  defined.  The  botanist,  if  he  is  to  give  us  a
science  of  the  plant,  must  begin  with  something  whose  in-
dwelling aim  it  is  to  be  itself  and  to  realise  its  own  possibility.
He  must  begin  with  what  is  not  the  plant,  and  end  with  what
is ;  begin,  let  us  say,  with  the  germ  which  has  the  tendency  to
pass  into  the  plant.  The  speculative  science  of  biology  begins
with  a  cell,  and  builds  these  cells  up  into  the  tissues  and  struc-
tures out  of  which  vegetables  and  animals  are  constituted.
The  object  of  the  science  appears  as  the  result  of  the  scientific
process  :  or,  a  science  is  the  ideal  construction  of  its  object.  As
in  these  cases,  so  in  the  case  of  thought.  We  must  see  it
grow  up  from  its  simplest  element,  from  the  bare  point  of  being,
which  is  nothing  actually,  but  all  things  potentially ;  and  see  it
appear  as  a  result  due  to  the  ingrowing  and  outgrowing  union
of  many  elements,  none  of  which  satisfies  by  itself,  but  leads
onward  from  abstractions  to  the  meeting  of  abstractions  in  the
concrete.  The  mind,  understanding,  and  reason  of  man  is  not


Ivi  PROLEGOMENA.  [vn.

a  matter-of-fact  unity  to  be  picked  up  and  examined.  You  must,
first  of  all,  make  sure  that  you  have  a  mind :  and  to  be  sure
of  that  is  to  see  that  the  mind  is  the  necessary  outcome  of  a
course  of  development.  The  mind  is  not  an  immediate  datum,
with  nothing  behind  it,  coming  upon  the  field  of  mental  vision
with  a  divinely-bestowed  array  of  faculties ;  but  a  mediated
unity,  i.  e.  a  unity  which  has  grown  up  through  a  complex
interchange  of  forces,  and  which  lives  in  differences.

If  the  mind  be  not  thus  exhibited  in  its  process,  we  may
mean  what  we  like  with  each  mental  object  that  comes  under
our  observation  :  but  with  as  much  right  another  observer  may
mean  something  else.  Unless  we  show  how  this  special  form
of  mind  is  constituted,  we  are  dealing  with  abstractions,  with
names  which  we  may  analyse,  but  which  remain  as  they  were
when  our  analysis  is  over,  and  which  seem  like  unsubstantial
ghosts  defying  our  coarse  engines  of  dissection.  They  are  not
destroyed :  like  immaterial  and  aery  beings  they  elude  the
sword  which  smites  them,  and  part  but  to  re-unite.  The
name,  and  the  conception  bodied  forth  in  it,  is  indeed  stag-
nant, and  will  to  all  appearance  become  the  ready  prey  of
analysis  :  but  there  is  something  behind  this  materialised  and
solidified  conception  which  mere  analysis  cannot  even  reach.
And  that  underlying  nature  is  a  process  or  movement,  a  meet-
ing of  elements,  which  it  is  the  business  of  philosophy  to
unfold.  The  analyst  in  this  case  has  dealt  with  thought  as  if
it  were  a  finer  sort  of  material  product,  a  fixed  and  assailable
point :  and  this  is  perhaps  the  character  of  the  generalised
images,  or  material  thoughts  of  ordinary  consciousness.  But
thoughts  in  their  native  medium  are  not  solid,  but,  as  it  were,
fiuid  and  transparent,  and  can  easily  escape  the  divisions  and
lines  which  the  analytical  intellect  would  impose.  Perhaps  some
may  think  that  it  is  unwise  to  fight  with  ghosts  like  these,
and  that  the  best  plan  would  be  to  disregard  them  altogether.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  urged  that  such  unsubstan-
tial forms  have  a  decided  reality  in  life :  that  men  will  talk
of  them  and  conjure  by  Iheir  means,  with  or  without  intel-


vii.] TWO  FACTORS  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  PROCESS. Ivii

ligence  ;  and  that  the  best  course  is  to  understand  them.  It
will  then  be  seen  that  it  is  our  proper  work  as  philosophers
to  watch  the  process,  by  which  the  spiritual  unity  divides  and
yet  retains  its  divided  members  in  unity.

Every  individual  object  is  seen  to  be  the  meeting  of  two
currents,  the  coincidence  of  two  movements.  It  concentrates
into  an  undecompounded  unit, — at  least  such  it  appears  to
imaginative  or  material  thought, — two  elements,  each  of  which
it  is  in  turn  identifiable  with.  The  one  of  these  elements  has
been  called  the  self-same  (or  identity),  the  universal,  the  genus,
the  whole :  while  the  second  is  called  the  difference,  the  par-
ticular, the  part.  What  has  thus  been  stated  in  the  technical
language  of  Logic  is  often  repeated  in  the  scientific  parlance  of
the  day,  but  with  more  materialised  conceptions  and  in  more
concrete  cases.  The  dynamic  theory  of  matter  represents  it  as
a  unity  of  attraction  and  repulsion.  A  distinguished  Dar-
winian remarks  that  '  all  the  various  forms  of  organisms  are
the  necessary  products  of  the  unconscious  action  and  reaction
between  the  two  properties  of  adaptability  and  heredity,  re-
ducible as  these  are  to  the  functions  of  nutrition  and  repro-
duction V  The  terms  '  action  and  reaction '  are  hardly
sufficient,  it  may  be,  to  express  the  sort  of  unity  which  is  called
for :  but  the  statement  at  least  shows  the  reduction  of  an  actual
fact  to  the  interaction  of  two  forces,  the  meeting  of  two  cur-
rents. The  one  of  these  is  the  power  of  the  kind,  or  universal,
which  tends  to  keep  things  always  the  same  :  the  other  the
power  of  localised  circumstances  and  particular  conditions,
which  tends  to  render  things  more  and  more  diversified.  The
one  may  be  called  a  centripetal,  the  other  a  centrifugal  force.  If
the  one  side  be  synthetic,  the  other  is  analytic.

1  Hackel,  Natiirliche  Schopfungs-Geschichte,  p.  157.


Iviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [vm.

CHAPTER  VIII.

TRANSITION FROM KANT TO HEGEL.

As  in  the  Dialectic  of  Pure  Reason  Kant  only  gave  logical
consistency  to  the  sarcasms  of  Voltaire,  so  in  the  Analytic  of  the
Understanding  he  trod  more  systematically  in  the  steps  of  Locke.
Locke  had  represented  the  mind  as  a  tabula  rasa  before  experience,
a  sheet  of  clean  paper  ready  to  receive  pen  and  ink ;  Kant  sup-
posed the  sheet  to  be  already  prepared,  like  a  photographic  slide,
with  certain  faculties  of  reception  and  combination,  called  out
into  actual  existence  when  the  sun  of  experience  arose.  But
in  both  the  mind  had  the  tablet-like  character.  They  both
began  with  an  assumption  based  upon  abstraction :  and  this
assumption  led  to  a  fatal  flaw  in  their  conclusions.  The  one  as
well  as  the  other  seems  to  have  taken  the  understanding  or
reason  to  be  some  sort  of  thing  or  entity,  however  much  they
differed  as  to  the  peculiar  nature  of  its  constitution,  or  the
amount  of  its  original  contents.  In  the  one  case  as  well  as
the  other,  accordingly,  they  were  compelled  to  confront  the
mind  with  an  external  world,  an  object  of  knowledge  existing
apart  by  itself,  and  coming  in  certain  ways  and  under  certain
forms  into  connexion  with  the  subject-mind,  likewise  existing
apart  by  itself.  In  this  state  of  absolute  disruption,  with  two
independent  centres  in  subject  and  object,  how  was  it  possible
to  get  from  one  to  the  other  ?

1  This  was  the  common  puzzle  of  all  philosophers  from  Descartes
to  Schelling,  Locke  and  Kant  alike  included.  For  its  solution
all  sorts  of  incredible  devices  have  been  suggested,  such  as  pre-
established  harmony,  divine  interposition,  and  impressions  with
ideas.  It  has  given  rise  to  the  two  opposite  views,  sometimes
known  as  Idealism  versus  Realism,  sometimes  as  Spiritualism
versus  Materialism.  Such  separations,  it  is  said,  do  not  concern
the  sciences.  Neither,  let  it  be  added,  have  they  meaning  when
employed  to  describe  the  character  of  a  philosophy.  They  are


VIIL]  THE  ORIGINAL  SIN  OF  THOUGHT.  lix

distinctions  familiar  to  popular  thought,  which  is  at  home  in
such  abstractions :  and  both  science  and  philosophy  have  found
it  difficult  to  overcome  them.  But  every  true  philosophy  must
be  both  idealist  and  realist :  for  Idealism  is  the  grasp^fjjig
whole  and  the  universal,  Realism  the  fulness  of  the  details  and


the  parts.  Without  Realism  a  philosophy  would  be  void  of  sub-
stance and  matter :  without  Idealism,  it  would  be  void  of  form
and  truth.  Realism  asserts  the  rights  of  the  several  and  par-
ticular existences  to  their  own  :  Idealism  asserts  the  thorough
dependence  and  inter-dependence  of  all  that  exists.

It  never  seems  to  have  occurred  to  these  thinkers  that  the
whole  difficulty  and  disruption  sprang  from  a  misinterpretation,
or  from  an  inability  to  grasp  a  thought  whole.  And  yet  in  this
lies  the  secret  of  the  solution.  Neither  the  mind  nor  the  so-
called  external  world  are  either  of  them  self-subsistent  existences,
issuing  at  once  and  ready-made  out  of  nothing.  The  mind  docs
not  come  forth,  either  equipped  or  un-equipped,  to  conquer  the
world :  the  world  is  not  a  prey  prepared  for  the  spoiler,  wait-
ing for  the  mind  to  comprehend  and  appropriate  it.  The  min
and  the  world,  the  so-called  '  subject '  and  so-called  '  object,1  are
equally  the  results  of  a  process :  and  it  is  only  when  we  isolate
the  terminal  aspects  of  that  process  of  differentiation,  and  lose
sight  of  their  origin,  that  we  have  two  worlds  facing  each
otherj  As  the  one  side  or  aspect  of  the  process  gathers
feature  and  form,  so  does  the  other.  As  the  depth  and  in-
tensity of  the  intellect  increases,  the  limits  of  the  external
world  extend  also.  The  mind  of  the  savage  is  exactly  mea-
sured by  the  world  he  has  around  him.  The  dull,  almost
animal,  sensation  and  feeling,  which  is  what  we  may  call
his  mental  action,  is  just  the  obverse  of  the  narrow  circum-
ference of  his  external  world.  The  beauty  and  interest  of  the
grander  phenomena  of  terrestrial  nature,  and  of  the  celestial
movements,  have  no  influence  on  a  being,  whose  whole  soul  is
swallowed  up  in  the  craving  for  food  and  the  lower  enjoyments
of  sense.  In  the  course  of  history  we  can  see  the  intellect
'  growing  deeper  and  broader,  and  the  limits  of  the  world


Ix  PROLEGOMENA.  [vm.

recede  simultaneously  with  the  advance  of  the  mind.  This
process  or  movement  of  culture  takes  place  in  the  sequence
of  generations.  But  science  takes  no  interest  in  the  medium
of  time,  and  merely  uses  it  as  a  stepping-stone  to  the  rational
sequence  of  ideas  ].

The  objective  world  of  knowledge  is  really  at  one  with  the
subjective  world  :  they  spring  from  a  common  source,  what  Kant
called  the  '  original  synthetic  unity  of  apperception.'  The  dis-
tinction between  them  flows  from  abstraction.  The  subjective
world — the  mind  of  man — is  really  constituted  by  the  same  force
as  the  objective  world  of  nature :  the  latter  has  been  translated
from  its  externality  of  parts  in  time  and  space,  into  an  inner
world  where  unity,  the  fusion  or  coalescence  of  all  types  and
forms,  is  a  leading  feature.  The  difficulty  of  passing  from  the
world  of  being  to  the  world  of  thoughts,  from  notion  to  thing,
from  subject  to  object,  from  Ego  to  Non-ego,  is  a  difficulty  which
men  have  made  for  themselves  in  their  theories.  They  reasoned
on  the  ground  that  the  individual  mind  was  a  fixed  and  ab-
solute centre,  from  which  the  universe  had  to  be  evaluated.
In  Hegel's  words,  they  made  man  and  not  God  the  object  of
their  philosophy 2.  So  that  Kant  really  showed  the  outcome
of  a  system  which  acted  on  the  hypothesis  that  man  in  his
individual  capacity  was  all  in  all.  Hegel,  on  his  own  showing,
came  to  prove  that  the  real  scope  of  philosophy  was  God, —
that  is,  the  '  original  synthetic  unity '  from  which  the  external
world  and  the  Ego  have  issued  by  differentiation,  and  in  which
they  return  to  unity.

If  this  be  so,  then  there  is  behind  the  external  world  and
behind  the  mind  an  organism  of  pure  types  or  forms  of  thought,
which  presents  itself,  complete  but  in  fragments,  to  the  senses

1  Natur-Philosophie,  p.  32.  Hegel  undoubtedly  held  that  'metamorphosis,'  as
the  word  then  was,  only  applied  to  the  living  individual,  and  not  to  the  succession
of  species.  'Auf  das  lebendige  Individuum  allein  ist  die  existirende  Metamor-
phose beschrankt.'  (Encycl.  §  249.)  It  is  an  absurd  idea,  he  says,  which,  in  order
to  make  the  development  clearer,  has  thrown  it  back  into  the  darkness  of  the  past
(um  sie  deutlicher  zu  machen,  in  das  Dunkel  der  Vergangenheit  zuruckgelegt
hat).  a  Hegel's  Werke,  vol.  i.  p.  15.


viii.]  THE  ORIGINAL  SYNTHETIC  UNITY.  Ixi

in  the  world  of  nature,  where  all  things  lie  outside  of  one  another,
and  which  then  is,  as  it  were,  reflected  back  into  itself  so  as
to  constitute  the  mind,  or  spiritual  world,  where  all  parts
tend  to  coalesce  in  unity.  The  deepest  craving  of  thought,
and  the  fundamental  problem  of  philosophy,  will  accordingly
be  to  discover  the  nature  and  law  of  that  totality  or  prime-
val unity, — the  totality,  which  we  see  appearing  in  the  double
aspect  of  nature  and  mind,  and  which  we  first  become  ac-
quainted with  as  it  is  manifested  in  this  state  of  disunion.
To  satisfy  this  want  is  what  the  Logic  of  Hegel  seeks.  It  lays
bare  the  kingdom  of  those  potent  shades,  which  embodies  itself
more  concretely  in  the  external  world  of  body,  and  the  inward
world  of  mind.  The  psychological  or  individualist  conditions,
which  even  in  the  Kantian  criticism  set  up  mind  as  an  entity
parallel  to  the  objects  of  nature,  and  antithetic  to  nature  as  a
whole,  have  fallen  away.  Reason  has  to  be  taken  in  the  whole  of
its  actualisation  as  a  world  of  reason,  not  in  its  bare  possibility,
not  in  the  narrow  ground  of  an  individual's  level  of  develop-
ment, but  in  the  realised  formations  of  reasonable  knowledge
and  action,  as  shown  in  Art,  Life,  Science,  and  Religion.  In
this  way  we  come  to  a  reason  which  might  be  in  us  or  in  the
world,  but  which,  being  to  a  certain  extent  different  from  either,
was  the  focus  of  two  orders  of  manifestations.

To  ascertain  that  ultimate  basis  of  the  world  and  mind  was
the  first  thing  philosophy  had  to  see  to.  But  in  order  to
do  this,  it  was  necessary  to  consider  the  self-conscious  mind,
or  total  and  absolute  individual,  in  its  course  of  formation.  In
other  words,  it  was  requisite  to  discern  the  real  value  of  history,
taking  that  name  in  its  largest  sense  as  the  general  record  of
development,  of  differentiation  and  integration  in  the  career  of
man  and  nature.  The  method  of  history  and  development,  if
systematically  carried  out  and  freed  from  times,  places,  and
accidents,  is  the  method  of  philosophy.  The  first  adequate  re-
cognition of  the  method  of  philosophy  as  the  real  method  of
history  is  to  be  found  in  Hegel.  It  is  true  that  the  poet  and
theologian  Herder  had  already  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  value


Ixii  PROLEGOMENA.  [vm.

and  meaning  of  history.  In  his  '  Ideen  zur  Philosophic  der
Geschichte  der  Menschheit'  (1784 — 1791)5  which  appeared
almost  at  the  same  time  with  the  great  works  of  Kant,  the
purpose  he  set  forth  was  to  comprehend  man,  the  microcosm,
by  first  studying  the  universe  as  a  whole.  And  however  much
the  general  vice  of  the  age  of  Rousseau  betrayed  itself  in  the
pre-possession  shown  for  the  natural  and  ruder  phases  of  human
life,  the  leading  principle  of  Herder, — that  history  and  nature
are  subject  to  the  same  laws,— was  true  and  fruitful.  This
historical  sense  and  perception  of  the  universal  bearings  of  life
was  foreign  to  Kant.  The  terms  in  which  he  mentions  the
Categories  of  Aristotle,  are  only  one  evidence  amongst  many
which  show  an  insensibility  to  the  meaning  of  history.  He
speaks  with  not  unjustifiable  contempt  of  scholars  to  whom
philosophy  meant  its  history :  and  his  own  acquaintance  with
the  writings  of  ancient  thinkers  seems  to  have  been  slight1.
In  these  points  he  is  the  very  opposite  of  Hegel.

Hegel's  philosophy  is  undoubtedly  the  outcome  of  a  vast
amount  of  historical  experience,  particularly  in  the  ancient
world,  and  implies  a  somewhat  exhaustive  study  of  the  products
of  art,  science,  politics,  and  religion.  By  experience  he  was
led  to  his  philosophy,  not  by  what  is  called  a  priori  reasoning.
It  is  curious  to  observe  the  prevalent  delusion  that  German
philosophy  is  the  '  high  a  priori  road/ — to  hear  its  profundity
admired,  but  its  audacity  and  neglect  of  obvious  facts  deplored.
The  fact  is  that  without  experience  neither  Hegel  nor  any-
body else  will  come  to  anything.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
experience  is  only  a  form  which  in  one  man's  case  means  a
certain  power  of  vision,  and  in  another  a  different  degree.  One
man  sees  the  idea  as  actuality :  to  the  other  man  it  is  only  a
subjective  notion.  And  even  when  it  is  seen,  there  are  dif-
ferences in  the  subsequent  development.  One  man  sees  it,
asserts  it  on  all  hands,  and  then  closes.  Another  sees  it,  and
asks  if  this  is  all,  or  if  it  is  only  part  of  a  system.  An  appeal
to  '  my  experience '  is  very  much  like  an  appeal  to  '  my  senti-

1  Hegel's  Werke,  vol.  i.  p.  38,


VIIL] HISTORY  WITHOUT  NAMES  OR  DATES. Ixiii

ments '  or  '  my  feelings : '  it  may  prove  as  much  or  as  little  as
can  be  imagined :  in  other  words,  it  can  prove  nothing.  And
if  an  appeal  to  other  people's  experience  is  meant,  that  is  only
an  argument  from  authority.  What  other  people  experience,
is  their  business,  not  mine.  Experience  means  a  great  deal  for
which  it  is  not  the  right  name:  and  to  give  an  explanation
of  what  it  is,  and  what  it  does,  would  render  a  great  service
to  English  methodologists.

There  are,  however,  two  modes  in  which  these  studies  to
discover  the  truth  may  appear.  In  the  one  case  they  are
reproduced  in  all  their  fragmentary  and  patch-work  character.
They  are  supposed  to  possess  a  value  of  their  own,  and  are
enunciated  with  all  the  detail  of  historic  incident.  The  common-
place books  of  a  man  are,  as  it  were,  published  to  instruct  the
world,  and  give  some  hint  of  the  extent  of  his  reading.  But
in  the  other  case  the  scaffolding  of  incident  and  externality  may
be  removed.  The  single  facts,  which  gave  the  persuasion  of
the  idea,  are  dismissed,  as  interesting  only  for  the  individual
student  on  his  way  to  truth :  or,  if  the  historical  vehicle  of
truth  be  retained  at  all,  it  is  translated  into  another  and  in-
tellectual medium.  Such  a  history,  the  quintessence  of  exten-
sive and  deep  research,  is  presented  in  the  Phenomenology.  The
names  of  persons  and  places  have  faded  from  the  record,  as
if  they  had  been  written  in  evanescent  inks, — dates  are  wanting,
— individualities  and  their  biographies  yield  up  their  place  to
universal  and  timeless  principles.  Such  typical  forms  are  the
concentrated  essence  of  endless  histories.  They  remind  one  of
the  descriptions  which  Plato  in  his  Republic  gives  of  the  several
forms  of  temporal  government.  Or,  to  take  a  modern  instance,
the  Hegelian  panorama  of  thought  which  presents  only  the
universal  evolution  of  thought, — that  evolution  in  which  the
whole  mind  of  the  world  takes  the  place  of  all  his  children,
whether  they  belong  to  the  common  level,  or  stand  amongst
representative  heroes, — may  be  paralleled  to  English  readers  by
Browning's  poem  of  Sordello.  There  can  be  no  question  that
such  a  method  is  exposed  to  criticism,  and  likely  to  excite  mis-


Ixiv  PROLEGOMENA .  [ix.

conception.  If  it  tend  to  give  artistic  completeness  to  the
work,  it  also  tantalises  the  outsider  who  has  a  desire  to  reach
the  unfamiliar  standing-ground.  He  wishes  a  background  of
time  and  space,  where  the  forms  of  the  abstract  ideas  may  be
embodied  to  his  mind's  eye.  In  most  ages,  and  with  good
ground,  the  world  has  been  sceptical,  when  it  perceived  no
reference  to  authorities,  no  foot-notes,  no  details  of  experiments
made :  nor  is  it  better  disposed  to  accept  provisorily,  and  see,
as  the  process  goes  on,  that  it  verifies  itself  to  intelligence.


CHAPTER  IX.

GENERAL LAW OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF HISTORY.

THE  present  medium  of  general  intelligence  and  theory  iii
which  we  live  embraces  the  results  of  all  that  has  preceded
it,  of  all  the  steps  of  culture  through  which  the  world  has  risen.
But  in  this  body  of  intellect  with  which  our  single  soul  is  clad,
— in  the  general  range  of  thought, — the  several  contributions
of  the  past  have  been  half  obliterated,  and  are  only  the  shadows
of  their  old  selves.  What  in  a  former  day  was  a  question  of
all-engrossing  interest  has  left  but  a  trace :  the  complete  and
detailed  formations  of  ancient  thought  have  lost  their  distinct-
ness of  outline,  and  have  shrunk  into  mere  shadings  in  the
grouping  of  the  intellectual  world.  Questions,  from  which
the  ancient  philosophers  could  never  shake  themselves  loose,  are
now  only  a  barely  perceptible  nuance  in  the  complex  questions
of  the  present  day.  Discussions  about  the  bearings  of  the  '  one  '
and  the  '  many,'  puzzles  like  those  of  Zeno,  and  the  casuistry
of  statesmanship  such  as  is  found  in  the  Politics  of  Aristotle,
have  for  the  most  part  little  else  than  an  antiquarian  interest.
We  scarcely  detect  the  faint  traces  they  have  left  in  the  '  burn-
ing questions'  of  our  own  age.  We  are  too  ready  to  forget


ix.]  PAST  AND  PRESENT.  Ixv

that  the  past  is  never  annihilated,  and  that  every  step,  however
slight  it  may  seem,  which  has  once  been  taken  in  the  movement
of  intellect,  must  be  traversed  in  order  to  understand  the  con-
stitution of  our  present  intellectual  world.  To  all  appearance
the  life  and  work  of  past  generations  have  so  completely  lost
their  organic  nature,  with  its  unified  and  vital  variety,  that
in  their  present  phase  they  have  turned  into  an  inorganic  mass
of  thought.  The  living  forces  of  growth,  as  geologists  tell  us,
in  the  vegetables  of  one  period  are  suspended  and  put  in
abeyance :  and  these  vegetables  pass  into  what  we  call  the
inorganic  and  inanimate  strata  of  the  earth.  Similarly,  when
all  vitality  has  been  quenched  or  rendered  torpid  in  the  struc-
tures of  thought,  they  sink  into  the  substance  from  which
individuals  draw  their  means  of  support.  This  inorganic  en-
velope of  thought  stands  to  the  mind,  almost  in  the  same  way
as  the  earth  and  its  products  stand  to  the  body  of  a  man.
If  the  one  is  our  material,  the  other  is  our  spiritual  substance.
In  the  one  our  mind,  as  in  the  other  our  body,  lives,  moves,
and  has  its  being.

But  in  each  case  besides  the  practical  need,  which  consumes
the  substance  as  dead  matter,  and  applies  it  to  use,  there
is  the  theoretical  bent  which  seeks  to  revive  and  restore  the
past  as  a  living  and  fully  developed  organism.  '  This  past,'
says  Hegel,  'is  traversed  by  the  individual,  in  the  same  way
as  one  who  begins  to  study  a  more  advanced  science  repeats
the  preliminary  lessons  with  which  he  had  long  been  acquainted,
in  order  to  bring  their  information  once  more  before  his  mind.
He  recalls  them :  but  his  interest  and  study  are  devoted  to
other  things.  In  the  same  way  the  individual  must  go  through
all  that  is  contained  in  the  several  stages  in  the  growth  of
the  universal  mind :  but  all  the  while  he  feels  that  they  are
forms  of  which  the  mind  has  divested  itself, — that  they  are
steps  on  a  road  which  has  been  long  ago  completed  and
levelled.  Thus,  points  of  learning,  which  in  former  times  tasked
the  mature  intellects  of  men,  are  now  reduced  to  the  level  of
exercises,  lessons,  and  even  games  of  boyhood :  and  in  the

e


Ixvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [ix.

progress  of  the  schoolroom  we  may  recognise  the  course  of
the  education  of  the  world,  drawn,  as  it  were,  in  shadowy
outline1.'

The  scope  of  historical  investigation  therefore  is  this.  It  has
to  show  how  every  shading  in  the  present  world  of  thought,
which  makes  our  spiritual  environment,  has  been  once  living
and  actual  with  an  independent  being  of  its  own :  that  in  these
formations,  which  are  produced  in  each  period  of  the  structural
development  of  reason,  the  universe  of  thought,  or  the  Idea,
is  always  whole  and  complete,  but  characterised  in  some  special
mode  which  for  that  period  seems  absolute  and  final.  Each
form  or  '  dimension '  of  thought,  in  which  the  totality  is  grasped
and  unified,  is  therefore  not  so  simple  or  elementary  as  it  may
seem  to  casual  observers  regarding  only  the  simplicity  of  lan-
guage :  it  is  a  total,  embracing  more  or  less  of  simpler  elements,
each  of  which  is  an  inferior  total,  though  in  this  larger  sphere
they  are  reduced  to  unity.  Thus  each  term  or  period  in  the
process  is  really  an  individualised  whole,  with  a  complex  inter-
connexion and  contrast  included  in  it :  it  is  concrete.  But
when  that  period  is  passing  away,  the  form  of  its  idea  is
separated,  and  retained,  apart  from  the  elements  which  con-
stituted it  a  real  totality;  and  then  the  mere  shading  or  shell
of  thought  is  left  abstract.  When  that  time  has  come,  a  special
form,  a  whole  act,  in  the  drama  of  humanity  has  been  trans-
formed into  an  empty  husk,  and  is  only  a  name.

The  sensuous  reality  of  life,  as  it  is  limited  in  space  and  time,
the  world  as  it  is  here  and  now,  is  however  the  earliest  cradle
of  humanity.  The  environment  of  sense  is  prior  in  the  order
of  time  to  the  environment  of  thought.  Who,  it  may  be  asked,
first  wrought  their  way  out  of  that  atmosphere  of  sense  into
an  ether  of  pure  thought  ?  Who  laid  the  first  foundations  of
that  world  of  reason  in  which  the  civilised  nations  of  the  modern
period  live  and  move  ?  The  answer  is,  the  Greek  philosophers :
and  in  the  first  place  the  philosophers  of  Elea.  For  Hegel
the  history  of  thought  begins  with  Greece.  All  that  preceded

'  Phenomenologie  des  Geistes,  p.  22.


ix.]  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  THOUGHT.  Ixvii

the  beginnings  of  Greek  speculation  has  only  a  secondary  in-
terest for  the  culture  of  the  West.

But  'many  heroes  lived  before  the  days  of  Agamemnon.'
The  records  of  culture  no  longer  begin  with  Greece.  Since  the
time  of  Hegel,  the  study  of  primitive  life,  and  of  the  rise  of
primitive  ideas  in  morals  and  religion,  has  enabled  us  to  some
extent  to  trace  the  early  gropings  of  barbarian  fancy  and  reason.
The  comparative  study  of  languages  has,  on  the  other  hand,
partly  revealed  the  contrivances  by  which  human  reason  has
risen  from  one  grade  of  consciousness  to  another.  The  sciences
of  language  and  of  primitive  culture  have  revealed  new  depths
in  the  development  of  thought,  where  thought  is  still  enveloped
in  nature  and  sense  and  symbols, — depths  which  were  scarcely
dreamed  of  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  present  century.  Here
and  there,  investigators  have  even  supposed  that  they  had  found
the  cradle  of  some  elements  in  art,  religion,  and  society,  or,
it  may  be,  of  humanity  itself.

These  researches  have  accomplished  much,  and  they  promise
to  accomplish  more.  But  for  the  present,  and  with  certain  ex-
planations to  be  given  later,  it  may  still  be  said  that  the  birthday
of  our  modern  world  is  the  moment  when  the  Greek  sages  began
to  construe  the  facts  of  the  universe.  Before  their  time  the
world  lay,  as  it  were,  in  a  dream-life.  Unconsciously  in  the
womb  of  time  the  spirit  of  the  world  was  growing, — its  faculties
forming  in  secresy  and  silence, — until  the  day  of  birth  when
the  preparations  were  completed,  and  the  young  spirit  drew  its
first  breath  in  the  air  of  thought.  The  history  of  thought  begins
with  the  Greeks :  and  the  utterances  of  Parmenides  mark  the
first  hard,  and  somewhat  material,  outlines  of  the  spiritual  world.
Other  nations  of  an  older  day  had  gathered  the  materials :  in
their  languages,  customs,  religions,  &c,,  there  was  an  unconscious
deposit  of  reason.  It  was  reserved  for  the  Greeks  to  recognise
that  reason :  and  thus  in  them  reason  became  conscious.

It  was  the  Greek  philosophers  who  distinctly  drew  the  dis-
tinction between  sense  and  thought,  and  who  first  translated
the  actual  forms  of  our  natural  life  into  their  abbreviated

e  a


Ixviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [ix.

equivalents  in  terms  of  logic.  The  struggle  to  carry  through
this  transition,  this  elevation  into  pure  thought,  is  what  gives
the  dramatic  interest  to  the  Dialogues  of  Plato  and  keeps  the
sympathy  of  his  readers  always  fresh.  The  endeavour  to  create
an  ideal  world,  which,  at  the  very  moment  when  it  is  created,
is  transformed  into  a  refined  and  attenuated  copy  of  the  sense-
world,  meets  us  in  almost  every  page  of  these  Dialogues.  In
Aristotle  this  effect  is  so  far  over  and  past ;  and  some  sort
of  intellectual  world,  perhaps  narrow  and  inadequate,  is  reached,
— the  only  world  which  the  brilliant,  but  restricted  life  of
Greece  allowed.  What  these  thinkers  began,  succeeding  ages
have  inherited  and  promoted.

In  the  environment  of  reason,  therefore,  which  encompasses
the  consciousness  of  our  age,  are  contained  under  a  generalised
form  and  with  elimination  of  all  the  particular  circumstances,
the  results  won  in  the  development  of  the  world.  These  results
now  constitute  the  familiar  joints  and  supports  in  the  frame-
work of  ordinary  thought :  around  them  cluster  our  imaginations.
During  each  epoch  of  history,  the  consciousness  of  the  world,
at  first  by  the  mouth  of  its  great  men,  its  illustrious  statesmen,
artists,  and  philosophers,  has  explicitly  recognised  and  trans-
lated into  terms  of  thought, — into  logical  language, — that  syn-
thesis of  the  world  which  the  period  had  practically  secured
by  the  action  of  its  children.  That  activity  went  on,  as  is  the
way  of  natural  activities,  unconsciously,  by  an  immanent
adaptation  of  means  to  ends,  not  in  conscious  straining  after
a  result.  For  the  conscious  effort  of  large  bodies  of  men
is  often  in  the  direction  contrary  to  the  Spirit  of  the  Time.
This  Spirit  of  the  Time,  the  absolute  mind,  which  is  neither
religious  nor  irreligious,  but  infinite  and  absolute  in  its  season,
is  the  real  motive  principle  of  the  world.  fThus  Hegel  is  the
i  foe  of  hero-worship.  Great  men  are  great  :but  the  Spirit  of
|the  Time  is  greater :  their  greatness  lies  in  understanding  it
-and  bringing  it  to  consciousness.  \  The  man,  who  would  act
independently  of  his  time  and  in  utter  separation  from  it,  is
likely  to  be  either  a  madman  or  a  fool.  Nor  need  the  synthesis


ix.]  PHILOSOPHY  AND THE  AGE.  Ixix

be  always  formulated  by  a  pbilosopher  in  order  to  leaven  the
minds  of  the  next  generation.  The  whole  system  of  thought, —
the  theory  of  the  time, — its  world,  in  short,  influences  minds,
although  it  is  not  explicitly  stated :  it  becomes  the  nursery
of  future  thought  and  speculation.  Philosophy  in  its  articulate
utterances  only  gives  expression  to  the  silent  and  half-conscious
grasp  of  reason  over  its  objects.  But  when  the  adaptation  is
not  merely  reached  but  seen  and  felt,  when  the  synthesis
or  world  of  that  time  is  made  an  object  of  self-consciousness,
the  exposition  has  made  an  advance  upon  the  period  which
preceded.  For  that  period  started  in  its  growth  from  the  last
exposition,  the  preceding  system  of  philosophy,  after  it  had
become  the  common  property  of  the  age,  and  taken  its  place
as  their  mental  equipment.

Each  exposition  or  perception  of  the  synthesis  by  the  philo-
sopher restores  or  re-affirms  the  unity  which  in  the  divided
energies  of  the  period,  in  its  progressive,  reforming,  and  re-
actionary aspects,  in  its  differentiating  time,  had  to  a  great
extent  been  ignored.  By  the  reforming,  progressive,  and  scien-
tific movement  of  which  each  period  is  full,  the  unity  or  totality
with  which  it  began  is  shown  to  be  defective.  The  value  of
the  initial  formula  is  impaired,  and  kept  in  abeyance :  and  the
differences  which  that  unity  involved,  or  which  were  implicitly
in  it,  are  now  explicitly  affirmed.  But  the  bent  towards  con-
centration is  a  natural  law  making  itself  felt  even  in  the  period
of  differentiation.  The  integrating  principle  is  present  and
active,  though  it  is  not  acknowledged.  By  means  of  the  philo-
sophical grasp,  or  act  of  self-consciousness,  that  unity  which
is  apt  to  be  lost  sight  of  in  the  divergent,  progressive,  and
scientific  period  is  enunciated  and  set  forth1 :  and  the  existing
contrasts  and  differences  which  the  re-forming  agency  has  called
into  vigorous  life  are  lifted  from  their  isolation  and  kept,  as
it  were,  suspended  in  the  unity2.  The  differences  are  not  lost
or  annihilated  :  but  they  come  back  to  a  centre,  they  find  them-
selves, as  it  were,  at  home :  they  lose  their  unfair  prominence
1  Gesetzt.  8  Aufgehoben.


Ixx  PROLEGOMENA.  [ix.

and  self-assertion,  and  sink  into  their  places  as  constituents  in
the  embracing1  organism1.  The  unity  which  comes  is  not  how-
ever the  same  as  the  unity  which  disappeared,  however  much
it  may  seem  so.  To  the  careless  glance  over  the  pages  of
Hegel's  Logic  it  often  seems  as  if  the  old  story  were  repeated
again  and  again,  till  it  ends  in  tedium  or  giddiness.  In  sooth,  it
is  tedious,  unless  one  sounds  it  to  the  depths.  For  Logic  hastens
in  the  course  of  a  few  paragraphs,  over  that  which  was  actually
accomplished  in  the  tardy  lapse  of  centuries.  The  Spirit  of  the
World  is  liberal  of  time.  With  the  Lord,  a  thousand  years
are  as  one  day.  The  impatience  of  man  leans  forward  for
reconciliations,  which  can  only  come  in  their  own  good  time.

The  mind  of  the  world  moves,  as  it  were,  in  cycles,  but  with
each  new  cycle  a  difference  supervenes,  a  new  tone  is  perceptible.
History  does  and  does  not  repeat  itself.  The  distinctions  and
the  unity  are  neither  of  them  the  same  after  each  union  as  they
were  before  it :  they  have  both  suffered  a  change :  it  is  a  new
scene  that  comes  above  the  horizon,  however  like  the  last  it
may  seem  to  the  casual  observer.  Thus  when  the  process  of
differentiation  is  repeated  anew,  it  is  repeated  in  higher  terms,
multiplied,  and  with  a  wider  range  of  meaning2.  Each  uni-
fication however  is  a  perfect  world,  a  complete  whole :  it  is  the
same  sum  of  being ;  but  in  each  successive  level  of  advance
it  receives  a  fuller  expression,  and  a  more  complexly-grouped
type  of  features3.  Such  is  the  rhythmic  movement, — the  ebb
and  flow  of  the  world,  always  recurring  with  the  same  burden
but  with  richer  variety  of  tones,  and  fuller  sense  of  itself.  The
sum  of  existence,  the  Absolute,  is  neither  increased  nor  dimin-
ished. The  world  was  as  much  a  rounded  total  to  the  Hebrew
Patriarchs  as  it  is  to  us :  without  advancing,  it  has  been,  we
may  say,  deepened,  developed,  and  organised.  In  one  part  of

1  Idee  :  ideeller  Weise.

2  Potenz.

3  '  Nicht  nur  die  Einsicht  in  die  Abhangigkeit  des  Einzelnen  vom  Ganzen  ist
allein  das  Wesentliche ;  ebenso  dass  jedes  Moment  selbst  unabhangig  vom  Ganzen
das  Ganze  ist,  und  dies  ist  das  Vertiefen  in  die  Sache.' (Hegel's  Leben,  p.  548.)


ix.]  THE RHYTHM  OF  THE WORLD.  Ixxi

the  sway  of  thought,  however,  there  is  a  fuller  recognition  of
the  differences,  gaps,  and  contradictions,  involved  in  the  last
synthesis, — which  recognition  it  is  the  tendency  of  scientific
inquiry,  of  reforming  efforts,  of  innovation,  to  produce :  and  in
the  other  half  of  the  sway,  there  is  a  stronger  and  more  ex-
tended grasp  taken  by  the  unity  pervading  these  differences,
— which  is  the  work  appointed  to  philosophy  gathering  up  the
results  of  science  and  practical  amendments.

To  this  rhythmical  movement  Hegel  has  appropriated  the
name  of  Dialectic.  The  name  probably  came  from  Plato,  where  it
denotes  the  process  which  brings  the  '  many'  under  the  '  one,'  and
divides  the  '  one  '  into  the  '  many.'  But  how,  it  may  be  asked,
does  difference  spring  up,  if  we  begin  with  unity,  and  how  do
the  differences  return  into  the  unity  ?  In  other  words,  given  a
universal,  how  are  we  ever  to  get  at  particulars,  and  how  will
these  particulars  ever  give  rise  to  a  real  individual  ?  Such  is  the
problem,  in  the  technical  language  of  the  Logic  of  the  '  Notion.'
But  the  unity,  which  in  its  actual  shape  is  formulated  by  philo-
sophers, is  not  mere  monotony  without  differences.  Because  it
is  a  living  thing,  it  contains  a  complex  inter-action  of  principles  :
it  is  not  a  single  line  of  action,  but  the  organic  confluence  of
several.  No  one  single  principle  by  itself  is  enough  to  state  a
life,  a  character,  or  a  period.  Now  as  the  unity  comes  before
the  eye  of  the  single  thinker,  it  is  seldom  or  never  grasped  with
all  its  fulness  of  life  and  difference.  The  whole  synthesis,
although  it  is  implicitly  present,  is  not  consciously  apprehended,
but  for  the  most  part  taken  on  one  side  only,  one  emphatic
aspect  into  which  it  has  concentrated  itself.  And  even  if  the
master  could  grasp  the  whole,  could  see  the  unity  of  the  age
in  all  its  differences,  his  followers  and  the  popular  mind  would
not  imitate  him.  While  his  grasp  of  comprehension  may  pos-
sibly have  been  thorough,  though  he  may  have  seen  life  whole
through  all  its  differences,  inequalities,  and  schisms,  and  with  all
these  into  the  unity  beyond,  the  crowd  who  follow  him  are  soon
reduced  to  lay  exclusive  stress  on  some  one  side  of  his  theory.
Some  of  them  see  the  totality  from  one  aspect,  some  from


Ixxii  PROLEGOMENA.  [ix.

another.  It  is  indeed  the  whole  which  in  a  certain  sense  they
see :  but  it  is  the  whole  narrowed  down  to  a  point.  While  his
theory  was  a  comprehensive  (and  concrete)  grasp,  including  and
harmonising  many  things  which  seem  otherwise  wide  apart,
theirs  is  (abstract  and)  inadequate :  it  fixes  on  a  single  point,  which
is  thus  withdrawn  from  its  living  and  meaning-giving  context,
and  left  as  an  empty  name.  Now  it  is  the  very  nature  of
popular  reasoning  to  tend  to  abstractions,  in  this  sense  of  the
word.  Popular  thought  wants  the  perseverance  necessary  to
retain  a  whole  truth,  and  so  is  contented  with  a  partial  image.
It  seeks  for  definiteness  and  precision :  it  likes  to  have  some-
thing distinctly  before  it,  visible  to  the  eye  of  imagination,  and
capable  of  being  stated  in  a  clear  and  unambiguous  formula  for
the  intellect.

Thus  it  comes  about  that  the  concrete  or  adequate  synthesis
which  should  have  appeared  in  the  self-conscious  thought  of  the
period,  when  it  reflected  upon  what  it  was,  has  been  replaced  by
a  narrow  and  one-sided  formula,  a  universal  which  does  not  in-
clude all  the  particulars.  One  predominant  side  of  the  synthesis
steals  the  place  of  the  total :  what  should  have  been  universal
has  lowered  itself  and  shrunk  into  a  particular.  Not  indeed
the  same  particular  as  existed  before  the  union :  because  it  has
been  influenced  by  the  synthesis,  so  as  to  issue  with  a  new
colouring,  as  if  it  had  been  steeped  in  a  fresh  liquid.  But  still
it  is  a  particular  :  and  as  such,  a  new  particular  is  evoked  in
antagonism  to  it,  exhibiting  a  new  element  latent  in  the
synthesis.  If  the  first  side  of  the  antithesis  which  claims  to  be
the  total,  or  universal,  be  called  Conservative  ;  the  second  must
be  called  Reforming  or  Progressive.  If  the  first  step  is  Dog-
matic, the  second  is  Sceptical.  If  the  one  side  assumes  to  be
the  whole,  the  other  practically  refutes  the  assumption.  If  the
one  agency  clings  blindly  to  the  unity,  as  when  good  men  rally
round  the  central  idea  of  religion,  the  other  as  tenaciously  and
narrowly  holds  to  the  difference,  as  when  science  displays  the
struggle  for  existence  among  the  myriads  of  cells  and  organisms.
They  are  two  warring  abstractions,  each  in  a  different  direction.


x.]  LAW  OF  THE THREE  STAGES.  Ixxiii

But  as  they  are  the  offspring  of  one  parent, — as  they  have  each
in  their  own  way  narrowed  the  whole  down  to  a  point,  it  cannot
but  be  that  when  they  evolve  or  develope  all  that  is  in  them,  they
will  ultimately  coincide,  and  complete  each  other.  The  contra-
diction will  not  disappear  until  it  has  been  persistently  worked
out, — when  each  opposing-  member  which  was  potentially  a  total
has  become  what  it  was  by  its  own  nature  destined  to  be.  And
this  disappearance  of  the  antithesis  is  the  reappearance  of  the
unity  in  all  its  strength,  reinforced  with  all  the  wealth  of  new
distinctions.

Thus  on  a  large  scale  we  have  seen  the  pulse  of  the  universal
movement  of  thought.  The  same  law  is  repeated  in  the  lesser
cycles  that  run  in  each  great  period.  It  is  the  same  law  again
which  reappears  in  every  one  of  these  categories,  to  which  the
actualised  thought  of  an  age  has  been  reduced.  In  every  term
of  thought  there  are  the  three  stages  or  elements :  the  original
narrow  definiteness,  claiming  to  be  self-sufficient, — the  antagon-
ism and  criticism  to  which  this  gives  rise,  —  and  the  union
which  results  when  the  two  supplement  and  modify  each  other.
In  every  notion  there  is  a  definite  kernel,  with  rigid  outlines  as
if  it  were  immovable :  there  is  a  revulsion  against  such  ex-
clusiveness,  a  questioning  and  critical  attitude :  and  there  is  the
complete  notion,  where  the  two  first  stages  interpenetrate.


CHAPTER  X.

ABSTRACT AND CONCRETE: AND THE ORDINARY LOGIC.

THE  ordinary  logic-books  have  made  us  all  familiar  with  the
popular  distinction  between  Abstract  and  Concrete.  By  a  con-
crete term  they  mean  the  name  of  an  existence  or  reality  which
is  obvious  to  the  senses,  and  is  found  in  time  and  place ; — or  they
mean  the  name  of  an  attribute  when  we  expressly  or  tacitly


Ixxiv  PROLEGOMENA.  [x.

recognise  its  dependence  upon  such  a  thing*  of  the  senses.  When,
on  the  contrary,  the  attribute  is  forcibly  withdrawn  from  its  con-
text and  made  an  independent  entity  in  the  mind,  the  term  ex-
pressing- it  becomes  in  the  usual  phraseology  abstract.  In  this
acceptation  all  the  terms  of  mind,  of  science,  and  of  the  intel-
ligible world,  are  in  popular  language  called  abstract.  And
tbere  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  popular  use  of  these  terms,  or
the  popular  apprehension  of  what  constitutes  reality, — for  that  is
what  it  comes  to, — is  sufficiently  represented  by  the  ordinary
logic-books.  So  that  if  the  whole  business  of  the  logician  lies  in
formulating  the  distinctions  prevalent  in  popular  thought,  the
ordinary  logic  is  correct.

Now  the  popular  logic  of  the  day, — the  logic  which  is  taught
in  our  schools  and  universities — has  three  sources. — In  the  first
place,  but  in  a  slight  degree,  it  trenches  upon  the  province  of
psychology,  and  gives  some  account  of  the  operation  by  which
concepts  are  supposed  to  be  formed,  and  of  the  errors  or  fallacies
which  naturally  creep  into  the  process  of  reasoning.  This  is  the
more  strictly  modern,  the  descriptive  part  of  our  logic-books. —
But,  secondly,  the  logic  of  our  youth  rests  in  a  much  higher
degree  upon  the  venerable  authority  of  Aristotle.  That  logic  in
its  own  compass  was  a  masterpiece  of  analysis,  and  for  many
centuries  maintained  an  ascendancy  over  thought,  which  was
often  faulty,  only  because  it  was  not  thorough  enough.  But  it
was  an  analysis  of  the  beginnings  of  reason  only,  not  of  its
matured  and  expanded  forms.  The  Logic  of  Aristotle  gave  a
systematic  account  of  the  procedure  of  the  ordinary  thought,
which  could  be  observed  in  popular  discussions  and  practical
oratory.  As  Lord  Bacon  remarked,  it  did  little  else  than  state,
and,  it  may  be,  exaggerate  the  rationale  of  popular  thought.  A
high  level  of  popular  thought  it  unquestionably  was,  which
Aristotle  had  to  investigate, — a  level  which  many  generations  of
less  favoured  races  were  unable  to  reach.  But  there  were  defects
in  this  Logic  which  fatally  marred  the  prospects  of  its  general
usefulness.  It  was  not  a  logic  of  scientific  thought :  that  is,  its
object  was  not  truth  or  knowledge  in  the  first  place,  and  con-


x.j  ARISTOTLE  AND  BACON.  Ixxv

viction  only  in  the  second.  The  thoughts  of  Greece  were
greatest  and  most  active  in  the  line  of  popular  action  for  the  city
and  the  public  interests,  in  the  discussions,  the  quibbles,  the
fallacies,  and  rhetorical  arts  of  the  barber's  shop  and  the  '  agora.'
The  aim  of  such  exercises  was  to  convince,  to  demonstrate,  to
persuade,  to  overcome ; — it  might  be  for  good  and  truth,  but  also
it  might  not.  And  accordingly  the  Logic  of  Aristotle  has  for  its
end  and  canon  the  power  to  convince  and  to  give  demonstrative
certainty.  This  is  in  the  main  its  characteristic.  And  it  is  this
analysis  of  popular  thought,  following  the  popular  distinctions  and
values  of  things,  which  the  second,  deductive,  and  fundamental
portion  of  the  received  logic-books  in  modern  times  presents.

But  when  the  Sciences  began  to  fill  up  the  lacunae  in  popular
thought,  or  at  least  pointed  them  tfat :  when  the  increase  of
knowledge  showed  how  fragmentary  and  crudely-constructed  the
edifice  of  popular  thought  was,  the  Logic  of  Aristotle  was  felt  to
fall  short.  A  new  logic  was  needed,  which  would  do  for  thought,
enlarged  and  deepened  by  science,  what  Aristotle  had  done  for
the  unenlarged  popular  thought.  This  want  Lord  Bacon  tried  to
satisfy.  And  he  pointed  out,  vaguely,  but  zealously  and  in  a
noble  spirit,  the  end  which  that  new  logic  had  to  accomplish.
Lord  Bacon,  however,  could  not  do  more  than  state  these  bold
suggestions :  he  had  not  the  power  to  execute  them.  He
imagined  that  he  could  display  a  method,  by  which  science
would  make  incredible  advances,  and  the  kingdom  of  truth  in  a
few  years  come  into  the  world.  But  this  is  a  sort  of  thing
which  no  man  can  do.  Plato  had  tried  to  do  it  for  the  social  life
of  Athens.  What  Plato  could  not  do  for  the  political  world  of
Greece,  Bacon  could  not  do  for  the  intellectual  world  in  his  time :
for  as  the  Athenian  worked  under  the  shadow  of  his  own  state,
over-mastered  even  without  his  knowledge  by  the  ordinances  of
Athens,  so  the  Englishman  was  evidently  enthralled  by  the
authority  of  that  very  Aristotelian  logic  which  he  condemned.
What  Aristotle  had  for  ages  been  supposed  to  do,  no  philosopher
could  do  for  the  new  spirit  of  inquiry  which  had  risen  in  and
before  the  days  of  Bacon.  That  spirit,  as  exhibited  in  his  great


Ixxvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [x.

contemporaries,  Bacon  could  not  rightly  understand  or  appre-
ciate. The  spirit  of  free  science,  of  critical  investigation,  of
inductive  inquiry,  must  and  did  constitute  its  forms,  legislation,
and  methods  for  itself.  For  no  philosopher  can  lay  down  laws
or  methods  beforehand  which  the  sciences  must  follow.  The
logician  only  comes  after,  and,  appreciating  and  discovering  the
not  always  conspicuous  methods  of  knowledge,  endeavours  to
gather  them  up  and  give  them  their  proper  place  in  the  grand
total  of  human  thought,  correcting  its  inadequacies  by  their  aid,
and  completing  their  divisions  by  its  larger  unities.  Or  rather
this  is  a  picture  of  what  English  logic  might  have  done.  But  it
does  not  do  so  in  the  ordinary  and  valuable  text-books  on  the
subject.  What  it  does  do,  is  rather  as  follows.  To  the  second
and  fundamental  part  which  it  subjects  to  a  few  unimportant
alterations, — i.e.  to  the  doctrine  of  terms,  propositions,  and
reasonings, — it  subjoins  an  enumeration  of  the  methods  used  in
the  sciences.

To  the  rude  minds  of  the  Teutonic  peoples  the  logical  system
of  Aristotle  had  seemed  almost  a  divine  revelation.  From  the
brilliant  intellect  of  Greece  a  hand  was  stretched  to  help  them  in
the  arrangement  of  their  religious  beliefs.  The  Church  accepted
the  aid  of  logic,  foreign  though  logic  was  to  its  natural  bent,  as
eagerly  as  the  political  world  tried  for  a  while  to  draw  support
from  the  effete  forms  of  the  Roman  Empire.  So  the  advancing
Sciences  of  modern  times  looked  upon  the  Inductive  Logic  of
Mill  in  the  light  of  a  new  revelation.  The  vigorous  action  of
the  sciences  hailed  a  systematic  account  of  its  methods  almost  as
eagerly  as  the  strong,  but  untaught  intellect  of  the  barbarian
world  welcomed  the  remains  of  ancient  philosophy.  For  the  first
time  the  sciences,  which  had  been  working  blindly  or  instinc-
tively, but  with  excellent  success,  found  their  procedure  stated
clearly  and  definitely,  yet  without  any  attempt  to  reduce  their
varied  life  to  the  Procrustean  bed  of  mathematics,  which  had
once  been  held  to  possess  a  monopoly  of  methods.  The  enormous
influence  of  the  physical  sciences  saw  itself  reflected  in  a  distinct
logical  outline  :  and  the  new  logic  became  the  dominant  philo-


x.]  THE  INDUCTIVE LOGIC.  Ixxvii

sophy.  Such  is  the  proud  position  of  the  Inductive  Logic.
Enthusiastic  students  of  science  in  all  countries,  who  were  not
inaccessible  to  wider  culture,  used  quotations  from  Mill  to  adorn
and  authorise  their  works.  A  period  of  speculation  in  the
scientific  world  succeeded  the  period  of  experiment,  in  which  facts
had  been  collected  and  registered.  A  chapter  on  Method  be-
came a  necessary  introduction  to  all  higher  scientific  treatises.
In  our  universities  methodology  was  prodigally  applied  to  the
study  of  ancient  philosophy.  And  so  long  as  the  scientific  epoch
lasts  in  its  one-sided  prominence,  so  long  the  theory  of  inductive
and  experimental  methods  may  dominate  the  intellectual  world.

It  is  the  business  of  the  Inductive  Logic  to  do  for  the  special
sphere  of  the  special  sciences,  what  the  Aristotelian  logic  did  for
the  general  sphere  of  common  consciousness.  Retaining  the
latter  with  certain  modifications,  although  it  has  now  lost  its
meaning  in  the  changed  outlines  of  the  intellectual  world,  In-
ductive Logic  adds  a  methodology  of  the  sciences,  without  how-
ever founding  this  methodology  upon  a  comprehensive  analysis  of
thought  as  a  whole,  when  enlarged  and  enlightened  by  the  work
of  the  sciences.  Hence  the  two  portions, — the  old  logic,  muti-
lated and  severed  from  the  Greek  world  it  grew  out  of,  and  the
new  Inductive  or  specially-scientific  logic,  not  going  beyond  a
mere  classification  of  methods, — can  never  combine,  any  more
than  oil  and  water.  And  the  little  psychology,  which  is  some-
times added,  does  not  contribute  much  to  the  harmony.

In  these  circumstances  the  ordinary  logic,  in  its  fundamental
terms,  is  more  on  the  level  of  popular  thought,  than  in  a  strictly
scientific  region,  and  does  not,  unless  we  are  to  except  the  work
of  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  attempt  to  unite  the  two  regions,  and
examine  the  fundamental  basis  of  thought  on  which  scientific
methods  rest.  The  case  of  Concrete  and  Abstract  will  illustrate
what  has  been  said.  To  popular  thought  the  sense-world  is  con-
crete :  the  intellectual  world  abstract.  And  so  it  is  in  the
ordinary  logic.  Now  the  difference  between  the  two  uses  of  the
term  is  not  a  mere  arbitrary  change  of  names.  When  we  strip
the  sense-world  of  its  concreteness,  and  say  that  it  is  better


Ixxviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [x.

described,  in  the  first  instance,  as  a  chaotic  mass  of  excluding
elements,  a  '  manifold,'  and  in  the  second  instance  as  a  series  of
abstractions,  drawn  out  of  this  congeries  by  the  intellect,  the
change  of  language  marks  the  total  change  of  position  between
.the  philosophic  and  the  popular  consciousness.  Reality  and  con-
creteness  as  estimated  by  the  one  line  of  thought  are  the  very
reverse  of  those  of  the  other.  A  mere  sense-world  to  the
philosopher  is  what  an  irreducible  nebula  is  to  the  speculative
astronomer.  Out  of  that  nebula  the  theorist  expects  that  a  solar
system,  a  concrete  unity,  will  one  day  spring.  Even  so  from
mere  sense  the  concrete  notion  of  reason  will  be  evolved.  But
in  the  form  of  sense  the  matter  of  sense  is  not  concrete,  a  unity
of  opposites :  but  a  chaos.  And,  in  addition,  even  when  the
chaos  begins  to  be  reduced  to  order,  the  primary  result,  and  that
which  popular  languages  express  and  retain,  is  an  abstraction,
the  one-sided  exposition  and  fixing  of  a  single  feature  in  a  thing.
Every  name  in  language  is  abstract,  compared  with  the  amount
of  our  knowledge  about  it.

The  apprehension  of  a  thing  from  one  side  or  aspect, — the
apprehension  of  one  thing  apart  from  its  connexions, — the
retention  of  a  term  or  formula  apart  from  its  context, — is  what
Hegel  terms  '  abstract.'  Ordinary  terms  are  essentially  abstract.
They  spring  from  something  which  would  in  strictness  be
described  not  as  concrete,  but  as  chaos : — as  the  indefinite,  or
'  manifold '  of  sensation.  The  primary  object  of  sight  or  sense,
the  scene  or  inter-action  of  several  objects  (if  we  may  thus  ana-
lyse it  by  an  act  of  subsequent  reflection),  is  so  characterized.
But  the  first  conceptions,  which  spring  from  this  group  when
it  is  analysed,  are  abstract :  they  are  each  severed  from  the
continuity  of  their  existence.  In  the  same  sense  we  call
Political  Economy  an  abstract  science,  because  it  looks  upon
man  as  a  money-making  and  money-distributing  creature,  and
keeps  out  of  sight  his  other  qualities.  Our  notions  in  this
way  are  more  abstract  or  more  concrete,  according  as  our  grasp
of  thought  extends  to  less  or  more  of  the  elements  which  are
necessarily  pre-supposed  by  them.  On  the  other  hand,  when


x.]  ABSTRACT  THOUGHT.  Ixxix

a  terra  of  thought  owns  and  emphasises  its  solidarity  with
others,  when  it  is  not  circumscribed  to  a  single  relation,  but
becomes  a  focus  in  which  a  variety  of  relations  converge,  when
it  is  placed  in  its  right  post  in  the  organism  of  thought,  its
limits  and  qualifications  as  it  were  recognised,  and  its  degree,
ascertained, — then  that  term  of  thought  is  { concrete.'  A  con-
crete notion  is  a  notion  in  its  totality,  looking  before  and  after,
connected  indissolubly  with  others :  a  unity  of  elements,  a
meeting-point  of  opposites.  An  abstract  notion  is  one  with-
drawn from  everything  that  naturally  goes  along  with  it,  and
enters  into  its  constitution.

In  a  short  essay,  with  much  grim  humour  and  quaint  illustra-
tions, Hegel  tried  to  show  what  was  meant  by  the  name
'  abstract/  which  in  his  use  of  it  denotes  the  cardinal  vice  of
analytical  thought.  From  this  essay,  entitled  '  Who  is  the
Abstract  Thinker l  ? '  it  may  be  interesting  to  quote  a  few
lines.  '  A  murderer  is,  we  may  suppose,  led  to  the  scaffold.
In  the  eyes  of  the  multitude  he  is  a  murderer  and  nothing
more.  The  ladies  perhaps  may  make  the  remark  that  he  is
a  strong,  handsome,  and  interesting  man.  At  such  a  remark
the  populace  is  horrified.  "  What !  a  murderer  handsome  ?
Can  anybody's  mind  be  so  low  as  to  call  a  murderer  hand-
some? You  must  be  little  better  yourselves."  And  per-
haps a  priest  who  sees  into  the  heart,  and  knows  the  reasons
of  things,  will  point  to  this  remark,  as  evidence  of  the  cor-
ruption of  morals  prevailing  among  the  upper  classes.  A
student  of  character,  again,  inquires  into  the  antecedents  of
the  criminal's  education :  he  finds  a  wrong  set  of  relations
between  father  and  mother;  or  he  finds  out  that  this  man
has  suffered  severely  for  some  trifling  offence,  and  that  under
the  bitter  feelings  thus  produced  he  has  spurned  the  orders  of
society,  and  cannot  support  himself  otherwise  than  by  crime.
No  doubt  there  will  be  people  who  when  they  hear  this  ex-
planation will  say  "  Does  this  person  then  mean  to  excuse
the  murderer  ? "  In  my  youth  I  remember  hearing  a  city

1  '  Wer  denkt  abstrakt?'  (Vennischte  Schriften,  vol.  II.  p.  402.)


Ixxx  PROLEGOMENA.  [XL

magistrate  complain  that  book-writers  were  going  too  far,
and  trying  to  root  out  Christianity  and  good  morals  altogether.
Some  one,  it  appeared,  had  written  a  defence  of  suicide.  It
was  horrible  !  too  horrible  !  On  further  inquiry  it  turned  out
that  the  book  in  question  was  the  "  Sorrows  of  Werther."

'  By  abstract  thinking,  then,  is  meant  that  in  the  murderer
we  see  nothing  but  the  simple  fact  that  he  is  a  murderer,
and  by  this  single  quality  annihilate  all  the  human  nature
which  is  in  him.  The  polished  and  sentimental  world  of
Leipsic  thought  otherwise.  They  threw  their  bouquets,  and
twined  their  flowers  round  the  wheel  and  the  criminal  who
was  fastened  to  it. — But  this  also  is  the  opposite  pole  of
abstraction. — It  was  in  a  different  strain  that  I  once  heard  a
poor  old  woman,  an  inmate  of  the  poor's-house,  rise  above
the  abstraction  of  the  murderer.  The  sun  shone,  as  the  severed
head  was  laid  upon  the  scaffold.  "  How  finely,"  said  the  woman,
"  does  God's  gracious  sun  lighten  up  Binder's  head  !  "  We
often  say  of  a  poor  creature  who  excites  our  anger  that  he
is  not  worth  the  sun  shining  on  him.  That  woman  saw  that
the  murderer's  head  was  in  the  sunlight,  and  that  it  had  not
become  quite  worthless.  She  raised  him  from  the  punishment
of  the  scaffold  into  the  sunlit  grace  of  God.  It  was  not
by  her  violets  and  her  sentimental  conceit  that  she  brought
about  the  reconciliation :  she  saw  him  in  the  sun  above  received
into  grace.'


CHAPTER  XI.

FROM SENSE TO THOUGHT.

EVERY  period  as  we  have  seen  translates  the  sensuous  fact
of  its  life  into  a  formula  of  thought,  and  fixes  it  in  definite
characters.  The  various  parts  of  existence,  and  existence  as
a  whole,  are  stripped  of  their  sensible  or  factual  nature,  in


xr.]  THE  RISE  OF  NUMBER.  Ixxxi

which  we  originally  feel  and  come  into  contact  with  them,
and  are  reduced  to  their  simple  equivalents  in  terms  of  thought.
From  sense  and  immediate  feeling  there  is,  in  the  first  place.
generated  a  materialised  conception  ;  and  from  that,  in  the  second
place,  comes  a  thought  or  notion  proper,  which  however  is  pri-
_niarily__abstract:  The  phenomenon  may,  perhaps,  be  illustrated
by  the  case  of  numbers.  To  us  numbers  are  most  unquestionably
realities,  however  abstract  we  find  them:  and  most  people
would  be  surprised  to  hear  that  numbers  qua  numbers  had
at  one  time  no  existence  in  thought.  And  yet  this  is  a  fact
well  known  to  the  philologist.  In  Greek,  for  example,  we
meet  the  distinction  between  numbers  in  the  abstract,  pure
numbers  (such  as  four  and  six),  and  bodily  or  physical  numbers
(such  as  four  men,  six  trees).  Aristotle  even  speaks  of  'fiery'
and  '  earthen'  numbers  *.  The  geometrical  aspect  under  which
numbers  were  regarded  by  the  Greeks  bears  in  the  same  direction.
But  another  phenomenon  in  language  tells  the  tale  more  dis-
tinctly2. Abundantly  in  Sanscrit  and  Greek,  more  rarely  in
Zend  and  Teutonic,  and  here  and  there  in  the  Semitic  languages,
we  meet  with  what  is  known  as  the  dual  number,  a  special  gram-
matical form  intended  to  express  a  pair  of  objects.  The  witty
remark  of  Du  Ponceau3  concerning  the  Greek  dual,  that  it  had
apparently  been  invented  only  for  lovers  and  married  people,  may
illustrate  its  uses,  but  hardly  suffices  to  explain  its  existence
in  language.  But  a  comparison  of  barbarian  dialects  serves
to  show  that  the  dual  is,  as  it  were,  a  prelude  to  the  plural,
—  a  first  attempt  to  grasp  the  notion  of  plurality  in  a  definite
way,  which  served  its  turn  in  primitive  society,  but  after-
wards disappeared,  when  the  plural  had  been  developed,  and  the
numerals  had  attained  a  form  of  their  own.  If  this  be  so,


1  Pure  number  is  apiO^bs  [tovaSiKus  :  applied  number  is  dpi9fi.bs  <pv<TiK6s  or  <rw/«x-
rt«(5s. Aristotle,  Metaph.  N.  5,  speaks  of  dptOfios  itvpwos  ff  ytyvos.

2  See  L.  Geiger  :  Ursprung  und  Entwickelung  der  menschlicheu  Sprache  und
Vernunft. (Vol.  I.  p. 380.) And  Gabelenz  (die melanesischen Sprachen) in
the  Abhandlungen  der  Sachsischen  Gesellschaft  der  Wissenschaften  (VIII),  1861.
pp.  89-91.

3  Memoire  sur  le  systeme  grammatical,  &c.  p.  155.

f


Ixxxii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xi.

the  dual  is  what  physiologists  call  a  rudimentary  organ,  and  tells
the  same  story  as  these  organs  do  of  the  processes  of  nature.

The  language  of  the  Melanesian  island  of  Annatom,  one  of
the  New  Hebrides,  may  be  taken  as  an  instance  of  a  state
of  speech  in  which  the  dual  is  natural.  That  language  possesses
a  fourfold  distinction  of  number  in  its  personal  pronouns,  a
different  form  to  mark  the  singular,  dual,  trial,  and  plural :
and  the  pronoun  of  the  first  person  plural  distinguishes  in
addition  whether  the  person  addressed  is  or  is  not  included  in
the  'we-two,'  'we-three/  or  'we-many'  of  the  speaker.  The
same  language  however  possesses  only  the  first  three  numerals,
and  in  the  translation  of  the  Bible  into  this  dialect  it  was
necessary  to  introduce  the  English  words,  four,  five,  &c.  The
two  facts  must  be  taken  together :  the  luxuriance  of  the  personal
pronouns  and  the  scanty  development  of  numerals  in  such
languages  are  two  phenomena  of  the  same  law.  The  numeral
'  four  '  to  these  tribes  bears  the  meaning  of  '  many '  or  '  several.'
Another  fact  points  in  the  same  direction.  In  many  languages,
such  as  those  of  Further  India  and  Mexico,  it  is  customary  in
numbering  to  use  what  W.  von  Humboldt  has  called  class-
words.  Thus  in  Malay,  instead  of  '  five  boys '  the  phrase
used  is  '  boy  five-man : '  in  other  words,  the  numerals  are  sup-
posed to  inhere  as  yet  in  objects  of  a  special  kind  or  common
occurrence1.  And  among  the  South  Sea  Islanders  the  con-
sciousness of  number  is  decidedly  personal :  that  is  to  say,  the
distinction  between  one  and  two  is  first  conceived  as  a  dis-
tinction between  '  I '  and  '  we  two.'  Even  this  amount  of
simplification  surpasses  what  is  found  amongst  some  Australian
tribes.  There  we  find  four  duals  :  one  for  brothers  and  sisters  :
one  for  parents  and  children :  one  for  husbands  and  wives  :
and  one  between  brothers-in-law 2.  Each  pair  has  a  different
form.  We  thus  see  to  what  early  language  is  applied :  not  to

1  W.  von  Humboldt: Verschiedenheit  des  menschlichen  Sprachbaues,  p.  423
(ed.  1841).

2  Capt.  Grey  :  Vocabulary  of  the  dialects  of  S.  W.  Australia,  pp.  xxi.  and  104.
(1840).


XL]  THE  NUMERALS.  Ixxxiii

designate  the  objects  of  nature,  but  the  members  of  the  primitive
family.  The  consciousness  of  numbers  was  first  awakened  by
the  need  of  distinguishing-  and  combining  men  and  women  in
the  narrow  circle  of  barbarian  life.

Numbers  were  at  first  immersed  in  the  persons,  and  then,
as  things  came  to  be  considered  also,  in  the  things  numbered.
The  mind  seems  to  have  proceeded  slowly  from  the  vague  one
to  definite  numbers.  And  the  first  decided  step  was  taken
towards  an  apprehension  of  numbers  when  two  was  distinguished
from  one,  and  the  distinction  was  made  part  of  the  personal
terminations.  The  plural  was  a  further  step  in  the  same
direction :  the  real  value  of  which,  however,  did  not  become
apparent  until  the  numerals  had  been  separately  established  in
forms  of  their  own.  When  that  was  accomplished,  the  special
form  of  the  dual  became  useless  :  it  had  outlived  its  purpose,
and  henceforth  it  ceased  to  have  any  but  that  poetical  beauty
which  often  adorns  the  once  natural,  but  now  obsolete  creations
of  the  past.  When  the  numerals  were  thus  emancipated  from
their  material  and  sensuous  environment,  quantity  was  trans-
lated from  outward  being  in  its  embodiments  into  a  form  of
thought.  At  first,  indeed,  it  was  placed  in  an  ethereal  or
imaginative  space,  the  counterpart  as  it  were  of  the  sensuous
space  in  which  it  had  been  previously  immersed.  It  became  a
denizen  of  the  mental  region,  as  it  had  been  before  a  habitant
of  the  sense-world.

The  mind  was  informed  with  quantity  in  the  shape  of
number :  but  it  does  not  follow  from  this,  that  the  new  product
was  comprehended,  or  the  process  of  its  production  kept  in
view.  Like  all  new  inventions  (and  numeration  may  fairly  be
classed  under  that  head),  it  was  laid  hold  of,  and  all  its
consequences,  results,  and  uses  estimated  and  realised  by  the
practical  and  defining  intellect.  In  one  direction,  it  became,
like  many  new  inventions  in  the  early  days  of  society,  a  magic
charm,  and  was  invested  with  mystery,  sacredness,  and  mar-
vellous powers.  But  the  intelligent  mind, — the  understanding,
— resolved  to  make  better  use  of  the  new  instrument:  and

f  2


fcxxiv  PROLEGOMENA.  [xi.

that  in  two  ways,  in  practical  work  and  in  theory.  On  the
one  hand  it  was  applied  practically  in  the  dealings  of  life, —
in  commerce,  contracts,  legislation,  and  religion.  On  the  other
hand,  the  new  conception  of  number,  which  common  sense  and
the  instinctive  action  of  men  had  evolved,  was  carried  out  in
all  its  theory :  it  was  analysed  in  all  directions,  and  its  elements
combined  in  all  possible  ways.  The  result  was  the  science  of
arithmetic,  and  mathematics  in  general.  Such  consequences
did  the  analytic  understanding  derive  from  the  analysis  of  its
datum, — the  fact  of  quantity  freed  from  its  sensuous  envelope.

The  general  action  of  understanding,  or  practical  thought,
is  of  this  kind.  It  accepts  the  data  of  conception,  the  results
of  rational  development  from  sensation,  as  they  occur :  and
tries  to  appreciate  them,  to  give  them  precision,  to  carry  them
into  details,  and  to  analyse  them  until  their  utmost  limits  of
meaning  are  explored.  Where  they  have  come  from,  and  where
they  lead  to, — the  process  out  of  which  they  spring,  and  which
fixes  the  extent  of  their  validity, — are  questions  of  no  interest  to
the  understanding.  It  takes  its  objects,  as  given  in  popular  con-
ception, as  fixed  and  ultimate  entities  to  be  expounded  in  detail.

We  have  taken  number  as  one  example  of  the  transference
of  a  sensible  or  sense-immersed  fact  into  a  form  of  thought :
but  a  form  which  is  still  placed  in  a  superior  or  mental  space.
One  advantage  of  taking  number  as  illustration,  is  that  num-
bered things  are  distinguished  from  numbers  in  an  emphatic
and  recognised  way.  Nobody  will  dispute  that  the  abstraction,
as  it  is  called,  has  an  existence  of  its  own,  and  can  be  made  a
legitimate  object  of  independent  investigation.  But  if  the
process  be  more  obvious  in  the  case  of  the  numerals,  there  must
have  been  a  similar  course  of  development  leading  to  the
pronouns,  the  prepositions,  and  the  auxiliary  verbs.  In  these
instances  we  can  more  or  less  trace  the  process  by  which  there
grew  up  in  language  an  independent  world  of  thought :  we  can
see  the  natural  existence  passing  out  of  the  range  of  the  senses
into  spiritual  relations.  Before  our  eyes  a  world  of  reason  is
slowly  constituting  itself  in  the  history  of  culture :  and  we,


xi.]  FIGURATE  CONCEPTIONS.  Ixxxv

who  live  now,  enter  upon  the  inheritance  which  past  ages
have  laid  up  for  us.  There  is,  however,  a  fundamental  difference
between  the  way  in  which  these  results  look  to  us  now,  and
the  way  in  which  they  originally  organised  themselves.  The
child  who  begins  to  learn  a  language  finds  the  members  of  it
all,  as  it  were,  upon  one  level :  adjectives,  adverbs,  prepositions,
and  verbs  confront  him  with  the  same  authority  and  rank.
This  appearance  is  deceptive  :  it  may  easily  suggest  that  the
words  are  not  members  in  an  organism,  in  and  out  of  which
they  have  developed.  They  are  not  therefore  so  self-supporting
as  they  seem.  We  can  go  back  to  a  point  where  there  was
little  or  no  distinction  between  elements  :  when  the  language
was  narrower  in  its  range,  and  not  as  now  developed  into  an
endless  host  of  points.  The  same  illusion  has  to  be  overcome
in  the  case  of  thought.  We  are  introduced  to  the  outcome
of  rational  development  in  the  shape  of  hard,  fixed,  and
materialised  thoughts :  and  one  stands  beside  another,  as  if
they  were  all  equally  good,  equally  primary,  equally  independent.
They  may  be  compared  to  seeds  which  the  practical  man  uses
by  eating  them,  while  the  theorist  puts  them  into  the  crucible
to  see  what  chemical  results  are  obtainable  therefrom.  Both
of  these  operators,  theoretical  and  practical,  in  whatever  they
differ,  agree  in  accepting  the  seed  as  an  ultimate  fact  to  be
commented  upon,  or  employed,  or  analysed.  In  so  acting
the  reason  is  analytic,  and  termed  Understanding.  Science,
in  the  higher  sense,  embraces  the  element  of  speculation  proper
to  philosophy,  asks  where  the  seed  came  from  and  where  it  is
going  to : —  two  questions,  which  tend  to  coincide  in  the
answer.

In  this  product  of  intellectual  movement  above  the  limits
of  sensation  we  have  the  '  presentation,' 1  as  Hegel  calls  it,
on  which  the  Understanding  turns  its  forces.  We  have  one
product  of  the  organic  whole  of  thought  taken  by  itself  as  if
it  were  independent,  set  forth  as  a  settled  nucleus  for  further
acquaintance :  and  this  one  point  discussed  fully  and  with
1  '  Vorstellung,'  as  distinguished  from  '  Begriff.'


Ixxxvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [xi.

precision,  elaborated  in  all  detail  and  consequence,  to  the
neglect  of  its  context,  and  the  necessary  limitations  involved
in  the  notion.  The  process  of  name-giving  may  illustrate  this
tendency  in  human  thought  to  touch  its  objects  only  in  one
point.  The  names  given  to  objects  do  not  embrace  the  whole
nature  of  these  objects,  but  give  expression  only  to  one  striking
feature  in  them.  Thus  the  name  of  the  horse  points  it  out
as  '  the  strong  '  or  '  the  swift : '  the  moon  is  '  the  measurer '  or
'  the  shining  one  ;'  and  so  in  all  cases.  The  object  as  expressed
in  these  names  is,  as  we  should  say,  viewed  from  one  aspect,
or  in  one  point :  and  the  name,  which  originally  at  least
corresponds  to  the  conception,  meets  it,  properly  speaking,  on
that  side  only,  or  in  that  relation.  One  can  at  least  guess  why
it  should  be  so  :  why  a  name  should,  in  logical  language,  express
an  '  accidens '  and  not  the  '  essentia '  of  the  object.  For  the
investigation  of  primitive  language  seems  to  show  that  words,
as  we  know  them  in  separate  existence,  are  a  secondary  forma-
tion :  and  that  the  first  significant  speech  was  an  utterance
intended  to  describe  a  scene,  an  action,  a  phenomenon,  or
moment  of  being.  In  point  of  time,  the  primary  fact  of
language  is  an  agglomeration  or  aggregate,  —  we  may  call
it  either  word  or  clause — which  describes  in  one  breath  a
highly  individualised  action  or  phenomenon.  The  spirit  or
unifying  principle  in  this  group  might  be  the  accent.  Such
a  word-group  denotes  a  highly  specialised  form  of  being  :  and
if  we  call  it  a  word,  we  may  say  that  the  earliest  words,  and
the  words  of  barbarous  tribes,  are  ingeniously  special.  But
it  would  be  more  correct  to  say,  that  in  such  a  group  the
elements  of  the  scene  enter  only  from  a  single  aspect  or  in  a
single  relation.  Accordingly  when  disintegration  begins,  the
result  is  as  follows.  The  elements  of  the  group,  having  now
become  independent  words  held  together  by  the  syntax  of  the
sentence,  are  adopted  to  denote  the  several  objects  which
entered  into  the  total  phenomenon.  But  these  words,  or
fragments  of  the  word-group,  denote  the  objects  in  question
from  a  certain  point  of  view,  and  not  in  their  integrity.  The


XIL]  PRIMITIVE  LANGUAGE.  Ixxxvii

names  of  things  therefore  touch  them  only  in  one  point,  and
express  only  one  aspect.  And  thus,  although  different  names
will  arise  for  the  same  thing,  as  it  enters  into  different  groups,
in  each  case  the  name  will  connote  only  a  general  attribute  and
not  the  nature  of  the  thing.  These  names  are  in  the  Hegelian
sense  of  the  term  '  abstract.'


CHAPTER  XII.

FIGURATE OR PRESENTATIVE THOUGHT.

THE  compensating  dialectic  of  reason,  overthrowing  the
narrowness  of  popular  estimates,  makes  itself  observed  even
in  the  popular  use  of  the  terms  abstract  and  concrete.  Terms
like  state,  mind,  wealth,  may  from  one  point  of  view  be  called
abstract,  from  another  concrete.  At  a  certain  pitch  these
abstractions  cease  to  be  abstract,  and  become  even  to  popular
sense  very  concrete  realities.  In  the  tendency  to  personification
in  language  we  see  the  same  change  from  abstract  to  concrete :
as  when  Virtue  is  called  a  goddess,  or  Fashion  surnamed  the
despot  of  womankind.  In  mythology  we  can  see  the  same
process  by  which,  as  it  is  phrased,  an  abstract  term  becomes
concrete  :  by  which,  as  we  more  correctly  say,  a  thought  is
transformed  into  a  representative  picture.  The  many  gods
of  polytheism  are  the  fixed  and  solidified  shapes  in  which  the
several  degrees  of  religious  growth  have  taken  '  a  local  habita-
tion and  a  name :'  or  they  bear  witness  to  the  failure  of  the
greater  part  of  the  world  to  grasp  the  idea  of  Deity  apart
from  certain  local  and  temporary  conditions.  So,  too,  terms
like  force,  law,  matter, — the  abstractions  of  the  popular  mind
— are  by  certain  periods  reduced  to  the  level  of  sensuous
things,  and  spoken  of  as  real  entities,  somewhere  and  some-
how existent,  apart  from  the  thinking  medium  to  which  they


Ixxxviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xn.

belong-.  Such  terms,  again,  as  property,  wealth,  truth,  are
popularly  identified  with  the  objects  in  which  they  are  mani-
fested or  embodied.

In  these  ways  the  abstract  in  the  ordinary  meaning  becomes
in  the  ordinary  meaning  concrete.  The  distinction  between
abstract  and  concrete  is  turned  into  a  distinction  between
understanding  and  sense,  instead  of,  as  Hegel  makes  it,  a
distinction  in  the  nature  of  thought  itself.  An  attempt  is  at
first  made  in  two  degrees  to  represent  the  thought  in  terms
of  the  senses.  When  the  impossibility  of  that  attempt  is  seen,
common  sense  ends  by  denying  the  super-sensible  altogether.
These  three  plans  may  be  called  respectively  the  mythological,
the  metaphysical,  and  the  positive  or  popular  fallacies  of
thought.  In  the  mythological,  or  strictly  anthropomorphic
fallacy,  thought  is  conceived  under  the  bodily  shape  and  the
physical  qualities  of  humanity :  that  is  to  say,  it  is  identified
with  a  subject  of  like  passions  with  ourselves,  a  repetition  of
the  particular  human  personality,  with  its  narrowness  and
weakness.  The  action  of  the  Idea  is  here  replaced  by  the
agency  of  supposed  living  beings,  invested  with  superhuman
powers.  In  the  metaphysical  fallacy  the  cause  of  the  changes
that  go  on  in  nature  is  attributed  to  indwelling  sympathies
and  animosities,  to  the  abhorrence  of  a  vacuum,  to  attraction,
affinity,  and  the  like :  to  mystic  essences  and  laws  conceived
of  as  somehow  existent  in  space  and  time.  In  the  positive
and  popular  fallacy,  the  failure  of  these  two  theories  begins
to  be  felt :  and  the  mind,  hopeless  of  reaching  thought,  and
impatient  for  the  senses,  eagerly  asserts  that  the  thought  is  a
dream  and  a  delusion,  and  that  the  reality  of  the  senses  is
what  the  idea  truly  is.  This  last  view  is  the  utterance  of  the
popular  matter-of-fact  reason,  when  in  weariness  and  tedium
it  turns  from  the  attempt  to  grasp  thought  pure  and  simple,
and  instead  of  passing  on  through  the  metaphysical  entities  to
the  fluid  and  transparent  ether  of  the  Idea,  relapses  into  the
ignoble  rest  of  thoughtlessness.

In  some  of  these  cases  the  full  step  into  pure  thought  is


xii.] THE  THREE  FALLACIES  OF  THOUGHT. Ixxxix

never  made.  The  creations  of  mythology,  for  example,  display
an  unfinished  and  baffled  attempt  to  rise  from  the  senses  to
the  generalisations  of  thought.  The  gods  of  heathenism  are
only  generalised  individuals :  syntheses  of  phenomena  under
the  form  of  the  man  with  flesh  and  blood  :  and  such  were
the  gods  of  Greece.  In  other  cases  there  is  a  relapse :  when
the  higher  stage  of  thought  has  been  attained,  it  is  instan-
taneously lost.  Terms  which  are  really  thoughts  are  reduced
to  the  level  of  the  things  of  sense,  individualised  in  some
object,  which,  though  it  is  only  a  representative  symbol,  is
allowed  to  usurp  the  place  of  the  thought  which  it  embodies.
The  intuition  of  the  senses  at  every  step  throws  its  spells  on
the  products  of  thought,  and  turns  them  into  a  representative
picture,  which  popularly  and  naturally  takes  the  place  of  the
notion.  Instead  of  being  retained  in  their  native  timelessness,
the  terms  of  the  Idea  are  brought  under  the  laws  of  sensuous
intuition,  under  the  conditions  of  space  and  time.

The  term  '  presentation,'  which  Hegel  employs  to  name
these  '  picture-thoughts '  or  '  figurate  conceptions,'  corresponds
to  the  facts  of  their  nature.  A  '  presentation '  is  one  of  two
things :  either  a  particular  thing  taken  under  general  aspects,
or  a  universal  narrowed  down  into  a  particular  thing.  Thus,
as  it  has  been  seen,  a  general  name  expresses  a  universal
relation  or  attribute,  but  confines  it  to  a  particular  object  or
class.  'Swift/  for  example,  was  an  epithet  tied  .down  to
express  the  horse.  In  the  first  instance  we  may  suppose  the
name  to  *be  a  sort  of  metaphor :  that  is,  we  conceive  the  object
as  an  embodiment  or  representation  of  the  quality, —  as  an
eagle  is  the  emblem  of  strength, — but  in  this  case  we  dis-
tinguish between  the  object  and  its  metaphorical  signification.
In  the  second  place,  however,  the  two  points  of  view  coincide,
and  we  can  no  longer  in  ordinary  thought  separate  the  imaging
object  from  the  general  relation  which  it  images  forth.  This
is  the  level  of  thought  to  which  Hegel  appropriates  the  term
'  presentation.'  It  includes  under  it  the  three  fallacies  of
thought  already  noted  : — and  saves  the  trouble  of  comprehending


xc  PROLEGOMENA.  [xn.

the  notion.  In  the  Hegelian  sense,  a  presentation  is  abstract :
because  it  solidifies,  hardens,  and  isolates  the  term  of  thought,
makes  it  a  particular,  and  never  rises  above  the  single  case
to  the  general  notion  embodied  in  it.

The  world  of  presentative  thought  is  a  world  of  independent
points  in  juxtaposition,  which  we  arrange  as  seems  best  to  us.
When  our  mind  moves  amongst  these  picture-thoughts,  we  can
only  institute  external  relations  between  the  terms.  A  judgment,
in  that  case,  is  interpreted  to  mean  the  conjunction  of  subject
with  predicate  by  means  of  the  copula.  A  sentence  is  an
arrangement  of  words  ab  extra  in  conformity  with  the  rules
of  grammar.  The  world  of  thought,  or  the  Idea,  as  a  whole
is  turned  into  a  plane  surface  with  its  typical  forms, —  the
members  of  the  organism  of  reason, —  like  dots  put  in  co-
ordination and  juxtaposition,  not  spontaneously  affected  towards
each  other.  Even  if  they  are  not  embodied  and  reduced  to  a
sensuous  level  of  existence,  they  are  held  to  be  originally
separate  and  unconnected.  How  they  all  came  into  being,
and  whether  they  do  not  all  by  gradations  and  differentiation
proceed  from  one  root,  are  questions  neither  asked  nor  answered.
To  inquire  into  the  evolution  of  thought  is  even  more  un-
dreamt-of than  to  ask  for  the  evolution  of  the  living  world
from  a  primordial  cell.  But  as  language  is  never  studied
rightly,  unless  we  remember  that  language  at  each  period
is  an  organic  body :  that  each  part  of  it  is  determined  by
the  meaning  of  all  the  other  parts  co-existing  with  it :  and
that,  as  the  language  advances,  there  is  an  almost  imperceptible
but  still  real  change  in  the  position  and  compass  of  every
word; — so  it  is  with  thought.  Every  term,  short  of  the
whole  system  of  thought,  is  mutually  conditioned  and  con-
ditioning. But  all  these  reciprocating  conditions  are  in  the
totality,  and  not  out  of  it.  In  each  it  is  the  whole,  but  the
whole  at  a  different  level  of  development.

The  level  of '  presentation,'  therefore,  is  in  its  several  aspects
the  level  on  which  stands  in  its  picture-thinking  the  general
mass  of  mankind.  Such  thinking  is  approximate  and  inexact :


xii.]  PICTURE-THINKING.  xci

and  has  hold  of  its  objects  in  one  point  only :  it  does  not  grasp
these  objects,  but  sets  them  before  it.  (a)  It  is  still  trammelled
by  the  senses.  Thought  and  sensation  strive  for  the  mastery
in  it.  Thought  is  bound  fast  to  an  illustration :  and  of  this
illustration  it  cannot  as  presentative  thought  divest  itself: — the
eternally  living  idea  is  chained  to  the  transient  and  perishable
form  of  sense.  It  is  metaphorical  and  material  thinking,  which
is  helpless  without  the  metaphor  and  the  matter.  (6)  Pre-
sentative thought  envisages  what  is  timeless  and  infinite  under
the  conditions  of  time  and  space.  It  loses  sight  of  the  moral
and  spirit  of  historical  development  under  the  semblance  of  the
names,  incidents,  and  forms  in  which  it  is  displayed.  The
historical  and  philosophical  sense  is  lost  under  the  antiquarian.
Presentative  thought  keeps  the  shell,  and  throws  away  the
kernel,  (c]  The  terms  by  which  such  a  materialised  thought
describes  its  objects  are  not  internally  connected :  each  is  in-
dependent of  the  other;  and  we  only  bring  them  together  for
the  nonce  by  an  act  of  subjective  arrangement1.

The  thing — the  so-called  subject  of  the  properties,  of  which
it  is  really  no  more  than  the  substratum — affords  no  sufficient
ground  for  the  unity  of  the  properties  attached  to  it.  The
substratum  or  subject  of  the  proposition  is  given,  and  we  then
look  around  to  see  what  other  properties  accompany  the  primary
characteristic  for  which  the  name  was  applied.  But  the  term
of  popular  language  is  not  a  real  unity  capable  of  supporting-
differences  ;  it  is  only  one  aspect  of  a  thing,  a  single  point
fixed  and  isolated  in  the  process  of  language  by  the  action  of
natural  selection.  And  so,  to  ask  how  the  properties  are  re-
lated to  the  thing,  is  to  ask  how  one  aspect,  taken  out  of  its
setting,  is  related  to  another  isolated  aspect :  which  is  evidently
an  unanswerable  question.  Science  is  right  in  rejecting  the
'  thing '  of  popular  conception.  If  a  is  a,  and  nothing  more,  as
the  law  of  Identity  informs  us,  then  it  is  for  ever  impossible  to
get  on  to  b,  c,  d,  and  the  rest.  The  union  between  the  thing
divided  or  defined,  and  its  divided  or  defining  members,  is  what

1  Philosophic  der  Religion,  I.  p.  137  seqq.


xcii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xii.

is  termed  extra-logical;  in  other  words,  it  is  not  evident  from
what  is  given  or  stated  in  the  popular  conception.  That  union
must  be  sought  elsewhere,  and  deeper.

And  when  we  step  in  to  overcome  the  repugnance  which  the
point  of  conception,  or  what  is  supposed  the  subject,  shows
against  admitting  a  diversity  of  predicates, — when  we  force  it
into  union  with  these  properties  :  or  when  we  try  to  remove  the
separation  which  leaves  the  cause  and  effect  as  two  independent
things  to  fall  apart;  our  action,  by  which  we  effect  a  synthesis
of  differences,  may,  from  another  and  a  universal  point  of  view,
be  said  to  be  the  notion,  or  grasp  of  thought,  coming  to  the
consciousness  of  itself.  Thought,  as  it  were,  recognises  itself
and  its  image  in  those  objects  of  presentative  conception,  which
seem  to  be  given  and  imposed  upon  the  intellect.  The  two
worlds,  which  the  understanding  accepts  as  each  solid  and  in-
dependent,— the  world  of  external  objects  or  conceptions,  and
the  world  of  self, — meet  and  coincide  in  the  free  agency  of
thought,  developing  itself  under  a  double  aspect.  It  is  the
'  original  synthetical  unity  of  apperception '  (to  quote  Kant's
words),  from  which  the  Ego  or  thinking  subject,  and  the
'  manifold,'  or  body  and  world,  are  subsequently  differentiated.
Thus,  on  the  one  hand,  we  ourselves  no  longer  remain  a  rigid
unity,  existing  in  antithesis  to  the  objects  of  presentative
thought:  and  on  the  other  hand  the  so-called  thing  loses  its
hardness  and  fragmentary  independence,  as  distinguished  from
our  apprehension  of  it.  Our  action,  as  we  incline  to  call  it,
which  mends  the  inadequacies  of  terms,  is  from  a  philosophic
point  of  view,  the  notion  itself  coming  to  the  front  and  claiming
recognition.  The  process  of  thought  is  then  seen  to  be  a  totality,
of  which  our  faculties,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  existing  thing,
on  the  other,  are  isolated  abstractions,  supposed  habitually  to
exist  on  their  own  account.  To  view  either  of  these  systems,
the  mental,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  objective  world,  on  the
other,  as  self-subsistent,  has  been  the  error  in  much  of  our
metaphysics,  and  in  the  popular  conceptions  of  what  constitutes
reality.  The  idealism  of  metaphysicians  has  been  equally


xii.]  CONCEPTIONS  AND  NOTIONS.  xciii

narrow  and  insufficient  with  the  realism  of  common  sense.
An  adequate  philosophy,  on  the  contrary,  recognises  the  presence
of  both  elements,  in  a  subordinate  and  formative  position.  Pre-
sentations may  be  compared  to  the  little  pools  left  here  and
there  by  the  sea  amongst  the  rocks  and  sand :  the  notion,  or
grasp  of  thought,  is  the  tidal  wave,  which  left  them  there  to
stagnate,  but  comes  back  again  to  restore  their  continuity  with
the  great  sea.  In  our  thinking  we  are  only  the  ministers  and
interpreters  of  the  Idea, — of  the  organic  and  self-developing
system  of  thought.

The  difference  between  a  presentative  conception  and  a
thought  proper  may  be  illustrated  by  the  case  of  the  term
Money.'  Money  may  be  either  a  materialised  thought,  i.  e.
a  Presentative  Conception,  or  a  Notion  Proper.  In  the  former
case,  money  is  identified  with  a  piece  of  money.  It  is  pro-
bably, in  the  first  instance,  embodied  in  coins  of  gold,  silver,
and  bronze.  In  the  second  place,  a  wide  gulf  is  placed  between
it  and  the  other  articles  for  which  it  is  given  in  exchange.
If  other  things  are  regarded  as  money,  they  are  generally
treated  on  the  assumption  that  they  can  in  case  of  need  be
reduced  to  coinage.  The  discussion  of  money  in  works  of
Political  Economy  considers  it  separately  from  other  com-
modities :  and  the  laws  which  forbade  its  exportation  gave  a
vigorous  expression  to  the  belief  that  it  was  something  mi
generis,  and  subject  to  conditions  of  its  own.  The  scientific
notion  of  money  abolishes  this  belief  in  the  peculiarity  and
fixity  of  money.  Science  does  so  historically,  when  it  can
point  to  a  time  and  a  race  where  money  in  our  sense  of  the
word  does  not  exist,  and  where  barter  takes  the  place  of  buying
and  selling.  Science  does  so  philosophically,  when  it  expounds
what  has  been  called  the  process  of  money, — the  inter-action  or
meeting  of  elements  to  which  the  existence  of  money  is  due.
The  notion  of  money,  as  given  in  the  Ethics  of  Aristotle,  says
that  it  is  the  common  measure  of  utility  or  demand.  When
we  leave  out  of  sight  the  specific  quality  of  an  object,  and
consider  only  its  capacity  of  satisfying  human  wants,  we  have


xciv  PROLEGOMENA.  [xm.

what  is  called  its  worth  or  value.  This  value  of  the  thing, —
the  quantitative  fact  which  is  left,  when  all  the  qualities  dis-
tinguishing the  thing  are  reduced  to  their  bare  equivalent — is
the  notion,  of  which  the  currency  is  the  representation,  reducing
thought  to  the  level  of  the  senses,  and  embodying  the  '  ideality '
of  value  in  a  tangible  and  visible  object.  So  long  as  this  '  idea '
of  value  is  kept  in  view,  the  currency  is  a  Representation :  but
when  the  perception  of  the  notion  disappears,  money  is  left  a  mere
Presentation,  the  general  notion  being  narrowed  down  to  the
coinage.  Thus  the  notion  of  money,  like  other  notions  in  their
ideal  truth,  is  not  in  us,  nor  in  the  things  merely :  it  is  what
from  a  minor  point  of  view,  when  we  and  the  things  are  re-
garded under  the  head  of  want  or  need,  may  be  called  the  truth
of  both,  the  unity  of  the  two  sides.  Thus  considered,  money
falls  into  its  proper  place  in  the  order  of  things.


CHAPTER  XIII.

REASON AND THE DIALECTIC OF UNDERSTANDING.

THESE  presentative  conceptions,  besides  being  the  burden  of
our  ordinary  materialising  consciousness,  are  also  the  data  of
science,  accepted  and  developed  in  their  consequences.  Because
they  are  so  accepted,  as  given  into  our  hand,  scientific  reasoning
can  only  institute  relations  between  them.  Its  business  as
thus  conceived  is  progressive  unification,  comparing  objects  with
one  another,  demonstrating  the  similarities  which  exist  between
them,  recognising  them,  and  combining  them  with  each  other.
The  exercise  of  thought  which  deals  with  such  objects  is  limited
by  their  existence :  it  is  only  formal.  It  is  finite  thought,
because  it  is  only  subjective :  each  of  the  objects  on  which  it


XIIL]  UNDERSTANDING.  xcv

is  turned  seems  to  be  outside  of  it,  and  independent  of  it.
Each  point  of  fact,  again,  when  it  is  carried  out  to  its  utmost,
meets  with  other  thoughts  which  limit  it,  and  claim  to  be
equally  self-centred.  Such  knowledge  creeps  on  from  point
to  point.  To  this  thinking,  which  is  always  confronted  by
a  something  which  continues  even  when  thinking  ceases,  German
philosophy  applies  a  name,  which  since  the  days  of  Coleridge
has  been  translated  by  '  Understanding1.'  This  degree  or  mode
of  thought — not  a  faculty  of  thought — is  the  systematised  and
thorough  exercise  of  what  in  England  is  called  '  Common
Sense/  In  the  first  place,  it  is  synonymous  with  practical
intelligence.  It  takes  what  it  calls  facts,  or  things,  as  given,
and  aims  only  at  arranging,  combining,  and  classifying  them.
Seeing  things  as  a  superficies,  as  it  were,  so  many  unconnected
points,  here  itself  and  there  the  various  things  of  the  world,  it
tries  to  bring  them  into  connexion.  It  accepts  existing  dis-
tinctions, and  seeks  to  render  them  more  precise  by  pointing
out  and  sifting  the  elements  of  sameness.  Its  greatest  merit
is  an  abhorrence  of  vagueness,  inconsistency,  and  superfluous
mysticism :  it  wishes  to  be  clear,  distinct,  and  practical.  In  its
proper  sphere,  i.  e.  in  every  exercise  of  thought  short  of  phi-
losophy— wherever,  in  short,  thought  in  us  must  submit  and
conform  itself  to  the  objective  existence  of  thought  as  embodied
in  the  natural  and  spiritual  world, — the  understanding  has  an
independent  value  of  its  own2.  Nor  is  this  true  merely  of
practical  life,  where  a  man  must  accommodate  himself  to  facts :
it  is  equally  applicable  in  the  higher  theoretic  life, — in  art,
religion,  and  philosophy.  If  intelligent  defmiteness  does  not
make  itself  apparent  in  these,  there  is  something  wrong  about
them.

It  is  only  when  this  exercise  of  thought  is  regarded  as  the
ne  plus  ultra  of  mind,  that  understanding  deserves  the  reproach-
ful language  which  is  lavished  upon  it  by  some  German  meta-

1  Verstand.

2  '  Die  Vernunft  ohne  Verstand  1st  Nichts ;  der  Verstand  doch  Etwaa  ohne
Vernunft.' Hegel's  Leben,  p.  546.


xcvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [xin.

physicians.  The  understanding  is  abstract :  this  sums  up  its
offences  in  one  word.  Both  in  its  contracted  forms,  such  as
faith  and  common  sense,  and  in  its  systematic  form,  the  logical
or  narrowly-consistent  intellect,  it  is  partial  and  liable  to  be
tenacious  of  half-truths.  Only  that  whereas  in  feeling  and
common  sense  there  is  often  a  great  deal  which  they  cannot
express, — whereas  the  heart  is  often  more  liberal  than  its  inter-
preting mind  will  allow — the  reverse  is  true  of  the  logically-
consistent  intellect.  The  narrowness  of  the  latter  is,  in  its  own
opinion,  exactly  equal  to  the  truth  of  things :  and  whatever  it
expresses  is  asserted  without  qualification  to  be  the  absolute
fact.  Its  business  is,  given  the  initial  point  (which  is  assumed
to  be  certain  and  perspicuous),  to  see  all  which  that  point  will
necessarily  involve  or  lead  to.  For  example,  Order  may  be
supposed  to  be  the  chief  end  of  the  State.  Let  us  consider,
says  the  intelligent  arguer,  to  what  consequences  and  insti-
tutions this  conception  will  lead  us.  Or,  again,  the  chief  end
of  the  State  is  assumed  to  be  Liberty.  To  what  special  forms
of  organisation  will  this  hypothesis  lead?  Or  we  may  go  a
step  further.  It  is  evident,  some  will  say,  that  in  a  State  there
must  be  a  certain  admixture  of  Order  and  Liberty.  How  are
we  to  proceed — what  laws  and  ordinances  will  be  necessary,
to  secure  the  proper  equilibrium  of  these  two  principles?  The
two  must  be  blended,  and  each  have  its  legitimate  influence.

These  are  examples  of  the  operation  of  Understanding.  It
can  never  reach  a  real  synthesis,  because  it  believes  in  the
omnipotence  of  the  abstractions  with  which  it  began :  but  must
either  carry  out  one  partial  principle  to  its  consequences,  or
allow  an  alternate  and  combined  force  to  two  opposite  principles.
Its  canon  is  identity  :  given  something,  let  us  see  what  follows
when  we  keep  the  same  point  always  in  view,  and  compare
other  points  with  the  one  which  we  are  supposed  to  know.  Its
method  is  analytic :  given  a  conception  in  which  popular  thought
supposes  itself  at  home,  and  let  us  see  all  the  elements  of  truth
which  can  be  deduced  from  it.  Its  statements  are  abstract  and
narrow :  or,  in  the  words  of  Anaxagoras,  one  thing  is  cut  off


xiii.]  DOGMATISM.  xcvii

from  another  with  a  hatchet  J.  In  its  excess  it  degenerates  into
dogmatism,  whether  that  dogmatism  be  religious  or  scientific.

The  fact  is  that  the  Understanding,  as  this  analytic,  abstract,
and  finite  action  of  mind  is  called,  —  the  thought  which  holds
objective  ideas  distinct  from  one  another,  and  from  the  sub-
jective faculties  of  thought  as  a  whole,  —  that  this  Understanding
is  not  sufficiently  thorough-going.  It  begins  at  a  point  which
is  not  so  isolated  as  it  seems,  but  is  a  member  of  a  body  of
thought  :  nor  is  it  aware  tha't  the  whole  of  this  body  of  thought
is  in  organic  union.  It  errs  in  taking  too  much  for  granted  :
and  in  not  seeing  how  this  given  point  is  the  result  of  a
process,  —  that  in  it,  in  any  thought  or  idea,  several  tendencies
or  elements  converge  and  are  held  in  union,  but  with  the
possibility  of  working  their  way  into  a  new  independence.
In  other  words,  the  Understanding  requires  to  be  supplemented
by  the  Reason  2,  —  by  infinite  thought,  concrete,  at  once  analytic
and  synthetic.  How  then,  it  may  be  asked,  can  we  make
the  passage  from  the  inadequate  to  the  adequate?  To  that
question  the  answer  may  be  given  that  it  is  our  act  which
halts  at  the  inadequate  :  that  in  complete  Reason  the  Under-
standing is  only  a  grade  which  points  beyond  itself,  and
therefore  pre-supposes  the  adequate  thought.  In  other  words,
it  is  Reason  which  creates  or  lays  down  the  aims,  conditions,
and  fixed  entities,  —  the  objects,  by  which  it  is  bound  and
limited  in  its  analytic  exercise  as  understanding.  Reason,
therefore,  corrects  its  own  inadequacy  :  and  we  have  only  to
watch  how  the  process  is  accomplished.

The  movement  is  not  at  one  step  :  it  has  a  middle  term  or
mean  which  often  seems  as  if  it  were  a  step  backward.  Pro-
gress in  knowledge  is  usually  described  as  produced  by  the
mode  of  demonstration  or  the  mode  of  experience.  Formal
Logic  prefers  the  first  mode  of  describing  it  :  Applied  Logic
prefers  the  second.  Either  mode  may  serve,  if  we  properly
comprehend  what  demonstration  and  experience  mean.  And


1  on ov Kt\ujpiarai  d\\r)\uv  rd kv T$ ivi  Kdayua ou5J  dnoKticoirTai ir(\fntl\
Shnplic.  Phys.  fol.  38  a.  *  Vernunft.


xcviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xm.

that  will  not  be  done  unless  we  keep  equally  before  us  the
affirmative  and  the  negative  element  in  the  process.  The  law
of  rational  progress  in  knowledge,  of  the  dialectical  movement
of  consciousness,  or  in  one  word  of  experience,  is  not  simple
movement  in  a  straight  line,  but  movement  by  negation  and
absorption  of  the  premisses.  The  conclusion  or  the  new  object
of  knowledge  is  a  product  into  which  the  preceding  object  is
reduced  or  absorbed.  Thus  the  movement  from  faith  to  know-
ledge must  pass  through  doubt.  'The  premisses  from  which
we  start,  or  the  original  object  with  which  we  begin,  are  not
left  in  statu  quo:  they  are  destroyed  in  their  own  shape,  and
become  only  materials  constituting  a  new  object  and  a  con-
clusion. It  is  on  the  stepping-stones  of  our  dead  selves  that
we  rise  to  higher  things :  and  it  is  on  the  abrogation  of  the
old  objects  of  knowledge  that  the  new  objects  are  founded.
Not  merely  does  a  new  object  come  in  to  supplement  the  old,
and  correct  its  inadequacies  by  the  new  presence :  not  merely
do  we  add  new  ranges  to  our  powers  of  vision,  retaining  the
old  faculties  and  subjoining  others.  The  whole  world — alike
inward  and  outward, — the  consciousness  and  its  object — are
subjected  to  a  thorough  renovation  :  every  feature  is  modified,
and  the  system  re-created.  The  old  perishes :  but  in  perishing
contributes  to  constitute  the  new.  Thus  the  new  is  at  once
the  affirmation  and  negation  of  the  old.  And  such  is  the
invariable  nature  of  intelligent  progress,  of  which  the  old
logicians  failed  to  render  a  right  account,  because  they  missed
the  negative  element,  and  did  not  see  that  the  immediate
premisses  must  be  abolished  in  order  to  secure  a  conclusion, —
even  as  the  grapes  must  be  crushed  before  the  wine  can  be
obtained.

This  is  the  real  meaning  of  Experience,  when  it  is  called
the  teacher  of  humanity :  and  it  was  for  this  reason  that
Bacon  described  it  as  '  far  the  best  demonstration1 ! '  Experience
is  that  absolute  process,  embracing  both  us  and  things,  which
displays  the  nullity  of  what  is  immediately  given,  or  baldly

J  Novum  Organum,  Book  I.  70.


xiii.] DEMONSTRATION  AND  EXPERIENCE. xcix

and  nakedly  accepted,  and  completes  it  by  the  rough  remedy
of  contradiction.  The  change  comes  over  both  us  and  tne
things:  neither  the  one  side  nor  the  other  is  left  as  it  was
before.  And  it  is  here  that  the  advantage  of  Experience  over
demonstration  consists.  Demonstration  tends  to  be  looked  upon
as  subjective  only:  whereas  Experience  is  also  objective.  But
Experience  is  more  than  merely  objective :  it  is  the  absolute
process  of  thought  pure  and  entire;  and  as  such  it  is  described
by  Hegel  .as  Dialectic,  or  Dialectical  movement.  This  Dialectic
covers°the  ground  of  demonstration,— a  fragment  of  it  especially
described  and  emphasised  in  the  Formal  Logic,— and  of  Ex-
perience,—under  which  name  it  is  better  known  in  actual  life,
and  in  the  philosophy  of  the  sciences '.

Dialectic is the  negative or destructive aspect of  reason,
as preparatory  to its affirmative or constructive aspect. It
is the spirit of difference and criticism: the outgoing as
opposed  to  the  indwelling :  the  restless  as  distinguished  from
the  quiet :  the  reproductive  as  oppose^  to  the  nutritive  instinct:
the  centrifugal  as  opposed  to  the  centripetal  force:  the  radical
and  progressive  tendency  as  opposed  to  the  conservative. But
no  one  of  these examples sufficiently  or accurately  describes
it. For  it  is  the  utterance  of  an  implicit  contradiction,— the
recognition of  an  existing,  but hitherto unrecognised  want.
Dialectic  does  not  supervene  from  without  upon  the  fixed  ideas
of  understanding: but  is  the  evidence of  the higher nature
which  lies  behind them, of  the unity which understanding
implicitly  or  explicitly  denies. That  higher  nature,  the  notion
or grasp of  reasonable thought,  comes  forward, and  has at
first,  in  opposition  to  the  one-sided  products  of  understanding,
the look of  a destructive agent. If  we regard the unde
standing  and  its  object,  as  ultimate  and  final,-and  they  are
so regarded  in the  ordinary estimation of  the world,— then
this  negative  action of  reason seems utterly  pernicious,  and
tends  to  end  in  the  subversion  of  all  fixity  whatever,  of  every-
thing definite. In  this  light  Dialectic  is  what  is commonly

1  Phenomenologie  des  Geistes,  p.  67.


c  PROLEGOMENA.  [xm.

known  as  Scepticism  :  just  as  the  understanding  in  its  excess
is  known  as  Dogmatism.  But  in  the  total  grasp  of  the  ra-
tional or  speculative  notion,  Dialectic  ceases  to  be  Scepticism,
and  Understanding  ceases  to  be  Dogmatism.

Still  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Dialectic  of  reason  is
dangerous,  if  taken  abstractly  and  as  if  it  were  a  whole  truth.
For  the  thoughts  of  ordinary  men  tend  to  be  more  abstract
than  their  materials  warrant.  Men  seek  to  formulate  their
feelings,  faith,  and  conduct :  but  the  rationale  of  their  inmost
belief, — their  creed, — is  generally  narrower  than  it  might  be.
Out  of  the  undecomposed  and  inorganic  mass,  on  which  their
life  and  conduct  is  founded,  they  extract  one  or  two  ingredients :
they  emphasise  with  undue  stress  one  or  two  features  in  their
world,  and  attach  to  these  partial  formula?  a  value  which  would
be  deserved  only  if  they  really  represented  the  whole  facts.
Hence  when  the  narrow  outlines  of  their  creed  are  submitted
to  dialectic, — when  the  inlying  contradictions  are  exposed,  men
feel  that  the  system  of  the  world  has  sunk  beneath  them.  But
it  is  not  the  massive  structure  of  their  world,  the  organic
unity  in  which  they  live,  that  is  struck  by  dialectic :  it  is
only  those  luminous  points,  the  representative  terms  of  material
thought,  which  float  before  their  consciousness,  and  which  have
been  formulated  in  hard  and  fast  outlines  by  the  under-
standing. These  points,  as  so  defined  and  exaggerated,  are
what  dialectic  shakes.  Not  an  alien  force,  but  the  inherent
power  of  thought,  destroys  the  temporary  constructions  of
the  understanding.  The  infinite  comes  to  show  the  inadequacy
of  the  finite  which  it  has  made.

In  philosophy  this  second  stage  is  as  essential  as  the  first.
The  one-sidedness  of  the  first  abstraction  is  corrected  by  the
one-sidedness  of  the  other.  In  the  Philosophy  of  Plato  the
dialectical  energy  of  thought  is  sometimes  spoken  of  in  a
metaphorical  way  as  Love.  But  Love,  as  the  speaker  explains,
is  a  child  of  Wealth  and  Want :  he  is  never  poor,  and  never
rich  :  he  is  in  a  mean  between  ignorance  and  knowledge  \  Thus

1  Plato:  Symposion,  203.


XIIL]  DIALECTIC.  ci

is  described  the  active  unrest  of  growth,  the ( inquietude  poussante,'
as  Leibnitz  called  it, — the  quickening  force  of  the  negative
and  of  contradiction.  It  is  the  principle  of  '  Compensation/
or  of  '  Righteousness/  which  an  American  essayist l,  and  the
Hebrew  writers,  have  represented  as  the  law  of  the  world.

But  if  we  merely  look  at  the  differentiation  or  negation
involved  in  the  action  of  reason,  we  miss  the  half  of  its
meaning :  and  the  new  statement  is  as  one-sided  as  the  old.
We  have  not  grasped  the  full  meaning  until  we  see  that
what  affirmed  a  finite,  as  understanding,  denies,  as  dialectic,
the  absoluteness  or  adequacy  of  that  finite.  Both  the  partial
views  have  a  right  to  exist,  because  each  gives  its  contribution
to  the  science  of  truth.  If  we  penetrate  behind  the  surface, —
if  we  do  not  look  at  the  two  steps  in  the  process  abstractly
and  in  separation, — it  will  be  seen  that  these  two  elements
coincide  and  unite.  But  we  must  be  careful  here.  This  co-
incidence or  identification  of  opposites  has  not  annihilated  their
opposition  or  difference.  That  difference  subsists,  but  in
abeyance,  reduced  to  an  element  or  '  moment '  in  the  unity.
Each  of  the  two  elements  has  been  modified  by  the  union :
and  thus  when  each  issues  from  the  unity  it  has  a  fuller
significance  than  it  had  before.  ^This  unity,  in  which  difference
is  lost  and  found,  is  the  rational  notion, — the  speculative  grasp
of  thought2.  It  is  the  product  of  experience, — the  ampler
affirmative  which  is  founded  upon  an  inclusion  of  negatives.

We  began  with  the  bare  unit,  or  simple  and  unanalysed
point,  which  satisfied  popular  language  and  popular  imagination
as  its  nucleus: — the  presentation  which  had  caught  and  half-
idealised  a  point,  moment,  or  aspect  in  the  range  of  feeling
and  sensation.  In  this  stage  the  notion  or  thought  proper
is  yet  latent.  In  the  first  place,  the  nucleus  of  imagination
was  analysed,  defined,  and  fixed  in  the  Intellect.  And  this
grade  of  thought  is  known  as  the  Understanding.  In  the
second  place,  the  definite  and  precise  term,  as  understanding
supposes  it,  was  subjected  to  criticism :  its  contradictions  dis-

1  Emerson.  *  Begriff.


cii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xm.

played  ;  and  the  very  opposite  of  the  first  definition  established
in  its  place.  This  is  the  action  of  Dialectic.  In  the  third
place,  by  means  of  this  second  stage,  the  real  nature  or  truth
was  seen  to  lie  in  a  union  where  the  opposites  interpenetrate
and  mould  each  other.  Thus  we  have  as  a  conscious  unity, —
conscious  because  it  embraces  a  difference — what  we  started
with  as  an  unconscious  unity,  the  truth  of  feeling-,  faith,  and
intuition.  The  first  was  an  immediate  unity : — that  is  to  say,
we  were  in  the  midst  of  the  unity,  sunk  in  it,  and  making
a  part  of  it :  the  second  is  a  mediated  unity,  which  has  been
reached  by  a  process,  or  by  differentiation,  and  which  as  a
conscious  unity  involves  that  process.

Reason,  however,  is  infinite,  as  opposed  to  understanding,
which  is  finite  thinking.  The  limits  of  reason,  as  they  are
found  by  the  analytic  intellect,  are  limits  which  reason  has
imposed,  and  which  it  can  take  away :  the  limits  are  in  it,
and  not  over  it.  Reason  has  been  silently  laying  down  those
limits,  which  the  understanding  finds  given,  and  supposes
absolute.  Let  us  put  the  same  law  in  a  more  concrete  case.
It  is  reason, — the  Idea, — or,  to  give  it  an  inadequate  and
abstract  name,  Natural  Selection — which  has  created  the  several
forms  of  the  animal  and  vegetable  world :  it  is  reason,  again,
which  in  the  struggle  for  existence  contradicts  the  very  inade-
quacies which  it  has  brought  into  being :  and  it  is  reason,
finally,  which  affirms  both  these  actions, — the  hereditary  descent,
and  the  adaptation — in  the  provisionally  permanent  and  ade-
quate forms  which  result  from  the  struggle.

The  three  stages  thus  enumerated  are  not  merely  stages  in  our
human  reason  as  subjective.  They  state  the  law  of  rational
progress  or  development  in  pure  thought,  in  Nature,  and  in  the
world  of  Mind, — the  world  of  Art,  Morals,  and  Science.  They
represent  the  law  of  thought  or  reason  in  its  most  general  or
abstract  terms.  They  state,  mainly  in  reference  to  the  method
or  form  of  thought,  that  Triplicity,  which  will  be  seen  in  the
real  formations,  the  terms  in  which  thought  moulds  itself,
the  typical  species  of  reason.  They  reappear  hundreds  of  times,


xin.]  REASON  IN  SEVERAL  FORMS.  ciii

in  different  multiples,  in  the  system  of  philosophy.  The  ab-
stract point  of  the  Notion  which  parts  asunder  in  the  Judg-
ment, and  returns  to  a  unity  including1  difference  in  the  Syl-
logism : — the  mere  generality  of  the  Universal,  which,  by  a  dis-
ruption into  Particulars  and  detail,  gives  rise  to  the  real  and
actual  Individual : — the  latent  nature,  given  and  tranquil,  which
asserts  and  appropriates  itself  to  the  exclusion  of  others,  only  to
assume  wholeness  and  integrity  when  it  realises  its  abstract  and
initial  being: — the  Identity  which  has  to  be  combined  with
Difference  in  order  to  furnish  a  possible  Ground  for  Existence : —
the  baldness  and  nakedness  of  an  Immediate  belief,  which  comes
to  the  full  and  direct  certainty  of  itself,  to  true  immediacy,  only
by  feeling  the  full  sense  of  the  antithesis  which  can  separate
conviction  from  truth,  or  of  the  Mediation  connecting  them  : —
all  these  are  illustrations  of  the  same  law  really  applied  which
has  been  formally  stated  as  the  necessity  for  a  defining,  a  dia-
lectical, and  a  speculative  element  in  thought.  The  three  parts
of  Logic  are  an  instance  of  the  same  thing :  and  when  the
Idea,  or  organism  of  thought,  appears  developed  in  the  series
of  Natural  forms,  it  is  only  to  prepare  the  kingdom  of  reason,
actualised  in  the  world  of  Mind.  The  Understanding,  on  the
field  of  the  world,  corresponds,  says  Hegel,  to  the  conception
of  Divine  Goodness.  The  life  of  nature  goes  on  in  self-satis-
fied ease,  while  men  take  things  for  granted,  and  make  the
best  of  natural  circumstances  as  if  the  earth  might  last  for
ever.  The  finite  being  then  has  his  season  of  self-satisfied
ease :  while  the  gods  live  in  quiet,  away  from  the  sight  of
man's  doings.  The  dialectical  stage,  again,  corresponds  to  the
conception  of  God  as  an  omnipotent  Lord  :  when  the  power
of  the  universe  waxes  terrific,  destroying  the  complacency  of
the  creatures  and  making  them  feel  their  insufficiency, — when
the  once  beneficent  appears  jealous  and  cruel,  and  the  joyous
equanimity  of  human  life  is  oppressed  by  the  sad  supremacy
of  the  prophet  and  the  priest.  The  easy-minded  Greek  lived
for  the  most  part  in  the  former  world :  the  uneasy  Hebrew  to
a  great  extent  in  the  latter.  But  the  truth  lay  neither  in  the


civ  PROLEGOMENA.  [xiv.

placid  wisdom  of  Zeus,  leaving  the  world  to  its  own  devices,
nor  in  the  jealous  Jehovah  of  Mount  Sinai :  the  true  specu-
lative union  is  found  in  the  mystical  unity  of  Godhead  with
the  human  nature.  In  this  comprehensive  spirit  did  Hegel
treat  Logic.

This  Triplicity  runs  through  Hegel's  works.  If  you  open
one,  the  main  divisions  are  marked  with  the  capitals  A,  B,  C.
One  of  these,  it  may  be,  is  broken  up  into  chapters  headed  by
the  Roman  numerals  I,  II,  III.  Under  one  or  more  of  these
probably  come  severally  the  Arabic  numerals,  i,  2,  3.  Any
one  of  these  again  may  be  subdivided,  and  gives  rise  to
sections,  headed  by  the  small  letters,  a,  b,  c.  And,  lastly,  any
one  of  these  may  be  treated  to  a  distribution  under  the  three
titles,  a,  /3,  y.  Of  course  the  division  is  not  in  each  case  car-
ried equally  far :  nor  does  the  subject  always  permit  it :  nor
is  Hegel's  knowledge  alike  vigorous,  or  his  interest  in  all
directions  the  same.


CHAPTEE  XIV.

THOUGHT PURE AND ENTIRE.

THERE  are  two  degrees  in  the  hindrance  against  mastering
Hegelianism.  The  first  difficulty  is  to  reach  the  point  of  view
from  which  the  system  starts.  It  is,  says  Hegel  himself,  like
learning  to  walk  upon  our  heads.  The  '  rock  of  offence '
which  blocks  the  way  into  philosophy  is  the  sustained  opposi-
tion between  our  thought'  and  things.  Up  to  a  certain  degree,
and  in  certain  conditions,  the  antithesis  thus  expressed  is  a
just  and  proper  distinction.  The  first  conscious  exercise  of
reason  makes  us  aware  of  a  world,  which  is  independent  of
our  feelings  and  acts,  and  continues  to  exist  whether  we


xiv.]  EGO  AND  NON-EGO.  cv

observe  it  or  not.  Consciousness  informs  us  of  ourselves,  and  of
something-  which  is  not  ourselves : — of  an  Ego  and  a  Non-

o  CJ

ego.  As  we  go  further  in  the  analysis  of  our  position  we
draw  a  sharp  line  of  demarcation  between  our  thoughts  and
the  being  of  things:  we  look  upon  them  as  two  formed  and
settled  orders  of  fact :  and  if  our  thought  deals  with  things,
we  find  it  proper  that  thought  should  conform.  Sometimes,
as  in  mere  observation,  our  thought  seems  to  get  the  worst
of  it,  and  to  be  obliged  simply  to  follow  and  record  the
movements  of  things :  sometimes,  as  in  experiment  and  action,
the  things  have  in  a  slight  degree  to  suit  themselves  to  the
requirements  of  our  thought.  We  draw  a  clear  distinction
between  certainty  and  truth.  The  former  is  a  state  of  our
minds,  a  subjective  conviction :  the  latter  depends  upon  the
conformity  of  our  thoughts  with  the  things  outside  us.

This  opposition  between  the  subject  and  the  object  runs
through  the  whole  range  of  consciousness,  and  influences
every  movement  of  thought.  The  bearing  of  the  one  side
upon  the  other, — of  the  understanding  upon  the  '  thing-in-
itself,'  forms  the  theme  of  the  Criticism  of  Pure  Reason.  Ac-
cordingly Kant  in  that  book  hardly  ever  comes  to  examine
the  thoughts  in  their  own  nature,  but  deals  with  them  mainly
as  they  bear  upon  (not  the  thing-in-itself,  but)  the  phenomenon,
or  thing  of  the  senses.  But  because  the  contrast  is  a  con-
trast within  consciousness,  the  philosophy  of  consciousness
must  overcome  it,  and  show  that  reason  has  created  this  divi-
sion or  contrast  under  which  it  acts.  Kant,  after  showing
that  the  forms  of  thought  did  not  belong  to  the  things,  had,
except  that  he  catalogued  them  with  more  than  usual  pre-
cision, left  them  in  the  subjective  mind  as  they  were  before.
Hegel  had  to  treat  the  forms  of  thought,  neither  as  subjective
nor  as  objective,  but  in  and  for  themselves.

But  the  second  demand, — to  move  in  this  ether  of  absolute
thought, — is  even  harder  than  the  first.  Like  Plato,  we  may
occasionally  feel  that  we  have  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  super-
sensible world  unveiled  ;  but  it  disappears  as  the  senses  regain


cvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [xiv.

their  hold.  We  can  probably  fix  a  firm  eye  on  one  term  of
reason,  and  criticise  its  value  :  but  it  is  less  easy  to  survey
the  Bacchic  dance  from  term  to  term 1,  and  allow  them  to
criticise  themselves.  The  distracting  influence  of  our  conscious-
ness or  of  things  is  always  leading  us  astray.  Either  we  in-
cline to  treat  thoughts  as  psychological  products  or  species,
the  outcome  o"f  our  mental  activity,  which  are  (a)  given  to
us  from  the  beginning,  and  so  a  priori  or  innate,  or  which  (b)
spring  up  in  the  course  of  experience  by  mutual  friction
between  our  mind,  and  the  outside  world,  and  so  are  a  posteriori
or  derivative.  Or  disregarding  thoughts,  we  act  as  if  they  were
more  correctly  called  things  :  we  speak  of  relations  between  phe-
nomena :  we  suppose  things,  and  causes,  and  quantities  to  form
part  of  the  so-called  external  universe,  which  science  explores.
The  one  estimate  of  thought,  like  the  other,  keeps  in  view,
though  at  some  distance,  and  so  as  not  to  interfere  with  their
practical  discussions,  the  separate  and  equal  existence  of  thoughts
and  things.  The  psychologists  of  logic  scrutinise  the  world
within  us  first  of  all,  and  purpose  to  accomplish  what  can
be  done  for  the  mind  as  possessing  a  faculty  of  thought,
before  they  turn  to  the  world  of  things.  The  realists  of  logic
think  it  better  for  practical  work  to  allow  thought  only  the
formal  or  outside  labour  of  surveying  and  analysing  the  laws
of  phenomena  out  of  the  phenomena  which  contain  them.  Neither
of  them  examines  thought  in  its  own  integrity  as  a  movement
in  its  own  self,  a  sort  of  organic  growth,  of  which  subject  and
object,  the  mind  and  the  things  called  external,  are  the  vehicles,
or,  in  logical  language,  the  accidents.

If  it  is  possible  to  treat  the  history  of  the  English  Constitu-
tion as  an  object  of  inquiry  in  itself  and  for  its  own  sake,  without
reference  to  the  individuals  who  in  course  of  time  marred  and
mended  it,  or  to  the  setting  of  events  in  which  its  advance
is  exhibited,  why  not  treat  the  thought,  which  is  the  universal

1  '  Das  Wahre  ist  der  bacchantische  Taumel,  an  dem  kein  Glied  nicht  trunken
ist ;  und  weil  jedes,  indem  es  sich  absondert,  ebenso  unmittelbar  sich  auflost, —
ist  es  ebenso  die  durchsichtige  und  einfache  Ruhe.'  Phenom.  des  Geistes,  p.  35.


xiv.]  THE  SYSTEM  OF  THOUGHT.  cvii

element  of  all  things,  of  English  Constitution,  and  Italian  Art,
and  Greek  Philosophy,  in  the  same  way, — absolutely,  i.  e.  in
itself  and  for  its  own  sake?  When  that  is  done,  distinctions
rigidly  sustained  between  a  priori  and  a  posteriori  become
meaningless.  There  is  at  best  only  a  modified  justification
for  such  mottoes  and  cries,  as  '  Art  for  Art's  sake/  or  '  Science
must  be  left  free  and  unchecked,'  or  'The  rights  of  the  re-
ligious conscience  ought  always  to  be  respected : '  but  there
can  be  no  demur  or  limitation  to  the  cry  that  Thought  must
be  studied  in  Thought  by  Thought  and  for  the  sake  of  Thought.
For  Art,  and  Science,  and  Religion  are  specialised  modes  in
which  the  totality  or  truth  of  things  presents  itself  to  mankind,
and  none  of  them  can  claim  an  unconditioned  sway :  their  claims
clash,  and  each  must  be  satisfied  with  its  part  of  human  life.
Thought  on  the  other  hand  is  unlimited :  for  it  exists  not
merely  in  its  own  special  modes,  but  interpenetrates  and  rules
all  the  other  forms,  manifesting  itself  in  Art  and  Religion,  not
less  than  in  Science.  And  thus  when  we  study  Thought,  we
study  that  which  is  in  itself  and  for  itself, — we  study  Abso-
lute Being.  On  the  other  side  it  must  be  noted  that  it  is
Absolute  Being,  when  it  is  thought,  which  we  study.  The  two
sides,  Being  and  Thought,  must  come  equally  forward :  and
come  in  synthesis,  with  the  antagonism  between  the  two
overcome.

This  is  the  characteristic  of  Logic,  as  distinct  from  the
Philosophy  of  Nature  and  the  Philosophy  of  Mind.  The  posi-
tion of  absolute  equilibrium  between  Thought  and  Being, — if
we  may  thus  inaccurately  describe  the  unity  where  they  are  in
abeyance, — gives  place  in  the  province  of  Nature  to  the  do-,
minance  of  the  element  of  Being.  The  Logical  world,  the
pure  Thought-world  which  is  in  and  for  itself,  passes  over
into  Being,  multiplying  itself,  as  it  were,  by  one  of  its  own
elements.  And  then  the  whole  Logical  world,  which  had  lost
itself  in  Being,  and  become  foreign  to  itself  in  Nature,  re-asserts
itself,  conquers  the  element  into  which  it  had  fallen,  incorporates
it  with  its  own  self,  and  thence  issues  the  Mind,  as  the  victory


cviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xiv.

over  Nature,  and  the  absorption  of  Nature.  The  spectral  world
of  Logic — the  Idea  in  its  own  compass,  comes  first :  and  when
its  compass  is  full  it  rises  into  a  new  sphere  or  medium.  The
Idea  is,  and  enters  into  Being, — as  it  appears  to  vision  in  the
series  of  the  natural  world.  But  this  one-sided  development  of
the  Thought,  which  is  in  and  for  itself,  into  Being,  calls  for  a
higher  re-affirmation  of  the  original  unity  of  the  two  sides.
Thus,  that  Idea,  which  in  Nature  is,  as  it  were,  outside  of  itself,
and  which  in  its  own  self  is  but  a  possibility  of  Being  and
Thought,  has  attained  its  full  actuality, — and  then  in  Mind
or  Spirit  comes  to  possess  its  own  self,  to  be  entirely  its  own.
Logic  is  the  abstract  universality  of  Thought  or  the  Idea :
Nature  as  philosophised  presents  the  Idea  in  its  particularity,
its  fragments  and  details :  the  Philosophy  of  Mind  brings  the
concrete  Individuality  of  Thought  in  actual  forms,  not  in
shadowy  outlines,  nor  in  broken  pieces.

Thus  Logic  deals  with  the  world  of  Thought  which  is  in  and
for  itself.  That  world  of  Thought  is  briefly  named  the  Idea.
In  Logic  the  Idea  is  considered  as  in  itself  on  the  stand-point
given  by  the  synthesis  or  coincidence  of  Thought  with  Being.
In  the  Philosophy  of  Nature  the  Idea  is  considered  in  Being, —
going  out  into  independent  forms  of  life  and  existence,  and  pre-
senting itself  to  the  senses  in  a  whole  array  of  structures.  In
the  Philosophy  of  Mind  the  Idea  has  mastered  its  independent
forms  evident  to  the  senses,  and  brought  them  back  to  the  unity
and  centrality  of  its  own  type.  Thus  then  the  Idea  in  itself —
the  Absolute  where  Being  and  Thought  are  in  implicit  equilibrium
— is  the  first  problem  of  Science.  But  this  Absolute  Science  is
at  once  subject  and  object :  Thought  meets  Thought :  and  the
creative  force  of  Thought  must  be  exactly  equal  to  the  force  of
Knowledge.  Thought  as  the  Idea  lays  itself  down  and  at  the
same  time  cognises  itself.  The  discursive  Thought  of  the  re-
flective thinker  retraces  the  creative  original  Thought  which
has  given  rise  to  the  organism  of  Reason.  What  as  the  object
of  the  Science  would  be  called  Being,  would  in  the  subject
be  called  Thought.  The  process  of  Logic  consists  in  the


xiv.]  THE  METHOD  OF  EVOLUTION.  cix

equalisation  of  these  two  elements.  But  if  Thought  lays  itself
down,  it  is  the  Absolute  Consciousness  which  is  conscious  of
itself:  and  so  while  it  is  conscious  of  itself  it  differentiates
itself  as  creative  from  itself  as  created.  Thus  it  works  its  way
from  point  to  point :  while  at  the  same  time,  as  it  knows  itself
in  this  distinction  from  itself,  it  must  re-affirm  itself  in  the  dif-
ference and  with  the  difference  included  in  it.  And  so  from
a  simple  point  or  nucleus  it  proceeds  onward,  and  yet  never
leaves  the  ground  which  it  has  once  gained :  for  the  ground
moves  also.  The  germ  of  thought  has  spread  into  an  organic
system  :  but  still  retains  its  identity.

This  conception  of  Logic  as  the  self-developing  system  of
Thought  pure  and  entire,  is  the  distinctive  achievement  of  Hegel.
'  I  cannot  imagine,'  he  says,  t  that  the  method  which  I  have
followed  in  this  system  of  Logic,  or  rather  the  method  which
this  system  follows  in  its  own  self,  is  otherwise  than  susceptible
of  much  improvement,  and  many  completions  of  detail :  but  I
know  at  the  same  time  that  it  is  the  only  genuine  method.
This  is  evident  from  the  circumstance  that  it  is  nothing,  distinct
from  its  object  and  subject-matter :  for  it  is  the  subject-matter
within  itself,  or  its  inherent  dialectic,  which  moves  it  along  V

But  how  is  this  universe  of  thought  to  be  discovered,  and  its
law  of  movement  to  be  described?  From  times  beyond  the
reach  of  history,  from  nations  and  tribes  of  which  we  know  only
by  tradition  and  vague  conjectures,  in  all  levels  of  social  life  and
action,  the  formation  of  thought,  its  evolution  in  the  field  of
time,  has  been  going  on.  For  thousands  of  years  the  intellectual
world  has  been  rearing  its  walls :  and  much  of  the  process  of  its
formation  lies  beyond  the  scope  of  observation.  But  fortunately
there  is  a  help  at  hand,  which  will  enable  us  to  discover  at  least
the  main  outlines  in  the  system  of  thought.

The  key  to  the  solution  was  found  in  the  same  way  as  led  to

the  Darwinian  theory  concerning  the  Origin  of  Species. When

the  question  touching  the  causes  of  variation  and  persistence  in

the  natural  kinds  of  plants  and  animals  seemed  so  complex  as  to

1  Wissenscbaft  der  Logik,  I.  p.  39.


ex  PROLEGOMENA.  [xiv.

baffle  all  attempts  at  an  answer,  Darwin  found  what  seemed  a
clue  likely  to  lead  to  a  theory  of  descent.  The  methods  adopted
in  order  to  keep  up,  or  to  vary,  a  species  under  domestication
were  open  to  anybody's  inspection :  and  those  principles,  which
were  consciously  pursued  in  artificial  selection  by  the  breeder,
suggested  a  theory  of  similar  selection  in  free  nature.  In  study-
ing the  phenomena  of  thought,  of  which  the  species  or  types
were  no  less  numerous  and  interesting  than  those  in  organic
nature,  it  was  perhaps  impossible  to  survey  the  whole  history  of
humanity.  But  it  was  comparatively  easy  to  observe  the  process
of  thought  in  those  cases  where  development  had  gone  on
consciously  and  distinctly.  [JThe  history  of  philosophy  is
the  consciou's  evolution  of  what  for  the  far  greater  part  is
transacted  in  the  silent  workshops  of  nature.  Philosophy,  in
short,  is  to  the  general  growth  of  intelligence  what  artificial
breeding  is  to  the  variation  of  species  under  natural  conditions.^
In  the  successive  systems  of  philosophy,  the  several  stages  in
the  process  of  reason  were  reduced  to  their  bare  equivalents  in
terms  of  thought,  and  thus  preserved.  Half  of  his  task  was
already  performed  for  the  logician,  and  there  remained  the  work,
certainly  no  slight  one — of  showing  the  unity  and  organic
development  which  marked  the  conscious  reasoning,  and  of
connecting  it  with  the  general  movement  of  human  thought.
The  logician  had  to  break  down  the  rigid  lines  which  separated
one  system  of  philosophy  from  another, — to  see  what  was  really
involved  in  the  contradiction  of  one  system  by  its  successor, —
and  to  show  that  the  negation  thus  given  to  an  antecedent
principle  was  a  definite  negation,  ending  not  in  mere  zero  or
vacuity,  but  in  a  distinct  result,  and  making  an  advance  upon
the  previous  point  of  view.

At  first  this  process  was  seen  in  the  medium  of  time.  But
the  conditions  of  time  are  of  practical  and  particular  interest
only.  The  day  when  the  first  leaves  appear,  and  the  season
when  the  fruit  ripens  on  a  tree,  are  questions  of  importance  to
practical  arboriculture.  But  botany  deals  only  with  the  general
theory  of  the  plant's  development,  in  which  such  considerations


xiv.]  LOGIC  AND  THE  SCIENCES.  cxi


exercise  no  weight.  ^So  logic  leaves  out  of  account  those  points
of  time  and  chance  which  the  interests  of  individuals  and  nations
find  all-important.  And  when  this  element  of  time  has  been
removed,  there  is  left  a  system  of  the  types  of  thought  pure  and
entire, — embalming  the  life  of  generations  in  mere  words^  The
same  self-identical  thought  is  set  forth  from  its -initial  narrow-
ness and  poverty  on  to  'its  final  amplitude  and  wealth  of
differences.  At  each  stage  it  is  the  Absolute  :  outside  of  it  there
is  nothing.  It  is  the  whole,  pure  and  entire  :  always  the  whole/
But  in  its  first  totality  it  is  a  void  :  in  its  last  a  fully-formed  and
articulated  world, — because  it  holds  all  that  it  ever  threw  out  of
itself  resumed  into  its  grasp.

In  these  circumstances  nothing  can  sound  higher  and  nobler
than  the  Theory  of  Logic.  It  presents  the  Truth  unveiled  in  its
proper  form  and  absolute  nature.  If  the  philosopher  may  call
this  absolute  totality  of  thought  ever  staying  the  same  in  its
eternal  developments, — this  adequacy  of  thought  to  its  own
requirements — by  the  name  of  God,  then  we  may  say  with
Hegel  that  Logic  exhibits  God  as  He  is  in  His  eternal  Being
before  the  creation  of  Nature  and  a  finite  Mind.  But  the  logical
Idea  is  only  a  phantom  Deity — the  bare  possibility  of  a  God  in
all  the  development  of  its  implicit  details.

The  first  acquaintance  with  the  Theory  of  Logic  is  likely  to  dash
cold  water  on  the  enthusiasm  thus  awakened,  and  may  sober  our
views  of  the  magic  efficacy  of  Logic.  '  The  student  on  his  first
approach  to  the  Science,'  says  Hegel,  '  sees  in  Logic  at  first  only
one  system  of  abstractions  apart  and  limited  to  itself,  not  extend-
ing so  as  to  include  other  facts  and  sciences.  On  the  contrary,
when  it  is  contrasted  with  the  variety  abounding  in  our  general-
ised picture  of  the  world,  and  with  the  tangible  realities  embraced
in  the  other  sciences, — when  it  is  compared  with  the  promise  of
the  Absolute  Science  to  lay  bare  the  essence  of  that  variety,  the
inner  nature  of  the  mind  and  the  world,  or,  in  one  word,  the
Truth, — this  science  of  Logic  in  its  abstract  outline,  in  the
colourless  cold  simplicity  of  its  mere  terms  of  thought,  seems  as
if  it  would  perform  anything  sooner  than  this  promise,  and  in


cxii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xiv.

the  face  of  that  variety  seems  very  empty  indeed.  A  first
introduction  to  the  study  of  Logic  leads  us  to  suppose  that  its
significance  is  restricted  to  itself.  Its  doctrines  are  not  believed
to  be  more  than  one  separate  branch  of  study  engaged  with  the
terms  or  dimensions  of  thought,,  besides  which  the  other  scientific
occupations  have  a  proper  material  and  body  of  their  own.
Upon  these  occupations,  it  is  assumed,  Logic  may  exert  a  formal
influence,  but  it  is  an  influence  which  is  mostly  spontaneous,  and
•for  which  the  scientific  form  and  its  study  may  be  in  case  of
need  dispensed  with.  The  other  sciences  have  upon  the  whole
rejected  the  regulation-method,  which  made  them  a  series  of
definitions,  axioms,  and  theorems,  with  the  demonstration  of
these  theorems.  What  is  called  Natural  Logic  rules  in  the
sciences  with  full  sway,  and  gets  along  without  any  special
investigation  in  the  direction  of  thought  itself.  The  entire
materials  and  facts  of  these  sciences  have  detached  themselves
completely  from  Logic.  Besides  they  are  more  attractive  for
sense,  feeling,  or  imagination,  and  for  practical  interests  of  every
description.

'  And  so  it  comes  about  that  Logic  has  to  be  learned  at  first,
as  something  which  is  perhaps  understood  and  seen  into,  but  of
which  the  compass,  the  depth,  and  further  import  are  in  the
earliest  stages  unperceived.  It  is  only  after  a  deeper  study  of
the  other  sciences  that  logical  theory  rises  before  the  mind  of
the  student  into  a  universal,  which  is  not  merely  abstract,  but
embraces  within  it  the  variety  of  particulars. — The  same  moral
truth  on  the  lips  of  a  youth,  who  understands  it  quite  correctly,
does  not  possess  the  significance  or  the  burden  of  meaning  which  it
has  in  the  mind  of  the  veteran,  in  whom  the  experience  of  a  life-
time has  made  it  express  the  whole  force  of  its  import.  In  the
same  way,  Logic  is  not  appreciated  at  its  right  value  until  it  has
grown  to  be  the  result  of  scientific  experience.  It  is  then  seen
to  be  the  universal  truth, — not  a  special  study  beside  other
matters  and  other  realities,  but  the  essence  of  all  these  other
facts  together1.'

1  Wissenschaft  der  Logik,  I.  p.  43.


xv.]  THE  UNCONDITIONED.  cxiii

CHAPTER XV.

ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE: OR THE CATEGORIES.

ACCORDING  to  the  strict  reasonings  of  Kant  in  his  Criticism
of  Pure  Reason,  and  the  somewhat  looser  discussions  of  Mr.
Spencer  in  his  '  First  Principles,'  a  system  of  Metaphysics  or
Theory  of  the  super-sensible  is  impossible.  As  a  result  of  the  -
criticism  by  Kant,  Jacobi  claimed  the  Absolute  for  Faith :  and
Spencer  banishes  the  Absolute  to  the  sphere  of  Religion  to  be
worshipped  or  ignored,  but  in  either  case  blindly.  Hegel,  on  the
contrary,  purposes  to  show  that  this  unfathomable  Absolute  is
very  near  us,  and  at  our  very  door :  in  our  hands,  as  it  were,  and
especially  present  in  our  every-day  language.  If  we  are  ever  to
gain  the  Absolute,  we  must  be  careful  not  to  lose  one  jot  or
tittle  of  the  Relative. /JJhe  Absolute — this  term,  which  is  to
some  so  offensive  and  to  others  so  precious — always  presents
itself  to  us  as  a  Relative  :  and  when  we  have  persistently  traced
the  Proteus  through  all  its  manifestations, — when  we  have,  so  to
speak,  seen  the  Absolute  Relativity  of  Relation,  there  is  very
little  more  needed  in  order  to  apprehend  the  Absolute  pure  and
entire.  I  One  may  say  of  the  Absolute  what  Goethe1  says  of
Nature :  '  She  lives  entirely  in  her  children  :  and  the  mother,
where  is  she  ? '

It  is  a  great  step,  when  we  have  detected  the  Relativity  of
what  had  hitherto  seemed  Absolute, — when  a  new  aspect  of  the
infinite  fulness  of  the  spiritual  world,  the  truth  of  God,  dawns
upon  us.  But  it  is  even  a  greater  step  when  we  see  that  the
Relativity  which  we  have  thus  discovered  is  itself  Relative.
And  this  is  precisely  the  advantage  of  studying  the  question  on
Logical  ground.  On  the  solid  ground  of  Nature  and  Mind,  the
several  grades  of  the  process  of  thought  have  a  portentous  firm-

1  Die  Natur  (1780).  'Sie  lebt  in  lauter  Kindern:  und  die  Mutter,  wo  ist  sie?
....  Sie  ist  ganz  und  doeh  immer  unvollendet.  .  .  .  Sie  verbirgt  sich  in  tausend
Namen  und  Termen,  uud  ist  imnier  dieaelbe.'

h


cxiv  PROLEGOMENA.  [xv.

ness  and  grandeur  about  them,  and  the  intrinsic  dialectic  seems
scarcely  adequate  to  shaking  the  foundations  of  their  stability.
They  seem  permanently  and  finally  distinct :  as  if  the  last  word
on  the  question  had  long  ago  been  uttered.  They  stand  as
independent  entities,  separate  from  each  other,  and  localised  in
their  several  formations.  But  in  the  ether  of  thought,  in  the
fluid  and  transparent  form  of  mere  thoughts,  the  several  stages
in  the  development  of  the  Absolute  clearly  betray  their  Rela-
tivity, and  by  the  negation  of  this  Relativity  lead  on  to  a  higher
Absolute.  The  logical  chemist  reduces  the  solid  formations  of
Mind  and  Nature  into  their  primary  elements  :  he  catches  the
ultimate  seed  of  thought  and  watches  it  unfolding  and  metamor-
phosing itself  into  a  totality  of  many  elements.

Instead,  therefore,  of  leaving  a  broad  abyss  between  the
Absolute  on  one  side,  and  the  Relative  on  another,  we  must  ask
whether,  taking  Thought  pure  and  entire,  there  is  not  room  for
plenty  of  Relativity  within  the  limits  of  its  Absoluteness.  One
difficulty  is  made  by  the  gap  between  ourselves  and  objectivity.
That  antithesis  may  for  each  man,  in  his  personal  life,  possess
interest  of  an  engrossing  nature :  just  as  in  more  material
spheres  the  interests  of  daily  life  may  lead  us  to  look  out  for  the
means  of  sustenance.  Such  questions  must  be  solved  by  every
one :  and  in  both  cases  the  less  talking  there,  is  about  the  con-
ditions of  the  problem,  there  will  be  more  fruitful  action.  But
to  the  philosopher  such  questions  and  such  antitheses  have  no
meaning,  as  they  are  put.  The  antithesis  between  subjective
and  objective  serves  its  purposes  in  many  grades  of  conscious-
ness, and  prepares  the  way  for  the  philosophic  point  of  view,
where  the  antithesis  enters  into  the  Idea  and  no  longer  stays
outside  as  a  fixed  opposition.  In  the  Idea,  Thought  and  Thing,
or  the  Notion  and  Being,  are  at  one  in  their  difference:  the
Thing  has  become  a  Thought,  and  the  Thought  is  adequate  to
the  Thing.  That  adequacy  in  its  several  Relative  stages,  falling
into  three  main  groups,  gives  the  several  degrees  of  what  Hegel
terms  Truth.

Accordingly,  Metaphysics  and  Logic tend  to  coincide. The


xv.]  LOGIC  AND  METAPHYSICS.  cxv

Absolute,  which  is  the  object  of  Metaphysics,  is  made  the
problem  of  Logic.  And  in  this  change  of  front  lies  the  secret  of
success.  Former  Metaphysics  had  dashed  itself  in  vain  against
a  world  of  true  Being,  which  all  the  efforts  of  subjective  thought
could  never  conquer  :  and  the  struggle  at  last  grew  so  disastrous
that  Kant  gave  the  signal  for  retreat,  and  left  the  world  of  true
Being,  the  impregnable  Thing-in-itself,  to  its  repose.  His  advice
to  metaphysicians  was  to  concentrate  the  attack  of  Understand-
ing upon  single  experiences  conforming  to  certain  conditions,
and  to  investigate  these  conditions  of  possible  experience.  In
other  words,  he  turned  observation  to  what  he  called  Transcen-
dental Logic.  It  was  by  means  of  this  suggestion,  understood
in  the  widest  sense,  and  with  various  assistance,  that  Hegel  was
led  to  his  discovery.  He  had  to  show  how  these  conditions  in
themselves  when  carried  out  in  full  gave  the  Unconditioned.
He  attacked  the  Absolute,  if  we  may  say  so,  in  detail.  The  Ab-
solute, as  the  totality,  universe  or  System  of  Relativity,  lays
itself  open  to  observation  by  deposing  itself  to  a  Relative.  It
possesses  the  differentiating  power  of  separating  itself  as  an
object  in  passivity,  from  itself  as  a  subject  in  action, — that  power  .
which  in  lower  grades  of  thought  lay  outside  of  consciousness.
And  thus  Thought  is  the  active  universal, — which  actualises
itself  more  and  more  out  of  abstraction  into  concreteness.

Hegel,  then,  solved  the  problem  of  Metaphysics  by  turning  it
into  Logic.  The  same  principle,  Thought,  appeared  in  both  :  in
the  former  as  a  purely  passive  result,  showing  no  traces  of  action
in  it, — in  the  latter  as  an  activity,  with  a  mere  power  of  passing
from  object  to  object,  discovering  and  establishing  connexions
and  relations.  The  two  sciences  were  fragments,  unintelligible
and  untenable,  when  taken  in  abstract  •  isolation.  This  is  the
justification,  if  justification  be  required,  for  Hegel's  identification
of  Logic  and  Metaphysics.  The  Hegelian  Logic  falls  into  three
parts :  the  theory  of  Transitory  Being :  the  theory  of  Relative
Being :  and  the  theory  of  the  Notion.  The  first  of  these  in  his
Science  of  Logic  is  called  Objective  Logic,  and  along  with  the
second  part  might  be  described  as  Metaphysics.  The  third  part\

h2


cxvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [xv.

is  more  strictly  on  Logical  ground.  But  perhaps  it  is  best  to
describe  tlie  whole  as  the  Metaphysics  of  Logic.

The  Logic  of  Hegel  is  the  Science  of  Thought  as  a  natural
system  of  its  characteristic  forms,  which  in  their  entirety
constitute  the  Idea.  These  forms  or  types  of  thought,  the
moulds  in  which  the  Idea  confines  itself  in  its  evolution,  are
not  unlike  what  have  been  otherwise  called  the  Categories.
(Of  course  the  foreign  word  '  Categories '  does  not  commend
itself  to  Hegel).  They  are  the  modifications  or  definite  forms,
the  articulated  and  distinct  shapes,  in  which  the  process  of
Thought  ever  and  anon  culminates  in  the  course  of  its  move-
ment. The  Infinite  and  Absolute  at  these  points  conditions
itself,  and  as  so  conditioned  or  differentiated  is  apprehended
and  stamped  with  a  name.  They  specify  the  unspecified,  and
give  utterance  to  the  ineffable.  They  are  the  names  by  which
reason  grasps  the  totality  of  things, — the  names  by  which  the
truth  (or  God)  reveals  itself,  however  inadequately.  From
one  point  of  view  they  constitute  a  series,  each  evolved  from
the  other,  a  more  completely  detailed  term  or  utterance  of
thought  resulting  by  innate  contradiction  from  a  less  detailed.
From  another  point  of  view  the  Total  remains  perpetually  the
same ;  and  the  change  seems  only  on  the  surface.  The  one
aspect  of  the  movement  conceals  the  Absolute :  the  other  puts
the  Relative  into  the  background.

What  then  are  the  Categories?  We  may  answer:  They
are  the  ways  in  which  expression  is  given  to  the  unifying
influence  of  thought :  and  we  have  to  consider  them  as  points
or  stations  in  the  progress  of  this  unification,  and  in  the  light
of  this  influence.  These  Categories  are  the  typical  structures
marking  the  definite  grades  in  the  growth  of  thought, — the
moulds  or  forms  which  thought  assumes  and  places  itself  in, —
those  instants  when  the  process  of  thought  takes  a  determinate
form,  and  admits  of  being  grasped.  They  are  the  world  of
Platonic  forms,  if  we  consider  his  '  form  of  Good '  as  correspond-
ing to  the  '  Idea '  of  Hegel.  For  if  we  look  carefully  into
this  mystic  word  '  Good '  which  plays  so  brilliant  a  part  in


xv.]  THE  CATEGORIES.  cxvii

ancient  philosophy,  we  shall  see  that  it  only  expresses  in  a
cruder  and  less  analytic  form,  as  ancient  thought  often  does,
the  same  thing  as  so  many  moderns  love  to  speak  of  as  Relativity,
and  which  is  also  implied  in  Aristotle's  conception  of  an  End.
And  the  '  form  of  Good '  is  only  a  brief  and  undeveloped  vision
of  an  Absolute,  which  is  the  '  form  of  Relativity,' — Relativity
elevated  into  an  Absolute.  The  process  of  Thought  is  for
the  major  part  impalpable,  and  then  a  condensation,  as  it  were,
takes  place,  and  a  precipitate  is  formed.  A  definite  term  of
thought  or  a  grasp  of  thought  issues  from  the  solution  of
elements  :  and  a  name  is  created  for  what  was  before  nameless.

A  Category  is  often  spoken  of  as  if  it  were  the  highest
extreme  of  generalisation,  the  most  abstract  and  most  widely
applicable  term  possible.  If  we  climb  sufficiently  far  and
high  up  the  Porphyry's  tree  of  thought,  we  may  expect,
thought  the  old  logicians,  to  reach  the  '  summa  genera '  or  highest
species  of  human  thought.  But  these  quantitative  distinctions
of  greater  and  less,  in  which  the  Formal  Logic  revels,  are
not  very  suitable  to  any  of  the  terms  or  processes  of  thought,
and  they  certainly  give  an  imperfect  description  of  the  Cate-
gories. The  essential  function  which  the  Categories  perform
in  the  fabric  of  thought  and  language  is,  in  the  first  place,  to
combine,  affirm,  demonstrate,  relate,  and  unify, — and  not  to
generalise.  Their  action  may  be  better  compared  to  that
fulfilled  by  those  symbols  in  an  algebraical  expression,  which
like  plus  and  minus  denote  an  operation  to  be  performed  in
the  way  of  combining  or  relating,  than  to  the  office  of  the
symbols  which  in  these  expressions  denote  the  magnitudes
themselves.

To  the  student  of  language  the  Categories  are  known  as
pronominal,  or  formal  roots, — those  roots  which,  as  it  is  said,
do  not  denote  things,  but  relations  between  things.  He  meets
them  in  the  inflections  of  nouns  and  verbs ;  in  the  signs  of
number,  gender,  case,  and  person :  but,  as  thus  presented,  their
influence  is  sub-ordinate  to  the  things  of  which  they  are,  as
it  were,  the  accidents.  He  meets  them  in  a  more  independent


CXV111


PROLEGOMENA.


[xv.


and  tangible  shape  in  the  articles,  pronouns,  prepositions,  con-
junctions, and  numerals,  and  in  what  are  called  the  auxiliary
verbs.  In  these  apparently  trifling-,  and  in  some  languages
almost  non-existent  words  or  parts  of  words,  we  have  the  sym-
bols of  relations, — the  means  of  connexion  between  single  words,
— the  cement  which  binds  significant  speech  together.  There
are  languages,  such  as  Chinese,  where  these  categorising  terms
are,  as  it  were,  in  the  air :  where  they  are  only  felt  in  accent
and  position,  and  have  no  separate  existence  of  their  own.
But  in  the  languages  of  the  Indo-European  family  they
gradually  appear,  at  first  in  combination,  perhaps,  with  the
more  material  roots,  and  only  in  the  course  of  time  asserting
an  independent  form.  Originally  they  denote  the  relations  of
space  and  time, — the  generalised  or  typical  forms  of  sensation :
but  from  these  they  are  afterwards,  and  in  a  little  while,
transferred  into  the  service  of  intellect.  /  These  little  words
are  the  very  life-blood  of  a  language, — its  spirit  and  force.

Complete mastery  in the usage of  them is  what  makes  an

diomatic  knowledge  of  a  language,  as  distinct  from  a  mere
remembrance  of  the  vocabulary.  And  philosophy  is  the  re-

ognition of  their  import  and significance. Thus  in Greek

philosophy  the  central  questions  turn  upon  such  words  as  Being
and  not-Being :  Becoming :  that  out  of  which :  that  for  the
sake  of  which  :  the  what-was-being :  the  what-is  :  the  other  :

the  one  :  the  great  and  small :  that  which  is  upon  the  whole  :
what  is  according  to  each  :  this  somewhat :  &C.1  And  again  in
Modern  Philosophy,  how  often  has  the  battle  raged  about  the

meaning  of  such  words  as  I : will :  may  : can :  must : because  :

same  and  different :  self;  &c.  ?


1  ov  and  /IT)  ov :  TO  yijvoufvov :  TO  e£  ov  :  TO  ov  tvtica. :  TO  TI  T}C  tlvai :  TO  TI  «<m  :
Oartpov  :  tv  :  TO  ftfya  «a2  TO  (UKpov :  TO  KaO'  o\ov  :  TO  KO.&'  tKaorov  :  ToSt  fl.


xvi.J  BEING  OR  IMMEDIACY.  cxix

CHAPTEK XVI.


THE THREE PAETS OF LOGIC.


THE  first  part  of  Logic,  the  theory  of  Being,  may  be  called
the  theory  of  unsupported  and  freely-floating  Being.  We  do
not  mean  something  which  is,  but  the  mere  'is,'  the  bare  fact  of


Being,  without  any  substratum.  The  degree  of  condensation  or
development,  where  substantive  and  attribute  co-exist,  has  not
yet  come.  The  terms  or  forms  of  Being  float  as  it  were  freely  in
the  air,  and  we  go  from  one  to  another,  or — to  put  it  more  cor-
rectly— one  passes  into  another.  The  terms  in  question  are  Is
and  Not :  Because  :  There  is  :  Some  and  Other :  Each :  One  :
Many :  and  so  on  through  the  terms  of  number  to  degree  and
numerical  specificality.  This  Being  is  immediate  :  i.e.  it  con-
tains no  reference  binding  it  with  anything  beyond  itself,  but
stands  forward  baldly  and  nakedly,  as  if  alone ;  and,  if  hard
pressed,  it  turns  over  into  something  else.  It  includes  the  three
stages  of  Quality,  Quantity,  and  Measure.  The  ether  of  '  Is '
presumes  no  substratum,  or  further  connexion  with  anything :
and  we  only  meet  a  series  of  points  as  we  travel  along  the  surface
of  thought.  To  name,  to  number,  fn  ntrmiYfr  are  the  three  grades
of  our  ordinary  and  natural  thought :  so  simple,  that  one  is
scarcely  disposed  to  look  upon  them  as  grades  of  thought  at  all.
And  yet  if  thought  is  self-specification,  what  more  obvious  forms
of  specifying  it  are  there  than  to  name  (so  pointing  it  out,  or
qualifying  it),  to  number  (so  quantifying  it,  or  stating  its
dimensions),  and  to  measure  it  ?  These  are  the  three  primary
specificates  by  which  we  think, — the  three  primary  dimensions
of  thought.  Thought,  in  so  determining,  plays  upon  the  surface,
and  has  no  sense  of  the  interdependence  of  its  terms.  And  if
we  could  imagine  a  natural  state  of  consciousness  in  which
sensations  had  not  yet  hardened  into  permanent  things,  and  into
connexions  between  things,  we  should  have  something  like  the
range  of  Immediate  Being.  Colours  and  sounds,  a  series  of


cxx  PROLEGOMENA.  [xvi.

floating-  qualities,  pass  before  the  eye  and  the  ear  :  these  colours
and  sounds  are  in  course  of  time  counted  :  and  then,  by  apply-
ing the  numbers  to  these  qualities,  we  get  the  proportions  or
limits  ascertained.  When  this  process  in  actual  life,  —  the
advance  from  the  vague  feelings  which  tell  us  of  sweet,  cold,  &c.,
by  means  of  a  definite  enumeration  of  their  phenomena,  to  the
rules  guiding"  their  operation, — is  reduced  to  its  most  abstract
terms,  we  have  the  process  of  Being.  It  is  the  period  in
language,  when  a  distinction  between  things  and  their  actions  or
properties  has  not  arisen.  The  demonstrative  pronouns  and  the
numerals  are  the  linguistic  expression  of  Being  in  its  several
stages.

The  first  sphere  was  that  of  Being  directly  confronting  us,  and
using  the  demonstrative  pronouns  first  of  all.  The  second  is
Relative  Being :  and  in  this  we  have  to  deal  with  the  relative
pronouns.  The  surface  of  Being  is  now  seen  to  exhibit  a
secondary  formation,  to  involve  a  sort  of  permanent  standard  in
itself,  and  to  be  essentially  relative.  The  mere  quality,  when
reduced  to  number,  is  seen  to  be  subjected  to  a  certain  measure,
rule,  sort,  or  standard  :  and  this  reflex  of  itself  always  haunts  it,
modifying  and  determining  it.  Thus  instead  of  qualities,  we
begin  to  speak  of  the  properties  of  a  thing  :  we  have,  as  it  were,
two  levels  of  Being,  in  intimate  and  necessary  connexion,  where
there  was  only  one  before.  In  this  sphere  of  Relativity  the
terms  expressive  of  things  come  in  pairs :  such  as  Same  and
Different,  Like  and  Unlike :  True  Being  and  Show  or  Sham :
Cause  and  Effect :  Substance  and  Accident :  Matter  and  Form  :
and  the  like.  If  we  compare  mere  Being  to  the  cell  in  its  simple
state,  we  may  say  that  in  the  second  sphere  of  Logic  a  nucleus
has  been  formed, — that  a  distinction  has  sprung  up  between  two
elements,  which  are  still  in  closest  inter-connexion.  We  have
penetrated  behind  the  seeming  simplicity  of  the  surface  :  and  in
fact  discovered  it  to  be  mere  seeming  in  the  light  of  the  sub-
stratum, cause,  or  essence,  upon  which  it  is  now  reflected.  In
immediate  Being  one  category,  or  specificate,  or  dimension  of
thought  passes  over  into  another,  and  then  disappears  :  but  in


xvi.]  ESSENCE  OR  RELATIVE  BEING.  cxxi

mediated  Being-  one  category  has  a  meaning-  only  by  its  relation
to  another, — only  by  its  reflection  on  another, — only  by  the  lig-ht
which  another  casts  upon  it.  Thus  a  cause  has  no  meaning
except  in  connexion  with  its  effect :  a  force  implies  or  postulates
an  exertion  of  that  force :  an  essence  is  constituted  by  the
existence  which  issues  from  it.  Instead  of  '  is,'  therefore,  which
denotes  resting--upon-self,  or  connexion -with-self,  the  verb  of  the
second  sphere  is  'has,'  denoting  reference,  or  connexion-with-
something-else :  e.g.  the  cause  has  an  effect :  the  thing-  has
properties.  Instead  of  numerals,  come  the  prepositions  and  pro-
nouns of  relation,  such  as  which,  same,  like,  as,  by,  because.  The
only  conjunction  in  the  first  stage  or  Being  was  '  And,' — mere
juxtaposition ;  and  even  that  conjunction  was  perhaps  premature,
and  due  to  reflective  thought  going  beyond  what  was  immediately
before  it,  and  tracing  out  connexions  with  other  things.  The
first  stage,  as  we  have  seen,  treated  of  the  terms  of  natural
thought  present  in  the  action  of  the  senses  :  the  second  stage —
that  of  Essential  Being  —  deals  with  scientific,  reflective,  or
mediate  thought.  What,  why,  are  the  questions :  comparison
and  connexion  the  methods  :  the  establishment  of  relations  of
similarity,  causation,  and  co-existence,  the  purpose  in  this  range
of  logical  inquiry.  It  is  the  peculiar  home  of  what  are  known
as  Metaphysical  subtleties.  The  natural  but  delusive  tendency  of
reasoning  is  to  throw  the  emphasis  on  one  side  of  the  relation,
and  to  regard  the  other  as  necessary  and  secondary.  Contrasts
between  essentia  and  existentia :  substantia  and  modi :  cause  and
effect :  real  and  apparent,  constantly  occur.

If  the  first  branch  of  Logic  was  the  sphere  of  simple  Being  in
a  point  or  series  of  points,  the  second  is  that  of  difference  and
discordant  Being,  broken  up  in  itself.  The  progress  in  this
second  sphere,  —  of  Essentia  or  Relative  Being  —  consists  in
gradually  overcoming  the  antithesis  and  discrepancy  between  the
two  sides  in  it, — the  Permanent  and  the  Phenomenal.  At  first
the  stress  rests  upon  the  Permanent  and  true  Being  which  lies
behind  the  seeming, — upon  the  essence  or  substratum  in  the
background,  on  which  the  show  of  immediate  Being  has  been


cxxii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xvi.

proved  by  the  process  in  the  first  sphere  really  to  rest.  Then,
secondly,  Existence  comes  to  the  front,  and  Appearances  or
Phenomena  are  regarded  as  the  only  realities  with  which  science
can  deal.  And  yet  even  in  this  case  we  cannot  but  distinguish
between  matter  and  form,  between  the  phenomena  and  their
laws,  between  force  and  its  exercises  :  and  thus  repeat  the  re-
lativity, though  both  terms  in  it  are  now  transferred  into  the
range  of  the  Phenomenal  world.  The  third  range  of  Essential
Being  is  known  as  Actuality,  where  the  two  elements  in  relation
rise  to  the  level  of  independent  existences,  essences  in  pheno-
menal guise, — bound  together,  and  deriving  their  very  character-
istics from  that  close  union.  Relativity  is  now  clearly  apparent
in  actual  form,  and  comprises  the  three  heads  of  Substantial
Relation,  Causal  Relation,  and  Reciprocal  Relation.  In  this
case  while  the  two  members  of  the  relation  are  now  indis-
solubly  linked  together,  they  are  no  more  submitted  to  each
other  than  they  are  independent.  According  to  Reciprocity
everything  actual  is  at  once  cause  and  effect :  it  is  the  meet-
ing-point of  relations :  a  whole  with  independent  elements
in  mutual  inter-connexion.  Such  a  total  is  the  Notion.

This  brings  us  to  the  third  branch  of  Logic, — the  theory  of
the  Notion,  or  Grasp  of  Thought.  The  theory  of  Causality,  with
which  the  second  branch  closed,  continued  to  let  the  thought  fall
asunder  into  two  unequal  halves, — always  in  relation  or  con-
nexion with  each  other.  But  in  the  present  theory  we  are
dealing  with  Development.  By  development  is  meant  self-
specification,  or  self-actualisation  :  the  thing  is  what  it  becomes,
or  while  it  changes  it  remains  identical  with  itself.  The  Category
of  Development  is  the  category  or  method  of  philosophic  or
speculative  science :  just  as  Being  corresponded  to  natural
thought,  and  Relativity  or  Reflection  to  Metaphysical  and  im-
perfect science.  According  to  the  law  of  Development  diversity
and  unity  both  receive  their  due.  Mere  unity  or  Being  re-
appears now  as  Universality  or  Generality.  Mere  diversity,  or
the  relativity  of  essence,  re-appears  as  Particularity,  or  the
speciality  of  details.  And  the  union  of  the  two  is  seen  in  the


xvi.]  NOTION  AND  IDEA.  cxxiii

Individualised  notion  or  actual  thing.  In  other  words,  the  true
thought  which  really  grasps  its  object,  which  is  a  real  whole,
is  a  Triplicity  :  it  is  first  seen  all  as  the  ground  or  self-same,
the  possibility, — secondly,  all  as  the  existence  in  details,  and
difference,  the  actuality  or  contingency, — and  thirdly,  all  as  the
self-same  in  difference,  and  the  possible  in  actuality.  It  contains
an  innate  movement,  and  to  grasp  it  wholly  we  must  apprehend
it  as  such  a  gradual  unity  of  elements,  in  each  of  which  however
it  is  whole  and  entire.  Thus  the  Notion  embraces  the  three
elements  or  grades  of  universal,  particular  and  individual.  These
three  elements  first  rise  to  independence  and  their  full  significance
in  the  syllogism,  with  its  three  terms  and  judgments,  exhibiting
the  various  ways  in  which  any  two  of  these  elements  in  thought
are  brought  into  unity  by  means  of  the  third.  This  adequate
form  is  a  system  or  synthesis  which  contains  in  itself  the  means
to  its  realisation, — which  is  a  process  within  itself,  and  when
complete  and  actual  perforce  gives  itself  reality.

Thus  the  Notion  or  Subject — the  Causa  Sui — when  it  is  fully
realised  in  the  plentitude  of  its  elements  or  differences, — when
each  element  has  scope  of  its  own,  is  the  Object — the  actual  and
individualised  world  of  thought,  or  syllogism  in  reality.  This
objective  world  or  Object  appears  in  three  forms.  An  Object  is
either  a  mechanical,  a  chemical,  or  a  teleological  object.  The
terms  mechanical  and  chemical  are  not  to  be  understood  in  the
narrow  sense  of  a  machine  or  chemical  compound.  They  are  to
be  taken  in  a  logical  sense,  just  as  Mr.  J.  S.  Mill  speaks  of  a
chemical  or  geometrical  method  of  treating  social  problems.
The  object  or  realised  notion  is  mechanical,  when  the  unification
of  the  members  in  the  totality  comes  from  without,  so  that  the
synthetic  whole  or  universal  is  external  to  the  particulars,  and
only  arranges  them.  An  object  is  chemical,  when  the  connexion
or  genesis  of  the  compound  from  its  factors  is  not  evident :  when
the  elements  are  as  it  were  lost,  and  only  give  rise  to  a  fresh  par-
ticular. An  object  is  teleological,  when  the '  universal  is  not
distinctly  conceived  as  realised,  but  as  tending  to  be  realised  by
the  particulars.  Modern  science  is  a  vehement  opponent  of


cxxiv  PROLEGOMENA.  [xvn.

teleology  :  and  with  justice,  so  far  as  in  teleology  means  and  end
fall  apart.  But  it  is  mistaken  in  supposing  itself  to  return  to  the
mechanical  point  of  view.  On  the  contrary  its  success  is  most
generally  secured  by  rising  to  the  point  of  view  given  by  the
Idea  of  Life,  and  by  looking  upon  the  objective  world  as  an
Organism,  that  is,  as  the  notion  in  objectivity,  soul  indissolubly
united  with  body.  But  even  the  Idea  of  Life,  in  which  we
enter  the  third  stage  of  the  notion,  is  defective  as  a  represen-
tation of  the  truth  of  Objectivity :  for  body  and  soul  must  part.
The  conception  of  an  Organism  or  living  being  is  too  crude  :  and
gives  place  to  the  Idea  as  Absolute, — the  developed  unity  of  the
Notion  with  Objectivity.  This  unity  thus  presented  is  what
lies  before  our  vision  in  Nature  :  and  thus  the  Idea,  as  developed
in  Logic,  forms  the  prologue  to  the  Philosophy  of  Nature.


CHAPTER  XVII.


THE SEARCH FOR A FIRST PRINCIPLE.

IF  there  be  one  thing  which,  more  than  another,  distinguishes
Modern  Philosophers  from  the  Ancient  Philosophy  of  Athens,  it  is
the  desire  to  discover  a  First  Principle,  or  Formula,  from  which
all  things  can  be  deduced  and  explained.  Emulating  the  boast
of  Archimedes,  they  would  be  glad  to  find  a  TTOV  orco,  a  standing-
ground  from  which  they  could  move  the  world.  In  order  to
secure  such  a  vantage-ground  they  find  it  necessary  to  produce
a  vacuum, — to  make  a  clean  sweep  of  all  existence  so  that
nothing  may  interfere  with  the  swing  of  their  principle.  A  state
of  utter  doubt,  dispossessing  all  past  prejudices  and  idola, —
a  tabula  rasa, —  a  mind  in  its  blankness  before  all  possible
experience,  is  the  site  on  which  modern  philosophers  have  elected


xvii.]  ABSTRACT  PRINCIPLES.  cxxv

to  plant  their  systems.  But  from  a  condition  of  mere  vacuity
and  emptiness,  nothing  can  spring1.  E  nikilo  nihil  fit.  At  this
turn  of  the  philosophic  way,  it  seems  as  if  every  prospect  of  ad-
vance was  cut  off, — as  if  philosophy  had  inveigled  us  out  of  our
comfortable  home  of  actuality  only  to  land  us  in  a  quagmire, —
'  a  Slough  of  Despond.'  Nor  is  such  a  termination,  awkward  as
it  appears,  without  veritable  examples.

For  the  most  part,  however,  philosophers  manage  to  continue
their  way  undiscouraged.  Their  statements  are  not,  as  it
appears,  to  be  taken  quite  literally  or  seriously :  and  even  in  the
deepest  deep,  when  the  spirit  faces  the  knowledge  that  it  knows
nothing,  there  is  a  means  of  rescue  at  hand.  If  the  doubt  has
been  radical  enough,  we  are  assured,  there  is  a  ground  for
certainty  in  that  very  doubt.  In  the  heart  of  Cartesian  Scep-
ticism, the  '  Cogito,  ergo  sum'  (I  must  be.  because  I  think),  comes
to  bring  relief.  And  from  that  stable  centre  of  certainty,  the
world  soon  resumes  all  its  old  serenity  and  solidity.  The
principle  in  fact  serves  to  re-instate  a  great  deal  that  was
apparently  lost,  and  continues  to  occupy  a  magisterial  authority
throughout  the  whole  evolution  of  the  system.  Like  a  cleus  ex
machina,  or  a  trick  of  the  trade,  it  is  applied  to  unloose  every
knot,  and  to  clear  any  difficulties  that  arise.  But  a  principle  of
this  stamp  possesses  no  intimate  connexion  or  organic  solidarity
with  the  theory  which  it  helps  to  prop.  It  is  always  at  hand  as
a  ready-made  schema  or  heading,  and  can  be  attached  to  the
most  incongruous  orders  of  fact.  Thus  in  many  parts  of  the
works  of  Aristotle,  the  principle  of  '  End '  or  '  Activity  '  is  applied
to  whatever  subject  comes  forward,  and  like  a  hereditary  official
vestment  it  suits  all  its  wearers  equally  well  or  equally  ill.
What  is  true  '  on  the  whole  '  is  not  always  true  '  of  each  : '  the
Ka66Xov  never  quite  equals  the  »ca0'  c/caarot-.

The  modern  principle  of  Utility  is  equally  flexible  in  its
application  to  the  problems  of  moral  and  social  life.  It  costs  no
trouble  to  pronounce  the  magic  word,  and  even  '  such  as  are  of
weaker  capacity  '  may  make  something  out  of  such  a  formula.
But  an  abstract  formula,  which  is  equally  applicable  -to  every-


cxxvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [xvir.

thing,  is  not  particularly  applicable  to  anything.  While  it
seems  to  save  trouble,  and  is  so  plain  as  to  be  almost  tauto-
logical (as  when  the  worth  of  a  thing  or  act  is  explained  to
mean  its  utility),  it  really  suggests  fresh  questions  in  every  case,
and  multiplies  the  difficulty.  Having  an  outward  adaptability
to  every  kind  of  fact,  the  principle  has  no  true  sympathy  with
any  :  it  becomes  a  mere  form,  which  we  use  as  we  do  a  measuring-
rod,  moving  it  along  from  one  thing  to  another.  We  are  always
reverting  to  first  principles  as  our  last  principles  also.  Even
Aristotle,  when  he  remarked  that  an  object  had  to  be  criticised
from  its  own  principles  and  not  from  general  formulae,  saw
through  the  fallacy  of  this  style  of  argument.

This  is  like  asking  for  bread  and  getting  a  stone.  The
philosopher,  who  ought  to  take  us  through  the  shut  chambers
of  the  world,  merely  hands  us  a  key  at  the  gate,  telling  us
that  it  will  unlock  every  door,  and  then  the  insides  will  speak
for  themselves.  But  we  would  have  our  philosopher  do  a  little
more  than  this.  Not  being  ourselves  omniscient,  we  should
be  glad  of  a  guide-book  at  the  least,  and  perhaps  even  of  the
services  of  an  interpreter  to  explain  some  peculiarities,  some
startling  phenomena,  and  sights  even  more  unpleasant  than
those  which  appalled  the  spouse  of  the  notorious  Bluebeard.
Or,  dropping  metaphor,  we  wish  the  formula  to  be  applied
systematically  and  thoroughly.  When  that  is  done  the  formula
loses  its  abstractness ;  it  gains  those  necessary  amplifications
and  qualifications,  as  we  call  them,  without  which  no  theory
explains  much  or  gives  much  information.  And  thus,  instead
of  fancying  that  our  initial  formula  contains  the  truth  in  a
nutshell,  we  shall  find  that  it  is  only  one  step  to  be  taken
on  the  way  to  truth,  and  that  its  narrow  statement  sinks
more  and  more  into  insignificance,  as  its  amplified  theory  gains
in  significance.

But  an  adequate  principle  must  have  other  qualities.  What
has  been  said  up  to  this  point,  only  amounts  to  a  condition,
that  our  principle  must  cease  to  be  abstract  and  formal,  and
must  become  concrete  and  real.  What  we  want  is  a  Be-


xvii.]  WHAT  A  BEGINNING  IMPLIES.  cxxvii

ginning1, — a  principle  which  shall  be  a  real  beginning1,  leading
out  of  itself  into  a  system  of  developed  doctrine.  But  where
are  we  to  find  a  Beginning  ?  A  mere  certainty  will  not  satisfy :
the  certainty  must  be  primary,  and,  as  it  were,  a  point  not
analysable  into  simpler  constituents,  but  issuing  into  fuller
truths :  nothing  actually,  but  all  things  potentially.  And
therefore  such  a  beginning  as  '  Cogito,  ergo  sum,'  must  be
dismissed, — not  because,  according  to  Gassendi,  '  Ambulo,  ergo
sum''  (I  exist,  because  I  am  walking),  would  be  as  valid  an
inference,  but  because  the  certainty  does  not  lie  at  the  very
root  of  all  things.  To  begin  with  the  '  I '  would  only  place  us
at  a  point  where  the  severance  between  thought  and  being
was  already  a  fait  accompli,  to  be  accepted,  however  profusely
we  may  analyse  the  separate  factors  and  co-ordinate  them  by
our  arrangements.

The  beginning  of  philosophy  or  logic  must  go  far  deeper
than  this  original  division.  It  must  penetrate  to  a  stage  where
thought  and  being  are  at  one, — to  the  absolute  unity  of  both
which  precedes  their  disruption  into  the  several  worlds  of
Nature  and  Mind.  It  must  show  us  the  very  beginning  of
thought,  before  it  has  yet  come  to  the  full  consciousness  of
itself, — when  the  truth  of  what  it  is  still  lurks  in  the  back-
ground and  has  to  be  developed.  We  must  see  thought  in
its  first  and  fundamental  calling.  As  the  biologist,  when  he
describes  the  structure  of  a  plant,  begins  on  the  assumption  of
a  previous  development  of  parts,  with  an  existing  plant,
which  has  resulted  in  a  seed, — but  begins  with  the  seed  from
which  the  plant  is  derived :  so  the  logician  must  begin  with  a
point  which  in  a  way  pre-supposes  the  system  to  which  it
leads.  But  in  its  beginning  this  pre-supposition  is  not
apparent :  and  in  fact,  the  pre-supposition  will  only  appear
when  the  development  of  the  system  is  complete.  The  first
step  in  a  process,  just  because  it  is  a  step,  may  be  said  to  pre-
suppose the  completed  process.  Thus  the  beginning  of  Logic
presumes  the  existence  of  Absolute  Mind,  as  the  beginning
of  botany  presumes  the  existence  of  the  plant.  It  is  from


cxxviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xvn.

this  circumstance  that  Hegel  describes  philosophy  as  a  circle
rounded  in  itself,  where  the  end  meets  with  the  beginning1,
or  says  that  philosophy  has  to  comprehend  its  original  grasp
or  concept.  In  other  words,  it  is  not  till  we  reach  the  con-
clusion that  we  see,  in  the  light  thus  shed  upon  the  beginning,
what  that  beginning  really  was.  From  the  general  analogy
of  the  sciences  we  should  not  expect  that  the  beginning  of
thought  would  be  full-grown  thought,  or  indeed  seem  to  the
undiscerning  eye  to  be  thought  at  all.  The  beginning  is  not
usually  identifiable  with  the  final  issue,  except  by  some  effort
to  trace  the  process  of  connexion.  The  object  of  science  only
appears  in  its  truth  when  the  science  has  done  its  work.

The  beginning  of  philosophy  must  hold  a  germ  of  develop-
ment, however  dead  and  motionless  it  may  seem.  But  it  must
also  to  some  extent  be  a  result, — the  result  of  the  development
or  concentration  of  consciousness ; — of  the  other  forms  of  which
it  is  the  hypothetical  foundation.  The  variety  of  imaginative
conception,  and  the  chaos  of  sense,  must  vanish  in  a  point,
by  an  act  of  abstraction,  which  leaves  out  all  the  variety  and
the  chaos, — or  rather  by  an  act  of  distillation,  which  draws
out  of  them  their  real  essence  and  concentrated  virtue.  This
variety,  when  thoroughly  examined  and  tested,  shrivels  up  into
a  point: — it  only  is.  Everything  definite  as  we  call  it,  the
endless  repetitions  of  existence,  have  disappeared,  and  have  left
only  the  energy  of  concentration,  the  unitary  point  of  Being.

We  may  describe  the  process  in  two  ways.  We  may  say
that  we  have  left  out  of  sight  all  existing  differences, — that  we
have  stripped  off  every  vestige  of  empirical  conceptions,  and  left
a  residue  of  pure  thought.  The  thought  is  pure,  perhaps,  but  it
is  not  entire.  In  this  way  of  describing  it,  pure  thought  is  the
most  abstract  thought, — the  last  outcome  of  those  operations
which  have  divested  our  conceptions  of  everything  real  and  con-
crete about  them.  But  thus  to  speak  of  the  process  as  Abstraction
would  be  to  express  half  of  the  truth  only :  and  would  really
leave  us  a  mere  zero,  or  gulf  of  vacuity.  In  the  beginning
there  would  then  be  nothing — the  mere  annihilation  of  all


xvii.]  THE  HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY.  cxxix

possible  and  actual  existence.  And  it  is  certainly  true  that
in  the  beginning  there  can  be  nothing. — On  the  other  hand,
and  secondly,  there  is  affirmation  as  well  as  negation  involved
in  the  ultimate  action  by  which  sense  and  imagination  pass
into  thought.  They  are  not  left  behind,  and  the  emptiness
only  retained  :  they  are  carried  into  their  primary  consequence,
or  into  their  proximate  truth.  They  are  reduced  to  their
simplest  equivalent  or  their  lowest  term  in  the  vocabulary
of  thought :  which  is  Being.  The  process  which  creates  the
initial  point  of  pure  thought  is  at  once  an  abstraction  from
everything,  and  a  concentration  upon  itself  in  a  point : — which
point,  accordingly,  is  a  unity  or  inter-penetration  of  positive
and  negative.  This  absolute  self-concentration  into  a  point
is  the  primary  step  by  which  Mind  or  Thought  comes  to
know  itself, — the  first  step  in  the  Absolute's  process  of  self-
cognition — that  process  which  it  is  the  purpose  f^f  Logic  to
trace.

The  bare  point  of  Being  and  nothing  more  is  the  beginning
in  the  process  of  the  Absolute's  self-cognition :  it  is,  in  other
words,  our  first  apprehension  of  the  process  of  thought, — the
narrow  edge  by  which  we  come  in  contact  with  the  universe
of  Reason.  For  these  are  two  aspects  of  the  same.  The
process  of  the  self-cognition  or  manifestation  of  the  Absolute
Idea  is  the  very  process  by  which  philosophers  have  built  up
the  edifice  of  thought.  What  the  one  statement  views  from
the  universal  side  or  the  totality,  the  other  views  in  connexion
with  the  several  achievements  of  individual  thinkers.  Of  course
the  evolution  of  the  system  of  thought,  as  it  is  brought  about
by  individuals,  leaves  plenty  of  room  for  the  play  of  what  is
known  as  Chance.  The  Natural  History  of  Thought  or  the
History  of  Philosophers  has  to  regard  the  action  of  national
character  upon  individual  minds,  and  the  reciprocal  action  of
these  minds  upon  one  another.  The  History  of  Organic  Nature
similarly  presents  the  dependence  of  the  species  upon  their
surroundings,  and  of  one  species  upon  another  in  the  medium
of  its  conditions.  Gradually  Physical  Science  reduces  these


cxxx  PROLEGOMENA.  [xvm.

conditions  to  their  universal  forms,  and  may  try  to  exhibit
the  evolution  of  the  animal  through  its  species  in  all  grades
of  development.  So  in  the  Science  of  Thought  the  accidents,
as  we  may  call  them,  disappear :  and  the  temporary  and  local
questions,  which  once  engrossed  the  deepest  attention,  fade
away  into  generalised  forms  of  universal  application.  Philo-
sophy, as  it  historically  presents  itself  in  the  world,  is  not
an  accidental  production,  or  dependent  on  the  arbitrary  choice
of  men.  The  accident,  if  such  there  be,  is  that  these  particular
men  should  have  been  the  philosophers,  and  not  that  such
should  have  been  their  philosophy.  They  were,  according  to
their  several  capacity  for  utterance,  only  the  mouth-pieces  of
the  Spirit  of  the  Times, — of  the  absolute  mind  under  the
phenomenal  limitations  of  their  period.  They  saw  the  Idea
of  their  world  more  clearly  and  distinctly  than  other  men :
and  therein  lies  their  title  to  fame :  but  really  their  words
were  only  a  reflex, — an  almost  involuntary  and  necessary  move-
ment, due  to  the  mind  in  its  gradual  unveilment.  The  great
philosophers  are  the  victims  of  Thought, — the  scapegoat  which
goes  forth  bearing  the  sins  of  the  people.  Necessity  is  laid
upon  them  to  consecrate  themselves  to  the  service  of  the  Idea,
and  to  devote  their  lives  to  solitary  work  in  the  vast  loneliness
of  the  Absolute.


CHAPTER  XVIII.

THE LOGIC OF BEING.

THE  antitheses  between  thought  and  being,  between  the
idea  and  actuality,  between  the  notion  and  the  objept,  are
contrasts  produced  by  separating  one  member  in  the  process
of  thought  from  its  context.  If  we  take  a  fully  developed


xviii.]  THOUGHT  AND  BEING.


CXXXl


organic  body,  such  as  that  of  a  horse,  and  compare  it  with  the
small animalcules that inhabit  the  bottom  of  the ocean,  we
shall probably draw an absolute distinction between them.
The former we term organised, the latter seem inorganic.
But  a  study  of  the  intervening  steps,  of  the inter-mediation
between  the  two  ends  of  the  series,  generally  serves  to  dissipate
the belief  in an unbounded opposition.  /We recognise that
organic  and  inorganic  are  two  terms  of  approximate  thought,
abstractly  stating  a  difference,  which  does  not  thus  abstractly
exist  in  nature.  J  In  the  same  way  it  is  the  province  of  Logical
Science  to  show  that  the  incommensurability  between  thought
and being,  or  between  the  idea and actuality,  disappears on
closer examination. When we trace the development of
thought  sufficiently  far,  we  see  that  Being  is  an  imperfect  or
inadequate  thought,— certainly  not  adequate  to  the  Idea,  but
not  for  that reason generically  differing  from  it. The abso-
luteness of  Being  as  an  antithesis  to  Thought  is a  fiction  of
the understanding, maintained by  an effort of abstraction,
which  becomes natural  to  us by  habit. The thought  which
is  found  in  the  term  Being  passes  onwards,  instead  of  stopping*
there. It  has  not  deposited  all  its  burden,  or  uttered  all  its
meaning  in  Being. Being  is  the  veriest  abstraction,— the  very
rudiment  of  thought — meagre  as  meagre  can  be. It  is  011  one
side  the  bare  position  or  affirmation  of  thought :  on  the  other
hand  it  is  the  very  negation  of  thought,— if  thought  be  only
possible  under difference. But a mere '  Is '  is  a  mere point
without  difference. There is no such thing  as  mere  Being:
or  mere  Being  is  mere  nothing:  mere  Being  is  not.

The  first  category  of  Ontology  is  that  of  Being.  It  is  the
merest  simplicity  and  meagreness,  with  nothing  definite  in
it  at  all :  and  for  that  very  reason  constantly  liable  to  be
confused  with  categories  of  more  concrete  burden.  It  does  not
however  mean  something  which  has  being;  it  does  not  mean
definite  being:  still  less  does  it  mean  a  being  (what  Hegel
calls  an  Essence).  Ordinary  language  certainly  uses  being  in
all  these  senses.  But  if  we  are  to  be  logical,  we  must  not  mix


i  2


cxxxn


PROLEGOMENA.  [xvni.


up  categories  with  one  another : we  must  take  terms  at  their
precise  value. Mere  Being  thenjsjhe_mere  js,'  which_can
give  no  explanation  or  analysis  of  itself:  whichjs_iridescribable
in  itselfj_which  is  an  '  Is '' and  "nothing  jnore. The simplest
a^wer  to  those,  who  invest  the  Os '  with  so  much  signification,
is  to  ask  them  to  consider  the  logical  copula. Every  one  knows
that  the  '  Is '  of  the copula  disappears  in  several  languages :
that  it  is  far  from  indispensable  in  Latin :  that  in  Greek  e.  g.
the  demonstrative  article  serves  the  same  purpose. In  Hebrew
too  the  pronouns  officiate  for  the  so-called  substantive  verb  :
and  the  same  verb  probably  does  not  exist  in  the  Polynesian
family  of  languages,  where  its  place  is  supplied  by  what  we
call  the  demonstrative  pronoun1. In  the  copula,  which  according
to  M.  Laromiguiere, as  quoted  by  Mr.  Mill,  expresses  only
<  un  rapport  spedal  entre  le  sujet  et  Vattribut,'  we  encounter  the
mere  undeveloped  and  unexplained  unifying of  thought, the
very  abstraction  of  relativity2.

f In  the  beginning,  then,  there  is  nothing  and  yet  that  nothing

/is. Such is the fundamental antithesis of  thought: or  the

'discrepancy  which  makes  itself  felt  between  each  several  term

of  thought  and  the  whole  Idea  of  which  they  are  the  expression.

Being  is  the  term  emphasised  as  absolute  by  understanding:

then  the  dialectical  power,  or  the  consciousness  of  the  whole,

steps  in  to  counteract  the  one-sided  element. In  other  words,

thought, the total thought, asks what is Being,  mere and

simple;  and answers  mere nothing. The  one aspect of  the

*  The  word  'no  '  with  its  root  «  na'  is  said  to  be  only  the  pronoun  expressing
remoteness  as  distinct  from  •  ta.' A  vague  demonstrative's  is  here  the  common
element. Again,  oui  (yes)  is  hoc-illud :  and  rien  (nothing)  is  Latin  rem.

•  When  it  is  said  that :  '  It  is  strange  that  so  profound  a  thinker  as  Hegel
should  not  have  seen  that  the  conception  of  definite  objects,  such  as  a  dog  and  cat,
is  prior  no  less  in  nature  than  in  knowledge  to  the  conception  of  abstract  relations,
such  as  u  and  is  not:  it  is  difficult  to  say  what  the  writer  meant. Had  he  ever
heard  of  geometry? It  seems  an  attempt  to  allow  a  certain  authority,  now  tc
common  sense,  now  to  philosophy,  as  if  there  was  a  good  deal  to  be  said  on  both
sides or  it  resembles  a  person  trying  to  reconcile  the  ordinary  language  a
sunrise  and  sunset,  with  the  astronomical  doctrine,  by  telling  us  that  the  ordinary
conception  of  the  sun's  movements  was  'prior  no  less  in  nature  than  in  knowledge
to  the  theory  of  the  earth's  rotation. See  Hansel's  Letters,  Lectures,  &c.,  p.  209,


xviii.]  IS  AND  IS  NOT.  cxxxiii

point  is  as  justifiable  as  the  other.  In  other  words  the  two
aspects  are  indissoluble :  they  are  in  one.  The  term  '  Unity,'
applied  to  the  relation  of  Being  and  Not,  may  perhaps  mislead :
and  it  is  therefore  better  to  say  that  the  two  points  of  view  are
inseparable.  In  the  point,  to  which  the  universe  of  thought
has  concentrated  itself,  the  opposites  have  drawn  together,
indissoluble  to  expression,  however  much  they  may  tend  to  be
different, — because  the  difference  cannot  explain  itself.  A  mere
Not,  with  no  substratum  which  it  negatives,  is  mere  Being :
and  a  mere  Being,  which  has  no  substratum,  is  a  mere  Not.
The  movement  upward  and  the  movement  downward  are  here
illustrated :  and  it  is  evident  that  they  are  the  same  movement.
Each — Being  and  Not — as  it  seeks  to  differentiate  itself,  to
make  itself  clear,  passes  into  the  other.  In  fact,  the  very
vocation,  calling,  or  notion  of  Being  and  Nothing,  is  not  Being
and  Nothing,  but  the  tendency  of  each  to  pass  into  the  other.
Their  truth,  in  short,  is  not  in  themselves,  but  in  their  process, —
and  that  process  by  which  the  one  passes  into  the  other  is
'  To  become.'  Of  mere  Being  we  can  only  predicate  Nought :
of  mere  Nought  we  can  only  predicate  Being.  The  two
abstractions  have  no  truth  except  in  the  passage  into  one
another :  and  this  passage  or  transition  is  '  To  become.'  The
first  concrete  or  real  thought, — the  unity  of  opposites — is  not
a  unity  in  rest,  but  a  process,  a  movement.  In  other  words,
'To  become'  does  not='to  be'  +  'not  to  be:'  the  truth  or
notion  of  each  lies  not  in  the  addition  of  one  element  to
another,  but  in  the  movement  of  each  to  the  other, — the
double  movement  of  coming  into  being  and  passing  out  of
being.

This  unity  or  inseparability  of  opposite  elements  in  a  truth  or
real  notion  is  the  stumbling-block  to  the  incipient  Hegelian.
The  respectable  citizens  of  Germany  were  amazed,  says  Heine,
at  the  shamelessness  of  J.  G.  Fichte,  when  he  proclaimed  that
the  Ego  produced  the  world,  as  if  that  had  cast  doubts  upon
their  being :  and  the  ladies  were  curious  to  know  whether
Madame  Fichte  was  included  in  the  general  denial  of  substantial


cxxxiv  PROLEGOMENA.  [xvin.

existence1.  If  easy-going  critics  treated  Fichte  in  this  way,  they
had  even  better  source  for  amusement  in  Hegel.  That  Being
is  Nothing  was  a  perpetual  fund  for  jokes,  too  tempting  to  be
missed.  Now,  in  the  baldness,  and  occasionally  paradoxical
style  of  Hegel's  statements,  there  is  some  excuse  for  such
exaggerations.  Being  and  Nothing  are  not  merely  the  same :
they  are  also  different :  they  at  least  tend  to  pass  into  each
other.  In  the  technical  language  of  logicians,  the  question  is
not  what  being  denotes,  but  what  it  connotes.  The  word  '  is '
had,  it  may  be,  originally  a  '  demonstrative '  meaning,  a  '  pro-
nominal' force,  which  in  course  of  time  passed  from  a  local  or
sensuous  meaning  to  express  a  thought.  No  doubt  '  is  '  and  '  is
not'  are  wide  enough  apart  in  our  application  of  them  as  copula
of  a  proposition :  but  if  we  subtract  the  two  terms  and  leave
only  the  copula  standing,  the  difference  of  the  two  becomes
inexpressible  and  unanalysable.  In  both  there  is  the  same  state-
ment of  immediacy  or  face-to-faceness :  that  two  things  are
brought  to  confront  each  other, — united,  as  it  were,  without
producing  any  real  or  specific  sort  of  union.  If  Thought  be
unifying,  Being  is  the  minimum  of  unification :  if  Thought  be
relating,  Being  is  the  most  abstract  of  relations.  No  doubt,
between  the  two  terms  Being  and  not-Being  a  difference  is
meant,  when  they  are  employed, — a  difference  is  thrown  into
them ;  and  then  they  are  not  the  same :  but  if  we  keep  out  of
sight  what  is  meant,  and  stick  to  the  ultimate  point  which  is
said,  we  shall  find  that  mere  being  and  mere  nothing  are  alike
impenetrable  by  themselves,  and  that  to  institute  a  difference
we  must  go  out  of  and  beyond  them.  Perhaps  some  approach
to  the  right  point  of  comprehension  may  be  made,  if  we  note
that  when  two  people  quarrel  and  can  give  no  reason  or  further
development  to  their  opposite  assertions,  the  one  person's  '  is '  is
exactly  equal  (apart  from  subsequent  explanations)  to  the  other's
'  is  not.'  The  mere  '  Is '  and  '  Is  not '  have  precisely  the  same
amount  of  content :  a  mere  affirmation  or  assertion,  which  is


mere  nothing.


Heine,  Ueber  Deutschland,  (Werke,  v.  213.)


xvm.]  IS  AND  THERE  IS.  cxxxv

The  truth  of  '  is '  then  turns  out  ( become : '  nothing  is :  all
things  are  coming  to  be  and  passing  out  of  being.  This  illus-
trates the  meaning  of  the  word  '  truth '  in  Hegel.  It  is  partly
synonymous  with  'concrete,'  partly  with  the  ( notion.'  With
concrete :  because  to  get  at  the  truth,  we  must  take  into  account
a  new  element,  kept  out  of  sight  in  the  mere  affirmation  of
being.  With  notion  :  because  if  we  wish  to  comprehend  being,
we  must  grasp  it  as  '  becoming.'  Secondly,  truth  lies  in  a
movement  or  process  :  not  in  isolation  and  rest.  We  go  forward,
and  we  go  backward,  as  it  were  :  forward  from  being,  backward
to  being:  we  look  before  and  after.  The  attempt  to  isolate  the
mere  point  of  being  is  impossible  in  thought :  it  would  only
lead  to  the  '  presentation '  of  being, — i.  e.  the  notion  of  being
would  be  arrested  in  its  development,  and  identified  probably
with  a  sensible  thing.

If  being,  however,  is  truly  apprehended  as  a  process,  as  a
becoming,  then  this  tendential  nature,  or  function,  or  vocation
implies  a  result,  a  certain  definiteness,  which  we  missed  before.
Somewhat  has  become :  or  the  indeterminate  being  has  been
invested  with  definiteness  and  distinct  character.  The  second
term  in  the  process  of  thought  therefore  is  reached  :  Being  has
become  Somewhat ;  and  is  real,  because  it  implies  negation.
The  fluid  unity  or  movement  from  '  is '  to  '  is  not,'  and  vice  versa,
has  crystallised  :  and  '  There  is  '  is  the  result  precipitated.  By
this  term  we  imply  the  finitude  of  being, — imply  that  a  portion
has  been  cut  off  from  its  context,  and  contrasted  with  some-
thing else.  In  the  ordinary  application  of  the  word,  Being  is
especially  employed  to  denote  this  stage  of  definite  and  limited
being : — what  we  emphatically  call  reality.  Thus  we  speak  of
bringing  something  into  being :  by  which  we  mean,  not  mere
being,  but  a  definite  being,  or,  in  short,  reality.  Reality  is
determinateness,  as  opposite  to  mere  vagueness.  To  be  real,  it
is  necessary  to  be  somewhat, — to  limit  and  define.  This  is  the
necessity  of  finitude  :  in  order  to  be  anything  more  and  higher,
there  must  come,  first  of  all,  a  determinate  being  and  reality.
But  reality,  as  we  have  seen,  implies  negation :  it  implies


cxxxvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [xvin.

limiting,  distinction,  and  opposition.  Everything  finite,  every
'  somewhat/  has  somewhat  else  to  counteract,  narrow,  and
thwart  it.  To  be  somewhat  is  an  object  of  ambition,  as  Juvenal
implies :  but  it  is  only  an  unsatisfactory  goal  after  all.  For
somewhat  always  implies  something  else,  to  which  it  is  in
bondage.  The  two  limit  each  other  :  or  the  one  is  the  limit  of
the  other.

This,  then,  is  the  price  to  be  paid  for  rising  into  reality,  and
coming  to  be  somewhat :  there  is  always  somewhat  else  to  be
minded.  The  very  point  which  makes  a  '  somewhat,'  as  above
a  mere  '  nothing,'  is  its  determinateness :  and  determinateness
is  at  least  negation  and  limit.  Now  the  limit  of  a  thing  is  that
point  where  it  begins  to  be  somewhat  else  :  where  it  passes  out
of  itself  and  yields  to  another.  Accordingly  as  limited,  as
determined,  somewhat  must  pass  over  into  another:  it  must
be  altered,  and  become  somewhat  else.  Thus  a  '  something '
implies  for  its  being  the  being  of  somewhat  else :  its  being  is
as  it  were  adjectival, — it  is  dependent,  finite,  and  alterable.
Such  is  the  character  of  determinate  being.  It  leads  to  an
endless  series  from  some  to  other,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum :  every-
thing as  a  somewhat,  as  a  determinate  being,  or  as  in  reality,
is  for  something  else,  and  that  again  for  some  third  thing,  and
so  the  chain  is  extended.  Somewhat-ness  is  always  being  for
somewhat  else :  and  for  that  very  reason,  ceasing  to  be  the
primary  object,  it  becomes  somewhat  else  itself;  and  the  other
term  becomes  the  somewhat.  And  so  the  same  story  is  re-
peated in  endless  progression,  till  one  gets  wearied  with  the
repetition  of  finitude,  which  is  held  out  as  infinite.

Thus  in  determinate  being  as  in  mere  being  we  see  the
apparent  point  issuing  in  a  double  movement — the  alteration
from  some- being  to  somewhat  else,  and  vice  versa.  But  a  move-
ment like  this  implies  after  all  that  there  is  a  something  which
alters :  which  is  alterable,  but  which  alters  into  somewhat.
This  somewhat  which  alters  into  somewhat,  and  thus  retains
itself,  is  a  being  which  has  risen  above  altei'ation,  which  is
independent  of  it :  which  is/0;-  itself,  and  not  for  somewhat  else.


xviii.]  SOME  AND  EACII.  cxxxvii

Thus  in  order  to  advance  a  step  further  from  determinate  and
alterable  being,  we  have  only  to  keep  a  firm  grasp  on  both  sides
of  the  process,  and  not  suffer  the  one  to  slip  away  from  the
other.  Something-  becomes  something  else  :  in  short,  the  one
side  passes  in  the  other  side  of  the  antithesis,  and  the  limitation
is  absorbed.  The  new  result  is  something  in  something  else  :
the  limit  is  taken  up  within  :  and  this  being  which  results  is
its  own  limit.  It  is  Being-for-self : — the  third  step  in  the
process  of  thought  under  the  general  category  of  Being.  The
range  of  Being  which  began  in  a  vague  nebula,  and  passed  into
a  series  of  points,  is  now  reduced  to  a  single  point,  self-com-
plete and  whole.

This  Being-for-self  is  a  true  infinite,  which  results  by  ab-
sorption of  the  finite.  The  false  infinite,  which  has  already  come
before  us,  is  the  endless  range  of  finitude,  passing  from  one
finite  to  another,  from  somewhat  to  somewhat  else,  until  satiety
sets  in  with  weariness.  The  true  infinite  is  satisfaction) — the
inclusion  of  the  other  being  into  self,  so  that  it  is  no  longer  a
limit,  but  a  part  in  the  being.  Such  inclusion  is  termed
'  ideality.'  The  antithesis  is  reduced  to  become  an  organic  and
dependent  part.  It  is,  but  no  longer  outside  and  independent.
Thus  in  determinate  being  the  determinateness  is  found  in
somewhat  else  :  in  being-for-self  the  determinateness  is  the  very
being.  Being-for-self  may  be  shortly  expressed  by  '  each : '  as
determinate  being  by  '  some  : '  and  Being  simple  by  '  a  '  or  '  an.'
As  '  some '  is  always  partial,  '  each '  is  always  whole.  '  A '  or
'  an '  is  too  vague  to  be  either.

But  'each  for  self  expresses  the  sentiment  of  universal
war, — the  bellum  omnium  contra  omnes.  Each  is  self-centred,
independent,  resting  upon  self,  and  not  minding  anything  else,
— which  is  now  thrown  out  as  indifferent  into  the  background.
Each  is  centripetal ;  anything  else  is  for  it  a  matter  of  no
moment.  If  determinate  being  was  adjectival,  this  is  sub-
stantival, and  rests  upon  itself.  It  seems  purely  affirmative,  and
promises  to  give  a  definite  unity.  But  we  cannot  free  thought
from  negation  in  this  sphere,  any  more  than  in  the  earlier.


cxxxviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xvni.

We  may,  if  we  like,  assert  the  absolute  self-sufficing-ness,  pri-
mariness,  and  unalterability  of  each ;  but  a  very  little  reflection
shows  the  opposite  to  be  true.  The  very  notion  of  each  is
exclusiveness  towards  the  rest :  a  negative  and,  as  it  were,
polemical  attitude  towards  others  is  the  very  basis  of  Being-
for-self.  One  after  one,  they  each  rise  to  confront  each,  each
excluding  each,  until  their  self-importance  is  reduced  to  be  a
mere  point  in  a  series  of  points,  one  amongst  many.  When
that  is  clearly  seen,  their  qualitative  character  has  disappeared :
and  there  is  left  only  their  quantity1.  The  negative  attitude
of  each  to  each  forms  a  sort  of  bond  connecting  them.  If  we
call  the  reference  which  connects,  by  the  name  of  attraction,
then  we  may  say  that  the  repulsion  of  each  against  each  is
exactly  equal  to  their  mutual  a£traction.  And  thus,  in  the
language  of  Hobbes,  the  universal  quarrel  is  only  the  other
side  of  the  general  union  in  the  great  Leviathan :  repulsion,  in
the  shape  of  mutual  fear,  is  the  principle  of  attraction.  Thus
each  for  self  is  repeated  endlessly :  instead  of  the  atom  or  unit
we  have  a  multitude,  utterly  indifferent  to  what  each  is  for
itself.  The  mere  fact  that  it  is,  entitles  it  to  count,  and  so
constitute  quantity.

Here  we  may  shortly  recapitulate  the  categories  of  Quality
or  Being  Proper.  It  forms  three  steps  or  grades :  those  of
indeterminate  being :  determinate  being :  self-determined  being :
or  if  we  speak  of  them  as  processes,  we  have  becoming :  altera-
tion :  attraction  and  repulsion.  From  the  extreme  of  ab-
straction and  concentration  thought,  under  the  form  of  Being,
passes  on  to  greater  determinateness  and  development.  The
vagueness  of  mere  Being  gives  place  to  a  distinction  of  elements,
and  a  dependence  of  one  upon  the  other :  where  the  '  is '  and  ( is
not'  part  from  each  other  sufficiently  to  let  us  distinguish  them.
This  is  the  stage  of  finitude :  when  we  say  that  there  is  some-
what, but  there  are  others,  and  imply  that  it  has  an  end,  a
limit,  a  negation  in  its  nature.  These  words  describe  the
finite  scene, — a  fragmentary  being  which  makes  an  advance

1  Hence  the  disparaging  sense  in  which  the  term  '  individual '  may  be  used.


xviii.]  THE  ELEMENTARY  NOTION.  cxxxix

upon  indeterminateness,  but  loses  its  wholeness  and  is  always
and  necessarily  leading  on  to  something  else.  It  is  the  re-
vulsion from  the  vague  and  yet  unspecified  universal  to  definite
and  limited  particulars.  In  the  third  stage  the  limit  is  uplifted
and  included  in  the  particular,  which  now  contains  its  negation
in  itself, — is  independent,  is  its  own  ground,  and  may  be  called
an  individual  or  one ;  and  thus  we  come  to  an  aggregate  of  ones,
or  a  multitude.  This  being-for-self  is  an  individual  or  atom :
it  is  the  basis  of  that  higher  development,  which  is  known  as
subjectivity  and  personality.  These  are,  as  it  were,  higher
multiples  of  it.

This  first  sphere  of  thought,  apparently  so  abstruse  and
unreal  in  its  abstractions,  had  to  be  thus  narrowly  discussed
because  it  presents  all  the  difficulties  and  peculiarities  of  Hegel
in  their  most  elementary  form.  These  same  distinctions  recur
in  higher  multiples.  They  are  clearly  the  fundamental  types
of  ancient  Greek  philosophy.  The  merit  of  the  Hegelian  method
is  to  begin  at  the  beginning,  and  to  examine  thoroughly
those  primary  abstract  notions  on  which  the  whole  structure  of
thought  rests,  and  which  philosophers  in  general  have  accepted
in  a  haphazard  way,  or  rejected  as  unworthy  of  their  con-
sideration. It  is  on  the  comprehension  of  these  lowest  terms
or  simplest  vocations  of  thought,  Being  and  not-Being,  that
the  profoundest  problems  of  Metaphysics  ultimately  turn.

Thus,  in  the  first  place,  the  process  of  Being,  as  seen  in
the  light  of  the  whole  system  of  Logic,  shows  that  it  has  to
be  comprehended  as  a  triple  unity.  This  is  the  'Notion'  or
'  Grasp '  of  Being.  First,  as  an  unspecialised,  vague,  and  by
itself  empty,  being, — which  by  itself  is  mere  nothing :  a  mere
universal.  Second,  as  a  specialised,  divided,  and  differentiated
being  of  some  and  other :  a  mere  particular,  limited  by  other
particulars,  and  so  finite.  Third,  as  a  combination  of  the  two
earlier  stages :  as  wholeness  with  determinateness,  as  unity ;
and  so  an  individual.  In  the  question  of  Being  these  three
elements  follow,  as  one  passes  over  into  another :  but  in  the
notion  they  inter-penetrate,  and  each  of  them  is  the  others  and


cxl  PROLEGOMENA.  [xvm.

the  total.  The  truth  or  the  notion  of  being  takes  it  in  Being-
for-self  as  a  universalised  particular  by  means  of  an  individual. —
In  the  second  place :  the  sphere  of  mere  Being  is  that  of
mere  identity :  that  of  determinate  being  is  the  sphere  of
difference :  that  of  self-determined  being  is  the  sphere  of  the
ground  of  existence. — Thirdly :  the  first  sphere  may  be  illus-
trated by  the  freedom  of  indeterminateness,  expressed  by  the
word  '  may : '  the  second  by  necessity  or  determinateness,  ex-
pressed by  the  word  '  must : '  and  the  third,  by  the  freedom
which  is  self-determining,  expressed  by  the  word  '  will.' —
Fourthly :  these  steps  illustrate  the  meaning  of  the  terms
setzen :  aufheben  :  an  sick  :  fur  sick :  Idealitat :  Realitdt.  Thus
Determinate  Being  or  somewhat  is  an  sick  somewhat  else :
and  the  process  of  determinate  being  is  to  lay  it  down  or
express  it  as  such.  When  this  explicitly-stated  'other'  or
limit  is  included  in  the  Being,  and  reduced  into  a  unity  with
somewhat  in  each  (Being-for-self),  it  is  said  to  be  '  aufgekoben.'
As  being  which  limits  and  is  limited,  determinate  being  is
Realitdt:  as  being  which  is  absorbed  and  denuded  of  its
independent  being,  it  is  Idealitat  in  Being-for-self.  Each  has
the  others  in  it  as  elements  (Momenta] ;  they  are  there  ideally
(ideeller  Weise),  as  it  were  organically :  that  is,  they  are  denied
the  privilege,  which  their  total  has,  of  being-for-themselves.
They  do  not  enjoy  the  benefit  of  their  own  being,  though  its
presence  is  felt. — Fifthly :  Being-for-self  is  absolute  negativity  ;
i.  e.  the  negation  of  negation.  Determinate  being  was  a  nega-
tion of  Being  mere  and  simple :  Being-for-self  is  the  negation
of  this,  and  so  a  return  to  true  affirmation,  as  including  the
element  of  negation.

The  vague  surface  of  Being  has  been  reduced  by  the  process
of  its  nature  into  a  series  of  units,  where  each  being  is  con-
tracted to  a  point,  a  unit  with  its  unity  set  aside,  and  where
it  matters  not  whether  it  be  somewhat  or  other.  This  vocation
of  Being,  in  which  all  qualitative  attributes  are  lost  and
sunk,  is  Quantity :  the  characteristic  of  which  is  to  be  a  matter
of  no  importance  to  Being,  as  it  originally  presents  itself.


xvm.]  QUANTITY.  cxli

In  other  words,  whilst  Quality  is  identical  with  Being1,  —  while
Being-  means  qualitativeness,  and  the  Being  of  a  thing-  means
its  quality,  or  constitution  ;  Quantity  is  external  to  Being-,
and  a  thing  is,  while  its  quantity  undergoes  all  sorts  of  variation.
At  least  this  is  true  within  certain  limits  :  for  quantity  is
not  an  ultimate  category  any  more  than  quality.  But  for
the  present  the  truth  of  quality  is  quantity.  First  come
qualities,  such  as  sweet,  green,  and  the  like  :  these  seem  to
be  truth  and  reality  to  the  senses  and  the  natural  mind  :  and
in  their  universality  are  represented  by  the  abstract  terms  of
qualitative  being.  But  one  part  of  the  progress  of  knowledge
consists  in  the  reduction  of  quality  to  quantity.  Number,  in
short,  is  the  proximate  truth  of  the  senses.  Sounds  are  reduced
to  relations  or  ratios  of  number  :  and  so  are  the  other  data  of
sensation.  We  see  this  truth  recognised  in  the  Atomic  School,
which  represents  the  summing-up  of  that  period  of  thought
which  begins  with  the  '  Being  '  of  Parmenides,  and  the  '  Be-
coming '  or  Process  of  Heraclitus.  When  Democritus  says
that,  although  bitter  and  sweet  are  conventional  distinctions,
yet  in  reality  there  is  only  atoms  and  void1,  he  is  stating
that  the  mere  vague  being  must  be  truly  apprehended  as  an
endless  multitude  of  beings,  each  complete  in  itself,  were  it
not  for  that  necessity  which  forces  them  by  negation,  i.  e.  by
the  void  (as  he  figuratively  represents  the  repulsion  of  the
atoms)  to  meet  each  other  and  form  apparent  unities.  Before
a  step  could  be  made  to  higher  problems,  it  was  necessary  to
see  that  the  proximate  truth  of  the  qualitative  world,  —  or
world  of  sense  proper  (i5to  afcrflqcris),  is  in  its  simplest  terms  a
'  one  '  and  '  many,'  the  quantitative  world,  or  world  of  common
sensibles  (KOLVO.  aurora),  universalised  sensibles,  number  and
quantity.

The  sphere  of  quantity  need  only  be  briefly  sketched.  It
has  its  three  heads  :  (1)  quantity  in  general,  —  the  universal
and  vague  notion  of  quantity,  the  mere  fact  of  it  :  (2)  quantum,


f\vnv  «ot  v6fiy  iriKpov  fTfrj  Se  dropa  nal  icevov. Democritus  ap.  Sext.
Empir.  adv.  Math.  vii.  135.


cxlii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xvin.

or  definite  quantity,  expressed  in  the  shape  of  number,  which
is  the  particularisation  of  quantity  (the  universal)  into  its
details:  and  (3)  the  quantitative  relation  or  degree,  which  is
the  individualisation  of  numbers,  or  their  application  to  one
another, — which  gives  the  real  meaning  and  value  of  numbers.
The  fundamental  antithesis,  which  we  found  'as  is '  and
'  is  not '  in  quality,  comes  before  us  here  more  definitely  as
the  'one'  and  the  'many.'  In  every  quantity  there  are.  the
two  elements :  the  '  one,'  unity  or  solidarity,  which  renders  a
total  or  a  whole  possible,  and  the  '  many '  or  multiplicity,
which  constitutes  each  a  distinct  and  definite  number.  Quantity
in  other  words  is  Continuous  and  Discrete.  Thus  when  I
regard  a  line  as  consisting  of  an  infinite  number  of  points  I
treat  it  as  a  discrete  quantity :  as  many  in  one.  When,  on
the  other  hand,  I  regard  the  line  as  the  unity  of  these  points,
it  becomes  a  continuous  quantity.  These  distinctions  are  not
so  trivial  as  they  may  appear :  they  lie  at  the  bases  of  paradoxes
like  those  by  which  Zeno  disproved  motion,  and  when  a  M.  P.
informs  the  House  of  Commons  that  it  is  impossible  to  divide
73/.  i*.  6d.  by  il.  2,s.  6d.}  he  is,  like  Zeno,  and  perhaps  more
unconsciously,  forgetting  that  these  quantities  are  not  merely
continuous  but  discrete.

These  two  elements  in  quantity,  and  number  generally,  were
known  to  the  Pythagoreans  under  the  name  of  the  Monad,
and  the  indefinite  Duad  :  or  of  the  limiting  and  the  unlimited.
There  is  in  every  number  what  we  may  call  a  numerator  and
a  denominator,  a  multiplier  and  a  multiplicand :  and  in  the
quantitative  relation  or  ratio  we  have  the  explicit  statement
of  this  double  element,  along  with  the  product  to  which  it
gives  rise.  It  is  in  virtue  of  the  '  one '  in  number  that  it  is
comparable :  in  virtue  of  the  '  many '  that  it  is  a  separate  and
distinct  number.  The  exponent  of  the  ratio  is  the  definite
statement  of  these  two  elements  in  their  connexion,  and  thus
gives  the  final  actualising  of  number.  When  we  thus  depose
numbers  to  such  a  position,  that  a  change  in  the  numbers  is
indifferent,  so  long  as  the  exponent  of  their  ratio  continues


XVIIL]  MEASVRE  AND  PROPORTION.  cxliii

the  same, — when  their  whole  value  lies  in  their  relation,  we
are  coming  to  what  Hegel  calls  '  Measure/ — in  the  first  place,
a  quantity  on  which  a  quality  depends.  Measure  is  quantity
applied  to  determine  quality.  This  meeting  of  quantity  with
quality  is  seen  in  what  in  mathematics  is  called  an  '  equation,'
such  as  of  a  circle  or  a  parabola.  The  quantitative  relation
is,  properly  speaking,  not  a  quantity,  but  a  relation  between
quantities,  and  thus  a  Measure.

Measure  is  the  third  grade  of  being.  To  measure  is  to  apply
a  quantitative  standard  to  objects  qualitatively  considered.  It
pre-supposes  therefore  both  quantity  and  quality.  To  measure
the  temperature  of  the  air  means  to  apply  some  recognised
standard,  a  quantity,  to  a  qualitatively  defined  body.  Thus
we  measure  the  moisture  in  the  air  by  an  inch  standard  applied
to  a  column  of  mercury.  Such  a  measure  is  only  a  standard,
or  a  rule  :  it  is,  in  other  words,  a  mere  quantity  applied  to
determine  quality.  But  standards  are  relative :  they  must  be
given.  One  nation  has  a  sterling  pound  for  its  standard  of
value :  another  a  franc.  It  therefore  pre-supposes  a  measure-
ment to  fix  it.  Again,  a  rule  is  only  the  majority  of  cases,  and
necessarily  admits  of  exceptions.  Whereas  a  law  gives  th'e
reason,  and  is  universally  valid.  In  these  cases,  the  standard
and  the  rule  are  not  absolutely  at  one  with  what  is  measured.
The  quantitative  determinant  remains  outside  of,  and  somewhat
foreign  to,  the  qualitative  character  with  which  it  is  connected.
Quantity  in  such  a  case  has  the  upper  hand  in  the  measure.
But  when  the  quantity  exceeds  a  certain  limit,  it  does  pro-
duce a  change  in  the  quality.  The  increase  of  the  proletariat  e.g.
may  go  on  within  certain  limits  without  producing  any  effect ;
but  at  a  certain  point  a  crisis  supervenes,  and  a  catastrophe
shows  the.  effect  of  the  gradual  advance.  In  these  circumstances
it  might  seem  as  if  measure  bad  been  abolished :  and  as  if
the  world  had  become  measureless.  So  at  least  in  the  case  of
revolutions  cry  the  classes  which  no  longer  retain  the  standard
and  measure  in  their  own  hands.  But  the  new  state  of  things
has  a  measure  and  an  order  of  its  own.  In  other  words,  we


cxliv  PROLEGOMENA.  [xix.

are  forced  beyond  an  external  measure,  which  is  a  mere
quantity,  and  which  disappears,  dragging  quality  with  it :  we
have  to  look  for  a  measure  which  shall  be  immanent  in  the
being :  and  that  is  proportion,  or  symmetry : — the  measure
of  parts  by  parts  and  by  the  whole.  Proportion  is  the  highest
form  of  measure.

But  in  this  way  we  see  the  rule  or  standard  separating
itself  from  the  varying  cases  which  it  measures :  and  the
measure  tends  to  become  a  permanent  something  by  itself,  of
which  the  cases  are  manifestations.  It  gives  itself  a  being  of
its  own :  it  is  what  they  were, — their  being  is  at  once  sus-
pended and  retained  in  it :  and  it  thus  becomes  that  of  which
Being  immediate  is  only  a  phase.  Such  a  measure  or  perma-
nent being,  which  is  the  basis  of  the  transitions  in  being,  is
what  is  known  as  the  Essence  of  a  thing, — the  substratum
which  is  or  has  being.


CHAPTER  XIX.

ILLUSTRATION FROM GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

PERHAPS  the  main  temptation  in  the  study  of  ancient  philo-
sophy springs  from  the  fluency  with  which  modern  conceptions
insinuate  themselves  under  the  cover  of  ancient  words.  Every-
day phrases  of  our  own  time,  such  as  individual  and  universal,
idea  and  reality,  subjective  and  objective,  essence  and  pheno-
menon, law  and  causation,  recur  to  our  memory  at  every  turn
as  we  read  Plato  and  Aristotle.  And  yet  their  associations  are
most  misleading.  The  Greek  world  was  to  the  Greek  his  im-
mediate being :  it  was  in  harmony  and  in  direct  contact  with
himself.  He  lived  and  had  his  being  in  the  world  of  the  senses,
— the  scenes  of  the  streets,  the  theatre,  the  place  of  public


xix.]  GREEK  LIFE  AND PHILOSOPHY.  cxlv

meeting,  and  the  banqueting-room, — the  world,  in  which  his
action,  political  and  economical,  lay.  There  may  have  beeiT
sharp  divisions  for  the  Greek,  as  for  us,  between  the  special
interests  of  each,  and  the  common  interests  of  all.  There  was
evil  and  imperfection  for  him,  as  for  us.  (But  there  was  little
consciousness  of  these  divisions,  and  never,  but  on  rare  occasions,
an  overwhelming  consciousness  of  them.  /And  hence  the  pro-
blem of  Greek  philosophy  was  to  ascertain  the  truth  of  what
the  senses  revealed, — the  reality  in  what  was  directly  present
to  them.  What  ultimately,  and  in  its  truth,  is  the  sense-world  ?
was  the  question.  "\  Now  the  sense- world  in  its  abstract  terms
is  what  we  name7"number,  and  measure  :  it  is  quality,  quantity,
and  measure  or  proportion.  This  answer  is  given  in  the  three
periods  of  Greek  philosophy.  Quality, — or  Being  in  its  several
characteristics — is  the  problem  discussed  by  Parmenides,  Hera-
clitus,  and  Democritus,  and  not  unknown  to  Plato :  discussed,
it  is  almost  needless  to  say,  with  much  admixture  of  the  terms
proper  to  the  senses.  The  discussion  of  Quantity,  again,  en-
gaged the  energies  of  a  numerous  class  of  speculators  and
geometricians,  beginning  with  the  half-mythical  name  of  Pytha-
goras, and  continuing  through  a  long  series  of  names,  till  it
lost  itself  in  mysticism  during  the  early  centuries  of  Christianity.
The  names  of  Theodoras  of  Cyrene,  and  of  Euclid,  adorn  that
department  of  Greek  inquiry,  which  as  the  necessary  pre-
liminary to  his  own  investigations  led  Plato  to  place,  as  legends
tell,  over  the  door  of  his  school,  the  inscription :  '  Let  no  man
ignorant  of  geometry  enter  here1.'  Thirdly,  there  came  the
school  of  Athenian  speculation,  introduced  by  the  famous  doc-
trine of  Protagoras  that  '  man  was  the  measure  of  all  things,'
and  by  the  no  less  famous  theory  of  Anaxagoras,  that  there
is  Reason  and  Arrangement  in  all  things,  understood  by  Plato
to  mean  appropriateness  or'  due  proportion.  The  notion  of

1  This  prohibitory  notice  has  been  long  ago  removed  from  the  portals  of
philosophy  :  and  speculation  is  generally  begun  without  any  knowledge  of  mathe-
matics or  of  the  special  sciences.  Philosophy  has  been  often  studied  of  late
as  a  branch  of  belles-lettres,  subsidiary  to  polite  learning.

k


cxlvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [xix.

measure  or  order  was  the  principle  of  Pythagoreanism,  the  syn-
thesis of  limit  and  unlimited  :  it  was  also  the  ruling  principle
of  Greek  life.  Greek  poets  and  sages  alike  recommend  the  mean,
and  the  avoidance  of  excess  :  alike  recognise  the  Nemesis  of  divine
symmetry  ;  and  condemn  the  overweening  spirit  which  tramples
on  equality  and  equal  laws.  The  measure  dominates  the  con-
ception of  Plato's  ideal  state,  and  Aristotle's  ethical  principle :
and  may,  upon  the  whole,  stand  for  the  expression  of  Greek
life,  in  its  most  characteristic  period — the  period  of  early  Athe-
nian culture.  Such  proportion,  as  concretely  exemplified  in  the
beautiful  and  in  art,  is  the  highest  form  and  the  truth  of  im-
mediate being.

And  even  the  deeper  thoughts  which  rise  to  the  surface  in
Greek  philosophy  are  expressed  in  terms  of  immediate  being.
Thus  Aristotle  knows  the  Individual  as  '  this  somewhat,'  and
the  Universal  as  the  '  such  as  this.'  The  term,  which  we  trans-
late Cause,  does  indeed  occur  both  in  Plato  and  Aristotle  ;  but
when  we  find  it  used  by  the  former  convertibly  with  Being
or  the  Best,  and  when  the  other  explains  it  as  the  Mean,  it  is
clear  that  we  are  far  away  from  the  knotty  problems  of  cause  and
effect,  which  perplex  modern  logics.  The  problems  of  causation,
of  essence  and  phenomena,  of  universal  and  individual,  and  still
more  those  of  freedom  and  necessity,  of  causality  versus  teleology,
were,  if  not  altogether,  at  least  in  the  main,  foreign  to  the  Greek
mind.  The  term  Ao'yos  properly  means  proportion  or  ratio :
and  is  connected  with  the  term  for  arithmetic  or  '  computation.'
The  term  elSos  or  tSe'a,  '  kind '  or  '  form/  expresses  the  per-
manent rule  or  standard  which  regulates  the  things  of  sense.
So  when  Aristotle  speaks  of  the  sort  or  kind  (yeVos),  when  he
contrasts  what  is  said  '  upon  the  whole '  (TO  Ka66\ov)  with  what
is  applicable  '  in  each  case '  (<ca0'  fKaarov),  we  can  see,  if  we  are
careful  and  fair,  that  he  is  not  speaking  of  concepts  or  universals
in  the  modern  sense,  but  of  a  standard,  paradigm,  or  rule,  which,
according  to  Plato,  must  be  supposed  separate  from  the  single
cases,  while,  according  to  Aristotle,  it  is  the  truth  in  them,
although  so  far  independent  of  the  variable  elements.


xix.]  PLATO AND ARISTOTLE.  cxlvii

These  remarks  need  not  be  pressed  so  far,  as  to  deny  that
in  ancient  philosophy  there  are  heights  and  depths  not  acknow-
ledged in  immediate  being.  But  it  is  certainly  worth  remem-
bering that  Greek  thinkers  had  a  range  of  their  own,  and  a
language,  as  characteristic  and  peculiar  as  that  of  Ancient
Politics.  If,  as  modern  historians  tell  us,  the  names  of  national
heroes  must  be  written  in  the  very  letters  in  which  their  people
spelled  those  names,  so  must  ancient  philosophy  be  freed  from
the  forms  which  it  has  acquired  in  the  course  of  transmission.
Up  to  the  time  of  Aristotle,  Greek  philosophy  seeks  to  render
the  senses  into  thought,  or  to  grasp  the  three  essential  features
of  immediate  being.  Till  his  time  the  struggle  was  to  get  clear
of  the  senses  ;  and  ancient  philosophers  up  to  the  days  of  Plato
inclusive  are  full  of  lamentations  over  the  ignis  fatmis  of  sensation.
These  plaints  are  born  of  the  impatience  of  reason,  not  yet  quite
sure  of  itself,  nor  quite  disentangled  from  the  meshes  of  the
senses.  But  once  (as  is  generally  the  case  in  Aristotle)  the
thought  has  gained  confidence  in  its  own  strength,  and  seen
that  the  things  of  reason  are  not  in  an  impossible  (  beyond,'
but  in  the  world  of  sense, — that  the  sense-world  is  the  world
of  thought;  then  the  language  of  complaint  dies  away.  This
confidence,  if  on  the  one  hand  it  makes  Aristotle  easier  reading
than  Plato,  because  there  is  no  distracting  other  world  always
turning  up  to  vex  the  ideas,  has  a  compensating  difficulty.  We
always  feel  a  sort  of  sympathy  with  the  endeavours  of  Plato.
But  Aristotle,  although  we  read  him  for  a  while,  as  if  he  too
moved  in  the  sense-world  like  ourselves,  and  took  things  at
the  estimate  affixed  by  the  senses,  every  now  and  then  startles
us  with  an  utterance,  which  shows  that  we  have  been  mis-
reading him,  and  that  the  apparent  realism  of  sense  which  we
believed  him  to  maintain  was  in  truth  the  thorough  idealism
of  reason.

Thus  in  Aristotle  the  problem  of  Immediate  Being,  so  far  as
the  development  of  the  time  allowed,  was  solved.  So  far  as  that
period  allowed, — for  of  course  the  later  stages  throw  a  new  light
upon  the  earlier  stages  and  elicit  relations  that  were  latent.

k  2


cxlviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xix.

But  at  any  rate  it  was  solved.  Nature  and  the  State, — the
immediate  aspect,  or  vague  generalities,  under  which  the  king-
doms of  Nature  and  Mind  were  presented  to  the  Greek,  were
reduced  to  their  equivalents  in  plain  thought.  And  by  '  vague
generalities  '  or  undetermined  universals,  is  meant  that  neither
the  one  nor  the  other  of  these  unities  was  differentiated  or
particularised, — developed  into  ordered  details :  that  neither  in
the  one  nor  the  other  had  the  analytic,  divisive,  distinguishing
principle  been  recognised.  Man  lived  in  direct  union  with  both
as  unbroken  totalities.  The  several  sciences  had  not  subdivided
nature  into  its  various  elements,  grades,  systems,  and  forces :
nor  had  political  and  social  development  gone  so  far  as  to  in-
troduce the  systems  and  organisations,  by  which  the  individual
is  brought  into  indirect  and  mediated  connexion  with  the
central  authority  of  government.  These  two  totalities  had  by
the  time  of  Aristotle  been  expressed  in  terms  of  thought.  And
now  the  antithesis,  which  had  heretofore  been  a  running  contest
between  the  senses  and  the  understanding,  where  one  half  of
the  antithesis  lay  outside  philosophy,  passes  into  thought :  and
we  have  the  period  of  antithetical  or  relative  thought  appearing
for  the  first  time  in  Aristotle.  The  terms  of  his  philosophy  fall
into  pairs :  a  duplicity,  which  often  annoys  and  cheats  the
readers,  as  one  term  slips  without  warning  into  another.  In-
stead of  '  sensibles  '  as  distinct  from  the  eternal  '  forms,'  we  now
have  opposing  and  correlative  abstractions.  '  Matter '  means
nothing  except  when  referred  to  '  form.'  '  Faculty  '  or  '  possi-
bility '  is  an  abstraction,  except  when  referred  to  '  actuality '
or  '  activity.'  '  Being  '  itself  fluctuates  between  two  antithetical
meanings :  and  body,  instead  of  being,  as  in  Plato,  turned  out
of  philosophy  as  unworthy  of  soul,  is  placed  in  the  same  anti-
thetical connexion  with  the  latter.  In  all  this  we  see  imme-
diate being  passing  out  of  itself  and  becoming  reflected  being :
being  i.  e.  which  is  always  in  relation  to,  and  a  phase  of,  some-
thing else.  The  categories  of  reflective  thought  are  mutually
complementary.

Here,  however,  there  occurred  a  misconception  fraught  with


xix.]  FROM  ANCIENT  TO MODERN.  cxlix

fatal  consequences.  The  speculative  theory  of  Aristotle  fell  into
the  hands  of  barbarians  :  and  the  advance,  which  he  had  made,
only  served  to  supply  a  phraseology  for  the  antithesis  which
he  had  overcome.  The  one  side  of  the  antithesis  was  identified
with  the  sensible ;  the  other  with  the  supersensible.  And  even
when  this  was  not  the  case,  the  philosophy  of  Aristotle,  with
its  pairs  of  relatives  and  opposites,  its  perpetual  antitheses^
has  remained  dominant  even  in  those  minds  which  nominally
tried  to  reject  it.

The  general  character  of  the  thought  of  the  ancient  world
was  the  rendering  of  the  presentations  of  sense.  The  Ptolemaic
astronomy  was  merely  an  attempt  to  construe  the  celestial
phenomena,  to  envisage  the  order  and  measure  of  the  celestial
movements :  and  its  general  principle  was  what  may  be  called
an  aesthetical  rule,  or  a  canon  of  excellence  and  adaptation.  To
go  beyond  the  observed  facts  of  sense,  and  to  endeavour  to
determine  their  cause  and  law,  was  a  species  of  inquiry  reserved
for  modern  times,  and  not  particularly  attractive  to  Greek
thought.  The  type  of  ancient  science  is  geometry.  And  the
objects  of  geometry — lines  and  figures — are  the  idealisation  of
the  sense-world  in  its  permanent  outlines.  To  represent  the
aspects  of  nature  as  a  systematic  whole  governed  by  a  rule  of
symmetry  was  what  the  ancients  sought.  Modern  science  is
aetiological.

The  Middle  Ages,  on  the  contrary,  are  a  great  scene  of  con-
trasts between  the  being  which  endures,  and  the  phases  of  it
which  pass  away.  The  oppositions  between  Nature  and  Grace,
between  Realist  and  Nominalist,  between  the  world  beyond  and
this  sublunary  scene,  between  freedom  and  necessity,  or  good
and  evil, — are  samples  of  the  prevalent  tone  of  medieval  thought.^
If  Greek  life  had  been  mainly  characterised  by  the  absence  of
any  medium  separating  the  single  man  from  the  universal  to
which  he  belonged, — by  a  sense  of  oneness  with  his  sur-
roundings, and  with  the  general  body  of  citizenship,  the  me-
dieval world  was  marked  by  an  equally  strong  sense  of  the
separation  of  this  world  from  the  next,  of  the  Church  from  the


\


cl  PROLEGOMENA.  [xx.

State,  and  of  the  absolute  inter-connexion  of  the  one  with  the
other.  Sometimes,  as  in  the  beliefs  of  the  cloister  and  the
church,  the  essence  behind  the  show  is  unduly  magnified  :  at
other  times  the  phenomenal  world,  with  its  chivalrous  and
erotic  display,  puts  that  dim  background  out  of  sight,  and  seems
to  swallow  up  in  itself  all  that  is  essential :  and  sometimes
^actuality,  with  its  contrasts  of  substance  and  accident,  and  its
hard  necessity,  seems  to  include  both  essence  and  phenomenon.
Science  in  its  more  popular  forms,  and  so  far  as  it  is  fully
conscious  of  its  methods,  adopts  the  same  categories :  it  takes
up  the  motto  of  reflection,  and  seeks  for  the  identity  and  the
difference  latent  in  the  ground  of  what  exists,  for  the  laws  of
phenomena,  for  the  forces  and  matters  which  underlie  actions
and  forms,  for  the  causes  of  given  effects,  and  the  true  being
of  what  is  apparent.  It  holds  by  the  categories  of  thing  and
properties,  of  whole  and  parts,  of  force  and  its  exercise,  &c.
Intellectual  acumen,  or  the  ingenuity  of  reflection  betakes  itself
to  the  same  contrasts  and  forms  of  words.  It  distinguishes
between  the  possible  and  the  actual, — between  the  outward
appearance  and  the  inward  truth, — between  the  motive  or
ground  of  an  action  and  its  consequences, — between  the  form
and  the  matter.


CHAPTER XX.

THE LOGIC OF ESSENCE  : Oil RELATIVITY.

IN  the  second  stage  of  Logic,  the  Theory  of  Essence,  we  are
engaged  with  what  is  otherwise  termed  Relativity  or  Reflective
categories.  They  are  called  '  Reflective '  because  the  one,  as  it
were,  shows  in  the  light  which  is  cast  upon  it  by  the  other.
They  do  not  fully  manifest  themselves.  Each  term  owes  its


xx.]  CORRELATIVE TERMS.  cli

distinct  existence  to  its  correlative :  each  gives  the  law  to  the
other,  and  invests  it  with  meaning1  and  authority.  Accordingly
when  the  ordinary  mind,  which  takes  these  categories  as  they
are  given,  is  asked  what  each  means,  it  can  only  reply  by
referring  to  the  other.  A  cause  is  that  which  has  an  effect.'
The  contrast  in  the  nature  of  thought, — its  distinguishing  or
conscious  nature — which  was  concealed  in  the  First  Part  of
Logic,  where  one  term,  when  carried  to  its  extreme,  passed  over
into  another,  is  made  obvious  in  the  Second  Part,  where  each
term  postulates  its  correlative,  and,  however  it  may  be  contra-
distinguished, cannot  be  thought  without  it.  Thus  the  force
is  a  meaningless  abstraction  without  the  correlative  expression
of  force  :  and  matter  means  nothing  except  in  its  distinction
from  form.  These,  it  may  be  said,  are  simple  and  tautological
statements.  They  are  principles,  however,  which  every  day  sees
disregarded.  Have  they  ever,  for  example,  occurred  to  the
speculators,  who  tell  us  that  everything  is  ultimately  reducible
to  matter,  or  who  propose  to  improve  upon  that  theory  by
explaining  that  matter  is  after  all  only  another  name  for  force  ?
Are  they  aware  that  they  are  dealing  with  abstractions  or
mental  figments,  and  losing  their  way  in  a  baseless  maze  of
metaphysics?  Do  those  who  speak  so  confidently  of  laws  of
nature  as  something  very  definite  and  intelligible  ever  reflect
that  the  two  terms  are  more  or  less  relative,  and  that  there  is
some  latent  metaphor  in  the  phrase  ?  Or  if  they  prefer  to  speak
of  laws  of  phenomena,  on  which  word  is  the  accent  to  be  laid?
It  is  but  a  poor  method  of  explanation  to  base  it  upon  one  of
two  terms,  which  is  constituted  by  the  relation  into  which  it  has
entered.  Those  who  thus  speak  of  matter  and  force,  really
speak  of  a  matter  which  is  capable  of  determining  its  own
form,  and  of  a  force  which  can  rule  its  own  exertions:  and
for  such  conceptions  the  words  in  question  are  scarcely  ade-
quate representatives.  They  use  the  language  of  the  Second,
to  express  notions  which  properly  belong  to  the  Third  branch
of  Logic.

The  whole  range  of  Essence  or  Relativity  exhibits  a  sort  of


clii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xx.

see-saw  :  while  one  term  goes  up  in  importance,  the  other  term
goes  down.  Those  logicians  who  speak  of  the  phenomena  of  nature
shrug  their  shoulders  at  the  very  mention  of  essences :  and  the
practical  man,  whose  field  is  actuality,  acquires  a  very  pronounced
contempt  for  both,  abstractions.  One  class  of  investigators  glory
in  the  perpetual  discovery  of  differences,  and  stigmatise  the
seekers  after  identity  and  similarity  as  dreamers :  while  the
latter  retort,  and  name  the  specialisers  empiricists.  The  mannish
intellect  considers  an  action  almost  solely  by  its  grounds  or
motives:  the  womanish  almost  solely  by  its  consequences.
Some  console  themselves  for  their  degradation  by  piquing
themselves  on  what  they  might  have  been  :  others  despise  these
'  would-be '  minds  for  what  they  practically  are.  What  a  wealth
there  lies  in  each  of  us,  which  our  nearest  friends  know  nothing
of,  and  which  has  never  been  made  outward  !  But  in  this  mode
of  thought,  it  is  the  persistent  delusion,  misleading  science  no
less  than  metaphysics  and  the  reflective  thinking  of  ordinary  life,
to  suppose  that  either  of  two  relative  terms  has  an  adequate  exist-
ence and  value  of  its  own.  In  some  parts  of  Germany  paper-
money  is  known  as  '  Schein  '  or  '  Show.'  That  term  marks  its
relativity  to  the  currency  of  the  realm  :  and  it  would  be  as
absurd  to  pay  with  Austrian  paper-money  in  Persia,  as  to  take
one  term  of  Essence  apart  from  its  correlative.  1A11  the  dis-
putes about  essences,  about  matters  and  forces,  about  substance,
[about  freedom  and  necessity,  or  cause  and  effect,  are  due  to  a
forced  abstraction  of  one  term  from  another,  when  the  two  terms
>nly  exist  in  their  relation  to  each  otherj

The essence may  be roughly defined as that measure or
standard  which  varies  with  the  immediate  being,  and  yet  remains

.

identical  in  all  variation.  Or,  if  we  like,  we  may  say  that  this
immediate  being,  which,  as  derivative,  may  now  be  called
existence,  has  its  ground  in  the  essence.  The  essence  is  the
ground  of  existence :  and  essence  which  exists  is  a  '  thing.'
Such  an  existing  essence  or  thing  subsists  in  its  properties ;  and
these  properties  are  only  found  in  the  thing.  Thus  the  essence,
when  it  comes -into  existence  as  a  thing,  turns  out  to  be  a  mere


xx.]  IDENTITY  AND DIFFERENCE.  clii

phenomenon  or  appearance. — Such  briefly  stated  is  the  develop-
ment of  essence  proper  into  appearance.

The  essence,  or  real  being,  as  distinct  from  its  unessential
phase  or  show,  has  a  double  function  :  it  unites  in  it  a  principle
of  identity  and  a  principle  of  difference.  If  we  deal  with
essences,  we  tend  primarily  to  look  at  them  as  mere  sameness
and  mere  difference.  But  abstract  sameness,  or  sameness  which
does  not  pre-suppose  a  tinge  of  difference,  is  a  fiction  of  weak
thought,  which  wishes  to  simplify  the  subtlety  of  nature.
Identity  is  a  relative  term,  and  for  that  very  reason  pre-
supposes difference :  and  for  the  same  reason  difference  pre-
supposes identity  and  is  meaningless  without  it.  The  whole
dispute  about  '  Personal  Identity,'  as  it  descends  from  one
English  psychologist  to  another,  is  enveloped  in  the  obscurity
which  springs  from  failure  to  grasp  the  very  term  on  which
the  question  turns.  When  I  feel  that  my  friend  whom  I  have
not  met  for  years  is  still  the  same,  should  I  take  the  trouble  to
express  myself  in  this  manner,  unless  with  reference  to  the
difference  betwixt  Then  and  Now  ?  If  I  remark  that  two  men
are  different,  would  the  remark  be  worth  making  or  hearing
unless  there  was  some  identity  which  made  that  difference  all
the  more  striking?  The  essence  is,  in  short,  the  unity  of
sameness  and  difference :  and  when  so  apprehended,  it  is  the
ground  by  which  we  explain  existence.  The  essence,  ground,
or  possibility,  is  at  once  itself  and  not  itself:  it  is  self-identical,
and  at  the  same  time  it  tends  out  of  itself  towards  existence,
towards  difference,  and  contingent  fact.  The  essence  of  an
event,  for  example,  is  the  ground  of  its  existence  :  the  necessary
unity  in  which  all  the  variety  and  distinctness  of  its  existent
facts  find  their  explanation,  and,  as  it  were,  only  the  other
side  of  that  existence,  where  its  diversities  are  gathered  into
unity.

The  preponderance  of  the  tendency  to  identify,  or  of  the  ten-
dency to  distinguish,  marks  the  two  opposite  tendencies  of  scien-
tific thought  or  of  general  culture.  The  transference  of  names
and  attributes  in  the  history  of  language  from  one  signification  to


cliv  PROLEGOMENA.  [xx.

another  nearly  allied  exemplifies  the  tendency  to  overlook  slight
differences.  The  same  tendency  is  apparent  in  those  theorists
who  explain  everything1  as  a  function  of  matter  or  force,  and
in  those  who  regard  everything  as  a  manifestation  of  will  or
reason.  But  it  is  only  when  the  two  tendencies  meet  and  inter-
penetrate that  science  accomplishes  its  end,  and  discovers  the
ground  of  existence.  In  the  first  instance  the  world  presents
to  science  the  aspect  of  mere  identity  and  of  mere  difference.
Likeness  is  confounded  with  sameness,  and  unlikeness  with
diversity.  The  popular  and  the  infant  minds  do  not  draw  fine
distinctions.  Things  to  them  are  either  the  same  or  different,
purely  and  simply,  i.  e.  abstractly.  ,  But  the  process  of  com-
parison, setting  things  beside  each  other,  teaches  us  to  refine  a
little,  and  speak  of  things  as  Like  or  Unlike.  One  thing  is  like
another  when  the  element  of  identity  preponderates :  it  is
unlike,  when  the  difference  is  uppermost.  Thus  while  we  dis-
tinguish things  from  one  another,  we  connect  them.  From
mere  variety,  and  mere  sameness,  we  have  risen,  secondly,  to  dis-
tinctions of  like  and  unlike.  But,  thirdly,  this  distinction  of
same  and  different  is  in  the  thing  itself.  Everything  includes
an  antithesis  or  contradiction  in  it :  it  is  at  once  positive  and
negative.  While  it  retains  itself,  it  must  lose  itself.  Its  posi-
tivity  is  only  secured  by  its  negation  of  others.  Its  identity
is  based  upon  its  distinction.  Every-  proposition  which  conveys
real  knowledge  is  a  statement,  that  self-sameness  is  combined
with  difference.  Every  such  proposition  is  synthetical :  it
unites  or  identifies  what  is  supposed  to  be  implicitly  different.
Here  we  have  that  coincidentia  opposilorum,  which  is  the  truth
of  essence.  Thus  the  essence  of  the  Ego  is  the  contradiction
between  a  self-centred  point,  and  an  expansion  into  the  universe.
Essence,  as  so  comprehended,  as  the  unity  of  identity  and
difference,  as  that  which  is  and  is  not  the  same,  is  the  ground,
and  from  which  an  Existence  is  the  Consequent.  Or,  otherwise
expressed,  the  ground  is  the  source  of  the  differences, — the  point
where  they  converge  into  unity,  and  whence  they  diverge  into
existence.  Everything  in  existence  has  such  a  ground :  or,  as


xx.]  THINGS  AND  PHENOMENA.  civ

it  is  somewhat  tautologically  stated  in  the  common  formula,
a  sufficient  ground.  On  that  account,  it  is  no  great  matter  to
give  reasons  or  grounds  for  a  thing,  and  no  amount  of  them
can  render  a  thing  either  right  or  wrong,  unless  in  reference
to  some  given  and  supposedly  fixed  point.  For  the  ground  is
simply  the  convergence  of  a  thing  upon  itself,  and  only  states
the  same  thing  over  again  in  a  mediate  or  reflected  form.
Any  one  can  give  a  reason  for  anything :  but  the  reason  is  not
always  right.  The  Thing  itself  is  the  ground  of  its  properties  :
i.  e.  each  thing  is  looked  upon  as  a  point  or  unity  in  which
different  relations  converge.  This  is  the  side  emphasised  in
ordinary  life  when  a  thing  is  regarded  as  the  permanent  and
enduring  subject,  which  has  certain  properties.  But  a  little
science  or  a  little  reflection  soon  turns  the  tables  upon  the
thing,  and  shows  that  the  properties  are  independent  matters,
which,  temporarily  it  may  be,  converge  or  combine  into  a
factitious  unity  which  we  term  a  thing.  But  these  very  mat-
ters cannot  be  independent  or  whole,  just  because  they  inter-
penetrate each  other  in  the  thing.  Thus  while  the  thing  shows
itself  to  be  only  a  form  under  which  the  properties,  of  which
the  thing  subsists,  are  subsumed  as  its  matter  ;  the  matter  itself
is  constituted  by  its  relation  to  the  form,  and  is  a  mere  ab-
straction without  it.  The  thing,  which  from  one  point  of
view  seemed  permanent,  and  the  properties,  which  from  an-
other point  seemed  self-subsistent  matters,  are  neither  of  them
more  than  appearance.  The  matter  is  really  only  constituted
by  the  form,  and  the  form  has  no  meaning  but  by  the  matter.

The  world  of  things  or  essences  has  passed  into  a  world  of
Phenomena  or  appearances.  Each  thing,  as  it  turns  out,  subsists
in  what  has  no  subsistence  of  its  own,  and  that  again  subsists
by  its  non-subsistence.  We  are  thus  in  presence  of  a  form
which  is  content,  and  a  content  which  is  form :  the  Law  is
only  the  simple  statement  of  the  phenomenon.  The  Law  is
the  form  of  the  phenomenon,  but  it  is  also  its  content.  In  this
way  the  Relativity  of  the  second  sphere — the  sphere  of  ap-
pearance— becomes  even  more  apparent  than  in  the  first, —


clvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [xx.

the  sphere  of  essence  proper.  The  truth  of  calling  a  thing  a
phenomenon  is  to  express  the  essential  relativity  of  its  nature.
This  essential  relativity  in  the  phenomenon  has  a  threefold
aspect :  the  relation  of  whole  and  parts  ;  of  force  and  the  exer-
tion of  force ;  of  inward  and  outward.  The  relation  of  whole
and  parts  tends  to  explain  by  statical  composition  :  the  relation
of  force  and  its  exertion,  by  dynamical  construction.  Accord-
ing to  the  former  the  parts  are  constituted  by  their  depend-
ence upon  and  in  the  whole :  and  the  whole  is  composed  by
the  addition  of  the  several  parts  together.  The  contents  and
the  form  are  in  the  relation  of  whole  and  parts  identified  and
yet  quasi-independent.  A  better  exhibition  of  the  inner  unity
and  the  difference  between  form  and  contents  is  seen  in  the
relation  of  a  force  to  its  exertion.  Here  the  content  appears
under  a  double  form :  first,  under  the  form  of  mere  identity,
as  force, — secondly,  under  the  form  of  mere  distinction,  as  the
manifestation  of  that  force.  This  separation  of  content  and
form,  or  of  content  as  developed  in  two  forms,  appears  still
more  clearly  in  the  third  relation  :  that  of  outward  and  in-
ward. This  is  a  popular  distinction  of  very  wide  application  in
reference  to  phenomena.  But  neither  outside  nor  inside  is  any-
thing apart  from  its  correlative.  The  truth  of  phenomena  requires
the  coincidence  of  the  outward  with  the  inward, — of  the  existence
or  phenomenon  with  its  essence.  Such  a  union  is  Actuality.

Actuality  is  the  third  division  of  the  Theory  of  Relativity.
An  actuality  is  a  phenomenon  where  inward  and  outward  meet :
where  the  essence  appears  in  existence.  In  the  total  of  actu-
ality the  merely  inward  takes  the  name  of  possibility,  and  the
merely  outward  takes  the  name  of  contingency  or  chance.  The
essence  taken  simply  is  the  element  of  possibility, — the  fact  of
existence  taken  simply  is  the  element  of  chance.  By  possibility
is  meant  the  sum  of  conditions  which  must  be  pre-supposed,
before  anything  can  actually  exist.  When  all  these  conditions
pre-supposed  in  the  actuality  of  a  thing  are  present,  the  thing  is
said  to  be  really  possible.  But,  secondly,  there  is  the  fact  of  ex-
istence, the  isolated  fact  apart  from  its  conditions  :  and  this  factual


xx.]  ACTUAL AND POSSIBLE.  clvii

existence  or  reality  forms  the  complement  to  possibility,  needed
to  make  a  thing-  actual.  If  this  fact  of  existence  be  considered  as
wholly  isolated  from  its  conditions  or  antecedents,  if  it  be  treated
abstractly  as  a  mere  fact  or  existence,  it  is  a  chance  or  contin-
gency, which,  in  the  abstract,  might  as  well  not  be  as  be.
It  has  no  reason  of  its  own,  why  it  should  be  in  one  way  more
than  another :  it  is  purely  determined  by  something  quite
foreign  to  it,  and  may  be  in  this  respect  looked  upon  as  neces-
sitated ab  extra.  This  is  the  incomprehensible  necessity,  or  the
stern  and  implacable  logic  of  facts.  Thirdly,  there  is  the  spark
which  fires  the  train  :  the  link  which  unites  the  conditions  and
the  fact,  which  quickens  them,  and  makes  them  one  totality.
This  is  the  activity  or  energy,  by  which  the  conditions  cease  to
be  a  mere  possibility,  and  the  fact  to  be  a  mere  contingency.
When  the  hour  has  come  (i.  e.  when  the  conditions  are  ripe),
and  the  man  (i.  e.  when  the  activity  is  found),  then  the  event  is
necessary,  and  actuality  must  ensue.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
when  the  hour  has  struck,  the  man  is  always  found.  In  other
words,  the  three  elements  constituting  actuality  are  abstractions,
which  are  only  found  in  concrete  actuality.

Thus  necessity  results  when  the  mere  possibility  is  at  the
same  time  carried  out  into  existence ;  or  the  necessary  is  that
cujus  essentia  involvit  existentiam.  Of  course  if  all  the  condi-
tions are  present,  the  event  must  happen :  for  the  fact  itself
is  one  of  the  conditions.  Possibility  in  this  real  sense,  as
distinguished  from  formal  possibility  or  the  mere  absence  of
contradiction,  has  a  bent  towards  realisation,  because  it  is  the
presence  of  the  determinate  conditions  necessary  to  the  event.
One  only  of  these  conditions,  the  factual  existence,  or  realisation,
is  not  yet  explicitly  given,  and  until  that  is  given,  the  thing
is  not  actual.  On  the  other  hand,  the  bare  fact  of  existence
is  not  sufficient  to  constitute  full  actuality :  that  fact  must
first  be  placed  in  its  right  position  with  reference  to  the  con-
ditions by  the  activity,  and,  instead  of  being  isolated,  form
part  of  a  connected  chain.  The  Actual  is  necessary,  when  it
unites  these  two  contradictory  elements.  A  thing  is  said  to


clviit  PROLEGOMENA.  [xx.

be  necessary,  when  it  is  because  it  is, — when  the  factual  exist-
ence is  seen  to  depend  upon  itself,  i.  e.  upon  the  sum  and
efficiency  of  its  own  conditions  and  nothing  else.  In  necessity
one  actuality  is  bound  up  with  another  in  such  a  way  that,
though  they  are  distinguished,  still  the  one,  as  it  were,  lives
transfigured  in  the  other.

This  absolute  and  necessary  relativity  of  the  actual  world
may  be  looked  at  under  three  aspects  :  the  relation  of  Substance
and  Accidents,  the  relation  of  Cause  and  Effect,  and  the  re-
lation of  Action  and  Reaction.  These  exhibit  the  several
ways  in  which  the  possibility  and  the  fact,  the  potential  and
the  actual,  are  bound  into  one,  In  the  case  of  substance,  the
absolute,  all-embracing,  non-determined,  and  essential  possibility
dominates  over  the  mere  determinate  and  isolated  contingencies
of  existence.  The  substance,  as  an  absolute  possibility  which  is
necessary,  reduces  existence  to  mere  '  accidents,' — passing  waves
on  its  own  great  ocean.  The  mere  facts  count  for  nothing :
the  substance  is  the  perpetual  resumption  of  them  into  itself,
as  every  actual  fact  turns  out  a  mere  modification  of  possi-
bility. But  such  a  view  does  not  explain  how  these  'modes'
or  '  accidents '  spring  from  substance,  although  it  shows  us
substance  reducing  them  to  nought.  It  only  swallows  up  re-
lativity. For  further  explanation  we  require  the  relation  of
Causality.  In  this  relation  the  substance,  although  it  still
lays  itself  down  as  the  fundamental  fact,  at  the  same  time
clearly  turns  that  fact  into  a  mere  possibility  or  condition,
from  which  there  follows  an  effect, — an  actual  fact,  which  by
this  process  of  derivation  is  rendered  necessary.  But  as  this
relation  is  primarily  looked  at,  the  cause  seems  a  mere  exist-
ence or  matter  of  fact,  from  which  necessity  is  produced  only
in  the  effect,  or  second  member  of  the  relation.  It  would
thus  seem  as  if  the  cause  were  left  to  its  own  devices  and  to
contingency.  But  a  little  consideration  will  show  that  the
cause  is  as  absolutely  relative  to  the  effect,  as  the  effect  is  to
the  cause.  The  cause,  if  it  is  to  be  a  true  cause,  must  be
dependent  on  the  effect.  The  whole  of  the  activity  does  not


xx.]  NECESSITY  AND  FREEDOM.  clix

fall'  upon  the  one  side  of  the  relation,  any  more  than  the
whole  of  the  passivity  upon  the  other.  The  effect  reacts
upon  the  cause  :  and  thus  the  proximate  truth  of  Causality,
which  is  the  one-sided  action  of  a  supposed  primary  substance
upon  another,  is  found  in  reciprocity,  where  the  one  side  of
the  relation  is  as  much  primary  and  active  or  passive  as  the
other.  Everything-  in  the  actual  world  is  a  necessary  relation
of  reciprocity,  of  action  and  reaction.

To  comprehend  the  actual  world, — i.e.  to  think  it,  we  must
see  it  as  a  whole,  including-  and  overlapping-  all  minor  differ-
ences and  relations, — not  in  actualities  which  repel  and  yet
attract  each  other,  and  assume  a  fictitious  independence.  In
the  necessaiy  relation  of  cause  and  effect,  one  actuality  was  so,
because  it  had  been  made  so.  That  necessity,  however,  lay  in
the  other  factor  and  not  in  itself:  the  necessitated  seemed  to
accept  its  fate  from  without,  and  to  have  no  points  of  kindred
or  affinity  with  it  in  its  own  nature.  Such  a  necessity  is  blind.
But  when  we  learn  that  these  two  substances  apparently  inde-
pendent, and  at  the  same  time  externally  connected  in  rigid
inter-dependence,  are  really  parts  of  a  totality, — independent
aspects  of  one  whole, — when  we  see  that  each  when  connected
with  the  other  is  connected  with  its  complementary  self, —
its  alter  ego,  then  the  necessity  is  unveiled,  and  when  the
partition  is  broken  down,  is  identified  with  Freedom.  With
this  result  closes  the  part  played  by  Relativity.  In  its
matured  form,  as  necessity,  it  has  locked  the  two  members  of
the  relation  so  closely  together,  that  their  independence  is  an
impermm  in  imperio ;  they  form  one  total,  dividing  itself  off
from  itself,  and  yet  retaining  the  divided  members  in  vital
unity.  Here  there  are  parts,  but  each  part  is  a  miniature  of
the  whole :  the  substance  is  freely  developed  into  its  attributes  :
the  cause  remains  active  in  its  effect.  This  is  the  sphere  of
Development.  In  the  first  sphere — that  of  Transition — one
term  of  being  passed  over  and  disappeared  in  the  following
term.  In  the  second  sphere — that  of  Relativity — term  was
always  in  relation  to  term,  one  always  dependent  upon  an-


clx  PROLEGOMENA.  [xxi.

other.  In  the  sphere  of  Development,  the  relativity  is  reduced
to  unity.  Every  division  or  relation  of  terms  is  now  supple-
mented by  their  union,  from  which  the  differentiation  is  seen
to  be"  the  act  of  one  total,  thus  defining  itself  against  itself.


CHAPTEE XXI.

THE  LOGIC  OF  THE  NOTION  :  OR  DEVELOPMENT.

THE  sphere  of  the  notion,  or  the  grasp  (conceptus)  of  thought,
is  the  Third  Part  of  Logic.  From  the  substance,  which  is  at
the  best  the  cause,  we  have  reached  the  subject,  which  is  the
author,  i.  e.  the  comprehensive  totality  which  renders  itself
visible  in  each  of  its  members,  but  is  not  exhausted  by  any
of  them.  The  author  of  a  work  e.  g.  is  seen  in  that  work,
it  may  be,  but  he  is  none  the  less  visible  in  others.  He  is
not  limited  by  his  modes  of  being,  but  limits  himself  in  them :
he  puts  his  whole  mind  into  them  v^n'A  yet  has  more  to  spare.
On  the  other  hand,  he  is  only  complete  in  all  his  works  and
not  in  distinction  from  them.  The  term  subject,  therefore,
explained  in  this  sense,  must  be  distinguished  from  substance,
in  which  all  variety  is  denied  and  lost,  and  understood  to
mean  that  which  makes  changes  issue  from  itself,  and  takes
up  at  once  a  positive  and  negative  attitude  to  them.  As
the  initial  point,  self-centred,  it  is  negative  towards  change,
which  seems  a  movement  out  of  itself:  as  a  terminal  product,
it  comprehends  change  and  movement  affirmatively  in  itself.
This  process — for  it  is  the  very  nature  of  this  grasp  pi-
notion  to  be  in  actu — may  be  called  self-realisation  (or  develop-
ment), self-determination  (or  freedom),  and  self-specification
(or  individuality).


xxi.]  NOTION,  OBJECT,  IDEA.  clxi

There  are  three  headings  coming-  under  the  general  category
of  Notion.  First  of  all,  there  is  the  Notion  Proper  :  meaning
thereby  the  elementary  principles  in  the  development  of  pure
thought,  which  has  now  come  to  itself,  instead  of,  as  hereto-
fore, passing  into,  or  throwing  light  upon  something  else.
This  whole  of  thought  specifies  itself  by  passing  from  its
point-like  beginning  through  a  process  of  differentiation  back
into  itself.  This  specification  has  a  double  form :  firstly,  in
each  notion,  as  a  process  of  the  three  factors  called  Universal,
Particular,  and  Individual :  and,  secondly,  when  that  internal
difference  is  explicitly  formulated  in  the  evolution  of  the  judg-
ment and  the  syllogism  from  the  notion.  In  this  first  part  we
are  presented  with  the  constituent  elements  of  pure  and  entire
thought  in  its  abstract  form,  as  a  process  or  development  in  itself.
This  may  be  regarded  as  the  possibility  of  pure  thought,  as
distinguished  from  its  actual  manifestation.  But,  as  we  have
seen,  the  possibility,  when  it  is  completed  in  all  its  details,
must  be  realised :  and  so  the  full  possibility  of  pure  thought
in  the  syllogism  is  translated,  when  that  fulness  is  at-
tained, into  immediate  being.  True  thought  specified  and
complete,  is  the  very  self  of  Objectivity.  Thus  in  the  second
part  of  this  sphere,  the  objective  thought  comes  before  us  in
being,  as  a  total  embracing  within  it  many  terms  and  their
relations,  presentable  as  a  syllogism.  An  object  is,  in  short,  a
realised  notion,  when  the  notion  is  complete  and  not  a  mere
fictitious  fragment.  But,  thirdly,  the  object  tends  to  obscure
the  equilibrium  and  pellucid  interaction  of  the  factors  of
thought,  and  calls  for  a  new  synthesis  of  subjectivity  and
objectivity  in  the  objective  thought  or  Idea.

We  must  examine  these  stages  with  somewhat  more  detail.
The  notion  is  the  expression  of  the  true  nature  in  the  first
instance  of  thought,  and  in  the  second  place  of  objectivity.
By  a  notion  (and  therefore  in  a  further  sense  by  objectivity)
is  meant  the  individualising  of  a  universal  through  a  parti-
cular. These  three  elements  and  their  power  of  self-identifi-
cation make  up  a  notion.

1


clxii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xxi.

Take  an  object  (or  individualised  and  specified  notion) :  such
as  a  State.  Consider  what  it  is  as  a  notion,  i.  e.  in  thought.
We  may  regard  it  as  a  formal  unity  really  composed  of  indi-
viduals,— or  as  a  substance  to  which  the  members  of  it  are
as  insignificant  as  passing  modifications  on  its  surface, — or  as
a  form  imposed  upon  national  life,  external  and  accidental  to
it.  Historical  inquiry  however  informs  us  that  in  a  remote
period  and  in  remote  tribes, — in  the  primitive  or  patriarchal
family — the  functions  of  government,  of  domestic  management,
and  of  individual  existence  were  not  distinguished  or  parted
amongst  different  hands.  In  this  stage  of  development  the
notion  of  State  was  implicitly  present :  all  its  further  differentia-
tion had  its  ground  in  that  unity,  but  in  an  abstract  form,
unspecialised,  and  as  a  Universal  simply  (or  at  least  presenting
only  one  aspect  of  the  whole  grasp  of  thought  by  itself).
And  by  this  universal  form  we  mean  not  what  is  left  of
the  State  when  by  an  effort  of  abstraction  we  strip  it  of  all
its  special  characteristics  : — the  general  conception  minus  the
special  attributes.  We  mean  the  undeveloped  and  undiffer-
entiated  whole,  which  conceals  all  germs  of  difference  in  its
point  of  unity.  This  is  the  immediate  or  natural  state.  We
have  called  it  universal,  but  we  might  as  well  style  it  merely
individual  (because  self-centred  and  negative  towards  its  neigh-
bours), or  merely  particular  (because  it  is  not  a  really  self-sup-
porting total) :  so  long  as  we  remember  that  each  of  these
elements  in  abstraction  is  the  same  as  another,  and  that  the
true  notion  lies  in  their  union.  The  second  stage  in  political
growth  is  the  recognition  of  the  right  of  the  several  members
to  independent  existence, — the  rise  of  a  self-seeking  spirit  as
antagonistic  to  the  commonwealth,  and  the  severance  of  the
interests  of  citizens  from  the  state  and  from  each  other.  This
exhibits  the  state  when  its  aspect  of  particularism  or  differentia-
tion has  attained  a  preponderating  influence.  It  is  the  element
of  difference, — of  uttering,  of  other-being,  of  accident,  of  show, —
coming  forward  in  an  isolated  self-sufficiency,  hostile  to  the
universal,  and  destructive  of  the  unity  of  the  state.


xxi.j  THE NOTION OF THE STATE.  clxiii

So  far  as  this  goes,  i.  e.  taking  the  stages  of  universal  and
particular  in  themselves,  or  as  distinct  and  separate  steps,  we
have  only  repeated  the  antitheses  of  relativity  between  identity
and  difference,  substance  and  accidents,  essence  and  appearance,
whole  and  parts,  which  have  been  examined  in  the  Second  Part
of  Logic.  The  partial  truth  thus  conveyed  is  that  the  particular
interests  may  claim  satisfaction  as  well  as  the  universal :  that
both  are  legitimate  principles,  because  in  a  modified  way  they
express  the  whole,  in  the  one  case  immature  but  unified,  in
the  other  case  fragmentary,  and  in  collision  with  itself,  but
developed.  The  higher  law  of  the  notion  requires  this  antithesis
to  be  abolished,  by  showing  the  unity  of  the  two  elements
which  the  understanding  separates.  Universalise  the  particular,
or  particularise  the  universal  (thus  roughly  to  express  it),  and
the  realised  or  developed  universal  is  found  in  the  individual, —
not  the  individual  supposed  to  be  given  in  sensation,  but  the
individual  as  a  real  universal.

In  this  case  the  business  of  the  Political  Philosopher  is  not
to  trace  the  limits  between  state  interference  and  the  liberty
of  particular  citizens,  nor  to  play  the  one  off  against  the  other
so  as  to  determine  their  several  spheres, — but  to  see  how  these
two  fragmentary  aspects  unite.  The  State  in  the  phrase  '  state
interference '  is  generally  used  to  mean  the  abstract  universal
of  the  state,  not  looked  at  as  a  germ  of  development  outwards,
but  as  a  mere  form  of  authority  or  government, — a  shell  left
behind  by  the  spirit  when  it  takes  another  shape.  The  so-called
notion  of  the  state,  has  been  arrested  in  its  development,  at
the  point  of  abstract  universality :  and  the  mere  formula  of
rule  or  government  has  been  taken  up  by  the  presenta,tive
intellect,  and  turned  into  a  picture  with  generalised  outlines.
The  particular  is  then  conceived  in  similar  isolation  ;  and  a  great
fuss  is  made  about  the  rights  of  trade,  of  society,  of  classes,
in  opposition  to  the  rule  of  the  state.  But  the  state  is  not
identical  with  the  government,  any  more  than  the  mind  is
identical  with  any  one  of  its  several  faculties.  To  try  to  fix
the  limits  between  the  rights  of  the  state,  and  the  interests

la


clxiv  PROLEGOMENA.  [xxi.

of  men  in  their  special  societies,  is  an  inquiry  of  the  same  kind
as  those  which  examine  the  bearings  and  boundaries  of  the
reason  and  the  imagination,  as  if  these  were  two  self-subsistent
and  co-ordinate  faculties  of  mind.  The  only  difference  between
the  two  cases  is  that  the  distinction  in  the  latter  case  is  on
the  ever-changing  ground  of  the  subjective  mind,  while  in  the
former  the  several  organs  of  the  state  have  created  objective
'  hypostases '  for  themselves.  Antitheses  between  social  and
political  exemplify  the  same  weakness,  which  is  unable  to
grasp  the  various  elements  of  the  state  in  one,  and  lets  them
assume  the  shape  of  classes  in  juxtaposition  or  of  independent
forces,  which,  however,  are  supposed  to  come  in  conflict  with
one  another.  Those  who  speak  of  the  rights  of  the  individual,
as  if  this  were  another  abstract  totality,  commit  the  same
mistake  :  the  individual  of  their  phrases  is  only  a  fragment,
and  the  rights  of  which  they  speak  require  to  be  supplemented
by  duties.

But  the  truth,  or  the  Notion  of  the  State, — the  state  as
the  objective  world  of  freedom  realised  .(in  the  same  way  as
the  Notion  itself  is  the  abstract  possibility  of  freedom)  abolishes
these  constraints  of  one  side  by  another,  by  making  the  one
side  subsist  in  pellucid  unity  with  the  others.  The  state,  being
a  concrete  but  implicit  universal,  descends  into  all  the  variety
of  particular  life  and  interest :  and  the  individual  may,  by
means  of  his  particular  functions  and  occupations,  rise  from
the  implicit  universal,  which  he  is,  to  actuality  in  the  state.
The  individual  so  explained  is  the  fulfilment  or  implementation
of  the  particular  and  universal,  in  which  they  descend  to
'  momenta  : '  though  they  are  also  the  whole,  the  second  having
the  details  latent,  the  first  sinking  the  unity  and  falling  into
a  series  of  exclusives.

This  same  unity,  transparent  even  in  its  distinctions,  of  the
three  elements  may  be  thus  illustrated.  A  man  in  his  special
department  and  sphere  of  action  may  very  likely  lose  the  sense
of  his  wholeness,  and  his  integrity  : — perhaps  in  more  senses  than
one !  He  may  reduce  himself  to  the  limits  of  his  profession.


xxi.] INDIVIDUAL,  PARTICULAR,  UNIVERSAL. clxv

But  in  so  doing-  he  becomes  untrue,  or,  in  Hegelian  parlance,
abstract :  he  fails  to  recognise  the  universality  of  his  position.
All  work,  however  petty,  which  is  done  in  the  right  spirit,  is
holy.

'  One  place  performs,  like  any  other  place,
The  proper  service  every  place  on  earth
Was  framed  to  furnish  man  with  : serves  alike
To  give  him  note,  that  through  the  place'  he  sees
A  place  is  signified  he  never  saw.'

It  is  a  false  patriotism,  for  example,  which  is  inconsistent  with
the  spirit  of  universal  brotherhood :  and  there  is  something
radically  wrong  with  the  religion,  on  the  other  hand,  which
cannot  be  carried  into  act  amid  the  pettiness  of  ordinary
practical  interests.  The  universal,  again,  is  not  a  world  beyond
this  world  of  sense  and  individuals :  if  it  were  so,  it  would
itself  be  a  mere  particular.  It  is  rather  the  world  of  sense
unified,  organised,  and,  if  we  may  say  so,  spiritualised.  And
an  individual  which  is  merely  and  simply  individual  is  an  utter
abstraction,  which  is  quite  meaningless,  and  in  the  real  world
impossible.  Or  if  we  prefer  to  express  the  same  thing  in
connexion  with  the  mind,  sensation  apart  from  thought  is  an
inconceivable  abstraction.  Sensation  is  always  alloyed  with
thought,  and  we  can  at  the  most  only  suppose  pure  sensation
to  exist  amongst  the  brutes.  The  mere  individual  opens  out
and  expands :  and  in  that  expansion  we  see  the  universal :
(sensation  is  thought  in  embryo).  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the
developed  universal  concentrates  itself  into  a  point :  (thought
returns  into  the  centre  of  feeling.)

The  same  process  of  particular,  individual  and  universal,  which
thus  goes  on  under  the  apparent  point  of  the  notion,  is  more
distinctly  and  explicitly  seen,  with  due  emphasis  on  the  several
members,  in  the  evolution  of  the  notion  into  the  Judgment
and  the  Syllogism.  The  judgment  is  the  statement  of  what
each  individual  notion  implicitly  is,  viz.  a  universal  or  inward
nature  in  itself,  or  that  it  is  a  universal  which  individualises
itself.  The  judgment  may,  therefore,  in  its  simplest  terms  be


clxvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [xxi.

formulated  as :  The  Individual  is  the  Universal.  The  connective
link, — the  copula  '  is,'  expresses  however  at  first  no  more  than
a  mere  point-like  contact  of  the  two  terms,  not  their  complete
identity.  By  a  graduated  series  of  judgments  this  identity
between  the  two  terms  is  drawn  closer,  until  in  the  three
terms  and  propositions  of  a  syllogism  the  unity  of  the  three
factors  of  the  notion  finds  its  most  adequate  expression  in
(subjective)  thought.

It  may  be  a  question  how  far  syllogisms  as  they  are  or-
dinarily found  are  calculated  to  impress  this  synthesis  of  the
three  elements  upon  the  observer.  The  three  elements  there  tend
to  bid  each  other  good-bye,  and  are  only  kept  together  by  the
awkward  means  of  the  middle  term,  and  the  conjunction  '  there-
fore.' In  these  circumstances  it  becomes  easy  to  show,  that
the  major  premiss  is  a  superfluity,  not  adding  anything  to
the  cogency  of  the  argument.  But  under  the  prominence  of
this  criticism  of  form,  we  are  apt  to  let  slip  the  real  question
touching  the  nature  of  the  Syllogism.  And  that  nature  is  to
give  their  due  place  to  the  three  elements  in  the  notion :
which  in  the  syllogism  have  each  a  quasi-independence  and
difference  as  separate  terms,  while  they  are  also  reduced  to
unity.  The  syllogism  expresses  in  definite  outlines  that  every-
thing which  we  think, — or  the  thought  which  comprehends, —
or  the  comprehension  which  constitutes  an  object,  is  a  particular
which  is  individualised  by  means  of  its  universal  nature.  Thus
the  realised  notion, — thought  specified  from  its  universality  by
means  of  particular  differences — is  the  Object.  The  mere  pos-
sibility of  pure  thought,  when  carried  out  into  its  entirety,
when  specialised,  has  immediate  being,  and  becomes  the  Ob-
jective world.  When  the  thought  by  itself  is  fully  adequate,
find  has  completed  the  cycle  of  its  inner  movement,  it  is  thrown
into  Objectivity.  So  long  as  it  is  still  imperfect  and  immature
the  notion  is  dependent  upon  the  process  of  thought  for  its
completion :  but  when  completed  and  regarded  as  a  realised
unity  of  its  elements,  it  is  on  its  own  account, — it  has  being
and  objectivity.  To  the  development  of  the  elements  there  is


XXL]  MECHANISM,  clxvii

added,  as  it  were :  '  Here  it  is.'  The  notion  is  in  being,  and
called  the  object.

Objectivity,  or  the  thought  which  is  a  world,  may  be  taken
in  three  aspects  :  Mechanical,  Chemical,  and  Teleological.  That
is  to  say,  the  method  of  investigating-  an  object,  or  the  way
of  grasping  the  objective  world,  is  threefold.  The  contradiction
which  lies  in  the  way  of  comprehending  objectivity  lies  in  the  fact
that  it  contains  subjectivity  absorbed  in  it.  In  other  words,  the
object  is  at  once  active  and  passive  ;  as  thought  and  subjectivity
it  has  force  of  its  own,  as  objectivity  it  is  in  complete  dependence.
Consequently,  either  the  two  attributes  co-exist,  or  they  cancel
each  other,  or  they  are  in  mutual  connexion.

(1)  In  the  first  case  the  objects  are  independent,  and  yet  are
connected  with  one  another.  Such  connexion  is  an  external
one,  due  to  force,  impulse,  and  outward  authority.  The  principle
of  union  is  without :  and  the  objects  are  mutually  determined
from  without.  The  more,  for  example,  an  object  acts  upon
the  imagination,  the  more  vehement  is  the  reaction  of  the
mind  towards  it. — (2)  But  if  the  object  is  independent,  as  has
been  allowed,  then  the  determination  from  without  must  really
come  from  within.  Thus  desire  is  a  turning  or  bent  towards
the  object  which  draws  it.  The  desiring  soul  leans  out  of
itself.  It  gravitates  towards  a  centre  :  and  it  is  its  own  nature
to  be  thus  centralised.  The  lesser  objects  of  themselves  draw
closer  around  the  more  prominent  object. — (3)  But  if  this
gravitation  were  absolute,  the  objects  would  lose  their  inde-
pendence altogether,  and  sink  into  their  centre.  Accordingly
if  the  independence  of  these  objects  is  to  remain,  there  must
be,  as  it  were,  a  double  centre,  the  relative  centre  of  each  object,
and  the  absolute  centre  of  the  system  to  which  it  belongs.
In  each  of  these  three  forms  of  mechanical  combination,  the
objects  continue  external  and  independent.  A  mechanical  theory
of  the  state  regards  classes  as  independent,  seeks  to  produce


a  balance  between  them,  separates  individuals  and  associations
from  the  state,  and,  in  short,  conceives  the  state  a.s  one  large


centralising  force  with  a  number  of  minor  spheres  depending


clxviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xxi.

upon  it,  but  with  a  greater  or  less  amount  of  self-centred  action
in  each  of  them.^.

The  fact  is  that  an  object  cannot  really  be  thought  as  thus
independently  constituted.  Its  real  nature  is  rather  affinity :
a  tendency  to  combine  with  another :  it  requires  to  receive  its
complement.  Every  object  is  naturally  in  a  state  of  unstable
equilibrium,  with  a  tendency  to  quit  its  isolation  and  form  a
union.  This  theory,  which  is  called  the  Chemical  theory  of  an
object,  regards  it  as  the  reverse  of  indifferent :  as  in  a  perma-
ment  state  of  susceptibility.  When  objects  thus  open  and  eager
for  foreign  influences  combine,  there  results  a  new  product,  in
which  both  the  constituents  are  lost,  so  far  as  their  qualities
go.  The  qualities  of  the  constituents  are  neutralised.  A  man's
mind,  for  example,  prepared  by  certain  culture,  meets  a  new
stimulus  in  some  strange  doctrine,  and  the  result  is  a  new
form  of  intellectual  life.  But  at  this  point  the  process,  which
such  a  form  of  objectivity  represents,  is  closed :  all  that  remains
is  for  the  product  to  break  up  one  day  into  its  constituent
factors.  There  is  no  provision  made  for  carrying  it  on  further.
Hence  if  we  are  to  have  a  system  of  objectivity,  we  must
rise  above  the  Chemical  theory  of  objects.  And  to  do  that,
the  only  course  is  to  look  at  the  objective  world  as  regulated
by  the  Notion.

The  Notion  as  regulative  of  objectivity, — as  independent  and
self-subsistent,  but  as  in  necessary  connexion  with  Objectivity,
— is  the  End,  Aim,  or  Final  Cause.  According  to  this,  the
Teleological  theory  of  the  Universe  of  objects,  the  object  is
considered  as  bound  to  reproduce  and  carry  out  the  notion,  and
the  notion  is  looked  upon  as  bound  to  execute  itself  in  reality.
The  two  sides,  subjective  and  objective,  are,  in  other  words,  in
necessary  connexion  with  each  other,  but  not  identical.  This
is  the  contrast  of  the  End  and  the  Means.  By  the  '  Means '
is  meant  an  object  which  is  determined  by  an  End,  and  which
operates  upon  other  objects. — (1)  The  End  is  originally  sub-
jective :  an  instinct  or  desire  after  something, — a  feeling  of
want  and  the  wish  to  remedy  it.  It  is  confronted  by  an


TELEOLOGY.  clxix

objective  mass,  which  is  indifferent  to  these  wishes :  and  is
never  more  than  a  Tendency  outwards, — an  appetite  towards
action.  It  seizes  and  uses  up  the  objective  world. — (2)  But
the  End  in  the  second  place  reduces  this  indifferent  mass  to
be  an  instrument  or  Means :  makes  it  the  middle  term  between
itself  and  the  object. — (3)  But  the  means  is  only  valuable  as
a  preparation  to  the  End  regarded  as  Realised.  The  end
realised  is  higher  than  the  means.  These  are  the  three  terms
of  the  Syllogism  of  Teleology :  the  Subjective  End/  the  Means,
and  the  End  Realised.  It  is  the  process  of  adaptation  by
which  each  thing  is  conceived  as  the  means  to  some  end,  and
which  actively  transforms  the  thing  into  something  by  which
that  end  is  realised.  In  the  last  resort  it  presents  us  with
an  objective  world  in  which  utility  or  design  is  the  principle
of  systematisation  :  and  in  which  therefore  there  is  an  endless
series  of  ends  which  become  means  to  other  and  higher  ends.
After  all  is  done,  the  object  remains  foreign  to  the  notion,  and  is
only  subsumed  under  it,  and  adapted  to  it.  We  want  a  notion
which  shall  be  identifiable  with  objectivity— which  shall  per-
meate it  through  and  through,  as  soul  does  body.  Such  a  unity
of  Subjective  and  Objective — the  Notion  in  (and  not  merely  in
relation  to)  Objectivity — is  what  Hegel  terms  the  Idea.

The  first  form  of  the  Idea  is  Life,  taking  that  as  a  logical
category,  or  as  equivalent  to  organisation.  The  living,  as
organisms,  are  contrasted  with  mere  mechanisms.  The  essential
progress  of  modern  science  lies  in  its  emphasis  on  this  aspect  of
the  Idea  :  which  includes  all  that  the  teleological  period  taught
about  adaptation,  and  only  sets  aside  the  externality  of  means  to
ends  there  found.  The  savant  of  the  last  century  and  the  beginning
of  the  present  dealt  with  the  object  of  his  inquiries  as  a  mechan-
ical, chemical,  or  teleological  object.  The  modern  theorist  seeks
to  carry  out  the  Idea  of  Life.  According  to  the  naturalist  of  last
century,  kinds  of  animals  and  plants  were  viewed  as  convenient
arrangements,  or  as  in  a  relation  of  means  to  ends  ;  according  to
the  moderns,  these  kinds  represent  the  grades  or  steps  in  the  life
of  the  natural  world.


IC
K

^


clxx  PROLEGOMENA.  [xxi.

What,  then,  is  the  nature  of  the  process  which  we  call  Life  ?
What  are  the  three  terms  in  the  syllogism  of  the  vital  process  ?
There  is,  in  the  first  place,  the  term,  which  is  also  a  process,  of
self-production.  The  living  must  articulate  itself,  create  for
itself  limbs  and  members,  and  keep  up  a  perpetual  circulation
and  process  of  mutual  assimilation  in  them.  Secondly,  there  is
the  assimilation  of  what  is  external  to  the  living'  individual.  If
there  is  to  be  life,  spiritual  or  bodily,  there  must  be  assimilation
or  appropriation  of  foreign  elements.  Without  this  the  first
term,  or  process,  is  impossible.  Thirdly,  there  must  be  a  term
or  process  of  Reproduction.  By  means  of  the  two  first  processes
the  living  must  be  reproduced.  All  life,  mental  or  bodily,  involves
Reproduction. — These  are  the  three  terms  of  the  process  of  vitality.

What  then  is  left  ?  Not  the  individual :  but  the  genus. —
The  universal  has  become  the  medium  in  which  the  Idea  exists  :
it  exists  no  longer  in  immediacy.  The  mere  natural  life  gives
place  to  the  life  of  the  Spirit.  The  life  of  the  Spirit  has  the
double  form  of  Cognition  and  Will :  —  the  theoretical  and  the
practical  action  of  the  Idea  :  or  Truth  and  Goodness.  In  short,
the  Idea  divides  into  two  halves,  which  yet  remain  the  same  at
bottom :  Beason  and  the  World :  but  yet  there  is  reason  in  the
World.  The  action  of  the  Idea,  or  its  process  at  this  stage,  is  to
bring  these  two  terms  into  connexion,  and  show  their  ideal  unity.
Beginning  with  Reason,  it  goes  on  to  discover  reason  in  the
World.  Truth  consists  in  the  adequacy  of  object  to  notion.
Such  adequacy  is  the  idea:  and  an  object  which  thus  corresponds
with  its  notion  is  an  ideal  object.  The  ideal  man  is  the  True
Man.  Truth  is  the  revelation  of  rationality  from  the  objective
world :  and  Cognition  is  the  name  for  that  process.  On  the
other  hand,  Goodness  is  the  realisation  of  rationality  in  the
objective  world  :  and  the  Will  is  the  name  for  that  process.
Truth  proceeds  from  the  Objectivity :  Goodness  from  the  Sub-
jectivity. But  truth  can  only  proceed  (analytically)  from  the
objective  world,  in  so  far  as  it  is  produced  (synthetically)  by  the
subjectivity.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  when  the  good  is  realised
in  objectivity,  it  is  submitted  to  the  process  of  Cognition.


xxn.]  GENERAL RESULTS.  clxxi

In  other  words,  the  Idea  does  not  find  itself  given  merely,  nor
has  it  merely  to  create  itself.  Rationality  or  the  Idea  lives  and
has  objective  Being :  it  realises  itself,  as  the  absolute  reason
which  is  in  the  world  —  which  is  that  world  in  its  absolute
signification.  Such  an  Idea  is  the  Idea  Absolute.  The
Absolute  Idea  is  the  process  which  produces  itself:  and  to  trace
that  process  is  the  problem  of  Logic.  Reason  with  all  its
abstractions  and  efforts  to  rise  above  them,  has  now  become  a
world  in  being :  an  objective  world  which  is  reason.  That
objective  world  of  rational  being  is  presented  to  perception  in
Nature,  and  there,  as  well  as  in  Mind,  the  categories  of  Logic
find  their  concreter  application.


CHAPTER XXII.

A BRIEF SUMMARY OF RESULTS.

IT  now  remains  to  attempt  briefly  to  put  together  the  main
points  of  general  interest  with  regard  to  the  Hegelian  system  of
Philosophy.  Even  those  who  do  not  accept  the  whole  theory,
and  those  who,  not  unnaturally,  cannot  grasp  its  point  of  view
in  detail,  may  nevertheless  find  something  worth  thinking  over
in  certain  fragmentary  glimpses.

His  system  is  encyclopaedic,  and  sets  before  itself  the  com-
prehension of  the  world,  as  it  is  in  its  primary  and  its  ultimate
meaning  and  being.  But  to  comprehend  means  to  think  in  its
totality,  —  not  to  explain.  The  philosophic  science  can  only
unveil  tvkat  is,  in  all  its  transitions,  relations,  and  development :
it  has  no  vocation  to  say  why  it  is,  or  how  it  can  be  so.

Philosophy  tries  to  solve  the  problem  of  what  the  world  is,  by
looking  at  the  process,  of  which  its  present  form  is  the  outcome.


clxxii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xxn.

What  is,  has  become.  The  movement  or  process,  of  which
history  is  the  record,  must  be  studied  in  order  to  comprehend
the  result.  The  steps  or  grades  of  the  process  of  development
must  be  traced  singly  and  in  succession.

The  movement  which  takes  place  in  history  as  in  a  succession
of  time  is  the  outward  aspect  of  the  real  development  which  is
rationally  presented  in  the  system  of  philosophy.  Outwardly
there  are  chances,  and  limitations, — for  the  individual  action  in
the  actual  world  is  never  quite  adequate  to  the  ideal  requirements
of  reason.  But,  with  this  qualification,  the  process  of  actual
history  and  the  process  in  thought  coincide.

The  nature  of  historical  progress  consists  in  what  we  may  call
combined  affirmation  and  negation.  The  past  is  absorbed,  but
not  lost.  Each  epoch  has  its  own  result  taken  and  affirmed  in
the  subsequent  range  of  development  as  a  partial  truth,  or
constituent  element, — but  negatived,  so  far  as  it  claims  to  be  a
totality.  In  this  way  nothing  wholly  disappears :  but  at  the
same  time  everything  is  entirely  modified  by  the  new  medium
into  which  it  enters.

The  process  of  history  (and  of  thought)  is  therefore  from
Abstract  to  Concrete.  Each  new  grasp  of  the  total  truth,  or
each  new  aspect  of  the  world's  life,  includes  in  it  whatever
articles  of  knowledge  had  been  previously  achieved.  This
process  may  be  called  Analytical,  if  we  look  only  to  the  fact  that
new  elements  or  aspects  are  continually  rising  from  out  the  old,
which  was  a  totality  in  itself,  and  is  now  evolving  ampler  and
fuller  forms.  It  may,  however,  be  also  styled  Synthetic,  if  we
only  note  that  elements  and  aspects  are  added  on  to,  or  multi-
plied into,  those  which  come  before,  until  a  large  total  is  formed.
Properly  speaking,  however,  the  process  includes  both  these
elements  of  method,  and  is  described  as  Dialectical.

The  movement  or  development  of  the  world,  when  seen  whole,
and  comprehended  in  its  absolute  totality,  is  the  manifestation
of  the  Divine  Nature  in  actuality.  God  reveals  His  absolute
nature  in  the  several  relatives  of  the  process  :  He  is  cognisable
in  those  points  where  that  process  comes  to  self-perception  or


xxii.]  GENERAL  RESULTS.  clxxiii

self-apprehension.  They  are  the  several  forms  under  which  the
Absolute  is  cognisable  to  men.  In  logical  language,  these  forms
of  the  Absolute  are  the  categories  of  thought.

A  Philosophy  is  the  expression  in  distinct  thoughts  of  the  period
of  the  world's  history  to  which  it  belongs,  stripping  the  actual  facts
(not  of  their  concreteness,  but)  of  whatever  is  accidental,  tem-
porary, and  local  in  them.  It  reduces  the  wide  range  and  the
endless  repetitions  of  the  phenomena  of  the  actual  world  to  their
simplest  equivalents.  The  medium  into  which  it  translates
objectivity  is  the  Universal.  A  system  of  philosophy  may  be
called  the  utterance  of  the  self-consciousness  of  its  generation  in
abbreviated  and  extremely  generalised  formulae.

If  the  world  of  immediate  being  can  only  be  comprehended  as
a  process  of  development,  the  thoughts,  to  which  in  its  several
periods  it  has  been  reduced,  and  which  are  the  ultimate  residuum
when  the  chemistry  of  time  has  dissipated  unessential  circum-
stances, must  be  similarly  treated  as  a  process.  They  cannot  be
abruptly  or  completely  severed  from  each  other,  as  if  independent.
Each  of  them  has  become  what  it  is,  and  is  destined  soon  to  pass
away  into  something  else.

These  thoughts  are  the  expression  of  the  same  Universal,
Totality,  or  Absolute,  but  with  a  very  different  amount  of  par-
ticular details  ;  so  that  each  has  an  individual  aspect  of  its  own.
Because  they  are  different,  each  is  so  far  finite.  Beginning  with
the  point  of  a  cone,  the  sweep  of  thought  grows  wider  and  wider
as  we  proceed  towards  its  base.

The  terms  of  thought  follow  one  another  in  a  regular  order,
and  have  a  value  in  virtue  of  that  order.  Standing,  as  it  were,
on  different  levels,  they  may  be  classed  as  lower  and  higher,
according  as  their  burden  of  meaning  is  less  or  greater.  Hence
they  are  not  all  equally  applicable  at  all  stages  of  knowledge.
One  term  is  truer  than  another,  i.e.  more  congruous  with
objectivity.  Much  mistake  arises  from  the  misapplication  of
certain  terms  or  categories  to  denote  or  explain  relations,  to
which  they  are  by  no  means  adequate.

Each  later  term  in  the  process  of  thought,  being  more  con-


clxxiv  PROLEGOMENA.  [xxn.

f

crete,  is  the  truth  of  the  earlier :  i.e.  it  gets  rid,  at  least  for  a
time,  of  the  difficulties  and  defects,  (the  contradiction,)  of  that
earlier  term.  Thus  each  term  points  out,  and,  while  pointing
out,  corrects  the  inadequacies  of  its  predecessor.  Consequently
our  criticism  is  rendered  superfluous.  As  in  history  the  Spirit
of  Time  betrays  the  weakness  of  the  past,  and  passes  those
judgments  which  the  historian  has  only  to  record  as  they  are
given,  so  in  the  logical  history  of  thought.  The  terms  or
categories  of  thought  criticise  themselves  by  unveiling  a  con-
tradiction which  leads  on  to  something  ampler  and  better.
Mere  causality  lays  bare  its  deficiency  by  forcing  us  to  regard
things  as  reciprocally  cause  and  effect.

The  logical  terms  are  fixed  in  value  by  the  rank  which  they
occupy  in  the  system.  They  cannot  be  used  as  vehicles  of  truth,
apart  from  the  limitations  imposed  by  that  process.  If  they  are
so  used,  their  application  becomes  merely  formal,  and  will  not
promote  or  contain  real  knowledge.

The  Hegelian  System  was  the  first  attempt  to  display  the
organisation  of  thought  pure  and  entire, — as  a  whole  and  in  all
its  details.  This  organism  of  thought,  as  the  living  reality  or
gist  of  the  external  world  and  the  world  within  us,  is  termed  the
Idea.  The  Idea  is  the  { reality '  and  the  '  ideality '  of  the  world
or  totality,  considered  as  a  process  beyond  time.  The  reality :
because  every  element  is  expressly  included.  The  ideality :
because  whatever  is  has  been  denuded  of  its  immediacy,
crushed  in  the  winepress,  and  only  the  spirit  remains.

In  the  study  of  Mind  and  its  works,  such  as  the  State,  Art,
and  Religion,  as  well  as  in  the  study  of  Nature,  the  several
phenomena  can  only  be  successfully  apprehended  when  they  are
known  to  evince  the  same  real  development  as  in  the  abstract
medium  of  thought.  Classes  of  living  beings,  and  faculties  of
mind,  instead  of  being  treated  in  co-ordination  on  one  level,  are
looked  at  as  successive  points  emphasised  and  defined  in  the
course  of  development.

The  whole  of  Philosophic  Science  is  divided  into  three  heads  :
Logic,  the  Philosophy  of  Nature,  and  the  Philosophy  of  Mind.


xxiii.]  GENERAL RESULTS.  clxxv

The  first  branch  might  also  be  termed  Metaphysics.  The
second  is  a  systematic  arrangement  of  the  several  Physical
Sciences  and  their  results.  The  third  includes  anthropology  and
psychology :  as  well  as  the  theory  of  Ethics  and  Jurisprudence,
the  Philosophy  of  Art,  of  History,  and  of  Keligion.

The  essential  character  of  thought  is  to  be  a  Notion  (or
grasp).  Hence  everything  which  is,  as  thought,  must  be  a
Notion.  By  this  is  meant  a  triplicity  in  process,  of  three
elements,  particular,  universal,  and  individual.

In  the  earlier  stages  of  thought  this  notional  or  comprehensive
character  is  not  explicitly  or  actually  present.  It  is  only  in
the  light  of  the  later  and  completer  thought  that  Being  is
seen  to  possess  this  same  character :  and  in  the  Essence  the
presence  of  a  triple  element  is  found  only  as  the  necessity,  which
constrains  us  to  combine  two  terms  in  mutual  relation.  In  other
words  the  Notion,  in  the  stage  of  Being,  is  latent,  and  only  to
be  discovered  by  our  reflection :  in  the  stage  of  Essence,  it  is
postulated  and  its  realisation  is  emphatically  called  for :  in  the
third  stage  it  is  actually  present.

Thought,  which  is  the  object  of  the  Hegelian  Logic,  is  not
merely  our  thought.  It  is  the  Universe  or  Totality,  of  which  we
and  the  so-called  things  are  merely  fragments  held  apart  by
abstraction.  These  fragments  philosophy  can  only  recognise  as
members  or  aspects  of  the  totality.


CHAPTER XXIII.

VOCABULARY.

PAKTLY  in  order  to  afford  materials  of  comparison  to  those
who  know  German,  and  partly  to  bring  together  some  points
noticed  in  these  introductory  outlines,  there  are  here  subjoined


clxxvi  PROLEGOMENA.  [xxni.

short explications of  the principal terms  which Hegel uses
in  peculiar,  and  what  the  grammarians  call  pregnant  senses.

Abstrakt  and  Concret. — By  abstrakt  (abstract)  is  meant
that  a  term,  thought,  or  object  is  withdrawn  from  its  context,
and  regarded  apart  from  the  elements  which  enter  into  its
composition,  or  from  the  relations  which  connect  it  with  other
things.  Words  and  notions,  when  severed  from  their  solidarity
with  things  and  facts,  are  abstract.  The  fewer  attributes,  or
relations  to  other  things,  are  distinctly  grasped  by  our  notions,
the  more  abstract  they  are.  To  be  abstract  is  to  be  one-sided,
to  emphasise  half-truths,  to  stick  to  partial  views,  and  to  lay
undue  stress  upon  names.

An  object  or  thought  is  concret  (concrete)  when  it  is  seen
and  known  to  be  the  confluence  of  several  elements, — to  be
a  process  or  becoming  in  its  own  nature,  and  not  a  mere
stationary  point  of  being.  A  concrete  notion  keeps  in  view
the  various  inter-connexion  and  inter-dependence  of  things :
and  states  that  each  object,  in  its  truth  and  totality,  must  be
regarded  as  equal  to  itself  in  the  abstract,  multiplied  into  all
other  things.

An  sich :  fur  sich :  an  und  fiir  sich. — That  is  an  sick
(implicit :  natural :  in,  at,  or  by  self)  which  is  given  in  germ,
but  undeveloped :  which  is  for  others  to  see,  feel,  and  recognise.
It  is  what  is  native  and  spontaneous  as  opposed  to  what  is
imported  :  latent  as  opposed  to  what  is  developed  and  realised :
potential  as  opposed  to  what  is  actual :  natural  as  opposed  to
artificial :  abstract  as  opposed  to  concrete.

That  is  fur  sich  (explicit :  actual :  for  self)  which  is  actual,
whether  it  be  native  or  not : — the  result  of  an  sick  when
developed,  looked  at  apart  from  the  process : — what  has  been
acquired  and  made  our  own,  as  opposed  to  what  is  merely  given.
A  human  being  has  a  capacity  for  reason :  he  is  an  sick
rational :  but  it  is  incumbent  upon  him  to  realise  that  ration-
ality, and  become  rational  fiir  sick.  What  is  an  sick  is  taken
pure  and  in  the  abstract :  what  is  fiir  sick  is  taken  entire
and  in  its  actuality.


xxm.]  VOCABULARY.  clxxvii

Hence  an  und  filr  sick  (in  and  for  self:  absolute:  pure  and
entire)  is  applied  to  denote  what  is  spontaneous  and  inde-
pendent :  when  a  thing  is  taken  in  the  entirety  of  its  develop-
ment, and  that  development  is  due  to  the  evolution  of  its
own  native  forces.  The  thing  is  in  the  fruition  of  its  nature :
it  has  become  everything-  which  it  was  destined  to  be.  We
may  compare  an  sick  to  the  mere  generality  or  possibility  of
a  thing  (such  is  the  well-known  Ding-an-sick] :  filr  sick  to  the
particularising,  determining,  differentiating,  or  realising  of  that
possibility:  and  an  und  filr  sick  to  completed  individuality.
When  the  knowledge  of  a  thing  presents  it  as  it  is  an  und  filr
sick,  it  presents  it  as  a  process  or  development  in  itself  by  itself
for  its  own  sake :  and  in  such  wise  it  is  Absolute.

Anschauung  (perception  or  intuition)  is  the  direct  contem-
plation of  an  object  or  quality  in  externality  under  the  con-
ditions of  space  and  time.  The  object  is  individualised  in  an
image  of  sensuous  kind.  The  works  of  art  are  such  indi-
vidualised forms ;  in  which,  for  example,  the  object  of  religious
worship  is  presented  to  the  bodily  eye.  In  Vorstellung  (see
that  word)  the  background  is  an  idealised  time  and  space,  and
the  eye  to  which  the  object  is  presented  is  the  mental  eye.
They  both  have  an  external  object :  but  the  externality  of
Vorstellung  is  in  the  mind,  that  of  Ansckauung  is  in  the  matter
of  sense.  Hence  in  Vorstellung  the  object  is  to  a  certain  extent
generalised.

Aufheben  and  Setzen.  To  explain  setzen  (posit,  statute,
lay  down,  set  forth  explicitly,  state)  we  must  recur  to  an  sick.
When  the  presence  of  an  element  in  a  thing  is  recognised  as
necessary,  when  its  existence  is  postulated  in  order  to  complete
a  notion,  it  is  said  to  be  gesetzt.  In  these  circumstances  it  is
imposed  from  without,  but  yet  the  external  imposition  pre-
supposes an  internal  response  and  willingness.  Thus  in  the
second  sphere  of  logic  we  can  see  that  a  grasp  (or  notion)  is
required  to  bind  the  two  elements  of  relativity  in  one :  but  as
merely  required  and  postulated  the  notion  appears  as  necessity,
and  is  not  yet  freely  active  fur  sick.  Thus  the  an  sick,  which

m


clxxviii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xxm.

exists  in  germ  undiscerned,  is  realised  as  existing :  and  when
thus  seen  to  be  self-existing  is  fur  sic h.  Setzen,  then,  is  the
process  of  raising  an  sick  to  filr  sick.

Aufheben  (suspend,  set  aside,  absorb,  put  in  abeyance,
abrogate)  has  a  double  meaning.  It  denotes  (i)  that  some-
thing, having  been  deprived  of  its  independent  existence,  is  for
practical  purposes  lost  and  gone.  But  (2)  what  has  thus  dis-
appeared is  retained  as  an  element  or  factor  in  the  result  to
which  it  has  led.  Thus  the  seed  is  aufgehoben  in  the  plant
which  grows  from  it :  it  has  perished  and  disappeared  as  a
seed:  but  it  is  transfigured  and  retained  in  the  existence  of
the  plant.  Thus  setzen  expounds  the  differences  which  lie
involved  in  an  abstraction  or  germ  of  truth,  and  leads  them
out  into  reality:  while  aufheben  concentrates  these  differences
into  unity  and  ideality.  (See  Idealitat  and  Realitdt.}

Begriff  and  Vorstellung.  Begriff  (notion,  comprehension:
literally,  grasp  or  grip)  is  the  name  of  that  thought  which
grasps  its  object, — which,  while  it  allows  all  freedom  to  the
several  members,  at  the  same  time  unifies  them.  The  object,
or  anything,  when  regarded  as  a  Begriff)  is  taken  in  the
entirety  of  its  nature,  as  what  has  come  into  being, — as  the
result  of  a  process,  and  not  intelligible  otherwise  than  in  that
process.  Thus  the  notion  has  three  functions :  or  the  same
thing  presents  itself  under  three  aspects  : — universal,  particular,
and  individual.  There  is  the  beginning,  or  mere  fact  of  being,
the  germ,  or  thing  in  itself,  the  undeveloped  universal.  There
is  the  movement  of  advance,  the  division  into  parts,  the  process
from  essence  to  appearance,  the  particularising.  And  there
is  the  end,  or  grasp  of  this  particularity  and  difference  in  the
unity  of  its  innate  germ :  the  individual  or  actual  object  into
which  the  vague  universal  has  been  developed  and  specified.
Thus  to  get  the  Begriff  e.  g.  of  a  plant,  we  must  comprehend
it  as  a  process  with  these  three  terms :  (a)  the  seed, — the  mere
possibility,  germ,  or  universal  of  the  plant :  (b]  the  division
into  roots,  stem,  branches,  leaves,  fruit,  &c.,  where  we  have
the  particulars  of  the  fact,  its  differences  :  (c)  the  union  of  these


xxm.]  VOCABULARY.  clxxix

in  the  plant, — the  individual  totality  by  its  living  movements
reducing  these  parts  to  their  functional  and  organic  position
in  the  whole.  Thus  to  understand  one  part  rightly  we  must
understand  the  whole  :  and  vice  versa.

Vorstellung  (conception,  figurate  conception :  material  or
picture  thought :  literally,  presentation,  from  vorstellen,  to
present  or  introduce  a  person)  instead  of  dissolving  an  object
into  its  process,  as  the  Begriff  does,  takes  it  as  stationary,  and
reduces  it  to  a  point  at  rest.  It  is  the  generalised  picture  of
an  object,  without  the  definite  outlines  of  Ansckauung.  The
Ansckauung  of  a  triangle  e.  g.  is  some  definite  triangle  before
our  eyes  at  this  moment :  the  Vorstellung  is  a  '  general  idea '
which  dare  not  take  the  definite  shape  of  one  triangle,  and
is  really  unrealizable  as  such.  It  must  pass  either  into  An-
schauung,  or  into  thought.  The  dispute  about  '  general  ideas '
among  nominalists,  conceptualists,  and  realists,  was  partly  due
to  a  confusion  of  Vorstellung  with  Begriff.  Compare  the  distinc-
tion in  Spinoza  between  imaginatio  and  intellectus.  A  Vorstellung
is  a  contrivance  for  sparing  thought  by  means  of  a  word,  with
which  we  have  otherwise  become  familiar.  Nominal  definitions
are  of  this  class :  they  satisfy  the  desire  to  have  something
before  us  upon  which  we  may  fix  our  mind's  eye.

Bestimmung  and  Bestimmtheit.  A  Bestimmung  (category:
characteristic  or  term  of  thought :  vocation :  typical  form :
feature :  article  :  specification :  determination, — from  lestimmen,
to  define,  literally  to  be-speak)  is  a  statement  or  article  formu-
lating a  thing.  It  gives  the  dimensions  of  an  object.  It  is  a
determination  (of  thought)  into  a  specific  or  typical  form.  The
Denkbestimmungen  are  the  several  articles  or  formulae  which
describe  the  nature  and  action  of  thought.  They  are  the  moulds
into  which  thought  has  shaped  itself,  and  by  which  we  take  the
dimensions  of  the  world.

A  Bestimmtheit  (determinateness  or  character)  is  that  which
renders  a  thing  cognisable, — its  quality  or  character  in  virtue
of  which  it  can  be  described.  The  terms  of  this  description
are  Bestimmungen.  Bestimmtheit  is  definiteness :  Bestimmung  is

in  2


clxxx  PROLEGOMENA.  [xxiu.

definition.  The  Bestimmtheit  is  the  specific  character,  the  con-
tents or  subject-matter  which  forms  the  basis  of  a  descrip-
tion.

Daseyn  and  Existenz.  Daseyn  (Being-there-and-then ;  de-
terminate being)  is  real  and  definite  as  opposed  to  mere  or
abstract  being.  To  bring  a  thing  into  Daseyn  is  to  give  it
definite  being;  whereas  Seyn  is  only  a  tendency  to  become,
the  bare  possibility  of  being.  By  calling  it  there-and-then
no  reference  is  meant  to  time  and  place  ;  only  to  the  limitations
of  reality.  Existenz  (existence)  implies  a  source  of  being,  a
ground  or  essence,  from  which  the  determinate  and  apparent
being  has  sprung.  Existence  is  always  the  consequence  of
some  ground.  A  thing  existirt  when  it  proceeds  from  its
essential  being  into  actuality:  it  has  Daseyn  (is  there  and
then)  when  it  is  in  definite  being.

Dialektik  and  Spekulation.  Dialektik  (dialectic)  is  the  prin-
ciple of  compensation,  which  shows  the  other  side  or  negative
of  things,  and  thus  relieves  us  from  the  one-sided  view  of  the
world,  given  by  understanding.  It  is  a  negative  and  destructive
action,  a  swing  round  in  the  reverse  direction,  which  betrays
the  inadequacy  of  any  given  definite  form.  The  primary  aspect
of  each  form  of  things  presents  it  as  an  affirmative  reality :
the  second  inspection  shows  that  there  is  contradiction  in  what
we  saw,  and  that  it  is  neither  complete  nor  absolute.  The
revelation  of  this  undiscerned  feature  leads  to  a  synthesis,  which
is  an  act  of  Spekulation  (speculation),  by  which  negative  and
positive  are  assimilated  into  each  other.  Thus,  while  the  usual
aspect  of  species  shows  us  the  several  bonae  species  (or  genuine
kinds)  distinct  from  each  other  and  from  varieties,  the  dialectic
of  nature  presents  these  species  as  in  a  greater  or  less  process
of  transition  from  one  to  another.  This  dialectic  is  the  natural
selection,  caused  by  the  struggle  for  existence.  The  speculative
biologist  applies  this  law  to  discover  the  order  and  connexion
of  the  several  kinds.  Hence  speculation  means  grasping  truth
in  its  wholeness,  and  not  merely  one  element  discoverable  by
analysis.  It  is  the  comprehension  of  rational  truth,  holding


xxin.]  VOCABULARY.  clxxxi

together  those  points  which  we  are  naturally  inclined  to  let
fall  asunder  into  the  isolation  of  their  details.

Formell  (formal)  means  that  regard  is  had  merely  to  the  form
or  to  external  considerations,  and  not  to  the  real  nature  or
essence  of  the  object  in  question.  What  is  formell  stands  in
no  vital  inter-connexion  with  the  thing  to  which  it  is  applied.
Thus  formal  mechanism  (p.  290)  means  that  the  mechanical
relation  is  at  this  stage  in  a  wholly  outside  connexion  with
its  objects.  A  party-cry  which  covers  a  variety  of  sentiments
in  its  different  criers,  and  a  phrase  which  suits  any  content
equally  well,  is  formally  applied.  So  we  speak  of  the  formalism
of  grounds  and  reasons ;  and  mean  that  they  can  be  employed
to  explain  or  excuse  anything,  one  as  well  as  another.

Idee  (idea)  is  the  thorough  adequacy  of  thought  to  itself,
the  solution  of  the  contradictions  which  attach  to  thought,  and
hence,  in  the  last  resort,  the  coincidence  or  equilibrium  of
subjective  notion  and  objectivity,  which  are  the  ultimate  ex-
pression of  that  fundamental  antithesis  in  thought.  Such  a
coincidence  is  only  attained  by  a  process  or  development, —
a  triplicity,  in  which  each  step  advances  upon  the  preceding,  by
mastering,  i.  e.  comprehending  its  limitations.  When  thought
is  fully  equal  to  itself  and  true  to  its  own  laws,  it  is  neither
objective  merely  nor  subjective  merely.  Hence  the  Idee  repre-
sents thought  in  its  totality  as  an  organisation  or  system  or
universe  of  reason, — a  process  of  development  or  self- construc-
tion. The  several  grades  of  that  self- construction  are  the  cate-
gories or  terms  treated  of  in  Logic.

Idealitat :  Realitat :  Moment.  By  Realittit  (reality)  is
meant  the  self-subsistence  and  independence  of  an  object :  by
Idealitat  (ideality)  is  meant  the  deprivation  of  this  definite  being,
and  its  reduction  into  an  element  or  factor,  depending  upon
other  parts  and  upon  the  whole  for  its  subsistence.  Thus  a
piece  of  coal  is  a  reality  when  it  is  looked  upon  as  one  sort
of  thing  distinguished  from  others,  and  existing  with  this
quality  or  character.  But  when  it  is  put  into  the  fire,  and
burned,  it  is  seen  to  make  one  element  in  the  process  :  it


clxxxii  PROLEGOMENA.  [xxin.

loses  its  self-subsistence,  and  is  as  coal  dissipated  and  lost.
But  it  is  ideally  present  so  long  as  its  efficiency  is  felt.
Similarly  in  the  case  of  living  beings  the  albumen,  &c.  of
which  they  consist  are  present  ideally  as  constituent  elements
which  can  be  discovered  by  analysis:  i.  e.  by  reducing  the
ideell  force  of  life  to  abeyance.  So,  again,  in  the  perfect  (ideal)
state  the  several  imperfect  realities  of  monarchy,  oligarchy,
and  democracy  are  present  in  an  ideal  way;  they  no  longer
subsist  in  their  unimpaired  reality,  but  in  their  truth  as  con-
stituent and  subordinate  elements  of  the  political  constitution.
Reell  is  to  Ideell  as  differentiation  is  to  integration.  When  the
existent  and  external  world  enters  the  mind  it  is  deprived  of
its  reality :  but  in  its  effect  upon  the  mind  and  character  it
continues  to  be  ideally  present.  Such  a  constituent  element,
or  factor,  which  has  lost  all  reality  of  its  own  except  in
combination  (i.  e.  in  ideality),  is  a  Moment.  The  reality  of
a  body  is  its  separate  qualitativeness  as  an  isolated  object ;
its  ideality  begins  when  its  reality  is  abolished  (aufgekoberi)
and  it  has  become  a  Moment  or  dynamic  element  in  a  larger
unity.

Heflexion  (reflection.)  Whenever,  instead  of  burying  our
contemplation  exclusively  in  the  object  which  is  directly  before
us,  and  studying  the  object  in  its  own  self,  we  proceed  to  trace
its  bearings  upon  other  things  and  the  consequences  which
follow  from  it  in  the  light  of  our  other  knowledge, — when  we
view  one  thing  in  the  light  which  it  casts  upon  another,  or
which  another  thing  casts  upon  it,  we  use  Reflexion.  We  connect
two  things  which,  as  it  appears,  exist  independently  by  them-
selves, and  we  institute  a  relation  between  them.  Thus  by
means  of  our  own  action  we  imitate  or  reproduce  that  connexion
of  distinct  or  different  things,  which  the  logical  idea  accom-
plishes inherently  by  the  force  of  its  own  dialectic.  Thus  a
Reflexions-Philosophic  is  one  which  tries  to  bring  together  and
unify  the  two  fundamental  opposites, — thought  and  objectivity,
— which  are  assumed  to  be  primarily  distinct.  Thus  it  is
by  an  act  of  Reflexion  (really  flowing  from  the  Begriff]  that


xxm.]  VOCABULARY.  clxxxiii

we  connect  and  systematise  the  several  stages  in  the  transitions
of  being  (Seyri).  We  ask  (reflectively),  what  follows  from  this?
How  does  this  comport  itself  with  other  known  facts?  What
would  this  lead  to  in  such  a  case?

Raisonnement  (ratiocination,  inference)  is  partly  connected
with  reflection,  and,  as  opposed  to  dialectic,  is  the  name  given  to
such  argument  as  believes  its  starting-point  to  be  fixed  and
stable,  and  is  unaware  that  all  process  in  thought  is  not  a
mere  stepping  from  one  point  forward  to  the  next,  but  the
abrogation  or  absorption  of  an  inferior  term  in  a  higher  or  more
comprehensive.  It  forgets  the  negation  implied  in  every  process
of  thought,  by  which  the  immediate  datum  is  annihilated  to
produce  something  better ;  by  which  truth  is  only  attained  by
means  of  untruth,  and  error  is  a  component  ideally  entering
into  the  production  of  true  knowledge.  Dialectical  proof  shows
its  conclusion  as  the  truth  of  its  premisses,  *.  e.  the  necessary
result  in  which  their  full  significance  first  becomes  apparent:
the  premisses  are  aufgehdben  in  the  conclusion.  ^Raisonnement^
on  the  contrary,  leaves  its  premisses  behind  as  they  were  at
first,  and  when  it  has  piled  on  argument  to  argument  and  term
to  term,  it  gets  to  its  conclusion.  The  French  word  suggests
that  it  is  the  vice  of  French  doctrinaires.

Vernunft  and  Verstand.  Vernnnft  (reason)  is  the  concrete
or  speculative  exercise  of  thought,  which  gives  due  expression
to  the  process-nature  in  things,  as  a  unity  of  differences  and
contrasts.  Hence  it  discovers  the  limitations  or  qualifications
in  each  term  of  thought  short  of  the  whole,  and  prevents  us
from  resting  in  inadequate  descriptions  and  half  truths.

Verstand  (understanding)  is  the  abstract  exercise  of  thought
which  distinguishes  and  defines,  instead  of  comprehending
and  grasping,  its  object.  Such  distinguishing  and  fixing  of  dif-
ferences is  a  necessary  preliminary  to  comprehension.  Verstand
analyses  and  states  the  several  elements  in  an  object;  it  accepts
each  object  as  an  ultimate  datum,  however  much  it  may  be
connected  with  other  objects,  or  resolved  into  its  elements.
Vernunft,  on  the  other  hand,  keeps  the  understanding  from


clxxxiv  PROLEGOMENA.

sticking  to  these  isolated  elements  as  the  whole  truth,  and  holds
them  suspended  (idealised)  in  the  unity  of  the  notion.

TJmnittelbar  and  Vermittelt.  Unmittellar  (immediate  ;  with-
out intermediation  or  derivation)  is  applied  to  denote  what  comes
before  us  nakedly  and  baldly,  as  a  mere  fact,  unaccounted  for,
and  face  to  face.  That  is  unmittelbar  which  comes  obviously
and  solely  on  its  own  evidence.  The  immediate  state  is  the
state  of  nature, — that  which  is  given  as  a  birthright  from  which
we  have  to  rise  to  the  state  of  culture,  or  intermediated  state.
That  is  vermittelt  (mediated  ;  derivative ;  with  intermediation)
which  comes  as  the  result  of  a  process  (or  of  an  argument);
which  is  not  founded  upon  its  own  evidence,  but  is  got  indirectly
and  by  means, — not  at  a  mere  momentary  act,  but  by  labour
and  instrumentality.  If  the  beginning  as  given  be  taken  apart,
it  is  immediate ;  if  the  conclusion  be  taken  by  itself,  it  is
mediate :  but  the  total  object,  which  is  a  process  or  movement
in  itself,  is  both  immediate  and  mediated ;  i.  e.  it  is  the  process
of  inter-mediation  by  itself,  or  the  process  of  self-realisation
(which  is  the  Idea).  Immediate  knowledge  is  that  which  comes
without  the  intervention  of  means ;  which  is  direct,  and  needs
no  confirmation  by  reasoning.


CHAPTEB  I.

INTRODUCTION.

1.]  IN  one  important  point  philosophy  has  to  contend  with
a  difficulty  unknown  to  the  other  sciences.  The  objects  with
which  it  has  to  deal  are  not,  like  the  objects  of  these  sciences,
familiar  to  the  imagination,  or  recognised  in  ordinary  thought.
The  method  of  its  investigation  also,  both  for  the  commencement
and  the  subsequent  course  of  discussion,  is  not  like  the  method
of  the  sciences,  a  universally  acknowledged  one.  The  objects  of
philosophy,  it  is  true,  are  upon  the  whole  the  same  as  those  of
religion.  In  both  the  object  is  Truth,  in  that  supreme  sense
in  which  God  and  God  only  is  the  Truth.  In  like  manner  both
religion  and  philosophy  treat  of  the  finite  worlds  of  Nature  and
the  human  Mind,  with  their  relation  to  each  other  and  to
their  truth  in  God.  Some  acquaintance  or  outside  familiarity
with  its  objects,  therefore,  and  a  certain  interest  in  them,  philo-
sophy may  and  must  presume,  even  if  it  were  for  no  other  reason
than  this  :  that  in  point  of  time  our  consciousness  forms  con-
ceptions or  generalised  images  of  objects,  long  before  it  forms
notions  of  them.  We  have  mental  pictures  of  objects  before  we
think  them  :  and  it  is  only  through  these  mental  pictures,  and  by
having  constant  recourse  to  them,  that  the  thinking  mind  goes
on  to  know  and  comprehend  in  the  strict  meaning  of  thought.

But,  in  the  case  of  the  thinking,  as  distinguished  from  the  earlier
and  semi-pictorial,  view  of  things,  it  soon  becomes  evident  that
thought  will  be  satisfied  with  nothing  short  of  a  proof  that  its
contents  or  facts  must  be  so,  and  cannot  be  otherwise.  In  other

B


2  INTRODUCTION.  [2.

words,  we  have  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of  its  objects,  as
well  as  exhibit  their  nature  and  qualities.  Our  original  ac-
quaintance with  them,  through  the  medium  of  semi-pictorial
generalisations,  is  soon  discovered  to  be  inadequate.  We  can
assume  nothing,  and  assert  nothing  dogmatically  ;  nor  can  we
accept  the  assertions  and  assumptions  of  others.  And  yet  we
must  make  a  beginning  :  and  a  beginning,  as  primary  and  un-
derived,  makes  an  assumption,  or  rather  is  an  assumption.  It
seems  as  if  it  were  impossible  to  make  a  beginning  at  all.

2.]  This  thinking  view  of  things  may  serve,  in  a  general
way,  as  a  description  of  philosophy.  But  the  description  is  too
wide.  If  it  be  correct  to  say,  that  thought  makes  the  distinc-
tion between  man  and  the  lower  animals,  then  everything
human  is  human,  precisely  because  it  is  a  product  of  thought.
Philosophy,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  special  or  peculiar  mode  of
thought — a  mode  in  which  thinking  becomes  knowledge,  rational
and  comprehensive  knowledge.  However  great  therefore  may
be  the  identity  and  essential  unity  of  the  two  modes  of  thought,
the  philosophic  mode  comes  to  be  distinguished  from  the  more
general  thought  which  acts  in  all  that  is  human,  in  all  that
gives  humanity  its  distinctive  character.  It  must  be  remem-
bered, besides,  that  the  thought  which  underlies  and  characterises
all  the  phenomena  of  human  consciousness  does  not  originally
appear  in  its  own  proper  form  of  thought,  but  under  the  aspect
of  feeling,  perception,  or  imagination — all  of  which  aspects  must
be  distinguished  from  the  form  of  thought  proper.

There  is  an  old  doctrine,  which  has  passed  into  a  trivial
proposition,  that  it  is  thought  which  marks  the  man  off  from
the  animals.  Yet  trivial  as  these  old  beliefs  may  seem,  they
must,  strangely  enough,  be  recalled  to  mind  in  presence  of
certain  current  doctrines  of  the  present  day.  These  doctrines
would  put  feeling  and  thought  so  far  apart  as  to  make  them
opposites,  and  would  represent  them  as  so  antagonistic,  that
feeling,  particularly  religious  feeling,  is  supposed  to  be  con-
^taminated,  perverted,  and  even  annihilated  by  thought.  They
also  emphatically  hold  that  religion  and  piety  must  grow  out


2.]  INTRODUCTION.  3

of,  and  rest  upon  something  very  different  from  thought.  But
those  who  make  this  separation  forget  meanwhile  that  only
man  has  the  capacity  for  religion,  and  that  animals  no  more
have  religion  than  they  have  law  and  morality.

The  believers  in  this  separation  between  religion  and  thinking
usually  have  in  their  minds  the  sort  of  thought  that  may  be
styled  after- thought.  They  mean  reflective  thinking,  which
has  to  deal  with  thoughts  as  thoughts,  and  brings  them  forward
into  consciousness.  It  is  because  people  omit  to  perceive  and
keep  in  view  the  distinction  which  philosophy  thus  definitely
draws  between  itself  and  the  general  tenor  of  thought,  that
some  of  the  crudest  fancies  and  objections  to  philosophy  have
arisen.  Man,  no  doubt,  just  because  it  is  his  nature  to  think,
is  the  only  being  that  possesses  law,  religion,  and  morality.
In  these  spheres  of  human  agency,  therefore,  thinking,  in  the
shape  of  feeling,  faith,  or  materialised  conception,  has  not  been
inactive :  for  its  action  and  its  productions  are  extant  in  them,
and  can  be  found  on  examination.  But  it  is  one  thing  to
have  such  feelings  and  generalised  images  that  have  been
moulded  and  permeated  by  thought,  and  another  thing  to  have
thoughts  about  them.  The  thoughts,  to  which  after-thought
upon  those  modes  of  consciousness  gives  rise,  comprise  every
thing  included  under  reflection,  ratiocination,  and  the  like,  as
well  as  under  philosophy  itself.

The  neglect  of  this  distinction  between  thought  in  general
and  the  reflective  thought  of  philosophy  has  led  to  a  still  more
prevalent  misunderstanding.  Reflection  of  this  kind  has  been
often  maintained  to  be  the  condition,  or  even  the  only  way,  of
attaining  the  ordinary  conception  and  the  certainty  of  true
and  everlasting  Being.  The  now  somewhat  obsolete  meta-
physical proofs  of  God's  existence,  for  example,  have  been
treated,  as  if  a  knowledge  of  them  and  a  conviction  of  their
truth  were  the  only  means  of  producing  a  belief  and  conviction
•of  the  being  of  God.  Such  a  doctrine  would  find  its  parallel,
if  we  said  that  eating  was  impossible  before  we  had  acquired  a
knowledge  of  the  chemical,  botanical,  and  zoological  qualities

B  2


4  INTRODUCTION.  [3.

of  our  food  ;  and  that  we  must  delay  digestion  till  we  had
finished  the  study  of  anatomy  and  physiology.  Were  it  so,  these
sciences  in  their  field,  like  philosophy  in  its,  would  gain  greatly
in  point  of  utility ;  in  fact,  their  utility  would  rise  to  the  height
of  absolute  and  universal  necessity.  Or  rather,  instead  of  being
indispensable,  they  would  not  exist  at  all.

3.]  It  is  the  facts  or  the  contents  in  our  consciousness,  of
whatever  kind  they  are,  that  give  the  character  or  determinate-
ness  to  our  feelings,  perceptions,  fancies,  and  figurate  conceptions ;
to  our  aims  and  duties ;  and  to  our  thoughts  and  notions.  From
this  point  of  view,  feeling,  perception,  &c.  are  the  forms  assumed
by  these  contents.  The  contents  remain  one  and  the  same,
whether  they  are  felt,  seen,  imagined,  or  willed,  and  whether  they
are  merely  felt,  or  felt  with  an  admixture  of  thoughts,  or  merely
and  simply  thought.  In  any  one  of  these  forms,  or  in  the  ad-
mixture of  several,  the  contents  are  said  to  confront  consciousness,
or  to  be  its  object.  But  when  they  are  thus  made  an  object
of  consciousness,  the  special  characters  of  these  forms  attach
themselves  to  the  contents;  and  each  form  of  them  appears  in
consequence  to  give  rise  to  a  special  object.  Thus  what  is
virtually  the  same  at  bottom,  may  look  like  a  different  sum
of  facts.

The  specific  phenomena  of  feeling,  perception,  desire,  and  will,
so  far  as  they  are  known,  may  be  in  general  described  under
the  name  of  Conception,  as  picture -thinking  or  materialised
thought :  and  it  may  be  roughly  said,  that  philosophy  puts
thoughts,  categories,  or,  in  more  precise  language,  adequate
notions,  in  the  place  of  semi-pictorial  and  material  conceptions.
Conceptions  such  as  these  may  be  regarded  as  the  metaphors
of  thoughts  and  notions.  But  to  have  these  figurate  conceptions
does  not  imply  that  we  know  their  significance  for  thinking,
or  the  thoughts  and  rational  notions  to  which  they  correspond.
Conversely,  it  is  one  thing  to  have  thoughts  and  general  ideas,
and  another  to  know  what  conceptions,  perceptions,  and  feelings
correspond  to  them.

This  difference  will  to  some  extent  explain  why  people  find


4-]  INTRODUCTION.  5

philosophy  unintelligible.  Their  difficulty  lies  partly  in  an
incapacity — which  in  itself  is  nothing  but  want  of  habit —
for  abstract  thinking ;  i.  e.  in  an  inability  to  grasp  immaterial
thoughts,  and  to  feel  at  home  in  them.  In  our  ordinary
state  of  mind,  thoughts  are  over-grown  and  combined  with  the
sensuous  or  mental  material  of  the  moment;  and  in  reflection
and  ratiocination  we  blend  our  feelings,  intuitions,  and  con-
ceptions with  thoughts.  Thus,  even  in  those  propositions  where
the  subject-matter  is  due  to  the  senses — such  as  '  This  leaf  is
green' — -we  have  such  categories  introduced,  as  being  and  indi-
viduality. But  it  is  a  very  different  thing  to  make  thoughts
pure  and  simple  our  object.

But  the  complaint  that  philosophy  is  unintelligible  is  as
much  due  to  another  reason ;  and  that  is  an  impatient  wish  to
have  in  imaginative  conception  as  a  picture  that  which  is  in
the  mind  as  a  thought  or  notion.  When  people  are  asked  to
apprehend  some  notion,  they  often  complain  that  they  do  not
know  what  they  are  to  think.  The  answer  to  that  complaint
is  this.  In  a  notion  there  is  nothing  further  to  be  thought
than  the  notion  itself.  What  the  phrase  reveals,  is  a  hankering
after  an  image  with  which  we  are  already  familiar.  Our  mind,
when  it  is  denied  the  use  of  its  generalised  images,  feels  the
ground  where  it  once  stood  firm  taken  away  from  beneath
it,  and  when  transported  into  the  region  of  abstract  thought,
cannot  tell  where  in  the  world  it  is.

One  consequence  of  this  weakness  is  that  authors,  preachers,
and  orators  are  found  most  intelligible,  when  they  speak  of
things  which  their  readers  or  hearers  already  know  by  rote; —
things  which  are  current  among  them,  and  require  no  expla-
nation.

4.]  The  philosopher  is  confronted  by  the  existence  of  popular
modes  of  thought,  and  by  the  fact  of  religion.  In  dealing  with
the  ordinary  habit  of  mind,  he  will  first  of  all,  as  we  saw,  have
to  prove  and  almost  to  awaken  the  need  for  his  peculiar  method
of  knowledge.  In  dealing  with  the  objects  of  religion,  and  with
truth  as  a  whole,  he  will  have  to  show  that  philosophy  is


6  INTRODUCTION.  [5.

capable  of  apprehending  them  from  its  own  resources;  and
where  a  divergence  from  religious  conceptions  appears,  he  will
have  to  justify  the  points  in  which  it  diverges.

5.]  To  let  the  reader  have  a  better  understanding  of  the
distinction  thus  made  between  thoughts  and  generalised  images
or  figurate  conceptions,  and  to  let  him  see  at  the  same  moment
that  the  real  contents  of  our  consciousness  are  preserved,  and
even  for  the  first  time  put  in  their  proper  light,  when  they  are
translated  into  the  form  of  thought  and  the  notion  of  reason,
it  will  be  well  to  recall  another  of  these  old  unreasoned  beliefs.
We  always  feel  that,  in  order  to  get  at  what  is  true  in  any
object  or  event,  as  well  as  in  feelings,  perceptions,  opinions,
and  imaginations,  we  must  reflect  and  meditate.  Now  in  every
case  the  work  of  reflection  means  at  least  the  translation  of
feelings  and  semi-pictorial  generalisations  into  thoughts.

Nature  has  given  every  one  a  faculty  of  thought.  But
thought  is  all  that  philosophy  claims  as  the  form  proper  to
her  processes :  and  thus  the  inadequate  view  which  omits  the
distinction  between  thought  in  general  and  scientific  reflection,
given  in  Sect.  3,  leads  to  a  new  delusion,  the  reverse  of  the
complaint  previously  mentioned  about  the  unintelligibility  of
philosophy.  In  other  words,  this  science  is  often  insulted  by
people  who  have  never  studied  a  word  of  it,  talking  as  if  they
were  thoroughly  acquainted  with  its  every  detail.  With  the
ordinary  amount  of  education,  especially  when  influenced  by
religious  feelings,  they  do  not  hesitate  to  philosophise  and  to
criticise  philosophy.  Everybody  allows  that  to  know  any
other  science  you  must  have  first  studied  it,  and  that  you  can
only  claim  to  express  your  judgment  upon  its  doctrines  in  virtue
of  such  knowledge.  Everybody  allows  that  to  make  a  shoe  you
must  have  learned  and  practised  the  craft  of  the  shoemaker,
though  every  man  has  a  model  in  his  own  foot,  and  possesses
in  his  hands  the  natural  endowments  for  the  operations  required.
For  philosophy  alone,  it  seems  to  be  imagined,  such  study,  care,
and  application  need  not  be  in  the  least  requisite.

This  comfortable  view  of  what  constitutes  a  philosopher  has


6.]  INTRODUCTION.  7

recently  received  a  fresh  corroboration  from  the  theory  of  imme-
diate or  intuitive  knowledge.

6.]  So  much  for  the  form  of  philosophical  knowledge.  It  is
no  less  desirable,  on  the  other  hand,  that  philosophy  should
understand  that  its  contents  extend  over  the  whole  of  actuality
or  the  sum  of  existing  facts.  These  contents  which  were
originally  produced,  or  which  produced  themselves  within  the
limits  of  the  mental  life,  at  length  become  a  world,  the  inward
and  outward  world  of  consciousness.  At  first  we  apprehend
these  contents  by  what  we  call  Experience.  But  as  we  survey
the  wide  range  of  inward  and  outward  existence,  an  intelligent
eye  will  soon  distinguish  the  mere  appearance,  which  is  transient
and  meaningless,  from  what  in  itself  really  deserves  the  name
of  actuality.  As  it  is  only  in  form  that  philosophy  is  distin-
guished from  other  means  of  attaining  an  acquaintance  with
this  same  sum  of  being,  it  must  necessarily  be  in  harmony
with  actuality  and  experience.  In  fact,  this  harmony  miay  be
viewed  as  at  least  an  extrinsic  means  of  testing  the  truth  of  a
philosophy.  Similarly  it  may  be  held  the  highest  aim  of
philosophic  science  to  bring  about,  through  the  recognition  of
this  harmony,  a  reconciliation  of  the  self-conscious  reason  with
the  reason  which  is  in  the  world;  in  other  words,  with  actuality.

In  the  preface  to  my  Philosophy  of  Natural  Law,  p.  xix,  I
have  stated  the  following  propositions  :

What  is  rational  is  actual ;
and,  What  is  actual  is  rational.

These  plain  truths  have  given  rise  to  expressions  of  surprise
and  hostility,  even  in  quarters  where  it  would  be  reckoned  an
insult  to  presume  ignorance  of  philosophy,  and  still  more  of
religion.  Religion  at  least  need  not  be  brought  into  the
discussion ;  its  doctrines  of  the  divine  government  of  the  world
declare  these  propositions  with  sufficient  clearness.  For  their
philosophic  sense,  we  must  pre-suppose  intelligence  enough  to
know,  not  only  that  God  is  actual,  most  actual,  and  indeed
the  only  actuality;  but  also,  in  connexion  with  the  logical
bearings  of  the  question,  that  existence  is  in  part  mere  appear-


8  INTRODUCTION.  [6.

ance,  and  only  in  part  reality.  In  common  life,  any  freak  or
error,  evil  and  everything  of  the  nature  of  evil,  as  well  as  every
miserable  and  transient  existence  whatever,  gets  in  a  careless
way,  and  as  if  it  were  by  accident,  the  name  of  reality.  But
even  our  ordinary  feelings  are  enough  to  forbid  an  accidental
existence  getting  the  emphatic  name  of  a  reality;  for  by
accidental  we  mean  an  existence  which  has  no  greater  value
than  that  of  something  possible,  which  may  as  well  not  be  as
be.  As  for  the  term  Actuality,  these  critics  would  have  done
well  to  consider  the  sense  in  which  I  had  employed  it.  In  a
detailed  Logic  I  had  treated  amongst  other  things  of  actuality,
and  accurately  distinguished  it  not  only  from  what  is  contin-
gent, which,  after  all,  has  existence,  but  even  from  the  cognate
categories  of  existence  and  the  other  modifications  of  being.

The  actuality  of  the  world  of  reason  stands  opposed  by  the
popular  fancy  that  ideas  and  ideals  are  nothing  but  chimeras,
and  philosophy  a  mere  system  of  such  phantasms.  It  is  also
opposed  by  the  very  different  fancy  that  ideas  and  ideals  are
something  far  too  excellent  to  possess  reality,  or  something
far  too  feeble  to  procure  it  for  themselves.  This  divorce  between
idea  and  reality  is  a  favourite  device  of  the  analytic  under-
standing in  particular.  Yet  strangely  in  contrast  with  this
separatist  tendency,  its  own  dreams,  half-truths  though  they
are,  appear  to  the  understanding  something  true  and  real;  it
prides  itself  on  the  imperative  '  ought,'  which  it  takes  especial
pleasure  in  prescribing  on  the  field  of  politics.  As  if  the  world
had  waited  on  it  to  learn  how  it  ought  to  be,  and  was  not!
For,  if  it  were  as  it  ought  to  be,  what  would  come  of  the  mystic
wisdom  of  that  'ought'?  When  understanding  uses  this
'ought'  against  trivial  and  transient  objects,  institutions  or
conditions,  of  no  intrinsic  value,  although  even  they  may  very
likely  possess  a  great  relative  importance  for  a  certain  time
and  special  circles,  it  may  often  be  right.  In  such  a  case  the
intelligent  observer  may  meet  much  that  fails  to  satisfy  the
precepts  of  universal  rectitude;  for  who  is  not  acute  enough
to  see  a  great  deal  in  his  own  surroundings  which  is  really  far


7.]  INTRODUCTION.  9

•

from  being  what  it  ought  to  be?  But  such  acuteness  is
mistaken  in  the  conceit  that,  when  it  examines  these  objects
and  pronounces  what  they  ought  to  be,  it  is  dealing  with
questions  of  philosophic  science.  The  object  of  philosophy  is
the  Idea :  and  the  Idea  is  not  so  feeble  as  merely  to  have  a
right  or  an  obligation  to  exist  without  actually  existing.  The
object  of  philosophy  is  an  actuality  of  which  those  objects,
institutions,  and  conditions  represent  only  the  outward  and
superficial  side.

7.]  Thus  reflection  may  be  said  in  a  general  way  to  involve
the  principle  (which  also  means  the  beginning)  of  philosophy.
But  when  the  reflective  spirit  sprang  up  free  and  independent
in  modern  times,  after  the  epoch  of  the  Lutheran  Reformation,
it  did  not,  as  in  the  beginnings  of  Greek  philosophy,  stand  aloof,
in  a  world  of  its  own,  but  at  once  turned  its  energies  upon
the  apparently  illimitable  material  of  the  phenomenal  world.
In  this  way  the  name  philosophy  came  to  be  applied  to  all
those  branches  of  knowledge,  which  are  engaged  in  investiga-
ting the  definite  numerical  relations,  and  the  Universal  element
in  the  host  of  individuals  presented  by  experience,  as  well  as
in  investigating  the  Necessary  element,  or  Laws,  to  be  found
in  the  apparent  disorder  of  the  endless  crowd  of  facts.  It  thus
appears  that  modern  philosophy,  in  this  sense  of  the  word,
derives  its  materials  from  our  own  observations  and  perceptions
of  the  external  and  internal  world,  from  nature  as  well  as
from  the  mind  and  heart  of  man,  when  both  stand  in  direct
and  immediate  contact  with  the  observer.

This  is  the  principle  of  Experience.  In  it  lies  the  unspeak-
ably important  truth  that,  in  order  to  accept  and  believe  any
fact,  we  must  be  in  contact  with  it;  or,  in  more  exact  terms,
that  we  must  find  the  fact  united  and  .combined  with  the
certainty  of  our  own  selves.  We  must  be  in  contact  with  our
subject-matter,  whether  it  be  by  means  of  our  external  senses,
or,  what  is  better,  by  our  profounder  mind  and  our  innermost
self-consciousness.  To  a  certain  extent  this  principle  is  the
same  as  that  which  has  lately  been  termed  faith,  immediate


10  INTRODUCTION.  [7.

•
knowledge,  the revelation  in the outward  world,  and,  above

all,  in  our  own  heart.

Those  sciences,  which  frequently  go  under  the  name  of
philosophy,  we  call  empirical  sciences,  for  the  reason  that  they
take  their  departure  from  experience.  Still  the  essential  results
which  they  aim  at,  are  laws,  general  propositions,  a  theory —
the  thoughts  of  what  is  found  existing.  On  this  ground  the
Newtonian  physics  were  termed  Natural  Philosophy.  Hugo
Grotius  again,  by  putting  together  and  comparing  the  be-
haviour of  states  towards  each  other  as  recorded  in  history,
and  with  what  help  the  ordinary  methods  of  inference  could
give,  discovered  certain  general  principles  and  established  a
theory  which  may  be  termed  the  Philosophy  of  International
Law.  In  England  this  is  still  the  usual  signification  of  the
term  philosophy.  Newton  continues  to  be  celebrated  as  the
greatest  of  philosophers :  and  the  name  goes  down  as  far  as
the  price-lists  of  instrument-makers.  All  instruments,  such  as
the  thermometer  and  barometer,  which  do  not  come  under  the
special  head  of  magnetic  or  electric  apparatus,  are  styled  phi-
losophical instruments l.  Surely  thought,  and  not  a  mere  com-
bination of  wood,  iron,  &c.  ought  to  be  called  the  instrument
of  philosophy !  The  recent  science  of  Political  Economy  in
particular,  which  in  Germany  is  known  as  Rational  Economy
of  the  State,  or  intelligent  national  economy,  has  in  England
especially  appropriated  the  name  of  philosophy  2.

1  Even  the  journal  edited  by  Thomson  is  called  '  Annals  of  Philosophy  ;
or,  Magazine  of  Chemistry,  Mineralogy,  Mechanics,  Natural  History,  Agricul-
ture, and  Arts."  We  can  easily  guess  from  the  title  what  sort  of  subjects  are
here  to  be  understood  under  the  term  '  philosophy.'  Among  the  advertisements
of  books  just  published,  I  lately  found  the  following  notice  in  an  English  news-
paper :  '  The  Art  of  Preserving  the  Hair,  on  Philosophical  Principles,  neatly
printed  in  post  8vo,  price  seven  shillings.'  By  philosophical  principles  for  the  pre-
servation of  the  hair  are  p*robably  meant  chemical  or  physiological  principles.

a  In  connexion  with  the  general  principles  of  Political  Economy,  the  term
'philosophical'  is  frequently  heard  from  the  lips  of  English  statesmen,  even  in
their  public  speeches.  In  the  House  of  Commons,  on  the  2nd  Feb.  1825,
Brougham,  speaking  on  the  address  in  reply  to  the  speech  from  the  throne,
talked  of  'the  statesman-like  and  philosophical  principles  of  Free-trade, — for
philosophical  they  undoubtedly  are — upon  the  acceptance  of  which  his  majesty
this  day  congratulated  the  House.'  Nor  is  this  language  confined  to  members


8,  9  •]  IN  TROD  UCTION.  1 1

8.]  In  its  own  field  this  empirical  knowledge  may  at  first
give  satisfaction;  but  in  two  ways  it  is  seen  to  come  short.
In  the  first  place  there  is  another  circle  of  objects  which  it
does  not  embrace.  These  are  Freedom,  Mind,  and  God.  They
belong  to  a  different  sphere,  not  because  it  can  be  said  that
they  have  nothing  to  do  with  experience ;  for  though  they
are  certainly  not  perceived  by  the  senses,  itjs  quite  an  identical
proposition  to  say  that  whatever  is  in  consciousness  is  ex-
perienced. The  real  ground  for  assigning  them  to  another
field  of  cognition  is  that  their  scope  and  contents  evidently
show  these  objects  to  be  infinite.

There  is  an  old  phrase  often  wrongly  attributed  to  Aristotle,
and  supposed  to  express  the  general  tenor  of  his  philosophy.
(  Nikilest  in  intellects,  quod  nonfuerit  in  sensu:'  there  is  nothing
in  thought  which  has  not  been  in  sense  and  experience.  If
speculative  philosophy  has  rejected  this  doctrine,  it  can  only
have  done  so  from  a  misunderstanding.  It  will,  however,  on
the  converse  side  no  less  assert :  '  Nihil  est  in  sensu  quod  non
fuerit  in  intellectu?  And  this  may  be  taken  in  two  senses.
In  the  general  sense  it  means  that  votis  or  spirit  (the  more
profound  idea  of  vovs  in  modern  thought)  is  the  cause  of  the
world.  In  its  special  meaning  (see  Sect.  2)  it  asserts  that
the  feeling  of  right,  morals,  and  religion  is  a  feeling  (and  in
that  way  an  experience)  of  such  scope  and  such  character  that
it  can  spring  from  and  rest  upon  thought  alone.

9.]  The  first  distinction  therefore  between  philosophy  and  the
sciences  of  experience  depends  upon  the  infinity  and  the  finitude
of  their  respective  contents.  But  in  the  second  place  the  sub-

of  the  Opposition.  At  the  shipowners'  yearly  dinner  in  the  same  month,  under
the  chairmanship  of  the  Premier  Lord  Liverpool,  supported  by  Canning  the
Secretary  of  State,  and  Sir  C.  Long  the  Paymaster-General  of  the  Army,  Can-
ning in  reply  to  the  toast  which  had  been  proposed  said:  'A  period  has  just
begun,  in  which  ministers  have  it  in  their  power  to  apply  to  the  administration
of  this  country  the  sound  maxims  of  a  profound  philosophy.'  Whatever  dif-
ferences there  may  be  between  English  and  German  philosophy,  and  though  on
other  occasions  the  name  of  philosophy  is  used  only  as  a  nickname  and  insult,
or  as  something  odious,  it  is  matter  of  rejoicing  to  see  it  still  honoured  in  the
mouth  of  the  English  Government.


12  INTRODUCTION.  [9.

jective  reason,  or  reason  within  us,  desires  a  further  satisfaction
in  point  of  form;  and  this  form,  in  one  word,  is  necessity.
(Sect,  i.)  The  method  of  empirical  science  exhibits  two  de-
fects. The  first  is  that  the  Universal  or  general  principle
contained  in  it,  the  genus,  or  kind,  &c.,  is  of  its  own  nature
indeterminate  and  vague,  and  therefore  not  explicitly  and  of
itself  in  connexion  with  the  Particular  or  the  details.  Both
are  external  and  accidental  to  each  other,  and  it  is  the  same
with  the  particular  facts  which  are  brought  into  union :  each
is  external  and  accidental  to  the  others.  The  second  defect  is
that  the  beginnings  are  in  every  case  data  and  postulates,  neither
accounted  for  nor  deduced.  In  both  these  points  the  form  of
necessity  fails  to  get  its  due.  Hence  reflection,  whenever  it
sets  itself  to  remedy  these  defects,  becomes  speculative  thinking,
the  genuine  organon  of  philosophy.  As  a  species  of  reflection,
therefore,  which,  though  it  has  a  certain  community  of  nature
with  the  reflection  already  mentioned,  is  nevertheless  different
from  it,  philosophic  thought  thus  possesses,  in  addition  to  the
common  forms,  some  forms  of  its  own,  of  which  the  rational
Notion  may  be  taken  as  the  type.

The  relation  of  speculative  science  to  the  other  sciences  may
be  stated  in  the  following  terms.  It  does  not  in  the  least
neglect  the  empirical  facts  contained  in  the  several  sciences,
but  recognises  and  adopts  them :  it  appreciates  and  applies
towards  its  own  structure  the  universal  element  in  these  sciences,
their  laws  and  classifications  :  but  besides  all  this,  it  introduces
new  categories  and  gives  them  an  authoritative  place  in  the
sciences.  The  difference,  looked  at  in  this  way,  is  only  a
change  of  categories.  Speculative  Logic  contains  all  previous
Logic  and  Metaphysics  :  it  preserves  the  same  forms  of  thought,
the  same  laws  and  objects, — while  at  the  same  time  trans-
forming and  expanding  them  by  the  means  of  wider  categories.

From  notion  in  the  speculative  sense  we  should  distinguish
what  is  ordinarily  called  a  notion.  The  phrase,  that  no  notion  can
ever  comprehend  the  Infinite,  a  phrase  which  has  been  repeated
over  and  over  again  till  it  has  grown  into  a  current  belief,  is


i  o.]  IN  TROD  UCTION.  1 3

based  upon  the  narrow  and  vulgar  estimate  of  what  is  meant  by
notions.

10.]  This  thought,  which  is  proposed  as  the  instrument  of  philo-
sophic knowledge,  itself  calls  for  further  explanation.  We  must
understand  in  what  way  it  possesses  necessity  or  cogency :  and
when  it  claims  to  be  equal  to  the  task  of  apprehending  the  absolute
objects  (God,  Mind,  Freedom),  that  claim  must  be  substantiated.
Such  an  explanation,  however,  is  itself  a  lesson  in  philosophy,
and  properly  falls  within  the  scope  of  the  science  itself.  A
preliminary  attempt  to  make  matters  plain  would  only  be  un-
philosophical,  and  consist  of  a  tissue  of  hypotheses,  assertions,
and  inferences,  i.e.  of  dogmatism  without  cogency,  as  against
which  there  would  be  an  equal  right  of  counter-dogmatism.

One  of  the  main  doctrines  of  the  Critical  Philosophy  bids
us  pause  before  proceeding  to  inquire  into  God  or  into  the
true  being  of  things,  and  tells  us  first  of  all  to  examine  the
faculty  of  cognition  and  see  whether  it  is  equal  to  such  an
effort.  We  ought,  says  Kant,  to  become  acquainted  with  the
instrument,  before  we  undertake  the  work  for  which  it  is  to  be
employed ;  for  if  the  instrument  be  insufficient,  all  our  trouble
will  be  spent  in  vain.  The  plausibility  of  this  suggestion  has
won  for  it  general  assent  and  admiration;  the  result  of  which
has  been  to  withdraw  cognition  from  an  interest  in  its  objects
and  absorption  in  the  study  of  them,  and  to  direct  it  back
upon  itself;  and  so  turn  it  to  a  question  of  form.  Unless
we  wish  to  be  deceived  by  words,  it  is  easy  to  see  what  this
amounts  to.  In  the  case  of  other  instruments,  we  can  try
and  criticise  them  in  other  ways  than  by  setting  about  the
special  work  for  which  they  are  destined.  But  the  examination
of  knowledge  can  only  be  carried  out  by  an  act  of  knowledge.
To  examine  this  so-called  instrument  is  the  same  thing  as  to
know  it.  But  to  seek  to  know  before  we  know  is  as  absurd
as  the  wise  resolution  of  Scholasticus,  not  to  venture  into  the
water  until  he  had  learned  to  swim.

Reinhold  saw  the  confusion  with  which  this  style  of  com-
mencement is  chargeable,  and  tried  to  get  out  of  the  difficulty


1 4  IN  TROD  UCTION.  [  1 1 .

by  starting  with  a  hypothetical  and  problematical  stage  of
philosophising.  In  this  way  he  supposed  that  it  would  be
possible,  nobody  can  tell  how,  to  go  on,  until  it  happened
at  last  that  the  primary  truth  of  truths  was  reached.  His
method,  when  closely  looked  into,  will  be  seen  to  be  identical
with  a  very  common  practice.  It  starts  from  a  substratum
of  experiential  fact,  or  from  a  provisional  assumption  which
has  been  brought  into  a  definition ;  and  then  proceeds  to
analyse  this  starting-point.  We  can  detect  in  Reinhold's
argument  a  perception  of  the  truth,  that  the  usual  course
which  proceeds  by  assumptions  and  anticipations  is  no  better
than  a  hypothetical  and  problematical  mode  of  procedure.
But  his  perceiving  this  makes  no  change  in  his  style  of
proceeding,  and  only  states  the  imperfections  of  the  method.

11.]  The  special  conditions  which  call  for  the  existence  of
philosophy  may  be  thus  described.  The  mind  or  spirit,  when
it  feels  or  perceives,  finds  its  object  in  a  sensuous  image ;
when  it  imagines,  in  a  picture  or  scene  of  fancy ;  when  it
wills,  in  an  aim  or  end.  But  in  contrast  to,  or  it  may  be
only  in  distinction  from,  these  forms  of  its  existence  and  of
its  objects,  the  mind  has  also  to  gratify  the  cravings  of  its
highest  and  most  inward  life.  That  innermost  self  is  thought.
Thus  the  mind  renders  thought  its  object.  In  the  best
meaning  of  the  phrase,  it  comes  to  itself;  for  thought  is  its
principle,  and  in  thought  it  finds  its  truest  self.  But  while
thus  occupied,  thought  is  confronted  on  every  side  with
contradictions,  puzzled  by  thoughts  which  refuse  to  be
identified  with  it,  and,  instead  of  finding  itself,  is  forced  to
sink  under  the  sway  of  its  own  ideas.  This  result,  to  which
honest  but  narrow  thinking  leads  the  mere  understanding,  is
met  by  the  loftier  craving  of  which  we  have  spoken.  That
craving  expresses  the  perseverance  of  thought,  which  has
resolved  to  continue  true  to  itself,  even  in  this  conscious
loss  of  its  native  rest  and  independence,  till  it  overcome  and
work  out  in  thought  the  solution  of  its  own  contradictions.

That  dialectic  isjthe  very  nature  of  thought,  and  that, as


12.]  IN  TROD  UCTION.  1 5

understanding,  thought  must  inevitably  fall  into  contradiction
and  the  negation  of  itself,  forms  one  of  the  main  lessons  of
logic.  When  thought  grows  hopeless  of  ever  achieving,  by
its  own  means,  the  solution  of  the  contradiction  which  it
has  by  its  own  action  brought  upon  itself,  it  turns  back  to
those  solutions  of  the  question  with  which  the  mind  had
learned  to  pacify  itself  in  some  of  its  other  modes  and  forms.
Unfortunately,  however,  the  retreat  of  thought  has  led  it,  as
Plato  noticed  even  in  his  time,  to  a  very  uncalled-for  hatred
of  reason  (misology) ;  and  it  then  displays  a  hostile  front
against  its  own  endeavours.  An  example  of  this  dislike  to
thought  may  be  found  in  the  doctrine,  that  immediate  know-
ledge, as  it  is  called,  is  the  exclusive  form  in  which  we
become  cognisant  of  truth.

12.]  The  first  beginnings  of  philosophy  date  from  these
cravings  of  thought.  It  takes  its  departure  from  Experience ;
including  under  that  name  our  immediate  consciousness  and
the  processes  of  inference  from  it.  Awakened,  as  it  were,
by  this  stimulus,  thought  is  vitally  characterised  by  raising
itself  above  the  natural  state  of  mind,  above  the  senses  and
inferences  from  the  senses.  At  first  it  assumes  a  repellent
and  negative  attitude  towards  the  point  from  which  it  draws
its  origin.  Through  this  state  of  antagonism  to  the  pheno-
mena of  sense  its  first  satisfaction  is  found  in  itself,  and  it
seizes  on  the  idea  of  the  universal  essence  of  these  phenomena.
This  idea  (the  Absolute,  or  God)  may  be  more  or  less
abstract.  Meanwhile,  on  the  other  hand,  the  sciences,  based
on  experience,  act  upon  the  mind  as  a  sort  of  stimulus  to
overcome  the  form  in  which  their  varied  contents  are  pre-
sented, and  to  elevate  these  contents  to  the  rank  of  necessary
truth.  For  the  facts  of  science  have  the  aspect  of  a  vast
conglomerate,  one  thing  coming  side  by  side  with  another,
as  if  they  were  merely  given,  and  not  deduced  or  derived, —
as  if  indeed  they  were  utterly  a  matter  of  chance.  In
consequence  of  this  stimulus  thought  is  dragged  out  of  its
unrealised  universality  and  its  fancied,  or  merely  possible


1 6  INTROD  UCTION.  [12.

satisfaction,  and  impelled  onwards  to  a  development  from
itself.  On  one  hand  this  development  only  means  that
thought  accepts  the  contents  of  science,  and  the  truths  which
are  propounded  in  regard  to  them.  On  the  other  it  makes
these  contents  imitate  the  action  of  the  original  creative
thought,  and  present  the  aspect  of  a  free  evolution  determined
by  the  laws  of  the  fact  alone.

On  the  relation  between  immediacy  and  mediation  in
consciousness  we  shall  speak  later,  expressly  and  with  more
detail.  Here  it  may  be  sufficient  to  premise  that,  though
the  two  elements  or  factors  present  themselves  as  distinct,
still  neither  of  them  can  be  absent,  or  exist  apart  from  the
other.  Thus  the  knowledge  of  God,  as  of  every  supersensible
reality,  is  in  its  true  character  an  exaltation  above  the  feelings
or  perceptions  of  the  senses :  it  consequently  involves  a  negative
attitude  to  the  initial  acts  of  sense,  and  to  that  extent  implies
mediation.  For  to  mediate  is  to  take  something  as  a  be-
ginning and  to  go  onward  to  a  second  thing;  so  that  the
existence  of  this  second  thing  depends  on  our  having  reached
it  from  something  else  contradistinguished  from  it.  In  spite
of  this,  the  knowledge  of  God  is  independent,  and  not  a
mere  consequence  of  the  empirical  phase  of  consciousness :  in
fact,  its  independence  is  essentially  secured  through  this
negation  and  exaltation.  No  doubt,  if  we  attach  an  unfair
prominence  to  the  fact  of  mediation,  and  represent  it  as
implying  a  state  of  dependence,  it  may  be  said — not  that
the  remark  would  mean  much — that  philosophy  is  the  child
of  experience,  and  owes  its  existence  to  an  a  posteriori  element.
(As  a  matter  of  fact,  thinking  is  always  the  negation  of  what
we  have  immediately  before  us.)  With  as  much  truth  we
may  be  said  to  owe  eating  to  the  means  of  nourishment,  so
long  as  we  can  have  no  eating  without  them.  If  we  take
this  view,  eating  is  certainly  represented  as  ungrateful :  it
devours  that  to  which  it  owes  itself.  Thinking,  upon  this
view  of  its  action,  is  equally  ungrateful.

But  the a  priori  aspect  or  immediacy  of  thought,  where


12.]  INTRODUCTION,  17

there  is  a  mediation,  not  made  by  anything  external  but  by
a  reflection  into  self,  is  another  name  for  universality,  the
complacency  or  contentment  of  thought  which  is  so  much  at
ease  with  itself,  that  it  feels  an  innate  aversion  to  descend
to  particulars,  and  in  that  way  to  the  development  of  its
own  nature.  It  is  as  in  the  case  of  religion,  which,  whether
it  be  rude  or  elaborate,  whether  it  be  invested  with  scientific
precision  of  detail  or  confined  to  the  simple  faith  of  the
heart,  possesses,  throughout,  the  same  intensive  nature  of
contentment  and  felicity.  But  if  thought  never  gets  further
than  universality  in  its  ideas,  as  was  perforce  the  case  in
the  first  philosophies  (when  the  Eleatics  never  got  beyond
Being,  or  Heraclitus  beyond  Becoming),  it  is  open  to  the
charge  of  formalism.  Even  in  a  more  advanced  period  of
philosophy,  we  may  often  find  it  taking  account  only  of
abstract  generalities  or  definitions,  such  as,  'In  the  absolute
all  is  one,'  '  Subject  and  object  are  identical,' — and  only
repeating  the  same  thing  when  it  comes  to  particulars.
When  we  look  at  this  first  period  of  thought,  the  period  of
mere  generality,  we  may  safely  say  that  experience  is  the
real  author  of  growth  and  advance  in  philosophy.  For,  firstly,
the  empirical  sciences  do  not  stop  short  at  the  perception
of  the  individual  features  of  a  phenomenon.  They  employ
thought,  and  come  forward  to  meet  philosophy  with  materials
for  it,  in  the  shape  of  general  characteristics  or  laws,  and
classifications  of  the  phenomena.  When  this  is  done,  the
particular  facts  which  they  contain  are  ready  to  be  received
into  philosophy.  This,  secondly,  implies  a  certain  compulsion
on  thought  itself  to  proceed  to  these  concrete  specific  truths.
The  reception  into  philosophy  of  this  scientific  material,  now
that  thought  has  removed  its  immediacy,  and  made  it  cease
to  be  any  longer  a  mere  datum,  forms  at  the  same  time  a
development  of  thought  out  of  itself.  Philosophy,  then,  owes
its  development  to  the  empirical  sciences.  In  return  it  gives
their  contents  what  is  so  vital  to  them,  the  freedom  of
thought,  or,  what  is  called  an  a  priori  character.  These

c


18  INTRODUCTION.  [13,

contents  are  now  demonstrated  to  be  necessary,  and  no  longer
depend  on  the  evidence  of  facts  merely,  that  they  were  so
found  and  so  experienced.  The  fact  of  experience  thus  becomes
an  illustration  and  image  of  the  original  and  completely  self-
supporting  activity  of  thought.

13.]  Stated  in  exact  terms,  such  is  the  origin  and  develop-
ment of  philosophy.  But  the  History  of  Philosophy  gives  us
the  same  process  from  an  historical  and  external  point  of  view.
The  stages  in  the  evolution  of  the  idea  there  seem  to  follow
each  other  by  accident,  and  to  present  merely  a  number  of
different  and  unconnected  principles,  which  the  several  systems
of  philosophy  carry  out  in  their  own  way.  But  it  is  not  so.
For  these  thousands  of  years  the  same  Architect  has  directed
the  work  :  and  that  Architect  is  the  one  living  Mind  of  which
the  nature  is  thought  and  self-consciousness.  Becoming  con-
scious of  what  it  is  in  one  period,  it  employs  this  knowledge
as  the  basis  of  a  new  period,  and  an  advance  in  its  course  of
progress.  The  differences  of  system  which  the  history  of
philosophy  presents  are  therefore  not  irreconcilable  with  unity.
We  may  either  say,  that  it  is  one  philosophy  at  different
degrees  of  completion :  or  that  the  particular  principle,  which
is  the  groundwork  of  each  system,  is  but  a  branch  of  one
and  the  same  universe  of  thought.  In  philosophy  the  latest
fcirth  of  time  is  the  result  of  all  the  systems  that  have  preceded
it,  and  must  include  their  principles ;  and  so,  if,  on  other
grounds,  it  deserve  the  title  of  philosophy,  will  be  the  fullest,
most  comprehensive,  and  most  adequate  system  of  all.

The  spectacle  of  so  many  and  so  different  systems  of  philosophy
suggests  the  necessity  of  denning  more  exactly  the  distinction
between  Universal  and  Particular.  When  the  universal  is  made
a  mere  form  and  co-ordinated  with  the  particular,  as  if  it  were
on  the  same  level,  it  sinks  into  a  particular  itself.  Even
common  sense  in  every-day  matters  is  above  the  absurdity
of  taking  a  universal  apart  from  the  particulars.  Would  any
one,  who  wished  for  fruit,  reject  cherries,  pears,  and  grapes,  on
the  ground  that  they  were  cherries,  pears,  or  grapes,  and  not


1 4-]  INTRODUCTION.  19

fruit?  But  when  philosophy  is  in  question,  the  excuse  of  many
is  that  philosophies  are  so  different,  and  none  of  them  is  the
philosophy, — that  each  is  only  a  philosophy.  Such  a  plea  is
assumed  to  justify  any  amount  of  contempt  for  philosophy.
And  yet  cherries  too  are  fruit.  Often,  too,  a  system,  of  which
the  principle  is  universal,  is  enumerated  on  a  level  with  another
of  which  the  principle  is  particular  and  limited,  and  with
theories  which  deny  the  existence  of  philosophy  altogether.
Such  systems  are  said  to  be  only  different  views  of  philosophy.
With  equal  justice,  light  and  darkness  may  be  styled  different
kinds  of  light.

14.]  The  same  evolution  of  thought  which  is  recorded  in
the  history  of  philosophy  is  presented  in  the  System  of  Philo-
sophy itself.  Here,  instead  of  surveying  the  process,  as  we  do
in  history,  from  the  outside,  we  see  the  movement  of  thought
clearly  defined  in  its  native  medium.  If  thought  is  free  and
actual,  it  must  involve  the  union  of  several  elements,  must  be
concrete ;  it  must  be  an  idea ;  and  when  it  is  viewed  in  the
whole  of  its  universality,  it  is  the  Idea,  or  the  Absolute.  The
science  of  this  Idea  must  form  a  system.  For  the  truth  is
concrete ;  that  is,  whilst  it  gives  a  bond  and  principle  of  unity,
it  also  possesses  an  internal  variety  of  development.  Truth,
then,  is  only  possible  as  a  universe  or  totality  of  thought;
and  the  freedom  of  the  whole,  as  well  as  the  necessity  of  the
several  divisions,  is  only  possible  when  we  distinguish  the  several
elements,  and  give  a  precise  expression  to  these  differences.

Unless  it  is  a  system,  a  philosophy  is  not  a  scientific  produc-
tion. Philosophising  of  this  sort  can  only  be  expected  to  give
expression  to  personal  peculiarities  of  mind,  and  has  no  principle
for  the  regulation  of  its  contents.  The  truths  of  philosophy
are  valueless,  apart  from  their  interdependence  and  organic
union,  and  must  then  be  treated  as  baseless  hypotheses,  or
personal  convictions.  Yet  many  philosophical  treatises  confine
themselves  to  such  an  exposition  of  the  opinions  and  sentiments
of  the  author.

The  term  system  is  often  misunderstood.  It  does  not  denote

c  2


20  INTRODUCTION.  [15,  1 6.

a  philosophy,  the  principle  of  which  is  narrow  and  to  be  dis-
tinguished from  others.  On  the  contrary,  all  real  philosophy
makes  it  a  principle  to  include  every  particular  principle.

15.]  Each  of  the  parts  of  philosophy  is  a  philosophical  whole,
a* circle  rounded  and  complete  in  itself.  In  each  of  these  parts,
however,  the  philosophical  idea  is  found  in  a  particular  speciality
or  medium.  The  single  circle,  because  it  is  a  real  totality,
bursts  through  the  limits  imposed  by  its  special  medium,  and
gives  rise  to  a  wider  circle.  The  whole  of  philosophy  in  this
way  resembles  a  circle  of  circles.  The  idea  is  exhibited  in  each
individual  circle,  but,  at  the  same  time,  the  whole  Idea  is
constituted  by  the  system  of  the  elements  special  to  each,  and
each  is  a  necessary  member  of  the  organisation.

16.]  In  the  form  of  an  Encyclopaedia,  our  science  does  not
leave  room  for  a  detailed  exposition  of  its  particular  truths,
and  must  be  limited  to  the  commencement  of  the  special
sciences,  and  to  the  notions  of  cardinal  importance  in  them.

How  much  of  the  particular  parts  is  requisite  to  constitute
a  particular  branch  of  knowledge  is  so  far  indeterminate,  that
the  part,  if  it  is  to  be  true,  must  be  not  an  isolated  member
merely,  but  an  organic  whole.  The^entire  field^  of  philosophy
really  forms  a  single  science ;  but  it  may  also  be  viewed  as
a  sum-total,  composed  of  several  particular  sciences.

The  encyclopedia  of  philosophy  must  not  be  confounded  with
ordinary  encyclopaedias.  An  ordinary  encyclopaedia  does  not
pretend  to  be  more  than  an  aggregation  of  sciences,  regulated
by  no  principle,  except  as  experience  offers  them.  Sometimes
it  even  includes  what  merely  bears  the  name  of  science,  while
it  is  nothing  more  than  a  collection  of  ascertained  facts.  In  an
aggregate  like  this,  the  several  branches  of  knowledge  owe  their
place  in  the  encyclopedia  to  extrinsic  reasons,  and  their  unity
is  therefore  artificial :  they  are  arranged,  but  we  cannot  say
they  form  a  system.  For  the  same  reason,  especially  as  the
materials  to  be  combined  depend  upon  no  fixed  rule  or  principle,
the  arrangement  is  at  best  an  experiment,  and  will  always
exhibit  inequalities.


1 6.]  IN  TROD  UCTION.  2 1

An  encyclopaedia  of  philosophy  excludes  three  kinds  of  partial
science.  I.  It  excludes  mere  aggregates  of  ascertained  facts.
Philology  in  its  primd  facie  aspect  belongs  to  this  class.  II.
It  rejects  the  quasi-sciences,  which  are  founded  on  an  act  of
arbitrary  will  alone,  such  as  Heraldry.  Sciences  of  this  class
are  positive  from  beginning  to  end.  III.  In  another  class  of
sciences,  also  styled  positive,  but  which  have  a  rational  basis
and  a  rational  beginning,  it  accepts  the  constituent  which
naturally  belongs  to  it.  The  positive  features  are  only  in-
teresting to  the  sciences  themselves.

The  positive  element  in  the  last  class  of  sciences  is  of  different
sorts.  (I.)  Their  commencement  may  possess  germs  of  ration-
ality, but  they  cease  to  exhibit  any  principle  of  reason,  when
they  have  to  bring  their  universal  truth  into  contact  with
actual  facts  and  the  single  phenomena  of  experience.  In  this
region  of  chance  and  change,  the  adequate  notion  of  science
must  yield  its  place  to  reasons  or  grounds  of  explanation.
Thus,  in  the  science  of  jurisprudence,  and  in  the  system  of  direct
and  indirect  taxation,  it  is  often  necessary  to  have  certain  points
precisely  and  definitively  settled :  and  such  settlement  is  not
within  the  competence  of  the  absolute  and  certain  fixity  of  the
pure  notion.  A  certain  amount  of  liberty  in  these  points
accordingly  is  left :  and  each  question  may  be  answered  in  one
way  on  one  principle,  in  another  way  on  another,  and  admits
of  no  definitive  settlement.  Similarly  the  idea  of  Nature,  when
it  is  individualised,  loses  itself  in  a  maze  of  chance.  Natural
history,  geography,  and  medicine  have  to  deal  with  points  of
existence,  with  kinds  and  with  distinctions,  which  are  not  de-
termined by  reason,  but  by  sport  and  adventitious  incidents
Even  history  comes  under  the  same  category.  The  idea  is  its
essence  and  inner  nature ;  but  its  phenomena  are  regulated  by
no  law,  and  depend  upon  arbitrary  influences.  (II.)  These
sciences  are  positive  also  in  failing  to  recognise  the  finite
nature  of  what  they  predicate,  and  to  point  out  how  these
predicates  and  their  whole  sphere  pass  into  a  higher.  They
assume  their  statements  of  truth  to  be  absolutely  valid.  Here


22  INTRODUCTION.  [17.

the  fault  lies  in  the  finitude  of  the  form,  as  in  the  previous
instance  it  lay  in  the  matter.  (III.)  As  a  consequence  of
this,  sciences  are  positive  in  consequence  of  the  inadequate  and
limited  ground  on  which  their  statements  rest.  Their  state-
ments are  based  upon  formal  inference,  or  upon  feeling-,  faith,
and  authority,  and,  generally  speaking,  upon  the  deliverances
of  inward  and  outward  perception.  Under  this  head  we  must
also  class  the  philosophy  which  proposes  to  build  upon  anthro-
pology, facts  of  consciousness,  inward  sense,  or  outward  ex-
perience. It  may  happen,  however,  that  empirical  is  an  epithet,
only  applicable  to  the  form  of  scientific  exposition ;  whilst  a
sagacious  intuition  has  arranged  what  are  mere  phenomena,
according  to  the  essential  sequence  of  the  notion.  The  oppo-
sitions between  the  varied  and  numerous  phenomena,  which
are  grouped  together,  serve  to  eliminate  the  external  and  acci-
dental circumstances  of  their  conditions,  and  the  universal  thus
comes  clearly  into  view.  In  this  way  a  judicious  experimental
physics  will  present  the  rational  science  of  Nature ;  and  a
judicious  history  will  present  the  science  of  human  affairs  and
actions  in  an  external  picture,  which  is  a  reflection  of  the  real
notion.

17.]  It  may  seem  as  if  philosophy,  in  order  to  start  on  its
course,  had,  like  the  rest  of  the  sciences,  to  begin  with  a
subjective  presupposition.  The  sciences  postulate  their  respec-
tive objects,  such  as  space,  number,  or  whatever  it  be;  and
it  might  be  supposed  that  philosophy  had  also  to  postulate
the  existence  of  thought.  But  the  two  cases  are  not  exactly
parallel.  It  is  by  the  free  act  of  thought  that  it  occupies  a
point  of  view,  in  which  it  is  all  its  own,  and  gives  itself  an
object  of  its  own  production.  Nor  is  this  all.  The  very  point
of  view,  which  originally  is  taken  on  its  own  evidence  only,
must  in  the  course  of  the  science  be  converted  to  a  result,
the  ultimate  result  in  which  philosophy  returns  into  itself,  and
achieves  the  point  with  which  it  began.  In  this  manner
philosophy  exhibits  the  appearance  of  a  circle  which  closes
with  itself,  and  has  no  beginning,  in  the  same  way  as  the


1 8.]  IN  TROD  UCTION.  2  3

other  sciences  have.  To  speak  of  a  beginning  of  philosophy
only  means  that  we  consider  it  in  relation  to  a  person  who
proposes  to  commence  the  study,  and  not  in  relation  to  the
science  as  science.  The  same  thing  may  be  thus  expressed.
The  initial  notion  in  which  philosophy  grasps  its  object,  for
the  very  reason  that  it  is  initial  implies  a  separation  between
the  thought  which  is  our  object,  and  the  subject  philosophising,
which  is,  as  it  were,  external  to  the  former.  This  separation
must  be  overcome,  and  the  science  itself  must  grasp  its  first
notion  and  make  it  its  own.  In  short,  the  one  aim,  end,  and
action  of  philosophy  is  to  arrive  at  the  notion  of  its  notion,
and  thus  secure  its  return  and  its  satisfaction.

18.]  As  the  whole  science,  and  only  the  whole,  can  exhibit
what  the  Idea  or  system  of  reason  is,  it  is  impossible  to  give
in  a  preliminary  way  a  general  conception  of  a  philosophy.
Nor  can  a  division  of  philosophy  into  its  parts  be  intelligible,
except  in  connexion  with  the  system.  A  preliminary  division,
like  the  limited  conception  from  which  it  comes,  is  a  pure
anticipation.  Here  however  it  is  premised,  that  the  Idea  turns
out  to  be  the  thought  which  is  completely  identical  with  itself,
and  not  identical  simply  in  the  abstract,  but  also  in  its  action
of  setting  itself  to  confront  itself,  and  so  gain  a  real  being
of  its  own,  and  yet  of  being  in  full  possession  of  itself  while
it  is  in  this  confronting  being.  Thus  philosophy  is  subdivided
into  three  parts :

I.  Logic,  the  science  of  the  absolute  Idea.

II.  The  Philosophy  of  Nature :  the  science  of  the  Idea  in  the
counterfeit  or  reflection  of  itself.

III.  The Philosophy of Mind : the science of the Idea
when it comes back  to  itself  out of  that  confronting  other
form.

As  observed  in  Sect.  15,  the  differences  between  the  several
philosophical  sciences  are  only  aspects  or  expressions  of  the  one
Idea  or  system  of  reason,  which  is  alike  exhibited  in  these
different  elements.  In  Nature  nothing  else  is  to  be  discerned,
except  the  Idea  :  but  the  Idea  has  here  divested  itself  of  its  proper


24  INTRODUCTION.

being.  In  Mind,  again,  the  Idea  has  asserted  a  being  of  its  own,
and  is  on  the  way  to  become  absolute.  Every  such  form  in
which  the  Idea  is  expressed,  is  at  the  same  time  a  passing  or
fleeting  stage :  and  hence  each  of  these  subdivisions  has  not  only
to  know  its  contents  as  an  object  which  has  being  for  the  time,
but  also  in  the  same  act  to  expound  how  these  contents  pass
into  their  higher  circle.  To  represent  the  relation  between  them
as  a  division  leads  to  misconception;  for  it  co-ordinates  the
several  parts  or  sciences  one  beside  another,  as  if  they  had
no  innate  movement,  but  were,  like  natural  kinds,  really  and
permanently  distinct.


CHAPTEK  II.

PRELIMINARY NOTION.
19.] LOGIC IS  THE SCIENCE OF  THE PURE  IDEA  ; pure,  that  is,

because  the  Idea  is  in  the  abstract  medium  of  Thought.

This  definition,  and  the  others  which  occur  in  these  intro-
ductory outlines,  are  derived  from  a  survey  of  the  whole  system,
to  which  accordingly  they  are  subsequent.  The  same  remark
applies  to  the  prefatory  notions  in  general  explanation  of
philosophy.

Logic  might  have  been  defined  as  the  science  of  thought,  and
of  its  laws  and  characteristic  forms.  But  thought,  as  thought,
constitutes  only  the  general  medium,  or  qualifying  circum-
stance, which  renders  the  Idea  distinctively  logical.  If  we
identify  the  Idea  with  thought,  thought  must  not  be  taken
in  the  sense  of  a  method  or  form,  but  in  the  sense  of  the
self-developing  system  of  its  laws  and  constituent  elements.
These  laws  are  the  work  of  thought  itself,  and  not  a  fact  which
it  finds  and  must  submit  to.

From  different  points  of  view,  Logic  is  either  the  hardest
or  the  easiest  of  the  sciences.  Logic  is  hard,  because  it  has  to
deal  not  with  perceptions,  nor,  like  geometry,  with  abstract
representations  of  the  senses,  but  with  pure  abstractions;  and
because  it  requires  a  habit  and  faculty  of  abstraction,  a  firm
apprehension  of  thought  per  se,  and  a  facility  of  movement
among  these  intangible  realities.  Logic  is  easy,  because  its
facts  are  nothing  but  our  own  thought  and  its  familiar  terms :
and  these  are  the  acme  of  simplicity,  the  a  b  c  of  everything


26  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  [19.

else.  They  are  also  what  we  are  best  acquainted  with :  such
as,  '  Is  '  and  '  Is  not ' :  quality  and  magnitude  :  being  potential
and  being  actual :  one,  many,  and  so  on.  But  such  an  ac-
quaintance only  adds  to  the  difficulties  of  the  study ;  for  while,
on  the  one  hand,  we  naturally  think  it  is  not  worth  our  trouble
to  occupy  ourselves  any  longer  with  things  so  well  known,
on  the  other  hand,  the  purpose  is  to  become  acquainted  with
them  in  a  new  way,  quite  opposite  to  that  in  which  we  know
them  already.

The  utility  of  Logic  is  a  matter  which  concerns  its  bearings
upon  the  student,  and  the  training  it  may  give  for  other
purposes.  This  logical  training  consists  of  the  exercise  in
thinking  which  the  student  has  to  undergo  (this  science  is  the
thinking  of  thinking) :  and  in  the  fact  that  he  stores  his  head
with  thoughts,  in  their  native  unalloyed  character.  It  is  true
that  Logic,  being  the  absolute  form  of  truth,  and  another  name
for  abstract  truth  itself,  is  something  more  than  merely  useful.
Yet  if  what  is  noblest,  most  liberal  and  most  independent  is
also  most  useful,  Logic  has  some  claim  to  the  latter  character.
Its  value  must  then  be  estimated  by  some  other  standard
than  exercise  in  thought  for  the  sake  of  the  exercise.

(1 )  The  first  question  is :  What  is  the  object  of  our  science  ?
The  simplest  and  most  intelligible  answer  to  this  question  is  that
Truth  is  the  object  of  Logic.  Truth  is  a  great  word,  and  the
thing  is  greater  still.  So  long  as  man  is  sound  at  heart  and  in
spirit,  the  search  for  truth  must  awake  all  the  enthusiasm  of  his
nature.  But  immediately  there  steps  in  the  objection — Are  we
able  to  know  truth  ?  There  seems  to  be  an  incommensurability
between  finite  beings  like  ourselves  and  the  truth  which  is
absolute:  and  doubts  suggest  themselves  whether  there  is  any
bridge  between  the  finite  and  the  infinite.  God  is  truth :  how
shall  we  know  Him  ?  Such  a  claim  appears  to  stand  in  contra-
diction with  the  graces  of  lowliness  and  humility.  Others  who
ask  whether  we  can  know  the  truth  have  a  different  purpose.
They  want  to  justify  themselves  in  living  on  contented  with
their  petty,  finite  aims.  And  humility  of  this  stamp  does  not
count  for  much.

The  time  is  past,  when  people  asked  :  How  shall  I,  a  poor
worm  of  the  dust,  be  able  to  know  the  truth?  And  we  have
now  to  contend  with  the  vanity  and  arrogance  of  those,  who


1 9.]  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  27

claim,  without  any  trouble  on  their  part,  to  breathe  the  very
atmosphere  of  truth.  The  young-  have  been  flattered  into  the
belief,  that  they  possess  a  natural  birthright  of  moral  and  religious
truth.  And  in  the  same  strain,  our  riper  years  are  declared  to
be  sunk,  petrified,  ossified  in  falsehood.  Youth,  say  these
teachers,  sees  the  bright  light  of  dawn  :  but  the  older  generation
lies  in  the  slough  and  mire  of  the  common  day.  They  admit  that
the  special  sciences  are  something  that  certainly  ought  to  be
cultivated,  but  merely  as  the  means  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  outer
life.  In  all  this  there  is  none  of  the  humility  which  shrinks  in
awe  from  the  knowledge  and  study  of  the  truth,  but  a  conviction
that  we  are  already  in  full  possession  of  the  truth.  It  is  an
unquestionable  fact  that  the  young  carry  with  them  the  hopes  of
their  elder  compeers  ;  on  them  rests  the  advance  of  the  world  and
science.  But  these  hopes  are  set  upon  the  young,  only  on  the
condition,  that  instead  of  remaining  as  they  are,  they  under-
take the  hard  work  of  thought.

This  modesty  in  truth -seeking  has  still  another  phase:  and
that  is  the  genteel  indifference  to  truth,  as  we  see  it  in  Pilate's
conversation  with  Christ.  Pilate  asked  '  What  is  truth  ?  '  with
the  air  of  a  man  who  had  settled  accounts  with  everything  long
ago,  and  concluded  that  nothing  particularly  matters : — he
meant  much  the  same  as  Solomon  when  he  says  :  '  All  is  vanity.'
When  it  comes  to  this,  nothing  is  left  but  self-conceit.

The  knowledge  of  the  truth  meets  an  additional  obstacle  in
timidity.  A  slothful  mind  finds  it  easy  to  say  :  '  Don't  let  it  be
supposed  that  we  mean  to  be  in  earnest  with  our  philosophy.
We  shall  be  glad  inter  alia,  to  study  Logic :  but  Logic  must  be
sui'e  to  leave  us  as  we  were  before/  People  have  a  feeling  that,
if  thinking  exceeds  the  ordinary  limits  in  which  our  material
conceptions  are  confined,  it  cannot  but  be  on  the  evil  road.
They  seem  to  be  trusting  themselves  to  a  sea,  on  which  they  will
be  tossed  to  and  fro  by  the  waves  of  thought,  till  they  again
reach  the  sand-bank  of  this  temporal  scene,  as  empty  as  they  left
it.  What  comes  of  such  a  view,  we  see  in  the  world.  It  is
possible  within  these  limits  to  gain  varied  information  and  many
accomplishments,  to  become  a  master  of  official  routine,  and  to  be
trained  for  special  purposes.  But,  it  is  quite  another  thing  to
educate  the  spirit  for  the  higher  life  and  to  devote  our  energies
to  its  service.  In  our  own  day  it  may  be  hoped  a  longing  for
something  better  has  sprung  up  among  the  young,  so  that  they
will  not  be  contented  with  the  empty  straw  of  outer  knowledge.

(2)  It  is  universally  agreed  that  thought  is  the  object  of  Logic.
Our  opinion  of  thought  may  be  very  mean,  or  it  may  be  very
high.  On  one  hand,  people  say :  '  It  is  only  a  thought.'  In
their  view  thought  is  subjective,  arbitrary  and  accidental — dis-


28  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  [19.

tinguished  from  the  thing-  itself,  and  neither  true  nor  real.  On
the  other  hand,  a  very  high  estimate  may  be  taken  of  thought ;
when  thought  alone  is  held  adequate  to  attain  the  highest  of  all
things,  the  nature  of  God,  of  which  the  senses  can  tell  us  nothing.
God  is  a  spirit,  it  is  said,  and  must  be  worshipped  in  spirit
and  in  truth.  But  the  objects  of  sense  and  feeling  are  different
from  the  object  of  spirit — of  which  the  innermost  nature  is
thought :  and  only  spirit  can  know  spirit.  Feeling  is  undoubt-
edly a  mode  of  spiritual  life  (of  which  we  have  an  instance  in
religion)  :  but  mere  feeling,  as  a  mode  of  consciousness,  is  one
thing,  and  its  contents  another.  Feeling,  as  feeling,  is  the
general  form  of  the  sensuous  nature,  which  we  have  in  common
with  the  brutes.  This  form,  viz.  feeling,  may  possibly  adopt
and  appropriate  all  the  elements  of  religious  truth  :  but  the  form
has  no  real  congruity  with  its  contents.  The  form  of  feeling  is
the  lowest  in  which  spiritual  truth  can  be  expressed.  The
'  central  idea  of  spiritual  consciousness,  that  is,  God,  himself,  exists
/  in  his  proper  truth,  only  in  thought  and  as  thought.  If  this
i  be  so,  therefore,  thought,  far  from  being  a  mere  thought,  is  the
highest,  and  in  strict  accuracy,  the  sole  mode  of  apprehending
the  eternal  and  absolute  being.

As  of  thought,  so  also  of  the  science  of  thought,  a  very  high
or  a  very  low  opinion  may  be  formed.  Any  man,  it  is  supposed,
can  think  without  Logic,  as  he  can  digest  without  studying
physiology.  If  he  have  studied  Logic,  he  thinks  after-
wards as  he  did  before,  perhaps  more  methodically,  but  with
little  difference.  If  this  were  all,  and  if  Logic  had  no  more  to
do  than  make  men  acquainted  with  the  action  of  thought  as  the
faculty  of  comparison  and  classification,  nothing  would  ensue
which  had  not  been  done  quite  as  well  before.  The  position  of
previous  Logic  was  substantially  the  same  as  this.  Yet  the
knowledge  of  thought,  even  as  a  mere  activity  of  the  subject-
mind,  is  honourable  and  interesting  for  man.  It  is  in  knowing
what  he  is  and  what  he  does,  that  man  is  distinguished  from  the
brutes.  But  we  may  take  the  higher  estimate  of  thought.  In
that  case,  Logic  as  the  science  of  thought  occupies  a  high  ground.
Thought  alone  is  capable  of  learning  to  know  the  highest  of  all
things — Truth.  If  the  science  of  Logic  then  considers  thought
in  its  activity  and  with  reference  to  its  productions  (and  thought
being  no  resultless  energy  produces  thoughts  and  the  particular
thought  required),  its  facts  may  be  generally  said  to  constitute
the  supersensible  world,  and  to  deal  with  these  facts  is  to  dwell
for  a  while  in  that  world.  Mathematics  is  concerned  with  the
abstractions  of  time  and  space.  But  these  are  the  object  of
sense,  although  the  sensible  is  abstract  and  idealized.  Thought
bids  adieu  even  to  this  last  abstraction  from  the  senses :  and


20.]  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  29

asserts  its  own  native  independence,  while  it  renounces  the  field
of  the  external  and  internal  sense,  and  turns  its  back  upon  the
interests  and  inclinations  of  the  individual.  When  Logic  takes
this  ground,  it  is  a  higher  science  than  we  are  in  the  habit  of
supposing.

(3)  The  necessity  of  understanding  Logic  in  a  wider  sense
than  as  the  science  of  the  form  of  thought  is  enforced  by  the
interests  of  religion  and  politics,  of  law  and  morality.  At
first  men  had  no  suspicions  of  thought ;  and  they  thought  away
freely  and  fearlessly.  They  thought  about  God,  about  Nature,
and  the  State ;  and  they  felt  sure  that  a  knowledge  of  the  truth
was  obtainable  by  thought  only,  and  not  by  the  senses  or
any  occasional  conception  and  opinion.  But  while  they  so
thought,  the  principal  ordinances  of  life  began  to  be  seriously
affected  by  their  conclusions.  Thought  deprived  existing  in-
stitutions of  their  force.  Constitutions  fell  a  victim  to  thought :
religion  was  assailed  by  thought :  firm  religious  beliefs  which
had  been  always  looked  upon  in  the  light  of  revelations  were
undermined,  and  in  many  minds  the  old  faith  was  overthrown.
The  Greek  philosophers,  for  example,  became  the  antagonists  of
the  old  religion,  and  annihilated  the  forms  of  popular  belief.
Philosophers  were  accordingly  banished  or  put  to  death,  as
revolutionists  who  had  subverted  religion  and  the  state,  two
things  which  were  inseparable.  Thought,  in  short,  made  itself  a
power  in  the  real  world,  and  exercised  enormous  influence.  The
matter  ended  by  drawing  attention  to  the  influence  of  thought
and  by  a  more  rigorous  scrutiny  of  its  claims,  in  which  the  world
would  have  been  glad  to  find  that  thought  arrogated  too  much  to
itself  and  was  unable  to  perform  what  it  had  undertaken.  It
had  not  learned  what  was  the  essence  of  God,  of  Nature  and
Mind.  It  had  not  learned  what  the  truth  was.  What  it  had
done,  was  to  overthrow  religion  and  the  state.  It  became  im-
perative therefore  to  justify  thought,  with  reference  to  the  results
it  had  produced  :  and  it  is  this  examination  into  the  nature  of
thought  and  this  justification  which  in  modern  times  has  consti-
tuted one  of  the  main  problems  of  philosophy.

20.]  When  we  examine  the  simplest  popular  conception  of
what  is  meant  by  Thought,  we  find  several  points  worthy  of
remark.  First  (a)  in  its  common  subjective  acceptation,  thought
is  one  out  of  many  activities  or  faculties  of  the  mind,  co-ordinate
with  such  others  as  sensation,  perception,  imagination,  desire,
volition,  and  the  like.  The  product  of  this  activity,  the  form
or  character  peculiar  to  thought,  is  a  UNIVERSAL,  of  which  the


30  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  [20.

nature  is  to  be  abstract.  Thought,  regarded  as  an  activity  of
the  mind,  may  be  accordingly  described  as  the  active  universal ;
and  since  the  result  produced  by  it  is  a  repetition  of  the
universal,  thought  may  be  called  a  self-actualising  universal.
Thought  conceived  as  a  subject  is  a  thinker,  and  the  subject
existing  as  a  thinker  is  simply  denoted  by  the  term  '  I.'

The  propositions  giving  an  account  of  thought  in  this  and
the  following  sections  are  not  offered  as  assertions  or  opinions
of  mine  on  the  matter.  But  in  these  preliminary  chapters
any  deduction  or  proof  would  be  impossible,  and  the  statements
may  be  taken  for  facts.  In  other  words,  every  man,  when  he
thinks  and  considers  his  thoughts,  will  discover  by  the  expe-
rience of  his  consciousness  that  they  involve  the  character  of
universality  as  well  as  the  other  forms  or  characters  of  thought
to  be  afterwards  enumerated.  We  assume  that  his  powers  of
attention  and  abstraction  have  undergone  a  previous  training,
enabling  him  to  observe  correctly  the  facts  of  his  consciousness
and  his  conceptions.

This  introductory  exposition  has  already  alluded  to  the  distinc-
tion between  Sense,  Conception,  and  Thought.  As  the  distinc-
tion is  of  capital  importance  for  understanding  the  nature  and
the  different  kinds  of  knowledge,  it  will  help  to  explain  matters
if  we  here  call  attention  to  it.  For  the  explanation  of  Sense,
the  easiest  method  certainly  is,  to  refer  to  its  external  source —
the  organs  of  sense.  But  to  give  the  name  of  the  organ,  does
not  help  much  to  explain  what  is  apprehended  by  it.  The  real
distinction  between  sense  and  thought  may  be  formulated  as
follows.  The  former  is  individual,  and  as  the  individual  (which,
reduced  to  its  simplest  terms,  is  the  atom)  is  also  a  member  .
of  a  series,  sensible  existence  presents  a  number  of  mutually
exclusive  units, — a  state  of  things  which  conforms  to  the  more
special  abstract  conditions  of  co-existence  and  succession.  Con-
ception or  picture-thinking  works  with  materials  from  the
same  sensuous  source.  But  these  materials  when  conceived
are  expressly  characterised  as  in  me  and  therefore  mine  :  and
secondly,  as  universal,  or  simple,  because  only  referred  to  self.


20.]  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  31

Nor  is  sense  the  only  source  of  materialised  conception.  There
are  conceptions  based  upon  materials  emanating  from  self-con-
scious thought,  such  as  those  of  right,  morality,  religion,  and
even  of  thought  itself,  and  one  does  not  immediately  observe
where  the  difference  exists  between  such  conceptions,  and
thoughts  having  the  same  scope.  For  it  is  a  thought  of  which
such  conception  is  the  vehicle,  and  there  is  no  want  of  the  form
of  universality,  without  which  no  content  could  be  in  me,  or
be  a  conception  at  all.  Yet  here  also  the  peculiarity  of  con-
ception is  the  individualism  or  isolation  of  its  contents.  True  it
is  that  morality  and  moral  ideas  do  not  exist  in  the  sensible
world  of  space,  mutually  excluding  one  another.  Nor  as  re-
gards time,  though  they  appear  to  some  extent  in  succession,
are  their  contents  themselves  conceived  as  affected  by  time,
or  as  transient  and  changeable  in  it.  The  fault  in  concep-
tion lies  deeper.  These  ideas,  though  they  are  properly  due  to
the  mind,  stand  isolated  here  and  there  on  the  broad  field  of
the  faculty  of  conception,  which  gives  them  only  an  inward
and  imperfect  generality.  Being  thus  reduced  to  separate
entities,  they  are  what  we  call  simple  :  Justice,  Duty,  God.
Conception  in  these  circumstances  either  rests  satisfied  with
declaring  that  Justice  is  justice,  God  is  God :  or  in  a  higher
grade  of  culture,  it  proceeds  to  enunciate  the  attributes ;  as,  for
instance,  God  is  the  Creator  of  the  world,  omniscient,  almighty,
&c.  In  this  way  several  isolated,  simple  predicates  are  strung
together :  but  in  spite  of  the  link  supplied  by  their  subject,
the  predicates  never  get  beyond  mere  contiguity.  In  this
point  Conception  coincides  with  Understanding :  the  only  dis-
tinction being  that  the  latter  introduces  relations  of  universal
and  particular,  of  cause  and  effect,  &c.,  and  in  this  way  gives
a  necessary  connexion  to  the  isolated  ideas  of  pictorial  con-
ception ;  which  last  has  left  them  side  by  side  in  the  vague
background  of  imagination,  connected  only  by  a  bare  'and.'
The  difference  between  conception  and  thought  is  of  special
importance :  because  philosophy  may  be  said  to  do  nothing
but  transform  conceptions  into  thoughts, — though  it  works  the


32  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  [20.

further  transformation  of  mere  thought  into  the  comprehensive
notion.

Sensible  existence  has  been  characterised  by  the  attributes  of
individuality,  and  a  mutual  exclusion  of  the  members.  It  is
well  to  remember  that  these  very  attributes  are  thoughts  and
general  terms.  It  will  be  shown  in  the  Logic  that  thought
(and  the  universal)  is  not  a  mere  opposite  of  sense :  it  com-
prehends its  opposite,  and,  overlapping  even  that,  lets  nothing
escape  it.  Now  language  is  the  work  of  thought :  and  hence
all  that  is  expressed  in  language  must  be  universal.  What
I  only  mean  or  suppose  is  mine :  it  belongs  to  me  as  a  particular
individual.  But  language  expresses  nothing  but  universality;
and  so  I  cannot  say  what  I  merely  mean  or  feel.  And  what
cannot  be  uttered,  feeling  or  sensation,  far  from  being  the
highest  truth,  is  the  most  unimportant  and  untrue.  If  I  say
'The  Unit,'  'This  Unit,'  'here/  'now,'  all  these  are  universal
terms.  Everything  and  anything  is  an  individual,  a  '  this/  or  if
it  be  sensible,  is  here  and  now.  Similarly  when  I  say,  '  I/  I  mean
my  single  self  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others :  but  what  I  say>
viz.  '  I/  is  just  every  '  I/  which  in  like  manner  excludes  all
others  from  itself.  In  an  awkward  expression  which  Kant
used,  he  said  that  the  I  is  associated  with  our  sensations,  desires,
and  actions,  as  well  as  our  conceptions.  '  I '  is  the  absolute
universal :  and  community  or  association  is  one  of  the  forms,
though  an  external  form  of  universality.  All  other  men  have
it  in  common  with  me  to  be  '  I :'  just  as  it  is  common  to  all
my  sensations  and  conceptions  to  be  mine.  But  'I/  in  the
abstract,  as  such,  is  the  mere  act  of  concentration  or  reference
to  self,  in  which  we  make  abstraction  from  all  conception,  and
feeling,  from  every  state  of  mind  and  every  peculiarity  of  nature,
talent,  and  experience.  To  this  extent,  '  I'  means  the  existence
of  a  wholly  abstract  universality,  a  principle  of  abstract  freedom.
Thought,  viewed  as  a  subject,  is  expressed  by  the  word  '  I :'
and  since  I  am  at  the  same  time  in  all  my  sensations,  concep-
tions, and  states  of  consciousness,  thought  is  everywhere  present,
and  is  a  category  that  runs  through  all  these  modifications.


20.]  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  33

Our  first  conception  when  we  use  the  term  thought  is  of  a
subjective  activity — one  amongst  many  similar  faculties,  such  as
memory,  imagination  and  will.  Were  thought  merely  an  activity
of  the  subject-mind  and  treated  under  that  aspect  by  logic,  logic
would  resemble  the  other  sciences  in  possessing  a  well-marked
object.  The  only  wonder  in  that  case  would  be,  that  any  one
should  have  imagined  it  necessary  to  devote  a  special  science  to
thought,  whilst  will,  imagination  and  the  rest  were  denied  the
same  privilege.  The  selection  of  one  faculty  however  might  even
in  this  view  be  very  well  grounded  on  a  certain  authority  ac-
knowledged to  belong  to  tliought,  and  on  its  claim  to  be  regarded
as  the  true  nature  of  man,  in  which  consists  his  distinction  from
the  brutes.  Nor  is  it  unimportant  to  study  thought  even  as  a
subjective  energy.  A  detailed  analysis  of  its  nature  would
exhibit  rules  and  laws,  a  knowledge  of  which  is  derived  from
experience.  A  treatment  of  the  laws  of  thought,  from  this  point
of  view,  used  once  to  form  the  body  of  logical  science.  Of  that
science  Aristotle  was  the  founder.  He  succeeded  in  assigning  to
thought  what  properly  belongs  to  it.  Our  thought  is  extremely
concrete  :  but  in  its  composite  contents  we  must  distinguish  the
part  that  belongs  to  thought,  or  the  abstract  mode  of  its  action.
A  subtle  spiritual  bond,  consisting  in  the  agency  of  thought,
knits  all  these  contents  into  one,  and  it  was  this  bond,  the  form
as  form,  that  Aristotle  noted  and  described.  Up  to  the  present
day,  the  logic  of  Aristotle  continues  to  be  the  received  system.
It  has  indeed  been  spun  out  to  greater  length,  especially  by
the  labours  of  the  medieval  Schoolmen,  who,  without  extending
the  material,  merely  worked  it  out  in  more  detail.  The  moderns
also  have  left  their  mark  upon  this  logic,  partly  by  omitting
many  points  of  logical  doctrine  due  to  Aristotle  and  the  School-
men, and  partly  by  foisting  in  a  quantity  of  psychological  matter.
The  purport  of  the  science  is  to  become  acquainted  with  the  pro-  \,
cedure  of  finite  thought  (or  of  thought  dealing  with  existing  '
objects) :  and,  if  it  is  adapted  to  its  pre-supposed  object,  the
science  is  entitled  to  be  styled  correct.  The  study  of  this  formal
logic  undoubtedly  has  its  uses.  It  clears  the  head,  as  the  phrase
goes,  and  teaches  us  to  collect  our  thoughts,  and  to  abstract —
whereas  in  common  consciousness  we  have  to  deal  with  sensuous
conceptions  which  cross  and  perplex  one  another.  Abstraction
moreover  implies  the  concentration  of  the  mind  on  a  single  point,
and  thus  induces  the  habit  of  attending  to  our  inward  selves.
An  acquaintance  with  the  forms  of  finite  thought  may  be  made  a
sort  of  introduction  to  the  prosecution  of  the  empirical  sciences,
since  their  method  is  regulated  by  these  forms :  and  in  this  sense
logic  has  been  designated  Instrumental.  It  is  true,  we  may  be
still  more  liberal,  and  say :  Logic  is  to  be  studied  not  for  its


34  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  [21.

utility,  but  for  its  own  sake :  the  highest  good  is  not  to  be
sought  for  the  sake  of  mere  utility.  In  one  sense  this  is  quite
correct:  but  it  may  be  replied  that  the  highest  good  is  also
the  most  useful :  because  it  is  the  all-encompassing  fact,  which,
having  a  subsistence  of  its  own,  may  therefore  serve  as  the  vehicle
of  all  the  special  ends  which  it  furthers  and  secures.  And  thus,
special  ends,  though  they  have  no  right  to  be  set  first,  are  still
fostered  by  the  presence  of  the  highest  good.  Religion,  for
instance,  has  an  absolute  value  of  its  own  ;  yet  at  the  same  time
other  ends  flourish  and  succeed  in  its  train.  As  Christ  says :
'  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  all  these  things  shall
be  added  unto  you.'  Particular  ends  can  be  attained  only
in  the  attainment  of  what  absolutely  is  and  exists  in  its  own
right.

21.]  (#)  Thought  has  been  shown  to  be  active.  We  now,
in  the  second  place,  consider  this  action  in  its  bearings  upon
objects,  or  as  Reflection  upon  something.  In  this  case  the
universal  or  product  of  its  operation  is  rated  as  equivalent  to
the  fact,  the  essence,  the  intrinsic  value,  the  truth.

In  Sect.  5  the  old  belief  was  quoted  that  the  reality  in
object,  circumstance,  or  event,  the  intrinsic  worth  or  essence,
is  the  fact  on  which  stress  is  to  be  laid — that  this  fact  is
not  a  self-evident  datum  of  consciousness,  or  coincident  with
the  first  appearance  and  impression ;  that,  on  the  contrary,
Reflection  is  required  in  order  to  discover  the  real  con-
stitution of  the  object — and  that  by  such  Reflection  it  will  be
ascertained.

To  reflect  is  a  lesson  which  even  the  child  has  to  learn.  One
of  his  first  lessons  is  to  join  adjectives  with  substantives.  This
obliges  him  to  attend  and  distinguish :  he  has  to  remember  a
rule  and  apply  it  to  the  particular  case.  This  rule  is  nothing
but  a  universal :  and  the  child  must  see  that  the  particular
adapts  itself  to  this  universal.  In  life,  again,  we  have  ends  to
attain.  And  with  regard  to  these  we  ponder  which  is  the  best
way  to  secure  them.  The  end  here  represents  the  universal  or
governing  principle :  and  we  have  means  and  instruments  whose
action  we  regulate  in  conformity  to  the  end.  In  the  same  way
reflection  is  active  in  questions  of  conduct.  To  reflect  here
means  to  remember  the  law  of  righteousness,  and  duty, — the
universal  which  serves  as  a  fixed  rule  to  guide  our  behaviour  in


2i.]  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  35

the  given  case.  Our  particular  act  must  imply  and  recognise
the  universal  law.  We  find  the  same  thing-  exhibited  in  our
study  of  natural  phenomena.  For  instance,  we  observe  thunder
and  lightning-.  The  phenomenon  is  a  familiar  one,  and  we  often
perceive  it.  But  man  is  not  content  with  a  bare  acquaintance,
or  with  the  fact  as  it  appears  to  the  senses ;  he  would  like  to
get  behind  the  surface,  to  know  what  it  is,  and  to  comprehend
it.  This  leads  him  to  reflect :  he  seeks  to  find  out  the  cause  as
something  distinct  from  the  mere  phenomenon :  he  tries  to
know  the  inside  in  its  distinction  from  the  outside.  Hence  the
phenomenon  becomes  double,  it  splits  into  inside  and  outside,
mtcTTorce  and  its  manifestation,  into  cause  and  effect.  Once
more  we  find  the  inside  or  the  force  identified  with  the  universal
and  permanent :  not  this  or  that  flash  of  lightning,  this  or  that
plant — but  that  which  continues  the  same  in  them  all.  The
sensible  appearance  is  individual  and  evanescent :  the  permanent
fact  contained  in  it  is  discovered  by  a  process  of  reflection.
Nature  shows  us  a  countless  number  of  individual  forms  and
phenomena.  Into  this  variety  we  feel  ourselves  forced  to  intro-
duce unity :  we  compare,  consequently,  and  try  to  find  the
universal  of  each  single  case.  Individuals  are  born  and  perish  :
the  species  abides  and  recurs  in  them  all :  and  its  existence  is
only  visible  to  reflection.  Under  the  same  head  fall  such  laws
as  those  regulating  the  motion  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  To-day
we  see  the  stars  here,  and  to-morrow  there :  and  our  mind  finds
something  incongruous  in  this  chaos — something  in  which  it
can  put  no  faith,  because  it  believes  in  order,  and  in  a  simple,
constant,  and  universal  law.  Inspired  by  this  belief,  our  mind
has  directed  its  reflection  towards  the  phenomena,  and  learnt
their  laws.  In  other  words,  it  has  established  the  movement  of
the  heavenly  bodies  to  be  in  accordance  with  a  universal  law,  from
which  every  change  of  position  may  be  known  and  predicted.
The  case  is  the  same  with  the  influences  which  make  themselves
felt  in  the  infinite  complexity  of  human  conduct.  There,  too,
man  has  the  belief  in  the  sway  of  a  general  principle.  From
all  these  examples  it  may  be  gathered  how  reflection  is  always
seeking  for  something  fixed  and  permanent,  which  has  a  certainty
of  its  own,  and  governs  the  particulars.  This  universal  principle
cannot  be  apprehended  by  the  senses ;  yet  it  alone  can  be
esteemed  true  and  essential.  Thus,  duties  and  rights  are  all-
important  in  the  matter  of  conduct :  and  an  action  is  true  when
it  conforms  to  those  universal  formulae.

In  thus  characterising  the  universal,  we  become  aware  of  its
antithesis  to  something  else.  This  something  else  is  the  merely
immediate,  outward  and  individual,  as  opposed  to  the  mediate,
inward  and  universal.  The  universal  does  not  exist  externally

D  a


36  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  [22.

to  the  outward  eye  as  a  universal.  The  kind  as  kind  cannot  be
perceived :  the  laws  of  the  celestial  motions  are  not  written  on
the  sky.  The  universal  is  neither  seen  nor  heard,  its  existence
is  the  secret  known  only  to  the  mind.  Religion  leads  us  to  a
universal,  which  embraces  all  else  within  itself,  to  an  Absolute
by  which  all  else  is  brought  into  being:  and  this  Absolute  is
an  object  not  of  the  senses  but  of  the  mind  and  of  thought.

22.]  (c)  By  the  act  of  reflection  and  meditation,  a  change
comes  over  the  import  of  our  sensation,  perception  and  material
conceptions.  The  object  of  consciousness  undergoes  a  trans-
formation. Thus,  as  it  appears,  an  alteration  of  the  object
must  be  interposed  before  its  true  nature  can  be  discovered.

What  reflection  elicits,  is  a  product  of  our  thought.  Solon,
for  instance,  drew  from  his  own  judgment,  the  laws  he  gave  to
the  Athenians.  This  is  half  of  the  truth :  but  we  must  not  on
that  account  forget  that  the  universal  (in  Solon's  case  the  laws)
is  the  very  reverse  of  merely  subjective,  or  fail  to  note  that  it
is  the  essential,  true,  and  objective  being  of  things.  To  discover
the  truth  in  things,  mere  attention  is  not  enough ;  we  must  call
in  the  action  of  our  own  faculties  to  transform  what  is  immediately
before  us.  Now,  at  first  sight,  this  seems  an  inversion  of  the
natural  order,  calculated  to  thwart  the  very  purpose  on  which
knowledge  is  bent.  But  the  method  is  not  so  irrational  as  it
seems.  Every  period  of  history  has  felt,  that  the  only  way  of
reaching  the  permanent  substratum,  was  to  transmute  the  given
phenomenon  by  means  of  reflection.  In  modern  times  a  doubt
has  for  the  first  time  been  raised  on  this  point  in  connexion  with
the  difference  alleged  to  exist  between  the  results  of  our  thought
and  the  things  in  their  own  nature.  This  real  nature  of  things,
it  is  said,  is  very  different  from  what  we  make  out  of  them.
The  divorce  between  thought  and  thing  is  mainly  the  work  of
the  Critical  Philosophy  and  runs  counter  to  the  conviction  of
all  previous  ages,  that  their  agreement  was  a  matter  of  course.
The  antithesis  between  them  is  the  hinge  on  which  modern
philosophy  turns.  Meanwhile  the  natural  belief  of  men  gives
the  lie  to  it.  In  common  life  we  reflect,  without  particularly
noting  that  this  is  the  process  of  arriving  at  the  truth,  and  we
think  without  hesitation,  and  in  the  firm  belief  that  thought
coincides  with  thing.  And  this  belief  is  of  the  greatest  import-
ance. It  marks  the  diseased  state  of  the  age  when  we  see  it
adopt  the  despairing  creed  that  our  knowledge  is  only  subjective,
and  that  this  subjective  result  is  final.  Whereas,  rightly  under-
stood, truth  is  objective,  and  ought  so  to  regulate  the  conviction


2 3.]  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  37

of  every  one,  that  the  conviction  of  the  individual  is  stamped  as
wrong1,  when  it  does  not  agree  with  this  rule.  Modern  views
indeed  put  great  value  on  the  mere  fact  of  conviction ;  and
hold  that  to  be  convinced  is  good  for  its  own  sake,  whatever  it
may  be  applied  to,  there  being  no  standard  by  which  we  can
measure  its  truth.

We  said  above  that,  according  to  the  old  belief,  it  was  the
characteristic  function  of  the  mind  to  know  the  truth.  We
may  go  a  step  further  and  say,  that  everything  we  know  both  of
outward  and  inward  nature,  in  one  word,  the  objective  world,  is
in  its  own  self  the  same  as  it  is  in  thought,  and  that  thought
consequently  expresses  the  truth  of  the  objects  of  perception.
The  whole  problem  of  philosophy  is  to  bring  into  explicit
consciousness  what  the  world  in  all  ages  has  believed  about
thought.  Philosophy  therefore  advances  nothing  new ;  and  our
present  discussion  has  led  us  to  a  conclusion  which  agrees  with
the  natural  belief  of  mankind.

23.]  (d)  The  real  nature  of  the  object  is  brought  to  light
in  reflection  ;  but  it  is  no  less  true  that  this  exertion  of  thought
is  my  act.  If  this  be  so,  the  real  nature  is  a  production  of  my
mind,  in  its  character  of  thinking  subject.  The  Ego  in  its
non-composite  universality,  self-collected  and  removed  from
extraneous  influences, — in  one  word,  our  Freedom,  is  thus  the
source  of  this  real  nature.

Think  for  yourself,  is  a  common  remark,  which  people  utter,
as  if  it  expressed  something  of  importance.  The  fact  is,  no
man  can  think  for  another,  any  more  than  he  can  eat  or  drink
for  him :  and  the  expression  savours  of  pleonasm.  Freedom
is  obviously  and  intimately  associated  with  thought,  which  as
the  action  of  the  universal,  puts  us  in  relation  only  with  a
second  self,  since  subject  and  object  of  thought  are  alike  uni-
versal. Here  we  are  at  home  with  ourselves;  yet  there  is
no  prominence  allowed  to  any  special  aspect  of  the  subject-mind,
and  the  contents  of  our  consciousness  are  entirely  based  upon
the  fact  and  the  deliverances  of  the  fact.  If  this  be  admitted,
and  if  we  apply  the  term  humility  to  an  attitude  where  no
particular  act  or  influence  is  ascribed  to  our  own  mental  selves,
it  is  easy  to  appreciate  the  question  touching  the  humility  or
pride  of  philosophy.  For  in  point  of  contents,  thought  is  only


38  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  [24.

true  in  proportion  as  it  is  absorbed  in  the  facts ;  and  in  point
of  form  it  is  no  special  or  peculiar  state  or  act  of  the  mind.
What  thought  implies  is  simply  this :  the  mind  as  an  Ego,
in  a  mere  point  of  its  being,  as  it  were,  shakes  itself  free  of  all
the  special  limitations  to  which  its  ordinary  states  or  qualities
are  liable,  and  restricts  itself  to  that  universal  action,  in  which
it  is  identical  with  all  individuals.  In  these  circumstances
philosophy  may  be  acquitted  of  the  charge  of  pride.  And
when  Aristotle  summons  the  mind  to  rise  to  the  dignity  of
that  action,  the  dignity  he  seeks  is  won  by  letting  slip  all  our
individual  opinions  and  prejudices,  and  submitting  to  the  sway
of  the  fact.

24.]  With  these  explanations  and  qualifications,  thoughts
may  be  termed  Objective  Thoughts,  among  which  we  shall
include  the  forms  ordinarily  discussed  in  the  common  logic,
where  they  are  believed  to  be  forms  of  conscious  thought  only.
Logic  in  our  sense  coincides  with  Metaphysics,  the  science  of
things  in  a  setting  of  thoughts  ;  which  thoughts,  it  is  allowed,
express  the  essence  of  things.

An  exposition  of  the  relation,  in  which  such  forms  as  notion,
judgment,  and  syllogism  stand  to  others,  such  as  causality,
is  a  matter  for  the  science  itself.  But  this  much  is  evident
beforehand.  If  thought  has  to  make  a  notion  of  things,  this
notion,  as  well  as  its  proximate  phases,  the  judgment  and
syllogism,  cannot  be  composed  of  articles  and  relations  which
are  alien  and  irrelevant  to  the  things.  Reflection,  as  was  said
above,  conducts  to  the  universal  of  things :  which  universal  is
itself  one  of  the  elementary  factors  of  a  notion.  To  say  that
Reason  or  Understanding  is  in  the  world,  is  equivalent  in  its
import  to  the  phrase  '  Objective  Thought.'  The  latter  phrase
however  is  awkward  and  ambiguous.  Thought  is  generally  con-
fined to  express  what  belongs  to  the  mind  or  consciousness  only,
while  objective  is  a  term  applied,  at  least  primarily,  to  the
opposite  of  mind.

(1)  To  speak  of  thought  or  objective  thought  as  the  inwardness,
or,  as  it  were,  the  kernel  of  the  world,  may  seem  to  be  ascribing


24.]  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  39

consciousness  to  the  things  of  nature.  One  cannot  but  feel  a
certain  repugnance  against  making  thought  the  inward  function
of  things,  so  long  as  we  believe  it  to  mark  the  divergence  of
man  from  nature.  It  will  therefore  be  better,  if  we  use  the  term
thought  at  all,  to  speak  of  nature  as  the  system  of  unconscious
thought,  or,  to  use  Schelling's  expression,  a  fossilized  intelligence.
And  in  order  to  prevent  all  misconception,  the  term  '  type'  or
'category'  of  thought  should  be  substituted  for  the  ambiguous
term  thought.

From  what  has  been  said  we  have  seen  that  logic  is  the
search  for  a  system  of  the  types  or  fundamental  ideas  of  thought,
in  which  the  opposition  between  subjective  and  objective,  in
its  usual  sense,  vanishes.  The  signification  attached  by  these
remarks  to  thought  and  its  characteristic  forms  may  be  illustrated
by  the  ancient  saying  that  '  vovs  governs  the  world,'  or  by  our
own  phrase  that  'Reason  is  in  the  world':  which  means  that
Reason  is  the  soul  of  the  world  it  inhabits,  its  immanent  principle,
its  most  proper  and  inward  nature,  its  universal.  Another
instance  is  offered  by  the  circumstance,  that  we  speak  of  some
definite  animal  as  an  animal.  Now,  the  animal,  qua  animal,
cannot  be  shown ;  nothing  can  be  pointed  out  excepting  some
special  animal.  An  animal,  qua  animal,  does  not  exist:  it  is
merely  the  universal  nature  of  the  individuals,  whilst  each
existing  animal  is  a  more  concretely  defined  and  particularized
thing.  But  to  be  an  animal, — the  law  of  Kind  which  is  the
universal  in  this  case, — is  the  property  of  the  particular  animal,
and  constitutes  its  definite  essence.  Take  away  from  the  dog
its  animality,  and  it  becomes  impossible  to  say  what  it  is.  All
things  have  a  permanent  inward  nature,  as  well  as  an  outward
existence.  They  live  and  die,  come  into  being  and  pass  out  of
being ;  but  their  essential  and  universal  part  is  the  Kind ;  and  this
is  not  fully  described  when  it  is  explained  to  mean  what  they  have
jointly  or  in  common.

Thought  forms  the  indwelling  nature  or  substance  of  external
things :  it  is  also  the  universal  substance  of  what  is  spiritual.
In  all  human  perception  thought  is  present;  so  too  thought  is
the  universal  in  all  the  acts  of  conception  and  recollection ;  in
short,  in  every  mental  activity,  in  willing,  wishing  and  the  like.
All  these  faculties  are  only  additional  specifications  of  thought.
When  it  is  presented  in  this  light,  thought  has  a  different  part
to  play  from  what  it  had  when  we  spoke  of  a  faculty  of  thought,
one  among  a  crowd  of  other  faculties,  such  as  perception,  con-
ception and  will,  with  which  it  stood  on  the  same  level.  When
it  is  seen  to  be  the  true  universal  of  all  that  nature  and  mind
contain,  it  extends  so  as  to  embrace  all  these  faculties,  and
becomes  the  basis  of  everything.  This  view  of  thought  in  its


40  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  [24.

objective  meaning-  as  vovs  gives  us  for  the  present  a  point  of
contact  from  which  we  can  pass  to  consider  the  subjective  sense
of  the  term. We  say  first,  Man  is  a  being  that  thinks ;  but  we
say  at  the  same  time,  Man  is  a  being  that  perceives  and  wills.
Man  is  a  thinker,  and  is  universal : but  he  is  a  thinker  only
because  he  feels  his  own  universality. The  animal  too  is  by
implication  universal,  but  the  universal  is  not  consciously  felt  by
it  to  be  universal :  it  feels  only  the  individual. The  animal  sees
a  singular  object,  for  instance,  its  food,  or  a  man. For  the
animal  all  this  never  goes  beyond  an  individual  thing. Similarly,
sensation has  to  do  with  nothing  but  singulars,  such  as  this
pain  or  this  pleasure. Nature  does  not  bring  its  you?  to  self-
consciousness  :  it  is  man  who  first  makes  himself  double  so  as  to
be  a  universal  for  a  universal. This  first  happens  when  man
knows  that  he  is  '  I.' By  the  term  '  I'  I  mean  myself,  a  single
and altogether determinate person. And yet I  really utter
nothing  peculiar  to  myself,  for  every  one  else  is  an  '  I '  or  '  Ego,'
and  when  I  call  myself  'I,'  though  I  indubitably  mean  the
single person myself, I express a thorough universal. <!,'
therefore,  is  mere  being-for-self,  in  which  everything  peculiar  or
marked  is  renounced  and  buried  out  of  sight ;  it  is  as  it  were
the  ultimate  and  unanalyzable  point  of  consciousness. We  may
say 'I'  and  thought  are  the  same,  or,  more  definitely,  'I'  is"
thought  as  a  thinker. What  I  have  in  my  consciousness,  is  for
me. '  I '  is  the  vacuum  or  receptacle  for  anything  and  every-
thing :  for  which  everything  is  and  which  stores  up  everything
in  itself. Every  man  is  a  whole  world  of  conceptions,  that  lie
buried  in  the  night  of  the  'Ego.' It  follows  that  the  'Ego'  is  the
universal  in  which  we  leave  aside  all  that  is  particular,  and  in
which  at  the  same  time  all  the  particulars  have  a  latent  existence.
In  other  words,  it  is  not  a  mere  universality  and  nothing  more,
but  the  universality  which  includes  and  comprehends  everything.
We  use  the  word  '  I '  without  commonly  attaching  much  im-
portance to  it,  nor  is  it  an  object  of  study  except  to  philosophical
reflection. In  the  'Ego,-'  the  fact  of  thought  is  clearly  and
directly  presented. While  the  brute  cannot  say  '  I,'  man  can,
because  he  thinks. Now  in  the  'Ego'  there  are  a  variety  of
contents, derived both from within and from without, and
according  to  the  nature  of  these  contents  our state  may  be
described  as  perception,  or  conception,  or  reminiscence. But  in
all  of  them  the  '  I '  is  found  :  or  in  them  all  thought  is  present.
Man,  therefore,  is  always  thinking,  even  in  his  perceptions : if
he  observes  anything,  he  always  observes  it  as  a  universal,  fixes
on  a  single  point  which  he  places  in  relief,  thus  withdrawing
his  attention  from  other  points,  and takes  it  as  abstract  and
universal,  even  if  the  universality  be  only  in  form.


24-]  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  41

In  the  case  of  our  representative  conceptions,  two  things  may
happen.  Either  the  contents  are  thought,  but  not  the  form  ;
or,  the  form  belongs  to  thought  and  not  the  contents.  In
such  terms,  for  instance,  as  anger,  rose,  hope,  I  am  speaking  of
things  which  I  have  learnt  in  the  way  of  sense  and  feeling,  but
I  express  these  contents  in  a  universal  mode,  that  is,  in  the  form
of  thought.  I  have  left  out  much  that  is  particular  and  given
the  contents  in  their  generality :  but  still  the  contents  remain
sense-derived.  On  the  other  hand,  when  I  represent  God,  the
content  is  undeniably  a  product  of  thought,  but  the  form  still
retains  the  sensuous  limitations,  which  it  has,  when  I  find  it
immediately  or  intuitively  present  in  myself.  In  these  gene-
ralized images  the  content  is  not  merely  and  simply  sensible,  as
it  is.  in  perception ;  but  either  the  content  is  sensuous  and  the
form  appertains  to  thought  or  vice  versa.  In  the  first  case
the  material  is  given  to  us,  and  our  thought  supplies  the  form :
in  the  second  case  the  content  originates  in  thought,  but  the
form  transmutes  this  content  into  a  datum  entering  the  spirit
from  without.

(2)  Logic  is  the  study  of  thought  pure  and  simple,  or  of  the
immaterial  types  of  thought.  In  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term,
we  generally  represent  to  ourselves  something  more  than  a  simple
and  unmixed  thought;  we  conceive  ourselves  as  thinking  some-
thing, which  something  is  a  gift  from  experience.  Whereas,  in
logic  a  thought  is  understood  to  include  nothing  else  but  what
depends  on  thinking  and  what  thinking  has  brought  into  exist-
ence. It  is  in  these  circumstances  that  thoughts  are  pure
(unmixed)  thoughts.  The  mind  in  these  circumstances  is  in
its  own  home  element  and  therefore  free :  for  freedom  means
that  the  other  thing  with  which  you  deal  is  a  second  self — (an
alter  ego] — so  that  you  never  leave  your  own  ground  but  give
the  law  to  yourself.  In  the  case  of  instincts  or  appetites  the
impulse  proceeds  from  something  else,  from  something  which  we
feel  to  be  external.  For  freedom  it  is  necessary  that  we  should
feel  no  presence  of  something  else  which  is  not  ourselves.  The
natural  man,  whose  motions  follow  the  rule  only  of  his  ap-
petites, is  not  his  own  master.  Be  he  as  self-willed  as  he  may,
the  actual  constituents  of  his  will  and  opinion  are  not  his
own  and  his  freedom  is  a  mere  form.  But  when  we  think,  we
renounce  our  selfish  and  particular  being,  sink  ourselves  in  the
thing,  allow  thought  to  follow  its  own  course,  and  if  we  add
anything  of  our  own,  we  think  ill.

If  in  pursuance  of  the  foregoing  remarks  we  consider  Logic
to  be  the  system  of  the  pure  types  of  thought,  we  find  that
the  other  philosophical  sciences,  the  Philosophy  of  Nature  and
the  Philosophy  of  Mind,  take  the  place,  as  it  were,  of  an


42  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  [24.

Applied  Logic,  and  that  Logic  is  the  soul  which  animates  them
both.  Their  problem  in  that  case  is  only  to  recognise  the
logical  forms  under  the  shapes  they  assume  in  Nature  and
Mind, — shapes  which  are  only  a  particular  mode  of  expression
for  the  forms  of  pure  thought.  If  for  instance  we  take  the
syllogism  (not  as  it  was  understood  in  the  old  formal  logic,
but  at  its  real  value),  we  shall  find  it  gives  expression  to  the  law
that  every  particular  thing  is  a  middle  term  which  fuses  together
the  extremes  of  the  universal  and  the  singular.  The  syllogistic
form  is  a  universal  form  of  all  things.  Everything  that
exists  is  a  particular,  a  close  unification  of  the  universal  and
the  singular.  But  Nature  is  weak  and  fails  to  exhibit  the
logical  forms  in  their  purity.  Such  a  feeble  exemplification
of  the  syllogism  may  be  seen  in  the  magnet.  In  the  middle,
or  point  of  indifference  of  a  magnet,  its  two  poles,  however
they  may  be  distinguished,  are  brought  into  one.  Physics
also  contains  an  exposition  of  the  universal  or  essence  in  Nature:
and  the  only  difference  between  it  and  the  Philosophy  of  Nature
is  that  the  latter  makes  us  apprehend  the  real  forms  of  the
notion  in  the  physical  world.

It  will  now  be  understood  that  Logic  is  the  all-animating
spirit  of  all  the  sciences,  and  that  its  categories  or  types  of
thought  constitute  the  spiritual  hierarchy.  They  are  the  heart
and  centre  of  things :  and  yet  at  the  same  time  they  are
always  in  our  mouths,  and  apparently,  at  least,  most  familiar
objects.  But  familiarity  of  this  style  usually  goes  with  the
least  amount  of  knowledge.  Being,  for  example,  is  a  category
of  pure  thought:  but  to  make  'Is'  an  object  of  investigation
would  be  the  last  thing  likely  to  occur  to  us.  Common  fancy
puts  the  Absolute  far  away  in  a  world  beyond.  The  Absolute
is  rather  the  ever-present,  that  present  which,  so  long  as  we
can  think,  we  must,  though  without  express  consciousness  of
it,  always  carry  with  us  and  always  use.  Language  is  the
main  depository  of  these  types  of  thought ;  and  one  use  of  the
grammatical  instruction  which  children  receive,  is  unconsciously
to  turn  their  attention  to  distinctions  of  thought.

Logic  has  been  often  said  to  be  concerned  with  forms  only
and  to  derive  the  subject-matter  for  them  from  elsewhere.  But
this  mode  of  speaking,  which  assumes  that  the  logical  thoughts
are  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  rest  of  the  contents,  is  very
much  the  reverse  of  the  truth.  '  Only '  is  not  the  word  to  use
about  forms,  which  make  the  absolute  and  self-existent  ground
of  the  universe.  We  should  rather  use  the  word  '  only '  about
everything  else  compared  with  these  thoughts.  To  make  such
abstract  forms  a  problem  to  be  investigated  demands  by  im-
plication a  higher  level  of  culture  than  ordinary ;  and  to  study


2 4.]  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  43

them  in  themselves  and  for  their  own  sake  signifies  in  addition
that  these  characteristic  types  must  be  deduced  out  of  the  re-
sources of  thought  itself,  and  their  truth  or  reality  examined  by
the  light  of  their  own  laws. We  do  not  assume  them  as  data
from  without,  and  then  define  them  or  demonstrate  their  value
and  adequacy  by  comparing  them  with  the  shape  they  take  in
our  own  minds. If  we  thus  acted,  our  method  would  be  based
upon  observation  and  experience,  and  we  should,  for  instance,
say  we  habitually  employ  the  term  'force'  in  such  a  case,  and
such  a  meaning. A  definition  like  that  would  be  called  sound
or  correct,  if  it  agreed  with  the  conception  of  its  object  present
in  our  ordinary  state  of  mind. The  defect  of  this  empirical
method  is  that  a  notion  is  not  defined  as  it  is  in  and  for  itself:
but  in  terms  of  something  assumed,  which  is  then  used  as  a
criterion  and  standard  of  correctness. No  such  test  must  be
applied  :  we  have  merely  to  let  the  categories  justify  themselves
in  their  own  independent  life. To  ask  when  a  category  is  true
or  not,  must  sound  strange  to  the  ordinary  mind : for  an  idea
or  category  apparently  becomes  true  only  when  it  is  referred
to  a  given  object,  and  apart  from  this  reference  it  would  seem
meaningless  to  inquire  into  its  truth. But  this  is  the  very
question  on  which everything  turns. We must however  in
the  first  place  understand  clearly  what  we  mean  by  Truth. In
common  life  we  call  truth  the  agreement  between an  object
and our  conception  of  the  object. We thus pre-suppose an
object  to  which  our  conception  must  conform. In  the  philo-
sophical sense  of  the  word,  on  the  other  hand,  truth  may  be
described,  in  a  general  and  one-sided  way,  as  the  agreement  of
the subject-matter  of  thought  with itself. This meaning  is
quite  different  from  the  one  given  above. At  the  same  time
the  deeper  and  philosophical  meaning  of  truth  can  be  partially
traced  even  in  the  expressions  of  ordinary  language. Thus  we
speak  of  a  true friend ; by  which  we mean  a  friend  whose
manner  of  conduct  accords  with  the  notion  of  friendship. In
the  same  way  we  speak  of  a  true  work  of  Art. Untrue  in  this
sense  means  much  the  same  as  bad,  or  self-discordant. In  this
sense  a  bad  state  is  an  untrue  state  ;  and  evil  and  untruth  may
be  said  to  consist  in  the  contradiction  subsisting  between  the
category  or  notion  and  the  existence  of  the  object. Of  such  a
bad  object  we  may  form  a  correct  image  or  conception  in  our
own minds,  but the fact which this image presents is in-
herently false. Specimens  of  this  kind  of  correctness,  which
are at  the  same  time  untruths, are  very  common in  men's
heads. God  alone  exhibits  a  real  agreement  of  the  notion  and
the  reality. All  finite  things  involve  an  untruth,  they  have  a
notion and an existence,  but  their existence does  not  meet


44  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  [24.

the  requirements  of  the  notion.  For  this  reason  they  must
perish  and  then  the  incompatibility  of  their  notion  and  their
existence  becomes  manifest.  It  is  in  the  Kind,  that  the  in-
dividual animal  has  its  notion :  and  the  Kind  escapes  from
this  individual  existence  by  death.

The  study  of  truth,  or,  as  it  is  here  explained  to  mean,
consistency,  constitutes  the  proper  problem  of  logic.  In  our
every-day  mind  we  are  never  troubled  with  questions  about
the  truth  of  the  forms  of  thought.  We  may  express  the
problem  of  logic  by  saying  that  it  examines  the  forms  of
thought  touching  their  capability  to  comprehend  truth.  And
the  question  comes  to  this :  What  are  the  forms  of  the  in-
finite, and  what  are  the  forms  of  the  finite?  Usually  no  sus-
picion attaches  to  the  finite  forms  of  thought ;  they  are  allowed
to  pass  unquestioned.  But  it  is  from  conforming  to  finite  cate-
gories in  our  thoughts  and  actions  that  all  deception  originates.

(3)  Truth  may  be  apprehended  by  several  methods,  each
of  which  however  is  no  more  than  a  form.  Experience  is  the
first  of  these  methods.  But  the  method  is  only  a  form :  it  has
no  intrinsic  value  of  its  own.  For  in  experience  everything
depends  upon  the  mind  we  bring  to  bear  upon  the  reality.  A
great  mind  is  great  in  its  experience;  and  in  the  motley  play
of  phenomena  at  once  perceives  the  point  of  real  significance.
The  idea  is  present,  in  actual  shape,  not  something  in  a  world
beyond  our  vision  and  far  away.  The  great  mind  of  a  Goethe,
for  example,  looking  into  nature  or  history,  has  great  experi-
ences, and  gives  expression  to  the  rational  law,  laid  open  to
his  glance.  A  second  method  of  apprehending  the  truth  is
Reflection,  which  defines  it  by  terms  or  relations  of  thought.
But  in  these  two  modes  the  absolute  truth  has  not  yet  found
its  appropriate  form.  The  most  perfect  method  of  knowledge
proceeds  in  the  pure  form  of  thought :  and  here  the  attitude
of  man  is  one  of  entire  freedom.

That  the  form  of  thought  is  the  perfect  form,  and  that  it
presents  the  truth  in  its  absolute  and  unconditioned  being,  is
the  general  dogma  of  all  philosophy.  Now  a  proof  of  the
dogma  sufficient  for  the  moment  will  be  given  if  we  can
show  that  these  other  forms  of  knowledge  are  finite  forms.
The  thorough-going  Scepticism  of  antiquity  accomplished  this
task  when  it  exhibited  the  contradictions  of  which  these  forms
are  full.  Scepticism  indeed  went  further :  but  when  it  ven-
tured to  assail  the  forms  of  reason,  it  began  by  insinuating
under  them  something  finite  upon  which  it  'might  fasten.  All
the  forms  of  finite  thought  will  make  their  appearance  in  the
course  of  the  logic  as  it  unfolds  itself,  the  order  in  which  they
present  themselves  being  determined  by  necessary  laws.  Here


24.]  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  45

in  the  introduction  they  could  only  be  unscientifically  assumed
without  proof.  In  the  theory  of  logic  itself  these  forms  will
be  exhibited,  not  only  on  their  negative,  but  also  on  their
positive  side.

When  we  compare  the  different  forms  of  knowledge  with  one
another,  the  first  of  them,  immediate  or  intuitive  knowledge,
may  perhaps  seem  the  finest,  noblest  and  most  appropriate.
It  comprehends  everything  which  the  moralists  term  innocence
as  well  as  religious  feeling,  simple  trust,  love,  fidelity,  and
natural  faith.  The  two  other  forms,  first  that  of  reflective
knowledge,  and  secondly  philosophical  knowledge,  must  leave
that  unsought  natural  harmony  behind  them.  And  so  far  as
they  have  this  in  common,  the  methods  which  claim  to  ap-
prehend the  truth  by  thought,  may  naturally  be  regarded  as
part  and  parcel  of  the  pride  which  leads  man  to  trust  to  his
own  powers  for  a  knowledge  of  the  truth.  Such  a  position
involves  a  thorough-going  disruption,  and,  viewed  in  that  light,
might  be  regarded  as  the  source  of  all  evil  and  misery — the
original  transgression.  Apparently  therefore  the  only  way  of
being  reconciled  and  restored  to  peace  is  to  surrender  all
claims  to  think  or  know.  This  abandonment  of  natural  unity
has  not  escaped  notice,  and  nations  from  the  earliest  times
have  asked  the  meaning  of  the  wonderful  division  of  the  spirit
against  itself.  No  such  inward  disunion  is  found  in  nature:
natural  things  do  no  evil.

The  Mosaic  legend  of  the  Fall  of  Man  has  preserved  an
ancient  picture  representing  the  origin  and  consequences
of  this  disunion.  The  facts  of  the  legend  form  the  basis
of  an  essential  article  of  the  creed,  the  doctrine  of  original
sin  in  man,  and  his  consequent  need  of  succour.  It  may  be
well  at  the  commencement  of  logic  to  examine  the  story  which
treats  of  the  origin  and  the  bearings  of  the  very  knowledge
which  logic  has  to  discuss.  For,  though  philosophy  must  not
allow  herself  to  be  overawed  by  religion,  or  accept  the  degraded
position  of  existence  on  sufferance,  she  cannot  afford  to  neglect
these  popular  conceptions.  The  tales  and  allegories  of  religion
have  enjoyed  for  thousands  of  years  the  reverence  of  nations,
and  are  not  without  a  certain  value  even  now.

Upon  a  closer  inspection  of  the  story  of  the  Fall  we  find,  as
was  already  said,  that  it  exemplifies  the  universal  bearings  of
knowledge  upon  the  spiritual  life.  In  its  instinctive  and  natural
form,  spiritual  life  wears  the  garb  of  innocence  and  confiding
simplicity :  but  the  very  essence  of  spirit  implies  the  absorption
of  this  immediate  condition  in  something  higher.  The  spiritual
is  distinguished  from  the  natural,  and  more  especially  from  the
animal  life  in  the  circumstance  that  it  does  not  continue  a  blind


46  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  [24.

fact,  but  rises  to  the  consciousness  of  itself,  and  a  being  of
its  own.  This  division  must  in  its  turn  vanish  and  be  absorbed,
and  then  the  spirit  can  win  its  way  to  peace  again.  The  con-
cord then  is  spiritual;  that  is,  the  principle  of  restoration  is
found  in  thought,  and  thought  only.  The  hand  that  inflicts
the  wound  is  also  the  hand  which  heals  it.

We  are  told  in  our  story  that  Adam  and  Eve,  the  first  human
beings,  the  types  of  humanity,  were  placed  in  a  garden,  where
grew  a  tree  of  life  and  a  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.
God,  it  is  said,  had  forbidden  them  to  eat  of  the  fruit  of  this
latter  tree :  of  the  tree  of  life  for  the  present  nothing  further
is  said.  These  words  evidently  declare  that  man  is  not  intended
to  seek  knowledge,  and  ought  to  remain  in  the  state  of  innocence.
Other  thoughtful  races,  it  may  be  remarked,  have  held  the  same
belief,  that  the  primitive  state  of  mankind  was  one  of  innocence
and  harmony.  Now  all  this  is  to  a  certain  extent  correct.  The
disunion  that  appears  throughout  humanity  is  not  a  condition
to  rest  in.  But  it  is  a  mistake  to  regard  the  natural  and
immediate  harmony  as  the  right  state.  The  mind  is  not  mere
instinct :  on  the  contrary,  it  essentially  involves  the  tendency
to  reasoning  and  meditation.  Childlike  innocence  no  doubt  has
in  it  much  that  is  sweet  and  attractive :  but  only  because  it
reminds  us  of  what  the  spirit  must  win  for  itself.  The  harmo-
nious existence  of  childhood  is  a  gift  from  the  hand  of  nature :
the  second  harmony  must  spring  from  the  labour  and  culture  of
the  spirit.  And  so  the  words  of  Christ,  '  Except  ye  become  as
little  children,'  &c.,  are  very  far  from  telling  us  that  we  must
always  remain  children.

Again,  we  find  in  the  narrative  of  Moses  that  the  occasion
which  led  man  to  leave  his  natural  unity  is  attributed  to  solici-
tation from  without.  The  serpent  was  the  tempter.  But  the
truth  is,  that  the  act  of  differentiation,  the  awakening  of  con-
sciousness, follows  from  the  very  nature  of  man :  and  the  same
history  repeats  itself  in  every  son  of  Adam.  The  serpent  repre-
sents likeness  to  God  as  consisting  in  the  knowledge  of  good
and  evil :  and  it  is  this  knowledge  and  no  other  in  which  man
participates  when  he  breaks  with  the  unity  of  his  instinctive
being,  and  eats  of  the  forbidden  fruit.  The  first  reflection  of
awakened  consciousness  in  men  told  them  that  they  were  naked.
This  is  a  naive  and  profound  trait.  For  the  sense  of  shame  bears
evidence  to  the  separation  of  man  from  his  natural  and  sensuous
life.  The  beasts  never  get  so  far  as  this  separation,  and  they
feel  no  shame.  And  it  is  in  the  human  feeling  of  shame
that  we  are  to  seek  the  spiritual  and  moral  origin  of  dress,
compared  with  which,  the  merely  physical  need  is  a  secondary
matter.


24-]  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  47

Next  comes  the  Curse,  as  it  is  called,  which  God  pronounced
upon  man.  The  prominent  point  in  that  curse  is  the  contrast
between  man  and  nature.  Man  must  work  in  the  sweat  of  his
brow :  and  woman  bring  forth  in  sorrow.  Touching  work,  we
remark  that  while  it  is  the  result  of  the  disunion,  it  is  also  the
victory  over  it.  The  beasts  have  nothing  more  to  do  but  to
pick  up  the  materials  required  to  satisfy  their  wants :  man  on
the  contrary  can  only  satisfy  his  wants  by  transforming,  and  as
it  were  originating  the  necessary  means.  Thus  even  in  these
outside  things  man  is  dealing  with  himself.

The  story  does  not  close  with  the  expulsion  from  Paradise.
We  are  further  told,  God  said,  '  Behold  Adam  is  become  as  one
of  us,  to  know  good  and  evil.'  Knowledge  is  now  called  divine,
and  not,  as  before,  something  wrong  and  unnatural.  Perhaps
these  words  may  confute  those  babblers  who  banish  philosophy  to
the  finitude  of  the  spirit.  Philosophy  is  knowledge,  and  it  is
through  knowledge  that  man  first  realises  his  original  vocation,
to  be  the  image  of  God.  When  the  record  adds  that  God  drove
men  out  of  the  Garden  of  Eden  to  prevent  their  eating  of  the
tree  of  life,  it  only  means  that  on  his  natural  side  man  is  finite
and  mortal,  but  in  knowledge  infinite.

We  all  know  the  theological  dogma  that  man's  nature  is  evil,
tainted  with  what  is  called  Original  Sin.  Now  while  we  accept
the  dogma,  we  must  give  up  the  setting  of  incident,  which  re-
presents original  sin  as  consequent  upon  an  accidental  act  of
the  first  man.  For  the  very  notion  of  spirit  is  enough  to  show
that  man  is  evil  by  nature,  and  that  it  is  an  error  to  imagine
that  he  could  ever  be  otherwise.  To  such  extent  as  man  is
and  acts  like  a  creature  of  nature,  to  that  extent  his  whole
position  and  behaviour  is  wrong.  For  the  spirit  it  is  a  duty
to  be  free,  and  to  win  the  being  which  is  its  due.  Nature  is
for  man  only  the  starting-point  which  he  must  transform  to
something  better.  The  theological  doctrine  of  original  sin  is  a
profound  truth;  but  modern  enlightenment  prefers  to  believe
that  man  is  naturally  good,  and  that  he  acts  right  so  long  as
he  continues  true  to  nature.

The  hour  when  man  leaves  the  path  of  mere  natural  being
marks  the  difference  between  him,  a  self-conscious  agent,  and
the  natural  world.  But  a  life  of  inward  division,  though  it
forms  a  necessary  part  of  the  very  notion  of  spirit,  is  not  the
final  goal  of  man.  The  position  of  a  divided  self  is  taken  up  by
the  whole  finite  action  of  thought  and  will.  In  that  finite  sphere
man  pursues  ends  of  his  own  making,  and  draws  from  himself
only  the  material  of  his  conduct.  While  he  pursues  these  aims
to  the  uttermost,  while  his  knowledge  and  his  will  seek  himself,
his  own  narrow  self  apart  from  the  universal,  he  is  evil ;  and  his


48  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  [25.

evil  is  that  lie  is  subjective.  We  seem  at  first  sight  to  have  a
double  evil  here :  but  both  are  really  the  same.  Man  in  so  far
as  he  is  spirit  is  not  the  creature  of  nature :  and  when  he  makes
himself  so,  and  follows  the  cravings  of  his  appetites,  it  is  because
he  wills  to  be  so.  The  natural  wickedness  of  man  is  therefore
unlike  the  natural  life  of  animals.  A  mere  natural  life  may  be
more  exactly  defined  by  saying-  that  the  natural  man  as  such  is
an  individual:  for  nature  in  every  part  is  under  the  bond  of
individualism.  Thus  when  man  wills  to  be  a  creature  of  nature,
he  wills  in  the  same  degree  to  be  an  individual  simply.  To
counteract  such  action  from  motives  of  passion  and  appetite
when  a  man  conforms  to  the  selfish  isolation  of  nature,  there
steps  in  the  law,  or  universal  command.  This  law  may  either
be  an  external  force,  or  have  the  form  of  divine  authority.  So
long  as  he  continues  in  his  natural  state,  man  is  in  bondage  to
the  law.  It  is  true  that  among  the  instincts  and  feelings  of
man,  there  are  social  or  benevolent  inclinations,  love,  sympathy,
and  others,  reaching  beyond  his  selfish  isolation.  But  to  what-
ever extent  these  tendencies  are  instinctive,  their  content,  though
virtually  universal,  retains  a  personal  or  subjective  character,  and
gives  opportunity  for  selfishness  and  caprice.

25.]  The  term  '  Objective  Thoughts'  indicates  the  truth  which
must  be  the  absolute  and  completed  object  of  philosophy,  and  not
merely  the  aim  of  a  science  unrealised.  But  the  very  expression
cannot  fail  to  suggest  an  opposition,  to  characterise  and  appreciate
which  is  the  main  motive  of  the  philosophical  attitude  of  the  pre-
sent time,  and  which  forms  the  real  problem  of  the  question  about
truth  and  our  means  of  knowing  it.  If  the  forms  of  thought  always
meet  and  always  will  meet  a  something  which  is  not  themselves,
i.e.  if  they  are  only  of  a  finite  character,  they  are  no  match  for
the  self-centred  universe  of  truth,  and  truth  must  be  sought  for  in
some  other  region  than  thought.  Some  thought  can  only  produce
these  limited  and  partial  categories  and  proceed  by  their  means.
This  is  what  in  the  stricter  sense  of  the  word  is  termed  Under-
standing. The  finite  nature  of  certain  modes  which  thought
adopts  is  seen  in  two  points.  *  Firstly,  they  are  only  subjective,
and  the  antithesis  of  an  objective  world  permanently  clings  to
them.  Secondly,  they  do  not  include  the  whole  truth,  and  so
they  are  always  mutually  opposed,  and  still  more  opposed  to  the
Absolute.  In  order  more  fully  to  explain  the  position  and  import


25-]  PRELIMINARY  NOTION.  49

here  attributed  to  logic,  the  attitudes  in  which  thought  is  sup-
posed to  stand  to  the  objective  world  will  next  be  examined
in  the  way  of  further  introduction.

In  my  Phenomenology  of  the  Spirit,  which  on  that  account
was  at  its  publication  described  as  the  first  part  of  the  System
of  Philosophy,  the  method  adopted  was  to  begin  with  the  first
and simplest phenomenon  of  mind, immediate  consciousness,
and to  show  how  that stage gradually of  necessity  worked
onward  to the view taken by  philosophy, the necessity of
that view being proved by the process. But in these
circumstances it was impossible to restrict the quest to
the  mere  form  or  manner  of  consciousness. For  the  stage  of
philosophical knowledge is at once the most adequate and
concrete, and therefore, as  it  came  before  us  in  the  shape  of
a  result,  it  pre-supposed  the  concrete  formations  of  consciousness,
such  as  social  and  individual  morality,  art  and  religion. In
the  development  of  consciousness,  which  at  first  sight  appears
limited  to  the  point  of  manner,  there  is  thus  at  the  same  time
included  the  development of  the matter, which  is  discussed
in  the  special  branches  of  philosophy. But  the  latter  process
must, so  to  speak, go on  behind consciousness, since those
facts  have  a  being  of  their  own,  which  consciousness  as  it  were
retraces. The  exposition  accordingly  is  rendered  more  intricate,
because  so  much  that  properly  belongs  to  the  concrete  branches
is  prematurely  dragged  into  the  introduction. The  survey  which
follows  in  the  present work  has  even  more  the  inconvenience
of  being  only  historical  and  inferential  in  its  method. But  it
will  help  to  show  how  the  questions  men  have  proposed  on  the
nature  of  Knowledge,  Faith  and  the  like, — questions,  which  they
imagine to have no connexion with abstract  thoughts, — are
naturally reducible to  the  simple  terms  or  categories,  which
first  find  their  true  solution  and  settlement  in  Logic.


CHAPTEE III.

FIRST  ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE  WORLD.

26.]  THE  first  of  these  attitudes  of  thought  is  seen  in  the
method  which  has  no  doubts  and  no  sense  of  the  contradiction
in  thought,  or  of  the  hostility  of  thought  against  itself.  It
entertains  an  unquestioning  belief  that  reflection  is  the  means
of  ascertaining  the  truth,  and  of  bringing  the  objects  before
the  mind  as  they  really  are.  And  in  this  belief  it  advances
straight  upon  its  objects,  takes  the  materials  furnished  by
sense  and  perception,  and  reproduces  them  from  itself  as  facts
of  thought ;  and  then,  believing  this  result  to  be  the  truth,
the  method  is  content.  Philosophy  in  its  first  stages,  alf  the
sciences,  and  even  the  daily  action  and  movement  of  conscious-
ness, live  in  this  faith.

27.]  This  method  of  thought  has  never  become  aware  of
the  antithesis  of  subjective  and  objective :  and  to  that  extent
there  is  nothing  to  prevent  its  statements  from  possessing  a
genuinely  philosophical  and  speculative  character,  though  it  is
just  as  possible  that  they  may  never  get  beyond  finite  categories,
or  the  stage  when  the  antithesis  is  still  unsolved.  In  the
present  introduction  the  main  question  for  us  is  to  observe
this  attitude  of  thought  in  its  extreme  form  ;  and  we  shall
accordingly  first  of  all  examine  the  second  and  inferior  aspect
of  the  method.  One  of  the  clearest  instances  of  it,  and  one
peculiarly  interesting  to  us,  may  be  found  in  the  Metaphysic
of  the  Past  as  it  subsisted  among  us  previous  to  the  philosophy
of  Kant.  It  is  however  only  in  reference  to  the  history  of


FIRST  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT,  ETC.  51

philosophy  that  this  Metaphysic  can  be  said  to  belong  to  the
past:  the  thing  is  always  and  at  all  places  to  be  found,  as  the
view  which  the  abstract  understanding  takes  of  the  objects  of
reason.  And  it  is  in  this  point  that  the  real  and  immediate  good
lies  of  a  closer  examination  of  its  main  facts  as  well  as  its  way
of  working.

28.]  The  metaphysical  systems  took  the  laws  and  forms  of
thought  to  be  the  fundamental  laws  and  forms  of  things.  They
assumed  that  to  think  a  thing  was  the  means  of  finding  its  very
self  and  nature :  and  to  that  extent  they  occupied  a  higher
ground  than  the  Critical  Philosophy  of  later  times.  But  in
the  first  instance  (1)  these  terms  of  thought  were  cut  off  from
their  connexion,  their  solidarity  ;  each  was  believed  valid  by
itself  and  capable  of  serving  as  a  predicate  of  the  truth.  It
was  an  axiom  in  these  systems  of  metaphysic  that  a  knowledge
of  the  Absolute  was  gained  by  merely  ascribing  predicates  to
it.  They  neither  inquired  what  the  terms  of  the  understanding
specially  meant  or  what  they  were  worth,  nor  did  they  critically
test  the  method  which  characterises  the  Absolute  by  the  ascrip-
tion of  predicates.

As  an  example  of  such  predicates  may  be  taken,  first,  Exist-
ence, as  in  the  proposition,  '  God  has  existence : '  secondly,
Finitude  or  Infinity,  as  in  the  question,  '  Whether  is  the  world
finite  or  infinite  ? ' :  thirdly,  Simple  and  Complex,  as  in  the
proposition,  '  The  soul  is  simple  : '  and,  again  such  expressions,
as,  '  The  thing  is  a  unity,  a  whole,'  &c.  Nobody  as  yet  dreamed
of  asking  whether  such  predicates  had  any  absolute  truth  of
their  own,  or  whether  the  prepositional  form  could  be  a  form
of  truth  at  all.

The  Metaphysic  of  the  past  adopted  the  same  axiom  as  in-
genuous faith  everywhere  adopts,  that  thought  apprehends  the
very  self  of  things,  and  that  things,  to  become  what  they  truly
are,  require  to  be  thought.  For  Nature  and  the  heart  of  man  are
constantly  exhibiting  a  series  of  Proteus-like  transformations,
never  the  same ;  and  a  moment's  reflection  shows  us  that  things,
when  they  are  immediately  set  before  us,  are  not  their  very
selves.  And  on  this  reflection  the  old  systems  of  metaphysic

E  2


52  FIRST  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [28.

acted.  Their  point  of  view  was  the  very  reverse  of  the  result
arrived  at  by  the  Critical  Philosophy  ;  a  result,  of  which  it
may  be  said,  that  it  bade  man  go  and  feed  on  mere  husks  and
chaff.

We  must  look  a  little  more  closely  into  the  ways  of  that  old
metaphysic.  In  the  first  place  it  never  went  beyond  the
province  of  the  analytic  understanding.  Without  preliminary
inquiry  it  adopted  the  abstract  characteristics  or  terms  of  thought
and  gave  them  rank  as  predicates  of  truth.  But  in  using  the  term
thought  we  must  not  forget  the  difference  between  finite  or  dis-
cursive thinking  and  the  thinking  which  is  infinite  and  rational.
The  categories,  as  they  meet  us  jprimd  facie  and  in  isolation,  are
finite  forms.  But  truth  is  always  infinite,  and  cannot  be  expressed
or  presented  to  consciousness  in  finite  terms.  The  phrase  infinite
thought  may  perhaps  excite  surprise,  if  we  adhere  to  the  modern
conception  that  thought  is  always  limited.  But  it  is,  speaking
rightly,  the  very  essence  of  thought  to  be  infinite.  The  nominal
explanation  of  calling  a  thing  finite  is  that  it  has  an  end,  that  it
exists  up  to  a  certain  point  only,  where  it  comes  into  contact
with,  and  is  limited  by,  its  antithesis.  The  finite  therefore
consists  in  being  attached  to  its  antithesis,  which  is  its  negation
and  presents  itself  as  its  limit.  Now  thought  is  always  in  its
own  sphere ;  its  relations  are  with  itself,  and  it  is  its  own  object.
In  having  a  thought  for  object,  I  am  at  home  with  myself.  The
thinking  power,  the  'I,'  is  therefore  infinite,  because,  when  it
thinks,  it  is  in  relation  to  an  object  which  is  no  other  than  itself.
In  other  cases  an  object  means  a  something  else,  a  negative  con-
fronting me.  But  in  the  case  where  thought  thinks  itself,  it  has
an  object  which  is  at  the  same  time  no  object,  in  other  words,
when  it  is  fully  thought  the  object  is,  as  it  were,  absorbed  and
held  in  abeyance.  Thought,  as  thought,  therefore  in  its  unmixed
nature  involves  no  limits ;  it  is  finite  only  when  it  keeps  to
limited  categories,  which  it  believes  to  be  ultimate.  Infinite  or
speculative  thought,  on  the  contrary,  while  it  no  less  defines,
does  in  the  very  act  of  limiting  and  defining  make  that  defect
sink  and  vanish.  And  so  infinity  is  not,  as  most  frequently  hap-
pens, to  be  conceived,  as  an  abstract  away  and  away  for  ever  and
ever,  but  in  the  simple  manner  previously  indicated.

The  thinking  of  the  old  metaphysical  system  was  finite.  Its
whole  mode  of  action  was  regulated  by  categories,  the  limits  of
which  it  believed  to  be  permanently  fixed  and  not  subject  to  any
further  negation.  Thus,  one  of  its  questions  was :  Has  God
existence  ?  The  question  supposes  that  existence  is  an  altogether
positive  term,  a  sort  of  ne  plus  ultra  of  high  value.  We  shall  see
however  in  course  of  time  that  existence  is  by  no  means  a  merely
positive  term,  but  one  which  is  too  low  for  the  Absolute  Idea,  and


28.]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  53

unworthy  of  God.  A  second  question  in  these  metaphysical
systems  was  :  Is  the  world  finite  or  infinite  ?  The  very  terms  of
the  question  assume  that  the  finite  is  a  permanent  contradictory
to  the  infinite :  and  one  can  easily  see  that,  when  they  are  so
opposed,  the  infinite,  which  of  course  ought  to  be  the  whole,
only  appears  as  a  single  side  of  it  and  suffers  restriction  from  the
finite.  But  a  limited  infinity  is  itself  only  a  finite.  In  the  same
way  it  was  asked,  whether  the  soul  was  simple  or  complex.  Simple-
ness  was  in  other  words  taken  to  be  an  ultimate  characteristic,
giving  expression  to  a  whole  truth.  Far  from  being  so,  simple-
ness  is  the  expression  of  a  half-truth,  as  one-sided  and  abstract  as
existence  : — a  term  of  thought,  which,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,
is  itself  untrue  and  hence  unable  to  lay  hold  of  truth.  If  the
soul  be  viewed  as  merely  and  abstractly  simple,  it  is  characterised
in  an  inadequate  and  finite  way.

It  was  therefore  the  main  question  of  the  pre-Kantian  meta-
physic  to  discover  whether  predicates  of  the  kind  mentioned  were  to
be  ascribed  to  its  objects.  Now  these  predicates  are  after  all  only
limited  formulae  of  the  understanding,  which  instead  of  expressing
the  truth,  merely  impose  a  limit.  More  than  this,  it  should  be
noted  that  the  chief  feature  of  the  method  lay  in  what  was  called
attributing  predicates  to  the  object  that  was  to  be  cognised,  for
example,  to  God.  But  attribution  is  no  more  than  an  external
reflection  about  the  object :  the  predicates  by  which  the  object  is
to  be  determined  are  supplied  from  the  resources  of  picture-
thought,  and  are  applied  in  a  mechanical  way.  Whereas,  if  we
are  to  have  genuine  cognition,  the  object  must  characterise  its  own
self,  and  ought  not  to  derive  its  predicates  from  foreign  sources.
Even  supposing  we  follow  the  method  of  predicating,  the  mind
cannot  help  feeling  that  predicates  of  this  sort  fail  to  exhaust  the
object.  From  the  same  point  of  view  the  Orientals  are  quite
correct  in  calling  God  the  many-named,  or  the  myriad-named
One.  One  after  another  of  these  finite  categories  leaves  the  heart
unsatisfied,  and  the  Oriental  sage  is  compelled  unceasingly  to
seek  for  more  and  more  of  such  predicates.  In  finite  things  it  is
no  doubt  the  case  that  they  have  to  be  characterised  through
finite  predicates  :  and  with  these  things  the  understanding  finds
proper  scope  for  its  special  action.  Itself  finite,  it  knows  only
the  nature  of  the  finite.  Thus,  when  I  call  some  action  a  theft,
I  have  characterised  the  action  in  its  essential  facts  :  and  such  a
knowledge  is  sufficient  for  the  judge.  Similarly,  finite  things
stand  to  each  other  as  cause  and  effect,  force  and  exercise,  and
when  they  are  apprehended  in  these  categories,  they  are  known
on  their  finite  side.  But  the  objects  of  reason  cannot  be  defined
by  these  finite  predicates :  and  to  try  to  do  so  was  the  fault  of  the
old  metaphysic.


54  FIRST  ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT [29-31-

29.]  Predicates  of  this  kind  when  tried  on  their  own  merits
suffer  from  the  limitation  of  their  scope,  and  no  one  can  fail
to  perceive  how  inadequate  they  are,  and  how  far  they  fall
below  the  fulness  of  detail  which  our  imaginative  thought
gives,  in  the  case,  for  example,  of  God,  Mind,  or  Nature.
Besides,  though  the  fact  of  their  being  all  predicates  of  one
subject  supplies  them  with  a  certain  connexion,  their  several
meanings  keep  them  apart :  and  consequently  each,  so  far  as
the  others  are  concerned,  is  assumed  from  without.

The  first  of  these  defects  the  Orientals  sought  to  remedy,
when,  for  example,  they  defined  God  by  attributing  to  Him
many  names;  but  still  they  felt  that  the  number  of  names
would  have  had  to  be  infinite.

30.]  (2)  In  the  second  place,  the  metaphysical  systems  adopted
a  wrong  criterion.  Their  objects  were  no  doubt  totalities,  which
in  their  own  proper  selves  belong  to  reason;  that  is,  to  the
organised  and  systematically-developed  universe  of  thought.
But  these  totalities — God,  the  Soul,  the  World, — were  given  to
the  metaphysician  as  subjects,  made  and  ready,  to  form  the
basis  for  an  application  of  the  categories  of  the  understanding.
They  were  derived  or  assumed  from  popular  conception.  Ac-
cordingly popular  conception  was  the  only  canon  for  settling
whether  or  not  the  predicates  were  suitable  and  sufficient.

31.]  The  common  conceptions  of  God,  the  Soul,  the  World,
may  be  supposed  to  give  a  firm  foundation  to  thought.
They  do  not  really  do  so.  Besides  having  a  particular  and
subjective  character  olinging  to  them,  and  thus  leaving  room
for  great  variety  of  meaning,  they  themselves  much  require
to  be  thoroughly  and  satisfactorily  fixed  by  thought.  This
may  be  seen  in  any  proposition.  We  need  the  predicate,  or
in  philosophy  the  determination  of  thought,  to  indicate  what
the  subject,  or  the  conception  we  start  with,  is.

In  such  a  sentence,  as  God  is  eternal,  we  begin  with  the
conception  of  God,  not  knowing  as  yet  what  he  is :  to  tell  us
that,  is  the  business  of  the  predicate.  In  the  theory  of  logic,
accordingly,  where  the  terms  formulating  the  subject-matter


32.]  TOWARDS THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  55

are  those  of  thought  only,  it  is  not  merely  superfluous  to
make  these  semi-sensuous  categories  predicates  to  propositions,
in  which  God,  or  the  still  vaguer  Absolute,  is  the  subject ;
but  it  is  even  wrong,  because  it  suggests  another  canon  than
the  nature  of  thought.  Besides,  the  propositional  form  (and  for
proposition,  it  would  be  more  correct  to  substitute  judgment)
is  not  suited  to  express  the  concrete — and  the  true  is  always
concrete — or  the  speculative.  Every  judgment  is  by  its  form
one-sided,  and,  to  that  extent,  false.

This  metaphysic  was  not  free  or  objective  thinking.  Instead
of  letting  the  object  freely  and  spontaneously  expound  its  own
characteristics,  metaphysic  took  it  up  as  a  settled  matter.  If
any  one  wishes  to  know  what  free  thought  means,  he  must  go
to  Greek  philosophy :  for  Scholasticism,  like  these  metaphysical
systems,  accepted  its  facts,  and  accepted  them  as  a  dogma  from
the  authority  of  the  Church.  Under  the  influence  of  modern
culture  we  have  been  initiated  into  conceptions,  of  which  it  is
very  hard  to  divest  ourselves,  on  account  of  the  depth  of  their
contents.  But  the  ancient  philosophers  were  in  a  different
position.  They  were  men,  who  lived  wholly  in  the  perceptions
of  the  senses,  and  who,  after  their  rejection  of  mythology  and
its  fancies,  pre-supposed  nothing  more  than  the  heaven  above
and  the  earth  around.  And  thus,  though  environed  by  actual
facts,  thought  is  free  and  enjoys  its  own  privacy :  cleared  of
everything  material,  and  thoroughly  at  home.  This  feeling  that
we  are  all  our  own  is  characteristic  of  free  thought — of  that
voyage  into  the  open  sea,  where  nothing  is  below  us  or  above
us,  and  we  stand  in  solitude  with  ourselves  alone.

32.]  (3)  In  the  third  place,  this  system  of  metapJiysic  turned
into  Dogmatism.  When  our  thought  never  ranges  beyond
narrow  and  rigid  terms,  we  are  forced  to  assume  that  of  two
contrary  assertions,  such  as  were  the  above  propositions,  the  one
must  be  true  and  the  other  false.

Dogmatism  may  be  most  simply  described  as  the  contrary  of
Scepticism.  The  ancient  Sceptics,  at  least,  gave  the  name  of
Dogmatism  to  every  philosophy  holding  a  system  of  definite
doctrine.  In  this  large  sense  Scepticism  may  apply  the  name
even  to  philosophy  which  is  properly  Speculative.  But  in  the
narrower  sense,  Dogmatism  consists  in  the  tenacity  which  draws
a  hard  and  fast  line  between  certain  terms  supposed  to  be


56  FIRST  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [33.

absolute  and  others  contrary  to  them.  We  may  see  this  clearly
in  the  strict  '  Either — or' :  for  instance,  the  world  is  either  finite
or  infinite ;  but  one  of  these  two  it  must  be.  The  contrary  of
this  rigidity  is  the  characteristic  of  all  Speculative  truth.  There
no  such  inadequate  formulae  are  allowed,  nor  can  they  possibly
exhaust  it.  These  formulae  Speculative  truth  holds  in  union  as  a
totality,  whereas  Dogmatism  invests  them  in  their  isolation  with
a  title  to  truth  and  fixity.

It  often  happens  in  philosophy  that  the  half-truth  holds,  its
ground  beside  the  whole  truth  and  assumes  on  its  own  account
the  position  of  something  permanent.  But  the  fact  is  that  the
half-truth  instead  of  being  a  fixed  or  self-subsistent  principle,  is
a  mere  element  vanishing  in  a  more  adequate  thought.  The
metaphysic  of  understanding  is  dogmatic,  because  it  maintains
half-truths  in  their  isolation :  whereas  the  idealism  of  speculative
philosophy  carries  out  the  law  or  principle  of  totality  and  shows
that  it  can  transcend  the  inadequacy  of  the  formularies  of  ab-
stract thought.  Thus  idealism  would  say  : — The  soul  is  neither
finite  only,  nor  infinite  only;  it  is  really  the  one  just  as  much
as  the  other,  and  in  that  way  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  In
other  words,  such  formularies  in  their  isolation  are  inapplicable,
and  only  come  into  account  as  formative  elements  in  a  larger
notion.  Such  idealism  we  see  even  in  the  ordinary  phases  of
the  mind.  Thus  we  say  of  sensible  things,  that  they  are
changeable :  that  is,  they  are,  but  it  is  equally  true  that  they
are  not.  We  show  more  obstinacy  in  dealing  with  the  categories
of  the  understanding.  These  are  terms  which  we  believe  to  be
somewhat  more  fixed — or  even  absolutely  rigid.  We  look  upon
them  as  separated  from  each  other  by  an  infinite  chasm,  so  that
opposite  categories  can  never  get  at  each  other.  The  battle  of
reason  is  the  struggle  to  break  up  the  rigidity  to  which  the
understanding  has  reduced  everything.

33.]  The  first  part  of  this  metaphysic  in  its  systematic  form
is  Ontology,  or  the  doctrine  of  the  abstract  characteristics  of
Being.  The  multitude  of  these  characteristics,  and  the  limits
set  to  their  applicability,  are  not  founded  upon  any  principle.
They  have  in  consequence  to  be  enumerated  as  experience
and  circumstances  direct,  and  the  import  ascribed  to  them  is
founded  only  upon  common  sensualized  conceptions,  upon
assertions  that  particular  words  are  used  in  a  particular
sense,  and  even  perhaps  upon  etymology.  If  experience  pro-
nounces the  import  ascribed  to  them  to  be  complete,  and  if


34-]  TOWARDS THE OBJECTIVE WOULD.  57

the  usage  of  language,  by  its  agreement,  shows  the  analysis
to  be  correct,  the  metaphysician  is  satisfied ;  and  the  truth
and  necessity  of  such  characteristics,  simply  on  their  own
account,  is  never  made  a  matter  of  investigation  at  all.

To  ask  if  being,  existence,  finitude,  simplicity,  complexity,
&c.  are  notions  true  to  their  own  highest  laws,  must  surprise
those  who  believe  that  a  question  about  truth  can  only
concern  propositions  (as  to  whether  a  notion  is,  or  is  not
with  truth  to  be  attributed,  as  the  phrase  is,  to  a  subject),
and  that  falsehood  lies  in  the  contradiction  existing  between
the  subject  of  our  conceptual  vision,  and  the  notion  to  be
predicated  of  it.  Now  as  the  notion  is  concrete,  it  and  every
character  of  it  in  general  is  essentially  a  self-contained  unity
of  distinct  characteristics.  If  truth  then  were  nothing  more
than  the  absence  of  contradiction,  it  would  be  first  of  all
necessary  in  the  case  of  every  notion  to  examine  whether  it
did  not  actually  contain  this  sort  of  intrinsic  contradiction.

34.]  The  second  branch  of  the  metaphysical  system  was
Rational  Psychology  or  Pneumatology.  It  dealt  with  the
metaphysical  nature  of  the  Soul,  that  is,  of  the  Mind  regarded
as  a  thing.  It  expected  to  find  immortality  in  a  sphere,
dominated  by  the  laws  of  composition,  time,  qualitative  change,
and  quantitative  increase  or  decrease.

The  name  '  rational,'  given  to  this  species  of  psychology,
serves  to  contrast  it  with  empirical  modes  of  observing  the
phenomena  of  the  soul.  Rational  psychology  viewed  the  soul
in  its  metaphysical  nature,  and  through  the  categories  supplied
by  abstract  thought.  The  rationalists  endeavoured  to  ascertain
the  inner  nature  of  the  soul  as  it  is  in  itself  and  as  it  is  for
thought.  In  philosophy  at  present  we  hear  little  of  the  soul :
the  favourite  term  now  is  mind  or  spirit.  The  two  are  distinct,
soul  being  as  it  were  the  middle  term  between  body  and  spirit,
or  the  bond  between  the  two.  The  mind,  as  soul,  is  immersed
in  corporeity,  and  the  soul  is  the  animating  principle  of  the
body.

The  pre-Kantian  metaphysic  we  say,  viewed  the  soul  as  a  thing.
'  Thing'  is  a  very  ambiguous  word.  By  a  thing,  we  mean,  firstly,
an  immediate  existence,  such  as  is  evident  to  the  senses  :  and
in  this  meaning  the  term  has  been  applied  to  the  soul.  Hence


58  FIRST  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [35.

the  question  regarding  the  seat  of  the  soul.  Of  course,  if  the
soul  have  a  seat,  it  is  in  space  and  evident  to  the  sense.  So,  too,
if  the  soul  be  viewed  as  a  thing,  we  can  ask  whether  the  soul  is
simple  or  composite.  The  question  is  important  as  bearing  on
the  immortality  of  the  soul,  which  is  supposed  to  depend  on
the  absence  of  composition.  But  the  fact  is,  that  in  abstract
simplicity  we  have  a  category,  which  as  little  corresponds  to  the
nature  of  the  soul,  as  that  of  complexity.

One  word  on  the  relation  of  rational  to  empirical  psychology.
The  former,  because  it  volunteers  to  apply  thought  to  cognise
mind  and  even  to  demonstrate  these  products  of  thought,  is  the
higher ;  whereas  empirical  psychology  starts  from  perception,
and  only  recounts  and  describes  what  perception  supplies.  But
if  we  propose  to  think  the  mind,  we  must  not  be  quite  so  shy  of
its  special  phenomena.  Mind  is  essentially  active  in  the  same
sense  as  the  Schoolmen  said  that  God  is  '  absolute  actuosity.'  But
if  the  mind  is  active  it  must  as  it  were  utter  itself.  It  is  wrong
therefore  to  take  the  mind  for  a  processless  ens,  as  did  the  old
metaphysics  which  divided  the  processless  inward  life  of  the
mind  from  its  outward  life.  No  good  will  be  done  unless  the
mind  be  viewed  in  its  concrete  reality  in  its  action ;  and  in  such
a  way  that  its  manifestations  are  seen  to  be  determined  by  its
inward  force.

35.]  The  third  branch  of  metaphysics  was  Cosmology.  The
topics  it  embraced  were  the  world,  its  contingency,  necessity,
eternity,  limitation  in  time  and  space :  the  laws  (only  formal)
of  its  changes :  the  freedom  of  man  and  the  origin  of  evil.

To  these  topics  it  applied  what  were  believed  to  be  thorough-
going contrasts :  such  as  contingency  and  necessity ;  external
and  internal  necessity ;  efficient  and  final  cause,  or  causality  in
general  and  design ;  essence  or  substance  and  phenomenon ;
form  and  matter;  freedom  and  necessity;  happiness  and  pain;
good  and  evil.

The  object  of  Cosmology  comprised  Nature,  as  well  as  the
complicated  phenomena  which  Mind  throws  out  from  itself;  in
fact,  existence  in  general,  or  the  sum  of  all  finite  things.  This
object  however  is  viewed  not  as  a  concrete  whole,  but  point  by
point  in  abstract  formulae.  The  questions  Cosmology  attempted
to  solve  were  such  as  these  :  Is  accident  or  necessity  dominant  in
the  world  ?  Is  the  world  eternal  or  created  ?  The  main  problem
of  this  cosmological  teaching  consequently  was  to  establish  what
were  termed  universal  laws  of  Cosmology :  for  instance,  that


35-]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  59

Nature  does  not  act  by  fits  and  starts.  And  by  fits  and  starts
(saltus)  they  meant  a  qualitative  difference  or  a  qualitative
alteration,  showing  itself  without  any  antecedent  and  deter-
mining- mean :  whereas,  on  the  contrary,  a  gradual  change  (of
quantity)  is  obviously  not  without  intermediation.

In  regard  to  Mind,  as  it  makes  itself  felt  in  the  world,  the
questions  which  Cosmology  chiefly  discussed  turned  upon  the
freedom  of  man  and  the  origin  of  evil.  Nobody  can  deny  that
these  are  questions  of  the  highest  importance.  But  to  give
them  a  satisfactory  answer,  it  is  above  all  things  necessary  not
to  assert  an  absolute  significance  for  the  abstract  formulae  of
understanding,  or  to  suppose  that  each  of  the  two  terms  in  an
antithesis  has  an  independent  meaning  and  truth.  This  however
is  the  general  position  taken  by  the  metaphysicians  before  Kant,
and  appears  in  their  cosmological  discussions,  which  for  that
reason  were  incapable  of  compassing  their  purpose,  and  of  under-
standing the  phenomena  of  the  world.  Observe  how  they  proceed
with  the  distinction  between  freedom  and  necessity,  in  their
application  of  these  categories  to  Nature  and  Mind.  Nature  they
regard  as  subject  in  its  workings  to  necessity ;  Mind,  they  hold
to  be  free.  No  doubt  there  is  a  real  foundation  for  this  dis-
tinction in  the  very  core  of  the  Mind  itself:  but  freedom  and
necessity,  when  opposed  in  the  abstract,  are  terms  applicable
only  in  the  finite  world  to  which,  as  such,  they  belong.  A
freedom  involving  no  necessity,  and  mere  necessity,  without
freedom,  are  abstract  and  in  this  way  untrue  formula  of  thought.
Freedom  essentially  implies  a  meeting  of  elements,  now  and
always  constituted  by  its  own  laws,  and  so  far  necessary.
Necessity,  again,  in  the  ordinary  acceptation  of  the  term  in
popular  philosophy,  means  determination  from  without  only ;
as  in  finite  mechanics,  a  body  moves  only  when  it  is  struck  by
another  body,  and  moves  in  the  direction  communicated  to  it  by
the  impact.  This  however  is  a  merely  external  necessity,  not
the  real  inward  necessity  which  is  identical  with  freedom.

The  case  is  similar  with  the  contrast  of  Good  and  Evil, — the
favourite  contrast  of  the  introspective  modern  world.  If  we
regard  Evil  as  possessing  a  fixity  of  its  own,  apart  and  distinct
from  Good,  we  are  to  a  certain  extent  right :  there  is  an  opposi-
tion between  them :  nor  do  those  who  maintain  the  apparent
and  relative  character  of  the  opposition  mean  that  Evil  and  Good
in  the  Absolute  are  one,  or,  in  accordance  with  the  modern
phrase,  that  a  thing  first  becomes  evil  from  our  way  of  looking
at  it.  The  error  arises  when  we  take  Evil  as  a  permanent
positive,  instead  of  what  it  really  is,  a  negative,  which  though  it
would  fain  assert  itself,  has  no  real  persistence,  and  is,  in  fact,
only  the  absolute  sham- existence  of  negativity  in  itself.


60  FIRST  ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT  [36.

36.]  The  fourth  branch  of  metaphysics  is  Natural  or  Rational
Theology.  The  notion  of  God,  or  God  as  a  possible  being,  the
proofs  of  his  existence,  and  his  properties,  formed  the  study  of
this  branch.

(a)  When  understanding  thus  discusses  the  Deity,  its  main
purpose  is  to  find  what  predicates  correspond  or  not  to  the
fact  we  have  in  our  imagination  as  God.  And  in  so  doing
it  assumes  the  contrast  between  positive  and  negative  to  be
absolute  and  inflexible;  and  hence  in  the  long  run,  nothing
is  left  for  the  notion,  as  understanding  takes  it,  but  the  empty
abstraction  of  indeterminate  Being,  of  mere  reality  or  positivity,
the  lifeless  product  of  modern  enlightenment.

(5)  The  method  of  demonstration  employed  in  finite  know-
ledge must  always  lead  to  a  wrong  position.  For  it  requires
the  statement  of  some  objective  ground  for  God's  being,  which
thus  acquires  the  appearance  of  being  derived  from  something
else.  This  mode  of  proof,  guided  as  it  is  by  the  canon  of  mere
analytical  identity,  is  embarrassed  by  the  difficulty  of  passing
from  the  finite  to  the  infinite.  Either  the  finitude  of  the  actual
world,  which  is  left  as  much  a  fact  as  it  was  before,  clings
to  the  notion  of  Deity,  and  God  has  to  be  defined  as  the
immediate  substance  of  that  world, — which  is  Pantheism :  or
He  remains  an  object  distinct  from  the  subject,  and  in  this  way,
finite, — which  is  Dualism.

(c)  The  attributes  of  God  which  ought  to  be  various  and
precise,  were,  properly  speaking,  lost  in  haze,  in  the  abstract
notion  of  pure  reality,  of  indeterminate  Being.  Still  in  our
material  thought,  the  finite  world  continues,  meanwhile,  to  have
a  real  being,  with  God  as  a  sort  of  antithesis :  and  thus  arises
the  further  picture  of  different  relations  of  God  to  the  world.
These,  formulated  as  properties,  must,  on  the  one  hand,  being
relations  to  finite  states,  themselves  possess  a  finite  character
(giving  us  such  properties  as  just,  gracious,  mighty,  wise,  &c.) ;
on  the  other  hand  they  must  be  infinite.  Now  on  this  level
of  thought  the  only  means,  and  a  hazy  one,  of  reconciling
these  opposing  requirements  was  quantitative  exaltation  of  the


36.]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD-.  61

properties,  forcing  them  into  the  unconditioned  sphere,  or  the
sensus  eminentlor.  But  it  was  an  expedient  which  really  de-
stroyed the  property  and  left  a  mere  name.

The  object  of  the  old  metaphysical  theology  was  to  see  how
far  unassisted  reason  could  go  in  the  knowledge  of  God.
Certainly  a  reason-derived  knowledge  of  God  is  the  highest
problem  of  philosophy.  The  earliest  teachings  of  .religion  are
figurate  conceptions  of  God.  These  conceptions,  as  the  Creed
arranges  them,  are  imparted  to  us  in  youth.  They  are  the
doctrines  of  our  religion,  and  in  so  far  as  the  individual  rests
his  faith  on  these  doctrines  and  feels  them  to  be  the  truth,  he
has  all  he  needs  as  a  Christian.  Such  is  faith  :  and  the  science
of  this  faith  is  Theology,  But  until  Theology  is  something  more
than  a  bare  enumeration  and  compilation  of  these  doctrines  ab
extra.,  it  has  no  right  to  the  title  of  science.  Even  the  method
so  much  in  vogue  at  present — the  purely  historical  mode  of
treatment — which  for  example  reports  what  has' been  said  by
this  or  the  other  Father  of  the  Church — does  not  invest  theology
with  a  genuinely  scientific  character.  That  result  is  not  reached
until  at  length  thought  gets  a  full  grasp  of  the  matter,  and  that
is  the  proper  business  of  philosophy.  Genuine  theology  is  thus
at  the  same  time  a  real  philosophy  of  religion,  as  it  was,  we  may
add,  in  the  Middle  Ages.

And  now  let  us  examine  this  rational  theology  more  narrowly.
It  was  a  science  which  approached  God  not  by  reason  but  by
understanding,  and,  in  its  mode  of  thought,  employed  the  terms
without  any  sense  of  their  mutual  limitations  and  connexions.
The  notion  of  God  formed  the  subject  of  discussion  ;  and  yet  the
criterion  of  our  knowledge  was  derived  from  such  an  extraneous
source  as  the  materialised  conception  of  God.  Now  thought
must  be  unimpeded  in  its  action.  It  is  no  doubt  to  be  remem-
bered, that  the  result  of  independent  thought  harmonises  with
the  import  of  the  Christian  religion  : — for  the  Christian  religion
is  a  revelation  of  reason.  But  such  a  harmony  surpassed  the
efforts  of  rational  theology.  It  proposed  to  express  the
figurate  conception  of  God  in  terms  of  thought ;  but  it
resulted  in  a  notion  of  God  which  was  what  we  may  call  the
abstraction  of  positivity  or  reality,  to  the  exclusion  of  all
negation.  God  was  accordingly  defined  to  be  the  most  real
of  all  beings.  Any  one  can  see  however  that  this  most  real  of
beings,  in  which  negation  forms  no  part,  is  the  very  opposite  of
what  it  ought  to  be  and  of  what  understanding  supposes  it  to
be.  Instead  of  being  ample  and  profound  above  all  measure,  it
is  so  narrowly  conceived,  that  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  extremely
poor  and  altogether  empty.  It  is  with  reason  that  the  heart


62  .  FIRST  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [36.

craves  a  varied  and  unified  content ;  but  without  definite  feature,
that  is,  without  negation,  contained  in  the  notion,  there  can
only  be  an  abstraction.  When  the  notion  of  God  is  apprehended
only  as  that  of  abstract  or  most  positive  being,  God  is,  as  it
were,  relegated  to  another  world  beyond :  and  to  speak  of  a
knowledge  of  him  would  be  meaningless.  Where  there  is  no
distinction  of  elements,  knowledge  is  impossible.  Mere  light  is
mere  darkness.

The  second  problem  of  rational  theology  was  to  prove  the  exist-
ence of  God.  Now,  in  this  matter,  the  main  point  to  be  noted  is
that  demonstration,  as  the  understanding  employs  it,  means  the
dependence  of  one  truth  on  another.  The  method  has  a  fixed
point,  a  hypothesis,  from  which  something  else  follows ;  and  it
exhibits  the  dependence  of  some  truth  from  an  assumed  starting-
point.  Hence,  if  this  mode  of  demonstration  is  applied  to  the
existence  of  God,  it  can  only  mean  that  the  being  of  God  is  to
depend  on  other  terms  of  thought,  which  will  then  constitute  the
ground  of  his  being.  It  is  at  once  evident  that  this  will  lead
to  some  mistake :  for  God  must  be  simply  and  solely  the  ground
of  everything,  and  in  so  far  not  dependent  upon  anything.  And
a  perception  of  this  danger  has  in  modern  times  led  some  to  say
that  God's  existence  is  not  capable  of  proof,  but  must  be  im-
mediately or  intuitively  apprehended.  Reason,  however,  and
even  sound  common  sense,  give  demonstration  a  meaning  quite
different  from  that  of  the  understanding.  The  demonstration  of
reason  no  doubt  starts  from  something  which  is  not  God.  But,  as
it  advances,  it  does  not  leave  the  starting-point  a  mere  unex-
plained fact,  which  is  what  it  was.  On  the  contrary  it  exhibits
that  point  as  derivative  and  called  into  being,  and  then  God  is
seen  to  be  primary,  truly  immediate  and  self-subsisting,  with  the
means  of  derivation  wrapt  up  and  absorbed  in  himself.  Those
who  say  :  '  Consider  Nature,  and  Nature  will  lead  you  to  God ;
you  will  find  an  absolute  final  cause :'  do  not  mean  that  God  is
something  derivative :  they  mean  that  it  is  we  who  proceed  to
God  himself  from  his  '  other/  and  in  this  way  God,  though  the
consequence,  is  also  the  absolute  ground  of  the  initial  step.  The
relation  of  the  two  things  is  reversed,  and  what  came  as  a
consequence,  being  shown  to  be  an  antecedent,  the  original
antecedent  is  reduced  to  a  consequence.  The  same  thing  recurs
whenever  reason  demonstrates.

If  in  the  light  of  the  present  discussion  we  cast  one  glance
more  on  the  metaphysical  method  as  a  whole,  we  find  its  main
characteristic  was  to  make  abstract  identity  its  principle  and  to
try  to  apprehend  the  objects  of  reason  by  the  abstract  and  finite
categories  of  the  understanding.  But  this  infinite  of  the  under-
standing, this  pure  essence,  is  still  finite :  it  has  excluded  all  the


36.]  TOWARDS  THE OBJECTIVE WORLD.  63

variety  of  particular  things,  which  thus  limit  and  deny  it.
Instead  of  winning  a  concrete,  this  metaphysic  kept  steadily  to
an  abstract,  identity.  Its  good  point  was  the  perception  that
thought  constitutes  the  essence  of  all  that  is.  It  derived  its
materials  from  earlier  philosophers,  particularly  the  Schoolmen.
In  speculative  philosophy  the  understanding  undoubtedly  forms
one  factor,  but  a  factor  which  ought  not  to  close  the  door  against
further  investigation.  Plato  is  no  metaphysician  of  this  im-
perfect type,  still  less  Aristotle,  although  the  contrary  is  generally
believed.


CHAPTEK IV.


SECOND ATTITUDE OF THOUGHT  TOWARDS THE OBJECTIVE WORLD.

I. The  Empirical  School.

37.]  UNDER  these  circumstances  a  double  want  began  to  be  felt.
Partly  it  was  the  need  of  a  subject-matter  in  which  variety  was
unified,  as  a  counterpoise  to  the  abstract  theories  of  the  under-
standing1, which  is  unable  to  advance  unaided  from  generalities
to  specialisation  and  determination.  Partly,  too,  it  was  the
demand  for  something  fixed  and  secure,  so  as  to  exclude  the
possibility  of  proving  anything  and  everything  in  the  sphere,
and  according  to  the  method,  of  the  finite  foramlse  of  thought.
Such  was  the  genesis  of  Empirical  philosophy,  which  abandons
the  search  for  truth  in  thought  itself,  and  goes  to  fetch  it  from
Experience,  the  outward  and  the  inward  present.

The  rise  of  Empiricism  is  due  to  the  need  thus  stated  of  con-
crete contents,  and  a  firm  footing — needs  which  the  abstract
metaphysic  of  the  understanding  failed  to  satisfy.  Now  by
concreteness  of  contents  it  is  meant  that  we  must  see  that  the
objects  of  consciousness  have  an  innate  character  of  their  own
and  are  the  unity  of  distinct  characteristics.  But,  as  we  have
already  seen,  this  is  by  no  means  the  case  with  the  metaphysic
of  understanding,  if  it  conform  to  its  principle.  With  the  mere
understanding,  thinking  is  limited  to  the  form  of  an  abstract
universal,  and  can  never  advance  to  the  particular  phases  of  this
universal.  Thus  we  find  the  metaphysicians  engaged  in  an
attempt  to  elicit  by  the  instrumentality  of  thought,  what  was
the  essence  or  fundamental  attribute  of  the  Soul.  The  Soul,
they  said,  is  simple.  The  ascription  of  this  attribute  to  the  Soul
points  to  simplicity  pure  and  simple,  from  which  difference  is


SECOND  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT.  65

excluded  :  difference,  or  composition,  being  made  the  funda-
mental attribute  of  body,  or  of  matter  in  general.  Clearly,  in
simplicity  of  this  narrow  type  we  have  a  very  shallow  category,
quite  incapable  of  comprehending  the  wealth  of  the  Soul  or  of  the
mind.  When  it  thus  appeared  that  abstract  metaphysical  think-
ing was  inadequate,  it  was  felt  that  we  must  have  recourse  to
empirical  psychology.  The  same  happened  in  the  case  of  Ra-
tional Physics.  The  current  phrases  there  were,  for  instance,  that
space  is  infinite,  that  Nature  makes  no  bound,  &c.  Evidently
this  phraseology  was  wholly  unsatisfactory  in  presence  of  the
luxuriant  life  of  nature.


38.]  To  some  extent  the  source  of  Empiricism  is  common
to  it  with  the  above  metaphysic.  It  is  in  our  materialized
conceptions,  i.e.  in  the  facts  which  emanate,  in  the  first  instance,
from  experience,  that  metaphysic  also  finds  the  guarantee  for
the  correctness  of  its  definitions  (including  both  its  assumptions
and  its  more  detailed  statements).  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it
must  be  noted  that  the  single  sensation  is  not  the  same  thing
as  experience,  and  that  the  advocates  of  experience  elevate
the  facts  included  under  sensation,  feeling,  and  perception  into
the  form  of  generalized  conceptions,  propositions  or  laws.  This,
however,  must  only  be  taken  to  mean  that  these  general  forms
of  relation,  such  as  force,  are  to  have  no  further  import  or
validity  of  their  own  beyond  what  is  derived  from  sensation,
and  that  no  connexion  shall  be  deemed  properly  qualified  ex-
cept what  can  be  shown  to  exist  in  the  phenomenal  world.
And  on  the  side  of  the  knowing  subject,  in  the  fact  that  in
sensation  consciousness  is  directly  present  and  certain  of  itself,
we  see  where  empirical  cognition  can  plant  a  firm  foot.

In  Empiricism  lies  the  great  principle  that  whatever  is  true
must  be  in  the  actual  world  and  present  to  sensation.  This
principle  contradicts  that  everlasting  'ought  to  be'  which  puffs
up  reflection  to  treat  the  actual  present  with  scorn,  and  to  point
to  a  scene  beyond — a  scene  that  has  no  existence  or  locality
except  in  the  understanding  of  those  who  talk  of  it.  No  less
than  Empiricism  (§  7)  philosophy  recognises  only  what  is ;
having  nothing  to  do  with  what  merely  ought  to  be  and  what

F


66  SECOND  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [38

is  thus  confessed  not  to  exist.  On  the  subjective  side,  too,  it
is  right  to  notice  the  valuable  principle  of  freedom  involved  in
Empiricism.  For  the  main  lesson  of  Empiricism  is  that  man
must  see  for  himself  and  feel  that  he  is  present  in  those  facts
of  knowledge  which  he  has  to  accept.

When  it  is  carried  out  to  its  legitimate  consequences,  Em-
piricism— being  in  its  facts  limited  to  the  finite  sphere — denies
the  super-sensible  in  general,  or  at  least  any  knowledge  of  it
which  would  mark  its  character,  and  leaves  thought  no  powers
except  abstraction,  and  formal  universality  and  identity.  And
here  we  find  the  delusion  that  lies  at  the  bottom  of  scientific
empiricism.  It  employs  the  metaphysical  categories  of  matter,
force,  those  of  one,  many,  generality,  infinity,  &c. ;  following
the  clue  given  by  these  categories  it  proceeds  to  draw  con-
clusions, and  in  so  doing  pre-supposes  and  applies  the  syllogistic
form.  And  all  the  while  it  is  unaware  that  it  contains  meta-
physics— in  wielding  which,  it  makes  use  of  those  categories
and  their  combinations  in  a  style  utterly  uncritical  and  un-
conscious.

From  Empiricism  came  the  cry :  '  No  more  aimless  wandering  in
empty  abstractions,  but  look  at  your  hands,  take  hold  of  man
and  nature  as  they  are  here  before  you,  and  enjoy  the  present
moment.'  Nobody  can  deny  that  there  is  a  good  deal  of  truth
in  these  words.  The  every-day  world,  what  is  here  and  now,
was  a  good  exchange  for  the  vain  world  beyond — for  the  mirages
and  the  phantasms  of  the  abstract  understanding.  And  thus  a
fully,  self-sufficing  phase  of  truth  was  gained, — that  firm  and
fast  support  so  much  missed  in  the  old  metaphysic.  Finite
principles  are  the  most  that  the  understanding  can  pick  out —
and  these  eventually  turning  out  untenable  and  fluctuating,  the
structure  they  supported  must  collapse  with  a  crash.  Always  the
instinct  of  reason  is  to  find  an  infinite  self- satisfy  ing  principle.
As  yet,  the  time  had  not  come  for  finding  it  in  thought.
Hence  this  instinct  seized  upon  the  present  moment,  what  is
here  :  the  individual  object  (this)  :  where  doubtless  one  can
discover  the  infinite  form,  but  not  in  the  genuine  existence  of
that  form.  The  external  world  is  the  truth,  if  it  could  but  know
it :  for  the  truth  is  actual  and  must  exist.  The  infinite  principle,
the  self-centred  truth,  therefore,  is  in  the  world  for  reason  to
discover  :  though  it  exists  in  an  individual  and  sensible  shape,


38.]  TOWARDS  THE OBJECTIVE WORLD.  67

and  not  in  its  truth.  Besides,  this  school  makes  sensation  the
form  in  which  we  are  to  get  our  notions  :  and  in  this  consists  the
failure  of  Empiricism.  Sensation  as  such  is  always  individual,
always  transient  :  nor  indeed  is  sensation  the  terminus  of  the
course  of  knowledge  —  which,  on  the  contrary,  proceeds  to  find
out  the  universal  and  permanent  element  in  the  individuals  we
perceive.  This  is  the  process  leading  from  simple  sensation  to
experience.

In  order  to  form  experiences,  Empiricism  makes  especial  use  of
the  form  of  Analysis.  .  In  sensation  we  have  a  group  made  up  of
many  elements  or  attributes  which  we  are  expected  to  peel  off
one  by  one,  like  the  coats  of  an  onion.  Now,  what  is  the  mean-
ing of  this  process  ?  We  disintegrate  and  take  to  pieces  these
attributes  which  have  coalesced,  and  we  add  nothing  but  our
own  act  of  disintegration.  Yet  analysis  is  the  process  from  the
immediacy  of  sensation  to  thought  :  those  attributes,  which  the
object  analysed  contains  in  perfect  union,  receive  the  form  of
universality  by  being  separated.  Empiricism  labours  under  a
delusion,  if  it  supposes  that,  while  analysing  the  objects,  it  leaves
them  as  they  were  :  it  really  transforms  the  concrete  into  an
abstract.  And  as  a  consequence  of  this  change  the  living  thing
must  die  :  life  can  exist  only  in  the  concrete  unit.  Not  that  we
can  do  without  this  division,  if  it  be  our  intention  to  comprehend.
Mind  itself  is  an  inherent  division.  The  error  lies  in  forgetting
that  this  is  only  one-half  of  the  process,  and  that  the  main  point
is  the  re-union  of  what  has  been  divided.  And  it  is  where
analysis  never  gets  beyond  the  stage  of  division  that  the  words
of  the  poet  are  true  :

"  Encheiresin  Naturae  nennt'8  bie  Sljemie,
@£ottet  ifjrer  felfcft,  imb  tceif  nicfjt,  we  :
4?at  bte  Sfyette  in  ifjrer  «£anb,

leiber  nur  bag  getftige  93anb."


Analysis  starts  from  the  concrete  ;  and  the  possession  of  this
material  gives  it  a  considerable  advantage  over  the  abstract
thinking  of  the  old  metaphysics.  It  gives  fixity  to  the  differences
in  things  ;  and  this  is  very  important  :  but  these  very  differences
are  nothing  after  all  but  abstract  attributes,  i.  e.  thoughts.  These
thoughts,  it  is  supposed,  contain  the  real  essence  of  the  objects  ;
and  thus  once  more  we  see  the  axiom  of  bygone  metaphysics
reappear,  that  the  truth  of  things  lies  in  thought.

Let  us  compare  the  empirical  theory  with  that  of  the  meta-
physicians in  the  matter  of  their  respective  contents.  We  find
the  latter,  as  already  stated,  taking  for  its  facts  the  universal
objects  of  the  reason,  viz.  God,  the  Soul,  and  the  World  —  and


68  SECOND  ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT  [39.

these  facts,  derived  from  popular  conception,  it  was  the  problem
of  philosophy  to  reduce  into  the  form  of  thoughts.  Another
specimen  of  the  same  method  is  the  Scholastic  philosophy.  Its
facts  were  accepted  without  criticism  from  the  dogmas  of  the
Christian  Church :  and  it  aimed  at  fixing  their  character  and
giving  them  a  systematic  arrangement  through  thought.  The
facts  on  which  Empiricism  is  based  are  of  an  entirely  different
kind.  They  are  the  sensible  facts  of  nature  and  the  facts  of  the
finite  mind.  In  other  words,  Empiricism  deals  with  a  finite
material — and  the  old  metaphysicians  had  an  infinite, — though,
let  us  add,  they  made  this  infinite  content  finite  by  the  finite
form  of  the  understanding.  The  same  finitude  of  form  reappears
in  Empiricism — but  here  the  sum  of  finite  facts  is  finite  also.  To
this  extent,  then,  both  modes  of  philosophising  have  the  same
method ;  both  proceed  from  data  or  assumptions,  which  they
accept  as  ultimate  fact.  Generally  speaking,  Empiricism  finds
the  truth  in  the  outward  world;  and  even  if  it  allow  a  super-
sensible world,  it  holds  knowledge  of  that  world  to  be  impossible,
and  would  restrict  us  to  the  province  of  sensation.  This  doctrine
when  systematically  carried  out  produces  what  has  been  latterly
termed  Materialism.  Materialism  of  this  stamp  looks  upon
matter,  qua  matter,  as  the  genuine  objective  world.  But  with
matter  we  are  at  once  introduced  to  a  new  abstraction,  which  as
such  cannot  be  perceived  :  and  it  may  be  maintained  that  there
is  no  matter,  because  as  it  exists,  it  is  always  something  definite
and  concrete.  Yet  the  abstraction  we  term  matter  is  supposed  to
lie  at  the  bottom  of  the  whole  world  of  sense,  and  expresses  the
sense-world  in  its  simplest  terms  as  out-and-out  individualisation,
and  hence  a  congeries  of  points  in  mutual  exclusion.  So  long
then  as  this  sensible  sphere  is  and  continues  to  be  for  Empiricism
a  mere  datum,  we  have  a  doctrine  of  bondage :  for  we  become
free,  when  we  are  confronted  by  no  absolutely  alien  world,  but  by
a  fact  which  is  our  second  self.  Consistently  with  this  point  of
view,  besides,  reason  and  unreason  can  only  be  subjective  :  in
other  words,  we  must  take  what  is  given  just  as  it  is,  and  we
have  no  right  to  ask  whether  and  to  what  extent  it  is  rational  in
its  own  nature.


39.]  Touching  this  principle  it  has  been  justly  observed  that,
in  what  we  call  Experience,  as  distinct  from  the  individual
sensation  of  individual  facts,  there  are  two  elements.  First,
there  is  the  infinitely  complex  matter,  which  so  far  as  itself
is  concerned  is  individualised :  secondly,  there  is  the  form,  as  seen
in  the  characteristics  of  universality  and  necessity.  Empiricism


4o.]  TOWARDS THE OBJECTIVE WORLD.  69

no  doubt  can  point  to  many,  almost  innumerable,  similar
perceptions  :  but,  after  all,  no  multitude,  however  great,  can
be  the  same  thing  as  universality.  Similarly,  Empiricism
reaches  so  far  as  the  perception  of  changes  in  succession  and
of  objects  in  juxta- position  or  co-existence  ;  but  it  presents  no
necessary  connexion.  If  sensation,  therefore,  is  to  maintain  its
claim  to  be  the  sole  basis  of  what  men  hold  for  truth,  univer-
sality and  necessity  can  have  no  right  to  exist :  they  become
an  accident  of  our  minds,  a  mere  custom,  the  content  of  which
might  be  otherwise  constituted  than  it  is.

It  is  an  important  corollary  of  this  theory,  that  in  the  em-
pirical mode  of  treatment  the  truths  and  rules  of  justice  and
morality,  as  well  as  the  body  of  religion,  are  exhibited  as  the
work  of  chance,  and  stripped  of  their  objective  character  and
inner  truth.

The  scepticism  of  Hume,  by  which  this  observation  was  chiefly
made,  should  be  clearly  marked  off  from  Greek  scepticism.
Hume  founds  his  remarks  on  the  truth  of  the  empirical  element,
on  feeling  and  sensation,  and  proceeds  to  attack  universal  truths
and  laws,  because  they  do  not  derive  their  authority  from  sense-
perception.  So  far  was  ancient  scepticism  from  making  feeling
and  sensation  a  canon  of  truth,  that  it  turned  against  the  de-
liverances of  sense  first  of  all.  (On  Modern  Scepticism  as  com-
pared with  Ancient,  see  Schelling  and  Hegel's  Critical  Journal
of  Philosophy  :  1802,  vol.  I.  i.)

II. The  Critical  Philosophy.

40-]  In  common  with  Empiricism  the  Critical  Philosophy
assumes  that  experience  affords  the  one  sole  foundation  for
cognitions.  But  a  cognition,  as  it  holds,  does  not  express  the
truth,  and  means  only  a  knowledge  of  the  phenomenon  or
appearance.

The  Critical  theory  starts  originally  from  the  distinction  of
elements  presented  in  the  analysis  of  experience,  viz.  the  matter
of  sense,  and  its  universal  relations.  Taking  into  account


70  SECOND ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [41.

the  observations  on  this  distinction  made  in  the  paragraph
preceding,  viz.  that  sensation  does  not  explicitly  apprehend
more  than  an  individual  and  an  occurrence  or  phenomenon,
it  sticks  at  the  same  time  to  the  fact  that  universality  and
necessity  are  seen  to  perform  a  function  equally  essential  in
constituting  what  is  called  experience.  This  element,  not
being  derived  from  the  empirical  facts  as  such,  must  belong
to  the  spontaneity  of  thought ;  in  other  words,  it  is  a  priori.
The  Categories  or  Notions  of  the  Understanding  are  the  objective
feature  in  the  cognitions  of  experience.  In  every  case  they
involve  a  connective  reference,  and  hence  through  their  means
are  formed  synthetic  judgments  a  priori,  that  is,  primary  and
underivative  connexions  of  contraries  with  each  other.

Even  Hume's  scepticism  does  not  deny  that  the  character-
istics of  universality  and  necessity  are  found  in  cognition.
And  in  Kant  this  fact  remains  a  presumption  after  all ;  it
may  be  said,  to  use  the  ordinary  phraseology  of  the  sciences,
that  Kant  did  no  more  than  offer  another  explanation  of
the  fact.

41.]  The  Critical  Philosophy  proceeds  to  test  the  value  of
the  categories  employed  in  metaphysics,  as  well  as  in  other
sciences  and  in  ordinary  conception.  This  scrutiny  however
is  not  directed  to  the  content  of  these  categories,  nor  does
it  inquire  into  the  exact  relation  they  bear  to  one  another  :
but  simply  asks  how  far  they  are  affected  by  the  contrast
between  subjective  and  objective.  The  contrast,  as  we  are
to  understand  it  here,  bears  upon  the  distinction  (see  preced.  §)
of  the  two  elements  included  in  experience.  The  name  of
objectivity  is  here  given  to  the  element  of  universality  and
necessity,  i.  e.  to  the  categories  themselves,  or  what  is  called
the  a  priori  constituent.  The  Critical  Philosophy  however
extended  the  contrast  so  far,  that  the  subjectivity  or  knowing
mind  comes  to  embrace  the  whole  range  of  experience,  including
both  its  elements ;  and  nothing  remains  on  the  other  side
but  the  '  thing-in-itself.'

The  special forms  of  the  a  priori  element,  in  other  words,


4i.]  TOWARDS THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  71

of  thought,  which  in  spite  of  its  objectivity  is  looked  upon
as  a  purely  subjective  act,  present  themselves  as  follows  in
a  systematic  order  which,  it  may  be  remarked,  is  solely  based
upon  the  history  of  psychology.

(1)  A  very  important  step  was  undoubtedly  made,  when
the  terms  of  the  old  metaphysic  were  subjected  to  scrutiny.
The  plain  straight-forward  thinker  managed  his  unsuspecting
way  among  those  categories  which  had  sprung  up  naturally
of  themselves.  It  never  occurred  to  him  to  ask  to  what  extent
these  categories  had  worth  and  authority.  If,  as  has  been
said,  it  is  characteristic  of  free  thought  to  allow  no  assump-
tions to  pass  unquestioned,  the  old  metaphysicians  were  not
independent  thinkers.  They  accepted  their  categories  as  they
were,  without  further  trouble,  as  a  sort  of  a  priori  datum,  not
yet  investigated  by  reflection.  The  Critical  philosophy  reversed
this.  Kant  undertook  to  examine  how  far  the  forms  of  thought
were  capable  of  assisting  the  knowledge  of  truth.  In  particular
he  demanded  a  criticism  of  the  faculty  of  cognition  as  pre-
liminary to  its  exercise.  That  is  a  fair  demand,  if  it  mean
that  the  forms  of  thought  must  be  made  an  object  of  knowledge.
Unfortunately  there  soon  creeps  in  the  misconception  of
seeking  knowledge  before  you  know, — the  error  of  refusing
to  enter  the  water  until  you  have  learnt  to  swim.  True,  indeed,
the  forms  of  thought  should  be  subjected  to  a  scrutiny  before
they  are  used :  yet  what  is  this  scrutiny  but  ipso  facto  a
cognition  ?  So  that  what  we  want  is  a  combination  in  our
process  of  knowledge  of  the  action  of  the  forms  of  thought
with  a  criticism  of  them.  The  forms  of  thought  must  be
treated  on  their  own  merits  apart  from  all  other  conditions  :
they  are  at  once  the  object  of  research  and  the  action  of  that
object.  Hence  they  must  examine  themselves,  determine  the
limits,  and  show  the  defects  attaching  to  their  very  nature.
This  is  the  action  of  thought,  which  will  hereafter  be  specially
considered  under  the  name  of  Dialectic,  and  regarding  which
we  need  only  at  the  outset  observe,  that  instead  of  being,  as
many  suppose,  brought  to  bear  upon  the  categories  from  with-
out, it  is  immanent  and  natural  to  them.

We  may  therefore  state  the  first  point  in  Kant's  philosophy
as  follows :  Thought  must  itself  investigate  how  far  it  has
a  capacity  of  knowledge.  People  in  the  present  day  have
got  over  Kant  and  his  philosophy :  everybody  wants  to  get
further.  But  there  are  two  ways  of  going  further — a  back-
ward and  a  forward.  The  light  of  criticism  soon  shows  that
many  of  our  modern  essays  in  philosophy  are  mere  repetitions


72  SECOND  ATTITUDE OF THOUGHT  [41.

of  the  old  metaphysical  method,  an  endless  and  uncritical
thinking-  at  random,  following  the  natural  bent  of  each  man's
mind.

(2)  Kant's  criticism  of  the  categories  suffers  from  the  grave
defect  of  viewing  them,  not  absolutely  and  for  their  own
sake,  but  in  order  to  see  whether  they  are  subjective  or  objective.
In  the  language  of  common  life  we  mean  by  objective  every-
thing existing  outside  of  us  and  reaching  us  from  without
by  means  of  sensation.  What  Kant  did,  was  to  deny  that
the  categories,  such  as  cause  and  effect,  were,  in  this  sense
of  the  word,  objective,  or  given  in  sensation,  and  to  maintain
on  the  contrary  that  they  proceeded  from  our  own  mental
faculty,  from  the  spontaneity  of  thought.  To  that  extent
therefore,  and  in  this  sense  of  the  terms,  they  were  subjective.
And  yet  in  spite  of  this,  Kant  gives  fhe  name  objective  to
what  is  thought,  to  the  universal  and  necessary,  while  he
describes  as  subjective  whatever  is  merely  felt.  This  arrange-
ment evidently  reverses  the  first-mentioned  use  of  the  word,
and  has  caused  Kant  to  be  charged  with  confusing  language.
But  the  charge  is  unfair.  When  we  more  narrowly  consider
the  facts  of  the  case,  the  vulgar  believe  that  the  objects  of
sensation  which  confront  them,  such  as  an  individual  animal,
or  a  single  star,  are  independent  and  permanent  existences,
compared  with  which,  thoughts  seem  unsubstantial  and  de-
pendent on  something  else.  In  fact  however  the  perceptions
of  sense  are  the  properly  dependent  and  secondary  feature,
while  the  thoughts  are  really  independent  and  primary.  This
being  so,  Kant  gave  the  title  objective  to  the  intellectual  factor,
to  the  universal  and  necessary :  and  he  was  quite  justified  in
so  doing.  Our  sensations  on  the  other  hand  are  subjective ;
for  sensations  lack  stability  in  their  own  nature,  and  are  no
less  fleeting  and  evanescent  than  thought  is  permanent  and
self-subsisting.  At  the  present  day,  the  special  line  of  distinc-
tion established  by  Kant  between  the  subjective  and  objective
is  adopted  by  the  phraseology  of  the  educated  world.  Thus
the  criticism  of  a  work  of  art  ought,  it  is  said,  to  be  not
subjective,  but  objective;  in  other  words,  instead  of  springing
from  the  particular  and  accidental  feeling  or  temper  of  the
moment,  it  should  embrace  those  general  points  of  view  which
the  laws  of  art  establish.  In  the  same  acceptation  we  can
distinguish  in  any  scientific  pursuit  the  objective  and  the  sub-
jective interest  of  the  investigation.

But  after  all,  objectivity  of  thought,  in  Kant's  sense,  is
again  to  a  certain  extent  subjective.  Thoughts,  according  to
Kant,  although  universal  and  necessary  categories,  are  only
our  thoughts — separated  by  an  impassable  gulf  from  the


42.]  TOWARDS THE OBJECTIVE WORLD.  73

thing-,  as  it  exists  apart  from  our  knowledge.  But  a  truly
objective  thought,  far  from  being  merely  ours,  must  at  the
same  time  be  what  we  have  to  discover  in  things,  and  in  every
object  of  perception.

Objective  and  subjective  are  convenient  expressions  in  current
use,  the  employment  of  which  may  easily  lead  to  confusion.
Up  to  this  point,  the  discussion  has  shown  three  meanings
of  objectivity.  First,  it  means  what  subsists  externally,  in
distinction  from  which,  the  subjective  is  what  is  only  supposed,
dreamed,  &c.  Secondly,  it  has  the  meaning,  attached  to  it
by  Kant,  of  the  Universal  and  necessary,  as  distinguished
from  the  particular,  subjective  and  occasional  character  which
belongs  to  our  sensations.  Thirdly,  as  has  been  just  explained,
it  means  thought  as  the  real  essence  of  the  existing  thing,
in  contradistinction  from  that  which  is  only  thought  by  us,
and  which  consequently  is  still  separated  from  the  thing  itself,
as  it  exists  apart  from  our  knowledge  of  it.

42.]  (a)  The  Theoretical  Faculty. — Cognition  qua  cog-
nition. The  specific  ground  or  basis  of  the  categories  is  declared
by  the  Critical  system  to  lie  in  the  primary  unity  or  identity
of  the  '  I '  in  thought, — what  Kant  calls  the  '  transcendental
unity  of  self-consciousness.'  The  impressions  from  feeling  and
perception  are,  if  we  look  to  their  contents,  constituted  of  a
chaotic  congeries  of  elements :  and  the  diversity  or  plurality
is  equally  conspicuous  in  their  form.  For  sense  is  marked  by
a  mutual  exclusion  of  members ;  and  that  under  two  aspects,
namely  space  and  time,  which  being  the  forms,  that  is  to  say,
the  universal  type  of  perception,  are  themselves  a  priori.  This
congeries,  afforded  by  sensation  and  perception,  must  however
be  reduced  to  an  identity  or  primary  and  fundamental  unity.
To  accomplish  this  the  'I'  brings  itself  to  bear  upon  it  and
unites  it  there  in  one  undivided  consciousness.  This,  Kant
calls  'pure  apperception.'  The  specific  modes  in  which  the
diversified  congeries  of  sense  is  referred  to  the  '  I,'  are  the  a,
priori  concepts  of  the  understanding,  the  Categories.

Kant,  it  is  well  known,  did  not  put  himself  to  much
trouble  in  discovering  the  categories.  '  I,'  the  unit  of  self-
consciousness,  being  quite  abstract  and  completely  indeter-
minate, the  question  arises,  how  we  are  to  get  at  the


74  SECOND ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT  [42.

specialized  forms  of  the  '  I,'  the  categories  ?  Fortunately,  the
common  logic  offers  to  our  hand  an  empirical  classification
of  the  kinds  of  judgment.  Now,  to  judge  is  the  same  as  to
think  of  a  determinate  object.  Thus  the  various  modes  of
judgment,  as  enumerated  to  our  hand,  provide  us  with  the
several  categories  of  thought.  The  philosophy  of  Fichte  will
always  have  this  credit,  that  it  called  attention  to  the  need
for  exhibiting  the  law  of  these  categories  and  for  giving  a
genuine  deduction  of  them.  Fichte  ought  to  have  produced
at  least  one  .effect  on  the  method  of  logical  treatment.  One
might  have  expected  that  the  general  terms  of  thought,  the
usual  stock  of  the  logicians,  including  the  several  species  of
notions,  judgments,  and  syllogisms,  would  be  no  longer  taken
up  empirically  as  a  mere  datum  of  observation,  but  be  deduced
from  the  nature  of  thought  itself.  If  thought  is  to  be  capable
of  proving  anything  at  all,  if  logic  must  insist  upon  proofs,
and  if  it  proposes  to  teach  the  theory  of  demonstration,  its
first  care  should  be  to  give  a  reason  for  its  own  subject-matter,
and  to  see  that  it  is  necessary.

(1)  Kant  therefore  holds  that  the  categories  have  their  source
in  the  fEgo,'  and  that  the  'Ego'  consequently  supplies  the
characteristics  of  universality  and  necessity.  If  we  observe
what  we  have  before  us  primarily,  we  may  describe  it  as  a
congeries  or  diversity :  and  in  the  categories  we  find  the  simple
points  or  units,  to  which  this  congeries  is  made  to  converge.
The  world  of  sense  is  a  scene  of  mutual  exclusion :  its  being  is
outside  itself.  That  is  the  fundamental  feature  of  sensation.
To  speak  of  'now'  has  no  meaning  except  in  reference  to  a
before  and  a  hereafter.  Red,  in  the  same  way,  only  subsists  by
being  opposed  to  yellow  and  blue.  Now  this  other  thing  is
outside  the  sensible  object ;  which  latter  is,  only  in  so  far  as  it
is  not  the  other,  and  only  in  so  far  as  that  other  exists.  But
thought,  or  the  '  Ego,'  occupies  a  position  the  very  reverse  of
the  sensible,  with  its  mutual  exclusions,  and  its  being  out  of
itself.  The  'I'  is  the  primary  identity — at  one  with  itself  and
all  at  home  in  itself.  The  word  '  I'  expresses  the  mere  act  of
bringing- to-bear-upon-self:  and  whatever  is  placed  in  this  unit
or  focus,  is  affected  by  it  and  transformed  into  it.  The  '  I '  is  as
it  were  the  crucible  and  the  fire  which  devours  the  freely  floating
plurality  of  sense  and  reduces  it  to  unity.  This  is  the  process


42.]  TOWARDS THE OBJECTIVE WORLD.  75

which  Kant  calls  pure  apperception  in  distinction  from  the
common  apperception,  to  which  the  plurality  it  receives  is  a
plurality  still ;  whereas  pure  apperception  is  rather  an  act  of
appropriation.

This  view  has  at  least  the  merit  of  giving  a  correct  expression
to  the  nature  of  all  consciousness.  The  tendency  of  all  man's
endeavours  is  to  understand  the  world,  to  appropriate  and
subdue  it  to  himself:  and  to  this  end  the  positive  reality  of
the  world  must  be  as  it  were  crushed  and  squashed,  in  other
words,  idealised.  At  the  same  time  we  must  note  that  it  is  nofT
the  mere  act  of  our  personal  self-consciousness,  which  introduces
an  absolute  unity  into  the  variety  of  sense.  Rather,  this  identity  r
is  itself  the  absolute  and  real  truth.  The  absolute  is,  as  it  were,
so  kind  as  to  leave  individual  things  to  their  own  enjoyment,  and
then  forces  them  back  to  the  absolute  unity.

(2)  Expressions,  like  '  transcendental  unity  of  self-consciousness,'
have  an  ugly  look  about  them,  and  suggest  a  monster  in  the
background :  but  their  meaning  is  not  so  abstruse  as  it  looks.
Kant's  meaning  of  transcendental  may  be  gathered  by  the  way
he  distinguishes  it  from  transcendent.  The  transcendent  may  be
said  to  be  what  transcends  the  categories  of  the  understanding :
a  sense  in  which  the  term  is  first  employed  in  mathematics.
Thus  in  geometry  you  are  told  to  conceive  the  circumference
of  a  circle  as  formed  of  an  infinite  number  of  infinitely  small
straight  lines.  In  other  words,  characteristics  which  the  under-
standing holds  to  be  totally  different,  the  straight  line  and
the  curve,  are  expressly  declared  to  be  identical.  Another
transcendent  -of  the  same  kind  is  the  self-consciousness,  which
is  identical  with  itself,  and  infinite  in  itself,  as  distinguished
from  the  ordinary  consciousness  which  derives  its  character  from
finite  materials.  That  unity  of  self-consciousness,  however,  Kant
calls  transcendental  only ;  and  he  meant  thereby  that  the  unity
was  only  in  our  minds  and  did  not  attach  to  the  objects  apart
from  our  knowledge  of  them.

(3)  To  regard  the  categories  as  subjective  only,  i.e.  as  a  part
of  ourselves,  must  seem  absurdly  quaint  to  the  natural  mind  ;
and  no  doubt  there  is  a  little  mistake  in  the  matter.  It  is
quite  true  however  that  the  categories  are  not  contained  in  the
sensation  as  it  is  given  us.  When,  for  instance,  we  look  at  a
piece  of  sugar,  we  find  it  is  hard,  white,  sweet,  &c.  All  these
properties  we  say  are  united  in  one  object.  Now  it  is  this  unity
that  is  not  found  in  the  sensation.  The  same  thing  happens  if  ,
we  conceive  two  events  to  stand  in  the  relation  of  cause  and  >
effect.  The  senses  only  inform  us  of  the  two  isolated  occurrences
which  follow  each  other  in  time.  But  that  the  one  is  cause,
the  other  effect,  in  other  words,  the  causal  nexus  between  the


76  SECOND  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [43.

two,  is  not  perceived  by  sense,  it  is  only  evident  to  thought.
Still,  though  the  categories,  such  as  unity,  or  cause  and  effect,
are  strictly  within  the  province  of  thought,  it  by  no  means
follows  that  they  must  be  ours  merely  and  not  also  characteristics
of  the  objects.  Kant  however  confines  them  to  the  subject-
mind,  and  his  philosophy  may  be  styled  subjective  idealism  :  for
he  holds  that  both  the  form  and  the  matter  of  knowledge  are  due
to  the  '  Ego '  or  knowing  subject,  the  form  to  our  thought,  the
matter  to  our  sensations.

If  we  look  only  at  the  content  of  this  subjective  idealism,
there  is  indeed  nothing  to  object  to.  It  might  at  first  sight  be
imagined,  that  objects  would  lose  their  reality,  when  their  unity
was  transferred  to  the  subject.  But  neither  we  nor  the  objects
would  have  anything  to  gain  by  the  mere  fact  that  they  possessed
being.  The  main  point  is  not,  that  they  are,  but  what  they  are,
and  whether  or  not  their  content  is  true.  It  does  no  good  to
the  things  to  say  merely  that  they  have  being.  What  has  being,
will  also  cease  to  be  when  time  creeps  over  it.  It  might  also  be
alleged  that  subjective  idealism  tended  to  promote  self-conceit.
But  surely  if  a  man's  world  be  the  sum  of  his  sensible  percep-
tions, he  has  no  reason  to  be  vain  of  such  a  world.  Laying
aside  therefore  as  unimportant  this  distinction  between  subjective
and  objective,  we  are  chiefly  interested  in  knowing  what  a  thing
is :  i.e.  its  content,  which  is  no  more  objective  than  it  is  sub-
jective. If  mere  existence  be  enough  to  make  objectivity,  even
a  crime  is  objective :  but  it  is  an  existence  which  is  nullity
at  the  core,  as  is  definitely  made  apparent  when  the  day  of
punishment  comes.

43-]  The  Categories  may  be  viewed  in  two  aspects.  On
the  one  hand  it  is  by  their  instrumentality  that  the  mere
perception  of  sense  rises  to  objectivity  and  experience.  On
the  other  hand  these  notions  are  unities  in  our  consciousness
merely :  they  are  consequently  conditioned  by  the  material
given  to  them,  and  having  nothing  in  themselves  they  can
be  applied  to  use  only  within  the  range  of  experience.  But
the  other  constituent  of  experience,  the  impressions  of  feeling
and  perception,  is  not  one  whit  less  subjective  than  the
categories.

To  assert  that  the  categories  taken  by  themselves  hold  nothing
but  emptiness  can  scarcely  be  right,  seeing  that  they  have  a
content,  at  all  events,  in  the  special  stamp  and  significance
which  they  possess.  Of  course  the  content  of  the  categories  is


44-]  TOWARDS THE OBJECTIVE WORLD.  77

not  perceptible  to  the  senses,  nor  is  it  in  time  and  space :  but
that  is  rather  an  excellence  than  a  defect.  A  glimpse  of  this
meaning1  of  content  may  be  observed  to  affect  our  ordinary
thinking.  A  book  or  a  speech  for  example  is  said  to  have  a
great  deal  in  it,  to  be  full  of  content,  in  proportion  to  the
greater  number  of  thoughts  and  general  results  to  be  found  in
it :  whilst,  on  the  contrary,  we  should  never  say  that  any  book,
e.g.  a  novel,  had  much  in  it,  because  it  included  a  great  number
of  single  incidents,  situations,  and  the  like.  Even  the  popular
voice  thus  recognises  that  something  more  than  the  facts  of  sense
is  needed  to  make  a  work  pregnant  with  matter.  And  what  is
this  additional  desideratum  but  thoughts,  or  in  the  first  instance
the  categories  ?  And  yet  it  is  not  altogether  wrong,  it  should
be  added,  to  call  the  categories  of  themselves  empty,  if  it  be
meant  that  they  and  the  logical  Idea,  of  which  they  are  the
single  members,  do  not  constitute  the  whole  of  philosophy,  but
necessarily  lead  onwards  in  due  progress  to  the  real  regions  of
Nature  and  Mind.  Only  let  the  progress  not  be  misunderstood.
The  logical  Idea  does  not  thereby  come  into  possession  of  a
content  originally  foreign  to  it :  but  by  its  own  native  action
is  specialized  and  developed  to  Nature  and  Mind.

44.]  It  follows  that  the  categories  are  unfit  to  express  the
characters  of  the  Absolute — the  Absolute  not  being  given  in
perception; — and  Understanding,  or  knowledge  by  means  of
the  categories,  is  consequently  incapable  of  knowing  the
Things-in-themselves.

The  Thing-in-itself  (and  under  '  thing '  we  must  include  Mind
and  God)  expresses  the  object,  when  we  leave  out  of  sight
all  that  consciousness  makes  of  it,  all  the  deliverances  of
feeling,  and  all  specific  thoughts  about  it.  It  is  easy  to
see  what  is  left, — utter  abstraction,  total  emptiness,  only
describable  still  as  a  '  beyond,' — the  negative  of  imagination,
of  feeling,  and  definite  thought.  Nor  does  it  require  much
penetration  to  see  that  this  caput  mortuum  is  still  only  a
product  of  thought,  such  as  accrues  when  thought  ends  in
abstraction  unalloyed :  that  it  is  the  work  of  the  empty  '  Ego,'
which  finds  an  object  in  this  empty  self-identity  of  its  own.
The  negative  characteristic  which  this  abstract  identity  receives,
when  it  is  described  as  an  object,  is  also  enumerated  among
the  categories  of  Kant,  and  is  no  less  familiar  than  the  empty


78  SECOND ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [45.

identity  aforesaid.  Hence  one  can  only  feel  surprise  at  the
perpetual  remark  that  we  do  not  know  the  Thing-in-itself.
On  the  contrary  there  is  nothing  we  can  know  so  easily.

45.]  It  is  Reason,  the  faculty  apprehending  the  Uncondi-
tioned, which  discovers  the  conditioned  nature  of  the  knowledge
comprised  in  experience.  What  is  thus  called  the  object  of
Reason,  the  Infinite  or  Unconditioned,  is  nothing  hut  self-same-
ness, or  that  primary  identity  of  the  '  Ego'  in  thought  (mentioned
in  §  42).  Reason  itself  is  the  name  given  to  the  abstract  '  Ego '
or  thought,  which  makes  this  pure  identity  its  aim  or  object
(cf.  note  to  the  preceding  §).  Now  this  identity,  having  no
definite  attribute  at  all,  can  receive  no  illumination  from  the
truths  of  experience,  for  the  reason  that  these  refer  always  to
definite  facts.  Such  is  the  sort  of  Unconditioned  that  is  sup-
posed to  be  the  absolute  truth  of  Reason,  what  is  termed  the
Idea ;  whilst  the  cognitions  of  experience  sink  to  the  level  of
untruth  and  turn  out  to  be  appearances.

Kant  was  the  first  to  signalise  the  distinction  between  Reason
and  Understanding.  The  object  of  the  former,  as  he  applied  the
term,  was  the  infinite  and  unconditioned,  of  the  latter  the  finite
and  conditioned.  Kant  did  valuable  service  when  he  established
the  finite  character  of  the  cognitions  of  the  understanding
founded  merely  upon  experience,  and  stamped  their  contents  ,
with  the  name  of  appearance  or  phenomenon.  But  the  mistake^-
came  when  he  stopped  at  the  purely  negative  point  of  view,
and  limited  the  unconditionality  of  Reason  to  an  abstract  self-
sameness  without  any  shade  of  distinction.  It  degrades  Reason
to  a  finite  and  conditioned  thing,  to  identify  it  with  a  mere
stepping  beyond  the  finite  and  conditioned  range  of  under-
standing. The  real  infinite,  far  from  being  a  mere  transcend-
ence of  the  finite,  always  involves  the  absorption  of  the  finite
into  its  own  fuller  nature.  In  the  same  way  Kant  restored
the  Idea  to  its  proper  dignity :  vindicating  it  for  Reason  as
distinct  from  the  inadequate  categories  of  the  understanding
or  from  the  merely  sensible  conceptions,  which  usually  appro-
priate to  themselves  the  name  of  ideas.  But  as  respects  the
Idea  also,  he  rested  content  with  a  negative  result,  and  a  state-
ment of  what  ought  to  be  done.

The  doctrine that the  objects of immediate consciousness,
which  constitute  the  body  of  experience,  are  only  appearances


46.]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  79

(phenomena),  was  another  important  result  of  the  Kantian  phi-
losophy. Common  Sense,  that  mixture  of  the  sense  and  the
understanding-,  believes  the  objects  of  which  it  has  knowledge
to  be  independent  and  self-supporting-,  each  individual  for  itself;
and  when  it  becomes  evident  that  they  tend  towards  and  limit
one  another,  the  interdependence  of  one  upon  another  is  reckoned
something-  foreign  to  them  and  to  their  true  nature.  The  very
opposite  is  the  truth.  The  things  immediately  known'  are  mere
appearances — in  other  words,  if  we  wish  to  know  why  they  are,
the  answer  is  found  not  in  themselves  but  in  something  else.
'  Then,'  it  may  be  asked,  '  how  are  we  to  find  this  something
else  ?  How  is  it  defined  ? '  According  to  Kant,  the  things  that
we  know  about,  are  to  us  appearances  only,  and  we  can  never
know  their  nature  behind  the  phenomena.  That  nature  belongs
to  another  world  which  we  cannot  approach.  Plain  unpreju-
diced minds  have  not  unreasonably  taken  exception  to  this  sub-
jective idealism,  with  its  reduction  of  the  facts  of  consciousness
to  a  purely  personal  world,  created  by  ourselves  alone.  For  the
true  statement  of  the  case  is  rather  as  follows.  The  things  that
we  immediately  know  about  are  mere  phenomena,  not  for  us
only,  but  in  their  own  nature  and  without  our  interference ;  and
these  things,  finite  as  they  are,  are  appropriately  described  when
we  say  that  their  being  is  established  not  on  themselves  but  on
the  divine  and  universal  Idea.  This  view  of  things,  it  is  true,
is  as  idealist  as  Kant's  ;  but  in  contradistinction  to  the  subjective
idealism  of  the  Critical  philosophy  may  be  termed  absolute
idealism.  Absolute  idealism,  however,  though  it  is  far  in  ad-
vance of  the  vulgarly-realistic  mind,  is  by  no  means  merely
restricted  to  philosophy.  The  truth  which  it  expresses  lies  at
the  root  of  all  religion  ;  for  religion  too  believes  the  actual
world,  the  sum  of  existence,  to  be  created  and  governed  by
God.

46.]  But  it  is  not  enough  simply  to  indicate  the  existence  of
the  object  of  Reason.  Curiosity  impels  us  to  seek  for  knowledge
of  this  identity,  this  empty  thing-in-itself.  Now  knowledge
means  such  an  acquaintance  with  the  object  as  extends  to  its
distinct  and  special  subject-matter.  But  such  subject-matter
involves  a  complex  inter-connexion  in  the  object  itself,  and
supplies  a  ground  of  connexion  with  many  other  objects.  In
the  present  case,  to  express  the  nature  of  the  features  of  the
Infinite  or  Thing-in-itself,  Reason  would  have  nothing  except  the
categories :  and  any  endeavour  to  employ  them  for  that  purpose


80  SECOND ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [47.

exposes  Reason  to  the  charge  of  overleaping  itself  or  becoming
'  transcendent/

Thus  begins  the  second  stage  of  the  Criticism  of  Pure  Reason
— which,  as  an  independent  piece  of  work,  is  more  valuable  than
the  first.  The  first  part,  as  has  been  explained  above,  teaches
that  the  categories  originate  in  the  unity  of  self-consciousness ;
that  any  knowledge  which  is  gained  by  their  means  has  nothing
objective  in  it,  and  that  the  objectivity  claimed  for  them  is  really
subjective.  So  far  as  this  goes,  the  Kantian  Critique  presents
that  shallow  type  of  idealism  known  as  Subjective  Idealism.  It
asks  no  questions  about  the  meaning  or  scope  of  the  categories,
but  simply  considers  the  abstract  difference  of  subjective  and
objective ;  and  even  these  terms  are  examined-  in  such  a  partial
way,  that  the  character  of  subjectivity  from  which  the  criticism
begins  is  retained  as  a  final  and  purely  affirmative  character  of
thought.  In  the  second  part,  however,  when  Kant  examines
the  application,  as  it  is  called,  which  Reason  makes  of  the  cate-
gories in  order  to  know  its  objects,  the  meaning  or  scope  of
these  categories,  at  least  in  some  of  their  functions,  comes  in  for
discussion :  or,  at  any  rate,  an  opportunity  presented  itself  for  a
discussion  of  the  question.  It  is  worth  while  to  -see  what  deci-
sion Kant  arrives  at  on  the  subject  of  metaphysic,  as  this  appli-
cation of  the  categories  to  the  unconditioned  is  called.  His
method  of  procedure  we  shall  here  briefly  state  and  criticise.

47.]  («)  The  first  of  the  unconditioned  entities  which  Kant
examines  is  the  Soul  (see  above,  §  34).  '  In  my  consciousness,'
he  says,  '  I  always  find  that  I  (i)  am  the  determining  subject:
(2)  am  singular  or  abstractly  simple :  (3)  am  identical,  or  one
and  the  same,  amid  all  the  variety  of  which  I  am  conscious :
(4)  distinguish  myself  as  thinking  from  everything  outside
of  me.'

The  method  of  the  old  metaphysic,  as  Kant  correctly  states
it,  consisted  in  substituting  for  these  statements  of  experience
the  corresponding  categories  or  metaphysical  terms.  Thus  by
translation  from  experience  arise  four  new  propositions  :  (a)  the
Soul  is  a  substance :  (V)  it  is  a  simple  substance :  (c)  it  is  nume-


47-]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  81

rically  identical  at  the  various  periods  of  existence  :  (d]  it  stands
in  relation  to  space.

Kant  discusses  this  translation,  and  draws  attention  to  the
Paralogism  or  mistake  of  confounding  one  kind  of  truth  with
another.  He  points  out  that  empirical  attributes  have  here  been
replaced  by  categories :  and  shows  that  we  are  not  entitled  to
argue  from  the  former  to  the  latter,  or  to  put  the  latter  in  place
of  the  former.

This  criticism  obviously  repeats  the  observation  of  Hume
(§  39)  th^  the  categories  as  a  whole,  the  ideas  of  universality
and  necessity,  are  entirely  absent  from  sensation,  and  that  the
empirical  fact  both  in  form  and  contents  differs  from  the  charac-
ters derived  from  thought.

If  the  empirical  fact  is  supposed  to  constitute  the  verification
of  thought,  then  no  doubt  it  becomes  indispensable  to  show,  in
the  case  of  sensations,  how  and  where  thought  is  present  in  them.

How  does  Kant  make  out,  in  his  criticism  of  the  metaphysical
psychology,  that  the  soul  cannot  be  described  as  substantial,
simple,  self-same,  and  as  maintaining  its  independence  in  inter-
course with  the  material  world?  He  bases  it  on  the  single
ground,  that  the  several  attributes  of  the  soul,  which  we  derive
from  the  experience  of  consciousness,  are  not  exactly  the  same
attributes  as  result  from  the  action  of  thought  upon  our  expe-
rience. But  we  have  seen  above,  that  according  to  Kant  all
knowledge,  even  experience,  consists  in  thinking  our  sensations,
— in  other  words,  in  transforming  into  categories  of  thought  the
attributes  primarily  belonging  to  sensation.

One  of  the  best  results  of  the  Kantian  criticism  was  that  it
emancipated  speculation  upon  the  mind  from  the  '  soul-thing,'
from  the  categories,  and,  consequently,  from  questions  about  the
simplicity,  complexity,  materiality,  &c.  of  the  soul.

But  even  for  the  common  sense  of  ordinary  men,  the  true
point  of  view,  from  which  the  inadmissibility  of  these  forms
best  appears,  will  be,  not  that  they  are  thoughts,  but  that
thoughts  of  such  a  stamp  are,  both  in  their  possible  tendency
and  their  actual  compass,  devoid  of  truth.

G


82  SECOND  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [48.

If  thoughts  and  phenomena  do  not  perfectly  correspond  to  one
another,  we  are  free  at  least  to  choose  which  of  the  two  shall  be
held  the  defaulter.  The  idealism  of  Kant,  where  it  touches  on
the  world  of  Reason,  throws  the  blame  on  the  thoughts ;  saying
that  the  thoughts  are  defective,  as  being  inadequate  to  the  sen-
sations and  to  a  mode  of  mind  which  is  restricted  within  the
range  of  sensation,  in  which  as  such  there  are  no  traces  of  the
presence  of  these  thoughts.  But  of  the  contents  of  thought  for
its  own  sake,  we  hear  nothing.

Paralogisms  are  a  species  of  unsound  syllogism,  the  especial
vice  of  which  consists  in  employing  one  and  the  same  word  in
the  two  premisses  with  a  different  meaning.  According  to  Kant
the  method  adopted  by  the  rational  psychology  of  the  old  meta-
physicians, when  they  assumed  that  the  qualities  of  the  pheno-
menal soul,  as  given  in  experience,  formed  part  of  its  own  real
essence,  was  based  upon  such  a  Paralogism.  Nor  can  it  be
denied  that  predicates  like  simplicity,  permanence,  &c.  are  in-
applicable to  the  soul.  But  their  unfitness  is  not  due  to  the
ground  assigned  by  Kant,  that  Reason,  by  applying  them,  would
exceed  its  appointed  bounds.  The  true  ground  is  that  this  style
of  abstract  terms  is  not  good  enough  for  the  soul,  which  is  very
much  more  than  a  mere  simple  or  unchangeable  sort  of  thing.
And  thus,  for  example,  while  the  soul  may  be  admitted  to  be
simple  self-sameness,  it  is  at  the  same  time  active,  and  evolves
distinctions  from  its  own  nature.  But  whatever  is  merely  or
abstractly  simple  without  complexity  is  a  dead  thing.  By  his
polemic  against  the  metaphysic  of  the  past  Kant  discarded  those
predicates  from  the  soul  or  mind.  He  did  well ;  but  when  he
came  to  state  his  reasons,  his  failure  is  apparent.

48.]  (/3)  The  second  unconditioned  object  is  the  World
(§  35)-  ^n  the  attempt  which  reason  makes  to  comprehend
the  unconditioned  nature  of  the  World,  it  falls  into  what  are
called  Antinomies.  In  other  words  it  maintains  two  contrary
propositions  about  the  same  object,  and  in  such  a  way  that
each  of  them  has  to  be  maintained  with  equal  necessity.
From  this  it  follows  that  the  cosmical  body  of  fact,  the  specific
statements  descriptive  of  which  run  into  contradiction,  cannot
be  anything  in  its  own  nature,  and  is  a  mere  appearance.
The  explanation  offered  by  Kant  alleges  that  the  contradiction


48.]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  83

does  not  affect  the  object  in  its  own  proper  essence,  but  attaches
only  to  the  Reason  which  seeks  to  comprehend  it.

Thus  it  seems  to  be  made  out  that  the  contradiction  is
occasioned  by  the  subject-matter  itself,  or  by  the  categories
on  their  own  account.  And  to  show  this,  to  discover  that
the  contradiction  introduced  into  the  world  of  Reason  by  the
categories  of  the  Understanding-  is  inevitable  and  natural,  was
to  make  one  of  the  most  important  steps  in  the  progress  of
Modern  Philosophy.  But  the  more  valuable  this  discovery,
the  more  trivial  was  the  solution.  Its  only  motive  was  an
excess  of  tenderness  for  the  things  of  the  world.  The  blemish
of  contradiction,  it  seems,  could  not  be  allowed  to  mar  the
real  world :  but  there  could  be  no  objection  to  attach  it  to
the  thinking  Reason,  to  the  essence  of  mind.  Probably  nobody
will  feel  disposed  to  deny  that  the  phenomenal  world  presents
contradictions  to  the  observing  mind;  meaning  by  'phenomenal'
the  world  as  it  is  apprehended  by  the  senses  and  understanding,
by  the  subjective  mind.  But  if  a  comparison  is  instituted
between  the  essence  of  the  world  and  the  essence  of  the  mind,
it  does  seem  strange  to  hear  how  calmly  and  confidently  the
modest  dogma  has  been  advanced  by  one,  and  repeated  by
others,  that  thought  or  Reason,  and  not  the  World,  is  the
source  of  contradiction.  It  is  no  escape  to  turn  round  and
explain  that  Reason  falls  into  contradiction  by  applying  the
categories.  For  this  application  of  the  categories  is  affirmed
to  be  necessary,  and  Reason  is  not  supposed  to  be  equipped
with  any  other  forms  but  the  categories  for  the  acquisition
of  truth.  Knowledge  is  specialising  and  specialised  thought:
so  that,  if  Reason  be  mere  empty  indeterminate  thinking,  it
thinks  nothing.  And  if  in  the  end  Reason  be  reduced  to  mere
identity  without  diversity,  it  will  in  the  end  also  win  a  happy
release  from  contradiction  at  the  slight  sacrifice  of  all  its
facts  and  contents.

His  failure  to  make  a  more  thorough  study  of  the  Antinomies
was  one  of  the  reasons  why  Kant  enumerated  only  four  of
them.  These  four  attracted  his  notice,  when,  as  may  be  seen

G  2,


84  SECOND  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [48.

in  his  discussion  of  the  so-called  Paralogisms  of  Reason,  he
assumed  the  list  of  the  categories  as  a  basis  of  his  argument.
Setting  the  example  of  what  is  now  a  common  artifice,  he
referred  an  object  to  a  ready-made  schema,  instead  of  deducing
its  characteristics  from  the  notion  of  that  object.  Further
deficiencies  in  the  construction  of  the  Antinomies  I  have
pointed  out,  as  occasions  offered,  in  my  '  Science  of  Logic.'
Here  it  will  be  sufficient  to  say  that  the  Antinomies  are  not
confined  to  the  four  special  objects  derived  from  Cosmology  :
they  appear  in  all  objects  of  every  kind,  in  all  conceptions,
notions  and  ideas.  To  be  aware  of  this  and  to  know  objects
in  this  property  of  theirs,  makes  a  vital  part  in  a  philosophical
theory.  For  the  quality  thus  indicated  is  what  we  shall
afterwards  describe  as  the  Dialectical  element  in  logic.

The  principles  of  the  metaphysical  philosophy  gave  rise
to  the  belief  that,  when  cognition  lapsed  into  contradictions,
it  was  a  mere  accidental  aberration,  due  to  some  subjective
mistake  in  argument  and  inference.  According  to  Kant,
however,  thought  has  a  natural  tendency  to  issue  in  contra-
dictions or  antinomies,  whenever  it  seeks  to  apprehend  the
infinite.  We  have  in  the  last  paragraph  referred  to  the
philosophical  importance  of  the  antinomies  of  reason,  and  shown
how  this  discovery  gets  rid  of  the  rigid  dogmatism  of  the
metaphysic  of  understanding,  and  suggests  the  Dialectical
movement  of  thought.  But_here__too  Kant,  as  we  must  add,
never  got  beyond  the  negative  result  that  the  thing-in-itself
is  unknowable,  and  never  penetrated  to  the  discovery  of  what^
the  antinomies  really  and  positively  mean.  That  true  and
positive  meaning  of  the  antinomies  is  this  :  that  every  actual

thing1 invnlvpg a nnpyistgnp.ft of nnntrnry elements. Conse-

quently  to  know,  or,  in  other  words,  to  comprehend  an  object
is  equivalent  to  being  conscious  of  it  as  a  unified  group  of
contrary  determinations.  The  old  metaphysic,  as  we  have
already  seen,  when  it  studied  the  objects  of  which  it  sought
a  metaphysical  knowledge,  went  to  work  by  applying  categories
abstractly  and  to  the  exclusion  of  their  contraries.  Kant,  on
the  other  hand,  tried  to  prove  that  the  statements,  issuing
through  this  method,  could  be  met  by  other  statements  of
contrary  import  with  equal  warrant  and  equal  necessity.  In
the  enumeration  of  these  antinomies  he  has  narrowed  his
ground  to  the  cosmology  of  the  old  metaphysical  system,  and  in


48.]  TOWARDS THE OBJECTIVE WORLD.  85

his  discussion  has  evolved  four  antinomies,  a  number  which  rests
upon  the  list  of  the  categories.  The  first  antinomy  is  on  the
question :  Whether  we  are  or  are  not  to  consider  the  world
limited  in  space  and  time.  In  the  second  antinomy  we  have
a  discussion  of  the  dilemma  :  Matter  must  be  conceived  either
as  endlessly  divisible,  or  as  consisting  of  atoms.  The  third
antinomy  bears  upon  the  antithesis  of  freedom  and  necessity,
to  such  extent  as  it  is  embraced  in  the  question,  Whether
everything-  in  the  world  must  be  supposed  subject  to  the
condition  of  causality,  or  if  we  can  also  assume  free  Beings,
in  other  words,  absolute  initial  points  of  action  in  the  world.
Finally,  the  fourth  antinomy  is  the  dilemma :  Either  the
world  as  a  whole  has  a  cause  or  it  is  uncaused.

The  method  which  Kant  follows  in  discussing  these  an-
tinomies is  as  follows.  He  arranges  the  contrasting  articles
in  exposition  of  each  side  under  the  opposite  heads  of  thesis
and  antithesis,  and  seeks  to  prove  both :  that  is  to  say  he
tries  to  exhibit  them  as  inevitably  issuing  from  reflection  on
the  question.  He  particularly  guards  himself  against  the
charge  of  being  a  special  pleader  and  of  grounding  his  reason-
ing on  delusions.  Speaking  honestly,  however,  the  arguments
which  Kant  offers  for  his  thesis  and  antithesis  are  mere  shams
of  demonstration.  The  thing  to  be  proved  is  invariably  implied
in  the  assumption  he  starts  from,  and  the  speciousness  of  his
proofs  is  a  consequence  of  his  prolix  and  apagogic  mode  of
procedure.  Yet  it  was,  and  still  is,  a  great  achievement  for
the  Critical  philosophy,  when  it  exhibited  these  antinomies :
for  in  this  way  it  gave  some  expression  (at  first  certainly
subjective  and  without  proper  deduction)  to  the  actual  unity
of  those  categories,  which  are  kept  severed  from  one  another
in  the  understanding.  The  first  of  the  cosmological  antinomies,
for  example,  implies  a  recognition  of  the  doctrine  that  space
and  time  present  a  discrete  as  well  as  a  continuous  aspect :
whereas  the  old  metaphysic,  laying  exclusive  emphasis  on  the
continuity,  had  been  led  to  maintain  that  the  world  was
unlimited  in  space  and  time.  It  is  quite  correct  to  say  that
we  can  go  beyond  every  definite  space  and  beyond  every  definite
time :  but  it  is  no  less  correct  that  space  and  time  are  real
and  actual  only  when  they  are  limited  or  specialized  into
'  here '  and  '  now,' — a  specialisation  which  is  involved  in  the
very  notion  of  them.  The  same  observations  apply  to  the
rest  of  the  antinomies.  Take,  for  example,  the  antinomy  of
freedom  and  necessity.  The  main  gist  of  it  is  that  freedom
and  necessity  as  understood  by  abstract  thinkers  are  not
independent,  as  these  thinkers  suppose,  but  merely  unsub-
stantial stages  or  elements  of  the  true  freedom  and  the  true


86  SECOND  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT [49,  50.

necessity,  and  that  the abstract and isolated conceptions of
both  are  false.


49-]  (y)  The  third  object  of  the  Reason  is  God;  He  also
must  be  known  and  evaluated  in  terms  of  thought.  But  in
comparison  with  an  unalloyed  identity,  any  evaluation  in
precise  terms  seems  to  the  understanding  to  be  a  limit,  and
a  negation :  so  that  all  reality  must  be  invested  with  bound-
lessness or  indeterminateness.  Accordingly  God,  when  he  is
defined  to  be  the  sum  of  all  realities,  the  most  real  of  beings,
turns  into  a  mere  abstraction.  -,  And  the  only  head  under
which  that  most  real  of  real  things,  or  abstract  identity,  can
be  brought  into  articulate  form,  is  the  equally  abstract  category
of  Being.  These  are  the  two  elements,  an  abstract  identity,
on  one  hand,  which  is  spoken  of  in  this  place  as  the  Notion ;
and  Being  on  the  other, — which  Reason  seeks  to  reconcile  into
unity.  And  their  union  is  the  Ideal  of  Reason.

50-]  To  carry  out  this  union  two  ways  or  two  forms
are  admissible.  Either  we  may  begin  with  Being  and  proceed
to  the  abstraction  called  Thought:  or,  the  movement  may
begin  with  the  abstraction  and  end  in  Being.

We  shall,  in  the  first  place,  start  from  Being.  But  Being,
as  it  is  immediately  given,  presents  itself  to  our  view  in  the
shape  of  a  Being  characterised  by  infinite  variety,  in  all  the
amplitude  of  a  world.  And  this  world  may  be  regarded  in
two  ways:  first,  as  a  collection  of  innumerable  unconnected
facts  ;  and  second,  as  a  collection  of  innumerable  facts  in  mutual
relation,  giving  evidence  of  design.  The  first  aspect  is  em-
phasised in  the  Cosmological  proof:  the  latter  in  the  proofs
of  Natural  Theology.  Suppose  however  this  surcharged  sum
of  Being  passes  under  the  agency  of  thought.  Then  it  is
stripped  of  the  form  of  isolated  and  unconnected  facts,  and
apprehended  as  a  universal  and  absolutely  necessary  Being,
which,  being  self-determined,  acts  conformably  to  general
ends.  And  this  necessary  Being,  acting  by  general  purposes
or  laws,  is  God.


50.]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  87

The  main  force  of  Kant's  criticisnf  on  this  process  attacks
it  for  being  a  syllogising,  i.  e.  a  transition.  Sensations,  and
that  aggregate  of  sensations  we  call  the  world,  exhibit  no
traces  of  that  universality  which  they  afterwards  receive  from  the
purifying  act  of  thought.  The  empirical  conception  of  the  world
therefore  can  give  no  warrant  for  the  assertion  of  universality.
And  so  any  attempt  on  the  part  of  thought  to  ascend  from
the  empirical  conception  of  the  world  to  God  is  checked  by
referring  to  the  doctrine  of  Hume  (as  in  the  paralogisms,  §  47),
according  to  which  we  have  no  right  to  think  sensations,
that  is,  to  elicit  universality  and  necessity  from  them.

Man  is  a  being  that  thinks  :  and  therefore  sound  Common
Sense,  as  well  as  Philosophy,  will  not  yield  up  their  right  of
rising  to  God  from  and  out  of  the  empirical  view  of  the
world.  The  only  basis  on  which  this  rise  is  possible  lies  in
that  study  of  the  world,  which  is  made  by  thought,  as  dis-
tinguished from  the  senses  and  the  animal  nature.  Thought
and  thought  alone  can  compass  the  essence,  substance,  uni-
versal power,  and  ultimate  design  of  the  world.  And  what
men  call  the  proofs  of  God's  existence  are  seen  to  be  ways
of  describing  and  analysing  the  inward  movement  of  the  mind,
which  is  the  great  thinker,  that  thinks  the  data  of  the  senses.
The  rise  of  thought  beyond  the  world  of  sense,  its  passage
from  the  finite  to  the  infinite,  the  leap  into  the  super-sensible
which  it  takes  when  it  snaps  asunder  the  links  of  the  chain
of  sense,  all  this  transition  is  thought  and  nothing  but  thought.
Say  there  must  be  no  such  passage,  and  you  say  there  is  to
be  no  thinking.  And  in  sooth,  animals  make  no  such  transi-
tion. They  never  get  further  than  sensation  and  the  perception
of  the  senses,  and  in  consequence  they  have  no  religion.

Both  on  general  grounds,  and  in  the  particular  case,  there
are  two  remarks  to  be  made  upon  the  criticism  of  this  exaltation
in  thought.  The  first  remark  deals  with  the  question  of  form.
When  the  exaltation  is  represented  in  a  syllogistic  process,  in
the  shape  of  what  we  call  proofs  of  the  Being  of  God,  these
reasonings  cannot  but  start  from  some  sort  of  theory  of  the


88  SECOND  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [50.

world,  which  makes  it  an  aggregate  either  of  contingent  facts
or  of  final  causes  and  relations  involving  design. The  thought
which  syllogises  may  probably  deem  this  starting-point  a  solid
basis :  the  beginning  may  continue  to  appear  throughout  in  the
same  empirical  light,  and  be  left  at  last  as  at  the  first. In  this
case,  the  bearings  of  the beginning  upon  the conclusion to
which  it  leads  may  take  a  purely  affirmative  aspect,  as  if  we
were  only  reasoning  from  one  thing  which  is  and  continues
to  be,  to  another  thing  which  in  like  manner  is. But  it  is  a
great  error  to  restrict  our  notions  of  the nature of  thought
to  its  form  in  Understanding  alone. To  think  the  phenomenal
world  rather  means  to  re-cast  its  phenomenal  form,  and  trans-
mute it  into  a  universal. And  thus  the  action  of  thought  has
a  negative  as  well  as  an  affirmative  effect  upon  its  basis :  and
the matter  of  sensation,  when  it  receives  the  stamp of  uni-
versality, at  once  loses  its  first  and phenomenal shape. By
the  removal  and  negation  of  the  shell,  the  kernel  within  what
we  perceived  is  brought  to  the  light  (§§  13  and  23). And  it  is
because they  do  not,  with  sufficient  prominence,  express  the
negative  features  implied  in  the  exaltation  of  the  mind  from
the  world  to  God,  that  the  metaphysical  proofs  of  the  Being
of  a  God  are  defective  interpretations  and  descriptions  "of  the
process. If  the  world  is  only  a  sum  of  incidents,  it  follows
that  it  is  also  deciduous  and  phenomenal,  a  complete  and  utter
nonentity. That  upward  spring  of  the  mind  signifies,  that  the
Being  which  the  world  has  is  only  a  semblance,  no  real  Being,
no absolute truth ; it  signifies that  beyond and above  that
apparent  Being,  truth  abides in  God,  so  that  true  Being  is
another  name  for  God. The  process  of  exaltation  might  thus
appear  to  be  transition  and  to  involve  a  means,  but  it  is  no
less  equally  true,  that  every  trace  of  transition  and  means  is
absorbed; since  the  world,  which might  have seemed  to  be
the  means  of  reaching  God, is explained to  be  a  nonentity.
Unless  the  world  be  reduced  to  non-being,  the  point d'appui
for  the exaltation is lost. In  this  way  the  apparent means
vanishes,  and  the  process  of  derivation  is  cancelled  in  the  very


.go.]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  89

fact  of  its  existence.  It  was  the  affirmative  aspect  of  this
relation,  as  supposed  to  subsist  between  two  things,  each  of  which
is  as  much  as  the  other,  which  Jacobi  mainly  had  in  his  eye
when  he  attacked  the  demonstrations  of  the  understanding.
He  justly  reproaches  them  with  seeking  conditions  (i.e.  the
world)  for  the  unconditioned,  and  says  that  the  Infinite  or  God
must  in  consequence  seem  to  be  dependent  and  derivative.  But
that  elevation,  as  it  takes  place  in  the  mind,  serves  to  correct  the
semblance  which  it  has  of  imposing  conditions  on  the  Infinite :
in  fact,  it  has  no  other  meaning  than  to  correct  that  semblance.
Jacobi,  however,  failed  to  recognise  the  genuine  nature  of
essential  thought — by  which  it  cancels  the  mediation  in  the
very  act  of  mediating ;  and  consequently,  his  objection,  though
it  tells  against  the  reflective  Understanding,  is  false  when
applied  to  thought  as  a  whole,  and  in  particular  to  reasonable
thought.

To  explain  what  we  mean  by  the  neglect  of  the  negative  force
in  thought,  we  may  refer  by  way  of  illustration  to  the  charges
of  Pantheism  and  Atheism  brought  against  the  doctrines  of
Spinoza.  The  absolute  Substance  of  Spinoza  certainly  requires
something  to  make  it  absolute  mind,  and  it  is  a  right  and
proper  requirement  that  God  should  be  defined  as  absolute
mind.  But  when  the  definition  in  Spinoza  is  said  to  identify
the  world  with  God,  and  to  confound  God  with  nature  and  the
finite  world,  it  appears  that  people  assume  the  finite  world  to
possess  a  genuine  actuality  and  affirmative  reality.  If  this
assumption  be  admitted,  of  course  a  union  of  God  with  the
world  renders  God  completely  finite,  and  degrades  him  to  the
bare  finite  and  adventitious  congeries  of  existence.  But  there
are  two  objections  to  be  noted.  In  the  first  place  Spinoza
does  not  define  God  as  the  unity  of  God  with  the  world,  but
as  the  union  of  thought  with  extension,  that  is,  with  the
material  world.  And  secondly,  even  if  we  accept  this  stupid
interpretation  of  the  teaching  of  Spinoza  in  the  matter  of  this
unity,  it  would  still  be  true  that  his  system  was  not  Atheism
but  Acosmism,  defining  the  world  to  be  a  phenomenon  lacking


90  SECOND  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [50.

in  true  reality.  A  philosophy  which  affirms  that  God  and
God  alone  is,  should  not  be  stigmatised  as  atheistic,  when
even  these  nations  which  worship  the  ape,  the  cow,  or  images
of  stone  and  brass,  are  credited  with  some  religion.  But  the
imagination  of  ordinary  men  feels  a  still  more  vehement  reluct-
ance to  surrender  its  dearest  conviction,  that  this  aggregate
of  finitude,  which  it  calls  a  world,  has  actual  reality.  To  hold
that  there  is  no  world  is  a  way  of  thinking  we  are  fain  to  believe
impossible,  or  at  least  much  less  possible  than  to  get  into  our
heads  that  there  is  no  God.  Human  nature,  not  much  to  its
credit,  is  more  ready  to  believe  that  a  system  denies  God,  than
that  it  denies  the  world.  A  denial  of  God  seems  so  much  more
intelligible  than  a  denial  of  the  world.

The  second  remark  bears  on  the  criticism  of  the  matter  or
body  of  truths,  to  which  that  elevation  in  thought  in  the  first
instance  leads.  If  these  truths  are  made  up  of  such  principal
articles,  as  substance  of  the  world,  its  necessary  essence,  cause
which  regulates  and  directs  it  according  to  design,  they  are
certainly  inadequate  to  express  what  is  or  ought  to  be  under-
stood by  God.  Yet  apart  from  the  trick  of  adopting  a  pre-
liminary and  materialised  conception  of  God,  and  criticising
a  result  by  this  assumed  standard,  it  is  certain  that  these
characteristics  have  great  value,  and  are  necessary  factors  in
the  idea  of  God.  But  if  we  wish  in  this  way  to  bring  before
thought  the  genuine  idea  of  God,  and  give  its  true  value  and
expression  to  the  body  of  truths,  we  must  be  careful  not  to
start  from  a  subordinate  range  of  facts.  The  merely  contingent
things  of  the  world  do  not  tell  us  very  much.  If  we  go  on
to  organic  structures,  and  the  evidence  they  bear  to  the  laws
of  design,  we  are  in  a  higher  circle  of  reasonable  thought  where
life  is  present.  But  even  life  is  not  enough.  For  even  without
taking  into  consideration  the  possible  blemish  which  the  view
of  animated  nature,  and  of  the  general  relation  of  existing  things
to  final  causes,  may  contract  from  the  pettiness  of  these  final
causes,  and  from  puerile  instances  of  them  and  their  bearings,
merely  animated  nature  is,  at  the  best,  incapable  of  giving  a


5i.]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  91

truthful  expression  to  the  idea  of  God.  God  is  more  than  life :
He  is  Mind.  And  therefore  if  the  thought  of  the  Absolute
adopts  a  starting-point  for  its  rise,  and  desires  to  take  the
nearest,  the  most  true  and  adequate  will  be  found  in  the  nature
of  Mind  alone.

51.]  The  other  way  of  union  by  which  we  seek  to  realise
the  Ideal  of  Reason  is  to  set  out  from  the  abslractum  of  Thought
and  seek  to  characterise  it;  for  which  purpose  Being  is  the
only  available  term.  This  is  the  method  of  the  Ontological
proof.  The  opposition  which  is  here  presented  solely  from
the  subjective  side,  lies  between  Thought  and  Being;  whereas
in  the  first  way  of  junction,  Being  is  common  to  the  two
sides  of  the  antithesis,  and  the  contrast  lies  between  indi-
vidualised and  universal.  Understanding  meets  this  second
way  with  what  is  implicitly  the  same  objection,  as  it  met  the
first.  As  it  denied  that  the  empirical  involves  the  universal,
so  it  denies  that  the  universal  involves  the  specialisation,
which  specialisation  in  this  instance  is  Being.  In  other  words
it  says:  Being  cannot  be  deduced  from  the  Notion  by  any
analysis.

The  unexampled  favour  and  acceptance  which  attended
Kant's  criticism  of  the  Ontological  proof  was  undoubtedly  due
to  the  illustration  which  he  made  use  of.  To  mark  the
difference  between  Thought  and  Being,  he  took  the  instance
of  a  hundred  sovereigns,  which,  for  anything  it  matters  to
the  Notion,  are  the  same  hundred  whether  they  are  real  or
only  possible,  though  the  difference  of  the  two  cases  is  very
perceptible  in  their  effect  on  a  man's  purse.  Nothing  can  be
more  obvious  than  that  anything  we  only  think  or  fancy  is
not  on  that  account  actual :  and  everybody  is  aware  that  a
conception,  and  even  a  Notion,  is  no  match  for  Being.  Still
it  may  not  unfairly  be  styled  a  barbarism  in  language,  when
the  name  of  Notion  is  given  to  things  like  a  hundred  sovereigns.
And,  putting  that  mistake  aside,  those  who  like  to  taunt  the
philosophic  idea  with  the  difference  between  Being  and  Thought,
might  have  admitted  that  philosophers  were  not  wholly  ignorant


92  SECOND  ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT  [52,

of  the  fact.  Can  there  be  anything  pettier  in  knowledge
than  this  ?  Above  all,  it  is  well  to  remember,  when  we  speak
of  God,  that  we  have  an  object  of  another  kind  than  any
hundred  sovereigns,  and  unlike  any  particular  notion,  conceit,
or  whatever  else  it  may  be  styled.  The  very  nature  of  every-
thing finite  is  expressed  by  saying  that  its  Being  in  time  and
space  is  discrepant  from  its  Notion.  God,  on  the  contrary,
ought  to  be  what  can  only  be  '  thought  as  existing ; '  His
Notion  involves  Being.  It  is  this  unity  of  the  Notion  and
Being  that  constitutes  the  notion  of  God.

If  this  were  all,  we  should  have  only  a  formal  expression  of
God;  which  would  not  really  go  beyond  a  statement  of  the
nature  of  the  Notion  itself.  And  that  the  Notion  in  its  most
abstract  terms,  involves  Being,  is  plain.  For  the  Notion,
whatever  additional  exposition  it  may  allow,  is  at  least  reference
back  on  itself,  which  results  by  abolishing  the  intermediate
term,  and  thus  is  immediate.  And  what  is  that  reference  to
self,  but  Being  ?  Certainly  it  would  be  strange  if  the  Notion,
the  very  heart  of  the  mind,  the  'Ego,'  or  in  one  word,  the
concrete  totality  we  call  God,  were  not  rich  enough  to  embrace
so  poor  a  category  as  Being,  the  very  poorest  and  most  abstract
of  all.  For,  if  we  look  at  the  thought  it  holds,  nothing  can
be  more  insignificant  than  Being.  And  yet  there  may  be
something  still  more  insignificant  than  Being, — that  which  at
first  sight  seems  to  be,  an  external  and  sensible  existence,  like
that  of  the  paper  lying  before  me.  However,  in  this  matter,
nobody  proposes  to  speak  of  the  sensible  existence  of  a  limited
and  perishable  thing.  Besides,  the  petty  stricture  which
separates  being  from  thought,  can  at  best  disturb  the  process
of  the  mind  from  the  thought  of  God  to  the  certainty  that  He
is :  it  cannot  take  it  away.  It  is  this  process  of  transition,
depending  on  the  absolute  inseparability  of  the  thought  of
God  from  his  Being,  for  which  its  proper  authority  has  been
vindicated  in  the  theory  of  faith  or  immediate  knowledge, —
whereof  hereafter.

52.]  In  this  way  thought,  even  at  its  highest  pitch,  has  no


53.  54-] TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  93

innate  character  of  its  own :  and  although  it  is  continually
termed  Reason,  is  thoroughly  abstract  thought.  And  the  result
of  all  is  that  Reason  supplies  nothing  beyond  the  formal  unity
required  to  simplify  and  systematise  experiences ;  it  is  a  canon,
not  an  organon  of  truth,  and  can  furnish  only  a  criticism  of
knowledge,  not  a  theory  of  the  infinite.  In  its  final  analysis
this  criticism  is  summed  up  in  the  assertion  that  in  strictness
thought  is  only  the  indeterminate  unity  and  the  action  of  this
indeterminate  unity.

Kant  undoubtedly  held  reason  to  be  the  faculty  of  the  un-
conditioned ;  but  if  reason  be  reduced  to  abstract  identity,  it
renounces  its  unconditioned  character,  and  sinks  to  the  level  of
an  empty  understanding.  For  reason  is  unconditioned,  only
because  it  is  not  stamped  with  the  characters  of  an  alien  content,
because  it  is  self  characterising,  and  thus,  in  point  of  content,  is
its  own  master.  Kant,  however,  expressly  explains  that  the
action  of  reason  consists  solely  in  an  application  of  the  categories
to  unify  and  systematise  the  matter  given  by  perception,  i.e.  to
place  it  in  an  outside  order,  under  the  guidance  of  the  principle
of  non-contradiction.

53.]  (b]  The  Practical  Reason  is  understood  by  Kant  to
mean  a  thinking  Will,  i.e.  a  Will  that  determines  itself  according
to  general  laws.  Its  office  is  to  give  objective,  imperative  laws
of  freedom, — laws,  that  is,  which  state  what  ought  to  happen.
The  warrant  for  thus  assuming  thought  to  be  an  activity  which
makes  itself  felt  objectively  or  by  all,  that  is,  to  be  one  Reason,
is  sought  in  the  possibility  of  proving  practical  freedom  by
experience,  that  is,  of  showing  it  in  the  phenomena  of  self-
consciousness.  This  experience  in  consciousness  is  at  once  met
by  all  that  the  Necessitarian  produces  from  contrary  experience,
particularly  by  the  sceptical  induction  (employed  amongst
others  by  Hume),  from  the  endless  diversity,  of  what  men
hold  to  be  right  and  duty ;  i.  e.  from  the  diversity  apparent  in
those  laws  of  freedom,  which  ought  to  be  objective,  or  valid
for  all  intelligence.

54.]  What,  then,  is  to  serve  as  the  law  which  the  Practical
Reason  embraces  and  obeys,  and  as  the  criterion  in  its  act  of  self-


94  SECOND  ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT  [54.

determination?  There  is  no  rule  at  hand  but  that  given  by
the  abstract  identity  of  understanding1,  which  is :  There  must
be  no  contradiction  in  the  act,  by  which  the  will  assumes  a
special  direction.  Hence  the  Practical  Reason  never  shakes
off  the  formalism,  that  terminates  the  range  of  the  Theoretical
Reason.

The  Practical  Reason  does  not  confine  the  operation  of  the
universal  law  or  principle  of  the  Good  to  itself  alone :  but  first
becomes  practical,  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  when  it  insists
on  the  Good  being  manifested  in  the  world  with  an  outward
objectivity,  and  requires  that  it  shall  be  objective  throughout,
and  not  merely  subjective.  We  shall  speak  of  this  postulate
of  the  Practical  Reason  afterwards.

The  free  control  of  its  own  conduct  which  Kant  denied  to  the
speculative,  he  has  expressly  vindicated  for  the  practical  reason.
To  many  minds  this  particular  aspect  of  the  Kantian  philosophy
made  it  welcome ;  and  that  for  good  reasons.  To  estimate
rightly  what  we  owe  to  Kant  in  the  matter,  we  ought  to  place
before  our  minds  the  form  of  practical  philosophy  or  ethics,
which  prevailed  in  his  time.  It  may  be  generally  described  as  a
system  of  Eudaemonism,  which,  when  asked  what  was  man's
chief  end,  replied  Happiness.  And  by  happiness  Eudaemonism  un-
derstood the  satisfaction  of  the  selfish  appetites,  wishes  and  wants
of  the  man  :  thus  raising  the  contingent  and  particular  into  a
principle,  to  guide  the  will  and  its  actualisation.  To  this  Eudae-
monism,  which  was  destitute  of  stability  and  consistency,  and
which  left  the  door  open  for  every  whim  and  caprice,  Kant
opposed  the  practical  reason,  and  thus  emphasised  the  need  for  a
principle  of  will  which  should  be  universal,  and  lay  the  same
obligation  on  all.  The  theoretical  reason,  as  has  been  made
evident  in  the  preceding  paragraphs,  is  restricted  by  Kant  to  the
negative  faculty  of  the  infinite;  and  as  it  has  no  positive  content
of  its  own,  its  only  function  is  to  discover  the  finitude  of  ex-
periential knowledge.  To  the  practical  reason,  on  the  contrary,
he  has  expressly  allowed  a  positive  infinity,  by  ascribing  to  the
will  the  power  of  modifying  itself  in  .universal  modes,  i.  e.  by
thought.  Such  a  power  the  will  undoubtedly  has :  and  it  is  well
to  remember  that  man  is  free  only  in  so  far  as  he  possesses  it  and
avails  himself  of  it  in  his  conduct.  But  a  recognition  of  the
existence  of  this  power  is  not  enough  to  answer  the  question,  as
to  what  are  the  contents  of  the  will  or  practical  reason.  Hence
to  say,  that  a  man  must  make  the  good  the  content  of  his  will,


55-]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  95

raises  the  question,  what  that  content  is,  and  what  are  the  means
of  ascertaining  what  good  is.  Nor  does  it  get  over  the  difficulty
to  adopt  the  principle,  that  the  will  must  coincide  with  itself,  or
to  assert  the  obligation  to  do  duty  for  the  sake  of  duty.

55.]  (c]  The  Reflective  Power  of  Judgment  is  invested
by  Kant  with  the  function  of  an  Intuitive  Understanding.
That  is  to  say,  whereas  the  particulars  had  hitherto  appeared  ac-
cidents, so  far  as  the  universal  or  abstract  identity  was  concerned,
adventitious  to  it  and  incapable  of  being  deduced  from  it,  the
Intuitive  Understanding  apprehends  the  particulars  as  moulded,
and  formed  by  the  universal  itself.  Experience  presents  such
universalised  particulars  in  the  products  of  Art  and  organic
Nature.

The  salient  feature  in  the  Critique  of  the  Judgment  is,  that
in  it  Kant  gave  utterance  to  a  general  image,  perhaps  even
the  thought,  of  the  Idea.  Such  an  approximate  image,  of  an
Intuitive  Understanding,  of  an  adaptation  within  things  them-
selves, suggests  a  universal  which  is  at  the  same  time  appre-
hended as  being  in  its  own  nature  a  concrete  unity.  It  is
in  these  approximations  to  thought  alone  that  the  Kantian
philosophy  rises  to  the  speculative  height.  Schiller,  and  others,
have  found  a  way  of  escape  from  the  abstract  and  separatist
understanding  in  the  idea  of  artistic  beauty.  In  that  idea
the  thought  and  the  sensuous  conception  have  grown  together
into  one.  Others  have  found  the  same  relief  in  the  perception
and  consciousness  of  life  and  of  living  things,  whether  that
life  be  natural  or  intellectual.  The  work  of  Art,  as  well  as
the  living  individual,  are,  it  must  be  owned,  of  limited  range
or  content.  But  Kant  goes  further  than  their  narrow  range,
and  gives  expression  to  the  Idea,  comprehensive  by  content
as  well  as  by  form,  in  his  postulated  harmony  between  the
necessity  of  nature,  and  the  end  sought  by  freedom,  or  in
the  final  end  of  the  world,  when  that  end  is  thought  to  be
realised.  But  thought  is,  as  it  were,  indolent  and  slow;  and
when  dealing  with  this  supreme  Idea,  finds  a  too  easy  mode
of  evasion  in  the  '  ought  to  be ' :  instead  of  the  actual  realisation


96  SECOND  ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT [56-58.

of  the  ultimate  end,  it  clings  hard  to  the  disjunction  of  the
notion  from  reality.  Yet  if  thought  will  not  think  the  ideal
realised,  the  senses  and  the  intuition  can  at  any  rate  see  it
in  the  very  presence  of  living  organisms,  and  of  the  beauty
in  Art.  And  consequently  Kant's  remarks  on  these  objects
were  well  adapted  to  lead  the  mind  on  to  grasp  and  think
the  concrete  Idea.

56.]  We  are  thus  led  to  conceive  a  different  relation  between
the  universal  of  understanding,  and  the  particular  of  perception,
than  that  on  which  the  theory  of  the  Theoretical  and  Practical
Reason  is  founded.  But  while  this  is  so,  it  is  not  supplemented
by  the  perception  that  it  is  the  former  which  gives  the  genuine
relation  and  the  very  truth.  Instead  of  that,  the  unity  is  accepted
only  as  it  exists  in  finite  phenomena,  and  as  it  is  illustrated
by  experience.  On  the  side  of  the  observer,  such  experience
may  come  from  two  sources.  It  may  spring  from  Genius,
the  faculty  which  produces  aesthetic  ideas  ;  meaning  by  aesthetic
ideas,  the  picture-thoughts  of  the  unfettered  imagination,
which  subserve  an  idea  and  suggest  thoughts,  although  their
content  is  not  expressed  in  a  notional  form,  and  even  admits  of
no  such  expression.  It  may  also  be  due  to  Taste,  the  feeling
of  the  congruity  of  intuitions  or  imaginations  in  their  freedom,
with  the  understanding  in  its  legality.

57.]  The  principle  by  which  the  Reflective  faculty  of  Judg-
ment regulates  and  arranges  the  products  of  animated  nature
is  described  as  the  End  or  final  cause :  where  the  notion  is  in
action,  and  the  universal  has  and  gives  its  own  lines  of  dif-
ferentiation. At  the  same  time  Kant  is  careful  to  set  aside
the  conception  of  external  or  finite  adaptation,  in  which  the  End
is  only  an  adventitious  form,  so  far  as  concerns  the  Means
and  material  in  which  it  is  realised.  Whereas,  in  the  living
organism,  the  final  cause  is  a  moulding  principle,  and  an
energy  immanent  in  the  matter,  and  every  member  is  in  its
turn  a  Means  as  well  as  an  End.

58.]  Such  an  idea  evidently  puts  a  stop  to  the  relation
which  the  understanding  institutes  between  Means  and  Ends,


59,  6o.] TOWARDS THE OBJECTIVE WORLD.  97

between  subjectivity  and  objectivity.  And  yet  in  the  face  of
this  unification,  the  End  or  design  is  subsequently  explained
to  be  a  cause  which  exists  and  acts  subjectively,  and  in  our
imagination  only :  and  design  is  accordingly  explained  to  be
only  a  principle  regulative  of  criticism,  and  to  be  purely  per-
sonal to  our  understanding.

After  the  Critical  philosophy  had  settled  that  Reason  can
know  phenomena  only,  there  might  still  have  been  an  option
for  animated  nature  between  two  equally  subjective  modes  of
thought.  Even  according  to  Kant's  own  exposition,  there
might  have  been  an  obligation  to  admit,  in  the  case  of  natural
productions,  a  knowledge  through  other  categories  than  those
of  quality,  cause  and  effect,  composition,  constituents,  and  so
on.  The  principle  of  inward  adaptation  or  design,  supposing
it  to  be  maintained  and  developed  in  a  scientific  application,
might  have  led  to  a  different  and  a  higher  method  of  obser-
vation.

59.]  If  we  adopt  this  principle,  the  Idea,  when  all  limita-
tions were  removed  from  it,  would  appear  as  follows.  The
universality  moulded  by  Reason,  and  described  as  the  absolute
design  of  all,  or  the  Good,  would  be  realised  in  the  world,
and  realised  moreover  by  means  of  a  third  thing,  the  power
which  proposes  this  End  as  well  as  realises  it, — that  is,  God.
Thus  in  Him,  who  is  the  absolute  truth,  those  oppositions  of
universal  and  individual,  subjective  and  objective,  are  solved
and  explained  to  be  neither  self-subsistent  nor  true.

60.]  But  Good,  which  is  thus  put  forward  as  the  final
cause  of  the  world — has  been  already  described  as  good  only
for  us,  the  moral  law  of  our  Practical  Reason.  This  being  so,
the  unity  in  question  goes  no  further  than  to  make  the  condition
and  events  of  the  world  harmonise  with  our  morality  l.  Besides,

1  In  Kant's  own  words  (Criticism  of  the  Power  of  Judgment,  p.  427)  :  '  Final
Cause  is  merely  a  notion  of  our  practical  reason.  It  cannot  be  deduced  from  any
data  of  experience  as  a  theoretical  criterion  of  nature,  nor  can  it  be  applied  to
the  knowledge  of  nature.  No  employment  of  this  notion  is  possible  except  solely
for  the  practical  reason,  in  accordance  with  moral  laws.  The  final  purpose  of
the  Creation  is  that  constitution  of  the  world,  which  harmonises  with  that


98  SECOND  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [60.

even  when  thus  limited,  the  final  cause,  or  Good,  becomes  a
vague  abstraction,  and  the  same  vagueness  attaches  to  the
proposed  idea  of  Duty.  And  in  particular,  this  harmony  is
met  by  the  revival  and  re-assertion  of  the  antithesis,  which
the  import  of  this  harmony  had  made  false.  The  accordance  is
then  described  as  merely  subjective,  something  which  merely
ought  to  be,  and  which  at  the  same  time  is  not  real, — some-
thing we  believe,  possessing  a  subjective  certainty,  but  without
truth,  or  that  objectivity  which  is  appropriate  to  the  Idea.
This  contradiction  may  seem  to  be  disguised  by  adjourning  the
realisation  of  the  Idea  to  a  future,  to  a  time  when  the  Idea
will  also  be.  But  a  sensuous  condition  like  time  is  the
reverse  of  a  reconciliation  of  the  discrepancy ;  and  an  infinite
progression — which  is  the  corresponding  image  adopted  by  the
understanding — is  on  the  very  face  of  it  only  a  constant  re-
establishment  of  this  contradiction.

A  general  remark  may  still  be  offered  on  the  result  at  which
the  Critical  philosophy  arrived  as  to  the  nature  of  knowledge ;  a
result  which  has  grown  one  of  the  axiomatic  beliefs  of  the  day.
In  every  dualistic  system,  and  especially  in  that  of  Kant,  the
fundamental  defect  makes  itself  visible  in  the  inconsistency  of  uni-
fying at  one  moment,  what  a  moment  before  had  been  explained
to  be  independent  and  incapable  of  unification.  And  then,  when
unification  has  been  alleged  to  be  the  right  state,  we  suddenly
come  upon  the  doctrine,  that  the  two  elements,  which  had  /
been  denuded  of  all  independent  subsistence  in  their  true/X
status  of  unification,  are  only  true  and  actual  in  their  state
of  separation.  Philosophising  of  this  kind  wants  the  little
penetration  needed  to  discover,  that  this  shuffling  and  fluc-
tuation only  evidences  how  unsatisfactory  each  of  the  two
characteristics  or  terms  is.  And  it  fails  simply  because  it  is
incapable  of  bringing  two  thoughts  together.  (And  in  point
of  form  there  are  never  more  than  two.)  It  argues  an  utter

which  alone  we  can  state  definitely  in  accordance  with  laws,  viz.  the  final
purpose  of  our  pure  practical  reason,  and  with  that  in  so  far  as  it  means  to  be
practical.'


6o.]  TOWARDS THE OBJECTIVE WORLD.  99

want  of  consistency  to  say,  on  the  one  hand,  that  the  under-
standing only  knows  phenomena,  and,  on  the  other,  assert
the  absolute  character  of  this  knowledge,  by  such  statements
as  '  Cognition  can  go  no  further ' ;  '  Here  is  the  natural  and
absolute  limit  of  human  knowledge.'  But  surely  natural  is
the  wrong  word  here.  The  things  of  Nature  are  limited ;  and
they  are  natural  things  only  to  such  extent  as  they  are  not
aware  of  their  universal  limit,  or  to  such  extent  as  their
character  is  a  limit  from  our  point  of  view,  and  not  from
their  own.  No  one  is  aware  that  anything  is  a  limit  or  defect,
until  he  is  at  the  same  time  above  and  beyond  it.  Living
beings,  for  example,  possess  the  prerogative  of  pain  which  is
denied  to  the  inanimate  :  even  with  living  beings,  a  single
affection  or  modification  rises  into  the  feeling  of  a  negative.
For  living  beings  have  within  them  the  universal  presence
of  vitality,  which  overpasses  and  includes  the  single  affection;
and  thus,  as  they  maintain  themselves  in  the  negative  of
themselves,  they  feel  the  contradiction  to  exist  within  them.
But  the  contradiction  is  within  them,  only  in  so  far  as  one
and  the  same  subject  comprehends  both  the  universality  of
their  feeling  of  life,  and  the  individuality  which  is  in  negation
with  it.  This  illustration  will  show  how  a  limit  or  imperfec-
tion in  knowledge  comes  to  be  termed  a  limit  or  imperfection,
only  when  it  is  compared  with  the  idea,  which  we  have  at
hand  of  the  universal,  or  perfect  whole.  A  very  little  con-
sideration might  show,  that  to  call  a  thing  finite  or  limited,
proves  by  implication  the  very  actual  presence  of  the  infinite  and
unlimited,  and  that  our  knowledge  of  a  limit  is  co-extensive
with  the  present  and  actual  consciousness  of  the  unlimited.

The  result  however  which  Kant  assigns  to  cognition  suggests
a  second  remark.  The  philosophy  of  Kant  could  have  no
influence  on  the  method  of  the  sciences.  For  it  allowed  the
categories  and  the  method  of  ordinary  knowledge  to  remain
unmolested.  Occasionally  it  may  be,  in  the  first  sections  of  a
scientific  work  of  that  period,  we  find  propositions  borrowed
from  the  Kantian  philosophy :  but  the  course  of  the  treatise

H  2,


100  SECOND ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT  [60.

renders  it  apparent  that  these  propositions  were  superfluous
ornament,  which,  as  well  as  the  few  first  pages,  might  have
been  omitted  without  producing  the  least  change  in  the  em-
pirical contents  l.

We  may  next  institute  a  comparison  of  Kant  with  the
metaphysics  of  the  empirical  school.  A  plain  and  unreflecting
Empiricism,  though  it  unquestionably  insists  most  upon  sensuous
perception,  still  allows  the  existence  of  a  super-sensible  world
or  spiritual  reality,  leaving  it  unsettled  how  the  contents  of
that  world  may  be  constituted,  and  whether  the  details  originate
from  thought  or  fancy.  So  far  as  form  goes,  the  facts  em-
braced in  this  super-sensible  world  rest  on  the  authority  of
mind,  in  the  same  way  as  the  other  facts,  constituting  em-
pirical knowledge,  rest  on  the  authority  of  external  perception.
But  when  Empiricism  takes  to  reflection  and  makes  a  principle
of  consistency,  it  turns  its  arms  against  this  dualism  in  the
ultimate  and  highest  species  of  fact ;  it  denies  the  indepen-
dence of  the  thinking  principle,  and  of  a  spiritual  world  which
developes  itself  in  thought.  Materialism,  or  Naturalism,  therefore,
is  the  only  consistent  and  thorough-going  system  of  Empiricism.
In  direct  opposition  to  such  an  Empiricism,  Kant  asserts  the
sovereign  principle  of  thought  and  Freedom,  and  attaches  himself
to  the  first-mentioned  form  of  empirical  doctrine,  the  general
principles  of  which  he  never  departed  from.  There  is  a  dualism
in  his  philosophy  also.  On  one  side  stands  the  world  of  sen-
sation, and  of  the  understanding  which  reflects  upon  it.  This
world,  it  is  true,  he  alleges  to  be  a  world  of  appearances.  But
that  is  only  a  title  or  formal  description ;  for  the  source,  the
facts,  and  the  modes  of  observation  continue  quite  the  same
as  in  Empiricism.  On  the  other  side  and  independent  stands
a  self-apprehending  thought,  the  principle  of  Freedom,  which

1  Even  Hermann's  '  Handbook  of  Prosody '  begins  with  paragraphs  of  Kantian
philosophy.  In  §  8  it  is  argued  that  the  law  of  rhythm  must  be  (i)  objective,
(2)  formal,  and  (3)  determined  a  priori.  With  these  requirements  and  with  the
principles  of  Causalty  and  Reciprocity  which  follow  later,  it  were  well  to  compare
the  treatment  of  the  various  measures,  upon  which  those  formal  principles  do  not
exercise  the  slightest  influence.


60.]  TOWARDS  THE OBJECTIVE WORLD.  101

Kant  adopts  from  the  metaphysicians  of  the  past,  after  he
has  emptied  it  of  all  that  it  held,  without  being  able  to  infuse
into  it  anything  new.  For,  in  the  Critical  doctrine,  -  thought,
or,  as  it  is  there  called,  Reason,  is  divested  of  every  specific
form,  and  thus  bereft  of  all  authority.  The  main  effect  of
the  Kantian  philosophy  has  been  to  revive  the  consciousness
of  Reason,  or  the  absolute  inwardness  of  thought.  Its  abstract-
ness  indeed  prevented  that  inwardness  from  developing  into
anything,  or  from  originating  any  special  forms,  whether
cognitive  principles  or  moral  laws  ;  but  nevertheless  it  abso-
lutely refused  to  accept  or  indulge  anything  possessing  the
character  of  outwardness.  Henceforth  the  principle  of  the
independence  of  Reason,  or  of  its  absolute  self-subsistence,  will
be  a  general  maxim  of  philosophy,  as  well  as  a  current  dogma
of  the  time.

(1)  The  Critical  philosophy  has  one  great  negative  merit. It
has  produced  a  general  conviction  that  the  categories  of  under-
standing  are  finite  in their range, and that any  knowledge
which  goes  on  within  their  pale  falls  short  of  the  truth. But
Kant had only  a sight  of  half  of  the  truth. He  explained
the  finite nature  of  the  categories,  to mean that  they  were
subjective only,  valid only  for our  thought, from which  the
thing-in-itself  was  divided  by  an  impassable  gulf. Now,  it  is
not  because  they  are  subjective,  that  the  categories  are  finite :
they  are  finite  by  their  very  nature,  and  it  is  on  their  own
selves  that  it  is  requisite  to  exhibit  their  finitude. Kant  how-
ever holds  that,  what  we  think,  is  false,  because  it  is  we  who
think  it. A  second  deficiency  in  the  system  is  that  it  gives
only  an historical description of  thought, and a mere enu-
meration of  the  elements  or  factors  of  consciousness. The  enu-
meration is  in  the  main  correct : but  nothing  is  said  of  the
necessity  of  what  is  thus  empirically  colligated. The  observa-
tions, made  on  the  various  stages  of  consciousness,  culminate
in  the  summary  statement,  that  the  content  of  all  we  are  ac-
quainted with is  only  an  appearance. And  as  it  is true  at
least  that  all  finite  thinking  is  concerned  with  appearances,  so
far  the  conclusion  is  justified. This  stage  of  appearance  how-
ever— the  phenomenal  world — is  not  the  terminus  of  thought :
there  is  another  and  a  higher  region. But  that  region  was  to
the  Kantian  philosophy  an  inaccessible  '  beyond.'

(2)  After  all  it  was  only  formally,  that  the  Kantian  system
established  the  principle  that  thought  acted  spontaneously  in


102  SECOND ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT,  &c.

forming  its  constitution.  Into  details  of  the  manner  and  the
extent  of  this  self-determination  of  thought,  Kant  never  went.
It  was  Fichte  who  first  noticed  the  omission ;  and  who,  after
he  had  called  attention  to  the  want  of  a  deduction  for  the
categories,  endeavoured  really  to  supply  something  of  the  kind.
With  Fichte,  the  '  Ego '  is  the  starting-point  in  the  philo-
sophical development :  and  the  outcome  of  its  action  is  sup-
posed to  be  visible  in  the  categories.  But  in  Fichte  the  '  Ego '
is  not  really  presented  as  a  free,  spontaneous  energy;  it  is
supposed  to  receive  its  first  excitation  by  an  impulse  from
without.  Against  this  impulse  the  'Ego'  will,  it  is  assumed,
react,  and  only  through  this  reaction  does  it  first  become  con-
scious of  itself.  Meanwhile,  the  nature  of  the  impulse  remains
a  stranger  beyond  our  pale  :  and  the  '  Ego/  with  something  else
always  confronting  it,  is  weighted  with  a  condition.  Fichte,
in  consequence,  never  advanced  beyond  Kant's  conclusion,  that
the  finite  only  is  knowable,  while  the  infinite  transcends  the
range  of  thought.  What  Kant  calls  the  thing-by-itself,  Fichte
calls  the  impulse  from  without — that  abstraction  of  another
'  Ego,'  not  otherwise  describable  or  definable  than  as  the  negative
or  non-Ego  in  general.  The  '  I '  is  thus  looked  at  as  standing
in  relation  with  the  not-I,  through  which  its  act  of  self-deter-
mination is  first  awakened.  And  in  this  manner  the  '  I '  is  but
the  continuous  act  of  self-liberation  from  this  impulse,  never
gaining  a  real  freedom,  because  with  the  surcease  of  the  impulse
the  '  I,'  whose  being  is  its  action,  would  also  cease  to  be.  Nor
is  the  content  produced  by  the  energy  of  the  '  I '  at  all  different
from  the  ordinary  content  of  experience,  except  by  the  supple-
mentary remark,  that  this  content  is  mere  appearance.


CHAPTER  V.

THIRD ATTITUDE OF THOUGHT TOWARDS THE OBJECTIVE WORLD.

Immediate  or  Intuitive  Knowledge.

61.]  IP  we  are  to  believe  the  Critical  Philosophy,  thought
is  subjective,  and  its  ultimate  vocation,  which  we  cannot  get
over,  lies  in  an  abstract  universality  or  formal  identity.  It  is
thus  made  an  antithesis  to  Truth,  which  is  no  abstraction,  but
a  concrete  universal.  In  this  highest  form  of  thought,  which
is  called  Reason,  the  Categories  are  out  of  the  question.  The
extreme  theory  on  the  opposite  side  denies  the  universality  of
thought,  and,  on  the  ground  of  its  being  an  act  of  the  par-
ticular only,  declares  it  incapable  of  apprehending  the  Truth.
This  is  the  Intuitional  theory.

62.]  If  thought  be  no  more  than  a  partial  and  individual
operation,  its  whole  scope  and  result  is  seen  in  the  Categories.
But,  these  Categories  when  reduced  to  fixity  by  the  under-
standing, are  limited  vehicles  of  thought,  forms  of  the  condi-
tioned, dependent  and  derivative.  A  thought  of  this  limited
compass  has  no  sense  of  the  Infinite  and  the  True,  and  cannot
bridge  over  the  gulf  that  separates  it  from  them.  (This
stricture  refers  to  the  proofs  of  God's  existence.)  These  in-
adequate terms  by  which  thought  tries  to  fix  its  objects  are
also  spoken  of  as  notions:  and  to  get  a  notion  of  an  object
therefore  can  only  mean,  in  this  language,  to  grasp  it  under  the
form  of  being  conditioned  and  derivative.  Consequently,  if  the
object  in  question  be  the  True,  the  Infinite,  the  Unconditioned,


104  THIRD  ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT  [62.

we  change  it  by  our  notions  into  a  finite  and  conditioned  ;
whereby,  instead  of  apprehending  the  truth  by  thought,  we
have  perverted  it  into  an  untruth.

Such  is  the  one  simple  line  of  argument  advanced  by  those
who  maintain  that  the  knowledge  of  God  and  of  truth  must
be  Immediate,  or  Intuitive.  At  an  earlier  period  all  sort  of
anthropomorphic  conceptions,  as  they  are  termed,  were  banished
from  God  as  being  finite,  and  therefore  unworthy  of  the  infinite  ;
and  in  this  way  God  has  been  reduced  to  a  tolerably  blank
Being.  But  in  those  days  the  terms  or  formulae  given  by
thought  were  in  general  not  supposed  to  come  under  the  head
of  anthropomorphism.  Thought  was  believed  rather  to  strip
finitude  from  the  conceptions  of  the  Absolute,  herein  confirming
the  above-mentioned  conviction  of  all  ages,  that  reflection  is
the  road  to  truth.  But  now,  at  length,  even  the  formulae
given  by  thought  are  pronounced  to  be  anthropomorphic,  and
thought  itself  is  described  as  a  mere  faculty  of  limitation.
Jacobi  has  presented  this  argument  most  distinctly  in  the
seventh  supplement  to  his  Letters  on  Spinoza ;  borrowing  his
line  of  argument  from  the  works  of  Spinoza  himself,  and  ap-
plying it  as  a  weapon  against  knowledge  in  general.  In  this
argument  knowledge  is  taken  to  mean  knowledge  of  the  finite
only,  a  process  of  thought  from  one  condition  in  a  series  to
another,  all  of  which  are  equally  conditioning  and  conditioned.
According  to  such  a  view,  to  explain  and  to  get  the  notion
of  anything,  is  the  same  as  to  point  out  the  derivation  of  any-
thing from  something  else.  Whatever  such  knowledge  em-
braces, consequently,  is  partial,  dependent  and  finite,  while  the
infinite,  or  true,  i.e.  God,  lies  outside  of  the  mechanical  con-
nexion, to  which  knowledge  is  said  to  be  confined.  It  is  impor-
tant to  observe,  that  while  Kant  makes  the  finite  nature  of  the
Categories  consist  mainly  in  the  formal  circumstance  that  they
are  subjective,  Jacobi  is  here  speaking  of  the  Categories,  apart
from  subjectivity,  in  their  own  proper  character,  and  pronounces
them  in  that  capacity  to  be  naturally  finite.  What  Jacobi
chiefly  had  before  his  eyes,  when  he  thus  described  science,  was


63.]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  105

the  brilliant  advance  of  the  physical  or  exact  sciences  in  the
discovery  of  natural  forces  and  laws.  It  is  not  on  the  finite
ground  occupied  by  these  sciences  that  we  can  expect  to  meet
the  indwelling  presence  of  the  infinite.  Lalande  was  right  when
he  said  he  had  swept  the  whole  heaven  with  his  glass,  and  seen
no  God.  (See  notes  to  §  60.)  In  the  field  of  purely  physical
science,  the  highest  attainable  result  is  a  universal,  describable
as  the  indefinite  aggregation  of  the  finite  outside  us,  or  in  one
word,  as  Matter :  and  Jacobi  well  perceived  that  there  was  no
other  issue  obtainable  in  the  way  of  a  mere  advance  from  one
explanatory  clause  or  law  to  another.

63-]  All  the  while  the  doctrine  that  there  is  a  truth  for
the  mind  was  so  strongly  maintained  by  Jacobi,  that  Reason
alone  is  declared  to  be  that  by  which  man  lives.  This  Reason
is  the  knowledge  of  God.  But  seeing  that  derivative  knowledge
is  restricted  to  a  finite  compass  of  facts,  Reason  is  knowledge
underivative,  or  Faith.

Knowledge,  Faith,  Thought,  Intuition  are  the  categories  that
we  meet  with  on  this  level  of  intellect.  These  terms,  as  pre-
sumably familiar  to  every  one,  are  too  frequently  subjected  to
an  arbitrary  use,  under  no  better  guidance  than  the  conceptions
and  distinctions  of  psychology ;  without  any  examination  of
their  nature  and  notion,  which  is  the  main  question  after  all.
Thus,  we  often  find  knowledge  contrasted  with  faith,  and  faith
at  the  same  time  explained  to  be  an  underivative  or  intuitive
knowledge  : — so  that  it  must  be  at  least  some  sort  of  knowledge.
And,  besides,  it  is  unquestionably  a  fact  of  experience,  firstly,
that  what  we  believe  is  in  our  consciousness, — which  implies  that
we  know  about  it ;  and  secondly,  that  this  belief  is  a  certainty
in  our  consciousness,— which  implies  that  we  know  it,  and  do
not  merely  know  about  it.  Again,  and  especially,  we  find
thought  opposed  to  immediate  knowledge  and  faith,  and,  in
particular,  to  intuition.  But  if  this  intuition  be  qualified  as
intellectual,  we  must  really  mean  the  intuition  of  thought,
unless,  in  a  question  about  the  nature  of  God,  we  are  willing
lo  interpret  intellect  to  mean  poetical  images  and  conceptions


106  THIRD ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [63.

of  fancy.  The  word  faith  or  belief,  in  the  peculiar  dialect  of
this  system,  comes  to  be  employed  even  with  reference  to  com-
mon objects  that  are  present  to  the  senses.  We  believe,  says
Jacobi,  that  we  have  a  body, — we  believe  in  the  existence  of
the  things  of  sense.  But  if  we  are  speaking  of  faith  in  the
True  and  Eternal,  and  saying  that  God  is  given  and  revealed
to  us  in  immediate  knowledge  or  intuition,  we  are  concerned
not  with  the  things  of  sense,  but  with  objects  special  to
our  thinking  mind,  with  facts  of  inherently  universal  signi-
ficance. And  when  the  individual  fl,'  or  in  other  words
personality,  is  before  the  mind — not  the  '  I '  of  experience,  or
a  single  partial  personality — above  all,  when  the  personality
of  God  is  before  us,  we  are  speaking  of  personality  unalloyed, —
of  a  personality  in  its  own  nature  universal.  Such  personality
is  a  thought,  and  falls  within  the  province  of  thought  only.
More  than  this.  Pure  and  simple  intuition  is  completely  the
same  as  pure  and  simple  thought.  Intuition  and  belief  are,  in
the  first  instance,  used  to  denote  the  definite  conceptions  we
attach  to  these  words  in  our  ordinary  employment  of  them  :  and
to  this  extent  they  differ  from  thought  in  certain  points  where
the  distinction  is  generally  intelligible.  But  here,  they  are
taken  in  a  higher  sense,  and  must  be  interpreted  to  mean  a
belief  in  God,  or  an  intellectual  intuition  of  God ;  in  short,  we
must  put  aside  all  that  especially  distinguishes  thought  on  the
one  side,  from  belief  and  intuition  on  the  other.  How  belief
and  intuition,  when  transferred  to  these  higher  regions,  differ
from  thought,  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  say.  And  yet,
such  are  the  barren  distinctions  of  words,  with  which  men  fancy
that  they  assert  an  important  truth :  even  while  the  formulae
they  maintain'  are  identical  with  those  which  they  impugn.  The
term  faith  brings  with  it  the  special  advantage  of  reminding
us  of  the  faith  of  the  Christian  religion ;  it  seems  to  include
Christian  faith,  or  perhaps  even  to  coincide  with  it;  and  thus
the  Philosophy  of  Faith  has  a  thoroughly  pious  and  Christian
look,  on  the  strength  of  which  it  takes  the  liberty  of  uttering
its  arbitrary  dicta  with  greater  pretensions  to  authority.  But


64.]  TOWARDS THE OBJECTIVE WORLD.  107

we  must  not  let  ourselves  be  deceived  by  the  semblance  sur-
reptitiously secured  by  means  of  a  merely  verbal  similarity.  The
two  things  are  radically  distinct.  Firstly,  Christian  faith  com-
prises in  it  a  certain  authority  of  the  Church :  but  the  faith
of  Jacobi's  philosophy  has  no  other  authority  than  that  of  the
philosopher  who  revealed  it.  And,  secondly,  Christian  faith  is
objective,  with  a  great  deal  of  substance  in  the  shape  of  a  system
of  knowledge  and  doctrine  :  while  the  contents  of  the  philosophic
faith  are  so  utterly  indefinite,  that,  while  its  arms  are  open  to
receive  the  faith  of  the  Christian,  it  equally  includes  a  belief
in  the  divinity  of  the  Dalai-lama,  the  ox,  or  the  monkey,  thus,
so  far  as  it  goes,  narrowing  Deity  down  to  its  simplest  terms,
to  a  Supreme  Being.  Faith  itself,  taken  in  the  sense  postulated
by  this  system,  is  nothing  but  the  sapless  abstraction  of  im-
mediate knowledge, — a  purely  formal  category  applicable  to
very  different  facts ;  and  it  ought  never  to  be  confused  or
identified  with  the  spiritual  fulness  of  Christian  faith,  whether
we  look  at  that  faith  in  the  heart  of  the  believer  and  the  in-
dwelling of  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  in  the  doctrines  of  Christianity
with  all  their  breadth  of  detail.

"With  what  is  here  called  faith  or  immediate  knowledge  must
also  be  identified  inspiration,  the  heart's  revelations,  the  truths
implanted  in  man  by  nature,  and,  in  particular,  sound  judgment
or  Common  Sense,  as  it  is  called.  All  these  forms  agree  in
adopting  as  their  leading  principle  the  immediacy,  or  the
self-evident  way,  in  which  a  fact  or  body  of  truths  is  presented
in  consciousness.

64.]  This  immediate  knowledge  consists  in  knowing  that  the
Infinite,  the  Eternal,  the  God  of  our  popular  conceptions,  really
is:  or,  it  asserts  that  in  our  consciousness  there  is  immediately
and  inseparably  bound  up  with  this  conception  the  certainty  of
its  actual  being.

To  seek  to  confute  these  utterances  of  immediate  knowledge
is  the  last  thing  philosophers  would  think  of.  They  may  rather
find  occasion  for  self-gratulation  when  these  ancient  doctrines,  ex-
pressing as  they  do  the  general  tenor  of  philosophic  teaching,  do,


108  THIRD ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT  [64.

even  in  this  unphilosophical  fashion,  become  to  some  extent
universal  convictions  of  the  age.  The  true  marvel  rather  is
that  any  one  could  suppose  these  principles  were  opposed  to
philosophy, — the  maxims,  I  mean,  that  whatever  is  held  to  be
true  is  immanent  in  the  mind,  and  that  there  is  a  truth  for
the  mind  (§  63).  From  a  formal  point  of  view,  there  is  a
peculiar  interest  in  the  maxim  that  the  being  of  God  is  imme-
diately and  inseparably  bound  up  with  the  thought  of  God,
that  objectivity  is  bound  up  with  the  subjectivity,  which  is
the  primd  facie  character  of  thought.  Not  content  with  that,
the  philosophy  of  immediate  knowledge  goes  so  far  in  its  one-
sided view,  as  to  affirm  that  the  attribute  of  existence,  even  in
perception,  is  quite  as  inseparably  connected  with  the  con-
ception we  have  of  our  bodies  and  of  external  things,  as  it  is
with  the  thought  of  God.  Now  it  is  the  endeavour  of  phi-
losophy to  prove  such  a  unity,  to  show  that  it  lies  in  the
very  nature  of  thought  and  subjectivity,  to  be  indissoluble
from  being  and  objectivity.  In  these  circumstances  therefore,
philosophy,  whatever  estimate  may  be  formed  of  the  character
of  these  proofs,  must  in  any  case  be  glad  to  see  it  shown  and
maintained,  that  its  maxims  are  facts  of  consciousness,  and  in
harmony  with  experience.  The  difference  between  philosophy
and  the  asseverations  of  immediate  knowledge  rather  centres
in  the  exclusive  position  which  immediate  knowledge  takes  up
and  in  its  opposition  to  philosophy.  And  yet  it  was  as  a  self-
evident  or  immediate  truth  that  the  '  Cogito,  ergo  sum,'  of
Descartes,  the  maxim  on  which  may  be  said  to  rest  the  whole
burden  of  Modern  Philosophy,  was  first  stated  by  its  author.
The  man  who  calls  this  a  syllogism,  must  know  little  more
about  a  syllogism  than  that  the  word  'Ergo'  occurs  in  it.
Where  shall  we  look  for  the  middle  term?  And  a  middle
term  is  a  much  more  essential  point  of  a  syllogism  than  the
word  fErgo.'  If  we  try  to  justify  the  name,  by  calling  the
combination  of  ideas  in  Descartes  an  immediate  syllogism,  this
superfluous  variety  of  syllogism  is  a  mere  name  for  a  combina-
tion of  distinct  terms  of  thought,  while  there  is  nothing  to


65.]  TOWARDS THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  109

bring  them  together.  That  being  so,  the  connexion  of  being
with  our  conceptions,  as  stated  in  the  maxim  of  immediate
knowledge,  has  no  more  and  no  less  claim  to  the  title  of
syllogism  than  the  axiom  of  Descartes  has.  From  Hotho's
'Dissertation  on  the  Cartesian  Philosophy'  (published  1826),  I
borrow  the  quotation  in  which  Descartes  himself  distinctly
declares,  that  the  maxim  '  Cogito,  ergo  sum,'  is  no  syllogism.
The  passages  are  Respons.  ad  II  Object. :  De  Methodo  IV :
Ep.  I.  1 18.  From  the  first  passage  I  quote  the  words  more
immediately  in  point.  Descartes  says  :  '  That  we  are  thinking
beings  is  "prima  quaedam  notio  quae  ex  nullo  syllogismo  conclu-
ditur " '  (a  certain  primary  notion,  which  is  deduced  from  no
syllogism) ;  and  goes  on  :  ( neque  cum  quis  elicit ;  ego  coffito,  ergo
sum  sive  existo,  existentiam  ex  cogitatione  per  syllogismum  deducit.'
(Nor,  when  one  says,  I  think,  therefore  I  am  or  exist,  does
he  deduce  existence  from  thought  by  means  of  a  syllogism.)
Descartes  knew  what  is  implied  in  a  syllogism,  and  so  he  adds,
that,  in  order  to  make  the  maxim  admit  of  a  deduction  by
syllogism,  we  should  have  to  add  the  major  premiss :  c  Illud
omne  quod  cogitat,  est  sive  existit'  (Everything  which  thinks,
is  or  exists.)  Of  course,  he  remarks,  this  major  proposition
could  only  be  deduced  from  the  original  statement.

The  language  of  Descartes  on  the  maxim  that  the  '  I '  which
thinks  must  also  at  the  same  time  6e,  his  saying  that  this
connexion  is  given  and  implied  in  the  simple  perception  of  con-
sciousness,— that  this  connexion  is  the  first  principle,  the  most
certain  and  evident  of  all  things,  so  that  no  scepticism  can  be
conceived  so  monstrous  as  not  to  admit  it : — all  this  language
is  so  vivid  and  distinct,  that  the  modern  statements  of  Jacobi
and  others  on  this  immediate  connexion  can  only  pass  for
needless  repetitions.

65.]  The  theory  of  which  we  are  speaking  is  not  satisfied
when  it  has  shown  that  mediate  knowledge  taken  separately
is  an  inadequate  vehicle  of  truth.  Its  distinctive  doctrine  is
that  immediate  knowledge  alone,  to  the  total  exclusion  of
mediation,  can  possess  a  content  which  is  true.  This  ex-


110  THIRD  ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT  [66.

clusiveness  is  enough  to  show  that  the  theory  is  a  relapse
into  the  metaphysics  of  Understanding,  with  its  pass-words
'Either — or.'  And  thus  it  sinks  into  the  condition  of  using
extrinsic  grounds  of  mediation,  the  strength  of  which  consists
in  clinging  to  those  narrow  and  one-sided  categories  of  the
finite,  which  it  falsely  imagined  itself  to  have  left  for  ever
behind.  This  point,  however,  we  shall  not  at  present  discuss
in  detail.  An  exclusively  immediate  knowledge  is  asserted
as  a  fact  only,  and  in  the  present  Introduction  we  can  only
study  it  on  the  surface  and  as  it  is  so  introduced.  The  real
significance  of  such  knowledge  will  be  explained,  when  we
come  to  the  logical  question  of  the  opposition  between  mediate
and  immediate.  But  it  is  characteristic  of  the  view  before  us
to  neglect  the  nature  of  the  fact,  that  is,  the  notion  of  it ;
for,  by  an  examination  of  that  question,  it  would  pave  the
way  for  mediation  and  even  for  knowledge.  The  genuine
discussion  on  logical  ground,  therefore,  must  be  deferred  till
we  come  to  the  proper  province  of  Logic  itself.

The  whole  of  the  second  part  of  Logic,  the  Doctrine  of
Essential  Being,  is  a  discussion  of  the  intrinsically  self-
affirming  unity  of  immediacy  and  mediation.

66.]  Beyond  this  point  then  we  need  not  go :  immediate
knowledge  is  to  be  accepted  as  a  fact.  Under  these  cir-
cumstances our  study  passes  to  the  field  of  experience,  to  a
psychological  phenomenon.  If  that  be  so,  we  need  only
remark,  that  in  the  common  course  of  experience,  truths,
which  we  well  know  to  be  results  of  complicated  and  highly
mediated  trains  of  thought,  present  themselves  immediately
and  without  effort  to  the  mind  of  any  man  who  is  familiar
with  the  subject.  The  mathematician,  like  every  one  who
has  mastered  a  particular  science,  meets  any  problem  with
ready-made  solutions,  which  pre-suppose  a  very  complex
analysis:  and  every  educated  man  has  a  number  of  general
views  and  maxims  which  he  can  muster  without  trouble,  but
which  can  only  have  sprung  from  frequent  reflection  and
long  experience.  The  facility  we  attain  in  any  sort  of  know-


67.]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  Ill

ledge,  art,  or  technical  expertness,  consists  in  having  the
particular  knowledge  or  kind  of  action  present  to  our  mind
in  any  case  that  occurs,  even  we  may  say,  immediate  in  our
very  limbs,  in  an  energy  that  tends  outward.  In  all  these
instances,  immediacy  of  knowledge  is  so  far  from  excluding
mediation,  that  the  two  things  are  linked  together, — immediate
knowledge  being  actually  the  product  and  result  of  mediate
knowledge.

It  is  no  less  obvious  that  immediate  existence  is  bound  up
with  its  mediation.  The  seed  and  the  parent  are  immediate
and  initial  existences  in  respect  of  the  children  which  are
generated.  But  the  seed  and  the  parent,  though  they  exist
immediately,  are  nevertheless  equally  generated :  and  the  child,
without  prejudice  to  the  mediation  of  its  existence,  is
immediate,  because  it  is.  The  fact  that  I  am  in  Berlin,
implying  my  immediate  presence,  is  mediated  by  my  having
made  the  journey  hither.

67-]  One  thing  may  be  observed  with  reference  to  the
immediate  knowledge  of  God,  of  abstract  right,  and  of  social
morality  (including  under  the  head  of  immediate  knowledge,
what  is  otherwise  termed  Instinct,  Implanted  or  Innate  Ideas,
Common  Sense,  Natural  Reason,  or  whatever  form,  in  short,  we
give  to  the  original  spontaneity).  It  is  a  matter  of  common
experience  that  education  or  development  is  required  to  bring
out  into  consciousness  what  is  therein  contained.  It  was  so
with  the  Platonic  reminiscence ;  and  the  Christian  rite  of
baptism,  although  a  sacrament,  involves  the  additional  ob-
ligation of  a  Christian  up-bringing.  In  short,  religion  and
morals,  however  much  they  may  contain  of  faith  or  immediate
knowledge,  are  still  on  every  side  conditioned  by  the  mediating
process  which  is  termed  development,  education,  and  formation
of  character.

The  adherents,  no  less  than  the  assailants,  of  the  doctrine
of  Innate  Ideas  have  been  guilty  throughout  of  the  like
exclusiveness  and  narrowness  as  is  here  noted.  They  have
drawn  a  hard  and  fast  line  between  the  essentially  immediate


112  THIRD  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT  [68.

or  spontaneous  union  (as  it  may  be  described)  of  certain
universal  ideas  with  the  soul,  and  another  union  which  has
to  be  brought  about  in  an  external  fashion,  and  through  the
channel  of  objects  and  conceptions  given  to  us.  There  is  one
objection,  borrowed  from  experience,  which  is  raised  against
the  doctrine  of  Innate  Ideas.  All  men,  it  is  said,  must  have
these  ideas,  such,  for  example,  as  the  maxim  of  contradiction,
present  in  the  mind ;  they  must  know  them ;  for  this  maxim
and  others  like  it  were  included  in  the  class  of  Innate  Ideas.
The  objection  may  be  set  down  to  misconception ;  for  the
ideas  or  characteristics  in  question,  though  innate,  need  not
on  that  account  have  the  form  of  ideas  or  conceptions  of
something  known.  Still,  the  objection  completely  meets  and
overthrows  the  crude  theory  of  immediate  knowledge,  which
expressly  asserts  its  formulae  in  so  far  as  they  are  in  con-
sciousness. Another  point  calls  for  notice.  We  may  suppose
it  admitted  by  the  intuitive  school,  that  the  special  case  of
religious  faith  involves  supplementing  by  a  Christian  or
religious  education  and  development.  In  that  case  it  is  acting
capriciously  when  it  seeks  to  ignore  this  admission  when
speaking  about  faith,  or  it  betrays  a  want  of  reflection  not
to  know,  that,  if  the  necessity  of  education  be  once  admitted,
mediation  is  declared  to  be  indispensable.

The  reminiscence  of  ideas  spoken  of  by  Plato  is  equivalent  to
saying  that  ideas  implicitly  exist  in  man,  instead  of  being,  as
the  Sophists  assert,  a  foreign  importation  into  his  mind.  But  to
conceive  knowledge  as  reminiscence,  does  not  interfere  with,  or
set  aside  as  useless,  the  development  of  what  is  implicitly  in
man  ; — which  development  is  another  word  for  mediation.  The
same  holds  good  of  the  innate  ideas  that  we  find  in  Descartes
and  the  Scotch  philosophers.  These  ideas  are  only  potential  in  the
first  instance,  and  seem  to  have  somewhat  of  the  nature  of  a
capacity  in  the  mind.

68.]  In  the  case  of  these  experiences  the  appeal  turns  upon
something  that  shows  itself  bound  up  with  the  immediate
knowledge.  Even  if  this  combination  be  in  the  first  instance
taken  as  an  external  and  empirical  connexion,  still  the  fact


69,  70.] TOWARDS  THE OBJECTIVE WOULD.  113

of  its  being  constant,  shows  it  to  be  essential  and  inseparable,
so  far  as  empirical  observation  is  concerned.  And  then,  if
this  immediate  knowledge,  as  exhibited  in  experience,  be
examined  for  its  own  sake,  where  it  appears  as  a  knowledge
of  God  and  the  divine  nature,  the  state  of  mind,  which  it
implies,  is  generally  described  as  an  exaltation  above  the
range  of  finitude,  above  the  senses,  and  above  the  instinctive
desires  and  affections  of  the  natural  heart :  which  exaltation
passes  over  into,  and  terminates  in,  faith  in  God  and  a  divine
order.  It  is  apparent,  therefore,  that,  though  faith  may  be
an  immediate  knowledge  and  certainty,  it  equally  implies  the
interposition  of  this  process  as  its  antecedent  and  condition.

It  has  been  already  observed  that  the  so-called  proofs  of
the  being  of  God,  which  start  from  finite  being,  give  an
expression  to  this  exaltation.  In  that  light  they  are  no
inventions  of  an  over-subtle  reflection,  but  the  necessary  and
native  channel  in  which  the  movement  of  mind  runs :  though
it  may  be,  that,  in  their  ordinary  form,  these  proofs  have
not  their  correct  and  perfect  expression.

69-]  It  is  the  passage  (§  64)  from  the  subjective  idea  to
being  which  gives  its  distinctive  feature  to  the  doctrine  of
immediate  knowledge.  A  primary  and  self-evident  inter-
connexion is  declared  to  exist  between  our  idea  and  being.
This  central  point  of  transition,  taken  utterly  irrespective  of
any  connexions  which  show  in  experience,  clearly  offers  a
mediation  or  means  of  communication  in  its  own  self.  And
the  mediation  is  of  no  imperfect  or  unreal  kind,  where  the
mediation  takes  place  with  and  through  something  external,
but  one  comprehending  both  antecedent  and  conclusion.

7O-]  The  drift  of  this  view,  then,  is  that  truth  lies  neither
in  the  idea  as  a  merely  subjective  thought,  nor  in  mere
being  on  its  own  account.  Being  on  its  own  account  only,
a  being  that  is  not  of  the  idea,  is  the  sensible  and  finite
being  of  the  world.  Now  all  this  only  affirms,  without
demonstration,  that  the  idea  has  truth  only  by  means  of
being,  and  being  has  truth  only  by  means  of  the  idea.  The

i


114  THIRD  ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT  [71.

maxim  of  immediate  knowledge  rejects  an  indefinite  and
empty  immediacy  (and  such  is  abstract  being,  or  the  pure
unity  taken  by  itself),  and  affirms  in  its  stead  the  unity  of
the  idea  with  being.  And  it  acts  rightly  in  so  doing.  But  it
is  stupid  not  to  see  that  the  unity  of  characteristics  which
are  distinct  is  not  immediate  unity  only,  i.e.  unity  empty
and  indeterminate,  but  a  clear  assertion  of  the  law  that  truth
lies  in  the  mediation  of  one  of  the  characteristics  by  the
other;  or,  if  the  phrase  be  preferred,  in  the  mediation  of
each  with  truth  only  by  means  of  the  other.  That  the  quality
of  mediation  is  thus  involved  in  the  very  immediacy  of  in-
tuition is  exhibited  as  a  fact,  against  which  understanding,
conformably  to  the  fundamental  maxim  of  immediate  know-
ledge, that  the  evidence  of  consciousness  is  infallible,  should
have  nothing  to  object.  It  is  only  ordinary  abstract  under-
standing which  takes  the  terms  of  mediation  and  immediacy,
each  by  itself  absolutely,  imagining  that  they  represent  an  in-
flexible line  of  distinction,  and  which  thus  draws  upon  its  own
head  the  hopeless  task  of  reconciling  them.  The  difficulty,
as  we  have  shown,  has  no  existence  even  in  the  fact,  and  it
vanishes  in  the  speculative  notion.

71J  The  one-sidedness  of  the  intuitional  school  has  certain
characteristics  attending  upon  it,  which  we  shall  proceed  to
point  out  in  their  main  features,  now  that  we  have  discussed
the  fundamental  principle.  The  first  of  these  corollaries  is  as
follows.  Since  the  criterion  of  truth  is  found,  not  in  the
character  of  the  content,  but  in  the  fact  of  consciousness,  all
alleged  truth  has  no  other  basis  than  subjective  knowledge,
and  the  assertion  that  we  discover  a  certain  fact  in  our
consciousness.  What  we  discover  in  our  own  consciousness
is  thus  exaggerated  into  a  fact  of  the  consciousness  of  all,
and  even  passed  off  for  the  very  nature  of  the  mind.

Among  the  so-called  proofs  of  the  existence  of  God,  there  used
to  stand  the  consensus  gentium,  to  which,  for  instance,  Cicero
appeals.  The  consensus  gentium  possesses  considerable  weight ;
for  the  transition  is  easy  and  natural  from  the  circumstance,


7i.]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  115

that  a  certain  fact  is  found  in  the  consciousness  of  every
one,  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  a  necessary  element  in  the
very  nature  of  consciousness.  In  this  category  of  general
agreement  there  was  latent  the  deep-rooted  perception,  which
does  not  escape  even  the  least  cultivated  mind,  that  the
consciousness  of  the  individual  is  particular  and  contingent.
Yet  if  we  do  not  examine  the  nature  of  this  consciousness,
stripping  it  of  the  particular  and  the  accidental,  and  by  the
wearisome  work  of  reflection  disclosing  the  universal  in  its
entirety  and  purity,  we  can  never  draw  from  the  general
consent  upon  a  given  point  more  than  a  decent  presumption
that  it  is  part  of  the  very  nature  of  consciousness.  Thought
insists  on  knowing  the  necessity  of  what  is  presented  as  a
fact  of  general  occurrence,  and  for  that  requirement  the
consensus  gentium  is  certainly  not  sufficient.  Even  granting
the  universality  of  the  fact  to  be  a  satisfactory  proof,  we
could  never  in  this  way  demonstrate  faith  in  God,  because
there  are  individuals  and  nations  without  any  such  faith1.

1  In  order  to  judge  of  the  greater  or  less  extent  to  which  Experience  shows
cases  of  Atheism  or  of  the  belief  in  God,  it  is  all-important  to  know  if  the  mere
general  conception  of  deity  suffices,  or  if  a  more  precise  knowledge  of  God  is
required.  The  Christian  world  would  certainly  refuse  the  title  of  God  to  the  idols
of  the  Hindoos  and  the  Chinese,  to  the  fetiches  of  the  Africans,  and  even  to  the
gods  of  Greece  themselves.  If  so,  a  believer  in  these  idols  would  not  be  a  believer
in  God.  If  it  were  contended,  on  the  other  hand,  that  such  a  belief  in  idols
implies  some  sort  of  belief  in  God,  as  the  species  implies  the  genus,  then  idolatry
would  argue  not  faith  in  an  idol  merely,  but  faith  in  God.  The  Athenians
took  an  opposite  view.  The  poets  and  philosophers  who  explained  Zeus  to  be
a  cloud,  and  maintained  that  there  was  only  one  God,  were  treated  as  Atheists
at  Athens.

The  danger  in  these  questions  lies  in  looking  at  what  the  mind  may  make  out
of  an  object,  and  not  what  that  object  actually  and  explicitly  is.  If  we  fail  to  note
this  distinction,  the  commonest  perceptions  of  men's  senses  will  be  religion  :  for
every  such  perception,  and  indeed  every  act  of  mind,  implicitly  contains  the
principle  which,  when  it  is  purified  and  developed,  rises  to  religion.  But  the
capability  of  religion  is  one  thing  and  the  possession  of  religion  another.  And
religion  yet  implicit  is  only  a  capacity  or  a  possibility.

Thus  in  modern  times,  travellers  have  found  tribes  (as  Captains  Ross  and
Parry  found  the  Esquimaux)  which,  as  they  tell  us,  have  not  even  that  small
modicum  of  religion  possessed  by  African  sorcerers,  the  goetes  of  Herodotus.  On
the  other  hand,  an  Englishman,  who  spent  the  first  months  of  the  last  Jubilee  at

I  2


116  THIRD  ATTITUDE OF  THOUGHT [72,  73.

But  there  can  be  nothing  shorter  and  more  convenient  than
to  have  the  bare  statement  to  make,  that  we  discover  a  fact
in  our  consciousness,  and  are  certain  that  it  is  true :  and
to  declare  that  this  certainty,  instead  of  inhering  in  our
particular  mental  constitution  only,  belongs  to  the  very  nature
of  the  mind.

72.]  Since  immediate  knowledge  is  declared  to  be  the
criterion  of  truth,  it  follows,  secondly,  that  all  superstition
or  idolatry  is  expounded  to  be  truth,  and  that  an  apology
is  prepared  for  any  contents  of  the  will,  however  unjust  and
immoral.  It  is  because  he  believes  in  them,  and  not  from
the  reasoning  and  syllogism  of  what  is  termed  mediate  know-
ledge, that  the  Indian  finds  God  in  the  cow,  the  monkey,
the  Brahmin,  or  the  Lama.  But  natural  desires  and  affections
spontaneously  carry  and  deposit  their  interests  in  consciousness,
where  also  immoral  purposes  make  themselves  naturally  at
home :  good  or  bad  character  could  only  express  the  definite
being  of  the  will,  which  would  be  known,  and  that  most
immediately,  in  the  main  objects  and  purposes  of  the  man.

73.]  Thirdly  and  lastly,  the  immediate  knowledge  of  God
goes  no  further  than  to  tell  us  that  He  is :  to  tell  us  what
He  is,  would  be  an  act  of  knowledge,  involving  mediation.
So  that  God  as  an  object  of  religion  is  expressly  narrowed
down  to  that  undefined  super-sensible,  God  in  general :  and
the  significance  of  religion  is  reduced  to  a  minimum.

If  it  were  really  needful  to  win  back  and  secure  the  bare
belief  that  there  is  a  God,  or  even  to  create  it,  we  might
well  wonder  at  the  poverty  of  the  age,  which  can  see  a  gain
in  the  merest  pittance  of  religious  knowledge,  and  which  in
its  church  has  sunk  so  low  as  to  worship  at  the  altar  that
stood  in  Athens  long  ago,  dedicated  to  the  '  Unknown
God.'

Rome,  says,  in  his  account  of  the  modern  Romans,  that  the  common  people  are
bigots,  whilst  those  who  can  read  and  write  are  one  mass  of  atheists.

The  charge  of  Atheism  is  seldom  heard  in  modern  tunes  :  principally  because
the  facts  and  the  requirements  of  religion  are  reduced  to  a  minimum.  (See  §  73.)


74-]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  117

74-]  We  have  still  to  make  a  brief  statement  on  the
general  nature  of  the  form  of  immediacy.  For  it  is  the  essential
narrowness  and  imperfection  of  the  category,  which  makes
whatever  comes  under  it  narrow  and,  for  that  reason,  finite.
And,  firstly,  it  makes  the  universal  no  better  than  an  ab-
straction external  to  the  particulars,  and  God  a  being  without
determinate  quality.  But  God  can  only  be  called  a  spirit
when  He  is  known  to  be  at  once  the  beginning  and  end,  as
well  as  the  mean,  in  the  process  of  mediation.  Without  this
unification  of  elements  He  is  neither  concrete,  nor  living,  nor
a  spirit.  Thus  the  knowledge  of  God  as  a  spirit  necessarily
implies  mediation.  Secondly,  when  applied  to  the  particular,
the  form  of  immediacy  tells  us  that  the  particular  has  being,
and  stands  in  connexion  with  itself.  But  such  predicates
contradict  the  very  essence  of  the  particular,  in  virtue  of
which  it  refers  to  something  else  outside.  They  make  the
finite  seem  an  absolute.  But,  besides,  the  form  of  immediacy
is  altogether  abstract.  It  has  no  preference  for  one  set  of
contents  more  than  another,  but  is  equally  susceptible  of  all :
it  may  as  well  sanction  what  is  idolatrous  and  immoral  as
the  reverse.  It  is  only  when  we  come  to  see  that  the  content
is  not  self-existent,  but  derivative  from  something  else,  that
its  finitude  and  untruth  are  shown  in  their  proper  light.
Such  a  perception,  where  the  content  is  itself  accompanied  by
a  recognition  of  its'  dependent  nature,  is  a  knowledge  which
involves  mediation.  The  only  content  which  can  be  held  to
be  the  truth,  is  one  not  mediated  with  something  else,  not
limited  by  other  things:  or,  otherwise  expressed,  it  is  one
mediated  by  itself,  where  mediation  and  immediate  reference-
to-self  coincide.  The  understanding  that  fancies  itself  freed
from  the  bondage  of  finite  knowledge  (beyond  the  identity
of  the  analytical  metaphysicians  and  the  'Encyclopaedists)'
turns  back  to  seek  its  principle  and  criterion  of  truth  in
immediacy,  which  is  an  abstract  reference-to-self  and  the
same  as  abstract  identity.  Abstract  thought  (the  form  used
by  the  metaphysic  that  plays  round  its  object)  and  abstract


118  THIRD ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT [75,  76.

intuition (the form  used by immediate knowledge) are one
and  the  same.

The  stereotyped  opposition  between  the  form  of  immediacy
and  that  of  mediation  gives  to  the  former  a  halfness  and
inadequacy,  that  affects  every  content  which  is  brought  under
it.  Immediacy  means,  upon  the  whole,  an  abstract  reference-
to-self,  that  is,  an  abstract  identity  or  abstract  universality.
Accordingly  the  universal,  in  its  absoluteness,  when  taken  as
if  it  were  only  immediate,  is  a  mere  abstract  universal ;  and
from  this  point  of  view  God  is  conceived  as  a  being  altogether
without  determinate  quality.  To  call  God  a  spirit  on  this
hypothesis  is  only  a  phrase :  for  the  consciousness  and  self-
consciousness,  which  a  spirit  implies,  are  impossible  without  a
distinguishing  of  it  from  itself  and  from  something  else,  i.  e.
without  a  mediation.


75.]  It  was  impossible  for  us  to  criticise  this,  the  third
attitude,  which  thought  has  been  supposed  to  take  towards
objective  truth,  in  any  other  direction  than  what  is  immediately
stated  and  recognised  in  the  doctrine  itself.  The  theory
asserts  that  immediate  knowledge  is  a  fact.  It  has  been
shown  to  be  untrue  in  fact  to  say  that  there  is  an  immediate
knowledge,  a  knowledge  without  mediation  either  by  means
of  something  else  or  in  itself.  It  has  also  been  explained  to
be  false  in  fact  to  say  that  thought  advances  through  finite
and  conditioned  categories  only,  which  are  always  mediated
by  a  something  else,  and  to  forget  that'  in  the  very  act  of
mediation,  the  mediation  itself  vanishes.  And  to  show  that,
in  point  of  fact,  there  is  a  knowledge,  which  advances  neither
by  unmixed  immediacy  nor  by  unmixed  mediation,  we  can
point  to  the  example  of  Logic  and  the  whole  of  philosophy.

76.]  If  we  view  the  maxims  of  immediate  knowledge  in
connexion  with  the  dogmatic  metaphysic  of  the  past  from
which  we  started,  we  shall  learn  from  the  comparison  the
reactionary  nature  of  the  school  of  Jacobi.  His  doctrine  is
a  return  to  the  modern  starting-point  of  this  metaphysic  in
the  Cartesian  philosophy.  Both  Jacobi  and  Descartes  maintain
the  following  three  points  :


76.]  TOWARDS  THE  OBJECTIVE WORLD.  119

(1)  The  simple  inseparability  of the  thought  and  being  of
the  thinker. 'Cogito,  ergo  sum,'  is  the  same  doctrine  as  that
the  being,  reality,  and  existence  of  the  'Ego'  is  immediately
revealed  to  me  in  consciousness. (Descartes,  in  fact,  is  careful
to  state  that  by  thought he  means  consciousness  in  general.
Princip.  Phil.  I.  9.) This  inseparability  is  the  absolutely  first
and  most  certain  knowledge,  not  mediated  or  demonstrated.

(2)  The inseparability  of  existence  from  the  conception  of
God : the  former  is  necessarily  implied  in  the  latter,  or  the
conception never can  be  without  the attribute of  existence,
which  is  thus  necessary  and  eternal 1.

(3)  The immediate consciousness of  the existence of  ex-
ternal things. Nothing  more  is  meant  than  the  consciousness
of  sense. To  have  such  a  thing  is  the  slightest  of  all  cog-
nitions; and  the  only  thing  worth  knowing  about  it,  is  that
such  immediate  consciousness  is  an  error  and  a  delusion,  the

1  Descartes,  Princip.  Phil.  I.  15  :  Magii  hoc  (ens  summe  perfectvm  existere)
credet,  si  attended,  nullius  alterius  rei  ideam  apud  se  inveniri,  in  qua  eodem  modo
necessariam  existentiam  contineri  animadvertat ; — intelliget  illam  ideam  exhibere
veram  et  immutabilem  naturam,  quaeque  non  potest  non  existere,  cum  necessaria
existentia  in  ea  contineatur.  (The  reader  will  be  more  disposed  to  believe  that
there  exists  a  being  supremely  perfect,  if  he  notes  that  in  the  case  of  nothing
else  is  there  found  in  him  an  idea,  in  which  he  notices  necessary  existence  to
be  contained  in  the  same  way.  He  will  see  that  that  idea  exhibits  a  true  and
unchangeable  nature, — a  nature  which  cannot  but  exist,  since  necessary  existence
is  contained  in  it.)  A  remark  which  immediately  follows,  and  which  sounds
like  mediation  or  demonstration,  does  not  really  affect  the  original  principle.

In  Spinoza  we  come  upon  the  same  statement  that  the  essence  or  abstract
conception  of  God  implies  existence.  The  first  of  Spinoza's  definitions,  that
of  the  Causa  Sui  (or  Self-Cause),  explains  it  to  be  cujus  essentia  involvit  existen-
tiam, sive  id,  cujus  natura  non  potest  concipi  nisi  existens  (that  of  which  the
essence  involves  existence,  or  that  whose  nature  cannot  be  conceived  except
as  existing).  The  inseparability  of  the  notion  from  being  is  the  main  point
and  fundamental  hypothesis  in  his  system.  But  what  notion  is  thus  inseparable
from  being  ?  Not  the  notion  of  finite  things,  for  they  are  so  constituted  as  to
have  a  contingent  and  a  created  existence.  Spinoza's  nth  proposition,  which
follows  with  a  proof  that  God  exists  necessarily,  and  his  zoth,  showing  that
God's  existence  and  his  essence  are  one  and  the  same,  are  really  superfluous,
and  the  proof  is  more  in  form  than  in  reality.  To  say,  that  God  is  Substance,
the  only  Substance ;  and  that,  as  Substance  is  Causa  Sui,  God  therefore  exists
necessarily,  is  merely  stating  that  God  is  that  of  which  the  notion  and  the
being  are  inseparable.


120  THIRD  ATTITUDE  OF  THOUGHT [77,  78.

sensible  world  being  altogether  void  of  truth :  that  the  being
of  these  external  things  is  accidental  and  passes  away  as  a
show ;  and  that  they  are  characterised  by  having  an  existence
which  is  separable  from  their  essence  and  notion.

77-]  There  is  however  a  distinction  between  the  two  points
of  view :

(1)  The  Cartesian  philosophy,  from  these  unproved  postulates,
which it  assumes  to be improvable, proceeds to wider and
wider  details  of  knowledge,  and  thus  gives  rise  to  the  sciences
of  modern times. The modern theory (of  Jacobi), on  the
contrary,  arrives (§ 62)  at  the  result (which is  valuable  on
its own  account) that knowledge, if it  proceeds by finite
mediations,  can  know  only  the  finite,  and  never  embody  the
truth ; while in our  consciousness of  God  it  bids  us  go  no
further  than  the  aforesaid  very  abstract  belief  that  God  is  l.

(2)  The  modern  doctrine  on  the  one  hand  makes  no  change
in  the Cartesian method of  the usual scientific knowledge,
and  conducts  on  the same  plan  the  experimental and  finite
sciences  that  have  sprung  from  it. But, on  the  other  hand,
when  it  comes  to  the  science  which  has  infinity  for  its  scope,
it  throws  aside  that  method,  and  thus,  as  it  knows  no  other,
it  rejects  all  methods. It  abandons  itself  to the control of
a  wild,  capricious  and  fantastic  dogmatism,  to  a  moral  prig-
gishness  and  pride  of  feeling,  or  to  an  excessive  opining  and
reasoning  which  is  loudest  against  philosophy  and  philosophic
themes. Philosophy  of course  tolerates  no  mere  assertions,  or
conceits,  or  arbitrary  fluctuations  of  inference  to  and  fro.

78.]  We  must  at  once  reject  the  opposition  between  an
independent  immediacy  in  the  contents,  or  in  the  knowledge
of  them,  and  an  equally  independent  mediation,  incompatible

1  Anselm  on  the  contrary  says  :  Negllgentiae  mihi  videtur,  si  postquam
confirmati  sumus  in  fide,  non  studemus,  quod  credimus,  intelligere.  (Methinks
it  is  carelessness,  if,  after  we  have  been  confirmed  in  the  faith,  we  do  not
exert  ourselves  to  see  the  meaning  of  what  we  believe.)  [Tractat.  Cur  Deus  Homo  ?]
These  words  of  Anselm,  in  connexion  with  the  varied  unity  of  Christian
doctrine,  offer  a  far  harder  problem  for  investigation,  than  is  in  the  view  of
the  modern  theory  of  faith  or  intuition.


78.]  TOWARDS  THE OBJECTIVE WORLD.  121

with  the  former.  The  antithesis  is  a  mere  dictum,  or  as-
sertion assumed  in  virtue  of  our  own  pleasure.  All  other
assumptions  and  postulates  must  in  like  manner  be  left  behind
at  the  entrance  to  philosophy,  whether  they  spring  from
conception  or  thought.  For  philosophy  is  the  science,  in  which
all  terms  or  formulae  of  that  kind  must  first  be  scrutinised
and  the  meaning  of  them  and  of  their  oppositions  be  ascertained.
Scepticism,  being  a  negative  science  running  through  all
forms  of  knowledge,  might  seem  a  suitable  introduction  for
pointing  out  the  nullity  of  such  assumptions.  But  a  sceptical
introduction  would  be  an  ungrateful  and  therefore  a  useless
course ;  for  Dialectic,  as  we  shall  soon  make  appear,  forms
an  essential  element  of  affirmative  science.  Scepticism,  besides,
could  only  find  the  finite  forms  as  they  were  suggested  by
experience,  taking  them  as  given,  instead  of  arriving  at  them
scientifically.  To  require  such  a  thorough-going  scepticism,
is  the  same  as  to  insist  on  science  being  preceded  by  universal
doubt,  or  a  total  absence  of  axiom  and  postulate.  But  there
is  no  necessity  for  such  utter  doubt.  In  the  resolve  to  think
purely  we  have  all  we  require :  for  we  have  freedom ;  and
freedom,  letting  everything  else  slip  away,  grasps  its  pure
abstraction,  the  simplicity  of  thought.


CHAPTER VI.


THE PROXIMATE NOTION OF LOGIC WITH ITS SUB-DIVISIONS.

79-]  IN  point  of  form  Logical  doctrine  has  three  stages  or
aspects :  (a)  the  Abstract  stage,  or  that  of  the  Understanding :
(/3)  the  Dialectical,  or  that  of  negative  reason :  (y)  the  Specula-
tive, or  that  of  positive  reason.

This  threefold  aspect  does  not  mean  that  there  are  three
parts  of  logic,  but  three  stages  or  factors  in  every  logical
reality,  that  is,  of  every  notion  and  truth  whatever.  They  may
all  be  put  under  the  first  stage,  that  of  Understanding,  and  so
kept  isolated  from  each  other ;  but  this  would  give  an  in-
adequate conception  of  them.  The  statement  of  the  dividing
lines  and  the  characteristic  qualities  of  logic  is  at  this  point
no  more  than  a  historical  anticipation.

80.]  (a)  Thought,  as  Understanding,  lives  in  a  world  where
every  term  or  product  of  thought  preserves  a  stereotyped
distinction  from  every  other.  Each  of  these  limited  abstrac-
tions the  Understanding  believes  to  be  and  exist  on  its  own
account.

In  our  ordinary  usage  of  the  term  thought,  and  even  notion,
we  often  have  before  our  eyes  nothing  more  than  the  operations
of  Understanding.  And  no  doubt  thought  is  primarily  an
exercise  of  the  Understanding: — only  it  goes  further,  and  the
notion  is  a  term  not  limited  to  the  Understanding  merely. —
The  action  of  the  Understanding  may  be  described  as  investing
its  subject-matter  with  the  form  of  universality.  But  this
universality  is  an  abstract  universal :  that  is  to  say,  its  opposi-


THE  PROXIMATE  NOTION  OF  LOGIC.  123

tion  to  the  particular  is  so  rigorously  maintained,  that  it  can
scarcely  be  defined  in  other  terms  than  as  a  particular  itself.
In  this  separating  and  abstracting  attitude  towards  its  objects
the  Understanding  is  the  reverse  of  immediate  perception  and
sensation,  which,  as  such,  never  get  beyond  their  native  sphere
of  action  in  the  concrete.

It  is  by  referring  to  this  opposition  of  Understanding  to
sensation  or  feeling,  that  we  must  explain  the  frequent  attacks
made  upon  thought  for  being  hard  and  narrow,  and  for  leading,
if  consistently  developed,  to  ruinous  and  pernicious  results.
The  answer  to  these  charges,  in  so  far  as  they  are  warranted
by  their  facts,  is,  that  they  do  not  touch  thinking  in  general,
certainly  not  the  thinking  of  Reason,  but  only  the  exercise  of
the  Understanding.  It  must  be  added  however,  that  the  merit
and  rights  of  the  mere  Understanding  should  unhesitatingly
be  admitted.  And  that  merit  lies  in  the  fact,  that  apart  from
Understanding  there  is  no  fixity  or  accuracy  to  be  found  in
the  region  either  of  theory  or  of  practice.  Let  us  first  consider
theory,  or  knowledge.  All  knowledge  begins  with  the  ap-
prehension of  existing  objects  in  their  specific  differences.  In
the  study  of  nature,  for  example,  we  distinguish  the  several
matters,  forces,  genera  and  the  like,  and  separately  appreciate
and  formulate  each.  Thought  is  here  acting  in  its  analytic
capacity,  where  its  canon  is  identity,  a  simple  reference  of  each
attribute  to  itself.  It  is  under  the  conditions  of  the  same
identity  that  the  process  in  knowledge  is  effected  from  one
scientific  truth  to  another.  Thus,  for  example,  in  mathematics
magnitude  is  the  principle  of  identification  which  guides  us,  to
the  exclusion  of  every  other.  Hence  in  geometry  we  compare
one  figure  with  another,  by  giving  prominence  to  their  identity.
Similarly  in  other  fields  of  knowledge,  such  as  jurisprudence,  the
advance  is  primarily  regulated  by  identity.  In  it  we  argue  from
one  specific  law  or  direction  to  another:  and  what  is  this  but
to  proceed  in  virtue  of  the  principle  of  identity  ?

But  Understanding  is  as  indispensable  in  practice  as  it  is  in
theory.  The  essential  ground  of  all  conduct  is  character,  and
a  man  of  character  is  an  understanding  man,  who  in  that
capacity  has  definite  ends  in  view,  which  he  undeviatingly
pursues.  The  man  who  will  do  some  great  thing  must  learn,
as  Goethe  says,  to  limit  himself.  The  man  who,  on  the  con-
trary, would  do  everything,  really  would  do  nothing,  and  comes
to  nothing.  There  is  a  host  of  interesting  things  in  the  world  :
Spanish  poetry,  chemistry,  politics,  and  music  are  all  very  inter-
esting, and  if  any  one  takes  an  interest  in  them  we  need  not
resent  it.  But  for  a  person  in  a  given  situation  to  accomplish
anything,  he  must  stick  to  one  definite  point,  and  not  dissipate


124  THE  PROXIMATE  NOTION  OF  LOGIC  [80.

his  forces  in  too  many  directions.  In  every  calling  the  great
thing  is  to  pursue  it  with  Understanding.  Thus  the  judge  must
stick  to  the  law,  and  give  his  verdict  in  accordance  with  it,
undeterred  by  one  motive  or  another,  and  allowing  no  extenu-
ating circumstance  to  divert  him  from  a  straightforward  view.
Understanding,  too,  is  always  an  element  in  thorough  culture.  A
man  of  culture  is  not  satisfied  with  cloudy  and  indefinite  ideas,
but  grasps  the  objects  in  their  determinate  form :  whereas  the
uncultivated  man  vacillates  in  his  views,  so  that  it  often  involves
a  deal  of  trouble  to  come  to  an  understanding  with  him  on  the
matter  under  discussion,  and  to  bring  him  to  fix  his  eye  on  the
definite  point  in  question.

It  has  been  already  explained  that  Logic  in  general,  far  from
being  a  purely  subjective  action  in  our  minds,  is  rather  the
thorough  universal,  which  as  such  is  objective  in  the  world.
This  doctrine  is  illustrated  in  the  case  of  Understanding,  the
first  form  of  logical  truths.  Understanding  may  be  termed  the
counterpart  of  what  we  call  the  goodness  of  God,  so  far  as  that
means  that  finite  things  are  and  subsist.  In  nature,  for  ex-
ample, we  recognise  the  goodness  of  God  in  the  fact  that  the
various  classes  or  species  of  animals  and  plants  are  provided
with  whatever  is  necessary  for  their  preservation  and  welfare.
Nor  is  man  excepted,  who  both  as  an  individual  and  as  a  nation,
possesses  in  the  given  circumstances  of  climate,  of  the  consti-
tution and  products  of  the  soil  in  which  he  is  born,  and  in  his
natural  parts  or  talent,  all  that  is  required  for  his  maintenance
and  development.  Under  this  shape  Understanding  is  visible
in  every  region  of  the  world  around  us,  and  no  object  of  that
world  can  ever  be  wholly  perfect  which  does  not  give  full  satis-
faction to  the  canons  of  Understanding.  A  state,  for  example,
is  imperfect,  so  long  as  it  has  not  instituted  a  clear  distinction
of  orders  and  callings,  and  so  long  as  those  functions  of  politics
and  government,  which  are  distinguished  in  thought,  have  not
evolved  for  themselves  special  organs,  in  the  same  way  as  we
see,  for  example,  the  full-grown  animal  organism  provided  with
its  separate  organs  for  the  functions  of  sensation,  motion,  and
digestion.

The  previous  course  of  the  discussion  may  serve  to  show,  that
Understanding  is  indispensable  even  in  those  spheres  and  regions
of  actuality  which  the  popular  fancy  would  deem  furthest  from
it,  and  that  in  proportion  as  Understanding  is  absent  from  an
object,  that  object  is  imperfect.  This  particularly  holds  good  of
Art,  Religion,  and  Philosophy.  In  the  theory  of  Art,  for  exam-
ple, Understanding  is  visible  where  the  forms  of  beauty,  which
have  an  appreciable  difference  in  their  notion,  are  distinctly
defined  and  clearly  presented.  The  same  may  be  said  of  single


125


8l-]  WITH  ITS  SUB-DIVISIONS.

works  of  art.  It  is  part  of  the  beauty  and  perfection  of  a
dramatic  poem  that  the  several  characters  should  be  clearly
and  distinctly  brought  out,  and  that  the  different  aims  and
interests  in  question  should  be  plainly  and  decidedly  exhibited.
Or  again,  we  may  look  at  the  province  of  Religion.  The  supe-
riority of  Greek  over  Northern  mythology  (apart  from  other
differences  of  subject-matter,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  is
conceived)  mainly  consists  in  this:  that  in  the  former  the
individual  gods  are  fashioned  into  forms  of  sculpture-like  dis-
tinctness of  outline,  while  in  the  latter  the  figures  float  vaguely
and  hazily  into  one  another.  Lastly  comes  the  case  of  Philo-
sophy. That  philosophy  never  can  get  on  without  the  Under-
standing hardly  calls  for  special  remark  after  what  has  been
Its  foremost  requirement  is  that  every  thought  shall  be
accurately  and  precisely  apprehended,  and  no  acquiescence  in
vague  and  indefinite  notions  permitted.

It  is  usually  added  that  Understanding  must  not  go  too  far
Which  is  so  far  correct,  that  Understanding  is  not  the  last  word,
but  finite,  and  so  constituted  that  when  carried  to  extremes  it
veers  round  to  its  opposite.  It  is  the  fashion  of  youth  to  dash
about  in  abstractions:  but  the  man  who  has  learnt  to  know
life  steers  clear  of  the  abstract  '  either— or,'  and  adheres  to  the
concrete.

81.]  (/3)  In  the  Dialectical  stage  these  finite  categories  or
formulae  of  thought  work  their  own  dissolution,  and  pass  over
into  the  opposite  categories.

(1)  But  when  Dialectic,  instead  of  forming  an  integral  part
in  thought,  is  taken  by  the  Understanding  as  a  separate  and
independent  act,  and  especially  when  its  operation  is  exhibited
in  the  notions  of  science,  Dialectic  becomes  Scepticism,  and  the
result  which  then  ensues  from  its  action  is  a  mere  negation.

(2)  It  is  customary  to  treat  Dialectic  as  an  outer  or  adven-
titious  art, which for very wantonness introduces confusion
and  a  mere  semblance  of  contradiction  into  definite  notions.
And  in  that  light,  the  semblance  is  the  nonentity,  while  the
true  reality  is  supposed  to  belong  to  the  original  notions  of
the  Understanding. Often,  too,  Dialectic  is  nothing  more  than
a  subjective  see-saw  of  arguments  pro  and  con,  where  the  ab-
sence of  sterling  thought  is  disguised  by  the  subtlety  which
gives  birth  to  such  arguments. But  in  its  true  and  proper


126  THE  PROXIMATE  NOTION  OF  LOGIC  [81.

character,  Dialectic  is  the  very  nature  and  essence  of  the  cate-
gories (formulated  by  the  understanding)  of  things,  and  of  the
finite  as  a  whole.  Dialectic  is  different  from  Reflection.  In  the
first  instance,  Reflection  does  no  more  than  go  out  beyond  the
isolated  formula  and  give  it  a  certain  bearing ;  by  which  it  is
made  to  enter  into  a  relation,  without  however  in  other  respects
ceasing  to  be  valid  in  its  isolated  form.  But  by  Dialectic  is
meant  an  indwelling  tendency  outwards  and  beyond ;  by  which
the  one-sidedness  and  limitation  of  the  formulae  of  undertanding
is  seen  in  its  true  light,  and  shown  to  be  the  negation  of  these
formulae.  Things  are  finite,  just  because  they  involve  their  own
dissolution.  Thus  understood,  Dialectic  is  discovered  to  be  the
life  and  soul  of  scientific  progress,  the  dynamic  which  alone
gives  an  immanent  connexion  and  necessity  to  the  subject-
matter  of  science ;  and,  in  a  word,  is  seen  to  constitute  the
real  and  true,  as  opposed  to  the  external,  exaltation  above  the
finite.


(1)  It  is  of  the  highest  importance  to  apprehend  and  understand
rightly  the  nature  of  Dialectic.  Wherever  there  is  movement,
wherever  there  is  life,  wherever  anything  is  carried  into  effect
in  the  actual  world,  there  Dialectic  is  at  work.  It  is  also  the
soul  of  all  knowledge  which  is  truly  scientific.  In  the  popular
way  of  looking  at  things,  the  refusal  to  abide  by  any  one  ab-
stract form  of  the  understanding  is  reckoned  mere  equity.  As  the
proverb  has  it,  Live  and  let  live.  Each  must  have  its  turn ;  we
admit  the  one,  but  we  admit  the  other  also.  But  when  we  look
more  closely,  we  find  that  the  limitations  of  the  finite  do  not
merely  come  from  without;  that  its  own  nature  is  the  cause  of
&  its  abrogation,  and  that  by  its  own  means  it  passes  into  its
counterpart.  We  say,  for  instance,  that  man  is  mortal,  and
seem  to  think  that  the  ground  of  his  death  is  in  external
circumstances  only  ;  so  that  if  this  way  of  looking  were  correct,
man  would  have  two  special  properties,  vitality  and  mortality.
But  the  true  view  of  the  matter  is,  that  life,  as  life,  involves  the
germ  of  death,  and  that  the  finite,  being  at  war  within  'itself,
causes  its  own  dissolution.

Of  course  Dialectic  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  mere  Sophis-
try.,  The  essence  of  Sophistry  lies  in  attaching  an  exaggerated

and  independent  value  to  partial  and  abstract  principles  in  their
isolation,  such  as  may  suit  the  interest  and  particular  situation


8 1.]  •  WITH  ITS  SUB-DIVISIONS.  127

of  the  individual  at  the  time.  For  example,  the  consideration
that  I  exist  and  have  the  means  of  existence,  is  an  indispensable
condition  as  bearing-  upon  conduct ;  but  when  I  exclusively
adopt  this  consideration,  or  motive  of  my  welfare,  and  draw  the
conclusion  that  I  may  steal,  or  betray  my  country,  we  have  a
case  of  Sophistry.  Similarly  it  is  an  important  principle  in
conduct  that  I  should  be  subjectively  free,  that  is  to  say,  that
I  should  have  an  insight  into  what  I  am  doing-,  and  a  conviction
that  it  is  right.  But  if  I  argue  from  this  motive  alone  I  fall
into  Sophistry,  such  as  would  overthrow  all  the  principles  of
morality.  From  this  sort  of  reasoning  Dialectic  is  wholly  dif-
ferent ;  its  purpose  is  to  observe  things  by  themselves  and  on
their  own  account,  and  thus  to  demonstrate  the  finitude  of  the
partial  categories  of  the  understanding.

Dialectic,  it  may  be  added,  is  no  novelty  in  philosophy.  Among
the  ancients  Plato  is  termed  the  inventor  of  Dialectic,  and  his
right  to  the  name  rests  on  the  fact,  that  the  Platonic  philosophy
first  gave  the  free  scientific,  and  thus  at  the  same  time  the
objective,  form  to  Dialectic.  Socrates,  as  we  should  expect  from
the  general  character  of  his  philosophising,  has  the  Dialectical
element,  for  the  most  part,  in  the  subjective  shape  of  Irony.
He  used  to  turn  his  Dialectic,  first  against  the  common  modes
of  conception,  and  then  especially  against  the  Sophists.  In  his
conversations  he  used  to  simulate  the  wish  for  some  clearer
knowledge  about  the  subject  under  discussion,  and  after  putting
all  sorts  of  questions  with  that  intent,  he  drew  on  those  with
whom  he  conversed  to  the  opposite  of  what  their  first  thoughts
had  pronounced  correct.  If,  for  instance,  the  Sophists  claimed
to  be  teachers,  Socrates  by  a  series  of  questions  forced  the  Sophist
Protagoras  to  confess  that  all  learning  is  only  recollection.  In
his  more  strictly  scientific  dialogues  Plato  employs  the  Dialec-
tical method  to  show  the  finitude  of  all  the  rigid  demarcations
of  thought  made  by  the  understanding.  Thus  in  the  Parme-
nides  he  deduces  the  many  from  the  one,  and  shows  nevertheless
that  the  many  cannot  but  define  itself  as  the  one.  In  this  lofty
style  did  Plato  treat  Dialectic.  In  modern  times  it  was  more
than  any  other  Kant  who  resuscitated  the  name  of  Dialectic,
and  restored  it  to  its  post  of  honour.  He  did  it,  as  we  have
seen  (§  48),  by  working  out  the  Antinomies  of  the  reason.  The
real  object  of  these  Antinomies  consists  not  in  the  mere  sub-
jective action,  the  oscillation  between  one  set  of  groxmds  and
another,  but  in  showing  that  every  abstract  form  of  the  under-
standing, taken  precisely  as  it  is  given,  naturally  veers  round
into  its  opposite.

However  reluctant  the  Understanding  may  be  to  admit  the
action  of  Dialectic,  we  must  not  suppose  that  the  recognition  of


128  TILE PROXIMATE  NOTION  OF  LOGIC  [81.

its  existence  is  peculiarly  confined  to  the  philosophic  intellect.
Jt  would  be  truer  to  say  that  Dialectic  gives  expression  to  a  law
/which  is  felt  in  all  other  grades  of  consciousness,  and  in  general
'  experience.  Everything  that  surrounds  us  may  be  viewed  as  an
^instance  of  Dialectic.  We  are  aware  that  everything  finite,
instead  of  being  inflexible  and  ultimate,  is  rather  changeable
and  transient ;  and  this  is  exactly  what  we  mean  by  that  Dia-
lectic of  the  finite,  by  which  the  finite,  as  implicitly  other  than
what  it  is,  is  forced  to  surrender  its  own  immediate  or  natural
being,  and  to  turn  suddenly  into  its  opposite.  We  have  before
this  (§  80)  identified  the  Understanding  with  what  is  implied  in
the  conception  of  the  goodness  of  God ;  we  may  now  remark  of
Dialectic,  in  the  Game  objective  signification,  that  its  principle
answers  to  the  conception  of  his  power.  All  things,  we  say,
that  is,  the  finite  world  as  such,  meet  their  doom ;  and  in  saying-
so,  we  have  a  perception  that  Dialectic  is  the  universal  and  irre-
sistible power,  before  which  nothing  can  stay,  however  secure
and  stable  it  may  deem  itself.  The  category  of  power  does  not
it  is  true  exhaust  the  depth  of  the  divine  nature  or  the  notion
of  God ;  but  it  certainly  forms  a  vital  element  in  all  religious
consciousness.

Apart  from  this  general  objectivity  of  Dialectic,  we  find  traces
of  its  presence  in  each  of  the  particular  regions  and  formations
of  the  natural  and  the  spiritual  world.  Take  as  an  illustration
the  motion  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  At  this  moment  the  planet
stands  in  this  spot,  but  implicitly  it  is  the  possibility  of  being  in
another  spot ;  and  that  possibility  of  being  otherwise  the  planet
brings  into  existence  by  moving.  Similarly  the  physical  ele-
ments prove  to  be  Dialectical.  The  process  of  meteorological
action  is  the  appearance  of  their  Dialectic.  It  is  the  same
dynamic  that  lies  at  the  root  of  every  other  natural  process,
and,  as  it  were,  forces  nature  out  of  itself.  To  illustrate  the
presence  of  Dialectic  in  the  spiritual  world,  especially  in  the
provinces  of  law  and  morality,  we  have  only  to  recollect  how
general  experience  shows  us  the  excess  of  one  state  or  action
suddenly  shifting  into  its  opposite :  a  Dialectic  which  is  recog-
nised in  many  ways  in  common  proverbs.  Thus  sumimim  jus
summa  injuria :  which  means,  that  to  drive  an  abstract  right  to
extremity  is  to  commit  injustice.  In  political  life,  as  every  one
knows,  extreme  anarchy  and  extreme  despotism  naturally  lead
to  one  another.  The  perception  of  Dialectic  in  the  province  of
the  Ethics  of  the  individual,  is  seen  in  the  well-known  adages,
Pride  comes  before  a  fall :  Too  much  wit  out-wits  itself.  Even
feeling,  bodily  as  well  as  mental,  has  its  Dialectic.  Every  one
knows  how  the  extremes  of  pain  and  pleasure  pass  into  each
other :  the  heart  overflowing  with  joy  seeks  relief  in  tears,  and


82.]  WITH  ITS  SUB-DIVISIONS.  129

the  deepest  melancholy  will  at  times  betray  its  presence  by  a
smile.

(2)  Scepticism  ought  never  to  be  esteemed  a  mere  doctrine  of
doubt.  It  would  be  more  correct  to  say  that  the  Sceptic  has  no
doubt  of  his  point,  which  is  the  nothing-ness  of  all  finite  exist-
ence. He  who  only  doubts  still  clings  to  the  hope  that  his
doubt  may  be  resolved,  and  that  one  or  other  of  the  definite
views,  between  which  he  wavers,  will  turn  out  a  settled  truth.
Scepticism  properly  so  called  is  a  very  different  thing :  it  is
complete  hopelessness  about  all  which  the  understanding  counts
stable,  and  the  feeling  to  which  it  gives  birth  is  one  of  unbroken
calmness  and  inward  repose.  Such  at  least  is  the  noble  Scepti-
cism of  antiquity,  especially  as  exhibited  in  the  writings  of
Sextus  Empiricus,  when  in  the  later  times  of  Rome  it  had
received  the  finishing  touch  as  a  complement  to  the  dogmatic
systems  of  Stoic  and  Epicurean.  Of  far  other  stamp,  and  to
be  strictly  distinguished  from  it,  is  the  modern  Scepticism
already  mentioned  (§  39),  which  partly  preceded  the  Critical
Philosophy,  and  partly  sprung  out  of  it.  That  later  Scepticism
had  only  one  motive — to  deny  the  truth  and  certitude  of  the
super-sensible,  and  to  uphold  the  facts  of  sense  and  of  imme-
diate sensation  as  what  we  had  to  rely  upon.

Even  to  this  day  Scepticism  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  irresistible
enemy  of  all  positive  knowledge,  and  hence  of  philosophy,  in  so
far  as  it  deals  with  positive  knowledge.  But  in  these  statements
there  is  a  misconception.  It  is  only  the  finite  thought  of  the
abstract  understanding  which  has  to  fear  Scepticism,  because
unable  to  withstand  it :  philosophy  includes  the  sceptical  prin-
ciple as  a  subordinate  function  of  its  own,  in  the  shape  of
Dialectic.  In  contradistinction  to  mere  Scepticism,  however,
philosophy  does  not  remain  content  with  the  purely  negative
result  of  Dialectic.  The  sceptic  mistakes  the  true  value  of  his
result,  when  he  supposes  it  to  be  no  more  than  a  negation  pure
and  simple.  For  Dialectic,  having  the  negative  for  its  result,
has  a  result  which  is  at  the  same  time  positive,  for  the  reason
that  it  contains  what  it  results  from,  absorbed  into  itself,  and
made  part  of  its  own  nature.  Thus  conceived,  however,  the
dialectical  stage  has  presented  us  with  the  features  characterising
the  third  grade  of  logical  truth,  the  speculative  form,  or  form  of
positive  reason.

82.  (y)  The  Speculative  stage,  or  stage  of  Positive  Reason,
apprehends  the  unity  of  the  categories  in  their  opposition.  It
marks  or  seizes  the  affirmation,  which  is  latent  in  their  disin-
tegration and  transition-state.

K


130  THE  PROXIMATE  NOTION  OF  LOGIC  [82.

(1)  The  result  of  Dialectic  is  positive,  because  its  own  content
was  specific,  or  because  its  result,  instead  of  being  an  empty  and
abstract  nothing,  is  rather  the  negation  of  certain  specific
terms:  which  terms  are  contained  in  the  result,  for  the  very
reason  that  it  is  a  result  and  not  an  immediate  nothing.
(2)  It  follows  from  this  that  the  rational  stage,  though  it  be
an  abstraction  of  thought,  is  still  concrete,  being  not  a  plain
formal  unity,  but  a  unity  of  distinct  terms  of  thought.  Bare
abstractions,  and  thoughts  which  only  give  a  form,  are  therefore
quite  foreign  to  the  business  of  philosophy,  which  has  to  deal
only  with  concrete  thoughts.  (3)  The  mere  logic  of  Under-
standing is  involved  in  Speculative  logic,  and  can  at  will  be
elicited  from  it,  by  the  simple  process  of  omitting  the  dialectical
and  rational  element.  When  that  is  done,  there  is  left  the
matter  of  the  common  logic,  a  resume  of  variously  compiled
principles  of  thought,  which,  finite  though  they  are,  are  taken
to  be  something  infinite.

If  we  consider  only  what  it  contains,  and  not  how  it  contains
it,  rational  truth,  so  far  from  being  peculiar  to  philosophy,  is
really  recognised  by  every  one  on  whatever  grade  of  culture  or
mental  growth  he  may  stand  ;  which  would  justify  man's  ancient
title  of  rational  being.  The  general  mode  by  which  experience
first  makes  us  acquainted  with  the  principle  of  reason  is,  in  the
first  instance,  that  by  accepted  and  unreasoned  belief;  and  the
character  of  rational  truth,  as  already  noted,  is  to  be  uncon-
ditioned, and  thus  to  have  form  and  speciality  to  itself.  In  this
sense  man  above  all  things  becomes  acquainted  with  reason,
when  he  knows  about  God,  and  knows  him  to  be  the  completely
self-determined  One.  Similarly,  the  perception  which  a  citizen
has  of  his  country  and  its  laws,  is  a  perception  of  rational
content,  so  long  as  he  holds  them  to  be  unconditioned  and
likewise  universal  powers,  to  which  he  must  subject  his  indi-
vidual will.  And  in  the  same  sense,  the  knowledge  and  will  of
the  child  is  rational,  when  he  knows  the  will  of  his  parents  and
is  willing  to  do  it.

Further,  speculative  is  just  another  word  for  rational — that  is,
positively  rational ;  but  implies  in  addition  that  we  think  the
rational  thing.  The  expression  '  Speculation '  in  common  life  is
often  used  with  a  very  vague  and  at  the  same  time  secondary
sense,  as  when  we  speak  of  a  matrimonial  or  a  commercial
speculation.  By  this  we  mean  two  things :  first,  that  what  is


82.]  WITH  ITS  SUB-DIVISIONS.  131

immediately  at  hand  has  to  be  passed  and  left  behind;  and
secondly,  that  the  subject-matter  of  such  speculations,  though  in
the  first  place  only  subjective,  must  be  realised  or  translated  into
objectivity.

What  was  sometime  ago  remarked  respecting  the  Idea,  may
be  applied  to  this  common  usage  of  the  term  speculation :  and,
we  may  add,  that  people  who  rank  themselves  amongst  the
educated,  speak  of  speculation  as  if  it  were  something  purely
subjective.  A  certain  theory  of  natural  or  mental  states  and
relations  for  example,  may  be,  say  these  people,  very  nice  and
correct  as  a  matter  of  speculation,  but  it  contradicts  experience
and  cannot  be  admitted  in  the  actual  world.  To  this  the  answer
is,  that  the  speculative  is  neither  in  its  preliminary  nor  in  its
final  sense  merely  subjective :  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  expressly
rises  above  and  absorbs  such  oppositions,  as  that  between  sub-
jective and  objective,  which  the  understanding  cannot  master ;
and  that  in  this  manner  its  own  concrete  and  all-embracing
nature  is  made  obvious.  A  one-sided  proposition  therefore  can
never  give  utterance  to  a  speculative  truth.  If  we  say,  for
example,  that  the  absolute  is  the  unity  of  subjective  and  objective,
we  are  undoubtedly  in  the  right,  but  so  far  one-sided  as  we
enunciate  the  unity  only  and  lay  the  accent  upon  it,  forgetting
that  in  reality  the  subjective  and  objective  are  not  merely
identical  but  distinct.

Speculation,  it  may  also  be  noted,  means  very  much  the  same
as  what,  in  special  connexion  with  religious  consciousness  and
religious  truth,  used  to  be  called  Mysticism.  The  term  mysticism
is  at  present  used  to  designate  what  is  mysterious  and  incom-
prehensible :  and  in  proportion  as  their  general  culture  and  way
of  thinking  vary,  the  epithet  is  applied  by  one  class  to  denote
the  real  and  the  true,  by  another  to  name  all  species  of  super-
stition and  illusion.  On  which  we  first  of  all  remark  that  there"
is  mystery  in  the  mystical,  only  however  for  the  understanding,
which  is  ruled  by  the  principle  of  abstract  identity.  But  the
mystical,  as  synonymous  with  the  speculative,  is  the  concrete
unity  of  those  terms  of  thought,  which  the  understanding  onl}
"accepts  in  their  separation  and  opposition.  And  if  those  who'
find  in  mysticism  the  source  of  every  truth,  understand  by
mysticism  neither  more  nor  less  than  utter  mystery,  their  conduct
only  proves  that  for  them  too,  as  well  as  for  their  antagonists,
thinking  means  abstract  identification,  and  that  in  their  opinion,
therefore,  truth  can  only  be  won  by  renouncing  thought,  or,  as
it  is  frequently  expressed,  by  leading  the  reason  captive.  But,
as  we  have  seen,  the  abstract  thinking  of  the  understanding  is
so  far  from  being  either  ultimate  or  stable,  that  it  has  evidently
a  perpetual  tendency  to  work  its  own  dissolution  and  swing

K  2


132  THE  PROXIMATE  NOTION OF  LOGIC.

round  into  its  opposite.  Rational  thinking1,  on  the  contrary,  is
secured  by  making-  these  opposites  enter  as  unsubstantial  elements
into  itself.  Thus  reason  is  altogether  a  mystical  ground,  not
because  thought  cannot  both  reach  and  comprehend  it,  but
merely  because  it  goes  beyond  the  compass  of  the  understanding.

83.] Logic  is  sub-divided  into  three  parts : —

I.  The  Doctrine  of  Being :

II.  The  Doctrine  of  Essence  :

III.  The  Doctrine  of  Notion  and  Idea.
That  is,  into  the  Theory  of  Thought :

I.  In  its  immediacy : the  notion  implicit,  and as  it were
in  germ.

II.  In  its  reflection  and  mediation : the  being-for-self  and
show  of  the  notion.

III.  In  its  return  into  itself,  and  its  being  all  to  itself:  the
notion  in  and  for  itself.

The  division  of  Logic  now  given,  as  well  as  the  whole  of  the
previous  discussion  on  the  nature  of  thought,  is  anticipatory  :  and
the  justification,  or  proof  of  it,  must  follow  from  the  completed
discussion  of  thought  itself.  For  in  philosophy,  to  prove  means
to  show  how  the  subject  by  and  from  itself  makes  itself  what  it
is.  The  relation  in  which  these  three  leading  grades  of  thought,
~Gf  of  the  logical  Idea,  stand  to  each  other  must  be  conceived  as
follows.  Truth  comes  with  the  notion :  or,  more  precisely,  the
notion  is  the  truth  of  being  and  essence,  both  of  which  when
separately  maintained  in  their  isolation,  cannot  but  be  untrue,
the  former  because  it  is  exclusively  immediate,  and  the  latter
because  it  is  exclusively  mediate.  Why  then,  it  may  be  asked,
begin  with  the  false  and  not  at  once  with  the  true  ?  To  which
we  answer  that  truth,  to  deserve  the  name,  must  authenticate  or
verify  its  own  truth :  which  verification,  here  within  the  sphere
of  logic,  is  given,  when  the  notion  demonstrates  itself  to  be  what
is  mediated  by  and  with  itself,  and  thus  at  the  same  time  to  be
truly  immediate.  This  relation  between  the  three  stages  of  the
logical  Idea  appears  in  a  more  real  and  concrete  shape  thus :
God,  who  is  the  truth,  is  known  by  us  in  his  truth,  that  is,  as
the  absolute  mind,  only  in  so  far  as  we  at  the  same  time  recog-
nise that  the  world  which  He  created  in  nature  and  the  finite
mind,  whenever  they  are  separated  from  him,  is  untrue.


CHAPTER  VII.
FIRST  SUB-DIVISION OF LOGIC.

THE DOCTRINE OF BEING.

^

84.]  BEING  is  the  notion,  implicit  only :  the  special  types
of  it  are  said  'to  be ' ;  when  they  are  distinguished  they  are
each  of  them  an  'other':  and  when  dialectic  appears  in  them,
i.  e.  when  they  are  further  specialised,  it  means  that  they  pass  '
over  into  another.  This  further  determination,  or  specialisation,
means  two  things :  it  is  an  exposition,  and  in  that  way  a
disengaging  of  the  notion  implicit  in  Being ;  and  at  the  same
time  it  shows  us  Being  withdrawing  inwards  and  sinking
deeper  into  itself.  Thus  the  explication  of  the  notion  in  the
sphere  of  Being  does  two  things :  it  gives  the  totality  of
Being,  and  it  abolishes  the  immediacy  of  Being,  or  the  form
of  Being  as  such.

85.]  Being  itself  and  the  special  types  of  it  which  follow,
as  well  as  those  of  logic  in  general,  may  be  looked  upon  as
definitions  of  the  Absolute,  or  metaphysical  definitions  of  God :
at  least  the  first  and  third  typical  form  in  every  triad  may,
— the  first,  where  the  notion  of  the  triad  is  simply  formulated
or  without  detail,  and  the  third,  being  the  return  from  differen-
tiation to  a  simple  self- reference.  For  a  metaphysical  definition
of  God  is  the  expression  of  his  nature  in  thoughts  as  such :
and  logic  embraces  all  thoughts  so  long  as  they  continue  in


134  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  BEING.  [85.

the  form  of  thoughts.  The  second  sub-category  in  each  triad,
where  this  grade  of  thought  is  in  its  differentiation,  gives,
on  the  other  hand,  a  definition  of  the  finite.  The  objection
to  the  form  of  definition  is  that  it  implies  a  sub-stratum  of
material  thought  floating  before  one's  mind.  Thus  even  the
Absolute  is  intended  and  ought  to  express  God  in  the  style
and  character  of  thought.  Compared  however  with  its  pre-
dicate (which  really  and  distinctly  expresses  in  thought  what
the  subject  does  not),  the  Absolute  continues  to  be  merely  an
intended  thought,  a  substratum  which  has  no  explicit  cha-
racteristics of  its  own.  The  thought,  which  is  in  our  case  the
matter  of  sole  importance,  is  only  contained  in  the  predicate :
and  hence  the  propositional  form,  like  the  subject,  viz.  the
Absolute,  is  reduced  to  a  meaningless  phrase  (§31,  and  below,
on  the  Judgment.)

Every  sphere  of  the  logical  idea  proves  to  be  a  complete
group  of  characteristics,  and  may  serve  to  represent  the  Abso-
lute. This  is  the  case  with  Being,  containing  the  three  grades
of  quality,  quantity,  and  measure.  Quality  is,  in  the  first  place,
the  character  identical  with  being :  thus  a  thing  ceases  to  be
what  it  is,  if  it  loses  its  quality.  Quantity,  again,  is  the
character  external  to  being,  and  does  not  affect  the  being  at
all.  Thus  e.g.  a  house  remains  what  it  is,  whether  it  be
greater  or  smaller ;  and  red  remains  red,  whether  it  be  brighter
or  darker.  The  third  grade  of  Being,  Measure,  which  is  the
unity  of  the  first  two,  is  a  qualitative  quantity.  All  things
have  their  measure :  i.  e.  they  are  quantitatively  characterised,
nor  does  their  being  so  and  so  great  make  any  matter,  at
least  within  certain  limits ;  though  when  these  limits  are  ex-
ceeded by  an  additional  more  or  less,  the  things  cease  to  be
what  they  were.  From  measure  follows  the  advance  to  the
second  sub-division  of  the  idea,  Essence.

The  three  forms  of  being  here  mentioned,  just  because  they
are  the  first,  have  also  least  in  them,  i.  e.  they  are  the  most
abstract. The  immediate  consciousness  of  the  senses,  in  so  far
s\  as  it  simultaneously  adopts  an attitude  of  thought, is espe-
cially restricted  to  the  abstract  characteristics  of  quality  and
quantity. This  sensuous  consciousness  is  in  ordinary  estimation
the  richest  and  most  concrete  form  of  mental  action ;  but  that
i is  only  true  in  point  of  matter, whereas,  in reference  to  the
V_thought  it  contains,  it  is  really  the  poorest  and  most  abstract.


86.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  135

A. — QUALITY.
(a)  Being.

86.]  Mere  Being  makes  the  beginning:  because  it  is  mere
thought,  and  because  it  is  immediacy  itself  without  difference
and  without  any  characteristics :  for  it  is  impossible  that  the
first  beginning  can  be  mediated  by  anything  else,  or  be  more
clearly  specialised.

All  the  doubts  and  the  admonitions,  which  might  be  evoked
against  beginning  the  science  with  the  empty  abstraction  of
being,  will  disappear,  if  we  only  perceive  what  a  beginning
naturally  implies.  Being  may  be  defined  as  1=1,  as  Absolute
Indifference,  or  Identity,  and  so  on.  And  as  it  is  felt  to  be
necessary  to  begin  either  with  what  is  absolutely  certain,  i.  e.
the  certainty  of  oneself,  or  with  a  definition  or  intuition  of
the  absolute  truth,  these  and  other  forms  of  the  kind  may  be
taken  to  represent  a  necessary  first.  But  these  forms  all  con-
tain a  mediation,  and  hence  cannot  be  the  real  first :  for  all
mediation  implies  that  an  advance  has  been  made  from  a  first
,  on  to  a  second,  and  suggests  dependence  from  some  other  point.
If  1=1,  or  even  the  intellectual  intuition  are  really  taken  to
mean  no  more  than  a  first  point,  they  are  the  same,  considered
in  their  mere  immediacy,  as  Being:  while  conversely,  Being,
if  abstract  no  longer,  but  including  a  mediation  in  it,  is  pure
thought  or  intuition.

If  we  enunciate  Being  as  a  predicate  of  the  Absolute,  we  get  v
the  first  definition  of  the  latter. The  Absolute  is  Being. So
far as  thought  goes,  this  is  the initial definition,  the most
abstract  and  sterile. It  is  the  definition  given  by  the  Eleatics,
and  means  the  same  as  the  well-known  definition  of  God  as
the  sum  of  all  realities. That  is  to  say,  it  means  that  we  are
to  make  abstraction  of  that  limitation  which  attaches  to  every s
reality,  so  that  God  is  the  very  reality  in  reality, the  super-
latively real. Or, if  we throw  aside reality,  as implying a
reflection,  we  get  a  more  immediate  or  unreflected  statement


136  THE DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [86.

of  the  same  thing,  when  Jacobi  says,  that  the  God  of  Spinoza
is  the  principium  of  being  in  all  that  there  is.

(1)  When  we  begin  to  think,  we  have  nothing  but  thought  in
its  merest  indeterminateness  and  absence  of  specialisation : for
we  cannot  specialise  unless  there  is  both  one  and  another ; and
in  the  beginning  there  is  yet  no  other. The  indeterminate,  as
we  have  it,  is  a  primary  and  underived  absence  of  characteristics  ;

j  not  the  annihilation  or  elimination  of  all  character,  but  the
original  and  underived  indeterminateness,  which  is  previous  to
all  definite  character  and  is  the  very  first  of  all.  And  this  is
what  we  call  Being.  It  is  not  something  felt,  or  perceived
by  spiritual  sense,  or  pictured  in  imagination :  it  is  only  and
merely  thought,  and  as  such  it  forms  the  beginning.  Essence,
the  substratum  of  Being,  also  is  indeterminate  and  without

V  any  definite  character,  but  in  another  sense :  a  process  of  me-
diation has  been  traversed,  and  the  characteristic  has  been
absorbed  and  reduced  into  it.

(2)  In  the  history  of  philosophy  the  different  stages  of  the
logical Idea  assume  the shape  of  successive  systems,  each  of
which  is  based  on  a  particular  definition  of  the  Absolute. As
the  logical  Idea  is  seen  to  unfold  itself  in  a  process  from  the
abstract  to  the concrete, so  in  the  history  of  philosophy  the
earliest  systems  are  the  most  abstract,  and  thus  at  the  same
time  have  least  in  them. The  relation  too  of  the  earlier  to
the  later  systems  of  philosophy  is  much  like the  relation  of
the earlier  to  the  later  stages  of  the  logical  Idea : in  other
words,  the  former  are  preserved  in  the  latter,  but  in  a  sub-
ordinate and  functional  position. This  is  the  true  meaning  of
a  much misunderstood phenomenon in  the history  of  philo-
sophy— the  refutation  of  one  system  by  another,  of  an  earlier
by  a  later. Most  commonly  the  refutation  is  understood  in  a
purely  negative  sense,  and  interpreted  to  mean  that  the  system
refuted  no  longer  holds  its  ground,  but  is  set  aside  and  ren-
dered for  ever  obsolete. Were  it  so,  the  history  of  philosophy
would  be  of  all  studies  most  saddening,  when  it displayed  to
us  the  refutation  of  every  system  which  time  has  brought  forth.
Now,  although  it  may  be  upon  the  whole  admitted  that  every
philosophy  has been  refuted, it must  be  in  an  equal degree
maintained,  that  no  philosophy  has  been  refuted,  nay,  or  can
be  refuted. And  that  in  two  ways. For  firstly,  every  philo-
sophy that  deserves the name, always has the Idea for its
subject-matter  or  contents : and  secondly,  every  system  should
represent  to  us  one  particular  factor  or  particular  stage  in  the
evolution  of  the  Idea. The  refutation  of  a  philosophy,  therefore,
only  means  that  its  limits  are  passed,  and  that  the  fixed  prin-


87-]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  BEING.  137

ciple  in  it  has  been  reduced  to  an  organic  element  in  the
completer  principle  that  follows.  Thus  the  history  of  philo-
sophy, in  its  true  meaning1,  deals  not  with  the  past,  but  with
the  eternal  and  the  veritable  present:  and,  in  its  results,  re-
sembles not  a  museum  of  the  aberrations  of  the  human  intellect,
but  a  Pantheon  of  Godlike  figures.  These  figures  of  Gods  are
the  various  stages  of  the  Idea,  as  they  come  forward  one  after
another  in  dialectical  development.  To  the  historian  of  philo-
sophy we  leave  it  to  point  out  more  precisely,  how  far  the
growth  of  its  living  matter  coincides  with,  or  swerves  from,  the
dialectical  unfolding  of  the  strictly  logical  Idea.  It  is  sufficient
to  mention  here,  that  logic  begins  where  the  proper  history  of
philosophy  begins.  Philosophy  began  in  the  Eleatic  school,
especially  with  Parmenides.  Parmenides,  to  whom  the  absolute
was  known  as  Being,  says  that  'Being  alone  is  and  Nothing
is  not.'  Such  was  the  true  starting-point  of  philosophy,  which
is  always  knowledge  by  thought:  and  here  for  the  first  time
we  find  thought  seized  and  made  an  object  to  itself.

Men  indeed  thought  from  the  beginning :  (for  tlms  only  were
they  distinguished  from  the  animals).  But  centuries  had  to
elapse  before  they  came  to  apprehend  thought  in  its  entirety,
as  constituiingthe  real  objective  world^  The  Eleatics  are  cele-
brated as  darmg  thinkersT  But  £ETs  nominal  admiration  is  often
accompanied  by  the  remark  that  they  went  too  far,  when  they
made  Being  alone  true,  and  denied  the  truth  of  every  other
object  of  consciousness.  We  must  go  farther  than  mere  Being,
it  is  true :  and  yet  it  is  absurd  to  speak  of  the  other  contents
of  our  consciousness  as  somewhat  situated  out  of  and  beside
Being,  or  to  say  that  there  are  other  things  as  well  as  Being.
The  true  relation  is  rather  as  follows.  Being,  as  Being,  is
nothing  fixed  or  ultimate :  it  yields  to  dialectic  and  sinks  into
its  opposite,  wMch,  also  taken  immediately,  is  Nothing.  After
all,  the  main  point  is  that  Being  is  the  first  mere  Thought ;
that  whatever  else  you  may  begin  with  (with  the  1  =  1,  with
the  absolute  indifference,  or  with  God  himself),  you  begin  with
a  figure  of  materialised  conception,  not  a  product  of  Thought ;
and  that,  so  far  as  its  hold  of  Thought  is  concerned,  such  begin-
ning is  merely  Being.

87.1  But  tints  mere  Being,  as  it  is  mere  abstraction,  is  there-
fore  absolutely  negative  :  which,  in  a  similarly  immediate  aspect,
is  just  what  may  be  said  of  Nothing.

(1)  Hence  was  derived  the  second  definition  of  the  Absolute;
the  Absolute  is  the  Nought.  In  fact  this  definition  is  implied
in  saying  that  the  thing-in-itself  is  indeterminate,  and  so  with-


138  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [87.

out  either  form  or  matter ;  or  in  saying  that  God  is  only  the
supreme  Being  and  nothing  more,  for  this  is  really  an  enun-
ciation of  the  same  negativity  as  above ;  or,  in  making,  as  the
Buddhists  do,  Nothing  the  principle  of  all  things,  the  final  aim
and  end  of  everything.  All  these  views  ultimately  amount  to
the  same  abstraction — of  Nothing.

(2)  It  is  difficult,  when  the  opposition  in  thought  is  stated
in  this  immediate  form  of  expression,  as  Being  and  Nothing,
to  regard  it  as  devoid  of  reality,  or  to  refrain  from  the  attempt
to  fix  Being  and  secure  it  against  the  transition  into  Nothing.
So  much  is  this  the  case,  that  reflection  has  recourse  to  the
plan  of  discovering  some  fixed  predicate  for  Being,  such  as
could  serve  to  mark  it  off  from  Nothing.  Thus  we  find  Being
identified  with  what  persists  amid  all  change,  with  matter
susceptible  of  innumerable  determinations — or  even,  unreflect-
ingly, with  a  single  existence,  any  chance  object  of  the  senses
or  of  the  mind.  .  But  every  additional  and  more  concrete  cha-
racteristic causes  Being  to  lose  that  integrity  and  simplicity  it
in  the  beginning.  Only  in,  and  by  virtue  of,  this  mere
generality  is  it  Nothing,  something  inexpressible,  whereof  the
distinction  from  Nothing  lies  in  feigning  opinion  only.

All  that  we  seek  to  impress  upon  consciousness,  is  that  these

""TT^  beginnings  are  to  be  apprehended  as  the  merest  abstractions,

one  as  empty  as  the  other. The  instinct  that  induces  us to

attach  a  settled  import  to  Being,  or  to  both,  *Is  the  very  ne-

l/ cessity  which leads to the onward  movement of  Being  and

Nothing,  and  gives  them  a  true  or  concrete  significance. This

advance is the execution of  the problem  of  Logic,  and  the

round  which  it  is  the  purpose  of  this  work  to  present. The

analytic  reflection  which  unlocks the  deeper  characteristics  of

Being  and  Nothing,  is  nothing  but  logical  thought,  through

r which  such  characteristics  are  evolved  not  in  an  accidental  but

a  necessary  way. Every  signification,  therefore,  in  which  they

afterwards  appear,  is  only  a  more  precise  specification  and  truer

definition  of  the  Absolute. And  when  that  is  done,  the  mere

abstract  Being  and  Nothing  are  replaced  by  a  concrete  notion,


88.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  BEING.  139

in  which  both  these  elements  form  an  organic  part.  The
supreme  form  of  Nought  for  its  own  sake  would  be  Freedom :
but  Freedom  is  negativity  in  that  stage,  when  it  plunges  into
itself  with  such  strong  intensity,  that  it  is  itself  an  affirmation,
and  even  absolute  affirmation.

The  distinction  between  Being  and  Nought  is,  in  the  first  >!/.
place,  only  implicit,  and  not  yet  actually  made :  they  only  ought
to  be  distinguished. A  distinction  of  course  implies  two  things,
and  that  one  of  them  possesses  an  attribute  which  is  not  found
in  the  other. Being  however  is  an  absolute  absence  of  attri-u,
butes,  and  so  is  Nought. Hence  the  distinction  between  the
two  is  one  of  opinion  only,  it  is  a  quite  nominal  distinction,
which  is  at  the  same  time  no  distinction. In  all  other  cases  \
of  difference  there  is  some  common  point  which  comprehends-/
both  things. Suppose  we  speak  of  two  different  species : the
genus  forms  a  common  ground  for  both. But  in  the  case  of
mere  Being  and  Nothing,  a  distinction  would  be  in  an  utterly
bottomless  state :  hence  there  can  be  no  distinction,  both  deter-
minations  being  baseless. If  it be replied  that Being and
Nothing  are  both  of  them  thoughts,  so  that  thought  may  be
reckoned  common  ground,  the  objector  forgets  that  Being  is
not  a  particular  or  definite  thought,  and  hence,  being  quite  in-*^"
determinate,  is  a  thought  not  to  be  distinguished  from  Nothing.
Being  may  perhaps  be  conceived  under  the  image  of  absolute
riches,  and  Nothing  under  the  image  of  absolute  poverty. But  ..
if  when  we  view  the  whole  world  we  can  only  say  that  Every-  (SL
thing  is,  and  nothing  more; we  are  neglecting  all  speciality,
and  instead  of  total  plenitude  we  have  total  emptiness. The
same  stricture  is  applicable  to  those,  who  define  God  to  be  mere
Being ;  a  definition  not  a  whit  better  than  that  of  the  Buddhists,
who  make  God  to  be  Nought,  and  who  from  that  principle  draw
the  further  conclusion  that  annihilation  is  the  means  by  which
man  becomes  God.

88.] Nothing,  which  is  thus immediate  and  identical  with
itself,  is  also  conversely  the  same  as  Being  is. The  truth  of  \^*
Being  and  of  Nothing  is  accordingly  the  unity  of  the two :
and  this  unity  is  Becoming.

(1)  The  proposition  that  Being  is  the  same  as  Nothing
seems  so  paradoxical  to  the  imagination  or  understanding,  that
it  is  perhaps  taken  for  a  joke.  And  indeed  it  is  one  of  the
hardest  demands  made  upon  thought :  for  Being  and  Nothing


140  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [88.

exhibit  the  contrast  in  thought  in  all  its  immediacy;  that  is,
without  any  characteristic  being  explicitly  given  in  the  one
which  would  involve  its  connexion  with  the  other.  This
characteristic  however,  as  shown  in  the  preceding  section,
is  implicit  in  them — the  characteristic  which  is  just  the  same
in  both.  So  far  the  deduction  of  their  unity  is  completely
analytical :  indeed  the  whole  progress  of  philosophising  in  every
-  case,  if  it  be  a  methodical,  that  is  to  say  a  necessary,  progress,
merely  renders  explicit  what  is  implicit  in  a  notion.  It  is  as
correct  however  to  say  that  Being  and  Nothing  are  altogether
different,  as  to  assert  their  unity.  The  one  is  not  what  the
other  is.  But  since  the  distinction  has  not  at  this  point
assumed  a  definite  character  (Being  and  Nothing  are  still  the
immediate),  it  is,  in  the  way  that  they  have  it,  something
unutterable,  which  we  merely  fancy  to  exist.

(2)  No  great  amount  of  wit  is  needed  to  throw  ridicule
on  the  maxim  that  Being  and  Nothing  are  the  same,  or  even
to  represent  the  absurdities  which,  it  is  falsely  said,  are  the
consequences  and  illustrations  of  that  maxim.

If  Being  and  Nought  are  identical,  say  these  objectors,  it
follows  that  it  makes  no  difference  whether  my  home,  my
property,  the  air  I  breathe,  this  city,  the  sun,  the  law,  mind,
God,  are  or  are  not.  Now  in  some  of  these  cases,  the  objectors
foist  in  special  and  private  aims,  or  the  utility  a  thing  may
have  for  a  particular  person,  and  then  ask,  whether  it  be  all
the  same  to  that  person  if  the  thing  exist  and  if  it  do  not.
As  to  that,  indeed,  we  may  note  that  the  teaching  of  philosophy
is  precisely  what  frees  man  from  the  endless  crowd  of  finite  aims
and  intentions,  by  making  him  so  indifferent  to  them,  that
their  existence  or  non-existence  is  to  him  a  matter  of  no
moment.  But  it  is  never  to  be  forgotten  that,  once  introduce
the  mention  of  a  particular  subject-matter,  and  you  thereby
state  a  connexion  with  other  existences  and  other  purposes,
which  are  ex  hypothesi  worth  having  :  and  on  such  hypothesis
it  comes  to  depend  whether  the  Being  and  not-Being  of  a
determinate  subject-matter  are  the  same  or  not.  A  distinc-


88.]  THE DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  141

tion  of  real  import  is  in  these  cases  secretly  substituted  for
the  empty  distinction  of  Being  and  Nought.  In  others  of
the  cases  referred  to,  we  have  absolute  existences  and  ideas
and  aims,  which  may  become  essential,  subsumed  under  the
mere  category  of  Being  or  not-Being.  But  there  is  more  to  be
said  of  these  concrete  objects,  than  that  they  merely  are  or
are  not.  Barren  abstractions,  like  Being  and  Nothing — the
initial  categories  which,  for  that  reason,  are  the  most  barren
anywhere  to  be  found — are  utterly  inadequate  to  the  nature
of  these  objects.  Real  facts  are  something  far  above  these
abstractions  and  the  opposition  between  them.  And  always
when  a  concrete  existence  is  disguised  under  the  name  of
Being  and  not-Being,  empty-headedness  makes  the  usual
mistake  of  speaking  about,  and  having  in  the  mind  an  image
of,  something  foreign  to  the  question  :  and  in  this  place  the
question  is  about  abstract  Being  and  Nothing.

(3)  It  may  perhaps  be  said  that  nobody  can  comprehend
the  unity  of  Being  and  Nought.  As  for  that,  the  notion  or
comprehension  of  the  unity  is  stated  in  the  sections  preceding,
and  that  is  all:  apprehend  that,  and  you  have  comprehended
this  unity.  What  the  objector  really  means  by  comprehension —
by  a  notion — is  more  than  his  language  properly  implies  :  he
wants  a  richer  and  more  complex  acquaintance,  a  material  or
pictorial  conception  which  will  propound  the  notion  as  a
concrete  case  and  one  more  familiar  to  the  ordinary  operations
of  thought.  And  so  long  as  incomprehensibility  means  only
the  want  of  habituation  for  the  effort  needed  to  grasp  an  ab-
stract thought, free  from  all  sensuous  admixture,  and  to  seize
a  speculative  truth,  the  reply  to  the  criticism  is,  that  philoso-
phical knowledge  is  undoubtedly  distinct  in  kind  from  the
mode  of  knowledge  best  known  in  common  life,  as  well  as
from  that  which  reigns  in  the  other  sciences.  But,  if  to  have
no  notion  merely  means  that  we  can  get  no  conception  or
imagination  of  the  oneness  of  Being  and  Nought,  the  state-
ment is  far  from  being  true  ;  for  every  one  has  countless
ways  of  envisaging  this  unity.  To  say  that  we  have  no  such


142  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  BEING.  [88.

conception  can  only  mean,  that  in  none  of  these  images  do
we  recognise  the  notion  in  question,  and  that  we  are  not
aware  of  their  office  as  examples  of  the  notion.  The  readiest
example  of  it  we  can  find  is  Becoming.  Every  one  can  form
an  image  of  Becoming,  and  will  even  allow  that  his  pictorial
idea  is  one  and  single :  he  will  further  allow  that,  when  it
is  analysed,  it  involves  the  attribute  of  Being,  and  also  what
is  the  reverse  of  Being,  viz.  Nothing :  and  that  these  two
attributes  lie  undivided  in  the  one  conception  :  so  that
Becoming  is  the  unity  of  Being  and  Nothing.  Another
tolerably  plain  instance  of  the  same  notion  is  a  beginning.
In  its  beginning,  the  thing  is  not  yet,  but  it  is  more  than
merely  nothing,  for  its  Being  is  already  in  the  beginning.
Beginning  is  itself  a  case  of  Becoming  ;  only  the  former
term  is  employed  with  an  eye  to  the  further  advance.  If  we
were  to  adapt  logic  to  the  more  usual  course  of  the  sciences,
we  might  begin  logic  with  the  popular  conception  of  a
Beginning  as  abstractly  thought,  or  with  Beginning  as  such,
and  then  analyse  this  conception  ;  and  perhaps  people  would
more  readily  accept  it  as  a  result  of  this  analysis,  that  Being
and  Nothing 'present  themselves  as  undivided  in  unity.

(4)  li  remains  to  note  that  such  phrases  as  '  Being  and  No-
thing are  the  same,'  or  '  The  unity  of  Being  and  Nothing ' —
like  all  other  such  unities,  that  of  subject  and  object,  and
others — may  give  rise  to  reasonable  objection.  They  misre-
present the  facts,  by  giving  an  exclusive  prominence  to  the
unity,  and  leaving  the  difference  which  undoubtedly  exists
in  it  (because  it  is  Being  and  Notbing,  for  example,  the
unity  of  which  is  declared)  without  any  express  mention  or
.  notice.  It  accordingly  seems  as  if  the  diversity  had  been
unduly  put  out  of  count,  and  deprived  of  its  proper  right.  The
fact  is,  no  speculative  category  can  be  correctly  expressed  by
any  such  propositional  form,  for  the  unity  is  expected  to  be
apprehended  within  the  diversity,  which  is  all  the  while  at
hand  and  explicitly  stated.  '  To  become '  is  the  true  expres-
sion for  the  resultant  of  'To  be '  and  ' Not  to  be ' ;  it  is  the


88.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  BEING.  143

unity  of  the  two;  and  not  only  the  unity,  it  is  also  inherent
unrest, — the  unity,  which  is  no  mere  reference-to-self  and  there-
fore without  movement,  but  which  through  the  diversity  of
Being  and  Nothing,  that  is  in  it,  is  at  war  within  itself.
'  To  be  there  and  so '  is  this  unity  of  Being  and  Nothing —
or  it  is  '  to  become '  in  this  form  of  unity :  hence  all  that  '  is
there  and  so/  all  definite  being,  is  one-sided  and  finite.  The
opposition  between  the  two  factors  seems  to  have  vanished;
it  is  only  implied  in  the  unity,  it  is  not  explicitly  affirmed.

(5)  The  maxim  of  Becoming,  that  Being  is  the  passage
into  Nought,  and  Nought  the  passage  into  Being,  is  con-
troverted by  the  maxim  of  Pantheism,  the  doctrine  of  the
eternity  of  matter,  that  from  nothing  comes  nothing,  and
that  something  can  only  come  out  of  something.  The  ancients
saw  plainly  that  the  maxim,  '  From  nothing  comes  nothing,
from  something,  something,'  really  abolishes  Becoming :  for
the  source  whence  it  comes  into  Being  and  the  end  to  which
it  comes  are  one  and  the  same.  All  that  is  then  at  our  disposal
is  the  maxim  of  abstract  identity  as  upheld  by  the  under-
standing. It  cannot  but  seem  strange,  therefore,  to  hear
such  maxims  as,  '  Out  of  nothing  comes  nothing :  Out  of
something  comes  something,'  calmly  taught  in  these  days,
without  the  teacher  being  apparently  in  the  least  aware  that
they  are  the  basis  of  Pantheism,  and  even  without  his
knowing  that  the  ancients  have  exhausted  all  that  is  to  be
said  about  them.

Becoming  is  the  first  concrete  thought,  and  therefore  the  first
notion  :  whereas  Being  and  Nought  are  empty  abstractions.
The  notion  of  Being,  therefore,  of  which  we  sometimes  speak,
must  mean  the  coming  into  Being.  It  does  not  mean  the  mere
point  of  Being,  which  is  empty  Nothing,  any  more  than  No-
thing which  is  empty  Being.  In  Being  then  we  have  Nothing,
and  in  Nothing  Being  :  but  this  Being  which  does  not  Jose  itself
in  Nothing  is  Becoming.  Nor  must  we  omit  the  distinction,  while
we  emphasise  the  unity  of  Becoming:  without  that  distinction
we  should  once  more  return  to  abstract  Being.  Becoming  is
only  the  explicit  statement  of  what  Being  is  in  its  truth.

We  often  hear  it  maintained  that  thought  is  opposed  to  Being.


144  THE DOCTRINE  OF  BEING.  [89.

Now  in  the  face  of  such  a  statement,  our  first  question  ought  to
be,  what  is  meant  by  Being1.  If  we  understand  Being,  as  it  is
defined  by  reflection,  all  that  we  can  say  of  it  is,  that  it  is  what  is

i"  wholly  identical  and  affirmative.  And  if  we  then  look  at  thought,
it  cannot  escape  us  that  thought  is  at  least  what  is  absolutely
identical  with  itself.  Both  therefore,  Being  as  well  as  thought,
have  the  same  attribute.  This  identity  of  Being  and  thought  is
not  however  to  be  taken  in  a  concrete  sense,  as  if  we  could  say
that  a  stone,  so  far  as  Being  goes,  is  the  same  as  a  thinking
man.  A  concrete  thing  is  always  very  different  from  the

^^  abstract  category  as  such.  And  in  the  case  of  Being,  we
are  speaking  of  nothing  concrete :  for  Being  is  the  utter  ab-
straction. So  far  then  the  question  regarding  the  Being  of  God
— a  Being  which  is  in  itself  concrete  above  all  measure — is  of
slight  importance.

As  the  first  concrete  category,  Becoming  is  the  first  truthful
category  of  thought.  In  the  history  of  philosophy,  this  stage  of
the  logical  Idea  finds  its  analogue  in  the  system  of  Heraclitus.
When  Heraclitus  says  '  All  is  flowing  '  (navra  pei),  he  enunciates
Becomimg  as  the  fundamental  category  of  all  that  there  is,
whereas  the  Eleatics,  as  already  remarked,  saw  the  only  truth
in  Being,  a  rigid  point  of  Being  where  there  is  no  process.
Glancing  at  the  principle  of  the  Eleatics,  Heraclitus  then  goes
on  to  say :  Being  no  more  is  than  not-Being  (ovbev  juoAAov  TO
ov  TOV  fji.ii  ovTos  e<m)  :  a  statement  expressing  the  negative  nature
of  abstract  Being,  and  its  identity  with  not-Being,  as  it  is  made
explicit  in  Becoming :  both  abstractions  being  alike  untenable.
This  may  be  looked  at  as  an  instance  of  the  real  refutation  of
one  system  by  another.  To  refute  is  to  exhibit  the  dialectical
.movement  in  the  principle  of  the  philosophy  which  is  refuted,
and  thus  reduce  it  to  a  constituent  member  of  a  higher  and
more  concrete  form  of  the  Idea.  Even  Becoming  however,
if  taken  in  the  whole  of  its  own  significance,  is  a  categoiy
v  with  very  little  in  it,  and  needs  to  be  further  deepened  and  com-
pleted. To  deepen  it,  we  must  take  some  of  its  more  developed
forms — such  as  Life.  Life  is  a  Becoming,  but  that  is  not
enough  to  define  the  notion  of  life.  A  still  higher  form  is  found
in  Mind.  Here  too  is  Becoming,  but  richer  and  more  intensive
than  mere  logical  Becoming.  The  elements,  whose  unity  con-
S  stitutes  mind,  are  not  the  bare  abstractions  of  Being  and  Nought,
but  the  system  of  the  logical  Idea  and  of  Nature.

(<5) Being  Determinate.

89.] (a)  In  Becoming  the  Being  which  is  one  with  Nothing,
and  the  Nothing  which  is  one  with  Being,  are  only  vanishing


89.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  BEING.  145

factors;  they  are  and  they  are  not.  Thus  by  its  inherent
contradiction  Becoming-  collapses  ;  or  is  precipitated  into  the
unity,  in  which  the  two  elements  are  completely  lost  to
view.  This  result  is  accordingly  Being  determinate,  or
definite.

In  this  first  example  we  must  call  to  mind,  once  for  all,
what  was  stated  in  §  83  and  in  the  note  there.  The  only
way  to  make  good  any  growth  and  progress  in  knowledge
is  to  hold  results  fast  in  their  truth.  There  is  absolutely
nothing  whatever  in  which  we  cannot  point  to  contradictions
or  opposite  attributes ;  and  necessarily  so :  and  all  that  the
abstraction  of  understanding  means  "is  the  forcible  retention
of  a  single  attribute,  and  the  effort  to  obscure  and  remove
all  consciousness  of  the  other  attribute  which  is  involved.
Whenever  such  contradiction  is  laid  bare  in  any  object  or
notion,  the  usual  inference  which  follows  is :  After  all  then,
the  opposition  is  nothing.  Thus  Zeno,  who  first  announced
the  contradiction  native  to  motion,  concluded  from  it  the
denial  of  all  motion  :  and  the  ancients,  who  spoke  of
origin  and  decease,  the  two  species  of  Becoming,  made  them
untrue  forms  of  thought,  when  they  used  the  phrase  that
the  One  or  Absolute  neither  arises  nor  perishes.  Such  a  style
of  dialectic  never  got  beyond  the  negative  aspect  of  its
result,  and  failed  to  notice,  what  is  at  the  same  time  really
present,  the  definite  result,  in  the  present  case  a  mere
nothing,  but  a  Nothing  which  includes  Being,  and,  in  like
manner,  a  Being  which,  includes  Nothing.  Hence  Being
Determinate  is  (1)  the  unity  of  Being  and  Nothing,  in  which
we  get  rid  of  the  immediacy  in  these  determinations,  and,
if  they  are  connectively  referred  to  each  other,  of  their  con-
tradiction. In  this  unity  they  are  only  constituent  elements.
And  (2)  since  the  result  is  the  abolition  of  the  contradiction,
it  comes  in  the  shape  of  a  simple  or  uncompounded  unity
with  itself:  that  is  to  say,  it  also  is  Being,  but  Being  with
negation  or  determinateness :  it  is  Becoming  expressly  put
or  stated  in  the  form  of  one  of  its  elements,  viz.  Being.

L


146  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [90.

Even  our  ordinary  conception  of  Becoming  implies  that  some-
what comes  out  of  it :  so  that  Becoming-  would  have  a  result.
But  this  conception  gives  rise  to  the  question,  how  Becoming
does  not  remain  mere  Becoming,  but  has  a  result  ?  The  answer
to  this  question  follows  from  what  Becoming  has  already  shown
itself  to  be.  Becoming  always  contains  Being  and  Nothing  in  such
a  way,  that  these  two  are  always  changing  into  each  other,  and
reciprocally  cancelling  each  other.  Thus  Becoming  stands  before
us  in  utter  restlessness — unable  however  to  maintain  itself  in
this  abstract  restlessness :  for  since  Being  and  Nothing  vanish
in  Becoming  (and  that  is  the  very  meaning  or  notion  of
Becoming),  the  latter  must  vanish  also.  Becoming  is  as  it  were
a  fire,  which  dies  out  in  itself,  when  it  consumes  its  material.
The  result  of  this  process  however  is  not  an  empty  Nothing —
•  but  Being  identical  with  the  negation,  which  we  call  Being
Determinate  (being  then  and  there,  some  being)  :  the  primary

import  of  which  evidently  is  that  it  has  become.
\

90.]  To  Being  therefore  in  this  stage  is  attached  a  deter-
minateness  (a  certaincognisabilitvj  which  as  it  is  immediate
and  said  to  be,  is  Quality.  And  as  reflected  into  itself  in
being  so  determined,  the  determinate  Being  is  Somewhat,
'-in  being  there  and  then.  The  categories,  which  issue  by
evolution  on  the  basis  of  determinate  Being,  need  only  be
mentioned  briefly.

Quality  may  be  described  as  the  determinateness  immediate
and  identical  with  Being — as  distinguished  from  Quantity  (to
come  afterwards),  which,  although  a  determinant  of  Being,  is
no  longer  immediately  identical  with  Being,  but  a  determinant
indifferent  and  external  to  it.  A  Something  is  what  it  is  in
virtue  of  its  quality,  and  losing  its  quality  it  ceases  to  be  what
it  is.  Quality,  moreover,  is  completely  a  category  of  the  finite,
and  for  that  reason  has  its  proper  place  in  Nature,  not  in  the
world  of  Mind.  Thus,  for  example,  in  Nature  what  are  styled
the  elementary  bodies,  oxygen,  nitrogen,  &c.,  should  be  regarded
as  existing  qualities.  But  in  the  sphere  of  mind,  Quality  appears
in  a  subordinate  way  only,  and  not  as  if  its  qualitativeness
could  exhaust  any  specific  aspect  of  mind.  If,  for  example,  we
consider  the  subjective  mind,  which  forms  the  object  of  psycho-
logy, we  may  describe  what  is  called  character,  as  in  logical
language  identical  with  Quality.  This  however  would  not  mean
that  character  is  a  determinant,  which  permeates  the  soul  and  is
immediately  identical  with  it,  as  is  the  case  in  the  natural


9i.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  BEING.  147

world  with  the  elementary  bodies  before  mentioned.  A  more
decided  manifestation  of  Quality  as  such,  in  mind  even,  is  found
in  the  case  of  slavish  or  diseased  states  of  consciousness,  especially
in  states  of  passion  and  when  the  passion  rises  to  frenzy.  The
consciousness  of  a  deranged  person,  being-  one  mass  of  jealousy,

fear,  &c.,  may  suitably  be  described  as  Quality.

J  J  J


91.]  Quality,  as  determinateness  which  is,  as  contrasted  with
the  Negation  which  is  involved  in  it  but  distinct  from  it,  is
Reality.  Negation,  which  is  no  longer  an  abstract  nothing,
but  somewhat  which  is-there-and-then,  becomes  a  mere  form
to  Being  —  it  is  Being  other  than  some-Being.  Since  this
other-Being,  though  a  determination  of  Quality  itself,  is  in  the
first  instance  distinct  from  it,  Quality  is  Being-for-another
—  one  width  as  it  were  of  Determinate  Being,  or  of  Somewhat.
The  Being  of  Quality  as  such,  contrasted  with  this  reference
connecting  it  with  another,  is  Being-by-self.

The  foundation  of  all  determinateness  is  negation  (as  Spinoza  ^
says,  Omnis  determinatio  est  negatio}.  Opinion,  with  its  usual
want  of  thought,  believes  that  specific  things  are  positive
throughout,  and  retains  them  fast  under  the  form  of  Being.
Mere  Being  however  is  not  the  end  of  the  matter  :  —  it  is,  as  we
have  already  seen,  utter  emptiness  and  instability  besides.  Still,
when  abstract  being  is  confused  in  this  way  with  Being  modified
or  Being  determinate,  it  implies  some  perception  of  the  fact  that,
though  in  determinate  Being  there  is  involved  an  element  of
negation,  this  element  is  at  first  wrapped  up,  as  it  were,  and  *^
only  comes  to  the  front  and  receives  its  due  in  Being-for-self.
If  we  further  consider  determinate  Being  as  a  determinateness
or  character  which  is,  we  get  in  this  way  the  same  as  what  is.  .
called  Reality.  We  speak,  for  example,  of  the  reality  of  a  plan
or  a  purpose,  meaning  thereby  that  they  are  no  longer  inner  and
subjective,  but  have  passed  into  Being-there-and-then.  In  the
same  sense  the  body  may  be  called  the  reality  of  the  soul,  and
the  moral  law  the  reality  of  freedom,  and  the  world  altogether
the  reality  of  the  divine  idea.  The  word  '  reality  '  is  however
used  in  another  acceptation  to  mean  that  a  thing  is  in  the  state
conformable  to  its  essential  characteristic  or  notion.  For  example,
we  use  the  expression  :  This  is  a  real  occupation  :  This  is  a  real
man.  Here  the  term  does  not  merely  mean  the  outward  and
immediate  Being  which  is-there-and-then  :  but  rather  means
that  something,  which  is-there-and-then,  agrees  with  its  notion.

L  2


148  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  BEING.  [92.

In  which  sense,  be  it  added,  reality  is  not  distinct  from  the
^.x*  ideality,  which  we  shall  in  the  first  instance  become  acquainted
with  in  the  shape  of  Being-for-self.

92-]  03)  Being,  if  kept  distinct  from  its  determinateness  or
character,  as  it  is  in  Being-by-self,  would  be  only  the  vacant
abstraction  of  mere  Being.  In  Being  determinate  (there  and
then),  the  determinateness  is  one  with  Being ;  yet  at  the  same
time,  when  explicitly  made  a  negation,  it  is  a  Limit  or  Barrier.
Hence  other-being  is  not  indifferent  to  or  outside  of  a  being,
but  an  element  or  function  proper  to  it.  Somewhat  is  by  its
quality, — firstly  finite, — secondly  alterable ;  so  that  finitude  and

^p

variability  appertain  to  its  being.

In  Being-there-and-then,  the  negation  is  still  directly  one
with  the  Being,  and  this  negation  is  what  we  call  a  Limit.  A
thing  is  what  it  is,  only  in  and  by  reason  of  its  limit.  We  cannot
therefore  regard  the  limit  as  only  external  to  Being  which  is
then  and  there.  It  rather  goes  through  and  through  every  part
of  such  definite  Being.  The  view  of  limit,  as  merely  an  external
characteristic  of  Being-there-and-then,  arises  from  a  confusion  of
quantitative  with  qualitative  limit.  Here  we  are  speaking
primarily  of  the  qualitative  limit.  If,  for  example,  we  observe
a  piece  of  ground,  three  acres  large,  that  circumstance  is  its
quantitative  limit.  But,  in  addition,  the  ground  is,  it  may  be,
a  meadow,  not  a  wood  or  a  pond.  This  is  its  qualitative  limit.
Man,  if  he  wishes  to  be  actual,  must  be-there-and-then,  and  to
this  end  he  must  set  a  limit  to  himself.  People  who  are  too
fastidious  towards  the  finite,  never  reach  actuality,  but  lie  idle
in  abstractions,  till  their  light  gradually  dies  away.

If  we  take  a  closer  look  at  what  a  limit  implies,  we  see  it
involving  a  contradiction  in  itself,  and  thus  evincing  its  dialec-
tical nature.  On  the  one  side  the  limit  makes  the  reality  of  a
thing,  on  the  other  it  is  its  negation.  But,  again,  the  limit,  as
the  negation  of  something,  is  not  an  abstract  nothing  but  a
nothing:  which  is, — what  we  call  an  other.  Given  something,

O  *  O '

and  up  starts  another  to  us :  we  know  that  there  is  not  some-
thing only,  but  another  as  well.  Nor,  again,  is  the  other  of
such  a  nature  that  we  can  think  something  apart  from  it ;  a
!/"  something  is  implicitly  the  other  of  itself,  and  the  somewhat
sees  its  limit  become  objective  to  it  in  the  other.  If  we  now  ask
the  difference  between  something  and  another,  it  appears  that
they  are  the  same :  which  sameness  is  expressed  in  Latin  by
calling  the  pair  aliud — aliud.  The  other,  as  opposed  to  the


93,  94-]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  149

something-,  is  itself  a  something1,  and  hence  we  say  some  other,
or  something1  else ;  and  so  on  the  other  hand  the  first  something
when  opposed  to  the  other,  also  defined  as  something1,  is  itself  an
other. When  we  say  '  something  else'  our  primary  conception  is
that  something-  taken  separately  is  only  something,  and  that  the
circumstance  of  being-  another  only  attaches  to  it  from  certain
outside  considerations. Thus  we  suppose  that  the  moon,  being-
something-  else  than  the  sun,  might  very  well  exist  without  the
sun. But  really  the  moon,  as  a  something-,  has  its  other  thing-  I"-"
in  itself;  and  so  it  is  of  finite  nature. Plato  says:  God  made
the  world  out  of  the  nature  of  the  '  one '  and  the  '  other'  (TOV
ere'pou) :  having-  brought  these  together,  he  formed  from  them  a
third,  which  is  of  the  nature  of  the  ' one'  and  the  'other.' In
these  words  we  have  in  general  terms  a  statement  of  the  nature
of  the  finite,  which,  as something-,  does  not  meet  the  nature  ^
of  the  other  as  if  it  had  no  affinity  to  it,  but  being  implicitly
the  other  of  itself,  thus  undergoes  alteration. Alteration  thus
exhibits  the  inherent  contradiction  which  originally  attaches  to  ,
(determinate)  being,  and  which  forces  it  out  of  its  own  bounds.
To  materialised  conception  a  Being  stands  in  the  character  of
something  solely  positive,  and  quietly  abiding  within  its  own  -
limits  :  though,  we  also  know,  it  is  true  that  everything  finite
(such as  Being-theu-and-there) is subject to change. Such
changeableness in Being which is-there-and-then is a mere
possibility  to  the  eye  of  conception. And  its  realisation  is  not
supposed  to  be  due  to  the  very  nature  of  such  Being. But  the
fact  is,  mutability  lies  in  the  notion  of  a  (some)  Being,  and  >-
change  is,  only  the  manifestation  of  what  a  something  is  im-
plicitly. The  living  die,  simply  because  as  living  they  bear  in  „
themselves  the  germ  of  death.


93.] Some  becomes  other : this  other  is  itself  somewhat :
therefore  it  likewise  becomes  another,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum.

94.]  This  Infinity  is  the  wrong  or  negative  infinity :  it
is  only  a  negation  of  a  finite :  but  the  finite  rises  again  the
same  as  ever,  and  is  never  got  rid  of  and  absorbed.  In  other
words,  this  infinite  only  expresses  that  there  ought  to  be  an1'
elimination  of  the  finite.  The  progression  into  the  infinite  never
gets  further  than  a  statement  of  the  contradiction  involved  in
the  finite,  viz.  that  it  is  somewhat  as  well  as  somewhat  else.  It
only  publishes  again  and  again  the  alternation  between  these
two  terms,  each  of  which  calls  up  the  other.


150  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [94.

If  we  let  somewhat  and  another,  the  elements  of  determinate
Being  (then-and-there)  fall  asunder,  the  result  is  that  some
becomes  other,  and  this  other  is  itself  a  somewhat,  which  then
as  such  changes  likewise,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum.  This  result
seems  to  superficial  reflection  something  very  grand,  the  grandest
possible.  But  such  a  progression  into  the  infinite  is  not  the

vX  real  infinite. That  consists  in  being  at  home  with  itself  in  its
antithesis,  or,  if  enunciated  as  a  process,  in  coming  to  itself  in

l/>  its  other.  Much  depends  on  a  right  estimate  of  the  notion  of
infinity,  as  distinguished  from  the  wrong  infinity  of  endless
progression,  with  which  we  are  too  apt  to  rest  satisfied.  When
time  and  space,  for  example,  are  spoken  of  as  infinite,  it  is  in
the  first  place  the  infinite  progression  to  which  our  thoughts
attach  themselves.  We  say,  Now,  This  moment,  and  then  we
keep  continually  going  forwards  and  backwards  beyond  this
limit.  The  case  is  the  same  with  space,  the  infinity  of  which
has  formed  the  theme  of  barren  declamation  to  astronomers
who  were  endowed  with  a  talent  for  edification.  In  the  con-
templation of  such  an  infinite,  our  thought,  we  are  commonly
informed,  must  sink  under  the  attempt.  It  is  true  indeed  that
we  must  abandon  the  unending  contemplation,  not  however
because  the  occupation  is  too  sublime,  but  because  it  is  too
tedious.  It  is  tedious  to  devote  ourselves  to  the  contempla-
tion of  this  infinite  progression,  because  the  same  thing  is
constantly  recurring.  We  lay  down  a  limit :  then  we  pass
it :  next  we  have  a  limit  once  more,  and  so  on  for  ever.  All
this  is  but  a  superficial  vicissitude  which  never  leaves  the
/'region  of  the  finite  behind.  To  suppose  that  by  stepping
<x  out  into  that  infinity  we  release  ourselves  from  the  finite,
/  s  is  in  truth  but  to  seek  the  release  which  comes  by  flight.
But  the  man  who  flees  is  not  yet  free :  in  fleeing  he  is  still
V  conditioned  by  that  from  which  he  flees.  If  it  be  also  said,  that
the  infinite  is  unattainable,  the  statement  is  true,  only  because
the  idea  of  infinity  has  been  burdened  with  the  circumstance  of
being  simply  and  solely  negative.  With  such  barren  forms  of
thought,  that  are  always  in  a  world  beyond,  philosophy  has
nothing  to  do.  Its  object  is  always  something  concrete,  and  in  .
the  highest  sense  present.

The  problem  of  philosophy  has  also  been  presented,  as  the
discovery  of  an  answer  to  the  question,  how  the  infinite  comes  to
the  resolution  of  issuing  out  of  itself.  This  question,  founded,
as  it  is,  upon  the  assumption  of  a  rigid  opposition  between  finite
and  infinite,  may  be  answered  by  saying  that  the  opposition  is
false,  and  that  in  point  of  fact  the  infinite  eternally  proceeds  out
of  itself,  and  yet  does  not  proceed  out  of  itself.  If  we  farther
say,  that  the  infinite  is  the  not-finite,  we  have  in  point  of  fact


95-]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  BEING.  151

virtually  expressed  the  truth :  for  as  the  finite  itself  is  the  first
negative,  the  not-finite  is the  negative  of  that  negation,  the  »•-*"
negation  which  is  identical  with  itself  and  thus  at  the  same  time
a  true  affirmation.

The  infinity  of  reflection  here  discussed  is  only  an  attempt  to
reach  the  true  infinity,  an  infelicitous  half-way  house.  Generally
speaking,  it  is  the  point  of  view  which  has  come  to  prevail  in
the  modern  philosophy  of  Germany.  The  finite,  this  theory  tells
us,  ought  to  be  absorbed  only ;  the  infinite  ought  not  to  be  a
negative  merely,  but  also  a  positive.  That  '  ought  to  be '  betrays
the  incapacity  of  actually  executing  and  making  good,  what  is  at
the  same  time  recognised  to  be  right.  This  stage  was  never
passed  by  the  systems  of  Kant  and  Fichte,  so  far  as  ethics  are
concerned.  The  utmost  to  which  this  way  will  bring  us  is  only
the  perpetual  approximation  to  the  law  of  Reason.  And  the
same  postulate  (which  demands  an  infinite  as  positive)  has
been  employed  to  demonstrate  the  immortality  of  the  soul.

95.]  (y)  What  we  now  in  point  of  fact  have  before  us,  is
that  somewhat  comes  to  be  an  other,  and  that  the  other
generally  comes  to  be  an  other.  In  its  relation  to  an  other,  .*•
somewhat  is  virtually  an  other,  as  compared  with  that  other:
and  since  what  is  passed  into  is  quite  the  same  as  what  passes
over,  since  both  have  one  and  the  same  attribute,  viz.  to  be
an  other,  it  follows  that  something  in  its  passage  into  other  r
only  joins  with  itself.  This  reference  binding  it  to  itself,  in
the  passage,  and  in  the  other,  is  the  genuine  Infinity.  Or
under  a  negative  aspect :  what  becomes  changed  is  the  other,
it  becomes  the  other  of  the  other.  Thus  we  find  ourselves
once  more  with  Being,  but  as  negation  of  the  negation,  as
Being-for-self.

The  dualism,  which  puts  an  insuperable  opposition'  between
finite  and  infinite,  fails  to  note  the  simple  circumstance  that
the  infinite  is  thereby  only  one  of  two,  and  is  reduced  to  a
particular,  to  which  the  finite  forms  the  other  particular.
Such  an  infinite,  which  is  only  a  particular,  is  co-ordinate  with
the  finite,  which  makes  for  it  a  limit  and  a  barrier :  it  is  not
what  it  ought  to  be  and  means  to  be,  that  is,  the  infinite,
but  only  finite.  In  such  a  state  of  matters,  where  the  finite
is  here,  and  the  infinite  there, — this  world  as  the  finite  and


152  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [95.

the  other  world  as  the  infinite,  an  equal  degree  of  permanence
and  independence  is  ascribed  to  the  finite  and  to  the  infinite.
The  Being  of  the  finite  is  made  an  absolute  Being-,  and  by
this  dualism  gets  a  fixed  ground  of  its  own.  Touched,  so  to
speak,  by  the  infinite,  it  would  be  annihilated.  But  it  must
not  be  touched  by  the  infinite.  There  must  be  an  abyss,  an
impassable  gulf  between  the  two,  with  the  infinite  abiding  on
yonder  side  and  the  finite  steadfast  on  this.  Those  who  at-
tribute to  the  finite  this  inflexible  persistence  in  comparison
with  the  infinite,  are  not,  as  they  imagine,  far  above  metaphy-
sic  :  they  are  still  on  the  level  of  the  most  ordinary  metaphysic
of  understanding.  For  the  same  thing  occurs  here  as  in
the  infinite  progression.  At  one  time  it  is  admitted  that  the
finite  has  no  independent  actuality,  no  absolute  Being,  (which
is  in  and  for  itself,)  but  is  only  a  mere  passing  moment.  At
another  time,  this  is  straightway  forgotten,  and  the  finite,
being  made  merely  a  counterpart  to  the  infinite,  is  represented
as  wholly  separated  from  it,  and  as  self-subsistent  beyond  the
reach  of  annihilation.  While  thought  thus  imagines  itself
elevated  to  the  infinite,  it  is  really  going  the  opposite  way :
it  comes  to  an  infinite  which  is  only  a  finite,  and  the  finite,
which  it  had  left  behind,  has  always  to  be  retained  and  made
into  an  Absolute.

After  this  examination  (with  which  it  were  well  to  compare
Plato's  Philebus),  tending  to  show  the  nullity  of  the  meaning
which  understanding  gives  to  the  finite  and  the  infinite,  we
are  in  danger  of  sliding  into  the  mistake  of  saying  that  the
infinite  and  the  finite  are  therefore  one,  and  that  the  true
infinity,  the  truth,  must  be  defined  and  enunciated  as  the
unity  of  the  finite  and  infinite.  Such  a  statement  would  be
to  some  extent  correct :  but  is  just  as  open  to  perversion  and
falsehood  as  the  unity  of  Being  and  Nothing  already  noticed.
Besides  it  may  very  fairly  be  charged  with  reducing  the  infinite
to  finitude  and  making  a  finite  infinite.  For,  so  far  as  the
expression  goes,  the  finite  seems  only  left  in  its  place, — it  is
not  expressly  and  actually  absorbed.  Or,  if  we  reflect  that


96.]  THE DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  153

the  finite,  when  identified  with  the  infinite,  cannot  at  all
events  remain  what  it  was  out  of  such  unity,  and  will  at
least  suffer  some  change  in  its  characteristics  (as  an  alkali,
when  combined  with  an  acid,  loses  some  of  its  properties),  we
must  see  that  the  same  fate  awaits  the  infinite,  which,  as  the
negative,  will  on  its  side  likewise  have  its  edge,  as  it  were,
blunted  on  its  antithesis.  And  this  does  really  happen  with
the  abstract  and  one-sided  infinite  of  the  understanding.  The
genuine  infinite  however  is  not  merely  in  the  position  of  the
one-sided  acid,  and  so  does  not  lose  itself.  The  negation  of
negation  is  not  a  neutralisation  :  the  infinite  is  the  affirmative,
and  it  is  only  the  finite  which  is  absorbed.

In  Being-for-self  we  first  meet  the  category  of  Ideality.
Being- there-and-then,  when  it  is  in  the  first  instance  appre-
hended in  its  Being  or  affirmation,  has  reality  :  and  thus  the
finite  sphere  also  in  the  first  instance  belongs  to  the  category
of  reality.  But  the  truth  of  the  finite  is  rather  its  ideality.
Similarly,  the  infinite  of  understanding  which  is  co-ordinated
with  the  finite,  is  itself  only  one  of  two  finites,  no  whole
truth,  but  a  non-substantial  element.  This  ideality  or  non-
substantiality  of  the  finite  is  the  chief  maxim  of  philosophy;
and  for  that  reason  every  true  philosophy  is  idealistic.  Every-
thing depends  upon  our  rejecting  such  an  infinite,  as  in  the
very  terms  of  its  characterisation  is  made  both  a  particular
and  a  finite.  •  For  this  reason  we  have  bestowed  a  greater
amount  of  attention  on  this  distinction  of  finite  and  infinite.
The  fundamental  notion  of  philosophy,  the  genuine  infinite,
depends  upon  it.  The  distinction  is  cleared  up  by  the  simple,
and  for  that  reason  seemingly  insignificant,  but  incontrovertible,
reflections,  contained  in  this  section.

(<?)  Being-for-self.

96.]  (a)  Being-for-self,  considered  as  a  connexion  with  itself,
is  immediacy,  and  considered  as  a  connexion  of  the  nega-
tive with  itself,  is  the  One,  which  is  for  itself.  This  unit,


154  THE DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [96.

being  without distinction in its  own self,  thus  excludes  the
others  out  of  itself.

To  be  for  self — to  be  one — is  the  last  stage  of  Quality,  and
^/  as  such,  it  contains  abstract  Being,  and  Being  modified  (there-
and-then),  as  nonsubstantial  elements  of  its  idea.  As  simple
Being,  the  One  is  a  simple  connexion  with  self;  as  Being
modified  (then-and- there),  it  is  determinate :  but  the  deter-
minateness  is  not  in  this  case  a  finite  determinateness,  as  in
the  distinction  of  somewhat  from  the  other,  but  infinite,
because  it  contains  distinction  absorbed  and  annulled  in  itself.

The  readiest  instance  of  Being-for-self  is  found  in  the  'I/
As  being  there  and  then,  we  know  ourselves  distinguished
in  the  first  place  from  another  Being-there-and-then,  and  with
certain  connective  bearings  thereto.  But  we  also  come  to
know  this  expanse  of  Being-there-and-then  reduced,  as  it  were,
to  a  point  in  the  simple  form  of  being  one,  and  for  self,
^yiien  we  say  fl,'  we  express  the  reference- to-self  which  is
infinite,  and  at  the  same  time  negative.  Man,  it  may  be  said,
is  distinguished  from  the  animal  world,  and  in  that  way  from
nature  altogether,  by  knowing  himself  as  '  I ' :  which  amounts
to  sa}Ting  that  natural  things  never  attain  a  free  Being-for-
self,  but  as  limited  to  Being-there-and-then,  are  always  and
\  only  Being  for  an  other. — Again,  Being-for-self  may  be
described  as  ideality,  just  as  Being-there-and-then  was  de-
[  scribed  as  reality.  It  is  said,  that  besides  reality  there  is  also
an  ideality.  Thus  the  two  categories  are  made  equal  and
parallel.  Properly  speaking,  ideality  is  not  somewhat  outside
of  and  beside  reality  :  the  notion  of  ideality  just  lies  in  its
"'•""being  the  truth  of  reality.  That  is  to  say,  when  reality  is
explicitly  stated  as  what  it  implicitly  is,  it  is  at  once  seen  to
be  ideality.  Hence  ideality  has  not  received  its  proper  estima-
tion, when  you  allow  that  reality  is  not  all  in  all,  but  that  an
ideality  must  be  recognised  outside  of  it.  Such  an  ideality,
external  to  or  it  may  be  beyond  reality,  would  be  no  better
than  an  empty  name.  Ideality  only  has  a  meaning  or  import
when  it  is  the  ideality  of  something :  but  this  something  is
not  a  mere  indefinite  this  or  that,  but  determinate  being  (then
and  there)  which  is  characterised  as  reality,  and  which,  if
retained  in  isolation,  possesses  no  truth.  The  distinction
between  Nature  and  Mind  is  not  improperly  conceived,  when
/"the  former  is  traced  back  to  reality,  and  the  latter  to  ideality
as  a  fundamental  category.  Nature  however  is  far  from  being
so  fixed  and  complete,  as  to  subsist  even  without  Mind :  in
Mind  it  first,  as  it  were,  attains  its  aim  and  its  truth.  And
similarly,  Mind  on  its  part  is  not  merely  a  world  beyond


97.]  THE DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  155

Nature  and  nothing-  more  :  it  is  really,  and  with  full  proof,
seen  to  be  mind,  only  when  it  involves  Nature  as  absorbed  in
itself. — Apropos  of  this,  we  should  note  the  double  meaning
of  the  German  word,  aufheben  (to  put  by,  or  put  aside).  We
mean  by  it  (1)  to  clear  away,  or  annul:  thus,  we  say,  a  law,
or  a  regulation  is  put  aside:  (2)  to  keep,  or  preserve:  in
which  sense  we  use  it  when  we  say :  something  is  well  put
aside.  This  double  usage  of  language,  which  gives  to  the  same
word  a  positive  and  negative  meaning,  is  not  an  accident,  and
gives  no  ground  for  reproaching  language  as  a  cause  of  con-
fusion. We  should  rather  recognise  in  it  the  speculative  spirit
of  our  language  rising  above  the  mere  'Either — or'  of  the
understanding.

97-]  (/3)  The  connexion  of  the  negative  with  itself  is  a
negative  connexion,  and  so  a  distinguishing  of  the  One  from
itself,  the  repulsion  of  the  One;  that  is,  it  makes  Many  Ones.
Being-for-self  however  is  also  immediacy,  and  hence  these  Many
are:  and  the  repulsion  of  every  One  which  is,  becomes  to  that
extent,  their  repulsion  against  each  other  as  pre-existing  units,
in  other  words,  their  reciprocal  exclusion.

Whenever  we  speak  of  the  One,  the  Many  usually  come  into
our  mind  at  the  same  time.  Whence,  then,  we  are  forced
to  ask,  do  the  Many  come?  This  question  is  unanswerable  by
the  conception,  which  supposes  the  Many  to  be  immediately
presented,  and  the  One  to  be  only  one  among  the  Many.  But
the  notion  teaches,  contrariwise,  that  the  One  forms  the  pre-
supposition of  the  Many :  and  in  the  thought  of  the  One  is
implied  that  it  explicitly  makes  itself  Many.  The  One  and
Individual,  is  not  like  abstract  Being,  void  of  all  connective
reference:  it  is  a  reference,  as  well  as  Being-there-and-then
was :  it  is  not  however  a  reference  connecting  somewhat  with
another  Being,  but  as  unity  of  some  and  other  being,  it  is  a
connexion  with  itself,  and  this  connexion,  it  must  be  said,
is  a  negative  connexion.  Hereby  the  One  manifests  an  utter  ..
incompatibility  with  itself,  a  self-repulsion  :  and  what  it  makes  *"
itself  explicitly  be,  is  the  Many.  We  may  denote  this  side  in
the  process  of  Being-for-self  by  the  figurative  term  Repulsion.  i^
Repulsion  is  a  term  originally  employed  in  the  study  of  matter,
to  mean  that  matter,  as  a  Many,  in  each  of  these  many  Ones,
stands  to  all  the  others  in  a  position  of  exclusion.  It  would
be  wrong  however  to  view  the  process  of  repulsion,  as  if  the
One  were  the  repellent  and  the  Many  the  repelled.  The  One,
as  already  remarked,  means  an  exclusion  of  self,  and  so  the


156  THE DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [98.

making  itself  into  Many.  Each  of  the  Many  however  is  itself
a  One,  and  in  virtue  of  its  being-  so,  the  general  repulsion  in
all  directions  is  by  one  stroke  converted  into  its  opposite,  that
is,  Attraction.

98.]  (y)  But  the  Many  are  one  the  same  as  another :  each  is
One,  or  even  one  of  the  Many  ;  they  are  consequently  one  and
the  same.  Or  when  we  study  all  that  Kepulsion  involves,  we
see  that  as  a  negative  attitude  of  many  Ones  to  one  another,
it  is  just  as  essentially  a  connective  reference  of  them  to  each
other;  and  as  whatever  the  One  is  connected  with  in  its  act
of  repulsion  is  a  One,  it  is  in  them  thrown  into  connexion
with  itself.  The  repulsion  therefore  has  an  equal  right  to  be
called  Attraction;  and  the  exclusive  One,  or  Being-for-self,  is
lost  to  view  and  merged.  The  qualitative  character,  which  in
the  One  or  unit  has  reached  its  extreme  point  of  characterisa-
tion, has  thus  passed  into  the  character  as  absorbed  and  lost
V  to  view,  i.e.  into  Being  as  Quantity.

The  philosophy  of  the  Atomists  is  the  doctrine  in  which  the
Absolute  is  formulated  as  Being-for-self,  as  One,  and  many  ones.
And  it  is  the  repulsion  which  appears  in  the  notion  of  the  One,
that  constitutes  the  fundamental  force  in  these  atoms.  But
instead  of  attraction,  it  is  Accident,  that  is,  the  mere  absence
of  thought,  which  is  expected  to  bring  them  together.  So
long  as  the  One  is  fixed  as  one,  it  is  certainly  impossible  to
regard  its  congression  with  others  as  anything  but  external
and  mechanical.  The  Void,  which  is  assumed  as  the  comple-
mentary principle  to  the  atoms,  is  repulsion  and  nothing  else,
presented  under  the  image  of  the  nothing  which  is  between
the  atoms.  Modern  Atomism — and  physics  always  founds  on
atomic  principles  — has  surrendered  the  atoms  so  far  as  to  pin
its  faith  on  molecules  or  infinitesimally  small  particles.  In  so
doing,  science  has  come  closer  to  sensuous  conception,  at  the
cost  of  losing  the  precision  of  thought.  To  put  an  attractive
by  the  side  of  a  repulsive  force,  as  the  moderns  have  done,
certainly  gives  completeness  to  the  contrast :  and  much  stress
has  been  laid  on  the  discovery  of  this  natural  force  as  it  is


98.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  157

called.  But  the  reciprocal  connexion  between  the  two,  which
makes  what  is  true  and  concrete  in  them,  would  have  to  be
rescued  from  the  obscurity  and  confusion  in  which  they  were
left  even  in  Kant's  Metaphysical  Principles  of  Natural
Science.  In  modern  times  the  importance  of  the  atomic  theory
is  even  more  evident  in  political  than  in  physical  science.  Ac-
cording to  it,  the  will  of  individuals  as  such  is  the  creative!
principle  of  the  State :  the  attracting  force  consists  of  the
particular  circumstances  of  want  and  inclination ;  and  the
Universal,  or  the  State  itself,  is  the  external  relation  of  aj
compact.

(1)  The  Atomic  philosophy  forms  a  vital  stage  in  the  historical
growth  of  the  Idea.  The  principle  of  that  system  may  be  .
described  as  Being-for-self  in  the  shape  of  the  Many.  At
present,  students  of  nature  who  are  anxious  to  avoid  metaphysics,
turn  a  favourable  ear  to  Atomism.  But  it  is  not  possible  to
escape  metaphysics  and  cease  to  trace  nature  back  to  terms  of
thought,  by  throwing  ourselves  into  the  arms  of  Atomism.  'Jfce
atom  in  fact  is  itself_a  thought ;  and  hence  the  theory  which
holdlT  matter  Tio~~consist  oF  atoms  is  a  metaphysical  theory.
Newton  gave  physics  an  express  warning  to  beware  of  meta-
physics, it  is  true ;  but  to  his  honour  be  it  said,  he  did  not
by  any  means  obey  his  owft  warning.  The  only  mere  physicists
are  the  animals  :  they  alone  do  not  thinkTVhile  rnanls  a  think-
ing being  and  a  born  metaphysician.  The  real  question  is  not
whether  we  shall  apply  metaphysics,  but  whether  our  meta-
physics are  of  the  right  kind :  in  others  words,  whether  we  are
not,  instead  of  the  concrete  logical  Idea,  adopting  one-sided  forms
of  thought,  fixed  by  the  understanding,  and  making  these  the
basis  of  our  theoretical  as  well  as  our  practical  work.  It  is  on
this  ground  that  one  objects  to  the  Atomic  philosophy.  The  old
Atomists  viewed  the  world  as  a  Many,'  as  their  successors  do  to
this  day.  On  accident  or  chance  they  laid  the  task  of  collecting
the  atoms  which  l!oat  about  in  the  void.  But,  after  all,  the
nexus  binding  the  Many  with  one  another  is  by  no  means  a
mere  accident :  as  we  have  already  remarked,  the  nexus  is
founded  on  their  very  nature.  To  Kant  we  owe  the  completed
theory  of  matter  as  the  unity  of  repulsion  and  attraction.  The
theory  is  correct,  so  far  as  it  recognises  attraction  to  be  the
second  of  the  two  elements  involved  in  the  notion  of  Being-for-
self:  and  to  be  an  element  no  less  essential  than  repulsion  to
constitute  matter.  Still  this  dynamical  construction  of  matter,


158  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [98.

as  it  is  termed,  has  the  fault  of  taking  for  granted,  instead  of
deducing,  attraction  and  repulsion.  Had  they  been  deduced,  we
should  then  have  seen  the  How  and  the  Why  of  a  unity  which
is  merely  asserted.  Kant  indeed  was  careful  to  inculcate  that
Matter  must  not  be  taken  to  be  already  at  hand  of  itself,  and
then  as  it  were  incidentally  to  be  provided  with  the  two  forces
mentioned,  but  must  be  regarded  as  consisting  solely  in  their
unity.  German  physicists  for  some  time  accepted  this  pure
dynamic.  But  in  spite  of  this,  the  majority  of  these  physicists  in
modern  times  have  found  it  more  convenient  to  return  to  the
Atomic  point  of  view,  and  in  spite  of  the  warnings  of  one  of
their  number,  the  late  M.  Kastner,  have  begun  to  regard  Matter
as  consisting  of  infinitesimally  small  particles,  termed  '  atoms ' —
which  atoms  have  then  to  be  brought  into  connexion  with  one
another  by  the  play  of  forces  attractive,  repulsive,  or  whatever
they  may  be.  This  too  is  metaphysics :  and  metaphysics  which,
for  its  utter  absence  of  thought,  there  would  be  sufficient  reason
to  guard  against.

(2)  The  transition  from  Quality  to  Quantity,  indicated  in  the
paragraph  before  us,  is  not  found  in  our  ordinary  way  of  think-
ing, which  deems  each  of  these  categories  to  exist  independently
beside  the  other.  We  are  in  the  habit  of  saying  that  things  are
not  merely  qualitatively,  but  also  quantitatively  defined ;  but
how  these  categories  originate,  and  how  they  are  related  to  each
other,  are  questions  not  further  examined.  The  fact  is,  quantity
just  means  quality  superseded  and  absorbed  :  and  it  is  by  the  dia-
lectic of  quality  here  examined  that  this  result  is  effected,  and
quality  reduced  to  inactivity.  First  of  all,  we  had  Being  :  as  the
truth  of  Being,  came  Becoming  :  which  formed  the  passage  to
Being  Determinate:  and  the  truth  of  that  we  found  to  be
Alteration.  And  in  its  result  Alteration  showed  itself  to
be  Being-for-self,  withdrawn  from  the  connexion  with  another
and  passage  into  another,  which  Being-for-self,  finally,  in
the  two  sides  of  its  process,  Repulsion  and  Attraction,  was
obviously  seen  to  annul  itself,  and  thereby  to  annul  quality
in  the  sum  total  of  its  several  stages.  Still  this  superseded  and
absorbed  quality  is  neither  an  abstract  nothing,  nor  an  equally
abstract  and  uncharacterised  being :  it  is  only  Being  indifferent
to  determinateness  or  character.  This  aspect  of  Being  is  also
what  appears  as  quantity  in  our  ordinary  conceptions.  We
observe  things,  first  of  all,  with  an  eye  to  their  quality — which
we  take  to  be  the  character  identical  with  the  Being  of  the  thing.
If  we  proceed  to  consider  the  quantity,  we  get  the  conception  of
an  indifferent  and  external  character  or  determinant  of  such

I a  kind,  that  a  thing  remains  what  it  is,  though  its  quantity

V  is  altered,  and  the  thing  becomes  greater  or  less.


99-]  THE DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  159

B. — QUANTITY.

(a)  Mere  Quantity.

99.] Quantity is mere Being, in  the case of  which the >X
character  or  determinateness  ceases  to  be  identified  with  Being
itself,  and  is  explicitly  set  aside  or  rendered  indifferent.

(1)  The  expression  Magnitude  especially  marks  determinate  u.
Quantity,  and  is  for  that  reason  not  a  suitable  name  for  Quantity
in  general.  (2)  Mathematics  usually  define  magnitude  as  what
can  be  increased  or  diminished.  This  definition  has  the  defect
of  containing  the  thing  to  be  defined  over  again :  but  it  may
serve  to  show  that ,  the  category  of  magnitude  is  explicitly
understood  to  be  changeable  and  indifferent,  so  that,  in  spite
of  its  being  altered  by  an  increased  extension  or  intension,  the
thing  does  not  cease  to  be;  a  house,  for  example,  remains  a
house,  and  red  remains  red.  (3)  The  Absolute  is  Quantity  mere  ^
and  simple.  This  point  of  view  is  upon  the  whole  the  same
as  when  the  Absolute  is  defined  to  be  Matter,  in  which,  though
form  undoubtedly  is  present,  the  form  is  a  characteristic  of  no
importance  in  one  way  or  another.  Quantity  too  constitutes
the  main  characteristic  of  the  Absolute,  when  the  Absolute  is
regarded  as  absolutely  indifferent,  and  only  admitting  of  quan-
titative distinction.  Otherwise  pure  space,  time,  &c.  may  be
taken. as  examples  of  Quantity,  if  we  allow  ourselves  to  regard
the  real  as  whatever  fills  up  space  and  time,  it  matters  not
what.

The  mathematical  definition  of  magnitude  as  what  may  be
increased  or  diminished,  appears  at  first  sight  to  be  more  plau-
sible and  perspicuous  than  the  exposition  of  the  notion  in  the
present  section.  When  closely  examined,  however,  it  involves,
under  cover  of  presumptions  and  popular  conception,  the  same
elements  as  appear  in  the  notion  of  quantity  derived  by  the
method  of  logical  development.  In  other  words,  when  we  say
that  the  notion  of  magnitude  lies  in  the  capacity  of  being  in-
creased or  diminished,  we  state  that  magnitude  (or  more  cor-
rectly, quantity)  as  distinguished  from  quality,  is  a  characteristic
of  such  kind  that  the  characterised  thing  is  not  in  the  least
affected  by  any  change  in  it.  What  then,  it  may  be  asked,  is


160  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [99.

the  fault  which  we  have  to  find  with  this  definition  ?  It  is  that
to  increase  and  to  diminish  is  the  same  thing1  as  to  characterise
magnitude  otherwise.  If  this  aspect  then  were  an  adequate  ac-
count of  it,  quantity  would  be  described  merely  as  whatever  can
be  altered.  But  quality  is  no  less  than  quantity  open  to  altera-
tion ;  and  the  distinction  we  have  given  between  quantity  and
quality  is  expressed  by  saying  increase  or  diminution :  the
meaning-  being  that,  towards  whatever  side  the  determination  of
magnitude  be  altered,  the  thing  still  remains  what  it  is.

One  remark  more.  Throughout  philosophy  we  do  not  seek
merely  for  correct,  still  less  for  pla\isible  definitions,  whose  cor-
rectness appeals  directly  and  of  itself  to  the  popular  imagination ;
we  seek  approved  or  verified  definitions,  the  content  of  which  is
not  assumed  as  given,  but  is  seen  and  known  to  be  founded  on
spontaneous  thought,  and  so  to  be  established  on  itself.  To  apply
this  to  the  present  case.  However  correct  and  self-evident  the
definition  of  quantity  usual  in  Mathematics  may  be,  it  will  still
fail  to  satisfy  the  wish  to  see  how  far  this  particular  thought
is  founded  in  universal  thought,  and  in  that  way  necessary.
This  difficulty,  however,  is  not  the  only  one.  If  quantity  is  not
derived  from  the  action  of  thought,  but  taken  uncritically  from
our  generalised  image  of  it,  we  are  liable  to  exaggerate  the  range
of  its  validity,  or  even  to  raise  it  to  the  height  of  an  absolute
category.  And  that  such  a  danger  is  real,  we  see  when  the
title  of  exact  science  is  restricted  to  those  sciences  the  subject-
matter  of  which  can  be  submitted  to  a  mathematical  calculation.
Here  we  have  another  trace  of  the  bad  metaphysics  (mentioned
in  §  98,  note)  which  displace  the  concrete  idea  to  make  room  for
partial  and  inadequate  categories  of  understanding.  Science
would  be  in  a  very  awkward  predicament  if  such  objects  as  free-
dom, the  moral  law,  goodness,  or  even  God  himself,  because  they
cannot  be  measured  and  calculated,  or  expressed  in  a  mathemati-
cal formula,  are  to  be  reckoned  beyond  the  reach  of  exact  know-
ledge :  or  if  we  are  forced  to  put  up  with  a  vague  generalised
image  of  them,  leaving  the  more  exact  and  particular  facts  to
the  pleasure  of  each  individual,  to  make  out  of  them  what  he
will.  The  pernicious  consequences,  to  which  such  a  theory  gives
rise  in  practice,  are  at  once  evident.  And  this  mere  mathema-
tical view,  which  identifies  with  the  Idea  one  of  its  special  stages,
viz.  quantity,  is  no  other  than  the  doctrine  of  Materialism.
Witness  the  history  of  the  scientific  modes  of  thought^,  especially
in  France  since  the  middle  of  last  century.  And  the  abstract-
ness  of  Matter  just  means,  that  in  it  form  may  no  doubt  be
found,  but  only  as  an  indifferent  and  external  attribute.

The  present  discussion  would  be  utterly  misconceived  if  it  were
supposed  to  disparage  the  value  of  mathematics.  By  calling  the


ioo.]  T11E  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  161

quantitative  characteristic  merely  external  and  indifferent,  we
offer  no  excuse  for  indolence  and  superficiality,  nor  do  we  assert
that  quantitative  characteristics  may  be  left  to  mind  themselves,
or  at  least  require  no  very  careful  handling.  Quantity,  certainly,
is  a  stage  of  the  Idea  :  and  as  such  it  must  have  its  due,  first  as
a  logical  category,  and  then  in  the  world  of  objects,  natural  as
well  as  spiritual.  Still  even  here  we  perceive  and  distinguish  the
different  importance  attaching  to  the  category  of  quantity  in
objects  of  the  natural  and  in  objects  of  the  spiritual  world.  For
in  Nature,  where  the  form  of  the  Idea  is  to  be  other  than  itself,
and  at  the  same  time  to  be  outside  itself,  greater  importance  is  for
that  very  reason  attached  to  quantity  than  in  the  world  of  Mind,
the  world  of  free  inwardness.  No  doubt  we  regard  even  facts  of
Mind  under  a  quantitative  point  of  view ;  but  it  is  at  once  ap-
parent that  in  speaking  of  God  as  a  Trinity,  the  number  three
has  by  no  means  the  same  prominence,  as  when  we  consider
the  three  dimensions  of  space  or  the  three  sides  of  a  triangle  ; —
which  last  we  have  sufficiently  described,  when  we  say  that
it  is  a  surface  bounded  by  three  lines.  Even  inside  the
realm  of  Nature  we  find  the  same  distinction  of  greater  or  less
importance  in  the  specification  of  quantity.  In  the  inorganic
world,  Quantity  plays,  so  to  say,  a  more  prominent  part  than  in
the  organic.  Even  in  inorganic  nature  when  we  distinguish
mechanical  functions  from  what  are  called  chemical,  and  in  the
narrower  sense,  physical,  there  is  the  same  difference.  Mechanics,
as  every  one  knows,  is  of  all  branches  of  science  that  in  which
the  aid  of  mathematics  can  be  least  dispensed  with,  where  in-
deed we  cannot  take  one  step  without  them.  On  that  account
mechanics  is  regarded  next  to  mathematics  as  the  exact  science
par  excellence ;  which  leads  us  to  repeat  the  remark  about  the
coincidence  of  the  materialist  with  the  exclusively  mathematical
point  of  view.  After  all  that  has  been  said,  we  cannot  but  hold
it,  in  the  interest  of  exact  and  thorough  knowledge,  one  of  the
most  hurtful  prejudices,  when  all  distinction  and  determinate-
ness  of  the  objects  of  knowledge  is  sought  for  merely  in
quantitative  differences.  Mind  to  be  sure  is  more  than  Nature
and  the  animal  is  more  than  the  plant :  but  we  know  very
little  of  these  objects  and  the  distinction  between  them,  if  a
more  and  less  is  enough  for  us,  and  if  we  do  not  proceed  to
comprehend  them  in  their  peculiar,  that  is  their  qualitative
character.

100.]  Quantity,  as  we  saw,  has  two  sources :  the  exclusive
unit,  and  the  identification  or  equalisation  of  these  units.  In
the  first  instance,  therefore,  when  we  look  at  its  immediate  con-
nexion with  self,  or  at  the  characteristic  of  self-sameness  made


162  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [100.

explicit  by  attraction,  quantity  is  Continuous  magnitude;  but
when  we  look  at  the  other  characteristic,  '  the  One '  implied
in  it,  it  is  Discrete  mag-nit ude.  Still  continuous  quantity  has
also  a  certain  discreteness,  being  but  a  continuity  of  the  Many  :
and  discrete  quantity  is  no  less  continuous,  its  continuity  being
the  One  or  Unit,  that  is,  the  self-same  point  of  the  many
Ones.

(1)  Continuous  and  Discrete  magnitude,  therefore,  must  not
be  supposed  two  species  of  magnitude,  as  if  the  characteristic
of  the  one  did  not  attach  to  the  other.  The  only  distinction
between  them  is  that  the  same  whole  of  quantity  is  at  one
time  explicitly  put  under  the  one,  at  another  under  the  other
of  its  characteristics.  (2)  The  Antinomy  of  space,  of  time,  or  of
matter,  which  deals  with  the  point  of  their  being  divisible  for
or  of  consisting  of  indivisible  units,  just  means  that  we
maintain  quantity  as  at  one  time  Discrete,  at  another  Continuous.
If  we  explicitly  specify  time,  space,  or  matter  as  Continuous
quantity  alone,  they  are  divisible  ad  infinitum.  When,  on  the
contrary,  they  are  invested  with  the  attribute  of  Discrete  quan-
tity, they  are  potentially  divided  already,  and  consist  of  indi-
visible units.  The  one  view  is  as  inadequate  as  the  other.

Quantity,  as  the  proximate  result  of  Being-for-self,  involves
the  two  sides  in  the  process  of  the  latter,  attraction  and  re-
pulsion, as  constitutive  elements  of  its  own  idea.  It  is  con-
\~~s  sequently  Continuous  as  well  as  Discrete.  Each  of  these  two
elements  involves  the  other  also,  and  hence  there  is  no  such
thing  as  a  merely  Continuous  or  a  merely  Discrete  quantity.
We  may  speak  of  the  two  as  two  particular  and  opposite
species  of  magnitude ;  but  that  is  merely  the  result  of  our
abstracting  reflection,  which  in  viewing  definite  magnitudes
waives  now  the  one,  now  the  other,  of  the  elements  contained
in  inseparable  unity  in  the  notion  of  quantity.  Thus,  it  may  be
said,  the  space  occupied  by  this  room  is  a  continuous  magnitude,
and  the  hundred  men,  assembled  in  it,  form  a  discrete  magni-
tude. And  yet  the  space  is  continuous  and  discrete  at  the  same
time  ;  and  in  this  sense  we  speak  of  points  of  space,  or  we  divide
space,  a  certain  length,  into  so  many  feet,  inches,  &c.,  which  can
be  done  only  on  the  hypothesis  that  space  is  potentially  discrete.
Similarly,  on  the  other  hand,  the  discrete  magnitude,  made  up
of  a  hundred  men,  is  also  continuous :  and  the  circumstance  on


i or,  102.]  THE DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  163

which  this  continuity  depends,  is  the  common  element,  the
species  man,  which  goes  through  all  the  individuals  and  unites
them  with  each  other.


(b] Quantum  (How  Much}.

101.] Quantity,  when  the  exclusionist  character  which  it  in- ^^
volves  is  explicitly  attached  to  its  essence,  is  a  Quantum  (or
How  Much) :  i.  e.  limited  quantity.

Quantum  is,  as  it  were,  the  then-and-there,  the  determinate
Being,  of  quantity :  whereas  mere  quantity  corresponds  to  ab-
stract Being,  and  the  Degree,  which  is  afterwards  to  be  con-
sidered, corresponds  to  Being-for-self.  As  for  the  details  of  the
advance  from  mere  quantity  to  quantum,  it  is  founded  on  this :
that  whilst  in  mere  quantity  the  distinction,  as  a  distinction  of
continuity  and  discreteness,  is  at  first  found  only  implicitly,  in
quantum  the  distinction  is  represented  as  actually  made,  so  that
quantity  in  general  now  appears  as  distinguished  or  limited.
But  in  this  way  the  quantum  breaks  up  at  the  same  time  into
an  indefinite  multitude  of  Quanta,  or  definite  magnitudes.  Each
of  these  definite  magnitudes,  as  distinguished  from  the  others,
forms  a  unity,  while  on  the  other  hand,  viewed  on  its  own
account,  it  is  a  many.  And  thus  the  quantum  is  described  as
Number.

102.J  Number  exhibits  the  development  and  perfect  cha-
racter of  the  Quantum.  Like  the  One,  the  medium  in  which  it
exists,  Number  involves  two  qualitative  factors  or  functions ;
Annumeration  or  Sum,  which  depends  on  the  discrete  influence,
and  Unity,  which  depends  on  continuity.

In  arithmetic  the  various  kinds  of  calculation  are  usually
represented  as  the  methods,  in  which,  as  it  happens,  numbers
are  treated.  If  necessity  and  meaning  is  to  be  found  in  these
operations,  it  must  be  by  a  principle :  and  that  must  come
from  the  characteristic  elements  in  the  notion  of  number
itself.  (This  principle  must  here  be  briefly  exhibited).  These
characteristic  elements  are  Annumeration  or  aggregation  on
the  one  hand,  and  Unity  on  the  other,  which  together  consti-
tute number.  Now  Unity,  when  applied  to  empirical  numbers,
means  the  equality  of  these  numbers :  hence  the  principle  of

M  2


164  THE DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [102.

arithmetical  operations  must  be  to  put  numbers  in  the  relation
of  Unity  and  Sum  (or  amount),  and  to  elicit  the  equality  of  these
two  functions.

The  Ones  or  the  numbers  themselves  are  indifferent  towards
each  other,  and  hence  the  unity  into  which  they  are  translated
by  the  arithmetical  operation  takes  the  aspect  of  an  external
colligation.  To  count  is  therefore  to  tell  number  on  to  number :
and  the  difference  between  the  kinds  of  counting  lies  only  in  the
qualitative  constitution  of  the  numbers  which  are  told  together.
The  principle  for  this  constitution  is  given  by  the  respective  func-
tions of  Unity  and  Aggregation.

Numeration  comes  first :  what  we  may  call,  making  number ;
a  colligation  of  as  many  Ones  as  we  please.  But  for  a  species  of
calculation,  it  is  necessary  that  we  number  together  what  are
numbers  already,  and  no  longer  bare  Ones.

Numbers  naturally  and  at  first  are  quite  vaguely  numbers  in
general,  and  on  that  account  are  unequal.  The  colligation,  or
telling  the  tale  of  these,  is  Addition.  „

The  second  circumstance  about  numbers  is  that  they  are  equal,
so  that  they  make  one  unity ;  of  such  there  is  a  Sum  or  amount
before  us.  To  tell  the  tale  of  these  is  Multiplication.  It  makes
no  matter  in  the  process,  how  the  functions  of  Sum  and  Unity
are  distributed  between  the  two  numbers,  or  factors  of  the  pro-
duct ;  either  may  be  Sum  and  either  may  be  Unity.

The  third  and  final  circumstance  is  the  equality  of  Sum
(amount)  and  Unity.  To  number  together  numbers  when  so
characterised  is  Involution;  and  in  the  first  instance  raising
them  to  the  Square  Power.  To  raise  the  number  to  a  higher
power,  means  in  point  of  form  the  continuation  of  the  multipli-
cation of  a  number  with  itself  on  to  an  indefinite  amount  of
times. — Since  this  third  type  of  calculation  exhibits  the  com-
plete equality  of  the  only  existing  distinction  in  number,  viz.  the
distinction  between  Sum  or  aggregate  and  Unity,  there  can  be
no  more  than  these  three  modes  of  calculation.  Corresponding
to  the  con-numeration  we  have  the  dissolution  of  numbers
according  to  the  same  features.  Hence  besides  the  three  species


io3.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  165

mentioned,  which  may  to  that  extent  be  called  positive,  there  are
three  negative  species  of  calculation.

Number  may  be  said  to  be  the  quantum  in  its  complete  spe-
cialisation. Hence  we  may  employ  it  not  only  to  determine
what  we  call  discrete,  but  what  are  called  continuous  magnitudes
as  well.  For  that  reason  even  geometry  must  have  reference  to
number,  when  it  is  required  to  state  definite  figurations  of  space
and  their  relations.

(c)  Degree.

103-] The  limit  is  identical  with  the  whole  of  the  quantum
itself. As  complex  in  itself,  the  limit  is  Extensive  magnitude ; > l
as  in  itself  simple  determinateness,  it  is  Intensive  magnitude  or
Degree.

The  distinction  between  Continuous  and  Discrete  magnitude
differs  from  that  between  Extensive  and  Intensive  in  the  circum-
stance, that  the  former  refer  to  quantity  in  general,  while  the
latter  refer  to  the  limit  or  determinateness  of  it  as  such.  Inten-
sive and  Extensive  magnitude  are  not,  any  more  than  the  other,
two  species,  of  which  the  one  might  have  a  character  not  pos-
sessed by  the  other :  what  is  Extensive  magnitude  is  just  as  much
Intensive,  and  vice  versa.

Intensive  magnitude  or  Degree  is  in  its  notion  distinct  from
Extensive  magnitude  or  the  Quantum.  It  is  therefore  inad-
missible to  act,  as  many  do,  who  refuse  to  recognise  this  dis-
tinction, and  without  scruple  identify  the  two  forms  of  magni-
tude. They  are  identified  in  physics,  when  the  difference  of
specific  gravity  is  explained  by  saying,  that  a  body  of  which
the  specific  gravity  is  twice  that  of  another  contains  within  the
same  space  twice  as  many  material  parts  or  atoms  as  the  other.
So  with  heat  and  light,  if  the  various  degrees  of  temperature
and  brilliancy  were  to  be  explained  by  the  greater  or  less
number  of  particles  or  molecules  of  heat  and  light.  No  doubt
the  physicists,  who  employ  such  a  mode  of  explanation,  usually
excuse  themselves,  when  they  are  remonstrated  with  on  its  un-
tenableness,  by  saying  that  it  decides  nothing  regarding  the  con-
fessedly unknowable  essence  of  such  phenomena,  and  that  they
employ  the  expressions  in  question  merely  for  the  sake  of
greater  convenience.  This  greater  convenience  is  meant  to  point
to  the  easier  application  of  the  calculus :  but  it  is  hard  to  see


166  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [103.

why  Intensive  magnitudes,  having-,  as  they  do,  a  definite  nume-
rical expression  of  their  own,  should  not  fit  in  with  calculation
as  well  as  Extensive  magnitudes.  If  convenience  is  all  that  is
desired,  surely  it  would  be  more  convenient  to  shake  off  calcu-
lation and  thought  altogether.  Another  argument  against  the
apology  offered  by  the  physicists  is,  that,  by  meddling  with
explanations  of  this  kind,  we  overstep  the  sphere  of  perception
and  experience,  and  resort  to  a  region  of  metaphysics  and  specu-
lation, which  at  other  times  would  be  called  idle  or  even  pernicious.
It  is  certainly  a  fact  of  experience  that,  if  one  of  two  purses  filled
with  shillings  is  twice  as  heavy  as  the  other,  the  reason  of  it
must  be,  that  the  one  contains,  say  two  hundred,  and  the  other
only  one  hundred  shillings.  These  pieces  of  money  we  can  see
and  feel  with  our  senses :  atoms,  molecules,  and  the  like,  are  on
the  contrary  beyond  the  range  of  sensuous  perception ;  and
thought  alone  can  decide  whether  they  are  admissible,  and  have
a  meaning.  But  (as  already  noticed  in  §  98,  note)  it  is  the
abstract  understanding  which  fixes  the  factor  or  element  of  the
Many  (involved  in  the  notion  of  Being-for-self )  in  the  shape  of
atoms,  and  adopts  it  as  an  ultimate  principle.  It  is  the  same
abstract  understanding  which,  in  the  present  instance,  at  equal
variance  with  unprejudiced  perception  and  with  real  concrete
thought,  regards  Extensive  magnitude  as  the  sole  form  of  quan-
tity, and  where  Intensive  magnitudes  occur,  does  not  recognise
them  in  their  own  character,  but  makes  a  violent  attempt  by  a
wholly  untenable  hypothesis  to  reduce  them  to  Extensive  magni-
tudes. Among  the  charges  made  against  modern  philosophy,
one  is  heard  more  than  another.  Modern  philosophy,  it  is  said,
reduces  everything  to  identity,  and  hence  its  nickname,  the  Philo-
sophy of  Identity.  Bjit  the  present  discussion  may  teach  us,
that  it  is  philosophy,  and  philosophy  alone,  that  leads  us  to
distinguish  what  is  distinct  in  notion  as  well  as  in  experience ;
while  the  professed  devotees  of  experience  are  the  people  who
erect  abstract  identity  into  the  chief  principle  of  knowledge.  It
is  their  philosophy,  which  might  more  appropriately  be  termed
one  of  identity.  Besides  it  is  quite  correct  that  there  are  no
merely  Extensive  and  merely  Intensive  magnitudes,  just  as  little
as  there  are  merely  continuous  and  merely  discrete  magnitudes.
The  two  characteristics  of  quantity  are  not  opposed  as  independent
kinds.  Every  Intensive  magnitude  is  also  Extensive,  and  vice
versa.  Thus  a  certain  degree  of  temperature  is  an  Intensive
magnitude,  which  has  a  perfectly  simple  sensation  corresponding
to  it  as  such.  If  we  look  at  a  thermometer,  we  find  this  degree
of  temperature  has  a  certain  extension  of  the  column  of  mercury
corresponding  to  it ;  which  Extensive  magnitude  changes  simul-
taneously with  the  temperature  or  Intensive  magnitude.  The


ic4.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  167

case  is  similar  in  the  world  of  mind :  a  more  intensive  character
has  a  wider  range  with  its  effects  than  a  less  intensive.

104.]  What  we  have  in  Degree  is  the  explicit  statement
of  the  notion  of  quantum.  It  is  magnitude  as  indifferent  on
its  own  account  and  simple :  but  in  such  a  way  that  the
character,  which  makes  it  a  quantum,  lies  quite  outside  it  in
other  magnitudes.  In  this  contradiction,  where  the  indifferent
limit  which  is-for-self  is  absolute  externality,  we  have  the
Infinite  Quantitative  Progression  explicitly  stated — an  im-
mediacy which  immediately  changes  into  its  counterpart,  into
mediation  (the  passing  beyond  and  over  the  quantum  just  laid
down),  and  vice  versa.

Number  is  a  thought,  but  thought  which  is  a  Being  com-
pletely external  to  itself.  Because  it  is  a  thought,  it  does  not
belong  to  perception  :  but  it  is  a  thought  which  is  characterised  "
by  the  externality  of  perception. — Not  only  therefore  may  the
quantum  be  increased  or  diminished  without  end :  the  very
notion  of  quantum  makes  it  this  pushing  out  and  out  beyond
itself.  The  infinite  quantitative  progression  is  only  the  mean-
ingless repetition  of  one  and  the  same  contradiction,  which  is
seen  in  the  quantum,  both  generally,  and  when  explicitly  in-
vested with  its  special  character,  in  the  degree.  Touching  the
superfluity,  which  enunciates  this  contradiction  in  the  form  of
inh'nite  progression,  Zeno,  as  quoted  by  Aristotle,  rightly  says,
'  It  is  the  same  to  say  a  thing  once,  and  to  say  it  for  ever.'

(1)  If  we  follow  the  usual  definition  of  the  mathematicians,
given  in  §  99,  and  say  that  magnitude  is  what  can  be  increased
or  diminished,  there  may  be  nothing  to  urge  against  the  correct-
ness of  the  perception  on  which  it  is  founded,  but  the  question
remains,  how  we  come  to  assume  such  a  capacity  of  increase  or
diminution.  If  we  appeal  for  an  answer  to  experience,  we  try
an  unsatisfactory  course,  and  that  for  two  reasons.  In  the  first
place  we  should  merely  have  a  generalised  or  material  image  of
magnitude,  and  not  the  true  notion.  But,  secondly,  magnitude  *\
would  look  as  if  it  were  a  bare  possibility  of  increasing  or°^
diminishing.  And  we  should  have  no  insight  into  the  necessity
for  its  exhibiting  this  behaviour.  In  the  way  of  our  logical
evolution,  on  the  contrary,  quantity  is  obviously  a  grade  in  the


168  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  BEING.  [104.

process  of  thought  which  produces  its  own  types  or  specific
forms ;  and  it  has  been  shown  that  it  lies  in  the  very  notion  of
quantity  to  shoot  out  beyond  itself.  In  that  way,  the  increase
or  diminution  of  which  we  have  heard,  is  not  merely  possible,
but  necessary.

(2)  The  quantitative  infinite  progression  is  what  the  reflective
understanding  relies  upon  most  strongly,  when  it  is  engaged
with  the  general  question  of  Infinity.  The  same  thing  however
holds  good  of  this  progression,  as  was  already  remarked  on  the
occasion  of  the  qualitatively  infinite  progression.  As  we  then
said,  it  is  not  the  expression  of  a  true,  but  of  a  wrong  infinity,
which  is  never  more  than  a  bare  '  ought,'  and  thus  really  remains
within  the  limits  of  finitude.  The  quantitative  form  of  this  infi-
nite progression,  which  Spinoza  rightly  calls  a  mere  imaginary
infinity  (infinitum  imaginationis),  is  a  sensuous  conception  often
employed  by  poets,  such  as  Haller  and  Klopstock,  to  envisage
the  infinity,  not  of  Nature  merely,  but  even  of  God  himself.
Thus  we  find  Haller,  in  a  famous  description  of  God's  infinity,
saying :

3cfy  tyciufe  ungetyeure  Sateen,

©efctrge  SJHflionen  auf,

3d)  fefce  3«t  auf  3*it

Unb  OBelt  auf  SBelt  ju  £auf,

Unb  reenn  irtj  i?on  ber  graitfen  <§ot/

2J?tt  (Scfyiwnbel  nrieber  nacfy  £>ir  fety:

3ft  afle  2«ad?t  ber  3af)l,

93ermef)rt  ju  Xaufenbmal,

0loc^  nicfyt  etn  Sfjeil  son  2>ir.

[I  heap  up  monstrous  numbers,  mountains  of  millions  ;  I  add  time
on  to  time,  and  world  on  the  top  of  world ;  and  when  I  turn  from  the
awful  height  and  cast  a  dizzy  look  towards  Thee,  all  the  power  of
number,  increased  a  thousand  times,  is  not  yet  one  part  of  Thee.]

Here  then  we  meet,  in  the  first  place,  that  continual  expansion
of  quantity,  and  especially  of  number,  beyond  itself,  which  Kant
describes  as  awful.  The  only  really  awful  thing  about  it  is  the
awful  wearisomeness  of  ever  fixing,  and  anon  unfixing  a  limit,
without  advancing  a  single  step.  The  same  poet  however  well
adds  to  that  description  of  false  infinity  the  closing  line :

3d)  jtel)  fie  06,  unb  £>u  liegji  ganj  »or  mtr.
[These  I  remove,  and  Thou  liest  all  before  me.]

Which  means,  that  the  true  infinite  is  more  than  a  mere  world
beyond  the  finite,  and  that  we,  in  order  to  become  conscious  of
it,  must  relinquish  that  progressus  in  injinilum.


1 04-]  THE DOCTRINE  OF  BEING.  1G9

(3)  Pythagoras,  as  is  well  known,  philosophised  in  numbers,
and  conceived  number  to  be  the  main  characteristic  of  things.
To  the  ordinary  mind  this  view  must  at  first  sight  appear  a
crazy  paradox.  "What,  then,  are  we  to  think  of  it?  To  answer
this  question,  we  must,  in  the  first  place,  remember  that  the  pro-
blem of  philosophy  consists  in  tracing  back  things  to  thoughts,
and,  more  than  that,  to  definite  and  special  thoughts.  Now,
number  is  undoubtedly  a  thought :  it  is  the  thought  nearest  the
sensible,  or,  more  precisely  expressed,  it  is  the  thought  of  the
sensible  itself,  if  we  take  the  sensible  to  mean  what  is  many,
and  in  reciprocal  exclusion.  The  attempt  to  apprehend  the  uni-
verse as  number  is  therefore  the  first  step  to  metaphysics.  In
the  history  of  philosophy,  Pythagoras,  as  we  know,  is  placed
between  the  Tonic  and  the  Eleatic  philosophers.  While  the
former,  as  Aristotle  says,  never  get  beyond  viewing  the  essence
of  things  as  a  material  v'Arj,  and  the  latter,  especially  Parmenides,
advanced  as  far  as  pure  thought,  in  the  shape  of  Being,  the  prin-
ciple of  the  Pythagorean  philosophy  forms,  as  it  were,  the  bridge
from  the  sensible  to  the  super-sensible.  We  may  gather  from
this,  what  is  to  be  said  of  those,  who  suppose  that  Pythagoras
undoubtedly  went  too  far,  when  he  apprehended  the  essence  of
things  as  number.  It  is  true,  they  admit,  that  we  can  number
things;  but,  they  contend,  things  are  far  more  than  mere  num-
bers. But  in  what  respect  are  they  more  ?  The  ordinary  sen-
suous consciousness,  from  its  own  point  of  view,  would  not
hesitate  to  answer  the  question  by  handing  us  over  to  sensuous
perception,  and  adding,  that  things  are  not  merely  numerable,
but  also  visible,  odorous,  palpable,  &c.  In  the  language  of
modern  times  the  fault  of  Pythagoras  would  be  described  as
an  excess  of  idealism.  As  may  be  gathered  from  what  has  been
said  on  the  historical  position  of  the  Pythagorean  school,  the.
real  state  of  the  case  is  quite  the  reverse.  Let  it  be  conceded  /
that  things  are  more  than  numbers;  but  the  meaning  of  that  |
admission  must  b«  that  the  bare  thought  of  number  is  still  j
insufficient  to  enunciate  the  definite  notion  or  essence  of  things.  ;
Instead,  then,  of  saying  that  Pythagoras  went  too  far  with  his
philosophy  of  number,  it  would  be  nearer  the  truth  to  say  that
he  did  not  go  far  enough ;  and  in  fact  the  Eleatics  were  the  first
to  make  the  further  step  to  pure  thought.

Besides,  even  if  there  are  not  things,  there  are  states  of  certain
things,  and,  generally  speaking,  certain  phenomena  of  nature,  the
character  of  which  mainly  rests  on  definite  numbers  and  relations
of  number.  This  is  especially  the  case  with  the  difference  of
tones  and  their  harmonic  concord,  which,  .according  to  the  com-
mon tradition,  first  suggested  to  Pythagoras  to  conceive  the
essence  of  things  as  number.  Though  it  is  unquestionably


170  THE  DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [105.

important  to  science  to  trace  back  these  phenomena,  of  which
definite  numbers  form  the  basis,  to  their  numbers,  it  is
wholly  inadmissible  to  view  the  character  and  special  function
of  thought  as  a  whole,  as  merely  numerical.  We  may  certainly
feel  ourselves  prompted  to  associate  the  most  general  character-
istics of  thought  with  the  first  numbers  :  saying,  I  is  the  simple
and  immediate ;  2  is  difference  and  mediation ;  and  3  the  unity
of  both  of  these.  Such  associations  however  are  purely  external :
and  there  is  nothing  in  the  mere  numbers  in  question  which
would  make  them  express  these  definite  thoughts.  The  further
we  go  in  this  method,  the  more  caprice  is  shown  in  associating
definite  numbers  with  definite  thoughts.  Thus,  we  may  view
4  as  the  unity  of  I  and  3,  and  of  the  thoughts  associated  with
them,  but  4  is  just  as  much  the  double  of  2  :  similarly  9  is  not
merely  the  square  of  3,  but  also  the  sum  of  8  and  I,  of  7  and  2,
and  so  on.  The  importance  which  some  secret  societies  of  modern
times  attach  to  all  sorts  of  numbers  and  figures,  is  to  some  extent
an  innocent  amusement,  but  it  is  also  a  sign  of  awkwardness  in
thought.  These  numbers,  it  is  said,  conceal  a  profound  mean-
ing, and  they  may  lead  you  to  think  a  great  deal.  But  the  point
in  philosophy  is,  not  what  you  may  think,  but  what  you  do  think  :
and  the  genuine  air  of  thought  is  to  be  sought  in  thought  itself,
and  not  in  symbols  arbitrarily  chosen.

105.]  The  fact  that  the  Quantum  is  external  to  itself  in
its  independent  character  or  determinant,  is  what  constitutes
its  quality.  In  that  externality  it  is  itself  and  referred  con-
nectively  to  itself.  It  is  a  union  of  externality,  which  is  the
quantitative,  and  of  independent  Being  (Being-for-self),  which
is  the  qualitative  part  in  it.  The  Quantum  when  thus  ex-
plicitly stated  in  its  own  self,  is  the  Quantitative  Relation.
This  is  a  specific  character,  which  while  it.  is  an  immediate
quantum,  viz.  the  exponent,  is  also  mediation,  viz.  the  reference
of  some  one  quantum  to  another.  These  Quanta  are  the  two
sides  of  the  ratio  or  relation.  They  are  not  reckoned  at  their
immediate  value.  Their  value  is  only  in  this  connexion.

The  quantitative  infinite  progression  appears  at  first  as  a
continual  out-going  of  number  beyond  itself.  On  looking
closer,  it  is,  however,  apparent  that  in  this  progression  quantity
returns  to  itself:  for  the  meaning  of  this  progression,  so  far
as  thought  goes,  is  the  fact  that  number  is  determined  by
number.  And  this  is  the  quantitative  relation.  Take,  for


io6.]  THE DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  171

example,  the  ratio  i :  4.  Here  we  have  two  magnitudes  not
counted  in  their  immediacy  as  such,  and  which  we  are  only
concerned  with  in  so  far  as  they  bear  upon  one  another.  This
reference  of  the  two  terms,  which  is  stated  in  the  exponent
of  the  ratio,  is  itself  a  magnitude,  distinguished  from  the
magnitudes  compared  by  this,  that  a  change  in  them  is  followed
by  a  change  of  the  ratio,  whereas  the  ratio  is  unaffected  by
the  change  of  both  its  sides,  and  remains  the  same  so  long
as  the  exponent  is  not  changed.  Consequently,  in  place  of
2:4,  we  can  put  3:6  without  changing  the  ratio;  as  the
exponent  2  remains  the  same  in  both  cases.

106-]  The  two  sides  of  the  ratio  are  still  immediate  quanta  :
and  the  qualitative  and  quantitative  characteristic  still  external
to  one  another.  But  in  their  truth,  seeing  that  the  quanti-
tative itself  is  a  connexion  with  self  in  its  externality,  or
seeing  that  the  independence  and  the  indifference  of  the
character  are  combined,  we  have  Measure.

Thus  by  means  of  the  dialectical  movement  which  has  now  \
been  discussed,  the  movement  of  quantity  through  its  several
stages,  quantity  turns  out  to  be  a  return  to  quality.  The
first  notion  of  quantity  presented  to  us  was  that  of  quality
abrogated  and  absorbed.  That  is  to  say,  quantity  seemed  an
external  character  not  identical  with  Being,  to  which  it  is
quite  immaterial.  This  notion,  as  we  have  seen,  underlies  the
mathematical  definition  of  magnitude,  as  what  can 'be  increased
or  diminished.  At  first  sight  this  definition  may  encourage
a  belief  that  quantity  is  merely  whatever  can  be  altered : —
increase  and  diminution  alike  implying  determination  of  mag-
nitude otherwise — and  may  tend  to  confuse  it  with  determinate
Being,  the  second  stage  of  quality,  which  in  its  notion  is
similarly  conceived  as  alterable.  We  can,  however,  complete
the  definition  by  adding,  that  in  quantity  we  have  something
which  alters,  but  which  in  spite  of  its  changes  still  remains
the  same.  The  notion  of  quantity,  as  it  thus  turns  out,  implies
an  inherent  contradiction.  This  contradiction  is  what  forms
the  dialectic  of  quantity.  The  result  of  the  dialectic  however
is  not  a  mere  return  to  quality,  as  if  that  were  the  true  and
quantity  the  false  notion,  but  an  advance  to  the  unity  and
truth  of  both,  to  qualitative  quantity,  or  Measure.

It  may  be  well  here  to  draw  attention  to  the  circumstance,
that  if  we  employ  quantitative  terms  in  our  observation  of
the  world  of  objects,  it  is  in  all  cases  the  Measure  which  we
have  in  view,  as  the  goal  of  our  operations.  This  is  hinted


172  THE DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [107.

at  even  in  language,  when  the  ascertainment  of  quantitative
features  and  relations  is  called  measuring.  We  measure  the
length  of  different  chords  that  have  been  put  into  a  state  of
vibration,  with  an  eye  to  the  qualitative  difference  of  the
tones  caused  by  their  vibration,  corresponding  to  this  difference
of  length.  Similarly,  in  chemistry,  we  try  to  ascertain  the
quantity  of  the  matters  that  are  brought  into  combination,  in
order  to  find  out  the  measures  or  proportions  conditioning  such
combinations,  that  is  to  say,  those  quantities  which  give  rise
to  definite  qualities.  In  statistics,  too,  the  numbers  with  which
the  study  is  engaged  are  important  only  from  the  qualitative
results  conditioned  by  them.  Mere  collection  of  numerical
facts,  prosecuted  without  regard  to  the  ends  here  noted,  is  justly
called  an  exercise  of  idle  curiosity,  and  subserves  neither  a
theoretical  nor  a  practical  interest.


C. — MEASURE.

107-]  Measure  is  the  qualitative  quantum,  in  the  first  place
as  immediate, — a  quantum,  to  which  a  determinate  being  or  a
quality  is  attached.

Measure,  where  quality  and  quantity  are  in  one,  is  thus
the  completion  of  Being.  Being,  as  we  first  apprehend  it,  is
something  utterly  abstract  and  characterless :  but  it  is  the  very
essence  of  Being  to  characterise  itself,  and  its  complete  cha-
racterisation is  reached  in  the  Measure.  Measure,  like  the  other
stages  of  Being,  may  serve  as  a  definition  of  the  Absolute :
God,  it  has  been  said,  is  the  Measure  of  all  things.  The  per-
ception of  this  truth  is  what  gives  the  tone  to  many  of  the
Hebrew  psalms,  in  which  the  glorification  of  God  tends  in  the
main  to  show  that  He  has  appointed  to  everything  its  bound :
to  the  sea  and  the  solid  land,  to  the  rivers  and  mountains ;
and  also  to  the  various  kinds  of  animals  and  plants.  To  the
religious  sense  of  the  Greeks  the  divinity  of  measure,  especially
in  respect  of  social  morality,  was  represented  by  Nemesis.
That  conception  is  founded  upon  a  general  theory  that  all
t  human  things,  riches,  honour,  and  power,  as  well  as  joy  and
pain,  have  their  definite  measure,  the  transgression  of  which
involves  ruin  and  destruction.  In  the  world  of  objects,  too,
we  have  measure.  We  see,  in  the  first  place,  existences  in
Nature,  of  which  the  constituent  features  vitally  depend  upon
the  measure.  This  is  the  case,  for  example,  with  the  solar
system,  which  may  be  described  as  the  empire  of  free  or  un-
checked measure.  As  we  penetrate  into  the  study  of  inorganic


io8.]  THE DOCTRINE OF BEING.  173

nature,  measure  retires,  as  it  were,  into  the  background;  at
least  we  often  find  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  character-
istics showing-  an  indifference  to  each  other.  Thus  the  quality
of  a  rock  or  a  river  is  not  tied  to  any  definite  magnitude.  But
even  these  objects  when  closely  inspected  are  found  not  to  be
quite  measureless :  the  water  of  a  river,  and  the  single  con-
stituents of  a  rock,  when  chemically  analysed,  are  seen  to  be
qualities  conditioned  by  quantitative  ratios  between  the  matters
they  contain.  In  organic  nature,  however,  measure  more  de-
cidedly rises  full  into  the  view  of  immediate  perception.  The
various  kinds  of  plants  and  animals,  in  the  whole  as  well  as
in  their  parts,  have  a  certain  measure :  though  it  is  worth
noticing  that  the  more  imperfect  forms,  those  which  are  least
removed  from  inorganic  nature,  are  partly  distinguished  from
the  higher  forms  by  the  greater  vagueness  of  their  measure.
Thus  among  fossils,  we  find  some  ammonites  so  small  as  to
require  the  microscope  for  seeing  them,  and  others  as  large  as
a  cart-wheel.  The  same  vagueness  of  measure  appears  in  several
plants,  which  stand  on  a  low  level  of  organic  development,  for
instance,  in  the  case  of  ferns.

108.]  In  so  far  as  Measure  presents  quality  and  quantity
in  a  unity  which  is  immediate  only,  to  that  extent  the  distinction
between  them  presents  itself  in,  a  manner  equally  immediate.
Two  cases  are  then  possible.  Either  the  specific  quantum  or
measure  is  a  bare  quantum  and  nothing  more,  and  the  definite
being  (there-and-then)  is  capable  of  an  increase  or  a  diminution,
without  thereby  setting  Measure  completely  aside.  In  that
case  Measure  takes  the  shape  of  a  Bule.  Or  the  alteration  of
the  quantum  is  equivalent  to  an  alteration  of  the  quality.

The  identity  between  quantity  and  quality,  which  is  found
in  Measure,  is  at  first  only  implicit,  and  not  yet  explicitly
realised.  In  other  words,  these  two  categories,  which  unite
in  Measure,  claim  a  certain  independence  and  applicability  of
their  own.  On  the  one  hand  the  quantitative  features  of  the
definite  Being  may  be  altered,  without  affecting  its  quality.
On  the  other  hand,  this  increase  and  diminution,  immaterial
though  it  be,  has  its  limit,  by  exceeding  which  the  quality
suffers  change.  Thus  the  temperature  of  water  is,  in  the  first
place,  a  point  of  no  consequence  in  respect  of  its  liquidity :
still  with  the  increase  or  diminution  of  the  temperature  of  the
liquid  water,  there  comes  a  point  where  this  state  of  cohesion


174  THE DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  [108.

suffers  a  qualitative  change,  and  the  water  is  converted  into
steam  or  ice.  A  quantitative  change  takes  place,  apparently
without  any  further  or  hidden  significance :  but  there  is  some-
thing lurking  behind,  and  a  seemingly  innocent  change  of
quantity  acts  as  a  kind  of  snare,  to  catch  hold  of  the  quality.
The  antinomy  of  Measure  which  this  implies  was  envisaged
under  more  than  one  phase  among  the  Greeks.  It  was  asked,
for  example,  whether  a  single  grain  makes  a  heap  of  wheat,
or  whether  it  makes  a  bare  tail  to  tear  out  a  single  hair  from
the  horse's  tail.  At  first,  no  doubt,  looking  at  the  nature  of
quantity  as  an  indifferent  and  external  character  of  Being,  we
are  disposed  to  answer  these  questions  in  the  negative.  And
yet,  as  we  must  admit,  this  indifferent  increase  and  diminution
has  its  limit :  a  point  is  finally  reached,  where  a  single  ad-
ditional grain  makes  a  heap  of  wheat ;  and  the  bare  tail  is
produced,  if  we  continue  plucking  out  single  hairs.  These
examples  find  a  parallel  in  the  story  of  the  peasant,  who  went
on  adding  pound  after  pound  to  the  burden  of  his  cheerful  ass,
till  it  sunk  at  length  beneath  a  load  that  had  grown  unendur-
able. It  would  be  a  mistake  to  treat  these  examples  as  pedantic
fooling ;  they  really  turn  on  thoughts,  an  acquaintance  with
which  is  of  great  importance  in  the  matter  of  practice,  and
especially  of  social  morality.  Thus  in  the  matter  of  expense,
there  is  a  certain  latitude  within  which  a  more  or  less  does  not
matter ;  but  when  the  Measure,  imposed  by  the  individual  cir-
cumstances of  the  special  case,  is  exceeded  on  the  one  side  or
the  other,  the  qualitative  nature  of  Measure  (as  in  the  above
examples  of  the  different  temperature  of  water)  makes  itself
felt,  and  a  course,  which  a  moment  before  was  held  good
economy,  turns  into  avarice  or  prodigality.  The  same  principle
may  be  applied  in  political  science,  when  the  constitution  of
a  state  is  regarded  as  independent  of,  no  less  than  dependent
on,  the  extent  of  its  territory,  the  number  of  its  inhabitants,
and  other  quantitative  points  of  the  same  kind.  If  we
look  at  a  state  with  a  territory  of  ten  thousand  square  miles
and  a  population  of  four  millions,  we  should  without  hesitation
admit  that  a  few  square  miles  of  land  or  a  few  thousand  in-
habitants could  exercise  no  essential  influence  on  the  character
of  its  constitution.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  must  not  for-
get, that  by  the  continual  increase  or  diminishing  of  a  state,  we
finally  get  to  a  point  where,  apart  from  all  other  circumstances,
this  quantitative  alteration  necessarily  draws  with  it  an  alteration
in  the  qualitative  features  of  the  constitution.  The  constitution
of  a  little  Swiss  canton  does  not  suit  a  great  kingdom ;  and,
similarly,  the  constitution  of  the  Roman  republic  was  unsuitable
when  transferred  to  the  small  German  towns  of  the  Empire.


i o9- 1 1 1.]  THE DOCTRINE OF  BEING.  175

109-]  In  this  second  case,  when  a  measure  through  its
quantitative  nature  has  to  leave  its  character  of  quality  behind,
we  meet,  what  seems  at  first  an  absence  of  measure,  the
Measureless.  But  seeing  that  the  second  quantitative  re-
lation, which  in  comparison  with  the  first  is  measureless,  is
none  the  less  qualitative,  the  measureless  is  also  a  measure.
These  two  transitions,  from  quality  to  quantum,  and  back
again  to  quality,  may  be  represented  under  the  image  of  an
infinite  progression — as  the  self-abrogation  of  the  measure  in
the  measureless,  and  its  restoration.

Quantity,  as  we  have  seen,  is  not  only  capable  of  alteration,
i.  e.  of  increase  or  diminution :  it  is  naturally  and  necessarily
a  tendency  to  leave  itself  behind.  This  tendency  is  preserved
even  in  measure.  But  if  the  quantity  in  measure  extends
further  than  a  certain  limit,  the  quality  corresponding  to  it  is
also  put  in  abeyance.  This  however  is  not  a  negation  of  quality
altogether,  but  only  of  a  definite  quality,  the  place  of  which
is  at  once  occupied  by  another.  This  process  of  measure,  whiclA
appears  alternately  as  a  mere  change  in  quantity,  and  then  as  >  '
a  sudden  revulsion  of  quantity  into  quality,  may  be  envisaged
under  the  figure  of  a  line  of  no,des.  Such  a  line  we  find  in
Nature  under  a  variety  of  forms.  We  have  already  referred
to  the  qualitatively  different  states  of  the  aggregation  of  water,
as  conditioned  by  increase  and  diminution.  The  same  pheno-
menon is  presented  by  the  different  degrees  in  the  oxidation
of  metals.  Even  the  difference  of  musical  notes  may  be  regarded
as  an  example  of  what  takes  place  in  the  process  of  measure, —
the  revulsion  from  what  is  at  first  merely  quantitative  into
qualitative  alteration.

110-]  What  really  takes  place  here,  is  that  the  immediacy
which  still  attaches  to  measure  as  such,  is  set  aside.  Quality
and  quantity  are  in  the  first  place  immediate  in  it,  and  measure
is  only  their  relative  identity.  But  measure  shows  itself
absorbed  and  lost  in  the  measureless :  yet  the  measureless,
although  it  be  the  negation  of  measure,  is  itself  a  unity  of
quantity  and  quality.  Thus  in  the  measureless  the  measure
is  still  seen  to  meet  only  with  itself.

111.]  Instead  of  the  more  abstract  factors,  Being  and
Nothing,  some  and  other,  &c.,  the  Infinite,  which  is  affirmation


176  THE  DOCT1UNE OF  BEING.  [in.

as  a  negation  of  negation,  finds  its  present  factors  in  quality
and  quantity.  These  (a)  have  in  the  first  place  passed  over,
quality  into  quantity  (§  98),  and  quantity  into  quality  (§  105),
and  thus  they  both  show  that  they  are  negations.  (/3)  But  in
their  unity,  that  is,  in  measure,  they  are  originally  distinct,
and  the  one  owes  its  place  to  the  intervention  of  the  other.
And  (y)  after  the  immediacy  of  this  unity  has  turned  out  to
Le  self-annulling,  the  unity  is  explicitly  carried  out  into  what
it  implicitly  is,  into  a  simple  connexion  with  self,  which
contains  in  it  Being  and  all  its  forms  absorbed.  Being  or
immediacy,  which  by  the  negation  of  itself  is  a  mediation  with
self  and  a  reference  to  self, — Being  which  is  also  a  mediation
that  passes  away  into  reference-to-self,  or  immediacy,  is  the
Essence,  or  Permanent  Being.

The  process  of  measure,  instead  of  being  only  the  wrong
infinite  of  an  endless  progression,  in  the  shape  of  a  perpetual
recoil  from  quality  to  quantity,  and  from  quantity  to  quality,
is  also  the  true  infinity  of  coincidence  with  self  in  another.
In  measure,  quality  and  quantity  originally  confront  each  other,
like  some  and  other.  But  quality  is  implicitly  quantity,  and
conversely  quantity  is  implicitly  quality.  In  the  process  of
measure,  these  two  pass  into  each  other  :  each  of  them  becomes
what  it  already  was  implicitly :  and  thus  we  get  Being  thrown
into  obeyance  and  absorbed,  with  its  several  characteristics
denied.  Such  a  Being  is  Essence.  Measure  is  implicitly  Essence  ;
and  its  process  consists  in  carrying  out  what  it  is  implicitly. —
The  ordinary  consciousness  conceives  things  as  being,  and  con-
siders them  in  their  quality,  quantity  and  measure.  These
immediate  characteristics  soon  show  themselves  to  be  not  fixed
but  transient ;  and  Essence  is  the  result  of  their  dialectic.  In
the  sphere  of  Essence  one  category  does  not  pass  into  another,
but  refers  to  another  merely.  In  Being,  the  form  of  reference
or  connexion  is  purely  a  matter  of  our  own  reflection  :  but  it
is  the  special  and  proper  characteristic  of  Essence.  In  the
sphere  of  Being,  when  somewhat  becomes  another,  the  somewhat
has  vanished.  Not  so  in  Essence  :  here  there  is  no  real  other,  but
only  diversity,  the  reference  of  one  category  to  its  antithesis.
The  transition  of  Essence  is  therefore  at  the  same  time  no  transi-
tion :  for  in  the  passage  of  different  into  different,  the  different
does  not  vanish :  the  different  terms  remain  in  their  connexion.
When  we  speak  of  Being  and  Nought :  Being  is  independent,
so  is  Noug-ht.  The  case  is  otherwise  with  the  Positive  and  the


in.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  BEING.  177

Negative. No  doubt  these  possess  the  characteristics  of  Being
and  Nought. But  the  positive  by  itself  has  no  sense ;  its  whole
Being  is  in  reference  to  the  negative. It  is  the  same  with  the
negative. In  the  sphere  of  Being  the  reference  of  one  term  to  j
another  is only implicit; in  Essence on  the contrary it  is  /
explicitly  stated. And  this  in  general  is the  distinction be-
tween the  forms  of  Being  and  Essence : in  Being  everything
is  immediate,  in  Essence  everything  is  relative.


N


CHAPTER  VIII.
SECOND SUB-DIVISION  OF LOGIC.

THE DOCTRINE OF ESSENCE.

112.]  THE  characteristics  or  special  forms  in  the  Essence
are  relative  only  to  one  another,  and  not  yet  in  all  respects
reflected  into  self:  the  notion  therefore  at  this  stage  is  not
fully  master  of  itself,  but  is  laid  down  and  stated  by  the
action  of  thought.  The  Essence,  which  is  Being  coming  into
mediation  with  self  through  the  negativity  of  itself,  is  a  con-
nexion with  self,  only  to  the  same  extent  as  it  is  a  connexion
with  another.  That  other  however  is  not  immediately  in  Being,
but  is  derived  from,  arid  created  by,  something  else.  Being  is
not  lost  to  sight :  for,  firstly,  the  Essence  as  a  simple  reference-
to-self  is  Being;  but,  secondly,  Being,  so  far  as  concerns  the
one-sided  characteristic  by  which  it  is  immediate,  is  reduced
to  a  mere  negative,  a  show  or  seeming.  And  the  Essence
accordingly  is  Being  as  throwing  light  or  showing  in  itself.

The  Absolute  is  the  Essence.  This  is  the  same  definition
as  the  previous  one  that  the  Absolute  is  Being,  in  so  far  as
Being  is  similarly  a  simple  reference  to  self.  It  is  at  the
same  time  higher,  because  the  Essence  is  Being  that  has  gone
into  itself:  that  is  to  say,  its  simple  reference-to-self  is  this
reference  realised  as  a  negation  of  the  negative,  as  a  mediation
of  it  in  itself  with  itself. — Unfortunately  when  the  Absolute
is  defined  to  be  the  Essence,  the  negativity  which  this  implies
is  often  taken  only  to  mean  the  withdrawal  of  all  determinate


THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  179

predicates.  This  negative  action  of  withdrawal  or  abstraction
thus  falls  outside  of  the  Essence — which  is  then  presented  as
a  result  apart  from  its  premisses  and  made  the  caput  morluum
of  abstraction.  But  as  this  negativity,  instead  of  being  external
to  Being,  is  the  very  dialectic  of  Being,  the  truth  of  the  latter,
viz.  the  Essence,  will  be  as  Being  gone  into  itself  or  abiding  in
itself.  That  reflection,  or  light  thrown  into  itself,  constitutes
the  distinction  between  the  Essence  and  immediate  Being ;  and
is  the  peculiar  characteristic  of  the  Essence  itself.

Any  mention  of  the  Essence  implies  that  we  distinguish  it
from  Being:  the  latter  is  immediate  and,  compared  with  the
Essence,  we  look  upon  it. as  mere  seeming  and  sham.  But,
this  reflected  light  or  seeming  is  not  an  utter  nonentity  and
nothing  at  all,  but  Being  which  has  been  absorbed.  The  point
of  view  given  by  the  Essence  is  the  same  as  what  is  termed
reflection.  This  word  '  reflection '  is  originally  applied,  when  a
ray  of  light  in  a  straight  line  impinges  upon  the  surface  of
a  mirror,  from  which  it  is  thrown  back.  In  this  phenomenon
we  have  a  double  fact :  first,  an  immediate  which  is,  and,
secondly,  the  same  thing  as  derivative  or  statuted.  The  same
process  takes  place  when  we  reflect,  or  think  upon  an  object;
for  here  we  aim  at  knowing  the  object,  not  in  its  immediacy,
but  as  derivative  or  mediated.  The  problem  or  aim  of  philo-
sophy is  often  represented  as  the  attainment  of  a  knowledge
of  the  essence  of  things :  a  phrase  which  only  means  that
things  instead  of  being  left  in  their  immediacy,  must  be  shown
to  be  mediated  by,  or  based  upon,  something  else.  The  imme-
diate Being  of  things  is  thus  conceived  under  the  image  of  a
rind  or  curtain  behind  which  the  Essence  lies  hidden.

Everything,  it  is  said,  has  an  Essence :  that  is,  things  really
are  not  as  they  immediately  present  themselves.  There  is  some-
thing more  to  be  done  than  merely  run  about  from  one  quality
to  another,  and  merely  to  advance  from  qualitative  to  quan-
titative, and  vice  versa:  there  is  permanence  in  things,  and
that  permanence  is  in  the  first  instance  their  Essence.  On  the
other  meaning  and  uses  of  the  category  of  Essence,  we  may
note  that  in  the  German  auxiliary  verb  '  sein,'  the  past  tense
is  expressed  by  the  term  for  Essence  (Wesen) :  for  '  gewesen'  is
the  past  participle  of  the  verb.  This  irregularity  of  language  is
based  to  some  extent  on  a  correct  perception  of  the  relation
between  Being  and  the  Essence.  The  Essence  we  may  regard  as
past  Being,  remembering  that  the  past  is  not  utterly  denied,
but  only  laid  aside  and  thus  at  the  same  time  preserved.  Thus,

N  2


180  THE DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [112.

to  say,  Caesar  was  in  Gaul,  only  denies  the  immediacy  of  the
event,  but  not  his  residence  in  Gaul  altogether.  That  residence
is  just  what  forms  the  gist  or  fact  of  the  sentence,  but  that
gist  or  fact  is  represented  as  over  and  gone.  So  'Wesen'  in
ordinary  life  is  used  to  express  a  collection  or  sum  total :
Zeitungswesen  (the  Press),  Postwesen  (the  Post-Office),  Steuer-
wesen  (the  Revenue).  All  that  these  terms  mean  is  that  the
things  in  question  are  not  to  be  taken  single,  in  their  imme-
diacy, but  as  a  complex  system,  and  in  their  various  bearings
or  points  of  connexion.  This  usage  of  the  term  is  not  very
different  from  our  own.

We  also  speak  of  finite  Essences  (or  beings),  such  as  man.
But  the  very  term  Essence  implies  that  we  have  made  a  step
beyond  finitude :  and  the  title  as  applied  to  man  is  so  far  in-
exact. It  is  often  added  that  there  is  a  supreme  Essence,
(Being)  :  by  which  is  meant  God.  "On  this  two  remarks  may
be  noted.  In  the  first  place  the  phrase  'there  is'  points  to
the  finite  only :  as  when  we  say,  there  are  so  many  planets :
or,  there  are  plants  of  such  a  constitution  and  plants  of  such
an  other.  In  these  cases  we  are  speaking  of  something  which
has  other  things  beyond  and  beside  it.  But  God,  who  is  ab-
solutely infinite,  is  not  something  out  of,  and  beside  whom,
there  are  other  essences.  All  else  out  of  God,  if  separated
from  him,  possesses  no  essentiality :  in  its  isolation  it  becomes
a  mere  show  or  seeming,  without  stay  or  essence  of  its  own.
But,  secondly,  it  is  a  poor  way  of  talking  to  call  God  the
highest  or  supreme  Essence.  The  category  of  quantity  which
the  phrase  employs  has  its  proper  place  within  the  compass
of  the  finite.  When  we  call  one  mountain  the  highest  on  the
earth,  we  have  the  picture  of  other  high  mountains  besides
this  one  in  our  view.  So  too  is  it,  when  we  call  any  one  the
richest  or  most  learned  in  his  country.  But  God,  far  from
being  a  Being  or  Essence,  even  the  highest,  is  the  Being  or
Essence.  This  definition,  however,  though  as  a  conception  of
God  it  is  an  important  and  necessary  stage  in  the  growth  of
the  religious  consciousness,  does  not  by  any  means  exhaust
the  depth  of  that  generalised  image  under  which  Christianity
represents  God.  If  we  consider  God  as  the  Essence  only,  and
nothing  more,  we  know  him  only  as  the  universal  and  irre-
sistible Power ;  in  other  words,  as  the  Lord.  Now  the  fear
of  the  Lord  is,  doubtless,  the  beginning, — but  it  is  only  the
beginning,  of  wisdom.  To  look  at  God  in  this  light,  as  the
Lord  alone,  is  especially  characteristic  of  the  Jewish  and  the
Mohammedan  religions.  The  defect  of  these  religions  lies  in
neglecting  the  claims  of  the  finite,  which  it  is  the  peculiar
merit  of  the  heathen  and  (as  they  also  are)  polytheistic  religions


ii3,  "4-] THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  181

to  maintain,  either  in  the  shape  of  a  natural  object  or  as  a  finite
form  of  the  mind.  Another  not  uncommon  assertion  is  that
God,  as  the  supreme  Essence  or  Being1,  cannot  be  known.  Such
is  the  view  taken  by  modern  Illumination  and  the  abstract
understanding-,  which  is  content  to  say,  II  y  a  un  etre  supreme :
and  there  lets  the  matter  rest.  To  speak  thus,  and  treat  God
as  the  supreme  and  super-sensible  Essence,  implies  that  we  look
upon  the  world  before  us  in  its  immediacy  as  something-  fixed
and  positive,  and  forget  that  the  Essence  is  just  the  superseding
of  all  that  is  immediate.  If  God  be  the  abstract  super-sensible
Essence  or  Being  which  is  void  of  all  difference  and  all  specific
character,  He  is  only  a  bare  name,  a  mere  caput  mortuum  of
the  abstract  understanding.  The  true  knowledge  of  God  begins
when  we  know  that  things,  as  they  immediately  are,  have  no
truth.

In  reference  to  other  subjects  besides  God  the  category  of
Essence  is  often  liable  to  an  abstract  use,  by  which,  in  the
study  of  anything,  its  Essence  is  held  to  be  something  un-
affected by,  and  subsisting  in  independence  of,  the  determinate
circumstances  that  form  its  Appearance.  Thus  we  say  of  a  man,
it  may  be,  that  the  main  point  is  not  his  actions  and  behaviour,
but  solely  what  he  essentially  is.  This  is  correct,  if  it  means
that  a  man's  conduct  is  to  be  judged,  not  in  its  immediacy,
but  as  due  to  the  instrumentality  of  his  inward  part,  and  as
a  manifestation  of  that  inward  part.  Still  it  should  be  remem-
bered that  the  only  means  by  which  the  Essence  and  the  inward
part  can  be  verified,  is  their  outward  appearance ;  whereas  the
appeal  which  men  make  to  the  essential  life,  as  distinct  from
the  circumstances  of  their  conduct,  is  generally  prompted  by
a  desire  to  emphasise  their  own  subjectivity  and  an  eagerness
to  elude  the  absolute  law.


113.]  The  connexion  with  self  in  the  Essence  is  the  form
of  Identity  or  of  reflection-into-self,  which  thus  arises  to
take  the  place  of  the  immediacy  of  Being.  They  are  both
the  same  abstraction, — connexion-with-self.

The  senses,  with  their  utter  want  of  thought,  took  every-
thing limited  and  finite  for  Being.  This  passes  into  the
obstinacy  of  understanding,  which  views  the  finite  as  some-
thing identical  with  itself,  and  not  inherently  self-contradictory.

114.]  This  identity,  as  it  has  descended  from  Being,
appears  in  the  first  place  only  possessed  of  the  characteristics
of  Being,  and  connected  with  Being  as  with  something


182  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [114.

external.  This  external  Being,  if  taken  in  separation  from
the  true  Being  of  the  Essence,  is  called  the  Unessential.
But  that  turns  out  a  mistake.  Because  Essence  is  Being-
within-self,  it  is  essential,  only  to  the  extent  that  it  contains
in  itself  its  negative,  which  is  connexion  with  another,  or
mediation.  Consequently,  it  has  the  unessential  as  a  part  of
itself;  as  it  were,  its  own  show.  But  to  show  or  seem,  in
other  words,  to  mediate,  involves  distinguishing :  and  since  what
is  distinguished,  (as  distinguished  from  the  identity  out  of
which  it  arises,  and  in  which  it  is  not,  or  lies  as  a  show,)
receives  itself  the  form  of  identity,  it  is  still  in  the  mode
of  Being,  or  of  immediacy  referring  -  itself  -  to  -  itself.  The
sphere  of  Essence  thus  turns  out  to  be  a  still  imperfect
combination  of  immediacy  and  mediation.  In  it  everything
is  expressly  made  to  refer  itself-to-itself,  and  yet  so  that  one
is  forced  at  the  same  time  to  go  beyond  it.  We  have,  in
short,  a  Being  of  reflection,  a  Being  in  which  another  shows,
and  which  shows  in  another.  And  so  it  is  also  the  sphere,
in  which  the  contradiction  still  implicit  in  the  sphere  of
Being,  is  explicitly  made.

As  the  one  notion  is  the  common  substance  of  all,  there  appear
in  the  development  of  the  Essence  the  same  categories  or
terms  of  thought  as  in  the  development  of  Being,  but  in  a
reflected  form.  Instead  of  Being  and  Nought  we  have  now
the  forms  of  Positive  and  Negative;  the  former  at  first  as
Identity  corresponding  to  pure  and  uncontrasted  Being,  the
latter  developed,  (showing  in  itself)  as  Difference.  So  also,  we
have  Becoming  represented  by  the  Ground  of  determinate
Being:  which  itself,  after  being  reflected  on  the  Ground,  is
to  be  termed  Existence.

The  theory  of  the  Essence  is  the  most  difficult  branch  of
Logic.  It  includes  the  categories  of  metaphysic  and  of  the
sciences  in  general.  These  are  products  of  the  reflective  un-
derstanding, which,  while  it  assumes  the  differences  to  possess
a  footing  of  their  own,  and  at  the  same  time  also  expressly
affirms  their  relativity,  still  combines  the  two  statements,  side


H5-]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  183

by  side,  or  one  after  the  other,  by  an  '  Also,'  without  bringing
these  thoughts  into  one,  or  uniting  them  in  the  notion.

A. — ESSENCE  AS  GROUND  OF  EXISTENCE.

(a)  The  primary  characteristics  or  Categories  of  Refection.

(a)  Identity.

115-]  The  Essence  shows  in  itself;  in  other  words,  it  is
mere  reflection :  and  therefore  is  a  connexion  with  self,  not
as  immediate  but  as  reflected.  And  that  reflected  connexion
is  Identity  with  self.

This  Identity  becomes  an  Identity  in  form  only,  or  of  the
understanding,  if  it  be  held  hard  and  fast,  quite  aloof  in
abstraction  from  the  difference.  Or,  rather,  abstraction  means
the  imposition  of  this  Identity  of  form,  the  change  of  some-
thing inherently  concrete  into  this  form  of  elementary  sim-
plicity. And  this  may  be  done  in  two  ways.  On  the  one
hand,  we  may  neglect  a  part  of  the  complex  features  which
are  found  in  the  concrete  thing  (by  what  is  called  analysis)
and  select  only  one  of  them ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  neglecting
.their  variety,  we  may  concentrate  the  numerous  characters
into  one.

If  we  associate  Identity  with  the  Absolute,  making  the
Absolute  the  subject  of  a  proposition,  we  get :  The  Absolute
is  what  is  identical  with  itself.  However  true  this  proposition
may  be,  it  is  doubtful,  whether  it  be  meant  in  its  truth  :
and  therefore  it  is  at  least  imperfect  in  the  expression.  For
it  is  left  undecided,  whether  it  means  the  abstract  Identity
of  understanding, — abstract,  that  is,  because  contrasted  with
and  opposed  to  the  other  characteristics  of  Essence,  or  the
Identity  which  is  inherently  concrete.  In  the  latter  case,  as
will  be  seen,  true  Identity  is  first  discoverable  in  the  Ground,
and,  with  a  higher  truth,  in  the  Notion.  Even  the  word
Absolute  is  often  used  to  mean  no  more  than  abstract.
Absolute  space  and  absolute  time,  for  example,  is  another
way  of  saying  abstract  space  and  abstract  time.


184  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [115.

When  the  characteristics  of  the  Essence  are  taken  as  essential
characteristics,  they  become  predicates  of  a  hypothetical  subject,
which,  because  it  is  essential,  is  '  Everything.'  The  propositions
thus  arising  have  been  expounded  as  the  universal  laws  of
thought.  Thus  the  first  of  them,  the  maxim  of  Identity,  reads  :
Everything  is  identical  with  itself,  A=A:  and,  negatively,
A  cannot  at  the  same  time  be  A  and  not  A.  This  maxim,
instead  of  being  a  true  law  of  thought,  is  nothing  but  the
law  of  the  abstract  understanding.  The  form  of  the  maxim
is  virtually  self-contradictory :  for  a  proposition  always  pro-
mises a  distinction  between  subject  and  predicate ;  while  the
present  one  does  not  fulfil  what  its  form  requires.  But  it
is  particularly  set  aside  by  the  following  so-called  Laws  of
Thought,  which  make  laws  out  of  the  very  counterpart  of
this  law.  It  is  asserted  that  the  maxim  of  Identity,  though
it  cannot  be  proved,  regulates  the  consciousness  of  every  one,  and
that  experience  shows  it  to  be  accepted  as  soon  as  its  terms  are
apprehended  by  consciousness.  To  this  pretended  experience
of  the  school  may  be  opposed  the  universal  experience  that
no  mind  thinks,  or  forms  conceptions,  or  speaks,  in  accordance
with  this  law,  and  that  no  existence  of  any  kind  whatever^
conforms  to  it.  The  language  which  such  a  pretended  law
demands  (A  planet  is  a  planet ;  Magnetism  is  magnetism ;
Mind  is  mind)  is,  as  it  deserves  to  be,  called  silliness.  That  is
certainly  matter  of  general  experience.  The  logic  which  seriously
propounds  such  laws  has  long  ago  cost  the  school,  in  which
they  alone  are  valid,  the  loss  of  its  credit  with  sound  com-
mon sense  as  well  as  with  reason.

Identity  is,  in  the  first  place,  the  repetition  of  what  we  had
earlier  as  Being,  but  having  become  so  by  laying  aside  its
immediate  character.  It  is  therefore  Being  as  Ideality.  It  is
important  to  have  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  true  mean-
ing of  Identity :  and,  for  that  purpose,  we  must  especially
guard  against  viewing  it  as  abstract  Identity,  to  the  exclusion
of  all  Difference.  That  is  the  touch-stone  for  distinguishing
all  bad  philosophy  from  what  alone  deserves  the  name  of
philosophy.  Identity  in  its  trutft,  as  an  Ideality  of  what  im-


1 1 6.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  185

mediately  is,  makes  a  high  category,  in  which  to  express  our
religious  modes  of  thought  as  well  as  any  other  forms  of  our
thought  and  mental  activity.  The  true  knowledge  of  God,  it
may  be  said,  begins  when  we  know  him  as  identity, — as  abso-
lute identity.  This  is  to  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  all  the
power  and  glory  of  the  world  sinks  into  nothing  in  God's  pre-
sence, and  subsists  only  as  the  reflection  of  His  power  and  His
glory.  In  the  same  way,  Identity,  as  the  consciousness  of  self,
is  what  distinguishes  man  from  nature,  particularly  from  the
brutes,  which  never  reach  the  point  of  comprehending  themselves
as  '  I,'  that  is,  a  mere  unity  of  self  in  one's  self.  So  again,  in
connexion  with  thought,  the  main  thing  is  not  to  confuse  the
true  Identity  which  contains  Being  and  its  typical  forms  bound
.  up  indissolubly  in  it,  with  an  abstract  Identity,  and  one  of  bare
form.  All  the  charges  of  inadequacy,  hardness,  meaninglessness,
which  are  so  often  directed  against  thought  from  the  quarters  of
feeling  and  immediate  perception,  rest  on  the  erroneous  hypo-
thesis that  thought  acts  only  as  a  faculty  of  abstract  Identi-
fication. The  Formal  Logic  itself  confirms  this  presumption  by
laying  down  the  supreme  laws  of  thought  (so-called)  which
have  been  discussed  above.  If  thinking  were  no  more  than
an  abstract  Identity,  we  could  not  but  own  it  to  be  a  most
unnecessary  and  tedious  business.  No  doubt  the  notion,  and
the  idea  too,  are  identical  with  themselves :  but  identical  only
in  so  far  as  they  at  the  same  jjime  involve  distinction.

(/3) Difference.

116.]  The  Essence  is  mere  Identity  and  show  in  itself,  only
as  it  is  the  negativity  which  connects  self  with  self,  and  by  this
means  a  thrusting  of  it  away  from  itself.  It  contains  there-
fore essentially  the  characteristic  of  Difference.

Other-Being  is  here  no  longer  qualitative,  taking  the  shape
of  the  character  or  limit.  It  is  now  in  the  Essence,  which
connects  self  with  self,  jmd  thus  is  the  negation,  which  at
the  same  time  is  a  reference  of  connexion.  It  is,  in  short,
Distinction,  Relativity,  Mediation.

To  ask,  'How  Identity  comes  to  Difference?'  assumes  that
Identity  as  mere  abstract  Identity  is  something  of  itself,  and
D]tference  also  something  else  equally  independent.  This  op-
position renders  an  answer  to  the  question  impossible.  If
Identity  is  viewed  as  diverse  from  Difference,  all  that  we  o-et
in  this  way  is  but  a  Difference ;  and  hence  we  cannot  demon-


186  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [117.

strate  the  advance  to  difference,  because  the  person  who  wants
to  know  the  How  of  the  progress  has  not  the  least  sense  of
the  point  from  which  we  are  expected  to  start.  The  question
then  when  put  to  the  test  has  obviously  no  meaning;  and  its
opposer  may  be  met  with  the  question,  what  he  means  by
Identity.  In  that  way  we  should  soon  see  that  he  attaches
no  idea  to  it  at  all,  and  that  Identity  is  for  him  an  empty
name.  As  we  have  seen,  besides,  Identity  is  an  undoubted
negative;  not  however  an  abstract  empty  Nought,  but  the
'  negation  of  Being  and  its  characteristics.  Being  so,  Identity
is  at  the  same  time  a  reference  of  connexion,  and  it  is  a
negative  connexion  with  self,  in  other  words,  it  draws  a  dis-
tinction between  it  and  itself.

117-]  Difference  is,  first  of  all,  immediate  difference,  i.  e.
Diversity  or  Variety.  In  Diversity  the  different  things  are  each
individually  what  they  are,  and  unaffected  by  the  connexion
in  which  they  stand  to  each  other.  This  connective  reference
is.  therefore  external  to  them.  In  consequence  of  the  various
things  being  thus  indifferent  to  the  difference  between  them,
it  falls  outside  them  into  a  third  thing,  the  act  of  Comparison.
This  external  difference,  as  an  identity  of  the  objects  con-
nectively  referred,  is  Likeness ;  as  a  non-identity  of  them,  it
is  Unlikeness.

The  interval,  which  understanding  allows  to  exist  between
these  characteristics  of  likeness  and  unlikeness,  is  so  great,
that  although  comparison  has  one  and  the  same  substratum,
in  which  likeness  and  unlikeness  ought  to  be  distinct  sides
and  points  of  view ;  still  likeness  by  itself  is  taken  to  be  the
first  of  the  elements  alone,  viz.  identity,  and  unlikeness  by
itself  to  be  difference.

Diversity  has,  like  Identity,  been  transformed  into  a  maxim  :
'  Everything  is  various  or  different ' :  or,  '  There  are  no  two
things  completely  like  each  other.'  Here  Everything  is  put
under  a  predicate,  which  is  the  reverse  of  the  identity  attri-
buted to  it  in  the  first  maxim  ;  and  therefore  under  a  law
contradicting  the  first.  However  there  is  an  explanation.  As
variety  is  a  matter  for  the  outward  comparison  only,  anything
on  its  own  account  is  expected  and  understood  always  to  be


1 1 7.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  187

identical  with  itself,  so  that  the  second  law  need  not  interfere
with  the  first.  But,  in  that  case  variety  does  not  belong  to  the
something  or  everything  in  question :  it  constitutes  no  intrinsic
characteristic  of  the  subject:  and  the  second  maxim  on  this
showing  does  not  admit  of  being  stated  at  all.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  the  something  itself  is  as  the  maxim  says  various,  it  must
be  in  virtue  of  its  own  proper  character :  but  in  this  case  the
specific  difference,  and  not  variety  as  such,  is  what  is  intended.
And  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  maxim  of  Leibnitz.

When understanding proposes to  consider  Identity,  it  has
already  passed  beyond  it,  and  is  looking  at  Difference  in  the  shape  /
of  bare  Variety. If  we  follow  the  so-called  law  of  Identity,  and  (
say, — The  sea  is  the  sea,  The  air  is  the  air,  The  moon  is  thei
moon ; these  objects  appear  to  us  to  have  no  bearing  on  one  \
another. What  we  have  before  us  therefore  is  not  Identity,  but  i^-
Difference. We  do  not  stop  at  this  point  however,  and  regard  *
things  only  as  different  and  various. We  compare  them  one
with  another,  and  thus  discover  the  features  of  likeness and
unlikeness. The  work  of  the  finite  sciences  lies  to  a  great  extent
in  the  application  of  these  categories,  and  the  phrase  ( scientific
treatment '  generally  means  no  more  than  the  method  which  has
for  its  aim  the  comparison  of  the  objects  brought  under  examina-
tion. This method has undoubtedly  led to  some important
results; — we  may  particularly  mention  the  great advance of
modern  times  in the provinces  of  comparative anatomy  and
comparative  philology. But  it  is  going  too  far  to  suppose  that
the  comparative  method  can  be  employed  with  equal  success  in
all  the  branches  of  knowledge. Nor  can  mere  comparison  ever
ultimately  satisfy  the  requirements  of  science. Its  results  are
indeed  indispensable,  but  they  are  still  labours  preliminary  to  the
adequate  notions  of  science.

If  it  be  the  office  of  comparison  to  reduce  existing  differences
to  Identity,  the  science,  which  most  perfectly  fulfils  that  end,  is
mathematics.  The  reason  of  that  is,  that  quantitative  difference
is  the  difference  which  is  quite  external.  Thus,  in  geometry,  a
triangle  and  a  quadrangle,  figures  which  are  qualitatively  different,
have  this  qualitative  difference  discounted  by  abstraction,  and
are  made  equal  to  one  another  in  their  magnitude.  It  follows
from  what  has  been  said  about  the  mere  Identity  of  understand-
ing that,  as  has  been  pointed  out  (§  99,  note),  neither  philosophy,
nor  the  empirical  sciences,  need  envy  this  superiority  of  Mathe-
matics.

The  story  is  told  that,  when  Leibnitz  propounded  the  maxim


188  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [118.

of  Variety,  the  cavaliers  and  ladies  of  the  .court,  as  they  walked
round  the  garden,  took  the  trouble  to  look  for  two  leaves  indis-
tinguishable from  each  other,  in  order  to  confute  tbe  law  stated
by  the  philosopher.  Their  device  was  unquestionably  a  con-
venient method  of  dealing  with  metaphysics,  which  has  not  yet
ceased  to  be  fashionable.  Unfortunately,  as  regards  the  principle
of  Leibnitz,  difference  must  be  understood  to  mean  not  an  ex-
ternal and  indifferent  diversity  merely,  but  difference  in  its  own
nature.  Hence  the  very  nature  of  things  implies  that  they  must
be  different.

118.]  Likeness  is  an  Identity  only  of  those  things  which
are  not  the  same,  or  not  identical  with  each  other  :  and
Unlikeness  is  a  reference  connecting  things  unlike.  The
two  therefore  do  not  sink  into  distinct  sides  or  aspects  which
have  no  bearing  upon  each  other.  The  one,  as  it  were,  shows
or  throws  light  into  the  other.  Variety  thus  comes  to  be  a
difference  of  reflection,  or  difference  (distinction)  as  it  is  in
its  own  self,  determinate  or  specific  difference.

While  things  merely  various  show  themselves  unaffected  by
each  other,  likeness  and  unlikeness  on  the  contrary  are  a  pair  of
characteristics  which  have  in  all  respects  a  reciprocal  connexion.
The  one  of  them  cannot  be  thought  without  the  other.  This
advance  from  simple  variety  to  opposition  appears  in  our  common
acts  of  thought,  when  we  allow  that  comparison  has  a  meaning
only  upon  the  hypothesis  of  an  existing  difference,  and  that  on
the  other  hand  we  can  distinguish  only  on  the  hypothesis  of
existing  similarity.  Hence,  if  the  problem  be  the  discovery  of  a
difference,  we  attribute  no  great  cleverness  to  the  man  who  only
distinguishes  those  objects,  of  which  the  difference  is  palpably
open  to  the  day,  e.g.  a  pen  and  a  camel :  and  similarly,  it  implies  no
very  advanced  faculty  of  comparison,  when  the  objects  compared,
e.  g.  a  beech  and  an  oak,  a  temple  and  a  church,  are  near  akin.
In  the  case  of  difference,  in  short,  we  like  to  see  identity,  and  in
the  case  of  identity  we  like  to  see  difference.  Within  the  range  of
the  empirical  sciences  however,  the  one  of  these  two  categories  often
puts  the  other  out  of  sight  and  mind.  The  scientific  problem  at
one  time  is  to  reduce  existing  differences  to  an  identity  ;  on
another  occasion,  with  equal  one- sided  ness,  to  discover  new
differences.  We  see  this  in  physical  science.  There  the  problem
consists,  in  the  first  place,  in  the  continual  discovery  of  new
matters,  new  forces,  new  genera,  and  species.  Or,  in  another
direction,  it  seeks  to  show  that  all  bodies  hitherto  believed  to  be
simple  are  compound :  and  modern  physicists  and  chemists  smile


1 1 9.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  189

at  the  ancients,  who  were  satisfied  with  four  elements,  and  these
not  simple.  Secondly,  and  on  the  other  hand,  mere  identity  is
made  the  chief  question.  Thus  the  electrical  and  chemical  forces
are  regarded  as  the  same,  and  even  the  organic  processes  of
digestion  and  assimilation  are  looked  upon  as  a  mere  chemical
operation.  Modern  philosophy  has  often  been  nicknamed  the
Philosophy  of  Identity.  But,  as  was  already  remarked  (§  103,
note),  it  is  precisely  philosophy,  and  in  particular  speculative
logic,  which  lays  bare  the  nothingness  of  the  mere  identity  of
the  understanding,  when  kept  aloof  from  difference  ;  though  it
also  undoubtedly  urges  its  disciples  not  to  rest  at  mere  diversity,
but  to  ascertain  the  inner  unity  of  all  that  there  is.

119.]  Difference  implicit  or  in  itself  is  a  difference  of  the
Essence,  and  includes  both  the  Positive  and  Negative:
and  that  in  this  way.  The  Positive  is  the  identical  connexion
with  self  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  be  the  Negative,  and  the
Negative  is  the  different  by  itself  so  as  not  to  be  the  Positive.
Thus  either  is  on  its  own  account,  in  proportion  as  it  is  not
the  other.  The  one  shows  in  the  other,  and  is  only  in  so
far  as  that  other  is.  The  essential  difference  is  therefore
Opposition  ;  according  to  which  the  different  is  not  faced  by
any  other  (as  in  mere  diversity)  but  by  its  other  or  special
antithesis.  That  is,  either  of  these  two  (Positive  and  Negative)
is  stamped  with  a  characteristic  of  its  own,  only  by  being
connected  in  reference  to  the  other :  the  one  is  only  reflected
into  itself,  as  it  is  reflected  into  the  other.  This  applies  also
to  the  other.  Either  in  this  way  is  the  other  of  its  other.

Difference  implicit  or  essential  gives  rise  to  the  maxim,
Everything  is  essentially  distinct ;  or,  as  it  may  be  expressed,
Of  two  opposite  predicates  the  one  only  can  be  assigned  to
anything,  and  there  is  no  third  possible.  This  maxim  of
Contrast  or  Opposition  expressly  controverts  the  maxim  of
Identity :  the  one  says  a  thing  should  be  only  a  reference
connecting  it  with  self,  the  other  says  that  it  must  be  an
opposite,  a  connexion  with  its  other.  The  native  thought-
lessness of  abstraction  betrays  itself  by  setting  in  juxtaposition
two  contrary  maxims,  like  these,  as  laws,  without  even  com-
paring them.  The  Maxim  of  Excluded  Middle  is  the  maxim


190  THE DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  [119.

of  the  definite  understanding-,  which  would  fain  avoid
contradiction,  but  in  so  doing  falls  into  it.  A  must  be
either  +  A  or  —  A,  it  says.  It  virtually  declares  in  these
words  a  third  A  which  is  neither  +  nor  — ,  and  which  at
the  same  time  is  yet  taken  as  both  +  and  — .  If  -f  W
mean  6  miles  to  the  West,  and  —  W  mean  6  miles  to  the
East,  and  if  the  +  and  —  cancel  each  other,  the  6  miles  of
way  or  space  remain  what  they  were  with  and  without  the
contrast.  Even  the  mere  plus-  and  minus  of  number  or  ab-
stract direction  have,  if  we  like,  zero,  for  their  third  :  but  it
cannot  be  denied  that  the  empty  contrast,  which  understand-
ing institutes  between  plus  and  minus,  is  not  without  some
value  in  such  abstractions  as  number,  direction,  &c.

In  the  doctrine  of  contradictory  notions,  the  one  notion  is
called,  say,  blue  (for  in  his  doctrine  even  the  sensuous  gene-
ralised image  of  a  colour  is  called  a  notion)  and  the  other  not-
blue.  This  other  then  would  not  be  an  affirmative  colour,
such  as  yellow,  but  would  merely  be  specified  as  the  abstract
or  simple  negative.  That  the  Negative  in  its  own  nature
is  quite  as  much  Positive,  is  implied  in  saying  that  what  is
opposite  to  another  is  its  other.  The  inanity  of  the  oppo-
sition between  what  are  called  contradictory  notions  is  well
presented  in  what  we  may  call  the  grandiose  formula  of  a
general  law,  that  Everything  has  the  one  and  not  the  other
of  all  predicates  which  are  in  such  opposition.  In  this  way,
mind  is  either  white  or  not-white,  yellow  or  not-yellow,  &c.
ad  infinitum.

It  was  forgotten  that  Identity  and  Opposition  are  them-
selves opposed,  and  the  maxim  of  Opposition  was  taken  for
that  of  Identity  under  the  form  of  the  maxim  of  Contradic-
tion. A  notion,  which  possesses  neither  or  both  of  two  mutually
contradictory  attributes,  such  a  notion  as  a  square  circle,
is  held  to  be  logically  false.  Now  though  a  polygonal  circle,
and  a  rectilineal  arc,  alike  contradict  this  maxim,  geometers
never  hesitate  to  treat  the  circle  as  a  polygon  with  rectilineal
sides.  But  anything  like  a  circle  (that  is  to  say  its  mere


1 1 9.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  191

character  or  definition)  is  still  no  notion.  In  the  notion  of  a
circle,  centre  and  circumference  are  equally  essential  ;  both
marks  or  attributives  belong  to  it :  and  yet  centre  and  cir-
cumference are  opposite  and  contradictory  to  each  other.

The  conception  of  Polarity,  which  is  so  dominant  in  physics,
contains  by  implication  the  more  correct  definition  of  Oppo-
sition. But  physics,  when  it  has  to  deal  with  thoughts,
adheres  to  the  ordinary  logic ;  and  it  may  therefore  well  be
horrified  in  case  it  should  ever  expand  the  conception  of
Polarity,  and  see  the  thoughts  which  are  implied  in  it.

(1)  With  the  positive  we  return  to  identity,  but  in  its  higher
truth  as  an  identical  connexion  with  self,  and  at  the  same  time  in
such  a  way  as  not  to  be  the  negative.  The  negative  on  its  own
account  is  the  same  as  difference  itself.  The  identical  as  such  is
primarily  the  uncharacterised  :  the  positive  on  the  other  hand  is
what  is  identical  with  itself,  but  characterised  as  antithetical.
And  the  negative  is  difference  as  such,  when  it  is  definitely
stated  not  to  be  identity.  This  is  the  difference  of  difference
within  its  own  self.

Positive  and  negative  are  supposed  to  express  an  absolute
difference.  The  two  however  are  at  bottom  the  same  :  the  name
of  either  might  be  transferred  to  the  other.  Thus,  for  example,
debts  and  assets  are  not  two  particular  and  self-subsisting
species  of  property.  What  is  negative  to  the  debtor,  is  positive
to  the  creditor.  A  way  to  the  east  is  also  a  way  to  the  west.
Positive  and  negative  are  therefore  intrinsically  conditioned  by
one  another,  and  have  a  being  only  when  they  are  connectively
referred  to  each  other.  The  north  pole  of  the  magnet  cannot  be
without  the  south  pole,  and  vice  versa.  If  we  cut  a  magnet  in
two,  we  have  not  a  north  pole  in  one  piece,  and  a  south  pole  in
another.  Similarly,  in  electricity,  the  positive  and  the  negative
are  not  two  diverse  and  independent  fluids.  In  opposition,  the
different  is  not  followed  by  any  other,  but  by  its  own  other.
Usually  we  regard  different  things  as  unaffected  by  each  other.
Thus  we  say :  I  am  a  human  being,  and  around  me  are  air,
water,  animals,  and  all  sorts  of  things.  Everything  is  thus  put
outside  of  every  other.  But_the  aim  of  philosophy  is  to  banish
indifference,  and  to  learn  the  necessity  of  things.  By  that  means
tEe  other  is  seen  to  stand  over  against  its  other.  Thus,  for
example,  inorganic  nature  is  not  to  be  considered  merely  some-
thing else  than  organic  nature  :  but  the  necessary  antithesis  of  it.
Both  are  in  essential  connexion  with  one  another ;  and  the  one
of  the  two  is,  only  in  so  far  as  it  excludes  the  other  from  it,


192  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [120.

and  thus  connects  itself  therewith.  Nature  in  like  manner  is
not  without  mind,  nor  mind  without  nature.  An  important
step  in  thinking-  has  been  taken,  when  we  cease  to  use  phrases
like :  Of  course  something-  else  is  also  possible.  While  we  so
speak,  we  have  not  yet  thrown  off  contingency:  and  all  true
thinking-,  we  have  already  said,  is  a  thinking-  of  necessity.

In  modern  physical  science  the  opposition,  first  observed  to
exist  in  magnetism  as  polarity,  has  come  to  be  regarded  as  a
universal  law  pervading  the  whole  of  nature.  This  would  be  a
genuine  advance  in  science,  if  care  were  taken  not  to  let  mere
variety  hold  its  ground  unquestioned  by  the  side  of  opposition.
Thus  at  one  time  the  colours  are  regarded  as  in  a  polar  opposition
to  one  another,  and  called  complementary  colours  :  at  another
time  they  become  an  indifferent  and  merely  quantitative  differ-
ence of  red,  yellow,  green,  &c.

(2)  Instead  of  speaking-  by  the  maxim  of  Excluded  Middle
(which  is  the  maxim  of  abstract  understandingJTwe  should  rather
say  :  Everything;  is  opposite.  Neither  in  heaven  nor  in  earth,
neither  in  the  world  of  mind  nor  of  nature,  is  there  anywhere
such  an  abstract,  <  Either — or  '  as  the  understanding  maintains.
All  that  there  ever  is,  is  concrete,  with*  difference  and  opposition
in  itself.  The  finitude  of  things  lies  in  the  want  of  correspond-
ence between  their  immediate  being  there  and  then,  and  what
they  virtually  are  by  themselves.  Thus,  in  inorganic  nature,  the
acid  is  implicitly  at  the  same  time  the  base :  in  other  words,  its
only  being  is  to  be  in  reference  to  its  other.  Hence  also  the
acid  is  not  something  that  remains  quietly  in  the  contrast :
it  is  always  seeking  to  realise  what  it  potentially  is.  Con-
tradiction,  above  all  things,  is  what  moves  the  world  :  and  it
is  ridiculous  to  say  that  contradiction  is  unthinkable.  The
correct  point  in  that  statement  is  that  contradiction  is  not  the
end  of  the  matter,  but  cancels  itself.  But  contradiction,  when
cancelled,  does  not  give  an  abstract  identity ;  for  that  is  itself
only  one  side  of  the  contrariety.  The  proximate  result  of  oppo-
sition when  realised  as  contradiction  is  the  ground,  which
contains  identity  as  well  as  difference  superseded  and  reduced  to
elements  in  the  completer  notion.

120.]  Contrariety  then  has  two  forms.  The  Positive  is  the
sort  of  variety,  which  means  to  be  independent,  and  yet  at
the  same  time  must  not  be  unaffected  by  its  connexion  with
its  antithesis.  The  Negative  must  be  no  less  independently  the
negative  connexion  with  self,  must  be  on  its  own  account,
but  at  the  same  time  as  Negative  must  on  every  point  have
this  its  connexion  with  self,  i.  e.  have  its  Positive  only  in  its


i2i.]  THE DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE,  193

antithesis.  Both  Positive  and  Negative  are  therefore  the  state- ;,
ment  of  contradiction  ;  both  are  potentially  the  same.  Both  are
so  actually  also  ;  since  either  is  the  abrogation  of  the  other  and
of  itself.  Thus  they  fall  to  the  Ground, — or,  as  is  plain,  the
essential  difference,  as  a  difference  in  and  for  itself,  is  the
difference  of  it  from  itself,  and  thus  implies  identity :  so  that
to  the  whole  of  absolute  difference  there  belongs  itself  as
well  as  identity.  As  a  difference  that  connects  self  with  self,
it  is  likewise  enunciated  to  be  what  is  identical  with  itself.
And  the  opposite  is  in  general  that  which  includes  the  one
and  its  other,  itself  and  its  opposite.  The  immanence  of  the
essence  thus  defined  is  the  Ground.

(y)  The  Ground.

121.]  The  Ground  is  the  unity  of  identity  and  difference,
the  truth  of  what  difference  and  identity  have  turned  out
to  be, — the  reflection-into-self,  which  is  equally  a  reflection-
into-other,  and  vice  versa.  It  is  the  essence  stated  as  a
totality.

The maxim  of  the  Ground  runs  thus  :  Everything  has  its
Sufficient  Ground  : that  is,  the true and  essential Being  of
any something  is not the circumstance that  something is
identical  with  itself,  or  different  (various),  or  merely  positive,
or  merely  negative ;  but  that  it  has  its  Being  in an  other,
which being  its  self-same,  is  its  essence. And  to  this  extent
the  essence  becomes  not  an  abstract  reflection  into  self  merely,
but  into an other. The Ground is the  essence  immanent ;  "•
the essence is intrinsically a ground ; and it is a  ground
only  when  it  is  a  ground  of  somewhat,  of  an  other.

We  must  be  careful,  when  we  say  that  the  grounxi  is  the  unity
of  identity  and  difference,  not  to  understand  an  abstract  identity.
Otherwise  we  only  change  the  name,  while  we  still  think  the  iden-
tity of  understanding  which  has  been  already  proved  to  be  false.
To  avoid  this  misconception  we  may  say,  that  the  ground,  besides
being  the  unity,  is  also  the  difference  of  identity  and  difference.
The  ground,  which  originally  seemed  to  supersede  and  swallow  up/
contradiction,  thus  presents  to  us  a  new  contradiction.  It  is


194  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [121.

however  a  contradiction,  which,  so  far  from  persisting-  quietly  in
itself,  is  rather  the  expulsion  of  it  from  itself.  The  ground  is  a
ground  only  to  the  extent  that  it  affords  ground  :  but  the  result
issuing  from  the  ground  is  only  the  ground  itself.  In  this  lies
its  formalism.  The  ground  and  what  is  grounded  are  one  and
the  same  content  or  matter  of  fact :  the  difference  between  the
•two  is  the  mere  difference  of  form  which  separates  a  simple
reference  to  self,  on  the  one  hand,  from  mediation  or  relativity
on  the  other.  The  inquiry  into  the  grounds  of  things  marks
the  point  of  view  which,  as  already  noted  (note  to  §  112),  is
adopted  by  reflection.  We  wish,  as  it  were,  to  see  the  matter
double,  first  in  its  immediacy,  and  secondly,  in  its  ground,  where
it  is  no  longer  immediate.  This  is  the  plain  meaning  of  the  law
of  sufficient  ground,  as  it  is  called ;  it  asserts  that  the  light  in
which  things  should  essentially  be  viewed  is  mediation.  The
manner  in  which  Formal  Logic  establishes  this  law  of  thought,
sets  a  bad  example  to  the  other  sciences.  The  Formal  Logic  asks
these  sciences  not  to  accept  their  subject-matter  as  it  is  imme-
diately given  ;  and  yet  herself  imposes  a  law  of  thought  without
deducing  it, — in  other  words,  without  exhibiting  the  means  by
which  it  is  reached.  With  the  same  justice  as  the  logician
maintains  our  faculty  of  thought  to  be  so  constituted  that  we
must  ask  for  the  ground  of  everything,  might  the  physician,
when  asked  why  a  man  who  falls  into  water  is  drowned,  reply
that  man  happens  to  be  so  organised  that  he  cannot  live  under
water ;  or  the  jurist,  when  asked  why  a  criminal  is  punished,
reply  that  civil  society  happens  to  be  so  constituted  that  crimes
cannot  be  left  unpunished.

Perhaps  however  logic  could  not  be  expected  to  give  a  ground
for  the  law  of  the  sufficient  ground.  Yet  it  might  at  least
explain  what  is  to  be  understood  by  a  ground.  The  common
explanation,  which  describes  the  ground  as  what  has  a  con-
sequence, seems  at  the  first  glance  more  evident  and  intelligible
than  the  preceding  determination  by  the  notion.  If  you  ask
however  what  the  consequence  is,  you  are  told  that  it  is  what
has  a  ground;  and  it  becomes  obvious  that  the  explanation  is
intelligible  only  because  it  assumes  what  in  our  case  has  been
reached  as  the  termination  of  an  antecedent  movement  of
thought.  And  this  is  the  true  business  of  logic.  It  shows  that
those  thoughts,  which  are  mere  generalised  images,  and  in  that
way  neither  understood  nor  demonstrated,  are  really  grades  in
the  self-determination  of  thought ;  and  by  this  means  they  are
understood  and  demonstrated.

In  common  life,  and  it  is  the  same  in  the  finite  sciences,  this
reflective  form  is  often  employed,  for  the  purpose  of  discovering
the  real  condition  of  the  objects  under  investigation.  So  long  as


i2i.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  195

we  deal  with  what  may  be  termed  the  simplest  economy  of
knowledge,  nothing  can  be  urged  against  this  mode  of  opera-
tion. But  it  can  never  afford  definitive  satisfaction,  either  in
theory  or  practice.  And  the  reason  why  it  fails  to  do  so,  is  that
the  ground  is  yet  without  a  content,  which  is  spontaneously  and
independently  specified ;  so  that  to  regard  anything  as  resting
upon  a  ground,  merely  serves  to  distinguish  the  point  of  form
between  immediacy  and  mediation.  We  see  an  electrical  pheno-
menon, for  example,  and  we  ask  for  its  ground  (or  reason) :  we
are  told  that  electricity  is  the  ground  of  this  phenomenon.
What  is  this  but  the  same  content  as  we  had  immediately  before
us,  only  translated  into  the  form  of  inwardness  ?

The  ground  however  is  not  simply  identity  with  self  only,
but  also  distinction :  hence  various  grounds  may  be  alleged  for
the  same  sum  of  fact.  These  various  grounds,  as  distinguished,
are  grounds  pro  and  contra.  In  any  action,  such  as  a  theft,
there  is  a  sum  of  fact  in  which  several  aspects  may  be  dis-
tinguished. The  theft  has  violated  the  rights  of  property :  it
has  given  the  means  of  satisfying  his  wants  to  the  needy  thief:
possibly  too  the  man,  from  whom  the  theft  was  made,  misused
his  property.  The  violation  of  property  is  unquestionably  the
decisive  point  of  view,  before  which  the  others  must  give  way :
but  the  bare  law  of  the  ground  cannot  settle  that  question.
Usually  indeed  the  law  is  interpreted  to  speak  of  a  sufficient
ground,  not  of  any  ground  whatever :  and  it  might  be  supposed
therefore,  in  the  action  referred  to,  that,  although  other  points
of  view  besides  the  violation  of  property  might  be  held  as
grounds,  yet  they  would  not  be  sufficient  grounds.  But  here
comes  a  dilemma.  If  we  use  the  phrase  '  sufficient  ground,'
the  epithet  is  either  otiose,  or  of  such  a  kind  as  to  carry  us
past  the  mere  category  of  ground.  The  predicate  is  otiose
and  tautological,  if  it  only  states  the  capability  of  giving  a
ground  or  reason :  for  the  ground  is  a  ground,  only  in  so
far  as  it  has  this  capability.  If  a  soldier  runs  away  from
battle  to  save  his  life,  his  conduct  is  certainly  unconformable
to  duty :  but  it  cannot  be  held  that  the  ground  which  led
him  so  to  act  was  insufficient,  otherwise  he  would  have
remained  at  his  post.  After  all  there  is  this  much  to  be
said.  On  the  one  hand  any  ground  suffices :  on  the  other  no
ground  suffices  as  ground,  because,  as  already  said,  it  is  yet  void
of  a  content  determined  in  itself  and  for  itself,  and  is  therefore
not  self-acting  and  productive.  A  content  thus  determined  in
itself  and  for  itself,  and  hence  self-acting,  will  hereafter  come
before  us  as  the  notion :  and  it  is  the  notion  which  Leibnitz
had  in  his  eye  when  he  spoke  of  sufficient  ground,  and  urged
the  examination  of  things  under  its  point  of  view.  His  remarks

O  2


196  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [121.

were  originally  directed  against  that  merely  mechanical  method
of  looking  at  things,  so  much  in  vogue  even  now;  a  method
which  he  justly  declares  insufficient.  We  may  see  an  instance
of  this  mechanical  theory  of  investigation,  when  the  organic
process  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood  is  traced  back  to  the
contraction  of  the  heart ;  or  when  certain  theories  in  like  manner
explain  the  purpose  of  punishment  to  lie  in  deterring  people
from  crime,  in  rendering  the  criminal  harmless,  or  in  other
extraneous  grounds  of  the  same  kind.  It  is  unfair  to  Leibnitz
to  suppose  that  he  was  pleased  with  anything  so  poor  as  this
formal  law  of  the  ground.  The  method  of  investigation  which
he  inaugurated  is  the  very  reverse  of  a  formalism,  which  ac-
quiesces in  mere  grounds,  where  a  full  and  concrete  knowledge
is  sought.  Considerations  to  this  effect  led  Leibnitz  to  contrast
causae  efficientes  and  causae  finales ;  and  he  calls  on  men  not  to
rest  satisfied  with  the  former  but  press  on  to  tihe  latter.  If  we
adopt  this  distinction,  light,  heat,  and  moisture  would  be  the
causae  efficientes,  not  the  causa  finalis  of  the  growth  of  plants :
the  causa  finalis  is  the  notion  of  the  plant  itself.

To  be  confined  within  the  range  of  mere  grounds,  especially  on
questions  of  justice  and  morality,  is  the  position  and  principle
characterising  the  Sophists.  Sophistry,  as  we  ordinarily  con-
ceive it,  is  a  mode  of  examining  an  object  which  aims  at  per-
verting what  is  just  and  true,  and  which  generally  seeks  to
present  things  in  a  false  light.  Such  however  is  not  the  proper
or  primary  tendency  of  Sophistry:  which  rather  occupies  the
position  of  inference  and  argumentation.  The  Sophists  came
forward  at  a  time  when  the  Greeks  had  begun  to  grow  dis-
satisfied with  mere  authority  and  tradition  in  the  matter  of
morals  and  religion,  and  when  they  felt  how  needful  it  was
to  see  that  the  sum  of  facts  was  due  to  the  intervention  and
act  of  thought.  That  desideratum  the  Sophists  supplied  by
teaching  their  countrymen  to  seek  for  the  various  points  of
view  under  which  things  may  be  considered:  which  points  of
view  are  the  same  as  grounds.  But  the  ground,  as  we  have
seen,  has  no  absolutely  determined  content  in  itself,  and  it  is
as  easy  to  discover  grounds  for  what  is  wrong  and  immoral  as
for  what  is  moral  and  right.  Upon  the  observer  therefore  it
depends  to  decide  what  points  shall  be  regarded.  The  decision
in  such  circumstances  is  prompted  by  his  individual  views  and
opinions.  Thus  the  objective  foundation  of  what  ought  to  have
been  the  absolute  and  universal  creed  for  the  acceptance  of
men,  was  undermined :  and  Sophistry  by  this  destructive  action
drew  upon  itself  merited  obloquy.  Socrates,  as  we  all  know,
met  the  Sophists  at  every  point,  not  by  a  bare  statement  and
re-assertion  of  authority  and  tradition  against  their  argumen-


122.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  197

were,  and  by  establishing  tbe  sxipremacy  of  justice  and  goodness,
in  short,  of  the  universal  or  the  notion  of  the  will.  In  the
present  day  such  a  method  of  argumentation  is  not  quite  out
of  fashion.  Nor  is  that  the  case  only  in  the  discussion  of  secular
matters.  It  occurs  even  in  sermons,  such  as  those  where  every
possible  ground  df  gratitude  to  God  is  propounded.  To  such
conduct  Socrates  and  Plato  would  not  have  scrupled  to  apply
the  name  of  Sophistry.  For  Sophistry  has  nothing  to  do  with
what  is  taught : — that  may  always  be  true.  Sophistry  lies  in
the  formal  circumstance  of  teaching  it  by  grounds  which  are  as
available  for  attack  as  for  defence.  In  a  time  so  rich  in  re-
flection and  so  devoted  to  ratiocination  as  our  own,  he  must
be  a  poor  creature  who  cannot  advance  a  good  ground  for  every-
thing, even  for  the  worst  and  most  depraved.  Everything  in
the  world  that  has  become  corrupt,  has  had  good  ground  for  its
corruption.  An  appeal  to  grounds  at  first  makes  the  hearer
think  of  beating  a  retreat:  but  when  experience  has  taught
him  the  real  state  of  these  matters,  he  closes  his  ears  against
them,  and  refuses  to  be  imposed  upon  any  more.

122.]  As  it  first  comes,  the  chief  feature  of  the  Essence  is
show  in  itself  and  intermediation  in  itself.  But  when  it  has
completed  the  circle  of  intermediation,  its  unity  with  itself  is
explicitly  stated  as  the  self-annulling  of  difference,  and  therefore
of  intermediation.  Once  more  then  we  come  back  to  immediacy
or  Being  ;  but  Being  in  so  far  as  it  is  intermediated  by  annulv-
ling  the  intermediation.  And  that  Being  is  Existence.

The  facts  which  constitute  the  ground  are  not  purely  and
entirely  determined  by  itself:  nor  is  the  ground  the  same
as  the  end  or  final  cause:  hence  it  is  not  active,  nor  does
it  produce  anything.  An  Existence  is  said  only  to  issue  or
proceed  from  the  ground.  The  determinate  ground  is  therefore
a  little  formal :  that  is  to  say,  any  point  will  do,  (if  it  be
expressly  put  in  connexion  with  its  own  self,  or  stated  as  an
affirmation,)  to  constitute  a  relation  to  the  immediate  existence
depending  on  it.  If  it  be  a  ground  at  all,  it  is  a  good  ground :
for  the  term  'good'  is  employed  abstractly  as  equivalent  to
affirmative;  and  any  character  is  good  which  can  in  any  way
be  enunciated  as  confessedly  affirmative.  So  it  happens  that
a  ground  can  be  found  and  adduced  for  everything :  and  a
tations,  but  by  showing  dialectically  how  untenable  mere  grounds


198  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [123.

good  ground  (for  example,  a  good  motive  for  action)  may
effect  something  or  may  not,  it  may  have  a  consequence  or  it
may  not.  It  becomes  a  motive  and  effects  something,  e.g.
through  its  reception  into  the  will ;  then  and  there  only  it
becomes  active  and  is  made  a  cause.

»'

(6) Existence.

123.]  Existence  is  the  immediate  unity  of  reflection-into-
self,  and  reflection-into-another.  It  follows  from  this  that
existence  is  the  indefinite  multitude  of  existents  as  reflected-
into-themselves,  which  at  the  same  time  equally  throw  light
upon  one  another, — which,  in  short,  are  relative,  and  form  a
world  of  reciprocal  dependence,  and  of  infinite  inter-connexion
between  grounds  and  consequents.  The  grounds  are  themselves
existences :  and  the  single  cases  of  existence  are  grounds  in  as
many  directions  as  they  are  consequents.

The  phrase  existence  (derived  from  existere]  suggests  the  fact
of  having  issued  from  something.  Existence  is  Being  which
issues  from  the  ground,  and  which  has  been  reinstated  by
annulling  its  intermediation.  The  Essence,  as  Being  set  aside
and  absorbed,  originally  came  before  us  as  shining  or  showing  in
self,  and  the  charactei'istic  features  of  this  light,  as  it  were,
which  is  thrown  into  itself  are  identity,  difference  and  ground.
The  last  is  the  unity  of  identity  and  difference;  and  because
it  unifies  them  it  has  at  the  same  time  to  distinguish  itself
from  itself.  But  that  which  is  in  this  way  distinguished  from
the  ground  is  as  little  mere  difference,  as  the  ground  itself  is
abstract  sameness.  The  ground  works  its  own  suspension :  and
.when  suspended,  the  result  of  its  negation  is  existence.  Having
issued  from  the  ground,  existence  contains  the  ground  in  it :
that  is  to  say,  the  ground  does  not  remain,  as  it  were,  behind
existence.  The  very  nature  of  the  ground  is  to  suspend  itself
and  translate  itself  into  existence.  This  is  exemplified  in  our
ordinary  mode  of  thinking,  when  we  look  upon  the  ground
of  a  thing,  not  as  something  merely  and  simply  inward,  but
as  itself  existent.  For  example,  the  lightning  which  has  set
a  house  on  fire  would  be  considered  the  ground  of  the  con-
flagration :  or  the  manners  of  a  nation  and  the  condition  of
its  life  would  be  regarded  as  the  ground  of  its  constitution.
Such  indeed  is  the  ordinary  aspect  in  which  the  existent  world


124.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  199

originally  appears  to  reflection.  It  looks  like  an  indefinite
crowd  of  things  existent,  which  being  simultaneously  reflected
in  themselves  and  in  one  another  are  related  reciprocally  to
one  another  as  ground  and  consequence.  In  this  motley  play
of  the  world,  if  we  may  so  call  the  sum  of  what  exists,  there
is  nowhere  a  firm  footing  to  be  found :  everything  bears  an
aspect  of  relativity,  conditioned  by  and  conditioning  something
else.  The  reflective  understanding  makes  it  its  business  to
elicit  and  trace  these  connexions  running  out  in  every  direc-
tion; but  the  question  touching  an  end  or  aim  does  not  by
these  means  approach  any  nearer  a  solution.  Thus  the  craving
of  the  reason  after  knowledge  passes  beyond  this  position  of
bare  relativity  along  with  the  extending  evolution  of  the  logical
idea.

124.]  ThAre  flection-into-another  of  what  is  existing  is  how-
ever inseparable  from  the  reflection-into-self :  the  ground  is
their  unity,  from  which  existence  has  issued.  Whatever  exists
therefore  includes  in  its  own  self  relativity  and  its  complex
inter-connexion  with  other  existences,  and  it  is  reflected  into
itself  as  ground.  What  exists  consequently  is,  when  so  dc-
scribed,  a  Thing.

The  '  thing-in-itself '  (or  thing  in  the  abstract),  so  famous  in
the  philosophy  of  Kant,  shows  itself  here  in  its  genesis.  It  is
seen  to  be  the  abstract  reflection-into-self,  which  is  retained,  to
the  exclusion  of  reflection-into-other-things  and  of  the  distinct
characteristics  in  general.  And  thus  it  is  only  the  empty
substratum  of  these  characteristics  of  the  thing.

If  to  know  means  to  comprehend  an  object  in  its  concrete
character,  then  the  thing-in-itself,  which  is  thus  in  general  quite
abstract  and  indeterminate,  must  certainly  be  as  unknowable  as
it  is  alleged  to  be.  With  as  much  reason  however  as  we  speak
of  the  thing-in-itself,  we  might  speak  of  quality-in-itself  or
quantity-in-itself,  and  of  any  other  category.  The  expression
would  then  serve  to  signify  that  these  categories  are  taken  in
their  abstract  immediacy,  apart  from  their  development  and
inward  character.  It  is  no  better  than  a  whim  of  the  under-
standing, therefore,  if  we  attach  the  qualificatory  term  '  in-itself '
to  the  thing  only.  But  this  term  '  in-itself  (or  '  in-the-abstract ')
is  applied  to  the  facts  of  the  mental  as  well  as  the  natural
world :  as  we  speak  of  electricity  or  of  a  plant  in  itself,  so
we  speak  of  man  or  the  state  in  itself.  By  this  '  in-itself  in


200  THE DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [125.

these  objects  is  meant  what  they,  rightly  and  properly  speak-
ing, are.  This  usage  is  liable  to  the  same  criticism  as  the
phrase  '  thing-in-itself.'  For  if  we  stick  to  the  mere  '  in-itself '
of  an  object,  we  apprehend  it  not  in  its  truth,  but  in  the
inadequate  form  of  mere  abstraction.  The  man-in-himself,  for
example,  is  the  child.  And  what  the  child  has  to  do  is  to  rise
out  of  this  abstract  and  undeveloped  '  in-himself,'  and  become
for  himself  what  he  is  at  first  only  'in-himself,' — a  free  and
reasonable  being.  Similarly,  the  state-in-itself  is  the  yet  im-
mature and  patriarchal  state,  where  the  various  political  func-
tions, latent  in  the  notion  of  the  state,  have  not  been  constituted
as  the  notion  requires.  In  the  same  sense,  the  germ  may  be
called  the  plant- in-itself.  These  examples  may  show  the-  mistake
of  supposing  that  the  '  thing-in-itself '  or  the  'in-itself  of  things
is  something  inaccessible  to  our  cognition.  All  things  are
originally  in-themselves,  but  that  is  not  the  end  of  the  matter.
As  the  germ,  being  the  plant-in-itself,  means  self-development,
so  the  thing  in  general  passes  beyond  its  in-itself,  the  abstract
reflection  into  self,  to  manifest  itself  further  as  a  reflection  into
other  things.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  it  has  properties.

(c) The  Thing.

125.]  (a)  The  Thing  is  that  totality,  where  the  development
of  the  features  of  the  ground  and  of  existence  is  explicitly
stated  in  one.  On  the  side  of  one  of  its  factors,  viz.  reflection-
into-other-things,  it  has  in  it  the  differences,  in  virtue  of  which
it  is  a  characterised  and  concrete  thing,  (a)  These  character-
istics are  various  or  diverse  from  one  another ;  they  have  their
reflection-into-self  not  in  themselves,  but  in  the  thing.  They
are  Properties  of  the  thing :  and  their  connexion  with  the
thing  is  expressed  by  the  word  'have.'

As  a  means  of  connexion,  '  to  have '  takes  the  place  of  '  to  be.'
True,  somewhat  has  qualities  in  it  too :  but  this  transference
of  'Having'  into  the  sphere  of  Being  is  inexact,  because  the
character  or  quality  is  directly  one  with  the  somewhat,  and
the  somewhat  ceases  to  be,  when  it  loses  its  quality.  But  the
thing  is  reflection-into-self:  for  it  is  an  identity  which  is  dis-
tinct even  from  the  difference,  th'e  characteristics  of  the  thing.
In  many  languages  'have'  is  employed  to  denote  past  time.
And  with  reason :  for  the  past  is  absorbed  or  suspended  Being,


126.]  THE DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  201

and  the  mind  is  its  reflection-into-self;  in  the  mind  only  it
continues  to  subsist, — the  mind  however  distinguishing-  from
itself  this  Being  in  it  which  has  been  absorbed  or  suspended.

In  the  Thing  all  the  characteristics  of  reflection  recur  as
existent.  Thus  the  thing,  in  its  initial  aspect  as  the  thing-
in-itself,  is  the  self-same  or  identical.  But  sameness,  it  was
proved,  is  not  found  without  difference :  so  the  properties,  which
the  thing  has,  are  the  existent  difference  in  the  form  of  diversity.
In  the  case  of  diversity  or  variety  we  were  led  to  see  the  aspect
of  reciprocal  indifference  of  the  diverse  terms,  having  no  other
connexion  with  each  other,  save  what  was  given  by  a  com-
parison external  to  them.  But  now  in  the  thing,  we  have  a
bond  which  knits  the  various  properties  into  union.  Property,
besides,  should  not  be  confused  with  quality.  No  doubt,  we
also  say,  a  thing  has  qualities.  But  the  phraseology  is  a  mis-
placed one :  '  having '  hints  at  an  independence,  foreign  to  the
'  Somewhat/  which  is  still  directly  the  same  with  its  quality.
Somewhat  is  what  it  is  only  by  its  quality :  whereas,  though
the  thing  indeed  exists  only  as  it  has  properties,  it  is  not
confined  to  this  or  that  definite  property,  and  can  therefore
lose  it,  without  ceasing  to  be  what  it  is.

126.]  (/3)  Even  in  the  ground  however,  the  reflection-into-
something-else  is  directly  convertible  with  reflection-into-self.
And  hence  the  properties  are  not  merely  different  from  each
other ;  they  are  also  identical  with  themselves,  independent,
and  relieved  from  their  attachment  to  the  thing.  Still  as  they
are  the  characters  of  the  thing  distinguished  from  one  another
(as  reflected-into-self)  they  are  not  themselves  things,  if  things
be  concrete ;  but  only  existences  reflected  into  themselves  as
abstract  characters.  They  are  what  are  called  Matters.

Nor  would  any  one  give  the  name  of  things  to  Matters,
such  as  magnetic  and  electric  matters.  They  are  qualities
proper,  at  one  with  their  Being, — they  are  the  character  that
has  reached  immediacy,  and  that  immediacy  a  reflected  Being  ;
in  other  words,  existence.  ^-"

To  elevate  the  properties  which  the  Thing  has,  to  the  indepen-
dent position  of  matters,  or  materials  of  which  it  consists,  is  a
proceeding  based  upon  the  notion  of  a  Thing:  and  for  that
reason  is  also  found  in  experience.  Thought  and  experience


202  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [127.

however  alike  protest  against  concluding  from  the  fact  that
certain  properties  of  a  thing-,  such  as  colour,  or  smell,  may  be
represented  as  particular  colouring  or  odorous  matters,  that  we
are  then  at  the  end  of  the  inquiry,  and  that  nothing  more  is
needed  to  penetrate  to  the  true  secret  of  things  than  a  dis-
integration of  them  into  their  component  materials.  This  dis-
integration into  independent  matters  is  properly  restricted  to
inorganic  nature  only.  The  chemist  is  in  the  right  therefore
when,  for  example,  he  analyses  common  salt  or  gypsum  into
its  elements,  and  finds  that  the  former  consists  of  muriatic
acid  and  soda,  the  latter  of  sulphuric  acid  and  calcium.  So
too  the  geologist  does  well  to  regard  granite  as  a  compound
of  quartz,  felspar,  and  mica.  These  matters,  again,  of  which  the
thing  consists,  are  themselves  partly  things,  which  in  that  way
may  be  once  more  reduced  to  more  abstract  or  simple  matters.
Sulphuric  acid,  for  example,  is  a  compound  of  sulphur  and
oxygen.  Such  matters  or  bodies  can  as  a  matter  of  fact  be
represented  as  subsisting  by  themselves :  but  frequently  we
find  other  properties  of  things,  entirely  wanting  this  self-sub-
sistence, also  regarded  as  particular  matters.  Thus  we  hear
caloric,  and  electrical  or  magnetic  matters  spoken  of.  Such
matters  are  at  the  best  figments  of  the  understanding.  And  we
see  here  the  usual  procedure  of  the  abstract  reflection  of  under-
standing. Capriciously  adopting  certain  categories,  whose  only
value  and  virtue  lies  in  their  place  in  the  gradual  evolution  of
the  logical  idea,  it  employs  them  in  the  pretended  interests  of
explanation,  but  against  the  unprejudiced  voice  of  perception
and  experiei^ce,  so  as  to  trace  back  to  them  every  object  of
research  and  observation.  Nor  is  this  all.  The  theory,  by  which
a  thing  consists  of  independent  matters,  is  frequently  applied
in  a  region  where  it  has  neither  meaning  nor  force.  For  within
the  limits  of  nature  even,  wherever  there  is  organic  life,  this
category  is  obviously  inadequate.  An  animal  may  be  said  to
consist  of  bones,  muscles,  nerves,  &c. :  but  evidently  we  are
here  using  the  term  'consist'  in  a  very  different  sense  from  its
use  when  we  spoke  of  the  piece  of  granite  as  consisting  of
the  above-mentioned  elements.  The  elements  of  granite  are
utterly  indifferent  to  their  combination :  they  could  subsist  as
well  without  it.  The  different  parts  and  members  of  an  organic
body  on  the  contrary  subsist  only  in  their  union :  they  cease
to  exist  as  such,  when  they  are  separated  from  each  other.


127-]  Thus  Matter  is  the  mere  abstract  or  indeterminate  reflec-
tion-into-something-else,  or  reflection-in to-self  at  the  same  time
as  determinate ;  it  is  consequently  Thinghood  which  then  and


128.]  THE DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  203

there is, — the subsistence or substratum  of  the thing. By
this  means  the  thing  finds  in  the  matters  its  reflection-into- '
self  (the  reverse  of  §  1 25) ; it  subsists  not  in  its  own  self,  but
in the  matters, and  is  only  a  superficial association between
them,  or  an  external  bond  over  them.

128-]  (y)  Matter,  being-  the  immediate  unity  of  existence
with  itself,  is  also  indifferent  towards  any  specific  character.
Hence  the  numerous  and  diverse  matters  coalesce  into  the
one  Matter,  or  into  existence  under  the  reflective  charac-
teristic of  identity.  In  contrast  to  this  one  Matter  we  have
these  distinct  characters  or  properties  and  their  external  con-
nexion which  they  have  with  one  another  in  the  thing.  These
together  constitute  the  Form, — the  reflective  characteristic  of
difference,  but  a  difference  which  exists  and  is  a  totality.

This  one  uncharacterised  Matter  is  also  the  same  as  the
Thing-in-itself  was :  only  the  latter  is  quite  abstract  in  itself,
while  the  former  properly  is  also  for  something  else,  and  in
the  first  place  for  the  Form.

The  various  matters  of  which  the  thing  consists  are  potentially
the  same  as  one  another.  Thus  we  get  one  Matter  in  general
to  which  the  difference  is  expressly  attached  externally  and
as  if  it  were  a  bare  Form.  This  theory  which  holds  things  all
round  to  have  one  and  the  same  matter  at  bottom,  and  merely
to  differ  externally  in  respect  of  form,  is  much  in  vogue  with
the  reflective  understanding.  Matter  in  that  case  counts  for
naturally  indeterminate  throughout,  but  susceptible  of  any  de-
termination ;  while  at  the  same  time  it  is  perfectly  permanent/
and  continues  the  same  amid  all  change  and  alteration.  And
in  finite  things  at  least  this  disregard  by  matter  of  any v  de-
terminate form  is  certainly  exhibited.  For  example,  it  matters
not  to  a  block  of  marble,  whether  it  receive  the  form  of  this
or  that  statue  or  even  the  form  of  a  pillar.  Be  it  noted  however
that  a  block  of  marble  can  disregard  form  only  relatively,  that
is,  in  reference  to  the  sculptor :  it  is  by  no  means  purely  form-
less. And  so  the  mineralogist  sees  the  relatively  formless
matter  of  the  sculptor,  in  the  light  of  a  special  formation  of
rock,  differing  from  other  equally  special  formations,  such  as
sandstone  or  porphyry.  Therefore  we  say  it  is  an  abstraction
of  the  understanding,  which  isolates  matter  into  a  certain  natural
formlessness.  For  properly  speaking  the  thought  of  matter


204  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE. [429,  130,

includes  the  principle  of  form  throughout,  and  no  formless
matter  therefore  appears  anywhere  in  experience  as  existing.
Be  this  as  it  may,  the  conception  of  matter  as  original  and
pre-existent,  and  as  naturally  formless,  is  at  least  very  ancient ;
it  meets  us  even  among  the  Greeks,  at  first  in  the  mythical
shape  of  Chaos,  which  is  supposed  to  represent  the  unformed
substratum  of  the  existing  world.  Such  a  conception  must  of
necessity  tend  to  make  God  not  the  Creator  of  the  world,  but
a  mere  world-moulder  or  demiurge.  A  deeper  insight  into
nature  reveals  God  as  creating  the  world  out  of  nothing.  And
that  teaches  two  things.  On  the  one  hand  it  enunciates  that
matter  as  such  has  no  independent  subsistence,  and  on  the  other
that  the  form  does  not  supervene  upon  matter  from  without,
but  as  a  totality  involves  the  principle  of  matter  in  itself.
This  free  and  infinite  form  will  hereafter  come  before  us  as
the  notion.

129.]  Thus  the  Thing  suffers  a  disruption  into  Matter  and
Form.  Each  of  these  is  the  totality  of  thinghood  and  can
stand  by  itself.  But  Matter,  which  is  meant  to  be  the  positive
and  indeterminate  existence,  contains,  as  an  existence,  reflection-
into-another,  every  whit  as  much  as  it  contains  Being-within-
self.  Accordingly  as  it  is  a  unity  of  these,  characteristics,
it  is  itself  the  totality  of  Form.  But  Form,  being  a  complete
whole  of  characteristics,  ipso  facto  involves  reflection-into-self ;
in  other  words,  as  a  Form  that  refers  itself  to  itself,  it  has  what
ought  to  constitute  the  characteristic  of  Matter.  Both  are  in
the  abstract  the  same.  This  unity  of  them,  expressly  realised,
is  the  reference  connecting  Matter  and  Form,  which  are  also
distinguished.

130-]  The  Thing,  being  this  totality,  is  a  contradiction.  On
the  side  of  its  negative  unity  it  is  the  Form  in  which  matter
is  determined  and  deposed  to  the  rank  of  properties  (§  125).
At  the  same  time  it  consists  of  Matters,  which  in  the  reflection-
of-the-thing-into-itself  are  as  much  independent  as  they  are
at  the  same  time  negatived.  Thus  the  thing  is  the  essential
existence,  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  an  existence  that  suspends
or  absorbs  itself  in  itself.  In  other  wrords,  the  thing  is  an
,  Appearance  or  Phenomenon.

In  physics,.  Porosity  represents  the  equal  place  which  in  the


i3i.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  205

thing  is  expressly  attributed  to  the  negation  and  to  the  in-
dependence of  matters.  Each  of  the  several  matters  (colouring
matter,  smelling  matter,  and  if  we  believe  some  people,  even
sound-matter, — not  excluding  caloric,  electric  matter,  &c.)  is
also  negatived :  and  in  this  negation  of  theirs,  that  is  to  say
interpenetrating  their  pores,  we  find  the  numerous  other  in-
dependent matters,  which,  being  similarly  porous,  allow  the
rest  in  turn  to  exist  in  themselves.  Pores  are  not  empirical
facts  ;  they  are  figments  of  the  understanding,  which  uses  them
to  represent  the  element  of  negation  in  independent  matters.
The  further  working-out  of  the  contradictions  is  concealed  by
the  nebulous  confusion  in  which  all  matters  are  independent
and  all  no  less  negatived  in  each  otter.  If  the  faculties  or
activities  of  mind  are  similarly  hypostatised,  their  vital  unity
also  turns  into  a  perplexed  mass  of  inter-actions.

These  pores  (meaning  thereby  not  the  pores  in  an  organic
body,  such  as  the  pores  of  wood  or  of  the  skin,  but  those
in  what  are  termed  matters,  such  as  in  colouring  matter,
caloric,  or  in  metals  and  crystals)  cannot  be  verified  by
observation.  In  the  same  way  matter  itself :  furthermore  form
which  is  separated  from  matter :  in  the  first  instance  the
thing  and  its  consistence  from  matters,  or  the  view  that  the
thing  subsists  itself,  and  only  has  properties :  all  these  are
products  of  the  reflective  understanding,  which  while  it  observes
and  professes  to  retail  only  what  it  observes,  is  rather  creating
a  metaphysic,  bristling  with  contradictions  of  which  it  is  un-
conscious.

B. — THE  APPEARANCE.

131.]  The  Essence  must  appear  or  show  itself.  In  the
essence  there  is  a  show  or  shining  by  which  it  is  suspended
and  translated  into  immediacy.  That  immediacy  has  a  double
character.  Whilst,  as  reflection-into-self,  it  is  matter  or  sub-
sistence, it  is  also  form,  reflection-into-something-else,  a  sub-
sistence which  sete  itself  aside.  To  show  or  shine  is  the
characteristic  by  which  the  essence  is  distinguished  from


206  THE DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [131.

being, — by  which  it  is  an  essence ;  and  it  is  this  show  which,
when  it  is  developed,  shows  itself,  and  is  the  Appearance.
The  Essence  accordingly  is  not  something  beyond  or  behind
the  appearance.  Existence  is  appearance,  just  because  it  is
the  essence  which  exists.  An  Appearance  (or  Phenomenon)
is  an  essential  existence.

Existence  stated  explicitly  in  its  contradiction,  is  Appearance.
But  an  appearance  or  phenomenon  is  not  to  be  confused  with
a  mere  show.  Show  or  sham  is  the  proximate  truth  of  Being
or  immediacy.  The  immediate,  instead  of  being  what  we  sup-
pose, something  independent,  resting  on  its  own  self,  is  a  mere
show,  and  as  such  it  is  packed  into  or  included  under  the  sim-
plicity of  the  immanent  essence.  The  essence  is,  in  the  first
place,  the  sum  total  of  the  showing  in  self,  but,  far  from
abiding  in  this  inwardness,  it  comes  as  a  ground  forward  into
existence ;  and  this  existence  being  grounded  not  in  itself,  but
on  something  else,  is  no  more  than  an  appearance.  In  our
imagination  we  ordinarily  combine  with  the  term  appearance
•or  phenomenon  the  conception  of  an  indefinite  congeries  of
things  existing,  the  being  of  which  is  purely  relative,  and
which  consequently  do  not  rest  on  a  foundation  of  their  own,
but  are  esteemed  only  as  passing  stages.  But  while  this  is  so,
essence  is  not  supposed  to  stay  persistently  behind  or  beyond
appearance.  Rather  it  is,  we  may  say,  the  infinite  kindness
which  lets  its  own  show  freely  issue  into  immediacy,  and  gra-
ciously allows  it  the  joy  of  being.  The  appearance  which  is
thus  created  does  not  stand  on  its  own  feet,  and  has  its
being  not  in  itself  but  in  something  else.  God  who  is  the
essence,  when  He  lends  existence  to  the  passing  stages  of  his
own  show  in  himself,  may  be  described  as  the  goodness  that
creates  a  world :  but  He  is  also  the  power  above  it,  and  the
righteousness,  which  manifests  the  merely  phenomenal  character
of  the  content  of  this  existing  world,  whenever  it  tries  to  exist
for  its  own  sake.

Appearance  is  upon  the  whole  a  very  important  grade  of  the
logical  Idea.  Philosophy,  in  fact,  may  be  marked  off  from  or-
dinary consciousness,  through  the  circumstance,  that  it  sees  the
merely  phenomenal  character  of  what  the  latter  supposes  to  have
an  independent  being.  The  significance  of  appearance  however
must  be  properly  grasped  or  mistakes  will  arise.  To  say  that
anything  is  a  mere  appearance  may  be  misinterpreted  to  mean,
that  as  compared  with  what  is  merely  phenomenal,  there  is
greater  truth  in  the  immediate,  in  that  which  is.  Now  in
strict  fact,  the  case  is  precisely  the  reverse.  Appearance  is


i3i.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  207

higher  than  mere  Being.  It  is  an  ampler  term  of  thought,
Because  it  holds  in  combination  the  two  elements  of  reflection-
into-self  and  reflection-into-another :  whereas  Being-  (or  im-
mediacy) is  simply  the  absence  of  connective  reference,  and  '--'
apparently  rests  upon  itself  alone.  Still,  to  say  that  anything
is  only  an  appearance  suggests  a  real  flaw,  which  consists  in
this,  that  Appearance  is  still  in  a  state  of  rupture,  and  has  no
stay  in  itself.  Beyond  and  above  mere  appearance  comes  in
the  first  place  Actuality,  the  third  grade  of  Essence,  of  which
we  shall  afterwards  speak.

In  the  history  of  Modern  Philosophy,  Kant  has  the  merit  of
first  rehabilitating  this  distinction  between  the  common  and
the  philosophic  modes  of  thought.  He  stopped  half-way  how-
ever, when  he  attached  to  Appearance"  a  subjective  meaning
only,  and  established  the  abstract  essence  outside  of  it  as  the
thing-in-itself  beyond  the  reach  of  our  cognition.  For  it  is
the  very  nature  of  the  world  of  immediate  objects  to  be  an
appearance  only.  Knowing  it  to  be  so,  we  know  at  the  same
time  the  essence,  which,  far  from  staying  behind  or  beyond  the
appearance,  rather  manifests  its  own  essentiality  by  bringing
it  down  to  the  level  of  mere  appearance.  One  can  hardly
quarrel  with  the  unprejudiced  mind,  which,  ii>  its  eagerness
after  a  rounded  whole,  cannot  acquiesce  in  the  doctrine  of
subjective  idealism,  that  we  are  solely  concerned  with  pheno-
mena. The  unprejudiced  mind,  however,  in  its  desire  to  save  .x"*
the  objectivity  of  knowledge,  may  very  naturally  return  t<r
abstract  immediacy,  and  maintain  that  immediacy  to  be  true
and  actual.  In  a  short  pamphlet  published  under  the  title,
e  A  most  Lucid  Statement  for  the  General  Public  touching  the
proper  nature  of  the  Latest  Philosophy:  an  Attempt  to  force
the  reader  to  understand^  Fichte  examined  the  opposition
between  subjective  idealism  and  immediate  consciousness  in  a
popular  form,  under  the  shape  of  a  dialogue  between  the  author
and  the  reader,  and  tried  haTd  to  prove  that  the  subjective
idealist's  point  of  view  was  right.  In  this  dialogue  the  reader
complains  to  the  author  that  he  has  failed  to  place  himself
in  the  idealist's  position,  and  is  inconsolable  at  being  told  that
things  around  him  are  no  real  things  but  mere  appearances.
The  affliction  of  the  reader  is  not  without  grounds  to  justify
it,  when  he  is  exhorted  to  consider  himself  hemmed  in  by  an
impenetrable  barrier  of  purely  subjective  conceptions.  Apart
from  this  subjective  view  of  Appearance,  however,  we  have  all
reason  to  rejoice  that  the  things  which  environ  us  are  appear-
ances and  not  steadfast  and  independent  existences;  since  in
that  case  we  should  soon  perish  of  hunger,  both  bodily  and
mental.


208  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE. [132,  133.

(a)  The  World  of  Appearance  or  Phenomenal  World.

132.]  The  Apparent  or  Phenomenal  exists  in  such  a  way,
that  its  subsistence  is  ipso  facto  thrown  into  abeyance  or
suspended  and  is  made  only  one  element  in  the  form  itself.
The  form  embraces  in  it  the  matter  or  subsistence  as  one  of
its  characteristics.  In  this  way  the  phenomenal  has  its
ground  in  this  matter  as  its  essence,  its  reflection-into-self
in  contrast  with  its  immediacy,  but,  in  so  doing,  has  it
only  in  another  character  of  the  form.  This  ground  of  its
is  no  less  phenomenal  than  itself,  and  the  phenomenon  in
this  way  passes  into  an  endless  mediation  of  subsistence  by
means  of  form,  and  thus  equally  by  non-subsistence.  This
endless  inter-mediation  is  at  the  same  time  a  unity  of  con-
nexion with  self:  and  existence  is  developed  into  a  totality,
into  a  world  of  phenomena, — of  reflected  finitude.

(b) Content  and  Form.

133-]  In  the  world  of  phenomena  one  phenomenon  is  outside
of  another.  But  they  compose  a  rounded  whole,  and  are
quite  contained  in  their  connexion  with  self.  In  this  way
the  connexion  of  the  phenomenon  with  self  is  completely
specified,  it  has  the  Form  in  itself:  and  because  it  is  in  this
identity,  has  it  as  essential  subsistence.  So  it  comes  about
that  the  form  is  Content :  and,  when  viewed  in  its  developed
character,  is  the  Law  of  the  Phenomenon.  When  the  form
on  the  contrary  is  not  reflected  into  self  it  is  equivalent  to
the  negative  of  the  phenomenon,  to  the  non-independent  and
changeable :  and  that  sort  of  form  is  the  indifferent  or  Ex-
ternal Form.

The  essential  point  to  keep  in  view  about  the  opposition
of  Form  and  Content  is  that  the  content  is  not  formless,  but
has  the  form  in  its  own  self,  quite  as  much  as  the  form  is
external  to  it.  There  is  a  double  sort  of  form.  At  one  time  it
is  reflected  into  itself.  That  form  is  identical  with  the  content.


1 3 3.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  209

At  another time  it  is  not  reflected into itself. That  is  the
external  existence,  which  does not at  all affect the  content.
We  are here in presence,  properly  speaking-,  of  the absolute
relation or  proportion between content and  form  : according  /^»
to which the one  lapses into the other,  so that content  is
nothing-  but the revulsion of  form into content,  and form
nothing  but  the  revulsion  of  content  into  form. This  mutual  ^
revulsion  is  one  of  the  most  important  laws  of  thought. But
it is  not explicity stated until we come to the Absolute
Relation  or  Proportion.

Form  and  content  are  a  pair  of  characteristics  frequently
employed  by  the  reflective  understanding,  especially  in  the  way
of  looking  on  the  content  as  the  essential  and  independent,  the
form  on  the  contrary  as  the  unessential  and  dependent.  Against
this  it  is  to  be  noted  that  both  are  in  fact  equally  essential ;  and
that,  while  a  formless  content  can  be  as  little  found  as  a  formless
matter,  the  two  (content  and  matter)  are  distinguished  by  this
circumstance,  that  matter,  though  implicitly  not  without  form, '^
still  in  being  one  thing  or  another  manifests  a  disregard  of  form,
whereas  the  content,  as  such,  is  what  it  is  only  because  the
matured  form  is  included  in  it.  Still  the  form  comes  before
us  sometimes  as  an  existence  indifferent  and  external  to  content,
and  does  so  for  the  reason  that  the  whole  range  of  Appearance  is
still  encumbered  with  externality.  In  a  book,  for  instance,  it
certainly  has  no  bearing  upon  the  content,  whether  it  be  bound
in  paper  or  in  leather.  That  however  does  not  in  the  least
imply  that  apart  from  such  an  indifferent  and  external  form,  the
content  of  the  book  is  itself  formless.  There  are  undoubtedly
books  enough  which  even  in  reference  to  their  content  may
well  be  styled  formless :  but  want  of  form  in  this  case  is  the
same  as  bad  form,  and  means  the  absence  of  the  right  form,
not  the  absence  of  all  form.  So  far  is  this  right  form  from  /
being  unaffected  by  the  content  that  it  is  rather  the  content  ^
itself.  A  work  of  art  that  wants  the  right  form  is  for  that  very
reason  no  right  or  true  work  of  art :  and  it  is  a  bad  way  of
excusing  an  artist,  to  say  that  the  content  of  his  works  is  good
and  even  excellent,  though  they  want  the  right  form.  Real  >•
works  of  art  are  those  where  content  and  form  are  throughout  ^
identical.  The  content  of  the  Iliad,  it  may  be  said,  is  the
Trojan  war,  and  especially  the  wrath  of  Achilles.  In  that  we
have  everything,  and  yet  very  little  after  all ;  for  the  Iliad  is
made  an  Iliad  by  the  poetic  form,  in  which  that  content  is
moulded.  The  content  of  Romeo  and  Juliet  may  similarly  be  said


210  THE DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  [134.

to  be  the  ruin  of  two  lovers  through  the  discord  between  their
families :  but  something  more  is  needed  to  make  Shakespeare's
immortal  tragedy.

In  reference  to  the  relation  of  form  and  content  in  the  field  of
science,  we  should  recollect  the  difference  between  philosophy
and  the  rest  of  the  sciences.  The  latter  are  said  to  be  finite,
because  their  mode  of  thought,  as  a  merely  formal  act,  derives
its  content  from  without.  Their  content  therefore  is  not  known
as  moulded  from  within  through  the  thoughts  which  lie  at  the
ground  of  it,  and  form  and  content  do  not  thoroughly  inter-
penetrate each  other.  This  partition  disappears  in  philosophy  ;
and  thus  justifies  the  title  of  infinite  knowledge  sometimes  given
to  philosophy.  Yet  even  philosophic  thought  is  often  held  to
be  a  merely  formal  act ;  and  the  absence  of  any  content  in
logic,  which  by  common  agreement  deals  only  with  thoughts  as
thoughts,  is  one  of  the  settled  facts  of  ordinary  opinion.  And  if
content  means  no  more  than  what  is  palpable  and  obvious  to
the  senses,  all  philosophy  and  logic  in  particular  must  be  at
once  acknowledged  to  be  void  of  content,  that  is  to  say,  of
content  perceptible  to  the  senses.  Even  ordinary  forms  of
thought  however  and  the  common  usage  of  language  do  not
in  the  least  restrict  the  appellation  of  content  to  what  is  perceived
by  the  senses,  or  to  what  has  a  being  in  place  and  time.  A  book
without  content  is,  as  every  one  knows,  not  a  book  with  empty
leaves,  but  one  of  which  the  content  is  as  good  as  none.  We
shall  find  as  the  last  result  on  closer  analysis,  that  by  content  an
educated  mind  means  nothing  but  the  presence  of  thought.
Hence  it  follows  that  thoughts  are  not  empty  forms  without
affinity  to  their  content,  and  that  in  other  spheres  than  that  of
art,  the  truth  and  thoroughness  of  the  content  essentially  depend
on  the  content  showing  itself  identical  with  the  form.

134.]  But  immediate  existence  is  a  character  of  the  subsistence
itself  as  well  as  of  the  form :  the  form  is  consequently  external
to  the  character  of  the  content,  but  in  an  equal  degree  this
externality,  which  the  content  has  through  the  factor  of  its
subsistence,  is  essential  to  it.  When  thus  explicitly  stated,  the
phenomenon  is  the  ratio  or  relation :  in  which  one  and  the  same
thing,  viz.  the  content  or  the  developed  form,  is  seen  as  the
externality  and  antithesis  of  independent  existences,  and  as  their
equation  or  identical  connexion.  And  it  is  in  this  connexion
alone  that  the  two  things  distinguished  are  what  they  are.


1 35-]  THE DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  211

(c)  Ratio  (Relation).

135.]  (a)  The  immediate  relation  (in  which  the  two  sides
are  quasi- independent)  is  that  of  the  Whole  and  the  Parts.
The  content  is  the  whole,  and  consists  of  the  parts :  these  parts
are  the  form  and  the  reverse  of  the  content.  The  parts  are
diverse  one  from  another.  It  is  they  that  possess  independent
being.  But  they  are  parts,  only  when  they  are  connected  with
one  another  as  identical,  i.  e.  when  equated ;  or,  in  so  far  as
they  make  up  the  whole,  when  taken  together.  But  this  term
'  Together '  is  the  reverse  and  negation  of  the  part.

Essential  relativity  is  the  specific  and  completely  universal
phase  in  which  things  appear.  Everything  that  exists  stands
in  relation,  and  this  relation  is  the  veritable  nature  of  every
existence.  The  existent  thing  in  this  way  is  not  solely  on
its  own  account,  its  being  is  in  something  else :  in  this  other
however  it  is  the  connexion  with  self ;  and  relation  is  the  unity  of
the  connexion  with  self  and  the  connexion  with  something  else.

The  relation  of  the  whole  and  the  parts  is  untrue  to  this
extent,  that  the  notion  and  the  reality  of  the  relation  are  not  in
harmony.  The  notion  of  the  whole  is  to  contain  parts :  but  if
the  whole  is  taken  and  made  what  its  notion  implies,  i.  e.  if  it  is
divided,  it  at  once  ceases  to  be  a  whole.  Things  there  are,  no
doubt,  which  correspond  to  this  relation :  but  for  that  very
reason  they  are  trifling  and  untrue  existences.  We  must  re-
member however  what  '  untrue '  signifies.  When  it  occurs  in  a
philosophical  discussion  the  term  c  untrue'  does  not  signify  that
the  thing  to  which  it  is  applied  is  non-existent.  A  bad  state  or
a  sickly  body  may  exist, — of  that  there  can  be  no  doubt ;  but
these  things  are  untrue,  because  their  notion  and  their  reality
are  out  of  harmony.

The  relation  of  whole  and  parts,  being  the  immediate  relation,
is  one  that  is  familiar  to  the  analytic  or  reflective  understanding  ;
and  for  that  reason  it  often  satisfies  when  the  question  really
turns  on  profounder  relations.  The  limbs  and  organs,  for
instance,  of  an  organic  body,  are  not  merely  parts  of  it :  it  is
only  in  their  unity  that  they  are  what  they  are,  and  they  are
unquestionably  affected  by  that  unity,  as  they  also  in  turn  affect
it.  These  limbs  and  organs  become  mere  parts,  only  when  they
pass  under  the  hands  of  the  anatomist,  whose  occupations,  be  it'
remembered,  are  not  with  the  living  body  but  with  the  corpse.
Not  that  we  call  dissection  a  mistake :  we  only  mean  that  the
external  and  mechanical  relation  of  whole  and  parts  is  not

P  2


212  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  [136.

sufficient  for  us,  if  we  want  to  learn  the  truth  of  organic  life.
And  if  this  be  so  in  organic  life,  it  is  the  case  to  a  much  greater
extent  when  we  apply  this  relation  to  the  mind  and  the  formations
of  the  spiritual  world.  Psychologists  may  not  expressly  speak
of  parts  of  the  soul  or  mind,  but  the  mode  in  which  this  subject
is  treated  by  the  analytic  understanding  shows  traces  of  copying
the  pattern  of  this  finite  relation.  At  least  that  is  so,  when  the
different  forms  of  mental  activity  are  enumerated  and  described
merely  in  their  isolation  one  after  another,  as  so-called  special
powers  and  faculties.


136.]  (/3)  The  one-and-same  of  this  ratio,  the  connexion
with  self  which  is  found  in  it,  is  thus  immediately  a  negative
connexion  with  itself.  And  it  is  so,  when  by  its  means  it  is
brought  about  that  one  and  the  same  is  indifferent  towards  the
difference,  and  that  this  one  and  the  same  is  the  negative
connexion  with  itself,  which  repels  itself  (as  reflection-into-self)
to  difference,  and  invests  itself  (as  reflection-into-something-
else)  with  existence.  Whilst  it  conversely  leads  back  this
reflection-into-other  to  a  connexion  with  self  and  to  in-
difference. Thus  comes  Force  and  its  Exertion.

In  the  relation  of  the  whole  and  the  parts,  self-sameness
is  brought  immediately,  and  therefore  without  thought,  into
relation  with  difference  and  into  a  revulsion  of  one  into  the
other.  We  pass  from  the  whole  to  the  parts,  and  from  the
parts  to  the  whole :  in  the  one  we  forget  its  opposition  to  the
other,  while  each  on  its  own  account,  at  one  time  the  whole,
at  another  the  parts,  is  taken  to  be  an  independent  existence.
In  other  words,  when  the  parts  are  declared  to  subsist  in  the
whole,  and  the  whole  to  consist  of  the  parts,  we  have  either
member  of  the  relation  at  different  times  taken  to  be  perma-
nently subsistent,  while  the  other  is  non-essential.  In  its
superficial  form  the  mechanical  relation  consists  in  making
the  parts  independent  of  each  other  and  of  the  whole.

This  relation  may  be  adopted  for  the  progression  ad  infinitum,
in  the  case  of  the  divisibility  of  matter :  and  then  it  becomes
an  absurd  see-saw  between  the  two  sides.  A  thing  at  one
time  is  taken  as  a  whole :  then  we  go  on  to  specify  the  parts :


136.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  213

this  specifying-  is  forgotten,  and  what  was  a  part  is  regarded  as
a  whole :  then  the  specifying  of  the  part  comes  up  again,  and
so  on  for  ever.  But  if  this  infinity  be  explicitly  stated  as  the
negative  which  it  is,  it  is  the  negative  connexion  of  the  relation
with  itself.  That  negative  connexion  with  self  is  Force,  the
whole  in  its  self-sameness  as  Being  immanent,  and  then  again
as  suspending  this  immanency  and  putting  itself  forth  :  or  con-
versely it  is  the  Exertion  which  vanishes  and  returns  into  Force.

Force,  notwithstanding  this  infinity,  is  also  finite :  for  the
content,  or  the  one  and  the  same  of  the  Force  and  its  out-
putting,  is  this  identity  at  first  only  for  the  observer :  the  two
sides  of  the  relation  are  not  yet,  each  on  its  own  account,  the
concrete  identity  of  that  one  and  same,  not  yet  the  totality.
For  one  another  they  are  therefore  different,  and  the  relation
is  a  finite  one.  Force  consequently  requires  solicitation  from
without :  it  works  blindly  :  and  on  account  of  this  defectiveness
of  form,  the  content  is  also  limited  and  accidental.  It  is  not
yet  genuinely  identical  with  the  form,  is  not  yet  found  defined
as  a  notion  and  an  end,  that  is  to  say,  characterised  in  itself
and  for  its  own  sake.  This  difference  is  most  essential,  but
not  easy  to  apprehend :  it  must  first  be  more  clearly  charac-
terised in  the  notion  of  an  End  itself.  If  it  be  overlooked,
it  leads  to  the  error  of  viewing  God  as  Force,  a  confusion
which  is  especially  evident  in  Herder's  conception  of  God.

It  is  often  said  that  the  nature  of  Force  itself  is  unknown
and  that  its  out-putting  or  exertion  only  is  apprehended.  But,
in  the  first  place,  it  may  be  replied,  all  that  is  specified  as
contained  in  Force  is  the  same  as  what  is  specified  in  the
Exertion :  and  the  explanation  of  a  phenomenon  from  a  Force
is  to  that  extent  a  mere  tautology.  What  is  supposed  to  remain
unknown,  therefore,  is  really  nothing  but  the  empty  form  of
reflection-into-self,  by  which  alone  the  Force  is  distinguished
from  the  Exertion, — and  that  form  is  every  whit  as  well  known.
It  is  a  form  that  does  not  make  the  slightest  addition  to  the
content  and  to  the  law,  which  have  to  be  discovered  from  the
phenomenon  alone.  Another  assertion  always  made  is  that


214  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [136.

these  remarks  do  not  affect  the  question  as  to  the  nature  of
Force :  and  that  being  so,  it  is  impossible  to  see  why  the  form
of  Force  has  been  introduced  into  the  sciences  at  all.  In  the
second  place  the  nature  of  Force  is  undoubtedly  unknown :  we
are  still  without  any  necessity  binding  and  connecting  its
content  together  in  itself,  and  there  is  no  necessity  in  the
content  in  so  far  as  it  is  expressly  limited,  and  hence  has  its
character  by  means  of  another  thing  outside  of  it.

(1)  Compared  with  the immediate  relation  of  a  whole  and
parts,  the  relation  between  force  and  its  putting  forth  may  be
esteemed  infinite. In  it  that  identity  of  the  two  sides  is  realised,
which  in  the  former  relation  only  existed  for  the  observer. The
whole,  though  we  can  see  that  it  consists  of  parts,  ceases  to  be  a
whole  when  it  is  divided : whereas  force  is  only  shown  to  be
force  when  it  exerts  itself,  and  in  its  exercise  only  comes  back
to  itself. The  exercise  is  only  force  once  more. Yet,  on  further
examination  even  this  relation  will  appear  finite,  and  finite  in
virtue  of  its  relativity  or  mediation :  just  as,  conversely,  the
relation  of  whole  and  parts  is  obviously  finite  in  virtue  of  its
immediacy. The  first  and  simplest  evidence  for  the  finitude  of
the  mediated  relation  of  force  and  its  exercise  is,  that  each  and
every  force  is  conditioned  and  requires  something  else  than  itself
for  its  subsistence. For  instance,  a  special  vehicle  of  magnetic
force,  as  is  well  known,  is  iron,  the  other  properties  of  which,
such as its colour,  specific weight, or relation to acids,  are
independent  of  this  connexion  with  magnetism. The  same  thing
is  seen  in  all  other  forces,  which  from  one  end  to  the  other  are
found  to  be  conditioned  and  mediated  by  something  else  than
themselves. Another  proof  of  the  finite  nature  of  force  is  that  it
requires  solicitation  before  it  can  put  itself  forth. That  through
which  the  force  is  solicited,  is  itself  another  exertion  of  force,
which  cannot  put  itself  forth  without  similar  solicitation. This
brings  us  either  to  a  repetition  of  the  infinite  progression,  or  to
a  mutual  state  of  soliciting  and  being  solicited. In  either  case
we  have  no  absolute  beginning  of  motion. Force  is  not  as  yet,
like  the  final  cause,  inherently  self-determining :  the  content  is
given  to  it  as  determined,  and  force,  when  it  exerts  itself,  is,
according  to  the  phrase,  blind in its  working. That  phrase
implies  the  distinction  between  the  merely  one-sided  exercise  of
force,  and  the  activity  which  is  guided  by  design.

(2)  The  frequent  statements,  telling  us  that  the  exercise  of
the  force  and  not  the  force  itself  admits  of  being  known,  must  be.
rejected  as  groundless. It  is  the  very  essence  of  force  to  exert
itself,  and  thus  in  the  whole  amount  of  the  exertion,  viewed  as  a


136.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  215

law,  we  at  the  same  time  discover  the  force  itself.  And  yet  this
assertion  that  force  in  its  own  self  is  unknowable  betrays  a  well-
grounded  presentiment  that  this  relation  is  finite.  The  several
exertions  of  a  force  at  first  meet  us  in  an  indefinite  variety,  and
in  their  isolation  they  seem  accidental :  but,  reducing  this  variety
to  its  inner  unity,  which  we  term  force,  we  learn  to  see  that  the
apparently  contingent  is  necessary,  by  recognising  the  law  that
rules  it.  But  the  different  forces  are  themselves  a  complex  mass,
and  as  they  stand  one  beside  another  seem  to  be  contingent.
Hence  in  empirical  physics,  we  speak  of  the  forces  of  gravity,
magnetism,  electricity,  &c.,  and  in  empirical  psychology  of  the
forces  of  memory,  imagination,  will,  and  all  the  other  forces  of
the  soul.  All  this  complication  excites  a  craving  to  know  these
different  forces  as  a  united  whole,  nor  would  this  craving  be
appeased  if  the  several  forces  were  merely  traced  back  to  one
common  primary  force.  Such  a  primary  force  would  be  really
no  more  than  an  empty  abstraction,  with  as  little  content  as  the
abstract  thing-in-self.  And  besides  this,  the  relation  of  force  to
its  exertion  is  essentially  the  mediated  relation,  and  it  must
therefore  contradict  the  notion  of  force  to  view  it  as  primary  or
resting  on  itself.

Such  being  the  case  with  the  nature  of  force,  though  we  may
be  willing,  it  is  true,  to  hear  the  world  called  an  exertion  (or
utterance)  of  divine  forces,  we  should  object  to  have  God  himself
viewed  as  a  mere  force.  For  force  is  after  all  a  subordinate  and
finite  category.  At  the  so-called  renascence  of  the  sciences,  when
there  grew  up  a  tendency  to  trace  the  single  phenomena  of
nature  back  to  forces  lying  at  the  ground  of  them,  the  Church
branded  the  enterprise  as  impious.  The  argument  of  the  Church
on  this  point  was  as  follows.  If  it  be  the  forces  of  gravitation,
of  vegetation,  &c.  which  occasion  the  movements  of  the  heavenly
bodies,  the  growth  of  plants,  &c.,  there  is  nothing  left  for,  divine
providence,  and  God  sinks  to  the  level  of  a  leisurely  onlooker,
surveying  such  a  play  of  forces.  The  students  of  nature,  it  is
true,  and  Newton  more  than  others,  when  they  employed  the
reflective  category  of  force  to  explain  natural  phenomena,  have
expressly  stated  that  the  honour  of  God,  as  the  Creator  and
Governor  of  the  world,  would  not  be  impaired.  Still  it  is  a
consequence  of  this  explanation  by  means  of  forces,  that  the
inferential  understanding  proceeds  to  give  each  of  these  forces  a
stability  of  its  own,  and  to  maintain  them  in  their  finitude  as
ultimate.  And  contrasted  with  this  finite  world  of  independent
forces  and  matters,  the  only  terms  in  which  it  is  possible  still  to
describe  God,  will  present  Him  in  the  abstract  infinity  of  an
unknowable  and  supreme  Being  in  some  world  far  away.  This
is  precisely  the  position  of  materialism,  and  of  the  modern
'  free-thinking,'  whose  theology  ignores  what  God  is  and  restricts


216  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE. [137,  I38.

itself  to  the  mere  fact  that  He  is.  In  this  dispute  therefore  the
Church  and  the  religious  mind  have  to  a  certain  extent  the  right
on  their  side.  The  finite  forms  of  understanding  certainly  fail
to  fulfil  the  conditions  requisite  for  a  knowledge  either  of  Nature
or  of  the  formations  in  the  world  of  Mind  as  they  truly  are.
Yet  on  the  other  side  it  is  impossible  to  overlook  the  formal
right  which,  in  the  first  place,  entitles  the  empirical  sciences  to
vindicate  for  science  the  existent  world  in  all  the  speciality  of  its
content,  and  to  seek  something  better  than  the  bare  statement  of
mere  abstract  faith  that  God  creates  and  governs  the  world.
When  our  religious  consciousness,  resting  upon  the  authority  of
the  Church,  teaches  us  that  God  created  the  world  by  his
almighty  will,  that  he  guides  the  stars  in  their  courses,  and
grants  to  all  his  creatures  their  existence  and  their  well-being,
the  question  Why  ?  is  still  left  waiting  for  an  answer.  Now  it
is  the  answer  to  this  question  which  forms  the  common  task  of
empirical  science  and  of  philosophy.  When  religion  refuses  to
recognise  this  problem,  or  the  justice  of  putting  it,  and  appeals
to  the  unsearehableness  of  the  decrees  of  God,  it  is  taking  up  the
same  ground  as  is  taken  by  the  superficial  Enlightenment  of
understanding.  Such  an  appeal  is  no  better  than  an  arbitrary
dogmatism,  which  contravenes  the  express  precept  of  Christianity,
enjoining,  us  to  know  God  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  and  is  prompted
by  a  humility  which  is  not  Christian,  but  born  of-  a  haughty
fanaticism.

137.]  Force  is  a  whole,  which  is  in  its  own  self  the  negative
connexion  with  itself ;  and  as  such  a  whole  it  continually  pushes
itself  back  from  itself  and  puts  itself  forth.  But  since  this
reflection-into-another  (corresponding  to  the  distinction  between
the  Pa/ts  of  the  Whole)  is  equally  much  a  reflection-into-self,
this  out-putting  is  the  way  and  means  by  which  Force  that
returns  back  into  itself  is  as  a  Force.  The  very  act  of  out-
putting  accordingly  sets  in  abeyance  or  suspends  the  diversity
of  the  two  sides  which  is  found  in  this  relation,  and  expressly
states  the  identity  which  virtually  constitutes  their  content.
The  truth  of  Force  and  utterance  therefore  is  that  relation,  in
which  the  two  sides  are  distinguished  only  as  Outward  and
Inward.

138.]  (y)  The  Inward  is  the  ground,  when  it  stands  for
the  mere  form  of  the  one  side  of  the  Appearance  and  the
Relation, — the  empty  form  of  reflection-into-self.  As  a  counter-


i39,  MO.] THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  217

part  to  it  stands  the  Outward.  It  is  the  existence,  as  the
form  of  the  other  side  of  the  relation,  with  the  empty  charac-
teristic of  reflection-into-something-else.  But  Inward  and
Outward  are  identified  :  and  their  identity  is  identity  consum-
mated :  viz.  the  content,  that  unity  of  reflection-into-self  and
reflection-into-other  which  was  at  least  statuted  in  the  movement
of  force.  Both  are  the  same  one  totality,  and  this  unity  makes
them  the  content.

139.]  In  the  first  place  then,  the  Outward  is  the  same
content  as  the  Inward.  What  is  inwardly  is  also  found  out-
wardly, and  vice  versa.  The  appearance  shows  nothing-  that
is  not  in  the  essence,  and  in  the  essence  there  is  nothing  but
what  is  manifested.

140.]  In  the  second  place,  Inward  and  Outward,  as  marking
the  form,  are  reciprocally  opposed,  and  that  thoroughly.  The
one  is  the  abstraction  of  identity  with  self;  the  other  is  mere
multiplicity  or  reality.  But  as  constituent  elements  of  the  one
form,  they  are  essentially  identical :  so  that  whatever  is  at  first
explicitly  put  only  in  the  one  abstraction,  is  also  as  plainly
and  at  one  step  only  in  the  other.  Therefore  what  is  only
internal  is  also  only  external :  and  what  is  only  external,  is  so
far  only  at  first  internal.

It  is  the  customary  mistake  of  reflection  to  take  the  essence  to
be  merely  what  is  inward.  If  it  be  so  understood,  even  this
contemplation  of  it  is  purely  external,  and  that  sort  of  essence
is  the  empty  external  abstraction.

3ng  Snnere  bet  0tatur,
2)ringt  fein  etfcfyaffner  @eift,
3u  glucflid)  mm  fie  nur
2)ie  ciufjere  <8>d)aale  wtft.1

1  Compare  Goethe's  indignant  outcry — '  To  Natural  Science* — vol.  i.  pt.  3  :

35a3  t»6r'  id)  fedjjtg  3al)re  fticberfjolen,

Unb  ftudje  brauf,  abet  tterftofylen, —

Sftatur  f)at  toeber  .fern  nod)  @d)aate,

9U(e3  ifi  jte  mit  einem  2Me.

The  poem  or  dialogue  is  to  this  effect :  "  '  Into  the  inward  parts  of  Nature  (oh !
thou  Philistine  !)  no  created  mind  can  reach.'  (To  me  and  my  brethren  only  ye


218  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [140.

It  ought  rather  to  have  been  said  that,  if  the  essence  of
nature  is  ever  described  as  the  inner  part,  the  person  who  so
describes  it  onlyknows  its  outer  shell.  In  Being-  as  a  whole,
or  even  in  the  mere  perception  of  sense,  the  notion  is  at  first
only  the  inward :  and  for  that  very  reason  it  is  something
external  to  Being, — a  subjective  and  truthless  Being  like  the
thought  that  believes  in  it.  In  Nature  as  well  as  in  Mind,  so
long  as  the  notion,  design,  or  law  are  at  first  the  inner  capacity,
mere  possibilities,  they  are  first  only  an  external,  and,  what
we  may  call,  an  inorganic  nature,  lying  in  the  knowledge  of
a  third  person,  in  foreign  ascendancy,  and  the  like.  As  a  man
is  outwardly,  that  is  to  say  in  his  actions  (not  of  course  in  his
merely  bodily  outwardness),  so  is  he-  inwardly  :  and  if  his  virtue,
morality,  &c.  are  only  inwardly  his,  that  is,  if  they  exist  only
in  his  intentions  and  sentiments,  and  his  outward  acts  are  not
identical  with  them,  the  one  half  of  him  is  as  hollow  and  empty
as  the  other.

The  relation  of  the  Outward  to  the  Inward  unites  the  two
relations  that  precede,  and  at  the  same  time  suspends  and  sets
in  abeyance  mere  relativity  and  the  whole  range  of  appearance.
Yet  so  long  as  understanding  asserts  the  stability  of  the  Inward
and  Outward  in  their  separation,  they  are  empty  forms,  the  one
as  null  as  the  other.  Not  only  in  the  study  of  nature,  but  also
of  the  spiritual  world,  much  depends  on  a  just  appreciation  of  the
relation  of  inward  and  outward,  and  especially  on  avoiding  the
misconception  that  the  former  only  is  the  essential  point  on
which  everything  turns,  while  the  latter  is  unessential  and
trivial.  We  find  this  mistake  made  when,  as  is  often  done,  the
difference  between  nature  and  mind  is  traced  back  to  the  abstract
difference  between  inner  and  outer.  As  for  nature,  it  at  any
rate  is  upon  the  whole  external,  not  merely  to  the  mind,  but
even  implicitly.  When  we  say  '  upon  the  whole '  however,  we
do  not  mean  an  abstract  externality — for  there  is  no  such  thing.
We  rather  mean  that  the  Idea  which  forms  the  common  content

need  not  recall  such  a  word.  We  think  that,  place  for  place,  we  are  in  the
inward  part.)  'Happy  the  man,  to  whom  nature  only  shows  her  outward  shell.'
(I  have  heard  that  repeated  for  sixty  years,  and  curse  it, — but  in  secret.  Thousands
and  thousands  of  times  I  tell  myself:  she  gives  everything  abundantly  and
willingly  :  Nature  has  neither  kernel  nor  shell :  she  is  everything  at  once.  Only
most  of  all  try  thyself  and  see  whether  thou  art  kernel  or  shell.)"


1 4o.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE,  219

of  nature  and  mind,  is  found  in  nature  as  outward  only,  and  for
that  very  reason  only  inward.  The  abstract  understanding,  with
its  '  Either — or,'  may  be  reluctant  to  take  this  view  of  nature.
It  is  none  the  less  obviously  found  in  our  other  modes  of
consciousness,  particularly  in  religion.  It  is  the  lesson  of  religion
that  nature,  no  less  than  the  spiritual  world,  is  a  revelation  of
God :  but  with  this  distinction,  that  while  nature  never  gets  so
far  as  to  be  conscious  of  its  divine  essence,  that  consciousness  is
the  express  problem  of  the  mind,  which  in  the  matter  of  that
problem  is  finite.  Those  who  look  upon  the  essence  of  nature  as
mere  inwardness  and  therefore  inaccessible  to  us,  take  up  the
same  line  as  that  ancient  creed  which  regarded  God  as  envious
and  jealous :  a  creed  against  which  both  Plato  and  Aristotle
have  protested.  All  that  God  is,  He  imparts  and  reveals ;  and
He  does  so,  at  first,  in  and  through  nature.

Any  object  indeed  is  faulty  and  imperfect  when  it  is  only
inward,  and  thus  at  the  same  time  only  outward,  or,  (which  is
the  same  thing,)  when  it  is  only  an  outward  and  thus  only  an
inward.  For  instance,  a  child,  being  in  a  way  a  man,  is  no
doubt  a  rational  creature ;  but  the  reason  of  the  child  as  child
comes  before  us  at  first  as  merely  inward,  in  the  shape  of  his
natural  ability  or  vocation,  &cl  This  mere  inward,  at  the  same
time,  has  for  the  child  the  form  of  a  mere  outward,  in  the  shape
of  the  will  of  his  parents,  the  attainments  of  his  teachers,  and
the  whole  world  of  reason  that  envelopes  him.  The  education
and  instruction  of  a  child  aim  at  making  him  be  for  his  own
sake  what  he  is  at  first  potentially,  and  in  that  way  for  others,
viz.  for  his  grown-up  friends.  The  reason,  which  at  first  exists
in  the  child  only  as  an  inner  possibility,  is  actualised  through
education :  and  conversely,  the'  child  by  these  means  becomes
conscious,  that  the  goodness,  religion,  and  science  which  he  had
at  first  looked  upon  as  an  outward  authority,  are  his  proper
and  inward  nature.  As  with  the  child  so  it  is  in  this  matter
with  the  grown-up  man,  when,  in  opposition  to  his  true  destiny,
he  remains  under  the  sway  of  his  natural  knowledge  and  will.
Thus,  the  criminal  sees  the  punishment  to  which  he  has  to
submit  as  an  act  of  violence  from  without :  whereas  in  fact,  the
penalty  is  only  the  manifestation  of  his  own  criminal  will.

From  what  has  now  been  said,  we  may  learn  what  to  think  of
a  man,  who,  when  blamed  for  feeble  performance  or  even  perni-
cious acts,  appeals  to  the  excellent  views  and  sentiments  within
him,  which  he  lays  claim  to  and  distinguishes  from  the  outward
action.  There  certainly  may  be  individual  cases,  where  the
malice  of  outward  circumstances  leads  to  the  frustration  of  well-
meant  designs,  and  disturbs  the  execution  of  the  best-laid  plans.
But  in  general  even  here  the  essential  unity  between  inward  and


220  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [140.

outward  is  maintained.  We  are  thus  justified  in  saying  that  a
./  man  is  what  he  does ;  and  to  the  lying-  vanity  which  consoles
itself  by  the  sentiment  of  inward  excellence,  we  may  hold  up  the
words  of  the  gospel :  '  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them.'
That  grand  saying  applies  primarily  in  a  moral  and  religious
aspect,  but  it  also  holds  good  in  reference  to  what  is  essayed  in
art  and  science.  The  keen  observation  of  a  teacher,  who  perceives
in  his  pupil  decided  evidences  of  talent,  may  lead  him  to  state
his  opinion  that  a  Raphael  or  a  Mozart  lies  hidden  in  the  boy :
and  the  result  will  show  how  far  such  an  opinion  was  well-
founded.  But  if  a  daub  of  a  painter,  or  a  poetaster,  soothe
themselves  by  the  conceit  that  their  head  is  full  of  high  ideals,
their  consolation  is  a  poor  one ;  and  if  they  insist  on  being
judged  not  by  their  actual  works  but  by  their  projects,  we  may
safely  reject  their  pretensions  as  unfounded  and  unmeaning.
The  converse  case  however  also  occurs.  In  passing  judgment
on  men  who  have  executed  something  great  and  good,  we
often  make  use  of  the  false  distinction  between  inward  and
outward.  All  that  they  have  accomplished,  we  say,  is  outward
merely,  whilst  inwardly  they  are  acting  from  some  very  different
motive,  such  as  a  desire  to  gratify  their  vanity  or  some  other
unworthy  passion.  Remarks  like  these  betray  the  spirit  of  envy.
Incapable  of  any  great  action  of  its  own,  envy  tries  hard  to
depreciate  greatness  and  to  bring  it  down  to  its  own  level.
Better  were  it  to  recall  the  fine  expression  of  Goethe,  that  there
is  no  means  but  Love  to  save  us  from  the  great  excellences  of
others.  We  may  seek  to  rob  men's  great  actions  of  their  praise,
by  the  insinuation  of  hypocrisy ;  but,  though  it  is  possible  that
men  in  an  instance  now  and  then  may  dissemble  and  disguise  a
good  deal,  they  cannot  conceal  the  whole  of  their  inner  life,
which  inevitably  betrays  itself  in  the  decursus  vitae.  Even  here  it
is  true  that  a  man  is  nothing  but  the  series  of  his  actions.  What
is  called  the  pragmatic  writing  of  history  sins  more  than  any-
thing else  in  modern  times  by  this  untruthful  separation  of  the
outward  from  the  inward :  and  has  in  many  ways  marred  and
confused  the  true  conception  of  great  historical  characters.  Not
content  with  telling  the  unvarnished  tale  of  the  great  acts
which  have  been  wrought  by  the  heroes  of  the  world's  history,
and  with  acknowledging  that  their  inward  being  corresponds
with  the  import  of  their  acts,  the  pragmatic  historian  fancies
himself  justified  and  even  obliged  to  trace  the  supposed  secret
motives  that  lie  behind  the  open  facts  of  the  record.  The
historian,  in  that  case,  is  supposed  to  write  with  more  depth  in
proportion  as  he  succeeds  in  tearing  away  the  aureole  from  all
that  has  been  heretofore  held  grand  and  glorious,  and  in  de-
pressing it,  so  far  as  its  origin  and  special  significance  are


1 4 1,  142.] THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  221

concerned,  to  the  level  of  vulgar  mediocrity.  To  make  these
pragmatical  researches  in  history  easier,  it  is  usual  to  recommend
the  study  ff  psychology,  which  is  supposed  to  make  us  acquainted
with  the  proper  motives  that  lead  men  to  act.  The  psychology
in  question  however  is  only  that  petty  knowledge  of  men,  which
looks  away  from  the  essential  and  permanent  facts  of  human
nature  to  fasten  its  glance  on  the  points  of  chance  and  singularity
shown  in  isolated  instincts  and  passions.  A  pragmatical  psy-
chology ought  at  least  to  leave  the  historian,  who  investigates
the  motives  at  the  ground  of  great  actions,  a  choice  between  the
substantial  and  unselfish  interests  of  patriotism,  justice,  religious
truth  and  the  like,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  subjective  and
formal  interests  of  vanity,  ambition,  avarice  and  the  like,  on  the
other.  The  lawr  however  are  the  motives  which  must  be  viewed
as  especially  efficient,  otherwise  the  assumption  of  a  contrast
between  the  inward  (the  disposition  of  the  agent)  and  the
outward  (the  import  of  the  action)  would  fall  to  the  ground.
But  inward  and  outward  have  in  truth  the  same  content,  and
the  right  doctrine  is  the  very  reverse  of  this  pedantic  subtlety.
If  the  heroes  of  history  had  been  actuated  by  subjective  and
formal  interests  alone,  they  would  never  have  accomplished  what
they  have.  And  if  we  have  due  regard  to  the  unity  between
the  inner  and  the  outer,  we  must  own  that  great  men  willed
what  they  did,  and  did  what  they  willed.

141.]  The  empty  abstractions,  by  means  of  which  the  one
identical  content  perforce  continues  in  the  relation,  pass  into
abeyance  in  the  immediate  transition,  the  one  in  the  other.
The  content  itself  is  nothing  but  their  identity  (§  138) :  and
these  abstractions  are  the  seeming  of  essence,  taken  and  put  as
seeming.  By  the  exertion  of  force  the  inward  is  taken  and
put  into  existence :  this  process  of  taking  and  putting  means
a  mediation  by  empty  abstractions.  In  its  own  self  the  inter-
mediating process  vanishes  into  the  immediacy,  in  which  the
inward  and  the  outward  are  absolutely  identical,  and  their  sole
distinction  is  in  being  stated  or  statuted.  This  identity  is

C. — ACTUALITY.

142.]  Actuality  brings  immediately  to  pass  the  unity  of
essence  with  existence,  or  of  the  inward  with  the  outward.  The
out-putting  of  what  is  actual  is  no  other  than  the  actual :  so


222  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [142.

that  in  this  out-putting  it  remains  as  essential,  and  only  in  so
far  is  essential  as  it  is  in  immediate  and  external  existence.

We  have  ere  this  met  Being  and  Existence  as  fofms  of  the
immediate.  Being  may  be  described  as  unreflected  immediacy
transition  into  another.  Existence  is  an  immediate  unity  of
and  reflexion ;  hence  it  is  an  appearance  or  phenomenon  :
it  comes  from  the  ground,  and  falls  to  the  ground.  But  when
we  have  actuality  this  unity  is  explicitly  stated :  and  the
relation  has  grown  identical  with  itself.  Hence  the  actual  is
Xexempted  from  transition,  and  its  externality  is  its  energising.
In  that  energising  it  is  reflected  into  itself:  so  that  its  Being
then  and  there  is  only  the  manifestation  of  itself  and  not  of
something  else.

Actuality  and  thought  (or  the  Idea)  are  often  absurdly  opposed.
How  commonly  we  hear  people  saying,  that  though  no  objection
can  be  urged  against  the  truth  and  correctness  of  a  certain
thought,  there  is  nothing  of  the  kind  to  be  seen  in  actuality,  or
that  it  cannot  be  actually  executed !  People  who  use  such
language  only  prove  that  they  have  not  properly  apprehended
the  nature  either  of  thought  or  of  actuality.  Thought  in  such
a  case  is,  on  one  ^hand,  the  synonym  for  a  subjective  con-
ception, plan,  intention  or  the  like,  just  as  actuality,  on  the
other,  is  made  synonymous  with  external  and  sensible  existence.
This  is  all  very  well  in  common  life,  where  great  laxity  is  allowed
in  the  categories  and  the  names  given  to  them :  and  it  may
always  happen  that  the  plan,  or,  as  it  is  styled,  the  idea,  say  of
a  certain  method  of  taxation,  is  good  and  advisable  in  the
abstract,  but  is  not  found  in  what  men  call  actuality,  or  could
not  possibly  be  carried  out  under  the  given  conditions.  But
when  the  abstract  understanding  gets  hold  of  these  categories
and  exalts  the  distinction  they  imply  into  a  hard  and  fast  line
of  contrast,  when  it  tells  us  that  in  this  actual  world  we  must
drive  ideas  out  of  our  heads,  it  is  necessary  energetically  to
protest  against  these  doctrines,  alike  in  the  name  of  science  and
/of  sound  reason.  For  on  the  one  hand  ideas  are  not  confined
(  to  our  heads  merely,  nor  is  the  idea,  upon  the  whole,  so  feeble  as
)  to  leave  the  question  of  its  actualisation  or  non-actualisation
^  I  dependent  on  our  will.  The  idea  is  rather  absolutely  active  as
^well  as  actual.  And  on  the  other  hand  actuality  is  not  so  bad
and  irrational,  as  it  is  supposed  to  be  by  the  practical  men,  who
are  either  without  thought  altogether  or  have  quarrelled  with
thought,  and  have  been  worsted  in  the  contest.  So  far  is


1 4 3.]  THE DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  223

actuality  or  reality,  as  distinguished  from  mere  appearance,
and  as  primarily  representing  the  unity  of  inward  and  outward,
from  being  in  contrariety  with  reason,  that  it  is  rather  thoroughly
rational,  and  everything  which  is  not  rational  must  on  that  veryv^
ground  cease  to  be  held  real.  The  same  view  may  be  traced  in
the  usages  of  educated  speech,  which  objects  to  give  the  name
of  real  poet  or  real  statesman  to  a  poet  or  a  statesman  who  can
do  nothing  really  meritorious  or  reasonable.

In  this  common  sense  attached  to  actuality,  and  the  confusion
of  it  with  what  is  palpable  and  directly  obvious  to  the  senses,  we
must  seek  the  ground  of  a  wide-spread  belief  about  the  relation
of  the  philosophy  of  Aristotle  to  that  of  Plato.  Popular  opinion
makes  the  difference  to  be  as  follows.  While  Plato  recognises
the  idea  and  only  the  idea  as  the  truth,  Aristotle,  rejecting  the
idea,  keeps  to  what  is  actual :  and  is  on  that  account  to  be  con-
sidered the  founder  and  chief  of  empiricism.  On  this  it  may  be
remarked  :  that  although  actuality  certainly  is  the  principle  of
the  Aristotelian  philosophy,  it  is  not  the  vulgar  actuality  of  what
is  immediately  at  hand,  but  the  idea  as  the  actuality.  Where
then  lies  the  controversy  between  Aristotle  and  Plato  ?  It  lies  in
this.  Aristotle  calls  the  Platonic  idea  a  mere  Swajuts,  and
establishes  in  opposition  to  Plato  that  the  idea,  which  both
equally  recognise  to  be  the  only  truth,  is  essentially  to  be  viewed
as  an  fvipyeia,  in  other  words,  as  the  inward,  which  goes  on
every  hand  outwards,  or  as  the  unity  of  inner  and  outer,  or  as
actuality,  in  the  emphatic  sense  here  given  to  the  word.

143.]  Such  a  concrete  category  as  Actuality  includes  the
characteristics  of  the  Essence  aforesaid  and  the  distinction
between  them,  and  is  therefore  also  the  development  of  them,
in  such  a  way  that  they  are  in  it  at  the  same  time  described
as  a  seeming,  or  as  merely  statuted  (§  141).

(a)  Viewed  as  an  identity  in  general,  Actuality  first  appears
as  Possibility — the  reflection-into-self,  which  as  in  contrast
with  the  concrete  unity  of  the  actual,  is  taken  and  made  an
abstract  and  unessential  essentiality.  Possibility  is  what  is  .
essential  to  reality,  but  in  such  a  way  that  it  is  at  the  same
time  only  a  possibility.

It  was  probably  the  definition  of  Possibility  which  prompted
Kant  to  regard  it,  along  with  necessity  and  actuality,  as  Moda-
lities, '  since  these  categories  do  not  in  the  least  increase  the
notion  as  object,  but  only  express  its  relation  to  the  faculty  of


224  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  [143.

knowledge.'  In  fact,  Possibility  is  the  bare  abstraction  of
reflection-into-self, — the  same  as  was  formerly  called  the  Inward,
only  that  it  is  now  characterised  as  the  external  inwardness
which  has  been  suspended  and  is  now  only  statuted.  So  far  un-
doubtedly, Possibility  is  also  statuted  as  a  mere  modality  or
insufficient  abstraction,  or,  looking  at  it  more  concretely,  as
belonging  to  subjective  thought  only.  It  is  otherwise  with
Actuality  and  Necessity.  They  are  anything  but  a  mere  kind
and  mode  for  something  else :  in  fact  the  very  reverse  of  that.
They  are  statuted  as  a  concrete,  completed  in  itself  and  not
merely  statuted.

As  Possibility  is,  in  the  first  instance,  the  mere  form  of
identity-with-self  (as  compared  with  the  concrete  which  is
,  its  rule  is  that  each  thing  must  not  be  self-contradictory.
Thus  everything  is  possible,  for  an  act  of  abstraction  can  give
any  content  this  form  of  identity.  Everything  however  is  as
impossible  as  it  is  possible.  In  every  content,  which  is  and
must  be  concrete,  the  speciality  of  its  nature  may  be  viewed
as  a  specialised  contrariety  and  in  that  way  as  a  contradiction.
Nothing  therefore  can  be  more  meaningless  than  to  speak  of
such  possibility  and  impossibility.  In  philosophy,  in  particular,
there  should  never  be  a  word  said  of  showing  that  something
is  possible,  or  that  there  is  still  something  else  possible,  or,  to
adopt  another  phraseology,  that  something  is  conceivable.  The
writer  of  history  is  no  less  directly  reminded  never  to  employ
a  category  which  has  now  been  explained  to  be  on  its  own
merits  untrue.  But  the  subtlety  of  the  vacant  understanding
finds  its  chief  pleasure  in  a  hollow  devising  of  possibilities  and
a  good  many  of  them.

Our  picture-thought  is  at  first  disposed  to  see  in  possibility
the  richer  and  more  comprehensive,  in  actuality  the  poorer  and
narrower  category.  Everything,  it  is  said,  is  possible,  but
everything  which  is  possible  is  not  on  that  account  actual.  In
real  truth,  however,  if  we  deal  with  them  as  thoughts,  actuality
is  the  more  comprehensive,  because  it  is  the  concrete  thought
which  includes  possibility  as  an  abstract  and  unsubstantial  stage.
And  that  superiority  is  to  some  extent  expressed,  when  we
speak  of  the  possible,  in  distinction  from  the  actual,  as  only


1 43.]  THE DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  225

possible.  Possibility  is  often  said  to  consist  in  a  thing's  being-
conceivable.  '  Conceive/  however,  in  this  use  of  the  word,  only
means  to  apprehend  any  content  under  the  form  of  an  abstract
identity.  Now  every  content  can  be  brought  under  this  form,
since  nothing  is  required  except  to  separate  it  from  the  con-
nexions in  which  it  stands.  Hence  any  content,  however  absurd
and  nonsensical,  can  be  viewed  as  possible.  It  is  possible
that  the  moon  might  fall  upon  the  earth  to-night ;  for  the
moon  is  a  body  separate  from  the  earth, — and  may  as  well
fall  down  upon  it  as  a  stone  thrown  into  the  air  does.  It  is
possible  that  the  Sultan  may  become  Pope ;  for,  being  a  man,
he  may  be  converted  to  the  Christian  faith,  may  become  a
Catholic  priest,  and  so  on.  In  language  like  this  about  pos-
sibilities, it  is  chiefly  the  law  of  the  sufficient  ground  or  reason
which  is  manipulated  in  the  style  already  explained.  Every-
thing,  it  is  said,  is  possible,  for  which  you  can  state~some
ground.  The  less  education  a  man  has,  or,  in  other  words,
the  less  he  knows  of  the  specific  connexions  of  the  objects  to
which  he  directs  his  observations,  the  greater  is  his  tendency
to  launch  out  into  all  sorts  of  empty  possibilities.  An  instance
of  this  habit  in  the  political  sphere  is  seen  in  the  case  of  the
pot-house  politicians.  In  practical  life  too  it  is  no  uncommon
thing  to  see  ill-will  and  indolence  slink  behind  the  category
of  possibility,  in  order  to  escape  definite  obligations.  To  such
conduct  the  same  remarks  apply  as  were  made  in  connexion
with  the  law  of  sufficient  ground.  'Reasonable  and  practical
men  refuse  to  be  imposed  upon  by  the  possible,  for  the  simple
ground  that  it  is  possible  only.  They  stand  fast  upon  what
is  actual  (not  meaning  by  that  word  merely  whatever  im-
mediately is  now  and  here).  Many  of  the  proverbs  of  common
life  express  the  same  contempt  for  what  is  abstractly  possible.
'A  bird  in  the  hand  is  worth  two  in  the  bush.'  After  all  there  is
as  good  reason  for  viewing  everything  to  be  impossible,  as  to
be  possible :  for  every  content  (a  content  is  always*  concrete)
includes  not  only  diverse  but  even  opposite  characteristics.
Nothing  is  so  impossible,  for  instance,  as  this,  that  I  am  :  for
'I'  is  at  the  same  time  a  simple  connexion  with  self,  and  as
undoubtedly  connexion  with  something  else.  The  same  may
be  seen  in  every  other  fact  in  the  natural  or  spiritual  world.
Matter,  it  may  be  said,  is  impossible:  for  it  is  the  unity  of
attraction  and  repulsion.  The  same  is  true  of  life,  justice,
freedom,  and  above  all,  of  God  himself,  as  the  true,  i.  e.  the
triune  God, — a  notion  of  God,  which  the  abstract  Enlightenment
of  Understanding,  in  conformity  with  its  canons,  rejected  on
the  ground  that  it  was  contradictory  in  thought.  Generally
speaking,  it  is  the  empty  understanding  which  haunts  these

Q


226  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE. [144,  145.

vacant  forms :  and  the  business  of  philosophy  in  the  matter
is  to  show  how  null  and  meaning-less  they  are.  .Whether  a
V/  thing  is  possible  or  impossible,  depends  altogether  on  the  subject-
matter  :  that  is,  on  the  sum  total  of  the  elements  in  actuality,
which,  as  it  opens  itself  out,  discloses  itself  to  be  necessity.

144.]  (/3)  But  if  the  Actual  be  taken  as  it  is  distin-
guished from  possibility  (which  is  reflection-into-self)  there  is
left  of  it  only  the  outward  concrete  thing,  unessential  and  im-
mediate. In  other  words,  to  such  extent  as  the  actual  is
primarily  (§  142)  the  simple  and  merely  given  unity  of  Inward
and  Outward,  it  is  obviously  made  an  unessential  outward
thing,  and  thus  at  the  same  time  (§  140)  it  is  merely  inward,
the  abstraction  known  as  reflection-into-self.  Hence  it  is  itself
characterised  as  merely  possible.  When  thus  valued  at  the
rate  of  a  mere  possibility,  the  actual  is  Contingent  or  Ae-
/  cidental,  and,  conversely,  possibility  is  mere  Accident  itself
or  Chance.

145-]  Possibility  and  Contingency  are  the  two  factors  of
Actuality, — Inward  and  Outward,  taken  and  made  mere  forms
which  constitute  the  externality  of  what  is  actual.  They  have
their  reflection-into-self  in  the  actual  fact,  or  content  with
its  intrinsic  definiteness,  which  gives  the  essential  ground  of
their  characterisation.  The  finitude  of  the  contingent  and  the
possible  lies,  as  we  now  see,  in  the  distinction  drawn  between
the  formal  characteristic  and  the  content :  and,  therefore,  it
depends  on  the  content  alone  whether  anything  is  contingent
and  possible.

As  possibility  is  the  mere  inside  of  actuality,  it  is  for  that
v/*  reason  a  mere  outside  actuality,  in  other  words,  Contingency.
The  contingent  may  be  described  as  what  has  the  ground  of
its  being,  not  in  itself  but  in  somewhat  else.  Such  is  the
aspect  under  which  actuality  first  comes  before  consciousness,
and  which  is  often  by  mistake  identified  with  actuality  itself.
But  the  contingent  is  only  one  side  of  the  actual,  the  side,
namely,  of  reflection  into  somewhat  else.  It  is  the  actual,  in
the  signification  of  something  merely  possible.  Accordingly  we
consider  the  contingent  to  be  what  may  or  may  not  be,  what
may  be  in  one  way  or  in  another,  whose  Being  or  not-Being,


1 45-]  THE DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  227

and  whose  being  on  this  wise  or  otherwise,  depends  not  upon
itself  but  on  something-  else.  To  overcome  this  contingency  is
generally  speaking  the  problem ~~6T  science  on  the  one  hand ;  as
in  the  range  of  practice  on  the  other,  the  end  of  action  is  to
rise  above  the  contingency  of  the  will,  or  above  caprice.  It
has  however  often  happened,  most  of  all  in  modern  times,  that
contingency  has  been  unwarrantably  elevated,  and  had  a  value
attached  to  it,  both  in  nature  and  the  world  of  mind,  to  which
it  has  no  just  claim.  Nature — to  speak  of  it  first,  has  been
often  and  especially  admired  for  the  richness  and  variety  of  its
structures.  Apart  however  from  what  disclosure  it  contains  of
the  idea,  this  richness  offers  none  of  the  higher  interests  of
reason,  and  in  its  vast  variety  of  structures,  organic  and  in-
organic, affords  us  only  the  spectacle  of  a  contingency  that  runs
out  into  endless  detail.  At  any  rate,  the  chequered  scene
presented  by  the  several  varieties  of  animals  and  plants,  con-
ditioned as  it  is  by  outward  circumstances, — the  complex  changes
in  the  figuration  and  grouping  of  clouds,  and  the  like,  ought
not  to  be  set  above  the  equally  casual  fancies  of  the  mind  which
surrenders  itself  to  its  own  caprices.  The  wonderment  with
which  such  phenomena  are  welcomed  is  a  most  abstract  state
of  mind,  which  should  be  abandoned  for  a  closer  insight  into
the  inner  harmony  and  regularity  of  nature.

Of  contingency  in  respect  of  the  Will  it  is  especially  important
to  form  a  proper  estimate.  The  Freedom  of  the  Will  is  an
expression  that  often  means  no  more  than  caprice,  or  the  will
in  the  form  of  contingency.  Freedom  of  choice,  or  the  capacity
of  determining  ourselves  towards  one  thing  or  another,  is  un-
doubtedly a  vital  element  in  the  will,  which  in  its  very  notion
is  free :  but  instead  of  being  freedom  itself,  it  is  only  in  the
first  instance  a  freedom  in  form.  The  genuinely  free  will,  which
includes  free  choice  as  absorbed  into  it,  is  conscious  to  itself
that  its  own  content  is  absolutely  firm  and  fast,  and  knows  it
at  the  same  time  to  be  thoroughly  its  own.  Will,  on  the  contrary,
which  never  rises  above  mere  freedom  of  choice,  even  supposing
it  does  decide  in  favour  of  what  is  in  import  right  and  true,
will  always  be  haunted  by  the  conceit*  that  it  might,  if  it  had
so  pleased,  have  decided  in  favour  of  the  reverse  course.  When
more  narrowly  examined,  free  choice  is  seen  to  be  a  contradic-
tion, to  this  extent  that  its  form  and  content  stand  in  antithesis.
The  content  of  the  will  is  given,  and  known  as  a  content
grounded,  not  in  the  will  itself,  but  in  outward  circumstances.
In  reference  to  such  a  given  content,  freedom  lies  only  in  the
form  of  choosing,  which,  as  it  is  only  a  freedom  in  form,  may
consequently  be  regarded  as  freedom  only  in  supposition.  On
an  ultimate  analysis  it  will  be  seen  that  the  same  outwardness


228  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  [146.

of  circumstances,  on  which  is  founded  the  content  that  the  will
finds  to  its  hand,  can  alone  account  for  the  will  giving  its
decision  for  the  one  and  not  the  other  of  the  two  alternatives.

Although  contingency,  as  it  now  appears,  is  only  one  aspect
in  the  whole  of  actuality,  and  therefore  not  to  be  substituted
for  actuality  itself,  it  has  no  less  than  the  rest  of  the  forms
of  the  idea  its  due  office  in  the  world  of  objects.  This  is,  in
the  first  place,  seen  in  Nature.  On  the  surface  of  Nature,
so  to  speak,  Chance  ranges  unchecked,  and  that  contingency
must  simply  be  recognised,  without  the  pretension  which  is
sometimes,  but  erroneously,  ascribed  to  philosophy,  of  seeking
in  it  a  necessary  and  rigidly  fixed  law.  Nor  is  contingency
less  visible  in  the  world  of  Mind.  The  will,  as  we  have  already
remarked,  involves  contingency  under  the  shape  of  option  or
free-choice,  but  involves  it  only  as  a  vanishing  and  abrogated
element.  In  respect  of  Mind  and  its  effects,  just  as  in  the
case  of  Nature,  we  must  guard  against  being  misled  by  a
well-meant  endeavour  after  rational  knowledge,  which  would
fain  exhibit  the  necessity  of  phenomena  which  are  marked  by
a  decided  contingency,  and  try,  as  the  phrase  is,  to  construe
them  a  priori.  Thus  in  language,  although  it  be,  as  it  were,
the  body  of  thought,  there  is  unquestionably  considerable  room
for  Chance ;  and  the  same  is  true  of  the  special  formations
of  law,  of  art,  &c.  The  problem  of  science,  and  especially  of
philosophy,  undoubtedly  consists  in  eliciting  the  necessity  con-
cealed under  the  semblance  of  contingency.  That  however  is
far  from  meaning  that  the  contingent  belongs  to  our  subjective
conception  alone,  and  must  therefore  be  simply  set  aside,  if
we  wish  to  get  at  the  truth.  All  scientific  researches  which
pursue  this  tendency  exclusively,  lay  themselves  fairly  open
to  the  charge  of  mere  juggling  with  their  subject,  and  an
over-affectation  of  precision.

146-]  When  more  closely  examined,  what  the  aforesaid
outward  side  of  actuality  implies  is  this.  Contingency,  which
is  actuality  in  its  immediacy,  is  self-identical,  essentially  only
as  dependent  and  statuted  being ;  which,  however,  being  like-
wise suspended  or  set  aside  is  an  externality  with  definite  Being
then-and-there.  Consequently  it  is  somewhat  pre-supposed,
of  which  the  immediate  Being  then-and-there  is  at  the  same
time  a  possibility,  and  has  the  vocation  to  be  suspended  or  put
in  abeyance,  to  be  the  possibility  of  something  else.  Now
this  possibility  is  the  Condition.


1 47-]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  229

The  Contingent,  which  is  immediate  actuality,  is  at  the
same  time  the  possibility  of  somewhat  else, — no  longer  however
that  abstract  possibility,  which  we  had  at  first,  but  the  possi-
bility in  being.  And  a  possibility  in  being  is  a  Condition.
By  the  Condition  of  a  matter  of  fact  we  mean  two  things;
first,  a  special  existence  or  immediate  thing,  and  secondly  the
vocation  of  this  immediate  to  be  put  in  abeyance  and  to  sub-
serve the  actualising  of  something  else. — Immediate  actuality  is
never  what  it  ought  to  be  ;  it  is  a  finite  actuality  with  an
inherent  Haw,  and  its  vocation  is  to  be  consumed.  But
the  other  aspect  of  actuality  is  .its  essentiality.  This  is
primarily  the  inside,  which  as  a  mere  possibility  is  no  less
destined  to  be  suspended.  When  it  ceases  to  be  a  possibility,
there  issues  a  new  actuality,  of  which  the  first  immediate
actuality  was  the  pre-supposition.  Here  we  see  the  alternation,
which  is  involved  in  the  notion  of  a  Condition.  The  Conditions
of  a  thing  seem  at  first  sight  to  be  quite  free  and  easy.  Really
however  an  immediate  actuality  of  this  kind  includes  in  it
the  germ  of  something  else  altogether.  At  first  this  something
else  is  only  a  possibility :  but  the  form  of  possibility  is  soon
absorbed  and  translated  into  actuality.  This  new  actuality
thus  issuing  is  the  very  inside  of  the  immediate  actuality  which
it  uses  up.  Thus  there  comes  into  being  quite  an  other  shape
of  things,  and  yet  it  is  not  an  other :  for  the  first  actuality
is  only  taken  and  put  as  what  it  is  in  its  essence.  The  con-
ditions which  are  sacrificed,  which  fall  to  the  ground  and  are
spent,  when  they  enter  the  other  actuality,  enter  only  into
union  with  themselves.  Such  in  general  is  the  nature  of  the
process  of  actuality.  The  actual  is  no  mere  case  of  immediate
Being,  but,  as  essential  Being,  it  sets  aside  and  suspends  its
own  immediacy  and  is  thus  mediated  with  itself.

147.]  (y)  When  this  outward  side  of  actuality  is  developed
into  a  circle  of  the  two  categories  of  possibility  and  imme-
diate actuality,  showing  the  intermediation  of  the  one  by  the
other,  it  is  what  is  called  Heal  Possibility.  Being  such  a
circle,  further,  it  is  the  totality,  and  thus  the  content,  or
absolutely  characterised  actual  Pact.  Whilst  in  like  manner,
if  we  look  at  the  distinction  between  the  two  characteristics  in
this  unity,  it  is  the  concrete  totality  of  the  form  by  itself,
the  immediate  self-translation  of  inner  into  outer,  and  of  outer
into  inner.  This  movement  of  the  form  is  Activity :  it  carries
into  effect  the  Fact,  or  real  ground,  which  rises  into  actuality ;


230  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [147.

and  it  carries  into  effect  the  contingent  actuality,  or  condi-
tions ;  i.  e.  it  is  their  reflection-in-self,  and  their  self-abrogation
into  an  other  actuality,  the  actuality  of  the  fact.  ^Ifjilljbhe
conditions  are  at  handj  the  fact  must  actually  take  place ;
and  the  fact  itself  is  one  of  the  conditions,  for  being  in  the
first  place  only  inner,  it  is  at  first  itself  only  pre-supposed.
Developed  actuality,  as  the  coincident  alternation  of  inner  and
'outer,  the  alternation  of  their  opposite  motions  which  are
,  combined  in  a  single  motion,  is  Necessity.

Necessity  has  been  defined,  and  rightly  so,  as  the  union  of
possibility  and  actuality.  This  mode  of  expression  would  give
a  superficial  and  therefore  unintelligible  description  of  the
very  difficult  notion  of  necessity.  It  is  difficult  because  it  is
the  notion  itself,  with  its  elementary  factors  however  still
appearing  as  actualities,  though  they  are  at  the  same  time
to  be  viewed  as  forms  only,  collapsing  and  transient.  In  the
two  following  paragraphs  therefore  an  exposition  of  the
elements  which  constitute  necessity  must  be  given  at  greater
length.

When  anything  is  said  to  be  necessary,  the  first  question
we  ask  is,  Why  ?  Necessity  in  this  way  comes  before  us  as
something  laid  down  and  imposed,  or  as  the  result  of  certain
antecedents.  If  we  go  no  further  than  mere  derivation  from
antecedents  however,  we  have  not  gained  a  complete  notion
of  what  necessity  means.  What  is  merely  derivative,  is  what
it  is,  not  through  itself,  but  through  something  else  ;  and  in
this  way  it  too  is  merely  contingent.  What  is  necessary,  on
the  other  hand,  we  require  to  be  what  it  is  through  itself,
and  thus,  although  derivative,  it  must  still  contain  the  ante-
cedent whence  it  is  derived  as  a  vanishing  element  in  itself.
Hence  we  say  of  what  is  necessary,  '  It  is.'  We  thus  hold  it
to  be  a  simple  reference  to  self,  in  which  all  dependence  on
something  else  is  lost  to  view.

Necessity  is  often  said  to  be  blind.  If  that  means  that
necessity  does  not  explicitly  present  the  End  or  Aim  in  its
own  character,  the  statement  is  correct.  The  process  of  ne-
cessity begins  with  the  existence  of  scattered  circumstances
which  do  not  concern  each  other  and  appear  to  have  no  inter-
connexion among  themselves.  These  circumstances  are  an
immediate  actuality  which  collapses,  and  out  of  which  a  new


1 47.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  231

actuality  proceeds.  Here  we  have  a  content  which  in  point
of  form  is  doubled  in  itself,  once  as  content  of  the  fact  with
which  we  deal,  and  once  as  content  of  the  scattered  circum-
stances which  appear  as  if  they  were  positive,  and  make
themselves  at  first  felt  in  that  character.  The  latter  content
is  in  itself  nought  and  is  accordingly  inverted  into  its  negative,
and  thus  becomes  content  of  the  fact.  The  immediate-  cir-
cumstances fall  to  the  ground  as  conditions,  but  are  at  the
same  time  retained  as  content  of  the  fact.  From  such  cir-
cumstances and  conditions  there  has,  as  we  say,  proceeded  quite
another  thing,  and  it  is  for  that  reason  that  we  call  this
process  of  necessity  blind.  If  on  the  contrary  we  consider  the
action  of  purpose  or  design,  we  have  in  the  end  of  action  a
content  which  is  already  fore-known.  This  activity  therefore
is  not  blind  but  seeing.  To  say  that  the  world  is  ruled  by
Providence  implies  that  design,  as  what  has  been  absolutely
pre-determined,  is  at  work,  so  that  the  issue  corresponds  to
what  has  been  fore-known  and  willed.  But,  let  it  be  noted,
the  theory  which  regards  the  world  as  determined  through
necessity  and  the  belief  in  a  divine  providence  are  by  no  means
mutually  excluding  points  of  view.  Divine  Providence,  in  the
light  of  thought,  will  soon  appear  to  be  based  upon  the  notion.
But  the  notion  is  the  truth^  of  necessity,  which  it  involves
as  a  vanishing  element ;  just  as,  conversely,  necessity  is  the
notion  implicit.  Necessity  is  blind  only  so  long  as  it  is  not
understood.  Thefe"ls~nothing  therefore  more  mistaken  than
the  charge  of  blind  fatalism  made  against  the  Philosophy  of
History,  when  it  claims  to  understand  the  necessity  of  whatever
Has  occurred.  The  philosophy  of  history  rightly  understood
takes  the  rank  of  a  Theodicee ;  and  those,  who  fancy  they
honour  Divine  Providence  by  excluding  necessity  from  it,  are
really  degrading  it  by  this  strict  line  of  demarcation  to  a  blind
and  irrational  caprice.  In  the  simple  language  of  the  religious
mind,  which  speaks  of  God's  eternal  and  immutable  decrees,
there  is  implied  an  express  recognition  that  necessity  forms
part  of  the  essence  of  God.  In  contradistinction  from  God,
man,  with  his  own  private  opinion  and  will,  follows  the  call
of  caprice  and  arbitrary  humour,  and  thus  often  finds  his  acts
turn  out  something  quite  different  from  what  he  had  thought
and  willed.  But  God  knows  what  he  wills,  is  determined  in
his  eternal  will  neither  by  accident  from  within  nor  from
without,  and  accomplishes  what  he  wills,  irresistibly.

Necessity  gives  a  point  of  view  which  is  very  important  in
its  bearings  upon  our  sentiments  and  conduct.  When  we  look
upon  events  as  necessary,  we  seem  at  first  sight  to  stand  in  a
thoroughly  slavish  and  dependent  position.  In  the  creed  of  the


232  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [147.

ancients,  as  we  know,  necessity  figured  as  Destiny.  The  modern
point  of  view,  on  the  contrary,  is  that  of  Consolation.  And  Con-
solation means  that  we  give  up  our  aims  and  interests,  only  in
prospect  of  being-  compensated  for  our  renunciation.  Destiny,
on  the  contrary,  leaves  no  room  for  Consolation.  But  a  close
examination  of  the  ancient  feeling  about  destiny,  will  not  by
any  means  reveal  any  sense  of  bondage.  Rather  the  reverse.
This  will  clearly  appear,  if  we  remember,  that  the  want  of
freedom  springs  from  clinging  tenaciously  to  an  antithesis,  and
from  looking  at  what  is,  and  what  happens,  as  contradictory  to
what  ought  to  be  and  happen.  In  the  ancient  mind  the  feeling
was  more  of  the  following  kind :  Because  such  a  thing  is,  it  is,
and  as  it  is,  so  ought  it  to  be.  Here  there  is  no  contrast  to  be
seen,  and  therefore  no  sense  of  bondage,  no  pain,  and  no  sorrow.
True,  indeed,  as  already  remarked,  this  relation  to  destiny  is
void  of  consolation.  But  then,  on  the  other  hand,  it  does  not
need  consolation,  so  long  as  the  personal  subject  has  not  acquired
its  infinite  import  and  significance.  It  is  this  point  on  which
special  stress  should  be  laid  in  comparing  the  ancient  sentiment
with  that  of  modern  Christianity.  But  there  are  two  ways  of
looking  at  Subjectivity.  We  may  understand  by  it,  in  the  first
place,  only  the  natural  and  finite  subjectivity,  with  its  contin-
gent and  arbitrary  content  of  particular  interests  and  inclina-
tions, all,  in  short,  that  we  call  person  as  distinguished  from
fact :  understanding  '  fact '  in  the  emphatic  sense  of  the  word
(in  which  we  use  the  (correct)  expression  that  it  is  a  question
of  facts  and  not  of  persons).  In  this  sense  of  subjectivity  we
cannot  help  admiring  the  tranquil  resignation  of  the  ancients  to
destiny,  and  feeling  that  it  is  a  much  higher  and  worthier  mood
than  that  of  the  moderns,  who  obstinately  pursue  their  subjective
aims,  and  when  they  find  themselves  constrained  to  give  up  the
hope  of  reaching  them,  console  themselves  with  the  prospect  of
a  reward  in  some  shape  or  other.  But  the  term  subjectivity  is
not  to  be  confined  merely  to  the  bad  and  finite  kind  of  it  which
is  contradistinguished  from  the  fact.  IVi  its  truth  subjectivity
is  immanent  in  the  fact,  and  as  a  subjectivity  thus  infinite  is  the
very  truth  of  the  fact.  Thus  regarded,  the  doctrine  of  consola-
tion receives  a  newer  and  a  higher  significance.  It  is  in  this
sense  that  the  Christian  religion  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  religion
of  consolation,  and  even  of  absolute  consolation.  Christianity,
we  know,  teaches  that  God  wishes  all  men  to  be  saved.  That
teaching  declares  that  subjectivity  has  an  infinite  value.  And
that  consoling  power  of  Christianity  just  lies  in  the  fact  that
God  himself  is  in  it  known  as  the  absolute  subjectivity,  so  that,
inasmuch  as  subjectivity  involves  the  element  of  particularity,
our  particular  or  personal  part  too  is  recognised  not  merely  as


i.48.]  THE DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  233

something  to  be  solely  and  simply  denied,  but  as  at  the  same
time  something-  to  be  preserved.  The  gods  of  the  ancient  world
even,  were,  it  is  true,  looked  upon  as  personal ;  but  the  person-
ality of  a  Zeus  and  an  Apollo  is  not  a  real  personality :  it  is
only  a  fiction  of  the  mind.  In  other  words,  these  gods  are
mere  personifications,  which,  being  such,  do  not  know  them-
selves, and  are  only  known.  An  evidence  of  this  defect  and
feebleness  of  the  old  gods  is  found  even  in  the  religious  beliefs
of  antiquity.  In  the  ancient  creeds  not  only  men,  but  even  gods,
were  represented  as  bending  to  destiny  (-ne-npvuevov  or  et/xap/xerrj),
a  destiny  which  we  ought  to  figure  to  ourselves  as  necessity  not
-unveiled,  and  thus  as  wholly  impersonal,  selfless,  and  blind.  On
the  other  hand,  the  Christian  God  is  God  not  known  merely,  but
also  self-knowing ;  He  is  a  personality  not  merely  figured  in  our
minds,  but  rather  absolutely  actual.

We  must  refer  to  the  Philosophy  of  Religion  for  a  further
disciission  of  the  points  here  touched.  But  we  may  note  in
passing  how  important  it  is  for  any  man  to  meet  everything
that  befalls  him  with  the  spirit  of  the  old  proverb,  which  de-
scribes each  man  as  the  architect  of  his  own  fortune.  That
means  that  it  is  only  himself  after  all  that  a  man  gets  the
benefit  of.  The  other  way  would  be  to  lay  the  blame  of
whatever  we  experience  upon  other  men,  upon  unfavourable
circumstances,  and  the  like.  And  this  is  a  fresh  example  of
the  language  of  unfreedom,  and  at  the  same  time  the  'spring  of
discontent.  If  men  remembered,  on  the  contrary,  that  whatever
happened  to  them  was  only  an  evolution  of  themselves,  and  that
they  only  bore  their  own  guilt,  they  would  stand  free,  and  in
everything  that  came  upon  them  would  have  the  consciousness
that  they  suffered  no  wrong.  A  man  who  is  discontented  with
himself  and  his  destiny,  commits  much  that  is  perverse  and
amiss,  for  no  other  reason  than  because  of  the  false  opinion  that
he  does  not  get  his  rights  from  others.  No  doubt  there  is  a
great  deal  of  chance  in  what  befalls  us.  But  this  accidental  con-
stituent is  founded  on  human  nature.  So  long  as  a  man  is
otherwise  conscious  that  he  is  free,  his  harmony  of  soul  and
peace  of  mind  will  not  be  disturbed  by  disagreeable  events.  It
is  their  view  of  necessity,  therefore,  which  is  at  the  root  of  the
content  and  discontent  of  men,  and  which  in  that  way  deter-
mines their  destiny  itself.

148-]  Among  the  three  elements  in  the  process  of  necessity —
the  Condition,  the  Fact,  and  the  Activity —

a.  The  Condition  is  (a)  what  is  pre-supposed  or  ante-stated,
i.  £.  it  is  not  only  supposed  or  stated,  and  so  relative  to  the  fact,


234  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [149.

but  also  prior,  and  so  independent,  a  contingent  and  external
circumstance  which  exists  without  respect  to  the  fact.  While
thus  contingent,  however,  this  pre-supposed  or  ante-stated  term,
is  in  respect  of  the  fact,  which  is  the  totality,  a  complete  circle
of  conditions.  (/3)  The  conditions  are  passive,  are  used  as  mate-
rials for  the  fact,  into  the  content  of  which  they  thus  enter.
They  are  likewise  conformable  to  this  content,  and  within  them-
selves contain  its  whole  characterising.

b.  The  Fact  is  also  (a)  something  pre-supposed  or  ante-stated,
i.  e.  it  is  at  first,  and  as  supposed,  only  inner  and  possible,  and
also,  being  prior,  an  independent  content  by  itself. (/3)  By
using  up  the  conditions,  it  receives  its  external  existence,  the
realisation  of  the  articles  of  its  content,  which  reciprocally  cor-
respond to  the  conditions,  so  that  whilst  it  presents  itself  out  of
these  as  the  fact,  it  also  proceeds  from  them.

c.  The  Activity  similarly  has  (a)  an  independent  existence  of
its  own  (as  in  a  man,  or  a  character),  and  at  the  same  time  it  is
possible  only  where  the  conditions  are  and  the  fact. (/3)  It  is
the  movement  which  translates  the  conditions  into  fact,  and  the
latter  into  the  former  as  the  side  of  existence,  or  rather  the
movement  which  educes  the  fact  from  the  conditions  in  which
it  is  potentially  present,  and  which  gives  existence  to  the  fact  by
abolishing  the  existence  possessed  by  the  conditions.

In  so  far  as  these  three  elements  stand  to  each  other  in  the
shape  of  independent  existences,  this  process  has  the  aspect  of
an  outward  necessity.  Outward  necessity  has  a  limited  content
for  its  fact.  For  the  fact  is  the  whole  of  the  process  in  a  simple
and  undeveloped  way.  But  since  in  its  form  this  whole  is
external  to  itself,  it  is  so  even  in  its  own  self  and  in  its  content,
and  this  externality,  attaching  to  the  fact,  is  a  limit  of  its
content.

149.]  Necessity,  then,  is  potentially  the  one  essence,  self-
same but  now  full  of  content,  in  the  reflected  light  of  which
its  distinctions  take  the  form  of  independent  realities.  This
self-sameness  is  at  the  same  time,  as  an  absolute  form,  the
activity  which  reduces  into  dependency  and  mediates  into  imme-


J5o,  i5i.] THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  235

tliacy. — Whatever  is  necessary  is  through  another,  which  is  sub-
divided into  the  mediating  ground  (the  Fact  and  the  Activity)
and  an  immediate  reality,  an  accidental  circumstance,  which  is
at  the  same  time  a  Condition.  Necessity  being  through  an  other
is  not  in  and  for  itself:  it  is  merely  statuted  or  dependent.  This
intermediation  is  just  as  immediately  however  the  abrogation  of
itself.  The  ground  and  contingent  condition  are  translated  into
immediacy,  by  which  that  dependency  is  now  lifted  into  actuality,
and  the  fact  has  closed  with  itself.  In  this  return  to  itself  we
have  a  downright  necessity,  as  unconditioned  actuality.  The
necessary  is  so,  mediated  through  a  circle  of  circumstances :  it  is
so,  because  the  circumstances  are  so,  and  in  a  word  it  is  so,
unmediated  :  it  is  so,  because  it  is.


(a)  Relation  of  Substantiality.

150.]  The  necessary  is  a  Relation,  absolute  in  itself,  i.  e.  the
process  developed  (in  the  preceding  paragraphs),  in  which  the
relation  also  loses  itself  in  absolute  identity.

In  its  immediate  form  Relation  is  that  of  substance  and  acci-
dent. The  absolute  identity  of  this  relation  with  itself  is  Sub-
stance as  such,  which  as  necessity  gives  the  negative  to  this
form  of  inwardness,  and  thus  makes  itself  a  reality,  but  also
gives  the  negative  to  this  outward  thing.  Being  thus  nega-
tived, the  actual,  as  immediate,  is  rendered  only  an  accident,
which  through  this  bare  possibility  passes  into  another  actuality.
This  transition  is  substantial  identity  as  the  activity  of  the  form
(§§  148,  149).

151.]  Substance  is  accordingly  the  sum  total  of  the  Accidents,
manifesting  itself  in  them  as  their  absolute  negativity,  that  is  to
say,  as  an  absolute  power,  and  at  the  same  time  as  the  abundance
of  all  content.  This  content  however  is  nothing  but  that  very
manifestation,  since  the  character  being  reflected  in  itself  to  the
content  is  only  an  active  element  of  the  form  which  drifts  away
in  the  power  of  substance.  Substantiality  is  the  absolute  activity
of  form  and  the  power  of  necessity  :  all  content  is  but  a  vanish-


236  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [151.

ing  element  which  merely  belongs  to  this  process ;  where  there
is  an  absolute  revulsion  of  form  and  content  into  one  another.

In  the  history  of  philosophy  we  meet  with  Substance  as  the
principle  of  Spinoza's  system.  On  the  import  and  value  of  that
much-praised  and  no  less  decried  philosophy  there  has  been
great  misunderstanding  and  a  deal  of  talking  since  the  days  of
Spinoza.  The  atheistic  and,  in  addition  to  that,  the  pantheistic
character  of  the  system  has  formed  the  commonest  ground  of
accusation.  These  cries  arise  because  of  Spinoza's  view  that
God  is  substance,  and  substance  only.  What  we  are  to  think
of  this  charge  follows,  in  the  first  instance,  from  the  place  which
substance  takes  in  the  system  of  the  logical  idea.  Though  an
essential  stage  in  the  evolution  of  the  idea,  substance  is  not  the
same  with  absolute  idea,  but  the  idea  under  the  still  limited
form  of  necessity.  It  is  true  that  God  is  necessity,  or  as  we
may  put  it,  that  He  is  the  absolute  thing  or  fact :  He  is  however
no  less  the  absolute  Person.  That  He  is  the  absolute  Person
however  is  a  point  which  the  philosophy  of  Spinoza  never  per-
ceived :  and  on  that  side  it  falls  short  of  the  true  notion  of  God
which  forms  the  content  of  religious  consciousness  in  Chris-
tianity. Spinoza  wras  by  descent  a  Jew,  and  it  is  upon  the
whole  the  Oriental  way  of  seeing  things,  according  to  which  the
nature  of  the  finite  world  seems  frail  and  transient,  that  has
found  its  intellectual  expression  in  his  system.  This  Oriental
view  of  the  unity  of  substance  certainly  gives  the  basis  for  all
real  further  development.  Still  it  is  not  the  final  idea.  It  is
marked  by  the  absence  of  the  principle  of  the  Western  World,
the  principle  of  individuality,  which  first  appeared  under  a  philo-
sophic shape,  contemporaneously  with  Spinoza,  in  the  Monad-
ology  of  Leibnitz.

From  this  point  we  glance  back  to  the  alleged  atheism  of
Spinoza.  The  charge  will  be  seen  to  be  unfounded  if  we  remem-
ber that  his  system  instead  of  denying  God,  rather  recognises
that  He  alone  really  is.  Nor  can  it  be  maintained  that  the  God
of  Spinoza,  although  he  is  described  as  alone  true,  is  not  the  true
God,  and  therefore  as  good  as  no  God.  If  that  were  a  just
charge,  it  would  only  prove  that  all  the  other  systems,  where
speculation  has  not  gone  beyond  a  subordinate  stage  of  the  idea,
that  the  Jews  and  Mohamedans  who  know  God  only  as  the
Lord,  and  that  even  the  many  Christians  for  whom  God  is
merely  the  most  high,  unknowable,  and  transcendental  being,
are  as  much  atheists  as  Spinoza.  The  so-called  atheism  of  Spi-
noza is  merely  an  exaggeration  of  the  fact  that  he  defrauds  the
principle  of  difference  or  finitude  of  its  due.  Hence  his  system,
as  it  holds  that  there  is  properly  speaking  no  world,  at  any  rate


152,  1 53-] THE DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  237

that  the  world  has  no  positive  being1,  should  rather  be  styled
Acosmism.  These  considerations  will  also  show  what  is  to  be
said  of  the  charge  of  Pantheism.  If  Pantheism  means,  as  it
often  does,  the  doctrine  which  takes  finite  thing's  in  their  fini-
tude  and  in  the  complex  of  them  to  be  God,  we  must  acquit  the
system  of  Spinoza  of  the  crime  of  Pantheism.  For  in  that  sys-
tem, finite  things  and  the  world  as  a  whole,  are  denied  all  truth.
On  the  other  hand,  the  philosophy  which  is  Acosmism  is  for
that  reason  certainly  pantheistic.  The  fault  which  is  thus  seen
to  attach  to  the  content  appears  also  to  be  a  defect  of  form.
Spinoza  puts  substance  at  the  head  of  his  system,  and  defines  it
to  be  the  unity  of  thought  and  extension,  without  demonstrating1
how  he  gets  to  this  distinction,  and  without  tracing  it  back  to
the  unity  of  substance.  The  discussion  then  proceeds  in  what
is  called  the  mathematical  method.  Definitions  and  axioms  are
first  laid  down :  after  them  follows  a  regular  order  of  proposi-
tions, which  are  proved  by  an  analytical  reduction  of  them  to
these  unproved  postulates.  Although  even  those  who  altogether
reject  its  content  and  results,  praise  the  system  of  Spinoza  for
the  strict  sequence  of  its  method,  such  unqualified  praise  of  the
form  is  as  little  justified  as  an  unqualified  rejection  of  the  con-
tent. The  fault  of  the  content  is  that  the  form  is  not  known
as  immanent  in  it,  and  therefore  only  accompanies  it  as  an  outer
and  subjective  form.  As  intuitively  accepted  by  Spinoza  without
a  previous  mediation  by  dialectic,  substance,  as  the  universal
negative  power,  is  as  it  were  a  dark  shapeless  aby?s  which
devours  all  definite  content  as  utterly  null,  and  produces  from
itself  nothing  that  has  a  positive  subsistence  within  itself.

152.]  When  substance  is  viewed  on  that  aspect,  where
being  absolute  power  it  is  the  power  that  connects  itself  with
itself  as  a  merely  inner  possibility  and  thus  gives  itself  the
character  of  accident ;  and  when  the  externality  thus  created
is  distinguished  from  it,  it  is  Relation  Proper  just  as  in  the
first  form  of  necessity  it  is  substance.  This  is  the  Relation
of  Causality.

(I)  Relation  of  Causality.

153.]  The  substance  is  a  Cause,  in  so  far  as  substance  reflects
into  self  as  against  its  passage  into  accidentality  and  so
stands  as  the  primary  fact,  but  again  no  less  suspends  this
reflection-into-self  or  its  bare  possibility,  lays  itself  down
as  the  negative  of  itself,  and  thus  produces  an  Effect,  an


238  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  [153.

actual  thing,  which  though  in  this  respect  only  a  created
actuality,  is  through  the  process  that  effectuates  it  at  the
same  time  necessary.

As  the  primary  fact,  the  cause  has  the  quality  of  absolute
independence  and  a  subsistence  that  holds  good  against  the
effect :  but  in  the  necessity,  whose  identity  is  constituted  by
that  primariness  itself,  it  has  only  passed  into  the  effect.  So
far  again  as  we  can  speak  of  a  definite  content,  there  is  no
content  in  the  effect  that  is  not  in  the  cause.  That  identity
in  fact  is  the  absolute  content  itself:  but  it  is  no  less  also
the  formal  characteristic.  The  primariness  of  the  cause  is  lost
in  the  effect  in  which  the  cause  makes  itself  a  dependent
being.  The  cause  however  does  not  thereupon  vanish  and
leave  the  effect  to  be  alone  actual.  For  this  dependent  being
is  in  like  manner  directly  swallowed  up,  and  is  rather  the
reflection  of  the  cause  in  itself,  its  primariness.  It  is  in  the
effect  that  the  cause  first  becomes  actual  and  a  cause.  The
cause  consequently  is  in  its  full  truth  causa  sui.  Jacobi,
sticking  to  the  partial  conception  of  mediation  (in  his  Letters
on  Spinoza,  second  edit.  p.  416),  regarded  the  causa  sui  (and
the  eifectus  sui  is  the  same),  which  is  the  absolute  truth  of

**/  / J

the  cause,  as  a  mere  formalism.  He  also  stated  that  God
ought  to  be  defined  not  as  the  ground  of  things,  but  essenti-
ally as  cause.  A  more  thorough  consideration  of  the  nature
of  cause  would  have  shown  Jacobi  that  he  did  not  by  this
means  gain  what  he  intended.  Even  in  the  finite  cause  and
its  conception  we  can  see  this  identity  between  cause  and
effect  in  point  of  content.  The  rain  (the  cause)  and  the  wet
(the  effect)  are  the  self-same  existing  water.  In  point  of
form  the  cause  (rain)  is  'dissipated  or  lost  in  the  effect  (wet) :
but  at  the  same  time  the  definite  characteristic  of  effect  is
also  lost,  for  without  the  cause  it  is  nothing,  and  we  should
have  only  the  neutral  wet  left.

In  the  common  acceptation  of  the  causal  relation  the  cause
is  finite,  to  such  extent  as  its  content  (as  in  the  case  of  finite
substance)  is  so,  and  so  far  as  cause  and  effect  are  conceived


1 53-]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  239

as  two  different  and  independent  existences  :  which  they  are,
however,  only  when  we  leave  the  causal  relation  out  of
sight.  In  the  finite  sphere  we  never  get  over  the  distinc-
tion of  the  special  articles  of  form,  even  while  they  are  con-
nected :  and  hence  we  can  turn  the  matter  round  and  define
the  cause  as  something  dependent  or  as  an  effect.  This
again  has  another  cause,  and  thus  there  grows  up  a  progress
from  effects  to  causes  ad  infinitum.  There  is  a  descending
progress  too :  the  effect  when  we  look  at  its  identity  with
the  cause  is  itself  defined  as  a  cause,  and  at  the  same  time
as  another  cause,  which  again  has  other  effects,  and  so  on
for  ever.

The  reluctance  of  the  understanding  to  accept  the  idea  of
substance,  is  equalled  by  its  familiarity  with  the  relation  of  cause
and  effect.  Whenever  it  is  proposed  to  view  any  sum  of  fact  as
necessary,  it  is  especially  the  relation  of  causality  to  which  the
reflective  understanding  makes  a  point  of  tracing  it  back.  Now,
aj^hough  this  relation  does  undoubtedly  belong  to  necessity,  it
forms  only  one  aspect  in  the  process  of  that  term  of  thought.
That  process  equally  requires  that  the  mediation  involved  in
causality  should  be  set  aside,  and  show  itself  as  a  simple  con-
nexion with  self.  If  we  stick  to  causality  as  such,  we  have  it
not  in  its  truth.  Such  a  causality  is  merely  finite,  and  its  finitude
lies  in  retaining  the  distinction  between  cause  and  effect  unas-
similated.  But  these  two  terms,  if  they  are  distinct,  are  also
identical.  Even  in  ordinary  consciousness  that  identity  may  be
found.  We  say  that  a  cause  is  a  cause,  only  when  it  has  an
effect,  and  vice  versa.  Both  cause  and  effect  are  thus  one  and
the  same  content :  and  the  distinction  between  them  is  primarily
only  that  the  one  lays  down  or  statutes,  and  the  other  is  laid
down  or  statuted.  This  formal  difference  however  is  again  lost,
because  the  cause  is  not  only  a  cause  of  something  else,  but  also
a  cause  of  itself ;  while  the  effect  is  not  only  an  effect  of  some-
thing else,  but  also  an  effect  of  itself.  The  finitude  of  things
consists  accordingly  in  this.  While  cause  and  effect  are  in  their
notion  identical,  the  two  forms  appear  separate.  Though  the
cause  is  also  an  effect,  and  the  effect  also  a  cause,  the  cause  is  not
an  effect,  in  the  same  connexion  as  it  is  a  cause,  nor  the  effect  a
cause  in  the  same  connexion  as  it  is  an  effect.  This  again  gives
the  infinite  progress,  in  the  shape  of  an  endless  series  of  causes,
which  shows  itself  at  the  same  time  as  an  endless  series  of
effects.


240  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  [154.

154.]  The  effect  is  different  from  the  cause.  The  former
as  such  has  a  Being  dependent  on  the  latter.  But  such  a
dependence  is  likewise  reflection-into-self  and  immediacy  :  and
the  action  of  the  cause,  when  it  makes  this  thesis  or  statu-
tion,  does  at  the  same  time  make  a  hypothesis  or  ante-
statution,  so  far  at  least  as  we  retain  the  effect  separate  from
the  cause.  Hence  there  must  be  already  in  existence  another
substance  on  which  the  effect  is  to  take  place.  It  is  imme-
diate, and  therefore  this  substance  is  not  a  negativity  which
connects  itself  with  itself:  it  is  in  other  words  not  active,
but  passive.  Yet  it  is  a  substance,  and  it  is  therefore  active
also :  so  that  setting  aside  the  hypothetical  immediacy  and
the  effect  put  as  a  thesis  into  it,  it  reacts,  i.  e.  it  puts  in
abeyance  the  activity  of  the  first  substance.  But  this  first
substance  also  in  the  same  way  sets  aside  its  own  immediacy,
or  the  effect  which  is  put  into  it,  and  thus  suspends  the
activity  of  the  other  substance  and  reacts.  In  this  manner
causality  passes  into  the  relation  of  Action  and  Reaction,  ^r
Reciprocity.

In  Reciprocity,  although  causality  is  not  yet  invested  with
its  true  characteristic,  the  rectilinear  movement  out  from
causes  to  effects,  and  from  effects  to  causes,  is  curved  round
and  back  into  itself,  and  thus  the  progress  ad  injinitum  of
causes  and  effects  is,  as  a  progress,  put  in  abeyance  in  a  real
fashion.

This  bend,  which  transforms  the  infinite  progression  into  a
self-contained  relation,  is  here  as  always  the  plain  reflection  that
in  the  above  meaningless  repetition  there  is  only  one  and
the  same  thing,  viz.  one  cause  and  another,  and  their  con-
nexion with  one  another.  The  carrying  out  of  this  connexion,
which  is  reciprocal  action,  is  itself  however  the  alternation  of
distinguishing  not  the  causes,  but  the  elements  of  causation.
In  each  of  these  elements  by  itself  (once  more  in  virtue  of
the  identity  that  the  cause  is  a  cause  in  the  effect,  and  con-
versely), in  virtue  of  this  inseparability  the  other  element  is
also  given  a  place.


155,  156.] THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  241

(c)  Reciprocity  or  Action  and  Reaction.

155.]  The  characteristics  which  are  retained  as  distinct  in
Reciprocal  Action  are  (a)  potentially  the  same.  The  one  side
is  a  cause,  is  primary,  active,  passive,  &c.  just  as  the  other  is.
Similarly  the  pre-supposition  of  another  side  and  the  action
upon  it,  the  immediate  primariness  and  the  dependence  pro-
duced by  the  alternation,  are  one  and  the  same  thing.  The
cause  assumed  to  be  first  is  on  account  of  its  immediacy
passive,  a  dependent  being-,  and  an  effect.  The  distinction
of  the  causes  spoken  of  as  two  is  accordingly  vain :  and,
properly  speaking,  there  is  only  one  cause,*  losing  itself  so
far  as  it  is  substance  in  its  effect,  and  in  this  action  as  a
cause  first  rendering  itself  complete.

156.]  But  this  unity  of  the  double  cause  is  also  (/3)
actual.  All  this  alternation  is  properly  the  explicit  creation  of
the  cause,  and  in  this  explicit  creation  lies  its  being.  The
nullity  of  the  distinctions  is  not  only  potential,  or  a  reflec-
tion of  ours  (preced.  §).  Reciprocal  action  just  means  that
each  of  the  characteristics  explicitly  stated  is  also  to  be
set  aside  and  inverted  into  its  opposite,  and  that  in  this
way  the  essential  nullity  of  the  elements  is  explicitly  stated.
An  effect  is  introduced  into  the  primariness ;  in  other  words,
the  primariness  is  abolished :  the  action  of  a  cause  becomes
reaction,  and  so  on.

Reciprocal  action  explicitly  invests  the  causal  relation  with  its
complete  development.  It  is  this  relation,  therefore,  in  which
reflection  usually  takes  shelter  when  things  can  no  longer  be
observed  satisfactorily  from  a  causal  point  of  view,  on  account  of
the  infinite  progress  already  spoken  of.  Thus  in  historical
research  the  question  may  be  raised  in  a  first  form,  whether  the
character  and  manners  of  a  nation  are  the  cause  of  its  constitu-
tion and  its  laws,  or  if  they  are  not  rather  the  effect.  Then,  as
the  second  step,  the  character  and  manners  on  one  side  and  the
constitution  and  laws  on  the  other  may  be  viewed  on  the
principle  of  reciprocity  :  and  in  that  case  the  cause  in  the  same
connexion  as  it  is  a  cause  will  at  the  same  time  be  an  effect,  and
vice  versa.  The  same  thing  is  done  in  the  study  of  Nature,  and
especially  of  living  organisms.  There  the  several  organs  and

R


242  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  [157.

functions  are  similarly  seen  to  stand  to  each  other  in  the  relation
of  reciprocity. Reciprocity  is  undoubtedly  the  proximate  truth
of  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect,  and  stands,  so  to  say,  on  the
threshold of  the  notion;  but  on that  very  ground,  supposing
that  our aim  is intelligent knowledge, we should not rest
content with the  application  of  this  relation. If  we  get  no
further  than  looking  at  a  given  content  from  the  stand-point
of  reciprocity,  we  are taking  up  an  attitude which is  really
unintelligent. It  is  only  dealing  with  a  dry  fact,  and  the  call
for mediation, which is the chief  question in  applying  the
relation  of  causality,  is  still  unanswered. And  if  we  look  more
narrowly  into  the  dissatisfaction  felt  in  applying  the  relation  of
reciprocity, we shall see  that  it  consists  in  the  circumstance,
that  this  relation  cannot  possibly  stand  as  an  equivalent  for  the
notion,  and  ought,  first  of  all,  to  be  known  and  understood  in  its
own  nature. And  to understand  the  relation  of  action and
reaction  we  must  not  let the two  sides  rest  in  their  state  of
being  immediately  given,  but  recognise  them,  as  has  been  shown
in  the  two  paragraphs  preceding,  for  factors  of  a  third  and
higher,  which  is the  notion  and  nothing  else. To  make,  for
example,  the  manners  of  the  Spartans  the  cause  of  their  constitu-
tion and  their  constitution  conversely  the  cause  of  their  manners,
may  no  doubt  be  in  a  way  correct. But,  as  we  have  compre-
hended neither  the  manners  nor  the  constitution  of  the  nation,
the  result  of  such  reflections  can  never  be  final  or  satisfactory.
The  satisfactory  point  will  be  reached  only  when  these  two,  as
well  as  all  other,  special  aspects  of  Spartan  life  and  Spartan
history  are  seen  and  known  to  be  founded  in  this  intelligent
notion.

157.]  This  pure  alternation  or  exchange  with  its  own  self
is  therefore  Necessity  laid  bare  or  explicitly  stated.  The  link
of  necessity  qua,  necessity  is  identity,  as  still  inward  and
concealed,  because  it  is  the  identity  of  what  are  esteemed
actual  things,  although  their  very  self-subsistence  is  meant  to
be  necessity.  The  circulation  of  substance  through  causality
and  reciprocity  therefore  only  expressly  makes  out  or  states
that  self-subsistence  is  the  infinite  negative  connexion  with
self.  The  connexion  is  negative,  in  general,  for  in  it  the  act
of  distinguishing  and  intermediating  becomes  a  primariness
of  actual  things  independent  one  against  the  other ;  and  it  is
an  infinite  connexion  with  self,  because  their  independence  only
lies  in  their  identity.


i58.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  243

158.]  This  truth  of  necessity,  therefore,  is  Freedom  :  and
the  truth  of  substance  is  the  Notion.  The  Notion  is  that
independence  which  is  a  thrusting  of  itself  off  from  itself
into  distinct  and  independent  units,  and  which,  in  this  re-
pulsion, is  identical  with  itself;  a  movement  of  alternation
which  goes  on  with  itself,  and  never  leaves  its  own  ground.

Necessity  is  often  called  hard,  and  rightly  so,  if  we  look  only
to  necessity  as  such,  i.  e.  to  its  immediate  shape.  Here  we  have,
first  of  all,  some  condition,  or,  generally  speaking,  a  fact,  possess-
ing an  independent  subsistence  :  and  necessity  primarily  implies
that  there  falls  upon  such  a  fact  something  else  by  which  it
is  ruined.  *Tn  this  consists  the  hard  and  gloomy  feature  of
necessity  immediate  or  abstract.  The  identity  of  the  two  things,
which  necessity  presents  as  bound  to  each  other,  and  thus  bereft
of  their  independence,  is  at  first  only  inward,  and  therefore  has
no  existence  for  those  under  the  yoke  of  necessity.  Freedom  too
from  this  point  of  view  is  only  abstract,  and  is  preserved  only  by
renouncing  all  that  we  immediately  are  and  have.  But,  as  we
have  seen  already,  the  process  of  necessity  is  of  such  a  nature
that  it  overcomes  the  rigid  externality  which  it  first  had  and
reveals  its  inward  self.  It  then  appears  that  the  members,
linked  to  one  another,  are  not  really  foreign  to  each  other,  but
only  elements  of  one  whole,  each  of  them,  in  its  connexion  with
the  other,  being,  as  it  were,  at  home,  and  combining  with  itself.
In  this  way  necessity  is  transfigured  into  freedom, — not  the
freedom  that  consists  in  abstract  negation,  but  freedom  concrete
and  positive.  From  which  we  may  learn  what  a  mistake  it  is  to
regard  freedom  and  necessity  as  mutually  excluding  one  another.
Necessity  indeed  qiid  necessity  is  far  from  being  freedom  :  yet
freedom  pre-supposes  necessity,  and  contains  it  as  an  unsub-
stantial element  in  itself.  A  good  man  feels  that  the  subject-
matter  of  his  action  is  a  necessary  fact  of  absolute  validity.  But
this  consciousness  is  so  far  from  making  any  abatement  from
his  freedom,  that  without  it  we  could  not  distinguish  real  and
reasonable  freedom  from  arbitrary  choice, — a  freedom  which  has
nothing  in  it  and  is  merely  potential.  The  criminal,  when
punished,  may  look  upon  his  punishment  as  a  restriction  of  his
freedom.  Really  the  punishment  is  not  foreign  constraint  to
which  he  is  subjected,  but  the  manifestation  of  his  own  act :  and
if  he  recognises  this,  he  ranks  in  that  way  as  a  free  man.  In
short,  man  is  most  independent  when  he  knows  himself  to  be
determined  by  the  absolute  idea  throughout.  It  was  the  con-
sciousness of  this,  and  this  attitude  of  mind,  which  Spinoza
called  the  Amor  intellectual! s  Dei.


244  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.  [159.

159.]  Thus  the  Notion  is  the  truth  of  Being  and  the  Essence,
inasmuch  as  the  showing  or  seeming  of  the  reflection  in  its
own  self  is  at  the  same  time  an  independent  immediacy,  and
this  Being  of  a  different  actuality  is  immediately  only  a
seeming  in  itself.

The  Notion  has  exhibited  itself  as  the  truth  of  Being  and
Essence,  which  both  revert  to  it  as  their  ground.  Con-
versely it  has  been  developed  out  of  being,  as  its  ground.  The
former  aspect  of  the  advance  may  be  regarded  as  a  deepen-
ing of  being  in  itself,  the  inner  nature  of  which  has  been
thereby  laid  bare :  the  latter  aspect  as  an  issuing  t>f  the  more
perfect  from  the  less  perfect.  When  such  development  is
viewed  on  the  latter  side  only,  it  does  prejudice  to  the
method  of  philosophy.  The  special  meaning  which  these  super-
ficial thoughts  of  more  imperfect  and  more  perfect  have  in
this  place,  is  to  indicate  the  distinction  of  being  as  an  im-
mediate unity  with  itself  from  the  notion  as  free  mediation
with  itself.  Since  being  has  shown  that  it  is  an  element  in
the  notion,  the  latter  has  thus  exhibited  itself  as  the  truth
of  being.  As  this  its  reflection  in  itself  and  as  an  absorption
of  the  mediation,  the  notion  is  the  pre-supposition  of  the
immediate — a  pre-supposition  which  is  identical  with  the  return
to  self;  and  in  this  identity  lies  freedom  and  the  notion.
If  the  formative  element  therefore  be  called  the  imperfect,
then  the  notion,  or  the  perfect,  is  at  any  rate  a  development
from  the  imperfect,  since  its  very  nature  is  thus  to  absorb
or  suspend  its  pre-supposition.  At  the  same  time  it  is  the
notion  alone,  which,  when  it  lays  itself  down,  makes  the  pre-
supposition ;  as  has  been  made  apparent  in  causality  in  general
and  especially  in  reciprocal  action.

Thus  in  reference  to  Being  and  Essence  the  Notion  is  defined
as  the  Essence  which  has  reverted  to  the  simple  immediacy
of  Being, — the  seeming  or  show  of  Essence  thereby  having
actuality,  and  its  actuality  being  at  the  same  time  a  free
seeming  or  show  in  itself.  In  this  manner  the  notion  has
being  as  its  simple  reference  to  itself,  or  as  the  immediacy


1 59-]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  ESSENCE.  245

of  its  unity  in  its  own  self. Being  is  so  poor  a  category  that
it  is  the  least  thing-  which  can  be  exhibited  in  the  notion.

The  passage  from  necessity  to  freedom,  or  from  actualit/
into  the  notion,  is  the  very  hardest,  because  it  proposes  that
independent  actuality  shall  be  thought  as  having  all  its  sub-
stantiality in  the  passage,  and  in  the  identity  with  the
independent  actuality  confronting  it.  The  notion,  too,  is  ex-
tremely hard,  because  it  is  this  very  identity.  But  the  actual
substance  as  such,  the  cause,  which  in  its  exclusive  being
will  let  nothing  penetrate  into  itself,  is  ipso  facto  subjected
to  necessity  or  the  destiny  of  passing  into  dependency :  and
it  is  this  subjection  rather  which  is  the  hardest  point.  To
think  necessity,  on  the  contrary,  rather  tends  to  dissolve  that
hardness.  For  thinking  means  that,  in  the  other,  one  meets
with  one's  self. — It  means  a  liberation,  which  is  not  the  flight
of  abstraction,  but  consists  in  that  which  is  actual  having
itself  .not  as  something  else,  but  as  its  own  being  and  creation
in  the  other  actuality  with  which  it  is  bound  up  by  the  force
of  necessity.  As  existing  in  an  individual  form,  this  liberation
is  called  I :  as  developed  to  its  totality,  it  is  free  Mind ;
as  feeling,  it  is  Love ;  and  as  enjoyment,  it  is  Happiness. —
The  great  vision  of  substance  in  Spinoza  is  only  a  potential
liberation  from  finite  exclusiveness  and  egotism  :  but  the  notion
itself  is  actually  endowed  with  the  power  of  necessity  and  with
actual  freedom.

When,  as  now,  the  notion  is  called  the  truth  of  Being  and
Essence,  we  must  expect  to  be  asked,  why  we  do  not  begin
with  the  notion  ?  The  answer  is  that,  where  scientific  cognition
is  our  aim,  we  cannot  begin  with  the  truth,  because  the  truth,
when  it  forms  the  beginning,  must  rest  on  mere  assertion.
The  truth  when  it  is  thought  must  as  such  verify  itself  to
thought.  If  the  notion  were  put  at  the  head  of  Logic,  and
defined,  quite  correctly  in  point  of  content,  as  the  unity  of
Being  and  Essence,  the  following  question  would  come  up :
What  are  we  to  think  under  the  terms  'Being'  and  'Essence/
and  how  do  they  come  to  be  embraced  in  the  unity  of  the
Notion?  But  if  we  answered  these  questions,  then  our  begin-
ning with  the  notion  would  be  merely  nominal.  The  real


246  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE.

start  would  be  made  with  Being,  as  we  have  here  done :  with
this  difference,  that  the  characteristics  of  Being  as  well  as
those  of  the  Essence  would  have  to  be  accepted  uncritically
from  figurate  conception,  whereas  we  have  observed  Being  and
Essence  in  their  own  dialectical  development  and  learnt  how
they  lose  themselves  in  the  unity  of  the  notion.


CHAPTER IX.
THIRD SUB-DIVISION OF LOGIC.

THE DOCTRINE OY THE NOTION.

160.]  The  Notion  is  the  power  of  substance  in  the  fruition
of  its  own  being,  and  therefore  what  is  free.  It  forms  a
systematic  whole,  in  which  each  of  its  elementary  functions
is  the  very  total  which  the  notion  is,  and  is  to  be  realised
as  indissolubly  one  with  it.  Thus  in  its  identity  with  itself
it  is  purely  and  entirely  characterised.

The  position  taken  up  by  the  notion  is  that  of  absolute
idealism.  Philosophy  is  a  knowledge  through  notions  when
it  sees  that  all  which  other  aspects  of  consciousness  believe  to
have  Being,  and  to  be  naturally  or  immediately  independent,
is  but  a  constituent  stage  in  the  idea.  In  the  logic  of  under-
standing, the  notion  is  generally  reckoned  a  mere  form  of
thought  and  explained  to  be  a  general  conception.  It  is  to
this  inferior  view  of  the  notion  that  the  assertion  refers,  so
often  urged  on  behalf  of  the  heart  and  sentiment,  that  notions
as  such  are  something  dead,  empty,  and  abstract.  The  case
is  really  quite  the  reverse.  The  notion  is,  on  the  contrary,  the
principle  of  all  life,  and  thus  possesses  in  every  part  a  character
of  concreteness.  That  it  is  so  follows  from  the  whole  logical
movement  up  to  this  point,  and  need  not  be  here  proved.  The
contrast  between  form  and  content,  which  is  thus  used  to
criticise  the  notion  when  it  is  alleged  to  be  merely  formal,
has,  like  all  the  other  contrasts  upheld  by  reflection,  been
already  left  behind  and  overcome  dialectically  or  through  itself.
The  notion,  in  short,  is  what  contains  all  the  earlier  categories
of  thought  merged  in  it.  It  certainly  is  a  form,  but  an  infinite
and  creative  form,  which  includes,  but  at  the  same  time  re-
leases, from  itself  the  plenitude  of  all  that  it  contains.  And


248  TEE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  [161.

so  too  the  notion  may,  if  it  be  wished,  be  styled  abstract,  if
the  name  concrete  is  restricted  to  the  concrete  facts  of  sense
or  of  immediate  perception.  For  the  notion  is  not  palpable
to  the  touch,  and  when  we  are  engaged  with  it,  we  must  be
dead  to  hearing  and  seeing.  And  yet,  as  it  was  before  re-
marked, the  notion  is  the  only  true  concrete ;  for  no  other
reason  than  because  it  involves  Being  and  the  Essence,  and
the  total  wealth  of  these  two  spheres  with  them,  merged  in
the  unity  of  thought.

If,  as  was  said  at  an  earlier  point,  the  different  stages  of
the  logical  idea  are  to  be  held  equivalent  to  a  series  of  definitions
of  the  Absolute,  the  definition  which  now  results  for  us  is
that  the  Absolute  is  the  notion.  That  necessitates  a  higher
estimate  of  the  notion,  however,  than  is  found  in  the  Logic  of
Understanding,  when  it  supposes  the  notion  to  be  a  form  of
our  subjective  thought,  with  no  original  content  of  its  own.
Considering  that  Speculative  Logic  attaches  a  meaning  to  the
term  notion  so  very  different  from  that  usually  given,  it  may
be  asked  why  the  same  word  should  be  employed  in  two  con-
trary acceptations,  and  an  occasion  thus  given  for  confusion
and  misconception.  The  answer  is  that,  great  as  the  interval
is  between  the  speculative  notion  and  the  notion  of  Formal
Logic,  a  closer  examination  shows  that  the  deeper  meaning  is
not  so  foreign  to  the  general  usages  of  language  as  it  seems
at  first  sight.  We  speak  of  the  deduction  of  a  content  from
the  notion,  e.  g.  of  the  specific  provisions  of  the  law  of  property
from  the  notion  of  property ;  and  so  again  we  speak  of  tracing
back  such  a  sum  of  facts  to  the  notion.  We  thus  recognise
that  the  notion  is  no  mere  form  without  a  content  of  its  own :
for  if~  it  were,  there  would  be  in  the  one  case  nothing  to  deduce
from  such  a  form,  and  in  the  other  case  to  trace  a  given  sum
of  facts  back  to  the  empty  form  of  the  notion  might  deprive
the  fact  of  its  specific  character,  but  would  not  make  it
understood.

161-]  The  onward  movement  of  the  notion  is  no  longer
either  a  transition  into,  or  a  reflection  on  something  else,  but
Development.  For  in  the  case  of  the  notion,  whatever  is
distinguished  is  without  more  ado  and  at  the  same  time  declared
to  be  identical,  one  with  another,  and  with  the  whole,  and
the  specific  character  exhibits  free  and  unchecked  the  being
of  the  whole  notion.

Transition  into  something  else  is  the  dialectical  process  within
the  range  of  Being:  reflection  (bringing  something  else  into


1 62.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  249

light),  in  the  range  of  Essence.  The  movement  of  the  notion
is  development :  by  which  that  only  is  explicitly  affirmed  which
is  already  naturally  and,  properly  speaking-,  present.  In  the
world  of  nature,  it  is  organic  life  that  corresponds  to  the  grade
of  the  notion.  Thus,  e.g.  the  plant  is  developed  from  its  seed.
The  seed  virtually  involves  the  whole  plant,  but  does  so  only
ideally  or  in  thought :  and  it  would  therefore  be  a  mistake  to
regard  the  development  of  the  root,  stem,  leaves,  and  other
different  parts  of  the  plant,  as  meaning  that  they  were  realiter
present,  but  in  a  minute  form,  in  the  germ.  That  is  the  so-
called  {box-within-box'  hypothesis;  a  theory  which  commits
the  mistake  of  supposing  an  actual  existence  of  what  is  at  first
found  only  as  a  postulate  of  the  completed  thought.  The  truth
of  the  hypothesis  on  the  other  hand  lies  in  its  perceiving  that
in  the  process  of  development  the  notion  keeps  to  itself,  and
only  gives  rise  to  alteration  of  form,  without  making  any
addition  in  point  of  content.  It  is  this  nature  of  the  notion —
this  manifestation  of  itself  in  its  process  as  a  development  of
its  own  self,  which  is  the  point  noted  by  those  who  speak  of
innate  ideas  in  men,  or  who,  like  Plato,  describe  all  learning
merely  as  reminiscence.  Of  course  that  again  does  not  mean
that  everything  which  is  embodied  in  a  mind,  after  that  mind
has  been  formed  by  instruction,  had  been  present  in  it  before-
hand, in  a  definitely  expanded  shape.

The  movement  of  the  notion  is  after  all  a  sort  of  illusion.
The  antithesis  which  it  lays  down  is  no  real  antithesis.  Or,  as
it  is  expressed  in  the  teaching  of  Christianity,  not  merely
has  God  created  a  world  which  forms  a  kind  of  antithesis  to
him :  He  has  also  from  all  eternity  begotten  a  Son  in  whom
He,  a  Spirit,  is  at  home  with  himself.

162.]  The  doctrine  of  the  notion  is  divided  into  three  parts.
The  first  is  the  doctrine  (1)  of  the  Subjective  Notion,  the  notion
as  a  form.  (2)  The  second  is  the  doctrine  of  the  notion  invested-
with  the  character  of  immediacy,  or  of  Objectivity.  (3)  The
third  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Idea,  the  subject-object,  the  unity
of  the  notion  and  objectivity,  the  absolute  truth.

The  Common  Logic  covers  only  the  matters  which  come  before
us  here  as  a  portion  of  the  third  part  of  the  whole  system,
together  with  the  so-called  Laws  of  Thought  which  we  have
already  met;  and  in  the  Applied  Logic  it  adds  a  little  about
cognition.  This  is  combined  with  psychological,  metaphysical,
and  all  sorts  of  empirical  materials,  which  were  introduced


250  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  [162.

because,  when  all  was  done,  those  forms  of  thought  could  not
be  made  to  do  all  that  was  required  of  them.  But  with  these
additions  the  science  lost  its  unity  of  aim.  Then  there  was
a  further  circumstance  against  the  Common  Logic.  Those
forms,  which  at  least  do  belong  to  the  proper  domain  of  Logic,
were  supposed  to  be  categories  of  conscious  thought  only,
of  thought  too  in  the  character  of  understanding,  not  of
reason.

The  preceding  logical  categories,  those  viz.  of  Being  and
Essence,  are,  it  is  true,  no  mere  formulae  of  thought:  they
are  proved  to  be  notions  in  their  transition,  or  their  dialectical
element,  and  in  their  return  into  themselves,  and  totality.
But  they  are  only  specific  or  determinate  notions  (cp.  §§  84  and
112),  notions  rudimentary,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  notions
for  us.  The  antithetical  term  into  which  each  category  passes,
or  which  it  brings  into  light,  so  as  to  be  in  this  way  relative,
is  not  characterised  as  a  particular.  The  third,  in  which  they
return  to  unity,  is  not  characterised  as  a  subject  or  an  in-
dividual :  nor  is  there  any  explicit  statement  that  the  category
is  identical  in  its  antithesis, — in  other  words,  freedom  is  not
expressly  stated :  and  all  this  because  the  category  is  not
a  universality.  What  generally  passes  current  under  the  name
of  a  notion  is  a  category  of  the  understanding,  or  even  a
general  conception  merely :  and  therefore,  in  short,  a  finite
category  (cp.  §  62).

The  Logic  of  the  Notion  is  usually  treated  as  a  science  of
form  only,  and  understood  to  deal  with  the  form  of  notion,
judgment,  and  syllogism  as  form,  without  in  the  least  touching
the  question  whether  anything  is  true.  The  answer  to  that
question  is  supposed  to  depend  on  the  content  only.  If  the
logical  forms  of  the  notion  were  really  dead  and  inert  re-
ceptacles of  conceptions  and  thoughts,  careless  of  what  they
contained,  the  knowledge  of  them  would  be  a  piece  of  in-
formation very  useless  and  superfluous  in  the  interests  of  truth.
On  the  contrary  they  are,  as  forms  of  the  notion,  the  vital
spirit  of  the  actual  world.  That  only  is  true  of  the  actual


163.]  THE DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  251

which  is  true  in  virtue  of  these  forms,  through  them  and
in  them.  As  yet,  however,  the  truth  of  these  forms  has  never
been  considered  or  examined  on  their  own  account  any  more
than  their  necessary  interconnexion.

A. — THE  SUBJECTIVE  NOTION.
(a) The  Notion  as  Notion.

163.]  The  Notion  as  Notion  contains  the  three  following
elements  or  functional  parts.  The  first  is  (1)  Universality —
meaning  that  it  is  in  free  equality  with  itself  in  its  specific
character.  The  second  is  (2)  Particularity — that  is,  the
specific  character,  in  which  the  universal  continues  serenely
equal  to  itself.  The  third  is  (3)  Individuality — meaning
the  reflection-into-self  of  the  specific  characters  of  universality
and  particularity.  This  last  negative  unity  with  self  is  abso-
lutely specified ;  and  is  at  the  same  time  identical  with  itself
or  universal.

Individual  and  actual  are  the  same  thing  :  only  the  former
has  issued  from  the  notion,  and  is  thus,  as  a  universal,  stated
expressly  as  a  negative  identity  with  itself.  The  actual,  be-
cause it  is  at  first  no  more  than  a  potential  or  immediate
unity  of  the  essence  and  existence,  may  possibly  work  the
actual :  but  the  individuality  of  the  notion  does  work  it  and
on  every  side  is  the  effective — efficient  moreover  no  longer
as  the  cause  is,  with  a  show  of  bringing  about  something
else,  but  bringing  about  its  own  realisation.  Individuality,
however,  is  not  to  be  understood  to  mean  the  immediate  or
natural  individual,  which  is  meant  when  we  speak  of  indi-
vidual things  or  individual  men :  for  that  special  form  of
individuality  does  not  appear  till  we  come  to  the  judgment.
Every  function  and  element  of  the  notion  is  itself  the  whole
notion  (§  160);  but  in  the  individual  or  subject  the  notion
is  expressly  realised  as  a  totality.

(1)  The  notion  is  generally  associated  in  our  minds  with  ab-
stract generality,  and  on  that  account  it  is  often  described  as


252  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  [163.

a  general  conception.  We  speak  of  notions  of  colour,  plant,
animal,  &c.  They  are  supposed  to  be  arrived  at  by  neglecting
the  particular  features  which  distinguish  the  different  colours,
plants,  and  animals  from  each  other,  and  by  retaining  those
common  to  them  all.  This  is  the  aspect  of  the  notion  which
is  familiar  to  understanding ;  and  feeling  is  in  the  right  when
it  protests  against  what  it  holds  to  be  the  hollowness  and  empti-
ness of  these  mere  phantoms  and  shadows.  But  the  universal
of  the  notion  is  not  a  mere  sum  of  features  common  to  several
things,  confronted  by  a  particular  which  enjoys  an  existence
of  its  own.  It  is,  on  the  contrary,  self-particularising  or  self-
specifying,  and  with  undimmed  clearness  finds  itself  at  home
in  its  antithesis.  For  the  sake  both  of  cognition  and  of  our
practical  conduct,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  real
universality  should  not  be  confused  with  what  is  merely  held  in
common.  All  those  charges  which  the  devotees  of  feeling  make
against  thought,  and  especially  against  philosophic  thought,  and
the  reiterated  statement  that  it  is  dangerous  to  carry  thought
to  what  they  call  too  great  lengths,  originate  in  the  confusion
of  these  two  things.

The  universal  in  its  true  and  comprehensive  meaning  is  one
of  those  thoughts  which  demanded  thousands  of  years  before
it  entered  into  the  consciousness  of  men.  The  thought  did
not  gain  its  full  recognition  till  the  days  of  Christianity.  The
Greeks,  whose  culture  was  in  other  respects  so  advanced,  knew
neither  God  nor  even  man  in  their  true  universality.  The  gods
of  the  Greeks  were  only  the  special  powers  of  the  mind ;  and
the  universal  God,  the  God  of  all  nations,  was  to  the  Athenians
still  an  unknown  God.  They  believed  in  the  same  way  that
an  absolute  gulf  separated  themselves  from  the  barbarians.
Man  as  man  was  not  then  recognised  to  be  of  infinite  worth
and  to  have  infinite  rights.  The  question  has  been  asked,  why
slavery  has  vanished  from  modern  Europe  ?  One  special  cir-
cumstance after  another  has  been  adduced  in  explanation  of
this  phenomenon.  But  the  real  ground  why  there  are  no  more
slaves  in  Christian  Europe  is  only  to  be  found  in  the  very
principle  of  Christianity  itself,  the  religion  of  absolute  freedom.
Only  in  Christendom  is  man  respected  as  man,  in  his  infinite
and  universal  nature.  What  the  slave  is  wanting  in,  is  the
recognition  that  he  is  a  person :  and  the  principle  of  person-
ality is  universality.  The  master  looks  upon  his  slave  not  as
a  person,  but  as  a  selfless  thing.  The  slave  is  not  himself
reckoned  an  '  I ' ; — his  '  I '  is  his  master.

The  distinction  referred  to  above  between  what  is  merely  in
common,  and  what  is  truly  universal,  is  strikingly  expressed
by  Rousseau  in  his  famous  '  Contrat  Social,'  when  he  says  that
the  laws  of  a  state  must  spring  from  the  universal  will  (volonte


1 64.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE NOTION.  253

generate),  but  need  not  on  that  account  be  the  will  of  all  (volonte
de  tons}.  Rousseau  would  have  done  better  service  towards  a
theory  of  the  state,  if  he  had  always  kept  this  distinction  in
sight.  The  general  will  is  the  notion  of  will :  and  the  laws
are  the  special  articles  in  exposition  of  this  will  and  based  upon
the  notion  of  it.

(2)  We  add  a  remark  upon  the  account  of  the  origin  and
formation  of  notions  which  is  usually  given  in  the  Logic  of
Understanding.  And  the  remark  is  this.  It  is  not  we  who
frame  the  notions.  The  notion  is  not  something  which  is
originated  at  all.  No  doubt  the  notion  is  neither  mere  Being,
nor  immediate :  it  involves  mediation,  but  the  mediation  lies
in  itself.  In  other  words,  the  notion  is  what  is  mediated
through  itself  and  with  itself.  It  is  a  mistake  to  imagine  that
the  objects  which  form  the  content  of  our  conceptions  come
first  and  that  our  subjective  agency  supervenes.  It  is  a  mis-
take to  suppose  that  by  the  aforesaid  operation  of  abstraction,
and  by  colligating  the  points  possessed  in  common  by  the
objects,  our  agency  frames  the  notions  of  them.  Bather  the
notion  is  the  genuine  first,  and  things  are  what  they  are
through  the  action  of  the  notion,  immanent  in  them,  and  re-
vealing itself  in  them.  In  our  religious  consciousness  we  find
the  same  doctrine,  when  it  is  said  that  God  created  the  world
out  of  nothing.  In  other  words,  the  world  and  finite  things
have  issued  from  the  fulness  of  the  divine  thoughts  and  the
divine  decrees.  Thus  religion  recognises  thought  and  (more
exactly)  the  notion  to  be  the  infinite  form,  or  the  free  creative
activity,  which  can  realise  itself  without  the  help  of  a  matter
that  exists  outside  of  it.

164.J  The  notion  is  concrete  out  and  out :  because  the
negative  unity  with  itself,  as  characterisation  pure  and  entire,
which  forms  the  individuality,  is  what  constitutes  its  re-
ference to  itself,  its  universality.  The  several  functions  or
elements  of  the  notion  are  to  this  extent  indissoluble.  The
categories  of  reflection  are  expected  to  be  severally  appre-
hended and  accepted  as  current,  apart  from  their  opposites.
But  in  the  notion,  where  their  identity  is  expressly  realised,
each  of  its  functions  can  be  immediately  apprehended  only  from
and  with  the  rest.

Universality,  particularity,  and  individuality  are,  when  taken
in  the  abstract,  the  same  as  identity,  difference,  and  ground.
But  the  universal  is  identical  with  itself,  with  the  express


254  THE DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  [164.

qualification,  that  it  simultaneously  contains  the  particular
and  the  individual.  Again,  the  particular  is  what  is  distin-
guished or  the  specific  character,  but  with  the  qualification
that  it  is  in  itself  universal  and  is  as  an  individual.  Simi-
larly the  individual  signifies  that  it  is  a  subject  or  sub-
stratum, which  involves  the  genus  and  species  in  itself  and
possesses  a  substantial  existence.  Such  is  the  explicit  or
realised  inseparability  of  the  functions  of  the  notion  in  their
distinction  (§  160) — what  may  be  called  the  clearness  of  the
notion,  in  which  each  distinction  causes  no  dimness  or  inter-
ruption, but  is  quite  as  much  transparent.

No  complaint  is  oftener  made  against  the  notion  than  that
it  is  abstract.  Of  course  it  is  abstract,  if  abstract  means  that
the  medium,  in  which  the  notion  exists,  is  thought  in  general
and  not  the  sensible  thing  in  its  empirical  concreteness.  It
is  abstract  also,  because  the  notion  falls  short  of  the  idea.
To  this  extent  the  subjective  notion  is  still  formal.  This
however  does  not  mean  that  it  ought  to  have  or  receive
another  content  than  its  own.  It  is  itself  the  absolute  form,
and  so  is  all  specific  character,  but  as  that  character  is  in  its
truth.  Although  it  be  abstract  therefore,  it  is  the  concrete,
concrete  altogether,  the  subject  as  such.  The  absolutely  con-
crete is  the  mind  (see  note  to  §  159) — the  notion  when  it
exists  as  notion,  distinguishing  itself  from  its  objectivity,
which  still  continues  to  be  its  own  notwithstanding  the  dis-
tinction. Everything  else  which  is  concrete,  however  rich  it
be,  is  not  so  thoroughly  identical  with  itself  and  therefore
not  so  concrete  in  its  own  nature,  least  of  all  what  is  com-
monly supposed  to  be  concrete,  but  is  only  a  congeries  held
together  by  external  influence.  What  are  called  notions,  and
in  fact  specific  notions,  such  as  man,  house,  animal,  &c.  are
simple  attributive  terms,  and  abstract  conceptions.  These
abstractions  retain  out  of  all  the  functions  of  the  notion
only  that  of  universality ;  they  leave  particularity  and  indi-
viduality out  of  account  and  have  no  development  in  these
directions.  By  so  doing  they  just  miss  the  notion.


165.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  255

165.]  It  is  the  element  of  Individuality  which  first  explicitly
makes  the  functions  of  the  notion  distinctions  in  it.  Indi-
viduality is  the  negative  reflection  rof  the  notion  into  itself,
and  it  is  in  that  way  at  first  the  free  distinguishing  of  it
as  the  first  negation,  by  which  the  specific  character  of  the
notion  is  stated,  but  stated  under  the  form  of  particularity.
That  is  to  say,  the  elements  distinguished  each  have,  in  the
first  place,  to  each  other,  only  the  character  of  the  several
functions  of  the  notion,  and,  secondly,  their  identity  is  also
explicitly  stated,  the  one  being  said  to  be  the  other.  The
explicit  or  imposed  particularity  of  the  notion  is  the  Judgment.

The  ordinary  classification  of  notions,  as  clear,  distinct  and
adequate,  is  no  part  of  the  notion;  it  belongs  to  psychology.
Notions,  in  fact,  are  here  synonymous  with  conceptions ;  a
clear  notion  is  an  abstract  conception,  with  a  simple  attri-
bution :  a  distinct  notion  is  one  where,  in  addition  to  the
simplicity,  there  is  one  mark,  or  character  emphasised  as  a
sign  for  subjective  cognition.  There  is  no  more  striking  mark
of  the  formalism  and  decay  of  Logic  than  the  favourite  category
of  the  'mark.'  The  adequate  notion  comes  nearer  the  notion
proper,  or  even  the  idea :  but  after  all  it  expresses  only  the
formal  circumstance  that  a  notion  or  a  conception  agrees  with
its  object,  that  is,  with  an  external  thing.  The  division  into
what  are  called  subordinate  and  co-ordinate  notions  is  based
upon  an  inept  or  notionless  distinction  of  universal  from  par-
ticular, and  their  proportional  bearing  upon  one  another  in
an  external  reflection.  Again,  an  enumeration  of  such  kinds
as  contrary  and  contradictory,  affirmative  and  negative  notions,
&c.  is  only  a  chance-directed  gleaning  of  characters  of  thought
which  in  their  own  right  belong  to  the  place  of  Being  or
Essence,  where  they  have  been  already  examined,  and  which
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  character  of  the  notion  as  notion.
The  real  distinctions  in  the  notion,  universal,  particular,  and
individual,  may  be  said  also  to  constitute  species  of  it,  but
only  when  they  are  severed  from  each  other  by  external  re-
flection. The  immanent  distinguishing  and  specifying  of  the


256  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  [166.

notion  come to  sight in the  judgment : for  to  judge is to
specify  the  notion.

(6) The  Judgment.

166.]  The  Judgment  is  the  notion  in  its  particularity,  as
a  connexion  of  its  functions  which  distinguishes  them.  These
functions  or  elements  are  laid  down  as  independent  units,  and
at  the  same  time  as  identical  with  themselves,  not  with  one
another.

One's  first  impression  about  the  Judgment  is  the  independ-
ence of  the  two  extremes,  the  subject  and  the  predicate.  The
former  we  take  to  be  a  thing  or  a  characteristic  in  its  own
right,  and  the  predicate  a  general  characteristic  outside  of  the
subject  and  somewhere  in  our  heads.  The  next  thing  is  for
us  to  bring  the  latter  into  combination  with  the  former,  and
in  this  way  frame  a  Judgment.  The  copula  fis'  however
enunciates  the  predicate  of  the  subject,  and  so  that  subjective
subsumption  from  without  is  again  put  in  abeyance,  and  the
Judgment  taken  as  a  special  phase  of  the  object  itself.  The
etymological  meaning  of  the  Judgment  (UrtJieil]  in  German
goes  deeper,  as  it  were  declaring  the  unity  of  the  notion  to
be  primary,  and  its  distinction  to  be  the  original  division.
And  that  is  what  the  Judgment  really  is.

In  its  abstract  terms  a  Judgment  is  expressible  in  the  pro-
position:  'The  individual  is  the  universal.'  These  are  the
features  under  which  the  subject  and  predicate  first  confront
each  other,  when  the  functions  of  the  notion  are  taken  in  their
immediate  character  or  first  abstraction.  [Propositions  such
as,  'The  particular  is  the  universal,'  and  'The  individual
is  the  particular/  belong  to  the  further  specialisation  of  the
judgment.]  It  shows  a  strange  want  of  observation  in  the
logic-books,  that  in  none  of  them  is  the  fact  stated,  that  in
every  judgment  there  is  such  a  statement  made,  as,  The  indi-
vidual is  the  universal,  or  still  more  definitely,  The  subject  is
the  predicate :  (e.  g.  God  is  an  absolute  mind).  No  doubt
there  is  also  a  distinction  between  the  categories  of  individual


1 66.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  257

and  universal,  of  subject  and  predicate :  but  it  is  none  the
less  a  universal  fact,  that  every  judgment  states  them  to  be
identical.

The  copula  'is'  springs  from  the  nature  of  the  notion,  by
which  it  is  identical  with  itself  even  when  it  divests  itself
of  its  own.  The  individual  and  universal  are  its  elements,
and  therefore  characters  such  as  cannot  be  isolated.  The
earlier  categories  of  reflection  in  their  relations  have  also  con-
nexion with  one  another:  but  their  interconnexion  is  only
'  having '  and  not  ' being,'  i.  e,  it  is  not  the  identity  which  is
realised  as  identity,  or  universality.  In  the  judgment,  there-
fore, for  the  first  time  there  is  seen  the  genuine  particularity
of  the  notion :  for  it  is  the  speciality  or  distinguishing  of  the
latter;  which  speciality  continues  to  be  universality.

Judgments  are  generally  looked  upon  as  combinations  of
notions  differing  in  kind.  This  theory  of  judgment  is  correct,
so  far  as  it  implies  that  it  is  the  notion  which  forms  the  pre-
supposition of  the  judgment,  and  which  in  the  judgment  presents
itsetrMn  the  form  of  difference.  But  on  the  other  hand,  it  is
false  to  speak  of  notions  differing  in  kind.  The  notion,  although
concrete,  is  still  as  a  notion  essentially  one,  and  the  functions
which  it  contains  are  not  different  kinds  of  it.  It  is  equally
false  to  speak  of  a  combination  of  the  two  sides  in  the  judg-
ment, if  we  understand  the  term  'combination'  to  imply  the
independent  existence  of  the  combining  members  apart  from  the
combination.  The  same  external  view  of  their  nature  is  more
forcibly  apparent  when  judgments  are  described  as  produced  by
the  ascription  of  a  predicate  to  the  subject.  Language  like  this
looks  upon  the  subject  as  self-subsistent  outside,  and  the  pre-
dicate as  found  somewhere  in  our  head.  Such  a  conception  of
the  relation  between  subject  and  predicate  however  is  at  once
contradicted  by  the  copula  '  is.'  By  saying  '  This  rose  is  red,'
or  c  This  picture  is  beautiful/  we  declare,  that  it  is  not  we  who
from  outside  attach  beauty  to  the  picture  or  redness  to  the  rose,
but  that  these  are  the  characteristics  proper  to  these  objects.  An
additional  fault  in  the  way  in  which  Formal  Logic  conceives"  the
judgment  is,  that  it  makes  the  judgment  look  as  if  it  were
contingent,  and  does  not  offer  any  proof  for  the  advance  from
notion  on  to  judgment.  For  the  notion  does  not,  as  under-
standing supposes,  stand  still  with  an  innate  immobility.  It
is  rather  an  infinite  form  of  boundless  activity,  as  it  were  the


258  TEE DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  [167.

punctum  saliens  of  all  vitality,  and  thereby  draws  a  distinction
within  itself.  This  disruption  of  the  notion  into  a  distinction
of  its  constituent  functions, — a  disruption  imposed  by  the  native
act  of  the  notion,  is  the  judgment.  A  judgment  therefore
means  the  particularising  of  the  notion.  No  doubt  the  notion
is  virtually  and  implicitly  the  particular.  But  in  the  notion
as  notion  the  particular  is  not  yet  explicit,  and  still  remains
in  transparent  unity  with  the  universal.  Thus,  for  example,
as  we  remarked  before  (§  160,  note),  the  germ  of  a  plant
contains  its  details  or  particular,  such  as  root,  branches,  leaves,
&c. :  but  these  details  are  at  first  present  only  potentially,
and  are  not  realised  till  the  germ  uncloses.  This  unclosing
is,  as  it  were,  the  judgment  (discretion)  of  the  plant.  The  il-
lustration may  also  serve  to  show  how  neither  the  notion  nor
the  judgment  are  merely  found  in  our  head,  or  merely  framed
by  us.  The  notion  is  what  dwells  in  the  very  heart  of  things,
and  makes  them  what  they  are.  To  form  a  notion  of  an  object
means  therefore  to  become  aware  of  its  notion  :  and  when  we
proceed  to  a  criticism  or  review  of  the  object,  we  are  not  per-
forming a  subjective  act,  and  merely  ascribing  this  or  that
predicate  to  the  object.  We  are,  on  the  contrary,  observing  the
object  in  the  character  imposed  by  its  notion.

167-]  The  Judgment  is  usually  taken  in  a  subjective  sense
as  an  operation  and  a  form,  which  is  found  merely  in  self-
conscious  thought.  Such  a  distinction  is  one  which  is  not
found  within  the  system  of  Logic,  where  the  judgment  is  for
the  present  to  be  understood  quite  universally.  All  things  are
a  judgment :  that  is  to  say,  they  are  individuals,  which  are
a  universality  or  inner  nature  in  themselves.  They  are  a  uni-
versal which  is  individualised.  Their  universality  and  indi-
viduality are  distinguished,  but  the  one  is  at  the  same  time
identical  with  the  other.

The  interpretation  of  the  judgment,  according  to  which  it  is
assumed  to  be  merely  subjective,  as  if  we  ascribed  a  predicate
to  a  subject,  is  contradicted  by  the  decidedly  objective  expression
of  the  judgment.  The  rose  is  red ;  Gold  is  a  metal.  It  is
not  by  us  that  something  is  first  ascribed  to  them.  A  judg-
ment is  however  distinguished  from  a  proposition.  The  latter
contains  a  statement  about  the  subject,  which  does  not  stand
to  it  in  any  relation  of  universality,  but  expresses  some  single


i68,  169.] THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  259

action,  or  some  state,  or  the  like.  Thus,.  '  Caesar  was  born  at
Rome  in  such  and  such  a  year,  waged  war  in  Gaul  for  ten
years,  crossed  the  Rubicon,  &c.,'  are  propositions,  but  not
judgments.  Again  it  is  absurd  to  say  that  such  statements
as,  rl  slept  well  last  night/  or  'Present  arms!'  can  be  turned
into  the  form  of  a  judgment.  'A  carriage  passes  by' — would
be  a  judgment,  and  a  subjective  one  at  best,  only  if  it  were
doubtful,  whether  the  passing  object  was  a  carriage,  or  whether
it  and  not  rather  the  point  of  observation  was  in  motion : — in
short,  only  if  it  were  desired  to  specify  a  conception  which
was  still  short  of  an  appropriate  specification.

168.]  The  judgment  is  the  expression  of  finitude.  Things
in  that  case  are  said  to  be  finite,  because  they  are  a  judgment,
because  their  definite  Being-then-and-there  and  their  universal
nature,  because  their  body  and  their  soul  are  united  indeed
(otherwise  the  things  would  be  nothing),  but  still  elements  in
their  constitution  which  are  already  different  and  also  in  any
case  separable.

169-]  The  abstract  terms  of  the  judgment,  '  The  individual
is  the  universal,'  present  the  subject  (as  negatively  connecting
self  with  self)  as  what  is  immediately  concrete,  while  the
predicate  is  what  is  abstract,  and  indefinite,  is,  in  short,  the
universal.  But  the  two  elements  are  connected  together  by  an
'  is ' :  and  thus  the  predicate  in  its  universality  must  also
contain  the  speciality  of  the  subject.  Thus,  this  speciality  is
particularity.  Thus  is  explicitly  stated  the  identity  between
subject  and  predicate ;  which,  being  now  unaffected  by  this
difference  in  form,  is  the  content.

It  is  the  predicate  which  first  gives  the  subject,  which  till
then  was  on  its  own  account  a  bare  conception  or  an  empty
name,  its  specific  character  and  content.  In  judgments  like,
'  God  is  the  most  real  of  all  things,'  or  c  The  Absolute  is
identical  with  itself,'  God  and  the  Absolute  are  mere  names,
which  receive  their  exposition  in  the  predicate.  As  to  what
the  subject  may  be  in  other  respects,  as  a  concrete  thing,  it
does  not  concern  the  present  judgment.  (Cp.  §  31.)

s  2


260  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION. [170,  171.

To  define  the  subject  as  that  of  which  something  is  said,
and  the  predicate  as  what  is  said  ahout  it,  is  mere  trifling.
It  gives  no  information  about  the  distinction  between  the
two.  In  point  of  thought,  the  subject  is  primarily  the  in-
dividual, and  the  predicate  the  universal.  As  the  judg-
ment receives  further  development,  the  subject  ceases  to  be
merely  an  immediate  individual,  and  the  predicate  merely  an
abstract  universal :  the  former  acquires  the  additional  signi-
fications of  particular  and  universal, — the  latter  the  additional
significations  of  particular  and  individual.  Thus  while  the  same
names  are  given  to  the  two  terms  of  the  judgment,  their  mean-
ing passes  through  a  series  of  changes.

170-]  We  now  go  closer  into  the  speciality  of  subject  and
predicate.  The  subject  as  the  negative  connexion  with  self
(§§  J^3*  166}  is  the  fixed  substratum  in  which  the  predicate
has  its  subsistence  and  where  it  is  ideally  present.  The  predicate,
it  is  said,  inheres  in  the  subject.  Further,  as  the  subject  may
be  generally  and  naturally  described  as  concrete,  the  specific
content  of  the  predicate  is  only  one  of  the  numerous  characters
of  the  subject.  Thus  the  subject  is  ampler  and  wider  than
the  predicate.

Conversely,  the  predicate  is  universal  and  subsists  of  itself,
and  is  indifferent  whether  this  subject  is  or  not.  The  predicate
transcends  the  subject,  subsuming  it  under  itself:  and  hence
in  its  own  way  is  also  wider  than  the  subject.  The  specific
content  of  the  predicate  (preced.  §)  alone  constitutes  the
identity  of  the  two.

171.]  At  first,  subject,  predicate,  and  the  specific  content  or
the  identity  are,  even  when  they  are  connected,  still  stated  in
the  judgment  as  different  and  not  coinciding  with  one  another.
By  implication,  however,  that  is,  in  their  notion,  they  are  identi-
cal. For  the  subject  is  a  concrete  totality  which  means  not'any
sort  of  aggregate  whatever,  but  individuality  alone,  the  par-
ticular and  the  universal  in  an  identity :  and  the  predicate  too
is  the  very  same  unity  (§  170).  The  copula  again,  even  while
imposing  an  identity  upon  subject  and  predicate,  does  so  at  first
only  by  an  abstract  '  is/  Conformably  to  such  an  identity,  we
have  to  invest  the  subject  with  the  characteristic  of  the  predicate.


i7i.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE NOTION.  261

By  this  means  the  latter  also  receives  the  character  of  the  former :
so  that  the  copula  receives  its  full  complement  and  full  force.
Such  is  the  continuous  specification  by  which  the  judgment,
through  a  copula  charged  with  content,  comes  to  be  syllogism.
As  it  is  primarily  exhibited  in  the  judgment,  this  gradual  spe-
cification consists  in  giving  a  universality,  which  is  originally  ab-
stract and  sensuous,  the  specific  character  of  allness,  of  a  species,
or  genus,  and  finally  of  the  developed  universality  of  the  notion.

After  we  are  made  aware  of  this  continuous  specification  of
the  judgment,  we  can  see  a  meaning  and  an  inter-connexion
in  what  are  usually  stated  as  the  kinds  of  judgment.  Not
only  does  the  ordinary  enumeration  seem  a  work  of  chance,
but  it  is  also  superficial,  and  wild  or  reckless  in  its  statement
of  their  distinctions.  The  distinction  between  positive,  cate-
gorical and  assertory  judgments,  is  either  a  pure  invention
of  fancy,  or  is  left  undetermined.  The  different  judgments,  on
the  right  theory,  follow  necessarily  from  one  another,  and
present  the  continuous  specification  of  the  notion ;  for  the
judgment  itself  is  nothing  but  the  notion  specified.

When  we  look  at  the  two  preceding  spheres  of  Being  and
Essence,  we  see  that  the  specified  notions  as  judgments  are
reproductions  of  these  spheres,  but  invested  with  the  simple
connexion  of  the  notion.

The  various  kinds  of  judgment  are  no  empirical  aggregate.
They  are  a  systematic  whole  bearing  the  stamp  of  thought,  and
it  was  one  of  Kant's  great  achievements  that  he  first  saw  this.
His  proposed  division,  according  to  the  headings  in  his  table
of  categories,  into  judgments  of  quality,  quantity,  relation  and
modality,  can  not  be  called  satisfactory,  partly  from  the  merely
formal  application  of  the  headings  of  these  categories,  partly  on
account  of  their  content.  Still  it  rests  upon  a  true  perception  of
the  fact  that  the  different  species  of  judgment  derive  their
features  from  the  universal  forms  of  the  logical  idea  itself.  If
we  follow  this  source,  it  will  supply  us  with  three  chief  kinds
of  judgment  parallel  to  the  stages  of  Being,  Essence,  and  Notion.
The  second  of  these  kinds,  as  required  by  the  character  of  Essence,
which  is  the  stage  of  differentiation,  must  be  doubled.  We  find
the  inner  ground  for  this  systematic  division  of  the  judgment
in  the  circumstance  that  when  the  Notion,  which  is  the  unity  of


262  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  [172.

Being  and  Essence  in  a  comprehensive  thought,  unfolds  as  it  does
in  the  judgment,  it  must  reproduce  these  two  stages  in  a  changed
shape  such  as  is  proper  to  the  notion.  The  notion  meanwhile
is  seen  to  specify  itself  as  the  genuine  judgment.

Far  from  occupying  the  same  level,  and  being  of  equal  value,
the  different  species  of  judgment  form  a  series  of  steps,  the  dis-
tinction between  which  rests  upon  the  logical  significance  of  the
predicate.  That  judgments  differ  in  value  is  evident  even  in  our
ordinary  ways  of  thinking.  We  should  not  hesitate  to  ascribe  a
very  slight  faculty  of  judgment  to  a  person  who  habitually  framed
such  judgments  as,  '  This  wall  is  green/  '  This  oven  is  hot/
On  the  other  hand  we  should  credit  with  a  genuine  capacity
of  judgment  the  person  whose  criticisms  dealt  with  such  ques-
tions as  whether  a  certain  work  of  art  was  beautiful,  whether
a  certain  action  was  good,  and  so  on.  In  judgments  of  the
first-mentioned  kind  the  content  forms  only  an  abstract  quality,
the  presence  of  which  can  be  sufficiently  detected  by  immediate
perception.  To  pronounce  a  work  of  art  to  be  beautiful,  or  an
action  to  be  good,  requires  on  the  contrary  a  comparison  of  the
objects  with  what  they  ought  to  be,  i.e.  with  their  notion.

(a) Qualitative  Judgment.

172.]  The  immediate  judgment  is  the  judgment  of  definite
Being.  The  subject  is  invested  with  a  universality  as  its
predicate,  which  is  an  immediate,  and  therefore  a  sensible
quality.  It  may  be,  in  the  first  place,  (1)  a  Positive  judg-
ment :  The  individual  is  a  particular.  But  the  individual  is
not  a  particular :  or  in  more  precise  language,  such  a  single
quality  is  not  congruous  with  the  concrete  nature  of  the
subject.  This  is,  secondly,  (2)  a  Negative  judgment.

It  is  one  of  the  fundamental  prejudices  of  Logic  to  imagine
that  Qualitative  judgments  such  as,  '  The  rose  is  red,'  or  '  is
not  red,'  can  contain  truth.  They  may  be  correct,  i.^e.  in
the  limited  circle  of  perception,  of  finite  conception  and
thought.  That  depends  on  the  content,  which  likewise  is
finite,  and,  on  its  own  merits,  untrue.  Truth,  however,  as
opposed  to  correctness  depends  solely  on  the  form,  viz.  on
the  notion  affirmed  or  stated,  and  the  reality  corresponding
to  it.  But  truth  of  that  stamp  is  not  found  in  the  Qualitative
judgment.


1 73.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  263

In  common  life  the  terms  truth  and  correctness  are  often
regarded  as  synonymous.  We  often  speak  of  the  truth  of  a
content,  when  we  are  only  thinking-  of  its  correctness.  Correct-
ness, generally  speaking,  concerns  only  the  formal  coincidence
between  our  conception  and  its  content,  whatever  the  constitution
of  this  content  may  be.  Truth,  on  the  contrary,  lies  in  the
coincidence  of  the  object  with  itself,  that  is,  with  its  notion.
That  a  person  is  sick,  or  that  some  one  has  committed  a  theft,
may  certainly  be  correct.  But  the  content  is  untrue.  A  sick
body  is  not  in  harmony  with  the  notion  of  body,  and  there  is
a  want  of  congruity  between  theft  and  the  notion  of  human
conduct.  These  instances  may  show  that  an  immediate  judg-
ment, in  which  an  abstract  quality  is  predicated  of  an  imme-
diately individual  thing,  however  correct  it  may  be,  cannot
contain  truth.  The  subject  and  predicate  of  it  do  not  stand  to
each  other  in  the  relation  of  reality  and  notion.

We  may  add  that  the  untruth  of  the  immediate  judgment  lies
in  the  incongruity  between  its  form  and  content.  To  say  '  This
rose  is  red,'  involves  (in  virtue  of  the  copula  '  is ')  the  coincidence
of  subject  and  predicate.  The  rose  however  is  a  concrete  thing,
and  so  it  is  not  red  only :  it  has  also  an  odour,  a  specific  form,
and  many  other  features  not  implied  in  the  predicate  red.  The
predicate  on  its  part  is  an  abstract  universal,  and  does  not  apply
to  the  rose  alone.  There  are  other  flowers  and  other  objects
which  are  red  too.  The  subject  and  predicate  in  the  immediate
judgment  touch,  as  it  were,  only  in  a  single  point,  but  do  not
cover  each  other.  The  case  is  different  with  the  notional  judg-
ment. In  pronouncing  an  action  to  be  good,  .we  frame  a  notional
judgment.  Here,  as  we  at  once  perceive,  there  is  a  closer  and  a
more  internal  relation  than  in  the  immediate  judgment.  The
predicate  in  the  latter  is  some  abstract  quality  which  may  or
may  not  be  applied  to  the  subject.  In  the  judgment  of  the
notion  the  predicate  is,  as  it  were,  the  soul  of  the  subject,  by
which  the  subject,  as  a  body,  is  characterised  through  and
through.

173.]  This  negation  of  a  particular  quality,  which  is  the
first  negation,  still  leaves  the  connexion  of  the  subject  with
the  predicate  subsisting.  The  predicate  is  in  that  manner
a  sort  of  relative  universal,  of  which  a  special  phase  only  has
been  negatived.  [To  say,  that  the  rose  is  not  red,  implies
that  it  is  still  coloured  —  in  the  first  place  with  another
colour ;  which  however  would  be  only  one  more  positive
judgment.]  The  individual  or  subject  however  is  not  a  uni-


264  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  [173.

versal.  Hence,  in  the  third  place,  (3)  the  judgment  suffers  dis-
ruption into  one  of  two  forms.  It  is  either  (a]  the  Identical
judgment,  an  empty  identical  connexion  stating  that  the
individual  is  the  individual ;  or  it  is  (6)  what  is  called  the
Infinite  judgment,  in  which  we  are  presented  with  the  total
incompatibility  of  subject  and  predicate.

Examples  of  the  latter  are  :  '  The  mind  is  no  elephant : '
*  A  lion  is  no  table ; '  propositions  which  are  correct  but
absurd,  exactly  like  the  identical  propositions :  '  A  lion  is  a
lion ;  '  '  The  mind  is  mind.'  Propositions  like  these  are  un-
doubtedly the  truth  of  the  immediate,  or,  as  it  is  called,
Qualitative  judgment.  But  they  are  not  judgments  at  all,  and
their  occurrence  is  confined  to  subjective  thought,  where
even  an  untrue  abstraction  may  hold  its  ground.  In  their
objective  aspect,  these  Qualitative  judgments  express  the  nature
of  what  is,  or  of  sensible  things,  which,  as  they  declare,
suffer  disruption  into  an  empty  identity  on  the  one  hand,
and  on  the  other  a  fully-charged  connexion  between  them —
only  that  this  connexion  is  the  qualitative  antagonism  of
the  things  connected,  their  total  incongruity.

The  negatively-infinite  judgment  in  which  the  subject  bears
no  connexion  whatever  to  the  predicate,  gets  its  place  in
the  Formal  Logic,  solely  as  a  nonsensical  curiosity.  But  the
infinite  judgment  is  not  really  a  mere  contingent  form  adopted
by  subjective  thought.  It  exhibits  the  proximate  result  of  the
dialectical  process  in  the  immediate  judgments  preceding  (the
positive  and  simply -negative),  and  distinctly  displays  their
finitude  and  untruth.  Crime  may  be  quoted  as  an  objective
instance  of  the  negatively-infinite  judgment.  The  person  com-
mitting a  crime,  such  as  a  theft,  does  not  as  in  a  question-  about
civil  rights,  merely  deny  the  particular  right  of  another  person
to  some  one  definite  thing.  He  denies  the  right  of  that  person  in
general,  and  therefore  he  is  not  merely  forced  to  restore  what  he
has  stolen,  but  is  punished  in  addition,  because  he  has  violated
right  as  right,  i.  e.  right  in  general.  The  civil  suit  on  the  con-
trary is  an  instance  of  the  negative  judgment  pure  and  simple.
In  a  civil  wrong  it  is  merely  the  particular  right  which  is
violated,  whilst  right  in  general  is  so  far  acknowledged.  Such
a  dispute  is  precisely  paralleled  by  a  negative  judgment,  like,
'  This  flower  is  not  red  : '  by  which  we  merely  deny  the  particular


174,  1 75-] THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  265

colour  of  the  flower,  but  not  its  colour  in  general,  which  may  be
blue,  yellow,  or  any  other.  Similarly  death,  as  a  negatively-
infinite  judgment,  is  distinguished  from  disease  as  simply-nega-
tive. In  disease,  merely  this  or  that  function  of  life  is  checked
or  negatived  :  in  death,  as  we  ordinarily  say,  body  and  soul  part,
i.  e.  subject  and  predicate  are  in  no  point  coincident.

(j3)  Judgment  of  Reflection.

174.]  The  individual  in  its  individual  character,  i.  e.  as
reflected-into-self,  when  it  is  taken  and  put  in  a  judgment,
has  a  predicate,  in  comparison  with  which  the  subject,  con-
necting itself  with  itself  and  keeping  aloof,  continues  to  be
still  another  thing. — In  the  existent  world  the  subject  ceases
to  be  immediately  qualitative,  it  comes  to  be  in  relation  and
inter-connexion  with  an  other  thing, — with  an  external  world.
In  this  way  the  universality  of  the  predicate  comes  to  signify
this  relativity — (e.  g.  useful,  or  dangerous :  a  weight  or  an
acid  ;  or  again,  an  instinct ;  are  examples  of  such  relativity).

The  Judgment  of  Reflection  is  distinguished  from  the  Qualita-
tive judgment  by  the  circumstance  that  its  predicate  is  not  an
immediate  or  abstract  quality,  but  of  such  a  kind  as  to  exhibit
the  subject  as  in  connexion  with  something  else.  When  we  say,
e.  g.  '  This  rose  is  red,'  we  regard  the  subject  in  its  immediate
individuality  and  without  reference  to  anything  else.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  we  pronounce  the  judgment,  'This  plant  is  whole-
some,' we  regard  the  subject,  plant,  as  standing  in  connexion
with  something  else  (the  sickness  which  it  cures),  by  means  of
its  predicate  (its  wholesomeness) .  The  case  is  the  same  with
judgments  like  :  This  body  is  elastic  :  This  instrument  is  useful :
This  punishment  has  a  deterrent  influence.  In  every  one  of
these  instances  the  predicate  is  some  category  of  reflection.
They  all  exhibit  an  advance  beyond  the  immediate  individuality
of  the  subject,  but  none  of  them  goes  so  far  as  to  indicate  the
adequate  notion  of  it.  It  is  in  this  mode  of  judgment  that  the
popular  forms  of  reasoning  delight.  The  greater  the  concrete-
ness  of  the  object  in  question,  the  more  points  of  view  does  it
offer  to  reflection  ;  by  which  however  its  proper  nature  or  notion
is  not  exhausted.

175.]  (1)  Firstly  then  the  subject,  the  individual  as  in-
dividual (in  the  Singular  judgment),  is  an  universal.  But,


266  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  [175.

(2)  secondly,  in  this  connexion  it  is  elevated  above  its
singularity.  This  extension  is  external,  due  to  subjective
reflection,  and  at  first  is  an  indefinite  number  of  particulars.
(This  is  seen  in  the  Particular  judgment,  which  is  obviously
negative  as  well  as  positive :  the  individual  is  divided  in
itself:  partly  it  is  connected  with  itself,  partly  with  something
else.)  (3)  Thirdly,  Some  are  the  universal :  particularity  is  thus
extended  to  become  universality :  or  universality  is  modified
by  the  individuality  of  the  subject,  and  appears  as  allness  or
omnitude,  (Community,  the  ordinary  universality  of  reflection).

The  subject  when,  in  the  Singular  judgment,  it  is  described  as
a  universal,  ceases  to  be  its  mere  individual  self.  To  say,  '  This
plant  is  wholesome,'  implies  not  only  that  this  single  plant  is
wholesome,  but  that  some  or  several  are  so.  We  thus  have  the
particular  judgment  (some  plants  are  wholesome,  some  men  are
inventive,  &c.).  By  means  of  particularity  the  immediate  in-
dividual comes  to  lose  its  independence,  and  enters  into  an  inter-
connexion with  something  else.  Man,  as  this  man,  is  not  this
single  man  alone,  he  stands  beside  other  men  and  becomes  one  in
the  crowd.  Just  by  this  means  however  he  belongs  to  his
universal,  and  is  consequently  raised.  The  particular  judgment
is  as  much  negative  as  positive.  If  only  some  bodies  are  elastic,
it  is  evident  that  the  rest  are  not  elastic.

On  this  fact  again  depends  the  advance  to  the  third  form  of
the  Reflective  judgment,  viz.  the- judgment  of  allness  (all  men
are  mortal,  all  metals  conduct  electricity).  It  is  as  'all '  that  the
universal  is  in  the  first  instance  generally  encountered  by  reflec-
tion. The  substratum  consists  of  the  individuals,  which  our
subjective  reflection  collects  and  describes  as  '  all.'  So  far  the
universal  has  the  aspect  of  an  external  fastening,  that  holds
together  a  number  of  independent  individuals,  which  have  not
the  least  affinity  towards  it.  This  semblance  of  indifference  is
however  unreal :  for  the  universal  is  the  ground  and  foundation,
the  root  and  substance  of  the  individual.  Caius,  Titus,  Sempro-
nius,  and  the  other  inhabitants  of  a  town  or  country  are  all  men.
That  they  are  so,  is  not  merely  something  which  they  have  in
common,  but  their  universal  or  kind,  without  which  these
individuals  would  not  be  at  all.  The  case  is  very  different  with
that  superficial  generality  falsely  so  called,  which  really  means
only  what  attaches,  or  is  common,  to  all  the  individuals.  It  has
been  remarked,  for  example,  that  men,  in  contradistinction  from
the  lower  animals,  possess  in  common  the  appendage  of  ear-
laps.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  the  absence  of  these  ear-laps


176,  1 77-] THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  267

in  one  man  or  another  would  not  affect  the  rest  of  his
being,  character,  or  capacities :  whereas  it  would  be  nonsense  to
suppose  that  Caius,  without  being  a  man,  would  still  be  brave,
learned,  &c.  The  individual  man  is  what  he  is  in  particular,
only  in  so  far  as  he  is  before  all  things  a  man  as  man  and  in
general.  That  generality  is  not  something  external  to,  or  some-
thing in  addition  to  other  abstract  qualities,  or  to  mere  features
discovered  by  reflection.  It  is  what  permeates  and  includes  in  it
everything  particular.

176.]  The  subject,  being  thus  like  the  predicate  invested
with  a  character  of  universality,  is  expressly  made  identical
with  the  predicate :  and  by  this  identity  the  very  specialisa-
tion of  judgment  is  set  forth  to  be  indifferent.  This  unity
of  the  content  (the  content  being  the  universality  which  is
identical  with  the  negative  reflection-in-self  of  the  subject)
makes  the  connexion  in  judgment  a  necessary  one.

The  advance  from  the  reflective  judgment  of  all  ness  to  the
judgment  of  necessity  is  found  in  our  usual  modes  of  thought,
when  we  say  that  everything  which  appertains  to  all,  appertains
to  the  species,  and  is  therefore  necessary.  To  say  All  plants,  or
All  men,  is  the  same  thing  as  to  say  the  plant,  or  the  man.

(y)  Judgment  of  Necessity.

177.]  The  Judgment  of  Necessity  is  that,  .where  the  content
though  in  distinction  is  identical.  (1)  It  contains,  in  the
first  place,  in  the  predicate,  partly  the  substance  or  nature
of  the  subject,  the  concrete  universal,  the  genus;  partly,
seeing  that  this  universal  also  contains  in  it  the  specific
character  as  negative,  the  predicate  represents  the  exclusive
essential  character,  the  species.  This  is  the  Categorical
judgment.

(2)  Conformably  to  their  substantiality,  the  two  terms  receive
the  aspect  of  independent  actuality,  and  their  identity  is  inward
only. And  thus  the  actuality  of  the  one  is  at  the  same  time  not
its  own,  but  the  being  of  the  other. This  is  the  Hypothetical
judgment.

(3)  If,  when  the  notion  is  thus  driven  out  of  its  oneness,  its
inner  identity  is  at  the  same  time  set  forth,  the  universal  is  the


268  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  [177.

genus,  which  in  its  exclusive  individuality  is  identical  with  itself.
This  judgment,  which  has  this  universal  for  both  its  terms,  the
one  time  as  a  universal,  the  other  time  as  the  circle  of  its  self-
excluding  particularisation  or  several  species  in  which  the  con-
junctions 'either — or'  as  much  as  the  'as  well  as'  stands  for
the  genus,  is  the  Disjunctive  judgment.  Universality,  at  first
as  a  genus,  and  now  also  as  the  circuit  of  its  species,  is  thus
described  and  expressly  stated  as  a  systematic  whole.

The  Categorical  judgment  (such  as  '  Gold  is  a  metal,'  '  The
rose  is  a  plant ')  is  the  immediate  judgment  of  necessity,  and
finds  within  the  sphere  of  Essence  its  parallel  in  the  relation  of
substance.  All  things  are  a  Categorical  judgment.  In  other
words,  they  have  their  substantial  nature,  forming  their  fixed
and  unchangeable  substratum.  It  is  when  the  point  of  view
from  which  things  are  considered  is  their  kind,  and  when  they
are  regarded  as  necessarily  modified  by  the  kind,  that  the  judg-
ment first  begins  to  be  real.  It  betrays  a^defective  logical
training  to  place  upon  the  same  level  judgments  like  '  gold  is
dear/  and  judgments  like  '  gold  is  a  metal.'  That  '  gold  is  dear'
is  a  matter  of  external  connexion  between  it  and  our  wants  or
inclinations,  the  costs  of  obtaining  it,  and  other  circumstances.
Gold  remains  the  same  as  it  was,  though  that  external  reference
changes  or  passes  away.  Metalleity,  on  the  contrary,  constitutes
the  substantial  nature  of  gold,  apart  from  which  it,  and  all  else
that  is  in  it,  or  can  be  predicated  of  it,  would  be  unable  to.
subsist.  The  same  is  the  case  if  we  say,  '  Caius  is  a  man.'  We
express  by  that,  that  whatever  else  he  may  be,  has  worth  and
meaning,  only  when  it  corresponds  to  his  substantial  nature
or  manhood.

But  even  the  Categorical  judgment  is  defective  to  a  certain
extent.  It  fails  to  give  due  place  to  the  function  or  element;
of  particularity.  Thus,  '  gold  is  a  metal/  it  is  true ;  but  so  are
silver,  copper,  iron :  and  metalleity  as  such  has  no  leanings
to  the  particulars  of  its  species.  In  these  circumstances  we
must  advance  from  the  Categorical  to  the  Hypothetical  judg-
ment, which  may  be  expressed  in  the  formula :  If  A  is,  B  is.
The  present  case  exhibits  the  same  advance  as  formerly  took
place  from  the  relation  of  substance  to  the  relation  of  cause.
In  the  Hypothetical  judgment  the  specific  character  of  the  con-
tent shows  itself  mediated  and  dependent  on  something  else :
and  this  is  exactly  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect.  And  if  we
were  to  give  a  general  interpretation  to  the  Hypothetical  judg-
ment, we  should  say  that  it  expressly  realises  the  universal  in  its


178,  1 7 9.] THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  269

particularising.  This  brings  us  to  the  third  form  of  the  Judg-
ment of  Necessity,  the  Disjunctive  judgment.  A  is  either  B  or  C
or  D.  A  work  of  poetic  art  is  either  epic  or  lyric  or  dramatic.
Colour  is  either  yellow  or  blue  or  red.  The  two  terms  in  the
Disjunctive  judgment  are  identical.  The  genus  is  the  sum  total
of  the  species,  and  the  sum  total  of  the  species  is  the  genus.
This  unity  of  the  universal  and  the  particular  is  the  notion :  and
it  is  the  notion  which,  as  we  now  see,  forms  the  content  or
burden  and  meaning  of  the  judgment.


(8) Judgment  of  the  Notion.

178.]  The  Judgment  of  the  Notion  has  for  its  content  the
notion,  the  systematic  whole  in  a  simple  form,  the  universal
with  its  complete  speciality.  The  subject  is  (1),  in  the  first  place,
an  individual,  which  has  for  its  predicate  the  reflection  of  the
particular  being  on  its  universal ;  and  the  judgment  states  the
agreement  or  disagreement  of  these  two  terms.  That  is,  the
predicate  is  such  a  term  as  good,  true,  correct.  This  is  the
Assertory  judgment.

Judgments,  such  as  whether  an  object,  action,  &c.  is  good,
bad,  true,  beautiful,  &c.,  are  those  to  which  even  ordinary  lan-
guage first  applies  the  name  of  judgment.  We  should  never
ascribe  much  judgment  to  a  person  who  framed  positive  or
negative  judgments  like,  This  rose  is  red,  This  picture  is  red,
green,  dusty,  &c.

The  Assertory  judgment,  although  rejected  by  society  as  out
of  place  when  it  claims  authority  on  its  own  showing,  has
however  been  made  the  single  and  essential  form  of  teaching,
even  in  philosophy,  through  the  influence  of  the  principle  of
immediate  knowledge  or  faith.  In  the  so-called  philosophic
works  which  maintain  this  principle,  we  may  read  hundreds
and  hundreds  of  assertions  about  reason,  knowledge,  thought,
&c.  which,  now  that  external  authority  counts  for  little,  seek
to  corroborate  themselves  by  an  endless  restatement  of  the  same
thesis.

179.]  So  far  as  appears  from  its  primarily  immediate  subject,
the  Assertory  judgment  does  not  contain  the  connexion  of  par-


270  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION. [180,  181.

ticular  with  universal  which  is  expressed  in  the  predicate.  This
judgment  is  consequently  a  mere  subjective  particularity,  and  is
confronted  by  a  contrary  assertion  with  equal  right,  or  rather  want
of  right.  It  is  therefore  at  once  turned  into  (2),  secondly,  a  Pro-
blematical judgment.  But  when  we  explicitly  invest  the  sub-
ject with  its  objective  particularity,  when  we  take  its  speciality
as  the  constitution  of  its  Being- then-and-there,  the  subject
(3)  then  expresses  the  connexion  of  that  objective  particularity
with  its  constitution,  i.  e.  with  its  genus ;  and  thus  expresses
what  forms  the  content  of  the  predicate  (see  preceding  §).  [This
(the  immediate  individual]  house  (the  genus)  being  so  and  so
constituted  (particularity)  is  good  or  bad.]  This  is  the  Apo-
dictic  judgment.  All  things  are  a  genus  (which  is  their  voca-
tion and  Aim  or  End)  in  an  individual  actuality  of  a  particular
constitution.  And  they  are  finite,  because  the  particular  in
them  may  and  also  may  not  conform  to  the  universal.

180-]  In  this  manner  subject  and  predicate  are  each  the
whole  judgment.  The  immediate  constitution  of  the  subject
is  at  first  exhibited  as  the  intermediating  ground,  where  the
individuality  of  the  actual  thing  meets  with  its  universality,
and  in  this  way  as  the  ground  of  the  judgment.  What  has
been  really  made  explicit  is  the  oneness  of  subject  and  predi-
cate, as  the  notion  itself,  consummating  the  empty  '  is '  of  the
copula.  While  its  constituent  elements  are  at  the  same  time
distinguished  as  subject  and  predicate,  the  notion  is  stated  as
their  unity,  as  the  connexion  which  serves  to  intermediate  them  :
in  short,  as  the  Syllogism.

(c)  The  Syllogism.

181.]  The  Syllogism  brings  the  notion  and  the  judgment
into  one.  It  is  notion, — being  the  simple  identity  into  which
the  distinctions  of  form  in  the  judgment  have  retired.  It  is
judgment, — because  it  is  at  the  same  time  set  in  reality,  that  is,
placed  in  the  distinction  of  its  terms.  The  Syllogism  is  what  is
rational,  and  everything  that  is  rational.


1 8 1.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  271

Even  the  ordinary  theories  represent  the  Syllogism  to  be  the
form  of  rational  thought,  but  only  a  subjective  form; and  no
inter-connexion  whatever  is  shown  to  exist  between  it  and  any
other  rational  content,  such  as  a  rational  principle,  action,  or
idea. The  name  of  reason  is  much  and  often  spoken  of,  and
appealed  to  :  but  no  one  thinks  of  explaining  what  its  character
is,  or  saying  what  it  is, — least  of  all  that  it  Jhas  any  connexion
with  Syllogism. But  formal  Syllogism  really  presents  what  is
rational  with  such  an  absence  of  reason  that  it  has  nothing  to
do  with  anything  of  rational  quality. But  as  the  matter  in
question  can  only  be  rational  in  virtue  of  the  character  by  which
thought  is  made  reason,  it  must  be  made  so  by  the  form  only :
and  that  form  is  Syllogism. And  what  is  a  Syllogism  but  an
explicit  statement  of  the  real  notion,  at  first  real  in  form  only,
as  stated  in  the  paragraph  ? On  that  account  the  Syllogism  is  -
the  essential  ground  of  whatever  is  true :  and  we  see  now  that
the  Syllogism  is  the  definition  of  the  Absolute. Or  if  we  state
this  characteristic in  the  form  of  a  proposition  it  will  run :
Eveiything  is  a  Syllogism. Everything  is  a  notion :  and  its
Being  then-and-there  is  the  distinction  of  the  constituent  func-
tions thereof. — In  that  way  the  universal  nature  of  the  Notion
acquires  external  reality  by  means  of  particularity,  and  thereby,
and  as  a  negative  reflection-into-itself,  makes  itself  an  indivi-
dual. Or,  conversely :  the  actual  thing  is  an  individual,  which
by  means  of  particularity  rises  to  universality  and  renders  itself
identical  with  itself. The  actual  thing  is  a  Unit :  but  it  is  also
the  breaking  up  and  partition  of  the  constituent  elements  of  the
notion ;  and  the  Syllogism  represents  the  circulating  movement
by  which  its  elements  are  intermediated,  and  by  which  it  ex-
plicitly sets  itself  as  a  unit.

The  Syllogism,  like  the  notion  and  the  judgment,  is  usually
described  as  a  form  merely  of  our  subjective  thinking.  The
Syllogism,  it  is  said,  is  the  proof  of  the  judgment.  And  cer-
tainly the  judgment  does  in  every  case  refer  us  to  the  Syllo-
gism. The  step  from  the  one  to  the  other  however  is  not
brought  about  by  our  subjective  action,  but  by  the  judgment
itself  which  becomes  explicit  in  the  Syllogism,  and  in  the  con-


272  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  [182.

elusion  returns  to  the  unity  of  the  notion.  The  precise  point  by
which  we  pass  to  the  Syllogism  is  found  in  the  Apodictic  judg-
ment. In  it  we  have  an  individual  which  by  means  of  its
qualities  connects  itself  with  its  universal  or  notion.  Here  we
see  the  particular  becoming  the  middle  ground  of  intermediation
between  the  individual  and  the  universal.  This  gives  the  funda-
mental form  of  the  Syllogism,  the  gradual  specification  of  which,
formally  considered,  consists  in  the  fact  that  universal  and  indi-
vidual also  occupy  this  place  of  mean.  This  again  paves  the  way
for  the  passage  from  subjectivity  to  objectivity.

182.]  In  the  immediate  Syllogism  the  several  characteristics
of  the  notion  confront  one  another  abstractly,  and  stand  in  an
external  relation  only.  We  have  first  the  two  extremes,  which
are  Individuality  and  Universality ;  and  then  the  notion,  as  the
mean  for  locking  the  two  together,  is  in  like  manner  only
abstract  Particularity.  In  this  way  the  extremes  are  invested
with  an  independence  which  permits  no  affinity  either  towards
one  another  or  towards  their  mean.  Such  a  Syllogism  may  be
rational,  but  it  is  void  of  all  notion.  It  is  the  formal  Syllogism
of  the  Understanding.  The  subject  in  it  is  locked  together  with
another  character  ;  or  the  universal  by  this  mediation  subsumes
a  subject  external  to  it.  In  the  rational  Syllogism,  on  the  con-
trary, the  subject  is  by  means  of  the  mediation  locked  together
with  itself.  In  this  manner  it  first  comes  to  be  a  subject :  or,
in  the  subject  we  have  the  first  germ  of  the  rational  Syllogism.

In  the  following  examination,  the  Syllogism  of  Understanding,
according  to  the  interpretation  usually  put  upon  it,  is  expressed
in  its  subjective  shape  ;  the  shape  which  it  has  when  we  are  said
to  make  such  Syllogisms.  And  it  really  is  only  a  subjective
syllogising.  Such  Syllogism  it  is  true  also  has  an  objective
meaning,  and  expresses  only  the  finitude  of  things,  but  it  does
so  in  the  specific  mode,  which  the  form  has  here  reached.  In
the  case  of  finite  things  the  subjectivity,  their  '  thinginess,'  is
separable  from  their  properties  or  their  particularity,  but  also
separable  from  their  universality,  not  only  when  the  universality
is  the  bare  quality  of  the  thing  and  its  external  inter-connexion
with  other  things,  but  also  when  it  is  its  genus  and  notion.


1 83.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  273

The  syllogism,  as  we  have  seen,  has  been  described  as  the
rational  form  par  excellence  ;  and  so  reason  has  been  defined  as
the  faculty  of  syllogising-,  whilst  understanding  is  defined  as  the
faculty  of  forming  notions.  We  might  object  to  the  conception
on  which  this  depends,  and  according  to  which  the  mind  is
merely  a  sum  of  forces  or  faculties  existing  side  by  side.  But
apart  from  that  objection,  we  may  observe  in  regard  to  the  juxta-
position of  understanding  with  the  notion,  as  well  as  of  reason
with  syllogism,  that  the  notion  is  as  little  a  mere  category  of
the  understanding  as  the  syllogism  is  without  qualification
definable  as  rational.  For,  in  the  first  place,  what  the  Formal
Logic  usually  examines  in  its  theory  of  syllogism,  is  really
nothing  but  the  mere  syllogism  of  understanding,  which  has
no  claim  to  the  honour  of  being  made  a  form  of  rationality,
still  less  to  be  held  as  the  embodiment  of  all  reason.  The
notion,  in  the  second  place,  so  far  from  being  a  form  of  under-
standing, owes  its  degradation  to  such  a  place  entirely  to  the
influence  of  that  abstract  mode  of  thought.  And  it  is  not
unusual  to  draw  such  a  distinction  between  a  notion  of  under-
standing and  a  notion  of  reason.  The  distinction  however  does
not  mean  that  notions  are  of  two  kinds.  It  means  that  our  own
action  often  makes  us  stop  short  at  the  mere  negative  and  ab-
stract form  of  the  notion,  when  we  might  also  have  proceeded
to  apprehend  the  notion  in  its  true  nature,  as  at  once  positive
and  concrete.  It  is  e.  g.  the  mere  understanding,  which  thinks
freedom  to  be  the  abstract  contrary  of  necessity,  whereas  the
adequate  rational  notion  of  freedom  requires  the  element  of
necessity  to  be  merged  in  it.  Similarly  the  definition  of  God,
given  by  what  is  called  Deism,  is  merely  the  mode  in  which,
the  understanding  thinks  God :  whereas  Christianity,  to  which
He  is  known  as  the  Trinity,  contains  the  rational  notion  of
God.

(a) Qualitative  Syllogism.

183.]  The  first  syllogism  is  a  syllogism  of  immediate  or
definite  being,  a  Qualitative  Syllogism,  as  stated  in  the  last
paragraph.  Its  form  (1)  is  I — P — U  :  i.  e.  a  subject  as  Indivi-
dual is  locked  together  with  a  Universal  character  by  means
of  one  (Particular)  quality.

We  have  nothing  at  present  to  do  with  the  fact  that  the
subject  (terminus  minor]  has  other  characteristics  besides  that
of  individuality,  just  as  the  other  extreme  (the  predicate  of
the  conclusion,  or  terminus  major]  has  other  characteristics  than

T


274  THE DOCTRINE OF  THE NOTION.  [183.

merely that of  universality. We are concerned only with
the  forms,  in  virtue  of  which  these  terms  make  a  syllogism.

The  syllogism  of  definite  being  is  a  syllogism  of  under-
standing merely,  at  least  in  so  far  as  it  leaves  the  individual,
the  particular,  and  the  universal  to  confront  each  other  quite
abstractly.  In  this  syllogism  the  notion  comes  most  completely
out  of  itself.  We  have  in  it  an  immediately  individual  thing
as  subject :  next  some  one  particular  aspect,  or  property  attach-
ing to  this  subject  is  emphasised,  and  by  means  of  this  property
the  individual  turns  out  to  be  a  universal.  Thus  we  may
say,  This  rose  is  red :  Red  is  a  colour :  Therefore,  this  rose
is  a  coloured  object.  It  is  this  aspect  of  the  syllogism  which
the  common  logics  mainly  treat  of.  There  was  a  time  when
the  syllogism  was  regarded  as  an  absolute  rule  for  all  cognition,
and  when  a  scientific  statement  was  not  held  to  be  valid  until
it  had  been  shown  to  follow  from  a  process  of  syllogism.  At
present,  on  the  contrary,  the  different  forms  of  the  syllogism
are  met  nowhere  save  in  the  compendia  of  Logic ;  and  to  make
an  acquaintance  with  them  would  be  termed  an  act  of  stupid
pedantry,  of  no  further  use  either  in  practical  life  or  in  science.
It  would  indeed  be  both  useless  and  pedantic  to  parade  the
whole  details  of  the  formal  syllogism  on  every  occasion.  And
yet  the  several  forms  of  syllogism  still  make  themselves  con-
stantly felt  in  our  cognition..  If  any  one,  when  awaking  on
a  winter  morning,  hears  the  creaking  of  the  carriages  on  the
street,  and  is  thus  led  to  conclude  that  it  has  been  a  strong
frost  during  the  night,  he  has  gone  through  a  syllogistic
process : — a  process  which  is  every  day  repeated  under  the
greatest  variety  of  conditions.  The  interest,  therefore,  ought
at  least  not  to  be  less  in  becoming  expressly  conscious  of  this
daily  action  of  our  thinking  selves,  than  is  admitted  to  ac-
company the  study  of  the  functions  of  organic  life,  such  as
the  processes  of  digestion,  assimilation,  respiration,  or  even
the  processes  and  structures  of  the  world  around  us.  We  do
not,  however,  for  a  moment  deny  that  a  knowledge  of  Logic  is
no  more  necessary  to  teach  us  how  to  draw  correct  conclusions,
than  a  previous  study  of  anatomy  and  physiology  is  required
in  order  to  digest  or  breathe.

Aristotle  was  the  first  to  observe  and  describe  the  different
forms,  or,  as  they  are  called,  figures  of  syllogism,  in  their
subjective  meaning :  and  he  performed  his  work  so  exactly
and  surely,  that  no  essential  addition  has  ever  been  required.
But  while  sensible  of  the  value  of  what  he  has  thus  done,
we  must  not  forget  that  the  forms  of  the  syllogism  of  under-
standing, and  of  finite  thought  altogether,  are  not  what


1 84.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  275

Aristotle  has made use of  in  his properly  philosophical in-
vestigations. (See  §  189.)


184.]  This  syllogism  is  completely  contingent  (a)  in  the
matter  of  its  terms.  The  Mean  is  an  abstract  quality,  and  is
therefore  only  some  one  character  of  the  subject :  but  the
subject,  being  immediate  and  thus  empirically  concrete,  has
several  other  characters.  It  could  be  combined  therefore  with
exactly  as  many  other  universalities  as  it  possesses  isolated
qualities.  Similarly  any  one  single  quality  may  have  different
characters  in  itself,  so  that  the  same  medius  terminus  would
serve  to  connect  the  subject  with  several  distinct  universals.

It  is  more  a  caprice  of  fashion,  than  a  sense  of  its  incorrect-
ness, which  has  led  people  to  abandon  the  use  of  ceremonious
syllogising.  This  and  the  following  paragraph  state  the  use-
lessness  of  such  syllogising  for  the  ends  of  truth.

The  point  noted  in  the  paragraph  will  show  that  this  style
of  syllogism  can  demonstrate  (for  that  is  the  word)  the  most
diverse  conclusions.  All  that  is  requisite  is  to  find  a  medius
terminus  from  which  the  transition  can  be  made  to  the  formula
or  conclusion  sought.  An  other  medius  terminus  would  enable
us  to  demonstrate  something  else,  and  even  the  contrary  of
the  last.  And  the  more  concrete  an  object  is,  the  more  aspects
it  has,  which  may  become  such  middle  terms.  To  determine
which  of  these  aspects  is  more  essential  than  another,  again,
requires  a  further  syllogism  of  this  kind,  which  attaches  itself
to  the  single  character :  and  for  it  also  some  aspect  or  con-
sideration may  be  discovered,  by  which  it  can  make  good  its
claims  to  be  considered  necessary  and  important.

Little  as  we  usually  think  on  the  Syllogism  of  Understanding
in  the  daily  business  of  life,  it  never  ceases  to  play  its  part
there.  In  a  civil  suit,  for  instance,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  advocate
to  give  due  force  to  the  legal  titles  which  make  in  favour  of
his  client.  In  logical  language,  such  a  legal  title  is  nothing
but  a  middle  term.  Diplomatic  transactions  afford  another
illustration  of  the  same,  when,  for  instance,  different  powers
lay  claim  to  one  and  the  same  territory.  In  such  a  case  the

T  2


276  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION. [185,  1 86.

laws  of  inheritance,  the  geographical  position  of  the  country,
the  descent  and  the  language  of  its  inhabitants,  or  any  other
ground,  may  be  emphasised  as  a  medius  terminus.

185.]  (/3)  This  syllogism,  if  it  is  contingent  in  point  of  its
terms,  is  no  less  contingent  in  virtue  of  the  form  of  connexion
which  is  found  in  it.  In  the  syllogism,  according  to  its  notion,
truth  lies  in  connecting  two  distinct  things  by  a  Mean  in
which  they  are  at  one.  But  connexions  of  the  extremes  with
the  Mean  (which  are  the  so-called  premisses,  the  major  and
minor  premiss)  are  in  the  case  of  this  syllogism  much  more
decidedly  immediate  connexions.  In  other  words,  they  have
not  a  proper  Mean.

This  contradiction  in  the  syllogism  is  exhibited  in  a  new  case
of  the  infinite  progression.  Each  of  the  premisses  evidently  calls
for  a  fresh  syllogism  to  demonstrate  it :  and  as  the  new  syllogism
has  two  immediate  premisses,  like  its  predecessor,  the  demand
for  proof  is  doubled  at  every  step,  and  repeated  without  end.

186.]  On  account  of  its  importance  for  experience,  we  have
here  noted  a  defect  in  the  syllogism,  although  in  this  form
absolute  correctness  had  been  ascribed  to  it.  This  defect  how-
ever must  lose  itself  in  the  gradual  specification  of  the  syllogism.
For  we  are  now  within  the  limits  of  the  notion ;  and  here
therefore,  as  well  as  in  the  judgment,  the  opposite  character
is  not  merely  present  potentially,  but  explicitly  stated.  To
work  out  the  gradual  specification  of  the  syllogism,  therefore,
there  need  only  be  admitted  and  accepted  what  is  each  time
imposed  by  the  laws  of  the  syllogism  itself.

Through  the  immediate  syllogism  I — P — U,  the  Individual
is  mediated  with  the  Universal,  and  in  this  conclusion  stated
expressly  as  a  universal.  It  follows  that  the  individual  sub-
ject, becoming  itself  a  universal,  serves  to  unite  the  two
extremes,  and  to  form  their  ground  of  intermediation.  This
gives  the  second  figure  of  the  syllogism  (2)  U — I — P.  It
expresses  the  truth  of  the  first,  because  it  shows  that  the
intermediation  has  taken  place  in  the  individual,  and  is  thus
something  contingent.


187.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  277

187- ]  The  universal,  by  the  first  conclusion,  was  specified
by  means  of  individuality,  and  passing-  over  into  the  second
figure  now  occupies  the  place  of  the  immediate  subject.  Thus
in  the  second  figure  the  universal  is  made  to  close  and  unite
with  the  particular.  By  this  conclusion  therefore  the  universal
is  explicitly  stated  as  particular — and  is  now  made  to  mediate
between  the  two  extremes,  the  place  of  which  is  occupied  by
the  two  others  (the  particular  and  the  individual).  This  is
the  third  figure  of  the  syllogism  :  (3)  P — U  — I.

What  are  called  the  Figures  of  the  syllogism  (being  three
in  number,  for  the  fourth  is  a  superfluous  and  even  absurd
addition  to  the  three  known  to  Aristotle)  are  in  the  usual
mode  of  treatment  put  side  by  side,  without  the  slightest
thought  of  showing  their  necessity,  and  still  less  of  pointing
out  their  import  and  value.  No  wonder  then  that  the  figures
have  been  in  later  times  treated  as  an  empty  piece  of  formalism.
They  have  however  a  most  profound  meaning,  which  rests  upon
the  necessity  that  requires  every  function  or  characteristic
element  of  the  notion  to  become  the  whole  itself,  and  to  stand
as  the  mean  in  which  they  all  converge.  To  find  out  what
other  characteristics  of  the  propositions,  (such  as  whether  they
may  be  universals,  or  negatives,)  are  needed  to  enable  us  to
draw  a  correct  conclusion  in  the  different  figures,  is  a  me-
chanical inquiry,  which  its  purely  mechanical  nature  and  its
want  of  inner  meaning  have  very  properly  consigned  to  oblivion.
And  Aristotle  is  the  last  person  to  give  any  countenance  to
those  who  wish  to  attach  importance  to  such  inquiries  or  to
the  syllogism  of  understanding  in  general.  It  is  true  that
he  described  these,  as  well  as  numerous  other  forms  of  mind
and  nature,  and  that  he  has  examined  and  expounded  their
specialities.  But  in  his  metaphysical  notions,  as  well  as  in
his  notions  of  nature  and  mind,  he  was  very  far  from  seeking
a  basis,  or  a  criterion,  in  the  syllogistic  forms  of  the  under-
standing. Indeed  it  might  be  maintained  that  not  one  of
these  notions  would  ever  have  come  into  existence,  or  been
allowed  to  exist,  if  it  had  been  compelled  to  submit  to  the


278  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE NOTION.  [188.

laws  of  understanding,  Amid  all  the  descriptive  material,  and
facts  of  understanding1,  which  Aristotle  after  his  fashion  thinks
it  necessary  to  adduce,  his  ruling  principle  is  always  the
speculative  notion  ;  and  that  syllogistic  of  the  understanding
to  which  he  first  gave  .such  a  definite  expression  is  never  allowed
to  intrude  in  the  higher  domain  of  philosophy  .

In  their  objective  sense,  the  three  figures  of  the  syllogism
declare  that  everything  rational  is  manifested  as  a  triple
syllogism ;  that  is  to  say,  each  one  of  the  members  takes  in  turn
the  place  of  the  extremes,  as  well  as  of  the  mean  which  reconciles
or  unites  them.  Such,  for  example,  is  the  case  with  the  three
branches  of  philosophy  ;  the  Logical  Idea,  Nature,  and  Mind.
As  we  first  see  them,  Nature  is  the  middle  term  which  links
the  others  together.  Nature,  the  systematic  whole  which  is
immediately  before  us,  unfolds  itself  into  the  two  extremes  of
the  Logical  Idea  and  the  Mind.  But  Mind  is  Mind  only  when
it  is  mediated  through  nature.  Then,  in  the  second  place,
the  Mind,  which  we  know  as  the  principle  of  individuality,
or  as  the  actualising  principle,  is  the  mean,  and  Nature  and
the  Logical  Idea  are  the  extremes.  It  is  Mind  which  cognises
the  Logical  Idea  in  Nature  and  which  thus  raises  Nature  to
its  essence.  In  the  third  place  again  the  Logical  Idea  itself
becomes  the  mean :  it  is  the  absolute  substance  both  of  mind
and  of  nature,  the  universal  and  all-pervading  principle.  These
are  the  members  of  the  Absolute  Syllogism.

188-]  In  the  round  by  which  each  constituent  function
assumes  successively  the  place  of  mean  and  of  the  two  extremes,
their  specific  difference  from  each  other  has  been  thrown  into
abeyance  or  suspended.  In  this  form,  where  there  is  no
distinction  between  its  constituent  elements,  the  syllogism  at
first  has  for  its  connective  link  equality,  or  the  external  identity
of  understanding.  This  is  the  Quantitative  or  Mathematical
Syllogism.  If  two  things  are  equal  to  a  third,  they  are  equal
to  one  another.

Everybody  knows  that  this  Quantitative  syllogism  appears
as  a  mathematical  axiom,  which  like  other  axioms  is  said  to
be  a  fact,  that  does  not  admit  of  proof,  and  which  indeed  being
self-evident  does  not  require  such  proof.  These  mathematical
axioms  however  are  really  nothing  but  logical  propositions,
which,  so  far  as  they  enunciate  definite  and  particular  thoughts,


189,  190.] THE DOCTRINE OF THE NOTION.  279

require  to  be  deduced  from  the  universal  and  self-characterising
thought.  To  do  so,  is  to  give  their  proof.  That  is  true  of
the  Quantitative  syllogism,  to  which  mathematics  gives  the
rank  of  an  axiom.  It  is  really  the  proximate  result  of  the
qualitative  or  immediate  syllogism.  Finally,  the  Quantitative
syllogism  is  the  syllogism  of  no  form  at  all.  That  distinction
between  the  terms  which  is  formulated  by  the  notion  is  sus-
pended. Extraneous  circumstances  alone  can  decide  what  pro-
positions are  to  be  premisses  here :  and  therefore  in  applying
this  syllogism  we  make  a  pre-supposition  of  what  has  been
elsewhere  proved  and  established.  ,

189.]  Two  results  follow  as  to  the  form.  In^the  first  place,
each  constituent  element  has  taken  the  place  and  performed
the  function  of  the  mean  and  therefore  of  the  whole,  thus  im-
plicitly losing  its  partial  and  abstract  character  (§  182  and  §  184) ;
secondly,  the  mediation  has  been  completed  (§  j85),  though
the  completion  too  is  only  implicit,  that  is,  only  as  a  circle
of  mediations  which  in  turn  pre-suppose  each  other.  In  the
first  figure  I— P — U  the  two  premisses  I — P  and  P — U  are
yet  without  a  mediation.  The  former  premiss  is  mediated  in
the  third,  the  latter  in  the  second  figure.  But  each  of  these
two  figures,  again,  for  the  mediation  of  its  premisses  pre-
supposes the  two  others.

In  consequence  of  this,  we  have  expressly  to  state  the  me-
diating unity  of  the  notion,  no  longer  as  an  abstract  and
particular  quality,  but  as  a  developed  unity  of  the  individual
and  universal — and  in  the  first  place  a  reflected  unity  of  these
elements.  That  is  to  say,  the  individual  gets  at  the  same
time  the  character  of  universality.  A  mean  of  this  kind  gives
the  Syllogism  of  Reflection.

(/3) Syllogism  of  Reflection.

190.]  If  the  mean,  in  the  first  place,  be  not  only  an  abstract
and  particular  character  of  the  subject,  but  at  the  same  time
all  the  individual  concrete  subjects,  which  possess  that  character
but  possess  it  only  along  with  others,  (1)  we  have  the  Syllogism
of  Allness.  The  major  premiss,  however,  which  has  for  its


280  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  [190.

subject  the  particular  character,  the  terminus  medius,  as  allness,
pre-supposes  the  very  conclusion  which  ought  rather  to  have
pre-supposed  it.  It  rests  therefore  (2)  on  an  Induction,  in
which  the  mean  is  given  by  the  complete  list  of  individuals,
as  such, — a,  b,  c,  d,  &c.  On  account  of  the  disparity,  however,
between  universality  and  an  immediate  and  empirical  indi-
viduality, the  list  can  never  be  complete.  Induction  therefore
rests  upon  (3)  Analogy.  The  middle  term  of  Analogy  is  an
individual,  which  however  is  understood  as  equivalent  to  its
essential  universality,  its  genus,  or  essential  character.  The
first  syllogism  for  its  intermediation  turns  us  over  to  the
second,  and"  the  second  turns  us  over  to  the  third.  But  the
third  similarly  calls  for  a  universality  specialised  in  itself,  or
for  individuality  in  the  shape  of  a  genus,  after  the  round  of
the  forms  of  external  connexion  between  individuality  and
universality  has  been  run  through  in  the  figures  of  the  Reflective
Syllogism.

By  the  Syllogism  of  Allness  the  defect  in  the  typical  form
of  the  Syllogism  of  Understanding,  noted  in  §  184,  is  remedied,
but  only  to  give  rise  to  a  new  defect.  This  defect  is  that  the
major  premiss  itself  pre-supposes  what  really  ought  to'  be  the
conclusion,  and  pre-supposes  it  as  what  is  thus  an  immediate
proposition.  Ail  men  are  mortal,  therefore  Caius  is  mortal :
All  metals  conduct  electricity,  therefore  e.g.  copper  does  so.
In  order  to  predicate  these  major  premisses,  which  when  they
say  'all'  express  the  immediate  individuals  and  are  properly
intended  to  be  empirical  propositions,  it  is  requisite  that  the
propositions  about  the  individual  Caius,  or  the  individual  copper,
should  previously  have  been  known  to  be  correct  on  grounds
of  their  own.  Everybody  feels  not  merely  the  pedantry,  but
the  unmeaning  formality  of  such  syllogisms  as :  All  men  are
mortal,  Caius  is  manrtherefore  Caius  is  mortal.

The  syllogism  of  Allness  hands  us  over  to  the  syllogism  of
Induction,  in  which  the  individuals  form  the  middle  term  where
the  extremes  meet.  'All  metals  conduct  electricity,'  is  an
empirical  proposition  derived  from  experiments  made  with  each


1 9o.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  281

of  the  individual  metals.  We  thus  get  the  syllogism  of  Induction

I

in  the  following  shape  P — I — U.


Gold  is  a  metal :  silver  is  a  metal :  so  is  copper,  lead,  &c. :  this
is  the  major  premiss.  Then  comes  the  minor  premiss :  all  these
bodies  conduct  electricity ;  and  hence  results  the  conclusion,  that
all  metals  conduct  electricity.  The  point  which  brings  about  a
combination  here  is  individuality  in  the  shape  of  allhood.  But
this  syllogism  once  more  hands  us  over  to  another  syllogism.
Its  mean  is  constituted  by  the  complete  list  of  the  individuals.
That  pre-supposes  that  over  a  certain  region  observation  and
experience  are  completed.  But  the  things  in  question  here  are
individuals.  This  gives  us  once  more  the  progression  ad  infini-
tum  (i,  i,  i,  &c.).  In  other  words,  in  no  Induction  can  we  ever
exhaust  the  individuals.  The  '  all  metals,'  '  all  plants,'  of  our
statements,  mean  only  all  the  metals,  all  the  plants,  which  we
have  hitherto  become  acquainted  with.  Every  Induction  is  con-
sequently imperfect.  One  and  the  other  observation,  many  it
may  be,  have  been  made :  but  all  the  cases,  all  the  individuals
have  not  been  observed.  By  this  defect  of  Induction  we  are  led
on  to  Analogy.  In  the  syllogism  of  Analogy  we  conclude  from
the  fact  that  some  things  of  a  certain  kind  possess  a  certain
quality,  that  the  same  quality  is  possessed  by  other  things  of  the
same  kind.  It  would  be  a  syllogism  of -Analogy,  for  example,  if
we  said :  In  all  planets  hitherto  discovered  this  law  of  motion
has  been  found,  consequently  a  newly  discovered  planet  will
probably  move  according  to  the  same  law.  In  the  experiential
sciences  Analogy  deservedly  occupies  a  high  place,  and  has  led  to
results  of  the  highest  importance.  Analogy  is  the  instinct  of
reason,  creating  an  anticipation  that  this  or  that  characteristic,
which  experience  has  discovered,  has  its  root  in  the  inner
nature  or  kind  of  an  object,  and  arguing  on  the  faith  of  that
anticipation.  Analogy  it  should  be  added  may  be  superficial  or
it  may  be  thorough.  It  would  certainly  be  a  very  bad  analogy
to  argue  that  since  the  man  Caius  is  a  scholar,  and  Titus  also  is
a  man^  Titus  will  probably  be  a  scholar  too  :  and  it  would  be  bad
because  a  man's  learning  is  not  an  unqualified  consequence  of
his  manhood.  Superficial  analogies  of  this  kind  however  are
very  frequently  met  with.  It  is  often  argued,  for  example :
The  moon  is  a  celestial  body,  and  is  therefore  in  all  probability
inhabited  as  well  as  the  earth.  The  analogy  is  not  one  whit
better  than  that  previously  mentioned.  That  the  earth  is
inhabited  does  not  depend  on  its  being  a  celestial  body,  but


282  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION. [191,  192.

on  other  conditions,  such  as  the  presence  of  an  atmosphere,  and
of  water  in  connexion  with  the  atmosphere,  &c. :  and  these  are
precisely  the  conditions  which  the  moon,  so  far  as  we  know,
does  not  possess.  What  has  in  modern  times  been  called  the
Philosophy  of  Nature  consists  principally  in  a  frivolous  play
with  empty  and  external  analogies,  which,  however,  claim  the
respect  due  to  profound  results.  The  natural  consequence  has
been  to  discredit  the  philosophical  study  of  nature.

(y)  Syllogism  of  -Necessity.

191.]  The  Syllogism  of  Necessity,  if  we  look  to  its  purely
abstract  characteristics  or  terms,  has  for  its  mean  the  Universal
in  the  same  way  as  the  Syllogism  of  Reflection  has  the  Individual,
the  latter  being  in  the  second,  and  the  former  in  the  third
figure  (§  187).  The  Universal  is  expressly  set  forth  as  essentially
specified  in  itself.  In  the  first  place  (1)  the  Particular,  meaning
by  the  particular  the  specific  genus  or  species,  is  the  term  for
mediating  the  extremes — as  is  done  in  the  Categorical  syllogism.

(2)  The  same  office  is  performed  by  the  Individual,  meaning  by
the  individual  immediate  being,  so  that  it  is  as  much  mediating
as mediated : — as happens in the Hypothetical syllogism.

(3)  We  have  also  the  mediating  Universal  explicitly  stated  in
the  shape  of  the  sum  total  of  its  particular  members,  and  as  a
single particular, or as an exclusive individuality :  —  which
happens  in  the  Disjunctive  syllogism. It  is  one  and  the  same
universal  which  is  in  these  terms  of  the  Disjunctive  syllogism ;
they  are  only  different  forms  for  expressing  it.

192.]  The  syllogism  has  been  taken  conformably  to  the
distinctions  which  it  contains,  and  the  general  result  of  the
course  of  their  evolution  has  been  to  show,  that  these  differences
work  out  their  own  abolition  and  destroy  the  notion's  out-
wardness to  its  own  self.  And,  as  we  see,  in  the  first  place,

(1)  each  of  the  dynamic  elements  has  proved  itself the  syste-
matic whole  of  these  elements,  in  short  a  whole  syllogism, —
they  are  consequently  implicitly  identical. In  the  second  place,

(2)  the  negation  of  their  distinctions  and  of  the  mediation  of
one  through  another  makes  each  independent,  so  that  it  is  one


192.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  283

and  the  same  universal  which  is  in  these  forms,  and  which
as  their  identity  is  in  this  way  also  explicitly  stated.  In
this  ideality  or  solidarity  of  its  dynamic  elements,  the  syllo-
gistic process  may  be  described  as  essentially  involving  the
negation  of  the  characters  through  which  its  course  runs,  as
being  a  mediative  process  through  the  suspension  of  media-
tion,— as  the  subject  becoming  bound  up  with  a  merged
antithesis,  another  which  is  not  another,  in  one  word,  with
itself.

In  the  common  logic,  the  doctrine  of  syllogism  is  supposed  to
conclude  the  first  part,  or  what  is  called  the  elementary  theory.
It  is  followed  by  the  second  part,  the  doctrine  of  Method,  which
proposes  to  show  how  a  body  of  scientific  knowledge  is  created
by  applying  to  existing  objects  the  forms  of  thought  discussed
in  the  elementary  part.  Whence  these  objects  originate,  and
what  the  thought  of  objectivity  generally  speaking  implies,  are
questions  to  which  the  Logic  of  Understanding  vouchsafes  no
further  answer.  It  believes  thought  to  be  a  mere  subjective  and
formal  activity ;  and  the  objective  fact,  which  confronts  thought,
it  holds  to  be  permanent  and  self-subsistent.  But  this  dualism
is  a  half-truth :  and  there  is  no  thought  in  a  procedure  which
accepts  without  question,  or  inquiring  into  their  origin,  the
categories  of  subjectivity  and  objectivity.  Both  of  them,
subjectivity  as  well  as  objectivity,  are  certainly  thoughts — even
specific  thoughts :  which  must  show  themselves  founded  on  the
universal  and  self-determining  thought.  This  has  here  been
done — at  least  for  subjectivity.  We  have  recognised  it,  or  the
notion  subjective,  which  includes  the  notion  proper,  the  judgment,
and  the  syllogism,  as  the  dialectical  result  of  the  first  two  main
stages  of  the  Logical  Idea,  Being  and  Essence.  To  say  that  the
notion  is  subjective  and  subjective  only,  is  so  far  quite  correct :
for  the  notion  certainly  is  subjectivity  itself.  Not  less  subjective
than  the  notion  are  also  the  judgment  and  syllogism:  and
these  forms,  together  with  the  so-called  Laws  of  Thought  (the
Laws  of  Identity,  Difference,  and  Sufficient  Ground),  make  up
the  contents  of  what  is  called  the  elementary  part  in  the  common
logic.  But  we  may  go  a  step  further.  This  subjectivity,  with
its  functions  of  notion,  judgment,  and  syllogism,  is  not  an  empty
framework,  which  holds  nothing  until  it  receives,  from  without,
objects  having  an  independent  existence.  It  would  be  truer  to
say  that  it  is  subjectivity  itself,  which,  as  dialectical,  breaks
through  its  own  barriers  and  developes  itself  to  objectivity  by
means  of  the  syllogism.


284  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  [193.

193.]  This  realisation  of  the  notion, — a  realisation  in  which
the  universal  is  this  one  totality  withdrawn  back  into  itself  (of
which  the  "distinct  members  are  no  less  the  whole,  and)  which
has  given  itself  a  character  of  immediate  unity  by  merging
the  mediation : — this  realisation  of  the  notion  is  the  Object.

This  transition  from  the  Subject,  the  notion  in  general,  and
especially  the  syllogism,  to  the  Object,  may,  at  the  first  glance,
appear  strange,  particularly  if  we  look  only  at  the  Syllogism
of  Understanding,  and  suppose  syllogising  to  be  only  an  act  of
consciousness.  But  that  strangeness  imposes  on  us  no  obligation
to  seek  to  make  the  transition  plausible  to  the  image-loving
conception.  The  only  question  which  can  be  considered  is,
whether  our  usual  conception  of  what  is  called  an  object
approximately  corresponds  to  the  object  as  here  described.  An
object  is  commonly  understood  to  mean  not  an  abstract  being,
or  an  existing  thing  merely,  or  any  sort  of  actuality,  but  implies
independence,  concreteness,  and  completeness  in  itself,  this  com-
pleteness being  the  totality  of  the  notion.  That  the  object  is  also
what  confronts  thought  and  perception,  and  that  it  is  external  to
something  else,  will  be  more  precisely  seen,  when  we  come  to
the  explicit  statement  of  its  contrast  to  the  subject.  At  present
as  that  into  which  the  notion  has  passed  from  its  mediation,
it  is  only  an  immediate  object  and  nothing  more,  just  as  the
notion  is  not  describable  as  subjective,  previous  to  the  subse-
quent contrast  with  objectivity.

Further,  the  Object  in  general  is  the  one  total,  in  itself
still  unspecified,  the  Objective  World  as  a  whole,  God,  the
Absolute  Object.  The  object,  however,  has  also  distinction  in
it,  it  breaks  up  into  a  vague  variety  and  multitude  (making
an  objective  world)  ;  and  each  of  these  individualised  parts  is
also  an  object,  has  a  being  then-and-there,  concrete  in  itself,
complete  and  independent.

Objectivity  has  been  compared  with  being,  existence,  and
actuality ;  and  so  too  the  transition  to  existence  and  actuality
(not  to  being,  for  it  is  thes  primary  and  quite  abstract  imme-
diate) may  be  compared  with  the  transition  to  objectivity.  The


1 93.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  285

Ground  from  which  existence  proceeds, — the  Relation  of  reflec-
tion, which  is  merged  in  actuality, — are  nothing  but  the  as
yet  imperfectly  realised  notion.  They  are  only  abstract  aspects
of  it, — the  Ground  being  its  unity,  which  only  attaches  to  the
essence,  and  the  Relation  only  the  connexion  of  real  sides  which
are  supposed  to  be  only  reflected  in  themselves.  The  notion
is  the  unity  of  the  two;  and  the  object  is  not  a  unity  which
attaches  to  the  essence  alone,  but  a  unity  in  itself  universal,
not  only  containing  real  distinctions,  but  containing  them  as
totalities  in  itself.

It  is  evident  that  in  all  these  transitions  there  is  a  further
purpose  than  merely  to  show  the  indissoluble  connexion  between
the  notion  or  thought  and  being.  It  has  been  more  than  once
remarked  that  being  is  nothing  more  than  the  simple  reference
on  self,  and  this  meagre  category  is  certainly  implied  in  the
notion,  or  even  in  thought.  But  the  meaning  of  these
transitions  is  not  to  accept  characteristics  or  categories,  as
only  implied :  a  fault  which  mars  even  the  Ontological  argu-
mentation for  God's  existence,  when  it  is  stated  that  being  is
one  among  the  realities.  What  such  a  transition  does,  is  to
take  the  notion  as  it  ought  to  be  primarily  characterised  on
its  own  account  as  a  notion,  with  which  this  remote  abstraction
of  being,  or  even  of  objectivity,  has  as  yet  nothing,  to  do  ;  and
looking  at  its  specific  character  as  a  notional  character  alone,  to
see  when  and  whether  it  passes  over  into  a  form,  which  is
different  from  the  character  as  it  belongs  to  the  notion  and
appears  in  it.

If  the  object,  the  product  of  this  transition,  be  brought
into  connexion  with  the  notion,  which,  so  far  as  its  special
form  is  concerned,  has  vanished  in  it,  we  may  give  a  correct
expression  to  the  result,  by  saying  that  notion  (or,  if  it  be
preferred,  subjectivity)  and  object  are  implicitly  the  same.
But  it  is  equally  correct  to  say  that  they  are  different.  In
short,  the  two  modes  of  expression  are  equally  correct  and
incorrect.  The  true  relation  can  be  presented  in  no  expres-
sions of  this  kind.  That  word  '  implicit '  is  an  abstraction,


286  THE  DOCTRINE OF THE  NOTION.  [193.

still  more  partial  and  inadequate  than  the  notion  itself,  of
which  the  inadequacy  is  upon  the  whole  merged,  when  it
merges  itself  in  the  object  with  its  opposite  inadequacy.  Hence
that  implicit  being-  also  must,  by  the  negation  of  it,  give
itself  the  character  of  a  being  of  its  own.  As  in  every  case,
speculative  identity  is  not  the  above-mentioned  trivial  state-
ment that  notion  and  object  are  implicitly  identical :  a  remark
which  has  been  repeated  often  enough,  but  cannot  be  too  often
repeated,  if  the  intention  be  to  put  an  end  to  the  stale
and  purely  malicious  misconception  in  regard  to  this  identity  :
of  which  however  there  does  not  seem  to  be  much  hope.

Looking  at  that  unity  as  a  whole  and  without  noting  the
one-sided  form  of  its  implicitness,  we  find  it  notoriously
forming  the  hypothesis  of  the  ontological  proof  for  the  ex-
istence of  God,  and  of  God  as  the  sum  of  all  perfection.
Anselm,  in  whom  we  first  come  upon  the  remarkable  thought
of  this  proof,  no  doubt  originally  restricted  himself  to  the
question  whether  a  certain  matter  of  fact  was  in  our
thinking  only.  His  words  are  briefly  these :  '  Certe  id  quo
majus  cogitari  nequit,  non  potest  esse  in  intellects,  solo.  Si
enim  vel  in  solo  intellectu  est,  potest  cogitari  et  in  re:  quod
majus  est.  Si  ergo  id  quo  majus  cogitari  non  potest,  est  in
solo  intellectu;  id  ipsum  quo  majus  cogitari  non  potest,  est
quo  majus  cogitari  potest.  Bed  certe  hoc  esse  non  potest?
(Certainly  that,  than  which  nothing  greater  can  be  thought,
cannot  be  in  the  intellect  alone.  For  even  if  it  is  in  the
intellect  alone,  it  can  also  be  thought  in  fact:  and  that  is
greater.  If  then  that,  than  which  nothing  greater  can  be
thought,  is  in  the  intellect  alone ;  then  the  very  thing,  which
is  greater  than  anything  which  can  be  thought,  can  be  ex-
ceeded in  thought.  But  certainly  this  is  impossible.)  Speak-
ing in  the  phraseology  and  on  the  level  of  the  categories
before  us,  we  may  say  that,  to  call  a  thing  finite,  means  that
its  objective  existence  is  not  in  harmony  with  the  thought  of
it,  with  its  universal  calling,  its  kind  and  End  or  Aim.  The
same  unity  was  stated  more  objectively  by  Descartes,  Spinoza


I93-]  THE DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  287

and  others  :  while  the  theory  of  immediate  certitude  or  faith
presents  it,  on  the  contrary,  in  somewhat  the  same  subjective
aspect  as  Anselm.  These  Intuitionalists  hold  that  in  our
consciousness  the  attribute  or  category  of  being  is  indissolubly
associated  with  the  conception  of  God.  The  theory  of  faith
brings  even  the  conception  of  external  finite  things  under
the  same  inseparable  nexus  between  the  consciousness  and  the
being  of  them,  on  the  ground  that  perception  presents  them
in  association  with  the  attribute  of  existence :  and  in  so
doing,  it  may  be  correct.  It  would  be  utterly  absurd,  how-
ever, to  suppose  that  the  association  in  consciousness  between
existence  and  our  conception  of  finite  things  is  of  the  same
description  as  the  association  between  existence  and  the
conception  of  God.  Such  an  assumption  fails  to  note  that
finite  things  are  changeable  and  transient,  i.  e.  that  existence
is  associated  with  them  for  a  season,  but  that  the  association
is  neither  eternal  nor  inseparable.  Anselm,  consequently,
neglecting  such  association,  when  it  is  presented  in  finite
things,  has  with  right  imputed  perfection  only  to  what  is
not  merely  in  a  subjective,  but  also  in  an  objective  mode.
All  the  disdain  that  is  lavished  on  the  -Ontological  proof,  as
it  is  called,  and  on  Anselm's  definition  of  perfection  is  in
vain.  The  argument  is  one  latent  in  every  unsophisticated
mind,  and  it  recurs  in  every  philosophy,  even  against  its
wish  and  without  its  knowledge — as  may  be  seen  in  the
theory  of  immediate  belief.

The  real  fault  in  the  argumentation  of  Anselm  is  one
which  is  chargeable  on  Descartes  and  Spinoza,  as  well  as
on  the  theory  of  immediate  knowledge.  It  is  this.  This
unity  which  is  enunciated  as  the  supreme  perfection  or,  it
may  be,  subjectively,  as  the  true  knowledge,  is  pre-supposed,
i.  e.  it  is  accepted  only  as  potential.  This  identity,  abstract
as  it  thus  appears,  between  the  two  categories  may  be  im-
mediately met  and  opposed  by  their  diversity  ;  and  this  was
the  very  answer  given  to  Anselm  long  ago.  In  short,  the
conception  and  existence  of  the  finite  is  set  in  antagonism


288  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  [194.

to  the  infinite  ;  for,  as  previously  remarked,  the  finite
possesses  objectivity  of  such  a  kind  as  is  at  once  incongruous
with  and  different  from  the  End  or  Aim,  its  essence  and
notion.  Or,  the  finite  is  such  a  conception  and  in  such  a
way  subjective,  that  it  does  not  involve  existence.  This
objection  and  this  antithesis  are  got  over,  only  by  showing
the  finite  to  be  untrue  and  these  categories  severally  and  in-
dividually to  be  inadequate  and  null.  Their  identity  is  thus
seen  to  be  one  into  which  they  spontaneously  pass  over,  and
in  which  they  are  reconciled.

B. — THE  OBJECT.

194.]  The  Object  is  immediate  being  ;  for  the  distinction
or  difference  is  merged  in  it,  and  it  is  therefore  indifferent
to  its  distinction.  It  is,  further,  a  totality  in  itself,  whilst
at  the  same  time  (as  this  identity  is  only  the  implicit
identity  of  its  dynamic  elements)  it  is  equally  indifferent  to  its
immediate  unity.  It  thus  breaks  up  into  distinct  parts,  each
of  which  is  itself  a  totality.  Hence  the  object  represents  the
absolute  contradiction  between  a  complete  independence  of  the
congeries,  and  the  equally  complete  non-independence  of  the
distinct  members.

The  definition,  which  states  that  the  Absolute  is  the  Object,
is  most  definitely  implied  in  the  Leibnitzian  Monad,  which  is
a  would-be  object  —  but  an  object  with  a  potentiality  of
figurative  conception,  and  in  fact  the  totality  of  the  concep-
tion of  the  world.  In  the  indecomposable  unity  of  the  monad
all  distinction  becomes  merely  ideal  and  without  a  stand-
ing of  its  own.  Nothing  from  without  penetrates  into  the
monad :  it  is  the  whole  notion  in  itself,  only  distinguished
by  its  greater  or  less  degree  of  development.  Similarly,  this
indecomposable  totality  parts  into  the  absolute  multitude  of
differences,  each  member  becoming  an  independent  monad.
In  the  monad  of  monads,  and  the  Pre-established  Harmony
of  their  inward  developments,  these  substances  are  in  like
manner  again  reduced  to  be  members  of  a  larger  thought,


1 94.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  289

and  to  be  without  subsistence  of  tbeir  own.  The  philosophy
of  Leibnitz,  therefore,  represents  contradiction  in  its  complete
development.

As  Fichte  was  one  of  the  earliest  among  modern  philosophers
to  remark,  the  theory  which  regards  the  Absolute  or  God  as  the
Object  and  nothing  more,  expresses  the  point  of  view  taken  by
superstition  and  slavish  fear.  No  doubt  God  is  the  Object,  and
the  fulness  of  Objectivity,  confronted  with  which  our  particular
or  subjective  opinions  and  desires  have  no  truth  and  no  validity.
As  absolute  object  however,  God  does  not  therefore  take  up  the
position  of  a  dark  and  hostile  power  in  antithesis  to  subjec-
tivity. He  rather  involves  it  as  a  vital  element  in  himself.
Such  also  is  the  meaning  of  the  Christian  doctrine,  according  to
which  God  has  willed  that  all  men  should  be  saved  and  all  be
made  happy.  The  salvation  and  the  happiness  of  men  are
effected  by  bringing  them  to  feel  themselves  at  one  with  God,  so
that  God,  on  the  other  hand,  ceases  to  be  for  them  a  mere  object,
and,  in  that  way,  an  object  of  fear  and  terror,  as  was  especially
the  case  with  the  religious  consciousness  of  the  Romans.  But
God  in  the  Christian  religion  is  also  known  as  Love.  In  his
Son,  who  is  one  with  him,  he  has  revealed  himself  to  men  as  a
man  amongst  men,  and  thereby  redeemed  them.  This  religious
dogma  is  only  another  way  of  saying  that  the  antithesis  of
subjective  and  objective  is  given  to  us  as  already  overcome,  and
that  on  us  lies  the  obligation  of  participating  in  this  redemption
by  laying  aside  our  immediate  subjectivity,  putting  off  the  old
Adam,  and  learning  to  know  God  as  our  true  and  essential  self!
And  as  it  is  the  aim  of  religion  and  religious  worship  to  win  the
victory  over  this  antithesis  of  subjectivity  and  objectivity,  so
science  too  and  philosophy  have  no  other  task  than  to  overcome
this  antithesis  by  the  medium  of  thought.  The  aim  of  know-
ledge is  to  divest  the  objective  world  that  stands  opposed  to  us
of  its  strangeness,  and,  as  the  phrase  is,  to  find  ourselves  at  home
in  it :  which  means  no  more  than  to  trace  the  objective  world
back  to  the  notion, — to  our  innermost  self.  We  may  learn
from  the  present,  discussion  the  mistake  of  regarding  the
antithesis  of  subjectivity  and  objectivity  as  an  abstract  and
permanent  one.  The  two  correlatives  are  wholly  dialectical.
The  notion  is  at  first  only  subjective  :  but  without  the  assistance
of  any  foreign  material  or  stuff  it  proceeds,  in  obedience  to  its
own  action,  to  objectify  itself.  So,  too,  the  object  is  not  rigid
and  immovable.  Its  process  is  to  show  itself  as  what  is  at  the
same  time  subjective,  and  thus  to  promote  the  advance  to  the
idea.  Any  one  who,  from  want  of  familiarity  with  the  categories
of  subjectivity  and  objectivity,  seeks  to  retain  them  in  their


290  THE  DOCTRINE  OF THE  NOTION.  [195.

eo-
abstraction,  will  find  that  the  isolated  categories  slip  through
his  fingers  before  he  is  aware,  and  that  he  says  the  exact  contrary
of  what  he  wanted  to  say.

(2)  Objectivity  contains  the  three  forms  of  Mechanism,  Chem-
ism,  and  the  nexus  of  Design.  The  object  of  mechanical  type  is
the  immediate  and  indifferent  object.  No  doubt  it  implies  distinc-
tion, but  the  different  members  stand,  as  it  were,  without  affinity
to  each  other,  and  their  connexion  is  only  extraneous.  In
chemism,  on  the  contrary,  the  object  exhibits  an  essential  tendency
to  difference,  in  such  a  way  that  the  objects  are  what  they  are
only  by  their  nexus  with  each  other :  this  tendency  to  difference
constitutes  their  quality.  The  third  type  of  objectivity,  the
teleological  relation,  is  the  unity  of  mechanism  and  chemism.
Design,  like  the  mechanical  object,  is  a  self-contained  totality,
enriched  however  by  the  principle  of  differentiation  which  was
made  so  prominent  in  chemism :  and  thus  design  is  connected
with  the  objective  world  that  stands  over  against  it.  Finally,
it  is  the  realisation  of  design,  which  forms  the  transition  to  the
idea.

(a)  Mechanism.

195.]  The  object  (1)  in  its  immediacy  is  the  notion  only
potential ;  the  notion  as  subjective  is  primarily  outside  it ;
and  all  its  specific  character  is  imposed  from  without.  The
immediate  object  is  a  unity  of  distinct  parts  and  is  in
consequence  a  composite  or  an  aggregate ;  and  its  capacity
of  acting  on  anything  else  continues  to  be  an  external  nexus.
This  is  Formal  Mechanism.  Notwithstanding  and  in  this
connexion  and  non-independence,  the  objects  remain  inde-
pendent and  offer  resistance  outwardly  to  each  other.

Pressure  and  impact  are  examples  of  mechanical  relations.
Our  knowledge  is  said  to  be  mechanical  or  by  rote,  when
the  words  have  no  meaning  for  us,  but  continue  external
to  the  senses,  to  conception  and  thought ;  and  when  being
similarly  external  to  each  other,  they  form  a  meaningless
sequence.  Conduct,  piety,  &c.  are  in  the  same  way  mecha.ii-
cal,  when  a  man's  behaviour  is  settled  for  him  by  ceremonial
laws,  by  a  spiritual  adviser,  &c.  ;  in  short,  when  his  own
mind  and  will  are  not  in  his  actions,  which  in  this  way
are  extraneous  to  himself.


I95-]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE NOTION.  291

Mechanism,  the  first  form  of  objectivity,  is  also  the  category
which  primarily  offers  itself  to  reflection,  as  it  examines  the
objective  world.  It  is  also  the  category  beyond  which  reflection
seldom  goes.  It  is,  however,  a  shallow  and  superficial  mode  of
observation,  with  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  effect  much  in
connexion  with  Nature  and  still  less  in  connexion  with  the
world  of  Mind.  In  Nature  it  is  only  the  veriest  abstract  re-
lations of  matter  in  its  massive  and  elementary  state,  which  obey
the  law  of  mechanism.  On  the  contrary  the  phenomena  and
operations  of  the  province  to  which  the  term  physical  in  its
narrow  sense  is  applied,  such  as  the  phenomena  of  light,  heat,
magnetism,  and  electricity,  cannot  be  explained  by  any  mere
mechanical  processes,  such  as  pressure,  impact,  displacement  of
parts,  and  the  like.  Still  less  satisfactory  is  it  to  transfer  these
categories  and  apply  them  in  the  field  of  organic  nature ;  at
least  if  it  be  our  aim  to  understand  the  specific  features  of  that
field,  such  as  the  growth  and  nourishment  of  animals,  or,  it  may
be,  even  animal  sensation.  It  is  at  any  rate  a  very  deep-seated,
and  perhaps  the  main,  defect  of  modern  researches  into  nature,
that  even  where  other  and  higher  categories* than  those  of  mere
mechanism  are  in  operation,  they  still  stick  obstinately  to  the
mechanical  laws ;  although  they  thus  conflict  with  the  testimony
of  unbiassed  perception,  and  foreclose  the  gate  to  an  adequate
knowledge  of  nature.  But  even  in  considering  the  formations  in
the  world  of  Mind,  the  mechanical  theory  has  been  invested  with
an  authority  which  it  has  no  right  to.  Take  as  an  instance  the
remark  that  man  consists  of  soul  and  body.  In  this  language,
the  two  things  stand  each  self-subsistent,  and  associated  only
from  without.  Similarly  we  find  the  soul  regarded  as  a  mere
group  of  forces  and  faculties,  subsisting  independently  side  by
side.

Thus  decidedly  must  we  reject  the  mechanical  mode  of  in-
quiry when  it  comes  forward  and  arrogates  to  itself  the  place  of
rational  cognition  in  general,  and  when  it  seeks  to  get  mechanism
accepted  as  an  absolute  category.  But  we  must  not  on  that
account  forget  expressly  to  vindicate  for  mechanism  the  right  and
import  of  a  general  logical  category.  It  would  be  wrong  to
restrict  it  to  the  special  region  of  nature  from  which  it  derives
its  name.  There  is  no  harm  done,  for  example,  in  directing  the
attention  to  mechanical  agency,  such  as  that  of  weight,  the  lever,
&c.  even  in  places  beyond  the  reach  of  mechanics  proper.  This
is  the  case  particularly  in  physics  and  physiology.  It  must
however  be  remembered,  that  within  these  spheres  the  laws  of
mechanism  cease  to  be  final  or  decisive,  and  sink,  as  it  were,  to  a
subservient  position.  To  which  may  be  added,  that,  in  Nature,
when  the  higher  or  organic  functions  are  in  any  way  checked  or


u  2


292  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  [196.

disturbed  in  their  normal  activity,  the  otherwise  subordinate
category  of  mechanism  is  immediately  seen  to  take  the  upper
hand.  Thus  a  sufferer  from  indigestion  feels  pressure  on  the
stomach,  after  he  has  eaten  certain  food  in  slight  quantity,
whereas  those  whose  digestive  organs  are  sound  remain  free
from  the  sensation,  although  they  have  eaten  as  much.  The
same  phenomenon  occurs  in  the  general  feeling  6f  heaviness  in
the  limbs,  experienced  during  a  morbid  state  of  the  body.  Even
in  the  world  of  Mind,  mechanism  has  its  place,  though  there,
too,  it  is  a  subordinate  one.  We  are  right  in  speaking  of
mechanical  memory,  and  of  thoroughly  mechanical  operations,
such  as  reading,  writing,  playing  on  musical  instruments,  &c.
In  memory,  indeed,  the  mechanical  quality  of  the  action  is
essential :  a  circumstance,  the  neglect  of  which  produces  great
injury  in  the  education  of  the  young,  from  the  misapplied  zeal
of  modern  Educationalists  for  the  freedom  of  intelligence.  It
would  betray  bad  psychology,  however,  to  have  recourse  to
mechanism  for  an  explanation  of  the  nature  of  memory,  and
to  proceed,  without  further  modifications,  to  apply  mechanical
laws  to  the  soul.  The  mechanical  feature  in  memory  lies  in  the
fact  that  certain  tones,  signs,  &c.  are  apprehended  in  their  purely
external  association,  and  then  reproduced  in  this  association,  for
the  most  part  without  attention  being  expressly  directed  to  their
meaning  and  inward  association.  To  become  acquainted  with
these  conditions  of  mechanical  memory  requires  no  further  study
of  mechanics,  nor  would  that  study  cause  any  advantage  to  accrue
to  the  special  inquiry  of  psychology.

196-]  The  want  of  stability  in  itself  which  allows  the  object
to  suffer  violence,  is  possessed  by  it  (see  preceding  §)  only  in  so
far  as  it  has  a  certain  stability.  Now  as  the  object  is  only
implicitly  invested  with  the  character  of  notion,  the  one  of  these
characteristics  is  not  merged  into  its  other.  The  object  however
in  virtue  of  the  negation  of  itself,  or  by  its  want  of  stability,
coalesces  with  itself  and  becomes  independent  or  stable  only  by
so  coalescing.  Thus  at  the  same  time  in  distinction  from  the
outwardness,  and  negativing  that  outwardness  in  its  independ-
ence, does  this  independence  form  a  negative  unity  with  itself,
Centrality  or  subjectivity.  And  in  being  so  centred,  the  object
is  itself  directed  towards,  and  connected  with,  what  is  external
to  it.  But  the  external  object  is  similarly  central  in  itself,  and
being  so  is  still  only  connected  with  the  other  centre.  In  this


197,  ipS-] THE DOCTRINE OF THE NOTION.  293

way  it  has  its  centralism  in  something  else.  This  is  (2)  Mecha-
nism with  Affinity,  and  may  be  illustrated  by  gravity,  desire,
social  instinct,  &c.

197.]  This  relation,  when  fully  carried  out,  forms  a  syllogism.
In  that  syllogism  the  immanent  negativity,  as  the  central  indi-
viduality of  an  object,  (which  is  the  abstract  centre,)  is  connected
with  dependent  and  unstable  objects,  as  the  other  extreme,  by
a  mean  which  combines  in  itself  the  centrality  with  the  non-
independence  of  the  objects ;  (which  is  a  relative  centre).  This
relation  is  (3)  Absolute  Mechanism.

198.]  The  syllogism  thus  indicated  (I — P — U)  is  a  triad  of  syl-
logisms. The  wrong  individuality  of  non-independent  and  unsta-
ble objects,  in  which  formal  Mechanism  is  at  home,  is,  by  reason
of  that  non-independence,  no  less  universality,  though  it  be  only
external.  Hence  these  objects  also  form  the  mean  between  the
absolute  and  the  relative  centre  (the  form  of  syllogism  being
U — I— rP) :  for  it  is  by  this  want  of  independence  that  those  two
are  kept  asunder  and  made  extremes,  as  well  as  connected  with
one  another.  Similarly  absolute  centralism,  as  the  universal
substance  (illustrated  by  the  gravity  which  continues  identical),
which  as  pure  negativity  also  includes"  individuality  in  it,  is
what  mediates  between  the  relative  centre  and  the  non-inde-
pendent objects  (the  form  of  syllogism  being  P — U — I).  It  does
so  no  less  essentially  as  a  disintegrating  force,  in  its  character  of
immanent  individuality,  than  in  virtue  of  universality,  acting
as  an  identical  bond  of  union  and  tranquil  self-containedness.

Like  the  solar  system,  so  for  example  in  the  sphere  of  ethics,
the  state  may  be  represented  as  a  system  of  three  syllogisms.

(1)  The  Individual  or  single  person,  in  virtue  of  his  particular
being,  or  his  physical  or  mental  needs  (which  when  carried  out
to  their  full  development  give  civil  society),  enters  into  union
with the  Universal,  i.  e.  with  society,  law,  right,  government.

(2)  The  will  or  action  of  the  individuals,  is  the  intermediating
force  which  procures  for  these  needs  satisfaction  in  society,  in
law,  &c.,  and  which  gives  to  society,  law,  &c.  their  fulfilment  and
actualisation. (3)  But  the  universal,  that  is  to  say,  the  state,


294  THE DOCTRINE  OF THE  NOTION. [199,  200.

government,  and  law,  is  the  mean  and  substance  in  which  the
individuals  and  their  satisfaction  have  and  receive  their  fulfilled
reality,  inter-mediation,  and  persistence.  Each  of  the  functions
of  the  notion,  as  it  is  brought  by  inter-mediation  to  coalesce
with  the  other  extreme,  is  brought  into  union  with  itself  and
produces  itself:  which  production  is  self-preservation. — It  is
only  by  the  nature  of  this  conjunction,  by  this  triad  of  syllo-
gisms with  the  same  termini,  that  a  whole  is  thoroughly  under-
stood in  its  organisation.

199 •]  The  immediacy  of  existence,  which  the  objects  have  in
Absolute  Mechanism,  is  implicitly  negatived  by  the  fact  that
their  independence  is  derived  from,  and  due  to,  their  connexions
with  each  other,  and  therefore  to  their  want  of  stability  in
themselves.  Thus  the  object  must  be  explicitly  stated  as  in  its
existence  having  an  Affinity  towards  its  antithesis.

(#) Chemism.

200-]  The  differenced  object  has  an  immanent  character
which  constitutes  its  nature,  and  in  which  it  has  existence.  It
is  an  explicit  totality  of  the  notion,  however,  and  thus  it  is
the  contradiction  between  this  totality  and  the  special  form  of  its
existence.  Consequently  it  is  the  constant  endeavour  to  cancel
this  contradiction  and  to  make  its  definite  being  equal  to  the
notion.

Chemism  is  a  category  of  objectivity  which,  as  a  rule,  is  not
particularly  emphasised,  and  is  generally  put  under  the  bead  of
mechanism.  The  common  name  of  mechanical  relation  is  applied
to  both,  in  contra-distinction  to  the  relation  of  design.  There  is
a  reason  for  this  in  the  common  feature  which  belongs  to  mecha-
nism and  chemism.  They  are  the  existent  notion  only  implicitly
and  in  their  essence,  and  are  thus  marked  off  from  the  aim  or
end  which  is  the  existing  notion  in  the  fulness  of  its  being.
This  is  true :  and  yet  chemism  and  mechanism  are  very  de-
cidedly distinct.  The  object,  in  the  form  of  mechanism,  is
primarily  only  an  indifferent  reference  to  self,  while  the  chemical
object  is  seen  to  be  completely  in  connexion  with  something
else.  No  doubt  even  in  mechanism,  as  it  developes  itself,  there
spring  up  references  to  something  else :  but  the  nexus  of  me-
chanical objects  with  one  another  is  at  first  only  an  external


20i,  202.] THE DOCTRINE OF  THE NOTION.  295

nexus,  so  that  the  objects  in  connexion  with  one  another  still
retain  the  semblance  of  independence.  In  nature,  for  example,
the  several  celestial  bodies,  which  compose  our  solar  system,
stand  to  one  another  in  the  relation  of  movement,  and  thereby
show  that  they  are  in  connexion  with  one  another.  Motion,
however,  as  the  unity  of  time  and  space,  is  a  connexion  which
is  purely  abstract  and  external.  And  it  would  therefore  seem
that  these  celestial  bodies,  which  are  thus  externally  connected
with  each  other,  would  continue  to  be  what  they  are,  even  apart
from  this  reciprocal  connexion  of  theirs.  The  case  is  quite  dif-
ferent with  chemism.  Objects  chemically  charged  with  differ-
ence, are  what  they  are  expressly  by  that  difference  alone.  Hence
they  are  the  absolute  instinct  towards  integration  by  and  in  one
another.


201.]  The  product  of  the  chemical  process,  consequently  is
to  release  the  two  extremes  from  their  state  of  tension,  and  to
develope  the  Neutral  object  out  of  them.  The  notion,  or  con-
crete universal,  by  means  of  the  differentiation  or  peculiarities  of
the  objects,  coalesces  with  the  individuality  in  the  shape  of  the
product,  and  in  that  only  with  itself.  In  this  process  too  the
other  syllogisms  are  equally  involved.  The  place  of  mean  is
taken  both  by  individuality  as  an  activity,  and  by  the  concrete
universal,  the  essence  or  real  nature  of  the  extremes  which  are
in  tension ;  which  essence  reaches  a  definite  being  in  the
product.

202.]  Chemism,  as  it  is  that  relation  of  objectivity  which
belongs  to  reflection,  has  along  with  the  actively-differenced
nature  of  the  objects,  at  the  same  time  still  pre-supposed  their
immediate  independence  or  stability.  The  process  of  chemistry
consists  in  passing  to  and  fro  from  one  form  to  another;  which
forms  continue  to  be  as  unconnected  as  before.  In  the  neutral
product  the  specific  properties,  which  the  extremes  bore  towards
each  other,  are  merged.  The  product  is  indeed  conformable  to
the  notion ;  but  the  inspiring  principle  of  active  differentiation
does  not  exist  in  it,  for  it  has  sunk  back  to  immediacy.  The
neutral  body  is  therefore  capable  of  dissolution.  But  the  dis-
cerning principle,  which  breaks  up  the  neutral  body  into  ac-
tively-differenced extremes,  and  which  gives  to  the  indifferent


296  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION. [203,  204.

object  in  general  its  affinity  and  animation  towards  another  ;
— that  principle  and  the  process  as  a  separation  with  tension,
falls  outside  of  that  first  process.

The  chemical  process  does  not  rise  above  a  conditioned  and
finite  process.  The  notion  as  notion  is  only  the  heart  and  core
of  the  process,  and  does  not  in  this  stage  come  to  existence  in  its
own  individual  being.  In  the  neutral  product  the  process  is
extinct,  and  the  existing  cause  falls  outside  it.

203-]  Each  of  these  two  processes,  the  reduction  of  the
actively-differenced  to  the  neutral,  and  the  differentiation  of
the  indifferent  or  neutral,  goes  its  own  way  without  hindrance
from  the  other.  But  that  want  of  inner  connexion  shows  that
they  are  finite  by  their  passage  into  products,  in  which  they  are
merged  and  lost.  Conversely  the  process  exhibits  the  nonentity
and  emptiness  of  the  pre-supposed  immediacy  of  the  differenced
objects.  By  this  negation  of  immediacy  and  of  externalism  in
which  the  notion  as  object  was  sunk,  it  is  made  free  and  insti-
tuted in  a  being  of  its  own,  as  contrasted  with  the  old  exter-
nalism and  immediacy.  In  these  circumstances  it  is  the  End,
or  Aim.

The  passage  from  chemism  to  the  teleological  relation  is  im-
plied in  the  mutual  cancelling  of  both  of  the  forms  of  the
chemical  process.  The  result  thus  attained  is  the  liberation  of
the  notion,  which  in  chemism  and  mechanism  was  present  only
in  the  germ,  and  not  yet  evolved.  The  notion  in  the  shape  of
the  aim  or  end  thus  comes  into  an  existence  of  its  own.

(c] Teleology.

204.]  The  Aim  or  End  is  the  notion  entered  into  a  free  exist-
ence and  having  a  being  of  its  own,  by  means  of  the  negation  of
immediate  objectivity.  It  is  characterised  as  subjective,  seeing
that  this  negation  is,  in  the  first  place,  abstract ;  and  hence  at
first  the  only  relation  between  it  and  objectivity  is  one  of
antagonism.  This  character  of  subjectivity,  however,  if  it  be*
compared  with  the  totality  of  the  notion,  is  one-sided.  Indeed
the  notion  of  an  Aim  or  End  shows  that  this  character  is  one-


204-]  THE DOCTRINE OF  THE NOTION.  297

sided:  for  all  specific  character  has  been  explicitly  stated  to  be
absorbed  in  it.  To  the  End  therefore  even  the  object,  which  it
pre-supposes,  is  only  an  ideal  reality,  potentially  null  and  void.
The  End  therefore  is  a  contradiction  of  its  identity  with  itself
against  the  negation  stated  in  it,  i.  e.  its  antithesis  to  objectivity.
It  is  therefore  the  eliminative  or  destructive  activity  which
negatives  the  antithesis  and  renders  it  identical  with  itself.
This  is  the  realisation  of  the  Aim :  in  which,  while  it  renders
itself  the  antithesis  of  its  subjectivity  and  objectifies  itself,  and
has  cancelled  the  distinction  between  the  two,  it  has  only  closed
with  itself,  and  in  short  retained  itself.

The  notion  of  Design  or  Aim,  while  on  one  hand  it  is  called
superfluous,  is  on  another  justly  described  as  the  rational  notion,
and  contrasted  with  the  abstract  universal  of  understanding.
The  latter  only  subsumes  the  particular,  and  so  connects  it  with
itself:  but  has  it  not  in  its  own  nature. The  distinction  be-
tween the  Aim  or  final  cause,  and  the  mere  efficient  cause,  which
is  the  cause  of  ordinary  language,  is  of  the  utmost  importance.
Causes,  properly  so  called,  belong  to  the  sphere  of  necessity,
blind,  and  not  yet  laid  bare. The  cause  therefore  appears  as
passing  into  its  correlative,  and  to  be  losing  its  primordiality  in
the  latter,  by  sinking  into  dependency. It  is  only  by  impli-
cation, or  for  our  perception,  that  the  cause  is  in  the  effect  made
for  the  first  time  a  cause,  and  that  it  there  returns  into  itself.
The  Aim  or  End,  on  the  other  hand,  is  expressly  stated  as  con-
taining the  specific  character  in  its  own  nature, — the  effect,
namely,  which  in  the  causal  relation  is  never  without  a  certain
otherness. The  Aim  therefore  in  its  agency  does  not  pass  over,
but  retains  itself,  i.  e.  it  carries  into  effect  itself  only,  and  is  at
the  end  what  it  was  in  the  beginning  or  primordial  state. Until
it  thus  retains  itself,  it  is  not  genuinely  primordial. The  Aim
or  End  requires  to  be  speculatively  apprehended,  and  grasped  as
the  notion,  which  itself  in  the  proper  unity  and  ideality  of  its
characteristics  contains  the  judgment  or  negation,  the  antithesis
of  subjective  and  objective,  and  which  to  an  equal  extent  sus-
pends that  antithesis.


298  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  [204.

By  Aim  or  End  we  must  not  at  once,  nor  must  we  ever
merely,  think  of  the  form  which  it  has  in  consciousness  as
a  category  found  in  our  picture-thinking.  By  means  of  the
notion  of  Inner  Design  Kant  has  resuscitated  the  idea  in
general  and  particularly  the  idea  of  life.  Aristotle's  definition
of  life  virtually  implies  inner  design,  and  is  thus  far  in  advance
of  the  notion  of  design  in  modern  Teleology,  which  had  in
view  finite  and  outward  design  only.

Want  and  appetite  are  some  of  the  readiest  instances  of
the  Aim  or  End.  They  represent  the  felt  contradiction,
which  exists  within  the  living  subject,  and  they  pass  into
the  activity  seeking  to  negative  this  felt  negation  which
has  not  gone  beyond  mere  subjectivity.  The  satisfaction  of
the  want  or  appetite  restores  the  peace  between  the  subject
and  the  object.  The  objective  thing  which,  while  the  con-
tradiction has  not  received  its  quietus,  i.  e.  while  the  want
exists,  stands  away  and  out  of  reach,  is  now,  so  far  as  its
one-sidedness  goes,  cancelled  by  its  union  with  the  subject.
Those  who  talk  of  the  permanence  and  immutability  of  the
finite,  as  well  subjective  as  objective,  may  see  the  reverse
illustrated  in  the  operations  of  every  appetite.  Appetite  is,
so  to  speak,  the  certainty  that  the  subjective  is  only  a  half-
truth,  no  more  adequate  than  the  objective.  But  appetite
in  the  second  place  makes  its  certainty  good.  It  brings
about  the  absorption  of  their  finitude,  and  cancels  the  anti-
thesis between  the  objective  which  is  and  seeks  to  remain  an
objective  only,  and  the  subjective  which  in  like  manner  is
and  seeks  to  remain  a  subjective  only.

As  regards  the  action  of  the  Aim,  we  may  call  attention
to  the  fact,  that  in  the  syllogism,  which  represents  that
action,  and  shows  the  end  closing  with  itself  by  the  means
of  realisation,  the  negation  of  the  termini  is  essentially
brought  to  view.  That  negation  is  the  one  just  mentioned
both  of  the  immediate  subjectivity  appearing  in  the  End  as
such,  and  of  the  immediate  objectivity  as  seen  in  the  means
and  the  object  pre-supposed.  This  is  the  same  negation,  as


205-]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  299

is  in  operation  when  the  mind  leaves  the  contingent  things
of  the  world  as  well  as  its  own  subjectivity  and  rises  to
God.  It  is  the  element  or  factor  which  (as  noticed  in  the
Introduction  and  §  192)  was  overlooked  and  neglected  in  the
analytic  form  of  syllogisms,  under  which  the  so-called  proofs
of  the  Being  of  a  God  presented  this  elevation.

205.]  In  its  primary  and  immediate  aspect  the  Teleological
reference  appears  as  external  design,  and  the  notion  appears
as  contrasted  with  the  object,  the  object  being  pre-supposed.
The  End  is  consequently  finite ;  and  thus  partly  in  its  content,
partly  in  the  circumstance  that  it  has  an  external  condition
in  the  object,  which  has  to  be  found  existing,  and  which  is
taken  as  material  for  its  realisation,  its  self-characterisation
is  to  that  extent  in  form  only.  On  its  immediacy  it  further
depends  that  the  particularity  (which  as  specifying  the  form
gives  the  subjectivity  of  the  final  cause)  as  reflected  in  itself,
the  content,  in  short,  appears  to  be  distinct  from  the  totality
of  the  form,  or  the  subjectivity  in  itself,  that  is,  the  notion.
This  difference  constitutes  the  finitude  of  Design  within  its
own  nature.  By  this  means  the  content  is  quite  as  limited,
contingent,  and  given,  as  the  object  is  particular  and  found
ready  to  hand.  •

Generally  speaking,  the  final  cause  is  taken  to  mean  nothing
more  than  external  design.  In  accordance  with  this  view  of  it,
things  are  supposed  not  to  carry  their  vocation  in  themselves,
but  merely  to  be  means  employed  and  spent  in  realising  a
purpose  which  lies  outside  of  them.  That  may  be  said  to  be  the
point  of  view  taken  by  Utility,  which  once  played  a  great  part
even  in  the  sciences.  Of  late,  however,  utility  has  fallen  into
disrepute,  now  that  people  have  begun  to  see  that  it  failed  to
give  a  genuine  insight  into  the  nature  of  things.  It  is  true
that  finite  things  as  finite  ought  in  justice  to  be  viewed  as  non-
ultimate,  and  as  pointing  beyond  themselves.  This  negativity
of  finite  things  however  is  their  own  dialectic,  and  in  order  to
ascertain  it  we  must  pay  attention  to  their  positive  content.

Teleological  modes  of  investigation  often  proceed  from  a  well-
meant  desire  of  displaying  the  wisdom  of  God,  especially  as  it  is
revealed  in  nature.  Now  in  thus  trying  to  discover  final  causes,
for  which  the  things  serve  as  means,  we  must  remember  that  we


300  THE DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION. [206,  207.

are  stopping1  short  at  the  finite,  and  are  liable  to  fall  into  trifling
reflections.  An  instance  of  such  triviality  is  seen,  when  we  first
of  all  treat  of  the  vine  solely  in  reference  to  the  well-known  uses
which  it  confers  upon  man,  and  then  proceed  to  view  the  cork-
tree in  connexion  with  the  corks  which  are  cut  from  its  bark  to
put  into  the  wine-bottles.  Whole  books  used  to  be  written  in
this  spirit.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  they  promoted  the  genuine
interest  neither  of  religion  nor  of  science.  External  design
stands  immediately  in  front  of  the  idea  :  but  what  thus  stands
on  the  threshold  often  for  that  reason  gives  the  least  satisfaction.

206.]  The  teleological  connexion  is  represented  by  a  syl-
logism :  in  which  subjective  design  is  made  to  coalesce  with
the  objectivity  external  to  it  through  the  instrumentality  of
a  middle  term,  which  is  the  unity  of  both;  a  unity  which
is  at  once  an  action  regulated  by  design,  and  also  an  objec-
tivity immediately  put  under  the  design.  This  middle  term
is  the  Means.

The  development  from  the  End  to  the  Idea  ensues  by  three
stages,  first,  the  Subjective  End  ;  second,  the  End  in  process  of
accomplishment ;  and  third,  the  End  accomplished.  First  of  all
we  have,  the  Subjective  End  ;  and  that,  as  the  notion  with  a
being  of  its  own,  is  itself  the  sum  total  of  the  elementary  func-
tions of  the  notion.  The  first  of  these  functions  is  that  of
universality  identical  with  its^f,  as  it  were  the  neutral  first
water,  in  which  all  is  involved,  but  nothing  as  yet  discriminated.
The  second^of  these  elements  is  the  particularising  of  this  univer-
sal, by  which  it  acquires  a  specific  content.  As  this  specific
content  again  is  realised  by  the  enactment  of  the  universal,  the
latter  returns  by  its  means  back  to  itself,  and  coalesces  with
itself.  Hence  when  we  set  some  end  before  us,  we  say  that  we
'  conclude '  to  do  something,  a  phrase  which  implies  that  we
were,  so  to  speak,  open  and  accessible  to  this  or  that  deter-
mination. Similarly  we  also  speak  of  a  man  '  resolving '  to  do
something,  meaning  that  the  subject  steps  forward  out  of  its
self-regarding  inwardness  and  enters  into  dealings  with  the
objectivity  which  confronts  it.  This  introduces  us  to  the  step
from  the  merely  Subjective  End  to  the  action  which  tends
outwards  under  the  regulation  of  design.

207.]  (1)  The  first  syllogism  of  the  final  cause  represents
the  Subjective  End.  The  universal  notion  is  brought  to
unite  with  individuality  by  means  of  particularity,  so  that  the


208.]  THE DOCTRINE  OF  THE NOTION.  301

individual  in  the  capacity  of  self-characterisation  acts  as  judge.
That  is  to  say,  the  individual  not  only  particularises  or  makes
into  a  specific  content  the  universal  which  is  still  indefinite,
but  also  explicitly  states  the  antithesis  of  subjectivity  and
objectivity.  In  its  own  self,  it  is  at  the  same  time  a  return
to  itself;  for  it  stamps  the  subjectivity  of  the  notion,  pre-
supposed as  against  objectivity,  with  the  mark  of  defect,  in
comparison  with  the  totality  embraced  in  itself,  and  thereby
at  the  same  time  turns  outwards.

208.]  (2)  This  action  which  is  directed  outwards  is  the
individuality,  which  in  the  Subjective  End  is  identical  with
the  particularity  under  which  the  external  objectivity  is  also
comprised,  together  with  the  content.  It  throws  itself  in  the
first  place  and  immediately  upon  the  object,  which  it  appro-
priates to  itself  as  a  Means.  The  notion  is  this  immediate
power;  for  the  notion  is  the  negativity  identical  with  itself,
in  which  the  being  of  the  object  is  characterised  as  wholly
and  merely  ideal.  The  whole  Mean  then  is  this  inward  power
of  the  notion,  in  the  shape  of  an  agency,  with  which  the
object  as  Means  is  immediately  united  and  in  obedience  to
which  it  stands.

In  finite  design  the  Mean  is  thus  broken  up  into  two
elements  external  to  each  other,  the  action  and  the  object,
which  serves  as  the  Means.  The  connexion  of  the  final
cause  as  a  power  with  this  object,  and  the  subjugation  of
the  object  to  it,  is  immediate  (it  forms  the  first  premiss  in
the  syllogism)  to  this  extent,  that  in  the  notion  as  the  self-
existent  ideality  the  object  is  set  forth  as  potentially  null.
This  connexion,  as  represented  in  the  first  premiss,  itself
becomes  the  Mean,  which  is  at  the  same  time  within  itself
the  syllogism.  By  this  connexion  in  fact,  that  is,  by  its
action  in  which  it  remains  involved  and  dominant,  the  End
is  brought  into  union  with  objectivity.

The  execution  of  the  End  is  the  mediated  mode  of  realising
the  End  ;  but  the  immediate  realisation  is  not  less  needful.
The  End  lays  hold  of  the  object  immediately,  because  it  is


302  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION. [209,  210.

the  power  over  the  object,  because  in  the  End  particularity,  and
in  particularity  objectivity  also,  is  involved.  Every  living  being
has  a  body ;  the  soul  takes  possession  of  it  and  in.  that  act  has
at  once  objectified  itself.  The  human  soul  has  much  to  do,  before  it
makes  its  corporeal  nature  into  a  means.  Man  must,  as  it  were,
take  possession  of  his  body,  so  that  it  may  be  the  instrument  of
his  soul.

209.]  (3)  Action,  under  the  guidance  of  design,  along
with  its  Means,  is  still  directed  outwards,  because  the  End
is  also  not  identical  with  the  object,  and  must  consequently
first  be  mediated  with  it.  The  Means  in  its  capacity  of
object  stands,  in  this  second  premiss,  in  immediate  connexion
with  the  other  extreme  of  the  syllogism,  namely,  the  material,
or  objectivity  which  is  pre-supposed  to  exist.  This  connexion
is  the  sphere  of  chemism  and  mechanism,  which  now  become
the  servants  of  the  End  or  Aim,  where  lies  their  truth  and
free  notion.  Thus  the  Subjective  End,  which  is  the  power
ruling  these  processes,  in  which  the  objective  things  wear
themselves  away  against  one  another,  contrives  to  keep
itself  free  from  them,  and  to  preserve  itself  in  them.  Doing
so,  it  appears  as  the  Cunning  or  Craft  of  reason.

Reason  is  as  cunning  as  it  is  powerful.  Cunning  may  be  said
to  lie  in  the  inter-mediative  action,  which,  while  it  permits  the
objects  to  follow  their  own  bent  and  act  upon  one  another,  till
they  waste  away,  and  does  not  itself  directly  interfere  in  the
process,  is  nevertheless  only  working  out  the  execution  of  its
own  aims.  With  this  explanation,  Divine  Providence  may  be
said  to  stand  to  the  world  and  its  process  in  the  capacity  of
absolute  cunning.  God  lets  men  direct  their  particular  passions
and  interests  as  they  please ;  but  the  result  is  the  accomplish-
ment of— not  their  plans,  but  His,  and  these  differ  decidedly
from  the  ends  primarily  sought  by  those  whom  He  employs.

21O.J  The  realised  End  thus  states  or  puts  before  us  the  unity
of  the  subjective  and  the  objective.  It  is  however  essentially
characteristic  of  this  unity,  that  the  subjective  and  objective
are  neutralised  and  cancelled  only  in  the  point  of  their  one-
sidedness.  But  the  objective  is  subdued  and  made  conformable
to  the  End,  as  the  free  notion,  and  thereby  to  the  power


211,212.] THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  303

which  dominates  the  objective.  The  End  maintains  itself
against  and  in  the  objective  fact:  for  it  is  not  merely  the
one-sided  subjective  or  the  particular,  it  is  also  the  concrete
universal,  the  implicit  identity  of  subjective  and  objective.
This  universal,  as  simply  reflected  in  itself,  is  the  content
which  remains  unchanged  through  all  the  three  termini  of
the  syllogism  and  their  movement.

211.]  In  finite  design,  however,  even  the  executed  and  ac-
complished Aim  is  something  no  less  fragmentary  and  defec-
tive than  was  the  Mean  and  the  initial  Aim.  We  have  got
therefore  a  form  only  extraneously  impressed  on  the  material
ready  to  hand  before  us :  and  this  form,  by  reason  of  the
limited  content  of  the  Aim,  is  also  a  contingent  character-
istic, which  may  be  removed  from  the  material.  The  End
achieved  consequently  is  only  an  object,  which  again  becomes
a  Means  or  material  for  other  purposes,  and  so  on  for  ever.

212-]  But  what  virtually  happens  in  the  realising  of  the  End
is  that  the  one-sided  subjectivity,  and  the  show  of  objective  inde-
pendence confronting  it,  are  both  cancelled.  In  laying  hold  of
the  means  the  notion  lays  itself  down  as  the  very  implicit  essence
of  the  object.  In  the  mechanical  and  chemical  processes  the
independence  or  stability  of  the  object  has  been  already  dis-
sipated implicitly,  and  in  the  course  of  their  movement  under
the  dominion  of  the  End  or  Aim,  the  show  of  that  independence,
the  negative  which  confronts  the  notion,  is  got  rid  of.  But  in
the  fact  that  the  End  achieved  is  characterised  Moiily  as  a  cans
and  a  material,  this  object,  viz.  the  teleological,  is  there  and
then  affirmed  to  be  implicitly  null,  and  only  ideal.  This  being
so,  the  antithesis  between  form  and  content  has  also  vanished.
While  the  End  by  the  removal  and  absorption  of  all  charac-
teristics of  form  coalesces  with  itself,  the  form  as  identical  with
itself  is  thereby  affirmed  to  be  the  content,  so  that  the  notion,
which  is  the  action  of  form,  has  only  itself  for  content.  Through
this  process  we  get  explicitly  stated  what  lay  in  the  notion  of
design :  viz.  the  implicit  unity  of  subjective  and  objective  comes
to  be  on  its  own  account.  And  this  is  the  Idea.


304  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  [213.

This  finitude  of  the  End  or  Aim  consists  in  the  circumstance,
that,  in  the  process  of  realising-  it,  the  material,  which  is
employed  as  a  means,  is  only  externally  subsumed  under  it
and  made  conformable  to  it.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the
object  is  the  notion  implicitly :  and  thus  when  the  notion,  in
the  shape  of  End  or  Aim,  is  realised  in  the  object,  we  have  but
the  manifestation  of  the  inner  nature  of  the  object  itself.  Objec-
tivity is  thus,  as  it  were,  only  a  shell  or  covering  under  which
the  notion  lies  concealed.  Within  the  range  of  the  finite  we
can  never  see  or  experience  that  the  End  or  Aim  has  been  really
secured.  The  consummation  of  the  infinite  Aim,  therefore,  con-
sists merely  in  removing  the  illusion  which  makes  it  seem  yet  un-
accomplished. Good  and  absolute  goodness  is  eternally  accom-
plishing itself  in  the  world :  and  the  result  is  that  it  needs  not
wait  upon  us,  but  is  already  by  implication,  as  well  as  in  full
actuality,  accomplished.  It  is  this  illusion  under  which  we  live.
It  alone  supplies  at  the  same  time  the  actualising  force  on  which
the  interest  in  the  world  reposes.  In  the  course  of  its  process
the  Idea  makes  itself  that  illusion,  by  setting  an  antithesis  to
confront  it ;  and  its  action  consists  in  getting  rid  of  the  illusion
which  it  has  created.  Only  out  of  this  error  does  the  truth
arise.  In  this  fact  lies  the  reconciliation  with  error  and  with
finitude.  Error  or  other-being,  when  it  is  uplifted  and  absorbed,
is  itself  a  necessary  dynamic  element  of  truth  :  for  truth  can
only  be  where  it  makes  itself  its  own  result.

C. — THE  IDEA.

213.]  The  Idea  is  truth  in  itself  and  for  itself, — the  absolute
unity  of  the  notion  and  objectivity.  Its  ideal  content  in  thought
is  only  the  notion  with  its  functional  characteristics :  its  real
content  is  only  the  exhibition  which  it  gives  itself  in  the
form  of  outward  Being-then-and-there,  whilst  by  retaining
this  outward  shape  included  in  its  ideality,  it  retains  it  in  its
power  and  thus  retains  itself  in  that  form.

The  definition,  which  declares  the  Absolute  to  be  the  Idea,
is  itself  absolute.  All  former  definitions  come  back  to  this.
The  Idea  is  the  Truth :  for  Truth  is  the  correspondence  of  ob-
jectivity with  the  notion.  By  that  correspondence,  however,  is
not  meant  the  correspondence  of  external  things  with  my  con-
ceptions : — for  these  are  only  correct  conceptions  held  by  me,
the  individual  person.  In  the  idea  we  have  nothing  to  do
with  the  individual,  nor  with  figurate  conceptions,  nor  with


2 1 3.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  305

external  things.  And  yet,  again,  everything  actual,  in  so  far
as  it  is  true,  is  the  Idea,  and  has  its  truth  by  and  in  virtue
of  the  Idea  alone.  Every  individual  being  is  some  one  aspect
of  the  Idea :  for  that  being  therefore,  yet  other  actualities  are
needed,  which  in  their  turn  appear  to  have  a  self-subsistence
of  their  own.  In  the  whole  of  them  together  and  in  their
connexion  alone,  is  the  notion  realised.  The  individual  does
not  of  itself  correspond  to  its  notion.  It  is  this  limitation  of
its  existence  which  constitutes  the  finitude  and  the  ruin  of
the  individual.  The  Idea  itself  is  not  to  be  taken  as  an  idea
of  something  or  other,  any  more  than  the  notion  is  to  be
taken  as  merely  a  specific  notion.  The  Absolute  is  the  uni-
versal and  one  idea,  which,  as  discerning,  or  in  the  act  of  judg-
ment, specialises  itself  to  the  system  of  specific  ideas  ;  which
after  all  are  constrained  by  their  nature  to  come  back  to  the
one  idea  where  their  truth  lies.  It  is  out  of  and  from  this
discerning  judgment  that  the  Idea  is  in  the  first  place  only
the  one  universal  substance:  but  its  developed  and  genuine
actuality  is  to  be  as  a  subject  and  in  that  way  as  mind.

Because  it  has  no  existence  to  start  from  and  support  itself
upon,  the  Idea  is  frequently  taken  to  be  a  mere  form  of  Logic.
Such  a  view  must  be  abandoned  to  those  theories,  which  ascribe
so-called  reality  and  genuine  actuality  to  the  existent  thing  and
all  the  other  categories,  which  have  not  yet  penetrated  as  far
as  the  Idea.  It  is  no  less  false  to  imagine  the  idea  to  be  a
mere  abstraction.  It  is  abstract  certainly,  in  so  far  as  every-
thing that  is  untrue  is  consumed  and  destroyed  in  it:  but  in
its  own  self  it  is  essentially  concrete,  because  it  is  the  free
notion  giving  character  to  itself,  and  that  character,  reality.
It  would  be  an  abstract  form,  only  if  the  notion,  which  is  its
principle,  were  taken  to  be  an  abstract  unity,  and  not  the
negative  return  of  it  into  self,  and  the  subjectivity  which
it  really  is.

By  truth  we  understand,  in  the  first  place,  that  we  ourselves
know  how  something  is.  This  is  truth,  however,  only  in  re-
ference to  consciousness ;  it  is  formal  truth,  and  bare  correctness.


306  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  [214.

Truth  in  the  deeper  sense  consists  in  the  identity  between  ob-
jectivity and  the  notion.  It  is  in  this  deeper  sense  that  truth
is  understood  when  we  speak  of  a  true  state,  or  of  a  true  work
of  art.  These  objects  are  true,  if  they  are  as  they  ought  to  be,
i.e.  if  their  reality  corresponds  to  their  notion.  When  thus
viewed,  to  be  untrue  means  much  the  same  as  to  be  bad.  A  bad
man  is  an  untrue  man,  one  who  does  not  behave  as  his  notion  or
his  vocation  requires  of  him.  Nothing  however  can  subsist,  if
it  be  wholly  devoid  of  identity  between  the  notion  and  reality.
Even  bad  and  untrue  things  have  being,  in  so  far  as  their  reality
still,  somehow,  conforms  to  their  notion.  Whatever  is  thoroughly
bad  or  contrary  to  the  notion,  for  that  very  reason  must  break
into  pieces.  It  is  by  the  notion  alone  that 'the  things  in  the
world  have  their  subsistence  ;  or,  as  it  is  expressed  in  the  figurate
language  of  religious  conception,  things  are  what  they  are,  only
in  virtue  of  the  divine  and  thereby  creative  thought  which
dwells  within  them.

When  we  hear  the  Idea  spoken  of,  we  need  not  imagine
something  far  away  beyond  this  mortal  sphere.  The  idea  is
rather  what  is  completely  present:  and  it  is  found  in  every
consciousness,  although  it  may  be  in  an  indistinct  and  stunted
form.  We  conceive  the  world  to  ourselves  as  a  great  totality,
which  is  created  by  God,  and  so  created  that  in  it  God  has
manifested  himself  to  us.  We  regard  the  world  also  as  ruled
by  Divine  Providence :  implying  that  the  division  between  the
parts  of  the  world  is  continually  brought  back,  and  made  con-
formable, to  the  unity  from  which  it  has  issued.  The  purpose
of  philosophy  has  always  been  to  know  the  idea  by  thought;
and  everything  deserving  the  name  of  philosophy  has  con-
stantly been  based  on  the  consciousness  of  an  absolute  unity
where  the  understanding  sees  and  accepts  only  separation.  It
is  too  late  now  to  ask  for  proof  that  the  idea  is  the  truth.
The  proof  of  that  is  contained  in  the  whole  construction  and
development  of  thought  up  to  this  point.  The  idea  is  the
result  of  this  course  of  dialectic.  Not  that  it  is  to  be  sup-
posed that  the  idea  is  mediate  only,  i.e.  mediated  through  some-
thing else  than  itself.  It  is  rather  its  own  result,  and  being
so,  is  no  less  immediate  than  mediate.  The  stages  hitherto
considered,  viz.  those  of  Being  and  the  Essence,  as  well  as  those  of
the  Notion  and  of  Objectivity,  are  not,  when  so  distinguished,
something  permanent,  resting  upon  themselves.  They  have
proved  to  be  dialectical,  and  their  only  truth  is  that  they  are
dynamic  elements  of  the  idea.

214.]  The  Idea  may  be  described  in  many  ways.  It  may
be  called  reason  (and  this  is  the  proper  philosophical  signifi-


2 1 4-]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  307

cation  of  reason) ;  a  subject-object ;  the  unity  of  the  ideal  and
the  real,  of  the  finite  and  the  infinite,  of  soul  and  body ;  the
possibility  which  has  its  actuality  in  its  own  self;  that  of
which  the  nature  can  be  thought  only  as  existent,  &c.  All
these  descriptions  apply,  because  the  Idea  contains  all  the  re-
lations of  understanding,  but  contains  them  in  their  infinite
return  and  identity  in  themselves.

It  is  not  difficult  for  the  understanding  to  show  that  every
statement  made  about  the  Idea  is  self-contradictory.  So  much
indeed  may  be  conceded  to  understanding :  or,  to  put  it  more
correctly,  is  accomplished  in  the  Idea.  And  this  work,  which
is  the  work  of  reason,  is  certainly  not  so  easy  as  that  of  the
understanding.  Understanding  may  demonstrate  that  the  Idea
is  self-contradictory :  because  the  subjective  is  subjective  only
and  is  always  confronted  by  the  objective, — because  being  is
different  from  the  notion  and  therefore  cannot  be  deduced
from  it, — because  the  finite  is  finite  only,  the  exact  antithesis
of  the  infinite,  and  therefore  not  identical  with  it;  and  so  on
with  every  term  of  the  description.  The  reverse  of  all  this
however  is  the  doctrine  of  Logic.  Logic  shows  that  the  sub-
jective which  is  to  be  subjective  only,  the  finite  which  would
be  finite  only,  the  infinite  which  would  be  infinite  only,  and  so
on,  have  no  truth,  but  contradict  themselves,  and  pass  over
into  their  opposites.  Hence  this  transition,  and  the  unity  in
which  the  extremes  are  merged  and  where  they  take  the  rank
of  mere  show,  or  of  organic  elements,  reveals  itself  as  their
truth.

The  understanding,  which  addresses  itself  to  the  Idea,  commits
a  double  misunderstanding.  It  takes  the  extremes  of  the  Idea
(be  they  expressed  as  they  will,  so  long  as  they  are  in  their
unity)  not  as  they  are  understood  when  stamped  with  this
concrete  unity,  but  as  if  they  remained  abstractions  outside
of  it.  It  no  less  mistakes  the  connexion,  even  when  it  has
been  expressly  stated.  Thus,  for  example,  it  overlooks  even
the  nature  of  the  copula  in  the  judgment,  which  affirms  that
the  individual,  or  subject,  is  after  all  not  an  individual,  but

X  2


308  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  [215.

a  universal.  But,  above  all  else,  the  understanding  believes  its
reflection, — that  the  Idea,  which  is  identical  with  itself,  contains
its  own  negative,  or  contains  contradiction,  to  be  an  external
reflection  which  does  not  occur  to  the  Idea  itself.  But  the
reflection  is  really  no  peculiar  cleverness  of  the  understanding-.
The  Idea  itself  is  the  dialectic  which  for  ever  divides  and  dis-
tinguishes what  is  identical  with  self  from  what  is  differenced,
the  subjective  from  the  objective,  the  finite  from  the  infinite,
the  soul  from  the  body.  Only  on  these  terms  is  it  an  eternal
creation,  eternal  vitality,  and  eternal  mind.  But  while  it
thus  passes  or  translates  itself  into  the  abstract  understanding,  it
for  ever  remains  reason.  The  Idea  is  the  dialectic  which  again
makes  this  mass  of  understanding  and  diversity  understand
its  finite  nature  and  the  false  show  of  independence  in  its
productions :  and  which  brings  the  diversity  back  to  unity.
Since  this  double  movement  is  not  separate  or  distinct  in  time,
nor  indeed  in  any  other  way — otherwise  it  would  be  only  a
repetition  of  the  abstract  understanding — the  Idea  is  the  eternal
perception  of  itself  in  the  other.  The  Idea  is  the  notion  which
has  achieved  itself  in  its  objectivity :  it  is  the  object,  which
is  inward  design,  or  essential  subjectivity.

The  different  modes  of  apprehending  the  Idea  as  a  unity  of
the  ideal  and  the  real,  of  finite  and  infinite,  of  identity  and
difference,  &c.  are  more  or  less  formal.  They  designate  some
one  stage  of  the  specific  notion.  Only  the  notion  itself,  how-
ever, is  free  and  the  genuine  universal.  In  the  Idea,  therefore,
the  character  or  specific  quality  of  the  notion  is  only  itself, —
an  objectivity,  viz.  into  which  it,  being  the  universal,  continues
itself,  and  in  which  it  has  only  its  own  character,  the  total
character.  The  Idea  is  the  infinite  judgment,  of  which  the
terms  are  severally  the  independent  totality ;  and  in  which  as
each  grows  to  the  fulness  of  its  own  nature  it  has  thereby
at  the  same  time  passed  into  the  other.  None  of  the  other
specific  notions  exhibits  this  totality  complete  on  both  its  sides,
except  the  notion  itself  and  objectivity.

215.]  The  Idea  is  essentially  a  process,  because  its  identity


2 1 5.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION,  309

is  the  absolute  and  free  identity  of  the  notion,  only  in  so  far
as  it  is  absolute  negativity  and  for  that  reason  dialectical.  It
represents  the  course  or  round,  in  which  the  notion,  in  the
capacity  of  universality  which  is  individuality,  gives  itself  the
character  of  objectivity  and  of  the  antithesis  to  objectivity :
and  in  which  this  externality  which  has  the  notion  for  its
substance,  finds  its  way  back  to  subjectivity  through  its
immanent  dialectic.

As  the  idea  is  (a)  a  process,  it  follows  that  the  expression  for
the  Absolute  (such  as  unity  of  thought  and  being,  of  finite
and  infinite,  &c.)  is  false;  for  unity  expresses  a  tranquil  and
abstract  identity  at  rest.  As  the  Idea  is  (b)  subjectivity,  it
follows  that  the  expression  is  equally  false  on  another  account.
That  unity  of  which  it  speaks  expresses  the  substance  or
implicit  nature  of  the  genuine  unity.  The  infinite  would  thus
seem  to  be  merely  neutralised  by  the  finite,  the  subjective  by
the  objective,  thought  by  being.  But  in  the  negative  unity
of  the  Idea,  the  infinite  overlaps  and  includes  the  finite,  thought
overlaps  being,  subjectivity  overlaps  objectivity.  The  unity
of  the  Idea  is  thought,  infinity,  and  subjectivity,  and  is  in
consequence  to  be  essentially  distinguished  from  the  Idea  as
substance,  just  as  this  overlapping  subjectivity,  thought,  or
infinity  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  one-sided  subjectivity,
one-sided  thought,  one-sided  infinity  to  which  it  descends  in
judging  and  defining.

The  idea  as  a  process  ruus  through  three  stages  in  its
development.  The  first  form  of  the  idea  is  Life :  that  is,  the
idea  in  the  form  of  immediacy.  The  second  form  is  that  of
mediation  or  differentiation ;  and  this  is  the  idea  in  the  form  of
Knowledge,  which  appears  under  the  double  aspect  of  the  Theo-
retical and  Practical  idea.  The  process  of  knowledge  eventuates
in  the  restoration  of  the  unity  enriched  by  difference.  This  gives
the  third  form  of  the  idea,  the  Absolute  Idea :  which  last  stage
of  the  logical  idea  evinces  itself  to  be  at  the  same  time  really
first,  and  to  have  a  being  due  to  itself  alone.


310  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  [216.


(a) Life.

216-]  The  immediate  idea  is  Life.  The  notion  is  realised  as
a  soul  in  a  body.  The  body  is  external,  and  the  soul  is  its  im-
mediate Universality  which  connects  self  with  self ;  but  also  its
Particularising,  so  that  the  body  has  no  other  differences  than
the  characteristic  of  the  notion  impresses  upon  it ;  and  finally
is  the  Individuality  of  the  body  as  infinite  negativity.  The  soul,
in  short,  is  the  dialectic  of  that  bodily  objectivity,  with  its  parts
lying  out  of  parts,  and  carries  it  away  from  the  semblance  of
independent  subsistence  back  into  subjectivity,  so  that  all  the
members  are  reciprocally  organic  means  as  well  as  organic  ends.
Thus  life  not  only  is  the  initial  particularisation :  it  results  in
the  negative  unity  which  feels  itself  to  be,  and  in  the  corporeal
part,  as  being  dialectical,  it  only  coalesces  with  itself.  In  this
way  life  is  essentially  a  living  thing,  and  in  point  of  its  im-
mediacy this  individual  living  thing.  It  is  characteristic  of
finitude  in  this  sphere  that,  by  reason  of  the  immediacy  of  the
idea,  body  and  soul  are  separable.  This  constitutes  the  mortality
of  the  living  being.  It  is  only,  however,  when  the  living  being
dies,  that  these  two  sides  of  the  idea  are  different  constituents.

The  single  members  of  the  body  are  what  they  are  only  by
and  in  connexion  with  their  unity.  A  hand,  e.g.  when  hewn
off  from  the  body  is  a  hand  in  name  only,  not  in  fact,  as
Aristotle  has  observed.  To  the  understanding,  and  from  its  point
of  view,  life  for  the  most  part  seems  an  inexplicable  mystery.
By  giving  it  such  a  name,  however,  the  Understanding  only  con-
fesses its  own  finitude  and  nullity.  So  far  is  life  from  being  in-
comprehensible, that  it  is  the  very  notion  which  is  presented  to  us,
or  rather  the  immediate  idea  existing  as  a  notion.  And  having
said  this,  we  have  indicated  the  defect  of  life.  Its  notion  and
reality  do  not  thoroughly  correspond  to  each  other.  The  notion
of  life  is  the  soul,  and  this  notion  has  the  body  for  its  reality.
The  soul  is,  as  it  were,  poured  out  and  diffused  into  its  corporeity ;
and  in  that  way  it  is  at  first  sentient  only,  and  not  yet  freely
self-conscious.  The  process  of  life  consists  in  getting  the  better
of  the  immediacy  which  continues  to  affect  it :  and  tins  process,
which  is  itself  threefold,  results  in  the  idea  under  the  form  of
judgment,  i.  e.  the  idea  as  Cognition.


2 1 7-2 1 9-] THE DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  311

217.]  Whatever  lives  is  a  syllogism,  of  which  the  very  ele-
ments are  in  themselves  systems  and  syllogisms  (§§  198,  201,
207).  They  are  however  active  syllogisms  or  processes ;  and  in
the  subjective  unity  of  the  vital  agent  make  only  one  process.
Thus  the  living  being  is  the  process  by  which  it  coalesces  with
itself,  and  this  coalescence  runs  on  through  three  processes.

218.]  (1)  The  first  is  the  process  of  the  living  being  inside
itself.  In  that  process  it  makes  a  split  on  its  own  nature,  and
reduces  its  corporeity  to  its  object  or  its  inorganic  nature.  This
corporeity,  being  relatively  external,  passes  in  its  own  self  into
a  distinction  and  antagonism  between  its  elements,  which  are
surrendered  to  one  another,  and  assimilate  one  another,  and
are  retained  by  producing  themselves.  This  act  of  the  several
members  is  only  the  one  act  of  the  living  subject  to  which
their  productions  return;  so  that  in  these  productions  nothing
is  produced  except  the  subject :  in  other  words,  the  subject  repro-
duces itself  only.

The  process  of  the  vital  subject  within  its  own  limits  has  in
Nature  the  threefold  form  of  Sensibility,  Irritability,  and  Repro-
duction. As  Sensibility,  the  living  being  is  immediately  simple
connexion  with  self— it  is  the  soul,  which  is  everywhere  present
in  its  body,  the  mutual  exclusiveness  of  which  has  no  truth  for  it.
As.  Irritability,  the  living  being  appears  to  be  split  up  in  itself;
and  as  Reproduction,  it  is  perpetually  restoring  itself  from  the
inner  distinction  of  its  members  and  organs.  A  vital  agent  is
thus  only  found  as  this  constantly  renewed  process  within  its
own  limits.

219.]  (2)  But  the  judgment  of  the  notion  proceeds,  as  free,
to  discharge  the  objective  or  bodily  nature  as  an  independent
totality  from  itself;  and  the  negative  connexion  of  the  living
thing  with  itself  makes,  as  immediate  individuality,  the  pre-
supposition of  an  inorganic  nature  confronting  it.  As  this
negative  of  vitality  is  no  less  a  function  in  the  notion  of  the
living  thing  itself,  it  exists  consequently  in  this  universal
(which  is  at  the  same  time  concrete)  in  the  shape  of  a  defect
or  want.  The  dialectic  by  which  the  object,  being  implicitly
null,  is  merged,  is  the  action  of  the  living  thing,  which  is  certain


312  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION. [220,221.

of  itself,  and  which  in  this  process  against  an  inorganic  nature
thus  retains,  developes,  and  objectifies  itself.

The  living  being  stands  face  to  face  with  an  inorganic  nature  :
it  conducts  itself  as  a  power  over  that  nature  and  assimilates
it  to  itself.  The  result  of  the  assimilation  is  not,  as  in  the
chemical  process,  a  neutral  product  in  which  the  independence
of  the  two  confronting  sides  is  merged;  but  the  living  being
shows  itself  as  overlapping  its  antithesis  which  cannot  withstand
its  power.  The  inorganic  nature  which  is  subdued  by  the  vital
agent  suffers  this  fate,  because  it  is  virtually  the  same  as  what
life  is  actually.  Thus  in  its  antithesis,  the  living  being  only
coalesces  with  itself.  But  when  the  soul  has  fled  from  the  body,
the  elementary  forces  of  objectivity  begin  their  play.  These
powers  are,  as  it  were,  continually  on  the  spring,  ready  to  begin
their  process  in  the  organic  body ;  and  life  is  the  constant  battle
against  them.

220.]  (3)  The  living  individuum  in  its  first  process  behaves
as  subject  and  notion  in  itself,  and  by  means  of  its  second
assimilates  its  external  objectivity  and  thus  puts  the  character
of  reality  into  itself.  It  is  now  therefore  implicitly  a  Kind,  a
substantial  universal.  The  particularising  of  the  Kind  is  the
connexion  of  the  living  subject,  with  another  subject  of  its
Kind :  and  the  judgment  is  the  relation  of  the  Kind  to  these
individuals  presenting  such  features  towards  each  other.  This
is  the  Affinity  of  the  Sexes.

221.]  The  process  of  the  Kind  brings  it  to  a  being  of  its  own.
Life  being  no  more  than  the  idea  immediate,  the  product  of
this  process  breaks  up  into  two  sides.  On  the  one  hand,  the
living  individuum,  which  was  at  first  pre-supposed  as  immediate,
is  now  seen  to  be  mediated  and  generated.  On  the  other,
however,  the  living  individuality,  which,  on  account  of  its  first
immediacy,  stands  in  a  negative  attitude  towards  universality,
sinks  in  the  superior  power  of  the  latter.

The  living  being  dies,  because  it  is  a  contradiction.  Implicitly
it  is  the  universal  or  Kind,  and  yet  immediately  it  exists  as  an
individual  only.  Death  shows  the  Kind  to  be  the  power  that
rules  the  immediate  individual.  For  the  animal  the  process  of
Kind  is  the  highest  point  of  its  vitality.  But  the  animal  never
gets  so  far  in  its  Kind  as  to  have  a  being  of  its  own ;  it  falls  a


222-224.] THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  313

victim  to  the  supremacy  of  Kind.  In  the  process  of  Kind  the
immediate  living  being-  mediates  itself  with  itself,  and  thus  rises
above  its  immediacy,  only  however  to  sink  back  into  it  again.
Life  thus  runs  away,  in  the  first  instance,  only  into  the  false
infinity  of  the  progress  ad  mjlnitum.  The  real  result,  however,  of
the  process  of  life,  in  the  point  of  its  notion,  is  to  merge  and
overcome  that  immediacy  with  which  the  idea,  in  the  shape  of
life,  never  ceases  to  be  oppressed.

222.]  In  this  manner  however  the  idea  of  life  has  thrown
off  not  some  one  particular  and  immediate  '  This^  but  the  first
immediacy  as  a  whole.  It  thus  comes  to  itself,  to  its  truth:
it  enters  upon  existence  as  a  free  Kind  on  its  own  behoof.  By
the  death  of  the  merely  immediate  and  individual  vitality,  the
spirit  comes  forward.

(b) Cognition  in  general.

223.]  The  idea  exists  free  for  itself,  in  so  far  as  it  has
universality  for  the  medium  of  its  existence,  or  as  it  is  objec-
tivity itself,  in  the  shape  of  the  notion,  or  as  the  idea  has  itself
for  object.  Its  subjectivity,  as  stamped  with  the  character  of
universality,  is  an  act  of  pure  distinguishing  within  its  own
limits — an  act  of  perception  which  keeps  itself  in  this  identical
universality.  But,  as  specific  distinction,  it  is  the  further
judgment  of  repelling  itself  as  a  totality  from  itself,  and  thus,
in  the  first  place,  pre-supposing  itself  as  an  external  universe.
There  are  two  judgments,  which  though  implicitly  identical
are  not  yet  explicitly  stated  as  identical.

224.]  The  connexion  between  these  two  ideas,  which  impli-
citly and  as  life  are  identical,  is  thus  a  relative  connexion  :  and  it
is  that  relativity  which  constitutes  the  characteristic  of  finitude
in  this  sphere.  It  is  the  relation  of  reflection,  seeing  that
the  distinguishing  of  the  idea  in  its  own  self  is  only  the  first
judgment,  the  presumption  or  hypothesis  is  not  yet  sumption
or  thesis,  and  not  yet  explicit.  And  thus  for  the  subjective  idea
the  objective,  i.  e.  the  world  immediately  presented  to  us,  or  the
idea  as  life,  is  contained  in  the  phenomenon  of  individual
existence.  At  the  same  time,  in  so  far  as  this  judgment  is  a


314  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION. [225,226.

pure  distinguishing  within  its  own  limits  (preced.  §),  the  idea
is  in  one  conscious  of  itself  and  of  its  antithesis.  Consequently
it  is  the  certitude  of  the  virtual  or  implicit  identity  between
itself  and  the  objective  world.  Reason  comes  to  the  world
with  an  absolute  faith  in  its  ability  to  make  the  identity  explicit,
and  to  raise  its  certitude  to  truth ;  and  with  the  instinct  of
stating  explicitly  the  nullity  of  that  contrast  which  it  sees  to
be  implicitly  null.

225.]  This  process  may  be  in  general  described  as  Cognition.
In  Cognition  in  a  single  act  the  contrast  is  virtually  absorbed,
both  the  one-sidedness  of  subjectivity  and  the  one-sidedness  of
objectivity.  At  first,  however,  the  merging  or  suspension  of
the  contrast  is  but  implicit.  The  process  as  such  is  in  conse-
quence immediately  infected  with  the  finitude  of  this  sphere.
It,  therefore,  parts  into  the  twofold  movement  of  the  instinct  of
reason,  a  movement  which  is  stated  as  different.  On  the  one
hand  it  gets  rid  of  the  narrowness  of  the  subjectivity  of  the
idea  by  receiving  the  world  of  Being  into  itself,  into  subjective
conception  and  thought,  and  with  this  objectivity,  which  is
thus  taken  to  be  real  and  true,  for  its  content  it  fills  up  the
abstract  certitude  of  itself.  On  the  other  hand,  it  gets  rid  of
the  narrowness  of  the  objective  world,  which  is  now  valued,  on
the  contrary,  as  only  a  mere  show  or  semblance,  a  collection
of  contingencies  and  of  forms  with  no  meaning  in  them.  It
modifies  and  moulds  that  world  by  the  inward  nature  of
subjectivity,  which  is  here  taken  to  be  the  genuine  objective,
and  works  the  subjectivity  into  it.  The  former  is  the  tendency
or  instinct  of  science  in  the  search  for  Truth,  Cognition  properly
so  called: — the  Theoretical  action  of  the  idea.  The  latter  is
the  tendency  or  instinct  of  the  Good  to  bring  about  itself — the
Practical  activity  of  the  idea  or  Volition.

(a)  Cognition  proper.

226.]  The  universal  finitude  of  Cognition,  which  lies  in  the
one  judgment,  the  presumption  of  the  contrast  as  objectivity
(§  224),  a  presumption  against  which  its  own  action  is  the


227-]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  315

implanted  contradiction,  specialises  itself  more  precisely  on  the
face  of  its  own  idea.  The  result  of  that  specialisation  is,  that
its  two  elements  receive  the  aspect  of  being  diverse  from
each  other,  and,  as  they  are  at  least  complete,  they  take  up
the  relation  of  reflection,  not  of  the  notion,  to  one  another.
The  assimilation  of  the  matter,  therefore,  as  what  is  given,
presents  itself  in  the  light  of  a  reception  of  it  into  categories
which  never  enter  into  thorough  union  with  it,  and  which
meet  each  other  in  the  same  style  of  diversity.  Reason  is
active  here,  but  it  is  reason  in  the  shape  of  understanding.
The  truth  which  such  Cognition  can  reach  will  be  only  finite :
while  the  infinite  truth  of  the  notion  is  fixed  for  finite  Cog-
nition as  a  transcendent  world  far  away,  which  exists  in
itself  only  and  not  for  knowledge.  Still  in  its  external  action
it  stands  under  the  guidance  of  the  notion,  and  the  laws  of
the  notion  give  the  inward  clue  to  its  onward  movement.

The  finitude  of  Cognition  lies  in  the  presumption  of  a  world
awaiting  our  action,  and  in  the  consequent  view  of  the  knowing
subject  as  a  tabula  rasa.  The  conception  is  one  attributed  to
Aristotle,  but  no  man  is  further  than  Aristotle  from  such  an
outside  theory  of  Cognition.  Such  a  style  of  Cognition  is  un-
aware that  it  is  the  activity  of  the  notion — an  activity  which
it  is  implicitly,  but  not  consciously.  In  its  own  estimation  its
procedure  is  passive.  Really  that  procedure  is  active.

227-]  Finite  Cognition,  when  it  presumes  what  is  distin-
guished from  it  to  be  something  ready  made  and  in  anti-
thesis to  itself — when  it  pre-supposes  the  various  facts  of
external  nature  or  of  consciousness — has,  in  the  first  place,
(1)  Formal  identity  or  the  abstraction  of  universality  for  the
form  in  which  it  acts.  Its  activity  therefore  consists  in  the
analysis  of  the  given  concrete  object,  in  isolating  the  dif-
ferences, and  giving  them  the  form  of  abstract  generality.
Or  it  leaves  the  concrete  thing  as  a  ground,  and  by  leaving
aside  the  apparently  unessential  particulars,  it  elicits  a  concrete
universal,  the  Genus,  or  the  Force  and  the  Law.  This  is  the
Analytical  Method.


316  THE  DOCTRINE  OF THE  NOTION. [228,  229.

People  generally  speak  of  the  analytical  and  synthetical
methods,  as  if  it  depended  solely  on  our  choice  which  we
pursued.  This  is  far  from  correct.  It  depends  on  the  form
of  the  objects  of  our  investigation,  which  of  the  two  methods,
that  are  derivable  from  the  notion  of  finite  cognition,  ought
to  be  applied.  In  the  first  place,  cognition  is  analytical.  Ana-
lytical cognition  deals  with  an  object  which  is  presented  in
isolation,  and  the  aim  of  its  action  is  to  trace  back  to  a  uni-
versal the  individual  object  that  lies  before  it.  Thought  in
such  circumstances  means  no  more  than  an  act  of  abstraction
or  of  formal  identity.  That  is  the  sense  in  which  thought  is
understood  by  Locke  and  the  empirical  school.  Cognition,  it
is  often  said,  can  never  do  more  than  separate  the  given  con-
crete objects  into  their  abstract  elements,  and  then  consider
these  elements  in  their  isolation.  It  is,  however,  at  once  ap-
parent that  this  turns  things  upside  down,  and  that  cognition
which  resolves  to  take  things  as  they  are  will  fall  into  con-
tradiction with  itself.  Thus  the  chemist  e.g.  places  a*  piece
of  flesh  in  his  retort,  tortures  it  in  many  ways,  and  then  in-
forms us  that  it  consists  of  nitrogen,  carbon,  hydrogen,  &c.
True  :  but  these  abstract  matters  have  ceased  to  be  flesh.  The
same  defect  occurs  in  the  reasoning  of  an  empirical  psychologist
when  he  divides  an  action  into  the  various  aspects  which  it
presents,  and  then  sticks  to  these  aspects  in  their  separation.
The  object  which  is  subjected  to  analysis  is  treated  as  a  sort
of  onion,  from  which  one  coat  is  peeled  off  after  another.

228-]  This  universality  is  also  a  specific  universality.  That
is  to  say :  (2)  the  activity  moves  onward  in  accordance  with
the  organic  functions  of  the  notion,  which  (as  it  has  not  its
infinity  in  finite  cognition)  is  the  specific  or  definite  notion
of  understanding.  The  reception  of  the  object  into  the  form
of  this  notion  is  the  Synthetic  Method.

The  movement  of  the  Synthetic  method  is  the  reverse  of  the
Analytical  method.  The  latter  starts  from  the  individual,  and
proceeds  to  the  universal ;  in  the  former  the  starting-point  is
given  by  the  universal  (as  a  definition),  from  which  we  proceed
by  particularising  (in  division)  to  the  individual  or  theorem.
The  Synthetical  method  thus  presents  itself  as  the  development
of  the  functions  of  the  notion  as  they  offer  themselves  on  the
object.

229-]  (a)  When  the  object  has  been  in  the  first  instance
brought  by  cognition  into  the  form  of  the  specific  notion


230.]  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  317

in  general,  so  that  its  genus  and  its  universal  character  or
speciality  are  explicitly  stated  with  it,  we  have  the  Definition.
The  materials  and  the  proof  of  Definition  are  procured  by  means
of  the  Analytical  method  (§  227).  The  specific  character  however
is  expected  to  be  a  '  mark'  only :  that  is  to  say  it  must  be  in
behoof  only  of  the  purely  subjective  cognition,  which  is  ex-
ternal to  the  object.

Definition  involves  the  three  organic  elements  of  the  notion  :
the  universal  or  proximate  genus  (genus  proximum),  the  par-
ticular or  character  of  the  genus  (qualitas  specijica),  and  the
individual,  or  object  defined.  The  first  question  that  definition
raises,  is  where  it  comes  from.  The  general  answer  to  this
question  is  to  say,  that  definitions  originate  by  way  of  analysis.
This  fact  will  explain  how  it  happens  that  people  can  quarrel
about  the  correctness  of  proposed  definitions.  In  these  cases
everything  depends  on  what  perceptions  we  started  from,  and
what  points  of  view  we  had  before  our  eyes.  The  richer
the  object  to  be  defined  is,  that  is,  the  more  numerous  are
the  aspects  which  it  offers  to  our  notice,  the  more  various  are
the  definitions  we  may  frame  of  it.  Thus  there  are  quite  a
host  of  definitions  of  life,  of  the  state,  &c.  Geometry,  on  the
contrary,  dealing  with  a  theme  so  abstract  as  space,  has  an
easy  task  in  giving  definitions.  Again,  in  respect  of  the  matter
or  contents  of  the  objects  defined*  there  is  no  constraining  ne-
cessity present.  We  have  only  to  take  it  for  granted  that
space  exists,  that  there  are  plants,  animals,  &c.  Nor  is  it  the
business  of  geometry,  botany,  &c.  to  demonstrate  that  the
objects  in  question  are  necessary.  This  very  circumstance
makes  the  synthetical  method  of  cognition  as  little  suitable
for  philosophy  as  the  analytical :  for  philosophy  has  above  all
things  to  leave  no  doubt  of  the  necessity  of  its  objects.  And
yet  several  attempts  have  been  made  to  introduce  the  syn-
thetical method  into  philosophy.  Thus  Spinoza,  in  particular,
begins  with  definitions.  He  says,  for  instance,  that  substance  is
the  causa  sui.  In  his  definitions  there  is  an  undoubted  deposit
of  speculative  truth,  but  it  takes  the  shape  of  dogmatic  asser-
tions. The  same  thing  is  also  true  of  Schelling.

230.]  (/3)  The  statement  of  the  second  element  of  the
notion,  i.  e.  of  the  character  of  the  universal  as  particularising,
is  given  by  Division  in  accordance  with  some  one  external
consideration.


318  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  [231.

Division  we  are  told  ought  to  be  complete.  That  requires
a  principle  or  ground  of  division  so  constituted,  that  the
division  based  upon  it  embraces  the  whole  extent  of  the  region
designated  by  the  definition  in  general.  Or,  in  more  precise
language,  the  main  point  in  division  is  that  the  principle  of
it  must  be  borrowed  from  the  nature  of  the  object  in  question.
If  this  condition  be  satisfied,  the  division  becomes  natural
and  not  merely  artificial,  that  is  to  say,  capricious.  Thus,  in
zoology,  the  ground  of  division  adopted  in  the  classification  of
the  mammalia  is  mainly  afforded  by  their  teeth  and  claws.  That
is  so  far  sensible,  as  the  mammals  themselves  are  distinguished
from  one  another  by  these  parts  of  their  bodies  ;  back  to  which
therefore  the  general  type  of  their  various  classes  may  be  traced.
In  every  case  the  genuine  division  must  be  determined  by  the
notion.  To  that  extent  a  division,  in  the  first  instance,  has
three  members :  but  as  particularity  exhibits  itself  as  double,
the  division  extends  to  the  number  of  even  four  parts.  In  the
sphere  of  mind  trichotomy  is  predominant,  a  circumstance  which
Kant  has  the  credit  of  bringing  into  notice.

231.]  (y)  In  the  concrete  individuality,  where  the  character
which  in  the  definition  is  simple  is  viewed  as  a  relation,  the
object  is  a  synthetical  nexus  of  distinct  characteristics.  It
is  a  Theorem.  Being  different,  these  characteristics  possess
but  a  mediated  identity.  To  supply  the  materials,  which  form
the  middle  terms,  is  the  office  of  Construction :  and  the  process
of  mediation  itself,  from  which  cognition  derives  the  necessity
of  that  nexus,  is  the  Demonstration.

As  the  difference  between  the  analytical  and  synthetical
methods  is  commonly  stated,  it  seems  wholly  dependent  on
our  will  which  of  the  two  we  employ.  Taking  as  our
hypothesis  the  concrete  thing  which  the  synthetic  method
presents  as  a  result,  we  can  analyse,  or  derive  from  it  as
consequences,  the  abstract  characteristics  which  made  up  the
hypothesis  and  the  material  for  the  proof.  The  algebraical
definitions  of  curved  lines  are  theorems  in  the  method  of
geometry.  Perhaps  even  the  Pythagorean  proposition,  if  made
the  definition  of  a  right-angled  triangle,  would  yield  to  analysis
those  propositions  which  geometry  had  already  demonstrated  on
its  behoof.  The  liberty  of  choosing  either  method  is  due  to


23i.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  319

the  external  presumption  from  which  both  alike  start.  So
far  as  the  nature  of  the  notion  is  concerned,  analysis  is  prior,
since  it  has  to  raise  the  given  material  with  its  empirical  con-
creteness  into  the  form  of  general  abstractions.  That  done,
they  can  be  set  in  the  front  of  the  synthetical  method  as
definitions.

That  these  methods,  however  indispensable  and  brilliantly
successful  in  their  own  province,  are  useless  for  philosophical
cognition,  is  self-evident.  They  have  pre-suppositions,  and
their  style  of  cognition  is  that  of  understanding,  under  the
canon  of  formal  identity.  Spinoza,  who  was  especially  ad-
dicted to  the  use  of  the  geometrical  method,  although  for
really  speculative  notions,  at  once  strikes  us  by  the  charac-
teristic formalism  of  it.  He  indeed  was  truly  speculative:
but  Wolf,  who  carried  the  method  out  into  a  gigantic  system
of  pedantry,  taught  even  in  his  subject-matter  a  metaphysic
of  the  understanding.  The  misapplication  of  these  methods
and  the  formalism  with  which  they  overspread  philosophy  and
science  has  passed  away  in  modern  times,  and  given  place
to  the  abuse  of  what  is  called  Construction.  Kant  brought
into  vogue  the  conception  that  mathematics  constructs  its
notions.  What  is  really  meant  by  the  phrase  is  that  mathe-
matics has  not  to  do  with  notions  at  all,  but  with  the  ab-
stract qualities  derived  from  the  perceptions  of  sense.  'Con-
struction of  notions'  has  since  been  the  name  given  to  a
statement  of  sensible  attributes  which  were  picked  up  from
perception,  quite  guiltless  of  any  influence  of  the  notion ;  and
the  additional  formalism  of  classifying  scientific  and  philoso-
phical objects  in  a  tabular  form  after  some  assumed  scheme,
but  in  other  respects  as  conceit  and  caprice  suggested,  has
in  like  manner  been  termed  Construction.  In  the  back-
ground of  all  this,  certainly,  there  is  a  dim  conception  of
the  idea,  of  the  unity  of  the  notion  and  objectivity :  a  con-
ception, too,  that  the  idea  is  concrete.  But  the  agency  of
construction,  as  it  is  called,  is  far  from  presenting  the  unity
adequately — a  unity  which  is  none  other  than  the  notion


320  THE DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  [232.

properly  so  called :  and  the  sensuously-concrete  object  of  per-
ception is  as  little  the  concrete  object  known  to  reason  and
the  idea.

Another  point  calls  for  notice.  Geometry  works  with  the
sensuous  but  abstract  perception  of  space;  and  in  space  it
experiences  no  difficulty  in  fixing  simple  characteristics  of
understanding.  To  geometry  alone  belongs  in  its  perfection
the  synthetical  method  of  finite  cognition.  In  its  course,  how-
ever (and  this  is  the  remarkable  point),  it  stumbles  upon  what
are  termed  irrational  and  incommensurable  quantities,  and  in
their  case  any  attempt  at  further  specification  drives  it  beyond
the  principle  of  the  understanding.  This  is  only  one  of  many
instances  in  terminology,  where  the  title  rational  is  perversely
applied  to  the  province  of  understanding,  while  we  stigmatise
as  irrational  that  which  shows  a  beginning  and  a  trace  of
rationality.  Other  sciences,  removed  as  they  are  from  the
simplicity  of  space  or  number,  often  and  necessarily  reach  a
point  where  understanding  can  no  longer  assist  them  to  ad-
vance :  but  they  get  over  the  difficulty  without  trouble.  They
make  a  break  in  the  strict  sequence  of  their  procedure,  and
assume  whatever  they  require,  though  it  be  the  reverse  of
what  preceded,  from  some  external  quarter, — opinion,  percep-
tion, conception  or  any  other  source.  The  want  of  all
consciousness  about  the  nature  of  its  methods  and  their  re-
lation to  the  content  has  awkward  consequences  for  finite
cognition  of  this  stamp.  It  cannot  see  that,  when  it  proceeds
by  definitions  and  divisions,  &c.  it  is  really  led  on  by  the
necessity  of  the  laws  of  the  notion.  It  cannot  see  when  it
has  reached  its  limit ;  nor,  if  it  have  transgressed  that  limit,
does  it  perceive  that  it  is  in  a  sphere,  where  the  categories  of
understanding  are  altogether  out  of  place,  however  much  it
may  rudely  apply  them.

232.]  The  necessity,  which  finite  cognition  produces  in  the
demonstration,  is,  in  the  first  place,  an  external  necessity,
intended  for  the  subjective  intelligence  alone.  But  in  neces-
sity as  such,  cognition  itself  has  left  behind  its  hypothesis


233,  234-] THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE NOTION.  321

and  starting-point,  which  consisted  in  accepting-  its  content
as  given  or  found.  Necessity  qnd  necessity  is  implicitly  the
notion  which  connects  self  with  self.  The  subjective  idea
has  thus  implicitly  reached  what  is  in  itself  and  for  itself
characterised, — a  something  not  given,  and  for  that  reason
immanent  in  the  subject.  It  has  passed  over  into  the  idea  of
Will.

The  necessity  which  cognition  reaches  by  means  of  the  de-
monstration is  the  reverse  of  what  formed  its  starting-point.
In  its  starting-point  cognition  had  a  given  and  a  contingent
content ;  but  now,  at  the  close  of  its  movement,  it  knows  its
content  to  be  necessary.  This  necessity  is  reached  through  the
means  of  subjective  agency.  Similarly,  subjectivity  at  starting
was  quite  abstract,  a  bare  tabula  rasa.  It  now  shows  itself
as  a  modifying  and  determining  principle.  By  this  means  we
pass  from  the  idea  of  cognition  to  that  of  will.  The  passage,
as  will  be  apparent  on  a  closer  examination,  means  that  the
universal,  to  be  truly  apprehended,  must  be  apprehended  as
subjectivity,  as  a  notion  self-moving,  active,  and  imposing
modifications.

(/3) Volition.

233-]  The  subjective  idea  as  what  is  characterised  in  itself
and  for  itself,  and  as  a  simple  content  which  is  equal  to  itself,
is  the  Good.  Its  tendency  or  instinct  towards  self-realisation
has  the  reverse  relation  to  what  that  of  the  idea  of  truth
has,  and  is  rather  directed  towards  moulding  the  world,  which
it  finds  before  it,  into  a  shape  conformable  to  its  purposed
End. — This  Volition  has,  on  the  one  hand,  the  certitude  of  the
nothingness  of  the  pre-supposed  object ;  but,  on  the  other,  as
finite,  it  pre-supposes  at  the  same  time  the  purposed  End  or
Aim  of  Good  as  a  subjective  idea  only,  and  also  pre-supposes
the  self-subsistence  of  the  object.

234.]  This  action  of  the  will  is  finite :  and  its  finitude
lies  in  the  contradiction  that  in  the  self-contradictory  features
of  the  objective  world  the  End  or  Aim  of  Good  is  just  as  much
not  executed  as  executed ;  that  the  end  in  question  is  stated
to  be  unessential  as  much  as  essential, — to  be  actual  and  at
the  same  time  merely  possible.  This  contradiction  presents

Y


322  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  [234.

itself  to  imagination  as  an  endless  progress  in  the  actualising
of  the  Good  ;  which  is  therefore  set  up  and  fixed  as  a  mere
c  ought/  or  goal  of  perfection.  In  point  of  form  however  this
contradiction  vanishes,  when  the  action  puts  an  end  to  the
subjectivity  of  the  purpose,  and  along  with  it  the  objectivity,
the  contrast  which  makes  the  two  finite ;  abolishing  subjectivity
as  a  whole  and  not  merely  the  one-sidedness  of  this  form  of
it.  (For  another  new  subjectivity  of  the  kind,  that  is,  a
new  generation  of  the  contrast,  is  not  distinct  from  that  which
is  supposed  to  be  obsolete.)  This  return  into  itself  is  at  the
same  time  the  recollection  into  itself  of  the  content,  which
is  the  Good '  and  the  implicitly  given  identity  of  the  two
sides, — it  is  a  recollection  of  the  pre-supposition  made  by  the
theoretical  point  of  view  (§  224),  viz.  that  the  object  is  identical
with  the  substance  and  truth  which  it  contains.

While  Intelligence  merely  proposes  to  take  the  world  as  it
finds  it,  the  Will  proposes  to  make  the  world  what  it  ought
to  be.  The  Will  looks  upon  the  immediate  and  given  present
not  as  a  solid  heing,  hut  as  a  mere  show  or  semblance  without
reality.  It  is  here  that  we  meet  those  contradictions  which
cause  so  much  trouble  in  the  field  of  abstract  morality.  This
position  in  its  bearings  on  practical  philosophy  is  the  one  taken
by  the  philosophy  of  Kant,  and  even  by  that  of  Fichte.  The
Good,  say  these  writers,  has  to  be  realised  :  we  have  to  work
in  order  to  produce  it :  and  the  Will  is  only  the  Good
actualising  itself.  If  the  world  then  were  as  it  ought  to
be,  the  action  of  the  Will  would  be  at  an  end.  The  Will
itself  therefore  requires  that  its  Aim  should  not  be  realised.
In  these  words,  a  correct  expression  is  given  to  the  finitude  of
the  Will.  But  this  finitude  was  not  meant  to  be  the  ultimate
point :  and  it  is  the  process  of  the  Will  itself  which  abolishes
the  finitude  and  the  contradiction  involved  in  that  finitude.
The  reconciliation  is  achieved,  when  the  Will  in  its  result
returns  to  the  pre-supposition  made  by  cognition.  In  other
words,  it  consists  in  the  unity  of  the  theoretical  and  practical
idea.  The  Will  knows  the  purposed  end  to  be  its  own,  and
Intelligence  apprehends  the  world  as  the  notion  actual.  This
is  the  right  attitude  of  rational  cognition.  Nullity  and  transit ori-
ness  constitute  only  the  superficial  features  and  not  the  real
essence  of  the  world.  That  essence  is  the  notion  in  itself  and
for  itself:  and  thus  the  world  is  itself  the  idea.  All  unsatisfied


235,  236.] THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  323

endeavour  ceases,  when  we  learn  that  the  final  purpose  of  the
world  is  accomplished  no  less  than  ever  accomplishing-  itself.
Generally  speaking,  this  is  the  belief  and  attitude  of  the  man ;
while  the  young  imagine  that  the  world  is  utterly  sunk  in
wickedness,  and  that  the  first  thing  needful  is  to  change  it
into  something  else.  The  religious  mind,  on  the  contrary,
views  the  world  as  ruled  by  Divine  Providence,  and  therefore
correspondent  with  what  it  ought  to  be.  But  this  harmony
between  the  '  is '  and  the  '  ought  to  be '  is  not  torpid  and
rigidly  stationary.  Good,  the  final  end  of  the  world,  has  being,
only  while  it  constantly  produces  itself.  And  the  world  of
mind  and  the  world  of  nature  continue  to  have  this  distinction,
that  the  latter  moves  only  in  a  recurring  cycle,  while  the  former
at  any  rate  also  makes  progress.

235.]  Thus  the  truth  of  the  Good  is  stated  or  laid  down
as  the  unity  of  the  theoretical  and  practical  idea.  Good  has
been  in  itself  and  for  itself  achieved.  The  objective  world
is  thus  in  itself  and  for  itself  the  Idea,  as  it  at  the  same  time
eternally  lays  itself  down  as  an  Aim  or  End,  and  by  action
brings  about  its  actuality.  This  life  which  has  returned  to
itself  from  the  differentiation  and  finitude  of  cognition,  and
which  the  notion  by  its  own  agency  has  made  identical  with
it,  is  the  Speculative  or  Absolute  Idea.

(c)  T/te  Absolute  Idea.

236-]  The  Idea  as  a  unity  of  the  Subjective  and  Objective
Idea,  is  the  notion  of  the  Idea,  which  the  Idea  as  such  confronts
as  its  object,  and  to  which  objectivity  is  found  in  the  Idea : —
an  Object  in  which  all  characteristics  have  coalesced.  This
unity  is  consequently  the  absolute  and  all  truth,  the  Idea
which  thinks  itself,  and  here  at  least  as  a  thinking,  or  Logical
Idea.

The  Absolute  Idea  is,  in  the  first  place,  the  unity  of  the
theoretical  and  practical  idea,  and  thus  at  the  same  time  the
unity  of  life  with  the  idea  of  cognition.  In  cognition  we  had
the  idea  in  the  shape  of  differentiation.  The  process  of  cogni-
tion has  issued  in  the  overthrow  of  this  differentiation  and
the  restoration  of  that  unity,  which  as  unity,  and  in  its  im-
mediacy, is  in  the  first  instance  the  Idea  of  Life.  The  defect

Y  2


324  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE NOTION.  [237.

of  life  lies  in  its  being  only  the  idea  in  itself  or  naturally :
whereas  cognition  is  in  an  equally  one-sided  way  the  merely
conscious  idea,  or,  the  idea  for  itself.  The  unity  and  truth
of  these  two  is  the  Absolute  Idea,  which  is  both  in  itself  and
for  itself.  Hitherto  we  have  dwelt  with  the  idea  in  develop-
ment through  its  various  grades,  but  now  the  idea  comes  to
confront  itself.  This  is  the  yorjo-ts  voTyo-ews,  which  Aristotle  long
ago  termed  the  supreme  form  of  the  idea.

237-]  Seeing  that  there  is  in  it  no  transition,  or  pre-sup-
position,  and  in  general  no  character  other  than  what  is
fluid  and  transparent,  the  Absolute  Idea  is  for  itself  the  pure
form  of  the  notion,  which  can  contemplate  its  content  as
its  own  self.  It  is  its  own  content,  in  so  far  as  it  distinguishes
itself  from  itself  in  thought;  the  one  of  the  two  things  dis-
tinguished is  an  identity  with  itself,  but  in  it  is  contained
the  sum  total  of  the  form  as  the  system  of  terms  describing
its  content.  This  content  is  the  system  of  Logic.  All  that
is  at  this  stage  left  for  the  idea  as  a  form,  is  the  Method  of  this
content, — the  specific  knowledge  of  the  value  and  currency  of
the  organic  elements  in  its  development.

To  speak  of  the  absolute  idea  may  suggest  the  conception
that  we  are  at  length  reaching  the  right  thing  and  the  sum
of  the  whole  matter.  It  is  certainly  possible  to  indulge  in  a
vast  amount  of  senseless  declamation  about  the  idea  absolute.
But  its  true  content  is  only  the  whole  system,  of  which  we
have  been  hitherto  examining  the  development.  It  may  ajso
be  said  in  this  strain  that  the  absolute  idea  is  the  universal,
but  the  universal  not  merely  as  an  abstract  form,  which  is
confronted  by  its  opposite  in  the  particular  content,  but  as
the  absolute  form,  into  which  all  the  categories,  the  whole
plenitude  of  the  content  which  it  states,  has  retired.  The
absolute  idea  may  in  this  respect  be  compared  to  the  old  man
who  utters  the  same  religious  propositions  as  the  child,  but
for  whom  they  are  pregnant  with  the  significance  of  a  lifetime.
Even  if  the  child  understands  the  truths  of  religion  which
these  propositions  include,  he  cannot  but  imagine  them  to  be
something  unconnected  with,  and  lying  outside  of,  the  whole
of  life  and  the  whole  of  the  world.  The  same  may  be  said
to  be  the  case  with  human  life  as  a  whole  and  the  occurrences
with  which  it  is  fraught.  All  work  is  directed  only  to  the
aim  or  end,  and  when  it  is  attained,  people  are  surprised  to


238.]  THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  325

find  nothing-  else  but  the  very  thing  which  they  had  wished
for.  The  interest  lies  in  the  whole  movement.  When  a
man  follows  up  his  life,  the  end  may  appear  to  him  very  narrow:
but  in  that  conclusion  the  whole  decursus  vitae  is  comprehended.
So,  too,  the  content  of  the  absolute  idea  is  the  whole  breadth
of  ground  which  has  passed  under  our  view  up  to  this  point.
Last  of  all  comes  the  perception,  that  the  whole  evolution  is
what  constitutes  the  content  and  the  interest.  It  is  indeed
the  prerogative  of  the  philosopher  to  see  that  everything1,
which,  when  taken  on  its  own  merits,  is  narrow  and  restricted,
receives  its  value  by  its  union  with  the  whole,  and  by  forming
an  organic  element  of  the  idea.  Thus  it  is  that  we  have  had
the  content  already,  and  what  we  have  now  is  the  knowledge
that  the  content  is  the  living  development  of  the  idea.  This
simple  retrospect  is  contained  in  the  form  of  the  idea.  'Each
of  the  stages  hitherto  reviewed  is  an  image  of  the  absolute,
but  at  first  in  a  limited  mode,  and  thus  it  is  forced  onwards  to
the  whole,  the  evolution  of  which  is  what  we  termed  Method.

238.]  The  organic  elements  of  the  Speculative  Method  are,
first  of  all,  (a)  the  Beginning,  which  is  Being  or  Immediacy  :
for  itself,  for  the  simple  reason,  that  it  is  the  beginning.
But  looked  at  from  the  speculative  idea,  Being  is  its  self-
specialising  act,  which  as  the  absolute  negativity  or  movement
of  the  notion  makes  a  judgment  and  states  itself  as  its  own
negative.  Being,  which  to  the  beginning  as  beginning  seems
mere  or  abstract  affirmation,  is  thus  rather  negation,  a  state
of  dependence,  derivation,  and  pre-supposition.  But  it  is  the
notion  of  which  Being  is  the  negation :  and  the  notion,  when
it  is  something  else,  is  identical  with  itself  throughout,  and
is  the  very  certainty  of  itself.  Being  therefore  is  the  notion
implicit,  before  it  has  been  explicitly  stated  as  a  notion.  This
Being  therefore  is  the  still  unspecified  notion, — a  notion  that
is  only  implicitly  or  immediately  specified  ;  and  may  be  equally
described  as  the  Universal.

When  it  means  immediate  being  the  beginning  is  taken
from  sensation  and  perception — which  form  the  initial  stage
in  the  analytical  method  of  finite  cognition.  When  it  means
universality,  it  is  the  beginning  of  the  synthetic  method.
But  since  the  Logical  Idea  is  as  much  a  universal  as  it  is  in


326  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.  [239.

Being- — since  it  is  pre-supposed  by  the  notion  as  much  as  it
itself  immediately  is,  its  beginning*  is  synthetical  as  well  as
analytical.

The  philosophical  method  is  analytical  as  well  as  synthetical,
not  indeed  in  the  sense  of  a  bare  juxtaposition  or  alternating-
employment  of  these  two  methods  of  finite  cognition,  but
rather  in  such  a  way  that  it  holds  them  merged  in  itself.
In  every  one  of  its  motions  therefore  it  displays  an  attitude
at  once  analytical  and  synthetical.  Philosophic  thought  pro-
ceeds analytically,  in  so  far  as  it  only  accepts  its  object,  the
idea,  and  while  allowing  it  its  own  way,  is  only,  as  it  were,
an  on-looker  at  its  movement  and  development.  To  this  extent
philosophising  is  wholly  passive.  Philosophic  thought  however
is  equally  synthetic,  and  evinces  itself  to  be  the  action  of  the
notion  itself.  To  that  end,  however,  there  is  required  an  effort
to  keep  off  the  ever  forward-pressing  throng  of  our  own  fancies
and  opinions.


239.]  (6)  The  Advance  from  this  Beginning  is  the  out-stated
judgment  of  the  idea.  The  immediate  universal,  as  the  notion
implicit,  is  the  dialectical  force  which  in  its  own  self  deposes
its  immediacy  and  universality  to  the  level  of  a  mere  stage
or  element.  Thus  the  negative  of  the  beginning,  or  the  true
first,  is  invested  with  its  specific  character :  it  is  for  one
thing  the  connexion  of  what  are  distinct — the  stage  of  Re-
flection.

Seeing  that  the  immanent  dialectic  only  states  explicitly
what  was  involved  in  the  immediate  notion,  this  advance  is
Analytical,  but  seeing  that  in  this  notion  this  distinction  was
not  yet  stated, — it  is  equally  Synthetical.

In  the  onward  movement  of  the  idea,  the  beginning  exhibits
itself  as  what  it  is  implicitly.  It  is  seen  to  be  mediated  and
derivative,  and  neither  to  have  proper  being  nor  proper  im-
mediacy. It  is  only  for  the  consciousness  which  is  itself
immediate,  that  Nature  forms  the  commencement  or  im-
mediacy, and  that  Mind  appears  as  what  is  mediated  by
Nature.  The  truth  is  that  Nature  is  due  to  the  statuting
of  Mind,  and  it  is  Mind  itself  which  gives  itself  a  pre-supposition
in  Nature.


240-242.] THE  DOCTRINE OF  THE  NOTION.  327

24O-]  The  abstract  form  of  the  continuation  or  advance  is,
in  Being-,  an  other  (or  antithesis)  and  transition  into  an  other;
in  the  Essence  showing-  or  reflection  in  its  opposite;  in  the
Notion,  the  distinction  of  the  individual  from  the  universality,
which  continues  itself  as  such  into,  and  forms  an  identity  with,
what  is  distinguished  from  it.

241.]  In  the  second  sphere  the  primarily  implicit  notion
has  come  as  far  as  showing,  and  thus  is  already  the  idea  in
germ.  The  development  of  this  sphere  becomes  a  retrogression
into  the  first,  just  as  the  development  of  the  first  is  a  transition
into  the  second.  It  is  only  by  means  of  this  double  move-
ment, that  the  difference  first  gets  its  due,  when  each  of  the
two  members  distinguished,  when  observed  in  its  own  self,
completes  itself  to  the  totality,  and  in  this  way  works  out
its  unity  with  the  other.  It  is  only  by  merging  the  one-
sidedness  of  both  in  their  own  selves,  that  the  unity  is  kept
from  becoming  one-sided.

242.]  The  second  sphere  developes  the  connexion  of  what
were  distinguished  to  what  it  primarily  is, — to  the  contradiction
in  its  own  Nature.  That  contradiction  is  seen  in  the  infinite
progress,  which  is  resolved  (c)  into  the  End,  where  the  differ-
enced  is  explicitly  stated  as  what  it  is  in  the  notion.  The
end  is  the  negative  of  the  first,  and  as  the  identity  with  that,  is
the  negativity  of  itself.  It  is  consequently  the  unity  in  which
both  of  these  Firsts,  the  immediate  and  the  real  First,  are
made  constituent  stages  in  thought,  merged,  and  at  the  same
time  preserved  in  the  unity.  The  notion,  which  from  its
implicitness  thus  comes  by  means  of  its  differentiation  and
the  merging  of  that  differentiation  to  close  with  itself,  is  the
realised  notion, — the  notion  which  contains  the  relativity  or
dependence  of  its  special  features  in  its  own  independence.
It  is  the  idea,  which  as  absolutely  first  (in  the  method)  regards
this  end  as  merely  the  annihilation  of  the  show  or  semblance,
which  made  the  beginning  appear  immediate,  and  made  itself
seem  a  result.  It  is  the  knowledge  that  the  idea  is  the  one
systematic  whole.


328  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION.

243.]  It  thus  appears  that  the  method  is  not  an  extraneous
form,  but  the  soul  and  notion  of  the  content,  from  which
its  only  distinction  is  that  the  dynamic  elements  of  the  notion
even  in  their  own  selves  come  in  their  own  specific  character
to  appear  as  the  totality  of  the  notion.  This  specific  character,
or  the  content,  leads  itself  with  the  form  back  to  the  idea;
and  thus  the  idea  is  presented  as  a  systematic  totality  which
is  only  one  idea,  of  which  the  several  elements  are  implicitly
the  idea  itself,  whilst  they  equally  by  the  dialectic  of  the
notion  produce  the  simple  independence  of  the  idea.  The  science
in  this  manner  -concludes  by  apprehending  the  notion  of  itself,
as  of  the  pure  idea,  for  which  the  idea  is.

244.]  The  idea  which  is  independent  or  for  itself,  when
viewed  on  the  point  of  this  its  unity  with  itself,  is  Perception,
or  Intuition,  and  the  idea  to  be  perceived  is  Nature.  But
as  intuition  the  idea  is  invested  with  the  one-sided  character-
istic of  immediacy,  or  of  negation,  by  means  of  an  external
reflection.  But  the  idea  is  absolutely  free :  and  its  freedom
means  that  it  does  not  merely  pass  over  into  life,  or  as  finite
cognition  allow  life  to  show  in  it,  but  in  its  own  absolute
truth  resolves  to  let  the  element  of  its  particularity,  or  of  the
first  characterisation  and  other-being,  the  immediate  idea,  as
its  reflection,  go  forth  freely  itself  from  itself  as  Nature.

We  have  now  returned  to  the  notion  of  the  idea  with  which
we  began.  This  return  to  the  beginning  is  also  an  advance.
We  began  with  Being,  abstract  Being :  where  we  now  are
we  also  have  the  idea  as  Being :  but  this  idea  which  has
Being  is  Nature.


INDEX.


A.

Absolute,  various  definitions of, 133,

I37»  I59>  '78,  M.  2?1.  288.

Abstraction,  252.

Accidents  (and  Substance),  235.

Activity,  229.

Actuality,  221  ;  its  relations  to  reason,
7,  222.

Affinity  (in  Chemism),  294.

Analogy,  280.

Analysis,  67.

Analytical  Method,  315.

Anselm,  quoted,  120,  280.

Antinomies  (Kant's),  82,  85.

Appearance,  205.

Apperception,  73.

Aristotle,  his  idealism,  n,  63,  223,  315;
his  Logic,  33,  274,  277  ;  on  the  dig-
nity of  philosophy,  38 ;  definition  of
life,  298  ;  on  the  Idea,  324.

Arithmetic,  classification  of  its  modes
of  operation,  163.

Atheism,  charged  against  Spinoza,  89,
236;  what  it  implies,  115.

Atomic  philosophy,  157  ;  in  physics
and  politics,  156.

Attraction,  a  principle  of  matter,  157.

Aufheben,  explained,  155.

Axioms  (mathematical),  278.

B.

Becoming,  139.

Beginning,  what  it  implies,  142.

Being,  as  descriptive  of  God,  60  ;  in  con-
trast to  thought  91 ;  the  category  of,
135  ;  Determinate  being,  144;  Being-
by-self,  147  ;  Being- for-self,  151.

Buddhists,  their  view  of  the  Absolute,
138-

C.

Categorical  judgment,  267  ;  syllogism,

282.

Categories  (Kant's),  70,  76.
Causality,  237.
Chance,  228.


Chaos  (mythical  conception  of  matter),
204.

Chemism  (a  relation  of  objectivity),  294.

Christianity,  a  religion  of  reason,  61  ;
of  faith,  106 ;  its  precept,  216;  a
religion  of  consolation,  232  ;  in-
fluence on  slavery,  252 ;  presents
God  as  Love,  289.

Cognition,  as  described  by  Kant,  73;
its  nature  and  methods,  315.

Comparison,  as  a  scientific  method,  187.

Conception,  its  nature  (distinguished
from  sense  and  thought),  30,  41  ;  pre-
liminary in  time  to  thought,  i.

Condition,  228  ;  supposed  to  be  the
nature  of  thought,  103.

Construction  (in  the  process  of  demon-
stration), 318.

Content  (as  opposed  to  form),  208.

Contingency,  226,

Continuous  (quantity),  162.

Contradiction,  190.

Copula  (in  judgments),  257.

Correctness,  distinguished  from truth,

3°S-
Cosmology  (a  branch  of  Metaphysics),

its  problems,  58  ;  criticised  by  Kant,

84  ;  its  proofs  of  God's  being,  86.
Critical  Philosophy,  its  main  thesis,  13,

36  ;  examined  at  length,  69-102.
Cunning  (in  Reason),  302.

D.

Definition,  its  elements,  317.

Degree  (intensive  magnitude),  165.

Demonstration,  true  nature  of,  87  ;  in
method,  318.

Descartes,  his  principle,  108  ;  his
agreement  with  Jacobi,  119;  his  dif-
ference from  Jacobi,  120  ;  his  proof
of  a  God,  287.

Design  (as  a  teleological  principle),
297.

Development,  a  corrective  to  innate
ideas,  112;  its  nature  and  action,
248.


330


INDEX.


Dialectic,  innate  in  reasoning,  14  ;  its
operations  explained  and  illustrated,
125;  distinguished  from  Scepticism,
129  ;  from  reflection,  125;  in  Socrates
and  Plato,  127.

Difference,  its  several  grades,  185.

Discrete  (quantity),  162.

Disjunctive  judgment,  268  ;  syllogism,
282.

Diversity,  186.

Division  (in  method),  317-

Dogmatism,  characteristic  of  Meta-
physics, 55.

Dualism,  in  Theology,  60 ;  in  the  Criti-
cal Philosophy,  98.


E.


Education,  its  office,  112;  mistake  in,
292.

Effect  (Cause  and),  237.

Eleatics,  their  doctrine,  135,  137.

Empirical,  science  in  its  relation  to
philosophy,  1 2  ;  Theory  or  School,  64 ;
its  principle,  65.

Encyclopaedia  (common  and  philoso-
phical), 20.

End  (in  teleology),  96,  297.

Essence,  178.

Eudaemonism  (before  Kant),  94.

Evil  (Good  and),  59  ;  origin  of,  45.

Existence,  197.

Experience,  cause  of  philosophic  pro-
gress, 7,  9,  15  ;  as  a  philosophic
principle,  64.


F.

Faith,  as  a  philosophic  principle,  105.

Fall  of  man,  an  allegory,  45.

Fate  (necessity),  233.

Fichte,  deduction  of  the  categories,
102  ;  his  'ought,'  151,  322  ;  defence
of  idealism,  207  ;  against  defining
God  as  Object,  289.

Figures  of  Syllogism,  three  in  number,

.277-

Final  Causes,  96,  299.

Finite,  99,  148  ;  thinking,  52.

Force,  212.

Form  (and  Content),  208  ;  (and  Mat-
ter), 203.

Freedom,  the  character  of  thought,  27,
100  ;  and  necessity,  59,  85.


G.

Genius  (defined  by  Kant),  96.
Geometry,  its  method,  320.


God,  logical  definitions  of,  133,  138,
180  ;  how  far  he  is  known,  61,  107  ;
proofs  for  his  Being  examined  and
defended,  3,  62,  86,  103,  285,  299  ;
proof  by  consensus  gentium,  115  ;  a
trinity,  161,  225,  273.

Goethe  quoted,  67,  123,  217,  220.

Good  (The),  59,  97.

Greek  Philosophers,  29  ;  Greek  Gods,
252.

Ground  (or  reason),  principle  of  suffi-
cient, 193.

H.

Haller  quoted,  168.

Heraclitus,  144.

Herder,  213.

History  (recording  facts),  220  ;  philo-
sophy of,  231.

Hume,  criticism  of  the  ideas  of  univer-
sality and  necessity,  69,  70,  81,  93.

Hypothetical  judgment,  267;  syllogism,
282.

I.

I,  its  universality,  32,  40 ;  source  of
the  categories,  74.

Idea,  304;  Absolute,  323;  Ideas  in-
nate, in.

Idealism,  subjective  (the  Kantian  philo-
sophy), 76,  80  ;  character  of  every
philosophy,  153.

Ideality,  153.

Identity,  philosophy  of,  166  ;  what  it
is,  181,  183  ;  Law  of,  184.

Immediacy,  16;  immediate  knowledge,
45,  103  seqq.

Individual,  254.

Induction,  280.

Infinity,  false,  149  ;  true,  151.

Intuition  (and  thought),  105.

Inward  (and  Outward),  217.


J.


Jacobi,  against  the  demonstrations  of
understanding,  89  ;  against  know-
ledge, 104;  compared  with  Descartes,
119  ;  on  Cause,  238.

Judgment,  256 ;  classification  of,  261 ;
qualitative,  262  ;  reflective,  265  ;  of
necessity,  267  ;  of  the  notion,  269  ;
distinguished  from  proposition,  258.

Judgment  (Eeflective  Faculty  of),  95.

K.

Kant,  referred  to,  13,  32  ;  his  doctrine
of  categories,  70  seqq. ;  his  philo-


INDEX.


331


sophy,  69-102  ;  theory  of  matter,
157;  doctrine  of  phenomena,  207;
on  modality,  223;  classification  of
judgments,  261;  on  teleology,  298;
his  moral  philosophy,  322.
Kind  (genus),  312.


L.


Law  (of  phenomenon),  208.

Leibnitz,  principle  of  variety,  187  ;  law

of  sufficient  reason,  195  ;  his  Monad-

ology,  288.
Life  (as  a  logical category),  310;  an

example  of  becoming,  144.
Likeness  (and  Unlikeness),  188.
Limit,  148.

Locke,  theory  of  knowledge,  316.
Logic, denned,  25  ; subdivided, 132  ;

common  logic,  247,  283.

M.

Magnitude,  159  ;  distinguished  from
quantity,  159.

Many  (and  One),  155.

Marks  (in  a  notion),  255.

Materialism,  consistent  result  of  em-
piricism, 100  ;  and  of  an  exclusively
mathematical  theory,  160.

Mathematics,  their  proper  place,  161.

Matter  (and  form),  203  ;  matters  in  a
thing,  20 1.

Mean  (middle  term),  275.

Means  (and  ends),  300.

Measure  (as  a  logical  category),  171,
173-

Mechanism,  290  ;  mechanical  theories,
291  ;  distinguished  from  chemism,
•294-

Memory,  its  mechanical  nature,  392.

Metaphysics  (pre-Kantian),  their  me-
thod and  branches,  50  seqq.

Method,  various  for  apprehending
truth,  44;  analytical,  315;  synthetic,
316  ;  of  philosophy,  324.

Middle  (Law  of  Excluded),  189.

Monads,  288.

Mysticism,  131.

N.

Necessity  (and  freedom),  59,  85  ;  and
universality,  69  ;  its  nature  analysed,
230-234  ;  its  relation  to  the  notion,
243-

Negation,  147  j  Negative,  189.

Nemesis,  172.

Newton,  referred  to,  10,  215.

Nothing  (and  Being),  137.

Notion,  contrasted  with  Being,  91  ;  its


theory,  247  seqq.  ;  classifications  of,

245-

Number,  163  ;  the  Pythagorean  doc-
trine of,  169  ;  as  symbols,  170.

0.

Object  (as  opposed  to  Subject),  284.
Objective  and  Subjective,  their  various

meanings,  72.
One  (and  Many),  155.
Ontology  (branch  of  Metaphysics),  56  ;

ontologies!  proof,  91.
Opposition  (in  logic),  189.
Outward  (and  Inward),  217.

P.

Pantheism,  in  Metaphysics,  60 ;  in
Spinoza,  89,  237;  its  maxim,  143.

Paralogism  (as  used  by  Kant),  81,  82.

Parmenides,  137.

Particular,  251.

Parts  (and  Whole),  211.

Phenomena  (in  Kant),  79 ;  as  a  general
category,  208.

Phenomenology  of  the  Spirit,  49.

Philosophy,  distinguished  from  thought
in  general,  2,  6 ;  its  scope,  7  ;  me-
thod, 325  ;  History  of,  18,  136  ;
must  be  a  system,  19  ;  sub-divided,

33.

Plato,  reminiscence  of  ideas,  in,  112;
his  Dialectic,  127;  on  the  finite,
149;  his  Philebus,  152;  relation  to
Aristotle,  223.

Pneumatology  (branch  of  Metaphysics),

57-

Polarity  (in  Physics),  191.
Porosity,  205.
Positive  (and  Negative),  189  ;  positive

elements  in  the  sciences,  21.
Possibility,  223.
Properties  (of  a  thing),  200.
Proverbs  quoted,  225.
Psychology,  rational,  57  ;  classifications

in,  212.
Pythagoras,  169.

Q.

Quality  (special),  146  ;  in  general,  135,

158-

Quantity  (special),  159 ;  in  general,
159-172.

R.

Ratio  (quantitative),  171.
Reality,  147.

Reason,  faculty  of  the  Unconditioned,
78  ;  theoretical,  73  ;  practical,  93  ;


332


INDEX.


as  a  stage  of  logical  truth,  125-132  ;

as  a  syllogism,  271.
Reciprocity (Action and Re-action),

241.
Reflection,  as  a  mode  of  thought,  34 ;

distinguished  from  dialectic,  126.
Reinhold,  on  a  beginning  of  philosophy,

13-

Relation  (in  Essence),  209.
Repulsion,  156.
Rousseau,  on  generality,  252.
Rule  (or  Measure),  173.


S.

Scepticism,  ancient,  44 ;  opposed  to
dogmatism,  55 ;  modern,  69  ;  pro-
posed as  a  beginning  of  philosophy,
lai;  its  right  function  in  thought,
129.

Schoolmen,  their  logic,  33  ;  definition
of  God,  58  ;  relation  to  metaphysics,
63  ;  and  to  Christianity,  68.

Science,  relation  to  philosophy,  12  ;
opposed  by  religion,  215.

Sensation,  described,  30,  32  ;  Common
Sense,  107.

Sextus  Empiricus,  129.

Sin,  original,  47.

Slavery,  its  abolition,  252.

Socrates,  his  method,  127.

Somewhat  (a  logical  category),  146.

Sophists,  held  ideas  to  be  adventitious,
112  ;  opposed  by  Socrates,  127  ;  na-
ture of  Sophistry,  196.

Soul,  object  of  psychology,  57  ',  error
alleged  by  Kant  to  exist  in  the  de-
scription of  the  soul,  80;  the  notion
•which  is  realised  in  the  body,  310.

Speculation,  as  describing  concrete  and
positive  reason,  129-132  ;  as  opposed
to  dogmatism,  56.

Spinoza,  charged  with  Pantheism  and
Atheism,  89,  236  ;  definition  of  God,
119,  136,  287;  on  determination,
147  ;  the  imaginary  infinite,  168 ;
his  method,  317,  319.

State,  atomic  theory  of  the,  157;
mechanical,  293.

Subjective,  72  ;  Subjectivity,  232.

Substance  (category  of),  235.


Syllogism, 270  ; qualitative, 273  ;

quantitative,  278  ;  of  reflection,  279  ;

of  necessity,  282;  universal  form  of

things,  271;  in  mechanism,  293  ;  and

teleology,  300.
Synthetic  Method,  316.

T.

Taste  (defined  by  Kant),  96.

Teleology,  296.

Theology  (natural),  60-62  ;  criticised  by
Kant,  86.

Theorem  (in  method),  318.

Thing,  200 ;  in-itself,  77,  199.

Thought,  its  meaning  and  activity
popularly  understood,  29-48  ;  sub-
jective, 33  ;  objective,  48 ;  distin-
guished from  figurate  conception,  I,

31-

Transcendent,  80 ;  transcendental,  74-
Truth,  the  object  of  philosophy,  i,  26  ;

described, 43 ;  distinguished from

correctness,  263,  305  ;  found  in  the

Idea,  304.

U.

Unconditioned,  the,  78.

Understanding,  its  finitude,  48 ;  its
action  described,  122-125.

Universal,  characteristic  product  of
thought,  29  ;  distinguished  from  par-
ticular, 1 8  ;  element  in  notion,  251.

Universality  (and  necessity),  69.

Urtheil,  256.

Utility,  a  principle  of  science,  299.

V.

Volition  (as  a  logical  category),  321.

W.

Wesen,  180.

Whole  (and  Parts),  211.

Will,  or  practical  reason,  93  ;  how  far
it  is  free,  227  ;  its  action,  322.

World  (object  of  Cosmology),  58  ;  dis-
cussed by  Kant,  82.

Z.

Zeno,  referred  to,  145, -167.
