Philosophy of Right (G. W. F. Hegel (S. W. Dyde, trans.), 1896)
==========================================================
Hegel's political philosophy: ethical life, civil society, and the state; the root of modern political theory. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (cu31924014578979).

Uo^, 






CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 




UNDERGRADUATE LIBRARY 



Cornell University Library 
B 2923.E5D9 1896 



Hegel's Philosophy of right, 




3 1924 014 578 979 




A Cornell University 
y Library 



The original of tliis book is in 
tlie Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924014578979 



HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT 



GEORGE BELL & SONS 

LONDON : YORK ST., COVENT GARDEN 
NEW YORK : 66, FIFTH AVENUE, AND 
BOMBAY ■ S3, ESPLANADE ROAD 
CAMBRIDGE: DEIGHTON, BELL & CO. 



HEGEL'S 
PHILOSOPHY OF, RIGHT 



TRANSLATED BY 

S. W. DYDE, M.A., D.Sc. 

PROFESSOR OF MENTAL PHILOSOPHY, QUEEN'S UNIVERSITY. 
KINGSTON, CANADA 




LONDON 

GEORGE BELL AND SONS 

1896 



URIS LIBRARY* 






G:^ji17^ 



CHISWICK PRESS :— CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO. 
T.OOKS COURTj CHANCERY LANE, LONDON. 



WITH THE NAME OP 

PEOFESSOR WATSOlSr, 

WHO GATE ME 

MT FIKST LESSONS, NOT IN HEGEL ONLY, BUT IN 

PHILOSOPHY, IT GIVES ME PLEASUEE TO 

CONNECT THIS TBANSLATION. 



CONTENTS. 

Translator's Preface page ix 

Author's Preface page xv 

Introduction. Conception of the Philosophy of Eight, 

Conception of the Will, of Freedom, and of Right §§ 1-32 
Division of the Work .... ... 33 

FIRST PART. 

abstract right. 

§§ .34-104. 

First Section. Property . . §§ 41-71 

a. Possession . . . 54-58 

6. Use . 59-64 

c. Relinquishment .... 65-70 

Transition from Property to Contract . 71 

Second Section. Contract . . . 72-81 

TMrd Section. Wrong . . . 82-104 

a. Unpremeditated (Civil) Wrong . . 84-86 

b. Fraud . . 87-89 

V. Violence and Crime ... . 90-103 

Transition from Right to Morality . . 104 

SECOND PART. 

MORALITY. 
§§ 105-141. 

First Section. Purpose and Responsibility . . . 115-118 

Second Section. Intention and Well-being . . . 119-128 

Third Section. The Good and Conscience . . . 129-141 

Moral Forms of Evil. Hypocrisy, Probability, good 

Intention, Conviction, Irony .... note to § 140 

Transition from Morality to the Ethical System . . . 141 



CONTENTS. 



THIRD PART. 

ETHICAL OBSERVANCE. 
§§ 142-360. 

First Section. The Family . . . 

A. Marriage . . . 

B. Family Means . 

C. Education of Children and Disruption of the Family 
Second Section. The Civic Community 

A. The System of Wants 
a. Want and its Satisfaction 
6. Labour .... 
t. Wealth and the Classes or Estates 

B. Administration of Justice 
a. Right as Law 
6. Law as Established 
c. The Court i . 

C. Police and the Corporation 

a. The Police . 

b. The Corporation . 
Third Section. The State 

A. Constitutional Law . 

I. The State Constitution 
a. The Prince 
h. The Executive . 
c. The Legislature 

II. Foreign Polity 

B. International Law . 

C. World-history . 



§§ 158-181 
161-169 
170-172 
173-181 
182-256 
189-208 
190-195 
196-198 
199-208 
209-229 
211-214 
215-218 
219-229 
230-256 
231-249 
250-256 
257-360 
260-329 
272-320 
275-286 
287-297 
298-320 
321-329 
330-340 
341-360 



TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE. 

In his preface, Hegel's editor, Professor Eduard Gans, 
makes some interesting remarks upon the " Philosophy of 
Eight," and informs us as to the way in which the matter of 
the book had heen. put together. He dates his preface 
May 29th, 1833, thirteen years, lacking one month, later 
than Hegel's date for the completion of his own preface, 
and eighteen mouths after the philosopher's death. 
Hegel had, it would appear, lived to see the outbreak 
of unusual opposition to his political conceptions, and 
so Dr. Grans begins : " The wide-spread misunderstanding, 
which prevents the recognition of the real value of 
the present work, and stands in the way of its general 
acceptance, urges me, now that an enlarged edition of it 
has been prepared, to touch upon some things, which 
I would rather have left simply to increasing philosophic 
insight." He goes on to give three reasons for placing 
great value upon this work of Hegel's. 

1. He thinks that the highest praise is due to the author 
for the way in which he does justice to every side of the 
subject, even investigating questions which have only a 
slight bearing upon the matter in hand, and thus erecting 
a marveUouslv complete structure. This fact is more 
striking, thinks Dr. Grans, than the foundation of the 
work, which had been already in a measure laid by Eant 
and TJousseau. 

2. A second achievement of the " Philosophy of Eight " 
is the abolition of the distinction, so prominent in the 



X translator's preface. 

seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, between law and 
politics. Even in our own time, remarks the editor, many 
think of law as the skeleton, as it were, of the different 
forms of the state, as an abstract thing devoid of life and 
movement. Politics, again, they conceive to be more 
mobile and a function of a living thing. Law is thus said 
to stand to politics as anatomy to physiology. This diverg- 
ence, which was unknown to Plato and Aristotle, had its 
origin in the separatist character of the Middle Ages, and 
was brought to completion in the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries. Hegel, gathering up the experience 
of centuries, returns to the form of the ancient state, and 
counts law and politics as organic phases of one single 
whole. 

3. The " Philosophy of Eight " suggests a two-fold 
place for the principle of natural right. In its scientific 
treatment this principle precedes the philosophy of right, 
and it also comes at the close. That part of the " Ency- 
clopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences," which precedes 
the discussion there given of right, morality, and the ethical 
system, is designated the subjective mind or spirit, and 
from that ground natural right proceeds. Skipping over 
the region occupied by the " Philosophy of Right," dealing 
with the objective spirit, natural right reappears in world- 
history. Dr. Gans means that the right of the world- 
spirit, transcending, as it does, the individual and the 
nation, is a return at a higher level to natural right. 
Nations are, as he says, so many streams discharging 
themselves into the world-ocean of history. 

The three points of Professor G-ans may be summarized 
thus: (1.) Hegel is thorough and systematic ; (2.) He has 
so clear and penetrating a conception of his main idea that 
he is able to unify sciences, which had seemed to be 
mutually exclusive ; (3.) A right of nature may be viewed 
as a phase of any stage of an expanding idea, and can be 
understood only by reference to the exact stage which the 



translator's preface. xi 

exposition has reached. Hence a right of nature, like sub- 
jectivity or objectivity, may mean quite different things at 
different points in the unfolding of the systemi. 

The single word here added is meant to accent what is 
implied in the third of these remarks. The " Philosophy 
of Right " is really only one part of a system. In the third 
part of his " Encyclopaedia," when he reaches the subject of 
Eight, Hegel says (note to § 487) that he may deal briefly 
with this topic, since he has already gone exhaustively into 
it in his " Philosophy of Eight." Hence as this work 
treats of an essential stage in the evolution of spirit, whose 
whole nature is unfolded scene by scene in the " Encyclo- 
paedia," it is not accurate to speak of Hegel's ethical prin- 
ciples as based upon his logic. The more concrete cate- 
gories of the " Philosophy of Eight " are related each to the 
next in the same way as are the more abstract categories 
treated of in the logic. But the relation of the ethics to 
the logic is not that of superstructure to foundation or of 
application to principle, but of the more concrete to the less 
concrete stage of evolution. One single life runs through 
the whole organism of the work. Hence, Dr. G-ans is not 
wrong in stating that this work is an essential part of 
Hegel's philosophy, and adding that with the entire system 
it m.ust stand or fall. Eather, correcting the dramatic 
tone of the remark, he says in effect that standing and 
faUing are not the only possibilities in the case of a great 
philosophy. Nor, agaia, can the different works of a 
genuine philosopher be separated into those that are gold 
and those that are alloy. His work as a whole becomes a 
common possession, and in that way makes ready, as Dr. 
G-ans say, for a higher thought. The unqualified rejection of 
any part of a philosopher's work is a challenge to his claim 
to rank as a great thinker. But the only challenge which 
he could himself accept as genuine, is the one which is 
prepared to call in question the basis of his entire system. 

Perhaps in the " Philosophy of Eight " the average 



xii translator's preface. 

philosophical worker comes more quickly to understand 
something of Hegel than in his other writings. At least 
Hegel in this book is more likely to collide directly with 
the reader's prepossessions, and therefore more speedily 
stimulates him to form his own view. No genuine philo- 
sopher will hesitate to show what form his principles 
assume in relation to tangible human interests. Hegel 
exhibits philosophic breadth by dressing up his ideas for 
the thoroughfare, where the every-day thinker finds it pos- 
sible to hob and nob with the master. Yet the student 
must be again cautioned not to fancy that, because he 
" feels sure " that Hegel's conception of the family, of the 
monarch, or of war is defective, he has left his author 
behind. Such a feeling is at best only a first step, and the 
student must go on to know how these practical ideas 
of Hegel are necessitated by his general conception of the 
process of spirit. And the sure feeling can survive only if 
it is transformed into a consistent criticism of this funda- 
mental process. The stronghold of Hegel may not be im- 
pregnable, but it will not fall on a mere summons to sur- 
render. 

The object of the translator is to let Hegel speak at large 
for himself. What liberties have been taken with the 
Hegelian vocabulary are illustrated by the index of words 
to be found at the close of this volume. It has been con- 
sidered quite within the province of a translator to 
ameliorate Hegel's rigid phraseology. Even as it is the 
English would read more smoothly, had the words " the 
individual," " the subject," etc., been more frequently used 
instead of " particularity " and " subjectivity," but the 
substitution casts a dififerent shade over Hegel's thought. 
Apart from the words, the reader of German will miss also 
Hegel's brackets and italics. 

As Dr. G-ans has pointed out, the present work is in form 
made up of three elements, the paragraphs proper, the notes 
and the additions. The paragraphs comprised the entire 



TRANSLATOR S PREFACE. XIU 

book as it was originally issued. Then Hegel added wHat lie 
in all his references to them calls Notes, although they are not 
expressly so designated in the German text. For the sake 
of simplicity this term has been used throughout the book. 
After these notes by Hegel are frequently found Additions 
made by students of Hegel from his oral lectures and com- 
ments. It is but bare justice to the editors to say that ' 
these additions usually cast a welcome light upon the text. 
Yet as they are mere additions, not even supervised by 
Hegel, it is no matter of surprise that the student; in 
beginning a new paragraph must, in order to get the direct 
connection, revert to the closing sentences not of the addi- 
tion or note but of the preceding paragraph. It ought to 
be some comfort to the earnest reader to have in his hand 
all that Hegel on this subject thought to be worth saying. 
Mistakes the translator has no doubt made, and it would 
be for him fortunate if workers in this department were 
sufficiently interested in this translation to point them out. 

S. W. Dtdb. 
Queen's University, 

Kingston, Canada, 

March 23rd, 1896. 



ERRATA. 

P. 48, last line, read "consists not in its satisfying." 

P. 78, 1. 8 from the end, /or " Anf.," read " Anf." 

P. 87, 1. 6, /or "contigent," read " contingent." 

P. 105, 1. 4, for " soul of freedom," read " soil of freedom." 

P. 107, 1. 5, delete " purpose or." 1, 

P. 109, 1. 7 from the end, /or "subjeetive," read " subjective." 

P. 115, 1. 34, read " since man in acting must deal with exter- 
nality." 

P. 156, 1. 6 from the end, for "independent," read "self-depen- 
dent." ' 

P. 167, 1. 16, read "such discernment as is implied in the judgment 
that," etc. 

P. 181, 1. 1,/or " ever," read "even." 

P. l68, 1. 12, for "and mutual relation," read "or mutual rela- 
tion. " 

P. 292, 1. 18, for "mere," read "merely." 

P. 302, 1. 23, for "authorities," read "officers." 



AUTHOR'S PREFACE. 

The immediate occasion for publishing these outlines is 
the need of placing in the hands of my hearers a guide to 
my professional lectures upon the Philosophy of Eight. 
Hitherto I have used as lectures that portion of the 
" Encyclopaedia of the Philosophic Sciences " (Heidelberg, 
1817,) which deals with this subject. The present work 
covers the same ground in a more detailed and systematic 
way. 

But now that these outlines are to be printed and given 
to the general public, there is an opportunity of explaining 
points which in lecturing would be commented on orally. 
Thus the notes are enlarged in order to include cognate or 
conflicting ideas, further consequences of the theory advo- 
cated, and the like. These expanded notes will, it is 
hoped, throw light upon the more abstract substance of 
the text, and present a more complete view of some of the 
ideas current in our own time. Moreover, there is also 
subjoined, as far as was compatible with the purpose of a 
compendium, a number of notes, ranging over a still 
greater latitude. A compendium proper, like a science, 
has its subject-matter accurately laid out. With the 
exception, possibly, of one or two slight additions, its chief 
task is to arrange the essential phases of its material. 
This material is regarded as fixed and known, just as the 
form is assumed to be governed by well-ascertained rules. 
A treatise in philosophy is usually not expected to be con- 
structed on such a pattern, perhaps because people sup- 

6 



xvi author's preface. 

pose that a philosophical product is a Penelope's web 
which must be started anew every day. 

This treatise differs from the ordinary compendium 
mainly in its method of procedure. It must be under- 
stood at the outset that the philosophic way of advancing 
from one matter to another, the general speculative 
method, which is the only kind of scientific proof avail- 
able in philosophy, is essentially different from every 
other. Only a clear insight into the necessity for this dif- 
ference can snatch philosophy out of the ignominious con- 
dition into which it has fallen in our day. True, the 
logical rules, such as those of definition, classification, and 
inference are now generally recognized to be inadequate 
for speculative science. Perhaps it is nearer the mark to 
say that the inadequacy of the rules has been felt rather 
than recognized, because they have been counted as mere 
fetters, and thrown aside to make room for free speech 
from the heart, fancy and random intuition. But when 
reflection and relations of thought were required, people 
unconsciously fell back upon the old-fashioned method of 
inference and formal reasoning. — In my " Science of 
Logic " I have developed the nature of speculative science 
in detail. Hence in this treatise an explanation of method 
will be added only here and there. In a work which is 
concrete, and presents such a diversity of phases, we may 
safely neglect to display at every turn the logical process, 
and may take for granted an acquaintance with the scien- 
tific procedure. Besides, it may readily be observed that 
the work as a whole, and also the construction of the 
parts, rest upon the logical spirit. From this standpoint, 
especially, is it that I would like this treatise to be under- 
stood and judged. In such a work as this we are dealing 
with a science, and in a science the matter must not be 
separated from the form. 

Some, who are thought to be taking a profound view, 
are heard to say that everything turns upon the subject- 



author's preface. xvii 

matter, and that the form may be ignored. The business 
of any writer, and especially of the philosopher, is, as they 
say, to discover, utter, and diffuse truth and adequate 
conceptions. In actual practice this business usually con- 
sists in warming up and distributing on all sides the same 
old cabbage. Perhaps the result of this operation may be 
to fashion and arouse the feelings ; though even this 
small merit may be regarded as superfluous, for " they 
have Moses and the prophets: let them hear them." 
Indeed, we have great cause to be amazed at the preten- 
tious tone of those who take this view. They seem to 
suppose that up till now the dissemination of truth 
throughout the world has been feeble. They think that 
the warmed-up cabbage contains new truths, especially to 
be laid to heart at the present time. And yet we see that 
what is on one side announced as true, is driven out and 
swept away by the same kind of worn-out truth. Out of 
this hurly-burly of opinions, that which is neither new nor 
. old, but permanent, cannot be rescued and preserved 
except by science. 

Further, as to rights, ethical observances, and the state, 
the truth is as old as that in which it is openly displayed 
and recognized, namely, the law, moraUty, and religion. 
But as the thinking spirit is not satisfied with possessing 
the truth in this simple way, it must conceive it, and thus 
acquire a rational form for a content which is already 
rational implicitly. In this way the substance is justified 
before the bar of free thought. Free thought cannot be 
satisfied with what is given to it, whether by the external 
positive authority of the state or human agreement, or by 
the authority of internal feelings, the heart, and the 
witness of the spirit, which coincides unquestioningly with 
the heart. It is the nature of free thought rather to pro- 
ceed out of its own self, and hence to demand that it 
should know itself as thoroughly one with truth. 

The ingenuous mind adheres with simple conviction to 



xviii author's preface. 

the truth which is publicly acknowledged. On this foun. 
dation it builds its conduct and way of life. In opposition 
to this naive view of things rises the supposed difficulty of 
detecting amidst the endless difEerences of opinion anything 
of universal application. This trouble may easily be sup- 
posed to spring from a spirit of earnest inquiry. But 
in point of fact those who pride themselves upon the exist- 
ence of this obstacle are in the plight of him who cannot 
see the woods for the trees. The confusion is all of their 
own making. Nay, more : this confusion is an indication 
that they are in fact not seeking for what is universally 
valid in right and the ethical order. If they were at pains 
to find that out, and refused to busy themselves with 
empty opinion and minute detail, they would adhere to and 
act in accordance with substantive right, namely the com- 
mands of the state and the claims of society. But a 
further difficulty lies in the fact that man thinks, and seeks 
freedom and a basis for conduct in thought. Divine as his 
right to act in this way is, it becomes a wrong, when it 
takes the place of thinking. Thought then regards itself 
as free only when it is conscious of being at variance with 
what is generally recognized, and of setting itself up as 
something original. 

The idea that freedom of thought and mind is indicated 
only by deviation from, or even hostility to what is every- 
where recognized, is most persistent with regard to the 
state. The essential task of a philosophy of the state 
would thus seem to be the discovery and publication of a 
new and original theory. When we examine this idea and 
the way it is applied, we are almost led to thiuk that 
no state or constitution has ever existed, or now exists. 
We are tempted to suppose that we must now begin 
and keep on beginning afresh for ever. We are to fancy 
that the founding of the social order has depended upon 
present devices and discoveries. As to nature, philosophy, 
it is admitted, has to understand it as it is. The philo- 



AUTHOR S PREFACE. XIX 

sophers' stone must be concealed somewhere, we say, in 
nature itself, as nature is in itself rational. Knowledge 
must, therefore, examine, apprehend and conceive the 
reason actually present in nature. Not with the super-, 
ficial shapes and accidents of nature, but with its eternal 
harmony, that is to say, its inherent law and essence, 
knowledge has to cope. But the ethical world or the 
state, which is in fact reason potently and permanently 
actualized in self-consciousness, is not permitted to enjoy 
the happiness of being reason at all.' On the contrary the 

^ There are two kinds of laws, laws of nature and iaws of right. 
The laws of nature are simply there, and are valid as they are. 
They cannot be gainsaid, although in certain cases they may be 
transgressed. In order to know laws of nature, we must set to 
work to ascertain them, for they are true, and only our ideas of 
them can be false. Of these laws the measure is outside of us. 
Our knowledge adds nothing to them, and does not further their 
operation. Only our knowledge of them expands. The knowledge 
of right is partly of the same nature and partly different. The 
laws of right also are simply there, and we have to become ac- 
quainted with them. In this way the citizen has a moi-e or less 
firm hold of them as they are given to him, and the jurist also 
abides by the same standpoint. But there is also a distinction. 
In connection with the laws of right the spirit of investigation is 
stirred up, and our attention is turned to the fact that the laws, 
because they are diflferent, are not absolute. Laws of right are 
established and handed down by men. The inner vpice must 
necessarily collide or agree with them. Man cannot be limited to 
what is presented to him, but maintains that he has the standard 
of right within himself. He may be subject to the necessity and 
force of external authority, but not in the same way as he is to the 
necessity of nature ; for always his inner being says to him how a 
thing ought to be, and within himself he finds the confirmation or 
lack of confirmation of what is generally accepted. In nature the 
highest truth is that a law is. In right a thing is not valid be- 
cause it is, since every one demands that it shall conform to his 
standard. Hence arises a possible conflict between what is and 
what ought to be, between absolute unchanging right and the 
arbitrary decision of what ought to be right. Such division and 
strife occur only on the soil of the spirit. Thus the unique privi- 



XX author's preface. 

spiritual universe is looked, upon as abandoned by Grod, and 
given over as a prey to accident and chance. As in this 
way the divine is eliminated from the ethical world, truth 
must be sought outside of it. And since at the same time 
reason should and does belong to the ethical world, truth, 
being divorced from reason, is reduced to a mere specula- 
tion. Thus seems to arise the necessity and duty of every 
thinker to pursue a career of his own. Not that he needs' 
to seek for the philosophers' stone, since the philosophizing 
of our day has saved him the trouble, and every would-be 
thinker is convinced that he possesses the stone already 
without search. But these erratic pretensions are, as it 
indeed happens, ridiculed by all who, whether they are 
aware of it or not, are conditioned in their lives by the 

lege of the spirit would appear to lead to discontent and unhappi- 
ness, and frequently we are directed to nature in contrast with the 
fluctuations of life. But it is exactly in the opposition arising 
between absolute right, and tliat whicli the arbitrary will seeks to 
make right, that the need lies of knowing thoroughly what right 
is. Men must openly meet and face their reason, and consider the 
rationality of right. This is the subject-matter of our science in 
contrast with jurisprudence, which often has to do merely with 
contradictions. Moreover the world of to-day has an imperative 
need to make this investigation. In ancient times respect and 
reverence for the law were universal. But now the fashion of the 
time has taken another turn, and thought confronts everything 
which has been approved. Theories now set themselves in oppo- 
sition to reality, and make as though they were absolutely true 
and necessary. And there is now more pressing need to know and 
conceive the thoughts upon right. Since thought has exalted itself 
as the essential form, we must now be careful to apprehend right 
also as thought. It would look as though the door were thrown 
open for every casual opinion, when thought is thus made to super- 
vene upon right. But true thought of a thing is not an opinion, 
but the conception of the thing itself. The conception of the thing 
does not come to us by nature. Every man has fingers, and may 
have brush and colours, but he is not by reason of that a painter. 
So is it with thought. The thought of right is not a thing which 
every man has at first hand. True thinking is thorough acquaint- 
ance with the object. Hence our knowledge must be scientific. 



author's preface. xxi 

state, and find their minds and wills satisfied in it. These, 
who include the majority if not all, regard the occupation 
of philosophers as a game, sometimes playful, sometimes 
earnest, sometimes entertaining, sometimes dangerous, but 
always as a mere game. Both this restless and frivolous 
reflection and also this treatment accorded to it might 
safely be left to take their own course, were it not that 
betwixt them philosophy is brought into discredit and con- 
tempt. The most cruel despite is done when every one is 
convinced of his ability to pass judgment upon, and discard 
philosophy without any special study. No such scorn is 
heaped upon any other art or science. 

In point of fact the pretentious utterances of recent 
philosophy regarding the state have been enough to justify 
any one who cared to meddle with the question, in the con- 
viction that he could prove himself a philosopher by 
weaving a philosophy out of his own brain. Notwith- 
standing this conviction, that which passes for philosophy 
has openly announced that truth cannot be known. The 
truth with regard to ethical ideals, the state, the govern- 
ment and the constitution ascends, so it declares, out of 
each man's heart, feeling, and enthusiasm. Such declara- 
tions have been poured especially into the eager ears of the 
young. The words " God giveth truth to his chosen in 
sleep " have been applied to science ; hence every sleeper 
has numbered himself amongst the chosen. But what he 
deals with in sleep is only the wares of sleep. Mr. Fries,' 
one of the leaders of this shallow-minded host of philo- 
sophers, on a public festive occasion, now become celebrated, 
has not hesitated to give utterance to the following notion 
of the state and constitution: " When a nation is ruled by a 
common spirit, then from below, out of the people, will 
come Ufe sufficient for the discharge of all public business. 

' I have already had occasion to notice the shallowness of his 
science. See " Science of Logic " (Ntirnberg, 1812), Introduction, 
p. 17. 



xxii author's preface. 

Living associations, united indissolubly by the holy bond of 
friendship, will devote themselves to every side of national 
service, and every means for educating the people." This 
is the last degree of shallowness, because in it science 
is looked upon as developing, not out of thought or concep- 
tion, but out of direct perception and random fancy. Now 
the organic connection of the manifold branches of the 
social system is the architectonic of the state's rationality, 
and in this supreme science of state architecture the 
strength of the whole is made to depend upon the harmony 
of all the clearly marked phases of public life, and the 
stability of every pillar, arch, and buttress of the social 
edifice. And yet the shallow doctrine, of which we have 
spoken, permits this elaborate structure to melt and lose 
itself in the brew and stew of the " heart, friendship, and 
inspiration." Epicurus, it is said, believed that the world 
generally should be given over to each individual's opinions ; 
and whims ; and according to the view we are criticising 
the ethical fabric should be treated in the same way. By 
this old wives' decoction, which consists in founding upon 
the feelings what has been for many centuries the labour of 
reason and understanding, we no longer need the guidance 
of any ruling conception of thought. On this point 
Groethe's Mephistopheles, and the poet is a good authority, 
has a remark, which I have already used elsewhere : 

" Verachte nur Verstand und Wissenschaft, 
des Menschen alleihochste Gaben — 
So hast dem Teufel dich ergeben 
und musst zu Grunde gehn. " 

It is no surprise that the view just criticised should 
appear in the form of piety. Where, indeed, has this 
whirlwind of impulse not sought to justify itself? In 
godliness and the Bible it has imagined itself able to find 
authority for despising order and law. And, in fact, it is 
piety of a sort which has reduced the whole organized 
system of truth to elementary intuition and feeling. But 



AUTHOR S PREFACE. XXUl 

piety of the right kind leaves this obscure region, and 
comes out into the daylight, where the idea unfolds and 
reveals itself. Out of its sanctuary it brings a reverence 
for the law and truth which are absolute and exalted above 
all subjective feeling. 

The particular kind of evil consciousness developed by 
the wishy-washy eloquence already alluded to, may be 
detected in the following way. It is most unspiritual, 
when it speaks most of the spirit. It is the most dead 
and leathern, when it talks of the scope of life. When it 
is exhibiting the greatest self-seeking and vanity it has 
most on its tongue the words " people " and " nation." 
But its peculiar mark, found on its very forehead, is its 
hatred of law. Right and ethical principle, the actual 
world of right and ethical life, are apprehended in thought, 
and by thought are given definite, general, and rational 
form, and this reasoned right finds expression in law. 
But feeling, which seeks its own pleasure, and conscience, 
which finds right in private conviction, regard the law as 
their most bitter foe. The right, which takes the shape of 
law and duty, is by feeling looked upon as a shackle or 
dead cold letter. In this law it does not recognize itself 
and does not find itself free. Yet the law is the reason of 
the object, and refuses to feeling the privilege of warming 
itself at its private hearth. Hence the law, as we shall 
occasionally observe, is the Shibboleth, by means of which 
are detected the false brethren and friends of the so-called 
people. 

Inasmuch as the purest charlatanism has won the name 
of philosophy, and has succeeded in convincing the public 
that its practices are philosophy, it has now become almost 
a disgrace to speak in a philosophic way about the state. 
Nor can it be taken ill, if honest men become impatient, 
when the subject is broached. Still less is it a surprise 
that the government has at last turned its attention to this 
false philosophizing. With us philosophy is not practised 



xxiv AUTHOR S PKEFACE. 

as a private art, as it was by the GTreeks, but has a public 
place, and should therefore be employed only in the service 
of the state. The government has, up till now, shown 
such confidence in the scholars in this department as to 
leave the subject matter of philosophy wholly in their 
hands. Here and there, perhaps, has been shown to this 
science not confidence so much as indifference, and pro- 
fessorships have been retained as a matter of traditions 
In Prance, as far as I am aware, the professional teaching 
of metaphysics at least has fallen into desuetude. In any 
case the confidence of the state has been ill requited by 
the teachers of this subject. Or, if we prefei' to see in the 
state not confidence, but indifference, the decay of funda- 
mental knowledge must be looked upon as a severe penance. 
Indeed, shallowness is to all appearance most endurable 
and most in harmony with the maintenance of order and 
peace, when it does not touch or hint at any real issue. 
Hence it would not be necessary to bring it under public 
control, if the state did not require deeper teaching and 
insight, and expect science to satisfy the need. Yet this 
shallowness, notwithstanding its seeming innocence, does 
bear upon social life, right and duty generally, advancing 
principles which are the very essence of superficiality. 
These, as we have learned so decidedly from Plato, are the 
principles of the Sophists, according to which the basis of 
right is subjective aims and opinions, subjective feeling 
and private conviction. The result of such principles is 
quite as much the destruction of the ethical system, df the 
upright conscience, of love and right, in private persons, 
as of public order and the institutions of the state. The 
significance of these facts for the authorities will not be 
obscured by the claim that the holder of these perilous 
doctrines should be trusted, or by the immunity of office. 
The authorities will not be deterred by the demand^ that 
they should protect and give free play to a theory which 
strikes at the substantial basis of conduct, namely, uni- 



author's preface. XXV 

versal principles, and that they should disregard insolence 
on the ground of its being the exercise of the teacher's 
function. To him, to whom Ood gives office, He gives also 
understanding is a well-worn jest, which no one in our time 
would like to take seriously. 

In the methods of teaching philosophy, which have under 
the circumstances been reanimated by the government, the 
important element of protection and support cannot be 
ignored. The study of philosophy is in many ways in 
need of such assistance. Frequently in scientific, religious, 
and other works may be read a contempt for philosophy. 
Some, who have no conspicuous education and are total 
strangers to philosophy, treat it as a cast-off garment. 
They even rail against it, and regard as foolishness and 
sinful presumption its efforts to conceive of God and 
physical and spiritual nature. They scout its endeavour 
to know the truth. Eeason, and again reason, and reason 
in endless iteration is by them accused, despised, con- 
demned. Free expression, also, is given by a large number 
of those, who are supposed to be cultivating scientific 
research, to their annoyance at the unassailable claims of 
the conception. When we, I say, are confronted with 
such phenomena as these, we are tempted to harbour the 
thought that old traditions of tolerance have fallen out of 
use, and no longer assure to philosophy a place and public 
recognition.^ 

^ The same view finds expression in a letter of Joh. v. Miiller 
("Works," Part VIII., p. 56), who, speaking of the condition of 
Rome in the year 1803, when the city was under French rule, 
writes, " A professor, asked how the puhlic academies were doing, 
answered, ' On les tolfere comme les bordels ! ' " Similarly the so- 
called theory of reason or logic we may still hear commended, 
perhaps under the belief that it is too dry and unfruitful a science 
to claim any one's attention, or, if it be pursued here and there, 
that its formulae are without content, and, though not of much 
good, can he of no great harm. Hence the recommendation, so it 
is thought, if useless, can do no injury. 



XXVI AUTHOR S PREFACK. 

These presumptuous utterances, wMcli are in vogue in 
our time, are, strange to say, in a measure justified by the 
shallovsrness of the current philosophy. Yet, on the other 
hand, they have sprung from the same root as that against 
which they so thanklessly direct their attacks. Since that 
seK-named philosophizing has declared that to know the 
truth is vain, it has reduced all matter of thought to the 
same level, resembling in this way the despotism of the 
Roman Empire, which equalized noble and slave, virtue 
and vice, honour and dishonour, knowledge and ignorance. , 
In such a view the conceptions of truth and the laws of 
ethical observance are simply opinions and subjective con- 
victions, and the most criminal principles, provided only 
that they are convictions, are put on a level with these 
laws. Thus, too, any paltry special object, be it never so 
flimsy, is given the same value as an interest common to 
all thinking men and the bonds of the established social 
world. 

Hence it is for science a piece of good fortune that that 
kind of philosophizing, which might, like scholasticism, 
have continued to spin its notions within itself, has been 
brought into contact with reality. Indeed, such contact 
was, as we have said, inevitable. The real world is in 
earnest with the principles of right and duty, and in the 
full light of a consciousness of these principles it lives. 
With this world of reality philosophic cob-web spinning 
has come into open rupture. Now, as to genuine philosophy 
it is precisely its attitude to reality which has been mis- 
apprehended. Philosophy is, as I have already observed, 
an inquisition into the rational, and therefore the appre- 
hension of the real and present. Hence it cannot be the 
exposition of a world beyond, which is merely a castle in 
the air, having no existence except in the terror of a one- 
sided and empty formalism of thought. In the following 
treatise I have remarked that even Plato's " Eepublic," 
now regarded as the byword for an empty ideal, has grasped 



AUTHOR S PREFACE, XXvii 

the essential nature of the ethical, observances of the 
Greeks. He knew that there was breaking in upon Greek 
life a deeper principle, which could directly manifest itself 
only as an unsatisfied longing and therefore as ruin. 
Moved by the same longing Plato had to seek help against 
it, but had to conceive of the help as coming down from 
above, and hoped at last to have found it in an external 
special form of Greek ethical observance. He exhausted 
himself in contriving how by means of this new society to 
stem the tide of ruin, but succeeded only in injuring more 
fatally its deeper motive, the free infinite personality. 
Tet he has proved himself to be a great mind because the 
very principle and central distiaguishiag feature of his 
idea is the pivot upon which the world-wide revolution 
then in process turned : 

What is rational is real ; 
And what is real is rational. 

Upon this conviction stand not philosophy only but even 
every unsophisticated consciousness. From it also pro- 
ceeds the view now under contemplation that the spiritual 
universe is the natural. When reflection, feeling, or what- 
ever other form the subjective consciousness may assume, 
regards the present as vanity, and thinks itself to be 
beyond it and wiser, it finds itself in emptiness, and, as it 
has actuality only in the present, it is vanity throughout. 
Against the doctrine that the idea is a mere idea, figment 
or opinion, philosophy preserves the more profound view 
that nothing is real except the idea. Hence arises the effort 
to recognize in the temporal and transient the substance, 
which is immanent, and the eternal, which is present. 
The rational is synonymous with the idea, because in 
realizing itself it passes into external existence. It thus 
appears in an endless wealth of forms, figures and phe- 
nomena. It wraps its kernel' round with a robe of many 
colours, in which consciousness finds itseE at home. 



xxviii author's preface. 

Through this varied husk the conception first of all pene- 
trates, in order to touch the pulse, and then feel it 
throbbing in its external manifestations. To bring to 
order the endlessly varied relations, which constitute the 
outer appearance of the rational essence is not the tasli of 
philosophy. Such material is not suitable for it, and it 
can well abstain from giving good advice about these 
things. Plato could refrain from recommending to the 
nurses not to stand still with children, but always to 
dandle them in their arms. So could Piehte forbear to 
construe, as they say, the supervision of passports to such 
a point as to demand of all suspects that not only a 
description of them but also their photograph, should be 
inserted in the pass. Philosophy now exhibits no trace of 
such details. These superfine concerns it may neglect all 
the more safely, since it shows itself of the most liberal 
spirit in its attitude towards the endless mass of objects 
and circumstances. By such a course Science will escape 
the hate which is visited upon a multitude of circumstances 
and institutions by the vanity of a better knowledge. In 
this hate bitterness of mind finds the greatest pleasure, as 
it can in no other way attain to a feeling of self-esteem. 

This treatise, in so far as it contains a political science, 
is nothing more than an attempt to conceive of and present 
the state as in itself rational. As a philosophic writing it 
must be on its guard against constructing a state as it 
ought to be. "Philosophy cannot teach the state what it 
should be, but only how it, the ethical universe, is to be 
known. 

iSoi] Po5or, iSov Kal to TT^^jjjucr. 
Sic Khodus, hie saltus. 

To apprehend what is is the task of philosophy, because! 
what is is reason. As for the individual, every one is a 
son of his time ; so philosophy also is its time apprehended 
in thoughts. It is just as foolish to fancy that any philo- 
sophy can transcend its present world, as that an indi- 



AUTHORS PREFACE. XXIX 

vidual could leap out of Ms time or jump over Rhodes. If 
a theory transgresses its time, and builds up a world as it 
ought to be, it has an existence merely in the unstable 
element of opinion, which gives room to every wandering 
fancy. 

With little change the above saying would read : 

Here is the rose, here dance. 

The barrier which stands between reason, as self-con- 
scious spirit, and reason as present reality, and does not 
permit spirit to find satisfaction in reality, is some abstrac- 
tion, which is not free to be conceived. To recognize reason 
as the rose in the cross of the present, and to find delight 
in it, is a rational insight which implies reconciliation with 
reality. This reconciliation philosophy grants to those 
who have felt the inward demand to conceive clearly, to 
preserve subjective freedom while present in substantive 
reality, and yet though possessing this freedom to stand' 
not upon the particular and contingent, but upon what is 
self-originated and self-completed. 

This also is the more concrete meaning of what was a 
moment ago more abstractly called the unity of form and 
content. Form in its most concrete significance is reason, 
as an intellectual apprehension which conceives its object. 
Content, again, is reason as the substantive essence of 
social order and nature, ■^he conscious identity of form 
and content is the philosophical idea. 

It is a self-assertion, which does honour to man, to re- 
cognize nothing in sentiment which is not justified by 
thought. This self-will is a feature of modem times, being 
indeed the peculiar principle of Protestantism. What 
was initiated by Luther as faith in feeling and the witness 
of the spirit, the more mature mind . strives to apprehend 
in conception. In that way it seeks to free itself in the 
present, and so find there itself. It is a celebrated saying 
that a half philosophy leads away from God, while a true 



XXX author's preface. 

philosophy leads to Grod. (It is the same halfness, I may 
say in passing, which regards knowledge as an approxima- 
tion to truth.) This saying is applicable to the science of 
the state. Eeason cannot content itself with a mere ap. 
proximation, something which is neither cold not hot, and 
must be spued out of the mouth. As little can it be con- 
tented with the cold scepticism that in this world of time 
things go badly, or at best only moderately well, and that 
we must keep the peace with reality, merely because there 
is nothing better to be had. Knowledge creates a much 
more vital peace. 

Only one word more concerning the desire to teach the 
world what it ought to be. For such a purpose philosophy 
at least always comes too late. Philosophy, as the thought 
of the world, does not appear until reality has completed 
its formative process, and made itself ready. History 
thus corroborates the teaching of the conception that only 
in the maturity of reality does the ideal appear as counter- 
part to the real, apprehends the real world in its substance, 
and shapes it into an intellectual kingdom. When philo- 
sophy paints its grey in grey, one form of life has become 
old, and by means of grey it cannot be rejuvenated, but 
only known. The owl of Minerva takes its flight only 
when the shades of night are gathering. 

But it is time to close this preface. As a preface it is its 
place to speak only externally and subjectively of the 
standpoint of the work which it introduces. A philo- 
sophical account of the essential content needs a scientific 
and objective treatment. So, too, criticisius, other than 
those which proceed from such a treatment, must be viewed 
by the author as unreflective convictions. Such subjective 
criticisms must be for him a matter of indifference. 

Berlin, June 25th, 1820. 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

INTRODUCTION. 

I. The philosophic science of right has as its object the 
idea of right, i.e., the conception of right and the realization 
of the conception. 

Note. — Philosophy has to do with ideas or realized 
thoughts, and hence not with what we have been accus- 
tomed to call mere conceptions. It has indeed to exhibit 
the onesidedness and untruth of these mere conceptions, 
and to show that, while that which commonly bears the 
name " conception," is only an abstract product of the un- 
derstanding, the true conception alone has reality and gives 
this reality to itself. Everything, other than the reality 
which is -established by the conception, is transient surface 
■existence, external accident, opinion, appearance void of 
essence, untruth, delusion, and so forth. Through the 
actual shape, which it takes upon itself in actuality, is the 
conception itself understood. This shape is the other 
essential element of the idea, and is to be distinguished 
from the form, which exists only as conception. 

Addition. — The conception and its existence are two sides, 
distinct yet united, like soul and body. The body is the 
same life as the soul, and yet the two can be named inde- 
pendently. A soul without a body would not be a living 
thing, and vice versa. Thus the visible existence of the 
•conception is its body, just as the body obeys the soul which 
produced it. Seeds contain the tree and its whole power. 



2 THE PHILOSOPHY of right. 

though they are not the tree itself ; the tree corresponds 
accurately to the simple structure of the seed. If the body 
does not correspond to the soul, it is defective. The unity 
of visible existence and conception, of body and soul, is the 
idea. It is not a mere harmony of the two, but their com- 
plete interpenetration. There lives nothing, which is not 
in some way idea. —The idea of right is freedom, which, if 
it is to be apprehended truly, must be known both in its 
conception and in the embodiment of the conception. 

2. The science of right is a part of philosophy. Hence 
it must develop the idea, which is the reason of an object, 
out of the conception. It is the same thing to say that it 
must regard the peculiar internal development of the thing 
itself. Since it is a part, it has a definite beginniDg, which 
is the result and truth of what goes before, and this, that 
goes before, constitutes its so-called proof. Hence the 
origin of the conception of right falls out-side of the science 
of right. The deduction of the conception is presup- 
posed in this treatise, and is to be considered as already 
given. 

Addition. — Philosophy forms a circle. It has, since it 
must somehow make a begianing, a primary, directly given 
matter, which is not proved and is not a result. But this 
starting-point is simply relative, since from another point 
of view it appears as a result. Philosophy is a consequence, 
which does not hang in the air or form a directly new be- 
ginning, but is self-enclosed. 

According to the formal unphilosophic method of the 
sciences, definition is the first desideratum, as regards, at 
least, the external scientific form. The positive science of 
right, however, is little concerned with definition, since its 
special aim is to give what it is that is right, and also the 
particular phases of the laws. For this reason it has been 
said as a warning, Omnis definitio in jure civili periculota;' 
and in fact the more disconnected and contradictory the- 
phases of a right are, the less possible is a definition of it. 



INTRODUCTION. 3 

A definition should contain only nniversal features; but 
these forthwith bring to light contradictions, which in the 
case of law are injustice, in all their nakedness. Thus in 
Soman law, for instance, no definition of man was possible, 
because it excluded the slave. The conception of man was 
destroyed by the .fact of slavery. In the same way to have 
defined property and owner, would have appeared to be 
perilous to many relations. — Bnt definitions may perhaps 
be derived from etymology, for the reason, principally, that 
in this way special cases are avoided, and a basis is found 
in the feeling and imaginative thought of men. The cor- 
rectness of a definition would thus consist in its agreement 
with existing ideas. By such a method everything essen- 
tially scientific is cast aside. As regards the content there is 
cast aside the necessity of the self-contained and self- 
developed object, and as regards the form there is discarded 
the nature of the conception. In philosophic knowledge 
the necessity of a conception is the main thing, and the 
process, by which it, as a result, has come into being, is 
the proof and deduction. After the content is seen to be 
necessary independently, the second point is to look about 
for that which corresponds to it in existing ideas and modes 
of speech. But the way in which a conception exists in its 
truth, and the way it presents itself in random ideas not 
only are but must be different both in form and structure. 
If a notion is not in its content false, the conception can be 
shown to be contained in it and to be already there in its 
essential traits. A notion may thus be raised to the form 
of a conception. But so little is any notion the measure 
and criterion of an independently necessary and true con- 
ception, that it must accept truth from the conception, be 
justified by it, and know itself through it. — If the method 
of knowing, which proceeds by formal definition, inference 
and proof, has more or less disappeared, a worse one has 
come to take its place. This new method maintains that 
ideas, as, e.g., the idea of right in all its aspects, are to be 



4 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

directly apprehended as mere facts of consciousness, and 
that natural feeling, or that heightened form of it which 
is known as the inspiration of one's own breast, is the 
source of right. This method may be the most convenient 
of all, but it is also the most unphilosophic. Other fea- 
tures of this view, referring not merely to knowledge but 
directly to action, need not detain us here. While the first 
or formal method went so far as to require in definition the 
form of the conception, and in proof the form of a necessity 
of knowledge, the method of the intuitive consciousness 
and feeling takes for its principle the arbitrary contingent 
consciousness of the subject. — In this treatise we take for 
granted the scientific procedure of philosophy, which has 
been set forth in the philosophic logic. 

3. Eight is positive in general (a) in its form, since it has 
validity in a stater; and this established authority is the 
principle for the knowledge of right. Hence we have the 
positive science of right. (6) On the side of content this 
right receives a positive element (a) through the particular 
character of a nation, the stage of its historical develop- 
ment, and the interconnection of all the relations which are 
necessitated by nature : (/3) through the necessity that a 
system of legalized right must contain the application of 
the universal conception to objects and cases whose qualities 
are given externally. Such an application is not the specu- 
lative thought or the development of the conception, but a 
subsumption made by the understanding : (y) through the 
ultimate nature of a decision which has become a reality. 

Note. — Philosophy at least cannot recognize the authority 
of feeling, inclination and caprice, when they are set in 
opposition to positive right and the laws. — It is an acci- 
dent, external to the nature of positive right, when force or 
tyranny becomes an element of it. It will be shown later 
(§§ 211-214), at what point right must become positive. 
The general phases which are there deduced, are here only 
mentioned, in order to indicate the limit of philosophic 



INTRODUCTION. 5 

right, and also to forestall the idea or indeed the demand 
that by a systematic development of right should be pro- 
duced a law-book, such as would be needed by an actual 
state. — To convert the difEerences between right of nature 
and positive right, or those between philosophic right and 
positive right, into open .antagonism would be a complete 
misunderstanding. Natural right or philosophic right 
stands to positive right as institutions to pandects. — With 
regard to the historical element in positive right, referred 
to in the paragraph, it may be said that the true historical 
view and genuine philosophic standpoint have been pre- 
sented by Montesquieu. He regards legislation and its 
specific traits not in an isolated and abstract way, but 
rather as a dependent element of one totality, connecting 
it with all the other elements which form the character of 
a nation and an epoch. In this interrelation the various 
elements receive their meaning and justification.— The 
purely historical treatment of the phases of right, as they 
develop in time, and. a comparison of their results with 
existing relations of right have their own value ; but they 
are out of place in a philosophic treatise, except in so far 
as the development out of historic grounds coincides with 
the development out of the conception, and the historical 
exposition and justification can be made to cover a justifica- 
tion which is valid in itself and independently. This dis- 
tinction is as manifest as it is weighty. A phase of right 
may be shown to rest upon and follow from the circum- 
stances and existing institutions of right, and yet may be 
absolutely unreasonable and void of right. This is the case 
in Soman law with many aspects of private right, which 
were the logical results of its interpretation of paternal power 
and of marriage. Further, if the aspects of right are really 
right and reasonable, it is one thing to point out what with 
regard to them can truly take place through the concep- 
tion, and quite another thing to portray the manner of 
their appearance in history, along with the circumstances, 



6 THL I'HILOSOPHY OF KIGUT. 

cases, wants and events, which they have called forth. 
Such a demonstration and deduction from nearer or more 
remote historic causes, which is the occupation of prag- 
matic history, is frequently called exposition, or preferably 
conception, under the opinion that in such an indication of 
the historic elements is found all that is essential to a con- 
cejstion of law and institutions of right. In point of fact 
that which is truly essential, the conception of the matter, 
has not been so much as mentioned. — So also we are accus- 
tomed to hear of Koman or German conceptions of right, 
and of conceptions of right as they are laid down in this 
or that statute-book, when indeed nothing about concep- 
tions can be found in them, but only general phases of 
right, propositions derived from the understanding, general 
maxims, and laws. — By neglect of the distiuction, just 
alluded to, the true standpoint is obscured and the question 
of a valid justification is shifted into a justification based 
upon circumstances ; results are founded on presupposi- 
tions, which in themselves are of little value ; and in 
general the relative is put in place of the absolute, and 
external appearance in place of the nature of the thing. 
When the historical vindication substitutes the external 
origin for the origin from the conception, it unconsciously 
does the opposite of what it intends. Suppose that an 
institution, originating under definite circumstances, is 
shown to be necessary and to answer its purpose, and that 
it accomplishes all that is required of it by the historical 
standpoint. When such a proof is made to stand for a 
justification of the thing itself, it follows that, when the 
circumstances are removed, the institution has lost its 
meaning and its right. When, e.g., it is sought to support 
andj defend cloisters on the grounds that they have served 
to clear and people the wilderness and by teaching and 
transcribing to preserve scholarship, it follows that just in 
so far as the circumstances are changed, cloisters have 
become aimless and superfluous. — In so far as the historic 



INTRODUCTION. 7 

significance, or the historical exposition and interpretation 
of the origin of anything is in different spheres at home 
with the philosophic view of the origin and conception of 
the thing, one might tolerate the other. But, in illustration 
of the fact that they neither here nor in science, preserve 
this peaceful attitude, I quote from Mr. Hugo's " Lehrbuch 
der Geschichte des romischen Eechts." ' In this -work 
Mr. Hugo says (5th edition § 53) that " Cicero praises the 
twelve tables with a side glance at philosophy," " but the 
philosopher Phavorinus treats them exactly as many a 
great philosopher since has treated positive right." Mr. 
Hugo makes the ultimate reply to such a method as that 
of Phavorinus, when he says of him that he "under- 
stood the twelve tables just as little as the philosophers 
understood positive right." — The correction of the philo- 
sopher Phavorinus by the jurist Sextus Csecilius (Gellius, 
" Noct. Attic." XX. 1) expresses the lasting and true principle 
of the justification of that which is in its content merely 
positive. " Non ignoras," as Csecilius felicitously remarks 
to Phavorinus, " legum opportunitates et medelas pro tem- 
porum moribus, et pro rerum publicarum generibus, ac 
pro utilitatum praesentium rationibus, proque vitiorum, 
quibus medendum est, fervoribus mutari ae flecti, neque 
uno statu eonsistere, quin, ut facies coeli et maris, ita 
rerum atque fortunae tempestatibus varientur. Quid 
salubrius visum est rogatione ilia Stolonis, etc., quid utilius 
plebiscite Voconio, etc., quid tam necessarium existimatum 
est, quam lex Licinia, etc. ? Omnia tamen hsec obliterata 
et operta sunt civitatis opulentia," etc. — These laws are 
positive so far as they have meaning and appropriateness 
under the circumstances, and thus have only an historic 
value. For this reason they are in their nature transient. 
Whether the legislator or government was wise or not in 
what it did for its own immediate time and circumstances 
is a matter quite by itself and is for history to say. 
' " Text-book of the Histoiy of Roman Law." 



8 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

History will the more profoundly recognize the action of 
the legislator in proportion as its estimate receives support 
from the philosophic standpoint. — From the vindications of 
the twelve tables against the judgment of Phavorinus I 
shall give<!^urther example^ because in them Caecilius 
furnishes an illustration of the fraud which is indissolubly 
bound up with the methods of the understanding and its 
reasonings. He adduces a good reason for a bad thing, 
and supposes that he has in that way justified the thing. 
Take the horrible law which permitted a creditor, after the 
lapse of a fixed term of respite, to kill a debtor or sell him 
into slavery. Nay, further, if there were several creditors, 
they were permitted to cut pieces ofE the debtor, and thus 
divide him amongst them, with the proviso that if any one of 
them should cut ofE too much or too little, no action shoqld . 
be taken against him. It was this clause, it may be noticed, 
which stood Shakespeare's Sbylock in " The Merchant of 
Venice " in such good stead, and was by him most thank- 
fully accepted. Well, for this law CjBcilius adduces the 
good argument that by it trust and credit were more firmly 
sepured, and also that, by reason of the very horror of the 
law, it never had to be enforced. Not only does he in his 
want of thought fail to observe that by the severity of the 
law that very intention of securing trust and credit was 
defeated, but he forthwith himself gives an illustration of 
the way in which the disproportionate punishment caused 
the law to be inoperative, namely through the habit of 
giving false witness. — But the remark of Mr. Hugo that 
Phavorinus had not understood the law is not to be passed 
over. Now any school-boy can understand the law just 
quoted, and better than anyone else would Shylock have 
understood what was to him of such advantage. Hence, 
by " understand " Mr. Hugo must mean that form of 
understanding which consists in bringing to the support of 
a, law a good reason. — Another failure to understand, 
asserted by Csecilius of Phavorinus, a philosopher at any 



INTKODUCTION. 9 

rate may without blushing acknowledge: jumentum, •which 
without any arcera was the only legal way to bring a sick 
man into court as a witness, was held to mean not only a 
horse but also a carriage or wagon. Further on in this law 
Caecilius found more evidence of the excellence and accuracy 
of the old statutes, which for the purpose of non-suiting a 
sick man at court distinguished not only between a horse and 
a wagon, but also, as Caecilius explains, between a wagon 
covered and cushioned and one not so comfortably equipped. 
Thus one would have the choice between utter severity on 
one side, and on the other senseless details. But to exhibit 
fully the absurdity of these laws and the pedantic defence 
offered in their behalf would give rise to an invincible 
repugnance to all scholarship of that kind. 

But in his manual Mr. Hugo speaks also of rationality 
in connection with Eoman law, and I have been struck 
with the following remarks. He first of all treats of the 
epoch extending from the origin of the Eepublic to the 
twelve tables (§§ 38, 89), noticing''*that jin Eome] people 
had many wants, and were compelled in their labour to 
use draught animals and beasts of burden, as we ourselves 
do, and that the ground was an alternation of hill and 
valley, and that the city was set upon a hill, etc. These 
statements might, perhaps, have answered to the sense of 
Montesquieu's thought, though in them it would be well- 
nigh impossible to find his genius. But after these pre- 
liminary paragraphs, he goes on to say in § 40, that the 
condition of the law was still very far from satisfying the 
highest demands of reasoni This remark is wholly in 
place, as the Roman family-right, slavery, etc., give no 
satisfaction to the smallest demands of reason. Tet when 
discussing the succeeding epochs, Mr. Hugo forgets to tell 
us in what particulars, if any, the Eoman law has satis- 
factorily met the highest demands of reason. Still of the 
classic jurists, who flourished in the era of the greatest 
expansion of Eoman law as a science, it is said (§ 289) 



^ 



10 TiiJi: PHILOSOPHY of right. 

'it has been long since been observed that the 
jurists were educated in philosophy," but "few 
know " (more will know now through the numerous 
oiitions of Mr. Hugo's manual) " that there is no class of 
writers, who, as regards deduction from principles, deserved 
to be placed beside the mathematicians, and also, as 
regards the quite remarkable way in which they develop 
their conceptions, beside the modern founder of meta- 
physic ; as voucher for this assertion is the notable fact 
that nowhere do so many trichotomies occur as in the 
classic jurists and in Kant." This form of logical reason- 
ing, extolled by Leibnitz, is certainly an essential feature 
of the science of right, as it is of mathematics and every 
other intelligible science ; but the logical procedure of the 
mere understanding, spoken of by Mr. Hugo, has nothing 
to do with the satisfaction of the claims'of reason and 
with philosophic science. Moreover, the very lack of 
logical procedure, which is characteristic of the Eoman 
jurists and prsetors, is to be esteemed as one of their chief 
virtues, since by means of it they obviated the conse- 
quences of unrighteous and horrible institutions. Through 
their want of logic they were compelled callide to put 
sense into mere verbal distinctions, as they did when they 
identified Bonorum possessio with inheritance, and also into 
silly evasions, for silliness is a defect of logic, in order to 
save the letter of the tables, as was done in the fictio or 
viroKpiata that &filiajpatroni was a filius (Heinecc. " Antiq. 
Rom.," lib. i. tit. ii. § 24). But it is absurd to place the 
classic jurists, with their use of trichotomy, along with 
Kant, and in that way to discern in them the promise of 
the development of conceptions. 

4. The territory of right is in general the spiritual, and 
its more definite place and origin is the will, which is 
free. Thus freedom constitutes the substance and essen- 
tial character of the will, and the system of right is 
the kingdom of actualized freedom. It is the world of 



I.NTKODL'CIION. 11 

spirit, which is produced out of itself, and is a second 
nature. 

Addition. — Freedom of will is best exj)lained by refer- 
eace to physical nature. Freedom is a fundamental phase 
of will, as weight is of bodies. When it is said that 
matter is heavy, it might be meant that the predicate is an 
accident ; but such is not the case, for iu matter there is 
nothing which has not weight ; in fact, matter is weight. 
That which is heavy constitutes the body, and is the body. 
Just so is it with freedom and the will; that which is free 
is the will. Will without freedom is an empty word, and 
freedom becomes actual only as will, as subject. A 
remark may also be made as to the connection of willing 
and thinking. Spirit, in general, is thought, and by 
thought man is distinguished from the animal. But we 
must not imagine that man is on one side thinking and on 
auother side willing, as though he had will in one pocket 
and tliought in another. Such an idea is vain. The dis- 
tiuctiffln between thought and will is only that between a 
theorffitical and a practical relation. They are not two 
separate faculties. The will is a special way of thinking ; 
it is I thought translating itself into reality ; it is the 
itnpuj se of thought to give itself reality. The distinction 
between thought and will may be expressed in this way. 
When I think an object, I make of it a thought, and take 
from i t the sensible. Thus I make of it something which 
is fese intially and directly mine. Only in thought am I 
self-co ntained. Conception is the penetration of the object, 
which is then no longer opposed to me. From it I have 
taken/ its own peculiar nature, which it had as an inde- 
pendent object in opposition to me. As Adam said to 
Eve, j" thou art flesh of my flesh and bone of my bone," 
so says the spirit, " This object is spirit of my spirit, and all 
alienation has disappeared." Any idea is a universalizing, 
and ■ this process belongs to thinking. To make something 
univi jrsal is to think. The " I " is thought and the uni- 



12 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

versa]. When I say "I," I let fall all particularity of 
character, natural endowment, knowledge, age. The I is 
empty, a point and simple, but in its simplicity active. 
The gaily coloured world is before me ; I stand opposed to 
it, and in this relation I cancel and transcend the opposi- 
tion, and make the content my own. The I is at home in 
the world, when it knows it, and still more when it has 
conceived it. 

So much for the theoretical relation. The practical, on 
the other hand, begins with thinking, with the I itself. It 
thus appears first of all as placed in opposition, because it 
exhibits, as it were, a separation. As I am practical, I a'm 
active ; I act and determine myself ; and to determine 
myself means to set up a distinction. But these distinc; 
tions are again mine, my own determinations come t o me ; 
and the ends are mine, to which I am impelled, i Even 
when I let these distinctions and determinations go, s :etting 
them in the so-called external world, they remain imine. 
They are that which I have done and made, and bei ir the 
trace of my spirit. That is the distinction to be dlrawn 
between the theoretical and the practical relations, i 

And now the connection of the two must be also seated. 
The theoretical is essentially contained in the pra( jtical. 
Against the idea that the two are separate runs th e fact 
that man has no will without intelligence. The will ; holds 
within itself the theoretical, the will determines itsel f, and, 
this determination is in the first instance internal. I Inat 
which I will I place before my mind, and it is an objffict for 
me. The animal acts according to instinct, is impellled by 
something internal, and so is also practical. But it hlas no 
will, because it cannot place before its mind whjat it 
desires. Similarly man cannot use his theoretic falculty 
or think without will, for in thinking we are active. 1 The 
content of what is thought receives, indeed, the foriln of 
something existing, but this existence is occasioned by our 
activity and by it established. These distinctions of theor 



INTRODUCTION. 13 

retical and practical are inseparable ; they are one and the 
same ; and i^ every activity, whether of thought or will, 
both these elements are found. 

It is worth while to recall the older way of proceeding 
with regard (to the freedom of the will. .First of all, the 
idea of the will was assumed, and then an effort was made 
to deduce fjjom it and establish a definition of the will. 
Next, the niethod of the older empirical psychology was 
adopted, an^ different perceptions and general phenomena 
of the ordinary consciousness were collected, such as re- 
morse, guilt, and the Uke, on the ground that these could 
be explained only as proceeding out of a will that is free. 
Then from these phenomena was deduced the so-called 
proof that the will is free. wBut it is more convenient to 
take a short cut and hold that freedom is given as a fact 
of consciousness, and must be believed in. 

The nature of the will and of freedom, and the proof 
that the will is free, can be shown, as has already been ob- 
served (§ 2), only in connection with the whole. The 
ground ])rinciples of the premises — that spirit is in the 
first instance intelligence, and that the phases, through 
which il| passes in its development, namely from feeling, 
through imaginative thinking to thought, are the way by 
which it produces itself as will, which, in turn, as thepractical 
spirit in general, is the most direct truth of intelligence — I 
have presented in my " Encyclopsedia of the Philosophical 
Sciences "" (Heidelberg, 1817), and hope some day to be 
able to give of them a more complete exposition. There is, 
to my mind, so much the more need for me to give my 
contribution to, as I hope, the more thorough knowledge 
of the nature of spirit, since, as I have there said, it would 
be difficult to find a philosophic science in a more neglected 
and evil plight than is that theory of spirit, which is com- 
monly called psychology. — Some elements of the conception 
of will, resulting from the premises enumerated above are 
mentioned in this and the following paragraphs. As to- 



14 TIIK PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

these, appeal may moreover be made to every individual to 
see them in his own self-consciousness. Everyone will, in 
the first place, find in himself the ability to abstract him- 
self from all that he is, and in this way prove' himself able 
of himself to set every content within himself, and thus 
have in his own consciousness an illustration of all the 
subsequent phases. 

6. The will contains (a) the element of pure indetermi- 
nateness, i.e., the pure doubling of the I back in thought 
upon itseK. In this process every limit or content, present 
though it be directly by way of nature, as in want, appe- 
tite or impulse, or given in any specific way, is dissolved. 
Thus we have the limitless infinitude of absolute abstrac- 
tion, or universality, the pure thought of itself. 

Note. — Those who treat thinking and willing as two 
special, peculiar, and separate faculties, and, further, look 
upon thought as detrimental to the will, especially the 
good will, show from the very start that they know nothing 
of the nature of willing — a remark which we shall be called 
upon to make a number of times upon the same attitude 
of mind. — The will on one side is the possibility of abstrac- 
tion from every aspect in which the I finds itself or has set 
itself up. It reckons any content as a limit, and flees from 
it. This is one of the forms of the self- direction of the 
will, and is by imaginative thinking insisted upoii as of 
itself freedom. It is the negative side of the will, jor free- 
dom as apprehended by the understanding. This fo-eedom 
is that of the void, which has taken actual shapej and is 
stirred to passion. It, while remaining purely theoretical, 
appears in Hindu religion as the fanaticism of pijire con- 
templation ; but becoming actual it assumes both in 
politics and religion the form of a fanaticism, which would 
destroy the established social order, remove all individuals 
suspected of desiring any kind of "order, and demolish any 
organization which then sought to rise out of the ruins 
Only in devastation does the negative will feel that it has 



INTRODUCTION. 15 

reality. It i ends, indeed, to bring to pass some jjositive 
social conditi i, such as universal equality or universal re- 
ligious life. 1 ut in fact it does not will the positive reality 
of any such c iidition, since that would carry in its train a 
system, and/f'htroduce a separation by way of institutions 
and between individuals. But classification and objective 
system attain self consciousness only by destroying negative 
freedom. Negative freedom is actuated by a mere solitary 
abstract idea, whose realization is nothing but the fury of 
desolation. 

Addition. — This phase of will implies that I break loose 
from everything, give up all ends, and bury myself in ab- 
straction. It is man alone who can let go everthing, even 
life. He can commit suicide, an act impossible for ihe 
fl,nimal, whicih always remains only negative, abiding in a 
state foreignito itself, to which it must merely get accus- 
tomed. Man is pure thought of himself, and only in 
thinking has he the power to give himself universality and 
to extinguish in himself all that is particular and definite. 
Negative! freedom, or freedom of the understanding, is 
one-sided[, yet as this one-sidedness contains an essential 
feature, it is not to be discarded. But the defect of the 
under stajiding is that it exalts its onesidedness to the solo 
and highest place. This form of freedom frequently occurs 
in history. By the Hindus, e.g., the highest freedom is de- 
clared to 
identity 






be persistence in the consciousness of one's simple 
■ with himself, to abide in the empty space of one's 
own inner being, like the colourless light of pure intuition, 
and to renounce every activity of life, every purpose and 
every idea. In this way man becomes Brahma ; Ihere is no 
longer cny distinction between finite man and Brahma, 
-every di^^ference having been swallowed up in this univer- 
sality. A more concrete manifestation of this freedom is 
the fanaticism of political and religious life. Of this 
nature was the terrille epoch of the French Eevolution, by 
Tvhich all distinctions in talent and authoritv were to have 



16 Till.: PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

been superseded. In this time of upheaval I d commotion 
any specific thing was intolerable. Tanat^ ism wills an 
abstraction and not an articulate association . It finds all 
distinctions antagonistic to its indefinitenel i, and super- 
sedes them. Hence in the French Eevolutibn the people 
abolished the institutions which they themselves had set 
up, since every institution is inimical to the jabstract self- 
consciousness of equality. 1 

6. (|3) The I is also the transition from blank indefinite- 
ness to the distinct and definite establishmenl| of a definite 
content and object, whether this content be gi^fen by nature 
or produced out of the conception of spirit. Through this 
establishment of itself as a definite thing thel I becomes a 
reality. This is the absolute element of the finitude or 
specialization of the I. I 

Note. This second element in the characterization of the 
I is just as negative as the first, since it annujls and re- 
places the first abstract negativity^ As the particular is 
contained in the universal, so this second phase is, contained ■ 
already in the first, and is only an establishing of what the 
first is implicitly. The first phase, if taken indejiondently. 
is not the true infinitude, I'.e., the concrete uniT(?eJr.^al, or 
the conception, but limited and onesided. In thai; it is the 
abstraction from all definite character, it has fi definite 
character. Its abstract and one-sided nature col nstitutes- 
its definite character, its defect and finitude. i 

The distinct charagterization of these two phaseis of the I 
is found in the philosophy of Fichte as also in that of Kant. 
Only, in the exposition of Fichte the I, when, taken. as un- 
limited, as it is in the first proposition of his "/Wissen- 
schaftslehre," is merely positive^ It is the uni y^^ality 
and identity made by the understanding. Hence ithis ab- 
stract I is in its independence to be taken as the -truth, to 
which by way of mere addition comes in the second propo- 
sition, the limitation, or the negative in general, whether; 
it be in the form of a given external limit or of an activity 



INTRODUCTION. 17 

of the I. — To apprehend the negative as immanent in the 
universal or self-identicsll, and also as in the I, was the 
next step, which speculative philosophy had to make. Of 
this want they have no presentiment, who Kke Fichte 
never apprehend that the infinite and finite are, if sepa- 
rated, abstract, and must be seen as immanent one in the 
other. 

Addition. — This second element makes its appearance as 
the opposite of the first ; it is to be understood in its 
general form : it belongs to freedom but does not constitute 
the whole of it. Here the I passes over from blank in- 
determinateness to the distinct establishment of a specific 
character as a content or object. I do not will merely, but 
I will something. Such a will, as is analysed in the pre- 
ceding paragraph, wills only the abstract universal, and 
therefore wills nothing. Hence it is not a wiU. The 
particular thing, which the will wills is a limitation, since 
the will, in order to be a will, must in general limit itself. 
Limit or negation consists in the will willing something. 
Particularizing is thus as a rule named finitude. Ordinary 
reflection holds the first element, that of the iudefinite, for 
the absolute and higher, and the limited for a mere nega- 
tion of this indefinitenesB. But this indefiniteness is itself 
only a negation, in contrast with the definite and finite. 
The I is solitude md absolute negation. The indefinite 
will is thus quite as much one-sided as the will, which 
continues merely in the definite. 

7. (7) The will is the unity of these two elements. It is 
particularity turned back within itself and thus led back to 
universality ; it is individuality ; it is the self-direction of 
the I. Thus at one and the same time it establishes itself 
as its own negation, that is to say, as definite and limited, 
and it also abides by itself, in its self -identity and univer- 
sality, and in this position remains purely self -enclosed. — 
The I determines itself in so far as it is the reference of 
negativity to itself ; and yet in this self -reference it is in- 

c 



18 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

different to its own definite character. This it knows as 
its own, that is, as an ideal or a mere possibility, by which 
it is not bound, but rather exists in it merely because it 
establishes itself there. — This is the freedom of the will, 
constituting its conception or substantive reality. It is its 
gravity, as it were, just as gravity is the substantive reality 
of a body. 

Note. — Every self-consciousness knows itself as at once 
universal, or the possibility of abstracting itself from 
everything definite, and as particular, with a fixed object, 
content or aim. These two elements, however, are only 
abstractions. The concrete and true, — and all that is true 
is concrete, — is the universality, to which the particular is at 
first opposed, but, when it has been turned back into itself, 
is in the end made equal. — This unity is individuality, but 
it is not a simple unit as is the individuality of imaginative 
thought, but a unit in terms of the conception (" Ency- 
clopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences," §§ 112-114). In 
other words, this individuality is pro^perly nothing else than 
the conception. [The first two elements of the will, that it 
can abstract itself from everything, and that it is definite 
through either its own activity or something else^are easily 
admitted and comprehended, because, in their separation 
they are untrue, and characteristic of tie mere understand- 
ing. But into the third, the true and speculative — and all 
truth, as far as it is conceived, must be thought specu- 
latively — the understanding declines to venture, always 
calling the conception the inconceivable. The proof and 
more detailed explanation of this inmost reserve of specu- 
lation, of infinitude as the negativity whicTi refers itself to 
itself, and of this ultimate source of all aptivity, life and 
consciousness, belong to logic, as the purely speculative 
philosophy. Here it can be noticed only in, passing that, 
in the sentences, " The will is universal," " The will directs 
itself," the will is already regarded as presupposed subject 
or substratum ; but it is not something finished and uni- 



INTRODUCTION. 19 

versal before it determines itself, nor yet before this deter- 
mination is superseded and idealized. It is will only when 
its activity is self -occasioned, and it lias returned into itself. 

Addition. — Wbat we properly call will contains the two 
above-mentioned elements. The I is, first of all, as such, 
pure activity, the universal which is by itself. Next this 
universal determines itself, and so far is no longer by itself, 
but establishes itself as another, and ceases to be the uni- 
versal. The t hird ste p is that the will, while in this limi- 
tation, i.e., in this other, is b y i tself. While it limits itself, 
it yet remains with itself, and does not lose its hold of the 
universal. This is, then, the concrete conception of freedom, 
whUe the other two elements have been thoroughly abs- 
tract and one-sided. But this concrete freedom we already 
have in the form of perception, as in friendship and love. 
Here a man is not one-sided, but limits himself willingly 
in reference to another, and yet in this limitation knows 
himself as himself. In this determination he does not 
feel himself determined, but in the contemplation of the 
other as another has the feeling of himself. Freedom 
also lies neither in indeterminateness nor in determinate- 
ness, but in both. The wilful man has a will which limits 
itself wholly to a particular object, and if he has not this 
will, he supposes himself not to be free. But the will is not 
bound to a particular object, but must go further, for the 
nature of the will is not to be one-sided and confined. 
/Free will consists in willing a definite object, but in so 
doing to be by itself and to return again into the universal."! 

8. If we define this particularizing (/3 § 6) further, we 
reach a distinction in the forms of the will, (a) In so far 
as the definite character of the will consists in the formal 
opposition of the subjective to the objective or external 
direct existence, we have the formal will as a self conscious- 
ness, which finds an outer world before it. The process by 
which individuality turns back in its definiteness into 
itself, is the translation of the subjective end, through the 



20 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

intervention of an activity and a means, into objectivity. 
In the absolute spirit, in which all definite character is 
thoroughly its own and true (" Encyclop." § 363), conscious- 
ness is only one side, namely, the manifestation or appear- 
ance of the will, a phase which does not require detailed 
consideration here. 

Addition.— The consideration of the definite nature of 
the will belongs to the understanding, and is not in the first 
instance speculative. The will as a whole, not only in the 
sense of its content, but also in the sense of its form, is 
determined. Determinate character on the side of form is 
the end, and the execution of the end. The end is at first 
merely something internal to me and subjective, but it is 
to be also objective and to cast away the defect of mere 
subjectivity. It may be asked, why it has this defect. 
When that which is deficient does not at the same time 
transcend its defect, the defect is for it not a defect at all. 
The animal is to us defective, but not for itself. The end, 
in so far as it is at first merely ours, is for us a defect, since 
freedom and will are for us the unity of subjective and 
objective. The end must also be established as objective; 
but does not in that way attain a new one-sided character, 
but rather its realization. 

9 (6). In so far as the definite phases of will are its own 
peculiar property or its particularization turned back into 
itself, they are content. This content, as content of the 
will, is for it, by virtue of the form given in (a), an end, 
which exists on its inner or subjective side as the imagina- 
tive will, but by the operation of the activity, which con- 
verts the subjective into the objective, it is realized, 
completed end. 

10. The content or determinate phase of will is in the 
first instance direct or immediate. Then the will is free 
only in itself or for us, i.e., it is the will in its conception. , 
Only when it has itself as an object is it also for itself, and 
its implicit freedom becomes realized. 



INTRODUCTION. 21 

Note. — At this standpoint tlie finite implies that what- 
ever is in itself, or according to its conception, has an 
existence or manifestation different from what it is for 
itself. For example the abstract separateness of nature is 
in itself space, but for itself time. Here, two things are 
to be observed, (1) that because the truth is the idea, when 
any object or phase is apprehended only as it is in itself or 
in conception, it is not as yet apprehended in its truth, and 
yet (2) that, whatever exists as conception or in itself, at 
the same time exists, and this existence is a peculiar form 
of the object, as e.g. space. The separation of existence- 
in-itself or implicit existence from existence-for-itself or 
explicit existence is a characteristic of the finite, and con- 
stitutes its appearance or merely external reality. An 
example of this is to hand in the separation of the natural 
will from formal right. The understanding adheres tc 
mere implicit existence, and in accordance with this position 
calls freedom a capacity, since it is at this point only a 
possibility. But the understanding regards this phase as 
absolute and perennial, and considers the relation of the 
will to what it wills or reality as an application to a given 
material, which does not belong to the essence of freedom. 
In this way the understanding occupies itself with mere 
abstractions, and not with the idea and truth. 

Addition. — The wiU, which is will only according to the 
conception, is free implicitly, but is at the same time 
not free. To be truly free, it must have a truly fixed 
content ; then it is explicitly free, has freedom for its 
object, and is freedom. What is at first merely in concep- 
tion, i.e., implicit, is only direct and natural,. We are 
familiar with this in pictorial thought also. The child is 
implicitly a man, at first has reason implicitly, and is at 
first the possibility of reason and freedom. He is thus 
free merely according to the conception. That which is 
only implicit does not yet exist in actuality. A man, who 
is implicitly rational, must create himself by working 



22 THE PHILOSOPHY OF BIGHT. 

through and out of himself and by reconstructing himself 
within himself, hef ore he can become also explicitly rational. 

11, The will, which is at first only implicitly free, is the 
direct or natural will. The distinctive phases, which the 
self-determining conception sets up in the will, appear in the 
direct will, as a directly present content. They are im- 
pulses, appetites, inclinations, by which the will finds itself 
determined by nature. Now this content, with all its 
attendant phases, proceeds from the rationality of the will, 
and is therefore implicitly rational ; but let loose in its im- 
mediate directness it has not as yet the form of rationahty. 
The content is indeed for me and my own, but the form 
and the content are yet different. The will is thus in 
itself finite. 

Note. — Empirical psychology enumerates and describes 
these impulses and inclinations, and the wants which are 
based upon them. It takes, or imagines that it takes this 
material from experience, and then seeks to classify it in 
the usual way. It will be stated below, what the objective 
side of impulse is, and what impulse is in its truth, apart 
from the form of irrationality which it has as an impulse, 
and also what shape it assumes when it reaches existence. 

Addition. — Impulse, appetite, inclination are possessed 
by the animal also, but it has not will ; it must obey 
impulse, if there is no external obstacle. Man, however, 
is the completely undetermined, and stands above impulse, 
and may fix and set it up as his. Impulse is in nature, 
but it depends on my will whether I establish it in the I. 
Nor can the will be unconditionally called to this action by 
the fact that the impulse lies in nature. 

12. The system of this content, as it occurs directly in 
the will, exists only as a multitude or multiplicity of im- 
pulses, every one of which is mine in a general way along 
with others, but is at the same time universal and undeter- 
mined, having many objects and ways of satisfaction. 
The will, by giving itself in this two-fold indefiniteness the 



INTRODUCTlOiV. 23 

form of individuality (§ 7), resolves, and only as resolving 
is it actual. 

Note. — Instead of to "resolve," i.e. to supersede the 
indefinite condition in which a content is merely possible, 
our language has the expression " decide " (" unfold itseK ") . 
The indeterminate condition of the will, as neutral but 
infinitely fruitful germ of aU existence, contains within 
itself its definite character and ends, and brings them forth 
solely out of itself. 

13. By resolution will fixes itself as the will of a definite 
individual, and as thereby distinguishing itself from 
another. However apart from this finite character which 
it has as consciousness (§ 8), the immediate will is in 
virtue of the distinction between its form and its content 
formal. Hence its resolution as such is abstract, and its 
content is not yet the content and work of its freedom. 

Note. — To the intelligence, as thinking, the object or 
content remains universal ; the intelligence retains the 
form merely of a universal activity. Now the universal 
signifies in will that which is mine, i.e. it is individuality. 
And yet, also, the direct and formal will is abstract ; its 
individuality is not yet filled with its free universality. 
Hence at the beginning the peculiar finitude of the intelli- 
gence is in will, and only by exalting itself again to 
thought and giving itself intrinsic universality does the 
will transcend the distinction of form and content and 
make itself objective infinite will. It is therefore a mis- 
understanding of the nature of thought and will to suppose 
that in the will man is infinite, while in thought and even 
in reason he is limited. In so far as thought and will are 
still distinct, the reverse is rather the case, and thinking 
reason, when it becomes will, assigns itself to finitude. 

Addition. — A will which resolves nothing, is not an 
actual will; that which is devoid of definite character 
never reaches a volition. The reason for hesitation may lie 
in a sensitiveness, which is aware that in determining 



24 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

itself it is engaged witli what is finite, is assigning itself a 
limit, and abandoning its infinity ; it may thus hold to its 
decision not to renounce the totality which it intends. 
Such a feeling is dead, even when it aims to be something 
beautiful. " Who will be great," says Groethe, " must be 
able to limit himself." By Tolition alone man enters 
actuality, however distasteful it may be to him ; for indo- 
lence w'ui not desert its own self-brooding, in which it 
clings to a universal possibility. But possibility is not yet 
actuality. Hence the will, which is secure simply of itself, 
does not as yet lose itself in any definite reality. 

14. The finite will, which has merely from the stand- 
poiut of form doubled itself back upon itself, and has 
become the infinite and self-secluded I (§ 5), stands above 
its content of different impulses and also above the several 
ways by which they are realized and satisfied. At the 
same time, as it is only formally infinite, it is confined to 
this very content as the decisive feature of its nature and 
external actuality, although it is undetermined and not 
confined to one content rather than another (§§ 6, 11). 
As to the return of the I into itself such a will is only a 
possible will, which may or may not be mine, and the I is 
only the possibility of deputing itself to this or that object. 
Hence amongst these definite phases, which in this light 
are for the I external, the will chooses. 

15. Freedom of the will is in this view of it caprice, 
in which are contained both a reflection, which is free and 
abstracted from everything, and a dependence upon a con- 
tent or matter either internally or externally provided. 
Since the content is in itself or implicitly necessary as 
an end, and in opposition to this reflection is a definite 
possibility, caprice, when it is will, is in its nature con- 
tingent. 

Note. — The usual idea of freedom is that of caprice. It 
is a midway stage of reflection between the will as merely 
natural impulse and the will as free absolutely. When it 



INTRODUCTION. 25 

is said that freedom as a general thing consists in doing 
what one likes, such an idea must be taken to imply 
an utter lack of developed thought, containing as yet not 
even a suspicion of what is meant by the absolutely free 
■mil, right, the ethical system, etc. Eeflection, being the 
formal universality and tmity of self- consciousness, is the 
will's abstract certitude of its freedom, but it is not yet the 
truth of it, because it has not as yet itself for content and 
end ; the subjective side is stiU different from the objective. 
Thus the content in such a case remains purely and com- 
pletely finite. Caprice, instead of being will in its truth, is 
rather will in its contradiction. 

In the controversy carried on, especially at the time of 
the metaphysic of Wolf, as to whether the will is really 
free, or our consciousness of its freedom is a delusion, 
it was this caprice which was in the minds of both parties. 
Against the certitude of abstract self-direction, determinism 
rightly opposed a content, which was externally presented, 
and not being contained in this certitude came from without. 
It did not matter whether this " without " were impulse, 
imagination, or in general a consciousness so filled that 
the content was not the peculiar possession of the self- 
determining activity as such. Since only the formal 
element of free self -direction is immanent in caprice, while 
the other element is something given to it from without, to 
take cajmce as freedom may fairly be named a delusion. 
Freedom in every philosophy of reflection, whether it be the 
Kantian or the rriesian, which is the Kantian super- 
ficialized, is nothing more than this formal self -activity. 

Addition. — Since I have the possibility of determining 
myself in this or that way, since I have the power of choice, 
I possess caprice, or what is commonly called freedom. 
This choice is due to the universality of the will, enabling 
me to make my own this thing or another. This possession 
is a particular content, which is therefore not adequate to 
me, but separated from me, and is mine only in possibility ; 



26 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

just as I am the possibility of bringing myself into coinci- 
dence witb it. Hence cboice is due to the indeterminate- 
ness of the I, and to the determinateness of a content. 
But as to this content the will is not free, although it has 
in itself formally the side of infinitude. No such content 
corresponds to will ; in no content can it truly find itself. 
In caprice it is involved that the content is not formed by 
the nature of my will, but by contingency. I am de- 
pendent upon this content. This is the contradiction con- 
tained in caprice. |Ordinary man believes that he is free, 
when he is allowed to act capriciously, but precisely in 
caprice is it inherent that he is not free. ; When I will the 
rational, I do not act as a particular individual but accord- 
ing to the conception of ethical observance in general. In 
an ethical act I establish not myself but the thing. A man, 
who acts perversely, exhibits particularity. The rational is 
the highway on which every one travels, and no one is 
specially marked. When a great artist finishes a work we 
say : " It must be so." The particularity of the artist has 
wholly disappeared and the work shows no mannerism. 
Phidias has no mannerism; the statue itself lives and 
moves. But the poorer is the artist, the more easily we 
discern himself, his particularity and caprice. If we adhere 
to the consideration that in caprice a man can will what he 
pleases, we have certainly freedom of a kind ; but again, if 
we hold to the view that the content is given, then man 
must be determined by it, and in this light is no longer 
free. 

16. What is resolved upon and chosen (§ 14) the wiU 
may again give up (§ 5). Yet, even with the possibility of 
transcending any other content which it may substitute, 
and of proceeding iji this way ad imfinitum, the will does 
not advance beyond finitude, because every content in turn 
is different from the form and is finite. The opposite aspect, 
naraely indeterminateness, irresolution or abstraction, is 
also one-sided. 



INTRODUCTION. 27 

17. Since the contradiction involved in caprice (§ 16) is 
the dialectic of the impulses and inclinations, it is mani- 
fested in their mutual antagonism. The satisfaction of one 
demands the subjection and sacrifice of the satisfaction of 
another. Since an impulse is merely the simple tendency 
of its own essential nature, and has no measure in itself, to 
subject or sacrifice the satisfaction of any impulse is a 
contingent decision of caprice. In such a case caprice 
may act upon the calculation as to which impulse will 
bring the greater satisfaction, or may have some other 
similar purpose. 

1 Addition. — Impulses and inclinations are in the first 
instance the content of will, and only reflection transcends 
them. But these impulses are self-directing, crowding 
ujpon and jostling one another, and all seeking to be 
satisfied. To set all but one in the background, and put 
myself into this one, is to limit and distort myself, since I, 
ip so doing, renounce my universality, which is a system of 
sill the impulses. Just as little help is found in a mere 
subordination of them, a course usually followed by the 
understanding. There is available no criterion by which 
to make such an arrangement, and hence the demand for a 
subordination is usually sustained by tedious and irrelevant 
allusions to general sayings. 

18. With regard to the moral estimate of impulses, 
dialectic appears in this form. The phases of the direct or 
natural will are immanent and positive, and thus good. 
Hence man is by nature good. But natural characteristics, 
since they are opposed to freedom and the conception of the 
spirit, and are, hence, negative, must be eradicated. Thus 
man is by nature evil. To decide for either view is a njatter 

Cubjective caprice. 
iddition. — The Christian doctrine that man is by nature 
is loftier than the opposite that he is naturally good, 
and IS to be interpreted philosophically in this way. Man 
as spirit is a free being, who need not give way to impulse. 



28 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

Hence in his direct and unformed condition, man is in 
a situation in which he ought not to be, and he must free 
himself. This is the meaning of the doctrine of original 
sin, without which Christianity would not be the religion of 
freedom. 

19. In the demand that impulses must be purified is 
found the general idea that they must be freed from 
the form of direct subjection to nature, and from a content 
that is subjective and contingent, and must be restored to 
their substantive essence. The truth contained in this iji- 
definite demand is that impulses should be phases of wilJlin 
a rational system. To apprehend them in this way as pro- 
ceeding from the conception is the content of the science i of 
right. I 

Note. — The content of this science may, in all its severlal 
elements, right, property, morality, family, state, be reprls- 
sented in this way, that man has by nature the impulse Jto 
right, the impulse to property, to morality, to sexual lovife, 
and to social life. If instead of this form, which belongis 
to empirical psychology, a philosophic form be preferred, it V; 
may be obtained cheap from what in modem times was re- i' 
puted and stiU is reputed to be philosophy. He will then I 
say that man finds in himself as a fact of consciousness 1 
that he wills right, property, the state, etc. Later will be I 
given still another form of the content which appears here 
in the shape of impulses, that, namely, of duties. 

20. The reflection which is brought to bear upon im- 
pulses, placing them before itself, estimating them, com- 
paring them with one another, and contrasting them with 
their means and consequences, and also with a whole 
of satisfaction, namely happiness, brings the formal uni 
versal to this material, and in an external way purifies it o; 
its crudity and barbarism. This propulsion by the uni- 
versality of thought is the absolute worth of civilization 
(§187)._ 

Addition. — In happiness thought has already the upper 



INTRODUCTION. 

hand with the force of natural impulse, since it is not 
satisfied with what is momentary, but requires happiness 
as a whole. This happiness is dependent upon civilization 
to the extent to which civilization confirms the universal. 
But in the ideal of happiness there are two elements. 
There is (1) a universal that is higher than all particulars ; 
yet, as the content of this universal is in turn only uni- 
versal pleasure, there arises once more the individual, 
particular and finite, and retreat must be made to impulse ; 
(2) Since the content of happiness lies in the subjective 
perception of each individual, this universal end is again 
particular ; nor is there present in it any true unity of 
content and form. 

21. But the truth of this formal universality, which 
taken by itself is undetermined and finds definite cha- 
racter in externally given material, is the self -directing 
universality which is will or freedom. Since the will has 
as its object, content and end, universality itself, and thus 
assumes the form of the infinite, it is free not only in 
itself or implicitly, but for itself or explicitly. It is the 
true idea. 

Note. — The self-consciousness of the will in the form of 
appetite or impulse is sensible, the sensible in general 
indicating the externality of self-consciousness, or that 
condition in which self-consciousness is outside of itself. 
Now this sensible side is one of the two elements of the 
reflecting will, and the other is the abstract universality of 
thought. But the absolute will has as its object the will 
itself as such in its pure universality. In this universality 
the directness of the natural will is superseded, and so also 
is the private individuahty which is produced by reflection 
and infects the natural condition. But to supersede these 
and Uft them into the universal, constitutes the activity 
of thought. Thus the self- consciousness, which purifies 
its object, content or end, and exalts it to universality, is 
thought carrying itself through iato will. It is at this 



30 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

point that it Ibecomes clear that the will is true and free 
only as thinking intelligence. The slave knows not his 
essence, his infinitude, his freedom ; he does not know 
himself in his essence, and not to know himself is not to 
think himself. (The self-consciousness, which by thought 
apprehends that itself is essence, and thus puts away from 
itself the accidental and untrue, constitutes the principle of 
right, morality, and all forms of ethical observance. They 
who, in speaking philosophically of right, morality, and 
ethical observance, would exclude thought and turn to 
feeling, the heart, the breast, and inspiration, express the 
deepest contempt for thought and science. And science 
itself, overwhelmed with despair and utter insipidity, 
makes barbarism and absence of thought a principle, and 
so far as in it lay robbed men of all truth, dignity, and 
worth. 

Addition. — In philosophy truth is had when the concep- 
tion corresponds to reality. A body is the reality, and soul 
is the conception. Soul and body should be adequate to 
each other. A dead man is still an existence, but no 
longer a true existence ; it is a reality void of conception. 
For that reason the dead body decays. So with the true 
will ; that which it wills, namely, its content, is identical 
with it, and so freedom wills freedom. 

22. The will which exists absolutely is truly infinite, 
because its object being the will itself, is for it not 
another or a limitation. In the object the will has simply 
reverted into itself. Moreover, it is not mere possibiUty, 
capacity, potentiality (potentia), but infinitely actual 
(infinitum actu), because the reality of the conception or 
its visible externality is internal to itself. 

Note. — Hence when the free will is spoken of without 
the qualification of absolute freedom, only the capacity of 
freedom is meant, or the natural and finite will (§ 11), 
and, notwithstanding all words and opinions to the con- 
trary, not the free will. Since the understanding com- 



INTRODUCTION. 31 

prehends the infinite only in its negatiTe aspect, and hence 
as a beyond, it thinks to do the infinite all the more 
honour the farther it removes it into the vague distance, 
and the more it takes it as a foreign thing. In free -will 
the true infinite is present and real ; it is itself the actually 
present self-contained idea. 

Addition. — The infinite has rightly been represented as 
a circle. The straight line goes out farther and farther, and 
symbolizes the merely negative and bad infinite, which, 
unlike the true, does not return into itself. The free wiU 
is truly infinite, for it is not a mere possibility or disposi- 
tion. Its external reality is its own inner nature, itself. 

23. Only in this freedom is the will wholly by itself, 
because it refers to nothing but itself, and all dependence 
upon any other thing falls away. — The will is true, or 
rather truth itself, because its character consists in its 
being in its manifested reality, or correlative opposite, 
what it is in its conception. In other words, the pure 
conception has the perception or intuition of itself as its 
end and reality. 

24. The will is universal, because in it all limitation and 
particular individuality are superseded. These one-sided 
phases are found only in the difference between the con- 
ception and its object or content, or, from another stand- 
point, in the difference between the conscious independent 
existence of the subject, and the vrill's implicit, or self- 
involved existence, or between its excluding and concluding 
individuality, and its universality. 

Note. — The different phases of universality are tabulated 
in the logic (" Encyclop. of the Phil. Sciences," §§ 118-126). 
Imaginative thinking always takes universality in an 
abstract and external way. But absolute universality is 
not to be thought of either as the universality of reflec- 
tion, which is a kind of concensus or generality, or, as the 
abstract universality and self -identity, which is fashioned 
by the understanding (§6, note), and keeps aloof from the 



32 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

individual. It is rather the concrete, self-contained, and 
self -referring universality, which is the substance, intrinsic 
genus, or immanent idea of self-consciousness. It is a 
conception of free will as the universal, transcending its 
object, passing through and beyond its own specific cha- 
racter, and then becoming identical with itself. — This abso- 
lute universal is what is in general called the rational, and 
is to be apprehended only in this speculative way. 

26. The subjective side of the will is the side of its self- 
consciousness and individuality (§ 7), as distinguished 
from its implicit conception. This subjectivity is (a) pure 
form or absolute unity of self-consciousness with itseK. 
This unity is the equation " I = I," consciousness being 
characterized by a thoroughly inward and abstract self- 
dependence. It is pure certitude of itself in contrast with 
the truth ; (fi) particularity of will, as caprice with its 
accidental content of pleasurable ends ; (y) in general a 
one-sided form (§ 8), in so far as that which is willed is at 
first an unfulfilled end, or a content which simply belongs 
to self-consciousness. 

26. (a) In so far as the will is determined by itself, and 
is in accord with its conception and true, it is wholly 
objective will. (j3) But objective self-consciousness, which 
has not the form of the infinite, is a will sunk in its object 
or condition, whatever the content of that may be. It is 
the will of the child, or the will present in slavery or 
superstition, (y) Objectivity is finally a one-sided form 
in opposition to the subjective phase of will ; it is direct 
reality, or external existence. In this sense the will 
becomes objective only by the execution of its ends. 

Note. — These logical phases of subjectivity and objec- 
tivity, since they are often made use of in the sequel, are 
here exposed, with the express purpose of noting that it 
happens with them as with other distinctions and opposed 
aspects of reflection; they by virtue of their finite and 
dialectic character pass over into their opposites. For 



INTRODUCTION. 33 

imagination and understanding the meanings of antithetic 
phases are not convertible, because their identity is still 
internal. But in will, on the contrary, these phases, 
which ought to be at once abstract and yet also sides of 
that which can be known only as concrete, lead of them- 
selves to identity, and to an exchange of meanings. To 
the understanding this is unintelligible. — Thus, e.g., the 
wUl, as a freedom which exists in itself, is subjectivity 
itself ; thus subjectivity is the conception of the will, and 
therefore its objectivity. But subjectivity is finite in 
opposition to objectivity, yet in this opposition the will is 
not isolated, but in intricate union with the object ; and 
thus its, finitude consists quite as much in its not being 
subjective, etc. — What in the sequel is to be meant by the 
subjective or the objective side of the will, has each time 
to be made clear from the context, which will supply their 
positions in relation to the totality. 

Addition. — It is ordinarily supposed that subjective and 
objective are blank opposite^ ; but this is not the case. 
Eather do they pass into one another, for they are not 
abstract aspects like positive and negative, but have already 
a doner ete significance. To consider in the first instance 
the expression " subjective ; " this may mean an end which 
is merely the end of a certain subject. In this sense a 
poor work of art, that is not adequate to the thing, is 
merely subjective. But, further, this expression may point 
to the content of the will, and is then of about the same 
meaning as capricious ; the subjective content then is that 
■^hich belongs merely to the subject. In this, sense bad 
acts are merely subjective. Further, the pure, empty I 
may be called subjective, as it has only itself as an object, 
and possesses the power of abstraction from all further 
content. Subjectivity has, moreover, a wholly particular 
and correct meaning in accordance with which anything, 
in order to win recognition from me, has to become mine 
and seek validity in me. This is the infinite avarice of 

D 



34 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

subjectivity, eager to comprehend and consume everything 
within the simple and pure I. 

Similarly we may take the objective in different ways. 
By it we may understand anything to which we give 
existence in contrast to ourselves, whether it he an actual 
thing or a mere thought, which we place over against our- 
selves. By it also we understand the direct reality, in 
which the end is to be realized. Although the end itself 
is quite particular and subjective, we yet name it objective 
after it has made its appearance. Further, the objective 
will is also that in which truth is ; thus, God's will, the 
ethical will also, are objective. Lastly, we may caU the 
wiU objective, when it is wholly submerged in its object, 
as, e.g., the child's will, which is confiding and without 
subjective freedom, and the slave's will, which does not 
know itself as free, and is thus a will-less will. In this 
sense any will' is objective, if it is guided in its action by a 
foreign authority, and has not yet completed the infinite 
return into itself. 

27. The absolute character or, if you like, the absolute 
impulse of the free spirit (§ 21) is, as has been observed, 
that its freedom shall be for it an object. It is to be 
objective in a two-fold sense : it is the rational system of 
itself, and this system is to be directly real (§ 26). There 
is thus actualized as idea what the will is implicitly. 
Hence, the abstract conception of the idea of the will is in 
general the free wiU which wills the free will. 

28. The activity of the will, directed to the task of 
transcending the contradiction between subjectivity and 
objectivity, of transferring its end from subjectivity into 
objectivity, and yet while in objectivity of remaining with 
itself, is beyond the formal method of consciousness (§ 8), 
in which objectivity is only direct actuality. This activity 
is the essential development of the substantive content of 
the idea (§ 21). In this development the conception 
moulds the idea, which is in the first instance abstract, into 



INTRODUCTION. 35 

the totality of a system. This totality as substantive is 
independent of the opposition between mere subjective end 
and its realization, and in both of these forms is the 
same. 

29.- That a reality is the realization of the free will, this 
is what is meant by a right. Eight, therefore, is, in 
general, freedom as idea. 

Note. — In the Kantian doctrine (Introduction to Kant's 
"Theory of Eight"), now generally accepted, " the highest 
factor is a limitation of my freedom or caprice, in order 
that it may he able to subsist alongside of every other 
individual's caprice in accordance with a universal law." 
This doctrine contains only a negative phase, that of 
limitation. And besides, the positive phase, the universal 
law or so-called law of reason, consisting in the agreement 
of the caprice of one with that of another, goes beyond the 
well-known formal identity and the proposition of con- 
tradiction. The definition of right, just quoted, contains 
the view which has especially since Eousseau spread widely. 
-According to this view neither the absolute and rational will, 
nor the true spirit, but the will and spirit of the particular 
individual in their peculiar caprice, are the substantive 
and primary basis. When once this principle is accepted, 
the rational can announce itself only as limiting this 
freedom. Hence it is not an inherent rationality, but only 
a mere external and formal universal. This view is 
accordingly devoid of speculative thought, and is rejected 
by the philosophic conception. In the minds of men and 
in the actual world it has assumed a shape, whose horror 
is without a parallel, except in the shallowness of the 
thoughts upon which it was founded. 

30. Eight in general is something holy, because it is the 
embodiment of the absolute conception and self-conscious 
freedom. But the formalism of right, and after a while 
of" duty also, is due to distinctions arising out of the 
development of the conception of freedom. In contrast 



36 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

with the more formal, abstract and hmited right, there is 
that sphere or stage of the spirit, in which spirit has 
brought to definite actuality the further elements contained 
in the idea. This stage is the richer and more concrete ; 
it is truly universal and has therefore a higher right. 

2ifote. — Every step in the development of the idea of 
freedom has its peculiar right, because it is the embodi-, 
ment of a phase of freedom. When morality and ethical 
observance are spoken of in opposition to right, only the 
first or formal right of the abstract personality is meant. 
Morahty, ethical observance, a state-interest, are every one 
a special right, because each of these is a definite realiza- 
tion of freedom. They can come into collision only in so 
far as they occupy the same plane. If the moral stand- 
point of spirit were not also a right and one of the forms 
of freedom, it could not collide with the right of personality 
or any other right. A right contains the conception of 
freedom which is the highest phase of spirit, and in opposi- 
tion to it any other kind of thing is lacking in real sub- 
stance. Yet collision also implies a limit and a subordina- 
tion of one phase to another. Only the right of the 
world-spirit is the unlimited absolute. 

31. The scientific method by which the conception is 
self-evolved, and its phases self -developed and self-pro- 
duced, is not first of all an assurance that certain relations 
are given from somiewhere or other, and then the applica- 
tion to this foreign material of the universal. The true 
process is found in the logic, and here is presupposed. 

Note. — The efficient or motive principle, which is not 
merely the analysis but the production of the several 
elements of the universal, I call dialectic. Dialectic is not 
that process in which an object or proposition, presented 
to feeliug or the direct consciousness, is analyzed, en- 
tangled, taken hither and thither, until at last its contrary 
is derived. Such a merely negative method appears 
frequently in Plato. It may fix the opposite of any 



INTRODUCTION. 37 

notion, or reveal the contradiction contained in it, as did 
the ancient scepticism, or it may in a feeble way consider 
an approximation to truth, or modern half-and-half attain- 
ment of it, as its goal. ^ But the higher dialectic of the con- 
ception does not merely apprehend any phase as a limit and 
opposite, but produces out of this negative a positive con- 
tent and result. ' Only by such a course is there develop- 
ment and inherent progress. Hence this dialectic is not 
the external agency of subjective thinking, but the private 
soul of the content, which unfolds its branches and fruit 
organically. Thought regards this development of the 
idea and of the peculiar activity of the reason of the idea 
as only subjective, but is on its side unable to make any 
addition. To consider anything rationally is not to bring 
reason to it from the outside, and work it up in this way, 
but to count it as itself reasonable. Here it is spirit in its 
freedom, the summit of self-conscious reason, which gives 
itself actuality, and produces itseH as the existing world. 
The business of science is simply to bring the specific work 
of the reason, which is in the thing, to consciousness. 

32. The phases of the development of the conception 
are themselves conceptions. And yet, because the concep- 
tion is essentially the idea, they have the form of manifes- 
tations. Hence the sequence of the conceptions, which 
arise in this way, is at the same time a sequence of realiza- 
tions, and are to be by science so considered. 

Note. — In a speculative sense the way, in which a con- 
ception is manifested in reality, is identical with a definite 
phase of the conception. But it is noteworthy that, in 
the scientific development of the idea, the elements, which 
result in a further definite form, although preceding this 
result as phases of the conception, do not in the tem- 
poral development go before it as concrete realizations. 
Thu«, as will be seen later, that stage of the idea which is 
the family presupposes phases of the conception, whose 
result it is. But that these internal presuppositions should 



38 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

be present in such visible realizations as right of property, 
contract, morality, etc., this is the other side of the process, 
which only in a highly developed civilization has attained 
to a specific realization of its elements. 

Addition. — The idea must always go on determining 
itself within itself, since at the beginning it is only abstract 
conception. However, this initial abstract conception is 
never given up, but only becomes inwardly richer, the last 
phase being the richest. The earlier and merely implicit 
phases reach in this way free self-dependence, but in such 
a manner that the conception remains the soul which holds 
everything together, and only through a procedure im- 
manent within itself arrives at its own distinctions. Hence 
the last phase falls again into a unity with the first, and it 
cannot be said that the conception ever comes to something 
new. Although the elements of the conception appear to 
have fallen apart when they enter reality, this is only a 
mere appearance. Its superficial character is revealed in 
the process, since all the particulars finally turn back again 
into the conception of the universal. The empirical sciences 
usually analyze what they find in pictorial ideas, and if the 
individual is successfully brought back to the general, the 
general property is then called the conception. But this is 
not our procedure. We desire only to observe how the 
conception determines itself, and compels us to keep at a 
distance everything of our own spinning and thinking. 
But what we get in this way is one series of thoughts and 
another series of realized forms. As to these two series, it 
may happen that the order of time of the actual manifesta- 
tions is partly different from the order of the conception. 
Thus it cannot, e.g., be said thait propei-ty existed before 
the family, and "yet, in spite of that it is discussed before 
the family is discussed. The question might also be 
raised here, Why do we not begin with the highest, i.e., 
with concrete truth ? The answer is, because we desire to 
see truth in the form of a result, and it is an essential part 



INTRODUCTION. 39 

of the process to conceive the conception first of all as ab- 
stract. The actual series of realizations of the conception 
is thus for us in due course as follows, even although in 
actuality the order should be the same. Our process is this, 
that the abstract forms reveal themselves not as self-sub- 
sistent but as untrue. 

Division of the Work. 

33. According to the stages in the development of the 
idea of the absolutely free will, 

A. The will is direct or immediate ; its conception is 
therefore abstract, i.e., personality, and its em.bodied 
reality is a direct external thing. This is the sphere of 
abstract or formal right. 

B. The will, passing out of external reality, turns back 
into itself. Its phase is subjective individuality, and it is 
contrasted with the universal. This universal is on its in- 
ternal side the good, and on its external side a presented 
world, and these two sides are occasioned only by means 
of each other. In this sphere the idea is divided, and 
exists in separate elements. The right of the subjective 
will is in a relation of contrast to the right of the world, or 
the right of the idea. Here, however, the idea exists only 
implicitly. This is the sphere of morality. 

c. The unity and truth of these two abstract elements. 
The thought idea of the good is realized both in the will 
turned back into itself, and also in the external world. 
Thus freedom exists as real substance, which is quite as 
much actuality and necessity as it is subjective will. The 
idea here is its absolutely universal existence, viz., ethical 
observance. This ethical substance is again, 

a. Natural spirit ; the family, 

6. The civic community, or spirit in its dual existence 
and mere appearance, 

c. The state, or freedom, which, while established in the 



40 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

free self-dependence of the particular will is also universajl 
and objective. This actual and organic spirit (a) is the spirit 
of a nation, (fi) is found in the relation to one another of 
national spirits, and (y) passing through and beyond this 
relation is actualized and revealed in world history as the 
universal world-spirit, whose right is the highest. 

Note. — It is to be found in the speculative logic, and 
here is presupposed, that a thing or content, which is estab- 
Hshed first of all according to its conception, or imphcitly, 
has the form of direct existence. The conception, however, 
when it has the form of the conception is explicit, and no 
longer is a direct existence. So, too, the principle, upon 
which the division of this work proceeds, is presupposed. 
The divisions might be regarded as already settled by 
history, since the different stages must be viewed as 
elements in the development of the idea, and therefore as 
springing from the nature of the content itself. A philo- 
sophic division is not an external classification of any given 
material, such a classification as would be made according 
to one or several schemes picked up at random, but the in- 
herent distinctions of the conception itself. Morality and 
ethical observance, which are usually supposed to mean the 
same thing, are here taken in essentially different meanings. 
Meanwhile even imaginative thought seems to make a dis- 
tinction between them. In the usage of Kant the pre- 
ference is given to the term morality, and the practical 
principles of his philosophy limit themselves wholly to this 
standpoint, making impossible the standpoint of ethical 
observance, and indeed expressly destroying and abolishing 
it. Although morality and ethics have the same meaning 
according to their etymology, yet these different words may 
be used for different conceptions. 

Addition. — ^When we speak of right, we mean not only 
civil right, which is the usual significance of the word, but 
also morality, ethical observance and world-history. These 
belong to this -realm, because the conception taking them in 



INTRODUCTION, 41 

their truth, brings them all together. Free will, in order 
not to remain abstract, must in the first instance give itself 
reality ; the sensible materials of this reality are objects, 
i.e., external things. This first phase of freedom we shall 
know as property. This is the sphere of formal and 
abstract right, to which belong property in the more 
developed form of contract and also the injury of right, i.e., 
crime and punishment. The freedom, we have here, we name 
person, or, in other words, the subject who is free, and indeed 
free independently, and gives himself a reality in things. 
But this direct reality is not adequate to freedom, and the 
negation of this phase is morality. In morality I am 
beyond the freedom found directly in this thing, and have a 
freedom in which this directness is superseded. I am free 
in myself, i.e., in the subjective. In this sphere we come 
upon my insight, intention, and end, and externality 
is estabUshed as indifferent. The good is now the 
universal end, which is not to remain merely internal 
to me, but to realize itself. The subjective will de- 
mands that its inward character, or purpose, shall re- 
ceive external reality, and also that the good shall be 
brought to completion in external existence. Morality, like 
formal right, is also an abstraction, whose truth is reached 
only in ethical observance. Hence ethical observance is the 
unity of the will in its conception with the will of the indi- 
vidual or subject. The primary reality of ethical observ- 
ance is in its turn natural, taking the form of love and 
feeling. This is the family. In it the individual has 
transcended his prudish personality, and finds himself with 
his consciousness in a totality. In the next stage is seen the 
loss of this peculiar ethical existence and substantive unity. 
Here the family falls asunder, and the members become in- 
dependent one of another, being now held together merely 
by the bond of mutual need. This is the stage of the civic 
community, which has frequently been taken for the state. 
But the state does not arise until we reach the third stage. 



42 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

that stage of ethical observance or spirit, in whicli both 
individual independence and universal substantivity are 
found in gigantic union. The right of the state is, there- 
fore, higher than that of the other stages. It is freedom 
in its most concrete embodiment, which yields to nothing 
but the highest absolute truth of the world-spirit. 



FIRST PART. 

ABSTRACT RIGHT. 

34. The completely free will, when it is conceived abstractly, 
is in a condition of self -involved simplicity. What actuality 
it has when taken in this abstract way, consists in a nega- 
tive attitude towards reality, and a bare abstract reference 
of itself to itself. Such an abstract will is the individual 
will of a subject. It, as particular, has definite ends, and, 
as exclusive and individual, has these ends before itself as 
an externally and directly presented world. 

Addition^ — The remark that the completely free will, 
when it is taken abstractly, is in a condition of self-in- 
volved simplicity must be understood in this way. The 
completed idea of the will is found when the conception has 
realized itself fully, and in such a manner that the embodi- 
ment of the conception is nothing but the development 
of the conception itself. But at the outset the con- 
ception is abstract. All its future characters are implied 
in it, it is true, but as yet no more than implied. They 
are, in other words, potential, and are not yet developed 
into an articulate whole. If I say, "I am free," the I, 
here, is still implicit and has no real object opposed to it. 
But from the standpoint of morality as contrasted with 
abstract right there is opposition, because there I am a 
, particular will, while the good, though within me, is the 
universal. Hence, at that stage, the will contains within 
itself the contrast between particular and universal, and in 
that way is made definite. But at the beginning such 



44 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT, 

a distinction does not occur, because in the first abstract 
unity there is as yet no progress or modification of any 
kind. That is what is meant by saying that the -will has 
the mark of self-involved simplicity or immediate being. 
The chief thing to notice at this point is that this very 
absence of definite features is itself a definite feature. 
Absence of determinate character exists where there is 
as yet no distinction between the will and its content. 
But when this lack of definiteness is set in opposition to 
the definite, it becomes itself something definite. In other 
words, abstract identity becomes the distinguishing feature 
of the will, and the will thereby becomes an individual will 
or person. 

35. This consciously free will has a universal side, which 
consists in a formal, simple and pure reference to itself as 
a separate and independent unit. This reference is also a 
self-conscious one though it has no further content. The 
subject is thus so far a person. It is implied in personality 
that I, as a distinct being, am on all sides completely 
bounded and limited, on the side of inner caprice, impulse 
and appetite, as well as in my direct and visible outer life. 
But it is implied likewise that I stand in absolutely pure 
relation to myself. Hence it is that in this finitude I 
know myself as infinite, universal and free. 

Note. — Personality does not arise till the subject has 
not merely a general consciousness of himself in some 
determinate mode of concrete existence, but rather a con- 
sciousness of himself as a completely abstract I, in which 
all concrete limits and values are negated and declared 
invalid. Hence personality involves the knowledge of one- 
self as an object, raised, however, by thought into the 
realm of pure infinitude, a realm, that is, in which it is 
purely identical with itself. ladividuals and peoples have 
no personality, if they have not reached this pure thought ^ 
and self-consciousness. In this way, too, the absolute or 
completed mind or spirit may be distinguished from its 



ABSTRACT RIGHT. 45 

mere semblance. The semblance, though self-conscious, is 
aware of itself only as a merely natural will with its 
external objects. The other, as an abstract and pure I, 
has itself as its end and object, and is therefore a person. 
Addition.— The abstract will, the will which exists for 
itself, is a person. The highest aim of man is to be a 
person, and yet again the mere abstraction "person" is 
not held in high esteem. Person is essentially different 
from subject. Subject is only the possibiUty of person- 
ality. Any living thing at all is a subject, while person is 
a subject which has its subjectivity as an object. As a 
person I exist for myself. Personality is the free being in 
pure self-conscious isolation. I as a person am conscious 
of freedom. I can abstract myself from everything, since 
nothing is before me except pure personality. Notwith- 
standing all this I am as a particular person completely 
limited. I am of a certain age, height, in this space, and 
so on. Thus a person is at one and the same time so exalted 
and so lowly a thing. In him is the unity of infinite and 
finite, of limit and unlimited. The dignity of personaUty 
can sustain a contradiction, which neither contains nor 
could tolerate anything natural. 

36. (1) Personahty implies, in general, a capacity to 
possess rights, and constitutes the conception and abstract 
basis of abstract right. This right, being abstract, must 
be formal also. Its mandate is : Be a person and respect 
others as persons. 

37. (2) The particularity of the will, that phase of the 
will, namely, which implies a consciousness of my specific 
interests, is doubtless an element of the whole conscious- 
ness of the will (§ 34), but it is not contained in mere 
abstract personality. It is indeed present in the form of 
appetite, want, impulse^ and random desire, but is distinct 
as yet from the personality, which is the essence of free- 
dom. — In treating of formal right therefore, we do not 
trench upon special interests, such as my advantage or my 



46 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

well-being, nor have we here to do with any special reason 
or intention of the will. 

Addition. — Since the particular phases of the person 
have not as yet attained the form of freedom, everything 
relating to these elements is so far a matter of indifference. 
When anyone bases a claim upon his mere formal right, 
he may be wholly selfish, and often such a claim comes 
from a contracted heart and mind. Uncivilized man, in 
general, holds fast to his rights, while a more generous 
disposition is alert to see all sides of the question. Abstract 
right is, moreover, the first mere possibility, and in con- 
trast with the whole context of a given relation is still 
formal. The possession of a right gives a certain authority, 
it is true, but it is not, therefore, absolutely necessary that 
I insist upon a right, which is only one aspect of the 
whole matter. In a word, possibility is something, which 
means that it either may or may not exist. 

38. In contrast with the deeper significance of a concrete 
act in all its moral and social bearings, abstract right is 
only a possibility. Such a right is, therefore, only a per- 
mission or indication of legal power. Because of this 
abstract character of right the only rule which is uncon- 
ditionally its own is merely the negative principle not to 
injure personality or anything which of necessity belongs 
to it. Hence we have here only prohibitions, the positive, 
form of command having in the last resort a prohibition 
as its basis. 

39. (3) A person in his direct and definite individuality 
is related to a given external nature. To this outer world 
the personality is opposed as something subjective. But 
to confine to mere subjectivity the personality, which is 
meant to be infinite and universal, contradicts and destroys 
its nature. It bestirs itself to abrogate the limitation by 
giving itself reality, and proceeds to make the outer visible 
existence its own. 

[40. Bight is at first the simple and direct concrete 



ABSTRACT RIGHT. 47 

existence wHcli freedom gives itself directly. This un- 
modified existence is 

(a) Possession or property. Here freedom is that of 
the abstract will in general, or of a separate person who 
relates himself only to himself. 

(6) A person by distinguishing himself from himself 
becomes related to another person, although the two have 
no fixed existence for each other except as owners. Their 
implicit identity becomes realized through a transference 
of property by mutual consent, and with the preservation 
of their rights. This is contract. 

(c) The will in its reference to itself, as in (a), may be at 
variance not with some other person, (6), but within itself. 
As a particular will it may differ from and be in opposition 
to its true and absolute self. This is wrong and crinjgj 

Note. — The division of rights into personal right, real 
right, and right to actions is, like many other divisions, 
intended to systematize the mass of unorganized material. 
But this division utterly confuses rights which presuppose 
such concrete relations as the family or the state with 
those which refer to mere abstract personality. An example 
of this confusion is the classification, made popular by 
Kant, of rights into Beal Eights, Personal Rights, and 
Personal Eights that are Eeal in kind. It would take us 
too far afield to show how contorted and irrational is the 
classification of rights into personal and real, a classifica- 
tion which lies at the foundation of Eoman law. The 
right to actions concerns the administration of justice, and 
does not fall under this branch of the subject. Clearly it 
is only personality which gives us a right to things, and 
therefore personal right is in essence real right. A thing 
must be taken in its universal sense as the external opposite 
of freedom, so that in this sense my body and my life are 
things. Thus real right is the right of personality as such. 
In the interpretation of personal right, found in Eoman 
law, a man is not a person till he has reached a certain 



48 THE PHILOSOPHY OF BIGHT. 

status (Heineccii "Elem. Jur. CIt.," § Ixxv.). In Eoman 
law personality is an attribute of a class and is contrast€d 
with slavery. The so-called personal right of Eoman law- 
includes not only a right to slaves, a class to which 
probably belong the children, not only a right over the 
class which has been deprived of right (capitis diminutio), 
but also family relations. With Kant, family relations are 
wholly personal rights which are real in kind.- — The Roman 
personal right is not the right of a person as such, but of 
a special person. It will be afterwards shown that, the 
family relation is really based upon the renunciation of 
personality. It cannot but seem an inverted method to 
treat of the rights of persons who belong to definite classes 
before the universal right of personality. — According to 
Kant personal rights arise out of a contract or agreement 
that I should give or perform something ; this is the jus 
ad rem of Eoman law which has its source in an ohligatio. 
Only a person, it is true, can perform a thing through 
contract ; and further, only a person can acquire the right 
to such a performance. Tet we cannot, therefore, call 
such a right personal. Every sort of right is right of a 
person ; but a right, which springs out of contract, is not 
a right to a person, but only to something external to him, 
or to be disposed of by him ; and this is always a thing. 



PIEST SECTION. 
Peopeett. 

41. A person must give to his freedom an external 
sphere, in order that he may reach the completeness 
implied in the idea. Since a person is as yet the first 
abstract phase of the completely existent, infinite will, the 
external sphere of freedom is not only distinguishable from 
him but directly different and separable. 

Addition.^-The reasonableness of property consists^in 



PROPERTY. 49 

its satisfying our needs, but in its superseding and re- 
placing the subjective phase of personality. It is in pos- 
session first of all that the person becomes rational. The 
first realization of my freedom in an external object is an 
imperfect one, it is true, but it is the only realization 
possible so long as the abstract personality has this first- 
hand relation to its object. 

42. That which is defined as different from the free 
spirit is both in its own nature and also for this spirit the 
external. It is an object, something not free, impersonal 
and without rights. 

Note. — " Thing," like " objective," has two opposite 
meanings. When we say " That is the thing or fact," " It 
depends on the thing itself, not on the person," we mean 
by " thing " that which is real and substantive. But it is 
also contrasted with person, which here includes more than 
a particular subject, and then it means the opposite of the 
real and substantive, and is something merely external. — 
What is external for the free spirit, which is different 
from mere consciousness, is absolutely external. Hence 
nature is to be conceived as that which is external in its 
very self. 

Addition. — Since a thing has no subjectivity it is external 
not merely to a subject, but to itself. Space and time are 
external. I, as sensible, am external, spatial, and tem- 
poral. My faculty of sense-perception is external to itself. 
An animal may perceive, but the soul of the animal has 
as its object not itself, but something external. 

43. The person in his direct conception and as a separate 
individual has an existence which is purely natural. This 
existence is something partly inalienable, partly akin in its 
nature to the external world. — As the individual is con- 
sidered in his first abstract simplicity, reference is here 
made only to those features of personality with which he 
is directly endowed, not to those which he might proceed 
to acquire by voluntary eff or 




50 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

Note. — Mental endowments, science, art, such matters 
of religion as sermons, masses, prayers, blessings of con- 
secrated utensils, inventions also, are objects of exchange, 
recognized things to be bought and sold. It is possible to 
ask, also, if an artist or scholar is in legal possession of his 
art, science, or capacity to preach or read mass ; and the 
question is put on the presumption that these objects are 
things. Tet one hesitates to call such gifts, knowledge, 
powers, mere things, because although they may be bar- 
gained for as a thing, they have an inner spiritual side. 
Hence the understanding becomes confused as to how they 
are to be regarded at law. Before lie understanding always 
arises an exclusive disjunction, which in this case is that 
something must be either a thing or not a thing. It is 
like the disjunctive judgment that a thing must be either 
finite or infinite. But, though knowledge, talents, etc., are 
the possession of the free mind, and therefore internal to 
it, they may be relinquished and given an external existence. 
(See below.) They would then fall under the category of 
things. They are not direct objects at the first, but the 
spirit lowers its inner side to the level of the directly 
external. 

According to the unjust and immoral finding of the 
Koman law, children were things for their father, and 
he was in legal possession of them. At the same time 
he was related to them '^ ethically by the tie of love, 
although the value of this relation was much weakened by 
the legal usage. In this legal relation there occurs a 
completely wrong union of thing and not-thing. 

The essential feature of abstract right is that its object 
is the person as such, with only those elements added 
which, belonging to the external and visible embodiment 
of his freedom, are directly different from him and separ- 
able. Other phases it can include only after the conscious 
operation of the subjective wiU. Mental endowments, the 
sciences, etc., come up for treatment only from the stand- 



PROPERTY. 51 

point of legal possession. The possession of the body and 
the mind, which is acquired by education, study and habit, 
is an inward property of the spirit, and does not fall to be 
considered here. The process by which a mental posses- 
sion passes into the external world and comes under the 
category of a legal property, will be taken up later, under 
relinquishment. 

44. A person has the right to direct his will upon any 

object, as his real and positive end. The object thus 

becomes his. As it has no end in itself, it receives its 

meaning and soul from his will. Mankind has the abso- 

" lute right to appropriate all that is a thing. 

Note. — There is a philosophy which ascribes to the 
impersonal, to separate things, as they are directly appre- 
hended, an independent and absolutely complete reality. 
There is also a philosophy which affirms that the mind 
cannot know what the truth or the thing in itself is. 
These philosophies are directly contradicted by the attitude 
of the free will to these things. Although the so-called 
external things seem to have an independent reality in 
consciousness as perceiving and imagining, the free will is 
the idealization or truth of such reality. 

Addition. — A man may own anything, because he is a 
free will, and is therefore self-contained and self-depen- 
dent. But the mere object is of an opposite nature. 
Every man has the right to turn his will upon a thing or 
make the thing an object of his will, that is to say, to set 
aside the mere thing and recreate it as his own. As the 
thing is in its nature external, it has no purpose of its own 
and contains no infinite reference to itself; it is external 
to itself. An animal also is external to itself, and is, so 
far, a thing. Only the wiU is the unlimited and absolute., 
while all other things in contrast with the will are 
merely relative. To appropriate is at bottom only to mani- 
fest the majesty of my will towards things, by demonstrat- 
ing that they are not self -complete and have no purpose 



52 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

of their own. TMs is brought about by my instilling into 
the object another end than that which it primarily had. 
When the living thing becomes my property it gets 
another soul than it had. I give it my will. Free will is 
thus the ideahsm which refuses to hold that things as they 
are can be self-complete. Eealism on the other hand 
declares them to be absolute in their finite form. But this 
realistic philosophy is not shared in by the animal, which 
by consuming things proves that they are not absolutely 
independent. 

46. To have something in my power, even though it be 
externally, is possession. The special fact that I make 
something my own through natural want, impulse or 
caprice, is the special interest of possession. But, when I 
as a free will am in possession of something, I get a 
tangible existence, and in this way first became an actual 
will. This is the true and legal nature of property, and 
constitutes its distinctive character. 

Note. — Since our wants are looked upon as primary, the 
possession of property appears at first to be a means to 
their satisfaction ; but it is really the first embodiment of 
freedom and an independent end. 

46. Since property makes objective my personal indivi- 
dual will, it is rightly described as a private possession. 
On the other hand, common property, which may be pos- 
sessed by a number of separate individuals, is a mark of a 
loosely joined company, in which a man may or may not 
allow his share to remain at his own choice. 

Note. — The elements of nature cannot become private 
property. — In the agrarian laws of Eome may be found a 
conflict between collective and private ownership of land. 
Private possession is the more reasonable, and, even at the 
expense of other rights, must win the victory. — Property 
bound up with family trusts contains an element which is 
opposed to the right of personality and private ownership. 
Tet private possession must be kepb subject to the higher 



PROPERTY. 53 

spheres of right, to a corporate body, e.g., or to the state, 
as happens -when private ownership is entrusted to a so- 
called moral person, as in mortmain. Yet these exceptions 
are not to be based on chance, private caprice or personal 
benefit, \mt only on the rational organization of the state. 
The idea of Plato's " Eepublic" does a wrong to the person, 
in regarding him as unable to hold property. The theory 
of a pious, friendly, or even compulsory brotherhood of 
men, who are to possess all their goods in common, and to 
banish the principle of private ownership, easily presents 
itself to one who fails to understand the nature of freedom 
of spirit, and the nature of right, through mistaking their 
definite phases. There is a moral or religious side, also. 
When the friends of Epicurus proposed to establish a 
community of goods, he dissuaded them on the ground that 
the plan indicated a lack of confidence in one another, and 
that those who mistrusted one another could not be friends 
(" Diog. Laert." 1. x. n. vi). 

Addition. — In property my will is personal. But the 
person, it must be observed, is this particular individual, 
and, thus, property is the embodiment of this particular 
will. Since property gives visible existence to my will, it 
must be regarded as " this " and hence as " mine." This 
is the important doctrine of the necessity of private pro- 
perty. If exceptions may be made by the state, the state 
alone can be suffered to make them. But frequently, and 
especially in our time, it has restored private possession. 
Thus, for instance, many states have rightly abolished 
cloisters, because persons, living together in these institu- 
tions, have ultimately no such right to property, as the 
person has. 

47. As a person, I am an individual in only its simplest 
aspect ; more definitely, I am alive in a particular bodily 
organism. My body is as to its content my universal 
undiffetentiated external existence ; it is the real possibility 
of all definite phases. But also as a person I have my life 



54 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

and body, as I have other things only in so far as they ex- 
press my will. 

Note. — The view that the individual, not in his actualized 
existence but in his direct conception, is to be taken simply 
as living and having a physical organism follows from the 
conception of that phase of life and spirit, which we know 
as soul. The details of this conception are found in the 
philosophy of nature. 

I have organs and life only so far as I will. The 
animal cannot mutilate or kill itself, but a human being 
can. 

. Addition. — Animals do in a manner jjossess them- 
selves. Their soul is in possession of their body. But 
they have no right to their life, because they do not 
will it. 

48. The body, merely as it stands, is not adequate to 
spirit. In order to be a willing instrument and vitalized 
means, it must first be taken possession of by the spirit 
(§ 67). Still for others I am essentially a free being in my 
body, as I directly have it. 

Note. — It is only because I in my living body am a free 
being, that my body cannot be used as a beast of burden. 
In so far as, the I lives, the soul, which conceives and, what 
is more, is free, is not separated from the body. The body 
is the outward embodiment of freedom, and in it the I is 
sensible. It is an irrational and sophistic doctrine, which 
separates body and soul, calling the soul the thing in itself 
and maintaining that it is not touched or hurt when the body 
is wrongly treated, or when the existence of a person is sub- 
ject to the power of another. I can indeed withdraw out of 
my existence into myself and make my existence something 
external; I can regard any present feeling as something 
apart from my real self, and may in this way be free 
even in chains. But that is an affair of my will. I exist 
for others in my body ; that I am free for others is the 
same thing as that I am free in this outward life. If 



PKOPERTY. 56 

my body is treated roughly by others, I am treated 
roughly. 

Since it is I that am sensible, violence offered to my 
body touches me instantly and directly. This is the differ- 
ence between personal assault and injury to any external 
property. In property my will is not so vividly present as 
it is in my body. 

49. In m.y relation to external things, the rational element 
is that it is I who own property. But the particular ele- 
ment on the other hand is concerned with ends, wants, 
caprices, talents, external circumstances, etc. (§ 45) . Upon 
them, it is true, mere abstract possession depends, but they 
in this sphere of abstract personality are not yet identical 
with freedom. Hence what and how much I possess 
is from the standpoint of right a matter of indifference. 

Note. — If we can speak of several persons, when as yet 
no distinction has been drawn between one person and 
another, we may say that in personality all persons are 
equal. But this is an empty tautological proposition, 
since a person abstractedly considered is not as yet separate 
from others, and has no distinguishing attribute. Equality 
is the abstract identity set up by the mere understanding. 
Upon this principle mere reflecting thought, or, in other 
words, spirit in its middle ranges, is apt to fall, when 
before it there arises the relation of unity to difference. 
This equality would be only the equality of abstract 
persons as such, and would exclude all reference to posses- 
sion, which is the basis of inequality. Sometimes the de- 
mand is made for equaKty in the division of the soil of the 
earth, and even of other kinds of wealth. Such a claim 
is superficial, because differences of wealth are due not 
only to the accidents of external nature but also to the infi- 
nite variety and difference of mind and character. In 
short, the quality of an individual's possessions depends 
upon his reason, developed into an organic whole. We 
cannot say that nature is unjust in distributing wealth and 



56 THE PHILOSOPHV OF RIGHT. 

property unequally, because nature is not free and, there- 
fore, neither just nor unjust. It is in part a moral desire 
that all men should haye sufficient income for their wants, 
and when the wish is left in this indefinite form it is well- 
meant, although it, like everything merely well-meant, has 
no counterpart in reality. But, further, income is different 
from possession and belongs to another sphere, that of the 
civic community. 

Addition. — Since wealth depends upon application, 
equality in the distribution of goods would, if introduced, 
soon be disturbed again. What does not permit of being 
carried out, ought not to be attempted. Men are equal, it 
is true, but only as persons, that is, only with reference to 
the source of possession. Accordingly every one must 
have property. This is the only kind of equality which it 
is possible to consider. Beyond this is found the region of 
particular persons, and the question for the first time comes 
up. How much do I possess ? Here the assertion that the 
property of every man ought in justice to be equal to that 
of every other is false, since justice demands merely that 
every one should have property. Indeed, amongst persons 
variously endowed inequality must occur, and equality 
would be wrong. It is quite true that men often desire the 
goods of others ; but this desire is wrong, for right is un- 
concerned about difEerences in individuals. 

50. It is a self-evident and, indeed, almost superfluous 
remark that an object belongs to him who is accidentally 
first in possession of it. A second person cannot take into 
possession what is already the property of another. 

Addition. — So far we have been chiefly concerned with 
the proposition that personality must find an embodiment 
in property. From what has been said, it follows that he 
who is first in possession is likewise owner. He is rightful 
owner, not because he is first, but because he is a free will. 
He is not first till some one comes after him. 

51. In order to fix property as the outward symbol of 



PROPERTY. 57 

my personality, it is not enough that I represent it as mine 
and internally -will it to be mine ; I must also take it over 
into my possession. The embodiment of my will can then 
be recognized by others as mine. That the object, of 
which I take possession be unowned is a self-evident, 
negative condition (§ 50). Eather it is more than a bare 
negative, since it anticipates a relation to others. 

Addition. — A person's putting his will into an object is 
the conception of property, and the next step is the realizing 
of it. The inner act of my will, which says that something 
is mine, must be made recognizable for others. When I make 
an object mine, I give it a predicate, which must be mani- 
fested in its outer form, and not remain merely in my inner 
will. Children often affirm this earlier act of will against 
the real possessing of a thing by others. But for adults 
such a will is not enough. The form of subjectivity must 
be removed by working itself out into something objective. 

52. Active possession makes the material of an object my 
property, since the material is not independently its own. 

Note. — The material opposes itself to me. Indeed its 
very nature is to furnish opposition to me. It exhibits 
its abstract independence to my abstract or sentient con- 
sciousness. The sentient imagination, it may be said in 
passing, puts the truth upside down when it regards the 
sentient side of mind as concrete, and the rational as ab- 
stract. In reference therefore to the will and property this 
absolute independence of the material has no truth. Active 
possession, viewed as an external activity, by which the 
universal right of appropriating natural things becomes 
actualized, is allied to physical strength, cunning, skill, all 
the means, in short, by which one is able to take hold cor- 
poreally of a thing. Owing to the qualitative differences 
of natural objects, the mastery over and possession of them 
has an infinitely diversified meaning, and a corresponding 
limitation and contingency. Moreover, no one kind of 
matter, such as an element, can be wholly possessed by any 



58 THE PHILOSOPHY OF BIGHT. 

number of separate persons. In order to become a possible 
object of possession, it must be taken in separate parts, as 
a breath of air or draught of water. The impossibihty of 
owning one kind of matter, or an element, depends finally, 
not upon external physical incapacity, but upon the fact 
that the person, as will, is not only individual, but directly 
individual, and that the external exists for him, therefore, 
only as a collection of particulars. (§ 13, note to § 43.) 

The process, by which we become master and external 
owner, is in a sense infinite, and must remain more or less 
undetermined and incomplete. None the less, however, has 
the material an essential form, because of which alone it is 
anything. The more I appropriate this form, so much the 
more do I come into real possession of the object. The 
consumption of iood is a through-and-through change of 
its quality. The cultivation of skill in my body, and the 
education of my mind, are also more or less an active 
possession by means of thorough-going modification. Mind 
or spirit is above all that which I can make my own. 
But this possession is different from property. Property 
is completed in its relation to the free will. In the external 
relation of active possession something of externality re- 
mains as a residue, but with regard to the free will the 
owned object has reserved nothing. A matter without 
qualities, a something which in property is supposed to 
remain outside of me, and to belong wholly to the object, is 
an empty abstraction, which thought must expose and defeat. 

Addition. — Fichte has raised the question, whether, if I 
have fashioned an object, its material is also mine. Accord- 
ing to his view, if I have made a cup out of gold, any one 
may take the gold, provided that he does no injury to my 
handiwork. Though we may imagine that form and sub- 
stance are separable in that way, the distinction is an 
empty subtlety. If I take possession of a field, and plough 
it, not only is the furrow mine, but also the ground which 
belongs to it. It is my will to take possession of the ma- 



' PROPEHTY. 59 

terial, even the whole object. Hence the material is not 
masterless ; it is not its own. Even if the material remains 
outside of the form which I give the object, the form is a 
sign that the object is to be mine. Hence the thing does 
not stay outside of my will or purpose. There is con- 
sequently nothing in it which can be taken hold of by 
another. 

53. Property has its more direct phases in the relation of 
the will to the object. This relation is (a) direct and active 
taking of possession, in so far as the will is embodied in 
the object as in something positive. (/3) In so far as this 
object is negative towards the will, the will is visibly em- 
bodied in it as something to be negated. This is use. (y) 
The return of the will into itself out of the object; this is 
relinquishment. These three phases are the positive, nega- 
tive, and infinite judgments of the will concerning the 
object. 

A. The Act of Possession. 

54. Taking possession is partly the simple bodily grasp, 
partly the forming and partly the marking or designating 
of the object. 

Addition. — These modes of taking possession exhibit the 
progress from the category of particularity to that of uni- 
versality. Bodily seizure can be made only of particular 
objects, while marking an object is done by a kind of 
picture-thinking. In marking I keep before me a repre- 
sentation, by which I intend that the object shall be mine 
in its totality, and not merely the part which I can hold in 
my hand. 

55. (a) Corporeal possession, in which I am present di- 
rectly, and my will is directly visible, appeals at once to the 
senses, and from that standpoint is the most complete 
kind of possession. But it is after all only subjective, 
temporary and greatly limited as well by surroundings as 
by the qualities of the object. But if I can connect an 



60 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

object with anything I have already, or if the two hecome 
connected accidentally, the sphere of direct physical pre- 
hension is to some extent enlarged. 

Note. — Mechanical forces, weapons, iastruments extend 
the compass of my power. If my ground is washed by the 
sea or a river, or lies adjacent to a bit of good hunting 
country or a pasturage, if it contains stone or other minerals, 
if there is any treasure in it or upon it, in each of these 
ways possession may be enlarged. It is the same if the 
enlargement occurs after I have possession and accidentally, 
as is the case with so-called natural accretions, such as 
alluvia] deposits, and with objects that are stranded. Every- 
thing that is born is also an extension of my wealth, /osiwra 
as they are called ; but as they involve an organic relation, 
and are not external additions to an object already in my 
possession, they are different from the other accessories. 
All these adjuncts, some of them mutually exclusive, are 
possibilities by which one oWner rather than another may 
the more easily take a piece of land into possession, or work 
it up ; they may also be viewed as mere accidental accom- 
paniments of the object to which they are added. They 
are in fact external concomitants which do not include any 
. conception or living union. Hence it devolves upon the 
understanding to bring forward and weigh reasons for or 
against their being mine, and to apply the positive edicts 
of the law, so that a decision may be reached in accordance 
with the relative closeness of the connection between the 
object and its accessory. 

Addition. — The act of possession assumes a separation of 
parts in the object. I take no more into my possession 
than I can touch with my body. But, secondly, external 
things have a wider range than I am able to cover physi- 
cally. Something else stands in connection with what I 
own. Through the hand I exercise the act of ownership, 
but the compass of the hand can be enlarged. No animal 
has this noble member. What I grasp with it can itself 



PROPERTY. 61 

become a means to further prehension. When I come into 
possession of a thing, the understanding goes at once over 
into it, and as a consequence not only what is directly laid 
hold upon is mine, but likewise what is connected with it. 
At this juncture positive law must introduce its prescripts, 
because nothing more than this can be deduced from the 
conception. 

56. (/3) When something that is mine is formed, it be- 
comes independent of me, ceasing to be limited to my pre- 
sence in this space or time, or to the presence of my con- 
sciousness and will. 

Note. — The fashioning of a thing is the kind of active 
possession which is most adequate to the idea, because it 
unites the subjective and the objective. It varies infinitely 
according to the quality of the object and the purpose of 
the subject. To this head belongs likewise the formation 
or nurture of living things, in which my work does not re- 
main something foreign, but is assimilated, as in the culti- 
vation of the soil, the care of plants, and the taming, feed- 
ing, and tending of animals. It includes also any arrange- 
ment for the more efficient use of natural products or forces, 
as well as the effect of one material upon another, etc. 

Addition. — This act of forming may in practice assume 
the greatest variety of aspects. The soil, which I till, is 
formed. The forming of the inorganic is sometimes in- 
direct. When I, for instance, build a windmill, I have not 
formed the air, but I form something which will utilize 
the air. Yet, as I have not formed the air, I dare not call 
it mine. Moreover the sparing of a wild animal's life may 
be viewed as a forming, since my conduct is the preserva- 
tion of the object. It is the same kind of act as the train- 
ing of animals, only that training is more direct, and pro- 
ceeds more largely from me. 

57. In his direct life, before it is idealized by self -con- 
sciousness, man is merely a natural being, standing outside 
of his true conception. Only through the education of his 



62 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

body and mind, mainly by his becoming conscious of him- 
self as free, does he take possession of himself, become his 
own property, and stand in opposition to others. This 
active possession of himself, conversely, is the giving of 
actuality to what he is in conception, in his possibilities, 
faculties, and disposition. By this process he is for the 
first time securely established as his own, becom.es a 
tangible reality as distinguished from a simple conscious- 
ness of himself, and is capable of assuming the form of 
an object (§ 43, note). 

Note. — We are now in a position to consider slavery. 
We may set aside the justification of slavery based upon 
the argument that it originates in superior physical force, 
the taking of prisoners in war, the saving and preserving 
of life, upbringing, education, or bestowal of kindnesses. 
These reasons all rest ultimately on the ground that man 
is to be taken as a merely natural being, living, or, it may 
even be, choosing a life which is not adequate to his 
conception. TJpon the same footing stands the attempted 
justification of ownership as merely the status of masters, 
as also all views of the right to slaves founded on history. 
The assertion of the absolute injustice of slavery on the 
contrary, clinging to the conception that man, as spiritual, 
is free of himself, is also a one-sided idea, since it supposes 
man to be free by nature. In other words, it takes as the 
truth the conception in its direct and unreflective form 
rather than the idea. This antinomy, like all others, rests 
upon the external thinking, which keeps separate and inde- 
pendent each of two aspects of a single complete idea. In 
point of fact, neither aspect, if separated from the other, is 
able to measure the idea, and present it in its truth. It is 
the mark of the free spirit (§ 21) that it does not exist 
merely as conception or naturally, but that it supersedes 
its own formalism, transcending thereby its naked natural 
existence, and gives to itself an existence, which, being its 
own, is free. 



PROPERTY. 63 

Hence the side of the antinomj, which tnaintains the 
conception of freedom, is to he preferred, since it contains 
at least the necessary point of departure for the truth. 
The other side, holding to the existence, which is utterly 
at variance with the conception, has in it nothing reasonable 
or right at all. The standpoint of the free wUl, with which 
right and the science of right begin, is already beyond the 
wrong view that man is simply a natural being, who, as he 
cannot exist for himself, is fit only to be enslaved. This 
untnie phenomenon had its origin in the circumstance that 
the spirit had at that time just attained the level of con- 
sciousness. Hence through the dialectical movement of 
the conception arises the first inkling of the consciousness 
of freedom. There is thus by this movement brought to 
pass a struggle for recognition, and, as a necessary result, 
the relation of master and slave. But in order that the 
objective spirit, which gives substance to right, may not 
again be apprehended only on its subjective side, and that 
it may not again appear as a mere unsupported command, 
intimating that man in his real nature is not appointed to 
slavery, it must be seen that the idea of freedom is in truth 
nothing but the state. 

Addition. — If we hold fast to the side that man is abso- 
lutely free, we condemn slavery. StiU it depends on the 
person's own will, whether he shall be a slave or not, just 
as it depends upon the will of a people whether or not it is to 
be in subjection. Hence slavery is a wrong not simply on 
the part of those who enslave or subjugate, but of the 
slaves and subjects themselves. Slavery occurs in the 
passage from the natural condition of man to his true 
moral and social condition. It is found in a world where 
a wrong is still a right. Under such a circumstance the 
wrong has its value and finds a necessary place. 

58. (y) The kindjof possession, which is not literal but 
only representative of my will, is a mark or symbol, whose 
meaning is that it is I who have put my will into the ob- 



64 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

ject. Owing to the variety of objects used as signs, this 
kind of possession is very indefinite in its meaning. 

Addition. — Of all kinds of possession this by marking is 
the most complete, since the others have more or less the 
effect of a mark. When I seize or form an object, in each 
case the result is in the end a mark, indicating to others 
that I exclude them, and have set my will in the object. 
The conception of the mark is that the object stands not 
for what it is, but for what it signifies. The cockade, e.g., 
means citizenship in a certain state, although its colour has 
no connection with the nation, and represents not itself but 
the nation. In that man acquires possession through the 
use of a sign, he exhibits his mastery over things. 

B. Use of the Object. 

69. The object taken into my possession receives the 
predicate " mine," and the will is related to it positively. 
Yet in this identity the object is established as something 
negative, and my will becomes particularized as a want or 
desire. But the particular want of one separate will is the 
positive, which satisfies itself ; while the object is negative 
in itself, and exists only for my want and serves it. Use is 
the realization of my want through the change, destruction, 
or consumption of the object, which in this way reveals 
that it has no self, and fulfils its nature . 

Note. — The view that use is the real nature and actuality 
of property floats before the mind of those who consider 
that pr'operty is dead and ownerless, if it is being put to 
no use. This they advance as reason for laying violent 
and unlawful hands upon property. But the will of an 
owner, by virtue of which a thing is his own, is the funda- 
mental principle, of which use is only an external, special, 
and subordinate manifestation. 

Addition. — In use is involved a wider relation than in 
possession by symbol, because the object, when used, is 



PROPERTY. 65 

not recognized in its particular existence, but is by me 
negated. It is reduced to a means for the satisfaction of 
my wants. When_the_object jind^I come to gether, one of 
the-two must lose' its q ualities, if we are to become i den- 
tical. But I am a living thing who wills and truly aflB.rms 
himself, while the object is only a natural thing. There- 
fore it must go to ground and I preserve myseK. This 
constitutes the superiority and reason of the organic 
world. 

60. Using an object in direct seizure is a single separate 
act. But when we have a recurring need, use repeatedly a 
product which replaces itself, and seek to preserve its 
power to replace itself, a direct and single act of seizure 
becomes a sign. It is universalized and denotes the pos- 
session of the elemental or organic basis, the conditions of 
production. 

61. A thing has in contrast with me, its possessor, no 
end of its ovm (§ 42). Its substance as an independent 
thing is thus a purely external and unsubstantial existence. 
As this externality when realized is the use, to which I put 
it, so the total use or service of the object is the object 
itself in its whole extent. When I am admitted to the 
complete use of a thing, I am the owner of it. Apart from 
the entire range of use, nothing is left over to be the 
possession of another. 

Addition. — The relation of use to property is the same 
as that of substance to accident, of internal to external, of 
force to its manifestation. But the force must be mani- 
fested ; a farm is a farm only as it bears produce. He 
who has the use of a farm is the possessor of the whole, 
and to suppose another ownership in addition is an empty 
abstraction. 

62. Partial or temporary use, and partial or temporary 
possession, or possibility of use, however, are to be dis- 
tinguished from actual ownership. The total use of a 
thing cannot be mine, while the abstract property is some- 



66 THE PHILOSOPHY OF KIGHT. 

body else's. Ttie object would in that case contain a 
contradiction. It would be wholly penetrated by my will 
and yet contain something impenetrable, namely, the 
empty will of another. The relation of my positive will 
to the thing would be objective and yet. not objective. 
Accordingly, possession is essentially free and complete. 

Note. — The distinction between right to total use and 
abstract possession is due to the empty and formal under- 
standing. To it the idea, which in this case is the unity 
of possession or the personal will with the realization of 
this will, is not true. On the contrary, it holds as true 
these two elements in their separation. This distinction 
of the understanding implies that an empty mastership of 
things is an actual relation. If we could extend the term 
" aberration " beyond the mere imagination of the subject, 
and the reality, with which he is directly at variance, we 
might call such a view of property an aberration of per- 
sonality. How can what is mine in one single object be 
without qualification my individual exclusive will, and also 
the individual exclusive will of someone else ? 

In the " Institut." libr. ii. tit. iv. it is said : " Vsufruclms 
est jus alienis rebus utendi, fruendi sal/va rerum substamtia," 
and again : " Ne iamen in universum inutiles essent pro- 
prietates, semper ahscendente usufructu ; placuit certis modis 
emti/ngui usumfructum etad proprietatem reverti. " " Placuit ' ' 
— as though it were optional, whether or not to give sense 
to the formal distinction of the understanding. A pro- 
prietas semper ahscendente usufructu would not only be 
inutiles, but no longer a proprietas. Many distinctions 
regarding property, such as that into res mancipi and nee 
mancipi, and that into dominiv/m Quiritarium and Boni- 
tarium, are merely historical dainties and do not belong to 
this place, because they have no relation to the conception 
of property. But the relation of the dominium, directum 
to the dominium utile, a,nd that of the contract which gives 
heritable right in atnother's land, and also the various ways 



PROPERTY. 67 

of dealing with estates in fee, with their ground rents 
and other rents and impositions, have a clear bearing 
upon the distinction now under discussion. When these 
charges are irredeemahly imposed, this formal distinction 
is indeed present, hut it is again transcended when by 
the association of certain charges with the dominium 
utile, the dominium utile and the dominiumi directwm be- 
come the same. If these relations contained no more that 
the formal distinction of the understanding, there would 
be opposed to each other not two masters (domini), but an 
owner and an empty master. But by virtue of the charges 
or taxes it is two owners, who stand in relation to each 
other, though they are not related by a common pos- 
session. In this relation is to be found the transition 
from property to use, a transition already operating when 
ownership, which was formerly reckoned as the more 
honourable, is given a secondary place, while the utile or 
produce of a dominium directum is regarded as the essential 
and rational. 

It is f uUy fifteen hundred years since through the influence 
of Christianity the freedom of the person began to flourish, 
and at least in a small section of the human race take rank 
as a universal principle. But the recognition here and 
there of the principle of the freedom of property is, as it 
were, a thing of yesterday. This is a good illustration 
from world-history, of the length of time needed by the 
spirit to reach self -consciousness, and is a rebuke also to 
the impatience of opinion. 

63. In use the object is a single one, definite in quality 
and quantity, and answers to a special need. But its 
special usefulness, when fixed quantitatively, can be com- 
pared with other objects capable of being put to the same 
use, and a special want, served by the object, and indeed 
any want may be compared with other wants ; and their 
corresponding objects may be also compared. This uni- 
versal characteristic, which proceeds from the particular 



68 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

object and yet abstracts from its special qualities is the 
value. Value is the true essence or substance of the 
object, and the object by possessing value becomes an 
object for consciousness. As complete owner of the object, 
I am owner of its value as well as of its use. 

Note. — The feudal tenant is the owner of use only, not 
of the value. 

Addition. — Quality here becomes quantity. Want is a 
term common to the greatest variety of things, and enables 
me to compare them. Thought in its progress starts from 
the special quality of an object, passes through indifference 
with regard to the quality, and finally reaches quantity. 
So in mathematics the circle, ellipse and parabola are 
specifically different, and yet the distinction of one curve 
from another is merely quantitative, being reduced to a 
mere quantitative difference in the largeness of their co- 
efficients. In property the quantitative aspect, which 
issues from the qualitative, is value. The qualitative 
determines the quantum, however, and is therefore quite 
as much retained as superseded. When we consider the 
conception of value, the object is regarded only as a sign, 
counting not for what it is but for what it is worth. A 
letter of credit, e.g., is not a kind of paper, but a sign of 
another universal, namely, its face value. The specific 
value of an object varies according to the want, but in 
order to express abstract worth, we use money. Money 
represents things, but since it does not represent want itself, 
but is only a sign of it, it is again governed by the specific 
value, which it merely stands for. One can be owner of an 
object without being master of its value. A family, which 
can neither sell nor pawn its goods, is not master of their 
value. But since the restrictions characterizing this form 
of property, such as fiefs, property conveyed in trust, etc., 
are not adequate to the conception of it, they are largely 
disappearing. 

64. The form of the object and the mark are themselves 



PROPERTY. 69 

external circumstances, deprived of meaning and worth if 
taken apart from use, employment, or some such manifes- 
tation of the subjective will. The presence of the will, 
however, is in time, and its objective reality is continuance 
of the subjective manifestation. If the manifestation 
lapses, the object, abandoned by the real essence of the 
will and of possession, becomes ownerless. Hence I may 
lose or acquire property through prescription. 

Note. — Prescription does not run counter to strict, right 
and is not introduced into law merely to cut short the 
strife and confusion, which would naturally arise out of 
old claims. It is founded on the reality of property, in 
other words upon the necessity that the wiU, in order to 
keep a thing, must manifest itself in it. — Public monuments 
are property of the nation, or rather they, like all works of 
art intended for use, are living and self-sufficient ends 
because of their indwelling soul of remembrance and 
honour. Deprived of- this soul they are, so far as the 
nation is concerned, without a master, and become casually 
a private possession, as has happened with the Greek and 
Egyptian works of art in Turkey. — The private right of an 
author's family to his works is prescribed for similar 
reasons. These works become in a sense masterless, since 
they, like the monuments, though in an opposite way, become 
first common property, and then through various channels, 
private property. To set apart land for a cemetery and , 
then not use it, or to set apart land never to be used, con- 
tains an empty unreal caprice. As to traverse this action 
does no injury, respect for it cannot be guaranteed. _, 

Addition. — Prescription rests upon the supposition that 
I have ceased to look upon the object as mine. If a thing 
is to remain mine, there must be a continuous act of will, ' 
and this act reveals itself through use or preservation.—^' 
The decline in the value of public monuments was fre- 
quently illustrated during the Eeformation in institutions 
founded for the saying of masses. The spirit of the old 



70 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

confession and therefore of these buildings had fled, and 
the buildings could be taken as private property. 

C. BelinguisJimerd of Property. 

65. I may relinquish property, since it is mine only by 
virtue of my having put my mil into it. I may let a 
thing go unowned by me or pass it over to the will and 
possession of another ; but this is possible only so far as 
the object is in its nature something external. 

Addition. — Prescription is relinquishment without direct 
declaration of will. True relinquishment is a declaration 
that I will no longer regard the object as mine. The 
process in all its phases may be taken to be a true taking of 
possession. First there is the direct prehension ; then by 
use property is thoroughly acquired ; and the third step is 
the unity of both these elements, possession through re- 
linquishment. 

66. Some goods, or rather substantive phases of life are 
inalienable, and the right to them does not perish through' 
lapse of time. These comprise my inner personality and 
the universal essence of my consciousness of myself, and 
are personality in general, freedom of will in the broadest 
sense, social life and religion. 

Note. — What the spirit is in conception, or implicitly?, it 
should also be in actuality ; it should be a person, that is 
to say, be able to possess property, have sociality and reli- 
gion. This idea is itself the conception of spirit. As 
causa sui, or free cause, it is that, cujus natura non potest 
concipi nisi existens (Spinoza, "Bth." Def. 1). In this 
very conception, namely, that spirit shall be what it is only 
through itself and by the infinite return into itself out of 
its natural and direct reality, lies the possibility of opposi- 
tion between what it is only implicitly (§ 57), and what it 
is only expHoitly, In the wiU this opposition is the possi- 
bility of evil, but in general it is the possibility of the 



PROPERTY. 71 

alienation of personality and substantive being ; and this 
alienation may occur either unconsciously or intentionally. 
— Examples of the disposal of personality are slavery, vas- 
salage, inability to own property or lack of complete control 
over it. Eelinquishment of reason, sociality, morality or 
religion occurs in superstition ; it occurs also if I delegate 
to others the authority to prescribe for me what kind of 
acts T_s hall commit, as when one sells himself for robbery, 
murder, or the posiibility of any other crime ; it occurs ^ 
whan I permit others to determine what for me shall be 
duty or religious truth. 

The right to nothing that is inalienable can be forfeited 
through lapse of time. The act by which I take possession 
of my personality and real being, and establish myseK as - 
having rights, responsibilities, and moral and religious obli- 
gations, deprives these attributes of that externality, which ^ 
alone gives them the capacity of being possessed by another- ( 
Along with the departure of this externality goes the refer- 
ence to time or to any previous consent or complaisance. 
This return of myself into myself, being the process by 
which I establish myself as idea or complete legal and 
moral person, does away with the old relation. It removes 
the violence which I and others had done to my own con- 
ception and reason, the wrong of having treated the infinite 
existence of self-consciousness as something merely ex- 
traneous, and of having suffered others to do the same. 
This return into myself reveals the contradiction implied 
in my having given into the keeping of others my right, 
morality or religion. I gave them what I did not myself 
possess, what, so soon as I do possess it, exists in essence 
only as mine, and not as something external. 

Addition. — It lies in thenature of the matter that the slave 
has an absolute right to make himself free, or that, when 
anyone has hired out his morality for robbery and murder, 
the transaction is absolutely void. Anyone possesses the 
competency to annul such an agreement. It is the same 



72 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

with the letting of religiosity hj a priest, who is my con- 
fessor. The "inner religious condition every one must adjust 
by himself. A religiosity, part of which is handed over to 
some one else is not genuine, for the spirit is only one, and 
must dwell within me. To me it must belong to unite the 
act of worship with religious aspiration. 

67. The use of single products of my particular physical 
endowments or mental capacities I may hand over to others 
for a limited time, since, when a time limit is recognized, 
these products may be said to have an external relatic^ to 
my genuine and total being. If I were to dispose of my 
whole time, made concrete in work, and all my activity, I 
would be giving up the essence of my productions. My 
whole activity and reality, in short, my personality, would 
be the property of another. 

Note. — This is the same relation as that (§ 61) between 
the substance of an object and its use. As it is only by 
limiting use that we can distinguish it from the object, so 
the use of my powers is to be distinguished from these 
powers themselves, only in so far as it has a quantitative 
limit. The total number of manifestations of a faculty is 
the faculty ; the accidents are the substance ; the parti- 
culars, the universal. 

Addition. — The distinction, here analyzed, is that between 
a slave and a servant or day-labourer in our own time. 
The Athenian slave had possibly lighter occupation and 
higher kind of mental work than is the rule with our 
workmen. But he was a slave notwithstanding, since the 
whole circle of his activity was controlled by his master. 

68. What is peculiar to a mental product can be exter- 
nalized and directly converted into an object, which it is 
possible for others to produce. When another person has 
acquired the object, he may make the thought or, it may 
be, the mechanical genius in it, his own ; a possibility 
which in the case of literary works constitutes the reason 
and special value of acquisition. But, over and above 



PROPERTY. 73 

this, the new owner conies at the same time into possession 
of the general power to express himself in the same way, 
and so of making any number of objects of the same kind. 

Note. — In works of art the form, which images the 
thought in an external material, is so conspicuously the 
possession of the artist, that an imitation of it is really a 
product of the imitator's mental and mechanical skiU. 
But in the case of literature or an invention of some 
technical contrivance, the form in which it is externalized 
is of a mechanical sort. In a book the thought is presented 
in a row of particular abstract signs ; in an invention the 
thought has a wholly mechanical content. The way to 
reproduce such things, as mere things, is a matter of 
ordinary skilled labour. Between the two extremes, on 
the one side a work of art, and on the other a product of 
manual labour, there are all stages of production, some of 
which incHne to one of the extremes, some to the other. 

69. Since the purchaser of such a product of mental 
skill possesses the full use and value of his single copy, he 
is complete and free owner of that one copy, although the 
author of the work or the inventor of the apparatus remains 
owner of the general method of multiplying such products. 
The author or inventor has not disposed directly of the 
general method, but may reserve it for his private 
utterance. 

Note. — The justification of the right of the author or in- 
ventor cannot be sought in his arbitrarily making it a con- 
dition, when he disposes of a copy, that the possibility of 
bringing out other copies shall not belong to the purchaser, 
but shall remain in his own hands. The first question is 
whether the separation of the object from the power to re- 
produce, which goes with the object, is allowable in thought, 
and does not destroy full and free possession (§ 62). Does 
it depend upon the arbitrary choice of the first producer to 
reserve to himseM the power to reproduce or dispose of the 
product of his mind? Or, on the other hand, may he 



74 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIRHT. 

count it of no value, and give it freely -with each separate 
copy ? Now there is this peculiarity ahout this power, 
that through it the object becomes not merely a possession, 
but a means of wealth (see § 170, and fol.). This new 
feature is a special kind of external use, and is different 
and separate from the use to which the object was directly 
appointed; It is not, as it is called, an accessio nattiralis 
as are foetura. Hence as the distinction occurs in the 
sphere of external use, which is naturally capable of being 
divided, the reservation of one part, while another is being 
disposed of, is not the retention of an ownership without 
utile. 

The primary and most important claim of trade and 
commerce is to give them surety against highway robbery. 
In the same way the primaiy though merely negative de- 
mand of the sciences and arts is to insure the workers in 
these fields against larceny, and give their property protec- 
tion. But in the case of a menl!al product the intention is 
that others should comprehend it, and make its imagina- 
tion, memory, and thought their own. Learning is not 
merely the treasuring up of words in the memory ; it is 
through thinking that the thoughts of others are seized, 
and this after-thinking is real learning. Now that which 
is learned becomes in turn something which can be dis- 
posed of ; and the external expression of this material may 
easily assume a form different from the form into which 
the original thinker threw his work. Thus those who have 
worked over the material a second time may regard as their 
own possession whatever money they may be able to extract 
from their work, and may contend that they have a right to 
reproduce it. In the transmission of the sciences in general, 
and especially in teaching positive science, church doctrine, 
or jurisprudence, are found the adoption and repetition of 
thoughts which are already established and expressed. 
This is largely the case with writings composed for the same 
purpose. It is not possible to state accurately, a.nd establish 



PROPERTY. 75 

explicitly hj law and right, just how far the new form, 
which accrues through repeated expression, should trans- 
mute the scientific treasure or the thoughts of others, 
who are still in external possession, into a special mental 
possession of the person who re-constructs them; how 
far, in other words, a repetition of an author's wort 
should be called a plagiarism. Hence plagiarism must be 
a question of honour, and should be refrained from on 
that score. 

Laws against reprinting protect the property of author 
and publisher in a Tery definite but, indeed, hmited 
measure. The ease with which one can intentionally alter 
the form or insert slight modifications into a large work 
on science or a comprehensive theory which is the work of 
another, and further, the great difficulty, when discoursing 
on what one has received, of abiding by the letter of the 
author, introduce, in addition to the special purposes re- 
quiring such a repetition, an endless variety of changes, 
which stamp upon the foreign article the more or less 
superficial impression of something which is one's own. 
The hundreds of compendium s, abridgments, compilations, 
arithmetics, geometries, rehgious tracts, every venture of a 
critical journal, an annual, or a cyclopaedia, keep on repeat- 
ing under the same or an altered title, although each may 
be maintained to be something new and unique. Tet the 
profit which the work promised the author or inventor in 
the first place may be wiped out, or the purpose of both 
author and imitator may be defeated, or one may be 
ruined. 

It is noteworthy that the term plagiarism, or scholar's 
larceny is no longer heard. It may be that the principle 
of honour has dislodged it, or that the feeling of honour 
has vanished or ceased to be directed against plagiarism, or 
that a small compilation or slight change of form is ranked 
as an original and independent production, and so highly 
esteemed as to banish all thought of plagiarism. 



76 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

70. Since personality is something directly present, the 
compreiiensive totality of one's outer activity, the life, is 
not externa] to it. Thus the disposal or sacrifice of life is 
not the manifestation of one's personality so much as the 
very opposite. Hence I have no right to relinquish my 
life. Only a moral and social ideal, which submerges the 
direct, simple and separate personality, and constitutes its 
real power, has a right to life. Life, as such, being direct 
and unreflected, and death the direct negation of it, death 
must come from without as a result of natural causes, or 
must be received in the service of the idea from a foreign 
hand. 

Addition. — The particular person is really a subordinate, 
who must devote his life to the service of the ethical fabric; 
when the state demands his life, he must yield it up. But 
should the man take his own life ? Suicide may at first 
glance be looked upon as bravery, although it be the poor 
bravery of tailors and maid-servants. Or it may be re- 
garded as a misfortune, caused by a broken heart. But 
the point is. Have I any right to kill myself ? The answer 
is that I, as this individual am not lord over my life, since 
the comprehensive totality of one's activity, the life, falls 
within the direct and present personality. To speak of the 
right of a person over his life is a contradiction, since it 
implies a right of a person over himself. But no one can 
stand above and execute himself. When Hercules burnt 
himself, and Brutus fell upon his sword, this action against 
their personality was doubtless of an heroic type ; but yet 
the simple right to commit suicide must be denied even to 
heroes. 

Transition from Property to Contract. 

71. Outward and visible existence, as definite, is essen- 
tially existence for another thing (see note to § 48). Thus 
property, as a visible external thing, is determined by its 



CONTRACT. 11 

relations to other external things, these relations being 
both necessary and accidental. But property is also a 
manifestation of will, and the other, for which it exists, is 
the will of another person. This reference of wiU to will is 
the true and pecuHar ground on which freedom is reahzed. 
The means by which I hold property, not by virtue of the 
relation of an object to my subjective will, but by virtue 
of another will, and hence share in a common will, is 
contract. 

'Sole. — It is just as much a necesity of reason that men 
make contracts, exchange, and trade, as that they should 
have property (§ 45, note). In their consciousness it is 
some want, benevolence, or advantage, which occasions the 
contract, but really it is reason, or the idea as it is embodied 
in the realized will of a free person. It is taken for 
granted that contracting parties recognize one another as 
persons and owners. Eecognition is contained and pre- 
supposed in the fact that contract is a relation of the 
objective spirit (§ 35, note to § 57). 

Addition. — In contract I hold property through a common 
will. It is the interest of reason that the subjective will 
become universal, and exalt itself to this level of realiza- 
tion. In contract the particular will remains, although it 
is now in conjunction with another will. The universal 
will assumes here no higher form than co-operation. 



SECOND SECTION. 

CONTKACT. 

72. In contract property is no longer viewed on the side 
of its external reality, as a mere thing, but rather as con- 
taining the elements of will, another's as well as my own. 
(Contract is the process which presents and occasions the 
lontradiction by which I, existing for myself and exclud- 
ing another will, am and remain an owner only in so far 



^' 



78 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

as I identify myself with the will of another, and cease to 
be an owner. 

73. Guided by the conception I must relinquish my 
property not merely as an external thing (§ 65), but as 
property, if my will is to become a genuine factor in 
reality. But by virtue of this procedure my will, when 
relinquished, is another will. The necessary nature of the 
conception is thus realized in a unity of different wills, 
which, neverthless, give up their differences and peculiari- . 
ties. But this identity implies not that one will is identical 
with the other, but rather that each at this stage remains 
an independent and private will. 

74. For two absolutely distinct and separate owners 
there is now formed one will. While each of them ceases 
to be an owner through his own distinct will, the one will 
remains. Each will gives up a particular property, and 
receives the particular property of another, adopting only 
that conclusion with which the other coincides. 

75. Since the two contracting parties appear as directly 
independent persons (a) contract proceeds from arbitrary 
choice ; (/3) the one will formed by the contract is the 
work merely of the two interested persons, and is thus a 
common, but not an absolutely universal will ; (y) the 
object of the contract is a single external thing, because 
only such a thing is subject to relinquishment at their 
mere option (§ 65 and fol.). 

Note. — Marriage does not come under the conception of 
contract. This view is, we must say it, in all its shameless- 
ness, propounded by Kant ("IMetaph. Attf. der Eechtslehre," 
p. 106). Just as little does the nature of the state conform to 
contract, whether the contract be regarded as a compact of 
a.11 with all, or of all with the prince or government. — The 
introduction of the relations of contract and private property 
into the functions of the state has produced the greatest 
confusion both in the law and in real life. In earlieij 
times civil rights and duties were thought and maintained! 



CONTRACT. 79 

to be a directly private possession of particular individuals 
in opposition to the rights of prince and state. In more 
recent years, also, the rights of prince and state have been 
treated as objects of covenant. They are said to be based 
on contract, or the mere general consent of those who "wish 
to form a state. DifEerent as these two views of the state 
are, they agree in taking the phases of private property 
into another and a higher region. This will be referred to 
again when we come to speak of ethical observances and 
the state. 

Addition. — ^It is a popular view in modern times that 
the state is a contract of all with all. All conclude, so the 
doctrine runs, a compact with the prince, and he in turn 
with the subjects. According to this superficial view, there 
is in contract only one unity of different wills ; but in fact 
there are two identical wills, both of which are persons, 
and wish to remain possessors. Contract, besides, arises 
out of the spontaneous choice of the persons. Marriage, 
indeed, has that point in common with contract, but with 
the state it is different. An individual cannot enter or 
leave the social condition at his option, since every one is 
by his very nature a citizen of a state. The characteristic 
of man as rational is to live in a state ; if there is no state, 
reason claims that one should be founded. A state, it is 
true, must grant permission either to enter or to leave it ; 
but this permission is not given in deference to the 
arbitrary choice of the individual, nor is the state founded 
upon a contract which presupposes this choice. It is false / 
to say that it rests with the arbitrary will of all to estab-/ 
lish a state ; rather is it absolutely necessary for every onei 
to be in a state. The great progress of the modern state 
is due to the fact that it has and keeps an absolute end, 
and no man is now at liberty to make private arrange- 
ments in connection with this end, as they did in the 
middle ages. 

76. Contract is formal when the two elements through 



80 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

which, the common will arises, the negative disposal of the 
thing and the positive reception of it, are so divided, that 
one of the contracting parties makes one side of the agree- 
ment, and the other, the other. This is gift. Contract is 
real when each of the contractors performs both sides of 
the double agreement, and is and remains an owner. This 
is exchange. 

Addition. — Contract involves two agreements to two 
things ; I both give up and acquire a property. Real 
contract occurs, when each yields up and acquires posses- 
sion ; in giving up he remains an owner. Formal contract 
occurs when a person only gives up or acquires. 

•77. In real contract every one both keeps the same 
property as he had when he undertook the contract, and 
also yields up his property. Hence it is necessary to dis- 
tinguish the property, which in contract remains perma- 
nently mine, from the external objects which change 
hands. The universal and self-identical element in ex- 
change, that with regard to which the objects to be 
exchanged are equal, is the value (§ 63). 

Note. — ^By the very conception of contract a Icesio 
enormis annuls the agreement, since the contractor, in dis- 
posing of his goods, must remain in possession of a 
quantitative equivalent. An injury may fairly be called 
enormous, if it exceeds half of the value ; but it is infinite, 
when a contract or any stipulation is entered into to dis- 
pose of an inalienable good (§ 66). A stipulation is only 
I one single part or side of the whole contract, or a merely 
"ormal settlement, of which more hereafter. It contains 
only the formal phase of contract, the consent of one party 
to perform something, and the consent of the other party 
to accept the performance. It must, therefore, be classed 
amongst the so-called one-sided contracts. The division 
of cipntracts into one-sided and two-sided, and many other 
divisl^ons of the same kind in Eoman law, are superficial 
combWtions, arising from some particular and external 



CONTRACT. 81 

consideration, as, for instance, the way in which they are 
made. They may also introduce attributes which do not 
concern the nature of contract, such as those which have 
meaning only in reference to the administration of justice 
(actiones), and to the legal consequences of positive laws, 
or such as may arise out of wholly external circumstances 
and injure the conception of right. 

78. The distinction between property and possession 
between the substantive and the external side (§ 46), 
assumes in contract the form of a distinction between the 
common will or agreement and the realization of this will 
in performance. The agreement, taken by itself in its 
difEerence from performance, is something imagined or 
symbolic, appearing ia reality as a visible sign. (" Ency- 
clopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences".) In stipula- 
tion it may be manifested by gesture or other symbolic 
act, but usually in an express declaration through speech, 
which is the most worthy vehicle of thought. 

Note. — Stipulation, thus interpreted, is the form in 
which the content of a concluded contract is outwardly 
symbolized. But this symbol is only the form. By 
this is not meant that the content is still merely sub- 
jective, merely a desideratum, but that the conclusion of 
the actual arrangement is made by the will. 

Addition. — As in property we had the distinction be- 
tween property and possession, the substantive and th 
external, so in contract we have the difEerence between tht 
common will as agreement and the particular will as per- 
formance. It is in the nature of contract that both the 
common and the particular wills should be manifested, 
because it is the relation of will to will. In civilized com- 
munities agreement, manifested by a sign, is separated 
from performance, although with ruder peoples they may 
concur. There is in the forests of Ceylon a tribe, which in 
trading puts down its property and waits patiently for the 
arrival of those who will place their property over against 



82 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

it ; the dumb declaration of the will is not separated from 
performanoje. 

79. As stipulation involves the will, it contains, from 
the standpoint of right, the substance of contract. In 
contrast with this substantive contract the possession, 
which remains till the contract is fully carried out, has no 
reality outside of the agreement. I have given up a pos- 
session and my private control over it, and it has already 
become the property of another. I am legally bound to 
carry out the stipulation. 

Note. — Mere promise is different from contract. "What 
I promise to do, give or perform, is future and a mere 
subjective qualification of my will. I am at liberty to 
change my promise. But stipulation is already the em- 
bodiment of my volition. I have disposed of my property ; 
it has ceased to be mine, and I recognize it as already be- 
longing to another. The !Roman distinction between pactv/m 
and contractus is not sound. 

richte once laid it down that the obligation to hold to 
the contract began for me only when the other party began 
to do his share. Before performance I am supposed to be 
doubtful whether the other had been really in earnest. 
The obligation before performance is, therefore, said to be 
moral and not legal. The trouble is that stipulation is 
not merely external, but involves a common will, which has 
already done away with mere intention and change of 
mind. The other party may of course change his mind 
after the engagement, but has he any right to do so? 
For plainly I may choose to do what is wrong, although 
the other person begins to perform his side of the contract. 
Fichte's view is worthless, since it bases the legal side of 
contract upon the bad infinite, that is, an infinite series, or 
the infinite divisibility of time, material and action. The 
embodiment of the will in gesture or a definite form of 
words is its complete intellectual embodiment, of which 
the performance is the merely mechanical result. 



CONTRACT. 83 

It does not alter the case that positive law distinguishes 
between so-called real contracts and consensual contracts, 
real contracts heing complete only when the actual per- 
formance {res, traditio rei) is added to consent. Some- 
times in these real contracts the surrender to me of the 
object enables me to carry out my part of the engagement, 
and my obligation to act refers to the object only in so far 
as I have received it into my hands. This occurs in loan, 
interest, deposit, and sometimes in exchange also. These 
cases do not concern the relation of stipulation to per- 
formance, but merely the manner of performance. It is 
also optional in the case of contract to bargain that on one 
side the obligation shall not arise until the other party fulfils 
his share of the engagement. 

80. The classification or rational treatment of contracts 
is deduced not from external circumstances, but from dis- 
tinctions which are involved in the very nature of contract. 
These distinctions are those between formal and real con- 
tract, between property and possession or use, and between 
Value and the specific thing. The subjoined classification 
agrees in the main with the Kantian (" Metaphysical 
Principles of the Theory of Eight," p. 120). It is sur- 
prising that the old method of classification of contracts 
into real and consensual, named and imnamed, has not 
long ago given way before something that is more 
reasonable. 

A. Gift. 

(1) Gift of an object or gift proper. 

(2) Loan of an object — the gift of a portion of it or 
of a partial use or enjoyment of it, the lender re- 
maining owner ; (mutuutn and commodatum without 
interest). The object is specific, or it may be 
regarded as universal, or it is, as in the case of 
money, actually universal. 

(3) Gift of service, as for example the mere storage 



84 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

of a property {depositv,m). The gift of an object 
on the special condition that the receiTsr shall be 
owner on the giver's death, when the giver can 
no longer be owner, is bequest, and does not come 
under the conception of contract. It presupposes 
the civic community and positive legislation. 

B. Exchange. 

(1) Exchange as such. 

(a) Exchange of objects, i.e. of one specific thing 
for another of the same kind. 

(/3) Purchase or sale {emtio, venditio). The ex- 
change of a specific object, for a general object, 
which has the phase of value but not of use, 
namely money. 

(2) Eent {locatio, conductio), relinquishment of the 
temporary use of a property for rent or interest, 
(a) Eenting of a specific thing, renting proper. 

(/3) Eenting of a universal thing, so that the lessor 
remains owner only of the universal or the value. 
This is loan, mutuum and commodatum with 
interest. Whether the object be a flat, furniture, 
house, a res fungihilis or non fungihilis, this 
question gives rise, here also as in the second 
kind of gift, to particular qualifications that are 
unimportant. 

(3) Contract for wages {locatio operce) — relinquish- 
ment, limited in time or otherwise, of my labour or 
services, in so far as as they are disposable (§ 67). 

Akin to this is the brief and other such contracts, 
in which the performance depends upon character, 
confidence, or special talents. Here the service 
cannot be measured by its money value, which 
is not called wages, but an honorarium or fee. 

C. Completion of a contract {cautio) through a security. 



CONTRACT. 85 

In contracts where I dispose of the use of a thing, as in 
rent, I am no longer in possession of it, hut am still the 
owner. In exchange, purchase, or gift, I may have become 
owner, without being as yet in actual possession. Indeed, in 
every contract, except such as are directly on a cash basis, 
this separation is to be found. Security or pledge is concerned 
with an object which I give up, or an object which is to 
be mine. It either keeps or puts me in actual posses- 
sion of the value, although in neither case am I in posses- 
sion of the specific thing. The thing which I have either 
given up, or expect to receive, is my property only as 
regards its value ; but as a specific thing it is the property 
of the holder of the pledge, who owns also whatever 
surplus value the object may have. Pledge is not itself a 
contract, but only a stipulation (§ 11^, which completes 
contract on the side of possession of property. — Mortgage 
and surety are special forms of the pledge. 

Addition. — In contract it was said that by means of an 
agreement a property becomes mine, although I have not pos- 
session as yet and shall have possession only by perform- 
ing my part. If I am out-and-out owner of the object, the 
intention of a pledge is to place me at once in possession of 
its value ; thus already in the engagement the possession is 
guaranteed. Surety is a special kind of pledge, some one 
offering his promise or credit as warrant for my performance. 
Here a person does, what in a pledge is done by a thing. 

81. When persons are viewed as direct and incomplete, 
their wills are still particular, however identical they may 
be implicitly, and however much they may, in contract, be 
subordinated to the common will. So long as they are 
direct and incomplete, it is a matter of accident whether 
their particular wills accord with the general wiU, which 
has existence only by means of them. When the par- 
ticular will is actually different from the universal, it is led 
by caprice, random insight and desire, and is opposed to 
general right. This is wrong. 



86 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

Note. — It is from the standpoint of logic a higher 
necessity which brings about the transition to wrong. 
The two phases of the conception of right are (a), intrinsic 
right or the general will, and (6) right as it exists, or the 
particular wiU. It inheres in the abstract reality of the 
conception that these two phases should be opposed and 
given independence. — The particular, independent will is 
caprice and erratic choice, which I, in exchange, have 
yielded up with regard to only one single thing, but not 
altogether. 

Addition. — In contract the two wills give rise to a 
common will. This common wiU is only relatively universal, 
and thus still in opposition to the particular will. Ex- 
change or covenant, it is true, implies the right to demand 
performance. But the particular will may act in opposition 
to the general abstract right. Hence arises the negation, 
which was already implicit in the general will. This 
negation is wrong. The general procedure is this, to 
purify the wiU of its abstract simplicity, and thus to 
summon out of the common wUl the particular will, which 
in turn takes the field against the common will, the par- 
ticipants, in contract, still preserve their particular wills. | 
Contract is not, therefore, beyond arbitrary caprice, and 
remains exposed to wrong. 



THIKD SECTION. 

Wrong. 

82. Contract establishes general right, whose inner or 
relative universality is merely a generality based on the 
caprice of the particular will. In this external manifesta- 
tion of right, right and its essential embodiment in the 
particular will are directly or accidentally in accord. In 
wrong this external manifestation becomes an empty ap- 
pearance. This seeming reality consists in the opposition 



WRONG. 87 

of abstract right to the particular will, involving a par- 
ticular right. But this seeming reality is in truth a mere 
nullity, since right by negating this negation of itself 
restores itself. By turning back to itself out of its negation 
right becomes actual and valid, whereas at first it was only 
a contigent possibility. 

Addition. — ^When intrinsic right or the general will is 
determined in its nature by the particular will, it is in 
relation with a non-essential. This is the relation of 
essence or reality to outward manifestation. Though the 
manifestation is in one aspect adequate to the essence, it 
is in another aspect inadequate ; as a manifestation is 
contingency, essence is in relation with the unessential. 
Now in wrong this manifestation has the form of a seem- 
ing reahty, which is to be interpreted as an outward reahty 
inadequate to the essence. It deprives essence of reality, 
and sets up the empty abstraction as real. It is conse- 
quently untrue. It vanishes when it tries to exist alone. 
By its departure the essence is in possession of itself as its 
reality, and becomes master over mere semblance. It has 
thus negated the negation of itself, and become strengthened 
in the process. Wrong is this mere seeming reality, and, 
when wrong vanishes, right receives an added fixity and 
value. What we call essence or reahty is the intrinsically 
universal will, as against which the particular will re- 
veals itself as untrue, and does away with itself. The 
general will had in the first instance only an immediate 
being ; but now it is something actual, because it has re- 
turned out of its negation. Actuality is active and finds 
itself in its opposite, whUe the implicit is to its negation 
passive. 

83. Eight, as particular and in its diverse shapes, is 
opposed to its own intrinsic universaUty and simplicity, and 
then has the form of a mere semblance. It is a mere seem- 
ing reahty partly of itself and directly ; partly is it so by 
means of the subject ; partly is it established as a pure 



88 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

nullity. There arise therefore (o) unpremeditated or civic 
wrong, (6) fraud, and (c) crime. 

Addition. — Wrong is the mere outer appearance of 
essence, giving itself forth as independent. If this 
semblance has a merely implicit and not an explicit exist- 
ence, that is to say, if the wrong is in my eyes a right, the 
wrong is unpremeditated. The mere semblance is such for 
right but not for me. The second form of wrong is fraud. 
Here the wrong is not such for general right, but by 
it I delude another person; for me the right is a mere 
semblance. In the first case wrong was for right only a 
semblance or seeming wrong ; in the second case right is 
for me, the wrong-doer, only a semblance or pretence. 
The third kind of wrong is crime. This is both of itself 
and also for me a wrong. I in this case desire the wrong, 
and make no use of the pretence of right. The other party, 
against whom the crime is done, is quite well aware that 
this unqualified wrong is not a right. The distinction 
between fraud and crime lies in this, that a fraudulent act 
is not yet recognized as a wrong, but in crime the wrong is 
openly seen. 

A. Unpremeditated Wrong. 

84. Since the will is in itself universal, possession (§ 64) 
and contract, in themselves and in their different kinds, 
and also all the various manifestations of my will imply a 
reference to other rights at law. Since these rights are so 
external and varied, several different persons may have a 
right to one and the same object, each basing his claim to 
ownership on his right at law. Thus arise collisions. 

85. A collision, in which the object is claimed on legal 
grounds, occurs in the region of civil law, and recognizes 
the law as the universal arbiter. The thing is admitted 
to belong to him who has the right to it. The legal con- 
test merely finds whether a thing is mine or another'sv 



WRONG. 89 

This is a piirely negative ju^ment, in which the predicate 
" mine " negates only the particular. 

86. In law-snits the recognition of right is bound up 
with some private interest or view opposed to right. 
Against this mere appearance, intrinsic right, which is in 
fact implied in it (§ 85), comes on the scene as a reahty 
purposed and demanded. This right, however, is demanded 
only abstractly, because the will as particular is not freed 
from direct contact with its private interest, and does not 
aim at the universal. Still, the law is here a recognized 
reality, as against which the contending parties must 
renounce their private views and interests. 

Addition. — That which is intrinsically right has a definite 
ground, and I defend my wrong, which I maintain to be 
right, also on some ground. It is the nature of the finite 
and particular to make room for accidents. CoUisions 
must occur, since we are at the sta^e of the finite. The 
first form of wrong negates only the particular will ; but 
pays respect to the general right ; it is thus the slightest 
of all forms of wrong. When I say that a rose is not red, 
I still admit that the object has colour. I thus do not 
deny the species, colour, but only the particular colour, 
red. It is the same here with right. Everybody wills the 
right, and for him the right only shall take place ; his 
wrong consists in his holding that what he wills is right. 

B. Fraud. 

87. Since intrinsic right, in distinction from paxticular 
and concrete right, is demanded, it is essential ; but just 
because it is only demanded and in that light merely sub- 
jective, it is non-essential, and becomes simply an appear- 
ance. When the imiversal is degraded from the particular 
will to the merely apparent will, when, e.g., contract is 
regarded as only an external association of the will, we have 
fraud. 



90 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

Addition. — In fraud uuiversal right is abused, but the 
particular will is respected. The person on whom the 
fraud is committed, is imposed upon and made to believe 
that he gets his rights. The right, which is demanded, 
however, is merely subjective and unreal, and in that 
consists the fraud. 

88. I acquire property by contract for the sake of the 
special qualities of the thing. But I acquire it, also, 
because of its inner universality which consists partly in 
its value, partly in its being the property of another. Now 
it is at the option of the other party to produce a false 
appearance in the case of contract. There may be the free 
consent of both parties to the exchange of the mere given 
object in its bare particularity, and so far the transaction 
is not unjust. Yet the object may fail to have any intrinsic 
universality. (The infinite judgment in its positive ex- 
pression or identical meaning. See " Encyclopaedia of the 
philosophical Sciences.") 

89. To guard against the acceptance of a thing in its 
bare particularity, and in order to be fortified against an 
arbitrary wiU, there is at this juncture pnlya demand that 
the objective or universal side of the thing should be 
recognizable, that the objective should be made good as. 
right, and that the arbitrary will, offending against right, 
should be removed and superseded. 

Addition. — No penalty is attached to mere unpremedi- 
tated or unintentional wrong, since in it I have willed 
nothing against right. But to fraud penalties are due, 
since right is violated. 

C. Violence and Crime. 

90. Since in property my will is embodied in an external 
thing, it follows that just as far as my will is reflected in 
that object, I can be attacked in it and placed under 
external compulsion. Hence my will may be enforced. 



WRONG. 91 

Violence is done to it, when force is employed in order to 
obtain some possession or object of desire. 

Addition. — In crime, which is wrong in its proper sense, 
neither right in general nor my personal right is respected. 
Both the objective and the subjective aspects of right are 
set at defiance by crime. 

91. As a living creature a man may be compelled to do 
a thing; his physical and other external powers may be 
brought under the force of another. But the free will 
cannot be absolutely compelled (§ 5), but only in so far as 
it does not withdraw (§ 7) out of the external, to which it 
is held fast, or out of the imaginative reproduction of the 
external. It can only be compelled when it allows itself 
to be compelled. 

92. Since it is only in so far as the will has visible 
existence that it is the idea and so really free, and its 
realized existence is the embodiment of freedom, force or 
violence destroys itself forthwith in its very conception. 
It is a manifestation of will which cancels and supersedes 
a manifestation or visible expression of will. Force or 
violence, therefore, is, according to this abstract treatment 
of it, devoid of right. 

93. Since it in its very conception destroys itseM, its 
principle is that it must be cancelled by violence. Hence 
it is not only right but necessary that a second exercise of 
force should annul and supersede the first. 

Note. — Violation of a contract through failure to carry 
out the agreement, or violation of the legal duties toward 
the family or the state, through action or neglect, is the 
first violence. It is an exercise of force, if I retain 
another's property, or neglect to do some duty. Torce 
exercised by a teacher upon a pupU, or by any one 
against incivihty and rudeness, seems to be the first act of 
violence, not caused by any previous display of force. 
But the merely natural will is of itself a violence to the 
universal idea of freedom ; and against the inroads of the 



92 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

uncivilized -will the idea of freedom ought to be protected 
and made good. Either there must be assumed within 
the family or state a moral and social atmosphere, against 
which a cnide naturalness is an act of violence, or else 
there is at first everywhere present a natural condition or 
state of violence, over which the idea has the right of 
mastery. 

Addition. — In the state there can be heroes no m.ore. 
They appear only in uncivilized communities. The aim of 
the hero is right, necessary and in keeping with the state ; 
but he carried it out, as if it was his own private affair. 
The heroes, who founded states, and introduced marriage 
and husbandry, did not in this realize a recognized right. 
These acts issue merely from their particular wills. Tet 
as they imply the higher right of the idea against a merely 
natural state of things, their violence is lawful. Little 
can be effected against the force of nature merely by 
goodness. 

94. Abstract right is a right to use force. A wrong 
done to this right is a force exercised against my liberty 
realized in an external thing. The preservation of my 
realized freedom against force must be itself an external 
act, and therefore a second force, which removes the first 
and takes its place. 

Note. — To define strict abstract right as the right to use 
compulsion is to apprehend it as a result, which enters first 
of all by the roundabout way of wrong. 

Addition. — Here may well be observed the difference 
between right and morality. In morality or the sphere 
in which I turn back into myself there are also two sides, 
for in it goodness is for me an end, and in accordance with 
this idea I must direct my life. Goodness is embodied in 
my resolution, and I realize it in myself. Tet this resolu- 
tion is wholly internal, and, as a consequence, is not sub- 
ject to coercion. The civil laws do not seek to stretch their 
control over the disposition. In morality I am inde- 



WRONG. 93 

pendent, and the application of external force has no 
meaning. 

95. A first violence, exercised by a free man, and doing 
injury to the concrete embodiment of freedom, namely 
right as right, is crime. Crime is the negative- infinite 
judgment in its complete sense. It negates not only the 
particular object of my will, but also the universal or 
infinite, which is involved in the predicate ' mine,' the very 
capacity for possessing rights ; nor does it even utilize my 
opinion, as in fraud (§ 88). Here we are in the realm of 
criminal law. 

Note. — The right, to injure which constitutes crime, has 
indeed so far only the features we have pointed out ; and 
crime has a meaning determined in each case by these 
special features. But the substance of these forms of 
right is the universal which remains the same in all its 
subsequent developments and modifications. So also crime 
remains the same in accordance with its conception. 
Hence the phase, noticed in the next paragraph, refers to 
particular and definite contents, as, e.g., perjury, treason, 
counterfeiting, forgery, etc. 

96. The actualized will, which alone is subject to injury, 
has, of course, a concrete existence, and varies, therefore, 
both in quality and in quantity. This variation gives rise 
to difEerences in the objective side of crime, which may in- 
jure only one side or phase of the wUl, or again, its whole 
concrete character and range, as in murder, slavery, and 
religious persecution. 

Note. — The Stoic theory that there is but one virtue and 
one vice, the Draconian statutes, which punished every 
crime with death, and the barbarity of the formal code 
of honour, which found in every injury an unpardonable 
insult, all in common cling to the abstract view of the free 
will and personality, and refuse to take them in that con- 
crete and definite realization which they must have, if they 
are to realize the idea. — Eobbery and theft differ in quality. 



94 THE PHILOSOPHY OF BIGHT. 

because in robbery personal violence is done to me as an 
actually present consciousness and as this self-determined 
subject. — Many qualitative phases of crime, as, for instance, 
an act done against public safety, are determined by defi- 
nite social relations, and may be deduced from the concep- 
tion, although they are often made in a roundabout way to 
depend upon consequences. A crime against public peace 
is of itself in its own direct composition heavier or lighter 
according to its extent and quality. The subjective 
moral quality referring to the higher distinction, as to 
how far the act is done consciously, will be dealt with 
later. 

Addition.— ThovL^'ht itself cann ot determine how_every 
single crime is to be punished. Un many cases t he positive 
jfeatufes~of~the act must be con sidered.l By the progress of 
civilization the estimate~or~crime becomes milder, to-day 
the criminal being punished less severely than he was 
a hundred years ago. It is not exactly that the crime 
or the punishment has become different but the relation 
between the two. 

97. An injury done touright as right is a positive external 
fact ; yet it is^ sTnniSi^/^ This nullity is exposed in the 
actual n^atSon?%f the injury and in the realization of right. 
Eight necessarily brings itself to pass by cancelling the in- 
jury and assuming its place. 

Addition. — By crime something is altered, and exists as 
so altered. But this existence is the opposite of itself, and 
so far null. Nullity consists in the usurpation of the place 
of right. But right, as absolute, is precisely what refuses 
to be set aside. Hence it is the manifestation of the crime 
which is intrinsically null, and this nullity is the essential 
result of all crime. But what is null must manifest itself 
as such, and make itself known as that which violates 
itself. The criminal act is not the primary and positive, to 
which punishment comes as the negative. It is the nega- 
tive, and punishment is only the negation of a negation. 



WRONG. 95 

Actual right destroys and replaces injury, thus showing 
its validity and verifying itself as a necessary factor in 
reality. 

98. Injury, confined merely to external reality or posses- 
sion of some kind, is detriment or damage to property 
or wealth. The cancellation of the injury or damage 
takes, when possible, the form of civic satisfaction or 
compensation. 

Note. — ^When damage consists in the destruction of some- 
thing which cannot be restored, compensation must take 
the form not of a particular object but of the universal 
quality, namely, value. 

99. The injury which befalls the intrinsic or general 
will, the win, that is, of the injurer, the injured and all 
others, has just as Httle positive existence in this general 
will as in the bare external result. The general will, i.e. 
right or law, is self-complete, has no external existence at 
all, and is inviolable. Injury is merely negative also for 
the particular wills of the injured and others. It exists 
positively, on the other hand, only as the particular will of 
the crimiual, and to injure this will in its concrete exist- 
ence is to supersede the crime, which would otherwise be 
positively estabHshed, and to restore right. 

Note. — The theory of punish ment is one of the matters, 
which in the modem positive sciencej)f right has fared 
worst. The attempt is jtnade_tQ base, this theory ijpon the 
understanding, and not,-as shauld-be done, upon -ihe_ con- 
ception. If ci ^e and its re movalt^f,. more_cLefinit.ely, 
punishment, are regarded merely as _eyiLit-D3igh±-indeed 
be thought unreasonable to wilL_a_ second— evil^ merely 
because one already existed. (Klein, " Grrunds. des 
peinlichen Eechts," § 9 fol.) In the different theories of 
punishment, that it is preventive, deterrent, reformatory, 
etc., this superficial notion is taken to be fundamental. In 
the same superficial way the result of punishment is 
«»et down as a good. But here we are not dealing with an 



96 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

evil, and this or that good, but with wrong and justice. In 
these superficial theories the consideration of justice is set 
aside, and the moralaspect, the subjective side of crime, is 
made the essential. Also with the moral view are mingled 
trivial psychological notions about temptation, and the 
strength of sensual impulses opposing reason, about psy- 
chological compulsion also, and the influences afEectiugvthe 
imagination ; it being forgotten that the subje^iv^^^ay 



freely abaseitself to something contingent and unreal. 

( The treatment of punishment in its character as a pheno- 
menon, of its relation to the particular consciousness, of the 
effect of threats upon the imagination, and of the possi- 
bility of reform is of great importance in its proper place, 
when the method of punishment is to be decided on. But 
such treatment must assume that punishment is abso- 

( lutely just. Hence everything turns on the point that in 
crime it is not the production of evil but the injury of right 
as right, which must be set aside and overcome. We must 
ask what that is in crime, whose existence has to be 
removed. That is the only evil to be set aside, and the 
essential thing is to determine wherein that evil lies. So 
long as conceptions are not clear on this point, confusion 
must reign in the theory of punishment. 

Addition. — Feuerbach, in his theory of punishment, 
considers punishment as a menace, and thinks that if any 
one disregards the threat and commits a crime, the punish- 
ment must follow, since it was already known to the 
criminal. But is it right to make threats ? A threat 
assumes that a man is not free, and will compel him by 
vividly presenting a possible evil. Right and justice, how- 
ever, must have their seat in freedom and in the will, and 
not in the restriction implied in menace. In this view of 
punishment it is much the same as when one raises a cane 
against a dog ; a man is not treated in accordance with his 
dignity and honour, but as a dog. A menace may incite a 
man to rebellion in order that he may demonstrate his free- 



WRONG. 97 

dom, and therefore sets justice wholly aside. Psychological 
compulsion may refer to distinctions of quality or quantity 
in crime, but not to the very nature of crime. Books of 
law, written in accordance with the principle that punish- 
ment is a threat, lack their proper basis. 

100. The injury which the criminal experiences is in- 
herently just because it expresses his own inherent will, is 
a visible proof of his freedom and is his right. But more 
than that, the injury is a right of the criminal himself, and 
is implied in his realized will or act. In his act, the act of 
a rational being, is involved a universal element, which by 
the act is set up as a law. This law he has recognized in 
his act, and has consented to be placed imder it as under 
his right. 

Note. — Beccaria, as is well known, has denied to the 
state the right of exacting the death penalty, on the ground 
that the social contract cannot be supposed to contain the 
consent of the individual to his own death ; rather, as he 
thought, must the opposite be assumed. To this it must be 
replied that the state is not a contract (§ 75), nor, more- 
over, are the protection and security of the life and pro- 
perty of individuals in their capacity as separate persons, 
the unconditioned object of the state's existence. On the 
contrary, the state is the higher existence, which lays claim 
to the life and property of the individual, and demands the 
sacrifice of them. 

Not only has the conception of crime, the reasonable 
essence of it, to be upheld by the state, with or without 
the consent of the individual, but rationality on its formal 
side, the side of the individual will, is contained in the act 
of the criminaL The criminal is honoured as reasonable, 
because the punishment is regarded as containing his own 
right. The honour would not be shared by him, if the 
conception and measure of his punishment were not de- 
duced from his very act. Just as little is he honoured 
when he is regarded as a hurtful animal, which must be 



98 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

made harmless, or as one who m.ust be terrified or re- 
formed. — Moreover, punishment is not the only embodi- 
ment of justice in the state, nor is the state merely the 
condition or possibility of justice. 

Addition. — The desire of Beccaria that men should con- 
sent to their own punishment is reasonable, but the crimiual 
has already yielded consent through his act. It is both in 
the nature of crime and in the criminal's own will, that the 
injury caused by him should be superseded. In spite of 
this Beccaria' s efforts to abolish capital punishment have 
had good results. Although neither Joseph II. nor the 
JFrench have ever been able to obtain complete abolition of 
the death-penalty, still we have begun to see what crimes 
deserve death and what do not. Capital punishment has 
thus become less frequent, as indeed should be the case 
with the extreme penalty of the law. /ig,o,7-„,..,o^,---e-#* 

101. The doing away with crime is retribution, in so far 
as retribution is in its conception injury of an injury, im- 
plying that as crime has a definite qualitative and quanti- 
tative context, its negation should be similarly definite. 
This identity, involved in the very nature of the case, is 
not literal equality, but equality in the inherent nature of 
the injury, namely, its valUe. 

Note. — If we were to deduce our definition of punish- 
ment, as science usually does, from accepted opinions as to 
the psychological experiences of consciousness, we could 
prove that in nations and individuals there is and has been 
a universal feeling that crime deserves punishment, and 
that it should be done to the criminal according to his act. 
Yet the sciences, which have drawn their decisions from 
universal opinion, the very next moment adopt conclu- 
sions at variance with their so-called universal facts of 
consciousness. 

The category of equality has introduced much difficulty 

into the general notion of retribution. __The_viewthatilLis 

just to^mete out punjghmeiit ij[jT:oporjjoiri to thespecipl 



WRONG. 99 

contest of the crime, of course arises later than the essen- 
tial relation of punishment to crime. A lthough, in order ^ 
to make this essential relation specific, we must look about / 
for other^ principles" tten merely the general principle of 
punish ment, g e t this general principle remain s asTl'is. 
AnHnSore. the c onception itself must contain the basis \ 
for special ap plications of it. The^ c onceptio n, made^ 
^thus specific, implies^ of necessity the_judgment that 
crime, as the product of a negative will, carries with \ 
JtTts own negation or punishment... This inner identity 
is reproduced by the understanding in the sphere of 
actual reahty as equality. The quantitative and quali- 
tative context of crime and its removal belongs to the ex- 
ternal region, in which no absolute rule can be laid down 
(compare § 49). In the region of the finite this rule of 
equality is only a demand which, as it is important to note, 
the understanding must more and more hold in check. 
However it goes on ad infinitwm, and permits only of a 
continual approximation. 

If we fail to observe the nature of the finite, and cling to 
absolute equality ia matters of detail, there arises first of 
all the insuperable difficulty of fixing the kind of punish- 
ment. To do this satisfactorily psychology would have to 
reckon with the magnitude of the sensual motives, and also 
with whatever accompanies them as, e.5r.,the greater strength 
of the evil will, or the weakness of the will, or its limited 
freedom. But that is not the sole difficulty. To adhere 
obstinately to the equalization of punishment and crime in 
every case would reduce retribution to an absurdity. It 
would be necessary to institute a theft in return for theft, 
robbery for robbery, and to demand an eye for an eye and 
a tooth for a tooth, although the criminal, as we can easily 
fancy, might have only one eye or be toothless. For these 
absurdities, however, the conception is not responsible. 
They are due to the attempt to equate crime and punish- 
ment throughout their minute details. Value, as the inner 



100 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

identity of things specifically different, has already been 
made use~of in connection with contract, and occurs again 
in the civil prosecution of crime (§ 95). By it the imagi- 
nation is transferred from the direct attributes of the object 
to its universal nature. Since the essential character of 
crime lies in its infinitude, i.e., in the breach of its own 
right, mere external details vanish. Equality becomes 
only a general rule for determining tlie essential, namely, 
a man's real desertTMt for deciding the special external 
penalty. Only when we limit ourselves to equaUty in the 
external details are theft and robbery unequal to fine and 
imprisonment. But from the standpoint of their value and 
their general capacity to be injuries, they can be equated. 
To approach as nearly as possible to this equality in value 
is, as h.as been remarked, the task of the understanding. 
If we ignore the relation of crime to its cancellation, and 
neglect the idea of value, and the possibility of comparing 
these two in terms of their value, we can see in punishment 
nothing more than the arbitrary attachment of an evil to 
an act not permitted (Klein, " G-runds. des peinUchen 
Rechts," § 9). 

Addition. — Eetribution is the inner connection and iden- 
tity of two things which in outward apgearance and in 
external reality are different, ^l^quital seemTto be some- 
thing foreign, and not of right to belong to the criminal. 
But punishment is only the manifestation of crime, the 
other half which is necessarily presupposed in the first. 
Eetribution looks like something immoral, like revenge, 
and may therefore seem to be something personal. But it 
is the conception, not the personal element, which carries 
out retribution. Revenge is mine, says God in the Bible, 
and, when some find in the word re-tribution the idea of 
a special pleasure for the subjective will, it must be replied 
that it signifies only the turning back of crime against 
itself. The Eumenides sleep, but crime wakes them. So 
it is the criminal's own deed which judges itself. Although 



WRONG. 101 

in requital we cannot venture upon equality of details, the 
case is different with, murder, to which death is necessarily 
due. Life is the total context of one's existence, and can- 
not be measured by value. Its punishment, therefore, 
cannot be measured by value, but must consist in the taking 
of another life. 

102. In the sphere of direct right the suppression of 
crime takes, in the first instance, the form of revenge. This 
in its content is just, so far as it is retribution ; but in its 
form it is the act of a subjective will, which may put into 
any injury an infinite or unpardonable wrong. Hence its 
justice is a matter of accident, and for others means only 
private satisfaction. As revenge is only the positive act of 
a particular will, it is a new injury. Through this contra- 
diction it becomes an infinite process, the insult being 
inherited without end from generation to generation. 

Note. — Wherever crime is punished not as crimina pvb- 
lica but as privata, it still has attached to it a remnant of 
revenge. This is the state of affairs with the Jews, with 
the Eomans in theft and robbery, and with the English in 
some special instances. Differing from private revenge is 
the exercise of revenge by heroes, adventurous knights, 
and others, all of whom appear when the state is in its 
infancy. 

Addition. — In that condition of society where there are 
no judges and no laws, punishment always takes the form 
of revenge. This is defective, as it is the act of a subjective 
will, and has an inadequate content. Judges are persons, 
it is true, but they will the universal meaning of the law, 
and insert into punishment nothing which is not found in 
the nature of the act. But the injured person, on the other 
hand, may view the wrong act not in its necessary limits of 
qu^ity and quantity, but simply as a wrong, and may in 
requital do what would lead to a new wrong. Amongst 
uncivilized peoples revenge is undying, as with the Arabs, 
amongst whom it can be suppressed only by a superior 



102 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGH'f. 

force or by impossibility. In several of our present regu- 
lations a trace of revenge survives, as when it is at the 
option of individuals to bring an injury to trial at court. 

103. That the contradiction involved in this way of 
abolishing crime, and the contradictions found in other 
cases of wrong (§§ 86, 89), should be solved, is a demand 
made by a justice which is freed at once from all subjective 
interests and limits and from the arbitrariness of power. 
Justice, therefore, does not revenge but punishes. Here we 
have in the first instance the demand of a will, which, 
while particular and subjective, wiUs the universal as such. 
But the conception of morality is not simply demanded, but 
is in the process created. 

Transition from Bight to Morality. 

104. Crime and revenging justice represent the visible 
outer form of the development of the will as occurring, 
first of all, in the distinction between the universal will 
and the individual wiU, which exists independently in 
opposition to the universal. Next, by rising above the 
opposition, the universal will is turned back into itself and 
has become an independent reality. Thus right, when 
maintained against the independent private will, has 
validity, being realized through its own necessity. 

This result is also arrived at by the development of the 
conception of will on the side of its inner character. The 
actualization of the will according to its conception pro- 
ceeds in this way. Its first form is the abstract and 
simple phase it assumes in abstract right. This first 
form must be in the next place set aside and passed be- 
yond (§ 21 j in order that the will may become involved 
in the opposition of the abstract universal will and the 
independent particular will. Then by the removal of this 
opposition, i.e., by the negation of a negd,tion, it becomes 
an actualized will, free not only abstractly and potentially, 



■WRONG. 103 

but actually, as is necessary in a negativity -which is able 
to refer itself to itself. Whereas in abstract right the wiU 
was itself mere personality, it now has its personality as 
its object. The subjectivity which is its own object is 
infinite, and freedom in its infinite subjectivity constitutes 
the principle of moraKty. 

Note. — ^Let us for the sake of a closer inspection turn 
back to the elements, through which the conception of 
freedom progresses from the first abstract phase of the will 
to that phase, in which it refers itself to itself, the phase 
of the self- determining subject. Thus property being an 
external object, we have in it the phase of the abstract 
"mine;" in exchange we have the common "mine," the 
" mine " brought into existence by two wills ; in wrong the 
will which belongs to the province of right, the will in its 
abstract, direct, and intrinsic existence, is made contingent 
by means of the particular will which is itself contingent. 
In morality this whole phase of will is so far transcended 
that its contingency is turned back into itself and made 
one with itself, and thus becomes a self-referring, infinite 
contingency of the will, or in a word subjectivity. 

Addition. — To truth it belongs that the conception 
should exist, and that its reality should correspond to the 
conception. In right the will exists in an external object. 
But as it must have its existence in itself, in an internal 
thing, it must become its own ' object ; it must pass into 
subjectivity and have itself over against itself. This rela- 
tion to itself is affirmative, a relation brought about by 
the will only through the transcendence of its direct 
existence. When its first-hand existence is transcended 
in crime, the way is open, through punishment, the nega- 
tion of a negation, to affirmation, that is, to morality. 



SECOND PART. 

MOEALITY. 

105. The moral standpoint is the standpoint of tlie wiU, 
not ifl its abstract or implicit existence, but in its existence 
for itself, an existence whicli is infinite (§ 104). Tbis 
turning back of the wiU upon itself, or its actual self- 
identity, with its associated phases stands in contrast to 
its abstract implicit existence, and converts person into 
subject. 

106. Subjectivity is the conception made definite, dif- 
fering therefore from the abstract, general will. Further, 
the will of the subject, though it still retains traces of self- 
involved simplicity, is the will of an individual, who is an 
object for himself. Hence subjectivity is the realization 
of the conception. — This gives freedom a higher ground. 
Now at last there appears in the idea the side of its real 
existence, the subjectivity of the will. It is only in the 
will as subjective that freedom, or the potentially existing 
wUl, can be actualized. 

Note. — Morality, the second sphere, gives an outline of 
the real side of the conception of freedom. Observe the 
process through which morality passes. As the will has 
now withdrawn into itself, it appears at the outset as 
existing independently, having merely a potential identity 
with the intrinsic or universal will. Then this abstract 
self-dependence is superseded ; and, finally, the will is 
made really and consciously identical with the intrinsic or 



MORALITY. 105 

universal will. Now in this movement, as I have said, is 
illustrated the conception of freedom. Freedom or sub- 
jectivity is at first abstract and distinct from the concep- 
tion of it. Then by means of this movement the so*! of 
freedom is so worked up, that for the conception, and 
necessarily also for the idea, it receives its true realiza- 
tion. The process ends, therefore, when the subjective 
will has become an objective and truly concrete will. 

Addition. — In right, taken strictly, nothing depends 
upon my purpose or intention. The question of the self- 
determination, impulse, or purpose of the will arises for 
the first time in morality. Since a man is to be judged 
according to the direction he has given himself, he is in 
this act free, let the external features of the act be what 
they may. As no one can successfully assail a man's 
inner conviction, and no force can reach it, the moral will 
is inaccessible. A man's worth is estimated by his inner 
act. Hence the moral standpoint implips the realization 
of freedom. 

107. As self-determination of wiU is at the same time a 
factor of the will's conception, subjectivity is not merely 
the outward reality of will, but its inner being (§ 104). 
This free and independent will, having now become the 
will of a subject, and assuming in the first instance the 
form of the conception, has itself a visible reaUzation ; 
otherwise it could not attain to the idea. The moral 
standpoint is in its realized form the right of the subjec- 
tive will. In accordance with this right the will recog- 
nizes and is a thing, only in so far as the thing is the will's 
own, and the will in it is itself and subjective. 

Note. — The process of the moral standpoint (Note to 
preceding paragraph) also appears as the development of 
the right of the subjective will, or of the way in which the 
subjective will is realized. Thus the wUl accounts what in 
its object it recognizes to be its own as its true conception, 
its objective or universal reality. 



106 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

Addition. — Subjectivity of will, as a complete phase, is 
in its turn a -whole which, by its very nature, must also 
have objectivity. Freedom can at first realize itself only 
in the subject, as it is the true material for this realiza- 
tion. But this concrete manifestation of will, which we 
have called subjectivity, is different from absolute will. 
From this new one-sidedness of subjectivity must the will 
free itself, in order that it may become absolute will. In 
morality the interest peculiar to man is in question, and 
the high value of this interest consists in man's knowing 
himself to be absolute, and determining himself. Un- 
civilized man is controlled by the forces and occurrences 
of nature. Children have no moral will, but are guided 
by their parents. Civilized man is determined from 
within, and wills that he shall be in all he does. 

108. The subjective will, in so far as it is directly its 
own object and distinct from the general will (§ 106, 
note), is abstract, limited, and formal. Subjectivity, how- 
ever, is not formal merely, but, since it is the infinite self- 
direction of the will, is the will itself taken formally. 
Since this formal character, as it appears first of all in the 
particular will, is not as yet identical with the conception 
of will, the moral standpoint is the standpoint of relation, 
of obligation or requirement. — ^Since, too, subjectivity in- 
volves difference, that is to say, opposition to objectivity 
as to a mere external existence, there arises here also the 
standpoint of consciousness (§ 8), the standpoint of dif- 
ference in general, of the finite and phenomenal phase of 
the will. 

Note. — The moral is not at once opposed to the immoral, 
just as right is not directly opposed to wrong. The 
general standpoint of both the moral and the immoral 
depends upon the subjectivity of the will . 

Addition. — In morality self-determination is to be con- 
strued as a restless activity, which cannot be satisfied with 
anything that is. Only in the region of established ethical 



MORALITY. 107 

principles is the will identical -with the conception of it, 
and has only this conception for its content. In morality 
the wiU is as yet related to what is potential. This is the 
standpoint of difference, and the process of this stand- 
point is the identification of the subjective will with the 
conception of will. The imperatiTe or ought, which, 
therefore, still is in morality, is fulfilled only in the ethical 
sphere. This sphere, to which the subjective will is 
related, has a twofold nature. It is the substance of the 
conception, and also external reality. If the good were 
established in the subjective will, it would not yet be 
realized. 

109. The formal will, by its own determining character, 
contains at the outset the opposition of subjectivity and 
objectivity, and the appropriate activity (§ 8). Of this 
will we have these further phases. Concrete realization 
and determinate character are in the conception identical. 
The conception of the subjective will is first to make these 
two phases separate and independent, and then to estab- 
lish them as identical. Determinate character in the 
self-determined wiU (a) is brought about in itself by 
itself, the opposition which it creates within itseK being a 
self-bestowed content. This is the first negation, whose 
formal limit consists in its being fixed as merely subjec- 
tive. (/3) Since the will returns into itself and is infinite, 
this limit exists for it, and it wills to transcend the limita- 
tion. Hence it strives to convert its content out of sub- 
jectivity into objectivity, i.e., some kind of directly given 
reality, (y) The simple identity of the will with itself in 
this opposition is the content, which maintains itself amid 
these oppositions, and is indifferent to formal distinctions. 
This content is the purpose or end. 

110. As at the moral standpoint, freedom or self-identity 
of will is for the will (§ 105), the simple identity of the 
content or end receives a further characteristic peculiar to 
itself. 



108 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

(a) This content becomes mine in such a way that it in 
its identity is not only my inner end, but also, so far as it 
is externally realized, contains for me my subjectivity. 

Addition. — The content of the subjective or moral will 
has a special character. Although it has attained the 
form of objectivity, it is yet always to contain my sub- 
jectivity. An act shall be counted mine only so far as it is 
on its inner side issued by me, and was my own proposition 
and intention. I do not recognize as mine anything in the 
outward act except what lay in my subjective will, and in 
the outer act I desire to see my subjective consciousness 
repeated. 

111. (6) The content, though it contains something 
particular, from whatever source it comes, is yet the con- 
tent of a self -referring will, which is also self -identical and 
universal. Thus it has these two features (a) It aims to 
be in itself adequate to the universal will, or to have the 
objectivity of the conception ; (/3) yet, since the subjective 
will exists for itself, and is therefore independent and 
formal (§ 108), its aim is only an ought and is possibly 
not adequate to the conception. 

112. (c) Though I preserve my subjectivity in accom- 
plishing my ends (§ 110), yet in the objectification of 
these ends I pass beyond the simple and elementary sub- 
jectivity which is merely my own. This new external 
subjectivity, which is identical with me, is the will of 
others (§ 73). The sphere for the! existence of the will is 
subjectivity (§ 106), and the will of others is the existence, 
which, though other than I, I yet give to my purpose. 
Hence the accomplishment of my purpose contains the 
identity of my will and that of others, and has to the wiU 
of others a relation which is positive. 

Note. — The objectivity of the realized end has three 
senses, or rather contains in union the three following 
phases, (a) It is external direct reality (§ 109). (/3) It is 
adequate to the conception (§ 112). (y) It is universal 



MORALITY. 109 

subjectivity. The subjectivity which preserves itself in 
this objectivity implies (n) that the objective end shall be 
my o-wu, so that in it I preserve myself as a particular 
individual (§ 110). The two phases (j8) and (y) of sub- 
jectivity concur with the phases (/3) and (y) of objectivity. 
At the moral standpoint these various phases are dis- 
tinguished or joined merely in a contradiction. This is 
the superficial and finite nature of the moral sphere (§ 108). 
The development of the standpoint consists in the de- 
velopment of these contradictions and their solution, 
an achievement which at the present point of view is 
incomplete or merely relative. 

Addition. — It was said that formal right contained only 
prohibitions, and that from the strict standpoint of legal 
right an act had only a negative reference to the wiU of 
others. In morals, on the contrary, the relation of my will 
to that of others is positive ; that, which the subjective wiU 
realizes, contains the universal will. In this is present the 
production or alteration of some visible reality, and this 
has a bearing upon the will of others. The conception of 
morality is the internal relation of the will to itself. But 
there is here more than one will, since the objectification of 
the will implies the transcendence of the onesidedness of 
the separate will, and the substitution of two wills having 
a positive relation one to the other. In right my will is 
realized in property, and there is no room for any reference 
of the will of others to my will. But morality treats of 
the well-being of others also. At this point this positive 
relation to others first makes its appearance. 

113. The expression of the subjective or moral will is 
action. Of action it may be said that (a) I know its 
external fulfillment to be mine, (j3) it is essentially related 
to the conception in its phase as the ought or imperative, 
and (y) it is essentially connected with the will of others. 

Note. — Firstly, the expression of the moral will is action. 
The embodiment achieved by the will in formal right is a 



110 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

mere object. This realization is direct, and has in the first 
instance no actual express reference to the conception. 
Not having as yet come into conflict with the subjective will, 
the conception is not yet distinguished from it, and has no 
positive relation to the will of others. The commands of 
right are, hence, fundamentally prohibitions (§ 38). In 
contract and wrong, indeed, there begins to be seen a rela- 
tion to the will of others, but the agreement, found at this 
point, is based upon arbitrary choice, while the essential 
reference to the will of others is in right merely the nega- 
tive proposal to keep my property or the worth of it, and 
to let others keep theirs. Crime does in a way issue from 
the subjective will. But the content of a crime is fixed 
by written instructions and is not directly imputable to me. 
Hence as the legal act contains only some elements of a dis- 
tinctively moral act, the two kinds of action are different. 

114. The right of the moral will has three factors : 

(a) The abstract or formal right. The act, as directly 
realized, is to be in its essential content mine, and embody 
the purpose of the subjective will. 

(6) The specific side of an act or its inner content, 
(a) This is intention, which is for me, whose general cha- 
racter is fixed, the value and inner substance of the act, 
(j3) and well-being, or the content taken as the particular 
end of my particular, subjective reality. 

(c) The good, or the content taken as universal and 
exalted to universality and absolute objectivity. This is 
the absolute end of the will. As this is the sphere of 
reflection, we have the opposition of the universality, which 
is subjective, and hence involves in one aspect evil, and in 
another conscience. 

Addition. — An act, to be moral, must in the first instance 
accord with my purpose, since the right of the moral will 
is to recognize as its realization nothing which is not found 
internally in the purpose. Purpose concerns the formal 
principle that the externalized will must also be internal 



PURPOSE AND RESPONSIBILITY. Ill 

to me. In the next place we ask after the intention, 
that is, the value of the act relatively to me. The third 
factor is not merely the relative, but the imiversal value of 
the act, the good. In the first phase of an act there is a 
breach between purpose and realization; in the second 
between what is given externally as universal wiU, and the 
particular internal character, which I give it ; the third 
and last phase is the claim of my intention to be the 
universal content. The good is the intention exalted to the 
conception of the wiU. 



FIEST SECTION. 

PUEPOSE AND EeSPONSIBILITT. 

115. In the direct or immediate act the subjective will 
is finite, since it has to do with both an external object and 
its varied surroundings, all presupposed. An accomplished 
act makes a change in this ready-to-hand material, and 
the will is responsible, in so far as the changed material 
can be said to be mine. 

Note. — An event or resultant condition is a concrete 
external reality, having an indefinite number of circum- 
stances associated with it. Every particular element, 
shown to be ra any sense a condition, ground or cause of 
such an event, and, therefore, to have contributed its por- 
tion, may be regarded as responsible for it, or at least as 
sharing in the responsibility. Hence in the case of such a 
richly varied event as the French Revolution, the formal 
understanding has to select from an untold multitude of cir- 
cumstances that one to which it will attribute responsibility. 

Addition. — What is contained in my purpose can be laid 
at my door, and this is one of the main considerations in 
the case of crime. But in simple responsibility there is 
found only the quite external judgment as to whether I 
have or have not done this thing. Thus merely to be 



112 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

responsible does not mean that the whole thing is to be 
imputed to me. 

116. It is not my deed, if things, which I own, cause 
injury to others through some of their many external con- 
nections; this may happen even with my body as a 
mechanical or living object. Tet I am not wholly free 
from responsibility in such a case, since these things are 
still mine, although by their very nature they are often 
only imperfectly subject to my attention and control. 

117. When the self-directing will proposes to act upon 
a given material, it has a representation of the circum- 
stances. Since the material is supplied, the will is finite, 
and the results of the act are for it accidental. Hence 
they may contain something very different from the repre- 
sentation. But the right of the will in acting is to recog- 
nize as its own deed only those results which were con- 
sciously in its end and were purposed. That responsibility 
shall extend to the will only so far as the results were 
known, is the right of knowledge. 

Addition. — The will has before it an outer reality, upon 
which it operates. But to be able to do this, it must have 
a representation of this reality. True responsibility is 
mine only in so- far as the outer reality was within my 
consciousness. I The wiU, because this external matter is 
supplied to it, is finite ; or rather because it is finite, the 
matter is supplied. I When I think and wiU rationally, I 
am not at this standpoint of finitude, nor is the object I 
act upon something opposed to me. The finite always has 
limit and boundary. There stands opposed to me that 
which is other than I, something acpadental and externally 
necessary ; it may or may not fall into agreement with me. 
But I am only what relates to my freedom ; and the act is 
the purport of my will only in so far as I am aware of it. 
(Edipus, who unwittingly slew his father, is not to be 
arraigned as a patricide. In the ancient laws, however, 
less value was attached to the subjective side of the act 



PURPOSE AND RESPONSIBILITY. 113 

than is done to-day. Hence arose amongst the ancients 
asylums, where the fugitive from reTenge might be received 
and protected. 

118. An act, when it has become an external reality, 
and is connected with a varied outer necessity, has mani- 
fold consequences. These consequences, being the visible 
shape, whose soul is the end of action, belong to the act. 
But at the same time the inner act, when realized as an 
end in the external world, is handed over to external 
forces, which attach to it something quite different from 
what it is in itself, and thus carry it away into strange and 
distant consequences. It is the right of the will to adopt 
only the first consequences, since they alone lie in the 
purpose. 

Note. — The division of consequences into necessary and 
accidental is not accurate, because the inner necessity, 
involved in the finite, is realized as a necessity which is 
external, a necessity, that is to say, implying a relation of 
separate things, which are independent, indifferent to one 
another, and only externally connected. The principle " In 
acting neglect the consequences," and the principle " Judge 
an act by its consequences, and make them the standard of 
what is right and good," belong both alike to the abstract 
understanding. The consequences are the native form of 
the act, simply manifest its nature, and are nothing but the 
act itself. The act cannot scorn and disown them. Tet 
amongst the consequences is included that which is only 
externally attached to them and has no fellowship with 
the act itself. 

The development of the contradiction involved in the 
necessary nature of the finite is in external reality the eon- 
version of necessity into contingency and vice versa. An 
overt act must therefore conform to this law. This law it 
is which stands the criminal in such good stead, if his act 
has had but few consequences ; so also must the good act 
be contented to have few or no consequences. But when 

I 



114 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

the consequences of crime have fully developed themselves, 
they add to the severity of the punishment. 

The self-consciousness of the heroic age, painted in the 
tragedy of " CEdipus," for instance, had not risen out of its 
simplicity, or reflectively &,ppreciated the difference between 
realized deed and inner act, between the outer occurrence 
and the purpose and knowledge of surroundings. Nor 
did it distinguish between one consequence and another, 
but spread responsibility over the whole area of the deed. 

Addition. — In the fact that I recognize as mine only 
what was in my representation is to be found the transition 
from purpose to intention. Only what I knew of the sur- 
roundings can be imputed to me. But there are necessary 
results attached to even the simplest act, and they are its 
universal element. The consequences, which may be pre- 
vented from taking effect, I cannot indeed foresee, but I 
ought to know the universal nature of each separate con- 
crete deed. The thing which ' I ought to know is the 
essential whole, which refers not to special details of an 
act, but to its real nature. The transition from purpose 
to intention consists in my being aware not merely of my 
separate act, but of the universal bound up with it. This 
universal, when willed by me, is my intention. 



SECOND SECTION. 
Intention and "Welii-bbing. 

119. The external embodiment of an act is composed of 
many parts, and may be regarded as capable of being 
divided into an infinite number of particulars. An act 
may be looked on as in the first instance coming into con- 
tact with only one of these particulars. But the truth of 
the particular is the universal. A definite act is not con- 
fined in its content to one isolated point of the varied 
external world, but is universal, including these varied 



INTENTION AND WELL-BEING. 115 

relations within itself. The purpose, which is the product 
of thought and embraces not the particular only but also 
the universal side, is intention. 

Note. — Intention (ia G-erman, " a looking away from ") 
implies, according to its etymology, an abstraction, which 
has in part the form of universality, and partly is the. 
extraction of a particular side of the concrete thing. The 
attempt to justify oneself by the intention consists, in 
general, in asserting that one special isolated phase is the 
subjective essence of the act. — To pass judgment upon an 
act simply as an external deed, without qualifying it as 
right or wrong, imparts to it a universal predicate ; it is 
killing, arson, etc. — ^When the parts of external reality are 
taken one by one, their connection must naturally be 
external. Eeality may be, in the first instance, touched 
at only a single point. Arson, e.g., may be directly con- 
cerned with only a small piece of wood, a statement which 
is merely a proposition, but not a judgment. But this 
single point has a universal nature, which involves the 
extension of it. In life the separate part is not a mere 
part, but directly an organ, in which the universal is really 
present. Hence in murder it is not a separate piece of 
flesh, but the life itself which is destroyed. On one side 
subjective reflection, in its ignorance of the logical nature 
of the particular and the universal, permits of a dis- 
section into mere particulars and their consequences. On 
the other side, the act in its finite and casual character 
naturally breaks up into separate parts.^ — -The invention 
of the dolus indirectus is due to this way of thinking. 

Addition. — Manifestly more or fewer circumstances may 
be included in an act. In the case of arson, e.g., the fire 
may not take effect, or it may spread farther than the 
agent intended. Yet in neither case is the result due to/* 
good or bad fortune, since man must in acting i»faB^*» j 
deal with externality. An old proverb rightly enough 
says, " A stone flung from the hand is the devil's." In 



116 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

acting I must expose myself to m.isfortune ; that also has 
a right to me, and is the manifestation of my own will. 

120. The right of intention is that the universal quality 
of the act should not only be implicitly present, but should 
be known by the agent, and be part and parcel of his sub- 
jective wiU. Conversely the right of objectivity of action, 
as it may be called, is to maintain that it be known and 
willed by a subject in his character as thinking. 

Note. — This right to this insight involves that children, 
imbeciles, and lunatics are completely, or almost com- 
pletely, irresponsible for their actions. Just as actions on 
the side of their external reality include accidental results, 
so also the subjective reality contains an indeterminate 
element, which depends upon the strength of self-con- 
sciousness and prudence. But this uncertain element 
needs to be reckoned with only in the case of imbecility, 
lunacy, or childhood. These are the only conditions of 
mind which supersede thought and free wiU, and permit 
us to take an agent otherwise than in accordance with his 
dignity as free and rational. 

121. The universal quality of action is in general the 
manifold content reduced to the simple form of univer- 
sality. But the subject turned back into himself is par- 
ticular, in opposition to the particulars of the objective 
world. He has in his end his own particular content, 
which constitutes the essential soul of his act. ( In the 
execution of this particular content of the act consists his 
subjective freedom in its concrete character. ) This is the 
subject's right to find in the act his satisfaction. 

Addition. — I, as independent and self-referred, am par- 
ticular, and opposed to the external side of the act. Its 
content is decided by my end. Murder and arson, e.g., 
are quite general and not the positive content of me, a 
subject. When anyone has committed a crime, we ask 
why he has done it. Murder is not done for the sake of 
murder. There must be besides a particular positive end. 



INTENTION AND WELL-BEING. 117 

If delight in murder were the motive of the crime, it would 
be the positive content of the subject as such, and the 
deed would be the satisfaction of his desire. CThe motive 
of a deed contains the moral element, which has the two- 
fold signification of the universal in purpose and of the 
particular in intention.5 In modem times we are at pains 
to ask after the motive. Formerly the question was 
merely. Is this man just ? Does he do his duty ? Now we 
scrutinize the heart, and fix a guK between the objective 
side of conduct and the internal subjective side, or motive. 
No doubt the subject's own determination must be con- 
sidered. What he wills has its ground within him ; he 
wills to satisfy a pleasure or gratify a passion. But right 
and good are also precisely such a content, due, however, 
not to nature but to my reason. To make my own freedom 
the content of my will is a pure characteristic of my free- 
dom itself. Hence the higher moral phase is to find 
satisfaction in the act, not to harp upon a breech between 
the objectivity of the deed, and the self-consciousness of 
man. This defective mode of interpretation has its epochs 
as well in world-history as in the history of individuals. 

122. By virtue of the particular element the act has 
for me subjective value or interest. In contrast with this 
end, whose content is the intention, the direct act in its 
wider content is reduced to a means. This end, as far as 
it is finite, can again be reduced to a means for a wider 
intention, and so on indefinitely. 

123. The content of these ends is only (a) formal activity, 
that is, the subject's interest or aim is to be effected by 
his agency. Men desire to be themselves actively in- 
terested in whatever is or ought to be their own. (fi) 
Further definite content is found for the still abstract and 
formal freedom of subjectivity only in its natural sub- 
jective embodiment, as inclinations, passions, opinions, 
whims, etc. The satisfaction of this content is well-being 
or happiness in its particular as also in its universal 



118 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

features. In this satisfaction consist the ends of finitude 
generally. 

Note. — This is the standpoint of relation (§ 108). The 
subject at this stage emphasizes his distinctive and par- 
ticular nature. Here enters the content of the natural 
will (§ 11). But the will is not in its simple and direct 
form, since the content belongs to a will which is turned 
back into itself, and raised to the level of a universal end, 
namely, well-being or happiness. 

Addition. — In so far as the elements of happiness are 
externally provided, they are not the true elements of 
freedom. Freedom truly is itself only in an end consti- 
tuted by itself, i.e., the good. Here the question may be 
raised. Has man a right to set up for himself ends which 
are not free, and depend simply on his being a living 
thing ? But life in man is not a mere accident, since it 
accords with reason. Man has so far a right to make his 
wants an end. There is nothing degrading in one's being 
alive. There is open to us no more spiritual region, in 
which we can exist, than that of life. Only through the 
exaltation of what is externally provided to the level of 
something self-created do we enter the higher altitude of 
the good. But this distinction implies ho intolerance of 
either side of man's nature. 

124. Since the subjective satisfaction of the individual, 
the recognition for example of oneself as honoured or 
famous, is involved in the realization of absolutely vahd 
ends, the demand that only subjective satisfaction should 
appear as willed and attained, and also the view that in 
action subjective and objective ends exclude each other, 
are empty assertions of the abstract understanding. Nay, 
more, the argument becomes a positive evil when it is held 
that, because subjective satisfaction is always found in 
every finished work, it must be the essential intention of 
the agent, the objective end being only a means to the 
attainment of this satisfaction. The subject is the series 



INTENTION AND WELL-BEING. 119 

of his acts. If these are a series of worthless productions, 
the subjectivity of the will is also worthless ; if the acts 
are substantial and sound, so likewise is the inner will of 
the individual. 

Note. — The right of the subject's particular being to 
find himself satisfied, the right, in other words, of sub- 
jective freedom, constitutes the middle or turning-point 
between the ancient and the modem world. This right in 
its infinite nature is expressed in Christianity, and has been 
made the universal active principle of a new form of the 
world. The more definite manifestations of this principle 
are love, romance, the hope of the eternal salvation of the 
individual, morality also, and conscience. It includes, 
moreover, various other forms, which will be, in a measure, 
introduced in the sequel as the principle of the civic 
society, and as elements of the political constitution, but 
partly, however, appear in history generally, especially in 
the history of art, the sciences, and philosophy. This 
principle of particularity is now, indeed, one side of the 
contradiction, and, in the first resort, is at least quite as 
much identical with the universal as distinct from it. But 
abstract reflection fastens upon this element in its difEerence 
from and opposition to the universal, and propounds the 
view that morality must carry on a continued warfare 
against the satisfaction of oneself, demanding of us — 

" Mit Abscheu zu thun was die Pflicht gebeut." ' 

The same abstract standpoint lies at the root of that 
psychological view of history, which seeks to disparage all 
great deeds and persons. It emphasizes the particular side, 
which it has already decreed to be evQ, considers as the 
chief factor in the act the honour and glory, which may 
accrue to the agent, and transforms and converts the in- 
clinations and passions, whose satisfaction was only one 

' " To do with aversioD what duty requires." 



120 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

element of the total result, into the agent's main intention 
and active principle. This same abstract point of view 
asserts that because great acts, and the real result brought 
to pass by a series of them, have produced a great effect 
upon the world, and have naturally resulted to the agent 
in power, honour, and renown, therefore there belongs to 
the individual not the greatness, but merely these par- 
ticular and external results. The reason assigned is that 
the particular consequence, since it was admittedly an end, 
must be the sole end. Such abstract thinking sees only 
the subjective side of great men, the side which constitutes 
its own essence. In its self-constituted vanity it overlooks 
their real nature. It takes the view of the " psychological 
valet for whom there are no heroes, not because there are 
no heroes, but because he is only a valet." 

Addition. — The sentence. In magnis voluisse sat est, is 
right, if it means that one should will something great. 
But he should also carry it out, otherwise his volition is 
vain. The laurels of mere willing are dry leaves, which 
have never been green. 

125. The subjective, whose concern is with the particular 
content of well-being, is, when it becomes infinite by being 
turned back into itself, at the same time brought into rela- 
tion with implicit or general will. This new element, 
established, in the first instance, in particularity itself, is 
the well-being of others ; in its complete but quite empty 
character it is the well-being of all. The well-being of 
many other particular persons is therefore an essential end 
or right of subjectivity. But since the absolute universal, 
which is distinguished from this particular content, is here 
defined simply as right, the ends of the particular will may 
or may not be in real accordance with the universal. 

126. My own particularity, and likewise the particularity 
of others are, however, a right, only in so far as I am free. 
They cannot maintain themselves in opposition to their real 
basis. An intention to further my well-being or that of 



INTENTION AND WELL-BEING. 121 

others, rightly called a moral intentioii, cannot justify a 
wrong act. 

Note. — It is one of the most corrupt maxims of our day 
which, originating in the pre-Kantian period of the good 
heart, and furnishing the quintessence of some well-known 
touching dramas, undertakes in the case of wrong acts to 
excite interest in the so-called moral intention. It pictures 
bad persons as having hearts filled with good intentions 
and desires for their own well-being, and perhaps for that of 
others as well. A heightened form of this theory has been 
vamped up in our own time. Inner inspiration and feel- 
ing, the very soul of particularity, have been made the 
criterion of what is right, reasonable, and excellent. Crime 
has been pronounced right, reasonable, and excellent, as 
also have the thoughts which led to it, merely on the 
ground that they proceeded from inspiration and feeling, 
though they may have been in fact the most hollow and 
commonplace whims and most foolish opinions (§ 140, 
note). — Observe further that here under right and well- 
being we are considering the formal right and particular 
well-being of the individual. The so-called general welfare, 
the well-being of the state, the right of the real, concrete 
spirit is quite another region, in which formal right and 
the particular well-being or happiness of the individual 
are subordinate elements. It has already been remarked 
that it is one of the most frequent misconceptions of the 
abstract intellect to set up private right and private well- 
being as absolutely valid in opposition to the universal 
principle of the state. 

Addition.- — ^We may quote here the celebrated retort 
given to the libeller, who excused himself with the remark, 
" Ilfaut done que je vive." " Je n'en vois pas la necessite," 
was the reply. Life is not necessary against the higher 
fact of freedom. When the holy Crispinus steals leather 
to make boots for the poor, his act, though moral, is not 
right, and cannot be justified. 



122 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

127. The particular interests of the natural will, viewed 
as a simple whole, constitute personal reality or the life. In 
the final resort, life, when in collision with another's 
rightful ownership, can claim the right of necessity, not on 
the ground of equity but of right. Observe that on the 
one side is placed the infinite destruction of our outer exis- 
tence, and therefore the complete loss of rights ; on the 
other side an injury to only a particular and limited 
embodiment of one's freedom. A slight injury to a 
particular possession does not violate the injured man's 
right, as such, or his capacity for right. 

Note. — Prom this right of need flows the benefit of com- 
petence (heneficium com/petentice), by virtue of which there is 
allowed to the debtor some of his tools, implements, clothes, 
and means generally, all of which are of course the property 
of the creditor. The allowance covers so much as is deemed 
sufficient for the possible maintenance of one in the debtor's 
class. 

Addition. — ^Life, or the totality of ends, has a right 
against abstract right. For instance, by the theft of a loaf 
of bread a property is doubtless inj ured. Still, if the act 
was the means of prolonging life, it would be wrong to 
consider it as ordinary theft. If the man whose life is in 
danger were not allowed to preserve himself, he would be 
without rights ; and, since his life is refused him, his whole 
freedom is denied to him also. Many things, it is true, 
must go to secure life, especially if we regard the future. 
But to live now is all that is necessary ; the future is not 
absolute, and remains exposed to accidents. Hence only 
the need of the immediate present can justify a wrong 
act. Yet the act is justified, because the agent, abstain- 
ing from it, would commit the highest wrong, namely, the 
total negation of his realized freedom. The beneficium 
convpetentice implies the right to ask that no man shall be 
wholly sacrificed to mere right. 

128. Need reveals the finite and contingent character of 



THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE. 123 

both right and -well-being, that is to say, of that abstract 
embodiment of freedom, which is not the existence of any 
particular person, and also of the sphere of the particular 
■will, which excluded the universality of ,right. The one- 
sidedness or ideality of these phases is found in the concep- 
tion itself. Eight has already been embodied as the parti- 
cular will (§ 106) ; and subjectivity, in the whole range of 
its particularity, is itself the embodiment of freedom 
(§ 127), and also, in its character as the infinite reference 
of the will to itself, is it implicitly the imiversal side of 
freedom. These two elements in their truth and identity, 
although, in the first instance, only in relative reference to 
each other, are on the one hand the good, as the fulfilled 
and absolutely definite universal, and, on the other hand, 
conscience, or an infinite subjectivity, which is aware of 
itself, and determines in itself its content. 



THIED SECTION. 
The GrooD and ConsciEifCE. 

129. The good is the idea, or unity of the conception 
of the will with the particular will. Abstract right, 
well-being, the subjectivity of consciousness, and the con- 
tingency of external reality, are in their independent and 
separate existences superseded in this unity, although in 
their real essence they are contained ia it and preserved. 
This unity is realized freedom, the absolute final cause of 
the world. 

Addition. — Every stage is properly the idea, but the 
earlier steps contain the idea only in more abstract form. 
The I, as person, is already the idea, although in its most 
abstract guise. The good is the idea more completely de- 
termined ; it is the unity of the conception of will with the 
particular vrill. It is not something abstractly right, but 



124 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

has a real content, whose substance constitutes both right 
and well-being. 

130. In this .idea well-being has value, not independently 
as the realization of the separate particular will, but only as 
universal well-being, as universal, that is, in its essence, 
intrinsically or in accordance with freedom. Hence, well- 
being is not a good, if separated from right ; nor is right a 
good, if separated from well-being. Fiat justitia ought not 
to have pereat mundus as a consequence. The good, carry- 
ing a necessity to be actualized by the particular will, and 
comprising the vital essence of such a will, has absolute 
right over the mere abstract right of property and the 
particular ends of well-being. If either of these elements 
is distinguished from the good, it has validity only in 
so far as it accords with the good and subordinates itself 
to it. 

131. The subjective will finds in the good the supremely 
essential, and has worth and merit only as its insight and 
intention accord with the good. In so far as the good in 
this place is still the abstract idea of the good, the subjec- 
tive will is not yet carried up into it, and made one with it. 
It stands to the good in a relation of the following kind. 
As the good is for it what is real and substantial, it ought 
to make the good its end and realize it ; and on the other 
hand it is only through the medium of the subjective will 
that the good can be realized. 

Addition. — The good is the truth of the particular will. 
But the will is only that to which it sets itself. It is not 
inherently good, but becomes what it is only by its work. 
On the other side the good apart from the subjective will 
is only an abstraction having no reality. Eeality first 
comes to the good through the private will. Thus the 
development of the good contains these three stages. 
(1) For me, as willing, the good should be particular will, 
and I should know it. (2) We should say what thing is 
good, and develop the particular phases of the good. (3) 



THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE. 125 

We determine the independent good, particularizing it as 
infinite and independent subjectivity. THs inner determi- 
nation is conscience. 

. 132. It is the right of the subjective -will that it should 
regard as good what it recognizes as authoritative. It is 
the individual's right, too, that an act, as the outer realiza- 
tion of an end, should be counted right or wrong, good or 
' evil, lawful or unlawful, according to his knowledge of the 
worth it has when objectively realized. 

Note. — The good is in general the essence of the will in its 
substantive and universal character, the will in its truth. 
It exists solely in and by means of thought. The doctrines 
that man cannot understand the truth but must deal with 
appearances only, and that thinking does harm to the good 
will, iake away from spirit all its intellectual and ethical 
merit and value. The right to admit nothing, which I do 
not regard as reasonable, is the highest right of the subject. 
But because of its subjective character it is a formal right. 
So that on the opposite hand the right to the subject of the 
reasonable or objective remains. 

Because of its formal nature insight may be either truth 
opinion and error. Whether or not the individual 
I to the right of his insight belongs, at least from the 
Standpoint, to his particular subjective character. I 
tke it a claim upon myself, and regard it as a subjec- 
^ht, that I should be convinced that the grounds of 
i,gation are good. I may even claim that I should 
know them in their conception and nature. But my 
demand for the satisfaction of my conviction as to what is 
good, what allowed and what not allowed, and also as 
to my responsibility, does not infringe upon the right 
of objectivity. 

Eight of insight into the good is different from right of 
insight (§ 117) with regard to action as such. The right 
of objectivity means that the act must be a change in the 
actual world, be recognized there, and in .general be 




126 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

adequate to what has validity there. Whoso will act 
in this actual world has thereby submitted to its laws, and 
recognized the right of objectivity. Similarly in the state, 
which is the objectivity of the conception of reason, legal 
responsibility does not adapt itself to what any one person 
holds to be reasonable or unreasonable. It does not adhere 
to subjective insight into right or wrong, good or evil, or 
to the claims which an iadividual mates for the satisfaction 
of his conviction. In this objective field the right of in- 
sight is reckoned as insight into what is legal or illegal, or 
the actual law. It limits itself to its simplest meaning, 
namely, knowledge of or acquaintance with what is lawful 
and binding. Through the publicity of the laws and 
through general customs the state removes from the right 
of insight that which is for the subject its formal side. li. ■ 
removes also the element of chance, which at our present 
standpoint still clings to it. 

The right of the subject to know the act as good oi evil, 
legal or illegal, has the result of lessening or abolikhing 
responsibility in the case of children, imbeciles,' and 
.lunatics, although the conditions of this responsibility 
cannot be definitely stated. But to take into conside i,tion 
momentary fascination, the allurement of passion, dru :en- 
ness, or the strength of what are called sensual im ses 
generally, that impulse alone being excepted which : ns 
the basis of the right of need (§ 120), to consider 30 
things in estimating the character of a crime ar '-,s 
liability to punishment, or to suppose that these circum'~ 
stances will remove the guilt of a criminal act, is to neglect 
right and the true dignity of manhood (§ 100, and § 119, 
note). The nature of man is essentially universal. His 
consciousness does not exist as a mere abstract moment of 
time or in isolated parts. Just as the incendiary sets on 
fire not a separate piece of wood an inch long, which 
he touches with his match, but the universal involved in it, 
namely the house, so he does not exist merely in one single 



THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE. 127 

moment, or in one isolated passion for revenge. If so, he 
would be an animal, wliicli, because of its dangerous and 
passionate nature would have to be be tilled. It is claimed 
that the criminal in the moment of his act must have pre- 
sented clearly to himself the nature of the wrong he is doing 
and of his liability to punishment, if the act is to be 
counted to him for a crime. This claim seems to preserve 
to him the right of his moral subjectivity, but it really 
denies to him that indwelling intelligent nature, which in 
its active presence has no affinity with the clear images of 
purely animal psychology. Only in the case of lunacy 
is intelligence so distorted as to be separated from the con- 
sciousness of particular things and the doing of them. 
The sphere, in which circumstances are adduced as 
grounds for leniency, is not that of right but of mercy. 

133. Since the good is the essence of the will of the par- 
ticular subject, it is his obUgation. As the good is 
distinct from particularity, and particularity occurs in the 
subjective will, the good has at the outset only the charac- 
ter of universal abstract essence. This abstract universal 
is duty. Hence duty, as is required by its character, must 
be done for duty's sake. 

Addition. — The essence of the will is for me duty. Tet 
if I know no more than that the good is my duty, it is for 
me still abstract. Duty should be done for duty's sake, 
and it is my objective nature in the truest^ense which 
I realize in duty ; in doing it I am self-ceMMfa and free. 
It is the signal merit of the standpoint of tlrefeantian phi- 
losophy of action that it has made prominent this significa- 
tion of duty. 

134. Since -an act requires its own special content and 
definite end, and duty in the abstract contains no such end, 
there arises the question. What is duty ? No answer is at 
once forthcoming, except "To do right, and to consider 
one's own well-being, and the general well-being, the well- 
being of others " (§ 119). 



128 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

Addition. — Precisely the same question was proposed to 
Jesus, when it was asked of him, " What should be done to 
obtain eternal life ? " The universal good cannot, if 
abstractly taken, be realized. If it is to be realized, it 
must be given a particular content. 

135. The two points of this answer, being each of them 
conditioned and limited, are not in fact contained in duty 
itself, but effect the transition into the higher sphere of the 
unconditioned, or duty. In so far as duty is the universal 
or essence of the moral consciousness, and merely refers 
itself to itself within itself, it is only an abstract univer- 
sality, and has for its characteristic an identity without 
content, an abstract positive, an absence of definite 
character. 

Note. — It is important to be clear that the pure uncondi- 
tioned self- direction of the will is the root of duty. This 
doctrine of volition attained to a firm basis and starting- 
point first of all in the Kantian philosophy through the 
thought of the infinite autonomy of the will (§ 133). Tet 
if this merely moral standpoint does not pass into the con- 
ception of the ethical system, this philosophical acquisition 
is reduced to empty formalism, and moral science is con- 
verted into mere rhetoric about duty for duty's sake. 
From such a position can be derived no inherent doctrine 
of duties. Materials, it is true, may be introduced from 
without, and in this way specific duties may be secured ; 
but from duty, whose characteristic is an absence of con- 
tradiction or formal concord with itself, a characteristic 
which is no more than the establishment of abstract indefi- 
niteness, no specific duties can be deduced. Nor, further, 
if any specific content of action comes up for consideration, 
is there in this principle any way of judging whether it is 
a duty or not. On the contrary, aU manner of wrong 
and immoral acts may be by such a method justified. 

The more detailed Kantian statement, the suitability of 
an act to be presented as a universal rule, implies indeed 



'j:he good and conscience. 129 

the more concrete notion of a condition, but really contains 
no other principle than absence of contradiction, or formal 
identity. The rule that there should be no private pro- 
perty contains of itself no contradiction, nor does the 
proposition that this or that particular nation or family 
should not exist, or that no one should live at aU. Only 
if it is really fixed and assumed that private property and 
human life should exist and be respected, is it a contradic- 
tion to commit theft or murder. There can be no con- 
tradiction except of something that exists or of a content, 
which is assumed to be a fixed principle. Only such a 
content can an act agree with or contradict. But duty 
which must be willed only as such, and not for the sake of 
a content, is a formal identity excluding all content and 
specific character. 

Other antinomies and developments of the Kantian 
position, in which is shown how the moral standpoint of 
relation wanders aiuilessly around without being able to 
find a way of escape from the mere abstract imperative, I 
have given in the " Phanomenologie des G-eistes." 

Addition. — -Although we exalted the standpoint of the 
Kantian philosophy, in so far as it nobly insists that duty 
should accord with reason, yet its weakness is that it lacks 
all organic filling. The proposition, " Consider if thy 
maxim can be set up as a universal rule " would be all 
right, if we already had definite rules concerning what 
should be done. A principle that is suitable for universal 
legislation already presupposes a content. If the content 
is present, the application of the law is an easy matter. 
But in the Kantian theory the rule is not to hand, and the 
criterion that there should be no contradiction produces 
nothing. Where there is nothing, there can be no con- 
tradiction. 

136. Owing to the, abstract nature of the good, the other 
side of the idea, i.e., particularity in general, falls within 
subjectivity. .This subjectivity, universalized' by being 



130 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

turned back into itself, is absolute certitude' of itself 
within itself. In this character it establishes particularity, 
it determines and judges. This is conscience.^ 

Addition. — We may speak in a lofty strain of duty, and 
this way of speaking elevates mankind, and widens the 
heart. Tet if nothing definite comes of it, it at last grows 
tedious. Spirit demands and is entitled to a particular 
content. But conscience is the deepest internal solitude, 
from which both limit and the external have wholly dis- 
appeared. It is a thorough-going retreat into itself. Man 
in his conscience is no longer bound by the ends of par- 
ticularity. This is a higher standpoint, the standpoint of 
the modern world. We have now arrived at the stage of 
consciousness, which involves a recoil upon itself. Earlier 
ages were more sensuous, and had before them something 
external and given, whether it was rehgion or law. But 
conscience is aware of itself as thought, and knows that 
my thought is for me the only thing that is binding. 

137. True conscience is the disposition to desire what is 
absolutely- good. It has therefore fixed rules, which are 
for it independently objective phases and duties. Dis- 
tinguished from this, which is its content or truth, con- 
science is only the formal side of the activity of the will, 
and the will as particular has no content peculiarly its own. 
The objective system of rules and duties and the union of 
them with the subjective consciousness appear first in the 
sphere of ethical observance. But at the formal stand- 
point of morality, conscience is devoid of objective content. 
It is merely an infinite certitude of itself and is formal 
and abstract. It is the certitude of a particular subject. 

Note. — Conscience expresses the absolute claim of the 
subjective self-consciousness to know in itself and from 
itself what right and duty are, and to recognize nothing 
except what it thus knows to be good. It asserts also that 

' Gewissheit, " Gewissen. 



THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE. 131 

what it so knows and wills is right and duty in very truth. 
Conscience, as the unity of the subject's will with the 
absolute, is a holy place which it would be sacrilege to 
assault. But whether the conscience of a certain indi- 
vidual is proportionate to this idea of conscience, in other 
words, whether what the individual conscience holds and 
gives out to be good is really good, can be ascertained only 
by an examination of the contents of the intended good. 
Right and duty, viewed as absolutely reasonable phases of 
will, are not in essence the particular property of an indi- 
vidual. Nor do they assume the form of perception or 
any other phase of mere individual sensuous consciousness. 
They are the universal products of thought, and exist in 
the form of laws and principles. Conscience is therefore 
subject to the judgment whether it is true or not, and its 
appeal merely to itself is directly opposed to what it wills 
to be, the rule, that is, of a reasonable absolutely valid 
way of acting. Tor this reason the stat€ cannot recognize 
conscience in its peculiar form as sabjective consciousness, 
just as subjective opinion, or the dogmatic appeal to a 
subjective opinion, can be of no avail in science. 

The elements which are united in true conscience can be 
separated. The determining subjectivity of consciousness 
and will may separate itself from the true content, proceed 
to establish itself, and reduce the true content to a form 
and unreality. Thus the term conscience is ambiguous. 
On the one hand it is presupposed in the identity of sub- 
jective consciousness and will with the true good, and is 
therefore maintained and recognized to be a holy thing. 
On the other hand it is the mere subjective return of con- 
sciousness into itself, claiming the authority which con- 
science in its first form possesses solely because of its 
absolutely valid and rational content. Now, at the moral 
standpoint, distinguished as it is in this treatise from 
ethical observance, there occurs only the formal conscience. 
The true conscience is mentioned here only to emphasize 



132 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

the difference between the two and to remove the possi- 
bility of supposing that here, where the formal conscience 
alone is considered, the argument is concerned with the 
true. But to repeat, the true conscience looms up only in 
the sequel, and has to do with the properly social disposi- 
tion. The religious conscience, however, does not belong 
to this sphere at all. 

Addition. — When we speak of conscience, it may easily 
be supposed that because of its abstract inner form, it is 
already the absolutely true conscience. But conscience as 
true wills absolute good and absolute duty. As we must 
here deal with the abstract good, conscience is so far devoid 
of this objective content, and is at first only the infinite 
certitude of itself. 

138. Subjectivity, as abstract self-determination and 
pure certitude only of itself, dissolves within itseK all 
definite realization of right and duty. It passes judgment 
within itself, determines solely out of itself what is good, 
and makes this self -produced good its content. It bestows 
reality upon a good which is at first only presented and 
intended. 

Note. — The self-consciousness, which has reached abso- 
lute return into itself, is conscious of itself as something 
over which nothing that exists or is given to it can or 
ought to have any power. This tendency to look within, 
and know and decide from oneself what is right and good, 
assumes a more general form in history, appearing at 
epochs such as that of Socrates, the Stoics, etc., when the 
accepted ethical principles could not satisfy the better will. 
When the visible world has become untrue to freedom, the 
will no longer finds itself in the established morality, and 
is forced to seek the harmony, which the actual world has 
lost, in the inner ideal life. Since the right, which self- 
consciousness acquires in this way, is formal,, everything 
depends upon the nature of the content, which it gives, 
itself. ' , 



THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE. 133 

Addition. — In the simple conception of conscience all 
definite phases of will are dissolved, and must proceed out 
of it again. Everything that is recognized as right or 
duty can in the first instance be proved by thought to be 
worthless, limited, and merely relative. But subjectivity, 
though it dissolves all content, must develop it again out 
of itself. Everything which comes to pass in ethical 
observance, is to be produced by this activity of spirit. 
But, on the other side, this standpoint is defective, because 
it is merely abstract. When I am conscious of my freedom 
as inner substantive reality, I do no act ; yet if I do act 
and seek principles, I must try to obtain definite characters 
for my act. The demand is then made that this definite 
context shall be deduced from the conception of the free 
vsdll. Btence, if it is right to absorb right and duty into 
subjectivity, it is on the other hand wrong if this abstract 
basis of action is not again evolved. Only in times when 
reality is a hollow, unspiritual, and shadowy existence, can 
a retreat be permitted out of the actual into an inner life. 
Socrates appeared at the time of the decay of the Athenian 
democracy. He dissolved what was established, and fled 
back into himself, to seek there what was right and good. 
In our own time also it occurs more or less frequently that 
reverence for the established is wanting, and that man 
holds his own will as for himself valid and authoritative. 

139. Self-consciousness, affirming to be vanity aU other- 
wise valid marks of action, and itself consisting of pure 
inwardness of will, may possibly convert the absolute uni- 
versal into mere caprice. It may make a principle out of 
what is peculiar to particularity, placing it over the uni- 
versal and realizing it in action. This is evil. 

Note. — If conscience is taken as formal subjectivity, it is 
on the verge of being transformed into evil. In a seK- 
certitude, which exists for itself, knows and decides for 
itself, both morality and evil have their common root. 

The origin of evil in general lies in the mystery, i.e., the 



134 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

speculative process, of freedom, in the necessity of freedom 
to rise out of its natural state, and find itself -within itself 
in opposition to the natural. In this opposition the natural 
will is contradictory of itself and incompatible with itself, 
and comes in this divided state into existence. Hence the 
particularity of the will itself receives the further mark of 
evil. Particularity has a twofold character, exhibited here 
in the opposition of the natural to the inner wUl. Through 
this opposition the inner phase of will gets only a relative 
and formal existence, and therefore has to create its content 
out of the elements of the natural will, such as desire, im- 
pulse, and inclination. These desires and impulses may be 
either good or evil. But again, owing to their mere natural- 
ness, they are contingent, and the will, as at present con- 
stituted, takes them in their contingent character as its 
content and brings them under the form of particularity. 
It thus becomes opposed to universality, the inner objective 
reality or the good, which, since it involves the return of 
the will into itself and a consciousness aware of itself, 
stands at the other extreme from the direct objectivity of 
what is merely natural. Thus also is this inner condition 
of the will evil. Man is consequently evil at once by nature 
or of himself and through his reflection within himself. 
Evil is not limited solely either to nature as such, unless 
it were the natural condition of a will which confines itself 
to its particular content, or to the reflection which goes 
into itself and includes cognition, unless it were to adhere 
to an antagonism to the good. 

Along with the phase, that evil of necessity is, goes in- 
separably the phase that evil of necessity shall not be. In 
other words, evil is that which is to be superseded. Never- 
theless, evil from the first standpoint of disruption must 
make its appearance, since it constitutes the division be- 
tween the unreasoning beast and man. We must not, how- 
ever, remain at this standpoint, or cling to the particular as 
though it in contrast with the universal were essential, 



THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE. 135 

but must overcome it, and set it aside as null and void. 
Further, as to this necessity of evil, it is subjectivity, or 
the infinity constituted by the reflex action of conscious- 
ness, which has this opposition before itself and exists in 
it. If it remains there, i.e., if it is evil, it exists simply for 
itseK, counts itself as independent, and is mere caprice. 
Hence the individual subject as such has the guilt of his 
evil. 

Addition. — Abstract certitude, which is aware of itself as 
the basis of everything, involves the possibility of willing 
the universality of the conception, but also the possibility 
of making a principle out of a particular content and 
realizing it. This second possibility is evil. To evil always 
belongs the abstraction imphed in self-certitude, and man 
alone, just in so far as he can be evil, is good. Good and 
evil are inseparable, their unity lying in this, that the con- 
ception becomes objective to itself and forthwith, as an 
object, involves distinction. The evil will wills something 
that is opposed to the universality of will ; but the good 
will is in accordance with its true conception. 

The difficulty as to how the will can be evil is due usually 
to our thinking of the will as in only a positive relation to 
itself, and to our representing it as some definite thing 
existing for itself, i.e., as the good. The question as to 
the origin of evil may be put better thus : How does the 
negative enter into the positive ? If God in the creation of 
the world is supposed to be the absolutely positive, then, let 
man turn where he will, he cannot in the positive find the 
negative. The view that God permitted evil to exist, in- 
volving a passive relation of God to evil, offers no satis- 
factory solution- of the problem. In the religious myth the 
origin of evil is not rationally conceived ; the negative is' 
not recognized to be in the positive. One is supposed to 
come after the other or to exist side by side with it, so that 
the negative comes to the positive from the outside. With 
this view thought cannot be satisfied. Thought desires a 



136 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

reason and a necessary relation, and insists that the negative 
and positive spring from the self-same root. The solution 
of the difficulty from the standing-ground of the conception 
is already contained in the conception. The conception, or, 
to speak more concretely, the idea, must in its very essence 
find distinctions in itself and establish itself as negative. 
To adhere to the positive merely, that is to say to the pure 
good, vrhich shall be in its origin nothing but good, is an 
empty effort of the understanding, which creates difficulty 
by introducing one-sidedness and abstraction. But from 
the ground of the conception the positive phase is appre- 
hended as an activity distinguishing itself from itself. 
Evil as well as good has its origin in the wiU, and the will 
in its conception is both good and evil. The natural will 
is, as it stands, a contradiction, implying a distinction of 
itself from itself, in order that it may be consciously for 
itself, and attain its inward nature. 

The proposition, that owing to the nature of evil man is 
evil, in so far as his will is natural, is opposed to a current 
idea that it is precisely the natural will which is innocent 
and good. But the natural will is opposed to the content 
of freedom. The child, or uneducated man, possessing only 
the natural will, is not fiiUy responsible. When we speak 
of man, we mean not children but self-conscious men. 
When we speak of good, we include a knowledge of it. 
Now, the natural or the ingenuous is of itself neither good 
nor evil, but when related to will, as freedom and know- 
ledge of freedom, it is not free, and hence evil. When the 
natural is willed by man, it is no longer simply the natural, 
but the negative of the good, or the negative of the con- 
ception of the will. 

If we were to say that, since evil lies in the conception, 
and exists of necessity, men are no longer responsible when 
they adopt it, it must be replied that their decision is their 
own deed, the act of their freedom, and therefore to be laid 
at their door. In religious fable it is said that man is likei 



THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE. 137 

Grod in Ws Laving a knowledge of good and evil. The 
resemblance to God is a fact so far as the necessity is not a 
necessity of nature, but rather a decision transcending the 
state in which good and evil are involved alike. Since both 
good and evil confront me, I may choose either, resolve 
upon either, and take up either into my subjectivity. It is 
the nature of evil that man may will it, although he is not 
forced by necessity to do so. 

140. As every end belongs to the purpose of actual con- 
crete action, it necessarily has a positive side (§ 130), which 
self-consciousness knows on occasion how to bring forward. 
But as self-consciousness implies a turning back into one- 
self, and is aware of the universal of the will, an act has also 
a negative side. The positive side of an act, whose nega- 
tive content stands in open contrast with the universal, 
may be looked on as a duty and an excellent motive, and 
be maintained by self-consciousness to be good for others 
as well as for itself. To hold it good for others is hypocrisy ; 
and to hold it good for itself is a still higher summit of the 
subjectivity, which maintains itself to be the absolute. 

Note. — The final most abstruse form of evil, that in 
which evil is turned into good and good into evil, in which, 
too, consciousness knows itself as the transforming power, 
and therefore as absolute, is the very summit of subjectivity 
from the moral standpoint. It is the form to which evil 
has risen in our time, and that, too, through philosophy, 
or rather a shallowness of thought, which has contorted a 
deep conception, and presumes to give itself the name of 
philosophy, just as it presumes to give to evU the name of 
good. In this note I shall mention briefly the chief forms 
of this subjectivity, which are in vogue. 

(a) Dissimulation, or hypocrisy. In it are contained the 
following elements : (a) knowledge of the true universal, 
whether it be in the form of the feeling of right and duty, 
or in the form of a thorough knowledge of them ; (fi) the 
willing of the particular, which is in open strife with the 



138 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

universal ; and (y) explicit comparison of the universal and 
particular, so that, for the willing consciousness itself, its 
particular will is understood to be evil. These three 
elements comprise the act done with evil conscience, but 
are not yet hypocrisy as such. — It was at one time a very, 
important question whether an act is evil only in as far as 
it is done with an evil conscience, i.e., with a developed 
consciousness of the elements involved in the act. Pascal 
(" Les Provinc." 4e lettre) well draws out the consequences 
of an affirmative answer to this question. He says, " lis 
seront tous damnes ces demi p&heurs, qui ont quelque 
amour pour la vertu. Mais pour ces franes-p^cheurs, 
pecheurs endurcis, p^cheurs sans melange, pleins et achev^s, 
I'enfer ne les tient pas : ils ont tromp^ le diable a force de 
s'y abandonner." ' 

The subjective right of self-consciousness, to know 
whether the act falls under the category of good or evil, 
must not be thought of as colliding with the absolute 
right of the objectivity of this category. At least, the two 

^ Pascal quotes also in the same place the prayer of Christ on 
the cross for his enemies, " Father, forgive them, for they know 
not what they do." He calls it a superfluous request, if the cir- 
cumstance that they were not conscious of what they had done 
deprived the act of its taint of evil, since in that case it would not 
need to be forgiven. In the same way he quotes the view of 
Aristotle ("Nicomach." Eth. III. 2), who draws a distinction 
between the agent who is ovk lidwg and one who is ayvoHv. In the 
first case the agent acts involuntarily, the lack of knowledge 
having to do with external circumstances (§ 117), and is thus not 
responsible for the act. But with regard to the other ease, Aristotle 
says, "No bad man really knows what should be done and left 
undone, and it is this lack (ajuapria) which makes him unjust and 
evil. Ignorance of the choice between good and evil does not make 
an act involuntaiy or the agent irresponsible, but only makes the 
act bad. " Aristotle has indeed a deeper insight into the connec- 
tion of knowing and willing than is in vogue in the superficial 
philosophy, which teaches that ignorance, feeling, and inspiration 
are the truest principles of ethical conduct. 



THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE. 139 

are not to be represented as separable, indifferent to each 
other, and related only casually. And yet this is just the 
view which lay at the basis of the old-time question aboiit 
saving grace.' Evil on its formal side is that which is 
most peculiarly the individual's own, since it is his sub- 
jectivity setting itself up as wholly and purely its own. 
For it he is, therefore, responsible (§ 139 and note). On 
the objective side, man in his conception as spirit is rational, 
and has solely in himself a universality, which is aware of 
itself. Hence we fail to treat him in accordance with the 
dignity of his conception, when we separate from him 
either the goodness of a good act or the evil of an evil act, 
and refuse to impute it to him as good or evil. How 
definite may be the consciousness of these two distinguish- 
able sides in man, with what degreeof clearness or obscurity 
this consciousness may become knowledge, or how far in an 
evil act conscience may be formal, are questions with which 
we are not much concerned. They belong to the empirical 
side of the subject-matter. 

(6) But evil and to act with evil conscience are not yet 
hypocrisy. We must add the formal phase of untruth, in 
which evil is maintained to be good and good for others. 
The agent represents as good, conscientious, and pious an 
act, which is merely an artifice for the betrayal of others. 
But by means of what is otherwise good and pious, namely, 
by good reasons generally, an evil man may find a justifica- 
tion of his evil, transforming evil into something good for 
himself. The possibility of such a transformation is found 
in the abstract and negative subjectivity, which is conscious 
that all phases must submit to and spring from it. 

(c) Allied to the foregoing is what is known as prob- 
ability. Its principle is that if consciousness can trump up 
one good reason, be it only the authority of a single theo- 
logian, whose judgment, it may be, is disapproved by 

' Wirksame Gnade. 



140 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

others, the act is permissible, and conscience may be at 
ease. Such a reason or authority, it is acknowledged, 
gives at best only probability, but that is supposed to be 
enough to confirm the conscience. It is admitted also 
that a good reason does not exclude others, which may be 
quite as good. Further, in this form of subjectivity there 
is a touch of the objective in the concession that conduct 
should be based on a ground or reason. But to the many 
good reasons and authorities, which might be adduced in 
favour of a certain line of action, may be opposed just as 
many good reasons for an opposite course. Hence the 
decision is intrusted not to the objectivity of the thing, 
but to subjectivity ; liking and caprice are made the 
discerners between good and evil, and ethical observance 
and religion are undermined. But since it is given out 
that some reason, and not private subjectivity, is the basis 
of decision, probability is so far a form of hypocrisy. 

(d) The next higher stage is the assertion that the good 
will shall consist in willing the good ; the willing of the 
abstract good shall be the sole requisite for a good act. 
Since the act, as a definite volition, has a content, while 
the abstract good determines nothing, it devolves upon the 
private individual to give the good filling and definiteness. 
In probability there must be obtained from some Reverend 
Pare authority to bring a definite content under the 
general category of the good. But here every subject, 
simpl}"^ as he stands, is invested with the dignity of giving 
a content to the abstract good, or, what is the same thing, 
of bringing a content under the universal. But this con- 
tent is only one of several sides of a concrete act, which 
may, on another of its sides, be bad or criminal. And yet 
my subjective estimate of the good is the good as known 
by me in the act ; it is my good intention (§ 111). Thus 
arises an opposition between different phases, in accordance 
with one of which the act is good, but in accordance with 
another, criminal. Here, too, would seem to come up the 



THE GOOD AND COXSCIE.VCE. 141 

question, if, in the actual act, the intention is reaHy good. 
But at this standpoint, at ■which abstract good is the deter- -^ 
mining motive, the good not only may but must be the I 
real intention. And, however bad and criminal they may 
be in other directions, the results of an act, which com- 
pletes a good intention, are also good. We seem forced to 
ask which of these sides is essential. But this objective 
question cannot here be put ; or rather the only objective 
is the decision of the subjective consciousness itself. 
Besides, at this standpoint the terms essential and good 
have the same meaning. Both are abstractions. Good is 
that which in regard to the will is essential; and the 
essential in regard to the will is that an act shall be for 
me good. But here one may place any pleasurable content 
he Ukes under the abstract good, because this good, having 
no content of its own, is reduced to mean merely a bare 
positive, something, that is, which may have value from 
some point of view, and also in its direct phase may be 
made to count as an essential end. Such a positive action 
might be, e.g., to do good to the poor, or to provide for my- 
self, my life, or my family. Further, as the good is 
abstract, the bad also must be without content, and must 
receive definiteness from my subjectivity. Hence arises the 
moral end to hate and root out the bad. 

Theft, cowardice, murder, as acts of a subjective will, 
imply at the very outset the satisfaction of this will, 
and are therefore something positive. Now, that the act 
may be good, I simply need to know this positive side of it 
as my intention. Hence the act is at once decided to be 
good, because to know it as good is involved in my inten- 
tion. Theft for the benefit of the poor, theft or flight 
from battle, in order to fulfil the duty of caring for one's 
life or one's family, which may be poor, murder through 
hate and revenge, i.e., to satisfy a sense of right, or of my 
right, or of the wickedness of another, or to satisfy a sense 
of the wrong done by him to me or others, or the world, or 



142 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

people generally, by extirpating him as thoroughly bad, 
and thus contributing something to the extermination of 
evil, — all these acts are on their positive side good in in- 
tention and so good in act. There is needed a superlatively 
small effort of the understanding to discover, as did the 
learned divines aforesaid, for every act a positive side, and 
a good reason or intention. — Hence it has been said that 
there are no evil men, because no one wills evil for evil's 
sake, an act which would be purely negative. He always 
wills something positive, and therefore, frOm this point of 
vision, good. In this abstract good the distinction between 
good and evil, and all real duties also, have disappeared. 
Accordingly, merely to will the good, merely to have a 
good intention when we act, is evil because the willed good 
is an abstraction, and the ascertainment of what is good is 
left to the caprice of the subject. 

To this place belongs the famous sentence, " The end 
justifies the means." This expression, as it stands, is 
trivial, because one could as vaguely reply that a just end 
justifies the means, but an unjust end does not. The ex- 
pression would then be tautological, since the means, if they 
are real means, are nothing of themselves but are only for 
the sake of something else, from which they derive their 
worth. — But this saying is not meant in a merely formal and 
indefinite sense. It justifies the use for a good end of some- 
thing not strictly a means at all. It justifies and inculcates 
as a duty even crime and the violation of what is of itself 
just, as means for effecting a good end. In this saying there 
floats a general consciousness of the dialectic of the positive 
element, alluded to above, as it bears upon right and ethics, 
and upon such indefinite propositions as " Thou shalt not 
kill," " Thou shalt care for thy own well-being and that of 
thy family." In law and war, to kill is not only a right 
but a duty ; but in these cases there is an accurate descrip- 
tion of the circumstances under which, and also of the 
kind of men whom it is permitted or enjoined to kill. In 



THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE. 143 

the same way my well-being and the well-being of my 
family must yield to higher ends, and be reduced to means. 
But a crime is not an indistinct generality, which has to 
undergo a process of dialectic, but something definitely and 
objectively limited. Tet the end which is to oppose this 
crime and deprive it of its nature, the holy and just end, is 
only the subjective opinion of what is good or better. 
Thus, here again the will holds to the abstract good ; and 
every absolutely valid mark of the good and bad, of right 
and wrong, is superseded by and handed over to the feel- 
ing, opinion, and liking of the individual. 

(e) Subjective opinion is openly pronounced to be the 
rule of right and duty, when the conviction that a thing 
is right is declared to be the criterion of the ethical cha- 
racter of an act. As the good, which is here willed, is still 
without content, the principle of conviction-implies that it 
is simply for the subject to decide whether the act is good 
or not. Thus here also all semblance of ethical objectivity 
has vanished. Such a theory has direct affinity with the 
so-called philosophy, already repeatedly alluded to, which 
denies the possibility of knowing the truth, and, in so 
doing, denies also the moral laws, which are the truth and 
reason of spirit as will. Such philosophizing, as it pro- 
claims a knowledge of the truth to be vanity, and the 
circle of knowledge to be mere appearance, must obviously 
make appearance the principle of action also. Thus 
ethical principles are decided by the individual's peculiar 
view of life and his private conviction. This degradation 
of philosophy appears, indeed, to outsiders as of supremely 
small importance, and to be confined merely to the idle 
talk of the school. But the view necessarily makes its 
way into ethics, which is an essential part of philosophy. 
The real world sees the meaning of these views only when 
they have become a reality. 

By the spread of the view that subjective conviction 
alone decides the ethical value of an act, it has come to 



144 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

pass that hypocrisy, formerly much discussed, is now 
hardly spoken of at all. To mark hypocrisy as evil is to 
helieve that certain acts are beyond all question trespasses, 
vices, and crimes ; that also, he who commits them must 
know what they are, knowing and recognizing, as he does, 
the principles and outward acts of piety and right, even in 
the false guise under which he misuses them. Or, per- 
haps, with regard to evil, it was assumed that it is a duty 
to know the good and to distinguish it from evil. In any 
case it was unconditionally claimed that men should do 
nothing vicious or criminal, and that if they did, they 
must, just so far as they are men, not cattle, be held 
responsible. But when the good heart, good intentions, 
and subjective conviction are said to decide the value of 
action, there is no longer any hypocrisy, or, for that 
matter, evil at all. Since whatever an individual does he 
can convert into good by the reflective intervention of good 
intentions and motives ; and by virtue of his conviction 
his act is good.^ There is no longer any absolute vice or 
crime. Instead of frank and free, hardened and un- 
troubled transgression ■" appears the consciousness of com- 
plete justification through intention and conviction ; my 
good intention and my conviction that the act is good 
make it good. To pass sentence upon an act is merely to 
judge of the intention, conviction, or faith of the agent. 

^ " That he feels fully convinced I do not in the least doubt. 
Yet many commit the worst outrages from just such a convic- 
tion. Besides, if that reason could avail everywhere as an excuse, 
there would no longer be any rational judgment upon good and 
evil, honourable and mean conduct. Lunacy would have the same 
rights as reason, or rather reason would no longer have any right 
or esteem. Its voice would be a thing of naught. Who does not 
doubt is in the truth ! I tremble at the results of such a tolera- 
tion, which would be exclusively to the advantage of unreason." 
Fr. H. Jaoobi to Count Holmer. Entin 5th Aug., 1800, Concern- 
ing Count Stolberg's Conversion (Brennus, Berlin, Aug., 1802). 

'' Alluded to by Pascal above. 



X 



THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE. 145 

Faith is not used here in the sense in which Christ 
demands faith in objective truth. In that sense, if a man 
has a bad faith, i.e., a conviction which is in its content 
evil, he must accordingly be condemned. But faith here 
means simply fidelity to conviction. When we ask if a 
man has remained true to his conviction, we refer to the 
merely formal subjective faith, which is supposed of itself 
to contain his duty. 

Because the principle of conviction is subjective, there 
is forced upon us the thoi^ht of the possibility of error, 
and in this thought is the implication of an absolute law. 
But a law does not act ; it is only a real human being who 
acts. If we are to estimate the worth of his acts accord- 
ing to this subjective principle, we can ask merely how far 
he has embodied the law in his conviction. Thus, if the 
acts are not to be judged and measured according to the 
law, it is not easy to perceive what purpose the law sub- 
serves. It is degraded to a mere external letter or empty 
word ; and inevitably, since it is made a binding law and 
obligation only by niy conviction. 

Such a law may have the authority of God, of the state, 
and of centuries, in which it united men and gave sub- 
stance to their acts and destiny. It may thus include the 
convictions of an untold number of individuals. And yet 
to it I oppose the authority of my private conviction — a 
conviction which has no other footing than authority. 
This, to all appearance, stupendous presumption is ignored 
by the principle which makes subjective conviction to be 
the rule. 

Although reason and conscience, never wholly driven 
away by shallow science and sophistry, with bad logic but 
a higher insight concede the possibility of error, they yet ' 
reduce crime and evil to a minimum by calling them 
errors. To err is human. Who has not often erred with 
regard to one thing and another, whether yesterday at 
dinner he had fresh or pickled cabbage, and in numberless 



146 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

other things of greater or less importance ? And yet the 
distinction between important and unimportant vanishes, 
if we cling obstinately to mere subjective conviction. But 
the natural, though illogical, admission of the possibility 
of error, when it allows that a bad conviction is only an 
error, is turned into another defect of logic, that, namely, 
of dishonesty. At one time it is said that upon subjective 
conviction rests the ethical structure and the highest 
worth of man, and this conviction is declared to be most 
high and holy. At another time we are dealing with a 
mere error, and my conviction has become trivial, contin- 
gent, and accidental. In point of fact my conviction is of 
trifling moment if I cannot know the truth. In such a 
case it is also a matter of indifference how I think, and 
there remains for my thought merely that empty good, 
which is an abstraction of the understanding. 

The principle of justification on the ground of convic- 
tion bears also upon others in their treatment of my 
action. They are quite right to hold my acts to be 
crimes, if this is in accordance with their belief and con- 
viction. Thus I not only cannot anticipate any favourable 
treatment, but, on the contrary, am reduced from a posi- 
tion of freedom and honour to one of dishonour and 
slavery. And this happens through that very justice 
which I have adopted as my own, by the exercise of which 
I experience only an alien subjective conviction, and the 
working of a merely external force. 

(/) Finally, the highest form in which this subjectivity 
fully grasps and expresses itself, is that which we, bor- 
rowing the name from Plato, have called irony. But it is 
only the name which is taken from Plato, who, like 
Socrates, used it in personal conversation against the 
opinions of the ordinary and of the sophistic conscious- 
ness, in order to bring out the idea of truth and justice ; 
but in treating the superficial consciousness in this way 
he expressly excepts the idea. Irony is employed by him 



THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE. 147 

in conversation, only against persons ; otherwise the 
essential movement of his thought is dialectic. So far 
was Plato from supposing the conversational process to 
be complete in itself, or irony to be the idea or ultimate 
form of thought, that he, on the contrary, terminated the 
backward and forward motion of thought, which prevails 
in subjective opinion, by sinking it in the substantive idea." 

' My deceased colleague, Professor Solger, adopted the inter- 
pretation of irony which Fried, v. Schlegel had at an early period 
of his literary career worked up till it became in his hands that 
subjectivity, which is conscious of itself as the highest. But 
Solger's superior judgment and more philosophic insight seized 
and retained of this view only the phase of dialectic proper, the 
moving pulse of the speculative method. Perfectly clear, how- 
ever, he cannot be said to be, nor can I agree with the conceptions 
which he developed in his recent thoughtful and detailed criticism 
of Schlegel's lectures.* 

"True irony," says Solger (p. 92), "proceeds from the view 
that man, so long as he lives in this present world, can do his 
highest appointed task only in this world. To believe ourselves 
to be transcending finite ends is a vain imagination ; " also " the 
highest exists for our conduct only in limited, finite form." This 
is, rightly understood, Platonic, and veiy truly spoken against 
the striving to attain the abstract infinite. But to say that 
the highest presents itself in a limited and finite form, as in ethics, 
and that the ethical is essentially reality and action, is very 
difiierent from saying that the ethical is only a finite end. The 
finite form deprives the ethical matter of none of its real sub- 
stance and infinitude. He goes on : " And just for this reason 
the highest is for us as empty as the lowest, and necessarily col- 
lapses along with us and our vain understanding. For truly the 
highest exists only in God, and reveals itself as divine in our 
collapse. In the divine we have no share, unless its immediate 
presence be revealed in the disappearance of our reality. The dis- 
position, to which tliis principle of life is clearly present, is tragic 
ii'onj-. " The name irony may be arbitrarily used to describe any 
state of mind, but it is far from clear how the highest goes down 



* "Kritik iiber die Vorlesungen des Herrn August Wilhelm v. 
Schlegel iiber dramatische Kunst und Literatur " (Wiener Jahrb. 
Bd. vii. S. 90 ff.). 



148 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

The summit of the subjectivity, which apprehends itseli 
as ultimate, consists in a consciousness of itself as judge 
of truth, right, and duty. It is aware, indeed, of the 
objective ethical principle, but does not forget or renounce 
itself, or make any earnest effort to sink itself in this 
principle and act from it. Although it is in relation to 
this principle, it holds itself free from it, and is conscious 
of itself as willing and deciding in a certain way, and as 
being able quite as well to will and decide otherwise. — 
You, let us suppose, honestly take a law to be something 
absolute ; but, as for me, I too have a share in it, but a 

with our nothingness, or how the divine is revealed only in the 
disappearance of our reality. This position is also maintained in 
a passage on p. 91, which runs : " We see heroes in error in both 
thought and feeling, with regard not only to the effects of the most 
noUe and the most beautiful, but also to their source and value ; yes, 
■\ve are exalted in the destruction of the best itself." The righteous 
destruction of ranting villains and criminals, of whom the hero in 
a modern tragedy, " Die Schuld," is an example, has indeed an 
interest for criminal law, but none for true art. But the tragic 
destruction of highly moral personages may interest, exalt, and 
reconcile us to itself, when they contract guilt by becoming 
opposing champions of equally just ethical forces, which by some 
misfortune come into collision. Out of this antagonism proceed 
the right and wrong of each party. There appears also the true 
ethical idea, purified and triumphant over onesidedness, and 
therefore reconciled with and in ourselves. Hence it is not the 
highest in us which is overwhelmed, nor is it when the best is 
submerged that we are exalted, but, on the contrary, when the 
truth triumphs. This, as I have explained, in the " Phanome- 
nologie des Geistes," is the true and pure ethical interest of the 
ancient tragedy, although in the romantic drama this function of 
tragedy suffers a further modification. But, apart altogether from 
the misfortune of tragic collision, and the destruction of the indi- 
viduals caught in this misfortune, the ethical idea has a real and 
present existence in the ethical world, and the ethical reality, 
namely, the state, has as its purpose and result that this highest 
shall not present itself in the real world as something valueless. 
This aim or object of the sbate the ethical consciousness possesses 
intuitively, and the thinking consciousness conceives. 



THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE. 149 

nrnch grander one than you, for I have gone through and 
beyond it, and can turn it as I please. It is not the 
subject-matter which is excellent, but I am the excellent 
thing, and am master of law and fact. I toy with them 
at my pleasure, and can. enjoy myself only when I ironi- 
cally know and permit the highest to be submerged. This 
form, indeed, makes vain the whole ethical content of 
right, duty, and law, being an evil and in itself a wholly 
universal eviL Yet to it we must add the subjective 
vanity of knowing itself as empty of all content, and yet 
of knowing this empty self as the absolute. 

This absolute self-complacency may in some cases pass 
beyond a solitary worship of itself, and frame some kind 
of community, the bond and essence of which would be 
the mutual asseveration of conscientiousness, good inten- 
tions, and reciprocal delight in purity. The members of 
this union would disport themselves in the luxury of self- 
knowledge and self -utterance, and would cherish them- 
selves to their heart's content. In those persons, who 
have been called beautiful souls, we find even a more 
sublime subjectivity, making void all that is objective and 
shining by the light of its own unreality. These and other 
phases, which are in some measure connected with the 
foregoing forms of subjectivity, I have treated in the 
" Phanomenologie des Greistes." In that work the whole 
section on Conscience, especially the paragraphs dealing 
under a different heading with the transition into a higher 
stage, may be compared with the present discussion. 

Addition. — Imagination may go further and convert the 
evil will into the pretence of the good. Though it cannot 
alter the substance of evil, it can lend to it the outer form 
and semblance of good. Every act contains something 
positive, and the demonstration that a thing is good, as 
opposed to evil, is effected by eliminating all but this 
positive. Thus I can maintain an act to be good in 
respect of my intention. Moreover, not only in conscious- 



150 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

ness, but also on the positive practical side of action, evil 
is connected with good. If self-consciousness gives out 
that the act is good only for others, it assumes the form 
of hypocrisy. Bat if it ventures to maintain that the act 
is good for itself, it rises to the still higher summit of a 
subjectivity, which is conscious of itself as absolute. For 
it good and evil, as they are in and of themselves, have 
whoUy disappeared, and it can, therefore, give itself out 
for what it pleases. This is the standpoint of absolute 
sophistry, which itself assumes the style of lawgiver, and 
refers the distinction between good and evil to caprice. 
Most pronounced in hypocrisy are the religious dis- 
semblers, the Tartiiifes, who perform all kinds of cere- 
monies, and are in their own eyes pious, although doing 
what they please. To-day we seldom speak of hypocrites, 
partly because the accusation seems too strong, but also 
because hypocrisy in its direct form has disappeared. 
Direct falsehood and complete cloaking of the good have 
become too transparent. Nor is the total severance of 
good and evil any longer so simple and available, since 
their limits have been made uncertain by growing culture. 
The more subtle form of hypocrisy now is that of pro- 
babiUty, by which one seeks to represent a transgression 
as something good for his own conscience. This occurs 
only where morals and the good are fixed by authority, so 
that the reasons for maintaining the evil to be the good 
are as num.erous as the authorities. Casuistic theologians, 
especially Jesuits, have worked up these cases of con- 
science, and multiplied them ad infinitum. Owing to this 
over-subtlety, good and evil come into collision, and are 
subject to such fluctuations that they seem to the indi- 
vidual to run into each other. The chief desideratum is 
only what is probable, an approximate good, for which a 
single reason or authority can be secured. Another pecu- 
liarity of this standpoint is that it contains only what is 
abstract, while the concrete filling is represented as un- 



THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE. 151 

essential, or rather is left to mere opinion. Thus anyone 
may have committed a crime and yet willed the good. 
When, for instance, a ■wicked person is murdered, the 
positive side of the act may be asserted to be a desire to 
oppose and diminish evil. 

The next sta^e of probability is reached when the 
subject depends not upon the authority and assertion of 
another, but upon himself. He relies upon his own con- 
viction, and his belief that only through his conviction can 
a thing be good. The defect of this attitude is the deter- 
mination to refer to nothing but the conviction itself, 
involving a rejection of the substance of absolute right, 
and a retention of the mere form. It is, of course, not a 
matter of indifference whether I do something through 
use and wont, or through the force of its truth. Yet 
objective truth is different from my conviction. Con- 
viction holds no distinction at all between good and evil, 
for it is always only conviction; the bad would be only 
that of which I am not convinced. This highest stand- 
point, in extinguishing good and evil, is admittedly exposed 
to error, and is cast down from its high estate to mere 
contingency and disregard. This is irony, the conscious- 
ness that the highest criterion, the principle of conviction, 
is ruled by caprice, and is, therefore, ineffective. For this 
view the philosophy of Fichte is chiefly responsible, as it 
claims that the I is absolute. At least it maintains that 
absolute certitude marks the general condition of the I, 
which by a further development passes into objectivity. 
Of Fichte, however, it cannot properly be said that in the 
practical realm he has made the caprice of the subject a 
principle. But after him the particular, interpreted as 
the condition of the individual subject, and applied by 
Friedrich v. Schlegel to the good and beautiful, has 
been set up as G-od. Hence the objective good is only an 
image formed by my conviction, receiving its substance 
only through me, and appearing and vanishing at the 



152 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

pleasure of me, its lord and master. The objective, to 
which I am related, is brought to naught, and thus T 
hover over a dim and monstrous space, calling up phantoms 
and dispersing them at will. This last extreme of sub- 
jectivity arises only at a time of high culture, where 
serious faith has crumbled away, and all things have 
become vanity. 

Transition from Morality to Ethical System. 

141. In behalf of conscience, or the mere abstract 
principle of determination, it is demanded that its phases 
shall be universal and objective. In the same way in 
behalf of the good which, though it is the essential uni- 
versal of freedom, is still abstract, are also required definite 
phases ; and for these phases is further demanded a prin- 
ciple which must, however, be identical with the good. 
The good and conscience, when each is raised into a 
separate totality, are void of all definiteness, and yet claim 
to be made definite. Still, the construction of these two 
relative totalities into an absolute identity is already ac- 
complished in germ, since even the subjectivity or pure 
self-certitude, which vanishes by degrees in its own vacuity, 
is identical with the abstract universality of the good. But 
the concrete identity of the good and the subjective will, 
the truth of these two, is completed only in the ethical 
system. 

Note. — A more detailed account of the transition of the 
conception is to be found in the " Logic." Here it is 
enough to say that the limited and finite by its very nature 
contains the opposite in itself. Such a finite thing is either 
the abstract good, which is as yet unrealized, or the ab- 
stract subjectivity, which is good only in intention. Abstract 
good implicitly contains its opposite, i.e., its realization, 
and abstract subjectivity, or the element in which the 
ethical is realized, implicitly contains its opposite, i.e., the 



THE GOOD AND CONSCIEKCE. 153 

good. Thus, when either of these two is taken in a one- 
sided way, it has not yet positively realized all that it is 
capable of being. The good, apart from all subjectivity 
and definite character, and the determining subjectivity, 
apart from anything that it may become, arrive at a 
higher actuality by a negative process. Each clings at 
first to its one-sided form, and resolves not to accept what 
it possesses potentially, thus constituting itself an abstract 
whole. Then it annuls itself in that capacity, and thereby 
reduces itself to the level of one element in a whole. Each 
of them becomes one element of the conception. The con- 
ception, in turn, is manifested as their unity, and, having 
received reality through the establishment of its elements, 
now exists as idea. The idea is the conception, when it 
has fashioned its elements into reality, and at the same 
time exists in their identity as their dynamic essence. 

The simplest realization of freedom is right. When 
self-consciousness is turned back upon itself, freedom is 
realized as the good. The third stage, which is here in its 
transition exhibited as the truth of the good and of sub- 
jectivity, is likewise quite as much the truth of right. The 
ethical is subjective disposition, and yet contains right im- 
plicitly. But that this idea is the truth of the conception 
of freedom must not be an assumption derived from such 
a source as feeling, but must in philosophy be demon- 
strated. This demonstration is made only when right and 
the moral self-consciousness are proved to exhibit of them- 
selves the tendency to run back into this idea as their re- 
sult. Those who believe that proof and demonstration can 
be dispensed with in philosophy, show that they are still a 
long distance from the first thought of what philosophy is. 
They may speak of other things indeed, but they have no 
right to discuss philosophy, if they have not understood 
the conception. 

Addition. — The two principles which we have so far con- 
sidered, both the abstract good and conscience, are as yet 



154 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

without their opposing principles. The abstract good is 
etherealized into something wholly devoid of power, some- 
thing into which I can introduce any content at all. And 
the subjectivity of spirit is equally without content, since 
it has no objective significance. Hence there may arise a 
longing after objectivity. Man would debase himself to 
the complete dependence of a serf, in order to escape the 
torment of sheer inanity and negativity. Many Protestants 
recently passed over to the Catholic church, simply because 
they found no substance in their own inner life. They 
were willing to accept any fixed and tangible authority, 
even though it had not the security which comes from 
thought. The social order is the unity, and according to 
the conception the reconciliation also of the subjective 
good with the objective absolute good. Morality is the 
general form of the will as subjective ; but the ethical 
order is not simply the subjective form and the self-deter- 
mination of the will, but contains their conception, namely, 
freedom. Neither right nor morality can exists indepen- 
dently, but must have the ethical as its pillar and support. 
In right is wanting the element of subjectivity, and in 
morality is wanting the objective, so that neither by itself 
has any actuality. 

Only the infinite, the idea is actual. Eight exists only as 
a branch of a whole, or as a vine twining itself about a 
firmly rooted tree. 



THIRD PART. 

THE ETHICAL SYSTEM. 

142. The etMcal system is the idea of freedom. It is tlie 
living good, wWcli has in self-consciousness its knowing 
and willing, and through the action of self-consciousness 
its actuality. Self-consciousness, on the other hand, finds 
in the ethical system its absolute basis and motive. The 
ethical system is thus the conception of freedom developed 
into a present world, and also into the nature of self-con- 
sciousness. 

143. The conception of the will, when united with the 
realization of the will, or the particular will, is knowing. 
Hence arises the consciousness of the distinction between 
these two phases of the idea. But the consciousness is 
now present in such a way that each phase is separately 
the totality of the idea, and has the idea as its content and 
foundation. 

144. The objective ethical principle which takes the 
place of the abstract good is in its substance concrete 
through the presence in it of subjectivity as its infinite 
form. Hence it makes differences which are within itself, 
and therefore are due to the conception. By means of 
these differences, it obtains a sure content, which is inde- 
pendent and necessary, and reaches a standing ground 
raised above subjective opinion and liking. This content 
is the self-originated and self-referring laws and regu- 
lations. 



156 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

Addition. — In the ethical principle as a whole occur both 
the objective and the subjective elements ; but of this 
principle each is only a form. Here the good is substance, 
or the filling of the objective with subjectivity. If we con- 
template the social order-from the objective standpoint, we 
can say that man, as ethical, is unconscious of himself. In 
this sense Antigone proclaims that no one knows whence 
the laws come ; they are everlasting, that is, they exist 
absolutely, and flow from the nature of things. None the 
less has this substantive existence a consciousness also, 
which, however, is only one element of the whole. 

145. The ethical material is rational, because it is the 
system of these phases of the idea. Thus freedom, the 
absolute will, the objective, and the circle of necessity, are 
all one principle, whose elements are the ethical forces. 
They rule the lives of individuals, and in individuals as 
their modes have their shape, manifestation, and actuality. 

Addition. — Since the phases of the ethical system are the 
conception of freedom, they are the substance or universal 
essence of individuals. In relation to it, individuals are 
merely accidental. Whether the individual exists or not 
is a matter of indifference to the objective ethical order, 
which alone is steadfast. It is the power by which the 
life of individuals is ruled. It has been represented by 
nations as eternal justice, or as deities who are absolute, in 
contrast with whom the striving of individuals is an empty 
game, like the tossing of the sea. 

146. (0) This ethical reality in its actual self-conscious- 
ness knows itself, and is therefore an object of knowledge. 
It, with its laws and forces, has for,the subject a real exis- 
tence, and is in the fullest sense mdependent. It has an 
absolute authority or force, infinitely more sure than that 
of natural objects. 

Note. — The sun, moon, mountains, rivers, and all objects 
of nature doubtless exist. They not only have for con- 
sciousness the authority of existence in general, but have 



THE ETHJCAL SYSTEM. 157 

also a particular nature. This nature consciousness re- 
gards as valid, and in its varied relation and commerce 
with objects and their use comports itself accordingly. 
But the authority of the social laws is infinitely higher, 
because natural things represent reason only in a quite ex- 
ternal and particular way, and hide it under the guise of 
contingency. 

147. On the other hand, the various social forces are not 
something foreign to the subject. His spirit bears witness 
to them as to his own being. In them he feels that he is 
himself, and in them, too, he lives as in an element indis- 
tinguishable from himself. This relation is more direct 
and intuitive than even faith or trust. 

Note. — raith and trust belong to the beginning of re- 
flection,, presupposmgjpictai^thou^ht and such discern- 
ment a^thar^toDeiieve ia aQaeawben reUgion is different 
from being a heathen. The relation, or rather identity 
without relation, in which the ethical principle is the actual 
Ufe of self -consciousness, can indeed be transformed into a 
relation of faith and conviction. By further reflection, also, 
it may pass into an insight based on reasons, which origi- 
nate in some particular end, interest, or regard, in fear or 
hope, or in historical presuppositions. But the adequate 
knowledge of these belongs to the conception arrived at 
through thought. 

148. The individual may distinguish himself from these 
substantive ethical factors, regarding himself as subjective, 
as of himself undetermined, or as determined to some 
particular course of action. He stands to them as to his 
substantive reality, and they are duties binding upon his. 

win. 

Note. — The ethical theory of duties in their objective 
character is not comprised under the empty principle of 
moral subjectivity, in which, indeed, nothing is determined 
(§ 134), but is rightly taken up in the third part of our 
work, in which is found a systematic development of the 



158 THE PHILOSOPHV OF RIGHT. 

sphere of ethical necessity. In this present method of 
treatment, as distinguished from a theory of duties, the 
ethical factors are deduced as necessary relations. It is, 
then, needless to add, with regard to each of them, the 
remark that it is thus for men a duty. A theory of duties, 
so far as it is not a philosophic science, simply takes its 
material out of the relations at hand, and shows how it is 
connected with personal ideas, with widely prevalent priu- 
ciples, and thoughts, with ends, impulses, and experiences. 
It may also adduce as reasons the consequences, which 
arise when each duty is referred to other ethical relations, 
as well as to general well-being and common opinion. But 
a theory of duties, which keeps to the logical settlement of 
its own inherent material, must be the development of the 
relations, which are made necessary through the idea of 
freedom, and are hence in their entire context actual. This 
is found only in the state. 

149. A duty or obligation appears as a limitation merely 
of undetermined subjectivity and abstract freedom, or of 
the impulse of the natural will, or of the moral will which 
fixes upon its undetermined good capriciously. But in 
point of fact the individual finds in duty liberation. He 
is freed from subjection to mere natural impulse ; he, is 
freed from the dependence which he as subjective and 
particular felt towards moral permission and command ; 
he is freed, also, from that indefinite subjectivity, which 
does not issue in the objective realization implied in 
action, but remains wrapped up in its own unreality. In 
duty the individual freely enters upon a liberty that is 
substantive. 

Addition. — Duty limits only the caprice of subjectivity, 
and comes into collision only with abstract good, with 
which subjectivity is so firmly allied. When men say we 
will to be free, they have in mind simply that abstract 
liberty, of which every definite organization in the state is 
regarded as a limitation. But duty is not a limitation of 



THE ETHICAL SYSTEM. 159 

f reedoTii, but only of the abstraction of freedom, that is to 
say, of servitude. In duty we reach the real essence, and 
gain positive freedom. 

150. The ethical, ia so far as it is reflected simply in the 
natural character of the individual, is virtue. When it 
contains nothing more than conformity to the duties of the 
sphere to which the individual belongs, it is integrity. 

Note. — ^What a man ought to do, or what duties he 
should fulfil in order to be virtuous, is in an ethical com- 
munity not hard to say. He has to do nothing except 
what is presented, expressed and recognized in his estab- 
lished relations. Integrity is the imiversal trait, which 
should be found in his character, partly on legal, partly on 
ethical grounds. But from the standpoint of morals a 
man often looks upon integrity both for himself and others 
as secondary and unessential. The longing to be unique 
and peculiar is not satisfied with what is absolute and 
universal, but only with some situation that is ex- 
ceptional. 

The name " virtue " may quite as well be appUed to the 
different aspects of integrity, because they, too, although 
they contain nothing belonging exclusively to the individual 
in contrast vnth others, are yet his possession. But discourse 
about the virtues easily passes into mere declamation, since 
its subject matter is abstract and indefinite, and its reasons 
and declarations are directed to the individual's caprice 
and subjective inclination. In any present ethical circum- 
stance, whose relations are fuUy developed and actualized, 
virtue in the strict sense has place and reality only when 
these relations come into collision. But genuine collisions 
are rare, although moral reflection can, on the slightest 
provocation, create them. It can also provide itself with 
the consciousness that, in order to fulfil its special mission, 
it must uiake sacrifices. Hence, in undeveloped conditions 
of social life virtue as such occurs more frequently, because 
ethical principles and the realization of them are more 



( 



160 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

a matter of private liking, belonging indeed to the nature 
of peculiarly gifted individuals. Thus, the ancients have 
attributed virtue in a special way to Hercules, So, too, in 
the ancient states, where ethical principles had not ex- 
panded into a system of free self-dependent development 
and objectivity, ethical defects had to be compensated for 
by the genius of the private individual. Thus the theory of 
the virtues, so far as it differs from a mere theory of duties, 
embraces the special features of character due to natural 
endowments, and thus becomes a spiritual history of the 
natural in man. 

Since the virtues are the ethical reality applied to the par- 
ticular, and are on this subjective side indefinite, there 
arises, in order to make them definite, a quantitative distinc- 
tion of more and less. Hence the consideration of the 
virtues calls up the opposing vices as defects. Thus 
Aristotle defines a particular virtue, when rightly under- 
stood, as the mean between too much and too little. 

The content, which receives the form of duties and also 
of virtues, is the same as that which has the form of 
appetites (§ 19, note). Besides, they all have the same con- 
tent as their basis. But because the content of the appe- 
tites still belongs to unformed wiU. and natural perception, 
and is not developed to an ethical order, the only object 
which they have in common with the content of duties and 
virtues is abstract. Since it in itself is indeterminate, it does 
not contain for the appetites the limits of good and evil. 
Thus appetites, if we consider their positive side, are good, 
if their negative side evil (§ 18). 

Addition. If a man realizes this or that social project, 
he is not at once virtuous, though such, indeed, he is, when 
this way of behaving is a fixed element of his character. 
Virtue is not wholly objective ; it is rather ethical vir- 
tuosity. To-day we do not speak of virtue as formerly, for 
the reason that ethical principles are not now so much a 
feature of a particular individual. The French speak most 



THE ETHICAL SYSTEM. 161 

of virtue, because amongst them the individual is more his 
own peculiar property, and acts according to the dictates of 
nature. The Germans, on the other hand, are more reflec- 
tive, and amongst them the same content attains the form 
of universality. 

151. The ethical, when simply identical with the reality 
of individuals, appears as a generally adopted mode of 
action, or an observance. This is the custom, which as a 
second nature has been substituted for the original and 
merely natural will, and has become the very soul, meaning, 
and reality of one's daily life. It is the living spirit 
actualized as a world ; by this actualization does the sub- 
stance of spirit exist as spirit. 

Addition. — As nature has its laws, as the animals, trees, 
the sun, fulfil their law, so observance belongs to the spirit 
of freedom. What right and morality are not as yet, the 
ethical principle is, namely, spirit. The particularity ia- 
volved is not yet that of the conception, but only of 
the natural wiU. So, too, from the standpoint of morality, 
self -consciousness is not yet spiritual consciousness. It is 
occupied simply with the value of the subject in himself ; 
the subject, who frames himseK according to the good and 
against evil, has yet the form of caprice. But, here at the 
ethical point of view, wUl is the will of spirit, and has 
a correspondingly substantive content. Pedagogy is the 
art of making men ethical. It looks upon man as natural, 
and points out the way in which he is to be bom again. 
His first nature must be converted into a second spiritual^ 
nature, in such a manner that the spiritual becomes in him ^ 
a habit. In the spiritual disposition the opposition of the 
natural and subjective will disappears, and the struggle of 
the subject ceases. To this extent habit belongs to ethics.* 
It belongs also to philosophic thought, which demands that 
the mind should be armed against sallies of caprice, rout 
and overcome them, in order that rational thought may 
have free course. It is true, on the other hand, that mere 

M 






162 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

habit causes death, which ensues when one gets thoroughly 
used to life, and has become physically and mentally dulled. 
Then the opposition due to subjective consciousness and 
spiritual activity has disappeared. Man is active only in 
so far as he has not attained something which he desires to 
effect. When this is fully accomplished, activity and 
vitality vaaish, and the lack of interest, which then per- 
vades him, is mental or physical death. 

152. Substantive ethical reality attains its right, and this 
right receives its due, when the individual in his private 
will and conscience drops his self-assertion and antagonism 
to the ethical. His character, moulded by ethical principles, 
takes as its motive the unmoved universal, which is open 
on all its sides to actual rationality. He recognizes that his 
worth and the stability of his private ends are grounded 

pon the universal, and derive their reality from it. Sub- 
jectivity is the absolute form and the existing actuality of 
the substance. The difference between the subject and 
substance, as the object, end, and power of the subject, 
forthwith vanishes, like the difference between form and 
matter. 

Note. — Subjectivity, which is the foundation for the real 
existence of the conception of freedom (§ 106), is at 
the moral standpoint still distinguished from the con- 
ception. In ethics it is adequate to the conception, whose 
existence it is. 

153. In that individuals belong to the ethical and social 
fabric they have a right to determine themselves sub- 
jectively and freely. Assurance of their freedom has its 
truth in the objectivity of ethical observance, in which 
they realize their own peculiar being and inner universality 
(§ l^?). 

Note. — To a father seeking the best way to bring up 
his son, a Pythagorean, or some other thinker, replied, 
" Make him a citizen of a state which has good laws." 

Addition. — The attempts of speculative educators to 



THE ETHICAL SYSTEM. 163 

withdraw people from their present social life and bring 
them up in the country, a proposal made by Eousseau in 
" Emile," have been vain, because no one can succeed in 
alienating man from the laws of the world Although the 
education of young men must take place in solitude, we 
cannot believe that the odour of the world of spirits does 
not in the end penetrate their seclusion, or that the power 
of the spirit of the world is too feeble to take possession of 
even the remotest corner. Only when the individual is a 
citizen of a good state, does he receive his right. 

154. The right of individuals to their particularity is 
contained in the concrete ethical order, because it is in 
particularity that the social principle finds a visible outer 
manifestation. 

155. Eight and duty coincide in the identity of the 
universal and the particular wills. By virtue of the ethical 
fabric man has rights, so far as he has duties, and duties so 
far as he has rights. In abstract right, on the contrary, I 
have the right and another person the corresponding duty ; 
and in morals I resolve to consider as an objective duty 
only the- right of my own knowledge and wiU and of my 
own well-being. 

Addition. — The slave can have no duties, but only the 
free man. If all rights were on one side and all duties on 
the other, the whole would be broken up. Identity is the 
only principle to which we must now adhere. 

156. The ethical substance, as the union of self-conscious- 
ness with its conception, is the actual spirit of a family and 
a nation. 

Addition. — The ethical framework is not abstract Kke the 
good, but in a special sense real. Spirit has actuality, and 
the accidents or modes of this actuality are individuals. 
Hence as to the ethical there are only two possible views. 
Either we start from the substantive social system, or we 
proceed atomically and work up from a basis of indi- 
viduality. This latter method, because it leads to mere 



164 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

juxtaposition, is void of spirit, since mind or spirit is 
not something individual, but the unity of individual and 
universal. 

157. The conception of this idea exists only as spirit, as 
active self-knowledge and reality, since it objectifies itself 
by passing through the form of its elements. Hence 
it is, 

A. The direct or natural ethical spirit, the family. This 
reality, losing its unity, passes over into dismember- 
ment, and assumes the nature of the relative. It thus 
becomes 

B. The civic community, an association of members or 
independent individuals in a formal universality. Such an 
association is occasioned by needs, and is preserved by the 
law, which secures one's person and property, and by an ex- 
ternal system for private and common interests. 

O. This external state goes back to, and finds its central 
principle in, the end and actuality of the substantive 
universal, and of the public life dedicated to the main- 
tenance of the universal. This is the state-constitution. 



riEST SECTION. 
The Family. 

158. The family is the direct substantive reality of 
spirit. The unity of the family is one of feeling, the feel- 
ing of love. The true disposition here is that which 
esteems the unity as absolutely essential, and within it 
places the consciousness of oneself as an individuality. 
Hence, in the family we are not independent persons but 
members. 

Addition. — Love is in general the consciousness of the 
unity of myself with another. I am not separate and 
isolated, but win my self-consciousness only by renouncing 
my independent existence, and by knowing myself as unity 



THE FAMILY. 166 

of myself with another and of another with me. But love 
is feeling, that is to say, the ethical in the form of the 
natural. It has no longer a place in the state, where one 
knows the unity as law, where, too, the content must be 
rational, and I must know it. The first element in love is 
that I will to be no longer an independent self-sufficing 
person, and that, if I were such a person, I should feel 
myself lacking and incomplete. The second element is 
that I gain myseK in another person, in whom I am recog- 
nized, as he again is in me. Hence love is the most 
tremendous contradiction, incapable of being solved by the 
understanding. Nothing is more obstinate than this 
scrupulosity of self-consciousness, which, though negated, I 
yet insist upon as something positive. Love is both the 
source and solution of this contradiction. As a solution it 
is an ethical union. 

159. A right, which comes to the individual by reason 
of the family and constitutes his hfe in it, does not appear 
in the form of a right, that is, the abstract element of a 
definite individuality, until the family is dissolved. Then 
those, who should be members, become in feeling and 
reality self-dependent persons. What was theirs by right 
of their position in the family, they now receive in separa- 
tion in an external way, in the form of money, main- 
tenance, or education. 

Addition. — The family has this special right, that its 
substantive nature should have a sphere in actuality. 
This right is a right against external influences and against 
abandonment of the unity. But, on the other hand, love is 
subjective feeling, which, if it oppose the unity of the 
family, destroys it. If in such a case a unity is insisted 
on, it can comprehend only things that are external and 
independent of feeling. 

160. The family when completed has the three following 
phases : 

(a.) The form of its direct conception, marriage. 



166 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

(6) External reality, the family property and goods 

and the care of them, 
(c) Education of children and dissolution of the 

family. 

A. Marriage. 

161. Marriage, as the elementary social relation, con- 
tains firstly the factor of natural life. As marriage is also 
a substantive fact, natural life must be viewed in its 
totality as the realization of the species, and the process 
which the realization involves. But, secondly, the merely 
inner, potential and, when actualized, external unity of 
the sexes is transformed in self-consciousness into the 
spiritual unity of self-conscious love. 

Addition. — Marriage is essentially an ethical relation. 
Formerly, in the majority of what are called rights of 
nature, marriage was interpreted on its physical or natural 
side. It has thus been looked upon simply as a sexual 
relation, and as excluding all the other features of marriage. 
But such a view is no more crude than to conceive of 
marriage merely as civil contract, a view found in Kant. 
In accordance with this view, individuals form a compact 
through mere caprice, and marriage is degraded to a 
bargain for mutual use. A third doctrine, equally repre- 
hensible, bases marriage on love only. Love, which is 
feeling, admits the accidental on every side, as the ethical 
cannot do. Hence, marriage is to be defined more exactly 
as legal ethical love. Out of marriage has disappeared 
the love, which is merely subjective. 

162. As a subjective starting-point for marriage either 
the special inclination of two persons for each other may 
be the more observable, or else the provision and general 
arrangements of the parents. The objective point of 
departure, however, is the free consent of the two to 
become one person. They give up their natural and 
private personality to enter a unity, which may be regarded 



THE FAMILY. 167 

as a limitation, but, since in it they attain to a substantive 
self-consciousness, is really their liberation. 

Note. — That an individual may be, objective, and so fulfil 
his ethical duty, he should marry. The circumstances 
attending the external starting-point are naturally a matter 
of chance, depending largely upon the state of reflective 
culture. In this there may be either of two extremes. 
Either well-meaning parents arrange beforehand for the 
marriage of two persons, who, when they have made each 
other's acquaintance as prospective husband and wife, are 
then expected to love each other. Or, on the other hand, 
inclination is supposed first to appear in the two persons, 
left absolutely to their private selves. The extreme, in 
which marriage is resolved on prior to inclination, and 
both resolution and inclination are then present in the 
actual marriage, is the more ethical. In the other extreme, 
it is the individual's private and unformed nature, which 
makes good its pretensions. This extreme is in close 
alliance with the subjective principle of the modern world 
(§ 124, note). 

Modern dramas and other works of art produce an 
atmosphere of the chilliest indifference, by the way in 
which they represent the motive of sexual love. This 
feeling of indifference is due to the association in the 
drama of ardent passion with the most utter contingency, 
the whole interest being made to depend simply upon 
merely private persons. The event is, doubtless, of the 
very last importance to these persons, but not in itself. 

Addition. — Amongst nations where women are held in 
slight esteem, parents arrange the marriage of their 
children, without ever consulting them. The children 
submit, because the particularity of feeling as yet makes 
no claim at aU. The maiden is simply to have a husband, 
the man a wife. In other circumstances regard may be 
had to means, connections, political hopes. To make 
marriage the means for other ends may cause great hard- 



168 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

ship. But in modern times the suhjective point of depar- 
ture, i.e., being in love, is thought to be the only thing of 
consequence. In this it is taken for granted that each 
one must wait till his hour has struck, and that he can 
bestow his love upon one and only one individual. 

163. The ethical side of marriage consists in the con- 
sciousness that the union is a substantive end. Marriage 
thus rests upon love, confidence, and the socializing of the 
whole individual existence. In this social disposition and 
reality natural impulse is reduced to the mode of a merely 
natural element, which is extinguished in the moment of 
its satisfaction. On the other hand, the spiritual bond of 
union, when its right as a substantive fact is recognized, is 
raised above the chances of passion and of temporary par- 
ticular inclination, and is of itself indissoluble. 

Note. — It has already been remarked that there is no 
contract in connection with the essential character of 
marriage (§ 75). Marriage leaves behind and transcends 
the standpoint of contract, occupied by the person who is 
sufficient for himself. Substance is such as to be in essen- 
tial relation to its accidents.^ The union of personalities, 
whereby the family becomes one person, and its members 
its accidents, is the ethical spirit. The ethical spirit, 
stripped of the many external phases which it has in par- 
ticular individuals and transitory interests, has been by 
picture-thought given independent form, and reverenced 
as the Penates, etc. In this attitude of mind is found 
that religious side of marriage and the family, which is 
called piety. It is a further abstraction, when the divine 
and substantive reality is separated from its physical em- 
bodiment. The result of this procedure is that feeling and 
the consciousness of spiritual unity become what is falsely 
called Platonic love. This separation is in keeping with 
the monastic doctrine, in which natural vitality is regarded 

' See " Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences.'' 



THE FAMILY. 169 

simply as negative, and is given by this very separation an 
infinite importance. 

Addition. — Marriage is distinguished from concubinage, 
siace in concubinage the chief factor is the satisfaction of 
natural impulse, while in marriage this satisfaction is sub- 
ordinate. Hence, in marriage one speaks without blushing 
of occurrences, which apart from the marriage relation cause 
a sense of shame. Therefore, also, is marriage to be 
esteemed as in itself indissoluble. The end of marriage is 
ethical, and therefore occupies so high a place that every- 
thing opposing it seems secondary and powerless. Marriage 
shall not be liable to dissolution through passion, since 
passion is subject to it. But, after all, it is only in itself 
indissoluble, for, as Christ says, divorce is permitted, but 
only because of hardness of heart. Marriage, since it con- 
tains feeling, is not absolute, but open to fluctuations, and 
has in it the possibility of dissolution. Yet the laws must 
make the possibility as difficult as can be, and must retain 
intact the right of the ethical against inclination. 

164. Just as in the case of contract it is the expUcit 
stipulation, which constitutes the true transference of pro- 
perty (§ 79), so in the case of the ethical bond of marriage 
the public celebration of consent, and the corresponding 
recognition and acceptance of it by the family and the 
community, constitute its consummation and reality. The 
function of the church is a separate feature, which is not 
to be considered here. Thus the union is established and 
completed ethically, only when preceded by social ceremony, 
the symbol of language being the most spiritual embodi- 
ment of the spiritual (§ 78). The sensual element pertain- 
ing to the natural life has place in the ethical relation only 
as an after result and accident belonging to the external 
reality of the ethical union. The union can be expressed 
fully only in mutual love and assistance. 

Note. — When the question as to the chief end of marriage 
is asked with a view to enact or recast laws, it means : 



170 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

Which, particular side of the reality of marriage must be 
accepted as the m.ost essential ? But no one separate phase 
of marriage comprises the whole range of its absolute 
ethical content; and one or other phase of its existence 
may he wanting without injury to its essence. — In the 
celebration of marriage the essence of the union is clearly 
understood to be an ethical principle, freed from the accidents 
of feeling and private inclination. If the solemnization be 
taken for an external formality, or a so-called mere civil 
requisition, the act loses all purpose except that of edifica- 
tion, or of an attestation to the civic regulation. Indeed, 
there may perhaps remain only the positive arbitrariness 
of a civil or ecclesiastical command. Now, not only is a 
command of this kind indifferent to the nature of marriage, 
but in so far as the two persons have because of it ascribed 
value to the formality, and counted it as a condition pre- 
cedent to complete abandonment to each other, it is an 
alien thing, bringing discord into the disposition of love, 
and thwarting the inner nature of the union. The opinion 
that the marriage ceremony is a mere civic mandate 
professes to contain the loftiest conception of the freedom, 
intensity, and completeness of love ; but in point of fact it 
denies the ethical side of it, which implies a limitation and 
repression of the mere natural tendency. Reserve is already 
found naturally in a sense of shame, and is by the more 
articulate spiritual consciousness raised to the higher form 
of modesty and chastity. In a word, the view of marriage 
just criticised rejects the ethical side, by virtue of which 
consciousness gathers itself out of its native and subjective 
condition, and attains to the thought of the substantive. In- 
stead of always holding before itself the accidental character 
of sensual inclination, it casts off the fetters of this state and 
engages itself to what is substantive and binding, namely, 
the Penates. The sensual [element is reduced and con- 
ditioned by the recognition of marriage as an ethical bond. 
Insolent is the view of the mere understanding, which is 



THE FAMILY. 171 

unable to apprehend marriage in its speculative nature. 
This substantive relation, however, is in harmony with the 
unsophisticated ethical sense, and with the laws of Chris- 
tian nations. 

Addition. — It is laid down by Friedrich v. Schlegel, in 
" Luciade," and by a follower of his in the " Letters of an 
Unknown " (Lubeck and Leipzig, 1800), that the marriage- 
ceremony is a superfluous formality. They argue that by 
the form of marriage love, which is the substantive factor, 
loses its value ; they represent that the abandonment to 
the sensual is necessary as proof of the freedom and inner 
reality of love. This style of argument is usual with 
seducers. Besides, as regards the relation of man to 
woman, it is woman who, in yielding to sense, gives up 
her dignity, whereas man has another field than the family 
for his ethical activity. The sphere of woman is essentially 
marriage. Her rightful claim is that love should assume the 
form of marriage, and that the different elements existing 
in love should be brought into a truly rational connection. 

165. The natural office of the sexes receives, when 
rationalized, intellectual and social significance. This 
significance is determined by the distinction which the 
ethical substance, as conception, introduces by its own 
motion into itself, in order to win out of the distinction 
its own life or concrete unity. 

166. In one sex the spiritual divides itself into two phases, 
independent, personal self-sufficiency, and knowing and 
wiUing of free universality. These two together are the 
self-consciousness of the conceiving thought, and the 
willing of the objective final cause. In the other sex the 
spiritual maintains itself in unity and concord. This sex 
knows and wills the substantive in the form of concrete 
individuality and feeling. In relation to what is without 
one sex exhibits power and mastery, while the other is 
subjective and passive. Hence the husband has bis real 
essential life in the state, the sciences, and the like, in 



172 THE PHILOSOPHY OF BIGHT, 

battle aad in struggle with, the outer world and with him- 
self. Only by effort does he, out of this disruption of 
himself, reach self-sufficing concord. A peaceful sense of 
this concord, and an ethical existence, which is intuitive 
and subjective, he finds in the family. In the family the 
wife has her full substantive place, and in the feeling of 
family piety realizes her ethical disposition. , 

Note. — Hence piety is in the " Antigone " of Sophocles 
most superbly presented as the law of the woman, the law 
of the nature, which realizes itself subjectively and intui- 
tively, the law of an inner life, which has not yet attained 
complete realization, the law of the ancient gods, and of 
the under-world, the eternal law, of whose origin no one 
knows, in opposition to the public law of the state. This 
opposition is in the highest sense ethical, and hence also 
tragic ; it is individualized in the opposing natures of man 
and woman. 

Addition. — Women can, of course, be educated, but their 
minds are not adapted to the higher sciences, philosophy, 
or certain of the arts. These demand a universal faculty. 
Women may have happy inspirations, taste, elegance, but 
they have not the ideal. The difference between man and 
woman is the same as that between animal and plant. 
The animal corresponds more closely to the character of 
the man, the plant to that of the woman. In woman 
there is a more peaceful unfolding of nature, a process, 
whose principle is the less clearly determined unity of 
feeling. If women were to control the government, the 
state would be in danger, for they do not act according 
to the dictates of universality, but are influenced by acci- 
dental inclinations and opinions. The education of woman 
goes on one hardly knows how, in the atmosphere of 
picture-thinking, as it were, more through life than through 
the acquisition of knowledge. Man attains his position 
only through stress of thought and much specialized effort. 

167. Marriage in its essence is monogamy, because in 



THE FAMILY. 173 

this relation it is the personality, the directly exclusive 
individuality which subsides and resigns itself. The true 
inner side of marriage, the subjective form of the real 
substantive institution, issues only out of such a mutual 
renunciation of personality as is shared in by no one else. 
Personality acquires the right of being conscious of itseK 
in another, only in so far as the other appears in this 
identity as a person or atomic individuality. 

Note. — Marriage, or monogamy, rather, is one of the 
principles on which the ethical life of a community de- 
pends most absolutely. Hence the institution of marriage 
is represented as one of the features of the divine or heroic 
founding of the state. 

168. Since marriage proceeds out of the free resignation 
by both sexes of that personality which is infinitely peculiar 
to themselves, it must not occur within the bounds of 
natural identity, which involves great intimacy and un- 
limited familiarity. Within such a circle individuals have 
no exclusive personality. Marriage must rather take place 
in families that are unconnected, and between persons 
who are distinct in their origin. Between persons related 
by blood, therefore, marriage is contrary to the conception 
of it. It is an ethical act done in freedom, and not con- 
trolled by direct natural conditions and their impulses. 
Marriage within these limits is likewise contrary to true 
natural feeling. 

Note. — To regard marriage as grounded not on a right 
of nature but on natural sexual impulse, to view it as a 
capricious contract, to give such an external reason for 
monogamy as the number of men in relation to the 
number of women, and to give only vague feelings as 
cause sufficient to prohibit marriage between blood con- 
nections, all such theories are due to the current idea of a 
state of nature, and to the opinion that such a state 
possesses rights. They are, however, devoid of the con- 
ception of rationality and freedom. 



174 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

Addition. — Consauguineous marriages find opposition, in 
the first instance, in the sense of shame. This feeling of 
hesitation is justified by the conception. What is already 
united eaniLot be first of all united by marriage. As to 
the relation of mere nature, it is known that amongst 
animals copulation within one stock produces weaker off- 
spring. "What is to be joined ought to be at first distinct 
and separate. The power of production, both of spirit and 
body, is greater, the deeper are the oppositions out of 
which it restores itself. Familiarity, intimacy, habituation 
due to the same course of action, ought not to occur pre- 
vious to marriage, but should be found for the first time in 
the married state. Their appearance after marriage has 
richer results and a higher value, the more numerous have 
been the points of difference. 

169. The family, as person, has its external reality in 
property. If it is to furnish a basis for the substantive 
personality of the family, it must take the form of means. 

B. The Family Means. 

170. It is not enough that the family has property, but, 
as a universal and lasting person, it needs a permanent 
and sure possession, or means. When property is treated 
abstractly, there occur at random the particular needs of 
the mere individual, and also, the self-seeking of the appe- 
tites. These now take on an ethical aspect, and are changed 
into provision for a common interest. 

Note. — In the wise sayings concerning the founding of 
states, the institution of a sure property makes its ap- 
pearance in connection with the institution of marriage, or 
at least with the introduction of an orderly social Hfe. — 
When we come to the civic community, we shall see in 
what family competence consists, and how it is to be 
secured. 

171. The husband is the head of the family, and when 



THE FAMILY. 175 

it, as a legal person, collides with other families, he is its 
representative. It is expected of him, further, to go out 
and earn its living, care for its needs, and administer the 
family means. This means is a common possession, to 
which each member has a common hut not a special right. 
This general right and the husband's right to dispose of 
the property may conflict, because the ethical sentiment 
(§ 158), which in the family is still in its simplest form, is 
subject to chance and violence. 

172. Marriage establishes a new family, which has its 
own independent footing as against the stems or houses 
from, which it has proceeded. The connection of the new 
family with these stems is consanguinity, but the principle 
of the new family is ethical love. Thus, the individual's 
property is essentially allied to his marriage, and less in- 
timately to his original stock or house. 

Note. — A marriage-settlement, which imposes a limit to 
the common possession of goods by the wedded couple, or 
any other arrangement by which the right of the wife is 
retained, is intended to be security against the dissolution 
of the marriage-tie by death or divorce. In such an event 
the different members of the family are by this arrange- 
ment apportioned their shares of the common possession. 

Addition. — In many law codes the more extended range 
of the family circle is retained. It is looked upon as the 
real bond of union, while the tie of the single family is re- 
garded as comparatively unimportant. Thus in the older 
Eoman law the wife of the lax marriage is more closely 
allied to her relatives than to her husband and children. 
In feudal times, also, the necessity of preserving the 
splendor famdliae led to reckoning under the family only 
its male members. Thus the whole family connection was 
the chief object of concern, and the newly-formed family 
was placed in the background. Notwithstanding this, 
every new family is more essential than the vidder circle 
bounded by the tie of consanguinity. A married couple 



176 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

with their children form a nucleus of their own in opposi- 
tion to the more extended household. Hence the financial 
status of individuals must be more vitally connected with 
marriage than with the wider family union. 

C. Education of the Children and Dissolution of the 
Family. 

173. The unity of marriage which, as substantive, exists 
only as an inner harmony and sentiment, but, so far as it 
exists actually, is separated in the two married persons, 
becomes in the children a unity, which has actual inde- 
pendent existence, and is an independent object. This new 
object the parents love as an embodiment of their love. — 
The presupposition of the direct presence of the two people 
as parents becomes, when taken on its merely natural 
side, a result. This process expands into an infinite series 
of generations, which beget and are presupposed. At this 
finite and natural standpoint the existence of the simple 
spirit of the Penates is represented as species or kind. 

Addition. — Between husband and wife the relation of 
love is not yet objective. Though feeling is a substantive 
unity, it has as yet no footing in reality. This foothold 
parents attain only in their children, in whom the totality 
of their alliance is visibly embodied. In the child the 
mother loves her husband, and the father his wife. In 
the child both parents have their love before their eyes. 
Whereas in means the marriage tie exists only in an 
external object, in children it is present in a spiritual 
being, in whom the parents are loved, and whom they 
love. 

174. Children have the right to be supported , and 
educated out of the common family means. The right of 
parents to the service of their children, as service, is 
limited to and based upon family cares. The right of 
parents over the free choice of their children is just as 



THE FAMILY. 177 

clearly limited to correction and education. The purpose 
of chastisement is not mere justice ; it has a subjective 
moral side, its object being to restrain a freedom, which is 
still bound to nature, and to instUl the universal into the 
child's consciousness aad will. 

Addition.- — Man does not possess by instinct what he is 
to be, but must first of all acquire it. Upon this is based 
the child's right to be educated. As it is with children, so 
is it with nations under paternal government ; the people 
are supplied with food out of storehouses, and are not 
looked upon as self-dependent or of age. The services 
required of children must bear upon their education and 
promote their good. To ignore this good would destroy 
the ethical element of the relation, and make the child a 
slave. A prominent feature in the education of children is 
correction, intended to break their self-will, and eradicate 
what is merely sensual and natural. One must not expect 
to succeed here simply vrith goodness, because the direct 
volition of children is moved by immediate suggestions 
and likings, not by reasons and ideas. If we give children 
reasons, we leave it open to them whether to act upon them 
or not. In this way everything depends upon their pleasure. 
In the fact that parents constitute the universal and essen- 
tial is included the necessity of obedience on the part of 
children. When no care is taken to cherish in children the 
feeling of subordination, a feeling begotten in them by the 
longing to be big, they become forward and impertinent. 

175. Children are potentially free, and life is the direct 
embodiment of this potential freedom. Hence they are 
not things, and cannot be said to belong to any one, their 
parents or others. But their freedom is as yet only 
potential. The education of children has with regard to 
family life a two-fold object. Its positive aim is to exalt 
the ethical nature of the child into a direct perception free 
from all opposition, and thus secure that state of mind, 
which forms the basis of ethical life. The child thus 



178 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

passes his earlier years ia love, trust, and obedience. Its 
negative aim is to lift the child out of the natural sim- 
plicity, in which it at first is, into self-dependence and free 
personality, and thus make it able to leave the natural 
unity of the family. 

Note. — That the children of Eoman parents were slaves 
is one of the facts which most tarnishes the Eoman law. 
This wounding of the ethical life in its most intimate 
quarter is an important element in forming an estimate of 
the world-historical character of the Bomans, as weU as of 
their tendency towards formal right. 

The necessity for the education of children is found in 
their inherent dissatisfaction with what they are, in their 
impulse to belong to the world of adults, whom they 
reverence as higher beings, and in the wish to become big. 
The sportive method of teaching gives to children what is 
childish under the idea that it is in itself valuable. It makes 
not only itself ridiculous, but also all that is serious. It 
is scorned by children themselves. Since it strives to 
represent children as complete in their very incompleteness, 
of which they themselves are already sensible. Hoping to 
•make them satisfied with their imperfect condition, it 
disturbs and taints their own truer and higher aspiration. 
The result is indifference to and want of interest in the 
substantive relations of the spiritual world, contempt of 
men, since they have posed before children in a childish 
and contemptible way, and vain conceit devoted to the 
contemplation of its own excellence. 

Addition. — Man, as child, must have been included with 
his parents in the circle of love and mutual confidence, and 
the rational must appear in him as his own most private 
subjectivity. At the outset the education given by the 
mother is of greater importance, since social character 
must be planted in the child as feeling. It is noticeable 
that children as a rule love their parents less than the 
parents do their children. Children are on the way to 



THE FAMILY. 179 

meet independence and wax in strength ; besides they have 
their parents in a sense behind them : but parents possess 
in their children the objective embodiment of their union. 

176. Marriage is only the direct form of the ethical 
idea, and has its objective reality in the inwardness of 
subjective sentiment and feeling. In this is found its first 
exposure to accident. Just as no one may be forced to 
marry, so there must be no positive legal bond to hold 
together persons, between whom have arisen hostile thoughts 
and acts. A third authority must, however, intervene to 
hold intact the right of marriage and the right of the 
ethical fabric against the inroads of mere opinion, and the 
accidents of fleeting resolves. It must also distinguish 
between the effervescence of feeling and total alienation, 
and have proof of alienation before permitting divorce. 

Addition. — ^As marriage rests only upon a subjective 
sentiment which is liable to change, it may be dissolved. 
The state, on the contrary, is not subject to division, since 
it rests upon the law. Marriage should be indissoluble, 
but this desirable state of things remains a mere moral 
command. Tet, since marriage is ethical, it cannot be 
dissolved at random, but only by a constituted ethical 
authority, be it the church or the law. If total alienation 
has taken place on account of adultery, for example, then 
the religious authority also must sanction divorce. 

177. The ethical or social dismemberment of the family 
occurs when the children have grown to be free per- 
sonalities. They are recognized as legal persons, when 
they have attained their majority. They are then capable 
both of possessing free property of their own and of found- 
ing their own families, sons as heads of the family, and 
daughters as wives. In the new family the founders have 
now their substantive office, in contrast with which the 
first family must occupy a subordinate place as mere basis 
and point of departure. The family stock is an abstrac- 
tion which has no rights. 



180 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

178. The natural disruption of the family by the death 
of the parents, especially of the husband, necessitates in- 
heritance of the family means. Inheritance is the entering 
into peculiar possession of the store that is in itself 
common. The terms of inheritance depend on degree of 
relation and on the extent of the dispersion throughout 
the community of the individuals and families, who have 
broken away from the original family and become inde- 
pendent. Hence inheritance is indefinite in proportion to 
the loss of the sense of unity, since every marriage is the 
renunciation of former connections, and the founding of a 
new independent family. 

Note. — It has been supposed that on the occasion of a 
death a fortune loses its owner, and falls to him who first 
gets possession of it. Actual possession, however, so the 
supposition runs, is generally made by relatives, since they 
are usually in the immediate neighbourhood of the de- 
ceased. Hence what customarily happens, is, for the sake 
of order, raised by positive law into a rule. This theory is 
little more than a whim, and altogether overlooks the 
nature of the family relation. 

179. Through the dismemberment of the family by 
death there is afforded free scope for the capricious fancy 
of the testator, who may. bestow his means in accordance 
with his personal likings, opinions, and ends. He may 
leave his possessions to friends and acquaintances instead 
of to the family, adopting the legal mode of bequest by 
embodying his declaration in a will. 

Note. — Into the formation of a circle of friends by a 
bequest, which is authorized by ethical observance, there 
enters, especially in the case of wills, so much of arbitrari- 
ness, wilfulness, and selfishness, that' the ethical element 
becomes extremely shadowy. Indeed the legal permission 
to be arbitrary in drawing up a will is rather the cause of 
injury to ethical institutions and, also, of underhand 
exertions and servility. It occasions and justifies the absurd 



THE FAMILY. 181 

ajid even malign desire to link to so-caUed benefactions 
and bequests of property, whicli in any case ceases at 
death to be mine, conditions that are vain and vexatious. 

180. The principle that the members of a family become 
independent legal persons (§ 177) allows something of 
capricious discrimination with regard to the natural heirs 
to enter inside even the family circle. But this discrimi- 
nation is greatly limited in order not to injure the funda- 
mental relation of the family. 

Note. — The simple direct freedom of choice of the 
deceased cannot be construed as the principle at the basis 
of the right to make a will. More particularly is this the 
case, if this wilfulness is opposed to the substantive right 
of the family, whose love and esteem for the deceased 
would be the chief reason for carrying out after his death 
his wayward behest. Such a will contains nothing so 
worthy of respect as the family right. Formerly the 
validity of a last will and testament lay only in its arbi- 
trary recognition of others. This validity can be conceded 
to a testamentary disposition only when the family rela- 
tion, in which it would otherwise be absorbed, is weak and 
ineffective. But to ignore the province of the family 
relation, when it is real and present, is unethical ; and it 
would also weaken its inherent ethical value to extend the 
boundaries of a testator's caprice. 

The harsh and unethical Roman law makes unlimited 
caprice inside the family the chief principle of succession. 
la accordance with this law the son could be sold by the 
father, and would, if freed, again come under his father's 
power. Only after being freed from slavery the third 
time, was he really free. According to these laws the son 
did not de jure come of age, and was not a legal person. 
Only what he took in war, peeulium castrense, was he 
entitled to possess. "When he, on being three times sold 
and freed, passed out of his father's power, he did not 
inherit along with those, who had remained in family 



182 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

servitude, except by the insertion of a special clause in the 
will. Similarly, the wife, in so far as she had entered 
marriage not as a slave, in manum conveniret, in mancipio 
esset, but as a matron, did not so miuch belong to the 
family, which had by her marriage been established, and 
was actually hers, as to the family of her birth. Hence 
she was excluded from, inheriting wealth, which belonged 
to what was really her own family. Though wife and 
mother she was disinherited. 

It has already been observed (§ 3, note) that, as the 
feeling of rationality developed, efforts were made to escape 
from the unethical elements of these and other laws. The 
expression honorum possessio, which, as every learned jurist 
knows, is to be distinguished from possessio honorum, was 
drawn into service by the judges instead of hereditas, 
through the employment of a legal fiction, by means of 
which a^Kawas changed by a second baptism into nfilius. 
It thus sometimes became the sad necessity of the judges 
slyly to smuggle in the reasonable as an offset to bad laws. 
Hence, the most important institutions became pitifully 
unstable, and evils arose, which necessitated in turn a 
tumultuous mass of counter legislation. 

The unethical results, flowing from the right of free 
choice allowed by Roman law to testators, are well known 
from history and from the descriptions of Lucian and 
others. As to marriage it is a direct and simple ethical 
relation, and implies a mingling of what is substantive 
with natural contingency and inner caprice. By making 
children slaves, and by kindred regulations, conspicuously 
by ready and easy divorce, preference is openly conceded to 
wilfulness over the right of the substantive ethical fact- 
Thus Cicero himself, who, in his " Officiis " and other 
works has written many a fine thing about the Honestum 
and Decorum, devised the scheme of sending away his wife 
in order that he might with a second wife get a sufficient 
dowry to pay his debts. When such things occur, a way 



THE FAMILY. 183 

is paved by the law for the ruin of morals ; or rather the 
laws are the necessary product of this ruin and decay. 

The institution of heirs-at-law is introduced in order to 
preserve the glory of the family stock. It makes use of 
substitutions and family trusts by excluding from the in- 
heritance the daughters in favour of the sons, or the rest 
of the family in favour of the eldest son, or by sanctioning 
some other inequality. By it injustice is done to the 
principle of freedom of property (§ 62). Besides, it rests 
upon an arbitrary will, which has absolutely no right to 
be recognized, since it aims to preserve a particular stock 
or house rather than a particular family. But the family, 
and not the stock or house is the idea, which has the right 
to be preserved. Moreover, the ethical fabric is as likely 
to be maintained by the free disposal of property and 
equaHty of succession, as family trees are to be preserved 
by an opposite course. 

In institutions like the Roman the right of marriage 
(§ 172) is everywhere misinterpreted. Marriage is the 
complete founding of a new and actual family, in contrast 
with which the family, as the stirps or gens is called, is an 
abstraction, becoming, as the generations pass by, ever 
more shadowy and unreal (§ 177). Love, the ethical 
element in marriage, is a feeling for real present indi- 
viduals, and not for an abstraction. It is shown further 
on (§ 356) that the world-historical principle of the Soman 
empire is an abstraction of the understanding. It is also 
shown further on (§ 306) that the higher poUtical sphere 
introduces a right of primogeniture and an inalienable 
family fortune, based, however, not on an arbitrary act of 
wiU, but on the necessary idea of the state. 

Addition. — ^Amongst the Komans in earlier times a 
father could disinherit his children, and even put them, 
to death. Afterwards neither of these acts was allowed. 
Efforts were made to bring both the unethical and also the 
illogical attempt to make it ethical into one system, the 



184 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

retention of which constitutes the difficulty and weatness 
of our law of inheritance. Wills may certainly be per- 
mitted, but in them should prevail the idea that the right 
of arbitrary decision grows only with the dispersion and 
separation of the members of the family. The so-called 
family of friendship, which bequest brings into existence, 
should appear only when there are no children or near 
relatives. Something ofEensive and disagreeable is asso- 
ciated with testamentary dispositions generally. In them 
I reveal those to whom I have inclination. But inclination 
is arbitrary, can be obtained surreptitiously, and is allied to 
whim and fancy. It may even be required in a will that an 
heir shall subject himself to the greatest indignities. In 
England, where they are given to riding all sorts of hobbies, 
an infinite number of absurdities are attached to wiUs. 

Transition of the Family into the Civic Community. 

181. In a natural way and essentially through the 
principle of personality, the family separates into a number 
of families, which then exist as independent concrete 
persons, and are therefore related externally to one another. 
The elements bound up in the unity of the family, which 
is the social idea stUI in the form of the conception, must 
now be released from the conception and given indepen- 
dent reality. This is the stage of difEerence. Here, at the 
outset, to use abstract expressions, we have the determina- 
tion of particularity, which is nevertheless in relation to 
universality. The universal is, in fact, the basis, which is, 
however, as yet only internal, and therefore exists in the 
particular only formally, and in it is manifested externally. 
Hence in this relation occasioned by reflection the ethical 
is, as it were, lost ; or rather since it, as essence, of neces- 
sity appears or is manifested, it occurs in its phenomenal 
form. This is the civic community. 

Note. — The extension of the family or the transition of 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 185 

it into another principle has in the actual world two 
phases. It is on one side the peaceful expansion of 
the family into a people or nation, whose component parts 
have a common natural origin. On the other side it is the 
collection of scattered groups of families by superior force, 
or it is their voluntary association, in order to satisfy by 
co-operation their common wants. 

Addition. — Universality has here a point of outlet in the 
independence of particularity. At this point the ethical 
appears to be lost. Consciousness finds in the identity of 
the family what is properly its first divine and obligatory 
principle. But now there appears a relation, in which the 
particular is to be the prime factor in determining my con- 
duct. Thus the ethical seems to be discarded and super- 
seded. But in this view I am really in error, for, while I 
believe myself to be retaining the particular, the universal 
and also the necessity of social unity still remain for me 
fundamental and essential. Besides, I am at the stage of 
appearance, and although my particular nature remains for 
me the determining factor and end, I serve in this way the 
universal, which does not relax its own special hold 
of me. 

SECOND SECTION. 

The Civic Commtjnitt. 

I82J The concrete^ person^ho as particular is an end to 
himself, is a totality of - wanta -and a mixture of necessity 
and caprice. As such he is one of the principles of 
the civic community. But the particular person is essen- 
tially connected with others. Hence each establishes and 
satisfies himself by means of others, and so must call in 
the assistance of the form of universality. This univer- 
sality is the other principle of the civic commun ity.l 

Addition. — The civic community is the realm of dif- 
ference, intermediate between the family and the state. 



186 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

altbougli its construction followed in point of time tLe con- 
struction of the state. It, as the difference, must presup- 
pose the state. On the self-dependent state it must rely 
for its subsistence. Further, the creation of the civic com- 
munity belongs to the modern world which alone has per- 
mitted every element of the idea to receive its due. When 
the state is represented as a union of different persons, that 
is, a unity which is merely a community, it is only the civic 
community which is meant. Many modern teachers of 
political science have not been able to develop any other 
view of the state. In this society every one is an end 
to himself ; all others are for him nothing. And yet with- 
out coming into relation with others he cannot realize his 
ends. Hence to each particular person others are a means 
to the attainment of his end. But the particular purpose 
gives itself through reference to others the form of univer- 
sality, and in satisfying itself accomplishes at the same 
time the well-being of others. Since particularity is bound 
up with the conditioning universal, the joint whole is the 
ground of adjustment or mediation, upon which all in- 
dividualities, all talents, all accidents of birth or fortune 
disport themselves. Here the fountains of all the passions 
are let loose, being merely governed by the sun of reason. 
Particularity limited by universality is the only standard 
to which the particular person conforms in promoting his 
well-being. 

183. The self-seeking end is conditioned in its realization 
by the universal. Hence is formed a system of mutual de- 
pendence, a system which interweaves the subsistence, 
happiness, and rights of the individual with the subsistence, 
happiness, and right of all. The general right and well- 
being form the basis of the individual's right and well- 
being, which only by this connection receives actuality and 
security. This system we may in the first instance call the 
external state, the state which satisfies one's needs, and 
meets the requirements of the understanding. 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 187 

184. When the idea is thus at variance with itself, 
it imparts to the phases of the peculiarly individual life, 
i.e., to particularity, the right to develop and publish 
themselves on all sides, and to universality it concedes the 
right to evince itself as the foundation and necessary form, 
overruling power and final end of the particular. In this 
system the ethical order is lost in its own extremes. It is 
a system characterized by external appearance and con- 
stituted by the abstract side of the reality of the idea. In 
it the idea is found only as relative totality, and inner 
necessity. 

Addition. — The direct unity of the family is here broken 
up into a multiplicity, and the ethical is lost in its 
extremes. Reality is at this stage externality, involving 
the dissolution of the conception, the liberation and inde- 
pendence of its realized elements. Although in the civic 
community particular and universal fall apart, they are 
none the less mutually connected and conditioned. WhUe 
the one seems to be just the opposite of the other, and is 
supposed to be able to exist only by keeping the other 
at arm's length, each nevertheless has the other as a condi- 
tion. Thus most people, for example, regard the payment 
of taxes as injuring their particularity, and as opposing and 
crippling their plans. True as this may seem to be, the 
particular purpose cannot be carried out apart from the 
universal. A land, in which no taxes were paid, would 
not be allowed to distinguish itself for the strength of its 
individuals. In the same way it might appear as if it 
would be better for the universal to draw to itself the 
resources of the individual, and become a society such 
as was delineated by Plato in his " Eepublic." But this, 
too, is only a mere appearance, since both elements exist 
only through and for each other, and are wrapped up 
in each other. When I promote my end, I promote 
the universal, and the universal in turn promotes my 
end. 



188 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

185. When independent particularity gives free reia 
to the satisfaction of want, caprice, and subjective liting, 
it destroys in its extravagance both itself and its substantive 
conception. On the other hand the satisfaction -whether of 
necessary or of contingent want is contingent, since it con- 
tains no inherent limit, and is wholly dependent on ex- 
ternal chance, caprice, and the power of the universal. In 
these conflicts and complexities the civic community 
affords a spectacle of excess, misery, and physical and 
social corruption. 

Note. — The independent development of particularity 
(compare § 124, note), is the element which was revealed 
in the ancient states as an inflow of immorality causing 
ultimately their decay. These states, founded as they 
were partly upon a patriarchal and religious principle, 
partly upon a spiritual though simple ethical life, and 
originating in general in native intuitions, could not with- 
stand the disunion and infinite reflection involved in self- 
consciousness. Hence, so soon as reflection arose, the 
state succumbed, first in sentiment and then in fact. Its 
as yet simple principle lacked the truly infinite power 
implied in a unity, which permits the opposition to reason 
to explode with all its force. In this way it would rise 
superior to the opposition, preserve itself in it, and take it 
into itself. 

Plato in his " Eepublic " represents the substantive 
ethical life in its ideal beauty and truth. But with the 
principle of independent particularity, which broke in upon 
Q-reek ethical life at his time, he could do nothing except 
to oppose to it his " Republic," which is simply substantive. 
Hence he excluded even the earliest form of subjectivity, as 
it exists in private property (§ 46, note) and the family, and 
also in its more expanded form as private liberty and 
choice of profession. It is this defect, which prevents the 
large and substantive truth of the " Eepublic " from being 
understood, and gives rise to the generally accepted view 



THE CIVIC COMMUXIXr. 189 

that it is a mere dream of abstract thought, or what we are 
used to calling an ideal. In the merely substantive form 
of the actual spirit, as it appears in Plato, the principle of 
self-dependent and in itself infinite personality of the indi- 
vidual, the principle of subjective freedom does not receive 
its due. This principle on its inner side issues in the 
Christian religion, and on its outer side in the Eoman 
world, where it was combined with abstract universality. 
It is historically later than the Greek world. So, too, the 
philosophic reflection, which fathoms the depth of this 
principle, is later than the substantive idea found in Greek 
thought. 

Addition. — Particularity, taken abstractly, is measureless 
in its excess, and the forms of excess are likewise measure- 
less. A man's appetites, which are not a closed circle like 
the instinct of the animal, are widened by picture-thought 
and reflection. He may carry appetite even to the spurious 
infinite. But on the other side privation and want are 
also measureless. The confusion, due to the collision of 
appetite and privation, can only be set to rights by the 
state. If the Platonic state excludes particularity, no hope 
can be held out to it, as it contradicts the infinite right of 
the idea to allow to particularity its freedom. In the 
Christian religion, the right of subjects and also the 
existence, which is self -referring and self-dependent, have 
received a marked expansion. And at the same time the 
whole is sufficiently strong to establish harmony between 
particularity and the ethical unity. 

186. But the principle of particularity develops of its 
own accord into a totality, and thus goes over into uni- 
versality. In this universality it has its truth and its 
right to positive realization. Since at the standpoint of 
dualism, which we now occupy (§ 184), the principles of 
particularity and tmiversality are independent, their unity 
is not an ethical identity. It does not exist as freedom, 
but as a necessity. That is to say the particular has to 



190 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

raise itself to the form of universality, and in it it has to 
seek and find its subsistence. 

187. Individuals in the civic community are private 
persons, who pursue their own interests. As these interests 
are occasioned hy the universal, which appears as a means, 
they can be obtained only in so far as individuals in their 
desire, will, and conduct, conform to the universal, and 
become a link in the chain of the whole. The interest of 
the idea as such does not, it is true, lie in the consciousness 
of the citizens ; yet it is not wholly wanting. It is found 
in the process, by means of which the individual, through 
necessity of nature and the caprice of his wants, seeks to 
raise his individual natural existence into formal freedom 
and the formal universality of knowing and willing. Thus, 
without departing from its particular nature, the indi- 
vidual's character is enlarged. 

Note. — The view that civilization is an external and 
degenerate form of life is allied to the idea that the natural 
condition of uncivilized peoples is one of unsophisticated 
innocence. So also the view that civilization is a mere 
means for the satisfaction of one's needs, and for the 
enjoyment and comfort of one's particular life, takes for 
granted that these selfish ends are absolute. Both theories 
manifest ignorance of the nature of spirit and the end of 
reason. Spirit is real only when by its own motion it 
divides itself, gives itself limit and finitude in the natural 
needs and the region of external necessity, and then, by 
moulding and shaping itself in them, overcomes them, and 
secures for itself an objective embodiment. The rational 
end, therefore, is neither the simplicity of nature nor the 
enjoyments resulting from civilization through the develop- 
ment of particularity. It rather works away from the 
condition of simple nature, in which there is either no self 
or a crude state of consciousness and will, and transcends 
the naive individuality, in which spirit is submerged. Its 
externality thus in the first instance receives the rationalitv, 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 191 

of which it is capable, namely, the form of Tiniversality 
characteristic of the understandiag. Only in this way is 
spirit at home and with itself in this externality as such. 
Hence in it the freedom of spirit is realized. Spirit, 
becoming actualized in an element, which of itself was 
foreign to its free character, has to do only with what is 
produced by itself and bears its own impress. — In this way 
the form of universality comes into independent existence 
in thought, a form which is the only worthy element for 
the existence of the idea. 

Culture or education is, as we may thus conclude, in 
its ultimate sense a liberation, and that of a high kind. 
Its task is to make possible the infinitely subjective sub- 
stantiality of the ethical life. In the process we pass 
upwards from the direct and natural existence to what is 
spiritual and has the form of the universal. — In the indi- 
vidual agent this liberation involves a struggle against 
mere subjectivity, immediate desire, subjective vanity, and 
capricious liking. The hardness of the task is in part the 
cause of the disfavour under which it falls. None the less 
is it through the labour of education that the subjective 
will itself wins possession of the objectivity, in which alone 
it is able and worthy to be the embodiment of the idea. — 
At the same time the form of universality, into which 
particularity has moulded itself and worked itself up, gives 
rise to that general principle of the understanding, in 
accordance with which the particular passes upward into 
the true, iudependent existence of the individual. And 
since the particular gives to the universal its adequate 
content and unconditioned seK-direction, it even in the 
ethical sphere is infinitely iudependent and free subjectivity. 
Education is thus proved to be an inherent element of the 
absolute, and is shown to have infinite value. 

Addition. — ^We call those men educated or cultured, who 
can .perform all that others do without exhibiting any 
oddities of behaviour. Uneducated men thrust their 



192 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

eccentricities upon your notice, and do not act according 
to the universal qualities of the object. It easily happens 
that the uneducated man wounds the feelings of others, 
since he lets himself go, and does not trouble himself about 
their sensibilities. Not that he desires to injure them at 
all, but his conduct is not in unison with his will. Educa- 
tion refines particularity, and enables it to conduct itself 
in harmony with the nature of the object. True originality, 
which creates its object, desires true culture, while untrue 
originality adopts insipidities, which are characteristic of a 
lack of culture. 

188. The civic community contains three elements : 

A. The recasting of want, and the satisfaction of the 
individual through his work, through the work of all 
others, and through the satisfaction of their wants. This 
is a system of wants. 

B. Actualization of the general freedom required for 
this, i.e., the protection of property by the administration 
of justice. 

C. Provision against possible mischances, and care for 
the particular interest as a common interest, by means of 
police and the corporation. 

A. The System of Wants. 

189. The particularity, which is in the first instance 
opposed to the universal will (§ 60), is subjective want. 
It gets objectivity, i.e., is satisfied (a), through external 
objects, which are at this stage the property of others, and 
the product of their needs and wills, and (/3) through 
active labour, as connecting link between subjective and 
objective. Labour has as its aim to satisfy subjective 
particularity. Yet by the introduction of the needs and 
free choice of others universality is realized. Hence 
rationality comes as an appearance into the sphere of the 
finite. This partial presence of rationality is the under- 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 193 

standing, to which is assigned the function of reconciling 
the opposing elements of the finite sphere. 

Note. — It is the task of political science, which originates 
at this point, to detect the laws governing the movement of 
the masses in the intricacy of their qualitative and quanti- 
tative relations. This science has sprung from the soil of 
modern times. Its development reveals the interesting 
process by which thought (see Smith, Say, Eicardo) 
examines the infinite multitude of particulars lying before 
it, and exposes their simple, active, regulating principles. 
These principles belong to the understanding. As on the 
one side the principle of reconciliation involves a recogni- 
tion of the external presence or appearance in the sphere of 
want of the reason which is active in the object ; so, on the 
exact contrary, is this also the sphere in which the under- 
standing with its subjective aims and moral opinions lets 
loose its discontent and moral vexation. 

Addition. — It depends altogether on accident how such 
universal wants, as those of food, drink, and clothing, are 
to be satisfied. The soil is more fertile in one place than 
another ; years differ in their yield ; one man is diligent, 
while another is lazy. But this swann of arbitrary things 
begets universal features, and what appears to be pure ab- 
straction and absence of thought becomes bound by a 
necessity, which enters of itself. To discover the element 
of necessity is the object of political science, a science which 
does honour to thought, because it finds laws in a mass of 
accidents. Interesting is it to witness the action and re- 
action of the different relations, how the special circles 
group themselves, influence others, and in turn receive 
from them help or hindrance. So remarkable is this inter- 
pretation of facts in a sphere, where everything seems to be 
postponed to the free will of the individual, that it almost 
passes belief. It resembles the planets, which though to 
the eye always complex and irregular in their movements, 
are yet governed by ascertained laws. 

o 



194 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

(a) Want and its Satisfaction. 

190. The animal has a limited range of ways and means 
for satisfying his limited wants. Man in his dependence 
proves his universality and his ability to become indepen- 
dent, firstly, by multiplying his wants and means, and, 
secondly, by dissecting the concrete want into parts. The 
parts then become other wants, and through being special- 
ized are more abstract than the first. 

Note. — The object is in right a person, in morals a sub- 
ject, in the family a member, in the city generally a 
burgher (bourgeois) ; and here, at the standpoint of want 
(§ 123, note), he is the concrete product of picture-thought 
which we call man. Here, and properly only here, is it 
that we first speak of man in this sense. 

Addition. — The animal is particular in its being, having 
instinct, and a strictly limited means of satisfaction. Some 
insects are confined to a certain kind of plant ; other 
animals have a wider circle and can inhabit different 
climates, but stiU their range is limited in contrast with 
that of man. Man's need of shelter and clothings his 
having to destroy the natural form of food, and adapt it 
by cooking to his changed taste, give him less aplomb than 
the animal. Indeed, as spirit, he ought to have less. The 
understanding, with its grasp of differences, brings multi- 
plicity into wants: and, when taste and utility become 
criteria of judgment, they change even the wants them- 
selves. It is in the end not the appetite, but the opinion 
which has to be satisfied. It is the province of education 
or culture to dissect the concrete need into its elements. 
When wants are multiplied, the mere appetites are re- 
stricted ; for, when man uses many things, the propulsion 
to any one of them is not so strong, a sign that the force 
of physical need in general is diminished. 

191. The means for satisfying the specialized wants are 
similarly divided and increased. These means become in 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 195 

their turn relative ends and abstract wants. Hence the 
multiplication expands into an infinite series of distinctions 
with regard to these phases, and of judgments concerning 
the suitability of the means to their ends. This is re- 
finement. 

Addition. — What the English call " comfortable " is 
something endless and inexhaustible. Every condition of 
comfort reveals in turn its discomfort, and these discoveries 
go on for ever. Hence the new want is not so much a want 
of those who have it directly, but is created by those who 
hope to mate profit from it. 

192. The satisfaction of want and the attainment of means 
thereto become a realized possibility for others, through 
whose wants and labour satisfaction is in turn conditioned. 
The abstraction, which becomes a quality of wants and 
means (§ 191), helps to determine the mutual relation of 
individuals. This general recognition of others is the 
element which makes the isolated abstract wants and 
means concrete and social. 

Addition. — Through the compulsion I am under to 
fashion myself according to others arises the form of 
universality. I acquire from others the means of satisfac- 
tion, and must accordingly fall in with their opinions. At 
the same time I am compelled to produce the means for 
the satisfaction of the wants of others. One plays into the 
other ; and the two are interdependent. Everything parti- 
cular becomes in this way social. In the matter of dress, 
time of eating, etc., we follow convention, because it is not 
worth while exercising our insight and judgment. He is 
the most prudent who does as others do. 

193. The social element is a special instrument both of 
the simple acquisition of the means, and also of the re- 
duplication of the ways by which want is satisfied. Further, 
it contains directly the claim of equality with others. 
Both the desire for equality, including the imitation of 
others, and also the desire of each person to be unique, 



196 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

become real sources of the nmltiplication and extension of 
wants. 

194. Social want joins the direct or natural want with 
the spiritual want due to picture-thinking ; but the spiritual 
or universal factor outweighs the other. The social element 
brings a liberation, by which the stringent necessity of 
nature is turned aside, and man is determined by his own 
universal opinion. He makes his own necessity. He has 
arbitrary choice, being in contact with a contingency which 
is not external but internal. 

Note. — It has been held that man as to want is free in a 
so-called state of nature, in which he has only the so-called 
simple wants of nature, reqliiring for their satisfaction 
merely the means furnished directly and at random by 
nature. In this view no account is taken of the freedom 
which lies in work, of which more hereafter. Such a view 
is not true, because in natural want and its direct satisfac- 
tion the spiritual is submerged by mere nature. Hence, a 
state of nature is a state of savagery and slavery. Freedom 
is nowhere to be found except in the return of spirit and 
thought to itself, a process by which it distinguishes itself 
from the natural and turns back upon it. 

195. This liberation is formal, since the particular side 
of the end remains the fundamental content. The ten- 
dency of the social condition indefinitely to increase and 
specialize wants, means, and enjoyments, and to distinguish 
natural from unrefined wants, has no limits. Hence arises 
luxury, in which the augmentation of dependence and dis- 
tress is in its nature infinite. It operates upon an infinitely 
unyielding material, namely, an external means, which has 
the special quality of being the possession of the free will. 
Hence it meets with the most obdurate resistance. 

Addition. — Diogenes in his completely cynical character 
is properly only a product of Athenian social life. That 
which gave birth to him was the public opinion, against 
which Ms behaviour was directed. His way of life 



THE Cn"IC COMMUNITY. 197 

was therefore not independent, but occasioned by his social 
surroundings. It was itself an ungainly product of luxury. 
Wherever luxury is extreme, there also prevail distress 
and depravity, and cynicism is produced in opposition to 
over-refinement. 

(6) Labour. 

196. The instrument for preparing and acquiring spe- 
cialized means adequate to specialized wants is labour. By 
labour the material, directly handed over by nature for 
these numerous ends, is specialized in a variety of ways. 
This fashioning of the material gives to the means value 
and purpose, so that in consumption it is chiefly human 
products and human effort that are used up. 

Addition. — The direct material, which requires no work- 
ing up, is small. Even air must be acquired, since it has 
to be made warm. Perhaps water is the only thing which 
man can use, simply as it is. Human sweat and toil win 
for men the means for satisfying their wants. 

197. Training on its theoretical side is developed by the 
great variety of objects and interests, and consists not only 
in numberless picture-thoughts and items of knowledge, 
but also in mobility and quickness of imagination, a mental 
alertness in passing from one image, or idea, to another, 
and in the apprehension of intricate general relations. This 
is the training of the understanding, with which goes the 
development of language. Practical training, or training 
by labour, consists in habituation to an employment, which 
satisfies a self-caused want. Its action is limited partly by 
the nature of the material, but chiefly by the caprice of 
others. It involves an habitual use of skill acquired by 
practice and implying objective conditions. 

Addition. — The barbarian is lazy, and is distioguished 
from tiie civilized man by his brooding stupidity. Practical 
training consists in habitual employment and the need of 
of it. The unskilled workman always makes something 



198 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

different from what he intended, because he is not master 
of his own hands. A workman is skilled, who produces 
what he intended, whose subjective action readily accords 
with his purpose. 

198. The universal and objective in work is to be found 
in the abstraction which, giving rise to the specialization 
of means and wants, causes the specialization also of pro- 
duction. This is the division of labour. By it the labour 
of the individual becomes more simple, his skill in his 
abstract work greater, and the amount he produces larger. 
The result of the abstraction of skill and means is that 
men's interdependence aadT mutual relation is completed. It 
becomes a thorough necessity. Moreover, the abstraction 
of production causes work to be continually more me- 
chanical, until it is at last possible for man to step out and 
let the machine take his place. 

(c) Wealth. 

199. Through the dependence and co-operation involved 
in labour, subjective self-seeking is converted into a con- 
tribution towards the satisfaction of the wants of all others. 
The universal so penetrates the particular by its dialectic 
movement, that the individual, while acquiring, producing, 
and enjoying for himself, at the same time produces and 
acquires for the enjoyment of others. This is a necessity, 
and in this necessity arising out of mutual dependence is 
contained the fact of a general and permanent wealth 
(§ 170). In it each person may share by means of his 
education and skill. Each, too, is by it assured of subsist- 
ence, while the results of his labour preserve and increase 
the general wealth. 

200. But particular wealth, or the possibility of sharing 
in the general wealth, is based partly on skill, partly on 
something which is directly the individual's own, nams^^ 
capital. Skill in its turn depends on capital, and on imany 
accidental circumstances. These also in their maixnifold 



\ 



\ 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 199 

variety make more pronounced the differences in the de- 
velopment of natural endowments, physical and mental, 
which were unequal to begin with. These differences are 
conspicuous everywhere in the sphere of particularity. 
They, along with other elements of chance and accident, 
necessarily produce inequalities of wealth and skill. 

Note. — ^Nature is the element of iaequality. Tet the ob- 
jective right of particularity of spirit, contained in the idea 
itseK, does not in the civic community supersede the in- 
equality set up by nature. On the contrary, it produces 
inequality out of spirit and exalts it to an inequahty of 
talents, wealth, and intellectual and moral education. To 
oppose to the objective right a demand for equality is a 
move of the empty understanding, which takes its own 
abstraction and mandate to be real and reasonable. In 
the sphere of particularity the universal images itself, 
forming with the particular merely a relative identity. The 
particular thus retains both the natural and the capricious 
particularity, and also a remnant of the state of nature. It 
is the reason immanent in the system of human wants and 
their activities, which fashions this system into an organic 
whole, of which the differences are members. (See next §.) 

201. The infinitely varied means and their infinitely 
interlacing play of mutual production and exchange are 
gathered together by virtue of the universality inherent in 
their content, and become divided into general masses. 
The whole is thus formed into particular systems of wants, 
means, and labour, ways and methods of satisfaction, and 
theoretical and practical training. Amongst these systems 
the individuals are apportioned, and compose a cluster of 
classes or estates. 

Addition. — The manner of sharing in the general wealth 
is left to each particular individual, but the general differ- 
ences, found in the division of the civic community, are 
essential. The family is the first basis of the state, and 
classes or estates are the second. This second is of con- 



200 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

sequence because private persons, through self-seeking, are 
compelled to turn themselves out towards others. This is 
the linkhy which self-seeking is joined to the universal or 
the state, whose care it must be to keep the connection 
strong and steadfast. 

202. Classes are, in terms of the conception, (a) the sub- 
stantial or direct, (6) the reflecting or formal, and (c) the 
universal. 

203. (a) The wealth of the substantial class is contained 
in natural products . obtained by cultivation. The soil is 
capable of being an exclusive, private possession, and 
demands not merely the taking from it what it bears 
naturally, but an objective working up. Since the returns 
of labour depend on the seasons, and harvests are influenced 
by variable weather and other natural conditions, provision 
for wants must take account of the future. However, 
owing to the natural conditions, this way of life involves 
but little reflection, and is but slightly modified by sub- 
jective volition. It therefore embodies in substantive feel- 
ing an ethical life resting directly upon trust and the 
family relation. 

Note. — States are rightly said to come into existence 
with the introduction of agriculture along with the intro- 
duction of marriage. The principle of agriculture involves 
the cultivation of the soil, and therefore, also, private 
ownership of property (compare § 170, note). It takes the 
life of nomadic tribes back to the repose of private right 
and to the secure satisfaction of wants. Joined also to 
the agricultural life are the limitation of sexual love to 
marriage, the extension of this bond to an enduring uni- 
versal relation, the extension of want to family maintenance 
and of possession to family wealth. Safety, protection by 
fortification, and uninterrupted satisfaction of wants are 
all commendable prima facie characteristics of these two 
fundamental ethical institutions. They are forms of uni- 
versality, or ways by which reason or the absolute end seeks 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 201 

to realize itself. In this connection nothing can be more 
interesting than the ingenious and learned explanations 
which my much honoured friend, Mr. Creuzer, has given in 
the fourth volume of his " Mythologie und Symbolik " with 
regard to the agrarian festivals, images, and sanctuaries of 
the ancients. In these customs and rites the introduction 
of agriculture and kindred institutions was known and 
revered as a divine act. 

From the side of private-right, especially the adminis- 
tration of justice, and from the side of instruction, culture, 
and also of religion, the substantive character of this class 
undergoes modifications. These modifications, however, 
are due to the development of reflection, and affect not the 
substantive content but the form. — They occur also in the 
other classes. 

Addition. — In our time agriculture, losing some of its 
naturalness, is managed in a reflective way like a factory, 
and acquires the character of the second class. Tet it will 
always retain much of the substantive feeling, which 
pervades the patriarchal life. In it man accepts what is 
given with a simple mind, thanks God for it, and lives in 
the assurance that the goodness of God will continue. 
What he gets suflSices him, and he uses it because it comes 
again. This is the simple disposition unaffected by the 
desire for wealth. It may be described as the type of the 
old nobility, who consumed simply what was there. In 
this class nature does the chief share of the work, and 
man's diligence is in comparison secondary. In the second 
class the understanding is the essential factor, and the 
natural products are regarded simply as furnishing 
material. 

204. (6) The business of the industrial class is to alter 
the form of the products of nature. This class is indebted 
for its subsistence to its labour, to reflection, and also to 
the interposition of the wants and labours of others. For 
that which it produces and enjoys it has to thank mainly 



202 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

its own activity. — Its field of action is again divided into 
three parts : — (i.) Labour for individual wants of the 
more concrete kind, and at the request of particular 
persons. This is manual labour, or the work: of single 
artisans, (ii.) The more abstract collective mass of labour, 
which is also for particular needs but due to a general 
demand. This is manufacture, (iii.) Business of exchange, 
by which one special means of subsistence is given for 
others, chiefly through money, the general medium of 
exchange, in which is realized the abstract value cif all 
merchandise. This is commerce. 

Addition. — The individual in the industrial class is re- 
ferred to himself, and this self-reference is intimately con- 
nected with the demand for a legal status. Consequently 
the sense for freedom and order has mainly arisen in 
cities. The first class needs to think little about itself. 
What it acquires is the gift of a stranger, nature. With 
it the feeling of dependence is primary. With this feeling 
is easily associated a willingness to submit to whatever 
occurs. The first class is therefore more inclined to sub- 
jection, the second to freedom. 

206 (c) The business of the universal class is with the 
universal interests of society. Hence it must be relieved 
of the direct task of providing for itself. It must possess 
private means, or receive an allowance from the state, 
which claims his activity. His private interest may thus 
find satisfaction in his labour for the universal. 

206. A class is a particularity which has become objec- 
tive, and the foregoing are the general divisions in accor- 
dance with the conception. Yet capacity, birth, and other 
circumstances have their influence in determining to what 
class an individual shall belong. But the final and 
essential factor in the case is subjective opinion and private 
freedom of choice. In this sphere free choice has its right, 
honour, and dignity. If a thing happens in this sphere 
according to internal necessity, it is ipso facto occasioned 



THE CIVIC COMML'NITT. 203 

by free arbitrary choice, and for the subjective conscious- 
ness bears the stamp of its will. 

Note. — In reference to the principle of particularity or 
subjective caprice may be clearly discerned the difference 
betvreen the political life of the East and that of the West, 
between the ancient and the modern world. In the ancient 
world the division of the whole into classes was produced 
objectively of itself, because it is implicitly rational. But 
the principle of subjectivity does not receive its due, since 
the separation of individuals into classes is either a func- 
tion of the rulers, as in Plato's " Republic " (Eep. iii. 120), 
or else it rests upon mere birth, as in the caste system of 
India. Now subjective particularity is an essential element 
of communal life, and, when it is not taken up into the 
organization of the whole and reconciled in the whole, it 
must prove a hostile force and pave the way for the ruin 
of the social order (see § 185, note). It either overturns 
society, as was the case in the Greet states and the 
Eoman republic, or, when the existing order is able to 
preserve itself by force or by religious authority, it then 
manifests itseK as internal corruption and complete degra- 
dation. This happened in a measure amongst the Lace- 
demonians, and now is completely the case with the in- 
habitants of India. 

But when subjective particularity is welcomed by ob- 
jective order, and given its rights and place, it becomes 
the animating principle of the civic community, stimulates 
thought and promotes merit and honour. The recognition 
of the claim that whatever in the civic community and the 
state is rationally necessary should occur through subjec- 
tive free choice is a fuller definition of the popular idea of 
freedom (§ 121). 

207. The particularity of the individual becomes de- 
finitely and actually realized, only by his limiting himself 
exclusively to one of the particular spheres of want. In 
this system the ethical sense is that of rectitude or class- 



204 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

honour. It involves the decision of the individual by 
means of his own native activity, diligence, and skill to 
make himself a member of one of these classes, preserve 
himself in it, and provide for himself only through the 
instrumentality of the universal. He should acknowledge 
this position, and also claim to have it recognized by 
others. — Morality has its peculiar place in this sphere, 
where the ruling factor is reflection upon one's action, or 
consideration of the end involved in particular wants and 
in well-being. Here also the element of chance in satisfy- 
ing these ends makes random and individual assistance a 
duty. 

Note. — ^Touth is specially apt to struggle against the 
proposal that it should decide upon a particular vocation, 
on the ground that any decision is a limitation of its 
universal scope and a mere external necessity. This aloof- 
ness is a product of the abstract thinking, which clings to 
the universal and unreal. It fails to recognize that the 
conception must experience a division into conception and 
its reality, if it is to have a definite and particular realiza- 
tion (§ 7), and to win for itself reality and ethical 
objectivity. 

Addition. — By the sentence that a man must be something 
we understand that he must belong to a definite class ; for 
this something signifies a substantive reality. A human 
being without a vocation is a mere private person, who 
has no place in any real universal. Still, the individual in 
his exclusiveness may regard himself as the universal, and 
may fancy that when he takes a trade or profession, he is 
sinking to a lower plane. That is the false notion that a 
thing, when it attains the realization which properly 
belongs to it, limits itself and gives up its independence. 

208. The principle of the system of wants, namely the 
particularity of knowing and willing, contains absolute 
universality, or the universality of freedom, only in the 
abstract form of right of property. But here right is no 



THE CIVIC COMIIUNITY. 205 

longer merely implicit, but is found in valid reality as 
protection of property through the administration of 
justice. 

B. Administration of Justice. 

209. The relative principle of the mutual exchange of 
wants and labour for their satisfaction has in the first 
instance its return into itself in the infinite personality 
generally, i.e., in abstract right. Yet it is the very sphere 
of the relative which in the form of education gives em- 
bodiment to right, by fixing it as something universally 
acknowledged, known, and willed. The relative also, through 
the interposition of knowledge and will, supplies right with 
validity and objective actuality. 

Note. — It is the essence of education and of thought, 
which is the consciousness of the individual in universal 
form, that the I should be apprehended asa universal person, 
in whom all are identical. Man must be accounted a uni- 
versal being, not because he is a Jew, Catholic, Protestant, 
German, or Italian, but because he is a man. This think- 
ing or reflective consciousness, is of infinite importance. 
It is defective only when " it plumes itseK upon being 
cosmopolitan, in opposition to the concrete life of the 
citizen. 

Addition. — From one point of view it is by means of the 
system of particularity that right becomes externally 
necessary as protection of individuals. Although right 
proceeds out of the conception, it enters into being only 
because it is serviceable for wants. To have the thought 
of right, one must be educated to the stage of thinking, 
and not linger in the region of the merely sensible. We 
must adapt the form of universaKty to the objects, and 
direct the will according to a universal principle. Only after 
man has found out for himself many wants, the acquisition 
'of which is an inseparable element of his satisfaction, is he 
able to frame laws. 



206 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

210. The objective actuality of right consists partly in 
existing for consciousness, or more generally in its being 
known, and partly in having, and being generally recog- 
nized as having, the validity and force of a reality. 

(a) Right as Law. 

211. What is in essence right becomes in its objective 
concrete existence constituted,' that is, made definite for 
consciousness through thought. It, having right and 
validity, is so recognized, and becomes law.' Eight in this 
characterization of it is positive right in general. 

Note. — To constitute something as universal, i.e., to bring 
it as iiniversal to consciousness, is to think (§ 13, note, and 
§ 21, note). The content in thus being brought back to 
its simplest form is given its final moidd. Only when 
what is right becomes law does it receive not merely the 
form of universality, but its own truest character. It is to 
select only one phase of law, if we consider it merely as a 
valid rule of conduct imposed upon all. Preceding this 
feature is the internal and essential element of law, namely, 
the recognition of the content in its definite universality. 
Even the rights of custom exist as thought and are known. 
Animals have law in the form of instinct ; man alone has 
law in the form of custom. The difference between custom 
and law consists merely in this, that customs are known in 
a subjective and accidental way, and hence are in their 
actual form more indefinite than laws. In custom, the 
universality of thought is more obscured, and the know- 
ledge of right is a partial and accidental possession of a 
few. The idea that customs rather than laws should pass 
over into life is a deception, because the valid laws of a 
nation, when written and collected, do not cease to be 
customs. People speak nowadays, indeed, most of all of 
life and of things passing over into life, when they are 

' Gesetzt. ' Gesetz. 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 207 

conversant ■with nothing but the deadest material and the 
deadest thoughts. When customs come to be collected 
and grouped, as takes place with every people which reaches 
a certain grade of civilization, there is formed a statute- 
book. It is somewhat difEerent from a statute-book properly 
so-called. A collection is formless, indefinite, and frag- 
mentary, whereas a real statute-book apprehends and ex- 
presses in terms of thought the principles of law in their 
universality. England's land-law or common law is, as is 
well known, made up both of statutes, having the forms of 
laws, and of so-called unwritten laws. However, this un- 
written law is written with a vengeance, and a knowledge 
of it is possible only by reading the inany quartos which it 
fills. The monstrous confusion which prevails in that 
country, both in the administration of justice and in the 
subject-matter of the law, is graphically portrayed by 
those who are acquainted with the facts. They specially 
notice that, since the unwritten law is contained in the 
decisions of law-courts and judges, the judges are con- 
tinually the lawgivers. Tiu^her, the judges are both 
directed and not directed to the authority of their pre- 
decessors. They are so directed, because their predecessors 
are said to have done nothing but interpret the unwritten 
law. They are not so directed, because they are supposed 
to have in themselves the Unwritten law, and hence have a 
right to determine whether previous decisions are in keep- 
ing with it or not. 

To avoid a similar confusion, which would have arisen 
iu the administration of justice at Home, when in later 
times the views of all the celebrated lawyers were made 
authoritative, one of the emperors hit upon an ingenious 
expedient. He passed a law, by which was founded a kind 
of college consisting of the jurisconsults who were longest 
deceased. This body had a president, and came to decisions 
through a majority of votes (Mr. Hugo's " History of 
Eoman Law," § 354). — ^It is the task of a nation, or at 



208 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

least of its jurisconsults, not indeed to make a system of 
laws entirely new in content, but to recognize the existing 
content of laws in its definite universality. They should 
apprehend it in thought, while also mating additions with 
regard to its application to special cases. To refuse to 
a people or its lawyers this right would be a flagrant 
insult. 

Addition. — The sun and the planets have laws, but they 
do not know them. Barbarians are ruled by impulses, 
customs, feelings, but have no consciousness of them. 
When right is established as law and known, all random 
intuitions and opinions, revenge, compassion, and self- 
interest, fall away. Only then does right attain its true 
character and receive its due honour. In being appre- 
hended right is purified from all mixture of chance elements, 
and thus becomes for the first time capable of universal 
application. Of course, in the administration of the laws 
collisions will necessarily occur, which must be settled by 
the understanding of the judge ; otherwise, the execution of 
the law would be merely mechanical. But to do away 
with collisions by giving full scope to the judge's well- 
meant opinions would be the poorest solution of the diffi- 
culty. Collisions, in f&,ct, belong to the nature of thought, 
the thinking consciousness and its dialectic, while the 
mere decision of a judge is arbitrary. 

In favour of rights of custom it is usually adduced that 
they are living ; but life, consisting in simple identity with 
the subject, does not constitute the essence of the matter. 
Eight must be known in thought. It must be a system in 
itself, and only as a system can' it be valid for civilized 
peoples. Very recently the vocation of making laws has 
been abolished. This is not only an affront, but also 
implies the absurdity that to no individual has been given 
the capacity to systematize the infinite multitude of existing- 
laws, and expose the universal contained in them, when 
this ta sk is precisely the most pressing need of the day 



THE ClYIC COMMUNITY. 209 

Similarly, it has been held that a digest of decisions, such 
as the Corpus juris, is preferable to a statute-book giving a 
detailed exhibition of the universal. A certain particularity 
and reminiscence of the historical is supposed to be con- 
tained in the decisions, and in a statute-book it is thought 
that these advantages would be wanting. But the mis- 
chievous nature of a mere collection is clearly manifest in 
the practice of the English law. 

212. Through this identity of the abstract or implicit 
with what is actually constituted,' only that right is bind- 
ing which has become law.'' But since to constitute a thing 
is to give it outer reaUty, there may creep into the process a 
contingency due to self-will and other elements of particu- 
larity. Hence, the actual law may be different from what 
is in itself right. 

Note. — Hence, in positive right that which is lawfully 
established is the source of the knowledge of what is right, 
or, more accurately, is the final resort in Utigation. Positive 
jurisprudence is to that extent an historical science based 
on authority. Additions are a matter of the understand- 
ing, and concern outward arrangements, combinations, 
results, further applications, and the like. But when the 
understanding meddles with the essential substance of the 
matter, it may serve up singular- theories, of which those 
regarding criminal law are an illustration. — It is not only 
the right but the necessary duty of positive science, it 
is true, to deduce out of its positive data the historic pro- 
gress and also applications and ramifications. Tet it can- 
not be wondered at if it be regarded as a fair cross-question 
whether a specific finding is after aU wholly in accordance 
with reason (compare on this point § 3 note). 

213. Eight is realized in the first instance in the form 
of constituted law. But it must in its content have further 
realization. It must apply to the matter of the relations 

'■ Gesetzt. ' Gesetz. 



210 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

bearing on property and contract, complicated and rami- 
fied as these relations in the civic community become. It 
must apply also to the ethical relations of feeling, love, and 
confidence, but only in so far as they contain the phase of 
abstract right (§ 159). The moral commands, touching 
the will in its most private subjectivity and particularity, 
cannot be the object of positive legislation. But additional 
material for legislation is furnished by the rights and 
duties vphich flow from the administration of justice itself 
and from the state. 

Addition. — Of the higher relations of marriage, love, 
religion, and the state, only those aspects can be objects of 
legislation, which are by their nature capable of having an 
external embodiment. Here the laws of different nations 
are very different. Amongst the Chinese, for example, it 
is a law of the state that the husband shall love his first 
wife more than any of the others. If he is convicted of 
the contrary, he is flogged. So, too, in the older laws may 
be found many prescripts concerning integrity and honour, 
things that are wholly internal and do not fall within the 
province of legislation. But as to the oath, where the 
matter is laid upon the conscience, integrity and honour 
must be viewed as in it outwardly substantive. 

214. Besides applying to the particular as a whole, the 
constituted law applies to the special case. Here it enters 
the. quantitative region left unoccupied by the conception. 
This is, of course, the abstract quantitative, which is found 
in exchange as value. The conception furnishes in this 
region only a general limit, inside of which there is room 
for considerable uncertainty. But fluctuations of opinion 
must be cut short, and a conclusion reached. Hence, in- 
side of this limit a decision has the character of accident 
and caprice. 

Note. — To whittle the universal down not only to the 
particular but to the individual case is the chief function of 
the purely positive in law. It cannot, for example, be de- 



THE CITIC COMMUNITY. 211 

termined by reason, or decided by any phase of the concep- 
tion itself, ■whether forty lashes or thirty-nine, a fine of four 
dollars or three dollars and ninety-nine cents, imprisonment 
for a year or three hundred and sixty-four or three hundred 
and sixty-six days, be the just punishment for a crime. And 
yet a lash, a cent, or a day too much or too little is 
an injustice. 

Iteason itself recognizes that contingency, contradiction, 
and appearance haTe their sphere or right, limited though 
it is, and is not at pains to rectify these contraditions. 
Here the purpose is solely to reach actuality, that is, some- 
how or other within the given limit to get the matter 
settled. This settlement is the office of formal self-certitude 
or abstract subjectivity, which, observing the prescribed 
limit, may bring the matter to issue simply for settlement's 
sake. Or its reasons for its decision are, if it has any, of 
this kind, that it should use round numbers, or that the 
number should be forty less one. 

It is of no real significance that the law does not make 
the final decision demanded by reality, but hands it over to 
the judge, limiting him merely by a maximum and mini- 
mum. The maximum and minimum are themselves round 
numbers, and do not do away with the requirement 
that the judge shall pronounce a finite purely positive 
sentence. On the contrary, this action devolves upon him 
necessarily. 

Addition. — ^Undoubtedly the laws and the administra- 
tion of justice contain in one of their aspects something 
contingent, since the law, though of a universal character, 
must nevertheless be applied to special cases. If we were 
to declare against this element of contingency, we woidd 
pronounce in favour of an abstraction. The exact quantity 
of punishment cannot be found in any factor of the con- 
ception ; and whatever judgment may be made, it is to 
some extent arbitrary. But this contingency is itself 
necessary. If one were to argue from the presence of con- 



212 THJi: PHILO.SOPHT OF RIGHT. 

tingency that a code of laws was imperfect, he would over- 
look the fact that perfection of such a kind is not to 
be attaitted. Law must, hence, be taken as it stands. 

(6) Law as Incorporated. 

215. Since the binding force of law rests upon the right 
of self-consciousness (§ 132 and note), the laws ought to be 
universally made known. 

Note. — To hang up the laws, as did Dionysius the 
Tyrant, so high that no citizen could read them, is a wrong. 
To bury them in a cumbrous apparatus of learned books, 
collections of decisions and opinions of judges, who have 
deviated from the rule, and, to make matters worse, to 
write them in a foreign tongue, so that no one can attain a 
knowledge of them, unless he has made them a special sub- 
ject of study, is the same wrong in another form. — The 
rulers, who have given their people a definite and system- 
atized book of common law, or even an unshapely collection 
such as that of Justinian, should be thanked and lauded as 
public benefactors. Moreover, they have done a decisive act 
of justice. 

Addition. ^Zuri&is, who have a detailed knowledge of the 
law, often look on it as their monopoly. He who is not of 
their profession, they say, shall not be heard. The 
physicists treated Groethe's theory of colours harshly, be- 
cause he was not of their vocation, and was a poet besides. 
But we do not need the services of a shoemaker to find out 
if the shoe fits, nor do we need to belong to a particular 
trade in order to have a knowledge of the objects which are 
of universal interest in it. Eight concerns freedom, the 
worthiest and holiest thing in man, the thing which he 
must know in so far as he is answerable to it. 

216. We are in the presence of an antinomy. Simple 
universal characteristics are needed in a public statute-book 
and yet the finite material by its nature gives rise to end- 
less definition ; the context of any law should be a rounded- 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 213 

off and complete whole, and yet there must continually be 
new legal findings. But the right to a completed statute- 
book remains unimpaired, since this antinomy does not 
occur in the case of fixed general principles, but only with 
their specialization. General principles can be apprehended 
and presented apart from special cases. 

Note. — One chief source of complexity in legislation 
occurs in the case of any historic institution, which in its 
origin contains an injustice. In the course of time it is 
sought to infuse into this institution reason and absolute 
right. An illustration of this procedure was cited above 
from Koman law (§ 180, note). It occurs also in the old 
feudal law and elsewhere. But it is essential to under- 
stand that, owing to the nature of finite material, any 
application to it of principles, absolutely reasonable and in 
themselves universal, must be an infinite process. To 
require of a statute-book that it should be absolutely 
finished, and incapable of any modification — a malady 
which is mainly German — and to base this demand upon 
the reason that, if the book cannot be completed, it cannot 
come up to the so-called imperfect and therefore falls 
short of reality, rest upon a twofold misunderstanding. 
This view implies a misconceptioQ of the nature of such 
finit« objects as private right, whose so-called perfection 
consists simply in a perennial approximation. It implies, 
too, a misconception of the difference between the universal 
of the understanding and that of reason, and also of their 
application to the finite and particular material, which goes 
on to infinity. Leplus grand ennemi du Bieti c'est le Meilleur 
is the expression of the tnaly sound human understandiiig 
in contrast with empty reasonings and reflections. 

Addition. — If completeness means the complete collection 
of every individual thing or instance which belongs to a 
given sphere, no science can be complete. If we say that 
philosophy or any other science is incomplete, it seems like 
saying that we must wait till it is perfected, as the best 



214 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

tiling may yet be lacking. In this way there is no getting 
on at all, neither in the seemingly completed science of 
geometry, in which, nevertheless, new elements are being 
introduced, nor in philosophy, which, though dealing with 
the universal idea, may be continually more and more' 
specialized. The universal law cannot be forever merely 
the ten commandments. Yet it would be absurd to refuse 
to set up the law "Thou shalt not kill" on the ground 
that a statute-book cannot be made complete. Every 
statute-book can, of course, be better. It is patent to the 
most idle reflection that the most excellent, noble, and 
beautiful can be conceived of as still more excellent, noble, 
and beautiful. A large old tree branches more and more 
without becoming a new tree in the process ; it would be 
folly, however, not to plant a new tree for the reason that 
it was destined in time to have new branches. 

217. In the civic society what is intrinsically right 
becomes law. What was formerly the simple and abstract 
realization of my private will becomes, when recognized, a 
tangible factor of the existing general will and conscious- 
ness. Acquisition of property and other such transactions 
must therefore be settled in accordance with the form 
assigned to this realized right. Hence, property now 
depends upon contract, and, in general, upon those for- 
malities, which furnish legal proof of possession. 

Note. — The original or direct titles to property and 
methods of acquisition (§ 54 and fol.) disappear in the 
civic community, or occur in it only as separate accidents 
and limited elements. — Forms are rejected by feeling, 
which holds to the subjective, and by reflection, which 
clings to the abstract side of the necessary formality. On 
the other hand the dead understanding clings to formali- 
ties in opposition to the thing itself, and infinitely increases 
their number. — For the rest it is involved in the whole 
process of education to win oneself free by hard and long 
endeavour from the sensuous and direct form, and attain 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 215 

to the form of thought with its appropriate simple expres- 
sion. It is onlj in the earliest stages of legal science that 
ceremony and formalities are significant. They are then 
esteemed as the thing itself rather than its outer symbol. 
In Eoman law is found a host of details and expressions, 
which formerly belonged to religious ceremonies, and 
should in law have given place to phases of thought and 
their appropriate expression. 

Addition. — In law what is in itself right is constituted. 
In property I possess something which was withoat an 
owner ; this must now be recognized and constituted as 
mine. Hence, with regard to property arise in a community 
legal forms. We place boundary stones as a sign for 
others to take notice of ; we have registers of mortgages 
and lists of properties. In the civic community property 
is generally obtained by contract, a legal process which is 
fixed and definite. Against forms the objection may be 
urged that they exist merely to bring money to the 
authorities. Or they may be held to be objectionable as 
indicating a lack of confidence. It -may be said that the 
maxim "A man is his word " has lost its force. But the 
essential thing about the form is that what is really right 
should be constituted as right. My will is rational; it 
has validity; and this validity is to be recognized by 
others. Here my subjectivity and that of others must fall 
away, and the wiU must attain a certainty, assurance, and 
objectivity, which can be realized only through the form. 

218. In the civic cominunity property and personality 
have a legal recognition and validity. Hence, crime is 
injury done not merely to an infinite subject, but to a 
universal fact, which has firm and sure reality. Here 
occurs, therefore, the view that crime is a menace to society. 
On the one hand the magnitude of the crime is increased, 
but on the other hand the security, felt by society, lessens 
the external importance of the injury. As a result, crime 
is now often punished more lightly. 



216 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

Note. — The fact that, when one member of a community 
suffers, all others suffer with him, alters the nature of 
crime, not indeed in its conception, but in its external 
existence. The injury now concerns the general thought 
and consciousness of the ciTic community, and not merely 
the existence of the person directly injured. In the heroic 
ages, portrayed in the tragedies of the ancients, the 
citizens did not regard themselves as injured by the crimes 
which the members of the royal houses committed against 
one another. — Crime, which in its inner nature is an infinite 
injury, must as a realized fact submit to a qualitative and 
quantitative measure (§ 96). This outward fact is con- 
ditioned by the general idea and consciousness of the validity 
of the laws. Hence, the danger to the civic community is 
one way of measuring the magnitude of a crime, or one of 
its attributes. — The quality or magnitude varies with the 
condition of a community. In the circumstances lies the 
justification of inflicting upon a theft of a few cents or a 
turnip the penalty of death, while it imposes a mild 
punishment upon a theft of a hundred or several hundred 
times the amount. Although the idea of danger to the 
civic community seems to aggravate the crime, it has really 
ameliorated the penalty. A penal code belongs to its time 
and to the condition in which the civic community at that 
time is. 

Addition. — An offence seems to be aggravated, if it is 
perpetrated in a community, and yet in such a case it is 
treated with more leniency. This appears to be self-con- 
tradictory. But although a crime could not be allowed by 
the community to go unpunished, since it would then be 
constituted as right, yet, because a community is sure of 
itself, a crime is always merely a single, isolated act of 
hostility without any foothold. By means of the very 
steadfastness of the community crime becomes a mere sub- 
jective act, which appears to spring not so much out of 
deliberate will as out of natural impulse. Hence, a more 



THE CITIC COMMUNITY. 217 

lenient view is taken of crime, and punishment also is 
ameliorated. If the community is stiU unsettled, an 
example must be made by means of punishment, for 
jjunishment is itself an example against the example of 
crime. But in the sure and firm community the position 
of crime is so unstable, that a lesser measure of punish- 
ment is sufficient to supersede it. Severe punishments are 
not absolutely unjust, but are due to the condition of the 
time. A criminal code cannot apply to all times, and 
crimes are mere seeming existences, vchich draw after them 
a greater or less rejection of themselves. 

(c) The Court of Justice. 

219. Eight, having entered reality in the form of law, 
and having become an actual fact, stands in independent 
opposition to the particular will and opinion of right, and 
has to vindicate itself as a tmiversal. The recognition and 
realization of right in each special case without the sub- 
jective instigation of private interests, is the office of a 
public power, the court of justice. 

Note. — The office of judge and the court of justice may 
have originated historically in the patriarchal relation, in 
force, or in voluntary choice. This is for the conception of 
the object a matter of indifEerence. To regard the ad- 
ministration of justice by princes and rulers merely as a 
courtesy and favour, as does Herr von Haller in his 
" Restoration of Political Science," is to have no inkling of 
the fact that, when vre speak of law and the state, we 
mean that its institutions are reasonable and absolutely 
necessary ; and that, when we consider the reasonable 
basis of the laws, we have nothing to do with the form of 
their origin. The extreme opposite to this view is the 
crude idea that the administration of justice is club-law or 
despotism, which suppressed liberty by violence. But the 
administration of the law is to be looked upon as the 
duty quite as much as the right of the public authority. 



218 THE PHILOSOPHY OF BIGHT. 

Whether to delegate the discharge of this office to some 
power or not is not at the option of any indiTidnal. 

220. Eevenge, or the right against crime (§ 102), is right 
only in itself. It is not right in the form of law, i.e., it is 
not in its actual existence jnst. The place of the injured 
person is now taken by the injured universal, which is 
actualized in a special way in the court of justice. To 
pursue and punish crime is its function, which therefore 
ceases to be a mere subjective retaliation or revenge, and 
is in punishment transformed into a true reconciliation of 
right with itself. In the act of punishment, viewed objec-t 
tively, right is reconciled to itself, and restores itself by 
superseding the crime and realizing its own inherent 
validity. In punishment, viewed subjectively, or from the 
standpoint of the criminal, the law, known by him and 
available for his protection, is atoned for. The execution 
of the law upon him, or the satisfaction of justice, he finds 
to be simply the completed act of his own law. 

221. A member of the civic community has the right to 
bring a cause before the court of justice, and is also in 
duty bound to appear in the court, and accept from it the 
decision of the point in dispute. 

Addition. — Every individual has the right to bring his 
case before the court. But he must know the laws, other- 
wise, the privilege would be of no service to him. But it is 
also a duty for him to appear before the court. Under the 
feudal system the prince or noble defied the court, and 
refused to appear, regarding it as a wrong if the court' 
summoned him before it. This condition of things is con- 
tradictory of the real function of the court. In more 
recent times the prince has in private affairs recognized 
the courts as superior to him, and in free states his cases 
are usually lost. 

222. By the court it is required that a right be proved: 
The legal process gives the contending parties an oppor- 
tunity to substantiate their claim by evidence, and put the 



THE CIVIC COMMUXITY. 219 

judge in possession of a knowledge of the case. The 
necessary steps are themselves rights ; their course must 
be legally fixed ; and they form an essential part of theo- 
retical jurisprudence. 

Addition. — It may stir men to revolt if they have a 
right, which is refused to them on the score that it cannot be 
proved. But the right, which I have, must be at the same 
time constituted. I must be able to present and prove it, 
and only when that, which it really is, is constituted as 
law, is it of any avail to me in a community. 

223. The stages of the legal process may be more and 
more minutely subdivided, and each stage has its right. 
As this subdivision has no inherent Umit, the legal pro- 
cess, which is already of itself a means, may be opposed to 
the end, and become something external. Though this 
extensive formality is meant for the two contending parties 
and belongs to them as their right, it may become an evil 
and an instrument of wrong. Therefore, in order that the 
two parties, and right itself as the substantive basis, may 
be protected against the legal process and its misuse, it is 
by way of law made a duty for them to submit themselves 
to a simple court, the civil court of arbitration, for a 
preUmiiiary trial, before going to the higher court. 

Note. — Equity includes a departure from formal right 
through moral and other regards, and refers directly to 
the content of the suit. A court of equity decides upon 
the particular case, without adhering to the formalities of 
the legal process. It is not confined to the objective evi- 
dence, as is formal law. It decides upon the interest 
peculiar to each particular suit. Its judgm.ent is not 
meant to be applied generally. 

224. As the public promulgation of the laws is one of 
the rights of the subjective consciousness (§ 215), so also 
is the possibility of knowing how in any special case the 
law is carried out. The course of the external proceedings 
should be public, and also the legal principles involved. 



220 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

The order of procedure is of itself a thing of general value. 
Though the special content of the case is of interest only 
to the contending parties, the universal content, involving 
right and a legal decision, is of interest to all. Hence is 
demanded the publicity of the administration of the law. 

Note. — Deliberations by the members of a court amongst 
themselves over the judgment to be given, are only private 
opinions and views, and are not of public import. 

Addition — Honest common sense holds that the pub- 
licity of legal proceedings is right and just. A strong 
reason to the contrary was always the rank of the judiciary. 
They were not to be seen by everybody, and regarded 
themselves as the warders of a law, into which laymen 
ought not to intrude. But law should possess the con- 
fidence of the citizens, and this fact calls for the publicity 
of the sentence. Publicity is a right, because the aim of 
the court is justice, which as a universality belongs to all. 
Moreover, the citizens should be convinced that the right 
sentence has actually been pronounced. 

225. In the application of the law by the judicial 
authorities to special cases are to be distinguished two 
separate aspects. There must be firstly an acquaintance 
with the direct facts of the case, whether a contract has 
taken place, an injurious act done, and who the doer is. 
In criminal law the act must be known also in its inten- 
tion, which contains its. substantive criminal quality 
(§ 119, note). In the second place the act must be brought 
under the law of the restoration of right. This in criminal 
law includes the punishment. Decisions in connection 
with, these two aspects are two different functions. 

Note. — In the constitution of the Eoman law-courts these 
two functions occurred in this way. The Froctor gave his 
decision on the condition that the case was of such and 
such a kind, and then he commanded a certain Judex to 
makes inquiries into its exact nature. The fixing of the 
exact criminal quality of an act, whether, for example, 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. , 221 

it be murder or manslaughter, is in English judicial pro- 
cedure left to the insight or caprice of the accuser, and the 
court is restricted to his view, even if it is seen to be 
wrong. 

226. To conduct the whole inquiry, to arrange the pro- 
cedure of the parties, which is itself aright (§ 222), and to 
pass sentence, are the special functions of the judge (§ 225). 
For him, as the organ of the law, the case must be prepared 
and broughtunder some law. It must be raised out of its 
empirical nature, and made a recognized fact with general 
attributes. 

227. That aspect of the case, which consists in know- 
ing and estimating the direct facts, contains no distinc- 
tively judicial elements. The knowledge is possible to any 
intelligent man. When, in order that an estimate of the 
act may be made, the subjective factor of the insight or in- 
tention of the agent is essential (see Second Part), when 
the evidence concerns no abstract object of reason or the 
understanding, but mere particulars, circumstances, and 
objects of sensible perception and subjective certitude, 
when the case contains no absolutely objective element, 
and the duty of deciding must fall to subjective conviction 
and conscience (animi sententia), and when the evidence 
rests on depositions and statements, the oath, though a 
subjective confirmation, is ultimate. 

Note.— In this question it is a cardinal point to keep 
before our eyes the nature of the available evidence, and to 
distinguish it from knowledge and evidence of other kinds. 
To prove a phase of reason, such as is the conception of 
right itself, that- is, to recognize its necessity, requires 
another method than the proof of a geometrical theorem. 
Moreover, in a theorem the figure is determined by the 
understanding, and is already abstractly made according to 
a law. But in the case of an empirical content, such as a 
fact, the material for knowledge is composed of sense-per- 
ceptions, and attestations based on the subjective certitude 



222 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

of sense. These depositions, testimonies, and circum- 
stances must he put together, and from them a conclusion 
must be drawn. With such material and such a means of 
making it independent and objective there is attained only 
partial proofs. In obedien.ce to a true logic, which never- 
theless is formally illogical, the punishments are conse- 
quently exceptional. This objective truth is quite different 
from the truth of a rational principle or of a proposition, 
whose matter has already been abstractly fixed by the 
understanding. In so far as an empirical truth can be 
recognized in the specific judicial finding of a court, and so 
far as in the finding can be shown to lie an unique quality, 
that is, an exclusive implicit right and necessity, the formal 
judicial court is entitled to pass judgment upon the fact as 
well as upon the point of law. 

Addition. — There is no reason for supposing that the 
judge is the only one to decide upon matters of fact. For 
this not the legal mind alone but any man of ordinary in- 
telligence is competent. Judgment as to matter of fact 
depends upon empirical circumstances, vritnesses of the 
act, and similar data of perception. There may also be 
other facts, by means of which one can infer the nature 
and probability of the act in dispute. Here at most we 
reach an assurance, but not a truth in the sense of some- 
thing eternal. Assurance is subjective conviction or con- 
science, and the question to decide is what form to give 
this certitude at a law court. The demand, usually made 
in German law, for a confession on the part of the 
criminal has this right, that by it satisfaction is given to 
the right of the subjective consciousness. The judge's de- 
cision must agree with the criminal's consciousness ; and, 
not until the culprit has confessed, is the sentence free 
from an element which is foreign to him. But the 
criminal may deny the act, and thus imperil the course of 
justice. Tet it is a harsh measure to treat him according 
to the subjective conviction of the judge, since then he is no 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 223 

longer regarded as free. Hence, it is still required that the 
decree of guilt or innocence should come from the soul of 
the criminal, and this requisite is secured through trial by 
jury. 

■ 228. When the facts of the case have heen decided on, 
and the judge in his sentence brings the case, so qualified, 
under a certain law, the accused's right of self-conscious- 
ness is not violated. In the first iplace, the law is known, 
and is itself the law of the accused. In the second place 
the proceedings, by which the case is brought under a 
certain law, are public. But when a decision is not yet 
reached upon the particular subjective and external con- 
tent of the matter, a knowledge of which comes under the 
first of the two aspects given in § 226, the accused's right 
of self-consciousness is preserved by intrusting the case to 
the subjectivity of jurors. This procedure is based on the 
equality of the jurors with the accused, both as regards 
class and in general. 

Note. — The right of self-consciousness, or the element of 
subjective freedom, can be regarded as the substantive 
point of view in the question of the necessity of a public 
trial, or trial by a jury. To this point of view all that is 
essential and needful in these institutions may be reduced. 
From any other standpoint disputes may arise as to 
whether this or that feature is an advantage or disadvan- 
tage, but such reasonings either are of secondary conse- 
quence and decide nothing, or they are taken from other 
and perhaps higher spheres. It is possible that the law 
might be as well administered by courts of judges, or even 
better by them than by other institutions. But grant the 
possibiHty, or let the possibility become a probability or 
even a certainty, there remains always on the other hand 
the right of self-consciousness, which maintains its claims 
and must be satisfied. Because of the general nature of 
the law, it can happen that the knowledge of right, the 
course of legal proceedings, and the possibility of prose- 



224 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

cuting the law, may become tlie exclusive property of a 
class. This class may use a language which is to those in 
whose interest it was made a foreign tongue. The members 
of a civic community, who have to rely for their subsistence 
upon their own activity, Irnowledge, and will, then become 
strangers not only to what is most private and jjersonal in 
the law, but also to its substantive and rational essence. 
Hence, they faU under a kind of bodily vassalage to the 
legal class. They may have the right to present themselves 
in person before the court (in judicio stare), but of what 
use is that, if they are not present as intelligent spirits 'i 
The justice, which they receive, remains for them an. ex- 
ternal fate. 

229. In the civic community the idea is lost in particu- 
larity, and dispersed by the separation of inner and outer. 
But in the administration of justice the community is 
brought back to the conception, that is, to the unity of the 
intrinsic universal with subjective particularity. But as 
subjective particularity is present only as one single case, 
and the universal only as abstract right, the unification is 
in the first instance relative. The realization of this rela- 
tive unity over the whole range of particularity is the 
function of the police, and within a limited but concrete 
totality constitutes the corporation. 

Addition. — In the civic community universality is only 
necessity. In the relation of wants, right as such is the only 
steadfast principle. But the sphere of this right is limited, 
and refers merely to the protection of what I have. To right 
as such, happiness is something external. Tet in the 
system of wants well-being is an essential element. The 
universal, which is at first only right, has to spread itself 
over the whole field of particularity. Justice, it is true, is 
a large factor in the civic community. The state will 
flourish, if it has good laws, of which free property is the 
fundamental condition. But since I am wholly environed 
by my particularity, I have a right to demand that in 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 225 

connecting myself with others I shall further my special 
happiness. Eegard to my particular . well-being is taken 
by the police and the corporation. 



C. Police and Corporation. 

230. In the system of wants the subsistence and happi- 
ness of every individual is a possibility, whose realization 
is conditioned by the objective system of wants. By the 
administration of justice compensation is rendered for 
injury done to property or person. But the right, which 
IS actualized in the particular individual, contains the two 
following factors. It asks firstly that person and property 
should be secured by the removal of all fortuitous hindrances, 
and secondly that the security of the individual's subsist- 
ence and happiness, his particular well-being should be 
regarded and actualized as a right. 

(a) Police. 

231. So far as the particular will is the principle of a 
purpose, the force, by which the universal guarantees 
security, is limited to the realm of mere accident, and is 
an external arrangement. 

232. Crimes are in their nature contingent or casual, 
taking the form of capricious choice of evil, and must be 
prevented or brought to justice by the general force. 
Apart from them, however, arbitrary choice must be 
allowed a place in connection with acts in themselves law- 
fid, such as the private use of property. Here it comes 
into external relation with other individuals, and also with 
public institutions for realizing a common end. In this 
way a private act is exposed to a haphazard play of cir- 
cumstances, which take it beyond my control. It thus 
may or actually does efEect an injury or vprong to others. 

233. This is, indeed, only a possibility of harm. But 

Q 



'226 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

that no actual injury is done is now no longer a matter of 
accident, since the aspect of wrong in private acts is the 
ultimate ground for the right of police control. 

234. The relations of external reality occur within the 
realm of the infinity created by the understanding, and 
have accordingly no inherent limit. Hence, as to what is 
dangerous and what not, what suspicious and what free 
from suspicion, what is to be forbidden, or kept under 
inspection, or pardoned with a reprimand, what is to be 
retained after pardon under police supervision, and what is 
to b'e dismissed on suspended sentence, no boundary can be 
laid down. Custom, the spirit of the constitution as a 
whole, the condition of the time, the danger of the moment, 
etc., furnish means for a decision. 

Addition. — No fixed definition can here be given, or 
absolute boundary drawn. Here everything is personal 
and influenced by subjective opinion. To the spirit of the 
constitution or the danger of the times are due any more 
decisive characteristics. In time of war, e.g., many things 
morally harmless are looked on as harmful. Because of 
the presence of this aspect of contingency and arbitrary 
personality the police are viewed with odium. They can by 
far-fetched conclusions draw every kind of thing within 
their sphere ; for in anything may be found a possibility 
of harm. Hence, the police may go to work in a pedantic 
spirit, and disturb the moral life of individuals. But 
great as the nuisance may be, an objective limit to their 
action cannot be drawn. 

235. Although every one relies on the untrammelled possi- 
bility of satisfying his daily wants, yet, when in the indefinite 
multiplication and limitation of them it is sought to procure 
or exchange the means and it is desired to expedite the 
transaction, there comes into sight a common interest, which 
makes the business of one subserve the interest of all. 
There appear, likewise, ways and means, which may be of 
public utility. To oversee and foster the ways and means 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 227 

calculated to promote the public weKare is the function 
of a public power. 

236. The different interests of producers and consumers 
may come into conflict, and, although the right relation 
between the two may on the whole arise of its own accord, 
yet the adjustment of the two caUs for a regulation stand- 
ing above both sides and put iuto operation consciously. 
The right to make such a regulation in any particular case 
{e.g., taxation of the articles most necessary to sustain life), 
consists in this, that the public ofEer of goods, in wide and 
daily use, is not to the individual, as such, but to him as 
a universal, i.e., to the public. The people's right to honest 
dealing and inspection of goods to prevent fraud may be 
enforced by a public functionary. But more especially 
does the dependence of great branches of industry upon 
foreign conditions and distant combinations, which the 
individuals engaged in these industries cannot themselves 
oversee, make necessary a general supervision and control. 

Note. — In contrast with freedom of business and trade 
in the civic community stands the other extreme of the 
establishment and direction of the work of aU by means of 
official regulation. Under this head comes perhaps the 
construction of the pyramids and other monstrous Egyptian 
and Asiatic works. They were built for public ends with- 
out the intervention of any work done by the individual to 
further his own private interests. Private interest summons 
the principle of freedom against interference from above, 
but the more blindly it is sunk in self-seeking ends, 
the more it stands in need of regulation, in order that it 
may be led back to the universal. Thus what might be a 
dangerous upheaval becomes largely harmless, and shorter 
time is left for conflicts to adjust themselves merely by 
unconscious necessity. 

Addition. — PoUce control and provision are intended to 
intervene between the individual and the universal pos- 
sibility of obtaining his wants. It takes charge of lighting 



228 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

the streets, building bridges, taxation of daily wants, even 
of health. Two main views stand out at this point. One 
view is that it falls to the police to look after everything, 
the other that the police should not interfere at all, since 
every one will be guided by the need of others. The in- 
dividual, it is true, must have the right to earn his bread 
in this or the other way, but on the other hand the public 
has a right to ask that what is necessary shall be done. 
Both claims should be met, and the freedom of trade ought 
not to be of such a kind as to endanger the general weal. 

237. The possibility of sharing in the general wealth is 
open to the individual and secured to him by pubHc 
regulations. This security, however, cannot be complete, 
and in any case the possibility of sharing in the general 
wealth is from the subjective side open to casualties, just 
in proportion as it presupposes conditions of skill, health, 
and capital. 

238. In the first instance the family is the substantive 
whole. To it falls the duty of providing for the particular 
side of the individual's life, both in regard of the means 
and talents requisite for winning his maintenance out of 
the common stock, and in regard of subsistence and pro- 
vision in case of disability. But the civic community tears 
the individual out of the family bonds, makes its members 
strangers to one another, and recognizes them as indepen- 
dent persons. Instead of external inorganic nature and 
the paternal soil, from which the individual drew sub- 
sistence, the community substitutes its own ground, and 
subjects the whole family to fortuitous dependence upon 
itself. Thus the individual has become the son of the 
civic community, which makes claims upon him, at the 
same time as he has rights to it. 

Addition. — The family has, of course, to provide bread 
for individuals ; but in the civic community the family is 
subordinate and merely forms a basis. After that it is no 
longer of such extensive efficacy. Eather is the civic 



THE CIVIC COIIMUNITY. 229 

community the monster, -which snatches man to itself, 
claims from him that he should toil for it and that he 
should exist through it and act by means of it. If man is 
a member of such a community, he has just such rights ia 
it or claims upon it as he had in and upon the family. The 
civic community must protect its members, and defend their 
rights, as they in turn are engaged to obey its mandates. 

239. The civic community, in its character as universal 
family, has the right and duty to supersede, if necessary, 
the will of the parents, and superintend the education of 
the young, at least in so far as their education bears upon 
their becoming members of the community. Especially is 
this the case if the education is to be completed not by the 
parents but by others. Further, the community must 
undertake general arrangements for education, in so far as 
they can be made. 

Addition. — The boundary line between the rights of 
parents and those of the civic community is hard to define. 
The parents generally suppose themselves to possess com- 
plete liberty with regard to education, and to be able to do 
whatever they wish. Whenever instruction is made public, 
the chief opposition usually comes from the parents, who 
cry out and make acclaim about teachers and schools 
merely because they are displeased with them. In spite 
of this, the community has the right to proceed according 
to tried methods, and to compel parents to send their 
children to school, to have them vaccinated, etc. Contests 
occur in Trance between the demands of free instruction, 
i.e., of the pleasure of parents, on the one side, and the 
oversight of the state on the other. 

240. Similarly, the community has the duty and right to 
take under its guardianship those who wantonly squander 
their subsistence and that of their family. In the place of 
this extravagance it substitutes their real end, which it 
seeks to promote along with the purpose of the community. 

Addition. — It was a law in Athens that every citizen 



230 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

should give an account of his way of life. Our view is 
that this is no one's business. Of course every, individual 
is in one way independent, but he is also a member of the 
system of the civic community. In so far as every man 
has the right to ask maintenance from it, it must also 
protect him against himself. It is not simply that starva- 
tion must be guarded against. The wider view is that 
there never shall arise a rabble, or mass. _ Since the civic 
community is obliged to support individuals, it has also 
the right to insist that individuals should care for its 
subsistence. 

241. Not the arbitrary will only, but accidental circum- 
stances, which may be physical or external (§ 200), may 
bring the individual to poverty. This condition exposes 
him to the wants of the civic community, "which has 
already deprived him of the natural methods of acquisition 
(§ 217), and superseded the bond of the family stoct 
(§ 181). Besides, poverty causes men to lose more or less 
the advantage of society, the opportunity to acquire skill 
or education, the benefit of the administration of justice, 
the care for health, even the consolation of religion. 
Amongst the poor the public power takes the place of the 
family in regard to their immediate need, dislike of work, 
bad disposition, and other vices, which spring out of 
poverty and the sense of wrong. 

242. The subjective element of poverty, or generally the 
distress, to which the individual is by nature exposed, , 
requires subjective assistance, both in view of the special 
circumstances, and out of sympathy and love. Here, 
amidst all general arrangements, morality finds ample room 
to work. But since the assistance is in its own nature and 
in its effects casual, the effort of society shall be to discover 
a general remedy for penury and to do without random 
help. 

Note. — Haphazard almsgiving and such foundations as 
the burning of lamps beside holy images, etc., are replaced 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 231 

by public poor-houses, hospitals, street lighting, etc. To 
charity enough still remains. It is a false view for charity 
to restrict its help to private methods and casual sentiment 
and knowledge, and to feel itself injured and weakened 
by regulations binding upon the whole community. On 
the contrary, the public system is to be regarded as all the 
more complete, the less remains to be done by special 
effort. 

243. When the civic community is untrammelled in its 
activity, it increases within itself in industry and popula- 
tion. By generalizing the relations of men by the way of 
their wants, and by generalizing the manner in which the 
means of meeting these wants are prepared and procured, 
large fortunes are amassed. On the other side, there occur 
repartition and limitation of the work of the individual 
labourer and, consequently, dependence and distress in the 
artisan class. With these drawbacks are associated callous- 
ness of feeling and inability to enjoy the larger possibilities 
of freedom, especially the mental advantages of the civic 
community. 

244. When a large number of people sink below the 
standard of living regarded as essential for the members of 
society, and lose that sense of right, rectitude, and honour 
which is derived from self-support, a pauper class arises, 
and wealth accumulates disproportionately in the hands of 
a few. 

Addition. — The way of living of the pauper class is the 
lowest of aU, and is adopted by themselves. But with 
different peoples the minimum is very different. In 
England even the poorest man believes that he has his 
right, and with him this standard-is different from that 
which satisfies the poor in other lands. Poverty does not 
of itself make a pauper. The pauper state implies a frame 
of mind, associated often with poverty, consisting in inner 
rebellion against the wealthy, against society, and against 
constituted authority. Moreover, in order to descend to 



232 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

the class, which is at the mercy of the changes and chances 
of life, men must be heedless and indifEerent to -work, as are 
the Lazzaroni in Naples. Hence, in this section of the 
community arises the evil thing that a man has not self- 
respect enough to earn his own living by his work, and 
still he claims support as a right. No man can maintain 
a right against nature. Tet, in social conditions want 
assumes the form of a wrong done to one or other class. 
The important question, how poverty is to be done away 
with, is one which has disturbed and agitated society, 
especially in modern times. 

245. If upon the more wealthy classes the burden were 
directly laid of maintaining the poor at the level of their 
ordinary way of life, or if in public institutions, such as 
rich hospitals, foundations, or cloisters, the poor could 
receive direct support, they would be assured of subsist- 
ence without requiring to do any work. This would be 
contrary both to the principle of the civic community and 
to the feeling its members have of independence and 
honour. 

Again, if subsistence were provided not directly but 
through work, or opportunity to work, the quantity of 
produce would be increased, and the consumers, becoming 
themselves producers, would be proportionately too few. 
Whether in the case of over-production, then, or in the 
case of direct help, the evil sought to be removed would 
remain, and, indeed, would by either method be enhanced. 
There arises the seeming paradox that the civic community 
when excessively wealthy is not rich enough. It has not 
suflB.cient hold of its own wealth to stem excess of poverty 
and the creation of paupers. 

Note. — These phenomena may be studied in England, 
where they occur on an extensive scale. In that country 
may also be observed the consequences of poor rates, of 
vast foundations, of unlimited private benevolence, and, 
above all, of the discontinuance of the corporation. In 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 233 

England, and especially in Scotland, the most direct 
remedy against poverty and against laziness and extrava- 
gance, which are the cause of poverty, has been proved by 
practical experience to be to leave the poor to their fate, 
and direct them to public begging. This, too, has been 
found to be the best means for preserving that sense of 
shame and honour, which is the subjective basis of 
society. 

246. By means of its own dialectic the civic community 
is driven beyond its own limits as a definite and self-com- 
plete society. It must find consumers and the necessary 
means of life amongst other peoples, who either lack the 
means, of which it has a superfluity, or have less developed 
industries. 

247. As the firm-set earth, or the soil, is the basis 
of family life, so the basis of industry is the sea, the 
natural element which stimulates intercourse with foreign 
lands. By the substitution for the tenacious grasp of the 

■ soU, and for the limited round of appetites and enjoyments 
embraced within the civic life, of the fluid element of 
danger and destruction, the passion for gain is transformed. 
By means of the sea, the greatest medium of communica- 
tion, the desire for wealth brings distant lands into an in- 
tercourse, which leads to commercial exchange. In this 
intercourse is found one of the chief means of culture, 
and in it, too, trade receives world-historical significance. 

Note. — Elvers are not natural boundaries, though people 
have in modern times tried to make them so. JRather 
do they, and more especially the sea, bind men together. 

That Horace (Carm. I. 8) is wrong when he says : 

"... dens abscidit 
Prudens Oceano dissociabili 
Terras, ..." 

is shown by the general fact that basins of rivers are 
inhabited by one nation or race. This is proved even more 



234 THE PHILOSOPHY 0¥ RIGHT. 

conspicuously by the relations of ancient Grejeee with Ionia 
and Magna Graecia, of Brittany with Brifedn, of Denmark 
with Norway, of Sweden with Finland and Lapland, 
in contrast with the slight intercours^tobtaining between 
the inhabitants of the coast and thosarof the interior. We 
have only to compare the position /of the nations, who 
have frequented the sea, with that^ the nations who have 
avoided it, in order to discover what a means of culture 
and commerce it really is. Observe how the Egyptians 
and Hindoos have become dull and insensible, and are sunk 
in the grossest and most shameful superstitions, while aU 
the great aspiring nations press to the sea. 

248. The wider connection due to the sea becomes al 
means for colonization, to which, be it sporadic or system- 
atic, the full-grown civic community finds itself impelled. 
Thus for a part of its population it provides on a new soil 
a return to the family principle, and also procures for 
itself at the same time a new incentive and field for 
work. 

Addition. — The civic society is forced to found colonies, 
owing to the increase of population, but more especially 
because production oversteps the needs of consumption, and 
the growing numbers cannot satisfy their needs by their 
work. Sporadic colonization occurs mainly in Germany, 
the colonists, finding a home in America or Eussia, being 
without any connection with and of no benefit to their 
native land. A different kind of colonization is the system- 
atic, which is conducted by the state consciously and 
with suitable appliances. Of this kind of colonization 
many forms occurred amongst the ancients, especially the 
Greeks. In Greece the citizens did not engage in severe 
toil, but directed their energies to public affairs. When 
the population grew to such an extent that it was difficult 
to provide for them, the youth were sent into a new neigh- 
bourhood, which was sometimes chosen for them, some- 
times left to the accident of discovery. In modern 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 235 

times colonists have not been granted the rights pos- 
sessed by the inhabitants of the parent country. The 
result has been war and ultimate independence, as may 
be read in the history of the English and Spanish colonies. 
The independence of the colonies has turned out to be 
of the greatest advantage to the mother land, just as the 
liberation of the slaves was of the greatest advantage to 
the masters. 

249. The universal, which is contained in the particu- 
larity of the civic community, is realized and preserved by 
the external system of police supervision, whose purpose is 
simply to protect and secure the multitude of private ends 
and interests subsisting within it. It has also the higher 
function of caring for the interests which lead out beyond 
the civic community (§ 246). In accordance with the idea 
particularity itself makes the universal, which exists in its 
special interests, the end and object of its will and en- 
deavour. The ethical principle thus comes back as a con- 
stituent element of t^e civic community. This is the 
corporation. 

(6) The Corporation. 

2-50. In its substantive family life and life of nature the 
agricultural class contains directly the concrete universal in 
which it Hves. The universal class, again, has this universal 
as an independent end of its activity, and as its ground and 
basis. The middle or commercial class is essentially en- 
gaged with the particular, and hence its peculiar province is 
the corporation. 

251. The work of the civic community spreads in dif- 
ferent directions in obedience to the nature of its particu- 
larity. Since the implicit equality, contained in par- 
ticularity, is here realized as the common purpose of an 
association, the particular and self-seeking end becomes 
something actively universal. Each member of the civic 
community is with his special talent a member of the cor- 



236 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

poration. The universal aim of the corporation is accord- 
ingly quite concrete, and has no wider application than 
what lies in trade and its distinctive interests. 

252. In keeping with this view, the corporation, under 
the oversight of the public authority, has the right to look 
after its own clearly-defined interests, according to the ob- 
jective qualifications of skill and rectitude to adopt mem- 
bers, whose number is determined by the general system, 
to make provision for its adherents against fortuitous 
occurrences, and to foster the capacity necessary in any one 
desiring to become a member. In general it must stand to 
its members as a second family, a position which remains 
more indefinite than the family relation, because the 
general civic community is at a farther remove from indi 
viduals and their special needs. 

Note.-^The tradesman is different from the day-labourer, 
as well as from him who is ready for any casual employ- 
ment. The trader, be he employer or employee, is a mem- 
ber of an association, not for mere accidental gain but for 
the whole circuit of gain, or the universal involved in his 
particular maintenance. The privileges, which are rights 
of a corporate branch of the civic community, are not 
the same as special privileges in the etymological sense of 
the term. Special privileges are haphazard exceptions to a 
general law, but the other privileges are legal phases of 
the particularity of an essential branch of the community. 

263. The corporation provides for the family a basis and 
steady means (§ 170), by securing for it a subsistence 
varying according to capacity . Moreover, both security and 
capacity are in the corporation publicly recognized. Hence, 
the member of a corporation does not need to certify his 
\ capacity or the reality of his regular income to any larger 
[outside organization. It is also recognized that he belongs 
to and has active interest in a whole, whose aim is to pro- 
mote the welfare of society in general. Thus, in his class he 
has honour. 



THE CIVIC COMMUNITY. 237 

Note. — The corporation, in making secure the means of 
the family, corresponds to agriculture and private property 
in another sphere (§ 203, note). — When it is complained 
that the luxury and extravagance of the commercial class 
give rise to paupers (§ 244), it must not be overlooked that 
these conditions have an ethical or social basis in such 
causes as the increasingly mechanical nature of work. 
If the individual is not a member of an authorized cor- 
poration, and no combination can be a corporation unless 
it is authorized, he has no class-honour. By limiting him- 
self to the self-seeking side of trade and his own subsist- 
ence and enjoyments, he loses standing. He perhaps seeks, 
in that case, to obtain recognition by displaying his success 
in his trade ; but his display has no limit, because he has 
no desire to live in a way becoming his class. Indeed, he 
has no class at all, since only what is of general purport 
really exists in a civic community, and can be established 
and recognized. As he has no class, he has not the more 
universal life characteristic of the class. — In the corporation 
the assistance received by poverty loses its lawless character, 
aijd the humiliation wrongly associated with it. The 
opulent, by performing their duty to their associates, lose 
their pride, and cease to stir up envy in others. Integrity 
receives its due honour and recognition. 

254. The corporation sets a limit to the so-called natural 
right to make acquisitions by the exercise of any skill, only 
so far as the limit is a rational one. This right is thus 
freed from mere opinion and random influences, and from, 
danger to itself and others. In this way it wins je'cognition 
and an assured place, and is exalted to the level of a 
conscious effort to attain a common purpose. 

256. As the family was the first, so the corporation, 
grounded upon the civic community, constitutes the second 
ethical root or basis of the state. The family contains the 
elements of subjective particularity and objective univer- 
sality in substantive unity. Then, in the civic community. 



238 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

these elements are in the first instance dissociated and 
become on the one side a particularity of want and satis- 
faction, which is turned back into itself, and on the other 
side abstract legal universality. The corporation joins 
these two in an internal way, so that particular well-being 
exists and is realized as a right. 

Note. — Sanctity in the marriage tie and honour in the 
corporation are the points which the disorganizing forces 
of the civic community assail. 

Addition. — In modern times the corporation has been 
superseded, with the intention that the individual should 
care for himself. Grant that the intention is wise, yet the 
obligation of the individual to procure his own livelihood is 
not by the corporation altered. In our modem states the 
citizens participate only slightly in the general business. 
It is, however, needful to provide the ethical man with a 
universal activity, one above his private ends. This uni- 
versal, with which the modern state does not always supply 
him, is given by the corporation. We have already seen 
that the individual, while maintaining himself in the civic 
community, acts also for others. But this unconscious 
necessity is not enough. It is in the corporation that a 
conscious and reflective ethical reality is first reached. The 
superintendence of the state is higher, it is true, and must 

.given an upper place ; otherwise the corporation would 
becosme fossilized; it would waste itself upon itself, and 
be reJduced to the level of a wretched club. But the cor- 
poratioH: is not in its absolute nature a secret society, but 
rather tli\§ socializing of a trade, which without it would 
stand in isolation. It takes the trade up into a circle, in 
which it secures strength and honour. 

256. The liiiitited and finite end of the corporation has 
its truth in the ai!?solutely universal end and the absolute 
actuality of this end. This actualized end is also the truth 
of the division involved in the external system of police, 
which is merely a relative identity of the divided elements. 



THE CIYIC COMMUNITY. 239 

Thus, the sphere of the civic comnmnity passes into the 
state. 

Note. — City and country are the two as yet ideal con- 
stituents, out of which the state proceeds. The city is the 
seat of the civic society, and of the reflection which goes 
into itself and causes separation. The country is the seat 
of the ethical, which rests upon nature. The one comprises 
the individuals, who gain their livelihood by virtue of their 
relation to other persons possessed of rights. The other 
comprises the family. The state is the true meaning and 
ground of both. 

The development of simple ethical observance into the 
dismemberment marking the civic community, and then 
forward into the state, which is shown to be the true foun- 
dation of these more abstract phases, is the only scientific 
proof of the conception of the state. — Although in the 
course of the scientific exposition the state has the appear- 
ance of a result, it is in reality the true foundation and 
cause. This appearance and its process are provisional, 
and must now be replaced by the state in its direct existence. 
In actual fact the state is in general primary. Within it 
the family grows into the civic community, the idea of the 
state being that which sunders itself into these two elements. 
In the development of the civic community the ethical sub- 
stance reaches its infinite form, which contains the follow- 
ing elements : — (1) infinite differentiation even to the point 
at which consciousness as it is in itself exists for itself, 
and (2) the form of universality, which in civilization is the 
form of thought, that form by which spirit is itseK in its 
laws and institutions. They are its thought will, and it 
and they together become objective and real in an organic 
whole. 



240 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

THIED SECTION. 
The Statb. 

267. The state is the realized ethical idea or ethical 
spirit. It is the will which manifests itself, makes itself 
clear and Tisible, substantiates itself. It is the will which 
thinks and knows itself, and carries out what it knows, and 
in so far as it knows. The state finds in ethical custom its 
direct and unreflected existence, and its indirect and re- 
flected existence in the self-consciousness of the individual 
and in his knowledge and activity. Self-consciousness in 
the form of social disposition has its substantive freedom 
in the state, as the essence, purpose, and product of its 
activity. 

Note. — The Penates are the inner and lower order of 
gods ; the spirit of a nation, Athene, is the divinity which 
knows and wills itself. Piety is feeling, or ethical behaviour 
in the form of feeling ; political virtue is the willing of the 
thought-out end, which exists absolutely. 

268. — The state, which is the realized substantive will, 
having its reality in the particular self -consciousness raised 
to the plane of the universal, is absolutely rational. This 
substantive unity is its own motive and absolute end. In 
this end freedom attains its highest right. This end has 
the highest right over the individual, whose highest duty 
in turn is to be a member of the state. 

Note. — Were the state to be considered as exchangeable 
with the civic society, and were its decisive features to be 
regarded as the security and protection of property and 
personal freedom, the interest of the individual as such 
would be the ultimate purpose of the social union. It would 
then be at one's option to be a member of the state. — But 
the state has a totally different relation to the individual. 
It is the objective spirit, and he has his truth, real existence, 



'THE STATE.^ 241 

and ethical status only in teing a member of it. Union, 
as such, is itseK the true content and end, since the indi- 
vidual is intended to pass a universal life. His particular 
satisfactions, activities, and way of life have in this authen- 
ticated substantive principle their origin and result. 

Eationality, viewed abstractly, consists in the thorough 
unity of universality and individuality. Taken concretely, 
and from the standpoint of the content, it is the unity of 
objective freedom with subjective freedom, of the general 
substantive will with the individual consciousness and the 
individual will seeking particular ends. From the stand- 
point of the form it consists in action determined by 
thought-out or universal laws and principles. — This idea 
is the absolutely eternal and necessary being of spirit. — 
The idea of the state is not concerned with the historical 
origin of either the state iu general or of any particular 
state with its special rights and characters. Hence, it is 
indifferent whether the state arose out of the patriarchal 
condition, out of fear or confidence, or out of the corpora- 
tion. It does not care whether the basis of state rights is 
declared to be in the divine, or in positive right, or con- 
tract, or custom. When we are dealing simply with the 
science of the state, these things are mere appearances, and 
belong to history. The causes or grounds of the authority 
of an actual state, in so far as they are required at all, 
must be derived from the forms of right, which have 
vaUdity in the state. 

Philosophic investigation deals with only the inner side 
of all this, the thought conception. To Eousseau is to be 
ascribed the merit of discovering and presenting a prin- 
ciple, which comes up to the standard of the thought, and 
is indeed thinking itself, not only in its form, such as 
would be a social impulse or divine authority, but in its 
very essence. This principle of Eousseau is will. But he 
conceives of the will only in the limited form of the indi- 
vidual will, as did also Fichte afterwards, and regards the 



242 THE PIIILOSOPHV OF RIGHT. 

universal will not as the absolutely reasonable will, but 
only as the common will, proceeding out of the individual 
will as conscious. Thus the union of individuals in a state 
becomes a contract, which is based upon caprice, opinion, 
and optional, explicit consent. Out of this view the under- 
standing deduces consequences, which destroy the abso- 
lutely divine, and its absolute authority and majesty. 
Hence, when these abstractions attained to power, there 
was enacted the most tremendous spectacle which the 
human race has ever witnessed. All the usages and 
institutions of a great state were swept away. It was then 
proposed to begin over again, starting from the thought, 
and as the basis of the state to will only what was judged 
to be rational. But as the undertaking was begun with 
abstractions void of all ideas, it ended in scenes of tragic 
cruelty and horror. 

As against the principle of the individual will we must 
bear in mind the fundamental conception that the objective 
will is in itself rational in its very conception, whether or 
not it be known by the individual or willed as an object of 
his good pleasure. "We must also keep in mind that the 
opposite principle, the subjectivity of freedom, i.e., such 
knowing and willing as are retained in that principle, con- 
tains only one, and that a one-sided factor of the idea of 
the reasonable will. The will is reasonable only if it is so 
both in itself and when it is actualized. 

The other contrary of the thought, which apprehends 
the state as an embodiment of reason, is the theory which 
takes such external appearances as the accidents of distress, 
need, protection, strength, and wealth, for the substance of 
the state, when they are mere elements of its historical ' 
development. Moreover, it is in unique and isolated indi- 
viduals that the principle of knowledge is here said to be 
found, not however in their thought, but in the attributes 
of their merely empirical personalities, such as strength or 
weakness, wealth or poverty. The freak of disregarding 



THE STATE. 243 

what is absolutely infinite and reasonable in the state and of 
banishing thought from the constitution of the state's 
inner nature has never appeared so undisguisedly as in 
Mr. V. Haller's " Eestauration der Staatswissenschaft." In 
all genuine attempts to reach the real nature of the state, 
though the principles adduced be ever so one-sided and 
superficial, there is yet implied that rightly to conceive of 
the state is to attain to thoughts and universal characters. 
But in the book alluded to, the author not only consciously 
renounces both the rational content; which is the state, and 
the form of thought, but passionately inveighs against 
them. One of what he himself calls the far-reaching effects 
of his work is due to the circumstance that in his inquiry 
he knew how to fasten the whole into one piece without 
the help of thought. Hence, he says, are absent the con- 
fusion and disturbance, which arise when into a discussion 
of the contingent is foisted a suggestion about the substan- 
tive, and into a discussion of the empiricaland external is 
injected a reminder of the universal and rational. Hence, 
when engaged with the inadequate and imperfect he is not 
continually reminding his readers of what is higher and 
infinite. — Yet even this method of inquiry has consequences. 
Since the fortuitous is taken as the essence of the state, 
and not the substantive, there results from the absence of 
thought an incoherence, which jogs on without looking 
back, and finds itself quite at home in the very opposite of 
what it had commended a moment before.' 

1 This book is of an original kind. The ill-humour of the author 
might in itself be not ignoble, since he was stirred to indignation 
by the false theories, to which is attached especially the name of 
Rousseau, and by the attempt to put them in operation. But 
Mr. V. Haller, in order to save himself, has thrown himself into a 
counter-position, which is wholly void of thought, and cannotj 
therefore, be said to have any standing-ground. He expresses the 
bitterest' hatred of all law, legislation, and all formally and legally 
constituted right. Hatred of the law, and of legally constituted 
right is the shibboleth, by means of which are revealed and may 



244 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

Addition. — The state as a completed reality is the 
ethical whole and the actualization of freedom. It is 
the absolute purpose of reason that freedom should be 
actualized. The state is the spirit, which abides in the 

Ije infallibly recognized fanaticism, mental imbecility, and the 
hypocrisy of good intentions, let them disguise themselves as tliey 
will. 

Such an originality as that of Mr. v. Haller's is always a note- 
worthy phenomenon, and for those of my readers who do not yet 
know the work, I shall quote a few passages in proof of my con- 
tention. Mr. V. H. (p. 342 ft'., vol. i.) thus exhibits his funda- 
mental proposition : " In the inorganic realm the greater oppresses 
the smaller, and the mighty the feeble ; so is it also with animals, 
and the same law in more honourable forms, and often indeed in 
dishonourable forms, appears again in man." " It is the eternal, 
unchangeable decree of God that the more powerful rules, must 
rule, and will ever rule.' From these sentences, and from those 
given further on, it may be seen in whatsense the word " power" 
is here used. It not the power of right and the ethical, but the 
contingent force of nature. This he proceeds to make good upon 
this amongst other grounds (p. 365 and fol. ), that by an admijable 
and wise provision of nature the feeling of one's own superiority 
irresistibly enriches the character, and favours the development of 
the very virtues which are most necessary in dealing with sub- 
ordinates. He asks, with much rhetoric, "whether in the kingdom 
of science it is the strong or the weak, who are the more inclined 
to use authority and trust, in order to aid their low selfish purposes, 
and for the ruin of confiding men, whether the majority of the 
lawyers are not jjettifoggers and pedants, who betray the hopes of 
confiding clients, make white black and black white, use the law 
as a vehicle of wrong, bring those who seek their protection to 
beggary, and, like the hungry vulture, tear in pieces the innocent 
lamb, etc." Mr. v. H. has here forgotten that he is employing 
this rhetoric in support of his sentence that the rule of the stronger 
is the eternal ordinance of God, the very same ordinance by virtue 
of which the vulture tears to pieces the innocent lamb. He seems 
to say that the stronger are quite right in using their knovsledge 
of the law to plunder the feeble trusting clients. But it would be 
asking too much of him to bring two thoughts into relation when 
he has not one. 

It is self-evident that Mr. v. H. is an enemy of statute-hooks. 
Civil laws in general are in his view " unnecessary, since they issue 



THE STATli:. 245 

world and there realizes itself consciously ; while in nature 
it is realized only as the other of itself or the sleeping spirit. 
Only when it is present in consciousness, knowing itself as an 

as self-evident from natural law. '' States, since states there are, 
would be saved the trouble devoted to laws, law-books, and the 
study of legal right, if they would simply repose on the principle 
that everything is self-evident. " But on the other side the laws 
are not properly speaking given to private persons. They are 
instructions for the judges, who are by them made acquainted 
with the will of the rulers. The administration of the law (vol. i. 
p. 297 ; pt. i. p. 254, and elsewhere) is not a duty of the state, but 
a donation or assistance by the strong, and is merely supplemen- 
tary. Of the means for the protection of rights the employment 
of law Ls not the most- complete, but is rather uncertain and 
insecure. It leaves us with only our modern law-scholars, and 
robs us of the three other means, which lead most (quickly and 
certainly to the end, the means which friendly nature has given 
man for the security of his rightful freedom." These three are 
(what do you think ?) "(1) Private obedience and enforcement of 
the natural law, (2) Resistance to wrong, and (3) Flight, when 
there is no other remedy." How unfriendly are the jurists in com- 
parison with friendly nature ! "But the natural divine law (vol. i. 
p. 292), which all-bountiful nature has given to every one, is : 
Honour every one as thy equal." (According to the author's prin- 
ciple this should read : Honour him who is not thy equal, but the 
stronger.) "Wrong no man who does not wrong thee. Demand 
nothing but what he owes thee. " (But what does he owe ?) "Yes, 
and more, love thy neighbour and use him when thou canst. " It 
is to be the planting of this law which is to make legislation and 
constitutions useless. It would be worth seeing how Mr. v. H. 
makes it intelligible that, irrespective of this planting, legislation 
and constitutions have come into the world. 

In vol. iii. p. 362 f ol. , the author reaches the ' ' so-called national 
liberties," that is, the laws and constitutions of nations. Every 
legally constituted right is in tliis larger use of the word a liberty. 
Of these laws he says this, amongst other things, " that their con- 
tent is usually very insignificant, although in books great stress is 
laid upon these documentary liberties." When we realize that 
the authjor means the national liberties of the German Empire and 
of the English nation (the Charta Magna, "which, however, is 
little read, and, because of its antiquated expressions, less under- 
stood," and the BUI of Rights), and the national liberties of the 



246 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

existing object, is it the state. In thinking of freedom we 
must not take our departure from individuality or the 
individual's self-consciousness, but from the essence of 

people of Hungary and other lands, we are surprised to learn that 
he regards these so highly-valued possessions as insignificant. As 
great a surprise is it to hear that the laws, wliich are of daily and 
hourly concern, dealing with every piece of clotli that is worn arid 
every piece of bread that is eaten, should have a value merely in 
books. 

As for the general statute-book of Prussia, to quote only one 
thing more, Mr. v. H. has not one good word to say for it (vol. i. 
p. 185 fol.), because upon it the unphilosophical errors (not aa yet ■ 
the Kantian philosophy, at any rate, I must add, against which Mr. 
V. H. inveighs most bitterly of all) have had a bad effect, especially 
in the matters of the state, national wealth, the end of the state, 
the head of the state, his duties, the servants of the state, and 
such things. What most anuoys Mr. v. H. is " the right to levy 
contributions upon private possessions, occupations, productions, 
and consumptions, in order to defray the expenses of the state. 
As state-wealth is not the private possession of the prince, but is 
qualified as the wealth of the state, neither the king himself nor 
any Prussian citizen has anything his own, neither body nor goods, 
and all the subjects become legal bondmen. They dare not with- 
draw themselves from the service of the state." 

In all this incredible crudity there is a touch of the ludicrous in 
thp unspeakable pleasure which Mr. v. H. feels in his own revela- 
tions (vol. i., preface). It was "a joy, such as only » friend ,of 
truth can feel, when he after an honest investigation is assured 
that he has hit upon as it were " (yes, indeed, As it were .') " the 
voice of nature or the word of God." (The word of God is in its 
revelation quite distinct from the voice of nature and of the 
natural man.) " And when he might have sunk down in sheer 
amazement, a stream of joyous tears sprang from his eyes, and 
from that moment living religiosity arose within him." Mr. v. H. 
ought rather, in his religiosity, to have wept over his fate as the 
hardest chastisement of God. It is the most severe punishment 
which can be experienced to wander so far from thought and 
reason, from reverence for the law and from the knowledge of how 
infinitely important and divine it is that the duties of the state 
and the rights of the citizens, as also the rights of the state and 
the duties of the citizens, should be legally determined, to wander 
so far from this as to substitute an absurdity for the word of God. 



THE STATE. 247 

self-consciousness. Let man be aware of it or not, this 
essence realizes itself as an independent power, in which 
particular persons are only phases. The state is the march 
of God in the world ; its ground or cause is the power of 
reason realizing itseK as will. When thinking of the idea 
of the state, we must not have in our mind any particular 
state, or particular institution, hut must rather contem- 
plate the idea, this actual God, by itself. Although a 
state may be declared to violate right principles and to be 
defective in various ways, it always contains the essential 
moments of its existence, if, that is to say, it belongs to 
the full formed states of our own time. But as it is more 
easy to detect short-comings than to grasp the positive 
meaning, one easily falls into the mistake of dwelling so 
much upon special aspects of the state as to overlook its 
inner organic being. The state is not a work of art. It 
is in the world, in the sphere of caprice, accident, and 
error. Evil behaviour can doubtless disfigure it in manv 
ways, but the ugliest man, the criminal, the invalid, the 
cripple, are living men. The positive thing, the life, is 
present in spite of defects, and it is vrith this affirmative 
that we have here to deal. 

259. (a) The idea of the state has direct actuality in the 
individual state. It, as a self-referring organism, is the 
constitution or internal state-organization or polity. 

(6) It passes over into a relation of the individual 
state to other states. This is its external organization or 
polity. ^ 

(c) As universal idea, or kind, or species, it has absolute 
authority over individual states. This is the spirit which 
gives itself reality in the process of world-history. 

Addition. — The state as an actual thing is pre-eminentl_y 
individual, and, what is more, particular. Individuality 
as distinguished from particularity is an element of the- 
idea of the state itself, while particularity belongs to 
history. Any two states, as such, are independent of each 



248 THE PHILOSOPHY OF BIGHT. 

other. Any relation between the two must be external. 
A third must therefore stand above and. unite them. Now 
this third is the spirit, which gives itself reality in world- 
history, and constitutes itself absolute judge over states. 
Several states indeed might form an alliance and pass 
judgment upon others, or interstate relations may arise of 
the nature of the Holy Alliance. But these things are 
always relative and limited, as was the everlasting peace, 
jl'he sole, absolute judge, which always avails against the 
Iparticular, is the self-caused self-existing spirit, which 
[presents itself as the universal and efficient leaven of world- 
Ihi story. 

A. Internal Polity. 

260. The state is the embodiment of concrete freedom. 
In this concrete freedom, personal individuality and its 
particular interests, as found in the family and civic com- 
munity, have their complete development. In this con- 
crete freedom, too, the rights of personal individuality 
receive adequate recognition. These interests and rights 
pass partly of their own accord into the interest of the 
universal. Partly, also, do the individuals recognize by 
their own knowledge and will the universal as their own 
substantive spirit, and work for it as their own end. 
Hence, neither is the universal completed without the 
assistance of the particular interest, knowledge, and will, 
nor, on the other hand, do individuals, as private persons, 
live merely for their own special concern. They regard 
the general end, and are in all their activities conscious of 
this end. The modern state has enormous strength and 
depth, in that it allows the principle of subjectivity to 
complete itself to an independent extreme of personal 
particiilarity, and yet at the same time brings it back into 
the substantive unity, and thus preserves particularity in 
the principle of the state. 

Addition. — The peculiarity of the idea of the modern 



THE STATE. 249 

state is that it is the embodiment of freedom, not accord- 
ing;, to subjective Irking, but to' the conception of the will, 
the will, that is, in its universal and divine character. 
Incomplete states are they, in which this idea is still only 
a germ, whose particular phases are not permitted to 
mature into self-dependence. In the republics of classical 
antiquity universality, it is true, is to be found. But in 
those ages particularity had not as yet been released from 
its fetters, and led back to universality or the universal 
purpose of the whole. The essence of the modern state 
binds together the universal and the full freedom of par- 
ticularity, including the welfare of individuals. It insists 
that the interests of the family and civic community shall 
Imk themselves to the state, and yet is aware that the 
universal purpose can make no advance without the private 
knowledge and will of a particularity, which must adhere 
to its right. The universal must be actively furthered, 
but, on the other side, subjectivity must be wholly and 
vitally developed. Only when both elements are present 
in force is the state to be regarded as articulate and truly 
organized. 

261. In contrast with the spheres of private right and 
private good, of the family and of the civic community, 
the state is on one of its sides an external necessity. It is 
thus a higher authority, in regard to which the laws and 
interests of the family and community are subject and 
dependent. On the other side, however, the state is the 
indwelling end of these things, and is strong in its union 
of the universal end with the particular interests of iu- 
dividuals. Thus, just so far as people have duties to fulfil 
towards it, they have also rights (§ 155). 

Hfote. — We have already noticed (§ 3, note) that Mon- 
tesquieu in his famous work, " The Spirit of the Laws," 
has kept before his mind, and sought to prove in detail, 
the thought that the laws, especially those of private right, 
are dependent upon the character of the state. He has 



250 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

maintained the philosophic view that the part is to be 
regarded only in relation to the whole. 

Duty is, in the first instance, a 'relation to something, 
which is for me a substantial and self-subsisting universal. 
Eight, on the other hand, is in general some embodiment 
of this substantive reality, and hence brings to the front 
its particular side and my particular freedom. These two 
things, treated formally, appear as deputed to different 
phases or persons. But the state as ethical, implying 
thorough interpenetratiou of the substantive and the par- 
ticular, brings into light the fact that my obligation to the 
substantive reality is at the same time the realization of 
my particular freedom. In the state, duty and right arc 
bound together in one and the same reference. But because 
in the state the elements of right and duty attain their 
peculiar shape and reality, the difference between them 
once more becomes manifest. While they are identical iu 
themselves or formally, they differ in content. In private 
right and morals the necessity inherent in the relation 
fails to be realized. The abstract equality of content is 
alone brought forward. In this abstract region what is 
right for one is right for another, and what is one man's 
duty is also another man's duty. This absolute identity 
of right and duty occurs, when transferred to the content, 
simply as equality. This content, which is now to rank as 
the complete universal and sole principle of duty and 
right, is the personal freedom of men. Hence, slaves have 
no duties, because they have no rights, and vice versa, 
religious duties, of course, falling outside of this dis- 
cussion. 

But when we turn from abstract identity to the concrete 
idea, the idea which develops itself within itself, right and 
duty are distinguished, and at once become different in con- 
tent. In the family, for example, the rights of tbe son are 
not the same in content as his duties towards his father, 
nor are the rights of the citizen the same in content as his 



THE STATE. 251 

duties to his prince or T;oveniment. — The conception of the 
union of duty and right is one of the most important 
features of states, and to.it is due their internal strength. 
— The abstract treatment of duty insists upon casting aside 
and banishing the particular interest as something un- 
essential and even unwortliy. But the concrete method, 
or the idea, exhibits particularity as essential, and the 
satisfaction of the particular as a sheer necessity. In 
tarrying out his duty the individual must in some way or 
other discover his own interest, his own satisfaction and 
recompense. A right must accrue to him out of his rela- 
tion to the state, and by this right the universal concern 
becomes his own private concern. The particular interest 
shall in truth be neither set aside nor suppressed, but be 
placed in open concord with the universal. In this concord 
both particular and universal are inclosed. The individual, 
who from the point of view of his duties is a subject, finds, 
in fulfilling his civic duties, protection of person and 
property, satisfaction of his real self, and the consciousness 
and self-respect implied in his being a member of this 
whole. Since the citizen discharges his duty as a per- 
formance and business for the state, the state is per- 
manently preserved. Viewed from the plane of abstrac- 
tion, on the other hand, the interest of the universal would 
be satisfied, if the contracts and business, which it demands 
of him, are by him fulfilled simply as duties. 

Addition. — Everything depends on the union of univer- 
sality and particularity in the state. In the ancient states 
the subjective end was out-and-out one with the volition 
of the state. In modern times, on the contrary, we 
demand an individual view, and individual will and con- 
science. Of these things the ancients had none in the same 
sense. For them the final thing was the will of 'the state. 
While in Asiatic despotisms the individual had no inner 
nature, and no self-justification, in the modem world man's 
inner self is honoured. The conjunction of duty and right 



252 IHK PHILOSOPHY' OF ftlGIIT. 

has the twofold aspect that what /the state demands as 
duty should forthwith he the riglyli of individuality, since 
the state's demand is nothing ot¥er than the organization 
of the conception of freedom ^The prevailing characters 
of the individual will are by the state brought into objec- 
tive reality, and in this way first attain to their truth and 
realization. The state is the sole and essential condition 
of the attainment of the particular end and good. 

262. The actual idea, the spirit, divides itself, as we 
have said, into the two ideal spheres of its conception, the 
family and the civic community. It descends into its tv o 
ideal and finite spheres, that it may out of them become 
actually infinite and real. Hence, spirit distributes to in- 
dividuals as a mass the material of its finite realization in 
these spheres, in such a way that the portion of the in- 
dividual has the appearance of being occasioned by his 
circumstances, caprice, and private choice (§ 185, and 
note) . 

Addition. — In the Platonic state subjective freedom has 
not as yet any place, since in it the rulers assigned to in- 
dividuals their occupations. In many oriental states occu- 
pation depends upon birth. But subjective freedom, which 
must be respected, demands free choice for individuals. 

263. In these two spheres, in which the elements of spirit, 
individuality, and particularity, have in one their direct 
and in the other their reflected reality, spirit is their objec- 
tive universality in the form of appearance. It is the power 
of the rational in the region of necessity (§ 184), and 
becomes the institutions, which have already been passed 
in review. 

Addition. — The state, as spirit, divides itself according 
to the particular determining attributes of its conception, 
in order to exist in its own way. We may adduce an 
illustration out of the region of nature. The nerve-system 
is especially the sensitive system ; it is the abstract element 
which aims, so to speak, to exist by itself, and in this 



THE STATE. 253 

existeme to have its own identity. Now feeling, when 
analyzed, furnishes two separate sides, dividing itself so 
that the differences appear as complete systems. On one 
side is the abstract sense of feeling, which withdraws by 
itself ; it is the smothered movement going on internally 
in reproduction, internal seK- nourishment, assimilation, 
and digestion. On the other hand this withdrawal into 
oneself has over against itself the element of difference, or 
the movement outwards ; and this outward movement of 
feeling is irritability. These two form a system of their 
own, and there are lower orders of animals, in which this 
system alone is developed, being without that unity of 
feeling which marks the complete soul. If we compare 
these facts of nature with the facts of spirit, we may place 
together family and sensibility on the one side, civic com- 
munity and irritability on the other. The third is the 
state, corresponding to the actual nervous system as an in- 
ternally organized whole. But it is a living unity only in 
so far as both elements, the family and the civic com- 
munity, are developed within it. The laws which govern 
these two are the institutions of the rational ; it makes its 
appearance in them. The foundation and~ final- truth of 
these institutions is the spirit, which is their universal 
purpose and conscious object. The family is, indeed, also 
ethical, but its purpose is not a conscious one. In the 
civic community, on the other hand, separation is the de- 
finitive feature. 

264 The individuals of a multitude are spiritual beings, 
and have a twofold character. In them is the extreme of 
the independently conscious and willing individuality, and 
also the extreme of the universality, which knows and wills 
what is substantive. They obtain the rights of both these 
aspects, only in so far as they themselves are actual, both 
as private persons and as persons substantive. One right 
they have directly in the family, the other in the civic 
community. In these two institutions, which implicitly 



254 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

universalize all particular interests, individuals have their 
real self-conscious existence. And in the corporation they 
provide for these particular interests a wider scope, and an 
activity directed to a universal end. 

265. These institutions comprise in detail the constitu- 
tion, that is, the developed and actualized rationality. They 
are the steadfast basis of the state, determining the temper 
of individuals towards the state, and their confidence in it. 
They are, moreover, the foundation-stones of public free- 
dom, because in them particular freedom becomes realized 
in a rational form. They thus involve an intrinsic union 
of freedom and necessity. 

Addition. — It has been already remarked that both the 
sanctity of marriage, and also the institutions, in which 
the ethical character of the civic community makes its 
appearance, constitute the stability of the whole. The 
universal is the concern of every particular person. Every- 
thing depends on the law of reason being thoroughly in- 
corporated with the law of particular freedom. My 
particular end thus becomes identical with the universal. 
In any other case the state is a mere castle in the air. In 
the general self-consciousness of individuals the state is 
actual, and in the identity of particularity and universality 
it has its stability. It has often been said that the end of 
the state is the happiness of the citizens. That is indeed 
true. If it is not well with them, if their subjective aim is 
not satisfied, if they find that the state as such is not the 
medium through which comes their satisfaction, the state 
stands upon an insecure footing. 

266. But spirit is realized and becomes its own object, 
not only as this necessity and as a kingdom of appearances, 
but as their ideality or inner being. Substantive univer- 
sality is thus an object and end for itself, and necessity 
assumes the form of freedom. 

267. By the necessity, which lies within this ideality, is 
meant the development of the idea within itself. As sub- 



THE STATE. 255 

jective substantiality the idea is a political temper of 
mind, and in distinction from this it, as objective, is the 
organism of the state, i.e., the strictly political state, and 
its constitution. 

Addition. — The unity of the freedom, which knows and 
wills itself, exists in the first instance as necessity. Here 
the substantive is found as the subjective existence of 
individuals. But there is a second necessity, and that 
is the organism. In this case spirit is a process within 
itself, makes within itself distinctions, divides itself into 
organic members, through which it passes in living circu- 
lation. 

268. Political disposition, or, in general terms, patriotism, 
may be defined as the assurance which stands on truth, 
and the will which has become a custom. Mere subjective 
assurance does not proceed out of truth, and is only opinion. 
Genuine patriotism is simply a result of the institutions 
which subsist in the state as in the actuality of reason. 
Hence, patriotic feeling is operative in the act, which is in 
accord with these institutions. Political sentiment is, 
in general, a confidence, which may pass over into a more 
or less intelligent insight ; it is a consciousness that 
my substantive and particular interest is contained and 
preserved in the interest and end of another, here the state, 
in its relation to me, the individual. Wherefore the state 
is for me forthwith not another, and I in this consciousness 
am free. 

Note. — By patriotic feeling is frequently understood 
merely a readiness to submit to exceptional sacrifices or do 
exceptional acts. But in reality it is the sentiment which 
arises in ordinary circumstances and ways of life, and is 
wont to regard the commonweal as its substantive basis 
and end. This consciousness is kept intact in the routine 
of life, and upon it the readiness to submit to exceptional 
efEort is based. But as men would rather be magnanimous 
than, merely right, they easily persuade themselves that 



256 THE PHILOSOPHY OF KIGHT. 

they possess this extraordinary patriotism, in order to 
spare themselves the burden of the true sentiment, and to 
excuse the lact of it. If this feeling be regarded as some- 
thing, which provides its own beginning, and can proceed 
out of subjective imaginations and thoughts, it is con- 
founded with mere opinion, and in that case is devoid of its 
true basis in objective reality. 

Addition. — Uneducated men delight in surface-reason- 
ings and fault-findings. Fault-finding is an easy matter, 
but hard is it to know the good and its inner necessity. 
Education always begins with fault-finding, but when full 
and complete sees in everything the positive. In the case 
of religion one may say off-hand that this or that is super- 
stition, but it is infinitely harder to conceive of the truth 
involved in it. Political sentiment, as a mere appearance, 
is also to be distinguished from what men truly will. 
They will in fact the real matter, but they hold fast to bits, 
and delight in the vanity of making improvements. Men 
trust in the stability of the state, and suppose that in 
it only the particular interest can come into being. But 
custom makes invisible that upon which our whole existence 
turns. If any one goes safe through the streets at night, 
it does not occur to him that it could be otherwise. The 
habit of feeling secure has become a second nature, and we 
do not reflect that it is first brought about by the agency 
of special institutions. Often it is imagined that force 
holds the state together, but the binding cord is nothing 
else than the deep-seated feeling of order, which is possessed 
by all. 

269. Political disposition is given definite content by the 
different phases of the organism of the state. This organ- 
ism is the development of the idea into its differences, 
which are objectively actualized. These differences are 
the different functions, affairs, and activities of state. By 
means of them the universal uninterruptedly produces 
itself, by a process which is a necessary one, since these 



THE STATE. 257 

various oflBces proceed from the natui-e of the conception. 
The universal is, hovyever, none the less self-contained, 
since it is already presupposed in its own productive 
process. This organism is the political constitution. 

Addition. — The state is an organism or the development 
of the idea into its differences. These different sides arc 
the different functions, affairs and activities of state 
bv means of which the universal unceasingly produces 
itseK by a necessary process. At the same time it is self-con- 
tained, since it is presupposed in its own productive activity. 
This organism is the political constitution. It proceeds 
eternally out of the state, just as the state in turn is self- 
contained by means of the constitution. If these two 
things fall apart, and make the different aspects inde- 
pendent, the unity produced by the constitution is no 
longer established. The true relation is illustrated by the 
fable of the belly and the Hmbs. Although the parts of an 
organism do not constitute an identity, yet it is of such a 
nature that, if one of its parts makes itself independent, all 
must be harmed. We cannot by means of predicates, pro- 
positions, etc., reach any right estimate of the state, which 
should be apprehended as an organism. It is much 
the same with the state as with the nature of God, who 
cannot be through predicates conceived, whose life rather 
is within itself and must be perceived. 

270. (1) The ahstract actuality or substantiahty of the 
state consists in this, that the end pursued by the state is 
the general interest, which, being the substance of all 
particular interests, includes the preservation of them 
also. (2) But the actuality of the state is also the 
necessity of the state, since it breaks up into the various 
distinctions of state-activity, which are implied in the 
conception. By means of the state's substantiahty these 
distinctions become real and tangible as the different 
public offices. (3) This substantiality, when thoroughly 
permeated by education, is the spirit which knows and 



258 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

wills itself. Hence, what the state wills it Icdows, and 
knows it in its universality as that which is thought out. 
The state works and acts in obedience to conscious ends, 
known principles and laws, which are not merely iniplied, 
but expressly before its consciousness. So, too, it works 
with a definite knowledge of all the actual circumstances 
and relations, to which the acts refer. 

Note. — We must here touch upon the relation of the 
state to religion. In modern times it is often repeated 
that religion is the foundation of the state, and accom- 
panying this assertion is the dogmatic claim that outside 
of religion nothing remains to political science. Now, no 
assertion can he more confusing. Indeed, it exalts con- 
fusion to the place of an essential element in the con- 
stitution of the state, and of a necessary form of know- 
ledge: — In the first place it may seem suspicious that 
religion is principally commended and resorted to in times 
of public distress, disturbance, and oppression ; it is 
thought to furnish consolation against wrong, and the 
hope of compensation in the case of loss. A proof of 
religious feeling is considered to be indifference to worldly 
affairs and to the course and tenor of actual life. But the 
state is the spirit, as it abides in the world. To refer 
people to religion is far from calculated to exalt the interest 
and business of the state into a really earnest purpose. On 
the contrary, state concerns are held to be a matter of pure 
caprice, and are therefore rejected. The ground for this 
step is that in the state only the purposes of passion and 
unlawful power prevail, or that religion, when taken by 
_^itself, is sufficient to control and decide what is right. It 
X would surely be regarded as a bitter jest if those who were 
'oppressed by any despotism were referred t(j the consola- 
tions of religion ; nor is it to be forgotten that religion 
may assume the form of a galling superstition, involving 
the most abject servitude, and the degradation of man 
below the level of the brute. Amongst the Egyptians and 



THE STATE. 259 

Hindoos animals are revered as higher creatures than man. 
Such a fact leads us to observe that we cannot speak of 
religion in general, and that when it assumes certain 
forms security must be found against it in some power 
which will guarantee the rights of reason and self -con- 
sciousness. 

But the ultimate judgment upon the connection of 
religion with the state is obtained only when we go back 
to their conception. Religion has as its content absolute 
truth, and, therefore, also the highest kind of feeling. 
Religion, as intuition, feeling, or imaginative thought, the 
object of whose activity is God, the unlimited basis and 
cause of all things, advances the claim that everything 
should be apprehended in reference to it, and in it should 
receive its confirmation, justification, and certitude. By 
this relation state and laws, as well as duties, attain for 
consciousness to their highest verification and most binding 
power, since they, as a determinate reality, pass up into 
and rest upon a higher sphere. (See " Encyclopaedia of 
the Philogophical Sciences.") For this reason in all the 
changes and chances of life religion preserves the con- 
sciousness of the unchanging and of the highest freedom 
and contentment.' 

EeUgion, so interpreted, is the foundation of the ethical 
system, and contains the nature of the state as the divine 

' Religion, knowledge, and science have as principles forms 
peculiar to themselves and different from that of the state. Hence, 
they enter the state partly as aids to education and sentiment, 
partly as ends for themselves, having an external reality. In both 
cases the principles of the state are merely applied to these spheres. 
In a fully concrete treatise on the state these spheres, as well as 
art and the mere natural relations, would have to be considered, 
and given their proper place. But in this treatise, where the 
principle of the state is traversed in its own peculiar sphere in 
accordance with its idea, these other principles, and the applica 
tion to them of the right of the state, can receive only a passing 
notice. 



260 THE PHILOSOPHY OF KIGHT. 

will ; yet it is only the foundation. This is the jjoint at 
which state and religion separate. The state is the divine 
will as a present spirit, which unfolds itself in the actual 
shape of an organized world. 

They who adhere to the form of religion, as opposed to 
the state, conduct themselves like persons who in know- 
ledge think that they are right when they cling to a mere 
abstract essence and never proceed to reality, or like those 
who will only the abstract good, and arbitrarily postpone 
deciding what in fact is good (§ 140, note). Religion is 
the relation to the absolute in the form of feeling, imagina- 
tion, faith ; and within its all-embracing circumference 
everything is merely accidental and transient. If this 
form is obstinately maintained to be the only real and 
valid determination for the state, the state, as an organiza- 
tion developed into stable differences, laws, and regulations, 
is handed over as booty to feebleness, uncertainty, and dis- 
order. By enveloping everything definite this vague form 
becomes a subjective principle. In contrast with it, th(! 
laws, instead of having validity and self-subsistence as the 
objective and universal, are counted as something merely 
negative. There result the .following practical maxims : 
" The righteous man is not subject to law ; only be pious 
and you may do what you please ; you may yield to your 
own arbitrary will and passion, and direct those, who 
suffer harm by your acts, to the comfort and hope of 
religion, or you may brand them as irreligious." But this 
negative relation sometimes refuses to remain merely an 
inner sentiment, and makes itself felt in external reality. 
There then arises the form of religious fanaticism, which, 
like political fanaticism, regards all state-management and 
lawful order as restrictive barriers, and discards them as 
unsuited to the inner life and infinitude of feeling. It 
banishes private property, marriage, and the relations and 
tasks of the civic community, as unworthy of love and of 
the freedom of feeling. But since in daily walk and action 



THE STATE. 261 

some decision must be made, then here, as is always the 
case with the subjective will, whose subjectivity is aware 
of itself as absolute (§ 140), the decision proceeds from 
subjective picture-thinking, that is, from opinion and 
arbitrary inclination. 

In opposition to that kind of truth which wraps itself up 
in the subjectivity of feeling and imagination, the real 
truth consists in the tremendous transition of the inner 
into the outer, of the visions of reason into reality. By 
this process the whole of world-history has been wrought 
out, and civilized man has at length won the actuality and 
the consciousness of a reasonable political life. There are 
those who, as they say, seek the Lord, and in their un- 
tutored opinion assure themselves of possessing aU things 
directly. They make no effort to raise their subjective 
experience into a knowledge of the ttuth and a conscious- 
ness of objective right and duty. From such persons can 
proceed nothing except abomination and folly, and the 
demolition of all ethical relations. These consequences 
are inevitable, if religious sentiment holds exclusively to 
its form, and turns against reality and the truth, which is 
present in the form of the universal, that is, of the laws. 

Still, this sentiment may not invade reality. On the 
contrary, it may retain its merely negative character, thus 
remaining something internal, suiting itself to the laws 
and affairs of state, and acquiescing either with sighs 
or with scorn and wishing. It is not strength, but weak- 
ness, which has in our times made religiosity a polemic 
kind of piety, be it conjoined with a true need, or with 
nothing Ijut discontented vanity. Instead of moulding 
one's opinion through study, and subjecting one's will to 
discipline, and thus exalting it to free obedience, it is 
much the cheaper plan to take a less arduous course. We 
renounce all knowledge of objective truth, treasure up a 
feeling of oppression and pride, and claim to possess beforer 
hand all the holiness requisite for discerning the laws and 



.262 THE PHILOSOPHY OV RIGHT. ' 

institutions of state, for prejudging them, and specifying 
what their nature ought to be. The ground for this be- 
haviour is that everything issues from the pious heart 
unquestionably and infalliblj'. Thus, as intentions and 
assertions go to religion for their support, neither by ex- 
posing their shallowness nor their erroneousness is it 
possible to prevail against them. 

In so far as religion is of a true sort, not displaying a 
negative and hostile spirit towards the state, but rather 
recognizing and supporting it, it has its own special place 
and station. Public worship consists in acts and doctrine ; 
it needs possessions and property, and likewise individuals 
devoted to the service of the congregation. ■ Out of this 
arises between church and state a relation, which it is not 
difficult to define. It is in the nature of the case that the 
state fulfils a duty by giving assistance and protection to the 
religious ends of a congregation. More than that, since to 
the deepest religious feeling there is present the state as a 
whole, it may fairly be demanded by the state that every 
individual should connect himself with some congregation. 
Of course, with its special character, depending on inner 
imaginative thinking, the state cannot interfere. When 
well organized and strong, the state can afford to be liberal 
in this matter, and may overlook small details affecting 
itself. It may even give room within itself to congregations, 
whose creed prevents them from recognizing any direct 
duties to it. But this concession must depend upon the 
numerical strength of the sects in question. The members 
of these religious bodies the state is content to leave to the 
laws of the civic community, and to accept a passive 
fulfilment of their direct duties to it by means of sub- 
stitutes.^ 

' Of Quakers, Anabaptists, etc., it may be said that they are 
merely active members of the civic community, having as private 
persons only private relations with others. Even here, however, 
they have been permitted to forego the use of the oath. Direct 



THE STATE. 263 

So far as the ecclesiastical body owns property, performs 
overt acts of worship, and maintains individuals for this 
service, it leaves the inner realm and enters that of the 
world. Hence it places itself directly under the jurisdic- 
tion of the state. The oath, ethical observaiices generally, 
as well as marriage, all carry with them the inner recon- 
struction and elevation of that disposition of mind which 
finds in religion its deepest confirmation. Since ethical 

state duties they fulfil passively. To one of the most important of 
these, that of defence against an enemy, they openly refuse to 
submit, and are granted release from it on condition of their sub- 
stituting some other service. Towards these sects the state is 
expected to exercise toleration. Since they do not recognize their 
duties to it, they cannot claim the right to be members of it. Once 
in a North American Congiess, when the abolition of the slavery 
of the negroes was being strongly advocated, a deputy from the 
Southern States made the apposite remark, " Let us have negroes ; 
we let you have Quakei's." — Only because the state is otherwise 
strong can it overlook and tolerate these anomalies. It relies upon 
the strength of its moral observances, and upon the inner reason 
of its institutions to diminish and overcome divisions, which it 
would nevertheless be within its strict right to abolish. So, too, 
states have had a formal right against the Jews in regard to the 
concession to them of even civil rights, because they are not 
merely a religious body, but claim to look upon themselves as a 
foreign nation. But the outcry raised against them on this and 
other grounds has overlooked the fact that they are first of all 
men, and that to be a man is more than a, superficial abstract 
qualification (§ 209, note). The civU rights implied in it give rise 
to a feeling of self-respect, the sense of counting as a lawful person 
in the civic community. This feeling of being infinite and free 
from all Others is the root out of which springs the needed balance 
of the various kinds of thought and sentiment. The isolation 
with which the Jews have been blamed it is better to preserve. It 
would have been a reproach and wrong for any state to have 
excluded them for this reason. To do so would be to misunder- 
stand its own principle, the nature and power of its objective 
institutions (§ 268, end of note). To expel the Jews on the pre- 
tence that this course is in accordance with the highest justice, 
has proved an unwi.se measure, while the actual method employed 
by the government has been shown to be wise and honourable. 



264 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

relations are essentially relations of actual rationality, the 
rights of these relations are the first to be maintained in 
reality, and to them is added ecclesiastical confirmation, 
simply as their inner and more abstract side. — As to other 
forms of ecclesiastical' communion, such as doctrine, the in- 
ternal is more important than the external. The same is 
true of overt acts of worship and tindred matters, whose 
legal side appears as independent, and belongs to the state. 
The ministers and property of churches, it is true, are 
exempt from the j)0wer and jurisdiction of the state. 
Churches have also assumed jurisdiction over worldly 
persons in all matters involving the co-operation of re- 
ligion, such as divorce and the administration of the oath. — 
In all affairs bearing the aspects of both church and state, 
the political side, owing to its nature, is ill-defined. This 
is observable even in relation to acts which are wholly civic 
(§ 234). In so far as individuals, assembling for religious 
worship, have formed themselves into a congregation or 
corporation, they come under the supervision of the superior 
officers of state. 

Doctrine has its province in conscience, and is founded 
upon the right of the subjective freedom of self-conscious- 
ness. This is the inner region, which as such does not 
come within the sphere of the state. However, the state 
also has a doctrine, in which its regulations, and whatever 
in right, in the constitution, etc., is valid generally, exist 
essentially in the form of thought, as law. And as the 
state is not a mechanism, but the reasonable life of self- 
conscious freedom and the system of the ethical world, so 
sentiment or feeling for it, and the conscious expression of 
this feeling in the form of principles, are an essential , 
element in the actual state. Then, again, the doctrine of 
the church is not merely the edict of conscience, but in the 
form of doctrine is rather an outward expression, and that, 
too, regarding a content, which has the most intimate con- 
nection with ethical principles and the laws, and may 



THE, STATE. 266 

directly concern them. Here also clinrcb and state meet 
either harmonionsly or in opposition. The difference be- 
tween the two realms may be driven by the churcli to 
extreme antagonism. It, containing as it does the abso- 
lute content of religion, may contemplate the spiritual 
element and therefore the ethical element also, as its own, 
and may regard the state as a mere mechanical scaffolding 
for unspiritual, external ends: It may esteem itself as the 
kingdom of God or at least as the way to it and its fore- 
court, and the state as the kingdom of this world, the 
sphere of the transient and finite. It may count itself 
as end for itself, and the state as merely a means. United 
with such a presumptuous attitude is the demand of the 
church that the state should let it have its own way, and 
should show to its doctrines unreserved respect, simply be- 
cause they are doctrines, no matter what the substance of 
them may be. The reason advanced by the church is that 
the formation of doctrine is exclusively its function. Just 
as the church makes this claim on the wide ground that the 
spiritual has been entrusted solely to its keeping, science 
and knowledge generally may occupy a similar position. 
Like the church, they may fashion themselves into an 
independent, exclusive organization, and may with even 
greater justice look upon themselves as filling the place of 
the church. Hence wotild be asked for science also inde- 
pendence of the state ; "the state would be only a means for 
it, while it would be its own end. 

In this connection it is unimportant whether the individuals 
and representatives, who minister to the congregation, have 
gone the length of secluding themselves, leaving only the 
congregations at large in subjection to the state, or whether 
they abide in the state, and withdraw only their church 
character. This general position, it may first of all be ob- 
servedj coincides with the view that the state in its funda- 
mentals takes into its protection and care the life, property, 
and free-will of every person, simply in so far as he does 



266 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

not injure the life, property, and free-will of any other. 
The state is thus considered as answering simply to our 
needs. The higher spiritual element, absolute truth, is 
counted as subjective religiosity or theoretical science, and 
placed outside of the state. The state is merely the laity, 
and must be absolutely respectful. That which is pecu- 
liarly ethical falls beyond its reach. Now it is a matter of 
history that there have been barbaric times and circum- 
stances, in which all high spiritual matters had their seat in 
the church, and the state was only a worldly rule of for6e, 
lawlessness, and passion. Abstract opposition was then 
the main principle of actuality (§ 358). But it is too 
blind and shallow a proceeding to consider this view as 
true and in accordance with the idea. The development of 
the idea has rather demonstrated that the spirit as free and 
rational is in itself ethical, that the true idea is actualized 
rationality, and that this rationality exists as the state. 
From this idea it is quite easy to infer that its ethical 
truth assumes for the thinking consciousness a content, 
which is worked up into the form of universality, and is 
realized as law. The state in general knows its own ends, 
recognizes them with a clear consciousness, and busies 
itself with them in accordance with fundamental prin- 
ciples. 

As before remarked, religion has truth for its universal 
object, but this content is merely given, and its funda- 
mental principles are not recognized through thinking and 
conceptions. Thus the individual is under an obligation, 
which is grounded upon authority, and the testimony of 
his own spirit and heart, in which is contained the element 
of freedom, takes the form of faith and feeling. But it is 
philosophic insight, which clearly recognizes that church 
and state are not opposed to each other on the question of 
truth and rationality, but differ only in form . There were, 
it is true, and still are, churches, which have nothing more 
than a form of public worship ; but there are others, which, 



THK STATIC. 267 

though in them the form of worship is the main thing, 
have also doctrine and instruction. Whenever the church 
takes up the point of doctrine, and deals in its teaching 
with objective thought and the principles of the ethical and 
rational, it passes over into the province of the state. It 
pronounces authoritatively upon the ethical and right, upon 
the law and institutions, and its utterance is believed. In 
contrast with faith and the authority of the church, in con- 
trast also with the subjective convictions which it requires, 
the state is that which knows. In its principles the con- 
tent does not remain in the form of feeling and faith, but 
belongs to the formed thought. 

In so far as the self-caused and self-existing content 
makes its appearance in religion as a particular content, 
namely, in the form of doctrines peculiar to the church as 
a religious community, it does not fall within the scope of 
the state. In Protestantism, it may be said, there are no 
clergy who are considered to be the sole depositary of 
church doctrine, because in this form of religion there is 
no laity. Since ethical and political principles pass over 
into the realm of religion, and not only are established, but 
must be established, in reference to religion, the state is 
thus on the one hand furnished with religious confirmation. 
On the other hand there remains to the state the right and 
the form of self-conscious objective rationality, the right, 
that is, to maintain objective reason against the assertions, 
which have their source in the subjective form of truth, no 
matter what depth of certitude and authority surrounds 
them. Because the principle of the state's form is uni- 
versal, and hence essentially the thought, freedom of 
thought and scientific investigation issue from the state. 
It was a church that burnt Giordano Bruno, and forced 
G-alileo, who advocated the Copernican system, to recant 
upon his knees.^ Hence science, also, has its place on the 

' Laplace, in his " Darstellung des Weltsystems," Book V., 
ch. 4, writes, ' ' When Galileo published his discoveries, to which 



268 IIIE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

side of the state, as it has the same element of form as the 
state ; its end is knowledge, and indeed thought out objec- 
tive truth and rationality. Thought knowledge may, it is 
true, fall from science to mere opinion, and from principles 
to mere reasonings. Applying itself to ethical objects and 

lie was assisted by the telescope and the phases of Venus, he 
proved incontestably that the earth moved. But the view that 
the earth is in motion was declared by an assembly of cardinals 
to be heretical. Whereupon Galileo, the famous advocate of this 
view, was summoned before the Inquisiticm, and compelled to re- 
tract on pain of a severe imprisonment. In a man of mind the 
passion for truth is one of the strongest passions. — Galileo, con- 
vinced by his own observations of the motion of the earth, thought 
for a long time upon a new work in which he would undertake to 
develop all the proofs of his theory. But in order at the same 
time to escape the persecution, of which he would have been the 
victim, he resolved to issue his work in the form of a dialogue 
between three persons. Naturally, the advantage lay with the 
advocate of the Copernican system. . But since Galileo did not 
decide between them, and gave every possible weight to the ob- 
jections of the follower of Ptolemaus, he had a right to expect 
that he would not be disturbed in the enjoyment of that rest 
which his great age and services deserved. But in his sixtieth 
year he was a second time summoned before the tribunal of the 
Inquisition, was imprisoned, and again asked to retract his views 
under the threat of the punishment which is meted out to a heretic 
twice fallen. They induced him to subscribe to the following form 
of abjuration : ' I, Galileo, who in my sixtieth year find myself 
in person befoie the court, kneeling and looking upon the holy 
Gospels, which I touch with my hands, forswear, abjure, and exe- 
crate with honest heart and true faith, the preposterous, false, and 
heretical doctrine of the motion of the earth, etc' What a spec- 
tacle ! An honourable old man, celebrated through a long life 
devoted to the investigation of nature, against the witness of his 
own conscience, recants upon his knees the truth, which he had 
so convincingly proved. By the sentence of the Inquisition he 
was condemned to perpetual imprisonment. A year afterwards, 
through the mediation of the Grand-duke of Florence, he was set 
at liberty. — He died in 1642. His loss was deplored by Europe, 
which had been enlightened by his labours and stirred to indigna- 
tion by the .sentence passed by so detested a tribunal upon so 
great a man. " 



THE statj:. 269 

the organization of the state, it may oppose their funda- 
mental principles. This it may do with something of the 
same pretentious claims, as the church makes with regard 
to its peculiar belongings. It may rely upon mere opining, 
as if it were reason, and upon the right, advanced by sub- 
jective self-consciousness, to be in its opinion and con- 
viction free. 

Already (§ 140, note) the principle of the subjectivity of 
knowledge has been examined, and only a single remark 
need now be added. On the one hand the state may treat 
with infinite indifference opinion, in so far as it is mere 
opinion, and has hence a mere subjective content. This 
opinion, let it plume itself to any extent it pleases, contains 
no true strength or force. The state is in the position of 
the painter, who in his work confines himself to the three 
ground colours, and may treat with indifference the school - 
wisdom which maintains that there are seven. But there 
is another side to the question. This opining of bad 
principles constitutes itself a universal fact and corrodes 
actuality. It is manifested as the formalism of uncon- 
ditioned subjectivity, which would adopt as a basis the 
scientific starting-point, would exalt the state-academies to 
the presumptuous level of a church, and would then turn 
them against the state. In opposition to this proceeding 
the state must take under its protection objective truth and 
the principle of the ethical life ; and on the other side, in 
opposition to the church, which claims unlimited and un-.' 
conditional authority, the state has to uphold as a general/ 
thing the formal right of self-consciousness to its oyfii 
insight, conviction, and thought of what shall be reckoned^ 
as objective truth. 

There may also be mentioned here the unity of state and 
church, a union which is much canvassed in modern times, 
and praised as the highest ideal. If the essential unity of 
these two is the unity of true principles with sentiment, it 
is also essential that along with this unity should come into 



270 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

specific existence the difference, which is in the form of 
their consciousness. In an oriental despotism there already 
exists the so frequently wished for unity of church and 
state. Yet in it the state is not present, at least not that 
self-conscious form of it, which is alone worthy of spirit 
and includes right, free ethical life and organic develop- 
ment. If the state is to have reality as the ethical self- 
conscious realization of spirit, it must be distinguished from 
the form of authority and faith. But this distinction 
arises only in so far as the ecclesiastical side is in itself 
divided into separate churches. Then only is the state 
seen to be superior to them, and wins and brings into 
existence the universality of thought as the principle of its 
form. To understand this we must know what universality 
is, not only in itself, but also in its existence. It is far 
from being a weakness or misfortune for the state that 
the church has been divided. Only through this division 
has the state been able to develop its true character, and 
become a self-conscious, rational, and ethical reality. This 
division was an event of the happiest augury, telling 
in behalf of the freedom and rationality of the church, and 
also in behalf of the freedom and rationality of thought. 

Addition. — The state is real. Its reality consists in its 
realizing the interest of the whole in particular ends. 
Actuality is always the unity of universality and particu- 
larity. Universality exists piecemeal in particularity. 
Each side appears as if self-sufficient, although it is 
upheld and suktained only in the whole. In so far as 
this unity is absent, the thing is unrealized, even though 
existence may be predicated of it. A bad state is one 
which merely exists. A sick body also exists, but it has 
no true reality. A hand, which is cut off, still looks like a 
hand and exists, though it is not real. True reality is 
necessity. What is real is in itself necessary. Necessity 
consists in this, that the whole is broken up into the dif- 
ferences contained in the conception. Then, as so broken 



THE STATE. 271 

up, it furnishes a fast and. enduring character, not that of 
the fossil, but of that which in giving itself up always 
begets itself anew. 

To the complete state essentially belong consciousness 
and thought. Hence the state knows what it wills, and 
knows it as something thought. Since consciousness has 
its seat only in the state, science has its p lace als o there, 
and not in the church. In despite of thai^^ich has in 
modem times been said to the efEect that the state has 
sprung into existence out of religion. The state is the 
developed spirit, and exhibits its elements in the daylight 
of consciousness. Owing to the fact that what lies in the 
idea walks forth into visible being, the state appears to be 
something finite, whose province is of this world, while 
religion represents itself as the realm of the infinite. Thus, 
the state seems to be subordinate, needing, since the finite 
cannot subsist by itself, the basis of the church. As finite, 
it is thought to have no verification, and only in and 
through religion to become holy and appertain to the 
infinite. But this version of the matter is highly one- 
sided. The state is certainly in its essence of the world 
and finite, having particular ends and functions. But its 
being worldly is only one side of it. Only to a perception, 
which is void of spirit, is the state merely finite. The 
state has a vital soul, and this vitalizing power is sub- 
jectivity, which both creates distinctions and yet preserves 
their u nity. | In the kingdom of religion there are also 
distinctions and finitudes. God is triune. Thus there are 
three determinations, whose unity alone is the spirit. If 
we would apprehend in a concrete way the divine nature, 
we do so only through distinctions. In the divine kingdom 
as in the worldly occur limits, and it is a one-sided view to 
say that the worldly spirit or the state is merely finite, for 
reality is nothing irrational. A bad state is indeed purely 
finite and worldly, _^^^^rationalst^^i^^nitself. 
jufinite^. 



272 THE PHILOSOPHY OF KIGIIT. 

Secondly, it is said that the state must accept its justifi- 
cation from religion. The idea, as present in religion, is 
spirit in the inner condition of feeling, but this same idea 
it is which gives itself worldliness in the state, and procures 
for itself in consciousness and will an outward place and 
reality. If we say that the state must be grounded on 
religion, we mean only that the state must rest upon and 
proceed from rationality. But this sentence can be under- 
stood wrongly to mean that when the spirit of man is 
bound by a religion which is not free, he is most adroitly 
brought to political obedience. The Christian religion, 
however, is the religion of freedom. Yet even Christianity 
may be infected by superstition, and converted into an in- 
strument of bondage. Thus, the doctrine that the state 
should be founded on religion is perverted, when it is in- 
terpreted to mean that individuals must have religion in 
order that their spirit, enchained by it, may be the more 
readily oppressed in the state. But if we mean that rever- 
ence should be felt for the state as the whole, of which 
individuals are the branches, this feeling flows most easily 
from philosophic insiglit into the nature of the state, 
although if that insight should be lacking, religious senti- 
ment may lead to the same result. So the state may need 
religion and faith. It yet remains essentially distinguished 
from religion in that its commands are a legal duty, it 
being a matter of indifference in what spirit the duty is 
performed, while the empire of religion, on the contrary, is 
the internal. Just as the state, if it were to make such a 
claim as religion makes, would endanger the right of the 
inner mind, so the church degenerates into a tyrannical 
religion, if it acts as a state and imposes punishments. 

A third distinction, related to the foregoing, is that the 
content of religion is and remains veiled ; feeling, sensi- 
bility, and fancy are the ground on which it is built, and 
on this ground everything has the form of subjectivity. 
The state, on the other hand, actualizes itself, and gives its 



THE STATE. 273 

phases a solid reality. If religiosity were to insist upon 
making itself good wittin the state, as it is wont to do in 
its own territory, it would overturn the political organiza- 
tion. Each several distinction has a broad and fair field 
in the state, while in religion everything is always referred 
to the totality. If this totality were to seize upon all the 
political relations, it would be fanaticism. It would be 
bent upon having the whole in every particular part, and 
could not accomplish its desire except by the destruction 
of the particular. Fanaticism will not allow particular 
differences to have their way. The expression, "The pious 
are subject to no law," is nothing more than the decree of 
fanaticism. Piety, when it replaces the state, cannot 
tolerate that which is definitely constituted and destroys it. 
A kindred type of mind is shown by him who permits 
conscience or internality to judge, and does not decide on 
general grounds. This internality does not in its develop- 
ment proceed to principles, and gives itself no justification. 
If piety is counted as the reality of the state, all laws are 
cast to the winds, and subjective feeling legislates. This 
feeling may be nothing but caprice, and yet this cannot be 
ascertained except by its acts. But in so far as it becomes 
acts or commands, it assumes the shape of laws, and is 
directly opposed to subjective feeling. God, who is the 
object of this feeling, may also be regarded as a being who 
determines. But God is the universal idea, and is in feel- 
ing the undetermined, which is not mature enough to deter- 
mine what actually exists in a developed form in the state. 
The fact that everything in the state is firm and secure- is 
a bulwark against caprice and positive opinion. So religion, 
as such, ought not to rule. 

271. The political constitution is (1) the organization 
of the state and the process of its organic life in reference 
to its own self. In this process the state distinguishes 
within itself its elements, and unfolds them into self- 
subsistence. 



274 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

(2) It is a single, exclusive iudividuality, and as such is 
related to anotlier. It turns its distinctive features towards 
foreign states, and in so doing establishes its self- subsisting 
distinctions vpithin itself in their ideality. 

Addition. — Just as irritabiUtj in the living organism is 
in one of its phases something internal, belonging to the 
organism as such, so. here also the reference to foreign 
states has a bearing upon what is within. The internal 
state as such is the civil power ; the direction outwards is 
the military power, which, however, has a definite side 
within the state itself. To balance both phases is one of 
the chief matters of statesmanship. Sometimes the civil 
power has been wholly extinguished, and rests only upon 
the military power, as happened during the time of the 
Eoman emperors and Pretorian Guards. Sometimes, as in 
modem days, the military power proceeds only out of the 
civil power, as when all citizens are bound to bear arms. 

I. Internal Constitution. 

272. The constitution is rational in so far as the active 
working divisions of the state are in accord with the 
nature of the conception. This occurs when every one of 
its functions is in itself the totality, in the sense that it 
effectually contains the other elements. These elements, 
too, though expressing the distinctions of the conception, 
remain strictly within its ideality, and constitute one indi- 
vidual whole. 

JVbie.— Concerning the constitution, as concerning reason 
itseM, there has in modern times been an endless babble, 
which has in Germany been more insipid than anywhere 
else. With us there are those who have persuaded them- 
selves that it is best even at the very threshold of govern- 
ment to understand before all other things what a con- 
stitution is. And they think that they have furnished 
invincible proof that religion and piety should be the 



THE STATE. 275 

basis of all their shallowness. It is small wonder if this 
prating has made for reasonable mortals the words reason, 
illumination, right, constitution, liberty, mere empty 
sounds, and men should have become ashamed to talk 
about a political constitution. At least as one effect of 
this superfluity, we may hope to see the conviction be- 
coming general, that a philosophic acquaintance with such 
topics cannot proceed from mere reasonings, ends, grounds, 
and utilities, much less from feeling, love, and inspiration, 
but only out of the conception. It will be a fortunate 
thing, too, if those who maintain the divine to be incon- 
ceivable and an acquaintance with the truth to be wasted 
effort, were henceforth to refrain from breaking in upon 
the argument. What of undigested rhetoric and edification 
they manufacture out of these feelings can at least lay no 
claim to philosophic notice. 

Amongst current ideas must be mentioned, in connection 
with § 269, that regarding the necessary division of the 
functions of the state. This is a most important feature, 
which, when taken in its true sense, is rightly regarded as 
the guarantee of public freedom. But of this those, who 
think to speak out of inspiration and love, neither know 
nor will know anything, for in it lies the element of de- 
termination through the way of reason. The principle of 
the separation of functions contains the essential element 
of difference, that is to say, of real rationality. But as 
apprehended by the abstract understanding it is false when 
it leads to the view that these several functions are abso- 
lutely independent, and it is one-sided when it considers 
the relation of these functions to one another as negative 
and mutually limiting. In such a view each function in 
hostility to or fear of the others acts towards them as 
towards an evil. Each resolves to oppose the others, 
effecting by this opposition of forces a general balance, it 
may be, but not a living unity. But the internal self- 
direction of the conception, and not any other purpoee or 



276 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

utility, contains the absolute source of the difEerent func- 
tions. On their account alone the political organization 
exists as intrinsically rational and as the image of eternal 
reason. 

From logic, though indeed not of the accepted kind, we 
know how the conception, and in a concrete way the idea, 
determine themselves of themselves, and thereby abstractly 
set up their phases of universality, particularity, and indi- 
viduality. To take the negative as the point of departure, 
and set up as primary the willing of evil and consequent 
mistrust, and then on this supposition cunningly to devise 
breakwaters, which in turn require other breakwaters to 
check their activity, any such contrivance is the mark of a 
thought, which is at the level of the negative under- 
standing, and of a feeling, which is characteristic of the 
rabble (§ 244). — The functions of the state, the executive 
and the legislative, as they are called, may be made inde- 
pendent of each other. The state is, then, forthwith over- 
thrown, an occurrence which we have witnessed on a vast 
scale, Or, in so far as the state is essentially self-con- 
tained, the struggle of one function to bring the other into 
subjection effects somehow or other a closer unity, and 
thus preserves only what is in the state essential and 
fundamental. 

Addition. — In the state we must have nothing which is 
not an expression of rationality. The state is the world, 
which the spirit has made for itself. Hence it 'has a 
definite self-begun and seKrelated course. Often we 
speak of the wisdom of G-od in nature, but we must not 
therefore believe that the physical world of nature is 
higher than the world of spirit. Just so high as the spirit 
stands above nature, the state stands above the physical 
life. We must hence honour the state as the divine on 
earth, and learn that if it is difScult to conceive of nature, 
it is infinitely harder to apprehend the state. That we in 
modern times have attained definite views concerning the 



THE STATE. 277 

state in general, and are perpetually engaged in speating 
about and manufacturing constitutions, is a fact of much 
importance. But that does not settle the whole matter. 
It is necessary further that we approach a reasonable 
question in the miad of i-ational beings, that we know 
what is essential, and distinguish it from what is merely 
striking. Thus, the functions of the state must indeed be 
distinguished ; and yet each must of itself form a whole, 
and also contain the other elements. When we speak of 
the distinctive activity of any function, we must not fall 
into the egregious error of supposing that it should exist 
in abstract independence, since it should rather be dis- 
tinguished merely as an element of the conception. If the 
distinctions were to subsist in abstract independence, it is 
as clear as light that two independent things are not able 
to constitute a unity, but must rather introduce strife. As 
a result, either the whole world would be cast into dis- 
order, or the unity would be restored by force. Thus, in the 
French Ilevolution at one time the legislative function had 
swallowed up the executive, at another time the executive 
had usurped the legislative function. It would be stupid 
in such a case to present the moral claim of harmony. 
If we cast the responsibility of the matter upon feeling, 
we have indeed got rid of the whole trouble. But, neces- 
sary as ethical feeling is, it cannot evolve from itself the 
functions of state. Whence it comes to pass that since 
the definite functions are the whole implicitly, they com- 
prise in their actual existence the total conception. We 
usually speak of the three functions of state, the legislative, 
executive, and judicial. The legislative corresponds to 
universality, and the executive to particularity ; but the 
judicial is not the third element of the conception. The 
individuality uniting the other two lies beyond these 
spheres. 

273. The political state is divided into three substantive 
branches : 



278 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

(a) The power to fix and establish the universal. This 
is legislation. 

(6) The power, which brings particular spheres and 
individual cases under the universal. This is the function 
of government. 

(c) The function of the prince, as the subjectivity with 
which rests the final decision. In this function the other 
two are brought into an individual unity. It is at once 
the culmination and beginning of the whole. This is 
constitutional m.onarchy. 

Note. — The perfecting of the state into a constitutional 
monarchy is the work of the modern world, in which the 
substantive idea has attained the infinite form. This is 
the descent of the spirit of the world into itself, the free 
perfection by virtue of which the idea sets loose from itself 
its own elements, and nothing but its own elements, and 
makes them totalities ; at the same time it holds them 
within the unity of the conception, in which is found their 
real rationality. The story of this true erection of the 
ethical life is the subject matter of universal world-history. 

The old classification of constitutions into monarchy, 
aristocracy, and democracy is based upon the substantive 
unity which has not yet been divided. This unity has no 
internal distinctions, is not an intrinsically developed 
organization, and has not attained depth and concrete 
rationality. Prom the standpoint of the ancient world the 
classification is correct, because the unity of the ancient 
state was a substantive whole, not as yet fully mature and 
unfolded. The distinctions predicated of it must hence be 
external, and refer merely to the number of persons in 
whom this substantive unity should find an abode. But 
these various forms of the state, which belong in this way 
to different wholes, are in constitutional monarchy lowered 
to their proper place as elements. In monarchy we have 
a single person, in its executive several, in legislation the 
multitude. But, as we have said, such merely quantita- 



THE STATE. 279 

tive distinctions are superficial, and do not account for the 
conception. Similarly, it is not to the point to speak so 
much as we do of the democratic or aristocratic element in 
the monarchy for the phases, described by these terms, 
just in so far as they occur in a monarchy, are no longer 
democratic and aristocratic. 

It is thought by some that the state is a mere abstrac- 
tion which orders and commands, and that it may -be left 
undecided, or be regarded as a trifle, whether one or several 
or all stand in the chief place in the state. — " All these 
forms," says Fichte (" Naturrecht," Pt. I., p. 196), " are 
right, and can produce and preserve universal right, if only 
there be present an ephorat." The ephorat was invented 
by Fichte, and defined as a needful counterpoise to the 
highest power. Such a view springs from a shallow con- 
ception of the state. It is trtie, indeed, that in a primitive 
condition of society these distinctions have little or no 
meaning. So Moses, when giving rules to the people in 
the case of their choosing a king, made no other alteration 
in the institutions than to command that the king's horses 
and wives should not be too numerous, or his treasure of 
gold and silver too large (Deut. xvii. 16, and foL). — 
Further, it is true that in one sense these three forms are 
even for the idea a matter of no concern. I mean monarchy 
in its limited and exclusive signification, in accordance with 
which it stands by the side of democracy and aristocracy. 
But such a remark has a meaning the opposite of Fichte' s. 
It would mean that these forms are a matter of indifference, 
because they collectively are not in accordance with the 
idea in its rational development (§ 272) ; nor can the idea 
in any one of them attain its right and actuality. Hence, 
it i3 idle to ask which of these forms is to be preferred. 
We speak of them now as having only an historical 
interest. 

Here, as in so many other places, must be recognized 
the penetrating vision of Montesquieu, who discusses this 



280 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

question in his celebrated description of the principles of 
these forms of government. But this description we m.ust 
not misunderstand, if we are to do it justice. He, as is well 
known, stated that virtue was the principle of democracy. 
Democracy does in fact rest upon sentiment as upon a form 
which is merely substantive. And it is still under this 
form that the rationality of the absolute will exists in 
democracy. But he goes on to say that England in the 
seventeenth century proved by a beautiful spectacle that its 
efforts to found a democracy were unavailing owing to a 
lack of virtue in the leaders. And he adds that, when in 
a republic virtue disappears, ambition seizes upon those 
whose minds are capable of it, and greed seizes upon all, 
and the state, becoming a general prey, maintains its 
strength only through the power of some individuals and 
the extravagance of all. Upon this view it must be re- 
marked that when society becomes civilized, and the powers 
of particularity are developed and freed, the virtue of the 
rulers is not enough. Not mere sentiment, but the form 
of rational law is required, if the whole is to be able to 
keep itself together, and give to the developed powers of 
particularity the right to expand positively as well as 
negatively. 

Similarly should be set aside the misconception that, 
since in a democratic republic the sentiment of virtue is 
the substantive form, it is wanting, or at least unnecessary, 
in a monarchy ; and also the misconception that the 
legally constituted agencies of a systematized organization 
are opposed to and incompatible with virtue. 

Moderation, or the principle of aristocracy, implies the 
incipient separation of public power and private interest. 
And yet these two are here in such close contact that 
aristocracy is always by its very nature on the verge of 
passing into the severest form of tyranny or anarchy, and 
so bringing on itself destruction. Witness Soman history. 

Montesquieu, by crediting monarchy with the principle 



THE STATE. 281 

of honour, refers, it is clear, not to tie patriarchal or any 
of the ancient monarchies, nor, on the other side, to the 
monarchy which has developed into an objective constitu- 
tion, but to a feudal monarchy, in which the relations of 
political right to lawful private property and the privileges 
of individuals and corporations are confirmed. Since in 
this form of constitution state-life depends upon privileged 
persons, in whose liking is laid a large part of what must 
be done for the maintenance of the state, the objective 
element of these transactions is grounded not on duty but 
on imaginative thought and opinion. Thus, instead of 
duty it is only honour which keeps the state together. 

Here it is natiiral to put a second question : — Who shall 
frame the constitution ? This question seems intelligible 
at first glance, but on closer examination turns out to be 
meaningless. It presupposes that no constitution exists, 
but merely a collection of atomic individuals. How a heap 
of individuals is to obtain a constitution, whether by its 
own efEorts or by means of others, whether by goodness, 
thought, or force, must be left to itself to decide, for with 
a mere mass the conception has nothing to do. If the 
question, however, takes for granted the existence of an 
actual constitution, then to make a constitution means 
only to modify it, the previous existence of the constitution 
implying that any change must be made constitutionally. 
But it is strictly essential that the constitution, though it 
is begotten in time, should not be contemplated as made. 
It is rather to be thought of as above and beyond what is 
made, as self-begotten and self-centred, as divine and per- 
petual. 

Addition. — The principle of the modern world as a whole 
is freedom of subjectivity, the principle that all essential 
aspects of the spiritu al whole should attain their right by 
self-development. From this standpoint one can hardly 
raise the idle question, as to which form is the better, 
monarchy or democracy. We venture to reply simply that 



282 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

the forms of all constitutions of the state are one-sidpd, if 
they are not able to contain the principle of free sub- 
jectivity, and do not know how to correspond to completed 
reason. 

274. Spirit is real only in what it knows itself to be. 
The state, which is the nation's spirit, is the law which 
permeates all its relations, ethical observances, and the 
consciousness of its individuals. Hence the constitution 
of a people depends mainly on the kind and character of 
its self-consciousness. In it are found both its subjective 
freedom and the actuality of the constitution. 

Note. — To think of giving to a people a consitution a 
priori is a whim, overlooking precisely that element which 
renders a constitution something more than a product of 
thought. Every nation, therefore, has the constitution 
which suits it and belongs to it. 

Addition. — The state must in its constitution penetrate 
all its aspects. Napoleon insisted upon giving to the 
Spanish a constitution a priori, but the project failed. A 
constitution is not a mere manufacture, but the work of 
centuries. It is the idea and the consciousness of what is 
reasonable, in so far as it is developed in a people. Hence 
no constitution is merely created. That which Napoleon 
gave to the Spanish was more rational than what they had 
before, yet they viewed it as something foreign to them, 
and rejected it because they were not sufficiently developed. 
In a constitution a people must embody their sense of right 
and reproduce their conditions. Otherwise the constitu- 
tion may exist externally, but it has no significance or 
truth. Often, indeed, the need of and longing for a better 
constitution may arise in individuals, but that is different 
from the whole multitude's being saturated by such a 
notion. This general conviction comes later. The principle 
of morality and inner conviction advocated by Socrates 
came of necessity into being in his day ; but time had to 
elapse before it cou.ld reach general self-consciousness. 



THE STATE. 283 

A. The Function of the Prince. 

275. The function of the prince contains of itself the 
three elements of the totality (§ 272), (1) the universality 
of the constitution and the laws ; (2) counsel, or reference 
of the particular to the universal ; and (3) the final de- 
cision, or the self-determination, into which all else returns 
and from which it receives the beginning of its actuality. 
This absolute self-determination, constituting the dis- 
tinguishing principle of the princely function, as such, 
must be the first to be considered. 

Addition. — We begin with the princely function or the 
factor of individuality, because in it the three phases of 
the state are inter-related as a totality. The I is at once 
the most individual and the most universal. The in- 
dividual occurs also in nature, but there reality is equal to 
non-ideality, and its parts exist externally to one another. 
Hence it is not self-complete existence ; in it the different 
individualities subsist side by side. In spirit, on the other 
hand, all differences exist only as ideal or as a unity. The 
state as spiritual is the interpretation of all its elements, 
but individuality is at the same time the soul, the vital 
and sovereign principle, which embraces all differences. 

276. (1) The basal principle of the political state is the 
substantive unity, which is the ideality of its elements, (a) 
In this ideality the particular functions and offices of the 
state are just as much dissolved as retained. Indeed, they 
are retained only as having no independent authority, but 
such and so extensive an authoritj' as is yielded them in the 
idea of the whole. They proceed, therefore, from the power 
of the state, and are the flexible limbs of the state as of their 
own simplified self. 

Addition. — This ideality of elements is like the life of an 
organized body. Life exists in every part. There is but 
one life in all points, and there is no opposition to it. Any 
part separated from it is dead. Such is also the ideaUty 



284 THE PHILOSOPHr OF KIGHT. 

of all individual occupations, functions, and corporations, 
great as may be their impulse to subsist and do for them- 
selves. It is as in the organism, v^here the stomach 
assumes independence, and yet is at the same time super- 
seded and sacrificed by becoming a member of one vchole. 

277. (p) The particular offices and agencies of the state, 
being its essential elements, are intimately connected with 
it. To the individuals, who manage and control them, 
they are attached in virtue not of their direct personality 
but of their objective and universal qualities. With 
particular personality, as such, they are joined only ex- 
ternally and accidentally. The business and functions of 
the state cannot therefore be private property. 

Addition. — The agencies of the state are attached to in- 
dividuals, vrho nevertheless are not authorized to discharge 
their offices through natural fitness, but by reason of their 
objective qualification. Capacity, skill, character, belong 
to the particularity of the individual, who must, however, 
be adapted to his special business by education and train- 
ing. An office can, therefore, be neither sold nor be- 
queathed. Formerly in France seats in parliament were 
saleable, and this is still the case with any position of 
officer in the English army below a certain grade. These 
facts depended, or depend, upon the mediaeval constitution 
of certain states, and are now gradually vanishing. 

278. These two characteristics, namely (/3) that the par- 
ticular offices and functions of the state have independent 
and firm footing neither in themselves, nor in the particular 
will of individuals, but (a) ultimately in the unity of the 
state as in their simple self, constitute the sovereignty of 
the state. 

Note. — This is sovereignty on its inner side. It has an 
outer side also, as we shall see. — In the older feudal 
monarchy the state had an outer aspect, but on its inner 
side not only was the monarch at no time sovereign, but 
neither was the state. Partly were the several offices and 



THE STATE. 285 

functions of the state and civic life dispersed in independent 
corporations and commnnities (§ 273, note), while the 
whole was rather an aggregate than an organism. Partly, 
too, were these functions the private property of individuals 
who, when it was proposed that they should act, consulted 
their own opinion and wish. 

The idealism, which constitutes sovereignty, is that 
point of view in accordance with which the so-called parts 
of an animal organism are not parts but members or 
organic elements. Their isolation or independent subsists 
ence would be disease. The same principle occurs in the 
abstract conception of the will (see note to next §) as the 
negativity, which by referring itself to itself reaches a 
universality, which definitely moulds itself into individuality 
(§ 7). Into this concrete universality all particularity and 
definiteness are taken up, and receive a new significance. 
It is the absolute self -determining ground. To apprehend 
it we must be at home with the conception in its true sub- 
stance and subjectivity. 

Because sovereignty is the ideality of all particular 
powers, it easily gives rise to the common misconception, 
which takes it to be mere force, empty wilfulness, and 
a synonym for despotism. But despotism is a condition of 
lawlessness, in which the particular will, whether of 
monarch or people (ochlocracy) counts as law, or rather 
instead of law. Sovereignty, on the contrary, constitutes 
the element of the ideality of particular spheres and ofiices, 
in a condition which is lawful and constitutional. No par- 
ticular sphere is independent and self-sufficient in its aims 
and methods of working. It does not immerse itself in its 
own separate vocation. On the contrary, its aims are led by 
and dependent upon the aim of the whole, an aim which 
has been named in general terms and indefinitely the well- 
being of the state. 

This ideality is manifested in a twofold way. (1) In 
times of peace the particular spheres and businesses go 



286 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

their way of satisfying their particular offices and ends. 
According to mere unconscious necessity self-seeking here 
veers round to a contribution in behalf of mutual preserva- 
tion and the preservation of the whole (§ 183). But, also, 
through a direct influence from above is it that these em- 
ployments are continually brought back and limited by the 
aim of the whole (see " Function of Grovernment," § 289), 
and led to make direct efforts for its preservation. (2) In 
circumstances of distress, internal or external, the organism 
consisting of its particulars, comes together into the simple 
conception of sovereignty, to which is intrusted the safety 
of the state, even at the sacrifice of what is at other times 
justifiable. It is here that idealism attains its peculiar 
realization (§ 321). 

279. (2) Sovereignty, at first only the universal thought 
of this ideality, exists merely as a subjectivity assured 
of itself, and as the abstract and so far groundless self- 
direction and ultimate decision of the will ; by virtue of 
this quality the state is individual and one. But in the 
next place subjectivity exists in its truth only as a subject, 
and personality as a person. In the constitution, which 
has matured into rational reality, each of the three elements 
of the conception has its own independent, real, and separate 
embodiment. Hence, the element which implies absolute 
decision is not individuality in general but one individual, 
the monarch. 

Note. — The internal development of a science, whose 
whole content is deduced out of the simple conception— the 
only method which is deserving of the name philosophic, — 
reveals the peculiarity that one and the same conception, 
here the will, which at the beginning is abstract because it 
is the beginning, yet contains itself, condenses of itself its 
own characteristics, and in this way acquires a concrete 
content. Thus it is fundamental in the personality, which 
is at first in simple right abstract. It then develops 
itself through the different forms of subjectivity, and 



THE STATE. 287 

at last in absolute right, the state or the complete, concrete 
objectiyity of the will, attains to the personality of the 
state and its conscious assurance of itself. This final term 
gives to all ]particularities a new form by taking them up 
into its pure self. It ceases to hesitate between reasons 
;pro and con., and deciding by an " I will," initiates all action 
and reality. 

Personality, further, or subjectivity generally, as infinite 
and self-referring, has truth only as a person or inde- 
pendent subject. This independent existence must be one, 
and the truth which it has is of the most direct or imme- 
diate kind. The personality of the state is actualized only 
as a person, the monarch. — Personality expresses the con- 
ception as such, while person contains also the actuality of 
the conception. Hence the conception becomes the idea or 
truth, only when it receives this additional character.— A 
so-called moral person, a society, congregation, or family, 
be it as concrete as it may, possesses personality only as an 
element and abstractly. It has not reached the truth of 
its existence. But the state is this very totality, in which 
the moments of the conception gain reality in accordance 
with their peculiar truth. — All these phases of the idea 
have been already explained, both in their abstract and in 
their concrete forms, in the course of this treatise. Here, 
however, they need to be repeated, because we, while easily 
admitting them piecemeal in their particular forms, do not 
so readily recognise and apprehend them in their true place 
as elements of the idea. 

The conception of monarch offers great difficulty to 
abstract reasonings and to the reflective methods of the 
tmderstanding. The understanding never gets beyond 
isolated determinations, and ascribes merit to mere reasons, 
or finite points of view and what can be derived from them. 
Thus the dignity of the monarch is represented as some- 
thing derivative not only in its form but also in its essen- 
tial character. But the conception of the monarch is not 



288 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

derivative, but purely self-originated. Akin to this mis- 
taken notion is the idea that the right of the monarch is 
based upon and receives its unconditional nature from 
divine authority. The misconceptions that are allied to 
this idea are well-known ; besides, philosophy sets itself 
the task of conceiving the divine. 

The phrase " sovereignty of the people," can be used in 
the sense that a people is in general self-dependent in its 
foreign relations, and constitutes its own state. Such are 
the people of Great Britain, for example. But the people 
of England, Scotland, Ireland, Venice, Genoa, or Ceylon, 
have ceased to be a sovereign people, since they no longer 
have independent princes, and the chief government is not 
exclusively their own. Further, it may be said that internal 
sovereignty resides in the people if, as was already pointed 
out (§§ 277-278), we speak in general terms, and mean 
that sovereignty accrues to the whole state. But the 
sovereignty of the people is usually in modern times 
opposed to the sovereignty of the monarch. This view of 
the sovereignty of the people may be traced to a confused 
idea of what is meant by "the people." The people apart 
from their monarch, and the common membership neces- 
sarily and directly associated with him, is a formless mass. 
It is no longer a state. In it occur none of the charac- 
teristic features of an equipped whole, such as sovereignty, 
government, law-courts, magistrates, professions, etc., etc. 
When these elements of an organized national life make 
their appearance in a people, it ceases to be that undefined 
abstraction, which is indicated by the mere general notion 
" people." 

If by the phrase "sovereignty of the people" is to be 
understood a republic, or more precisely a democracy, for 
by a republic we understand various empirical mixtures 
which do not belong to a philosophic treatise, all that is 
necessary has already been said (§ 273, note). There can 
no longer be any defence of such a notion in contrast with 



THE STATK. 289 

the developed idea. — When a people is not a patriarchal 
tribe, having passed from the primitive condition, which 
made the forms of aristocracy and democracy possible, and 
is represented not as in a wilful and unorganized condition, 
but as a self-developed truly organic totality, in such a 
people sovereignty is the personality of the whole, and 
exists, too, in a reality, which is proportionate to the con- 
ception, the person of the monarch. 

The element of the ultimate self- determining decision of 
will does not appear as an immanent vital element of the 
actual state in its peculiar reality, so long as the classifica- 
tion of constitutions into democracy, aristocracy, and 
monarchy can be made. When this classification prevails 
we are, as we have said, at the stage of the undeveloped 
substantive unity, which has not yet reached infinite 
difference and self-immersion. But even in these incom- 
plete forms of the state the summit must be occupied by 
an individual. Either he appears in actual fact, as iu 
those monarchies, which are of this type. Or, under 
aristocratic, or more especially under democratic govern- 
ments, he appears iu the person of statesmen or generals, 
according to accident and the particular need of the time. 
Here all overt action and realization have their origin and 
completion in the unity of the leader's decision. But this 
subjectivity of decision, confined within a primitive and 
unalloyed unity of functions, must be accidental in its 
origin and manifestation, and also on the whole sub- 
ordinate. Accordingly, a pure and unmixed decision was 
looked for outside of and beyond this conditional summit, 
and was found in a fate which pronounced judgment from 
without. As an element of the idea it had to enter actual 
existence, but yet it had its root outside of human freedom, 
and the compass of the state. — ^To this source is to be 
traced the need of oracles, the daimon of Socrates, the 
consultation of the entrails of animals, the flight of birds, 
9,nd their way of eating, etc., methods resorted to on great 



290 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

occasions, when it was necessary to have final judgment upon 
weighty affairs of state. As mankind had not yet realized 
the profundity of self-consciousness, or come forth frotn 
the pure virginity of the substantive unity into self-conscious 
existence, they had not yet strength to discover such a 
judgment within the pale of human existence. — In the 
daimon of Socrates (§ 138) we can discern the beginning 
of a change ; we can see that the will, formerly set up'on an 
object wholly outside of itseM, has begun to transfer itself 
into itself, and recognize itself within itself. This is the 
beginning of self-conscious and therefore true freedom. 
This real freedom of the idea, since it gives its own present 
self-conscious reality to every one of the elements of ration- 
ality, imparts to the function of consciousness the final 
self-determining certitude, which in the conception of the 
will is the cope-stone. But this final self-determination 
can fall within the sphere of human liberty only in so far 
as it is assigned to an independent and separate pinnacle, 
exalted above all that is particular and conditional. Only 
when so placed, has it a reaUty in accordance with the 
conception. 

Addition. — In the organization of the state, that is to 
say, in constitutional monarchy, we must have before us 
nothing except the inner necessity of the idea. Every 
other point of view must disappear. The state must be 
regarded as a great architectonic building, or the hieroglyph 
of reason, presenting itself in actuality. Everything re- 
ferring merely to utility, externality, etc., must be excluded 
from a philosophic treatment. It is easy for one to grasp 
the notion that the state is the self-determining and com- 
pletely sovereign will, whose judgment is final. It is more 
difficult to apprehend this " I will " as a person. By this 
is not meant that the monarch can be wilful in his acts. 
Eather is he bound to the concrete content of the advice of 
his councillors, and, when the constitution is established, 
he has often nothing to do but sign his name. But this 



THE STATE. 291 

name is -weighty. It is the summit, over which nothing 
can dimb. It may be said that an articulated organiza- 
tion has already existed in the beautiful democracy of 
Athens. Yet we see that the Grreeks extracted the ulti- 
mate judgment from quite external phenomena, such as 
oracles, entrails of sacrificial animals, and the flight of 
birds, and that to nature they held as to a power, which ia 
these ways made known and gave expression to what was 
good for mankind. Self-consciousness had at that time 
not yet risen to the abstraction of subjectivity, or to the 
fact that concerning the matter to be judged upon must be 
spoken a human "I will." This "I will" constitutes the 
greatest distinction between the ancient and the modem 
world, and so must have its peculiar niche in the great 
building of state. It is to be deplored that this character- 
istic should be viewed as something merely external, to be 
set aside or used at pleasure. 

280. (3) This ultimate seK of the state's wUl is in this 
its abstraction an individuality, which is simple and direct. 
Hence its very conception implies that it is natural. Thus 
the monarch as a specific individual is abstracted from all 
other content, and is appointed to the dignity of monarch 
in a directly natural way, by natural birth. 

Note. — This transition from the conception of pure self- 
determination to direct existence, and so to simple natural- 
ness, is truly speculative in its nature. A systematic 
account of it belongs to logic. It is on the whole the 
same transition which is well-known in the nature of the 
will. It is the process of translation of a content out of 
subjectivity, as represented end, into tangible reality 
(§ 8). But the peculiar form of the idea and of the transi- 
tion, here passed in review, is the direct conversion of the 
pure self-determination of the wUl, the simple conception 
itself, into a specific object, a " this," or natural visible 
reality, without the intervention of any particular content, 
such as an end of action. 



292 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

In the' so-called oiitological proof of the existence of 
God there is the same conversion of the absolute conception 
into being. This conversion has constituted the depth of 
the idea in modern times, although it has been recently 
pronounced to be inconceivable. On such a theory, since 
the unity of conception and embodiment is the truth 
(§ 23), all knowledge of the truth must be renounced. 
Although the understanding does not find this unity in its 
consciousness, and harps upon the separation of the two 
elements of the truth, it still permits a belief in a unity. 
But since the current idea of the monarch is regarded as 
issuing out of the ordinary consciousness, the understand- 
ing, with its astute reasonings, holds all the more 
tenaciously to the principle of separation and its results. 
It thereupon denies that the element of ultimate decision 
in the state is absolutely, that is, in .the conception of 
reason, conjoined with direct nature. It maintains, on the 
contrary-, the mer»^ccidental character of the conjunction 
of these two, and hence regards as rational their absolute 
divergence. Finally, from the irrationality of the co-rela- 
tion of these two phases proceed other consequences, which 
destroy the idea of the state. 

Addition. — It is often maintained that the position of 
monarch gives to the affairs of state a haphazard 
character. It is said that the monarch may be ill-educated, 
and unworthy to stand at the helm of state, and that it is 
absurd for such a condition of things to exist under the 
name of reason. It must be replied that the assumption 
on which these objections proceed is of no value, since 
there is here no reference to particularity of character. In 
a completed organization we have to do with nothing but 
the extreme of formal decision, and that for this office is 
needed only a man who says " Yes," and so puts the dot 
upon the " i." The pinnacle of state must be such that 
the private character of its occupant shall be of ho signifi- 
cance. What beyond this final judgment belongs to the 



THE STATE. 293 

inonarcli devolves upon particularity, witli which we have 
no concern. There may indeed arise circumstances, in 
which this particularity alone has prominence, but in that 
case the state is not yet fully, or else badly constructed. 
In a well-ordered monarchy only the objective side of law 
comes to hand, and to this the monarch subjoins merely 
the subjective " I will." 

281. Both elements, the final motiveless self of the will, 
and the like motiveless existence on the side of nature, 
indissolubly unite in the idea of that which is beyond the 
reach of caprice, and constitute the majesty of the monarch. 
In this unity lies the actualized unity of the state. Only 
by means of its uumotived directness on both its external 
and its internal side is the unity taken beyond the pos- 
sibility of degradation to the wilfulness, ends, and views 
of particularity. It is thus removed also from the en- 
feeblement and overthrow of the functions of state and 
from the struggle of faction against faction around the 
throne. 

Note. — Right of birth and right of inheritance constitute 
the basis of legitimacy, not as regards positive right merely, 
but likewise in the idea. — Through the self-determined or 
natural succession to the vacant throne all factious dis- 
putes are avoided. This has rightly been reckoned as 
one of the advantages of inheritance. However, it is only 
a consequence, and to assign it as a motive is to drag 
majesty down into the sphere of mere reasonings. The 
character of majesty is unmotived directness, and final 
self-involved existence. To speak of grounds is to pro- 
pound as its basis not the idea of the state, which is 
internal to it, but something external in its nature and 
alien, such as the thought of the well-being of the state 
or of the people. By such a method inheritance can 
indeed be deduced through medii termini; but there 
might be other medii termini with quite other conse- 
quences. And it is only too well known what conse- 



294 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

quences may be drawn from the well-being of the people 
(solid du pewple). — Hence, philosophy ventures to contem- 
plate majesty only in the medium of thought. Every 
other method of inquiry, except the speculative method 
of the infinite self-grounded idea, absolutely annuls the 
nature of majesty. 

Treely to elect the monarch is readily taken as the most 
natural way. It is closely allied to the following shallow 
thought : — " Because it is the concern and interest of the 
people which the monarch has to provide for, it must be 
left to the people to choose whom it will depute to provide 
for them, and only out of such a commission arises the 
right of governing." This view, as well as the idea that 
the monarch is chief-officer of state, and also the idea of a 
contract between him and the people, proceed from the 
will of the multitude, in the form of inclination, opinion, 
and caprice. These views, as we long ago remarked, first 
make themselves good, or rather seek to do so, in the civic 
community. They can make no headway against the 
principle of the family, still less that of the state, or, in 
general, the idea of the ethical system. — That the election 
of a monarch is the worst of proceedings may be even by 
ratiocination detected in the consequences, which to it 
appear only as something possible or probable, but are in 
fact inevitable. Through the relation involved in free 
choice the particular will gives the ultimate decision, and 
the constitution becomes a free-capitulation, that is, the 
abandonment of the functions of state to the discretion of 
the particular will. The specific functions of state are 
thus transformed into private property, and there ensue 
the enfeeblement and injury of the sovereignty of the 
state, its internal dissolution and external overthrow. 

Addition. — If we are to apprehend the idea of the 
monarch, it is not sufficient for us to say that God has 
established kings, since God has made everything, even 
the worst of things. Nor can we proceed very far under 



THE STATE. 295 

the guidance of the principle of utility, since it is always 
open to point out disadvantages. Just as little are we 
helped by regarding monarchy as positive right. That I 
should have property is necessary, but this specific pos- 
session is accidental. Accidental also appears to be the 
right that one man should stand at the helm of state, if this 
right, too, he regarded as abstract and positive. But this 
right is present absolutely, both as a felt want and as a 
need of the thing itself. A monarch is not remarkable 
for bodily strength or intellect, and yet millions permit 
themselves to be ruled by him. To say that men permit 
themselves to be governed contrary to their interests, ends, 
and intentions is preposterous, since men are not so stupid. 
It is their need and the inner power of the idea which urge 
them to this in opposition to their seeming consciousness, 
and retain them in this relation. 

Although the monarch comes forward as summit and 
essential factor of the constitution, it must be admitted 
that in the constitution a conquered people is not identical 
with the prince. An uprising occurring in a province con- 
quered in war is dLEEerent from a rebellion in a well- 
organized state. The conquered are not rising against 
their prince, and commit no crime against the state, be- 
cause they are not joined with their master in the intimate 
relation of the idea. They do not come within the inner 
necessity of the constitution. In that case only a contract 
is to the fore, and not a state-bond. " Je ne suis pas voire 
prince, je suis voire maitre," replied Napoleon to the delega- 
tion from Erfurt. 

282. Out of the sovereignty of the monarch flows the 
right of pardoning criminals. Only to sovereignty belongs 
that realization of the power of the spirit, which consists 
in regarding what has happened as not having happened, 
and cancels crime by forgiving and forgetting. 

Noie. — The right of pardon is one of the highest recogni- 
tions of the majesty of spirit. This right belongs to the 



296 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

retrospective application of the character of a higher sphere 
to a lower and antecedent one. — Similar applications are 
found in the special sciences, which treat of objects in their 
empirical environment (§ 270, footnote). — It belongs to 
applications of this kind that injury done to the state 
generally or to the sovereignty, majesty, and personality 
of the prince, should fall under the conception of crime, as 
it has already been discussed (§§ 95-102), and should 
indeed be declared to be a specific crime of the gravest 
character. 

Addition. — Pardon is the remission of piuiishment, but 
does not supersede right. Eather right remains, and the 
pardoned is a criminal as much after the pardon as he 
was before. Pardon does not imply that no wrong has 
been committed. Remission of the penalty may occur in 
religion, for by and in spirit what has occurred can be 
made not to have occurred. But in so far as remission 
of penalty is completed in the world, it has place only 
in majesty, and can be effected only by its unmotived 
edict. 

283. The second element contained in the princely func- 
tion is that of particularity, involving a definite content 
and the subsumption of it under the universal. In so far 
as it receives a particular existence, it is the supreme 
council, and is composed of individuals. They present to 
the monarch for his decision the content of the affairs, as 
they arise, and of the legal cases which necessarily spring out 
of actual wants. Along with these they furnish also their 
objective sides, namely, the grounds for decision, the laws 
which bear on the case, the circumstances, etc. As the in- 
dividuals who discharge this ofiice have to do with the 
monarch's immediate person, their appointment and dis- 
missal lie in his unlimited, free, arbitrary will. 

284. The objective side of decision, including knowledge 
of the special content and circumstances, and the legal and 
other evidence, is alone responsible. It, that is to say, is 



THE STATE. 297 

aloiie able to furnish proof of objectivity. It must, there- 
fore, come before a council other than the personal will of 
the monarch, as such. These councils, advising boards or 
individual advisers, are alone answerable. The peculiar 
majesty of the monarch, as the final deciding subjectivity, 
is exalted above all responsibility for the acts of govern- 
ment. 

285. The third element of the princely function concerns 
the absolutely universal, which consists subjectively in the 
conscience of the monarch, objectively in the whole con- 
stitution and the laws. The princely function presupposes 
these other elements, just as much as they presuppose it. 

286. The objective guarantee of the princely office, or the 
securing of the lawful succession to the throne by in- 
heritance, lies in the fact that, just as this office has a 
reality distinct from the other elements determined by 
reason, so the others have also their independent and 
peculiar rights and duties. Every member of a rational 
organism, while preserving itself in independence, preserves 
also the peculiarities of the others. 

Note. — One of the later results of history is such a modi- 
fication of the monarchical constitution that the succession 
to the throne is determined by the law of primogeniture. 
This is, as it were, a return to the patriarchal principle, 
out of which this mode of succession has historically arisen, 
although it now bears the higher form of an absolute 
pinnacle of an organically developed state. This result 
has a most significant bearing upon public liberty, and is 
one of the most important elements in a rational constitu- 
tion, although, as has already been observed, it is not so 
generally understood as it is respected. The earlier and 
merely feudal monarchies, and despotism also, reveal in 
their history the alternation of revolutions, high-handed 
dealings of princes, rebellion, overthrow of princely in- 
dividuals and houses, and a general desolation and de-- 
struction, internal and external. The reason is that their 



298 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

division of state offices, entrusted as they were to vassals, 
pashas, etc., was only mechanical. It was not a distinc- 
tion inherent in the essential character and form, but one 
of merely greater or less power. Accordingly, each part, 
preserving and producing only itself, did not preserve and 
produce the rest. All the elements were thus completely 
isolated and independent. 

In the organic relation, in which members, and not parts, 
are related to one another, each one preserves the rest while 
fulfilling its own sphere. The preservation of the other 
members is the substantial end and product of each one in 
preserving itself. The guarantees asked for, be they for 
the stability of succession, for the stability of the princely 
office generally, or for justice and public liberty, are 
secured in institutions. Love of the people, character, 
oaths, force, etc., may be regarded as subjective guaran- 
tees ; but when we speak of a constitution, we are engaged 
with only objective guarantees, institutions, or organically 
intertwined and self-conditioned elements. Thus, public 
freedom and hereditary succession are mutual guarantees, 
and are absolutely connected. Public liberty is the rational 
constitution, and hereditary succession of the princely 
function lies, as has been shown, in the conception of the 
constitution. 

B. The Executive. 

287. Decision is to be distinguished from its execution, 
and application, and in general from the prosecution and 
preservation of what has been already resolved, namely, the 
existing laws, regulations, establishments for common ends, 
and the lite. This business of subsumption or application 
is undertaken by the executive, including the judiciary and 
police. It is their duty directly to care for each particular 
thing in the civic community, and in these private ends 
make to prevail the universal interest. 



THE STATE. 299 

288. Common interests of private concern occur within 
the civic community, and fall outside of the seM-constituted 
and self-contained universal of the state (§ 266). They 
are administered in the corporations (§ 251) of the 
societies, trades, and professions, by their superintendents 
and representatives. The affairs, overseen by them, are 
the private property and interest of these particular 
spheres, whose authority depends upon the mutual trust 
of the associates, and confidence in the securities. Tet 
these circles must be subordinate to the higher interest of 
the state. Hence, in filling these posts generally, there 
will occur a mingling of the choice of the interested parties 
with the ratification of a higher authority. 

289. To secure the universal interest of the state and to 
preserve the law in the province of particular rights, and also 
to lead these rights back to the universal interest, require 
the attention of subordinates of the executive. These 
subordinates are on one side executive ofiicers and on the 
other a college of advisers. These two meet together in 
the highest offices of all, which ai'e in contact with the 
monarch. 

Note. — The civic community is, as we saw, the arena for 
the contest of the private interests of all against all. It is 
also the seat of battle between private interest and the 
collective special interest, and likewise of both private and 
collective special interests with the higher standpoint and 
order of the state. The spii'it of the corporation, begotten 
in the course of regulating the particular spheres, becomes 
by a process internal to itself converted into the spirit of 
the state. It finds the state to be the means of preserving 
particular ends. This is the secret of the patriotism of the 
citizens in one of its phases. They are aware that the 
state is their substantive being, because it preserves their 
particular spheres, sustains their authority, and considers 
their welfare. Since the spirit of the corporation contains 
directly the riveting of the particular to the universal, it 



300 'JHE PHILOSOPIir OF RIGHT. 

exhibits the depth and strength of the state as it exists in 
sentiment. 

The administration of the business of the corporation 
through its own representatives is often clumsy, because, 
while they see and know their own peculiar interests and 
affairs, they do not discern the connection with remote 
conditions or the universal standpoint. Other elements 
contribute to this result, as, e.g., an intimate private 
relation between the representatives and their subordi- 
nates. Circumstances often tend to equalize these two 
classes which are in many ways mutually dependent. 
This peculiar territoiy can be looked on as handed over to 
the element of formal freedom, in which the knowledge, 
judgment, and practice of individuals, as also their small 
passions and fancies, may have room to wrestle with one 
another. This may all the more easily happen, the more 
trivial from the universal side of the state is the mis- 
managed affair, especially when the mismanagement stands 
of itself in direct relation to the satisfaction and opinion, 
which are derived from it. 

290. In the business of the executive also there is a 
division of labour (§ 198). The organized executive officers 
have therefore a formal though difficult task before them. 
The lower concrete civil life must be governed from below 
in a concrete way. And yet the work must be divided into 
its abstract branches, specially officered by middlemen, 
whose activity in connection with those below them must 
from the lowest to the highest executive offices take the 
form of a continuous concrete oversight. 

Addition. — The main point which crops up in connection 
with the executive is the division of offices. This division 
is concerned with the transition from the universal to the 
j)articular and singular ; and the business is to be divided 
according to the different branches. The difficulty is that 
the different functions, the inferior and superior, must 
work in harmony. The police and the judiciary proceed 



THE STATE. 301 

each on its own course, it is true, but they yet in some 
office or other meet again. The means used to effect this 
conjunction often consists in appointing the chancellor of 
state and the prime minister, ministers in council. The 
matter is thus simplified on its upper side. In this way 
also everything issues from above out of the ministerial 
power, and business is, as they say, centralized. With 
this are associated the greatest possible despatch and 
efficiency in regard to what may affect the universal 
interests of state. This n'gime was introduced by the 
French Revolution, developed by Napoleon, and in France 
is found to this day. But France, on the other hand, has 
neither corporations nor communes, that is to say, the 
sphere in which particular and general interests coincide. 
In the Middle Ages this sphere had acquired too great an 
independence. Then there were states within the state, 
who persisted in behaving as if they wpre self-subsistent 
bodies. Though this ought not to occur, yet the peculiar 
strength of states lies in the communities. Here the govern- 
ment meets vested interests, which must be respected by 
it. These interests are inspected, and may be assisted by 
the government. Thus the individual finds protection in 
the exercise of his rights, and so attaches his particular 
interest to the preservation of the whole. For some time 
past the chief task has been that of organization carried on 
from above : while the lower and bulky part of the whole 
was readily left more or less unorganized. Yet it is of 
high importance that it also should be organized, because 
only as an organism is it a power or force. Otherwise it 
is a mere heap or mass of broken bits. An authoritative 
power is found only in the organic condition of the par- 
ticular spheres. 

291. The offices of the executive are of an objective 
nature, which is already independently marked out in 
accordance with their substance (§287). They are at the 
same time conducted by individuals. Between the objective 



302 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

element and individuals there is no direct, natural con- 
necting tie. Hence individuals are not set aside for these 
oiSces by natural personality or by birth. There is required 
in them the objective element, namely, knowledge and 
proof of fitness. This proof guarantees to the state what 
it needs, and, as it is the sole condition, makes it possible 
for any citizen to devote himself to the universal class. 

292. The subjective side is found in this, that out of 
many one individual must be chosen, and empowered to 
discharge the office. Since in this case the objective 
element does not lie in genius, as it does in art, the number 
of persons from whom the selection may be made is neces- 
sarily indefinite, and whom finally to prefer is beyond the 
possibility of absolute determination. The junction of 
individual and office, two phases whose relation is always 
accidental, devolves upon the princely power as decisive 
and sovereign. 

293. The particular state-business, which monarchy 
transfers to executive officers, constitutes the objective 
side of the sovereignty inherent in the monarch. The 
distinguishing feature of this state-business is found 
in^ie nature of its matter. Just as the activity of the 
aumonmoc . is the discharge of a duty, so their office is not 
subject to chance but a right. 

294. The individual, who by the act of the sovereign 
(§ 292) is given an official vocation, holds it on the 
condition that he discharges his duty, which is the sub- 
stantive factor in his relation. By virtue of this factor 
the individual finds in his official employment his livelihood 
and the assured satisfaction of his particularity (§ 264), 
and in his external surroundings and official activity is 
free from subjective dependence and influences. 

Note. — The state cannot rely upon service which is 
capricious and voluntary, such, for example, as the ad- 
ministration of justice by knights-errant. This service 
reserves to itself the right to act in accordance with sub- 



THE STATE. 303 

jective views, and also the right to withhold itself at will, 
or to realize subjective ends. The opposite extreme to the 
knight-errant in reference to public service would be the 
act of the public servsint, who was attached to his employ- 
ment merely by want, without true duty or right. 

The public service requires the sacrifice of independent 
self-satisfaction at one's pleasiire, and grants the right of 
finding satisfaction in the performance of duty, but no- 
where else. Here is found the conjunction of universal 
and particular interests, a union which constitutes the 
conception and the internal stability of the state (§ 260). 

Official position is not based upon contract (§ 75), 
although it involves the consent of the two sides and also 
a double performance. The public servant is not called to 
a single chance act of service, as is the attorney, but finds 
in his work the main interest of both his spiritual and his 
particular existence. So also it is not a matter merely 
external and particular, the performance of which is in- 
trusted to him. The value of such a matter on its inner 
side is different from the externality of it, and thus is not as 
yet injured, as a stipulation is (§ 77), merely by non- 
performance. That which the public servant has to per- 
form is as it stands of absolute value. Hence positive injury 
or non-performance, either being opposed to the essence of 
service, is a wrong to the universal content (§ 95, a nega- 
tive-infinite judgment), and therefore a fault or crime. 

The assured satisfaction of particular want does away 
with external need. There is no occasion to seek the 
means for alleviating want at the cost of official activity 
and duty. In the universal function of state those who 
are commissioned with the affairs of state are protected 
also against the other subjective side, the private passion 
of subjects, whose private interests, etc., may be injured 
by the furtherance of the universal 

295. Security for the state and its subjects against mis- 
use of power by the authorities and their officers is found 



S04 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

directly iu their responsibility arising out of their nature as 
a hierarchy. But it is also found in the legitimate societies 
and corporations. They hold in check the inflow of sub- 
jective wilfulness into the power of the officers. They also 
supplement from below the control from above, which 
cannot reach down to the conduct of individuals. 

Note. — In the conduct and character of the officers the 
laws and decisions of government touch individuality, and 
are given reality. On this depend the satisfaction and 
confidence of the citizens in the government. On this also 
depends the execution of the government's intentions, or 
else the weakening and frustration of them, since the 
manner in which the intention is realized is by sensibility 
and sentiment easily estimated more highly than the act 
itself, even though it be a tax. It is due to this direct and 
personal contact that the control from above may incom- 
pletely attain its end. This end may find an obstacle in 
the common interest of the official class, which is distinct 
from both subjects and superiors. Especially when in- 
stitutions are perhaps not yet perfected, the higher inter- 
ference of sovereignty for the removal of these hindrances 
(as for example that of Friedrioh II. in the famous Miiller- 
Arnold affair) is demanded and justified. 

296. Whether or no integrity of conduct, gentleness, and 
freedom from passion pass into social custom depends Upon 
the nature of the direct ethical life and thought. These 
phases of character maintain the spiritual balance over 
against the merely mental acquisition of the so-called 
sciences, dealing with the objects of these spheres of govern- 
ment, against also the necessary practice of business, and the 
actual labour of mechanical and other trades. The great- 
ness of the state is also a controlling element, by virtue of 
which the importance of family relations and other private 
ties is diininished, and revenge, hate, and the like passions 
become inoperative and powerless. In concern for the 
great interests of a large state, these subjective elements 



THE STATE. 306 

sink out of sight, and there is produced an habitual regard 
for universal interests and affairs. 

297. The members of the executive and the state officials 
constitute the main part of the middle class, in which are 
found the educated intelligence and the consciousness 
of right of the mass of a people. The institutions of 
sovereignty operating from above and the rights of corpora- 
tions from below prevent this class from occupying the 
position of an exclusive aristocracy and using their educa- 
tion and skill wilfully and despotically. 

Note. — At one time the administration of justice, whose 
object is the peculiar interest of all individuals, had been 
converted iuto an instrument of gain and despotism. The 
knowledge of law was concealed under a pedantic or foreign 
speech, and the knowledge of legal procedure under an in- 
volved formalism. 

Addition. — The state's consciousness and the most con- 
spicuous education are found in the middle class, to which 
the state officials belong. The members of this class, 
therefore, form the pillars of the state in regard to recti- 
tude and intelligence. The state, if it has no middle class, 
is stiU at a low stage of development. In Kussia, for 
example, there is a multitude of serfs and a host of rulers. 
It is of great concern to the state that a middle class should 
be formed, but this can be effected only in an organization 
such as we have described, namely, by the legalization of 
particular circles, which are relatively independent, and by 
a force of officials, whose wiKulness has no power over these 
legalized circles. Action in accordance with universal right, 
and the habit of such action, are consequences of the oppo- 
sition produced by these self-reliant independent circles. 

C. The Legislature. 

298. The legislature interprets the laws and also those 
internal arfiEairs of the state whose content is universal. 
This function is itself a part of the constitution. In it the 



306 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

constitution is presupposed, and so far lies absolutely be- 
yond direct delimitation. Yet it receives development in 
the improvement of tbe laws, and the progressive character 
of the universal affairs of government. 

Addition. — The constitution must unquestionably be the 
solid ground, on vehich the legislature stands. Hence, the 
prime essential is not to set to work to make a constitution. 
It exists, but yet it radically becomes, that is, it is formed 
progressively. This progress is an alteration which is not 
noticed, and has not the form of an alteration. For 
example, the wealth of princes and their families was 
at first a private possession in Germany ; then, without any 
struggle or opposition it was converted into domains, that 
is, state wealth. This came about through the princes 
feeling the need of an undivided possession and demanding 
from the country, and the landed classes generally, security 
for the same. There was in this way developed a kind of 
possession, over which the princes had no longer the sole 
disposition. In a similar way, the emperor was formerly 
judge, and travelled about in his Iringdom giving the law. 
Through the merely seeming or external progress of civili- 
zation, it has become necessary that the emperor should 
more and more delegate this office of judge to others. Thus 
the judicial function passed from the person of the prince 
to colleagues. So the progress of any condition of things is 
a seemingly calm and unnoticed one. In the lapse of 
time a constitution attains a position quite other than it 
had before. 

299. These objects are defined in reference to individuals 
more precisely in two ways, (a) what of good comes to in- 
dividuals to enjoy at the hands of the state, and (/3) what 
they must j)erform for the state. The first division em- 
braces the laws of private right in general, also the rights 
of societies and corporations. To these must be added 
universal institutions, and indirectly (§ 298) the whole of 
the constitution. But that which, on the other hand, is to 



THE STATE. 307 

be performed, is reduced to money as the existing universal 
value of things and services. Hence, it can be determined 
only in so equitable a way that the particular tasks 
and services, which the individual can perform, may be 
effected by his private will. 

Note. — The object-matter of universal legislation may be 
in general distinguished from that of the administrative 
and executive functions in this way. Only what is wholly 
universal in its content falls under legislation, while 
administration deals with the particular and also the 
special way of carrying it out. But this distinction is not 
absolute, since the law, as it is a law, and not a mere 
general command such as " Thou shalt not kill" (§ 140, 
note, p. 142), must be in itself definite, and the more 
definite it is, the more nearly its content approaches 
the possibility of being carried out as it is. But at the 
same time such a complete settlement of the laws would 
give them an empirical side, which in actual execution 
would make them subject to alteration. This would be 
detrimental to their character as laws. The organic unity 
of the functions of state implies that one single spirit both 
fixes the nature of the universal and also carries it out to its 
definite reality. 

It may occur that the state lays no direct claim upon 
the many kinds of skill, possessions, talents, faculties, with 
the manifold personal wealth which is contained in them 
and is tinged with subjective sentiment, but only upon 
that form of wealth which appears as money. — The services 
referring to the defence of the state against enemies belong 
to the duty discussed in the next section of this treatise. 
Money is, in fact, not a special kind of wealth, but the 
universal element in all kinds, in so far as they in pro- 
duction are given such an external reality as can be appre- 
hended as an object. Only at this external point of view 
is it possible and just to estimate performances quantita- 
tively. 



308 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

Plato in his "Eepublic" allows the rulers to appoint 
individuals to their particular class, and assign to them 
their particular tasks (§ 185, note). In feudal-monarchy 
vassals had to perform a similarly unlimited service, and 
simply in their particularity to discharge such a duty as 
that of a judge. Services in the East, such as the vast 
undertakings in architecture in Egypt, are also in quality 
particular. In all these relations there is lacking the 
principle of subjective freedom. In accordance with this 
principle, the substantive act of the individual, which even 
in the above-mentioned services is in its content particular, 
should proceed from his particular will. This right is 
possible only when the demand for work rests upon the 
basis of universal value. Through the influence of this 
right the substitution of money for services has been 
introduced. 

Addition. — The two aspects of the constitution refer to 
the rights and the services of individuals. The services 
are now almost all reduced to money. Military duty is 
perhaps the only remaining personal service. In former 
times claim was made to the concrete individual, who was 
summoned to work in accordance with his skill. Now the 
state buys what it needs. This may seem abstract, dead, 
and unfeeling. It may also seem as if to be satisfied with 
abstract services were for the state a retrograde step. But 
the principle of the modern state involves that everything 
which the individual does should be occasioned by his will. 
By means of money the justice implied in equality can be 
much better substantiated. The talented would be more 
heavily taxed than the man without talents if respect were 
had to concrete capacity. But now, out of reverence for 
subjective liberty, the principle is brought to light that 
only that shall be laid hold upon which is of a nature to 
be laid hold upon. 

300. In the legislative function in its totality are active 
both the monarchical element and the executive. The 



THE STATE. 309 

monarcliical gives the final decision, and the executive 
element advises. The executive element has concrete 
knowledge and oversight of the whole in its many sides 
and in the actual principles firmly rooted in them. It has 
also acquaintance with the wants of the oflices of state. 
In the legislature are at last represented the different 
classes or estates. 

Addition. — It proceeds from a wrong view of the state 
to exclude the members of the executive from the legis- 
lature, as was at one time done by the constituent 
assembly. In England the ministers are rightly members 
of parliament, since those who share in the executive 
should stand in connection with and not in opposition to 
the legislature. The idea that the functions of govern- 
ment should be independent contains the fundamental 
error that they should check one another. But this inde- 
pendence is apt to usurp the unity of the state, and unity 
is above all things to be desired. 

301. By admitting the classes the legislature gives not 
simply implicit but actual existence to matters of general 
concern. The element of subjective formal freedom, the 
public consciousness, or the empirical universality of the 
views and thoughts of the many, here becomes a reality. 

Note. — The expression " The Many " (ol iroWoi) charac- 
terizes the empirical universality better than the word 
" All," which is in current use. Under this " all," children, 
women, etc., are manifestly not meant to be included. 
Manifestly, therefore, the definite term "all" should not 
be employed, when, it may be, some quite indefinite thing 
is being discussed. 

There are found in current opinion so unspeakably many 
perverted and false notions and sayings concerning the 
people, the constitution, and the classes, that it would be 
a vain task to specify, explain, and correct them. When 
it is argued that an assembly of estates is necessary and 
advantageous, it is meant that the people's deputies, or. 



310 THE PHILOSOPHY OF KIGHT. 

indeed, the people itself, must best understand their own 
interest, and that it has undoubtedly the truest desire to 
secure this interest. But it is rather true that the people, 
in so far as this term signifies a special part of the 
citizens, does not know what it wills. To know what we 
will, and further what the absolute will, namely reason, 
wills, is the fruit of deep knowledge and insight, and is 
therefore not the property of the people. 

It requires but little reflection to see that the services 
performed by the classes in behalf of the general well-being 
and public liberty cannot be traced to an insight special to 
these classes. The highest state of&cials have necessarily 
deeper and more comprehensive insight into the workings 
and needs of the state, and also greater skill and wider 
practical experience. They are able without the classes to 
secure the best results, just as it is they who must con- 
tinually do this when the classes are in actual assembly. 
General well-being does not therefore depend upon the 
particular insight of the clg,sses, but is rather the achieve- 
ment of the official deputies. They can inspect the work 
of the officers who are farthest removed from the observa- 
tion of the chief functionaries of state. They, too, have a 
concrete perception of the more urgent special needs and 
defects. But to this intelligent oversight must be added 
the possibility of public censure. This possibility has the 
efEect of calling out the best insight upon public affairs 
and projects, and also the purest motives ; its influence is 
felt by the members of the classes themselves. As for the 
conspicuously good will, which is said to be shown by the 
classes towards the general interest, it has already been 
remarked (§ 272, note) that the masses, who in general 
adopt a negative standpoint, take for granted that the will 
of the government is evil or but little good. If this 
assumption were replied to in kind, it would lead to the 
recrimination that the classes, since they originate in 
individuality, the private standpoint and particular in- 



THE STATE. 311 

terests, are apt to pursue these things at the expense of 
the universal interest ; while the other elements of the 
state, being already at the point of view of the state, are 
devoted to universal ends. As for the pledge to respect 
the public welfare and rational freedom, it should be given 
especially by the classes, but is shared in by aU the other 
institutions of state. This guarantee is present in such 
institutions as the sovereignty of the monarch, hereditary 
succession, and the constitution of the law-courts, mach 
more pronouncedly than in the classes. The classes, there- 
fore, are specially marked out by their containing the sub- 
jective element of universal liberty. In them the peculiar 
insight and peculiar will of the sphere, which in this 
treatise has been called the civic community, is actualized 
in relation to the state. It is here as elsewhere by means 
of the philosophic point of view that this element is 
discerned to be a mark of the idea when developed to a 
totality. This inner necessity is not to be confounded with 
the external necessities and utiUties of this phase of state 
activity. 

Addition. — The attitude of the government to the classes 
must not be in its essence hostile. The belief in the 
necessity of this hostile relation is a sad mistake. The 
government is not one party which stands over against 
another, in such a way that each is seeking to wrest some- 
thing from the other. If the state should find itself in 
such a situation, it must be regarded as a misfortune and 
not as a sign of health. Further, the taxes, to which the 
classes give their consent, are not to be looked upon as a 
gift to the state, but are contributed for the interest of the 
contributors. The pecuUar significance of the classes or 
estates is this, that through them the state enters into and 
begins to share in the subjective consciousness of the 
people. 

302. The classes, considered as a mediating organ, stand 
between the government and the people at large in their 



312 THE PHIJ-OSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

several spheres and individual capacities. This specific 
designation of the classes requires of them a sense and 
sentiment both for the state and government and for the 
interests of special circles and individuals. This position 
of the classes has, in common with the organized executive, 
a mediatorial function. It neither isolates the princely 
function as an extreme, causing it to appear as a mere 
ruling power acting capriciously, nor does it isolate the 
particular interests of communities, corporations, and indi- 
viduals. Furthermore, individuals are not in it contrasted 
with the organized state, and thus are not presented as a 
mass or heap, as unorganized opinion and will, or as a 
mere collective force. 

Note. — It is one of the fundamental principles of logic, 
that a definite element, which, when^standing in opposition, 
has the bearing of an extreme, ceases to be in opposition 
and becomes an organic element, when it is observed to be 
at the same time a mean. In this present question it is 
all the more important to mate prominent this principle, 
since the prejudice is as common as it is dangerous, which 
presents the classes as essentially in opposition to the 
government. Taken organically, that is, in its totality, the 
element of the classes proves its right only through its 
office of mediation. Thus the opposition is reduced to mere 
appearance. If it, in so far as it is manifested, were not 
concerned merely with the superficial aspect of things but 
became a substantive opposition, the state would be con- 
ceived of as in decay. — That the antagonism is not of this 
radical kind is shown by the fact that the objects, against 
which it is directed, are not the essential phases of the 
political organism, but things that are more special and 
indifferent. The passion, which attaches itself to this 
opposition, becomes mere party seeking for some subjective 
interest, perhaps for one of the higher offices of state. 

Addition. — The constitution is essentially a system of 
mediation. In despotic lands where there are only princes 



THE STATE. 313 

and people, the people act, if they act at all, in such a way 
as to disturb or destroy the political organization. But 
when the multitude has an organic relation to the whole, it 
obtains its interests in a right and orderly way. If this 
middle term is not present, the utterance of the masses is 
always violent. Therefore, the despot treats the people 
with indulgence, while his rage afEects only those in his 
immediate neighbourhood. So also the people in a des- 
potism pay light taxes, which in a constitutional state be- 
come larger through the people's own consciousness. In 
no other land are taxes so heavy as they are in England. 

303. The universal class, the class devoted to the service 
of the government, has directly in its structure the universal 
as the end of its essential activity. In that branch of the 
legislative function, which contains the classes, the private 
individual attains political significance and efficiency. 
Hence, private persons cannot appear in the legislature 
either as a mere undistinguished mass, or as an aggregate 
of atoms. In fact, they already exist under two distinct 
aspects. They are found in the class, which is based on 
the substantive relation, and also in the class based upon 
particular interests and the labour by which they are 
secured (§ 201 and fob). Only in this way is the actual 
particular in the state securely attached to the universal. 

Note. — This view makes against another widespread idea, 
that since the private class is in the legislature exalted to 
participation in the universal business, it must appear in 
the form of individuals, be it that representatives are 
chosen for this purpose, or that every person shall exercise 
a voice. But even in the family this abstract atomic view 
is no longer to be found, nor in the civic community, in 
both of which the individual makes his appearance only as 
a member of a universal. As to the state, it is essentially 
an organization, whose members are independent spheres, 
and in it no phase shall show itself as an unorganized 
multitude. The many, as individuals, whom we are prone 



314 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

to call the people, are indeed a collective whole, but merely 
as a multitude or formless mass, whose movement and 
action would be elemental, void of reason, violent, and 
terrible. When in reference to the constitution we still 
hear the people, that is, this unorganized mass, spoken of, 
we may take it for granted that we shall be given only 
generalities and warped declamations. 

The view leading to the disintegration of the common 
existence found in the various circles, which are elements in 
the political world or highest concrete universality, would 
seek to divide the civic from the political life. The basis 
of the state would then be only the abstract individuality 
of wilfulness and opinion, a foundation which is merely 
accidental, and not absolutely steadfast and authoritative. 
That would be like building political life in the air. Although 
in these so-called theories the classes of the civic com- 
munity generally and the classes in their political signi- 
ficance lie far apart, yet speech has retained their unity, a 
union which indeed existed long ago. 

304. The distinction of classes, which is already present 
in the earlier spheres, is contained also within the strict 
circumference of the political classes generally. Their 
abstract position is the extreme of empirical universality 
in opposition to the princely or monarchical principle. In 
this abstract position there is only the possibility of agree- 
ment, and hence quite as much the possibility of an- 
tagonism. It becomes a reasonable relation, and leads to 
the conclusion of the syllogism (§ 302, note), only if its 
middle term, or element of mediation, becomes a reality. 
Just as from the side of the princely function the execu- 
tive (§ 300) has already. this character of reconciliation, so 
also from the side of the classes should one of their elements 
be converted into a mediating term. 

306. Of the classes of the civic community one contains 
the principle, which is really capable of filling this politica 
position. This is the class, whose ethical character is 



THE STATE. 315 

natural. As its basis it has family life, and as regards 
subsistence it has the possession of the soil. As regards 
its particularity it has a will, which rests upon itself, and, 
in common with the princely function, it bears the mark of 
nature. 

306. In its political position and significance this class 
becomes more clearly defined, when its means are made as 
independent of the wealth of the state as they are of the 
uncertainty of trade, the desire for gain, and the fluctuations 
of property. It is secure from the favour at once of the 
executive and of the multitude. It is further secured even 
from its own caprice, since.the members of this class, who 
are called to this office, do without the rights exercised by 
the other citizens. They do not freely dispose of their 
property, nor do they divide it equally among their 
children, whom they love equally. This wealth becomes 
an inalienable inheritance burdened by primogeniture. 

Addition. — This class has a more indeijendent volition. 
The class of property owners is divided into two broad 
parts, the educated and the peasants. In contradistinction 
to these two kinds stand both the industrial class, which is 
dependent on and directed by the general wants, and the 
universal class, which is essentially dependent upon the 
state. The security and stability of this propertied ilass 
may be increased still more by the institution of primogeni- 
ture. This, however, is desirable only in reference to the 
state, since it entails a sacrifice for the political purpose of 
giving to the eldest son an independent life. Primogeni- 
ture is instituted that the state may reckon upon, not the 
mere possibility belonging to sentiment, but upon some- 
thing necessary. Now sentiment, it is true, is not bound 
up with a competence. But it is relatively necessary that 
some having a sufficient property and being thereby freed 
from external pressure, should step forth without hindrance 
and use their activity for the state. But to establish and 
foster primogeniture where there are no political institu- 



316 THE PHILOSOPHY OF BIGHT. 

tions would be nothing but a fetter clogging the freedom 
of private right. Unless this freedom is supplemented by 
the political sense, it goes to meet its dissolution. 

307. The right of this part of the substantive class 
is based upon the nature-principle of the family. But 
through heavy sacrifices for the state this principle is 
transformed, and by the transformation this class is set 
apart for political activity. Hence it is called and entitled 
to this sphere by birth, without the accident of choice. It 
thus receives a stable substantive situation intermediate 
between the subjective caprice and the accidents of the two 
extremes. While it resembles the princely function 
(§ 306), it participates in the wants and rights of the other 
extreme. It thus becomes a support at once to the throne 
and to the comniunity. 

308. Under the other part of the general class element 
is found the fluctuating side of the civic community, which 
externally because of its numerous membership, and neces- 
sarily because of its nature and occupation, takes part in 
legislation only through deputies. If the civic community 
appoints these deputies, it does so in accordance with its 
real nature. It is not a number of atoms gathering to- 
gether merely for a particular and momentary act without 
any further bond of union, but a body systematically 
composed of constituted societies, communities, and cor- 
porations. These various circles receive in this way political 
unity. Through the just claim of this part to be repre- 
sented by a deputation to be summoned by the princely 
power, and also through th6 claim of the first part to make 
an appearance (§ 307), the existence of the classes and of 
their assembly finds its peculiar constitutional guarantee. 

JVoie.— It is held that all should share individually in 
the counsels and decisions regarding the general affairs of 
state. The reason assigned is that all are members of the 
state, its affairs are the affairs of all, and for the transac- 
tion of these affairs all vrith their knowledge and will have 



THE STATE. 317 

a right to be present. This is a notion which, although it 
has no reasonable form, the democratic element would 
insert into the organism of state, notwithstanding the fact 
that the state is an organism only because of its reasonable 
form. This superficial view fastens upon and adheres to 
the abstraction " member of the state." But the rational 
method, the consciousness of the idea, is concrete and is 
combined with the true practical sense, which is itself 
nothing else than the rational sense or the sense for the 
idea. Tet this sense is not to be confounded with mere 
business routine, or bounded by the horizon of a limited 
sphere. The concrete state is the whole, articulated into 
its particular circles, and the member of the state is the 
member of a circle or class. Only his objective character 
can be recognized in the state. His general character con- 
tains the twofold element, private person and think- 
ing person, and thinking is the consciousness and will- 
ing of the universal. But consciousness and will cease 
to be empty only when they are filled with particularity, 
and by particularity is meant the characteristic of a 
particular class. The individual is species, let us say, but 
has his intrinsic general actuality in the species next above 
it. He attains actual and vital contact with the universal 
in the sphere of the corporations and societies (§ 251). It 
remains open to him by means of his skill to make his way 
into any class, for which he has the capacity, including the 
universal class. Another assumption, found in the current 
idea that all should have a share in the business of state, is 
that all understand this business. This is as absurd as it, 
despite its absurdity, is widespread. However, through the 
channel of public opinion (§ 316) every one is free to 
express and make good his subjective opinion concerning 
the universal. 

309. Counsels and decisions upon universal concerns re- 
quire delegates, who are chosen under the belief that they 
have a better understanding of state business than the 



318 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

electors themselves. They are trusted to prosecute not the 
particular interest of a community or a corporation in opposi- 
tion to the universal, but the universal only. Hence, to the 
deputies are not committed specific mandates or explicit 
instructions. But jiist as little has the assembly the cha- 
racter merely of a lively gathering of persons, each of whom 
is bent upon instructing, convincing, and advising the rest. 

Addition. — In the case of representation consent is not 
given directly by all, but by those who are qualified, since 
here the individual voter is no longer a mere infinite 
person. Eepresentation is based upon confidence ; but 
confidence is different from simply casting a vote. To 
be guided by the majority of votes is antagonistic to 
the principle that I must meet my duty as a particular 
person. We have confidence in a person when we believe 
in his insight and his willingness to treat my affair as his 
own according to the best light of his knowledge and con- 
science. The principle of the individual subjective will 
also disappears, for confidence is concerned with a thing, 
the guiding ideals of a man, his behaviour, his acts, his 
concrete understanding. A representative must have a 
character, insight, and will capable of participating in 
universal business. He speaks not in his character as an 
abstract individual, but as one who seeks to make good his 
interests in an assembly occupied with the universal. And 
the electors merely ask for some guarantee that the dele- 
gate shall carry out and further this universal. 

310. Independent means has its right in the first part of 
the classes. The guarantee implied in a qualification and 
sentiment adequate to public ends is found in the second 
part, which arises out of the fluctuating, variable element 
of the civic community. It is chiefly found in sentiment, 
skill, and practical knowledge of the interests of the state 
and civic community, all of which qualities are acquired 
through actual conduct of business in the magistracies and 
jjublic offices, and are preserved by practical use. It is found 



THE STATE. 319 

present, too, in the official or political sense, which, is 
fashioned and tested by actual experience. 

Note. — Subjective opinion readily finds the demand for 
guarantees superfluous or injurious, when it is made upon 
the so-called people. But the state contains the objective 
as its distinguishing trait, and not subjective opinion with 
its seK-confideuce. Individuals can be for the state only 
what in them is objectively recognizable and approved. 
Since this second part of the class-element has its root in 
particular interests and concerns, where accident, change, 
and caprice have the right to disport themselves, the state 
must here look the more closely after the objective. 

The external qualification of a certain property appears, 
when taken abstractly, a one-sided external extreme, in con- 
trast with the other just as one-sided extreme, namely, the 
mere subjective confidence and opinion of the electors. 
Each in its abstraction is distinguished from the concrete 
qualifications, indicated in § 302, which are required of 
those who advise concerning the business of state. — Never- 
theless, in the choice of a magistrate or other officer of a 
society or an association, a property qualification is rightly 
made a condition, especially as much of the business is ad- 
ministered without remuneration. This qualification has 
also direct value in regard to the political business of the 
classes, if the members receive no salary. 

311. Deputies from the civic community should be 
acquainted with the particular needs and interests of the 
body which they represent, and also with the special 
obstacles which ought to be removed. They should there- 
fore be chosen from amongst themselves. Such a delega- 
tion is naturally appointed by the different corporations of 
the civic community (§ 308) by a simple process, which is 
not disturbed by abstractions and atomistic notions. Thus 
they fulfil the point of view of the community directly, and 
either an election is altogether superfluous, or the play of 
opinion and caprice is reduced to a minimum. 



320 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

Note. — It is a manifest advantage to have amongst the 
delegates individuals who represent every considerable 
special hranch of the community, such as trade, manu- 
facture, etc. These individuals must be thoroughly ac- 
quainted with their branch and belong to it. In the idea 
of a loose, indefinite election this important circumstance 
is given over to accident. Every branch, however, has an 
equal right to be represented. To regard the deputies as 
representatives has a significance that is organic and 
rational, only if they are not representatives of mere 
separate individuals or of a mere multitude, but of one 
of the essential spheres of the community and of its larger 
interests. Representation no longer means that one person 
should take the place of another. Rather is the interest 
itself actually present in the person of the representative, 
since he is there in behalf of his own objective nature. 

Of elections by means of many separate persons it may 
be observed that there is necessarily little desire to vote, 
because one vote has so slight an influence. Even when 
those who are entitled to vote are told how extremely 
valuable their privilege is, they do not vote. Hence occurs 
just the opposite of what is sought. The selection passes 
into the hands of a few, a single party, or a special acci- 
dental interest, which should rather be neutralized. 

312. Of the two elements comprised under the classes, 
each brings into council a particular modification. As one 
of these elements has within the sphere of the classes the 
peculiar function of mediation, and that, too, between two 
things which both exist, it has a separate existence. The 
assembly of the classes is thus divided into two chambers. 

313. By this separation the number of courts is in- 
creased, and there is a greater certainty of mature judg- 
ment. Moreover, an accidental decision, secured on the 
spur of the moment by a simple majority of the votes, is 
rendered much less probable. But these are not the main 
advantages. There is, besides, smaller opportunity or 



THE STATE. 321 

occasion for direct opposition to arise between the class 
element and the government. Or in the case when the 
mediating element is also found on the side of the lower 
chamber, the insight of this lower house becomes all the 
stronger, since it in this case appears to be more unpartisan 
and its opposition to be neutralized. 

314. The classes are not the sole investigators of the 
afEairs of state and sole judges of the general interest. 
Eather do they form merely an addition (§ 301). Their 
distinctive trait is that, as they represent the members of 
the civic community who have no share in the government, 
it is through their co-operating knowledge, counsel, and 
judgment that the element of formal freedom attains its 
right. Besides, a general acquaintance with state affairs 
is more widely extended through the publicity given to the 
transactions of the classes. 

315. By means of this avenue to knowledge pubHc 
opinion first attains to true thoughts, and to an insight 
into the condition and conception of the state and its 
concerns. It thus first reaches the capacity of judging 
rationally concerning them. It learns, besides, to know 
and esteem the management, talents, virtues, and skill of 
the different officers of state. While these talents by re- 
ceiving publicity are given a strong impulse towards 
development and an honourable field for exhibiting their 
worth, they are also an antidote for the pride of indi- 
viduals and of the multitude, and are one of the best 
means for their education. 

Addition. — To open the proceedings of the assembly of 
classes to the public is of great educational value, especially 
for the citizens. By it the people learn most certainly the 
true nature of their interests. There prevails extensively 
the idea that everybody knows already what is good for 
the state, and that this general knowledge is merely given 
utterance to in a state assembly. But, indeed, the very 
opposite is the fact. Here, first of all are developed 



,322 THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 

virtues, talents, skill, wliich have to serve as examples. 
Indeed, these assemblies may be awkward for the ministers, 
who must here buckle on their wit and eloquence to resist 
the attacks of their opponents. Publicity is the greatest 
opportunity for instruction in the state interests gener- 
ally. Amongst a people, where publicity is the rule, 
there is seen quite a different attitude towards the state 
than in those places where state assemblies are not found 
or are secret. By the publication of every proceeding, the 
chambers are first brought into union with the larger 
general opinion. It is shown that what a man fancies 
when he is at home with his wife and friends is one thing, 
and quite another thing what occurs in a great gathering 
where one clever stroke annihilates the preceding. 

316. Formal subjective freedom, implying that indi- 
viduals as such should have and express their own judg- 
ment, opinion, and advice concerning affairs of state, makes 
its appearance in that aggregate, which is called public 
opinion. In it what is absolutely universal, substantive, 
and true is joined with its opposite, the independent, 
peculiar, and particular opinions of the many. This phase 
of existence is therefore the actual contradiction of itself ; 
knowledge is appearance, the essential exists directly as 
the unessential. 

Addition.— Vublic opinion is the unorganized means 
through which what a people wills and thinks is made known. 
That which is effective in the state must indeed be in 
organic relation to it ; and in the constitution this is the 
case. But at all times public opinion has been a great 
power, and it is especially so in our time, when the prin- 
ciple of subjective freedom has such importance and sig- 
nificance. What now shall be confirmed is confirmed no 
longer through force, and but little through use and wont, 
but mainly by insight and reasons. 

317. Public opinion contains therefore the eternal sub- 
stantive principles of justice, the true content a,nd result 



THE STATE. 323 

of the whole constitution, of legislation, and of the universal 
condition in general. It exists in the form of sound human 
understanding, that is, of an ethical principle which in the 
shape of prepossessions runs through everything. It con- 
tains the true wants and right tendencies of actuality. 

But when this inner phase comes forth into conscious- 
ness, it appears to imaginative thinking in the form of 
general propositions. It claims to be of interest partly on 
its own separate account ; but it also comes to the assist- 
ance of concrete reasoning upon felt wants and upon the 
events, arrangements, and relations of the state. When 
this happens, there is brought forward also the whole 
range of accidental opinion, with its ignorance and per- 
version, its false knowledge and incorrect judgment. Now, 
as to the consciousness of what is peculiar in thought and 
knowledge, with which the present phenomenon has to do, 
it may be said that the worse an opinion is, the more 
peculiar and unique it is. The bad is in its content wholly 
particular and unique ; the rational, on the contrary, is the 
absolutely universal. Tet it is the unique upon which 
opinion founds its exalted self-esteem. 

Note. — Hence it is not to be regarded merely as a 
difference in the subjective point of view when it is declared 
on one side 

"Vox populi, vox dei ; " 

and on the other side (in Ariosto, for example),' 

" Che '1 Volgare ignorante ogn' un riprenda 
E parli piu di quel che meno intenda ; " 

both phases are found side by side in public opinion. 
Since truth and endless error are so directly united in it, 

' Or in Goethe : 

" Zuschlagen kann die Masse, 
Da 1st sie respektabel ; 
Urtheilen gelingt ihr miserabel." 



324 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

either tke one or the otter is not truly in earnest. It may 
seem hard to decide -which is in earnest ; and it would still 
be hard, even if we were to confine ourselves to the direct 
expression of public opinion. But since in its inner being 
j)ublic opinion is the substantive, it is truly in earnest only 
about that. Tet the substantive cannot be extracted from 
public opinion ; it, by its very nature as substantive, can 
be known only out of itself and on its own account. No 
matter what passion is expended in support of an opinion, 
no matter how seriously it is defended or attacked, this is 
no criterion of its practical validity. Yet least of all would 
opinion tolerate the idea that its earnestness is not earnest 
at all. 

A great mind has publicly raised the question, whether 
it be permitted to deceive a people. We must answer that 
a people does not allow itself to be deceived in l-egard to 
its substantive basis, or the essence and definite character 
of its spirit ; but in regard to the way in which it knows 
this, and judges of its acts and phases, it deceives itself. 

Addition. — The principle of the modern world demands 
that what every man is bound to recognize must seem to 
him justified. He, moreover, has had a voice in the 
discussion and decision. If he has given his word and 
indicated that he is responsible, his subjectivity is satisfied, 
and he allows many things to go unchallenged. In France 
freedom of speech has always proved less dangerous than 
silence. One fears that if a man is silent he will retain his 
aversion to an object ; but reasoning upon it furnishes a 
safety-valve and brings satisfaction, while the object, in 
the meantime, pursues its way unmolested. 

318. Public opinion deserves, therefore, to be esteemed 
and despised ; to be despised in its concrete consciousness 
and expression, to be esteemed in its essential basis. At 
best, its inner nature makes merely an appearance in its 
concrete expression, and that, too, in a more or less 
troubled shape. Since it has not within itself the means of 



THE STATE. 326 

drawing distinctions, nor the capacity to raise its substan- 
tive side into definite knowledge, independence of it is the 
first formal condition of anything great and reasonable, 
whether in actuality or in science. Of any reasonable end 
we may be sure that public opinion will ultimately be 
pleased with it, recognize it, and constitute it one of its 
prepossessions. 

Addition. — In pubHc opinion all Is false and true, but to 
find out the truth in it is the affair of the great man. He 
who tells the time what it wills and means, and then 
brings it to completion, is the great man of the time. In 
his act the inner significance and essence of the time 
is actualized. Who does not learn to despise pubhe 
opinion, which is one thing in one place and another in 
another, will never produce anything great. 

319. The liberty of taking part in state affairs, the 
pricking impulse to say and to have said one's opinion, is 
directly secured by police laws and regulations, which, 
however, hinder and punish the excess of this liberty. In- 
direct security is based upon the government's strength, 
which lies mainly in the rationahty of its constitution and 
the stability of its measures, but partly also in the publicity 
given to the assemblies of the classes. Security is 
guaranteed by publicity in so far as the assemblies voice 
the mature and educated insight into the interests of 
the state, and pass over to others what is less significant, 
especially if they are disabused of the idea that the utter- 
ances of these others are peculiarly important and effica- 
cious. Besides, a broad guarantee is found in the general 
indifference and contempt, with which shallow and malicious 
utterances are quickly and effectually visited. 

Note. — One means of freely and widely participating in 
public affairs is the press, which, in its more extended 
range, is superior to speech, although inferior in vivacity. — 
To define the liberty of the press as the liberty to speak and 
write what one pleases is parallel to the definition of liberty 



326 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

iu general, as liberty to do what one pleases. These views 
belong to the undeveloped crudity and superficiality of 
fanciful theorizing. Nowhere so much as in this matter 
does formalism hold its ground so obstinately, and so little 
permits itseK to be influenced by reasons. And this was to 
be expected, because the object is here the most transient, 
accidental, and particular in the whole range of opinion, 
with its infinite variety of content and aspect. Of course, 
there is no obscurity about a direct summons to steal, 
murder, or revolt. But, aside from that, much depends on 
the manner and form of expression. The words may seem. 
to be quite general and undefined, and yet may conceal 
a perfectly definite significance. Besides, they may have 
consequences, which are not actually expressed. Indeed, it 
may even be debated whether these consequences are really 
in the expression and properly follow from it. This indefi- 
niteness in the form and in the substance does not admit of 
the laws attaining in this case the precision usually de- 
manded of laws. Since in this field crime, wrong, and in- 
justice have their most particular and subjective shape, the 
indefiniteness of the wrong causes the sentence also to be 
completely subjective. Besides, the injury is in this matter 
sought to be done to and make itself real in the thought, 
opinion, and will of others. But it thus comes into contact 
with the freedom of others, upon whom it depends whether 
the act is actually an injury or not. 

Hence, the laws are open to criticism because of their in- 
definiteness. By the skilful use of terms they may be 
evaded ; or, on the other hand, it may be contended that 
the sentence is merely subjective. It may be maintained 
further that an expression is not a deed but only an opinion, 
or thought, or a simple saying. Thus, from the mere sub- 
jectivity of content and from the insignificance of a mere 
opinion or saying the inference is drawn that these words 
should pass unpimished. Yet in the same breath there is 
demanded as great a respect and esteem for that very 



THE STATE. 327 

opinion of mine as for my real mental possession, and for 
the utterance of that opinion as for the deliberate utterance 
of a mental possession. 

The fact remains that injury to the honour of individuals 
generally, as libel, abuse, disdaiaful treatment of the 
government, its officials and officers, especially the person of 
the prince, contempt for the laws, incitement to civil broil, 
etc., are all crimes or faults of difEerent magnitudes. The 
greater indefiniteness of these acts, due to the element 
ia which they find utterance, does not annul their real 
character. It simply causes the subjective ground, on 
which the ofEence is committed, to decide the nature and 
shape of the reaction. It is this subjective nature of the 
ofEence, which in the reaction converts subjectivity and un- 
certainty into necessity, whether this reaction be mere pre- 
vention of crime by the police or specific punishment. 
Here, as always, formalism relies on isolated aspects, 
belonging to the extern&,l appearance, and seeks by these 
abstractions of its own creation to reason away the real and 
concrete nature of the thing. 

As to the sciences, they, if they are sciences in reality, 
are not found in the region of opinion and subjective 
thought, nor does their method of presentation consist in 
the adroit use of terms, or allusions, or haK-uttered, half- 
concealed opinions, but in the simple, definite, and open 
expression of the sense and meaning. Hence, the sciences 
do not come under the category of public opinion 
(§ 316). 

For the rest, the element in which public opinion finds 
utterance and becomes an overt and tangible act is, as we 
have already observed, the intelligence, principles, and 
opinions of others. It is this element which determines 
the peculiar ' effect of these acts or the danger of them 
to individuals, the community or the state (§ 218), just as 
a spark, if thrown upon a heap of gunpowder, is much 
more dangerous than if thrown on the ground, where 



328 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

it goes OTit and leaves no trace. — Hence, as the right 
of science finds security in the content of its matter, so 
also may an uttered wrong find security, or, at least, 
toleration, in the contempt with which it is received. 
Offences, which are in strictness punishable at law, may 
thus partly come under a kind of nemesis. Internal 
impotence, by opposing itself to the talents and virtues, by 
which it feels oppressed, comes in this way to itself, 
and gives self-consciousness to its own nothingness. A 
more harmless form of nemesis was found amongst the 
Roman soldiers in the satirical songs directed against their 
emperors on the triumphal march. Having gone through 
hard service, and yet failing to secure mention in the list of 
honours, they sought to get even with the emperor in this 
jesting way. But even the nemesis which is bad and 
malevolent is, when treated with scorn, deprived of its 
effect. Like the public, which to some extent forms a 
circle for this kind of activity, it is limited to a meaningless 
delight in others' misfortunes and to a condemnation, which 
is inherent in itself. 

320. There is the subjectivity, which is the dissolution of 
the established state life. It has its external manifestation 
in the opinion or reasoning, which, in seeking to make good 
its own random aims, destroys itself. This subjectivity has 
its true reality in its opposite, namely, in that subjectivity, 
which, being identical with the substantive wiU, and 
constituting the conception of the princely power, is the 
ideality of the whole; This higher subjectivity has not 
as yet received in this treatise its right and visible embodi- 
ment. 

Addition. — We have already regarded subjectivity as 
existing in the monarch, and in that capacity occupying 
the pinnacle of the state. The other side of subjectivity 
manifests itself arbitrarily and quite externally in public 
opinion. The subjectivity of the monarch is in itself 
abstract, but it should be concrete, and should as concrete 



THE STATE. 329 

be the ideality -which difEuses itself over the whole. In 
the state which is at peace, all branches of the civic life 
have their subsistence, but this subsistence beside and out- 
side of one another the branches have only as it issues out 
of the idea of the whole. This process or idealization of 
the whole must also have its own manifestation. 



II. ExTEBNAL Sovereignty. 

321. Internal sovereignty (§ 278) is this ideality in so 
far as the elements of spirit, and of the state as the em- 
bodiment of spirit, are unfolded in their necessity, and 
subsist as organs of the state. But spirit, involving a 
reference to itself, which is negative and infinitely free, 
becomes an independent existence, which has incorporated 
the subsistent differences, and hence is exclusive. So 
constituted, the state has an individuality, which exists 
essentially as an individual, and in the sovereign is a real, 
direct individual (§ 279). 

322. Individuality, as exclusive and independent exist- 
ence, appears as a relation to other self-dependent states. 
The independent existence of the actual spirit finds an 
embodiment in this general self-dependence, which is, 
therefore, the first freedom and highest dignity of a 
people. 

Note. — Those who, out of a desire for a collective whole, 
which will constitute a more or less self-dependent state, 
and have its own centre, are willing to abandon their own 
centre and self-dependence, and form with others a new 
whole, are ignorant of the nature of a collective whole, and 
underrate the pride of a people in its independence. — The 
force, which states have on their first appearance in history, 
is this self-dependence, even though it is quite abstract 
and has no further internal development. Hence, in its 
most primitive manifestation, the state has at its head an 
individual, whether he be patriarch, chief, or what not. 



330 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

323. In actual reality, this negative reference of the 
state to itself appears as reference to each other of two 
independent things, as though the negative were some 
external thing. This negative reference has, therefore, in 
its existence the form of an event, involving accidental 
occurrences coming from without. But it is in fact its 
own highest element, its real infinitude, the idealization of 
all its finite materials. The substance, as the absolute 
power, is here brought into contrast with all that is 
individual and particular, such as life, property, the rights 
of property, or even wider circles, and makes their relative 
worthlessness a fact for consciousness. 

324. The phase, according to which the interest and 
right of individuals is made a vanishing factor, is at the 
same time a positive element, forming the basis of their, 
not accidental and fleeting, but absolute individuality. 
This relation and the recognition of it constitute their 
substantial duty. Property and Ufe, not to speak of 
opinions and the ordinary routine of existence, they must 
sacrifice, if necessary, in order to preserve the substantive 
individuality, independence, and sovereignty of the state. 

Note. — It is a very distorted account of the matter when 
the state, in demanding sacrifices from the citizens, is 
taken to be simply the civic community, whose object is 
merely the security of life and property. Security cannot 
possibly be obtained by the sacrifice of what is to be 
secured. 

Herein is to be found the ethical element in war. War 
is not to be regarded as an absolute evil. It is not a 
merely external accident, having its accidental ground ia 
the passions of powerful individuals or nations, in acts 
of injustice, or in anything which ought not to be. Acci- 
dent befalls that which is by nature accidental, and this 
fate is a necessity. So from the standpoint of the con- 
ception and in philosophy the merely accidental vanishes, 
because in it, as it is a mere appearance, is recognized its 



THE STATE. 331 

essence, namely, necessity. It is necessary that what is 
finite, such as life and property, should have its contingent 
nature exposed, since contingency is inherent in the con- 
ception of the finite. This necessity has in one phase of 
it the form of a force of nature, since all that is finite is 
mortal and transient. But in the ethical Uf e, that is to 
say, the state, this force and nature are separated. Ne- 
cessity becomes in this way exalted to the work of freedom, 
and becomes a force which is ethical. What from the 
standpoint of nature is transient, is now transient because 
it is willed to be so ; and that, which is fundamentally 
negative, becomes substantive arid distinctive iudividuaUty 
in the ethical order. 

It is often said, for the sate of edification, that war 
makes short work of the vanity of temporal things. It is 
the element by which the idealization of what is particular 
receives its right and becomes an actuality. Moreover, by 
it, as I have elsewhere expressed it, " finite pursuits are 
rendered unstable, and the ethical health of peoples is 
preserved. ] Just as the movement of the ocean prevents 
the corruption which would be the result of perpetual 
calm, so by war people escape the corruption which would 
be occasioned by a continuous or eternal peace/M— The 
view that this quotation contains merely a philosophical 
idea, or, as it is sometimes called, a justification of provi- 
dence, and that actual war needs another kind of justifica- 
tion, wiU be taken up later. The idealization, which comes 
to the surface in war, viewed as an accidental foreign 
relation, is the same as the ideality by virtue of which the 
internal state functions are organic elements of the whole. 
This principle is found in history in such a fact as that 
successful wars have prevented civil broils and strengthened 
the internal power of the state. So, too, peoples, who 
have been unwilling or afraid to endure internal sove- 
reignty, have been subjugated by others, and in their 
struggles for independence have had honour and success 



332 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

small in proportion to their failure to establish within 
themselves a central political power; their freedom died 
through their fear of its dying. Moreover, states, which 
have no guarantee of independence in the strength of their 
army, states, e.g., that are very small in comparison with 
their neighbours, have continued to subsist because of their 
internal constitution, which merely of itself would seem to 
promise them neither internal repose nor external security. 
These phenomena are illustrations of our principle drawn 
from history. 

Addition. — In peace the civic life becomes more and 
more extended. Each separate sphere walls itself in and 
becomes exclusive, and at last there is a stagnation of 
mankind. Their particularity becomes more and more 
fixed and ossified. Unity of the body is essential to health, 
and where the organs become hard death ensues. Ever- 
lasting peace is frequently demanded as the ideal towards 
which mankind must move. Hence, Kant proposed an 
alliance of princes, which should settle the controversies of 
states, and the Holy Alliance was probably intended to be 
an institution of this kind. But the state is individual, 
and in individuality negation is essentially implied. 
Although a number of states may make themselves into a 
family, the union, because it is an individuality, must 
create an opposition, and so beget an enemy. As a result 
of war peoples are strengthened, nations, which are in- 
volved in civil quarrels, winning repose at home by means 
of war abroad. It is true that war occasions insecurity of 
possessions, but this real insecurity is simply a necessary 
commotion. Erom the pulpit we hear much regarding the 
uncertainty, vanity, and instability of temporal things. At 
the very same time every one, no matter how much he is 
impressed by these utterances, thinks that he will manage 
to retain his own stock and store. But if the uncertainty 
comes in the form of hussars with glistening sabres, and 
begins to work in downright earnest, this touching edifica- 



THE STATE. 333 

tion turns right about face, and hurls curses at the invader. 
In spite of this, wars arise, when they he in the nature of 
the matter. The seeds spring up afresh, and words are 
silenced before the earnest repetitions of history. 

826. Sacrifice for the sake of the individuaUty of the 
state is the substantive relation of all the citizens, and is, 
thus, a universal duty. It is ideality on one of its sides, 
and stands in contrast to the reaUty of particular sub- 
sistence. Hence it itself becomes a specific relation, and to 
it is dedicated a class of its own, the class whose virtue is 
bravery. 

326. Dissensions between states may arise out of any 
one specific side of their relations to each other. Through 
these dissensions the specific part of the state devoted to 
defence receives its distinguishing character. But if the 
whole state, as such, is in danger of losing its independence, 
duty summons all the citizens to its defence. If the whole 
becomes a single force, and is torn from its internal 
position and goes abroad, defence becomes converted into 
a war of conquest. 

Note. — The weaponed force of the state constitutes its 
standing army. The specific function of defending the 
state must be intrusted to a separate class. This pro- 
ceeding is due to the same necessity by which each of the 
other particular elements, interests, or affairs, has a 
separate place, as in raarriage, the industrial class, the 
business class, and the political class. Theorizing, which 
wanders up and down with its reasons, goes about to con- 
template the greater advantages or the greater disadvan- 
tages of a standing army. Mere opinion decides against 
an army, because the conception of the matter is harder to 
understand than are separate and external sides. Another 
reason is that the interests and aims of particularity, 
expenses, consequent higher taxation, etc., are counted of 
greater concern by the civic community than is the abso- 
lutely necessary. On this view the necessary is valuable 



'334 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

only as a means to the preservation of the various special 
civic interests. 

327. Bravery taken by itself is a formal virtue, since in 
it freedom is farthest removed from all special aims, 
possessions, and enjoyments, and even from life. But it 
involves a negation or renunciation of only external 
realities, and does not carry vrith it a completion of the 
spiritual nature. Thus, the sentiment of courage may be 
based upon any one of a variety of grounds, and its actual 
result may be not for the brave themselves, but only for 
others. 

Addition. — The military class is the class of universality. 
To it are assigned the defence of the state and the duty of 
bringing into existence the ideality implicit in itself. In 
other words it must sacrifice itself. Bravery is, it is true, 
of different sorts. The courage of the animal, or the 
robber, the bravery due to a sense of honour, the bravery 
of chivalry, are not yet the true forms of it. True bravery 
in civilized peoples consists in a readiness to offer up one- 
self in the service of the state, so that the individual counts 
only as one amongst many. Not personal fearlessness, but 
the tating of one's place in a universal cause, is the 
valuable feature of it. In India five hundred men con- 
quered twenty thousand, who were by no means cowardly 
but lacked the sense of co-operation. 

328. The content of bravery as a sentiment is found in 
the true absolute final end, the sovereignty of the state. 
Bravery realizes this end, and in so doing gives up personal 
reality. Hence, in this feeling are found the most rigorous 
and direct antagonisms. There is present in it a self- 
sacrifice, which is yet the existence of freedom. In it is 
found the highest self-control or independence, which yet 
in its existence submits to the mechanism of an external 
order and a life of service. An utter obedience or com- 
plete abnegation of one's own opinion and reasonings, even 
an absence of one's own spirit, is coupled with the most 



THE STATE. 335 

intense and comprehensive direct presence of the spirit and 
of resolution. The most hostile and hence most personal 
attitude towards individuals is allied with perfect indif- 
ference, or even, it may be, a kindly feeUng towards them as 
individuals. 

Note. — To risk one's life is indeed something more than 
fear of death, but it is yet a mere negative, having no 
independent character and value. Only the positive ele- 
ment, the aim and content of the act, gives significance to 
the feeling of fearlessness. Bobbers or murderers, having 
in view a crime, adventurers bent upon gratifying merely 
their own fancy, risk their lives without fear. — The prin- 
ciple of the modern world, that is, the thought and the 
universal, have given bravery a higher form. It now seems 
to be mechanical in its expression, being the act not of a 
particular person, but of a member of the whole. As 
antagonism is now directed, not against separate persons, 
but against a hostile whole, personal courage appears as 
impersonal. To this change is due the invention of the 
gun ; and this by no means chance invention has trans- 
muted the naerely personal form of bravery into the more 
abstract. 

329. The state has a foreign aspect, because it is an 
individual subject. Hence, its relation to other states falls 
within, the princely function. Upon this function it de- 
volves solely and directly to command the armed force, to 
entertain relations with other states through ambassadors, 
to decide upon peace and war, and to conduct other 
negotiations. 

Addition. — In almost all European countries the in- 
dividual summit is the princely function, which has charge 
of foreign affairs. Wherever the constitution requires the 
existence of classes or estates, it may be asked whether the 
classes, which in any ease control the supplies, should not 
also "resolve upon war and peace. In England, for 
example, no unpopular war can be waged. But if it is 



336 THE PHILOSOPHT OF RIGHT. 

meant that princes and cabinets are more subject to 
passion tlian tlie houses, and hence that the houses should 
decide whether, there should be war or peace, it must 
be replied, that often whole nations have been roused to a 
pitch of enthusiasm surpassing that of their princes. 
Frequently in England the whole people have insisted upon 
war, and in a certain measure compelled the ministers to 
wage it. The popularity of Pitt was due to his knowing 
how to meet what the nation willed. Not till afterwards 
did calm give rise to the consciousness that the war 
was utterly useless, and undertaken without adequate 
means. Moreover, a state is conijiected not only with 
another but with several others, and the complications are 
so delicate that they can be managed only by the highest 
power. 

B. Intbbnatiojstal Law. 

330. International law arises out of the relation to one 
another of independent states. Whatever is absolute in 
this relation receives the form of a command, because its 
reality depends upon a distinct sovereign will. 

Addition. — A state is not a private person, but in itself 
a completely independent totality. Hence, the relation of 
states to one another is not merely that of morality and 
private right. It is often desired that states should be 
regarded from the standpoint of private right and morality. 
But the position of private persons is such that they have 
over them a law court, which realizes what is intrinsically 
right. A relation between states ought also to be intrinsi- 
cally right, and in mundane affairs that which is intrinsi- 
cally right ought to have power. But as against the state 
there is no power to decide what is intrinsically right and 
to realize this decision. Hence, we must here remain by 
the absolute command. States in their relation to one 
another are independent and look upon the stipulations 
which they make one with another as provisional. 



THE STATE. 337 

331. The nation as a state is the spirit suhstantively 
realized and directly real. Hence, it is the absolute power 
on earth. As regards other states it exists in sovereign 
independence. Hence, to exist for and he recognized by 
another as such a state is its primary absolute right. But 
this right is yet only formal, and the state's demand to be 
recognized, when based on these external relations, is 
abstract. Whether the state exists absolutely and in 
concrete fact, depends upon its content, constitution, and 
condition. Even then the recognition, containing the 
identity of both inner and outer relations, depends upon 
the view and will of another. 

Note. — Just as the individual person is not real unless 
related to others (§ 71 and elsewhere), so the state is not 
really individual unless related to other states (§ 322). 
The legitimate province of a state in its foreign relations, 
and more especially of the princely function, is on one 
side wholly iatemal ; a state shall not meddle with the 
iutemal affairs of another state. Yet, on the other side, it 
is essential for its completeness that it be recognized by 
others. But this recognition demands as a guarantee 
that it shall recognize those who recognize it, and will have 
respect for their independence. Therefore they cannot be 
indifEerent to its internal affairs. — In the case of a nomadic 
people, or any people occupying a lower grade of civiliza- 
tion, the question arises how far it can be considered as 
a state. The religious opinions formerly held by Jews, 
and Mahomedans may contain a still higher opposition, 
which does not permit of the universal identity implied in 
recognition. 

Addition. — When Napoleon, before the peace of Campo- 
formio, said, " The French Eepublic needs recognition as 
little as the sim requires to be recognized," he really 
indicated the strength of the existence, which already 
carried with it a guarantee of recognition, without its 
having been expressed. 



338 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

332. The direct reality, in which, states stand to one 
another, sunders itself into various relations, whose nature 
proceeds from independent caprice on both sides, and 
hence has as a general thing the formal character of a 
contract. The subject matter of these contracts is, how- 
ever, of infinitely narrower range than of those in the civic 
community. There individuals are dependent upon one 
another in a great variety of ways, while independent 
states are wholes, which find satisfaction in the main 
within themselves. 

333. International law, or the law which is universal, 
and is meant to hold absolutely good between states, is to be 
distinguished from the special content of positive treaties, 
and has at its basis the proposition that treaties, as they 
involve the mutual obligations of states, must be kept 
inviolate. But because the relation of states to one another 
has sovereignty as its principle, they are so far in a con- 
dition of nature one to the other. Their rights have 
reality not in a general will, which is constituted as a 
superior power, but in their particular wills. Accordingly 
the fundamental proposition of international law remains a 
good intention, while in the . actual situation the relation 
established by the treaty is being continually shifted or 
abrogated. 

^iTofe.— There is no judge over states, at most only a 
referee or mediator, and even the mediatorial function is 
only an accidental thing, being due to particular wills. 
Kant's idea was that eternal peace should be secured by an 
alliance of states. This alliance should settle every dispute, 
make impossible the resort to arms for a decision, and be 
recognized by every state. . This idea assumes that states 
are in accord, an agreement which, strengthened though it 
might be by moral, religious, and other considerations, 
nevertheless always rested on the private sovereign will, 
and was therefore liable to be disturbed by the element of 
contingency. 



THE STATE. 339 

334. Therefore, when the particular wills of states can 
come to no agreement, the controversy can be settled only 
by war. Owing to the wide field and the varied relations 
of the citizens of different states to one another, injuries 
occur easily and frequently. What of these injuries is to 
be viewed as a specific breach of a treaty or as a violation 
of formal recognition and honour remains from the nature 
of the case indefinite. A state may introduce its infinitude 
and honour into every one of its separate compartments. 
It is all the more tempted to make or seek some occasion 
for a display of irritability, if the individuality within it 
has been strengthened by long internal rest, and desires an 
outlet for its pent-up activity. 

335. Moreover, the state as a spiritual whole cannot be 
satisfied merely with taking notice of the fact of an injury, 
because injury involves a threatened danger arising from 
the possible action of the other state. Then, too, there is 
the weighing of probabilities, guesses at intentions, and 
so forth, all of which have a part in the creation of 
strife. 

336. Each self-dependent state has the standing of a 
particular will ; and it is on this alone that the validity of 
treaties depends. This particular will of the whole is in 
its content its well-being, and well-being constitutes the 
highest law in its relation to another. All the more is 
this so since the idea of the state involves that the opposi- 
tion between right or abstract freedom on one side and the 
complete specific content or well-being on the other is 
superseded. It is to states as concrete wholes that recog- 
nition (§ 331) is first granted. 

337. The substantive weal of the state is its weal as a 
particular state in its definite interests and condition, its 
peculiar external circumstances, and its particular treaty 
obligations. Thus the government is a particular wisdom 
and not universal providence (§ 324, note). So, too, its 
end in relation to other states, the principle justifying its 



340 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

wars and treaties, is not a general thonglit, such as philan- 
thropy, but the actually wronged or threatened weal in its 
definite particularity. 

Note. — At one time a lengthy discussion was held with 
regard to the opposition between morals and politics, and 
the demand was made that politics should be in accordance 
with morality. Here it may be remarked merely that the 
commonweal has quite another authority than the weal of 
the individual, and that the ethical substance or the state 
has directly its reality or right not in an abstract but in a 
concrete existence. This existence, and not one of the 
many general thoughts held to be moral commands, must 
be the principle of its conduct. The view that politics in 
this assumed opposition is presumptively in the wrong 
depends on a shallow notion both of morality and of the 
nature of the state in relation to morality. 

338. Although in war there prevails force, contiugency, 
and absence of right, states continue to recognize one 
another as states. In this fact is implied a covenant, by 
virtue of which each state retains absolute value. Hence, 
war, even when actively prosecuted, is understood to be 
temporary, and in international law is recognized as contain- 
ing the possibility of peace. Ambassadors, also, are to be 
respected. War is not to be waged" against internal insti- 
tutions, or the peaceable family and private life, or private 
persons. 

Addition. — Modern wars are carried on humanely. One 
person is ' not set in hate over against another. Personal 
hostilities occur at most in the case of the pickets. But in 
the army as an army, enmity is something undetermined, 
and gives place to the duty which each person owes to 
another. 

339. For the rest, the capture of prisoners in time of 
war, and in time of peace the concession of rights of 
private intercourse to the subjects of another state, depend 
principally upon the ethical observances of nations. In 



THE STATE. 341 

them is embodied that inner universality of behaviour, 
which is preserved under all relations. 

Addition. — The nations of Europe form a family by 
virtue of the universal principle of their legislation, their 
ethical observances, and their civilization. Amongst them 
international behaviour is ameliorated, whUe there prevails 
elsewhere a mutual infliction of evils. The relation of one 
state to another fluctuates ; no judge is present to compose 
differences ; the higher judge is simply the universal and 
absolute spirit, the spirit of the world. 

340. As states are particular, there is manifested in their 
relation to one another a shifting play of internal particu- 
larity of passions, interests, aims, talents, virtues, force, 
wrong, vice, and external contingency on the very largest 
scale. In this play even the ethical whole, national inde- 
pendence, is exposed to chance. The spirit of a nation is 
an existing individual having in particularity its objective 
actuality and self-consciousness. Because of this particu- 
larity it is limited. The destinies and deeds of states in 
their connection with one another are the visible dialectic 
of the finite nature of these spirits. Out of this dialectic 
the universal spirit, the spirit of the world, the unlimited 
spirit, produces itself. It has the highest right of all, and 
exercises its right upon the lower spirits in world-history. 
The history of the world is the world's court of judgment. 

C. WOELD-HISTOET. 

341. The universal spirit exists concretely in art in the 
form of perception and image, in religion in the form of 
feeling and pictorial imaginative thinking, and in philo- 
sophy in the form of pure free thought. ( In world-history 
this concrete existence of spirit is the spiritual actuality in 
the -total range of its internality and externality. It is a 
court of judgment because in its absolute universality the 
particular, namely, the Penates, the civic community, and 



342 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

the national spirit in their many-coloured reality are all 
merely ideal. The movement of spirit in this case consists 
in visibly presenting these spheres as merely ideal. 

342. Moreover, world-history is not a court of judgment, 
whose principle is force, nor is it the-abstract and irrational 
necessity, of a— blind fate. — It is self.caused and self- 
realized^^ggonJ, and its_a.c,t.naj i7iafl p.-yiRt,p-nr»tf in ^pirit- is- 
Enosfledge. Hence, its development issuing solely out or 
the conception of its freedom is a necessary development 
of the ele m^ntbLiii rgasea; It is, therefore, an_ajnfQldiJig_ 
of the s piritVself-consciousness n rid fre^dnn-). ItJ£__lh£. 
ex hibition and actual izaition-jof-tbe-^HHversal-spirit. 

343. The history of spirit is its overt deeds, for only 
what it does it^is, and its deed is to make itself as a spirit 
the object of its consciousness, to explain and lay hold 
upon itself by reference to itself. To lay hold upon itself 
is its being and principle, and the completion of this act is 
at the same time self-renunciation and transition. To 
express the matter formally, the spirit which again -appre- 
hends what has already been grasped and actualized, or, 
what is the same thing, passes through self-renunciation 
into itself, is the s^jirit of a higher stage. 

Note. — Here occurs the question of the perfection and 
education of humanity. They who have argued in favour 
of this idea, have surmised something of the nature of 
spirit. They have understood that spirit has rvwOi asavrov 
as a law of its being, and that when it lays hold upon what 
it itself is, it assumes a higher form. To those who have 
rejected this idea, spirit has remained an empty word and 
history a superficial play of accidental and so-called mere 
human strife and passion. Though in their use of the 
words "providence" and "design of providence," they 
express their belief in a higher control, they do not fill up 
the notion, but announce that the design of providence is 
for them unknowable and inconceivable. 

344. States, peoples, and individuals are established 



THE STATE. 343 

upon their own particular definite principle, which has 
systematized reality in their constitutions and in the 
entire compass of their surroundings. Of this systematized 
reality they are aware, and in its interests are absorbed. 
Yet are they the unconscious tools and organs of the 
world-spirit, through whose inner activity the lower forms 
pass away. Thus the spirit by its own motion and for its 
own end makes ready and works out the transition iuto its 
next higher stage. 

345. Justice and virtue, wrong, force, and crime, talents) 
and their results, smull and great passions, innocence andl 
guilt, the splendour of individuals, national life, inde- 
pendence, the fortune and misfortune of states and indi- 
viduals, have in the sphere o f couscinns vea.lit y their dfifiiiitp. 
Tnfia.Tiing and ya.hiP!, and find in that sphere judgment and 
their due. Thi s due is , however, a s yet incomplet e. In 
world-history, which lies beyond this range of vision, the 
idea of the j7orld-spirit, in that necessary phase of it 
which constitutes at any time its actual stage, is given its 
absolute right. The nation, then really flourishing, attains 
to happiness and renown, and its deeds receive completion. 

346. Since history i s the embodimeTit of sp irit in the 
fo rm of events, that is, of d irect nat ural reahty, the stages 
of development are present as dirpft natnra,1 principles. 
Because they are natural, they conform to the nature of a 
mu Mplicity, and exist o ne outs ide the ot her. Hence, to 
each nation is to be ascribed a sin gle pr inciple, com- 
prised under its geogra phical and, anthropoloBjical exist- 
ence. 

347. To the nation, whose natural principle is one of these 
stages, is assigned the accomplishment of it through the 
process characteristic of the self-developing self-conscious- 
ness of the world-spirit.'^ fin the history of the world this 
nation is for a given epoch dominant, although it can make 
an epoch but once (§ 346). In contrast vnth the absolute 
right of this nation to be the bearer of the current phase 



344 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

in the development of the world-spirit, the spirits of other 
existing nations are void of right, and they, like those 
whose epochs are gone, count "^o longer in the history of 
the world. 

Note. — The special history of a world-historic nation 

contains the nnfnTrMnCT of its prinfiiplA from its nnfiftvfilnp afl 

i nfancy up to the tim e when, in the. fall manhood of fsee 
AiViipa.1 ap.lf.nnnsdinnaTipgji it presses in upon univ ersal 
hiiSi^ii it contains, moreover, the period of decline and 
destruction, the rise of a higher principle bein g ma rked in- 
it si mply as the negative of its own . Hence, the spirit 
passes over into that higher principle, and thus indicates to 
world-history another nation. From that time onward 
the first nation . has lost absolute interest, absorbs the 
higher principle positively, it may be, and fashions itself 
in accordance with it, but is, after all, only a recipient, and 
has no indwelling vitality and freshness. Perhaps it loses 
its independence, perhaps continues to drag itself on as a 
particular state or circle of states, and spends itself in . 
various random civil enterprises and foreign broils. 

348. At the summit of all actions, includixjg world- 
historical actions, stand individuals. Each of these indi- 
viduals is a subjectivity who realizes what is substantive 
(§ 279, note). He is a living embodiment of the substan- 
tive deed of the world-spirit, and is, therefore, directly 
identical with this deed. It is concealed even from him- 
self, and is not his object and end (§ 344). Thus they do 
not receive honour and thanks for their acts either from 
their contemporaries (§ 344), or from the public opinion 
of posterity. By this opinion they are viewed merely as 
formal subjectivities, and, as such, are simply given their 
part in immortal fame. 

349. A people is not as yet a state. The transition from 
the family, horde, clan, or multitude into a state constitutes 
the formal realization in it of the idea. If the ethical 
substance, which every people has implicitly, lacks this 



THE STATE. 346 

form, it is without that objectivity which comes from laws 
and thought-out regulations. It has neither for itself nor 
for others any universal or generally admitted reality. It 
will not be recognized. Its independence, being devoid of 
objective law or secure realized rationality, is formal only 
and not a sovereignty. 

Note. — From the ordinary point of view we do not caU 
the patriarchal condition a constitution, or a people in this 
condition a state, or its independence sovereignty. Before 
the beginning of actual history there are found uninterest- 
ing stupid .innocence and the bravery arising out of the 
formal struggle for recognition and out of revenge (§§ 331, 
57, note). 

350. It is the a.hRolnte^rjght "f the irlej). to come visibly 
forth ,_ and proceeding from marriage and agriculture 
(§ 203, note) realize itself j n laws and objective institu- 
tions. This is true whether its realization appears in the 
form of divine law and beneficence or in the form of force 
and wrong. This right is the right of heroes to found 
states. 

851. In the same way civilized nations may treat as 
barbarians the peoples who are behind them in the essential 
elements of the state. Thus, the rights of ipere herdsmen, 
hunters, and tillers of the soil are inferior, and their 
independence is merely formal. 

Note. — Wars and contests arising under such circum- 
stances are struggles for recognition in behalf of a certain 
definite content. It is this feature of them which is 
significant in world-history. 

352. The concrete ideas, which embody the national 
minds or - Spirits, h as its truth in the concrete idea i n its 
absolute, jiniversality. This is the spirit of the world, 
around whose throne stand the other spirits as perfecters 
of its actuality, and witnesses and ornaments of its splen- 
dour." Since it is, as spirit, only the movement of its 
activity in order to know itself absolutely, to free its con- 



346 THE PHILOSOPHY OF BIGHT. 

sciousness from mere direct naturalness, and to come to. 
itself, the principles of the different forms of its self-con- 
sciousness, as they appear in the process of liberation, are 
fgufc They a re the princ i ples of the four world -historic 
kingdoms. 

353. In its first and direct revelation the world-spirit 
has as its principle the forin of the sub stantive sp irit, in 
whose identity individaality jg_in its essen ce submer ged 
a nd without explicit j ustifi cation. 

In the second principle the substantive spirit is _aiWaje-of 

itself^ Hg£e jpirit isjt]ie._pQ |itigfe-COBtgBt-ainrl filling,^ a nd 

is also at the same time the livingjonn, which is in its 

nature seK-referred . 

^ The third principle is the r etreat int oitself-o L this con- 

M scious sel f -referred existence. There thus arises an abstract 

"^ universali ty., and with it an infinite opposition to ob jectivity. 

wh khis regarded as bereft oLsjiri t.' ~ 

In the fourth principle_this opposition of the spirit is 
o verturned Jn order that spirit may receive into its inner 
self its _truth and^ concrete essence. It thus becomes at 
home with objectivity, and the_^twoare r econcile d. Because 
the spirit has come back to its formal substantive realit y 
by returninp: ftnt-of-thia_ infinite opp osition, it seeks to 
pggduc e and know its triith^as thought,, and as a world o f 
established, reality . 

364"rrn accordance with these four principles the four 
world-historic empires are (1) the Oriental, (2) the Greek, 
(3) the Koman, and (4) the Grermanic. 

355. (1) The Obibntal Empibe : — The first empire is 
the substantive world-intuition, which proceeds from the 
natural whole of patriarchal times. It has no internal 
divisions. Its worldly government is theocracy, its ruler 
a high priest or God, its constitution and legislation are at 
the same time its religion, and its civic and legal regula- 
tions are religious and moral commands or usages. In the 
splendour of this totality the individual personality sinks 



THE STATE. 347 

without rights ; external nature is directly divine or an 
ornament of God, and the history of reaUty is poetry. The 
distinctions, .which develop themselves in customs, govern- 
ment, and the state, serve instead of laws, being converted 
by mere social usage into clumsy, diffuse, and superstitious 
ceremonies, the accidents of personal power and arbitrary 
rule. The division into classes becomes a caste fixed as 
the laws of nature. Since in the Oriental empire there is 
nothing stable, or rather what is firm is petrified, it has 
life only in a movement, which goes on from the outside, 
and becomes an elemental violence and desolation. Internal 
repose is merely a private Ufe, which is sunk in feebleness 
and lassitude. 

Note. — The element of substantive natural spirituality 
is present in the first forming of every state, and constitutes 
the absolute starting-point of its history. This assertion 
is presented and historically established by Dr. Stuhr in 
his well-reasoned and scholarly treatise " Vom Untergange 
der Naturstaaten " (Berlin, 1812), who, moreover, suggests 
in this work a rational method of viewing constitutional 
history and history in general. The principle of sub- 
jectivity and self-conscious freedom he ascribes to the 
German nation. But since the treatise is wholly taken up 
with the decline of the nature-states, it simply leads to the 
point at which this modern principle makes its appearance. 
At that time it assumed in part the guise of restless move- 
ment, human caprice, and corruption, in part the particular 
guise of feeling, not having as yet developed itself into the 
objectivity of self-conscious substantivity or the condition 
of organized law. 

356. (2) The Greek Empire : — This empire still con- 
tains the earlier substantive unity of the finite and infinite, 
but only as a mysterious background, suppressed and kept 
down in gloomy reminiscence, in caves and in traditional 
imagery. This background under the influence of the seK- 
distinguishing spirib is recreated into individual spirituality. 



848 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGllT. 

and exalted into the daylight of consciousness, where it is 
tempered and clarified into beauty and a free and cheerful 
ethical life. Here arises the principle of personal indi- 
viduality, although it is not as yet self-centred, but held in 
its ideal unity. One result of this incompleteness is that 
the whole is broken up into a number of particular national 
minds or spirits. Further, the final decision of will is not 
as yet intrusted to the subjectivity of the independent self - 
consciousness, but resides in a power, which is higher than, 
and lies beyond it (§ 279, note). Moreover, the particularity, 
which is found in wants, is not yet taken up into freedom, 
but segregated in a class of slaves. 

357. (3) The Roman Empiee : — In this empire the 
distinctions of spirit are carried to the length of an inflnite 
rupt ure of the ethical life into two extremes, p firsonal 

/ priva te _aelf-consciousness. and abstract universality .^ The 
antagonism, arising between the substantive intuitiori of an 
aristocracy and the principle of f ree personaililiy in- demo- 
cratic form, developed on the side of the aristocracy into 
superstition and the retention of cold self-seeking power, 
and on the side of the democracy into the corrupt mass. 
The dissolution of the whole culminates in universal mis- 
fortune, ethical life dies, national individualities, having 
merely the bond of union of a Pantheon, perish, and indi- 
viduals are degraded to the level of that equality, in which 
they are merely private persons and have only formal 
rights. 

358. (4) The GtEEMAn Empiee : — Owing to the loss of 
itself and its world, and to the infinite pain caused by it, a 
loss ci which the Jewish people were already held to be the 
tvpe/ spirit is pressed ba.ck into itselfAa.-nfi fi nds itself in 
the_ fflLiiffimp "f absolute negativity . But this extreme is the 
absolute turning-point, and in it spirit finds the infinite 
and ^t positive nature of its own inner being . This new 
discovery is the qaitg!LQ£_the rlivine amd the human. By 
means of it obj ective truth is re f^nripilft d with freedo-m, a nd 



THE STATE. 349 

that, too, inside of self-consciousness and subjectivity. 
This new basis, infinite and yet positive, it has been 
charged upon the northern principle of the Germanic 
nations to bring to completion. 

359. The internal aspect of this northern principle exists 
in feelin g as_faitb^Jove. and h ope.^ Although it is in this 
form still abstract, it^i s the reconciliation and solution of 
aU^jo ntrad iction.^ It proceeds to unfold its content in 
order to raise it to reality and self-conscious rationality. 
It thus, constructs a kingdom of this world, based upon 
the feeling, trust, and fellowship nf fretunep. This king- 
dom in this its subjectivity is an actual kingdom of rude 
caprice and barbarism in contrast with the world beyond. 
It is an int ellect ual empire , whose content is indeed the 
t ruth of i ts^piriL But as it is yet not thought out, and 
still is veiled in the barbarism of picture-thinking, it^exists 
as _a spiritual force, which exercises over the actual mind 
a despotic and tyrannical iufluenue. 

360. These kingdoms are based upon the distinction, 
which has now won the form of absolute antagonism, and 
yet at the same time are rooted in a single unity and idea. 
In the obdurate struggle, which thus ensues, the spiritual 
has to lower its heaven to the level of an earthly and 
temporal condition, to common worldliness, and to ordinary 
life and thought. On the other hand the abstract actuality 
of the worldly is exalted to thought, to the principle of 
rational being and knowing, and to the rationality of right 
and law. As a result of these two tendencies, the contra- 
diction has become a marrowless phantasm. The present 
has stripped off its barbarism and its lawless caprice, and 
truth has stripped off its beyond and its casualness. The 
true atonement and reconciliation has become objective, 
and unfolds the state as the image and reality of reason. 
In the state, self-consciousness finds the organic develop- 
ment of its real substantive knowing and will, in religion 
it finds in the form of ideal essence the feeling and the 



350 THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 

vision of this its truth, and in science it finds the. free 
conceived knowledge of this truth, seeing it to be one and 
the same in all its mutually completing manifestations, 
namelv, the state, nature, and the ideal world. 



THE END. 



INDEX OF WORDS. 



(The figures refer to the page and the line.) 



An sich, (^ fiir uns), 20, 34 ; im- 
plicit, 20, 36; in itself, 20, 
34, etc. ; potential, 43, 18 ; 
general, 85, 36 ; abstract, 87, 1 ; 
intrinsic, 87, 33 ; ( = unmittel- 
har), 87, 33 ; inherently, 97, 7 ; 
dynamic, 153, 16 ; really, 215, 
22 ; 219, 9 ; in its inner nature, 
216, 10. 

An sich seyend, general, 85, 32 ; 
(= allgemein), 104, 23. 

An und fiir. sich, self-originated 
and self -completed, xxix, 19 ; 
self-contained and self-de- 
veloped, 3, 15 ; ill, itself and in- 
dependently, 5, 25 ; absolute, 
20, 2 ; completely, 43, 1 ; self- 
contained and self-dependent, 
51, 24 ; self-complete, 52, 6 ; 
beyond all question, 144, 3 ; as 
completed reality, 244, 1 ; self- 
caused, self -existing, 248, 10 ; 
self -begun and self-related, 276, 
28; self-begotten and self- 
centred, 281, 29. 

Aufhehen, supersede, 16, 1 ; an- 
nul and replace, 16, 17 ; tran- 
scend, 34, 29. 

BegriflF, (differs from Idee), 21, 8 ; 
(= an sich), 21, 8; uniformly 
translated conception. 



Bestimmen, depute, 24, 23 ; m^ould, 

34, 36 ; determine. 
hestimmt, definite, 2, 14 ; limited, 

16, 23; fixed, 18, 10; deter- 
mined, 24, 19 ; certain, 33, 24 ; 
described, 142, 34. 

Bestimmtheit, -i definite character, 
Bestimmnng, / 19, 31 ; cha- 
racter, 20, 22; phase, 2, 36; 
feature, 3, 1 ; aspect, 3, 36 ; 
essential character, 10, 34 ; de- 
termination, 12, 15 ; charac- 
terization, 16, 16 ; definite na- 
ture, 20, 7 ; specific character, 

17, 12 ; determinateness, 19, 21 ; 
determinate character, 20, 11 ; 
standpoint, 21, 1 ; decisive fea- 
ture, 24, 18 ; not translated, 34, 
29 ; 56, 30, etc. ; condition, 
43, 2 ; mark, 52, 26 ; category, 
50, 19 ; 138, 19 ; rule, 99, 15 ; 
function, 148, 32 ; aim,, 178, 2 ; 
office, 171, 20; attribute, 216, 
16. 

Dasein, surface existence, 1, 12; 
visible existence, 1, 23 ; embodi- 
ment, 2, 9 ; 35, 33 ;. 43, 13 ; 
reality, 15, 1 ; 16,14 ; 35, 5 ; ( = 
Erscheinung) external reality, 
21, 14 ; realization, 35, 5 ; 49, 
5; manifestation, 37, 23; ( = 



352 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF EIGHT. 



Gestaltuiig), 37, 26 ; embodied 
reality, 39, 11 ; outward sym- 
hol, 56,36 ; ( = Realisation), 57, 
9 ; (= Aeusserlichkeit), 77, 27 ; 
visible expression, 91, 20 ; visible 
proof, 97, 8. 

Erscheinung, manifestation, 21, 
3 ; appearance, 21, 14. 

Fiirsich, independently, 16, 21 ; m 
{their) separation, 18, 23 ; de- 
tailed, 20, 5 ; fm- itself, 20, 18 ; 
21, 3, etc. ; realized, 20, 36 ; 
explicitly, 29, 20 ; self -referring, 
32, 2 ; consciously, 44, 14 ; in 
strictness, 328, 5 ; o/ itself, 142, 
27 ; m iAei?' ot(OT eyes, 150, 14. 

Fiirsichseyn, self-consciotts isola- 
tion, 45, 13. 

Gestaltung, i actual shape, 1, 15 ; 

Gestalt, / r ealization, 3T, 25; 

form, 38, 28 ; embodiment, 42, 5. 

Idee, idea, preceded by the ad- 
jective the. 

Idealitat (= Einseitigkeit), 123, 
5. 

Uiimittelbar, immediate, xv, 1 ; 
20, 33; unqiiestioningly, xvii, 
32 ; direct, xxii, 6 ; 20, 33 ; 
directly given, 2, 22 ; forthwith, 
3, 2 ; 8, 25 ; 252, 2 ; 



11, 27 ; simple, 18, 16 ; to i 
21, 15 ; unmodified, 47, 2; first- 
hand, 49, 6; 103, 30; as it 
stands, 54, 16 ; vividly, 55, 6 ; 
naked, 62, 34 ; (= zufallig), 86, 

34 ; ( = an sich), 87, 35 ; bare, 
90, 14 ; direct and incomplete, 
86, 27; mere, .110, 1; {= ur- 
spriinglich), 214, 26 ; naive,190, 
35. 

Unmittelbarkeit, (= Seyn'), 40, 
10 ; 44, i; self-involved sim- 
plicity, 43, 2 ; 44, 4 ; simplicity, 
178, 2. 

Vermittelung, intervention, 20, 1; 
operation, 20, 29 ; modification, 
44:, 2 ; recasting, 192, 13; in- 
strument, 197, 6 ; interposition, 
201, 35 ; medium, 124, 25. 

Vorstellen (sich), suppose, xv, 27 ; 
imagine, 11, 16 ; place before 
the mind, 12, 28 ; represent, 63, 

35 ; theorize fancifully, 326, 3. 
Vorstellung, imaginative thought, 

3, 11 ; 13, 23 ; idea, 3, 13, etc.; 
notion, 3, 28, etc. ; picttrrial 
idea, 38, 21 ; also picture- 
thought and picture-thinking ; 
general idea, 216, 13 ; general 
thought, 216, 4. 

Zufallig, (= unmittelbar), 86, 29. 
Zufalligkeit, ( = Erscheinung), 87, 
12. 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 



(n. = note, add. = addition ; the figures refer to the paragraph, and 
the figures in parentheses to the page ; thus — 273, n. (280), means 
that portion of the note to paragraph 273 which is found on page 
280). 



Action, phases of, 113. 
Administration of Justice, 188, 
219, n., 229, 
implies the universal person, 

209, 209, n. 
HaUer's view of, 219, /t. 
is club law, 219, n. 
Agriculture, in the founding of 
states, 203, n. 
modification of, 203, add. 
Anabaptists, 270, n. (262, foot- 
note). 
Antigone, 144, add., 166, n. 
Appetites, nature of, 11. 
in relation to one another, 17. 
in relation to the understand- 
ing, 17, add. 
in relation to the will, 17, add., 

139, n. 

in relation to freedom, 18, 139, 
n. 

possibility of purification of, 19. 

in relation to civilization, 20. 
Aristocracy, 273, n. 

principle of, 273, n. (280). 

in Koman empire, 357. 
Aristotle, conception of action, 

140, n. (138, footnote). 



Aristotle, conception of virtue, 

150, n. (160). 
Army, 325, 326, 326, n. 

Barbarism, and civilization, 351. 

Beccaria. See Punishment. 

Beyond. See Infinite. 

Body, in relation to soul, 48, n. 

Bravery, 325, 327, 327, add., 328, 
328, n. 

Brotherhood, relation of, to pro- 
perty, 46, n. 

Cseoilius, Sextus, 3, n. (7). 
Caprice, definition of, 15, 15, add. 

contrasted with freedom, 15, n., 
15, add. 

and evil, 139, n. 

and sovereignty, 278, n. (285). 

and elections, 311, 311, n. 

See also Contingency. 
Chambers, two, 312, 313. 

public deliberations of, 315, 315, 
add. 
Children, status of, in the family, 
173. 

rights of, 174, 174, add. 

education of, 174, add., 175. 



354 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 



Children, in Eoman law, 175, »., 

180, «., 180, add. 
Christianity, its doctrine of evil, 
18, add. 
and freedom, 62, n. (67), 185, 
n. (189), 185, add., 270, add. 
(272). 
and right of the subject, 124, n. 
and marriage, 164, n. (171). 
Church, and state, 270, «., 270, 

add. 
Cicero, and the twelve tables, 3, 
n. (7). 
and divorce, 180, n. (182). 
Civic community, logical place of, 
157, 182, 182, add., 255, 256, 
«., 262, 263, add., 290, add. 
(301). 
nature of, 184, 184, add., 238, 
add., 239, 264, 265, 265, add., 
289, re., 303, n. 
elements of, 188. 
rights of, 239, 240, 240, add. 
duties of, 240, 241. 
limit of, 256, 260, 289, n. 
and the classes, 801, n. (311), 

303, n. 
and representation, 311, n. 
Civilization, and state of nature, 
187, n,. 
of the newspaper, 319, n. 
and barbarism, 351. 
Classes, how arise, 201. , 
logical place of, 201, add., 314, 
division of, 202. 
the substantial class, 203, 250, 
304, 305, 306, 306, add., 
307. 
the industrial class and its 
parts, 204, 250, 303, 306, 
add. 
the universal class, 205, 250, 
303, 306, add. 



Classes, Plato's view of, 206, n. 
in India, 206, n., 355. 
and morality, 207. 
a necessity of reason, 207, 207, 

add. 
and the legislature, 301, 301, «., 
301, add., 302, n., 303, 333, n. 
a mediating organ, 302, 302, 

add., 307. 
and the prince, 304. 
the military, 325, 327, add. 
Colonization. See Sea. 
Completeness, nature of, 216, add. 
Conception, definition of, 1, «., 
279, ra. (287). 
not mere conception, 1, n. 
and reality, 1, add., 280, n. 
and evil, 139, add. (136). 
of will, 278, n. (285), 279, n. 
(286). 
Concubinage. See Marriage. 
Confession, of crime, 227, add. 
Conscience, nature of, 136, 1.36, 
add., 137, 137, n. 
and subjective consciousness, 

137, n., 138, add. 
ambiguous character of, 137, n. 

(131). 
the formal and the true, 137, 

add. 
and the good, 141. 
Consequences of an act, 118, 
118, n. 
necessary and accidental, 118, 
n., 118, add. 
Constitution of the state is 
rational, 272, 272, n. (281), 
274, add. 
classification of constitutions, 

273, n., 279, n., (289). 
national, 274, 274, n., 274, add. 
Contingency, in law. See Law. 
in private action, 232, 233. 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 



355 



Contingency, in police-control, 

234, 234, aM. 
in state, 303, n. 
in elections, 311, n. 
in relations between states, 

333, 11., 340. 
Contract, logical justification of, 

71. 
nature of, 72, 217, add. 
involves two wUls, 73, 74. 
involves a common will, 75. 
based on arbitrary choice, 75. 
and marriage, 75, n., 75, add. 
and the state, 75, «., 75, add., 

258, n. (242), 281, ii. 
real and formal, 76. 
and value, 77. 
and stipulation, 77, n., 78, 78, 

n., 79. 
consensual, 79, n., 80. 
classification of contracts, 80. 
and office, 290, n. 
Conviction, is subjective, 140, «. 

(144-45), 140, add. (151). 
Co-operation, effect of, 199. 
Corporation, logical place of, 188, 

229, 229, add., 255. 
function of, 230, 249, 250, 251, 

254, 255, add. 
and class, 252, n., 253, 253, n. 
is limited, 256, 288. 
in Middle Ages, 290, add. 
in France, 290, add. 
and individuals, 308, n. 
Crime, definition of, 40, 90, 90, 

add., 95, 97, add. 
differences in, 96, 96, n. 
logical intermediate between 

right and morality, 104, 104, 

»., 104, add. 
amongst the ancients, 218, n. 
and SnKety, 218, 218, n., 218 

add. 



Crime, and the state, 282, add. 
Criminal, has rights, 132, n. 
(126-127). 
pardon of, 282, 282, «. , 282, add. 
Crispinus, 126, add. 

Definition, value of, 2, add. 
Democracy, 273, n. 
principle of, 273, n. (280). 
in Roman empire, 357. 
Deputies, in legislation, 308, 308, 
n., 309, 309, add., 310, 310, 
n., 311 
Determinism, 15, n. 
Development, of the idea, 31, n., 
32, 32, add. 
in relation to time, 32, n. , 32 add. 
in contrast with generalization, 

32, add. 
of the conception, 34, add. 
Dialectic, the true, 31, n. 
the negative, of Plato, 31, n. 
of the conception applied to 

slavery, 57, n. 
involves collisions, 211, add. 
in the civic community, 246. 
Diogenes, character of, 195, add. 
Dissimulation, 140, n. (137). 
Divorce,176, 176, arfrf., 180, m. (182). 
Duty, nature of, 133, 133, add., 
135, 135, n., 149. 
and freedom, 149, 149, add. 
. and right, 155, 261, n. (250), 
261, add. 

Education, Rousseau's view of, 
153, add. 
of children, 160. 
of women, 166, add. 
and state of nature, 187, ". 
(191). 
timpire, Oriental, 355. 
Greek, 356. 
Roman, 357. 



356 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 



Empire, German, 358, 359. 

Encyclopsediaof the Philosophical 

Sciences, general references 

to, 4, add., 7, n., 8, 24, n., 

78, n., 88, 163, n., 270, n. 

" End, justifies the means," 140, 

n. (142). 
English, wills, 180, add. 
conception of " comfort,'' 191, 

add., 244, add. 
common law, 211, n. (207), 211, 

add. 
procedure at law, 225, n. 
treatment of poverty, 245, n. 
colonization, 248, add. 
constitution, 300, add. 
taxes, 302, add. 
idea of war, 329, add. 
Epicurus, his conception of a 

common property, 46, n. 
Equality, conception of by the 
understanding, 49, n., 49, 
add., 200, n., 261, n. (250). 
in the sphere of wants, 193. 
Equity. See Law. 
Estates. See Classes. 
Ethical observance, the truth of 
morality, 33, add., 135, n., 
151, add., 152, 152, «. 
unity of good and conscience, 

141, 141, add. 

and freedom, 141, n., 141, add,, 

142, 153. 

and the laws, 144. 

and the individual, 145, add., 

147, 148, 148, »., 154. 
the natural, 150, 150, n. 
the truth of right, 151, add. 
and custom, 151, 151, add. 
realized in the family, 156, 157, 

175, add. 
Evil, in relation to good, 18. 
possibility of, 66, n. 



Evil, definition of, 139, 140, 140, n. 
in relation to morality, 139, n., 

139, add. 
origin of, 139, n., 139, add. (135). 
twofold meaning of, 139, n. 
necessity of, 139, n. 
and responsibility, 139, add. 

(136). 
Exchange, 80. 
Executive, branch of state, 273, 

294, n. 
function and relations of, 287, 

288, 289, 292, 294, 295, 297, 

297, n. 
contains judiciary and police, 

287. 
division of, 290, 290, add., 291. 
twofold character of, 291, 292. 
duties of, 294, 294, n., 295. 
Explicit, definition of, 10, add. 
related to implicit, 66, n. 

Faith, 147, n. 

Family, logical place of, 156, 157, 
262, 263, 263, add. 
nature of, 158, 163, n., 238, 
add., 264, 265, 265, add., 
303, n. 
and right, 159. 
phases of, 160. 
right of, 159, add., 180, n. 
means of, 170. 

disruption of by divorce, 176. 
disruption of by death, 178., 
Family-stock, in relation to mar- 
riage, 172. 
in relation to inheritance, 180, 
n. (183). 
Feeling, in religion, 270, n. (260). 

in German Empire, 359. 
Feudal Law, the tenant in, 63, «., 
63, add. 
the family in, 172, add. 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 



357 



Feuerbach. See Punishment. 
Fiohte, his view of the I, 6, »., 

140, add. (151). 
his view of the material of a 

formed object, 52, add. 
his view of contract, 79, n. 
his view of the principle of 

the state, 258, n. (241), 273, n. 
Finite, character of , 1 41 , m. , 324, n. 
Force, in abstract right, 94, 94, n. 
Form, relation of to material, 52, 

add. 
Fraud, nature of, 87, 87, add. 
Freedom, is substance of the 

will, 4. 
general interpretation of, 4, 

add., 121, add. 
isnegative, one-sided, or formal, 

5, add., 123, 123, add., 195, 

208, 228, n., 258, n. (242), 

289, n., (300), 301, 314, 316. 
of the understanding, 5, add. 
Hindu conception of, 5, add. 
how manifested in French Re- 
volution, 5, add. See French 

Revolution, 
development of, 33, add., 186. 
is concrete, 33, add. , 123, add. , 

260. 
Kantian conception of, 15, n. 
Friesian conception of, 15, n. 
and Christianity, 62, ti. (67), 

185, n. (189), ),^5,add. 
ground of, 71. 
realized in subjectivity, 106, 

106, n., 106, add. 
and evil, 139, n. 
and necessity, 145, 266, 267, add. 
and the ethical system, 142, 

143, 145, 145, add. 
and duty, 149, 149, add. 
in the civic community, 187, 

206, 206, »., 208, 273, add. 



Freedom, and the state, 257, 260, 
261, n. (250), 314. 
in German empire, 358. 
is subjective, 299, n. (308), 299, 
add., 301. 
French, the, 150, add. 
French Revolution, the, 115, n. 
view of freedom found in the, 
5, n., 5, add., 258, n. (242). 
Fries, his conception of freedom, 
15, n. 

Germans, the, 150, add. 
God, and evil, 139, add. (135). 
Goethe, 13, n., 215, add. 
Good, in relation to evil, 18. 

nature of the, 129. 

stages of the, 131, add. 

and subjectivity, 136. 

and intention, 140, n. (140-2). 

and conscience, 141. 
Greek, life and freedom, 185, n. 
(188). 

colonization, 248, add. 

Habit, and mere habit, 151, 

add. 
Haller, his conception of law, 

219, n. 
his conception of the state, 

258, n. (243 auA footnote). 
Happiness, and thought, 20, add. 

and impulse, 20, add. 
Hindu, religion characterized, 5, 

n., 5, add. 
Holy Alliance, the, 259, add., 

324, add. 
Honour, theprinciple of monarchy, 

273, n. (280-1). 
Hugo, his text-book of the his- 
tory of Roman law, 3, n. (7- 

10), 211, n. (207). 
Humanity, perfection of, 343, n. 



358 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 



Hypocrisy, 140, n. (137), 140, 
add. 

Idea, what it is, 1, 1, add., 
267. 
its relation to reality, 1, add., 

280, K., 350. 
its stages, 129, add., 184, 270, 

n. (266). 
its relation to the good, 129, 

129, add. 
in the civic community, 187. 
necessity of the, 267. 
its differences, 269, 269, add. 
Implicit, relation to explicit, 10, 

add., 66, n. 
Impulse. See Appetites. 
Individual, and the ethical sys- 
tem, 145, add., 147, 148, 148, 
n., 258, 258, n. 
and the civic community, 187, 

258, n. 
and the state, 308, 308, n., 314, 

315. 
and the worl^ spirit, 348. 
Individuality, in the Greek em- 
pire, 356. 
Inequality, in nature, 200, n. 

in spirit, 200, n. 
Infinite, nature of the, 22, 22, 
add, 
as understood by the under- 
standing, 22, n. 
the bad, 79, n. 
Inheritance, 178, 178, n., 179, 
179, »., 180, 180, n., 180, 
add. 
and family right, 180, •«. 
in Eoman law, 180, n. 
of the throne, 281, n., 286. 
Intention, universal implied in, 
118, add., 119. 
two meanings of, 119, n. 



Intention, right of, 120. 
and wrong, 126, 126, n. 
and evil, 140, add. 
Irony, 140, n. (146), 140, add. 
(151). 
of Plato, Socrates, the Sophists, 
140, n. (146). 

Jacobi, 140, «. {I4i, footnote). 
Jews, in world history, 358. 
Judge, office of, 214, n., 226. 

historic origin of the, 219, n. 
Judiciary, branch of the execu- 
tive, 287, 290, add. 
Jury, office of, 227, 227, n., 227, 
add., 228. 

composition of, 228. 

reason of, 228, n. 

Kant, Hugo's idea of, 3, n. (10). 
his conception of the I, 6, n. 
his conception of freedom, 15, 
. w- 

his conception of right, 29, n. 
his conception of morality, 33, 

11., 135, add. 
his classification of right, 40, n. 
his conception of marriage, 75, 

»., 161, add. 
his classification of contracts, 

80. 
his conception of duty, 133, 

add., 135, n., 135, add. 
and alliance of princes, 324, 

add., 333, n. 
Klein. See Punishment. 

Labour, place of, 196. 

division of, 198. 
Law, of debtors, 3, n. 

involves thinking, 209, add., 
211, 211, add., 215. 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 



369 



Law is constituted right, 21] , 217, 

217, add., 219. 
differs from custom, 211, n. 
contains an element of accident, 

212,214, n., 2li,add. 
application of, 213, 214, 214, n., 

225. 
limits of, 213, 213, add. 
publicity of, 215, 215, n., 215, 

add., 224, 224, add. 
procedure of, 217, add., 219, 

223, 224. 
and equity, 223, n. 
international, 330, 333. 
Law-court, function of, 221, 221, 

add., 222. 
in Eoman law, 225, n. 
Legislature, a branch of state, 

273, 298. 
function of, 298, 298, add., 299. 
object-matter of, 299, 299, n. 
includes monarchical and e.'te- 

cutive elements, 300, 300, 

add. 
publicity of, 319. 
Leibnitz, his view of trichotomy, 

3, n. (10). 
Logic, procedure of taken for 

granted here, 2, add., 7, «., 

141, n. 
exhibits true process of the con- 
ception, 31, 33, n. 
position of in wrong, 81, m. 
Life, in relation to personality, 

70. 
and freedom, 123, add. 
nature of, 127. 
right to, 127, 127, add. 
Love, is the basis of the family, 

158, 159, add. 
nature of, 158, add., 163. 
two aspects of, 161, add. 
and marriage, 162, 162, add. 



Leve in modern dramaSj 162, n. 

Platonic, 163, n. 

and the civil requirements, 164, 
n., 164, add. 

realized in children, 173. 
Luxury, 195. 

Man, in his generalization, 190, 

190, n., 190, add. 
Mark. See Possession. 
Marriage, and contract, 75, n., 
75, add., 163, n. 
Kant's conception of, 75, n., 

161, add. 
a phase of the family, 160. 
two features of, 161, 161, add. 
subjective and objective bases 

of, 162, 162, »., 176, add. 
ethical nature of, 163, 165, 

168. 
different from concubinage, 163, 

add. 
in itself indissoluble, 163, add. 
public celebration of, 164, 164, 

n., 164, add. 
is monogamy, 167, 167, n. 
and consanguinity, 168, 168, 

add. 
and family-stock, 172, 177. 
in Koman law, 180, n. (183). 
at the foundation of states, 
203, n. 
Material, in relation to the form, 

52, add. 
Matter, character of, 52, n. 
Middle class, 297, 297, add. 
Moderation, the principle of aris- 
tocracy, 273, n. (280). 
Monarch, 280, 280, n., 280, add., 

281, 281, n., 320, add., 321. 
election of, 281, n. 

his right of pardon, 282, 282, n., 

282, add. 



360 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 



Monarch, and council, 283, 284. 

objective side of the, 293. 
Monarchy, constitutional, 273, 
273, n. 
principle of, 273, n. (280-1), 

279, n., 281. 
feudal, 278, n., 299, n. (308). 
objective side of, 293. 
Money, a universal service, 299, 

add. 
Monogamy. See Marriage. 
Montesquieu, his view of legisla- 
tion, 3, n. (5), 261, n. 
his view of monarchy, aristo- 
cracy and democracy, 273, n. 
Morality, nature of, 105, 106, »., 
112, n., 112, add. 
distinct from ethical observ- 
ance, 33, n., 108, 108, add., 
135, n. 
Kant's conception of, 135, n. 

135, add. 
and poverty, 242, 242, n. 
and politics, 337, n. 
Motive, twofold nature of, 121, 
add. 

Napoleon, 274, add., 281, add. 

290, add., 331, add. 
Nation, the, and the world-spirit, 

345, 346, 347, 347, n. 
Nature, how understood, 42, n., 

146, n. 
state of, 187, n., 194, n., 333. 
Necessity, of the idea, 267. 

is twofold, 267, add. 
Need, and right, 127, 128. 

Objectivity, meanings of, 26. 

relation to subjectivity, 26, add. 

in German empire, 358. 
Opinion. /SeeSubjectivity, Public. 

and science, 319, n. (327). 



Particularity, and universality, 

181, 181, add., 182, add., 

183, 186, 260, 261, add., 265, 

add. 

and ancient states, 185, n., 260, 

add. 
in civic community, 185, 185, 

add., 206, n., 229. 
and the monarch, 280, add. 
and the classes, .301, d. (311), 

308, n. 
in Greek empire, 356. 
Pascal, 140, n. (138). 
Patriotism, 268, 268, «., 268, add., 

269, 289, n. 
Paupers, origin of, 243; 244, 244, 
add. 
character of, 244, add. 
Pedagogy, scope of, 151, add. 
People. See Public. 

is not a state, 349, 349, n. 
Person, natural existence of, 43. 
endowments of, 43, n. 
as particular, 182. 
Personality, in relation to ethical 
observance, 33, add. (41). 
implications of, 35-39. 
distinct from subject, 35, add. 
and slavery, 66, add. 
and life, 70. 
and contract, 72. 
and the family, 181. 
in Oriental empire, 355. 
Phanomenologie des Geistes, 135, 
n. (129), 140, n. (US, footnote, 
149). 
Phavorinus, criticised, 3 w. 
Phidias, 15, add. 
Philosophy of Nature, 47, n. 
Plagiarism, 69, n. 
Plato, negative dialectic of, 31, n. 
his " Republic " wrongs the 
person, 46., n., 184, add., 185, 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 



361 



n., 185, add., 262, add., 299, 
n. (308). 
his view of irony, 140, n, (146). 
his view of classes, 206, n. 
Police, logical place of, 188, 229, 
229, add. 
function of. 230, 232-7, 287. 
nature of, 231, 238. 
Political Science, aim of, 189, n. 
Politics, and morality, 337, n. 
Polity, internal, of the state, 259. 

external, of the state, 259. 
Possession, modes of, 54. 
as direct seizure, 55, 55, /<., 55, 

add. 
as forming, 56. 
of self, 57. 

by a mark, 58, 58, add. 
Poverty, treatment of, 244, add. , 
245, 253, n. 
claims of, 241, 242. 
Practical, in relation to theoreti- 
cal, 4, add., 5, n. 
Prescription. See Property. 
Press, 319, n. 
Primogeniture, 286, n., 306, 306, 

add., 307. 
Prmce, function of, 273, 275, 275, 
add., 283-5, 292, 329, 329, 
cuid., 333. 
Probability, 140, n. (139), 140, 

add. (150). 
Proof, nature of in philosophy, 
141, n. 
nature of in law, 227, n. 
ontological, 280, n. 
Property, nature of, 41, etc., 45, 
51, add. 
reasonableness of, 41 add. 
is first embodiment of freedom, 

45, n. 
K first embodiment of person- 
ality, 51. 



Property is firet embodiment of 
will, 51. 

is private, 46, 46, add. 

phases of, 53. 

and use, 59, n. 

and prescription, 64, 64, n., 64, 
add., 65, add. 

and relinquishment, 65. 

in mental products, 68, 69. 

of the family, 160, 169, 170, 171. 

and law, 217, 217, «., 217, add. 

in civic community, 218. 
Protestantism, 270, n. (267). 
Providence, and history, 343, /'. 
Psychology, empirical, 11, «i. 

method of, 19, ti. 
Public, meanings of the, 301, n. 

influence of the, 301, n. 

the, andgovernment, 302, 302, n . 

the, and the state, 303, n. 

opinion, 316, 316, add., 317, 
317, n., 318, 318, add. 
Punishment, of crime, 96, add., 
97, add., 98, 98, n. 

definition of, 97, add. 

Klein's theory of, 99, n. 

various theories of, 99, n. 

Feuerbach's theory of, 99, add. 

is just, 100, 100, n. 

Beccaria's theory of capital, 
100 m., 100 odd. 

is retribution. See Retribution. 

of crime as a social factor, 218, 
n., 218, add. 
Purpose, is factor of the moral 
win, 114, 114, add. 

nature of, 115. 

Quakers, 270, n, (262, footnoU). 

Rational, opposed to sentient, 

52, n. 
Rationality, meaning of, 258, n. 



362 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF KIGHT. 



Reason, universal of, 216, n. 
Recognition, is the right of the 
state, 331, 331, »., 331, add., 
336. 
Reflection, subjective, in relation 
to an act, 119, n. 
and morality, 124, n. 
and history, 124, n. 
Reformation, and public monu- 
ments, 64, add. 
Relation, standpoint of, 123, n. 

and morality, 108, 135, n. (129). 
Religion, relation to the state, 

270, n., 270, add. 
Relinquishment. See Property. 
Rent, 80. 

Responsibility, for an act, 115, 
115, n., 115, add., 116, 117, 
117, add. 
in ancient laws, 117, add. 
of children, etc., 120, n., 132, 

n., (126). 
and evil, 139, add. (136). 
Retribution, 101, 101, n., 101, 
add. 
is not absolute equality, 101, n. 
considers value, 101, n. 
. differs from revenge, 102, 102, 

n, 102, add., 103. 
Revenge, is subjective, 220. 

See Retribution. 
Right, science of, 2, 3, 19, 19, n. 
positive, 212, n. 
history of, 3, n. 
definition of, 29, 40, 94. 
differs from morality, 94, add. 
of the criminal, 132, n. (126- 

127). 
extent of, 33, add. 
Rousseau's view of, 29, n. 
a mere semblance, 83. 
varied manifestations of the 
subject's, 124, n. 



Right, formal and concrete, 126, 

n., 132, n. 
limited by need, 128. 
and the good, 129, 130. 
of the subject, 132, n. 
and duty, 155, 261, n. (250), 

261, add. 
in the family, 159. 
of the family, 159, add. 
of children, 174. 
becomes law, 211, 211, n. 
of state, 331, 331, n. 
Roman Law, 217, n. 
estimate of by Csecilius, Phavo- 

rinus, Cicero, 3, n. 
division of rights founded on, 

40, n. 
treatment of children in, 43 n., 

115 n. 
agrarian, 46, n. 
conception of use in, 62, n. 
treatment of contract in, 79, n. 
and the family, 172, add. 
and inheritance, 180, n. 
and the wife, 180,.m. (182). 
constitution of law-court in, 

225, n. 
Roman world, and freedom, 185, 

n. (189). 
Rousseau, his view of right, 29, n. 
his view of education, 153, add. 
and the principle of the state, 

258, n. (241). 

Sacrifice, for the state, 325, 328, 

328, n. 
Scepticism, the ancient, 31, n. 
Schlegel, 140, n. (147, footnote), 
140, add. (151). 
view of marriage, 164, add. 
Sea, means of communication, 
247, 248, 248, add. 
and intelligence, 247, n. 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 



363 



Self-certitude, and evil, 139, add, 
Self-consciousness, as subjective, 
139. 
right of, 228, n. 
and the' state, 257. 
in Greek state, 279, add. 
Self-determination, is an element 
of will, 107, 107, add., 108, 
add. 
Sense-perception, of the animal, 
42, add. 
opposed to the rational, 52, n. 
Sexes, different spheres of the, 

166, 166, n., 166, add. 
Shakespeare, 3, n. (8). 
Sin, original, 18, add. 
Slave, his will merely objective, 
26, add. 
and workman, 67, add. 
Athenian, 67, add., 356. 
has no duties, 155, add. 
Slavery, 21, n. 
general consideration of , 57, n., 

57, add. 
in relation to personality, 66, 

add. 
found in a state of nature, 
194, n. 
Socrates, subjectivity of, 138, n., 
138, add., 274, add. 
irony of, 140, ii. (146). 
daimon of, 279, n. (289-290). 
Solger, 140, n. {W , footnote). 
Sophistry, absolute, 140, add. 

(150). 
Soul, and body, 48, n. 
Sovereignty of people, 279, n. 

(288). ' 
Sovereignty of state, has two 
sides, 278, n., 321. 
ideaUty of, 278, n. (285). 
and sovereign, 279, n. (288-289), 
279, add., 280, 280, n. 



Sovereignty of.-'state, externa], 

321, 323, 324, 324, re. 
Space, 10, n. 
Spinoza, 66 n. 

Spirit, conception of, 66, »., 187, 
n., 274, 275, add. 
its own end, 266. 
of a nation, 345, 346, 352. 
State, and contract, 75 n., 15 add. 
is completion of the civic com- 
munity, 256, n., 258, n., 260, 
261. 
nature of, 257, 258, 258, add., 

273, 71., 274, 275, add. 
in its historic development, 

258, n. (242). 

aspects and functions of, 259, 

259, add., 270, 271, 272, n. 
(^75), 272, add., 273, 277, 
277, add. 

Completion of personal individu- 
ality, 260, 360. 
realization of freedom, 260, 260, 

add. 
ancient and modern, 260, add., 

261, add., 273, n. 
completion of the family, 261. 
is an organism, 269, 269, add., 

271, 276, 286, n., 308, n. 
relation to religion, 270, n., 

270, add. 
branches of, 273. 
basis of, 276. 
sovereignty of, 277, 278, 278, n., 

321, 322, 331. 
and monarch. See monarch, 
and conquered peoples, 281, 

add. 
and the individual, 302, 302, n., 

303, n., 308, 308, n., 310, n., 

314, 315, 325. 
and war, 326, 326, n., 329. 
States, relations of, 330-340. 



364 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT. 



Stipulation., See Contract. 
Stoics, subjectivity of, 138, n. . 
Subject, different from person, 

105. 
Subjectivity, meanings of, 25, 
106, 108, 320, 320, add. 
and conscience, 137, n, 138, 

138, n. 
and freedom, 106. 
and objectivity, 26, n. 
in relation to others, 112, 112, 

add, 
phases of, 112, »., 140, n. 
and the good, 136. 
and evil, 140, 140, n. 
and ethical observance, 152, 

320. 
and law, 217, add. 
in religion, 270, add. (272). 
is the principle of the modern 

world, 273, add. 
and subject, 279, 279, n. 
and the classes, 301, add., 308. 
and the state, 308, n, 310, n, 

317, add, 320, 320, add. 
in the Oriental empire, 355. 
in the Greek empire, 356. 
Succession. See Inheritance. 
Suicide, not permitted, 70, add. 

Theoretical, and practical, 4, add., 

5, n. 
Thing, two meanings of, 42, n. 
viewed as independently real, 

44, n. 
in relation to use, 61. 
Thinking, and willing, 4, add. 

(11). 
definition of, 211, n. 
involves collisions, 211, add. 
Time, 10, n. 

Tragedy, meaning of, 140, n. (148, 
footnote). 



Training, twofold nature of, 197. 
Truth, unknowable, 44, n., 280, n. 
unity of conception and em- 
bodiment, 280, n. 

Understanding, view of wiU in 

the, 8, add., 10, n. 
its view of law, 212, n. 
its view of impulses, 17, add, 
its view of equality, 49, n, 
its view of evil, 139, add. (136) 
its view of marriage, 164, n. 

(171). 
universality characteristic of 

the, 187, n., 216, n. 
function of in wants, 189, 189, ». 
training of, 197. 
limits of, 217, n., 280, n. 
the infinite of the, 234. 
its view of the state, 258, n. 

(242), 272, n. (275). 
its view of the monarch, 280, n. 
Universality, definition of, 24, n. 
formal or relative, 157, 229, 

229, add. 
and particularity, 181, 181, 

add., 182, add., 183, 186,260, 

261, a(W., 265, add. 
origin of the form of the, 192, 

add. 
agriculture a form of, 203, n. 
marriage a form of, 203, n. 
Use, nature of, 59. 
and property, 59, n., 61, add. 
and possession, 59, add., 62, 

62, n. 
and the object, 61. 
conception of, in Boman law, 

62, n. 
time-limit of, 67, 67, n. 

"Value, definition of, 63. 
and contract, 77. 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 



366 



Violence, nature of, 90, etc. 

cancels itself, 93. 

two stages of, 93, n. 
Virtue, 150, add. 

is the principle of democracy, 
273, n. (280). 
Virtues, nature of the, 150, n. 

Wants, system of, 188. 

satisfaction of, 189. 

specialized, 190. 
War, is ethical, 324, n., 324, add. 

is necessary, 334. 

limit of, 338, 338, add. 

and Europe, 339, add. 
Wealth, general, 199. 

particular, 200. 
Well-being, deduction of from the 
subjective, 125. 

particular and general, 126, n. 

limited by need, 128. 

in relation to the good, 129, 130. 

basis of a state, 336. 
Wife, in Roman law, 180, n. 

(182). 
Will, nature of, 7, 7, add., 91, 
278, n. (285). 

detailed consideration of, 8-13. 

contrasted with thought, 13, n. 

is infinite, 22. 

a common, 75, 81, add., 82, 
add. 

collision of wills, 81. 

is free, 92. 

in morality, 105. 



Will, phases of subjective, 109. 
subjective right of, 107, 107, n., 

110, add., 117, 132. 
as moral has three factors, 114, 
subjective and the good, 131. 
autonomy of, 135, n. 
as natural, 139, n. 
and evil, 139, add. (136). 
and the state, 258, n. (241-2), 

320. 
the state as, 334, 336, 337. 
Wolff, his view of freedom, 15, n. 
Woman, sphere of, 164, add., 
166. 
the law of, 166, n. 
limitations of, 166, add. 
World-history. See World-spirit. 
World-spirit, in relation to states, 
340. 
nature of, 341, 352. 
history of, 343. 
operation of, 344. 
and nationality, 345, 346, 352. 
development of, 346. 
and individuals, 348. 
has had four forms, 352, 353, 
354. 
Wrong, definition of, 40, 8^, 82, 
add. 
as collision of wills, 81, 81, add., 

86, add. 
as unpremeditated, 83, 83, add., 

84-86. 
subdivisions of, 83, 83, add. 
and intention, 126, 



CHISWICK PRESS :— CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO. 
TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON. 



