Science of Logic, Vol. 1 (G. W. F. Hegel (W. H. Johnston and L. G. Struthers, trans.), 1929)
==========================================================
Hegel's system in its most rigorous form; the logic every later dialectical theory answers to. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (hegelsscienceofl0001whjo_u3a4).

(Seva vecnvasesse®
eueeen

we... ox

weer eee een saae

eee * weeeerede


BVH Se eee ne ey


ee pee ere eee re getters ©
ex Cee ena ee ees
eve spans seeed
DANN a A
ee `
OOE OOO
ee


Do
urn.
wrrruees ..


DIENEN
D


passers rt
“une
..
eee e eee s
EEE RENTE
DEE RR NE
esaten


eee suesetetedys A
RER) \ N EEE EAE
DER ulm
DECKE RENT


EN
Donner

tp sete
serat


ie
Nae
er


EN
. ewes
BARRIERE x

x DOCO Ex ne y
Socugeuee@s tees 6 AR, DOS
eu eeeee 4 AARP Fer , wecaet $ eee ts,
“...... Doc ae ane La
Se OOE wae u. y

ese wee CARER acne

ee


see tenes
aserti cree EN
Dee * A AEI G
r..


OOOO
EENE EEKEE
OIEA AR

o0


..
OOOO
G


“urre«
PRENEKENKNK


VER Setesaaet®


re
aves
N ‘


- 5
eee auecceeye
AA ac eevee eee tose eee +
PITERTERRARENE NE
PR neo A
eure eee eh)


eee


De
ee A
OPOE REELS EEEO
TEO 4
= 3 r ee
feces COE ee ea eas
EN RERKI LINZ e
N ees


EEE

OO

DERTER ER ENG

“ae ae tae Loar


verses anges
ees


*
eee eee eten
PEEING G


seiesaast
este
«ous


g D
ae


are yee eres
Odea ueeete


OORE .
es ame use sa ee ein DEE ELLE)
Vela sas sen 4 . ns eianeiurun euer
à (eee eee ERIC)
eueeeress
senate ened
Hee eewe nee
ee ewwee
ory
BEFORE EEE
BADER
DENE
Fat Ord eae
*


eee
POLO:


rà

5 2)
LE re ac

REALS BP EEE,

Se RK PER

Paps +
re ler h eae
De nwe eee OY) ee tye
tee
a


BR


Serenuunes
et,


Dee
Soc ew ee ee.
Aes oe «8 * «
errr es ne eee cubevet O
ars ep Selo d ww alee casi


eth:


PREISE HR) i č
7 A
x 3 Aer
Te rR e a aa a rahe a
EREE IT


e NRE TE EN


CALIFORNIA STATE COLLEGE
AT PALOS VERDES


C LETREN" OS


Date Due


PRINTED IN U.S.A,


N
sc ra
Ow wy .
ON thm Pp


2%


ae


i
epi


% ey ” d i
me


Nak ¥


ee 22 #7 Ye re


"y


MUIRHEAD LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY


An admirable statement of the aims of the Library of Philosophy was
provided by the first editor, the late Professor J. H. Muirhead, in his
description of the original programme printed in Erdmann’s History of
Philosophy under the date 1890. This was slightly modified in subsequent
volumes to take the form of the following statement:

‘The Muirhead Library of Philosophy was designed as a contribution
to the History of Modern Philosophy under the heads: first of different
Schools of Thought—Sensationalist, Realist, Idealist, Intuitivist; secondly
of different Subjects—Psychology, Ethics, Aesthetics, Political Philosophy,


Theology. While much had been done in England in tracing the course of


evolution in nature, history, economics, morals and religion, little had been
done in tracing the development of thought on these subjects. Yet “the
evolution of opinion is part of the whole evolution”.

‘By the co-operation of different writers in carrying out this plan it was
hoped that a thoroughness and completeness of treatment, otherwise
unattainable, might be secured. It was believed also that from writers
mainly British and American fuller consideration of English Philosophy
than it had hitherto received might be looked for. In the earlier series of
books containing, among others, Bosanquet’s History of Aesthetic, Pfleiderer’s
Rational Theology since Kant, Albee’s History of English Utilitarianism, Bonar’s
Philosophy and Political Economy, Brett’s History of Psychology, Ritchie’s Natural
Rights, these objects were to a large extent effected.

‘In the meantime original work of a high order was being produced
both in England and America by such writers as Bradley, Stout, Bertrand
Russell, Baldwin, Urban, Montague, and others, and a new interest in
foreign works, German, French and Italian, which had either become
classical or were attracting public attention, had developed. The scope of
the Library thus became extended into something more international, and
it is entering on the fifth decade of its existence in the hope that it may
contribute to that mutual understanding between countries which is so
pressing a need of the present time.’

The need which Professor Muirhead stressed is no less pressing today,
and few will deny that philosophy has much to do with enabling us to
meet it, although no one, least of all Muirhead himself, would regard that
as the sole, or even the main, object of philosophy. As Professor Muirhead
continues to lend the distinction of his name to the Library of Philosophy
it seemed not inappropriate to allow him to recall us to these aims in his
own words. The emphasis on the history of thought also seemed to me very
timely; and the number of important works promised for the Library in
the near future augur well for the continued fulfilment, in this and other


ways, of the expectations of the original editor.
H. D. LEWIS


= att unser) ER igi 3
ei ae DR, Se ar
re IR a He RN

ies aoe


ati a a SEE ty Week
woe Se spo BAIA an patton
ae an wi ben Mh
ehr iA at, K Ador A yeh i
re) era a pets S ws WR Sr ¥
ijai à WNA axe iis rn RN arg jae ir
ae st BE ER Pig hes: SE aie: anual
rae, at ae es Hat PER N I N rer Lee N.
ea ante alla an Ina,
ee in Ser DR Bow an bE PEIN zur
A ger apo DER. Arc. eee tl bias tart. er
Be,‘ en 2 TE a ek nt iR
ive ei olga Ay DENE RT wi


Aa: AER ht


RE ea aie mth Nee a eee a
RE Re re Ir FR art: SEE
ps ri a feds a = pini nysa
Pea La ie “i a. eit ON Ry e Freee, L cid abil BAER


ey 2 0 Why t: RRN ķi agh AA SER
2 gor. ZUBE ti PER EL A a En NG wer ba
nr oA, ebay PROS She dh ie
es MTT” Hirn Ba TU ARP Een Re bt a chains ad ih ie
ae wie Ug Bi ne R Ad AN ERA OR


ER Le TA


als FR
n Ta e


ash Ls he ar St NE oe wur: N
a Gey. | iTA EN ie
Kane Du SEET is
í ir A sR
TIR ;
sa


MUIRHEAD LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY


Gihti Editor: HL D. Lewn 2
Professor of History and Philosophy of Religion in the University of London


The Analysis of Mind. By BERTRAND RussELL. 8th Impression,

Analytic Psychology. By G. F. Stout. 2 Vols. 5th Impression.

Coleridge as Philosopher. By J. H. Murruean. 2nd Impression.

Contemporary American Philosophy. Edited by G. P. Anams and W. P. MONTAGUE.
Contemporary British Philosophy. Edited by J. H. MurrHeap.

Contemporary Indian Philosophy. Edited by RADHAKRISHNAN and J. H. MUIRHEAD.
Contemporary British Philosophy. Third Series. Edited by H. D. Lewis. 2nd Impression
Development of Theology Since Kant. By O. PFLEIDERER.


Dialogues on Metaphysics. By NicHoLAs MALEBRANCHE. Translated by Morris
GINSBURG.


Ethics. By NıcoLaı HARTMANN. Translated by Stanton Coit. 3 Vols.
The Good Will: A Study in the Coherence Theory of Goodness. By H. J. PATON.
Hegel: A Re-Examination. By J. N. FINDLAY.


Hegel’s Science of Logic. Translated by W. H. Jornston and L. G. STRUTHERS.
2 Vols. 3rd Impression.


History of Æsthetic. By B. BosANQueT. 4th Edition, 5th Impression,
History of English Utilitarianism. By E. ALBEE. 2nd Impression


History of Psychology. By G. S. Brett. Edited by R. S. Peters. Abridged one-
volume edition.


Human Knowledge. By BERTRAND Russerr. 3rd Impression.
A Hundred Years of British Philosophy. By RupoLr Merz. Translated by J. W.


re Harvey, T. E. Jessop, Henry Sturt. 2nd Impression.

Ideas: A General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology. By Eomunn Husseru. Translated
Pe: by W. R. Boyce Geson. 3rd Impression.

= Indian Philosophy. By RADHAKRISHNAN. 2 Vols. Revised 2nd Edition.

= The Intelligible World Metaphysics and Value. By W. M. URBAN.

Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. By Berrranp Russert. 2nd Edition. roth
8 Impression.

Kants First Critique. By H. W. CASSIRER.

5 Kant’s Metaphysic of Experience. By H. J. Paron. 2nd Impression.


Know Thyself. By BERNARDINO Varisco. Translated by GUGLIELMO SALVADORI.
Language and Reality. By WiLeur MARSHALL URBAN. 2nd Impression


~ Matter and Memory. By Henrt Bercson. Translated by N. M. PauL and W., S.
% PALMER. 6th Impression.
Modern Philosophy. By Gumo pe Rucciero. Translated by A. Howarp HANNAY
and R. G. COLLINGWOOD.


The Modern Predicament. By H. J. Paron. 2nd Impression


Moral Sense. By James Bonar.

Natural Rights. By D. G. RırcHıe. 3rd Edition. 5th Impression.
Nature, Mind and Modern Science. By E. HARRIS.

The Nature of Thought. By BRAND BLANSHARD. 2nd Impression.
On Selfhood and Godhood. By C. A. CAMPBELL.

Personality and Reality. By E. J. TURNER.


The Phenomenology of Mind. By G. W. F. HEGEL. Translated by Sır James BAILLIE.
Revised 2nd Edition. 4th Impression.


Philosophical Papers. By G. E. Moore.

Philosophy and Political Economy. By J. Bonar. 4th Impression.

Philosophy of Whitehead. By W. Mays.

The Platonic Tradition in Anglo-Saxon Philosophy. By J. H. MUIRHEAD.

The Principal Upanisads. By RADHAKRISHNAN.

The Problems of Perception. By R. J. Hirst.

Some Main Problems of Philosophy. By G. E. Moore.

Time and Free Will. By HENRI BErcson. Translated by F. G. Pocson. 7th Impression.


The Ways of Knowing: or The Methods of Philosophy. By W. P. MONTAGUE.
5th Impression.


 Auirbead Library of Philosophy


SCIENCE OF LOGIC


HEGEL’S


SCIENCE OF LOGIC


TRANSLATED BY


W. H. JOHNSTON, B.A., AND
L. G. STRUTHERS, MA
*


With an Introductory Preface by
Viscount Haldane of Cloan
BF. PC. OM. FRS.


VOLUME ONE


LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD
NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY


FIRST PUBLISHED IN ENGLISH IN 1929
SECOND IMPRESSION 195I


THIRD IMPRESSION 1961


This book is copyright under the Berne Convention. Apart

from any fair dealing for the purpose of private study,

research, criticism or review, as permitted under the

Copyright Act, 1956, no portion may be reproduced by

any process without written permission. Enquiries should be
addressed to the publisher.


First published in German 1812-1816 under the title ‘‘ Wissenschaft der Logik.”


The greater part of this translation was made from the edition published in 1923
by Felix Meiner, Leipzig, edited by Dr. Georg Lasson, of Berlin.


Printed in Great Britain by Photolitho
UNWIN BROTHERS LIMITED
WOKING AND LONDON


CALIFORNIA STATE COLLEGE


meem 23 N
DEDICATED TO THE MEMORY OF


FABIAN PEMBER REEVES
1895-1917


INTRODUCTORY PREFACE


Tue Wissenschaft der Logik is one of the most important of Hegel’s
works. It was first written when he was at Nürnberg in 1812.
He was engaged in revising it for a second edition at the
time of his death, in the end of 1831. It now appears in an
English form, carefully rendered for the benefit of students in
this country, in a fashion which shows that the translators have
not only reproduced the words in our own language, but
have interpreted Hegel’s meaning fully.

Hegel, who at one time dominated the study of philosophy,
is not at present much read. People have gone back to Kant.
But the very reasons which led them back to Kant have led
some of the keenest inquirers on to Hegel. The revision of
current ideas which was effected by the latter is just as close
as that brought about by Kant. It follows the same line but
follows it further.

Hegel is very difficult to read for those who have not first
of all mastered the conception of the Critical Philosophy. But
if they have mastered this conception and have also mastered
the general outlook of the Hegelian system in its amendment,
Hegel is comparatively easy to read. There is in his exposition
a principle closely worked out, and the principle when once
grasped makes his language readily intelligible. If it is asked
why then, since 1850 at any rate, his writings have been a good
deal neglected, the answer is not difficult to give. It is only by
the multitude that they have been laid aside. The principle
has penetrated in this country into the attitude and methods
of some of the later thinkers who have been greatest among us,
men like Green, Caird, Bradley and Bosanquet. These have
indeed hardly been Hegelians. It was not probable that a
system which was given to the world a century since should
serve the world sufficiently to-day. But its broad principle
has profoundly moved the English thinkers to whom I have
referred, and I might add instances of the same kind from
the United States and from other countries, as well as from
Germany.

A®


B SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Not the less is it true that there has been a reaction against
the Hegelian outlook. First of all its author wrote as though
his teaching culminated in the exposition of an Absolute. I do
not think that Hegel ever meant his Absolute to be accepted
as more than an ideal, to be worked towards but not to be
regarded as capable of description excepting in abstract terms
which were therefore insufficient for the concrete ideas of human
beings. In the second place he has been held responsible for an
idea of the State as a super-person. He has even been accused
of having been the indirect but potent cause of the late war.
A little study of his writings shows this to be a gross exaggera-
tion. He held that Society was no mechanical aggregate of
isolated individuals, and that there were identities in thinking
and willing which united Society into what was more real and
of a higher order than such a mere aggregate. As for the State,
he declared that whether it was to be monarchical or republican
was a question with which philosophy had no concern.

But a more serious criticism on Hegel has been made from
another side. He attached high importance to the application
of his principle to the whole field of experience. This principle
he applied to the current results of the physical and natural
science of his time. Although his reading was vast he was not
a trained man of science. He had too little knowledge to be
sufficiently critical of the results reached a century ago, at a
time when people were carried away by such brilliant aberra-
tions as Goethe’s attack on Newton’s explanation of colour.
Along with other great thinkers of his time he committed him-
self to some views largely accepted early in last century but
now wholly superseded. The outcome of this was that after
his death there was a great revulsion against certain of the
views expressed in his Philosophy of Nature.

Now although some of Hegel’s opinions on scientific subjects
were wrong and are now wholly superseded, none of the
criticisms made upon them affected the validity of his funda-
mental principle. The fierceness of the attacks on him was
partly at least due to his personality. He was a hard dry man.
He had, notwithstanding what has been said by people who
have not mastered his system, nothing of the mystic in his
composition. He exercised at Berlin, where he was professor for
many years, more influence with the Prussian Ministry than


INTRODUCTORY PREFACE 9


was desirable in one who had better have held himself aloof
from these things. In short, though worshipped as a teacher,
he was far from being universally liked as a man. Schopen-
hauer’s testimony against him is far too bitter to be reliable,
but that it should have been given wide publicity is indicative
of much that was felt.

It was therefore to an audience not wholly indisposed to
listen that the critics of Hegel addressed themselves after he
was dead and his reign was over. In reality what they attacked
most were doctrines that were not vital to the system. But public
opinion had become suspicious of attempts to rationalize on
high principles of metaphysics the fruits which they held not
_ unjustly that they were receiving from observation and experi-
ment alone, and men were not then conscious how impossible
it is to avoid the recognition in these deliverances of factors
due to the unavoidably moulding influence of reflection.

Then, too, the system had become too much of an effort
after a complete and all-embracing account of the Universe,
of God as well as Men and things, to inspire confidence in
those who belonged to a later generation with different ten-
dencies. The day for any attempt at a display of the ‘“‘Absolute”
was gone by.

Notwithstanding all these things the greatness of Hegel’s
real contribution to the history of thought seems to me to
remain intact. His method is what he himself declared to be
the important thing; the results might well, he himself said,
assume a form different from that they took in his own hands.
What have to be grasped are therefore the ground-principle
and the method. We need not be deterred by the feeling that
we are no longer interested in the doctrine of the Absolute
which engrossed attention in the early part of last century;
nor by Hegel’s political tendencies, whatever they were, and
they were diverse; nor by the insufficiency of the scientific
teaching which was that of his time. For none of these things
detracts from the principle underlying his method, a method
which is applicable to the subject-matter of our general ex-
perience as it is interpreted to-day just as much as it was
applicable to that subject-matter in the shape which was current
in the period in which he wrote.

What then was the principle underlying Hegel’s method?


10 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


He starts from the fact of human experience, differently inter-
preted as it may well be in different times and by different
individuals, but in substance analogous for those who possess
the brain and senses that are common to mankind. Experience
is the actual and the actual is experience. We really, therefore,
make self-conscious man our point of departure. He is the
“That” which we have to interpret into the “What.” The result
of doing so is exhibited in his first great book, the Phenomenology
of Mind, which appeared in 1807, before the present book.
There we encounter the actual. We find that mind moulds its
experience, and that mind and its object alike are no static
entities, independent of each other, but consist in a process
which is dynamic, in that each distinction made turns out to
involve further distinctions ahead. Reflection does not stand
still when it makes the generalizations which it is ofits character
to make; it always implies and leads on to further generaliza-
tions which in the end turn out to be themselves abstract and
relatively insufficient. Its procedure is in this sense dialectical,
and the ideal of knowledge is a whole towards which know-
ledge is always by its very nature striving, but which it can
never, limited as it is by our station in nature, reach as an
immediate object of concrete experience. Such a whole can
only be rendered in the abstractions of reflection. It cannot
be directly apprehended.

Still experience can be sifted out by thought. It is the actual,
but it is actual only in so far as thought sets feeling in it and
so gives it meaning for us. Into every form of experience
reflection thus enters, not as constituting it ab extra, but as
inherent in its very nature. The universal and the particular
factors which thus belong to the constitution of actual experi-
ence are not separate entities. Neither exists apart from the
other, nor is either reducible to the other. What is concrete
is also universal, and what is universal has reality only in the
concrete form of the actual. What reflection can do is to dis-
engage by analysis of what is before it in experience the
notions or categories which give experience its meaning and
therefore its reality. For to have no’ meaning is to be wholly
unreal. The meaning of things must be found, but the nature
and relations of the categories which enter into and constitute
their significance can only be reached by a sustained process


INTRODUCTORY PREFACE Il


of investigation. As reflection is dynamic and has not static
nor self-contained notions to deal with, the development of
the activity of thought as a system may thus turn out to be
a process of self-development, and this is just what Hegel finds.

The principle of his idealism is accordingly very different
from that of Kant. The latter also found categories or notions
that entered into the constitution of experience. But these he
got at empirically, by a scrutiny of the forms of judgment as
stated in the current logic which dealt with subjective thinking.
Each of his categories was self-contained and stood by itself
as though it were a particular form of subjective thought,
detachable from and applied to a raw material independent
of it, which indicated as its origin the existence in some form
of things in themselves real apart from any knowledge of them.
For Kant mind was also real apart from its activity in judg-
ment and the forms of space and time into which it moulded
the matter that came within its grasp. For him experience was
thus made up of separable factors, capable of being treated
independently of each other, and the result was an idealism
which was in truth subjective.

Hegel laid hold of the principle which Kant had expressed
when the latter said that we must search for the categories
which mould our subjective experience and give it reality with
the aid of the other elements which he brings in. But Hegel
was far from content with the narrow view which his prede-
cessor took of the number and nature of the categories. For
Hegel they were not forms which the mind imposed on some-
thing from without it. It was true that by themselves they
could not give anything actual, for they were abstract universals
intelligible only to reflection. Nor were they to be found by
themselves in the objects of experience. For these so far as real
were always individual. The individual is indeed unique, just
this and none other in the universe. But what is individual is
real only in so far as there is recognized the universal aspect
which reflection discloses in it. This is indeed only disclosed
as inseparable from a particularity which is indefinable and
is only there in the individual form in which thought sets it.
The particular as such, bare sensation for instance, is only
actual in so far as it is recognized as my sensation or as
analogous to it, and it is thus that reflection must enter into


12 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


the constitution of our experience. Universal and particular
conceived in isolation from each other are mere abstractions
from an experience which can be real only in an individual
form,

But as all that is significant in the actual is the work done
by reflection in setting particulars in individual aspects that
are due to the abstract universals of reflection, it is obvious
that to ascertain the character and system of these universals
is a matter of great importance for philosophy. We can study
these only as disclosed in experience itself, an experience that
is always changing, and has orders or grades. It is this abstract
side of experience with which metaphysics is concerned. Its
form varies according to the phases of the world with which
we are dealing. Mathematics and physics deal with certain
phases of experience which are distinguished and made definite
by the characters of the categories which these phases present.
. In biology, ethics, art and religion we are confronted with
other categories of different orders. The investigation of the
characters of these varying categories and of their relation to
each other is the subject of Hegel’s Encyclopaedia.

The Encyclopaedia contains the system in its full scope. The
first part is directed to Logic, really to what is properly
Metaphysics, for the abstract notions with which it is concerned
lie at the foundations of all experience. But they are not.the
only forms in which that experience is presented. In the
“Philosophy of Nature” to which the second part is devoted,
he sets out his view of thought as it enters into the fashioning
of the external world, a world directly apprehended as a
not-self. This world, of which we take ourselves to be imme-
diately aware, is a form which is essential in our experience,
apart from which it has no reality nor significance. In the
Logic the categories are set out as abstractions in their relations
to each other. They form an entirety which he calls the Idea,
an entirety in which every phase, from mere being onwards,
has significance only as a stage or level in the whole. Every
category, every determination which mind makes, is dynamic.
It is an activity in which form develops itself out of form in
a process where negation or determination is the characteristic
feature. The system of these abstract categories constitutes what
he calls the “Idea,” a system in which every feature implies


INTRODUCTORY PREFACE 13


and involves all the others. It is this complete system of
notional categories that has its logical counterpart and com-
plement in Nature. It is a mistake to suppose that Hegel
deduces Nature from his categories. Thought for him does not
make things. It is exemplified in Nature in the form of exter-
nality. But mind in this abstract form is not yet actual. It only
becomes so in a logical development later than both Logic and
its other, Nature, in which both become actual for the first
time in the concrete experience in which they are real only
as moments, separable solely through reflection. The categories
as realized in this latest form can be traced just as they can
in the other form to which they give the aspect of externality.
It is the same single process throughout. Nature and thought
imply each other, but neither creates the other.

In the third part of the system, in the individual objects
of our experience, we find these objects considered as actual.
Here the self-evolution of thought exhibits itself in the shapes
which the moulding influence of reflection gives to the contents
of our self-consciousness. The shapes are more concrete than
those of the Logic, with its system of abstract notions. They
are more nearly of the nature of self-conscious knowledge than
they could have been had the antithetical phase of externality
not been there for the self to distinguish itself from. But in all
cases it is thought in some form that we are concerned with.
Subject and object must be distinguished by us, but they fall
within a larger entirety. The investigation of the content of
self-consciousness in the “Philosophy of Mind,” the third part
of the Encyclopaedia, is the investigation of actual experience
and the bringing to light of the logical constituents implied
in it. It is a question throughout of disentangling and setting
out categories. What is not reached nor exhausted is just that
moment of the particular, itself an abstraction but one that
is inevitable, which is ever present in finite experience but
which cannot be even defined, for to define it would be to
bring it under some category and so to turn it into a universal.
Our thought does not create things. It finds itself in them.
They belong to our experience, which we have not to explain
because it is the starting-point of which we cannot rid our-


selves.
There is for Hegel an ideal towards which we are ever


14 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


striving, although it is only in abstract reflection and con-
sequently in general terms that we can ever approach it. He
holds that he has to assume such an ideal as the completion
of his system. That is how he comes to the idea of what is
absolute.

The system, then, first of all is concentrated on the character
of the categories, not isolated from each other in a table, as
with Kant, but as the limitless self-determination of knowledge
in an abstract form. Hegel then examines the antithesis to
itself which this self-determination implies in order to attain
to the status of self-conscious mind. The antithesis is not that
of the indefinably particular to a universal. It is no creation
ab extra. It is the system of universals reproducing itself in the
form of what for mind is apparent externality to itself, of
object as set over against subject. The two phases are actual
and cease to be unreal abstractions only in mind itself, which
is the degree below which actual experience cannot be attained.
But here as elsewhere in the self-determination of thought the
activity of the movement of reflection in categories is present
in the same fashion, only at a level which is higher than in the
stages which so far as logic is concerned are earlier. We now
reach Mind with its self-development towards an ideal torm
in which the antithesis between universal and particular and
between subject and object has been superseded, and both
belong to the whole in which the distinction between them
will, like all other distinctions, be found to be one that is due
only to thought itself. In that way and in that way only are
we impelled towards the ideal of an Absolute outside which
nothing has any meaning and within which all falls, an
Absolute which we cannot envisage in itself.

This is the principle, and the disclosure of the self-arranging
relation through the activity of thought is the method. We
have travelled further than Kant. The criticism of knowledge
by itself has taken a new shape. Behind knowledge we cannot
go. There is no standard of truth save in its own process.

Were this investigation of the forms of thought only a general
and superficial one, the student of philosophy might prefer to
pass it by as being uncertain and highly speculative. But the
investigation is so thorough and is carried into detail with such
care and illuminating illustration that it is not safe to neglect


INTRODUCTORY PREFACE 15


it. For if the method be a true one it seems to solve difficulties
with which Kant refused even to try to cope by means of the
restricted instrument which was all that he had in his hands.
It is not too much to say that no student of philosophy can
be sure of the ground he is treading unless he has made the
effort required to follow out what Hegel claims to tell him.
For the task is to get a clear conception of how thought enters
into every form of experience in ways that determine the
character of that experience in its differing shapes and grades
and orders. Hegel may or may not have succeeded in giving
a complete account of how this task is to be performed, but
at least he has realized fully what it implies, and has warned
us to scrutinize carefully the categories which we employ, often
with little regard to the question whether they are appropriate
to their subject-matter.
HALDANE


ret


P


ERI
a ao ae
Moe 2 Ir À
i
I 7


EDITOR’S NOTE


Ir may seem a matter of surprise that the “Larger Logic”
which has been described as the “Bible of Hegelianism” should
now, for the first time, more than a century after its publica-
tion, be translated into English. It would seem to be a case
of the good being the enemy of the better. In 1865 appeared
J. Hutchison Stirling’s Secret of Hegel in which was included
“a translation from the Complete Logic of the whole first
section, Quality” and “a Summary of the second section,
Quantity.” This was followed in 1874 by William Wallace’s
translation of the “‘lesser Logic” of the Encyclopaedia with the
accompanying Prolegomena republished in separate volumes
in 1892 and 1894 respectively. With these present aids British
students, unfamiliar with German, have hitherto been fain
to be content. In America the history of the larger Logic
has been different though up to the present time, so far as
publication is concerned, without more fortunate result. So
early as 1858 a group of scholars in St. Louis, Missouri, became
acquainted with the book of which Henry C. Brockmeyer,
a German who had come while quite a boy to America,
executed unaided a complete translation into English. This was
copied out by William T. Harris, subjected to revision by some
of Brockmeyer’s friends, and again before his death revised
by Brockmeyer himself, but left by him unpublished.

Some years ago the Editor of the Library of Philosophy
was approached by the surviving friends of Henry Brockmeyer
with a view to the publication in that series of the trans-
lation which he had left. It was to be accompanied with a
short biography of the translator, and to partake of the
character of a tribute to his memory both as a philosopher
and as Governor of the State of Missouri. As it seemed in-
appropriate to have a volume of this kind included in a series

VOL. I


18 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


devoted to the pure study of philosophy, it was impossible to
accept this offer, and as there seemed no immediate prospect
of the American translation coming out, the Editor felt himself
free to make an arrangement with the present translators for
the publication of a work begun some years before by dis-
tinguished Cambridge scholars both of whom have since died.
He wishes, however, to dissociate himself from any spirit of
rivalry with the American translation. Each must stand on its
own merits. Whatever Brockmeyer’s may possess, its romantic
history and the distinguished names with which it also is
associated ought to assure it a welcome on this as well as on
the other side of the Atlantic.


TRANSLATORS’ PREFACE


Tuts translation is made from the Fourth Edition of the
Wissenschaft der Logik, issued in 1923 by Dr. Georg Lasson of
Berlin. The book was first published at Nuremberg in three
parts, which appeared respectively in 1812, 1813, and 1816.
The second edition was printed in 1833, and the third in 1841.
No English version of this book has hitherto been published.
The translation made by Wallace and published under the
title The Logic of Hegel in 1874 is a translation of the section
on Logic in Hegel’s later book the Encyklopädie der philosophischen
Wissenschaften. Wallace’s book has been long and deservedly
popular; but at the same time a need has often been felt for
an English version of the earlier, fuller, and more authoritative
Logic, the corner-stone of the Hegelian system, upon which
estimates of Hegel must always ultimately be based.

The translation was begun, at the suggestion of the late
Dr. McTaggart, by the late Miss Constance Jones (formerly
Mistress of Girton). The first fifty pages of the text represent
in a finished state the work which she had roughly drafted
before her death in 1922. Permission to use this initial work
and to incorporate it with their own was kindly granted to
the present translators by her sister and literary executrix Miss
Parnell Jones ; and we, in completing the work from this point,
have (like Miss Jones) adhered as closely as possible to the
terminology used by McTaggart in his Commentary on Hegel’s
Logic (Cambridge University Press, 1910), departing from it
only where the exigencies of translation made it imperative
to do so in order to avoid ambiguity. In point of interpretation
too our chief guide has been this Commentary, though we have
derived assistance also from the Logique de Hegel of M. Georges
Noél (Paris, Félix Alcan, 1897). It may further be added that
there isin McTaggart’s book an exact account of the relation of
this, the “Greater,” Logic to the Logic of the Encyclopaedia men-
tioned above. Itthus results that McTaggart’s Commentary may be
used in direct connexion with this translation, and we have there-
fore felt ourselves absolved from the task of supplying explanatory
notes or appendices, in which in any case we could not hope to
excel or usefully to supplement the work of McTaggart. We


20 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


must here also, as former pupils of Dr. McTaggart at
Trinity College in Cambridge, express our gratitude for the
help and encouragement which he gave us in the early stages
of the work, and our deep sense of the irreplaceable loss, in
this as in all ways, which we suffered by his untimely death.

Little attempt has been made to impart grace to Hegel’s
remarkable style. No doubt roughness and obscurity abound ;

but these qualities are often a necessary consequence of Hegel’s

peculiar conception of his subject-matter and attitude to it;
though indeed we have occasionally been tempted to think
that he was rough and obscure from sheer devilry. But our aim
throughout has been to represent as exactly as possible in
English what Hegel was apparently trying to say in German,
regardless of the notorious “Himalayan” severity and the
strangeness of phraseology. Without doubt, in many places we
have failed to understand the thought perfectly. Moreover, our
collaboration has been carried on in circumstances of difficulty
during the leisure hours of four years, for half of which we have
been widely separated in space across Europe. This, however,
though it may be taken as an apology, is not put forward as
an excuse for any shortcomings in a work now deliberately
published ; and it is our hope that we have not so frequently
or so completely misrepresented Hegel’s meaning as to render
our translation entirely useless.

We wish to acknowledge our debt of gratitude to Dr. C. D.
Broad of Trinity College, Cambridge, and Professor J. C. Burkill
of the University of Liverpool, for valuable help in the notes
on the Mathematical Infinite and the Differential Calculus;
to Dr. G. Lasson, of Berlin, for assistance in elucidating obscuri-
ties in terminology and text; and to Mr. R. L. Collett, M.A.,
Fellow and Assistant Secretary of the Institute of Chemistry of
Great Britain and Ireland, for aid in many passages requiring
detailed knowledge of chemistry. We are also under obligation
to Professor J. H. Muirhead, General Editor of the Library of
Philosophy, and to Messrs. George Allen and Unwin’s Philo-
sophical Reader, for numerous helpful suggestions throughout.

The publication of this work was made possible by grants
of money made by the Council of Trinity College, Cambridge,
and by certain other Benefactors, our gratitude to whom we
take this opportunity of expressing. L. G. $.


August 1928 W. H. J.


TABLE OF CONTENTS


INTRODUCTORY PREFACE .
EDITOR’S NOTE ety he
TRANSLATORS’ PREFACE k RG,
TABLE OF CATEGORIES Fe ee we a er Sacing page 24
a ee A ee er Le Th Oe ee oa


. e . . ` . . e ~ vi


VOLUME I: OBJECTIVE LOGIC


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION cl O T er?
PREPAGE TO- THE SECOND EDITION ., . s > w. o o. 99
INTRODUCTION:


GENERAL Concept oF Locic a en el A WS |
REAL CCAGINICATION OF LOGO 0 4 0, 0 oe «, rien. 70
BOOK ONE
THE DOCTRINE OF BEING
WITH WHAT MUST THE SCIENCE BEGIN? . . . ...7
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION OF BEING IRRE ae


SECTION ONE
DETERMINATENESS (QUALITY). . . 93
en er ee


A ESS a te a C O
ee ee | ee


C—Becominc . . ee ear ee).
1. Unity of Being er Nothing k . 95
Observation 1. The Opposition of dag’ pee Nothing in
Imagination . . 95
Observation 2. The REES of the Expression “Unity” of or
“Identity of Being and Nothing” ‘ Gale «tes
Observation 3. The Isolation of these ee ne ys LOG
Observation 4. Incomprehensible Nature of the Beginning . 116
2. Moments of Becoming: Arising and Passing Away . . . 118
9. Transcendence of Becoming . . - + + «© « « IIB


Observation: The Expression “to transcend? . . » «+ 119


22 SCIENCE OF LOGIC
CHAPTER Fi


INSDELERMINATE:BEING DR a EE e A


A—DETERMINATE BEING As SUCH e7 f, . A S 5 =


(a) Determinate Being in General Wee E AR RE
(b) Quality ales Series IR EN mits
Observation: Quality a Neganiok eee Wer ade
(ce). Something tts, Wise re arenes apie gr
B—FINITUDE . à E A RE
{a) Something and an Other PN FRE ey AR, ©
(b) Determination, Modification, and Limit . . . à
(e)-Finitude...~ k a EDEN =

(a) The REN of F er BE ale ee ee

(p): Barrier and Ought! 27:57 wa ee


Observation: Ought a a Ma a
(y) Transition of Finite into Infinite . . . . œ


C—INFINITY


(a) Infinity in General e ta Tite ER MEL eee yr

(b) Reciprocal Determination of Finite and Infinite aoe

(c) Affirmative Infinity . .
Transition


Observation 1. Infinite Progress . .
Observation 2. Idealism . . . .


III. BEING FOR SELF
A—BEınG FOR SELF as SUCH
(a) Being Determinate and Being for Self ‘
(b) Being for One
Observation ab Ar
(a) ONCE sin a wes T s
B—Tuer ONE AND THE Many .
(a) The One in Itself
(b) The One and the Void 3
Observation: The Atomistic Principle.
(ec) Many Ones. Repulsion
Observation: Leibniz’s Monad
C—REPULSION AND ATTRACTION
(a) Exclusion of the One i
Observation: Proposition of the Unity of the One ani ihe aie
(6) The one One of Attraction {
(c) The Relation of Repulsion and TR, x A
Observation: Kant’s Construction of Matter out of iesene
and Repulsive Force


.


141
142


146
149
150
150
151
156
163
164
168


170
170
171
172
173
176
177
178
178
179
180
182
183
183
185
186
187


192


TABLE OF CONTENTS


SECTION TWO
MAGNITUDE (QUANTITY) . .


Observation . 5 Š 5 ä 3 A x N


CHAPTER
POORER EY o A ve
A—PurE Quantity : . =) i
Observation 1. The sie of Pure RR ore


Observation 2. Kant’s Antinomy of the Indivisibility and Infinite
Divisibility of Time, Space, and Matter .


. - 5 . . . . `


B—Continuous AND DISCRETE MAGNITUDE
Observation: The Customary Distinction between NN ibook


C—LMITATION oF QUANTITY


BEGHANLOM -= Sa: |


A— NUMBER Fi 3 $


Observation 1. The Species of Calculation in ale Kant’s
Synthetic Propositions a priori of Intuition


Observation 2. Employment of Numerical Meise to


express Philosophie Goncepts s „0  » 0
B—EXTENSIVE AND INTENSIVE QUANTUM. . . e 2 è >
(a) Their Difference ee ET eee a ee ee

(b) Identity of Extensive and Intensive Magnitude . . . .
Observation 1. Examples of this Identity . . . . .
Observation 2. Kant’s Application of Degree-Determination

to the Existence of the Soul .
(O (Phe Alteration of Quantum)". .„ Tree 8
C—Tue QUANTITATIVE INFINITY ae ye ee ae ee ge
(a) Its Notion. . See mers a


(b) The Quantitative Infinite ee
Observation ı. High Esteem enjoyed by the ei to Dii


Observation 2. Kant’s Antinomy of the Temporal and Spatial
Limitedness—and Unlimitedness—of the World


(c) The Infinity of Quantum `
Observation 1. The Conceptual ee ar Pr ER


matical Infinite . . ‘
Observation 2. The Purpose of ides’ Differential Calculus
deduced from its Application . . . e`


Observation 3. Further Forms connected with the RR
Determinateness of Magnitude eh


23
PAGE
198
199
201
201
202
204
213
214
215
217


217
219


227
232
232
235
236


239
240


241
241
242
244


249
253


256
291


321


24 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


CHAPTER PAGE
Il. THE QUANTITATIVE RATIO . . . 0. 0000. 333
A—Tue Direct RATIO TELL ary fetta A dehy ane A oe rea Oe
B—Tue Inverse RATIO MN TE ala eae Ses ee s


C—Tue Ratio oF POWERS . s A = . < 2 5 = . 340
Observation . X Pr a fe oe ol Se ees


SECTION THREE
MEASURE 4-03," 2" «0m Sn wea


Tee SPECIFIC QUANTITY uo 5. e “ia ee eae ee


A—Tue SPECIFIC QUANTUM a ia NE eas ee

B- SPECIFYING 'MEASURE o e sae ww 08035

(abhor Riles ce ES le Set a ee Oa

(5) Fhe Specifying: Measure) es e 5 en se | oS

Observation. . en ee ee

(c) Relation of Both Sides as Qualities Se Eee,

Obsartanon Ea ya ra, ee nn Mn se RE

C—BEING FOR SELF IN MEASURE ae ese Ta ic ae ae

II. REAL MEASURE Si ga Se he, oe REESE RR ER ee

A—Tue RELATION OF STABLE MEASURES on te” a | Ghee

(d) Unionofsiwo- Measures: e a hm es be ee

(b) Measure as a Series of Measure-Relations . . . . . 371

(c) Elective Affinity sting 2 374
Observation: Berthollet on Chemical D Affinity and

Berzelius’s Theory on this Subject „x -. *. are

B—NopaL Line oF MEASURE-RELATIONS . . . . . . . 386
Observation: Examples of such Nodal Lines; natura non

POCIE NEL WEN RE RE erga, Pig RO” canine

C= Tae MEASURELERS i. u sl ue fa he te oe, OE


III. THE BECOMING OF ESSENCE . . . . . . « s 394
A— THE ABSOLUTE INDIFFERENCE an et ER lay Sons, One) RUN:


B—INDIFFERENCE AS INVERSE RELATION OF ITs BACTORS. mm 0 88
Observation: On Centripetal and Centrifugal Force . . 399


C—TRANSITION TO ESSENCE . 200,408


ESTARI

SS NN,
m reyes}
TS DRAN


GLOSSARY


OF SOME PRINCIPAL RECURRENT EQUIVALENTS
USED IN THIS TRANSLATION


Nore.—Words used to translate the names of categories, or in a technical sense,
are spelt with initial capitals.


1. GERMAN—ENGLISH


Dasein

Dasein, Schluss des (category)
Dasein, Urteil des (category)
Ding


an sich in itself, implicitly
Anderssein otherness
Anderswerden other-becoming
Anschauung intuition
Ansichsein? Being-in-Self
Anstoss resistance-principle
Anzahl amount
‚aufheben transcend, cancel
auflösen dissolve, resolve
Aussereinandersein juxtaposition

t Note.— (etwas) ist an sich is in itself

ist an ihm has in itself

begreifen conceive, form a Notion of
Begriff concept, Notion
bei sich with itself
beschränken restrict
Bestimmtheit determinateness
Bestimmtsein determinedness
Bestimmtwerden becoming-determinate
Bestimmung determination
Beziehung relation
Beziehung auf sich self-relation


Determinate Being, existence
Qualitative Syllogism
Judgment of Inherence
thing


Einheit unity, or (as opposed to Anzahl = “amount”)
unit 2

Einteilung classification, division

Entschluss resolution

entstehen arise

erscheinen appear

Erscheinende, das Apparent, the

für sich for itself, by itself

Gegensatz opposition

Gegenstand object


26


Gesetztsein
Gleichgültigkeit
Gleichheit
Grenze
Grundlage


hinausgehen


ideal

ideell

in sich
Inbegriff
Indifferenz


Insichreflektiertsein


Lehrsatz


Mannigfaltigkeit


Mehrere
Mehrheit
Menge
Merkmal


Objekt


real

realisieren
Realität

reell

Reflexion in sich


Sache
scheinen
Schranke
Seele
Sein
setzen
Streben


Trieb


Übergang
übergehen
untergehen
Unterschied
Unterschiedenheit
Urteil


SCIENCE OF LOGIC


positedness
indifference |
equality, likeness
limit

foundation


overpass


ideal

of ideal nature
within itself
sum-total
Indifference
intro-reflectedness


proposition, theorem (in Cognition: Proposi-
tion)


multifariousness, \manifoldness, multiplicity (in
qualitative as well as quantitative sense)

heap

manyness

multitude,number (in Elective Affinity: amount)

characteristic


Object


real

realize

reality

of real nature
intro-Reflection


fact, case

seem, show (intransitive)

barrier

(in Life this word is not translated)
Being

posit

tendency


impulse


transition

pass over

perish

distinction, difference

differentiation

Judgment. (After the categories of Judgment,
and also in the Introduction, Hegel seems
frequently, in using this word, to be mindful
of its etymological meaning, “fundamental
division.’’)


GLOSSARY 27


vergehen pass away

Verhalten attitude

Verhältniss ratio, proportion, relation
Vernunft reason

Vernünftig reasonable
Verschiedenheit variety

Verstand understanding
verständig rational

Vielfachheit multiplicity

Vielheit plurality

Voraussetzung presupposition
Vorstellung sensuous representation, image, imagination,


presentation, idea, general idea, ideation


Nore.— This word, which has occasioned great difficulty in translation, commonly
stands in Hegel for something between sensuous intuition (Anschauung) or
perception (Wahrnehmung) on the one hand, and Notion (Begriff) on the
other. It usually means representation before the mind, in sensuous or semi-
sensuous form, of some particular or universal. It is applied sometimes to
a faculty, sometimes to an activity, and sometimes to the product of an
activity. Often it corresponds roughly to the “general idea” of the English
empiricists, occasionally to the “image” of modern psychology.


Wahrnehmung perception
Widerspruch contradiction
Widerstreit conflict
Wirklichkeit actuality
zugrundegehen perish
zugrundeliegend fundamental
zusammenfallen collapse


zusammengehen coincide


28 SCIENCE OF LOGIC
2. ENGLISH—GERMAN

actuality Wirklichkeit

amount Anzahl

Apparent, the Erscheinende, das

appear erscheinen

arise entstehen

attitude Verhalten

barrier Schranke

becoming-determinate Bestimmtwerden

Being-in-Self Ansichsein

by itself fiir sich

cancel aufheben

case Sache

characteristic Merkmal

classification Einteilung

coincide zusammengehen

collapse zusammenfallen

conceive begreifen

concept Begriff

conflict Widerstreit

contradiction Widerspruch

Determinate Being Dasein

determinateness Bestimmtheit

determination Bestimmung

determinedness Bestimmtsein

difference Unterschied

differentiation Unterschiedenheit

dissolve auflösen

distinction ‘Unterschied

division Einteilung

entity (this word used with an adjective or participre
represents a German adjective or participle
in the neuter gender used as a noun)

equality Gleichheit

existence Existenz, Dasein

Existence Existenz (category)

fact Sache

for itself für sich

form a Notion of begreifen

foundation Grundlage

fundamental zugrundeliegend


general idea Vorstellung


heap


idea

Idea

ideal

ideal nature, of
ideation

image
imagination
implicitly
impulse

in itself
indifference
Indifference
individual, the
Individual
Inherence


Inherence, Judgment of
intro-reflectedness


intro-Reflection
intuition


Judgment of Inherence


juxtaposition


likeness
_ limit


manifoldness
manyness
multifariousness
multiplicity
multitude


Notion
number


object

Object
opposition
other-becoming
otherness
overpass


pass away
pass over
perception
perish
plurality

posit
positedness
presentation
presupposition


GLOSSARY 29
Mehrere


Vorstellung

Idee

ideal

ideell

Vorstellung

Vorstellung

Vorstellung

an sich

Trieb

an sich

Gleichgültigkeit
Indifferenz

Einzelne, das

Individuum (in The Living Individual
Inhärenz

Urteil des Daseins (category)
Insichreflektiertsein
Reflexion in sich
Anschauung


Urteil des Daseins (category)
Aussereinandersein


Gleichheit
Grenze


Mannigfaltigkeit

Mehrheit

Mannigfaltigkeit

Vielfachheit, Mannigfaltigkeit
Menge


Begriff
Zahl, Menge


Gegenstand
Objekt
Gegensatz
Anderswerden
Anderssein
hinausgehen


vergehen

übergehen

Wahrnehmung

untergehen, zugrundegchen
Vielheit

setzen

Gesetztsein

Vorstellung

Voraussetzung


30


proportion
proposition


Qualitative Syllogism


ratio

rational

real

real nature, of
reality

realize

reason
reasonable
relation
resistance-principle
resolution
resolve

restrict


seem

self-relation

sensuous representation
show (intransitive)
sum-total


tendency
theorem
thing
transcend
transition


understanding
unit
unity


variety


with itself
within itself


SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Verhältniss
Satz, Lehrsatz


Schluss des Daseins (category)


Verhältniss
verständig, rationell
real

reell

Realität

realisieren

Vernunft
vernünftig
Beziehung, Verhältniss
Anstoss

Entschluss

auflösen
beschränken


scheinen
Beziehung auf sich
Vorstellung
scheinen


Inbegriff


Streben
Lehrsatz
Ding
aufheben
Übergang


Verstand

Einheit (as opposed to Anzahl = “amount”)
Einheit

Verschiedenheit


bei sich
in sich


Nore.—The biographical footnotes which will be found in various parts of this
work are not part of Hegel’s text. They were added by the German Editor,
and it seemed worth while to take them up into this translation,


VOLUME I


OBJECTIVE LOGIQ


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


THE complete transformation which philosophical thought has
undergone in Germany during the last five-and-twenty years!
and the loftier outlook upon thought which self-conscious mind
has attained in this period, have hitherto had but little influence
on the structure of Logic.

That which before this period was called Metaphysic, has
been, so to speak, extirpated root and branch, and has dis-
appeared from the ranks of the Sciences. Where could one
now catch an echo— where would any echo venture to linger
—of the Ontology, the Rational Psychology, the Cosmology,
or even the Natural Theology, of former times? Where, for
instance, would investigations concerning the Immateriality
of the Soul, or Efficient and Final Causes—where would these
now arouse any interest? And the other proofs of the existence
of God are now brought forward only from an historical
standpoint, or with a view to edification and spiritual uplifting.
It is the fact that men have lost interest partly in the content
of the old Metaphysic, partly in its form—and partly in both
content and form. If it is a remarkable thing when a nation
finds that its Constitutional Theory, its customary ways of
thinking and feeling, its ethical habits and traditional virtues,
have become inapplicable, it is certainly not less remarkable
when a nation loses its Metaphysic, when the intellect occupying
itself with its own pure essence, has no longer any real existence
in the thought of the nation.

The exoteric doctrine of Kantian Philosophy that Under-
standing cannot go beyond Experience, because if so the
faculty of cognition would be a merely theoretical intelligence
which could by itself produce nothing but idle fancies of the
brain—this doctrine has given a scientific justification to the
renunciation of Speculative Thought. This popular doctrine
was supported by the cry of modern educationalists, voicing
the needs of the hard times, which draw men’s attention to
immediate requirements; it was clamoured that as for know-


1 This was written in 1812 (Translators’ note).
VOL. I B


34 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


ledge experience is the starting point, so for ability in public
and in private life, theoretical insight is actually injurious,
while it is practice and technical education which are above
all essential, and alone lead to better things. Philosophy and
crude Common Sense playing thus into each other’s hands for
the downfall of Metaphysic, there was presented the strange
spectacle of a cultured people having no Metaphysic—as it
were a temple, in all other respects richly ornamented, but
lacking its Holy of Holies. —Theology, which in earlier times
had been the guardian of speculative mysteries, and of a
Metaphysic subordinate to itself, had given up this science in
exchange for emotions, for popular practicality, and learned
historicity. On the other hand, in correspondence with this
change, those lonely souls who were sacrificed by their fellows,
and isolated from the world, to the end that contemplation
of the eternal and a life dedicated thereto should be main-
tained—the life and the contemplation being for the sake of
an ideal and not of a practical Good—these devotees passed
out of existence;—and their passing away may, from another
point of view, be regarded as essentially one with the pheno-
menon of which we have already spoken. And so, when such
metaphysical shadows, and such colourless self-concentration
of the introspective spirit, had been brushed aside, existence
seemed to be transformed into the sunny land of flowers—and,
as we know, no flowers are black.

It did not fare quite so ill with Logic as with Metaphysic.
The view that by Logic one would learn how to think (the
usefulness and hence the purpose of Logic being supposed to
consist in this)—which was just as though one were to expect
to learn how to digest and how to move, by the study of
anatomy and physiology—this prejudice has long ago been
exploded, and the spirit of practicality probably intended
for Logic a fate no better than that which had fallen to the
lot of the sister Science. In spite of this, however, and probably
on account of some formal utility, a place among the Sciences
was left to Logic, and it was even retained as a subject of
public instruction. But this better fate concerned only
externals, for the form and content of Logic had remained
the same that it had inherited by long tradition—a tradition
which in being handed down had become ever more meagre


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 35


and attenuated; there are no traces in Logic of the new spirit
which has arisen both in Learning and in Life. It is, however
(let us sayit once for all), quite vain to try to retain the forms
of an earlier stage of development when the inner structure of
spirit has become transformed; these earlier forms are like
withered leaves which are pushed off by the new buds already
being generated at the roots.

But even in the scientific sphere this ignoring of the
universal change is beginning to fail. Imperceptibly the new
ideas became familiar even to their opposers, who appropriated
them and—though persistently slighting and gainsaying the
sources and principles of these ideas—yet had to accept their
results, and were unable to evade their influence. The only
way in which opposers could give content and positive value
to their negative attitude (which was getting to be of ever less
and less importance) was by giving in their adherence to the
new ways of thinking.

On the other hand, the period of fermentation with which
a new creation begins seems to be past. At its first appearance
such a period generally wears an aspect of fanatical hostility
towards the prevalent systematization of the older principle;
it is also, partly, fearful of losing itself in the wilderness of
particulars while it shuns the labour required for scientific
development, and in its need of such a development grasps,
at first, at an empty formalism. The demand for the digestion
and development of the material now becomes so much the
more pressing. This is a period in the development of an age,
as in the development of an individual, when the chief business
is to acquire and maintain the principle in its undeveloped
intensity. But the higher requirement is that the principle
should be elaborated into systematized knowledge.

Still, whatever may have been already done for the cause
and for the form of philosophy in other respects, the logical
science which is the true content of genuine Metaphysic or
pure speculative philosophy has heretofore been very much
neglected. What I more exactly understand by this Logic and
its standpoint I have set forth provisionally in the Introduction.
The necessity of once more beginning this science from the
very beginning, the nature of the subject itself, and the absence
of previous work which could be used in the projected trans-


36 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


formation, should all be taken into account by fair and
reasonable judges—even though the labour of many years has
not been able to secure for this attempt a nearer approach to
perfection. The essential point of view is, that we have to do,
altogether, with a new concept of philosophical method. As
I have elsewhere recalled * Philosophy, since it is to be
Ordered Knowledge, cannot borrow its Method from a
subordinate science, such as Mathematics, any more than it
can rest satisfied with categorical assertions of pure intuition,
or use reasonings based on external reflection. But it is the
nature of the content and that alone which lives and stirs in
philosophic cognition, while it is this very reflection of the
content which itself originates and determines the nature of
philosophy.

Understanding makes determinations and maintains them.
Reason is negative and dialectical because it dissolves into
nothing the determinations of Understanding; Reason is
positive because it is the source of the Universal in which the
Particular is comprehended. Just as Understanding is com-
monly held to be something separate from Reason regarded
generally, so dialectical Reason is held to be something separate
from positive Reason. But in its real truth Reason is Mind—
Mind which is higher than either Reason which understands,
or Understanding which reasons. Mind is the negative, it is
that which constitutes the quality alike of dialectical Reason
and of Understanding; it negates the simple and thus posits
that determinate distinction which is the work of Under-
standing, and just as truly it resolves this distinction, and is
thus dialectical. Yet it does not abide in the negation which
thus results, but is therein just as much positive,—thus it has
thereby established the first Simple, but so that the Simple is
also a Universal which is in itself concrete ; under this universal
a given Particular is not subsumed ; but, in that determination,
and in the solution thereof, the Particular has already been
coincidently determined. This movement of Mind, which in
its simplicity gives itself its determinateness and hence self-
equality, and which thus is the immanent development of
the Notion—this movement is the Absolute Method of know-


* Phenomenology of Spirit, Preface to the first edition—The special exposition
is the understanding of Method, and this has its place in Logic itself. [1831.]


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 37


ledge, and at the same time the immanent soul of the Content |
of knowledge.—It is, I maintain, along this path of self-
construction alone that Philosophy can become objective and
demonstrated science.—It is after this fashion that I have tried
to present consciousness in the Phenomenology of Spirit. Con-
sciousness is Spirit as knowing which is concrete and engrossed
in externality; but the schema of movement of this concrete
knowing (like the development of all physical and intellectual
life) depends entirely on the nature of the pure essentialities
which make up the content of Logic. Consciousness, as mani-
fested Spirit which as it develops frees itself from its immediacy
and external concretions, becomes Pure Knowing, which takes
as object of its knowing those pure essentialities as they are in
and for themselves. They are pure thought, Spirit thinking its
own essence. Their spontaneous movement is their spiritual
life: by this movement philosophy constitutes itself; and
philosophy is just the exhibition of this movement.

I have thus indicated the relation to Logic of the science
which I call Phenomenology of Spirit. With regard to the external
arrangement, it was intended that the first part of the System
of Knowledge: which contains the Phenomenology, should be
followed by a second part which should contain Logic and
the two concrete Philosophical Sciences, the Philosophy of
Nature and the Philosophy of Spirit, thus completing the
System of Knowledge. But the extensive elaboration demanded
by Logic has caused me to allow this portion to be published
separately ; thus, in an enlarged scheme, Logic constitutes the
first sequel to the Phenomenology of Spirit. I shall work out later
the two concrete Philosophical Sciences already spoken of.—
The First Book of this first volume of the Logic is The Doctrine of
Being ; the Second Book contains The Doctrine of Essence, which
is the second division of the first volume; the second volume
will contain Subjective Logic, or The Doctrine of the Notion.


NÜRNBERG,
22nd March 1812.


ı (Bamberg and Würzburg, Göbhard, 1807.) This title will not be given to
the second edition, which will come out next Easter. —Instead of the projected
Second Part (mentioned in the sentences that follow above) containing all the
rest of the philosophical sciences, I have since brought out the Encyclopaedia of
the Philosophical Sciences, which last year was in its third edition. [1831.]


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


I HAvE embarked upon the new elaboration of the Science of
Logic of which this is the first volume, with full consciousness
bath of the difficulties of the subject in itself and of its exposition,
and also of the imperfection of the elaboration contained in
the first edition ; earnestly as I have striven, after many years’
further occupation with the subject, to remedy this imper-
fection, I still feel that I have good reason to bespeak the
indulgence of my readers. The title to such a claim for
indulgence may well be based in the first instance upon the
circumstance that for the content of the science hardly any-
thing but merely external material was to be found in the
earlier Metaphysic and Logic. Though both of these subjects
have been universally and assiduously cultivated, the latter
even up to our own day, the speculative aspect has met with
but slight attention; on the contrary, we have, for the most
part, the same things repeated again and again—sometimes
thinned down to shallow triviality, while sometimes the old
ballast is unloaded afresh and dragged about in ever greater
bulk after such a fashion that the efforts expended—to a large
extent merely mechanical—could bring no gain to the philo-
sophic content. Hence it had come to pass that to present the
realm of thought in its philosophical aspect—that is, inits own
immanent activity, or (which comes to the same thing) in its
necessary development—this had to be a new undertaking,
and to be begun from the very beginning; but the traditional
material—the well-known forms of thought—must be regarded
as a highly important pattern—in fact a necessary condition,
a presupposition to be thankfully acknowledged, even if only
providing here and there a barren clue or, as it were, the
lifeless bones of a skeleton, sometimes even flung together in
disorder.

It is in human Language that the Forms of Thought are
manifested and laid down in the first instance. In our day
it cannot be too often recalled, that what distinguishes man
from the beasts is the faculty of Thought. Language has penetrated


40 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


into whatever becomes for man something inner—becomes, that
is, an idea, something which he makes his very own ;—and what
man transforms to Language contains—concealed, or mixed
up with other things, or worked out to clearness—a Category ;
so natural to man is Logic—indeed, Logic itself is just man’s
peculiar nature. But if Nature in general is opposed, as
physical, to what is mental, then it must be said that Logic is
rather that something Super-natural which enters into all the
natural behaviour of man—Feeling, Intuition, Desire, Need,
Impulse—and thereby alone transforms it all to something
human—to ideas and purposes—though, perhaps, only for-
mally human. It is a great advantage to a language when it
has a wealth of logical expressions—that is, expressions charac-
teristic and set apart—for the determinations of thought; of
prepositions and articles many belong to those relationships
which depend upon thinking; the Chinese language is said
not to have developed so far, or only in a very small degree;
these particles in fact perform an entirely subordinate office,
the same as prefixes and suffixes, and in an only slightly more
independent form. It is much more important that in a lan-
guage the determinations of thought should be manifested in
Substantives and Verbs and thus receive the stamp of objective
form; the German language has here many advantages over
other modern languages; indeed, many of its words have the
further peculiarity that they have not only various, but even
opposed, meanings, so that we must recognize here a specu-
lative spirit in the language; it is a joy to thought to stumble
upon such words, and to meet with the union of opposites
(a result of Speculative Thought which to Human Under-
standing seems senseless) in the naive shape of one word with
opposite meanings registered in a dictionary. For this reason,
in German, Philosophy for the most part requires no peculiar
terminology. Of course some words from foreign languages
(which indeed have already acquired by prescription the right
of citizenship in the philosophic realm) have to be adopted
in German, and an affected purism would be least in place
where it is the thing and not the word that is of capital
importance. The progress of culture generally, and of the
sciences in particular, gradually brings to light higher relations
of thought, or at any rate raises these relations to greater


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 41


generality, and thereby attracts to them more attentive con-
sideration. This is true even of those sciences which relate to
what is empirical and sensuous, since they use in general the
most familiar categories (for example, Whole and Parts, a
Thing and its Properties, and the like). For instance, though
in Physics the idea of Force had become supreme, in more
modern times the most important part here has been played
by the Category of Polarity—which indeed has been too much
dragged in everywhere at random, and even into the theory
of Light. In this determination of thought a distinction is
drawn, while the things distinguished are inseparably bound
up together. It is of infinite importance that in this way the
abstract form (Identity) by which a thought-determinateness
is endowed with independence (as, for example, Force) has
been abandoned, and the form of the determination, of a
distinction which remains all the while in identity because it
is inseparable, is emphasized and becomes a current idea.
Owing to the reality which appertains to natural objects, the
observation of nature compels us to establish those natural
Categories which we cannot ignore even when they may be
thoroughly incoherent with others to which also validity is
allowed, and does not permit here that passage from opposites
to abstracts and universals, which more easily takes place in
the case of ideational objects.

But whilst logical objects and the expression of them are thus
something that is everywhere familiar in cultivated thought, still,
as I have elsewhere observed, what is familiar is not on that
account necessarily understood. It even rouses one’s impatience
to have to go on merely busying oneself about what is thus
familiar—and what is more familiar than just those deter-
minations of thought of which we make use at every turn,
which proceed out of our mouths with every sentence that we
speak? This foreword is intended to give the fundamental
points in that course of the progress of Cognition which starts
from what is thus known and familiar, and in the relation of
Scientific thinking to Natural thinking; this, together with
what is contained in the earlier Introduction, will suffice to
furnish that general notion of the meaning of logical Cognition
which one is accustomed to demand in the case of any Science,
as a preliminary to the presentation of the Science itself.


B*


42 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


In the first place, it is to be regarded as an immense advance
that the Forms of Thought should be disengaged from the
Matter of Thought in which they are imbedded in self-conscious
Intuition and Ideation as well as in Desire and Will—or rather
(since there is no human Desire nor Will without Ideas) in
ideating Desire and Will; it is an immense advance that these
Universals should be drawn forth and set up as objects of
contemplation on their own account, as was done by Plato
and then more especially by Aristotle; we have in this the
beginning of knowledge. “It was only,” says Aristotle, “after
nearly everything that was necessary, and that pertained to
the convenience and intercourse of life, had been obtained,
that people began to trouble themselves about philosophic
knowledge.”: “In Egypt,” he had previously remarked, “the
mathematical sciences were early developed, because there
the priestly caste at an early period was in such a position as
to make leisure possible.” In truth the need to busy oneself
with pure thought presupposes a long stretch of road already
traversed by the mind of man. It is, one may say, the need
of a need already satisfied as regards necessaries, the need of
an attained absence of need, of abstraction from the matter
of intuition, imagination, and so forth—from the concrete
interests of Desire, Impulse, and Will, in which the deter-
minations of thought are wrapped up and concealed. In the
still spaces of Thought which has come to itself and is purely
self-existent, those interests are hushed which move the lives
of peoples and of individuals. “In so many directions,” says
Aristotle in the same connexion, “the nature of man is
dependent; but this science, which is not sought for the sake
of utility, this alone, in itself and for itself, is free, and seems
therefore to be a possession not wholly human.’’3 Philosophy
generally still has in its thinking to deal with concrete objects
—God, Nature, Mind—; but Logic is concerned with such
thought wholly and solely on account of the thought itself,
in complete abstraction from its objects. It is customary to
assign to Logic a place among the studies of youth, because
the young have not yet entered upon the interests of concrete
life. Youth lives at leisure in respect of these interests; its
business is to acquire the means and power of entering actively

1 Metaph., A 2. 982b. 2 Ibid., A 1. 981. 3 Ibid., A 2. 9826.


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 43


upon the objects of these interests, and even these objects are
considered in a merely theoretic manner. In opposition to the
view of Aristotle already quoted, logical science is reckoned
as part of this equipment; occupation with Logic is a pre-
liminary business, its place is said to be the school, which ought
to precede the seriousness of life and action for solid ends. In
Life, categories are used—they are degraded from the honour
of being contemplated on their own account to serve in
intellectual exercise upon living content by production and
interchange of the ideas appropriate thereto. They serve, first,
as abbreviations, in virtue of their generality ; for what an endless
multitude of particulars of external existence and of action do
ideas comprise, for example, Battle, War, Nation, or Sea,
Animal, and so forth ;—how in the Idea of God, or of Love,
and so on, in the simplicity of such ideating, we have an
endless multitude of ideas, activities, conditions, and so on,
epitomized! Secondly, Categories serve for the closer deter-
mination and discovery of objective relations, in which, how-
ever, content and purpose, the validity and truth of the thought
which enters into this process, are made entirely dependent on
the material presented, and no efficacy in determining the
content is ascribed to the determinations of thought in them-
selves. Such use of the Categories, which has above been called
Natural Logic, is unconscious, and when in scientific con-
templation the mind assigns to the Categories the function of
serving as means, then Thinking in general is turned into
something subordinate to other mental functions. We do not
say of our Feelings, Impulses and Interests that they serve us
—rather, they are regarded as independent faculties and
powers, the fact being that so to feel, thus to desire and will,
to take interest in this or that—all this is just what we are.
On the other hand again, we are likely to become conscious
that we are at the disposal of our Feelings, Impulses, Passions,
and Interests, let alone Habits, rather than that we are the
owners of these or (still less) that they serve us as means, seeing
how intimately they are incorporated in us. Such determina-
tions of disposition and intellect soon show themselves as
Particulars in contradistinction to that Universality of which
we are conscious in ourselves and in which we find our Free-
dom; and indeed we think that we are entangled in these


44 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Particularities, and that they tyrannize over us. Consequently
we are much less able to hold that the Forms of Thought
serve us than that we serve them—that we are their masters
and not much rather that they are our masters—those Forms
of Thought which permeate all our ideas, whether those ideas
are just theories or have a content of Sensation, of Impulse,
or of Will. What surplus have we as against them, how shall
we—how shall I—set myself up as more universal than they—
they who are the Universal itself? When we give ourselves up
to a sensation, a purpose, an interest, and then feel ourselves
to be limited and unfree, the place into which we can with-
draw therefrom and get back into freedom is the place where
we are certain of ourselves, the region of pure abstraction, the
region of Thought. So, when we mean to speak of things, we
call the Nature or Essence of them their Concept—and this
exists only for thought: but of the concepts of things we cannot
say that we govern them, or that the thought-determinations
of which they are the complexes serve us; on the contrary, our
thought has to limit itself in accordance with them, and our

arbitrary choice or Freedom ought not to try to frame them
-after its own fancy. In so far, then, as subjective Thinking is
our own-est and innermost act, and the objective concept of
things constitutes their own reality, we cannot get beyond that
own act of ours, we cannot stand above it, and just as little
can we get beyond the nature of things. We can, however,
disregard the latter determination ; it coincides in so far with
the former, since it would furnish a relation of our thoughts
to the thing, giving, however, only an empty result, the real
thing being set up as a standard for our concepts, while that
thing can for us be nothing else than our concepts of it. When
the Critical Philosophy understands the relation of these three
Terms so as to make Thoughts intermediary between Us and
Things in such a sense that this intermediary rather excludes
us from things than connects us with them, this view may be
met by the simple observation that these very things which
are supposed to stand beyond ourselves, and beyond the
thoughts referring to them, at the opposite extreme, are them-
selves things of thought, and, as being quite undetermined,
are just one such thing (the so-called Thing-in-itself), the
product of empty abstraction.


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 45


Enough said, however, of that point of view at which the
relation vanishes away, according to which determinations of
thought are regarded merely as means and instrument; more
important is the further point connected therewith, according
to which it is customary to regard these determinations as
external Forms.—That activity of Thinking which works in
all our ideas, purposes, interests, and deeds is, as has been
already remarked, un-self-consciously active (Natural Logic) ;
what is present to consciousness is the content, the objects of
our ideas, that in which we are interested; in this connexion
the determinations of Thought are regarded as Forms, which
are not the content itself but only attached to the content. But if
it is true, as was asserted above and is generally admitted,
that in an object the nature, the peculiar essence, the truly
permanent and substantial among the multiplicity and con-
tingency of its appearance and fleeting manifestation, consists
in the concept of the thing, in the Universal immanent in it;
as every human individual, though infinitely unique, is so only
because it belongs to the class of man, every animal only because
it belongs to the class of animal: if this be true, what remains
of such an individual if this basis (i.e. the universal) be
removed, however many other predicates it have, and although
the universal be only one among them? The indispensable
basis, the Concept, the Universal, which is Thought itself—
in so far, that is, as in using the word Thought one can abstract
from the idea—this cannot be regarded as a merely indifferent
form which is attached to some content. But these thoughts
of all natural and spiritual things, even the substantial content,
are yet such as to possess manifold determinations and to
contain the distinction between Soul and Body, between a
concept and its respective reality; the deeper basis is the soul
in itself, the pure concept, which is the very core of objects,
their very life-pulse, as it is the core and pulse of subjective
thinking itself. To bring into clear consciousness this logical
character which gives soul to mind and stirs and works in it,
this is our problem. Instinctive action is distinguished from
intelligent and free action broadly by this, that the latter is
accompanied by clear consciousness; when the content of that
which stirs the mind is drawn out of its immediate unity with
the Subject, and made an Object for it, then there begins


46 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Freedom for the mind, which while caught in the workings
of instinctive mental activity is broken up within the meshes
of its Categories into an infinitely various material. In this
web strong knots are formed now and then, which are foci
of arrest and direction in mental life and consciousness: they
owe their firmness and strength to the fact that, brought before
consciousness, they are found to be independent concepts of
the latter’s essentiality. The most important point for the
nature of mind is not merely the relation of that which it is
in itself, but furthermore of that as which it knows itself, to
that which it is in actuality; this self-knowledge, because it is
essentially consciousness, is the fundamental determination of
mind’s actuality. These Categories function only instinctively
and as impulses—they are at first introduced into consciousness
piecemeal, and therefore are mutable and mutually confusing,
and thus yield to mind only a piecemeal and insecure actuality.
To purify these Categories and to raise the mind through them
to Freedom and Truth, this it is which is the loftier task of
Logic.

What we have laid down as the first step in Philosophy (a
step the high value of which both on its own account and also
as a condition of genuine cognition we have already recog-
nized)—namely, that concepts in general and the moments of
concepts (that is, the determinations of thought) should be
treated at first as Forms which are distinct from Matter, and
merely attached to it,—this procedure advertises itself at once
as inadequate for the attainment of truth—truth, which is
announced as the subject-matter and goal of Logic. For,
taken thus as bare forms, as distinct from the content, they
are taken to be standing in a determination which stamps
them as finite, and makes them incapable of comprehending
the truth, which is in itself infinite. If the true can, in whatever
reference, be elsewhere associated with limitation and finitude,
this is its aspect of negation, of untruth and unreality—in fact
of its end—not its aspect of affirmation, which it is by virtue
of being truth. Against the baldness of the merely formal
categories, the instinct of common sense has at last felt itself
so confirmed as contemptuously to abandon the knowledge
of them to the domain of School Logic and School Metaphysics,
with a want of appreciation of the intrinsic value that this clue


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 47


possesses, and completely unaware that it (that is, common
sense) is itself held captive when it adopts the instinctive
activities of Natural Logic, and still more when it deliberately
rejects both cognition and recognition of thought-determina-
tions, —captive by a mode of thinking that is unpurged and
therefore unfree. The simple basic or common determination
of all these forms is Identity, which as the Law of Identity
as A=A, and as the maxim of contradiction, is maintained
in the Logic of this collection of forms. Common sense has so
thoroughly lost its reverence for the school which is in pos-
session of these laws of truth and still fosters them, that it
derides the school on account of the laws, and would regard
anyone as insufferable who, in accordance with these laws,
made true statements such as, “The plant is—a plant,”
“Science is—Science,’ and so ad infinitum. And as to the formu-
las which constitute the rules of syllogizing (which, in fact, is
one of the principal employments of Understanding)—mis-
taken as it would be not to recognize their place and validity
in cognition and the fact that they are essential material for
rational thought, yet the equally just view has been established
that these laws are, quite as much, impartial instruments of
error and sophistry, and—however Truth may be determined
—that they are unserviceable for higher Truth—for instance,
for religious Truth ;—that, broadly, they are merely a matter
of epistemological correctness and not of Truth itself.

The inadequacy of this way of regarding thought, which
leaves Truth on one side, can only be supplemented when in
the contemplation of Thought, Content is included as well as
that which is habitually reckoned as belonging to external
form. It very soon appears that what at first is to ordinary
reflection, as Content, separated from Form, cannot in fact
be formless, cannot be without internal determination; if it
were so, it would be only emptiness, the abstraction of the
Thing-in-itself. It appears that, on the contrary, Content has
in itself Form, indeed it is only through Form that it has Soul
and subsistence, and that it is Form itself which changes only
into the show of a Content, as also into the show of a something
external to this show. With this introduction of Content into
logical consideration, the concrete concepts of things become
the object of thought, instead of the mere things. And in this


48 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


connexion we may recall that there is a multitude of Concepts,
a multitude of concrete Things. The way, however, in which
this multitude is limited and confined is (as has already been
pointed out) partly this, that the Concept as Thought in
general, as Universal, immeasurably abbreviates the endless
Particularity of mere Things, which in their multitudinousness
hover before the eye of indeterminate intuition and ideation ;
partly, however, a Concept is, to start with, the Concept in
itself, and the Concept is One, and is the substantial basis;
and secondly though it is a definite Concept, and this definite-
ness in it is what appears as Content, yet on the other hand
the definiteness of the Concept is a Form-determination of that
substantial One-ness, a phase of Form as Totality, of the
Concept itself, which is the basis of determinate Concepts. This
is not sensuously intuited nor ideated; it is only the object,
product, and content of Thinking, and the Real Thing which
exists in and for itself, the Logos, the reason of that which is,
the Truth of what we call a mere thing (Ding) ; and it is Logos
which should least of all be left outside logical science. We
cannot therefore include it in the science, or leave it outside,
at our discretion. When the thought-determinations which are
only external forms are truly considered in themselves, only
their finitude, and the untruth of attempts to make them exist
for themselves, show up, and what shows up as their truth is
the concept. Hence logical science, since it deals with the
determinations of thought (which generally run through our
mind instinctively and unreflectively, and—even though they
enter into language—remain unidentified and unregarded)—
logical science, I say, will be the re-construction of those
thought-determinations which are thrown into relief by reflec-
tion, and by reflection are fixed as subjective forms, forms
external to matter and content.

No unfolding of any subject-matter of Thought is in itself
capable of such strictly immanent plasticity as is that of the
development of Thinking in accordance with its own necessary
Laws; no other carries with it this demand in such a degree
of intensity; in this respect the science of Logic must surpass
even Mathematics, for no subject-matter of thought has in
itself this freedom and independence. By such a free and
independent exposition—which after its fashion is present in


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 49


the process of mathematical thought—it is demanded that
there should not appear at any stage of the development, any
thought-determination, any reflection, that does not imme-
diately arise at this stage, and that has not passed into it from
the stage preceding. However, such abstract perfection of
exposition must, I confess, be generally given up; since the
Science must begin with the absolutely simple, that is, with
what is most general and most empty, the exposition would
permit only quite simple expression of that simplicity, without
the addition of a single word ;—what would be admissible in
accordance with the conditions of the case would be negative
considerations, the objects of which were to ward off and to
banish elements which might otherwise be introduced by
imagination or unregulated thinking. Such invasions of the
simple immanent process of development are, however,. in
themselves contingent, and consequently the effort to ward
them off is itself tainted with contingency; besides which just
because such occurrences lie outside the subject-matter it is
-vain to try to meet them all, and the systematic complete-
ness demanded would itself be something imperfect. But the
peculiar unrest and distraction of our modern consciousness
force us to take into account reflections and fancies that lie
more or less near at hand. And an explanation which lends
itself to the subject calls for a corresponding docility of temper
in those who would apprehend and comprehend; but youths
and men thus docile, with such tranquil self-denial in the
matter of reflections and fancies of their own, in which “original”
thought is so impatient to manifest itself—listeners (such as
Plato feigns) who only want to follow the argument—such
could hardly be set up as interlocutors in a modern dialogue ;
still less could we reckon upon readers of such a temper of
mind. Quite the reverse—I have been only too often and too
fiercely attacked by opponents who are incapable of the simple
reflection that their onslaughts and objections contain cate-
gories which are themselves assumptions and themselves need
to be criticized before being employed. Want of knowledge
in this matter goes incredibly far ; it is guilty of the fundamental
misunderstanding, the uninstructed and barbarous procedure
of taking a category which is under consideration for something
else and not for what it is. This ignorance is the less to be


VOL. I


50 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


justified because this something else consists of other thought-
determinations and concepts, and in a system of Logic these
other categories themselves must likewise have found their
place, and be themselves awaiting consideration in their place
in the system. Where this is most surprising is in the great
majority of the objections and attacks which are directed
against the primary concepts or starting-points of Legic, Being
and Nothing, and Becoming, as that which contains the two
previous determinations (Being and Nothing) as Moments ;—
Becoming, which is itself without question a simple determina-
tion, as appears on the simplest analysis. Thoroughness seems
to demand that the beginning—as the foundation upon which
everything is to be built—should be examined before anything
else, in fact that we should not proceed further until it has
proved itself solid, and on the other hand, if it does not prove
so, that everything that follows should be rejected. This
thoroughness of procedure has at the same time the advantage
that it guarantees a vast easing of the work of thought; it has
before it, enclosed in this germ, the whole development of the
science, and regards itself as having done the whole of its
business when it has done the first part of it. This piece of the
work is the easiest to dispatch, for it is the simplest, it deals
with simplicity itself; it is the trifling labour that is here
required that really recommends this ‘‘thoroughness” of pro-
cedure, which is so well satisfied with itself. This restriction
to what is simple gives full scope to the free play of thought—
thought which cannot go on being simple, but must bring in
its reflections on the subject. Having good right to be busied
at first only with the fundamental principle and, at that stage,
not to allow itself to enter upon what is beyond, this thoroughness,
even when employed on its own business, works in a contrary
sense, and brings in what goes beyond the fundamental prin-
ciple—it brings in, that is, other categories and other pre-
suppositions and prejudices. Such presuppositions as that
Infinity is different from Finitude, that Content is other than
Form, that the Inner is other than the Outer, that Mediacy
is not Immediacy—as though anybody did not know such
things—are brought forward by way of information, and
related and insisted upon rather than proved. A habit of such
instruction is a childish procedure—we can call it nothing


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 51


else; technically it is unjustifiable, because it presupposes and
immediately assumes such things; and it is even more guilty
of ignorance of the fact that it is the need and business of
logical thought to investigate just this—whether a Finite with-
out Infinity is something true, whether such abstract Infinity,
and moreover a Content without Form and a Form without
Content, similarly an Inner by itself that has no Outer, an
Externality without Inwardness, and so forth—whether these
can be something true, or something actual. But this education and
discipline of thought, by which an adaptable attitude of
thought is brought about, and the impatience of intrusive
reflection overcome—all this can be procured only by going
further, only by study, and by actualization ofthe whole course
of development.

Anyone who works at building up anew an independent
structure of philosophical science in modern times, may; when
referring to the Platonic exposition, be reminded of the story
of how Plato revised his Republic seven times over. The remem-
brance of this, the comparison in as far as such may seem to
be implied here, should only urge one all the more to the
desire, that for a work which, as pertaining to the modern
world, has to deal with a deeper principle, a more difficult
subject, and material of wider scope—for such a work leisure
might have been vouchsafed, to go through it seventy times
and seven. The author however, in face of the greatness of the
task, has had to content himself with what it has been possible
to accomplish under pressure of external necessity, inevitable
distractions due to the greatness and many-sidedness of the
interests of the time, and under a doubt whether the noisy
clamour of everyday affairs, and the bewildering volubility of
undisciplined fancy (which takes a pride in limiting its interests
to such affairs)—whether these leave any room for sympathy
with the passionless calm of purely speculative knowledge.


BERLIN,
7th November 1831.


RN
ohi


INTRODUCTION


GENERAL Concept OF Locic


Tue need to begin with the subject itself, without preliminary
observations, is felt nowhere more strongly than in the Science
of Logic. In every other science, the Subject dealt with, and
the Method of the Science, are distinguished from one another ;
and further the subject is not absolutely original, but depends
upon other concepts, and is connected in all directions with
other material. It is therefore granted to these other sciences
to regard both their Principles (with the connexions of these)
and also their Method, as starting from assumptions—to begin
with applying forms of Definition and so on, which are pre-
supposed as known and accepted, and to make use of familiar
forms of reasoning for the establishment of their general
concepts and fundamental determinations.

Logic on the other hand cannot take for granted any of
these forms of reflection or rules and laws of thought, for these
are a part of the very fabric of Logic, and must be demonstrated
within the boundaries of the science itself. But not only the
scheme of philosophic method, but also the very concept of
philosophy in general belongs to the content of Logic and in
fact constitutes its final result; what Logic is, cannot be set
out beforehand—on the contrary this knowledge of what Logic
is can only be reached as the end and consummation of the
whole treatment of the subject. Moreover the subject of Logic
(Thinking, or more precisely Conceptual Thinking) is really
treated of within the boundaries of the science itself; the
Concept of this Thinking is engendered in the course of develop-
ment of the Science, and therefore cannot precede it. There-
fore what is set forth in a preliminary way in this Introduction
does not aim at establishing the concept of Logic at all, or at
justifying beforehand its substance and method scientifically,
but—by help of some reasoned and historical explanations and
reflections—at bringing more clearly before the mind the point
of view from which this science is to be regarded.

When Logic is taken as the science of Thinking in general,


54 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


it is understood that this Thinking constitutes the bare form
of cognition, that Logic abstracts from all content, and that the
(so-called) other constituent of a cognition,—that is, its Matter, —
must come from a different source; that thus Logic—as some-
thing of which this Matter is wholly and entirely independent
—can provide only the formal conditions of true knowledge,
and cannot, in and by itself, contain real truth, nor even be
the path to real truth, because just that which is the essence
of truth,—that is, its content—lies outside Logic.

But in the first place it is most inept to say that Logic
abstracts from all Content, that it teaches only the rules of
Thinking without going into what is thought or being able
to consider its nature. For since Thinking and the Rules of
Thinking are the subject of Logic, Logic has directly in them
its own peculiar content ;—has in them that second constituent
of cognition—its Matter—about the structure of which it
concerns itself.

But secondly, the ideas upon which the concept of Logic
has hitherto rested have partly died out already, and, for the
rest, it is time that they should disappear altogether, and that
this science should be taken from a higher point of view, and
should receive an entirely different structure.

The hitherto accepted concept of Logic rests upon the
assumed separation ofthe Content of knowledge and the Form of
knowledge (or Truth and Certainty)—a separation that is assumed
once for all in ordinary consciousness. First, it is assumed that
the material of knowledge is present in and for itselfin the shape
of a finished world apart from Thinking, that Thinking is in
itself empty, and comes to that world from outside as Form to
Matter, fills itself therewith, and only thus gets a content, and
thereby becomes real knowing.

Next, these two constituents—for it is supposed that they
have the reciprocal relation of constituents, and Cognition is
constructed out of them in a mechanical or at best a chemical
fashion—these constituents are placed in an order of merit in
which the object is regarded as something in itself finished
and complete, something which, as far as its reality is concerned,
could entirely dispense with thought, while on the other hand,
Thought is something incomplete which has to seek completion
by means of some material, and indeed has to adapt itself to


INTRODUCTION | 55


its material as if it were a form in itself pliable and undeter-
mined. Truth is supposed to be the agreement of Thought
with its object, and in order to bring about this agreement (for
the agreement is not there by itself) thinking must accommodate
and adapt itself to its object.

Thirdly, when the difference of Matter and Form, of Object
and Thought, is not left thus nebulous and undetermined, but
is taken more definitely, each is regarded as a sphere separated
from the other. Thus Thought in its reception and formation


~~ of material is supposed not to go beyond itself—its reception


of material and accommodation thereto is still regarded as a
modification of self by which Thought is not transformed into
its Other; moreover, self-conscious determination is held to
belong to Thought alone; thus Thought in its relation to the
Object of Thought does not go out of itself to the Object,
while the Object, as a thing-in-itself, simply remains a some-
thing beyond Thought.

These views concerning the relation to one another of Subject
and Object express the determinations which constitute the
nature of our ordinary consciousness just as it appears; but
these prejudices, translated into the sphere of Reason—as if
the same relationship held there or had any truth by itself—
are errors, the refutation of which throughout all departments
of the spiritual and physical world is Philosophy itself; or
rather, since these errors bar the way, they must be renounced
at the very threshold of Philosophy.

The older Metaphysic had in this respect a loftier conception
of Thought than that which has become current in more
modern times. For the older Metaphysic laid down as funda-
mental that that which by thinking is known of and in things,
that alone is what is really true in them; that what is really
true is not things in their immediacy, but only things when
they have been taken up into the Form of Thought, as
conceptions. Thus this older Metaphysic stands for the view
that thinking and the determinations of thinking are not
something foreign to the objects of thought, but are rather
of the very essence of those objects; in other words that
Things and the Thinking of them are in harmony in and
for themselves, —indeed language itself expresses an affinity
between them,—that thought in its immanent determina-


56 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


tions, and the true nature of things, are one and the same
content.

But reflective Understanding assumed possession of Philosophy.
We must learn precisely what is meant by this expression,
which indeed is frequently used as a catch-word; by it is to
be understood generally the abstracting and separating intelli-
gence which clings tenaciously to the separations which it has
made. Directed against Reason, this intelligence behaves as
crude Common Sense and maintains the view that Truth rests
upon sense-reality, that thoughts are only thoughts, meaning
that it is sense-perception that first endows them with sub-
stance and reality, that Reason—in as far as it is merely
Reason—can spin nothing but idle fancies. In this renunciation
of Reason by itself, the concept of Truth is lost; it is restricted
to the cognition of merely subjective Truth, of mere appear-
ance, of something to which the nature of the thing itself does
not correspond ; knowing falls back into opinion.

But this turn which Cognition takes, and which has the air
of being a loss and a retrogression, has something deeper
behind it—something upon which the uplifting of Reason to
the loftier spirit of the newer Philosophy chiefly depends. That
is, the ground of this now everywhere prevalent idea is to be
sought in a perception of the necessary conflict with each other
of the determinations of Understanding. The reflection already
mentioned is this, that the immediate concrete must be tran-
scended, and must undergo determination and abstraction.
But reflection must, just as much, transcend these its own
separative determinations, and forthwith relate them to each
other. Then at the standpoint of this relating, the conflict
emerges. This relating activity of reflection belongs in itself
to Reason; that transcending of these determinations which
attains to a perception of their conflict, is the great negative
step towards the true concept of Reason. But this perception,
being merely partial, falls into the error of fancying that it is
Reason which is in contradiction with itself, and does not
recognize that the contradiction is just the lifting of Reason
above the limitations of Understanding, and the dissolution
of these. Instead of starting from this point to make the final
step upwards, knowledge, recognizing the unsatisfactory nature
of the determinations of Understanding, flies straight back to


INTRODUCTION 57


sensible existence, thinking to find therein stability and unity.
But on the other hand, since this knowledge knows itself to be
knowledge only of appearances, its insufficiency is confessed,
yet at the same time it is supposed that things, though not
rightly known in themselves, still are rightly known within
the sphere of appearances; as though only the kinds of objects
were different, and the one kind, namely Things in them-
selves, did not fall within knowledge, and the other kind,
namely Appearances, did so fall. It is as though accurate
perception were attributed to a man, with the proviso that
he yet could not perceive Truth but only untruth. Absurd as
this would be, a true knowledge which did not know the
object of knowledge as it is in itself, would be equally absurd.
The criticism of the Forms of Common Understanding has had
the result (mentioned above) that these Forms have no applic-
ability to things in themselves. This can have no other meaning
than that the Forms are in themselves something untrue. But
if they are allowed to remain as valid for subjective Reason
and for experience, then criticism has made no change in
them, but leaves them in the same attitude towards the Subject
of knowledge, as they formerly had towards the Object of
knowledge. But if they do not suffice for the Thing in itself,
then still less should common understanding, to which
they are supposed to belong, put up with them and be content
with them. If they cannot be determinations of the Thing in
itself, they can still less be determinations of Understanding,
to which we must allow at the very least the dignity of a Thing
in itself. The determinations of Finite and Infinite are similarly
in conflict—whether they are applied to the world, to time
and space, or are determinations within the mind; just as
black and white produce grey whether they are mixed on a
canvas or on the palette; so if our World-representation is
dissolved by having the determinations of Finite and Infinite
transferred to it, still more must the Mind itself, which contains
them both, be something self-contradictory and self-dissolving.
It is not the constitution of the Matter or Object to which
they are applied or in which they occur, that can make the
difference, for the Object contains the contradiction only
through these determinations and in accordance with them.
Thus this Criticism has only separated the forms of objective


58 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Thinking from the Thing, and left them, as it found them, in
the Subject of Thought. For in doing so, it has not regarded
these Forms in and for themselves, according to their charac-
teristic content, but has simply taken them up as a corollary
from subjective Logic; so that it was not a question of the
deduction of them in themselves, nor of a deduction of tnem
as subjective-logical Forms, and still less a question of the
dialectical consideration of them.

Transcendental Idealism, carried more consistently to its
logical conclusion, has recognized the emptiness of that spectre
of the Thing-in-itself which the critical philosophy left over—
an abstract shadow, detached from all content—and had it
in view to demolish it altogether. Also this philosophy made
a beginning of letting Reason produce its own determinations
out of itself. But the subjective attitude of this attempt did not
admit of its being carried to completion. Henceforth this
attitude—and with it that beginning, and the development of
pure philosophy--was given up.

But that which has commonly been understood by Logic
is considered without any reference to metaphysical import.
In its present condition, this Science has indeed no Content
of such a kind that it can be regarded by ordinary conscious-
ness as reality and truth. But Logic is not on this account
a mere formal science, destitute of significant truth. In any
case, the province of truth is not to be looked for in that
subject-matter which is lacking in Logic, and to the want of
which the inadequacy of the Science is commonly attributed:
the emptiness and worthlessness of the logical forms reside
solely in the way in which they have been considered and
treated. Whilst as fixed determinations they fall apart and
cannot be held together in organic unity, they are mere dead
forms, and have not dwelling in them the spirit which is
their living concrete unity. Thus they are destitute of solid
content and substantial filling. The content which we miss in
the logical forms, is nothing other than a solid foundation and
concreting of those abstract forms, and it is customary to seek
this substantial essence for them, from outside. But it is just
logical Reason which is that substantial or real, which holds
together in itself all abstract determinations, and is their solid
absolutely concrete unity. Thus we do not need to seck far


INTRODUCTION 59


afield for what is usually regarded as a filling or content; it
1s not the fault of the subject-matter of Logic if it is supposed
to be without content or filling, but of the way in which Logic
is conceived.

This reflection leads us nearer to the problem of the point
of view from which Logic is to be regarded; how it is dis-
tinguished from the mode of treatment which this science has
hitherto received, and to what extent it is the only true point
of view upon which Logic is in the future to be permanently
based.

In the Phenomenology of Spirit (Bamberg and Wiirzburg, 1807)
I have set forth the movement of consciousness, from the first
crude opposition between itself and the Object, up to absolute
knowledge. This process goes through all the forms of the
relation of thought to its object, and reaches the Concept of Science
as its result. Thus this concept (apart from the fact that it
arises within the boundaries of Logic) needs here no justifica-
tion, having already received its justification in that place;
the concept is incapable of any other justification than just
this production by consciousness; for to consciousness, all its
forms are resolved into this concept, as into the truth. A
reasoned deduction or elucidation of the concept of science
can at best render this service, that by it the concept is pre-
sented to the mind, and a historical knowledge of it is pro-
duced ; but a definition of science, or—more precisely —of logic,
has its evidence solely in the inevitableness (already referred
to) of its origin. The definition with which any science makes
an absolute beginning can contain nothing other than the
precise and correct expression of that which is presented to
one’s mind as the accepted and recognized subject-matter and
purpose of the science. That exactly this or that is thus pre-
sented is a historical asseveration, in respect of which one may
indeed appeal to certain facts as commonly accepted ; or rather
the request can be made that certain facts may be granted as
accepted. And still we find that one man here and another
there will bring forward, here a case and there an instance,
according to which something more and other is to be under-
stood by various expressions, into the definition of which
therefore a narrower or more general determination is to be
admitted, and in accordance with which the science is to be


60 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


arranged. It further depends upon argument what should be
admitted or excluded, and within what limit and scope; and
there stand open to argument the most manifold and varied
opinions, among which only arbitrary choice can make a fixed
and final decision. In this mode of procedure, of beginning a
science with its definition, nothing is said of the need that the
inevitableness of the subject-matter, and therefore of the Science
itself, should be demonstrated.

The concept of pure Science, and the Deduction of it, are
assumed in the present treatise so far as this, that the Pheno-
menology of Spirit is nothing other than the Deduction of this
concept. Absolute Knowledge is the Truth of all modes of
Consciousness, because according to the process of knowledge,
it is only when absolute knowledge has been reached that the
separation of the Object of Knowledge from Subjective Certainty
is completely resolved, and Truth equated to this Certainty,
and this Certainty equated to Truth.

So pure Science presupposes deliverance from the opposition
of Consciousness. Pure Science includes Thought in so far as it
is just as much the Thing in itself as it is Thought, or the Thing
in itself in so far as it is just as much pure Thought as it is the Thing
in itself. Truth, as Science, is pure Self-Consciousness unfolding
itself, and it has the form of Self in that what exists in and
for itself is the known concept, while the Concept as such is
that which exists in and for itself.

This objective thinking is then the content of the pure science.
Hence Logic is so little merely formal, so little destitute of
the matter necessary for real and true knowledge, that on the
contrary its Content is the only Absolutely True, or (if we
wish still to employ the word matter) is the true genuine matter
—a Matter, however, to which Form is not external, since this
Matter is in fact Pure Thought, and thus Absolute Form itself.
Logic is consequently to be understood as the System of Pure
Reason, as the Realm of Pure Thought. This realm is the Truth
as it is, without husk in and for itself. One may therefore express
it thus: that this content shows forth God as he is in his eternal
essence before the creation of Nature and of a Finite Spirit.

Anaxagoras is praised as the man who first gave voice to
the idea that we ought to lay down, as the World-principle,
Nous, that is Thought, and Thought as the World-essence.


INTRODUCTION 61


He thus laid the foundation of an intellectualist view of the
Universe, and of this view Logic must be the pure form. In
it we are not concerned with thinking about something lying
outside thought, as the basis of thought, nor with Forms which
serve merely as signs of Truth; on the contrary, the necessary
Forms and characteristic determinations of thought are the
Content and the Supreme Truth itself.

In order that we may at least envisage this we must put
aside the opinion that Truth is something tangible. Such
tangibility has for example been imported even into the
Platonic Ideas, which are in the thought of God, as though
they were things existing, but existing in a world or region
outside the world of Reality, a world other than that of those
Ideas, and only having real Substantiality in virtue of this
otherness. The Platonic Idea is nothing other than the Uni-
versal, or more precisely the Concept of an Object of Thought ;
it is only in its concept that anything has actuality; in so far
as it is other than its concept, it ceases to be actual and is a
non-entity ; the aspect of tangibility and of sensuous externality
to self belongs to that non-entical aspect.—From the other side,
however, one can refer to the characteristic ideas of ordinary
Logic ; for it is assumed that, for instance, Definitions comprise
not determinations which belong only to the cognizing Subject,
but determinations which belong to the Object, and constitute
its most essential and inmost nature. Again, when from given
determinations we conclude to others, it is assumed that what
is concluded is not something external to the Object and
foreign to it, but that it belongs to the object,—that Being
corresponds to Thought.—Speaking generally, it lies at the
very basis of our use of the Forms of Concept, Judgment,
Inference, Definition, Division, and so on, that they are Forms
not merely of self-conscious Thinking but also of the objective
understanding.—To think is an expression which attributes
specially to Consciousness the determination which it contains.
But in as far as it is allowed that Understanding, and Reason,
are of the World of Objects, that Spirit and Nature have General
Laws in accordance with which their life and their mutations
are governed, in so far is it admitted that the determinations
of Thought also have objective validity and existence.

The Critical Philosophy has indeed turned Metaphysics


62 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


into Logic, but—as already mentioned—like the later idealism
it shied at the Object, and gave to logical determinations an
essentially subjective signification; thus both the Critical
Philosophy and the later idealism remained saddled with the
Object which they shunned, and for Kant a ‘““Thing-in-itself,”
for Fichte an abiding “Resistance-principle,’” was left over as
an unconquerable Other. But that freedom from the opposition
of consciousness which Logic must be able to assume, lifts these
thought-determinations above such a timid and incomplete
point of view, and requires that those determinations should
be considered not with any such limitation and reference, but
as they are in and for themselves, as Logic, as Pure Reason.

Kant considers that Logic—that is, the aggregate of Defini-
tions and Propositions which are called Logic in the ordinary
sense—is fortunate in that it has fallen to its lot to attain so
early to completion, before the other sciences; for Logic has
not taken any step backwards since Aristotle,—but also it has
taken no step forwards—the latter because to all appearance
it was already finished and complete.—If Logic has undergone
no change since Aristotle—and in fact when one looks at
modern compendiums of Logic the changes consist to a large
extent merely in omissions—what is rather to be inferred from
this is, that Logic is all the more in need of a thorough over-
haul; for when Spirit has worked on for two thousand years,
it must have reached a better reflective consciousness of its
own thought and its own unadulterated essence. A comparison
of the forms to which Spirit has risen in the worlds of Practice
and Religion, and of Science in every department of know-
ledge Positive and Speculative,—-a comparison of these with the
form which Logic—that is, Spirit’s knowledge of its own pure
essence—has attained, shows such a glaring discrepancy that
it cannot fail to strike the most superficial observer that the
latter is inadequate to the lofty development of the former,
and unworthy of it.

As a matter of fact the need of a transformation of Logic
has long been felt. It may be said that, both in Form and in
Content, as exhibited in text-books, Logic has become con-
temptible. It is still trailed along rather with a feeling that
one cannot do without Logic altogether, and from a surviving
adherence to the tradition of its importance, than from any


INTRODUCTION 63


conviction that that familiar content, and occupation with
those empty forms, can be valuable and useful.

The additions—psychological, educational, even physiolo-
gical—which Logic received during a certain period were,
later, almost universally recognized as disfigurements. In them-
selves, a great part of these psychological, educational, and
physiological observations, laws, and rules, must appear very
trivial and futile, whether they occur in Logic or anywhere
else. Besides, such rules as for instance that one should think
out and test what one reads in books or hears by word of
mouth, that when one does not see well, one should use
spectacles to help one’s eyes—rules which in text-books on
so-called Applied Logic are put forward with great seriousness
and formality to help us to attain to truth—these must appear
to all the world to be superfluous—except indeed to the writer
or teacher who is at his wits’ end to know how to piece out
the inadequate lifeless content of his Logic. !

As to this content, we have given above the reason why it
is so empty and lifeless. Its determinations are assumed to
stand immovably rigid and are brought into a merely external
relation with one another. Because in the operations ofjudgment
and syllogism it is chiefly their quantitative element that is
referred to and built upon, everything rests on an external
difference, on mere comparison, and becomes a wholly analytic
procedure, a matter of merely mechanical calculation. The
deduction of the so-called rules and laws (especially of Syllo-
gism) is not much better than a manipulation of rods of
unequal length in order to sort and arrange them according
to size—like the child’s game of trying to fit into their right
places the various pieces of a picture-puzzle. Not without
reason, therefore, has this Thinking been identified with
Reckoning, and Reckoning with this Thinking. In Arithmetic
the numbers are taken as non-significant, as something that,
except for equality or inequality—that is, except for quite
external relations—has no significance,—that contains no
Thought, either in itself or in its relations. When it is worked


ı Observation in first edition. A work on this science which has recently
appeared, System of Logic by Fries, returns to the anthropological foundations.
The ideas and opinions on which it is based are so shallow in themselves and in
their development that I am saved the trouble of having to take any notice
of this insignificant performance.


64 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


out in a mechanical way that three-fourths multiplied by two-
thirds make a half, this operation involves about as much or as
little thought as the calculation whether in any Figure of
Syllogism this or that Mood is admissible.

In order that these dead bones of Logic may be re-vivified
by Mind, and endowed with content and coherence, its Method
must be that by means of which alone Logic is capable of
becoming a Pure Science. In the present condition of Logic,
hardly a suspicion of scientific Method is to be recognized. It
has very nearly the structure of merely Empirical Science.
For attaining their purpose, empirical sciences have hit upon
a characteristic Method of defining and classifying their
material as best they can. Pure Mathematics again has its own
Method, which suits its abstract objects and the quantitative
determinations with which alone it is concerned. I have in
the Preface to the Phenomenology of Spirit said what is essential
concerning this Method and especially concerning the subor-
dinate nature of such Science as can find a place in Mathe-
matics; but it will also be more closely considered within the
bounds of Logic itself. Spinoza, Wolf, and others, have allowed
themselves to be misled into applying this method in Philosophy,
and identifying the external processof concept-less quantity with
the conceptual process, which is self-contradictory. Hitherto
Philosophy had not discovered its own method; it regarded
with an envious eye the systematic structure of Mathematics
and, as already remarked, borrowed this, or sought help in
the method of Sciences which are only a medley of given
material and empirical maxims and ideas—or took refuge in
a crude rejection of all Method. But the exposition of that
which alone is capable of being the true Method of philosophic
Science belongs to Logic itself; since method is the conscious-
ness of the form taken by the inner spontaneous movement
of the content of Logic. In the Phenomenology of Spirit I have
set out an example of this Method as applied to a more concrete
object, namely to Consciousness. We have here modes of
consciousness each of which in realizing itself abolishes itself,
has its own negation as its result,—and thus passes over into
a higher mode. The one and only. thing for securing scientific


1 And later as applied to other concrete objects, and corresponding depart-
ments of Philosophy.


INTRODUCTION 65


progress (and for quite simple insight into which, it is essential
to strive)—is knowledge of the logical precept that Negation
is just as much Affirmation as Negation, or that what is self-
contradictory resolves itself not into nullity, into abstract
Nothingness, but essentially only into the negation of its
particular content, that such negation is not an all-embracing
Negation, but is the negation of a definite somewhat which abolishes
itself, and thus is a definite negation; and that thus the result
contains in essence that from which it results—which is indeed
a tautology, for otherwise it would be something immediate
and not a result. Since what results, the negation, is a definite
negation, it has a content. It is a new concept, but a higher,
richer concept than that which preceded; for it has been
enriched by the negation or opposite of that preceding concept,
and thus contains it, but contains also more than it, and is
the unity of it and its opposite.—On these lines the system of
Concepts has broadly to be constructed, and to go on to com-
pletion in a resistless course, free from all foreign elements,
admitting nothing from outside.

I could not of course imagine that the Method which in
this System of Logic I have followed—or rather which this
System follows of itself—is not capable of much improvement,
of much elaboration in detail, but at the same time I know
that it is the only true Method. This is already evident from
the fact that the Method is no-ways different from its object
and content ;—for it is the content in itself, the Dialectic which
it has in itself, that moves it on. It is clear that no expositions
can be regarded as scientific which do not follow the course
of this Method, and which are not conformable to its simple
rhythm, for that is the course of the thing itself.

In accordance with this Method I would observe that the
divisions and headings of the Books, Sections, and Chapters
which are given in the work, as well as to some extent the
explanations connected with them, were made for the purposes
of a preliminary survey, and that in fact they have only a
historical value. They do not belong to the content and body
of the Science, but are compiled by external reflexion, which
has already run through the whole of the scheme, and hence
knows and indicates in advance the sequence of its phases,
before these introduce themselves in the subject itself.

VOL. I c


66 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


In the other Sciences too, such preliminary Definitions and
Divisions are in themselves no other than such external speci-
fications; but even within each science they are not raised
above this status. Even in Logic, for example, we may be told
that “Logic has two principal parts, (1) the Doctrine of
Elements and (2) Methodology’’;—then under the first head
we forthwith find, perhaps, the superscription : Laws of Thought;
—and then: Chapter I—Concepts. First Section: Of the Clearness
of Concepts—and so on.—These Determinations and Divisions,
made without any deduction or justification, furnish the sys-
tematic framework and the whole bond of connexion of such
sciences. Such a Logic regards it as rts business to say that
Concepts and Truths must be derived from Principles; but in
what this Logic calls Method, derivation is the last thing that
is thought of. The procedure consists, it may be, in grouping
together what is similar, in putting what is simpler before what
is compound, and other external considerations. But as for any
inner necessary connexion, this goes no further than the list
of Sections, and the transition consists merely in saying
Chapter II;—or We now come to Judgment, and the like.

The headings and divisions which occur in this system too
are designed in themselves to have no other significance than
that of a Table of Contents. But in addition to this the necessity
of connexion and the immanent origination of distinctions must show
themselves in the discussion of the subject-matter, for they are
part of the self-development of the concept.

That by means of which the Concept forges ahead is the
above-mentioned Negative which it carries within itself; it is
this that constitutes the genuine dialectical procedure. Dialectic
—which has been regarded as an isolated part of Logic, and
which as regards its purpose and standpoint has, one may aver,
been entirely misunderstood—is thus put in quite a different
position.—The Platonic Dialectic too, even in the Parmenides
(and still more directly in other places), is sometimes intended
merely to dispose of and to. refute through themselves
limited assertions, and sometimes again has nullity for its
result. Dialectic is generally regarded as an external and
negative procedure, that does not’ pertain to the subject-
matter, that is based on a mere idle subjective craving to
disturb and unsettle what is fixed and true, or that at best


INTRODUCTION 67


leads to nothing except the futility of the dialectically treated
matter.

Kant set Dialectic higher, and this part of his work is among
the greatest of his merits,—for he freed Dialectic from the
semblance of arbitrariness attributed to it in ordinary thought,
and set it forth as a necessary procedure of Reason. Since Dialectic
was regarded merely as the art of producing deceptions and
bringing about illusions, it was straightway assumed that it
played a cheating game, and that its whole power depended
solely on concealment of the fraud ; that its results were reached
surreptitiously, and were a mcre subjective illusion. When
Kant’s dialectical expositions in the Antinomies of Pure Reason
are looked at closely (as they will be more at large in the
course of this work) it will be seen that they are not indeed
deserving of any great praise ; but the general idea upon which
he builds and which he has vindicated, is the Objectivity of
Appearance and the Necessity of Contradiction which belong to the
very nature of thought-determinations ; primarily indeed in so
far as these determinations are applied by Reason to Things
in themselves; but further, just what these determinations are
in Reason and in respect of that which is self-existent,—just this it
is which is their own nature. This result, grasped on its positive
side, is nothing other than the inherent Negativity of these
thought-determinations, their self-moving soul, the principle of
all physical and spiritual life. But if people stop short at the
abstract-negative aspect of the Dialectic, they reach only the
familiar result that Reason is incapable of cognition of the
Infinite ;—a strange result, for—since the Infinite is the Reason-
able—it amounts to saying that Reason is incapable of cognizing
that which is Reasonable.

It is in this Dialectic (as here understood) and in the com-
prehension of the Unity of Opposites, or of the Positive in the
Negative, that Speculative knowledge consists. This is the most
important aspect of the Dialectic, but for thought that is as
yet unpractised and unfree, it is the most difficult. If thought
is still in the process of cutting itself loose from concrete sense-
presentation and from syllogizing (Räsonnieren), it must first
practise abstract thinking, and learn to hold fast concepts in
their definiteness and to recognize by means of them. An
exposition of Logic with this in view must, in its Method,


68 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


follow the division above mentioned, and with regard to the
more detailed content must hold to the determinations of the
particular concepts without embarking upon the Dialectic.
As far as external structure is concerned, this Logic would be
similar to the usual presentation of the science, but as regards
content would be distinct from it, and still would serve for
practice in abstract thinking, though not in speculative thinking
(a purpose which could not be in any degree fulfilled by the
Logic which has become popular by means of psychological
and anthropological trappings). It would present to the mind
the picture of a methodically ordered whole, although the soul
of the structure, the Method itself (which lives in Dialectic),
would not be apparent in it.

As regards education and the relation of the individual to Logic,
I observe in conclusion that this Science, like grammar, has’
two different aspects or values. It is one thing to him who
approaches Logic and the Sciences in general for the first time,
and another thing to him who comes back from the Sciences
to Logic. He who begins to learn grammar, finds in its Forms
and Laws dry abstractions, contingent rules, briefly an isolated
multitude of determinations which only indicate the worth and
significance of their face-value. At first, knowledge recognizes
in them nothing whatever but barely themselves. On the other
hand, if anyone has mastered a language, and has also a
comparative knowledge of other languages, he and he only
is capable of discerning the spirit and the culture of a people
in the grammar of their language. Those same dry Rules and
Forms have now for him a full and living value. Through
grammar he can recognize the expression of mind in general—
that is, Logic. Thus he who approaches Logic finds in the
science at first an isolated system of abstractions that is self-
contained and does not reach out to other knowledges and
sciences. On the contrary, contrasted with the wealth of our
world-presentations and the apparently real content of the
other sciences, and compared with the promise of absolute
Science to unfold the essential character of this wealth, the
inner nature of Spirit and of the world, and to unveil the Truth,
this science—in its abstract form, in the colourless cold sim-
plicity of its purely formal determinations—looks, rather, as
if the last thing to be expected from it were the fulfilment


INTRODUCTION 69


of such a promise, and as if it would stand empty in face of
that wealth. On a first acquaintance, the significance of Logic
is limited to itself; its content is regarded as only an isolated
occupation with thought-determinations, alongside of which
other scientific activities have their own material and their own
intrinsic worth, upon which Logic may perhaps have some
formal influence which it seems to exercise spontaneously, and
for which logical structure and logical study can certainly be
dispensed with, at need. The other Sciences have mostly
rejected the regular Method, of a connected series of Defini-
tions, Axioms, Theorems and their Proofs, and so forth; while
so-called Natural Logic plays its part automatically in such
series, and works of its own motion, without any special
knowledge having Thought itself for its object. Above all the
matter and content of these sciences keeps entirely independent
of Logic, and altogether makes its appeal more to our senses,
feeling, impressions, and practical interests.

Thus then Logic must certainly be learnt, at first, as some-
thing of which one has indeed perception and understanding,
but which seems at the beginning to lack scope, profundity,
and wider significance. It is only through a profounder
acquaintance with other sciences that Logic discovers itself to
subjective thought as not a mere abstract Universal, but as
a Universal which comprises in itself the full wealth of Par-
ticulars ;—just as a proverb, in the mouth of a youth who
understands it quite accurately, yet fails of the significance and
scope which it has in the mind of a man of years and experience,
for whom it expresses the full force of its content. Thus the
value of Logic only receives due appreciation when it is seen
to result from knowledge of the particular sciences ; so regarded,
it presents itself to the mind as Universal Truth, not as a
particular department of knowledge alongside of other depart-
ments and other realities, but as the very essence of all these
other Contents.

Now though when one begins to study it, Logic is not present
to the mind in all this recognized power, yet none the less the
mind of the student conceives from it a power which will lead
him into all truth. The System of Logic is the realm of shades,
a world of simple essentialities freed from all concretion of
sense. To study this Science, to dwell and labour in this shadow-


70 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


realm, is a perfect training and discipline of consciousness. In
this realm the mind carries on a business which is far removed
from the intuitions and aims of sense, from emotions, from
ideas which are a mere matter of opinion. Regarded on its
negative side, the work consists in holding at bay the accidentals
of syllogizing thought and the arbitrary preference and accept-
ance from among opposing arguments.

But above all, Thought wins thus self-reliance and inde-
pendence. It becomes at home in the region of the abstract
and in progression by means of concepts which have no
substratum of sensation, it develops an unconscious power of
taking up into the forms of Reason the multiplicity of all other
knowledge and science, comprehending and holding fast what
is essential therein, stripping off externalities and in this way
extracting what is logical,—or, which is the same thing, filling
with the content of all truth the abstract outline of Logic
acquired by study, and giving it the value of a Universal, which
no longer appears as a Particular side by side with other
Particulars, but reaches out beyond all this, and is the essential
nature thereof,—that is, the Absolute Truth.


GENERAL CLASSIFICATION OF LocIc


In what has been said of the concept of this Science, and
the direction which its justification must take, it is implied
that a general classification can at this point be only provisional,
and hence can be indicated only so far as the author already
knows the Science and is thus in a position to present here,
historically and in a preliminary fashion, the principal forms
in which the concept will manifest itself in the course of its
development.

A provisional attempt can, however, be made to render
generally intelligible what is required for such a classification,
although in doing so one must employ a method that will
only receive its full elucidation and justification within the
precincts of the Science itself. First, then, it is to be remembered
that we here presuppose that the classification must harmonize
with the concept, or rather must be immanent in it. The
concept is not indeterminate; it is determinate in itself; and
the classification is the developed expression of this its deter-


INTRODUCTION | 71


minateness. Itis the fundamental and significant classification:
of the concept; not of anything taken from without, but the
fundamental classification, that is, the determination of the con-
cept by itself. The quality of being right-angled, acute-angled,
or equilateral, the determinations according to which tri-
angles are classified, are not contained in the determinateness of
the triangle itself; that is, they are not contained in what we are
accustomed to call the concept of the triangle, any more than
the commonly admitted concept of Animal in general, or of
Mammal, Bird, and so forth contains the determinations by
which animals are classified into mammals, birds, and so on,
and these classes are subdivided into further genera. Such
determinations are obtained otherwise, that is, from empirical
contemplation; they come to these so-called concepts from
without; but in the philosophical treatment of classification,
it must be shown that the classification has its origin in the
concept itself.

But in the Introduction the concept of Logic itself is stated
to be the result of a Science which lies outside Logic, and thus
this concept too is here presupposed. Logic was there found
to determine itself as the science of pure thought, having pure
knowledge as its principle, which is not abstract, but a concrete
living unity; for in it the opposition in consciousness between
a subjective entity existing for itself, and another similar
objective entity, is known to be overcome, and existence is
known as pure concept in itself, and the pure concept known
as true existence. These are then the two Moments which are
contained in Logic. But they are now known as existing
inseparably, and not as in consciousness each existing for itself;
it is only because they are known as distinct and yet not merely
self-existent that their unity is not abstract, dead, and immo-
bile, but concrete.

This unity constitutes an element of the logical principle,
so that the development of the distinction which is immediately
latent within it takes place only within this element. We have
said that the classification is the fundamental classification of
the concept, the positing of the determination immanent in it
and thus of its distinction; hence this positing is not to be
understood as resolving that concrete unity back into its


ı German, Urteil; see Glossary (Translators’ note).


72 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


determinations regarded as self-existent entities, which here
would be mere retrogression to the former position, namely
the opposition of consciousness. This opposition, on the con-
trary, has vanished, and that unity remains the element,
beyond which the distinctions which occur in the classification
and the development generally, do not pass. And thus deter-
minations (such as the subjective and the objective, thought
and being, concept and reality, whatever the respect in which
they were determined)—determinations which, at an earlier
point on the road to truth, were self-existing, are now, in their
unity (which constitutes their truth), degraded to the rank of
forms. In their distinction they therefore remain, in themselves,
the whole concept, and this is placed under its own deter-
minations in the classification.

Thus the whole concept is to be considered, first as existent
concept, secondly merely as concept; in the former case it is
merely the concept in itself, the concept of reality or being;
in the latter, it is the concept as such existing for itself (as it
is found, to give a concrete example, in thinking man, and
even in the sentient animal and in organic individuality in
general, though there it is not conscious, still less known:
concept in itself it is only in inorganic nature). —Logic is
accordingly to be divided into the Logic of the Concept as
Being, and of the Concept as Concept; or, to employ terms
more habitual though least definite and therefore most
ambiguous, into Objective and Subjective Logic.

The basic element, then, is the unity of the concept in itself,
and the inseparable nature of its determinations ; these, there-
fore, in so far as they are distinct, and the concept is posited
in their distinctness, must at least be somehow related. There
results a sphere of mediation—the concept as a system of
determinations of reflection, that is, of Being in transition to the
being-in-self of the concept; thus the concept is not yet posited
as such for itself; immediate being, as something external, still
cleaves to it. This is the Doctrine of Essence, which is inter-
mediate between the Doctrine of Being and that of the Notion.
In the general classification of this logical work it has been
placed under Objective Logic, since, though Essence already
is the Inward, the character of Subject has been expressly
reserved for the Notion.


INTRODUCTION | 73


In recent times Kant! has opposed to what is commonly
called Logic yet another, namely Transcendental Logic. What has
here been called Objective Logic would partly correspond to
what is Transcendental Logic with him. He distinguishes it
from what he calls General Logic because (a) it considers
concepts which refer a priori to objects and thus does not abstract
from the entire content of objective cognition, —in other words
it contains the rules of pure thinking about an object; and
(8) because it further considers the origin of our cognition, so
far as this cannot be ascribed to the objects.—It is on the second
of these two aspects that the philosophic interest of Kant is
exclusively directed. His chief aim is to claim the Categories
for Self-consciousness, for the Subjective Ego. By virtue of this
determination, his point of view remains within the boundaries
of consciousness and its opposition, and there is a surplus,
beyond the data of sensation and intuition, which is not posited
and determined by thinking self-consciousness and is foreign
and external to thought, namely the thing-in-itself; though it
is easy to perceive that such an abstraction as the thing-in-itself
is itself only a product of thought, namely, of purely abstracting
thought. Other disciples of Kant have expressed themselves
concerning the determination of the object through the ego
in this sense, that the objectifying of the ego is to be considered
as an original and necessary activity of consciousness, so that
this original activity does not yet contain the idea of the ego


t It is to be remembered that I frequently take the Kantian philosophy into
consideration in this work (superfluous though this may seem to some), because,
however its detailed determinations and the individual parts of its development
may be regarded in this work and elsewhere, it still remains the basis and beginning
of modern German philosophy; whatever faults we may find with it, this must
be set down undiminished to its credit. And further, objective Logic must
frequently refer to it for this other reason, that it treats important definite aspects
of Logic in greater detail, whereas later philosophical expositions have either
neglected these, or else displayed a mere crude contempt for them; which has
not, however, remained unavenged. The philosophies which are most widely
diffused among us did not get beyond the Kantian results, that reason can
cognize no valid content, and with regard to absolute truth must be referred to
faith. Kant’s results are made the immediate beginning of these philosophies, so
that the preceding exposition, from which those results are derived, and which
is philosophic cognition, is cut away beforehand. Thus the Kantian philosophy
becomes a pillow for intellectual sloth, which soothes itself with the idea that
everything has been already proved and done with. Those who look for knowledge
and a definite content of thought, which are not to be found in this dry and
sterile acquiescence, must turn to that preceding exposition.


c*


74 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


itself; this latter being the consciousness, or even the objecti-
fying, of such consciousness. On such a view, this objectifying
activity, freed from the opposition of consciousness, is just that
which can, generally, be called Thought as such.t But this
activity should no longer be called consciousness : consciousness
comprehends within it that opposition of ego and object which
does not exist in this original activity. The name of conscious-
ness gives a greater appearance of subjectivity to it than the
expression “thought,” which, however, is here to be taken in
the absolute sense as Thought infinite and untainted by the
finitude of consciousness: briefly, as Thought as such.

Kant’s philosophy then directing its interest on the so-called
transcendental element of the determinations of thought, the
treatment of these received no attention: it was not considered
what they are in themselves apart from the abstract relation
to the ego common to all, or what are their reciprocal deter-
minations and relations. Hence this philosophy has in no way
contributed to knowledge of their natures. The only interesting
matter bearing upon the point occurs in the Critique of Ideas.
But for the real progress of philosophy it was necessary that
the interest of thought should be directed upon the formal
side, the ego, consciousness as such, that is, the abstract relation
of subjective knowledge to an object; and that the cognition
of infinite form, that is, of the concept, should be introduced
in this manner. But in order that this cognition may be reached,
that finite determination, in which the form still is ego, or
consciousness, has still to be cast off. The form, thus developed
into purity by thought, will then have in itself the capacity of
self-determination, that is, of giving itself content, and that a
necessary content, in the shape of a system of determinations
of thought.

Objective Logic then takes the place of the former meta-
physic considered as the scientific reconstruction of the world,
which was to be built of thoughts alone. If we refer to the last
stage in the evolution of this science, we find, first and imme-

« If the expression “objectifying activity of the ego” appears to suggest other
productions of Spirit, e.g. imagination, it is to be remembered that we are
speaking of a determining of an object in so far as the moments of its content
do not belong to sensation and intuition. Such an object is a thought: to


determine it means, partly, first to produce it, partly, in so far as it is already
posited, to have further thoughts about it, further to develop it by thought.


INTRODUCTION 75


diately, that it is Ontology whose place is taken by Objective
Logic—that part of this metaphysic which is to investigate
the nature of Ens in general ;—Ens comprehending both Being
and Essence, a distinction for which the German language has
fortunately preserved different terms.—Secondly, Objective
Logic also comprises the rest of metaphysics, in so far as the
latter attempted to comprehend with the pure forms of thought
certain substrata primarily taken from sensuous representation,
such as Soul, World, God; and the determinations of thought
constituted what was essential in the method of contemplation.
Logic, however, considers these forms detached from such
substrata, which are the subjects of sensuous representation ;
it considers their nature and value in themselves. The old
metaphysic neglected this, and thus earned the just reproach
of having used these forms uncritically, without a preliminary
investigation as to whether and how far they were capable
of being determinations of the thing-in-itself, to use the Kant-
ian expression, or, to put it better, determinations of the
Rational.—Objective Logic thus is their true critique, a
critique which considers the forms of thought not under the
abstract form of apriority as opposed to the a posteriori, but
considers each according to its particular content.

Subjective Logic is the Logic of the Notion,—of Essence
which has transcended its relation to any mere being, real or
apparent, and in its determination is no longer external, but
is the free, independent, and self-determining Subjective, or
rather the Subject itself—Since the subjective involves the
misconception of the contingent and. arbitrary, and, more
generally, of determinations belonging to the form of con-
sciousness, no special weight is to be attached to the distinction
between the Subjective and the Objective, which will develop
itself more clearly within the body of the Logic.

Thus Logic is divided broadly into Objective and Subjective
Logic; more definitely, it has three parts, namely—


1. The Logic of Being,
2. The Logic of Essence, and
3. The Logic of the Notion.


N?
a


ĝ


h s
t ee


BOOK ONE


THE DOCTRINE OF BEING


WITH WHAT MUST THE SCIENCE BEGIN?


Ir has only recently been felt that there is a difficulty in finding
a beginning in philosophy, and the reason for this difficulty, as
well as the possibility of solving it, has been much discussed.
The beginning of philosophy must be either mediate or
immediate, and it is easy to show that it can be neither the one
nor the other: so that either method of beginning is refuted.

It is true that the principle of any philosophy also expresses
a beginning, but this beginning is objective and not subjective;
it is the beginning of all things. The principle is a content
somehow determined,—Water, the One, Nous, Idea,—Sub-
stance, Monad, and so forth; or, where it relates to the nature
of cognition and so is designed rather to be a criterion than
an objective determination (like Thought, Intuition, Sensation,
Ego, or Subjectivity itself), it is still the determination of the
content to which interest is directed. On the other hand
the beginning as such, considered as something subjective in the
sense of some contingent way of introducing the exposition,
remains neglected and indifferent; and so the need of the
question, with what we are to begin, still seems unimportant
compared with the need of a principle, which alone seems to
contain the interest of the matter,—the interest as to what is
the truth and the absolute basis of all things.

The modern embarrassment about a beginning arises from
yet another need with which those are unacquainted who, as
dogmatists, seek a demonstration of the principle, or who, as
sceptics, seek a subjective criterion with which to meet dog-
matic philosophy ;—a need which, finally, is entirely denied
by those who begin with explosive abruptness from their inner
revelation, faith, intellectual intuition, and so forth, and desire
to dispense with Method and Logic. If thought at first is
abstract and concerns itself merely with the principle regarded
as content, but in the progress of its evolution is forced to
regard also the other side, the behaviour of cognition, then
subjective activity is perceived as an essential moment of
objective truth, and the need arises of uniting method with


80 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


content and form with principle. The principle is to be the
beginning, and the actual “prius” for thought is also to be first
in the logical thought-process.

We have here only to consider how the logical beginning
appears; the two aspects in which it can be taken, mediately
as a result or immediately as a beginning proper, have already
been named. The question which seems so important to con-
temporary thought, whether knowledge of the truth is imme-
diate and simply begins, whether it is an act of faith, or a
mediated knowledge, is not to be discussed here. In so far as
such consideration can be undertaken preliminarily, this has
been done in another place (in my Encyclopaedia of the
Philosophical Sciences, 3rd Edn. Vorbegrif, 8 61 ff.). We need
only quote here that there is nothing in Heaven, Nature, Spirit,
or anywhere else, which does not contain immediacy as well
as mediacy, so that these two determinations are seen to be
unseparated and inseparable, and the opposition between them
null. As regards philosophical discussion, the determinations
of mediacy and immediacy, and hence the discussion of their
opposition and truth, occur in every logical proposition. With
regard to thought, knowledge, and cognition, this opposition
receives the more concrete shape of knowledge mediate or
immediate; and the nature of cognition is considered within
the Science of Logic itself, in so far as cognition, in its wider
and concrete form, falls within the Science of Spirit and the
Phenomenology of Spirit. But to ask for clearness about cog-
nition before the beginning of the Science, is to demand that
it shall be discussed outside its precincts; but outside the
precincts of Science this cannot be done—at least not in a
scientific manner, and such a manner alone is here in question.

The beginning is logical in that it is to be made within the
sphere of Thought existing freely for itself, in other words, in
pure Knowledge; its mediacy here arises from the fact that
pure knowledge is Consciousness in its last and absolute truth.
We have remarked in the introduction that the ‘“‘Phenomeno-
logy of Spirit” is the Science of Consciousness, demonstrating
that consciousness has for result the concept of Science, that
is, pure knowledge. The science of manifested Spirit, which
involves and demonstrates the necessity, and hence the proof,
together with the mediation in general, of that standpoint


WITH WHAT MUST THE SCIENCE BEGIN? 8ı


which is pure knowledge, is thus presupposed by Logic. In
this science of manifested Spirit we start from empirical and
sensuous consciousness; this is immediate knowledge proper,
and in the work mentioned its validity is discussed. Other kinds
of consciousness, such as faith in divine truths, inner experience,
knowledge through inner revelation, and so on, are shown on
slight reflection to be very inappropriate as instances of imme-
diate knowledge. In the treatise referred to, immediate con-
sciousness is also the first and immediate element in the science,
and therefore the presupposition: in the Logic, that is pre-
supposition which appeared as the result of those reflections, —
namely, the Idea as pure knowledge. Logic is pure science, that
is, pure knowledge in the whole extent of its development. In
its result, this Idea has determined itself to be certainty become
‘truth; certainty which in one aspect is no longer over against
the object, but has incorporated it with itself and knows it to
be itself; and, from another aspect, has given up its conviction
that it is opposed to and destructive of the object: it has
renounced this subjectivity and is one with this renunciation.

Starting from this determination of pure knowledge, the begin-
ning of the science of knowledge is to remain immanent; and
in order to effect this, no more is requisite than that we must
contemplate, or rather, putting aside all reflections and opinions
otherwise held, we must just absorb, that which is presented.

Pure knowledge, taken as shrunk into this unity, has tran-
scended all reference to an Other and to mediation; it is the
undifferentiated, and as such ceases to be knowledge; nothing
is there but simple immediacy.

Simple immediacy is itself an expression of reflection, and
refers to its distinction from the mediated: properly expressed,
this simple immediacy is therefore Pure Being. Just as pure
knowledge is to mean nothing except purely abstract knowing
as such, so Pure Being is to mean nothing except Being in
general; Being and nothing else, without any further deter-
mination or filling.

Being is here the beginning represented as arising from
mediation, a mediation which transcends itself; it being assumed
that pure knowledge is the result of finite knowledge, of con-
sciousness. If no assumption is to be made, and the beginning
is to be taken immediately, it determines itself only in this way,

VOL. I


82 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


that it is to be the beginning of Logic, of independent thought.
Nothing is there except the decision (which might appear
arbitrary) to consider Thought as such. The beginning must
be an absolute, or, what here is equivalent, an abstract
beginning: it must presuppose nothing, must be mediated by
nothing, must have no foundation: itself is to be the foundation
of the whole science. It must therefore just be something
immediate, or rather the immediate itself. As it cannot have
any determination relatively to Other, so also it cannot hold
in itself any determination or content; for this would be
differentiation and mutual relation of distincts, and thus
mediation.—The beginning therefore is Pure Being.

To this simple exposition of what is proper to the subject
of the perfectly simple, which is the logical beginning, the
following further reflections may be added; their function
however cannot be to elucidate or confirm this exposition,
which is complete in itself, since they are rather the result of
ideas and reflections which, though they may come in our way
at the outset, must, like every other preliminary prejudice, be
disposed of within the Science itself; so that really they should
be made to await such disposal.

It has already been perceived that the absolutely true must
be a result, and that, conversely, a result presupposes some
primary truth; which, however, because it is primary, is not
necessary, considered objectively, and, from the subjective side,
is not known. Consequently the idea has arisen in recent times
that the truth with which philosophy begins must be hypo-
thetical or problematical, and that hence philosophy at first
must be mere seeking. This view, frequently urged by Reinhold
in the later period of his philosophy, must in justice be allowed
to be based on a genuine interest regarding the speculative
nature of the Beginning in philosophy. The analysis of this
view is also an occasion for commencing a preliminary
understanding of the meaning of logical progress; for the view
in question immediately implies a reference to progress. Pro-
gress in philosophy, on this view, is in fact retrogression and
justification, the result of which is to show that the Beginning
was not taken arbitrarily, but is, indeed, partly the truth,
partly the primary truth. .

If it is considered that progress is a return to the foundation,


WITH WHAT MUST THE SCIENCE BEGIN? 83


to that origin and truth on which depends and indeed by
which is produced that with which the beginning was made,
then it must be admitted that this consideration is of essential
importance; and it will be more clearly evident in the Logic
itself—Thus consciousness is led back on its road from imme-
diacy, with which it begins, to absolute knowledge as its
inmost truth; and the first term, which entered the stage as
the immediate, arises, precisely, from this last term, the founda-
tion.—Still further, we see that Absolute Spirit, which is found
to be the concrete, last, and highest truth of all Being, at the
end of its evolution freely passes beyond itself and lapses into
the shape of an immediate Being ; it resolves itself to the creation
of a world which contains everything included in the evolution
preceding that result; all of which, by reason of this inverted
position, is changed, together with its beginning, into some-
thing dependent on the result, for the result is the principle.
What is essential for the Science is not so much that a pure
immediate is the beginning, but that itself in its totality forms
a cycle returning upon itself, wherein the first is also last, and
the last first.

Hence it equally results on the other hand that we must
regard as result that to which the movement returns as into
its foundation. From this point of view the first is equally the
foundation, and the last derived: it is a result, in so far as we
start from the first and reach the last (the foundation) by a
series of correct conclusions. And further, the movement away
from the beginning is to be considered merely as a further
determination of it, so that the beginning remains the founda-
tion of all that follows without disappearing from it. The move-
ment does not consist in the derivation of an Other, or in a
transition into something veritably Other ;—in so far as such
a transition occurs, it cancels itself again. Thus the beginning
of philosophy, the basis which is present and preserves itself
in all the developments which follow, remains a something
immanent throughout its further determinations.

What is one-sided in the beginning, owing to its general
determination as something abstract and immediate, is lost in
this movement: it becomes mediated, and the line of scientific
advance becomes a circle.—It also follows that the constituents
of the Beginning, since at that point they are undeveloped and


84 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


without content, are not truly understood at the Beginning;
only the Science itself fully developed is an understanding of
it, complete, significant, and based on truth.

Now precisely because the Result stands out as the absolute
foundation, the advance of this knowledge is not something
provisional, problematical, or hypothetical; it must be deter-
mined by the nature of the subject and the content. This
beginning is not arbitrary nor temporarily accepted, nor is it
something which, appearing arbitrary and assumed under
correction, in the event turns out rightly to have been made
the beginning. (The case is not that of the construction we are
directed to make in order to prove a theorem in geometry,
where it is only the proof which shows that we did right to
draw just these lines, and then, in the proof itself, to begin
with comparisons of just those lines or angles. For itself, the
drawing such lines and making such comparisons does not
render the proof self-evident.)

In this way the reason why in the pure Science we begin
from Pure Being was above indicated immediately in the Science
itself. This Pure Being is the unity into which pure knowledge
returns, or, if pure knowledge as form is to be kept separate
from its unity, then Pure Being is the content of pure know-
ledge. It is in this respect that pure Being, the absolutely
immediate, is also absolutely mediated. But it is equally
essential to take it one-sidedly as pure immediacy, just because
it is here taken as the beginning. Were it not to be taken as
this pure indeterminateness, then, in so far as it were deter-
minate, it would be taken as mediated and as thus already
carried a step further; for what is determinate contains an
Other for a first element. It is therefore in the nature of the
Beginning to be Being and nothing else. For entering into
philosophy there is therefore no further need of preparations,
nor of other considerations or connections.

We cannot extract any closer determination or positive
content for the beginning from the fact that it is the beginning
of philosophy. For here at the beginning, where there is as
yet no philosophy, philosophy is an empty word, or an idea
taken at random and not justified. Pure knowledge affords only
this negative determination, that the beginning must be. the
abstract beginning. In so far as Pure Being is taken as the


WITH WHAT MUST THE SCIENCE BEGIN? 85


content of pure knowledge, the latter must draw back from
its content and leave it to itself without further determining
it.—Or again, if Pure Being is to be regarded as the unity into
which knowledge has collapsed at the point where its union
with the object is consummated, then knowledge has dis-
appeared into this unity, leaving no distinction from it, and
hence no determination for it.—Nor is there any other some-
thing, nor any content, which could be used to make a more
closely determined beginning.

But even the determination of Being, which has been
accepted so far as beginning, could be omitted, so that the
only requirement would be to make a pure beginning. There
would then be nothing but the beginning itself, and it would
remain to be seen what that is.— This position might be used
to pacify those who partly will not be satisfied because we
begin with Being (from whatever considerations), still less with
the resulting transition of Being into Nothing, partly know no
better than that in any science a beginning is made by pre-
supposing some idea ;—such idea being next analysed, so that
it is only the result of this analysis which affords the first
definite concept of the science. Were we too to observe this
procedure we should have no particular Object before us,
because the beginning, as being the Beginning of Thought, must
be perfectly abstract and general, pure form quite without
content: we should have nothing but the idea of a bare
beginning as such. It remains to be seen what we possess in
this idea.

So far, there is Nothing: Something is to become. The
Beginning is not pure Nothing, but a Nothing from which
Something is to proceed; so that Being is already contained
in the Beginning. The Beginning thus contains both, Being and
Nothing; it is the unity of Being and Nothing, or is Not-being
which is Being, and Being which also is Not-being.

Further, Being and Nothing are present in the Beginning
as distinct from one another: for the Beginning points forward
to something Other ;—it is a Not-being related to Being as to
an Other: that which is-beginning, as yet is not: it is advancing
towards Being. The Beginning therefore contains Being as
having this characteristic, that it flies from and transcends
Not-being, as its opposite.


86 . SCIENCE OF LOGIC


And further, that which is-beginning, already is, and equally,
as yet, is not. The opposites Being and Not-being are therefore
in immediate union in it: in other words, it is the undifferen-
tiated unity of the two.

The analysis of the Beginning thus yields the concept of the
unity of Being and Not-being, or (in a more reflected form)
the unity of the state of being differentiated and of being
undifferentiated, or the identity of identity and non-identity.
This concept might be considered as the first or purest (that
is, most abstract) definition of the Absolute; which in fact it
would be were we concerned with the forms of definitions and
the name of the Absolute. In this sense, this abstract concept
would be the first definition of the Absolute, and all further
determinations and developments would be richer and more
closely determinate definitions of it. Being may be rejected as
a beginning by some because of its transition to Nothing and
the resulting unity of Being and Nothing: let these see whether
their beginning, which starts with the idea of the Beginning,
and the analysis of this (which, though doubtless correct, also
leads to the unity of Being and Nothing), will turn out more
satisfactory than the method by which Being is made the
beginning.

But there is yet a further observation to be made on this
method. This analysis presupposes as already known the idea
of the Beginning: it has therefore copied the methods of other
sciences. These presuppose their object, and take leave to
assume that everyone has the same idea of it, and is likely to
discover in it roughly the same determinations that they them-
selves indicate and extract from the object in various ways by
analysis, comparison, and other forms of reasoning. But that
which constitutes the absolute Beginning must likewise be
something otherwise known; now if it is something concrete,
and therefore contains a multiplicity of determinations within
itself, then this relation, which it isin itself, is assumed as some-
thing known: it is asserted to be something immediate, and
this it is not; for it is merely a relation of distincts, and there-
fore contains mediation. Further, in the concrete the contin-
gency and arbitrariness proper to analysis and to varying
determination begin to operate. The determinations which are
extracted depend on what each individual finds given in his


WITH WHAT MUST THE SCIENCE BEGIN? 87


own immediate and contingent idea. The relation contained
in a concrete, that is, a synthetic unity, is necessary only in
so far as it is not a datum, but is produced by the inherent
movement of the moments tending back into this unity ;—a
movement which is the opposite of the analytic method, which
is an activity belonging to the subject and external to the
object.

What has been said implies this further point, that that with
which we must begin, cannot be something concrete, some-
thing containing a relation within itself. For such presupposes
a mediation and a transition within itself from a first to an
other, of which process the concrete, now reduced to simplicity,
would be the result. But the beginning must not be a first and
an other: in a thing which in itself is first and an other, progress
has already advanced a step. That which constitutes the
beginning (and that is, the very Beginning itself) must therefore
be taken, in its simple immediacy without content, as some-
thing not admitting analysis, hence as pure vacuity, as Being.

If anyone, impatient of the consideration of the abstract
Beginning, should demand that we begin, not with the Begin-
ning, but directly with the matter itself, the answer is that
the matter is just this empty Being: it is in the course of the
Science that we are to discover what the matter is; the Science
must not therefore presuppose this as known.

If any other form is taken for the beginning in preference to
empty Being, then the beginning suffers from the flaws men-
tioned. Those who remain dissatisfied with this beginning
are asked to set themselves the task of beginning differently
in order to avoid these faults.

There is however one novel beginning in philosophy, which
recently has become famous and cannot be passed over without
mention, namely that which begins with the Ego. It arose
partly from the reflection that all that follows must be derived
from the first truth, partly from the need that the first truth
should be something known and, even more, something imme-
diately certain. Such a beginning generally is not a contingent
idea which can take a different form in different subjects. For,
the ego, this immediate consciousness of self, first manifests
itself partly as something immediate, partly as something
known in a far higher sense than any other idea; things other-


88 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


wise known, though they belong to the ego, are a content
distinct from it and therefore contingent, whereas the ego is
simple certainty of itself. But the ego in general is also some-
thing concrete, or rather the most concrete of all things—
consciousness of self as of a world infinitely complex. In order
to make Ego the Beginning and basis of philosophy, this con-
crete element must be removed by an absolute act by which
the ego is purged of itself and is presented to its own con-
sciousness as abstract ego. But this pure ego is now no longer
immediate, nor is it the known and ordinary ego of our con-
sciousness, to which the Science was to be linked immediately
and equally for all. Such an act would really be an exaltation
to the standpoint of pure knowledge, where the distinction
between subjective and objective has disappeared. But as this
elevation is demanded immediately, it is a subjective postulate:
in order to prove itself a legitimate demand the movement of
the concrete ego from immediate consciousness to pure know-
ledge would have to be proved and demonstrated upon itself
from inner necessity. Without this objective movement pure
knowledge, even when defined as “intellectual intuition,”
appears as an arbitrary standpoint, or even as one of the
empirical conditions of consciousness, with regard to which all
depends on whether one individual finds it within himself or
can produce it, and another not. But this pure ego must
be pure essential knowledge, and pure knowledge is posited in
the individual consciousness only through the absolute act of
self-exaltation—it is not present immediately in consciousness ;
and it is just in this respect that the advantage is lost which
is to arise from this beginning of philosophy, namely that it is
something thoroughly well known which everyone finds imme-
diately within himself as the starting-point of further reflection.
Rather, in its abstract essential nature this pure ego is
something quite unknown to ordinary consciousness, some-
thing which it does not find in itself. And here, on the contrary,
there sets in the disadvantage of the illusion that we are speaking
of something known, namely the ego of empirical self-conscious-
ness, whereas in fact we are speaking of something remote from
this consciousness. The determination of pure knowledge as ego
involves a permanent recollection of the subjective ego, the
barriers of which are to be forgotten, and preserves the idea


WITH WHAT MUST THE SCIENCE BEGIN? 89


that the propositions and relations yielded in the further
development of the ego occur or are found in ordinary
consciousness, since it is this of which they are asserted. This
confusion, instead of immediate illumination, produces so much
the more glaring complications and indeed a total loss of
direction; among laymen especially it has led to the crudest
misunderstandings.

Next, as regards the fact that the ego in general is determined
as subjective, it is true that pure knowledge clears the ego of
its limited meaning, according to which the object presents
to it an insuperable opposition. But for this very reason it
would at least be superfluous to retain this subjective attitude
and the determination of pure essence as ego. Such a deter-
mination, however, not only involves this disturbing ambiguity,
but, more closely regarded, it still remains a subjective ego.
The actual development of the Science which starts from the
ego shows that the object there persists in having and retaining
its determination as Other relatively to the ego, so that this
ego from which we start is not pure knowledge which has
veritably overcome the opposition of consciousness, but is still
imprisoned in the sphere of appearance.

This further essential observation must here be made : it is
true that the ego in itself can be defined as pure knowledge
or intellectual intuition, and asserted as a Beginning; but in
philosophy what matters is not that which is there already in
itself, or internally, but the presence in thought of the internal
element and the determinateness in which the latter thus
presents itself. Whatever element of intellectual intuition is
present at the beginning of the Science, it cannot be anything
but primary, immediate, and simple determination; or, if the
object of such intuition is called the eternal or the divine or
the absolute, the same applies to whatever of these elements is
present in the beginning. Whatever name be applied of richer
content than that expressed by mere Being, the only matter
for consideration is how such an absolute enters into thinking
knowledge and the expression of this. True, intellectual in-
tuition is the forcible rejection of mediation and of demon-
strative external reflection. But if it asserts more than simple
immediacy, it asserts something concrete, something containing
distinct determinations. But it has already been remarked that


90 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


to express and represent such a thing is a mediating movement,
which begins with one of the determinations and proceeds to
the other, even although the latter returns to the former; and
further, such a movement must not be arbitrary nor assertoric.
Hence in such a representation a beginning is not made with
the concrete, but with the simple immediate whence the move-
ment starts. Further, if a concrete thing is taken as the begin-
ning, there is lacking the proof which is demanded by the
complex of determinations contained in the concrete.

The expression of the absolute, the eternal, or God (and
God has the most undisputed right that the Beginning should
be made with him), or the contemplation or thought of these,
may contain more than pure Being: if that is so, such content
has yet to manifest itself to thinking, (and not to presentational,)
knowledge; for, however rich this content, the first determina-
tion which emerges into knowledge is something simple, for
it is only the simple which does not contain something more
than pure Beginning: the immediate alone is simple, for there
only no transition has taken place from one to an other. If
these richer forms of presentation, such as the Absolute, or
God, express or contain anything beyond Being, then this is,
in the Beginning, but an empty word and mere Being; so that
this simple vacancy without further meaning is, absolutely, the
Beginning of philosophy.

This consideration is so simple that the Beginning as such
requires no preparation nor further introduction; and this
preliminary discussion was not so much intended to deduce it
as to remove all preliminaries.


GENERAL CLASSIFICATION OF BEING


Being, first, is determined as opposed to Other in general;

Secondly, as determining itself within itself;

Thirdly, this preliminary classification being rejected, it is
abstract indeterminateness and immediacy, and in this it must
be the Beginning.

According to the first determination Being distinguishes itself
from Essence because in its further development it shows itself
in its totality to be no more than one sphere of the concept,
opposing to it by way of moment another sphere.

According to thesecond determination it is the sphere wherein
fall the determinations and the whole movement of its re-
flection. Being here will posit itself in the following three
determinations:


I. as Determinateness, as such: Quality;
II. as Determinateness transcended: Magnitude, Quantity;
III. as Quantity qualitatively determined: Measure.


At this point this classification is a preliminary enumeration,
as was pointed out in the Introduction concerning these classi-
fications generally; their determinations must arise from the
movement of Being itself, and must thereby define and justify
themselves. We have nothing here to remark on the divergence
of this classification from the ordinary enumeration of cate-
gories, namely as Quantity, Quality, Relation, and Modality
(which same, we may note in passing, are intended by Kant
himself merely as titles for his categories, though in fact they
are categories themselves, only of a more universal nature) ;
the reason why we make this observation is that the whole
exposition will show the divergence from the common order
and meaning of the categories.

This remark only might perhaps be made, that elsewhere
Quantity is enumerated before Quality, and this—as most
other things—without reason. It has already been shown that
the Beginning is made with Being as such, that is, qualitative
Being. And if Quality be compared with Quantity it is evident


92 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


that the former is by its nature prior. For Quantity is Quality
which has already become negative: Magnitude is Deter-
minateness no longer identical with Being, but already differ-
entiated from it; it is Quality transcended and rendered
indifferent. It comprehends the mutability of Being, while the
matter itself, Being, of which it is a determination, suffers no
mutation through it. The qualitative determinateness, on the
other hand, is one with its Being; it neither falls short of nor
exceeds it, but is its immediate limitedness. Quality therefore
is immediate determinateness, and as such is prior and must
constitute the Beginning.

Measure is a relation, though not Relation in general, but
a definite relation—that of Quality to Quantity ; the categories
which Kant includes under Relation will be treated in quite
another place. Measure may also, if you will, be regarded as
a kind of Modality; but since with Kant modality is no longer
meant to constitute a determination of the content, but is
merely intended to concern the relation of the content to
thought (that is, to the subjective element), this is an entirely
heterogeneous relation which does not belong to this place.

The third determination of Being falls under the heading
of Quality because, as abstract immediacy, it reduces itself to
an individual determinateness as opposed to other such within
its sphere.


SECTION ONE
DETERMINATENESS (QUALITY)


Berg is indeterminate immediacy; it is free from all deter-
minateness as contrasted with Essence, and similarly from all
that it can hold within itself. This unreflected Being is Being
as it is immediately only in itself.

Since it is indeterminate it lacks all quality ; but the character
of indeterminateness in itself belongs to it only in contradistinc-
tion from that of being determinate or qualitative. Determinate
Being as such opposes itself to Being in general, and hence
it is just the latter’s indeterminateness which constitutes its
quality. Hence it will be shown that primary Being is in itself
determinate, and therefore,

Secondly, passes over into Determinate Being, and is Deter-
minate Being; which however transcends itself as finite Being,
and passes over into the infinite relation of Being to itself,
namely,


Thirdly, Being for Self.


CHAPTERI


BEING


A
BEING


BEıng, pure Being—without any further determination. In its
indeterminate immediacy it is similar to itself alone, and also
not dissimilar from any other; it has no differentiation either
within itself or relatively to anything external; nor would it
remain fixed in its purity, were there any determination or
content which could be distinguished within it, or whereby
it could be posited as distinct from an Other. It is pure indeter-
minateness and vacuity.—Nothing can be intuited in it, if there
is any question here of intuition, or again it is merely this pure
and empty intuition itself; equally there is in it no object for
thought, or again it is just this empty thought. In fact, Being,
indeterminate immediacy, is Nothing, neither more nor less.


B
NOTHING


Nothing, pure Nothing: it is simple equality with itself,
complete emptiness, without determination or content: un-
differentiatedness in itself.—In so far as mention can here be
made of intuition or thought, it is considered a distinction
whether we intuit, or think, something or nothing. In that case,
to intuit, or think, nothing, has a meaning: so if intuition or
thought of Being and of Nothing are distinguished, then Nothing
is (or does exist) in our intuition or thought; or rather, it is
this empty intuition and thought itself: the same empty intuition
or thought, as pure Being.—Nothing, therefore, is the same
determination (or rather lack of determination), and thus
altogether the same thing, as pure Being.


BEING 95


Cc
BECOMING


1. Uniry or BEING AND NOTHING


Pure Being and pure Nothing are, then, the same; the truth
is, not either Being or Nothing, but that Being—not passes—
but has passed over into Nothing, and Nothing into Being.
But equally the truth is not their lack of distinction, but that
they are not the same, that they are absolutely distinct, and
yet unseparated and inseparable, each disappearing imme-
diately in its opposite. Their truth is therefore this movement,
this immediate disappearance of the one into the other, in
a word, Becoming; a movement wherein both are distinct,
but in virtue of a distinction which has equally immediately
dissolved itself.


Observation 1


Nothing is generally opposed to Something; but Something
is an already determinate existent distinguished from another
Something: such a Nothing opposed to Something, therefore,
such a negation of Something, is a determinate Nothing. Here,
however, Nothing must be taken in its indeterminate simplicity.
—If it were held more correct to oppose Not-being, instead
of Nothing, to Being, no objection could be made as far as the
result is concerned, for Not-being contains the relation to Being :
both Being and its negation are simultaneously asserted, and
this assertion is Nothing as it exists in Becoming. Primarily,
however, we are not concerned to have a formal opposition
(that is, a relation) so much as abstract and immediate negation,
Nothing purely for itself, unrelated repudiation, or what one
might express if one so wished, merely by ‘‘Not.”

The simple idea of pure Being was first enunciated by the
Eleatics, as the Absolute and as sole truth; especially by
Parmenides, whose surviving fragments, with the pure enthu-
siasm of thought first comprehending itself in its absolute
abstraction, proclaim that “Being alone is, and Nothing is not
at all.’—It is well known that in oriental systems, and essen-
tially in Buddhism, Nothing, or the Void, is the absolute


96 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


principle.—Herakleitos was profound enough to emphasize in
opposition to this simple and one-sided abstraction the higher
‚total concept of Becoming, saying: “Being is no more than
Nothing is,” or “All things flow,” which means, everything
is Becoming.—Popular sayings, chiefly oriental, to the effect
that everything which is has in its birth the germs of its decay,
while death conversely is entrance to a new life, express at
bottom the same union of Being and Nothing. But such ex-
pressions have a substratum upon which the transition takes
place: Being and Nothing are held apart in Time; they are
presented as alternating in Time, and they are not thought in
their abstraction, and therefore not thought in such a manner
as makes them in and for themselves the same.

Ex nihilo nihil fit is one of the maxims to which great impor-
tance was at one time ascribed in metaphysics. Either it is just
the empty tautology, “Nothing = Nothing;” or, should Be-
coming be supposed to have real meaning in it, there is in
fact no Becoming contained in it, for, since only Nothing comes
out of Nothing, Nothing still remains Nothing here. Becoming
implies that Nothing should not remain Nothing but pass over
into its Other, into Being.—In rejecting the proposition that
nothing comes out of nothing, later (chiefly Christian) meta-
physics asserted the transition of Nothing into Being; however
synthetically or merely imaginatively this proposition was
taken, even the least complete union contains a point where
Being and Nothing coincide and their distinction vanishes.—
The true importance of the proposition that Nothing comes
out of Nothing, that Nothing is just Nothing, resides in its
opposition to Becoming generally and therefore to the creation
of the world out of nothing. Those who assert the proposition
that Nothing is just Nothing, and even grow heated in its
defence, do not know that in so doing they are subscribing to
the abstract Pantheism of the Eleatics and, in essentials, of
Spinoza. That view in philosophy which takes for principle
that Being is merely Being, and Nothing merely Nothing,
deserves the name of system of identity: this abstract identity
is the essence of Pantheism.

If the result which identifies Being and Nothing is startling
in itself or seems a paradox, no further attention is here to be
paid to this: rather should we wonder at this wonderment


BEING 97


which shows itself such a tiro in philosophy, and forgets that
in this Science there occur determinations quite different from
those of ordinary consciousness and so-called common-sense,—
which is not exactly sound understanding, but understanding
educated up to abstractions and the faith, or rather super-
stition, of abstractions. It would not be difficult to demonstrate
this unity of Being and Nothing in every example, in every
fact and thought. What was said above about immediacy and
mediation (which latter contains a relation and therefore
negation), must also be said of Being and Nothing: that neither
in heaven nor on earth is there anything not containing both
Being and Nothing. Since here we are speaking of a Something,
of an actual fact, these determinations admittedly are no longer
found in that complete untruth in which they manifest them-
selves as Being and Nothing: they have already been further
determined and are taken, for example, as positive and negative,
the former being posited and reflected Being, the latter posited
and reflected Nothing : now of positive and negative, the former
has Being and the latter Nothing for abstract basis.—And so,
in God himself, his quality (energy, creation, might, and the
like) essentially contains the determination of the negative,—
it is the production of an Other. But an empirical elucidation
of this assertion by means of examples would here be entirely
superfluous. This unity of Being and Nothing, as being the
primary truth, is, once and for all, the basis and the element
of all that follows: therefore, besides Becoming itself, all further
logical determinations, such as Determinate Being, Quality,
and in short all philosophic concepts, are examples of this
unity.—As for what calls itself sound or common sense, so far
as it rejects the inseparateness of Being and Nothing, it might
be invited to find an instance where One can be found separate
from Other—Something from limit (or barrier), or the infinite
(or God), as we have just remarked, from energy. Only the
empty thought-structures, Being and Nothing, are thus separate,
and those are they which common sense prefers to the truth
which everywhere faces us—the unity of both.

It cannot be our intention to meet at all points the confusions
into which ordinary consciousness falls when faced by such a
logical proposition, for they are inexhaustible. Only a few can
be mentioned. One source among others of such confusion is

VOL. I D


98 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


- that consciousness imports into such an abstract logical pro-
position representations of a concrete something, forgetting
that we are not dealing with this, but with the pure abstrac-
tions of Being and Nothing, and that these alone are to be
grasped.

Being and Not-being are the same: ergo it is the same whether
I am or am not, whether this house is or is not, whether these
hundred Thalers are part of my fortune or not.— This inference
from or application of the proposition radically alters its
meaning. In the proposition we merely have the pure ab-
stractions of Being and Nothing; in the application these
become a determinate Being and a determinate Nothing. But
it has already been said that we are not here dealing with
determinate Being. A determinate or finite Being is such as
refers itself to an other ; it is a content which stands in a relation
of necessity with other content or with the whole world. In
view of the mutually determinant connection of the whole,
metaphysics could make the assertion (which is really a tauto-
logy) that if the least grain of dust were destroyed the whole
universe must collapse. In the instances which are adduced
against our proposition, something appears for which it is not
indifferent whether it is or is not; and this not because of its
being or not-being, but because of its content, which connects
it with other matter. If a determinate content or being is
presupposed, then such determinate being, because determinate,
stands in various relations with other content; and for such
being it is not indifferent whether a certain other content with
which it stands in a relation, is, or is not: for it is only such
a relation which essentially makes it what it is. The same occurs
with imagination (where we oppose not-being in the more
determinate sense of imagination to actuality); and in the
context of imagination, the being and the absence of a content
which is imagined as determined and in relation with other,
are not indifferent.

This consideration also contains what is of capital importance
in Kant’s critique of the ontological proof of the existence of
God; but it can be noted here only with respect to the dis-
tinction which occurs in this proof between (a) Being and
Nothing in general and (b) determinate Being and Not-being.—
The reader will know that in this so-called proof the concept


BEING 99


of an essence is presupposed to which all realities pertain,
and therefore that of existence, which was also taken as one
of the realities. The Kantian critique in the main followed
the line that Existence or Being (here taken as equivalent)
is no attribute nor real predicate, that is, is not a concept of
something which could be added to the concept of a thing.:—
Kant by this means to say that Being is not a determination
of content.—Therefore, he proceeds, what is potential contains
no more than what is actual: one hundred actual Thalers
contain not one doit more than one hundred potential ;—that
is, the former have no other determination of content than
the latter. It is, in fact, indifferent for this content, regarded
as isolated, whether it is or is not: it contains no distinction
of being and not-being, indeed this distinction does not touch it
at all; the hundred Thalers become no less when they are not,
and no more when they are. A distinction must come from
another source.—‘‘On the other hand,” so Kant reminds us,
“my fortune is larger when the hundred Thalers are real than
when they are a mere concept or merely potential. For, where
it is actual, the object is not merely contained analytically in
my concept, but is added synthetically to my concept (which
is a determination of my condition), without the aforesaid
hundred Thalers being in the least increased because they exist
externally to my concept.” _

Two conditions, to retain Kant’s terminology, which is not
without a certain confused clumsiness, are here presupposed,—
(1) what Kant calls concept, meaning representation; and
(2) my fortune. For each of these conditions, for fortune as well
as representation, such hundred Thalers are a determination
of content, or, as Kant expresses himself, “they are added
synthetically to a condition.” I as owner or not-owner of one
hundred Thalers, or I as representing, or else as not repre-
senting, them to myself: here there is, of course, a difference
of content. And, more generally, the abstractions both of Being
and of Nothing cease to be abstractions when they are given
a determinate content; Being then becomes reality, the deter-
minate being of one hundred Thalers, and Nothing becomes
negation, the determinate not-being of them. This determina-
tion of content itself, the hundred Thalers, has remained the

ı Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason, and Ed., pp. 628 sqq.


100 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


same in the one as in the other; and this is also the case when
itis taken abstractly by itself. But when, further, Being is taken
as a condition of my fortune, then the hundred Thalers enter
into a certain relation with this condition, and, for this latter,
such determinateness as the Thalers have is not indifferent;
this being and not-being of the hundred Thalers is merely
change; they are transferred into the sphere of Determinate
Being. Therefore, if anyone urges against the unity of Being
and Nothing that after all it is not indifferent whether a certain
thing (such as the 100 Thalers) is or is not, it is because he
is under the delusion that the distinction between possessing
and not possessing one hundred Thalers has been passed on
merely to Being and Not-being; this delusion depending, as
has been shown, on the one-sided abstraction which omits
the Determinate Being present in such examples and retains
merely Being and Not-being, conversely changing abstract
Being and Nothing, which it is its task to comprehend, into
Determinate Being and Determinate Nothing. It is only Deter-
minate Being itself which contains the true distinction between
Being and Nothing, namely Something and an Other. — This
real distinction is vaguely presented to the mind instead of
abstract Being and pure Nothing and the merely intended
distinction between these.

Kant employs the expression that “‘existence adds something
to the fabric of total experience”; ‘it gives us one further
object of perception, though our concept of the object is not
thereby increased.” —From the preceding explanation it follows
that this means that through existence Something, essentially
because it is determinate existence, is connected with Other,
which also includes a percipient.—Kant says that the concept
of one hundred Thalers is not increased by reason of their
being perceived. The concept here means the before-mentioned
hundred Thalers presented as isolated. It is true that in this
isolated manner they are an empirical content, but content
cut off and without connection or determinateness relatively
to Other; the form ofidentity with self deprives them of
relation to Other and makes their perception or non-perception
a matter of indifference. But this so-called concept of one hun-
dred Thalers is a spurious concept; the form of simple relation
to self does not properly belong to such limited and finite


BEING 101


content, it is a form applied and lent to it by subjective under-
standing. One hundred Thalers are not related to themselves
alone: they are mutable and perishable.

_ Thought or representation which has before it only a par-
ticular kind of Being, namely Determinate Being, must be
referred back to the already mentioned beginning of Science
which was made by Parmenides: it was he who purified and
elevated his own processes of representation (and so those of
posterity) to pure Thought, to Being as such, and so created
the Element of the Science.—What is first in science has had
to show itself first, too, historically. And we must consider the
Eleatics’ One or Being as the first step in the knowledge of
Thought; water and similar material principles are indeed
intended for the Universal, but are material and therefore
not pure thought ; numbers are Thought quite external to itself,
and neither primary and simple nor resting in itself.

It is to be considered not only the very first demand of
theory, but also of practice, that Thought should be ordered
back from particular and finite Being to Being as such in its
purely abstract universality. For if such an ado is made about
the hundred Thalers, and it is said that the state of my fortune
is altered by their possession or non-possession, and that the
difference is still greater between the being and not-being of
myself, or of other; then—neglecting the fact that there will
probably be such fortunes as are indifferent to the possession
of such hundred Thalers—we must recall that it is the duty
of man to rise to that abstract universality of outlook for which
it is indeed indifferent whether the hundred Thalers exist or
not, whatever their quantitative relation to his fortune, just
as much as he should be indifferent to his existence or non-
existence—in finite life (for a condition, a determinate being,
is here intended), and so forth. Si fractus illabatur orbis, impavi-
dum ferient ruine was said by a Roman: a Christian should be
even more perfectly indifferent.

Finally, we must notice the immediate connection between
this elevation above the hundred Thalers (and finite things
in general), and the ontological proof, together with Kant’s
critique of this. This critique has made itself universally plaus-
ible with its popular example: who does not know that a
hundred actual Thalers differ from a hundred merely potential


102 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


ones, and that they constitute a difference in my fortune?
Because this difference is so salient with the hundred Thalers,
therefore the concept (in the sense of the determinateness of
content as bare potentiality) and being also are distinct: hence
the concept of God is distinct from his existence, and I can
no more “extract” the existence of God from his concept than
I can get the actual existence of one hundred Thalers from
their potential existence; now the ontological proof is supposed
to consist in this extraction of the existence of God from his
concept. But if it is correct that concept is not the same as
being, it is truer still that God is not the same as one hundred
Thalers or other finite things. It is the definition of finite things
that with them concept and being, concept and reality, soul
and body, are different and separable, and that therefore they
are perishable and mortal : while it is just the abstract definition
of God that with him concept and being are unseparated and
inseparable. The true critique of the Categories and of Reason
consists precisely in explaining this difference to cognition, and
in preventing it from applying to God the determinations and
relations of the finite.


Observation 2


Another reason should be mentioned which strengthens the
repugnance to the proposition about Being and Nothing: this
is, that the result of the consideration of Being and Nothing,
when expressed in the proposition that “Being and Nothing
are one and the same,” is incomplete. The accent is chiefly
placed on the “are one and the same,” as in a judgment
generally, where it is only the predicate which tells what the
subject is. The sense therefore appears to be that the distinction
is denied, although it immediately occurs in the sentence; for
the proposition asserts the two determinations of Being and
Nothing and contains them as distinct.—At the same time the
meaning cannot be that they are to be abstracted from, and
only the unity retained. Such a meaning would proclaim its
own inadequacy, since that from which abstraction is to be
made is present, and is named, in the sentence. Now in so far
as the proposition that “Being and Nothing are the same”
asserts the identity of these determinations, while yet containing
both as distinct, it is self-contradictory and dissolves itself. If


BEING 103


we look more closely we find that a proposition has here been
asserted which, carefully considered, has a movement by which,
through its proper nature, it disappears. But in so doing it does
what must be held to constitute its true content, it undergoes
Becoming.

The proposition thus contains the result, it in itself is the
result. That to which attention must here be drawn, is the
defect that this result is not itself expressed in the sentence;
it is an external reflection which perceives it in the proposition.
—At the outset we must make the general observation on this
subject that a proposition, in the form of a judgment, is ill
fitted to express speculative truths ; acquaintance with this fact
would be apt to remove many misunderstandings of speculative
truths. Judgment is a relation of identity between subject and
predicate, and it abstracts from the fact that the predicate
is not the only determinateness of the subject, and also is wider
than the subject. Now when the content is speculative the
non-identical nature of the subject and predicate is an essential
moment; but this is not expressed in the judgment. The
paradoxical and bizarre light in which many aspects of modern
philosophy appear to those unacquainted with speculative
thought, is frequently due to the form of the simple judgment
when it is used to express speculative results.

In order to express the speculative truth, the defect is
remedied, in the first place, by adding the contradictory
proposition, namely, “‘Being and Nothing are not the same;”
this proposition, too, is expressed above. But now a further
defect arises: these propositions lack connection and therefore
show their content only. in the form of an antinomy, whereas
the content refers to one and the same thing, and the deter-
minations expressed in the two propositions should be abso-
lutely united; so that the union can then be called only a
restlessness between incompatible terms, a movement. The
most common injustice done to speculative content is to make
it one-sided, that is, to emphasize one only of the propositions
into which it can be resolved. When this happens, it cannot
be denied that that proposition is asserted; but this assertion
is as false as it is true, for once one proposition is taken from
the speculative complex the other, too, should equally be
considered and enunciated.—Special mention must here


104 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


further be made of this unhappy word, as it may be called,
of “unity ;” unity even more than identity indicates subjective
reflection; it is generally taken as the relation arising from
external reflection, from comparison. In so far as this finds the
same thing in two distinct objects there is unity, but in this
shape, that the complete indifference towards this unity of the
objects compared is presupposed, so that comparison and unity
in no way concern the objects themselves, being a procedure
and determining quite external to them. Unity therefore ex-
presses a quite abstract sameness, and sounds violent and
striking in proportion as the objects of which it is asserted
obviously show themselves as distinct. In this respect therefore
mere Unseparateness or Inseparability would be a good sub-
stitute for Unity; but these would not express the affirmative
nature of the relation of the whole.

The whole and true result, therefore, which has here been
found, is Becoming, which is more than the one-sided or
abstract unity of Being and Nothing. On the contrary it con-
sists of this Movement—that pure Being is immediate and
simple; that it therefore equally is Nothing; that there is a
distinction between them, but equally this cancels itself, and
is not. In the result, therefore, the distinction between Being
and Nothing is equally asserted, but is asserted as a distinction
that is merely intended.

It is intended to take Being, rather, as that which is simply
other than Nothing; nothing is clearer than their absolute
distinctness, and nothing seems easier than to be able to describe
it. But it is equally easy to prove the impossibility of this, and
that the distinction cannot be expressed. Those who insist on
remaining at this standpoint of the distinctness of Being and
Nothing, should set themselves the task of indicating in what
it consists. If Being and Nothing had any determinateness to
distinguish one from the other, they would be determinate
Being and determinate Nothing, as has been recalled, and not
pure Being and pure Nothing, as they still are at this stage.
The distinction between them is therefore completely void;
each is the indeterminate itself, and is so in the same manner;
the distinction therefore does not lie in themselves but in a
third thing, namely our intention. This however is a form of
the subjective which does not belong to this stage of the


BEING 105


exposition. But the third element which gives subsistence to
Being and Nothing must occur here too; and indeed it has
occurred here too, and is Becoming. In Becoming the two
exist as distinct; and only in so far as they are distinct is there
Becoming. This third is something other than themselves ;—
they subsist solely in an Other, which also means that they
do not subsist for themselves. Becoming is the subsistence of
Being as much as of Not-being ; in other words, their subsistence
simply is their being in One: it is just this their subsistence
which equally transcends their distinction.

The challenge to indicate the distinction between Being and
Nothing includes a challenge to say what Being, and what
Nothing, is. Those who struggle against recognizing, in either,
any more than a transition to the other, and make various
assertions about Being and Nothing, should indicate what they
are speaking of; that is, they should give a definition of Being
and Nothing, and demonstrate its correctness. Unless they
satisfy this first demand of the old science of which they else-
where admit and employ the logical rules, all such assertions
about Being and Nothing are merely asseverations, scientifically
invalid. If it has elsewhere been said that Existence (here
regarded as equivalent to Being) is the complement to Possi-
bility, then another determination, that of Possibility, is pre-
supposed, and Being is asserted, not in its immediacy, but as
dependent and conditioned. We shall reserve for such Being
as is mediated the term of “Existence.”’” Of course Being is
sometimes imaged, for instance as pure light, as the clearness
of unclouded vision, and Nothing as pure night; and their
distinction is thus connected with this well-known sensuous
difference. But in fact, if this pure seeing be imagined more
exactly, it is easy to perceive that in absolute clearness as much
and as little is seen as in absolute darkness, and that one kind
of seeing, as much as the other, is pure seeing, that is, a seeing
of nothing. Pure light and pure darkness are two voids which
are the same. We can distinguish only in determinate light,
that is, since light is determined by darkness, in clouded light,
—and, equally, in determinate darkness, that is, since darkness
is determined by light, in illuminated darkness: and this is
just because clouded light and illuminated darkness contain
distinction in themselves and therefore are Determinate Being.


D*


106 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Observation 3


The unity whose moments, Being and Nothing, exist as
inseparable, is at the same time different from them, and there-
fore stands to them in the relation of a third: this, in its most
characteristic form, is Becoming. Transition is the same thing
as Becoming; only in the former the two, between which, as
One and an Other, the transition takes place, are imagined
rather as resting apart, transition taking place between them.
Now, in whatever place or manner Being or Nothing is dis-
cussed, this third must be there too; for these two do not
subsist for themselves, but are only in this third, in Becoming.
This latter however has many empirical forms which abstraction
shelves and neglects, in order to retain severally these its
creations, Being and Nothing, and to prove them armed against
transition. This simple attitude of abstraction is met, equally
simply, by the reminder that in empirical Existence this
abstraction itself is only Something, and has Determinate Being.
Or the attempt is made to give fixity to this separation of
inseparables by other Forms of Reflection. Such a determina-
tion contains its own opposite in itself, and this determination
of reflection is refuted in itself, without any return or appeal
to the nature of its object, by taking it as it is and showing it
to contain its Other within itself. It would be wasted labour
to spread a net for all the twistings and objections of reflection
and its reasonings, in order to cut off and render impossible
all the evasions and digressions which it uses to hide from itself
its own internal contradictoriness. I therefore refrain from
noticing much that calls itself objection or refutation of the
assertion that neither Being nor Nothing is true and only
Becoming is their truth. That temper of mind which alone
can perceive the futility of such refutations, or rather alone
can expel them, is only brought about by critical cognition
of the forms of Understanding; but those who are readiest
with such objections immediately assault with their reflections
the very first propositions; not attaining nor having attained,
through a further study of Logic, to any consciousness of the
nature of these crude reflections.

We must now consider some of the’ phenomena which result
from the isolation of Being and Nothing, when one is placed


BEING 107


without the sphere of the other, and transition is thus
denied.

Parmenides held fast to Being, and was the most consistent
of all when at the same time he said of Nothing that it is not
at all; Being alone is. Being thus isolated is the indeterminate;
it is not related to Other; it therefore seems that no progress
could be made from this Beginning (that is, from out of Being
itself) : progress could only be effected by connecting something
foreign from without. The progress made by asserting that
Being is the same as Nothing, therefore, appears like a second
and independent Beginning,—a transition dependent on itself
and merely added to Being from without. In short, Being
would not be the absolute Beginning if it were in any way
determined; for, if it were, it would be dependent on some-
thing else, would not be immediate, would not therefore be
the Beginning. But if Being is indeterminate and therefore the
true Beginning, it lacks whatever could transform it into an
Other; it is End as well as Beginning. Nothing can assault
it from without; but also, nothing can sally forth from within;
Parmenides, equally with Spinoza, will not admit progress
from Being, or the absolute Substance, to the negative or finite.
We have remarked that, on this showing, Being admits of no
relation and therefore no progress; if a progress is made never-
theless, it can only be effected in an external manner, and
must be a second and new Beginning. Thus Fichte’s most
absolute and unconditional, fundamcntal assertion, A = A, is
Thesis; his second is Antithesis: the latter is supposed to be
partly conditioned, partly unconditioned, and thus self-con-
tradictory. This progress is therefore one of external reflection,
which, first, denies what, as being an Absolute, it made its
Beginning (Antithesis being the negation of the first identity) ;
and, secondly, forthwith expressly makes conditioned its second
unconditioned element. But if there were any justification for
the progress, that is, for transcending the first Beginning, then
this first Beginning would itself have to possess the capacity
of having an Other related to itself: it would have to be
determinate. But such neither Being nor Absolute Substance
professes to be: quite the reverse. It is the immediate, that
which is as yet utterly indeterminate.

The most eloquent descriptions—perhaps already forgotten—


108 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


ofthe impossibility of passing on from an abstract to something
beyond, and to a union of the two, are given by Jacobi in
support of his attack on the Kantian “a priori Synthesis” of
self-consciousness, in his dissertation on the undertaking of the
Critical Method to bring Reason within limits (Jac., Works,
Vol. III). He puts the problem in this way, that the origin
or creation of a synthesis is to be demonstrated in some pure
sphere, whether in pure consciousness, pure space or pure
time (p. 113). “Let space be one, let time be one, let conscious-
ness be one ;—say now, how does any one of these three Ones,
purely and in itself, engender multiplicity? Each is one and
no other; an indifference, a self-identity of space, time, and
consciousness, where not even space, time, and consciousness
can be asserted; for these nouns still slumber in the infinite
naught of the indeterminate, whence each and every deter-
minate has yet to issue. What introduces finitude into these
three infinities? What renders Space and Time, a priori, preg-
nant with Number and Measure and changes them into a pure
multiplicity; what causes pure spontaneity (Ego) to oscillate?
Whence does the pure vowel get its consonant, or rather, how
does its soundless and unbroken note break off and interrupt
itself in order to get at least a kind of independent sound, an
accent?”’—It will be seen that Jacobi saw very clearly the
unsubstantial nature of abstraction, whether of so-called
absolute, that is, of abstract Space, or of abstract Time, or
of abstract pure Consciousness or Ego; and he remains in this
position in order to uphold the impossibility of a progress to
Other (which is the condition of a Synthesis), and so to the
Synthesis itself. The Synthesis here in question must not be
taken as a connection of determinations already present exter-
nally ;—the question is, partly, the creation for a first element
of its second, and for the originally indeterminate, of something
determinate; partly, it is the immanent synthesis or synthesis
a priori,—the self-existent unity of distincts. Becoming is this
immanent synthesis of Being and Nothing; but, since “‘syn-
thesis” suggests external juxtaposition of things already there
externally to one another, the word synthesis, and synthetic
unity, rightly has not been employed.—Jacobi asks how the
pure vowel of the ego gets its consonant, and what introduces
determinateness into indeterminateness. The latter question


BEING 109


is easily answered, and has been answered by Kant after his
fashion; the former asks after the particular manner, the
relations and so forth, and thus demands that a special category
should be indicated; but here there can be no question of
particular manner or of such categories of understanding. The
question “how” is itself one of the bad habits of reflection,
which asks how a thing can be conceived, but at the same
time presupposes its own fixed categories, and thus knows itself
armed against the answer to its question. With Jacobi too the
question lacks the higher significance of a demand after the
necessity of the synthesis, for, as was said, he stays firm in his
intention to remain with the abstractions, so as tö assert the
impossibility of a synthesis. His description of the procedure
for reaching the abstraction of Space is especially graphic
(p- 147). “For a time I must seek utterly to forget whatever
I saw, heard, touched or handled, myself expressly not excepted.
Utterly and purely must I forget all motion and, just because
it is hardest, be at greatest pains to achieve this forgetting.
Whatsoever I have thought away I must also wholly and
entirely keep away, nothing being retained save only the
intuition, forcibly retained, of infinite unchangeable Space.
Nor must I re-introduce myself into Space as something dis-
tinct from it and yet connected: I must not merely allow
myself to be surrounded and penetrated by it: I must pass
over into Space, become one with it, be changed into it;
nothing must remain of me save this my intuition itself, so
that this may be contemplated as a presentation truly self-
subsistent and independent, one, and one only.”

Such being the perfectly abstract purity of Continuity, that
is, of indeterminateness and vacuity of presentation, this
abstraction may indifferently be termed Space, or pure In-
tuition, pure Thought ;—the Indian, who, externally motion-
less, and impassive also as regards sensation, fancy, imagination,
desire, and so forth, contemplates the point of his nose for
years on end, rehearsing his Om Om Om, or else nothing at all,
has one name for all these concepts—Brahma. This torpid and
vacuous consciousness, taken as consciousness, is Being.

Now in this void, so Jacobi continues, his experience is the
reverse of what it should be, according to Kant’s assurance:
he does not find himself to be a multinlicity and manifold,


110 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


but rather a One quite lacking either of these attributes ; indeed,
“I am impossibility itself, the annihilation of all manifold and
multiplicity; from my pure, utterly simple and unalterable
essence I cannot reconstruct, nor spirit into myself, any least
thing ; thus in this pure state the external and separate existence
of entities, and every manifold and multiplicity based on these,
are manifested as a pure impossibility” (p. 149).
This impossibility is simply the tautology of saying, “I hold
' fast to abstract unity and exclude all multiplicity and manifold ;
I persist in the undifferentiated and indeterminate, neglecting
all that is differentiated and determinate.” The Kantian a
priori synthesis of self-consciousness, the active force, which this
unity contains, whereby it splits itself up and sustains itself in
this state of diremption, is, with Jacobi, watered down to the
same abstraction. This “‘synthesis in itself,” this “original
judgment,” with him is one-sidedly turned into “the Copula
in itself;—an ‘is,’ ‘is,’ ‘is,’ without beginning or end, without
what, who, or which; this repetition of repetition ad infinitum
is the one business, function, and output of this purest of pure
synthesis; which itself is just pure, absolute, and simple repe-
tition” (p. 125). Or in fact, there being no break, that is, no
negation or distinction, in it, it is not repetition, but merely
undifferentiated simple Being.—But is this synthesis, if Jacobi
‚ omits precisely that which makes unity into synthetic unity?
It must be remarked, first, that when Jacobi thus entrenches
himself in absolute or abstract Space, Time, and Consciousness,
he has in this manner entered, and retains, a sphere empirically
false ; there is, given empirically, neither Space nor Time which
is spatially or temporally unlimited, or whose continuity is not
filled with the manifold limits of Determinate Being and
Change, so that these limits and changes belong, unseparate
and inseparably, to spatiality and temporality; similarly con-
sciousness is filled with determinate sensation, presentation,
desire, and so forth; it exists only in connection with some
particular content.—The empirical transition in any case goes
without saying; it is true that consciousness can make empty
space, empty time, and even empty consciousness, or again
empty Being, its object and content; but it does not remain
there; it proceeds, or rather bursts on from such vacuity to
a content which is better, that is, in some way more concrete;


BEING III


which, however bad it may be in other ways, is, by this much
at least, better and truer; and precisely such content is syn-
thetic in itself, synthetic, taken in the more general sense. Thus
Parmenides is faced with Appearance and Opinion, the opposite
of Being and Truth; Spinoza with the Attributes, the Modes,
Extension, Movement, Understanding, Will, and so forth. The
synthesis contains and demonstrates the invalidity of these
abstractions: in the synthesis they are united each with its
Other and therefore exist, not as self-subsistent and absolute,
but as entirely relative.

But we are not here concerned to demonstrate the empirical
invalidity of empty space, and so forth. It is true that, by
abstracting, consciousness can fill itself with those indetermin-
ates; and the abstractions, thus fixed, are the ideas of pure space
and time, pure consciousness, and pure being. The task is, to
demonstrate as invalid the idea of pure space, and so on, that
is, pure space itself, and so on, in itself: to demonstrate, in other
words, that, being what it is, it is its own opposite, that its
opposite has penetrated into it as being what it is, that it itself is
the perfected transition from itself, namely, determinateness.

This, however, is immediately evident in these ideas. They
are, as Jacobi abundantly describes them, results of abstraction,
they are expressly determined as indeterminate; and the in-
determinate, in its simplest form, is Being. But it is just this
indeterminateness which constitutes its determinateness; for,
the former being the opposite of the latter, indeterminateness,
as being opposite, is itself the determinate, or negative, and,
moreover, the pure and entirely abstract negative. It is this
indeterminateness or abstract negation, thus inherent in Being,
which is asserted by external as well as internal reflection when
it equates Being with Nothing, declaring it to be an empty
fabrication of thought: that is, Nothing.—Or we may say that,
since Being is the indeterminate, it is not what it is (namely,
affirmative determinateness) : it is not Being, but Nothing.

In the pure reflection of the Beginning, as it is made in this
Logic with Being as such, the transition is as yet hidden; since
Being is posited as merely immediate, Nothing can break forth
from it only immediately. But every subsequent determination
(as will immediately be seen in Determinate Being) is more
concrete; in Determinate Being that is already posited which


112 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


contains and produces the contradiction, and hence the tran-
sition, of those abstractions. While Being is considered as this
simple immediacy, the recollection that Being is the result or
perfect abstraction and by this alone abstract negativity, of
Nothing, is left outside the science, which, within itself, will,
under the category of Essence, exhibit this one-sided immediacy
as mediated; for Being there is posited as Existence and as that
which mediates this Being, as Ground.

With this recollection the transition from Being to Nothing
can even be imagined as something easy and trivial, or, as
it is called, can be explained and made conceivable, thus:
Being, which was made the Beginning of the Science, is of
course Nothing, for we can abstract from everything, and this
having been done, Nothing remains. But, so one might con-
tinue, in this way the Beginning is not affirmative, it is not
Being but just Nothing, and Nothing then is the End, at least
as much as immediate Being and even more so. It is simplest
to let such reasoning be and look for the nature of the results
of which it boasts. If Nothing were the result of this reasoning,
and we should begin with Nothing (as does Chinese philosophy),
this need not cause us to raise a finger, for before it could be
raised this Nothing would have changed into Being (see above,
B. Nothing). But if this abstraction from everything, since
everything after all has the quality of being, is presupposed, it
must be examined more exactly; the result of abstracting from
all beings is, first, abstract Being, Being in general; just as
in the cosmological proof of the existence of God we rise above
the accidental being of the world, but, in rising, take with us
this Being: Being is determined as infinite Being. But we can
also abstract from this pure Being, Being can be added on to
all that from which we have already abstracted: then Nothing
remains. Now if we wish to forget the thinking of Nothing,
that is, its metamorphosis into Being, or know nothing about
it, we can continue further to do what we can: for we can,
further, (heaven be thanked) abstract from Nothing (—the
Creation of the World is an abstraction from Nothing), and
then not Nothing remains, for it is just this from which we
are abstracting; and so Being has been reached again.—This
method of “can” affords an external play of abstraction where
abstraction itself is a one-sided activity of the negative element.


BEING 113


First, then, to this method, Being is as indifferent as Nothing,
and each arises as much as it vanishes; but it is, equally,
indifferent whether we begin with the doing of Nothing, or
with Nothing; for the former, that is, pure abstracting, is
neither more nor less real than pure Nothing.

The dialectic which Plato applies to the One in the Parmenides
must also be taken rather as a dialectic of external reflection.
Being and the One are both Eleatic concepts, and are identical.
But they are also to be distinguished, and this is the aspect
which Plato seizes upon in this dialogue. He removes from the
One its various determinations, e.g. whole and part, being in
itself and being in an other, shape, time, and so forth, and
reaches the result that Being does not pertain to the One, since
Being pertains to nothing save in one of these modes (p. 141,
e. Vol. III, ed. Steph.). Plato next deals with the proposition,
“The One is;” and Plato himself should be consulted for the
transition from this to the proposition that the One is not.
It is effected by comparing the two determinations of the
proposition which is assumed, namely, “The One is,” which
contains ‘‘One” and also “Being” : now “The One is” contains
more than the simple assertion of “One.” The negative element
of the proposition is demonstrated from the difference between
these two. It is clear that this method presupposes something
and is an external reflection.

The One is here connected with Being : similarly Being which
it is desired to retain abstractly for itself, is best shown, without
any reference to thought, in a connection which contains the
contrary of that which is to be asserted. Being, taken in its
immediacy, belongs to a Subject; it is asserted, has an empirical
existence in general, and therefore is within the sphere of
limitation and negation. Let understanding take what turns
or phrases it will in its repugnance to the unity of Being and
Nothing and in its appeal to that which is immediately at
hand, it will find in this experience nothing but determinate
Being, Being with some limitation or negation, which is just
that unity which it rejects. The assertion of immediate Being
is thus reduced to empirical Existence, nor can it reject the
demonstration of this empirical Existence, since it desires to
cling to the immediacy external to thought.

The case of Nothing is the same, but in the opposite manner,

VOL. I


114 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


and this reflection is well known and has often enough been
made about Nothing. Nothing, taken in its immediacy, appears
as being; for in its nature it is identical with Being. Nothing
is the object of thought, of imagination, of speech: it therefore
is; it has its being in thought, imagination, speech, and so
forth. But, further, this Being also differs from it; it is therefore
said that, although Nothing is in thought or imagination, yet
it cannot for that reason be, and being does not belong to it
as such, since such being is just thought or imagination. It is
undeniable that where this distinction is made Nothing is in
a relation to Being; but this relation, although it contains the
distinction, also contains a unity with Being. In what manner
soever Nothing is asserted or demonstrated, it shows itself in
connection or, if that is preferred, in contact, with some Being,
and unsevered from some Being; that is, precisely, in a Deter-
minate Being.

But, where the presence of Nothing in a Determinate Being
is thus demonstrated, its distinction from Being is vaguely
presented in the form that Being does not pertain to Nothing
in itself, and that it has not in it the quality of being for itself,
that it is not Being as such; and that Nothing is just absence
of Being, and darkness absence of light, coldness absence of
warmth, and so on. It is said that darkness has meaning only
with reference to the eye, by virtue of an external comparison
with the positive element (light) ; and that similarly coldness
is something only in our sensation; whereas light, warmth,
and Being, are, in themselves, the Objective, the Real and
Active, having a quality and dignity quite different from that
of those Negatives, or of Nothing. It is a common thing to find
it cited as a most important reflection and significant recog-
nition that darkness is mere absence of light and cold mere
absence of warmth. Here, within the sphere of empirical
objects, this one empirical remark may be made about this
acute reflection, that darkness does indeed show itself active
in light by determining it to colour, and thereby alone endows
it with visibility; since, as was said above, as little is seen in
pure light as in pure darkness. But visibility is activity within
the eye, an activity in which this negative element has as great
a share as light which counts for real and positive; similarly
cold manifests itself adequately to water, to our sensation, and


BEING 115


so on, and if we deny it so-called objective reality, our case
against it is not strengthened thereby in the least. But this
further censure might here be made, that here as well as above
the negative of a determinate content is discussed, and the
argument does not stop at Nothing itself, which, as regards
empty abstraction, is neither superior nor inferior to Being. —
But let cold, darkness, and other determinate negations be
taken for themselves, and let it be seen what is thereby posited
with regard to their general determination according to which
they are here introduced. They are to be, not Nothing in
general, but the not-being of light, warmth, and so on, of
something determinate, of a content: they are, if one may say
so, Nothings determinate and having content. But a deter-
minateness, as will also be seen below, is itself a negation;
hence they are negative nothings: but a negative nothing is
something affirmative. This transformation of Nothing into
something affirmative, by virtue of its determinateness (which
above appeared as a Determinate Being in the subject, or
whatever else it might be), seems the greatest of paradoxes
to the consciousness which stands firm in the abstractions of
Understanding. The recognition (in spite, or perhaps because,
of its simplicity) that the negation of a negation is something
positive, appears to be a triviality beneath the notice of Under-
standing in its pride, though no doubt correct enough: but
this recognition not only is correct, but, because of the univer-
sality of such determinations, is of such infinite scope and
universal application that it is well worthy of attention.

This further remark may be made about the determination
of the transition of Being and Nothing into one another, that
it is similarly to be taken without further determination of
reflection. It is immediate and quite abstract, because of the
abstract nature of the moments which pass into one another,
since there is not yet posited in either moment the deter-
minateness of that other which brings about the transition:
although Being is essentially Nothing, yet Nothing is not yet
posited in Being, and vice versa. It is not therefore here admissible
to employ mediations further determinate, and to take Being
and Nothing as in any way related; this transition is not yet
a relation. It is therefore incorrect to say that Nothing is the
ground of Being, or that Being is the ground of Nothing; that


116 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Nothing is cause of Being, and so on; or that the transition
to Nothing depends on this condition, that there is something,
or the transition to Being on the condition that there should
be Nothing. The kind of relation cannot be more closely
determined without simultaneously determining the terms of
the relation. In the connection between ground and conse-
quence, and so on, the terms connected are no longer mere
Being and Nothing, but, expressly, Being which is ground, and
something which, though merely posited and not independent,
yet is not abstract Nothing.


Observation 4


What has been said throws light on the quality of the
dialectic directed against the beginning of the world, as also
against its destruction,—the dialectic which was to establish
the eternity of matter and refute Becoming, arising, and passing
away in general.—The Kantian antinomy of the spatial and
temporal finitude or infinity of the world will be more closely
considered below, under the concept of Quantitative Infinity.—
This simple, ordinary dialectic is based on the retention of the
opposition between Being and Nothing. The impossibility of
a beginning of the world, or of anything, is demonstrated in
the following manner :—

Nothing can begin, either in so far as it is or in so far as
it is not: for in so far as it is, it is not merely beginning; in
so far as it is not, it is not even beginning.—If the world, or
anything, is supposed to have begun, it must have begun in
Nothing; but Nothing is not beginning, neither is there any
beginning in it: for beginning comprehends a Being, and
Nothing contains no Being. Nothing is only Nothing. In a
ground, cause, and so on (if Nothing is determined in that
way), there is contained an affirmation, a Being.—For the same
reason something also cannot cease to be. For then Being would
contain Nothing; but Being is only Being and not its own
opposite.

It is evident that nothing is adduced here against Becoming,
or against beginning and ceasing, against this unity of Being
and Nothing, save a dogmatic denial,—validity being ascribed
to Being and to Nothing, each distinct from the other.—At
any rate this dialectic is more consistent than reflective imagina-


BEING | 117


tion. This latter thinks it perfect truth that Being and Nothing
can exist only as separate; but on the other hand it admits
beginning and ceasing as equally valid determinations, and
therein in fact assumes the inseparate nature of Being and
Nothing.

If Being and Nothing are supposed to be absolutely separate,
then—as we so often hear—beginning and Becoming are indeed
something inconceivable; for an assumption is made which
destroys beginning and Becoming; and yet these are again
admitted: the contradiction, thus introduced and made incap-
able of solution, is then called the inconceivable.

What has been adduced is the same dialectic as is employed
by Understanding against the concept of the infinitely
small magnitudes of the higher analysis. This concept is dealt
with at greater length below.—These magnitudes have been
defined as such as are in process of disappearing,—neither before
their disappearance, for then they are finite magnitudes, nor
after it, for then they are nothing. Against this pure concept
the objection has been made and has ever been repeated, that
such magnitudes are either Something or else Nothing; that
there is no mean condition (condition here is an improper and
barbarous expression) between Being and Not-being.—Here,
too, the absolute separation of Being and Nothing is assumed.
But in fact the identity of Being and Nothing has been demon-
strated, or, to speak the language of the objectors, it has been
shown that there exists nothing that is not a mean condition
between Being and Nothing. Mathematics owes its most brilliant
successes to the adoption of this determination which Under-
standing contradicts.

This argument, which wrongly presupposes the absolute
separateness of Being and Not-being and there remains
stationary, should be called, not dialectic, but sophistry. For
sophistry is an argument proceeding from a baseless supposition
which is allowed without criticism or reflection ; while we term
dialectic that higher movement of Reason where terms appear-
ing absolutely distinct pass into one another because they are
what they are, where the assumption of their separateness
cancels itself. It is the dialectic immanent nature itself of
Being and of Nothing that they manifest their unity (which is
Becoming) as their truth.


118 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


2. MoMENTs OF BECOMING: ARISING AND PAssıng AWAY


Becoming is the unseparateness of Being and Nothing, not
the unity which abstracts from Being and Nothing; rather,
Becoming as the unity of Being and Nothing is this determinate
unity in which there is Being as well as Nothing. But each,
Being and Nothing, in so far as it is unseparated from its Other,
is not. They are, therefore, in this unity: but only as dis-
appearing and transcended. From the independence (which
they were primarily imagined as possessing) they fall to the
status of moments, which still are distinct, but at the same time
are transcended.

The moments being thus taken in this their distinctness, each
is in it as unity with its other. Becoming thus contains Being
and Nothing as two such unities, each of which itself is unity
of Being and Nothing: one of them is Being taken immediately
and as relation to Nothing; the other Nothing taken imme-
diately and as relation to Being. The determinations are of
unequal value in these unities.

In this manner Becoming is in a twofold determination. In
one of these, Nothing is immediate, that is, the determination
begins with Nothing which relates itself to Being, or passes
over into it; in the other, Being is immediate, that is, this
determination begins with Being which passes over into
Nothing: Arising and Passing Away.

Both are the same thing, namely Becoming ; and even when
taken as these different directions they penetrate and paralyse
each other. One direction is Passing Away: Being passes over
into Nothing; but equally Nothing is its own opposite, a
transition to Being, that is, Arising. This Arising is the other
direction: Nothing passes over into Being, but Being equally
cancels itself (hebt sich auf) and is rather a transition to Nothing,
a Passing Away.—They do not cancel mutually, nor one the
other externally; each cancels itself in itself, and in itself is its
own opposite.


3. TRANSCENDENCE OF BECOMING


The equipoise of Arising and Passing Away is, first, Becoming
itself. But this equally collapses into static unity. In it Being


BEING 119


and Nothing exist only in so far as they disappear, but Becoming

‘as such exists only by virtue of their distinctness. Their dis-
appearance therefore is the disappearance of Becoming, or the
disappearance of disappearance itself. Becoming is a baseless
unrest which collapses into a static result.

This might also be expressed as follows :—Becoming is the
disappearance of Being in Nothing and of Nothing in Being,
and the disappearance of Being and Nothing in general; but
also it depends upon the difference between these. It is there-
fore self-contradictory, because it unites contradictories within
itself; but such a union destroys itself.

The result is, that disappearance has taken place; but this
is not Nothing: that would be merely a relapse into one of
the determinations which have already been transcended (auf-
gehoben), and not the result of Nothing and of Being too. It is
the union of Being and Nothing, which has become a static
simplicity. But this static simplicity is Being, which again, how-
ever, exists no longer for itself, but as a determination of the
whole.

Becoming, then, taken as transition into the unity of Being
and Nothing, which exists because it is, or has the form of,
the one-sided immediate unity of these moments, is Determinate
Being.

Observation


To transcend (aufheben), and that which is transcended (the
ideal), are among the most important concepts of philosophy,—
a fundamental determination which reappears everywhere
without exception, the meaning of which must be taken
definitely, and must especially be distinguished from Nothing.—
What transcends itself does not thereby become Nothing. What
is Nothing is immediate: what is transcended is mediated, and,
though it is not, yet it has reached nonentity as a result
approached from Being. It therefore retains the determinateness
whence it started.

To transcend (aufheben) has this double meaning, that it
signifies to keep or to preserve and also to make to cease, to
finish. To preserve includes this negative element, that some-
thing is removed from its immediacy and therefore from a
Determinate Being exposed to external influences, in order that


120 SCIENCE OF LOGIG


it may be preserved.—Thus, what is transcended is also pre-
served ; it has only lost its immediacy and is not on that account
annihilated.—In the dictionary the two determinations of
transcending may be cited as two meanings of this word. But
it should appear as remarkable that a language should have
come to use one and the same word for two opposite deter-
minations. It is a joy for speculative thought to find words
which in themselves have a speculative meaning; the German
language has several such. The double meaning of the Latin
tollere (which has achieved fame through the Ciceronian pun
tollendum esse Octavium) does not go so far; the affirmative
determination only goes so far as to mean elevation. A thing
is transcended only in so far as it has come into unity with
its opposite; in this narrow determination, as something re-
flected, it may fittingly be called moment. With the lever,
weight and distance from a point are called its mechanical
moments, on account of the sameness of their operation and
in spite of the difference between something real (such as a
weight) and something ideal (the mere spatial determination,
the line): see Encyclopaedia, 3rd Ed., section 261, note.—Even
more frequently the observation will force itself into notice that
the technical language of philosophy employs Latin expressions
for reflected determinations, either because the mother tongue-
has no expressions for them, or because, when it has such, as
happens here, its own expressions call to mind rather what is
immediate, and the foreign language what is reflected.

The more precise meaning and expression which Being and
Nothing receive, now that they are moments, must result from
the consideration of Determinate Being as the unity in which
they are preserved. Being is Being, and Nothing Nothing, only
in the distinctness of one from the other; but, truly considered
and in their unity, they have disappeared as these determina-
tions, and are now something different. Being and Nothing
are the same: but just because they are the same they no
longer are Being and Nothing, and have a different deter-
mination. In Becoming they were Arising and Passing Away:
in Determinate Being, as in a differently determined unity,
they are moments differently determined. This unity now
remains their basis, from which they no more issue to the
abstract meaning of Being and Nothing.


CHAPTER II
DETERMINATE BEING


THE determinateness of Determinate Being, as such, is existent
determinateness, or Quality. By virtue of its quality Something
is opposed to an Other: it is variable and finite, and determined
not only as contrasted with but also simply as negative against,
an Other. First, then, this its negation opposed to the finite
Something is the Infinite: the abstract opposition in which
these determinations appear resolves itself into an Infinity which
contains no oppositions, into Being for Self.
_ The treatment of Determinate Being has therefore three
divisions :

(A) Determinate Being as such.

(B) Something and Other: Finitude.

(C) Qualitative Infinity.


A
DETERMINATE BEING AS SUCH


In Determinate Being


(a) as such, its determinateness

(5) as Quality, must first be distinguished. This, however,
must be taken as well in the one determination of Determinate
Being as in the other; as Reality as well as Negation. But
equally in these determinatenesses Determinate Being is re-
flected into itself; and posited as such it is

(c) Something, or that which Is Determinate.


(a) DETERMINATE BEING IN GENERAL


Determinate Being issues from Becoming: it is the simple
oneness of Being and Nothing. From this simplicity it derives
its form as of something immediate. Becoming, which mediated
it, is left behind; it has transcended itself, and Determinate
Being therefore appears as something primary and as something


122 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


from which a beginning is being made. First, then, it is one-
sidedly determined as Being; the other determination which
it contains, that of Nothing, will also develop itself in it, in
opposition to this other.

It is not mere Being, but Determinate Being (Dasein), the
etymology of which implies being at a certain place, though
the spatial signification does not belong here. According to the
manner of its Becoming, Determinate Being in general is Being
together with a Not-being, so that this latter is taken up into
simple unity with Being. Not-being taken up into Being in this
manner, that the concrete whole is in the form of Being, of
immediacy, constitutes determinateness as such.

Since, in Becoming, Being has proved itself to be no more
than a moment, the Whole also, in the form—that is, in the
determinateness—of Being, is something transcended and nega-
tively determined; but it is such for us when we reflect, it is
not yet so posited in itself. But the determinateness as such of
Determinate Being is the determinateness which is posited and
also is implied in the expression “Determinate Being.” —The
two must always be carefully distinguished: only that which
is posited in a concept is proper to the contemplation which
develops it, to its content. The determinateness, however,
which is not yet posited in the concept is part of our reflection,
whether it regards the nature of the concept itself, or is external
comparison: if attention is drawn to a determinateness of the
latter kind it can only serve to elucidate, or point the way of,
the process which will clearly manifest itself in the course of
development. It is an external reflection which holds that the
whole, the unity of Being and Nothing, is contained in the
one-sided determinateness of Being; but this reflection will
actually be posited in the negation, in Something and an Other,
and so forth.—Our aim here has been to draw attention to this
difference; but, if we were to give an account of everything
which reflection would presume to remark, we should fall into
the prolixity of anticipating what must in any case result in the
investigation. Such reflections may facilitate a general view and
hence an understanding of the process; but they have this
disadvantage, that they may be mistaken for mere unjustified
assertions, grounds and foundations for the further development
of the subject. We must therefore take them for no more than


DETERMINATE BEING i 123


they are meant to be, distinguishing them from those terms
which are moments in the development of the process itself.

Determinate Being corresponds to Being in the previous
sphere; but, since Being is indeterminate, no determinations
can be evolved in it. But Determinate Being is, as such, con-
crete ; so that immediately various determinations and distinct
relations of its moments disclose themselves in it.


(b) Quauıty


In Determinate Being, Being and Nothing are immediately
one: they are therefore coextensive. In so far as Determinate
Being is at all, in so far it is Not-being, and therefore deter-
minate. Being is not the universal and determinateness not the
particular. Determinateness has not yet severed itself from
Being ; and, indeed, it never will do so, for the truth which is
now the basis is the unity of Being and Not-being; and all
further determinations are based on this as their foundation.
But the relation here existing between determinateness and
Being is the immediate unity of both, so that as yet no dis-
tinctness between them is posited.

Determinateness, taken thus isolated and by itself as existent
determinateness, is Quality,—something quite simple and
immediate. Determinateness in general is that more universal
something which may equally be the quantitative or something
further determined. This simplicity makes it impossible to say
anything further about Quality as such.

But Determinate Being, which contains Nothing as well as
Being, is itself the measure of the one-sidedness of Quality as
merely immediate or existent determinateness. It must equally
be posited in the determination of Nothing; and then this
immediate or existent determinateness is posited as one which
is differentiated and reflected: Nothing, the determinate part
of a determinateness, is equally reflected, is a negation.
Quality which is to count as something separately existing is
Reality; taken as infected with any negation, it becomes
Negation in general, which also is a Quality (though it
counts as a deficiency) and further determines itself as limit


or barrier.
Each is a Determinate Being; but with Reality as Quality


124 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


(with emphasis on the fact that it is) the fact is hidden that
it contains determinateness and therefore negation; Reality
therefore is taken as something positive from which negation,
limitation, and deficiency are supposed to be excluded. Nega-
tion taken as mere deficiency would be equivalent to Nothing:
in fact it is a Determinate Being, a Quality, but one which
has for determination a Not-being.


Observation


Reality may seem to be an ambiguous word, since it is
employed for different and even opposite determinations. In
the philosophic sense, for instance, a merely empirical reality
is spoken of as a worthless existence. On the other hand, if a
thought, a concept, or a theory is said to have no reality, the
meaning is that it has no actuality; while in itself or as a
concept the idea, for instance, of a Platonic Republic might
very well be true. The idea here is not denied its value, and
it is allowed to remain by the side of the reality. But as opposed
to “mere” ideas and ““mere” concepts, the real is taken as the
only truth.—Ifit is a one-sided sense in which external existence
is taken as the criterion of the truth of a content, it is equally
one-sided if the idea, the essence or internal feeling is imagined
as indifferent to external existence or is even regarded as
excellent in proportion as it is removed from Reality.

In dealing with the expression “Reality? we must make
mention of the former metaphysical concept of God, which
used especially to be made the basis of the so-called ontological
proof of the existence of God. God was defined as the Sum-total
of all Realities; and of this sum-total it was said that it con-
tained no contradiction, none of the realities cancelling the
other ; for a reality was to be taken merely as something com-
plete and affirmative, containing no negation. Thus the realities
were neither opposed nor contradictory to one another.

This concept of Reality implies that it survives when every
negation is thought away. But this removes every determinate-
ness. Reality is Quality, or Determinate Being; it therefore
contains the moment of negation: this alone makes it that
determinate something which it is. Taken as infinite (in the
ordinary meaning of the term), or in its so-called “eminent”


DETERMINATE BEING. 125


sense (and this is what is demanded), it spreads out into
indeterminateness and loses its meaning. The goodness of God
is not to be goodness in the ordinary, but in the eminent,
sense ; it is not to be distinct from justice, but is to be tempered
by it (this is a mediatory expression belonging to Leibniz) ;
and contrariwise justice is to be tempered by goodness; and
now goodness has ceased to be goodness, and justice, justice.
Power is to be tempered by wisdom; but then it is no longer
power as such, for it is subordinate to wisdom; wisdom is to
be extended into power, but then it ceases to be that wisdom
which determines end and means. The true concept of the
infinite and its absolute unity, which will be discovered later,
must not be taken as a tempering or mutual limitation or
mingling; for as such it is a superficial relation held fast in
an indeterminate mist, and satisfactory only to non-conceptual
imagination.—Reality, as it is taken in this definition of God,
as a determinate Quality, is driven beyond its determinateness
and ceases to be Reality: it becomes abstract Being. God as
the purely Real in all Reals, or as the Sum-total of all Realities,
is that same indeterminate and nebulous something as the
empty Absolute where everything is one.

If on the other hand Reality is taken in its determinateness,
then, since it essentially contains the moment of negativeness,
the Sum-total of all Realities equally becomes the sum-total of
all negations and of all contradictions ; it becomes, for instance,
absolute power which holds absorbed everything determinate,
but, since it exists only in so far as it has opposed to it some-
thing not yet subjected to it, any thought which extends it to
perfected and unbounded power leads it back to abstract
Nothing. This Real in all Reals, or Being in all Determinate
Being, which is to express the concept of God, is nothing else
than abstract Being, and identical with Nothing.

“Determinateness is negation posited affirmatively,” is the
meaning of Spinoza’s omnis determinatio est negatio,—a proposition
of infinite importance; only, negation as such is formless
abstraction. Speculative philosophy must not be accused of
making negation, or Nothing, its end: Nothing is the end of
philosophy as little as Reality is the truth.

From the proposition that determinateness is negation it
necessarily follows that there is One Substance only: the unity


126 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


of Spinoza’s Substance: Spinoza was forced thus to unite
Thought and Being (or Extension), the two determinations
which were present to his mind; for, taken as determinate
realities, they are negations, the infinite nature of which con-
stitutes their unity; according to Spinoza’s definition (which
will be further dealt with below), the infinity of anything is
its affirmation. He therefore conceived of them as Attributes,
that is, as such as, having no separate persistence or Being-in-
and-for-self, exist only as transcended, or as moments; or,
rather, they are not even moments, since Substance is that
which in itself is quite indeterminate, the Attributes (as also
the Modes) being distinctions made by an external Under-
standing.—Nor can the substantiality of individuals persist
against this proposition. The individual is related to itself
because it sets a limit to everything else: from this very
fact the limits become limits of itself, relations to an other,
and its existence no longer depends upon itself. It is true
that the individual is more than a something limited in every
direction ; but this “more” belongs to a different sphere of the
concept; in the metaphysics of Being it is simply something
determinate ; and it is determinateness, essentially in its nega-
tive force, which opposes itself to the existence, as such and in
and for itself, of such a something, such a finite thing, whirling
it into the same negative movement of Understanding which
causes everything to disappear in the abstract unity which is
Substance.

Negation is immediately opposed to Reality ; further on and
in the proper sphere of reflected determinations it is opposed
to the positive, which is Reality reflecting upon negation,—
Reality in which the negative element, hidden in Reality as
such, shows forth.

Quality is chiefly property in this respect, that it shows
itself as an immanent determination in an external relation.
By properties, for instance those of herbs, we mean determina-
tions which not only are proper to a something, but the degree
in which it preserves itself in relation to others in a peculiar
manner by virtue of them, not allowing free course to alien
activities posited in it, but on the contrary enforcing its own
determinations in an Other, at the same time not keeping this ©
external to itself. A more passive determinateness, such as figure


DETERMINATE BEING 127


or form, is not, on the other hand, called property nor even
ality, since it is imagined as variable and not identical with
ng.

_ “Qualation” or “Inqualation”—an expression belonging to
Jacob Böhme’s philosophy, a philosophy which goes deep but
into a murky depth—means the movement of a quality (that
of being sour, astringent, fiery, and so forth) in itself, in so far
as it posits and confirms itself in its negative nature (its quale)
as opposed to an other and is its own restlessness, so that it is
r by means of a struggle that it produces and maintains
itseli.


(c) SOMETHING


In Determinate Being its determinateness was distinguished
in the shape of Quality : in Quality, so far as it exists, there exists
distinction—that between Reality and Negation. But, however
much these distinctions may have a place in Determinate Being,
they are equally void and transcended. Reality itself contains
negation, it is Being Determinate, and not indeterminate nor
abstract. And, equally, Negation is Determinate Being: it is
not a Nothing which is supposed to be abstract, but it is here
posited as it is in itself, as being and as belonging to Determinate
Being. Thus Quality is in no way separated from Determinate
Being, which is just this—a qualitative Being.

But this transcendence of the distinction is more than a mere
retraction and external re-omission of it, more than a mere
return to the simple beginning, Determinate Being as such.
The distinction cannot be omitted, for it zs. Therefore, the
truth which we have, is, Determinate Being in general, dis-
tinction in it, and the transcendence of this distinction;
Determinate Being is not merely undifferentiated, as at the
beginning; it is once more identical with itself through the
transcendence of the distinction, and the simple nature of
Determinate Being is mediated through this transcendence.
The fact of this transcendence of distinction is the peculiar
determinateness of Determinate Being ; it is Being-in-itself, that
which is-determinate, or Something.

Something is the first negation of negation as simple existent
self-relation. Determinate Being, living, thinking, and so on,
determine themselves essentially as that which exists, lives,


128 SCIENCE OF LOGIC.


thinks (ego), and so on. This determination is of the utmost
importance, as it saves us from stopping at Determinate Being,
living, or thinking, and so on, or at Godhead (instead of God),
as universals. Imagination rightly holds Something to be some-
thing real. But Something is still a very superficial determina-
tion; just as Reality and Negation, so Determinate Being and
its determinateness, though not completely void like Being and
Nothing, yet are quite abstract determinations. It is just for
this reason that they are the commonest expressions ; reflection
untrained in philosophy most uses them, pours its distinctions
into them, and imagines that now it has something really well
and firmly determined.—The negative of the negative, as
Something, is only the beginning of the subject; and the Being-
in-self is quite indeterminate. It next determines itself as being-
for-self and so on, till finally as Notion it receives the concrete
intensity of the subject. The negative unity with self is the basis
of all these determinations; though here the first negation
(negation in general) must carefully be distinguished from the
second, the negation of negation, which is concrete and absolute
negativity, while the first is only abstract negativity.

Something, so far as it is, is because it is the negation of
negation; for this is the restoration of simple self-reference;
but, for this very reason, Something is equally self-mediation.
Already in the simple form of Something, and, more definitely,
in Being-for-Self, Subject, and so on, self-mediation is present ;
even in Becoming there is a quite abstract mediation: in Some-
thing the self-mediation is posited in so far as it is determined
as a simple identity.—Attention may be drawn to the presence
of mediation in general, as against the principle of the alleged
mere immediacy of knowledge, from which all mediation is
supposed to be excluded: but there is no further need to draw
attention particularly to the moment of mediation, for it is to
be found everywhere and in every concept.

This self-mediation, which Something in itself is, taken
merely as negation of negation, has no concrete determinations
for its sides: it therefore collapses into that simple unity which
is Being. Something is, and therefore also is a Determinate
Being; and, further, it also in itself is a Becoming, having,
however, something more than Being and Nothing for moments.
One of these, Being, has now become Determinate Being, and,


‘DETERMINATE BEING _ 129


further, a Determinate Being. The second also is a Determinate
Being, but one determined as a negative of Something, —as an
Other. Something as Becoming is transition, having Somethings
for its moments; it therefore is change,—a Becoming which has
now become concrete.—At first, however, Something merely
changes in its concept; it is not yet thus posited as mediating
and mediated, but merely as preserving itself in its simplicity
as self-related ; and its negative is posited equally as something
qualitative, as merely Other in general.


B
FINITUDE


(a) Primarily Something and Other are mutually indifferent ;
an Other, too, is an immediate existence, a Something; so that
negation falls outside the two. Something is in itself, as opposed
to its Being-for-Other. But determinateness also belongs to its
in-itself, and is (b) its determination. This in turn passes over
into Modification, which is identical with the determination
and constitutes the immanent and simultaneously negated
Being-for-Other, which is the limit of Something. (c) This limit
is the immanent determination of Something itself, which
accordingly is the Finite.

In the first section in which Determinate Being was considered
it had the determination, as there taken, of being. Hence Quality
and Something, the moments in its development, also have an
affirmative determination. In this section, on the other hand,
the negative determination immanent in Determinate Being
develops itself. At that point it was merely negation in general,
or First negation ; here it is precisely determined as the “‘Being-
in-itself”” of Something, or the negation of negation.


(a) SOMETHING AND AN OTHER


1. First, Something and Other each are determinate Beings,
or Somethings.

Secondly, each is also an Other. Which is mentioned first,
and for this reason only has the name of Something, is imma-

VOL. I E


130 SCIENCE OF LOGIC.


terial. (In Latin, where they occur in one sentence, both are
called aliud; “one another” is alius alium; when there is reci-
procity the expression alier alterum is analogous. ) If we call one
determinate Being A and another B, then for the present B is
determined as the Other. But A is just as much Other to B.
Both are in the same way Others. The word “this’”” serves to
fix the distinction and that Something which is to be taken
affirmatively. But “this” clearly expresses that this distinction
and emphasizing of one Something is a process of designation,
subjective and external to the Something. The entire deter-
minateness falls within this external designation, and even the
expression ‘‘this” contains no distinction ; each and every Some-
thing is “this” as much as it also is Other. We fancy that by
“this? we are expressing something perfectly definite, over-
looking that language, being a work of understanding, expresses
universals only, except when it names individual objects; the
individual name, however, is meaningless in this sense that it
expresses no universal, for which reason it also appears as
something merely posited and arbitrary; and indeed proper
names may be assumed, bestowed, and also altered at will.

Otherness thus appears as a determination alien to Deter-
minate Being determined in this manner: it is the other and
is external to the one Determinate Being; it seems as though
one Determinate Being were determined as other partly only
by some external intelligence, partly only by virtue of some
Other which is outside it, while, for itself, it is not other at all.
Simultaneously, as we remarked, every one Determinate Being
equally determines itself as an other Determinate Being, even
for imagination, so that there does not remain one Determinate
Being which is determined merely as such and is not also
external to another, and therefore itself an Other.

Both are determined alike as Something and as Other; they
are therefore the same, and as yet there is no distinction between
them. But also this sameness of the determinations falls within
external reflection, within comparison of the two ; but according
to the manner in which Other is provisionally posited it is
indeed in itself in relation to Something, but it is also in itselt
external to this latter.

Thirdly, therefore, Other must be taken as isolated and in
relation only to itself, as Other in the abstract, as rò črepov


DETERMINATE BEING ~ 131


of Plato, who takes it as one of the moments of totality, opposing
it to the One and thus ascribing to Other a nature of its own.
Thus Other, taken by itself as such, is not Other to Something
but Other by itself, that is, its own Other.—Physical Nature
is such an entity which is Other according to its determination :
it is Other to Spirit; and thus preliminarily this determination
is merely relative, and expresses not a quality of Nature but
a relation external to it. But Spirit is true Something, and hence
Nature by itself is only that which it is relatively to Spirit;
therefore, if Nature is taken by itself, its quality is just that it
is Other in itself, or that which is external to itself (in the
determinations of space, time, and matter).

The Other for itself is the Other in itself, and hence that
which is Other to itself, or Other to Other; that which in itself
is the absolutely non-identical, the self-negating or changing.
But also it remains identical with itself, for the only thing
into which it could change is the Other which has no deter-
mination except this. But that which changes is determined in
no different manner, but in the same, namely, to be Other;
consequently the Other in the Other merely collapses into
itself. It is thus posited as Something intro-reflected, added
to which is a transcendence of otherness; it is a self-identical
Something, and otherness, which also is one of its moments,
is consequently something separate from it and not appertaining
to it as Something.

2. Something preserves itself in its state of non-existence;
it is essentially identical, and also essentially non-identical with
this state. It therefore is in relation to its otherness, and is not
simply its otherness. Otherness is simultaneously contained in
and also separated from it: it is Being-for-Other.

Determinate Being as such is something immediate and
unrelated : it is within the determination of Being. Since, how-
ever, it includes Not-being, it is a Being which is determinate
and negated within itself; it next becomes Other; but, since
it also preserves itself in its negation, it is merely Being-for-
Other.

It preserves itself in its non-existence, and is Being ; not Being
in general but as relation to itself as opposed to its relation to
Other, or as self-equality as opposed to inequality to itself.
Such a Being is Being-in-Self.


132 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Being-for-Other and Being-in-Self constitute the two mo-
ments of Something. Two pairs of determinations occur here—
(1) Something and Other, (2) Being-for-Other and Being-in-
Self. The first contains the unrelatedness which constitutes their
determinateness: Something and Other fall apart. But their
relation is their truth; therefore Being-for-Other and Being-in-
Self are the above determinations posited as moments of one
and the same thing, determinations which are relations and
remain in their unity, the unity of Determinate Being. Thus,
also, each of them contains the other moment which is distinct
from it.

Being and Nothing in their unity (which is Determinate
Being) are no more than Being and Nothing; it is only outside
their unity that they are more: but in their restless unity, in
Becoming, they are Arising and Passing Away.—In Something,
Being is Being-in-Self. Being, or self-relation and self-identity,
is now no longer immediate; it is self-relation only in so far
as it is the Not-being of otherness, that is, intro-reflected
Determinate Being. —Similarly, Not-being as moment of Some-
thing in this unity of Being and Not-being is not non-existence
in general, but Other, and, more definitely, after the distinction
of Being from it, it also is relation to its non-existence, or Being-
for-Other.

Thus Being-in-Selfis, first, negative relation to non-existence ;
otherness is external to and opposed to it; so far as Something
is in itself it is removed beyond the sphere of otherness and of
Being-for-Other. But, secondly, it also has Not-being in itself,
since it is itself the Not-being of Being-for-Other.

But Being-for-Other is, first, the negation of the simple self-
relation of Being, which in the first instance is supposed to be
Determinate Being, and Something: in so far as Something
is in or for an Other, it lacks its own Being. But, secondly,
it is not non-existence equivalent to pure Nothing: it is a
non-existence which points to Being-in-Self as its own intro-
reflected Being; just as conversely Being-in-Self refers to
Being-for-Other.

3. Both these moments are determinations of one and the
same thing, namely, of Something. Something is in itself in so
far as it has returned to itself from Being-for-Other. But, also,
Something has a determination, or circumstance, in itself (the


DETERMINATE BEING 133


accent here is on “‘in’’!), or in it, in so far as this circumstance is
“ım” it externally, and is a Being-for-Other.

This leads to a further determination. Primarily, Being-in-
Self and Being-for-Other are distinct; but, further, Something
also has in itself that which it is in itself, and conversely it is
in itself what it is as Being-for-Other ; and this fact constitutes
the identity of Being-in-Self and Being-for-Other, according
to the determination that Something is equivalent to each
of the moments, which therefore are comprehended in it as
unseparated.—Formally, this identity already results in the
sphere of Determinate Being, but more expressly in the con-
sideration of Essence and further of the Relation of Internality
and Externality, and most precisely in the contemplation of
the Idea as unity of Notion and Actuality.—We imagine that
we express something lofty in saying “in itself,” as in saying
“inner” ; but that which Something is only in itself, this is only
“in” this Something: “in itself” is a merely abstract and there-
fore external determination. The expressions “‘there is nothing in
him,” or “‘there’s something in it,” imply, though dimly, that
that which is “in” a thing belongs to its Being-in-Self, to its
true and inner worth.

We may remark that the meaning of the Thing-in-itself here
becomes plain: it is a very simple abstraction, though for some
time it was considered a most important and, as it were, high-
class determination, just as the proposition, that we do not
know what Things-in-themselves are, was a piece of wisdom
held in wide esteem.—Things are called “in themselves” in so
far as we abstract from all Being-for-Other, which means that
they are thought of as quite without determination, as Nothings.
In this sense it is indeed impossible to know what the Thing-
in-itself is. For the question ‘what? demands that deter-
minations should be indicated ; and since it is postulated that
the things of which these are to be predicated must be Things-
in-themselves, that is, indeterminate, the question, in sheer
thoughtlessness, is so put as to render an answer either impossible
or self-contradictory.—The Thing-in-itself is like that Absolute


ı The German an denotes (in space) contiguousness and not inclusion;
but it has seemed best to render it by “in” in order to make possible an
intelligible translation of the sentences where it is used half punningly at the
end of the next paragraph. (Translators’ Note.)


134 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


of which we know only that in it all things are one. It is there-
fore easy to know what is in these Things-in-themselves: as
such, they are mere abstractions, void of truth and content.
It is Logic which demonstrates what a Thing-in-itself is in
truth, and what truly is in itself; but here “in itself” is taken
as something better than abstraction, namely, as that which
something is by virtue of its concept: and the concept is con-
crete in itself; being a concept it may be conceived, and, being
determinate and a concatenation of its determinations, it is
in itself knowable.

Being-for-Other stands to Being-in-Self in the relation of
contrasted moment; but Positedness also is contrasted with
Being-in-Self. Though this expression, too, contains Being-for-
Other, it also contains, definitely, the already accomplished
refraction of that which is not in itself into its Being-in-Self,
where it is positive. Generally Being-in-Self may be taken as
an abstract manner of expressing the concept ; Positing properly
falls only within the sphere of Essence, or objective Reflection ;
Ground posits that which is grounded in it; and Cause even
more produces an effect—a Determinate Being, of which the
independence is immediately negated and which has in it
the meaning that it has its base, or being, in an Other. In the
sphere of Being, Determinate Being merely proceeds forth from
Becoming; or, with Something an Other is posited and with
the Finite the Infinite; but the Finite does not produce, does
not itself posit, the Infinite. In the sphere of Being the self-
determination of the concept is only in itself, and is called a
transition ; and the reflective determinations of Being, like Some-
thing and Other or Finite and Infinite, although they essen-
tially point to one another, or exist as Being-for-Other, yet
count as qualitative and as persisting for themselves; Other is,
and Finite is counted, as being immediately and persisting for
itself, no less than Infinite; the meaning of each appears com-
plete even without its other. But positive and negative, and
cause and effect, in however isolated a manner they are taken,
are meaningless one without the other; they show in each
other, and each shows in its other, and this is implied in
themselves.—In the several circles of determination, and more
especially in the progress of the demonstration or rather in the
progress of the Notion towards its demonstration, it is a main


DETERMINATE BEING 135


point always to distinguish what is still in itself and what is
posited; as with the determinations, whether they are in the
concept, or posited and being-for-other. This distinction is
proper only to dialectical development and is unknown to the
metaphysical (which includes the Critical) philosophy. The
definitions, postulates, distinctions, and conclusions of meta-
physics intend to produce and assert only what is in the category
of Being, and, more precisely, of Being-for-Self.

In the self-unity of Something, Being-for-Other is identical
with its in-itself; thus Being-for-Other is in Something. Deter-
minateness thus reflected into self is therefore once more one
which simply is, and thus is a Quality—Determination.


(b) DETERMINATION, MODIFICATION, AND LIMIT


This “in-itself,”” into which as back upon itself Something
is reflected from its Being-for-Other, is no longer abstract “in-
itself” but mediated, since it is the negation of its Being-for-
Other; this, therefore, is its moment. It is not merely the
immediate self-identity of Something, but that identity through
which Something is in it (the in-itself) that which it is in itself:
it has Being-for-Other in itself because “in-itself” is the tran-
scendence of this latter and is in itself having passed out from
it; but also because it is abstract and therefore essentially
infected with negation and Being-for-Other. Here there is not
only Quality and Reality, or existent determinateness, but
determinateness which is in itself: the course of development
consists in positing it as this intro-reflected determinateness.

1. Quality, which constitutes the in-itself in the simple Some-
thing, essentially in unity with its other moment, being-in-it,
may be called its Determination, in so far as this word is
distinguished in its exact meaning from determinateness.
Determination is affirmative determinateness: it is Being-in-
Self to which existent Something remains conformable, oppos-
ing any entanglement with Other, which would determine it;
it thus remains equal to itself, and gives weight to this equality
in its Being-for-Other. It fulfils its Determination in so far as
the further determinateness which springs up in many shapes
owing to its relation to Other, becomes adequate to its Being-


136 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


in-Self, becomes its fulfilment. Determination contains this,
that what Something is in itself, it also has in itself.

The Determination of man is thinking reason: thinking in
general is his simple determinateness, which distinguishes him
from the beast: he is Thought in himself, in so far as this is
also distinct from his Being-for-Other which immediately
connects him with Other—namely his natural and sensuous
quality. But also man has thought in himself: man is thought,
it is as thinking that he is, and this is his existence and actuality ;
and, further, since it is in his Determinate Being and his Deter-
minate Being is in thought, it must be taken as concrete, as
having content and filling; it is thinking reason, and thus the
Determination of man. But, in itself, even this determination
is no more than an Ought; that is, with the filling which is
incorporated with its in-itself, it is in the form of in-itself in
general in opposition to such Determinate Being as is not
incorporated with it, which latter may also be taken as an
externally opposite and immediate sensuousness and nature.

2. The fulfilling of Being-in-Self with determinateness is also
distinct from such determinateness as is only Being-for-Other
and remains outside the determination. For, in the field of the
qualitative, distinctions, when they exist as transcended, retain,
relatively to one another, immediate and qualitative Being.
That which Something has in itself divides up in this manner,
and in this direction is external Determinate Being of the
Something, which also is its Determinate Being, but does not
belong to its Being-in-Self—Thus determinateness is Modi-
fication.

Modified in this or that manner, Something is conceived as
being externally influenced and related. This external relation
on which Modification depends, and the fact that determina-
tion takes place through the medium of an Other, appears
as contingent. But it is the quality of Something to be subject
to this external influence and to have a Modification.

In so far as Something changes, the change falls within its
Modification: it is that element within the Something which
becomes an Other. The Something preserves itself in the change,
which affects only this unstable surface of its otherness and not
its Determination.

Thus Determination and Modification are distinct: accord-


DETERMINATE BEING 137


ing to its Determination, Something remains indifferent to its
Modification ; while that which Something has in itself is the
middle term of this syllogism and connects the two. But it
appeared that to belong to Something analysed itself into these
two extremes. Determinateness as such is the simple mean; and
both Determination and Modification belong to its identity.
But, for itself, Determination passes over into Modification,
and Modification into Determination. This much is implied
in what has been said already; more precisely, the connexion
is as follows: In so far as Something has in itself what it is in
itself, it is infected with Being-for-Other; and hence Deter-
mination as such remains liable to a relation to Other. Deter-
minateness is also a moment; but simultaneously it contains
this qualitative distinction, that it differs from Being-in-Self
and is the negative of Something, an other Determinate Being.
Determinateness which thus comprehends Other, when united
with Being-in-Self, introduces otherness into Being-in-Self (or
Determination) ; the latter thus is reduced to Modification.—
Conversely, Being-for-Other posited as Modification—that is
isolated and by itself—is, in itself, the same as is Other as such,
that is, that which is Other to itself, or of itself; taken thus
it is self-related Determinate Being, or Being-in-Self with a
determinateness; that is, Determination.—But the two must
also be kept distinct: hence Modification, whose very basis
appears to be in something external, or Other, also depends
upon Determination, and the alien determining is also deter-
mined by the determination proper to and immanent in
the Something. But, further, Modification belongs to that
which the Something is in itself: Something changes with its
Modification.

This mutation of Something no longer is its first change
according to its Being-for-Other: the former was change in
itself only, and proper to the inner concept; now the change
is that which is posited of Something.—Something has itself
been further determined, and the negation has been posited as
immanent in it, or as its developed Being-in-Self.

At first the transition into each other of Determination and
Modification is the transcendence of the distinction between
them; here Determinate Being or Something in general is
posited. It is the result of the distinction which comprehends


E*


138 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


within itself qualitative otherness: there thus are two Some-
things, which are not merely Other to each other (in which
case this negation would be only abstract and dependent on
comparison), but the negation is immanent in these Somethings.
As existent they are indifferent to each other, but this their
affirmation is no longer immediate, and each is related to itself
through the transcendence of otherness, which, in the deter-
mination, is reflected into Being-in-Self.

Something is in this relation to Other from its own nature
and because otherness is posited in it as its own moment: its
Being-in-Self comprehends negation, through which alone it
now has its affirmative existence. From this, however, Other
is distinct qualitatively, too, and thus it is posited as outside
Something. The negation of its Other is only the quality of
Something, for it is just as this cancellation of its Other that
it is Something. It is only through this that Other opposes
itself to a Determinate Being: it is only in an external manner
that Other is opposed to the first Something; or else, if they
are in fact connected absolutely (or according to their concept),
the connection is merely this, that Determinate Being has
passed over into otherness, or Something into Other, so that
Something is Other just as much as Other is. Now in so far
as Being-in-Self is the Not-being of otherness, which is con-
tained in it, but also distinguished from it by virtue of its
quality of being, Something itself is negation, namely this
negation, that an Other ceases when Something begins: it is
posited as remaining negative towards it, and as thus preserving
itself;—and this Other, the Being-in-Self of Something taken
as negation of negation, is its Being as such; and also this
cancellation as simple negation is a quality it has, the quality
of negating the other Something external to it. It is one deter-
minateness of these, and it is identical with the Being-in-Self
of Somethings (as negation of negation); and it also (since
these negations now stand in the relation of other Somethings
to each other) makes them spontaneously to coalesce while
simultaneously severing them, one negating the other. This is
Limit.

3. Being-for-Other is indeterminate and affirmative com-
munity of Something with its Other: in Limit, Not-being-for-
Other becomes prominent, which is qualitative negation of


DETERMINATE BEING 139


Other; the latter thereby is kept away from intro-reflected
Something. It remains to see the development of this concept,
which soon, however, reveals itself as a confusion and a con-
tradiction. The latter is immediately found in this fact, that
Limit, as the intro-reflected negation of Something, contains
ideally the moments of Something and Other, while these as
distinct moments are posited in the sphere of Determinate
Being as real and as qualitatively distinct.

a. Something then is immediate and self-related Determinate
Being, and has a Limit, first, as in relation to Other: it is the
not-being of Other, not of Something itself; in the Limit Some-
thing delimits its Other.—But Other is, itself, and in general,
a Something: therefore, the Limit which Something has rela-
tively to Other is Limit also of Other relatively to Something,
it is that Limit by means of which Other keeps distinct the
first Something as its own Other; in other words, it is a not-
being of this Something. It is thus not only not-being of Other
but of both Somethings equally, and thus of Something in
general.

But essentially also it is the not-being of Other, and thus
Something also exists by virtue of its Limit. True, in so far as
Something exists as limiting, it itself is degraded to the rank
of something limited; but its Limit (which is the fact that
Other ends where it begins) also is no more than the Being
of Something: through it the latter is what it is and has its
quality in it.—This relation is the external aspect of the fact
that Limit is simple (or first) negation, while Other is negation
of negation or the Being-in-Self of Something.

Something as immediate Determinate Being is, therefore,
Limit with reference to another Something; but this Limit is
also its own, and if it is Something, it is so only through the
mediation of this which is equally its not-being. Limit is the
mediation through which Something and Other is and also
is not.

ß. Now, in so far as Something simultaneously is and is not
in its Limit, and these moments are an immediate and quali-
tative distinction, the Determinate Being and not-being of
Something fall apart. Something has its Determinate Being
without (or also, as we imagine it, within) its Limit; and so
too Other, because it is Something, is outside it. Limit is the


140 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


mean between the two, in which they cease. They have their
Determinate Being beyond one another and beyond their Limit:
Limit as the not-being of either is the Other of both.

According to this distinction of Something from its Limit,
the line appears as line only outside its limit, the point; the
plane as plane outside of the line; and body as body only
outside its limit, the plane. —It is from this aspect that Limit
first strikes imagination (the externalization of the concept),
and is also chiefly applied to spatial objects.

y. But further, Something as it is outside the Limit, or
unlimited Something, is just Determinate Being in general.
Here it is not distinct from its Other: it is only Determinate
Being and has the same determination as its Other; each is
only Something in general and also Other: both are the same.
But this their at first immediate Determinate Being is now
posited with determinateness as Limit, in which both are what
they are distinctly from one another. But also Limit is their
common distinctness, their unity and distinctness, like Deter-
minate Being. This double identity (Determinate Being and
Limit) of both, implies that Something has its Determinate
Being only in Limit, and also (since immediate Determinate
Being and Limit are negative of one another) that Something,
which only exists within its Limit, severs itself from itself and
points beyond itself to its not-being and predicates this as its
Being, thus passing over into it. To apply this to the former
example, one determination is that Something is what it is
only within its Limit ;—thus the point is not limit of the line
only in the sense that the line only ceases in it and, as Deter-
minate Being, exists outside it; the line is not limit of the plane
only in the sense that the plane only ceases in the line; and
so with the plane as limit of the body: rather the line begins
in the point; it is its absolute beginning; even in so far as it
is imagined as unlimited in either direction, or produced to
infinity, as it is put,—even then the point is its element, and
the line the element of the plane, and the plane of the body.
These limits are the principle of that which they limit; just
a one (e.g. as hundredth) is limit, but also is element of the
whole hundred.

The other determination is the unrest of Something in its
Limit ; it is immanent in the Limit to be a contradiction which


DETERMINATE BEING 141


send; Something on beyond itself. Thus point is this self-
dialectic which becomes line, line that which becomes plane,
and plane that which becomes total space. There is a second
definition of line, plane, and cubic space, namely that the line
is created through the movement of a point, the plane through
the movement of a line, and so forth. This movement of the
point, the line, and so forth, is, however, taken as something
merely contingent or imaginary. This assumption is really,
however, retracted when it is said that the determinations from
which line and so forth are to be evolved are their elements
and principles; and these also are nothing else than their
Limits: this creation, therefore, is not looked on as merely
contingent or imaginary. It is part of the concept of the Limit
which is immanent to Something that point, line, and plane
in themselves, as self-contradictory, are self-repellent begin-
nings; so that the point (for instance) passes from itself into
the line because its concept is what it is; it moves in itself, and
thus creates line. The application, however, belongs to the
consideration of Space; to give an indication of it here, point
is purely abstract Limit, but it is so within a Determinate
Being: and as yet the latter is taken in a quite indeterminate
manner, being so-called absolute (that is, abstract) Space, or
entirely continuous being-separate. And Limit is not abstract
negation but is in a given determinate Existence and is spatial
determinateness; and hence the point is spatial, the contra-
diction of abstract negation and of continuity, and so incipient
and perfected transition into line, and so forth; and indeed
“there is”? no such thing as point, or line, or plane.

Something, posited with its immanent Limit as self-contra-
diction through which it is driven and forced beyond itself, is
the Finite.


(c) FinıTuDE


Existence is determinate; Something has a quality, and in
it is limited as well as merely determined: its quality is its
limit, and, affected with this, it at first remains affirmative
and quiescent Determinate Being. But when this negation is
developed to show that the opposition between its Determinate
Being and negation as its immanent limit, is itself the Being-


142 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


in-Self of Something, and that thus this latter is in itself just
Becoming, then these facts constitute its Finitude.

When we say of things that they are finite, we mean thereby
not only that they have a determinateness, that quality is here
reality and self-existent determination, and that they are merely
limited; for then they still have Determinate Being outside
their limit ;—but rather that Not-being constitutes their nature
and their Being. Finite things are; but their relation to them-
selves is this, that, being negative, they are self-related, and
in this self-relation send themselves on beyond themselves and
their being. They are, but the truth of this being is their end.
The finite does not only change, like Something in general,
but it perishes; and its perishing is not merely contingent, so
that it could be without perishing. It is rather the very being
of finite things, that they contain the seeds of perishing as their
own Being-in-Self, and the hour of their birth is the hour of

their death.


(a) THe Immepracy oF FINITUDE


The thought of the Finitude of things brings with it this
sorrow, because it is quintessential qualitative negation, and
because in the simplicity of this kind of determination no
affirmative Being is left them as distinct from their deter-
mination to destruction. Because of this qualitative simplicity
of negation, which has gone back to the abstract opposition
between Nothing and Passing Away, on the one hand, and
Being, on the other, Finitude is the most stubborn category of
understanding. Negation in general, Modification, and Limit
do not war with their Other, that is, Determinate Being; and
even abstract Nothing is abandoned as an abstraction; but
Finitude is negation based on itself and is therefore in abrupt
opposition to its affirmative. It is true that the finite can be
put in motion: it is itself the fact that it is determined as
doomed to end, but only to end ;—or, rather, it is the refusal
to move affirmatively to its affirmative, the Infinite, and to
allow itself to be connected with it; it is therefore posited
inseparably from its Nothing, and every reconciliation with
its Other, the affirmative, is thus precluded. The determination
of finite things is none other than their end. Understanding


DETERMINATE BEING 143


persists in this sorrow of Finitude by making not-being the
determination of things, and also making it at once enduring
and absolute. Their perishability could perish only in their
Other, the affirmative, but then their Finitude would leave
them; but this Finitude is their unchanging quality,—quality,
that is to say, which does not pass over into its Other, or, in
other words, into its affirmative. It is thus eternal.

This consideration is of great importance; but certainly no
philosophy, nor opinion, nor Understanding in general, will
allow itself to be saddled with the point of view that the finite
is absolute; rather, the opposite is expressly present in the
assertion of the finite. The finite is that which is bounded and
perishable: it is only finite and not imperishable: this is implied
immediately in its determination and expression. But the
question is whether speculation persists in the Being of Finitude,
and perishability remains, or perishability and perishing perish?
And it is precisely in that view of the finite which makes
perishing the end of all finite things, that this does not happen.
It is expressly asserted that between finite and infinite no peace
and no union are possible, that finite is absolutely opposed to
infinite. Being, absolute Being, is ascribed to the infinite: the
finite is retained in opposition to it as its negative; and, incom-
patible with the infinite, it remains absolute upon its own side.
From the affirmative, or infinite, it would receive affirmation,
and thus itself would perish; but a union with it is just that
which is declared to be impossible. If it is not to remain
opposed to the infinite, but to perish, then, as was said above,
it is perishing which is its end, and not the affirmative, which
would only be a perishing of perishing. But, if the finite should
not perish in the affirmative, and should its end be taken as
being Nothing, then we should have returned to that first and
abstract Nothing, which has perished long ago.

With this Nothing, however, which is to be merely Nothing,
and yet is granted an existence in thought, imagination, or
speech, the same contradiction occurs as was just indicated in
the Finite, with this difference, that it merely occurs in the first
and abstract Nothing, while in Finitude it is expressed. There
it appears as subjective, here the perennial opposition of finite
and infinite is upheld,—the finite being that which in itself is
null, and exists as such. This must be made evident; and the


144 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


development of the finite shows that it is here that, because it
is this contradiction, it collapses into itself, while at the same
time it actually resolves the contradiction by showing, not that
it is merely perishable and perishes, but that perishing, or
Nothing, is not the last word, but perishes itself.


(B) BARRIER AND OUGHT


Abstractly, indeed, this contradiction is at once present in
the fact that Something is finite, or that the Finite is. But
Something or Being is no longer posited as abstract, it is intro-
reflected and developed as Being-in-Self having a determination
and modification, or, more closely, a limit, which, as that
which is immanent in the Something and constitutes the quality
of its Being-in-Self, is Finitude. We must now see what moments
are contained in this concept of the finite Something.

It was seen that determination and modification were dif-
ferent aspects for external reflection; but already the former
contained otherness as belonging to the nature of Something
by itself; the externality of otherness is on the one hand con-
tained in the proper internality of Something, but, on the
other, as externality it remains distinct from it; it is still
externality as such, but applied to a Something. But since,
turther, otherness is itself determined as limit, or negation of
negation, the otherness immanent to Something is posited as
the relation of the two sides; and the self-identity of Something
to which both determination and modification belong is its
introverted relation, or that relation which negates its imma-
nent limit relating the self-existent determination to it. Thus,
self-identical Being-in-Self relates itself to itself as its own not-
being, but in the shape of negation of negation, or as negating
that which simultaneously retains Determinate Being in itself,
since it is the quality of its Being-in-Self. The proper limit of
Something, thus posited of it as something negative and also
essential, is no longer Limit as such, but Barrier. But Barrier
is not only that which is posited as negated: the negation acts
both ways, since that which it posits as negated is Limit; for
this latter is that which is common to Something and Other,
and also is the determinateness of the Being-in-Self of the
determination as such. This Being-in-Self is then the negative


DETERMINATE BEING 145


relation to its limit (which also is distinct from it), or to itself
taken as Barrier: that is, Ought.

In order that the limit applying to Something in general
should also be Barrier, Something must pass over into itself
beyond the limit; it must, referring to itself, relate itself to it
as to something which is not. The Determinate Being of Some-
thing lies undisturbed and indifferent, so to speak beside its
limit. But Something passes beyond its limit only in so far as
it accomplishes its cancellation and is negative Being-in-Self
relatively to it. And since in determination Limit itself exists
as Barrier, Something thus passes beyond itself.

Ought thus contains a double determination, first as self-
existent determination relatively to negation, secondly as a
not-being, which, as Barrier, is distinguished from it, but also
itself is self-existent determination.

Thus the finite has determined itself as the relation of its
determination to its limit: in this relation the former is Ought
and the latter Barrier. Thus both are moments of the finite;
and both themselves are thus finite, Ought as well as Barrier.
But it is only Barrier which is posited as finite : Ought is restricted
only in itself (and thus for us). It is restricted by the relation
to the limit already immanent in it, but this restriction is
wrapped up in Being-in-Self, for, according to its Determinate
Being, that is, its determinateness in relation to Barrier, it is
posited as Being-in-Self.

What ought to be is, and also is not; for if it were, then it
could not also be the case that it ought to be. Thus, essentially,
Ought has a Barrier. This Barrier is nothing alien: that which
merely ought to be is the determination which now is posited
as it is in fact, namely, as being also just a determinateness.

Thus the Being-in-Self of Something in its determination
reduces itself to Ought by reason of the fact that that which
constitutes its Being-in-Self exists, in exactly the same respect,
as Not-being. This takes place in the following manner: in
Self-existence (or the negation of negation) this Being-in-Self,
as being one of the two negations (as that which negates),
is one with the other, which also exists as a qualitatively other
limit, whereby this unity exists as relation to it. The Barrier
of the finite is nothing external; its own determination is
also its barrier: and this latter is Ought as well; it is that


VOL. I


146 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


which is common to both, or rather that wherein both are
identical.

But the finite further, as Ought, passes beyond its Barrier;
the very determinateness which is its negation is also tran-
scended, and thus is its Being-in-Self: its limit is also not its
limit.

Something, as Ought, thus rises superior to its Barrier; but,
conversely, it has a Barrier only as Ought. Both are inseparable.
Something has a Barrier in so far as it contains negation in
its determination, and the determination is also the accom-
plished transcendence of the Barrier.


Observation


Ought has latterly played a great part in philosophy, chiefly
in relation to morality and, in a more general metaphysical
manner, as the last and most absolute concept of the identity
of Being-in-Self, or self-reference, and determinateness or limit.

“Thou canst because thou oughtest””—this expression, by
which much is intended, is implied in the very concept of
Ought. For Ought is the accomplished transgression of the
barrier; in it, limit is transcended, and thus Ought’s Being-
in-Self is identical self-relation and is hence the abstraction
of “Can.” —But the converse is equally correct: “Thou canst
not just because thou oughtest.’” For Barrier, as Barrier, is
equally implied in Ought; and the first-mentioned formalism
of possibility finds in it a reality and qualitative otherness
opposed to itself: the relation of the two to each other is
one of contradictoriness, and thus of ‘‘Cannot,” or rather of
impossibility.

At Ought the transgression beyond finitude, Infinity, bebini
Ought is that which, leaving behind impossibility, manifests
itself in its development as progress into the infinite.

Coming to details we may criticize two prejudices with regard
to the form of Barrier and Ought. First, the barrier of Thought,
of Reason, and so on, is often held in high respect, and it is
asserted that no progress can be made beyond the barrier.
When this assertion is made it is not seen that by the very fact
that something has been determined as barrier, it has already
been surpassed. For any determinateness or limit is determined
as barrier only as opposed to its Other in general, that is,


DETERMINATE BEING 147


something unrestricted: for the Other of a barrier i is just the
beyond. A stone or metal is not beyond its barrier just because,
for it, it is not barrier. But if, in such general propositions of
understanding thought as deny the possibility of transgressing
the barrier, thought refuses to apply itself to examining the,
contents of the concept, then it must be referred to actuality.
where such propositions turn out the least actual things of all
Just because thought ‘‘ought” to be above actuality, dwelling
apart from it in higher regions, so that itself is determined as
an Ought, it firstly does not pass on to the concept, and,
secondly, finds itself in an attitude equally invalid relatively
to actuality as to the concept.—The stone thinks not nor has
it even any sensation; for it, therefore, its restrictedness is no
barrier, that is, it is no negation of sensation, imagination, or
thought for the stone, since it does not possess these faculties.
But even the stone, as Something, is distinguished into its
determination (or Being-in-Self), and its Determinate Being,
and in this respect even it passes beyond its barrier ; the concept
which it is in itself implies the identity with its Other. If
it is a base, and is capable of being acted on by an acid, it
may be oxidized, neutralized, and so forth. In oxidization,
neutralization, and so forth, its barrier, which is, to exist only as
base, cancels itself: it passes beyond, and similarly acid cancels
its barrier, which is, to be acid; and in the case of acid (as in
that of caustic base) so much is it true that it “ought” to pass
beyond its barrier, that force must be employed to keep them
apart as (waterless, i.e. purely non-neutral) acid and caustic
base.

But where an existent contains the concept, not as abstract
Being-in-Self, but as a totality which is for itself, as impulse,
life, sensation, imagination, and so on, then it has achieved
through its own power the passage of the barrier and an
existence beyond it. The plant passes over the barrier of
existing as a seed, and over the barrier of existing as blossom,
fruit, or leaf; the seed becomes the unfolded plant, the blossom
fades, and so forth. In the barrier of hunger, of thirst, and so
on, the sentient element is the impulse to pass beyond this
barrier, and it also completes this egress. It feels pain, and it
is the privilege of sentient nature to feel pain: it is a negation
within its self, and it is determined as a barrier in its sensibility


148 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


just because whatever is sentient has the sensation of its self,
which is the totality that exists beyond this determinateness.
Ifit were not beyond it, then it would not feel it as its negation,
and would feel no pain.—And then we are told that Reason,
and Thought, cannot pass beyond its barrier,—Reason, which
is the universal and therefore in itself is beyond abstract, that
is, beyond all, particularity; which is nothing if not egress
beyond the barrier.—It is true that not every passage and
existence beyond the barrier is a veritable emancipation from
it, or a veritable affirmation. Ought itself, and abstraction in
general, is such an incomplete egress. But it is enough to point
to the purely abstract universal to refute the equally abstract
asseveration that no progress beyond the barrier is possible;
or to point to the infinite in general to refute the asseveration
that no progress is possible beyond the finite.

We may here mention a notion of Leibniz, which appears
ingenious; namely, that, if a magnet had consciousness, it

would consider its direction to the north as a determination
of its will, or a law applied to its freedom. Much rather, if it
had consciousness, and therefore will and freedom, it could
think: and then space for it would be a universal containing
all directions, so that the one direction towards the north would
be a barrier to its freedom, as much as it would be a barrier
to the freedom of a man to be kept at one point, but not for
a plant.

On the other hand Ought is an egress beyond the barrier,
but one which itself is only finite. In the sphere of finitude
therefore it has its place and its validity, where it maintains
Being-in-Self against that which is restricted, asserting it as
Rule and as essential against the void. Duty is Ought turned
against individual will, against selfish desire and capricious
interest: and this is put before will as an Ought in so far as,
in its mobility, it can isolate itself from the veritable. There
are those who esteem the Ought of morality thus highly, and
see an attempt to destroy morality in the refusal to accept the
Ought as something ultimate and veritable ; there are reasoners
whose understanding indulges in the unceasing satisfaction of
being able to adduce, against everything which is, an Ought,
and thus a superior knowledge, and therefore also decline to
see themselves robbed of their Ought: these do not see that,


DETERMINATE BEING 149


as regards the finitude of their sphere, the Ought is fully
recognized.—But in actual fact Reason and Law are at no
such sorry pass as that they merely “ought” to be; it is only
the abstraction of Being-in-Self which stops dead at that point;
—nor yet is Ought in itself perpetual, nor finitude (which
would be the same) absolute. The philosophy of Kant and
Fichte calls Ought the highest point of the resolution of the
contradictions of Reason: in truth, this is only the standpoint
where they persist in finitude, and (which is the same thing)
in contradiction.


(y) TRANSITION OF FINITE INTO INFINITE


{n itself Ought contains Barrier; and Barrier, Ought. Their
relation to each other is Finitude itself, which, in its Being-
in-Self, contains them both. These moments of its determina-
tion are qualitatively opposite, Barrier being determined as the
negation of Ought, and similarly Ought as the negation of
Barrier. The Finite thus is self-contradictory; it cancels itself
and passes away. But this result, namely, the negative in
general, is (a) its proper determination; for it is the negative
of the negative. Thus the finite in perishing has not perished ;
so far it has only become another finite, which, however, in
turn perishes in the sense of passing over into another finite,
and so on, perhaps ad infinitum. But (ß) if this result is more
closely considered, the finite in perishing, in this negation of
its self, has reached its Being-in-Self, and therefore has here
collapsed into itself. Each of its moments contains just this
result: Ought passes beyond the Barrier, that is, beyond itself:
but that which is beyond it (its Other) is precisely the Barrier.
But Barrier immediately points on beyond itself to its Other,
which is Ought; this, however, is that same antagonism of
Being-in-Self and Determinate Being, which Barrier is itself;
it is the same thing. Thus it passes beyond itself only to collapse
again into itself. This self-identity, or negation of negation, is
affirmative Being, or the Other of the Finite, which is supposed
to have the first negation as its determinateness ;—this Other


is the Infinite.


150 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


C
INFINITY


In its simple concept the Infinite may be regarded, first,
as a fresh definition of the Absolute; as indeterminate self-
relation it is posited as Being and Becoming. The forms of
Determinate Being do not form part of the series of determina-
tions which can be regarded as definitions of the Absolute,
since each form of that sphere is posited immediately for
itself merely as a determinateness, or as finite in general.
But the infinite is considered as absolute in itself, since it is
expressly determined as negation of the finite, and thus in the
infinite an express attitude is taken to the quality of being
subject to barrier (of which Being and Becoming, though in
themselves they neither have nor show this quality, might yet
be in some way capable); and in fact this quality is negated
in the infinite.

But this in itself is not sufficient to remove the infinite beyond
finitude and the quality of being subject to barrier; the main
point is, to distinguish the true concept of infinity from bad
infinity, the infinite of Reason from that of Understanding;
the latter is the infinite made finite, and it will appear that,
just when it is to be kept unspotted and removed from the
finite, the infinite is made finite.

The Infinite


(a) is, in simple determination, the affirmative as negation
of the Finite;

(b) thereby, however, is in Reciprocal Determination with
the Finite, and is abstract or one-sided Infinite ;

(c) the self-transcendence of this Infinite and of the Finite,
taken as one process, is the veritable Infinite.


(a) THE INFINITE IN GENERAL


The Infinite is the negation of negation, the affirmation or
Being which has re-issued from its quality of being subject
to barrier. The infinite is, and is in a more intensive sense
than the first immediate Being; it is veritable Being, elevation


DETERMINATE BEING 151


above the barrier. The name of the Infinite kindles in the mind
and the spirit a light; for here it not only rests abstractly by
itself, but rather rises to itself, to the light of its thought, its
universality, and its freedom.

It has appeared, first, with regard to the concept of the
infinite, that Determinate Being in its Being-in-Self determines
itself as finite and passes beyond its barrier. It is the nature of the
finit to pass beyond itself, to negate its negation and to become
infinite. The infinite thus does not stand above the finite as
something complete in itself, the finite still permanently re-
maining without or beneath it. As yet we pass from the finite
into the infinite only as a subjective Reason. Thus when we
say that the infinite is a concept of Reason, and that we rise
by Reason above temporality, we do this without infringing
upon finitude, which this exaltation (since it remains external
to it) does not concern. But also, since it is the finite which is
raised into the infinite, it is no external power which impels it
to do so; rather it is its nature to relate itself to itself as barrier,
(both as barrier as such and as Ought,) and to pass beyond it;
or, rather, to have negated it as relation to itself and to be
in the state of having passed beyond it. Infinity in general
is not created by the cancellation of finitude in general: the
finite is just that which itself becomes infinity through its own
nature. Infinity is its affirmative determination, or that which
it veritably is in itself.

Thus the finite has disappeared in the infinite, and what is,
is nothing but the infinite.


(b) RECIPROCAL DETERMINATION OF FINITE AND INFINITE


The Infinite is, and in this immediacy it also is the negation
of an Other—the Finite. Since thus it is, and also is the not-
being of an Other, it has fallen back into the category of
Something with a limit (in the sense of anything determinate
in general); more exactly, this is so because it is posited as
intro-reflected Determinate Being which results from the can-
cellation of determinateness in general and thus is distinct from
its determinateness.—In consequence of this determinateness,
the Finite stands over against the Infinite as real Determinate
Being; they thus stand in qualitative relation as entities


152 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


remaining external to each other. The immediate Being of
the Infinite resuscitates the Being of its negation, the Finite,
which for the moment had appeared to vanish into the Infinite.

Infinite and Finite are not however in these two categories
of relation only; the relation of the two sides is more closely
determined than that they should be mere Others to each
other. For the finite is barrier posited as barrier; it is Deter-
minate Being posited with the determination to pass over into
its Being-in-Self, to become infinite. Infinity is the Nothing of
the Finite, it is its Being-in-Self and Ought, but is so as Ought
fulfilled and intro-reflected, as Being self-related only and
wholly affirmative. There is this to satisfy the mind in Infinity,
that all determinateness, change, barrier, and therefore even
Ought itself, have disappeared, and that, these cancelled, the
Nothing of the Finite is now posited. Being-in-Selfis determined
as this negation of the Finite; as negation of negation it thus
is affirmative in itself. But this affirmation, since it is quali-
tatively immediate self-relation, is Being; and thus the Infinite
has been brought back to the category where it has the Finite
over against it as an Other; its negative nature is posited as
being, and therefore as first and immediate negation. Thus the
Infinite is infected with the opposition to the Finite, which,
since it is Other, remains determinate and real Being, although
in its Being-in-Self—the Infinite—it is also posited as cancelled:
this is the Non-finite,—a Being in the determinateness of
negation. In opposition to the Finite, the sphere of existent
determinatenesses, of realities, there stands the Infinite, the
indeterminate void, the beyond of the Finite, whose Being-in-
Self does not depend on its Determinate Being, which is a
determinate.

When the infinite is posited in this qualitative relation of
opposition to the finite as to its Other, it must be called the
bad infinite or the infinite of Understanding, which takes it for
the highest and absolute truth. The contradictions which assail
it from every side when it undertakes to apply and explain
these its categories, should suffice to make it aware that, while
it thinks to have reached a point of satisfaction in this recon-
ciliation of truth, it in fact remains in a state of contradiction
unreconciled, unresolved, and absolute.

This contradiction is immediately found in the fact that the


DETERMINATE BEING 153


finite remains opposed to the infinite as a Determinate Being;
thus there are two determinatenesses: there are two worlds,
the finite and the infinite, which being related the infinite is
but the limit of the finite, and thus is merely an infinite itself
determinate and finite.

This contradiction develops its content into more express
forms.—The finite is real Determinate Being, which remains
so still even after the transition has been made to its not-being,
the infinite;—and this, as has been shown, is determined
relatively to the finite merely as first, or immediate, negation;
and the latter, opposed to this negation, and as negated, has
merely the meaning of an Other, and therefore still is Some-
thing. And thus when Understanding, rising from this finite
world, climbs to its highest height, the infinite, the finite world
still remains as something on this side of it; the infinite is
placed merely above the finite and separate from it, by which
process precisely the finite is separated from the infinite. Each
is set in a different place: the finite is Determinate Being ‘‘on
this side” ; the infinite, although it is the in-itself of the finite,
is yet placed on the far side, in a dim and inaccessible distance,
outside of which the finite is supposed to be and remain.

Thus separated, however, they are also, and equally essen-
tially, related to each other by the very negation which
separates them. This negation which relates these intro-reflected
Somethings is the mutual limit of One opposed to an Other;
the manner in which this happens is this, that each has the
negation not merely in its other, as opposed to the other ; rather,
the negation is their Being-in-Self, each has the limit in itself
for itself in its separation from the other. But the limit here
is the first negation: thus both are limited and finite in them-
selves. Also, however, each, as being affirmatively self-relating,
is the negation of its limit; it immediately casts off the limit
as its not-being, and thus qualitatively separated from it posits
it as another Being outside itself: the finite positing its not-
being as this infinite, and the infinite as the finite. It is gladly
admitted that the transition from finite to infinite is necessary
(that is, in accordance with the determination of the finite),
and that the former is elevated to Being-in-Self; for the finite
is determined as a Determinate Being which, though it persists,
yet is determined as inherently working its own dissolution and


154 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


nullity, while the infinite, though its determination infects it
with negation and limit, also is that which is in itself, so that
this abstraction of the self-relating affirmation constitutes its
determination, and finite Determinate Being accordingly is not
implicit in it. But it has been shown that the infinite itself
reaches the result of affirmative Being only through negation
(namely, as negation of negation), and that this its affirmation,
taken as merely simple, qualitative Being, reduces the negation
it contains to mere simple and immediate negation, and thus
to determinateness and limit; and this, as contradictory to its
Being-in-Self, is excluded from it, and is thus posited as not
belonging to it but rather opposed to its Being-in-Self,—in
short, as finite. Each in itself and from its determination thus
being the positing of the other, the two are inseparable. But
this unity lies hidden in their qualitative otherness, it is internal
and only basic.

This determines the manner in which this unity manifests
itself: posited in the category of Determinate Being, it is a
metamorphosis or transition of finite into infinite, and con-
. versely; the infinite being the background against which the
finite merely shows forth, and similarly the infinite showing
forth against the finite, or Other against Other. In short, each
has its immediate origin in the other, their relation being
merely external.

In detail the process of transition takes the following form.
We pass beyond the finite to the infinite. This egress appears
as an external activity. What is it that arises in this void which
is beyond the finite? What is its positive element? Finite and
infinite being inseparable (or, because the infinite, standing
aloof on its own side, itself is subject-to barrier), the limit
arises: the infinite has disappeared, and its Other, the finite,
has taken its place. But this entrance of the finite appears as
an event external to the infinite; and the new limit as some-
thing which has not arisen out of the infinite itself, but likewise
is accidentally discovered. This constitutes a relapse into the
former, and vainly transcended, determination. The new limit
itself, however, exists only to be cancelled or transcended. Thus,
once more the void or Nothing has arisen, in which we once
more find the above-mentioned determinateness, or new limit,
and so on to infinity.


DETERMINATE BEING ~ 155


This is the Reciprocal Determination of Finite and Infinite:
the finite is finite only with reference to Ought, or the infinite,
and the infinite is infinite only with reference to the finite.
They are inseparable and, at the same time, absolutely, in the
relation of Other to each other: each has its Other in itself;
thus each is the unity of itself and its Other, and in its deter-
minateness is a Determinate Being which is not that which it,
and its Other, is.

This Reciprocal Determination, negating both itself and its
negation, appears as that progress to infinity which, in so many
forms and applications, is taken as something ultimate beyond
which no progress is possible: having reached this “and so on
to infinity,” the train of thought generally is at an end.—This
progress takes place everywhere where relative determinations
are forced into opposition, so that, while they are in indissoluble
unity, each yet has independent existence as opposed to the
other ascribed to it. Hence this progress is contradiction which
is not resolved, but asserted to be still at hand.

We have here an abstract progress which remains incomplete
because there is no progress beyond this progress itself. The
infinite is indeed at hand, and we progress beyond it; for a
new limit is posited: but this very act constitutes a return to
the finite. In itself, this bad infinity is the same as perpetual
Ought, it is negation of the finite, but cannot truly rid itself
of finitude. The latter reappears within it as its Other, since
the infinite exists only in relation to its Other, the finite. The
progress to infinity is therefore only a recurring monotony,
one and the same wearisome alternation of this finite and
infinite.

The infinity of the infinite progress remains infected with
the finite as such; it is limited by the finite, is finite itself.
Thus it would indeed be posited as the unity of finite and
infinite. This unity, however, is not kept in mind, though it is
it alone which calls up the infinite in the finite and the finite
in the infinite,—a mainspring, so to speak, of the infinite
progress. This progress is the external aspect of this unity which
is the ne plus ultra of imagination,—this perpetual repetition
of one and the same alternation, the empty restlessness of a
progress beyond the limit to infinity, which, finding a new
limit in this infinite, can find a hold in the limit no more than


156 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


in infinity. This infinite has the fixed determination of a beyond,
which cannot be reached because it ought not to be reached,
because the determinateness of the beyond, the existent nega-
tion, is never surrendered. According to this determination the
finite remains opposed to it as a hither; and this likewise cannot
rise into the infinite because it is determined as an Other,
that is, as a Determinate Being, perpetual, and still reproducing
itself in its beyond in the shape of something different from
this beyond.


(c) AFFIRMATIVE INFINITY


We have demonstrated the alternating and reciprocal deter-
mination of finite and infinite: the truth of these terms here
is already established, and all that is necessary is to seize this
established truth. This alternation constitutes the external
realization of the concept: in it the contents of the concept
are posited, though in an external and non-coherent manner.
For it is only necessary to compare the different moments for
that unity to manifest itself, which in turn yields the concept ;—
this unity of finite and infinite (as has often been remarked,
but must especially be remembered here) being the distorted
expression for the unity as it in truth is; however, the exposition
of the concept now before us must also contain the removal
of this distorted determination.

Taken according to its first and merely immediate deter-
mination, the infinite is just a going beyond the finite; its
determination makes it the negation of the finite; the finite,
therefore, taken only as that which must be gone beyond, is in
itself that self-negation which is infinity. Each, therefore, implies
the determinateness of the other of the pair, which, according
to the implication of the infinite progress, should exclude each
other and follow alternately; neither can be posited or com-
prehended without the other, neither infinite without finite
nor finite without infinite. When we put in words what the
infinite is (namely, the negation of the finite), the finite itself
is the word we pronounce; we cannot do without it in order
to determine the infinite. We need only know what we are
saying, in order to find the determination of the finite in the
infinite. As regards the finite, it is immediately admitted on


DETERMINATE BEING _ 157


its side that it is null; but its nullity, precisely, is infinity,
from which it is equally inseparable.—It might appear that
in this view they are taken according to their relation to their
Other. If, accordingly, they are taken as unrelated, so that
they are connected solely by the “and,” they are opposed to
each other as independent, because each has its being entirely
in itself. It remains to be seen what their nature is in this view.
Thus placed, the infinite is only one of the two; but, as only
one of the two, it is itself finite, it is not the whole but only
one side; it has its limit in that which is opposed to it; it is
thus the finite infinite. There are given only two finites. It is
just the fact of the infinite’s separation from the finite, and
consequent one-sidedness, that constitutes its finitude, that is,
its unity with the finite——On the other hand the finite, when
separated from the infinite, is that self-relation which excludes
its relativity, dependence, and transitoriness; it is that inde-
pendence and self-affirmation which the infinite is supposed
to be.

These two ways of regarding the matter appear at first to
have a different determinateness for their point of departure,
inasmuch as the former must consider them purely as the
relation of infinite and finite, of each to its Other, and the latter
in their complete severance from each other. Both, however,
give one and the same result: infinite and finite regarded
in their relation to each other (a relation which was to be
external to them, but really is essential, for without it neither
is what it is) contain each its own Other in its own proper
determination, just as much as each taken by itself and con-
sidered in itself possesses its Other in it as its own moment.

We thus have that ill-famed unity of Finite and Infinite ;—
that unity which is itself infinity, and comprises both itself
and finitude ;—infinity, therefore, in a sense different from that
in which the finite is separated from and opposed to it. Since
now they must still be distinguished, each in itself, as has been
shown, is the unity of both; thus two such unities result. The
common element, the unity of each determinateness with the
other, first posits these (when taken as unity) as negated, since
each is supposed to be that which it is when the two are held
distinct: in their unity they thus lose their qualitative nature.—
This reflection is of importance to refute the idea which, in


158 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


the unity of finite and infinite, refuses to abandon their reten-
tion in the quality, which is supposed to be theirs, of being
external to one another ;—an idea which therefore sees in their
unity only the contradiction and not its solution through the
negation of the qualitative determinateness of the two. Thus
the unity of finite and infinite, simple and general at first, is
adulterated.

But, further, since they must also be taken as distinct, the
unity of the infinite, which each of these two moments is itself,
is determined in each of them in a different manner. That
which is determined as infinite yet contains finitude, which
is distinct from it: in this unity, the former is the “‘in-itself,”
the latter, only determinateness and limit; but it is a limit
which is its absolute Other, its opposite ; and its determination,
which is Being-in-Self as such, is spoilt by the addition of a
quality of this kind: it is thus an infinity made finite. Similarly,
since the finite as such is only not-Being-in-Self, but in the
unity also contains its opposite, it appreciates above its proper
value, infinitely as one may say: it is posited as the finite made
infinite.

Understanding, as before it adulterated the simple unity of
infinite and finite, now likewise adulterates their twofold unity.
Here again this is brought about when in one of the two unities
the infinite is taken not as negated but as Being-in-Self, so that
determinateness and barrier must not be applied to it; for else
(it is thought) Being-in-Self is degraded and spoilt. Conversely,
the finite, too, remains in its aspect of that which, though null,
is not negated, so that in its connexion with the infinite it is
held to be elevated to a status not its own, and therefore to
be made infinite, in opposition to its determination which still
persists and has not disappeared.

When understanding thus adulterates finite and infinite,
holding fast their relation to one another as qualitative dis-
tinctness, and asserting that their determination is one of
separateness (in fact, of absolute separateness), it can do so
only by forgetting that which, for understanding, is the concept
of these moments. For according to the concept, the unity of
finite and infinite is not an external juxtaposition of these
terms, nor an improper connexion contrary to their determina-
tion, and binding together entities separate and opposed and


DETERMINATE BEING 159


mutually independent and hence incompatible; on the con-
trary, each in itself is this unity, and is so only in transcending
itself, neither excelling the other in Being-in-Self and affirmative
Determinate Being. It has been demonstrated above that
finitude exists only as a passing beyond itself; it thus contains
infinity, which is its Other. And, similarly, infinity exists only
as a passing beyond finitude; it thus essentially contains its
Other, and so is in itself its own Other. The infinite does not
transcend the finite as a power existing external to the latter;
rather, it is the infinity of the finite to transcend itself.

This transcendence is not therefore alteration or otherness
in general ; it is not the transcendence of Something. The finite
transcends itself in the infinite as negation of finitude; but
the latter itself has for some time past been Determinate Being
determined as a Not-being. Thus, what is transcended in the
negation is itself negation. So, on its side infinity is determined
as the negative of finitude and therefore of determinateness
in general; as a vacant beyond; its self-transcendence in
finitude is a return from this empty flight: it is a negation of
that beyond, which in itself is a negative.

In both, therefore, we have the same negation of negation.
But this is, in itself, a self-relation; it is affirmation, but
affirmation in the sense of a return to itself, that is, through
mediation, which is negation of negation. Mainly we must fix
our attention upon these determinations ; secondly, on the fact
that they are also posited in the infinite progress, and on the
manner in which they are so posited, namely, as not yet in
their ultimate truth.

Here, then, first, both are negated—both finite and infinite ;
both are overpassed in the same manner: secondly, each after
the other is posited as distinct and positive in itself. We thus
select these two determinations for comparison; in this com-
parison (which is external) we compare how we have
separated two modes of contemplation—on the one hand
finite and infinite in their relation, on the other each taken
for itself. The infinite progress, however, asserts more than
this: in it is also posited the connexion of terms which also
are distinct, though at present distinct only as transition
and alternation; we need only a simple reflection in order
to see what is in fact contained therein.


160 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


The aegation of finite and infinite which is posited in
the infinite progress may, first, be taken as simple, so that the
terms are separate members of a series. Beginning with the
finite we pass beyond the limit, and the finite is negated. We
therefore have its beyond, which is the infinite; in it, however,
limit again arises, and thus we have the progress beyond the
infinite. Partly, however, this double transcendence is posited
as a mere external contingency, an alternation of the moments ;
partly it is not yet posited as one unity; each transition is a
fresh start or new act, so that they fall apart.—Further, how-
ever, the infinite progress also contains the relation of these
terms. First, there is the finite ; next we pass beyond it, and this
negative or beyond of the finite is the infinite; thirdly, we pass
once more beyond this negation, and a fresh limit—which once
more is a finite—arises.—This is the complete and self-ter-
minating movement, where the end reached is that from which
a start was made; that from which we began has now arisen,
that is, the finite has been reconstructed ; it has thus collapsed
into itself, has found only itself again in its beyond.

The same happens with regard to the infinite. In the infinite,
or the beyond of the limit, a new limit arises, and its fate is
the same: being finite it must be negated. Thus that which
we now have is that same infinite which lately disappeared in
the new limit; consequently through its transcendence,through
the new limit, the infinite has not been pushed further; it has
neither been removed from the finite, since this is the mere
transition into the infinite, nor from itself, for it has returned
upon itself.

Thus, both infinite and finite are this movement which
through negation returns to itself: they are in themselves only
as mediation, and the affirmative of both contains the negation
of both and is the negation of negation.—Taken thus they are
result, and not, therefore, that which they are in the determina-
tion of their beginning ;—the finite is not a Determinate Being on
its side, and the infinite a Determinate Being or Being-in-Self
beyond this Determinate Being, that is, beyond that which was
determined as finite. Understanding recoils from the unity of
finite and infinite chiefly for this reason only, that it presupposes
the barrier and the finite, as well as Being-in-Self, as perpetual ;
it thus overlooks the negation of both which in fact is present


DETERMINATE BEING | 161


- in the infinite progress, together with the fact that they occur
in it only as moments of a whole and that they manifest them-
selves only through their opposite, but equally and essentially
through the transcendence of their opposite.

The return upon itself has been considered both as return
of the finite and of the infinite to itself; the result shows a flaw
which is connected with the distortion just criticized; first,
finitude, and then infinity, is taken as point of departure, and
it is only thus that two results arise. But it is perfectly indifferent
which is taken as beginning; and this disposes in itself of the
distinction which caused the double result. This is likewise
implied in the line of the infinite progress which is unlimited
in either sense; each moment, there, occurs equally in alterna-
tion, and it is quite contingent what point is fixed on and which
of the two is taken as the beginning.—They are here distinct,
but also each is but the moment of the other. And as both
finite and infinite are themselves moments of the progress,
they jointly are the finite: since jointly they are negated in the
progress and in the result, their result, which is the negation
of the finitude of both, is justly called the infinite. Thus the
double meaning proper to both is their distinction. The finite
has this double meaning, that first it is finite only relatively
to the infinite which is opposed to it, while secondly it is
simultaneously the finite and also the infinite opposed to it.
And the infinite too has the double meaning that it is one of
these two moments (it then is the bad infinite), and also is
that infinite in which those two, itself and its Other, are only
moments. As we actually find the infinite, its nature is to be
the process in which it first degrades itself to the rank of one
only of its determinations, having the finite opposed to it and
thus itself becoming a finite, and next transcends this distinction
from itself, rises to self-affirmation, and through this mediation
is true infinite.

This determination of the true infinite cannot be cast into
the formula (already criticized) of the unity of finite and
infinite; the unity is abstract and motionless self-equality, and
the moments too are as unmoved existents. But the infinite,
like its two moments, essentially exists as Becoming, a Becoming
which is now further determined in its moments. Its deter-
minations are at first abstract Being and Nothing ; as Change,

VOL. I F


162 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


it has for moments determinate existents—Something and
Other; as Infinite, it has Finite and Infinite, which are them-
selves in process of becoming.

This infinite is the accomplished return upon itself. As such
it is self-relation or Being; but not abstract or indeterminate
Being, for it is posited as negating negation; and thus it
is also Determinate Being, for it contains negation as such,
and, therefore, determinateness. It exists, and exists as a
Determinate Being, present and before us. It is only the bad
infinite which is the beyond, because it is the negation, and
nothing more, of the finite posited as real; it is thus abstract
and first negation; it is determined as merely negative, and
is without the affirmation implicit in Determinate Being; and
if held fast as mere negative it is even supposed to be non-
existent and beyond reach. But to be thus beyond reach is not
its glory but its shame; which, ultimately, is based on the fact
that the finite as such is held fast as existent. That which is
untrue is beyond reach; and it is evident that such an infinite
is the untrue.—The image of the “‘progress to infinity” is
the straight line, the infinite still remaining at its two limits
and there only where the line is not; now the line is Deter-
minate Being, which passes on to this its contradictory, that
is, into the indeterminate. But as true infinity, turned back
upon itself, it has for image the circle, the line which has
reached itself, closed and wholly present and having neither
beginning nor end.

True Infinity thus taken, in general, as Determinate Being
opposed affirmatively to abstract negation, is Reality in a
higher meaning than is that infinity which before was deter-
mined as simple; it has here received concrete content. It is
not the finite which is the real, but the infinite; and thus
Reality is further determined as Essence, Notion, Idea, and
so forth. It is, however, superfluous to repeat these earlier and
more abstract categories, such as “Reality,” when the more
concrete has been reached, and to employ them for deter-
minations more concrete than these are in themselves. A
repetition, such as is made when we say that Essence or the
Idea is the Real, has its reason in the fact that, to uncultivated
thought, the most abstract categories, such as Being, Determi-
nate Being, Reality, and Finitude, are the most familiar.


DETERMINATE BEING 163


Here there is a more definite reason for recalling the category
of reality, for the negation to which it stands in the relation
of affirmative is here the negation of negation: it is thus itself
opposed to this reality, which is finite Determinate Being. —
Negation is thus determined as ideality; that which partakes
of the ideal nature (das Ideelle)! is the finite as it is found in
true infinity,—as a determination or content, which though
distinct does not exist independently, but only as moment.
Ideality has this more concrete meaning, which is not fully
expressed by negation of finite Determinate Being.—But with
relation to reality and ideality the opposition of finite and
infinite is taken in this manner, that the finite is taken as real
and the infinite as of ideal nature; and such, indeed, and only
such, the Notion is later on taken to be; whereas Determinate
Being in general is taken as real. In this manner it is indeed
of little avail if we reserve for the concrete determination of
negation just indicated the term of “ideal in nature” : in this
opposition a return is once more made to the one-sidedness
of the abstract negative which is proper to the bad infinite,
and we remain fixed in the affirmative Determinate Being of
the finite.


Transition


Ideality may be called the Quality of Infinity; but, as it is
essentially the process of Becoming, it is a Transition, like that
of Becoming in Determinate Being, and it must now be indi-
cated. As transcendence of finitude (finitude as such) and also
of the infinity which is merely opposed to it and merely negative,
this return to self is self-relation or Being: But since this Being
contains negation it is Determinate Being, and since this
negation essentially is negation of negation, or self-related
negation, it is that kind of Determinate Being which is called


Being-for-Self.


t This has a narrower meaning than the Ideal (das Ideale) (the Beautiful and
whatever tends thither) ; this does not yet belong to that plane: hence the expression
in question “of ideal nature,” is used. With reality this distinction is hardly made
in ordinary parlance, and “real” (das Reale) and “of real nature” (das Reelle)
are used almost interchangeably: the precise nuance of these expressions relatively
to each other is of no interest. [Author’s note.]


164 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Observation 1


The infinite,—in the ordinary sense of bad infinity,—and
the progress to infinity, are, like Ought, the expression of
a contradiction, which pretends to be the solution and the
ultimate. This infinite represents the first exaltation of sensuous
imagination above the finite into Thought, the content of
which, however, is Nothing, or that which is expressly posited
as not-being ; it is a flight from barrier, which, however, neither
collects itself nor knows how to lead back the negative to the
positive. This imperfect reflection has completely before it the
two determinations of the true infinite—the opposition of finite
and infinite, and the unity of these; but it fails to reconcile
these two thoughts; either inevitably evokes the other, but in
this reflection they merely alternate. An exhibition of this
alternation, an infinite progress, everywhere takes place where
a halt is made at the contradiction between the unity, and the
opposition, of two determinations. The finite is self-transcen-
dence and includes its own negation, which is infinity,—this is
the unity of both; we pass beyond the finite to the infinite as
its beyond,—and this is the separation of them. But beyond
the infinite there is another finite: the beyond or finite contains
finitude ;—once more we have the unity of both; but this finite
is also a negative of the infinite, and this is the separation of
the two: and so forth.—Thus in the causal relation cause and
effect are inseparable; a cause which should have no effect is
no cause, and also an effect having no cause is no effect. This
relation therefore yields the infinite progress of cause and effect ;
Something is determined as cause, but being finite—and finite
it is just because it is separated from the effect—it also has
a cause, that is, it is itself effect ; thus that which is determined
as cause is also determined as effect: this is the unity of cause
and effect. And now that which is determined as effect again
has a cause, that is, cause must be separated from its effect, must
be posited as a different Something ;—but the new cause being
itself effect, we have unity of cause and effect. But it also has
an Other for its cause; this is the separation of the two deter-
minations ; and so on to infinity.

A more peculiar form can thus be given to the progress.
It is asserted that finite and infinite are one unity: this false


DETERMINATE BEING | 165


assertion must be rectified by its contradictory,—they are
absolutely different and opposite: this assertion must again be
rectified in the sense that they are inseparable, one determina-
tion being contained in the other through the assertion of their
unity ; and so to infinity.—It is an easy demand, made in order
that the nature of the infinite may be understood, that it should
be clearly grasped that it is the nature of the infinite progress,
or developed infinite of Understanding, to be an alternation
of the two determinations, of the unity and separation of the
two moments; and that further it should be grasped that this
unity and separation are themselves inseparable.

The solution of the contradiction does not lie in the recog-
nition of the equal validity and the equal invalidity of the
two assertions (—for this is only another form of the abiding
contradiction), but in the ideality of both, in which, in their
distinction, and as mutual negations, they are only moments.
That other monotonous alternation is in fact the negation as
well of their unity as of their separation. But what was indicated
above is equally definitely contained in it, namely, that the
finite falls beyond itself into the infinite, but also finds itself
regenerated beyond it; that thus it merely collapses into itself,
as does the infinite; so that the same negation of negation in
the result brings about affirmation, which result thus proves
itself to be its truth and original nature. In this Being, which
is the ideality of the distinct elements, the contradiction has
not vanished abstractly, but it is resolved and reconciled, and
the thoughts are not only complete but combined. The nature
of speculative thought shows its characteristic method in this
example just worked out: it consists solely in seizing the opposed
moments in their unity. Here each in fact shows that it contains
its opposite and coincides with it: and thus the affirmative
truth is this unity which moves itself within itself, the com-
pacting of the two thoughts, their infinity,—self-relation, not
immediate, but infinite.

Those who are no tiros in thought have often placed the
essence of philosophy in the problem of answering the question
how the infinite passes beyond itself and achieves finitude.—
It is supposed that this cannot be made conceivable. The
infinite, the concept of which we have reached, will further
determine itself in the course of this demonstration; it will


166 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


exemplify in every variety of form what was demanded,
namely, how it, if that expression is desired, achieves finitude.
Here we are examining this question only in its immediacy,
and with respect to the meaning, above considered, which
infinity is wont to have.

On the answer to this question nothing less than the existence
or non-existence of philosophy is supposed to depend; and,
while it is pretended that this is still in doubt, the question
itself is thought to be a sort of puzzle, an invincible talisman
rendering us safe and secure against the answer, and therefore
against philosophy and the arrival at philosophy.—In other
subjects, too, the art of putting a question demands some
education; still more so in philosophical subjects, if a better
answer be required than this, that the question is idle.

In such questions it is claimed as reasonable that the wording
is irrelevant, and that it shall be intelligible from one or other
mode of expression, what the point is. Expressions of sensuous
imagination such as “passing beyond” and the like, which are
used in the question, raise the suspicion that it is derived from
the sphere of ordinary imagination, and that in the reply also
figures current in common life, and the form of a sensuous
analogy, are expected.

If, instead of the infinite, Being in general is taken, the
determining of Being, the existence of negation or finitude in
it, seems more easily comprehensible. Being is itself the inde-
terminate; but it is not immediately expressed in it that it is
the opposite of the determinate. The infinite on the contrary
contains this expressly; it is the not-finite. Thus the unity of
finite and infinite immediately seems precluded ; and therefore
incomplete reflection opposes itself most stubbornly to this
unity.

But it has been shown, and is immediately evident without
further investigation of the determination of finite and infinite,
that infinite, in the sense in which it is taken by this reflection
(namely, as opposed to the finite), has in it its Other just
because it is opposed to it; that, therefore, -it is limited and
itself finite, and is the bad infinite. Therefore, if it is asked how
the infinite becomes finite, the answer is that there is no infinite
which first is infinite and then must become finite or pass on
to finitude, but that for itself it is already finite as much as


DETERMINATE BEING 167


infinite. The question assumes that the infinite is on the one
side, by itself; and that the finite, having passed out of it, or
from some other source, into the state of separation from it,
is, though finite, yet veritably real, In this assumption one
should rather say that that which is unintelligible is the separa-
tion: neither finite nor infinite of such a kind is true; and what
is without truth is unintelligible. But we must just as much
say that they are intelligible; if, considering them even as they
appear to sensuous representation, we see that one contains
the determination of the other, then to have this simple per-
ception of their inseparability is to understand them: this
inseparability is their concept. —But when it implies the inde-
pendence of finite and infinite the question sets up an invalid
content and implies an invalid relation of the latter. Therefore,
instead of answering the question, its wrong presuppositions
(that is, the question itself) must be negated. The question
about the validity of finite and infinite changes the standpoint,
and this change will cause to recoil upon the first question that
embarrassment which it was intended to produce. This question
of ours is foreign to the reflection which gave rise to the first
question; for that reflection does not contain that speculative
interest which, before it relates determinations, proceeds for
its own sake to see whether they are valid as they are assumed.
But once we have perceived the invalidity of this abstract
infinite, and of the finite which is equally supposed to remain
fixed by its side, this may be said about the emergence of the
finite from the infinite, that the infinite passes out into finitude
just because, taken as abstract unity, it has in it neither validity
nor permanence; and, conversely, the finite passes into the
infinite for the same reason, because it is void. Or, rather, this
should be said, that the infinite has ever passed out to finitude;
that, absolutely, it does not exist, by itselfand without having its
Other in itself, any more than does Pure Being.

This question about the transition of infinite into finite may
also contain this presupposition, that in itself the infinite
includes the finite, being thus in itself the unity of itself and
its Other; so that the difficulty relates chiefly to the separation
as repugnant to the supposed unity of the two. Here the
opposition which is retained has only another form; unity
and distinctness are separated and isolated from each other. But,


168 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


if this unity is taken not as the abstract and indeterminate
unity, but as the determinate unity of finite and infinite (as
it is in the former presupposition), then it already contains
the distinction of the two moments ;—a distinction which thus,
further, does not set them free to achieve separate independence,
but keeps them, as of ideal nature, in their unity. This unity
and this distinctness of finite and infinite are the same in-
separability as finitude and infinity.


Observation 2


The proposition that the finite is of ideal nature constitutes
Idealism. In philosophy idealism consists of nothing else than
the recognition that the finite has no veritable being. Essen-
tially every philosophy is an idealism, or at least has idealism
for its principle, and the question then is only how far it is
actually carried through. This is as true of philosophy as of reli-
gion; for religion equally with philosophy refuses to recognize
in finitude a veritable being, or something ultimate and abso-
lute, or non-posited, uncreated, and eternal. The opposition of
idealistic and realistic philosophy is therefore without meaning.
A philosophy which should ascribe to finite Determinate
Being, as such, veritable, ultimate, and absolute being, would
not deserve the name of philosophy: the principles of old and
new philosophies, such as water, matter, or atoms, are Thoughts,
universals, and of ideal nature, not Things such as we find
them immediately, that is, in their sensuous isolation. Such
was not even that water which Thales feigned was the principle
of things; for though it is empirical water, it is also the “in-
itself” or essence of all other things ; and these are not indepen-
dent or based upon themselves, but posited in something else,
namely, water; that is, of ideal nature. Above, the principle
or universal was said to be of ideal nature; and the Notion,
the Idea, the Spirit, still more deserve this name; whereas the
individual things of sense-perception, as being of ideal nature
in principle, exist in the Notion, and still more in the Spirit,
as transcended. Herein attention must provisionally be drawn
to the same double aspect as showed itself with the infinite,
namely, that first that which is of ideal nature is the concrete
and veritable; but, secondly, its moments are just as much


DETERMINATE BEING . 169


that which is of ideal nature, that which is transcended in it;
while, in fact, there is but the one concrete whole, from which
the moments are inseparable.

By that which is “‘of ideal nature,” the form of imagination
is meant primarily; and this name is given to whatever is in
my imagination in general, or in the concept, in the idea, in
the fancy, and so forth; so that it comes to be counted equiva-
lent only to fancies,—imaginations which are not only distinct
from the real, but are supposed in their essence to be not
real. The true idealist, indeed, is the Spirit. Its content, even
when it only feels and imagines, much more when it thinks
or conceives, is not so-called real Determinate Being; in the
simplicity of the ego such external Being is merely transcended,
it is for me, or ideally within me. This subjective idealism,
whether as the unconscious idealism of consciousness in general
or as consciously expressed and laid down as a principle,
applies only to the form of imagination, according to which
a content is my own; in the systematic idealism of subjectivity
this form is asserted to be the one true form, excluding the
form of objectivity or reality, or of the external existence of
this content. This idealism is formal, for it does not consider
the content of imagination or of thought, which can thus remain
entirely in its finitude both in imagination and in thought.
In such an idealism nothing is lost; for the reality of such
finite content, Determinate Being filled with finitude, is pre-
served ; and also, in so far as we abstract from this, this content
in itselfis supposed to be irrelevant. Nor is anything gained, pre-
cisely because nothing is lost, and the ego, imagination, or Spirit
remains filled with the same content of finitude. It is true that
the opposition between the forms of subjectivity and objectivity
is one of the finitudes; but the content as taken up into sen-
sation, intuition, or the more abstract element of imagination
or of thought, contains finitudes in abundance; and though
this mode of finitude, the form of subjective and objective,
is excluded, it is but one, and the others have not been removed,
still less fallen away spontaneously.


F*


CHAPTER III
BEING FOR SELF


In Being for Self qualitative Being finds its consummation; it
is infinite Being. The Being of the Beginning is indeterminate.
Determinate Being is Being transcended, but transcended only
immediately: it thus contains only first negation, itself imme-
diate ; Being indeed is preserved, and in Being Determinate both
have entered into a simple unity; but for that very reason they
are not yet in themselves equal to one another, and their unity is
not yet posited. For this reason Determinate Being is the sphere
of difference, of dualism, the field of finitude. The determinate-
ness here is determinateness as such, a fact relative and not
absolute. In Being for Self the difference between Being and
determinateness, or negation, is posited and levelled; quality,
otherness, limit, and reality, being-in-self, ought, and so forth,
are incomplete adaptations of negation to Being, which still
have for base the difference between the two. But in finitude
negation has passed over into infinity, into the posited negation
of negation; it is thus simple self-relation, and in itself is the
identification with Being :—absolute determinateness.

Being for Self is such, first, immediately; it is One.

Secondly, One passes over into Plurality of Ones—Repulsion ;
which otherness of One transcends itself in its ideality—
Attraction.

Thirdly, there is the mutual determination of Repulsion and
Attraction in which they collapse into equipoise; here Quality,
which reached its climax in Being for Self, passes over into


Quantity.
A
BEING FOR SELF AS SUCH


We have reached the general concept of Being-for-Self. The
task now is to demonstrate that the image which we connect
with the term of ““Being-for-Self”’ does correspond to this con-
cept, if we are to be justified in employing it for this concept.


BEING FOR SELF 171


And so, indeed, it seems; we say that something is for itself
in so far as it cancels its otherness, its relatedness to and com-
munity with Other, rejecting and abstracting from them. In
it, Other only exists as having been transcended, or as its
moment; and Being-for-Self consists in this, that it has passed.
beyond the Barrier and its Otherness in such a manner that,
thus negating them, it is infinite return upon itself. —Conscious-
ness as such already contains the determination of Being-for-
Self; for, the object of its sensation, intuition, and so forth, is
imagined, and it thus comprehends its content, which, there-
fore, is of ideal nature; in its intuition, and, generally, in its
entanglement with its own negative or Other, it still remains
at home. Being-for-Self is the polemical or negative attitude
against the limiting other; by virtue of this negation it is an
intro-reflectedness; although, parallel to this return of con-
sciousness upon itself and the ideality of the object, the reality
likewise of the object is preserved, since simultaneously it is
known also to be an external Determinate Being. In this
its phenomenal aspect consciousness is a dualism; first it has
knowledge of another and external object; secondly it is for
itself, it contains the object in an ideal manner; its being is
not only with such an Other, but, being with such an Other,
it is also at home with itself. On the other hand, self-conscious-
ness is Being-for-Self accomplished and posited; the aspect of
relation to an Other, an external object, has been removed.
Self-consciousness is thus the nearest example of the presence
of infinity ;—an infinity abstract indeed, but also of a concrete
determination very different from that of Being-for-Self in
general, the infinity of which still has a wholly qualitative
determinateness.


(a) Bemnc-DETERMINATE AND BEING-FOR-SELF


It has already been pointed out that Being-for-Self is infinity
which has collapsed into simple Being; it is Determinate Being
in so far as the negative nature of infinity, which is negation
of negation, exists only as negation in general or simple quali-
tative determinateness, in the form, now posited, of the imme-
diacy of Being. In this kind of determinateness Being appears
as Determinate Being, but further is distinct from that Being-


172 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


for-Self which is only Being-for-Self in so far as its determinate-
ness is of this infinite kind; but, also, Determinate Being is a
moment of Being-for-Self, since it is true that the latter also
contains Being infected with negation. Thus determinateness,
which, in Determinate Being as such, is an Other and a Being-
for-Other, is reflected into the infinite unity of Being-for-Self;
and here the moment of Determinate Being is present as Being-
for-One.


(b) BEING-FOR-OnE


This moment expresses the manner in which the finite exists
in its unity with the infinite, or as ideal in nature. In Being-
for-Self negation is not applied as a determinateness or limit,
not, therefore, as relation to another and distinct Determinate
Being. This moment has been called Being-for-One, but so far
there is nothing for which it could be;—there is no One, of
which it could be a moment. And, indeed, nothing of this kind
has yet been fixed in Being-for-Self; that for which Something
would be (and, in fact, there is no Something), that which
should be its general counterpart, is itself a moment and only
Being-for-One; it is not yet One. Thus the two sides which
may be suggested in Being-for-One are not distinguished ; there
is only one Being-for-Other, and just because it is one, it too
is a Being-for-One; it is but one ideality of that, for which or
in which a determination should exist as moment, and of that,
which should be moment in it. Thus Being-for-One and Being-
for-Self are not true determinatenesses relatively to one another.
But let the distinction be granted for a moment; then, if we
can assume a Being-for-Self, it is Being-for-Self, as cancellation
of otherness, itself, which relates itself to itself as to the can-
celled Other; it is thus for One, and in its Other relates itself
to itself. That which is of ideal nature must needs be for One,
but not for an Other: that One for which it is, is merely itself. —
Ego, or Spirit in general, or God, are of ideal nature because
they are infinite; but, as being for themselves, they are not
distinct, ideally, from that which is for One. For then they
would be merely immediate, or rather, they would be deter-
minate beings, or being-for-other; for that which for them is
would then be an Other and not themselves, if they had not


BEING FOR SELF 173


the moment of being for One. God is thus for himself in so
far as he is himself that which is for him.

Thus, Being-for-Self and Being-for-One are not really dis-
tinct meanings of ideality, but rather moments of it essential
and inseparable.


Observation


The moment here considered is clearly emphasized in its
intro-reflection by the expression of the German language,
strange at first sight, in enquiring after quality by asking, “what
for a thing is this?” In its origin the expression is idealistic;
it does not ask what this thing A is for another, -B, or what
this man for another man ;—but, “what for a thing, what for
a man, is this?” Thus, this Being-for-One has forthwith returned
into this thing, or man, itself, and that which is, is identical
with that for which it is,—an identity which must also be
considered as ideality.

Ideality first applies to the already cancelled determinations
as distinct from that wherein they are cancelled; this latter
may be called the real. But thus once more that which is of
ideal nature is one of the moments, and the real the other;
but ideality consists in this, that both determinations in the
same manner are only for one and count only as one, this one
ideality thus being undifferentiated reality. In this sense self-
consciousness, Spirit, God, are of this ideal nature as pure
infinite self-relation ;—ego is for ego, and both are the same,
ego is named twice, but each of the two is for one, and of
ideal nature; Spirit is only for Spirit, God for God, and it is
only this unity which is God, God as Spirit.—But self-con-
sciousness, as consciousness, enters into the distinction between
itself and an Other, or between its ideality (where it exists as
imagining) and its reality (inasmuch as its imagination has
a definite content which has this further aspect of being known
as untranscended negative, or as Determinate Being). But if
Thought, Spirit, or God is called only of ideal nature, that
point of view is assumed from which finite Determinate Being
is counted as real, and that which is of ideal nature, or Being-
for-One, has only a one-sided meaning.


The equivalents of the German words (was fiir ein Ding) are used; the
meaning is, ‘what kind of thing is this?” (Translators’ note.)


174 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


In a previous Observation (p. 168), it was indicated what
is the principle of idealism; and it was said that in any
philosophy the next point of importance was, how far this
principle was applied. As to the manner of application, a
further remark may be made with reference to the category
at which we have arrived. First, the possible independent
existence of finite Determinate Being, alongside Being-for-Self,
governs this application; and next, the possible positing of the
moment of “for-one” (a self-relation of that which is of ideal
nature, as such) in the infinite itself. The Eleatic Being, or the
Substance of Spinoza, for instance, is only the abstract negation
of all determinateness; but no ideality is posited in this nega-
tion. And with Spinoza (as will be mentioned below) infinity
is only the absolute affirmation of a thing, and thus immobile
one-ness ; Substance thus does not even reach the determination
of Being-for-Self, and much less that of Subject and Spirit.
The noble idealism of Malebranche is, in itself, more explicit.
It contains the following fundamental thought :—God contains
all the eternal truths, the ideas and perfections of all things,
so that they are his and his alone; therefore we see them in
him only; God causes in us our sensations of objects by means
of an act which has no sensuous element: we imagine that we
obtain of the object not only the idea (which represents its
essence), but also the sensation of its determinate existence
(De la Recherche de la Verite, Eclairc. sur la nature des idées, etc.).
Thus the determinate existence, like the eternal truths and
ideas (or essentialities) of things, is, in God, of ideal nature;
it is not an actual Determinate Being; they are objects to us,
and yet they are only “for-one.” This moment of explicit and
concrete idealism, lacking in Spinoza, is present here, absolute
ideality being determined as knowledge. This idealism is pure
and deep, but these relations partly contain much that is
as yet indeterminate for thought, and partly their content is
immediately wholly concrete (Sin and Salvation, and so on,
enter immediately into play); the logical determination of
infinity, which ought to be its foundation, is not carried through
for itself; and thus, although this lofty and complete idealism
is the work of a pure speculative spirit, it is not the work
of a pure speculative and therefore alone truly fundamental
thinking.


BEING FOR SELF 175


The idealism of Leibniz lies rather within the limits of the
abstract concept.—Leibniz’s imagining subject, the monad,
is essentially of ideal nature. Imagination is a Being-for-Self,
in which the determinatenesses are not limits and therefore
not a Determinate Being, but only moments. To imagine is
certainly a more concrete determination, but still it has here
no further meaning than ideality; for with Leibniz even that
which lacks consciousness in general has imagination and per-
ception. Thus otherness is transcended in this system; Spirit
and Body, or, the monads in general, are not Others for one
another; they neither limit nor act on one another; thus all
the relations based upon a Determinate Being are absent. The
differentiation, therefore, is of ideal nature, and internal, and
the monad here remains self-related; changes develop within
it; they are not relations of it to others. Where the real deter-
mination sees a determinately existing relation of the monads
to one another, there is in fact an independent and merely
simultaneous Becoming, included in the Being-for-Self of each
individual. —That there is a plurality of Monads, and that
therefore each is also determined as an Other, does not concern
them, for this is the external reflection of a third party; in
themselves they are not related as Others, and Being-for-Self
remains unadulterated by any parallel Determinate Being. —
However, this also implies the incompleteness of this system.
It is only in themselves, or in God (as the monad of monads),
or in the system, that the monads thus exist as imagining.
Otherness also exists, in imagination itself or in whatever other
name we give to that third element which considers them as
Others and as Many. The multiplicity of their Determinate
Being has only been barred out, and that only for the moment,
and it is only by abstraction that the monads have been posited
as existing as not-others. If a third element posits their other-
ness, it also cancels it; but the whole movement which gives
them their ideal nature is external to them. Should it be
objected that the whole movement of thought only falls within
a monad imagining, then it may be replied that the content
of such thought in itself is external to itself. From the oneness
of absolute ideality (the monad of the monad) an immediate
and non-conceptual transition (—by means of the image of
creation) is made to the category of abstract, or unrelated,


176 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


multiplicity of Determinate Being; and an equally abstract
return is made from it to the former oneness. Ideality and
imagination in general remain formal, and formal too is
imagination raised to the power of consciousness. We mentioned
above Leibniz’s notion about the needle of the compass which,
if it had consciousness, would regard its northward direction
as a determination of its freedom: there consciousness was
taken as a one-sided form, supposed to be indifferent to its
content and determination: here, similarly, ideality in the
monads is a form which remains external to multiplicity.
Ideality is supposed to be immanent in them, imagination is
supposed to be their nature: but, first, their conduct is their
Harmony, which is not within the sphere of their Determinate
Being, and hence is pre-established ; next, this their Determinate
Being is not taken as Being-for-Other, nor, further, as Ideality ;
it is determined merely as abstract multiplicity; the ideality
of multiplicity and its further determination to Harmony
never become immanent and proper to this multiplicity.

Other forms of idealism, like that for instance of Kant and
Fichte, do not get beyond Ought and the infinite progress;
they remain in the dualism of Determinate Being and Being-
for-Self. The Thing-in-itself, or the infinite Resistance-principle,
does indeed enter immediately into the Ego in these systems, be-
coming “for-it”” alone; but it starts from a free otherness, which
persists as negative Being-in-Self. The Ego therefore may be
determined as being of ideal nature, as infinite self-relation
and being-for-self; but Being-for-One is not completed to that
point where its beyond, or the trend towards the beyond,
disappears.


(c) OnE


Being-for-Self is the simple unity of its self and of its moment,
Being-for-One. Here there is only one determination, the self-
relation of the transcendence. The moments of Being-for-Self
have collapsed into indistinguishability ; this is immediacy, or
Being, but an immediacy based on that negation which has
been posited as its determination. Being-for-Self thus is that
which is for itself; and since in this immediacy its inner sig-
nificance vanishes, it is its own completely abstract limit—One.

Attention may be drawn before beginning to the difficulty


BEING FOR SELF 177


inherent in the following presentation of the development of
One, and to the ground of this difficulty. The moments which
constitute the concept of One as Being-for-Self here fall apart.
They are (1) negation in general; (2) two negations; (3) nega-
tions, therefore, of two terms which are the same; (4) these
are utterly opposite ; (5) self-relation, identity as such; (6) nega-
tive relation which yet is self-relation. These moments here
fall apart because the form of immediacy, or Being, enters
into Being-for-Self as that which is for itself; by virtue of this
immediacy each moment is posited as an independent deter-
mination which has Being; and yet also they are inseparable.
Of each determination, therefore, its contradictory must be
asserted: it is this contradiction which, together with the
abstract nature of the moments, constitutes their difficulty.


B
THE ONE AND THE MANY


One is the simple relation of Being-for-Self to itself, where
its moments have collapsed into themselves; here, therefore,
it has the form of immediacy, and its moments now have
determinate existence.

One, as self-relation of the negative, is determination,—and
as self-relation, it is infinite self-determination. The resulting
immediacy, however, brings it about that these distinctions are
no longer posited merely as moments of one and the same
self-determination, but also as being. The ideality of Being-
for-Self as totality thus, first, passes into reality, and into the
most fixed and abstract of all, into One. Being-for-Self, in One,
is the posited unity of Being and of Determinate Being, as
absolute union of relation to Other and Self-relation. Next,
however, the determinateness of Being opposes itself to the
determination of infinite negation (or self-determination) ; so
that what One is in itself it now merely has in itself; the
negative thus is an Other, distinct from it. That which shows
itself present, as distinguished from it, is its own self-determina-
tion; and its unity with itself as thus distinct from itself is
degraded to the rank of relation; and, as negative unity, it is
negation of itself as an Other, an exclusion of the One as
something Other to the One.

VOL. I


178 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


(a) THE ONE IN ITSELF


In itself, the One has existence in general; this its Being is
not determinate or determinateness as relation to Other, nor
is it Modification: what it is, is the fact that this circle of
categories has been negated. One thus cannot become Other;
it is immutable.

It is indeterminate, but not as Being is; its indeterminateness
is that determinateness which is self-relation: the fact of being
absolutely determined, posited Being-in-Self. Since in its con-
cept it is self-related negation, it contains distinction,—it passes
away from itself towards Other, which tendency, however, is
immediately reversed; for this moment of self-determination
brings it about that there is no Other to be a point of direction ;
it thus returns to itself.

In this simple immediacy the mediation of Determinate
Being and of ideality, and thus all differentiation and multi-
plicity, has disappeared. There is nothing in it; and this
nothing, which is the abstraction of self-relation, is here distinct
from Being-in-Self; it is posited, since Being-in-Self no longer
is that simplicity proper to the category of Something, but has
a determination, namely that of being mediation and hence
concrete. Being abstract, it is identical with One, but it is
distinct from its determination. Nothing, thus pcsited as within
the One, is Nothing as the Void.—This Void is thus the quality
of One in its immediacy.


(b) THE ONE AND THE VoıD


The One is the Void as the abstract self-relation of negation.
But the Void, as Nothing, is absolutely different from the simple
immediacy, the Being of One which is also an affirmation;
and since they are in one relation (namely, that of One), their
difference is also posited. The Nothing as Void differs from the
existent, however, in that it is outside the existent One.

Thus Being-for-Self is determined as One and Void, and has
once more acquired Determinate Being.—The One and the
Void have for common and simple basis their negative self-
relation. The moments of Being-for-Self leave this unity and


BEING FOR SELF 179


become external to one another: since the determination of
Being is introduced through the simple unity of the moments,
it thus reduces itself to one side only (to the rank of Determinate
Being), and thus its other determination, negation in general,
likewise opposes itself in the shape of Determinate Being of
Nothing, that is, as Void.


Observation


In this form of Determinate Being, the One is that grade
of the category which occurs with the ancients as the atomistic
principle, which places the essence of things in the atom and
the void (rò drouov or ra drona Kal TO Kevdv). Abstraction having
reached to this shape has gained a greater determinateness
than the Being of Parmenides or the Becoming of Herakleitos.
Lofty as is its stand when, making the simple determinateness
of the One and the Void into the principle of all things, it
reduces the infinite variety of the world to this simple antithesis,
daring to understand it through this alone, it is equally easy
for imagining reflection to imagine, here atoms, and there
beside them, the void. No wonder therefore that the atomistic
principle has always survived; the equally trivial and external
relation of combination, which must be added if we would
reach the appearance of a concrete and a multiplicity, is as
popular as the atoms themselves and the void. The One and
the Void is Being-for-Self, the highest qualitative Being-in-Self,
sunk back to complete externality ; and the immediacy or Being
of One, since it is the negation of all otherness, is so posited
as to exclude all determination or variation; it is absolutely
brittle, and thus all determination, multiplicity, or connection
remains a wholly external relation.

They who first thought it did not however leave the atomistic
principle in this externality; besides its abstraction it had a
speculative determination when the Void was understood to
be the source of motion. This is a relation of atom and void
quite different from the mere parallelism and mutual indiffer-
ence of these determinations. And when it was said that the
void was the source of motion it had not this trivial meaning,
that Something can have motion only into a Void and not
into a space already filled, for then no room would be left


180 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


open for it; in which case the Void would be only the pre-
supposition or condition and not the ground of motion, motion
itself being already assumed and its ground (which is the
essential thing) forgotten. Rather, the view that Void is the
ground of motion, contains this profounder thought, that
the negative in general contains the ground of Becoming, the
unrest of self-movement: and in this sense the negative must
be taken as the true negativity of the infinite.—The Void is
the ground of movement only as the negative relation of the
One to its negative, to the One (that is, to itself) ; this, however,
is posited as having determinate existence.

Apart from this the further determinations of the ancients
about form and position of the atoms and about the direction
of their movement, are sufficiently arbitrary and external; and,
what is more, they are directly contradictory to the fundamental
determination of the atom. The atoms are the principle of utter
externality and utter absence of concept; this principle, in the
shape of molecules and particles, causes physics to suffer as
much as a theory of the State which begins from the separate
wills of individuals.


(c) Many Ones


Repulsion


The One and the Void constitute Being-for-Self in its closest
Determinate Being. Each of these moments has negation for
its determination, and is also posited as a Determinate Being.
According to this, One and Void are the relation of negation
to negation as of one Other to its Other; the One is negation
in the determination of Being, the Void in Not-being. Essen-
tially, however, the One is self-relation only as relating negation ;
that is, it is itself that which the Void is intended to be outside
it. But each is also posited as an affirmative Determinate Being,
one as Being-for-Self as such, the other as indeterminate
Existence in general; their mutual relation is that of other
Determinate Being. The Being-for-Self of One is, however,
essentially the ideality of Being Determinate and of Other;
it is related, not as to an Other, but to itself. But Being-
for-Self is pegged down as One, as something which is for itself


BEING FOR SELF 181


and is immediately present, and thus its negative relation to
itself is also relation to a Being: and since the relation is
negative, that to which it relates itself remains determined
as a Being Determinate and Other; being essentially a self-
relation, this Other is not indeterminate negation, as Void,
but likewise is One. One thus is Becoming which differentiates
itself into many Ones.

But, really, this is not properly a Becoming, for Becoming
is a transition of Being into Nothing; while One only becomes
One. One as the other term of the relation contains the nega-
tive as relation, and thus is itself affected with it. Instead of
Becoming, there is then, first, the proper and immanent
relation of One; next, since it is negative, and also the One .
has being, One repulses itself from itself. The negative relation
of One to itself is Repulsion. ;

This Repulsion, taken thus as a positing of many Ones, is
effected only by the egress of One beyond itself; but they which
are beyond, are also Ones. This is Repulsion according to the
concept, or, as it is in itself. The second Repulsion is distinct
from it, it is that which is present to the imagination of external
reflection: not the creation of Ones, but the mutual exclusion
of Ones which are presupposed and already present. It remains
to be seen how that first Repulsion, which is in itself, deter-
mines itself to the second, which is external.

It must first be settled what determinations the many Ones
have as such. The multiple Becoming, or production of Many,
vanishes immediately as the fact of being posited ; the products
are Ones, but not for Other; they are infinitely self-related.
The One repels only itself from itself: it does not become, but
is already; what is imagined as the object of repulsion is also
a One, a Being; each is equally the subject and object of a
Repulsion which makes no difference.

Thus, relatively to one another, the Ones are presupposed ;—
they are supposed (or posited) by the self-repulsion of the One,
and pre-supposed as not posited ; the fact of their being posited
is transcended; they are related to one another as Beings as
being related each only to itself.

Thus plurality does not appear as otherness, but as a deter-
mination quite external to One. One, which repels itself,
remains a relation to itself, like that which first is taken as


182 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


repelled. Thus it does not concern the Ones that, comprehended
into the determinateness of plurality, they are related to one
another as Others. If plurality were a relation of the Ones
themselves to one another, they would limit one another and
would contain Being-for-Other affirmatively. Their relation—
theirs by virtue of their self-subsistent unity—as posited here,
is determined as none: it is once more the Void already posited.
It is their limit, a limit which, however, is external to them, in
which they must not be for one another. The limit is that in
which that which is limited is and also is not; but the Void
is determined as pure not-being, and this alone constitutes
their limit.

The self-repulsion of the Oae is the explication of that which
the One is in itself; but infinity, as split-up, is here infinity
which has passed beyond. itself: and this it has done through
the immediacy of the infinite entity, the One. It is a simple
relation of One to One, and equally, or rather, the absolute
unrelatedness of the One; it is the former according to the
simple affirmative self-relation of One, and the latter according
to the same as negative. In other words, the plurality of the
One is its self-positing; the One is its own negative self-
relation and nothing else, and this relation (the One itself)
is many Ones. But, equally, plurality is merely external to the
One; for the One also is the transcending of Otherness,
Repulsion is its self-relation and simple self-identity. The
plurality of Ones is infinity, as contradiction which uncon-
cernedly produces itself.


Observation


Mention was made above of Leibniz’s idealism. We may
here add that from the imagining monad, determined as being
for itself, it proceeded only to the Repulsion just considered,
and in fact only to plurality as such, wherein each One is for
itself only, remaining indifferent to the Being Determinate or
for-Self of Others, or Others do not exist at all for the One.
The monad is for itself the whole and complete world; none
has need of the other; but this inner multiplicity which it has
in its imagination in no way alters its determination of being
“for itself.” Leibniz’s idealism takes plurality immediately as
given, and does not conceive of it as of a Repulsion of the


BEING FOR SELF 183


monad; with him, theretore, plurality is taken only in its aspect
of abstract externality. Atomistic philosophy does not know
the concept of ideality ; it does not take One as comprehending
within itself the two moments of Being-for-Self and Being-for-
It (that is, as of ideal nature), but as being simply and bluntly
for-Self. However, it proceeds beyond mere indifferent plurality ;
the atoms enter into a further determination relatively to one
another, though in a really inconsistent manner; whereas in
the former indifferent independence of the monads, plurality
remains the rigid and fundamental determination, so that their
relation belongs to the monad of monads, or to the contem-
plating philosopher. l


Cc
REPULSION AND ATTRACTION


(a) EXCLUSION OF THE ONE


The many Ones have Being; their Determinate Being, their
relation, is non-relation and external to them ;—it is abstract
Void. But they themselves are this negative relation to self
now as to existent Others;—demonstrated contradiction, in-
finity, posited in the immediacy of Being. Thus here Repulsion
immediately finds that which is repelled from it. In this deter-
mination it is Exclusion: One repels only the many Ones which
were neither created nor posited by it. This mutual, or universal,
Repulsion, is relative, limited by the Being of the Ones.

Plurality is, first, not-posited Otherness. The limit is only
the Void, or that where the Ones are not. But also they are
in the limit: they are in the Void, or, their Repulsion is their
common relation.

This mutual Repulsion is the posited Determinate Being of
the many Ones: it is not their Being-for-Self,—in which they
would be distinct, as many, only for a third party,—it is their
own distinguishing, which preserves them.—They negate one
another, posit one another as being only for-One. But they
equally negate this quality of being only for-One: they repulse
this their ideality, and are.—Thus the moments, absolutely
united in ideality, are separated. In its Being-for-Self the
One also is for-One, but this One for which it is is itself: its


184 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


distinction from itself is immediately transcended. But the One
which is distinguished has a Being in plurality; Being-for-One
(as it is determined in Exclusion) hence is a Being-for-Other.
Thus each is repulsed by an Other, is transcended, and is made
into something which is not for itself but for-One, and in fact
is another One.

The Being-for-Self of the many Ones thus shows itself to be
their self-preservation, due to the mediation of their mutual
Repulsion, in which they cancel one another and posit each
the others as mere Being-for-Other; but it also consists in the
repulsion of this ideality and in positing the One as not being
for-Other. But this self-preservation of the Ones through their
negative relation is rather their dissolution.

The Ones not only have, but also preserve, their Being by
mutual Exclusion. Now first that which ought to give them
their fixed support against negation (namely, their distinctness),
is their Being, in fact their Being-in-Self, as opposed to their
relation to Other: this Being-in-Self is, that they are Ones.
But this they all are: in their Being-in-Self they are the same,
instead of having in it a definite distinction. Next, their Deter-
minate Being and attitude to one another, that is, the fact that
each posits itself as One, is their mutual negation; but this
also is one and the same determination of all; and through
it they rather posit themselves as identical. Similarly, the fact
that in themselves they are the same makes the ideality, which
is supposed to be posited in them through Others, their own;
it also they equally, therefore, do not repel.—Thus, according
to their Being and positing, they are but one affirmative unity.

Our comparison is just this view of the Ones—that, in their
two determinations, both as being and as mutually related,
they manifest themselves as identical, and necessarily identical.
—But we must further see what is posited of them in their
mutual relation.—They are; this is presupposed in this relation ;
and they are only in so far as they negate one another, at the
same time repelling this their ideality or negatedness; that is,
in so far as they negate mutual negation. But they are ‚only
in so far as they negate; and thus in negating their negation
they negate their being. In so far as they are, indeed, this
negation would not negate them, for it is only external to them:
the negation of the Other rebounds from them and strikes their


BEING FOR SELF 185


_ surface only to touch it. But they return upon themselves only

‘through the negation of the Other: they are only by virtue of
this mediation, and this return is their self-preservation and
their Being-for-Self. In so far as their negation effects nothing,
by reason of the resistance offered by the existents, as such or
as negating, they do not return upon themselves, they neither
preserve themselves, nor are.

We observed above that the Ones are the same, that each
one is the same as the other. This is not only our relation—
a mere external juxtaposing; rather, the Repulsion is itself
relation: the One which excludes the Ones relates itself to
them (the Ones), that is, to itself. Thus the negative attitude
of the Ones to each other is only a collapse into them-
selves. This identity, into which their repulsion passes, is the
transcending of their distinctness and externality, which, as
Excluding, they ought mutually to assert.

This self-positing of the many Ones in one One is Attraction.


Observation


Independence having reached its quintessence in the One
which is for itself, is abstract and formal, destroying itself; it
is the highest and most stubborn error, which takes itself for
highest truth ;—appearing, more concretely, as abstract free-
dom, pure ego, and, further, as Evil. It is freedom which goes
so far astray as to place its essence in this abstraction, flattering
itself that, being thus by itself, it possesses itself in its purity.
Determined more closely, independence is that error which
regards as negative, and maintains a negative attitude towards,
that which is its own essence. It is thus a negative attitude
towards itself, which seeking to possess its own Being destroys
it; and this its activity only manifests the vanity of its activity.
The reconciliation consists in acknowledging rather that that
which is counter to the negative attitude is its essence; it is
a renunciation of the negativity of its Being-for-Self in place
of a clinging to it.

It is an old proposition that One is Many, and more especially
that the Many are One. We may here repeat the observation
that the truth of the One and the Many, expressed in pro-
positions, appears in an inadequate form; and that this truth


186 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


can be seized and expressed only as a Becoming and as a
process, as Repulsion and Attraction, and not as a Being;
but it is as the latter, as a stable unity, that it is taken in a
proposition. Above, we mentioned and recalled the dialectic
of Plato in the Parmenides in deriving the Many from the One,
namely, from the proposition ‘One is.” The inner dialectic
of the concept has been indicated; and the dialectic of the
proposition “that Many are One,” is most easily taken as
external reflection. External it here may be allowed to be,
since its object too, the Many, are those entities which are
external to one another. This comparison of the Many, each
with the other, shows immediately that One is determined just
like Other : each is One, is One of the Many, and is by excluding
the others;—they are simply the same: there is only one
determination present. This is the fact, and just this simple
fact must now be grasped. Understanding is stubborn in its
refusal to accept it only because there is present to it also
(and rightly) the distinction; yet the fact mentioned does not
eliminate the distinction, and equally the fact exists in spite
of the distinction. And one can comfort understanding for the
naive manner in which it grasps the fact of the distinction by
reminding it that the distinction will return again.


(b) THe One ONE OF ATTRACTION


Repulsion is the schism which the One makes of itself into
Many, the negative attitude of which is powerless because they
each presuppose the others as existent. It is only the Ought
of ideality ; but the latter is realized in Attraction. Repulsion
passes over into Attraction, and the many Ones into One One.
At first both Repulsion and Attraction are distinct; the former
as the reality of One, and the latter as its posited ideality.
The relation of Attractizn to Repulsion is this, that the latter
is its presupposition. Repulsion furnishes the material for
Attraction, If there were no Ones there would be nothing to
attract: the idea of continuous Attraction or consumption of
Ones presupposes an equally continuous creation of Ones; the
sensuous representation of spatial Attraction allows the series
of attracted Ones to continue; the place of the atoms which
vanish into the point which attracts them is taken by a new


BEING FOR SELF 187


multitude surging out of the void; and so, if it is desired, to
infinity. If attraction were to be imagined as completed—that
is, the many Ones brought to the point of One One—there
would be but one sluggish One and no Attraction. The ideality
which determinately exists in Attraction also has in it the
determination of self-negation, that is, has in it the many Ones
to which it is the relation; and Attraction is inseparable from
Repulsion.

First, Attraction is equally the property of each of the
immediate Ones; not one is preferred beyond another; and
thus we really have an equipoise in Attraction, or rather an
equipoise of Attraction and Repulsion itself, a sluggish rest in
which there is no determinate ideality. But there can here be no
question of preference of one One beyond others, for this would
imply a determinate distinction between them: Attraction
rather is the positing of the already present indistinguishability
of the Ones. It is only Attraction itself which is the positing
of a One distinct from the others; these are only the immediate
Ones, which are supposed to preserve themselves by means
of Repulsion; but, from their posited negation, the One of
Attraction arises, which is hence determined as One mediated
and posited as One. The first Ones, as being immediate, do
not return upon themselves in their ideality, but have it in
another One.

But the One One is ideality realized and posited in the One.
It attracts by the mediation of Repulsion, and contains this
mediation as its determination. Thus it does not absorb the
attracted Ones in itself as in a point, that is, it does not
abstractly cancel them. It contains Repulsion in its deter-
mination, and Repulsion preserves the Ones, as Many, in it;
through its Attraction it makes a profit, so to speak, gaining
in width and content. Thus there is in it unity of Repulsion
and Attraction in general.


(c) THe RELATION or REPULSION AND ATTRACTION


The distinction of One and Many has determined itself to
be that of their relation to one another; this is divided into
two relations, Repulsion and Attraction. Each of these remains
outside the other and independent for the present; and yet


188 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


essentially they are connected. Their unity, as yetindeterminate,
must reveal itself more definitely.

Repulsion as the fundamental determination of the One
appears first and immediately, like its Ones, which though
produced by it are yet posited as immediate; they are thus
unaffected by Attraction, which is added to them, thus pre-
supposed, from without. Repulsion, on the other hand, does
not presuppose Attraction, so that the latter ought to have
no part in its positing and Being; that is, so that Repulsion
is not in itself the negation of itself, nor the Ones in themselves
negated. Thus we have Repulsion abstractly by itself; and
indeed Attraction too, relatively to the Ones as existents, has
the aspect of an immediate Determinate Being; leaving its
place it comes to them as an Other.

Thus if we take pure Repulsion by itself it is the scattering
of many Ones into the indeterminate, outside the sphere of
Repulsion: for it is just the negation of the mutual relation
of the Many; if it is taken in the abstract, unrelatedness is its
determination. But Repulsion is not merely the Void; the Ones,
as unrelated, do not repulse or exclude one another; and this
constitutes their determination. Repulsion, though negative,
still essentially is a relation; mutual exclusion and avoidance
do not mean liberation from that which is excluded and avoided,
and that which excludes is still in connexion with that which
is excluded. Now this moment of relation is Attraction, and
thus is in the midst of Repulsion. itself: it is the negation of
that abstract Repulsion according to which the Ones would
be but self-related existents, without the moment of excluding.

But when we start from the Repulsion of the determinately
existing Ones, and in doing so posit Attraction as being added
to them from without, then, though inseparable, both are kept
apart as distinct determinations; we have seen, however, that
Attraction does not only presuppose Repulsion, but that there
also is a reverse relation of Repulsion to Attraction, so that
the former equally has its presupposition in the latter.

According to this determination they are inseparable, and
also each is determined as Ought and Barrier relatively to the
other. Their Ought is their abstract determinateness as being
in themselves; thereby, however, it is just referred beyond
itself and relates itself to the other, so that each is mediated


BEING FOR SELF 189


by the other as other. Their independence consists in this, that
in this mediation they are posited as another determining for
each other (Repulsion is the positing of the Many, Attraction
of the One; the latter is also negation of the Many, the former,
the negation of their ideality in the One), and in that Attraction
is Attraction only by the mediation of Repulsion, and Repul-
sion Repulsion only by the mediation of Attraction. The further
fact that mediation through Other is here in fact rather negated
and each of these determinations is self-mediation, results from
closer contemplation and carries them back to the unity of
their concept.

First, then, the attitude of Repulsion and Attraction (which
as yet are only relative) already implies that each presupposes
itself, and in so doing relates itself only to itself.

Relative Repulsion is the mutual repelling of the many given
Ones, which are supposed to exist immediately. But that there
are many Ones, this assertion is just Repulsion; and any pre-
supposition of Repulsion is only its own positing. Further, the
determination of Being, which might belong to the Ones apart
from the fact that they are posited—a determination which
would give them pre-cxistence—also belongs to Repulsion. It
is by means of Repulsion that the Ones manifest and preserve
themselves as Ones, and have Being as such. Their Being is
Repulsion itself, which thus is not relative to any other Deter-
minate Being, but stands related only to itself.

Attraction is the positing of the One as such, of the real One,
in opposition to which the Many are determined, in their
Determinate Being, as only of ideal nature, and as vanishing.
And thus Attraction also presupposes itself, namely in the
determination of the other Ones to be of ideal nature, which
elsewhere are supposed to be repellent for-themselves and for-
others, and therefore also for whatever attracts. They gain
ideality as opposed to this determination of repulsion, not in
the end and only through their relation to Attraction; rather
it is presupposed, and is the self-existent ideality of the Ones,
since, as Ones (and here we include the One which is imagined
as attracting), they are undistinguished one from another, they
are one and the same.

If then the two determinations thus presuppose themselves,
each for itself, this further means that each contains the other


190 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


as moment. Self-presupposition is the positing of self in One
as its own negative,—here we have Repulsion; and that which
is presupposed is the same as that which presupposes,—here
we have Attraction. The fact that each is in itself mere moment
constitutes the transition of one into the other, negating itself
in itself and positing itself as its own Other. The One as such
is self-transcendence, and its only meaning is to posit itself as
its Other, the Many; and the Many similarly is only collapse
upon itself,—it posits itself as its Other, the One, and in it
alone relates itself to itself; so that each continues itseif in its
Other; and thus we have already here self-transcendence
(Repulsion) and self-positing-as-One (Attraction) present un-
separated. That which is posited in a Repulsion and Attraction
which are relative (that is, which presuppose immediate Ones
existing determinately) is this, that each is in itself its own
negation, and therefore the continuation of its self into its
Other. The Repulsion of Ones having Determinate Being is
the self-preservation of each one by means of the mutual
repulsion of the others: thus (1) the other Ones are negated
in it; this is the aspect of its Determinate Being, or Being-for-
Other; this therefore is Attraction as being the ideality of the
Ones :—and (2) the One is in itself, without relation to others;
but “in-itself” passed long ago into “Being-for-self,”” and
further the One in itself is by its determination that Becoming
of Many.—The Attraction of determinately existing Ones is
their ideality, and is the positing of the One, wherein as
negation and production of the One it thus transcends itself,
and, as positing of the One, is its own negative, or Repulsion.
Thus Being-for-Self has completed its development and has
reached its result. The One as in infinite self-relation (infinite
because it is the posited negation of negation) is mediation:
itself, as its own absolute (that is, abstract) otherness (the Many),
it repulses from itself; and, entering into a negative relation
to this its not-Being, it transcends it and thus again is self-
relation; and One is no more than this Becoming, in which
the determination has vanished which states it to be Beginning,
that is, posits it as immediate and having Being, and, further,
as reconstituting itself, in the result, as One, a One equally
immediate and exclusive. The process, which is the One,
everywhere posits and contains it only as transcended. This


BEING FOR SELF 191


transcendence first is determined only as relative, as a relation
to other Determinate Being, which thus itself is a different
Repulsion and Attraction; next, it shows itself as passing over
into the infinite relation of mediation through negation of the
external relations of Beings immediate and Determinate, having
for result this Becoming which, through the instability of its
moments, is the collapse, or rather self-gathering, into simple
immediacy. Having acquired this new determination, this
Being is Quantity.

If we review in brief the moments of this transition of
Quality into Quantity, the qualitative has for fundamental
determination Being and immediacy, where limit and deter-
minateness are identical with the being of the Something in
such a manner that, these being altered, the Something itself
vanishes. Being posited in this manner it is determined as
finite. By virtue of the immediacy of this unity, in which
distinction has disappeared, though it is in itself present in the
unity of Being and Nothing, the distinction becomes Otherness
in general and is outside this unity. This relation to Other is
in contradiction to the immediacy in which qualitative deter-
minateness is self-relation. This Otherness transcends itself in
the infinity of Being-for-Self; by the latter the distinction,
which it has in and by itself in the negation of negation, is
made real into the stages of One and Many and their relations:
the qualitative is elevated to the unity which is true because
it is no longer immediate but posited as in harmony with itself.

This Unity then is (a) Being, purely affirmative, that is,
immediacy mediated with itself through the negation of nega-
tion; Being is posited as the unity which runs through each
determinateness, through limit and so on; these are posited
in it as transcended:

(8) Determinate Being; according to such a determination
it is negation or determinateness as moment of affirmative
Being; but it is such no longer as immediate, but as intro-
reflected, related not to Other but to Self; it is Determined-
ness-in-itself, or One; Otherness as such is itself Being-for-Self:

(y) Being-for-Self, as this Being which endures through
determinateness; here One and Determinedness-in-itself are
themselves posited as transcended. The One is now determined
as having passed beyond itself and as Unity; and hence the


192 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


One, the absolutely determinate Limit, is posited as the Limit
which is not Limit, and as indifferent to Being although it is
posited in it.


Observation


Attraction and Repulsion are generally, of course, regarded
as forces. This determination, and the relations connected with
it, should be compared with the concepts which they have
been found to be.—In the view mentioned they are regarded
as independent, as if they were not related to one another by
their own nature; that is, they are taken not as two moments
passing each into its opposite, but rather as standing one
against the other in fixed opposition. It is further imagined
that they meet in a third element, namely, matter; but this
takes place in such a manner that this unification is not held
to be their truth: rather, each is a first principle and is for
itself, while matter and its determinations are posited and
created by them. When it is said that matter contains the forces,
this unity is intended to mean a connexion, while at the same
time they are presupposed as having independent self-existence.

Kant, as we know, has constructed matter from Repulsive
and Attractive force, or, at least, he has erected (as he calls
it) the metaphysical elements of this construction.—It will not
be without some interest to cast light upon this construction.
This metaphysical exposition of an object which, not only itself
but also in its determinations, appeared to belong only to
experience, is remarkable: first, because, as an essay of the
concept, it furnished at least the impulse to the modern
philosophy of nature, which does not make nature as a sense-
datum the foundation of science, but proceeds from the absolute
concept to the cognition of its determinations; next, because
often a halt is made at this Kantian construction, and it is
taken as the philosophic beginning and foundation of physics.

Now an existent such as empirical matter is not the object
of Logic any more than are Space and the determinations
of Space. But Repulsive and Attractive force, too, in so far as
they are looked on as forces of empirical matter, are based upon
the pure determinations of One and Many here considered,
and on those relations of them which (because these names
were most obvious) I have called Repulsion and Attraction.


BEING FOR SELF 193


Closely considered, Kant’s method in the deduction of matter
from these forces, which he calls a construction, does not
deserve this name, unless indeed every kind of reflection, even
analytical reflection, be called a construction; and, indeed,
later natural philosophers have given the name of construction
to the shallowest reasoning and the most baseless concoction
of arbitrary imagination and thoughtless reflection—especially
if it employed and everywhere displayed the so-called factors
of attractive and repulsive force.

For at bottom Kant’s method is analytical and not con-
structive. He presupposes the idea of matter, and next asks
what forces are necessary to maintain its determinations thus
assumed. Thus first he postulates Attractive force, because
really matter cannot exist through Repulsion alone without
Attraction (Anfangsgriinde der Naturwissenschaft, pp. 53 et seq.).
Next he derives Repulsion, too, from matter, and gives as
reason the fact that we imagine matter as impenetrable, since
it presents itself under this determination to the sense of feeling,
by which it manifests itself to us. Consequently (he proceeds)
Repulsion is immediately thought in the concept of matter,
since it is immediately given therein; whereas Attraction is
syllogistically added to it. But these syllogisms, too, are based
on what has just been said, namely, that matter having only
repulsive force does not exhaust our image of matter.—It is
evident that this is the procedure of knowledge reflecting on
experience, which first perceives determinations in the pheno-
menon, next makes them the basis, and finally assumes for their
so-called explanation corresponding fundamental materials or
forces which are supposed to produce these determinations of
the phenomenon.

In view of the different fashion in which repulsive and
attractive force are thus discovered by cognition in matter,
Kant further observes that attractive force really equally belongs
to the concept of matter, “although it is not contained in it.”
Kant lays emphasis on this last expression, Yet it is not clear
what the distinction may be; for a determination which belongs
to the concept of a thing must be truly contained in it.

What causes the difficulty and gives rise to this vain subter-
fuge is that Kant from the beginning arbitrarily counts im-
penetrability alone as proper to the concept of matter; this,

VOL. I G


194 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


he says, we perceive by the senses, and therefore repulsive force
—the repelling of other from one—is immediately given. But
if he goes on to say that matter cannot exist without attraction,
then this assertion is based on a view of matter which is taken
from experience; perception therefore must yield us the deter-
mination of attraction, too. Indeed it is easy to perceive that
beyond its Being-for-Self, which transcends Being-for-Other
(or offers resistance), matter contains a relation of entities
which are for themselves, and thus has spatial extension and
cohesion, which latter, in the qualities of rigidity and solidity,
is very strong. Explanatory physics demands, in order (for
instance) that a body may be torn apart, a force which must
be stronger than the mutual attraction of the parts of that
body. And from this truth reflection can just as immediately
deduce attractive force, or take it as given, as it did with
repulsive force. Indeed, if we consider Kant’s syllogisms from
which he tries to deduce attractive force (the proof of the
proposition, that the possibility of matter demands attractive
force as a second basic power, loc. cit.), they are found to con-
tain nothing save that mere repulsion would not make matter
spatial. When matter is presupposed as filling space, continuity
is ascribed to it, and the basis of continuity is supposed to be
attractive force.

But though this so-called construction of matter would at
most have value as analysis (a value diminished by the impure
exposition), still the fundamental thought which derives cog-
nition of matter from these two opposed determinations as
from its basic forces, must always be highly esteemed. Kant
chiefly is at pains to banish the vulgar and mechanistic idea
which stops at the one determination, namely, impenetrability,
or self-existent puncticity, and makes into something external
the opposite determination, the relation of matter in itself or
in other matters, which in turn are regarded as separate Ones;
a manner of presentation which, as Kant says, will allow no
other motive forces except pressure and impact, that is, action
from without. This externality of cognition always presupposes
motion as already existing externally in matter, and never
thinks of taking it as something internal and of comprehending
it in matter, which thus is assumed in itself as motionless and
inert. This point of view looks only on common mechanics,


BEING FOR SELF 195


and not on immanent and free movement.—It is true that
Kant transcends this externality in so far as Attraction (or the
relation of one matter to another in so far as they are taken
as separate, or else of matter in general, in its existence beyond
itself) is with him made into a force of matter itself; still, on
the other side, his two basic forces remain, within matter,
opposed to one another, external and independent.

The independent distinction between these two factors, attri-
buted to them from the point of view of this cognition, was
void, and equally void every other distinction must show itself
to be if it is made with regard to the determination of their
content as something which ought to be fixed ; for, as they were
considered above in their truth, they are no more than moments,
which pass into one another.—I will consider these further
determinations of distinction as indicated by Kant.

Kant determines attractive force as a penetrative force, by
means of which one piece of matter can act immediately upon
parts of another even beyond the surface of contact; repulsive
force, on the other hand, he determines as a superficial force,
by means of which parts of matter can act upon one another
only at the common surface of contact. The reason cited for
this determination of the latter is as follows :—““Parts in contact
with one another limit each the sphere of activity of the other,
and repulsive force cannot move any more distant part except
through those parts which intervene; an immediate action of
one part of matter on another, passing straight through these,
by means of forces of expansion (that is, repulsive forces), is
impossible.” (See ibid. Erklärung und Zusätze, p. 67.)

And here the reader must remember this: when “nearer”
and ‘more distant” parts of matter are assumed, the distinction
would also arise with regard to Attraction, in this way, that
though one atom might act upon another, yet a third and more
distant atom (between which and the attracting atom the
“other” atom would be) would next enter into the sphere of
attraction of the intermediate (and more proximate) atom;
thus the action of the first atom on the third would not be
immediate and simple. Thus mediated action would result for
attractive as well as for repulsive force. Further, true penetra-
tion of attractive force would then have to consist solely in the
fact that all parts of matter had power to attract in themselves,


196 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


and not in the passivity of a certain number and the activity
of just one atom.—With immediate regard to repulsive force
itself we may remark that in the passage quoted there occur
“parts in contact with one another”; which means a homo-
geneity and continuity of finished matter not admitting of
repulsion. But this homogeneity of matter, where parts, no
longer separated by void, are in contact with one another,
already presupposes the transcendence of repulsive force;
according to the sense-image of Repulsion which governs here,
parts in contact must be taken as such as do not repel one
another. The tautological conclusion therefore is that where
the not-being of Repulsion is assumed there can take place no
Repulsion. But nothing further follows from this by way of a
determination of repulsive force.—If, however, it is considered
that parts in contact touch one another only in so far as they
still keep one another apart, then repulsive force no longer
resides merely in the surface of matter, but within that sphere
which was intended to be the sphere of Attraction only.

Next Kant assumes the determination that “through attrac-
tive force matter occupies but does not fill space” (ibid.) ; “and
since matter does not through this force fill space, it can act
across empty space, since there is no intervening matter which
could limit it.”—This distinction resembles the one mentioned
above, where a determination is supposed to belong to but not
to be contained in the concept of a thing; similarly here matter
is to occupy space but not to fill it. It is then Repulsion (if we
remain at its first determination) by means of which the Ones
repulse one another and are related to one another only
negatively, that is, here, across empty space. But here it is
attractive force which keeps space empty; it does not fill space
by means of the relation between atoms which here prevails;
that is, it keeps the atoms in a negative relation to one another.
—Thus Kant is unconsciously brought to do what is implicit
in the nature of the case, that is, he ascribes to attractive
force precisely what he ascribed (according to the first deter-
mination) to the opposite force. While the distinction between
the two forces was being laid down, one had passed over into
the other.—By Repulsion, on the other hand, matter is intended
to fill space, that is, through it the empty space left over by
Attractive force is intended to vanish. And in fact, in cancelling


p


BEING FOR SELF 197


empty space it cancels the negative relation of the atoms or
Ones, that is, the Repulsion which takes place between them;
in other words, Repulsion is determined as its own opposite.

Thus the distinctions are blurred; and to this is added the
confusion arising from the fact that (as was observed at the
beginning) Kant’s exposition of the opposed forces is analytic,
and in the whole course thereof matter, which should be
derived first from its elements, appears fully and completely
constituted. In the definition of superficial and of penetrative
force both are taken as motive forces, by means of which matter
can act in one or in the other manner.—They are thus here
set out as forces by which matter is not created but, being
already given, is only moved. But in so far as we speak of
forces by means of which matter acts upon matter, or moves
itself, this is a very different thing from the determination and
relation which they were supposed to have as moments of
matter.

In a further determination centripetal and centrifugal force
form the same antithesis as attractive and repulsive force. The
former seem to offer an essential distinction, since in their
sphere one One, or centre, is fixed, relatively to which other
Ones behave as not self-existent, so that the distinction between
the forces may be connected to this presupposed distinction
between a central One and others which are not independent
relatively to it. But in so far as they are used for explanation,
for which purpose (like Repulsive and Attractive force) they
are taken to be in inverse quantitative ratio, one increasing as
the other decreases, the phenomenon of movement and its
inequality, which they are accepted in order to explain, is
supposed only to result from them. However, it is only necessary
to examine any exposition of a phenomenon, like the unequal
velocity of a planet in its orbit around the central body, to see
that, when based on the opposition of these forces, it is full of
confusion and that it is impossible to disentangle the magni-
tudes; so that the one, which in the exposition is assumed to be
diminishing, may just as well be assumed to increase, and con-
versely. To make this evident would require an exposition more
lengthy than can be offered here; what is essential occurs
below, under the category of Inverse Ratio.


SECTION TWO
MAGNITUDE (QUANTITY)


We have indicated the difference between Quantity and
Quality. Quality is primary and immediate determinateness;
quantity is such determinateness as has become indifferent to
Being. It is a limit which also is no limit, it is Being-for-Self
which is simply identical with Being-for-Other, the Repulsion
of many Ones which immediately is their Non-Repulsion or
continuousness.

Now Being-for-Self has been so posited as not to exclude its
Other but rather affirmatively to continue itself into it; hence
it is Otherness (in so far as Determinate Being again arises in
this continuity) and its determinateness simultaneously ceases
to be simply self-related and is no longer the immediate deter-
minateness of the determinately existing Something; instead,
it is posited as self-repelling and as having its relation to itself,
as determinateness, rather in some other Determinate Being
(which is for itself); and, since also they exist as indifferent,
intro-reflected, and relationless limits, determinateness is simply
beyond itself; it is external to itself and is a Something as
equally external; such a limit, together with the indifference
of itself to itself and to Something, constitutes its quantitative
determinateness.

Pure Quantity must here be distinguished from determinate
quantity, or Quantum. As the former, Quantity is, first, real
Being-for-Self, which has returned upon itself and as yet has
no determinateness ; as infinite, homogeneous unity which con-
tinues into itself.

Secondly, this passes over into a determinateness, which is
posited of it as one which is none, or, rather, is only external.
It becomes Quantum. Quantum is indifferent determinateness,
that is, it passes beyond and negates itself; as this otherness
of otherness it is caught in the infinite progress. Infinite Quan-
tum, however, is the transcendence of indifferent determinate-
ness, it is the rehabilitation of Quality.


MAGNITUDE (QUANTITY) 199


Thirdly, Quantum in qualitative form is quantitative relation.
Quantum merely passes beyond itself; in Relation it passes over
into its otherness in such a way that the latter, which forms its
determination, is posited simultaneously, and is another Quan-
tum; we then find that it has returned to itself and that it is
related to itself (namely in its otherness).

Further, this relation is based on the externality of Quantum;
the quanta which are related (that is, whose self-relation con-
sists in their being beyond themselves) are indifferent. Thus
this relation is a merely formal unity of Quality and Quantity.
The dialectic of this relation is its transition into their absolute
unity, into Measure.


Observation


In the Something, its limit, as Quality, essentially is its
determinateness. But if by limit we mean quantitative limit,
and a field (for instance) changes this its limit, it remains what
it was—field. Whereas if its qualitative limit is changed, then
its determinateness, which makes it a field, is changed, and
it becomes meadow, forest, and so on.—A red which becomes
darker or lighter still is red; but if it were to change its quality,
it would cease to be red and would become blue or some other
colour.—This determination of magnitude as Quantum as
deduced above—namely, an unchanging substratum of Being
which is indifferent to its determinateness—can also be deduced
from every other example.

By magnitude Quantum is meant, as in the examples cited,
and not Quantity; this is the chief reason why this alien term
must be borrowed.

The definition of magnitude which mathematicians employ
also refers to Quantum. Magnitude is generally defined as
something which may be increased or diminished. But to
increase means to make something more great (maius), and to
diminish to make it less great (minus). Thus there is a distinction
between magnitude in general and itself, and magnitude
appears as something of which the magnitude may be varied.
The definition thus proves improper, since it employs the
determination which it would define. In so far as the same
determination must not be employed in it, “more” and “less”
must be analysed into an affirmative addition (which, according


200 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


to the nature of Quantum, is likewise external) and a sub-
traction (an equally external negation). Indeed, it is to this
external kind both of Reality and of Negation that the nature
of change determines itself in Quantum. The governing
moment, therefore (which is the main matter) must not be mis-
taken in this incomplete expression; namely, the indifference
to change, so that its own More and Less, its indifference to
itself, lies in its very concept.


CHAPTERI
QUANTITY


A
PURE QUANTITY


Quantity is Being-for-Self transcended; the repelling One,
which (as we saw) remains merely negative towards the ex-
cluded One, has passed over into relation to it, and, becoming
identical with Other, has lost its determination ; Being-for-Self
has passed over into Attraction. The absolute brittleness of the
repelling One has melted down into this unity; and this, since
it contains this One and also is determined by the immanent
Repulsion, is unity with itself as being unity with Being-beyond-
self. Attraction thus is the moment of continuity in Quantity.

Continuity thus is simple and self-identical self-relation,
interrupted by no limit or exclusion; not, however, an imme-
diate unity, but a unity of the Ones which are for themselves.
The externality of plurality is here still contained, but as
something undifferentiated and uninterrupted. In continuity,
plurality is posited as it is in itself; each of the many is what
the others are, each is equal to the other, and hence plurality
is simple and undifferentiated equality. Continuity is this
moment of the self-identity of Being-external-to-one-another,
the self-prolongation of different Ones into other and distinct
Ones.

Thus Magnitude in continuity has the moment of discrete-
ness immediately—Repulsion, which now in Quantity is bare
moment.—Stability is self-identity, self-identity of the many
which do not become exclusive; it is only Repulsion which
expands self-identity into continuity. And thus on its side dis-
creteness is coalescent discreteness, where the Ones are related
not to the void (or negative) but to their own stability, and
do not, in the Many, interrupt this self-identity.

Quantity is the unity of these moments, of continuity and
discreteness ; but at the outset it is so in the form of one of them,


G*


202 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


namely of continuity; and this is the result of the dialectic of
Being-for-Self, which has collapsed into the form of self-identical
immediacy. Quantity as such is just this simple result, in so far
as its moments are not yet developed, nor posited in it.—At
present, posited as Being-for-self as it truly is, it only contains
them. It was determined as self-transcendent self-relation, a
perennial egress beyond itself. But that which it repels is itself;
and thus Repulsion is its own creative onward flow. Because
of this identity with that which is repulsed, this discreteness is
an uninterrupted continuity; and because it passes beyond
itself, this continuity, without being interrupted, is at the same
time plurality, which equally immediately remains in its identity
with itself.


Observation 1


Pure Quantity as yet has no limit, or in other words is
not yet Quantum; and even in so far as it becomes Quantum,
limit does not bar it in; it rather consists in the fact that limit
does not bar it in, and that it contains Being-for-Self as tran-
scended. Discreteness is moment in it, which may be expressed
by saying that Quantity always and everywhere is the real
potentiality of One, but that also conversely One is equally
absolutely continuous.

Imagination operating without concept easily changes Con-
tinuity into Combination, that is, into an external relation of
the Ones to one another, the One remaining in its absolute
and brittle exclusiveness. But we saw when examining the One
that, in its own true nature, it passes over into its ideality,
which is Attraction, and that thus continuity is not external
but peculiar to it, and founded in its essence. It is this exter-
nality of continuity for the One in which atomism remains
entangled; it is this which imagination finds it so hard to
leave.—On the other hand, mathematics rejects a metaphysic
which should be content to allow time to consist of points of
time, space in general (or, as a first step, the line) of points
in space, the plane, of lines, and the whole of space, of planes;
it allows no validity to such discontinuous Ones. And although
it determines, for instance, the magnitude of a plane as con-
sisting of the sum of an infinity of lines, yet this discreteness
is taken only as a momentary image; and the infinite plurality


QUANTITY 203


of lines implies, since the space which they are meant to con-
stitute is after all limited, that their discreteness has already
been transcended.

It is the concept of pure Quantity as opposed to the mere
image of it that Spinoza (to whom it was of especial importance)
has in mind when he speaks of Quantity as follows (Eth. P. I.
Prop. XV, Schol.) :—


Quantitas duobus modis a nobis concipitur, abstracte scilicet sive super-
ficialiter, prout nempe ipsam imaginamur; vel ut substantia, quod a solo
intellectu fit. Si itaque ad quantitatem attendimus, prout in imaginatione
est, quod saepe et facilius a nobis fit, reperietur finita, divisibilis, et ex
partibus conflata, si autem ad ipsam, prout in intellectu est, attendimus,
et eam, quatenus substantia est, concipimus, quod difficillime fit,—infinita,
unica, et indivisibilis reperietur. Quod omnibus, qui inter imaginationem
et intellectum distinguere sciverint, satis manifestum erit.


Should more definite examples of pure Quantity be demanded,
Space and Time, Matter in general, Light, and so forth,
the Ego itself, will furnish them; only by Quantity we must
not understand (as was remarked above) Quantum. Space,
Time, and so on, are expansions or pluralities where egress
beyond self, and a constant flow, take place; though what is
reached is not the opposite (Quality, or the One), but, passing
beyond themselves, they are engaged upon a perpetual self-
production of their unity.

Space is such an absolute being-beyond-self; it is also
absolutely uninterrupted, a still-repeated otherness which is
identical with itself; and Time is an absolute passing-beyond-
self, a creation of the One (the point of time or Now), which
immediately becomes the annihilation of it, and also the per-
petual annihilation of this destruction: so that this self-creation
of Not-being is also simple self-equality and self-identity.—As
regards Matter as Quantity, among the seven Prepositions
surviving of the first dissertation of Leibniz there is one (the
second) which deals with this (left-hand page of Part One of
his works); it runs thus: Non omnino improbabile est, materiam
et quantitatem esse realiter idem.—And, indeed, there is no differ-
ence between these concepts, save that Quantity is a pure
determination of thought, while Matter is the same as existing
externally.— The Ego, too, is determined as pure Quantity,
since it is an absolute alienation, an infinite removal or universal


204 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


repulsion towards the negative freedom of Being-for-Self, though
it remains absolutely simple continuity—the continuity of uni-
versality or Being-with-Self, which is not interrupted by the
infinite variety of limits, the content of sensations, intuitions,
and so forth.—Those who refuse to take plurality as simple
unity, and want an image of this unity, apart from the concept
(namely, that each of the Many is the same as every other,
that is, One of the Many,—since we are not here speaking of
many further determined, of green, red, and so on, but of the
Many considered in itself), will find plenty of examples among
those static existences which offer as present the deduced
concept of Quantity in simple intuition.


Observation 2


It is the nature of Quantity to be this simple unity of Dis-
creteness and Continuity; and to this appertains the conflict
or Antinomy of the infinite divisibility of Space, of Time, of
Matter, and so on.

This antinomy consists solely in the necessity of asserting
Discreteness as much as Continuity. The one-sided assertion
of Discreteness gives an infinite or absolute division (and thus
something indivisible) for principle; and the one-sided assertion
of Continuity, infinite divisibility.

Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason sets up, as is well known,
four (cosmological) Antinomies, the second of which deals with
the opposition which is constituted by the moments of Quantity.

These Kantian antinomies still remain an important part
of the critical philosophy; they, principally, effected the fall
of the previous metaphysics, and may be looked on as a chief
transition to modern philosophy ; for they in particular assisted
to produce a conviction of the invalidity of the categories of
finitude by examining their content ;—and this is a more correct
method than that formal method of a subjective idealism
according to which their only fault is supposed to be that they
are subjective, and not that which they are in themselves. But,
great as are its merits, this exposition is very incomplete, being
in part self-hampered and cross-grained, and in part faulty in
view of its result which assumes that cognition has no other
form of thought than finite categories.—In both respects these


QUANTITY 205


antinomies deserve a more exact criticism, as well investigating
their standpoint and method more closely as liberating the
main and essential point from the useless mould into which
it has been forced.

First I remark that Kant tried to give an appearance of
completeness to his four cosmological antinomies by his method
of classification, which he borrowed from his scheme of cate-
gories. A deeper insight into the antinomous or, rather, into
the dialectic nature of Reason shows, however, that every con-
cept is a unity of opposite moments, which could therefore be
asserted in the shape of an antinomy. Thus, Becoming, Deter-
minate Being, and so on, and other concepts, could each
furnish its particular antinomy, and as many antinomies could
be set up as concepts were yielded.—The old scepticism did
not shrink from the labour of demonstrating this contradic-
tion or antinomy in every concept which it found in the
sciences.

Next, Kant took the antinomy not in the concepts themselves,
but in the already concrete form of cosmological determina-
tions. In order to have a pure antinomy which might be dealt
with in its simple concept, it was necessary not to take the
determinations of thought in their application to and admixture
with the ideas of World, Space, Time, Matter, and so on,
but to consider them purely for themselves without this con-
crete material, which here has no force nor avail; for these
determinations alone constitute the essence and base of the
antinomies.

Kant offers this concept of the antinomies, that they are
no tricks of sophistry, but contradictions which Reason must
necessarily hit on (as Kant puts it) : a view which is important.
— “The natural appearance of the antinomies no longer actively
deludes Reason when it perceives its base; yet still Reason is
deceived by it.”—Naturally ; for the critical solution by means
of the so-called transcendental ideality of the world of per-
ception has no other result than this, that it makes the so-called
conflict into something subjective; and there, of course, it
remains appearance, that is, it remains unresolved, as much
as before. The true solution can only be this, that two deter-
minations, being contradictory, and yet necessary to the same
concept, cannot be valid each by itself in its one-sidedness, but


206 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


have their truth only in their transcendence, in the unity of
their concept.

More closely considered, the Kantian antinomies contain
no more than the simple categorical assertion of each one of
the two opposed moments of a determination, apart from the
other. But while this is done, the simple categorical or rather
assertorical statement is enveloped in a scaffolding of reasoning,
awry and crooked, intended to produce a show of proofs and
to hide and disguise its merely assertorical character. This will
become clear on closer examination.

The antinomy proper to this place is that of the so-called
infinite divisibility of matter, and is based on the opposition
between the moments of continuity and discreteness contained
in the concept of Quantity.

In Kant’s exposition the Thesis is as follows :—

“Every composite substance in the world consists of simple
parts, and there exists everywhere nothing but what is simple
or is composed of simple parts.”

Here to the simple, the atom, is opposed the composite,
which as compared with the static or continuous is a rudi-
mentary determination.—The substratum given to these ab-
stractions (namely, substances in the world) means no more
than things as perceived by the senses, and is irrelevant to the
antinomy ; Space or Time might equally well have been taken.
—Since now the thesis deals only with compositeness instead
of continuity, it is really an analytical or tautological proposi-
tion. That the composite is not One in itself, but is only
something put together externally and consisting of Other, is
its immediate determination. But the Other of the composite
is the simple. It is therefore a tautology to say that the com-
posite consists of the simple.—If it is asked of what something
consists, it is demanded that something other be indicated, the
compounding of which constitutes this something. If ink is to
be made up just of ink, then the meaning of the question which
asks of what other bodies it consists is missed and, not being
answered, merely repeats itself. It is then a further question
whether the object of enquiry is to consist of something or not.
But the composite is just that which is supposed to be a con-
glomeration and to consist of others.—If the simple (which is
allowed to be Other to the composite) is taken as merely


QUANTITY 207


relatively simple, but again composite in itself, then the question
still remains. Imagination has before it only this or that concrete
composite, of which this or that Something might be indicated
as its simple unit, though composite in itself. But here we are
speaking of the composite as such.

As regards Kant’s proof of the Thesis, it—like all Kant’s
proofs of the remaining antinomous propositions—makes the
detour (which will prove highly superfluous) of being apagogic.

“Assume” (he begins) “that the composite substances do not
consist of simple parts; then, if all composition were mentally
removed, there would be no composite part; now we have
assumed that there are no simple parts; there is therefore no
simple part—and hence nothing at all—left ; hence no substance
is given us.” —

This conclusion is quite correct: if there is only composite
and we imagine everything composite removed, then nothing
remains; we may grant this, but this tautological superfluity
might be spared, and the proof might begin with what follows,
namely :—

“Either all composition cannot be mentally removed, or, it
being removed, something subsisting without composition—
namely, the simple—must remain.”

“But in the first case again the composite would not consist
of substances (for with these compositeness is only a contingent
relation of the substances,: and they must be capable of existing
as persistent beings without it).—But this case is contradictory
to the hypothesis, and thereiore only the second remains:
namely, that all composite substance consists of simple parts.”

The reason which is the main point, compared with which
all that has been said is quite superfluous, is relegated to a
parenthesis. The dilemma is this :—That which persists is either
the composite or else the simple. If the first (the composite)
were that which persists, then that which persists is not the
substances, for in these compositeness is a contingent relation ;
but the substances are that which persists, therefore that which
persists is the simple.

It is evident that the apagogic detour might be avoided, and


ı Here redundance of language is added to redundance in proof,—‘“‘for with
these (to wit, the substances) compositeness is only a contingent relation of the
substances.”


208 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


that to the Thesis (“Composite substance consists of simple
parts”) this reason might immediately be added as proof,
namely that compositeness is merely a contingent relation of
the substances, external to and not concerned with them.—If
compositeness is in truth contingent, then the essence is of
course the simple. But this contingency, which is the sole point
at issue, is not proved but simply assumed (in parenthesis) as
though it were obvious or beside the point. It is, of course,
self-evident that compositeness is the determination of con-
tingency and externality; but, if we were only about to deal
with a contingent juxtaposition instead of continuity, it was
not worth while to set up an antinomy about it, or, rather, it
was impossible; in that case it is mere tautology (as was said)
to assert that the parts are simple.

Thus in the apagogic detour we see that the very assertion
which is to be its result already occurs. Thus the proof might
more briefly be put as follows :—

Let it be assumed that substances do not consist of simple
parts, but are composite. Now all composition can be thought
away (since it is a merely contingent relation) ; it being removed,
therefore, no substances remain unless they consist of simple
parts. But we must have substances, since we assumed their
existence ; everything must not vanish, something must remain;
for we have presupposed that some such persistent entity (which
we called substance) exists. Therefore this something must be
simple.

To complete matters, we must consider the conclusion, which
runs as follows :—

“Hence it follows immediately that all the things in the
world are simple essences, that compositeness is a condition
merely external to them, and that reason must consider the
elementary substances to be simple essences.”

Here the external, that is, the contingent, nature of com-
positeness is cited as a consequence, after having already been
introduced parenthetically and used in the proof.

Kant protests much that he is not looking for sophisms in
the conflicting propositions of the antinomy, in order to effect
(as the phrase is) an advocate’s proof. Indeed, this proof is not
really to be accused of sophistry so much as of a forced and
useless tortuosity, which serves only to produce the outer form


QUANTITY 209


of a proof, not allowing it to be perfectly transparent that that
which should stand out as conclusion is the (parenthetic) hinge
of the proof, and that there is no proof but only an assumption.

The Antithesis is as follows :—

“No composite thing in the world consists of simple parts,
and nothing simple anywhere exists in it.”

The proof again has the apagogic turn, and in another
manner is as faulty as the previous.

“Assume,” it runs, “that a composite thing as substance
consists of simple parts. Now all external relation (and therefore
also the composition of substances) is possible only in space,
and therefore the space which it occupies must consist of as
many parts as those of which the composite thing consists.
Now space does not consist of simple parts, but of spaces.
Therefore each part of the composite thing must occupy one
space.”

“But the absolutely first parts of every composite thing are
simple.”

“Hence the simple thing occupies a space.”

“Now every reality which occupies a space comprehends a
manifold of mutual externalities; it is therefore composed (of
substances), and thus the simple would be a substantial com-
posite, which is self-contradictory.”

This proof may be called a perfect nest (to use an expression
which is elsewhere employed by Kant) of faulty procedure.

First, the apagogic turn is a baseless fabric. The assumption
that whatever is substantial is spatial, while space does not
consist of simple parts, is a direct assertion which is made the
immediate foundation of that which is to be proved; after this
there is no need for further proof.

Next, this apagogic proof begins with the proposition “that
all composition of substances is an external relation,” but,
strangely enough, immediately forgets it. For the further con-
clusion is made that composition can take place only in space,
that space does not consist of simple parts, and that therefore
the reality occupying a space is composite. If once composite-
ness has been taken as an external relation, then spatiality itself
(since composition is supposed to be possible in it alone) is for
that very reason a relation external to the substances, which
does not concern them nor touch their nature any more than

VOL. I


210 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


does all the rest that can be inferred from the determination
of spatiality. For this very reason the substances should not be
placed in space.

Further, it is assumed that the space into which the sub-
stances are here transplanted does not consist of simple parts;
since it is an intuition (that is, according to Kant’s determina-
tion, a sensuous representation) which can be given only by
one single object, and is not a so-called discursive concept.—
This distinction of Kant’s between intuition and concept has,
of course, led to the abuse of the former, and, in order to save
the labour of achieving the latter, its value and sphere have
been extended to all cognition. What is relevant here is this,
that space, like intuition itself; must be conceived if we would
have any concept at all. And thus the question would arise
whether space, though simple continuity for intuition, might
not conceptually have to be taken as composed of simple parts,
since otherwise space would be affected by that same antinomy
into which substance only was transplanted. Indeed, if the
antinomy is taken in the abstract, it extends to all Quantity
(as was said above) and therefore also to Space and Time.

Now in the proof it is assumed that space does not consist
of simple parts; and this should have been sufficient reason for
not transplanting the simple into this element, which is inade-
quate to the determination of the simple.—Here also the con-
tinuity of space comes into collision with compositeness ; these
two are confused, and the former is inserted in the place of
the latter (which results in a Quaternio terminorum in the con-
clusion). Kant expressly determines space as being one, its parts
being based only on limitations, so that they do not precede
space, sole and all-comprehending, as its component parts from
which it could be put together. (Critique of Pure Reason, Second
Ed., p. 39.) Here continuity is predicated of space, very justly
and definitely, in opposition to its compositeness out of parts.
In the proof, on the other hand, the transplanting of the sub-
stances into space is to involve “a manifold of mutual exter-
nalities,” which, further, is “therefore composite.” Yet we have
quoted what shows that the manner in which a manifold exists
in space is expressly designed to exclude compositeness and
parts which precede its unity.

In the Note to the proof of the Antithesis, the other funda-


QUANTITY 211


mental notion of the critical philosophy is further expressly
adduced, namely, that we have a concept of bodies only as
phenomena, which, as such, necessarily presuppose space as the
condition of the possibility of all external manifestation. If by
substances mere bodies are meant, such as are seen, felt, tasted,
and so forth, then there is really no question of their concep-
tual meaning: sense-perception only is in question. The proof
of the Antithesis might then be put in brief thus :—All visual,
sensory, and other experience shows us only what is composite ;
the best microscopes and the keenest knives have never yet
allowed us to hit on anything simple. Therefore Reason, too,
should not want to hit on anything simple.

And thus when now we regard more closely this opposition
of Thesis and Antithesis, liberating their proofs of all idle
superfluity and tortuousness, we find that the proof of the
Antithesis, by transplanting the substances into space, contains
a dogmatic assumption of Continuity, and that the proof of the
Thesis, by assuming Compositeness as the class of relation sub-
sistent between the substances, contains the dogmatic assump-
tion of the contingency of this relation—that is, the assumption
that the substances are absolute Ones. Thus the whole antinomy
reduces itself to the separation and direct assertion of the two
moments of Quantity as being absolutely separate. Looked at
from the point of view of mere discreteness, substance, matter,
space and time, and so on, are absolutely divided, and the One
is their principle. From the point of view of continuity, this
One is merely suspended: division remains divisibility, the
possibility of dividing remains as possibility, without ever
actually reaching the atom. Now even if we do not move
beyond the determination implied in what has been said about
these contradictions, still continuity itself contains the moment
of the atom, since continuity exists simply as the possibility of
division ; just as accomplished division, or discreteness, cancels
all distinction between the Ones—for each simple One is what
every other is,—and for that very reason contains their equality
and therefore their continuity. Each of the two opposed sides
contains its other in itself, and neither can be thought of with-
out the other; and thus it follows that, taken alone, neither
determination has truth, but only their unity. This is the true
dialectic consideration of them, and the true result.


212 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


The dialectic examples of the old Eleatic school, especially
those which deal with motion, are incomparably deeper and
richer in meaning than the antinomy of Kant which we have
considered. They, too, are based on the concept of Quantity,
and in it have their solution. To consider them here would
lead too far; they concern the concepts of Space and Time,
and can be dealt with in connexion with these subjects and
with the history of philosophy. —They do the highest honour
to the reason of their inventors; their result is the pure Being
of Parmenides, since they demonstrate the solution into itself
of all determinate being: in themselves, therefore, they are the
Flux of Herakleitos. They therefore deserve a fuller considera-
tion than the ordinary explanation that they are just sophisms ;
—an assertion which clings to empirical perception, following
that method of Diogenes (so convincing to common sense),
who, when a dialectician demonstrated the contradiction con-
tained in motion, is said to have put no further strain on his
reason, but, by mutely walking up and down, to have referred
to the evidence of the eyes;—an assertion and a refutation
which of course it is easier to make than to enter upon thought,
to seize the confusions into which thought, quite unforced,
leads when it formulates itself in ordinary consciousness, and
to solve them by means of thought.

The solution of these dialectic formations which Aristotle
effects is highly to be praised: it is implied in his truly specu-
lative concepts of Space, Time, and Motion. Infinite divisibility
(which, being imagined as actually completed, is equivalent
to infinite division, or the atoms), as being the principle on
which are based the most famous of these proofs, is by him
opposed to Continuity (of Time as well as of Space), in such
a manner that infinite—that is, abstract—plurality is contained
in continuity only in itself, or potentially. The actual, as
opposed to abstract plurality (or to abstract continuity), is their
concrete form, it is Time and Space itself; and these in turn.
are opposed to Motion and Matter. The abstract exists only
in itself, or potentially ; it exists only as a moment of the Real.
Bayle in his Dictionnaire (Article, Zenon) considers Aristotle’s
solution of Zeno’s dialectic “pitoyable” : he does not understand
the meaning of the potentially infinite divisibility of matter. He
replies that if matter is infinitely divisible, it actually contains


=~
“ J r Le
te


QUANTITY | 213


an infinite number of parts, so that this is not an infinite en
puissance but an infinite really and actually existing. —No:
divisibility itself is only a potentiality, not an existence of parts;
and in any case, in Continuity, plurality is posited only as a
moment already transcended.—Keen understanding—though
in this, too, probably Aristotle has not been excelled—is not
sufficient to seize and judge his speculative concepts; nor is
the clumsy method of sensuous representation which we cited
sufficient to refute such arguments as Zeno used. Such an
understanding makes the mistake of taking these objects of
thought or abstraction, such as an infinite number of parts,
for Something, for true and actual ; and this sensuous conscious-
ness will never let itself be raised from the sphere of the empirical
to that of Thought.

Kant’s solution of the antinomy, too, consists only in demand-
ing that Reason must not rise above sense-perception, but must
take the phenomenon as it is. This solution leaves on one side
the content of the antinomy; it does not reach the nature of
the concept of its determinations, each of which, isolated by
itself, is null, being no more than a transition to its Other,
while Quantity is their unity and therefore their truth.


B
CONTINUOUS AND DISCRETE MAGNITUDE


1. Quantity contains the two moments of Continuity and
Discreteness. Each is its determination, and it must therefore
be posited in each.—Primarily it is their immediate unity, that
is, primarily it is posited only in one of its determinations,
namely, continuity ; and thus is Continuous Magnitude.

Or again, continuity is one of the moments of Quantity
which requires the other moment, discreteness, to complete it.
But still Quantity is concrete unity only in so far as it is the
unity of distinct moments. The moments therefore must be taken
as distinct, but must not be resolved back into Attraction and
Repulsion ; they must be taken in their truth, as each forming
the whole in its unity with the other. Continuity is only
coherent and homogeneous unity as unity of discrete elements,


214 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


and, posited thus, it is no longer mere moment but complete
Quantity: this is Continuous Magnitude.

2. Immediate quantity is Continuous Magnitude. But in
fact Quantity is not immediate; immediacy is a determinate-
ness, and Quantity itself is this immediacy transcended. It must
therefore be posited in the determinateness immanent in it,
and this is the One. Quantity is Discrete Magnitude.

Discreteness, like continuity, is a moment of Quantity, but
is also the whole of Quantity just because it is a moment of
this whole, and thus, as distinct from it, does not relinquish
its unity with the other moment. —Quantity is externality in
itself, and Continuous Magnitude is this externality as pro-
pagating itself without negation, as a context which remains
at one in itself. Discrete Magnitude is this externality as non-
continuous or interrupted. But though we thus have a multi-
tude of Ones, this is not the multitude of atoms and the void,
or Repulsion in general, meeting us once again: Discrete
Magnitude is Quantity; and for that very reason their dis-
creteness is continuous. The continuity in discreteness consists
in the fact that the Ones are equal to one another, or have
the same unity. Discrete Magnitude, then, is the externality of
much One posited as the same, and not of the many Ones in
general; it is posited as the Many of one unity.


Observation


Ordinarily, when an image is formed of Continuous and of
Discrete Magnitude, it is overlooked that each of these mag-
nitudes has both the moments, continuity and discreteness, and
that their difference is only constituted by which of the two
moments is posited determinateness, and which that which only
is in itself. Space, Time, Matter, and so on, are fixed mag-
nitudes because each is a repulsion from itself, where there
is a stream of extrogression without any transition or relation
to what is qualitatively Other. They have the absolute poten-
tiality of the One being posited relatively to them, and not
merely as the empty potentiality of. a mere otherness (as we
say that a tree might occupy the space occupied by a stone) :
they contain in themselves the principle of the One, it is one
of the determinations which constitute them.


QUANTITY 215


Conversely, continuity must not be overlooked in Discrete
Magnitude: this moment, as has been shown, is the One as
unity.

Continuous and Discrete Magnitude may be considered as
species of Quantity, but only in so far as magnitude is posited
not under any external determinateness, but solely under the
determinatenesses of its own moments; the ordinary transition
from genus to species allows external determinations to be
applied to these according to some external principle of classi-
fication. And so far Continuous and Discrete Magnitude are
not yet Quanta: they are Quantity itself in each one of its two
forms. If they are called magnitude, this is because they have
this in common with Quantum, to be a determinateness applied
to Quantity.


C
LIMITATION OF QUANTITY


Discrete Magnitude, first, has the One for principle ; secondly,
it is a plurality of Ones; thirdly, it is, essentially, static; it is
One, but One transcended, or as unity; it is self-continuation
as such in the discreteness of the Ones. It is therefore posited
as one magnitude, and its determinateness is the One, which,
in this positedness and determinate being is exclusive One, or
Limit, applied to unity. Discrete Magnitude as such is not to
be limited immediately; but, as distinct from Continuous
Magnitude, it exists as a Determinate Being and a Something
whose determinateness is One, and, as being in a Determinate
Being, is also first negation and Limit.

This Limit is referred to unity and applied to it as negation,
and, besides this, as One is also referred to itself; it is thus
including and comprehending Limit. Here the Limit is not
distinguished from the Something of its Determinate Being,
but, as One, is immediately this negative point itself. But the
Being which here is limited exists essentially as continuity, by
virtue of which it passes beyond the Limit and beyond this
One, and is indifferent to them. Real discrete Quantity is
therefore one Quantity, or Quantum, —Quantity as Determinate
Being and Something.


216 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Since the One, which is Limit, comprehends in itself the
many Ones of discrete Quantity, it in so doing also posits them
as transcended in itself. It is Limit as applied to continuity in
general as such, and hence the distinction between Continuous
and Discrete Magnitude is here immaterial; or, rather, it is
Limit to the continuity of the one as much as of the other:
both pass over into the state of Quantum.


ER


CHAPTER II
QUANTUM


Quantum— which, first, means Quantity having any deter-
minateness or limit at all—is, in its complete determinateness,
Number. It is divided into

secondly (a) Extensive Quantum, where the Limit is the
Barrier of a plurality there existing; (b) Intensive Quantum
or Degree, the plurality having passed over into being-for-self.
This Barrier being for itself, and therefore as Limit indifferent,
is equally immediately outside itself and has its determinate-
ness in an Other. Thus Quantum is a posited contradiction,
it is simply determined for itself and also has its determinate-
ness outside itself and thus refers beyond itself; it therefore

thirdly passes over, as that which is itself posited as external
to itself, into Quantitative Infinity.


A
NUMBER


Quantity is Quantum; it has a Limit, whether it be taken
as continuous or as discrete magnitude. The distinction between
these two species is here of no importance.

As transcended Being-for-Self, Quantity in itself already is
indifferent to its Limit. For that very reason Limit (or the
fact that it is a Quantum) is not indifferent to it; for it contains
the One, or absolute determinateness, in itself as its own
moment, which thus posited in its continuity or oneness is its
Limit, but yet remains that One which it has become.

This One is thus the principle of Quantum; but it is the
One of Quantity. Hence, first, it is continuous, or Unity;
secondly, it is discrete, plurality of Ones which is in itself
(as in continuous magnitude) or posited (as in discrete mag-
nitude): these Ones are equal to one another, they have this
continuity, this same unity. Thirdly, this One is also negation
of the many Ones as simple Limit, an exclusion of otherness,


218 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


or a determination of itself in opposition to other Quanta. One
is thus Limit (a) referring to itself, (£) inclusive, and (y) ex-
clusive of Other.

Quantum completely posited in these determinations is
Number. Complete positedness is implied by the existence of
the Limit as plurality and its consequent distinctness from
unity. Hence Number appears as discrete magnitude, but in
unity it also has continuity. Hence too it is Quantum in com-
plete determinateness: for in it Limit is determinate plurality,
having for principle One, the absolutely determinate. Con-
tinuity, where One is only in itself or as transcended (posited
as unity)—is the form of indeterminateness.

Quantum, merely as such, is limited generally; its limit is
its abstract and simple determinateness. But since it is Number,
the Limit is posited as being manifold within itself. It contains
the many Ones which constitute its Determinate Being, but
not in a merely indeterminate manner: the determinateness
of the Limit falls within it. The Limit excludes other Deter-
minate Being, that is, other Manies: the Ones included in it
are a determinate heap, an Amount. This is discreteness as
` it is in Number, and hence its other is Unity, the continuity
of this. Amount and Unit constitute the moments of Number.

With regard to Amount, it must further be considered in
what manner the many Ones of which it consists are in the
Limit; it is correct to say of Amount that it consists of the
Many, for in it the Ones do not exist as transcended, but in
it they are, posited only with the excluding Limit, to which
they are indifferent. The Limit is not, however, indifferent to
them. The relation of Determinate Being to Limit (as was seen
when that category was treated) was such that Determinate
Being, as the affirmative, remained on this side of its Limit,
while the Limit (or negation) remained outside, at the edge;
similarly, with the many Ones, the abrupt exclusion of other
Ones appears as a determination falling without the included
Ones. But it was seen above that Determinate Being is pene-
trated by Limit and is coextensive with it, and that thus some-
thing is inherently limited, that is, finite—Thus Number—
which is Quantitative—is imagined in such a way that with
one hundred, for instance, the hundredth One alone shall limit
the Many in such a manner as to make them one hundred.


"i


QUANTUM 219


This is correct; yet among the hundred Ones none is preferred
individually, since all are equal : each equally is the hundredth ;
they all equally belong to the Limit which makes the number
one hundred, and, for the determinateness of the number, not
one can be spared. Thus the others do not constitute relatively
to the hundredth One a Determinate Being external to the
limit, or distinct from it within it. Amount then is not a
plurality as opposed to the inclusive and limiting One, but
rather itself constitutes the limitation which is a determinate
Quantum : the Many constitute one number, One two, One ten,
One hundred, and so forth. 3

Now the limiting One is determinateness against Other, the
distinguishing of one number from another. But this dis-
tinguishing does not become qualitative determinateness; it
remains quantitative and appertains only to external com-
paring reflection: Number, as One, has returned upon itself,
and at this resting-place it remains indifferent to Others. This
indifference of Number to Others is its essential determination:
by virtue of it, Number is determinate-in-itself, but also in
itself external.—It is thus a numerical One, as absolutely
determinate; it has the form of simple immediacy, and there-
fore relation to Other is quite external to it. And as being One
which is Number, it further has determinateness (in so far as
it is relation to Other) as its moments in itself, in its distinction
between Unit and Amount; and Amount itself is plurality of
Ones, that is, in itself it is this absolute externality —This
contradiction of Number, or of Quantum in general, in itself,
is the quality of Quantum: this contradiction develops itself
in the further determinations of the latter.


Observation 1


Spatial and numerical magnitude are generally considered
as two species, each being a determinate magnitude as much
as the other; and it is thought that, the distinction being only
in the different determinations of continuity and discreteness,
they rank equally as Quantum. Geometry, in spatial magni-
tude, generally has continuous magnitude for object; and
arithmetic, in numerical, has discrete magnitude for object.
But, the objects being thus different, they are not limited or


220 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


determined in the same manner or with the same completeness.
Spatial magnitude is merely limited in the abstract; if it must
be considered as a definitely determinate Quantum, Number
is required. Geometry as such does not measure spatial figures
—it is not the art of measuring: it only compares. In its
definitions too the determinations partly are derived from
equality of sides and angles, or from equidistance. Thus the
circle, since it is based solely upon the equidistance of all
possible points in it from a centre, can be determined with-
out Number. These determinations, based on equality and
inequality, are true geometry. But they are not sufficient, and
others, such as triangle or quadrilateral, require Number,
which in its principle, the One, contains determinedness-for-
self, not determinedness by the aid of an Other, hence not by
comparison. It is true that, in the point, spatial magnitude
has a determinateness corresponding to the One; but the
point, in so far as it passes out of itself, becomes an Other,
becomes the line; and, being essentially the One of Space, it
becomes, when related, a continuity, in which its puncticity
(or determinedness-for-self, or the One) is transcended. In so
far as determinedness-for-self is to preserve itself in self-exter-
nality, the line must be imagined as a multitude of Ones, and
the Limit must contain the determination of many Ones; that
is, the magnitude of the line—like other spatial determinations
— must be taken as Number.

Arithmetic contemplates Number and its figures; or, rather,
itoperates with them and does not contemplate. For Number
is indifferent determinateness and inert; it must be actuated
and brought into relation from without. The different methods
of relation are the species of calculation. In arithmetic they are
enumerated in series, and it is evident that they are mutually
dependent. But arithmetic does not give prominence to the
thread which guides their progress. However, the systematic
arrangement which the exposition of these elements in the
text-books justly claims, results easily from the conceptual
determination of Number itself. We will here briefly notice
these cardinal determinations.

The principle of Number is the One, and for this reason it
is a purely analytic figure ; its elements are connected externally, .
not internally. It is thus only an external creation; for which


QUANTUM 221


reason, too, all arithmetical operations are the production of
numbers, —numbering, or, more closely, adding together.
Variations in this external production, which ever proceeds
in the same manner, can depend only on relative diversity
between the numbers which are to be added together; such
diversity itself must come from another source, and from
external determination.

The qualitative distinction which constitutes the deter-
minateness of Number is, as we have seen, that which subsists
between Unit and Amount; hence all conceptual determinate-
ness which can arise in the species of calculation reduces itself
to this. But the distinction proper to numbers as Quanta is
external identity and external difference, or equality and
inequality; and these are moments of reflection, and must be
dealt with when we deal with the determinations of Essence
(under the heading of Difference).

And further we must premise that numbers can in general
be produced in two ways—by joining, or by disjoining what
was already joined. Each takes place in a manner of numbering
determined in the same way; and thus to the joining of numbers
there corresponds what may be called a positive kind of arith-
metic; and to disjoining, a negative; the determination of each
species of calculation itself is independent of this contrast.

1. We proceed to indicate the species. The first creation of
Number is the joining together of Manies as such, that is, such
as are posited each as One only,—Numbering. The Ones are
external to one another, and are thus imagined under a sense-
image: the operation which creates the number becomes a
process of counting fingers, dots, and so forth. We can only
point to an example of four, or of five, and so on. And the point
where the process of joining is broken is (since the Limit is
external) contingent and arbitrary.—The distinction between
Amount and Unit which arises in the process of the species
of calculation, becomes the basis of a system of numbers, such
as the dyadic, decadic, and so on; in general such system rests
on the choice of the amount which is consistently to be taken
as unit.

The numbers produced by numbering are once more num-
bered: posited thus immediately they are determined as
mutually quite unrelated, and indifferent to equality and


222 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


inequality; their relative magnitude is contingent; they are
hence altogether unequal. This is Addition. We discover that
7 and 5 make twelve by adding (by counting on our fingers
or otherwise) 5 more Ones to the 7; the result is afterwards
learnt by heart: but there is nothing internal here. We similarly
learn that 7x5 = 35 by counting on the fingers, and so forth,
one seven being added to another, this process being gone
through five times, and the result again being learnt by heart.
The trouble of numbering, the discovering of sums or products,
is abolished by the finished ‘‘one and one” or multiplication-
tables, which have only to be learnt by heart.

In the Introduction to the Critique of Pure Reason, V, Kant
has considered the proposition that 7+5 = 12 as a synthetic
proposition. “At first,” he says, ‘‘one should think [of course !]
that it is merely an analytical proposition, resulting from the
concept of a sum of seven and five by the Law of Contradiction.”
The concept of a sum is just this abstract determination that
these two numbers ought to be joined together, and that too
(since they are numbers) in an external and conceptless
manner,—that we are to count on from seven until the Ones
which are to be added (their amount being determined as five)
are exhausted ; the result bears the name independently known
as twelve. “But,” so Kant continues, “if we look more closely,
we find that the concept of the sum of seven and five contains
no more than the joining of these two numbers into one; it is
not thought at all what this single number is which compre-
hends these two;” “—however much I may analyse my con-
cept of such a possible sum, I shall never find twelve therein.”
The transition from the problem to the result has indeed
nothing to do with the thinking of the sum and the analysis
of the concept; and he adds, “We must pass beyond these
concepts and take to intuition, to five fingers and so on, adding
the five ones given by intuition to the concept of seven.” Of course
five is given intuitively, that is, it is an entirely external
agglomeration of the thought of one, arbitrarily repeated; but
equally seven itself is no concept; there are no concepts beyond
which a transition here is made. The sum of 5 and 7 is the
conceptless connexion of these two numbers, and the concept-
less process of numbering from seven on, until five are ex-
hausted, can literally be called a synthesis, which name can


QUANTUM l 223


__also be given to the process of numbering from one onwards ;—

but this synthesis is wholly analytical in nature, for the con-
nexion is quite artificial and nothing is introduced that is not
at hand externally. The postulate of adding 5 to 7 is to the
postulate of numbering at all as is the postulate of producing
a straight line to that of drawing a straight line.

The expression “‘synthesis” is void, and equally void is the
determination that it takes place a priori. Counting is not, of
course, a determination of sensation (which, according to
Kant’s determination of intuition, is all that remains to be
predicated of whatever is a posteriori), and it is an occupation
on the basis of abstract intuition: that is, it is determined
through the category of the One, and abstraction is here made
from all other determinations of sensation, as well as from
concepts. Altogether, the a priori is quite vague; and deter-
mination of feeling, in the shape of impulse, tendency, and
so forth, contains the moment of apriority as much as space
and time are determined as existing, and the temporal and
the spatial are determined, a posteriori.

We may add in this connexion that Kant’s assertion of the
synthetic nature of the foundations of pure geometry equally
lacks solidity. He asserts that several are really analytic, but
cites in favour of this idea only the proposition that the straight
line is the shortest between any two points. “My concept of
the straight does not contain anything about magnitude, but
only a Quality; thus the concept of shortest is a pure addition,
which can be extracted by no analysis from the concept of the
straight line: we must have recourse to intuition, and then
alone synthesis is possible.” —But here again we are not dealing
with a concept of the straight in general, but with that of a
straight line, and this is already spatial and intuited. The
determination (or, if you will, the concept) of the straight line
is surely none other than this, that it is the absolutely simple
line, that is, that, in passing beyond itself (the so-called move-
ment of the point) it is simply self-related ; in its extension no
sort of differentiation of the determination, or relation to any
other point or line without it, is posited ;—it is just simple
direction in itself. This simplicity is indeed its Quality; and,
if it should seem hard to define the straight line analytically,
this is so only because of this determination of simplicity or


224 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


self-relation, and solely because, when determination is thought
of, a multiplicity, or determining through others, is primarily
imagined. In itself, however, it is not difficult to seize on this
determination of the simplicity in itself of extension, and of
its indeterminedness by Other;—Euclid’s definition contains
nothing else than this simplicity.—Now the transition of this
Quality to quantitative determination (namely, that of being
the shortest), which is supposed to constitute the synthetic
element, is purely analytical. Being spatial, the line is Quantity
in general; the most simple thing, if predicated of Quantum,
is “least”; and this, predicated of a line, is “shortest.”
Geometry can take these determinations as corollary to the
definition ; but Archimedes in his books on Sphere and Cylinder
(translation Hauber, p. 4) did more suitably in making this
determination of the straight line fundamental: and therein he
was right, as was Euclid when he placed the determination
relating to parallel lines among the fundamentals; for, in order
to become a definition, the development of this determina-
tion too would have required qualitative determinations not
properly spatial but more abstract, namely (as simplicity above,
so here) similarity of direction and the like. The ancients gave
a plastic character even to their sciences; they kept their
exposition strictly within the peculiarities of their material, and
therefore excluded what would have been heterogeneous.

The concept advanced by Kant in the synthetic judgments
a priori—the concept of differentiation with inseparability, and
of identity which in itself is unseparated differentiation—belongs
to the great and immortal part of his philosophy. In intuition
this concept—since it is the concept itself, and everything in
itself is concept—likewise is certainly present; but the deter-
minations which have been taken in those examples do not
represent it; Number, and numbering, rather is an identity
and the production of an identity which is merely external,
or merely a superficial synthesis; a unity of Ones, such as are
posited as not identical with one another, but rather as mutually
separate and external. With the straight line, the determination
of being the shortest line between two points is based rather
on the moment of abstract identity, without differentiation in
itself.

From this digression I revert to addition. The corresponding


QUANTUM 225


negative arithmetical process, subtraction, likewise is the purely
analytical severing of numbers, which, as in addition, are
determined merely as mutually altogether unequal.

2. The next determination is the equality of the numbers
which are to be numbered. This equality makes them into a
unity; and thus there is applied to Number the distinction
between Unit and Amount. Multiplication is the problem of
adding an amount of units of which each is an amount. It is
here indifferent which of the two numbers is taken as unit and
which as amount,—whether we say 4 times 3 (where 4 is the
amount and 3 the unit) or, conversely, 3 times 4.—We have
already indicated above that the original discovery of the
product is effected by simple numbering, by counting on the
fingers and so forth; the product, later, can be indicated
immediately because there is a collection of these products (the
multiplication table) which is known by heart.

Division is the negative arithmetical process with the same
determination of the distinction. It is equally indifferent
which of the two factors, divisor or quotient, is determined
as unit or as amount. The divisor is determined as unit and
the quotient as amount when the problem in division is ex-
pressed in the words that it is desired to see how many times
(amount) one number (unit) is contained in a given number;
conversely the divisor is taken as amount and the quotient as
unit, when it is said that a number is to be divided into a given
amount of equal parts, and that the magnitude of such a part
(the unit) is to be found.

3. The two numbers which are determined as being related
to one another as unit and amount, are still immediately
opposed as numbers, and therefore are altogether unequal.
The equality which is attained is next that of unit and of amount
themselves: thus the progress towards the equality of the
determinations immanent in the determination of Number, is
completed. According to this complete equality, counting is the
raising to a certain power (the negative arithmetical process
being to take the root)—and, first, the squaring of a number ;—
numbering is here completely determinate in itself, when (1) the
many numbers which are to be added are the same, and
(2) their plurality, or amount, is the same as the number which
is posited so many times, that is, which is unit. There are no


VOL. f H


226 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


further determinations in the concept of Number which could
offer a differentiation; nor can the differentiation immanent
in Number be made more homogeneous. Where a number is
raised to a higher power than the square, there is a formal
continuation; partly (with the even exponents) there is a mere
repetition of squaring; partly (with the odd powers) inequality
returns; for, although the new factor is formally equal (for
example, in a first instance with the cube) both to amount
and to unit, yet it stands, as unit, in a relation of inequality
to the amount (the square, 3 against 3 times 3) ; still more in
the cube of four, where the amount, 3, according to which the
number which is unit should be multiplied by itself, is actually
different from the latter.— Where these determinations— amount
and unit—are present, they constitute in themselves the essen-
tial differentiation of the concept: in order that that which
has gone outside itself may completely return upon itself, these
two must be equalized. The above exposition contains the
reason why partly the solution of higher equations must consist
in the reduction to quadratic equations, and partly why the
equations of odd exponents can only be formally determined,
and, just when the roots are rational, they cannot be found
otherwise than by an imaginary expression, that is, by the
opposite of that which the roots are and express.—From
what has been said it appears that the arithmetical square
alone contains absolute self-determinedness in itself; hence
the equations with further formal powers must be reduced
to it; just as the right-angled triangle in geometry con-
tains that absolute self-determinedness in itself which is set
forth in the theorem of Pythagoras, and so all other geo-
metrical figures must be reduced to it for their complete
determination.

A method proceeding under the guidance of a judgment
logically constituted treats of powers before it treats of pro-
portions; it is true that the latter are connected with the
difference between unit and amount, which constitutes the
determination of the second arithmetical process; but they
step beyond the One of immediate Quantum, in which unit
and amount are only moments; and the further determination
according to it still remains external to it. In Ratio, Number
no longer is immediate Quantum: there it has its determinate-


QUANTUM 227


ness, as mediation. Qualitative Relation will be considered in
what follows.

We may say of this exposition of the progressive determina-
tion of the arithmetical processes, that it is no philosophy of
them nor demonstration of their inner meaning, since in fact
it is not an immanent development of the concept. But philo-
sophy must know how to distinguish what is in its nature a
material external to itself, so that here the progress of the
concept can take place only in an external manner, while its
moments can have only the peculiar form of their externality,
such as oddness and evenness in this example. It is an essential
condition, if one would philosophize about real objects, that
the spheres be distinguished in which a definite form of the
concept belongs, or, in other words, is present as existence:
else what is external and contingent will be disturbed in its
peculiarity by ideas; and also these ideas, through the inade-
quacy of the material, will be distorted and formalized. Now
this externality in which the moments of the concept appear
in this external material— Number—is here the adequate form;
they represent the object in its understanding, and further
contain no speculative demands and thus appear easy: they
therefore deserve to be employed in text-books of the elements.


Observation 2


It is well known that Pythagoras represented intellectual
relations (or philosophemata) by numbers; in more modern
times too numbers and the forms of their relations (such as
powers and so on) have been used in philosophy, in order to
regulate thoughts or to express them.—From an educational
point of view Number has been considered the most suitable
object of inner intuition, and the arithmetical manipulation
of its relations has been considered that activity of the mind
where it manifests its most peculiar relations and altogether
the fundamental relations of Essence.—The concept of Number,
as it has here yielded itself, shows how far Number may claim
this high worth.

We have seen in Number the absolute determinateness of
Quantity, and in its element differentiation which has become
indifferent ;—determinateness in itself, which also is posited


228 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


as wholly external. Arithmetic is an analytic science, because
all connexions and distinctions which occur in its object are
not inherent in it, but are applied to it wholly from without.
It has no concrete object containing internal relations which,
at first hidden from knowledge and not given in the immediate
idea of the object, have to be elaborated by the efforts of
cognition. Not only does it not contain the concept and there-
with the task for conceptual thought: it even is its opposite.
The connected terms are indifferent to the connexion, which
lacks necessity: the activity of thought, therefore, is here one
which is the extremest self-renunciation, an activity which
forces it to move in thoughtlessness and to connect terms which
admit of no necessity. The object is the abstract thought of
externality itself.

Number thus being the very thought of externality, is also
the abstraction from the manifold of the senses; it has retained
nothing of the sensuous except the abstract determination of
externality itself; and the latter therefore approaches nearest
to it in thought; it is the pure thought of the self-renunciation
of thought.

Mind, which rises above the world of the senses and under-
stands its own essence, when it seeks an element for its pure
imagination, for the expression of its essence, may therefore
strike upon that inner and abstract externality, Number, before
it seizes thought itself as this element and achieves the purely
spiritual expression fit to represent it. Hence we see, early in
the history of Science, Number being used to express philoso-
phemata. It constitutes the last step of that incomplete method
which apprehends the universal as affected by the sensuous.
The ancients were clearly conscious that Number is midway
between the sensuous and thought. Aristotle (Metaphys. I. 5)
quotes Plato as saying that the mathematical determinations
of things stand apart from and between the sensuous and the
Ideas, distinguished from the former because they are invisible
(eternal) and unmoved, and from the latter because they are
a manifold and have similarity, while the Idea is simply self-
identical and one within itself.—A more detailed and profound
consideration of this matter, by Moderatus? of Cadiz, is quoted
in Malchi Vita Pythagorae ed. Ritterhus, pp. 30 sq. He thinks that


1 A Neopythagorean who lived in the time of Nero.


QUANTUM 229


the Pythagoreans hit upon numbers because they were not yet
able clearly to seize in Reason the fundamental ideas and first
principles, these principles being hard to think and hard to
express. Numbers serve the teacher well as designations; and
the Pythagoreans imitated, herein as elsewhere, the geometers,
who cannot express the corporeal in thought, and therefore
use figures, saying “this is a triangle” when, however, they do
not mean that this optically visible figure is to be taken for
a triangle, but that only the concept is to be represented. And
thus the Pythagoreans used the expression “One” for the
concept of unity, of identity and equality, the basis of agree-
ment, of connexion, of the preservation of all, of the self-
identical and so forth.—It is superfluous to observe that the
Pythagoreans passed beyond the expression of Number to the
expression of Thought, to the express categories of equal and
unequal, to limit and infinity ; indeed, at the place where these
numerical expressions are considered (ibid., note to p. 31, l. s.,
from a Life of Pythagoras in Photius, p. 722), it is mentioned
that the Pythagoreans distinguished between the Monas and
the One, taking the Monas as concept and the One as number,
and, similarly, the Two for the arithmetical term, but the Dyas
(for this seems the correct reading) for the concept of the
indeterminate.—Thus these ancient writers correctly perceived
the inadequacy of these numerical forms as determinations of
thought, and equally rightly they demanded, in place of this
first substitute for thought, its characteristic expression; how
much further had they progressed in thought than those who
in our day, when some put in the place of determinations of
thought numbers and determinations of numbers (like powers),
next the infinitely great and the infinitely small, one divided
by infinity, and other such determinations, which often are
a perverted mathematical formalism, take the return to this
impotent childishness for something praiseworthy and even for
something thorough and profound.

We quoted above the expression that number stands between
the sensuous and thought, since it shares with the former the
quality of being in itself the Many, or separate existence: it is
here to be noted that this Many itself, the sensuous which is
taken up into thought, is that category of the self-external
which is proper to it. Further, concrete, veritable thoughts,


230 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


which of all things are the most quick and flexible, conceived
only where there is relation, when translated into this element
of being beyond self become dead and rigid determinations.
The richer in determinateness, and hence in relation, thoughts
become, the more confused and the more arbitrary and sense-
less becomes their representation in such forms as numbers.
The One, the Two, the Three, and the Four, Henas or Monas,
Dyas, Trias, Tetraktys, still approximate to the simple and
abstract concepts; but when numbers are required to pass over
into concrete relations it is a vain attempt which would keep
them close to the concept.

But the hardest thing is asked of thought, when the deter-
minations of thought by One, Two, Three, Four are desig-
nated as that movement of the concept through which alone
it is concept. It moves in the element of its opposite, which
is unrelatedness; its work is the work of derangement. It is a
hard suggestion to conceive that One is Three (for instance)
or Three One, because the One is the unrelated and, therefore,
does not show in itself the determination by virtue of which
it passes over into its opposite, since its very being is the
absolute exclusion and negation of such a relation. Conversely,
Understanding makes use of this against speculative truth (for
instance against that which is laid down in the doctrine called
that of the Trinity), and counts those determinations of it which
constitute One Unity, in order to demonstrate it to be a clear
contradiction ;—that is, itself contradictorily makes unrelated
that which essentially is relation. It was not expected, when
the name of Trinity was coined, that Understanding would
consider One and Number as the essential determinateness of
the content. This name expresses contempt for Understanding,
which has nevertheless confirmed itself in its vanity in clinging
to One and Number as such, and has set it up against Reason.

It is, in a manner, harmless, when numbers or geometrical
figures are taken as mere symbols, as has often been done with
the circle, the triangle, and so on, the circle for instance
standing for eternity and the triangle for the Trinity; but it
is foolish to think that more is thus expressed than can be
comprehended or expressed by thought. These symbols, like
others created by fancy in the mythologies of peoples and in
poetry generally,—compared with which the bare geometrical


QUANTUM 231


figures are in any case meagre,—are supposed to contain a
profound wisdom and a profound meaning; if it is so, then
the sole purpose of thought is, to extract the wisdom which
lies only here, and not merely in symbols but also in Nature
and in Spirit. In symbols truth is darkened and veiled by the
sensuous element; it is wholly revealed to consciousness only
in the form of thought: Meaning is only the thought itself.

But when mathematical categories are used to determine
something bearing upon the method or content of philosophic
science, such a procedure proves its preposterous nature chiefly
herein, that, in so far as mathematical formulae mean thoughts
and conceptual distinctions, such meaning must first report,
determine, and justify itself in philosophy. In its concrete
sciences, philosophy takes the logical element from logic and
not from mathematics; it must be a mere refuge of philosophic
impotence when it flies to the formations which logic takes in
other sciences, of which many are only dim presentiments and
others stunted forms of it, in order to get logic for philosophy.
The mere employment of such borrowed forms is in any case
an external attitude: a knowledge of their worth and of their
meaning should precede their use; but such knowledge results
only from thoughtful contemplation, and not from the authority
which mathematics gives them. Logic itself is such a conscious-
ness; and such consciousness strips them of their particular
form, making it superfluous and useless, and, while correcting
them, alone gives them justification, meaning, and worth.

The value of the use of Number and of Arithmetic, in so far
as it is supposed to be a main basis of education, is evident
from the above. Number is a non-sensuous object, and an
occupation with it and its combinations a non-sensuous busi-
ness: thus the mind is urged to reflect in itself and to do inner
and abstract work; which is of great though one-sided impor-
tance. For, on the other hand, Number being based only on
external and non-conceptual differentiation, this occupation
becomes thoughtless and mechanical. The effort chiefly consists
in seizing units void of concept and combining them without
the use of concept. The content is the empty One: that rich
content of moral and spiritual life, and its individual growth,
on which, as its noblest nourishment, education should rear the
young mind, would here be ousted by the empty One; and


232 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


when such exercises form the main matter and the main
occupation, the effect can be no other than to hollow and
blunt the spirit in form and concept. Arithmetic being so
extremely external and therefore mechanical a matter, it has
been possible to construct machines which execute the arith-
metical operations in the most perfect manner. If this one
circumstance were known about the nature of arithmetic, it
alone would contain a judgment about the value of the notion
which would make arithmetic the chief instrument for educating
the mind by putting it on the rack which would perfect it into
a machine.


B
EXTENSIVE AND INTENSIVE QUANTUM


(a) THEIR DIFFERENCE


1. We saw that Quantum has its determinateness as limit
in Amount. It is a something discrete and manifold in itself,
and has no Being distinct from its limit and having this outside
itself. Quantum and its limit (and the limit in itself is a mani-
fold) together thus are Extensive Magnitude.

Extensive Magnitude must be distinguished from continuous
magnitude: the former is opposed to intensive and not to dis-
crete magnitude. Of extensive and intensive magnitude each
is a determinateness of the quantitative limit itself, while
Quantum is identical with its limit; continuous and discrete
magnitude, on the other hand, are determinations of magnitude
in itself, that is, of Quantity as such, in so far as in Quantum
abstraction is made from limit—The moment of continuity is
attached to extensive magnitude and to its limit, for its Many
is simply continuous; the limit as negation thus appears in this
levelling of the Many, as limitation of unity. Continuous mag-
nitude is self-repeating Quantity without regard to any limit,
and, in so far as it is imagined as having a limit, this is limitation
in general, without discreteness being posited in it. Quantum
taken merely as continuous magnitude is not yet truly deter-
minate for itself, for it lacks Number and the One which
implies that it is determinate for itself. And similarly discrete
magnitude is, immediately, only differentiated Many in general,


QUANTUM 233


- which, in so far as it had a limit as such, would be just a
multitude, that is, a something limited but limited indeter-
minately; in order to make it into a determinate Quantum,
the Many must be subsumed into One, by which process they
are posited as identical with the limit. Continuous and discrete
magnitude, taken as Quantum generally, have each posited
in it only one of the sides by which it is completely determined
and made into Number. The latter is immediate Extensive
Quantum,—simple determinateness, existing essentially as
amount, though only as an amount of one and the same unit,
being distinguished from Number only in this, that in the
latter determinateness is expressly posited as plurality.

2. However, when the magnitude of something is determined
by number, no contrast with another magnitude is needed:
the determinateness of this magnitude does not depend upon
itself and another magnitude, for the determinateness of mag-
nitude in general is self-determinate, indifferent and simply
self-related Limit; which, in Number, is posited as enclosed
in the self-existing One, externality and relation to Other being
within itself. This Many of the Limit, further, (like the Many
in general) is not differentiated within itself, but continuous;
each of the Many is what every other is; its determinateness
as such does not consist in its quality of mutual externality of
parts, or discreteness. Thus this Many for itself collapses into
its continuity and becomes simple unity.—Amount is only a
moment of Number, but does not constitute the determinate-
ness of Number as a multitude of numerical Ones: the Ones,
as indifferent and self-external, are transcended when Number
has returned upon itself. Externality, which constituted the
Ones of plurality, vanishes in the One as self-relation of
Number.

Quantum, as extensive, had its existing determinateness as
self-external Amount: its limit thus passes over into simple
determinateness. In this simple determination of the limit,
Quantum is intensive magnitude; and the limit or deter-
minateness which is identical with Quantum is now also posited
as simple—it is Degree.

Degree thus is determinate magnitude or Quantum, but it
is not also a multitude or multiplicity within itself; it is only
a “more”; and the quality of “more” is the many taken
H*


234 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


together in the simple determination, Determinate Being
which has returned to Being-for-Self. Its determinateness re-
quires a number (which is the complete determinedness of
Quantum) to express it; but the number is not Amount but,
simply, a Degree. If we speak of ten or twenty degrees, then
the Quantum which has so many degrees is the tenth or
twentieth degree, and not the amount and sum of them; for,
if so, it would be extensive; but in fact it is only one—the
tenth or twentieth—degree. It contains the determinateness
implied in the amount ten or twenty, but does not contain it
as many; it is Number as transcended amount or simple
determinateness.

3. In Number, Quantum is posited in its complete deter-
minateness; but as Intensive Quantum, as in the Being-for-
Self of Number, it is posited as it is according to its notion,
or in itself. For the form of self-relation which it has as Degree
is also its self-externality. As Extensive Quantum, Number is
numerical plurality, and thus contains externality within itself.
The latter, as being Many in general, collapses into undifferen-
tiatedness and transcends itself in the One of Number, which
is its self-relation. Now Quantum has determinateness when
taken as Amount: as shown above, it contains amount though
amount is not posited in it. And so Degree, as being simple in
itself, no longer has this external otherness within itself; it has
it outside itself, and it stands related to it as to its determi-
nateness. A plurality external to it constitutes the determinate-
ness of the simple limit, which Degree is for itself. If, therefore,
Amount (so far as, in Extensive Quantum, it existed within
Number) there transcended itself, it passes into being posited
outside Number. Number being posited as One, as intro-
reflected self-relation, excludes from itself the indifference and
externality inherent in Amount, and is self-related because
through itself it is related to something external.

Herein Quantum has the reality proper to its notion. The
indifference of determinateness constitutes its Quality; that
is, determinateness which in itself exists as self-external deter-
minateness.—Degree accordingly is a simple determination of
magnitude among several such intensities, which are different,
each being a simple self-relation but also being in an essential
relation to the others, so that each has its determinateness in


QUANTUM 235


_ this continuity with the others. Since, then, Degree is related
to its Other through itself, the ascent or descent in a scale of
degrees becomes a steady progress or flow, which is an unin-
terrupted and indivisible mutation; not one of the several
entities which are distinguished therein is separated from the
others, but each has its determinateness only in them. As self-
related determination of magnitude each degree is indifferent
to the others ; but also it is implicitly related to this externality,
and is what it is only through it; in a word, its self-relation is
the non-indifferent relation to the external, and in this fact
consists the quality of the degree.


(b) IDENTITY OF EXTENSIVE AND INTENSIVE MAGNITUDE


Degree is not self-external within itself. But it is not indeter-
minate One, or that general principle of Number which is no
amount except that negative amount implied in the fact that
it is not amount. First, Intensive Magnitude is a simple One
of the heap; there are several degrees ; but they are determined
neither as simple One nor as heap, but only in the relation
of this self-externality, or in the identity of One and plurality.
So that, if members of a plurality, as such, are outside the
simple degree, its determinateness consists in its relation to
them: it thus contains Amount. Twenty, as Extensive Mag-
nitude, also contains twenty. discrete Ones; on the other hand,
the determinate degree contains them as a continuity; and
this determinate plurality is this continuity simply. It is the
twentieth degree, and is such only by virtue of this amount,
which as such is external to it.

The determinateness of Intensive Magnitude must therefore
be considered from two aspects. It is determined through other
intensive Quanta, and it is continuous with its otherness, in
such a manner that its determinateness consists of its relation
to this. First, then, in so far as it is simple determinateness,
it is determinate relatively to other degrees; it excludes them,
and this exclusion constitutes its determinateness. Secondly,
however, it is determinate in itself: it is determinate in amount,
as in “ts? amount, not in amount as excluded nor as taken
as the amount of other degrees. The twentieth degree contains
twenty in itself; it is determinate, not only as distinguished


236 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


from the nineteenth, twenty-first, or other degrees; but, further,
its determinateness is its amount. But, in so far as the amount
is its own—and determinateness also essentially exists as amount
—degree is Extensive Quantum.

Thus Extensive and Intensive Magnitude are one and the
same determinateness of Quantum; they only differ in that
one has amount within itself, and the other without. Extensive
Magnitude passes over into Intensive Magnitude because the
Many of Extensive Magnitude in itself collapses into the unity
to which the Many is external. But conversely this simple result
has its determinateness only in amount, and in fact in “its”
amount; it is indifferent to intensities otherwise determined,
and, therefore, has the externality of amount in itself; and
thus Intensive Magnitude equally essentially is Extensive
Magnitude.

Having reached this identity, we have reached the qualita-
tive Something; for this identity is unity self-related by virtue
of the negation of its distinctions; now the latter constitute
the existing determinateness of magnitude: this negative
identity thus is Something, Something moreover which is in-
different to its quantitative determinateness. Something is a
Quantum, but now qualitative Determinate Being, as it is in
itself, is posited as indifferent towards it. Quantum, Number
as such, and so forth, could be spoken of without mention of
a Something such as should be their substratum. Now, however,
Something stands opposed to these its determinations as exist-
ing for itself; it has become mediated with itself through their
negation, and, in having a Quantum, is opposed to them as
that same Something which is defined as having Extensive and
Intensive Quantum. Its one determinateness proper to it as
Quantum is posited in the distinct moments of Unit and
Amount. Now not only is this determinateness one and the
same in itself, but, when it is posited in these distinctions as
Extensive and Intensive Quantum, there is a return to that
unity which, as negative, is the Something which is posited as
indifferent to it.


Observation 1


In common imagination Extensive and Intensive Quantum
generally are distinguished as different kinds of magnitude, as


QUANTUM 237


though some objects had only intensive and others only ex-
tensive magnitude. To this has been added the view proper
to a philosophy of nature, where the many, or that which is
extensive (as happens, for instance, in the fundamental deter-
mination of matter—namely, that it occupies space—and in
other concepts), is changed into something intensive in this
sense, that the true determination was supposed to be the
equation of the intensive with the dynamic; it was thought
that, for instance, density (or the specific occupation of space)
must be taken essentially as a certain degree of the space-
occupying force of matter, and not as a certain multitude and
amount of material parts in a quantum of space. `

Here two determinations must be distinguished. In the so-
called transvaluation of the mechanistic into the dynamic view,
there occurs the concept of independent parts existing apart
from one another (the nexus which makes them a whole being
merely external), and the distinct concept of force. That which,
as occupying space, was considered merely as a multitude of
mutually external atoms, is now regarded as the manifestation
of a simple latent force.—But these relations of Whole and
Parts, of Force and its Manifestation, which are here opposed
to one another, do not belong to this place, and will be con-
sidered later. But this much may be said, that the relation
of Force and its Manifestation, which corresponds to intensity,
is more valid than the relation of Whole and Parts; but that in
spite of this force is equally as one-sided as intensity, and that
manifestation (the externality of extensiveness) is equally in-
separable from force, so that one and the same content is
found alike in both forms, in the intensive as well as in the
extensive.

The other determinateness which here occurs is quantitative
determinateness as such, by which is meant a determinateness
which is transcended as Extensive Quantum and is changed into
Degree, which is supposed to be the valid determination. But
it has been shown that Degree too contains the former, so that
one form is essential to the other, and each Determinate Being
represents its determination of magnitude as Extensive and as
Intensive Quantum equally.

Everything, so far as it appears as a determinate magnitude,
will serve as example for this. Number itself necessarily bears


238 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


immediately in it this double form. It is amount, and in so far
it is extensive magnitude; but also it is One, one Ten, one
Hundred, and in so far it stands at the point of transition to
intensive magnitude, since in this unity the multiple collapses
into simple. One is extensive magnitude in itself, and may be
imagined as any desired amount of parts. Thus the tenth or
hundredth part is this simple intensity which has its deter-
minateness in the Many which fall outside it, that is, in
extensity. A number is ten or one hundred, and also is the
tenth or one hundredth in the numerical system; and each
determinateness is identical with the other.

In the circle the One is called Degree, because any part of
a circle essentially has its determinateness in the Many external
to it, and is determined as merely one of a limited amount of
such Ones. As a mere spatial magnitude the degree of the
circle is a common number; regarded as degree it is an inten-
sive magnitude, which only has meaning as determined by the
amount of degrees into which the circle is divided; just as
Number in general has its meaning only in the numerical
series.

The magnitude of a more concrete object also has this twin
aspect of extensive and intensive, and manifests this in the twin
determinations of its Determinate Being, in one of which it
appears as external, while in the other it appears as internal.
Thus, for instance, a mass, as weight, has extensive magnitude,
since it constitutes an amount of pounds, hundredweights, and
so forth; and intensive magnitude in so far as it exerts a certain
pressure: the magnitude of pressure is simple, it is a degree
which has its determinateness in the scale of degrees of pressure.
Mass, as exerting pressure, appears as a Being-in-Self or Sub-
ject, which has an intensive differentiation of magnitude.—
Conversely, that which exerts this degree of pressure has the
power to displace a certain amount of pounds (and so on), and
therein lies the measure of its magnitude.

Again, heat has a degree, and this degree (whether the roth,
2oth, or any other) is a simple sensation, is subjective. But this
degree equally exists as extensive magnitude, as the expansion
of a liquid, of mercury in the thermometer, of air, of sound,
and so on. A higher degree of temperature expresses itself as
a longer column of mercury, or as a narrower sound-cylinder ;


QUANTUM | 239


it heats a greater space in the same manner as a lesser degree
heats a smaller space.

The higher note, as the more intensive, is also a greater
multitude of vibrations; and a louder note (to which we ascribe
a higher degree) is audible in a greater space. —A more inten-
sive colour will serve to stain a larger surface than a weaker
colour can similarly stain; that which is brighter (again a
different kind of intensity) is visible farther than the less bright;
and so forth.

And in the spiritual sphere high intensity of character, of
talent, or genius, has a similarly comprehensive being, extended
action, and manifold contact. The profoundest concept also has
the most universal meaning and application.


Observation 2


Kant has employed the application of the determinateness
of Intensive Quantum to a metaphysical determination of the
soul in a peculiar manner. In his critique of the metaphysical
propositions about the soul (which he calls Paralogisms of Pure
Reason), he comes to consider the deduction of the permanence
of the soul from its simplicity. To this conclusion he objects in
these terms (Critique of Pure Reason, p. 414) :—‘‘Although we
grant that the Soul is of this simple nature, since it contains
no manifold of separate entities, and therefore no extensive
magnitude, yet we cannot deny to it, any more than to any
other existent, intensive magnitude, that is, a degree of reality
with regard to all its powers and in general with regard to
everything that exists; this degree can decrease through an
infinity of lesser degrees, so that this would-be substance can
be changed into nothing by gradual relaxation (remissio) of
its forces if not by division; for consciousness itself always has
a degree which can still be diminished; this therefore must
apply also to the faculty of self-consciousness and to all the
other faculties.”—In rational psychology—and this abstract
metaphysic was such—the soul is considered not as Spirit but
as a merely immediate Being, as a soul-thing. Kant thus has
the right to apply the category of Quantum to it “as much as
to any other existent;” and, in so far as it is determined as
simple, to apply the category of Intensive Quantum. It is true


240 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


that Being is a part of Spirit, but a Being of an intensity wholly
different from that of Intensive Quantum; an intensity rather
where the form of mere immediate Being and every category
of it have been transcended. Not only the removal of the
category of Extensive Quantum should have been admitted:
Quantum should have been removed altogether. But it is yet
a further matter to understand how existence, consciousness,
and finitude are in the eternal nature of Spirit and emerge
from it, while it does not thereby become a thing.


(c) THE ALTERATION OF QUANTUM


The distinction between Extensive and Intensive Quantum
is indifferent to the determinateness of Quantum as such. But,
altogether, Quantum is determinateness posited as transcended,
it is the indifferent limit and a determinateness which is also
its own negation. This distinction is developed in Extensive
Magnitude; Intensive Magnitude is the presence of this ex-
ternality which Quantum is in itself. It is posited as its own
contradiction in itself, where it is simple self-related deter-
minateness and also that self-negation which has its deter-
minateness not in itself but in another Quantum.

According to its Quality, therefore, a Quantum is posited
in absolute continuity with its externality and otherness. Thus,
it is not merely possible to pass beyond every determinateness
of magnitude, and possible to alter it; but it is posited that it
must alter. The determination of magnitude continues itself
into its otherness in this manner, that it has its being only in
this continuity with an Other: it is a limit which is not, but
becomes.

The One is infinite, or is self-related negation, and therefore
self-repulsion. Quantum too is infinite, being posited as self-
relating negativity; it repels itself from itself. But it is a deter-
minate One, a One which has passed over into Determinate
Being and Limit: it is the self-repulsion of determinateness and
not the creation of the self-equal (as happens in the repulsion
of One) but of its otherness: it is now posited in itself to refer
beyond itself and to become an Other. It consists in increase
or diminution: it is in itself the externality of determinateness.

Thus Quantum refers itself beyond itself: it becomes an


QUANTUM 241


Other, and this also is, primarily, Quantum; but it is this as
a limit which is not, but forces itself beyond itself. Thus the
limit which arises again in this outward passage is simply one
which again transcends itself and refers to yet another, and
so on to infinity.


Cc
THE QUANTITATIVE INFINITY


(a) Irs Notion


Quantum alters and becomes another Quantum; the further
determination of this alteration, that it proceeds to infinity, is
implied in the fact that Quantum is posited as self-contra-
dictory.—Quantum becomes an Other; but it continues itself
into its otherness; the Other too is, therefore, a Quantum.
But this latter is the Other not only of a Quantum, but of
Quantum itself: it is the negative of Quantum taken as limited;
it is, therefore, its unlimitedness, or Infinity. Quantum is an
Ought: it is determined for itself, and this is a part of it, and
this very determinedness is, rather, a determinedness in an
Other. And, inversely, it is transcended determinedness in
an Other, it is indifferent self-subsistence.

Finitude and Infinity thus forthwith each receive a double,
and in fact an opposite, meaning. Quantum is finite first because
it is limited, and secondly because it refers beyond itself, and
has its determinedness in an Other. And Quantum is infinite,
first, in its non-limitedness, and, secondly, because, having
returned upon itself, it 1s indifferent Being-for-Self. If, now,
we compare these moments, we find that the determination
of finitude in Quantum, that reference beyond itself to an
Other which constitutes its determination, is likewise deter-
mination of the infinite: the negation of the limit is a similar
passing beyond determinateness, so that Quantum is to have
its last determinateness in this negation, the infinite. The other
moment of Infinity is that Being-for-Self which is indifferent
to limit, but Quantum itself is limited in such a manner that
relatively to its limit (and, therefore, to other Quanta and to
its beyond) it is in itself indifferent. Finitude and Infinity
(of the sort which tries to be separate from the finite—the

VOL. I


242 SCIENCE -OF LOGIC


bad infinite) in Quantum each already contain the other for
moment.

Qualitative and Quantitative Infinity are distinct because
in the former the opposition between finite and infinite is
qualitative, and the transition from the finite into the infinite,
or the relation of either one to the other, subsists only in the
“in-itself,” in their notion. Qualitative determinateness is
immediate, and is related to otherness essentially as to another
Being; and it is not posited as having its negation, its Other,
in itself. But magnitude is, as such, transcended determinate-
ness: it is posited as being both unequal and indifferent to
itself, and, therefore, as being that which is alterable. Quali-,
tative Finitude and Infinity are, therefore, opposed absolutely,
that is, abstractly ; their unity is the fundamental inner relation ;
and, therefore, the finite continues itself into its Other only
in itself and not in the infinite. But the quantitative finite refers
itself to its infinite in the latter itself, claiming to have its
absolute determinateness in it. This relation, then, is repre-
sented by the Quantitatively Infinite Progress.


(b) THE QUANTITATIVE INFINITE PROGRESS


In general an infinite progress is the expression of a con-
tradiction: here it expresses the contradiction contained in the
quantitatively finite, or in Quantum in general. It is that
reciprocal determination of finite and infinite which was con-
sidered in the sphere of Quality, with this difference that, as
has just been pointed out, in the quantitative the limit in itself
refers and continues beyond itself, and that therefore, con-
versely, the quantitatively infinite is posited as containing
Quantum in itself, —for Quantum, in its self-externality, is also
itself; its externality is part of its determination.

Now the Infinite Progress expresses but does not solve this
contradiction; but, by reason of the merging of one deter-
minateness into the other, it produces an apparent solution
by uniting the two. As it is primarily posited, it makes the
infinite the goal, which, however, is not reached: it is a per-
petuated creation of it, while yet Quantum is never left behind
and the infinite never becomes positive and present. It is part
of the notion of Quantum to have a beyond. This beyond is,


QUANTUM 243


first, the abstract moment of the not-being of Quantum; this
resolves itself in itself; and thus it relates itself to its beyond
as to its infinity, according to the qualitative moment of the
opposition. Secondly, however, Quantum is continuous with
this beyond: it is the very being of Quantum to be its own
Other, to be self-external; and thus this external part is equally
nothing else than Quantum: the beyond, or the infinite, itself
is a Quantum. Thus the beyond has been recalled from its
flight, and the infinite has been reached. But now this “beyond”
which has become “hither”” once more is a Quantum; and,
therefore, only a new limit has now been posited. This is
a Quantum, and itself has again fled from itself; being a
Quantum, it is beyond itself, and has repelled itself into
its own not-being and its own beyond, which in turn becomes
Quantum in the same perpetual manner in which Quantum
repels itself from itself into beyond.

The continuousness of Quantum with its Other gives rise to
the combination of the two in the expression of the infinitely
great and the infinitely small. Both still contain the determina-
tion of Quantum, and, therefore, are variable ; and the absolute
determinateness, which would be a Being-for-Self, is thus not
reached. This self-externality of the determination is posited
in the double infinite, whose terms are in the opposition of
“more” and “less,” namely, the infinitely great and the in-
finitely small. In each, Quantum is preserved in perpetual
opposition to its beyond. However much the great is extended,
it shrinks into insignificance; it refers to the infinite as to its
non-being, and thus the opposition is qualitative; the extended
Quantum has wrested nothing from the infinite, which remains
its not-being as before. Or again, Quantum by being enlarged
does not approach the infinite, for the distinction between
Quantum and its infinity has this for essential moment, that
it is not a quantitative distinction. This is only the expression
of the contradiction brought under narrower consideration:
the infinitely great is defined as great (that is, Quantum)
and infinite (that is, not Quantum).—Similarly, the infinitely
small, as small, is Quantum, and, therefore, remains qualitatively
(that is, absolutely) too great for the infinite, and is opposed
to it. In both is preserved the contradiction of the Infinite
Progress, which was supposed to have found its goal in them.


244 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


This infinity which, as the beyond of the finite, is determined
as stable, may be described as the “bad quantitative infinity.”
Like qualitative bad infinity, it is an infinite alternation”
` between the two members of a persistent contradiction, from the
limit to its not-being, and from there back once more to the
limit. In the quantitative progress the term towards which the
progress moves is not indeed abstractly and altogether Other,
but is merely a Quantum posited as different; but it remains
in opposition to its negation in a similar manner. The progress,
too, therefore, is no forward advance but a repetition of the
same cycle, of positing and transcending still repeated; an
impotence of the negative which by the very act of transcending
is ever again faced with that which it had transcended. Two
members are connected in such a way that they must fly apart;
and in so doing they cannot part company, but even in flying
from one another remain connected.


Observation 1


Bad infinity, more especially in its form of the progress to
infinity of the quantitative, is often considered sublime, and
this continual surpassing of the limit (which really means an
incapacity to transcend it), together with the perpetual relapse
into it, has been held a kind of divine service. Philosophy has
considered it as ultimate. And this progress has often furnished
material for outbursts which have been admired as lofty
achievements. Yet this modern sublimity does not exalt the
object, for that escapes, but only the subject, which consumes
such vast quantities. The meagre nature of this exaltation,
which, still subjective, climbs up the ladder of the quantitative,
is made clear when it is admitted that it vainly labours to
reach an unattainable goal, which indeed to be gained must
be quite otherwise attacked.

In the following outbursts of this nature it also appears
whither this exaltation moves and where it ceases. Thus Kant
cites it as sublime (Critique of Practical Reason: end)

“when the subject rises in thought above the place which
it occupies in the world of sense, magnifying into the infinitely
great its relation,—a relation with stars beyond stars, worlds
beyond worlds, systems beyond systems, where periodic move-
ment, beginning, and duration are infinite in time as they are


QUANTUM 245


in space.—Imagination fails before this progress into the
immeasurably far, where the furthest world has one yet further,
and past and future, however distant, have a more distant
past and a more distant future beyond; thought fails before
this image of the immeasurable; as a dream, where one goes
down a long passage ever further and interminably further,
without an end in sight, ends in a fall or in dizziness.”

This description condenses into rich imagery the content
of quantitative exaltation: it also deserves praise for the truth-
fulness with which it shows in what this exaltation ends:
thought fails, the end is a fall and dizziness. And what causes
thought to fail and produces the fall and the dizziness, is
nothing else than the weariness of repetition, where the limit
is made to vanish, return, and vanish again perpetually, and
the hither to arise and perish in the beyond, and the beyond
in the hither, one after the other and the one in the other;
which causes a feeling of the impotence of this infinite and
this ought, which would master the finite and cannot.

Haller’s description of eternity, too (called “the horrible
description” by Kant), is often admired, though not for that
aspect which constitutes its real merit :—


“T pile up monstrous numbers,

Mountains of millions,

I pile time upon time and world upon world;
When from the horrible height

Dizzy I look again on you,

All power of number, taken a thousandfold,
Is no part even of you.

I discard it, and you are wholly revealed.”


When this heaping and piling of numbers and worlds is
considered valuable as a description of eternity, it is over-
looked that the poet himself declares this so-called horrible
process vain and void, concluding that the true infinite reveals
its presence only after this empty infinite progress has been
abandoned.

There have been astronomers who took pleasure in priding
themselves upon the sublime nature of their science because
it dealt with an immeasurable multitude of stars and immeasur-
able extents of space and time, where distances and periods,
already great in themselves, serve as units which being taken


246 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


however many times over themselves shrink into insignificance.
The shallow amazement to which they here abandon them-
selves, and those silly hopes of travelling from one star to
another in a second life, and of thus acquiring into infinity
similar new knowledge, were proclaimed by them one of the
chief accounts of excellence in their science, —which in truth
is admirable, not because of this quantitative infinity, but
rather because of those relations of measure and those laws
which reason recognizes in these objects; for they are the
infinity of reason and those others the infinity of unreason.

Kant opposes another infinity to that which relates itself to
external sensuous intuition, when

“the individual returns upon his invisible ego, and opposes
the absolute freedom of his will as pure ego to all the terrors
of fate and of tyranny, and, beginning with his nearest sur-
roundings, allows them to vanish before him, next causes what
seem most durable, worlds upon worlds, to collapse in ruins,
and, alone, knows himself equal to himself.”

The ego in this loneliness has indeed achieved the Beyond,
it has gained itself, is gathered upon itself, and is on the hither
side: in pure self-consciousness absolute negativity, which ever
flies in that progress above sensuous Quantum, is affirmed and
made present. But while this pure ego fixes itself in its abstrac-
tion and lack of content, it has opposed to and beyond itself
existence in general, or the totality of the natural and spiritual
universe. The same contradiction appears on which the infinite
progress is based: namely, a term has returned upon itself and
also, immediately, is self-external, is related to its Other as to
its not-being; and this relation remains a longing, for the ego
has, on the one hand, fixed before itself, its own hollow and
unstable void, and, on the other, the full content of its beyond
which remains present even in the negation.

Kant subjoins to these two examples of the sublime the
remark “that astonishment (for the first and external kind)
and reverence (for the second and inward) stimulate investi-
gation but cannot replace the lack of it.’—He thus declares
these sublimities to be unsatisfactory to reason, which cannot
remain with them and the feelings connected with them,
and cannot allow the name of ultimate to the beyond and
the void.


QUANTUM 247


The infinite progress has been considered ultimate chiefly.
in its application to morality. The opposition just quoted
between finite and infinite as standing respectively for the
manifold world and the ego exalted in its freedom, is at this
point qualitative. The ego in determining itself attempts simul-
taneously to determine Nature and to free itself from it: it
thus relates itself to its Other through itself: and the Other,
being an external existence, is a manifold and quantitative.
The relation to what is quantitative itself becomes quantitative ;
and the negative relation of the ego to it, the power which the
ego exercises over the non-ego (the world of the senses, and
external Nature), is therefore imagined as meaning that
morality can and ought to grow, and the power of sensuousness
to wane. But the perfect adequacy of the will to the moral law
is relegated to the progress into the infinite, that is, it is
imagined as an absolute and unattainable Beyond; and this
its unattainable nature is supposed to be the true sheet-anchor
and proper consolation; for morality should be a fight; and
it is such only where will is not adequate to the law, and the
law therefore is its absolute Beyond.

In this opposition ego and non-ego or pure will and moral
law, and Nature and the sensuousness of will are presupposed
as entirely independent and indifferent to one another. Pure
will has its peculiar law, which is in essential relation with
sensuousness; and sensuousness and Nature have their own
laws, which neither come from nor are adapted to will, nor
yet, although different from it, have any essential relation ‘to
it: they are determined in themselves, finished and complete.
But also both are moments of one and the same simple essence,
namely, the ego: will is determined as standing in the relation
of negative to Nature, so that it exists only in so far as this
different sphere exists, which it transcends, but is itself touched
and affected thereby in so doing. Nature, taken as the sensuous
sphere of man, is an independent system of laws: it is therefore
indifferent to limitation by any Other; even while it is being
limited it preserves itself, enters independently into relation,
and limits the will of law as much as the will of law limits
it.—When will determines itself and transcends the otherness
of a nature, and again, when this otherness is posited as existing,
as continued into a state of becoming-transcended, and yet


248 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


as not transcended—these two are one act. This contradiction
is not resolved in the infinite progress, but is on the contrary
represented and affirmed as unresolved and incapable of
resolution: the struggle between morality and sensuousness is
imagined as the self-existent, absolute relation.

Where it is thus impossible to master the qualitative oppo-
sition between finite and infinite and to seize the idea of true
will, or substantial freedom, recourse is had to magnitude
as mediation, for magnitude is the qualitative element
transcended, or distinction become indifferent. But both the
members in opposition remain, qualitatively distinct, at
bottom, so that when they are mutually related as quanta
each immediately is made indifferent to this change. Nature
is determined by ego and sensuousness by the will to the good,
and the change thus produced therein is only a quantitative
difference and one which allows it to remain as it is.

In the more abstract exposition of the Kantian philosophy,
or at least of its principles, which is found in Fichte’s Doctrine
of Science, the infinite progress similarly is the basis and the
ultimate. The first principle of the exegesis, ego = ego, is fol-
lowed by another which is independent of it, namely, the
opposition of the non-ego; and the relation of these two is
immediately taken as being a quantitative difference, non-ego
being partly determined by ego and partly not. Thus the non-
ego prolongs itself into its not-being, in such a manner that
it remains opposed to this latter in it as being not yet tran-
scended. Thus after the contradictions herein contained have
been developed in the system, the final result is the same
relation as was the beginning; the non-ego remains an infinite
“resistance-principle’” (Anstoss), an absolute Other; the ulti-
mate relation between it and the ego is the infinite progress,
longing and yearning,—the same contradiction with which a
beginning was made.

The quantitative is determinateness posited as transcended:
for this reason it was thought that much or rather everything
had been gained for the Unity of the Absolute, for Mono-
substantiality, when contrariety in general was reduced to a
merely quantitative difference. For a time it was a main thesis
of modern philosophy, that all contrariety is only quantitative ;
opposite determinations are of the same essence and content,


QUANTUM ns


they are real sides of the opposition, in so far as each contains
both the latter’s determinations and both its factors; only, one
factor, matter or energy, preponderates on one side, one on
the other, or one is present in greater quantity or more intense
degree on the one side than on the other. In so far as different
kinds of matter and energy are assumed, the quantitative
difference rather confirms and completes their externality and
indifference both in relation to one another and to their unity.
The distinction of absolute unity is supposed to be merely
quantitative; the quantitative is transcended immediate deter-
minateness, but still, as negation, it is incomplete and first
negation only, not infinite nor negation of negation.—Being
and Thought are imagined as quantitative determinations of
absolute Substance, and therefore, being quanta, they become
quite external and unrelated to one another; as, in a subor-
dinate sphere, do carbon, nitrogen, and so on. It is a third
factor, an external reflection, which abstracts from the differ-
ence between them and recognizes their unity, which is inner
and only in itself, not for itself. Thus in fact this unity is
imagined merely as of the first and immediate kind, or as
Being which in its quantitative difference remains equal to itself,
but does not through itself posit itself as equal to itself: it is
thus not conceived as negation of negation, or infinite unity.
It is only in the qualitative opposition that posited infinity or
Being-for-Self appears; and quantitative determination passes
over—as will be seen immediately—into the qualitative.


Observation 2


It was mentioned above that Kant’s antinomies are repre-
sentations of the opposition between finite and infinite in a
more concrete shape and applied to more specialized substrata
of imagination. The antinomy there considered contained the
opposition of qualitative finitude and infinity. In another (the
first of the four cosmological antinomies) it is rather the
quantitative limit of which the self-conflicting nature is con-
sidered. I shall therefore proceed here to the examination of
this antinomy.

It deals with the spatial and temporal limitation or un-
limitedness of the world.—Equally well the contradiction might


250 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


have been considered with reference to time and space them-
selves, for the antinomy of limitation and unlimitedness remains
in them unchanged, whether they be relations of things or only
forms of intuition.

The closer analysis of this antinomy will also show that the
two propositions with their proofs (which, like those considered
above, are apagogic) come to nothing except these two simple
and contrary assertions: “there is a limit,” and “the limit must
be overpassed.”

The Thesis is as follows :—

“The world has a beginning in time, and spatially, too, is
limited.”

One part of the proof, which deals with time, assumes the
opposite :—

“If the world has no beginning in time, then an eternity
has passed up to any given point of time; hence an infinite
series of successive world-states has passed. But the infinite
nature of a series consists precisely in this, that it can never
be completed by successive synthesis. Thus an infinite world-
series which also has elapsed, is impossible, and, therefore, a
beginning of the world is an essential condition of its existence,—
which was to be proved.”

The remaining part of the proof, which deals with space,
is based upon time. It would require an infinite time to com-
prehend the parts of a spatially infinite world, and this time
would have to be regarded as expired in so far as the world
in space is to be regarded not as a process but as a given
whole. But it was shown of time in the first part of the proof
that it is impossible to assume the expiration of an infinite
period of time.

But it is immediately evident that it was unnecessary to
make the proof apagogic, or, indeed, to give any proof, since
it contains immediately for basis an assertion of that which
was to be proved. For each, or any, point of time is here
assumed, up to which an eternity has expired (—eternity here
meaning merely infinite time in the bad sense). Now a given
point of time means nothing else than a definite limit in time.
In the proof, therefore, a limit of time is assumed to exist;
which is precisely what was to be proved. For the thesis is,
that the world has a beginning in time,


QUANTUM 251


There is only this one distinction, that the limit of time which
is assumed is “now” as end of an already expired period, while
that which is to be proved is “now” as beginning of the future.
But this distinction is immaterial. “Now” is taken as the point
where an infinite series of consecutive world-states has ended:
it is taken as end, or qualitative limit. If this “now” were
considered merely as quantitative limit, which remains fluid
and not only must be overpassed but itself is nothing but
an overpassing of itself, then the infinite time-series in it
would not be expired but would continue to flow; and the
argument of the proof would vanish. However, the point of
time is taken as qualitative limit for the past, but this is also
the beginning of a future (for in itself every point of time is
the relation of past and future), and, further, is its absolute
or abstract beginning, that is, that which was to be proved.
It is irrelevant that this future and this its beginning are pre-
ceded by a past; in so far as this point of time is qualitative
limit--and this is implied in the determination of expired or
completed, that is, not self-continuing—time in it is broken
off short, and that past is without relation to this time which
could be called future only with reference to that past, and
consequently when unrelated becomes time in general, which
has an absolute beginning. But if—as is the case—through the
“now” (or given point of time) it were linked to the past, and
so determined as future, then this point of time too, seen from
the other side, would be no limit; the infinite time-series would
continue itself in that which was before called future and would
not be, as was assumed, completed.

In truth time is pure Quantity: the point of time at which
it is supposed to be interrupted, which is employed in the proof,
is simply the self-transcending Being-for-Self of the Now. The
proof effects nothing, except to present to imagination the
absolute limit of time, which is asserted in the Thesis, as a given
point of time, and to take it boldly as a complete or abstract
point ;—a popular determination which sensuous imagination
easily allows to pass as limit, and thus allows the proof to
assume what before was set forth as to be proved.

The Antithesis is this :—

“The world has no beginning and no limits in space, but
is infinite both with regard to time and to space.”


252 0 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


The proof likewise assumes the opposite :—

“Let the world be assumed to have a beginning. Now the
beginning is an existence preceded by a time in which the
thing does not exist; therefore a time must have preceded in
which the world did not exist; that is, an empty time. Now
in an empty time nothing can arise, for no part of such a time
has in itself, and in preference to any other, the differentiating
condition of its existence or non-existence. Therefore any series
of things can begin in the world, but the world itself cannot
begin and with regard to past time is infinite.”

Like the others this apagogic proof contains the direct and
unproved assertion of that which it ought to prove. At first
it assumes a Beyond of the existence of the world, namely,
empty time; but next it also continues the existence of the
world beyond itself into this empty time, thus cancelling it,
and continuing this existence into infinity. The world is an
existence; the proof presupposes that this existence arises, and
that the arising has a temporally precedent condition. But the
Antithesis just consists in this, that there is no unconditioned
existence and no absolute limit, but that the existence of the
world always demands a precedent condition.—What was to
be proved is thus already present in the proof as an assump-
tion.—Further, the condition is now looked for in empty time,
which means that it is taken as temporal and therefore as an
existence and as limited. Thus altogether the assumption is
made that the world as existence presupposes another con-
ditioned existence in time, and so to infinity.

The proof with regard to the spatial infinity of the world
is the same. The spatial finitude of the world is posited in the
apagogic manner: “the world would thus -be in an empty and
unlimited space and would stand in a relation to it; but such
a relation of the world to no object is Nothing.”

There again the proof directly presupposes what was to be
proved. It is directly assumed that the limited spatial world
must be in an empty space and stand in a relation to it,
that is, that it must be overpassed ;—a process leading on the
one hand into the void, the beyond and not-being of the world,
and, on the other, meaning that it stands in a relation to the
void, that is, that it continues itself into it and therefore that
the beyond is to be imagined as filled with world-existence.


QUANTUM 253


The spatial infinity of the world which is asserted in the
Antithesis is just (a) empty space and (b) the relation of
the world to it, that is, the continuity of the world in it, or the
filling of empty space; and this contradiction—that space is
empty and also is full—is the infinite progress of Existence in
space. And this contradiction itself, the relation of the world
to empty space, is directly made the basis of the proof.

The Thesis and the Antithesis and their proofs thus represent
nothing but the contrary assertions that there is a limit, and
that this limit equally is cancelled, that the limit has a beyond,
but that it is in relation with the latter and must pass over
to it; which again gives rise to such a limit which is no limit.

The solution of these antinomies, as with the first, is tran-
scendental, that is, it consists in the assertion of the ideality
of space and time as forms of intuition,—in this sense, that
the world in itself is not in- contradiction with itself and does
not transcend itself, but that consciousness in its intuition and
in the relation of intuition to understanding and reason is a
self-contradictory essence. But it is an excessive tenderness
towards the world to remove from it the contradiction and to
transfer it into Spirit or Reason, allowing it to remain there
unresolved. In point of fact it is Spirit which is strong enough
to support the contradiction, but it is also Spirit which knows
how to resolve it. As for the so-called world (whether it be called
objective or real world, or, according to the transcendental
idealism, subjective intuition and sensuousness determined by
the category of understanding), it never and nowhere is
without the contradiction, but, since it cannot support it, is
subject to arising and passing away.


(c) THE INFINITY oF QUANTUM


1. Infinite Quantum, as infinitely great or infinitely small,
is, in itself, the infinite progress; being either great or small,
it is Quantum; and it is also the not-being of Quantum. Hence
the infinitely great and the infinitely small are pictures of the
imagination, which, closely considered, prove mere mist and
shadow. But in the infinite progress this contradiction is present
explicitly, and with it that which is the nature of Quantum
which has reached its reality as intensive magnitude and is


254 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


now posited in its determinate existence as it is in its concept.
This identity must now be considered.

Quantum as degree is simple, self-referred, and self-deter-
minate. Through this simplicity, otherness and determinateness
are cancelled in it, and therefore the latter is external to it:
it has its determinateness outside it. This self-externality is,
first, the abstract not-being of Quantum in general, or bad
infinity. But, further, this not-being is itself a magnitude;
Quantum continues itself into its not-being, for it is in its
externality that it has its determinateness; therefore this ex-
ternality, too, is itself Quantum; and its not-being, or infinity,
is thus limited, that is, this beyond is transcended and is
determined as Quantum, which thus, in its negation, is gathered
to itself.

But this is just what Quantum as such is in itself. For it is
itself because it is outside itself: externality constitutes that
by virtue of which it is Quantum and is with itself. Thus in
the infinite progress the concept of Quantum is posited.

If we take it first in its abstract determinations as we find
them, it contains the transcendence of Quantum, but also of
its Beyond; there is thus the negation of Quantum as well as
the negation of this negation. In its truth it is the unity in
which these are contained, but as moments only.—This truth
is the solution of the contradiction of which the progress is the
expression, and its nearest meaning is therefore the rehabili-
tation of that concept of magnitude where it is indifferent or
external limit. In the infinite progress as such the only reflection
made generally is that every Quantum, however great or small,
can vanish, that progress may take place beyond it; but the
reflection, that this its transcendence, the Beyond, and the bad
infinite also vanish, is generally not made.

The first transcendence, the negation of Quality in general,
whereby Quantum is posited, is already in itself the tran-
scendence of negation, Quantum being transcended qualitative
limit and therefore transcended negation; but also it is this
in itself only; it is posited as a Determinate Being, and hence
its negation is established as the infinite, as the Beyond of
Quantum, which takes up the place of Hither or of immediate:
thus the infinite is determined only as first negation, and as
such it appears in the infinite progress. But it has been shown


QUANTUM 255


that this contains more, namely, the negation of negation or
that which is in truth the infinite. This was looked at before
in such a way that the concept of Quantum was thus restored ;
and this restoration means, first, that its Determinate Existence
has received a closer determination: for Quantum determined
according to its concept has now arisen, and this differs from
immediate Quantum; externality is now its own opposite; it
is posited as a moment of magnitude itself, and Quantum is
posited as having its determinateness in another Quantum
through the mediation of its not-being, namely, of infinity;
that is, it is qualitatively that which it is. However, this com-
parisen of the concept of Quantum with its existence belongs
rather to our reflection, to a relation which is not yet here at
hand. The nearest determination is this, that Quantum having
returned to Quality is now determined qualitatively. For
Quality, which is its characteristic, is externality or indifference
of determinateness ; and it is now posited as, in its externality,
being itself, and as self-relating, having its determination in
simple self-unity, that is, qualitatively —This Qualitative is also
more closely determined, it is determined as Being-for-Self;
for the relation to itself which it has reached has been evolved
from mediation, from the negation of negation. Quantum is
infinite and is determined for itself: and this is no longer
external to it, but within itself.

The infinite, which in the infinite progress had the mere
empty meaning of a not-being, a Beyond not reached but
searched for, is, in fact, just Quality. Quantum as indifferent
limit passes beyond itself into the infinite, and in so doing seeks
after nothing else than determinateness-for-self, the qualitative
moment which hitherto, however, is no more’ than Ought.
Quantum is Quantum, because of its indifference to the limit
and because, therefore, it has no self-subsistent determinate-
ness and so overpasses itself: this its overpassing is to be negated
and its absolute determinateness is to be found in the infinite.

And, quite generally, Quantum is Quality transcended ; but
Quantum is infinite, overpasses itself, and is its own negation:
thus this overpassing is in itself the negation of negated Quality,
and its restitution; and so it is posited that externality, which
appeared as a Beyond, is determined as own moment to
Quantum.


256 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Quantum thus is posited as self-repelled: there thus are two —
Quanta, which, however, are transcended and exist only as
moments of one unity: this unity is the determinateness of
Quantum.—Quantum then, related to itself as indifferent limit
in its externality and therefore qualitatively posited, is the
Quantitative Ratio.—In Ratio, Quantum is external to and
different from itself: this its externality is the relation of one
Quantum to another, each of which has value only in this its
relation to its Other; and this relation constitutes the deter-
minateness of Quantum, which exists as such a unity. Here its
determination is not indifferent, but qualitative: in this its
externality it has returned upon itself, and in it is that which
it is.

Observation 1
THE CONCEPTUAL DETERMINATENESS OF THE MATHEMATICAL
INFINITE


The mathematical infinite is interesting, first, because its
introduction has widened the scope of mathematics and has
led to important results therein; next it is remarkable because
this science has not yet succeeded in vindicating this use of it
conceptually (“concept’ being here taken in its proper mean-
ing). Ultimately, such vindications are based on the correct-
ness (demonstrated on other grounds) of the results achieved by
means of this determination, and not on the clarity of the object
and of the process which produces the results: indeed, the
process itself is admitted to be faulty.

This in itself is a flaw: such a procedure is unscientific. But
it also involves the drawback that mathematics, not knowing
the nature of this its instrument (and this, because it cannot
cope with the metaphysics and critique of it), could not deter
mine the sphere in which it must be applied, and could not
safeguard itself against misapplication.

In its philosophical aspect, however, he tmathematical
infinite is important because the concept of the true infinite
is, in fact, its basis: it stands on a much higher level than the
so-called metaphysical infinite, whence objections against the
former are launched. The science of mathematics often has
no refuge from these objections except in denying the com-
petence of metaphysics, asserting that it has nothing to do with


QUANTUM 257


this science and need not trouble about its concepts if only it
acts consistently within its own sphere. It need not consider
truth in itself, but only what is true in its own domain. And
metaphysics, though it opposes them, cannot deny nor in-
validate the brilliant results of the employment of the mathe-
matical infinite; while mathematics cannot achieve clearness
about the metaphysics of its own concept, nor, therefore, about
the derivation of the methods which the employment of the
infinite necessitates.

If it were this single difficulty of the concept in general which
oppressed mathematics, it could without ceremony neglect this,
at least in so far as the concept is more than an expression of
the essential determinations of a thing, that is, those which
determine it for the mere Understanding: and mathematics
has not allowed such determinateness to be lacking in precision;
for it is not a science which is concerned with the concepts
of its objects or has to create its content by the development
(even if this were only through a process of argumentation)
of the concept. But in the method of the mathematical infinite
mathematics finds a radical contradiction to that very method
which is characteristic of itself, and on which it rests as a science.
For the calculation of the infinite admits of, and demands,
modes of procedure which mathematics, when it operates with
finite magnitudes, must altogether reject, and at the same time
it treats these infinite magnitudes as finite Quanta, seeking to
apply to the former those same methods which are valid for
the latter. The most important step in the development of this
science is to have imposed on transcendent determinations and
the treatment of these the form of ordinary calculation.

In spite of this conflict in its operations, mathematics shows
results which agree exactly with those found by the true
‘mathematical method, the geometrical and analytic method.
However, this does not apply to all results; and the end for
which the infinite is introduced is not to shorten the beaten
road, but to reach results to which it cannot lead. And also
the success does not justify the manner of road. Now, this
manner of calculating the infinite is plainly oppressed by the
apparent inexactitude in which it involves itself when, first,
it increases finite magnitudes by an infinitely small amount,
and then partly retains these during the further processes, but

VOL. I I


258 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


partly also neglects. This procedure has this strange quality,
that in spite of the admitted inexactitude a result is achieved
which is exact,—not merely tolerably or to such a degree that
the difference might be neglected, but absolutely. But in the
process itself which precedes the result we cannot do without
the suggestion that a certain quantity is not equal to nil but
is so inconsiderable that it may be neglected. But where
mathematical exactitude is meant, the distinction between
greater and less accuracy quite disappears, just as in philosophy
there can be no question of greater or less probability, but
of truth alone. If the method and employment of the infinite
are justified by success, it is not as superfluous to demand
notwithstanding this a justification as to ask in the case of the
nose for a demonstration of the right to use it. For mathematical
cognition is a scientific cognition, and therefore the proof is
essential; and as regards the results, too, it is the fact that a
strictly mathematical method does not stamp all with the mark
of success,—which mark in any case is only external.

It is worth while more closely to consider the mathematical
concept of the infinite, together with the more remarkable
among the attempts designed to justify its employment and to
remove the difficulty by which the method feels itself oppressed.
The consideration of these justifications and determinations of
the mathematical infinite, which I shall undertake at some
length in this Observation, will also throw the clearest light
on the nature of the true concept itself, and will show how a
confused notion of this latter was present as a foundation
for those processes.

The mathematical infinite is commonly determined as a
magnitude than which there is no greater (when it is deter-
mined as the infinitely great) or no smaller (when it is deter-
mined as the infinitely small); or as one which is greater (in
the former) or smaller (in the latter instance) than any given
magnitude.—It is true that in this definition the true concept
is not expressed, but only, as has already been remarked, ‘the
same contradiction as is contained in the infinite progress;
however, let us see what it contains in itself. A magnitude
is defined in mathematics as something which can be
increased and decreased: that is, then, as an indifferent limit.
Now since the infinitely great or small is such as cannot be


QUANTUM 259


increased nor decreased, it is in fact no longer a Quantum
as such.

This consequence follows necessarily and immediately. But
it is just the reflection that Quantum has been transcended
which is generally not made (and in this Observation I designate
as “finite Quantum,” Quantum in general, as we find it):
and it is just this which constitutes the difficulty for ordinary
thought; for it is demanded that Quantum, in so far as it is
infinite, be thought of as transcended and as something which
is not a Quantum, although its quantitative determinateness
remains.

We may here quote Kant’s judgment about this dena
tion :: he finds that it does not agree with the common notion
of an “infinite whole.” “According to the ordinary concept,
that magnitude is infinite beyond which there can be no
greater magnitude (that is, beyond the multitude of a given
unit which it contains). But no multitude is the greatest, because
it is always possible to add one or more units.—But the notion
of an infinite whole does not imply any magnitude, and there-
fore the concept of an infinite whole is not the concept of a
maximum (or minimum): this concept rather expresses the
relation of the whole to any given unit, with respect to which
it is greater than any number. The infinite would be greater
or less according as this unit was taken to be greater or
smaller; but infinity, which consists only in the relation to
this given unit, will always remain the same, although of
course the absolute magnitude of the whole cannot be known
through it.”

Kant disapproves when infinite wholes are regarded as a
maximum, as the entire multitude of a given unit. Maximum
or minimum as such still appears as a Quantum, or a multitude.
And this idea cannot avert the conclusion, mentioned by Kant,
which leads to a greater or lesser infinite. And generally, so
long as the infinite is imagined as Quantum, the distinction
between greater and less applies to it. But this criticism
has no force against the concept of the true mathematical
infinite, the infinite difference, for this no longer is a finite


Quantum.


t Observation to the Thesis of the First Cosmological Antinomy, in the Critique
of Pure Reason.


260 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Opposed to this is Kant’s concept of infinity, which he calls
the true and transcendental ‚—namely, “that the successive
synthesis of the unit, in measuring a Quantum, can never be
completed. DA Quantum in general is supposed to be given:
it is demanded that, by synthetizing the unit, this be made
into an amount, into a Quantum which can definitely be
indicated; and it is asserted that this synthetizing can never
be completed. Clearly, it is only the progress to infinity which
has here been posited; only it is figured in a transcendental,
that is really in a subjective and psychological, manner. It is
demanded that in itself Quantum be complete; but (it is said)
in the transcendental manner, that is, in the subject, which
gives it a relation to a unit, the only determination of the
Quantum which arises is such as is incomplete and altogether
infected with a Beyond. The contradiction which magnitude
contains still remains the limit of our progress; but it is
distributed between object and subject, limitedness being attri-
buted to the former, and to the latter the passing beyond every
determinate measure which it may have reached at any stage
into the bad infinite.

On the other hand it was stated above that the determina-
tion of the mathematical infinite, as it is used in the higher
analysis, corresponds to the concept of the true infinite: the
comparison of the two determinations will now be undertaken
in its more detailed development.—And, first, as regards true
infinite Quantum, it determined itself as intrinsically infinite ;
and it is so because, as was seen, finite Quantum (or Quantum
in general) and its Beyond, the bad infinite, are alike trans-
cended. Quantum transcended has thus returned into sim-
plicity and self-relation, and this not merely as did Extensive
Quantum when it passed over into Intensive Quantum; for
this latter has its determinateness only in itself in an external
multiplicity, towards which it is required however to be
indifferent and from which it must be distinct. But Infinite
Quantum contains in itself, first externality, and then the
negation of this; and thus it no longer is a finite Quantum
or determinateness of magnitude having a determinate exist-
ence as Quantum, but is simple, and therefore exists only as
moment: it is determinateness of magnitude in a qualitative
form, and its infinite nature consists in the fact that it is


QUANTUM 261


qualitative determinateness.—As moment, then, it is essentially
at one with its Other only as determined through this its
Other, that is, it has significance only with reference to some-
thing which stands in a relation towards it. Apart from this
relation it is nil,—just because the Quantum as such has to
be indifferent towards the relation, whilst in the relation it is
an immediate constant value. In the relation, as a mere
moment, it is not indifferent for itself; since it is at the
same time a quantitative determinateness, it exists in infinity
(regarded as Being-for-Self) only as a “For-One.”

It will appear that the concept of the infinite as here abstractly
expounded is the basis of the mathematical infinite: the concept
itself will become clearer if we consider the several steps of the
expression of Quantum, as a moment of relation, beginning
with the lowest step where it is still also Quantum as such, and
proceeding to the higher where it receives the meaning and
expression of real infinite magnitude.

Let us first take Quantum in a ratio, such as is a fraction.


; 3 a: ;
Such a fraction, for instance 7’ is not a Quantum like ı, 2, 3


and so on; it is an ordinary finite number, but not absolute,
like integers: as fraction it is determined mediately by two
other numbers which stand in the relation of Amount and
Unit, the Unit itself being a determinate Amount. However,
if we abstract from this closer mutual determination of these,
and consider them only according to their fate as Quanta, in
the qualitative relation in which they here are, 2 and 7 are
Quanta otherwise indifferent: here, however, they act only
as moments, one ofthe other, and, therefore, ofa third (namely,
that Quantum which is called the Exponent): here it is not
their status as 2 and 7, but their mutual determinateness, which
matters. In their place 4 and 14, 6 and 21, and so on to infinity,
might equally well be put. They thus herewith assume a
qualitative character. If they counted as mere Quanta, then
2 and 7 are, the one just 2 and the other just 7; and 4, 14, 6, 21
and so on are simply other than those numbers, and, in so far
as they would be absolute Quanta, they could not be sub-
stituted for one another. But, since 2 and 7 are not counted
according to their determinateness as such Quanta, their
indifferent limit is transcended; and thus in this aspect they


262 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


contain the moment of infinity; for not only is each number
not itself, but also their quantitative determinateness remains:
it remains, however, as qualitative in itself, and depends on
their value as related. An infinite number of others could be
put in their place, and yet the value of the fraction, owing to
the determinateness possessed by the relation, is not varied.

But infinity is still not adequately represented by a fraction,
and this because the two sides of the fraction, 2 and 7, can
be taken apart from the ratio, and are ordinary indifferent
Quanta: the relation which subsists between them (namely,
that of being in ratio, and of being moments) is external and
indifferent to them. And their relation too is an ordinary
Quantum, the exponent of the ratio.

The letters with which general arithmetic operates form the
next universality into which numbers rise: they have not the
peculiarity of bearing a determinate numerical value; they are
only general symbols and indeterminate potentialities of any


; RER.
determinate value. And therefore the fraction 5 seems to be a


more fitting expression of the infinite, since a and b, taken apart
from their relation to one another, remain indeterminate, and
severally too have no special and peculiar value.—But, though
these letters are posited as indeterminate magnitudes, their
significance is that they are some finite Quantum. Thus they
are the general image, but the image only of determinate
number, and therefore with them too it is indifferent that they
should be in a ratio, and they retain this value also when they
are no longer in such ratio.

If we consider more closely what is present in Ratio, we
find therein these two determinations, first that it is a Quantum,
and secondly that this Quantum is not immediate, but contains
the qualitative opposition; and also there remains in it that
determinate and indifferent Quantum, because it returns
upon itself from its otherness (the opposition), and there-
fore is infinite itself. These two determinations are seen
clearly developed in their distinctness from each other in
the following well-known form.


The fraction 2 may be expressed as 0:285714 ...


Ka See


as 1 +a +a? +a + .... It thus appears as an infinite series;


QUANTUM 263


the fraction itself is called the sum or finite expression of it.
If these two expressions be compared, then one, the infinite
series, no longer represents it as a ratio, but in its aspect as
Quantum (since it is a multitude of added units) or as Amount.
—It is here irrelevant that the magnitudes of which it is
supposed, as Amount, to consist are in turn themselves made
up of decimal fractions, that is, of ratios; for this fact applies
only to the special kind of unit of which these magnitudes are
composed, and not to the magnitudes as constituting an
Amount; and, similarly, a multi-figured integer of the decimal
system is counted essentially as Amount, and the fact is neg-
lected that it consists of the products of a number and of the
number ten and the powers of ten. And, similarly, it is here
irrelevant that there are other fractions besides the one taken


of , which, if converted into decimals, do not yield an infinite


series ; every fraction can be so expressed in a numerical system
having a different unit.

Thus, in the infinite series which is to represent the fraction
as Amount, its aspect of ratio vanishes; and simultaneously
there vanishes that aspect which—as was shown above—gave
to it infinity. Infinity, however, has now been introduced in
another manner; for the series itself is infinite.

Now it is self-evident what is the nature of the infinity of
the series: it is the bad infinity of the progression. The series
contains and illustrates the contradiction which would repre-
sent as a mere Quantum or Amount, or as non-relational, that
which is a ratio and includes a qualitative nature. The conse-
quence of. this is that the Amount expressed in the series
is ever incomplete, so that what is posited must still be sur-
passed if the determinateness demanded would be reached.
The law of progress is known, and is implicit in the deter-
mination of Quantum which is contained in the fraction, and
in the nature of the form in which this determination has to
be expressed. The Amount can indeed be made as exact as
‚is necessary by a continuation of the series; but the represen-
tation through the series still remains an Ought; it is infected
with a Beyond which cannot be transcended, because to express
as Amount that which is based on qualitative determinateness,
is an abiding contradiction.


264 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


This inexactitude, of which there is only an appearance in
the true mathematical infinite, is actually present in this infinite
series. These two kinds of mathematical infinite are as little
to be confounded as the two kinds of philosophical infinite.
In representing the true mathematical infinite the form of a
series was originally used, and has again lately been invoked.
But this form is not necessary for it; on the contrary the infinite
of the infinite series differs from it essentially, as the sequel
will show. Indeed, it is inferior even to the fraction as a form
of expression.

For the infinite series contains bad infinity, since that which
the series is designed to express remains as Ought; and what
it does express is infected with a Beyond that never vanishes,
and is distinct from what it is desired to express. It is infinite,
not because of the number of its terms, but because they are
incomplete, because the Other, which essentially belongs to
them, is beyond them; that which it really contains (let the
terms posited be as many as they will) is but something finite,
in the proper sense, posited as finite—that is as something which
is not what it ought to be. That, on the contrary, which is
called the finite expression or sum of such a series, has nothing
lacking: it contains fully the value which the series only seeks
after; the Beyond is recalled from its flight; what it is, and
what it ought to be, are not severed, but the same.

The differentia of these two is, more precisely, this: in the
infinite series the negative is outside its terms, which are present
only in so far as they count as parts of the Amount. On the
other hand, in the finite expression, which is a ratio, the
negative is immanent as being the mutual determinateness of
the sides of the ratio; and this, being a return upon self or
self-relating unity as negation of negation (for both the sides
of the ratio exist only as moments), contains the determina-
tion of infinity.—Thus, in fact, what is ordinarily called sum


ENI
(ike r or
is the truly infinite expression. The infinite series, on the other
hand, is in truth a sum: it is designed to set forth in the form
of sum what is in itself a ratio, and. terms of the series exist


not as terms of a ratio but of an aggregate. And, further, it
is, more properly, the finite expression; for it is an incomplete


) is a ratio; and this so-called finite expression


QUANTUM 265


aggregate and essentially has something lacking. According to
its actual content it is a determinate Quantum, but also a
Quantum less than it should be; and that which is lacking is
then also a determinate Quantum. This lacking part is in fact
that which is called the infinite part of the series, in this merely
formal meaning, that it is a something which is lacking, or a
not-being; according to its content it is a finite Quantum. It
is only that which the series contains, plus that which is lacking,
which constitutes the fraction,—that determinate Quantum
which it too ought to, but cannot, be.—In the infinite series,
too, the word “infinite” generally enjoys the reputation of
something lofty and venerable; this is a kind of superstition,
the superstition of the understanding; we have seen that it
reduces itself rather to the determination of a deficiency.

We may still remark that the existence of infinite series which
cannot be summed is a circumstance altogether external and
contingent with respect to the form of the series. These contain
a higher kind of infinity than do the series which can be
summed: they contain incommensurability,—that is to say,
the quantitative ratio which they contain cannot be repre-
sented as Quantum even in the shape of a fraction. However,
the form of series as such, which is theirs, contains the same
determination of bad infinity that exists in the series which
admits of being summed.

The terminological inversion remarked above in connexion
with fractions and their equivalent series is found also in so
far as the mathematical infinite—not that just mentioned, but
the true one—has been called the relative infinite, and the
ordinary metaphysical infinite on the other hand (by which
is meant the abstract and bad infinite), the absolute. But, in
fact, this metaphysical infinite is merely relative, because the
negation which it expresses remains in the opposition of a limit
only in such a way that the limit persists outside it and is not
transcended by it; whereas the mathematical infinite has
veritably in itself transcended its finite limit, because its Beyond
is incorporated with it.

It is in this sense, in which it has just been demonstrated
that the so-called sum or finite expression of an infinite series
is in fact to be regarded as its infinite expression, that Spinoza
opposes the concept of true infinity to that of bad, and


1*


266 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


elucidates it by means of examples. His concept gains the
greatest clarity if I join his observations on this subject to my
exposition.

He begins by defining the Infinite as the absolute affirmation
of the existence of any one Nature, and the Finite on the
contrary as determinateness, or negation. For the absolute
affirmation of an existence must be taken as meaning its self-
relation, the fact that its existence does not depend on that
of an Other. The finite, on the other hand, is negation, that
is, cessation as meaning relation to an Other which begins
beyond it. It is true that the absolute affirmation of an existence
does not exhaust the concept of infinity; for this concept also
implies that infinity is affirmation not as immediate, but only
as restored through the intro-Reflection of the Other, or as
negation of the negative. But with Spinoza, Substance and its
absolute unity have the form of an imert, that is, of a not
self-mediating, unity,—of a rigidity wherein the concept
of the negative unity of the self (Subjectivity) has not yet
found a place.

Spinoza explains the true infinite by means of a mathematical
example (Epist. XXIX), namely, a space contained between
two unequal circles which are not concentric, while one lies
within the other without touching it. It seems that he thought
much of this figure and of the concept for which he used it as
example: he made it the motto of his Ethics.—“Mathe-
maticians,” he says, “conclude that the inequalities which are
possible in such a space are infinite, not from the infinite
multitude of parts (for its magnitude is determinate and limited,
and I can posit similar spaces both greater and smaller), but
because the nature of the matter surpasses any determinate-
ness.” —Evidently Spinoza rejects that idea of the infinite
according to which it is imagined as multitude or as incomplete
series, reminding us that here in the space of the example the
infinite is not beyond, but is present and complete; this space
is limited, and is infinite, “because the nature of the matter
surpasses all determinateness,” because, that is, the magni-
tudinal determination which it contains cannot also be repre-
sented as a Quantum, or (to use the expression of Kant quoted
above) because the synthesis cannot be completed into a
(discrete) Quantum.—How in general the opposition of con-


QUANTUM 267


tinuous and discrete Quantum leads to the infinite, must be
explained in a later Observation.—Spinoza calls this serial
infinite “the infinite of imagination,” but the infinite as self-
relation “the infinite of thought,” or infinitum actu. For it is
actually (actu) infinite, because it is complete and present in
itself. Thus the series 0:285714... or Ita+a+a+...is
merely the infinite of fancy or opinion, for it has no actuality
:
ee the
actual infinite, and not only is what the series is in those of
its terms which are given, but has also that which the series
lacks and is what the latter only ought to be. The fraction


and has something altogether lacking; while : or


2 . : i ; f
- or is also a finite magnitude, like Spinoza’s space


enclosed between two circles, with its inequalities; and, like
that space, it may be increased or decreased. But this does
not result in the absurdity of an infinite which may be greater
or less; for this Quantum of thé whole does not touch the
ratio between its moments, the “nature of the matter,” that
is, the qualitative determination of magnitude. That which the
infinite series presents to us is also a finite Quantum; but,
further, it is defective.—But fancy stands still at Quantum as
such, and does not reflect upon the qualitative relation that
is the basis of the incommensurability which faces it.

That incommensurability which is implied in Spinoza’s
example includes in a general way the functions of curves,
and, more exactly, leads to the infinite which mathematics
has introduced with such functions and, generally, with the
functions of variable magnitudes; this is the true mathematical
or qualitative infinite, which also Spinoza had in mind. We
will now discuss this determination in greater detail.

First, as regards that important category of variability, which
comprises the magnitudes which are related in these functions,
these are supposed to be variable, but not with that meaning in


sie ° 2 ;
which in the fraction - the two numbers 2 and 7 are variable,


since 4 and 14, 6 and 21, and other numbers to infinity, may
be put in their place without altering the value denoted in


the fraction. Similarly, in = any number may be put in place


b


268 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


; Goes :
of a or b without altering what 338 intended to express. It is


only in this sense (that an infinite, that is, an inexhaustible,
multitude of numbers may be put in the place of the x and y
of a function) that a and b are variable magnitudes as much
as that x and that y. And hence the expression “variable
magnitudes” is very vague and ill-chosen for determinations
of magnitude whose interest and manner of treatment lie in
something quite different from their mere variability.

In order to make clear where lies the true determination
of the moments of a function to which higher analysis devotes
its attention, we must once more run through the stages to


which attention has already been drawn. In 2 or P 2 and 7


are each a determinate Quantum, and their relation is not
essential to them; and a and b are likewise meant to represent
such Quanta as remain what they are even outside the ratio.

2 a
And, further, 3 and 5
the ratio constitutes a number of which the unit is expressed
by the denominator and the Amount of these units by the
numerator, or conversely; and even when 4 and 14, or other
numbers, are substituted for 2 and 7, the ratio, as a Quantum,


2
remains the same. But in the function = =p, for example, this


are each a fixed Quantum, a quotient;


is essentially changed; for, though here x and y have the
meaning that they can be determinate Quanta, it is not x and y
but only x and y? which here have a determinate quotient.
Hence these sides of the ratio, x and y, first are not determinate
Quanta, and secondly the ratio subsisting between them is
not a fixed quotient or Quantum (nor is such a Quantum
intended as with a and 5); but this quotient, simply as a
Quantum, is itself variable. But all this is implied in the fact
that x is related, not to y, but to the square of y. The relation
of a magnitude to a power is not a Quantum, but is essentially
qualitative: the power-relation is the circumstance which must
be regarded as the fundamental determination. —But in the


function of the straight line, y = a x,  — ais an ordinary fraction
x


and quotient; hence this function is only formally a function


QUANTUM 269

of variable magnitudes, and here x and y are what a and b
dta - i

are in fe that is, they are not in that determination in which


the differential and the integral calculus consider them.—On
account of the peculiar nature of variable magnitudes, in this
point of view it would have been well done to have introduced
a name for them and also symbols other than those used for
ordinary unknown magnitudes in any finite equation deter-
minate or indeterminate; and this because of their essential
difference from such merely unknown magnitudes, which in
themselves are wholly determinate Quanta, or a determinate
range of determinate Quanta.—And it is only because the
peculiarity of that which constitutes the interest of the higher
analysis, and has led to the need for and invention of the
differential calculus, is not fully understood, that functions
of the first degree, like the equation of the straight line, have
been included by themselves in the treatment of this calculus.
This formalism results, further, from the misconception which
thinks to fulfil the just demand for the universalization of a
method by neglecting the specific determinateness on which
the need is based, so that here the assumption is made that
in this sphere only variable magnitudes in general are dealt
with. Much formalism in the consideration and treatment of
these objects would have been spared if it had been understood
that it dealt, not with variable magnitudes as such, but with
determinations of powers.

But the mathematical infinite shows itself in its peculiar
nature at yet a further stage. In an equation where x and y
are posited primarily as determined through a ratio of powers,
x and y as such are still meant to denote Quanta: now this
meaning is entirely lost in the so-called infinitesimal differences.
dx and dy are no longer Quanta and are not supposed to
signify such; they have a significance only in their relation,
a meaning merely as moments. They no longer are Something
(Something being taken as Quantum), nor are they finite
differences; but also they are not Nothing or the indeter-
minate nil. Apart from their relation they are pure nil; but
they are meant to be taken only as moments of the relation,


N ; i dx
as determinations of the differential coefficient G


270 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


In this concept of the infinite, Quantum veritably is per-
fected into a qualitative Determinate Being; it is posited as
actually infinite, and is transcended not only as being this or
that Quantum, but as Quantum in general. And yet the
quantitative determinateness as element of Quanta remains
the principle, or, as has also been said, it remains part of their
primary concept.

All the attacks which have been made upon the fundamental
determination of the mathematics of this infinite, that is, on
the differential and integral calculus, have been directed against
this concept. The mistaken ideas of mathematicians themselves
prevented it from being justly recognized; but mainly these
attacks are due to the impossibility of justifying this object
as a concept. But, as has been mentioned above, mathematics
cannot here evade the concept; for, being the mathematics
of the infinite, it does not confine itself to the finite deter-
minateness of its objects (as does genuine mathematics, where
space and number and their determinations are considered and
related only according to their finitude) ; but, on the contrary,
it transplants into identity with its opposite a determination
already taken from that study and treated by it, as for instance
it makes a curve into a straight line, or a circle into a polygon,
and so on. The operations which it presumes to undertake as
differential or integral calculus are, therefore, quite contra-
dictory to the nature of merely finite determinations and their
relations; their only justification, therefore, would be in the
concept.

Now when the mathematics of the infinite still maintained
that these quantitative determinations were vanishing mag-
nitudes, that is, magnitudes which no longer are any Quantum,
but also are not nothing, being merely a determinateness as
opposed to Other, it seemed abundantly clear that such an
intermediate state, as it was called, between Being and Nothing
did not exist.— The nature of this objection and of the so-called
intermediate state has been indicated above under the cate-
gory of Becoming, Observation 4. The unity of Being and
Nothing is not indeed a state; for a state would be a deter-
mination of Being and Nothing such as might have been
reached by these moments only contingently, as it were through
disease or external influence, and through erroneous thinking ;


QUANTUM 271


but, on the contrary, this mean and unity, this vanishing and,
equally, Becoming, is, in fact, their only truth.

It has further been said that infinities cannot be compared
as greater or less, and that, therefore, there could be no ratio
between infinite and infinite in their ranks and orders, as in
the distinctions of the infinite differences that occur in the
science which concerns itself with them.—This objection,
already referred to, is based upon the idea that Quanta are
here in question, and are being compared as such; and that
determinations which are Quanta no longer, have no longer
the relation of ratio. But, on the contrary, that which is only
in such a relation is no Quantum: Quantum is a determination
which is supposed to have a perfectly indifferent existence apart
from its ratio, and its distinctness from an Other is supposed
to be indifferent to it: while that which is qualitative is that
only which it is in its distinctness from an Other. These infinite
magnitudes, therefore, are not only comparable, but exist only
as moments of the comparison or ratio.

I proceed to enumerate the chief determinations which have
been offered in mathematics about this infinite; it will appear
that, although they are based upon the thought of the real
matter, agreeing with the concept here developed, its authors
did not fully probe it as concept, and in applying it were
again forced to have recourse to means dissonant with their
better cause.

No correcter determination of the thought can be made than
that offered by Newton. I here set apart the determinations
belonging to the idea of motion and velocity (from which
latter chiefly he took the name of fluxions), for here the thought
appears not in its due abstraction, but concrete and mixed
with unessential forms. Newton explains these fluxions (Princ.
Mathem. Phil. Nat. L. 1. Lemma XI. Schol.) by saying that he
takes them not as indivisible (a form used by earlier mathe-
maticians, Cavalierit and others: it contains the concept of
a Quantum determinate in itself), but as vanishing divistbilia ;
and, further, not as the sums and ratios of determinate parts,
but as the limits (limites) of the sums and ratios. It will be


ı Cavalieri, Francesco Bonaventura, 1598-1647, Professor of Mathematics at
Bologna: Geomet ia indivisibilium continuorum nova, 1635; Exercitationes geometricae,
1647


272 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


objected, he says, that vanishing magnitudes have no final
ratio, because the ratio before they vanish is not the last, and,
after they have vanished, no longer exists. But by the ratio
between vanishing magnitudes must not be understood the ratio
which exists either before or after, but that with which, they
vanish (guacum evanescunt). And, similarly, the first ratio of
becoming magnitudes is that with which they arise.

Newton did what was demanded by the stage which scientific
method had reached in his day—he only explained what was
to be understood by a certain expression ; but really the demand
for such a particular explanation is subjective, or historical,
and it is not demonstrated that such a concept is necessary
in itself and possesses inner truth. But what has been quoted
shows that the concept as posited by Newton conforms with
the development of infinite magnitude from the reflexion of
Quantum, as it was set out above. He means magnitudes which
are at the point of vanishing, that is, are Quanta no longer;
and not ratios between definite parts, but limits of the ratio.
Thus, the Quanta in themselves, the sides of the ratio, and
also the ratio in itself (that is, in so far as it is Quantum), are
supposed to vanish; the limit of the magnitudinal ratio is that
point where it is and is not,—or, more precisely, where the
Quantum has vanished, and the ratio, therefore, is preserved
only as qualitative quantity-ratio, and its sides as qualitative
quantity-moments.—Newton adds that it must not be con-
cluded from the existence of final ratios between vanishing
magnitudes that there are final magnitudes or indivisibilia.
For this would be another leap from the abstract ratio to such
sides of it as should have a value for themselves outside their
relation, as being indivisibilia or something that is a One, a
non-relational entity.

And further, to refute this error he reminds us that final
ratios are not ratios between final magnitudes, but limits to
which the ratios of the magnitudes decreasing without limit
are nearer than any given (that is, finite) difference; but they
never overstep this limit so as to become Nothing.—It has been
said above that by final magnitudes indivisibilia, or Ones, might
have been understood. But in the determination of final ratio
the idea of indifferent One (non-proportional Quantum), as
well as that of finite Quantum, is absent. But, if the suggested


QUANTUM 273


mode of determination had been developed into the concept
of a form of magnitude which is simply a moment of ratio,
there would be need neither of that decrease without limit
into which Newton transposes Quantum (and this expresses
only the progress to infinity), nor of the characteristic
of divisibility, which here no longer has any immediate
meaning.

In connexion with the preservation of the ratio at the
vanishing of Quanta, the expression is elsewhere found (for
instance in Carnot, Réflexions sur la Métaphysique du Calcul
Infinitésimal) that, by virtue of the law of continuity, vanishing
magnitudes still retain the ratio whence they arise before they
vanish.—This idea expresses the true nature of the matter in
so far as it is not the continuity of Quantum which is meant,
for this continuity of the Quantum would consist in the endless
process by which it continues itself into its own vanishing in
such a manner that in its Beyond there only arises again a
finite Quantum, a new term of the series; while a continuous
progress is always imagined as such that the values, which still
are finite Quanta, are passed through. But where the transition
made is to the true infinite, it is the ratio that is continuous;
and it is so completely continuous and self-supporting that the
transition just consists in presenting the ratio in its complete
purity and causing the non-relational factor (that is, the con-
cept of a Quantum which is one term of a ratio and yet also
a Quantum apart from this relation) to vanish.—This purifica-
tion of quantitative ratio is exactly analogous to what happens
when an empirically given existent is grasped by conceptual
thought. Such an existent is thereby raised above itself in such
a manner that its concept contains the same determinations
as itself, but taken in their essentiality and in the unity of the
concept, wherein they have lost their indifferent and non-
conceptual persistence.

The other form of Newton’s exposition of the magnitudes
in question—namely, generative magnitudes or principles—is
equally interesting. A generated (genita) magnitude is a pro-
duct or quotient, roots, rectangles, squares, and also the sides


t Carnot, Lazare Nicolas Marguerite, Count, 1753-1823, “organizer of victory”
in the republican armies, equally important as politician and soldier until his
banishment in 1815, died at Magdeburg: Réflexions, etc., 1797.


VOL. I


274 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


of rectangles and squares, and, in general, any finite magni-
tude.— “It is considered as variable in its incessant motion and
flow of increase or decrease, and to its momentary augmen-
tation and diminution he gives the name of Moments. These,
however, must not be taken as particles of determinate mag-
nitude (particulae finitae). They are not moments themselves,
but magnitudes produced by moments ; the generative principles
or beginnings of finite magnitudes must here be understood.”
—An internal distinction is here made in Quantum; it is taken
first as product or Determinate Being, and next in its Becoming,
in its beginning and principle, that is, as it is in its concept
or (which is here the same thing) in its qualitative determina-
tion. In the latter the quantitative differences, the infinitesimal
incrementa or decrementa, are moments only; and it is only
in what has been generated that we have Quantum or that
which has passed over into the indifference of determinate
existence and into externality.—But, although the philosophy
of the true concept must acknowledge those determinations of
the infinite just mentioned in the consideration of the incre-
menta and decrementa, it must also be observed that the forms
themselves of incrementa (and so on) fall within the category
of absolute Quantum and of the continuous progress to which
we have alluded; indeed, the ideas of increment, of addition,
of growth of x by dx or i, and so on, must be considered the
fundamental evil inherent in these methods,—as an enduring
obstacle which makes it impossible clearly to disengage the
determination of the qualitative moment of quantity from the
idea of ordinary Quantum.

The idea of infinitely small magnitudes (latent also in
increment and decrement) is far inferior to the mode of con-
ception indicated. This idea supposes them to be of such a
nature that they may be neglected in relation to finite mag-
nitudes; and not only that, but also their higher orders
relatively to the lower order, and the products of several
relatively to one.—With Leibniz this demand to neglect (which
previous inventors of methods referring to this kind of mag-
nitude also bring into play) becomes more strikingly prominent.
It is this chiefly which gives an appearance of inexactitude
and express incorrectness, the price of convenience, to this
calculus in the course of its operation.—Wolf has attempted


QUANTUM a75


to make it intelligible in his manner of popularizing a problem,
which is to confuse the concept and to put in its place incorrect
sensuous images. He compares the neglect of infinitesimal
differences of higher orders relatively to lower with the pro-
cedure of a surveyor who, in measuring the height of a moun-
tain, is none the less exact if meanwhile the wind has blown
away a grain of sand from the top; or with the neglect of the
height of houses or towers in a calculation of eclipses of the
moon (Element. Mathes. univ. Tom. I. El. Analys. math. P. II.
C. 1. s. Schol.).

Common sense in fairness admits such an inaccuracy; but
all geometers have rejected this idea. It is perfectly self-evident
that in the science of mathematics such empirical accuracy
is not at all in question, and that mathematical measurement
by means of the operations of the calculus or the constructions
and proofs of geometry differs altogether from surveying, from
the measuring of empirical lines, figures, and so on. And this
apart, analysts (as mentioned above) demonstrate, by a com-
parison of the result as reached in a strictly geometrical way
and by the method of infinitesimal difference, that one is the
same as the other and that there is, absolutely, no more nor
less of exactness. And it is obvious that an absolutely exact
result could not be obtained by an inexact procedure. And
yet, on the other hand, the procedure itself cannot do without
this neglect of the “insignificant,” in spite of all protests against
the method of justification just quoted. And this is the difficulty
about which the analysts are at pains, —to make intelligible
and to remove the inherent anomaly.

In this regard Euler’s: idea especially must be cited. On
the basis of Newton’s general definition, he insists that the
differential calculus considers the ratios of the incrementa of
a magnitude, while the infinitesimal difference as such is to be
regarded wholly as nil (Institut Calc. different. P.I.C. III.) —It
will be clear from the above how this is to be understood:: the
infinitesimal difference is nil only quantitatively, it is not a
qualitative nil, but, as nil of quantum, it is pure moment of a
ratio only. There is no magnitudinal difference; but for that


t Euler, Leopold, 1707-1783, Professor at S. Petersburg, at Berlin, and again
at S. Petersburg : Introductio in analysin infinitorum, 1748 ; Institutiones calculi differentialis,
1755; Instit. calc. integralis, 1768-1794.


276 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


reason it is, in a manner, wrong to express as incrementa or
decrementa and as differences those moments which are called
infinitely small magnitudes. This point of view has for basis
the thought that something is joined to or taken from the
finite magnitude first given, that subtraction or addition—an
arithmetical external operation—takes place. But the transition
of the function of the variable magnitude into its differential
must be considered; it is of quite different nature, and in fact,
as decided above, it must be regarded as the reduction of the
finite functions to the qualitative ratio of their determinations
of quantity.—On the other hand, the difficulty is self-evident
when it is said that for themselves the incrementa are each nil,
and that only their ratios are being considered; for a nil is
altogether without determinateness. Thus this image, although
it reaches the negative aspect of Quantum and expressly asserts
it, yet does not simultaneously seize this negative in its positive
meaning of qualitative determinations of quantity, which, if
torn away from the ratio and treated as Quanta, would each
be but a nil.—Lagrange? (Theorie des fonctions analytiques, Introd.)
judges, regarding the idea of limits or final ratios, that while
the ratio between two magnitudes may easily be imagined so
long as they remain finite, this ratio offers to understanding
no clear and determinate concept when its terms simultaneously
become nil.—And indeed understanding must pass beyond
this merely negative side, where each member of the ratio is
a nil as Quantum, and must take them positively, as quali-
tative moments.—But we cannot regard as satisfactory Euler’s
further remarks (loc. cit. § 84 sqq.) with regard to this theory
of his, by way of proving that two so-called infinitesimal
magnitudes, which ought to be nothing but nil, yet stand in
a ratio to one another; on which account they are commonly
denoted, not by the symbol for nought, but by others. He
attempts to base this upon the distinction between arithmetical
and geometrical relations: in the former we consider the
difference, in the latter the quotient, and, although the former
is the same between any two noughts, this is not true of
geometrical ratio; if 2 : 1 = 0:0, then it would follow from the
nature of the proportion (since the fitst term is twice as great


t Lagrange, Jos. Louis, 1736-1812, Euler’s successor at Berlin, then Professor
at the £cole Polytechnique in Paris: Théorie des fonctions analytiques, 1797.


QUANTUM 277


as the second) that the third term is twice as great as the
fourth; thus, according to the proportion, 0:0 is to be taken
as being the ratio of 2 : 1.—And even in common arithmetic
n.o = 0; and therefore n : 1 = 0: 0.—But it is just because 2 : 1
orn : 1 is a ratio between Quanta that no ratio nor designation
like o : o is adequate to it.

I refrain from citing any further attempts. Those which we
have considered have shown sufficiently that they contain the
true concept of the infinite, but that it is not disengaged nor
seized upon in its determinateness. Therefore, when mathe-
maticians proceed to practice, it is impossible for the true
conceptual determination to assert itself therein: the finite
determinateness of quantity returns, and the operation can no
longer do without the idea of a Quantum which is merely
relatively small. The calculus makes it necessary to subordinate
the so-called infinite magnitudes to the ordinary arithmetical
operations of addition and so on (which are based on the
nature of finite magnitudes), and thus to count and treat
them for a moment as finite magnitudes. And on the cal-
culus rests the burden of justifying this method, where first,
drawing them down into this sphere, it treats them as incre-
menta or differences, and then neglects them as Quanta
after having applied to them the forms and laws of finite
magnitudes.

I now recount the chief heads of the attempts made by the
geometers to remove these difficulties.

The older analysts had small scruples in this matter; the
efforts of the moderns were chiefly directed towards bringing
back the infinitesimal calculus to the evidence of a “properly
geometrical method,” and thereby attaining in mathematics
to the “‘strictness of proof of the ancients.” (These are Lagrange’s
expressions.) But since the principle of the analysis of the
infinite is of higher nature than the principle of the mathe-
matics of finite magnitudes, the former immediately was forced
to renounce this kind of evidence; just as philosophy cannot
claim the kind of obviousness proper to the sciences of the
sensuous, such as natural history,—and indeed eating and
drinking are counted a more intelligible business than thinking
and understanding. We shall thus deal only with the attempts
to reach the strictness of proof of the ancients.


278 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Many have tried altogether to discard the concept of the
infinite, and to effect their aim while dispensing with what
seemed indispensable.—Lagrange speaks for example of the
method invented by Landen,: and says that it is purely
analytical and does not employ infinitesimal differences, but
at first introduces different values of the variable magnitudes,
and, in the course of the demonstration, makes them equal.
But he considers that in other respects the advantages peculiar
to the differential calculus—simplicity of method and ease in
operation—are here lost.—Probably this procedure has some-
thing which corresponds to the starting point of Descartes’
tangential method, of which further mention must be made
below. But we may here remark that this at least is clear,
that the general procedure which assumes different values of
the variable magnitudes and afterwards makes them equal,
belongs to a different sphere of mathematical treatment from
that to which the method of the differential calculus itself
belongs; and that the peculiarity of the simple relation (to
be more fully considered later) to which the actual concrete
determination of the calculus reduces itself, namely, the
relation of the derivative to the original function, is not here
emphasized.

The older of the moderns (such as Fermat,? Barrow,3 and
others), who first used the infinitesimally small in that appli-
cation which was later developed into differential and integral
calculus, and, subsequently, Leibniz and his successors, with
Euler, always undisguisedly believed that they could neglect
the products and the higher powers of infinitesimal differences
only because they vanish relatively to the lower order. It is
on this alone that with them the fundamental proposition is
based, namely, the determination of what the differential of
a product or a power is; for to this all their theoretical doctrine
reduces itself. The rest is partly the mechanism of development
and partly also application, in which, however (as must further
be considered), in fact lies the higher or rather the only
interest.—With respect to our present subject, only the elemen-


™ Landen, John, English mathematician, 1719-1790 : Mathematical Lucubra-
tions, 1755, ete.
» Fermat, Pierre de, 1601-1665: Varia opera mathematica, 1679.


3 Barrow, Isaac, 1630-1677, Professor at Cambridge: Lectiones geometricae, 1669
Lectiones opticae, 1674.


QUANTUM 279


tary statement need here be made that, for the same reason
of insignificance as caused the acceptance of the capital
proposition, it is assumed, with regard to curves, that the ele-
ments of curves, the incrementa of abscissae and ordinates, are
in the relation of subtangents and ordinates to one another ; and
for the purpose of obtaining similar triangles, the arc which
constitutes the third side of a triangle together with the two
incrementa of the characteristic triangle (as it used rightly to
be called formerly) is regarded as a straight line and as part
of the tangent, and thus one of the incrementa is regarded as
reaching the tangent. By these assumptions those determina-
tions are, on the one hand, raised above the nature of finite
magnitudes; on the other hand a procedure is applied to the
moments (now called infinitesimal) which is valid only for
finite magnitudes; and where this is applied nothing may be
neglected on the ground of insignificance. With such a mode
of procedure, the difficulty which obsesses the method remains
in all its force.

A remarkable procedure of Newton’s may here be noted
(Princ. Math. phil. nat. Lib. II. Lemma II. after Propos. VII.)—
the invention of an ingenious trick designed to remove the
neglect, arithmetically invalid, of the products of infinitesimal
differences or of higher orders of these in the process of finding
differentials. He finds the differential of the product (whence
the differentials of quotients, powers and so on are then easily
derived) in the following manner. When x and y are each taken
as smaller by half its infinitesimal difference, the product passes
xdy ydx


over into xy —
2 2


+ KAG but if x and y are increased
x ydx dxdy
2 4
If the first product be subtracted from this second product,
there remains over _ydx + xdy as surplus, and this is said to be
the surplus due to an augmentation by a whole dx and dy,
for this augmentation is the difference between the two pro-
ducts; it, therefore, is the differential of x y.—Clearly, in this
procedure, the term which forms the chief difficulty, the pro-
duct of the two infinitesimal differences, dxdy, drops out by
itself. But, in spite of the name of Newton, it must be said
that such an operation, though very elementary, is incorrect ;


. , xd
by the same amount, it passes over into xy + — fr


280 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


d d d
it is not true that (2+5) (2+2) — (=) ae
2 2 2 2


= (x + dx) (y + dy) — xy. It can only have been the need to
justify the fluxional calculus in its importance which could
bring a Newton to deceive himself with such a proof.

Other forms which Newton employed in the derivation of
the differential are bound up with concrete meanings (having
reference to motion) of the elements and their powers.—In the
case of the serial form, which elsewhere characterizes his
method, the statement suggests itself that it is always possible
to take the magnitude as exactly as required by the addition
of further terms, and that those which are left out are relatively
insignificant and the result only an approximation; and not
that here too he was satisfied with that ground on which, in
his method of solving equations of higher degrees by approxi-
mation, he omits the higher powers (which arise when any
value, just found and as yet inexact, is substituted in the given
equation)—namely for the crude reason that they are small;
see Lagrange, Equations Numériques, p. 125.

The error into which Newton fell in the solution of a certain
problem through neglecting higher powers which were essential
to the problem, gave his opponents an opportunity of triumph
for their method over his: Lagrange, in his recent investigation
of it (Théorie des fonctions analytiques, gme P., Ch. IV.), has
shown its true origin; and this mistake proves the formality
and unreliability then still inherent in the use of this instru-
ment. Lagrange shows that Newton made the mistake because
he neglected the term of the series which contained that power
which was essential in the given problem. Newton had re-
mained faithful to the formal and superficial principle of omit-
ting terms because of their relative smallness.—For it is known
that in mechanics there is attributed a definite meaning to the
terms of a series in which the function of a motion is developed,
so that the first term (or the first function) refers to the moment
of velocity, the second to accelerating force, and the third to
the resistance of forces. Thus here the terms of the series must
not only be regarded as part of a sum, but as qualitative
moments of a conceptual whole. For this reason, if here the
other terms of the series (infinite in the bad sense) are omitted,
this has a significance wholly different from that which belongs


QUANTUM 281


to their omission on the ground of relative smallness.: The
Newtonian solution contained this mistake, not because in it
terms of the series were taken account of only as parts of a
sum, but because the term containing the qualitative deter-
mination (and this was the essential matter) was neglected.
In this example, the procedure is made dependent upon the
qualitative meaning. And here the general assertion can be
made that the whole difficulty of the principle would be
removed, if the qualitative meaning of the principle were
indicated and the operation made dependent upon it, in place
of the formalism which identifies the determination of the
differential with the problem which gives it its name, the dis-
tinction generally between a function and its variation after
its variable magnitude has received an increment. In this sense,


ı Lagrange in a simple manner sets side by side the two considerations in the
application to mechanics of the theory of functions, in the chapter on rectilinear
motion (Théorie des fonct., gme P., Ch. I, art. 4). The space passed through, con-
sidered as a function of the time elapsed, gives the equation x = ft; this developed


g2
as f (t+ 0) gives: ft+ A ce riot BLE ol
Thus aA space ag alee in the period of time presents itself as


=6f’t+— Sge En itt . The motion, therefore, by means of which


passage TEEN this space takes place, is composed, as has been said, of various
partial motions (and this, because analytical development produces a plurality
and in fact an infinite plurality of Peru), the spaces of which—corresponding


0+ 47
to the time—will be Of’, zf bos


the first partial motion is pae uniform and has a velocity determined by
f t, the second uniformly accelerated and derived from an accelerative force
proportional to f’’ t. “Now the remaining terms are related to no known simple
motion, and, therefore, they need not be specially taken into account; and it
will be shown that we can abstract from them in determining the motion at
the beginning of the point of time.” There now follows the demonstration,
which, however, is only a comparison of the series all of whose terms are re-
quired to determine the magnitude of the space passed through in the period
of time, with the equation given in art. 3 (for the motion of falling), namely
x=at+ bi, in which only these two terms occur. But this equation has itself
received this form only because the explanation given to the terms evolved by
analytical development is presupposed ; and this presupposition is, that uniformly
accelerated motion is composed of a formally uniform motion, continued at the
velocity reached in the previous period of time, and of an increment (which is
ain s=at?, that is, the empirical coefficient) to which the force of gravity is
ascribed;—a distinction which has no existence nor reason in the nature of the
matter, and is only the expression—erroneously physicized—of the result of the
analytical treatment assumed.


f” t, etc. When the motion is known,


282 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


it is clear that the first term of the series resulting from the
development of (x + dx)” quite exhausts the differential of x”.
Thus the neglect of the other terms is not due to their relative
smallness ;—and no inexactitude, no mistake nor error is here
assumed which is supposed to be compensated or rectified by
another error,—a point of view from which many, and notably
Carnot, justify the ordinary method of the infinitesimal cal-
culus. A ratio, and not a sum, is here in question; and, there-
fore, with the first term the differential is fully found; and
where further terms and differentials of higher orders are
required, their determination does not imply the prolongation
of a series as sum, but the repetition of one and the same
ratio, which alone is aimed at and is complete already in the
first term. The need for the serial form, its summation, and
all therewith connected, must be quite separated from this
interest in ratio.

The explanations of Carnot concerning the method of
infinitesimal magnitudes contain, most lucidly exposed, all
that is soundest in the ideas cited above. But in the transition
to practice the usual ideas about the infinite smallness of the
terms omitted, relatively to the others, more or less emerge.
And Carnot justifies his method by the fact that the -results
turn out correct, and by the advantage coming from the
introduction of such imperfect equations (as he calls them—
meaning those where there has been such an arithmetically
incorrect omission) in the simplification and abbreviation
of the calculus: he does not justify it from the nature of the
matter itself.

It is well known that Lagrange resumed Newton’s original
method, the method of series, in order to be rid of the difficul-
ties inherent in the idea of the infinitesimally small and in the
method of first and last ratios and limits. The advantages of
his functional calculus for exactitude, abstractness, and
universality are generally acknowledged: here it is relevant
to mention that it rests on the fundamental proposition that
the difference, without becoming nil, may yet be taken as so
small that any term of the series is greater than the sum of
all the following terms.—In this method too a beginning is
made from the categories of augmentation and the difference
of the function, whose variable magnitude receives the aug-


QUANTUM | 283


mentation from the original function, thereby introducing that
tiresome series ; while in the sequel the terms of the series which
must be omitted are important only in the respect that they
constitute a sum,—the reason of their omission being placed
in the relative nature of their Quantum. Here too, therefore,
the omission is not in a general way reconducted to that point
of view which partly occurs in some applications, where (as
was recalled above) the terms of the series are supposed to
have a definite qualitative meaning, and terms are neglected
because they are qualitatively insignificant, and not because
they are insignificant in magnitude; but then partly the
omission itself finds no place in the essential point of view,
which, for the so-called differential coefficient, manifests itself
only with Lagrange in the so-called application of the calculus,
—as will be explained more fully in the next Observation.
That element of the form of magnitude under discussion
which is called the infinitesimally small has been proved to
partake of a qualitative character; and this is found most
immediately in the category of the Limit of Ratio cited above,
the consistent use of which in the calculus has become a
characteristic and peculiar method. Lagrange criticizes this
method as lacking ease in application and offering no definite
idea in the expression “limit”: we will take up the second
criticism and consider more closely what is stated about its
analytical significance. For the idea of limit does contain the
valid category mentioned of qualitative determination of the
ratio of variable magnitudes; for the forms which these intro-
duce (dx and dy) must be regarded simply as moments of


sA and 2 itself as a single and indivisible symbol. We may


disregard the fact that the practical application of the mechan-
ism of the calculus loses the advantage which it derives from
the separation of the sides of the differential coefficient. Now
this limit is supposed to be Limit of a given function ;—to
indicate a certain value with reference to it, which value
determines itself according to its derivation. The mere category
of limit, however, would not take us beyond the scope of this
Observation, which is to show that the infinitesimally small
(which appears as dx and dy in the differential calculus) has
not merely the negative and empty meaning of a not finite


284 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


and not given magnitude (as when we say “an infinite mul-
titude,” “to infinity,” and the like), but also the definite
meaning of a qualitative determinateness of the Quantitative,
or a moment of ratio as such. As yet, however, this category
has no relation to what a given function is, and does not inter-
fere in the treatment of it nor in the use made of this deter-
mination in it; and thus the idea of limit too, if confined to
this demonstrated determinateness, would lead nowhere. The
term “limit” itself, however, implies that it is the limit of
something, that is, that it expresses a certain value contained
in the function of variable magnitude; and we must here inves-
tigate the nature of this concrete behaviour.—It is supposed to
be the limit of the ratio between the two increments by which
the two variable magnitudes connected in an equation (one
being regarded as a function of the other) were taken to be
increased ; the augmentation is here taken as just indeterminate,
and, in so far, the infinitesimally small is not employed. But,
first, the approach by which this limit is found involves the
same inconsistencies as are implied in all the other metkods.
The approach is as follows. If y = fx, then fx, when y passes
over into y + k, is to change into fx+phigh+rh4+...,


and thus k=ph+qh?+..., and ep+ghtrk+...


Now if k and A vanish, the second member, except p, also
vanishes: p thus is the limit of the ratio of the two increments.


Clearly A (as Quantum) is equated with o, while : is neverthe-


o : !
less not supposed to equal 3 but still to remain a ratio. Now


the idea of the limit is supposed to afford the advantage of
averting the implied inconsistency; and p at the same time is


supposed to be, not the actual ratio (which would be =°),
o


but only the determinate value to which the ratio may approxi-
mate infinitely, that is, in such a manner that the difference
can become smaller than any given difference. The closer
meaning of approximation (with respect to the terms which are
supposed to approximate) will be considered below.—But if
anything can be self-evident in mathematics, then this is self-
evident, that a quantitative difference which has the deter-


QUANTUM 285


mination, not only that it can, but that it shall, be smaller
than any given difference, has ceased to be a quantitative
BR and thus no progress has been made beyond
= = =. If, on the other hand, z is assumed to be equal
to f, that is, is assumed as a determinate quantitative ratio
—which in fact is the case—then there are difficulties for the


assumption which makes h = 0; and by this assumption alone


k . >
hs $ is found. Again, grant that =0;—and when h=o,


then, in fact, automatically k = o; for the increase of k into y
takes place only on the condition that the increment be A.
But now the question arises, what p—which is a perfectly
determinate quantitative value—is to be. A simple, barren
answer immediately offers itself: it is a coefficient, and the
derivation whence it arises is this,—the first function, derived
in a determinate manner, of a primary function. It is possible
to remain satisfied with this; in practice Lagrange did so; and
then the general part of the science of the differential calculus,
and, immediately, that part of it which is called Theory of
Limits, would be freed from the incrementa, from their infini-
tesimal or arbitrary smallness, from the difficulty of removing
again, beyond the first term, or rather only the coefficient of
the first term, the further terms of a series which inevitably
arrive with the introduction of these incrementa; it would be
purged, too, of what follows further, the formal categories
(chiefly that of the Infinite), of infinite approximation, and
of the further categories (here equally void) of continuous
magnitude,! and those which elsewhere (like nisus, or becoming,


ı The category of continuous or flowing magnitude arises in the consideration
of external and empirical variation of magnitudes,—which, by an equation, are
brought into this relation, that one is a function of the other. Now the scientific
object of the differential calculus is a certain ratio (generally expressed by the
differential coefficient)—a determinateness which might also be called Law; and,
therefore, for this specific determinateness mere continuity is partly a foreign
aspect, and partly and in any case an abstract and here empty category, since
nothing is here stated about the Law of Continuity.—The ingenious General
Exposition of the fundamental determinations used in the deduction of the
differential calculus by my respected colleague, Professor Dirksen,* which forms


® Dirksen, Enno Heeren, 1792-1850, Professor of Mathematics at Berlin:
Analytische Darstellung der Variationsrechnung, 1823.


286 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


or opportunity for change) are deemed necessary. But now it
would be necessary to show what p is apart from the bare
determination (quite adequate for the theory) that it is
nothing but a function derived from the development of a
binomial, and what is its further meaning and value, that is,
how it is connected with and employed for further mathe-
matical requirements: this will be the subject of the second
Observation.—But first we add an explanation of the confusion
which has been introduced into the view of the proper and
qualitative determinateness of Ratio by the common use,
already exemplified, of the idea of approximation.

It has been shown that the so-called infinitesimal differences
express the vanishing of the sides of the ratio as Quanta, and
that what remains is their quantitative ratio, purely in so far
as it is qualitatively determined; so little is the qualitative
ratio here lost, that it is precisely the very result of the con-
version of finite magnitude into infinite. And we have seen
that this is the very nature of the matter.—Thus, for instance,
in the ultimate ratio the Quanta of abscissae and of ordinates
vanish; but the sides of this ratio essentially remain, the one
an element of the ordinates, and the other of the abscissae.
When that form of image is used in which one ordinate is
allowed infinitely to approach the other, the one ordinate
formerly distinct passes over into the other, and the previously
distinct abscissa into the other abscissa; but it is an essential
fact that ordinate does not pass over into abscissa nor abscissa
into ordinate. The element of ordinate (to go no further than
this example of variable magnitudes) must not be taken as the
difference between one ordinate and another, but rather as
the difference (or qualitative magnitudinal determination)
relatively to the element of abscissa: the principle of one
variable magnitude relatively to that of the other—these two
are here in ratio with one another. The difference, no longer
being a difference between finite magnitudes, has ceased to


an appendix to a criticism of certain new treatises on this science (Jahrb. f.
wissensch. Kritik, 1827, Nr. 153 sqq.), will show what kind of formal definitions
have been resorted to in this matter. The following definition (op. cit., p. 1251)
is actually quoted: “Every magnitude which is considered as in the state of
becoming, provided that this becoming does not take place by leaps, but in an
uninterrupted progress, is a constant or continuous magnitude, a Continuum.”
Surely this is a tautology, and the same as the definitum.


QUANTUM 287


be a manifold within itself: it has collapsed into simple intensity,
into the determinateness of one qualitative moment of the ratio
relatively to the other.

This aspect of the matter is, however, obscured when that
which we have just called element (element, for instance, of
the ordinate) is taken as difference or increment in the sense
that it is only the numerical difference of the Quantum of one
ordinate from the Quantum of another ordinate. Thus Limit
has not here the meaning of ratio: it counts only as the
ultimate value which another and similar magnitude steadily
approaches in such a manner, that the difference between
them may be as small as desired, and the ultimate relation be
a relation of equality. Thus the infinitesimal difference is the
ghost of a difference between one Quantum and another, and,
when it is thus imagined, the qualitative nature, according to
which dx is related essentially as a determination of ratio not
to x but to dy, is in the background. Relatively to dx, dx? is
allowed to vanish; but dx vanishes still more relatively to x;
and this, justly considered, means that it is related only to dy.
—In this kind of demonstration, geometers are chiefly at pains
to make intelligible the approximation of a magnitude to its
limit, clinging to this aspect of the difference between Quantum
and Quantum, where it is no difference and yet still is a
difference. But in any case Approximation is a category which
in itself means and makes intelligible nothing; dx has already
passed through approximation, it is neither near nor is it
nearer; and “infinitely near” itself means the negation of
nearness and of approximation.

The process thus has been this, that the incrementa or
infinitesimal differences have been considered only from the
side of the Quantum which vanishes in them, and as the limit
of this: they are, then, taken as unrelated moments. From this
the inadmissible idea would follow, that it would be per-
missible to equate in the ultimate ratio abscissae and ordinates,
or else sines and cosines, tangents, and versed sines,—anything,
in fact—This idea seems to be operating when a curve is

_treated as a tangent; for the curve too is incommensurable
with the straight line, and its element of a different quality
from the element of the straight line. And it seems even more
irrational and less permissible than the confusion of abscissae


288 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


and ordinates, versed sine and cosine, and so forth, when
(quadrata rotundis) a part—though infinitely small—of a curve
is taken for part of a tangent and thus is treated as a straight
line.—However, this treatment differs essentially from the
confusion we have just denounced ; and this is its justification,—
in the triangle, which has for sides the element of a curve and
the elements of its abscissae and ordinates, the relation is the
same as though this element of the curve were the element of
a straight line—the tangent: the angles, which constitute the
essential relation (that is, that which remains in these elements
after abstraction made from the finite magnitudes belonging
to them), are the same.—We can also express ourselves in this
matter as follows:—straight lines, as being infinitely small,
have passed over into curves, and the ratio which subsists
between them in their infinity is a ratio of curves. The straight
line according to its definition is the shortest distance between
two points, and therefore its difference from the curve is based
upon the determination of amount, upon the smaller number
of distinguishable steps on this route,—and this is a quanti-
tative determination. But when it is taken as intensive mag-
nitude, or infinite moment, or element, this determination
vanishes in it, and with it vanishes the difference from the
curve, which is based solely on a difference in Quantum.—
Taken as infinitesimal, therefore, straight line and curve have
no quantitative relation, and hence (on the basis of the accepted
definition) no qualitative difference relatively to each other:
the latter now passes over into the former.

Different from the equation of heterogeneous determinations
(although analogous) is the assumption, indeterminate in itself
and quite indifferent, that infinitely small parts of the same
whole are equal to one another; but when this is applied to
an object heterogeneous within itself (that is, infected with
essential non-uniformity of magnitudinal determination), it
produces the peculiar inversion contained in that proposition
of higher mechanics which asserts that infinitely small parts
of a curve are passed through in equal (and infinitely small)
periods of time at a uniform rate: and this is asserted of
that kind of motion where, in equal finite (that is, existing)
periods of time, finite (that is, existing) and unequal parts of
a curve are passed through; the assertion is thus made of a


QUANTUM 289


‚movement which as existent is, and is assumed to be, non-
“uniform. This proposition is the verbal expression of the
intended meaning of an analytic term which results from the
development (quoted above) of the formula covering a motion
which is non-uniform but, otherwise, conforms to some law.
Older mathematicians attempted to express in words and
sentences, and to exhibit in geometrical tables, the results of
the newly invented infinitesimal calculus (which in any case
had to do solely with concrete objects), chiefly in order to use
them in theorems in accordance with the ordinary method
of proof. The terms of a mathematical formula into which
analytic treatment decomposed the magnitude of an object
(for instance, motion) there received an objective meaning
such as velocity, accelerated force, and so on; according to
this meaning they were to produce correct propositions and
physical laws; their objective connexions and relations, too,
were to be determined by analytic means; for instance, it was
said that in a uniformly accelerated motion, there existed a
special velocity proportional to the periods of time, while
besides an accretion was added uniformly from the force of
gravity. In the modern analytical form of mechanics such
propositions are regularly cited as results of the calculus,
regardless of whether they had in themselves a real meaning—
that is, a meaning having a corresponding existent—or whether
such a meaning could be proved; and it is thought that the
difficulty of making intelligible the connexion of such deter-
minations, when they are taken in the express real meaning
(like the transition from that plain uniform velocity to a
uniform accelerated velocity), has been totally removed by the
analytic treatment, since in it this connexion follows directly
from the authority, now regarded as established, of the opera-
tion of the calculus. We are told that it is a triumph of science
when supra-empirical laws—that is, existential propositions
having no existence—are discovered by the pure calculus.
But in the first and naive stage of the infinitesimal calculus
the task was to indicate a real meaning of these determinations
and propositions, which were represented in geometrical
diagrams: this meaning was to be made plausible, and with
this meaning they were to be applied in the proof of the capital
propositions which were in question. (See Newton’s proof of
VOL. I K


290 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


his fundamental proposition of the theory of gravitation in
Princ. mathem. philosophiae naturalis lib. I., Sect. II., Prop. I., and
cf. Schubert’s! Astronomy—first Ed., Vol. III.,§ 20—, where
it is admitted that things are not exactly as Newton assumes,
that is, at that point which is the nerve of the proof.)

It will be impossible to deny that in this sphere much has
been accepted as proof—chiefly veiled under the kindly mist
of the infinitesimally small—on no other ground than that the
result was always already known beforehand, and the proof,
which was arranged in such a manner as to produce the result,
at least effected the illusion of a framework of proof,—which
illusion was preferred to mere belief or empirical knowledge.
But I do not hesitate to regard this method as no better than
demonstrational jugglery and counterfeiting; and I include
even some of Newton’s demonstrations, and especially such as
belong to those just mentioned, for which Newton has been
extolled to the skies and above Kepler, because what Kepler
had discovered empirically he demonstrated mathematically.

The useless framework of such proofs was erected in order
to prove physical laws. But mathematics is altogether unable
to prove the magnitudinal determinations of physics in so far
as they are laws based upon the qualitative nature of the
moments, for this simple reason that this science is not

philosophy and does not start from the concept, so that the
_ qualitative element (in so far as it is not taken lemmatically
from experience) lies outside its sphere. The assertion of the
honour of mathematics, which demands the strict proof of all
its propositions, often allowed it to forget its limit; thus it
seemed against its honour to acknowledge simply experience
as source and sole proof of empirical propositions. Thought
at a later period achieved a more instructed view of this
matter; and, until it clearly understands the difference between
what is mathematically demonstrable and what can only come
from another source, between the things which are terms
of an analytical development and those which are physical
existents, scientific method cannot achieve a strict and pure
attitude.—But justice will no doubt be done to that framework


t Schubert, Friedrich ‘Theodor von, 1758-1825, Director of the Observatory
at S. Petersburg: Lehrbuch der theoretischen Astronomie, 1798; Populdre Astronomie,
3 vols., 1804-1810.


QUANTUM 291


of Newtonian proof as it was to another baseless Newtonian
structure of optical experiments and conclusions connected
with them. Applied mathematics still seethes with a similar
brew of experience and reflection; but long ago one part after
another of that optics began to be ignored by science in practice
(with this inconsistency—that all the rest, though in con-
tradiction, was allowed to stand); and, similarly, in practice
some of these sophistical proofs have already been forgotten
or replaced by others.


Observation 2


THE PURPOSE OF THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS DEDUCED
FROM ITs APPLICATION


In the previous Observation we considered, partly the con-
ceptual determinateness of the infinitesimally small, which is
used in the differential calculus, and partly the reason for its
introduction into this calculus; both determinations are
abstract and in themselves therefore easy. Their so-called
application, however, offers greater difficulties but also a
more interesting aspect: the elements of this concrete side are
to be the object of this Observation.—The whole method of
the differential calculus is complete in the proposition that


a(x") =nx"-* dx, a ee = P, that is, that it is equal


to the coefficient of the first term of the binomial x + dx, x + i,
if the latter is developed according to the powers of dx or i.
No need to learn anything further: the derivation of the next
forms, the differential of a product, an exponential magnitude
and so on, results mechanically; and in a short time, perhaps
a mere half-hour—for the deduction of the differential also
gives us the reverse, namely, the deduction of the original func-
tion, or integration, from these former—the whole theory may be
had by heart. The only delay is due to the effort to understand
and make it intelligible that that other part—the omission of
the remaining terms of the series which arises, apart from the
first terms—is valid, after the first part of the task, the deduction
of the coefficient, was effected so easily by analytical, that is,
by purely arithmetical means, through the development of the


292 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


function of the variable magnitude, after an increment had
given it the form of a binomial. And if it were the case that
we needed only the coefficient, then, as was said, once it was
determined the entire theoretical part would be done with
in less than half an hour, and the omission of further terms
of the series would cause no difficulty if only because they
would not even come into question as terms of the series; being
second, third, or other functions, they are determined with the
determination of the first, and now are quite beside the issue.

And first we may observe that probably the method of the
differential calculus shows on the face of it that it was neither
invented nor constructed as an end in itself. Not only was it
not founded for its own sake as a new kind of analytical
process, but the arbitrary neglect of terms resulting from the
development of a function is contrary to every mathematical
principle ;—arbitrary, because it is assumed that the whole
of this development entirely belongs to the matter in hand—
the matter being looked at as the difference of the developed
function of a variable magnitude (after it has been given the
form of a binomial) from the original function. The need for
such a mode of procedure and its internal lack of justification
immediately point to the fact that its origin and basis must
be elsewhere. It happens in other sciences, too, that that which
is placed first, as being elementary, and which is the source
from which are ostensibly derived the propositions of the
science, is not self-evident, and that it eventually appears that its
reason and foundation lie rather in what follows. In the history
of the differential calculus the course of things makes it plain
that, especially in the various so-called tangential methods,
the matter began in special artifices. The method of procedure,
later becoming extended to further objects, reached conscious-
ness and was cast into abstract formulae, which it was then
attempted to raise to the rank of first principles.

We have shown that the qualitative quantity-determinateness
of entities, which, primarily, are related to one another as
Quanta, is the conceptual determinateness of the so-called
infinitesimally small; from this there started the empirical
investigation which attempted to demonstrate this conceptual
determinateness in the descriptions or definitions of the in-
finitesimally small, in so far as it is taken as infinitesimal


QUANTUM 293


difference or something similar—This was done only in the
interest of abstract conceptual determinateness as such; it
might further be asked, what is the nature of the transition
thence to mathematical formation and application? To this
end the theoretic part (the conceptual determinateness) must
further be examined, and this will prove not wholly unfruitful
in itself; next we must consider its relation to Application;
and with both we must demonstrate, as far as here is possible,
that the general conclusions are adequate to the end of the
differential calculus and to the manner in which it brings that
end about.

It must first be remembered that the mathematical form of
the conceptual determinateness which is under discussion has
already been mentioned in passing. The qualitative deter-
minateness of the quantitative is first and generally stated in
Quantitative Ratio, but already in the demonstration of the
various so-called rules of arithmetic (see Observation on this
subject) it was said that it was in the Ratio of Powers (to be
considered later in its proper place) that Number is posited
by the equation of Unit and Amount (the moments of its
concept) as returned to itself, and thus acquires in itself the
moment of Infinity or Being-for-Self, that is, of self-deter-
minedness. Thus, the express qualitative magnitudinal deter-
minateness essentially (as has also been mentioned already)
refers to determinations of powers; and since it is the specific
characteristic of the differential calculus that it operates with
qualitative forms of magnitude, its peculiar object in mathe-
matics must be the treatment of forms of powers; and all the
problems, with their solutions, for which the differential
calculus is used, show that all the interest lies only in the
treatment of determinations of powers as such.

This foundation is important and immediately puts in the
forefront something determinate instead of the merely formal
categories of variable, continuous, or infinite magnitudes and
the like, or of functions in general; but for all that it is still
too general; other operations too are concerned here; the
elevation to a power and the extraction of a root, the treat-
ment of exponential magnitudes and of logarithms and series
and the equations of higher orders, all are interested in and
operate upon ratios only which are based upon powers. No


294 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


doubt they must between them constitute a system of treatment
of powers; which, however, of the various ratios wherein
determinations of powers can be posited is the one which is
the proper object and interest of the differential calculus, this
can only be elicited from itself, that is, from its so-called
applications. These in fact are the thing itself, the actual
procedure in the mathematical solution of a certain group of
problems; and this procedure was earlier than the theory or
general part, and has been called application only with refer-
ence to the later created theory whose aim was to set up the
general method of procedure and also to produce its first
principles, that is, its justification. It has been shown in the
previous Observation how idle an attempt it has been to find
principles for the former manner of comprehending the pro-
cedure,—principles which really solved the contradiction which
there was found, instead of excusing it or hiding it behind the
insignificance of that which was requisite to the mathematical
procedure (which here meant that which was to be omitted),
or behind the possibility (which comes to the same thing) of
infinite or arbitrary approximation, and the like. If the general
part of the procedure were to be abstracted, in a manner
different from that which has hitherto been followed, from that
real part of mathematics which ‘is called differential calculus,
then these principles and all the trouble taken over them would
prove superfluous, inasmuch as they reveal in themselves a
distortion and an abiding contradiction.

If we search out this peculiarity by simply gathering what
we find in this part of mathematics, we discover as its object :—

(a) Equations in which any number of magnitudes (we may,
however, here confine ourselves to two) are combined into one
determinate whole in such a manner that, firstly, they have
their determinateness in empirical magnitudes which are
their fixed limits, and, moreover, in the particular kind of
union with them and with one another, which, indeed, is the
case with equations generally; but, since there is only one
equation for both magnitudes (or several equations for several
magnitudes, but always fewer than the magnitudes), these
equations belong to the class of indeterminate equations ;—and,
secondly, that one aspect of them (the determinateness of these
magnitudes here being what it is) is that they are, or at least


QUANTUM 295


one of them is, present in the equation in a higher power than
the first.

Certain observations may be made about this; and first,
that according to the first determination mentioned these
magnitudes are wholly of the character of such variable mag-
nitudes as occur in the problems of indeterminate analysis. Their
value is indeterminate, but is so in such a manner that when
the one gets a perfectly determinate value (a numerical value)
from without, then the other too is determined: one is a
function of the other. The categories of variable magnitudes,
functions, and the like, are, therefore, merely formal for that
specific determinateness of magnitude with which we are
dealing here, as was said above; for they are of a generality
not yet containing that specific factor which is the one aim
of the differential calculus; nor can that factor be explained
from them analytically. In themselves they are simple, unim-
portant, easy determinations, which are made difficult only
when what they do not properly contain is put into them in
order to be then deduced, I mean the specific determination
of the differential calculus.—With regard to the so-called
constant, we may remark that it exists first as an indifferent
empirical magnitude, determining the variable magnitudes
only with respect to their empirical Quantum, as Limit of their
minimum and maximum; while the nature of the connexion
between the constants and the variable magnitudes is itself one
of the moments of the nature of that special function which
these magnitudes are. But, conversely, the constants also are
functions; for instance, in so far as a straight line has the


meaning that it is the parameter of a parabola, then its meaning
2


is this, that it is the function” ; and, generally, in the develop-


ment of the binomial, the constant which is the coefficient of
the first term of the development is the sum of the roots;
the coefficient of the second is the sum of their products, in
pairs, and so on: thus the constants here are just functions of
the roots; where, in the integral calculus, the constant is
determined from the given formula, it is in this respect treated
as a function of the latter. We shall elsewhere consider these
coefficients, in another determination, as functions, whose
meaning in the concrete is the only matter of interest.


296 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


The peculiarity, however, by which the consideration of the
variable magnitudes is distinguished, in the differential calcu-
lus, from its nature in the indeterminate problems, must be
attributed to what has been mentioned, namely that at least
one, and possibly every one, of these magnitudes is in a higher
power than the first; and here again it is indifferent whether
all ofthem are of the same higher power, or of unequal powers;
the specific indeterminateness which they here have lies solely
in the fact that they are functions of one another standing in
such a ratio of powers. This gives a qualitative determination
to the variation of the variable magnitudes: it is thus continuous,
and this continuousness (which in itself is merely the formal
category of an identity in general, a determinateness persisting
unchanged in variation) here has its determinate meaning, and
that only in the ratio of powers, which is supposed to have
no Quantum for exponent and to constitute the non-quanti-
tative and permanent determinateness of the ratio of variable
magnitudes. On the other hand we may object to another
formalism, that the first power is power only in relation to
higher power: for itself, x is only any indeterminate Quantum.
There is thus no meaning in differentiating in themselves
the equations y = ax + b (the equation of the straight line)
or s=ct (the equation of plain uniform velocity); if the


} d
equation y = ax, or y= ax + b, becomes a= =, or s= ci
x
ds RAS S Pe
becomes chet then, equally, a = z5 the determination of


5 DRG : i
the tangents, or ie the determination of plain velocity.


The latter, as en
asserted to be the development of uniformly accelerated motion ;
but it has been remarked above that it is an empty assumption,
based upon the routine of method alone, that a moment of
simple, merely uniform velocity (that is, velocity not deter-
mined by the higher power of one of the moments of motion),
has a place in the system of such motion. The method proceeds
from the idea of the increment to which the variable magnitude
is subject; naturally, therefore, only a magnitude which is a
function of a first power can be subject to an increment: when


is exhibited in connexion with what is


QUANTUM 297


now, in order to discover the differential, the difference be-
tween the given equation and that which has thereby arisen,
has to be found, the empty nature of this operation manifests
itself; for, as we remarked, after as well as before it the
equation is the same for the so-called increments as for the
variable magnitudes themselves.

(8) What has been said determines the nature of the equation
which is to be treated; we must now indicate upon what point
of interest its treatment is directed. This consideration can
furnish only known results, such (with respect to form) as are
especially to be found in Lagrange’s conception; but I have,
of course, made this exposition wholly elementary in order to
remove all heterogeneous determinations involved in it.—The
basis of the treatment of an equation of this kind is seen to be
this, that the power within itself is taken as a ratio or system
of determinations of ratios. We stated above that Power is
Number in so far as it has reached that stage where its variation
is determined by itself, and its moments, Unit and Amount,
are identical ;—which, as was shown above, is found perfectly
in the square, and more formally (which here makes no
difference) in the higher powers. Now power is number
(though the expression “magnitude” be preferred as more
general, yet in itself it always is number), and thus is a mul-
titude, and can be represented as a sum: it can, therefore,
be divided within itself into any multitude of numbers, which
relatively to one another and to their sum are without any
determination except that together they are equal to the sum.
But the power can also be divided into a sum of such differ-
ences as are determined by the form of the power. If the power
is taken as sum, then its radical number or root too is taken
as a sum, and, as regards multiplicity of division, is arbitrary,—
which multiplicity, however, is the indifferent and empirical
Quantitative. The sum, in which shape the root is supposed to
exist, reduced to its simple determinateness, that is, its true
universality, is the binomial; and any further multiplication of
the terms is a pure repetition of the same determination, and,
therefore, an empty process.“ What matters is the determinate-


t It is only a part of the formalism of that universality to which analysis per-
force lays claim, when (a + b) * is not taken for the development of the power, and
(a+b+c+d+...)”is substituted. This is often done elsewhere too; and this


K*


298 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


ness of the terms (which thus is qualitative) which results from
the raising of the root, taken as sum, to a power, and this
determinateness lies entirely within that change which this
process is. These terms, thus, are entirely functions of power
and of raising to a power. Now this representation of number
as sum of a multitude of such terms, which are functions of
this process, and further the eagerness to find the form of such
functions and also this sum from the multitude of such terms,
this it is (the discovery being entirely dependent on that form)
which constitutes, as is well known, the special doctrine of
series. But here it is important to distinguish the further point
of interest, namely, the relation of the basic magnitude itself
(the determinateness of which, in so far as it is a complex,
that is, in this instance, an equation, therefore includes a
power) to the functions of its potentiation. This relation (apart
altogether from the above-mentioned interest in the sum) will
show itself to be the only truly scientific point of view by which
the differential calculus is guided.

But first another determination must be added to what has
been said; or rather, a determination implied in it must be
removed. It was said that the variable magnitude, in whose
determination power is an element, is looked upon as a sum
within itself, as being, in fact, a system of terms, in so far
as these are functions of potentiation, and that thus the root
too was considered as a sum, and, in its simply determinate
form, as a binomial, namely


"= (y+ z)* = (9 4+ ny" 2+.--).


This presentation started from Sum as such upon the process
of developing Power, that is, upon the process of achieving
its potentiational functions; here, however, the aim is not a
sum as such, nor the series which arises from it: the only
element which must be taken up from Sum is Relation.
Relation of magnitudes as such is on the one hand all that
remains after abstraction has been made from the plus of a
sum as such, and is all that is needed on the other hand in


form, so to speak, should be taken for an affectation of the appearance of univer-
sality, for the matter is exhausted in the binomjal; by the development of this
the law is found, and it is the law which is the true universality, and not external
and empty repetition of the law, which is all that this a+ b-+-c+d+... effects.


QUANTUM 299


order that the functions of development of Power may be
found. But such a Relation is determined already by the fact
that the object here is an equation (y” = ax”), that is, a
complex of several (variable) magnitudes which contains their
determination of powers. In this complex each of these mag-
nitudes is posited as just being in relation with the other, with
the meaning, as one might say, of a plus in itself,—as a function
of the other magnitudes; their characteristic (that of being
functions of one another) gives them this determination of a
plus, which for that very reason is quite indeterminate and is
not an addition, increment, or the like. This abstract point
of view could, however, be neglected; we may simply remain
at that point where, the variable magnitudes being given in
the equation as functions of one another in such a manner
that this determinateness contains a relation of powers, the
functions of potentiation too are now compared one with the
other ;—which second functions have no determination what-
ever except that which comes from potentiation. So far we can
assert that it is optional, or possible, to transpose an equation
from the powers of its variable magnitudes to a relation of
its functions of development; and the utilitarian quality of such
a transformation must be indicated by some further purpose,
advantage, or use; the transformation has been made only
because of its usefulness. Above we started from the presen-
tation of these determinations of potentiation, and experimented
on a magnitude which was stated to be a sum and, therefore
was to be assumed as being differentiated within itself; but
this was only done, partly to indicate the nature of such
functions, and partly because this implies the mode by which
they are found.

We have thus reached the ordinary analytical development,
which for the purposes of the differential calculus is taken in
this manner, that an increment, dx or i, is given to the variable
magnitude, and then the power of the binomial is explained
by means of the series of terms belonging to it. The so-called
increment, however, is intended to be not a Quantum but
a form, whose only value is that it assists the development ;
what is wanted (and this is admitted, and most explicitly by
Euler and Lagrange) in the above-mentioned idea of Limit,
is the resulting determinations of powers of the variable


300 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


magnitudes, the so-called coefficients of the increment (as is
admitted) and its powers, according to which the series is ordered,
and to which the different coefficients belong. To this we might
also add that an increment (without Quantum) is only assumed
for the sake of development, and that, therefore, it would be
most convenient to take 1 (the One) for that purpose; for in
the development this only occurs as factor; so that the factor
One fulfils the purpose, which is, that the increment is not
to imply the positing of any quantitative determinateness or
change; dx, on the other hand, is infected with the false idea
of a quantitative difference, and other symbols, like 2, with
the show, useless here, of universality, so that they always have
the appearance and pretension of a Quantum and its powers;
which pretension then involves the trouble that they must
nevertheless be taken away and kept away. In order to preserve
the form of a series developed on the principle of powers, the
denominations of exponents (being indices) might equally well
be placed behind a One. In any case abstraction must be made
from the series and from the determination of coefficients
according to their place in the series: the relation between all
is the same; the second function is derived from the first in
just the same manner as this from the original, and for the
one which is counted second, the first, and derivative, function,
is counted original. The essential point of interest is not,
however, the series, but solely the determination of powers
resulting from the development in relation to the magnitude
which, to them, is immediate. They are not, therefore, deter-
mined as being coefficients of the first term of the development,
since one term is designated as first in relation to others follow-
ing it in the series, and such a power as the power of an incre-
ment, together with the series, is here out of place; therefore,
the plain expression of derivative function of a power or, as was
said above, function of potentiation of a magnitude, would
be preferable,—the knowledge being presupposed of the manner
in which the derivation is taken as a development included
within a power.

The pure mathematical beginning in this part of the analysis
is just the discovery of the function determined by the develop-
ment of powers; it is a further question, what is to be done
with the ratio thus obtained, where it is to be applied and used,


QUANTUM 301


or, in fact, for what purpose such functions are looked for.
It is the process of discovering proportions in concrete objects
which may be referred back to those abstract analytic pro-
portions, that has given the differential calculus its great
interest.

But as regards applicability, the immediate outcome of the
nature of the matter—merely in virtue of the form which we
have shown the moments of powers to possess, and no con-
clusion being yet drawn from any instances of application—is
as follows. The development of powers whence result the
functions of their potentiation contains (abstraction being made
from closer determination) the reduction of magnitude to the
next lowest power. Thus it is that this operation is applicable
to such objects as also contain this distinction of determinations
of powers. If now we consider spatial determinateness, we find
that it contains the three dimensions which we may call the
concrete, in order to distinguish them from the abstract distinc-
tions of height, length, and breadth,—namely, line, surface,
and solid space; and, when they are taken in their simplest
forms and with reference to self-determination and, therefore,
to analytic dimensions, we arrive at the straight line, the plane
surface and surface taken as square, and the cube. The straight
line has an empirical Quantum, but with the plane we reach
the qualitative element—determination of power; we may
neglect closer modifications,—the reflection, for instance, that
this also happens to plane curves; for here we are only dealing
with the distinction in general. Herewith also the need arises
to pass from a higher to a lower determination of power, and
conversely,—the attempt being for instance to derive linear
determinations from given equations of plane and so on, or
the other way about.—In motion, further, the magnitudinal
proportion of the space passed through with its elapsed time
must be considered, and motion manifests itself in various
determinations, as simply uniform, as uniformly accelerated,
and as alternately accelerated uniformly and retarded uni-
formly, returning upon itself; these different kinds of motion
are expressed according to the magnitudinal proportion of their
moments, space and time; and thus there result for it equations
having different determinations of powers; and, in so far as
it may be necessary to determine one kind of motion or of


302 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


spatial magnitude to which one kind is tied, from another kind
of these, the operation also involves the transition of one
function of power to another, either higher or lower.—The
examples of these two objects should suffice for the purpose for
which they are cited.

The appearance of contingency which the differential cal-
culus presents in its applications would certainly be simplified
if the nature of the spheres where the application can take
place, and the peculiar need for and condition of this applica-
tion, were clearly understood. But now it is necessary further
to know, within these spheres, between what parts of the objects
of the mathematical problem such a relation takes place as
is posited peculiarly by the differential calculus. And first it
must be remarked that two kinds of relation are to be observed.
The operation of the depotentiation of any equation (the
equation considered according to the derivative functions of
its variable magnitudes) gives a result which in itself really
no longer is an equation but a proportion: this proportion is
the object of the differential calculus proper. And precisely
in this fact we are also presented with a second proportion,
that between the higher determination of power (the original
equation) itself and the lower (the derivative). This second
proportion we must here provisionally neglect: it will prove
to be the peculiar object of the integral calculus.

We will then consider the first relation, and, for the deter-
mination of the moment (which must be taken from the so-
called application and contains the interesting part of the
operation) we will take the simplest example, curves such as
are determined by an equation of the second degree. The
relation of the coordinates is, of course, given immediately
through the equation in a determination of powers. From the
fundamental determination there follow determinations of
other straight lines connected with the coordinates—tangents,
subtangents, normals, and so on. The equations, however,
between these lines and the coordinates are linear equations;
and the wholes, of which these lines are determined to be
parts, are right-angled triangles of straight lines. Now the
transition from the fundamental equation, which contains the
determination of the powers, to these linear equations, con-
tains the above transition from the original function (that is,


QUANTUM 303


the function which is an equation) to the derivative function
(which is a relation—a relation subsisting between certain lines
contained in the curve). What must now be discovered is the
connexion between the relation of these lines and the equation
of the curve.

It is not without interest to introduce this much of historicity,
as to remark that the first discoverers can indicate their dis-
covery only in a wholly empirical manner, without being able
to render an account of the operation, which has remained
quite external. In this regard I content myself with a reference
to Barrow, who was Newton’s master. In his lect. Opt. et Geom.,
in which he treats problems of higher geometry according to
the method of the indivisibles (which, in the first place, differs
from the characteristic feature of the differential calculus), he
also indicates his mode of determining the tangents, “‘because
his friends had urged him” (lect. X.). The nature of this
indication must be read in his own words if we would properly
understand how this method is given quite as an external rule
—in the same style in which formerly in arithmetical school-
books the “rule of three,” or, better still, the so-called “test
by casting out the nines,” was enunciated. He enumerates
the minute lines, which later were called the increments in
the characteristic triangle of a curve, and then gives the
instruction—which is a mere rule—to cast off as superfluous
the terms which appear when the equations are developed
as powers of these increments or products (etenim isti termint
nihilum valebunt); adding that the terms which contain only
magnitudes determined by the original equation must also
be cast off (—which means that the original equation is sub-
tracted afterwards from the equation formed with the incre-
ments), and that the ordinates themselves must be substituted
for the increment of the ordinates, and the subtangents for
the increment of the abscissae. The method could be set forth
(if one may say so) in no more school-masterly manner ;—
the second substitution is the assumption of the proportionality
of the increments of ordinates and abscissae to the ordinates
and subtangents, which is the basis of the procedure for deter-
mining tangents in the ordinary differential method: in
Barrow’s rule this assumption appears in all its naive naked-
ness. A simple way of determining subtangents had been


304 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


found: Roberval’s and Fermat’s methods come to the same
issue ;—the method for finding maximal and minimal values,
from which the latter started, is based on the same foundation
and the same procedure. It was a mathematical mania of that
period to discover so-called methods, that is, rules of this kind,
and to make a mystery of them; which was not only easy, but
also, in one respect, necessary, and for the same reason for
which it was easy,—namely that the inventors had found only
an empirical and external rule and no method, that is, nothing
derived from acknowledged principles. Such so-called methods
Leibniz absorbed from his period, and Newton from it and,
immediately, from his master: the generalization implied in
their form and applicability opened new roads to the Sciences,
but also brought the need of forcing the method out of the
shape of merely external rules, and attempted to give it the
justification which it demanded.

If now the method be more closely analysed, the true
process is this. First the determinations of powers (powers, cf
course, of variable magnitudes) contained in the equation, are
reduced to their first derivatives. But this changes the value
of the members of the equation: hence no equation remains,
and a proportion has arisen which subsists between the first
derivative of one variable magnitude and the first derivative
of the other; for px = y? we have p: 29, or for 2ax — x? =»?
we have a—x : y, which later used to be called the proportion
= The equation is an equation of the curve; this relation,
on the other hand, wholly dependent on it and wholly derived
from it (derived in the process described above in accordance
with a bare rule), is linear, certain lines here being proportional
one to the other; p:2y or a—x: y are themselves relations
of straight lines of the curve, or of coordinates or parameters;
but so far knowing this we know nothing. The aim is to know,
with regard to other lines which occur in connexion with the
curve, that a certain one of these relations holds between
them, —that is, to identify two relations. —Thus, secondly, the
question arises, which are the straight lines determined by the
nature of the curve which are thus related?—But this was
known already—namely, that a relation thus reached is the


1 Personne, Gilles, sieur de Roberval, 1602-1675.


QUANTUM 305


relation between ordinates and subtangents. The ancients had
found this by an ingenious geometrical method; what modern
inventors discovered was the empirical mode of arranging the
equation of a curve in such a manner that the first relation
should result, of which it is already known that it is equal to
a relation which contains the line (here the subtangent) which
it is desired to determine. Now, in part, this arrangement of
the equation has been taken methodically and made methodi-
cally (Differentiation) —and, in part, the imaginary increments
of the coordinates and the imaginary characteristic triangle
(which is formed of these and of a similar increment of the
tangents) have been invented,—simply in order that the pro-
portionality between the relation found by the depotentiation
of the equation and the relation between ordinates and sub-
tangents should not be represented as taken up empirically
from old acquaintance, but as a demonstrated truth. And yet
old acquaintance proves itself, generally and most unmistak-
ably in the form of rules (such as we quoted), as the only
occasion and justification (where needed) of the assumption
of the characteristic triangle and of that proportionality.

It was Lagrange who rejected this pretence and followed
the true scientific course: thanks to his method we know the
real point at issue, for it consists in a separation of the two
transitions which must be made in order that the problem
may be solved, and in a separate treatment and proof of each
of these sides. —In our more detailed explanation of the pro-
cedure we will retain as example the elementary problem of
finding the subtangents.—Now one part of this solution, the
theoretical or general part, which is the finding of the first
function from the given equation of curves, is regulated by
itself: this part gives us a linear relation, a relation, that is,
of straight lines, which occur in the system of curve-deter-
mination. The other part of the solution now is the finding
of those lines in the curve which are in this relation. This is
done directly (Théorie des Fonct. Anal. II. P. II. Chap.), that is,
without the characteristic triangle, which means that no
assumption is made of infinitely small arcs, ordinates, or
abscissae, nor are the determinations of dy and dx (that is, of
being sides of this relation) attributed to them, which would
mean immediately that it was equated with the ordinate and

VOL. I


306 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


subtangent. A line (and also a point) has its determination
in so far as it constitutes the side of a triangle, and the deter-
mination of a point too lies only in this. This (as may be
mentioned in passing) is the fundamental proposition of
analytical geometry, which introduces the coordinates as (what
is the same thing) in mechanics it does the parallelogram of
forces,—which for that very reason does not require all the
efforts that are made to find a proof.—The subtangent is now
made the third side of a triangle, the other sides of which are
the ordinate and the relative tangent. The latter is a straight
line, and, therefore, its equation is p= aq, (the addition of
+ b adds nothing to the determination and is made only for _
the sake of the fetish of universality) ;—the determination of


p


the ratio ~ falls within a, the coefficient of g, which in turn
is the first derivative of the equation, but need be considered
only as a= Pe as has been said, the essential deter-


mination of the straight line which is applied as tangent to
the curve. Now, further, the first derivative of the curve-
equation is taken, and, therefore, it is also the determination
of a straight line; further, it is assumed that the coordinate p of
the first straight line, and y, the ordinate of the curve, are
identical, and, therefore, that the point where that first straight
line (which is taken to be a tangent) touches the curve is also
the beginning of the straight line which is determined by the
first function of the curve: the task, therefore, is to show that
this second straight line coincides with the first and, therefore,
is a tangent; which may be thus algebraically expressed :—
since y = fx and p= Fq, and it is assumed that y = p and
hence that fx= Fq, therefore f’x = F’g. In order to prove that
the straight line which is applied as tangent and the straight
line of the equation which is determined as being its first
function coincide, and, therefore, that the latter is a tangent,
recourse is had to the increment i of the abscissa and to the
increment of the ordinate which is determined during the
development of the function. Thus here too that ill-famed
increment is introduced; but its introduction for this purpose,
and the development of the function under its guidance, must
carefully be distinguished from the use (mentioned above) of


QUANTUM 367


the increment in the discovery of the differential equation
and in the characteristic triangle. The use here made is justified
and necessary; it falls within the scope of geometry, for it is
part of the geometrical determination of a tangent as such
that between it and the curve with which it has a point in
common no other straight line can pass and pass also through
that point. In this determination the quality of tangent or
not-tangent is reduced to a magnitudinal difference: that line
is the tangent of which simply greater smallness with respect
to the essential determination is predicated. There is no
empirical element whatever in this smallness, which appears
to be only relative,—nothing, that is, which depends on a
Quantum as such; it is posited as qualitative by the nature
of the formula when the difference of the moment on which
the magnitude which is to be compared depends, is a difference
of powers; this difference is reduced to 7 and :?, and i (which
after all must signify a number) must then be imagined as
a fraction, and thus 7? in itself is smaller than 7; so that the
idea of an arbitrary magnitude as which i might be taken is
here superfluous and even out of place. And for this very
reason the demonstration of a greater smallness has nothing
to do with an infinitesimally small quantity, the introduction
of which is thus here by no means necessary.

I will now mention—if only for its beauty and for its fame,
mostly forgotten now, but well deserved—the tangential method
of Descartes; it moreover has a bearing on the nature of
equations, on which an observation remains to be made.
Descartes unfolds this independent method, where the linear
determination required is discovered from the same derivative
function, in his geometry, which has proved so fruitful in other
respects too (liv. II. p. 357 sqq. Oeuvres Compl. ed. Cousin Tom. V.) ;
for in it he teaches the great basis of the nature of equations
and their geometrical construction, and of the Analysis of
Geometry, the sense of which he had thereby so greatly ex-
tended. With him the form of the problem was this, to draw
straight lines at right angles to given points of a curve, by
which method the subtangent (and so forth) is determined;
and it is easy to understand the satisfaction which he expresses
there at his discovery, which concerned an object of general
scientific interest at that period, and is purely geometrical and


308 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


thereby stands high above the mere methods of rule (mentioned
above) used by his rivals: “Fose dire que cest ceci le probleme
le plus utile et le plus général, non seulement que je sache, mais méme
que j’aie jamais desire de savoir en géometrie.’—He bases the
solution upon the analytic equation of the right-angled triangle
which is formed by (1) the ordinate of the point of the curve
to which the straight line demanded in the problem is to be
perpendicular, by (2) this straight line itself (the normal), and
by (3) that part of the axis which is cut off by the ordinate
and the normal (the sub-normal). Now the equation of a curve
is knewn, and from this equation the value of ordinate or abscissa
is substituted into this equation of the triangle. Thus an equa-
tion of the second degree results; and Descartes shows also
how curves whose equations contain higher degrees are reduced
to this. In this equation only one of the variable magnitudes
occurs, either as square or as first power ;—a quadratic equation
which at first appears as a so-called impure equation. On this
Descartes reflects as follows:—If the point taken in the curve
is imagined as the point of intersection of this and of a circle,
then this circle will intersect the curve at another point, so
that for the two unequal x’s which will thus arise there will
be two equations with the same constants and having the same
form ;—or else there will be only one equation with unequal
values of x. But the equation is one only for the one triangle,
in which the hypotenuse is perpendicular to the curve (or is
normal) ,—which is imagined in this way, that the two points
of intersection of the curve and the circle are allowed to coin-
cide, so that the curve is allowed to touch the circle. But then
also the fact that the x or y of the quadratic equation has
unequal roots, disappears. But in a quadratic equation of two
equal roots, the coefficient of the member contained by the
unknown in the first power is twice the single root; and from
this there results an equation by which the required deter-
minations are discovered. This method must be considered
the brilliant device of a true analytic mind, compared with
which the arbitrarily assumed proportionality of subtangent
and ordinate, together with the so-called increments of abscissa
and ordinate (supposed to be infinitely small), is vastly inferior.

The final equation reached in this manner, in which the
coefficient of the second member of the quadratic equation


QUANTUM 309


is equated with the double root or unknown, is the same as
is found by the method of the differential calculus. When
x? —ax—b=o is differentiated, there results the new
equation 2x — a = 0; or, again, 3x —p=o results from
x8 — px — q = 0. And here we may observe that it is by no
means self-evident that such a derivative equation is also
correct. We have already considered the fact that in an equation
with two variable magnitudes which never lose their quality
of being unknown magnitudes just because they are variable,
only a proportion results; and this for the simple reason
indicated, that, when the functions of the potentiation are
substituted for the powers themselves, the value of the two
members of the equation is altered, and it remains as yet
unknown whether an equation subsists between them with


their values thus altered. The equation & = P expresses

nothing except that P is a proportion, and no other real
: ‘ d Fates:

meaning can be ascribed to = And also it is still not known


of this proportion = P, to what other proportion it is equal;
it is only this equation, or proportionality, which gives value
and meaning to the proportion.—It was mentioned that this
meaning—and this was what was called application—was
introduced empirically and from without; and, similarly, as
the equations here under discussion are derived by differentia-
tion, we must know from some other source whether they
have equal roots, in order to know whether the equation
reached remains correct. But this fact is not expressly brought
to notice in the manuals; although it must be admitted that
it is got out of the way when an equation with an unknown,
reduced to nought, is straightway equated with y, whereupon


of course only A (a proportion) results from the differentia-
tion. It is true that the functional calculus is supposed to deal
with functions of potentiation, and the differential calculus
with differentials; but it by no means follows immediately that
magnitudes whose differentials or functions of potentiation are
taken, are themselves only to be functions of other magnitudes.
In any case, in the theoretic part, that is, where the instruc-


tion is given to derive the differential (or the functions of


310 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


potentiation), no thought is yet given to the intention that
the magnitudes, of which the treatment according to such a
derivation is there taught, are themselves to be functions of
other magnitudes.

With regard to the omission of the constant in the process
of differentiation, this further observation may be made, that
differentiation here means that the constant is indifferent for
the determination of the roots when they are equal, the deter-
mination being exhausted by the coefficient of the second
member of the equation. In the example quoted from Descartes
the constant is itself the square of the roots, so that it can be
determined from the constant as well as from the coefficients ;
for, generally, like the coefficients, it is a function of the roots
of the equation. In the ordinary exposition the omission of
the so-called constants (which are connected with the other
members only by plus or minus) is brought about by the mere
mechanism of the method,—when, in order that the differential
of a composite expression may be found, only the variable
magnitudes receive an increment, and the expression thus
formulated is subtracted from the original expression. The
meaning of the constants and of their omission, the question
how far they are themselves functions and serve or do not
serve in this determination, finds no expression here.

In connexion with the omission of constants, an observation
may be made about the names of Differentiation and Inte-
gration, similar to the observation which was made above about
the expressions Finite and Infinite,—namely, that their deter-
mination contains the opposite of what is denoted by the terms.
To differentiate denotes that differences are posited, whereas
differentiation in fact reduces an equation to lesser dimensions,
and the omission of the constant removes one moment of the
determinateness ; for, as we remarked, the roots of the variable
magnitude were placed upon an equality, and thus the dif-
ference between them was cancelled. And in integration the
constant is supposed to be reintroduced; and though by this
process the equation is integrated, it is so in this sense, that
the difference of the roots, which had just been cancelled, is
reconstructed, so that the equalization is differentiated once
more.—The ordinary expression adds its share in obscuring
the essential nature of the matter and in setting everything


QUANTUM git


in a point of view which is subordinate and even alien to the
main issue: I mean the point of view of the infinitely small
_ difference, the increment, and the like, and also of the bare
difference generally between the given and the derivative
function, no designation being made of the specific, namely
the qualitative, difference.

Mechanics is another important field where the differential
calculus is applied; mention has already been made inciden-
tally of the different functions of powers that result from the
elementary equations of its object, which is motion, and of
their significance. I will admit these directly here. The equation
(that is, the mathematical expression) for motion which is


i $ S ;
simply uniform, c Ehe t, where the spaces passed


through are proportionate to the times elapsed according to
an empirical unit c (the magnitude of velocity), offers no
meaning for differentiation: the coefficient c is already fully
determined and known, and no further development of powers
can take place.—The analysis of s = a, the equation of the
motion of a falling body, has already been recorded ;—the first
member of the analysis = = 2at is translated into language
(or into fact, as the case may be) when it is postulated that
a member of a sum (an idea which we banished long ago)
must be one part of this motion; and that, further, this part
must be added to the force of inertia (a merely uniform
velocity) in such a manner that the motion is uniform in
infinitesimally small parts of time, and not uniform in finite
parts of time, that is, in those which actually exist. It is true
that fs = 2at; and the meaning of a and t is known already,
together with the fact that this suffices to posit the deter-


; S A S
mination of the uniform velocity of a motion ; for since 4 = P


SI 3 ; i
then 2 at = F universally; but having this we are no wiser


at all, and only the deceitful assumption that 2 a t is part of the
motion regarded as a sum gives the deceitful appearance of
a physical proposition. The factor itself (a, the empirical unit,
a Quantum as such) is ascribed to gravity; but if the category
of force of gravity is employed at all, it should rather be said


312 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


that the whole s =a? is the effect, or, better, the law, of
` gravity.—Similar to this is the proposition derived from


ds F : i
eign t, which enunciates that if gravity ceased to act, the


body, moving at the velocity reached at the end of its fall,
would describe twice the space it has already passed through
in a time equal to that occupied by its fall.—This contains
a metaphysic which in itself is unsound: the end of the fall,
or the end of a period of time during whick the body has
been falling, still is itself a period of time; if it were not, a state
of rest, which excludes velocity, would be assumed; velocity
can be introduced only according to the space passed through
in a period of time and not at the end of a period.—When the
differential calculus is actually applied in other spheres of
physics where there is no motion at all, for instance in the
behaviour of light (apart from its so-called propagation in
space) or in the magnitudinal determinations of colours, the
first derivative of a quadratic function being here too called
velocity, then we must regard this as a still more illegitimate
example of the formalism which feigns real existence.—

The motion (says Lagrange) which is represented by the
equation s = a tł? is empirically given in falling bodies; the
next simplest motion after this equation would be that whose
equation was s = ¢ i, but nature knows no such motion; and
we do not know what meaning the coefficient ¢ could have.
This is true; but there is a motion whose equation is s* = a #,
and this is Kepler’s law of the motion of the bodies of the solar
system ;—and indeed it would appear an interesting task to
show the intended meaning here of the first derivative function


2at . . .
pam: and so on, to treat this equation further and directly by


means of differentiation, and to develop the laws and deter-
minations of that absolute motion from this starting point,—
a task in which analysis might display a brilliance most worthy
of itself.

Thus the application of the differential calculus to the
elementary equations of motion offers in itself no real interest:
formal interest is derived from the general mechanism of the
calculus. But another significance is gained by the analysis of
motion with respect to the determination of its trajectory: if


QUANTUM 313


this is a curve and its equation contains higher powers, then
the transition is necessary of rectilinear functions (as functions
of potentiation) to the powers themselves; the former must be
extracted from the original equation of motion, which contains
the factor of time, and time must be eliminated; and so at the
same time this factor must be reduced to lower functions of
development, from which these equations of linear determina-
tions can be worked out. This aspect leads us to the interesting
element of the other part of the differential calculus.

What has been said so far was said with the purpose of
emphasizing and fixing the simple and specific determination
of the differential calculus, and of demonstrating it in a few
elementary examples. It was seen that this determination
consisted in the following process: the coefficient of the member
of development (the so-called first derivative) is found from
an equation of functions of powers; this function is a propor-
tion which is demonstrated in moments of the concrete object;
an equation results which determines these moments themselves
as between the two proportions. And also we must briefly
consider the principle of the integral calculus, and what results
from its application for its specific concrete determination. The
consideration of this calculus has been simplified and more
correctly determined through the fact that it is no longer taken
as a method of summation, as it was called in opposition to
differentiation ; the increment was there considered the essential
ingredient, and with this it appeared in essential connexion
with the serial form.—The task of this calculus, as of the
differential, is, first, theoretical or rather formal, but, as is
well known, it is the converse of the differential. Here a
beginning is made from a function which is considered as
derivative and as the coefficient of the next member, which
originates from the development of an equation as yet un-
known; and from it the original function of power is to be
calculated. The function which in the natural order of develop-
ment must be regarded as primary is here considered derivative,
and that which before was considered derivative here is con-
sidered as given and in fact as beginning to exist. But it appears
that the formal part of this operation has already been per-
formed by the differential calculus; since in it the transition
and relation in general between original function and function


314 SUIENCE OF LOGIC


of development is established. In order to apply the function
from which we must start, and also in order to effect the
transition from it to the original function, it is necessary in
many cases to have recourse to the serial form; but it must
be remembered that this form as such has nothing to do
directly with the peculiar principle of integration.

It appears next that the other part of the task of the calculus,
with respect to its formal operation, is the application of the
latter. This is now itself the task, namely, to know the meaning
(in the sense indicated above), as a separate object, of the
original function of the given function, which is considered
the first derivative. It might appear that this doctrine was
quite done with in the differential calculus; but a further
circumstance enters into play which does not allow the matter
to be so simple. For it resulted from this calculus that the
proportion—which is linear—was obtained from the first
derivative of the equation of a curve; and, therefore, knowing
this we also know that the integration of this proportion gives
us the equation of the curve in the proportion of abscissa and
ordinate; or, if the equation were given for the plane of a
curve, then it would be the case that the differential calculus
ought already to have taught, with respect to the meaning of
the first derivative of such an equation, that this function
exhibited the ordinate as function of the abscissa, and, there-
fore, the equation of a curve.

But the question is, which of the determining moments of
the object is itself given in the equation; for the analytic treat-
ment can proceed only from what is given, and pass thence
to the remaining determinations of the object. Thus what is
given is not the equation of an area of the curve, nor of the
body arising from its revolution, nor of an arc of the curve;
but only the proportion of the abscissae and ordinates in the
equation of the curve itself is given. Therefore, the transitions
from those determinations to this equation itself cannot already
be treated in the differential calculus: it is reserved for the
integral calculus to find these proportions.

But further it has been shown that the differentiation of an
equation of more than one variable, magnitude gives the power
of development or differential coefficient, not as an equation,
but only as a proportion: the task, then, is to indicate in the


QUANTUM 315


moments of the object a second proportion that shall be equal
to this first proportion, which is the derivative function. In
the integral calculus, on the other hand, the object is the
proportion itself of the original function to the derivative
(which is here supposed to be given); and the task is, to
indicate the meaning of the original function (which is to be
discovered) in the object of the given first derivative, or rather,
since this meaning has already been declared to be the problem
(the meaning is, for instance, the plane of a curve, or the
curve, imagined as rectilinear, which remains to be rectified ;
and so on), to demonstrate that such a determination is found
by the original function, and to show which is the moment
of the object that must be taken for this purpose as initial
function of the derivative function.

Now the ordinary method, which uses the idea of the dif-
ference as equivalent to the infinitely small, makes its task
simple: thus, for the quadrature of curves, an infinitely small
rectangle, a product of ordinate and element, that is, the
infinitely small part of the abscissa, is taken for the trapezium
which is supposed to have for one of its sides the infinitesimally
small arc opposite to that infinitesimally small part of the
abscissa. The product is integrated in this sense, that the
integral gives the sum of the infinitely great number of trapezia,
the plane whose determination is required, that is, the finite
magnitude of this element of the plane. And, similarly, it forms
a right-angled triangle out of the infinitesimally small elements
of the arc and the ordinates and abscissae belonging to them;
in this the square of that arc is supposed to be equal to the
sum of the squares of the other two infinitesimally small
elements, the integration of which presents us with this arc
as a finite arc.

This procedure is based upon the general discovery which
is the foundation of this part of Analysis; and here is based
upon it in that the quadrated curve, the rectified arc, and so
on, stand to a certain function which is given by the equation
of the curve, in the relation of so-called original to derivative
function. The question now is this: when a certain part of
a mathematical object (for instance, of a curve) is assumed
to be the derivative function, what other part of it is expressed
by the corresponding original function? We know that, when


316 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


the function of the ordinate given by the equation of the curve
is taken to be the derivative function, then the (relatively)
original function expresses the magnitude of the area of the
curve which is cut off by this ordinate; and, when a certain
tangential determination is regarded as derivative function,
then its original function expresses the magnitude of the arc
belonging to this tangential determination, and so on: but
the method which uses the infinitesimally small and operates
with it does not take the trouble to recognize and to demon-
strate that these ratios (firstly that which subsists between
original and derivative function, and secondly that between
the magnitudes of two parts, or conditions, of the mathematical
object) together form one proportion. It is the peculiar merit
of intellectual insight to have discovered from results already
known from without, that certain and specified sides of a
mathematical object stand in the relation one to the other of
original and derivative function.

In this calculus, of these two the derivative function, or (as
it has been determined) the function of potentiation, is the
one which is given relatively to the original function; the latter
still remains to be discovered from the former by integration.
But it is not given immediately, nor is it given for itself which
part or determination of the mathematical object is to be
looked at as derivative function, in order to find, through
tracing it back to the original function, the other part or
determination, whose magnitude the problem requires. The
ordinary method, as has been stated, immediately represents
certain parts of the object as infinitesimally small, in the form
of derivative functions which can be determined from the
original equation of the object by differentiation in general
(—thus for the rectification of a curve it takes the infinitesimal
abscissae and ordinates); and this method takes instead such
as can be brought into a connexion with the object of the
problem (in the example, with the arc, which also is imagined
as infinitesimal) which is fixed and determined by elementary
mathematics, by which procedure, these parts being known,
that part also of which the magnitude was to be found, is
determined. Thus, for rectification, the three infinitesimals
we mentioned are connected in the equation of the right-angled
triangle, while for quadrature, the ordinate and the infinitesimal


QUANTUM 317


abscissa are connected in a product, a plane being taken, in
the general arithmetical manner, as a product of straight lines.
The transition from such a so-called element of plane or arc,
and so forth, to the magnitude of plane or arc itself now only
counts as ascent from the infinitesimal to the finite expression
or to the sum of an infinite number of elements, of which the
required magnitude is supposed to consist.

We can, therefore, make only the superficial observation
that the integral calculus is just the problem of the differential
calculus, but inverted, and, in general, more difficult; while
the real interest of the integral calculus concerns itself entirely
with the relation to each other of the original and the
derivative function in concrete objects.

Lagrange nowhere banished the difficulty of any problem
in the facile manner of these direct assumptions, nor did he
consent to do so in this part of the calculus. It will help the
elucidation of the nature of the matter if here too we indicate
the detail of his procedure in a few examples. For the task of
his method is to demonstrate in itself that a relation of original
to derivative function subsists between separate determinations
of a mathematical whole, for instance a curve. But in this
sphere, because of the nature of the relation itself, this cannot
be done in a direct manner, since in the mathematical object
the relation connects curved with straight lines, linear dimen-
sions and their functions with plane dimensions and their
function, and so on,—connects, that is, terms which are quali-
tatively different; the determination thus can only be taken
as the mean between a greater and a less. Thus here again
there enters spontaneously the form of increment with its plus
and minus, and that vigorous “Developpons” is here in place;
but we have already discussed that purely arithmetical and
finite meaning which here is all that belongs to the increments.
When we develop the condition that the magnitude which is
to be determined must be greater than one and less than
another limit (itself easily determinable), we derive such facts
as that the function of the ordinate stands in the relation of
first derivative function to the function of the area.

Lagrange’s exposition of the rectification of curves starts
from Archimedes’ principle, and is interesting, therefore, as
affording an insight into the translation of the Archimedean


318 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


method into the principle of modern analysis, which allows
us to look upon the inner and true meaning of an affair which
by the other mode is pursued but mechanically. The procedure
is necessarily analogous to that which has just been indicated:
no direct equation results from the principle of Archimcdes,
which is that the arc of a curve is greater than its chord and
less than the sum of two tangents drawn between the ends of
the arc and their point of intersection. This fundamental
determination of Archimedes is translated into the modern
analytic form when an expression is found which is in itself
a simple fundamental equation, whereas the form of Archi-
medes only postulates that there must be an infinite progress
between two elements, respectively too great and too small,
which each time determine themselves,—this progress ever
giving but a new pair of great and small, with an ever narrower
limit of inaccuracy. The formalism of the infinitesimally small
immediately gives us the equation dz? = dx? + dy’. But
Lagrange’s demonstration, starting from the foundation which
has been indicated, shows that the magnitude of the arc stands
in the relation of original to a derivative function, in which
the characteristic member itself is a function which comes from
the relation of a derivative to the original function of the
ordinate.

The method of Archimedes, and, at a later date, Kepler’s
treatment of stereometrical objects, employ the idea of the
infinitesimally small,—a fact which has often been quoted as
authorizing the use made of this idea in the differential cal-
culus, while its peculiarity and distinguishing quality were not
sufficiently emphasized. The infinitesimally small means, first,
the negation of Quantum as such, that is, of a so-called finite
expression, or of that perfect determinateness which belongs
to Quantum as such. And, similarly, the fundamental deter-
mination in the subsequent famous methods of Valerius,!
Cavalieri, and others, which are based on the consideration
of the relations of geometrical objects, is, that the Quantum
(as such) of determinations which so far are being considered
merely as related terms, is to be neglected for this purpose,
and consequently they are to be taken as non-magnitudinal.


t Valerius, Lucas, died 1618 at Rome, called by Galileo the Archimedes of
his time: de quadratura parabolae per simplex falsum.


QUANTUM 319


But here the general affirmative element which is latent in
the merely negative determination remains unrecognized and
unnoticed—an element which, abstractly, proved to be quali-
tative magnitudinal determinateness based, more precisely,
upon the ratio of powers;—and also, since this relation itself
includes a number of more closely determinate relations like
powers and the functions of their development, attempts have
been made to base these too on the general and negative
determination of the same infinitesimally small, and to d.rive
them thence. In Lagrange’s exposition which we have just
examined, the determinate affirmative which is contained in
Archimedes’ manner of developing the problem has been dis-
covered, and thus the procedure, which was infected with an
unlimited overpassing, has been given its correct limit. The
importance of the modern invention in itself, and its capacity
to solve problems hitherto intractable, and to treat in a simple
manner those which were not insoluble before, is due solely
to the discovery of the relation of the original to the so-called
derivative, and of the parts which, in a mathematical whole,
stand in this relation.

What has been said may serve to make clear what is
characteristic in that proportion of magnitudes which is the
object of the particular kind of calculus under discussion. Our
exposition was able to confine itself to simple problems and
the methods of solving them; and it would neither have been
suitable for the determination of the concept (which here alone
was our object), nor would it have been in the power of the
author, to examine the whole scope of the so-called application
of the differential and integral calculus, and to complete the
induction that they are based upon the principle which we
discovered, by tracing back to it all their problems and their
solutions. But our contribution has sufficiently shown that as-
every other calculus has for object a separate determinateness
or relation of magnitude, and addition, multiplication, the
raising to powers and extraction of roots, operations. with
logarithms and with series, and so on, constitute such objects,
so too the differential and integral calculus; and the name
of relation of a function of powers and of the function of its
development or potentiation, is perhaps fittest for whatever
is akin to this calculus, for this name places us nearest to an


320 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


insight into the nature of the matter. Only, operations accord-
ing to other magnitudinal relations (addition and so on) are
also generally used in this calculus, and so also logarithmic,
circular, and serial relations are applied, especially in order
to make more tractable expressions for the purpose of the
necessary operations of the derivation of original functions
from functions of development. The differential and integral
calculus has this point of interest in common with the form
of the series, that it determines the functions of development
which, in series, are called coefficients of the terms; but the
interest of this calculus is directed only upon the relation of
the original function to the next coefficient of its development,
and thus the series tries to represent a sum in the multitude
of terms arranged according to powers which have these
coefficients. The infinite of the infinite series—that indeter-
minate expression of the negative element of Quantum in
general—has nothing in common with the affirmative deter-
mination which is contained in the infinite of this calculus.
And also the infinitesimally small (whicn appears under the
shape of increment), which gives to development the form of
series, is a merely external means to this end, and the only
meaning of its so-called infinity is to have no meaning except
as this methodological device: the series, which in fact is not
what is wanted, produces an excess the removal ot which
causes the unnecessary trouble. Lagrange’s method too—he
took up the serial form again by preference—is hampered by
this trouble; although it is in this method that the true
peculiarity stands revealed in what is called the application,
for, without forcing the forms of dx, dy, and so on, into the
objects, that part is directly indicated to which the deter-
minateness of the derived function (function of development)
belongs in them: so that it is clear that here the real matter
in hand is nat the form of the series.


* In the above-mentioned criticism (Jahrb. für wissensch. Krit., II Bd. 1827,
Nr. 115, 6 sqq.), interesting views of a sound scholar in this science, Mr. Spehr,*
may be found; they are quoted from his Neue Prinzipien des Fluentenkalkuls,
Brunswick, 1826, relating to a fact which he asserts materially to contribute to
the obscurities and unscientific parts of the differential calculus, and they agree


* Spehr, Friedrich Wilhelm, 1799-1833, a mathematician of Brunswick:
Vollständiger Lehrbegriff der reinen Kombinationslehre, 1824.


QUANTUM 321


Observation 3


FURTHER FORMS CONNECTED WITH THE QUALITATIVE
DETERMINATENESS OF MAGNITUDE


i In the differential calculus the infinitesimally small appears
in its affirmative meaning as qualitative magnitudinal deter-
minateness; and of this it has further been shown that it is
present in this calculus not only as determinateness of powers
in general, but more especially as the determinateness of the
ratio of a function of powers to the power of development.
The qualitative determinateness is also present in a wider and,
so to say, weaker form, which, together with the connected
employment of the infinitesimally small and its meaning in
this employment, will be considered in this Observation.

We begin from what precedes, and must first remark in this
regard that the various determinations of powers, in the
analytic aspect, manifest themselves as purely formal and quite
homogeneous, since they denote numerical magnitudes, which,
as such, do not possess this mutual relation of qualitative
difference. But when applied to objects of space, the analytic
relation shows itself in its qualitative determinateness as the
transition from linear to plane determinations, from deter-
minations of straight lines to determinations of curves, and so


with what has been said about the general nature of the theory of this calculus.
“Purely arithmetical investigations,” he says, “(admittedly related more closely
than any others to the differential calculus) were not distinguished from the
differential calculus proper, and have ever been confused (as by Lagrange) with
the matter itself, which latter was regarded as a mere application of them. These
arithmetical investigations include the rules of differentiation, the derivation of
Taylor’s theorem, etc., and even the various methods of integration. But the
reverse is the case, and these applications are the object of the real differential
calculus, which, from the analysis, presupposes all these arithmetical develop-
ments and operations.” —We have shown how with Lagrange the separation of
the so-called application from the procedure of the general part, which starts
from series, serves only to emphasize the peculiar nature of the differential
calculus for itself. And it is strange that the author, having this interesting under-
standing that the so-called applications are just what constitutes the object of
the differential calculus proper, should enter upon the formal metaphysics (there
quoted) of Continuous Magnitude, Becoming, Flow, and so on, and should even
desire to add new ballast to this old. These determinations are formal because
they are only general categories, which do not indicate what is specific in the
matter which was to be learned and abstracted from the concrete doctrines, the
applications.


VOL. I É


322 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


on. This application further involves that spatial objects which
from their very nature are given in the form of continuous
magnitudes, are taken as discrete, the plane as a multitude
of lines, the line as a multitude of points, and so on. This
solution is interesting only in one respect, which is that it
itself determines the points into which the line is analysed and
the lines into which the plane, and so forth, in order that
from such a determination it may proceed analytically, which
really means arithmetically; the starting-points for the mag-
nitudinal determinations which are to be found are those
elements whence are to be derived the function and equation
for the concrete, that is, the continuous magnitude. In those
problems which are interesting chiefly because they employ
this procedure, something which is determinate in itself is de-
manded, in the element, for the starting-point,—in opposition
to the method which is indirect, because it can begin on the
contrary only with limits between which is supposed to lie thät
entity, determinate for itself, which is its objective. In both
methods the result is the same if only it is possible to discover
the law of further determination and impossible to reach
the perfect (that is, so-called finite) determination which is
demanded. To Kepler is ascribed the honour of first having
thought of this reversal of the progress, and of making the
discrete its starting-point. He expresses this simply when he
explains how he understands the first theorem in Archimedes’
cyclometry. Archimedes’ first theorem is, of course, that a circle
is equal to a right-angled triangle having one catheter equal
to the radius and one equal to the circumference of the circle.
Kepler takes the meaning of the theorem to be this, that the
circumference of the circle has as many parts as it has points,
that is, infinitely many, each of which may be considered as
the base of an isosceles triangle, and so on: he thus gives
expression to the dissolution of the continuous into the form
of discreteness. The expression “infinite”” which here occurs
is still far distant from the determination which it is destined
to have in the differential calculus.—A determinateness or func-
tion having now been found for such discreta, they must next
be united, and exist essentially as elements of the continuous.
But a sum of points produces no line and a sum of lines no
plane: the points are, therefore, immediately taken as linear


QUANTUM 323


and the lines as plane in nature. But also these linear entities
must not yec be lines (which they would be if they were taken
as quantum): they are, therefore, imagined as infinitesimally
small. But what is discrete can be united only externally, the
moments retaining their meaning of discrete Ones; the analytic
transition from them is made only to their sum, and is not
also the geometric transition from point into line, line into
plane, and so on; and, therefore, the element which has its
determination as point or as line is given the quality of line
with the former, and the quality of plane with the latter
determination, so that the sum, being a sum of little lines,
may become a line, and being a sum of little planes, a plane.

The need of acquiring this moment of qualitative transition
and of recurring to the infinitesimally small to this end must
be regarded as the source of all the ideas which, intended to
overcome this difficulty, are the greatest difficulty themselves.
In order that one might, dispense with this expedient, it would
have to be possible to show that the analytic procedure itself,
which appears as a mere summation, in fact already contains
multiplication. But in this regard a new assumption enters,
which constitutes the basis of this application of arithmetical
relations to geometrical figurations. This assumption is, that
arithmetical multiplication is a transition to a higher dimension
for the geometrical determination too, and that the arith-
metical multiplication of magnitudes which, according to their
spatial determinations, are lines, also extracts a plane from the
linear determination. Three times four linear feet are twelve
linear feet, but three linear feet times four linear feet are twelve
plane feet (square feet), for the unit in both, since each is a
discrete magnitude, is the same. The multiplication of lines
by lines at first appears meaningless, since multiplication only
deals with numbers; that is, it is a change of entities which
are perfectly homogeneous with that into which they pass over
(the product), and change only their magnitude. On the other
hand, a process of multiplying a line as such by a line—which
has been called ductus lineae in lineam, like plani in planum, and
is also ductus puncti in lineam—is a change not only of the mag-
nitude but also of the line as qualitative determination of
spatiality, as a dimension; the transition of line into plane
must be taken as its self-externalization, which for the point


324 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


is a line, and for the plane, a volume. It is this process which
is imagined when it is said that the movement of a point is a
line, and so forth; but movement includes the determination
of time, and in this idea, therefore, appears rather as a con-
tingent and external variation of the condition; whereas it is
the conceptual determinateness (which was expressed as self-
externalization) which must be taken, —that qualitative change,
which in arithmetic is the multiplication, of Unit (the point
and so on) into Amount (the line and so on).—We may here
make this further remark, that in the self-externalization of
the plane (which would manifest itself as a multiplication of
plane into plane) the appearance of a difference between
arithmetical and geometrical products results when the self-
externalization of the plane, as ductus plant in planum, would
in arithmetic produce the multiplication of two determinations
of the second degree, that is, a product of four dimensions,
which in the geometrical determination is however reduced
to three. Although on the one hand Number, because it has
One for principle, provides the fixed determination for the
external quantity, yet equally its productive power is formal.
Taken as a numerical determination, 3 x 3, when it repro-
duces itself, is 3x 3 x3 x 3; but this same magnitude as
plane determination is not allowed, when it reproduces itself,
to proceed beyond 3 x 3 x 3, because space, imagined as a
progress from the point, or the merely abstract limit, has its
true limit as concrete determinateness after line in the third
dimension. This difference might prove powerful with regard
to free movement, wherein one (spatial) side is governed by
geometrical determination (in Kepler’s law s° : #), and the
other (temporal) side by arithmetical determination.

It will now be evident without further remark how the
qualitative here considered differs from the subject of the
previous Observation. There the qualitative element consisted
in the determinateness of powers: here, like the infinitesimally
small, it stands in the mere arithmetical relation of factor to
product, or as point to line, line to plane, and so on. And the
qualitative transition which must be made to the continuous
from the discrete (into which continuous magnitude is imagined
as dissolved) is effected by a process of summation.

However, this would-be mere summation contains in fact


QUANTUM 325


a multiplication and, therefore, a transition from linear to
plane determination; and this appears most simply in the
manner in which (for instance) it is shown that the area of
a trapezium is equal to the product of the sum of the two
opposite parallel lines and half the height. This height is
imagined simply as the amount of a multitude of discrete mag-
nitudes which must be summed up. These magnitudes are lines
which lie parallel between those two limiting parallels; their
number is infinite, for they must constitute the surface, and
also they are lines which, therefore, in order to be of plane
nature, must be posited together witk negation. In order to
escape the difficulty that a sum of lines is to produce a plane,
lines are immediately assumed to be planes, but infinitely
narrow, for their only determination lies in the linear element
of the parallel limits of the trapezium. Being parallel, and
being limited by the other pair of rectilinear sides of the
trapezium, they can be imagined as terms of an arithmetical
progression, having a uniform difference which, however, need
not be determined, and having those two parallels for first
and last terms; the sum of this series is of course the product
of the parallels and half the amount of the terms. This
latter quantum is called Amount only relatively to the idea
of the infinitely many lines: it is the magnitudinal deter-
minateness of something continuous, namely height. Clearly
that which is called sum is also a ductus lineae in lineam, multi-
plication of linear by linear element, and, therefore, the produc-
tion (according to the above determination) of something
of plane nature. In the simplest case of any rectangle A B,
each of the two factors is a simple magnitude; already in the
next example (itself elementary) of the trapezium, only one
factor is once half the height, while the other is determined by
a progression : it too is of linear nature, but the determinateness
of its magnitude is more complex: and since it can be expressed
only by a series, the endeavour to sum it up is called analytical,
that is, arithmetical; while multiplication here is the geomet-
rical moment, the qualitative part of the transition from the
dimension of line into plane: one factor is taken, discretely,
only for the arithmetical determination of the other, and, like
the other, is itself the magnitude of a linear something.

The method in which planes are imagined as sums of lines


326 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


is also frequently used when multiplication as such is not used
in order to find the result. This happens where the object is
not to indicate the magnitude in the equation as Quantum,
but as a proportion. For instance, it is commonly proved that
the area of a circle is to the area of an ellipse, of which the
major axis is equal to the diameter of the circle, as the major
axis is to the minor axis, by assuming that each of these areas
is the sum of the relative ordinates. Each ordinate of the ellipse
is to the corresponding ordinate of the circle as the minor is
to the major axis: it is concluded that, therefore, the sums of
the ordinates too (that is, the areas) are in the same proportion.
Those who here wish to avoid the idea that an area is a sum
of lines have recourse to the common and quite gratuitous
makeshift of making the ordinates into trapezia of infinitely
small breadth: the equation is only a proportion, and there-
fore only one of the two linear elements of a plane enters into
the comparison. The other element (the axis of the abscissa)
is assumed to be equal in ellipse and in circle, and therefore
as = I in so far as it is a factor of arithmetical magnitudinal
determination: the proportion therefore depends solely upon
the relation of the one determining moment. The two dimen-
sions are essential to the idea of area: but the magnitudinal
determination, as it is required to be indicated in this pro-
portion, concerns itself only with one moment; and when the
idea of sum is added to this one moment (which is a surrender
to, or attempted propping of, the idea), then this means that
the real point demanded by mathematical determinateness is
here missed.

This exposition also contains the criterion of Cavalieri’s
method of the indivisible (which has been mentioned above) :
this, too, is therefore justified and need not have recourse to
the infinitesimally small. These indivisibilia are lines when he
is considering a plane, and squares or plane circles when he is
considering a pyramid, cone, and so on. The basic line or
plane (which he takes as determinate) is called the regula; it
is the constant, and with reference to a series it is its first or
last term; and to it these indivisibilia are considered parallel,
that is, as having the same determination with regard to the
figure. Now Cavalieri’s general fundamental proposition is
(Exerc. Geometr. VI., in the later work Exerc. I., p. 6), “that all


QUANTUM 327


figures, both plane and solid, are proportionate to all their
indivisibilia, and compare these collectively or, when there is
a common proportion in them, distributively.”—For this pur-
pose he compares, in figures of the same base and height, the
proportions between lines drawn parallel to the former and
at equal distance from it; all such lines in a figure have one
and the same determination and constitute its whole content.
In this manner, too, Cavalieri proves, for instance, the elemen-
tary proposition that parallelograms of equal height are pro-
portionate each to its base: any two lines drawn at an equal
distance from the base and parallel to it in the two figures
are in the same proportion to the bases; and so, therefore,
are the whole figures. In fact, the lines do not constitute the
content of the figure in so far as it is continuous, but only in so
far as it is to be determined arithmetically; the linear factor
is its element, and through it alone its determinateness must
be seized.

And here we are led to reflect upon the difference which
exists with respect to that element in which the determinateness
of a figure consists; it is either of the same nature as is here
the height of the figure, or it is external limit. In so far as it
is determinateness as being external limit, it is admitted that
the continuity of the figure follows, so to speak, upon the
equality or the proportion of the limit; thus the equality of
figures which coincide with one another follows from the fact
that the limiting lines coincide with one another. But when
parallelograms are of equal height and base, only the latter
determinateness is external limit; height, and not parallelism
(and on this the second capital determination of figures, that
is their ratio, depends), introduces a second principle which
determines external limits. Euclid’s proof that parallelograms
of equal height and base are equal, reduces them to triangles,
that is, to continua limited externally: in Cavalieri’s proof,
and first in his proof of the proportionality of parallelograms,
the limit is magnitudinal determinateness as such in general,
which is explained to be taken as applied to each pair of lines
drawn at an equal distance in the two figures. These lines,
which are either equal or in an equal ratio with the base, being
taken collectively, produce the figures which also are in the
same ratio, The idea of an aggregate of lines is incompatible


328 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


with the continuity of a figure; the mere consideration of
lines quite exhausts the essential determinateness. Cavalieri
frequently answers the objection that the idea of the indivisible
necessarily involves the comparison of lines or planes infinite
in amount (Geom. Lib. II. Prop. I. Schol.); and makes the just
distinction, that it is not their amount, which we do not know
(—it is, as has been observed, an empty auxiliary idea—), but
only magnitude, that is quantitative determinateness as such,
equal to the space enclosed by these lines, which he compares.
This space is contained in limits, and, therefore, its magnitude
too is contained within these limits: the continuous is nothing other
than the indivisibilia themselves, says Cavalieri: if it were outside
them it would be incommensurable: but it would be absurd
to say that limited continua were incommensurable.

Clearly, thus, Cavalieri attempts to distinguish what belongs
to the external existence of the continuous from that which
constitutes its determinateness and needs to be emphasized
only for comparison and for theorems dealing with it. It is
true that the categories which he uses for this purpose (the
fact that the continuous is composed or consists of the indivisibilia,
and the like) are inadequate, since they also involve the
intuition, or, as was said before, the external existence, of the
continuous; instead of saying that “the continuous is nothing
but the indivisibilia themselves,” it would be more correct
and therefore also immediately more clear to say that the mag-
nitudinal determinateness of the continuous is the same as
that of the indivisibilia themselves.—Cavalieri does not care
for the faulty conclusion that there are greater and less infinites,
which (he says) is drawn by the schools from the idea that
the indivisibilia constitute the continuous; and, further, (Geom.
Lib. VII. Pref.) he expresses the more definite knowledge that
his method of proof by no means forces him into the idea of
the composition of the continuous from indivisibilia: the con-
tinua only follow the proportion of the indivisibilia. He
claims to have taken the aggregates of indivisibilia, not in
that manner in which, for the sake of an infinite multitude of
lines or planes, they appear to fall into the determination of
infinity, but in so far as they contain a determinate condition
and nature of limitedness. But in order finally to remove this
stumbling-block, he does not spare himself the pains of proving


QUANTUM | 329


the capital propositions of his geometry (in the seventh book,
specially added for this purpose) in a manner designed to be
uninfected with infinity.—This manner reduces the proof to
the ordinary form (mentioned before) of the coincidence of
figures, that is, as was observed, to the idea of determinateness
as external spatial limit.

We may further remark about this form of coinciding, that
altogether it is what may be called a childish aid for sensuous
intuition. In the elementary theorems about triangles, two
triangles are imagined side by side; of their six component
parts, three are assumed equal to the corresponding three in
the other triangle, and then it is demonstrated that such
triangles are equal in all respects; that is, that each has the
remaining three parts also equal to those of the other, because
it follows from the equality of the first three that they coincide,
If the matter be taken more abstractly, it is just because of
this equality of each pair of the parts corresponding to each
other in both, that there is only one triangle, in which three
parts are taken as already determinate, whence follows the
determinateness of the three remaining parts. In this manner
determinateness is demonstrated as complete in three parts;
and, for determinateness as such, the three remaining parts
represent a superfluity, the superfluity of sensuous existence,
that is, of the intuition of continuity. Expressed in this form,
qualitative determinateness manifests itself as distinct from the
object of intuition, which is the whole as continuous in itself;
and coincidence does not allow this distinction to be perceived.

With parallel lines and parallelograms there comes into play
(as has been observed) a new circumstance, namely, partly
the equality of the angles only and partly the height of the
figures, from which latter their external limits (the sides of
the parallelograms) are distinct. Here a doubtful question
arises, that is, how far in these figures—apart from the deter-
minateness of one side, the base, which is an external limit—
we are to take for the other determinateness (a) the other
external limit, namely, the other side of the parallelogram,
or (6) the height. Where there are two such figures having
the same base and height, the one being rectangular and the
other having very acute angles (the opposite pair being there-
fore very obtuse), the latter could easily appear greater to


L*


330 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


intuition than the former, in so far as it might take its long
side as determinant and (according to Cavalieri’s method of
imagining the matter) might compare the areas according to
the multitude of parallel lines which can pass through them:
the longer side might be considered as affording a potentiality
of more lines than the vertical side of the rectangle affords.
Such an idea, however, provides no objection to Cavalieri’s
method; for the multitude of parallel lines imagined for pur-
poses of comparison in the two parallelograms -presupposes
their equidistance from one another or from the base: it
follows, therefore, that height and not the other side of the
parallelogram is the other determining moment. But this
changes further when two parallelograms are compared with
each other which have the same height and base but are
not in the same plane, and are at different angles with a third
plane: here the parallel sections which arise when the third
plane is imagined as passing through them and moving parallel
to itself, are no longer equidistant from one another, and the
two planes are unequal. Cavalieri is very careful to draw
attention to this distinction, which he defines as the distinction
between a transitus rectus and a transitus obliquus of the indi-
visibilia (already in Exercit. I. n. XII. sqq. and also in Geometr.
I. II.), and prevents a superficial misunderstanding which might
arise in this direction. Barrow in his above-cited work (Lect.
Geom. II. p. 21) also uses the method of indivisibilia, although
he adulterates it with the assumption (which from him passed
on to his pupil, Newton, and to other mathematical contem-
poraries, among them Leibniz) that a curvilinear triangle,
like the so-called characteristic triangle, may be equated with
a rectilinear triangle in so far as both are infinitely, that is,
very small; and I remember that he quotes an objection of
Tacquet,' an ingenious geometer who worked upon what then
were new methods, which points to that same end. The
difficulty which he raises refers to the question, which line, in
the calculation of conical and spherical surfaces, should be
taken as fundamental moment of determination for the con-
sideration based upon application of the discrete. He says that
Tacquet’s objection to the method of indivisibilia is this, that


* Tacquet, Andr., 1611-1660, Professor in the Jesuit College at Antwerp:
Cylindricorum et annularium libri V, 1651-9.


QUANTUM 331


in the calculation of the surface of a right-angled cone the
triangle. of the cone is imagined, in this atomistic method, as
composed of straight lines parallel to the base and at right
angles to the axis, which also are the radii of the circles of
which the surface of the cone consists. And if this surface is
determined from the sum of the circumferences, and this sum
from the number of their radii, that is, from the magnitude
of the axis, or the height of the cone, then (he proceeds) such
a result is in contradiction with the truth elsewhere taught and
demonstrated by Archimedes.. And Barrow shows that, to
determine the surface, it is not the axis but the side of the
triangle of the cone which must be taken as the line the
revolution of which produces the surface; this line, therefore,
and not the axis, must be taken as the magnitudinal deter-
minateness for the multitude of circumferences.

Such objections and hesitancies have their sole origin in the
indeterminate idea which they use of the infinite multitude
of points of which a line, or of lines of which a plane, and so
forth, is regarded as consisting: the essential magnitudinal
determinateness of lines and planes is obscured by this idea.—
It has been the intention of these Observations to make evident
the affirmative determinations which so to speak remain in
the background in the varied use which is made of the in-
finitesimally small in mathematics; and to raise them from
the obscurity in which they are wrapped by this purely negative
category. In the infinite series (as in Archimedes’ cyclometry)
the Infinite means nothing more than that the law of further
determination is known, but that the so-called finite (that is,
arithmetical) expression, is not given, so that it is impossible
to effect the reduction of the curve to the straight line: this
incommensurability constitutes their qualitative difference.
The qualitative difference between discrete and continuous in
general also contains a negative determination, which causes
them to appear incommensurable and introduces the infinite
in this sense, that the continuous (which is to be taken as
discrete) must now have no Quantum according to its con-
tinuous determinateness. The continuous (which, arithmeti-
cally, is to be taken as product) is thus posited discretely in
itself, as being analysed into the elements which are its factors:
in these lies its magnitudinal determinateness ; and just because


332 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


they are these elements or factors, they are of a lower dimension,
and, in so far as there is any determinateness of power, of
a lower power than the magnitude of which they are elements
or factors. Arithmetically this difference appears as merely
quantitative, as a difference of root or power or any other
determinateness of power; but when the expression concerns
only the quantitative as such (for instance a: a? or d. a? =
2a :a*== 2 : a, or, for the law of gravitation, ?:a??), the
ratios which result are meaningless (1 : a, 2 : a, 1 : at); the
sides ought to be held apart against their merely quantitative
determination by a difference in qualitative meaning, as
s:at?, where the magnitude as a quality is expressed as
function of the magnitude of another quality. Here then it
is only quantitative determinateness which is present to con-
sciousness ; with it, it is easy to operate according to its manner,
and no objection can be offered if the magnitude of one line
be multiplied by the magnitude of another; but from the
multiplication of these same magnitudes there also results the
qualitative change of the transition of line into plane: and
in so far a negative determination comes into play. It is this
that causes the difficulty which is solved by an understanding
of its peculiarity and of the simple nature of the matter, but
by the help of the infinite, which is intended to remove it, is
suspended quite unsolved and in confusion.


CHAPTER III
THE QUANTITATIVE RATIO


Tue Infinity of Quantum has proved itself to be the negative
Beyond of Quantum; but it belongs to Quantum. This Beyond
is the Qualitative in general. Infinite Quantum, as the union
of the two moments (quantitative and qualitative determinate-
ness), is Ratio.

In Ratio the determinateness of Quantum no longer is
indifferent: it is qualitatively determined as absolutely related
to its Beyond. It continues itself into its Beyond; and this, for
the present, is simply any other Quantum. But essentially they
are related to one another not as external Quanta; each has its
determinateness in this relation to the other. In this their other-
ness they have thus returned upon themselves; what each is, it is
in the other; and the other constitutes the determinateness of
each.—Thus the passing of Quantum. beyond itself now has
this meaning, that it did not merely change into an Other, nor
into its abstract Other (its negative Beyond), but that it there
reached its determinateness: it finds itself in its Beyond, which
is another Quantum. The quality, or conceptual determinate-
ness, of Quantum is its externality in general. Now in Ratio
it is posited as having its determinateness in its externality and
in another Quantum, and as finding its true nature in its Beyond.

The entities that have the relation which we have found,
are Quanta. This relation is itself a magnitude; Quantum is
posited, not only as being in a Ratio, but as being itself a
Ratio; it is a Quantum in general which contains this quali-
tative determinateness within itself. Taken thus as Ratio, it
expresses its existence as self-contained totality and its indiffer-
ence to limit, through the fact that it has within itself the
externality of its determinateness and in this externality is
related only to itself, that is, is in itself infinite.

Ratio is divided into :—


(1) Direct Ratio. Here the qualitative element does not
show forth for itself as such: it is in a purely quantitative


334 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


manner that Quantum is posited as having its determinateness
in its externality.—In itself Quantitative Ratio is the con-
tradiction of externality and of self-relation, of the existence
of Quanta and of their negation ;—it transcends itself when
next

(2) in Indirect Ratio there is posited the negation as such
of one Quantum together with the alteration of the other, and
the alterability of Direct Ratio itself;

(3) in Ratio of Powers, however, unity, which in its differ-
ence is self-related, asserts itself as simple self-production of
Quantum; this qualitative element being finally posited in
simple determination and as identical with Quantum, becomes
Measure.


—In the preceding Observations, which deal with the
infinite of Quantity (that is, with the qualitative moment in
Quantity), much that is true of the nature of the following
Ratios has been anticipated. All that remains, therefore, is to
explain the abstract concept of these Ratios.


A
THE DIRECT RATIO


1. In that Ratio which is immediate and, therefore, direct,
the determinateness of one Quantum is contained reciprocally
in the determinateness of the other. There is only one deter-
minateness or limit of the two, which is also itself a Quantum,
and this is the exponent of the Ratio.

2. The exponent may be any Quantum; but it is a quali-
tatively determinate Quantum self-related in its externality
only in so far as it has in itself its difference, its Beyond and
otherness. But this difference of the Quantum in itself is the
difference of Unit and Amount: Unit is self-determinateness ;
Amount, the indifferent oscillation about determinateness, the
external indifference of Quantum. At first Unit and Amount
were moments of Quantum; now, in Ratio (which to this
extent is Quantum realized) each of its moments appears as an
independent Quantum, and as deterniinations of its existence,
as limitations of its otherwise purely external and indifferent
magnitudinal determinateness.


THE QUANTITATIVE RATIO 335


The exponent is this difference as simple determinateness,
that is, it immediately contains in itself the meaning of both
determinations. It is, first, Quantum, and thus is Amount; if
one side of the Ratio, which is taken as Unit, is expressed
as numerical One—and as such only it is counted,—then the
other, Amount, is the Quantum of the exponent itself. Secondly,
it is simple determinateness as the qualitative element of the
sides of the Ratio: if the Quantum of one is determined, the
Quantum of the other too is determined by the exponent, and
it is quite indifferent how the first is determined: as Quantum
determinate for itself it no longer has a meaning, but can
equally well be any other without changing the determinate-
ness of the Ratio, which rests wholly upon the exponent. The
one, which is taken as Unit, always remains Unit, however
great it becomes; and the other, however great it likewise
becomes in the process, must always remain the same Amount
of that Unit.

3. Thus really both only constitute one Quantum; one
relatively to the other has the value only of Unit and not of
an Amount, and the other has only that of an Amount; and
thus, according to their conceptual determinateness, they are
not themselves complete Quanta. But this incompleteness is
a negation in them,—not a negation which follows from their
general alterability according to which one (and each is one
of the two) can assume any magnitude, but according to the
determination that when one is altered the other increases or
decreases proportionally; this means (as has been shown) that
only one (Unit) changes as Quantum; the other side (Amount)
remains the same Quantum of units, and even the former has
meaning only as Unit, however much it may change as Quan-
tum. Thus each of the two sides is only one of the two moments
of Quantum, and that independence which is its peculiarity,
is negated in itself: in this qualitative connexion they must be
posited as negative to each other.

The exponent is supposed to be the complete Quantum, for
in it the determination of the two sides coincides; but in fact,
as quotient, it only has the value of the Amount, or of the
Unit. There is here no determination showing which of the
sides of the ratio must be taken as Unit and which as Amount;
if one (the Quantum B) be measured against the Quantum 4


336 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


as Unit, then the quotient C is the Amount of such Units;
but if A itself be taken as Amount, then the quotient C is the
Unit which the Amount A demands for the Quantum B; thus
this quotient, as exponent, is not posited as what it is supposed
to be, namely, the determinant of the ratio or its qualitative
unity. It is posited as such only in so far as it has the meaning
of being the union of both moments, of Unit and Amount.
These sides are present as Quanta (such as they are supposed
to be in explicit Quantum, which is Ratio), but also only in
the value which they are supposed to have as being sides of
the Ratio,—which means that they are incomplete Quanta
and count only as one of these qualitative moments; and,
therefore, they must be posited as having this their negation.
Thus there arises a Ratio more real and better corresponding
to its determination; the exponent here has the meaning of
being their product; Ratio according to this determinateness
is Inverse Ratio.


B
THE INVERSE RATIO


1. The Ratio which has now been reached is transcended
Direct Ratio; the first stage was immediate and, therefore,
not truly determinate Ratio; here determinateness has been
added, in such a manner that the exponent counts as product,
as the unity of Unit and Amount. With regard to immediacy,
it could indifferently be taken as Unit and as Amount, as was
shown above, and so it also existed as Quantum only in general,
and hence, by preference, as Amount; one side had to be taken
as Unit and as One, to which the other stood in the relation
of fixed Amount, which also was the exponent; its quality,
therefore, was only this, that this Quantum is taken as fixed,
or rather that what is fixed has the meaning only of Quantum.

Now in Inverse Ratio, too, the exponent, as Quantum,
is taken as immediate; and any Quantum can be taken as
fixed. But this Quantum is not related as fixed Amount to the
One of the other Quantum in the ratio; this ratio, which before
was fixed, is now posited as variable; if another Quantum is
taken as the One of the one side, then the other no longer
remains the same amount of units of the first. In Direct Ratio


THE QUANTITATIVE RATIO 337


this unit is only the common part of both sides; as such it con-
tinues itself into the other side, which is Amount; and Amount
itself for itself, or the exponent, is indifferent to the Unit.

But under the present determinateness of Ratio, Amount as
such is varied relatively to the One to which it is related as
the other side of the Ratio. It becomes another when another
One is taken as Quantum. Consequently, though the exponent
is only immediate and a Quantum arbitrarily taken as fixed,
yet it does not preserve itself as such in the side of the Ratio:
it, and with it the direct ratio of the sides, is variable. Thus in
the present Ratio the exponent as determining Quantum
is posited as negating itself as Quantum of the Ratio: hence
it is posited as qualitative, as Limit, so that the qualitative
element emphasizes itself in opposition to the quantitative.—
In Direct Ratio the variation of both sides is the single altera-
tion only ofthe Quantum which the unit (the common element)
is supposed to be; one side is increased or decreased in the
same proportion as is the other; the Ratio itself is indifferent
to this variation, which remains ET But in Inverse Ratio
the variation, although likewise arbitrary according to the
indifferent quantitative moment, is contained within the Ratio;
and even this arbitrary quantitative overpassing is circum-
scribed by a limit, namely, the negative determinateness of
the exponent.

2. This qualitative nature of Indirect Ratio must be further
considered—in its realization; and the complication of the
affirmative with the negative which it contains must be
analysed.—Quantum is posited as qualitatively determining
Quantum, that is, itself, as representing itself in itself as its
own limit. Thus, first, it is an immediate magnitude as simple
determinateness; it is the whole as existent and affirmative
Quantum. Secondly, however, this immediate determinateness
is also limit; and hence it is differentiated into two Quanta,
which stand primarily in the relation of Other to each other;
—but, since it is their qualitative and their complete deter-
minateness, it is the unity of Unit and Amount; it is product,
and they are its factors. Thus partly the exponent of their
ratio is identical with itself in them and is their affirmative,
and thus they are Quanta; and partly, as negation posited
in them, it is the element of unity in them, according to which

VOL. I


338 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


each is an immediate and limited Quantum, and limited in
such a way that it is identical with its Other only in itself.
Thirdly, as simple determinateness, it is the negative unity of
this its differentiation into two Quanta and the limit of their
reciprocal limitation.

According to these determinations, the two moments limit
each other in the exponent; and since the exponent is their
determinate unity, each is the negative of the other; one
increases in the same ratio in which the other decreases; each
has its magnitude in so far as it is in contact with the magnitude
of the other and is what the other lacks. Thus each negatively
continues itself into the other; it cancels its own Amount in
the other, and is what it is only by virtue of the negation or
limit which the other posits in it. Thus each contains and has
its measure in the other, for each is to be only that Quantum
which the other is not; the magnitude of the other is indis-
pensable to the value of each, and therefore inseparable from it.

This continuity of one in the other constitutes the moment
of unity by which they form a Ratio,—or the one determinate-
ness and simple limit which is the exponent. This unity, the
whole, constitutes the Being-in-Self of each, which is distinct
from their magnitude as it is found: according to the latter,
each exists only in so far as it withdraws from the other part
of their common Being-in-Self or whole. But it can withdraw
from the other only as much as makes it equal to this Being-
in-Self; it has its maximum in the exponent, which, according
to the second determination which we indicated, is the limit
of their reciprocal limitation. And since each is moment of
the Ratio only in so far as it limits the other and therefore is
limited by it, it loses this its determination by equating itself
with its Being-in-Self; in it not only the other magnitude
becomes nought, but it vanishes itself, since it is not mere
Quantum, but is to be what it is as such only as being such
a moment of the Ratio. Thus each side is the contradiction
of the determination as their Being-in-Self, that is, of the unity
of the whole (which is the exponent), and of the determination
as moment of the Ratio: and this contradiction is once more
infinity in a new and peculiar form.

The exponent is limit of the sides of its Ratio, within which
they increase and decrease relatively to each other; and accord-


THE QUANTITATIVE RATIO 339


ing to the affirmative determinateness which the exponent
(as Quantum) is, neither can become equal to it. As limit
thus of their reciprocal limitation, it is (a) their Beyond, to
which they can approximate infinitely; but they cannot reach
it. This infinity in which they approximate to it is the bad
infinity of the infinite progress; this itself is finite, and has its
barrier in its opposite, in the finitude of the two sides and of
the exponent; it, therefore, is only approximation. But (8) bad
infinity is here also posited as what in truth it is, namely as
the merely negative moment in general, according to which
the exponent is simple limit as Being-in-Self in relation to the
distinct Quanta of the Ratio; their finitude is referred to this
as to a pure variable, although it remains quite distinct from
them as their negation. This infinite, to which they can but
approximate, further is found and is present as affirmative
Hither: this is the simple Quantum of the exponent. Here the
Beyond is reached with which the sides of the Ratio are tainted :
it is in itself the unity of both and, therefore, in itself the other
side of each; for each only counts for as much as the other
does not, and thus the whole determinateness of each resides
in the other; and this their Being-in-Self is, as affirmative
infinity, simply the exponent.

- 3. But now the result is that Inverse Ratio has passed over
into a determination different from that which it had at first.
The determination was, that a Quantum (as immediate) is
related also to another Quantum in such a manner that it is
greater in the proportion in which the other is smaller, that
it is what it is by virtue of its negative attitude to the other;
and similarly a third magnitude is the common barrier of this
their increase. Here this variation (as opposed to the Qualita-
tive as fixed limit) is their peculiarity: they have the deter-
mination of variable magnitudes, having this fixed limit as an
infinite Beyond.

We have found and must coordinate the determinations that
this infinite Beyond exists as a present and finite (but optional)
Quantum; and, further, that its fixity (by virtue of which it
is thus related to the quantitative as infinite Beyond) which is
the qualitative element of Being only as abstract self-relation,
has developed itself with itself as mediation of itself in its
Other, namely the finite moments of the Ratio. The universal


340 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


part of this is contained in the fact that the whole as exponent
is the limit of the reciprocal limitation of the two members;
thus negation of negation and, therefore, infinity (an affirma-
tive attitude to itself) is posited. A closer determination is, that
in itself the exponent is product and, therefore, unity of Unit
` and Amount, whereas each of the two members is only one of
these moments; it, therefore, includes them, and in them (as
containing them) relates itself to itself. But in Inverse Ratio
the difference develops into the externality of quantitative
Being; and the Qualitative is not merely what is fixed or
immediately includes the moments, but is found coalescing
with itself in self-external otherness. It is this determination
which manifests itself as result in the moments which we
discovered. For the exponent is found to be Being-in-Self, the
moments of which are realized in Quanta and in their vari-
ability in general; the indifference of their magnitudes in
their variation manifests itself as infinite progress, and this is
based upon the fact that in their indifference it is their deter-
minateness that they have their value in the value of an other.
Thus (a) in the affirmative aspect of their Quantum they are,
in themselves, the whole of the exponent. Equally, (8) their
negative moment, for their reciprocal limitation, is the mag-
nitude of the exponent; their limit is that of the exponent.
The infinite progress of their determinate existence and of their
limitation, and the negation of any particular value, implies
that they have no other immanent limit or fixed immediacy.
This negation, therefore, is the negation of the self-externality
of the exponent which is represented in them; and the exponent
(taken as Quantum in general and as analysed into Quanta)
is posited as that which preserves itself amid the negation of
their indifferent persistence and collapses into itself, and, there-
fore, as the determinant of any such transition beyond itself,

Hence Ratio has come to be determined as the Ratio of
Powers.


Cc
THE RATIO OF POWERS
1. Quantum, which in its other-being identifies itself with


itself and determines its self-overpassing, has reached Being-
for-Self. It is thus qualitative totality, and, positing itself as


THE QUANTITATIVE RATIO 341


_ developed, it has for moments the conceptual determinations

_ of number—Unit and Amount. Even in Inverse Ratio the
latter is a multitude determined, not by the former as such,
but from without by a third element: now it is posited as
determined only by the former. This happens in the Ratio
of Powers, where Unit, which in itself is Amount, is also Amount
relatively to itself as Unit. Other-being, the Amount of Units,
is Unit itself. Power is a multitude of Units each of which
itself is this multitude. Quantum as indifferent determinate-
ness varies; but where this variation means raising to a power,
this its other-being is limited purely by itself—Thus in Power
Quantum is posited as having returned upon itself: it is
immediately itself and also its other-being.

The exponent of this Ratio no longer is an immediate
Quantum as in Direct and also in Inverse Ratio. In the Ratio
of Powers it is of a wholly qualitative nature; it is the simple
determinateness that Amount here is Unit and that Quantum
in its other-being is self-identical. This also contains the aspect
of its quantitative nature, which is, that limit or negation is
not posited as existing immediately, but that Determinate
Being is posited as continued into its otherness; for the true
nature of quality is this, that it is quantity (or immediate
determinateness in so far as it is transcended).

2. Ratio of Powers first appears as an external variation
applied to any Quantum; but it has this closer connexion with
the concept of Quantum, that Quantum, in that Determinate
Existence into which it has developed in this Ratio, reaches
and completely realizes this concept: this Ratio represents what
Quantum is in itself, and expresses its determinateness or
quality by which it is distinct from anything else. Quantum
is determinateness indifferent and posited as transcended ; that
is, determinateness as limit which also is no limit, and continues
itself into its otherness, and consequently remains self-identical.
It is thus posited in the Ratio of Powers, and its other-being
or self-overpassing into another Quantum is determined by
itself.

If we compare the progress of this realization in the Ratios
with which we have dealt hitherto, then the quality of Quan-
tum to be its own posited self-difference, is just this, that it
is Ratio. As Direct Ratio it is, as such posited difference, only


342 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


general or immediate, so that its self-relation, which, as ex-
ponent, it possesses in relation to its differences, counts only as
the fixity of an Amount of Units. In Inverse Ratio, Quantum in
its negative determination is an attitude of itself to itself,—to
itself as its own negation, wherein, however, it has its value; as
affirmative self-relation it is an exponent, which, as Quantum,
is the determinant of its moments only in itself. But in the Ratio
of Powers it is present in the difference, because the difference
is a self-difference. Externality of determinateness is the quality
of Quantum; and according to its concept this externality is
posited as its self-determination, as its self-relation and its
Quality.

3. But Quantum, being now posited as it is in accordance
with its concept, has passed over into another determination.
This might also be expressed thus—that its determination is
its determinateness, and its Being-in-Self its Determinate Being.
It is Quantum in so far as the externality or indifference of
determinateness (which means that it is that, as the phrase
goes, which can be increased or diminished) counts and is
posited only simply or immediately; and it has become its
Other (namely Quality) in so far as this externality is now
posited as mediated by Quantum and as being such a moment
as refers itself in it to itself and is Being as Quality.

Thus first Quantity as such appears as opposed to Quality.
But Quantity is itself a quality; it is self-relating determinate-
ness in general, distinct from that determinateness which is
other to it, namely Quality as such. But it is not only a
quality: the truth of Quality itself is Quantity, and the former
has manifested itself as passing over into the latter. On the
other hand, Quantity in its truth is externality which has
returned to itself and is not indifferent. And thus it is Quality
itself, and, outside this determination, Quality as such would
be nothing.—In order that the totality may be posited, the
twofold transition is required,—not only the transition of one
determinateness into its other, but also the transition of the
latter into the former, its regress into the first. The first tran-
sition gives us only the identity in itself of both ;—Quality is
contained in Quantity, but so far Quantity is a one-sided
determinateness. It is the result of the second transition that,
conversely, Quantity is contained in Quality, and that it too


THE QUANTITATIVE RATIO 343


exists only as having been transcended. This is the regress into
the first. This observation upon the necessity of the twofold
transition is of great importance for the whole scientific method.

Now Quantum no longer is indifferent or external deter-
mination, but, as such, is transcended, and is Quality, and is
that by virtue of which something is what it is: this is the truth
of Quantum, and this is Measure.


Observation


It has been explained above, in the Observations upon the
Quantitative Infinite, that this and the difficulties which result
have their origin in the qualitative moment which manifests
itself in the quantitative; and further, how especially the
qualitative moment of the Ratio of Powers runs into manifold
developments and complexities. It was shown that the funda-
mental flaw which prevented the concept from being appre-
hended was, that a halt was made at the negative deter-
mination of the infinite (where it is negation of Quantum),
and that no progress was made to the simple affırmative
determination which states that this is the qualitative. —Here
it only remains to remark upon the intrusion, in philosophy,
of quantitative forms into the pure qualitative forms of thought.
The Ratio of Powers has especially been applied in recent
times to conceptual determinations. The concept in its imme-
diacy was called first power, in its other-being or difference (the
Determinate Being of its moments) it was called second power,
and in its return upon itself or totality, third power—Here it
is immediately evident that Power thus employed is a category
essentially belonging to Quantum: this Power is not meant
as potentia, the dvvayis of Aristotle. The Ratio of Powers thus
expresses determinateness as reaching its truth in Difference,
as Difference exists in the special notion of Quantum, but not as
it exists in the Notion as such. Quantum does not yet by any
means possess that negativity which belongs to the nature of
the Notion, as posited in its peculiar determination: differences
which are proper to Quantum are superficial determina-
tions for the Notion itself, and are far from being determinate
as they are determinate in the Notion. It was in the child-
hood of philosophic thought that numbers were used (as by


344 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Pythagoras) to designate universal and essential distinctions;
and here first, second, or other Powers are in no way better
than numbers. This was a rudimentary form of pure thinking
comprehension; the determinations of thought themselves were
not discovered—that is, brought to consciousness for themselves
—till after Pythagoras. To return from these to numerical
determinations is the part of thought which knows its impotence
and, in opposition to what our philosophic culture—no stranger
to determinations of thought—had reached, commits the
further folly of trying to vindicate this weakness as something
new, superior, and in the line of progress.

In so far as Powers are used only as a symbolical expression,
they are unobjectionable, just as much as are numbers and
other symbols of concepts,—but also they are as objectionable
as all symbolism whatever which attempts to represent pure
conceptual or philosophic determinations. Philosophy needs
no such help either from the sensible world or from active
imagination or from subordinate fields of philosophical specu-
lation, the determinations of which, therefore, are unfitted
for higher spheres and for the whole. The latter happens
whenever categories of the finite are applied to the infinite;
the common determinations of force, or substantiality, cause
and effect, and others, are themselves too only symbols used
to express other relations, like vital and spiritual relations;
that is, they are untrue determinations of those relations, and
still more so are Powers of Quantum and numbered powers,
both for such and for speculative relations generally.—If
numbers, powers, the mathematical infinite, and the like are
to be used not as symbols but as forms for philosophic deter-
minations and hence themselves as philosophic forms, then
first of all their philosophic meaning, that is, their conceptual
determinateness, must be demonstrated. If this is done, they
are superfluous designations: the conceptual determinateness
designates itself, and its own is the only correct and fitting
designation. The use of these forms is, therefore, nothing but
a convenient means of escaping the trouble of seizing, pro-
claiming, and justifying the conceptual determinations.


SECTION THREE
MEASURE


ABSTRACTLY the statement may be made that in Measure
Quality and Quantity are united. Being as such is the imme-
diate self-identity of determinateness. This immediacy of
determinateness has transcended itself. Quantity is Being
which has returned upon itself in such a manner that
it is simple self-identity as indifference to determinateness.
But this indifference is merely externality—possessing its
determinateness not in itself but in an Other. Thirdly, there
is self-relating externality: as self-relation it is also transcended
externality and has in itself its own difference from itself. This
difference as externality is the quantitative moment, and, as
having returned to itself, the qualitative moment.

Modality is enumerated among the categories of transcendental
idealism after Quantity and Quality, and where Relation is
inserted ; so that it may be mentioned here. The category there
means that it is the relation of the object to thought. In this
idealism thought is essentially external to the thing-in-itself.
In so far as other categories have only the transcendental
determination of belonging to consciousness as its objective
element, modality, which is the category of relation to the
subject, to this extent relatively contains the determination
of intro-reflection; that is, objectivity, which is stated to be
a quality of the other categories, is lacking in the categories
of modality; and these (in Kant’s expression) do not in the
least add to the concept as determination of the object, but
only express the relation to the possibility of cognition (Critique
of Pure Reason, 2nd Ed., see pp. 99, 266).—The categories
which Kant groups under Modality—Possibility, Actuality, and
Necessity—will occur later in their place; that infinitely
important triple form was not applied by Kant—for with
him it appeared only as a formal flash of light—to the
genera of his categories (Quantity, Quality, etc.); and this
name too he applied only to their species. It was impossible for


346 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


him, therefore, to find the third member for Quality and
Quantity.

With Spinoza, too, the Mode is third after Substance and
Attribute: he declares that the Mode is the afections of Sub-
stance, or is that element in an Other by virtue of which it
is comprehended. According to this concept this third element
is only externality as such; and indeed it has been mentioned
elsewhere that in Spinoza in general rigid substantiality lacks
the return into itself.

The observation here made extends more generally to those
systems of Pantheism upon which thought has done its elabo-
rating work. Being, the One, Substance, the Infinite, or Essence,
is the first; in opposition to this abstract element the second,
namely every kind cf determinateness, can equally abstractly
be grouped as that which is merely finite, accidental, perish-
able, unessential, and non-essential; and this is the next and
ordinary step in purely formal thought. But the connexion of
the second with the first makes itself so evident that both must
needs be taken as one unity; and thus with Spinoza the
Attribute is the whole Substance, that is, as taken by Under-
standing—itself a limitation or Mode: and Mode (which is the
non-substantial in general which can be understood only from
an Other) is thus the other extreme for Substance, the third
in general. Indian Pantheism in all its monstrous imagination
has also, taken abstractly, received this elaboration; this is the
tempering thread which leads through its riot to this point
of moderate interest, that Brahma, the One of abstract thought,
passes through the shape of Vishnu (especially in the form
of Krishna) to the third form, Siva. The determination of this
third is Mode, change, arising and passing away, the field of
externality in general. If this Indian triad has led to a com-
parison with the Christian, it must be recognized that they
have a common element of conceptual determination; but it
is essential that the difference be more definitely brought to
consciousness: the difference is not only infinite, but true
infinity constitutes the difference itself. According to its deter-
mination this third principle is the explosion of substantial
unity into its opposite, and not its return to itself,—the non-
spiritual, not Spirit. In the true triad not only unity is found,
but harmony—the consummation of a pregnant and real unity,


MEASURE 347


_ which in its wholly concrete determination is Spirit. The
principle of Mode and change does not indeed exclude unity :
thus with Spinoza the Mode as such is the false, and Substance
alone is the true, and everything must be reduced to it; which
is a jettison of all content into the void, into a unity merely
formal and without content; and similarly, Siva once more
is the great whole, not distinct from Brahma: it is Brahma
itself; that is, the difference and the determinateness vanish
again, but are neither preserved nor transcended; unity is
not led back to concrete unity, nor dissension to reconciliation.
The highest goal for man transplanted into the sphere of
arising and passing away, of modality in general, is submer-
sion into unconsciousness, unity with Brahma, annihilation,
which is the same as the Buddhist Nirvana, Nibbana, and so
forth.

The Mode is abstract externality in general and indifference
to qualitative and to quantitative determinations; and in
essence what is external and unessential should not matter;
but on the other hand it is often admitted that all depends
upon the how and why. The Mode is thus declared essentially
to belong to the substantial part of a thing. This very indefinite
relation contains at least this, that this external part is the
external not quite so abstractly.—

The Mode here has the definite meaning of Measure.
Spinoza’s Mode, like the Indian principle of Change, is the
measureless. The Greek idea, though indeterminate as yet,
that everything has a Measure (which led Parmenides to
introduce, after abstract Leing, Necessity as the ancient Limit
imposed on all things), is the beginning of a much higher
concept than that contained in Substance and the difference
between Mode and Substance.

When more fully developed and reflected, Measure becomes
Necessity; Fate and Nemesis were generally limited to the
determinateness of Measure, which meant that what is pre-
sumptuous, or grows too high and great, is reduced to the
other extreme by being brought down to annihilation, and
that thus the mean of Measure, mediocrity, is restored.—
“The Absolute, or God, is the Measure of all things” is a
definition not more strongly pantheistic but infinitely more
true than “the Absolute, or God, is Being.”—Measure is


348 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


indeed an external way or manner, a more or less, but it is
also reflected into itself, and is a determinateness not merely
indifferent and external, but existing in itself. It is thus the
concrete truth of Being; and, therefore, mankiad has revered in
Measure something inviolable and holy.

The idea of Essence is already contained in Measure, namely
that it is identical with itself in the immediacy of determinate-
ness, so that this self-identity reduces the immediacy to a
mediate; and also this mediate is mediated only through this
externality, but is self-mediation; it is the reflection whose
determinations are, but, thus being, exist only as moments of
their negative unity. The qualitative is quantitative in Measure:
determinateness or difference is indifferent, and, therefore, the
difference is no difference, it is transcended: and this quanti-
tativity, as return upon self, where it exists as the qualitative,
constitutes that Being-in-and-for-Self which is Essence. But
Measure is Essence only in itself or in the concept; and this
concept of Measure has not yet been posited. Measure, while
it is Measure, is the existent unity of the qualitative and the
quantitative: its moments are as a Determinate Being, a
Quality and its Quanta, which are inseparable only in them-
selves at first, but have not yet the meaning of this reflected
determination. The development of Measure contains the
differentiation of these moments, but also their relation, so
that the identity which they are in themselves becomes their
mutual relation, that is, is posited as such. The meaning of
this development is the realization of Measure, where it posits
itself as being related to itself and hence as a moment. This
mediation determines it as being transcended; its immediacy
and the immediacy of its moments disappear, and they exist
as being reflected; and Measure, which thus has manifested
itself as being what it is according to its concept, has passed
over into Essence.

Measure now is immediate unity of the Qualitative and the
Quantitative. Thus :—

first, it is a Quantum having qualitative meaning, and,
therefore, existing as Measure. The process of further deter-
mination is, that the difference of its moments (qualitative and
quantitative determinateness) appears in this self-determined
entity. These moments further determine themselves as each a


MEASURE 349


whole Measure, which thus is independent; and, these being
essentially related to one another, Measure becomes,

secondly, the relation of Specific Quanta as independent
Measures. But at the same time their independence essentially
is based on quantitative ratio and magnitudinal difference;
thus their independence becomes a reciprocal transition.
Consequently Measure perishes in the measureless.—But this
Beyond of Measure is its negativity only in itself; hence,

thirdly, the indifference of determinations of Measure is
posited; and Measure (as real by virtue of the negativity
which it contains) is posited as the Inverse Ratio of Measures,
which, as independent Qualities, are essentially based only
upon their Quantity and their negative relation to one another;
they thus turn out to be no more than moments of their truly
independent unity, which is their intro-reflection and ‘its
positing, that is, Essence.

The development of Measure which has been attempted in
what follows is exceedingly difficult; it starts from immediate,
external Measure, and should, therefore, on the one hand,
proceed to the abstract further determination of the Quanti-
tative (a natural mathematics), and, on the other, demonstrate
the connexion between this Measure-determination and the
Qualities of natural objects, at least in a general manner; for
the exact demonstration of the connexion between Qualitative
and Quantitative which arises from the concept of the concrete
object belongs to the special science of the concrete,—examples
of which may be looked up in the Encyclopaedia of the Philo-
sophical Sciences, 3rd Ed. §§ 267 and 270, Observations on the
Law of Gravity and that of free celestial motion. We may
here observe generally that the various forms in which Measure
realizes itself belong also to different spheres of natural reality.
The complete and abstract indifference of developed Measure,
that is, of its laws, can occur only in the sphere of Mechanism
where the concrete corporeal is only matter, abstract itself;
its qualitative differences essentially have the Quantitative for
their determinateness; Space and Time are themselves pure
externalities, and the multitude of materials or masses, the
intensity of weight, are also external determinations having
their peculiar determinateness in the Quantitative. However,
such magnitudinal determinateness of the abstractly material


350 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


is marred by plurality, and hence by a conflict of qualities,
in the physical and even more in the organic sphere. And here
not merely the conflict of qualities as such operates, but
Measure is subordinated to higher relations, and the immanent
development of Measure is reduced to the simple form of
Immediate Measure. The members of the animal organism
have a Measure which, as a simple Quantum, is in a ratio
to other Quanta of the other members: the proportions of the
human body are fixed ratios of such Quanta; and natural
science has much to discover of the connexion of such mag-
nitudes with the organic functions, on which they wholly
depend. But Motion is the nearest example of the reduction
of an immanent Measure to a magnitude merely externally
determined. In the celestial bodies it is free motion determined
only by the concept, and, therefore, its magnitudes also depend
on it alone (see above); but it is reduced from organic to
arbitrary or mechanically regular motion, that is, to an alto-
gether abstract, formal motion.

And in the realm of Spirit a peculiar and free development
of Measure takes place even less. It is evident, for instance,
that a republican constitution, like that of Athens, or an
aristocratic constitution tempered by democracy, can exist
only where the State has a certain magnitude, and that in
developed civic society aggregates of individuals belonging to
different trades are in a certain relation to one another; but
this yields neither laws of Measure nor peculiar forms of it.
In the realm of Spirit as such differences occur of intensity
of character, strength of imagination, of feelings, of conceptions,
and so on; but determination does not pass beyond this
indeterminate concept of strength or weakness. And it is
realized how poor and wholly void, in the end, are these
so-called laws which are set up about the relation of strength
and weakness of sensations, images, and so on, when the
psychologies are examined which labour on these matters.


CHAPTERI
THE SPECIFIC QUANTITY


QUALITATIVE Quantity is, firstly, an immediate specific
Quantum; this,

secondly, is in a relation to another, and therefore becomes
a quantitative specifying, a transcendence of indifferent
Quantum. This Measure thus is a Rule, and contains, un-
synthetized, the two moments of Measure, namely, self-existent
quantitative determinateness and external Quantum. But being
thus held apart the two sides become Qualities, and the Rule
becomes a relation between them; hence Measure manifests
itself,

thirdly, as a Relation of Qualities, which have first One
Measure; later on, this specifies itself as an internal difference
of Measure.


A
THE SPECIFIC QUANTUM


1. Measure is the simple self-relation of Quantum, its own
determinateness determined by itself: thus Quantum exists
qualitatively. And first, as immediate Measure, it is an imme-
diate Quantum, determined accordingly as being just any
Quantum; and the Quality belonging to it is similarly imme-
diate and is determined similarly—Thus Quantum, as being
this no longer indifferent limit, but a self-relating externality,
is itself Quality; and being differentiated from Quality it does
not pass beyond it, nor does Quality pass beyond Quantum.
It is thus determinateness which has returned into simple
self-identity ; it is one with Determinate Being as Determinate
Being is one with its Quantum.

If the determination which has been reached is to be for-
mulated, it may be expressed in the proposition that everything
which exists has a Measure. All Determinate Being has a mag-
nitude, and this magnitude belongs to the nature of Something
itself; it constitutes its determinate nature and Being-in-Self.


952 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Something is not indifferent to this magnitude, nor does it
remain unchanged when the latter changes: a change in the
magnitude would change its quality. As Measure, Quantum
has ceased to be a limit which is no limit; it now is a deter-
mination of the Thing in such a manner that an increase or
decrease in this Quantum would destroy it.—

A Measure as standard in the ordinary sense is a Quantum
which is arbitrarily taken as Unit, determinate by itself, against
an external Amount. Such a unit can, of course, also be a unit
determinate by itself in fact, like a foot and other original
measures; but, in so far as it is also used as standard for other
things, it is for them an external and not their original
Measure.—In this way the diameter of the earth or the length
of the pendulum may be taken as specific Quantum for itself.
But what fraction of the diameter of the earth or length of the
pendulum is taken, and the degree of latitude under which the
latter is taken when it is to be used as standard,—this is
arbitrary. And for other things such a standard is still more
something external. These have specified the general specific
Quantum in yet another particular manner, and have thereby
become particular things. It is, therefore, foolish to speak of
a natural standard of things. Moreover, a general standard
is designed to serve only for external comparison; and in this
most superficial meaning, where it is taken as General Measure,
it is quite indifferent what is used as Measure. It is not meant
to be a fundamental Measure, which would mean that in it
the natural Measures of particular things would be represented
and would hence, according to a Rule, be recognized as speci-
fications of a universal Measure, the Measure of their universal
body. But without this meaning an absolute standard is
interesting and significant only as being common to all; and
such a common element is universal not in itself, but only by
convention.

This immediate Measure is a simple magnitudinal deter-
mination, like the magnitude (for example) of organic beings,
of their members, etc. But everything that exists has a mag-
nitude which makes it what it is and allows it to have Deter-
minate Being. —As Quantum it is an indifferent magnitude,
open to external determination and capable of oscillation along
the scale of more and less. But, as Measure, it is also distinct


THE SPECIFIC QUANTITY 353


from itself as Quantum (which is such an indifferent deter-
mination), and is a limitation of this indifferent oscillation
along a limit.

In Determinate Being quantitative determinateness thus is
double; first, Quality is bound to it, but, secondly, oscillation
may take place along it and Quality yet survive. It thus comes
about that whatever has a Measure may perish when its
Quantum is varied. In a manner this destruction appears
unexpected in so far as changes can be made in Quantum
while Measure and Quality are unchanged; and yet it can
be made quite intelligible—for it is gradual. Recourse is so
readily made to this category in order to render intelligible
to the eye or to the mind the disappearance of a Quality or
of something; for thus the illusion is created that one can
almost be eye-witness of disappearance; for, Quantum being
posited as limit external and variable by its very nature,
change (as a change of Quantum only) needs no explanation.
But in fact nothing is thereby explained; the change is also
essentially the transition of one Quality into another, or (a
more abstract transition) of one existence into a non-existence;
and this contains a determination different from that of
“gradual,” which is only a decrease or increase and a one-
sided retention of magnitude.

2. But already the ancients were aware of the connexion
by which a change appearing as merely quantitative turns
into one which is qualitative, and they illustrated the con-
fusions which arise from ignorance of this connexion by popular
examples; the well-known éAcyxoi called those of the Bald and
of the Heap belong here; these (according to Aristotle) are
devices to compel the assertion of the contradictory of a first
assertion. The question was, whether (for example) the re-
moval of one hair from a head, or from a horse’s tail, produced
baldness; or whether a heap ceased to be a heap after the
removal of one grain. This could be denied without hesitation,
for such a removal constitutes a wholly negligible quantitative
difference; and thus one hair or grain is removed, and this
is repeated, one only being removed after each acquiescence:
there appears at last the qualitative change,—the head (or
tail) is bare, the heap has vanished. At each acquiescence not
only the repetition was forgotten, but also the fact that the

VOL. I M


354 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


quantities negligible in themselves (like disbursements neg-
ligible in themselves from a capital) add up, and that the sum
forms the qualitative whole, which, therefore, at the end has
vanished: the head is bald, and the purse empty.

The embarrassment and contradiction which result are no
sophism in the ordinary meaning of the term: this contradic-
tion is not vicious nor illusory. The error is committed by the
Other which was assumed, namely by ordinary consciousness,
when it takes a quantity as a merely indifferent limit, that is,
precisely, in the definite meaning of a Quantity. This assump-
tion is upset by the truth to which it is led, namely, that it
is a moment of Measure and is connected with Quality: what
is refuted is the one-sided clinging to abstract determinateness
of Quantum.— And therefore these divagations are no idle and
pedantic joke; they are in themselves correct and the product
of a consciousness which takes an interest in the phenomena
which occur in thought.

Quantum when it is taken as indifferent limit is that side
from which a Determinate Being can unsuspectedly be attacked
and destroyed. It is the cunning of the Notion to seize it from this
side, where its Quality does not appear to come into play ;—
and this so much so that the aggrandizement of a State or of
a property, and so on, which leads in the end to disaster for
the State or the owner of the property, may at first actually
appear as their good fortune.

3. Measure in its immediacy is an ordinary Quality of a
determinate magnitude belonging to it. Now that side accord-
ing to which Quantum is indifferent limit along which oscilla-
tion can take place while the Quality remains unchanged,
is also different from its other side, according to which it is
qualitative or specific. Both are magnitudinal determinations
of one and the same thing; but, further, this difference must
be taken as immediate in accordance with the immediacy in
which Measure first is found : hence the two sides have different
existences. The existence of Measure, then, which is magnitude
determinate in itself, is, in its attitude to the existence of the
variable and external side, a transcendence of its indifference ;
it is a specifying of Measure.


THE SPECIFIC QUANTITY 355


B


SPECIFYING MEASURE
This is
firstly, a Rule, a Measure external to mere Quantum;
secondly, Specific Quantity, determining external Quantum;
thirdly, both sides, as Qualities of specific quantitative
determinateness, are related to one another as One Measure.


(a) THE RULE


Rule, or Standard (which has already been spoken of), is
first a magnitude determinate in itself; it is Unit with reference
to a Quantum, which is a particular existence, existing in a
Something other than the Something ofthe Rule, and measured
by the Rule, that is, determined as Amount of that Unit which
is the Rule. This comparison is an external activity, and the
Unit is an arbitrary magnitude, which in turn can be posited
as Amount (the foot as an Amount of inches). But Measure
is not only external Rule, but being specific it must also in
itself be related to an Other which is a Quantum.


(b) THE SPECIFYING MEASURE


Measure is a specific determining of external magnitude,
that is, of the indifferent magnitude which is posited by some
other existence in general in the Something of Measure ; Measure
is itself a Quantum, but, as distinguished from this, it is the
qualitative element determining merely indifferent and external
Quantum. Something has in it that side of Being-for-Other
to which indifferent increase and decrease is proper. This
immanent mensor is a Quality of Something, to which the
same Quality in another Something is opposed; but in the
latter the Quantum is relatively measureless as opposed to
the former Quality which is determined as mensor.

In so far ¿s Something is a Measure in itself, a change in
the magnitude of its Quality is external, and does not make
of it an arithmetical plurality. But its Measure reacts against
it, is in the relation of an intensive to this plurality, and
assimilates it in a peculiar manner; it changes the change
which is externally posited, makes this Quantum another, and,


356 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


by means of this Specification, manifests itself in this externality

„as Being-for-Self.—The plurality which is specifically assimi-

lated is itself a Quantum, dependent upon the other plurality,
which also remains merely external to it. The specified plurality

is consequently also variable; but it is not, therefore, a Quan-

tum as such, but is external Quantum specified in a constant

manner. Thus Measure has its determinate being as Ratio,

and its specific element is in general the exponent of this

Ratio.

It was seen, when these determinations were being con-
sidered, that in Intensive and Extensive Quantum it is one
and the same Quantum which we find, in one case in the
form of intensity, and in the other in the form of extensity.
In this difference the basic Quantum undergoes no change:
the difference is only an external form. On the other hand, in
Specifying Measure, Quantum in the first case exists in its
immediate magnitude, but in the second is taken (by virtue
of the exponent of the Ratio) in another Amount.

The exponent, which constitutes the specific element, might
at first appear to be a fixed Quantum, as being the quotient
of the ratio between the external and the qualitatively deter-
minate term. But then it would be nothing but an external
Quantum; by exponent nothing must here be understood but
the qualitative moment itself which specifies the Quantum as
such. The properly immanent qualitative element of Quantum
is (as was seen above) only the Determination of Power. This
it must be which constitutes the ratio, and which here, as the
self-existent determination, has opposed Quantum as being
external modification. The principle of Quantum is the numeri-
cal One, which constitutes its determinateness-in-itself; and the
relation of the numerical One is external; and the change
(which is determined only by the nature ofimmediate Quantum
as such) consists in itself in the addition of such a numerical
One, of yet another, and so on. Thus external Quantum
changes in arithmetical progression; and thus the specifying
reaction of the qualitative nature of Measure produces another
series, which is related to the first and increases and decreases
with it, but in a ratio which is not determined by a numerical
exponent, but is incommensurable with a number, according
to a determination of powers.


: THE SPECIFIC QUANTITY 357


Observation


Temperature—to cite an example—is a Quality where these
two sides, of being external and specified Quantum, are dis-
tinguished. As Quantum it is external temperature (even that
of a body as the general medium), of which it is assumed
that its change moves along the scale of arithmetical pro-
gression, and that it increases or decreases uniformly ; whereas
it is absorbed in a different manner by the different individual
bodies which it includes, since these, by virtue of their immanent
Measure, determine the temperature which they receive from
without, and the change in the temperature of any one does
not correspond. directly with that of the medium or of any
other. Different bodies, compared under the same temperature,
give relative numbers of their specific heats, of their capacities
- for heat. But these capacities of bodies vary under different
temperatures, and thus a change in the specific configuration
is introduced. Hence a particular specification manifests itself
in the increase or decrease of temperature. The relation of
the temperature which is imagined as external, to the tem-
perature of a given body, which also depends upon the former,
has no fixed exponent of ratio; the increase or decrease of
this heat does not progress uniformly with the increase or
decrease of external heat.—A temperature is here assumed
which is altogether external, and changes quite externally or
purely quantitatively. But the temperature is itself the tem-
perature of air or some other specific temperature. More closely
considered, therefore, the ratio would really have to be taken
not as the relation between a merely quantitative and a
qualifying Quantum, but between two specific Quanta. And
indeed Specifying Ratio will immediately proceed to determine
itself in such a manner that the moments of Measure do not
consist only of two sides of one and the same Quality, a
quantitative side and a side qualifying the Quantum, but of
the relation between two Qualities which in themselves are
Measures.


(c) RELATION oF BOTH SIDES As QUALITIES


1. The qualitative and self-determinate side of Quantum
exists only as relation to the externally quantitative; as its


358 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


specification it is the transcendence of its externality, by virtue
of which Quantum exists as such; thus it logically depends
on, and begins from, Quantum. But Quantum differs from
Quality itself also in a qualitative manner; and this difference
between the two must be posited in the immediacy of Being in
general, which as yet is still the sphere of Measure: the two
sides are thus qualitatively related to each other, and each
for itself is such a Determinate Being; and the one Quantum
(as yet formal and not determinate in itself) is the Quantum
of a Something and of its Quality, and also is the specific
magnitude of these qualities, since it is the case that their
mutual relation has proceeded to the determination of Measure
in general. These Qualities are related to each other according
to the determination of Measure, and this determination is
their exponent; but they are so related in themselves already
in the Being-for-Self of Measure: in its double existence
Quantum is both external and specific, so that each of the
different Quantities has this double determination in itself and
also is absolutely interlocked with the other: it is just in this
alone that the Qualities are determinate. Thus they are not
only determinate existences existing for each other, but they
are posited as inseparable, and the magnitudinal determinate-
ness connected with them is a qualitative unity—one deter-
mination of Measure in which, according to their concept,
they cohere. Measure is thus the immanent quantitative mutual
attitude of two Qualities.

2. In Measure the essential determination of variable mag-
nitude appears, for Measure is Quantum as transcended, that
is, no longer as that which it is supposed to be in order to
be Quantum, but as Quantum and also something else; this
Other is the Qualitative, and, as was determined, nothing else
than its Ratio of Powers. This change is not yet posited in
immediate Measure: any Quantum (and in fact one individual
Quantum) is there connected with the one Quality. But in
the Specifying of Measure (the preceding determination) as
a changing of merely external Quantum by means of the
Qualitative, a difference is posited between the two magni-
tudinal determinatenesses, and thus a plurality of Measures
in a common external Quantum; and Quantum shows itself
as existing Measure only here where it is differentiated from


THE SPECIFIC QUANTITY 359


itself, for here it is manifested both as one and the same
(e.g. the same temperature of the medium) and also as different
(quantitative) Determinate Being (in the different temperatures
of the bodies contained in the medium). This differentiation
of Quantum in the different Qualities (the different bodies)
gives another form of Measure, namely the one where both
sides are mutually related as Quanta qualitatively determined:
this might be called Realized Measure.

Magnitude as magnitude in general is variable, for its
determinateness is a limit which also is no limit; variation
then affects only a particular Quantum, for which another
is substituted. But the true change is the change of Quantum
as such; this leads to the determination, interesting if taken
in this way, of the variable magnitude of higher mathematics:
here no halt must be made at the mere form of variability
in general, nor must any other determination be introduced
than the simple determination of the concept, according to
which the Other of Quantum is only the Qualitative. Thus
the true determination of real variable magnitude is that it is
magnitude qualitatively determined, that is (as has sufficiently
been shown) determined by a Ratio of Powers: in this variable
magnitude it is posited that Quantum is counted not as such,
but according to its other, or qualitative, determination.

The two sides between which this attitude subsists are, in
the abstract, Qualities in general, and as such have some
particular meaning, such as Space and Time. Taken in their
general relation of Measure as magnitudinal determinations
they are, the one Amount oscillating in external arithmetical
progression, and the other an Amount which is specifically
determined by the first, which for it is Unit. If each were
only any particular quality in general, they would contain no
difference that could determine which should, in view of its
magnitudinal determination, be taken as merely externally
quantitative, and which as varying in quantitative specifica-
tion. If, for instance, they are related as root and square, it
is indifferent in which the increase or decrease is considered
to be merely external and moving in arithmetical progression,
and which on the other hand as specifically determining itself


in this Quantum. l
But in fact the Qualities are not indeterminately different


360 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


from each other, for being moments of Measure they are to
contain its qualification. The next determinateness of the
Qualities themselves is, for the one, that it is the Extensive,
or externality, in itself, and, for the other, that it is the
Intensive, that which is in itself and is negative to the former.
Thus of the quantitative moments Amount belongs to the
former and Unit to the latter; in simple direct ratio the former
must be taken as dividend and the latter as divisor, in speci-
fying ratio the former as the power or other-becoming and
the latter as root. In so far as counting here still takes
place, and external Quantum (which thus is a magnitudinal
determinateness wholly contingent and empirically hit on) is
reflected upon, and consequently change too is taken as pro-
ceeding in external arithmetical progression, this falls within
the side of Unit or intensive Quality; while the external or
extensive side must be represented as varying in the specified


3 ; ; : Bar 5
series. Direct relation, however (like velocity in general, „>


is here reduced to a formal and not existing determination,
belonging only to abstracting reflection; even in the relation
of root and square (as in s = a #*) the root must be taken as
empirical Quantum and proceeding in arithmetical progression,
while the other side must be taken as specified: but the higher
realization of the qualification of the quantitative, more truly
corresponding with the concept, is this, that both sides are
related in higher determinations of powers (as is the case in
Faß).


Observation


What has here been discussed with respect to the connexion
of the qualitative nature of a Determinate Being with its
quantitative determination in Measure, has an application
in the example (already indicated) of movement: here, in
velocity as the direct ratio of space passed through and time
elapsed, the magnitude of time is taken as denominator, and
the magnitude of space as numerator. If velocity is altogether
only a ratio of the space and time of a movement, it is
indifferent which of the two moments is to be considered as
Amount or as Unit. But space (like weight in specific gravity)
is external and real Whole as such, and hence Amount: time,


THE SPECIFIC QUANTITY 361


on the other hand (like volume), is that which is of ideal
nature, the negative, the side of Unit.—Essentially, too, this
is the proper place of a more important ratio, that of free
movement;—movement first conditional, as in gravitation
(where, of temporal and spatial Quantity, the former is root
and the latter square), or next absolutely free, as of the celestial
bodies, where, of the period of revolution and the distance,
the former is by one power lower than the latter, since the
two are related to each other as square and cube. Such
fundamental ratios are based upon the nature of the related
qualities of space and time, and upon the class of relation in
which they stand, which is either mechanical movement—
that is, not free and not determined by the concept of the
moments,—or gravitational—that is, movement conditionally
free,—or, thirdly, absolutely free, as celestial movement. These
classes of movement and their laws are based upon the develop-
ment of the concept of their moments, space and time; for these
Qualities prove as such and in themselves, that is, in their
concept, to be inseparable, and their quantitative ratio is the
Being-for-Self of Measure, it is only one determination of
Measure.

With respect to the absolute relations of Measure, it may
be proper to recall that the Mathematics of Nature, if it would
be worthy of the name of Science, must essentially be a science
of measures,—a science for which much has been done em-
pirically, but little in a truly scientific, that is philosophic,
manner. Mathematical principles of Natural Philosophty—as
Newton called his work—if they were to fulfil this determina-
tion in a philosophic and scientific meaning deeper than that
which was reached by Newton and the whole Baconian
generation, must contain quite other things in order to bring
light into these regions, dark as yet, but most worthy of con-
templation.—It is a great merit to become acquainted with
the empirical numbers of nature (as the distances from one
another of the planets), but an infinitely greater merit to cause
the empirical Quanta to disappear and to raise them into a
universal form of quantitative determinations, so that they
become moments of a law or Measure ;—immortal merits,
acquired (for instance) by Galileo with regard to gravity and
by Kepler with regard to the movements of the celestial bodies.


M*


362 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


They demonstrated the laws which they discovered by showing
that with them the totality of details corresponds with obser-
vation. But a higher proof of these laws must be demanded,
nothing less than that their quantitative determinations be
known from the qualities or determinate concepts which (like
time and space) are related. There is no trace of this kind
of demonstration either in those mathematical principles of
natural philosophy nor in further works of this kind. We
observed above (in connexion with the show of a mathematical
demonstration of natural relations based on an abuse of the
infinitesimally small) that the attempt to conduct such demon-
strations in a properly mathematical manner, that is, with
neither experience nor the concept for starting-point, was a
contradictory undertaking. Such proofs presuppose their
theorems (namely precisely these laws) out of experience: their
work is to reduce them to abstract expressions and convenient
formulae. No doubt but that the whole real merit which is
ascribed to Newton over Kepler in relation to the same objects
will be reduced, with full knowledge (the false fabric of proofs
being banished) and after clearer reflection upon what mathe-
matics can do and has done, to this transformation of the
expression,! and to the analytic treatment introduced in a
rudimentary form.


Cc
BEING-FOR-SELF IN MEASURE


1. In the form of specified Measure which we have just
considered, the quantitative element of both sides is qualita-
tively determined (both in the Ratio of Powers): thus they
are moments of one determinateness of Measure of qualitative
nature. But the qualities are thus posited so far only as
immediate and merely different; they are not themselves in
the relation in which is the magnitudinal determinateness of
each, that is, having neither meaning nor existence outside this
ratio; for this is contained in the determinateness of powers


* See Encyclopaedia of Philosophical Sciences, Observation on § 270 on the


: See E
transformation of Kepler’s A into 2


Ri tees 3 Po
(which is Newton’s), the part p being
called the force of gravity.


THE SPECIFIC QUANTITY 363


of magnitude. Thus the qualitative veils itself, as though
specifying not itself, but magnitudinal determinateness: it is
posited only as applied to this, while for itself it is immediate
quality as such, which, beyond the fact that magnitude is
differentiated from it, and beyond its relation to its other, has
a Determinate Being which subsists for itself. Thus space and
time, apart from that specification which their magnitudinal
determinateness contains in the movement of gravitation, or
in absolutely free movement, count as space or as time in
general, space persisting permanently for itself beyond and
without time, and time flowing for itself independently of space.

This immediacy of the qualitative as against its specific
relation of Measure is, however, equally bound up with a
quantitative immediacy and with the indifference of a quanti-
tative element in itself as opposed to this its relation ; immediate
Quality has a Quantum which also is only immediate. Con-
sequently specific Measure has also a side of—at this point—
external variation ; it does not interfere with its progress, which
is merely arithmetical and contains external and therefore
only empirical magnitudinal determinateness. When Quality
and Quantum thus appear outside of specific Measure, they
are also related to it; immediacy is a moment of such things
as themselves belong to Measure. Thus the immediate Qualities
also belong to Measure, they are also related, and, apart from
magnitudinal determinateness, they are in a relation which in
being outside the specified relation (determination of powers)
is itself only direct relation and immediate Measure. This con-
clusion and its corollaries must be expounded in greater detail.

2. Immediately determinate Quantum as such is, in itself,
and as moment of Measure, based upon a conceptual complex ;
nevertheless it is given as external in its relation to specific
Measure. But the immediacy which is hereby posited is the
negation of qualitative determination of Measure: this was
demonstrated above of the sides of this determination of
Measure, which therefore appeared as independent Qualities.
This negation and the return to immediate quantitative
determinateness are contained in qualitatively determinate
ratio in so far as the relation of differentiated somethings in
general contains their relation as one determinateness, which,
accordingly, here in the quantitative, and distinct from the


364 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


determination of ratio, is a Quantum. As negation of the
differentiated and qualitatively determined sides, this exponent
is a Being-for-Self, it is absolute determinedness; but it is such
Being-for-Self only in itself: as Determinate Being it is a simple,
immediate Quantum, it is quotient or exponent as of a ratio
of the sides of Measure (this ratio being taken as direct), but,
generally, the empirically appearing unit in the quantitative
element of Measure.—In the fall of bodies the spaces passed
through vary as the squares of the times elapsed (s = a t?) ;—
this is a ratio of powers, specifically determined, of time and
space; the other or direct ratio would belong to space and
time as Qualities indifferent to each other: it is supposed to
be the ratio of space to the first moment of time, and in all
the following points of time the same coefficient a remains the
Unit as an ordinary Quantum for the Amount which, for the
rest, is determined by Specifying Measure. At the same time
.it counts as the exponent of that direct ratio which belongs
to imaginary and absolute velocity, that is velocity which is
formal and not specifically determined by the concept. Such
velocity does not exist here any more than that mentioned
above which was supposed to belong to a body at the end
of a moment of time. The former velocity is attributed to the
first moment of time occupied by the fall, but this so-called
moment of time is itself only an assumed unit, and thus, as
an atomic point, has no Determinate Being; the beginning of
the movement—and the smallness which is attributed to the
beginning could make no difference—is forthwith a magnitude,
and a magnitude specified by the law of gravitation. This
empirical Quantum is ascribed to the force of gravity, in such
a manner that this force itself is to have no relation to the given
specification (the determinateness of powers) and to what is
peculiar in the determination of Measure. The immediate moment
—namely, that in the movement of falling one unit of time
(one second—that which is called the first) goes with an amount
of some fifteen spatial units (which are taken as feet)—this
moment is an immediate Measure, like the measure-magnitude
of human limbs, the distances and diameters of the planets,
and so on. The determination of such a measure does not
belong to the sphere of qualitative determination of Measure
(which here is the law of gravitation itself) ; and the concrete


THE SPECIFIC QUANTITY 365


sciences have not yet given us any clue to that upon which
depend such numbers, being as they are that element of a
Measure which appears only immediately, that is, empirically.
Here we are concerned only with this conceptual determinate-
ness, which is, that that empirical coefficient constitutes Being-
for-Self in the determination of Measure, but constitutes the
moment of Being-for-Self only in so far as it exists in itself
and therefore immediately. The rest is the developed aspect
of this Being-for-Self, the specific measure-determinateness of
the sides. —In the relation of gravitation (a movement which
indeed is half conditioned and half free), gravity according
to this second moment must be looked upon as a force of
nature, its ratio being determined by the nature of time and
of space, so that this specification (the ratio of powers) falls
within gravity: the former simple and direct ratio expresses
only a mechanical behaviour of time and space, formal velocity
externally produced and determined.

3. Measure has reached the determination that it is a
specified ratio of magnitudes, which as qualitative has applied
to it ordinary external Quantum; but this is not a Quantum
in general, but essentially is the determining moment of Ratio
as such; thus it is exponent, and, as immediate determinate-
ness, it is now an invariable exponent, and exponent therefore
of the direct ratio (already mentioned) of those same Qualities
by which their magnitudinal ratio to each other is specifically
determined. In the example which we used (the Measure of
the movement of gravitation) this direct ratio is anticipated,
so to speak, and assumed to be given; but, as was observed,
it does not yet in fact exist in this movement.—But it con-
stitutes the further determination that Measure is now realized
in this manner, that its two sides are Measures (distinguished
as an immediate and external Measure and a Measure specified
within itself), and that it is their unity. As such a unity Measure
contains the relation in which the magnitudes are determined
by the nature of the Qualities and are posited as different:
its determinateness is therefore quite immanent and indepen-
dent and, simultaneously, has collapsed into the Being-for-
Self of immediate Quantum, the exponent of a direct ratio.
And here its self-determination is negated, for it has its
last and self-existent determinateness in this its Other: and,


366 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


conversely, immediate Measure, which in itself is supposed to
be qualitative, in truth has qualitative determinateness only in
the former. This negative unity is real Being-for-Self, the category
of a Something as unity of Qualities related as Measures,—a
complete independence. Immediately, the two (which have shown
themselves to be two different ratios) yield a twofold Deter-
minate Being; or rather, such an independent whole, since
it is a Being-for-Self in general, is also a schism into different
stable somethings whose qualitative nature and subsistence
(materiality) lies in their mensural determinateness.


CHAPTERII
REAL MEASURE


MEASURE is determined as a Relation of Measures which
constitute the Quality of different stable Somethings, or, more
familiarly, Things. The Measure-Relations which we have
just considered belong to abstract Qualities like space and time:
specific gravity, and further the chemical properties, are
examples (which are determinations of material existences) of
those which still remain to be considered. Space and time are
also moments of such Measures; but now, subordinated to
further determinations, they are no longer related only in
accordance with their peculiar conceptual determination. In
sound, for instance, the time in which a certain number of
vibrations occurs, and the spatial elements of length and
thickness of the vibrating body, are among the determining
moments; but the magnitudes of these ideal moments are
determined externally: they manifest themselves no longer in
a ratio of powers, but in ordinary direct ratio; and harmony
reduces itself to the wholly external simplicity of numbers the
ratios of which are most easily apprehended, and therefore
afford a satisfaction which belongs entirely to sensation, since
the spirit finds no image, phantasy, thought, nor anything of
this kind, to fill it. The sides which now constitute the Measure-
Relation are Measures themselves, but are also real Some-
things; and thus their Measures are, first, immediate Measures
and, as Relations, direct Relations. The relation to each other
of such relations must now be considered in its progressive
determination.

Measure is now real Measure, and thus

first, it is the stable Measure of a corporeality which is in
a relation to others, and in this attitude specifies them and
also, thereby, specifies stable materiality. This specification,
as an external relating to many others in general, is the pro-
duction of other Relations and therefore of other Measures;
and specific stability does not continue to consist in one direct


368 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


Relation, but passes over into specific determinateness, which
is a Series of Measures.

Secondly, the direct Relations which thus result are Measures
determinate and exclusive in themselves (Elective Affinities) ;
..but their difference is also only quantitative, and thus there
is aptogress of Relations, which partly is merely externally
quantitative, but also is interrupted by qualitative Relations,
and forms a nodal line of specific stable entities.

Thirdly, however, in this progress measurelessness in general
and, more determinately, the infinity of Measure, enter into play
for Measure: here the mutually exclusive stabilities are One
with one another, and the stable entity enters into a negative
relation to itself.


A
THE RELATION OF STABLE MEASURES


Measures must now be called not merely immediate, but
stable, since they in themselves now become Relations of
Measures which are specified ; they are thus first, in this Being-
for-Self, physical somethings, material things. Now the whole
which is a Relation of such Measures is

(a) first, itself immediate; thus the two sides, which are
determined as being such Stable Measures, severally subsist
in separate things; their connexion is effected from without.

(b) The stable materialities are, however, what they are
qualitatively, only by virtue of the quantitative determination
which they have as Measures; that is, they are determined
by virtue of a relation to others which is itself quantitative,
and are determined as themselves different from these (this
is so-called Affinity) and as members of a series of such
quantitative attitude.

(c) This indifferent manifold attitude also rounds itself off
into exclusive Being-for-Self,—into so-called Elective Affinity.


(a) Union or Two MEASURES


In itself, Something is determined.as a Measure-relation of
Quanta, which, further, have Qualities; and the Something is
the relation of these Qualities. One of them is its Being-in-Self,


\ REAL MEASURE 369


| which makes it a Being-for-Self—a material (like weight, taken
\ intensively; or extensively, multitude, that is of material
parts). The other is the externality of this Being-in-Self (the
abstract or ideal, or space). These Qualities are determined
quantitatively, and their relation constitutes the qualitative
nature of the material Something ;—the relation between weight
and volume, determinate specific gravity. The volume (that
which is of ideal nature) must be taken as Unit, and that
which is intensive (which appears in quantitative determinate-
ness and, in comparison with the former, as extensive magni-
tude, a multitude of Ones of which each is for self) as Amount.—
The purely qualitative attitude between one magnitudinal
determinateness and the other according to a ratio of powers
has vanished in the fact that, in the stability of Being-for-Self
(or material Being), immediacy has returned; and here the
magnitudinal determinateness is determined as a Quantum
as such, and the ratio of such a Quantum to the other side
is also determined in the ordinary exponent of a direct ratio.
This exponent is the specific Quantum of a Something, but
it is immediate Quantum; and this (and therefore the specific
nature of such a Something) is determined only in comparison
with other exponents of such ratios. It constitutes the specific
determinateness-in-self, the inner peculiar Measure of some-
thing. But this its Measure is based upon Quantum, and
therefore it is only external and indifferent determinateness ;
and hence such a Something is variable, in spite of the internal
measure-determination. The Other towards which it can be
variable is not a material multitude, a Quantum in general
(for its specific determinateness-in-self can withstand this), but
a Quantum which is also exponent of such a specific ratio.
Two things having different internal Measures are related
and enter into union,—like two metals of different specific
gravities;—and what kind of homogeneity of nature (since
it is not the case that the union of a metal, for instance, with
water, is here in question) is further required to make possible
such a union need not here be considered.—On the one hand
now each of the two Measures preserves itself in the variation,
which might reach it through the externality of Quantum,
because it is Measure; on the other hand this self-preser-
vation itself is a negative attitude to this Quantum, a
VOL. I


370 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


specification of it; and, since the Quantum is exponent of
the Measure-relation, it is a change in Measure itself—a
reciprocal specification.

According to the merely quantitative determination, Union
is a mere summation of the two magnitudes of the one Quality
and of the two magnitudes of the other; for instance, the sum
of the two weights and the two volumes in the union of two
bits of matter of different specific gravity, with the condition
that not only the weight of the compound remains equal to
that sum, but also the space which it occupies equal to the
sum of those spaces. But in fact only the weight is equal to
the sum of the weights which were found before the union:
that side is summed up which, because it is for itself, has
become fixed Determinate Being and therefore has permanent
immediate Quantum, and this is the weight of matter, or
(which is the same from the point of view of quantitative
determinateness) the multitude of material parts. It is into the
exponents that the change falls, for as Measure-relations they
are the expression of qualitative determinateness, of Being-for-
Self, which also manifests itself as negative towards this ex-
ternality, since Quantum as such undergoes the contingent
and external change by accretion which is summed up. This
immanent determining of the quantitative cannot appear in
weight (as has been shown), and therefore manifests itself in
the other Quality, which is that side of the relation which is
of ideal nature. It may be remarkable to sensuous perception
that, after the mixture of two specifically different bits of
matter, a change, —and usually a diminution,—of the volume
which is summed up should appear: space itself constitutes
the persistence of material things existing externally to one
another. But this persistence as against negativity (which
contains Being-for-Self) is that which is not in itself, or is the
variable; in this manner space is posited as that which in truth
it is—that which is of ideal nature.

But thus not only is one of the qualitative sides posited as
variable, but Measure itself and the qualitative determinateness
of the Something, which is based on it, has shown itself not
to be in itself fixed, but to have’its determinateness (like
Quantum in general) in other Measure-relations.


REAL MEASURE 371


(b) MEASURE As A SERIES OF MEASURE-RELATIONS


1. If something which enters into union with another, and
this other too, were determined only by simple Quality and
were what it is only for this reason, then they would only
cancel each other in this union. But something which is a
Measure-relation in itself is stable, and therefore it can enter
into union with another such; and being cancelled in this
union it preserves itself by virtue of its indifferent and quanti-
tative persistence, and at the same time functions as specifying
moment in a new Measure-relation. Its Quality is enveloped
in the quantitative; thus it is also indifferent to the other
Measure, and continues itself into it and into the newly-formed
Measure; the exponent of the new Measure is itself only an
indifferent Quantum, external determinateness, and manifests
its indifference when the specifically determinate Something
enters upon similar neutralizations of pairs of Measure-relations
with similar Measures; its specific peculiarity fails to express
itself when it and another form One only.

2. This union with a plurality of others which also are
Measures in themselves yields different ratios, which accord-
ingly have different exponents. What is stable has the exponent
of its determinateness-in-self only in the comparison with others :
now the neutrality with others constitutes its real comparison
with them; it is its comparison with them through itself. But
the exponents of these ratios are different, and thus it exhibits
its qualitative exponent as the series of these different Amounts
to which it is related as Unit,—or as a series of specific attitudes
to others. The qualitative exponent as one immediate Quantum
expresses one single relation. In truth the differentia of what
is stable is the peculiar series of exponents which, if taken as
Unit, are formed by it together with other such stable entities,
one Other of them being similarly brought into relation with
these and (taken as Unit) forming another series.—Now the
relation of such a series within itself constitutes the qualitative
element of that which is stable.

Now such a stable entity forms a series of exponents with
a series of stable entities, so that at first it appears to be
differentiated from an Other (outside this series) with which


372 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


it is compared, by the fact that this latter forms another series
‚ of exponents with the same opposed entities. In this way,
however, these two stable entities would be incommensurable,
for here each is regarded as Unit to its exponents, and the
two series which arise from this relation are other, but indeter-
minate else. The two entities which are to be compared as
stable are so far different from each other only as Quanta; and
in order that their relation may be determined, a common
Unit which is for itself is required. And this determinate Unit
must be looked for there only where the entities which are
to be compared have the specific Determinate Being (as has
been shown) of their Measure: that is, in the ratio which
subsists between the ratio-exponents of the series. But this ratio
of the exponents themselves is a Unit which is in fact deter-
minate and for itself only in so far as the terms of the series
have it to both as a constant relation among themselves; and
then it can be their common Unit. Here alone then we have
the commensurability of the two stable entities which are
assumed to be indifferent to, and not neutralizing, each other.
Each severally and apart from comparison is the Unit of the
relations with the terms which stand opposed: the terms
are Amounts as opposed to this Unit, and thus represent the
series of exponents. But conversely this series is Unit for those
two which, when compared with each other, are Quanta each
to the other; as such they are themselves different Amounts of
their lately demonstrated Unit.

But further those entities which, together with the pair (or
rather the many in general) opposed to and compared with
one another, produce the series of the exponents of their
behaviour, are, in themselves, stable too, each being a specific
Something of a Measure-relation which in itself belongs to it.
And so each can in this regard be taken as Unit; so that they
have a series of exponents in the first-mentioned and merely
internally compared pair or rather indeterminate plurality;
which exponents are the numbers resulting from comparison
among themselves of the entities just mentioned; and con-
versely, if the entities are now severally taken as stable, then
their numbers of comparison, among themselves, are the series
of exponents for the terms of the first series. Thus both sides
are series; in them, each number, firstly, is Unit in general to


REAL MEASURE 373


the series which opposes it, and in this latter it has its determi-
nateness-in-self as a series of exponents; secondly, it is itself one
of the exponents for each term of the opposite series; and
thirdly, it is number of comparison for the other numbers of
its series, and as being such an Amount (which belongs to it
also as exponent) it has its Unit which is determinate in itself,
in the opposite series.

3. In this attitude the manner has recurred in which Quan-
tum as existing for self, that is as Degree, is posited as simple,
but also as having magnitudinal determinateness in a Quantum
which exists outside it and is a circle of Quanta. But in Measure,
this external field is not merely a Quantum and a circle of
Quanta but a series of ratio-numbers; and the determinate-
ness-for-self of Measure lies in their totality. It is here as in
the Being-for-Self of Quantum as Degree: the nature of Stable
Measure has converted itself into this externality of itself. Its
self-relation is, so far, immediate relation; and hereby, imme-
diately, its indifference to an Other consists only in the
Quantum. Its qualitative side therefore falls within this ex-
ternality, and its attitude to Other becomes what constitutes
the specific determination of this stable entity. Thus it consists,
absolutely, in the quantitative character of this attitude, and
this character is determined by the Other as much as by itself,
and this Other is a series of Quanta, and itself is reciprocally
a Quantum. But this relation, where two specific entities
specify themselves to something, to some third element (the
exponent), contains this too, that one has not here passed
over into the other, so that not one negation in general has
been posited, but both are posited here as negative; and, each
preserving itself indifferent, its negation itself is negated. This
their qualitative unity is thus self-existent exclusive unity. The
exponents, which at first are numbers of comparison among
themselves, have their true specific determinateness relatively
to one another only in the moment of exclusion, and thus at
the same time their difference becomes qualitative. But it is
based upon the quantitative element: the stable element is in
a relation to a plurality of its qualitatively different side,
firstly, only because it is also indifferent in this attitude;
secondly, this neutral relation, by virtue of the quantitativity
which it contains, is not only change, but is posited as negation


374 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


of negation and as exclusive unity. And so the Affinity of a
stable entity to the plurality of the other side is no longer an
indifferent relation, but an Elective Affinity.


(c) ELECTIVE AFFINITY


The expression Elective Affinity has here been used as above
“Neutrality” and “Affinity” were used,—expressions which
refer to the chemical relation. For in the chemical sphere the
material essentially has its specific determinateness in the
relation to its Other: as this difference only does it exist.
Further, this specific relation is tied to Quantity, and at the
same time is not only the relation to one single Other, but
to a series of such entities, different from and opposed to it;
its combinations with this series are based upon a so-called
Affinity with each of its members; but, while indifferent, each
is also exclusive of others,—which relation of opposite deter-
minations remains still to be considered.—But it is not only
in the chemical sphere that the specific manifests itself in a
circle of combinations: a single note too has meaning only in
the attitude to and combination with another and with a series
of others; the harmony or disharmony in such a circle of
combinations constitutes its qualitative nature, which at the
same time is based upon quantitative ratios that form a series
of exponents and are the ratios between the two specific ratios
which each of the notes that are combined is in itself. A single
note is the key-note of a system; but also it is a single member
in the system of any other key-note. The harmonies are ex-
clusive Elective Affinities; but their qualitative peculiarity
equally resolves itself again into the externality of merely
quantitative progress.—As for the question as to where the
principle of a Measure resides for these Affinities, which (be
they chemical or musical or other) are Elective Affinities
among and to one another, an observation remains to be made
with regard to chemical affinity in the sequel; but this higher
question is connected in the closest manner with the Specific
of the properly Qualitative, and belung to the separate parts
of concrete Natural Science.

Inasmuch as the member of a series has its qualitative unity
in its attitude to the totality of an opposed series, the members


REAL MEASURE 375


of which are differentiated from one another only by the
Quantum according to which they neutralize themselves with
the former, in so far the more special determinateness in this
multiple affinity too is only quantitative. In Elective Affinity
—as exclusive and qualitative relation—the attitude avoids
this quantitative difference. The next determination which
presents itself is this, that upon the distinction of multitude
(that is, of extensive magnitude) which subsists between the
members of the one side for the neutralization of a member
of the other side should depend the Elective Affinity- of this
member to the members of the other series (to all of which
it has affinity). Exclusion—as a firmer coherence against other
possible combinations—which would be justified by this, would
appear, when thus transformed, in a proportionately greater
intensity according to the identity of the forms of intensive and
extensive magnitude (which was proved above), since in these
two forms magnitudinal determinateness is one and the same.
But this transformation of the one-sided form of extensive
magnitude into its other, the intensive form, makes no differ-
ence in the nature of the fundamental determination, which
is one and the same Quantum: in fact, then, no exclusion
would be posited here, but indifferently either only one com-
bination, or, equally, one combination of an indeterminate
number of members, could take place, if only the portions of
these which came into play corresponded with the Quantum
asked for in accordance with their relations to one another.
However, the combination which we have also called
neutralization, is not only the form of intensity: the exponent
essentially is measure-determination, and hence is exclusive;
and the numbers, in this side of exclusive attitude, have lost
their continuity and fluid power of mingling; the “more” or
“less” acquires a negative character, and the advantage which
one exponent has over others is not confined to magnitudinal
determinateness. But equally there is present this other side,
in which it is indifferent to a moment if it receive the neutral-
izing Quantum from several opposed moments, and from each
according to its specific determinateness against the other; the
exclusive negative attitude at the same time undergoes this
infringement from the quantitative side—Thus here there is
posited a transformation of indifferent and merely quantitative


376 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


attitude into qualitative, and conversely a transition of specific
determinateness into merely external relation,—a series of
relations which sometimes are of merely quantitative nature,
and sometimes are Measures, and specific.


Observation


Chemical substances are the properest examples of such
Measures as, being Measure-moments, have that which con-
stitutes their determination only in their attitude to others.
Acids and alkalis or bases appear as things immediately deter-
minate in themselves, but still more as incomplete elements
of bodies, as constituent parts which do not really exist for
themselves, but have this existence only, that they transcend
their isolated persistence and combine with an other. Further,
the distinctness which makes them stable does not consist in
this immediate quality, but in the quantitative character of
the attitude. For this is not confined to the chemical opposition
of acid and alkali or base in general, but is specified to be
a measure of saturation, and consists in the specific deter-
minateness of the quantity of the substances which neutralize
one another. This quantity-determination in respect of satura-
tion constitutes the qualitative nature of a substance: it makes
it what it is for itself, and the number which expresses this is
essentially one of several exponents for an opposed unit.—Such
a substance has a so-called Affinity for another; in so far as
this relation were purely qualitative, the one determinateness
—like the relation of the magnetic poles or of the two kinds
of electricity—would be merely related as negative to the
other, and the two sides would not also manifest themselves
as indifferent to each other. But the relation is also quanti-
tative, and therefore each of these substances is capable of
neutralizing itself with more than one; it is not confined to
the one only to which it is opposed. It is not only the acid
and the alkali or base which are in relation, but acids and
alkalis or bases are related to one another. First they are
characterized as against one another according as one acid
requires (for example) more of an alkali than another in order
to become saturated by it. But the stability: (which is for

1 Selbständigkeit.


REAL MEASURE 377


itself) manifests itself in the fact that the Affinities remain
exclusive of one another, and one remains superior to the
others, since one acid can, by itself, combine with all the
alkalis, and conversely. Thus the capital difference as between
two acids consists in the closer affinity of one to a base,—that
is, in its so-called Elective Affinity.

A law has been discovered with regard to the chemical
affinities of acids and alkalis, which states that, if two neutral
solutions are mixed, so that there results a separation and
hence two new combinations, these products likewise are
neutral. It follows that the amounts of two alkaline bases
required to saturate an acid must be in the same ratio in order
to saturate another acid; and generally, if for one alkali (which
is taken as unit) the series of ratio-numbers has been deter-
mined in which the various acids saturate it, then the series
is the same for any other alkali; only the different alkalis must
be taken in different amounts relatively to one another, —
amounts which again on their part form a similar fixed series
of exponents for any of the opposite acids, for they are related
to each acid in the same ratio as to any other.—Fischert first
extracted these series in their simplicity from the works of
Richter :2 see his observations on the translation of Berthollet’s3
treatise on the Law of Affinity in Chemistry, p. 232, and Berthollet,
Statique Chimique, I. Part. p. 134 sqq.—Our knowledge of the
ratio-numbers of mixtures of chemical elements has grown
more perfect in every respect since that was written: to take
it into consideration here would be a digression, because
(among other reasons) this extension, which is empirical and
partly only hypothetical, remains confined within the same
conceptual determinations. But we may add a few observations
on the categories used, and further on views about chemical
Elective Affinity and its relation to the quantitative, and like-
wise on the attempt to base this upon determinate physical
qualities.

It is well known that Berthollet modified the common idea
of Elective Affinity by the concept of the activity of a chemical

ı Fischer, Ernst Gottfried, Professor of Physics at Berlin, Member of the
Academy, 1754-1831.

2 Richter, Jeremiah Benjamin, 1762-1807, Bergassessor in Berlin.


3 Berthollet, Claude Louis, Count, 1748-1822, Professor at the Polytechnic
School in Paris.


378 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


mass. It must be clearly distinguished that this modification
has no influence upon the quantitative ratios of the laws of
chemical saturation themselves; but the qualitative moment
of exclusive Elective Affinity as such is not merely weakened
but transcended. If two acids act upon an alkali, and that
acid, of which it is said that it has the closer affinity to the
alkali, is present also in that Quantum which is sufficient to
saturate the Quantum of the base, then, according to the
earlier idea of Elective Affinity, only this saturation takes
place: the other acid remains quite inactive and is excluded
from the neutral combination. But according to this other
concept of the activity of a chemical mass, each of the two
is active in a ratio which is composed of the amount in which
they are present and of their saturation-capacity or so-called
Affinity. Berthollet’s investigations have indicated in greater
detail the circumstances in which the activity of the chemical
mass is suspended, and one acid (the more powerfully allied)
appears to cast out the other (the weaker) and exclude its
activity, that is, to be active within the meaning of the earlier
Elective Affinity. He has shown that the circumstances in which
this exclusion takes place are such as cohesive force or the
insolubility in water of the salts formed, and not the qualitative
nature of the agents as such;—circumstances which can be
suspended in their activity by other circumstances in turn—
by temperature, for example. These obstacles removed, the
chemical mass enters into activity uncrippled, and that which
appeared as a purely qualitative exclusion, as Elective Affinity,
shows itself as consisting only in external modifications.
Berzelius! is the next writer who best deserves to be heard
on this matter. But in his Manual of Chemistry he brings
forward nothing peculiar or more definite on the subject.
Berthollet’s views have been incorporated and repeated word
for word, tricked out only with the peculiar metaphysics of an
uncritical reflection ; the categories of this alone therefore offer
themselves for further consideration. The theory goes beyond
experience, and partly invents sensuous images of a kind which
experience does not offer of itself, partly it employs deter-
minations of thought: in each way it makes itself the object


1 Berzelius, Johann Jakob, Baron von, 1779-1848, from 1807 Professor of
Chemistry at Stockholm: Manual of Chemistry, 3 volumes, 1808 to 1828.


REAL MEASURE 379


of logical criticism. We will therefore scrutinize what we are
told about the theory in the Manual itself (Vol. III., Part I.,
transl. by Wöhler, pp. 82 sqq.). Now here we read that we
must imagine that in a fluid uniformly mixed each atom of
the dissolved body is surrounded by an equal number of atoms
of the solvent : “when several substances are dissolved together,
they must share among themselves the interstices between the
atoms of the solvent, so that, when the fluid is mixed uniformly,
a symmetry arises in the arrangement of the atoms such that
all the atoms of the individual bodies are in a uniform position
relatively to the atoms of the other bodies; one could therefore
say that the solution is characterized by symmetry in the position
of the atoms, and the combination by the fixed proportions.” —
Berzelius proceeds to exemplify this by means of the com-
binations which result when sulphuric acid is added to a
solution of copper chloride: unfortunately the example demon-
strates neither that atoms exist, nor that a number of atoms
of the bodies which are dissolved surround atoms of the fluid,
nor that free atoms of the two acids arrange themselves around
those which remain combined (with the copper oxide), nor
that there is any symmetry in position and arrangement, nor
that there are interstices between the atoms,—and least of
all that the dissolved substances share among themselves the
interstices between the atoms of the solvent. This would mean
that the atoms of the dissolved substance take up their position
where the solvent is not,—for the interstices between its atoms
are spaces empty of it,—and hence that the dissolved substances
are not in the solvent but outside it (although they surround and
are ranged around it, or conversely), and therefore certainly
are not dissolved by it. Consequently it is not clear why we
must form such images, which are not exhibited in experience,
essentially contradict themselves immediately, and are not
corroborated in any other manner. This could be effected only
by a consideration of these images themselves, that is, through
Metaphysics, which is Logic; but this confirms them as little
as experience—quite the contrary.—For the rest, Berzelius
admits (what also was said above) that Berthollet’s propositions
are not opposed to the theory of determinate proportions;
although he adds that they also do not oppose the views of
the corpuscular philosophy, that is, the images, cited above,


380 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


of the atoms and of a solvent fluid which fills the interstices
with the atoms of the undissolved bodies, and so on;—but this
latter and baseless metaphysic has essentially nothing to do
with the proportions of saturation itself.

Thus that specific nature which is expressed in the laws of
saturation applies only to the multitude of units of a body
which are themselves quantitative (and not atoms), with which
multitude the quantitative unit (which equally is no atom) of
another body chemically different from the first, neutralizes
itself; the difference consists solely of these different propor-
tions. And if Berzelius, in spite of the fact that his theory of
proportions is wholly a determination of multitudes, speaks
(for instance, p. 86) also of degrees of affinity, when he explains
Berthollet’s chemical mass, as the sum of the degree of affinity,
from the given quantity of the active body, then he himself
falls here into the form of intensive magnitude. Berthollet here
more consistently uses “capacité de saturation.” But this form
constitutes the peculiar element of the so-called dynamic
philosophy which above (p. 29, loc. cit.) he calls “the specu-
lative philosophy of certain German schools,” and expressly
rejects in favour of the excellent ““Corpuscular Philosophy.”
He there states of this dynamic philosophy that it assumes
that the elements interpenetrate one another in their chemical
combination, and that neutralization consists in this mutual
interpenetration: this merely means that the chemically
different particles, which are in the relation one to another
of multitudes, collapse into the simplicity of an intensive
magnitude,—a fact which also manifests itself as a diminution
of volume. In the corpuscular theory, on the other hand,
the atoms, even when chemically combined, are supposed to
remain outside one another in the interstices (juxtaposition) ;
and in such an attitude, as being a merely extensive magnitude
and persisting multitude, degree of affinity has no meaning.
If it is stated in the same place that the appearances of deter-
minate proportions came quite unexpectedly for the dynamic
view, then this would be a merely external historical circum-
stance, apart from the fact that Richter’s stoechiometric series
(in Fischer’s arrangement) were already known to Berthollet
and are quoted in the first edition of this Logic, which
demonstrates the invalidity of the categories upon which are


REAL MEASURE 381


based the corpuscular theories—the old and that which strives
to be new. But Berzelius’s judgment is wrong when he says
that, under the dominion of “the dynamic view,” the appear-
ances of determinate proportions would have been “for ever”
unknown, —meaning that this view is incompatible with the
determinateness of proportions. In any case this determinate-
ness is only a magnitudinal determinateness, and it is indifferent
whether it is in extensive or intensive form; so that even
Berzelius, however much he is attached to the first form
(multitude), himself uses the idea of degrees of affinity.

Affinity hereby is traced back to the quantitative difference,
and therefore is transcended as Elective Affinity; while the
exclusive element which occurs in it is traced back to circum-
stances, that is to determinations which appear as something
external to the affinity—to cohesion, insolubility of the com-
binations reached, and so forth. With this idea, in a measure,
the procedure adopted in considering the effect of gravity may
be compared: what in itself belongs to gravity (the fact that
the moving pendulum, through its operation, necessarily passes
into a state of rest) is there taken only as a concomitant fact
due to the external resistance of air, of the thread, and so on,
and is attributed to friction alone instead of to gravity.—Here
it makes no difference to the nature of the qualitative which
is contained in Elective Affinity, whether it appears in the
form of these circumstances (these being taken as its con-
ditions) and is so conceived. With the qualitative as such a
new order begins, of which the specification no longer is
quantitative difference only.

Accordingly the difference of chemical affinity is exactly fixed
in a series of quantitative ratios as against Elective Affinity:
it is fixed as a difference of qualitative determinateness which
begins to function, the behaviour of which by no means
coincides with that order; but this difference is wholly con-
fused by the manner in which electricity has recently been
coupled with chemical behaviour; and the hope to reach a
clue about the most important principle, namely, Measure-
relation, from this, which professes greater profundity, is
entirely disappointed. In this theory the phenomena of elec-
tricity and of chemism are completely identified in so far as it
refers to physical properties and not to Measure-relations only ;


382 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


here the theory need not further be considered, and need be
noticed only in so far as it contributes to confuse the dif-
ferentiation of Measure-determinations. It may be called
shallow in itself, for shallowness is the identification of things
which differ, the differentia being omitted. As for affinity,
chemical processes being thus identified with electrical, as well
as with phenomena of light and fire, this is reduced “to
neutralization of opposite electricities.” It is almost funny to
see the identification of electricity and chemism put into the
following words (p. 63, loc. cit.): “it is true that electrical
phenomena explain the action of bodies at a greater or less
distance, their attraction before they are united (that is,
behaviour which is not yet chemical), and the fire (?) caused
by this union; but they offer us no explanation for the com-
bination of the bodies which powerfully persists even after the
opposite electrical condition has been destroyed;” that is,
the theory tells us that electricity is the cause of chemical
behaviour, but electricity cannot tell us what is chemical in
the chemical process. —By the fact that chemical difference in
general is traced back to the opposition of positive and negative
electricity, the difference in affinity of the agents which belong
to either side is determined between them as the order of two
series of electro-positive and electro-negative bodies. When
electricity and chemism are identified according to their general
determination, it is overlooked already that the former in
itself and in its neutralization is transient and remains external
to the Quality of bodies, while chemism in its action, and
especially in neutralization, occupies and alters the whole
qualitative nature of the bodies. And within electricity the
opposition of positive and negative is equally transient; it is
so unstable that it depends upon the smallest external circum-
stances, and cannot even be compared with the determinate-
ness and fixity of the opposition of acids (for instance) and
metals, and so on. The variability which can have place in
this chemical behaviour through exceedingly violent activity
(for instance of a raised temperature and the like) cannot be
compared with the superficiality of the electrical opposition.
Finally the further difference, within the series of each of the
two sides, between more or less positively electrical or more
or less negatively electrical nature is entirely uncertain and


REAL MEASURE 383


undemonstrated. But from these series of bodies (Berzelius,
loc. cit., p. 84 sq.) “the electrochemical system is to be
evolved according to their electrical dispositions,—a system
fittest of all to give an idea of chemistry” : these series are next
indicated; and of their actual nature, this is added (p. 67):
“this, roughly, is the order of these bodies; but this matter has
been so little investigated that nothing quite certain can yet
be determined of this relative order.”—The ratio-numbers of
these series of affinity (first made by Richter), as well as the
exceedingly interesting reduction of the combinations of two
bodies into the simplicity of a few quantitative ratios (first
made by Berzelius), are wholly independent of this would-be
electrochemical brew. It may be that in these proportions and
in their universal extension, made since Richter, the experi-
mental method was the true guiding star; if so, the mixture
of these great discoveries with the so-called corpuscular theory,
a wilderness lying apart from the road of experience, contrasts
with it all the more; and only this beginning (by deserting
the principle of experience) could cause that idea once more
to be taken up after it had already been commenced upon
earlier (especially by Ritter"), namely, to set up fixed orders
of electro-positive and electro-negative bodies which were also
to have chemical significance.

The opposition between electro-positive and electro-negative
bodies is not in fact as true as it is assumed to be; and when
this is made the basis of chemical affinity, then the vanity of
this basis soon shows itself even in experiment, and leads to
further inconsistencies. It is admitted (p. 73, loc. cit.) that
two so-called electro-negative bodies, like sulphur and oxygen,
combine in a far more intimate manner than, for example,
oxygen and copper, although the latter is electro-positive.
Thus the basis of affinity founded upon the general opposition
of positive and negative electricity must come second to a
mere more or less within one and the same series of electrical
determinateness. From this it is concluded that the degree of
affinity between bodies does not only depend upon their
specific unipolarity (it is here irrelevant with what hypothesis
this determination is connected: here it means only the


t Ritter, Johann Wilhelm, 1776-1810, Member of the Academy of Munich:
Das elektrische System der Körper, 3 volumes, 1805-1806.


984 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


alternative determinations of positive and negative), and that
the degree of affinity must chiefly be derived from the intensity
of their polarity in general. Thus here the consideration of
affinity passes over to the relation of Elective Affinity, which
is our chief concern; and we must consider what now results
for this subject. It is forthwith admitted (ibid. p. 73) that the
degree of this polarity, unless it exists merely in our imagina-
tion, seems to be no constant quality, but greatly depends on
temperature; so that after all this the result announced is not
only that every chemical effect is ultimately an electrical
phenomenon, but also that what appears to be effect of so-
called Elective Affinity is really brought about only by an
electrical polarity which is stronger in some bodies than in
others. At the end of our meanderings in hypothetical images
we remain at the category of greater intensity, which is the same
formality as Elective Affinity in general; and the latter, after
it has been founded on greater intensity of electrical polarity,
is no nearer to being on a physical basis than before. But even
that which is here supposed to be determined as greater specific
intensity is later traced back only to the modifications demon-
strated by Berthollet, which have already been cited.

The merit and fame which were won for Berzelius by his
doctrine of proportions, which has been extended to all chemical
relations, are in themselves no reason why the deficiencies of
this theory should not be set forth; and there is a further
reason in the fact that such merit in one branch of Science
(as with Newton) tends to become the authority for a baseless
fabric of invalid categories which is connected with it, and
that it is just this kind of metaphysic which is proclaimed and
echoed with the greatest pretension.

Apart from the forms of Measure-relation which refer to
chemical and to Elective Affinity, others too may be considered
with respect to quantities which qualify themselves into a
system. Chemical bodies form a system of relations in regard
to saturation: saturation itself depends on the determinate
proportion in which combine the two aggregates which are
opposed to each other as having separate material existence.
But there are also Measure-relations of which the moments
are inseparable and cannot be represented in a private and
independent existence. These are what before were called


REAL MEASURE 385


immediate Stable Measures: they are represented in the specific
gravity of bodies.—Within the bodies they are a ratio of weight
to volume; the ratio-exponent which expresses the deter-
minateness of a specific weight and thus differentiates it from
others, is a determinate Quantum of comparison only, a ratio
external to them in an external reflection, not based upon its
own qualitative attitude to an opposite existence. The task
would be this,—from a rule, to understand the ratio-exponents
of the series of specific gravities to be a system,—the rule
specifying a merely arithmetical plurality to be a series of
harmonic knots.—And the same demand would be applied
to the understanding of the chemical affinity-series which have
been mentioned. But Science has far to go before it will reach
this point,—as far as it must go before it can comprehend in
one Measure-system the numbers relating to the distances
between the planets of the solar system.

Although at first specific gravities appear to be in no
qualitative relation, they too do become qualitatively related.
When bodies are chemically combined, or even only amal-
gamated or synsomatized, a neutralization of specific gravities
also appears. The phenomenon has been mentioned above,
that the volume, even of a mixture of substances which really
remain chemically indifferent to one another, is not equal to
the sum of their volumes before they were mixed. In the
mixture they reciprocally modify the Quantum of the deter-
minateness with which they enter into the relation; and in
this manner they show that the relation subsisting between
them is qualitative. Here the Quantum of specific gravity
manifests itself not merely as a fixed number of comparison,
but as a ratio-number, which is variable; and the exponents
of the mixtures furnish series of Measures whose progress is
determined by a principle other than the ratio-numbers of the
specific gravities which are combined. The exponents of these
ratios are not exclusive Measure-determinations: their progress
is continuous, but contains a specifying law that is different
from the ratios (which progress formally) in which the amounts
are combined. The two progresses thus are made incommen-
surable.


VOL. I N


386 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


B
NODAL LINE OF MEASURE RELATIONS


The last determination of Measure-Relation was that, being
specific, it is exelusive: exclusiveness is proper to neutrality as
negative unity of the differentiated moments. This unity is for
self; it is Elective Affinity: with regard to its relation to the
other neutralities no further principle of specification has shown
itself; the latter resides only in the quantitative determination
of Affinity in general, according to which the amounts which
neutralize one another, and thereby stand opposed to other
relative Elective Affinities of their moments, are determinate.
But further, by virtue of its fundamentally quantitative deter-
mination, exclusive Elective Affinity also continues itself into
neutralities other to it; and this continuity is not only external
relation of the various relations of neutrality as a comparison,
but, besides, neutrality as such contains a separability, since the
entities whose unity produced it enter into relation, as stable
Somethings and each as indifferent as to whether it combines
with one or with other of the opposing series, although they
do so in different and specifically determinate amounts. Thus
this Measure, being in itself based upon such a relation, is
in itself infected with indifference: it is external in itself, and
in its relation to itself is variable.

The relation to itself of the Measure-Relation is a different
matter from its externality and variability as its quantitative
side: as relation to itself as against these it is an existent and
qualitative foundation,—an enduring and material substratum
which ought to contain in its Quality this principle of the
specification of this externality together with the continuity
of Measure in its externality with itself.

Exclusive Measure in this closer determination is external
to itself in its Being-for-Self; it repels itself from itself and
posits itself as another—both as quantitatively other, and also
as another such relation as also is another Measure; it is
determined as unity specifying in itself and producing Measure-
Relations as against it. Such relations are different from the
previous kind of affinities, in which one stable entity is related


REAL MEASURE 387


to stable entities of a different Quality, and to a series of such:
they take place against one and the same substratum within
the same moments of neutrality; Measure determines itself
as repelling itself towards other relations which are only
quantitatively different and also form Affinities and Measures,
alternating with such as remain merely quantitative differences.
They form in this way a Nodal Line of Measures along a scale
of more and less.

We have here a Measure-Relation, an independent reality,
qualitatively different from others. Such a Being-for-Self is
also essentially a relation of Quanta, and therefore open to
externality and variation of Quantum: it has some play,
within which it remains indifferent to this change and does
not alter its Quality. But there comes a point in this quantitative
change at which Quality changes and Quantum shows itself
as specifying ; so that the altered quantitative relation is turned
under our hands into a Measure and thereby into a new
Quality and a new Something. The relation which has taken
the place of the first is determined by this, partly according
to the qualitative identity of the moments which have affinity
to one another, and partly according to quantitative con-
tinuity. But, since the difference falls within this quantitative
part, the new Something is indifferent to its predecessor: their
difference is one of Quantum, and hence external. It has there-
fore appeared, not out of the former, but, immediately, out of
itself, that is, out of internal specifying unity which has not
yet entered into existence—The new Quality or the new
Something is subject to the same progress of change, and so
on to infinity.

In so far as the progress of one Quality is in steady con-
tinuity of Quantity, the relations which approach to one quali-
fying point are differentiated, quantitatively considered, only
by more and less. In this regard change is gradual. But this
gradual nature affects only the external part of change, not
its qualitative part; the preceding quantitative relation, which
is infinitely near to that which follows, is still a different
qualitative existence. Hence the merely quantitative progress
of gradualness, which is no limit in itself, is broken short
absolutely on its qualitative side; the new emerging Quality
in its merely quantitative relation is, relatively to the
*


388 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


disappearing one, an indeterminate other, is indifferent, and
so far the transition is per saltum: both are posited as wholly
external to each other.—Men like to try to make a change
conceivable by means of the gradualness of transition; but
rather gradualness is precisely the merely indifferent change,
the opposite of qualitative change. Rather, in gradualness the
connexion of the two realities—whether taken as states or as
independent things—is suspended; it is posited that neither
is limit of the other, but that one is just external to the other;
and hereby, precisely, that which is needful in order that
change may be understood is eliminated, however little may
be required to this end.


Observation


Already the natural numerical system exemplifies such a
Nodal Line of qualitative moments, which manifest themselves
in the merely external progression. There is, partly, a merely
quantitative oscillation, a persistent addition or subtraction,
so that each number has the same arithmetical relation to its
predecessor and successor as either of these had to its pre-
decessor and successor, and so on. But the numbers which thus
result have also a specific relation to other numbers that precede
or follow, which makes them either such a multiple of one of
them as is expressed by a whole number, or else power and
root.—In musical relations a harmonic relation in the scale
of quantitative progression is introduced by a Quantum, while
yet this Quantum for itself has no other relation in the scale
to its predecessor and successor than these in turn to their
predecessors and successors. While succeeding notes appear
progressively to move further from the key-note, and numbers
through arithmetical progression to become more and more
other, suddenly a return or surprising concord emerges, which
was not qualitatively led up to by what immediately preceded,
but appears as an actio in distans, as a relation to a distant
entity. The progression along merely indifferent relations which
do not change the preceding specific reality (or do not even
form one) suddenly interrupts itself, and, while it continues in
the same manner quantitatively, a'specific relation breaks in
per saltum.

Among chemical combinations, when mixture-proportions


REAL MEASURE 389


are progressively altered, certain qualitative nodes and jumps
occur, such that two materials form products at particular
points of the scale of mixture, which then show particular
qualities. These products are differentiated not only by more
and less, nor are they already given (in a weaker degree, for
instance) in the relations which are akin to these nodal relations,
but are actually bound to such points. The combinations of
oxygen and nitrogen, for instance, produce the various oxides
of nitrogen and nitric acids, which appear only in definite
quantity-relations of the mixture and have essentially different
qualities, so that in intermediate mixture-relations no com-
binations of specific existences take place. —Metal oxides (for
instance, lead oxides) are formed at certain quantitative points
of oxidation, and differ in colour and in other qualities. They
do not gradually merge in one another; the relations which
lie between those nodes produce no neutral and no specific
Determinate Being. A specific combination appears which has
not passed through these intermediate steps, but is based on
a Measure-Relation and has qualities of its own.— Again,
water, when it changes its temperature, not merely becomes
less hot, but passes through conditions of hardness, of drop-
forming liquidity, and of elastic liquidity; these different con-
ditions do not appear gradually; but the merely gradual
progress of change of temperature is suddenly interrupted and
checked by these points, and the appearance of such a new
condition is a jump.—All birth and death, instead of being
a continued graduality, are rather an interruption of this and
are the jump from quantitative into qualitative change.

It is said, natura non facit saltum; and ordinary imagination,
when it has to conceive an arising or passing away, thinks
it has conceived them (as was mentioned) when it imagines
them as a gradual emergence or disappearance. But we saw
that the changes of Being were in general not only a transition
of one magnitude into another, but a transition from the
qualitative into the quantitative, and conversely: a process of
becoming other which breaks off graduality and is qualitatively
other as against the preceding Determinate Being. Water on
being cooled does not little by little become hard, gradually
reaching the consistency of ice after having passed through
the consistency of a paste, but is suddenly hard; when it


390 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


already has quite attained freezing-point it may (if it stands
still) be wholly liquid, and a slight shake brings it into the
condition of hardness.

The gradualness of arising is based upon the ideas that that
which arises is already, sensibly or otherwise, actually there, and
is imperceptible only on account of its smallness; and the
gradualness of vanishing on the idea that Not-being or the
Other which is assuming its place equally is there, only is not
yet noticeable;—there, not in the sense that the Other is
contained in the Other which is there in itself, but that it is
there as Determinate Being, only unnoticeable. This altogether
cancels arising and passing away; or the In-itself, that inner
somewhat in which something is before it attains Determinate
Being, is transmuted into a smallness of external Determinate
Being, and the essential or conceptual distinction into a dif-
ference external and merely magnitudinal.—The procedure
which makes arising and passing away conceivable from the
gradualness of change is boring in the manner peculiar to
tautology; that which arises or passes away is prepared before-
hand, and the change is turned into the mere changing of an
external distinction; and now it is indeed a mere tautology.
The difficulty for such Understanding which attempts to con-
ceive consists in the qualitative transition of something into
its Other in general and into its opposite; Understanding
prefers to fancy identity and change to be of that indifferent
and external kind which applies to the quantitative.

In Ethics, in so far as it is considered in the sphere of Being,
the same transition from quantitative to qualitative takes place,
and different qualities appear to base themselves on differences
in magnitude. A more or less suffices to transgress the limit of
levity, where something quite different, namely, crime, appears ;
and thus right passes over into wrong, and virtue into vice.—
Thus too do States—other things equal—derive a different
qualitative character from magnitudinal difference. Laws and
constitution become something different when the extent of
the State and the number of citizens increases. The State has
a certain measure of its magnitude, and if forced beyond this
it collapses helplessly under that very same constitution which
was its blessing and its strength for as long as its extent alone
was different.


REAL MEASURE 391


Cc
THE MEASURELESS


In its realized Being-for-Self exclusive Measure still remains
infected with the moment of quantitative Determinate Being,
and therefore remains capable of oscillation along the scale
of Quantum, on which the alteration of relations takes place.
A Something or a Quality which rests on such a relation is
forced beyond itself into the Measureless, and perishes by the
mere alteration of its magnitude. Magnitude is that charac-
teristic wherein, while no harm appears to be intended, a
Determinate Being can be seized, and whereby it can be
destroyed.

The abstract Measureless is Quantum in general as lacking
determination in itself and as merely indifferent determinate-
ness by which the Measure is not changed. In the Nodal Line
of Measures determinateness is also posited as specifying; the
abstract Measureless transcends itself into qualitative deter-
minateness ; the first Measure-Relation passes over into another
which is new, and is a Measureless in regard to it, while in
itself it is just as much a Quality which is for itself; thus then
is posited the alternation of specific existences with one another
and also with relations which remain merely quantitative,—
and so to infinity. This transition then contains the negation
of specific relations as well as the negation of the quantitative
progress,—that is, infinity which is for itself.—Qualttative infinity
(as in Determinate Being) was the eruption of the infinite in
the finite, as immediate transition and disappearance of the Hither
in its Beyond. But quantitative infinity is according to its deter-
minateness the continuity of Quantum—a continuity of it beyond
itself. The qualitatively finite becomes infinite: the quanti-
tatively finite is its Beyond in itself and points beyond itself.
But this infinity of the specification of Measure posits the
qualitative as well as the quantitative, each cancelling the
other, and thereby also posits their first and immediate unity
(which is Measure in general) as having returned upon itself,
and therefore as itself posited. The qualitative—a specific
existence—passes over into another in such a manner that
nothing takes place except a change in the magnitudinal


392 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


determinateness of a relation : thereby the change of qualitative
itself into qualitative is posited as external and indifferent, as
a coincidence with itself; and apart from this the quantitative
transcends itself as turning into qualitative, as being deter-
minate in itself. This unity which thus continues itself into
itself in its alternation of Measures is the stable Matter or
Thing which in truth persists.

We have, then, (a) one and the same Thing which is posited
as the substratum of its differentiations, and as persisting. This
severance of Being from its determinateness begins already in
Quantum in general; something has magnitude as indifferent
to its determinateness as Being. In Measure the Thing is
already in itself the unity of the qualitative and the quanti-
tative—the two moments which constitute the distinction in
the general sphere of Being, each being the Beyond of the
other; in this manner the persisting substratum, so far, has
in itself the determination of infinity which is. (8) This un-
differentiatedness of the substratum is posited in the fact that
the qualitative stabilities into which the measure-determining
unity is broken up consist only in quantitative differences, so
that the substratum continues itself into this its differentiating
process; (y) in the infinite process of the nodal series the
continuation of the Qualitative into the quantitative progress,
as into an indifferent variation, is posited; and in this is
posited the negation of the Qualitative and therefore of merely
quantitative externality. The quantitative reference beyond
itself to an Other, as being another Quantitative, perishes in
the emergence of a Relation-measure or Quality, and the
qualitative transition transcends itself precisely in the fact that
the new Quality itself is only a quantitative relation. This
transition of Qualitative and Quantitative into each other
takes place upon the foundation of their unity, and the only
meaning of this process is the Determinate Being, the demon-
stration or positing that it is based on such a substratum, which
is their unity.

In the series of Stable Measure-Relations, the one-sided
members of these series are immediate qualitative Somethings
(specific gravities, or chemical substances, basic or alkaline,
for instance acids) ; and next their neutralizations (—by which
here must be understood also combinations of substances of


REAL MEASURE 393


different specific gravity—) are stable and even exclusive
Measure-Relations ; relatively to one another they are indif-
ferent totalities of Determinate Being which is for itself. Now
such relations are determined as being only nodes of one and
the same substratum. This reduces the Measures and their
implied stabilities to states. The change is change only of a
state, and that which passes over is posited as remaining the
same in the process.

We now survey the progress in determination which Measure
has covered. The moments of this progress are grouped in such
a manner that Measure first is the unity (itself immediate)
of Quality and Quantity, since it is an ordinary- Quantum,
which however is also specific. Here it is a quantitative deter-
minateness referring not to other but to itself; it is, essentially,
Relation. And further, therefore, it contains its moments as
transcended and unseparated; the differentiation within it—
as in every concept—is such that each of its moments is itself
unity of the Qualitative and the Quantitative. The differen-
tiation has thus become real, and produces a multitude of
Measure-Relations which formally are totalities and as such
are stable within themselves. The series which form the sides
of these relations are the same constant order for each individual
member which, as belonging to one side, is in a relation to
the whole opposing series. This unity, as being mere order, is
quite external; it shows itself as immanent specifying unity
of a Measure which is for itself as distinct from its specification ;
but the specifying principle is not yet the free concept which
alone gives immanent determination to its differentiations : so
far the principle is only a substratum or material ; and to effect
that its differentiations shall be totalities, that is, shall contain |
the nature of the unchanging substratum, there is only the
external quantitative determination, which at the same time
manifests itself as differentiation of Quality. In this unity of
the substratum with itself the Measure-determination is tran-
scended, and its Quality is a condition determined by the
Quantum, and external.—This course is the realizing and
progressive determination of Measure, and this determination
is also its reduction to the position of a moment.


CHAPTER III
THE BECOMING OF ESSENCE


A
ABSOLUTE INDIFFERENCE


Being is abstract equivalence—which we will call Indifference,
since for itself it must be thought of as Being—having, as yet,
no kind of determinateness; pure Quantity is Indifference,
as being capable of every determination, but in such a manner
that determinations are external to it and it has no connexion
with them immanent in itself; while that Indifference which
may be called Absolute is that which mediates itself with itself
into simple unity by the negation of every determinateness of
Being, of Quality, Quantity, and their unity, Measure, which,
so far, is immediate. Of this Indifference, determinateness is
no more than a state, that is, a qualitative externality having
Indifference for substratum.

Now this entity which has thus been determined to be a
qualitative externality, is only a vanishing entity; and, as
being thus external to Being, the Qualitative, as its own
opposite, just transcends itself. In this manner determinateness
is posited of the substratum only as an empty differentiation.
But this empty differentiation is Indifference itself as result.
And this Indifference is thus Concrete, or that which is
mediated in itself through the negation of every determination
of Being. Since it is this mediation it contains negation and
relation; and that which we called state is its immanent and
self-relating differentiation ; it is, precisely, externality and its
disappearance which make the unity of Being to be Indiffer-
ence; they are therefore within Indifference, which now ceases
to be abstract and to be substratum, and only applied to
itself.


THE BECOMING OF ESSENCE 395


B
INDIFFERENCE AS INVERSE RELATION OF ITS FACTORS


We must now see how this determination of Indifference
is posited in itself, and the latter therewith as being for itself.

1. The reduction of Measure-Relations, which so far are
accounted stable, is based upon one common substratum; this
substratum is their continuation into one another, and so that
indivisible stability the totality of which exists in its differen-
tiations. For this differentiation there are present the deter-
minations of Quality and Quantity which it contains, and
nothing matters except how these are posited in it. This,
however, is determined by the fact that so far the substratum
is result, and mediation in itself, while at the same time
mediation is not yet posited in it as such; this fact makes
it, first, substratum, and, with regard to determinateness,
Indifference.

Hence differentiation is in it essentially so far merely quan-
titative and external: we have two different Quanta of one
and the same substratum, which thus is their sum, and there-
. fore is itself determined as Quantum. But Indifference is this
fixed Measure and self-existent absolute limit only in relation
to these differentiations, and that in such a manner that it
is not Quantum in itself, and is not in any manner opposed
as sum or exponent to other entities, whether sums or Indiffer-
ences. Indifference contains only abstract determinateness;
and the two Quanta, in order that they may be posited
as moments of it, are related as variable, indifferent, and
greater or less. But being confined within the fixed limit of
their sum they also are not external to each other, but
negative;—and this is the qualitative determination which
relates them. They are accordingly in Inverse Relation to
each other. This Relation differs from the previous, formal
Inverse Ratio, because the whole is here a real substratum, and
it is posited of each of the two sides that in itself it is to be
this whole.

According to the qualitative determinateness which was
mentioned there is, further, a distinction of two Qualities of
which one is cancelled by the other, although, since both are


396 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


in and constitute a unity, each is inseparable from the other.
The substratum itself, as Indifference, is also in itself the unity
of the two Qualities: thus each of the sides of the relation
contains both, and is differentiated only by a more of one
Quality and a less of the other, and conversely; the one
Quality is just preponderant by virtue of its Quantum in the
one side, and the other Quality in the other side.

Thus each side is in itself an Inverse Relation: this Rela-
tion recurs, as formal, in the sides which are differentiated.
Thus these sides themselves also continue themselves into each
other according to their qualitative determinations: each
Quality is related to itself in the other, and is in each of the
two sides just in a different Quantum. Their quantitative
difference is that Indifference according to which they con-
tinue themselves into each other, and this continuation, as
homogeneity of the Qualities, is in each of the two unities.—
Meanwhile the sides (of which each contains the totality of the
determinations, and hence the Indifference itself) are thus also
posited as stable relatively to each other.

2. Being now, as this Indifference, is the determinateness
of Measure, no longer in its immediacy, but in the developed
manner which has just been set forth. It is Indifference, since
in itself it is the totality of the determinations of Being which
have been dissolved into this unity; and also Determinate
Being, as totality of posited realization in which the moments
themselves are the self-existent totality of Indifference, sup-
ported by it as their unity. But unity has here been fixed only
as Indifference and, therefore, only as in itself, and the moments
are not yet determined as being for themselves, that is, as can-
celling each other in and through themselves into unity; and
so we have the indifference of these to themselves, as developed
determinateness.

This stability, which has thus turned out inseparable, must
now be further considered. It is immanent in all its deter-
minations, and in them remains in unity with itself and un-
disturbed by them; but (a) since it is totality in itself, every
determinateness which is cancelled in it persists in it, but only
as arising in it baselessly. There is no connexion between the
“in-itself”” of Indifference and this its Determinate Being;
every determinateness shows itself immediately in it, and in


THE BECOMING OF ESSENCE 397


each one it is in its totality; thus the differentiation between
all is at first posited as transcended, that is, as quantitative,
and for that very reason as no self-repulsion; they are not
posited as self-determining, but only as being, and as becoming,
determinate externally.

(ß) The two moments are in inverse quantitative relation
—an oscillation along magnitude which is not determined
by Indifference (which is, precisely, the indifference of this
oscillation), but hereby is determined only externally. There is
here reference to an Other which lies beyond and contains the
determining. In this aspect the absolute as Indifference has
the second deficiency of the quantitative form, which is that
the determinateness of the differentiation is not determined
by it; and it has the first deficiency, too, in the fact that the
differentiations only emerge in it,—that is, its positing is imme-
diate and not its own self- mediation.

(y) The quantitative determinateness of the moments which
now are sides of the relation, constitutes this manner of their
persistence; their Determinate Being is saved from the tran-
sition of the Qualitative by this indifference. They have a
persistence, however, which is different from this their Deter-
minate Being, and is in itself, in the fact that they are the
Indifference in themselves, and that each is the unity of the
two Qualities into which the qualitative moment splits itself.
The difference of the two sides reduces itself to this, that the
one Quality is posited in the one side with a more and in the
other with a less, and the other correspondingly and con-
versely. Thus each side is in itself the totality of Indifference.—
Each of the two Qualities being taken individually remains
that sum which the Indifference is: it continues itself from one
side into the other, and is not restricted by the quantitative
limit which is posited of it in this process. Here the deter-
minations come into immediate opposition which develops
itself into contradiction, as must now be shown.

3. For each Quality enters into relation with the other
within each side, and that in such a manner that this relation
is to be only a quantitative difference: this determination has
already been reached. If both the Qualities are stable—as
when, for instance, they are taken as independent sensible
substances—then the whole determinateness of Indifference


398 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


collapses; their unity and totality would be empty names. But
in fact they are also determined in such a manner that they
are comprehended within one unity; they are inseparable,
and each has meaning and reality only in this one qualitative
relation to the other. And now each extends as far only as
the other, just because their quantitativity is of this qualitative
nature. If they were different as Quanta, then one would by
so much fail to coincide with the other, and in this overplus
it would have an indifferent existence lacking to the other.
But in their qualitative relation each is only in so far as the
other is.—From this it follows that they are in equipoise, that
one would increase or decrease by as much as the other did,
and that it would increase or decrease in the same proportion.
Hence neither Quality can achieve a “more,” and no
quantitative difference can arise, from the basis of their
qualitative relation. The “more” by which one of the related
moments exceeded the other would be a foundationless deter-
mination, that is, this “more”? would only again be the other
itself; but both being thus equal both would have vanished,
since their existence was to be based only upon the inequality
of their Quantum.—Two factors are desiderated, and each
vanishes when it is supposed to exceed the other as much as
when it is supposed to be equal to it. This disappearance
manifests itself thus: a disturbance of the equilibrium emanates
from the quantitative point of view, and one factor is taken
to be greater than the other; thus the cancellation of the
Quality of the other, and its foundationlessness, are posited ; the
first becomes preponderant, so that the other decreases with
accelerated speed and is overwhelmed by it. The first thus
becomes the sole stable entity: but now we no longer have
two specific entities and two factors, but only the one whole.
This unity, thus posited as the totality of determination,
which totality is itself here determined as Indifference, is
universal contradiction. It must, therefore, be posited as being
determined as stability which is for self, just because it is this
self-cancelling contradiction. This stability has for result and
as its truth unity which no longer is merely indifferent, but
immanent in itself, negative and absolute. This is Essence.


THE BECOMING OF ESSENCE 399


Observation


The relation of a whole which is supposed to have its
determinateness in the magnitudinal difference between factors
which are qualitatively determined relatively to one another,
is used in the elliptical movement of the celestial bodies. In
the first instance this example shows only two Qualities in
inverse relation to each other, not two sides, of which each
is the unity of both and its inverse relation. And since the
empirical basis is so firm, the consequence is overlooked to
which the theory applied to it leads, which is, to destroy the
basic fact or else (if, as is proper, it is retained) to demonstrate
the emptiness of the theory as against it. But this consequence
is ignored, which permits the fact and the theory which con-
tradicts it quietly to subsist side by side —The simple fact is
that in the elliptic movement of the celestial bodies their
velocity increases as they approach their perihelion, and
decreases as they approach their aphelion. The quantitative
part of this fact has been determined exactly by untiring
diligence of observation; it has further been reduced to its
simple law and formula, and thus every demand which could
legitimately be made of theory has been met. But to reflective
understanding this did not seem enough. In order that the
phenomenon and its law may have a so-called explanation,
a centripetal and a centrifugal force are assumed, as qualitative
moments of movement along the curved line. Their qualitative
difference consists in opposition of direction, and their quanti-
tative difference in the fact that they are determined as unequal
and that one is to increase as the other decreases, and conversely,
and, further, their relation suddenly is reversed: after cen-
tripetal force has been waxing and centrifugal waning for a
time, a point arises where centripetal force wanes while cen-
trifugal force waxes. But this idea is contradicted by the
relation to each other of their respective determinatenesses.
These are essentially qualitative, and make it quite impossible
to separate the forces: each has meaning only with respect
to the other; therefore, in so far as one exceeded the other,


1 The following sentence is added here in the first edition: “I have considered
this subject in an earlier treatise, and have demonstrated the idleness of this
distinction and the explanations which are based upon it.”


400 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


in so far also it would have no relation to it, and would be
non-existent.—When the assumption is made that one is
definitely greater than the other when it is related to it as
greater to less, then what was said above comes about: it
gains absolute preponderance, and the other vanishes; the
latter is posited as that which vanishes and is unfounded ; and
the fact that the disappearance is gradual, and that what it
loses in magnitude accrues to the other, does not alter this
determination. One perishes with the other, since what itis
is only in so far as the other is. And here is a very simple
consideration: if, for example, as is asserted, the centripetal
force of the body as it approaches the perihelion is to increase,
and its centrifugal force to decrease proportionally, then the
latter would no longer be able to save it from the former and
to remove it from the attracting body; on the contrary, since
the centripetal is supposed to be preponderant, the centrifugal
is overcome, and the body approaches the attracting body
with accelerated velocity. And, conversely, if centrifugal force
dominates at infinite proximity to the aphelion, it is equally
contradictory that it should now be overcome at the aphelion
by the weaker force. —Further it is clear that the cause of this
inversion must be a foreign force ; which means that the velocity
of movement, at times accelerated and at times retarded,
cannot be understood nor, as it is called, explained from the
determination of these factors which is here assumed, although
these were assumed for the very purpose of explaining this
difference. The conclusion which follows from the disappear-
ance of one or the other direction, and hence of elliptical
movement altogether, is ignored and concealed for the sake
of the established fact that this movement persists and passes
from accelerated into retarded velocity. When it is assumed
that a weaker centripetal force is transmuted at the aphelion
into a force which preponderates against centrifugal force, and
when a converse assumption is made for the perihelion, then
this assumption partly contains what was developed above,
that each of the sides of the inverse relation is in itself the
whole inverse relation ; for the side of movement from aphelion
to perihelion (where centripetal force is supposed to be pre-
ponderant) is supposed also to contain centrifugal force, though
decreasing as the other increases ; and the same inverse relation


THE BECOMING OF ESSENCE 401


is supposed to subsist, in the side of retarded movement,
between an increasingly preponderating centrifugal force, and
centripetal force, so that neither has vanished on either side,
but each merely decreases progressively until the time arrives
when the reversal occurs and it begins to preponderate over
the other. Consequently what recurs on each side is nothing
but the flaw in this inverse relation, namely that either each
force is taken independently by itself, so that, as in the
parallelogram of forces, the unity of the concept and the
nature of the fact is transcended in the merely external co-
operation of the forces in one movement, or else, each being
qualitatively related to the other through the concept, neither
can attain indifferent and independent persistence as against
the other, —this was to be the contribution of the “overplus.”
The intensive (or so-called dynamic) form does not change
anything, since it itself has its determinateness in Quantum,
and so can manifest only as much force as is opposed to it
by the opposite force; and this is the measure of its existence.
But partly this transmutation of preponderance into its opposite
contains the alternation of positive and negative, which are
qualitative determinations: the increase of one is balanced
by a loss of the other. The inseparable qualitative connexion
of this qualitative opposition is disjointed into chronological
succession by the theory; but the theory still fails thereby to
furnish the explanation of this alternation, and also, above all,
of this method of disjointing. Here the illusion of unity, which
was present while one increased as the other decreased, wholly
vanishes: a merely external succession is proclaimed, which
contradicts only the consequence of this connexion, by which,
when one has established preponderance, the other must vanish.

This same relation has been applied to Attractive and
Repulsive Force in order to render intelligible the varying
density of bodies; and the inverse ratio of sensibility and
irritability too has been drawn upon to explain from the
inequality of these factors of life the various determinations
of the whole, of health, as also the variety of living species.
But the confusion and the absurdity in which this explana-
tion—designed to become a natural philosophical basis for
physiology, nosology, and finally zoology—became involved
through an uncritical use of these conceptual determinations,


402 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


led here to the result that this formalism was quickly renounced,
though it is still continued to its full extent in the science,
especially, of physical astronomy.

Absolute Indifference may appear to be the fundamental
determination of Spinoza’s Substance; and in this regard we
may here observe that it is so in fact in this respect that, in
both, all determinations of Being, as in general all further
concrete differentiation of Thought and Extension and so forth,
are posited as having vanished. Indeed it is indifferent, if we
are not to proceed beyond abstraction, what was the appear-
ance, while it existed, of that which has perished in this abyss.
But Substance, as Indifference, is partly connected with the
need of determining and with a respect to this process; it is
'not supposed to remain the Substance of Spinoza, whose one
determination is that negation which claims that everything
is absorbed in it. With Spinoza differentiation—the attributes,
Thought and Extension, the modes too, the affections, and
all other determinations—is introduced quite empirically; and
it is understanding—itself a mode—in which this differentiation
takes place. The attributes in relation to Substance and to each
other have this sole determinateness, that they wholly express
Substance, and that their content—the order of things as
extended, and as thoughts—is the same. But when Substance
is determined as Indifference, reflection arrives at differentia-
tion; the latter is now posited as that which, with Spinoza, it
is in itself, namely, as external and therefore, more precisely,
as quantitative. Thus, in differentiation, Indifference remains
immanent in itself like Substance,—but abstractly and only
in itself; differentiation is not immanent for it, but, on the
contrary, being quantitative, it is the opposite of Immanence,
and quantitative Indifference is rather the self-externality of
Unity. Here then differentiation is not taken as qualitative,
and Substance is not determined as the self-differentiating, as
Subject. What follows next, with regard to the category of
Indifference itself, is that in it the distinction between quan-
titative and qualitative determination falls asunder, as appeared
in the development of Indifference: it is the dissolution of


Measure, in which both moments were posited immediately
as one.


THE BECOMING OF ESSENCE 403


©
TRANSITION TO ESSENCE


Absolute Indifference is the last determination of Being
before it becomes Essence; but it does not attain to Essence.
Indifference shows itself as still belonging to the sphere of
Being, for, being determined as indifferent, it has differentiation
as quantitative and external. This is its Determinate Being;
and now it is in this contradictory state, that it is determined
as against its Determinate Being only as that which is in itself,
and is not thought of as the Absolute which is for itself. Or again
it is external reflection, which does not progress beyond the
position where the specific entities in themselves or in the
Absolute are one and the same, and their difference is in-
different and not a difference in itself. What here is lacking
is this, that this reflection is not the external reflection -of
thinking and subjective consciousness, but is the determination
of the differentiations themselves of this unity to transcend
themselves ; which unity then turns out to be absolute negativity
and indifference to itself and to its own indifference as much
as to other-being.

But this self-cancellation of the determination of Indifference
has already been reached: this determination has shown itself
in the development of its positedness in every direction as
contradiction. It is in itself that totality in which every deter-
mination of Being is transcended and contained ; thus it is the
basis, but so far is only in the one-sided determination of
Being-in-Self, which implies that differentiations, quantitative
difference, and the inverse relation of factors are external to it.
It is the contradiction of itself and of its determinateness, of
its determination as it is in itself and of its posited deter-
minateness ; it is, accordingly, negative totality, of which every
determinateness has transcended itself of itself, and has thereby
transcended this its fundamental onesidedness, its Being-in-
Self. It is now posited as that which Indifference in fact is,
and is simple and infinite negative self-relation, self-incom-
patibility and self-repulsion. Determining and being determined
are here neither a transition, nor external variation, nor an
emergence of external determinations in it, but the self-relation


404 SCIENCE OF LOGIC


of Indifference, which is the negativity of itself and of its
Being-in-Self.

The determinations, being thus repelled somethings, are not
masters of themselves and do not emerge in independence or
externality, but, as moments, belong first to unity which is in
itself, and have not been dismissed from it but have in it their
supporting substratum and sole filling;—and next are those
determinations which are immanent in unity which ts for itself,
and have being only by virtue of its self-repulsion. They are
not existents (as in the whole sphere of Being), but are hence-
forth only that which is posited; they have just this deter-
mination and meaning, that they are referred to their unity,
and hence each to its other and to negation;—and as such
they bear the mark of this their relativity.

And now Being in general, and the being or immediacy
which belongs to each differentiated determinateness, has
vanished together with Being-in-Self; and the unity is Being,
immediate and presupposed totality, and is this simple self-
relation only through the mediation of the transcending of
this presupposition, while this presupposedness and immediate
Being itself is only a moment of its repulsion; the original
independence and self-identity exist only as the resulting infinite
coincidence with itself. —Being is thus determined to be Essence;
—Being, as through transcendence of Being simple Being with
itself.


k: iae er ‘
er Zr
: BI Sy


ua un rt


N AAAA oe ak 2a MA N Sale
var eee nee po
Perino yyw Shaiya vert NEIL tones DC ONT e ai te ate A
SHE TUE N ohhh AN
UNE HE ET Re pre u
N NE Sons

ee

r an

aatia N ae
N AAN a Wh DA
BIENEN ae HERE ae a ee NEE

EEE HN I EINER


havin, wa Wk Pere ate
wee ee
Oe We whe > Oe HUNG)
N eho
Ryd ae bile bp eae ay


wanana
ea


irn
KONE ae a o


+
‘o's


RO)


3A


ORS
N
a


BEIN
wipe a ee NEE SER NEIN
mern. BLEI TERRA New OR Re ck Mesa”
LERNEN N ISCH MICHELLE rie yy eee Nee

vere nee nen


EB RR nae
RR EN REN ER REN
EHEN MUST RENTEN
a stale ste eher


oo
MT Vee ba ey


h IE A AI AA AE A a AESC SAS RAA NEAR N

ata Day Stee oD Se eee ay ii ieee en E E ren EN eh A a eta E

NE a yee VaGeeevrase Ac ees eee a E AS AAR A latte tl i RA

N EUER eb eee KICIA RA AN oR er

ecko y et A BEER
E Vee awe o


Te wane ere +
ape ye ey ky


Marg
NEE ee
wa eee eds ee eee Bale


ne,
i
a


“eyes a LEE
N44 b's Ke a ey ee Od YTS LERNTEN
PLACES DENTE WO OEE «eK ae Sy eh wy Uh
No She ea he eye bb ee rem \
RGran Wb EL
PERSON TER sent DB SE N ee eee yy
Re A EEEE EEE


EN iY is
WER OT
CON We Se S ee Aa
SNe mW Ala ho tere Uae Bib tyes
BR eh a a ER
ER
DO LEER TRAURIG
an
Lr


a ee a Sete
ae


una ee pe me
Da a aan
< ere


*
Ereann wa
REN

Berne on
Baia SOWA N we ee aa p wee eh ig
nS ke LTE en an

Sy N inh on
‘be CO 'e yo bre
re“
Kar ar
Do


ea ae
DE
RETURN
Be de A eT ne ar
TR EEG
OUR SEN RIOR LE eh Br
RI LEN ER
NER RE ROH Sew his
VER ET
Baki ee
N NE LA
Kerne ties hear
AT cork bh ere a os
neo


RN EIER NED
ren.
EN
EIN
sarima ea a a
E a ht


a
Darra)
eae ey >
web


Aaa eee ee eee ee heh | eee


i AR
oy PEE EU ER Cece wes ate ar a aaa yey
u ee vie ata ehe Ge ere Nw tee ruhe
N hee piers eres pee mo
Sib b's: = ad Gin kway ak a here sale ete ee a
ne Ae es oka bine ede bs bey
<> ed cswpue cha ik
eee haere


neath NZ te we p
PAAA RV bie Ne S
SE ENE bets uty bo cme
en nen

EN LI a au Ae D e DIET
ee
RR TE


ae,
ee eee ee `
N EY
NEE De
a an
Ci OOS ak nares ru...
KR U N EN SEG ee O
eS E a. e w aih a TINO IR ES
I ER URN
N a ee
wre


werner nie cede
te Oe Se O
- N nese a ee
dicen de ee Vea eh ee
Sas se Wada ee hee ee ye He Nee
Se eV eed ane veces bers 26+ ean ee
Oe ee Sie ie eee
Saar T ah Se aN ST IE


rer E
IE ee ar eee ee


Ss eee


DS IDEE
an a m 2 2 in > bab oie b's a 8 8 a a ee
AU EIELEEN EN
IE ENTE NEN ERIUUENEN
She sey Seen tab pena dN Hate e
eee ieee ee


Lek og aay
Aves
tte NOG Me ae


*
Dewy
as


SV Veer eee hele ween
Wee SRA Sk > ie eee Ce
Poe ede Ue eul wae ye eee hs
vere keen w


ver
COE nt mei ene
See Wh baa a atk a bs Fae
anne.

x an
BER


elle
a Ta
Schr er
KOOKS a
wur


ee a)


Den een
REN
“ern iid)


Cees
KEN N
See ade ny


OOREEN
CO rennen
N a -
ET ENEREN TRETEN
Wk gabe Wie RE VOR
EN RER ER ate

N ae era aa EN
I


DEE eye


ran:
u...


Ren ans
Area aaa,


aa


hanterenn ria
CO O ee ins
ak SCHERE EEE NS
I REN LER EIERN
A En AN A Wig we ta


DER
Sere ee eee
wx ome on er Sor ens
DN TEN
PARDO RUG ete ew hb bin
+ COO wi ry
A hw tema ay S
SOLD Ha aa an.
SO ee ee
Oot


hie e's
SOO ie eine
vena ae hee ee
See ee ek ew)
aMSe+aeseb ba eh aba u
Keinen
Dear


Peer eee eee a,
AGA ee ee nee wee bh aw ne) ye >

toner are wey due eee kA
REINE srw eee
AAs ep EPID TDD aja A y
Or ear wre E E
ews


EEE EN T
erahnen
INTER EN
LEE eee as
ort Rese bays
VECTOR OLE ee een


meee rennen


Ve BE Sheen wate


ER
ey


nn OE he re arg
= wee


a
ER
g


vee meee neha nahen


a ene ee
S*#v Abbe eeage ny


ernennen
on


a


DOOR
wanna ira
WR e eee sate
ana ire art
Pheer wen ye
a ee)


nr
Ba


we
22 Opt ea p ind mena ake >
Oe re ay
ee pe koa
VP PUG DNS Cade ea ob, bed De
COL ON IESE We hea rar tesa ies
were


te eee eens te
aac ebweo evade
RN


BORD
asiesars


+o kee wan
Tee whe ede ee bee &
Kran ase dey
Se ee ie a
Coe ic nes DON
beee uiad ON belek ae oe wee

Kaasani


oe
GOLEI
E


EN


Burton

Caa a abah peep ye
EOE eres
Dorae wee anes ab
ae ee haw hee ye
ka DOT)


BCE
Tae ee N en
BR SEN NN SEN

SON enh eke ee
` KRISE ary 4
ae ere
Dede eee he ee ce eae

Ce Nar ares


ernennen
PARK ne


NT,
ek Na nen
DENE OO Ci)
Week aoa NE)

+e eee yy
ree ee ten ata
COS ar ie iin aie


SAE rie
ee
NER LT
RN N
Aobeue ede eharteay drupe soe = b
Beck SOOO nee nen i

EEE
Gare


en,


BIN
EN


RR EN
Dee


p
N
mr...

IR NEN
N I REN


IT EN


LEN RS


names anne
USOC ee ir


Bers
CU nas à
TOON


bhosa bee


EEO OE
eee e eee be >! Re DREIER LEUTEN NE
BR N SCHIENE SI UN EN ew ee e vr mara ane eee
ths LCT IDI yar S BORO Se a ee
SR NN KERN ICE ER EN URLS eae ee Ay ark O wie wie tre PX

A Peet ee ee Nees» DOCK EEE
ANIONA Teuer A BORNO OAA NT A
non DOREEN EN >

“rn Ave ee eed way ey


eon
een


NN
Panbers ebsin


SOUR ete
en


D
RN RES
te
durap CL eae
PRR ICR ION WIENER TOL WAP py he of ery
RUE OO USE aCe Lene ar Ada a


a)
<te pawn


+PP Da edd e dD eeasad ee


waar pea
NEE
EN we vinta Da ay
OR E YON Ir ir tear hehehe
v EO E EERS
OE ae ee N
LS P


* eae de eee EL N
Onn

+o Phere oe ee
MO Sac


‘
% . ne DO OLO
KASR OONN
GDA +
ETES


t>


On re
Doo


f, kana
S ah ole
Pie i NE) ee won. SSR


EN SENSE EN
G


PA Oe ESE

018 0.0 ade

bith TOME AUST Nor a fee wr ach
eee ier)


DENE


ri.


a
rn
aan
ie
RANDE k,
Gon


Dr eer)
SUDO UO Int
een
een


+
RT ee


Hee ee ees
tae


Boor
Dedede Tee A ee)


Xe Sie ee wm, Orie a fe rota
Sa AOS CON One hb hee e warn
SE IE


ee
paa a adn
ODOR Ere if) Ts eee eee eye ke ee
Oo D EN
oe + NE
ee ee
BI I NT
> Pipi a0 6 QW YAO > eae
UTA Ot as ies


senpa Reh ubj ae ©
oe


RN
REN
Te a N TI
BEE BI NE NICH I eh
BI RETTEN
re a ey ae
a RN Se A bine, a aon ie RR Ua HTS
ee ne A ee ee
Rr ne an
BEE SEEN SCHNEE NT hia og hpi hee org pret
+20 serene es yar ho eee y ak eh
N EMO able ae E ERKENNT


See ee Seh
run,

ae
wee


Opies
BER


oe N * bs popon Siete es estate Seele BIN RER
ej, N Pe 2 I LE NEU bey w arena $ “ ar

He RT CE NIE URS oie seen
raft EEE NER


te
RIESEN
BR amy hn, vie ole ee


sh ee en


UL
Wil Tale lene sete
end,
een
REN gee
nee a ea.
LIE TURN TR


pa
9 28 E lara ia e
eve thie ent

2 he ee wine sw


