Max Heindel, The Rosicrucian Cosmo-Conception (1909)
==========================================================================
Heindel's masterwork of Rosicrucian cosmology — man's past evolution, present constitution, and future development. The central text of the Rosicrucian Fellowship and one of the most influential esoteric systems of the 20th century. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

: ‘Gre enville College
oe on ; :


ey Gey ee Lg pe 2m 2 a,


ae Doe


in 2024


Max H&INDEL


THE ROSICRUCIAN
COSMO-CONCEPTION


OR


MYSTIC CHRISTIANITY


AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE UPON
MAN’S PAST EVOLUTION, PRESENT CONSTITU-
TION AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENT


BY
MAX HEINDEL


Its MESSAGE AND MISSION.
A SANE MIND.
A SOFT HEART.
A SOUND BODY.


ELEVENTH EDITION


The Rosicrucian Fellowship
International Headquarters
Mr. EccuEsia
OCEANSIDE, CALIFORNIA


LONDON :
L. N. Fowuer & Co., 7 ImpertaL ARCADE
LupGatTe Circus


Mrs. Max HEINDEL


Ali rights, including that of translation, reserved.


Permission to copy or translate will be readily given upon
application.


Greed or Christ


No man loves God who hates his kind,

Who tramples on his brother’s heart and soul;
Who seeks to shackle, cloud, or fog the mind

By fears of hell has not perceived our goal.


God-sent are all religions blest;

And Christ, the Way, the Truth, the Life,
To give the heavy laden rest

And peace from sorrow, sin, and strife.


Behold the Universal Spirit came
To all the churches, not to one alone;
On Pentecostal morn a tongue of flame
Round each apostle as a halo shone.


Since then, as vultures ravenous with greed,
We oft have battled for an empty name,
And sought by dogma, edict, cult, or creed,
To send each other to the quenchless flame.


Is Christ then twain? Was Cephas, Paul,
To save the world, nailed to the tree?
Then why divisions here at all?
Christ’s love enfolds both you and me.


His pure sweet love is not confined

By creeds which segregate and raise a wall.
His love enfolds, embraces human kind,

No matter what ourselves or Him we eall.


Then why not take Him at His word?
Why hold to creeds which tear apart?

But one thing matters, be it heard,
That brother love fill every heart.


There’s but one thing the world has need to know,
There’s but one balm for all our human woe;
There’s but one way that leads to heaven above—
That way is human sympathy and love. |
Max. HEINDEL.


iy


ease


“ } pixoran
' ro tr ver ‘i AT 7) |
yee Oy ra Ws ho
YT Has dae aut date te
ok yoko OT gen



pel " ie att pike:


A WORD TO THE WISE.


The founder of the Christian Religion stated an occult
maxim when He said: “Whosoever shall not receive the
kingdom of God as a little child shall not enter therein”
(Mark x: 15). All occultists recognize the far-reaching
importance of this teaching of Christ, and endeavor to
“live” it day by day.

When a new philosophy is presented to the world it is
met in different ways by different people.

One person will grasp with avidity any new philosophical
effort in an endeavor to ascertain how far it supports his
own ideas. To such an one the philosophy itself is of
minor importance. Its prime value will be its vindication
of u1s ideas. If the work comes up to expectation in that
respect, he will enthusiastically adopt it and cling to it
with a most unreasoning partisanship ; if not, he will prob-
ably lay the book down in disgust and disappointment,
feeling as if the author had done him an injury.

Another adopts an attitude of skepticism as soon as he
discovers that it contains something which HE has not
previously read, heard, or originated in his own thought.
He would probably resent as extremely unjustified the
accusation that his mental attitude is the acme of self-
satisfaction and intolerance; such is nevert’eless the case;
and thus he shuts his mind to any truth which may possibly
be hidden in that which he off-hand rejects.

Both these classes stand in their own light. “Set” ideas
render them impervious to rays of truth. “A little child”

5


6 A WORD TO THE WISE


is the very opposite of its elders in that respect. It is not
imbued with an overwhelming sense of superior knowledge,
nor does it feel compelled to look wise or to hide its
nescience of any subject by a smile or a sneer. It is frankly
ignorant, unfettered by preconceived opinions and therefore
eminently teachable. It takes everything with that beauti-
ful attitude of trust which we have designated “child-like
faith,’ wherein there is not the shadow of a doubt. There
the child holds the teaching it receives until proven or
disproven.

In all occult schools the pupil is first taught to forget
all else when a new teaching is being given, to allow neither
preference nor prejudice to govern, but to keep the mind
in a state of calm, dignified waiting. As skepticism will
blind us to truth in the most effective manner, so this calm,
trustful attitude of the mind will allow the intuition, or
“teaching from within,” to become aware of the truth con-
tained in the proposition. ‘That is the only way to culti-
vate an absolutely certain perception of truth.

The pupil is not required to believe off-hand that a
given object which he has observed to be white, is really
black, when such a statement is made to him; but he must
cultivate an attitude of mind which “believeth all things”
as possible. That will allow him to put by for the time
being even what are generally considered “established
facts,’ and investigate if perchance there be another
viewpoint hitherto unobserved by him whence the object
referred to would appear black. Indeed, he would not
allow himself to look upon anything as “an established
fact,” for he realizes thoroughly the importance of keeping
his mind in the fluidal state of adaptability which charac-
terizes the little child. He realizes in every fibre of his
being that “now we see through a glass, darkly,” and


A WORD TO THE WISE ”


Ajax-like he is ever on the alert, yearning for “Light,
more Light.”

The enormous advantage of such an attitude of mind
when investigating any given subject, object or idea must
be apparent. Statements which appear positively and
unequivocally contradictory, which have caused an immense
amount of feeling among the advocates of opposite sides,
may nevertheless be capable of perfect reconciliation, as
shown in one such instance mentioned in the present work.
The bond of concord is only discovered by the open mind,
however, and though the present work may be found to
differ from others, the writer would bespeak an impartial
hearing as the basis of subsequent judgment. If the book
is “weighed and found wanting,” the writer will have no
complaint. He only fears a hasty judgment based upon
lack of knowledge of the system he advocates—a hearing
wherein the judgment is “wanting” in consequence of
having been denied an impartial “weighing.” He would
further submit, that the only opinion worthy of the one
who expresses it must be based upon knowledge.

As a further reason for care in judgment we suggest
that to many it is exceedingly difficult to retract a hastily
expressed opinion. Therefore it is urged that the reader
withhold all expressions of either praise or blame until
study of the work has reasonably satisfied him of its merit
or demerit.

The Rosicrucian Cosmo-conception is not dogmatic,
neither does it appeal to any other authority than the
reason of the student. It is not controversial, but is sent
forth in the hope that it may help to clear some of the
difficulties which have beset the minds of students of the
deeper philosophies in the past. In order to avoid serious
misunderstanding, it should be firmly impressed upon the


8 A WORD TO THE WISE


mind of the student, however, that there is no infallible
revelation of this complicated subject, which includes
everything under the sun and above it also.

An infallible exposition would predicate omniscience
upon the part of the writer, and even the Elder Brothers
tell us that they are sometimes at fault in their judgment,
so a book which shall say the last word on the World-
Mystery is out of the question, and the writer of the present
work does not pretend to give aught but the most ele-
mentary teachings of the Rosicrucians.

The Rosicrucian Brotherhood has the most far-reaching,
the most logical conception of the World-Mystery of which
the writer has gained any knowledge during the many
years he has devoted exclusively to the study of this
subject. So far as he has been able to investigate, their
teachings have been found in accordance with facts as he
knows them. Yet he is convinced that the Rosicrucian
Cosmo-conception is far from being the last word on the
subject ; that as we advance greater vistas of truth will open
to us and make clear many things which we now “see
through a glass, darkly.” At the same time he firmly be-
lieves that all other philosophies of the future will follow
the same main lines, for they appear to be absolutely true.

In view of the foregoing it will be plain that this book
is not considered by the writer as the Alpha and Omega,
the ultimate of occult knowledge, and even though it is
entitled “The Rosicrucian Cosmo-conception,” the writer
desires to strongly emphasize that it is not to be under-
stood as a “faith once for all delivered” to the Rosicrucians
by the founder of the Order or by any other individual.
It is emphatically stated that this work embodies only the
writer’s understanding of the Rosicrucian teachings con-
cerning the World-Mystery, strengthened by his personal


A WORD TO THE WISE y


investigations of the inner Worlds, the ante-natal and
post-mortem states of man, etc. The responsibility up-
on one who wittingly or unwittingly leads others astray
is clearly realized by the writer, and he wishes to guard
as far as possible against that contingency, and also to
guard others against going wrong inadvertently.

What is said in this work is to be accepted or reject-
ed by the reader according to his own discretion. All
eare has been used in trying to make plain the teach-
ing; great pains have been taken to put it into words
that shall be easily understood. For that reason only
one term has been used throughout to convey each idea.
The same word will have the same meaning wherever
used. When any word descriptive of an idea is first
used, the clearest definition possible to the writer is
given. None but English terms and the simplest lan-
guage have been used. The writer has tried to give as
exact and definite descriptions of the subjec: under con-
sideration as possible; to eliminate all ambiguity and
to make everything clear. How far he has succeedea
must be left to the student to judge; but having used
every possible means to convey the teaching, he feels
_ obliged to guard also against the possibility of this work
being taken as a verbatim statement of the Rosicrucian
teachings. Neglect of this precaution might give undue
weight to this work in the minds of some students. That
would not be fair to the Brotherhood nor to the reader.
It would tend to throw the responsibility upon the
Brotherhood for the mistakes which must occur in this
as in all other human works. Hence the above warning.


10 A WORD TO THE WISE


During the four years which have elapsed since the
foregoing paragraphs were written, the writer has con-
tinued his investigations of the invisible worlds, and
experienced the expansion of consciousness relative to
these realms of nature which comes by practice of the
precepts taught in the Western Mystery School. Others
also who have followed the method of soul-unfoldment
herein described as particularly suited to the Western
peoples, have likewise been enabled to verify for them-
selves many things here taught. Thus the writer’s under-
standing of what was given by the Elder Brothers has
received some corroboration and seems to have been
substantially correct, therefore he feels it a duty to state
this for the encouragement of those who are still unable
to see for themselves.

If we had said that the vital body is built of prisms
instead of points, it would have been better, for it is
by refraction through these minute prisms that the color-
less solar fluid changes to a rosy hue as observed by
other writers beside the author.

Other new and important discoveries have also been
made; for instance, we know now that the Silver Cord
is grown anew in each life, that one part sprouts from
the seed atom of the desire body in the great vortex of the
liver, that the other part grows out of the seed atom of
the dense body in the heart, that both parts meet in
the seed atom of the vital body in the solar plexus, and
that this union of the higher and lower vehicles causes
the quickening. Further development of the cord be-
tween the heart and solar plexus during the first seven
years has an important bearing on the mystery of child-
life, likewise its fuller growth from the liver to the
solar plexus, which takes place during the second septe-
nary period, is a contributory cause of adolescence.
Completion of the Silver Cord marks the end of child-
life, and from that time the solar energy which enters
through the spleen and is tinted by refraction through
the prismatic seed atom of the vital body located in the
solar plexus, commences to give a distinctive and indi-
vidual coloring to the aura which we observe in adults.


LIST OF CONTENTS.


PART IT,

MAN’s PRESENT CONSTITUTION AND METHOD OF DEVELOPMENT,
Diagram 16, The Lord’s Prayer............- 464
PV OTUmcOp ENG © Wise: <5.2t RI oti eteuies sean. cn aca Onan e s+ 5
Mhestiourskhanedoms: diagram. 10 2% s.5 sis «sa -1s.0) + sae opleumaieterels 16
MTU OG UC bl Oey. 2.604 14)%.0-2 1s aleeite eh ote, spe a ele wie Lie aslo eoenaeratene 17
CHartTerR I. The Visible and Invisible Worlds.............. 24
Chemical Region of the Physical World............... 29
Etheric Region of the Physical World................ 34
rey Desire Wiorldechcnre ine sya nee ke mies 38
homVorld tot Chou ch ti.:sr: ..jeitie\sjs.- het mice esheets 48

Diagram J. The Material World a Reverse Reflection
GEaubesopiritual Wiorldsi.'.c sete sits aetietaes ee etagetel = 52
iiaoramino we lhe Seven Worlds... .. «<4 ial orelae > 54
CHA PIMRe eg bbe JE OUrsKANSCOMG,. 15. fuspelals oielel> + ws sfoleueiesshs e 6 56
Diagram 3. The Vehicles of the Four Kingdoms...... 73


Diagram 4. The Consciousness of the Four Kingdoms... 74
CuaptTer IIT. Man and the Method of Evolution.


Activities of Life; Memory and Soul-growth.......... 87
The Constitution of the Seven-fold Man.............. 88
Diagram 5. The Three-fold Spirit, the Three-fold Body
BadwineMhreetoldy Soulaiy. site she- fora stsvewyee tect ae is 95
Doane d PUT CALOT Ye cp dey ease, ohare |e Sopot lellvendyarenelh opsueso fess 96
igiexamyd toc The) SilveraCord eyly.cjtaiste whaicjerielere shales 98
AUF OMIOKCERIATIOUS sic\oxe 04 orafare chose 'syelousisionarne’ olbberspsyels .atetels: 6 112
ue mPEME SU aL CAV OIL. of oifajeiay0)0:(61 615, 0) 4) exes! «os sie: sh sin! eyo wyelie iin ioe 113
EDGES CCOUMMELCAW CIN is atere ofessio-elers cistoie sieieliaicls oye. 4 okey eaters 121
‘iMlngy IUaieoly CEN EMNES Ge Ou dec odo OCU bao OU OGon me conn 129
re MALAnONS LOL ReCDITUD...c « stsilemitie storks tai «fe uke act ota's 133
egOwOrethe, Dense, DOGY:......<.0/clensistveyeie = a) <,chekettalebam 139
Birth of the Vital Body and Growth................. 141
Birth of the Desire Body and Puberty................ 142
Bironos the Mand and) Majority: sccm slerte «cette tie © 142
The Blood; the Vehicle of the Ego....... sooveoor --- 143
Ne lurteu Cy clom (diagram). caverta selerre terete svete: hatahore 146
Cuapter IV. Rebirth and the Law of Consequence......... 147
iWaneract a Hactorgin Hyoluviony ena. sector irene =) 165
AmehemarkablewoLoryincwye rasta cle spetteciersis slsielaasie sa 172


12 CONTENTS.


PART ILI.
COSMOGENESIS AND ANTHROPOGENESIS.

CHAPTER V. The Relation of Man to God...............00- 177

Diagram 6. The Supreme Being, the Cosmic Planes
ANG: GO. ois ceseuseianyes scl snatena tesla ottcxe eee eae nee 178

Cuaptrer VI. The Scheme of Evolution.

Ther Beginnings Love vcehe slo meroraitevesaietenths 'oeioy acenuteeee 183
ANN aga MCGEE ono boo Jo anedae ane mo GE SCOR Pe aoc & 186
Mhe Seven? Reriods Aa Hkecishe cre srossie’ star ste eee sere ore 188
Diacram. 7... "Phe Saturm Period’)... iis de.< std aoa 193
CHAPTER VIL. The) Path of Evolution: oy... t+ 4). see 194
Revolutions) and) Cosmic Nights. -s40-. «vale 195

Diagram 8. The Seven Worlds, Seven Globes and
Seven Periods.” As case as se eels inst crea al stetenenete 197


CHAPTER VIII. The Work of Evolution.


Ariadness Thr adie: once qa coe heats breias We eee 201
The Saturn® Periodinit, tira cst e isin} a sca eo ee 204
Recapitulation sd 3x oa ssid diets sciecieie cies oe aie eesti 208
The Sum Period vcs asictern sie etl aeentske sees «slate tetera 209
Whe! Moon Period Saceccts oie sont hatte ate oke) ores 213
Diagram 9. The Twelve Creative Hierarchies........ 221
CHAPTER IX. Stragglers and Newcomers................-- 223


Classes of Beings at the Beginning of the Moon Period 226
Diagram 10. Classes at the Beginning of Earth Period 230


CHAPTER X.. he Harth Pertodes ya..cess eee ce seine 233
Saturn Revolution of the Earth Period............... 236
Sun Revolution ‘of thesHarth’ Period: 65>. 225.0525 cane 240
Moon Revolution of the Earth Period................ 242
Rest Periods Between Revolutions.................-- 243
The Fourth Revolution of the Earth Period.......... 245

{

CHAPTER XI. Genesis and Evolution of Our Solar System.
Cag es xaivs hire ape bate teva tetera Dis Site Fafa alia a roeelet el tile alates Oa nee 246
The Birth of the: Planets. cateu cases > lees creteretereente 252
Diagram. «Vibrations? «.c-.-<sntmes ath ree acre erat eerie 254


Diagram 12. Man’s Past, Present and Future Form.. 257


CHAPTER XII. Evolution on the Earth.


The Polarian: Epoch.) djalteeraettasicet «fea aera eer 261
Mie: Hyperborean Epoch \7) ys 4 aaewitlacd« anh he leia ie eee 262
The» Moons, the Mighth Spherems, Son cil wi> e kee eae 264


The Lemurian Epoch). iNet cel vel teens ernie


CONTENTS. 13


Birtheotathe sIndividuals ..P Vos a ie. he SRE. 266
Separation of ther Sexesisis ds aa se vecs weet nes ete « 267
RRTEOTICOROLUMEATS)., otal eseteste =. snciciengs «ke augers Sisas eleters aratere’ 6 268
mhe wacesjand Their Leaders. Yokes et oe RS 270
letuencerot Mercury... of....0n2 on meyer eR a ace a, 273
he semuriansy Race .itaicnec fence na thas Re eae we 275
Pibewballkok! Mane t:.0) Fees! TOS ROR cos | Ee, 5 282
ROBB CILeY SPITIts soe ececite occ Mee Meera metas) als 286
ihesAtlantean: *Hpoch: 6245 52,282 a te eniarlt woe deve: 291
pilewaryany Hpochict. crottsctnel clear tteree sia klt sdantehs iets 6: 304
The Sixteen Paths to Destruction../........s60.002... 306
CHAPTERCAGIL:, Back, to. the Bible... ccm slik aarcaeee ome «=. 308
CHAPTER XIV. Occult Analysis of Genesis.
anmtations of the» Bible... 5 sc. c.+0.2.0.0 ce) ee ee 317
ep beeBegINNING 1. Kise sir) aoc eeustia,: So 1S se Eee 321
punem Ne Dwar. TH COn ye. cso a sycsce vse onay eqns -yategs RICE aoe 322
pita eC@roative: ELerarcniesis« delcce os cee cies eekikee Gein: 325
POMS AOUEM Le CLI OGK ty cickovarsis <inie! lel cle sc'ol eieaguiecaunssusteieKaaere.e 327
‘hesSun Period, the Moon Period... <.c5..0.-.0. «om: « 328
MUO mE TUN  PCY1O dc... < vrccis's s/eriis onela’s etapa edeadiray takers Sunes © 329
MehOvateand:,t11d" MISSLOM A nce stere chic seas Museeay aie ae ons 333
Involution, Evolution and Epigenesis................ 336
PAMB IVAN Fes OULG 3/012 foi Aschel oie eiiePetease a cysits «578 aS Fo spntys 344
AGES, TE OR SR Mone COR LO Le COCR ETO et ae 346
Cibeneiateh a) AME icici oloe i din Oa culbac Oro DOM nO aie 347
Mixa Fa 1Ood! in Marra Ses 5). feqsscyers itera vannpeynne. pte 6 352
PEN MHOMBOL SMa ra).1 ae sre keoe ec. e ho ee ORCA MO ee wsece le 6s 360
Diagram 13. The Beginning and End of Sex........ 364
PART bt
Man’s Future DEVELOPMENT AND INITIATION.
Diagram. The Seven Days of Creation.............. 366
bewmrvolution OL HOM OLOMS ra at-e ci wc arose) ol eheiase ore sce ote 367
Pestomand me Ohrish-SeSUSA 4 Nae ccd Cuneo ea tate cheeses 6 374
Diagram 14. The Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit 377
INO TMCACOMDUL EA OW OLA, uc sslcdnielaleiee cc, \ocs'e cfs snsteeis «6 383
Mnesstar ot Bethlehem. ..2 15 v.ate etesva aie ft sis cise rely 388
Mbfowbleart car AMOMALY. 3. esse rsue elle > pans «is: 0's eey'sione%6 393
Mom NLyateny sO GOlLOUNA. crorereie ntonse ae ole stl fern he felons 400
he. Cae AB Wyte g caso soo bho ad CD DSOM DO DoRcor 406
CuHaprer XV. Christ and His Mission,
Diagram. ‘‘As Above, so Below’’......... sere eisiet ent 410,
Cuaprer XVI. Future Development and Initiation.
hen seveneDaysnOL Creation «cs 'tereies terete cision otaretere olor 411
Diagram 15. The Symbolism of the Caduceus ...... 413
Radiates, Mollusks, Articulates and Vertebrates....... 416


Spiralstiwithine Spirals trerct cto stein detec stewie iors ae 420


14 CONTENTS.


Alchemy and Soulgrowth..................- 2 Gawise seed
The Creative) Word. .0.0%,. assert oils dai aaehireereicls 425
CHartrR XVII. The Method of Acquiring First-Hand
Knowledge.
The AHiIrshiStepsisianay ce 2 s.c.cheelers ols cleleho stale vorelaeenente 430
Western Methods for Western People............... 437
The: Science of Nutrition, 2:7, . sss stat) s/oott asic elie 441
Pable wt sHood-Values). «ic 0: <),c.¢ eieayais ete efefaiblarors oie + aan 450
Thewuaw, Of sAssimiUlation,.,. 5, ««,sleentaeit ieee ae yeeros 457
Livevand. Get, Lave’. 6 less cctectl«% actasve-spors sue oO ree 460
The: Thord’s. Prayers, saeco ves sta -oveuave re ne teks injoseve voice eee 462
he Vow. of Celibacy acoehat svat. ts otaetet ale. oj: oleh Ronelemeten 467
The Pituitary Body and the Pineal Gland............ 473
Diagram 17. Path of the Unused Sex Currents....... 475
Hsoterie “lrainingy, weenie clei waeiete ci totes tense aera 477
How? the, Inner Vehicle as; Bualtit vtec.) -1-perpereteneie ate 480
Corticentration’ % jevass «eter ssre shonrartaduele ersrciereie sperte eee 486
Meditation Sante wbiectereeieertetlecscuaieysisie oo omyslerene tees 489
Observation CN. hi oreiacdtecpeta teste taceerctersielevene re) nee ate 492
Diseriminatlony yer « oicie.s ees ori ste olepereis ssaps.> ayers oka tenon meme 493
Contemplation ye crest nier eerie te AOHARESDOCDNOODOOGG. 494
Adoration heii ctetie Pevccr tetas tieers oreo ec ceien eee 495
CuHapTEeR XVIII. The Constitution of the Earth and Volcanic
IETUPTLONS el store sie ueten tara erete eererc ata atetereletaciaretctetetarane 498
Thev Number ot the (Beasts ciareie a etn ois ciara tte cnerennerele 499
Diagram 18. The Constitution of the Earth......... 509
CHAPTER XIX. Christian Rosenkreuz and the Order of Rosi-
GLUCIANSS oi seraie ore, onsyersteyeisen Sos Bley sialeieist sl hase 3 ve ee 515
IMITATION fares ards. Snape ad IN Coal ce wrasse Se ee 524
Phe Rosierucian! Well owsbip ss tree iets iors! cketel= eters 530
Correspondence Coursesscc smitten 533
Symbolism! Of WOSe: CUOSS ereeres che kere aetesciciel ei orarctereneeeene 534


INQ@x: « 5:< ayetats ons) htetevoteveneleuclerstenqateleter dtieiistess eee eee 539


PART I


Man’s Present Constitution and


Method of Development


THE FOUR KINGDOMS.
WILL THE ONE UNIVERSAL SPIRIT


Im AG INATION


“ipinel ke (8) Ass TRACT "Tn OUGHT


irr Tue Focus OF Plinnv


Minn
0
a irr GoncneTe Rovtir sa


Prysic s


Hicwer Desines 4

Deane Desme
Worn | Bopy Fernine >
_ Low ER Desires 2


Wor LD


INTRODUCTION.


the human race, and, for reasons given in the fol-

lowing pages, it is held by the Rosicrucian that
neither Judaism nor “popular Christianity,’ but true_
Esoteric Christianity is to be its world-religion.

Buddha, great, grand and sublime, may be the “Light
of Asia,” but Christ will yet be acknowledged the “Light
of the World.” As the sun outshines the brightest star
in the heavens, dispels every vestige of darkness and gives
life and light to all beings, so, in a not too distant future,
will the true religion of Christ supersede and obliterate all
other religions, to the eternal benefit of mankind.

In our civilization the chasm that stretches between
mind and heart yawns deep and wide and, as the mind flies
on from discovery to discovery in the realms of science,
the gulf becomes ever deeper and wider and the heart is
left further and further behind. The mind loudly demands
and will be satisfied with nothing less than a materially
demonstrable explanation of man and his fellow-creatures
that make up the phenomenal world. The heart feels in-
stinctively that there is something greater, and it yearns
for that which it feels is a higher truth than can be
grasped by the mind alone. The human soul would fain
soar upon ethereal pinions of intuition; would fain lave in
the eternal fount of spiritual light and love; but modern
scientific views have shorn its wings and it sits fettered


1?


Ti Western world is undoubtedly the vanguard of


18 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


and mute, unsatisfied longings gnawing at its tendrils as
the vulture at Prometheus’ liver.

Is this necessary? Is there no common ground upon
which head and heart may meet, each assisting the other,
each by the help of the other becoming more effective in
the search for universal truth, and each receiving equal
satisfaction ?

As surely as the pre-existing light created the eye whereby
the light is seen; as surely as the primordial desire for
growth created the digestive and assimilative system for
the attainment of that end; as surely as thought existed
before the brain and built and still is building the brain
for its expression; as surely as the mind is now forging
ahead and wringing her secrets from nature by the very
force of its audacity, just so surely will the heart find a
way to burst its bonds and gratify its longings. At present
it is shackled by the dominant brain. Some day it will
gather strength to burst its prison bars and become a power
greater than the mind.

It is equally certain that there can be no contradiction
in nature, therefore the heart and the mind must be capa-
ble of uniting. To indicate this common ground is pre-
cisely the purpose of this book. To show where and how
the mind, helped by the intuition of the heart, can probe
more deeply into the mysteries of being than either could
do alone; where the heart, by union with the mind, can be
kept from going astray; where each can have full scope
for action, neither doing violence to the other and where
both mind and heart can be satisfied.

Only when that co-operation is attained and perfected
will man attain the higher, truer understanding of himself
and of the world of which he is a part; only that can give
him a broad mind and a great heart.


INTRODUCTION 19


At every birth what appears to be a new life comes
among us. We see the little form as it lives and grows,
becoming a factor in our lives for days, months, or years.
At last there comes a day when the form dies and goes to
decay. The life that came, whence we know not, has
passed to the invisible beyond, and in sorrow we ask our-
selves, Whence came it? Why was it here? and Whither
has it gone?

Across every threshold the skeleton form of Death
throws his fearsome shadow. Old or young, well or ill,
rich or poor, all, all alike must pass out into that shadow
and throughout the ages has sounded the piteous cry for
a solution of the riddle of life—the riddle of death.

So far as the vast majority of people are concerned the
three great questions, Whence have we come? Why are we
here? Whither are we going? remain unanswered to this
day. It has unfortunately come to be the popularly ac- _
cepted opinion that nothing can be definitely known about ™
these matters of deepest interest to humanity. Nothing
could be more erroneous than such an idea. Each and
every one, without exception, may become capable of obtain-
ing first-hand, definite information upon this subject; may
personally investigate the state of the human spirit, both
before birth and after death. There is no favoritism, nor
are special gifts required. Hach of us has inherently the
faculty for knowing all of ‘hese matters; but !—Yes, there
is a “but,” and a “BUT” that must be written large. These
faculties are present in all, though latent in most people.
It requires persistent effort to awaken them and that seems
to be a powerful deterrent. If these faculties, “awake and
aware,” could be had for a monetary consideration, even if
the price were high, many people would pay it to gain such
immense advantage over their fellow-men, but few indeed


20 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


are those willing to live the life that is required to awaken
them. That awakening comes only by patient, persistent
effort. It cannot be bought; there is no royal road to it.

It is conceded that practice is necessary to learn to play
the piano, and that it is useless to think of being a watch-
maker without being willing to serve an apprenticeship.
Yet when the matter of the soul, of death and the beyond,
of the great causes of being, are the questions at issue,
many think they know as much as anyone and have an
equal right to express an opinion, though they may never
have given the subject an hour’s study.

As a matter of fact, no one unless qualified by study
of the subject should expect serious consideration for an
opinion. In legal cases, where experts are called to testify,
they are first examined as to their competency. The weight
of their testimony will be nil, unless they are found to be
thoroughly proficient in the branch of knowledge regarding
which their testimony is sought.

If, hewever, they are found to be qualified—by study
and practice—to express an expert opinion, it is received
with the utmost respect and deference; and if the testi-
mony of one expert is corroborated by others equally pro-
ficient, the testimony of each additional man adds im-
mensely to the weight of the previous evidence.

The irrefutable testimony of one such man easily coun-
terbalances that of one or a dozen or a million men who
know nothing of that whereof they speak, for nothing,
even though multiplied by a million, will still remain
nothing. This is as true of any other subject as of mathe-
matics.

As previously said, we recognize these facts readily
enough in material affairs, but when things beyond the
world of sense, when the super-physical world is under


INTRODUCTION 21


discussion ; when the relations of God to man, the inner-
most mysteries of the immortal spark of divinity, loosely
termed the soul, are to be probed, then each clamors for
as serious consideration of his opinions and ideas regard-
ing spiritual matters as is given to the sage, who by a life
of patient and toilsome research has acquired wisdom in
these higher things.

Nay, more; many will not even content themselves with
claiming equal consideration for their opinions, but will
even jeer and scoff at the words of the sage, seek to impugn
his testimony as fraud, and, with the supreme confidence
of deepest ignorance, asseverate that as they know nothing
of such matters, it is absolutely impossible that anyone
else can.

The man who realizes his ignorance has taken the first
step toward knowledge.

The path to first-hand knowledge is not easy. Nothing
- worth having ever comes without persistent effort. It can-
not be too often repeated that there are no such things as
special gifts or “luck.” All that anyone is or has, is the
result of effort. What one lacks in comparison with an-
other is latent in himself and capable of development by
proper methods.

If the reader, having grasped this idea thoroughly,
should ask, what he must do to obtain this first-hand
knowledge, the following story may serve to impress the
idea, which is the central one in occultism:

A young man came to a sage one day and asked, “Sire,
what must I do to become wise?’ The sage vouchsafed
no answer. The youth after repeating his question a num-
ber of times, with a like result, at last left him, to return
the next day with the same question. Again no answer was
given and the youth returned on the third day, still repem-


22 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


ing his question, “Sire, what must I do to become wise?”

Finally the sage turned and went down to a near-by
river. He entered the water, bidding the youth follow him.
Upon arriving at a sufficient depth the sage took the young
man by the shoulders and held him under the water, despite
his struggles to free himself. At last, however, he released
him and when the youth had regained his breath the sage
questioned him:

“Son, when you were under the water what did you
most desire?”

“The youth answered without hesitation, “Air, air!
I wanted air!”

“Would you not rather have had riches, pleasure, power
or love, my son? Did you not think of any of these?”
queried the sage.

“No, sire! I wanted air and thought only of air,’ came
the instant response.

“Then,” said the sage, “to become wise you must desire
wisdom with as great intensity as you just now desired air.
You must struggle for it, to the exclusion of every other
aim in life. It must be your one and only aspiration, by
day and by night. If you seek wisdom with that fervor,
my son, you will surely become wise.”

That is the first and central requisite the aspirant to
occult knowledge must possess—an unswerving desire, a
burning thirst for knowledge; a zeal that allows no obstacle
to conquer it; but the supreme motive for seeking this
occult knowledge must be an ardent desire to benefit hu-
manity, entirely disregarding self in order to work for
others. Unless prompted by that motive, occult knowledge
is dangerous.

Without possessing these qualifications—especially the
latter_-in some measure, any attempt to tread the arduous


INTRODUCTION 23


path of occultism would be a hazardous undertaking. An-
other prerequisite to this first-hand knowledge, however, is
the study of occultism at second-hand. Certain occult pow-
ers are necessary for the first-hand investigation of matters
connected with the pre-natal and post-mortem states of
man, but no one need despair of acquiring information
about these conditions because of undeveloped occult pow-
ers. As a man may know about Africa either by going
there personally or by reading descriptions written by trav-
elers who have been there, so may he visit the super-
physical realms if he will but qualify himself therefor, or
he may learn what others who have so qualified themselves
report as a result of their investigations.

Christ said, “The Truth shall make you free,” but Truth
is not found once and forever. Truth is eternal, and the
quest for Truth must also be eternal. Occultism knows
of no “faith once for all delivered.” There are certain
basic truths which remain, but which may be looked at
from many sides, each giving a different view, which com-
plements the previous ones; therefore, so far as we can
see at present, there is no such achievement possible as
arriving at the ultimate truth.

Wherein this work differs from some philosophical works
the variations are caused by difference of viewpoint, and
all respect is paid to the conclusions reached and the ideas
set forth by other investigators. It is the earnest hope of
the writer that the study of the following pages may help
to make the student’s ideas fuller and more rounded than
they were before.


CHAPTER I.


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS.


ble Worlds. These Worlds are invisible to the

majority of people because of the dormancy of the
finer and higher senses whereby they may be perceived, in
the same way that the Physical World about us is per-
ceived through the physical senses. The majority of peo-
ple are on a similar footing in regard to the super-physical
Worlds as the man who is born blind is to our world of
sense; although light and color are all about him, he is
unable to see them. To him they are non-existent and
incomprehensible, simply because he lacks the sense of sight
wherewith to perceive them. . Objects he can feel; they
seem real; but light and color are beyond his ken.

So with the greater part of humanity. They feel, and
see objects and hear sounds in the Physical World, but the
other realms, which the clairvoyant calls the higher Worlds,
are as incomprehensible to them as light and color are to
the blind man. Because the blind man cannot see color
and light, however, is no argument against their existence
and reality. Neither is it an argument, that because most
people cannot see the super-physical Worlds no one can do
so. If the blind man obtains his sight, he will see light
and color. If the higher senses of those blind to the super-
physical Worlds are awakened by proper methods, they

24


Tu first step in Occultism is the study of the invisi-


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 25


also will be able to behold the Worlds which are now hidden
from them.

While many people make the mistake of being incredu-
lous concerning the existence or reality of the super-sensu-
ous Worlds, there are also many who go to the other ex-
treme, and, having become convinced of the verity of invisi-
ble Worlds, think that when a person is clairvoyant all
truth is at once open to him; that when one can “see,” he.
at once “knows all about” these higher Worlds. )

This is a great mistake. We readily recognize the fal-
lacy of such a contention in matters of everyday life. We
do not think that a man who was born blind, but has ob-
tained his sight, at once “knows all about” the Physical
World. Nay, more; we know that even those of us who
have been able to see the things about us all our lives are
far from having a universal knowledge of them. We know
that it requires arduous study and years of application to
know about even that infinitesimal part of things that we
handle in our daily lives, and reversing the Hermetic
aphorism, “as above, so below,” we gather at once that it
must be the same in the other Worlds. At the same time
it is also true that there are much greater facilities for
acquiring knowledge in the super-physical Worlds than in
our present dense physical condition, but not so great as
to eliminate the necessity for close study and the possi-
bility of making a mistake in observation. In fact, all the
testimony of reliable and qualified observers prove that
much more care in observation is needed there than here.

Clairvoyants must first be trained before their observa-
tions are of any real value, and the more proficient they be-
come the more modest are they about telling of what they
see; the more do they defer to the versions of others, know-
ing how much there is to learn and realizing how little the


26 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


single investigator can grasp of all the detail incident to
his investigations.

This also accounts for the varied versions, which super-
ficial people think are an argument against the existence of
the higher Worlds. They contend that if these Worlds
exist, investigators must necessarily bring back identical
descriptions. If we take an illustration from everyday
life, the fallacy of this becomes apparent.

Suppose a newspaper sends twenty reporters to a city
with orders to “write it up.” Reporters are, or ought to
be, trained observers. It is their business to see every-
thing and they should be able to give as good descriptions
as can be expected from any source. Yet it is certain that
of the twenty reports, no two would be exactly alike. It is
much more likely that they would be totally different.
Although some of them might contain leading features in
common, others might be unique in quality and quantity of
description.

Is it an argument against the existence of the city that
these reports differ? Certainly not! It is easily accounted
for by the fact that each saw the city from his own par-
ticular point of view and instead of these varying reports
being confusing and detrimental, it is safe to say that a
perusal of them all would give a fuller, better understand-
ing and description of the city than if only one were read
and the others thrown in the waste-basket. Each report
would round out and complement the others.

The same is true regarding accounts made by investi-
gators of the higher Worlds. Each has his own peculiar
way of looking at things and can describe only what he
sees from his particular point of view. The account he
gives may differ from those of others, yet all be equally
truthful from each individual observer’s viewpoint.


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS Qn”


lt is sometimes asked, Why investigate these Worlds?
Why is it not best to take one World at a time; to be con-
tent for the present with the lessons to be learned in the
Physical World, and, if there are invisible Worlds why not
wait until we reach them before investigating? “Sufficient
unto the day is the evil thereof!” Why borrow more?

If we knew without doubt that at some time, sooner or
later, each one of us must be transported to a far country
where, under new and strange conditions, we must live for
many years, is it not reasonable to believe that if we had
an opportunity to learn of that country in advance of our
removal to it we would gladly do so? Knowledge would
render it much easier for us to accommodate ourselves to
new conditions.

There is only one certainty in life and that is—Death!
As we pass into the beyond and are confronted by new
conditions, knowledge of them is sure to be of the greatest
help.

But that is not all. To understand the Physical World,
which is the world of effects, it is necessary to understand
the super-physical World, which is the world of causes.
We see street cars in motion and we hear the clicking of
telegraph instruments, but the mysterious force which
causes the phenomena remains invisible to us. We say it
is electricity, but the name gives us no explanation. We
learn nothing of the force itself; we see and hear only its
effects.

If a dish of cold water be placed in an atmosphere of a
sufficiently low temperature ice crystals immediately begin
to form and we can see the process of their formation.
The lines along which the water crystallizes were in it all
the time as lines of force but they were invisible until the
water congealed. The beautiful “frost flowers” on a win-


28 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


dowpane are visible manifestations of currents of the highe1
Worlds which operate upon us all the time, unrecognized by
most of us, but none the less potent.

The higher Worlds are thus the worlds of causes, of
~ forces; and we cannot really understand this lower World
unless we know the others and realize the forces and causes
of which all material things are but the effects.

As to the reality of these higher Worlds compared with
that of the Physical World, strange as it may seem, these
higher Worlds, which to the majority appear as mirages, or
even less substantial, are, in truth, much more real and
the objects in them more lasting and indestructible than
the objects in the Physical World. If we take an example
we shall readily see this. An architect does not start to
build a house by procuring the material and setting the
workmen to laying stone upon stone in a haphazard way,
without thought or plan. He “thinks the house out.”
Gradually it takes form in his mind and finally there
stands a clear idea of the house that is to be—a thought-
form of a house.

This house is yet invisible to all but the architect. He
makes it objective on paper. He draws the plans and
from this objective image of the thought-form the work-
men construct the house of wood, iron, or stone, accurately
corresponding to the thought-form originated by the
architect.

Thus the thought-form becomes a material reality. The
materialist would assert that it is much more real, lasting
and substantial than the image in the architect’s wimd.
But let us see. The house could not have been constructed
without the thought-form. The material object can be de-
stroyed by dynamite, earthquake, fire, or decay, but the
thought-form will remain. It will exist as long as the


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 29


architect lives and from it any number of houses similar to
the one destroyed may be constructed. Not even the archi-
tect himself can destroy it. Even after his death this
thought-form can be recovered by those who are qualified to
read the memory of nature, which will be dealt with later.

Having thus seen the reasonableness of such Worlds
existing around and about us, and having satisfied ourselves
of their reality, their permanency, and of the utility of a
knowledge concerning them, we shall now examine them
severally and singly, commencing with the Physical World.


CHEMICAL REGION OF THE PHysICcAL WORLD.


In the Rosicrucian teaching the universe is divided into
seven different Worlds, or states of matter, as follows:
1—World of God.
2—World of Virgin Spirits.
3—World of Divine Spirit.
4—World of Life Spirit.
5—World of Thought.
6—Desire World.
%—Physical World.

This division is not arbitrary but necessary, because the
substance of each of these Worlds is amenable to laws which
are practically inoperative in the others. For instance, in
the Physical World, matter is subject to gravity, contrac-
tion and expansion. In the Desire World there is neither
heat nor cold, and forms levitate as easily as they gravitate.
Distance and time are also governing factors of existence in
the Physical World, but are almost non-existent in the
Desire World.

The matter of these worlds also varies in density, the
Physical World being the densest of the seven.

Each World is subdivided into seven Regions or sub-


30 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


divisions of matter. In the Physical World the solids,
liquids and gases form the three denser subdivisions, the
remaining four being ethers of varying densities. In the
other Worlds similar subdivisions are necessary, because the
matter of which they are composed is not of uniform
density.

There are still two further distinctions to be made. The
three dense subdivisions of the Physical World—the solids,
liquids and gases—constitute what is termed the Chemical
Region. The substance in this Region is the basis of all
dense Form.

The Ether is also physical matter. It is not homogene-
ous, as material science alleges, but exists in four different
states. It is the medium of ingress for the quickening
spirit which imparts vitality to the Forms in the Chemical
Region. The four finer or etheric subdivisions of the
Physical World constitute what is known as the Etheric
Region.

In the World of Thought the three higher subdivisions
are the basis of abstract thought, hence they, collectively,
are called the Region of Abstract Thought. The four
denser subdivisions supply the mind-stuff in which we
embody and concrete our ideas and are therefore termed the
Region of Concrete Thought.

The careful consideration given by the occultist to the
characteristics of the Physical World might seem super-
fluous were it-not that he regards all things from a view
point differing widely from that of the materialist. The
latter recognizes three states of matter—solids, liquids,
and gases. These are all chemical, because derived from
the chemical constituents of the Earth. From this chem-
ical matter all the forms of mineral, plant, animal, and
man have been built, hence they are as truly chemical as


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 31


the substances which are commonly so termed. Thus
whether we consider the mountain or the cloud that en-
velops its top, the juice of the plant or the blood of the
animal, the spider’s thread, the wing of the butterfiy or
the bones of the elephant, the air we breathe or the water
we drink—all are composed of the same chemical sub-
stance.

What is it then which determines the conformation of
this basic substance into the multiplex variety of Forms
which we see about us? It is the One Universal Spirit, ex-
pressing Itself in the visible world as four great streams
of Life, at varying stages of development. This fourfold
spiritual impulse molds the chemical matter of the Earth
into the variegated forms of the four Kingdoms—mineral,
plant, animal, and man. When a form has served its
purpose as a vehicle of expression for the three higher
streams of life, the chemical forces disintegrate that form
so that the matter may be returned to its primordial state,
and thus made available for the building of new forms.
Nhe spirit or life which molds the form into an expression
of itself is, therefore, as extraneous to the matter it uses
as a carpenter is apart from and personally independent
of the house he builds for his own occupancy.

As all the forms of mineral, plant, animal, and man are
chemical, they must logically be as dead and devoid of
feeling as chemical matter in its primitive state, and the
Rosicrucian asserts that they are.

Some scientists contend that there is feeling in all tissue,
living or dead, to whatever kingdom it belongs. They in-
clude even the substances ordinarily classed as mineral in
their category of objects having feeling, and to prove their
contentions they submit diagrams with curves of energy
obtained from tests. Another class of investigators teach


832 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


that there is no feeling even in the human body, except in
the brain, which is the seat of feeling. They say it is the
brain and not the finger which feels the pain when the
latter is injured. Thus is the house of Science divided
against itself on this as on most other points. The posi-
tion taken by each is partly right. It depends upon what
we mean by “feeling.” If we mean simply response to
impacts, such as the rebound of a rubber ball that is
dropped to the ground, of course it is correct to attribute
feeling to mineral, plant, and animal tissue; but if we
mean pleasure and pain, love and hate, joy and sorrow, it
would be absurd to attribute them to the lower forms of
life, to detached tissue, to minerals in their native state,
or even to the brain, because such feelings are expressions
of the self-conscious immortal spirit, and the brain is only
the keyboard of the wonderful instrument upon which the
human spirit plays its symphony of life, just as the musi-
cian expresses himself upon his violin.

As there are people who are quite unable to understand
that there must be and are higher Worlds, so there are
some who, having become slightly acquainted with the
higher realms, acquire the habit of undervaluing this Phys-
ical World. Such an attitude is as incorrect as that of
the materialist. The great and wise Beings who carry
out the will and design of God placed us in this physical
environment to learn great and important lessons which
could not be learned under other conditions, and it is our
duty to use our knowledge of the higher Worlds in learn-
ing to the best of our ability the lessons which this mate-
rial world has to teach us.

In one sense the Physical World is a sort of model school
or experiment station to teach us to work correctly in the
others. It does this whether or not we know of tbe exe


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 33


istence of those other worlds, thereby proving the great
wisdom of the originators of the plan. If we had knowl-
ddge of none but the higher Worlds, we would make many
mistakes which would become apparent only when physical
conditions are brought to bear as a criterion. To illus-
trate: Let us imagine the case of an inventor working
out his idea of a machine. First he builds the machine in
thought, and in his mind he sees it complete and in oper-
ation, performing most beautifully the work it is designed
to do. He next makes a drawing of the design, and in
doing so perhaps finds that modificationsin his first con-
ception are necessary. When, from the drawings, he has
become satisfied that the plan is feasible, he proceeds to
build the actual machine from suitable material.

Now it is almost certain that still further modifications
will be found necessary before the machine will work as
intended. It may be found that it must be entirely re-
modeled, or even that it is altogether useless in its present
form, must be discarded and a new plan evolved. But
mark this, for here is the point: the new idea or plan will
be formulated for the purpose of eliminating the defects
in the useless machine. Had there been no material ma-
chine constructed, thereby making evident the faults of the
first idea, a second and correct idea would not have been
formed.

This applies equally to all conditions of life—social,
mercantile, and philanthropic. Many plans appear ex-
cellent to those conceiving them, and may even look well
on paper, but when brought down to the actual test of
utility they often fail. That, however, should not discour-
age us. It is true that “we learn more from our mistakes
than from our successes,” and the proper light in which
to regard this Physical World is as a school of valuable

2


34 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


experience, in which we learn lessons of the utmost im-
portance.
THE Erueric REGION OF THE PHysicAL WORLD.

As soon as we enter this realm of nature we are in the
invisible, intangible World, where our ordinary senses fail
us, hence this part of the Physical World is practically
unexplored by material science.

Air is invisible, yet modern science knows that it ex-
ists. By means of instruments its velocity as wind can be
measured; by compression it can be made visible as liquid
air. With ether, however, that is not so easy. Material
science finds that it is necessary to account in some way
for the transmission of electricity, with or without wires.
It is forced to postulate some substance of a finer kind
than it knows, and it calls that substance “ether.” It does
not really know that ether exists, as the ingenuity of the
scientist has not, as yet, been able to devise a vessel in
which it is possible to confine this substance, which is alto-
gether too elusive for the comfort of the “wizard of the
laboratory.” He cannot measure, weigh, nor analyze it
by any apparatus now at his disposal.

Truly, the achievements of modern science are marvel-
ous. The best way to learn the secrets of nature, however,
is not by inventing instruments, but by improving the in-
vestigator himself. Man has within himself faculties
which eliminate distance and compensate for lack of size
to a degree as much greater than the power of telescope
and microscope as theirs exceeds that of the naked eye.
These senses or faculties are the means of investigation
used by occultists. They are their “open sesame” in
searching for truth.

To the trained clairvoyant ether is as tangible as are
the solids, liquids, and gases of the Chemical Region tw


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 35


ordinary beings. He sees that the vital forces which give
life to the mineral forms of plant, animal and man flow
into these forms, by means of the four states of ether.
The names and specific functions of these four ethers are
as follows.

(1) Chemical Ether.—This ether is both positive and
negative in its manifestation. The forces which cause as-
similation and excretion work through it. Assimilation
is the process whereby the different nutritive elements of
food are incorporated into the body of plant, animal and
man. ‘This is carried on by forces with which we shal]
become acquainted later. They work along the positive
pole of the chemical ether and attract the needed elements,
building them into the forms concerned. These forces
do not act blindly nor mechanically, but in a selective way
(well-known to scientists by its effects) thereby accom-
plishing their purpose, which is the growth and mainte-
nance of the body.

Excretion is carried on by forces of the same kind, but
working along the negative pole of the chemical ether.
By means of this pole they expel from the body the mate-
rials in the food which are unfit for use, or those which
have outlived their usefulness in the body and should be
expurgated from the system. This, like all other proc-
esses independent of man’s volition, is also wise, selective,
and not merely mechanical in its operation, as seen, for
instance, in the case of the action of the kidneys, where
only the urine is filtered through when the organs are in
health; but it is known that when the organs are not in
health, the valuable albumen is allowed to escape with
the urine, the proper selection not being made because of
an abnormal condition.

(2) Life Ether—As the chemical ether is the avenue


36 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


for the operation of the forces the object of which is the
maintenance of the individual form, so the life ether is
the avenue for the operation of the forces which have for
their object the maintenance of the species—the forces of
propagation.

Like the chemical ether, the life ether also has its posi-
tive and negative pole. The forces which work along the
positive pole are those which work in the female during
gestation. They enable her to do the positive, active work
of bringing forth a new being. On the other hand the
forces which work along the negative pole of the life ether
enable the male to produce semen.

In the work on the impregnated ovum of the animal
and man, or upon the seed of the plant, the forces working
along the positive pole of the life ether produce male
plants, animals and men; while the forces which express
themselves through the negative pole generate females.

(8) Light Ether.—This ether is both positive and nega-
tive, and the forces which play along its positive pole are
the forces which generate that blood heat in the higher
species of animal and in man, which makes them individ-
ual sources of heat. The forces which work along the
negative pole of the light ether are those which operate
through the senses, manifesting as the passive functions
ot sight, hearing, feeling, tasting, and smelling. They
also build and nourish the eye.

In the cold-blooded animals the positive pole of the
light ether is the avenue of the forces which circulate the
blood, and the negative forces have the same functions
in regard to the eye as in the case of the higher animals
and man. Where eyes are lacking, the forces working in
the negative pole of the light ether are perhaps building


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 37


or nourishing other sense organs, as they do in all that
have sense organs.

In plants the forces which work along the positive pole
of the light ether cause the circulation of the juices of the
plant. Thus in winter, when the light ether is not charged
with sunlight as in summer, the sap ceases to flow until
the summer sun again invests the light ether with
its force. The forces which work along the negative pole
of the light ether deposit the chlorophyl, the green sub-
stance of the plant and also color the flowers. In fact, all
color, in all the kingdoms is deposited by means of the
negative pole of the light ether. Therefore animals have
the deepest color on the back and flowers are deepest col-
ored on the side turned towards the light. In the polar
regions of the earth, where the rays of the sun are weak,
all color is lighter and in some cases is so sparingly de-
posited that in winter it is withdrawn altogether and the
animals become white.

(4) Reflecting Ether.—It has heretofore been stated
that the idea of the house which has existed in the mind
can be recovered from the memory of nature, even after the
death of the architect. Everything that has ever hap-
pened has left behind it an ineffaceable picture in this
reflecting ether. As the giant ferns of the childhood of
the Earth have left their pictures in the coal beds, and
as the progress of the glacier of a bygone day may be
traced by means of the trail it has left upon the rocks
along its path, even so are the thoughts and acts of men
ineffaceably recorded by nature in this reflecting ether,
where the trained seer may read their story with an ac-
curacy commensurate with his ability.

The reflecting ether deserves its name for more than
one reason, for the pictures in it are but reflections of the


38 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


memory of nature. The real memory of nature is found
in a much higher realm. In this reflecting ether no thor-
oughly trained clairvoyant cares to read, as the pictures
are blurred and\vague compared to those found in the
higher realm. Those who read in the reflecting ether are
generally those who have no choice, who, in fact, do not
know in what they are reading. As a rule ordinary psy-
chometrists and mediums obtain their knowledge through
the reflecting ether. To some slight extent the pupil of
the occult school in the first stages of his training also
reads in the reflecting ether, but he is warned by his
teacher of the insufficiencies of this ether as a means of
acquiring accurate information, so that he does not easily
draw wrong conclusions.

This ether is also the medium through which thought
makes an impression upon the human brain. It is most
intimately connected with the fourth subdivision of the
World of Thought. This is the highest of the four sub-
divisions contained in the Region of Concrete Thought
and is the homeworld of the human mind. There a much
clearer version of the memory of nature is found than in
the reflecting ether.


THE DESIRE WORLD.


Like the Physical World, and every other realm of
nature, the Desire World has the seven subdivisions called
“Regions,” but unlike the Physical World, it does not have
the great divisions corresponding to the Chemical and
Etheric Regions. Desire stuff in the Desire World per-
sists through its seven subdivisions or regions as material
for the embodiment of desire. As the Chemical Region
is the realm of form and as the Etheric Region is the
home of the forces carrying on life activities in those


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 39


forms, enabling them to live, move and propagate, so the
forces in the Desire World, working in the quickened dense
body, impel it to move in this or that direction.

If there were only the activities of the Chemical and
Etheric Regions of the Physical World, there would be
forms having life, able to move, but with no incentive for
so doing. ‘This incentive is supplied by the cosmic forces
active in the Desire World and without this activity play-
ing through every fibre of the vitalized body, urging
action in this direction or that, there would be no experi-
ence and no moral growth. The functions of the different
ethers would take care of the growth of the form, but
moral growth would be entirely lacking. Evolution would
be an impossibility, both as to form and life, for it is only
in response to the requirements of spiritual growth that
forms evolve to higher states. Thus we at once see the
great importance of this realm of nature.

Desires, wishes, passions, and feelings express them-
selves in the matter of the different regions of the De-
sire World as form and feature express themselves in the
Chemical Region of the Physical World. They take forms
which last for a longer or shorter time, according to the
intensity of the desire, wish, or feeling embodied in them.
In the Desire World the distinction between the forces
and the matter is not so definite and apparent as in the
Physical World. One might almost say that here the
ideas of force and matter are identical or interchange-
able. It is not quite so, but we may say that to a certain
extent the Desire World consists of force-matter.

When speaking of the matter of the Desire World, it is
true that it is one degree less dense than the matter of
the Physical World, but we entertain an entirely wrong
idea if we imagine it is finer physical matter. That idea,


40 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


though held by many who have studied occult philosophies,
is entirely erroneous. The wrong impression is caused,
principally by the difficulty of giving the full and accurate
description necessary for a thorough understanding of the
higher worlds. Unfortunately, our language is descriptive
of material things and therefore entirely inadequate to
describe the conditions of the super-physical realms, hence
all that is said about these realms must be taken tenta-
tively, as similes, rather than as accurate descriptions.

Though the mountain and the daisy, the man, the horse,
and a piece of iron, are composed of one ultimate atomic
substance, we do not say that the daisy is a finer form of
iron. Similarly it is impossible to explain in words the
change or difference in physical matter when it is broken
up into desire-stuff. If there were no difference it would ©
be amenable to the laws of the Physical World, which it
is not.

The law of matter of the Chemical Region is inertia—
the tendency to remain in statu quo. It takes a certain
amount of force to overcome this inertia and cause a body
which is at rest to move, or to stop a body in motion. Not
so with the matter of the Desire World. That matter itself
is almost living. It is in unceasing motion, fluid, taking
all imaginable and unimaginable forms with inconceivable
facility and rapidity, at the same time coruseiting and
scintillating in a thousand ever-changing shades of color,
incomparable to anything we know in this physical state
of consciousness. Something very faintly resembling the
action and appearance of this matter will be seen in the
play of colors on an abalone shell when held in the sun-
light and moved to and fro.

That is what the Desire World is—ever-changing light
and color—in which the forces of animal and man inter-


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 41


mingie with the forces of innumerable Hierarchies of spirit-
ual beings which do not appear in our Physical World,
but are as active in the Desire World as we are here. Some
of them will be dealt with later and their connection with
man’s evolution described.

The forces sent out by this vast and varied host of Be-
ings mold the ever-changing matter of the Desire World
into innumerable and differing forms of more or less
durability, according to the kinetic energy of the impulse
which gave them birth.

From this slight description it may be understood how
difficult it is for a neophyte who has just had his inner eyes
opened to find his balance in the World of Desire. The
trained clairvoyant soon ceases to wonder at the impossi-
ble descriptions sometimes brought through by mediums.
They may be perfectly honest, but the possibilities
of getting the parallax out of focus are legion, end of the
subtlest nature, and the real wonder is that they ever com-
municate anything correctly. All of us had to learn to
see, in the days of our infancy, as we may readily find by
watching a young babe. It will be found that the little
one will reach for objects on the other side of the room
or the street, or for the Moon. He is entirely unable to
gauge distances. The blind man who has been made to
see will, at first, often close his eyes to walk from one
place to another, declaring, until he has learned to use
his eyes, that it is easier to walk by feeling than by sight.
So the one whose inner organs of perception have been
vivified must also be trained in the use of his newly ac-
quired faculty. At first the neophyte will try to apply to
the Desire World the knowledge derived from his experi-
ence in the Physical World, because he has not yet learnea
the laws of the world into which he is entering. This is


42 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


the source of a vast amount of trouble and perplexity.
Before he can understand, he must become as a little child,
which imbibed knowledge without reference to any pre-
vious experience.

To arrive at a correct understanding of the Desire
World it is necessary to realize that it is the world of feel-
ings, desires, and emotions. These are all under the domi-
nation of two great forces—Attraction and Repulsion,
which act in a different way in the three denser Regions
of the Desire World from that in which they act in the
three finer or upper Regions, while the central Region
may be called neutral ground.

This central Region is the Region of feeling. Here
interest in or indifference to an object or an idea sways the
balance in favor of one of the two previously mentioned
forces, thereby relegating the object or idea to the three
higher or the three lower Regions of the Desire World,
or else they will expel it. We shall see presently how
this is accomplished.

In the finest and rarest substance of the three higher
Regions of the Desire World the force of Attraction alone
holds sway, but it is also present in some degree in the
denser matter of the three lower Regions, where it works
against the force of Repulsion, which is dominant there.
The disintegrating force of Repulsion would soon destroy
every form coming into these three lower Regions were it
not that it is thus counteracted. In the densest or lowest
Region, where it is strongest, it tears and shatters the
forms built there in a way dreadful to see, yet it is not a
vandalistic force. Nothing in nature is vandalistic. All
that appears so is but working towards good. So with
this force in its work in the lowest Region of the Desire


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 43


World. The forms here are demoniac creations, built by
the coarsest passions and desires of man and beast.

The tendency of every form in the Desire World is to
attract to itself all it can of a like nature and grow thereby.
If this tendency to attraction were to predominate in the
lowest Regions, evil would grow like a weed. There would
be anarchy instead of order in the Cosmos. This is pre-
vented by the preponderating power of the force of Re-
pulsion in this Region. When a coarse desire form is
being attracted to another of the same nature, there is
a disharmony in their vibrations, whereby one has a dis-
integrating effect upon the other. Thus, instead of unit-
ing and amalgamating evil with evil, they act with mutual
destructiveness and in that way the evil in the world is
kept within reasonable bounds. When we understand the
working of the twin forces in this respect we are in a posi-
tion to understand the occult maxim, “A lie is both mur-
der and suicide in the Desire World.”

Anything happening in the Physical World is reflected
in all the other realms of nature and, as we have seen,
builds its appropriate form in the Desire World. When
a true account of the occurrence is given, another form is
built, exactly like the first. They are then drawn together
and coalesce, strengthening each other. If, however, an
untrue account is given, a form different from and antago-
nistic to the first, or true one, is created. As they deal with
the same occurrence, they are drawn together, but as their
vibrations are different they act upon each other with
mutual destructiveness. Therefore, evil and malicious lies
ean kill anything that is good, if they are strong enough
and repeated often enough. But, conversely, seeking for
the good in evil will, in time, transmute the evil into good.
Uf the form that is built to minimize the evil is weak. it


44 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


will have no effect and will be destroyed by the evil form,
but if it is strong and frequently repeated it will have the
effect of disintegrating the evil and substituting the good.
That effect, be it. distinctly understood, is not brought
about by lying, nor denying the evil, but by looking for
the good. The occult scientist practices very rigidly this
principle of looking for good in all things, because he
knows what a power it possesses in keeping down evil.

There is a story of Christ which illustrates this point.
Once when walking with His disciples they passed the
decaying and ill-smelling carcass of a dog. The disciples
turned in disgust, commenting upon the nauseating na-
ture of the sight; but Christ looked at the dead body and
said ‘‘Pearls are not whiter than its teeth.’’ He was de-
termined to find the good, because He knew the beneficial
effect which would result in the Desire World from giv-
ing it expression.

The lowest Region of the Desire World is called ‘‘the
Region of Passion and Sensual Desire.’’ The second sub-
division is best described by the name of ‘‘Region of Im-
pressionability.’’ Here the effect of the twin forces of
Attraction and Repulsion is evenly balanced. This is a
neutral Region, hence all our impressions which are built
of the matter of this Region are neutral. Only when the
twin feelings, which we shall meet in the fourth Region,
are brought to bear, do the twin forces come into play.
The mere impression of anything, however, in and of
itself, is entirely separate from the feeling it engenders.
The impression is neutral and is an activity of the second
Region of the Desire World, where pictures are formed
by the forces of sense-perception in the vital body of man.

In the third Region of the Desire World, the force of
Attraction, the integrating, upbuilding force, has already


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 45


gained the upper hand over the force of Repulsion, with its
destructive tendency. When we understand that the
mainspring in this force of Repulsion is self-assertion, a
pushing away of all others that it may have room, we
shall understand that it gives way most easily to a desire
for other things, so that the substance of the third Region
of the Desire World is principally dominated by the force
of Attraction towards other things, but in a selfish way,
and therefore this is the Region of Wishes.

The Region of Coarse Desires may be likened to the
solids in the Physical World; the Region of Impression-
ability to the fluids; and the fluctuating, evanescent nature
of the Region of Wishes will make that compare with the
gaseous portion of the Physical World. These three Re-
gions give the substance for the forms which make for
experience, soul-growth and evolution, purging the alto-
gether destructive and retaining the materials which may
be used for progress.

The fourth Region of the Desire World is the “Region
of Feeling.” From it comes the feelirg concerning the
already described forms and upon the feeling engendered
by them depends the life which they have for us and also
their effect upon us. Whether the objects and ideas pre-
sented are good or bad in themselves is not important at
this stage. It is our feeling, whether of Interest or In-
difference that is the determining factor as to the fate of
the object or idea.

If the feeling with which we meet an impression of an
object or an idea is Interest, it has the same effect upon
that impression as sunlight and air have upon a plant.
That idea will grow and flourish in our lives. If, on the
other hand, we meet an impression or idea with Indiffer-
ence, it withers as does a plant when put in a dark cellar,


46 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Thus from this central Region of the Desire World
comes the incentive to action, or the decision to refrain
therefrom (though the latter is also action in the eyes of
the occult scientist), for at the present stage of our de-
velopment the twin feelings, Interest and Indifference
furnish the incentive to action and are the springs that
move the world. Ata later stage these feelings will cease
to have any weight. Then the determining factor will be
duty.

Interest starts the forces of Attraction or Repulsion.

Indifference simply withers the object or idea against
which it is directed, so far as our connection with it is
concerned.

If our interest in an object or an idea generates Re-
pulsion, that naturally causes us to expurgate from our
lives any connection with the object or idea which roused
it; but there is a great difference between the action of
the force of Repulsion and the mere feeling of Indiffer-
ence. Perhaps an illustration will make more clear the
operation of the twin Feelings and the twin Forces.

Three men are walking along a road. They see a sick
dog; it is covered with sores and is evidently suffering in-
tensely from pain and thirst. This much is evident to
all three men—their senses tell them that. Now Feeling
comes. ‘Two of them take an “interest” in the animal, but
in the third there is a feeling of “indifference.” He
passes on, leaving the dog to its fate. The others remain;
they are both interested, but each manifests it in a quite
different way. The interest of one man is sympathetic and
helpful, impelling him to care for the poor beast, to as-
suage pains and nurse it back to health. In him the feel-
ing of interest has aroused the force of Attraction. The
ather man’s interest is of a different kind. He sees only


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 4Y


a loathsome sight which is revolting to him and ‘wishes
to rid himself and the world of it as quickly as possible.
He advises killing the animal outright and burying it. In
him the feeling of interest generates the destructive force
of Repulsion.

When the feeling of Interest arouses the force of At-
traction and it is directed toward low objects and desires,
these work themselves out in the lower Regions of the
Desire World, where the counteracting force of Repulsion
operates, as previously described. From the battle of the
twin forces—Attraction and Repulsion—results all the
pain and suffering incident to wrongdoing or misdirected
effort, whether intentional or otherwise.

Thus we may see how very important is the Feeling we
have concerning anything, for upon that depends the
nature of the atmosphere we create for ourselves. If we
love the good, we shall keep and nourish as guardian
angels all that is good about us; if the reverse, we shall
people our path with demons of our own breeding.

The names of the three upper Regions of the Desire
World are “Region of Soul-Life,’ “Region of Soul-Light,”
and “Region of Soul-Power.” In these abide Art, Altru-
ism, Philanthropy, and all the activities of the higher
soul-life. When we think of these Regions as radiating
the qualities indicated by their names, into the forms of
the three lower Regions, we shall understand correctly the
higher and lower activities. Soul-power, however, may
for a time be used for evil purposes as well as for good,
but eventually the force of Repulsion destroys vice and
the force of Attraction builds virtue upon its shattered
ruins. All things, in the. ultimate, work together for
GOOD.

The Physical and the Desire Worlds are not separated


48 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


from éach other by space. They are “closer than hands
and feet.” It is not necessary to move to get from one
to the other, nor from one Region to the next. Just as
solids, liquids, and gases are all together in our bodies,
inter-penetrating one another, so are the different Regions
of the Desire World within us also. We may again com-
pare the lines of force along which ice-crystals form in
water to the invisible causes originating in the Desire
World, which appear in the Physical World and give us
the incentive to action, in whatever direction it may be.

The Desire World, with its innumerable inhabitants,
permeates the Physical World, as the lines of force do the
water—invisible, but everywhere present and poteht as the
cause of everything in the Physical World.


Tuer WoRrRLD oF THOUGHT.


The World of Thought also consists of seven Regions
of varying qualities and densities, and, like the Physical
World, the World of Thought is divided into two main
divisions—the Region of Concrete Thought, comprising
the four densest Regions; and the Region of Abstract
Thought, comprising the three Regions of finest substance.
This World of Thought is the central one of the five
Worlds from which man obtains his vehicles. Here spirit
and body meet. It is also the highest of the three Worlds
in which man’s evolution is being carried forward at the
present time, the two higher Worlds being practically in
abeyance as yet, so far as man is concerned.

We know that the materials of the Chemical Region are
used in building all physical forms. These forms are given
life and the power of motion by the forces at work in the
Etheric Region, and some of these living forms are stirred
into activity by means of the twin Feelings of the Desire


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 49


World. The Region of Concrete Thought furnishes the
mind-stuff in which ideas generated in the Region of Ab-
stract Thought clothe themselves as thought-forms, to act
as regulators and balance wheels upon the impulses en-
gendered in the Desire World by impacts from the phenom-
enal World.

Thus we see how the three Worlds, in which man is at
present evolving, complement one another, making a whole
that shows forth the Supreme Wisdom of the Great Archi-
tect of the system to which we belong, and Whom we rey-
erence by the holy name of God.

Taking a more detailed view of the several divisions of
the Region of Concrete Thought we find that the arche-
types of physical form no matter to what kingdom they
may belong, are found in its lowest subdivision, or the
“Continental Region.” In this Continental Region are
also the archetypes of the continents and the isles of the
world, and corresponding to these archetypes are they
fashioned. Modifications in the crust of the Earth must
first be wrought in the Continental Region. Not until the
archetypal model has been changed can the Intelligences
which we (to hide our ignorance concerning them) call
the “Laws of Nature,” bring about the physical conditions
which alter the physical features of the Earth according
to the modifications designed by the Hierarchies in charge
of evolution. They plan changes as an architect plans the
alteration of a building before the workmen give it con-
erete expression. In like manner are changes in the flora
and fauna due to metamorphoses in their respective arche-
types.

When we speak of the archetypes of all the different
forms in the dense world it must not be thought that
these archetypes are merely models in the same sense


50 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


in which we speak of an object constructed in miniature,
or in some material other than that appropriate for its
proper and final use. They are not merely likenesses nor
models of the forms we see about us, but are creative arche-
types; that is, they fashion the forms of the Physical
World in their own likeness or likenesses, for often many
work together to form one certain species, each archetype
giving part of itself to build the required form.

The second subdivision of the Region of Concrete
Thought is called the “Oceanic Region.” It is best de-
scribed as flowing, pulsating vitality. All the forces that
work through the four ethers which constitute the Etheric
Region are there seen as archetypes. It is a stream of
flowing life, pulsating through all forms, as blood pulsates
through the body, the same life in all forms. Here the
trained clairvoyant sees how true it is that “all life is one.”

The “Aerial Region” is the third division of the Re-
gion of Concrete Thought. Here we find the archetype of
desires, passions, wishes, feelings, and emotions such as we
experience in the Desire World. Here all the activities of
the Desire World appear as atmospheric conditions. Like
the kiss of the summer breeze come the feelings of pleas-
ure and joy to the clairvoyant sense; as the sighing of
the wind in the tree-tops seem the longings of the soul and
like flashes of lighting the passions of warring nations.
In this atmosphere of the Region of Concrete Thought are
also pictures of the emotions of man and beast.

The “Region of Archetypal Forces” is the fourth divi-
sion of the Region of Concrete Thought. It is the central
and most important Region in the five Worlds wherein
man’s entire evolution is carried on. On the one side of
this Region are the three higher Regions of the World of
Thought, the World of Life Spirit and the World of Divine


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 51


Spirit. On the other side of this Region of Archetypa]
Forces are the three lower Regions of the World of
Thought, the Desire and the Physical Worlds. Thus this
Region becomes a sort of “crux,” bounded on one side by
the Realyis of Spirit, on the other by the Worlds of Form.
It is a focusing point, where Spirit reflects itself in
matter.

As the name implies, this Region is the home of the
Archetypal Forces which direct the activity of the arche-
types in the Region of Concrete Thought. From this
Region Spirit works on matter in a formative manner.
Diagram 1 shows the idea in a schematic way, the forms in
the lower World being reflections of the Spirit in the
higher Worlds. The fifth Region, which is the one nearest
to the focusing point on the Spirit side, reflects itself in
the third Region, which is nearest the focusing point on
the Form side. The sixth Region reflects itself in the
second and the seventh reflects itself in the first.

The whole of the Region of Abstract Thought is re-
flected in the World of Desire; the World of Life Spirit in
the Etheric Region of the Physical World; and the World
of Divine Spirit in the Chemical Region of the Physical
World.

Diagram 2 will give a comprehensive idea of the seven
Worlds which are the sphere of our development, but we
must carefully keep in mind that these Worlds are not
placed one above another, as shown in the diagram. They
inter-penetrate—that is to say, that as in the case where
the relation of the Physical World and the Desire World
were compared, where we likened the Desire World to the
lines of force in freezing water and the water itself to the
Physical World, in the same way we may think of the
lines of force as being any of the seven Worlds, and the


due
yerrSAu -} 24)


| eae


PHN,
Jer!SA4}


yo0iyIe 6}
Vuiide vrem 244
qussaad 1v 241530]


PAIS 3°}


aaqpoid
jusueutted 3y6)


waoy 1ybroyay


Vv


eP| 249)


* prrzys!
’


14ySn0y9)


313130


fo uobay


| vorjoursenty


gt


serpy] pure


qysnoyy Peysq
J jo ee


i


soqoudgy


Diagram 1—The Relative Permanency of the Visible and


Invisible Worlds.
(Illustrated by comparison with a stereopticon.)


52


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 53


water, as in our illustration, would correspond to the next
denser World in the scale. Another illustration may per-
haps make the subject clearer.

Let us use a spherical sponge .» represent the dense earth
—the Chemical Region. Imagine that sand permeates
every part of the sponge and also forms a layer outside the
sponge. Let the sand represent the Etheric Region, which
in a similar manner permeates the dense earth and ex-
tends beyond its atmosphere.

Let us further imagine this sponge and sand immersed
in a spherical glass vessel filled with clear water, and a
little larger than the sponge and sand. We place the
sponge and sand in the center of the vessel as the yolk
is placed in the center of an egg. We have now a space
of clear water between the sand and the vessel. The water
as a whole will represent the Desire World, for just as the
water percolates between the grains of sand, through every
pore of the sponge, and forms that clear layer, so the
Desire World permeates both the dense Earth and the
ether and extends beyond both of these substances.

We know there is air in water, and if we think of the
air in the water (in our illustration), as representing
the World of Thought, we shall have a fair mental picture
of the way in which the World of Thought, being finer and
more subtle, inter-penetrates the two denser Worlds.

Finally, imagine that the vessel containing the sponge,
sand and water is placed in the center of a larger spherical
vessel;then the air in the space between the two vessels
would represent that part of the World of Thought which
extends beyond the Desire World.

Each of the planets in our solar system has three such
inter-penetrating Worlds, and if we think of each of the
planets consisting of three Worlds as being individual


54 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


DIAGRAM 2


THE SEVEN WORLDS


Consisting ect 7 Regions.


This World consists of 7 Regions and is the

abode of the Virgin Spirits when they have

been differentiated in God before the pilgrim- ay
Vehicles


SPIRITS age through matter.

WORLD OF Consists of 7 Regions and is the abode of the| Divine
DIVINE SPIRIT highest spiritual influence in man. Spirit
WORLD OF Consists of 7 Regions and is the abode of the | Life
LIFE SPIRIT second aspect of the threefold spirit in man. Spirit


7th Region contains the germinal idea of form
in mineral, plant, animal and man.
REGION OF 6th Region contains germinal idea of life in
‘’ ABSTRACT plant, animal and man.
» 5th Region contains germinal idea of desire
THOUGHT and emotion in animal and man; abode of 3rd
aspect of spirit in man.


4th Region contains the archetypal forces and
the human mind.. It is the focusing point
REGION OF through which the spirit mirrors itself in mat-
CONCRETE ter.
THOUGHT rd Region archetypes of desire and emotion.
2nd Region archetypes of universal vitality.
1st Region archetypes of form.


7th Region Soul-Power

6th Region Soul-Light J} artraction

5th Region Soul-Life,
DESIRE Interest Desire
WORLD 4th Reglon Feeling Body

Indifference.
3rd Region Wishes
2nd Region Impressionability }Reputsion.


WORLD OF THOUGKT


THE LINK
BETWEEN


ist Region Passion and Low Desire


7th Region Reflecting ether, memory of nature.

6th Region Light ether, medium of sense per-
ETHERIC _ ception. Vital
REGION: 5th Region Life ether, medium for propagation. | Body


a
<
z
°
7)
c
w
a
w
=r
-


4th Region Chemical ether, medium for assimi-
lation and excretion.


CHEMICAL 3rd Region Gases. Dense
REGION 2rd Region Liquids. Body
ist Region Solids.


PHYSICAL WORLD


THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS 5d


sponges, and of the fourth World, the World of Life Spirit,
as being the water in a large vessel where these threefold
separate sponges swim, we shall understand that as the
water in the vessel fills the space between the sponges and
percolates through them, so the World of Life Spirit per-
vades inter-planetary space and inter-penetrates the indi-
vidual planets. It forms a common bond between them,
so that as it is necessary to have a boat and be able to
control it, if we wish to sail from America to Africa, so it
is necessary to have a vehicle correlated to the World of
Life Spirit under our conscious control in order to be able
to travel from one planet to another.

In a manner similar to that in which the World of Life
Spirit correlates us to the other planets in our own solar
system does the World of Divine Spirit correlate us to the
other solar systems. We may regard the solar systems as
separate sponges, swimming in a World of Divine Spirit,
and thus it will be apparent that in order to travel from
one solar system to another it would be necessary to be
able to function consciously in the highest vehicle of man,
the Divine Spirit.


‘CHAPTER II.


THE Four KINGDoMs.


field of evolution, for a number of different king-

doms of life, at various stages of development. Only
four of these need concern us at present, viz.: the mineral,
plant, animal, and human kingdoms.

These four kingdoms are related to the three Worlds
in different ways, according to the progress these groups of
evolving life have made in the school of experience. So
far as form is concerned the dense bodies of all the king-
doms are composed of the same chemical substances—
the solids, liquids, and gases of the Chemical Region.
The dense body of a man is as truly a chemical compound
as is the stone, although the latter is ensouled by mineral
life only. But even when speaking from the purely physical
standpoint, and laying aside all other considerations for the
time being, there are several important differences when we
compare the dense body of the human being with the min-
eral of the Earth. Man moyes, grows, and propagates his
species—the mineral, in its native state, does none of these
things.

Comparing man with the forms of the plant kingdom,
we find that both plant.and man have a dense body, capa-
ble of growth and propagation. But Man has faculties not
possessed by the plant. He feels, has the power of motion,
and the faculty of perceiving things exterior to himself.

56


Ts three Worlds of our planet are at present the


THE FOUR KINGDOMS 5%


When we compare man with the animal we see that
both have the faculties of feeling, motion, growth, propa-
gation, and sense-perception. In addition, man has the
faculty of speech, a superior structure of the brain, and
also hands—which are a very great physical advantage.
We may note especially the development of the thumb,
which makes the hand much more valuable than even that
of the anthropoid. Man has also evolved a definite lan-
guage in which to express his feelings and thoughts, all of
which places the dense body of the human being in a class
by itself, beyond the three lower kingdoms.

To account for these differences in the four kingdoms
we must go to the invisible Worlds, and seek the causes
which give one kingdom that which is denied to another.

To function in any world, and express the qualities
peculiar to it, we must first possess a vehicle made of its
material. In order to function in the dense Physical
World it is necessary to have a dense body, adapted to our
environment. Otherwise we should be ghosts, as they are
commonly called, and be invisible to most physical beings.
So we must have a vital body before we can express life,
grow, or externalize the other qualities peculiar to the
Etheric Region.

To show feeling and emotion it is necessary to have a
vehicle composed of the materials of the Desire World, and
a mind formed of the substance of the Region of Concrete
Thought is necessary to render thinking possible.

When we examine the four kingdoms in relation to the
Etheric Region, we find that the mineral does not possess
a separate vital body, and at once we see the reason why it
cannot grow, propagate, or show sentient life.

As an hypothesis necessary to account for other known
facts, material science holds that in the densest solid, as in


58 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


the rarest and most attenuated gas, no two atoms touch
each other; that there is an envelope of ether around each
atom; that the atoms in the universe float in an ocean of
ether.

The occult scientist knows this to be true of the Chem-
ical Region and that the mineral does not possess a separate
vital body of ether. And as it is the planetary ether alone
which envelops the atoms of the mineral, that makes the
difference described. It is necessary, as we have shown,
to have a separate, vital body, desire body, etc., to express
the qualities of a particular realm, because the atoms of the
World of Desire, of the World of Thought and even of the
Higher Worlds, inter-penetrate the Mineral as well as the
dense human body, and if the inter-penetration of the
planetary ether, which is the ether that envelops the atoms
of the mineral, were enough to make it feel and propagate
its inter-penetration by the planetary World of Thought
would also be sufficient to make it think. This it cannot
do, because it lacks a separate vehicle. It is penetrated by
the planetary ether only, and is therefore incapable of indi-
vidual growth. Only the lowest of the four states of
ether—the chemical—is active in the mineral. The chem-
ical forces in minerals are due to that fact.

When we consider plant, animal, and man in relation
to the Etheric Region we note that each has a separate,
vital body, in addition to being penetrated by the planetary
ether which forms the Etheric Region. There is a differ-
ence, however, between the vital bodies of the plants and
the vital bodies of animal and man. In the vital body
of the plant only the chemical and the life ethers are fully
active. Hence the plant can grow by the action of the
chemical ether and propagate its species through the activ-
ity of the life ether of the separate, vital body which it


THE FOUR KINGDOMS 59


possesses. The light ether is present, but is partially latent
or dormant and reflecting ether is lacking. Therefore it
is evident that the faculties of sense-perception and mem-
ory, which are the qualities of these ethers, cannot be
expressed by the plant kingdom.

Turning our attention to the vital body of the animal
we find that in it the chemical, life and light ethers are
dynamically active. Hence the animal has the faculties
of assimilation and growth, caused by the activities of
the chemical ether; and the faculty of propagation by
means of the life ether—these being the same as in plants.
But in addition, consequent upon the action of the third
or light ether, it has the faculties of generating internal
heat and of sense-perception. The fourth ether, however,
is inactive in the animal, hence it has no thought nor mem-
ory. That which appears as such will be shown later to
be of a different nature.

When we analyze the human being, we find that in him
all four ethers are dynamically active in the highly organ-
ized vital body. By means of the activities of the chemical
ether he is able to assimilate food and to grow; the forces at
work in the life ether enable him to propagate his species;
the forces in the light ether supply the dense body with
heat, work on the nervous system and the muscles, thus
opening the doors of communication with the outside world
by way of the senses; and the reflecting ether enables the
spirit to control its vehicle by means of thought. This
ether also stores past experience as memory.

The vital body of plant, animal, and man, extends be-
yond the periphery of the dense body as the Etheric
Region, which is the vital body of a planet, extends beyond
its dense part, showing again the truth of the Hermetic


axiom “As above, so below.” The distance of this exten-
s


60 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


sion of the vital body of man is about an inch and a half.
The part which is outside the dense body is very luminous
and about the color of a new-blown peach-blossom. It is
often seen by persons\having very slight involuntary clair-
voyance. The writer has found, when speaking with such
persons, that they frequently are not aware they see any-
thing unusual and do not know what they see.

The dense body is built into the matrix of this vital
body during ante-natal life, and with one exception, it is
an exact copy, molecule for molecule, of the vital body.
As the lines of force in freezing water are the avenues of
formation for ice crystals, so the lines of force in the vital
body determine the shape of the dense body. All through
life the vital body is the builder and restorer of the dense
form. Were it not for the etheric heart the dense heart
would break quickly under the constant strain we put upon
it. All the abuses to which we subject the dense body are
counteracted, so far as lies in its power, by the vital body,
which is continually fighting against the death of the
dense body. —

The exception mentioned above is that the vital body
of a man is female or negative, while that of a woman is
male or positive. In that fact we have the key to numer-
ous puzzling problems of life. That woman gives way to
her emotions is due to the polarity noted, for her positive,
vital body generates an excess of blood and causes her to
labor under an enormous internal pressure that would
break the physical casement were not a safety-valve pro-
vided in the periodical flow, and another in the tears which
relieve the pressure on special occasions—for tears are
“white bleeding.”

Man may have and has as strong emotions as woman,
but he is usually able to suppress them without tears, be-


THE FOUR KINGDOMS 61


cause his negative vital body does not generate more blood
than he can comfortably control.

Unlike the higher vehicles of humanity, the vital body
(except under certain circumstances, to be explained when
the subject of “Initiation” is dealt with) does not ordinar-
ily leave the dense body until the death of the latter. Then
the chemical forces of the dense body are no longer held
in check"by the evolving life. They proceed to restore the
matter to its primordial condition by disintegration so that
it may be available for the formation of other forms in
the economy of nature. Disintegration is thus due to the
activity of the planetary forces in the chemical ether.

In texture the vital body may be crudely compared to
one of those picture frames made of hundreds of little
pieces of wood which interlock and present innumerable
points to the observer. The vital body presents millions
of points to the observer. These points enter into the
hollow centers of the dense atoms, imbuing them with vital
force that sets them vibrating at a rate higher than that of
the mineral of the earth which is not thus accelerated and
ensouled.

When a person is drowning, or falling from a height,
or freezing, the vital body leaves the dense body, the atoms
of which become temporarily inert in consequence, but at
resuscitation it re-enters the dense body and the “points”
are again inserted in the dense atoms. The inertia of the
atoms causes them to resist the resumption of vibration
and that is the cause of the intense prickly pain and the
tingling sensation noted at such times, but not ordinarily,
for the same reason that we become conscious of the start-
ing or stopping of a clock, but are oblivious to its tick
when it is running.

There are certain cases where the vital body partly


62 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


leaves the dense body, such as when a hand “goes te
sleep.” Then the etheric hand of the vital body may be
seen hanging below the dense arm like a glove and the
points cause the peculiar pricking sensation felt when the
etheric hand re-enters the dense hand. Sometimes in
hypnosis the head of the vital body divides and hangs out-
side the dense head, one half over each shoulder, or les
around the neck like the collar of a sweater. The absence
of prickly sensation at awakening in cases like this is be-
cause during the hypnosis part of the hypnotist’s vital
body had been substituted for that of the victim.

When anesthetics are used the vital body is partially
driven out, along with the higher vehicles, and if the appli-
cation is too strong and the life ether is driven out, death
ensues. This same phenomenon may also be observed in
the case of materializing mediums. In fact the difference
between a materializing medium and an ordinary man
or woman is just this: In the ordinary man or woman
the vital body and the dense body are, at the present stage
of evolution, quite firmly interlocked, while in the medium
they are loosely connected. It has not always been so, and
the time will again come when the vital body may normally
leave the dense vehicle, but that is not normally accom-
plished at present. When a medium allows his or her vital
body to be used by entities from the Desire World who
wish to materialize, the vital body generally oozes from
the left side—through the spleen, which is its particular
“cate.” Then the vital forces cannot flow into the body
as they do normally, the medium becomes greatly ex-
hausted, and some of them resort to stimulants to counter-
act the effects, in time becoming incurable drunkards.

The vital force from the sun, which surrounds us as a
colorless fluid, is absorbed by the vital body through the


THE FOUR KINGDOMS 63


etheric counterpart of the spleen, wherein it undergoes a
curious transformation of color. It becomes pale rose-
hued and spreads along the nerves all over the dense body.
It is to the nervous system what the force of electricity is
to a telegraph system. Though there be wires, instruments,
and telegraph operators all in order, if the electricity is
lacking, no message can be sent. The Ego, the brain, and
the nervous system may be in seemingly perfect order, but
if the vital force be lacking to carry the message of the
Ego through the nerves to the muscles, the dense body will
remain inert. This is exactly what happens when part of
the dense body becomes paralyzed. The vital body has be-
come diseased and the vital force can no longer flow. In
such cases, as in most sickness, the trouble is with the
finer invisible vehicles. In conscious or unconscious rec-
ognition of this fact, the most successful physicians use
suggestion—which works upon the higher vehicles—as an
aid to medicine. The more a physician can imbue his
patient with faith and hope, the speedier disease will van-
ish and give place to perfect health.

During health the vital body specializes a superabundance
of vital force, which, after passing through a dense body,
radiates in straight lines in every direction from the per-
iphery thereof, as the radii of a circle do from the center ;
but during ill-health, when the vital body becomes attenu-
ated, it is not able to draw to itself the same amount of
force and in addition the dense body is feeding upon it.
Then the lines of the vital fluid which pass out from the
body are crumpled and bent, showing the lack of force
behind them. In health the great force of these radiations
carries with it germs and microbes which are inimical to
the health of the dense body, but in sickness, when the vital
force is weak, these emanations do not so readily eliminate


64 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


disease germs. Therefore the danger of contracting dis-
ease is much greater when the vital forces are low than
when one is in robust health.

In cases where parts of the dense body are amputated,
only the planetary ether accompanies the separated part.
The separate vital body and the dense body disintegrate
synchronously after death. So with the etheric coun-
terpart of the amputated iimb. It will gradually
disintegrate as the dense member decays, but in the
meantime the fact that the man still possesses the etheric
limb accounts for his assertion that he can feel his fin-
gers or suffers pain in them. There is also a connection
with a buried member, irrespective of distance. A
ease is on record where a man felt a severe pain, as if a
nail had been driven into the flesh of an amputated limb,
and he persisted until the limb was exhumed, when it was
found that a nail had been driven into it at the time it was
boxed for burial. The nail was removed and the pain
instantly stopped. It is also in accordance with these
facts that people complain of pain in a limb for perhaps
two or three years after the amputation. The pain will
then cease. This is because the disease remains in the still
undetached etheric limb, but as the amputated part dis-
integrates, the etheric limb follows suit and thus the pain
ceases.

Having noted the relations of the four kingdoms to the
Etheric Region of the Physical World, we will next turn
our attention to their relation to the Desire World.

Here we find that both minerals and plants lack the
separate desire body. They are permeated only by the
planetary desire body, the Desire World. Lacking the
separate vehicle, they are incapable of feeling, desire, and
emotion, which are faculties pertaining to the Desire


THE FOUR KINGDOMS 65


World. When a stone is broken, it does not feel; but it
would be wrong to infer that there is no feeling connected
with such an action. That is the materialistic view, or the
view taken by the uncomprehending multitude. The
occult scientist knows that there is no act, great or small,
which is not felt throughout the universe, and even though
the stone, because it has no separate desire body, cannot
feel, the Spirit of the Earth feels because it is the Earth’s
desire body that permeates the stone. When a man cuts
his finger, the finger, having no separate desire body, does
not feel the pain, but the man does, because it is his desire
body which permeates the finger. If a plant is torn up by
the roots, it is felt by the Spirit of the Earth as a man
would feel if a hair were torn from his head. This Earth
is a living, feeling body, and all the forms which are with-
out separate desire bodies through which their informing
spirits may experience feeling, are included in the desire
body of the Earth and that desire body has feeling. The
breaking of a stone and the breaking off of flowers are
productive of pleasure to the Earth, while the pulling out
of plants by the root causes pain. The reason is given in
the latter part of this work, for at this stage of our study
the explanation would be incomprehensible to the general
reader.

The planetary Desire World pulsates through the dense
and vital bodies of animal and man in the same way that
it penetrates the mineral and plant, but in addition to this,
animal and man have separate desire bodies, which enable
them to feel desire, emotion and passion. There is a differ-
ence, however. The desire body of the animal is built en-
tirely of the material of the denser regions of the Desire
World, while in the case of even the lowest of human races
a little of the matter of the higher Regions enters into the

3


66 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


composition of the desire body. The feelings of animals
and the lowest human races are almost entirely concerned
with the gratification of the lowest desires and passions
which find their expression in the matter of the lower
Regions of the Desire World. Hence, in order that they
may have such emotions to educate them for something
higher, it is necessary that they should have the corre-
sponding materials in their desire bodies. As man pro-
gresses in the school of life, his experiences teach him,
and his desires become purer and better. Thus by degrees
the material of his desire body undergoes a corresponding
change. The purer and brighter material of the higher
Regions of the Desire World replaces the murky colors
of the lower part. The desire body also grows in size, so
that in a saint it is truly a glorious object to behold, the
purity of its colors and its luminous transparency being
beyond adequate simile. It must be seen to be appreciated.

At present the materials of both the lower and the
higher Regions enter into the composition of the desire
bodies of the great majority of mankind. None are so
bad that they have not some good trait. This is expressed
in the materials of the higher Regions which we find in
their desire bodies. But, on the other hand, very, very few
are so good that they do not use some of the materials of
the lower Regions.

In the same way that the planetary vital and desire
bodies inter-penetrate the dense material of the Earth, as


we saw in the illustration of the sponge, the sand and the .


water, so the vital and desire bodies inter-penetrate the
dense body of plant, animal and man. But during the
life of man his desire body is not shaped like his dense and
vital bodies. After death it assumes that shape. During
life it has the appearance of a luminous ovoid which, in


QnARY Hy
(a=
VCS EN
ARE SN
Vie


YN


ay
RN


f aa :


wi ARY CL Alp


Ss


)
)


“Oy,


\\)
)


\\
\
i
<IN=


\J
~
\y HEN
= HY NI


\\


y, N


.
=
/f,


if


all


IDS SIORIE, IBXOONG


GUNREIN TS EN ea Eile


THE FOUR KINGDOMS 6%


waking hours, completely surrounds the dense body, as
the albumen does the yolk of an egg. It extends from
twelve to sixteen inches beyond the dense body. In this
desire body there are a number of sense centers, but, in
the great majority of people, they are latent. It is the
awakening of these centers of perception that corresponds
to the opening of the blind man’s eyes in our former illus-
tration. The matter in the human desire body is in in-
cessant motion of inconceivable rapidity. There is in it
no settled place for any particle, as in the dense body.
The matter that is at the head one moment may be at the
feet in the next and back again. There are no organs in the
desire body, as in the dense and vital bodies, but there are
centers of perception, which, when active, appear as vor-
tices, always remaining in the same relative position to the
dense body, most of them about the head. In the majority
of people they are mere eddies and are of no use as centers
of perception. They may be awakened in all, however,
but different methods produce different results.

In the involuntary clairvoyant developed along improper,
negative lines, these vortices turn from right to left, or
in the opposite direction to the hands of a clock—counter-
clockwise.

In the desire body of the properly trained voluntary
clairvoyant, they turn in the same direction as the hands
of a elock—clockwise, glowing with exceeding splendor, far
surpassing the brilliant luminosity of the ordinary desire
body. ‘These centers furnish him with means for the per-
ception of things in the Desire World and he sees, and in-
vestigates as he wills, while the person whose centers turn
counter-clockwise is like a mirror, which reflects what
passes before it. Such a person is incapable of reaching
out for information. The reason for this belongs to a later


68 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


chapter, but the above is one of the fundamental differences
between a medium and a properly trained clairvoyant.
It is impossible for most people to distinguish between
the two; yet there is one infallible rule that can be followed
by anyone: No genuinely developed seer will ever exercise
this faculty for money or its equivalent; nor will he use tt
to gratify curiosity; but only to help humanity.

No one capable of teaching the proper method for the
development of this faculty will ever charge so much a
lesson. Those demanding money for the exercise of, or for
giving lessons in these things never have anything worth
paying for. The above rule is a safe and sure guide, which
all may follow with absolute confidence. :

In a far distant future man’s desire body will become as
definitely organized as are the vital and dense bodies.
When that stage is reached we shall all have the power to
function in the desire body as we now do in the dense
body, which is the oldest and best organized of these bodies
of man—the desire body being the youngest.

The desire body is rooted in the liver, as the vital body
is in the spleen.

In all warm-blooded creatures, which are the highest
evolved, and have feelings, passions and emotions, which
reach outward into the world with desire, which may be
said to really live in the fuller meaning of the term and not
merely vegetate—in all such creatures the currents of the
desire body flow outward from the liver. The desire stuff
is continually welling out in streams or currents which
travel in curved lines to every point of the periphery of
the ovoid and then return to the liver through a number
of vortices, much as boiling water is continually welling
vutward from the source of heat and returning to it after
completing its cycle.


THE FOUR KINGDOMS 69


The plants are devoid of this impelling, energizing
principle, hence they cannot show life and motion as can
the more highly developed organisms.

Where there is vitality and motion, but no red blood,
there is no separate desire body. The creature is simply
in the transition stage from plant to animal and therefore
it moves entirely in the strength of the group-spirit.

In the cold-blooded animals which have a liver and red
blood, there is a separate desire body and the group-spirit
directs the currents inward, because in their case the sepa-
rate spirit (of the individual fish or reptile for instance)
is entirely outside the dense vehicle.

When the organism has evolved so far that the separate
spirit can commence to draw into its vehicles then it (the
individual spirit) commences to direct the currents out-
ward, and we see the beginning of passionate existence and
warm blood. It is the warm, red blood in the liver of the
organism sufficiently evolved to have an indwelling spirit
which energizes the outgoing currents of desire stuff
that cause the animal or the man to display desire and
passion. In the case of the animal the spirit is not yet
entirely indwelling. It does not become so until the points
in the vital body and the dense body come into correspond-
ence, as explained in Chapter XII. For this reason the
animal is not a “liver,” that is, he does not live as com-
pletely as does man, not being capable of as fine desires and
emotions, because not as fully conscious. The mammalia of
today are on a higher plane than was man at the animal
stage of his evolution, because they have warm, red blood,
which man did not have at that stage. This difference in
status is accounted for by the spiral path of evolution,
which also accounts for the fact that man is a higher type
of humanity than the present Angels were in their human


70 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


stage. The present mammalia, which have in their animal
stage attained to the possession of warm, red blood, and are
therefore capable of experiencing desire and emotion to
some extent, will; in the Jupiter Period, be a purer and
better type of humanity than we are now, while from
among our present humanity there will be some, even in
the Jupiter Period, who will be openly and avowedly
wicked. Moreover, they will not then be able to conceal
their passions as is now possible, but will be unabashed
about their evil doing. j
In the light of this exposition of the connection between
the liver and the life of the organism, it is noteworthy
that in several European languages (English, German,
and the Scandinavian tongues) the same word signifies
the organ of the body (the liver) and also “one who lives.”
When we turn our attention to the four kingdoms in
their relation to the World of Thought we find that min-
erals, plants and animals lack a vehicle correlating them to
that World. Yet we know some animals think, but they
are the highest domesticated animals which have come
into close touch with man for generations and have thus
developed a faculty not possessed by other animals, which
have not had that advantage. This is on the same princi-
ple that a highly charged wire will “induce” a weaker cur-
rent of electricity in a wire brought close to it; or that a
man of strong morals will arouse a like tendency in a
weaker nature, while one morally weak will be overthrown
if brought within the influence of evil characters. All we
do, say, or are, reflects itself in our surroundings. This is
why the highest domestic animals think. They are the
highest of their kind, almost on the point of individualiza-
tion, and man’s thought vibrations have “induced” in them
a similar activity of a lower order. With the exceptions


THE FOUR KINGDOMS "1


noted, the animal kingdom has not acquired the faculty of
thought. They are not individualized. This is the great
and cardinal difference between the human and other king-
doms. Man is an individual. The animals, plants and
minerals are divided into species. They are not individual-
ized in the same sense that man is.

It is true that we divide mankind into races, tribes and
nations; we note the difference between the Cauca sian, the
Negro, the Indian, etc.; but that is not to the point. If
we wish to study the characteristics of the lion or the
elephant or any other species of the lower animals, all that
is necessary is to take any member of that species for that
purpose. When we learn the characteristics of one animal,
we know the characteristics of the species to which it be-
longs. All members of the same animal tribe are alike.
That is the point. A lion, or its father, or its son, all
look alike; there is no difference in the way they will act
under like conditions. All have the same likes and dis-
likes; one is the same as another.

Not so with human beings. If we want to know about
the characteristics of Negroes, it is not enough that we
examine one single individual. It would be necessary to
examine each individually, and even then we will arrive at
no knowledge concerning Negroes as a whole, simply
because that which was a characteristic of the single indi-
vidual does not apply to the race collectively.

If we desire to know the character of Abraham Lin-
coln it will avail us nothing to study his father, his grand-
father, or his son, for they would differ entirely. Each
would have his own peculiarities quite distinct from the
idiosyncrasies of Abraham Lincoln.

On the other hand, minerals, plants, and animals are
described if we devote our attention to the description of


op?) ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


one of each species; while there are as many species among
human beings as there are individuals. Each individual
person is a “species,” a law unto himself, altogether sepa-
rate and apart from ‘any other individual, as different from
his fellow men as one species in the lower kingdom is from
another. We may write the biography of a man, but an
animal can have no biography. This is because there is in
each man an individual, indwelling spirit which dictates
the thoughts and actions of each individual human being;
while there is one “group-spirit” common to all the differ-
ent animals or plants of the same species. The group-
spirit works on them all from the outside. The tiger
which roams in the wilds of the Indian jungle and the
tiger penned up in the cage of a menagerie are both ex-
pressions of the same group-spirit. It influences both
alike from the Desire World, distance being almost anni-
hilated in the inner Worlds.

The group-spirits of the three lower kingdoms are vari-
ously located in the higher Worlds, as we shall see when
we investigate the consciousness of the different kingdoms ;
but to properly comprehend the positions of these group-
spirits in the inner Worlds it is necessary to remember
and to clearly understand what has been said about all the
forms that are in the visible world having crystallized from
models and ideas in the inner Worlds, as illustrated by the
architect’s house and the inventor’s machine. As the juices
of the soft body of the snail crystallize into the hard shell
which it carries upon its back, so the Spirits in the higher
Worlds have, in a similar manner, crystallized out from
themselves the dense, material bodies of the different
kingdoms.

Thus the so-called “higher” bodies, although so fine and
cloudy as to be invisible, are not by any means “emana-


THE FOUR KINGDOMS 3


tions” from the dense body, but the dense vehicles of all
kingdoms correspond to the shell of the snail, which is
crystallized from its juices, the snail representing the
spirit; and the juices of its body in their progress towards
crystallization representing the mind, desire body and vital
body. These various vehicles were emanated by the spirit
from ttself for the purpose of gaining experience through
them. It is the spirit that moves the dense body where
it will, as the snail moves its house, and not the body that
controls the movements of the spirit. The more closely the
spirit is able to enter into touch with its vehicle the better
can it control and express itself through that vehicle, and
vice versa. That is the key to the different states of con-
sciousness in the different kingdoms. A study of diagrams
3 and 4 should give a clear understanding of the vehicles
of each kingdom, the manner in which they are correlated


DIAGRAM 3


Showing the vehicles of each kingdom, and the manner in which
such vehicles are correlated to the different worlds.


KINGDOM
WORLD
Mineral Plant Animal Man
Region of Group-spi1it|Group-spirit|Group-spirit Eco
Abstract Thought ....| and Ego and Ego and Ego
and
Region of
Concrete Thought..... No vehicle | No vehicle | No vehicle Mind
Desire World........... No vehicle | No vehicle | Desire body | Desire body
Physical World;
includes the
Etheric Region....... No vehicle | Vital body | Vital body | Vital body
and the


Chemical Region..... Dense body | Dense body | Dense body | Dense body


4 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


DIAGRAM 4


Showing the state of consciousness appertaining to each kingdom.


KINGDOM State of
WORLD | Conscious-
Mineral} Plant | Animal| Man ness
Group-
Region of spirit
Abstract Thought...... and Trance-
a Ego like
oe Group-
Region of spirit ® Dreamless
Concrete Thovght...... and Sleep
Ego
Group- Dream
Desire World ........... ae Conscious-
Web ness
Ego
Physical World; Mind
includes the Peete ere Wralcina,
: : ody ody
Etheric Region......... Vital Vital Vital ||Conscious-
_ and the body | body | body ness
Chemical Region.......]| Dense Dense Dense Dense
body body body body


to the different Worlds and the resulting state of con-
sciousness.

From diagram 3 we learn that the separate Ego is
definitely segregated within the Universal Spirit in the
Region of Abstract Thought. It shows that only man
possesses the complete chain of vehicles correlating him
to all divisions of the three Worlds. The animal lacks one
link of chain—the mind; the plant lacks two links, the
mind and the desire body; and the mineral lacks three
links in the chain of vehicles necessary to function in a
self-conscious manner in the Physical World—the mind,
the desire and the vital bodies.

The reason for the various deficiencies is that the Min-
eral Kingdom is the expression of the latest stream of
evolving life; the Plant Kingdom is ensouled by a life wave
that has been longer upon the path of evolution; the life


THE FOUR KINGDOMS "5


wave of the animal Kingdom has a still longer past ; while
Man, that is to say, the life now expressing itself in the
human form, has behind it the longest journey of all the
four kingdoms, and therefore leads. In time, the three
life-waves which now animate the three lower kingdoms
will reach the human, and we shall have passed to higher
stages of development.

To understand the degree of consciousness which results
from the possession of the vehicles used by the life evolving
in the four kingdoms, we turn our attention to diagram 4,
which shows that man, the Ego, the Thinker, has de-
scended into the Chemical Region of the Physical World.
Here he has marshaled all his vehicles, thereby attaining
the state of waking consciousness. He is learning to con:
trol his vehicles. The organs of neither the desire body
nor the mind are yet evolved. The latter is not yet even
a body. At present it is simply a link, a sheath for the
use of the Ego as a focusing point. It is the last of the
vehicles that have been built. The spirit works gradually
from finer into coarser substance, the vehicles also being
built in fine substance first, then in coarser and coarser
substance. The dense body was built first and has now
come into its fourth stage of density; the vital body is
in its third stage and the desire body in its second, hence it
is still cloud-like, and the sheath of mind is filmier still.
As those vehicles have not, as yet, evolved any organs, it is
clear that they alone would be useless as vehicles of con-
sciousness. The Ego, however, enters into the dense body
and connects these organless vehicles with the physical
sense centers and thus attains the waking state of con-
sciousness in the Physical World.

The student should particularly note that it is because
of their connection with the splendidly organized mechan-


"6 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


ism of the dense body that these higher vehicles become of
value at present. He will thus avoid a mistake frequently
made by people who, when they come into the knowledge
that there are higher bodies, grow to despise the dense
vehicle; to speak of it as “low” and “vile’—turning their
eyes to heaven and wishing that they might soon be able
to leave this earthly lump of clay and fly about in their
“higher vehicles.”

These people generally do not realize the difference be-
tween “higher” and “perfect.” Certainly, the dense body
is the lowest vehicle in the sense that it is the most un-
wieldy, correlating man to the world of sense with all the
limitations thus implied. As stated, it has an enormous
period of evolution back of it; is in its fourth stage of
development and has now reached a great and marvelous
degree of efficiency. It will, in time, reach perfection,
but even at present it is the best organized of man’s vehi-
cles. The vital body is in its third stage of evolution, and
less completely organized than the dense body. ‘The desire
body and the mind are, as yet, mere clouds—almost en-
tirely unorganized. In the very lowest human beings
these vehicles are not even definite ovoids; they are more
or less undefined in form.

The dense body is a wonderfully constructed instrument
and should be recognized as such by everyone pretending
to have any knowledge of the constitution of man. Observe
the femur, for instance. This bone carries the entire
weight of the body. On the outside it is built of a thin
layer of compact bone, strengthened on the inside by beams
and cross-beams of cancellated bone, in such a marvelous
manner that the most skilled bridge or construction en-
gineer could never accomplish the feat of building a pillar
of equal strength with so little weight. The bones of the


THE FOUR KINGDOMS vag


skull are built in a similar manner, always the least possible
material is used and the maximum of strength obtained.
Consider the wisdom manifested in the construction of the
heart and then question if this superb mechanism deserves
to be despised. The wise man is grateful for his dense
body and takes the best possible care of it, because he knows
that it is the most valuable of his present instruments.
The animal spirit has in its descent reached only the
Desire World. It has not yet evolved to the point where
it can “enter” a dense body. Therefore the animal has no
individual imdwelling spirit, but a group-spirit, which
directs it from without. The animal has the dense body,
the vital body and the desire body, but the group-spirit
which directs it is outside. The vital body and the desire
body of an animal are not entirely within the dense body,
especially where the head is concerned. For instance, the
etheric head of a horse projects far beyond and above the
dense physical head. When, as in rare cases it happens,
the etheric head of a horse draws into the head of the
dense body, that horse can learn to read, count and work
examples in elementary arithmetic. To this peculiarity is
also due the fact that horses, dogs, cats and other domesti-
cated animals sense the Desire World, though not always
tealizing the difference between it and the Physical World.
A horse will shy at the sight of a figure invisible to the
driver; a cat will go through the motions of rubbing itself
against invisible legs. The cat sees the ghost, however,
without realizing that it has no dense legs available for
frictional purposes. The dog, wiser than cat or horse, will
often sense that there is something he does not under-
stand about the appearance of a dead master whose hands it
cannot lick. It will howl mournfully and slink into a
corner with its tail between its legs. The following illus-


"8 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


tration may perhaps be of service to show the difference
between the man with his indwelling spirit and the animal
with its group-spirit.

Let us imagine*a room divided by means of a curtain,
one side of the curtain representing the Desire World and
the other the Physical. There are two men in the room,
one in each division; they cannot see each other, nor can
they get into the same division. There are, however, ten
holes in the curtain and the man who is in the division
representing the Desire World can put his ten fingers
through these holes into the other division, representing
the Physical World. He now furnishes an excellent rep-
resentation of the group-spirit which is in the Desire
World. ‘The fingers represent the animals belonging to
one species. He is able to move them as he wills, but he
cannot use them as freely nor as intelligently as the man
who is walking about in the Physical division uses his body.
The latter sees the fingers which are thrust through the
curtain and he observes that they all move, but he does
not see the connection between them. To him it appears
as if they were all separate and distinct from one another.
He cannot see that they are the fingers of the man behind
the veil and are governed in their movements by his in-
telligence. If he hurts one of the fingers, it is not only
the finger that he hurts, but chiefly the man on the other
side of the curtain. If an animal is hurt, it suffers, but not
to the degree that the group-spirit does. The finger
has no individualized consciousness; it moves as the man
dictates—so do the animals move as the group-spirit dic-
tates. We hear of “animal instinct” and “blind instinct.”
There is no such vague, indefinite thing as “blind” in-
stinct. There is nothing “blind” about the way the group-
spirit guides its members—there is Wisdom, spelled with


THE FOUR KINGDOMS "9


capitals. The trained clairvoyant, when functioning in the
Desire World, can communicate with these spirits of the
animal species and finds them much more intelligent than
a large percentage of human beings. He can see the mar-
velous insight they display in marshaling the animals
which are their physical bodies.

It is the spirit of the group which gathers its flocks of
birds in the fall and compels them to migrate to the south,
neither too early nor too late to escape the winter’s chilly
blast; that directs their return in the spring, causing them
to fly at just the proper altitude, which differs for the
different species.

The group-spirit of the beaver teaches it to build its
dam across a stream at exactly the proper angle. It con-
siders the rapidity of the flow, and all the circumstances,
precisely as a skilled engineer would do, showing that it is
as up-to-date in every particular of the craft as the col-
lege-bred, technically-educated man. It is the wisdom of
the group-spirit that directs the building of the hexagon
cell of the bee with such geometrical nicety; that teaches
the snail to fashion its house in an accurate, beautiful
spiral; that teaches the ocean mollusk the art of decorat-
ing its iridescent shell. Wisdom, wisdom everywhere! so
grand, so great that one who looks with an observant eye
is filled with amazement and reverence.

At this point the thought will naturally occur that if the
animal group-spirit is so wise, considering the short period
of evolution of the animal as compared with that of man,
why does not the latter display wisdom to a much greater
degree and why must man be taught to build dams and
geometrize, all of which the group-spirit does without
being taught?

The answer to that question has to .do with the descent of


80 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


the Universal Spirit into matter of ever-increasing density.
In the higher Worlds, where its vehicles are fewer and
finer, it is in closer touch with cosmic wisdom which shines
out in a manner\inconceivable in the dense Physical
World, but as the spirit descends, the light of wisdom
becomes temporarily more and more dimmed, until in the
densest of all the Worlds, it is held almost entirely in
abeyance.

An illustration will make this clearer. The hand is
man’s most valuable servant; its dexterity enables it to
respond to his slightest bidding. In some vocations, such
as bank teller, the delicate touch of the hand becomes so
sensitive, that it is able to distinguish a counterfeit coin
from a genuine in a way so marvelous that one woula
almost think the hand were endowed with individual in-
telligence.

Its greatest efficiency is perhaps reached in the produc-
tion of music. It is capable of producing the most beauti-
ful, soul-stirring melodies. The delicate, caressing touch
of the hand elicits the tenderest strains of soul-speech from
the instrument, telling of the sorrows, the joys, the hopes,
the fears and the longings of the soul in a way that noth-
ing but music can do, It is the language of the heaven
world, the spirit’s true home, and comes to the divine
spark imprisoned in flesh as a message from its native land.
Music appeals to all, regardless of race, creed, or other
worldly distinction. The higher and more spiritual the
individual the plainer does it speak to him and even “the
savage breast” is not unmoved by it.

Let us now imagine a master musician putting on thin
gloves and trying to play his violin. We note at once that
the delicate touch is less subtle; the soul of the music is
gone. If he puts another and a heavier pair of gloves over


THE FOUR KINGDOMS 8i


the first pair, his hand is hampered to such an extent that
he may occasionally create a discord instead of the former
harmony. Should he at last put on, in addition to the
two pairs of gloves already hampering him, a pair of still
heavier mittens, he would,temporarily, be entirely unable
to play, and one who had not heard him play previously
to the time he put on the gloves and the mittens, would
naturally think that he had never been able to do so,
especially if ignorant of the hampering of his hands.

So it is with the Spirit ; every step down, every descent
into coarser matter is to it what the putting on of a pair
of gloves would be to the musician. Every step down
limits its power of expression until it has become accus-
tomed to the limitations and has found its focus, in the
same way that the eye must find its focus after we enter a
house on a bright summer day. The pupil of the eye con-
tracts to its limit in the glare of the sun and on entering
the house all seems dark; but, as the pupil expands, and
admits the light, the man is enabled to see as well in the
dimmer light of the house as he did in the sunlight.

The purpose of man’s evolution here is to enable him
to find his focus in the Physical World, where at present
the light of wisdom seems obscured. But when in time
we have “‘found the light,’’ the wisdom of man will shine
forth in his actions, and far surpass the wisdom expressed
by the group-spirit of the animal.

Besides, a distinction must be made between the group
spirit and the virgin spirits of the life wave now express-
ing itself as animals. The group-spirit belongs to a dif-
ferent evolution and is the guardian of the animal spirits.

The dense body in which we function is composed of
numerous cells, each having separate cell-consciousness,
though of a very low order. While these cells form part of


R2 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


our body they are subjected to and dominated by our
consciousness. An animal group-spirit functions in a spirit-
wal body, which is its lowest vehicle. This vehicle consists
of a varying number of virgin spirits imbued for the time
being with the consciousness of the group-spirit. The
latter directs the vehicles built by the virgin spirits in its
charge, caring for them and helping them to evolve their
vehicies. As its wards evolve, the group-spirit also evolves,
undergoing a series of metamorphoses, in a manner similar
to that in which we grow and gain experience by taking
into our bodies the cells of the food we eat, thereby also
raising their consciousness by enduing them with ours for
a time.

Thus while a separate, self-conscious Ego is within each
human body and dominates the actions of its particular
vehicle, the spirit of the separate animal is not yet individ-
ualized and self-conscious, but forms part of the vehicle of
a self-conscious entity belonging to a different evolution—
the group-spirit.

This group-spirit dominates the actions of the animals
in harmony with cosmic law, until the virgin spirits in its
charge shall have gained self-consciousness and become
human. Then they will gradually manifest wills of their
own, gaining more and more freedom from the group-spirit
and becoming responsible for their own actions. The group-
spirit will influence them, however (although in a de-
creasing degree), as race, tribe, community, or family
spirit until each individual has become capable of acting
in full harmony with cosmic law. Not until that time will
the Ego be entirely free and independent of the group-
spirit, which will then enter a higher phase of evolu-
tion.

The position occupied by the group-spirit in the Desire


THE FOUR KINGDOMS 83


World gives to the animal a consciousness different from
that of man, who has a clear, definite waking conscious-
ness. Man sees things outside of himself in sharp, dis-
tinct outlines. Owing to the spiral path of evolution, the
higher domestic animals, particularly the dog, horse, cat
and elephant see objects in somewhat the same way, though
perhaps not so clearly defined. All other animals have
an internal “picture consciousness” similar to the dream-
state in man. When such an animal is confronted by an
object, a picture is immediately perceived within, accom-
panied by a strong impression that the object is inimical
or beneficial to its welfare. If the feeling is one of fear,
it is associated with a suggestion from the group-spirit how
to escape the threatened danger. This negative state of
consciousness renders it easy for the group-spirit to guide
the dense bodies of its charges by suggestion, as the animals
have no will of their own.

Man is not so easily managed from without, either with
or without his consent. As evolution progresses and man’s
will develops more and more, he will become non-amenable
to outside suggestion and free to do as he pleases regard-
less of suggestions from others. This is the chief difference
between man and the other kingdoms. They act accord-
ing to law and the dictates of the group-spirit (which we
call instinct), while man is becoming more and more a
law unto himself. We do not ask the mineral whether
or not it will crystallize, nor the flower whether it will or
will not bloom, nor the lion whether it will or will not
cease to prey. They are all, in the smallest as in the great-
est matter, under the absolute domination of the group-
spirit, being without free will and initiative which, in
some degree, are possessed by every human being. All
animals of the same species look nearly alike, because they


84 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


emanate from the same group-spirit, while among the fif-
teen hundred millions of human beings who people the
Earth no two look exactly alike, not even twins when ado-
lescent, because the,stamp that is put upon each by the
indwelling individual Ego makes the difference in appear-
ance as well as in character.

That all oxen thrive on grass, and all lions eat flesh,
while “one man’s meat is another man’s poison” is an-
other illustration of the all-inclusive influence of the
group-spirit as contrasted with the Ego which makes each
human being require a different proportion of food from
every other. Doctors note with perpiexity the same pecu-
liarity in administering medicine. It acts differently
upon different individuals, while the same medicine will
produce identical effects on two animals of the same spe-
cies, owing to the fact that animals all follow the dictates
of the group-spirit and Cosmic Law—always act similariy
in identical circumstances. Man alone is, in some measure,
able to follow his own desires within certain limits. That
his mistakes are many and grievous, is granted, and to
many it might seem better if he were forced into the right
way, but if this were done, he would never learn to do
right. Lessons of discrimination between good and eyil
cannot be learned unless he is free to choose his own course
and has learned to eschew the wrong as a veritable “womb
of pain.” If he did right only because he had no choice,
and had no chance to do otherwise, he would be but an
automaton and not an evolving God. As the builder
learns by his mistakes, correcting past errors in future
buildings, so man, by means of his blunders, and the pain
they cause him, is attaining to a higher (because self-
conscious) wisdom than the animal, which acts wisely
because it is impelled to action by the group-spirit. In


THE FOUR KINGDOMS 85


time the animal will become human, have liberty of choice
and will make mistakes and learn by them as we do now.

Diagram 4 shows that the group-spirit of the plant
kingdom has its lowest vehicle in the Region of Concvete
Thought. It is two steps removed from its dense vehicle
and consequently the plants have a consciousness corre-
sponding to that of dreamless sleep. The group-spirit of
the mineral has its lowest vehicle in the Region of Abstract
Thought and it is, therefore, three steps removed from its
dense vehicle; hence it is in a state of deep unconsciousness
similar to the trance condition.

We have now shown that man is an individual indwell-
ing spirit, an Ego separate from all other entities, directing
and working in one set of vehicles from within, and that
plants and animals are directed from without by a group-
spirit having jurisdiction over a number of animals or
plants in our Physical World. They are separate only in
appearance.

The relations of plant, animal and man to the life cur-
rents in the Earth’s atmosphere are symbolically repre-
sented by the cross. The Mineral Kingdom is not repre-
sented, because as we have seen, it possesses no individual
vital body, hence cannot be the vehicle for currents belong-
ing to the higher realms. Plato, who was an Initiate, often
gave out occult truths. He said “The World-Soul is
erucified.”

The lower limb of the cross indicates the plant with its
root in the chemical mineral soil. The group-spirits of
plants are at the center of the Earth. They are (it will
be remembered) in the Region of Concrete Thought, which
inter-penetrates the Earth, as do all the other Worlds.
From these group-spirits flow streams or currents in all


86 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


directions to the periphery of the Earth, passing outward
through the length of plant or tree.

Man is represented by the upper limb; he is the inverted
plant. The plant takes its food through the root. Man
takes his food through the head. The plant stretches its
generative organs towards the sun. Man, the inverted
plant, turns his towards the center of the earth. The plant
is sustained by the spiritual currents of the group-spirit im
the center of the earth, which enter into it by way of the
root. Later it will be shown that the highest spiritual
influence comes to man from the sun, which sends its rays
through man, the inverted plant, from the head downwards.
The plant inhales the poisonous carbon dioxide exhaled by
man and exhales the life-giving oxygen used by him.

The animal, which is symbolized by the horizontal limb
of the cross, is between the plant and the man. Its spine
is in a horizontal position and through it play the cur-
rents of the animal group-spirit which encircle the Earth.

No animal can be made to remain constantly upright,
because in that case the currents of the group-spirit could
not guide it, and if it were not sufficiently individualized to
endure the spiritual currents which enter the vertical
human spine, it would die. It is necessary that a vehicle
for the expression of an individual Ego shall have three
things—an upright walk, that it may come into touch with
the currents just mentioned; an upright. larynx, for only
such a larynx is capable of speech (parrots and starlings
are examples of this effect of the upright larynx) ; and,
owing to the solar currents, it must have warm blood. The
latter is of the utmost importance to the Ego, which will be
logically explained and illustrated later. These requisites
are simply mentioned here as the last words on the status
of the four kingdoms in relation to each other and to the


Worlds.


(CHRUAIEM MDI JUTE
Maw AND THE MetHop oF EVOLUTION.


Activities of Life; Memory and Soul-Growth.


matter has shown us that each serves a definite

purpose in the economy of nature, and that God,
the Great Spirit, in Whom we actually and in fact “live
and move and have our being,” is the Power that per-
meates and sustains the whole Universe with Its Life; but
while that Life fiows into and is immanent in every atom of
the six lower Worlds and all contained therein, in the
Seventh—the highest—the Triune God alone 1s.

The next highest or sixth realm is the World of Virgin
Spirits. Here those sparks from the divine “Flame” have
their being before they commence their long pilgrimage
through the five denser Worlds for the purpose of develop-
ing latent potentialities into dynamic powers. As the seed
unfolds its hidden possibilities by being buried in the soil,
so these virgin spirits will, in time, when they have passed
through matter (the school of experience), also become
divine “Flames,” capable of bringing forth universes from
themselves.

The five Worlds constitute the field of man’s evolution,
the three lower or denser being the scene of the present
phase of his development: We will now consider him as
related to these five Worlds by means of his appropriate
vehicles, remembering the two grand divisions into which
two of these Worlds are divided, and that man has a vehicle
for each of these divisions.


O UR study thus far of the seven Worlds or states of


87


88 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


THE SEVENFOLD CONSTITUTION OF MAN.


World or Region. Corresponding Vehicle.
5.. World of Divine Spirit........ Divine Spirit Th
&- ./ Worl diotluite Spiblur easerc iets Life Spirit ' Gig fold The
World of ) Region of Abstract Thought...... fs hy, 2 Ego
ee eiesioteiiisioecelstels Human Spirit P

one Region of Concrete Thought..Mind.. (The Mind is

the mirror

through which

the threefold

spirit reflects

itself in the

threefold

body; the fo-

cussing - point.

See Diagr. 1.)


2... Desire:World!. ss sas. oes Desire Body ea 4
Phys- Etherie Region. . Vital Body | ine Shadow of titan
1+ ical " nS ft
World } Chemical Region.Dense Body Threefold Spirit.


In the waking state these vehicles are all together. They
inter-penetrate one another as the blood, the lymph, and
other juices cf the body inter-penetrate. Thus is the Ego
enabled to act in the Physical World.

We ourselves, as Egos, function directly in the subtle
substance of the Region of Abstract Thought, which we
have specialized within the periphery of our individual
aura. ‘Thence we view the impressions made by the outer
world upon the vital body through the senses, together with
the feelings and emotions generated by them in the desire
body, and mirrored in the mind.

From these mental images we form our conclusions, in
the substance of the Region of Abstract Thought, con-
cerning the subjects with which they deal. These con-
clusions are ideas. By the power of will we project an
idea through the mind, where it takes concrete shape as
a thought-form by drawing mind-stuff around itself from
the Region of Concrete Thought.


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 89


The mind is like the projecting lens of a stereopticon.
It projects the image in one of three directions, according
to the will of the thinker, which ensouls the thought-form.

(1) It may be projected against the desire body in an
endeavor to arouse feeling which will lead to immediate
action.

(a) If the thought awakens Interest, one of the twin
forces, Attraction or Repulsion, will be stirred up.

If Attraction, the centripetal force, is aroused, it seizes
the thought, whirls it into the desire body, endows the
image with added life and clothes it with desire-stuff
Then the thought is able to act on the etheric brain, and
propel the vital force through the appropriate brain cen-
ters and nerves to the voluntary muscles which perform
the necessary action. Thus the force in the thought is
expended and the image remains in the ether of the vital
body as memory of the act and the feeling that caused it.

(b) Repulsion is the centrifugal force and if that is
aroused by the thought there will be a struggle between
the spiritual force (the will of the man) within the
thought-form, and the desire body. This is the battle be-
tween conscience and desire, the higher and the lower
nature. The spiritual force, in spite of resistance, will
seek to clothe the thought-form in the desire-stuff needed
to manipulate the brain and muscles. The force of Re-
pulsion will endeavor to scatter the appropriated material
and oust the thought. If the spiritual energy is strong
it may force its way through to the brain centers and hold
its clothing of desire-stuff while manipulating the vital
force, thus compelling action, and will then leave upon
the memory a vivid impression of the struggle and the
victory. If the spiritual energy is exhausted before action
has resulted, it will be overcome by the force of Repul-


90 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


sion, and will be stored in the memory, as are all other
thought-forms when they have expended their energy.

(c) If the thought-form meets the withering feeling
of Indifference it depends upon the spiritual energy con-
tained in it whether it will be able to compel action, or
simply leave a weak impress upon the reflecting ether of
the vital body after its kinetic energy has been exhausted.

(2) Where no immediate action is called for by, the
mental images of impacts from without, these may be
projected directly upon the reflecting ether, together with
the thoughts occasioned by them, to be used at some future
time. The spirit, working through the mind, has instant
access to the storehouse of conscious memory and may at
any time resurrect any of the pictures found there, endue
them with new spiritual force, and project them upon
the desire body to compel action. Hach time such a pic-
ture is thus used it will gain in vividness, strength and
efficiency, and will compel action along its particular line
more readily than on previous occasions, because it cuts
grooves, and produces the phenomenon of thought, “gain-
ing” or “growing” upon us by repetition.

(3) A third way of using a thought-form is when the
thinker projects it toward another mind to act as a sug-
gestion, to carry information, ete., as in thought-trans-
ference, or it may be directed against the desire body of
another person to compel action, as in the case of a hypno-
tist influencing a victim at a distance. It will then act
in precisely the same manner as if it were the victim’s
own thought. If in line with his proclivities it will act
as per paragraph la. If contrary to his nature, as des-
cribed in 1b or le.

When the work designed for such a projected thought-
form has been accomplished, or its energy expended in


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 91


vain attempts to achieve its object, it gravitates back to
its creator, bearing with it the indelible record of the jour-
ney. Its success or failure is imprinted on the negative
atoms of the reflecting ether of its creator’s vital body,
where it forms that part of the record of the thinker’s
life and action which is sometimes called the sub-conscious
mind.

This record is much more important than the memory
to which we have conscious access, for the latter is made
up from imperfect and illusive sense-perceptions and is
the voluntary memory or conscious mind.

The involuntary memory or sub-conscious mind comes
into being in a different way, altogether beyond our con-
trol at present. As the ether carries to the sensitive film
in the camera an accurate impresion of the surrounding
landscape, taking in the minutest detail regardless of
whether the photographer has observed it or not, so the
ether contained in the air we inspire carries with it an
accurate and detailed picture of all our surroundings.
Not only of material things, but also the conditions ex-
isting each moment within our aura. The slightest
thought, feeling or emotion is transmitted to the lungs,
where it is injected into the blood. The blood is one of
the highest products of the vital body as it is the carrier
of nourishment to every part of the body, and the direct
vehicle of the Ego. The pictures it contains are impressed
upon the negative atoms of the vital body, to serve as
arbiters of the man’s destiny in the post mortem state.

The memory (or so-called mind), both conscious and
sub-conscious, relates wholly to the experiences of this
life. It consists of impressions of events on the vital body.
These may be changed or even eradicated, as noted in
the explanation concerning the forgiveness of sins which


$2 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


is given a few pages further on, which change or eradi-
cation depends upon the elimination of these impressions
from the ether of the vital body.

There is also a superconscious memory. That is the
storehouse of all faculties acquired and knowledge gained
in previous lives, though perhaps latent in the present
life. This record is indelibly engraven on the life
spirit. It manifests ordinarily, though not to the full
extent, as conscience and character which ensoul all
thought-forms, sometimes as counsellor, sometimes com-
pelling action with resistless force, even contrary to
reason and desire.

In many women, in whom the vital body is positive, and
in advanced people of either sex where the vital body has
been sensitized by a pure and holy life, by prayer and
concentration, this superconscious memory inherent in
the life spirit is occasionally, to some extent, above the
necessity of clothing itself in mind stuff and desire mat-
ter in order to compel action. . It does not always need to
ineur the danger of being subjected to and perhaps over-
ruled by a process of reasoning. Sometimes, in the form
of intuition or teaching from within, it impresses itself
directly upon the reflecting ether of the vital body. The
more readily we learn to recognize it and follow its dic-
tates, the oftener it will speak, to our eternal welfare.

By their activities during waking hours the desire body
and the mind are constantly destroying the dense vehicle.
Every thought and movement breaks down tissue. On the
other hand, the vital body faithfully endeavors to restore
harmony and build up what the other vehicles are tearing
down. It is not able, however, to entirely withstand the
powerful onslaughts of the impulses and thoughts. It
gradually loses ground and at last there comes a time


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 93


when it collapses. Its “points” shrivel-up, so to say. The
vital fluid ceases to flow along the nerves in sufficient
quantity; the body becomes drowsy, the Thinker is ham-
pered by its drowsiness and forced to withdraw, taking the
desire body with him. This withdrawal of the higher
vehicles leaves the dense body interpenetrated by the vital
body in the senseless state we call sleep.

Sleep, however, is not by any means an inactive state,
as people generally suppose. If it were, the body would
be no different on awakening in the morning from its con-
dition when it went to sleep at night; its fatigue would
be just as great. On the contrary, sleep is a period of
intense activity and the more intense it is the greater its
value, for it eliminates the poisons resulting from tissue
destroyed by the mental and physical activities of the day.
The tissues are re-built and the rhythm of the body re-
stored. The more thoroughly this work is done the greater
the benefit accruing from sleep.

The Desire World is an ocean of wisdom and harmony.
Into this the Ego takes the mind and the desire body
when the lower vehicles have been left in sleep. There the
first care of the Ego is the restoration of the rhythm and
harmony of the mind and the desire body. This res-
toration is accomplished gradually as the harmonious
vibrations of the Desire World flow through them. There
is an essence in the Desire World corresponding to the
vital fluid which permeates the dense body by means of
the vital body. The higher vehicles, as it were, steep them-
selves in this elixir of life. When strengthened, they
commence work on the vital body, which was left with
the sleeping dense body. Then the vital body begins te
specialize the solar energy anew, rebuilding the dense


94 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


body, using particularly the chemical ether as its medium
in the process of restoration.

It is this activity of the different vehicles during sleep
which forms the basis for the activity of the following
day. Without that there would be no awakening, for the
Ego was forced to abandon his vehicles because their
weariness rendered them useless. If the work of removing
that fatigue were not done, the bodies would remain
asleep, as sometimes happens in natural trance. It is just
because of this harmonizing, recuperative activity that
sleep is better than doctor or medicine in preserving
health. Mere rest is nothing in comparison with sleep. It
is only while the higher vehicles are in the Desire World
that there is a total suspension of waste and an influx of
restoring force. It is true that during rest the vital body
is not hampered in its work by tissue being broken down
by active motion and tense muscles, but still it must con-
tend with the wasting energy of thought and it does not
then receive the outside recuperative force from the de-
sire body as during sleep.

It happens, however, that at times the desire body does
not fully withdraw, so that part of it remains connected
with the vital body, the vehicle for sense perception and
memory. The result is that restoration is only partly ac-
complished and that the scenes and actions of the Desire
World are brought into the physical consciousness as
dreams. Of course most dreams are confused as the axis
of perception is askew, because of the improper relation
of one body to another. The memory is also confused by
this incongruous relation of the vehicles and as a result
of the loss of the restoring force, dream-filled sleep is rest-
less and the body feels tired on awakening.

During life the threefold spirit, the Ego, works on and


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 95


in the threefold body, to which it is connected by the link
of mind. This work brings the threefold soul into being.
The soul is the spiritualized product of the body.


Diagram 5


Diagram 5 skows the Tenfold Constitution of Man.


Man is a threefold Spirit, possessing a Mind by means of which he gov-
erns a threefold Body, which he emanated from himself to gather experience.
This threefold body he transmutes into a threefold Soul, upon which he nour-
ishes himself from impotence to omnipotence.


The Divfme Spirit ( emanates( The Dense Body ) extracting ( Conscious Soul
The Life Spirit from The Vital Body as Intellectual Soul
The Human Spirit itself { The Desire Body 5 pabulum ¢ Emotional Soul


The mrirror of Mind also contributes increasingly to spiritual growth as
the thoughts. which it transmits to and from the Spirit polish it to greater
brightness, sharpening and intensifying its focus more and more to a single
point, perfectly flexible and under the control of the Spirit.


96 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


As proper food feeds the body in a material sense, so
the activity of the spirit in the dense body, which results
in right action, promotes the growth of the Conscious
Soul. As the forces from the sun play in the vital body
and nourish it, that it may act on the dense body, so the
memory of actions done in the dense body—the desires,
feelings and emotions of the desire body and the thoughts
and ideas in the mind—cause the growth of the Intel-
lectual Soul. In lke manner the highest desires and emo-
tions of the desire body form the Emotional Soul.

This threefold soul in turn enhances the consciousness
of the threefold spirit.

The Emotional Soul, which is the extract of the desire
body, adds to the efficiency of the Human Spirit, which
is the spiritual counterpart of the desire body.

The Intellectual Soul gives added power to the Life
Spirit, because the Intellectual Soul is extracted from the
vital body, which is the material counterpart of the Life
Spirit.

The Conscious Soul increases the consciousness of the
Divine Spirit because it (the Conscious Soul) is the
extract, of the dense body, which latter is the counterpart
of the Divine Spirit.


DEATH AND PURGATORY.


So man builds and sows until the moment of death ar-
rives. Then the seed-time and the periods of growth and
ripening are past. The harvest time has come, when the
skeleton spectre of Death arrives with his scythe and
hour-glass. That is a good symbol. The skeleton symbol-
izes the relatively permanent part of the body. The
scythe represents the fact that this permanent part, which


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 9%


is about to be harvested by the spirit, is the fruitage of the
life now drawing to a close. The hour-glass in his hand
indicates that the hour does not strike until the full course
has been run in harmony with unvarying laws. When
that moment arrives a separation of the vehicles takes
place. As his life in the Physical World is ended for the
time being, it is not necessary for man to retain his dense
body. The vital body, which as we have explained, also
belongs to the Physical World, is withdrawn by way of
the head, leaving the dense body inanimate.

The higher vehicles—vital body, desire body and mind
—are seen to leave the dense body with a spiral movement,
taking with them the soul of one dense atom. Not the
atom itself, but the forces that played through it. The
results of the experiences passed through in the dense body
during the life just ended have been impressed upon this
particular atom. While all the other atoms of the dense
body have been renewed from time to time, this permanent
atom has remained. It has remained stable, not only
through one life, but it has been a part of every dense
body ever used by a particular Ego. It is withdrawn at
death only to reawaken at the dawn of another physical
life, to serve again as the nucleus around which is built
the new dense body to be used by the same Ego. It is
therefore called the “Seed-Atom.” During life the seed-
atom is situated in the left ventricle of the heart, near the
apex. At death it rises to the brain by way of the pneu-
mogastric nerve, leaving the dense body, together with
the higher vehicles, by way of the sutures between the
parietal and occipital bones.

When the higher vehicles have left the dense body they
sre still connected with it by a slender, glistening, silvery


4


98 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


cord shaped much like two figure sixes reversed, one up-
right and one horizontally placed, the two connected at
the extremities of the hooks. (See diagram 514.)

One end is fastened to the heart by means of the seed-
atom, and it is the rupture of the seed-atom which causes
the heart to stop. The cord itself is not snapped until
the panorama of the past life, contained in the vital body,
has been reviewed.

Care should be taken, however, not to cremate or em-
balm the body until at least three days after death, for
while the vital body is with the higher vehicles, and they
are still connected with the dense body by means of the
silver cord, any post mortem examination or other injury
to the dense body will be felt, in a measure, by the man.


THe Sitver Corpo


DIAGRAM
52 PoINT OF ------4---(---


SEPARATION


Cremation should be particularly avoided in the first
three days after death, because it tends to disintegrate the
vital body, which should be kept intact until the pano-
rama. of the past life has been etched into the desire body.

The silver cord snaps at the point where the sixes unite,
half remaining with the dense body and the other half


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 99


with the higher vehicles. From the time the cord snaps
the dense body is quite dead.

In the beginning of 1906 Dr. McDougall made a series
of experiments in the Massachusetts General Hospital,
to determine, if possible, whether anything not ordinarily
visible left the body at death. For this purpose he con-
structed a pair of scales capable of registering differences
of one-tenth of an ounce.

The dying person and his bed were placed on one of
the platforms of the scale, which was then balanced by
weights placed on the opposite platform. In every in-
stance it was noted that at the precise moment when the
dying person drew the last breath, the platform contain-
ing the weights dropped with a startling suddenness, lift-
ing the bed and the body, thus showing that something
invisible, but having weight, had left the body. There-
upon the newspapers all over the country announced in
glaring headlines that Dr. McDougall had “weighed the
soul.”

Occultism hails with joy the discoveries of modern
science, as they invariably corroborate what occult science
has long taught. The experiments of Dr. McDougall
showed conclusively that something invisible to ordinary
sight left the body at death, as trained clairvoyants had
seen, and as had been stated in lectures and literature for
many years previous to Dr. McDougall’s discovery.

But this invisible “something” is not the soul. There
is a great difference. The reporters jump at conclusions
when they state that the scientists have “weighed the
““goul.?? The soul belongs to higher realms and can never
i be weighed on physical scales, even though they registered
‘variations of one-millionth part of a grain instead of one-
tenth of an ounce.


100 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


It was the vital body which the scientists weighed. It
_ is formed of the four ethers and they belong to the Phys-
ical World.

As we have séen, a certain amount of this ether is
“superimposed” upon the ether which envelops the parti-
cles of the human body and is confined there during phys-
ical life, adding in a slight degree to the weight of the
dense body of plant, animal and man. In death it escapes ;
hence the diminution in-weight noticed by Dr. McDougall
when the persons with whom he experimented expired.

Dr. McDougall also tried his scales in weighing dying
animals. No diminution was found here, though one of
the animals was a large St. Bernard dog. That was taken
to indicate that animals have no souls. A little later,
however, Professor La V. Twining, head of the Science
Department of the Los Angeles Polytechnic School, ex-
perimented with mice and kittens, which he enclosed in
hermetically sealed glass flasks. His scales were the most
sensitive procurable and were enclosed in a glass case
from which all moisture had been removed. It was found
that all the animals observed lost weight at death. A
good sized mouse, weighing 12.886 grams, suddenly lost
3.1 milligrams at death.

A kitten used in another experiment lost one hundred
milligrams while dying and at its last gasp it suddenly
lost an additional sixty milligrams. After that it lost
weight slowly, due to evaporation.

Thus the teaching of occult science in regard to the
possession of vital bodies by animals was also vindicated
when sufficiently fine scales were used, and the case where
the rather insensitive scales did not show diminution in
the weight of the St. Bernard dog shows that the vital
bodies of animals are proportionately lighter than in man.


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 104


When the “silver cord” is loosened in the heart, and
man has been released from his dense body, a moment
of the highest importance comes to the Ego, and it can-
not be too seriously impressed upon the relatives of a dy-
ing person that it is a great crime against the departing
soul to give expression to loud grief and lamentations, for
it is just then engaged in a matter of supreme importance
and a great deal of the value of the past life depends upon
how much attention the soul can give to this matter.
This wiil be made clearer when we come to the descrip-
tion of man’s life in the Desire World.

It is also a crime against the dying to administer stim-
ulants which have the effect of forcing the higher vehicles
back into the dense body with a jerk, thus imparting a
great shock to the man. It is no torture to pass out, but it
is torture to be dragged back to endure further suffering.
Some who have passed out have told investigators that
they had, in that way, been kept dying for hours and had
prayed that their relatives would cease their mistaken
kindness and let them die.

When the man is freed from the dense body, which was
the heaviest clog upon his spiritual power (like the heavy
mitten on the hand of the musician in our previous illus-
tration), his spiritual power comes back in some measure,
and he is able to read the pictures in the negative pole of
the reflecting ether of his vital body, which is the seat
of the sub-conscious memory.

The whole of his past life passes before his sight like
a panorama, the events being presented in reverse order.
The incidents of the days immediately preceding death
come first and so on back through manhood or woman-
hood to youth, childhood and infancy. Everything is re-
membered.


102 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


The man stands as a spectator before this panorama of
his past life. He sees the pictures as they pass and they
impress themselves upon his higher vehicles, but he has
no feeling about them at this time. That is reserved until
the time when he enters into the Desire World, which is
the world of feeling and emotion. At present he is only
in the Etheric Region of the Physical World.

This panorama lasts from a few hours to several days,
depending upon the length of time the man could keep
awake, if necessary. Some people can keep awake only
twelve hours, or even less; others can do so, upon occasion,
for a number of days, but as long as the man can remain
awake, this panorama lasts.

This feature of life after death is similar to that which
takes place when one is drowning or falling from a height.
In such cases the vital body also leaves the dense body and
the man sees his life in a flash, because he loses conscious-
ness at once. Of course the “silver cord” is not broken,
or there could be no resuscitation.

When the endurance of the vital body has reached its
limit, it collapses in the way described when we were con-
sidering the phenomenon of sleep. During physical life,
when the Ego controls its vehicles, this collapse terminates
the waking hours; after death the collapse of the vital
body terminates the panorama and forces the man to with-
draw into the Desire World. The silver cord breaks at the
point where the “sixes” unite (see diagram 54), and the
same division is made as during sleep, but with this im-
portant difference, that though the vital body returns to the
dense body, it no longer interpenetrates it, but simply
hovers over it. It remains floating over the grave, decaying
synchronously with the dense vehicle. Hence, to the trained
clairvoyant, a graveyard is a nauseating sight and if only


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 103


more people could see it as he does, little argument would
be necessary to induce them to change from the present
unsanitary method of disposing of the dead to the more
rational method of cremation, which restores the elements
to their primordial condition without the objectionable
features incident to the process of slow decay.

In leaving the vital body the process is much the same
as when the dense body is discarded. The life forces of
one atom are taken, to be used as a nucleus for the vital
body of a future embodiment. Thus, upon his entrance
into the Desire World the man has the seed-atoms of the
dense and the vital bodies, in addition to the desire body
and the mind.

If the dying man could leave all desires behind, the de-
sire body would very quickly fall away from him, leaving
him free to proceed into the heaven world, but that is not
generally the case. Most people, especialiy if they die in
the prime of life, have many ties and much interest in
life on earth. They have not altered their desires because
they have lost their physical bodies. In fact often their
desires are even augmented by a very intense longing to
return. This acts in such a manner as to bind them to ~
the Desire World in a very unpleasant way, although un-
fortunately, they do not realize 1t. On the other hand, old
and decrepit persons and those who are weakened by
long illness and are tired of life, pass on very quickly.

The matter may be illustrated by the ease with which
the seed falls out of the ripe fruit, no particle of the flesh
clinging to it, while in the unripe fruit the seed clings
to the flesh with the greatest tenacity. Thus it is espe-
cially hard for people to die who were taken out of their
bodies by accident while at the height of their physical
health and strength, engaged in numerous ways in the


104 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


activities of physical life; held by the ties of wife, family,
relatives, friends, pursuits of business and pleasure.

The suicide, who tries to get away from life, only to
find that he is as much alive as ever, is in the most piti-
able plight. He is able to watch those whom he has, per-
haps, disgraced by his act, and worst of all, he has an un-
speakable feeling of being “hollowed out.” The part in
the ovoid aura where the dense body used to be is empty
and although the desire body has taken the form of the
discarded dense body, it feels like an empty shell, because
the creative archetype of the body in the Region of Con-
crete Thought persists as an empty mold, so to speak, as
long as the dense body should properly have lived. When
a person meets a natural death, even in the prime of life,
the activity of the archetype ceases, and the desire body
adjusts itself so as to occupy the whole of the form, but
in the case of the suicide that awful feeling of “empti-
ness” remains until the time comes when, in the natural
course of events, his death would have occurred.

As long as the man entertains the desires connected
with earth life he must stay in his desire body and as the
progress of the individual requires that he pass on to
higher Regions, the existence in the Desire World must
necessarily become purgative, tending to purify him from
his binding desires. How this is done is best seen by tak-
ing some radical instances.

The miser who loved his gold in earth life loves it just
as dearly after death; but in the first place he cannot
acquire any more, because he has no longer a dense body
wherewith to grasp it and worst of all, he cannot even keep
what he hoarded during life. He will, perhaps, go and sit
by his safe and watch the cherished gold or bonds; but
the heirs appear and with, it may be, a stinging jeer at the


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 05


“stingy old fool” (whom they do not see, but who both
sees and hears them), will open his safe, and thoxgh he
may throw himself over his gold to protect it, they will
put their hands through him, neither knowing nor caring
that he is there, and will then proceed to spend his hoard,
while he suffers in sorrow and impotent rage.

He will suffer keenly, his sufferings all the more ter-
Tible on account of being entirely mental, because the
dense body dulls even suffering to some extent. In the
Desire World, however, these sufferings have full sway and
the man suffers until he learns that gold may be a curse.
Thus he gradually becomes contented with his lot and at
last is freed from his desire body and is ready to go on.

Or take the case of the drunkard. He is just as fond
of intoxicants after death as he was before. It is not the
dense body that craves drink. It is made sick by alcohol
and would rather be without it. It vainly protests in
different ways, but the desire body of the drunkard craves
the drink and forces the dense body to take it, that the
desire body may have the sensation of pleasure resulting
from the increased vibration. That desire remains after
the death of the dense body, but the drunkard has in his
desire body neither mouth to drink nor stomach to contain
physical liquor. He may and does get into saloons, where
he interpolates his body into the bodies of the drinkers
to get a little of their vibrations by induction, but that
is too weak to give him much satisfaction. He may and
also does sometimes get inside a whiskey cask, but that

is of no avail either for there are in the cask no such
fumes as are generated in the digestive organs of a tip-
pler. It has no effect upon him and he is like a man in
an open boat on the ocean, “Water, water everywhere,
but not a drop to drink ;” consequently he suffers intensely.


106 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


In time, however, he learns the uselessness of longing for
drink which he cannot obtain. As with so many of our
desires in the Earth life, all desires in the Desire World
die for want of opportunity to gratify them. When the
drunkard has been purged, he is ready, so far as this habit
is concerned, to leave this state of “purgatory” and ascend
into the heaven world.

Thus we see that it is not an avenging Deity that makes
purgatory or hell for us, but our own individual evil habits
and acts. According to the intensity of our desires will
be the time and suffering entailed in their expurgation.
In the cases mentioned it would have been no suffering
to the drunkard to lose his worldly possessions. If he had
any, he did not cling to them. Neither would it have
caused the miser any pain to have been deprived of in-
toxicants. It is safe to say that he would not have cared
if there were not a drop of liquor in the world. But he
did care about his gold, and the drunkard cared about
his drink and so the unerring law gave to each that which
was needed to purge him of his unhallowed desires and
evil habits.

This is the law that is symbolized in the scythe of the
reaper, Death; the law that says, “whatsoever a man
soweth, that shall he also reap.” It is the law of cause
and effect, which rules all things in the three Worlds, in
every realm of nature—physical, moral and mental.
Everywhere it works inexorably, adjusting all things, re-
storing the equilibrium wherever even the slightest action
has brought about a disturbance, as all action must. The
result may be manifest immediately or it may be delayed
for years or for lives, but sometime, somewhere, just and
equal retribution will be made. The student should par-
ticularly note that its work is absolutely impersonal.


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 107


There is in the universe neither reward nor punishment.
All is the result of invariable law. The action of this
law will be more fully elucidated in the next chapter,
where we shall find it associated with another Great Law
of the Cosmos, which also operates in the evolution of
man. The law we are now considering is called the law
of Consequence.

In the Desire World it operates in purging man of the
baser desires and the correction of the weaknesses and
vices which hinder his progress, by making him suffer in
the manner best adapted to that purpose. If he has
made others suffer, or has dealt unjustly with them, he
will be made to suffer in that identical way. Be it noted,
however, that if a person has been subject to vices, or has
done wrong to others, but has overcome his vices, or re-
pented and, as far as possible, made right the wrong
done, such repentance, reform and restitution have
purged him of those special vices and evil acts. The
equilibrium has been restored and the lesson: learned
during that embodiment, and therefore will not be a
cause of suffering after death.

In the Desire World life is lived about three times as
rapidly:as in the Physical World. A man who has lived
to be fifty years of age in the Physical World would live
through the same life events in the Desire World in about
sixteen years. This is, of course, only a general gauge.
There are persons who remain in the Desire World much
longer than their term of physical life. Others again,
who have led lives with few gross desires, pass through
in a much shorter period, but the measure above given
is very nearly correct for the average man of the pres-
ent day.

It will be remembered that as the man leaves the dense


108 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


body at death, his past life passes before him in pictures;
but at that time he has no feeling concerning them.

During his life in the Desire World also these life pic-
tures roll backwards, as before; but now the man has all
the feelings that it is possible for him to have as, one by
one, the scenes pass before him. Every incident in his
past life is now lived over again. When he comes to a
point where he has injured someone, he himself feels the
pain as the injured person felt it. He lives through all
the sorrow and suffering he has caused to others and
learns just how painful is the hurt and how hard to bear
is the sorrow he has caused. In addition there is the fact
already mentioned that the suffering is much keener be-
cause he has no dense body to dull the pain. Perhaps that
is why the speed of life there is tripled—that the suffer-
ing may lose in duration what it gains in sharpness. Nat-
ture’s measures are wonderfully just and true.

There is another characteristic peculiar to this phase
of post mortem existence which is intimately connected
with the fact (already mentioned) that distance is almost
annihilated in the Desire World. When a man dies, he
at once seems to swell out in his vital body; he appears
to himself to grow into immense proportions. This feel-
ing is due to the fact, not that the body really grows, but
that the perceptive faculties receive so many impressions
from various sources, all seeming to be close at hand.
The same is true of the desire body. The man seems to
be present with all the people with whom on earth he
had relations of a nature which require correction. If
he has injured one man in San Francisco and another in
New York, he will feel as if part of him were in each
place. This gives him a peculiar feeling of being cut to
pieces.


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 109


The student will now understand the importance of the
panorama of the past life during the purgative existence,
where this panorama is realized in definite feelings. If
it lasted long and the man were undisturbed, the ful,
deep, clear impression etched into the desire body would
make life in the Desire World more vivid and conscious
and the purgation more thorough than if, because of dis-
tress at the loud outbursts of grief on the part of his rela-
tives, at the death bed and during the three-day period
previously mentioned the man had only a vague impres-
sion of his past life. The spirit which has etched a deep
clear record into its desire body will realize the mistakes
of the past life so much more clearly and definitely than
if the pictures were blurred on account of the individual’s
attention being diverted by the suffering and grief around
him. His feeling concerning the things which cause his
present suffering in the Desire World will be much more
definite if they are drawn from a distinct panoramic im-
pression than if the duration of the process were short.

This sharp, clear-cut feeling is of immense value in
future lives. It stamps upon the seed-atom of the desire
body an ineffaceable impression of itself. The experiences
wili be forgotten in succeeding lives, but the Feeling re-
mains. When opportunities occur to repeat the error in
later lives, this Feeling will speak to us clearly and un-
mistakably. It is the “still; small voice” which warns
us, though we do not know why; but the clearer and more
definite the panoramas of past lives have been, the oftener,
stronger and clearer shall we hear this voice. Thus we
see how important it is that we leave the passing spirit in
absolute quietness after death. By so doing we help it
to reap the greatest possible benefit from the life just
ended and to avoid perpetuating the same mistakes in


110 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


future lives, while our selfish, hysterical lamentations may
deprive it of much of the value of the life it has just con-
cluded.

The mission of purgatory is to eradicate the injurious
habits by making their gratification impossible. The in-
dividual suffers exactly as he has made others suffer
through his dishonesty, cruelty, intolerance, or what not.
Because of this suffering he learns to act kindly, honestly,
and with forbearance toward others in future. Thus, in
consequence of the existence of this beneficent state, man
learns virtue and right action. When he is reborn he is
free from evil habits, at least every evil act committed is
one of free will. The tendencies to repeat the evil of past
lives remain, for we must learn to do right consciously
and of our own will. Upon occasion these tendencies
tempt us, thereby affording us an opportunity of ranging
ourselves on the side of mercy and virtue as against vice
and cruelty. But to indicate right action and to help us
resist the snares and wiles of temptation, we have the feel-
ing resulting from the expurgation of evil habits and the
expiation of the wrong acts of past lives. If we heed that
feeling and abstain from the particular evil involved, the
temptation will cease. We have freed ourselves from it
for all time. If we yield we shall experience keener suffer-
ing than before until at last we have learned to live by
the Golden Rule, because the way of the transgressor is
hard. Even then we have not reached the ultimate. To
do good to others because we want them to do good to us
is essentially selfish. In time we must learn to do good
regardless of how we are treated by others; as Christ said,
we must love even our enemies.

There is an inestimable benefit) in knowing about the
method and object of this purgation, because we are thus


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 111


enabled to forestall it by living our purgatory here and
now day by day, thus advancing much faster than would
otherwise be possible. An exercise is given in the latter
part of this work, the object of which is purification as
an aid to the development of spiritual sight. It consists
of thinking over the happenings of the day after retiring
at night. We review each incident of the day, in reverse
order, taking particular note of the moral aspect, consid-
ering whether we acted rightly or wrongly in each par-
ticular case regarding actions, mental attitude and habits.
By thus judging ourselves day by day, endeavoring to cor-
rect mistakes and wrong actions, we shall materially
shorten or perhaps even eliminate the necessity for pur-
gatory and be able to pass to the first heaven directly after
death. If in this manner, we consciously overcome our
weaknesses, we also make a very material advance in the
school of evolution. Even if we fail to correct our actions,
we derive an immense benefit from judging ourselves,
thereby generating aspirations toward good, which in time
will surely bear fruit in right action.

In reviewing the day’s happenings and blaming our-
selves for wrong, we should not forget to impersonally
approve of the good we have done and determine to do
still better. In this way we enhance the good by approval
as much as we abjure the evil by blame.

Repentance and reform are also powerful factors in
shortening the purgatorial existence, for nature never
wastes effort in useless processes. When we realize the
wrong of certain habits or acts in our past life, and
determine to eradicate the habit and to redress the wrong
committed, we are expunging the pictures of them from
the sub-conscious memory and they will not be there to
judge us after death. Even though we are not able to


112 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


make restitution for a wrong, the sincerity of our regret
will suffice. Nature does not aim to “get even,’ or to
take revenge. Recompense may be given to our victim in
other ways.

Much progress ordinarily reserved for future lives will
be made by the man who thus takes time by the forelock,
judging himself and eradicating vice by reforming his
character. ‘This practice is earnestly recommended. It
is perhaps the most important teaching in the present
work.

THE BORDERLAND.

Purgatory occupies the three lower Regions of the De-
sire World. The first heaven is in the three upper Re-
gions. The central Region is a sort of borderland—
neither heaven nor hell. In this Region we find people
who are honest and upright; who wronged no one, but
were deeply immersed in business and thought nothing of
the higher life. For them the Desire World is a state of
the most indescribable monotony. There is no “business”
in that world nor is there, for a man of that kind, any-
thing that will take its place. He has a very hard time
until he learns to think of higher things than ledgers and
drafts. The men who thought of the problem of life and
came to the conclusion that “death ends it all;” who de-
nied the existence of things outside the material sense
world—these men also feel this dreadful monotony. They
had expected annihilation of consciousness, but instead of
that they find themselves witi an augmented perception
of persons and things about them. They had been ac-
customed 10 denying these things so vehemently that they
often fancy the Desire World an hallucination, and may
frequently be heard exclaiming in the deepest despair,
“When will it end? When will it end?”


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 113


Such people are really in a pitiable state. They are
generally beyond the reach of any help whatever and suf-
fer much longer than almost anyone else. Besides, they
have scarcely any life in the Heaven World, where the
building of bodies for future use is taught, so they put
all their crystallizing thoughts into whatsoever body they
build for a future life, and thus a body is built that has
the hardening tendencies we see, for instance, in consump-
tion. Sometimes the suffering incident to such decrepit
bodies will turn the thoughts of the entities ensouling
them to God, and their evolution can proceed; but in the
materialistic mind lies the greatest danger of losing touch
with the spirit and becoming an outcast. Therefore the
Elder Brothers have been very seriously concerned for
the last century regarding the fate of the Western World
and were it not for their special beneficent action in
its behalf, we should have had a social cataclysm com-
pared with which the French Revolution were child’s
play. The trained clairvoyant can see how narrowly
humanity has escaped disasters of a nature so devastat-
ing that continents would have been swept into the sea.
The reader will find a more extended and thorough exposi-
tion of the connection of materialism with volcanic out-
bursts in Chapter XVIII, where the list of the eruptions of
Vesuvius would seem to corroborate the statement of such
a connection, unless it is credited to “coincidence,” as the
sceptic generally does when confronted with facts and
figures he cannot explain.


THE First HEAVEN.


When the purgatorial existence is over the purified
spirit rises into the first heaven, which is located in the
three highest Regions of the Desire World, where the re-


114 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


sults of its sufferings are incorporated in the seed-atom of
the desire body, thus imparting to it the quality of right
feeling, which acts as an impulse to good and a deterrent
from evil in the future. Here the panorama of the past
again unrolls itself backward, but this time it is the good
acts of life that are the basis of feeling. When we come
to scenes where we helped others we realize anew all the
joy of helping which was ours at the time, and in addition
we feel all the gratitude poured out to us by the recipient
of our help. When we come to scenes where we were
helped by others, we again feel all the gratitude that we
then felt toward our benefactor. Thus we see the impor-
tance of appreciating the favors shown us by others, be-
cause gratitude makes for soul-growth. Our happiness in
heaven depends upon the joy we gave others, and the
valuation we placed upon what others did for us.

It should be ever borne in mind that the power of giv-
ing is not vested chiefly in the monied man. Indiscrimi-
nate giving of money may even be an evil. It is well to
give money for a purpose we are convinced is good, but
service is a thousandfold better. As Whitman says,


Behold! I do not give lectures, or a little charity;
When I give, I give myself. .


A kind look, expressions of confidence, a sympathetic and
loving helpfulness—these can be given by all regard-
less of wealth. Moreover, we should particularly endeavor
to help the needy one to help himself, whether physically,
financially, morally, or mentally, and not cause him to be-
come dependent upon us or others.

The ethics of giving, with the effect on the giver as a
spiritual lesson, are most beautifully shown in Lowell’s
“The Vision of Sir Launfal.” The young and ambitious


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 115


knight, Sir Launfal, clad in shining armor and astride a
splendid charger, is setting out from his castle to seek
The Holy Grail. On his shield gleams the cross, the sym-
bol of the benignity and tenderness of Our Savior, the
meek and lowly One, but the knight’s heart is filled with
pride and haughty disdain for the poor and needy. He
meets a leper asking alms and with a contemptuous frown
throws him a coin, as ong might cast a bone to a hungry
cur, but


The leper raised not the gold from the dust,
‘“Better to me the poor man’s crust,

Better the blessing of the poor,

Though I turn empty from his door.

That is no true a/ms which the hand ean hold;
He gives only the worthless gold

Who gives from a sense of duty;

But he who gives from a slender mite,

And gives to that which is out of sight—

That thread of all-sustaining Beauty

Which runs through all and doth all unite,
The hand cannot clasp the whole of his alms,
The heart outstretches its eager palms,

For a god goes with it and makes it store

To the soul that was starving in darkness before.


On his return Sir Launfal finds another in possession
of his castle, and is driven from the gate.


An old bent man, worn out and frail,

He came back from seeking the Holy Grail;
Little he recked of his earldom’s loss,

No more on his surcoat was blazoned the cross,
But deep in his heart the sign he wore,

The badge of the suffering and the poor.


Again he meets the leper, who again asks alms. This
time the knight responds differently.


And Sir Launfal said: ‘‘T behold in thee

An image of Him Who died on the tree;

Thou also hast had thy crown of thorns,

Thou also hast had the world’s buffets and scorns,


116 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


And to thy life were not denied

The wounds in the hands and feet and side;
Mild Mary’s Son, acknowledge me;

Behold, through him I give to Thee! ’’


A look in the leper’s eye brings remembrance and recog-
nition, and


The heart within him was ashes and dust;
He parted in twain his single crust,

He broke the ice on the streamlet’s brink,
And gave the leper to eat and drink.


A transformation takes place:


The leper no longer crouched by his side,
But stood before him glorified,


And the Voice that was softer than silence suid,
‘“Lo, it is I, be not afraid!

In many lands, without avail,

Thou hast spent thy life for the Holy Grail;
Behold, it is here!—This cup which thou
Did’st fill at the streamlet for me but now;
This crust is my body broken for thee,

This water the blood I shed on the tree;

The Holy Supper is kept, indeed,

In whatso we share with another’s need;

Not what we give, but what we share—

For the gift without the giver is bare;

Who gives himself with his alms feeds three—
Himself, his hungering neighbor, and me.’’


The first heaven is a place of joy without a single drop
of bitterness. The spirit is beyond the influence of the
material, earthly conditions, and assimilates all the good
contained in the past life as it lives it over again. Here
all ennobling pursuits to which the man aspired are realized
in fullest measure. It is a place of rest, and the harder
has been the life, the more keenly will the rest be enjoyed.
Sickness, sorrow, and pain are unknown quantities. This
is the Summerland of the Spiritualists. There the thoughts
of the devout Christian have built the New Jerusalem.


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 117


Beautiful houses, flowers, ete., are the portion of those
who aspired to them; they build them themselves by
thought from the subtle desire stuff. Nevertheless these
things are just as real and tangible to them as our ma-
terial houses are to us. All gain here the satisfaction
which earth life lacked for them.

There is one class there who lead a particularly beau-
tiful life—the children. If we could but see them we
would quickly cease our grief. When a child dies before
the birth of the desire body, which takes place about the
fourteenth year, it does not go any higher than the first
heaven, because it is not responsible for its actions, any
more than the unborn child is responsible for the pain
it causes the mother by turning and twisting in her
womb. Therefore the child has no purgatorial existence.
That which is not quickened cannot die, hence the desire
body of a child, together with the mind, will persist
until a new birth, and for that reason such children are
very apt to remember their previous life as instanced in
the case cited elsewhere.

For such children the first heaven is a waiting-place
where they dwell from one to twenty years, until an op-
portunity for a new birth is offered. Yet it is more than
simply a waiting-place, because there is much progress
made during this interim.

When a child dies there is always some relative await-
ing it, or, failing that, there are people who loved to
“‘mother’’ children in earth life who find delight in tak-
ing care of a little waif. The extreme plasticity of the de-
sire stuff makes it easy to form the most exquisite living
toys for the children, and their life is one beautiful play ;
nevertheless their instruction is not neglected. They are
formed into classes according to their temperaments. but


118 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


quite regardless of age. In the Desire World it is easy
to give object-lessons in the influence of good and evil
passions on conduct and happiness. These lessons are
indelibly imprinted upon the child’s sensitive and emo-
tional desire body, and remain with it after rebirth, so
that many a one living a noble life owes much of it to the
fact that he was given this training. Often when a weak
spirit is born, the Compassionate Ones (the invisivle Lead-
ers who guide our evolution) cause it to die in early life
that it may have this extra training to fit it for what may
be perhaps a hard life. This seems to be the case particu-
larly where the etching on the desire body was weak in
consequence of a dying person having been disturbed by
the lamentations of his relatives, or because he met death
by accident or on the battle-field. He did not under those
circumstances experience the appropriate intensity of feel-
ing in his post mortem existence, therefore, when he is
born and dies in early life, the loss is made up as above.
Often the duty of caring for such a child in the heaven life
falls to those who were the cause of the anomaly. They
are thus afforded a chance to make up for the fault and to
learn better. Or perhaps they become the parents of the
one they harmed and care for it during the few years it
lives. It does not matter then if they do lament hysteric-
ally over its death, because there would be no pictures of
any consequence in a child’s vital body.

This heaven is also a place of progression for all who
have been studious, artistic, or altruistic. The student
and the philosopher have instant access to all the libraries
of the world. The painter has endless delight in the ever-
changing color combinations. He soon learns that his
thought blends and shapes these colors at will. His crea-
tions glow and'scintillate with a life impossible of attain-


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 119


ment. to one who works with the dull pigments of Earth.
He is, as it were, painting with living, glowing materials
and able to execute his designs with a facility which fills
his soul with delight. The musician has not yet reached
the place where his art will express itself to the fullest
extent. The Physical World is the world of Form. The
Desire World, where we find purgatory and the first
heaven, is particularly the world of Color ;. but the World
of Thought, where the second and third heavens are located,
is the sphere of J’one. Celestial music is a fact and not a
mere figure of speech. Pythagoras: was not romancing
_ when he spoke of the music of the spheres, for each one of

the heavenly orbs has its definite tone and together they
sound the celestial symphony which Goethe also mentions
in the prolog to his “Faust,” where the scene is laid in
heaven. The Archangel Raphael says,


The Sun intones his ancient song
*Mid rival chant of brother spheres.
His prescribed course he speeds along
In thund’rous way throughout the years.


Echoes of that heavenly music reach us even here in
the Physical World. They are our most precious posses-
sion, even though they are as elusive as a will-o’-the-wisp,
and cannot be permanently created, as can other works
of art—a statue, a painting, or a book. In the Physical
World tone dies and vanishes the moment after it is born.
In the first heaven these echoes are, of course, much more
beautiful and have more permanency, hence there the musi-
cian hears sweeter strains than ever he did during earth
life.

The experiences of the poet are akin-to those of the
musician, for poetry is the soul’s expression of its inner-
most feelings in words which are ordered according to the


120 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


same laws of harmony and rhythm that govern the out-
pouring of the spirit in music. In addition, the poet
finds a wonderful inspiration in the pictures and colors
which are the chief characteristics of the Desire World.
Thence he will draw the material for use in his next in-
carnation. In like manner does the author accumulate
material and faculty. The philanthropist works out his
altruistic plans for the upliftment of man. If he failed in
one life, he will see the reason for it in the first heaven
and will there learn how to overcome the obstacles and
avoid the errors that made his plan impracticable.

Tn time a point is reached where the result of the pain
and suffering incident to purgation, together with the joy
extracted from the good actions of the past life, have been
built into the seed-atom of the desire body. Together
these constitute what we call conscience, that impelling
force which warns us against evil as productive of pain
and inclines us toward good as productive of happiness and
joy. Then man leaves his desire body to disintegrate, as
he left his dense body and vital body. He takes with him
the forces only of the seed-atom, which are to form the
nucleus of future desire bodies, as it was the persistent
particle of his past vehicles of feeling.

As stated above, the forces of the seed-atom are with-
drawn. To the materialist force and matter are insepara-
ble. The occultist knows differently. To him they are
not two entirely distinct and separate concepts, but the
two poles of the one spirit.

Matter is crystallized spirit.

Force is the same spirit not yet crystallized.

This has been said before, but it cannot be too strongly
impressed upon the mind. In this connection the illustra-
tion of the snail is very helpful. Matter, which is erys-


o


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 12]


tallized spirit, corresponds to the snail’s house, which is
crystallized snail. ‘The chemical force which moves mat-
ter, making it available for the building of form, and
the snail which moves its house are also good correspond-
ences. That which is now the snail will in time become
the house, and that which is now force will in time become
matter when it has crystallized further. The reverse process
of resolving matter back into spirit is also going on con-
tinually. The coarser pl ase of this process we see as decay
when a man is leaving his vehicles behind and at that time
the spirit of an atom is easily detachable from the coarser
spirit which has been manifesting as matter.


THE SECOND HEAVEN.


At last the man, the Ego, the threefold spirit, enters the
second heaven. He is clad in the sheath of mind, which
contains the three seed-atoms—the quintessence of the
three discarded vehicles.

When the man dies and loses his dense and vital bodies
there is the same condition as when one falls asleep. The
desire body, as has been explained, had no organs ready
for use. It is now transformed from an ovoid to a figure
resembling the dense body which has been abandoned.
We can easily understand that there must be an interval
of unconsciousness resembling sleep and then the man
awakes in the Desire World. It not infrequently happens,
however, that such people are, for a long time, unaware
of what has happened to them. They do not realize that
they have died. They know that they are able to move
and think. It is sometimes even a very hard matter to
get them to believe that they are really “dead.” They
realize that something is different, but they are not able
to understand what it is.


122 ROSIGRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Not so, however, when the change is made from the first
heaven, which is in the Desire World, to the second heaven,
which is in the’ Region: of Concrete Thought. Then the
man leaves his desire body. He is perfectly conscious. He
passes into a great stillness. For the time being every-
thing seems to'fade away. He cannot think. No faculty is
alive, yet he knows that he is. He has a feeling of stand-
ing in “The Great Forever ;” of standing utterly alone, yet
unafraid; and his soul is filled with a wonderful peace,
“which passeth all understanding.”

In occult science this is called “The Great Silence.”

Then comes the awakening. The spirit is now in its
home-World—heaven. Here the first awakening brings to
the spirit the sound of “the music of the spheres.” In
our Harth life we are so immersed in the little noises and
sounds of our limited environment that we are incapable
of hearing the music of the marching orbs, but the occult
scientist hears it. He knows that the twelve signs of the
Zodiac and the seven planets form the sounding-board and
strings of “Apollo’s seven-stringed lyre.” He knows that
were a single discord to mar the celestial harmony from
that grand Instrument there would.be “a wreck of matter
and a crash of worlds.”

The power of rhythmic vibration is well known to all
who have given the subject even the least study. For.
instance, soldiers are commanded to break step when cross-
ing a bridge, otherwise their rhythmic tramp would shatter
the strongest structure. The Bible story of the sounding
of the ram’s horn while marching around the walls of the
city of Jericho is not nonsensical in the eyes of the occult-
ist.. In some cases similar things have happened without
the world smiling in supercilious incredulity. A few years


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 123


ago, a band of musicians were practicing in a garden
close to the very solid wall of an old castle. There oc-
curred at a certain place in the music a prolonged and very
piercing tone. When this note was sounded the wall of.
the castle suddenly fell. The musicians had struck the key-
note of the wall and it was sufficiently prolonged to
shatter it.

When it is said that this is the world of tone, it must
not be thought that there are no colors. Many people
know that there is an intimate connection between color
and tone; that when a certain note is struck, a certain color
appears simultaneously. So it is also in the Heaven World.
Color and sound are both present; but the tone is the
originator of the color. Hence it is said, that this is par-
ticularly the world of tone, and it is this tone that builds
all forms in the Physical World. The musician can hear
certain tones in different parts of nature, such as the wind
in the forest, the breaking of the surf on the beach, the
roar of the ocean and the sounding of many waters. These
combined tones make a whole which is the key-note of: the
EKarth—its “tone.” As geometrical figures are created by
drawing a violin bow over the edge of a glass plate, so the
forms we see around us are the crystallized sound-figures
of the archetypal forces which play into the ‘archetypes in
the Heaven World.

The work done by man in the Heaven World is many-
sided. It is not in the least an inactive, dreamy nor
illusory existence. It is a time of the greatest and most
important activity in preparing for the next life, as sleep is
an active preparation for the work of the following day.

Here the quintessence of the three bodies is built into
the threefold spirit. As much of the desire body as the
man had worked upon during life, by purifying lis desires


124 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


and emotions, will be welded into the human spirit, thus
giving an improved mind in the future.

As much of the vital body as the life spirit had worked
upon, transformed, spiritualized, and thus saved from the
decay to which the rest of the vital body is subject, will
be amalgamated with the life spirit to insure a better vital
body and temperament in the succeeding lives.

As much of the dense body as the divine spirit has
saved by right action will be worked into it and will bring
Setter environment and opportunities.

This spiritualization of the vehicle is accomplished by
cultivation of the faculties of observation, discrimination
and memory, devotion to high ideals, prayer, concentra-
tion, persistence and right use of the life forces.

The second heaven is the real home of man—the Ego,
the Thinker. Here he dwells for centuries, assimilating the
fruit of the last earth life and preparing the earthly con-
ditions which will be best suited for his next step in prog-
ress. The sound or tone which pervades this Region, and is
everywhere apparent as color, is his instrument, so to speak.
It is this harmonious sound vibration which, as an elixir
of life, builds into the threefold spirit the quintessence of
the threefold body, upon which it depends for growth.

The life in the second heaven is an exceedingly active
one, varied in many different ways. The. Ego assimilates
the fruits of the last earth life and prepares the environ-
ment for a new physical existence. It is not enough to
say that the new conditions will be determined by con-
duct and action in the life just closed. It is required that
the fruits of the past be worked into the World which is
to be the next scene of activity while the Ego is gaining
fresh physical experiences and gathering further fruit.
Therefore all the denizens of the Heaven World work upon


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 125


the models of the Earth, all of which are in the Region
of Concrete Thought. They alter the physical features of
the Earth, and bring about the gradual changes which vary
its appearance, so that on each return to physical life a
different environment has been prepared, wherein new
experiences may be gained. Climate, flora, and fauna are
altered by man under the direction of higher Beings, to
be described later. Thus the world is just what we our-
selves, individually and collectively, have made it; and it
will be what we make it. The occult scientist sees in every-
thing that happens a cause of a spiritual nature manifest-
ing itself, not omitting the prevalence and alarmingly in-
creasing frequency of seismic disturbances, which it traces
to the materialistic thought of modern science.

It is true that purely physical causes can bring about
such disturbances, but is that the last word on the subject ?
Can we always get the full explanation by merely record-
ing what appears on the surface? Surely not! We see
two men conversing on the street and one suddenly strikes
the other, knocking him down. One observer may say
that an angry thought knocked the man down. Another
may scoff at this answer and declare that he saw the arm
lifted, the muscles contract, the arm shooting out and com-
ing in contact with the victim, who was knocked down.
That is also true, but it is safe to say that had there not
first been the angry thought, the blow would not have been
struck. In like manner the occultist says that if material-
ism had not been, seismic disturbances would not have
occurred.

Man’s work in the Heaven World is not confined solely
to the alteration of the surface of the Earth which is to
be the scene of his future struggles in the subjugation of
the Physical World. He is also actively engaged in learn-


126 ROSICRUCIAN: COSMO-CONCEPTION


ing how to build a body which shall afford a better means of
expression. It is man’s destiny to become a Creative In-
telligence and he is serving his apprenticeship all the time.
During his heaven life he is learning to build all kinds of
bodies—the human included.

We have spoken of the forces which work along the
positive and negative poles of the different ethers. Man
himself is part of that force. Those whom we call dead
are the ones who help us to live. They in turn are helped
by the so-called “nature spirits,” which they command.
Man is directed in this work by Teachers from the higher
creative Hierarchies, which helped him to build his vehicles
before he attained self-consciousness, in the same way he
himself now builds his bodies in sleep. During heaven
life they teach him consciously. The painter is taught to
build an accurate eye, capable of taking in a perfect per-
spective and of distinguishing colors and shades to a
degree inconceivable among those not interested in color
and light.

The mathematician has: to deal with space, and the
faculty for space perception is connected with the delicate
adjustment of the three semi-circular* canals which are
situated inside the ear, each pointing in one of the three
dimensions in!space. Logical thought and mathematical
ability are in proportion to the accuracy of the adjustment
of these semi-éircular canals. Musical ability is also de-
pendent upon the same factor, but in addition to the neces-
sity for the proper adjustment of the semi-circular canals,
the musician requires extreme delicacy of the “fibres of
Corti,” of which there are about ten thousand in the
human ear, each capable of interpreting about twenty-five
gradations of tone. In the ears of the majority of people
they do not: respond to more than from three to ten of


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 12”


the possible gradations. Among ordinary:.musical people
the greatest degree of efficiency is about fifteen sounds. to
each fibre; but the master musician, who is able to inter-
pret and bring down music from the Heaven World, re-
quires a greater range to be able to distinguish the differ-
ent notes and detect the slightest discord in the most com-
plicated chords. Persons who require organs of such ex-
ceeding delicacy for the expression of their faculties are
specially taken care of, as the higher state of their devel-
opment merits and demands. None other ranks so high
as the musician, which is reasonable when we consider
that while the painter draws his inspiration chiefly from
the world of color—the nearer Desire World—the musician
attempts to bring to us the atmosphere of our heavenly
home world (where, as spirits, we are citizens), and to
translate them into the sounds of earth life. His is the
highest mission, because as a mode of expression for soul
life, music. reigns supreme. That music is different from
and higher than all the other arts can be understood when
we reflect that a statue or a painting, when once created,
is permanent. They are drawn from the Desire World
and are therefore more easily crystallized, while music,
being of the Heaven World,.is more elusive and must be
re-created each. time we hear. it. It cannot be imprisoned,
as shown by the unsuccessful attempts to do so partially
by means of such mechanical devices as phonographs and
piano-players. The music so reproduced loses much of the
soul-stirring sweetness it possesses when it: comes fresh
from, its own world, carrying to the soul memories of its
home. and speaking to it in a language .that no beauty
. expressed in marble or upon canvas can equal. -.

...The instrument through which man senses music is the
-most. perfect sense organ in the human bedy.. The eye is


128 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


not by any means true, but the ear is, in the sense that it
hears every sound without distortion, while the eye often
distorts what it sees.

In addition to the musical ear, the musician must also
learn to build a long, fine hand with slender fingers and
sensitive nerves, otherwise he woul not be able to repro-
duce the melodies he hears.

It is a law of nature that no one can inhabit a more
efficient body than he is capable of building. He first
learns to build a certain grade of body and afterwards he
learns to live in it. In that way he discovers its defects
and is taught how to remedy them.

All men work unconsciously at the building of their
bodies during ante-natal life until they have reached the
point where the quintessence of former bodies—which they
have saved—is to be built in. Then they work consciously.
It will therefore be seen that the more a man advances and
the more he works on his vehicles, thus making them im-
mortal, the more power he has to build for a new life. The
advanced pupil of an occult school sometimes commences
to build for himself as soon as the work during the first
three weeks (which belongs exclusively to the mother) has
been completed. When the period of unconscious building
has passed the man has a chance to exercise his nascent
creative power, and the true original creative process—
“Epigenesis”—begins.

Thus we see that man learns to build his vehicles in the
Heaven World, and to use them in the Physical World.
Nature provides all phases of experience in such a mar-
velous manner and with such consummate wisdom that
as we learn to see deeper and deeper into her secrets we
are more and more impressed with our own insignificance
and with an ever-growing reverence for God, whose visi-


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 129


ble symbol nature is. The more we learn of her wonders,
the more we realize that this world system is not the vast
perpetual motion machine unthinking people would have
us believe. It would be quite as logical to think that if
we toss a box of loose type into the air the characters will
have arranged themselves into the words of a beautiful
poem by the time they reach the ground. The greater the
complexity of the plan the greater the argumental weight
in favor of the theory of an intelligent Divine Author.


Tue Turrp HEAVEN.


Having assimilated all the fruits of his last life and
altered the appearance of the Earth in such a manner as to
afford him the necessary environment for his next step
towards perfection; having also learned by work on the
bodies of others, to build a suitable body through which to
express himself in the Physical World and having at last
resolved the mind into the essence which builds the three-
fold spirit, the naked individual spirit ascends into the
higher Region of the World of Thought—the third heaven.
Here, by the ineffable harmony of this higher world, it is
strengthened for its next dip into matter.

After a time comes the desire for new experience and
the contemplation of a new birth. This conjures up a
series of pictures before the vision of the spirit—a pano-
rama of the new life in store for it. But, mark this well—
this panorama contains only the principal events. The
spirit has free will as to detail. It is as if a man going to a
distant city had a time-limit ticket, with initial choice of
route. After he has chosen and begun his journey it is not
sure that he can change to another route during the trip.
He may stop over in as many places as he wishes, within


his time limit, but he cannot go back. Thus as he proceeds
5


130 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


on his journey, he becomes more and more limited by his
past choice. If he has chosen a steam road, using soft
coal, he must expect to be soiled and dusty. Had he
chosen a road burning anthracite or using electricity he
would have been cleaner. So it is with the man in a new
life. He may have to live a hard life, but he is free to
choose whether he will live it cleanly or wallow in the
mire. Other conditions are also within his control, sub-
ject to the limits of his past choices and acts.

The pictures in the panorama of the coming life, of
which we have just spoken, begin at the cradle and end
at the grave. This is the opposite direction to that in
which they travel in the after-death panorama, already
explained, which passes before the vision of the spirit
immediately following its release from the dense body.
The reason for this radical difference in the two pano-
ramas is that in the before-birth panorama the object is
to show the returning Ego how certain causes or acts
always produce certain effects. In the ease of the after-
death panorama the object is the reverse,i.e.,to show how
each eventin the past life was the effect of some cause fur-
ther back in the life. Nature, or God, does nothing with-
out a logical reason, and the further we search the more
apparent it becomes to us that Nature is a wise mother,
always using the best means to accomplish her ends.

But it may be asked, Why should we be reborn? Why
must we return to this limited and miserable earth exist-
ence? Why can we not get experience in those higher
realms without coming to Earth? We are tired of this
dreary, weary earth life!

Such queries are based upon misunderstandings of sev-
eral kinds. In the first place, let us realize and engrave it
deep upon the tablets of our memory that the purpose of


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 1381


life is not happiness, but experience. Sorrow and pain
are our most benevolent teachers, while the joys of life
are but fleeting.

This seems a stern doctrine and the heart cries out pas-
sionately at even the thought that it may possibly be
true. Nevertheless, it is true, and upon examination it
will be found not such a stern doctrine after all.

Consider the blessings of pain. If we could place our
hand upon a hot stove and feel no pain, the hand might
be allowed to remain until it and perhaps the arm were
burned away, without our knowing anything about it
until too late to save them. It is the pain resulting from
the contact with the hot stove which makes us snatch our
hand away before serious damage is done. Instead of
losing the hand, we escape with a blister which quickly
heals. This is an illustration from the Physical World.
We find that the same principle applies in the Moral and
Mental Worlds. If we outrage morality the pangs of
conscience bring us pain that will prevent us from re-
peating the act and if we do not heed the first lesson,
nature will give us harder and harder experiences until
at last the fact is forced into our consciousness that ‘‘the
way of the transgressor is hard.’’ This will continue
until at last we are forced to turn in a new direction and
take a step onward toward a better life.

Experience is ‘‘knowledge of the effects which follow
acts.’’ This is the object of life, together with the devel-
opment of ‘‘ Will,’’ which is the force whereby we apply
the results of experience. Experience must be gained,
but we have the choice whether we gain it by the hard
path of personal experience or by observation of other
people’s acts, reasoning and reflecting thereon, guided
by the light of whatever experience we have already had.


132 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


This is the method by which the occult student should
learn, instead of requiring the lash of adversity and pain.
The more willing we are to learn in that way, the less we
shall feel the stinging thorns of “the path of pain” and
the more quickly shall we gain “the path of peace.”

The choice is ours, but so long as we have not learned
all there is to learn in this world, we must come back to it.
We cannot stay in the higher worlds and learn there until
we have mastered the lessons of earth life. That would
be as sensible as to send a child to kindergarten one day
and to college the next. The child must return to the kin-
dergarten day after day and spend years in the grammar
school and the high school before its study has developed
its capacity sufficiently to enable it to understand the les-
sons taught in college.

Man is also in school—the school of experience. He
must return many times before he can hope to master
all the knowledge in the world of sense. No one earth
life, however rich in experience, could furnish the knowl-
edge, so nature decrees that he must return to Earth, after
intervals of rest, to take up his work where he dropped it,
exactly as a child takes up its work in school each day,
after the intervening sleep of night. It is no argument
against this theory to say that man does not remember his
former lives. We cannot recall all the events of our pres-
ent lives. We do not recollect our labors in learning to
write, yet we have acquired a knowledge of the art of writ-
ing, which proves that we did learn. All the faculties we
possess are a proof that we acquired them sometime, some-
where. Some people do remember their past, however, as
a remarkable instance related at the end of the next chap-
ter will show, and it is but one among many.

Again, if there were no return to Earth, what is the


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 183


use of living? Why strive for anything? Why should a
life of happiness in an eternal heaven be the reward fora
good life? What benefit could come from a good life in a
heaven where everybody is already happy? Surely in a
place where everybody is happy and contented there is
no need for sympathy, self-sacrifice or wise counsel! No
one would need them there; but on Earth there are many
who need those very things and such humanitarian and
altruistic qualities are of the greatest service to strug-
gling humanity. Therefore the Great Law, which works
for Good, brings man back to work again in the world
for the benefit of himself and others, with his acquired
treasures, instead of letting them go to waste in a heaven
where no one needs them.
PREPARATIONS FOR REBIRTH.

Having thus seen the necessity for repeated embodi-
ments, we will next consider the method by which this
purpose is accomplished.

Previous to taking the dip into matter, the threefold
spirit is naked, having only the forces of the four seed-
atoms (which are the nuclei of the threefold body and
the sheath of mind). Its descent resembles the putting
on of several pairs of gloves of increasing thickness, as
previously illustrated. The forces of the mind of the last
life are awakened from their latency in the seed-atom.
This begins to attract to itself materials from the high-
est subdivision of the Region of Concrete Thought, in a
manner similar to that in which a magnet draws to itself
iron filings.

If we hold a magnet over a miscellaneous heap of filings
of brass, silver, gold, iron, lead and other metals, we shall

find that it selects only iron filings and that even of them


134 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


it will take no more than its strength enables it to lift.
Its attractive power is of a certain kind and is limited to
a certain quantity of that kind. The same is true of the
seed-atom. It can take, in each Region, nothing except
the material for which it has an affinity and nothing be-
yond a certain definite quantity even of that. Thus the
vehicle built around this nucleus becomes an exact coun-
terpart of the corresponding vehicle of the last life minus
the evil which has been expurgated and plus the quintes-
sence of good which has been incorvorated 1n the seed-atom.

The material selected by the threefold spirit forms itself
into a great bell-shaped figure, open at the bottom and
with the seed-atom at the top. If we conceive of this il-
lustration spiritually we may compare it to a diving-pell
descending into a sea composed of fluids of increasing
density. These correspond to the different subdivisions of
each World. The matter taken into the texture of the bell-
shaped body makes it heavier,so that itsinks into the next
lower subdivision and it takes from that its proper quota
of matter. Thus it becomes still heavier and sinks yet
deeper until it has passed through the four subdivisions
of the Region of Concrete Thought and the sheath of the
new mind of the man is complete. Next the forces in the
seed-atom of the desire body are awakened. It places it-
self at the top of the bell, znside, and the materials of the
seventh Region of the Desire World draw around it until
it sinks to the sixth Region, getting more material there.
and this process continues until the first Region of the
Desire World is reached. The bell hag now two layers—
the sheath of mind outside and the new desire body inside.

The seed-atom of the vital body is next aroused into
activity, but here the process of formation is not so simple
as in the case of the mind and the desire body, for it must


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 135


be remembered that those vehicles were comparatively un-
organized, while the vital body and the dense body are
more organized and very complicated. The material, of a
given quantity and quality, is attracted in the same man-
ner and under the operation of the same law as in the case
of the higher bodies, but the building of the new body
and the placement in the proper environment is done by
four great Beings of immeasurable wisdom, which are the
Recording Angels, the‘‘Lords of Destiny.’’ They impress
the reflecting ether of the vital body in such a way that
the pictures of the coming life are reflected in it. It (the
vitalbody ) is built by the inhabitants of the Heaven World
and the elemental spirits in such a manner as to form a
particular type of brain. But mark this, the returning
Ego itself wncorporates therein the quintessence of its
former vital bodies and in addition to this also does a
little original work. This is done that in the coming lite
there may be some room for original and individual ex-
pression, not predetermined by past action.

It is very important to remember this fact. There is too
great a tendency to think that all which now exists is the
result of something that previously existed, but if that
were the case there would be no margin left for new and
original effort and for new causes. The chain of cause and
effect 1s not a monotonous repetition. There is an influx of
new and original causes all the time. That is the real
backbone of evolution—the only thing that gives it mean-
ing and makes it other than an unrolling of latent actual-
ities. This is ‘‘Hpigenesis’’—the free-will that consists
of the freedom to inaugurate something entirely new, not
merely a choice between two courses of action. This is the
important factor which alone can explain the system to
which we belong in satisfactory manner. Involution and


136 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Evolution in themselves are insufficient; but coupled
with Epigenesis we have a full triad of explanation.
The fate of an individual generated under the law of
Consequence, is of great complexity and involves associa-
tion with Egos in and out of physical existence, at all
times. Even those living at one time may not be living in
the same locality, so that it is impossible for one individ-
ual’s destiny to be all worked out in one lifetime orin one
place. The Ego is therefore brought into a certain envi-
ronment and family with which it is in some way related.
As regards the fate to be worked out, 1t is sometimes im-
material into which one of several environments the Ego
is reborn, and when such is the ease, it is allowed its choice
as far as possible, but once an Ego is so placed the agents
of the Lords of Destiny watch unseen, that no act of free
will shall frustrate the working out of the portion of fate
selected. If we do aught of such a nature as to circumvent
that part, they will make another move, so as to enforce
fulfillment of the destiny. It cannot be too often reiter-
ated, however, that this does not render man helpless. It
js merely the same law that governs after we have fired a
pistol. We are then unable to stop the bullet, or even to
deflect it from its course in any way. Its direction was
determined by the position in which the pistol was held
when we fired. That could have been changed at any
time before the trigger was pulled, as up to that time we
had full control. The same is true regarding new actions
which make future destiny. Wemay, up toa certain point,
modify or even altogether counteract certain causes al-
ready set in motion, but once started, and no further ac-
tion taken, they will get beyond our control. Thisis called
“‘ripe’’ fate and it is this kind that is meant when it. is
said that the Lords of Destiny check every attempt to


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 137


shirk it. With regard to our past we are to a great extent
helpless, Lut in regard to future action we have full con-
trol, except insofar as we are hampered by our past actions.
By and by, however, as we learn that we are the cause of
our own sorrow or joy, we shall awake to the necessity of
ordering our lives more in harmony with the laws of God
and thus rise above these laws of the Physical World.
That is the key to emancipation; as Goethe says:


From every power that all the world enchains
Man frees himself when self-control he gains.


The vital body, having been molded by the Lords of
Destiny, will give form to the dense body, organ for organ.
This matrix or mold is then placed in the womb of the
future mother. The seed-atom for the dense body is in
the triangular head of one of the spermatozoa in the semen
of the father. This alone makes fertilization possible and
here is the explanation of the fact that so many times
sex-unions are unfruitful. The chemical constituents of
the seminal fluid and the ovaare the same at all times and
were thes? the only requirements, the explanation of the
phenomen ‘nofunfertility,if sought in the material, visible
world alone, would not be found. It becomes plain, how-
ever, when we understand that as the molecules of water
freeze only along the lines of force in the water and
manifest as ice crystals instead of freezing into a homogen-
eous mass, as would be the case if there were no lines of
force previous to coagulation, so there can be no dense body
built until there is a vital body in which to build the
material; also there must be a seed-atom for the dense
body, to act as gauge of the quality and quantity of the
matter which is to be built into that dense body. Although
at the present stage of development there is never full har-


138 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


mony in the materials of the body, because that would mean
a perfect body, yet the discord must not be so great as to
be disruptive of the organism.

Thus while heredity in the first place is true only as
regards the material of the dense body and not the soul
qualities, which are entirely individual, the incoming Ego
also does a certain amount of work on its dense body, in-
corporating in it the quintessence of its past physical quali-
ties. No body is an exact mixture of the qualities of its
parents, although the Ego is restricted to the use of the
materials taken from the bodies of the father and mother.
Hence a musician incarnates where he can get the material
to build the slender hand and the delicate ear, with its
sensitive fibres of Corti and its accurate adjustment of the
three semicircular canals. The arrangement of these mate-
rials, however, is, to the extent named, under the control
of the Ego. It is as though a carpenter were given a pile
of boards to use in building a house in which to live, but
is left to his own judgment as to the kind of house he
wishes to build.

Except in the case of a very highly developed being,
this work of the Ego is almost negligible at the present
stage of man’s evolution. The greatest scope is given in
the building of the desire body, very little in that of the
vital body and almost none in the dense body; yet even
this little is sufficient to make each individual an expres-
sion of his own spirit and different from the parents.

When the impregnation of the ovum has taken place,
the desire body of the mother works upon it for a period
of from eighteen to twenty-one days, the Ego remaining
outside in its desire body and mind sheath, yet always in
close touch with the mother. Upon the expiration of that
time the Ego enters the mother’s body. The bell-shaped


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION = 139


vehicles draw themselves down over the head of the vital
body and the bell closes at the bottom. From this time
the Ego broods over its coming instrument until the birth
of the child and the new earth life of the returning Ego
commences.

BirTH OF THE DENSE Bopy

The vehicles of the new-born do not at once become
active. The dense body is helpless for a long time after
birth. Reasoning from analogy we can readily see that
the same must be ihe case with the higher vehicles. The
oeeult scientist sees it, but even without clairvoyance
reason will show that this must be so. As the dense body
is slowly prepared for the separate, individual life within
the protecting cover of the womb, so the other bodies are
gradually born and nurtured into activity, and while the
times given in the following description are but approxi-
mate, they are nevertheless accurate enough for general
purposes and show the connection between the Microcosm
and the Macrocosm—the individual and the world.

In the period immediately following birth the different
vehicles inter-penetrate one another, as, in our previous
illustration, the sand penetrates the sponge and the water
both sand and sponge. But, though they are all present, as
in adult life, they are merely present. None of their posi-
tive faculties are active. The vital body cannot use the
forces which operate along the positive pole of the ethers.
Assimilation, which works along the positive pole of the
chemical ether, is very dainty during childhood and what
there is of it is due to the macrocosmic vital body. the
ethers which act asa womb for the child’s vital body until
the seventh year. gradually ripening it during that period.
The propagative faculty, which works along the positive


140 .  ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


pole of the life ether, is also latent. The heating of the

body—which is carried on along the positive pole of the
light ether—and the circulation of the blood are due to
the macrocosmic vital body, the ethers acting on the child
and slowly developing it to the point where it can control
these functions itself. The forces working along the nega-
tive pole of the ethers are so much the more active. The
excretion of solids, carried on along the negative pole of
the chemical ether (corresponding to the solid subdivision
of the Chemical Region), is too unrestrained, as is also the
excretion of fluid, which is carried on along the negative
pole of the life ether (corresponding to the second or fluid
subdivision of the Chemical Region). The passive sense-
perception, which is due to the negative forces of the light
ether, is also exceedingly prominent. ‘The child is very
impressionable and it is “all eyes and ears.”

During the earlier years the forces operating along the
negative pole of the reflecting ether are also extremely
active. In those years children can “see” the higher
Worlds and they often prattle about what they see until
the ridicule of their elders or punishment for “telling sto-
ries” teaches them to desist.

It is deplorable that the little ones are forced to lie—
or at least to deny the truth—because of the incredulity of
their “wise” elders. Even the investigations of the Society
for Psychical Research have proven that children often
have invisible playmates, who frequently visit them until
they are several years old. During those years the clair-
voyance of the children is of the same negative character
as that of the mediums.

It is the same with the forces working in the desire
body. The passive feeling of physical pain is present, while
the feeling of emotion is almost entirely absent. The child


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 141


will. of course, show emotion on the slightest provocation,
but the duration of that emotion is but momentary. It
is all on the surface.

The child also has the link of mind, but is almost incapa-
ble of individual thought activity. It is exceedingly sensi-
tive to forces working along the negative pole and is there-
fore imitative and teachable.

Thus it is shown that all the negative qualities are active
in the new-born entity, but before it is able to use its
different vehicles, the positive qualities must be ripened.

Each vehicle is therefore brought to a certain degree of
maturity by the activity of the corresponding vehicle of
the macrocosm, which acts as a womb for it until that
degree is reached.

From the first to the seventh year the vital body grows
and slowly matures within the womb of the macrocosmic
vital body and because of the greater wisdom of this vehicle
of the macrocosm the child’s body is more rounded and
well-built than in later life.


BirTH OF THE VITAL Bopy.


While the macrocosmie vital body guides the growth of
the child’s body it is guarded from the dangers which later
threaten it when the unwise individual vital body takes
unchecked charge. This happens in the seventh year, when
the period of excessive, dangerous growth begins, and con-
tinues through the next seven years. During this time
the macrocosmic desire body performs the function of a
womb for the individual desire body.

Were the vital body to have continual and unrestrained
sway in the human kingdom, as it has in the plant, man
would grow to an enormous size. There was a time in the
far distant past when man was constituted like a plant,


142 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


having only a dense body and a vital body. The traditions
of mythology and folk-lore all over the world concerning
giants in olden times are absolutely true, because then men
grew as tall as trees, and for the same reason.


BirtTH oF THE DESIRE Bopy.


The vital body of the plant builds leaf after leaf, carry-
ing the stem higher and higher. Were it not for the
macrocosmice desire body it would keep on in that way
indefinitely, but the macrocosmic desire body steps in at a
certain point and checks further growth. The force that
is not needed for further growth is then available for
other purposes and is used to build the flower and the seed.
In like manner the human vital body, when the dense
body comes under its sway, after the seventh year, makes
the latter grow very rapidly, but about the fourteenth year
the individual desire body is born from the womb of the
macrocosmie desire body and is then free to work on its
dense body. The excessive growth is then checked and
the force theretofore used for that purpose becomes available
for propagation, that the human plant may flower and
bring forth. Therefore the birth of the personal desire
body marks the period of puberty. From this period the
attraction towards the opposite sex is felt, being especially
active and unrestrained in the third septenary period of
life—from the fourteenth to the twenty-first year, because
the restraining mind is then still unborn.


BrrTH OF THE MIND.


After the fourteenth year, the mind is in turn brooded
over and nurtured by the macrocosmic mind, unfolding its
latent possibilities and making it capable of original
thought. The forces of the individual’s different vehicles


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 143


nave now been ripened to such a degree that he can use
tnem all in his evolution, therefore at the twenty-first year
tne Ego comes into possession of its complete vehicle. It
does this by means of the blood-heat and by developing
individual blood. This is done in connection with the
full development of the light ether.


THE BLOOD THE VEHICLE OF THE Hao.


in infancy, and up to the fourteenth year, the red mar-
row-bones do not make all the blood corpuscles. Most of
them are supplied by the thymus gland, which is largest
in the foetus and gradually diminishes as the individual
blood-making faculty develops in the growing child. The
thymus gland contains, as it were, a supply of blood cor-
puscles given by the parents, and consequently the child,
which draws its blood from that source, does not realize its
individuality. Not until the blood is made by the child
does it think of itself as “I,” and when the thymus gland
disappears, at the age of fourteen, the “I” feeling reaches
its full expression, for then the blood is made and dom-
inated entirely by the Ego. The following will make clear
the idea and its logic:

It will be remembered that assimilation and growth de-
pend upon the forces working along the positive pole of
the vital body’s chemical ether. That is set free at the
seventh year, together with the balance of the vital body.
Only the chemical ether is fully ripe at that time; the
other parts need more ripening. At the fourteenth year
the life ether of the vital body, which has to do with
propagation, is fully ripe. In the period from seven to
fourteen years of age the excessive assimilation has stored
up an amount of force which goes to the sex organs and
is ready at the time the desire body is set free.


144 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


This force of sex is stored in the blood during the third
of the seven-year periods and in that time the light ether,
which is the avenue for the blood-heat, is developed and
controls the heart, so that the body is neither too hot nor
too cold. In early childhood the blood very often rises
to an abnormal temperature. During the period of ex-
cessive growth it is frequently the reverse, but in the hot-
headed, unrestrained youth, passion and temper very often
drive the Ego out by over-heating the blood. We very
appropriately call this an ebullition or boiling over of
temper and describe the effect as causing the person to
“lose his head,” i. e., become incapable of thought. That
is exactly what happens when passion, rage, or temper
overheats the blood, thus drawing the Ego outside the
bodies. The description is accurate when, of a person in
such a state, we say, “He has lost control of himself.” The
Ego is outside of his vehicles and they are running amuck,
hereft of the guiding influence of thought, part of the work
of which is to act as a brake on impulse. The great and
terrible danger of such outbursts is that before the owner
re-enters his body some disembodied entity may take pos-
session of it and keep him out. This is called “obsession.”
Only the man who keeps cool and does not allow excess of
heat to drive him out can think properly. As proof of the
assertion that the Ego cannot work in the body when the
blood is either too hot or too cold we will call attention to
the well-known fact that excessive heat makes one sleepy
and, if carried beyond a certain point, it drives the Ego
out, leaving the body in a faint, that is, unconscious.
Excessive cold has also a tendency to make the body sleepy
or unconscious. It is only when the blood is at or near
the normal temperature that the Ego can use it as a
vehicle of consciousness.


MAN AND THE METHOD OF EVOLUTION 145


To further show the connection of the Ego with the
blood we may mention the burning blush of shame, which
is an evidence of the manner in which the blood is driven
to the head, thus over-heating the brain and paralyzing
thought. Fear is the state when the Ego wants to barri-
cade himself against some outside danger. He then drives
the blood to the center and grows pale, because the blood
has left the periphery of the body and has lost heat, thus
paralyzing thought. His blood “freezes,” he shivers and
his teeth chatter, as when the temperature is lowered by
atmospheric conditions. In fever the excess of heat causes
delirium.

The full-blooded person, when the blood is not too hot,
is active in body and mind, while the anemic person is
sleepy. In one the Ego has better control; in the other less.
When the Ego wants to think it drives blood, at the proper
heat, to the brain. When a heavy meal centers the activity
of the Ego upon the digestive tracts, the man cannot think;
he is sleepy.

The old Norsemen and the Scots recognized that the
Ego is in the blood. No stranger could become associated
with them as a relative until he had “mixed blood” with
them and thus become one of them. Goethe, who was an
Initiate, also showed this in his “Faust.” Faust is about
to sign the compact with Mephistopheles and asks, “Why
not sign with ordinary ink? Why use blood?” Mephisto
answers, “Blood is a most peculiar essence.” He knows,
that who has the blood has the man; that without the
warm blood, no Ego can find expression.

The proper heat for the real expression of the Ego is not
present until the mind is born from the macrocosmic Con-
erete Mind, when the individual is about twenty-one years


146 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


old. Statutory law also recognizes this as the earliest age
when the man is deemed fit to exercise a franchise.

At the present stage of human development the man
goes through these princival stages in each life cycle, from
one birth to the next.


A°LIFE-GYCLE


Mird-Essence of Ri kt SD) Desire for Experience
Thought Soul-Esserc alot ae ard Soul-Growtk World


“Bight Feeling built into Spirit 7 = ‘ draws the E50 An
asbesisforFuturcltigt At Peaven To Re-Birth | 0


Good in pest Life built into Tt Gathers
the Mina asltisht Trouht 1 2nd Platerials for


also work on New B Heaveg


and
Concrete


A
Environment New Mina | pRovikt


Esserce of Pun built into 1s
Soul as Right Feeting Heaver A New Desire
Desire [Sody World


Suffering purges Soul Purjatory


Sout views panorama of | TheEier | ANewVital: od
past L f The Ether Birth of DeneBody


Besirrine of Serious Life


CHAPTER iV.
REBIRTH AND THE LAW OF CONSEQUENCE.


NLY three theories worthy of note have ever been
C) brought forward to solve the riddle of Life and
Death.

In the previous chapter we have, to some extent, ex-
plained one of these three theories—that of Rebirth, to-
gether with its companion law, the law of Consequence.
It may not be out of place to compare the theory of Re-
birth with the other two theories advanced, with a view
to ascertaining their relative foundation in nature. To
the occultist there can be no question. He does not say
that he “believes” in it any more than we need to say that
we “believe” as to the blooming of the rose or the flowing
of the river, or the operation of any of the visible workings
of the material world, which are continually going on ie
fore our eyes. We do not say of these things that we “be-
lieve ;” we say that we “know,” because we see them. So
the occult scientist can say “I know” in regard to Rebirth,
the law of Consequence and their corollaries. He sevs the
Ego and can trace its path after it has passed out of the
dense body at death until it has reappeared on earth
through a new birth. Therefore to him no “belief” is
necessary. For the satisfaction of others, however, it may
be well to examine these three theories of life and death
in order to arrive at an intelligent conclusion.

Any great law of nature must necessarily be in harmony

147


148


ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


with all her other laws. Therefore it may be very helpful
to the inquirer to examine these theories in their relation
to what are admitted by all parties to be “known laws of
nature,” as observed in that part of our universe with


which


we are more familiar. To this end we will first


state the three theories:


(1)


The Materialistic Theory holds that life is a
journey from the womb to the tomb; that mind is
the result of certain correlations of matter; that
man is the highest intelligence in the Cosmos; and,
that his intelligence perishes when the body disin-
tegrates at death.

The Theory of Theology asserts that at each birth
a newly-created soul enters the arena of life fresh
from the hand of God, passing from an invisible
state through the gate of birth into visible exist-
ence; that at the end of one short span of life in
the material world it passes out through the gate
of death into the invisible beyond,.whence it returns
no more; that its happimess or misery there is de-
termined for all eternity by its actions during the
infinitesimal period intervening between birth and
death.

The Theory of Rebirth teaches that each soul is
an integral part of God, enfolding all divine possi-
bilities as the seed enfolds the plant; that by means
of repeated existences in an earthly body of! gradu-
ally improving quality, the latent possibilities are
slowly developed into dynamic powers; that none
are lost by this process, but that all mankind will
ultimately attain the goal of perfection and re-union
with God.


The first of these theories is monistic. It seeks to ex-


REBIRTH AND THE LAW OF CONSEQUENCE 149


plain all facts of existence as processes within the material
world. The two other theories agree in being dualistic,
that is, they ascribe some of the facts and phases of exist-
ence to a super-physical, invisible state, but they differ
widely on other points.

Bringing the materialistic theory into comparison with
the known laws of the universe, we find that the con-
tinuity of force is as well established as the continuity of
matter and both are beyond the need of elucidation. We
also know that matter and force are inseparable in the
Physical World. This is contrary to the materialistic the-
ory, which holds that mind perishes at death. When
nothing can be destroyed, mind must be included. More-
over we know that mind is superior to matter, for it molds
the face, so that it becomes a reflection or mirror of the
mind. We have discovered that the particles of our bodies
are constantly changing; that at least once in seven years
there is a change in every atom of matter composing them.
If the materialistic theory were true, the consciousness
ought also to undergo an entire change, with no memory
of that which preceded, so that at no time could man re-
member any event more than seven years. We know that
this is not the case. We remember the events of our child-
hood. Many of the most trivial incidents though forgotten
in ordinary consciousness, have been distinctly recalled in
a swift vision of the whole life by drowning persons, who
have related the experience after resuscitation. Similar
experiences in states of trance are also common. Materi-
alism is unable to account for these phases of sub- and
super-consciousness. It ignores them. At the present stage
of scientific investigation, where leading scientists have
established beyond a doubt the existence of these phenom-
ena, the policy of ignoring them is a serious defect in a


150 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


theory claiming to solve the greatest problem of life—
Life itself.

We may therefore safely pass from the materialistic
theory as being inadequate to solve the mystery of life and
death and turn to a consideration of the next theory.

One of the greatest objections to the orthodox theological
doctrine, as it is expounded, is its entire and confessed
inadequacy. Of the myriads of souls which have been
created and have inhabited this Globe since the beginning
of existence, even if that beginning dates back no further
than six thousand years, the insignificant number of
only “one hundred and forty and four thousand” are to
be saved! The rest are to be tortured forever and ever!
The devil gets the best of it all the time. One cannot help
saying with Buddha, “If God permits such misery to exist
He cannot be good, and if He is powerless to prevent it,
He cannot be God.”

Nothing in nature is analogous to such a method of
creation in order that destruction may follow. It is repre-
sented that God desires ALL should be saved and is averse
to the destruction of any, having for their salvation “given
His only Son,” and yet this “glorious plan of salvation”
fails to save!

If a trans-Atlantic liner with two thousand souls on
board sent a wireless message that she was sinking just
off Sandy Hook, would it be regarded as a “glorious plan
of salvation” if a fast motor-boat capable of rescuing only
two or three people, were sent to her aid? Certainly not:
It would more likely be denounced as a “plan of destruc-
tion” if adequate means were not provided for the saving
of at least the majority of those in danger.

But the theologians’ plan of salvation is vastly worse
than this, because two-or three out of two thousand is an


REBIRTH AND THE LAW OF CONSEQUENCE 151


immensely greater proportion than the orthodox theo-
logical plan of saving only 144,000 out of all the myriads
of souls created. We may safely reject this theory also,
as being untrue, because unreasonable. If God were all.
wise He would have evolved a more efficacious plan. So
He has, and the above is only the theory of the theologian,
The teaching of the Bible is very different, as will appear
later. |

We turn now to consider the doctrine of Rebirth, which
postulates a slow process of development, carried on with
unwavering persistence through repeated embodiments in
forms of increasing efficiency whereby all are, in time,
brought to a height of spiritual splendor at present incon-
ceivable to us. There is nothing unreasonable nor difficult
to accept in-such a theory. As we look about us we find
everywhere in nature this striving for perfection in a slow,
persistent manner. We find no sudden process of creation
or destruction, such as the theologian postulates, but we do
find “Evolution.”

Evolution is “the history of the progression of the
Spirit in Time.” Everywhere, as we see about us the
varied phenomena in the universe, we realize that the path
of evolution is a spiral. Each loop of the spiral is a cycle.
Each cycle merges into the next, as the loops of the spiral
are continuous, each cycle being the improved product of
those preceding it and the creator of those more developed
states which succeed it.

A straight line is but the extension of a point. It occu-
pies but one dimension in space. The theory of the mate-
rialist and that of the theologian would be analogous to this
line. The materialist makes the line of life start at birth,
and to be consistent, the death hour must terminate it.
The theologian commences his line with the creation of


152 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


the soul just previous to birth. After death the soul lives
on, its fate irretrievably determined by the deeds of a few
short years. There is no coming back to correct mistakes.
The line runs straight on, implying a modicum of experi-
ence and no elevation for the soul after death.

Natural progression does not follow a straight line such
as these two theories imply; nor even a circular path, for
that would imply a never-ending round of the same experi-
ences and the use of only two dimensions in space. All
things move in progressive cycles and in order to take
full advantage of all the opportunities for advancement
offered by our three-dimensional universe, it is necessary
that the evolving life should take the three-dimensional
path—the spiral—which goes ever onward and upward.

Whether we look at the modest little plant in our garden,
or go to the redwood district of California and examine one
of the giant sequoias with its thirty-foot diameter, it is
always the same—every branch, twig or leaf will be found
growing in either a single or a double spiral, or in opposite
pairs, each balancing either, analogous to ebb and flow,
day and night, life and death and other alternating activi-
ties in nature.

Examine the vaulted arch of the sky and observe the
fiery nebule or the path of the Solar Systems—everywhere
the spiral meets the eye. In the spring the Earth discards
its white blanket and emerges from its period of rest—
its winter’s sleep. All activities are exerted to bring forth
new life everywhere. Time passes. The corn and the
grape are ripened and harvested. Again the busy summer
fades into the silence and inactivity of the winter. Again
the snowy coverlet enwraps the Earth. But her sleep is
not forever; she will wake again to the song of the new


REBIRTH AND THE LAW OF CONSEQUENCE 153


spring, which will mark for her a little further progress
along the pathway of time.

So with the Sun. He rises in the morning of each day,
but each morning he is further along on his journey
through the year.

Everywhere the spiral—Onward, Upward, Forever!

Is it possible that this law, so universal in all other
realms, should be inoperative in the life of man? Shall
the earth wake each year from its winter sleep; shall the
tree and the flower live again and man die? It cannot be!
The same law that wakes the life in the plant to new
growth will wake the human being to new experience, to
further progress toward the goal of perfection. Therefore
the theory of Rebirth, which teaches repeated embodiment
in gradually improving vehicles, is in perfect accord with
evolution and the phenomena of nature, which tle other
two theories are not.

Regarding life from an ethical viewpoint, we find that
the law of Rebirth coupled with the companion law of Con-
sequence, is the only theory that will satisfy a sense of
justice, in harmony with the facts of life as we see them
about us.

It is not easy for the logical mind to understand how a
“Just and loving” God can require the same virtues from
the milliards whom He has been “pleased to place in dif-
fering circumstances” according to no apparent rule nor
system, but willy-nilly, according to His own capricious
mood. One lives in luxury; the other on “kicks and
crusts.” One has a moral education and an atmosphere of
high ideals ; the other is placed in squalid surroundings and
taught to lie and steal and that the more he does of both,
the more of a success he is. Is it just to require the same
of both? Is it right to reward one for living a good life


154. ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


when he was placed in an environment that made it ex-
tremely difficult for him to go astray, or to punish the
other, who was handicapped to such an extent that he never
had an idea of what constitutes true morality. Surely not!
Is it not more logical to think that we may have misin-
terpreted the Bible than to impute to God such a mon-
strous plan and method of procedure?

It is useless to say that we must not inquire into the
mysteries of God; that they are past our finding out. The
inequalities of life can be satisfactorily explained by the
twin law of Rebirth and Consequence and made to har-
monize with the conception of a just and loving God, as
taught by Christ Himself.

Moreover, by means of these twin laws a way to emanci-
pation from present undesirable position or environment
is shown, together with the means of attaining to any de-
gree of development, no matter how imperfect we may be
now.

What we are, what we have, all our good qualities are
the result of our own actions in the past. What we lack
in physical, moral, or mental excellence may yet be ours
in the future.

Exactly as we cannot do otherwise than take up our
lives each morning where we laid them down the preceding
night, co by our work in previous lives have we made the
conditions under which we now live and labor, and are
at present creating the conditions of our future lives.
Instead of bemoaning the lack of this or that faculty which
we covet, we must set to work to acquire it.

If one child plays beautifully on a musical instrument,
with hardly an effort at learning, while another, despite
persistent effort, is a poor player in comparison, it merely
shows that one expended the effort in a previous life and is


REBIRTH AND THE LAW OF CONSEQUENCE 155


easily regaining a former proficiency, while the efforts of
the other have been started only in the present life, and
in consequence we see the uphill work. But, if the latter
persist, he may, even in the present life, become superior
to the former unless the former constantly improves.

That we do not remember the effort made in acquiring
a faculty by hard work is immaterial; it does not alter
the fact that the faculty remains with us.

Genius is the hall-mark of the advanced soul, which by
hard work in many previous lives has developed itself in
some way beyond the normal achievements of the race.
It reveals a glimpse of the degree of attainment which
will be the common possession of the coming Race. It can-
not be accounted for by heredity, which applies only in
part to the dense body and not to qualities of the soul. If
genius could be accounted for by heredity, why is there
not along line of mechanical ancestors previous to Thomas
Edison, each more capable than his predecessor? Why
does not genius propagate itself? Why is not Siegfried
the son, greater than Richard Wagner, the father?

In cases where the expression of genius depends upon
the possession of specially constructed organs, requiring
ages of development, the Ego naturally is reborn in a
family the Egos of which have, for generations, labored
to build a similar organism. That is why twenty-nine
musicians of more or less genius were born in the Bach
family during a period of two hunared and fifty years.
That genius is an expression of the soul and not of the
body is shown by the fact that it did not gradually im-
prove and reacn efflorescence in the person of John
Sebastian Bach, but that the proficiency which reached
its highest expression in him towered high above ances-
tors and descendants alike.


156 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


The body is simply an instrument, the work it yields
being dependent upon the Ego which guides it, as the
quality of the melody is dependent upon the musician’s
skill, aided by the timbre of the instrument. <A good
musician cannot fully express himself upon a poor in-
strument, and even upon the same instrument, all musi-
cians do not and cannot play alike. Because an Ego
seeks rebirth as the son of a great musician it does not
necessarily follow that he must be a still greater genius,
as would be the ease if physical heredity were a fact and
genius were not a soul-quality.

The ‘‘Law of Attraction’’ accounts in quite as satisfac-
tory a manner for the facts we ascribe to heredity. We
know that people of like tastes will seek one another. If
we know that a friend is in a certain city, but are igno-
rant of his address, we will naturally be governed by the
law of association in our efforts to find him. If he is a
musician, he will most likely be found where musicians
are wont to assemble; if he is a student inquiry will be
made at libraries, reading-rooms and book stores, or if he
is a sporting man we would seek him at race tracks, pool-
rooms or saloons. It is not probable that the musician or
the student would frequent the latter places and it is safe
to say that our search for the sporting man would not be
successful if we sought him in a library or at a classical
concert.

Similarly, the Ego ordinarily gravitates to the most
congenial associations. It is constrained to do so by one
of the twin forees of the Desire World—the force of
Attraction.

The objection may be urged that there are people of
entirely opposite tastes, or bitter enemies even, in the


REBIRTH AND THE LAW OF CONSEQUENCE 157


same family, and if the law of Association governed why
should they be attracted thereto?

The explanation of such cases is that during the Ego’s
earth lives many relations have been established with vari-
ous people. These relations were pleasant or otherwise,
involving on the one hand obligations which were not
liquidated at the time; or on the other involving the
infliction of an injury and a feeling of very strong hate
between the injured and his enemy. The law of Conse-
quence requires an exact adjustment of the score. Death
does not ‘‘pay it all’? any more than moving to another
city will liquidate a monetary debt. The time comes
when the two enemies shall meet again. The old hate has
brought them together in the same family, because it is
the purpose of God that all shall love one another; there-
fore hate must be transformed into love and though, per-
chance, they may spend many lives ‘‘fighting it out,”’
they will at some time learn the lesson and become friends
and mutual benefactors instead of enemies. In such
eases the Interest these people had in one another set in
action the force of Attraction, and that brought them
together. Had they simply been mutually Indifferent,
they could not have become associated.

Thus do the twin laws of Rebirth and Consequence solve,
in a rational manner, all the problems incident to human
life as man steadily advances toward the next stage in
evolution—the Superman. The trend of humanity’s
progress is onward and upward forever, says this theory
—not as some people think who have confounded the doc-
trine of Rebirth with the foolish teaching of some Indian
tribes who believe that man is reborn in animals or
plants. That would be retrogression. No authority for
this doctrine of retrogression can be found in nature or


158 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


in the sacred books of any religion. In one (and one only)
of the religious writings of India is it touched upon. In
the Kathopanishad (ch. v; verse 9) it is stated that “Some
men, according to their deeds, go into the womb and others
into the ‘sthanu’ ” “Sthanu” is a Sanskrit word, which
means “motionless,” but it also means “a pillar,” and has
been interpreted to mean that some men, because of their
sins, go back to the motionless plant kingdom.

Spirits incarnate only to gain experience; to conquer
the world; to overcome the lower self and attain self-mas-
tery. When we realize this we shall understand that there
comes a time when there is no further need for incarnation
because the lessons have all been learned. The teaching
of the Kathopanishad indicates that instead of remaining
tied to the wheel of birth and death, man will at some time
go into the motionless state of “Nirvana.”

In the Book of Revelation we find these words: “Him
that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my
God and he shall go no more out,” referring to entire lib<
eration from concrete existence. Nowhere is there any
authority for the doctrine of the transmigration of souls.
A man who has evolved so far as to have an individual,
separate soul cannot turn back in his progress and enter the
vehicle of animal or plant, which are under a group-spirit.
The individual spirit is a higher evolution than the group-
spirit and the lesser cannot contain the greater.

Oliver Wendell Holmes, in his beautiful poem, “The
Chambered Nautilus,” has embodied this idea of constant
progression in gradually improving vehicles, and final lib-
eration. The nautilus builds its spiral shell in chambered
sections, constantly leaving the smaller ones, which it has
outgrown, for the one last built:


REBIRTH AND THE LAW OF CONSEQUENCE 459


x * * * * + * *


Year after year beheld the silent toil

That spread his lustrous coil;

Still, as the spiral grew,

He left the past year’s dwelling for the new,

Stole with soft step its shining archway through,

Built up its idle door,

Stretched in his last-found home, and knew the old no more,


Thanks for the heavenly message brought by thee,

Child of the wandering sea,

Cast from her lap forlorn!

From thy dead lips a clearer note is born

Than ever Triton blew from wreathéd horn!

While on mine ear it rings,

Through the deep caves of thought I hear a voice that sings:


Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul!

As the swift seasons roll!

Leave thy low-vaulted past!

Let each new temple, nobler than the last,

Shut thee from heaven with a dome more vast,

Till thou at length art free,

Leaving thine outgrown shell by life’s unresting sea!


The necessity, previously referred to, of obtaining an
organism of a specific nature, brings to mind an interest-
ing phase of the twin laws of Rebirth and Consequence.
These laws are connected with the motion of the Cosmic
bodies, the Sun, the planets and the signs of the Zodiac.
All move in harmony with these laws, guided in their
orbits by their indwelling spiritual Intelligences—the
Planetary Spirits.

On account of the precession of the equinoxes the Sun
moves backward through the twelve signs of the Zodiac at
the rate of approximately one degree of space in 72 years,
and through each sign (30 degrees of space) in about 2,100
years, or around the whole circle in about 26,000 years.

This is due to the fact that the Earth does not spin upon
a stationary axis. Its axis has a slow, swinging motion of
its own (just like the wabble of a spinning top that has


160 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


almost spent its force), so that it describes a circle in
space and thus one star after another becomes Pole Star.

Because of this wabbling motion the Sun does not cross
the equator in the same place every year, but a few hun-
dred rods further back, hence the name, the ‘‘ precession
of the equinoxes,’’ because the equinox ‘‘precedes’’—
comes too early.

All happenings on the Karth in connection with the
other Cosmic bodies and their inhabitants are connected
with this and other Cosmic movements. So are also the
laws of Rebirth and Consequence.

As the Sun passes through the different signs in the
course of the year, the climatie and other changes affect
man and his activities in different ways. Similarly the
passage of the Sun by the precession of the equinoxes,
through the twelve signs of the Zodiae—which is called a
World-year, brings about conditions on the Earth of a far
greater variety. It is necessary to the growth of the soul
that it should experience them all. In fact, as we have
seen, the man himself makes these conditions while in the
Heaven World between births. Therefore, every Ego is
born twice during the time the Sun is passing through one
sign of the Zodiac; and, as the soul itself is necessarily
double-sexed, in order to obtain all experience, it is reborn
alternately in a male and a female body. This is because
the experience of one sex differs widely from that of the
other. At the same time, the outside conditions are not
greatly altered in one thousand years and therefore per-
mit the entity to receive experience in the same identical
environment from the standpoint of both man and woman.

These are the general terms upon which the law of
Rebirth operates, but as it is not a blind law, it is subject
to frequent modifications, determined by the Lords of


REBIRTH AND THE LAW OF CONSEQUENCE 162


Destiny, the Recording Angels, as, for instance, in a case
where an Ego needs a sensitive eye or ear and there is an
opportunity for giving it the required instrument in a
family with which relations have previously been estab-
lished. The time fo. the re-embodiment of the Ego in ques-
tion may lack, perhaps, two hundred years of beii.z ripe,
according to the average period, but it is seen by the Lords
of Destiny that unless this opportunity is embraced, the
Ego will perhaps have to spend four or five hundred years
in heaven in excess of the time required, Lefore another
chane¢e will present itself. Therefore the Ego is brought
to rebirth ahead of schedule time, so to speak, the de-
ficreney of rest in the third heaven being made up at an-
other time. So we see that, not only do the departed work
on us from the Heaven World, but we also work on them,
attracting or repelling them. A favorable opportunity
for procuring a suitabl. instrument may attract an Ego
to rebirth. Had no instrument been available, he would
have been kept longer in heaven and the surplus time
deducted from his succeeding heaven lives.

The law of Consequence also works in harmony with
the stars, so that a man is born at the time when the posi-
tions of the bodies wn the solar system will give the con
ditions necessary to his experrence and advancement in
the school of life. That is why Astrology is an absolutely
true science, though even the best astrologer may misin-
terpret it, because, like all other human beings, he is
fallible. The stars show accurately the time in a man’s
life when the debt which the Lords of Destiny have se-
lected for payment is due, and to evade it is beyond the
power of man. Yes, they show the very day, although
we are not always able to read them correctly.


Perhans the most striking instance known to the writer
6


162 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


of this inability to escape what is written in the stars,
though perfectly cognizant of it, occurred in Los Angeles,
California, in 1906. Some instructions in astrology were
given to Mr. L., a well-known lecturer. Mr. L.’s own
horoscope was taken up, because a pupil will be more in-
terested in that than in the nativity of a stranger. He is
also enabled to check the accuracy of the interpretation
of the signs which are given him. The horoscope revealed
a liability to accidents and Mr. L. was shown how acci-
dents and other events in the past figured to the time of
occurrence. In addition, he was told that another accident
would befall him and that it would occur on the twenty-
first of the following July, or the seventh day after, i. e.,
on the twenty-eighth, the latter day being regarded as the
more dangerous. He was warned against conveyances of
any kind and the place of the threatened injury was desig-
nated as the breast, shoulders, arms and lower part of the
head. He was thoroughly convinced of the danger and
promised to remain at home on that day.

The writer went north to Seattle and a few days before
the critical time wrote to Mr. L. and again warned him.
Mr. L. answered that he remembered the warning and
would act accordingly.

The next communication in regard to the matter came
from a mutual friend, who stated that on the 28th of July
Mr. L. had gone to Sierra Madre on an electric car which
had collided with a railroad train, Mr. L. sustaining in-
juries of the exact description mentioned and also haying a
tendon cut in the left leg.

The question was why Mr. L., having entire faith in
the prediction, had disregarded the advice. The explana-
tion came three months later, when he had recovered suffi-


REBIRTH AND THE LAW OF CONSEQUENCE 163


ciently to write. The letter said, “I thought the 28th was
the 29th.”

There is no question in the writer’s mind that this was
a piece of “ripe” fate, impossible to escape, which was
accurately foreshown by the stars.

The stars may therefore be called the “Clock of Des-
tiny.” The twelve signs of the Zodiac correspond to the
dial; the Sun and the planets to the hour hand, which
indicates the year; and the Moon to the minute hand, indi-
eating the month of the year when the different items in
the score of ripe fate allotted to each life are due to work
themselves out.

It cannot be sufficiently emphasized, however, that
though there are some things that cannot be escaped, man
has a certain scope of free will in modifying causes already
set going. A poet puts it thus:


One ship sails east and another sails west
With the self-same winds that blow.

’Tis the set of the sail and not the gale
Which determines the way they go.


As the winds of the sea are the ways of fate
As we voyage along through life,

Tis the act of the soul that determines the goal,
And not the calm or the strife.


The great point to grasp is that our present actions
determine future conditions.

Orthodox religionists and even those who profess no
religion at all, often bring forward as one of their strong-
est objections to the law of Rebirth that it is taught in
India to the “ignorant heathen,” who believe in it. If it
is a natural law, however, there is no objection strong
enough to invalidate it or make it inoperative. Before
we speak of “ignorant heathen,” or send missionaries to
them, it might be well to examine our own knowledge a


164 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


little. Educators everywhere complain of superficiality on
the part of our students. Professor Wilbur L. Cross, of
Yale, mentions among other startling cases of ignorance,
the fact that in a class of forty students, not one could
“place” Judas Iscariot!

It would seem as though the labors of missionaries could
profitably be diverted from “heathen” countries and from
slum work to enlighten the college-bred individuals of our
own country, on the principle that “charity begins at
home,” and, “as God will not let the ignorant heathen
perish” it would seem better to leave him in ignorance where
he is sure of heaven, than to enlighten him and so render
his chances of going to hell legion. Surely, this is a case
of “Where ignorance is bliss ’tis folly to be wise.” We
would be doing ourselves and the heathen a signal service
by letting him alone and looking after the ignorant Chris-
tian nearer home.

Moreover, to call this a heathen doctrine does not dis~
prove it. Its assumed priority in the East is no more an
argument against it than the accuracy of the solution of a
mathematical problem is invalidated because we do not
happen to like the person who first solved it. The only
questionis: Is it correct? If so, it is absolutely immaterial
whence the solution first came.

All other religions have been but leading up to the
Christian religion, They were Race Religions and con-
tain only in part that which Christianity has in fuller
measure. The real Esoteric Christianity has not yet been
taught publicly, nor will it be so taught until humanity
has passed the materialistic stage and becomes fitted to
receive it. The laws of Rebirth and Consequence have
been secretly taught all the time, but, by the direet Com-
mand of Christ Himself, as we shall see, these two iaws


REBIRTH AND THE LAW OF CONSEQUENCE 165


have not been publicly taught in the Western world for
the past two thousand years.


WINE AS A FAcToR IN EVOLUTION.


To understand the reason for this omission and the
means employed to obscure these teachings, we must go
back to the beginning of man’s history and see how, for
his good, he has been led by the Great Teacher of human-
ity.

In the teaching of occult science the stages of develop-
ment on the earth are divided into periods called
“Epochs.” There have been four of these Epochs, which
are designated as follows, respectively: The Polarian, the
Hyperborean, the Lemurian, the Atlantean. The present
Epoch is called the Aryan Epoch.

In the First or Polarian Epoch, what is now humanity
had only a dense body, as the minerals have now, hence
he was mineral-like,

In the Second or Hyperborean Epoch, a vital body was
added and man-in-the-making possessed a body constituted
as are those of plants. He was not a plant, but was plant-
like. |

In the Third or Lemurian Epoch, he obtained his desire
body and became constituted like the animal—an animal-
man.

In the Fourth or Atlantean Epoch, mind was unfolded
and now, so far as his principles are concerned, he steps
upon the stage of physical life as MAN.

In the present, the Fifth or Aryan Epoch, man will in
some degree unfold the third or lowest aspect of his three-
fold spirit—the Ego.

The student is requested to sil ae impress upon his


166 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


mind the emphatic statement that in the process of evolu-
tion up to the time when man gained self-consciousness,
absolutely nothing was left to chance.

After gaining seif-consciousness there is a certain scope
for the exercise of man’s own individual will to enable
him to unfold his Divine spiritual powers.

The great Leaders of mankind take everything into
consideration, the food of man included. This has a
great deal to do with his development. ‘‘Tell me what
you eat and I will tell you what you are”’ is not a far-
fetched idea, but a great truth in nature.

The man of the first Epoch was ethereal. That does
not contradict the statement that he was mineral-like, for
all gases are mineral. The Earth was still soft, not yet
having solidified. In the Bible man is called Adam and
it is said that he was made of earth.

Cain is described as an agriculturist. He symbolizes
the man of the Second Epoch. He had a vital body like
the plants which sustained him.

In the Third Epoch food was obtained from living
animals to supplement the former plant food. Milk was
the means used for evolving the desire body, which made
the mankind of that time animal-like. This is what is
meant by the Bible statement that ‘‘ Abel was a shep-
herd.’’ It is nowhere stated that he killed animals.

In the Fourth Epoch man had evolved beyond the ani-
mal—he had mind. Thought breaks down nerve cells;
kills, destroys and causes decay. Therefore the food of
the Atlantean was, by analogy, carcasses. He killed
to eat and that is why the Bible states that ‘‘ Nimrod was
a mighty hunter.’’ Nimrod represents the man of the
Fourth Epoch.

In the meanwhile, man had descended deeper and deeper


®
REBIRTH AND THE LAW OF CONSEQUENCE 167


into matter. His former ethereal body formed the skel-
eton within and had become solid. He had also lost by
degrees the spiritual perception which was possessed by
him in the earlier Epochs. Thus it was designed. He is
destined to get it back at a higher stage, plus the self-
consciousness which he did not then possess. He had,
however, during the first four Epochs, a greater knowl-
edge of the spiritual world. He knew he did not die and
that when one body wasted away it was like the drying
of a leaf from the tree in the autumn—another body
would grow to take its place. Therefore he had no real
appreciation of the opportunities and advantages of this
Earth life of concrete existence.

But it was necessary that he should become thoroughly
awake to the great importance of this concrete existence,
so that he might learn from it all that could be learned.
So long as he felt that he was a citizen of the higher
Worlds and knew for a certainty that physical life is but
a small part of real existence he did not take it seriously
enough. He did not apply himself to the cultivation of
the opportunities for growth which are found only in the
present phase of existence. He dallied his time away
without developing the resources of the world, as do the
people of India today, for the same reason.

The only way in which an appreciation of concrete
physical existence could be aroused in man was by de-
priving him of the memory of his higher, spiritual exist-
ence for a few lives. Thus, during his Earth life, he
came to hold no positive knowledge of any other than the
one present physical life, and was in this way impelled
to earnestly apply himself to living it.

There had been religions previous to Christianity which
had taught Rebirth and the law of Consequence, but the


168 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


time had now come when it was no longer conducive
to man’s advancement that he should know this doctrine,
and ignorance concerning it came to be regarded as a sign
of progress. This one single life was to be made para-
mount. Therefore we find that the Christian Religion, as
publicly taught, does not embody the laws of Consequence
and Rebirth. Nevertheless, as Christianity is the religion
of the most advanced Race, it must be the most advanced
Religion, and because of the elimination of this doctrine
from its public teachings, the conquest of the world of
matter is being made by the Anglo-Saxon and Teutonic
races, in which this phase has been carried furthest.

As some new addition to or change in the food of man
had been made in every Epoch to meet its conditions and
accomplish its purposes, we now find added to the food
of the previous Epochs a new article—-WINH. It was
needed on account of its benumbing effect upon the spir-
itual principle in man, because no religion, in and of
itself, could have made man forget his nature as a spirit
and have caused him to think of himself as “a worm of the
dust,’ or made him believe that “we walk with the same
force with which we think”—indeed, it was never in-
tended that he should go so far as that. i

Hitherto only water had been used as a drink and in
the ceremonies of the Temple service, but after the sub-
mergence of Atlantis—a continent which once existed be-
tween Europe and America, where the Atlantic Ocean now
lies—those who escaped destruction began to cultivate
the vine and make wine, as we find narrated in the Bible
story of Noah. Noah symbolizes the remnant of the At-
lantean Epoch, which became the nucleus of the Fifth
Race—therefore our progenitors.

The active principle of alcohol is a “spirit” and as the


REBIRTH AND THE LAW OF CONSEQUENCE 169


humanity of the earlier Epochs used the articles of food
best suited to their vehicles, so this spirit was, in the Fifth
Epoch, added to the foods previously used by evolving
humanity. It acts upon the spirit of the Fifth Epoch
man, temporarily paralyzing it, that it may know, esteem
and conquer the physical world and value it at its proper
worth. Thus man forgets, for the time being, his spir-
itual home, clinging to this form of existence, which he
has previously despised, with all the tenacity born of a
feeling that this is all there is—or at least, preferring
the certainty of this world to taking chances on a heaven
which, in his present muddled state, he does not under-
stand.

Water only had been used in the Temples, but now this
is altered. “Bacchus,” a god of wine, appears and under
his sway the most advanced nations forget that there is a
higher life. None who offer tribute to the counterfeit
spirit of wine or any alcoholic liquor (the product of
fermentation and decay) can ever know anything of the
higher Self—the true Spirit which is the very source of
life.

All this was preparatory to the coming of Christ, and
it is of the highest significance that His first act was to
change “water into wine.” (John ii:11.)

In private He taught Rebirth to His disciples. He not
only taught them in words, but He took them “into the
mountain.” This is a mystic term meaning a place of
Initiation. In the course of Initiation they see for them-
selves that Rebirth is a fact, for there Elijah appeared
before them, who, they are told, is also John the Baptist.
Christ, in unequivocal terms, had previously told them,
when speaking of John the Baptist, “this is Elijah who
was for to come.” He reiterates this at the transfigura-


170 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


tion scene, saying, ‘‘Elijah has come already and they
knew him not, but have done to him whatsoever they list-
ed.’’ And following this, it is said that ‘‘they understood
He spake of John the Baptist’’ (Matt. xvii :12-13). On this
oceasion, and also at the time when Rebirth was discussed
between Him and His disciples, they told Him that some
thought He was Elijah and others that He was one of the
prophets who had been reborn. He commanded them
to ‘‘tell no man.’’ (Matt. xvii:9; Luke ix:21). This
was to be, for thousands of years, an esoteric teaching,
to be known only among the few pioneers who fitted
themselves for the knowledge, pushing ahead to the
stage of development when these truths will again be
known to man.

That Christ taught Rebirth and also the law of Con-
sequence is perhaps shown in no other place as clearly
as in the case of the man who had been born blind, where
His disciples asked, ‘‘Who did sin, this man or his par-
ents, that he was born blind?’’ (John ix:2).

Had Christ not taught Rebirth and the law of Conse-
quence, the natural answer would have been, ‘‘ Nonsense!
how could a man have sinned before he was born, and
have brought blindness upon himself as a result?’’ But
Christ does net answer in that way. He is not surprised
at the question, nor does He treat it as being at all un-
usual, showing that it was quite in harmony with His
teachings. He explains, ‘‘Neither hath this man sinned,
nor his parents; but that the works of (the) God should
be made manifest in him.”’

The orthodox interpretation 1s that the man was born
blind in order that Christ might have the opportunity of
performing a miracle to show His power. It would have
been a strange way for a God to obtain glory—capriciously


REBIRTH AND THE LAW OF CONSEQUENCE Weal


condemning a man to many years of blindness and misery
that He might “show off” at a future time! We would
consider a man who acted in such a manner a monster
of cruelty.

How much more logical to think that there may be
another explanation. To impute to God conduct which, in
a human being, we would denounce in the strongest terms,
is surely unreasonable. /

Christ differentiates between the physically blind body
of the man and the God within, which is the Higher Self.

The dense body has committed no sin. The God within
has done some deed which manifests in the particular
affliction from which he is suffering. It is not stretching
a point to call a man a God. Paul says, “know ye not
that ye are Gods?” and he refers to the human body as
the “temple of God,” the indwelling spirit.

Finally, although most people do not remember their
past lives, there are some who do, and all may know if
they will live the life necessary to attain the knowledge.
This requires great strength of character, because such
knowledge will carry with it a knowledge of impending
fate that may be hanging black and sinister over one,
which will manifest in dire disaster. Nature has gra-
ciously hidden the past and the future from us, that we
may not be robbed of peace of mind by suffering in antici-
pation of the pain in store for us. As we attain greater —
development we shall learn to welcome all things with —
equanimity, seeing in all troubles the result of past evil
and feeling thankful that the obligations incurred thereby
are being annulled, knowing that so much less stands
between us and the day of liberation from the wheel of
birth and death.

When a person dies in childhood in one life, he or she


172 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


not infrequently remembers that life in the next body,
because ehildren under 14 years do not journey around
the entire life cycle, which necessitates the building of a
complete set of new vehicles. They simply pass into the
upper Regions of the Desire World and there wait for a
new embodiment, which usually takes place in from one
to twenty years after death. When they return to birth,
they bring with them the old mind and desire body, and
if we listened to the prattle of children, we should often
be able to discover and reconstruct such stories as the
following:
A REMARKABLE STORY.

One day in Santa Barbara, Cal., a man by the name of
Roberts came to a trained clairvoyant who is also a lecturer
on Theosophy and asked for help in a perplexing ease.
Mr. Roberts had been walking in the street the previous
day when a little three-year-old girl came up to him and
put her arms around his knees, calling him papa. Mr.
Roberts was indignant, thinking that someone was trying
to father the child on him. But the mother of the child,
who came up directly, was equally put out and tried to get
the child away. The child, however, kept on clinging
to Mr. R., insisting that he was her father. On account
of circumstances to be told later Mr. R. could not put
it out of his mind, and sought out the clairvoyant, who
accompanied him to the house of the child’s parents,
where the little girl at once ran up to Mr. R. and again
called him papa. The clairvoyant, whom I will eall X,
first took the child over to the window to note whether
the iris of the eye would expand and contract when he
turned her to and from the light, in order to see whether
another entity than the rightful owner was in possession


REBIRTH AND THE LAW OF CONSEQUENCE 1738


of the child’s body, for the eye is the window of the soul
and no ‘‘obsessing’’ entity can secure control of that part.
Mr. X. found, however, that the child was normal, and
next proceeded to question the little one carefully. After
patient work carried on intermittently during the after-
noon, so as not to tire the child, this is the story she told:

She had lived with her papa, Mr. Roberts, and another
mamma in a little house that stood all alone, where no
other house could be seen; there was a little brook close
to the house where some flowers grew (and here she ran
out and brought in some ‘‘ pussy-willows’’) and there was
a plank across the brook which she was cautioned against
crossing, for fear she might fall into the brook. One day
her papa had left her mother and herself and had not
returned. When their supply of food was exhausted her
mamma lay down on the bed and became so still. At last
she said quaintly, ‘‘then I also died, but I didn’t die. I
came here.”’

Mr. Roberts next told his story. Eighteen years before
he lived in London, where his father was a brewer. He
fell in love with their servant girl. His father objected,
so he eloped with her to Australia after they had first
been married. Here he went out into the bush and cleared
a little farm, where he erected a small cabin by a brook,
just as described by the little girl. A daughter was born
to them there, and when she was about two years old he
left the house one morning and went to a clearing some
distance from the house, and while there a man with a
rifle came up to him, saying that he arrested him in the
name of the law for a bank robbery committed on the
night Mr. R. bad left England. The officer had tracked
him here. thinking him the criminal. Mr. R. begged to
be allowed to go to his wife and child, but, thinking this


174 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


a ruse to entrap him into the hands of confederates, the
officer refused and drove him to the coast at the point of
the gun. He was taken to England and tried and his in-
nocence proven.

First then did the authorities take heed of his constant
ravings about his wife and child, whom he knew must
starve in that wild and lonely country. An expedition
was sent out to the cabin, when it was found that only the
skeletons of the wife and child remained. Mr. Roberts’
father had died in the meantime, and though he had
disinherited Mr. R., his brothers divided with him and he
came to America a broken man.

He then produced photographs of himself and his wife,
and at the suggestion of Mr. X. they were mixed with a
number of other photographs and shown to the little girl,
who unhesitatingiy picked out the photographs of both
her alleged parents, although the photograph shown was
very ditferent from the present appearance of Mr. Roberts.


PART II.


Cosmogenesis and Anthropogenesis


y é


Ate, tedep le Di


Fi , sis ach
-s li uape ry y
» Tar F
. f, A iis'y
‘ wil SAR }
j lim
| x
~
he '
I 5 4 he e
‘ ahi AE At Ma %
is na 4 li F ‘ t a
‘ . 1


oo


isd nen Si een al
siedesyocetinl brie


i
i
*
.
-_ , 1
sd ; i]
ray re
, Le
re s
. im. 4’
Ce | = »
a! ”
; eA Ye


CHAPTER V.


Tur RELATION oF MAN TO Gop.


man in relation to three of the five Worlds which

form the field of his evolution. We have partly de-
scribed these Worlds and noted the different vehicles of
consciousness by means of which he is correlated to them.
We have studied his relation to the other three king-
doms—mineral, plant and animal—noting the difference
in vehicles, and consequent difference in consciousness,
between man and each of these kingdoms. We have fol-
lowed man through one life cycle in the three Worlds
and have examined the operation of the twin laws of
Consequence and Rebirth in their bearing upon the evolu-
tion of man.

In order to understand further details as to the prog-
ress of man, it now becomes necessary to study his relation
to the Grand Architect of the Universe—to God and to
the Hierarchies of Celestial Beings which stand upon the
many different rungs of the Jacob’s ladder of attainment
that stretches from man to God and beyond.

This is a task of the utmost difficulty, rendered still
more so by the indefinite conceptions of God which exist
in the minds of the majority of the readers of literature
dealing with this subject. It is true that names, in and
of themselves, are not important, but it matters greatly
that we know what we mean by a name; otherwise misun-


ee


Hee the preceding chapters we have been considering


Diagrar b. Baga


Ist Cosmic Plane Supreme Beiet


(Motior


Od Cosmic Plane


+


LIN,


tik Cosmic Plane


otk Cosmic Plane


A


Gtr Cosmic Plane


sees VAIN


ods of olker Delar


tems
Ttk Cosmic Planeincludes all below i
this lire, the sever worlds béing __#
subdivisions of NE


1 Gke World of God rae
‘Wisdom Activity
ne
Ww Ww Ww


2 Che World of Virgie dpirits
5 Cke World of Divine Spirit
4@he World of Lite Dpsit
SGhke World of Ghouskt
Oke World of Desire
TOhke Physical World


——y


—>


THH RELATION OF MAN TO GOD 179


derstanding will result, and if a common nomenclature is
not agreed upon by writers and teachers, the present con-
fusion will be worse confounded. When the name “God”
is used it is always uncertain whether The Absolute, The
One Existence, is meant; or The Supreme Being, Who is
the Great Architect of the Universe; or God, Who is the
Architect of our Solar System.

The division of the Godhead into “Father,” “Son” and
“Holy Ghost” is also confusing. Although the Beings
designated by these names are immeasurably above man
and worthy of all the reverence and worship he is capable
of rendering to his highest conceptions of Divinity, yet
They are different from one another in actual fact.

Diagrams 6 and 11 will perhaps make the subject clear.
It must be kept in mind that the Worlds and Cosmic
Planes are not one above another in space, but that the
seven Cosmic Planes inter-penetrate each other and all the
seven Worlds. They are states of spirit-matter, permeating
one another, so that God and the other great Beings who
are mentioned are not far away in space. They pervade
every part of their own realms and realms of greater
density than their own. They are all present in our world
and are actually and de facto “nearer than hands and
feet.” It is a literal truth when we say “in Him we live
and move and have our being,” for none of us could
exist outside these great Intelligences Who pervade and
sustain eur world with Their Life.

It has been shown that the Etheric Region extends
beyond the atmosphere of our dense Earth; that the De-
sire World extends out into space further than the Etheric
Region; also that the World of Thought extends further
into inter-planetary Space than either of the others. Of
course, the Worlds of rarer substance occupy a larger space


180 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


than the denser World, which has crystallized and con-
densed, thus occupying less space.

The same principle is operative in the Cosmic Planes.
The densest of them is the seventh (counting from the
top downward). It is represented in the diagram as
larger than any of the others, the reason being that it
is the plane with which we are most intimately concerned,
and it was desired to indicate its principal subdivisions.
In reality, however, it occupies less space than any of the
other Cosmic Planes, although it must be borne in mind
that, even with this comparatively restrictive qualification
as to its extent, it is still immeasurably vast, far beyond
the utmost power of the human mind to conceive, com-
prising within its limits millions of Solar Systems similar
to our own, which are the fields for the evolution of many
grades of beings of approximately our own status.

Of the six Cosmic Planes above our own we know
nothing, save that we are told they are the fields of
activity of great Hierarchies of Beings of indescribable
splendor.

Proceeding from our Physical World to the inner and
finer Worlds and up through the Cosmie Planes, we find
that God, the Architect of our Solar System, the Source
and Goal of our existence, 1s found in the highest division
of the seventh Cosmic Plane. This is His World.

His Realm includes the systems of evolution carried on
in the other planets which belong to our system—Uranus,
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Earth, Venus, Mercury, and their
satellites.

The great Spiritual Intelligences designated as the
Planetary Spirits, which guide these evolutions, are called
the ‘‘Seven Spirits before the Throne.’’ They are His
Ministers. each presiding over a certain department of the
Kingdom of God—which is our Solar System. The Sun


THE RELATION OF MAN TO GOD 181


is also the field of evolution of the most exalted Beings
in our Cosmos. They alone can endure and advance by
means of the terrific solar vibrations. The Sun is the
nearest approach we have to a visible symbol of God,
yet it is but a veil for That which is behind. What That
is cannot be uttered publicly.

When we try to discover the origin of the Architect of
our Solar System, we find that we must pass to the highest
of the seven Cosmic Planes. We are then in the Realm
of The Supreme Being, Who emanated from The Absolute.

The Absolute is beyond comprehension. No expression
nor simile which we are capable of conceiving can possibly
convey any adequate idea) Manifestation implies limita-
tion. Therefore, we may at best characterize The Abso-
lute as Boundless Being; as the Root of Existence.

From the Root of Existence—The Absolute—proceeds
the Supreme Being, at the dawn of manifestation. This
is THE ONE.

In the first chapter of John this Great Being is called
God. From this Supreme Being emanates The Word, the
Creative Fiat “without whom was not anything made,”
and this Word is the alone-begotten Son, born of His
Father (the Supreme Being) before all worlds—but posi-
tively not Christ. Grand and glorious as is Christ, tower-
ing high above mere human nature, He is not this Exalted
Being. Truly “the Word was made flesh,” but not in the
limited sense of the flesh of one body, but the flesh of all
that is, in this and millions of other Solar Systems.

The First Aspect of the Supreme Being may be char-
acterized as POWER. From this proceeds the Second
Aspect, THE WORD; and from both of these proceeds the
Third Aspect, MOTION.

From this threefold Supreme Being proceed the seven


182 ROSICKUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Great Logoi. They contain within Themselves all the
great Hierarchies which differentiate more and more as
They diffuse through the various Cosmic Planes. (See
diagram 6.) There are forty-nine Hierarchies on the sec-
ond Cosmic Plane; on the third there are 343 Hierarchies.
Each of these is capable of septenary divisions and subdi-
visions, so that in the lowest Cosmic Plane, where the
Solar Systems manifest, the number of divisions and sub-
divisions is almost infinite.

In the Highest World of the seventh Cosmic Plane
dwells the God of our Solar System and the Gods of all
other Solar Systems in the Universe. These great Beings
are also threefold in manifestation, lke The Supreme
Being. Their three aspects are Will, Wisdom and Activity.

Each of the seven Planetary Spirits which proceed
from God and have charge of the evolution of life on one
of the seven planets, is also threefold and differentiates
within itself Creative Hierarchies which go through a
septenary evolution. The evolution carried on by one
Planetary Spirit differs from the methods of development
inaugurated by each of the others.

It may be further stated that, at least in the particular
planetary scheme to which we belong, the entities farthest
evolved in the earliest stages, who had reached a high
stage of perfection in previous evolutions, assume the func-
tions of the original Planetary Spirit and continue the
evolution, the original Planetary Spirit withdrawing from
active participation, but guiding its Regents.

The foregoing is the teaching relative to all the Solar
Systems, but coming down to the particular System to
which we belong, the following is the teaching which the
sufficiently trained Seer can obtain for himself by per-
sonal investigation of the memory of nature.


CHAPTER VI.
THE SCHEME OF EVOLUTION.


The Beginning.


below’’ and vice versa, Solar Systems are born, die
and come to birth anew in cycles of activity and rest,
as does man.

There is a constant flaming out and dying down of
activity in every department of nature, corresponding to
the alternations of ebb and flow, day and night, summer
and winter, life and death.

In the beginning of a Day of Manifestation it is taught
that a certain Great Being (designated in the Western
World by the name of God, but by other names in other
parts of the earth) limits Himself to a certain portion
of space, in which He elects to create a Solar System
for the evolution of added self-consciousness. (See dia-
gram 6.)

He includes in His own Being hosts of glorious Hier-
archies of, to us, immeasurable spiritual power and splen-
dor. They are the fruitage of past manifestations of this
same Being and also other Intelligences, in descending
degrees of development down to such as have not reached
a stage of consciousness as high as our present humanity,
and therefore these latter will not be able to finish their
evolution in this System. In God—this great collective


183


T° harmony with the Hermetic axiom ‘‘ As above, so


184 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Being—there are contained lesser beings of every grade of
intelligence and stage of consciousness, from omniscience
to an unconsciousness deeper than that of the deepest
trance condition.

During the period of manifestation with which we are
concerned, these various grades of beings are working to
acquire more experience than they possessed at the begin-
ning of this period of existence. ‘Those who, in previous
manifestations, have attained to the highest degree of
development work on those who have not yet evolved any
consciousness. They induce in them a stage of self-con-
sciousness from which they can take up further work
themselves. Those who had started their evolution in a
former Day of Manifestation, but had not progressed far
at the close, now take up their task again, just as we take
up our daily work in the morning where we left off the
previous night.

All the different Beings, however, do not take up their
evolution at the early stages of a new manifestation. Some
must wait until those who precede them have made the
conditions which are necessary for their further develop-
ment. There are no instantaneous processes in nature.
All is an exceedingly slow unfolding, a development which,
though so exceedingly slow, is yet absolutely certain to
attain ultimate perfection. Just as there are progressive
stages in the human life—childhood, youth, manhood or
womanhood, and old age—so in the macrocosm there are
different stages corresponding to these various periods of
the microcosmic life.

A child cannot take up the duties of fatherhood or
motherhood. Its undeveloped mental and physical con-
dition render it incapable of doing such work. The same
is true of the less evolved beings in the beginning of mani-


THE SCHEME OF EVOLUTION 185


festation. They must wait until the higher evolved have
made the proper conditions for them. The lower the
grade of the intelligence of the evolving being, the more
it is dependent upon outside help.

At the Beginning, then, the highest Beings—those who
are the farthest evolved—work upon those who have the
greatest degree of unconsciousness. Later, they turn them
over to some of the less evolved entities, who are then
able to carry the work a little further. At last self-
consciousness is awakened. The evolving life has be-
come Man.

From the point where the self-conscious individual Ego
has come into being he must go on and expand his con-
sciousness without outside help. Experience and thought
are then to take the place of outside teachers and the
glory, power and splendor he may attain are limitless.

The period of time devoted to the attainment of self-
consciousness and to the building of the vehicles through
which the spirit in man manifests, is called ‘‘Involution.’’

The subsequent period of existence, during which the
individual human being develops self-consciousness into
divine omniscience, is called ‘‘Evolution.’’

The Force within the evolving being which makes evo-
lution what it is and not a mere unfoldment of latent ger-
minal possibilities ; which makes the evolution of each in-
dividual differ from that of every other; which provides
the element of originality and gives scope to the creative
ability which the evolving being is te cultivate that he
may become a God—that Force is called ‘‘Genius,’’ and,
as previously explained, its manifestation is‘‘ Epigenesis.’’

Many of the advanced philosophies of modern times
recognize involution.and evolution. Science recognizes
only the latter, because it (Science) deals only with the


186 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Form side of manifestation. Involution belongs to the
Life side; but the most advanced scientists regard Epi-
genesis as a demonstrable fact. The Rosicrucian Cosmo-
Conception combines all three as necessary to full under-
standing of the past, present and future development of
the System to which we belong.


THe WoRLDs.


We might use a homely instance to illustrate the build-
ing of a Cosmos. Suppose a man wants to establish a
home in which to live. He first selects a suitable location
and then proceeds to build a house, dividing it into various
rooms to serve certain purposes. He makes a kitchen,
dining-room, bedrooms ana bathroom, and furnishes them
all to suit the special purpose they are intended to serve.

When God desires to create, He seeks out an appropriate
place in space, which He fills with His aura, permeating
every atom of the Cosmic Root-substance of that particular
portion of space with His Life, thus awakening the activ-
ity latent within every inseparate atom.

This Cosmic Root-substance is an expression of the:
negative pole of the Universal Spirit, while the great
Creative Being we call God (of whom we, as spirits, are
part) is an expression of the positive energy of the same
Universal Absolute Spirit. From the work of one upon
the other, all that we see about us in the Physical World
has resulted. The oceans, the Earth, everything we see
manifesting as mineral, plant, animal and human forms
—all are crystallized space, emanated from this negative
Spirit-substance, which alone existed at the dawn of Being.
As surely as the hard and flinty house of the snail is the
solidified juices of its soft body, so surely all forms are
erystallizations around the negative pole of Spirit.


THE SCHEME OF EVOLUTION 187


God draws from the Cosmic Root-substance outside His
rmmediate sphere; thus the substance within the nascent
cosmos becomes denser than it is in Universal space, be-
tween Solar Systems.

When God has thus prepared the material for His
Habitation, He next sets it in order. Every part of the
system is pervaded by His consciousness, but a different
modification of that consciousness in each part or divi-
sion. The Cosmic Root-substance is set in varying rates
of vibration and is therefore differently constituted in its
various divisions, or regions.

The above is the manner in which the Worlds come into
being and are fitted to serve different purposes in the evo-
lutionary scheme, the same as the various rooms in the
house are fitted to serve the purposes of everyday life in
the Physical World.

We have already seen that there are seven Worlds. These
Worlds have each a different “measure” and rate of vibra-
tion. In the densest World (the Physical) the measure of
vibration, though in the case of light-waves, reaching a
rate of hundreds of millions per second, is nevertheless in-
finitesimal when compared to the rapidity of the vibration
in the Desire World, which is next to the Physical. To
get some conception of the meaning and rapidity of vibra-
tion, perhaps the easiest way is to watch the heat vibrations
rising from a very hot stove, or from a steam radiator
near a window.

It must be borne constantly in mind that these Worlds
are not separated by space or distance, as is the earth.
from the other planets. They are states of matter, of vary-
ing density and vibration, as are the solids, liquids and
gases of our Physical World. These Worlds are not in-
stantaneously created at the beginning of a Day of Mani-


188 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


festation, nor do they last until the end; but as a spider
spins its web thread by thread, so God differentiates one
after another of the Worlds within Himself, as the neces-
sity arises for new conditions in the scheme of evolution
in which He is engaged. Thus have all the seven Worlds
been gradually differentiated as they are at present.

The highest Worlds are created first, and as involution
is to slowly carry the life into denser and denser matter
for the building of forms, the finer Worlds gradually con-
dense and new Worlds are differentiated within God to
furnish the necessary links between Himself and the
Worlds which have consolidated. In due time the point
of greatest density, the nadir of materiality, is reached.
From that point the life begins to ascend into higher
Worlds, as evolution proceeds. That leaves the denser
Worlds depopulated, one by one. When the purpose has
been served for which a particular World was created, God
ends its existence, which has become superfluous, by ceas-
ing within Himself the particular activity which brought
into being and sustained that World.

The highest (finest, rarest, most ethereal) Worlds are
the first created and the last eliminated, while the three
densest Worlds, in which our present phase of evolution is
carried on, are but comparatively evanescent phenomena
incident to the spirit’s dip into matter.


THE SEVEN PERIODS.


The evolutionary scheme is carried through these five
Worlds in seven great Periods of Manifestation, during
which the virgin spirit, or evolving life, becomes first,
man—then, a God.

At the beginning of Manifestation God differentiates
within (not from) Himself these virgin spirits, as sparks


THE SCHEME OF EVOLUTION 189


from a Flame, of the same nature, capable of being fanned
into Flames themselves. Evolution is the fanning process
which is to accomplish that end. In the virgin spirits are
enfolded all the possibilities of their Divine Father, in-
cluding the germ of independent Will, which makes them
capable of originating new phases, not latent in them.The
latent possibilities are transformed into dynamic powers
and available faculties during evolution, while the inde-
pendent Will institutes new and original departures—or
Epigenesis.

Prior to the beginning of the pilgrimage through mat-
ter the virgin spirit is in the World of Virgin Spirits, the
next to the highest of the seven Worlds. It has Divine
Consciousness, but not Self-consciousness. That, Soul-
power, and the Creative Mind, are faculties or powers
attained to by evolution.

When the virgin spirit is immersed in the World of
Divine Spirit, it is blinded and rendered utterly uncon-
scious by that matter. It is as oblivious to outside condi-
tions as is man when in the deepest trance. This state
of unconsciousness prevails during the first period.

In the Second Period it rises to the dreamless sleep
state; in the Third Period it reaches the dream stage, and
in the middle of the Fourth Period, at which we have now
arrived, the full waking consciousness of man is attained.
This is a consciousness pertaining to only the lowest one
of the seven Worlds. During the remaining half of this
Period, and the entire three remaining Periods, man
must expand his conseiousness so as to include all of the
six Worlds above this Physical World.

When man passed through these Worlds in his descent
his energies were directed by higher Beings, who assisted
him to turn his uneonsejous energy inward for the building


190 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


of proper vehicles. At last, when he was far enough ads
vanced and equipped with the threefold body as a necessary
instrument, these higher Beings “opened his eyes” and
turned his gaze outward upon the Chemical Region of thé
Physical World, that his energies might conquer it.

When he has fitted himself by his work in the Chemical
Region, his next step in progress will be towards an ex-
pansion in consciousness that will include the Etheric
Region; then the Desire World, etc., ete.

In the Rosicrucian terminology, the names of the seven
Periods are as follows:


. The Venus Period.
. The Vulcan Period.


1. The Saturn Period.

2. The Sun Period.

3. The Moon Period. These periods are suc-
4. The Earth Period. cessive Rebirths of our
5. The Jupiter Period. Earth.

6

q


It must not be thought that the above mentioned Periods
have anything to do with the planets which move in their
orbits around the sun in company with the earth. In fact,
it cannot be too emphatically stated that there is no con-
nection whatever between these planets and the Periods.
The Periods are simply past, present or future incarnations
of our Earth, “conditions” through which it has passed,
is now passing, or will pass in the future.

The three first mentioned Periods (the Saturn, Sun and
Moon Periods) have been passed through. We are now in
the fourth, or Earth Period. When this Karth Period of
our Globe has been completed, we and it shall pass in
turp through the Jupiter, Venus and Vulcan conditions

-torethe great septenary Day of Manifestation comes to


THE SCHEME OF EVOLUTION 191


an end, when all that now is will once more be merged in
the Absolute for a period of rest and assimilation of the
fruits of our evolution, to re-emerge for further and higher
development at the dawn of another Great Day.

The three and one-half Periods already behind us have
been spent in gaining our present vehicles and conscious-
ness. The remaining three and one-half Periods wil! be
devoted to perfecting these different vehicles and expanding
our consciousness into something akin to omniscience.

The journey made by the virgin spirit from unconscious-
ness to omniscience, unfolding its latent possibilities into
a kinetic energy, is a process of marvelous complexity and
only the roughest outline will at first be given. As we
progress in our present study, however, more details will be
filled in, until the picture is as complete as the writer is
capable of making it. The attention of the student is
called to the definition of terms that are given as new
ideas are being presented. He is earnestly importuned to
familiarize himself with them, as the intention is to sim-
plify the matter by using only one familiar English name
for the same idea throughout the work. The name will be
as descriptive as possible of the idea to be conveyed, in
hope that thereby much of the confusion arising from a
multiplex terminology may be avoided. By paying strict
attention to definition of terms, it should not be too diffi-
cult for any person of average intelligence to acquire a
knowledge of at least the outlines of the scheme of
evolution.

That such a knowledge is of the utmost importance will.
we think, be conceded by every intelligent individual. We
live in this world, governed by the laws of nature. Under
these laws we must live and work, and we are powerless
tc change them. If we know them and intelligently cm


192 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


operate with them, these nature-forces become most valu-
able servants, e. g., electricity and the expansive force of
steam. If, on the other hand, we do not understand them
and in our ignorance work contrary to them, they become
most dangerous enemies, capable of terrible destruction.
Therefore, the more we know of the working methods of
nature, which latter is but the visible symbol of the in-
visible God, the better able we shall be to take advantage
of the opportunities it offers for growth and power; for
emancipation from bondage and for elevation to mastery.


DIAGRAM 7


Wor tp oF
Divine
Spirit


Wortp or
Lire
Spirit


if


Apstracr
THOUGHT


REGION oF
Concrete
THOUGHT


CHARTER Vad
Tue PatH or EvoLurion.


WORD of warning in regard to diagrams used for
purposes of illustration may not be out of place.

The student should remember that anything that is re-
duced into another dimension can never be accurate.
The picture of a house would mean little or nothing to
us if we had never seen a house. In that case we would


see in the picture only lines and blotches. It would con-


vey no meaning to us. Diagrams used to illustrate su-
perphysical matters are much less true representations
of the reality, for the simple reason that in the case of
the picture, the three-dimensional house is only reduced
to two dimensions, while in the case of diagrams of the
Periods, Worlds and Globes, the realities possess from
four to seven dimensions, and the diagrams of
two dimensions by which it is endeavored to
represent them are thus so much further removed from
the possibility of correctly portraying them. We must
constantly bear in mind that these Worlds inter-pene-
trate, that the Globes inter-penetrate, and that the way
they are shown in the diagram is analogous to taking all
the wheels of a watch and laying them side by side in
order to show how the watch keeps time. If these dia-
grams are to be of any use to the student they must be
spiritually conceived. Otherwise they will be confus-
ing instead of enlightening.
194


lion 4


THE PATH OF EVOLUTION 198


REVOLUTIONS AND Cosmic NIGHTs.


The Saturn Period is the first of the seven Periods, and
at this early stage the virgin spirits take their first step
towards the evolution of Consciousness and Form. By
reference to diagram 7 it will be seen that the evolutionary
impulse travels seven times around the seven Globes, A, B,
C, D, E, F and G, the arrows showing the direction.

First, a part of the evolution is accomplished on Globe
A, situated in the World of Divine Spirit, the rarest of the
five Worlds which form our field of evolution. Then,
gradually the evolving life is transferrea to Globe B, which
is located in the somewhat denser World of Life Spirit.
Here another stage of evolution is passed through. In due
time the evolving life is ready to enter the arena on Globe
C, which is situated in and formed of the yet denser sub-
stance of the Region of Abstract Thought. After learning
the lessons peculiar to that stage of existence, the life
wave travels onward to Globe D, which'is located in and
formed of the substance of the Region of Concrete Thought.
This is the densest degree of matter reached by the life
wave during the Saturn Period.

From this point the life wave is carried upward again
to Globe E, which is situated in the Region of Abstract
Thought, as is Globe C, yet the conditions are not the same
as on Globe C. This is the Involutionary stage, and the
substance of the Worlds is getting denser all the time.
The tendency in everything is to become denser and more
solid as time goes on; also, as the path of evolution is a
spiral, it will be clear that, though the same points are
gone over, the conditions are never the same, but are
on a higher and more advanced plane.

When the work on Globe E has been completed, the


196 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


next step is taken on Globe F, which is situated in the
World of Life Spirit, the same as Globe B; thence it
mounts to Globe G. When the work there is done, the
life wave has traveled once around all the seven Globes;
once down and up through the four respective Worlds.
This journey of the life wave is called a Revolution, and
seven Revolutions make one Period. During one Period
the life wave travels seven times down and up through the
four Worlds.

When the life wave has traveled its full complement of
seven times around the seven Globes, completing the seven
Revolutions, the first Day of Creation closes and there fol-
lows a Cosmic Night of rest and assimilation, after which
the Sun Period dawns.

Like the night of sleep between two days of human life
and the interval of rest between two earth lives, this Cosmic
Night of rest after the completion of the Saturn Period
is not a time of passive repose, but a season of preparation
for the activity to be unfolded in the coming Sun Period,
where man-in-the-making is to take a further dip into
matter. Therefore, new Globes are necessary, the positions
of which in the seven Worlds are different from those occu-
pied by the Worlds of the Saturn Period. The providing
of these new Globes, and other subjective activities, occupy
the evolving spirits during the interval between Periods—
the Cosmic Night. The manner of procedure is as follows:


When the life wave has left Globe A in the Saturn |


Period for the last time, the Globe begins to slowly disin-
tegrate. The forces which built it are transferred from
the World of Divine Spirit (where Globe A is located
during the Saturn Period) to the World of Life Spirit
(where Globe A is located during the Sun Period). This
is shown on diagram 8.


AN


SS


4


Sp


)


‘Spolled PIIOM 1 94} Jo soqoTyH 2 oy} punore SUOTINIOASY /,
S}IIdS UISITA oy} Jo oseulssig
mie)


suoTzeureouy 22, 9YUI—8 werseiq


ees


$98 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


When the life wave has left Globe B in the Saturn
Period for the last time, it also commences to disintegrate,
and the forces thereof, lke the seed-atom of a human
vehicle, are used as a nucleus for Globe B in the Sun
Period, this Globe being then located in the Region of
Abstract Thought.

In like manner the forces of Globe C are transferred
to the Region of Concrete Thought and draw upon the
substance of that Region for the material wherewith to
build a new Globe C for the coming Sun Period. Globe D
is similarly transmuted and placed in the Desire World,
Globes E, F and G, in order named, are analogously trans-
ferred. The result is (as reference to diagram 8 will show)
that in the Sun Period all the Globes are located one step
further down into denser matter than they were in the
Saturn Period, so that the life wave, upon its emergence
from the Cosmic Night of Rest intervening between the
last activity on Globe G of the Saturn Period and the
renewed activity on Globe A of the Sun Period finds a new
environment, with the opportunity thus afforded for new
experiences,

The life wave now circles seven times around the seven
Globes during the Sun Period, traversing seven times down
and up the four Worlds or Regions in which these Globes
are located. It makes seven Revolutions in the Sun Period,
as it did in the Saturn Period.

When the life wave leaves Globe A in the Sun Period
for the last time, that Globe begins to disintegrate. Its
forces are transferred to the denser Region of Abstract
Thought, where they form a planet to be used during the
Moon Period. In the same way, the forces of the other
Globes are transferred and serve as nuclei for the Globes
at the Moon Period, as shown in diagram 8, the proces


THE WORK OF EVOLUTION 199


being exactly the same as when the Globes were removed
from their locations in the Saturn Period to the posi-
tions they occupied during the Sun Period. Thus the
Globes of the Moon Period are placed one step further
down in matter than they were during the Sun Period,
the lowest (Globe D) being situated in the Etheric Re-
gion of the Physical World.

After the interim of Cosmie Night between the Sun
Period and the Moon Period, the life wave starts its
course on Globe A of the latter, completing in due time
its seven Revolutions, as before. Then there is another
Cosmic Night, during which the Globes are again trans-
ferred one step further down, and this time the densest
Globe is located in the Chemical Region of the Physical
World, as reference to diagram 8 will show.

This, then, is the Earth Period and the lowest and
densest Globe (Globe D) is our present Earth.

The life wave here, as usual, started on Globe A, af-
ter the Cosmie Night succeeding the Moon Period. In
the present Earth Period it has circled three times
around the seven Globes and is now on Globe D, in its
fourth Revolution.

Here on earth and in this present fourth Revolution,
the greatest density of matter—the nadir of materiality
—was reached a few millions of years ago. The tenden-
ey henceforth will be upward into rarer substance. Dur-
ing the three and one-half Revolutions which remain to
complete this Period, the condition of the Earth will
gradually become more and more ethereal, and in the
next—the Jupiter Period—Globe D will again be loca-
ted in the Etheric Region, as it was in the Moon Period,
the other Globes being also elevated correspondingly.

In the Venus Period they will be located in the same


200 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Worlds as were the Globes of the Sun Period. The Globes
of the Vulcan Period will have the same density and be
located in the same Worlds as were the Globes of the
Saturn Period. This is all shown on diagram 8.

When the life wave has completed its work in the Harth
Period and the Cosmic Night which follows is past, it will
go through its seven Revolutions on the Globes of the
Jupiter Period. Then will come the usual Cosmic Night,
with its subjective activities; after which the seven Revolu-
tions of the Venus Period; then another rest, succeeded
by the last of the Periods of the present scheme of evolu-
tion—the Vulcan Period. The life wave also makes its
seven Revolutions here, and at the end of the last Revo-
lution all the Globes are dissolved and the life wave is
reabsorbed by God, for a period of time equal in duration
to that occupied by all of the seven Periods of activity.
God Himself then merges into the Absolute during the
Universal Night of assimilation and preparation for an-
other Great Day.

Other and grander evolutions will then follow, but we
can deal only with the seven Periods described.


CHAPTER VIII.
Tue Work OF EVOLUTION
Ariadne’s Thread.


AVING become acquainted with the Worlds, the
Globes and the Revolutions which constitute the
path of evolution during the seven Periods, we are now
in a position to consider the work which is done in each
Period, as well as the methods employed to accomplish it.
The ‘‘Ariadne’s thread’’ which will guide us through
the maze of Globes, Worlds, Revolutions and Periods will
be found when it is remembered and kept steadily in
mind that the virgin spirits which constitute the evolv-
ing life wave became entirely wnconscious when they
commenced their evolutionary pilgrimage through the
five Worlds of substance denser than the World of
Virgin Spirits. The purpose of evolution is to make
them fully conscious and able to master the matter of
all the Worlds, therefore the conditions embodied in
Globes, Worlds, Revolutions and Periods are ordered
with that end in view.

During the Saturn, Sun and Moon Periods and the
past half of the present Earth Period, the virgin spirits
have unconsciously built their different vehicles under
the direction of exalted Beings who guided their prog-
ress, and have gradually awakened until they have at-
tained the present state of waking consciousness. This
period is called ‘‘Involution.’’

From the present time to the end of the Vulean Period,

201


292 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


the virgin spirits, who are now our humanity, will perfect
their vehicles and expand their consciousness in the five
Worlds by their own efforts and genius. This period is
called “Evolution.”

The above is the key to the understanding of what
follows.

A thorough comprehension of the scheme of planetary
evolution which has been outlined in the preceding pages is
of immense value to the student. Although some believers
in the laws of Consequence and Rebirth seem to think
that the possession of such knowledge is quite non-essential
and of little use, it is nevertheless of very great impor-
tance to the earnest student of these two laws. It trains
the mind in abstract thought and elevates it above the
sordid things of concrete existence, helping the imagina-
tion to soar beyond the hampering toils of self-interest.
As stated in our study of the Desire World, Interest is the
mainspring to action, yet, at our present stage of progress,
Interest is generally aroused by selfishness. It is some-
times of a very subtle nature, but it spurs to action of
various kinds. All action inspired by Interest generates
certain effects which act on us, and in consequence we are
bound by action having to do with the concrete Worlds.
But, if our minds are occupied with such subjects as
mathematics or study of the planetary phases of evolution,
we are in the Region of purely Abstract Thought, beyond
the influence of Feeling, and the mind is directed upward
towards the spiritual realms and liberation. When we are
extracting cube root, or multiplying figures, or thinking of
Periods, Revolutions, ete., we have no Feeling about it.
We do not quarrel about twice two being four. If our
feelings were involved we should perhaps try to make it
five and quarrel with the one who, for personal reasons,


THE WORK OF EVOLUTION 2038


said it was but three, but in mathematics Truth is most
clearly apparent and Feeling is eliminated. Therefore, to
the average man, desiring to live in the feelings, mathe-
matics is dry and uninteresting. Pythagoras taught his
pupils to live in the World of Eternal Spirit and he de-
manded that those who desired instruction from him should
first study mathematics. A mind capable of understanding
mathematics is above the average and is capable of rising
into the World of Spirit, because it is not fettered in the
World of Feeling and Desire. The more we accustom our-
selves to think in terms of the Spiritual Worlds, the better
we shall be able to rise above the illusions which surround
us in this concrete existence, where the twin feelings, In-
terest and Indifference, obscure the Truth and bias us, as
the refraction of the light rays through the Earth’s atmos-
phere gives us incorrect ideas of the position of the lumi-
nary emitting them.

Therefore the student who wishes to know Truth; to
enter and investigate the realms of Spirit; to free himself
from the toils of the flesh, as rapidly as is consistent with
safety and proper growth, is earnestly advised to study
what follows as thoroughly as possible; to assimilate it and
draw mental conceptions of these Worlds, Globes and
Periods. If he wishes to progress in this way, the study
of mathematics and of Hinton’s “The Fourth Dimension”
are also admirable exercises in abstract thought. This
work of Hinton’s (though basically incorrect, because the
four-dimensional Desire World cannot be actually found by
three-dimensional methods), has opened the eyes of several
persons who have studied it, and made them clairvoyant.
Moreover, remembering that logic is the best teacher in any
world, it is certain that the individual who succeeds in
entering into the superphysical World by means of such


£04 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


studies in abstract thought, will not become confused, but
will be able to give a good account of himself under all
circumstances.

A stupendous scheme is here unfolded, and as more and
more detail is filled in, its complexity becomes almost in-
conceivable. Anyone capable of comprehending it will be
well rewarded for taking the utmost pains to do so. There-
fore, the student should read slowly, repeat often, think
deeply and much.

This book, particularly this chapter, cannot be read in a
casual manner. Every sentence has weight and bearing
upon what follows, and presupposes a knowledge of what
precedes it. If the book is not studied thoroughly and sys-
tematically, it will grow more and more incomprehensible
and confusing with every page. On the other hand, if it
is studied and well thought out as the student proceeds,
it will be found that each page is illuminated by the in-
creased knowledge gained by study of what went before.

No work of this kind, dealing with the deepest phases of
the Great World Mystery that the human mind, at its
present stage of development, is capable of grasping, can
be written in such a manner that it will be light reading.
Yet the deepest phases now comprehensible to us are but
the A B C of the scheme as it will be revealed to us when
our minds have become capable of understanding more, ik:
later stages of our development as Supermen.


Tur SATURN PERIOD.


The Globes of the Saturn Period consisted of much rarer
and finer substance than our Earth, as will be evident from
a study of diagrams 7 and 8, which the student is advised to
keep close at hand for frequent reference while studying
this subject. The densest Globe of that Period was located


THE WORK OF EVOLUTION 205


in the same portion of the World of Thought occupied
by the rarest Globes of the present Period—the Region
of Conerete Thought. These Globes had no consistency
such as we can sense. ‘‘ Warmth’’ is the only word that
approximates the idea of the ancient Saturn Period {t
was dark; and if a person could have entered into the
space it occupied, he would have seen nothing. _All
about him would have been darkness, put he would have
felt its warmth.

To the materialist it will, of course, seem insanity to
eall such a condition a ‘‘Globe,’’ and to assert that it,
was the field of evolution of Form and Life. Yet, when
we consider the Nebular Theory, we can realize that the
nebula must have been dark before it glowed with light,
and that it must have been hot before it could become
fiery. This heat must have been brought about by mo-
tion, and motion is life.

We may say that the virgin spirits who were to evolve
consciousness and form were embedded in this Globe, or
perhaps better, that the whole Globe was composed of
virgin spirits, as a raspberry is made of a great number
of small raspberries. They were incorporated in the
Globe, as the life ensouling the mineral is in our Earth.
Therefore it is said among occult scientists that in the
Saturn Period man went through the mineral stage.

Outside this ‘‘warmth-Globe’’—in its atmosphere, we
might say—were the great creative Hierarchies, who
were to help the evolving virgin spirits to develop form
and consciousness. There were many Hierarchies, but
for the present we shall concern ourselves with the
principle ones only—those which did the most import-
ant work of the Saturn Period.

In Rosiecrucian terms these are called ‘‘Lords of
the Flame,’’ because of the brilliant luminosity of their


206 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


bodies and their great spiritual powers. They are called
“Thrones” in the Bible, and worked on man of their own
free will. They were so far advanced that this evolutionary
manifestation could give them no new experiences, and
therefore no added wisdom, and the same may be said of
two still higher order of Hierarchies, to be named later.
The rest of the creative Hierarchies, in order to complete
their own evolution, were compelled to work on, in and
with man.

These Lords of the Flame were outside the dark Saturn
Globe and their bodies emitted a strong light. They, so to
say, projected their pictures upon the surface of that
ancient Saturn Globe, which was so unimpressionable that
it reflected, in a multiple or echo-like manner, everything
that came in contact with it, giving back the images mani-
folded. (This is told in the Greek myth wherein it is said
that Saturn destroyed his children.)

However, by repeated efforts during the first Revolution,
the Lords of the Flame succeeded in implanting in the
evolving life the germ which has developed our present
dense body. This germ was somewhat developed during the
remainder of the first six Revolutions, being given the
capacity for developing the sense organs, particularly the
ear. Therefore, the ear is the most highly developed organ
we possess. It is the instrument which carries with the
greatest accuracy the impressions of outside conditions to
the consciousness. It is less subject to the illusions of the
Physical World than the other sense organs.

The consciousness of the evolving life of that Period
was like that of the mineral of today—a state of uncon-
sciousness similar to that attained by mediums in the
deepest trance—yet during the first six Revolutions, the
evolving life worked on the germ of the dense body under


THE WORK OF EVOLUTION 207


the direction and with the help of the different creative
Hierarchies. In the middle of the seventh Revolution the
Lords of the Flame, Who had been inactive since They
gave the germ of the dense body in the first Revolution,
again became active, this time to awaken the highest spir-
itual principle. They aroused the initial activity of the
divine spirit in man.

Thus, man owes his highest and lowest vehicles—the di-
vine spirit and the dense body to the evolution of the
Saturn Period. These the Lords of the Flame of their own
free will helped him to manifest, not being under the
slightest compulsion to do so.

The work of the various creative Hierarchies is not
started on Globe A at the commencement of a Period
or a Revolution. It commences in the middle of one
Revolution, growing in strength and reaching its highest
efficiency in the middle of the Cosmic Night—which is
between Revolutions, as well as between Periods. Thep
it gradually declines, as the life wave sweeps on to the
middle of the next Revolution.

Thus the work of the Lords of the Flame in awakening
the germinal consciousness, was most active and efficient
during the rest Period between the Saturn and Sun
Periods.

We reiterate that a Cosmic Night is not to be regarded
as a time of inactivity. It is not inert existence, as we
saw in the case of the individual passing from death to a
new birth. So with the great death of all the Globes of a
Period. It is a cessation of active manifestation, that a
proportionately keener subjective activity may be unfolded.

Perhaps the best idea of the nature of this subjective
activity may be gained by observing what happens when
a ripe fruit is buried in the ground. Fermentation and


208 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCErTION


decay of the flesh sets in, but out of that chaos comes the
new plant, sprouting forth into the air and sunshine.
So, when a Period is past, all is resolved into conglomerate
chaos, apparently incapable of being reduced to order.
At the proper time, however, the Globes of a new Period
are formed and made ready for occupancy as man-bearing
Worlds. Hither the evolving life is transferred from five
dark Globes which it traverses during the Cosmic Night,
to commence the activities of a new creative day in an
altered environment, prepared and externalized during the
activities of the Cosmic Night. As the forces of fer-
mentation in the fruit stimulate the seed and fertilize the
soil in which it grows, so the Lords of the Flame stimu-
fated the germ of divine spirit, particularly during the
Cosmic Night between the Saturn and the Sun Periods,
continuing their activities until the middle of the first
Revolution of the Sun Period.


RECAPITULATION.


Before the activity in any Period can be started, there
is a recapitulation of all that has been gone through
before. Owing to the spiral path of evolution, this activity
takes place each time on a higher scale than the stage in
progression which it rehearses. The necessity will become
apparent when the actual work in recapitulation is de-
scribed.

The first Revolution of any Period is a recapitulation
of the work upon the dense body in the Saturn Period,
and is spoken of among Rosicrucians as the “Saturn
Revolution.”

The Second Period is the Sun Period, and therefore
the second Revolution of any Period subsequent to the
Sun Period would be the “Sun Revolution.”


THE WORK OF EVOLUTION 209


The third Period is the Moon Period, therefore the third
Revolution of any subsequent Period would be a recapitu-
lation of the work done in the Moon Period, and is called
the “Moon Revolution.”

Not until after the recapitulatory Revolutions does the
proper work of a Period begin. For instance, in the
present Earth Period, we have passed through three and
one-half Revolutions. That means that in the first, or
Saturn Revolution of the Earth Period, the work done
in the Saturn Period was repeated, but on an advanced
scale. In the second, or Sun Revolution, the work of the
Sun Period was gone through again. In the third, or
Moon Revolution, the work of the Moon Period was re-
peated; and it was only in the fourth—the present Revo-
lution—that the real work of the Earth Period commenced.

In the last of the seven Periods—the, Vulean Period—
only the last Revolution will be concerned with real Vul-
ean work. In the preceding six Revolutions the work of
the preceding six Periods will have been recapitulated.

Moreover (and this will particularly help the student
to remember), a Saturn Revolution in any Period has
always to do with the development of some new feature of
the dense body, because that was started in a first Revo-
lution; and any seventh, or Vulcan Revolution, has for
its particular work some activity in connection with the
divine spirit, because that was started in a seventh Revo-
lution. In the same way, we shall see that there is a con-
nection between the different Revolutions and all the
vehicles of man.


TE Sun PERIOD.


Conditions during the Sun Period differed radically
frora those of the Saturn Period. Instead of the “warmth-


210 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Globes” of the latter, the Sun Period Globes were glowing
light-balls, of the consistency of gas. These great gas-
balls contained all that had been evolved in the Saturn
Period, and similarly, in the atmosphere were the creative
Hierarchies.

Instead of the echo-like, reflecting quality of the Sat-
urn Period, these Globes, to some extent, had the quality
of absorbing and working over any sight or sound pro-
jected against their surfaces. They, as it were, “sensed”
things. The Earth does not seem to do this, and a ma-
terialist would scoff at the idea, yet the occultist knows
that the Earth feels everything on and in it. This lighter
Globe was much more sensitive than the Earth, because
it was not limited and bound in such hard and fast con-
ditions of materiality as is our present habitat.

The life, of course, was different, because no forms such
as we know could have existed there. But life can express
itself in forms of fiery gas as well as—in fact better
than—in forms of hard chemical matter such as the
present dense forms of mineral, plant, animal and man.

As the evolving life appeared upon Globe A in the first,
or Saturn Revolution of the Sun Period, it was still in
charge of the Lords of the Flame who, in the middle of
the last Revolution of the Saturn Period, awakened in
man the germ of the divine spirit.

They had previously given the germ of the dense body
and, in the first half of the Saturn Revolution of the Sun
Period, were concerned with certain improvements to be
made upon it.

In the Sun Period the formation of the vital body was
to be commenced, with all thereby implied of capability
for assimilation, growth, propagation, glands, ete.

The Lords of the Flame incorporated in the germ of


THE WORK OF EVOLUTION Pilal


the dense body only the capability of evolving sense organs.
At the time now under consideration it became necessary
to change the germ in such a way as to allow of inter-
penetration by a vital body, also capability of evolving
glands and an alimentary canal. This was done by the
joint action of the Lords of the Flame, who gave the
original germ, and the Lords of Wisdom, who took charge
of material evolution in the Sun Period.

The Lords of Wisdom, who were not so highly evolved
as the Lords of the Flame, worked to complete their own
evolution; therefore they received the assistance of an
order of exalted Beings who, like the Lords of the Flame,
acted of their own free will. In esoteric parlance they are
called the Cherubim. These exalted Beings did not, how~
ever, become active in the work until it was necessary to
awaken the germ of the second spiritual principle of our
man-in-the-making, as the Lords of Wisdom were quite
capable of doing the work connected with the vital body
which was to be added to the constitution of man in the
Sun Period, but not of awakening the second spiritual
principle.

When the Lords of the Flame and the Lords of Wisdom
had, in the Saturn Revolution of the Sun Period, con-
jointly reconstructed the germinal dense body, the Lords
of Wisdom, in the second Revolution, started the proper
work of the Sun Period by radiating from their own
bodies the germ of the vital body, making it capable of
inter-penetrating the dense body and giving to the germ
the capability of furthering growth and propagation and
of exciting the sense centers of the dense body and causing
it to move. In short, they gave, germinally, to the vital
body all the faculties which it is now unfolding to vevome
a perfect and pliable instrument for the use of the spirit.


219 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


This work occupied the second, third, fourth and fifth
Revolutions of the Sun Period. In the sixth Revolution
the Cherubim entered and awakened the germ of the
second aspect of the threefold spirit in man—the life-
spirit. In the seventh and last Revolution the newly
awakened germ of the life spirit was linked to the ger-
minal divine spirit, and this was still further worked
upon.

We remember that in the Saturn Period our conscious-
ness was similar to the trance condition. By the activity
of the Sun Period this was modified until it became like
the consciousness of dreamless sleep.

Evolution in the Sun Period added to the constitution
of the evolving embryonic man, the next highest and the
next lowest of his present vehicles. As the result of the
Saturn Period he possessed a germinal dense body and
divine spirit. At the end of the Sun Period he possessed
a germinal dense body, vital body, divine spirit and life
spirit, i. e., a twofold spirit and a twofold body.

We also note that, as the first, or Saturn Revolution, of
any Period is concerned with work in the dense body
(because that was started in a first Revolution), so the
second, or Sun Revolution, of any Period is concerned
with improvements on the vital body, because it was
started in a second Revolution. In like manner, the sixth
Revolution of any Period is dedicated to some work on
the life spirit, and any seventh Revolution is particularly
concerned with matters connected with the divine spirit.

in the Saturn Period man-in-the-making went through
a mineral stage of existence. That is to say, he had a
dense body only in the sense as had the mineral. His
consciousness was also similar to that of the present
mineral.


THE WORK OF EVOLUTION 213


In the same way, and for analogous reasons, it may be
said that in the Sun Period man went through the plant
existence. He had a dense body and a vital body, as
plants have, and his consciousness, like theirs, was that
of dreamless sleep. The student will fully grasp this
analogy by referring to diagram 4 in the chapter on the
four kingdoms, where the vehicles of consciousness pos-
sessed by mineral, plant, animal and man are schema-
tically shown, with the particular consciousness result-
ing from their possession in each case. ©

When the Sun Period was past there came another
Cosmie Night of assimilation, together with the sub-
jective activity necessary before the opening of the
Moon Period. This was equal in length to the preced-
ing Period of objective manifestation.

THE Moon PErtop.

As the chief characteristic feature of the dark Sa-
turn Globes was described by the term ‘‘warmth,’’ and
that of the Sun period Globes as ‘‘light,’’ or glowing
heat, so the chief characteristic feature of the Globes
of the Moon Period may be best described by the term
““moisture.” There was no air such as we know. In
the center was the hot fiery core. Next to that, and con-
sequent upon contact with the cold of outside space,
there was dense moisture. By contact with the fiery
central core the dense moisture was changed into hot
steam, which rushed outward to cool, and sink again
toward the center. Therefore the occult scientist calls
the Globes of the Moon Period ‘‘water,’’ and describes
the atmosphere of that time as ‘‘fire-fog.’’ That was
the scene of the next forward step of the evolving life.

The Moon Period work was that of acquiring the


214 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


germ of a desire body and starting the germinal activity
of the third aspect of the threefold spirit in man—the
human spirit—the Ego.

In the middle of the seventh Revolution of the Sun
Period, the Lords of Wisdom took charge of the germin-
al life spirit given by the Cherubim in the sixth Revolu-
tion of the Sun Period. They did this for the purpose of
linking it to the divine spirit. Their greatest activity in
this work was reached in the Cosmic Night intervening
between the Sun and the Moon Periods. In the first
dawn of the Moon Period, as the life wave started upon
its new pilgrimage, the Lords of Wisdom reappeared,
bearing with them the germinal vehicles of the evolving
man. In the first or Saturn Revolution of the Moon
Period, they co-operated with the ‘‘Lords of Individu-
ality,’’ who had special charge of the material evolution
of the Moon Period. Together they reconstructed the
germ of the dense body, brought over from the Sun Per-
iod. This germ had unfolded embryonic sense organs,
digestive organs, glands, ete., and was inter-penetrated
by a budding vital body which diffused a certain degree
of life into the embryonic dense body. Of course, it was
not solid and visible as it is now, yet in a crude sort of
way it was somewhat organized and is perfectly distin-
guishable to the trained clairvoyant sight of the com-
petent investigator who searches the memory of nature
for scenes in that far-off past.

In the Moon Period it was necessary to reconstruct
the dense body to make it capable of being inter-pene-
trated by a desire body, and also capable of evolving a
nervous system, muscle, cartilage and a rudimentary
skeleton. This reconstruction was the work of the Sa-
turn Revolution of the Moon Period.

In the second, or Sun Revolution, the vital body was


THE WORK OF EVOLUTION 215


also modified to render it capable of being inter-penetrated
by a desire body, also of accommodating itself to the nerv-
ous system, muscle, skeleton, etc. The Lords of Wisdom,
who were the originators of the vital body, also helped the
Lords of Individuality with this work.

In the third Revolution the proper Moon work com-
menced. The Lords of Individuality radiated from them-
selves the substance which they helped the unconscious,
evolving man to appropriate and build into a germinal de-
sire body. They also helped him to incorporate this germ-
inal desire body in the compound vital body and dense
body which he already possessed. This work was carried
on all through the third and fourth Revolutions of the
Moon Period.

As with the Lords of Wisdom, so with the Lords of
Individuality ; though exalted far above man, they worked
on and in him to complete their own evolution. While
they were capable of dealing with the lower vehicle, they
were powerless in regard to the higher. They could not
give the spiritual impulse necessary to the awakening of
the third aspect of the threefold spirit in man. Therefore
another class of Beings who were beyond the necessity of
evolving in such an evolution as we are passing through—
who also worked of their own free will, as did the Lords
of the Flame and the Cherubim—came in during the
fifth Revolution of the Moon Period, to help man. They
are called “Seraphim.” They awakened the germ of the
third aspect of the spirit—the human spirit.

In the sixth Revolution of the Moon Period the Cheru
bim reappeared and co-operated with the Lords of Indi-
niduality to link the newly acquired germ of the human
apirit to the life spirit.

In the seventh Revolution of the Moon Period the Lords


216 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


of the Flame again came to the aid of man, helping the
Lords of Individuality to link the human spirit to the
divine spirit. Thus the separate Ego—the threefold spirit
—came into existence.

Before the beginning of the Saturn Period the virgin
spirits who are now man, were in the World of Virgin
Spirits, and were “All-conscious” as God in whom (not
from whom), they were differentiated. They were not
“self” conscious however. The attainment of that faculty
is partly the object of evolution which plunges the virgin
spirit into a sea of matter of gradually increasing density
which eventually shuts it from the All-consciousness.

Thus, in the Saturn Period the virgin spirits were im-
mersed iu the World of Divine Spirit and encased in the
tiniest film of that substance which they partially pene-
trated by the help of the Lords of Flame.

In the Sun Period the virgin spirit was plunged into the
denser World of Life Spirit and more effectively blinded to
the All-consciousness by a second veil of the substance of
the World of Life Spirit. Still, by the help of the Cheru-
bim it partially penetrated this second veil also. The
feeling of the Oneness of All was not lost either, for the
World of Life Spirit is still a universal World common
to and inter-penetrating all the planets of a Solar System.

In the Moon Period, however, the virgin spirits take a
further dip into the still denser matter of the Region of
Abstract Thought and here the most opaque of its veils,
the human spirit, is added. Henceforth the All-conscious-
ness of tne virgin spirit is lost. It can no longer penetrate
its veils, look outwards and perceive others, so it is forced
to turn its consciousness inwards and there it finds its self,
as the Ego, separated and apart from all others.

Thus the virgin spirit is encased in a threefold veil, and


THE WORK OF EVOLUTION 217


as its outermost veil, the human spirit, effectively blinds
it to the oneness of Life, it becomes the Ego by enter-
taining the illusion of separateness contracted during
involution. Evolution will gradually dissolve the illu-
sion, bring back the All-consciousness, and Self-con-
sciousness will have been added.

Thus we see that at the close of the Moon Period man
possessed a threefold body in varying stages of develop-
ment; and also the germ of the threefold spirit. He had
dense, vital, and desire bodies, and divine, life and hu-
man spirit. All he lacked was the link to connect them.

It has been stated that man passed through the min-
eral stage in the Saturn Period; through the plant stage
in the Sun Period, and his pilgrimage through the con-
ditions of the Moon Period corresponds to the phase of
animal existence, for the same reason that the two other
similes are applicable—he had the dense, vital, and de-
sire bodies, as have our present animals, and his con-
sclousness was an internal picture-consciousness, such
as the lower animals have today. This resembles the
dream consciousness of man, save that it is perfectly ra-
tional, being directed by the group-spirit of the animals.
The student is again referred to diagram 4 in the chap-
ter on the four kingdoms, where this is shown.

These Moon beings were not so purely germinal as in
the previous Periods. To the trained clairvoyant they
appear suspended by strings in the atmosphere of the
fire-fog, as the embryo hangs from the placenta by the
umbilical cord. Currents (common to all of them),
which provided some sort of nourishment, flowed in
and out from the atmosphere through those cords.
These currents were thus, to some extent, similar in
their function to the blood of the present day.
The name ‘‘blood’’ as applied to these currents, how-


218 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


ever, is used merely to suggest an analogy, because the
Beings of the Moon Period possessed nothing like our
present red blood, which is one of the very latest ac-
quisitions of man.

Towards the end of the Moon Period there was a div-
ision of the Globe which was the field of our and other
evolutions, which, for the sake of greater simplicity, we
have not heretofore mentioned, but with which we shall
presently become acquainted.

Part of that great Globe was erystallized by man
on account of his inability to keep the part which he in-
habited in the high state of vibration maintained by the
other beings there, and as this part became more inert
the centrifugal force of the revolving Globe sent it spin-
ning into space, where it began to circle around the
glowing fiery central portion.

The spiritual reason for the throwing off of such erys-
tallizations is that the highest beings on such a Globe
require for their evolution the exceedingly rapid vi-
brations of fire. They are hampered by condensa-
tion, although such a condition is necessary to the evo-
lution of other and less advanced beings requiring low-
er rates of vibration. Therefore, when part of any
Globe has been consolidated by a group of evolving be-
ings to the detriment of others, that part is thrown
off to exactly the proper distance from the central mass,
so that it circles as a satellite around its primary. The
heat vibrations which strike it are of the rate and
strength suitable to the peculiar needs of the beings
evolving upon that satellite. Of course the law of gravi-
tation accounts quite satisfactorily for the phenomenon
from a physical viewpoint. But there is always a deep-
er cause, that yields a more complete explanation and
which we will find if we consider the spiritual side of


THE WORK OF EVOLUTION 219


things. As a physical action is but the visible manifestation
of the invisible thought which must precede it, so is the
throwing off of a planet from a central Sun simply the
visible and unavoidable effect of invisible spiritual
conditions.

The smaller planet which was thrown off in the Moon
Period, condensed with comparative rapidity and remained
the field of our evolution until the end of that Period.
It was a moon to the parent planet, circling around it as
our Moon circles around the Earth, but it did not show
phases as our Moon does. It revolved in such a manner
that one-half was always light and the other always dark,
as is the case with Venus. One of its poles was pointed
directly towards the large fiery Globe, as one of the poles
of Venus points directly towards the Sun.

On this satellite of the Moon Period there were currents
which encircled it, as the group-spirit currents encircle the
Earth. The Moon beings followed those currents instinct-
ively from the light to the dark side of this old Moon. At
certain times of the year, when they were on the light side,
a sort of propagation took place. We have the atavistic
residue of those moon travels for propagation in the migra-
tions of the birds of passage which, to the present day,
follow the group-spirit currents around the Earth at cer-
tain seasons of the year, for identical purposes. Even the
(honey) moon trips of human beings show that man him-
self has not yet outgrown the migratory impulse in connec-
tion with mating.

The Moon beings at this last stage were also capable
of giving utterance to sounds, or cries. These were Cosmic
sounds—not expressions of individual joy or sorrow, for
as yet there was no individual. The development of the
individual came later—in the Earth Period.


220 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


At the end of the Moon Period once more came the
interval of rest, the Cosmic Night. The divided parts
were dissolved and merged in the general Chaos which
preceded the reorganization of the Globe for the Earth
Period.

The Lords of Wisdom had now evolved so far, that
they were capable of taking charge as the highest crea-
tive Hierarchy. They were given special charge of the
divine spirit in man during the Earth Period.

The Lords of Individuality were also sufficiently ad-
vanced to work upon the spirit in man and the life spir-
it was therefore put under their charge.

Another creative Hierarchy had special care of the
three germs of the dense, vital, and desire bodies as they
were evolving. They were the ones who, under the di-
rection of the higher orders, actually did the principal
work on these bodies, using the evolving life as a kind
of instrument. This Hierarchy is called the ‘‘Lords of
Form.’’ They were now evolved so far that they were
given charge of the third aspect of the spirit in man—
the human spirit—in the coming Earth Period.

There were twelve great Creative Hierarchies active
in the work of evolution at the commencement of the
Saturn Period. Two of these Hierarchies did some
work to help at the very beginning. No information has
been given as to what they did, nor anything about
them, except that they helped of their own free will,
and then withdrew from limited existence into libera-
tion.

Three more of the Creative Hierarchies followed them
at the beginning of the Earth Period, the Lords of the
Flame, the Cherubim and the Seraphim, leaving seven
Hierarchies in active service when the Harth Period


THE WORK OF EVOLUTION 221


began. (Diagram 9 will give a clear idea of the twelve
Creative Hierarchies and their status).


Diagram 9.
The Twelve Great Creative Hierarchies.
Zodiacal Sign. Name. Status.
eerATICSs. 5... 5,5 Nameless....... The first and second or-
2 - Taurus.... Nameless.......ders are said to have


passed beyond the ken of
anyone on Earth. It is
known that they gave
some assistance at the
beginning of our evolu-
tion.


The three following orders worked
of their own free will to help man
during the three periods which pre-
ceded the Earth Period. They have
also passed to liberation:

38 - Gemini..... Seraphim...... who, in the Moon Period,
aroused in man-in-the
making the germ of the
human spirit—the Ego,

4 - Cancer..... Cherubim...... who, in the Sun Period,
aroused the germ of the
life spirit.

5 - Leo.... Lords of Flame..... who, in the Saturn Per-
jod, aroused the germ of
the divine spirit and gave
the germ of the dense
body.

The following Seven Creative Hier-
archies are active in the Earth Period:

6 - Virgo.... Lords of Wisdom..who, in the Sun Period,
started the vital body.

7 - Libra.Lords of Individuality. who, in the Moon Period,
started the desire body.

8 - Scorpio.... Lords of Form..who have special charge
of human evolution in
the Earth Period.

9 - Sagittarius..Lords of Mind..the humanity of the
Saturn Period.

10-Capricornus .. Archangels..the humanity of the
Sun Period.

11- Aquarius ..... Angels..... the humanity of the
Moon Period.

12- Pisces .. The Virgin Spirits. who are the humanity of
the present Earth Period.


292. THE ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


The Lords of Mind became experts at building bodies of
“mind-stuff” as we are becoming experts at building bodies
of chemical matter, and for a similar reason: The Region
of Concrete Thought was the densest condition of matter
reached during the Saturn Period where they were human
and the Chemical Region is the densest state to be con-
tacted by our humanity.

In the Earth Period the Lords of Mind reached the
Creator-stage, and radiated from themselves into our being
the nucleus of material from which we are now seeking to
build an organized mind. They are called “Powers of
Darkness” by Paul because they came from the dark Saturn
Period, and are considered evil on account of the sepa-
rative tendency appertaining to the plane of Reason as
contrasted with the unifying forces of the World of Life
Spirit; the realm of Love. The Lords of Mind work with
humanity; but not with the three lower Kingdoms.

.The Archangels became experts at building a body of
desire-stuff: the densest matter of the Sun Period. There-
fore they are able to teach and guide such less evolved
beings as man and animal how to mold and use a desire-
body.

The Angels are thoroughly experienced in building a
vital body for in the Moon period when they were human
the ether was the densest condition of matter. On account
of this ability they are properly the teachers of man, animal
and plant with regard to the vital functions: propagation,
nutrition, etc.


CHAPTER IX.
STRAGGLERS AND NEWCOMERS.


N following through the preceding chapter the evolution
of life, consciousness and form—the triple phase of
manifestation of the virgin spirit—which is the life

that gathers the form about itself and gains consciousness
thereby, we have spoken as though there were only one
class; as though the virgin spirits, without exception, had
made constant and uniform progress.

This was done for the sake of simplicity, because strag-
glers there were, as there are in any great body or
company.

In school there are, every year, those who fail to reach
the standard required for promotion into a higher grade.
Similarly, in every Period of Evolution, there are those
who fall behind because they have not attained the stand-
ard necessary to pass onward to the next higher stage.

Even so early as the Saturn Period there were some who
failed to improve sufficiently to take the next forward step.
At that stage the Higher Beings were working with the
life, which was itself unconscious, but that unconscious-
ness did not prevent the retardation of some of the virgin
spirits who were not so pliable, nor so readily adaptable
as others.

In that one word “Adaptability,” we have the great


secret of advancement or retardation. All progress depends
223


224 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


upon whether an evolving being is flexible, adaptable
and pliable, so.as to be able to accommodate itself to
new conditions, or whether it is crystallized, set, and in-
eapable of alteration. Adaptability is the quality which
makes for progress, whether an entity is at a high or a
low stage of evolution. Lack of it is the cause of the re-
tardation of the spirit and retrogression of the Form.
This applies to the past, present and future, the division
of the qualified and the unqualified, thus, being made
with the exact and impersonal justice of the law of Con-
sequence. There never was, or ever shall be any ar-
bitrary distinction made between the ‘‘sheep’’ and the
*“ goats.’

The hardened unresponsive condition of some of the
Saturn beings prevented the awakening of the divine
spirit within them, therefore they remained simply min-
eral, all they had gained being the germinal dense body.

Thus there were two classes, or kingdoms, in the Sun
Period, i.e., the stragglers of the Saturn Period, who
were still mineral, and the pioneers of the Saturn Per-
iod, who were capable of receiving the germ of a vital
body and becoming plant-like.

In addition to those two kingdoms there was also a
third—a new life wave, which was just commencing its
activity at the beginning of the Sun Period. (That is
the life wave which now ensouls our animals).

The matter into which the new life wave entered, to-
gether with the stragglers of the Saturn Period, com-
posed the mineral kingdom of the Sun Period. There
was, however, a great difference in those two sub-divi-
sions of the second kingdom. It is possible for the
stragglers to make a ‘‘spurt’’ and overtake the pioneers,
who are now our humanity, but impossible for the new
life wave of the Sup Period to do that. It will reach


STRAGGLERS AND NEWCOMERS 225


a stage corresponding to the human, but under very dit-
ferent conditions.

The division of stragglers and pioneers took place in
the seventh Revolution of the Saturn Period, when the
divine spirit was awakened by the Lords of the Flame.
Then it was found that some of the evolving entities were
in such an unresponsive, hardened condition that it was
impossible to arouse them. They therefore remained with-
out the spark of spirit upon which their progress depended
and they were obliged to remain at the same level, being
unable to follow the others in whom the spiritual spark
was awakened. ‘Truly, truly, all that we are or are not is
the result of our own effort, or our own inaction.

These stragglers and the newly arrived life wave formed
dark spots in the otherwise glowing gas sphere which was
the densest Globe of the Sun Period, and our present Sun-
spots are an atavistic remainder of that condition.

In the sixth Revolution of the Sun Period the life spirit
was awakened by the Cherubim, and again it was found
that some who had safely passed the critical point in the
Saturn Period, had fallen behind in the Sun Period and
were unfit to have the second aspect of the spirit vivified,
Thus there were another class of stragglers, who had
lagged behind the crest wave of evolution.

In the seventh Revolution of the Sun Period the Lords
of the Flame reappeared to awaken the divine spirit in
those who failed to qualify for it at the end of the Saturn
Period, but had attained to the point where they could
receive the spiritual impulse in the Sun Period. The
Lords of the Flame also awakened the germ of divine
spirit in as many of the new life wave entities as were
ready, but here also there were stragglers.


8


926 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Thus at the beginning of the Moon Period there were
the following classes:


1—The Pioneers who had successfully passed through the Saturn
and the Sun Periods. They had dense and vital bodies,
divine and life spirit germinally active.

2—The Stragglers of the Sun Period, who had dense and vital
bodies, also divine spirit—all germinal.

38—The Stragglers of the Saturn Period, who had-been promoted
in the seventh Revolution of the Sun Period. They had
the germ of dense body and divine spirit.

4—The Pioneers of the new Life Wave, who had the same vehicles
as class 3, but belong to a different scheme of evolution
from ours.

5—The Stragglers of the new Life Wave, who had only the germ
for the dense body.

6—-A. New Life Wave, which entered upon its evolution at the
beginning of the Moon Period and is the life that en-
souls our plants of the present day.


It is necessary to remember that Nature hastens slowly.
She makes no sudden changes in forms. To her, time is
nothing; the attainment of perfection is everything. A
mineral does not change to a plant at one bound, but by
gradual, almost imperceptible degrees. A plant does not
become an animal in a night. It requires millions of years
to bring about the change. Thus at all times there are all
stages and gradations to be found in nature. The Ladder
of Being stretches without break from protoplasm to God.

Therefore we have to deal, not with six different king-
tloms corresponding to the above six classes which entered
the arena of evolution at the beginning of the Moon
Period, but with three kingdoms only—mineral, plant and
animal.

The lowest class in the Moon Period composed the new
life stream which there commenced its evolution. It
formed the hardest mineral part, yet it must be borne in
mind that it was by no means as hard as the mineral of
the present time, but only about as dense as our wood.


STRAGGLERS AND NEWCOMERS 2%


This statement does not contradict former ones which
described the Moon as watery, nor does it conflict with
diagram 8, showing the densest Globe in the Moon Period
as located in the Etheric Region, which is etheric. As
before stated, the fact that the path of evolution is spiral
prevents any condition ever being duplicated. There are
similarities, but never reproductions of identical eonditions.
It is not always possible to describe conditions in exact
terms. The best available term is used to convey an idea
of the conditions existing at the time under consideration.

Class 5 in our list was nearly mineral, yet on account
of having passed through and beyond the mineral condi-
tion during the Sun Period, it had some plant charac-
teristics.

Class 4 was almost plant and did evolve to a plant before
the close of the Moon Period. It was, however, more
nearly allied to the mineral kingdom than the next two
classes, which formed the higher kingdom. We may there-
fore group classes 4 and 5 together, as forming a sort of
half step, a “mineral-plant” kingdom, which composed the
surface of the ancient planet of the Moon Period. It was
something like our present peat, which is also a state
between the mineral and the plant. It was soggy and wet,
consistent with the statement that the Moon Period was
watery.

Thus the fourth, fifth and sixth classes composed the
different gradations of the mineral kingdom in the Moon
Period—the highest being nearly plant and the lowest
the hardest mineral substance of that time.

Classes 2 and 3 formed the plant kingdom, though they
were both really more than plants, yet were not quite
animal. They grew in the mineral-plant soil; they were
stationary like plants; yet they could not have grown in a


998 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


purely mineral soil, as our plants do now. Good examples
of what they were like may be found in our parasitic plants,
which cannot grow in a purely mineral soil, but seek the
food already specialized by a real plant or tree.

Class 1 was composed of the pioneers of the life wave
of virgin spirits. In the Moon Period they were going
through a sort of animal-like existence. Yet they were
like the animals of our time only in so far as they had the
same vehicles and were under the control of a group-
spirit, which included the whole human family. In ap-
pearance they were very different from our present animals,
as shown by the partial description given in the previous
chapter. They did not touch the surface of the planet,
but floated suspended by umbilical-like cords. Instead
of lungs they had a gill-like apparatus through which they
breathed the hot steamy “fire-fog.” These features of the
Moon existence are still recapitulated by the embryo dur
ing the period of gestation. At certain stages of develop-
ment it has the gills. The Moon beings at that time had
also the horizontal spine of the animal.

During the Moon Period several more divisions of classes
occurred than in the preceding periods, because there were,
of course, stragglers who failed to keep abreast of the crest-
wave of evolution. As a result there were, at the begin-
ning of the Earth Period, 5 classes, some ot them contain-
ing several divisions, as diagram 10 will show. ‘These divi-
sions occurred at the following times and for the follow-
ing reasons:

In the middle of the fifth Revolution of the Moon Period,
ven the Seraphim bestowed the germ of the human spirit
upon the pioneers who had fitted themselves to pass on,
some were found wanting when weighed in the balance


STRAGGLERS AND NEWCOMERS 999


and therefore unfit to receive the spiritual impulse which
awakened the threefold spirit.

In the sixth Revolution of the Moon Period the Cheru-
bim reappeared and vivified the life spirit of those who
had been left behind in the Sun Period but had since
‘reached the necessary stage of development (Class 2 in
our previous list), and also in those stragglers of the Sun
Period who had now evolved a vital body during their
plant existence in the Moon Period. (These latter were
class 3 in the previous list.)

Class 4 in the previous list had been going through a
low stage of plant existence; nevertheless the majority
of them had evolved the vital body sufficiently to allow
of the awakening of the life spirit.

Thus, the three last named all possessed the same ve-
hicles at the beginning of the Earth Period, although only
the two first named (classes 38a and 3b in diagram 10)
belong to our life wave, and have a chance of even yet
overtaking us if they pass the critical point which will
come in the next Revolution of the Earth Period. Those
who cannot pass that point will be held over until some
future evolution reaches a stage where they can drop in
and proceed with their development in a new human pe-
riod. They will be debarred from going forward with our
humanity because it will be advanced so far beyond their
status that it would prove a serious clog to our progress
to drag them along. They will not be destroyed, but
simply held in waiting for another period of evolution.

Progression with our present wave of evolution is what
is meant when ‘‘salvation’’ is spoken of in the Christian
religion, and it is something to be earnestly sought, for
though the ‘‘eternal damnation’’ of those who are not
*“saved’’ does not mean destruction nor endless torture, it


230


DIAGRAM 10


ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Showing the different classes of the several life waves which are
evolving in the four kingdoms of the earth; their status at the
beginning of the earth period and the vehicles they then possessed ;
also their present status.


CLASS VEHICLES PRESENT STATE
1—Pioneers of theDivine ) Dense ))
Saturn, Sun and)Life fee Vital body |The Aryan Races
Moon Periods....... {Human Desire J
Divine Dense The Mongolians, Af-
2—The | Stragulers of spirit, Vital body | rieans, and all lower
the Moon Period... Life Desire J Races
8—(a) The Stragglers'!
of the Saturn Pe-
PIG ich acy sinale sesh \Divine Dense
\ ae
(b) The Stragglers; spirit phody Anthropoids
of the Sun Period..|Life Vital J
All the/jabove belong to our!life wave


(c) Pioneers of the
new Sun life wave.


Same as 3a and 3b


Animals


4—(a) Stragglers of
the new Sun life
wave


(b) Pioneers of the
new Moon life wave


Divine spirit Dense body


Same as 4a


Plant Kingdom


‘Trees and perennials


Flowers and grasses


5—(a) Stragglers of
the new Moon life
WAVE) Uti icuenetecae


(b) The new life
wave of the Earth,
Period


\Dense body only


‘Dense Lody only; same as 5a..


Mineral Kingdom


Sand, soft soils, ete.


Mountains, rocks, ete.


STRAGGLERS AND NEWCOMERS 231


is nevertheless a very serious matter to be held in a state
of inertia for inconceivable milliards of years, before a
new evolution shall have progressed to such a stage that
those who fail here can have an opportunity to proceed.
The spirit is not conscious of the lapse of time, but it is
none the less a serious loss, and there must also be a
feeling of unhomelikeness when at last such spirits find
themselves in a new evolution.

So far as the present humanity is concerned, that pos-
sibility is so small as to be almost negligible. It is said,
however, that of the total number of virgin spirits which
started evolution in the Saturn Period, only about
three-fifths will pass that critical point in the next Rev-
olution and go on to the end.

The greatest apprehension of occult scientists is ma-
terialism, which if carried too far, not only prevents
progress but will destroy all the seven vehicles of the
virgin spirit, leaving it naked. Such an one will then
have to commence at the very beginning of the new evo-
lution. All the work it has done since the dawn of the
Saturn Period will have been utterly wasted. For this
reason, the present period is to our humanity, the most
critical of all. Therefore occult scientists speak of the
Sixteen Races, of which the Germano-Anglo-Saxon is
one, as ‘‘the sixteen possibilities for destruction.’’ May
the reader safely pass them all, for their grip is worse
than the retardation in the next Revolution.

Speaking generally, class 5 in the foregoing list was
given the germ of the divine spirit during the seventh
Revolution, when the Lords of Flame reappeared.
Therefore they were pioneers of the last life wave, en-
tering evolution at the Moon Period. They passed their


939 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


minerai existence there. The stragglers of that life wave
were thus left with only the germ of a dense body.

In addition to the above, there was also a new life wave
(our present mineral kingdom) entering upon its evolution
at the beginning of the Earth Period.

At the end of the Moon Period these classes possessed
the vehicles as they are classified in diagram 10, and started
with them in the beginning of the Earth Period. During
the time which has elapsed since then, the human kingdom
has been evolving the link of mind, and has thereby
attained full waking consciousness. T'he animals have
obtained a desire body; the plants a vital body; the strag-
glers of the life wave which entered evolution in the Moon
Period have escaped the hard and fast conditions of rock
formation and now their dense bodies compose our softer
soils; while the life wave that entered evolution here in
the Earth Period forms the hard rocks and stones.

Thus have the different classes obtained the vehicles
ascribed to them in diagram 3, ta which the reader is
referred.


CHAPTER X.
THe Karty PERIoD


HE Globes of the Earth Period are located in the

four densest states of matter—the Region of Con-

crete Thought, the Desire World, the Etheric, and the

Chemical Regions (See Diagram 8). The densest Globe
(Globe D) is our present Earth.

When we speak of ‘‘the densest Worlds,’’ or the ‘‘dens-
est states of matter,’’ the term must be taken in a rela-
tive sense. Otherwise it would imply a limitation
in the absolute, and that is absurd. Dense and attenuated,
up and down, east and west, are applicable only rela-
tively to our own status or position. As there are higher,
finer Worlds than those touched by our life wave, so there
are also denser states of matter which are the fields of
evolution for other classes of beings. Nor must it be
thought that these denser worlds are elsewhere in space;
they are interpenetrated by our worlds in a manner simi-
lar to that in which the higher Worlds interpenetrate this
Earth. The fancied solidity of the Earth and the forms
we see are no bar to the passage of a denser body any
more than our solid dense walls bar the passage of a hu-
man being clothed in his desire body. Neither is solidity
synonymous with density, as may be illustrated by
aluminum, a solid which is less dense than the fluidic
mercury; nevertheless the latter, in spite of its density,
will evaporate or exude through many solids.

This being the fourth Period, we have at present four

233


934 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


elements. In the Saturn Period there was but one element,
Fire—i. e., there was warmth, or heat, which is incipient
fire. In the second, or Sun Period, there were two ele-
ments, Fire and Air. In the third, or Moon Period, there
were three elements, Water being added; and in the fourth,
or Earth Period, was added the fourth element, Karth.
Thus it will be seen that a new element was added for
each Period.

In the Jupiter Period an element of a spiritual nature
will be added, which will unite with the speech so that
words will invariably carry with them understanding—
not misunderstanding, as is frequently the case now. For
instance, when one says “house,” he may mean a cottage,
while the hearer may get the idea of a tenement flat
building.

To this environment of the four elements, as specified
above, the different classes mentioned in diagram 10 were
brought over by the Hierarchies in charge of them. We
remember that in the Moon Period these classes formed
three kingdoms—animal, animal-plant and plant-mineral.
Here on Earth, however, the conditions are such that there
can be no large half-way classes. There must be four dis-
tinctly different kingdoms. In this crystallized phase of
existence the lines between them must be more sharply
drawn than was the case in former Periods, where one king-
dom gradually merged into the next. Therefore some of
the classes mentioned in diagram 10 advanced one-half
step, while others went back half a step.

Some of the mineral-plants advanced completely into
the plant kingdom and became the verdure of the fields,
Others went down and became the purely mineral soil in
which the plants grew. Of the plant-animals some ad-
vanced into the animal kingdom, ahead of time, and those


THE EARTH PERIOD 235


species have yet the colorless plant-blood, and some, like
star-fishes, have even the five points like the petals of
flowers.

All of class 2 whose desire bodies could be divided into
two parts (as was the case with all of class 1) were fitted
to become human vehicles and were therefore advanced
into the human group.

We must carefully remember that in the above para-
graphs we are dealing with Form, not with the Life which
dwells in the Form. The instrument is graded to suit the
life that is to dwell in it. Those of class 2, in whose
vehicles the above mentioned division could be made were
raised to the human kingdom, but were given the indwell-
ing spirit at a point in time later than class 1. Hence,
they are not now so far evolved as class 1, and are there-
fore the lower races of mankind.

Those whose desire bodies were incapable of division
were put into the same division as classes 3a and 3b. They
are our present anthropoids. These may yet overtake our
evolution if they reach a sufficient degree of advancement
before the critical point already mentioned, which will
come in the middle of the fifth Revolution. If they do not
overtake us by that time, they will have lost touch with
our evolution.

It was said that man had built his threefold body by
the help of others higher than he, but in the previous
Period there was no co-ordinating power; the threefold
spirit, the Ego, was separate and apart from its vehicles.
Now the time had come to unite the spirit and the body.

Where the desire body separated, the higher part became
somewhat master over the lower part and over the dense
and vital bodies. It formed a sort of animal-soul with
which the spirit could unite by means of the link of mind.


236 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Where there was no division of the desire body, the vehicle
was given over to desires and passions without any check,
and could therefore not be used as a vehicle within which
the spirit could dwell. So it was put under the control of a
group-spirit which ruled it from without. It became an
animal body, and that kind has now degenerated into the
body of the anthropoid.

Where there was a division of the desire body, the dense
body gradually assumed a vertical position, thus taking
the spine out of the horizontal currents of the Desire
World in which the group-spirit acts upon the animal
through the horizontal spine. The Ego could then enter,
work in and express itself through the vertical spine and
build the vertical larynx and brain for its adequate expres-
sion in the dense body. A horizontal larynx is also under
the domination of the group-spirit. While it is true that
some animals, as the starling, raven, parrot, etc., previ-'
ously mentioned, are able, because of the possession of a
vertical larynx, to utter words, they cannot use them under-
standingly. The use of words to express thought is the
highest human privilege and can be exercised only by a
reasoning, thinking entity like man. If the student will
keep this in mind, it will be easier to follow the different
steps which lead up to this result.

THE SATURN REVOLUTION OF THE HEARTH PERIOD.

This is the Revolution during which, in each Period,
the dense body is reconstructed. This time it was given the
ability to form a brain and become a vehicle for the germ
of mind which was to be added later. This addition
constituted the final reconstruction of the dense body, ren-
dering it capable of attaining the highest degree of effi-
ciency possible to such a vehicle.

Unspeakable Wisdom has been employed in its construe-


THE EARTH PERIOD 237


tion. Itisa marvel. It can never be sufficiently im-
pressed upon the mind of the student what immeasur.
able facilities for the gaining of knowledge are contain-
ed in this instrument, and what a great boon it is to
man; how much he should prize it and how thankful he
should be to have it.

Some examples of the perfection of construction and
intelligent adaptability displayed in this instrument
have previously been given, but in order to further im-
press this great truth upon the mind of the student, it
might not be out of place to illustrate more fully this
Wisdom, also the work of the Ego in the blood.

It is generally known, in a vague kind of way, that
the gastric juice acts upon the food to promote assimila-
tion; but only a very few people, outside of the medical
profession, are aware that there are many different gas-
trie juices, each appropriate to the treatment of a cer-
tain kind of food. The researches of Pavloff, however,
have established the fact beyond doubt, that there is
one kind of juice for the digestion of meat, another for
milk, another for acid fruit, ete. That fact, by the way,
is the reason why all foods do not mix well. Milk, for
instance, requires a gastric juice that is widely differ-
ent from almost any other kind except that required
for the digestion of starchy foods, and is not readily di-
gested with any food other than cereals. This alone
would show marvelous wisdom; that the Ego working
subconsciously is able to select the different juices
which are appropriate to the different kinds of food
taken into the stomach, making each of just the right
strength and quantity to digest the food. What makes
the matter still more wonderful, however, is the fact
that the gastric juice is poured into the stomach in ad-
wance of the food.


238 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


We do not consciously direct the process of mixing this
fluid. The great majority of people know nothing of
metabolism or any other phase of chemistry. So it is not
enough to say that, as we taste what is coming, we direct
the process by means of signals through the nervous
system.

When this fact of the selection of juices was first proven,
scientists were sorely puzzled trying to learn how the right
kind of juice was selected and caused to enter the stomach
before the food. They thought the signal was given along
the nervous system. But it was demonstrated beyond doubt
that the proper juice was poured into the stomach even
though the nervous system was blocked.

At last Starling and Bayliss, in a series of experiments
of brilliant ingenuity, proved that infinitesimal parts of
the food are taken up by the blood as soon as the food en-
ters the mouth, go in advance to the digestive glands and
cause a flow of the proper juice.

This again, is only the physical side of the phenomena.
To understand the whole wonderful connection, we must
turn to occult science. That alone explains why the signal
is carried by the blood.

The blood is one of the highest expressions of the vital
body. The Ego guides and controls its dense instrument
by means of the blood, therefore the blood is also the means
used to act on the nervous system. During some of the
time that digestion is going on, it acts partially through the
nervous system, but (especially at the commencement of
the digestive process) it acts directly upon the stomach.
When, during scientific experiments, the nerves were
blocked, the direct way through the blood was still open and
the Ego derived the necessary information in that way.

It will also be seen that the blood is driven to wherever


THE EARTH PERIOD 239


the Ego unfolds the greatest activity at any time. If a
situation requires sudden thought and action, the biood is
promptly driven to the head. If a heavy meal is to be
digested the greater portion of the blood leaves the head,
centering around the digestive organs. The Ego concen-
trates its efforts on ridding the body of the useless food.
Therefore a man cannot think well after a heavy meal. He
is sleepy because so much blood has left the brain that the
residue is insufficient to carry on the functions necessary
to full waking consciousness, besides, nearly all the vital
fluid or solar energy specialized by the spleen is absorbed
by the blood rushing through that organ after a meal in
greater volume than between meals. Thus the rest of the
system is also deprived of the vital fluid in a large measure
during digestion. It is the Ego that drives the blood into
the brain. Whenever the body goes to sleep, the blood
leaves the brain, as may be proven by placing a man on a
balanced table. When he goes to sleep, the table will
invariably tip towards the feet, raising the head. During
coition the blood is centered in the sex organs, ete. All
these examples tend to prove that during the waking hours,
the Ego works in and controls the dense body by means of
the blood. The larger portion of the total amount goes to
that part of the body where at any given time, the Ego
unfolds any particular activity.

The reconstruction of the dense body in the Saturn
Revolution of the Earth Period was for the purpose of
rendering it capable of inter-penetration by the mind. It
gave the first impulse to the building of the frontal part of
the brain; also the incipient division in the nervous system
which has since become apparent in its subdivisions—the
voluntary and the sympathetic. The latter was the only
one provided’for in the Moon Period. The voluntary nerv«


240 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


ous system (which has transformed the dense body from
a mere automaton acting under stimuli from without, to
an extraordinary adaptable instrument capable of being
guided and controlled by an Ego from within) was not
added until the present Earth Period.

The principal part of this reconstructive work was
done by the Lords of Form. They are the Creative
Hierarchy which is most active in the Earth Period, as
were the Lords of Flame in the Saturn Period, the
Lords of Wisdom in the Sun Period, and the Lords of
Individuality in the Moon Period.

The Earth Period is pre-eminently the Period of
Form, for here the form or matter side of evolution
reaches its greatest and most pronounced state. Here
spirit is more helpless and suppressed and Form is the
most dominant factor—hence the prominence of the
Lords of Form.

THE SuN REVOLUTION OF THE EARTH PERIOD.


During this Revolution the vital body was recon-
structed to accommodate the germinal mind. The vital
body was fashioned more in the likeness of the dense
body, so that it could become fitted for use as the dens-
est vehicle during the Jupiter Period, when the dense
body will have become spiritualized.

The Angels, the humanity of the Moon Period, were
aided by the Lords of Form in reconstruction. The or-
ganization of the vital body is now next in efficiency to
the dense body. Some writers on this subject call the
former a link, and contend that it is simply a mold of
the dense body, and not a separate vehicle.

While not desiring to criticise, and admitting that
this contention is justified by the fact that man, at his
present stage of evolution, cannot ordinarily use the


THE EARTH PERIOD 241


vital body as a separate vehicle—because it always re-
mains with the dense body and to extract it in tuto would
eause the death of the dense body—yet there was a time
when it was not so firmly incorporated with the latter,
as we shall presently see.

During those epochs of our Earth’s history which have
already been mentioned as the Lemurian and the Atlan-
tean, man was involuntarily clairvoyant, and it was pre-
cisely this looseness of connection between the dense and
the vital bodies that made him so. (The Initiators of
that time helped the candidate to loosen the connection
still further, as in the voluntary clairvoyant.)

Since then the vital body has become much more firmly
interwoven with the dense body in the majority of people,
but in all sensitives it is loose. It is that looseness which
constitutes the difference between the psychic and the or-
dinary person who is unconscious of all but the vibrations
contacted by means of the five senses. All human beings
have to pass through this period of close connection of the
vehicles and experience the consequent limitation of con-
sciousness. There are, therefore, two classes of sensitives,
those who have not become firmly enmeshed in matter,
such as the majority of the Hindus, the Indians, ete., who
possess a certain low grade of clairvoyance, or are sensitve
to the sounds of nature, and those who are in the vanguard
of evolution. The latter are emerging from the xcme of
materiality, and are again divisible into two kinds, one of


which develops in a passive, weak-willed manner. By the
help of others they re-awaken the solar plexus or other


organs in connection with the involuntary nervous system.
These are therefore involuntary clairvoyants, mediumswho
have no control of their faculty. They have retrograded.
The other kind is made up of those who by their own wills,


242 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


unfold the vibratory powers of organs now connected with
the voluntary nervous system and thus become trained
occultists, controlling their own bodies and exercising the
clairvoyant faculty as they will to do. They are called
voluntary or trained clairvoyants.

In the Jupiter Period man will function in his vital
body as he now does in his dense body; and as no develop-
ment in nature is sudden, the process of separating the
two bodies has already commenced. The vital body will
then attain a much higher degree of efficiency than the
dense body of today. As it is a much more pliable vehicle,
the spirit will then be able to use it in a manner impossible
of realization in the case of the present dense vehicle.

THE Moon Revo.ution or THE EArtH Perron.

Here the Moon Period was recapitulated, and much the
same conditions prevailed (on an advanced scale) as ob-
tained on Globe D of that Period. There was the same
kind of fire-fog atmosphere; the same fiery core; the same
division of the Globe into twe parts, in order to allow the
more highly evolved beings a chance to progress at the
proper rate and pace, which it would be impossible for
beings such as our humanity to equal.

In that Revolution the Archangels (humanity of the
Sun Period) and the Lords of Form took charge of the
reconstruction of the desire body, but they were not alone
in that work. When the separation of the Globe into two
parts occurred, there was a similar division in the desire
bodies of some of the evolving beings. We have already
noted that where this division took place, the form was
ready to become the vehicle of an indwellng spirit, and in
order to further this purpose the Lords of Mind (humanity
of the Saturn Period) took possession of the higher pare
of the desire body and implanted in it the separate self-


THE EARTH PERIOD 243


hood, without which the present man with all his glorious
possibilities, could never have existed.

Thus in the latter part of the Moon Revolution the
first germ of separate personality was implanted in the
higher part of the desire body by the Lords of Mind.

The Archangels were active in the lower part of the
desire body, giving it the purely animal desires. They
also worked in the desire bodies where there was no divi-
sion. Some of these were to become the vehicles of the
animal group-spirits, which work on them from without,
but do not enter wholly into the animal forms, as the indi-
vidual spirit does into the human body.

The desire body was reconstructed to render it capable of
being interpenetrated by the germinal mind which, during
the Earth Period, will be implanted in all those desire
bodies in which it was possible to make the before-men-
tioned division.

As has been previously explained, the desire body is an
unorganized ovoid, holding the dense body as a dark spot
within its center, as the white of an egg surrounds the yolk.
There are a number of sense centers in the ovoid, which
have appeared since the beginning of the Earth Period. In
the average human being these centers appear merely as
eddies in a current and are not now awake, hence his
desire body is of no use to him as a separate vehicle of con-
sciousness; but when the sense centers are awakened they
look like whirling vortices.

Rest PERiops BETWEEN REVOLUTIONS.


Hitherto we have noted only the Cosmic Nights between
Periods. We saw that there was an interval of rest and
assimilation between the Saturn and the Sun Periods;
another Cosmic Night between the Sun and the Moon


244 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Periods, etc. But in addition to these, there are also rests
between the Revolutions.

We might liken the Periods to the different incarnations
of man; the Cosmic Nights between them to the intervals
between deaths and new births; and the rest between Revo-
lutions would then be analogous to the rest of sleep between
two days.

When a Cosmic Night sets in, all manifested things are
resolved into a homogeneous mass—the Cosmos again
becomes Chaos.

This periodical return of matter to primordial substance
is what makes it possible for the spirit to evolve. Were the
crystallizing process of active manifestation to continue
indefinitely it would offer an insurmountable barrier to the
progress of Spirit. Every time matter has crystallized to
such a degree that it becomes too hard for the spirit to
work in, the latter withdraws to recuperate its exhausted
energy, on the same principle that a power-drill which has
stopped when boring in hard metals, is withdrawn te
regain its momentum. It is then able to bore its way
further into the metal.

Freed from the crystallizing energy of the evolving spir
its, the chemical forces in matter turn Cosmos to Chaos by
restoring matter to its primordial state, that a new start
may be made by the regenerated virgin spirits at the dawn
of a new Day of Manifestation. The experience gained in
former Periods and Revolutions enables the Spirit to build
up to the point last reached, with comparative celerity,
also to facilitate further progress by making such altera-
tions as its cumulative experience dictates.

Thus at the end of the Moon Revolution of the Earth
Period, all the Globes and all life returned to Chaos, re-


THE EARTH PERIOD 245


emerging therefrom at the beginning of the fourth Revo-
lution.
Tue FourtH REVOLUTION oF THE EARTH PERIOD.


In the exceeding complexity of the scheme of evolution,
there are always spirals within spirals, ad infinitum. So
it will not be surprising to learn that in every Revolution
the work of recapitulation and rest is applied to the differ-
ent Globes. When the life wave reappeared on Globe A
in this Revolution, it went through the development of the
Saturn period; then after a rest which, however, did not
involve the complete destruction of the Globe, but only an
alteration, it appeared on Globe B, where the work of the
Sun Period was recapitulated. Then after a rest, the life
wave passed on to Globe C, and the work of the Moon
Period was repeated. Finally, the life wave arrived on
Globe D, which is our Earth, and not until then did the
proper work of the Earth Period begin.

Even then, the spiral within the spiral precluded its
beginning immediately on the arrival of the life wave
from Globe C, for the bestowal of the germ of mind did
not actually take place until the fourth Epoch, the first
three Epochs being still further recapitulations of the Sat-
urn, Sun and Moon Periods, but always on a higher scale.


CHAPTER XI.


THE GENESIS AND EVOLUTION OF OUR SOLAR SYSTEM.


Chaos.


N the previous pages nothing has been said about our
Solar System, and of the different planets which
compose it, because it was not until the Karth Period

was reached that the present differentiation was made.
The Earth Period is the acme of diversification, and
although we have been speaking of only one class of virgin
spirits—those who, in the strictest and most limited sense,
are concerned with the Earth evolution—there are in real-
ity seven “Rays” or streams of life, all pursuing different
evolutions, yet all belonging to the original class of virgin
spirits to which our humanity belongs.

In the previous Periods all of these different sub-classes
or Rays found a suitable environment for their evolution
on the same planet. But, in the Earth Period, conditions
became such that in order to provide for each class the
degree of heat and the vibration necessary for its particu-
lar phase of evolution, they were segregated on different
planets, at varying distances from the Sun—the central
source of life. This is the raison @étre of our System
and all the other Solar Systems in the Universe.

Before proceeding with the description of the evolution
of our humanity on the Earth after its separation from
the central Sun, it is necessary for the maintenance of
sequential order in the description to explain the differen-
tiation which scattered the planets of our System in space.

246


GENESIS AND EVOLUTION OF SOLAR SYSTEM 247


Active manifestation—particularly in the Physical
World—depends upon separateness; upon the limitation
of life by form. But during the interim between Periods
and Revolutions the marked distinction between form and
life ceases. This applies not only to man and the lower
kingdoms, but to the Worlds and Globes which are the
basis of form for the evolving life. Only the seed-atoms
and the nuclei or centers of the World-Globes remain—
all else is one homogeneous substance. There is but one
Spirit pervading space. Life and Form, its positive and
negative poles, are one.

This state of things was what Greek mythology de-«
scribed as “Chaos.” The ancient Norsemen and the Teu-.
tonic mythology call it “Ginnungagap,” which was bounded
upon the northern side by the cold and foggy “Niflheim”
—the land of mist and fog—and upon the south side by
the fire “Muspelheim.” When heat and erld entered the
space which was occupied by Chaos or Ginnungagap, they
caused the crystallization of the visible universe.

The Bible also gives one the idea of infinite space pre-
ceding the activity of Spirit.

In our present materialistic period we have unfortunate-
ly lost the idea of all that lies behind that word Space.
We are so accustomed to speaking of “empty” space, or
the “great void” of space, that we have entirely lost the
grand and holy significance of the word, and are thus in-
capable of feeling the reverence that this idea of Space
and Chaos should inspire in our breasts.

To the Rosicrucians, as to any occult school, there is no
such thing as empty or void space. To them space is Spirit
in its attenuated form; while matter is crystallized space
or Spirit. Spirit iz manifestation is dual; that which we
see as Form is the negative manifestation of Spirit—crys-


248 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEETION


tallized and inert. The positive pole of Spirit manifests
as Life, galvanizing the negative Form into action, hut
both Life and Form originated in Spirit, Space, Chaos!

To get an idea from everyday life which will illustrate,
we may take the hatching of an egg. The egg is filled
with a moderately viscous fluid. This fluid, or moisture,
is subjected to heat, and out of the soft, fluidic substance
comes a living chick, with hard bones and comparatively
hard flesh, and with down that has a comparatively hard
quill, ete.

When a living chick can come out of the inert fluid of
an egg without the addition of any hardening substance
from outside, is it a far-fetched idea to claim that the
universe is crystallized Space or Spirit? There is no doubt
that the claim will seem foolish to many; but this book
is not for the purpose of convincing the world at large
that these things are. It is intended to aid those who
inherently feel that these things must be and to help them
to see the light upon this great World-mystery, which the
writer has been permitted to behold. The special object
at present is to show that Spirit is active all the time—in
one way during Manifestation, and in another during
Chaos.

Modern science would sneer at the idea that life could
exist upon a Globe which is in the process of formation.
That is because science cannot dissociate Life and Form
and cannot conceive of Form except as solid and tangible
—cognizable by one of our five physical senses.

The occult scientist, in accordance with the above defini-
tions of Life and Form, holds that Life may exist inde-
pendently of Concrete Form; may have Forms not per-
ceptible to our present limited senses, and amenable to


GENESIS AND EVOLUTION OF SOLAR SYSTEM 249


none of the laws which apply to this present concrete
state of matter.

It is true that the Nebular Theory holds that all ex-
istence (which is to say all Form, the Worlds in Space
and whatever Forms there may be upon them) has come
from the fiery nebula; but it does not recognize the fur-
ther fact insisted upon by occult science—that the fiery
nebula is Spirit. It does not admit that the whole at-
mosphere around us, the space between the worlds, is
Spirit and that there is a constant interchange going om
all the time—Form dissolving into Space, and Space
erystallizing into Form.

Chaos is not a state which has existed in the past and’
has now entirely disappeared. It is all around us at the
present moment. Were it not that old forms—having
outlived their usefulness—are constantly being resolved
back into that Chaos, which is also as constantly giving
birth to new forms, there could be no progress; the work
of evolution would cease and stagnation would prevent
the possibility of advancement.

It is axiomatic that ‘‘The oftener we die, the better we


live.’’ The Poet-Initiate, Goethe, says:
Who has not this—
Ever dying and bringing to birth—
Will aye remain a sorry guest
Upon this dismal earth.


and Paul says, “I die daily.”

Therefore, as students of occult science, it is necessary
to realize that even during active manifestation, it is
Chaos that is the basis of all progress. Our life during
Chaos is based upon our life in active manifestation, and
vice versa, i. e., what we are able to achieve during active
manifestation, and the ability to progress at all, is the


250 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


result of the existence in Chaos. The interim between
Periods and Revolutions is in reality much more impor-
tant to the growth of the soul than concrete existence,
though the latter is the basis of the former and therefore
cannot be dispensed with. The importance of the Chaotic
interim lies in the fact that during that period the evolv-
ing entities of all classes are so closely united that they
are really one; consequently those which are of lower
development during manifestation are in closest contact
with the more highly evolved, thus experiencing and ben-
efiting by a much higher vibration than their own. ‘This
enables them to live over and assimilate their past experie
ences in a manner impossible when hampered by Form.

We have seen the benefit to the spirit in man from the
interim between death and a new birth. There the form
still exists, though much more attenuated than the dense
body; but in the Cosmic Night and intervals of rest
between Periods and Revolutions, where there is perfect
freedom from form, the beneficial results of past experi-
ences can be much more effectively assimilated.

We have a word which was originally coined to convey
the idea of the state of things between manifestations.
This word, however, has been used in a material sense to
such an extent that it has lost its primal significance,
That word is Gas.

It may be thought that this is a very old word, which
has nearly always existed as a synonym for a state of
matter lighter than liquids, but such is not the case. The
word was first used in “Physica,” a work which appeared
in 1632, the author of it being Comenius, a Rosicrucian.

Comenius, did not call himself a Rosicrucian; no true
Brother does so publicly. Only the Rosicrucian knows the
brother Rosicrucian. Not even the most intimate friends


GENESIS AND EVOLUTION OF SOLAR SYSTEM 251


or relatives know of a man’s connection with the order.
Those only who are Initiates themselves know the writers
of the past who were Rosicrucians, because ever through
their works shine the unmistakable words, phrases and
‘signs indicative of the deep meaning that remains hidden
from the non-Initiate. The Rosicrucian Fellowship is
composed of students of the teachings of the Order, which
are now given publicly, because the world’s intelligence is
growing to the necessary point of comprehension. This
work is one of the first few fragments of the Rosicrucian
knowledge being publicly given out. All that has been
printed as such, previous to the last few years, has been
the work of either charlatans or traitors.

Rosicrucians such as Paracelsus, Gomenius, Bacon,
Hellmond and others gave hints in their works and in-
fluenced others. The great controversy concerning the
authorship of Shakespeare (which has to no avail blunted
so many goose-quills and wasted so much good ink that
might have served useful ends) would never have arisen
had it been known that the similarity in Shakespeare and
Bacon is due to the fact that both were influenced by the
same Initiate, who also influenced Jacob Boehme and a
pastor of Ingolstadt, Jacobus Baldus, who lived subsequent
to the death of the Bard of Avon, and wrote Latin lyric
verse. If the first poem of Jacobus Baldus is read with a
certain key, it will be found that by reading down and up
the lines, the following sentence will appear: ‘Hitherto
I have spoken from across the sea by means of the drama ;
now I will express myself in lyrics.”

In his “Physica,” Comenius, the Rosicrucian, wrote:
“Ad huc spiritum incognitum Gas voco,” i. e, “This
hitherto unknown Spirit I call Gas.” Further on in the
same work he says, “This vapor which I have called Gas


252 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


is not far removed from the Chaos the ancients spoke of.”

We must learn to think of Chaos as the Spirit of God,
which pervades every part of infinity; it will then be seen
in its true light, as the occult maxim puts it: “Chaos is
the seed-ground of the Cosmos,” and we shall no longer
wonder how “something can come out of nothing,” be-
cause Space is not synonymous with “nothing.” It holds
within itself the germs of all that exists during a physical
manifestation, yet not quite all; for by the wedding of
Chaos with Cosmos there is something new brought forth
each time, which did not exist before; something that was
not foreshown and latent. The name of that something
is Genius—the cause of Epigenesis.

It appears in all kingdoms. It is the expression of the
progressive spirit in man, animal and plant. Chaos is
therefore a holy name; a name that signifies the Cause of
all we see in Nature and inspires a feeling of devotion
in every tried, true and trained occultist. He regards the
visible sense world as a revelation of the hidden potentiali-
ties of the Chaos.


THE BIRTH OF THE PLANETS.


To express himself in the dense physical world, it was
necessary for man to evolve a suitable dense body. Ina
world like this he must have a body with limbs, organs,
and a muscular system by means of which to move about;
also a brain to direct and co-ordinate his movements. If
the conditions had been different the body would have been
modified accordingly.

It is necessary for all beings, high or low in the scale
of existence, to possess vehicles for expression in any par-
ticular world in which they may wish to manifest. Even
the Seven Spirits before The Throne must possess these


Tue 1.3.7&10 Aspects or Gop & MAN


DIAGRAM 11


GENESIS AND EVOLUTION OF SOLAR SYSTEM ~— 253


necessary vehicles, which of course are differently condi-
tioned for each of Them. Collectively, They are God, and
make up the Triune Godhead, and He manifests in a dif-
ferent way through each of Them.

There is no contradiction in ascribing different num-
bers to God. We do not sin against the “oneness” of light
because we distinguish three primary colors into which it
divides itself. The white light of the Sun contains the
seven colors of the spectrum. The occultist sees even,
twelve colors, there being five between red and violet—
going one way around the circle—in addition to the red,
orange, yellow, green, etc., of the visible spectrum. Four
of these colors are quite indescribable, but the fifth—the
middle one of the five—is similar to the tint of a new-
blown peach blossom. It is in fact the color of the vital
body. Trained clairvoyants who describe it as “bluish-
grey,’ or “reddish-grey,” etc., are trying to describe a
color that has no equivalent in the physical world; and
they are therefore compelled to use the nearest descriptive
terms afforded by our language.

Perhaps Color will enable us to realize the oneness of
God with the Seven Spirits before The Throne better than
anything else. We will therefore turn to diagram 11.

We see here a white triangle looming up from a dark
background. White is synthetic, containing all colors
within itself, as God contains within Himself all things
in the Solar System.

Within the white triangle are a blue, a red and a yellow
circle. All other colors are simply combinations of these
three primary colors. These circles correspond to the
three aspects of God, which are without beginning, and
end in God, though externalized only during active mani-
festation.


TABLE OF VIBRATIONS
WHOSE EFFECTS ARE RECOGNIZED AND STUDIED BY SCIENCE,


Number of Vibrations
per second.
2


1st Octave Sip ODA ud OrONd oC Gud O.0 Carl osc-o chbicvena Auiige sand 9.0
Cay yey 2a toate ust sucticn oriep aude Lolieetnara|cot cited stings Setuninarsiea si #1 auete panel 4
3d Ee EECA Ec LETO UENCE SOR He AL Reco De Ce oh en ROMER 8
ANA WT iano Bia a eet Gao D0 O.0.ci, SO ac Mee MO Ee COT CAG ASOD cE 16
CADIS E aabericcarn. ears cpereri mete aye etet ors remains tn-eeten Nerd. teanas oe
IS ae rhea ale oie soe Se ieiese ase niclsaseis eg Ae
TREN) NY BME teri tai Gucke tet EICUERTIG 0.120" 4G: ROME aero LO. 28
RUBY, meee ye cscs Wachee u.c.dy Stat oc 40k ere Co eteee
a Me aoa O thonerouie ansia tin ClO Cold SPO MRORe no Oro 12
OCI Re sitar Soper stat sremcet au Belo aleue tay exeh odebemeitaye teas, d:108ai3\se oe 1,024
15th Rim Ma Seay al cust speost erste, 3 aie cchsteWerenerenaneates aneqoters: 6 32,768
OC iae i et eRe co Ss cuivavedtiavastusa pe meno cre ee tele 1,047,576 Unknown.
DISS SOM a nel MibaaeMir elena, or Sonne BREWS ED
SMTi nie dt Ws ite eg oh Ine latecnhecwaanonen Rare aneavala 1,073,741,824 ¢ Hlectricity.
SO ME RAR ae ans A Ne 4081 388:368
0 of ,099,511,627,776 | ts
ate ; 379 Mitte ee ( Unknown.


‘ 70,368,744,177,644
47th * 140,737,468/355,328 + Heat.
AGN Uaelenis PAC hock, GE 281.474.979.710.656
Adie ON. » >. oe Keku Gas Oe ee 562,949.953,421.312 Light.
Btu moe! at. wrekiate ean eae 1,125,899,906,842,624 Chemical Ltays,
Bist “© ' ...ccasc lous cr fe ce 2281,799,813,685,248 :
BUCH ea ene 144/115,188.075,855,872 } Unknown.
Seta hes. ween 288/230,376,151.711,744
Boeke <> joe ReneS 576,460,752,303.423'488
Goby 10s ee ee 1,152921,504,606,846.976 (X-Rays.
Biistu Ph. a ee 21305,843,009,213,693,952


62d Sits Wolrensunteataremvaat ne kenae 4,611,686,618,427,389,904 Unknown.


GENESIS AND EVOLUTION OF SOLAR SYSTEM 255


When these three colors are interblended, as shown in
the diagram, there appear four additional colors, the
three secondary colors—each due to the blending of two
primary colors—and one color (indigo) which contains
the entire gamut of colors, making in all the seven colors
of the spectrum. These colors represent the Seven Spir-
its before the Throne. The colors are different, as are
also the Seven Spirits, each having a different mission
in the Kingdom of God—our Solar System.

The seven planets circling around the Sun are the
dense bodies of the Seven Planetary Genii. Their names
are: Uranus with one satellite, Saturn with eight moons,
Jupiter with four moons, Marg with two moons, the
Earth and its moon, Venus and Mercury.

Bodies are always found to suit the purpose they are
made to serve, hence the dense bodies of the Seven Plan-
etary Spirits are spherical, that form being best adapted
to the enormous velocity with which they travel through
space. The Karth, for instance, travels about 66,000
miles per hour in its orbit.

Man’s body had a different shape in the past from that
of the present, and from that which it will have in the fu-
ture. During involution it was approximately spherical,
as it still is during ante-natal life, because the intra-
uterine development is a recapitulation of past stages of
evolution. At that stage the organism developed the
sphere, because during involution man’s energies were
directed inward, upon the building of its own vehicles,
as the embryo develops within the sphere of the uterus.

Man’s dense and vital bodies have straightened, but his
higher vehicles still retain their ovoid form. In the dense
body, the co-ordinating and governing brain issituated at


256 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


one extremity. This is the most unfavorable position
for such an organ. Too long a time is required for im-
pulses to travel from one extremity to the other—from
the brain to the feet, or for impacts on the feet to reach
the brain. In cases of burns, for instance, science has
demonstrated that valuable time is lost, the skin being
blistered before a message can be carried from the in-
jured place to the brain and back again.

This inefficiency would be greatly lessened if the brain
were in the center of the body. Sensations and the re-
sponses thereto could be more quickly received and trans-
mitted. In the spherical planets the Planetary Spirit di-
rects from the center the movements of its vehicle. In
future man will bend over, as shown in diagram 12. He
will become a sphere, directing his energies outward, be-
cause a spherical form affords the greatest facility for
motion in all directions, and indeed, for combination of
simultaneous motions.

The Rosicrucian Cosmo-Conception teaches that there
is a further evolution in store for planets.

When the beings upon a planet have evolved to a suffi-
cient degree, the planet becomes a Sun—the fixed center
of a Solar System. When the beings upon it have evolved
to a still greater degree, and consequently it has reached
its maximum of brillianey, it breaks up into a Zodiac,
becoming, so to speak, the womb for a new Solar System.

Thus the great hosts of Divine Beings who, until then,
were confined within that Sun, gain freedom of action
upon a great number of stars, whence they can affect in
different ways the system which grows up within their
sphere of influence. The planets, or man-bearing worlds,
within the Zodiac are constantly being worked upon by


DIAGRAM 12 MANS FORM OF BODY
PRESENT FUTURE


g


=
9
ME


BENT INWARDS


DURING INVOLUTION AND STRAIGHT AS CELESTIAL SPHERES
ANTE-NATAL LIFE pee gate Mabe CONSCIOUSNESS INTHE
UNCONSCIOUS ere eS CENTER


258 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


these forces, but in various ways, according to the stage
they have reached in evolution.

Our Sun could not become a Sun until it had sent out
from itself all the beings who were not sufficiently evolved
to endure the high rate of vibration and the great lumi-
nosity of the beings who were qualified for that evolution.
All the beings upon the different planets would have been
consumed had they remained in the Sun.

This visible Sun, however, though it is the place of
evolution for Beings vastly above man, is not by any
means the Father of the other planets, as material science
supposes. On the contrary, it is itself an emanation from
the Central Sun, which is the invisible source of all that
1s in our Solar System. Our visible Sun is but the
mirror in which are reflected the rays of energy from the
Spiritual Sun. The real Sun is as invisible as the real
Man.

Uranus was the first planet to be thrown off from the
nebula when its differentiation began in Chaos, at the
dawn of the Earth Period. There was no light but the
dim light of the Zodiac. The hfe that left with Uranus
is of a rather backward strain and is said to evolve very,
very slowly.

Saturn was next differentiated. It is the field of action
for the life which is at the stage of evolution correspond-
ing to the Saturn Period. This planet was differentiated
before the ignition of the nebula and (like all nebule
when passing through their Saturn Period of evolution)
was not a source of light, but a reflector.

Jupiter was differentiated shortly afterwards, when the
nebula had become ignited. The heat of Jupiter is not so
great as that of the Sun, Venus or Mercury, but on account
of its immense bulk, it is capable of retaining its heat and


GENESIS AND EVOLUTION OF SOLAR SYSTEM 259


thus remains a suitable field of evolution for very ad-
vanced beings. It corresponds to the stage which will be
reached by the Earth itself in the Jupiter Period.

Mars is a mystery, and only a limited amount of in-
formation may be given out. We may say, however, that
the life on Mars is of a very backward nature and that the
so-called “canals” are not excavations in the surface of
the planet. They are currents such as, during the Atlan-
tean Epoch, spread over our planet, and the remains of
which can still be observed in the Aurora Borealis and the
Aurora Australis. The shifting of the Martian “canals,”
noted by astronomers, is thus accounted for. If they were
really canals, they could not possibly shift, but currents
emanating from the Poles of Mars may do so.

The Earth, including the Moon, was next set out from
the Sun, and later Venus and Mercury. These and Mars
will be referred to later, in connection with the evolution
of man on the earth, and need not be further considered at
this time.

When a planet has Moons it indicates that there are
some beings in the life wave evolving on that planet who
are too backward to share in the evolution of the main
life wave, and they have therefore been set out from the
planet to prevent them from hindering the progress of
the pioneers. Such is the case with the beings inhabiting
our Moon. In the case of Jupiter it is thought probable
that the inhabitants of three of its moous will eventually
be able to rejoin the life on the parent planet, but it
is thought that at least one of the others is an eighth
sphere, like our own Moon, where retrogression and dis-
integration of the already acquired vehicle will result from
too close adherence to material existence upon the part


260 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


of the evolving beings who have brought themselves to
that deplorable end.

Neptune and its satellites do not properly belong to
our Solar System. The other planets—or rather their
Spirits—exercise an influence over the whole of human-
ity, but the influence of Neptune is largely restricted
to one particular class the astrologers. The writer, for
instance, has several times felt its compelling influence


in a marked way.

When laggards inhabiting a Moon have retrieved their
position and returned to the parent planet; or, when con-
tinued retrogression has caused complete disintegration
of their vehicles, the abandoned Mccn also commences to
dissolve. The momentum of a spiritual impulse which
propelled it in a fixed orbit for aeons, may endure for
aeons after the Moon has been vacated, and from the
physical point of view it may still seem to be a satellite
of the pianet it encircles. As the time goes on, however,
and the power of attraction exercised by the parent
planet diminishes, its orbit widens, until it reaches the
limit of our solar system. It is then expelled into inter-
stellar space; dissolved in Chaos. The expulsion of these
cinder-like dead worlds is analogous to the manner in
which hard and foreign bodies imbedded in the human
system make their way through the flesh to the skin. The
Asteroids illustrate this point. They are fragments of
Moons which once encircled Venus and Mercury. The
beings once confined upon them are known in esotericism
as ‘‘The Lords from Venus’’ and ‘‘The Lords from Mer-
cury ;’’ they retrieved their lost estate in a large measure
by service to our humanity, ag will be later described,
and are now safe on their parent,planet, while the Moons
they inhabited have partly disintegrated, and are already
far outside the earth’s orbit. There are other ‘‘seeming’’
moons in our system, but the Rosicrucian Cosmo-Concep-
tion does not notice them, as they are outside the pale
of evolution.


CHAPTER XII.
EVOLUTION ON THE HARTH.


The Polarian Epoch.


\ N J HILE the material which now forms the Earth

was yet a part of the Sun, it was, of course, in a

fiery condition; but as the fire does not burn

spirit, our human evolution commenced at once, being
confined particularly to the Polar Region of the Sun.

The highest evolved beings which were to become
human were the first to appear. The substances which
now form the Earth were all molten, and the atmosphere
was gaseous, yet man recapitulated his mineral stage anew.

From that attenuated chemical substance of the sun man
himself built his first mineral body, assisted by the Lords
of Form. If this statement is objected to on the ground
that man could not build unconsciously, the case of the
mother can be cited in answer. Is she conscious of build-
ing the body of the babe in her womb? yet surely no one
will say that she has nothing to do with it! The only
difference is that the mother builds unconsciously for the
babe; and man built unconsciously for himself.

Man’s first dense body did not even remotely resemble
his present splendidly organized vehicle. That has been
evolved only in the course of myriads of years. The first
dense body was a large, baggy object with an opening at
the top, from which an organ projected. This was a kind

261


262 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


of organ of orientation and direction. In the course of
time the dense body drew more closely together and con-
densed. If it came too close to places of greater heat than
it could endure, it disintegrated. In time the organ grew
sensitive to the condition that threatened destruction and
the dense body automatically moved to a safer place.

This organ has now degenerated into what is called the
pineal gland. Sometimes it is called “the third eye,” but
that is a misnomer, because it never was an eye, but rather
the localized organ for the sensing of heat and cold, which
faculty is now distributed over the entire dense body.
During the Polarian Epoch this sense was thus localized,
as the sense of sight is now in the eye, and that of hearing
in the ear. The extension of the sense of feeling since that’
time indicates the manner in which the entire body will
be improved, so that at some future time any part of it
will be able to perceive all things. The senses of sight and
hearing will be extended over the entire body, as the sense
of feeling is now. Then man will be all eyes and ears.
Specialized sense organs indicate limitation. Sense per-
ception by the whole is comparative perfection.

At the early stage of which we are now speaking there
was a kind of propagation. ‘These immense baggy crea-
tures divided in halves in a manner similar to the division
of cells by fission, but the separated portions would not
grow, each remaining only half as large as the original
form.

Tue HypPrersorean Erocn.


At different points on the fiery globe there began in
the course of time the formation of crust-islands in a sea
of fire.

The Lords of Form appeared, with the Angels (human-


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 263


ity of the Moon Period), and clothed man’s dense form
with a vital body. Those baggy bodies then began to in-
crease in size by drawing to themselves material from the
outside by osmosis, as it were. When they propagated, it
was no longer by dividing into halves, but into two un-
equal parts. Both parts grew until each had attained the
original size of the parent.

As the Polarian Epoch was really a recapitulation of
the Saturn Period, it may be said that during that time
man passed through the mineral state; he had the same
vehicle—the dense body—and a consciousness similar to
the trance state. For analogous reasons, the plant state
was passed through in the Hyperborean Epoch, as man
had a dense and a vital body and a dreamless-sleep-con-
sciousness.

Man began his evolution on the Earth after Mars had
been thrown off from the central mass, and that which is
now the Harth was yet undetached from the Sun; but at
the close of the Hyperborean Epoch the incrustation had
progressed so far that it had become an obstacle to the
progress of some of the higher evolved beings in the Sun.
The fiery condition also hindered the evolution of some of
the lower grades of creatures, such as man, who at that
stage required a denser world for his further development.
Therefore, the part which is now the Earth was thrown
off from the Sun at the end of the Hyperborean Epoch,
and commenced to revolve around the parent body in a
somewhat different orbit than at present. Shortly after-
wards Venus and Mercury were thrown off for similar
reasons.

Crystallization always commences at the pole of a planet
where motion is slow. The consolidated part gradually
works outwards towards the equator in obedience to the


264 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


centrifugal force. If that force is stronger than the co-
hesive tendency the consolidated mass is thrown outwards
into space.

At the time when the Earth-globe was separated from
the parent-mass, it included that part which is now our
Moon. On this great globe was evolving the life-wave
now passing through the human kingdom, also the life-
waves which entered evolution in the Sun, Moon, and
Earth Periods, and are now evolving through the animal,
plant and mineral kingdoms.

Mention has been made of the stragglers of various
Periods who in later Periods were enabled to take a step
upward in evolution. There were some, however, who did
not take this step. They did not evolve, and were there-
fore left further and further behind, until they became a
drag and a hindrance to the progressive ones. It became
necessary to get them out of the way, that the evolution
of the others might not be retarded.

In the beginning of the Lemurian Epoch, these ‘‘fail-
ures’’ (note that they were failures, not merely strag-
glers) had erystallized that part of the Earth occupied by
them to such a degree that it became as a huge cinder or
clinker, in the otherwise soft and fiery Earth. They were
a hindrance and an obstruction, so they, with the part of
the Earth they had crystallized, were thrown out into
space beyond recall. That is the genesis of the Moon.

THE Moon—TuHE EIGHTH SPHERE.

The seven Globes, A to G, inclusive, are the field of
Evolution. The Moon is the field of Disintegration.

If Earth had not segregated from the original Globe
which is now the Sun, the rapidity of the vibrations would
have disintegrated man’s vehicles. He would have grown


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 265


so rapidly that the growth of the mushroom would seem
slow in comparison. He would have become old before
he had time to pass through youth. That such is the effect
of too much Sun is shown by the rapidity of growth at the
tropies, where maturity and old age are reached much
sooner than in the north. On the other hand had the
Moon remained with the Earth, man would have crystal-
lized into a statue. The separation of the Earth from the
Sun, which now sends its rays from a far distance, enables
man to live at the proper rate of vibration, to unfold
slowly. The Moon-forces reach him from the exact dis-
tance necessary to enable him to build a body of the proper
density. But although the latter forces are active in the
building of the form, they also cause death when their
continued work finally crystallizes the tissues of the body.

The Sun works in the vital body and is the force which
makes for life, and wars against the death-dealing Moon
force.

THe Lemurian Epocu.


In this Epoch appeared the Archangels (the humanity
of Sun Period), and the Lords of Mind (the humanity of
Saturn Period). These Hierarchies were assisted by the
Lords of Form, who were given charge of the Earth
Period. They helped man to build his desire body, and
the Lords of Mind gave the germ of Mind two the greater
part of the pioneers who formed class 1, according to the
classification in diagram 10.

The Lords of Form vivified the Human spirit in as
many of the stragglers of the Moon Period as had made
the necessary progress in the three and one-half Revolu-
tions which had elapsed since the commencement of the «
Earth Period, but at that time the Lords of Mind could


266 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


not give them the germ of Mind. Thus a great part of
nascent humanity was left without this link between the
threefold spirit and the threefold body.

The Lords of Mind took charge of the higher part of the
desire body and of the germinal mind, impregnating them
with the quality of separate selfhood, without which no
separate, self-contained beings such as we are today would
be possible.

We owe to the Lords of Mind the separate personality,
with all the possibilities for experience and growth thus
afforded. And this point marks the birth of the Indi-
vidual.

BirTH OF THE INDIVIDUAL.


Diagram 1 will make clear the fact that the personality
is the reflected picture of the Spirit, the mind being the
mirror, or focus.

As when reflected in a pond, the images of trees appear
inverted, the foliage seeming to be the deepest down in
the water, so the highest aspect of the spirit (the Divine
Spirit) finds its counterpart in the lowest of the three
bodies (the dense body). The next highest spirit (the
life spirit) is reflected in the next lowest body (the vital
body). The third spirit (the human spirit) and its re-
flection, the third body (the desire body), appear closest
of all to the reflecting mirror, which is the mind, the lat-
ter corresponding to the surface of the pond—the reflect-
ing medium in our analogy.

The Spirit came down from the higher Worlds during
involution; and by concurrent action, the Bodies were
built upward in the same period. It is the meeting of

e these two streams in the focussing Mind that marks the
point in time when the individual, the human being, the


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 267


Ego, is born—when the Spirit takes possession of its
vehicles.

Yet we must not suppose that this at once raised man
to his present status in evolution, making him the self-
conscious, thinking being he is today. Before that point
could be reached a long and weary road had to be tray-
eled, for at the time we are considering, organs were in
their most rudimentary stage and there was no brain that
could be used as an instrument of expression. Hence the
consciousness was the dimmest imaginable. In short, the
man of that day was very far from being as intelligent as
our present-day animals. The first step in the direction
of improvement was the building of a brain to use as an
instrument of mind in the Physical World. That was
achieved by separating humanity into sexes.


SEPARATION OF THE SEXES.


Contrary to the generally accepted idea, the Ego is bi-
sexual. Were the Ego sexless, the body would necessarily
be sexless also, for the body is but the external symbol of
the indwelling spirit.

The sex of the Ego does not, of course, express itself as
such in the inner worlds. It manifests there as two dis-
tinct qualities—Will and Imagination. The Will is the
male power and is allied to the Sun forces; Imagination
is the female power and is always linked to the Moon
forces. This accounts for the imaginative trend of woman
and for the special power which the Moon exercises over
the female organism.

When the matter of which the Earth and the Moon were
afterwards formed was still a part of the Sun, the body
of man-in-the-making was yet plastic, and the forces from
that part which afterwards became Sun, and that part


268 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


which is now Moon worked readily in all bodies, so that
the man of the Hyperborean Epoch was he1maphrodite—
capable of producing another being from himself without
intercourse with any other.

When the Earth separated from the Sun and shortly
afterwards threw off the Moon, the forces from the two
luminaries did not find equal expression in all, as formerly.
Some bodies became more amenable to the forces from one,
and some to those from the other. /


INFLUENCE oF Mars.


In the part of the Earth Period preceding the separation
of the sexes—during the three and one-half Revolutions
which intervened between the time when Mars was differ-
entiated and the beginning of the Lemurian Epoch—
Mars traveled in a different orbit from the present, and its
aura (that part of its finer vehicles which extends beyond
the dense planet) permeated the body of the central planet
and polarized the iron within it.

As iron is essential to the production of warm, red
blood, all creatures were cold-blooded, or rather, the fluid
parts of the body were no warmer than the surrounding
atmosphere.

When the Earth was set free from the Central Sun, that
event changed the orbits of the planets and thus the influ-
ence of Mars over the iron in the Earth was minimized.
The Planetary Spirit of Mars finally withdrew the re-
mainder of that influence, and although the desire bodies
of the Earth and Mars still penetrate, the dynamic power
of Mars over the iron (which is a Mars metal) has ceased
and iron has become available for use on our planet.

Iron is in reality the basis of separate existence. With-
out iron the red, heat-giving blood would be an impossi-


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 269


bility, and the Ego could have no hold in the body. When
red blood developed—in the latter part of the Lemurian
Epoch—the body became upright and the time had come
when the Ego could begin to dwell within the body and
control it.

But to dwell within is not the end and aim of evolu-
tion. It is simply a means by which the Ego may better
express itself through its instrument, that it may manifest
in the Physical World. To that end the sense organs, the
larynx, and above all, a brain, must be built and perfected.

During the early part of the Hyperborean Epoch, while
the Earth was still united with the Sun, the solar forces
supplied man with all the sustenance he needed and he
unconsciously radiated the surplus for the purpose of
propagation.

When the Ego entered into possession of its vehicles it
became necessary to use part of this force for the building
of the brain and larynx. The latter was originally a part
of the creative organ. The larynx was built while the
dense body was yet bent together in the bag-like shape
already described, which is still the form of the human
embryo. As the dense body straightened and became up-
right, part of the creative organ remained with the upper
part of the dense body and later became the larynx.

Thus the dual creative force which had hitherto worked
in only one direction, for the purpose of creating another
being, became divided. One part was directed upward to
build the brain and larynx, by means of which the Ego
was to become capable of thinking and communicating
thoughts to other beings.

As a result of this change only one part of the force
essential in the. creation of another being was available
to one individual, hence it became necessary for each indi-


270 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


vidual to seek the co-operation of another, who possessed
that part of the procreative force which the seeker lacked.

Thus did the evolving entity obtain brain consciousness
of the outside world at the cost of half its creative power.
Previous to that time, it used within itself both parts of
that power to externalize another being. As a result of
that modification, however, it has evolved the power to
create and express thought. Before then, it was a creator
in the physical world only; since then it has become able
to create in the three worlds.


Tur Racrs anp THEIR LEADERS.


Before considering in detail the evolution of the Le-
murians it may be well to take a general survey of the
Races and their Leaders.

Some very valuable works on Occultism, bringing before
the public the teachings of the Eastern Wisdom, have
nevertheless contained certain mistakes, owing to a mis-
understanding of the teachings by those who were so for-
tunate as to receive them. All books, not written directly
by the Elder Brothers, are liable to contain such errors.
Considering the extreme intricacy and many complica-
tions of the subject, the wonder is not that mistakes do
occur, but that they are not more frequent. Therefore the
writer does not presume to criticise, recognizing that more
numerous and more serious mistakes may be embodied in
the present work, owing to his own misconception of the
teaching. He simply sets forth in the next few paragraphs
what he has received, which shows how the differing (and
seemingly contradictory) teaching of two such valuable
works as “The Secret Doctrine” by H. P. Blavatsky, and
“Esoteric Buddhism,” by A. P. Sinnett, may be reconciled.


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 271


That part of human evolution which is to be accom-
plished during the present sojourn of the life wave on our
Earth is divisible into seven great stages or Epochs; but
these cannot appropriately be called Races. Nothing to
which that name could be correctly applied appears until
the end of the Lemurian Epoch. From that time different
Races succeed one another through the Atlantean and
Aryan Epochs, and will extend slightly into the Sixth
great Epoch.

The total number of Races—past, present and future—
in our scheme of evolution is sixteen; one at the end of
the Lemurian Epoch, seven during the Atlantean Epoch,
seven more in our present Aryan Epoch and one in the
beginning of the Sixth Epoch. After that time there will
be nothing that can properly be called a Race.

Races did not exist in the Periods which have preceded
the Earth Period and they will not exist in those Periods
which follow it. It is only here, at the very nadir of ma-
terial existence, that the difference is so great between
man and man as to warrant the separation into Races.

The immediate Leaders of humanity (apart from the
creative Hierarchies) who helped man to take the first
tottering steps in Evolution, after Involution had fur-
nished him with vehicles, were Beings much further ad-
vaneed than man along the path of evolution. They
came on this errand of love from the two planets which
are located between the Earth and the Sun—Venus and
Mercury.

The Beings who inhabit Venus and Mercury are not
quite so far advanced as those whose present field of evo-
lution is the Sun, but they are very much further ad-
vanced than our humanity. Therefore they stayed some-
what longer with the central mass than did the inhabita.ts


272 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


of the Earth, but at a certain point their evolution de-
manded separate fields, so those two planets were thrown
off, Venus first, and then Mercury. Each was given such
proximity to the central orb as insured the rate of vibra-
tion necessary for its evolution. The inhabitants of Mer-
cury are the furthest advanced, hence are closer to the Sun.

Some of the inhabitants of each planet were sent to the
Earth to help nascent humanity and are known to occult
scientists as the “Lords of Venus” and the “Lords of Mer-
cury.” .

The Lords of Venus were leaders of the masses of our
people. They were inferior beings of the Venus evolution,
who appeared among men and were known as “messen-
gers of the Gods.” . For the good of our humanity they
led and guided it, step by step. There was no rebellion
against their authority, because man had not yet evolved
an independent will. It was to bring him to the stage
where he would be able to manifest will and judgment
that they guided him, until he should be able to guide
himself.

It was known that these messengers communed with the
Gods They were held in deep reverence and their com-
mands were obeyed without question.

When under the tuition of these Beings mankind had
reached a certain stage of progress, the most advanced
were placed under the guidance of the Lords of Mercury,
who initiated them into the higher truths for the purpose
of making them leaders of the people. These Initiates
were then exalted to kingship and were the founders of the
dynasties of Divine Rulers who were indeed kings “by the
grace of God,” i. e., by the grace of the Lords of Venus
and Mercury, who were as Gods to infant humanity. They
guided and instructed the kings for the good of the peo-


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 273


ple and not for self-aggrandizement and arrogation of
rights at their expense.

At that time a Ruler held a sacred trust to educate and
help his people; to alleviate and promote equity and well-
being. He had the light of God to give him wisdom and
guide his judgment. Hence, while those kings reigned,
all things prospered, and it was indeed a Golden Age. Yet,
as we follow the evolution of man in detail, we shall see
that the present phase or period of development, though it
cannot be called a golden age in any but a material sense,
is nevertheless a necessary one, in order to bring man to
the point where he will be able to rule himself, for self-
mastery is the end and aim of all rulership. No man can
safely remain ungoverned who has not learned to govern
himself, and at the present stage of development, that is
the hardest task that can be given him. It is easy to com-
mand others; it is hard to force obedience from oneself.


INFLUENCE OF MERCURY.


The purpose of the Lords of Mercury at that time, and
of all Hierophants of Mysteries since then, as also all
the occult schools of our day, was and is to teach the
candidate the art of Self-Mastery. In the measure that a
man has mastered himself, and in that measure only, is he
qualified to govern others. Were the present rulers of the
masses able to govern themselves we should again have the
Millennium or Golden Age.

As the Lords of Venus worked on the masses of a long-
past age, so do the Lords of Mercury now work on the
Individual, fitting him for mastery over self and (inci-
dentally only, not primarily) for mastery over others.
This work on their part is but the beginning of what will


avd. ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


be an increasing Mercurial influence during the remaining
three and one-half Revolutions of the Earth Period.

During the first three and one-half Revolutions Mars
held sway, polarizing the iron, preventing the formation
of the red blood and keeping the Ego from immuring itself
in the body until the latter had attained to the requisite
degree of development.

During the last three and one-half Revolutions Mercury
will operate to extricate the Ego from its densest vehicle
by means of Initiation.

Incidentally, it may be noted that, as Mars polarized the
iron, so Mercury has polarized the metal bearing its name
and the workings of that metal will show very well this
tendency to take the dense body away from the spirit—to
liberate the latter from the former.

That dread disease, syphilis, is an example of condi-
tions where the Ego is fettered and immured in the body
to a particularly cramping extent. Sufficient mercury
relieves the condition, lessens the hold of the body upon
the Ego and leaves the latter to that comparative freedom
within the body which the normal person enjoys. But on
the other hand, an overdose of mercury causes paralysis,
thus taking the dense body from the man in an improper
way.

The Lords of Mercury taught man to leave and re-enter
the body at will; to function in his higher vehicles inde-
pendent of the dense body, so that the latter becomes a
cheerful dwelling house instead of a closely-locked prison
—a useful instrument instead of a clogging fetter.

Therefore occult science speaks of the Earth Period as
Mars-Mercury, and so it may be said truly that we have
been in Mars and are going to Mercury, as taught in one
of the occult works previously mentioned. Jt is also true,


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH Qs


however, that we have never inhabited the planet Mars,
nor are we to leave the earth at some future time to take
up our abode on the planet Mercury, as the other work
mentioned states, with the intention of correcting an error
in the first one.

Mercury, now being in obscuration, is exercising very
little influence on us, but it is emerging from a planetary
rest and as time goes on its influence will be more and
more in evidence as a factor in our evolution. The coming
Races will have much help from the Mercurians, and the
people of still later Epochs and Revolutions will have even
more.


THE LEMURIAN RACE.


We are now in a position to understand the information
which is to follow concerning the people who lived in the
latter part of the Lemurian Epoch, whom we may call the
Lemurian Race.

The atmosphere of Lemuria was still very dense—some-
what like the fire-fog of the Moon Period, but denser.
The crust of the Earth was just starting to become quite
hard and solid in some places, while in others it was still
fiery, and between islands of crust was a sea of boiling,
seething water. Volcanic outbursts and cataclysms marked
this time when the nether fires fought hard against the
formation of the encircling wall which was to imprison
them.

Upon the harder and comparatively cool spots man lived
surrounded by giant fern-forests and animals of enormous
size. The forms of both man and animal were yet quite
plastic. The skeleton had formed, but man himself had
great power in molding the flesh of his own body and
that of the animals about him.


276 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


When he was born he could hear and feel, but his per-
ception of light came later. We have analogous cases in
animals like cats and dogs, the young of which receive
the sense of sight some time after birth. The Lemurian
had no eyes. He had two sensitive spots which were
affected by the light of the Sun as it shone dimly through
the fiery atmosphere of ancient Lemuria, but it was not
until nearly the close of the Atlantean Epoch that he had
sight as we have it today. Up to that time the building of
the eye was in progress. While the Sun was within—while
the Earth formed part of the light-giving mass—man
needed no external illuminant; he was luminous himself.
But when the dark Earth was separated from the Sun it
became necessary that the light should be perceived, there-
fore as the lightrays impinged upon man, he perceived
them. Nature built the eye as a light-perceiver, in re-
sponse to the demand of the already-existing function,
which is invariably the case, as Professor Huxley has so
ably shown. The amceba has no stomach, yet it digests.
It is all stomach. The necessity for digesting food built
the stomach in the course of time, but digestion took place
before the alimentary canal was formed. In an analogous
manner, the perception of light called forth the eye. The
light itself built the eye and maintains it. Where there
is no light there can be no eye. In cases where animals
have withdrawn and dwelt in caves—keeping away from
the light—the eyes have degenerated and atrophied because
there were no light rays to maintain them and no eyes
were needed in the dark caves. The Lemurian needed
eyes; he had a perception of light, and the light was com-
mencing to build the eye in response to his demand.

His language consisted of sounds like those of Nature.
The sighing of the wind in the immense forests which


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH any


grew in great luxuriance in that super-tropical climate,
the rippling of the brook, the howling of the tempest—for
Lemuria was storm-swept—the thunder of the waterfall,
the roar of the voleano—all these were to him voices of the
Gods from whom he knew himself to have descended.

Of the birth of his body he knew nothing. He could
not see either it or anything else, but he did perceive his
fellow beings. It was, however, an inner perception, like
our perception of persons and things in dreams, but with
this very important difference, that his dream-perception
was clear and rational.

Thus he knew nothing at all about his body, in fact he
did not even know he had a body any more than we know
we have a stomach when that organ is in good health. We
remember its existence only when our abuse of it causes
us to feel pain there. Under normal conditions we are
entirely unconscious of its processes. Similarly did the
body of the Lemurian serve him excellently, although he
was unaware of its existence. Pain was the means of
making him aware of his body and of the world without.

Everything in connection with the propagation of the
race and the bringing to birth was done by direction of the
Angels under the leadership of Jehovah, the Regent of the
Moon. The propagative function was performed at stated
times of the year when the lines of force, running from
planet to planet, were focussed at proper angles. Thus
the creative force encountered no obstruction and parturi-
tion was painless. Man was unaware of birth, because at
that time he was as unconscious of the physical world as
he now is during sleep. It was only in the intimate con-
tact of sex relation that the spirit became aware of the
flesh and the man “knew” his wife. That is shown in
such passages of the Bible as “Adam knew Eve and she


ang ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


bore Seth”; “Elkanah knew Hannah and she bore Sam-
uel”; and Mary’s question, “How shall I conceive, seeing
I know no man?” This is also the key to the meaning
of the “Tree of Knowledge,” the fruit of which opened
the eyes of Adam and Eve, so that they came to know both
good and evil. Previously they had known only good,
but when they began to exercise the creative function
independently, they were ignorant of stellar influences,
as are their descendants, and Jehovah’s supposed curse was
not a curse at all, but a simple statement of the result
which must inevitably follow use of the generative force
which failed to take into consideration the effect of the
stellar rays on childbirth.

Thus the ignorant use of the generative force is pri-
marily responsible for pain, sickness and sorrow.

The Lemurian knew no death because when, in the
course of long ages, his body dropped away, he entered an-
other, quite unconscious of the change. His consciousness
was not focussed in the physical world, therefore the laying
aside of one body and the taking of another was no more
to him than a leaf or twig drying and falling away from
the tree and being replaced by a new growth.

Their language was to the Lemurians something holy.
It was not a dead language hke ours—a mere orderly ar-
rangement of sounds. Each sound uttered by the Lemu-
rian had power over his fellow-beings, over the animals
and even over nature around him. ‘Therefore, under the
guidance of the Lords of Venus, who were the messengers
of God—the agents of the creative hierarchies—the
power of speech was used with great reverence, as some-
thing most holy.

The education of the boys differed greatly from that of
the girls. The Lemurian methods of education seem


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 2"9


shocking to our more refined sensibilities. In order to
spare the reader’s feelings, only the least cruel of them will
be touched upon. Strenuous in the extreme as they may
seem, it must be remembered that the Lemurian body was
not nearly so high-strung as are the human bodies of the
present day; also that it was only by the very harshest
measures that the exceedingly dim consciousness could be
touched at all. As time went on and the consciousness
became more and more awakened, such extreme measures
as those used then became unnecessary and have passed
away, but at that time they were indispensable to arouse
the slumbering forces of the spirit to a consciousness of
the outside world.

The education of the boys was designed especially to de-
velop the quality of Will. They were made to fight one
another, and these fights were extremely brutal. They
were impaled upon spits, with full power to release them-
selves, but by exercising the will power they were to re-
main there in spite of the pain. They learned to make
their muscles tense, and to carry immense burdens by the
exercise of the Will.

The education of the girls was intended to promote the
development of the imaginative faculty. They also were
subjected to strenuous and severe treatment. They were
put out in the great forests, to let the sound of the wind
in the tree tops speak to them and to listen to the furious
outbursts of flood and tempest. They thus learned to
have no fear of those paroxysms of nature and to perceive
only the grandeur of the warring elements. The frequent
volcanic outbursts were greatly valued as a means of edu-
cation, being particularly conducive to the awakening of
the faculty of memory.

Such educational methods would be entirely out of the


280 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


question at the present day, but they did not make the
Lemurian morbid, because he had no memory. No matter
what painful or terrifying experiences he endured, every-
thing was forgotten as soon as past. The above mentioned
strenuous experiences were for the purpose of developing
memory, to imprint these violent and constantly repeated
impacts from without upon the brain, because memory is
necessary that the experiences of the past may be used as
guides to Action.

The education of the girls developed the first germinal,
flickering memory. The first idea of Good and Evil was
formulated by them because of their experiences, which
worked chiefly on the imagination. Those experiences
most likely to leave a recollection were thought “Good ;”
those which did not produce that much desired result were
considered “Evil.”

Thus woman became the pioneer in culture, being the
first to develop the idea of “a good life,” of which she be-
came the esteemed exponent among the ancients and in
that respect she has nobly led the vanguard ever since.
Of course, as all Egos incarnate alternately as male and
female, there is really no pre-eminence. It is simply that
those who for the time being are in a dense body of the
feminine gender have a positive vital body, and are there-
fore more responsive to spiritual impacts than when the
vital body is negative as in the male.

As we have seen, the Lemurian was a born magician.
He felt himself a descendant of the Gods, a spiritual being;
therefore his line of advancement was by gaining not spir-
itual, but material knowledge. The Temples of Initiation
for the most advanced did not need to reveal to man his
high origin; to educate him to perform feats of magic; to
instruct him how to function in the desire world and the


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 281


higher realms. Such instruction is necessary today be-
cause now the average man has no knowledge-of the spir-
itual world, nor can he function in superphysical realms.
The Lemurian, however, in his own way, did possess that
knowledge and could exercise those faculties, but on the
other hand, he was ignorant of the Laws of the Cosmos and
of facts regarding the physical world which are matters of
common, everyday knowledge with us. Therefore at the
School of Initiation he was taught art, the laws of Nature
and facts relating to the physical universe. His will was
strengthened and his imagination and memory wakened so
that he could correlate experiences and devise ways and
means of action when his past experiences did not serve
to indicate a proper course of procedure. Thus the Tem-
ples of Initiation in the Lemurian times were High
Schools for the cultivation of Will-power and Imagina-
tion, with “post-graduate courses” in Art and Science.
Yet, though the Lemurian was a born magician, he never
misused his powers because he felt himself related to the
Gods. Under the direction of the Messengers of the Gods,
already spoken of, his forces were directed toward the
molding of forms in the animal and the plant worlds. It
may be hard for the materialist to understand how he
could do such work if he could not see the world about
him. I¢ is true man could not “see” as we understand the
term and as he now sees objects outside in space with his
physical eyes. Still, as the purest of our children are
clairvoyant to this day while they remain in a state of
sinless innocence, so the Lemurians, who were yet pure
and innocent, possessed an internal perception which gave
them only a dim idea of the outward shape of any object,
but illumined so much the brighter its inner nature, its


282 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


soul-quality, by a spiritual apperception born of innocent
purity.

Innocence, however, is not synonymous with Virtue.
Innocence is the child of Ignorance and could not be main-
tained in a universe where the purpose of evolution is the
acquisition of Wisdom. To attain that end, a knowledge
of good and evil, right and wrong, is essential, also choice
of action.

If, having knowledge and choice, man ranges himself on
the side of Good and Right he cultivates Virtue and Wis-
dom. If he succumbs to temptation and does wrong know-
ingly, he fosters vice.

God’s plan is not to be brought to naught, however.
Every act is a seed-ground for the law of Consequence.
We reap what we sow. The weeds of wrong action bear
flowers of sorrow and suffering, and when the seeds from
them have fallen into a chastened heart, when they have
been watered by the tears of repentance Virtue will event-
ually blossom forth. What blessed assurance, that out of
every evil we do, Good will eventually accrue, for in our
Father’s Kingdom naught but Good can endure.

Therefore the “Fall” with its consequent pain and suf-
fering is but a temporary state where we see through a
glass darkly, but anon we shall behold again face to face
the God within and without,who is ever perceived by the
pure in heart.


THE Fatt or MAN.


This is cabalistically described as the experience of one
pair who, of course, represent humanity. The key is
given in the verse where the Messenger of the Gods says
to the woman, “in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children ;”


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 283


the clue is also found in the sentence of death which was
pronounced at that same time.

It will be observed that previous to the Fall the con-
sciousness was not focussed in the physical world. Man
was unconscious of propagation, birth and death. The An-
gels who have charge of and work in the vital body (the
medium of propagation) regulated the propagative func-
tion and brought the sexes together at certain seasons of
the year, using the solar and the lunar forces when they
produced conditions most propitious for fecundation, the
union being achieved unconsciously by the participants at
first, but later it produced a momentary physical cognition.
Then the period of gestation caused no inconvenience and
parturition was painless, the parent being plunged in deep
sleep. Birth and death involved no break in the conscious-
ness and were therefore non-existent to the Lemurians.

Their consciousness was directed inward. ‘They per-
ceived physical things in a spiritual way, as we perceive
them in a dream—at which time all that we see is within
ourselves.

When “their eyes were opened” and their consciousness
was directed outward toward the facts of the physical
world, conditions were altered. Propagation was directed,
not by the Angels, but by man, who was ignorant of the
operation of the Sun- and Moon-forces. He also abused
the sex-function, using it for sense-gratification, with the
result that pain attended the process of child-bearing.
Then his consciousness became focussed in the physical
world, although all things did not appear to his vision with
clearly defined outlines until the latter part of the Atlan-
tean Epoch. Still he came by degrees to know death be-
cause of the break made in his consciousness when it was


284 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


shifted to the higher worlds at death and back to the
physical world at rebirth.

The “opening of the eyes” was brought about in the fol-
lowing manner: We remember that when the sexes sep-
arated, the male became an expression for Will, which is
one part of the twofold soul-force; the female expressing
the other part, Imagination. If woman were not imagina-
tive she could not build the new body in the womb and
were not the spermatozoon an embodiment of the concen-
trated human will, it could not accomplish impregnation
and so commence the germination, which results in the
continued segmentation of the ovum.

These twin-forces, Will and Imagination, are both
necessary to the propagation of bodies. Since the separa-
tion of the sexes, however, one of these forces remains
within each individual and only the part given out is avail-
able for propagation. Hence the necessity for the one-
sexed being who expresses only one kind of soul-force, to
unite with another, who expresses the complementary soul-
force. This was previously explained; also that the part
of the soul-force not used for propagation becomes avail-
able for inner growth. So long as man sent out the full,
dual sex-force for generation, he could accomplish nothing
in the direction of soul-growth for himself. But since
then the part not used through the sex-organ has been ap-
propriated by the indwelling spirit to build the brain and
the larynx for its expression.

Thus man built on, all through the latter part of the
Lemurian Epoch and the first two-thirds of the Atlantean
Epoch until, by the above mentioned use of this half of
his sex-force, he became a fully-conscious, thinking, rea-
soning, being.

In man the brain is the link between the spirit and the


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 285


outside world. He can know nothing of the outside world
except through the medium of the brain. The sense organs
are merely carriers to the brain of impacts from without
and the brain is the instrument which interprets and co-
ordinates those impacts. The Angels belonged to a dif-
ferent evolution and had never been imprisoned in a dense
and cumbrously slow vehicle such as ours. They had
learned to obtain knowledge without a physical brain.
Their lowest vehicle is the vital body. Wisdom came to
them as a gift, without the necessity of laboriously think-
ing it out through a physical brain.

Man, however, had to “fall into generation,” and work
for his knowledge. The spirit, by means of one part of
the sex-force directed inward, built the brain to gather
knowledge from the physical world, and the same force is
feeding and building the brain today. It is subverted
from its proper course inasmuch as it should have gone
outward for procreation, but man retains it for selfish pur-
poses. Notso the Angels. They had experienced no di-
vision of their soul-powers, therefore they could send out
the dual soul-force without selfish reservation.

The force that goes outward for the purpose of creating
another being is Love. The Angels sent out their whole
love, without selfishness or desire and in return, Cosmic
Wisdom flowed into them.

Man sends out only part of his love; the residue he
selfishly keeps and uses to build his inner organs of ex-
pression, to improve himself; thus does his love become
selfish and sensual. With one part of his creative soul~
power he selfishly loves another being because he desires
co-operation in propagation. With the other part of. his
creative soul-power he thinks (also for selfish reasons)
because he desires knowledge.


6


286 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


The Angels love without desire, but man had to go
through selfishness. He must desire and work for wisdom
selfishly, that he may reach selflessness at a higher stage.

The Angels helped him to propagate even after the sub-
version of part of the soul-force. They helped him to
build the physical brain, but they had no knowledge that
could be transmitted by means of it, because they did not
know how to use such an instrument and could not speak
directly to a brain’being. All they could do was to con-
trol the physical expression of the love of man and guide ~
it through the emotions in a loving, innocent way, thus
saving man the pain and trouble incident to the exercise
of the sex-function without wisdom.

Had that régime lasted, man would have remained
simply a God-guided automaton and would never have
become a personality—an individual. That he has be-
come so is due to a much maligned class of entities called
the Lucifer Spirits.


THE LucIFeR SPIRITS.


These spirits were a class of stragglers in the life wave
of the Angels. In the Moon Period they worked them-
selves far ahead of the great mass of those who are now
the most advanced of our humanity. They have not pro-
gressed as far as the Angels who were the pioneer human-
ity of the Moon, however, but they were so much in
advance of our present humanity that 1t was impossible for
them to take a dense body as we have done; yet they could
not gain knowledge without the use or an inner organ,
a physical brain. They were haff-way pnetween man who
has a brain and the Angels who need none—in short, they
were demi-gods.

They were thus in a serious situation. The only way


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 287


they could find an avenue through which to express them-
selves and gain knowledge was to use man’s physica! brain,
as they could make themselves understood by a physical
being endowed with a brain, which the Angels could not.

As said, in the latter part of the Lemurian Epoch man
did not see the physical world as we do now. To him the
desire world was much more real. He had the dream-
consciousness of the Moon Period—an inner picture-con-
sciousness; he was unconscious of the world outside him-
self. The Lucifers had no difficulty in manifesting to
his inner consciousness and calling his attention to his out-
ward shape, which he had not theretofore perceived. They
told him how he could cease being simply the servant of
external powers, and could become his own master and
like unto the gods, “knowing good and evil.” They also
made clear to him that he need have no apprehension if his
body died, inasmuch as he had within himself the creative
ability to form new bodies without the mediation of the
Angels. All of which information was given with the one
purpose of turning his consciousness outward for the
acquirement of knowledge.

This the Lucifers did that they might profit by it
themselves—to gain knowledge as man acquired it. They
brought to him pain and suffering where there was none
before; but they also brought him the inestimable blessing
of emancipation from outside influence and guidance,
thereby starting him on the road to the evolution of his
own spiritual powers—an evolution which will eventually
enable him to upbuild himself with wisdom such as that
of the Angels and other Beings Who guided him before
he first exercised free will.

Betore man’s enlightenment by the Lucifer Spirits he
had not known sickness, pain nor death. All of these


288 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


resulted from the unwise use of the propagative faculty
and its abuse for the gratification of the senses. Animals
in their wild state are exempt from sickness and pain,
because their propagation is carried on under the care and
direction of the wise group-spirit at only those times of the
year which are propitious to that process. The sex-func-
tion is designed solely for the perpetuation of the species
and under no circumstances for the gratification of sensual
desire.

Had man remained a God-guided automaton, he would
have known no sickness, pain, nor death unto this day;
but he would also have lacked the brain-consciousness and
independence which resulted from his enlightenment by
the Lucifer Spirits, the “light-givers,” who opened the eyes
of his understanding and taught him to use his then dim
vision to gain knowledge of the Physical World which he
was destined to conquer.

From that time there have been two forces working in
man. One force is that of the Angels, who build new
beings in the womb by means of the Love which is turned
downward for procreation; they are therefore the perpetu-
ators of the race.

The other force is that of the Lucifers, who are the
instigators of all mental activity, by means of the other
part of the sex-force, which is carried upward for work
in the brain.

The Lucifers are also called “serpents” and are vari-
ously represented in different mythologies. More will be
said about them when we come to the analysis of Genesis.
For the present enough has been said to warrant us in
pursuing the main line of investigation, which leads us te
follow the progress of man’s evolution still further, through
the Atlantean and Aryan Epochs, down to the present day.


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 289


What has been said about the enlightenment of tne
Lemurians applies to only a minor portion of those wh:
lived in the latter part of that Epoch, and who became
the Seed for the Seven Atlantean Races. The greater
part of the Lemurians were animal-like and the forms
inhabited by them have degenerated into the savages and
anthropoids of the present day.

The student is requested to note carefully that it was
the Forms which degenerated. There is a very important
distinction to be kept in mind between the bodies (or
forms) of a race, and the Egos (or life) which is reborn
in those race-bodies.

When a race is born, the forms are ensouled by a cer-
tain group of spirits and have inherent capability of
evolving to a certain stage of completion and no further.
There can be no standing still in nature, therefore when
the limit of attainment has been reached the bodies or
forms of that race begin to degenerate, sinking lower and
lower until at last the race dies out.

The reason is not far to seek. New race bodies are par-
ticularly flexible and plastic, affording great seope for the
Egos who are reborn in them to improve those vehicles
and progress thereby. The most advanced Egos are
brought to birth in such bodies and improve them to the
best of their ability. These Egos, however, are only ap-
prentices as yet, and they cause the bodies to gradually
erystallize and harden until the limit of improvement of
that particular kind of body has been reached. Then
forms for another new race are created, to afford the ad-
vancing Egos further scope for more extended experience
and greater development. They discard the old race
bodies for the new, their discarded bodies becoming the


habitations for less advanced Egos who, in their turn,
10


290 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


use them as stepping-stones on the path of progress.
Thus the old race bodies are used by Egos of increasung
inferiority. gradually degenerating until at last there are
no Egos low enough to profit by rebirth in such bodies.
The women then become sterile and the race-forms die.

We may easily trace this process by certain examples.
The Teutonic-Anglo-Saxon race (particularly the Ameri-
ean branch of it) has a softer and more flexible body and
a more high-strung nervous system than any other race
on earth at the present time. The Indian and the Negro
have much harder bodies and, because of the duller ner-
vous system, are much less sensitive to lacerations. An
Indian will continue to fight after receiving wounds the
shock of which would prostrate or kill a white man,
whereas the Indian will quickly recover. The Australian
aborigines or Bushmen furnish an example of a race dy-
ing out on account of sterility, notwithstanding all that
the British government is doing to perpetuate them.

It has been said by white men against the white race,
that wherever it goes the other races die out, The whites
have been guilty of fearful oppression against those other
races, having in many cases massacred multitudes of the
defenseless and unsuspecting natives—as witness the con-
duct of the Spaniards towards the ancient Peruvians and
Mexicans, to specify but one of many instances. The
obligations resulting from such betrayal of confidence and
abuse of superior intelligence and power will all have to
be paid—yea, to the last, least iota!—by those incurring
them. It is equally true, however, that even had the
whites not massacred, starved, enslaved, expatriated and
otherwise maltreated those older races, the latter would
nevertheless have died out just as surely, though more
slowly, because such is the Law of Evolution—the Order


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 291


of Nature. At some future time the white race bodies,
when they become inhabited by the Egos who are now em-
bodied in red, black, yellow or brown skins, will have
degenerated so far that they also will disappear, to give
place to other and better vehicles.

Science speaks only of evolution. It fails to consider
the lines of Degeneration which are slowly but surely
destroying such bodies as have crystallized beyond possi-
bility of improvement.


Tur ATLANTEAN EPocn.


Voleanic cataclysms destroyed the greater part of the
Lemurian continent and iu its stead rose the Atlantean
continent, where the Atlantic Ocean now is.

Material scientists, impelled by the story of Plato to
undertake researches regarding Atlantis, have demon-
strated *that there is ample foundation for the story that
such a continent did exist. Occult scientists know that it
existed and they also know that the conditions there were
such as shall now be described.

Ancient Atlantis differed from our present world in
many ways, but the greatest difference was in the consti-
tution of the atmosphere and the water of that Epoch.

From the southern part of the planet came the hot,
fiery breath of the voleanoes which were still abundantly
active. From the north swept down the icy blasts of the
Polar region. The continent of Atlantis was the meeting-
place of those two currents, consequently its atmosphere
was always filled with a thick and murky fog. The water
was not so dense as now, but contained a greater propor-
tion of air. Much water was also held in suspension in
the heavy, foggy Atlantean atmosphere.

Through this atmosphere the Sun never clearly shone.


292 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


It appeared to be surrounded by an aura of light-mist, as
do street-lamps when seen through a dense fog. It was
then possible to see only a few feet in any direction and
the outlines of all objects ‘not close at hand appeared
dim, hazy and uncertain. Man was guided more by
internal perception than by external vision.

Not only the country, but also the man of that time
was very different from anything existent on earth at the
present time. He had a head, but scarcely any forehead ;
his brain had no frontal development; the head sloped
almost abruptly back from a point just above the eyes.
As compared with our present humanity, he was a giant;
his arms and legs were much longer, in proportion to his
body, than ours. Instead of walking, he progressed by a
series of flying leaps, not unlike those of the kangaroo.
He had small blinking eyes and his hair was round in
section. The latter peculiarity, if no other, distinguishes
the descendants of the Atlantean races who remain with
us at the present day. Their hair was straight, glossy,
black and round in section. That of the Aryan, though
it may differ in color, is always oval in section. The ears
of the Atlantean sat much further back upon the head
than do those of the Aryan.

The higher vehicles of the early Atlanteans were not
drawn into a concentric position in relation to the dense
body, as are ours. The spirit was not quite an indwelling
spirit; it was partially outside, therefore could not con-
trol its vehicles with as great facility as though it dwelt
entirely inside. The head of the vital body was outside of
and held a position far above the physical head. There
is a point between the eyebrows and about half an inch
below the surface of the skin, which has a corresponding
point in the vital body. This point is not the pituitary


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 293


body, which lies much deeper in the head of the dense
body. It might be called “the root of the nose.” When
these two points in the dense and the vital bodies come into
correspondence, as they do in man today, the trained clair-
voyant sees them as a black spot, or rather as a vacant
space, like the invisible core of a gas flame. This is the
seat of the indwelling spirit in the man—the Holy of Holies
in the temple of the human body, barred to all but that
indwelling human Ego whose home it is. The trained
clairvoyant can see with more or less distinctness, accord-
ing to his capacity and training, all the different bodies
which form the aura of man. This spot alone is hidden
from him. This is the “Isis” whose veil none may lift.
Not even the highest evolved being on earth is capable of
unveiling the Ego of the humblest and least developed
creature. That, and that alone upon earth, is so sacred that
it is absolutely safe from intrusion.

These two points just spoken of—the one in the dense
body and its counterpart in the vital body—were far apart
in the men of the early Atlantean days, as they are in
the animals of our day. The head of the horse’s vital
body is far outside the head of its dense body. The two
points are closer together in the dog than in any other
animal except, perhaps, the elephant. When they come into
correspondence we have an animal prodigy, able to count,
spell, etc.

On account of the distance between these two points,
the Atlantean’s power of perception or vision was much
keener in the inner Worlds than in the dense Physical
World, obscured by its atmosphere of thick, heavy fog.
In the fullness of time, however, the atmosphere slowly
became clearer; at the same time, the point spoken of in
the vital body came closer and closer to the corresponding


294 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONGEPTION


point in the dense body. As the two approached each
other, man gradually lost touch with the inner Worlds.
They became dimmer as the dense Physical World became
clearer in outline. Finally, in the last third of the At-
lantean Epoch, the point in the vital body was united to
the corresponding point in the dense body. Not until then
did man become fully awake in the dense Physical World;
but at the same time that full sight and perception in the
Physical World were gained, the capability of perceiving
the inner Worlds was gradually lost to most of the people.

In an earlier time the Atlantean did not clearly per-
ceive the outline of an object or a person, but he saw the
soul and at once knew its attributes, whether they were
beneficial to him or otherwise. He knew whether the man
or animal he was regarding was kindly or inimically dis-
posed toward him. He was accurately taught by spiritual
perception how to deal with others and how to escape
harm, therefore when the Spiritual World gradually faded
from his consciousness, great was his sorrow at the loss.

The Rmoahals were the first of the Atlantean Races.
They had but little memory and that little was chiefly con-
nected with sensation. They remembered colors and tones,
and thus to some extent they evolved Feeling. The
Lemurian had entirely lacked Feeling, in the finer sig-
nification of the word. He had the sense of touch, could
feel the physical sensations of pain, ease and comfort, but
not the mental and spiritual ones of joy, sorrow, sympathy
and antipathy.

With memory came to the Atlanteans the rudiments of
a language. They evolved words and no longer made use
of mere sounds, as did the Lemurians. The Rmoahals
began to give names to things. They were yet a spiritual
race and, their soul-powers being like the forces of nature,


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 295


they not only named the objects around them, but in their
words was power over the things they named. Like the
last of the Lemurians, their Feelings as spirits inspired
them, and no harm was ever done to one another. To
them the language was holy, as the highest direct expres-
sion of the spirit. The power was never abused or de-
graded by gossip or small talk. By the use of definite
language the soul in this race first became able to contact
the soul of things in the outside world.

The Tlavatlis were the second Atlantean Race. Already
they began to feel their worth as separate human beings.
They became ambitious; they demanded that their works
be remembered. Memory became a factor in the life of
the community. The remembrance of the deeds done by
certain ones would cause a group of people to choose as_
their leader one who had done great deeds. This was the
germ of Royalty.

This remembrance of the meritorious deeds of great
men was carried even beyond the time when such leaders
died. Mankind began to honor the memory of ancestors
and to worship them and others who had shown great
merit. That was the beginning of a form of worship
which is practiced to this day by some Asiatics.

The Toltecs were the third Atlantean Race. They car-
ried still further the ideas of their predecessors, inaugurat-
ing Monarchy and Hereditary Succession. The Toltecs
originated the custom of honoring men for the deeds done
by their ancestors, but there was then a very good reason
for so doing. Because of the peculiar training at that
time, the father had the power to bestow his qualities upon
his son in a way impossible to mankind at the present time.

The education consisted of calling up before the soul of
the child pictures of the different phases of life The con-


\


296 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


sciousness of the early Atlantean was, as yet, principally
an internal picture-consciousness. The power of the edu-
cator to call up these pictures before the soul of the child
was the determining factor upon which depended the soul-
qualities that would be possessed by the grown man. The
instinct and not the reason was appealed to and aroused,
and by this method of education the son, in the great ma-
jority of cases, readily absorbed the qualities of the father.
It is thus evident that there was at that time good reason
for bestowing honor upon the descendants of great men,
because the son almost always inherited most of his father’s
good qualities. Unfortunately, that is not the case in our
time, although we still follow the same practice of honor-
ing the sons of great men; but we have no reason whatever
for doing so.

Among the Toltecs, experience came to be highly valued.
The man who had gained the most varied experience was
the most honored and sought. Memory was then so great
and accurate that our present memory is nothing in com-
parison. In an emergency, a Toltec of wide practical ex-
perience would be very likely to remember similar cases
in the past, and suggest what action should be taken. Thus
he became a valuable adviser to the community when a
situation developed which none of the members had pre-
viously encountered and they were unable to think or rea-
son from analogy as to how to deal promptly with the
emergency. When such an individual was not available,
they were compelled to experiment in order to find what
was best to do.

In the middle third of Atlantis we find the beginning
of separate nations. Groups of people who discovered in
one another similar tastes and habits would leave their
old homes and found a new colony. They remembered the


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 297


old customs and followed them in their new homes as far
as they suited, forming new ones to meet their own par-
ticular ideas and necessities.

The Leaders of mankind initiated great Kings at that
time to rule the people, over whom they were given great
power. The masses honored these kings with all the rever-
ence due to those who were thus truly Kings “by the grace
of God.” This happy state, however, had in it the germ of
disintegration, for in time the Kings became intoxicated
with power. They forgot that it had been put into their
hands by the grace of God, as a sacred trust; that they
were made Kings for the purpose of dealing justly by and
helping the people. They began to use their power cor-
ruptly, for selfish ends and personal aggrandizement in-
stead of for the common good, arrogating to themselves
privileges and authorities never intended for them. Ambi-
tion and selfishness ruled them and they abused their high,
divinely derived powers, for purposes of oppression and
revenge. This was true, not only of the Kings, but also
of the nobles and the higher classes, and when one con-
siders the power possessed by them over their fellow
beings of the less developed classes, it is easy to under-
stand that its misuse would bring about terrible conditions.

The Original Turanians were the fourth Atlantean Race.
They were especially vile in their abominable selfishness.
They erected temples where the Kings were worshiped as
gods, and caused the extreme oppression of the helpless
lower classes. Black magic of the worst and most nauseat-
ing kind flourished and all their efforts were directed
towards the gratification of vanity and external display.

The Original Semites were the fifth and most important
cf the seven Atlantean Races, because in them we find the
first germ of the corrective quality of Thought. Therefore


298 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


the Original Semitic Race became the “seed-race” for the
seven Races of the present Aryan Epoch.

In the Polarian Epoch man acquired the dense body as
an instrument of action. In the Hyperborean Epoch the
vital body was added to give power of motion necessary to
action. In the Lemurian Epoch the desire body furnished
incentive to action.

The mind was given to man in the Atlantean Epoch to
give purpose to action, but as the Ego was exceedingly
weak and the desire nature strong, the nascent mind
coalesced with the desire body; the faculty of Cunning re-
sulted and was the cause of all the wickedness of the mid-
dle third of the Atlantean Epoch.

In the Aryan Epoch Thought and Reason were to be
evolved by the work of the Ego in the mind to conduct
Desire into channels leading to the attainment of spiritual
perfection, which is the Goal of Evolution. This faculty
of Thought and of forming Ideas was gained by man at
the expense of loss of control over the vital forces—i. e.,
power over Nature.

With Thought and Mind man can at present exercise
power over the chemicals and minerals only, for his mind
is now in the first or mineral stage of its evolution, as was
his dense body in the Saturn Period. He can exercise no
power over plant or animal life. Wood and various
vegetable substances, together with different parts of the
animals, are used by man in his industries. These sub-
stances are all in the final analysis chemical matter en-
souled by mineral life, of which the bodies in all the king-
doms are composed, as previously explained. Over all these
varieties of chemical mineral combinations man at his
present stage may have dominion, but until he has reached
the Jupiter Period, that dominion will not be extended so


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 299


that he can work with life. In that Period, however, he
will have the power to work with plant life as the Angels
do at present in the Earth Period.

Material scientists have labored for many years in an
endeavor to “create” life, but they will not succeed until
they have learned that they must approach the laboratory
table with the deepest reverence, as they would draw near
to the altar in a Temple—with purity of heart and with
holy hands, devoid of greed and selfish ambition.

Such is the wise decision of the Elder Brothers, who
guard this and all the deep secrets of Nature until man
shall be fit to use them for the uplifting of the race—for
the glory of God and not for personal profit or self-ag-
grandizement.

It was, however, this very loss of power over the vital
forces which the Atlanteans suffered that made it possible
for man to evolve further. After that, no matter how great
his selfishness became, it could not prove absolutely de-
structive of himself and of Nature, as would have been the
case had the growing selfishness been accompanied by the
great power possessed by man in his innocent former state.
Thought that works only in man is powerless to command
Nature and can never endanger humanity, as would be
possible were Nature’s forces under man’s control.

The Original Semites regulated their desires to some
extent by the mind, and instead of mere desire, came cun-
ning and craftiness—the means by which those people
sought to attain their selfish ends. Though they were a
very turbulent people, they learned to curb their passions
to a great extent and accomplish their purposes by the use
of cunning, as being more subtle and potent than mere
brute strength. They were the first to discover that
“brain” is superior to “brawn.”


300 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


During the existence of this Race, the atmosphere of
Atlantis commenced to clear definitely, and the previously-
mentioned point in the vital body came into correspondence
with its companion point in the dense body. The combina-
tion of events gave man the ability to see objects clearly
with sharp, well-defined contours; but it also resulted in
loss of the sight pertaining to the inner Worlds.

Thus we see, and it may be well to definitely state it as
a law: No progress is ever made that is not gained at the
cost of some previously possessed faculty, which is later
regained in a higher form.

Man built brain at the expense of the temporary loss of
the power to bring forth offspring from himself alone. In
order to get the instrument wherewith to guide his dense
body, he became subject to all the difficulty, sorrow and
pain which is involved in the co-operation necessary to the
perpetuation of the race; he obtained his reasoning power
at the cost of the temporary loss of his spiritual insight.

While reason benefited him in many ways, it shut from
his vision the soul of things which had previously spoken
to him, and the gaining of the intellect which is now man’s
most precious possession was at first but sadly contem-
plated by the Atlantean, who mourned the loss of spiritual
sight and power which marked its acquisition.

The exchange of spiritual powers for physical faculties
was necessary, however, in order that man might be able
to function, independent of outside guidance, in the Phys-
ical World which he must conquer. In time his higher
powers will be regained when, by means of his experiences
in his journey through the denser Physical World, he has
learned to use them properly. When he possessed them,
he had no knowledge of their proper use, aud they were


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH SO0ley


too precious and too dangerous to be used as toys, with
which to experiment.

Under the guidance of a great Entity, the Original
Semitic Race was led eastward from the continent of At-
lantis, over Europe, to the great waste in Central Asia
which is known as the Gobi Desert. There it prepared
them to be the seed of the seven Races of the Aryan Epoch,
imbuing them potentially with the qualities to be evolved
by their descendants.

During all the previous ages—from the commencement
of the Saturn Period, through the Sun and Moon Periods,
and in the three and one-half Revolutions of the Harth
Period (the Polarian, Hyperborean, Lemurian, and earlier
part of the Atlantean Epochs)—man had been led and
guided by higher Beings, without the slightest choice.
In those days he was unable to guide himself, not yet hav-
ing evolved a mind of his own; but at last the time had
come when it was necessary for his further development
that he should begin to guide himself. He must learn
independence and assume responsibility for his own actions.
Hitherto he had been compelled to obey the commands of
his Ruler; now his thoughts were to be turned from the
visible Leaders, the Lords from Venus, whom he wor-
shipped as messengers from the gods—to the idea of the
true God, the invisible Creator of the System. Man was
to learn to worship and obey the commands of a God he
could not see.

Their Leader therefore called the people together and
delivered a soul-stirring oration, which might be thus ex-
pressed :

Hitherto you have seen Those who led you, but there are
Leaders of varying grades of splendor, higher than They,


302 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Whom you have not seen, Who guided your every tottering
step in the evolution of consciousness.

Exalted above all these glorious Beings stands the invis-
ible God Who has created the heaven, and the earth upon
which you dwell. He has willed to give you dominion over
all this land, that you may be fruitful and multiply in it.

This invisible God only, must you worship, but you must
worship Him in Spirit and in Truth, and not make any
graven image of Him, nor use any likeness to picture Him
to yourselves, because He is everywhere present, and is
beyond any comparison or similitude.

If you follow His precepts, He will bless you abundantly
in all good. If you stray from His ways, evil will follow.
The choice is yours. You are free; but you must endure
the consequences of your own actions.

The education of man proceeds by four great steps.
First, he is worked upon from without, unconsciously.
Then he is placed under the Rulership of Divine Messen-
gers and Kings whom he sees, and whose commands he
must obey. Next he is taught to revere the commands of
a God whom he does not see. Finally, he learns to rise
above commands; to become a law unto himself; and, by
conquering himself of his own free will, to live in harmony
with the Order of Nature, which is the Law of God.

Fourfold also are the steps by which man climbs up-
ward to God.

First, through fear, he worships the God whom he begins
to sense, sacrificing to propitiate Him, as do the fetish-
worshipers.

Next, he learns to look to God as the Giver of all things,
and hopes to receive from Him material benefits here and
now. He sacrifices through avarice, expecting that the


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 303


Lord will repay an hundredfold, or to escape swift punish-
ment by plague, war, etc.

Next, he is taught to worship God by prayer and the liv-
ing of a good life; and that he must cultivate faith in a
Heaven where he will be rewarded in the future; and to
abstain from evil that he may escape a future punishment
in Hell.

At last he comes to a point where he can do right with-
out any thought of reward, bribe, or punishment, but sim-
ply because “it is right to do right.” He loves right for
its own sake and seeks to govern his conduct thereby, re-
gardless of present benefit or injury, or of painful results
‘at some future time.

The Original Semites had reached the second of these
steps. They were taught to worship an invisible God and
to expect to be rewarded by material benefits, or punished
by painfu! afflictions.

Popular Christianity is at the third step. Esoteric
Christians, and the pupils of all occult schools are trying
to reach the highest step, which will be generally achieved
in the Sixth Epoch, the New Galilee, when the unifying
Christian religion will open the hearts of men, as their
understanding is being opened now.

The Akkadians were the sixth and the Mongolians the
seventh of the Atlantean Races. They evolved the faculty
of thought still further, but followed lines of reasoning
which deviated more and more from the main trend of the
developing life. The Chinese Mongolians maintain to this
day that the old ways are the best. Progress constantly
requires new methods and adaptability, keeping ideas in
a fluid state, therefore those races fell behind and are de-
generating, with the remainder of the Atlantean Races.

As the heavy fogs of Atlantis condensed more and more,


304 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


the increased quantity of water gradually inundated that
continent, destroying the greater part of the population
and the evidences of their civilization.

Great numbers were driven from the doomed continenf.
by the floods, and wandered across Europe. The Mon-
golian races are the descendants of those Atlantean refu-
gees. The Negroes and the savage races with curly hair,
are the last remnants of the Lemurians.


Tue ARYAN Hpocu.


Central Asia was the cradle of the Aryan Races, who
descended from the Original Semites. Thence have the
different Races gone out. It is unnecessary to describe
them here, as historical researches have sufficiently re-
vealed their main features.

In the present (the Fifth or Aryan) Epoch, man came
to know the use of fire and other forces, the divine origin
of which was purposely withheld from him, that he might
be free to use them for higher purposes or his own devel-
opment. Therefore we have in this present Epoch two
classes: One looks upon this Earth and upon man as be-
ing of divine origin; the other sees all things from a purely
utilitarian viewpoint.

The most advanced among humanity at the beginning of
the Aryan Epoch were given the higher Initiations, that
they might take the place of the messengers of God, i. e.,
the Lords of Venus. Such human Initiates were from this
time forth the only mediators between God and man. Even
they didnot appear publicly nor show any signs and won-
ders that they were Leaders and Teachers. Man was left
entirely free to seek them or not, as he desired.

At the end of our present Epoch the highest Initiate
will appear publicly, when a sufficient number of ordinary


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTH 305


humanity desire, and will voluntarily subject themselves
to such a Leader. They will thus form the nucleus for the
last Race, which will appear at the beginning of the Sixth
Epoch. After that time races and nations will cease to
exist. Humanity will form one spiritual Fellowship as
before the end of the Lemurian Epoch.

The names of the Races which have spread over the
Earth during the Fifth Epoch, up to the present time,
are as follow:

1.—The Aryan, which went south to India,

2.—The Babylonian-Assyrian-Chaldean.

3.—The Persian-Graeco-Latin.

4.—The Celtic.

5.—The Teutonic-Anglo-Saxon (to which we
belong).

From the mixture of the different nations now taking
place in the United States will come the “Seed” for the
last Race, in the beginning of the Sixth Epoch.

Two more Races will be evolved in our present Epoch,
one of them being the Slav. When, in the course of a few
hundred years, the Sun, because of the precession of the
equinoxes, shall have entered the sign Aquarius, the Rus-
sian people and the Slav Races in general will reach a
degree of spiritual development which will advance them
far beyond tneir present condition. Music will be the
chief factor in bringing this about, for on the wings of
music the soul which is attuned may fly to the very
Throne of God, where the mere intellect cannot reach.
Development attained in that manner, however, is not
permanent, because it is one-sided, therefore not in har-
mony with the law of evolution, which demands that
development, to be permanent, must be evenly balanced—
in other words, that spirituality shall evolve through, or


306 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


at least equally with, intellect. For this reason the Slavic
civilization will be short-lived, but it will be great and
joyful while it lasts, for it is being born of deep sorrow
and untold suffering, and the law of Compensation will
bring the opposite in due time.

From the Slavs will descend a people which will form
the last of the seven Races of the Aryan Epoch, and from
the people of the United States will descend the last of
all the Races in this scheme of evolution, which will run
its course in the beginning of the Sixth Epoch.


Tue Sixteen Parus To DESTRUCTION.


The sixteen Races are called the “Sixteen paths to
destruction” because there is always, in each Race, a
danger that the soul may become too much attached to
the Race; that it may become so enmeshed in Race char-
acteristics it cannot rise above the race idea, and will
therefore fail to advance; that it may, so to speak, crystal-
lize into that Race and consequently be confined to the
Race bodies when they start to degenerate, as happened to
the Jews.

In Periods, Revolutions, and Epochs where there are
no Races, there is much more time, and the likelihood of
becoming fossilized is not so great, nor so frequent. But
the sixteen Races are born and die in such a relatively
short time there is grave danger that the one who gets too
much attached to conditions may be left behind.

Christ is the great unifying Leader of the Sixth Epoch,
and He enunciated this law when He uttered those little-
understood words: “If any man come to me, and hate
not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and
brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot
be my disciple.


EVOLUTION ON THE EARTR 307


“And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after
me, cannot be my disciple.

- . . whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not
all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple.”

Not that we are to leave, nor underestimate family
ties, but that we are to rise above them. Father and
mother are “bodies”; all relations are part of the Race—
which belongs to Form. The souls must recognize that
they are not Bodies, nor Races, but Egos striving for per-
fection. If a man forgets this, and identifies himself with
his Race—clinging to it with fanatic patriotism—he is
likely to become enmeshed in and sink with it when his
compeers have passed to greater heights on the Path of
Attainment.


CHAPTER XIII.
_ Back To THE BIBLE.


N our age the missionary spirit is strong. The West-
| ern churches are sending missionaries all over the

world to convert the people of every nation to a belief
in their creeds; nor are they alone in their proselyting
efforts. The East has commenced a strong invasion of
Western fields, and many Christians who have beceme
dissatisfied with the creeds and dogmas taught by the -
clergy and impelled to search for truth to satisfy the de-
mands of the intellect for an adequate explanation of the
problems of life, have familiarized themselves with, and
in many cases accepted, the Eastern teachings of Bud-
dhism, Hinduism, ete.

From an occult point of view, this missionary effort,
whether from East to West or vice versa, is not desirable,
because it is contrary to the trend of evolution. The great
Leaders of humanity Who are in charge of our develop-
ment give us every aid necessary to that end. Religion
is one of these aids, and there are excellent reasons why
the Bible, containing not only the one, but both the
Jewish and Christian religions, should have been given
to the West. If we earnestly seek for light we shall see
the Supreme Wisdom which has given us this double
religion and how no other religion of the present day is
suitable to our peculiar needs. To this end we will in this


308


BACK TO THE BIBLE 309


chapter touch again upon certain points previously
brought out in various places and connections.

In the Polarian, Hyperborean and Lemurian Epochs
the task of leading humanity was a comparatively easy one,
for man was then without mind, but when that disturbing
element came in during the first part of the Atlantean
Epoch, he developed Cunning, which is the product of the
mind unchecked by the spirit. Cunning acts as an aid
to desire, regardless of whether the desire is good or bad,
whether it will bring joy or sorrow.

In the middle of the Atlantean Epoch the spirit had
drawn completely into its vehicles and commenced to work
in the mind to produce Thought and Reason: the ability
to trace a given cause to its inevitable effect, and to
deduce from a given effect the cause which produced it.
This faculty of Reasoning or Logic was to become more
fully developed in the Aryan Epoch, and therefore the
Original Semites (the fifth race of the Atlantean Epoch)
were a “chosen people,” to bring out that germinal faculty
to such a ripeness that it would be impregnated into the
very fibre of their descendants, who would thus become the
New Race.

To transmute Cunning into Reason proved no easy task.
The earlier changes in man’s nature had been easily
brought about. He could then be led without difficulty
because he had no conscious desires, nor mind to guide
him, but by the time of the Original Semites he had
become cunning enough to resent limitations of his liberty
and to circumvent repeatedly the measures taken to hold
him in line. The task of guiding him was all the more
difficult because it was necessary he should have some lib-
erty of choice, that he might in time learn self-govern-
ment. Therefore a law was enacted which decreed imme-


310 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


diate rewards for obedience and instant punishment for
disregard of its provisions. Thus was man taught, coaxed
and coerced into reasoning in a limited manner that ‘‘the
way of the transgressor is hard,’’ and that he must ‘‘fear
God,’’ or the Leader Who guided him.

Out of all who were chosen as ‘‘seed’’ for the new Race,
but few remained faithful. Most of them were rebellious
and, so far as they were concerned, entirely frustrated the
purpose of the Leader by intermarrying with the other
Atlantean Races, thus bringing inferior blood into their
descendants. That 1s what is meant in the Bible where
the fact is recorded that the sons of God married the
daughters of men. For that act of disobedience were they
abandoned and “‘lost.’’ Even the faithful died, according
to the body, in the Desert of Gobi (the ‘‘ Wilderness’’) in
Central Asia, the cradle of our present Race. They were
reborn, as their own descendants of course, and thus in-
herited the ‘‘Promised Land,’’ the Earth as it is now.
They are the Aryan Races, in whom Reason is being
evolved to perfection.

The rebellious ones who were abandoned are the Jews,
of whom the great majority are still governed more by the
Atlantean faculty of Cunning than by Reason. In them
the race-feeling is so strong that they distinguish only
two classes of people: Jews and Gentiles. They despise
the other nations and are in turn despised by them for
their cunning, selfishness and avarice. It 1s not denied
that they give to charity, but it is principally, if not ex-
clusively, among their own people and rarely internation-
ally, as was done in the ease of the earthquake disaster in
Italy, where barriers of creed, race and nationality were
forgotten in the human feeling of sympathy.

In such cases as that and the San Francisco disaster the


BACK TO THE BIBLE 311


inner spiritual nature of man becomes more in evidence
than under any other circumstances, and the close observer
may then discern the trend of evolution. The fact then
becomes manifest that though in the stress of ordinary life
our actions may deny it, nevertheless at heart we know and
acknowledge the great truth that we are brothers and the
hurt of one is really felt by all. Such incidents, therefore,
point out the direction of evolution. The control of man
by Reason must be succeeded by that of Love, which at
present acts independent of and sometimes even contrary
to the dictates of Reason. This anomaly arises from
the fact that Love, at present, is rarely quite unselfish
and our Reason is not always true. In the “New Galilee,”
the coming Sixth Epoch, Love will become unselfish and
Reason will approve its dictates. Universal Brotherhood
shall then be fully realized, each working for the good of
all, because self-seeking will be a thing of the past.

That this much-to-be-desired end may be attained, it
will be necessary to select another “chosen people” from
the present stock to serve as a nucleus from which the
new Race shall spring. This choosing is not to be done
zontrary to the will of the chosen. Each man must choose
for himself; he must willingly enter the ranks.

Races are but an evanescent feature of evolution. Be-
fore the end of the Lemurian Epoch there was a “chosen
people,” different from the ordinary humanity of that
time, who became the ancestors of the Atlantean Races.
From the fifth race of those another “chosen people” was
drawn, from which the Aryan Races descended, of which
there have been five and will be two more. Before a new
Epoch is ushered in, however, there must be “a new heaven
and a new earth”; the physical features of the Earth will
be changed and its density decreased. There will be one


312 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Race at the beginning of the next Epoch, but after that
every thought and feeling of Race will disappear. Hu-
manity will again constitute one vast Fellowship, regard-
less of all distinctions. Races are simply steps in evolu-
tion which must be taken, otherwise there will be no
progress for the spirits reborn in them. But, though
necessary steps, they are also extremely dangerous ones,
and are therefore the cause of grave concern to the Lead-
ers of mankind. They call these sixteen Races ‘‘the six-
teen paths to destruction,’’ because, while in previous
Epochs the changes came after such enormous intervals
that it was easier to get the majority of the entities in
line for promotion, it is different with the Races. They
are comparatively evanescent; therefore extra care must
be taken that as few of the spirits as possible become en-
meshed in the fetters of Race.

This is exactly what happened to the spirits reborn in
the Jewish Race-bodies. They attached themselves so
firmly to the Race that they are drawn back into it in
successive births. ‘‘Once a Jew, always a Jew’”’ is their
slogan. They have entirely forgotten their spiritual na-
ture and glory in the material fact of being ‘‘ Abraham’s
seed.’’ Therefore they are neither ‘‘fish nor flesh.’’ They
have no part in the advancing Aryan Race and yet they
are beyond those remnants of the Lemurian and Atlan-
tean peoples which are still with us. They have become
a people without a country, an anomaly among mankind.

Because of their bondage to the Race-idea, their one-
time Leader was forced to abandon them, and they became
“‘lost.’’ That they might cease to regard themselves as
separate from other peoples, other nations were stirred up
against them at various times by the Leaders of humanity
and they were led captive from the country where they had


BACK TO THE BIBLE 313


settled, but in vain. They stubbornly refused to amal-
gamate with others. Again and again they returned in
a body to their arid land. Prophets of their own Race
were raised up who mercilessly rebuked them and pre-
dicted dire disaster, but without avail.

As a final effort to persuade them to east off the fetters
of Race, we have the seeming anomaly that the Leader of
the coming Race, the Great Teacher Christ, appeared
among the Jews. This still further shows the compassion
and Wisdom of the great Beings Who guide evolution.
Among all the Race: of the Earth, none other was ‘‘lost’’
in the same sense as the Jews; none other so sorely needed
help. To send them a stranger, not one of their own Race,
would have been manifestly useless. It was a foregone
conclusion that they would have rejected him. As the
great spirit known as Booker T. Washington was reborn
among the negroes, to be received by them as one of them-
selves, and thus enabled to enlighten them as no white man
could, so the great Leaders hoped that the appearance of
Christ among the Jews as one of their own might bring
them to accept Him and His teachings and thus draw
them out of the meshes of the Race bodies. But sad it is
to see how human prejudice can prevail. ‘‘He came unto
His own and’’ they chose Barabbas. He did not glory in
Abraham, nor any other of their ancient traditions. He
spoke of ‘‘another world,’’ of a new earth, of Love and
Forgiveness, and repudiated the doctrine of ‘‘an eye for
an eye.’’ He did not call them to arms against Cesar;
had He done so, they would have hailed Him as a deliv-
erer. Jn that respect He was misunderstood even by His
disciples, who mourned as greatly over their vanished
hope of an earthly kingdom as over the Friend slain by
Roman hands.


314 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTILON


The rejection of Christ by the Jews was the supreme
proof of their thralldom to Race. Thenceforth all efforts
to save them as a whole by giving them special prophets
and teachers, were abandoned and, as the futility of exiling
them in a body had been proven, they were, as a last
expedient, scattered among all the nations of the earth.
Despite all, however, the extreme tenacity of this people
has prevailed even to the present day, the majority being
yet orthodox. In America, however, there is now a slight
falling away. The younger generation is commencing to
marry outside the Race. In time, an increasing number
of bodies, with fewer and fewer of the Race characteristics,
will thus be provided for the incarnating spirits of the
Jews of the past. In this manner will they be saved in
spite of themselves. They became “lost” by marrying into
inferior Races; they will be saved by amalgamating with
those more advanced.

As the present Aryan Races are reasoning human beings,
capable of profiting by past experience, the logical means
of helping them is by telling them of past stages of growth
and the fate that overtook the disobedient Jews. Those
rebels had a written record of how their Leaders had dealt
with them. It set forth how they had been chosen and
rebelled; were punished; but were yet hopeful of ultimate
redemption. That record may be profitably used by us,
that we may learn how not to act. It is immaterial that, .
in the course of ages, it has become mutilated, and that the
Jews of today are still under the delusion of being a
“chosen people”; the lesson that may be drawn from their
experience is none the less valid. We may learn how a
“chosen people” may harass their Leader, frustrate His
plans, and become bound to a Race for ages. Their ex-
perience should be a warning to any future “chosen peo-


BACK TO THE BIBLE 315


ple.’’ This Paul points out in unmistakable terms (Heb.
ii. 3-4) ; ‘‘ For if the word spoken by angels was steadfast,
and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward, How shall we escape if we neglect
so great salvation?’’ and Paul was speaking to Chris-
tiens, for the Hebrews to whom he wrote this were con-
verted, had acceptec. Christ and were people whom he ex-
pected would, in some future life, be among the new
““ehosen people,’’? who would willingly follow a Leader
and evolve the faculty of Love and spiritual perception,
the intuition which shall succeed self-seeking and Reason.

The Christian teaching of the New Testament belongs
particularly to the pioneer Races of the Western World.
It is being specially implanted among the people of the
United States, for as the object of the new Race of
the Sixth Epoch will be the unification of all the Races,
the United States is becoming the ‘‘melting-pot’’ where
all the nations of the earth are being amalgamated, and
from this amalgamation will the next ‘‘chosen people,’’
the nucleus, be chiefly derived.

Those spirits, from all countries of the earth, who have
striven to follow the teachings of the Christ, consciously
or otherwise, will be reborn here, for the purpose of giv-
ing them conditions suitable for that development. Hence
the American-born Jew is different from the Jew of other
countries. The very fact that he has been reborn in the
Western World shows that he is becoming emancipated
from the Race spirit, and is consequently in advance of
the crystallized Old World orthodox Jew, as were his
parents, or they would not have conceived the idea of sev-
ering the old ties and moving to America. Therefore the
American-born Jew is the pioneer who will prepare the
path whieh his compatriots will follow later.


316 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Thus we can see that the Bible contains the teaching
peculiarly needed by the Western peoples, that they may be
taught a lesson by the awful example of the Jewish Race
as recorded in the Old Testament, and learn to live by
the teachings of the Christ in the New, willingly offering
up their bodies as a living sacrifice upon the altar of Fei-
lowship and Love.


CHAPTER XIV.
TH» Occutr ANALYSIS oF GENESIS.
Limitations of the Bible.


N our study thus far, previous to Chapter XIII, com-
| paratively little reference has been made to the Bible,
but we shall now devote our attention to it for some
time. Not that it is intended to attempt a vindication of
the Bible (in the form in which it is commonly known
to us at the present day) as the only true and inspired
Word of God, nevertheless it is true that it contains much
valuable occult knowledge. This is, to a great extent,
hidden beneath interpolations and obscured by the arbi-
trary withholding of certain parts as being “apocryphal.”
The occult scientist, who knows the intended meaning,
can, of course, easily see which portions are original and
which have been interpolated. Yet, if we take the first
chapter of Genesis even as it stands, in the best transla-
tions we possess, we shall find that it unfolds the identical
scheme of evolution which has been explained in the pre-
ceding portion of this work and harmonizes quite well
with the occult information in regard to Periods, Revo-
lutions, Races, etc. The outlines given are necessarily
of the briefest and most condensed character, an entire
Period being covered in a score of words—nevertheless, the
outlines are there.
Before proceeding with an analysis it is necessary to
317


318 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


say that the words of the Hebrew language, particularly
the old style, run into one another and are not divided as
are those of our language. Add to this that there is a
custom of leaving out vowels from the writing, so that fn
reading much depends upon where and how they are
mserted, and it will be seen how great are the difticulties
to be surmounted in ascertaining the original meaning.
A slight change may entirely alter the signification of
almost any sentence.

In addition to these great difficulties we must also
bear in mind that of the forty-seven translators of the
King James version (that most commonly used in Eng-
Jand and America), only three were Hebrew scholars, and
of those three, two died before the Psalms had been trans-
lated! We must still further take into consideration that
the Act which authorized the translation prohibited the
translators from any rendition that would greatly deviate
from or tend to disturb the already existing belief. It
is evident, therefore, that the chances of getting a correct
translation were very small indeed.

Nor were conditions much more favorable in Germany,
for there Martin Luther was the sole translator and even
he did not translate from the original Hebrew, but merely
from a Latin text. Most of the versions used in Conti-
nental Protestant countries today are simply translations,
into the different languages, of Luther’s translation.

True, there have been revisions, but they have not
greatly improved matters. Moreover, there is a large num-
ber of people in this country who insist that the Hnglish
text of the King James version is absolutely correct from
cover to cover, as though the Bible had been originally
written in English, and the King James version were 4
certified copy of the original manuscript. So the old


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 319


mistakes are still there, in spite of the efforts which have
been made to eradicate them.

It must also be noted that those who originally wrote
the Bible did not intend to give out the truth in such
plain form that he who ran might read. Nothing was
further from their thoughts than to write an “open book
of God.” The great occultists who wrote the Zohar are
very emphatic upon this point. The secrets of the Thorah
were not to be understood by all, as the following quotation
will show:

“Woe to the man who sees in the Thorah (the law)
only simple recitals and ordinary words! Because, if in
truth it contained only these, we would even today be able
to compose a Thorah much more worthy of admiration.
But it is not so. Hach word of the Thorah contains an
elevated meaning and a sublime mystery. . . . The
recitals of the Thorah are the vestments of the Thorah.
Woe to him who takes this vestment of the Thorah for
the Thorah itself! . . . The simple take notice of the
garments and recitals of the Thorah alone. They know
no other thing. They see not that which is concealed
under the vestment. The more instructed men do not pay
attention to the vestment, but to the body which it en-
velops.”

In the preceding words .the allegorical meanings are
plainly implied. Paul also unequivocally says that the
story of Abraham and the two sons whom he had by Sarah
and Hagar is purely allegorical (Gal. iv:22-26). Many
passages are veiled; others are to be taken verbatim; and
no one who has not the occult key is able to find the deep
truth hidden in what is often a very hideous garment.

The secrecy regarding these deep matters and the in-
variable use of allegories where the mass of the people


320 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


were permitted to come in contact with occult truths will
also be apparent from the practice of Christ, who always
spoke to the multitude in parables, afterward privately
explaining to His disciples the deeper meaning contained
therein. On several occasions He imposed secrecy upon
them with regard to such private teachings.

Paul’s methods sre also in harmony with this, for he
gives “milk” or the more elementary teaching to the
“babes” in the faith, reserving the “meat” or deeper teach-
ing for the “strong’—those who had qualified themselves
to understand and receive them.

The Jewish Bible was originally written in Hebrew,
but we do not possess one single line of the criginal writ-
ings. As early as 280 B. C. the Septuagint, a translation
into Greek, was brought forth. Even in the time of Christ
there was already the utmost confusion and diversity of
opinion regarding what was to be admitted as original,
and what had been interpolated.

It was not until the return from the Babylonian exile
that the scribes began to piece together the different writ-
ings, and not until about 500 A. D. did the Talmud ap-
pear, giving the first text resembling the present one,
which, in view of the foregoing facts, cannot be perfect.

The Talmud was then taken in hand by the Masorete
school, which from 590 to about 800 A. D. was principally
in Tiberias. With great and painstaking labor, a Hebrew
Old Testament was produced, which is the nearest to the
original we have at the present time.

This Masoretic text will be used in the following elucida-
tion of Genesis, and, not relying upon the work of one
translator, it will be supplemented by a German transla-
tion, the work of three eminent Hebrew scholars—H. Arn-


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 321


heim, M. Sachs, and Jul. Furst, who co-operated with a
fourth, Dr. Zunz, the latter being also the editor.


IN THE BEGINNING


The opening sentence of Genesis is a very good example
of what has been stated about the interpretation of the
Hebrew text, which may be changed by differently placing
the vowels and dividing the words in another way.

There are two well recognized methods of reading this
sentence. One is: “In the beginning God created the
heavens and the earth”; the other is: “Out of the ever-
existing essence [of space] the twofold energy formed the
double heaven.”

Much has been said and written as to which of these
two interpretations is correct. The difficulty is, that peo-
ple want something settled and definite. They take the
. stand that, if a certain explanation is true, all others
must be wrong. But, emphatically, this is not the way
to get at truth, which is many sided and multiplex. Each
occult truth requires examination from many different
points of view; each viewpoint presents a certain phase
of the truth, and all of them are necessary to get a com-
plete, definite conception of whatever is under considera-
tion.

The very fact that this sentence and many others in the
vestment of the Thorah can thus be made to yield many
meanings, while confusing to the uninitiated, is illumina-
tive to those who have the key, and the transcendental
wisdom of the wonderful Intelligences Who inspired the
Thorah is thereby shown. Had the vowels been inserted,
and a division made into words, there would have been
only one way of reading it and these grand and sublime


mysteries could not have been hidden therein. That would
11


322 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


have been the proper method to pursue if the authors had
meant to write an “open” book of God; but that was not
their purpose. It was written solely for the initiated,
and can be read understandingly by them only. It would
have required much less skill to have written the book
plainly than to have concealed its meaning. No pains
are ever spared, however, to bring the information, in due
time, to those who are entitled to it, while withholding
it from those who have not yet earned the right to pos-
sess it.


Tur NrspuLtar THEORY.


Regarded by the lhght thrown upon the genesis and
evolution of our system, it is plain that both renderings of
the opening sentence in the Book of Genesis are necessary
to an understanding of the subject. The first tells that
there was a beginning of our evolution, in which the
heavens were created; the other interpretation supplements
the first statement by adding that the heavens and the
earth were created out of the “ever-existing essence,” not
out of “nothing,” as is jeeringly pointed out by the ma-
terialist. The Cosmic Root-substance is gathered together
and set in motion. The rings formed by the inertia of the
revolving mass break away from the central part, forming
planets, etc., as the modern scientist, with remarkable in-
genuity, has reasoned out. Occult and modern science are
in perfect harmony as to the modus operandi. There is
nothing in these statements inconsistent with the two
theories, as will presently be shown. Occult science teaches
that God instituted the process of formation and is con-
stantly guiding the System in a definite path. The modern
scientist, in refutation of what he calls a foolish idea, and
to demonstrate that a God is not necessary, takes a basin


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 323


of water and pours a little oil into it. The water and the
oil represent space and fire-mist respectively. He now
commences to turn the oil around with a needle, bringing
it into the form of a sphere. This, he explains, repre-
sents the Central Sun. As he turns the oil-ball faster and
faster, it bulges at the equator and throws off a ring; the
ring breaks and the fragments coalesce, forming a smaller
ball, which circles around the central mass as a planet
circles around the Sun. Then he pityingly asks the occult
scientist, “Do you not see how it is done? There is no
need for your God, or any supernatural force.”

The occultist readily agrees that a Solar System may
be formed in approximately the manner illustrated. But
he marvels greatly that a man possessing the clear in-
tuition enabling him to perceive with such accuracy the
operation of Cosmic processes, and the intellect to con-
ceive this brilliant demonstration of his monumental
theory, should at the same time be quite unable to see
that in his demonstration he himself plays the part of
God. His was the extraneous power that placed the oil
in the water, where it would have remained inert and
shapeless through all eternity had he not supplied the
force that set it in motion, thereby causing it to shape
itself into a representation of Sun and planets. His was
the Thought which designed the experiment, using the
oil, water and force, thus illustrating in a splendid man-
ner the Triune God working in Cosmic substance to form
a Solar System.

The attributes of God are Will, Wisdom, and Activity.
(See diagram 6. Note carefully what the name “God”
signifies in this terminology.) The scientist has Will to
make the experiment. He has ingenuity to supply ways
and means for the demonstration. This ingenuity corre-


824 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


sponds to Wisdom, the second attribute of God. He has
also the muscular force necessary to perform the action,
corresponding to Activity, which is the third attribute of
God.

Further, the universe is not a vast perpetual-motion ma-
chine, which, when once set going, keeps on without any
internal cause or guiding force. That also is proven by
the experiment of the scientist, for the moment he ceases
to turn the oil-ball the orderly motion of his miniature
planets also ceases and all returns to a shapeless mass of
oil floating on the water. In a corresponding ‘manner, the
universe would at once dissolve into “thin space” if God
for one moment ceased to exert His all-embracing care
and energizing activity.

The second interpretation of Genesis is marvelously exact
in its description of a twofold formative energy. It does
not specifically state that God is Triune. The reader’s
knowledge of that fact is taken for granted. It states the
exact truth when it says that only two forces are active in
the formation of a universe.

When the first aspect of the Triune God manifests as
the Will to create, It arouses the second aspect (which is
Wisdom) to design a plan for the future universe. This
first manifestation of Force is Imagination. After this
primal Force of Imagination has conceived the Idea of a
universe, the third aspect (which is Activity), working in
Cosmic substance, produces Motion. This is the second
manifestation of Force. Motion alone, however, is not
sufficient. To form a system of worlds, it must be orderly
motion. Wisdom is therefore necessary to guide Motion
in an intelligent manner to produce definite results.

Thus we find the opening sentence of the Book of


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 325


Genesis tells us that in the beginning, orderly, rhythmic
motion, in Cosmic Root-substance, formed the universe.


THE CREATIVE HIERARCHIES.


The second interpretation of the opening sentence also
gives us a fuller idea of God when it speaks of the “two-
fold energy,” pointing to the positive and negative phases
of the One Spirit of God in manifestation. In harmony
with the teaching of occult science, God is represented as
a composite Being. This is accentuated in the remaining
verses of the chapter.

In addition to the creative Hierarchies which worked
voluntarily in our evolution, there are seven others which
belong to our evolution, and are co-workers with God in
the formation of the universe. In the first chapter of
Genesis these Hierarchies are called “Elohim.” The name
signifies a host of dual or double-sexed Beings. The first
part of the word is “Eloh,” which is a feminine noun, the
letter “h” indicating the gender. If a single feminine Be-
ing were meant, the word “Eloh” would have been used.
The feminine plural is “oth,” so if the intention had been
to indicate a number of Gods of the feminine gender, the
correct word to use would have been “Elooth.” Instead of
either of those forms, however, we find the masculine,
plural ending, “im,” added to the feminine noun, “Eloh,”
indicating a host of male-female, double-sexed Beings, ex-
pressions of the dual, positive-negative, creative energy.

The plurality of Creators is again implied in the latter
part of the chapter, where these words are ascribed to the
Elohim: “Let us make man in our image;” after which
it is inconsistently added, ““He made them male and fe-
male.”

The translators have here rendered the puzzling word


326 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


“Elohim” (which was decidedly not only a plural woid
but also both masculine and feminine) as being the equiva-
lent of the singular, sexless word, “God.” Yet could they
have done differently, even had they known? They were
forbidden to disturb existing ideas. It was not truth at
any price, but peace at any price that King James desired,
his sole anxiety being to avoid any controversy that might
create a disturbance in his kingdom.

The plural “them” is also used where the creation of man
is mentioned, clearly indicating that the reference is to
the creation of ADM, the human species, and not Adam,
the individual.

We have shown that six creative Hierarchies (besides
the Lords of Flame, the Cherubim, the Seraphim, and the
two unnamed Hierarchies which have passed into libera-
tion) were active in assisting the virgin spirits which in
themselves form a seventh Hierarchy.

The Cherubim and the Seraphim had nothing to do
with the creation of Form; therefore they are not men-
tioned in the chapter under consideration, which deals
principally with the Form-side of Creation. Here we
find mentioned only the seven creative Hierarchies which
did the actual work of bringing man to where he acquired
a dense physical form, through which the indwelling spirit
could work.

After a description of each part of the work of Creation
it is said: “and Elohim saw that it was good.” This is
said seven times, the last time being on the sixth day,
when the human form had been created.

It is stated that on the seventh day “Hlohim rested.”
This is all in accord with our occult teaching of the part
taken by each of the creative Hierarchies in the work of
evolution down to the present Period. It is also taught


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 327


W


that in the present Epoch the Gods and creative
Hierarchies have withdrawn from active participation, that
man may work out his own salvation, leaving the neces-
sary guidance of ordinary humanity to the “Elder
Brothers,” who are now the mediators between man and
the Gods.


THE SATURN PERIOD.


Having satisfied ourselves that the beginning of our
System and the work of the creative Hierarchies, as de-
scribed by occult science, harmonize with the teachings of
the Bible, we will now examine the Bible account of the
different “Days of Creation” and see how they agree with
the occult teachings relative to the Saturn, Sun, and Moon
Periods; the three and one-half Revolutions of the Earth
Period; and the Polarian, Hyperborean, Lemurian, and
Atlantean Epochs, which have preceded the present Aryan
Epoch.

Naturally, a detailed account could not be given in a
few lines like the first chapter of Genesis, but the main
points are there in vrderly succession, very much like an
algebraical formula for Creation.

The secend verse proceeds: “The Earth was waste and
uninhabited, and darkness rested upon the face of the deep ;
and the Spirits of the Elohim floated above the deep.” In
the beginning of manifestation that which is now the
Earth was in the Saturn Period, and in exactly the condi-
tion described, as may be seen by referring to the descrip-
tions already given of that Period. It was not “without
form and void,” as expressed in the King James version.
It was hot, and thus well-defined and separate from the
deep of space, which was cold. It is true that it was
dark, but it could be dark and still be hot, for “dark”


828 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


heat necessarily precedes glowing or visible heat. Above
this dark Earth of the Saturn Period floated the creative
Hierarchies. They worked upon it from the outside and
molded it. The Bible refers to them as the “Spirits of the
Elohim.”


THE Sun PERIOD.


The Sun Period is well described in the third verse,
which says, “And the Elohim said, Let there be Light;
and there was Light.” This passage has been jeered at as
the most ridiculous nonsense. The scornful query has been
put, How could there be light upon the Earth when the
Sun was not made until the fourth day? The Bible nar-
rator, however, is not speaking of the Earth alone. He
is speaking of the central “Fire-mist,” from which were
formed the planets of our system, including the Earth.
Thus when the nebula reached a state of glowing heat,
which it did in the Sun Period, there was no necessity
for an outside illuminant; the Light was within.

In the fourth verse we read: “The Elohim differentiated
between the light and the darkness.” Necessarily, for the
outside space was dark, in contradistinction to the glow-
ing nebula which existed during the Sun Period.


Tuer Moon PERIop.


The Moon Period is described in the sixth verse, as fol-
lows: “and Elohim said, Let there be an expansion [trans-
lated “firmament” in other versions] in the waters, to di-
vide the water from the water.” This exactly describes
conditions in the Moon Period, when the heat of the glow-
ing fire-mist and the cold of outside space had formed a
body of water around the fiery core. The contact of fire
and water generated steam, which is water in expansion,


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 329


as our verse describes. It was different from the com-
paratively cool water, which constantly gravitated toward
the hot, fiery core, to replace the outrushing steam. Thus
there was a constant circulation of the water held in sus-
pension, and also an expansion, as the steam, rushing
outward from the fiery core, formed an atmosphere of
“fire-fog” condensed by contact with outside space,
returning again to the core to be reheated and perform
another cycle. Thus there were two kinds of water, and
a division between them, as stated in the Bible. The dense
water was nearest the fiery core; the expanded water or
steam was on the outside.

This also harmonizes with the scientific theory of mod-
ern times. First the dark heat; then the glowing nebula;
later the outside moisture and inside heat; and, finally,
incrustation.


THE HartH PERIOD.


The Earth Period is next described. Before we take
up its description, however, we have to deal with the Re-
capitulations. The verses quoted and the descriptions given
will also correspond to the recapitulatory Periods. Thus
what is said of the Saturn Period describes also the con-
dition of the System when it emerges from any of the rest
Periods. The descriptions of the Saturn, Sun, and Moon
Periods would therefore correspond to the first three Revo-
lutions of our present Earth Period, and the following
would correspond with conditions on Earth in the present
Revolution.

In the ninth verse, we read: “And Elohim said, Let
the waters be divided from the dry land . . . and
Elohim called the dry land Earth.” This refers to the


330 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-C@NCEPTION


first firm incrustation. Heat and moisture had generated
the solid body of our present Globe.

The Polarian Epoch: The ninth verse, which describes
the Earth Period in this fourth Revolution (where the
real Earth Period work commenced), also describes the
formation of the mineral kingdom and the Recapitulation
by man of the mineral stage in the Polarian Epoch. Hach
Epoch is also a Recapitulation of the previous stage. Just
as there are Recapitulations of Globes, Revolutions, and
Periods, so there are on each Globe, recapitulations of all
that has gone before. These Recapitulations are endless.
There is always a spiral within a spiral—in the atom, in
the Globe, and in all other phases of evolution.

Complicated and bewildering as this may appear at
first, it is really not so difficult to understand. There is
an orderly method running through it all and in time one
is able to perceive and follow the workings of this method,
as a clue leading through the maze. Analogy is one of the
best helps to an understanding of evolution.

The Hyperborean Epoch is described in verses 11 to 19,
as the work of the fourth day. It is here recorded that
Elohim created the plant kingdom, the Sun, the Moon,,.
and the stars.

The Bible agrees with the teaching of modern science
that plants succeeded the mineral. The difference be-
tween the two teachings is in regard to the time when the
Earth was thrown off from the central mass. Science as-
serts that it was before the formation of any incrustation
which could be called mineral and plant. If we mean

such minerals and plants as we have today, that assertion
is correct. There was no dense material substance, but
nevertheless the first incrustation that took place in the
central Sun was mineral. The Bible narrator gives only


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 331


the principal incidents. It is not recorded that the in-
crustation melted when it was thrown off from the central
mass as a ring which broke, the fragments afterward
coalescing. In a body as small as our Earth, the time re-
quired for recrystallization was so comparatively short that
the historian does not mention it, nor the further sub-
sidiary fact that the melting process took place once more
when the Moon was thrown off from the Earth. He prob-
ably reasons that one who is entitled to occult information
is already in possession of such minor details as those.

The plants of the incrustation of the central fire-mist
were ethereal, therefore the melting processes did not de-
stroy them. As the lines of force along which the ice
crystals form are present in the water, so when the Earth
erystallized, were those ethereal plant-forms present in it.
They were the molds which drew to themselves the dense
material forming the plant-bodies of the present day and
also of the plant-forms of the past, which are embedded
in the geological strata of our Earth globe.

These ethereal plant-forms were aided in their forma-
tion when the heat came from outside, after the separa-
tion of the Earth from Sun and Moon. That heat gave
them the vital force to draw to themselves the denser sub-
stance.

The Lemurian Epoch is described in the work of the
fifth day. This Epoch, being the third, is in a sense a
Recapitulation of the Moon Period, and in the Biblical
narrative we find described such conditions as obtained in
the Moon Period—water, fire-fog, and the first attempts
at moving, breathing life.

Verses 20 and 21 tell us that “Elohim said, Let the
waters bring forth life-breathing things . . . and
fowl . . . 3 and Elohim formed the great amphibians


332 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


and all life-breathing things according to their species, and
all fowl with wings.”

This also harmonizes with the teaching of material sci-
ence that the amphibians preceded the birds.

The student is invited to note particularly that the
things that were formed were not Life. It does not say
that Life was created, but “things” that breathe or inhale
life. . . . The Hebrew word for that which they in-
hale is nephesh, and it should be carefully noted, as we
shall meet it in a new dress later.

The Atlantean Epoch is dealt with in the work of the
sixth day. In verse 24 the creation of mammals is men-
tioned, and there the word nephesh again occurs, explain-
ing that the mammals “breathed life.” “Elohim said, Let
the earth bring forth life-breathing things . . . mam-
mals . . .  ;” and in verse 27, “Elohim formed man
in their likeness; male and female made they [Elohim]
them.”

The Bible historian here omits the a-sexual and
hermaphrodite human stages and comes to the two sepa-
rate sexes, as we know them now. He could not do other-
wise, as he is describing the Atlantean Epoch, and by the
time that stage in evolution was reached there were neither
sexless men nor hermaphrodites, the differentiation of the
sexes having taken place earlier—in the Lemurian Epoch.
That which afterward became man could hardly be spoken
of as man in the earlier stages of its development, as it
differed but little from the animals. Therefore the Bible
narrator is doing no violence to facts when he states that
man was formed in the Atlantean Epoch.

In verse 28 (all versions) will be found a very small
prefix, with a very great significance: “Elohim said, Be
fruitful and RE-plenish the earth.” This plainly shows


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 333


that the scribe who wrote it was cognizant of the occult
teaching that the life wave had evolved here, on Globe D
of the Earth Period, in previous Revolutions.

The Aryan Epoch corresponds to the seventh day of
Creation, when the Elohim rested from their labors as
Creators and Guides, and humanity had been launched
upon an independent career.

This ends the story of the manner in which thx Forms
were produced. In the following chapter the story is
told from the point of view which deals a little more with
the Life side.

JEHOVAH AND His MIssIon

There has been much learned discussion concerning the
discrepancy between, and especially the authorship of, the
creation story of the first chapter and that which starts at
the fourth verse of the second chapter. It is asserted that
the two accounts were written by different men, because
the Being or Beings, the name of Whom the translators
have rendered as ‘‘God’’ in both the first and second
chapters of the English version, are, in the Hebrew text,
called ‘‘Elohim”’ in the first chapter, and ‘‘Jehovah’’ in
the second chapter. It is argued that the same narrator
would not have named God in two different ways.

Had he meant the same God in both cases, he probably
would not, but he was not a monotheist. He knew better
than to think of God as simply a superior Man, using the
sky for a throne and the earth for a footstool. When he
wrote of Jehovah he meant the Leader Who had charge of
the particular part of the work of Creation which was
then being described. Jehovah was and is one of the Elo-
him He is the Leader of the Angels who were the human-
ity of the Moon Period, and He is Regent of our Moon.


334 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


The reader is referred to diagram 14 for an accurate under-
standing of the position and constitution of Jehovah.

As Regent of our Moon, He has charge of the degen-
erate, evil Beings there, and He also rules the Angels.
With Him are some of the Archangels, who were the hu-
manity of the Sun Period. They are the “Race-spirits.”

It is the work of Jehovah to build concrete bodies or
forms, by means of the hardening, crystallizing Moon
forces. Therefore He is the giver of children and the
Angels are His messengers in this work. It is well known
to physiologists that the Moon is connected with gestation ;
at least, they have observed that it measures and governs
the periods of intra-uterine life and other physiological
functions.

The Archangels, as Spirits and Leaders of a Race, are
known to fight for or against a people, as the exigencies
of the evolution of that Race demand. In Daniel x:20,
an Archangel, speaking to Daniel, says, “And now will I
return to fight with the prince of Persia: and when I am
gone forth, lo, the prince of Grecia shall come.”

The Archangel Michael is the Race-spirit of the Jews
(Daniel xii:1), but Jehovah ts not the God of the Jews
alone; He 1s the Author of all Race-religions which led up
to Christianity. Nevertheless, it is true that He did take
a special interest in the progenitors of the present degen-
erate Jews—the Original Semites, the “seed-race” for the
seven races of the Aryan Epoch. Jehovah, of course, takes
special care of a seed-race, in which are to be inculeated
the embryonic faculties of the humanity of a new Epoch.
For that reason He was particularly concerned with the
Original Semites. They were His “chosen people’—chosen
to be the seed for a new Race, which was to inherit the


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 335


“Promised Land”’—not merely insignificant Palestine, but
the entire Earth, as it is at present.

He did not lead them out of Egypt. That story orig-
inated with their descendants and is a confused account
of their journey eastward through flood and disaster out
of the doomed Atlantis into the “wilderness” (the Desert
of Gobi in Central Asia), there to wander during the
cabalistic forty years, until they could enter the Promised
Land. There is a double and peculiar significance to the
descriptive word “promised” in this connection. The land
was called the “promised Land” because, as land or earth
suitable for human occupation, it did not exist at the time
the “chosen people” were led into the “wilderness.” Part
of the Earth had been submerged by floods and other parts
changed by volcanic eruptions, hence it was necessary that
a period of time elapse before the new Harth was in a
fit condition to become the possession of the Aryan Race.

The Original Semites were set apart and forbidden to
marry into other tribes or peoples, but they were a stiff-
necked and hard people, being yet led almost exclusively
by desire and cunning, therefore they disobeyed the com-
mand. Their Bible records that the sons of God married
the daughters of man—the lower grades of their Atlantean
compatriots. They thus frustrated the designs of Jehovah
and were cast off, the fruit of such cross-breeding being
useless as seed for the coming Race.

These cross-breeds were the progenitors of the present
Jews, who now speak of “lost tribes.” They know that
some of the original number left them and went another
way, but they do not know that those were the few who
remained true. The story of the ten tribes being lost is a
fable. Most of them perished, but the faithful ones sur-


336 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


vived, and from that faithful remnant have descended the
present Aryan Races.

The contention of the opponents of the Bible, that it is a
mere mutilation of the original writings, is cheerfully
agreed to by occult science. Parts of it are even conceded
to be entire fabrications and no attempt is made to prove
its authenticity as a whole, in the form we now have it.
The present effort is simply an attempt to exhume a few
kernels of occult truth from the bewildering mass of mis-
leading and incorrect interpretations under which they
have been buried by the various translators and revisors.


INVOLUTION, EVOLUTION AND EPIGENESIS.


Having in the foregoing paragraphs disentangled from
the general confusion the identity and mission of Jehovah,
it may be that we can now find harmony in the two seem-
ingly contradictory accounts of the creation of man, as
recorded in the first and second chapters of Genesis, in the
first of which it is written that he was the last, and in the
second that he was the first created of all living things.

We note that the first chapter deals chiefly with the
creation of Form, the second chapter is devoted to the
consideration of Life, while the fifth chapter deals with
Consciousness. The key to the meaning, then, is that we
must differentiate sharply between the physical Form, and
the Life that builds that Form for its own expression. Al-
though the order of the creation of the other kingdoms is
not as correctly given in the second chapter as in the first,
it is true that if we consider man from the Life side, he
was created first, but if we consider him from the stand-
point of Form, as is done in the first chapter, he was
created last.

All through the course of evolution—through Periods,


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 337


Globes, Revolutions and Races—those who do not improve
by the formation of new characteristics are held back and
immediately begin to degenerate. Only that which re-
mains plastic and pliable and adaptable for molding into
new Forms suitable for the expression of the expanding
consciousness ; only the Life which is capable of outgrow-
ing the possibilities for improvement inhering in the
forms it ensouls, can evolve with the pioneers of any life
wave. All else must straggle on behind.

This is the kernel of the occult teaching. Progress is
not simply unfoldment; not simply Involution and Evolu-
tion. There is a third factor, making a triad—Involution,
Evolution, and—Epigenesis.

The first two words are familiar to all who have studied
Life and Form, but while it is generally admitted that the
involution of spirit into matter takes place in order that
Form may be built, it is not so commonly recognized that
the Involution of Spirit runs side by side with the Evolu-
tion of Form.

From the very beginning of the Saturn Period up to the
time in the Atlantean Epoch when “man’s eyes were
opened” by the Lucifer Spirits, and as a consequence the
activities of man—or the Life-force which has become man
—were chiefly directed inward; that very same force which
he now sends out from himself to build railways, steam-
boats, etc., was used internally in building a vehicle through
which to manifest himself. This vehicle is threefold, like
the spirit which built it.

The same power by which man is now improving outside
conditions was used during Involution for purposes of in-
ternal growth.

The Form was built by Evolution; the Spirit built and


338 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


entered it by Involution; but the means for devising im-
provements is Epigenesis.

There is a strong tendency to regard all that is, as the
result of something that has been; all improvements on
previously existing forms, as being present in all forms
as latencies; to regard Evolution as simply the unfolding
of germinal improvements. Such a conception excludes
Epigenesis from the scheme of things. it allows no pos-
sibility for the building of anything new, no scope for
originality.

The occultist believes the purpose of evolution to be the
development of man from a statie to a dynamic God—a
Creator. If the develonment ho is av present undergoing
is to be his education and if, during its progress, he is
simply unfolding latent actualities, where does he learn
to CREATE?

If man’s development consists solely in learning to
build better and better Forms, according to models al-
ready existing in his Creator’s mind, he can become, at
best, only a good dmitator—never a creator.

In order that he may become an independent, original
Creator, it is necessary that his training should include
sufficient latitude for the exercise of the individual orig-
inality which distinguishes creation from imitation. So
long as certain features of the old Form meet the require-
ments of progression they are retained, but at each re-
birth the evolving Life adds such original improvements
as are necessary for its further expression.

The pioneers of science are constantly brought face to
face with Epigenesis as a fact in all departments of
nature. As early as 1759, Caspar Wolff published his
‘‘Theoria Generationis,’’ in which he shows that in the
human ovum there is absolutely no trace of the coming


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 339


organism ; that its evolution consists of the addition of new
formations; a building of something which is not latent
in the ovum.

Heckel (that great and fearless student of nature as he
sees it, and very near to knowledge of the complete truth
regarding evolution) says of the “Theoria Generationis” :
“Despite its small compass and difficult terminology, it is
one of the most valuable works in the whole literature of
biology.”

Heckel’s own views we find thus stated in his “An-
thropogenie”: ‘Nowadays we are hardly justified in call-
ing Epigenesis an hypothesis, as we have fully convinced
ourselves of its being a FACT and are able at any moment
to demonstrate it by the help of the microscope.”

A builder would be but a sorry craftsman were his abili-
ties limited to the building of houses after only one par-
ticular model, which, during his apprenticeship, his master
had taught him to imitate, but which he is unable to alter
to meet new requirements. To be successful he must be
capable of designing new and better houses, improving’
that which experience teaches was not serviceable in the
earlier buildings. The same force which the builder now
directs outward to build houses better adapted to new
conditions was used in past Periods to build new and bet-
ter vehicles for the evolution of the Ego.

Starting with the simplest organisms, the Life which is
now Man built the Form to suit its necessities. In due
time, as the entity progressed, it became evident that new
improvements must be added which conflicted with the
lines previously followed. A new start must be given it in
a new species, where it could retrieve any previous mis-
takes which experience taught would preclude further de-
velopment if the old lines were adhered to, and thus the


340 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


evolving life would be enabled to progress further in a
new species. When later experience proved that the new
form also wags inadequate, inasmuch as it could not adapt
itself to some improvement necessary to the progress of
the evolving life, it too was discarded and still another
departure made, in a form adaptable to the necessary
improvement.

Thus by successive steps does the evolving Life im-
prove its vehicles, and the improvement is still going on.
Man, who is in the vanguard of progress, has built his
bodies, from the similitude of the amceba up to the hu-
man form of the savage, and from that up through the
various grades until the most advanced races are now
using the best and most highly organized bodies on
Earth. Between deaths and rebirths we are constantly
building bodies in which to function during our lives and
a far greater degree of efficiency than the present will yet
be reached. If we make mistakes in building between
lives, they become evident when we are using the body in
Earth life, and it is well for us if we are able to perceive
and realize our mistakes, that we may avoid making them
afresh life after life.

But just as the builder of houses would lag commercially
if he did not constantly improve his methods to meet the
exigencies of his business, so those who persistently adhere
to the old forms fail to rise above the species and are left
behind, as stragglers. These stragglers take the forms
outgrown by the pioneers, as previously explained, and they
compose the lower Races and species of any kingdom in
which they are evolving. As the Life which is now Man
passed through stages analagous to the mineral, plant, and
animal kingdoms and through the lower human Races,
stragglers were left all along the way who had failed to


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF-GENESIS 341


reach the necessary standard to keep abreast of the crest-
wave of evolution. They took the discarded Forms of the
pioneers and used them as stepping-stones, by means of
which they tried to overtake the others, but the advanced
Forms did not stand still. In the progress of Evolution
there is no halting-place. In evolving Life, as in com-
merce, there is no such thing as merely “holding your
own.” Progression or Retrogression is the Law. The
Form that is not capable of further improvement must
Degenerate.

Therefore there is one line of improving forms ensouled
by the pioneers of the evolving Life, and another line of
degenerating forms, outgrown by the pioneers, but en-
souled by the stragglers, as long as there are any strag-
glers of that particular life wave to which those forms
originally belonged.

When there are no more stragglers, the species gradually
dies out. The Forms have been crystallized beyond the
possibility of being improved by tenants of increasing in-
ability. They therefore return to the mineral kingdom,
fossilize and are added to the different strata of the Earth’s
crust.

The assertion of material science that man has ascended
through the different kingdoms of plant and animal which
exist about us now to anthropoid and thence to man, is not
quite correct. Man has never inhabited forms identical
with those of our present-day animals, nor the present-day
anthropoid species; but he has inhabited forms which were
similar to but higher than those of the present anthropoids.

The scientist sees that there is an anatomical likeness
between man and the monkey, and as the evolutionary im-
pulse always makes for improvement, he concludes that man
must have descended from the monkey, but he is always


842 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


baffled in his efforts to find the “missing link” connecting
the two.

From the point.where the pioneers of our life wave (The
Aryan Races) occupied ape-like forms, they have progressed
to their present stage of development, while the Forms
(which were the “missing link”) have degenerated and are
now ensouled by the last stragglers of the Saturn Period.

The. lower monkeys, instead of being the progenitors of
the higher species, are stragglers occupying the most de-
generated specimens of what was once the human form.
Instead of man having ascended from the anthropoids, the
reverse is true—the anthropoids have degenerated from
man. Material science, dealing only with Form, has thus
misled itself and drawn erroneous conclusions in this mat-
ter.

The same relative conditions are to be found in the ani-
mal kingdom. The pioneers of the life wave which en-
tered evolution in the Sun Period are our present-day
mammals. The different grades correspond to the steps
once taken by man, but the forms are all degenerating
under the management of the stragglers. Similarly, the
pioneers of the life wave which entered evolution in the
Moon Period are found among the fruit trees, while the
stragglers of that life wave ensoul all other plant forms.

Each life wave, however, remains definitely confined
within its own borders. The anthropoids may overtake us
and become human beings, but no other animals will reach
our particular point of development. They will reach a
similar stage, but under different conditions, in the Jupiter
Period. The present plants will be the humanity of the
Venus Period, under a still greater difference of condition,
and our minerals will reach the human stage under the
conditions of the Vulcan Period.


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 343


It will be noted that the modern evolutionary theory,
particularly that of Heckel, would, if it were completely
reversed, be in almost perfect accord with the knowledge
of occult science.

The monkey has degenerated from the man.

The polyps are the last degeneration left behind by the
mammals.

The mosses are the lowest degenerations of the plant
kingdom.

The mineral kingdom is the final goal of the forms
of all the kingdoms when they have reached the acme
of degeneration.

A corroboration of this is found in coal, which was once
vegetable or plant forms; also in petrified wood and fos-
silized remains of various animal forms. Common stone
or rock, which no scientist would admit had its origin in
another kingdom, is to the occult investigator as truly
mineralized plants as coal itself. The mineralogist will
learnedly explain that it is composed of hornblende, feld-
spar and mica, but the trained clairvoyant, who can trace
it back in the memory of Nature, through millions of years,
can supplement that statement by adding: Yes, and that
which you call hornblende and feldspar are the leaves and
stems of prehistoric flowers, and the mica is all that remains
of their petals.

The occult teaching of evolution is also corroborated
by the science of embryology in the ante-natal recapitula-
tion of all past stages of development. The difference be-
tween the ovum of a human being and of some of the higher
mammals, and even of the higher developments in the plant
kingdom, is indistinguishable, even under the microscope.
Experts are unable to tell which is animal and which is
human. Even after several of the initial ante-natal stages


344 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


have been passed through the experts cannot differen-
tiate between animal and human embryo.

But if the animal ovum is studied through the entire
period of gestation, it will be observed that it passes
through the mineral and plant stages only, and is born
when it reaches the animal stage. This is because the
Life ensouling such an ovum passed through its mineral
evolution in the Sun Period, its plant life in the Moon
Period, and is now forced to stop at the animal stage in
the Earth Period.

On the other hand, the Life which uses the human ovum
had its mineral existence in the Saturn Period, its plant
existence in the Sun Period, passed the animal stage in the
Moon Period, has still some scope for Epigenesis after it
has reached the animal stage and therefore goes on to the
human—nor does it stop there. The father and mother
give the substance of their bodies for the building of the
child’s body, but, particularly in the higher races, Epi-
genesis makes it possible to add something which makes
the child different from the parents.

Where Epigenesis is inactive in the individual, family,
nation or Race—there evolution ceases and degeneration
commences.

A Livine Sou?

Thus the two Creation stories harmonize very well.

One deals with Form, which was built up through min-
eral, plant and animal and reached the human last.

The other tells us that the Life which now ensouls hu-
man forms was manifested anterior to the Life which
ensouls the forms of the other kingdoms.

One of these accounts of Creation would not have been
sufficient. There are important particulars hidden behind


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 8345


the narrative of man’s creation, in the second chapter;
the verse reads: “Then Jehovah formed man from the
dust of the Earth, and blew into his nostrils the breath
[nephesh], and man became a breathing creature [nephesh
chayim |.”

In other places in the King James version nephesh is
translated “life,” but in this particular instance (Gen. 11:7)
it is rendered “living soul,” thus conveying the idea that
there was a distinction made between the life that ensouled
the human form and that which ensouled inferior creations,
There is no authority whatever for this difference in trans-
lation, which is purely arbitrary. The  life-breath
(nephesh) is the same in man and beast. This can be
shown even to those who stand firmly upon the Bible as
authority, for even the King James version distinctly states
(Eccles. 11:19, 20): “ . . . as the one dieth, so dieth
the other; yea, they all have one breath [nephesh] ; so that
a man hath no pre-eminence above a beast: . . . All
go unto one place.”

The animals are but our “younger brothers,” and though
they are not now so finely organized, they will eventually
reach a state as high as our own, and we shall then have
ascended still higher.

If it is contended that man received his soul in the way
described in this seventh verse of the second chapter of
Genesis, and that he could have received it in no other
way, it is pertinent to ask where and how woman received
her soul?

The meaning of the chapter, and of the inspiration of
the breath of life by Jehovah, is very plain and clear when
we use the occult key, and it has the further and immense
advantage of being logical.

The fact that the Regent of the Moon (Jehovah), with


346 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


His Angels and Archangels, were the principals in this
action fixes the time when this creation occurred. It was
between the earlyxand the middle parts of the Lemurian
Epoch, and must have been after the Moon was thrown
out from the Earth, because Jehovah had nothing to do
with the generation of bodies before the Moon was thrown
off. The forms were then more ethereal. There were no
dense and concrete bodies. It is possible to make such
bodies only by means of the hardening and crystallizing
Moon-forces. It must have been in the first half of the
Lemurian Epoch, because the separation of the sexes,
which is recorded later, took place in the middle of that
epoch.

At that time man-in-the-making had not yet commenced
to breathe by means of lungs. He had the gill-like ap-
paratus still present in the human embryo while passing
through the stage of ante-natal life corresponding to that
Epoch. He had no warm, red blood, for at that stage there
was no individual spirit, the entire form was soft and
phable and the skeleton soft like cartilage. Before the
later date, when it became necessary to separate humanity
into sexes, the skeleton had grown firm and solid.

The work done by Jehovah was to build dense, hard bone
substance into the soft bodies already existing. Previous
to this time, i. e., during the Polarian and Hyperborean
Epochs, neither animal nor man had bones.


ApDAm’s RI.


The grotesque and impossible manner in which the sep-
aration of the sexes is said to have been accomplished (as
described in the common versions of the Bible and, in this
particular case, in the Masoretic text also) is another ex-
ample of what may be done by changing vowels in the old


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS B47


Hebrew text. Read in one way, the word is “rib”; but in
another, which has at least as good a claim to considera-
tion, with the additional advantage of being common-sense,
it reads “side.” If we interpret this to mean that man
was male-female and that Jehovah caused one side or sex
in each being to remain latent, we shall not be doing vio-
lence to our reason, as we would by accepting the “rib”
story.

When this alteration is made, the occult teaching as
previously given harmonizes with that of the Bible and both
agree with the teaching of modern science that man was
bi-sexual at one time, before he developed one sex at the
expense of the other. In corroboration of this, it is pointed
out that the foetus is bi-sexual up to a certain point; there-
after one sex predominates, while the other remains in
abeyance, so that each person still has the opposite sex-
organs in a rudimentary form and therefore is really bi-
sexual, as was primitive man.

Apparently the Bible narrator does not wish to give, in
this second creation account, an accurate picture of the
whole of evolution, but rather to particularize a little more
what was said in the first chapter. He tells us that man
did not always breathe as he does now; that there was a
time when he was not separated into sexes; and that it was
Jehovah Who effected the change, thus fixing the time of
the occurrence. As we proceed, it will be found that much
further information is given.


GUARDIAN ANGELS.


During the earlier Epochs and Periods the great creative
Hierarchies had worked upon humanity as it was uncon-
sciously evolving. There had been only one common cone


348 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


sciousness among ALL human beings; one group-spirit
for all mankind, as it were.

In the Lemurian Epoch a new step was taken. Bodies
had been definitely formed, but they must have warm, red
blood before they could be ensouled and become the abode
of indwelling spirits.

In nature no process is sudden. We would get a wrong
idea were we to imagine that air blown into the nostrils
could put a soul into an image of clay and galvanize it into
life as a sentient, thinking being.

The individual spirit was very weak and impotent and
quite unfitted for the task of guiding its dense vehicle.
In that respect it is not yet very strong. To any qualified
observer, it is evident that the desire body rules the per-
sonality more than does the spirit, even at our present
stage of advancement. But in the middle of the Lemurian
Epoch, when the lower personality—the threefold body—
was to be endowed with the light of the Ego, the latter,
if left to itself, would have been absolutely powerless to
guide its instrument.

Therefore it was necessary for someone much more highly
evolved to help the individual spirit and gradually prepare
the way for its complete union with its instruments. It
was analogous to a new nation, over which, until it be-
comes capable of forming a stable government for itself,
some stronger power establishes a protectorate, guarding it
alike from external dangers and internal indiscretions.
Such a protectorate was exercised over evolving humanity
by the Race-spirit, and is exercised over the animals by the
group-spirit, in a somewhat different way.

Jehovah is the Most High. He is Race-God, as one
might express it, having dominion over all Form. He is
the Chief Ruler and the highest Power in maintaining the


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 349


form and exercising an orderly government over it. The
Archangels are the Race-spirits, each having dominion
over a certain group of people. They also have dominion.
over animals, while the Angels have dominion over the
plants.

The Archangels have dominion over races or groups of
people and also over the animals, for these two kingdoms
have desire bodies and the Archangels are expert architects
of desire matter, because in the Sun Period the densest
globe was composed of that material, and the humanity of
that period, who are now Archangels, learned to build their
densest vehicles of desire stuff as we are now learning to
build our bodies of the chemical elements whereof our
Earth-globe is composed. Thus it will be readily under-
stood that the Archangels are peculiarly qualified to help
later life waves through the stage where they learn to
build and control a desire body.

For analogous reasons the Angels work in the vital
bodies of man, animal and plant. Their densest bodies
are composed of ether and so was the Globe D in the Moon
Period when they were human.

Jehovah and His Archangels, therefore, hold a similar
relation to Races that the group-spirit does to animals.
When individual members of a Race have evolved entire
self-control and government, they are emancipated from
the influence of the Race-spirit and kindred beings.

As we have seen, the point of vantage of the group-spirit,
as of any Ego in the dense body, is in the blood. The
Masoretic text shows that this knowledge was possessed by
the writer of Leviticus. In the fourteenth verse of the
seventeenth chapter the Jews are prohibited from eating
blood because “ . . . the soul of all flesh is in the
blood . . .  ;” and in the eleventh verse of the same


350 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


chapter we find these words: “ for the soul of


the flesh is in the blood . . . the blood itself mediates
for the soul,” which shows that this applies to both man
and beast, for the word here used in the Hebrew ‘is
neshamah and means “soul”—not “life,” as it is rendered
in the King James version.

The Ego works directly through the blood. The Race-
spirit guides the Races by working in the blood, as the
group-spirit guides the animals of its species through the
blood. So also does the Ego control its own vehicle, but
with a difference.

The Ego operates by means of the heat of the blood,
while the Race (i. e., tribal, or family) spirit works by
means of the air, as it is drawn into the lungs. That is
why Jehovah, or His messengers, “breathed into man’s
nostrils,” thereby securing admission for the Race-spirit,
Community-spirits, ete.

The different classes of Race-spirits guided their peoples
to various climates and different parts of the Earth. To
the trained clairvoyant, a tribal-spirit appears as a cloud
enveloping and permeating the atmosphere of the whole
country inhabited by the people under its dominion. Thus
are produced the different peoples and nations. Paul spoke
of “The Prince of the Power of the Air”; of “principalities
and powers,” ete., showing that he knew of the Race-spirits,
but now not even an attempt is made to understand what
they mean, although their influence is strongly felt. Patriot-
ism is one of the sentiments emanating from and fostered
by them. It has not now so much power over people as
formerly. There are some who are being liberated from
the Race-spirit and can say with Thomas Paine, “The
world is my country.” There are those who can leave
father and mother and look upon all men as brothers.


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 351


They are being liberated from the Family-spirit, or spirit
of the Clan, which is different from the race-spirit, an
etheric entity. Others again, who are deep in the toils of
the Race or Family spirit, will suffer the most dreadful
depression if they leave home or country and breathe the
air of another Race or Family spirit.

At the time the Race-spirit entered human bodies the
individualized Ego commenced to get some slight control
of its vehicles. Hach human entity became more and more
conscious of being separate and distinct from cther men,
yet for ages he did not think of himself primarily as an
individual, but as belonging to a tribe or a family. The
affix “son” to many present day surnames is a remnant of
this feeling. A man was not simply “John,” or “James.”
He was John Robertson, or James Williamson. In some
countries a woman was not “Mary,” or “Martha.” She was
Mary Marthasdaughter, Martha Marysdaughter. This cus-
tom was continued in some European countries until with-
in a few generations of the present time; the “son” affix
remains with us yet and the family name is still much
honored.

Among the Jews, even down to the time of Christ, the
Race-spirit was stronger than the individual spirit. Every
Jew thought of himself first as belonging to a certain tribe
or family. His proudest boast was that he was of the
“Seed of Abraham.” All this was the work of the Race-
spirit.

Previous to the advent of Jehovah, when the Earth was
yet a part of the Sun, there was one common group-spirit,
composed of all the creative Hierarchies, which controlled
the entire human family, but it was intended that each
body should be the temple and pliable instrument of an in-


352 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


dwelling spirit and that meant an infinite division of
rulership.

Jehovah came with His Angels and Archangels and made
the first great division into Races, giving to each group the
guiding influence of a Race-spirit—an Archangel. For
each Ego He appointed one of the Angels to act as guardian
until the individual spirit had grown strong enough to be-
come emancipated from all outside influence. 7


Mixine Bioop In MARRIAGE.


Christ came to prepare the way for the emancipation
of humanity from the guidance of the differentiating Race-
and Family-spirit, and to unite the whole human family
in One Universal Brotherhood.

He taught that “Abraham’s seed” referred to the bodies
only, and called their attention to the fact that before
Abraham lived [the] “I”—the Ego—was in existence. The
threefold individual spirit had its being before all Tribes
and Races and it will remain when they have passed away
and even the memory of them is no more.

The threefold spirit in man, the Ego, is the God within,
whom the personal, bodily man must learn to follow.
Therefore did Christ say that, to be His disciple, a man
must forsake all that he had. His teaching points to the
emancipation of the God within. He calls upon man to
exercise his prerogative as an individual and rise above
family, tribe, and nation. Not that he is to disregard kin
and country. He must fulfill all duties, but he is to cease
identifying himself with part and must recognize an equal
kinship with all the world. That is the ideal given to
mankind by the Christ.

Under the rule of the Race-spirit, the nation, tribe or
family was considered first—the individual last. The fam-


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 853


ily must be kept intact. If any man died without leaving
offspring to perpetuate his name, his brother must “carry
seed” to the widow, that there might be no dying out (Deu.
xxv:5-10). Marrying out of the family was regarded
with horror in the earliest times. A member of one tribe
could not become connected with another without losing
caste in his own. It was not an easy matter to become a
member of another family. Not only among the Jews
and other early nations was the integrity of the family
insisted upon, but also in more modern times. As prevl-
ously mentioned, the Scots, even in comparatively recent
times, clung tenaciously to their Clan, and the old Norse
Vikings would take no one into their families without
_ first “mixing blood” with him, for the spiritual effects of
hemolysis, which are unknown to material science, were
known of old.

All these customs resulted from the working of the Race-
and tribal-spirit in the common blood. To admit as a mem-
ber one in whom that common blood did not flow would
have caused “confusion of caste.” The closer the inbreed-
ing, the greater the power of the Race-spirit, and the
stronger the ties that bound the individual to the tribe,
because the vital force of the man is in his blood. Mem-

-ory is intimately connected with the blood, which is the
highest expression of the vital body.

The brain and the nervous system are the highest ex-
pressions of the desire body. They call up pictures of the
outside world, but in mental image-making, i. e., imagina-
tion, the blood brings the material for the pictures; there-
fore when the thought is active the blood flows to the
head.

When the same unmixed strain of blood flows in the


veins of a family for generations, the same mental pictures
12


854 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


made by great-grandfather, grandfather and father are re-
produced in the son by the family-spirit which lived in the
haemoglobin of the blood. He sees himself as the continu-
ation of a long line of ancestors who live in him. He sees
all the events of the past lives of the family as though he
had been present, therefore he does not realize himself as
an Ego. He is not simply “Dayid,” but “the son of Abra-
ham”; not “Joseph,” but “the son of David.”

By means of this common blood men are said to have
lived for many generations, because through the blood their
descendants had access to the memory of nature, in which
the records of the lives of their ancestors were preserved.
That is why, in the fifth chapter of Genesis, it is stated
that the patriarchs lived for centuries. Adam, Methuselah
and the other patriarchs did not personaily attain to such
great age, but they lived in the consciousness of their de-
scendants, who saw the lives of their ancestors as if they
had lived them. After the expiration of the period stated,
the descendants did not think of themselves as Adam or
Methuselah. Memory of those ancestors faded and so it
is said they died.

The “second sight” of the Scotch Highlanders shows
that by means of endogamy the consciousness of the inner
Worlds is retained. They have practiced marrying in the
Clan until recent times; also in Gipsies, who always marry
in the tribe. The smaller the tribe and the closer the in-
breeding, the more pronounced is the “sight.”

The earlier Races would not have dared to disobey the
injunction issued by the tribal God, not to marry outside
of the tribe, nor had they any inclination to do so, for
they had no mind of their own.

The Original Semites were the first to evolve Will, and
they at once married the daughters of the men of other


a


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 355


tribes, frustrating temporarily the design of their Race-
spirit and being promptly ejected as evil-doers who had
- “gone a-whoring after strange gods,” thereby rendering
themselves unfit to give the “seed” for the seven Races of
our present Aryan Epoch. The Original Semites were, for
the time being, the last Race that the Race-spirit cared to
keep separate.

Later, man was given free will. The time had come
when he was to be prepared for individualization. The
former “common” consciousness, the involuntary clairvoy-
ance or second-sight which constantly held before a tribes-
man the pictures of his ancestors’ lives and caused him
to feel most closely identified with the tribe or family,
was to be replaced for a time by a strictly individual con-
sciousness confined to the material world, so as to break
up the nations into individuals, that the Brotherhood of
Man regardless of exterior circumstances may pecome a
fact. This is on the same principle that if we have a
number of buildings and wish to make them into one
large structure, it is necessary to break them up into sep-
arate bricks. Only then can the large building be con-
structed.

In order to accomplish this separation of nations into
individuals, laws were given which prohibited endogamy
or marriage in the family and henceforth incestuous mar-
riages gradually came to be regarded with horror. Strange
blood has thus been introduced into all the families of the
Earth and it has gradually wiped out the involuntary clair-
voyance which promoted the clannish feeling and segre-
gated humanity into groups. Altruism is superseding
patriotism, and loyalty to the family is disappearing in
consequence of the mixture of blood.

Science has lately discovered that hemolysis results from


356 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


the inoculation of the blood of one individual into the
veins of another of a different species, causing the death
of the lower of the two. Thus any animal inoculated with
the blood of a man dies. The blood of a dog transfused
into the veins of a bird kills the bird, but it will not hurt
the dog to have the bird’s blood inoculated into its veins.
Science merely states the fact, the occult scientist gives
the reason. The blood is the vantage ground of the spirit,
as shown elsewhere. The Ego in man works in its own
vehicles by means of the heat of the blood; the race, family
or community spirit gains entrance to the blood by means
of the air we inspire. In the animals are also both the
separate spirit of the animal and the group-spirit of the
species to which it belongs, but the spirit of the animal is
not individualized and does not work self-consciously with
its vehicles as does the Ego, hence it is altogether domi-
nated by the group-spirit which works in the blood.

When the blood of a higher animal is inoculated into
the veins of one from a lower species, the spirit in the
blood of the higher animal is of course stronger than the
spirit of the less evolved; hence when it endeavors to as-
sert itself it kills the imprisoning form and liberates itself.
When, on the other hand, the blood of a lower species is
inoculated into the veins of a higher animal, the higher
spirit is capable of ousting the less evolved spirit in the
strange blood and assimilating the blood to its own pur-
poses, therefore no visible catastrophe ensues.

The group-spirit always aims to preserve the integrity
of its domain in the blood of the species under its charge.
Like the human Race-God, it resents the marriage of its
subjects into other species and visits the sins of the fathers
upon the children as we see in the case of hybrids. Where
a horse and a donkey produce a mule for instance, the


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 357


mixture of strange blood destroys the propagative fac-
ulty so as not to perpetuate the hybrid which is an abomi-
nation from the standpoint of the group-spirit, for the
mule is not so definitely under the dominion of the group-
spirit of the horses or of the group-spirit of the donkeys
as the pure breed, yet it is not so far away as to be en-
tirely exempt from their influence. If two mules could
mate, their offspring would be still less under the domin-
ion of either of these group-spirits, and so a new species
WITHOUT A GROUP-SPIRIT would result. That would
be an anomaly in nature, an impossibility until the sep-
arate animal-spirits should have become sufficiently
evolved to be self-sufficient. Such aspecies, could it be pro-
duced, would be without the guiding instinct, so-called,
which is in reality the promptings of the group-spirit ; they
would be in an analogous position to a litter of kittens re-
moved from the mother’s womb prior to birth. They could
not possibly shift for themselves, so they would die.

- Therefore, as it is the group-spirit of the animals that
sends the separate spirits of the animals into embodiment,
it simply withholds the fertilizing seed-atom when ani-
mals of widely differing species are mated. It permits
one of its charges to take advantage of an opportunity
for re-embodiment where two animals of nearly the same
nature are mated, but refuses to let the hybrids perpet-
uate themselves. Thus we see that the infusion of strange
blood weakens the hold of the group-spirit and that there-
fore it either destroys the form or the propagative fac-
ulty where it has the power.

The human spirit is individualized, an Ego, it is evolv-
ing free will and responsibility. It is drawn to birth
by the irresistible law of Consequence, so that it is be-
yond the power of the race, community or family spirit


358 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


to keep it from returning at the present stage of human
development, and by the admixture of strange blood, by
intermarriage of the individuals of different tribes or
nations, the leaders of man are gradually helping him to
oust the family, tribal or national spirit from the blood,
but with it has necessarily gone the involuntary clairvoy-
ance which was due to its working in the blood, whereby
it fostered the family traditions in its charges, and so we
see that also in the case of man a faculty was destroyed
by the mixture of blood. That loss was a gain, however,
for it has concentrated man’s energy on the material
world and he is better able to master its lessons than if he
were still distracted by the visions of the higher realms.

As man becomes emancipated he gradually ceases to
think of himself as ‘‘ Abraham’s Seed,’’ as a ‘‘ Clan Stew-
art Man,’’ as a ‘‘Brahmin’’ or a ‘‘Levite’’; he is learn-
ing to think more of himself as an individual, an ‘‘I.’’
The more he cultivates that ‘‘Self,’’? the more he frees
himself from the family and national spirit in the blood,
the more he becomes a self-sufficient citizen of the world.

There is much foolish, even dangerous, talk of giving up
the Self to the Not-Self; only when we have eultivated a
““Self,’’ can we sacrifice ourselves and give up the Self to
the WHOLE. So long as we can only love our own family
or nation we are incapable of loving others. Weare bound
by the tie of kin and country. When we have burst the
tie of blood and asserted ourselves and become self-suffi-
cient may we become unselfish helpers of humanity. When
a man has reached that stage he will find that, instead of
having lost his own family, he has gained all the families
in the world, for they will have become his sisters and
brothers, his fathers and mothers to care for and help.

Then he will regain the viewpoint of the Spiritual World


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 359


which he lost by the mixing of blood, but it will be a
higher faculty an intelligent, voluntary clairvoyance where
he can see what he wills and not merely the negative fac-
ulty imprinted in his blood by the family spirit which
bound him to the family to the exclusion of all other
families. His viewpoint will be universal, to be used for
universal good.

For aforementioned reasons, intertribal, and later inter-
national, marriages came gradually to be regarded as de-
sirable and preferable to close intermarriages.

As man progressed through these stages, and gradually
lost touch with the inner world, he sorrowed over the loss
and longed for a return of the “inner” vision. But by
degrees he forgot, and the material world gradually loomed
up before his mind as the only reality, until at last he has
come to scout the idea that such inner Worlds exist and
to regard a belief in them as foolish superstition.

The four causes contributing to this condition were:

(1) The clearing of the foggy atmosphere of the At-
lantean continent.

(2) The indrawing of the vital body, so that a point
it the root of the nose corresponds to a similar point in
the vital body.

(8) The elimination of inbreeding and the substitu-
tion therefor of marriages outside the family and tribe.

(4) The use of intoxicants.

The Race-spirits still exist in and work with man, but
the more advanced the nation, the more freedom is given
the individual. In countries where people are most fet-
tered, the Race-spirit is strongest. The more in harmony
a man is with the law of Love, and the higher his ideals,
the more he frees himself from the spirit of the Race.

Patriotism, while good in itself, is a tie of the Race-


360 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


spirit. The ideal of Universal Brotherhood, which identi-
fies itself with neither country nor race, is the only path
which leads to emancipation.

Christ came to reunite the separated races in bonds of
peace and good will, wherein all will willingly and con-
sciously follow the law of Love.

The present Christianity is not even a shadow of the
true religion of Christ. That will remain in abeyance
until all race feeling shall have been overcome. In the
Sixth Epoch there will be but one Universal Brotherhood,
under the Leadership of the Returned Christ, but the day
and the hour no man knows, for it is not fixed, but de-
pends upon how soon a sufficient number of people shall
have commenced to live the life of Fellowship and Love,
which is to be the hall-mark of the new dispensation.


Tue Fay or Man.


In connection with the analysis of Genesis, a few more
words must be said about “The Fall,” which is the back-
bone and sinew of popular Christianity. Had there been
no “Fall,” there would have been no need for the “plan
of salvation.”

When, in the middle of the Lemurian Epoch, the separa-
tion of the sexes occurred (in which work Jehovah and His
Angels were active), the Ego began to work slightly upon
the dense body, building organs within. Man was not at
that time the wide-awake conscious being he is at present,
but by means of half the sex force, he was building a brain
for the expression of thought as previously described. He
was more awake in the Spiritual World than in the physi-
cal; hardly saw his body and was not conscious of the act
of propagation. The Bible statement that Jehovah put
man to sleep when he was to bring forth is correct. There


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 361


was no pain nor trouble connected with childbirth; nor
(because of man’s exceedingly dim consciousness of his
physical surroundings) did he know anything of the loss
of his dense body by death, or of his installment in a new
dense vehicle at birth.

It will be remembered that the Lucifers were a part of
the humanity of the Moon Period; they are the stragglers
of the life wave of the Angels, too far advanced to take a
dense physical body, yet they needed an “inner” organ for
the acquisition of knowledge. Moreover, they could work
through a physical brain, which the Angels or Jehovah
could not.

These spirits entered the spinal cord and brain and
spoke to the woman, whose Imagination, as explained else-
where, had been aroused by the training of the Lemurian
Race. As her consciousness was principally internal, a
picture-consciousness of them was received by her, and she
saw them as serpents, for they had entered her brain by
the serpentine spinal cord.

The training of the women included watching the peril-
ous feats and fights of the Men in developing Will, in
which fights bodies were necessarily often killed. The dim
consciousness of something unusual set the imagination of
the woman to wondering why she saw these strange things.
She was conscious of the spirits of those who had lost their
bodies, but her imperfect sense of the Physical World
failed to reveal these friends whose dense bodies had been
destroyed.

The Lucifers solved the problem for her by “opening
her eyes.” They revealed to her her own body and that of
the man and taught her how, together, they might conquer
death by creating new bodies. Thus death could not touch
them for they, like Jehovah, could create at will.


362 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Lucifer opened the eyes of woman. She sought the help
of man and opened his eyes. Thus, in a real though dim
way, they first “knew” or became aware of one another and
also of the Physical World. They became conscious of death
and pain and by this knowledge they learned to differentiate
between the inner man and the outer garment he wears and
renews each time it is necessary to take his next step in
evolution. They ceased to be automatons and became free
thinking beings at the cost of freedom from pain, sickness
and death.

That the interpretation of the eating of the fruit as
symbol of the generative act is not a far-fetched idea, is
shown by the declaration of Jehovah (which is not a
curse at all, but simply a statement of the consequences
that would follow the act) that they will die and that the
woman will bear her children in pain and suffering. He
knew that, as man’s attention had now been called to his
physical garment, he would become aware of its loss by
death. He also knew that man had not yet wisdom to
bridle his passion and regulate sexual intercourse by the
positions of the planets, therefore pain in childbirth must
follow his ignorant abuse of the function.

It has always been a sore puzzle to Bible commentators
what connection there could possibly be between the eating
of fruit and the bearing of children, but if we under-
stand that the eating of the fruit is symbolical of the gen-
erative act whereby man becomes “like God” inasmuch as
he knows his kind and is thus able to generate new beings,
the solution is easy.

In the latter part of the Lemurian Epoch when man
arrogated to himself the prerogative of performing the
generative act when he pleased, it was his then-powerful
will that enabled him to do so. By “eating of the tree


OCCULT ANALYSIS OF GENESIS 363


of knowledge” at any and all times he was able to create
a new body whenever he lost an old vehicle.

We usually think of death as something to be dreaded.
Had man also “eaten of the tree of life,’ had he learned
the secret of how to perpetually vitalize his body, there
would have been a worse condition. We know that our
bodies are not perfect today and in those ancient days they
were exceedingly primitive. Therefore the anxiety of the
creative Hierarchies lest man “eat of the tree of life also,”
and become capable of renewing his vital body, was well
founded. Had he done so he would have been immortal
indeed, but would never have been able to progress. The
evolution of the Ego depends upon its vehicles and if it
could not get new and improving ones by death and birth,
there would be stagnation. It is an occult maxim that
the oftener we die the better we are able to live, for every
birth gives us a new chance.

We have seen that brain-knowledge, with its concomitant
selfishness, was bought by man at the cost of the power to
create from himself alone. He bought his free will at
the cost of pain and death; but when man learns to use his
intellect for the good of humanity, he will gain spiritual
power over life and in addition, will be guided by an innate
knowledge as much higher than the present brain-conscious-
ness as that is higher than the lowest animal consciousness.

The fall into generation was necessary to build the
brain, but that is, at best, only an indirect way of gaining
knowledge and will be superseded by direct touch with the
Wisdom of Nature, which man, without any co-operation,
will then be able to use for the generation of new bodies.
The larnyx will again speak “the lost Word,” the “creative
Fiat,” which, under the guidance of great Teachers, was


364 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


used in ancient Lemuria in the creation of plants and
animals.

Man will then be a creator in very truth. Not in the
slow and toilsome manner of the present day, but by the
use of the proper word or magical formula, will he be able
to create a body.

All that was manifested during the descending period
of involution remains until the corresponding point on the
ascending arc of evolution has been reached. The present
generative organs will degenerate and atrophy. The female
organ was the first to come into existence as a separate
unit and, according to the law that “the first shall be
last,” will be the last to atrophy. The male organ was
differentiated last and is even now commencing to divide
itself from the body. Diagram 13 will make this clear.


[Diagram 15


ile Wave Righer Worlds


Female Qrsan originales... . 22... -.-.-- Female Orjana rophies
ee mG
€ bs
MatcONn “oriquaales. ... .. Dale Orsay A snc
SS WA


Material World


PART IIL.


Man’s Future Development


and _ Initiation.


2y} YIM
INos PIOs-E
ayy Bujzew
-eBjeuy


——


403829,
pue


=
>
a
rs
*
=
o
°
5


See


u2aw *
-po®
24 II 2M


GOIMAd NVOANA 243 40 8299019


UEWINY oq Ij} SIUCIG


|


Goliad SANSA 943 340 899015


243 wos5
iInos
jeuojjow yg


our
30BI3xXea pus


spo
-}wadg
29 HIM OM


{Nos 02] S2;poq aur Bujz
opengjsjds Aq 4933eUl go 3NO Hades 243 8331] UO}INIOAD


UOjNjOAg 0} Ssusny uo} NjOAUT YS!UM uodn wnsd
=|Ng 243 S1 PUIW 243 PUE J2A9| 243 S} ‘yJ4108 O43
$0 AZAIZOE GAZEBO yeuybyso yy sjsousbjdg


IOQZ Kpo' i)
>Cm Bee Si


ee
= °
@ paoeiyxs =
» nos fad uso}
OQ}}3 snojosu0g & 3yBnoyy
°
sz m F
> ® wii0s 34GN0YY D °
3 ° 3 cae s| YW ni|> SF) (ws03 yy6noyr
ZF eypwoss “IIS pulW 4]}}2 sem yum © eB @au3
» jnos Ss as 4° spso7q ais @ 2 sem YO]UM
@ jenzoajjaruy @]}o Aq uaaji iG re
F3 cis mU< 4
———s —EE See
= S pulw ails Apog > S$
v = zi} |2
oc = oll? eujseq ° Apog 2 Apog
a a ole sOlern QR ys = esueg
Z uy 0843x2 Zl |wuos dO SGHOT1}I3 EOSIN Fa | Fe S
3 v = a oS >
» m 3 me? ri i
= b) < jeuswsah o]]s
pue Fe) ® Be wyy cic e40
uew r) @ oaeBpue ZI}1, wid}
sadng s YEW UL pf] 346n0Uy
2q 111M 9M 5 mlz
x} l=
sd ro) 4
5 2
WIGS B17
2° “ny aur Olj< eur wiy
3° (77) pauaxeme @ aaeb pue
te) 77 o ueWw ut
Re) S76 WIGNHAHO JI>
or 129 c
0° No 2————
% fo)
Nr 3
Yo WAIGS BVJAIG
> our
Oo, pousxeme
<9
~ SASNOYHL


NOILVa¥O JO SAVG N3AaS AHL


s9/pog Puy 31 Busze3sA4s Aq s0z3;eud
Ozu] UMOP 34IGS 943 sBujiq uoj3njoAuy


uo|bey
yeopwayd


yuBnouL =F
2324909 oo
youojbey 2
o a
e g
3 4
= =
o}}/3uBnou, ©
“*Ilyoensaqy §
J} souciBeu =
o -
”
>
4
ce
a
Zz
v
m
2
°
.2)


CHAPTER XV.
Curist AND His Mission.
The Evolution of Religion.


N the foregoing part of this work we have become
| familiar with the way in which our present outside

world came into existence, and how man evolved the
complicated organism with which he is related to outer
conditions. We have also, in a measure, studied the
Jewish Race-religion. We will next consider the last
and greatest of the divine measures put forth for the
uplifting of humanity, i. e., Christianity, which will be
the Universal Religion of the future.

It is a notable fact that man and his religions have
evolved side by side and in an equal degree. The earliest
religion of any Race is found to be as savage as the people
governed by it and as they become more civilized, their
religions become more and more humane and in harmony
with higher ideals.

From this fact materialists have drawn the inference
that no religion has a higher origin than man himself.
Their investigations into early history have resulted in a
conviction that, as man progressed, he civilized his God
and fashioned Him after his own pattern.

This reasoning is defective, because it fails to take into
account that man is not the body, but an indwelling spirit,
an Ego who uses the body with ever-increasing facility as
evolution progresses.

367


368 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


There is no doubt that the law for the body is “The
Survival of the Fittest.” The law for the evolution of
the spirit demands “Sacrifice.” As long as man believes
that “Might is Right,’ the Form prospers and waxes
strong, because all obstacles are swept out of the way re-
gardless of others. If the body were all, that manner of
life would be the only one possible for man. He would be
altogether incapable of any regard for others and would
forcibly resist any attempt to encroach upon what he con-
sidered his rights—the right of the stronger, which is the
sole standard of justice under the law of the Survival of
the Fittest. He would be quite regardless of his fellow-
beings; absolutely insensible to any force from without
that tended to make him act in any manner not conducive
to his own momentary pleasure.

It is manifest, then, that whatever urges man toward a
higher standard of conduct in his dealing with others must
come from within, and from a source which is not identical
with the body, otherwise it would not strive with the body
and often prevail against its most obvious interests. More-
over, it must be a stronger force than that of the body, or
it could not succeed in overcoming its desires and com-~-
pelling it to make sacrifices for those who are physically
weaker.

That such a force exists, surely no one will deny. We
have come to that stage in our advancement where, instead
of seeing in physical weakness an opportunity for easy
prey, we recognize in the very frailty of another a valid
claim upon our protection. Selfishness is being slowly
but surely routed by Altruism.

Nature is sure to accomplish her purposes. Though
slow, her progress is orderly and certain. In the breast of
every man this force of Altruism works as a leaven. It is


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 369


transforming the savage into the civilized man, and will in
time transform the latter into a God.

Though nothing that is truly spiritual can be thoroughly
comprehended, yet it may at least be apprehended by means
of an illustration.

If one of two tuning-forks of exactly the same pitch is
struck, the sound will induce the same vibration in the
other, weak to begin with, but if the strokes are continued,
the second fork will give out a louder and louder tone
until it will emit a volume of sound equal to that of the
first. This will happen though the forks are several feet
apart, and even if one of them is encased in glass. The
sound from the smitten one will penetrate the glass and
the answering note be emitted by the enclosed instrument.

These invisible sound-vibrations have great power over
concrete matter. They can both build and destroy. If a
small quantity of very fine powder is placed upon a brass
or glass plate, and a violin bow drawn across the edge, the
vibrations will cause the powder to assume beautiful geo-
metrical figures. The human voice is also capable of pro-
ducing these figures; always the same figure for the same
tone. 4

If one note or chord after another be sounded upon a
musical instrument—a piano, or preferably a violin, for
from it more gradations of tone can be obtained—a tone
will finally be reached which will cause the hearer to feel
a distinct vibration in the back of the lower part of the
head. Each time that note is struck, the vibration will be
felt. That note is the “key-note” of the person whom it so
affects. If it is struck slowly and soothingly it will build
and rest the body, tone the nerves and restore health. If,
on the other hand, it be sounded in a dominant way, loud


370 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


and long enough, it will kill as surely as a bullet from a
pistol.

If we now apply what has been said about music or
sound to the problem of how this inner force is awakened
and strengthened, we may perhaps understand the matter
better.

In the first place, let us particularly note the fact that
the two tuning-forks were of the same itch. Had this not
been the case, we might have sounded and sounded one of
them until the crack of doom, but the other one would
have remained mute. Let us understand this thoroughly:
Vibration can be induced in one tuning-fork by one of
like tone only. Any thing, or any being, can be affected as
above stated by no sound except its own key-note.

We know that this force of Altruism exists. We also
know that it is less pronounced among uncivilized people
than among people of higher social attainment, and among
the very lowest races it is almost entirely lacking. The
logical conclusion is that there was a time when it was
altogether absent. Consequent upon this conclusion fol-
lows the natural question: What induced it?

The material personality surely had nothing to do with
it; in fact, that part of man’s nature was much more com-
fortable without it than it has been at any time since.
Man must have had the force of Altruism latent within,
otherwise it could not have been awakened. Still further,
it must have been awakened by a force of the same kind—
a similar force that was already active—as the second
tuning-fork was started into vibration by the first after
it was struck.

We also saw that the vibrations in the second fork be-
came stronger and stronger under the continued impacts of
sound from the first, and that a glass case was no hindrance


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 371


to the induction of the sound. Under the continued im-
pacts of a force similar to that within him, the Love of
God to man has awakened this force of Altruism and is
constantly increasing its potency.

It is therefore reasonable and logical to conclude that,
at first, it was necessary to give man a religion commen-
surate with his ignorance. It would have been useless
to talk to him, at that stage, of a God Who was all tender-
ness and love. From his viewpoint, those attributes were
weaknesses and he could not have been expected to rever-
ence a God Who possessed what were to him despicable
qualities. The God to Whom he rendered obedience must
be a strong God, a God to be feared, a God Who could
hurl the thunderbolt and wield the flail of the lightning.

Thus, man was impelled first to fear God and was given
religions of a nature to further his spiritual well-being
under the lash of fear.

‘The next step was to induce in him a certain kind of
unselfishness, by causing him to give up part of his worldly
goods—to sacrifice. This was achieved by giving him the
Tribal or Race-God, Who is a jealous God, requiring of
him the strictest allegiance and the sacrifice of wealth,
which the growing man greatly prizes. But in return, this
Race-God is a friend and mighty ally, fighting man’s bat-
tles and giving him back many fold the sheep, bullocks
and grain which he sacrificed. He had not yet arrived at
the stage where it was possible for him to understand
that all creatures are akin, but the Tribal God taught
him that he must deal mercifully with his brother tribes-
man and gave laws which made for equity and fair dealing
between men of the same Race.

It must not be thought that these successive steps were
taken easily, nor without rebellion and lapses upon the


372 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


part of primitive man. Selfishness is ingrained in the
lower nature even unto this day, and there must have been
many lapses and much backsliding. We have in the Jew-
ish Bible good examples of how man forgot, and had to
be patiently and persistently “prodded” again and again by
the Tribal God. Only the visitations of a long-suffering
Race-spirit were potent, at times, in bringing him back to
the law—that law very few people have even yet learned
to obey.

There are always pioneers, however, who require some-
thing higher. When they become sufficiently numerous, a
new step in evolution is taken, so that several gradations
always exist. There came a time, nearly two thousand
years ago, when the most advanced of humanity were
ready to take another step forward, and learn the religion
of living a good life for the sake of future reward in a state
of existence in which they must have faith.

That was a long, hard step to take. It was compara-
tively easy to take a sheep or a bullock to the temple and
offer it as a sacrifice. If a man brought the first-fruits of
his granary, his vineyards, or his flocks and herds, he still
had more, and he knew that the Tribal God would refill
his stores and give abundantly in return. But in this
new departure, it was not a question of sacrificing his
goods. It was demanded that he sacrifice himself. It was
not even a sacrifice to be made by one supreme effort of
martyrdom ; that also would have been comparatively easy.
Instead, it was demanded that day by day, from morning
until night, he must act mercifully toward all. He must
forego selfishness, and Jove his neighbor, as he had been
used to loving himself. Moreover, he was not promised
any immediate and visible reward, but must have faith in
a future happiness.


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 373


Is it strange that people find it difficult to realize this
high ideal of continued well-doing, made doubly hard by
the fact that self-interest is entirely ignored? Sacrifice is
demanded with no positive assurance of any reward.
Surely it is much to the credit of humanity that so much
altruism is practiced agd that it is constantly increasing.
The wise Leaders, knowing the frailness of the spirit to
cope with the selfish instincts of the body, and the dangers
of despondency in the face of such standards of conduct,
gave another uplifting impulse when they incorporated in
the new religion the doctrine of “vicarious Atonement.”

This idea is scouted by some very advanced philosophers,
and the law of “Consequence” made paramount. If it so
happens that the reader agrees with these philosophers,
we request that he await the explanation herein set forth,
showing how both are part of the scheme of upliftment.
Suffice it to say, for the present, that this doctrine of
atonement gives many an earnest soul the strength to
strive and, in spite of repeated failures, to bring the lower
nature under subjection. Let it be remembered that, for
reasons given when the laws of Rebirth and Consequence
were discussed, western humanity knew practically noth-
ing of these laws. With such a great ideal before them
as the Christ, and believing they had but a few short years
in which to attain to such a high degree of development as
this, would it not have been the greatest imaginable cruelty
to leave them without help? Therefore, the GRHAT SAC-
RIFICE on Calvary—while it also served other purposes,
as will be shown—became rightfully the Beacon of Hope
for every earnest soul who is striving to achieve the impos-
sible; to attain, in one short life, to the perfection
demanded by the Christian religion.


874 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


JESUS AND CHRIST-JESUS.


To gain some slight insight into the Great Mystery of
Golgotha, and to understand the Mission of Christ as the
Founder of the Universal Religion of the future, it is
necessary that we first become familiar with His exact
nature and incidentally, with that %®f Jehovah, Who is the
head of such Race-religions as Taoism, Buddhism, Hindu-
ism, Judaism, ete. ; also with the identity of “The Father,”
to Whom Christ is to give up the Kingdom, in due time.

In the Christian creed occurs this sentence: “Jesus
Christ, the only begotten Son of God.” This is generally
understood to mean that a certain person Who appeared
in Palestine about 2,000 years ago, Who is spoken of as
Jesus Christ—one separate individual—was the only be-
gotten Son of God. =

This is a great mistake. There are three distinct and
widely different Beings characterized in this sentence. It
is of the greatest importance that the student should clearly
understand the exact nature of these Three Great and
Exalted Beings—differing vastly in glory, yet eavh entitled
to our deepest and most devout adoration.

The student is requested to turn to diagram 6 and note
that “The only begotten” (“The Word,” of Whom John
speaks) is the second aspect of the Supreme Being.

This “Word,” and It alone, is “begotten of His Father
[the first aspect] before all Worlds.” “Without Him was
not anything made that was made,” not even the third
aspect of the Supreme Being, which proceeds from the
two previous aspects. Therefore the “only begotten” is
the exalted Being which ranks above all else in the Uni-
verse, save only the Power-aspect which created It.

The first aspect of the Supreme Being “thinks out,” or
imagines, the Universe before the beginning of active


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 375


manifestation, everything, including the millions of Solar
Systems and the great creative Hierarchies which inhabit
the Cosmic Planes of existence above the seventh, which is
the field of our evolution (See diagram 6). This is also
the Force which dissolves everything that has crystallized
beyond the possibility of further growth and at last, when
the end of active manifestation has come, reabsorbs within
Itself all that is, until the dawn of another Period of
Manifestation.

The second aspect of the Supreme Being is that which
manifests in matter as the forces of attraction and cohe-
sion, thus giving it the capability of combining into Forms
of various kinds. This is “The Word,” the “creative
Fiat,’ which molds the primordial Cosmic Root-substance
in a manner similar to the formation of figures by musical
vibrations, as previously mentioned, the same tone always
producing the same figure. So this great primordial
“WORD” brought, or “spoke,” into being, in finest matter,
all the different Worlds, with all their myriads of Forms,
which have since been copied and worked out in detail by
the innumerable creative Hierarchies.

“The Word” could not have done this, however, until
the third aspect of the Supreme Being had first prepared
the Cosmic Root-substance; had awakened it from its nor-
mal state of inertia and set the countless inseparate atoms
spinning upon their axes, placing those axes at various
angles with respect to each other, giving to each kind a cer-
tain “measure of vibration.”

These varying angles of inclination of the axes and the
measures of vibration made the Cosmic Root-substance
capable of forming different combinations, which are the
basis of the seven great Cosmic Planes. There is, in each
of these Planes, a different inclination of the axes, and


8376 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


also a different measure of vibration, consequently the con-

ditions and combinations in each one are different from

those in any of the others, due to the activity of “The

Only Begotten.”

Diagram 14 shows us that:

“The Father” is the highest Initiate among the humanity
of the Saturn Period. The ordinary humanity of
that Period are now the Lords of Mind.

“The Son” (Christ) is the highest Initiate of the Sun
Period. The ordinary humanity of that Period are
now the Archangels.

“The Holy Spirit” (Jehovah) is the highest Initiate of
the Moon Period. The ordinary humanity of that
Period are now the Angels.


This diagram also shows what are the vehicles of these
different orders of Beings, and upon comparison with
diagram 8, it will be seen that their bodies or vehicles
(indicated by squares on diagram 14) correspond to the
Globes of the Period in which they were human. This is
always the case so far as the ordinary humanities are
concerned, for at the end of the Period during which any
life wave becomes individualized as human beings, those
beings retain bodies corresponding to the Globes on which
they have functioned.

On the other hand, the Initiates have progressed and
evolved for themselves higher vehicles, discontinuing the
ordinary use of the lowest vehicle when the ability to use a
new and higher one has been attained. Ordinarily, the
lowest vehicle of an Archangel is the desire body, but
Christ, Who is the highest Initiate of the Sun Period,
ordinarily uses the life spirit as lowest vehicle, functioning
as consciously in the World of Life Spirit as we do in the
Physical World. The student is requested to note this


Che vehicles 0


aolmialc '& ordinary humanity


| The highe


Rriod Sur ORriod Moor Dk


“Ghee
Worlds ire whick
hese orders kave

Correspordiry
vekicles


ae ‘


Eig


3 Etheric Region


BO o- a


23 (hemicalRegion


€mod
Che Ghe
highest


©ke
ordinary | kiskesl ordinary
sRumanily | Ir tate 19 Jritiate is | humanity
Jekovak


Are row


FAngels


3878 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


point particularly, as the World of Life Spirit is the first
universal World, as explained in the chapter on Worlds.
Tt is the World in which differentiation ceases and unity
begins to be realized, so far as our solar system is con-
cerned.

Christ has power to build and function in a vehicle as
low as the desire body, such as is used by the Archangels,
but He can descend no further. The significance of this
will be seen presently.

Jesus belongs to our humanity. When the man, Jesus,
is studied through the memory of nature, he can be
traced back life by life, where he lived in different cir-
cumstances, under various names, in different embodi-
ments, the same, in that respect, as any other human be-
ing. This cannot be done with the Being, Christ. In His
case can be found but one embodiment.

It must not be supposed, however, that Jesus was an
ordinary individual. He was of a singularly pure type
of mind, vastly superior to the great majority of our
present humanity. Through many lives had he trod the
Path of Holiness and thus fitted himself for the greatest
honor ever bestowed upon a human being.

His mother, the Virgin Mary, was also a type of the
highest human purity and because of that was selected to
become the mother of Jesus. His father was a high Ini-
tiate, virgin, and capable of performing the act of fecun-
dation as a sacrament, without personal desire or passion.

Thus the beautiful, pure and lovely spirit whom we
know as Jesus of Nazareth was born into a pure and pas-
sionless body. This body was the best that could be pro-
duced on Earth and the task of Jesus, in that embodiment.
was to care for it and evolve it to the highest possible


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 379


degree of efficiency, in preparation for the great purpose
it was to serve.

Jesus of Nazareth was born at about the time stated in
the historic records, and not 105 B. C., as stated in some
occult works. The name Jesus is common in the Kast,
and an Initiate named Jesus did live 105 B. C., but he
took the Egyptian Initiation, and was not Jesus of Naza-
reth, with whom we are concerned.

The Individual who was later born under the name of
Christian Rosenkreuz, who is in the body today, was a
highly evolved being when Jesus of Nazareth was born.
His testimony, as well as the results of first-hand investi-
gation by later Rosicrucians, all agree in placing the birth
of Jesus of Nazareth at the beginning of the Christian
Era, on about the date usually ascribed to that event.

Jesus was educated by the Hssenes and reached a very
high state of spiritual development during the thirty
years in which he used his body.

It may here be said, parenthetically, that the Essenes
were a third sect which existed in Palestine, besides the
two mentioned in the New Testament—the Pharisees and
the Sadducees. The Essenes were an exceedingly devout
order, widely different from the materialistic Sadducees
and entirely opposite to the hypocritical, publicity seek-
ing Pharisees. They shunned all mention of themselves
and their methods of study and worship. To the latter
peculiarity is due the fact that almost nothing is known
of them, and that they are not mentioned in the New
Testament.

It is a law of the Cosmos that no Being, however high,
ean function in any world without a vehicle built of the
material of that world (See diagrams 8 and 14). There-
fore the desire body was the lowest vehicle of the group of


380 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


spirits who had reached the human stage in the Sun
Period.

Christ was one of those spirits and was consequently un-
able to build for Himself a vital body and a dense physical
vehicle. He could have worked upon humanity in a desire
body, as did His younger brothers, the Archangels, as
Race-spirits. Jehovah had opened an avenue for them to
enter the dense body of man by means of the air he in-
haled. All Race-religions were religions of law, and cre-
ators of sin through disobedience of that law. They were
under the direction of Jehovah, Whose lowest vehicle is the
human spirit, correlating Him to the World of Abstract
Thought, where everything is separative and therefore
leads to self-seeking.

That is precisely the reason why the intervention of
Christ became necessary. Under the regime of Jehovah
unity is impossible. Therefore the Christ, Who possesses
as a lowest vehicle the unifying life spirit, must enter
into the dense human body. He must appear as a man
among men and dwell in this body, because only from
within is it possible to conquer the Race-religion, which
influences man from without.

Christ could not be born in a dense body, because He
had never passed through an evolution such as the
Earth Period, therefore He would first have had
to acquire the ability to build a dense body such as
ours. But even had He possessed that ability, it would
have been inexpedient for such an exalted Being to ex-
pend for that purpose the energy necessary for body-
building through ante-natal life, childhood and youth, to
bring it to sufficient maturity for use. He had ceased
to use, ordinarily, vehicles such as would correspond to our
human spirit, mind and desire body, although He had
learned to build them in the Sun Period, and retained the


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 381


ability to build and function in them whenever desired
or required. He used all his own vehicles, taking only
the vital and dense bodies from Jesus. When the latter
was 30 years of age Christ entered these bodies and used
them until the climax of His Mission on Golgotha. After
the destruction of the dense body, Christ appeared among
His disciples in the vital body, in which He functioned for
some time. The vital body is the vehicle which He will
use when He appears again, for He will never take another
dense body.

It is encroaching upon a subject to be dealt with later
to remark that the object of all esoteric training is to so
work on the vital body that the life spirit is built up and
quickened. When we come to deal with Initiation it may
be possible to give more detailed explanations, but no more
can be said on the subject just now. In chronicling the
events incident to post mortem existence, this subject has
been partially dealt with and the student is here asked to
note that a man is supposed to have conquered his desire
body to a considerable extent before attempting esoteri-
cism. His esoteric training and the earlier Initiations are
devoted to work on the vital body and result in the build-
ing of the life spirit. At the time Christ entered the body
of Jesus, the latter was a disciple of high degree, conse-
quently his life spirit was well organized. Therefore, the
lowest vehicle in which Christ functioned, and the best
organized of the higher vehicles of Jesus, were identical ;
and Christ, when He took the vital body and the dense
body of Jesus, was thus furnished with a complete chain
of vehicles bridging the gap between the World of Life
Spirit and the dense Physical World.

The significance of the fact that Jesus had passed sev-
eral initiations lies in the effect that has on the vital body.


382 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Jesus’ vital body was already attuned to the high vibra-
tions of the life spirit. An ordinary man’s vital body
would have instantly collapsed under the terrific vibra-
tions of the Great Spirit who entered Jesus’ body. Even
that body, pure and high-strung as it was, could not
withstand those tremendous impacts for many years, and
when we read of certain times when Christ withdrew
temporarily from his disciples, as when he later walked
on the sea to meet them, the esotericist knows that he
drew out of Jesus’ vehicles to give them a rest under the
eare of the Essene Brothers, who knew more of how to
treat such vehicles than Christ did.

This change was consummated with the full and free
consent of Jesus, who knew during this entire life that
he was preparing a vehicle for Christ. He submitted
gladly, that his brother humanity might receive the gi-
gantie impetus which was given to its development by
the mysterious sacrifice on Golgotha.

Thus (as shown in diagram 14) Christ Jesus possessed
the twelve vehicles, which formed an unbroken chain
from the Physical World to the very Throne of God.
Therefore He is the only Being in the Universe in touch
with both God and man and capable of mediating be-
tween them, because He has, personally and individually,
experienced all conditions and knows every limitation
incidental to physical existence.

Christ is unique among all Beings in all the seven
Worlds. He alone possesses the twelve vehicles. None
save He is able to feel such compassion, nor so fully un-
derstand the position and needs of humanity; none save
He is qualified to bring the relief that shall fully meet
our needs.


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 383


Thus do we know the nature of Christ. He is the high-
est Initiate of the Sun Period and He took the dense and
vital bodies of Jesus that He might function directly in
the Physical World and appear as a man among men.
Had He appeared in a manifestly miraculous manner, it
would have been contrary to the scheme of evolution, be-
cause at the end of the Atlantean Epoch humanity had
been given freedom to do right or wrong. That they might
learn to become self-governing, no coercion whatever could
be used. They must know good and evil through experi-
ence. Before that time they had been Jed willy-nilly, but
at that time they were given freedom under the different
Race-religions, each religion adapted to the needs of its
particular Tribe or Nation.


Not PEAcE BuT A Sworpb.


All Race-religions are of the Holy Spirit. They are in-
sufficient, because they are based on law, which makes for
sin and brings death, pain and sorrow.

All Race-spirits know this, and realize that their reli-
gions are merely steps to something better. This is shown
by the fact that all Race-religions, without exception, point
_ to One Who is to come. The religion of the Persians
pointed to Mithras; of the Chaldeans to Tammuz. The
old Norse Gods foresaw the approach of “The Twilight
of the Gods,” when Surt, the bright Sun-spirit, shall super-
sede them and a new and fairer order be established on
“Gimle,” the regenerated earth. The Egyptians waited
for Horus, the new-born Sun. Mithras and Tammuz are
also symbolized as Solar orbs and all the principal Temples
were built facing the East, that the rays of the rising
Sun might shine directly through the open doors; even
Saint Peter’s at Rome is so placed. All these fact; show


384 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


that it was generally known that the One Who was to
come was a Sun-spirit and was to save humanity from
the separative influences necessarily contained in all Race-
religions.

These religions were steps which it was necessary for
mankind to take to prepare for the advent of Christ. Man
must first cultivate a “self” before he can becomé really
unselfish and understand the higher phase of Universal
Brotherhood—unity of purpose and interest—for which
Christ laid the foundation at His first coming, and which
He will make living realities when He returns.

As the fundamental principle of a Race-religion is sep-
aration, inculcating self-seeking at the expense of other
men and nations, it is evident that if the principle is car-
ried to its ultimate conclusion it must necessarily have
an increasingly destructive tendency and finally frustrate
evolution, unless succeeded by a more constructive religion.

Therefore the separative religions of the Holy Spirit
must give place to the unifying religion of the Son, which
is the Christian religion.

Law must give place to Love, and the separate Races and
Nations be united in one Universal Brotherhood, with
Christ as the Eldest Brother.

The Christian religion has not yet had time to accom-
plish this great object. Man is still in the toils of the
dominant Race-spirit and the ideals of Christianity are
yet too high for him. The intellect can see some of the
beauties, and readily admits that we should love our ene-
mies, but the passions of the desire body are still too
strong. The law ef the Race-spirit being “An eye for an
eye,” the Feeling is “I’ll get even!” The heart prays for
Love; the desire body hopes for Revenge. The intellect
sees, in the abstract, the beauty of loving one’s enemies,


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 385


but in concrete cases it allies itself with the vengeful feel-
ing of the desire body, pleading, as an excuse for “getting
even,” that “the social organism must be protected.”

It is a matter for congratulation, however, that society
feels compelled to apologize for the retaliative methods
used. Corrective methods and mercy are becoming more
and more prominent in the administration of the laws, as
is shown by the favorable reception which has been accorded
that very modern institution, the Juvenile Court. Fur-
ther manifestation of this same tendency may be noted in
the increasing frequency with which convicted prisoners
are released on probation, under suspended sentence; also
in the greater humanity with which prisoners of war are
treated of late years. These are the vanguards of the sen-
timent of Universal Brotherhood, which is slowly but
surely making its influence felt.

Yet, though the world is advancing and though, for in-
stance, it has been comparatively easy for the writer to
secure a hearing for his views in the different cities where
he has lectured, the daily papers sometimes devoting to
his utterances whole pages (and front pages at that) so
long as he confined himself to speaking of the higher
worlds and the post mortem states, it has been very notice-
able that as soon as the theme was Universal Brotherhood
his articles have always been consigned to the waste-basket.

The world in general is very unwilling to consider any-
thing that is, as it thinks, “too” unselfish. There must be
“something in it.” Nothing is regarded as an entirely
natural line of conduct if it offers no opportunity for
“getting the best of” one’s fellowmen. Commercial under-
takings are planned and conducted on that principle and,
before the minds of those who are enslaved by the desire


to accumulate useless wealth, the idea of Universal Brother-
13


386 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


hood conjures up frightful visions of the abolition of cap-
italism and its inevitable concomitant, the exploitation of
others, with the wreck of “business interests” implied
thereby. The word “enslaved” exactly describes this con-
dition. According to the Bible, man was to have dominion
over the world, but in the vast majority of cases the reverse
is true—it is the world which has dominion over man.
Every man who has property interests will, in his saner
moments, admit that they are a never-failing source of
worry to him; that he is constantly scheming to hold his
possessions, or at least to keep from being deprived of them
by “sharp practice,” knowing that others are as constantly
scheming to accomplish that, to them, desirable end. The
man is the slave of what, with unconscious irony, he calls
“my possessions,” when in reality they possess him. Well
did the Sage of Concord say, “Things are in the saddle and
ride mankind !”

This state of affairs is the result of Race-religions, with
their system of law; therefore do they all look for “One
Who is to come.” The Christian religion ALONE is not
looking for One Who is to come, but for One Who is to
come again. The time of this second coming depends
upon when the Church can free itself from the State. The
Church, especially in Europe, is bound to the Chariot of
State. The ministers are fettered by economic considera-
tions and dare not proclaim the truths that their studies
have revealed to them.

A visitor to Copenhagen, Dennfark, recently witnessed a
church confirmation service. The Church there is under
State control and all ministers are appointed by the tem-
poral power. The parishioners have nothing whatever to
say in the matter. They may attend church or not, as


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 387


they please, but they are compelled to pay the taxes which
support the institution.

In addition to holding office by the bounty of the State,
the pastor of the particular church visited was decorated
with several Orders conferred by the king, the glittering
badges bearing silent but eloquent testimony as to the
extent of his subserviency to the State. During the cere-
mony, he prayed for the king and the legislators, that
they might rule the country wisely. As long as kings and
legislators exist, this prayer might be very appropriate, but
it was a considerable shock to hear him add: “
and, Almighty God, protect and strengthen our army iad
navy !”

Such a prayer as this shows plainly that the God wor-
shiped is the Tribal or National God—the Race-spirit, for
the last act of the gentle Christ Jesus was to stay the sword
of the friend who would have protected Him therewith.
Although He said He had not come to send peace, but a
sword, it was because He foresaw the oceans of blood that
would be spilled by the militant “Christian” nations in
their mistaken understanding of His teachings and because
high ideals cannot be immediately attained by humanity.
The wholesale murder of war and like atrocities are harsh,
but they are potent illustrations of what Love would
abolish.

There is, apparently, a flat contradiction between the
words of Christ Jesus, “I came not to send peace, but a
sword,” and the words of the celestial song which heralded
the birth of Jesus, “On earth Peace, Goodwill toward men.”
This contradiction, however, is apparent only.

'There is as great an apparent contradiction between a
woman’s words and her actions when she says, “J am
going to clean house and tidy up,” and then proceeds to


388 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


take up carpets and pile chairs one upon another, produc-
ing general confusion in a previously orderly house. One
observing only this aspect of the matter, would be justified
in saying, “She is making matters worse instead of better,”
but when the purpose of her work is understood, the ex-
pediency of the temporary disorder is realized and in the
end her house will be the better for the passing disturbance.

Similarly, we must bear in mind that the time which
has elapsed since the coming of Christ Jesus is but little
more than a moment in comparison with the duration of
even one Day of Manifestation. We must learn, as did
Whitman, to “know the amplitude of time,” and look be-
yond the past and present cruelties and jealousies of the
warring sects to the shining age of Universal Brotherhood,
which will mark the next great step of man’s progress on
his long and wondrous journey from the clod to the God,
from protoplasm to conscious unity with the Father, that

. . one far-off, divine event
To which the whole creation moves.

It may be added that the above mentioned pastor, dur-
ing the ceremony of receiving his pupils into the Church,
taught them that Jesus Christ was a composite individual ;
that Jesus was the mortal, human part, while Christ was
the divine, immortal Spirit. Presumably, if the matter
had been discussed with him, he would not have supported
that statement, nevertheless in making it he stated an
occult fact.

THE STAR OF BETHLEHEM.


The unifying influence of the Christ has been symbolized
in the beautiful legend of the worship of the three magi,
or “wise men of the East,” so skilfully woven by General
Lew Wallace into his charming story, “Ben Hur.”


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 389


The three wise men—Caspar, Melchior and Balthasar—
are the representatives of the white, yellow and black
Races and symbolize the people of Europe, Asia and
Africa, who are all led by The Star to the World Savior,
to Whom eventually ‘‘every knee shall bow,’’ and Whom
“every tongue shall confess’’?; Who shall unite all the
scattered nations under the Banner of Peace and Good-
will; Who shall cause men to ‘‘beat their swords into
plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks.”’

The Star of Bethlehem is said to have appeared at the
time of the birth of Jesus, and to have guided the three
wise men to the Savior.

Much speculation has been indulged in as to the nature
of this Star. Most material scientists have declared it a
myth, while others have said if it were anything more
than a myth, it might have been a “coincidence”’—two
dead Suns might have collided and caused a conflagration.
Every mystic, however, knows the “Star’—yea, and the
“Cross” also—not only as symbols connected with the life
of Jesus and Christ Jesus, but in his own personal experi-
ence. Paul says: “Until Christ be formed in you”; and
the mystic, Angelus Silesius, echoes:


Though Christ a thousand times in Bethlehem be born
And not within thyself, thy soul will be forlorn.

The Cross on Golgotha thou lookest to in vain

Unless within thyself it be set up again.


Richard Wagner shows the intuitional knowledge of
the artist when, to the question of Parsifal, “Who is The
Grail?” Gurnemanz answers:


That tell we not;

But if thou hast by Him been bidden,

From thee the truth will not stay hidden.

o » . The Jand to Him no path leads through,
And search but severs from Him wider

When He Himself is not the Guider.


390 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Under the “old dispensation” the path to Initiation was
not open. It was for only the chosen few. Some might
seek the path, but only those who were guided to the Tem-
ples by the Hierophants found entrance. Previous to the
advent of Christ, there was no such sweeping invitation as
“Whosoever will may come.”

At the moment the blood flowed on Golgotha, however,
“the veil of the Temple was rent” (for reasons presently to
be explained), and ever since that time, whosoever will
seek admittance will surely find it.

In the Temples of Mystery the Hierophant taught his
pupils that there is in the Sun a spiritual, as well as a
physical force. The latter force in the rays of the Sun
is the fecundating principle in nature. It causes the
growth of the plant world and thereby sustains the animal
and human kingdoms. It is the upbuilding energy which
is the source of all physical force.

This physical, solar energy reaches its highest expres-
sion in midsummer, when the days are longest and the
nights are shortest, because the rays of the Sun then fall
directly on the northern hemisphere. At that time the
spiritual forces are the most inactive.

On the other hand, in December, during the long win-
ter nights, the physical force of the solar orb is dormant
and the spiritual forces reach their maximum degree of
activity.

The night between the 24th and the 25th of December
is The Holy Night, par eacellence, of the entire year. The
Zodiacal sign of the immaculate celestial Virgin stands
upon the eastern horizon near midnight, the Sun of the
New Year is then born and starts upon his journey from
the southernmost point toward the northern hemisphere,
to save that part of humanity (physically) from the dark-


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 391


ness and famine which would inevitably result if he were
to remain permanently south of the equator.

To the people of the northern hemisphere, where all
our present day religions originated, the Sun is directly
below the Earth; and the spiritual influences are strong-
est, in the north, at midnight of the 24th of December.

That being the case, it follows as a matter of course that
it would then be easiest for those who wished to take a
definite step toward Initiation to get in conscious touch
with the spiritual Sun especially for the first time.

Therefore the pupils who were ready for Initiation were
taken in hand by the Hierophants of the Mysteries, and
by means of ceremonies performed in the Temple, were
raised to a state of exaltation wherein they transcended
physical conditions. ‘To their spiritual vision, the solid
Earth became transparent and they saw the Sun at mid-
night—“The Star!” - It was not the physical Sun they
saw with spiritual eyes, however, but the Spirit in the Sun
—The Christ—their Spiritual Savior, as the physical Sun
was their physical Savior.

This is the Star that shone on that Holy Night and
that still shines for the mystic in the darkness of night.
When the noise and confusion of physical activity are
quieted, he enters into his closet and seeks the way to the
King of Peace. The Blazing Star is ever there to guide
him and his soul hears the prophetic song, “On earth
Peace, Goodwill toward men.”

Peace and goodwill to all, without exception; no room
for one single enemy or outcast! Is it any wonder that
it is hard to educate humanity to such a high standard?
Is there any better way to show the beauty of, and the
necessity for peace, goodwill and love than by contrasting
them with the present state of war, selfishness and hate?


392 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


The stronger the light, the deeper the shadow it casts.
The higher our ideals, the more plainly can we see our
shortcomings.

Unfortunately, at the present stage of development, hu-
manity is willing to learn only by the hardest experience.
As a Race, it must become absolutely selfish to feel the
bitter pangs caused by the selfishness of others, as one
must know much sickness to be thoroughly thankful for
health.

The religion miscalled Christianity has therefore been
the bloodiest religion known, not excepting Mohammedan-
ism, which in this respect is somewhat akin to our mal-
practiced Christianity. On the battle field and in the
Inquisition innumerable and unspeakable atrocities have
been committed in the name of the gentle Nazarene. The
Sword and the Wine Cup,—the perverted Cross and Com-
munion Chalice—have been the means by which the more
powerful of the so-called Christian nations gained suprem-
acy over the heathen peoples, and even over other but
weaker nations professing the same faith as their con-
querors. The most cursory reading of the history of the
Graeco-Latin, Teutonic and Anglo-Saxon Races will cor-
roborate this.

While man was under the full sway of Race-religions
each nation was an united whole. Individual interests were
willingly subordinated to the community interests. All
were “under the law.” All were members of their respec-
tive tribes first, and individuals only secondarily.

At the present time there is a tendency toward the other
extreme—to exalt “self” above all else. The result is evi-
dent in the economic and industrial problems that are
facing every nation and clamoring for solution.

The state of development wherein every man feels him-


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 393


self an absolutely separate unit, an Ego, independently
pursuing his own course, is a necessary stage. The
national, tribal and family unity must first be broken up
before Universal Brotherhood can become a fact. The
regime of Paternalism has been largely superseded by the
reign of Individualism. We are learning the evils of the
latter more and more as our civilization advances. Our
unsystematic method of distributing the products of labor,
the rapacity of the few and the exploitation of the many—
these social crimes result in under-consumption, industrial
depressions and labor disturbances, destroying internal
peace. The industrial war of the present day is vastly
more far-reaching and destructive than the military wars
of the nations.


Tur HEART As AN ANOMALY.


No lesson, though its truth may be superficially assented
to, is of any real value as an active principle of the life
until the heart has learned it in longing and bitterness,
and the lesson man must so learn is that what is not bene-
ficial to all can never be truly beneficial to any. For
nearly 2,000 years we have lightly assented with our lips
that we should govern our lives in accordance with such
maxims as, “Return good for evil.” The Heart urges
mercy and love, but the Reason urges belligerent and re-
taliatory measures, if not as revenge, at least as a means
of preventing a repetition of hostilities. It is this divorce
of head from heart that hinders the growth of a true feel-
ing of Universal Brotherhood and the adoption of the
teachings of Christ—the Lord of Love.

The mind is the focusing point by means of which the
Ego becomes aware of the material universe. As an in-
strument for the acquisition of knowledge in those realms


394 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


the mind is invaluable, but when it arrogates to itself the
role of dictator as to the conduct of man to man, it is as
though the lens should say to an astronomer who was in
the act of photographing the Sun through a telescope:
“You have me improperly focused. You re not looking
at the Sun correctly. I do not think it is good to photo-
graph the Sun anyway, and I want you to point me at
Jupiter. The rays of the Sun heat me too much and are
liable to damage me.”

If the astronomer exercises his will and focuses the
telescope as he desires, telling it to attend to its business
of transmitting the rays that strike it, leaving the results
to him, the work will proceed well, but if the lens has the
stronger will and the mechanism of the telescope is in
league with it, the astronomer will be seriously hampered
in having to contend with a refractory instrument, and
the result will be blurred pictures, of little or no value.

Thus it is with the Ego. It works with a threefold
body, which it controls, or should control through the
mind. But, sad to say, this body has a will of its own and
is often aided and abetted by the mind, thus frustrating
the purposes of the Ego.

This antagonistic “lower will” is an expression of the
higher part of the desire body. When the division of the
Sun, Moon and Earth took place, in the early part of the
Lemurian Epoch, the more advanced portion of humanity-
in-the-making experienced a division of the desire body
into a higher and a lower part. The rest of humanity did
likewise in the early part of the Atlantean Epoch.

This higher part of the desire body became a sort of
animal soul. It built the cerebro-spinal nervous system
and the voluntary muscles, by that means controlling the
lower part of the threefold body until the link of mind was


a


~


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 395


given. Then the mind “coalesced” with this animal soul
and became a co-regent.

The mind is thus bound up in desire; is enmeshed in the
selfish lower nature, making it difficult for the spirit to
control the body. The focusing mind, which should be the
ally of the higher nature, is alienated by and in league
with the lower nature—-enslaved by desire.

The law of the Race religions was given to emancipate
intellect from desire. The “fear of God” was pitted against
“the desires of the flesh.” This, however, was not enough
to enable one to become master of the body and secure
its willing co-operation. It became necessary for the spirit
to find in the body another point of vantage, which was
not under the sway of the desire nature. All muscles are
expressions of the desire body and a straight road to the
capital, where the traitorous mind is wedded to desire and
reigns supreme.

If the United States were at war with France, it would
not land troops in England, hoping in that way to subju-
gate the French. It would land its soldiers directly in
France, and fight there.

Like a wise general, the Ego followed a similar course
of action. It did not commence its campaign by getting
control of one of the glands, for they are expressions of
the vital body; nor was it possible to get control of the
voluntary muscles, for they are too well garrisoned by the
enemy. That part of the involuntary muscular system
which is controJled by the sympathetic nervous system
would also be useless for the purpose. It must get into a
more direct touch with the cerebro-spinal nervous system.
To do this, and secure a base of operations in the enemy’s
country, it must control a muscle which is involuntary, and


396 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


yet connected with the voluntary nervous system. Such a
muscle is the heart.

We have previously spoken of the two kinds of muscles
—yvoluntary and involuntary. The latter are formed in
lengthwise stripes and are connected with functions not
under the control of the will, such as digestion, respiration,
excretion, ete. The voluntary muscles are those which
are controlled by the will through the voluntary nervous
system, such as the muscles of the hand and arm. They
are striped both lengthwise and crosswise.

The above is true of all muscles in the body eaxcept the
heart, which is an involuntary muscle. Ordinarily, we
cannot control the circulation. Under normal conditions
the heart-beat is a fixed quantity, yet to the bewilderment
of physiologists, the heart is cross-striped like a voluntary
muscle. It is the only organ in the body exhibiting this
peculiarity but, sphinx-like, it refuses to give material
scientists an answer to the riddle.

The occult scientist easily finds the answer in the mem
ory of nature. From that record he learns that when the
Ego first sought a stronghold in the heart, the latter was
striped lengthwise only, the same as any other involuntary
muscle; but as the Ego gained more and more contro] over
the heart, the cross. stripes have gradually developed. They
are not so numerous nor so well defined as on the 1auscles
under the full control of the desire body, but as the altru-
istic principles of love and brotherhood increase in strength
and gradually overrule the reason, which is based in desire,
so will these cross stripes become more numercas and more
marked.

As previously stated, the seed-atom of .che dense body
is located in the heart during life and withdrawn only at
death. The active work of the Ego is in the blood. Now,


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 3897


if we except the lungs, the heart is the only orgar in the
body through which all the blood passes in every cycle.

The blood is the highest expression of the vital body,
for it nourishes the entire physical organism. It is also,
in a sense, the vehicle of the subconscious memory, and in
touch with the Memory of Nature, situated in the highest
division of the Etheric Region. The blood carries the pic-
tures of life from ancestors to descendants for generations,
where there is a common blood, as produced by inbreeding.

There are in the head three points, each of which is
the particular seat of one of the three aspects of the spirit
(See diagram 17), the second and third aspects having, in
addition, secondary vantage grounds.

The desire body is the perverted expression of the Ego.
It converts the “Selfhood” of the spirit into “selfishness.”
Selfhood seeks not its own at the expense of others. Self-
ishness seeks gain regardless of others. The seat of the
human spirit is primarily in the pineal gland and sec-
ondarily in the brain and cerebro-spinal nervous system,
which control the voluntary muscles.

The love and unity in the World of the Life Spirit find
their illusory counterpart in the Etheric Region, to which
we are correlated by the vital body, which latter promotes
sex love and sex union. The life spirit has its seat pri-
marily in the pituitary body and secondarily in the heart,
which is the gateway of the blood that nourishes the
muscles.

The actionless Divine Spirit—The Silent Watcher—
finds its material expression in the passive, inert and irre-
sponsive skeleton of the dense body, which is the obedient
instrument of the other bodies, but has no power to act
on its own initiative. The Divine Spirit has its strong-
hold in the impenetrable point at the root of the nose.


398 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


In reality there is but one spirit, the Ego, but looking at
it from the Physical World, it is refracted into the three
aspects, which work as stated.

As the blood passes through the heart, cycle after cycle,
hour after hour all through life, it engraves the pictures
it carries upon the seed-atoms while they are still fresh,
thus making a faithful record of the life which is indelibly
impressed on the soul in the post mortem existence. It
is always in closest touch with the life spirit, the spirit of
love and unity, therefore the heart is the home of altruistic
love.

As these pictures pass inward to the World of Life Spirit,
in which is the true memory of nature, they do not come
through the slow physical senses, but directly through the
fourth ether contained in the air we breathe. in the
World of Life Spirit the life spirit sees much more clearly
than it can in the denser Worlds. In its high home it is in
touch with the Cosmic Wisdom and in any situation it
knows at once what to do and flashes the message of guid-
ance and proper action back to the heart, which as in-
stantaneously flashes it on to the brain through the medium
of the pneumo-gastric nerve, resulting in “first impres-
sions’—the intuitional impulse, which is always good,
because it is drawn directly from the fountain of Cosmic
Wisdom and Loye.

This is all done so quickly that the heart has control
before the slower reason has had time to “take in the situa-
tion,” as it were. It is the thought that a man “thinketh
in his heart,’ and it is true that “so is he.’ Man is
inherently a virgin spirit, good, noble and true in every
respect. All that is not good is from the lower nature, that
illusory reflection of the Kgo. The virgin spirit is always
giving wise counsel.’ If we could only follow the impulses


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 399


of the heart—the first thought—Universal Brotherhood
would be realized here and now.

But that is just the point where the trouble begins.
After the good counsel of the first thought has been given,
the brain begins to reason, with the result that, in the
great majority of cases, it dominates the heart. The tele-
scope arranges its own focus and points where it lists,
despite the astronomer. ‘The mind and the desire body
frustrate the designs of the spirit by taking control and, as
they lack the spirit’s wisdom, both spirit and body suffer.

Physiologists note that certain areas of the brain are
devoted to particular thought activities and phrenologists
have carried this branch of science still further. Now, it
is known that thought breaks down and destroys nerve
tissues. This and all other waste of the body, is replaced
by the blood. When, through the development of the heart
into a voluntary muscle, the circulation of the blood finally
passes under the absolute control of the unifying life spirit
—the Spirit of Love—it will then be within the power of
that spirit to withhold the blood from those areas of the
mind devoted to selfish purposes. As a result, those par-
ticular thought centers will gradually atrophy.

On the other hand, it will be possible for the spirit to
increase the blood supply when the mental activities are
altruistic, and thus build up the areas devoted to altruism,
so that, in time, the desire nature will be conquered and
the mind emancipated by Love from its bondage to desire.
It is only by complete emancipation, through Love, that
man can rise above the law and become a law unto himself.
Having conquered himself, he will have conquered all the
World.

The cross stripes of the heart may be built by certain
exercises under occult training, but as some of these exer-


400 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


cises are dangerous, they should be undertaken only under
the direction of a competent teacher. That no reader of
this book may be deceived by impostors professing ability
and willingness to so train aspirants for a consideration,
it is emphatically repeated that No true occultist ever
boasts, advertises his occult nower, sells occult information
or lessons at so much each or yor a course; nor will he
consent to a theatrical display. His work is done in the
most unobtrusive manner possibie and solely for the pur-
pose of legitimately helping others, without thought of
self.

As said in the beginning of this chapter, all persons
earnestly desiring the higher knowledge may rest assured
that if they will but seek, they wiil find the way open for
them. Christ Himself prepared the way for “whosoever
will.” He will help and welcome all real seekers, who are
willing to work for Universal Brotherhood.


Tuer Mystery or GOLGOTHA.


During the last 2,000 years much has been said about
“the cleansing blood.” The blood of Christ has been
extolled from the pulpit as the sovereign remedy for sin;
the only means of redemption and salvation.

But if the laws of Rebirth and Consequence work in such
a way that evolving beings reap as they have sown, and if
the evolutionary impulse is constantly bringing humanity
higher and higher, ultimately to attain perfection—where
then is the need for redemption and salvation? Even if
the need existed, how can the death of one individual help
the rest? Would it not be nobler to suffer the consequences
of one’s acts than to hide behind another? These are some
of the objections to the doctrine of vicarious atonement
and redemption by the blood of Christ Jesus. We will try


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION +401


to answer them before showing the logical harmony be-
tween the operation of the law of Consequence and the
Atonement by Christ.

In the first place, it is absolutely true that the evolution-
ary impulse does work to achieve ultimate perfection for
all; yet there are some who are constantly straggling be-
hind. At the present time, we have just passed the extreme
point of materiality and are going through the sixteen
Races. We are treading “the sixteen paths to destruc-
tion,” and are consequently in graver danger of falling
behind than at any other part of the evolutionary journey.

In the abstract, time is nothing. A number may fall
behind so far that they must be abandoned, to take up their
further evolution in another scheme, where they can con-
tinue their journey to perfection. Nevertheless that was
not the evolution originally designed for them and it is
reasonable to suppose that the exalted Intelligences in charge
of our evolution use every means to bring through in safety
as many as possible of the entities under their charge.

In ordinary evolution, the laws of Rebirth and Conse-
quence are perfectly adequate for bringing the major por-
tion of the life wave up to perfection, but they do not suffice
in the case of the stragglers, who are lagging behind in the
various Races. During the stage of individualism, which
is the climax of the illusion of separateness, all mankind
needs extra help, but for the stragglers some additional
special aid must be provided.

To give that special aid, to redeem the stragglers, was
the mission of Christ. He said that He came to seek and
to save that which was lost. He opened up the way of
Initiation for all who are willing to seek it.

Objectors to vicarious atonement urge: That it is cow-


402 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION
ardly to hide behind another; that each man should be
willing to take the consequence of his acts.

Let us consider an analogous case. The waters of the
Great Lakes narrow into the Niagara River. For twenty
miles this enormous volume of water flows rapidly toward
the falls. The river bed is filled with rocks and if a person
who goes beyond a certain point does not lose his life in the
rapids above the cataract, he will surely do so by the plunge
over the brink.

Suppose a man appeared who, in pity for the victims of
the current, placed a rope above the cataract, although he
knew that the conditions were such that in doing so, he
himself could not by any possible chance escape death. Yet
gladly and of his own free will, he sacrificed his life and
placed the rope, thus modifying former conditions so that
any otherwise helpless victims who would grasp the rope
would be saved and thenceforward none need be lost.

What would we think of a man who had fallen into the
water through his own carelessness, and was struggling
madly to reach the shore, if he should say: “What! Save
myself and seek to avoid the penalty of my carelessness by
shielding myself behind the strength of another, who suf-
fered through no fault of his own, and gave up his life that
such as I might live? No, never! That would not be
“manly.” I will take my deserts!” Would we not all
agree that the man was a fool?

Not all are in need of salvation. Christ knew that there
is a very large class who do not require salvation in this
way, but just as surely as there are the ninety-and-nine
who are well taken care of by the laws of Rebirth and
Consequence and will reach perfection in that way, so there
are the “sinners” who have become “bogged” in matter and
cannot escape without a rope. Christ came to save them


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 403


and to bring peace and good will to all, by raising them
to the necessary point of spirituality, causing a change in
their desire bodies which will make the influence of the
life spirit in the heart more potent.

His younger brother Sun spirits, the Archangels, had
worked as Race-spirits on the desire bodies of man, but
their work had been from without. It was simply a re-
flected spiritual Sun-force and came through the Moon—
as moonlight is reflected sunlight. Christ, the Chief Ini-
tiate of the Sun spirits, entered directly into the dense
body of the Earth and brought the direct Sun-force, thus
enabling Him to influence our desire bodies from within.

Man cannot gaze long upon the Sun without becoming
blind because its vibrations are so rapid that they destroy
the retina of the eye. But he can look without harmful
results upon the Moon, the vibrations from which are
much slower; yet they are also sunlight, but the higher
vibrations have been taken up by the Moon, which then
reflects the residue to us.

So it is with the spiritual impulses which help man to
evolve. The reason why the Earth was thrown off from
the Sun was because our humanity could not endure the
Sun’s tremendous physical and spiritual impulses. Even
after an enormous distance had been placed between
Earth and Sun, the spiritual impulse would still have
been too strong had it not been sent first to the Moon, to
be used by Jehovah, the Regent of the Moon. for man’s
benefit. A number of Archangels (ordinary Sun spirits)
were given Jehovah as helpers in reflecting these spiritual
impulses from the Sun upon the humanity of the Earth,
in the form of Jehovistic or Race-religions.

The lowest vehicle of the Archangels is the desire body.
Our desire body was added in the Moon Period, at which


404. ROSICRUCIAN COSMO:.CONCEPTION


time Jehovah was the highest Initiate. Therefore Jehovah
is able to deal with man’s desire body. Jehovah’s lowest
vehicle is the human spirit (see diagram 14) and its coun-
terpart is the desire body. The Archangels are His helpers
because they are able to manage the spiritual Sun forces
and the desire body is their lowest vehicle. Thus they are
able to work with and prepare humanity for the time when
it can receive the spiritual impulses directly from the Solar
Orb, without the intervention of the Moon.

Upon Christ, as the highest Initiate of the Sun Period,
is laid the task of sending out this impulse. The impulse
which Jehovah reflected was sent out by Christ, Who thus
prepared both the Earth and humanity for His direct
ingress.

The expression, “prepared the Earth,’ means that all
evolution on a planet is accompanied by the evolution of
that planet itself. Had some observer gifted with spiritual
sight watched the evolution of our Earth from some distant
star, he would have noticed a gradual change taking place
in the Earth’s desire body.

Under the old dispensation the desire bodies of people
in general were improved by means of the law. This work
is still going on in the majority of people, who are thus
preparing themselves for the higher life.

The higher life (Initiation) does not commence, how-
ever, until the work on the vital body begins. The means
used for bringing that into activity is Love, or rather
Altruism. The former word has been so abused that it no
longer conveys the meaning here required.

During the old dispensation the path of Initiation was
not free and open, except to the chosen few. The Hiero-
phants of the Mysteries collected certain families about
the Temples, setting them apart from all the other people.


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 405


These chosen families were then rigorously guarded as
to certain rites and ceremonies. Their marriages and
sexual intercourse were regulated by the Hierophants.

The effect of this was to produce a race having the
proper degree of laxity between the dense and vital bod-
ics; also to wake the desire body from its state of leth-
argy during sleep. Thus a special few were made fit for
Initiation and were given opportunities that could not
be given to all. We see instances of this method among
the Jews, where the tribe of Levi were the chosen Tem-
plars; also in the caste of the Brahmins, who were the
only priestly class among the Hindus.

The Mission of Christ, in addition to saving the lost,
was to make Initiation possible to all; therefore Jesus
was not a Levite of the class to which priesthood came by
inheritance. He came from the common people and,
though not of the teacher class, His teaching was higher
than that of Moses.

Christ Jesus did not deny Moses, the law, nor the
prophets. On the contrary, He acknowledged them all
and showed the people that they were His witnesses, as
they all pointed to One Who was to come. He told the
people that those things had served their purpose and
that henceforth Love must supersede Law.

Christ Jesus was killed. In connection with this fact,
we come to the supreme and fundamental difference be-
tween Him and the previous teachers, in whom the Race
spirits were born. They all died and must be reborn
again and again to help their peoples bear their destiny,
The Archangel Michael (the Race-spirit of the Jews)
raised up Moses, who was taken up to Mount Nebo to die.
He was reborn as Elijah. Elijah returned as John the
Baptist; Buddha died and was reborn as Shankara-


406 RCSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


charya; Shri Krishna says, “Whenever there is decay of
Dharma . .. and... . exaltation of Adharma, then
I myself come forth for the protection of good, for the
destruction of evil-doers, for the sake of firmly establishing
Dharma. I am born from age to age.”

When death came Moses’ face shone and Buddha’s body
became alight. They all reached the stage when the spirit
begins to shine from within—but then they died.

Christ Jesus reached that stage on the Mount of Trans-
figuration. It is of the very highest significance that
His real work took place subsequent to that event. He
suffered ; was killed—and resurrected.

Being killed is a very different thing from dying. The
blood that had been the vehicle of the Race-spirit must
flow and be cleansed of that contaminating influence. Love
of father and mother, exclusive of other fathers and moth-
ers, must go—otherwise Universal Brotherhood and an
all-embracing, Altruistic Love could never become an
actuality.


TrE CLEANSING Buoop.


When the Savior Christ Jesus was crucified His body
was pierced in five places; in the five centers where the
currents of the vital body flow; and the pressure of the
crown of thorns caused a flow from the sixth also. (This
is a hint to those who already know these currents. A
full elucidation of this matter cannot be publicly given
out at this time.)

When the blood flowed from these centers, the great
Sun-spirit Christ was liberated from the physical vehicle
of Jesus and found Himself in the Harth, with individual
vehicles. The already existing planetary vehicles He per-
meated with His own vehicles and, in the twinkling of an


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 40%


eye, diffused His own desire body over the planet, which
has enabled Him thenceforth to work upon the Earth and
its humanity from within.

At that moment a tremendous wave of spiritual sunlight
flooded the Earth. It rent the veil which the Race-spirit
had hung before the Temple to keep out all but the chosen
few, and it made the Path of Initiation free thenceforth
to whomsoeyer will. So far as concerned the Spiritual
Worlds, this wave transformed the conditions of Earth
like a flash of lightning, but the dense, concrete conditions
are, of course, much more slowly affected.

Like all rapid and high vibrations of hght, this great
wave blinded the people by its dazzling brilliance, there-
tore it was said that “the Sun was darkened.” The very
opposite was what actually occurred. The Sun was not
darkened, but shone out in glorious splendor. It was the
excess of light that blinded the people, and only as the
entire Earth absorbed the desire body of the bright Sun-
spirit did the vibration return to a more normal rate.

The expression, “the cleansing blood of Christ Jesus,”
means that as the blood flowed on Calvary, it bore with it
the great Sun-spirit Christ, Who by that means secured
admission to the earth itself and since that moment has
been its Regent. He diffused His own desire body through-
out the planet, thereby cleansing it from all the vile influ-
ences which had grown up under the regime of the Race-
spirit.

Under the law all sinned; nay, more—they could not
help it. They had not evolved to where they could do
right for Love’s sake. The desire nature was so strong that
it was an impossibility for them to rule it altogether, there-
fore their debts, engendered under the law of Consequence,
piled up to monstrous proportions. Evolution would have


408 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


been terribly delayed and many lost to our life wave
altogether if some help had not been given.

Therefore did Christ come “to seek and to save that
which was lost.” He took away the sin of the world by
His cleansing blood, which gave Him entrance to the
Earth and its humanity. He purified the conditions and
we owe it to Him that we are able to gather for our desire
bodies purer desire-stuff than formerly, and He continues
working to help us, by making our external environment
constantly purer.

That this was and is done at the expense of great suf-
fering to Himself, no one can doubt who is able to form
the least conception of the limitations endured by that
Great Spirit in entering the hampering conditions of
physical existence, even in the best and purest vehicle pos-
sible; nor is His present limitation as Regent of the Harth
much less painful. True, He is also Regent of the Sun,
and therefore only partially confined to the Earth, yet the
limitations set by the crampingly slow vibrations of our
dense planet must be almost unendurable.

Had Christ Jesus simply died, it would have been im-
possible for Him to have done this work, but the Christians
have a risen Savior; One Who is ever present to help those
who call upon His Name. Having suffered like unto our-
selves in all things and knowing fully our needs, He is
lenient toward our mistakes and failures so long as we
continue trying to live the good life. We must ever keep
verore our eyes the fact that the only real failure is ceasing
to try.

Upon the death of the dense body of Christ Jesus, the
seedatom was returned to the original owner, Jesus
of Nazareth, who for some time afterward, while function-
ing in a vital body which he had gathered temporarily,


CHRIST AND HIS MISSION 409


taught the nucleus of the new faith which Christ had left
behind. Jesus of Nazareth has since had the guidance of
the esoteric branches which sprang up all over Europe.

In many places the Knights of the Round Table were
high Initiates in the Mysteries of the New Dispensation.
So were the Knights of The Grail—to whom was finally
confided Joseph of Arimathea’s Grail Cup, which was used
by Christ Jesus at The Last Supper. They were after-
ward entrusted also with the Lance which pierced His
side, and the receptacle which received the blood from the
wound.

The Druids of Ireland and the Trottes of Northern
Russia were esoteric schools through which the Master
Jesus worked during the so-called “Dark Ages,” but, dark
though they were, the spiritual impulse spread, and from
the standpoint of the occult scientist they were “Bright
Ages” compared to the growing materialism of the last
300 years, which has increased physical knowledge im-
mensely, but has almost extinguished the Light of the
Spirit.

Tales of “The Grail,” “Knights of The Round Table,”
etc., are now scouted as superstitions and all that cannot
be materially demonstrated is regarded as unworthy of
belief. Glorious as are the discoveries of modern science,
they have been bought at the terrible price of crushing the
spiritual intuition and, from a spiritual standpoint, no
darker day than the present has ever dawned.

The Elder Brothers, Jesus among them, have striven
and are striving to counteract this terrible influence, which
is like that in the eyes of the snake, causing the bird to
fall into its jaws. Every attempt to enlighten the people
and awaken in them a desire to cultivate the spiritual side
of life, is an evidence of the activity of the Elder Brethers.


410 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


May their efforts be crowned with success and speed the
day when modern science shall be spiritualized and con-
duct its investigations of matter from the standpoint of
spirit, for then, and not until then, will it arrive at a true
knowledge of the world.


“As Above, So Bretow.”


NEGATIVE POSITIVE


SAT ae
. ss
5 } c—p )
Period a
bs So) -
YE ee ho»
er2uP + Fina mnnon, A poo
Period I Fees ae?
(cB ae
Lone moace nal G.
(Ate ee
be oat as to os eo coed Ce
\ Eee
CiGeaseas
eam)
a amaly, Tm
(SE Pp eS
Yi Mercury ta


GROUP NO.
COMBININC CAPACITY
ATOMIC .WEIGHT
DENS TT


The world, the man and the atom are governed by the same
law. Our dense earth is now in its 4TH stage of consolidation.
The mind, the desire body and the vital body are less solid than
our 4TH vehicle, the dense body.. In the atomic weight of the
chemical elements there is a similar arrangement. The 47TH
group marks the acme of density.


CHAPTER XVI.


Future DEVELOPMENT AND INITIATION,


The Seven Days of Creation.


4 “HE Rosicrucian speaks of the Earth Period as Mars-
Mercury. The great creative Day of Manifesta-
tion is embodied in the names of the days of the

week, for our week-days have been named after the evolu-

tionary stages through which the virgin spirits pass in
their pilgrimage through matter.


Day. Corresponds to the Ts ruled by
Saturday ...... Saturn “Periodic. cuteticiaa sige eetioere © Saturn
Sunday fe .c/l POLIO OG Wave wvopertatds: vhkess bls Boia t The Sun
Mondays ci... « NLOODE EROTIOG «uc, sheeted eit) seb eiels The Moon
WDUCSO Age ecscass/<i0 First half of the Earth Period..... Mars
Wednesday .... Second half of the Earth Period.... Mereury
CUNO EEC hi: 9 Geen Uiihavtigenee WTI MOCK: Bn ocr chron se ae OBE Jupiter
JoBGEA? ORs MAVENS: -P-CLlOd. :enscaenetel s.cfo sielis 6:5. « Venus


The Vulean Period is the last Period of our scheme of
evolution. The quintessence of all the preceding Periods
is extracted by the recapitulation of spiral after spiral.
No new work is done until the very last Revolution on the
very last Globe and then only in the Seventh Epoch.
Therefore the Vulcan Period may be said to correspond to
the week, which includes all of the seven days.

The claim of astrologers that the days of the week are
ruled by the particular planet for which they are named,
is well-founded. The ancients were also familiar with this
occult knowledge, as is shown in their mythologies, in

411


412 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


which the names of the gods are associated with the days
of the week. Saturday is plainly “Saturn’s day”; Sunday
is correlated to the Sun, and Monday to the Moon. The
Latins call Tuesday “Dies Martis,”’ which obviously shows
its connection with Mars, the god of war. The name
“Tuesday” is derived from “Tirsdag,” “Tir” or “Tyr,”
being the name of the Norse god of war. “Wednesday”
was “Wotensdag,’ from Woten, also a Norse god; it is
called “Dies Mercurii” by the Latins, showing its associa-
tion with Mercury, as given in our list.

Thursday, or “Thorsdag,” is named for “Thor,” the
Norse god of thunder, and is called “Dies Jovis” by the
Latins, after the thunder god , “Jove” or “Jupiter.”

Friday is named for the Norse goddess of beauty,
“Freya,” and for similar reasons, the Latins call it “Dies
Veneris,” or Day of Venus.

These names of Periods have nothing to do with the
physical planets, but refer to past, present or future t-
carnations of the Earth; for, again applying the Hermetic
axiom, “As above, so below,” the macrocosm must have its
incarnations as well as the microcosm, man.

Occult science teaches that there are 777 incarnations,
but that does not mean that the Earth undergoes 777
metamorphoses. It means that evolving life makes

% Revolutions around the
7 Globes of the
% World Periods.

This pilgrimage of Involution and Evolution, including
the “short cut” of Initiation, is embodied in the Caduceus,
or “Staff of Mercury” (see diagram 15), so called because
this occult symbol indicates The Path of Initiation, which
has been open to man only since the beginning of the
Mercury half of the Earth Period. Some of the lesser


DIAGRAM (5


Tue Seven Days of CREATION
AND


Tue Four GREAT INITIATIONS


ORDINARY HUMANITY PURSUES THE SPIRAL PATH


i) < Cf
SATURN -PERIOD VWULCAN-PERIOD
(Saturoay ) THEWEEK
VIOLET (EMBRACING ALLTHE DAYS)
WHITE
(inctun NG ALL THE covers)


6 2
Venus-Perioo Sun- Perion
(FRIDAY) (SUNDAY )
RED INDIGO

4


5
JupItTER-Periop
(THURSDAY )


MERCURY -HALF MARS - HALF
(WEDNESDAY )-YELLOW (TUESDAY ) GREEN


THe Way or INITIATION
THERE WAS NO INITIATION PRIOR TO THE END OF THE
MARS HALF OF THE EARTH PERIOD. THE LESSER MYS-
TERIES EMBRACE HUMAN EVOLTION IN THE MERCURY
HALF OF THE EARTH PERtOD


414 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


mysteries were given to the earlier Lemurians and Atlan
teans, but not the Four Great Initiations.

The black serpent on diagram 15 indicates the winding,
cyclic path of Involution, comprising the Saturn, Sun and
Moon Periods, and the Mars half of the Earth Period,
during which the evolving life built its vehicles, not be-
coming fully awake and clearly conscious of the outside
world until the latter part of the Atlantean Epoch.

The white serpent represents the path that the human
race will follow through the Mercury half of the Harth
Period, and the Jupiter, Venus, and Vulcan Periods, dur-
ing which pilgrimage man’s consciousness will expand into
that of an omniscient, Creative Intelligence.

The serpentine path is the path followed by the great
majority; but the “Staff of Mercury,” around which the
serpents twine, shows the “straight and narrow way,” the
path of Initiation, which enables those who walk therein
to accomplish in a few short lives that which it requires
millions of years for the majority of mankind to accom-
plish.

It need scarcely be said that no description of the initia-
tory ceremonies can be given, as the first vow of the Ini-
tiate is silence; but even if permissible, it would not be
important. What concerns us in getting a bird’s-eye view
of the evolutionary path is to ascertain the results of the
ceremonies.

The whole result of initiation is to give to the spiritually
aspiring an opportunity to develop the higher faculties
and powers in a short time and by severe training, thereby
gaining the expansion of consciousness that all mankind
will surely possess eventually, but which the vast majority
choose to acquire through the slow process of ordinary evo-
lution. We may know the states of consciousness and


FUTURE DEVELOPMENT 415


their concomitant powers attained by the candidate as he
passes through successive great Initiations, provided we
know what those future states and powers will be for hu-
manity in general. Some hints have been given and more
may be logically deduced by an application of the law of
Correspondences, to give a fairly rounded picture of the
evolution in store for all of us, and the magnitude of the
_ great steps in Initiation. To do this it may help us to
glance back over the steps by which the consciousness of
man has been evolved through the various Periods.

We remember that during the Saturn Period the uncon-
sciousness of man was similar to that of the dense body
when plunged into the deepest trance condition; this was
succeeded, in the Sun period, by a dreamless-sleep con-
sciousness. In the Moon Period the first glimmering of
waking showed itseif in inward pictures of outward things.
The entire consciousness consisted of such inward repre-
sentations of external objects, colors, or sounds. At last,
in the latter part of the Atlantean Epoch, this picture-
consciousness gave way to the present full waking-con-
sciousness, in which objects could be observed outside,
clearly and distinctly outlined in space. When this objec-
tive-consciousness was attained, man became aware of an
outside world and for the first time thoroughly realized
the difference between “self” and “others.” He then real-
ized his separateness and thenceforth the “I” consciousness,
Egoism, became paramount. As previous to that time
there had been no thoughts nor ideas dealing with an out-
side world, there had consequently been no memory of
events.

The change from the internal picture consciousness to
the objective-self-consciousness was effected by a very slow
process, commensurate with its magnitude, lasting from


A16 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


the existence on Globe C in the third Revolution of the
Moon Period, until the latter part of the Atlantean Epoch.

During that time the evolving life passed through four
great stages of animal-like development before reaching the
human stage. These steps of the past correspond to four
stages yet to be passed through, and to the four initiations.

Within these four stages of consciousness previously
passed there are altogether thirteen steps, and from man’s
present state to the last of the Great Initiations there are
also thirteen initiations—the nine degrees of the lesser
mysteries and the four Great Initiations.

There is a similar division among our present animals
which can be traced through Form, because, as the form
is the expression of the life, so each step in its development
must necessarily show a step forward in consciousness.

Cuvier was the first to divide the animal kingdom into
four primary classes, but was not so successful in his divi-
sion of these classes into sub-classes. The embryologist,
Karl Ernst von Baer, also Professor Agassiz and other
scientists, classify the animal kingdom into four primary
and thirteen subdivisions, as follows:


. RADIATES:
1—Polyps, Sea-anemones and Coral.
2—Acalephs, or Jelly-fish.
3—Starfish, Sea-urchins.

II MOLLUSKS:

‘ 4—Acephala (oysters, etc.).
5—Gast ropoda (snails).
6—Cephalopoda.

III ARTICULATES:
7—Worms.
8—Crustacea (lobsters, ete.).
9—Insects.
IV VERTEBRATES:
10—Fishes.
11—Reptiles.
12—Birds.
13—Mammals,


FUTURE DEVELOPMENT 417


The first three divisions correspond to the remaining
three Revolutions of the Mercury half of the Earth Period,
and their nine steps correspond to the nine degrees of the
lesser mysteries, which will have been taken by humanity
in general when it has reached the middle of the last
Revolution of the Earth Period.

The fourth division in the list of the advancing animal
kingdom has four subdivisions: Fishes, Reptiles, Birds,
and Mammals. The steps in consciousness thus indicated
correspond to similar states of advancement to be attained
by humanity at the end of the Earth, Jupiter, Venus, and
Vulean Periods and which any qualified individual may
now attain by initiation. The first of the Great Initiations
gives the stage of consciousness which will be attained by
ordinary humanity at the end of the Earth Period; the
second that to which all will attain at the end of the
Jupiter Period; the third gives the extension of conscious-
ness to be reached at the close of the Venus Period; the
last brings to the initiate the power and omniscience to
which the majority will attain only at the end of the Vul-
can Period.

The Objective-Consciousness by which we obtain knowl-
edge of the outside world is dependent upon what we
perceive through the medium of the senses. This we call
“real,” in contradistinction to our thoughts and ideas
which come to us through our inner consciousness; their
reality is not apparent to us in the same way as that of
a book or table, or other visible or tangible object in space.
Thoughts and ideas seem misty and wmnreal, therefore we
speak of a “mere” thought, or of “just” an idea.

The ideas and thoughts of today, however, have an evo-
lution before them; they are destined to become as real,


clear and tangible as any of the objects of the outside
14


418 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


world which we now perceive through the physical senses.
At present, when a thing or a color is thought of, the pic-
ture or color presented by the memory to our inner con-
sciousness is but a dim and shadowy one compared with
the thing thought of.

As early as the Jupiter Period there will be a marked
change in this respect. Then the dream-pictures of the
Moon Period will return, but they will be subject to the
eall of the thinker, and not mere reproductions of outer
objects. Thus there will be a combination of the pictures
of the Moon Period and the thoughts and ideas consciously
developed during the Earth Period, that is, it will be a
Self-Conscious Picture-Consciousness.

When a man of the Jupiter Period says “red,” or speaks
the name of an object, a clear and exact reproduction of
the particular shade of red of which he is thinking, or of
the object to which he refers, will be presented to his inner
vision and will also be quite visible to the hearer. There
will be no misconception as to what is meant by the words
spoken. Thoughts and ideas will be alive and visible,
therefore hypocrisy and flattery will be entirely eliminated.
People can be seen exactly as they are. There will be
both good and bad, but the two qualities will not be min-
gled in the same person. There will be the thoroughly
good man and the downright evil man, and one of the
serious problems of that time will be how to deal with
the latter. The Manichees, an Order of still higher spiritu-
ality than the Rosicrucians, are at present studying that
very problem. An idea of the condition anticipated may
be gained from a short resumé of their legend. (All
mystic orders have a legend symbolica! of their ideals and
aspirations. )

In the legend of the Manichees there are two kingdotue


FUTURE DEVELOPMENT 419


—that of the Light Elves and that of the Night Elves.
The latter attack the former, are defeated and must be
punished. But, as the Light Elves are as thoroughly good
as the Night Elves are bad, they cannot inflict evil upon
their foes, so they must be punished with Good. 'There-
fore a part of the kingdom of the Light Elves is incor-
porated with that of the Night Elves and in this way the
evil is in time overcome. Hate which will not submit to
hate, must succumb to Love.

The internal pictures of the Moon Period were a cer-
tain expression of mari’s external environment. In the
Jupiter Period the pictures will be expressed from within ;
they will be an outcome of the inner life of the man. He
will also possess the additional faculty, which he cultivated
in the Earth Period, of seeing things in space outside of
himself. In the Moon Period he did not see the concrete
thing, but only its soul qualities. In the Jupiter Period
he will see both, and will thus have a thorough perception
and understanding of his surroundings. At a later stage
in the same Period, this perceptive ability will be suc-
ceeded by a still higher phase. His power to form clear
mental conceptions of colors, objects, or tones will enable
him to contact and influence supersensuous beings of vari-
ous orders and to secure their obedience, employing their
forces as he wishes. He will be unable to send out from
himself the forces wherewith to carry out his designs, how-
ever, and will be dependent upon the help of these super-
physical beings, who will then be at his service.

At the close of the Venus Period he will be able to use
his own force to give his pictures life and to set them out
from himself as objects in space. He will then possess an
Objective, Self-Conscious, Creative-Consciousness.

Very little can be said about the high spiritual con-


420 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


sciousness which will be attained at the close of the Vulcan
Period; it would be quite beyond our present comprehen-
*jon.


SPIRALS WITHIN SPIRALS.


It must not be supposed that these states of conscious-
tess commence at the beginning of the Periods to which
they belong and last until the end. There is always the
Recapitulation, and therefore there must be the corre-
sponding stages of consciousness on an ascending scale.
The Saturn Revolution of any Period, the stay on Globe
A, and the first Epoch on any Globe, are repetitions of
the Saturn Period states of development. The Sun Revo-
lution, the stay on Globe B, and the second Epoch on any
Globe are Recapitulations of the Sun Period states of de-
velopment, and so on, all the way through. Hence it will
be seen that the consciousness which is to be the especial
and peculiar result or product of any Period, does not
begin to be evolved until all the Recapitulations have been
made. The waking-consciousness of the Earth Period was
not started until the Fourth Revolution, when the life
wave had reached the Fourth Globe (D), and was in the
Fourth or Atlantean Epoch on that Globe.

The Jupiter consciousness will not start in the Jupiter
Period until the Fifth Revolution, when the Fifth Globe
(E) has been reached and the Fifth Epoch commences
on that Globe.

Correspondingly, the Venus consciousness will not begin
until the Sixth Revolution has come to the Sixth Globe
and Epoch, and the special Vulcan work will be confined
to the very last Globe and Epoch, just before the Day of
Manifestation closes.

The time required for passing through these respective


FUTURE DEVELOPMENT 421


Periods varies greatly. The further into matter the virgin
spirits descend, the slower their progress and the more
numerous the steps or stages of progression. After the
nadir of material existence has been passed and the life
wave ascends into more tenuous and mobile conditions, the
progress is gradually accelerated. The Sun Period is of
somewhat longer duration than the Saturn Period, and
the Moon Period is longer than the Sun Period. The
Mars (or first) half of the Earth Period is the longest
half of any Period. Then the time begins to shorten
again, so that the Mercury half of the Earth Period, the
latter three and a half Revolutions, will occupy less time
than the Mars half; the Jupiter Period will be shorter
than the Moon Period; the Venus Period shorter than
the corresponding Sun Period; and the Vulcan Period
the shortest Period of them all.

The states of consciousness of the different Periods
may be tabulated as follows:


Period Corresponding consciousness
Saturn ......Unconsciousness corresponding to deep trance
Sy We soaeno Unconsciousness resembling dreamless sleep
Moon ...... .Picture consciousness corresponding to dream state
Binge eetttsrctee Waking, objective consciousness
Jupiter ..... Self-conscious picture consciousness
WENUST «vies Objective, Self-conscious, Creative consciousness


Vulean ..... Highest Spiritual Consciousness


Having taken a general survey of the states of conscious-
ness to be developed in the next three and a half Periods,
we will now study the means of attainment.


ALCHEMY AND SOUL-GROWTH.


The dense body was started in the Saturn Period, passed
through various transformations in the Sun and Moon


422 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Periods, and will reach its highest development in the
Earth Period.

The vital body was started in the second Revolution of
the Sun Period, was reconstructed in the Moon and Karth
Periods, and will reach perfection in the Jupiter Period,
which is its fourth stage, as the Earth Period is the fourth
stage for the dense body.

The desire body was started in the Moon period, recon-
structed in the Earth period, will be further modified in
the Jupiter Period, reaching perfection in the Venus
Period.

The mind was started in the Earth Period, will be modi-
fied in the Jupiter and Venus Periods, and attain to per-
fection in the Vulcan Period.

Reference to diagram 8 will show that the lowest Globe
of the Jupiter Period is located in the Etheric Region. It
would therefore be impossible to use the dense physical
vehicle there, as only a vital body can be used in the
Etheric Region. Yet it must not be supposed that after
spending the time from the beginning of the Saturn
Period to the end of the Earth Period in completing and
perfecting this body, it is then thrown away that man
may function in a “higher” vehicle!

Nothing in Nature is wasted. In the Jupiter Period
the forces of the dense body will be superimposed upon
the completed vital body. That vehicle will then possess
the powers of the dense body in addition to its own facul-
ties, and will therefore be a much more yaluable instru-
ment for the expression of the threefold spirit than if
built from its own forces alone.

Similarly, Globe D of the Venus Period is located in
the Desire World (see diagram 8), hence neither a dense
nor a vital body could be used as an instrument of con-


FUTURE DEVELOPMENT 423


sciousness, therefore the essences of the perfected dense
and vital bodies are incorporated in the completed desire
body, the latter thus becoming a vehicle of transcendent
qualities, marvelously adaptable and so responsive to the
slightest wish of the indwelling spirit that in our present
limitations, it is beyond our utmost conception.

Yet the efficiency of even this splendid vehicle will be
transcended when in the Vulcan period its essence, to-
gether with the essences of the dense and vital bodies, are
added to the mind body, which becomes the highest of
man’s vehicles, containing within itself the quintessence
of all that was best in all the vehicles. The vehicle of the
Venus Period being beyond our present power of concep-
tion, how much more so is that which will be at the service
of the divine beings of the Vulcan Period!

During involution the creative Hierarchies assisted man
to arouse into activity the threefold spirit, the Ego, to
build the threefold body, and to acquire the link of mind.
Now, however, on the seventh day (to use the language
of the Bible), God rests. Man must work out his own
salvation. The threefold spirit must complete the working
out of the plan begun by the Gods.

The human spirit, which was awakened during Involu-
tion in the Moon Period, will be the most prominent of
the three aspects of the spirit in the evolution of the
Jupiter Period, which is the corresponding Period on the
upward are of the spiral. The life spirit, which was
started into activity in the Sun Period, will manifest its
principal activity in the corresponding Venus Period, and
the particular influences of the Divine Spirit will be strong-
est in the Vulcan Period, because it was vivified in the
corresponding Saturn Period.

All three aspects of the spirit are active all the time


424 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


during evolution, but the principal activity of each aspect
will be unfolded in those particular Periods, because the
work to be done there is its special work.

When the threefold spirit had evolved the threefold body
and gained control of it through the focus of Mind, it
commenced to evolve the threefold soul by working from
within. How much or how little soul a man has depends
upon the amount of work the spirit has done in the bodies.
This has been explained in the chapter describing post
mortem experiences.

As much of the desire body as has been worked upon
by the Ego is transmuted into the emotional soul, and is
ultimately assimilated by the human spirit, the special
vehicle of which is the desire body.

As much of the vital body as has been worked upon by
the life spirit, becomes the Intellectual soul, and it builds
the life spirit, because that aspect of the threefold spirit
has its counterpart in the vital body.

As much of the dense body as has been worked upon
by the Divine Spirit is called the Conscious soul, and is
ultimately merged in the Divine Spirit, because the dense
body is its material emanation.

The Conscious soul grows by action, external impacts,
and experience.

The Emotional soul grows by the feelings and emotions
generated by actions and experiences.

The Intellectual soul, as mediator between the other
two, grows by the exercise of memory, by which it links
together past and present experiences and the feelings
engendered thereby, thus creating “sympathy” and “an-
tipathy,” which could not exist apart from memory, be-
cause the feelings resulting from experience alone would be
evanescent.


FUTURE DEVELOPMENT 425


During involution the spirit progressed by growing
bodies, but evolution depends upon soul growth—the trans-
mutation of the bodies into soul. The soul is, so to say,
the quintessence, the power or force of the body, and when
a body has been completely built and brought to perfec-
tion through the stages and Periods as above described,
the soul is fully extracted therefrom and is absorbed by
the one of the three aspects of the spirit which generated
the body in the first place; thus:

The Conscious soul will be absorbed by the divine spirit
in the seventh Revolution of the Jupiter Period ;

The Intellectual soul will be absorbed by the life spirit
in the sixth Revolution of the Venus Period;

The Emotional soul will be absorbed by the human spirit
in the fifth Revolution of the Vulcan Period.


Ter CREATIVE WorpD.


The mind is the most important instrument possessed
by the spirit, and its special instrument in the work of
creation. The spiritualized and perfected larynx will speak
the creative Word, but the perfected mind will decide as
to the particular form and the volume of vibration, and
will thus be the determining factor. Imagination will be
the spiritualized faculty directing the work of creation.

There is a strong tendency at the present time to regard
the faculty of imagination slightingly, yet it is one of the
most important factors in our civilization. If it were not
for the imagination, we would still be naked savages.
Imagination planned our houses, our clothes and our trans-
portation and transmission facilities. Had not the in-
ventors of these improvements possessed the mind and
imagination to form mental images, the improvements
could never have become concrete realities. In our mate-


426 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


1ialistie day and age there is scarcely an effort made to
conceal the contempt in which the faculty of imagination
is generally held, and none feel the effects of this more
acutely than inventors. They are usually classed as
“cranks,” and yet they have been the chief factors in the
subjugation of the Physical World and in making our
social environment what it is today. Any improvement in
spiritual or physical conditions must first be imagined as
a possibility before it can become an actuality.

If the student will turn to diagram 1 this fact will be-
come clear. In the comparison there drawn between the
functions of the different human vehicles and the parts of
a stereopticon, the mind corresponds to the lens. It is the
focusing medium whereby the ideas wrought by the imagi-
nation of the spirit are projected upon the material uni-
verse. First they are thought forms only, but when the
desire to realize the imagined possibilities has set the man
to work in the Physical World, they become what we call
concrete “realities.”

At the present time, however, the mind is not focused
in a way that enables it to give a clear and true picture of
what the spirit imagines. It is not one-pointed. It gives
misty and clouded pictures. Hence the necessity of experi-
ment to show the inadequacies of the first conception, and
bring about new imaginings and ideas until the image
produced by the spirit in mental substance has been repro-
duced in physical substance.

At the best, we are able to shape through the mind only
such images as have to do with Form, because the human
mind was not started until the Earth Period, and there-
fore is now in its form, or “mineral” stage, hence in our
operations we are confined to forms, to minerals. We can
imagine ways and means of working with the mineral


FUTURE DEVELOPMENT 427


forms of the three lower kingdoms, but can do little or
nothing with living bodies. We may indeed graft living
branch to living tree, or living part of animal or man to
other living part, but it is not life with which we are
working; it is form only. We are making different condi-
tions, but the life which already inhabited the form con-
tinues to do so still. To create life is beyond man’s power
until his mind has become alive.

In the Jupiter Period the mind will be vivified to some
extent and man can then imagine forms which will live
and grow, like plants.

In the Venus Period, when his mind has acquired “Feel-
ing,” he can create living, growing, and feeling things.

When he reaches perfection, at the end of the Vulcan
Period, he will be able to “imagine” into existence crea-
tures that will live, grow, feel, and think.

In the Saturn Period the life wave which is now man
started on its evolution. The Lords of Mind were then
human. They worked with man at that Period, when he
was mineral. They now have nothing to do with the lower
kingdoms, but are concerned solely with our human
development.

Our present animals started their mineral existence in
the Sun Period, at which time the Archangels were human,
therefore the Archangels are the rulers and guides of the
evolution of that which is now animal, but have nothing to
do with plant or mineral.

The present plants had their mineral existence in the
Moon Period. The Angels were then human, therefore
they have special concern with the life that now inhabits
the plants, to guide it up to the human stage; but they
have no interest in the minerals.

Our present humanity will have to work with the new


428 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


life wave, which entered evolution in the Earth Period and
now ensouls the minerals. We are now working with it
by means of the faculty of imagination, giving it form—
building it into ships, bridges, railways, houses, etc.

In the Jupiter Period we shall guide the evolution of the
plant kingdom, for that which is at present mineral will
then have a plant-like existence and we must work with it
there as the Angels are now doing with our plant kingdom.
Our faculty of imagination will be so developed that
we shall have the ability, not only to create forms by means
of it, but to endow those forms with vitality.

In the Venus Period our present mineral life wave
shall have advanced another step, and we shall be doing for
the animals of that period what the Archangels are now
doing for our animals—giving them living and feeling
forms.

Lastly, in the Vulcan Period it will be our privilege
to give them a germinal mind, as the Lords of Mind did
to us. The present minerals will then have become the
humanity of the Vulcan Period, and we shall have passed
through stages similar to those through which the Angels
and Archangels are now passing. We shall then have
reached a point in evolution a little higher than that of the
present Lords of Mind, for remember, there is never an
exact reproduction anywhere, but always progressive im-
provement, because of the spiral.

The Divine Spirit will absorb the human spirit at the
close of the Jupiter Period; the life spirit at the close of
the Venus Period; and the perfected Mind, embodying
all that it has garnered during its pilgrimage through all
the seven Periods, will be absorbed by the Divine Spirit at
the close of the Vulcan Period. (There is no contradic-
tion of the foregoing in the statement made elsewhere that


EEE


FUTURE DEVELOPMENT 429


the Emotional soul will be absorbed by the human spirit in
the fifth Revolution of the Vulcan Period, because the
latter will then be within the Divine Spirit.)

Then will succeed the long interval of subjective activity,
during which the virgin spirit will assimilate all the fruits
of the septenary Periods of active Manifestation. It is
then merged in God, from Whom it came, to re-emerge
at the dawn of another Great Day, as One of His glorious
helpers. During its past evolution its latent possibilities
have been transmuted to dynamic powers. It has acquired
Soul power and a Creative Mind as the fruitage of its
pilgrimage through matter. It has advanced from impo-
tence to Omnipotence, from nescience to Ommiscience.


CHAPTER XVII.


Tur Mertuop or Aceurring First-Hanp KNOWLEDGE.
The First Steps.


4 “HE time has now come for pointing out the way by
which each individual may investigate for himself
all the facts with which we have dealt thus far in

our study. As stated in the beginning, there are no special
“oifts’ bestowed upon any. All may know for themselves
the truth concerning the pilgrimage of the soul, the past
evolution and future destiny of the world; without being
compelled to depend upon the veracity of another. There
is a method whereby this valuable faculty may be acquired,
and the earnest student qualify himself to investigate those
super-physical realms; a method by which, if persistently
followed, the powers of a God may be developed.

A simple illustration may indicate the first steps. The
very best mechanic is well-nigh helpless without the tools
of his craft. Indeed it is the hall-mark of a good artisan
that he is very fastidious as to the quality and condition
of the tools he uses, because he knows that the work de-
pends as much upon their excellence as upon his skill.

The Ego has several instruments—a dense body, a vital
body, a desire body, and a mind. ‘These are its tools and
upon their quality and condition depends how much or how
little it can accomplish in its work of gathering experience
in each life. If the instruments are poor and dull there

430


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 431


will be but little spiritual growth and the life will be a
barren one, so far as the spirit is concerned.

We generally estimate a “successful” life by the bank
account, the social position attained, or the happi-
ness resulting from a carefree existence and a sheltered
environment.

When life is regarded in that way all the principal
things that make for permanency are forgotten; the indi-
vidual is blinded by the evanescent and illusionary. A
bank account seems such a very real success, the fact is
forgotten that from the moment the Ego leaves the body, it
has no equity in gold nor any other earthly treasure. It
may even have to answer for the methods employed in
amassing that hoard, and suffer great pain in seeing others
spend it. It is forgotten that the important social posi-
tion also disappears when the silver cord is loosed. Those
who once fawned may then sneer, and even those who were
faithful in life might shudder at the thought of an hour
spent with no company but that of the dead. All that is
of this life alone is vanity. Only that is of true value
which can be taken with us across the threshold as the
treasure of the spirit.

The hot-house plant may look very beautiful as it blooms
in its sheltered glass house, but should the furnace fire
go out, it would wither and die, while the plant that has
grown in rain and sunshine, through storm and calm, will
survive the winter and bloom afresh each year. From the
viewpoint of the soul, happiness and a sheltered environ-
ment are generally unfortunate circumstances. The petted
and fondled lap dog is subject to diseases of which the
homeless cur, which has to fight for a scrap from a gar-
bage can, knows nothing. The cur’s life is hard, but it
gets experience that makes it alert, alive and resourceful.


432 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Its life is rich in events, and it reaps a harvest of experi-
ence, while the pampered lap dog drones its time away in
fearful monotony.

The case of a human being is somewhat similar. It
may be hard to fight poverty and hunger, but from the
standpoint of the soul it is infinitely preferable to a life of
idleluxury. Where wealth is nothing more than the hand-
maid of well thought out philanthropy, which helps man
in such a way as to really uplift him, it may be a very
great blessing and a means of growth for its possessor, but
when used for selfish purposes and oppression, it cannot
be regarded as other than an unmitigated curse.

The scul is here to acquire experience through its instru-
ments. These are the tools furnished to each at birth, and
they are good, bad or indifferent according to what we
have learned through past experience in the building of
them. Such as they are we must work with them, if at all.

If we have become aroused from the usual lethargy and
are anxious to progress, the question naturally arises,
What must I do?

Without well-kept tools the mechanic can do no effective
work; similarly, the instruments of the Ego must be
cleansed and sharpened; then we may commence to work
to some purpose. As one works with those wonderful
tools they themselves improve with proper use and be-
come more and more efficient to aid in the work. The
object of this work is Union with the Higher Self.

There are three steps by which this work conquers the
lower nature, but they are not completely taken one after
the other. In a certain sense they go together, so that at
the present stage the first receives the most attention, the
second less, and the third least of all. In time, when the


————


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 433


first step has been wholly taken, naturally more attention
can be paid to the other two.

There are three helps given in attaining these three
stages. They can be seen in the outside world, where the
great Leaders of humanity have placed them.

The first help is Race religions, which by aiding human-
ity to overcome the desire body, prepare it for union with
the Holy Spirit.

The full operation of this help was seen on the Day of
Pentecost. As the Holy Spirit is the Race God, all lan-
guages are expressions of it. That is why the apostles,
when fully united and filled with the Holy Spirit, spoke
with different tongues and were able to convince their
hearers. Their desire bodies had been sufficiently purified
te bring about the wished-for union and this is an earnest
of what the disciple will one day attain to—the power tc
speak all tongues. It may also be cited as a modern,
historical example, that the Com te de St. Germain (who
was one of the later incarnations of Christian Rosenkrepz
the founder of our sacred Order), spoke all languages, so
that all to whom the spoke thought he belonged to the
same nation as they. He also had achieved union with the
Holy Spirit.

In the Hyperborean Epoch, before man possessed a
desire body, there was but one universal mode of communi-
cation and when the desire body has become sufficiently
purified, all men will again be able to understand one
another, for then the separative Race differentiation will
have passed away.

The second help which humanity now has is the Pion
of the Son—the Christian religion, the object of which is
Union with Christ by purification and control of the vital
body.


434 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Paul refers to this future state when he says: “Until
Christ be formed in you,” and exhorts his followers, as men
who are running a race, to rid themselves of every weight.

The fundamental principle in building the vital body is
repetition. Repeated experiences work on it to create
memory. The Leaders of humanity, who desired to give
us unconscious help by certain exercises, instituted prayer
as a means of bringing pure and lofty thought to work on
the vital body, and enjoined us to “pray without ceasing.”
Seoffers have often asked sneeringly why it should be
thought necessary to always pray, because if God is omnis-
cient He knows our needs and if He is not, our prayers
will probably never reach Him; and if not omniscient,
He cannot be omnipotent, and therefore could not answer
prayer in any case. Many an earnest Christian may also
have thought it wrong to be continually importuning the
Throne of Grace.

Such ideas are founded upon a misundersianding of
facts. Truly God is omniscient and requires no reminder
of our needs, but if we pray aright, we lift ourselves up to
Him, thus working upon and purifying our vital bodies.
If we pray aright—but that is the great trouble. We are
generally much more concerned about temporal things
than we are about spiritual upliftment. Churches will
hold special meetings to pray for rain! and the chaplains
of opposing armies or navies will even pray before a battle
that success may follow their arms!

That is prayer to the Race God, Who fights the battles
of His people, gives them increase of flocks and herds,
fills their granaries and caters to their material wants.
Such prayers are not even purifying. They are from the
desire body, which sums up the situation thus: Now Lord,


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 435


I am keeping your commandments to the best of my ability
and I want You to do Your part in return.

Christ gave to humanity a prayer that is, like Himself,
unique and all-embracing. In it there are seven distinct
and separate prayers; one for each of the seven principles
of man—the threefold body, the threefold spirit and the
link of mind. Each prayer is peculiarly adapted to pro-
_ mote the progression of that pait of composite man to
which it refers.

The purpose of the prayer relating to the threefold body
is the spiritualization of those vehicles and the extraction
therefrom of the threefold soul.

The prayers relating to the threefold spirit prepare it to
receive the extracted essence, the threefold soul.

The prayer for the link of mind is to keep it in its
proper relation as a tie between the higher and the lower
nature.

The third help to be given to humanity will be the
Religion of the Father. We can have very little concep-
tion of what that will be, save that the ideal will be even
higher than Brotherhood and that by it the dense body
will be spiritualized.

The Religions of the Holy Spirit, the Race religions,
were for the uplifting of the human race through a feeling
of kinship limited to a group—family, tribe or nation.

The purpose of the Religion of The Son, Christ, is to
further uplift mankind by forming it into a Universal
Brotherhood of separate individuals.

The ideal of the Religion of The Father will be the
elimination of all separateness, merging all into One, so
that there will be no “I” nor “Thou,” but all will be One
wn reality. This will not come to pass while we are still
inhabitants of the physical Harth, but in a future state


436 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


where we shall realize our unity with all, each having access
to all the knowledge garnered by each separate individual.
Just as the single facet of a diamond has access to all the
light that comes through each of the other facets, is one
with them, yet bounded by lines which give it a certain
individuality without separateness, so will the individual
spirit retain the memory of its particular experiences,
while giving to all others the fruits of its individual
existence. 3

These are the steps and stages through which humanity
is unconsciously being led.

In past ages the Race spirit reigned alone.. Man was
content with a patriarchal and paternal government in
which he had no part. Now all over the world we see
signs of the breaking down of the old system. The caste
system, which was the stronghold of England in India,
is crumbling. Instead of being separated into small
groups, the people are uniting in the demand that the
oppressor shall depart and leave them to live in freedom
under a government of, by and for the people. Russia is
torn by strife for freedom from a dictatorial, autocratic
government. Turkey has awakened and taken a long
stride toward liberty. Here in our own land, where we
are supposed to be in the actual enjoyment of such liberty
as others are, as yet, only able to covet or fight for, we are
not yet satisfied. We are learning that there are other
oppressions than those of an autocratic monarchy. We
see that we have still industrial freedom to gain. We are
chafing under the yoke of the trusts and an insane system
of competition. We are trending toward co-operation,
which is now practiced by the trusts within their own
confines for private profit. We are desirous of a state of


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 43%


society where “they shall sit every man under his vine and
under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid.”

Thus, all over the world, the old systems of paternal
government are changing. Nations, as such, have had
their day and are unwittingly working toward Universal
Brotherhood in accordance with the design of our invisible
Leaders, who are none the less potent in shaping events
because they are not officially seated in the councils of
nations.

These are the slow means by which the different bodies
of humanity at large are being purified, but the aspirant
to the higher knowledge works consciously to attain to
these ends, by well-defined methods, according to his con-
stitution.


WESTERN MertTHops FoR WESTERN PEOPLE.


In India, certain methods under different systems of
Yoga, are used. Yoga means Union and, as in the West,
the object of the aspirant is union with the Higher Self;
but to be efficacious, the methods of seeking that union
must differ. The vehicles of a Hindu are very differently
constituted from those of a Caucasian. The Hindus have
lived for many, many thousands of years in an environ-
ment and climate totally different from ours. They have
pursued a different method of thought and their civiliza-
tion, though of a very high order, is different from ours
in its effects. Therefore it would be useless for us to
adopt their methods, which are the outcome of the highest
occult knowledge and perfectly suited to them, but as un-
suitable for the people of the West as a diet of oats would
be for a lion.

For instance, in some systems it is required that the
yogi shall sit in certain positions, that particular cosmic


438 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


currents may flow through his body in a certain way to
produce certain definite results. That instruction would
be altogether uséless for a’ Caucasian, as he is absolutely
impervious to those currents, because of his way of living.
If he is to attain results at all, he must work in harmony
with the constitution of his vehicles. That is why the
‘“Mysteries’’ were established in different parts of Europe
during the Middle Ages. The alchemists were deep stu-
dents of the higher occult science. The popular belief
that the object of their study and experimenting was the
transmutation of baser metals into gold, was because they
chose that symbolic way of describing their true work,
which was the transmutation of the lower nature into
spirit. It was thus described to lull the suspicions of the
priests, without stating a falsehood. The statement that
the Rosicrucians were a society devoted to the discovery
and use of the formula for the making of the ‘‘ Philoso-
pher’s Stone’’ wag and is true. It is also true that most
people have handled and do often handle this wondrous
stone. It is common, but of no avail to any but the indi-
vidual who makes it for himself. The formula is given in
the esoteric training and a Rosicrucian is no different in
that respect from the occultist of any other school. All
are engaged in the making of this coveted stone, each,
however, using his own methods, as there are no two indi-
viduals alike and consequently really effective work is
always individual in its seope.

All occult schools are divisible into seven, as are the
““Rays’’ of Life, the virgin spirits. Hach School or Order
belongs to one of these seven Rays, as does each unit of
our humanity. Therefore any individual seeking to unite
with one of these occult groups, the ‘‘Brothers’’ in which
do not belong to his Ray, cannot do so with benefit to


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 439


himself. The members of these groups are brothers in a
more intimate sense than are the rest of humanity.

Perhaps if these seven Rays are compared to the seven
colors of the spectrum, their relation to one another car
be better understood. For instance, if a red ray were to
ally itself with a green ray, inharmony would result. ‘The
same principle applies to spirits. Each must proceed
with the group to which it belongs during manifestation,
yet they are all one. As all the colors are contained in
the white light, but the refractive quality of our atmos-
phere seems to divide it into seven colors, so the illusory
conditions of concrete existence cause the virgin spirits
to seem grouped and this apparent grouping will abide
while we are in this state.

The Rosicrucian Order was started particularly for those
whose high degree of intellectual development caused them
to repudiate the heart. Intellect imperiously demands a
logical explanation of everything—the world mystery, the
questions of life and death. The reasons for and the
modus operand. of existence were not explained by the
priestly injuction “not to seek to know the mysteries of
God.”

To any man or woman who is blest, or otherwise, with
such an inquiring mind it is of paramount importance
that they shall receive all the information they crave, so
that when the head is stilled, the heart may speak. Intel-
lectual knowledge is but a means to an end, not the end
itself. Therefore, the Rosicrucian purposes first of all to
satisfy the aspirant for knowledge that everything in the
universe is reasonable, thus winning over the rebellious
intellect. When it has ceased to criticise and is ready to
accept provisionally, as probably true, statements which
cannot be immediately verified, then, and not until thea,


440 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


will esoteric training be effective in developing the higher
faculties whereby man passes from faith to first-hand
knowledge. Yet, even then it will be found that, as the
pupil progresses in first-hand knowledge and becomes able
to investigate for himself, there are always truths ahead
of him that he knows to be truths, but which he is not yet
advanced sufficiently to investigate.

The pupil will do well to remember that nothing that is
not logical can exist in the universe and that logic is the
surest guide in all the Worlds, but he must not forget that
his faculties are limited and that more than his own pow-
ers of logical reasoning may be needed to solve a given
problem, although it may, nevertheless, be susceptible of
full explanation, but by lines of reasoning which are be-
yond the capacity of the pupil at that stage of his de-
velopment. Another point that must be borne in mind
is that unwavering confidence in the teacher is absolutely
necessary.

The foregoing is recommended to the particular con-
sideration of all who intend taking the first steps toward
the higher knowledge. If the directions given are fol-
lowed at all, they must be given full credence as an effi-
cacious means to accomplish their purpose. To follow
them in a half-hearted manner would be of no avail what-
ever. Unbelief will kill the fairest flower ever produced
by the spirit.

Work on the different bodies of man is carried on syn-
chronously. One body cannot be influenced without af-
fecting the others, but the principal work may be done on
any one of them.

lf strict attention is paid to hygiene and diet, the dense
body is the one principally affected, but at the same time
there is also an effect on the vital body and the desire


ee


eo


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE A4]


body for, as purer and better materials are built into the
dense body, the particles are enveloped in purer planetary
ether and desire-stuff also, therefore the planetary parts
of the vital and desire bodies become purer. If attention
is paid to food and hygiene only, the personal vital and
desire bodies may remain almost as impure as before, but
it has become just a little easier to get into touch with the
good than if gross food were used.

On the other hand if, despite annoyances, an equable
temper is cultivated, also literary and artistic tastes, the
vital body will produce an effect of daintiness and fas-
tidiousness in physical matters and will also engender en-
nobling feelings and emotions in the desire body.

Seeking to cultivate the emotions also reacts upon the
other vehicles and helps to improve them.


THE SCIENCE oF NUTRITION.


If we begin with the dense vehicle and consider the
physical means available to improve it and make it the
best possible instrument for the spirit and afterward con-
sider the spiritual means to the same end, we shall be in-
eluding all the other vehicles as well; therefore we shall
follow that method.

The first visible state of a human embryo is a small,
globulous, pulpy or jelly-like substance, similar to albu-
men, or the white of an egg. In this pulpy globule various
particles of more solid matter appear. These gradually
increase in bulk and density until they come in contact
with one another. The different points of contact are
slowly modified into joints or hinges and thus a distinct
framework of solid matter, a skeleton, is gradually formed.

During the formation of this framework the surround-
ing pulpy matter accumulates and changes in form until


A492 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


at length that degree of organization develops which is
known as a foetus. This becomes larger, firmer, and more
fully organized up to the time of birth, when the state of
infancy begins. .

The same process of consolidation which commenced
with the first visible stage of existence, still continues:
The being passes through the different stages of infancy,
ehildhood, youth, manhood or womanhood, old age, and
at last comes to the change that is called death.

Each of these stages is characterized by an increasing
degree of hardness and solidity.

There is a gradual increase in density and firmness of
the bones, tendons, cartilages, ligaments, tissues, ‘mem-
branes, the coverings and even the very substance of the
stomach, liver, lungs, and other organs. The joints be-
come rigid and dry. They begin to crack and grate when
they are moved, because the synovial fluid, which oils and
softens them, is diminished in quantity and rendered too
thick and glutinous to serve that purpose.

The heart, the brain, and the entire muscular system,
spinal cord, nerves. eyes, etc., partake of the same con-
solidating process, growing more and more rigid. Millions
upon millions of the minute capillary vessels which ramify
and spread like the branches of a tree throughout the en-
tire body, gradually choke up and change into solid fibre,
no longer pervious to the blood.

The larger blood vessels, both arteries and veins, indu-
rate, lose their elasticity, grow smaller, and become in-
capable of carrying the required amount of blood. The
fluids of the body thicken and become putrid, loaded with
earthy matter. The skin withers and grows wrinkled and
dry. The hair falls off for lack of oil. The teeth decay
and drop out for lack of gelatine. The motor nerves begin


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 448


to dry up and the movements of the body become awkward
and slow. The senses fail; the circulation of the blood is
retarded; it stagnates and congeals in the vessels. More
and more the body loses its former powers. Once elastic,
healthy, alert, pliable, active and sensitive, it becomes
rigid, slow, and insensible. Finally, it dies of old age.

The question now arises, What is the cause of this grad-
_ ual ossification of the body, bringing rigidity, decrepitude,
and death?

From the purely physical standpoint, chemists seem to
be unanimous in the opinion that it is principally an in-
crease of phosphate of lime (bone matter), carbonate of
lime (common chalk), and sulphate of lime (plaster of
paris), with occasionally a little magnesia and an insigni-
ficant amount of other earthy matters.

The only difference between the body of old age and
that of childhood is the greater density, toughness and
rigidity, caused by the greater proportion of calcareous,
earthy matter entering into the composition of the for-
mer. ‘The bones of a child are composed of three parts of
gelatine to one part of earthy matter. In old age this
proportion is reversed. What is the source of this death-
dealing accumulation of solid matter?

It seems to be axiomatic that the entire body is nour-
ished by the blood and that everything contained in the
body, of whatever nature, has first been in the blood.
Analysis shows that the blood holds earthy substances of
the same kind as the solidifying agents—and mark !—the
arterial blood contains more earthy matter than the venous
blood.

This is highly important. It shows that in every cycle
the blood deposits earthy substances. It is therefore the
common carrier that chokes up the system. But» its sup-


444 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


ply of earthy matter must be replenished, otherwise it
could net continue to do this. Where does it renew its
deadly lead? ‘There can be but one answer to that ques-
tion—from the food and drink; there is absolutely no
other source.

The food and drink which nourish the body must be,
at the same time, the primary source of the calcareous,
earthy matter which is deposited by the blood all over the
system, causing decrepitude and finally death. To sus-
tain physical life it is necessary that we eat and drink,
but as there are many kinds of food and drink, it be-
hooves us, in the light of the above facts, to ascertain, if
possible, what kinds contain the smallest proportion of
destructive matter. If we can find such food we can
lengthen our lives and, from an occult standpoint, it is
desirable to live as long as possible in each dense body,
particularly after a start has been made toward the path.
So many years are required to educate, through childhood
and hot youth, each body inhabited, until the spirit can
at last obtain some control over it, that the longer we can
retain a body that has become amenable to the spirit’s
promptings, the better. Therefore it is highly important
that the pupil partake of such food and drink only as will
deposit the least amount of hardening matter and at the
same time keep the excretory organs active.

The skin and the urinary system are the saviors of man
from an early grave. Were it not that by their means,
most of the earthy matter taken with our food is elimi-
nated, no one would live ten years.

It has been estimated that ordinary, undistilled spring
water contains carbonate and other compounds of lime to
such an extent that the average quantity used each day by
one person in the form of tea, coffee, soup, ete., would in


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 445


forty years be sufficient to form a block of solid chalk ox
marble the size of a large man. It is also a significant
fact that although phosphate of lime is always found in
the urine of adults, it is not found in the urine of chil-
dren, because in them the rapid formation of bone re-
quires that this salt be retained. During the period of
gestation there is very little earthy matter in the urine of
the mother, as it is used in the building of the fetus. In
- ordinary circumstances, however, earthy matter is very
much in evidence in the urine of adults and to this we
owe the fact that physical life reaches even its present
length.

Undistilled water, when taken internally, is man’s worst
enemy, but used externally, it becomes his best friend. It
keeps the pores of the skin open, induces circulation of
the blood and prevents the stagnation which affords the
best opportunity for the depositing of the earthy, death-
dealing phosphate of lime.

Harvey, who discovered the circulation of the blood,
said that health denotes a free circulation and disease is
the result of an obstructed circulation of the blood.

The bathtub is a great aid in keeping up the health of
the body and should be freely used by the aspirant to the
higher life. Perspiration, sensible and insensible, carries
more earthy matter out of the body than any other agency.

As long as fuel is supplied and the fire kept free from
ashes, it will burn. The kidneys are important in carry-
ing away the ashes from the body, but despite the great
amount of earthy matter carried away by the urine, enough
remains in many cases to form gravel and stone in the
bladder, causing untold agony and often death.

Let no one be deceived into thinking that water con-
tains less stone because it has been boiled. The stone that


446 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


forms on the bottom of the teakettle has been left there
by the evaporated water which escaped from the kettle as
steam. If the steam were condensed, we should have dis-
tilled water, which is an important adjunct in keeping
the body young.

There is absolutely no earthy matter in distilled water,
nor in rain water, snow nor hail (except what may be
gathered by contact with house-tops, etc.), but coffee, tea,
or soup made with ordinary water, no matter how long
boiled, is not purified of the earthy particles; on the con-
trary, the longer they are boiled, the more heavily charged
withashthey become. Those suffering from urinary dis-
eases should never drink any but distilled water.

It may be said generally of the solid foods we take into
our system, that fresh vegetables and ripe fruits contain
the greatest proportion of nutritious matter and the least
of earthy substances.

As we are writing for the aspirant to the higher life
and not for the general public, it may also be said that
animal food should be entirely avoided, if possible. No
one who kills can go very far along the path of holiness.
We do even worse than if we actually killed, for in order
to shield ourselves from the personal commission of the
act of killing, and still reap its results, we force a fellow
being, through economic necessity, to devote his entire
time to murder, thereby brutalizing him to such an extent
that the law will not allow him to act as a juror in cases
of capital crime, because his business has so familiarized
him with the taking of life.

The enlightened know the animals to be their younger
brothers and that they will be human in the Jupiter
Period. We shall then help them as the Angels, who were
human in the Moon Period, are now helping us, and for an


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 4447


aspirant to high ideals to kill—either in person or by
proxy—is out of the question.

Several very important food products from animals,
such as milk, cheese and butter, may be used. These are
the results of the processes of life and require no tragedies
to convert them into food. Milk, which is an important
food for the occult student, contains no earthy matter of
any consequence and has an influence upon the body pos-
sessed by no other food.

During the Moon Period man was fed upon the milk
of Nature. Universal food was absorbed by him and the
use of railk has a tendency to put him in touch with the
Cosmic forces and enable him to heal others.

. It is popularly supposed that sugar or any saccharine
substance is injurious to the general health, and particu-
larly to the teeth, causing their decay and the resulting
toothache. Only under certain circumstances is this true.
It is harmful in certain diseases, such as biliousness and
dyspepsia, or if held long in the mouth as candy, but if
sparingly used during good health and the amount grad-
ually increased as the stomach becomes accustomed to its
use, it will be found very nourishing. The health of
negroes becomes greatly improved during the sugar-cane
harvest time, nothwithstanding their increased labor. This
is attributed solely to their fondness for the sweet cane-
juice. The same may be said of horses, cows, and other
animals in those localities, which are all fond of the refuse
syrup fed to them. They grow fat in harvest time, their’
coats becoming sleek and shining. Horses fed on boiled
carrots for a few weeks will get a coat like silk, owing to
the saccharine juices of that vegetable. Sugar is a nutri-
tious and beneficial article of diet and contains no ash
whatever.


448 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO:CONCEPTION


Fruits are an ideal diet. They are in fact evolved by
the trees to induce animal and man to eat them, so that
the seed may be disseminated, as flowers entice bees for a
similar purpose.

Fresh fruit contains water of the purest and best kind,
capable of permeating the system in a marvelous manner.
Grape juice is a particularly wonderful solvent. It thins
and stimulates the blood, opening the way into capillaries
already dried and choked up—if the process has not gone
too far. By a course of unfermented grape-juice treat-
ment, people with sunken eyes, wrinkled skins and poor
complexions become plump, ruddy and lively. The in-
creased permeability enables the spirit to manifest more
freely and with renewed energy. ‘The following table,
which with the exception of the last column, is taken
from the publications of the United States Department of
Agriculture, will give the aspirant some idea of the amount
it is necessary to eat for different degrees of activity, alsc
the constituents of the various foods named.

Considering the body from a purely physical standpoint,
it is what we might call a chemical furnace, the food being
the fuel. The more the body is exercised, the more fuel
it requires. It would be foolish for a man to change an
ordinary diet which for years had adequately nourished
him, and take up a new method without due thought as to
which would be the best for serving his purpose. To sim-
ply eliminate meats from the ordinary diet of meat-eaters
would unquestionably undermine the health of most per-
sons. The only safe way is to experiment and study the
inatter out first, using due discrimination. No fixed rules
ean be given, the matter of diet being as individual as any
other characteristic. All that can be done is to give the
table of food values and describe the general influence of


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 449


each chemical element, allowing the aspirant to work out
his own method.

Neither must we allow the appearance of a person to
influence our judgment as to the condition of his health.
Certain general ideas of how a healthy person should look
are commonly accepted, but there is no valid reason for so
judging. Ruddy cheeks might be an indication of health
in one individual and of disease in another. There is no
particular rule by which good health can be known except
the feeling of comfort and well-being which is enjoyed by
the individual himself, irrespective of appearances.

The table of foods here given deals with five chemical
compounds.

Water is the great solvent.

Nitrogen or proteid is the essential builder of flesh, but
contains some earthy matter.

Carbo-hydrates or sugars are the principal power-pro-
ducers.

Fats are the producers of heat and the storers of reserve
force.

Ash is mineral, earthy, and chokes the system. We need
have no fear of not obtaining it in sufficient quantities to
build the bones; on the contrary, we cannot be too careful
to get as little as possible.

The calorie is the simple unit of heat, and the table
shows the number contained in each article of food when
bought at the market. In a pound of Brazil nuts, for in-
stance, 49.6% of the whole is waste (shells), but the re-
maining 50.4% contains 1485 calories. That means that
about one-half of what is bought is waste, but the re-
mainder contains the number of calories named. That
we may get the greatest amount of strength from our food


we must pay attention to the number of calories it con-
15


450 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


tains, for from them we obtain the energy required to per-
form our daily work. The number of calories necessary
to sustain the body under varying conditions is shown in
the following table (per day) :


Man at very hard muscular work......... Sa Aa 5500 Calories
Man at moderately hard muscular work............ 41500 es
Man at moderately active muscular work...........3400 ‘‘
Man at moderately light work................... ss0o0RMee
Man at sedentary work ........ a bdquercounan ed Seay
Man without muscular exercise............. 9 efens, oot) 0 eae
Woman at light tomoderatemanual work..........2450 ‘¢


ales bo 58 ||5¢
2) o = SS eka Leafy
Ere | Ze] See] Bre] See! Gee] | PSS | oBa™
STs ST Er ey TS sad ||BE on
oz} a as SOR |S
iS) 2 os
FRUITS.
Apples; dried. <i..0 set Peele Seki Ose WOO 2 Oil en
Apples iresa. eee oe 25.0|63.3] 0.3] 0.3] 10.8] 0.3 190 2 :30
Apricots, dried iy... er. ..../29.41 4.7] 1.0] 62.5] 2.4)/ 1125
Bananis. mecha mee. 35.0/48.0] 0.8] 0.4] 14.5] 0.6 260 1:45
Cucumber se yi. . ka Sekeyaiehers 15.0/81.1] 0.7} 0.2] 2.6] 0.4 65
Dutes, dried! 70 atk. woe. 10.0/13.8] 1.9} 2.5| 70.6) 1.2|) 1275
Mice midricdan)sasoeaceas ....|18.8] 4.3] 0.3] 74.2) 2.41] 1280 || 3:00
GLAD ES Ue etare, Sete orescleerace 25.0|58.0| 1.0] 1.2] 14.4] 0.4 295
PiGMOUSUowieycvsteveler «-siehoveys 30.0|62.5] 0.7| 0.5] 5.9] 0.4 125
MUSKMeLONS Sa occs ene 50.9|44.8] 0.3].... 4.6| 0.3 80 3:00
OTaW Ses Macrae ices tis 27.1/63.4] 0.6] 0.1] 8.5! 0.4 150 2:45
IPCATS Fasicr wafer sexemaiere 10.0|76.0] 0.5] 0.4) 12.7] 0.4 230 2:00
Persimmons (ediblepart)|..../66.1] 0.8] 0.7] 31.5] 0.9 550
Raisins, dried... se er 10.0/13.1] 2.3) 8.0] 68.5) 3.1}| 1265 4:00
Raspberries... wjoe sie ecs safe ct SOLS LO eect fied ooG to OlG 220 3:45
POURS Mao ae tnyatitc a taratans aac 150.0|44.2] 0.7] 0.2 4.5) 0.4 100
Strawberries ......... 5.0|85.9| 0.9] 0.6] 7.01 0.6 150 2:45
Tomatoes, canned...... +s. «|/94.0] 1.2) 0.2{ 4.0] 0.6 95 2:00
Tomatoes, fresh....... wae |94.3] 0.9] 0.4 $:9).015 100 2:00
Watermelons ......... ac BG-D|, 0-2) O50) 280i! Ord 50
NUTS.
PATTOMIS te neusis sesienetts of 31 si 45.0] 2.7|11.5/30.2| 9.5) L.1|| 1515 4:00
Brazil nuts . /49.6] 2.6] 8.6]33.7] 3.5] 2.01] 1485 4:00
BULternuts) avers a 86.4] 0.6] 3.8] 8.3 0.5| O.4 385 4:00
Chestnuts, dried. 24.0) 4.5] 8.1] 5.3) 56.4] 1.7|| 1885
Chestnuts, fresh. 16.0)37.0| 5.2] 4.5] 35.4) 1.1 915
Filberts é 52.1] 1.8) 7.5/381.3 62 p 1430 4:00
Hickory nuts. 62.2) 1.4] 5.8/25.5| 4.38] 0.8]| 1145 4:00
Pedans: lysrers ts 53.2] 1.4] 5. 6.2| 0.7|| 1465 4:00
Walnuts, Black. 174.1) 0.6] 7.2/14. 83.0) 0.5 730 4:00
Walnuts, English...... 58.1] 1.0] 6.9/26.6] 6.8] 0.6]] 1250 ||’ 4:00
GRAINS.
Bread:
LAIR DNS! pA Awe eo teat 5.4] 1.8] 47.1} 2.1]| 1040 4:00
Grialiam ier n wie eet 8.9] 1.8] 52.1) 1.5]| 1195 4:00
ERGO) veh ceiartics, Seal orate alee soe loo-c 9.0| O.6]OS.2) eb LLse 4:00
White, fresh........ the 9.2] 1.3] 53.1] 1.1]] 1200 4:30


ee


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 451


TABLE OF FCOD VALUES (ContTINUED)


yw
hice o bes .
Fe || oe Anekt—|
Pico wove Se Fe Lo
me |e | & 5 Oo
Ay ; Hoo
NWVRTEO NALA tia te wuss ocx. nae SOs) Meee dees ca ja 1200 3:30
Whole Wheat....... ...- {38.4} 9.7] 0.9] 49.7] 1.3]} 1139 4:00
Corn, green, sweet,
Gaya ol 0, oo en -e+-|76.1] 2.8] 1.2] 19.0] 0.9 430 3:45
Corn, green, sweet (edi-
DIE DAre) Sacer. aleve oct gases | TOA Slate LO ON 440 3 3:45
@WOTMUICAN ere cereieceie cca.c% -.../12.5| 9.2) 1.9] 75.4} 1.0|| 1635
Flour:
Buckwheat ........ .... {18.6} 6.4] 1.2} 77.9} 0.91] 1605
GTA aN Ge cave chs ck vers (ss ....]11.3/13.3] 1.9] 71.4] 1.8]| 1645
LE), CSCO. Lee eee --.-/12.9| 6.8] 0.9] 78.7] 0.7}| 1620
Wheat (high grade).|....|12.0]11.4{ 1.0] 75.1| 0.5]| 16385
Wheat (low grade)..|....|12.0/14.0] 1.9] 71.2] 0.9]| 1640
Whole Wheat....... ....{11.4/13.8] 1.9] 71.9] 1.0]] 1650
Macaroni, Vermicelli, etc.|....|10.3]13.4] 0.9] 74.1] 1.3]] 1645 3:00
Oat Breakfast Food....|....| 7.7|/16.7| 7.3] 66.2] 2.1]] 1800
Oyster Crackers....... cae oi) 4:9)11.9)10151. 70.5 2.91} 1910
RAC be tray cle elt et wiete eters ....{12.3] 8.0] 0.3] 79.0] 0.41} 1620 1:00
Soda Crackers........ wens! OO BS) Slt VS 2b A875
Ru 00), ee ae ottedl'« 22a lkemtont lis styl POs Ollie alt (MLO TO
Wheat Breakfast Food. 9.6/12.1] 1.8] 75.2] 1.3}| 1680
LEGUMES
Beans, baked, canned...|..../68.9| 6.9] 2.5] 19.6} 2.1 555 3 :45
Beans, dried.,......... -o» o (12:6]22.5|. 1.8) 59.6] (3.5]] 1520 3:45
Beans, Lima, shelled...|....|68.5) 7.1] 0.7] 22.0] 1.7 540 3 :30
Beans, String......... 7.0/83.0] 2.1] 0.3] 6.9] 0.7 170
Pease Cannes ccs 0-2 | 0. 6 (o0-0| 3.6| 0.2 9.8] 1.1 235
Bean daried.. ss. ra. .s es aero 2461 72.0) (62:01) 2:91 |) 1565
CaS meMeNeG ss a5 5. ss. sana) 4.6) ¢.0} 0.5) 16.9) 1.0 440 2 335
IPOAMWUS Ha cetera yore oes 24.5| 6.9/19.5/29.1| 18.5] 1.5]| 1775
VEGETABLES.
Becta remiatirrsies «502 «\- 20.0|70.0] 1.8] 0.1] 7.7] 0.9 160 3:45
COADDASC Mais isis cite s+ + U5.0177. 0) Lh O24 4.8] 0.9 115 4 :30
CETCHY Mtarahe ale bole ste sense) 20.0|75.6| 0.9| 0.1] 2.6| 0.8 65. | |NSELS:
MLCEUTICOMeusbeenis ais <he s-- 3 15.0|80.5| 1.0] 0.2} 2.5] 0.8 65
ORTONS ara 6 toys. sz! 0% «- 10.0|62.6| 1.4] 0.8] 8.9] 0.5 190 2 :05
RATA OG ele tie t.as sees 20.0166. 1.3] 0.4] 10.8] 1.1 230 3:30
Potatoes ter aetney< 452 5). - 20.0/62.6| 1.8] 0.1] 14.7] 0.8 295 33
Rhubarb (pie plant).../40.0|56.6| 0.4] 0.4] 2.2] 0.4 60
Spinach) on. vujes% « iby ria Gece Wea | Ovo eoee | eee L 95
Sweet potatocs..... 20.0/55.2| 1.4] 0.6] 21.9] 0.9 440
Turnipg ieee. os: 30.0/62.7] 0.9] 0.1] 5.7] 0.6 120 4:00
SUGARS.
CWamdyar pain)... seo. BOP iewse 96.0]. 1680
18 Goya eae ae 81.01. 1420
Maple Syrup.. T1.A4Al. 1250
Molasses .%-..62. 5 ais -| 70,0| 1235
Sugar, granulated...... 100.0|. 1750
MISCELLANEOUS.
Chocolate .... 8.5/12.9]48.7| 30.3] 2.2]) 5625
Cocoanuts 7.2| 2.9)/25.9/ 14.8] 0.9]| 1295
Cocoanuts, ed... 3.5] 6.3/57.4) 31.5] 1.38/| 2805
Cocoa, powdered.... 4.6(/21.6/28.9) 87.7] 7.2)| 2160
Mushrooms . nis Be Bs 88.1] 3.5] 0.4] 6.8] 1.2 185 20:
PU ANLOGH OS Faves sen cahv ie caneye 11.4] 0.4] 0.1] 88.0] 0.1]] 1650 2 :00


452 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


According to this table, it is evident that chocolate is
the most nutritious food we have; also that cocoa, in its
powdered state, is the most dangerous of all foods, contain-
ing three times as much ash as most of the others, and ten
times as much as many. It is a powerful food and also a
powerful poison, for it chokes the system more quickly
than any other substance.

Of course, it will require some study at first to secure
the best nourishment, but it pays in health and longevity
and secures the free use of the body, making study and
application to higher things possible. After a while the
aspirant will become so familiar with the subject that he
will need to give it no particular attention.

While the foregoing table shows the proportion of chem-
ical substances contained in each article of food named, it
must be remembered that not all of this is available for
use in the system, because there are certain portions which
the body refuses to assimilate.

Of vegetables we digest only about 83% of the proteids,
90% of the fat, and 95% of the carbo-hydrates.

Of fruits we assimilate about 85% of the proteids, 90%
of the fat, and 90% of the carbo-hydrates.

The brain is the co-ordinating mechanism whereby the
movements of the body are controlled and our ideas are
expressed. It is built of the same substances as are all
other parts of the body, with the addition of phosphorus,
which is peculiar to the brain alone.

The logical conclusion is that phosphorus is the particu-
lar element by means of which the Ego is able to express
thought and influence the dense physical body. It is also
a fact that the proportion and variation of this substance
is found to correspond to the state and stage of intelligence
of the individual. Idiots have very little phosphorus;


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 453


shrewd thinkers have much; and in the animal world, the
degree of consciousness and intelligence is in proportion
to the amount of phosphorus contained in the brain.)

It is therefore of great importance that the aspirant
who is to use his body for mental and spiritual work,
should supply his brain with the substance necessary for
that purpose. Most vegetables and fruits contain a certain
amount of phosphorus, but it is a peculiar fact that the
greater proportion is contained in the leaves, which are
usually thrown away. It is found in considerable quanti-
ties in grapes, onions, sage, beans, cloves, pineapples, in
the leaves and stalks of many vegetables, and also in sugar-
cane juice, but not in refined sugar.

The following table shows the proportions of phosphoric
acid in a few articles:

100,000 PARTS OF:


Barley, dry, contain, of phosphoric acid, ............. 210 parts
IBOALISMMPMERE MR eteterr hc cele aclu no whcld folate ara ord cttiratel chalets ene eT
BO 1455.00 0.00 COR SOOO CO Dee OT IEC nO MCR il Pree aye ey
Vere mmnC CV OSMOMMM Lofe Ve fcuaie Tas) Viens) wis! eqsicirs (oucesloays ites het ghey GOO
Buckwheat ....... a Seca ee SR CE aT a 7. QiaMe sere
COP ESE MOLVA EP Ui = tn sy) evind ars cya kte Seeeg Dab herwactcusyaile einetels 390i
ORO UAMMECA CIOL i sicus aise) a..6 cue cqrvepnuete syile'gi ater evagessie,'s #18 963, 4°
MGITIMCOOMMMMP TERT Motel are) s Sve ches se le cle Gh cl emake see oe es os S30
WOO CME AL KS Oily wera xara ai siceyecionduonoi-ciap ors Glan siainte ine Wraijei wis ave TESy = OU
IP2PRIEIOS » cond CORRS eens GOOD Com ren ators iGhb or we
PAT STP OMEGA VES (OL ens) an ale telale slave eieteiee ule viet veers N7S4 eS
OAS MPMI Te S “oct 6 sys: silorer sais -osedalisyevar-e's lecalave“suajaye shee? one OO Reis


The gist of the preceding argument may be thus suc-
cinetly stated:

(1) The body, throughout the entire period of life, is
subject to a process of consolidation.

(2) This process consists of the depositing by the blood
of earthy substances, principally phosphate and carbonate
of lime, by which the various parts become ossified, con-
verted into bone, or kindred matter.


454. ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


(8) This conversion into bone destroys the flexibility
of the vessels, muscles and other parts of the body subject
to motion. It thickens the blood and entirely chokes up
the minute capillaries, so that the circulation of the fluids
and the action of the system generally diminishes, the
termination of this process being death.

(4) This process of consolidation may be retarded and
life prolonged by carefully avoiding the foods that contain
much ash; by using distilled water for internal purposes ;
and by promoting excretion through the skin by means of
frequent baths.

The foregoing explains why some religions prescribe
frequent ablutions as a religious exercise, because they pro-
mote the health and purify the dense body. Fastings were
also prescribed for the same purpose. They give the stom-
ach a much needed rest, allow the body to eliminate the
effete matter, and thus, if not toofrequent or too prolonged,
promote the health, but usually as much and more can be
accomplished by giving the body proper foods which are
the best medicines. 2

Always the first care of the physician is to ascertain if
there is proper excretion, that being Nature’s chief means
for ridding the body of the poisons contained in all foods.

In conclusion, let the aspirant choose such food as is
most easily digested, for the more easily the energy in
food is extracted, the longer time will the system have for
recuperation before it becomes necessary to replenish the
supply. Milk should never be drunk as one may drink a
glass of water. Taken in that way, it forms in the stomach
a large cheese ball, quite impervious to the action of the
gastric juices. It should be sipped, as we sip tea or coffee.
It will then form many small globules in the stomach,
which are easily assimilated. Properly used, it is one of


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 455


the best possible articles of diet. Citrus fruits are power-
ful antiseptics, and cereals, particularly rice, are antitoxins
of great efficiency.

Having now explained, from the purely material point
of view, what is necessary for the dense body, we will con-
sider the subject from the occult side, taking into con-
sideration the effect on the two invisible bodies which in-
terpenetrate the dense body.

The particular stronghold of the desire body is in the
muscles and the cerebro-spinal nervous system, as already
shown. The energy displayed by a person when laboring
under great excitement or anger is an example of this. At
such times the whole muscular system is tense and no hard
labor is so exhausting as a “fit of temper.” It sometimes
leaves the body prostrated for weeks. There can be seen
the necessity for improving the desire body by controlling
the temper, thus sparing the dense body the suffering re-
sulting from the ungoverned action of the desire body.

Looking at the matter from an occult standpoint, all
consciousness in the Physical World is the result of the
constant war between the desire and the vital bodies.

The tendency of the vital body is to soften and build.
Its chief expression is the blood and the glands, also the
sympathetic nervous system, having obtained ingress into
the stronghold of the desire body (the muscular and the
voluntary nervous systems) when it began to develop the
heart into a voluntary muscle.

The tendency of the desire body is to harden, and it in
turn has invaded the realm of the vital body, gaining pos-
session of the spleen and making the white blood cor-
puscles, which are not “the policemen of the system” as
science now thinks, but destroyers. It uses the blood to
carry these tiny destroyers all over the body. They pass


456 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


through the walls of arteries and veins whenever annoy-
ance is felt, and especially in times of great anger. Then
the rush of forces in the desire body makes the arteries
and veins swell and opens the way for the passage of the
white corpuscles into the tissues of the body, where they
form bases for the earthy matter which kills the body.

Given the same amount and kind of food, the person of
serene and jovial disposition will live longer, enjoy better
health, and be more active than the person who worries, or
loses his temper. The latter will make and distribute
through his body more destructive white corpuscles than
the former. Were a scientist to analyze the bodies of these
two men, he would find that there was considerably less
earthy matter in the body of the kindly disposed man than
in that of the scold.

This destruction is constantly going on and it is not
possible to keep all the destroyers out, nor is such the
intention. If the vital body had uninterrupted sway, it
would build and build, using all the energy for that pur-
pose. There would be no consciousness and thought. It
is because the desire body checks and hardens the inner
parts that consciousness develops.

There was a time in the far, far past when we set out
the concretions, as do the mollusks, leaving the body soft,
flexible and boneless, but at that time we had only the
dull, glimmering consciousness the mollusks now have.
Before we could advance, it became necessary to retain
the concretions and it will be found that the stage of
consciousness of any species is in proportion to the de-
velopment of the bony framework within. The Ego must
have the solid bones with the semi-fluid red marrow, in
order to be able to build the red blood corpuscles for its
expression.


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 45%


That is the highest development of the dense body. It
signifies nothing in this connection that the highest class
of animals have an internal bone formation similar to
man’s, but still have no indwelling spirit. They belong to
a different stream of evolution.


Tue Law or ASSIMILATION.


The law of assimilation allows no particle to be built
into our bodies that we, as spirits, have not overcome
and made subject to ourselves. The forces active along
these lines are, as we remember, principally our “dead,”
who have entered “heaven” and are learning there to
build bodies to use here, but they work according to
certain laws that they cannot circumvent. There is life
in every particle of food that we take into our bodies, and
before we can build that life into our bodies by the proc-
ess of assimilation, we must overcome and make it
subject to ourselves. Otherwise there could be no harmony
in the body. All parts would act independently, as they
do when the co-ordinating life has been withdrawn. That
would be what we call decay, the process of disintegration,
which is the direct opposite of assimilation. The more
individualized is the particle to be assimilated, the more
energy will it require to digest it and the shorter time
will it remain before secking to reassert itself.

Human beings are not organized in such a manner that
they can live upon solid minerals. When a purely mineral
substance, such as salt, is eaten, it passes through the
body leaving behind it but very little waste. What it
does leave, however, is of a very injurious character. If
it were possible for man to use minerals as food, they
would be ideal for that purpose because of their stability
and the little energy required to overcome and subject


458 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


them to the life of the body. We should be compelled
to eat very much less in quantity and also less often than
we now do. Our laboratories will some time supply us
with chemical food of a quality far surpassing anything
that we now have, which shall be always fresh.” Food
obtained from the higher plants and still more from the
yet higher animal kingdom, is positively nauseating be-
cause of the rapidity of decay. This process is caused
by the efforts made by the individual particles to escape
from the composite whole.

The plant kingdom is next above the mineral. It has
an organization capable of assimilating the mineral com-
pounds of the Earth. Man and animal can assimilate
the plants and thus obtain the chemical compounds neces-
sary to sustain their bodies and as the consciousness of
the plant kingdom is that of dreamless sleep, it offers
no resistance. It requires but little energy to assimilate
the particles thus derived and having small individuality
of their own, the life ensouling the particles does not
seek to escape from our body as soon as food derived from
more highly developed forms, therefore the strength de-
rived from a diet of fruit and vegetables is more enduring
than that derived from a meat diet, and the food supply
does not require as frequent replenishing, besides giving
more strength in proportion, because less energy is re-
quired for assimilation.

Food composed of the bodies of animals consists of
particles which have been worked upon and _ inter-pene-
trated by an individual desire body, and have thus been
individualized to a much greater extent than the plant
particles. There is an individual cell soul, which is per-
meated by the passions and desires of the animal. It
requires considerable energy to overcome it in the first


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 459


place, so that it may be assimilated, yet it never becomes
so fully incorporated into the polity of the body as do
the plant constituents, which have no such strong indi-
vidua? tendencies. The result is that it is necessary for
the flesh-eater to consume a greater weight of food than
is required by the fruitarian; also he must eat oftener.
Moreover, this inward strife of the particles of flesh causes
greater wear and tear of the body in general, rendering
the meat-eater less active and capable of endurance than
the. vegetarian, as all contests between advocates of the
two methods have demonstrated. '

Therefore, when flesh food derived from the herbivora
is such an unstable diet, it is evident that if we should
try to use the flesh of carnivorous animals, in which the

cells are still further individualized, we would be forced

to consume enormous quantities of food. Kating would
oceupy the greater part of our time, but notwithstanding
that: fact, we would always be lean and hungry. That
such is its effect, can be'seen in the wolf and the vulture;
their leanness and hunger are proverbial. Cannibals eat
human flesh, but only at long intervals and as a luxury.
As man does not confine himself exclusively to a meat
diet, his flesh is not that of an entirely carnivorous beast,
nevertheless the hunger of the cannibal has also become
the burden of a proverb.

If the flesh of the herbivora were the essence of what
is good in plants, then, logically, the flesh of the carniv-
ora should be the quintessence. The meat of wolves
and vultures would thus be the creme de la creme, and
much to be desired. This we know is not the case, but
quite the reverse. The nearer we get to the plant king-
dom, the more strengti: we derive from our food. If the
reverse were the case, the flesh of carnivorous animals


460 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION ©


would be sought by other beasts of prey, but examples
of “dog eat dog” are very few throughout) nature.


Livre anp Ler Live.


The first law of occult science is “Thou shalt not’ kill,”
and that should have the greatest weight with the aspirant
to the higher life. We cannot create so much as one
particle of dust, therefore what right have we to destroy
the very least form? All Form is an expression of the
One Life—the Life of God. We have no right to destroy
the Form through which the Life is seeking experience,
and force it to build a new vehicle.

Ella Wheeler Wilcox, with the true compassion of all
far advanced souls, champions this occult maxim, in the
following beautiful words:


I am the voice of the voiceless;
Through me the dumb shall speak
Till a deaf world’s ear

Shall be made to hear

The wrongs of the wordless weak.


The same force formed the sparrow
That fashioned man, the king.

The God of the Whole

Gave a spark of soul

To furred and feathered thing.


And I am my brother’s keeper;
And I will fight his fight,

And speak the word

For beast and bird

Till the world shall set things right.


Sometimes the objection is made that life is also taken
when vegetables and fruits are eaten, but that statement
is based upon a complete misunderstanding of the facts.
When the fruit is ripe, it has accomplished its purpose,
which is to act as a womb for the ripening of the seed.


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE AG1


If not eaten, it decays and goes to waste. Moreover, it
is designed to serve as food for the animal and human
kingdoms, thus affording the seed oportunities for growth
by scattering it in fertile soil. Besides, just as the ovum
and the semen of human beings are ineffectual without the
seed-atom of the reincarnating Ego and the matrix of
its vital body, so any egg or seed, of itself, is devoid of
life. If it is given the proper conditions of incubator or
soil, the life of the group spirit is then poured into it,
thus grasping the opportunity so afforded of producing
a dense body. If the egg or seed is cooked, crushed, or not
given the conditions necessary for the life, the opportunity
is lost, but that is all.

At the present stage of the evolutionary journey, every-
one knows inherently that it is wrong to kill and man
will love and protect the animals in all cases where his
greed and selfish interest does not blind him to their
rights. The law protects even a cat or a dog against
wanton cruelty. Except in “sport,” that most wanton of
all our cruelties against the animal creation, it is always
for the sake of money that animals are murdered and
bred to be murdered. By the devotees of “sport” the
helpless creatures are shot down to no purpose save to
bolster up a false idea of prowess upon the part of the
huntsman. It is hard to understand how people who ap-
pear otherwise sane and kindly can, for the time, trample
upon all their gentler instincts and revert to bloodthirsty
savagery, killing for the sheer lust of blood and joy in
destruction. It is certainly a reversion to the lowest
savage animal instincts, and can never be dignified into
the remotest semblance of anything “manly,” even though
practiced and defended by the otherwise humane and
worthy temporary head of a mighty nation.


462 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


How much more beautiful it would be for man to play
the role of friend and protector of the weak. Who does
not love to visit Central Park in New York City and pet,
stroke and feed the hundreds of squirrels which are run-
ning about secure in the knowledge that they will not be
molested? And who is not glad, for the sake of the
squirrels, to see the sign, “Dogs found chasing the squir-
rels will be shot.” This is hard on the dogs, but it is
to be commended as an evidence of the growth of the senti-
ment favoring the protection of the weak against the
unreasoning or merciless strong. Nothing is said on the
sign about the squirrels being injured by men, because
that would be unthinkable. So strong is the influence of
the trust the little animals repose in the kindness of man,
that no one would violate it.


Tur Lorp’s PRAYER.


Returning to our consideration of the spiritual aids
to human progress, the Lord’s Prayer, which may be
considered as an abstract, algebraical formula for the up-
liftment and purification of all the vehicles of man, the
idea of taking proper care of the dense body is expressed
in the words: “Give us this day our daily bread.”

The prayer dealing with the needs of the vital body
is, “Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who
trespass against us.”

The vital body is the seat of memory. In it are stored
the sub-conscious records of all the past events of our
life, good or ill, including all injuries inflicted or sus-
tained and benefits received, or bestowed. We remember
that the record of the life is taken from those pictures
immediately after leaving the dense body at death, and


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 463


that all the sufferings of post mortem existence are the
results of the events these pictures portray.

If, by continual prayer, we obtain forgiveness for the
injuries we have inflicted upon others and if we make
all the restitution possible, purify our vital bodies by
forgiving those who have wronged us, and eliminate all
ill feeling, we save ourselves much post mortem misery,
besides preparing the way for Universal Brotherhood,
which is particularly dependent upon the victory of the
vital body over the desire body. In the form of memory,
the desire body impresses upon the vital body the idea of
revenge. An even temper amid tne various annoyances of
daily life indicates such a victory, therefore the aspirant
should cultivate control of the temper, as it includes work
on both bodies. The Lord’s Prayer includes this also,
for when we see that we are injuring others, we look
about and try to find the cause. Loss of temper is one
of the causes and it originates in the desire body.

Most people leave physical life with the same tempera-
ment they bring into it, but the aspirant must systematic-
ally conquer all attempts of the desire body to assume
mastery. That can be done by concentration upon high
ideals, which strengthens the vital body and is much more
efficacious than the common prayers of the Church. The
occult scientist uses concentration in preference to prayer,
because the former is accomplished by the aid of the mind,
which is cold and unfeeling, whereas prayer is usually
dictated by emotion. Where it is dictated by a pure un-
selfish devotion to high ideals prayer is much higher than
cold concentration. It can never be cold, but bears upon
the pinions of Love the outpourings of the mystic to the
Deity.

The praycr for the desire body is, “Lead us not into


464 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


temptation.” Desire is the great tempter of mankind.
It is the great incentive to all action, and in so far as the
actions subserve the purposes of the spirit, it is good; but
where the desire is for something degrading, something
that debases the nature, it is indeed meet that we pray
not to be led into temptation.

Love, Wealth, Power, and Fame!—These are the four
great motives of human action. Desire for one or more
of these is the motive for all that man does or leaves un-
done. The great Leaders of humanity have wisely given
them as incentives to action, that man may gain experi-
ence and learn thereby. They are necessary, and the
aspirant may safely continue to use them as motives for
action, but he must transmute them into something higher.
He must overcome with nobler aspirations the selfish love
which seeks the ownership of another body, and all de-
sires for wealth, power and fame for narrow and personal
reasons.

The Love for which he must long is that only which
is of the soul and embraces all beings, high and low, in-
creasing in proportion to the needs of the recipient;

The Wealth, that which consists solely of abundance of
opportunities to serve his fellow men;

The Power, that alone which makes for the upliftment
of humanity ;

The Fame, none save that which increases his ability
to spread the good news, that all who suffer may thus
quickly find solace for the heart’s grief.

The prayer for the mind is “Deliver us from evil.” We
have seen that mind is the link between the higher and
the lower natures. Animals are permitted to follow de-
sire without any restriction whatever. In their case, there


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 465


is neither good nor evil, because they lack mind, the
faculty of discrimination. The method of self-protection
which we pursue in regard to animals which kill and steal
is different from that which we use in relation to human
beings who do the same things. Even a human being who
is bereft of mind is not held accountable. The fact is
recognized that he does not know he is doing wrong,
therefore he is simply restrained.

It was only when his mental eyes were opened that man
came to know good and evil. When the link of mind be-
comes allied to the Higher Self and does its bidding, we
have the high-minded person. On the contrary, the coali-
tion of the mind with the lower desire nature produces
the low-minded person; therefore the meaning of this
prayer is that we may be delivered from the experience
resulting from the alliance of the mind with the desire
body, with all thereby implied.

The aspirant to the higher life accomplishes the union
of the higher and the lower natures by means of Medita-
tion on lofty subjects. This union is further cemented by
Contemplation, and both these states are transcended by
Adoration, which lifts the spirit to the very Throne.

The Lord’s Prayer, given for the general use of the
Church, gives Adoration first place, in order to reach
the spiritual exaltation necessary to proffer a petition
representing the needs of the lower vehicles. Hach aspect
of the threefold spirit, commencing with the lowest, raises
itself in adoration to its corresponding aspect of Deity.
When the three aspects of the spirit are all arrayed before
the Throne of Grace, each utters the prayer appropriate
to the needs of its material counterpart, all three joining
in the closing prayer for the mind.


466 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


The human spirit soars to its counterpart, the Holy
Spirit (Jehovah), saying “Hallowed be Thy Name.”

The life spirit bows before its counterpart, The Son
(Christ), saying “Thy Kingdom Come.”

The divine spirit kneels before its counterpart, The
Father, with the prayer, “Thy Will be done.”

Then the highest, the divine spirit, petitions the
highest aspect of the Deity, the Father, for its counter-
part, the dense body: “Give us this day our daily bread.”

The next highest, the life spirit, prays to its counter-
part, the Son, for its counterpart in the lower nature,
the vital body: “Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive
those who trespass against us.”

The lowest aspect of the spirit, the human spirit, next
offers its petition to the lowest aspect of Deity for the
highest of the threefold bodies, the desire body: “Lead
us not into temptation.”

‘Lastly, in unison, all three aspects of the threefold
spirit in man join in the most important of the prayers,
the petition for the mind, in the words: “Deliver us from
evil.”

The introduction, “Our Father Who art in Heaven,”
is merely as the address on an envelope. The addition,
“For Thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the
Glory, forever. Amen,” was not given by Christ, but is
very appropriate as the parting adoration of the three-
fold spirit as it closes its direct address to the Deity.

Diagram 16 illustrates the foregoing explanation in a
simple and easily remembered manner, showing the con-
nection between the different prayers and the correspond-
ing vehicles, which are similarly colored. This diagram
is inserted opposite page 464.


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 46%


THE Vow oF CELIBACY.


The sex-pervert, or sex-maniac, is a proof of the cor-
rectness of the contention of occultists that one part of
the sex-force builds the brain. He becomes an idiot,
unable to think because of drawing and sending out, not
only the negative or positive part of the sex force (ac-
cording to whether male or female) which is normally
to be used through the sex-organ for propagation, but
in addition to that, some of the force which should build
up the brain, enabling it to produce thought—hence the
mental deficiency.

On the other hand, if the person is given to spiritual
thought, the tendency to use the sex force for propagation
is slight, and whatever part of it is not used in that way
may be transmuted into spiritual force.

That is why the initiate, at a certain stage of develop-
ment, takes the vow of celibacy. It is not an easy vow,
nor one to be lightly taken by one desirous of spiritual
advancement. Many people who are not yet ripe for the
higher life have ignorantly bound themselves to a life of
asceticism. They are as dangerous to the community and
to themselves on the one hand as is the imbecile sex-
maniac on the other.

At the present stage of human evolution the sex func-
tion is the means whereby bodies are provided, through
which the spirit can gain experience. The people who
are most prolific and follow the creative impulse un-
reservedly are the lowest classes; thus it is difficult for
incoming entities to find good vehicles amid environments
enabling them to unfold their faculties in such a manner
as to permanently benefit themselves and the rest of
humanity, for among the wealthier classes who could
furnish more favorable conditions many have few or ne


468 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


children. It is not because they live abstemious sex-
lives, but for the entirely selfish reasons that they may
have more ease.and leisure and indulge in unlimited sex-
gratification without the burden of a family. Among the
less wealthy middle class, families are also restricted, but
in their case partially for economic reasons, that they
may give one or two children educational and other ad-
vantages that their means would not permit them to give
to four or five.

Thus man exercises his divine prerogative of bringing
disorder into nature. Incoming Egos must take the oppor-
tunities offered them sometimes under unfavorable circum-
stances. Other Egos who cannot do that, must wait till
favorable environment offers. Thus do we affect one an-
other by our actions and thus are the sins of the fathers
visited upon the children, for as the Holy Spirit is the
creative energy in nature, the sex energy is its reflection
in man, and misuse or abuse of that power is the sin that
is not forgiven, but must be expiated in impaired efficiency
of the vehicles, in order to thoroughly teach us the
sanctity of the creative force.

Aspirants to the higher life, filled with an earnest
desire to live a noble spiritual life, often regard the sex-
function with horror, because of the harvest of misery
which humanity has reaped as a result of its abuse. They
are apt to turn in disgust from what they regard as im-
purity, overlooking the fact that it is precisely such peo-
ple as they who (having brought their vehicles into good
condition by means of proper sanitary food, high and
lofty thought, and pure and spiritual lives) are best
fitted to generate the dense bodies essential to the develop-
ment of entities seeking incarnation. It is common knowl-
edge among occult scientists that, to the detriment of the


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND’ KNOWLEDGE 469


race, many high class Egos are kept out of incarnation
at the present time solely because parents cannot be found
who are pure enough to provide them with the necessary
whysical, vehicles.

Persons who, for the reason above mentioned, refrain
from doing their duty to humanity, are magnifying the
sun spots to such an extent that they forget to see the
Sun itself! The sex function has its great place in the
economy of the world... When properly used, there is no
greater boon to the Ego, for it, then provides pure and
healthful bodies such as man needs for his development ;
conversely, when abused, there is no greater curse, for it
is then the source of the worst ills to which flesh is heir.

It is a truism that “no man liveth unto himself.” By
our words and acts we are constantly affecting others.
By the proper performance, or the neglect of our duty,
we make or mar the lives, first, of those in our immediate
environment, but ultimately of all. the inhabitants of the
Earth, and more. No one has a right to seek the higher
life without having performed his duty to his family,
his country, and the human race. To selfishly set aside
everything else and live solely for one’s own spiritual
advancement, is as reprehensible as not to care for the
spiritual life at all. Nay, it is worse; for. those who do
their duty in the ordinary life to the best of their ability,
devoting themselves to the. welfare of those dependent
upon them, are cultivating the essential quality of faith-
fulness. They will certainly advance in due time to a
point where they will become awake to spiritual, necessi-
ties, and will carry to that work the faithfulness. developed
elsewhere. The man who deliberately turns his back upon
nis present duties to take up the spiritual life will surely
be forced back into the path of duty from which he has


470 RROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION:


mistakenly diverged, with no possible means of escape
until the lesson has been learned.

Certain tribes of India make the following excellent
division of life. The first twenty years are spent in ob-
taining an education; the years from 20 to 40 are devoted
to the duty of raising a family; and the remaining time
is devoted to spiritual development, without any phiysicet
cares to harass or distract the mind.

During the first period the child is supported: by: its
parents; during the second’ period the man, in addition
to supporting his own family, cares for his parents while
they are giving their attention to higher things; and
during the balance of his life, he is in turn supported
by his children.

This seems a very sensible method, and is quite ‘satis-
factory in a country where all, from the cradle to the
grave, feel the spiritual need, to such degree that they
mistakenly neglect material development except as’ im-
pelled by the lash of direst need, and where the children
cheerfully support their parents, secure in the’ knowledge
that they will be supported in turn and thus be enabled
to devote themselves entirely to the higher life after hav-
ing performed their duty to their country and to humanity.
In the Western World, however, where no spiritual need
is at present felt by the average man because he is prop-
erly following material lines of development, such a mode
of life would be impossible of realization.

Spiritual desire never comes until the time is ripe, and
always when the particular conditions obtain under which
we must seek its gratification, if at all. Whatever duties
exist which are apparent restrictions must be borne. If
the care of a family prevents the complete consecration
desired, the aspirant would certainly not be justified in


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 471


neglecting duty and devoting the entire time and energy
to spiritual purposes. An effort must be made to gratify
such aspirations without interfering with duty to family.

If the desire to live a celibate life comes to a person
who holds marriage relations with another, the obligations
of such relations are not to be forgotten. It would be
very wrong, by practicing celibacy under such circum-
stances, to endeavor to escape from the proper perform-
ance of duty. As to what constitutes duty in regard to
coition, however, there is a standard for aspirants to the
higher life different from that of the ordinary man or
woman.

Most people regard marriage as sanctioning unlimited
license for the gratification of sexual desire. In the eyes
of statute law, perhaps it does so, but no man-made law
nor custom has any right to govern this matter. Occult
science teaches that the sex-function should never be used
for sense-gratification, but for propagation only. 'There-
fore an aspirant to the higher life would be justified in
refusing coition with the marriage partner unless the
object were the begetting of a child, and then only if both
parties were in perfect health—physically, morally and
mentally—as otherwise the union would be likely to re-
sult in the generation of a feeble or degenerate body.

Each person owns his or her body, and is responsible
to the law of Consequence for any misuse resulting from
the weak willed abandonment of that body to another.

In the light of the foregoing, and looking at the matter
from the viewpoint of occult science, it is both a duty
and a privilege (to be exercised with thanks for the
opportunity) for all persons who are healthy and of sound
mind to provide vehicles for as many entities as is con-
sistent with their health and ability to care for the same.


472 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


And, as previously stated, most particularly are aspirants
to the higher life under obligation in this respect, on ac-
count of the purification which their purer lives have
wrought in theirsbodies, because of which they are better
qualified than ordinary humanity to generate pure vehicles.
Thus they enable high-class entities to find suitable
vehicles and help humanity to advance by affording these
waiting Egos opportunities to incarnate and exercise their
influence at an earlier period than would otherwise be
possible. :

If the sex force is used in the way indicated, coition
will take place but few times in a life, and practically the
entire sex force may be used for spiritual purposes. It
is not the use, but the abuse that causes all the trouble
and interferes with the spiritual life, so there is no need
for anyone to abandon the higher life because he or she
cannot be celibate. It is not necessary to be strictly celi-
bate while going through the lesser Initiations. The vow
of absolute celibacy applies to the greater Initiations only,
and even then a single act of fecundation may sometimes
be necessary as an act of sacrifice, as was the case in pro-
viding a body for Christ.

It may also be said that it is worse to suffer from a
burning desire, to be constantly thinking vividly of the
gratification of sense, than to live the married life in
moderation. Christ taught that unchaste thoughts are
as bad as, and even worse than unchaste acts, because
thoughts may be repeated indefinitely, whereas there is at
least some limit to acts.

The aspirant to the higher hfe can be successful only
in proportion to the extent of the subjugation of the lower
nature, but should beware of the other extreme.


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 473


THE Pirurrary Bopy AND THE PINEAL GLAND.


In the brain, and in approximately the positions shown
in diagram 17, are two small organs called the pituitary
body and the pineal gland. Medical science knows but
little about these, or the other ductless glands of the body.
It calls the pineal gland “the atrophied third eye,” yet
neither it nor the pituitary body are atrophying. This
is very perplexing to scientists, for nature retains nothing
useless. All over the body we find organs which are either
atrophying or developing, the former being milestones,
as it were, along the path which man has traveled to reach
his present stage of development, the latter pointing out
the lines for future improvement and development. For
instance, the muscles which animals use to move the ears
are present in man also, but as they are atrophying, few
people can use them. ‘The heart belongs to the class
indicating future development; as already shown, it is
becoming a voluntary muscle.

The pituitary body and the pineal gland belong to still
another class of organs, which at the present time are
neither evolving nor degenerating, but are dormant. In
the far past, when man was in touch with the “inner”
Worlds, these organs were his means of ingress thereto,
and they will again serve that purpose at a later stage.
They were connected with the involuntary or sympathetic
nervous system. Man then saw the inner Worlds, as in
the Moon Period and the latter part of the Lemurian and
early Atlantean Epochs. Pictures presented themselves
quite independent of his will. The sense centers of his
desire body were spinning around counter-clockwise (fol-
lowing negatively the motion of the Earth, which revolves
on its axis in that direction) as the sense centers of


AY4 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


“mediums” do to this day. In most people these sense-
centers are inactive, but true development will set them
spinning clockwise, as explained elsewhere. That is the
difficult feature in the development of positive clairvoy-
ance.

The development of mediumship is much easier, be-
cause it is merely a revival of the mirror-like function
possessed by man in the far past, by which the outside
world was involuntarily reflected in him, and which func-
tion was afterward retained by inbreeding. With present
day mediums this power is intermittent, which explains
why they can sometimes “see” and at other times, for no
apparent reason, fail utterly. Occasionally, the strong
desire of the client enables them to get into touch with
the information he is seeking, on which occasions they
see correctly, but they are not always honest. Office rent
and other expenses must be paid, so when the power
(over which they have no conscious control) fails them,
some resort to fraud and utter any absurdity that occurs
to their minds, in order to satisfy their client and get his
money, thus casting discredit upon what they really do
see at other times.

The aspirant to true spiritual sight and insight must
first of all give proof of unselfishness, because the trained
clairvoyant has no “off days.” He is not in the least
mirror-like, dependent upon the reflections which may
happen to come his way. He is able to reach out at any
time and in any direction, and read the thoughts and
plans of others, provided he particularly turns his atten-
tion that way—not otherwise.

The great danger to society which would result from
the indiscriminate use of this power if possessed by an un-
worthy individual, can be easily understood. He would


Dia. 1. THE PATH OF THE UNUSED SEX CURRENTS 7e
IN


THE MYSTIC “HE OCCULTIST THE ADEPT
ORGANS OF fy \ \ ki \\ ra
KNOWLEDGE oF : 3
: f |
LARYNX CREATIVE——' THE
{/ ORGAN WORD
i 6) E
ORGAN OF WW / = Q 1 === e{ ) a
FEELING (" - f
). | )
RIGHT SIDE Sh LEFT SIDE ay. ;
SPINAL CORD ss SPINAL CORD : \


UNUSED SEX-
FORCE - POSITIVE
IN HEART-NEG —
ATIVE IN BRAIN


UNUSED SEX FORCE PERFECT
NEGATIVE IN HEART
POSITIVE IN BRAIN BALANCE


46 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


be able to read the most secret thought. Therefore the
initiate is bound by the most solemn vows never to use
this power to serve his individual interest in the slightest
degree, nor to save himself a pang. He may feed five thou-
sand others if he will, but he must not turn a stone into
bread to appease his own hunger. He may heal others of
palsy and leprosy, but by the Law of the Universe, he is
forbidden to stanch his own mortal wounds. Because he
is bound by his vow of absolute unselfishness, it is ever
true of the Initiate that although he saves others, himself
he cannot save.

So the trained clairvoyant who really has something to
give will never hang out a sign offering to exercise his
gifts for a fee, but will give and give freely where he con-
siders it consistent with the ripe destiny generated under
the law of consequence by the person to be helped.

Trained clairvoyance is the kind used for investigating
occult facts, and it is the only kind that is of any use for
that purpose. Therefore the aspirant must feel, not a wish
to gratify an idle curiosity, but a holy and unselfish desire
to help humanity. Until such a desire exists, no progress
can be made in the attainment of positive clairvoyance.

In the ages that have passed since the Lemurian Epoch
humanity has been gradually building the cerebro-spinal
nervous system, which is under the control of the will. In
the latter part of the Atlantean Epoch, this was so far
evolved that it became possible for the Ego to take full pos-
session of the dense body. That was the time (previously
described) when the point in the vital body came into cor-
respondence with the point at the root of the nose in the
dense body and the indwelling spirit became awake in the
Physical World but, so far as the greater part of humanity
was concerned, lost consciousness of the inner Worlds.


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 4YY


Since then, the connection of the pineal gland and the
pituitary body with the cerebro-spinal nervous system has
been slowly building, and is now all but complete.

To regain contact with the inner Worlds, all that re-
mains to be done is the reawakening of the pituitary body
and the pineal gland. When that is accomplished, man
will again possess the faculty of perception in the higher
worlds, but on a grander scale than formerly, because it
will be in connection with the voluntary nervous system
and therefore under the control of his Will. Through this
inner perceptive faculty all avenues of knowledge will be
opened to him and he will have at his service a means of
acquiring information compared with which all other
methods of investigation are but child’s play.

The awakening of these organs is accomplished by Eso-
teric Training, which we will now describe, as far as may
be done in public.


ESoreric ‘TRAINING.


In the majority of people, the greater part of the sex
force which may legitimately be used through the creative
organs is expended for sense-gratification; therefore in
such people there is very little of the ascending current
shown in diagram 17.

When the aspirant to the higher life begins to curb these
excesses more and more, and to devote his attention to
spiritual thoughts and efforts, the trained clairvoyant can
perceive the unused sex force commencing to ascend. It
surges upward in stronger and stronger volume, along the
path indicated by the arrows in diagram 17, traversing
the heart and the larynx or the spinal cord and the larynx
or both, and then passing directly between the pituitary
body and the pineal gland toward the dark point at the


478 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTLON


root of the nose where “The Silent Watcher,” the highest
spirit, has its seat.

These currents do not usually take one of the two paths
indicated in the diagram to the entire exclusion of the
other, but generally one path is traveled by the greater
volume of the sex-currents, according to the temperament
of the aspirant. In one who is seeking enlightenment
along purely intellectual lines the current travels particu-
larly over the spinal cord and only a small part goes over
the path through the heart. In the mystic who feels
rather than knows, the currents find their way upwards
through the heart.

Both are developing abnormally, and each must some-
time take up the development he has neglected, so as to
become fully rounded. Therefore the Rosicrucians aim
to give a teaching that will satisfy both classes, although
their main efforts are expended in reaching the intellec-
tually minded, for their need is the greater.

This current of itself, however, even though it assumes
the proportions of a Niagara and flows until the crack of
doom, will be useless. But still, as it is not only a neces-
sary accompaniment, but a pre-requisite to self-conscious
work in the inner World, it must be cultivated to some
extent before the real esoteric training can begin. It will
thus be seen that a moral life devoted to spiritual thought
must be lived by the aspirant for a certain length of time
before it is possible to commence the work that will give
him first-hand knowledge of the super-physical realms and
enable him to become, in the truest sense, a helper of
humanity.

When the candidate has lived such a life for a time suf-
ficient to establish the current of spiritual force, and is
found worthy and qualified to receive esoteric instruction,


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE A479


he is taught certain exercises, to set the pituitary body in
vibration. This vibration causes the pituitary body to im-
pinge upon and slightly deflect the nearest line of force
(See diagram 17). This, in turn, impinges upon the line
next to it, and so the process continues until the force of
the vibration hag been spent. It is similar to the way in
which the striking of one note on a piano will produce a
number of overtones, by setting up a vibration in the
other strings which are at proper intervals of pitch.

When by the increased vibration of the pituitary body,
the lines of force have been deflected sufficiently to reach
the pineal gland, the object has been accomplished, the gap
between these two organs has been bridged. This is the
bridge between the World of Sense and the World of De-
sire. From the time it is built, man becomes clairvoyant
and able to direct his gaze where he will. Solid objects
are seen both inside and out. To him space and solidity,
as hindrances to observation, have ceased to exist.

He is not yet a trained clairvoyant, but he zs a clairvoy-
ant at will, a voluntary clairvoyant. His is a very differ-
ent faculty from that possessed by the medium, who is
usually an involuntary clairvoyant and can see only what
comes; or who has, at best, very little more than the purely
negative faculty. But the person in whom this bridge is
once built 1s always 1n sure touch with the inner Worlds,
the connection being made and broken at his will. By de-
grees, the observer learns to control the vibration of the
pituitary body in a manner enabling him to get in toueh
with any of the regions of the inner Worlds which he de-
sires to visit. The faculty is completely under the control
of his will. It is not necessary for him to go into a trance
or do anything abnormal, to raise his consciousness to the
Desire World. He simply wills to see, and sees.


480 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


As was explained in the earlier part of this work, the
neophyte must learn to see in the Desire World, or rather,
he must learn how to understand what he sees there. In
the Physical World objects are dense, solid, and do not
change in the twinkling of an eye. In the Desire World
they change in the most erratic manner. This is a source
of endless confusion to the negative involuntary clairvoy-
ant, and even to the neophyte who enters under the guid-
ance of a teacher, but the teaching soon brings the pupil
to a point where the Form may change as often as it will;
he can perceive the Life that causes the change, and knows
it for what it is, despite all possible and puzzling changes.

There is also another and most important distinction to
be made. The power which enables one to perceive the
objects in a world is not identical with the power of enter-
ing that world and functioning there. The voluntary clair-
voyant, though he may have received some training, and is
able to distinguish the true from the false in the Desire
World, is in practically the same relation to it as a prisoner
behind a barred window is to the outside world—he can
see it, but cannot function therein. ‘Therefore esoteric
training not only opens up the inner vision of the aspirant,
hut at the proper time further exercises are given to fur-
nish him with a vehicle in which he can function in the
inner Worlds in a perfectly self-conscious manner.


How tur INNER VEHICLE Is BUILT.


In ordinary life most people live to eat, they drink,
gratify the sex-passion in an unrestrained manner, and lose
their tempers on the slightest provocation. Though out-
wardly these people may be very “respectable,” they are,
nearly every day of their lives, causing almost utter con-
fusion in their organization. The entire period of sleep


ACQUIRING FIRST-IIAND KNOWLEDGE 481


is spent by the desire and the vital bodies in repairing the
damage done in the day time, leaving no time for outside
work of any kind. But as the individual begins to feel
the needs of the higher life, control sex force, and temper,
and cultivate a serene disposition, there is less disturbance
caused in the vehicles during waking hours; consequently
less time is required to repair the damage during sleep.
Thus it becomes possible to leave the dense body for long
periods during sleeping hours, and function in the inner
Worlds in the higher vehicles. As the desire body and
the mind are not yet organized, they are of no use as sep-
arate vehicles of consciousness. Neither can the vital body
leave the dense body, as that would cause death, so it is
evident that measures must be taken to provide an or-
ganized vehicle which is fluidic and so constructed that it
will meet the needs of the Ego in the inner Worlds as does
the dense body in the Physical World.

The vital body is such an organized vehicle, and if some
means could be found to loosen it from the dense body
without causing death, the problem would be solved. Be-
sides, the vital body is the seat of memory, without which
it would be impossible to bring back into our physical con-
sciousness the remembrance of super-physical experiences
and thus obtain the full benefit of them.

We remember that the Hierophants of the old Mystery
Temples segregated some of the people into castes and
tribes such as the Brahmins and the Levites, for the pur-
pose of providing bodies for the use of such Egos as were
advanced enough to be ready for Initiation. This was done
in such a manner that the vital body became separable
into two parts, as were the desire bodies of all humanity
at the beginning of the Earth Period. When the Hiero-
phant took the pupils out of their bodies he left one part

16


482 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


of the vital body, comprising the first and second ethers, to
perform the purely animal functions (they are the only
ones active during sleep), the pupil taking with him a
vehicle capable of perception, because of its connection
with the sense-centers of the dense body; and also capable
of memory. It possessed these capabilities because it was
composed of the third and fourth ethers, which are the
mediums of sense-perception and memory.

This is, in fact, that part of the vital body which the
aspirant retains from life to life, and immortalizes as the
Intellectual Soul.

Since Christ came and “took away the sin of the world,”
(not of the individual) purifying the desire body of our
planet, the connection between all human dense and vital
bodies has been loosened to such an extent that, by train-
ing, they are capable of separation as above described.
Therefore Initiation is open to all.

The finer part of the desire body, which constitutes the
Emotional Soul, is capable of separation in most people
(in fact, it possessed that capability even before Christ
came) and thus when, by concentration and the use of the
proper formula, the finer parts of the vehicles have been
segregated for use during sleep, or at any other time, the
lower parts of the desire and vital bodies are still left to
carry on the processes of restoration in the dense vehicle,
the mere animal part.

That part of the vital body which goes out is highly or-
ganized, as we have seen. It is an exact counterpart of the
dense body. The desire body and the mind, not being or-
ganized, are of use only because they are connected with
the highly organized dense body. When separated from
it they are but poor instruments, therefore before man


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 483


can withdraw from the dense body, the sense-centers of the
desire body must be awakened.

In ordinary life the Ego is inside its bodies and its force
is directed outward. All man’s will and energy are bent
upon the task of subduing the outside world. At no time
is he able to get away from the impressions of his outside
environment and thus be free to work on himself in his
waking hours. During sleep, when such an opportunity
is afforded, because of the dense body having lost con-
sciousness of the world, the Ego is outside his bodies. If
man is to work on his vehicles at all, it must be when the
outside world is shut out as in sleep, but yet the spirit still
remains within and in full control of the faculties, as it is
in the waking state. Not until such a state can be attained
will it be possible for the spirit to work inwardly and prop-
erly sensitize its vehicles.

Concentration is such a state. When in it, the senses
are stilled and a person is outwardly in the same condition
as in the deepest sleep, yet the spirit remains within and
fully conscious. Most people have experienced this state,
at least in some degree, when they have become interested
to absorption in a book. At such times they live in the
scenes depicted by the author and are lost to their environ-
ment. When spoken to, they are oblivious to the sound,
so to all else transpiring around them, yet they are fully
awake to all they are reading, to the invisible world created
by the author, living there and feeling the heart-beats of
all the different characters in the story. They are not
independent, but are bound in the life which some one has
created for them in the book.

The aspirant to the higher life cultivates the faculty of
becoming absorbed at will in any subject he chooses, or
rather not a subject usually, but a very simple object, which


AS4 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


he imagines. Thus when the proper condition or point of
absorption has been reached where his senses are absolutely
still, he concentrates his thought upon the different sense
centers of the desire body and they start to revolve.

At first their motion is slow and hard to bring about,
but by degrees the sense centers of the desire body will
make places for themselves within the dense and vital
bodies, which learn to accommodate themselves to this new
activity. Then some day, when the proper life has
developed the requisite cleavage between the higher and
lower parts of the vital body, there is a supreme effort of
the will; a spiral motion in many directions takes place,
and the aspirant stands outside his dense body. He looks
at it as at another person. The door of his prison house
has been opened. He is free to come and go, as much at
liberty in the inner worlds as in the Physical World, funce-
tioning at will, in the inner or outer World, a helper of
all desiring his services in any of them.

Before the aspirant learns to voluntarily leave the body,
he may have worked in the desire body during sleep, for
in some people the desire body becomes organized before
the separation can be brought about in the vital body. Un-
der those conditions it is impossible to bring back these
subjective experiences to waking consciousness, but gen-
erally in such cases it will be noticed, as the first sign of
development, that all confused dreams will cease. ‘Then,
after a while, the dreams will become more vivid and per-
fectly logical. The aspirant will dream of being in places
and with people (whether known to him in waking hours
or not matters little), conducting himself in as reasonable
a way as if he were in the waking state. If the place of
which he dreams is accessible to him in waking hours, he
may sometimes get proof of the reality of his dream if he


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 485


will note some physical detail of the scene and verify his
nocturnal impression next day.

He will next find that he can, during sleeping hours,
visit any place he desires upon the face of the Earth and
investigate it a great deal more thoroughly than if he had
gone there in the dense body, because in his desire body
he has access to all places, regardless of locks and bars.
If he persists, there will at last come a day when he need
not wait for sleep to dissolve the connection between his


vehicles, but can consciously set himself free.
Specific directions for freeing the higher vehicles can-


not be given indiscriminately. The separation is brought
about, not by a set formula of words, but rather by an act
of will, yet the manner in which the will is directed is in-
dividual, and can therefore be given only by a competent
teacher. Like all other real esoteric information, it is
never sold, but comes only as a result of the pupil qualify-
ing himself to receive it. All that can be done here is to
give an indication of the first steps which lead up to the
acquirement of the faculty of voluntary clairvoyance.

The most favorable time to exercise is on first awaken-
ing in the morning, before any of the worries and cares of
daily life have entered the mind. At that time one is fresh
from the inner Worlds and therefore more easily brought
back into touch with them than at any other time of the
day. Do not wait to dress, or sit up in bed, but relax the
body perfectly and let the exercises be the first waking
thought. Relaxation does not mean simply a comfortable
position ; it is possible to have every muscle tense with ea-
pectation and that of itself frustrates the object, for in that
condition the desire body is gripping the muscles. It can-
not do otherwise till we calm the mind.


A486 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


CONCENTRATION.


The first thing to practice is fixing one’s thoughts upon
some ideal and holding them there without letting them
swerve. It is an exceedingly hard task, but, to some extent
at least, it must be accomplished before it is possible to
make any further progress. Thought is the power we use
in making images, pictures, thought forms, according to
ideas from within. It is our principal power, and we must
learn to have absolute control of it, so that what we pro-
duce is not wild illusion induced by outside conditions, but
true imagination generated by the spirit from within (see
diagram 1).

Sceptics will say that it is all imagination but, as said
before, if the inventor had not been able to imagine the
telephone, etc., we would not today possess those things.
His imaginings were not generally correct or true at first,
otherwise the inventions would have worked successfully
from the beginning, without the many failures and ap-
parently useless experiments that have nearly always pre-
ceded the production of the practical and serviceable in-
strument or machine. Neither is the imagination of the
budding occult scientist correct at first. The only way to
make it true is by uninterrupted practice, day after day,
exercising the will to keep the thought focussed upon one
subject, object, or idea, exclusive of all else. Thought is a
great power which we have been accustomed to waste. It
has been allowed to flow on aimlessly, as water flows over a
precipice before it is made to turn the wheel.

The rays of the Sun, diffused over the entire surface of
the Earth, produce only a moderate warmth, but if even a
few of them are concentrated by means of a glass, they are
capable of producing fire at the focusing point.


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE AY


Thought force is the most powerful means of obtaining
knowledge. If it is concentrated upon a subject, it wiil
burn its way through any obstacle and solve the problem
If the requisite amount of thought force is brought to bear,
there is nothing that is beyond the power of human com-
prehension. So long as we scatter it, thought force is of
little use to us, but as soon as we are prepared to take the
trouble necessary to harness it, all knowledge is ours.

We often hear people exclaim petulantly, “Oh, I cannot
think of a hundred things at once!” when really that is
exactly what they have been doing, and what has caused
the very trouble of which they complain. People are con-
stantly thinking of a hundred things other than the one
they have in hand. Every success has been accomplished
by persistent concentration upon the desired end.

This is something the aspirant to the higher life must
positively learn to do. There is no other way. At first he
will find himself thinking of everything under the sun in-
stead of the ideal upon which he has decided to concen-
trate, but he must not let that discourage him. In time
he will find it easier to still his senses and hold his
thoughts steady. Persistence, persistence, and always
PERSISTENCE will win at last. Without that, how-
ever, no results can be expected. It is of no use to perform
the exercises for two or three mornings or weeks and then
neglect them for as long. To be effective they must be
done faithfully every morning without fail.

Any subject may be selected, according to the tempera-
ment and mental persuasion of the aspirant, so long as
it is pure and mentally uplifting in its tendency. Christ
will do for some; others, who love flowers particularly, are
most easily helped by taking one as the subject of concen-
tration. The object matters little, but whatever it is wr


- 488 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


must imagine it true to life in all details. If it is Christ,
we must imagine a real Christ, with mobile features, life
in His eyes, and an expression that is not stony and dead.
We must build a living ideal, not a statue. If it is a
flower, we must, in imagination, take the seed and having
buried it in the ground, fix our mind upon it steadily.
Presently we shall see it burst, shooting forth its roots,
which penetrate the Earth in a spiral manner. From the
main branches of the roots we watch the myriads of minute
rootlets, as they branch out and ramify in all directions.
Then the stem begins to shoot upward, bursting through
the surface of the earth and coming forth as a tiny green
stalk. It grows; presently there is an off-set; a tiny twig
shoots out from the main stem. It grows; another off-set
and a branch appears; from the branches, little stalks
with buds at the end shoot out; presently there are a num-
ber of leaves. Then comes a bud at the top; it grows
larger until it begins to burst and the red leaves of the
rose show beneath the green. It unfolds in the air, emit-
ting an exquisite perfume, which we sense perfectly as it
is wafted to us on the balmy summer breeze which gently
sways the beautiful creation before the mind’s eye.

Only when we “imagine” in such clear and complete out-
lines as these, do we enter into the spirit of concentration.
There must be no shadowy, faint resemblance.

Those who have traveled in India have told of fakirs
showing them a seed, which was planted and grew before
the eyes of the astonished witness, bearing fruit which the
traveler tasted. That was done by concentration so intense
that the picture was visible, not only to the fakir himself,
but also to the spectators. A case is recorded where the
members of a committee of scientists all saw the wonderful
things done before their eyes, unde conditions where


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 489


sleight-of-hand was impossible, yet the photographs which
they obtained while the experiment was in progress, came
to naught. There was no impression on the sensitive
plates, because there had been no material, concrete objects.

At first the pictures which the aspirant builds will be
but shadowy and poor likenesses, but in the end he can,
by concentration, conjure up an image more real and alive
than things in the Physical World.

When the aspirant has become able to form such pictures
and has succeeded in holding his mind upon the picture
thus created, he may try to drop the picture suddenly and,
holding his mind steady without any thought, wait to see
what comes into the vacuum.

For a long time nothing may appear and the aspirant
must carefully guard against making visions for himself,
but if he keeps on faithfully and patiently every morning,
there will come a time when, the moment he has let the
imaged picture drop, in a flash the surrounding Desire
World will open up to his inner eye. At first it may be
but a mere glimpse, but it is an earnest of what will later
come at will.


MEDITATION.


When the aspirant has practiced concentration for some
time, focussing the mind upon some simple object, build-
ing a living thought form by means of the imaginative
faculty, he will, by means of Meditation, learn all about
the object thus created.

Supposing that the aspirant has, by concentration,
called up the image of the Christ. It is very easy to
meditatively recall the incidents of His life, suffering
and resurrection, but much beyond that can be learned
by meditation. Knowledge never before dreamed of will


490 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


flood the soul with a glorious light. Yet something that
is uninteresting and does not of itself suggest anything
marvelous, is better for practice. Try to find out all
about—say, a match, or a common table.

When the image of the table has been clearly formed
in the mind, think what kind of wood it is and whence
it came. Go back to the time when, as a tiny seed, the
tree from which the wood was cut first fell into the forest
soil. Watch it grow from year to year, covered by the
snows of winter and warmed by the summer Sun, steadily
growlng upward—its roots meanwhile constantly spread-
ing under the ground. First it is a tender sapling, sway-
ing in the breeze; then, as a young tree, it gradually
stretches higher and higher toward the air and the sun-
shine. As the years pass, its girth becomes greater and
greater, until at last one day the logger comes, with his
axe and saw gleaming as they reflect the rays of the winter
Sun. Our tree is felled and shorn of its branches, leay-
ing but the trunk; that is cut into logs, which are hauled
over the frozen roads to the river bank, there to await the
springtime when the melting snow swells the streams.
A great raft of the logs is made, the pieces of our tree
being among them. We know every little peculiarity
about them and would recognize them instantly among
thousands, so clearly have we marked them in our mind.
We follow the raft down the stream, noting the passing
landscape and becoming familiar with the men who have
the care of the raft and who sleep upon little huts built
upon their floating charge. At last we see it arrive at
a sawmill and disbanded. One by one the logs are grasped
by prongs on an endless chain and hauled out of the water.
Here comes one of our logs, the widest part of which will
be made into the top of our table. It is hauled out of


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 491


the water to the log-deck and rolled about by men with
peavies. We hear the hungry whine of the great circular
saws as they revolve so fast that they appear as mere blurs
before our eyes. Our log is placed upon a carriage which
is propelled toward one of them, and in a moment those
teeth of steel are tearing their way through its body and
dividing it into boards and planks. Some of the wood
is selected to form part of a building, but the best of it
is taken to a furniture factory and put into a kiln, where
it is dried by steam so that it will not shrink after it has
been made into furniture. Then it is taken out and put
through a great planing machine with many sharp knives,
which makes it smooth. Next it is sawn off into different
lengths and glued together to form table-tops. The legs
are turned from thicker pieces and set into the frame
which supports the top; then the whole article is smoothed
again with sandpaper, varnished and polished, thus com-
pleting the table in every respect. It is next sent out,
with other furniture, to the store where we bought it,
and we follow it as it is carted from that place to our
home and left in our dining room.

Thus, by meditation, we have become conversant with
the various branches of industry necessary to convert a
forest tree into a piece of furniture. We have seen all
the machines and the men, and noted the peculiarities of
the various places. We have even followed the life process
whereby that tree has grown from a tiny seed, and have
learned that back of seemingly very commonplace things
there is a great and absorbingly interesting history. A
pin; the match with which we light the gas; the gas
itself; and the room in which that gas is burned—all
have interesting histories, well worth learning.


492 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


OBSERVATION.


One of the most important aids to the aspirant in his
efforts is observation. Most people go through life blind-
folded. Of them it is literally true that they “have eyes,
and see not; . . . have ears, and hear not.” Upon the
part of the majority of humanity there is a deplorable
lack of observation.

Most people are, to some extent, excusable for this, be-
cause their sight is not normal. Urban life has caused
untold damage to the eyes. In the country the child
learns to use the muscles of the eye to the full extent,
relaxing or contracting them as required to see objects
at considerable distances in the open, or close at hand
in and about the house. But the city-bred child sees
practically everything close at hand and the muscles of its
eyes are seldom used to observe objects at any great
distance, therefore that faculty is to a great extent lost,
resulting in a prevalence of near-sightedness and other
eye troubles.

It is very important to one aspiring to the higher life
that he be able to see all things about him in clear,
definite outlines, and in full detail. To one suffering
from defective sight, the use of glasses is like opening up
a new world. Instead of the former mistiness, everything
is seen clearly and definitely. If the condition of the
sight requires the use of two foci, one should not be con-
tent with having two pairs of glasses, one for near and
one for far seeing, thus necessitating frequent changes.
Not only are the changes wearisome, but one is very apt
to forget one pair when leaving home. The two foci can
be had in one pair of bi-focal glasses, and such should be
worn, to facilitate observation of the minutest details.


* ACQUIRING FIRST-HAwWD KNOWLEDGE 493


DISCRIMINATION.


When the aspirant has attended to his eyesight, he
should systematically observe everything and everybody,
drawing conclusions from actions, to cultivate the faculty
of logical reasoning. Logic is the best teacher in the
Physical World, as well as the safest and surest guide in
any world.

While practicing this method of observation, it should
always be kept in mind that it must be used only to
gather facts and not for purposes of criticism, at least
not wanton criticism. Constructive criticism, which
points out defects and the means of remedying them, is
the basis of progress; but destructive criticism, which
vandalistically demolishes good and bad alike without aim-
ing at any higher attainment, is an ulcer on the character
and must be eradicated. Gossip and idle tale-bearing are
clogs and hindrances. While it is not required that we
shall say that black is white and overlook manifestly wrong
conduct, criticism should be made for the purpose of help-
ing, not to wantonly besmirch the character of a fellow-
being because we have found a little stain. Remembering
the parable of the mote and the beam, we should turn our
most unsparing criticism toward ourselves. None is so
perfect that there is no room for improvement. 'The more
blameless the man, the less prone he is to find fault and
cast the first stone at another. If we point out faults
and suggest ways for improvement, it must be done with-
out personal feeling. We must always seek the good
which is hidden in everything. The cultivation of this
attitude of discrimination is particularly important.

When the aspirant to first-hand knowledge has practiced
concentration and meditation exercises for some time, and


494. ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


has become fairly proficient in them, there is a still higher
step to be taken.

We have seen that concentration is focusing thought
upon a single object. It is the means whereby we build
a clear, objective, and living image of the form about
which we wish to acquire knowledge.

Meditation is the exercise whereby the history of the
object of our investigation is traced and, so to say, entered
into, to pick out of it every shred of evidence as to its
relation to the world in general.

These two mental exercises deal, in the deepest and most
thorough manner imaginable, with things. They lead
up to a higher, deeper and more subtle stage of mental
development, which deals with the very soul of things.

The name of that stage is Contemplation.


CONTEMPLATION.


In contemplation there is no reaching out in thought
or imagination for the sake of getting information, as
was the case in Meditation. It is simply the holding of
the object before our mental vision and letting the soul
of it speak to us. We repose quietly and relaxed upon
a couch or bed—not negatively, but thoroughly on the
alert—watching for the information that will surely come
if we have reached the proper development. Then the
Form of the object seems to vanish and we see only the
Life at work. Contemplation will teach us about the
Life side, as Meditation taught us about the Form side.

When we reach this stage and have before us, say, a
tree in the forest, we lose sight of the Form entirely, and
see only the Life, which in this case is a group spirit.
We shall find, to our astonishment, that the group spirit
of the tree includes the various insects which feed upon it;


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 495


that the parasite and its host are emanations from one
and the same group spirit, for the higher we ascend in
the invisible realms, the fewer the separate and distinct
forms, and the more completely the One Life predomi-
nates, impressing upon the investigator the supreme fact
that there is but the One Life—the Universal Life of
God, in Whom it is an actual fact that “we live, and
move, and have our being.” Mineral, plant, animal, and
man—all, without exception—are manifestations of God,
and this fact furnishes the true basis of brotherhood—a
brotherhood which includes everything from the atom to
the Sun, because all are emanations from God. Concep-
tions of brotherhood based upon any other foundation,
such as class distinctions, Race affinity, similarity of occu-
pation, etc., fall far short of this true basis, as the occult
scientist clearly realizes when he sees the Universal Life
flowing in all that exists.


ADORATION.


When this height has been reached by Contemplation,
and the aspirant has realized that he is in truth beholding
God in the Life that permeates all things, there remains
still to be taken the highest step, Adoration, whereby he
unites himself with the Source of all things, reaching by
that act the highest goal possible of attainment by man
until the time when the permanent union takes place at
the end of the great Day of Manifestation.

It is the writer’s opinion that neither the heights of
Contemplation, nor the final step of Adoration can be
attained without the aid of a teacher. The aspirant need
never fear, however, that for want of a teacher he will
be delayed in taking these steps; nor need he be concerned
about looking for a teacher. All that is necessary for him


496 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


to do is to start to improve himself, and to earnestly and
persistently continue therein. In that way he will purify
his vehicles. They will commence to shine in the inner
Worlds, and cannot fail to attract the attention of the
teachers, who are always watching for just such cases and
are more than eager and glad to help those who, because
of their earnest efforts to purify themselves, have won the
right to receive help. Humanity is sorely in need of
helpers who are able to work from the inner Worlds,
therefore “seek and ye shall find,” but let us not imagine
that by going about from one professed teacher to an-
other, we are seeking. “Seeking,” in that sense of the
word, will avail nothing in this dark world. We our-
selves must kindle the light—the light which invariably
radiates from the vehicles of the earnest aspirant. That
is the star which will lead us to the teacher, or rather the
teacher to us.

The time required to bring results from the perform-
ance of the exercises varies with each individual and is
dependent upon his application, his stage in evolution and
his record in the book of destiny; therefore no general
time can be set. Some, who are almost ready, obtain re-
sults in a few days or weeks; others have to work months,
years, and even their whole life without visible results,
yet the results will be there, and the aspirant who faith-
fully persists will some day, in this or a future life, be-
hold his patience and faithfulness rewarded and the inner
Worlds open to his gaze, finding himself a citizen of
realms where the opportunities are immeasurably greater
than in the Physical World only.

From that time—awake or asleep, through what men
call life, and through what men call death—his conscious-


ACQUIRING FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 497


ness will be unbroken. He will lead a consciously con-
tinuous existence, having the benefit of all the conditions
which make for more rapid advancement to ever higher
positions of trust, to be used in the uplifting of the race.


CHAPTER XVIII.


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE HARTH: AND VOLCANIC
ERUPTIONS.


VEN among occult scientists it is counted among
the most difficult problems to investigate the mys-
terious construction of the Earth. Every occult

scientist knows how much easier it is to thoroughly and
accurately investigate the Desire World and the Region
of Concrete Thought and bring back the results into the
Physical World than to investigate completely the secrets
of our physical planet, because to do that fully, one must
have passed through the nine lesser Mysteries and the first
of the Great Initiations.

Modern scientists know very little about this matter.
So far as seismic phenomena are concerned, they very
frequently change their theories, because they are constant-
ly discovering reasons why their previous hypotheses were
untenable. They have, with all their usual splendid care,
investigated the very outside shell, but only to an insignifi-
cant depth. As for voleanic eruptions, they try to under-
stand them as they try to understand everything else, in
a purely mechanical way, depicting the center of the Earth
as a fiery furnace and concluding that the eruptions are
caused by the accidental admission of water and in other
similar ways.

In a certain sense, their theories have some foundation,
but in this case they are, as always, neglecting the spiritual

498


CONSTITUTION OF THE EARTH 499


causes which to the occultist appear to be the true ones.
To him, the world is far from being “dead.” On the
contrary, its every nook and crevice is permeated by spirit,
which is the leaven that causes changes in and upon the
planet.

The different kinds of quartz, the metals, the disposition
of the various strata—all have a much higher significance
than the materialistic investigator has ever been able to
grasp. To the occult scientist, the way in which these
materials are arranged is full of meaning. On this sub-
ject, as on every other, occult science stands in the same
relation to modern science as physiology does to anatomy.
Anatomy states with minute detail the exact position of
every bone, muscle, ligament, nerve, etc., their relative
positions to one another and so forth, but does not give
any clue to the use of any one of the different parts of
which the body is composed. Physiology, on the other
hand, not only states the position and structure of every
part of the body, but also tells their use in the body.

To know the different strata of the Earth and the rela-
tive positions of the planets in the sky without having
also a knowledge of their use and meaning in the life and
purpose of the Cosmos, is as useless as to know merely
the positions of bones, nerves, etc., without understanding
also their use in the functional economy of the body.


Tue NUMBER OF THE Brast.


To the trained clairvoyant sight, of the Initiate of the
various degrees of the Mysteries, the Earth appears built
in strata, something like an onion, one layer or stratum
outside another. There are nine such strata and the cen-
tral core, making ten in all. These strata are revealed
to the Initiate gradually. One stratum becomes accessi-


500 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


ble to him at each Initiation, so that at the end of the
nine lesser Initiations he is master of all the layers, but
has not yet access to the secrets of the core.

In ancient parlance these nine steps are called the
“lesser Mysteries.” They take the neophyte consciously
through all that relates to his past evolution, through the
activities of involuntary existence, so that he is able to
understand the manner and meaning of the work he then
performed unconsciously. He is shown how the present
ninefold constitution (the threefold body, the threefold
soul, and the threefold spirit) was brought into existence ;
how the great creative Hierarchies worked on the virgin
spirit, awakening in it the Ego, helping it to form the
body; and also the work he himself has done, to extract
from the threefold body as much of the threefold soul
as he now possesses. One step at a time is he led through
the nine steps of the lesser mysteries, the nine strata.

This number nine is the root number of our present
stage of evolution. It bears a significance in our system
that no other number does. It is the number of Adam,
the life which commenced its evolution as Man, which
reached the human stage during the Earth Period. In
the Hebrew, as in the Greek, there are no numerals, but
each letter has a numerical value. In Hebrew “Adam”
is called “ADM.” The value of “A” is 1; of “D,” 4;
and of “M,” 40. If we add these figures, we get
1444+44+0—=9—the number of Adam, or humanity.

If we turn from the Book of Genesis, which deals with
the creation of man in the hoary past, to the Book of
Revelation, which deals with his future attainment, we
find that the number of the beast which hinders is 666.
Adding these figures, 6+6+6=18; and further, 148—9
—we have again the number of humanity, which is itself


CONSTITUTION OF THE EARTH 501


the cause of all the evil which hinders its own progress.
Going further, to the point where the number of those
who are to be saved is stated, we find it to be 144,000.
Adding as before, 1+4+4+000—9—again the number of
humanity, showing that practically it will be saved in
its totality, the number incapable of progress in our
present evolution being negligible in comparison to the
grand total, and even the few who fail are not lost, but
will progress in a later scheme.

The consciousness of the mineral and the plant is really
unconsciousness. The first glimmering dawn of con-
sciousness begins with the animal kingdom. We have
seen also that according to the most modern classification,
there are thirteen steps in the animal kingdom: three
classes of Radiates; three classes of Mollusks; three classes
of Articulates; and four classes of Vertebrates.

If we regard ordinary man as a step by himself, and
remember that there are thirteen Initiations from man
to God, or from the time he commenced to qualify him-
self for becoming a self-conscious Creative Intelligence,
we have again the same number, Nine: 13+1+13=27;
2+%—=9.

The number 9 is also hidden in the age of Christ
Jesus, 33; 8x3==9, and in a similar manner in the 33
degrees of Masonry. In olden times Masonry was a
system of Initiation into the lesser Mysteries which, as
we have seen, have 9 degrees, but the Initiates often wrote
it as 33. Similarly we read of the 18th degree of the
Rosicrucians, which was only a “blind” for the uniniti-
ated, because there are never more than 9 degrees in any
lesser Mystery, and the Masons of today have but very
little of the occult ritual left in their degrees.

We have also the nine months of gestation, during


502 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


which the body is built up to its present efficiency; and
there are in the body nine perforations—two eyes, two
nostrils, two ears, one mouth, and the two lower orifices.

When the advancing man has passed through the nine
lesser Initiations, gaining thereby entrance to all the
layers of the Harth, entrance into the core is yet to be
won. That is opened to him by the first of the four Great
Initiations, in which he learns to know the mystery of
the mind, that part of his being begun on Harth. When
he is ready for the first Great Initiation he has developed
his mind to the degree all men are destined to attain to
at the end of the Earth Period. In that Initiation he is
given the key to the next stage, and all work done by him
after that will be such as humanity in general will do in
the Jupiter Period, and does not concern us at present.

After his first Great Initiation, he is an Adept. The
second, third and fourth Initiations pertain to the stages
of development to be arrived at by ordinary humanity
in the Jupiter, Venus, and Vulcan Periods.

These thirteen Initiations are symbolically represented
in the Christ and His twelve Apostles. Judas Iscariot ig
the traitorous propensities of the lower nature of the
neophyte. The beloved John is the Venus Initiation, and
Christ Himself symbolizes the Divine Initiate of the
Vulcan Period.

In different schools of occult science the rites of Ini-
tiation vary, also their statement of the number of Initia-
tions, but that is merely a matter of classification. It will
be observed that such vague descriptions as can be given
become more vague as one proceeds higher and higher.
Where seven or more degrees are spoken of, almost nothing
is said of the sixth Initiation, and nothing whatever of
the ones beyond. ‘That is because of another division—


CONSTITUTION OF THE BARTH 503


the six steps of “Preparation,” and the four Initiations
which bring the candidate to the end of the Karth Period,
to Adeptship. ‘Then there must always be three more,
if the philosophy of the school or society goes so far. ‘The
writer, however, knows of none but the Rosicrucians who
have anything to say of the three Periods which preceded
the Earth Period, save the bare statement that there were
such Periods. ‘They are not brought very definitely into
relationship with our present phase of existence, how-
ever. Likewise, other occult teachings simply state that
there will be three more schemes of evolution, but no
particulars are given. Of course, under those circum-
stances, the three last Initiations are not mentioned.

Diagram 18 will give an idea of the arrangement of the
Karth’s strata, the central core being omitted to indicate
more clearly the lemniscate formation of the currents in
the ninth stratum. In the diagram the strata are repre-
sented as being of equal thickness, though in reality some
are much thinner than others. Beginning at the outside,
they appear in the following order:

(1) The Mineral Earth: This is the stony crust of
the Harth, with which Geology deals as far as it is able
to penetrate.

(2) The Fluid Stratum: The matter of this stratum
is more fluid than that of the outside crust, yet it is not
watery, but rather more like a thick paste. It has the
quality of expansion, like that of an exceedingly explosive
gas, and is kept in place only by the enormous pressure
of the outer crust. Were that removed, the whole of the
fluid stratum would disappear in space with a tremendous
explosion. ‘These correspond to the Chemical and Etheric
Regions of the Physical World.

(3) Vapor Stratum: In the first and second strata


504 ROSICRUCIAN COSMUCcONCEPTION


there is really no conscious life. But in this stratum
there is an ever-flowing and pulsating life, as in the
Desire World surrounding and inter-penetrating our
Earth.

(4) Water Stratum: In this stratum are the germinal
possibilities of all that exists upon the surface of the
Earth. Here are the archetypal forces which are back
of the group spirits; also the archetypal forces of the
minerals, for this is the direct physical expression of the
Region of Concrete Thought.

(5) Seed Stratum: Material scientists have been
baffled in their efforts to discover the origin of life, how
the first living things came forth from previously dead
matter.

In reality, according to the occult explanation of evo-
lution, the question should be how the “dead” things
originated. The Life was there previous to the dead
Forms. It built its bodies from the attenuated, vaporous
substance long before it condensed into the Harth’s solid
crust. Only when the life had left the forms could they
crystallize and become hard and dead.

Coal is but crystallized plant bodies; coral is also the
crystallization of animal forms. The life leaves the forms
and the forms die. Life never came into a form to awaken
it to life. Life departed from the forms and the forms
died. Thus did “dead” things come to be.

In this fifth stratum is the primordial fount of life
from which came the impetus that built all the forms on
Earth. It corresponds to the Region of Abstract Thought.

(6) Fiery Stratum: Strange as it may seem, this
stratum is possessed of sensation. Pleasure and pain,
sympathy and antipathy have here their effect on the
Earth. It is generaliy supposed that under no possible


CONSTITUTION OF THE EARTH 505


circumstances can the Earth have any sensation whatever.
The occult scientist, however, as he watches the harvesting
of the ripe grain and the gathering of fruit from the trees
in the autumn, or the plucking of flowers, knows the
pleasure experienced by the Earth itself. It is similar to
the pleasure felt by the cow when its bursting udders are
being relieved by the sucking calf. The Earth feels the
delight of having yielded nourishment for its progeny
of Forms, this delight reaching its culmination in the
harvest time.

On the other hand, when plants are torn out by the
roots, it is patent to the occult scientist that the Earth
senses a sting of pain. For that reason he does not eat
the plant-foods which grow under the Earth. In the first
place they are full of the Earth force and deficient in
Sun force, and are additionally poisoned by being pulled
up by the roots. The only exception to this rule is that
he may partake sparingly of the potato, which originally
grew on the surface of the earth, and has only in com-
paratively recent times grown beneath the soil. Occultists
endeavor to nourish their bodies on fruits which grow
toward the Sun, because they contain more of the higher
Sun force, and have not caused the Earth pain.

It might be supposed that mining operations would
be very painful to the Earth, but the reverse is the case.
Every disintegration of the hard crust causes a sensation
of relief and every solidification is a source of pain.
Where a mountain torrent washes away the soil and carries
it toward the plains, the earth feels freer. Where the
disintegrated matter is again deposited, as in a bar out-
side the mouth of a great river, there is a corresponding
sense of uneasiness.

As sensation in animals and men is due to their sepa-


506 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


rate vital bodies, so the feeling of the Earth is particularly
active in this sixth stratum, which corresponds to the
World of Life Spirit. To understand the pleasure felt
when mining operations are disintegrating the hard rock,
and the pain when deposits gather, we must remember
that the Earth is the dense body of a Great Spirit, and
to furnish us with an environment in which we could
live and gather experience, it had to crystallize this body
into its present solid condition.

As evolution proceeds, however, and man learns the les-
sons pertaining to this acme of concretion, then Earth
will become softer and its spirit more and more liberated.
This is what Paul meant when he spoke of the whole
creation groaning and travailing, waiting for the day of
liberation.

(7) Refracting Stratum: This part of the Earth
corresponds to the World of Divine Spirit. There are,
in occult science what are known as “The Seven Un-
speakable Secrets.” For those who are not acquainted
with these secrets, or have not at least an inkling of their
import, the properties of this stratum must seem particu- .
larly absurd and grotesque. In it all the forces which
are known to us as the “Laws of Nature” exist as moral,
or rather immoral forces. In the beginning of the con-
scious career of man they were much worse than at
present. But it appears that as humanity progresses in
morals, these forces improve correspondingly; also that
any lapse in morals has a tendency to unleash these
Nature forces and causes them to create havoe upon the
Earth; while the striving for higher ideals makes them
less inimical to man.

The forces in this stratum are thus, at any time, an
exact reflection of the existing moral status of mankind,


CONSTITUTION OF THE EARTH 507


From the occult point of view, the “hand of God” which
smites a Sodom or a Gomorrah is not a foolish super-
stition, for as surely as there is individual responsibility to
the law of Consequence which brings to each person the
just results of his deeds whether for good or evil, so is
there also community and national responsibility, which
brings upon groups of men corresponding results for their
collective acts. Nature forces are the general agents of
such retributive justice, causing floods, or earthquakes,
or the beneficent formation of oil or coal for various
groups, according to their deserts.

(8) Atomistic Stratum: This is the name given by the
Rosicrucians to the eighth layer of the Earth, which is
the expression of the World of Virgin Spirits. It seems
to have the property of multiplying many fold the things
in it; this applies, however, only to those things which
have been definitely formed. An unshapen piece of wood,
or an unhewn stone has no existence there, but upon any-
thing which has been shaped, or has life and form (such
as a flower or a picture), this stratum has the effect of
multiplication to an astonishing degree.

(9) Material Expression of the Earth spirit: There
are here lemniscate currents, which are intimately con-
nected with the brain, heart, and sex organs of the human
race. It corresponds to the World of God.

(10) Center of Being of the Earth spirit: Nothing
more can be said about this at present except that it is tke
ultimate seed ground of all that is in and on Earth, and
corresponds to the Absolute.

From the sixth or fiery stratum to the surface of the
Earth are a number of shafts in different places. The
outer ends of these are called “volcanic craters.” When
the Nature forces in the seventh stratum are unleashed so


508 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


that they can express themselves through.a volcanic out-
burst, they set the (sixth) fiery stratum in motion and the
agitation spreads outward to the mouth of the crater. The
bulk of the material is taken from the substance of the
second stratum, for that is the denser counterpart of the
sixth stratum as the vital body, the second vehicle of man,
is the denser counterpart of the life Spirit, the sixth prin-
ciple. This fluidic stratum, with its expansive and highly
explosive quality, insures an uniimited supply of material
at the point of eruption. The contact with the outer
atmosphere hardens that part of it which is not blown
away into space, thus forming the lava and dust, until, as
the blood from a wound congeals and stanches the flow,
so the lava finally seals the aperture from the inner parts
of the Earth.

As might be gathered from the fact that it is the re-
flected immorality and anti-spiritual tendencies of man-
kind which arouse ‘the Nature-forces in the seventh
stratum to destructive activity, it is generally profligate
and degenerate peoples who succumb to these catastrophes.
They, together with others whose destiny, self-generated
under the law of Consequence, for various reasons, involves
a violent death, are gathered from many lands by the
superhuman forces, to the point where the eruption is to
occur. To the thoughtful, the voleanie outbursts of Ve-
suvius, for instance, will afford corroboration of this state-
ment.

A list of these outbursts during the last 2,000 years
shows that their frequency has been increasing with the
growth of materialism. In the last sixty years, especially,
in the ratio that materialistic science has grown arrogant
in its absolute and sweeping denial of everything spiritual,
have the eruptions increased in frequency. While there


Dac Roe Se


CONSTITUTION OF THE EARTH


510 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


were but six eruptions in the first 1,000 years after Christ,
the last five have taken place within 51 years, as will be
shown.

The first eruption during the Christian Era was that
which destroyed the cities of Herculaneum and Pompeii,
in which the elder Pliny perished, A. D. 79. The other
eruptions followed in A. D. 203, 472, 512, 652, 982, 1036,
1158, 1500, 1631, 1737, 1794, 1822, 1855, 1872, 1885,
1891, 1906.

In the first thousand years, there were six eruptions; in
the second thousand there have been twelve, the last five
occurring in a period of 51 years, as before stated.

Of the entire number of 18 eruptions, the first nine oc-
curred in the so-called “dark ages,” that is to say, the 1600
years during which the Western World was dominated by
what are commonly termed the “heathen,” or by the
Roman Church. The remainder have taken place in the
last three hundred years, during which the advent and rise
of Modern Science, with its materializing tendencies, has
driven almost the last vestige of spirituality to the wall,
particularly in the last half of the 19th Century. There-
fore the eruptions for that period comprise nearly one-
third of the total number that have taken place in our Era.

To counteract this demoralizing influence, a great deal
of occult information has been given out during that time
by the Elder Brothers of Wisdom, who are ever working
for the benefit of humanity. It is thought that by giving
out this knowledge and educating the few who will still
receive it, it may ke possible to stem the tide of material-
ism, which otherwise may bring about very serious conse-
quences to its advocates who, having so long denied the
existence of the spiritual, may be unable to find their bal-
ance when they discover that, though still living, they have


CONSTITUTION OF THE EARTH 511


been deprived of the dense body. Such persons may meet
a fate too sad to contemplate with equanimity. One of the
causes of the dread “white plague” is this materialism,
not traceable to the present incarnation perhaps, but the
result of previous materialistic beliefs and affirmations.

We have spoken of the demise of the elder Pliny, at the
time of the destruction of Pompeii. It is interesting to
follow the fate of such a scientist, not so much for the
sake of that particular individual as for the light it throws
upon the manner in which the memory of Nature is read
by the occult scientist, how the impressions are made upon
it, and the effect of past traits upon present tendencies.

When a man dies, his dense body disintegrates, but the
sum total of its forces can be found in the seventh or re-
flecting stratum of the Earth, which may be said to con-
stitute a reservoir in which, as forces, past forms are stored.
If, knowing the time of the death of a man, we search
this reservoir, it is possible to find his form there. Not
only is it stored in the seventh stratum, but the eighth or
atomistic stratum multiplies it, so that any one type may
be reproduced and modified by others. Thus it is used
over and over again in the formation of other bodies. The
brain tendencies of such a man as Pliny the elder may
have been reproduced a thousand years afterwards, and
have been partly the cause of the present crop of mate-
tialistic scientists.

There is still much for modern, material scientists to
learn and to unlearn. Though they fight to the last ditch
what they sneeringly term the “illusionary ideas” of the
occult scientist, they are being compelled to acknowledge
their truth and accept them one by one, and it is only a
matter of time when they will have been compelled to ac-
cept them all.


512 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Mesmer, who was sent by the Elder Brothers, was worse
than ridiculed, but when materialists had changed the
name of the force discovered by him, calling it “hypno-
tism” instead of “mesmerism,” it at once became “scien-
tific.”

Twenty years ago Madame Blavatsky, a faithful pupil
of Eastern Masters, said that the Harth had a third move-
ment, in addition to the two producing day and night and
the seasons. She pointed out that the inclination of the
Earth’s axis is caused by a movement which, in due time,
brings the north pole to where the equator is now and still
later, to the place now occupied by the south pole. This,
sue said, was known to the ancient Hgyptiaris, the famous
planisphere at Dendera showing that they had records of
three such revolutions. These statements, in common with
the whole of her unexcelled work, “The Secret Doctrine,”
were hooted at.

A few years ago, an astronomer, Mr. G. E. Sutcliffe, of
Bombay, discovered and mathematically demonstrated that.
Laplace had made a mistake in his calculations. The dis-
covery and rectification of this error confirmed by mathe-
matical demonstration the existence of the third motion of
the Earth, as claimed by Madame Blavatsky. It also af-
forded an explanation of the theretofore puzzling fact that
tropical plants and fossils are found in the polar regions,
as such a movement would necessarily produce, in due
time, tropical and glacial periods on all parts of the Earth,
corresponding to its changed position in relation to the
Sun. Mr. Sutcliffe sent his letter and demonstrations to
Nature, but that journal refused to publish them, and
when the author made public the discovery by means of a
pamphlet, he drew upon himself an appalling storm of
vituperation. However, he is an avowed and a deep stu-


CONSTITUTION Oi THE EARTH 513


dent of “The Secret Doctrine,” and that explains the hos-
tile reception accorded his discovery and its inevitable
corollaries.

Later, however, a Frenchman, not an astronomer, but a
mechanician, constructed an apparatus demonstrating the
ample possibility of the existence of such a movement. The
apparatus was exhibited at the Louisiana Purchase Ex-
hibition at Saint Louis, and was warmly endorsed by M.
Camille Flammarion, as worthy of investigation. Here
was something concrete, something “mechanical,” and the
editor of The Monist, though he described the inventor as
a man laboring somewhat under “mystic illusions” (be-
cause of his belief that the ancient Egyptians knew of this
third motion), nevertheless magnanimously overlooked that
feature of the case and said that he had not lost faith in
M. Beziau’s theory on that account. He published an ex-
planation and an essay by M. Beziau, wherein the motion
and its effects upon the surface of the Earth were described
in terms similar to those used by Madame Blavatsky and
Mr. Sutcliffe. M. Beziau is not definitely “billed” as an
occultist, therefore his discovery may be countenanced.

Many instances might be cited showing how occult in-
formation has been corroborated later by material science.
One of them is the atomistic theory, which is advocated in
the Greek philosophies and later in “The» Secret Doc-
trine.” It was “discovered” in 1897, by Professor Thom-
son.

In Mr. A. P. Sinnett’s valuable work, “The Growth of
the Soul,” published in 1896, the author stated that there
are two planets beyond the orbit of Neptune, only one of
which, he thought, would be discovered by modern astron-
omers. In Nature for August, 1906, the statement is made


that Professor Barnard, through the 36-inch Lick refrac-
17


514 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


tor, had discovered such a planet in 1892. There had been
no mistake about it, yet he waited fourteen years before he
announced his discovery! One need not be concerned
about that, however. The main point is that the planet is
there, and that Mr. Sinnett’s book said so ten years before
Professor Barnard’s claim to prior discovery. Probably,
previous to 1906 the announcement of the newly discovered
planet might have tended to disarrange some popularly
accepted theory !

There are many such theories. The Copernican theory
is not altogether correct, and there are many facts that
cannot be accounted for by the lauded Nebular theory
alone. Tycho Brahe, the famous Danish astronomer, re-
fused to accept the Copernican theory. He had a very good
reason for remaining true to the Ptolemaic theory because,
as he said, by it the movements of the planets figured out
correctly, while with the Copernican theory, it is neces-
sary to use a table of corrections. The Ptolemaic system
is correct from the standpoint of the Desire World, and it
has points that are needed in the Physical World.

By many the statements made in the foregoing pages
will be considered fantastic. Be it so. Time will bring to
all a knowledge of the facts herein set forth. This book
is only for the few who, having freed their minds from the
shackles of orthodox science and religion, are ready to
accept this until they have proven it wrong.


CHAE TER» ox bxe
CHRISTIAN ROSENKREUZ AND THE ORDER OF ROSICRUCIANS
Ancient Truths ir Modern Dress


Having encountered among the public a widespread
desire to learn something of the Order of Rosicrucians,
and as there is a lack of understanding of the important
place occupied by the Brothers of the Rose Cross in our
Western civilization, even among our students, it may be
well to furnish authentic information upon the subject.

Everything in the world is subject to law, even our
evolution is thus encompassed; spiritual and physical
progression go hand in hand. The sun is the physical
light bringer and, as we know, it apparently travels from
east to west bringing light and life to one part of the
earth after another. But the visible sun is only a part
of the sun as the visible body is a small part of composite
man. There is an:invisible and spiritual sun whose rays
promote soul growth upon one part of the earth after an-
other as the physical sun promotes the growth of form,


and this spiritual impulse also travels in the same direc-
tion as the physical sun; from east to west.


Six or seven hundred years B. C., a new wave of spirit-
uality was started near thewestern shores of the Pacific
Ocean to give enlightenment to the Chinese nation and
the religion of Confucius is embraced to this day by many
millions in the celestial kingdom. Later we note the
effect of this wave in the religion of Buddha, a teaching

515


516 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


designed to stir the aspiratiogs of millions of Hindus and
western Chinese. In its westward course it appears among
the more intellectual Greeks in the lofty philosophies of
Pythagoras and Plato, and at last it sweeps over the west-
ern world, among the pioneers of the human race, where
it takes the lofty form of the Christian religion.

The Christian religion has gradually worked its way to
the westward, even to the shores of the Pacific Ocean and
thither the spiritual aspirations are being massed and
concentrated. There they will reach a point of culmina-
tion, prior to taking a new leap across the ocean and in-
augurating a higher and more lofty spiritual awakening in
the Orient than now exists in that part of the earth.

Just as day and night, summer and winter, ebb and
flood, follow each other in unbroken sequence according
to the law of alternating cycles, so also the appearance of a
wave of spiritual awakening in any part of the world is
followed by a period of material reaction, so that our de-
velopment may not become onesided.

Religion, Art and Science are the three most important
means of human education, and they are a trinity in unity
which cannot be separated without distorting our view-
point of whatever we may investigate. J'rue Religion em-
bodies both science and art, for it teaches a beautiful life
in harmony with the laws of nature.

True Science is artistic and religious in the highest sense,
for it teaches us to reverence and conform to laws govern-
ing our well-being and explains why the religious life is
conducive to health and beauty.

True Art is as educational as science and as uplifting
in its influence as religion. In architecture we nave a most
sublime presentation of cosmic lines. of force in the uni-
verse. It fills the spiritual beholder with a powerful devo-


THE ORDER OF ROSICRUCIANS 517


tion and adoration born of an awe-inspiring conception
of the overwhelming grandeur and majesty of Deity.
Sculpture and painting, music and hterature inspire us
with a sense of transcendent loveliness of God, the im-
mutable source and goal of all this beautiful world.

Nothing short of such an all-embracing teaching will
answer the needs of humanity permanently. There was a
time, even as late as Greece, when Religion, Art and Science
were taught unitedly in Mystery temples. But it was neces-
sary to the better development of each that they should
separate for a time.

Religion held sole sway in the so-called “dark ages.”
During that time it bound both Science and Art hand and
foot. Then came the period of Renaissance and Art came
to the fore in all its branches. Religion was strong as yet.
however, and Art was only too often prostituted in the
service of Religion. Last came the wave of modern Science,
and with iron hand it has subjugated Religion.

It was a detriment to the world when Religion shackled
Science. Ignorance and Superstition caused untold woe,
nevertheless man cherished a lofty spiritual ideal then; he
hoped for a higher and better life. It is infinitely more dis-
astrous that Science is killing Religion, for now even Hope,
the only gift of the gods left in Pandora’s box, may vanish
before Materialism and Agnosticism.

Such a state cannot continue. Reaction must set in. If
it does not, Anarchy will rend the Cosmos. To avert a
calamity Religion, Science and Art must reunite in a higher
expression of the Good, the True and the Beautiful than
obtained before the separation.

Coming events cast their shadows before, and when the
Great Leaders of humanity saw the tendency towards ultra-
materialism which is now rampant in the Western World,


518 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


they took certain steps to counteract and transmute it at
the auspicious time. They did not wish to kill the bud-
ding Science as the latter has strangled Religion, for they
saw the ultimate good which will result when an advanced
Science has again become the co-worker of Religion.

A spiritual Religion, however, cannot blend with a ma-
terialistic Science any more than oil can mix with water.
Therefore steps were taken to spiritualize Science and make
Religion scientific.

In the thirteenth century a high spiritual teacher, having
the symbolical name Christian Rosenkreuz—Christian :
Rose: Cross—appeared in Europe to commence that work.
He founded the mysterious Order of Rosicrucians with the
object of throwing occult light upon the misunderstood
Christian Religion and to explain the mystery of Life and
Being from the scientific standpoint in harmony with
Religion.

Many centuries have rolled by since the birth, as Chris-
tian Rosenkreuz, of the Founder of the Rosicrucian Mystery
School, and by many his existence is even regarded as a
myth. But his birth as Christian Rosenkreuz marked the
beginning of a new epoch in spiritual life of the Western
World. That particular Ego has also been in continuous
physical existence ever since, in one or another of the
European Countries. He has taken a new body when his
successive vehicles have outlived their usefulness, or cir-
cumstances rendered it expedient that he change the scene
of his activities. Moreover, he is embodied today—an
Initiate of high degree, an active and potent factor in all
affairs of the West—although unknown to the World.

He labored with the Alchemists centuries before the ad-
vent of modern science. He, through an intermediary, in-
spired the now mutilated works of Bacon. Jacob Boehme


THE ORDER OF ROSICRUCIANS 519


and others received through him the inspiration which
makes their works so spiritually illuminating. In the
works of the immortal Goethe and the masterpieces of
Wagner the same influence meets us. All undaunted spirits
who refuse to be fettered by either orthodox science or or-
thodox religion, who fling away the husks and penetrate to
the spiritual kernel regardless of vilification or of flattery,
draw their inspiration from the same fountain as did and
does the great spirit which animated Christian Rosenkreuz.

His very name is an embodiment of the manner and the
means by which the present day man is transformed into
the Divine Superman. This symbol,


“Christian Rosen Kreuz”
[The] Christian Rose Cross,


shows the end and aim of human evolution, the road to be
traveled, and the means whereby that end is gained. The
black cross, the twining green stem of the plant, the thorns,
the blood red roses—in these is hidden the solution of the
World Mystery—Man’s past evolution, present constitu-
tion, and particularly the secret of his future development.

It hides from the profane, but reveals to the Initiate the
more clearly how he is to labor day by day to make for
himself that choicest of all gems, the Philosopher’s Stone—
more precious than the Kohinoor; nay, than the sum of
all earthly wealth! It reminds him how mankind, in its
ignorance, is hourly wasting the actual concrete material
that might be used in the formation of this priceless
treasure.

To keep him steadfast and true through every adversity,
the Rose cross holds aloft, as an inspiration, the glorious
consummation in store for him that overcometh, and points


520 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


to Christ as the Star of Hope, the ‘‘first fruits,’’ Who
wrought this marvelous Stone while inhabiting the body
of Jesus.

Upon investigation it has been found that there was in
all systems of Religion a teaching reserved for the Priest-
eraft and not given to the multitude. The Christ also
spoke to the multitude in parables, but explained the inner
meaning of these parables to the disciples, to give them an
understanding more suited to their developed minds.

Paul gave ‘‘milk’’ to the babes or younger members of
the community, but ‘‘meat’’ to the strong who had stud-
ied more deeply. Thus there has always been an inner
and an outer teaching, and this inner teaching was given
in so-called Mystery Schools which have changed from
time to time to suit the needs of the people among whom
they were designed to work.

The Order of Rosicrucians is not merely a secret so-
ciety ; it is one of the Mystery Schools, and the Brothers
are Hierophants of the lesser Mysteries, Custodians of
the Sacred Teachings and a spiritual Power more potent
in the life of the Western World than any of the visible
Governments, though they may not interfere with hu-
manity so as to deprive them of their free will.

As the path of development in all cases depends upon
the temperament of the aspirant, there are two paths,
the mystic and the intellectual. The Mystic is usually de-
void of intellectual knowledge; he follows the dictates of
his heart and strives to do the will of God as he feels it,
lifting himself upward without being conscious of any
definite goal, and in the end he attains to knowledge. In
the middle ages people were not as intellectual as we are
nowadays, and those who felt the call of a higher life
usually followed the mystic path. But in the last few


‘


THE ORDER OF ROSICRUCIANS 521


hundred years, since the advent of modern science, a more
intellectual humanity has peopled the earth; the head has
completely overruled the heart, materialism has dominated
all spiritual impulse and the majority of thinking people
do not believe anything they cannot touch, taste or handle.
Therefore, it is necessary that appeal should be made to
their intellect in order that the heart may be allowed to
believe what the intellect has sanctioned. As a response
to this demand the Rosicrucian Mystery teachings aim to
correlate scientific facts to spiritual verities.

In the past these have been kept secret from all but a
few Initiates, and even today they are among the most mys-
terious and secret in the Western World. All so-called
“discoveries” of the past which have professed to reveal
the Rosicrucian secrets, have been either fraudulent, or
the result of treachery upon the part of some outsider who
may, accidentally or otherwise, have overheard fragments
of conversation, unintelligible to all but those who have
the key. It is possible to live under the same roof and on
terms of the closest intimacy with an Initiate of any school,
yet his secret will always remain hidden in his breast until
the friend has reached the point where he can become a
Brother Initiate. The revealing of secrets does not depend
upon the Will of the Initiate, but upon the qualifications of
the aspirant.

Like all other Mystery Orders, the Order of Rosicrucians
is formed on cosmic lines: If we take balls of even size
and try how many it will take to cover one and hide it
from view, we shall find that it will require 12 to conceal
a thirteenth ball. The ultimate division of physical mat-
ter, the true atom, found in interplanetary space, is thus
grouped in twelve around one. The twelve signs of the
Zodiac enveloping our Solar System, the twelve semi-tones


522 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


of the musical scale comprising the octave, the twelve
Apostles who clustered around the Christ, etc., are other
examples of this grouping of 12 and 1. The Rosicrucian
Order is therefore\also composed of 12 Brothers and a 13th.
~ There are other divisions to be noted, however. We have
seen that of the Heavenly Host of twelve Creative Hier-
archies who were active in our scheme of evolution, five
have withdrawn to liberation, leaving only seven to busy
themselves with our further progress. It is in harmony
with this fact that the man of today, the indwelling Ego,
the microcosm, works outwards through seven visible ori-
fices in his body: 2 eyes, 2 ears, 2 nostrils and a mouth,
while five more orifices are wholly or partially closed, the
mamme, the umbilicus and the two excretory organs.

The seven roses which garnish our beautiful emblem and
the five pointed radiating star behind, are emblematical of
the twelve Great Creative Hierarchies which have assisted
the evolving human spirit through the previous conditions
as mineral, plant and animal, when it was devoid of self-
consciousness and unable to care for itself in the slightest
degree. Of these twelve hosts of Great Beings, three classes
worked upon and with man of their own free wills and
without any obligation whatever.

These are symbolized by the three points in the star upon
our emblem which point upwards. Two more of the Great
Hierarchies are upon the point of withdrawal, and these
are pictured in the two points of the star which radiate
downward from the center. The seven roses reveal the
fact that there are still seven Great Creative Hierarchies
active in the development of the beings upon earth, and as
all of these various classes from the smallest to the great-
est are but parts of One Great Whole whom we call God,
the whole emblem is a symbol of God in manifestation.


THE ORDER OF ROSICRUCIANS 523


The Hermetic axiom says: “As above so below,” and the
lesser teachers of mankind are also grouped upon the same
cosmic lines of 7, 5 and 1. There are upon earth seven
schools of the lesser Mysteries, five of the Greater Mysteries
and the whole is grouped under one Central Head Who is -
called the Liberator.

In the Order of Rosicrucians seven Brothers go out into
the World whenever occasion requires; appearing as men
among other men or working in their invisible vehicles
with or upon others as needed; yet it must be strictly kept
in mind that they never influence people against their will
or contrary to their desires; but only strengthen good
wherever found.

The remaining five Brothers never leave the temple; and
though they do possess physical bodies all their work is done
from the inner Worlds.

The Thirteenth is Head of the Order, the link with a
higher Central Council composed of the Hierophants of the
Greater Mysteries, who do not deal with ordinary humanity
at all, but only with graduates of the lesser Mysteries.

The Head of the Order is hidden from the outside world
by the twelve Brothers, as the central ball mentioned in
our illustration. Even the pupils of the School never see
him, but at the nightly Services in the Temple His presence
is felt by all, whenever He enters, and is the signal for the
commencement of the ceremony.

Gathered around the Brothers of the Rose Cross, as their
pupils, are a number of “lay brothers”; people who live in
various parts of the,Western World, but are able to leave
their bodies consciously, attend the services and participate
in the spiritual work at the temple; they having each and
every one been “initiated” in the method of so doing by
one of the Elder Brothers. Most of them are able to re-


524 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


member all that happens, but there are a few cases where
the faculty of leaving the body was acquired in a previous
life of well-doing and where a drug: habit or a sickness con-
tracted in the present existence has unfitted the brain to
receive impression of the work done by the man when away.


Initiation.


The general idea of initiation is that it is merely a cere-
mony which makes one a member of a secret society; that
it may be conferred upon anyone willing to pay a certain
price, a sum of money in most cases.

While that is true of the so-called initiation of fraternal
orders and also in most pseudo-occult orders, it is alto-
gether an erroneous idea when applied to initiations into
various degrees of truly occult Brotherhoods, as a little
understanding of the real requirements and of their reason-
ableness will readily make clear.

In the first place there is no golden key to the temple;
merit counts but not money. Merit is not acquired in a
day ; it is the cumulative product of past good action. The
Candidate for initiation is usually totally unconscious that
he is a candidate, he is usually living his life in the com-
munity and serving his fellow man for days and years with-
out any ulterior thought until one day there appears in his
life the teacher, a Hierophant of the lesser Mysteries appro-
priate to the country in which he resides. By this time the
candidate has cultivated within himself certain faculties,
stored up certain powers for service and help, of which he
is usually unconscious or which he does not know how to
properly utilize. The task of the initiator will now be
plain: he shows the candidate the latent faculties, the dor-
mant powers and initiates him into their use; explains


THE ORDER OF ROSICRUCIANS BOB


or demonstrates to him for the first time how the candidate
may awaken the static energy into a dynamic power.

Initiation may be accomplished by a ceremony, or not,
but let it be particularly observed, that while Initiation
is the inevitable culmination of prolonged spiritual en-
deavor, whether conscious or the reverse upon the part
of the candidate, it can positively never take place till
the requisite inner development has accumulated the latent
powers which Initiation teaches how to use dynamically,
any more than pulling the trigger can cause an explosion
in a gun that has not first been loaded.

Neither is there any danger that the teacher may over-
look anyone who has attained the requisite development.
Each good and unselfish deed increases the luminosity and
vibrant power of the candidate’s aura enormously, and as
surely as the magnet attracts the needle, so will the brill-
iancy of that auric light bring the teacher.

It is, of course, impossible to describe in a book intended
for the general public the stages of the Rosicrucian Initia-
tion ; to do so would be a breach of faith, and it would also
be impossible for lack of words to adequately express one-
self. But it is permissible to give an outline and to show
the purpose of initiation.

The lesser Mysteries deal only with evolution of man-
kind during the Earth Period. In the first three and one-
half Revolutions of the life wave around the seven globes
the Virgin Spirits had not yet attained consciousness. In
consequence of this fact we are ignorant of how we came to
be as we are today. The candidate is to have light upon
that subject so by the spell of the Hierophants during the
period of initiation into the first degree his consciousness is
turned towards that page of the memory of nature bearing
the records of the first revolution when we recapitulated the


526 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


development of the Saturn Period. He is still in full pose
session of his every-day consciousness; he knows and re-
members the facts of twentieth Century life, but he is now
consciously watching the progress of the evolving host of
Virgin Spirits of which he formed one unit during the
Saturn Revolution. Thus he learns how the first steps
were taken in the Earth Period towards the goal of attain-
ment which will be revealed to him in a later step.

Having learned the lesson as practically described in
Chapter X, the candidate has acquired first-hand knowl-
edge upon this subject and has come into direct touch with
the Creative Hierarchies in their work with and upon man;
he is therefore able to appreciate their beneficent labors in
the World and is in a measure able to range himself in line
with them ; becoming thus far their co-worker.

When the time has arrived for him to take the second
degree, he is similarly caused to turn his attention to the
conditions of the second Revolution of the Earth Period,
and as depicted in the memory of nature; then he watches
in full consciousness the progress made at that time by the
Virgin Spirits, much as Peter Ibbetson—the hero of a
book, “Peter Ibbetson,’’ by George du Maurier; it is well
worth reading, for it is a graphic description of certain
phases of subconsciousness—watched his child life during
the nights when he “dreamed true.” In the third degree he
follows the evolution of the third or Moon, Revolution, and
in the fourth degree he sees the progress made in the half-
Revolution we have made of the fourth.

There is, however, a further step taken in each degree;
the pupil sees in addition to the work done in each revolu-
tion also the work accomplished in the corresponding Epoch
during our present stay upon globe D, the Earth.

During the first degree he follows the work of the Saturn


THE ORDER OF ROSICRUCIANS 527


Revolution and its latest consummation in the Polarian
Epoch.

In the second degree he follows the work of the Sun
Revolution and its replica: the Hyperborean Epoch.

During the third degree he watches the work as per-
formed in the Moon Revolution and sees how that was the
basis of hfe in the Lemurian Epoch.

During the fourth degree he sees the evolution of the
last half Revolution with its corresponding period of time
in our present stay on Harth; the first half of the Atlantean
Epoch which ended when the dense foggy atmosphere sub-
sided, and the sun first shone upon land and sea; then the
night of unconsciousness was over, the eyes of the indwell-
ing Ego were fully opened, and he was able to turn the
Light of Reason upon the problem of conquering the World.
That was the time when a man as we now know him was
first born.

When in the olden systems of initiation we hear that the
candidate was entranced for a period of three and one-half
days, reference is had to the part of initiation just described,
and the three and one-half days refer to the stages gone
through; they are not by any means days of twenty-four
hours; the actual time varies with each candidate, but in
all cases he is taken through the unconscious development
of mankind during the past Revolutions, and when it is
said that he is awakened at the time of sunrise on the
fourth day that is the mystical way of expressing that his
initiation into the work of the involutionary career of man
ceases at the time when the sun rose above the clear atmos-
phere of Atlantis. Then the candidate is also hailed as a
“first-born.”

Having become familiar with the road we have traveled
in the past, the fifth degree takes the candidate to the very


528 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


A


end of the Earth Period, when a glorious humanity is gath-
ering the fruits of this Period and taking it away from the
seven globes upon which we evolve during each day of mani-
festation, into the first of the five dark globes which are
our habitation during the Cosmic nights. The densest of
these is located in the Region of Abstract Thought, and is
in reality the “Chaos” spoken of on page 249 and the fol-
lowing pages. This globe is also the Third Heaven, and
when Paul speaks of being caught up into the Third
Heaven and of seeing things there which he could not law-
fully reveal, he was referring to the experiences of an
equivalent of this fifth degree in the present Rosicrucian
Mysteries.

After being shown the end in the fifth degree, the candi-
date is made acquainted with the means whereby. that end
is to be attained during the remaining three and one-half
Revolutions of the Earth Period; the four remaining de-
grees being devoted to his enlightenment in that respect.

By the insight he has thus acquired he is able to intelli-
gently co-operate with the Powers that work for Good, and
thus he will help to hasten the day of our emancipation.

In order to rout a common misconception we wish to
make clear to students that we are not Rosicrucians because
we study their teachings, or does even admission to the
temple entitle us to call ourselves by that name. The
writer, for instance, is only a lay brother, a pupil, and would
under no circumstances call himself a Rosicrucian.

We know well, that when a boy has graduated from
grammar school he is not therefore fitted to teach. He
must first go through high school and college, and even
then he may not feel the call to be a school teacher.
Similarly in the school of life, because a man has grad-
uated from the Rosicrucian Mystery School he is not even


THE ORDER OF ROSICRUCIANS 529


then a Rosicrucian. Graduates from the various schools of
the lesser mysteries advance into five schools of the greater
mysteries. In the first four they pass the four Great Ini-
tiations and at last reach the Liberator, where they receive
a knowledge concerning other evolutions and are given the
choice of remaining here to assist their brothers or enter
other evolutions as Helpers. Those who elect to stay here
as helpers are given various positions according to their
tastes and natural bent. The Brothers of the Rose Cross
are among those Compassionate Ones, and it is a sacrilege to
drag the Rosicrucian name in the mire by applying it to our-
selves when we are merely students of their lofty teachings.

During the past few centuries the Brothers have worked
for humanity in secret; each night at midnight there is a
Service at the temple where the Elder Brothers, assisted
by the lay brothers who are able to leave their work in the
World (for many of them reside in places where it is yet
day when it is midnight in the location of the temple of the
Rose Cross), gather up from everywhere in the Western
World the thoughts of sensuality, greed, selfishness and
materialism. These they seek to transmute into pure love,
benevolence, altruism and spiritual aspirations sending
them back to the World to uplift and encourage all Good.
Were it not for this potent source of spiritual vibration
materialism must long ago have totally squelched all spir-
itual effort, for there has never been a darker age from the
spiritual standpoint than the last three hundred years of
materialism.

Now the time has come, however, when the method of
secret endeavor is to be supplemented with a more direct
effort to promulgate a definite, logical and sequential teach-
ing concerning the. origin, evolution and future develop-
ment of the World and man, showing both the spiritual


530 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


and the scientific aspect: a teaching which makes no state-
ments that are not supported by reason and logic; a
teaching which is satisfying to the mind, for it holds out a
reasonable solution to all mysteries; it neither begs nor
evades questions and its explanations are both profound
and lucid.

But, and this is a very important “But,” the Rosicrucians
do not regard an intellectual understanding of God and the
Universe as an end in wtself ; far from it! The greater the
intellect, the greater the danger of its misuse. Therefore,
this scientific, logical and exhaustive teaching is given in
order that man may believe in his heart that which his head
has sanctioned and start to live the religious life.


THE ROSICRUCIAN H'ELLOWSHIP


In order to promulgate this teaching the Rosicrucian
Fellowship has been formed, and anyone who is not a
HYPNOTIST, professional MEDIUM, CLAIRVOYANT, PALMIST
or ASTROLOGER, may enroll as a Preliminary Course Stlu-
dent by writing to the General Secretary. There is no
fee for Initiation, or dues. Money cannot buy our
teaching, advancement depends on merit.

After completing the Preliminary Course one is put
on the Regular Student list for a period of two years,
after which if he has become so imbued with the verity
of the Rosicrucian teachings that he is prepared to
sever his connection with all other occult or religious or-
ders—the Christian Churches and Fraternal Orders are
excepted—he may assume the Obligation which admits him
to the degree of Probationer,

We do not mean to insinuate by the foregoing clause
that all other schools of occultism are of no account—far
from it—many roads lead to Rome, but we shall attain
with much less effort if we follow one of them than if we


THE ORDER OF ROSICRUCIANS 531


zigzag from path to path. Our time and energy are limited
in the first place, and are still further curtailed by family
and social duties not to be neglected for self-development.
It is to husband the minim of energy which we may legiti-
mately expend upon ourselves, and to avoid waste of the
scanty moments at our disposal, that resignation from all
other Orders is insisted upon by the leaders.

The world is an aggregate of opportunities, but to take
advantage of any one of them we must possess efficiency in
a certain line of endeavor. Development of our spiritual
powers will enable us to help or harm our weaker brothers.
It is only justifiable when efficiency in Service of Humanity
is the object.

The Rosicrucian method of attainment differs from other
systems in one especial particular: It aims, even at the
very start, to emancipate the pupil from dependence upon
others, to make him Self-Reliant in the very highest degree,
so that he may be able to stand alone under all circum-
stances and cope with all conditions. Only one who is
thus strongly poised can help the weak.

When a number of people meet in a class or circle for
self-development along Negative lines, results are usually
achieved in a short time on the principle that it is easier
to drift with the tide than to breast the current. The
medium is not master of his actions, however, but the
slave of a spirit control. Hence such gatherings must be
shunned by Probationers.

Even classes which meet in positive attitude of mind are
not advised by the Elder Brothers, because the latent powers
of all members are massed and visions of the inner worlds
obtained by anyone there, are partly due to the faculties
of others. The heat of coal in the center of a fire is en-
hanced by surrounding coals, and the clairvoyant produced


532 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


in a circle, be it ever so positive, isa hot-house plant, too
dependent himself to be trusted with the care of others.

Therefore each Probationer in the Rosicrucian Fel-
lowship performs his exercises in the seclusion and pri-
vacy of his room. Results may be obtained more slowly
by this system, but when they appear, they will be man-
ifest as powers cultivated by himself, useable independ-
ently of all others. Besides, the Rosicrucian methods
build character at the same time that they develop spirit-
ual faculties and thus safeguard the pupil against yield-
ing to temptation to Prpgtanite divine powers for world-
ly prestige.

When the Probationer has complied with the neces-
sary requirements and completed the term of proba-
tion, he may send request for individual instruction by
the Elder Brothers through the General Secretary.

The International Headquarters of the
Rosicrucian Fellowship.

Having formed the Rosierucian Fellowship for the
purpose of promulgating the teaching given in this
book, and aiding aspirants on the path of progression,
it became necessary to find a permanent home and fa-
cilities requisite for doing this work. To this end a
tract of land was purchased in the town of Oceanside,
Cal., ninety miles south of Los Angeles and forty miles
north of San Diego, the southwesternmost city of the
United States.

This tract occupies a commanding site having a most
wonderful view of the great Pacific Ocean to the west
and the beautiful snow capped mountains in the east.

Southern California offers exceptional opportunities
for spiritual growth, because of the ether atmosphere
being denser than in any other part of the world and
Mount Ecclesia, as the Rosicrucian Fellowship Head-
quarters are called, is particularly favored in this re-
spect.


THE ORDER OF ROSICRUCIANS 533


Our Buildings.

The work was started in the end of 1911. Since then
there have been built a Sanctuary wherein the Rosicru-
cian temple services are held, a Healing Temple and a
two-story Admimstration Building. The last named con-
tains on the second floor, the offices of the various execu-
tives, a large general office, and the publishing and edi-
torial departments. On the first floor is a large, well
equipped printing office, including a linotype, cylinder
and platen presses, folding machine, paper cutter, also a
complete book bindery which enables us to produce our
publications entire from setting of the type to the fin-
ished product. In this department a monthly magazine,
“‘RAYS FROM THE ROSE CROSS,” is printed, also all other
Rosicrucian Fellowship publications.

There is a modern fireproof Dining Hall with a cap-
acity to accommodate one hundred and twenty at once.
In it a wholesome, nutritious meatless diet is served to
workers and visitors. There is also a Ladies’ Dormi-
tory with a commodious class room and social hall, and a
number of Cottages to take care of the overflow of
visitors during the vacation season. The grounds are
growing more beautiful year by year: hundreds of
palms and a profusion of flowers such as are seen only
in California add to its inspiration and make this place
a wonderfully attractive one.

The Correspondence School.

In addition to publications of the Rosicrucian Fel-
lowship noted in the back of this book there are two
correspondence courses which furnish instruction to
students who are desirous of growth and enlightenment
by study of the Rosicrucian Mysteries and the Science
of Astrology. Information regarding these will be fur-
nished upon request.


534 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


THE SYMBOLISM OF THE ROSE CROSS


When inquiring into the meaning of any myth, legend or
symbol of occult value, it is an absolute necessity that we
should understand that, aS any object in the three-dimen-
sional world may, or rather must, be viewed from all points
to obtain a full and complete comprehension thereof, so all
symbols have a number of aspects. Hach viewpoint reveals
a different phase from the others, and all have an equal
claim to consideration.

Viewed in its fullness, this wonderful symbol contains
the key to man’s past evolution, his present constitution
and future development, together with the method of attain-
ment. In the form where it is represented with a single
rose in the center it symbolizes the spirit radiating from
itself the four vehicles: the dense, vital and desire bodies
plus the mind; where the spirit has drawn into its instru-
ments and become the indwelling human spirit. But there
was a time when that condition did not obtain, a time when
the three-fold spirit hovered above its vehicles and was un-
able to enter. Then the cross stood alone without the rose,
symbolizing the condition which prevailed in the early
third of Atlantis. There was even a time when the upper
limb of the cross was lacking and man’s constitution was
represented by the Tau (T) that was in the Lemurian


THE ORDER OF ROSICRUCIANS 535


epoch when he had only the dense, vital and desire bod-
ies, but lacked the mind. Then the animal nature was
paramount. Man followed desire without reserve. Ata
still earlier time, in the Hyperborean Epoch, he was also
minus the desire body and possessed only the dense and
vital bodies. Then man-in-the-making was like the
plants: chaste and devoid of desire. At that time his
constitution could not have been represented by a cross.
It was symbolized by a straight shaft, a pillar (1).

This symbol has been considered phallic, an emblem
showing the licentiousness of the people who worshiped it.
Truly it is a symbol of generation, but generation is by no
means synonymous with degradation—far from it—the
pillar is the lower limb of the cross, symbolical of man-in-
the-making when he was plantlike. The plant is uncon-
scious of passion, desire, innocent of evil. It generates
and perpetuates its species in a manner so pure, so chaste,
that, properly understood, it is a model for fallen and
passionate humanity to worship as an ideal and it was
given to earlier races with that intent. The Phallus and
Yona used in the Greek mystery temples were given by
the hierophants in that spirit, and over the temple was
placed the enigmatical words: ‘‘Man, know thyself,’’
which motto, properly understood, is similar to that of
the Rose Cross, for it shows the reason for man’s fall
into desire, passion and sin, and gives the key to his
liberation in the same way that the roses upon the cross
indicate the path of liberation.

The plant is innocent, but not virtuous; it has neither
desire nor choice. Man has both. He may follow desire or
not as he wishes, that he may learn to master himself.

While he was plant-like, a hermaphrodite, he could gex-
erate from himself without the help of another, but though

he was chaste and as innocent as the plants, he was alsi


536 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


as unconscious and inert. In order to advance he must
have desire to spur him on, and a mind to guide him, and
therefore half his creative force was retained for the pur-
pose of building.a brain and a larynx. He had at that
time a round shape similar to that of the embryo, and
the present larynx was a part of the creative organ which
adhered to the head when the body straightened out. The
connection between the two is seen even today in the fact
that the boy, who expresses the positive pole of the gener-
ative force, changes his voice at puberty. That the same
force which builds another body when it is sent outwards
builds the brain when retained is equally clear when we con-
sider that sex mania leads to insanity, while the profound
thinker will feel little inclination for amorous practices.
He uses all his creative force to generate thought instead
of wasting it in sense gratification.

At the time when man commenced to withhold half his
creative force for the above mentioned purpose, his con-
sciousness was directed inwards to build organs. He was
capable of seeing these organs and he used the same creative
force then under the direction of Creative Hierarchies in
planning and in executing plans of organs, that he now
uses in the outer world to build airships, houses, automo-
biles, telephones, etc. Then he was unconscious of how that
half of the creative force was used which was sent outwards
for generation of another body.

Generation was carried on under the guidance of Angels.
At certain times of the year they herded the growing man
together in great temples and there the generative act was
performed. Man was unconscious of the fact. His eyes
had not yet been opened, and though it was necessary for
him to have a partner who had the half or other pole of the
creative force available for generation which he retained to


THE ORDER OF ROSICRUCIANS 534


build organs within, he did not at first know his wife. In or-
dinary life he was shut within himself so far as the Physical
World was concerned, but it was different when he was
brought into such intimate and close touch with another, as
in the case of the generative act. Then for the moment the
spirit pierced the veil of flesh and Adam knew his wife. He
had ceased to know himself—thus his consciousness became
more and more and more centered outside himself in the
outside world and he lost his inner perception. That can-
not be fully regained until he has passed to the stage where
it is no longer necessary to have a partner in generation,
and he has reached the development where he can again
utilize his whole creative force at will. Then he will again
know himself as he did during his stage of plant-like ex-
istence, but with this all important difference that he will
use his creative faculty consciously, and will not be re-
stricted to using it solely for the pro-creation of his own
species, but may create whatever he will. Neither will he
use his present organs of generation, but the larynx will
speak the creative word as directed by the spirit through the
co-ordinating mechanism of the brain. Thus the two or-
gans built by half the creative force will in time be the
means whereby man will eventually become an independent
self-conscious creator.

Even at the present time man molds matter both by
thought and voice, as instanced in scientific experiments
where thoughts have created an image on photographic
plates, and where the human voice has created geometrical
figures in sand, etc. In proportion as man becomes unselfish
he will release the creative force held in leash. That will
give him added thought power and enable him to utilize it
for upliftment of others instead of to plan how to degrade
and subject others to his will. He will learn how to master


538 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


himself and cease to try to master others, except it be done
temporarily for their good, but never for selfish ends. Only
one who has mastered himself is qualified to rule others,
and competent to judge when that should be done, and
what is best for them.

Thus we see that in time the present passionate mode of
generation will be again superseded by a pure and more
efficient method than the present, and that also is symbol-
ized in the Rose Cross where the rose is placed in the center
between the four arms. The long limb represents the body,
the two horizontals, the two arms,and the short upper limb,
the head. The rose 1s in place of the larynz.

The rose, like any other flower, is the generative organ
of the plant. Its green stem carries the colorless, passion-
less plant blood. The blood red rose shows the passion filled
blood of the human race, but in the rose the vital fluid is
not sensuous; it is chaste and pure. Thus it is an excellent
symbol of the generative organ in the pure and holy state
to which man will attain when he has cleansed and purified
his blood from desire, when he has become chaste, pure and
Christ-like.

Therefore the Rosicrucians look ardently forward to the
day when the roses shall bloom upon the cross of humanity,
therefore the Elder Brothers greet the aspiring soul with
the words of the Rosicrucian Greeting: “May the Roses
bloom upon your Cross,” and therefore the greeting is given
in the meetings of the Fellowship Centers by the leader to
the assembled students, probationers and disciples who re-
spond to the greeting by saying “And on yours, also.”

John speaks of his purification (1st epistle, ii, 9) and
says that he who is born of God cannot sin, for he keepeth
his seed within him. It is an absolute necessity to progress
that the aspirant should be chaste. Yet it must also be


THE ORDER OF ROSICRUCIANS 529


borne in mind, that absolute celibacy is not required of
man until he has reached a point where he is ready for
the great initiations, and that it is a duty we owe to the
. whole to perpetuate the race. If we are mentally, mor-
ally, physically and financially able, we may approach
the act of generation as a holy sacrifice laid upon the
altar of humanity, but not for sensual pleasure. Neither
should it be performed in an austere, forbidding frame
of mind, but in glad giving up of oneself for the priv-
ilege of furnishing a friend seeking rebirth with the body
and environment he needs for development. Thus we
shall also help him cultivate the blooming roses upon his
Cross.


Topical Index


Alphabetical List of Words Indexed


The Topical Index is arranged with particular view to
facilitate topical study, but at the same time alphabetical
order has been adhered to as nearly as possible. We add
an alphabetical list of the words indexed.

Opposite each word in this list will be found a number,
which refers to a page in the Index. On that page the
word is grouped with others pertaining to the same topic.

The student is particularly requested to note the con-
secutive arrangement of references. For instance, under
the heading, ‘‘ Vital Body,’’ the first reference tells where
that. vehicle had its first inception, the lust directs to a
page which treats of its final spiritualization, and the
intervening references point in orderly succession to the
places where its gradual unfoldment is described. These
references, in themselves, form an excellent syllabus of
the vital body.

By diligent and intelligent use of this index the Rosi-
erucian. Cosmo-Conception will be found a most complete
and exhaustive reference library, and we recommend
students to study the index as much as the book. The


540


ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


mere reading of references will often clear comprehension
of a subject and reveal much that is hidden in a general


reading of the book.


A
Page
Adaptability) setters cielebe tors 543
IMDB ODD Ae nG evan 5 Capos Oe 543
A COTAbLON! witerieres evo biettiese 568
INKkadtanee hacen ate acscteiee 596
ATM AIS eA VAL AA rhe het tela, aber a 543-553
Anaesthetics) jm. winters «¢ 544
Aino ela: spec greia tee aber st evan ale 551-553
Archang els! sot eersisisls 551-553
ANCHEEYPES «chs minhetaisveniohere 544
IaH, MOV A 55-5 6. gcse © 597
Atlantean Epoch......... 596
ACEPACTIOM. nea cbeleaenelsteleie 590
ATOMS "errs eereneiecienlaeeee 544
PA SStMIAGLONE |<: stepepeieieve oer 562
INTO ONE Gh G0 Dag BOOS Ot 544

B
BiDVe MR OKtB er clerc owl steisiege evere 544
Binth venice cee Sak, eet 564
Blood Pe Vien cia eee 559
"BAI s eee iat td comarenesenereen 561
Brotherhood!) y) cmemarceen: 546
Borderland 2. a aciiee oes 566

¢
Celibaeyey. Were veh hy stcteh ors 577
Christian Doctrines....... 546
[Gils Nhe sor bt hetero n ak 548
Cherubim ¥.'232 ke. ates 550
Chemical, (thers teres «wae 589
Chosen -People jcswieoust: 596-597
Childrent i tsrwete teva sererssens 557
Clainvoyance acne sects 568
Causation; Law of....... 569
GOlorys Res eee eo kines 548
Conscience isa. sacs ators 546
Consciousness .........-.. 547
Conception tee crrresi ae 564
Creator Whincch: fe. cistere ate 546
CYEMALIONY |. Sina peteiecsre exevei® 565
Crime ees See soe ie eee 548
CrOSS ERS PAIS aioe. 548
Creative Hierarchies...... 548


Cosmie Night or Chaos.... 594


Page
Contemplation, (3. ..sn.sstnee 568
Concentrations “mesa eene 567
D
Death? hia. cree eee eee 564
DeOCay. te. ck aiele os cimscece eee 565
Desire (a: cists) stoletahe ects 554
Dense: Body...2.i.\a: ec aes 558
Desires 'BOdya eats eee 572
Desire“ World’ nnsn- eee eee 590
Destiny 1). iain eee 555
DIFESION' sero rapeieeete 562
DISEASE > NP os hereto tenes 554
Discrimination” .... eee 567
Doctrines Christian...... 546
Drowning %).\-i serovars 554
DYGAMS .y..ctne sees cree 554
Drunkard” %.; cee ae sete 554
Divane Spiribey ae. eile 576
E
IEE? \.geyare, oy <0! so 0's 5 See 559
Barth ws, 2 55 vite e » enc een 583
Barth) Period. 2e ve shears 592
Hgo! J... dete cays sores 575
Blements’ “2/510 sa neers eters 554
Blementals’ [222 Jlaeeee 554
Hpochs) 5 ses hepa eee 594
Epigenesisin os.. weiss euestenene 569
Equinox; Precession...... 579
EXXCretlon! | .fi. cls meee eee 562
Wxercises: 24s Gas eeee 567
Hither sess 5. cis earls: uenseeeion 589-590
DOV Sess 0 ie wc nee secle renee 554
FS VOLItLON (Acros selene 568
Ly £2) ga ORIEN OO UO oc 559
F
Balth: (crec.eve dort oa eenereenere 554
Beeling "4.2.31. naiaertreris 554
Pertilization ysis. eres 555
H Norte WARP A Cenc HOE C b.0- 555
Pree: Wills s.,0scte Me eros inser 555
NOVI” Lohse yie asta re hate ies 556
Forgiveness of Sin....... 555
FROPCOS. sh. esc teach osususuentteteas 555
Hather se thelas oicicicisie's op oie 548


LIST OF WORDS INDEXED 541


Page
? G bike: Spiritessee aes cie coe
eas afore eiersicrere ates BOG” Life WAVES. on <6 ees sulci 553
a SME eSs le encleis isicissetexe.s ve rieht there ics cece 590
Been eisMakoxoustetetolevevel's' ets IVER. icreeeisierotioe higieis.e chi O0
Good ... ttt e eee ees 656 Lords of Flame ...... 549
GEOUDE SDILIC. acres 00 oo 6 552; Lords of -Form ....:.. 550
ft eS H Lords of Individuality . 550
ne NSIS Miers cle latctete.¢ ae 559 Lords of Mind .... 551-553
a 4.8 0S Cee ae pace of Wisdom ..... a
2.0 SERDAR ORO OR UCILSrE HT eas aslo 1
PRCROCICVgeleta\corsse 0's aes de SLO, Tunes series.
eet iat Creative .. 548 7 M Re
GLU ODITUbieicckc ox a.cte ae ee tae
ee por Hen. Gociahiear aaagre
Human Organism ..... 558 Matieceen pee as pe
IMITATE SPIT bs vopsusye rstel< BIG oy Mi airena eek 23 eee
Hyperborean Epoch ....595 Materi Jiery: 3: And Ga ac
is alismutiese sete. 577
Hypnotism ae Te 556 Materialization she ae 577
THEMAtICS sh. seine eters 577
WWeenS. - 5G one eee Ree 566 ne 3
TMIStPATIONS! . 1/61. sie-orene 585 eg rie: mney, Gees Le ae
EMASINALION | «...< oe oor 566 Lip vain mci
Immortality .......... 566 an iay ae ieee
Indifference .......... BOOS emcee fee ee es ou
Eathividuality 566 Memory of Nature oom OLS
Information Eo: ek bee ope yepen Piceete (iy oe
BRIGTAGION tous ic oo 6 e:0.6'sie's 567 Be erates gee a eyee Des
MEMOCENCEL -. Sisislesye herere 566 oo Mi eel akee —
eee Peg» Mindyon tte ene acta: BTA
Siege? 229912 eho: sens Mind, Lords of .....551-553
Interest .......... seiespPol We eral 578
A ara veceee seeeees ae Missionary ........00. 578
aes Sieeiesess eiepeolians SOIC OUC: oe
OONS We Bert ones Me
qepoyen susteiejeie/ 6 00.0) 20) oar Moon Period’... eee 592
Ra edad TE ee Muscles! i s)et t's e'fois erore 560
ee Page OMasio“t te .n P78 578
ee ee se Mystery Schools ....... 567
Ken edoms: .- ss. e'sis s+ 569
Knowledge ....... Sonoma, N ney ys These ee as pe
rt ebular Theory .......
Wivientations << 2+eoe' 569 Neptune ...........-. 583
TEVA ie cos ccc concen. 561 Nerves ..........--;.- 561
Law of Causation ..... 569 New Jerusalem ....... 579
Law of Rebirth ....... 570 New Life Waves ...... 552
Lemurian Epoch ...... 595
Lemurian Race ........ 596 Observation ...... siaieion DOW
Puire ther tess cia cies octets 58¢ Organism human ...... 558


EL ee sscgecesecees 563 Original Semitic ...... 596


542

Page
Original Turanian .... 596
OSMOSISE cee ce eRe 579
PAINT Ce cltoseete eee 579
Panorama of life’...... 565
Ratriotism, .. eek. see 579
Periods, the seven ..... 591
Philosopher’s Stone . 579
Physical World ....... 589


Pilgrimage through mat-


OEY PA ck he teasancts ieveiare meee 579
Pineal) Gland 92... >.<: 560
Pituitary Body ....... 560
Planetiseer, scuusseretelevekerte 582
Blan tovpeecekrscerroier 553-579
BOGIMS bits sree siete leterexe 580
Polarian Epoch ....... 594
Eraverey. oc teediacnies 579


Precession of Equinox . 579
Purgatory 565


RACES (cord ces cielo sleyerers 596
Races Spirits mucesteies 551-553
REASON): torctsteys ote iu teteis 580
Rebirth law: Olmert 570
Recapitulation ........ 594
Recording Angels ..... 580
Reflecting Ether ...... 590
ReovONS) 2. tate eters 9-591
IVSCENGIN gagggeacogdas 4 580
IREMOrSO! Salers s\6 sereborekess 554
Repulsion eis aereetersttare 590
RRetrOSpeCtlony sc. cieras 567
Revolutions, 2.1 tecreeho's 594
RibsSuey cope ees eters 562
RimoshaleRace hcieciele ote 596
Rosierucians ..... Soto OOL
Salvation cattle ote cisiciersic 581
Saturnu Periodur:seecteste 591
Seed atom es esc ve'seriste 562
Sense Perception ...... 581
eeebaa 5 RN ORS OIE AS 550

Pooh s aiagareeheye et sieiee)s 561
Silver Cord tec. hehe ees 565
Sin, Forgiveness of . 555
Skepticism ts.10: siserte ee 554
Skeletons. esteete cits 562
Sleep trax. cetera se ROOL


ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Page
Solar System ......... 581
Son, the vs liveraskoeb asec 548
OUl thers creme eee 584
SOUNG, Sivecaicsc oieps ee eee 584
SPACE UL. cessakere eee 585
SPIVIE ine (si saane-s Bike eee 585
Spiritm@ (Group) cece 552
spirit, (Holy)) .. eee Bee
Spirit, (Human), oo. -aee 576
Spirit (7 before Throne) 548
SPlCON. 15 <0 o dai win eee 560
Stone, Philosopher’s ... 579
SLONES, ses.ds bus ois oles 84
stragglers... ..« «ste steooe
Suicide, .\. .ieeereteene 3 efefeeOOu,
SUM. ciote ie w ore svshe sere 582
Sun, Period isd. .releleeiets 591
Supreme Being ....... 548
AN
Tears s%4%0%%.000 Aon. alls:
Temperament ......... 587
Temptation ...... AN 587
Thoughts 22% 4. terete 587
Thymus Gland, . Weegee 560
Tlavathly Race. Winer 596
Toltec: Race: ..< deen 596
TRANCE Snia4 6 veierertttetete 587
Transmigration ....... 587
ALWSIIT Ya. Rear terete rote oe eee
Turanian Race ........ 596
V
MENUS are saveke terete a lelerelore 583
Wenus: Period: =. 593
VieSUVIUS. s.c\0:- 10 < erscoteletere 588
Virein Spirits) 3... 551-553
VATtUG ....« « = oelarere eine 588
WVatal Bod yiiertete teria aie Bi)
Waitality.” sts. overs sccreteteleters 588
Vulcan Period ..... saree OO
WwW
\ EN SU RRIOTEE  C oc - 588
AW pare ica ej suctersuete yshonete 588
Wasdom. . oidennieietiesae 588
(WOMEN) wij. o seterentetetewera 557
Niiforg0 Weloponts sau be aoc 588
World Periodss(.i)< «cs10\2 591
WWiOTI GS ea aracatoveiskoneunicetats 589
World (Soulc co... 0601 Ooo


Frdex


PAGE
DAE PABIDIDY SOL SUpPKeMe IMpPOTtanees = .% hind «bietew «sets ee, oust 223
ADEPT; One who has passed the 9 degrees of the lesser Mys-
teries and the first of the Great Initiations....... 475, 502
ANIMALS.
Animals started evolution in the Sun Period, become
human ini Jupiter Period... ..nta-lae ess: eee 70, 224
Why some have cold and others warm blood............. 37
Why their color often changes with the seasons.......... 37
PAunimia les: COMPATed Mw ite TA AN: 2. asians stole Wiehe erck steeme ie ada 57
Winyveanimals: do aotinealby think 2 ene eft. a. svciereeteys © 59, 70
Desirebody of cold and warm-blooded animals differently
COMSEICMES Migs. Bes artis sisters ucts vi'viaceleiots Gael tea ere eee 68, 69
The present animals are more developed than we were
MURINgeOUT BAMA SUAS. A heleketwevelaystatse te wke| aaaeatan, lerare 69
How animals think though lacking mind............... 70
Animal group spirit located in Desireworld............. 77
Why desire and vital bodies of animals are not concentric
pupUaCeN Se) 10 O.Ciygse-tarstake, Mied-ofvlen ats toned steelers lnlieite. ote Hk
PMMA A eT O (LUO CS: co citssarerceroreeusi es Solies exokauer clePereh~ ae tstatatte Sesto oS TT, 293
Minveanimalsvarey. Clairvoyant) siil.s sssatelalonle <i .teilstele ceils He
Relation of groupspirit to animals illustrated.......... 78, 82
When hurt animals do not suffer as much as group spirit. 78
Nuiateiastinct, really. 1s: Ftpe. trtyses whale. last fee ee leerepete eeeal 78
Groupspirit governs the animals by suggestion........ 83, 350
Horizontal limb of cross symbolizes animal kingdom..... 86
BerettqoL vitalybodyvatad cat isc tes. <t.-.toutecnsees «>t buttbes avert 100
Archangels work in animals’ desirebodies............... 222
Amos work inithemr vatalWbodiesivar.iaiwrs tqersser-coi 31s tone <1 222
Anthropoids belong to human lifewave.............. 230, 235
4M ave) AES KOON Coe Korey OC MO ODE OTC Oc OT BOO cr dtd 341
Lemurian’s Word gave him power over animals...... 275, 281
Horse’s head and vital body not concentric............ 293


543


544 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
Hemolysis; the destruction of blood corpuscles.......... 356
Wihy hybrids) canmoty maton. tere) sioiers tale elalonerel~inievalsiieiteienene 357
Groupspirit withholds seed atom from eggs pending favor-
able” conditions sat. saree see siete cicvshers cas terete es ernie erarenete 461
ANZSTHETICS ; their effect on the vital body...............- 62
ASTROLOGY; spiritually based in the Law of Causation....... 161
Atoms; How vital body accelerates their vibratory rate..... 61
ARCHETYPES,
Not merely models, but living things.................. 49
Archetype of suicide’s body persists after death and
causes him SUMLETING way teks stoves rete ei btadeloha weokehs .Nenellenecenene 104
BisLE TEXTS AND TEACHINGS.
Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom, etc........... 5, 223
The; truth shalllmakery Ousstree es .iacrets atere's wicicleete etka tke Seer 23
In whom we live and move and have our being........ 87,179
Whatsoever a man soweth that also shall he reap........ 106
Falling of thetwallstof<Jerichoras.. nc). <1. «1 ole ees 122
Misunderstanding concerning the plan of salvation. ...151, 223
Changing Waveri TOL wane Mrseywechersis revs, ofobele lees etcl ef te elee setae 159
Him that overcometh will I make a pillar, etc.......... 158
Christ said of the Baptist: This 1s Elijah.............. 169
Who did sin, this man or his\parents?. . 00.2.2. 05 sersleleute 170
Know tye mot that yerare gods tee... Jot. ve. ne tote oe 171
The Seven Spirits before the Throne................ 180, 252
Mhey Wordmade stleshicr-s-penever sce vencve a) over’ sj <erete) staicl ave) aeeaeetene 181
Their eyes were opened and they saw they were naked... 190
Everlasting Salvation and Damnation............... 224, 229
Tidievdanly-7 (Paull) ict, toga srereteteatale eleithednn) ehatets Aeeeen 249
Adam knew Eve and she bore Seth................2000- 277
Ther tree: of Hiowled se: scissor se ctecrks take 5 he 278
The. treesofritest ie Needs ke Aa eer ohn oe 363
How shall I conceive, I know not a man (Mary)......... 278
Why the Angel said: In pain shalt thou bear children.... 278
Why foreign missions are a mistake.................05- 308
The sons of God married the daughters of men....... 310, 335
Location of the promised land...............2..005 310, 335
The» <“lost2+tribés 1822. Fie Later a eae eae eee 310, 313
Chosen people—past and future............ 298, 305, 311, 334


Anew heaven’ anda new.carthwc..c «sleasin ces es nine 313


INDEX 54%


PAGE
How shall we escape if we neglect so great a salvaticz... 315
Translation of the Bible discussed.......... iQ HO SOME OUT 317
Bible aot intended as an ‘‘open book’’............+. 319, 322
Paul asserts allegorical signification of Bible, he and
Christ gave deeper teaclings to a few.............. 320
The Greek Septuagint; the Talmud and the transcription
OfetNe MASOretes svete, Sy.leperale slaleisusls cvateispapeteneeerepemiovete wet 320
Mefallacious standard. of Wrubhiy for criedsicciset Metre 1 321
Two renderings of the opening sentence in Genesis and
how each complements the other................... 321
According to the Bible the Earth was formed from the
*“everexisting essence, uvt from ‘‘nothing’’....... 322
Nebular theory proves Gods creative and sustaining
QUES Vic fore tiottensl stoke wheel okere safes Suaiodeketehe onete aueletstarene 129, 323
Neds Crea Five LOL CO../asts cles sloie © Yossi gyas eros teeta orale 324
Mibeml Creative (rLerarchies..ts (jars lets oar sieleleleleonfemnetlcvenets 325
Why Genesis does not mention Cherubim and Seraphim... 326
WG SOPH E HA OU SOOO AG ODD AC 3G HOODOO O10 20 NOOO OOOO 327
The Sun Period; how it is scientifically possible to have.
light ere sun and moon were created............... 328
The Moon Period; its atmosphere of ‘‘firefog’’......... 328
The Earth Period and Recapitulations................. 329
The Polarian Epoch; the Hyperborean Epoch............ 330
MinesOrontionvOL thewSul. ricci tere sto vale srarelone elelols eae biel 330
Expelling the Moon from the Harth.................... 331
MCU CAUTIAN, EDOM «<0: 01 0,5) 01s) ofsiels Gave, 01% 6; 8 oyeta slate ee aie wie 331
Oe maeMObi LAS,” ” CTCATEG « staasietelsisbars, slate etc alate 3a
Atlantean Epoch; ‘‘nephesh’’ an important word....... 332
Aryan Epoch; the Elohim rest and man’s work begins.... 333
Jehovah, leader of Angels and Regent of the Moon...... 333
Jehovah is builder of ‘‘Form’’; giver of children...... . 334
Mhepwalderness;: the; rebel, JOws's..:«s:0:s/ 0.6 «se elsielee cioies's « 335
Involution, Evolution and Epigenesis................... 336
How the two Creation stories of Bible harmonize........ 344


Jehovah blew nephesh: breath into Adam’s nostrils and
Adam became nephesh chayim: breathing creature .. 345


Occult effect of this inbreathing.............-...00% 348, 350
The soul (not merely the ‘‘life’’) of all flesh is in the
LO} (YG Ee gin reat om 0.6-0-150. 005 Camo. SoC Oe OA TOE CAG 349


18


$46 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO UONCEPTION


PAGE
The: seed fof “Abraham sypaciiei Se ata stele ister sets. cratctele eae 351
Before-Abraham- was i ampemicn seieiee cerele acer 352
How and why the Lucifer Spirits spoke to woman....... 361
Atonement of Christ and Forgiveness of sins complement
they Lavy, 00 Casati omisgeyreerateccweref etait teloheis) eee ee 373, 401
Jesus, Christ, the only begotten, not one but three....... 374
On earth peace; good will among men............++++0- 387
I came not to bring peace, but a sword...............0. 383
(Am\eye? fort ain) Cy ertrettes syerselotets «eters, sate crelenttecletstel ratetntete 384
Returny good. Lor; evil severe: tete.nteie rete rretele oh atcteler tener eaters 393
As annanithinkethiin bistheartar crest). stele afte ccharerels retreat 398
Why Christ’s mission required a violent ending....... 406, 408
The! Cleansing sBlood! (chapter) sclera ret. \-'m ele olele fenyenatenats 406
Darkness and rending of the temple veil............... 407
BROTHERHOOD.


Atlanteans evolved cunning, we Aryans are evolving
reason, in future New Galileans will cultivate love... 311
One groupspirit controlled humanity during the earliest


OP OCHS Werk. epteravere tolevouetel lea ete (ote abevane tle vets ci heer ete ean 348
That was composed of all the Creative Hierarchies...... 351
Jehovah segregated humanity into nations and races...... 352
Christ came to reunite them into a Brotherhood......... 352
Why Christ is the only Being who can do that........... 380
CHRISTIAN DOCTRINES.
The: Creation tr.-.vorstetosertaetele ices ofthese otetel Shan. 0c eve tenet ae 317
Ge! WALLA, SStivae eke ad en a 277, 278, 361
Salvationvand) Dammartionljyacmnrc s+ «sree vayeriel sistent 224, 229
The Immaculate Conception. 1.72.03. . .. 2. le oe serene 378, 390
The Atonement. © Vie AA ATs So ae oleae a: Sal stele 400
Mhe. Cleamsing Boo dicryiere fever teria sere crates ctovetel eteretetemetetnene 406
Horgivenessnoie Sin vetapaetere eee al ovo. aster aepeonevete get 9 111, 373
AUG) AMAA Cone coo ono dopo Aon acoL Doc ooNaooGgO. 87, 229, 253
CONSCIENCE.
Conscience is the fruitage of previous purgatorial
EXISCSN COR 1-lishGha sath talotoustol Oe eas ob leer Pe eee. Moe a tctene 120
How conscience battles with desire...........csseseeeee 89
CREATOR.
Nebular theory predicates a creator..........-.....+6.. 322


Creator of Universe a logical necessity...... areletel ur ete felae 129,


INDEX 547


PAGE
How we learn to become Ureators....--.....-00000s 128, 338
Man’s desire to create caused the Fall...............-- 361
CONSCIOUSNESS.
Consciousness of the four Kingdoms, with diagram..... 73, 74
Consciousness of animals described............2+-2005. 83
Effect of the skeleton on consciousness.........+-+...005. 456
Consciousness of minerals and plants described.......... 85
How soul-growth enlarges the consciousness............. 96
Evolution of consciousness, Ariadne’s thread through
maze of ‘‘ Worlds,’’ ‘‘ Periods,’’ ‘‘Globes,’’ ete..... 201
Why Pytnagoras made knowledge of mathematics a pre-
TECUISIGE ILO OCCIIE, LEAChIN—. <-fpevetereel-al-va ares eaters ase 203
Vehicles and consciousness of man in Saturn Period like
PHOSCNOL PLESeMt INET Als ty esa etelerlar ioe rama eetleeeatelen 212
Vehicles and consciousness plantlike in Sun Period...... 213
‘Vehicles and consciousness of man like the lower Animals
Gimine 7 how MioommlPeKiods\. ier.\atersse, otetatstet napnter Morareletaievee 217
Tabular description of consciousness in past and future
CLIO ASH ayasesyonsyeuonek Pavonohe tte (sue Sep emanate cheielions sear oes ategart 421
Our present consciousness results from the war between
the desire body and the vital body................ 455
Involution: from divine All-consciousness to human self-
CDA CMOTEINEI 556595000 760005 GO sO dodo awe un 6 80, 216
Polarian Epoch; trance consciousness like Saturn, Hyper-
borean Epoch deep sleep like in Sun Period........ 263
Torture used in Lemuria to waken consciousness to a
AT eAMiy SLATE! evstbette= tte vhoihaboiates oselevele My atetetemelamanterenies 279
Our present waking consciousness dates from the middle
of Atlantis when ‘‘mist?’ cleared. .......0..s00000. 300
How marriage in the family produced the tie of blood by
generating common consciousness...........+..- 354, 397
How intertribal marriages has destroyed ‘‘second sight’’
OLMCIAINY.OVAMCE Laid lensenetoreete atalcvotie Seat eharatials atelte eFefela ete’ 355
Internal and external skeleton as factors in consciousness. 456
The four causes of our materialistic ideas.............- 359
How sin and its consequent pain has awakened and is
sharpening our CONSCIOUSNESS. ....... ee eee eee eae 362
How our consciousness will be expanded..............+- 417


The Consciousness of the Jupiter Period...........0000- 418


548 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
The Consciousness of the Venus Period................. 419
The Consciousness of the Vulcan Period.............6+5 421
CoLor.
hllustrativeio£ ther“ Trinity? 72% roe «chee alee oe trae 253
Why changeable in animals at different seasons......... 37
CRIME; crimes we ignorantly commit against the dying....... 101
Cross.
The cross is symbolical of the life currents vitalizing the
bodies of plant, animal and man................... 85
Cross symbolical of man’s past evolution, present consti-
tution and"future development .2) 2f 1s. sso. one ol aeters 516


CREATIVE HIERARCHIES AND OTHER LIFE WAVES.


THE SUPREME BEING.
The Supreme Being is the architect of the whole Uni-


verse; vastly exalted above our solar God........... 179
The Supreme Being images the Universe prior to creation
and dissolves it when it has served its purpose...... 375
Thes WORD made: flesh s cr nace” is olotsiateroiel toraetetats 181
Gop.
God is the Creator and sustainer of solar system......... 179
The logical necessity of a creator and sustainer of the
WOTUCS? fre aie ereersrarelate miteteye ee eel’ 0 e/ei atelier or cnereneee 129, 323
God is an expression of the positive pole of the Universal
Spirit (matter is negative pole)...............-..0. 185
God istavcomposite: Being, tre cm seteiersss aes yee renee 183, 253
The:Sun'is the visible symbol of God... 2.05. .0 en etenlere 181
The Father is highest Initiate of Saturn Period......... 376
Lhe Son: Christ, is highest Initiate of Sun Period....... 376
The Holy Spirit (Jehovah) is highest Initiate of Moon
12) (00 DE in Oran a UO CINTA Gb o rib ioc 376
Purpose of the Jehovistie Race religions......... 352, 433, 435
Purpose of the Christian religion............... 352, 433, 435
Purpose of the'coming religion of the Father............ 435
THE SEVEN SPIRITS BEFORE THE THRONE.
CollectivelystheyareiGodlii . 2. ele sislelib\ale onsle ce ase (sere +. 202-3
Individually they are Regents of the planets......:..-.. 180
CuRIST.


Christ is highest Initiate of Sun Period....... a eadets dele 376


INDEX 549


PAGE
The Christ became Regent of Earth at Golgotha......... 407
pehemimmaculate Conceptions « 2: acimisraele:stelesieiele diate eile 378


Why Christ used the dense and vital body of Jesus..128, 378, 380
Why Christ is unique among all Beings, celestial or ter-


restrial, and alone able to reunite mankind....... 380, 382
Jesus’ body attuned to Christ vibrations............... 382
Atonement does not vitiate the law of Causation; nor

does doctrine of remission of sins.............. 373, 401
SAV APION sp ilIUStTAted stearate :chater sietalevelereeke siete eterno unie’s eic 402
Why Christ said ‘‘not peace but a sword’’.........++... 389
Why the death of Christ was violent.................-- 405
The wounds of Christ, of esoteric significance............ 406
How the sin of the world was taken away............... 408
The purpose of the Christian Religion............... 433, 435
Jehovah segregated mankind into nations and races.

Christ will reunite them in Brotherhood............ 352
howspecialsumissiony of (Christ ::5\1<i<iceta/e stele oteteuielelsee ts 401, 405


JEHOVAH (Holy Spirit).


Prior to Jehovah’s regime a common groupspirit ruled


RIVNISIT igs hors fovatal eat = Wolave lak ates Bre le tolehey Iotetotanel aishaaeaue 351
Jehovah is highest Initiate of the Moon Period.......... 376
He is leader of Angels and Regent of all moons, ours

BIA] INCL OG. wabvons tel otah ere ses elets tis fatatore lara) eiolorslsratnesietotoeietele © 333
Why some Archangels (who are sun spirits) help Jehovah,

PEO MUNITIAT CO Céctnatehais’ aheto|atetaltcheca siecliays Sis fetal eS aleta eietlees 404
Jehovah built hard bony structure in early Lemuria. . 346
He blew in the breath: nephesh, and men became nephesh

chayim: breathing creatures... ......scccccceesesce 345
TORSO aTALeC ul NOESOKES es shyteratere tre ste lafe oisvarel Nests claleAlelaters 347


Jehovah and the Archangels divided mankind into nations
and races, appointing a Guardian Angel for each


TBEEO Oger OS Oc CCS 0-00.05 COO LES OO 0-S is IUCR DCS 347, 352
Jehovah and Archangels work in desirebody by ‘‘Law,’’

fear of God is pitted against desire of flesh........ 395
Purpose of the Jehovistic Race religions............. 433, 435


Why Race religions are insufficient to meet human uceds. 383


QRorDs oF FLAME.


Are brilliantly luminous; called ‘‘ Thrones’’ in Bible..... 206


550 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE

They gave germ of dense body and awakened divine spirit
Of MMAn-in-Lhe-Ma kang eepeerava te sislevetnieleloderetelc eelV eke eietetere 207

Lords of Flame aided Virgin Spirits to penetrate first veil
OL IMAL LCT rarer tor terarattetelerende rote reee token odes crane fold ehete lente 216
They helped Lords of Wisdom reconstruct dense body.... 211
Lords of Flame help link divine spirit and life spirit.... 212

They helped Lords of Individuality link divine spirit and
HUMANS PIPL peperevern ie sere tetetente ete elotale tere tenet otsy eheretate 216
Lords of Flame, Cherubim and Seraphim leave our system. 220

CHERUBIM.


Awaken life spirit of man-in-the-making............... 212
Aid spirit penetrate second veil of matter............... 216
Cherubim help Lords of Individuality link human spirit to
Wife cSpArit. teen. tercke eae ete eine stele orove oleate rc 215
Lords of Flame, Cherubim and Seraphim leave our evo-
TUGLONG vercrcveye steko eleieavereyeteterstereterere eich atcha’ siaieloneret ete toters 220
Why Cherubim and Seraphim are not nentioned in the
Creation story VOLs Bibles ie o. (e's /etelejelere aatolelels eleteletamete 326
SERAPHIM.
Awaken human spirit (the Ego) in man-in-the-making.... 215
Mhey, leave: Ourre vOlUutiOn sey. wie toiete eisteroreterelereteleror estate .. 326


Lorps or WIspoM.
They had charge of material evolution in Sun Period,
they helped Lords of Flame reconstruct dense body... 211
They gave germ of vital body.to man-in-the-making...... 211
They helped Lords of Flame link divine spirit to life spirit 214
Lords of Individuality help Lords of Wisdom reconstruct
dense body, giving germ of skeleton, muscle........ 214
Lords of Wisdom now in charge of divine spirit......... 220
Lorps or INDIVIDUALITY.
They had charge of material evolution in Moon Period,


and helped reconstruct dense body........:...s0+00+- 214

They gave germ of desire DOdY.......ceecsssccccvecuce 215

They havevchargerofeliterspirits Ow selaelerecielelelels elslelate leis 220
Lorps oF Form.

They have charge of material evolution now............ 240

Alsovofdhtuman spirit, theme! 20) strcatenste citeberiere ee erect 220

They reconstruct dense body, giving germ of brain...... 239


Help Angels reconstruct vital body..........csscvscese 240


INDEX 551


PAGE
Help man build dense body in Polarian Epoch.......... 261
Vivified human spirit in many Moon Stragglers.......... 266
Those stragglers remained mindless, however............ 266


Lorps or MInp.
They were human in the Saturn period, are expert mind-
builders and work only with man............... 222, 243
They also help man build higher desire body............ 265
The Father is highest Initiate among Lords of Mind.... 376
ARCHANGELS.
They were human in Sun Period, are expert builders in


desire bodies, work with animal and man........ 222, 349
The Son, Christ, is highest Initiate Archangel........... 376
Archangels work in lower part of desirebody............ 243
They helped man build his desirebody in Lemuria....... 265


During heavenlife they teach him to reconstruct the earth, 126
ANGELS,
They were human in Moon Period; are expert builders of


vital body, work with plant, animal and man..... 222, 349
A Guardian Angel was appointed for each Ego......... 352
The Holy Spirit, Jehovah, is their highest Initiate...... 376
Angels and Lords of Form clothe man in vital body..... 263
The vital body is their normal vehicle, they are double

SEXO ANG without: DLAI .w1.,-12) debeletehel el -eliel~ oles eis is! 2/61 = 28%
Angels directed man’s propagation in harmony with stars,

shens parturition: was: Painlessiicicecas os'- sie oc sctele sis 283

LucIFrer SPIRITS.

They were stragglers of the life wave of Angels........ 286
HO Vmar oe CALLE CISEL DENTS teyslevalesteleierchals ate) screieleld eal) <ta's « 288
How and why they spoke to the woman.............. 287, 361


VIRGIN SPIRITS (our human Life wave).
Whence we came and why pilgrimage through matter was


MING OLEAK CMM Gestch. sfotels fel d <.aheletevalarcisndia: sielesc/evauctaterstaharte 87
Our varying grades of unconsciousness during Involution,

attainment of self-consciousness...............-. 189, 201
The descent of spirit marks the ascent of form and both

streams coalesce in the focusing mind............. 266
Their evolution depends upon adaptability.............. 223


Dber futureydevelopmentetaeterere. siete xelereiee) kevesehsenetelays\efe;'s 417


552 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
STRAGGLERS AND NEWCOMERS.
Some of our life wave proved unadaptable in Saturn
Period, they formed dark spots on the luminous Sun


PIG Dontiinc ony otmMmoGhHGusscunGe cdo sab ros boue- 225
More straggled in sixth revolution of Sun Period....... 226
Some Saturn stragglers were promoted in seventh revolu-

blionvof abhet Sunt ieriodiveyeie ers ersreke Petts sastera) estate ote 225
Some from the animal life wave straggled in Sun Period.. 225
List of classes at beginning of Moon Period............ 226
More spirits of our life wave straggled in fifth revolution

of the Moon Period. Cherubim promoted some..... 229
When there are no more stragglers a race dies........... 341

New Lire WaAvES (behind the human spirits).
The present animals started evolution in Sun Period..... 224
The present plants started evolution in Moon Period..... 226
The minerals started in the Earth Period............ 230, 232


GROUP SPIRITS.
A guardian spirit governing a tribe of animals or plants


fTONG AWUUROUTNG Holl Ata stots Axes telat, Sea keeeyaee 72, 81
Prior to the advent of Jehovah humanity was governed

from without by a common groupspirit............ 351
Jehovah and his Archangels are like groupspirits, for they

Govern’ theynablOnscparvoys each aleketoyoka/enel alee Coenen 349
Group spirits evolve to family and Race spirits........ 82


Groupspirit of plant and oviparous animals withhold seed-
atom from seed and egg, pending favorable conditions 461
Groupspirit is ‘‘a jealous god’’ like Jehovah; it abhors


and prevents intermarriage of species........... 353, 357
Instinct is suggestion of groupspirit responded to by

PNUD Ue OR ER oe OO LRA no OR ARG 0.060900 6 78
Groupspirit suffers when an animal is hurt............ 78


Groupspirit is responsible for the similar traits, tastes
and appearance of the separate plants or animals in


AISA S| 81 PIAL C OLS. GSTs DO OC CCAM MO TIO. OCLC S Gin bine S 71
Groupspirit is responsible for the currents which flow in-
wards in coldblooded animals. . 2... 0-2. Jeu utiss oe 69


Outgoing currents in the desirebody of animals are gen-
erated by them, not by groupspirit................ 69


INDEX 553


PAGE

Animal groupspirits work in the blood by means of the air
MIRCHI Camm ate ar store lors taryter oficial sisyol sks, eto MORRTay Ace whateueee ie, seks 350
Difference between a groupspirit and a human Ego..78, 82, 350
Diagram showing present location of groupspirits........ 74


LIFE WAVES.


(Which reach the human stage im our system.)
Lorps or Minp (started evolution before our scheme).
Became human in the Saturn Period, are expert mind-
builders, work only with man (who was mineral in
RSA! PECTIC) oo: os epepepeans essiovexev ox; sasucusis iste ane _. 222, 427
Lhe Father is their highest Initiate... 2.0... c62-56 5 376
They became Creative Intelligences in Earth Period.... 243
ARCHANGELS (started prior to our scheme).
Became human in the Sun Period, are expert builders of
coarse desirestuff, work principally with animals
(which were mineral in Sun Period), but also with
jHENA 9456000 COURTS COD OUODOO COD COO DOAUOUS 222, 349, 427
The Son (Christ) is their highest Initiate.............. 376
They become Creative Intelligences in Jupiter Period....
ANGELS (started prior to our evolution).
Became human in Moon Period, are expert builders of
Ether. Work specially with plants (which were


muMeraleim: Moon PeniOd)) ix ersleeiyecisistersis e+ ope - 222, 349, 427
Their highest Initiate is Jehovah, the Holy Spirit....... 376
They become Creative Intelligences in Venus Period.....
VIRGIN SPIRITS (our present humanity).
Started evolution as mineral in Saturn Period.......... , 205


Became human in the Earth Period. We are now becom-
ing expert builders of Form from chemical mineral


EUIOEEY ona Ann non as co MIO Be O00 SOU DON AO GD GNIS G 426
In the Jupiter Periods we shall vitalize the forms........ 428
In the Venus Period we shall give them feeling......... 428
In the Vulean Period we shall become Creative Intelli-
gences and give the forms a mind.................. 428
ANIMALS started evolution in Sun Period, become human in
ipo tbets eerlO Ginetta ayes) ah coketonelerelepeeelas fetes <ietonkats 70, 224


PLants started evolution in Moon Period, become human in
NiGANE! TES MOG Gh on nab CO OOAOOOOOO ODE COND 66 SO th PAS)


B54 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
MINERALS started evolution in Earth Period, become human in
Vulcan Period xc .y. steele omunarioisis sratersioheletorriene mieten 230, 232
DESIRE.
Desire for prolonged earth-life makes the spirit earth-
bound amid unpleasant surroundings............... 103
How conscience battles with desire..............-.++e0- 89
Archetypes of desires, feelings and emotions............ 50
DISEASE.
Why complications set in when a person is sick.......... 64
Why pain is felt in a limb subsequent to the time of
AIP UCATLOM Gy apeveteved cred ok etoler Vatshslotahehol ters\ cle sle-ttey este telene 64
A. spiritual cause. of paralysis). cfesleice cal ojos oe terete sotenale 63
A spiritual cause of consumption and rachitis........... 113
Haemolysis (destruction of blood corpuscles; see Human
Organism).
Nostalgia (homesickness); how engendered by the Race
SIONAL KOM Dr0.0 Un sCOOO060 00D SHABUODOODOGOLODUO SC 351
DREAMS.
The cause of dreams, and why mostly confused.......... 94
Dreamlike internal picture consciousness of animals
rational because engendered by groupspirit.......... 217
DrRUNKARD; how purged in Purgatory.................+00. 105


DROWNING; why drowning persons see past life in a flash.... 61
ELEMENTS.
In Saturn Period there was only one element: heat—


INCIPLENteHiren. Me atevootatarerersvolete.ole hee teheneve rate cnet ctee tree naENs 234
In Sun Period there was fire and air; in Moon Period fire,
air, water. Here we have four elements............ 234
A new element will be added in the Jupiter Period...... 234
ELEMENTALS or naturespirits; help build our bodies......... 126
Hyin; how it grows and is destroyed... .......0.cs+seelscne 42-43
FPairu.
Childlike faith and scepticism compared.............e+. 6
FEELING.
Distinct from mere response to impacts.............0.. 32
A separate desirebody necessary to true feeling.......... 57
interest and Indifference; the twin feelings which move
thie try Onl GeHeny watever eter ate = otete olonavereitonateteiete sicihers) sectarian 45


IRBMOTSO Ma ctotetetolereletetotetets atetevePeoteyo 4c6 3 04e oleate tetateverehotere ts Aero th


INDEX


PxZOnebyPEsnOLerecliniG rks dete ssiamaes hee od aceee viele
Effect of sharp purgatorial pain on future lives.........
Mathematic study zaises us above feelings..............
Pineal gland once an organ of feeling.................
Feeling was awakened by torture in Lemuria..........
Rbmoahals developed finer feelings: joy and sorrow, pleas-

RLEOM AD B Glae [YAMIN OL eas chests on x01 8 Sos ove tr ashte obese top MEL Mee 21s
Mavatlisedeveloped«ambitlonss seeraie \cpysrays-teeie male ls shot

YWREEWILL AND DESTINY.

Relative freewill of mineral, plant, animal and man com-

[O20 ORR ot neresc1 5:2 AO STE Tee RD PATI oc 3c. coded cl
All evil acts in life at least are voluntary...............
Choice regarding place of Rebirth..............s0+- 129
Spigenesis more than choice of action...............---
Original Semites the first to be given freewill and made

responsible to law of consequence... 2.15). tiie esse et
Causes when ripened to maturity become destiny........
Mature destiny cannot be escaped (story)............-.
Mnoustoms bie ClO CKAOd LOSE YK Syarerateefeteiees sober stihl © eae e.0<0
Hpocmmmoner reewilli aid MA CStLMY:s)5).teu~. olaiaeBallels. s oreitcs le (alae sheers
Freewill bought at cost of pain and death........... 288

FORGIVENESS OF SIN.

Forgiveness and the subconscious mind.............+..
How it shortens or eliminates Purgatory................
The doctrines of Forgiveness and Atonement do not


vitiate, but complement the Law of Causation...... ‘
FERTILIZATION.
Depends upon presencs of etheric matrix of body being
present in mother’s womb and on seedatom...... 137


Seedatom withheld sy gyoupspirit when animals mate
GAMESUG Opal CURES CCLES 26) 4) of ora oy aay oh oka vorage tel custo A «sin loreton =e
Foop.
Why one man’s meat is another’s polson...............
Hood asca, Tactor, imevolutiOnay, cc aciletqeieiet stat cueyeratelee
ihenscience of nutrition s(¢hapter’) > «ts siete etn sreis «e¥st «1 cies
Why we do not take life when eating plantseed or eggs. .
Pheplawa Oreassiniila ton a (CHA pter. kisi.) scste aiete = <losquete aeehes
FORCES.
Laws of Nature not blind, but Great Intelligences.......


505


PAGE
50


262
278


110


135


461


461
457


556 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
Archetypal Forces and the inception of form............ 51
Force is spirit not yet erystallized to matter......... 120, 247
Relation of force and matter illustrated................ 121
Attraction and Repulsion; the twin forces, and how they
QPELATED Tes ioavatele tovededetes Sats eleiers eoetolsta Ne as hs, Sieh oh leneeatr erate 46
The Bible on ‘‘ dual creative energy’’........... eee eee 324
HORM.
All forms are built of one basic substance.............- 31
Forms are crystallized space; at death it dissolves to
SPIVIG’ Lies ctoete cis Oretemvele niet lever tonsa stare stoke feu fevers 249, 186
Relation of Life, Form and Consciousness.............- 223
Reason for multiplicity of forms and their decay........ 31
ATl-formiidevoidsofitrueykeelin ge nryee veils cris tetehelee te eretetetere 31
Wonderful metamorphoses of forms in Desire world..... 41
Archetypes of form. 2... 21 a0 Dos ods. ae eee 50
Archetypes: build forms ye Sounds scree oes itele totes riaictel nent 123
Sound the builder of climate, flora and fauna.......... 125
Form and life merge into one spirit in Chaos; seedatoms
of worldglobes alone remain intact................ 247
Life may, and does, exist independently of concrete form. 248
Forms are always built to suit conditions............ .. 255
Man’s past, present and future form.............0..00: 257
How pineal gland preserved man’s form from destrue-
tion, by; fire, ind Wemiunial eteyctove\sielaeotesie}e"atelekolaont ener 262
Why form evolves to a certain point; then degenerates
ANP AICS shale 5 cls etelote crease Patent eieleleielaie ete sxsiee 289, 341, 343
Jehovah, the builder of form and giver of children. . .334, 348
Bible story of Creation refers to form: Life is uncreate 332, 344
Jife has novorigin: HHorms *haves 1 -acmialenesisistaeieeiete eles 504
GENIUS.
Geniusiand/Fepigenesis vey cra a =i detedetel aelehetey eet ohana 185
A genius builds better organism from parental material
than, others 0 ero oe tre eile Sette tances are hae pee tee eee 138
Heredity cannot account. for genius. ........ 24.5. eek 155
Why geniusis ahead, of itsibime.o<.h es. oeles cir cle 161
Goop; how assimilated by the spirit............ 21, 47, 96, 123, 417
HyPNnorisM.
How hypnotism and anesthetics affect vital body........ 62


INDEX bod


HUMANITY (topical).
PAGE
Humanity compared with mineral, plant and animal.... 57
Origin of our faculties: sense perception, locomotion and


WATE» 00 a Oe CRRA INO Ob DE IA AIMIASS GOIAE REREAD OF 59
Manmismubeninverteds planta .jesiep.< svaiieisiowl els 'eldcr ete lela sta 86
Seven human principles as correlated to five worlds...... 88
Man is a 3-fold spirit having a mind by which he governs

a 3-fold body and transmutes it to soul............. 95
Man builds in heaven the body he uses on earth......... 128
In Hyperborean Epoch we had both lunar and solar

sexforce, hence we were hermaphrodites............ 268
Wihvanations tisecand falls cance wieretsislanalers leteloaeeietel sieaote 289
Originally kumanity were governed by one common group-

STIMU sect Carsten cacti usy evapo tape gh clebeeronete wheres store tenet neens 351
Later Jehovah segregated them into nations............ 352
Original Semites first to be given freewill and made

responsible to the law of consequence.............. 301
Mission of Christ to reunite the races as Brothers....... 352
The four steps and stages in Religion.................. 302
The sixteen paths to destruction..................0. 271, 306
Mommas IN rahi kK? 7 he spiel. apslale ts steve jcthala welt lereueperere a Sehete 341
INA@ Ceili Oh MR Ao ae On oneo bands. 0 Jona oducis oc oon 504

MAN.
Differently educated from women in Lemuria............ 279
Man possesses solar sexforce expressing ‘‘ Will’’........ 267
Spermatozoon an expression of concentrated will.......... 284
‘WoMAN,
Why subject to periodical flow and tears............... 60
Whyamore intuitivesthaniman «45°! seis oi. eid sien el sleleses 92
Woman has lunar sexforce which expresses itself spir-

Rieullypuasie Oana ination. 4m sols sh sehen sice o akeleiaheuetelersie 267
How woman was educated in Lemuria................. 279
Woman developed memory before man................. 280
Wihysparturitions became, Palmtulls....)otlstee slelamisiccelsls eles! 283
imagination =buildsethowtoetuus smn sntvrere site aaisicte ss 284
How and why Lucifer spoke to the woman............. 361

CHILDREN.
Childlike faith compared to scepticism...............065 &


Childlife:inathe first) heavens) esteisiers. arches ave cleteleloteiste vel ala yy


558


ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION

PAGE

Birth of a child only commenced with the delivery of. the
CONSEVDOMYS <fyee.pereperatelevaytens teveleio toleyereiclerere olcuanehert tee 139
Children are clairvoyant and have invisible playmates.... 240
Do not manufacture individual blood in early years..... 143
Birth of the vital body produces growth............... 141

Why one who has died as a child will be apt to remember
that life in its next embodiment................-. 172
Edueation of children in Lemuria..............-.... 279, 361
Education of children in early Atlantis................ 296
Children are clairvoyant while innocent................. 281

Jehovah, the Regent of the Moon, is the builder of
‘-form’” and hence: the) giver of ichildreni). cs. setts 334


HUMAN ORGANISM (topical).


DENSE Bony.


A dense body necessary to live in the Physical World.... 57


What determines shape of dense body.................- 60
Why the dense body is our most valuable instrument.... 76
Dense body abandoned at death... 2. 0. 6. cle wens cowie 97
How premature loss of dense body causes suffering to

SUICLC) ~ cravctere cymes cietorereieberel oie eerste retare tere ets eee 104
Archetype of dense body built by us in heaven......... 126
Birth? of denser body Aca werwtslee ole atave evele te telerers Core eteaanae 139
Germinally started in Saturn Period with incipient sense

OL GANG; fiers lestelet wailetareneievalale eeevetelare ce acevale cteletawen sate Rename 206
Reconstructed in Sun Period. Germination of alimentary

canal and ‘glands! commenced #21. ss clave sole entree tenets 211
Reconstructed in Moon Period. Skeleton, cartilage, muscle

ANG METVessDESIMPTOMMOTIN Were eierela wl cleats leletelets leteretaene 214
Reconstructed in Earth Period. Then brain and voluntary

MEKVESMVOLAM OMLOLM sks roket, creroreteeletelstetere ec cravehereraye 236, 239
Wonderful mechanism of dense body..................- 237
Tinesof futurevim provement sursmr wepaeversi <7clehemesie ites iets 262
“*Point’’ in forehead not. concentric with the ecorrespond-

ing ‘‘point’’ in vital body in Atlantis.............. 293
When those points came into correspondence clairvoyance

WAS LOSU a ous: 2 sropevend strate obersiehe ePeta avahereteyetatene teeters teats 294


INDEX 559


PAGE

How connection between dense and vital bodies has be-
comosrolaxed ‘since: Golgotha.. wees sinece oes ee os 482

BLoop.

How warm and coldblooded animals are produced........ 37

Difference of constitution of desirebody in cold and warm-
I ORUED! CUMS geo Dee OmO OS HOCOG Joo SAO ope oe 69
Red blood requisite to a separate desirebody............ 69
In our animal stage we had no red blood............. 69
Incipient blood currents started in Moon Period........ 218


Before the Ego can become an indwelling spirit it must
have body with warm blood and upright larynx. . .86, 236


The blood is the direct vehicle of the Ego....... 91, 238, 350
The blood is the carrier of feelings and emotions....... 91
Children do not manufacture individual blood.......... 143
Effects upon Ego of high and low temperature......... 144
Constancy of blood temperature more marked after
PIIIST)” SiGEMMS ca.0 ON SA COO Oe CO OOD CCD Oo no ODO Momo Coc 145
Mars, iron, warm blood and individuality............ 268, 274
Why Mars prevented evolution of warm blood in the first
three and one-half Earth-revolutions............... 274
homsoul ot all flesh. 19) Insthe bloods iase s/cfoy> efwisjare vere wrayer 350
Why marriage ‘‘in the clan’’ gives second sight...... 353, 397
Why mixing blood of one family by marriage with another
Geeamiby. Wills Clairvoyanceiyes sais. /wieyasremyoreleree¢« esislele 355
The blood; the highest expression of vital body......... 397
PFGE SETA LON SLT Cas COATS afareye | stoyeyoicte) botetiers! stots sci S16) «(o/srs) ware 6C
In each eyele the blood earries a picture of the outside
world’ to, seedatom: im hearts... icine ais os vis aieieiere cies 92, 398


Harmotysis (destruction of blood).
Haemolysis and death results when blood of higher animal


DHMINTOGEE Cyan LOW OR ve « Sve) ataro'ereter stersetiete. «i strorsier ees oparene 355
Mating of different species causes partial haemolysis with
FOSS One PLO PAC awn Mena CUlG YA tals aielcreleieicieiv/ cls ls cieelalele 357
International marriages produce haemolysis which kiils
second sight enjoyed by marrying in the clan....... 358
Ear.
The semicircular canals of the ear, music and logic...... 126
Har was started iin Saturn Period... ci. sssccee eos .. 206


ys. the eye wasnhuiltybyWohite .cterieus: yl wtete) sss xe arora chats 18, 276


560 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
The so-called ‘‘third eye’’ was organ of feeling..... Woeee con
LIVER.
Desinebody, Looked im ayer eimevstess otehetelolettelevetateietetenetentee ees 68
Groupspirit directs currents inwards in cold-blooded ani-
mals. Currents well owt in mammals.............. 69
Drivervand: ¢* liver? 2 save ot ast sai om ee hart oho baie te eater ane 69
Lunes; the place of ingress for the groupspirit...... 345, 348, 350
SPLEEN.
Spleen is root of vital body, it specializes solar energy... 63
Howi white corpuscles are madet yee. <i. a. oats = wets wtolulerete 455
GLANDS.
Glands and alimentary canal started in Sun Period...... 211
Pineal Gland was once the localized seat of feeling...... 262
Glands are expressions of the vital body............... 455
THYMUS GLAND; supplies parental blood to child in infancy
andl early: childhood 2h )trwetstein sc. <tetstealelctetelstatetnneeaane 143
Pituitary Bopy; latent in most people, it is an orgau of
clairvoyance: <j. 2 sh. mWeenet htie¥e’ efor cle toteto lo decree here neneneee 473
PINEAL GLAND.
Once a localized organ of feeling......2...........-05- 262
Now an organ of clairvoyance when developed..:....... 473
HEART.
Head and heart figuratively at war............0...06: 17, 393
Silver Cord fastened to left ventricle of heart by the
seedatomi sts Sh, weaves o muievctolle sla tele level ctete y= etal inrannnene 98
Rupture of silver cord causes heart te svop..........-.- 98
Heart, though an involuntary muscle, is cross-striped iike
@ Voluntary -musclorrarvaretetersiatcrs, sra/ervoteretensiele) oy chet eteeme 396
How the crossstripes may be developed and the heart
CONELOL! DOD. HO Me Ae etal Cee Gate lad teaver ree Shel Laan 399
How heart, larynx and spinal cord become path of sex-
CULTEMUS)/ er. cle letavetehalarate ete. sl'viofcteloreleleieteielstelolp teratnntant 477
wlUSCLES.
How manivulated by thoughts of Ego................. 89
‘che higher part of desirebody built the voluntary nervous
EMEIRoEle iy adie Wace oo tintn CoS Angas own co otooe 46 394
Voluntary muscles striped lengthwise at CTOSSWISE ;
involuntary muscles striped lengthwise only........ 396


Muscles the particular stronghold of desirebody......... 455


INDEX 561
PAGE
NERVES.
Bee case LON paral yeisisye).tevsieseiteyer. vrata etarsuetee rorarchteneselsie nts 63
Voluntary nerves started in Earth Period, sympathetic
SV SUGLY sTpMLOOTIME- OFIO Cy. yateraieretel al atime alepaisa’s taal 239
Higher part of desirebody built voluntary nerves....... 394


Pneumogastrie nerve, avenue of ingress of intuition or


eins t eli pTeSSiONSy) /. ebsites Wet.goit otelNt eats ter <'s 398
Pneumogastrie nerve is avenue of egress for the seedatom
DACA EN < <8. sale isidsiloraslolia wi(ehcvays fae eae Sette eee ems ice 97
BRAIN.
How the Ego manipulates the braincenters............. 89
Building of brain started in Lemuria................. 239
IBuitesince Separation’ OfNSEXES 5101s. ait scree seks ele ere le 267
Half the sexforce diverted to build brain............ 269, 284
GCostzotethentacultyior, thoughtiiierys tes chic Jelacl. tote sialon 270
Lemurian girls first developed memory................. 280
Why Lucifer prompted Lemurians to use the generative
force independent of the Angels.................. 287
How Lucifer spoke to the woman..................04. 361
LARYNX.
Wihtyeamimals (Camnot Speak ....c/./. sicferelsieis cveiosletstsieies e601 86
A horizontal larynx is under groupspirit............... 236
Larynx, the highest achievement of human Ego......... 236
Originally the larynx was part of the sexorgan......... 269
The larynx is sustained by sexforce................ 269, 284
‘The larynx will eventually supersede the sexorgans and
man will speak the (now lost.) creative WORD. .364, 425
Larynx, heart and spinal cord, path of sexcurrent in
HINT AL OSI 5; sfc c/ale Nake « aleve cols otkaletdels cilctel. oS eesti Sls els 478
Srx.
Change of boy’s voice at the time of puberty. Sex is
determined by forces active in Life Ether........ 36
Sex alternates in suceessive births..............sesce 160
Will and Imagination are solar and lunar sexforces...... 267
When Earth was united with sun and moon in the
Hyperborean Epoch man was male-female......... 268-9
When Earth separated from sun and nivon the sexes also
separated ....... CA £1553,0/0 CORR AG ECLO SO OI Seas Beers 268


562 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
Sextorcesbuls rainvand dayne siete eielerste olen ie » 269
When Angels regulated sexrelation in harmony with stars
parturitionmyas! pamlessa.. melee. meee). crehuetnsteke PUT
When Adam knew his wife indiscriminately, ‘their eyes
were opened;’’ then pain and death began...... 278, 283
Spermatozoa an expression of male sexforce: Will. Imagi-
nation, the female sexforce, builds foetus.......... 284
All retain one-half of sexforce to build brain, nervous
Systemimam Ci lary mepetstege ete te eet ioneic/ote Seoher eres ener ares 284
Selfish motive in sex and thought activities............. 288
Lucifer spirits prompted man to abuse of sex........... 287
Adam/’su$$rib??yandintSside whens eay.teretacst. dete Caso 347
Mhe: beginning and ithe endkotesexs, sietielss'sslsiolslelnhs tetalans 364
SKELETON.
Skeleton soft as cartilage till crystallized in early Le-
muria by Jehovah’s lunar forces............... 275, 346
Comparison of the effect of external and internal skel-
CLONE) LOWS CONSCLOUSNESS soto «) doin sidteistalel stots laloreliotel ct erieiaes 456
Hardening of bones contributed to divide sexes......... 275
Skeleton the particular stronghold of divine spirit....... 397
RIBs. :
Young children do not create blood from bones......... 143
PGP NaVs ee Oo or SOT OO ORm I IGHOCC DOC60 a0 2. 347
DIGESTION.
Digestion accomplished through the aid of forces in the
chemiucallmethior eaiarerarererisvrtetretselerate inkl sloranantye 35, 94, 14F
Manufacture and selection of gastric juices............ 263
Digestion commenced in Hyperborean Epoch by osmosis.. 263
Alimentary canal started in Sun Period................ 211
How digestion is affected by temper..............s.00 456
The law of assimilation) (chapter) «215... «ss. lee elles 457
EXcRETION; a selective elimination of waste................ 35
SEEDATOM.
The seedatoms have formed part of all vehicles ever used
by onesparticulansEl gy o)sreye -)sistets toll 2) level re ctctaievels). erent 97
Seedatom of dense body leaves heart just after last
breath, bearing imprint of panorama of life....... 97


Seedatom of dense body fastens silver cord to heart.... 98


INDEX 563


PAGE
Seedatom of vital body extracted at second rupture of
UNV? CONG moieetiod cchoGonerk ono Boo ace Ah eueerEe 103
Seedatom of desirebody: seat of conscience. It is ex-
tracted ere spirit leaves desirebody to disintegrate... 120
How seedatom of mind gathers materials for the mind of


Ame WaliLe? Priory tOmOMt Metres ui. eevats ener eesatsvererotn ons 133
How seedatom of desirebody gathers desirestuff for a

MEM CeSITEDO CY: .¥.cratie cine es ae iere esos stein ors ctameneetarets ae 6 134
How seedatom of vital body gathers new ether......... 134
Flow the etheric mold of the coming dense body is placed

in womb of mother by the Lords of Destiny........ 137
Seedatom of dense body placed in semen of father...... 13%
Seedatoms of World-globes alone persist in Chaos....... 247
Seedatoms of plant seed or eggs withheld by groupspirit

pendine favorable; condibions: sae aed ee lees s 461
Seedatoms of animals withheld by groupspirit to prevent

Maing OF shy PTidS: OF) MMSMAING eid sres ee siete rsiele 357
Nutside world pictured upon seedatom in each cycle of

CMM OO Clwetega. cde rste sialletetotane ethernet ch ater otter aval sual oreteteNe 398


LIFE HERE AND HEREAFTER (topical).


fire In GENERAL.


Peupnoblemwmot lute and death fay .r.5/0sleqerercsysys «ray: siaieorote 19
Pe mUN TEC Ee SOlITIONSs Off CLEC cre saet saree syerevslieso1c/sh sce snare stensie.e 148
The four streams of life ensouling all form............. 31
Life alone can feel; form is dead and unfeeling........ 32
jitewHther: the avenue of propagation... ......+++«. 36
iiieomeinbersireed at age Of 14, 200. ce-cm Selere sine imitie tae 143
A. separate vital body necessary to express life.......... 57
The four Kingdoms of life symbolized in the ecross...... 85
The value of a life largely dependent upon conditions at
CERI maeSordma tie wae oO Gs 6 don Gamat berg, d 101
MarahionvoL ltewnieurcavoryacs. ssc eree teen ie rene 107
iti Omanie- GHO\ BINS MELCAVEM te r.retefre-crercicro ss tis crete wate mretocr cts 113
Pit onama the SecOMd ELCAVENM srr. lectenrele tere «ae 4 sisters 12]
Bites thes i hinge Evea vente. cretusistescstsist tate sete 129
EE HESPUTPOSCLOL, MILO starrer seeiaescs le cre ciecsie eis < tee setts Wee oye 131


Piteraischoolkotrexpertenceeeacm.a terse cutee etleetrererctetye 132


564 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION

PAGE

The life ensouling man entered evolution in the Saturn
POriod yg. sahsysrsioteyeleye ris iets oie crete ley tele ntey ee eee 205

The life ensouling the animals entered evoluticn in the
Sur) Perio diye Gpashorserer door toryed ton tiebe tegen sh Mae yaeermete 224

The life ensouling the plants entered evolution in the
MOON iP CLOG ieysinetsteteiete tecaucha) st ohee- Mactaie- told toh kaa 226

The life ensouling the mineral entered evolution in the
Barth Beriod!®.:.oersgerce storie sieve ole otetacienaree ee eee 232
The relation of Life, Form and Consciousness........ 80, 223

Life and form merge in Chaos, leaving only seedatoms of
IWiorld-clobeswimtaletiars pris evel clei et-leies7o1exs oye neterate 247
Life may, and does, exist in forms intangible to us...... 248
Life always builds forms to suit conditions............ 256
Life uncreate, the importance of the word nephesh...... 332

First Creation story of Bible deals with form, the second
with, the) ensouling: lifes nephesh...-.). ci... ojssyebereaiele 344
Nephesh chayim: breathing creatures; not living souls.. 345
Life did not originate anywhere, at any time: it is...... 584
Making lites Pomel OO Mises sky eretete eretstel serie) eters olegeteteil-Uierereens 460
Why plant seed and eggs contain no life.............. 461

CONCEPTION.


Conception results only when etherie mold of a body and
the: seedatomimare presents. «cee ais ciele pease meteiete 137
Ego enters mother’s womb 18 days after conception.... 138


BirTH.
Birth is the result of Ego’s desire for experience........ 129
Birthplace usually chosen by, Heo. 2)... «1. «.- «a's: larueiieiets 136
Birth not accomplished when dense body is delivered.... 139
‘Birth. of -yital body andy prow bho oc...) -/epe oisiers cea terete 141
Birth of desire: body -andapubenty;. <1). setts aielel oi ceneneean 142
Birth of the mind and maturity........ SRE ca bc 143

DEATH.
Whe! problem) of Mifeiand Deaths cy.jia sstcueti emits eke 19
How death is robbed. of ats) terror), <j). cjste eletet= ia) s)-1siaie 27
Death by, drowning or LreeZzin piseys sehele nis oie (olay) eieks telah ooagete 61
Death by suicide and its dreadful consequences.......... 104
Death by accident or on the battlefield.................. 118


The importance of peaceful surroundings at death...... 109


INDEX 565


PAGE
One of the main causes of infant mortality............ 118
People who have died sometimes ignorant of that fact.... 121
Death did not exist till latter part of Lemuria....... 167, 278
Premature cremation causes departing spirit pain........ 98
The oftener we die, the better we shall live.......... 244, 363
Death of form gives spirit scope for advancement...... 249
Our liberty purchased at cost of death and pain........ 363
Degeneracy and death of races and nations............ 289
DECAY; an activity of the chemical forces in matter......... 31
Vital and dense bodies disintegrate simultaneously...... 102
CREMATION.
Premature incineration pains departing Spirit.......... 98


SILVER CoRD.
Silver Cord fastened in left ventricle of heart by seed-


atom. Rupture there stops heart.................. 98
Silver Cord not broken in any case where resuscitation is

EAP IS HE mmcnayet sacl stelelo Told cfel civics. sieiesass-s'els eleiese eta ers 102
AAEM PUTS, ANG Its CILCCh. 2c \s\elcisielele’eieliecelela«) ils («10 <l 2 102


PANORAMA OF LIFE.
Panorama viewed through negative pole of Reflecting


Ether just subsequent to death...........-...00. 91,101
Panorama is of varying length—what terminates it...... 102
Panorama basis of pleasure and pain beyond............ 108


How panorama may be eradicated by remission of sin... 111
Contrast between panorama of a past life viewed after


death and a coming life seen prior to birth......... 130
The blood in each cycle through heart engraves panorama

Cf! ISUIRNGH ok solsot Sobor Bio on ONO GCOreG COCO OL 398

PURGATORY.

How and why suicide suffers for rash act.............. 104
Why post-mortem existence is first purgative........... 104
iow the miser is purged of avarice... ......6.2seecee es 104
How drunkard is purged from his vice................. 105
How each act in life automatically produces its just re-

WARCRY AIPA OOO 6 \Soddedgdce Dado Io Coons oc anne 107
DiraplonvoLe lite min UNS ALOLY ctolaistoiolo ciel earelets| ocarelaiaiete etek 107


How we may escape Purgatory........ ibdoncapsonacsns 11]


566 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
Children go through Purgatory to First Heaven at once., 117
Conscience: the fruitage of Purgatory...............-.. 119


BORDERLAND; a pitiable state of existence between Heaven
and Purgatory, and who goes there................ 112


First HEAVEN.
A place of happiness, the measure determined by our own


previous benevolence expressed in Panorama........ 114
Therethies: of trues benevolence. 6 A.tv. isis alebis ler tele ah datets 115
SECOND HEAVEN.
his isuthemmealm vot, Comes averse istics ceetetetetel elhekol alerts 122
Assimilation of soulpower generated in past life....... . 123
Preparation for new earth-life.......... er oip clearer arene 124
Building new environment and new body........:...125, 128
THIRD HEAVEN.
Panorama of a new life as chosen by Ego............-. 129
IpBas.
Set ideas detrimental to investigation; great importance
Of sadaptabilityF.1c..4 a1 eerste olosehocbe eles seneree Sees 5, 223
ImMorvaLity; why it would be most undesirable at present.. 363
INDIVIDUALITY.
Of man compared sto AnIMAlss, << are). eisielslalehee enim 71
‘“T?? consciousness of children and the thymus gland.... 143
Birth. of Individuality (chapter) sr. «s)\<\cis'et-\s<isieer eee 266
Mars, iron, red blood and individuality.............. 268, 274
Christ preached cultivation of Individuality............. 352
TNFORMATION; source of the author’s information........... 8
BNNOGENGCE, | 16 iMGb 7 VALUE serosa: ctojelatelsio «(+\eicla) ofa vials aleve otetate renee 282
IMAGINATION.
Imagination is the spiritual expression of the female,
lunar sexforce. (Will is male and solar).......... 267
Imagination the formative force in creation.......... 324, 425
INstIncr.
Instinct an expression of wisdom of groupspirit........ 78
Why man’s unwisdom is superior to infallible «wnimal
ANUSTUT CL wheter. <i fevsteNele ovoyake tases circ (enstehouetelmacds acuelsNenevober ees ete 79
INTUITION.


What it is, and why most noticeable in women......... 7 02


INDEX 567


INITIATION AND ITS RESULTS (topical).


INITIATION. PAGE
imitiation described, and defined .../....0/.:,. + os eielnnis else ‘519
Enables man to build body consciously during antenatal

iets OMonaeebsy Pater s5aY s/o lstaatere le areroiptevs or sos elata te vereletoy ctcrelels 128, 138
Value of mathematics in process of attainment.......... 203
Lemurian kings initiated by Lords of Mercury......... 272-3
Initiation will enable man to leave body at will......... 274
Lemurian initiators taught art and science............. » 281
Human Initiates have had entire charge of our evolution

since the beginning of the Aryan Epoch............ 304
At end of Aryan Epoch highest Initiate will appear pub-

licly as leader of those who want him.............. 305
Jesus’ body attuned to Christvibrations by initiation.... 382
Initiation yunder the {Christsstar sy <<). dasielenters ecole oh eleliaeste 391
Howatosknow, an Initiates ist s:sie.cieteletere mate olefeleler » 68, 400
Initiation open to chosen few only, before Christ........ 404
Why it is now open to ‘‘ whosoever will’’............ 404, 482
The Seven Days of Creation and Initiation...........- 412
How Initiation will expand our consciousness.......... 417
Consciousness of the Jupiter Period.................6- 418
Consclousness, OLIV ENUS!.POT1O Cis: sole els suniayolsig) “ela aloe ys esl 419
Spirals within spirals of attainment............... =reee- 420
Schematic list of Periods and consciousness........... 421
Why probation must precede Initiation.............. 478,519
Amanabronot ther Wose) Cross. .icie ee oie olla +s 006s + ee 519.
MROsMecessity (OL, YAMIN... «1216.0: 3 ojessipiy) syolais/nke\< witveirinie 25, 41, 480
Mneworidge to the unseen) worlds......5.0..s. es ecsewcre 476

MYSTERY SCHOOLS; septenary division of.

The Rosicrucian method of preparation................ 439

EXERCISES.

Retrospection, a review of the day’s events............. Alp til
Concentration; its similarity to, and its difference from

See Viacethoro ooo DOOD OLE rc DTD ato OO OO oo Ut nan oe 483
@he best time.to concentrate. sei.ia eis selels sie «coisa ates oss 485
Concentration. (chapter) eratraeryarctel to veisteeei- ial atetehdstei niet 486
Mediate tlOMe (CHAPLET) lateteteisis: sialic =) «/ehelaysie aictenelats) diclelsites oletahiel 489
Observation gramee ater cmerns roles: delets) scfokerepetsvers ahaleyesloraieiatetel 492


Miserimanatlonin.ccrvhseretetves to «lle lal lalcasieiol os octet. olevereiarers 493


568 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
Contemplationia (chapter) vrauny- cistet eile) sieielne asi ace 494
Adoration (chapter) ic sy ster aio ste ttetsrein ofeleteicteio aerate tiene 495
CLAIRVOYANCE.
Clairvoyance is a faculty immanent in all.............. UY
Value of testimony to superphysical truths clairvoyantly
obtained ws Lehi ts Meee) OL eet, paar 20
The necessity and the results of training.......... 25, 41, 480
Animals sare clairvoy antiverrs aie. nistere ovevore oiei acl se oheleletorneters 77
Children\are, claivoyantleescir. siesta. eievelatnlels love ween 140, 281
A positive method of attainmentses 22% viele sc rs eiereeiere 203
‘*Second-Sight’’ produced by marriage in the clan or
LAMLILY Ma: dals ole ayeta hereteleterede cu otavatebalst iat ot covets: ohare eteeetene 354
How international marriages have destroyed this involun-
tary iclalrVvoyanceveles) tects ca tits ctatelayeld aie lotaletnie orients 355
Activity of pituitary body and pineal gland formerly pro-
duced involuntary clairvoyance...........+....ss0- 473
Re-awakening of their vibratory powers will produce pos-
itive, Clairvoyamnces/.1 Waeretseniee clei stotelete chores rotskehelaeaete 477
CLAIRVOYANTS.
Why, their observations: differ, s.%.is, . 111s ae 'c's)s'ele el etstoreiene 26
Difference in desirebody of trained and untrained clair-
MOV AMG Hs fc sissies ¥ apeietredtelstotelo ceorenteleiene atetie econ eens 67, 241


The Lemurians were all clairvoyant but could not see
PHYSICA Ye sarse ope mietellstererels lie ciele stake ols lotetevetehels ete vetenaes


INVOLUTION, EVOLUTION AND EPIGENESIS (topical).


INVOLUTION.
Involutionwillustrated/AMvacirel. se. wlcleeetayetetsieie ye seems
Involution is the period of unconscious development. .185,
Energy of Virgin Spirits turned inwards to build vehicles


of consciousness during Involution.............. 189,

Descent of svirit marks ascent of form. Both streams

coalesce in the focusing mind.............4. ee see

Tnvolution, evolution and epigenesis chapter.............
EVOLUTION.


Evolution commences at the coalition of spirit and body,
when self-consciousness is awakened............ 185,


80
201


201
266
336


202


INDEX 569


PAGE
Then ‘‘their eyes were opened,’’ the creative energy
turned outwards and conquest of world begun..81, 190, 202
Salvation and damnation, the great importance of


LAP LLP G Wares cata «zeta tetsu pestt sp cre tavs ayeh srs eyed 1 ToneePete tees 223
Evolution would have ceased if man had eaten of tree of

TIRE) set ad Penne DES CSD OC OCR Dees a eer ore oo Sore 363
The next great division of the ‘‘sheep’’ and ‘‘goats’’.. 229
Dyiriceasaa, factor, in, evolubionie. «.5.c0:-.ca0) exieis act siieyeics 168, 359
Eyolution is progression in three directions............. 151
Mherendrot human evolution. <0: <6 + 2. += wee semen 108


Our dense body is in fourth stage of evolution, vital body
in third, desirebody in second and the mind a mere


CISTI Boats O MIO OO PORE Or Ce uree Games o moss 76
Why races evolve to a certain point, then degenerate and
Pina iver (GEG cioterettionc wicks ‘tars s e1a-c'e'e lotta aero GWEN Mone or 289, 341
How embryology confirms occult teaching............... 344
Brain evolved at cost of half our creative force, free-will
PUERCOSL G01) DAME ANG GOAN sae scsi ere scus shel elms o50.dei sieutlets 363
Inyolution, Evolution and Epigenesis (chapter)........ 336
EPIGENESIS.
Man’s own original creative activity............ 128, 135, 185
Chapter on Involution, Evolution and Epigenesis. . .80, 81, 336
See definitions under diagram................sesseeees 367
KNOWLEDGE.
Knowledge a necessary prerequisite to judgment......... 7
Knowledge of clairvoyant depends upon training. ..25, 41, 480
Why knowledge of Cosmogony is very important......... Ow
How to obtain first-hand knowledge...... 21, 97, 111, 430, 528
KINGDOMS OF LIFE.
Comparing man to mineral, plant and animal........... 56
Various constitution of vital body in plant, animal aud
THN oy Saiganmsangy Hone Chri ROT ears 8 OO Pe DEE 58


Divers constitution of desirebody in animal and man...65, 235
The cross symbolical of the life currents pulsating in the
LOT AINSROM A wre. eh. Ayes aN oe Hue eae ane eres Ne 85
LAMENTATIONS; their effect upon the dying and dead..... 101, 118
Law oF CAUSATION.
Original Semites the first to be made morally responsible
MING CrMA WMO taCAUSALION wesyarersuct, chojeseinieve Ss: stc anette tase 301


570 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Law of causation is the force impelling to rebirth......
It brings each to birth at psychological moment when


stellar influences are most propitious.............. 161
How and why the panoramas of life are produced...... 130
Causation automatically produces the appropriate suffer-

ing needed to purge each from his vice............ 106
Mature destiny and inexorable fate................ 136, 161
Law of Causation not vitiated, but complemented, by

doctrines of Forgiveness of Sin and Atone-

menbeds sages HOM erro: eau § 91, 222, 373, 402
The binding effect of action and method of liberation... 202
Causation superseded by epigenesis............-.-.00% 135
Causation, and not heredity, accounts for our character-

DSLICS MAM TCLOSVNCTACIOS feta vc ee ole nicieltn- etter 157

Law or REBIRTH. ohh
Rebirth not to be confused with doctrine of transmigration 157
Rebirthy axChristian™ doctrines... cess se se ls eee 164
Why this teaching has been temporarily suppressed...... 167
Mhorpurposesoe Reve beret eile crete elele sere) cetctele enateteretatere 130
he me cessity/OLmGbir biiersterevsreleccvelevarei olele ee eierere entre 132, 137
RMebirthe and freewilly. cece «cvs csciclcle + We oles oleic clsiereretens 129
Panorama of future life....... OIRO RIOD C100 130
The method of re-embodiment.............--ss+eeccss 133
Rebirth in consonance with law of evolution............ 151
Rebirth in consonance with law of periodicity........... 152
Rebirth in consonance with ethical requirements......... 153
All may know at first hand this truth.................. 147
Interval between births measured by the sun........... 159
Intelligent administration and exceptions.............. 161
Barth and other worlds also subject to this law...... 190, 412

MAN’S INVISIBLE VEHICLES (topical).

VITAL Bopy.
Germinated as a thoughtform in Sun period given to man

in the making by Lords of Wisdom................ 210
Reconstructed in Moon Period by Lords of Individuality

and Lords of Wisdom. .s.escvcsccvccvecessvenseee alo


INDEX 571


PAGE
Reconstructed in Earth Period by Angels and Lords of
LPORED. no goiSOBO CP GOIOIOS OOD ANS CO OaaOr Aocmn oocmac an 240
They later, in Hyperborean behothy clothe man in the
Sete with an improved vital body.............. 263
Vital body is in its third stage of evolution........... 75, 76


It is rooted in the spleen. Through that organ the vital
body specializes solar energy.........eeeeeseeses +00, 68
The vital body is built of ‘‘points’’ which penetrate the


dense atoms and raise their vibrations.............. 61
The Recording Angels direct its construction at present so

that man may reap what he sowS..........-..-+2++% 135
A separate vital body is necessary to growth and assimila-

AS ONAMMNeN eee seTeNe. Gvovers cc''e ioe cla. c le scls «clei dele: ooteteters teratotmere 57, 58
It serves to give shape to the dense body during antenatal

WE®. oc co diodon docodumonS FdopoadoIn.s aabanudddoode 60, 137
Vital body is born at 7th year; causing growth.......... 141
Under normal conditions it remains imbedded in dense

WOdvaLEoM) DI thy LONCCATIN. eteteicteravers) 21s cvolelelcle ete letsl > wee OL
The chemical, life, light and reflecting ethers in vital body

ALGmIpPCHed SUCCESSIVE] Viole roieieielste oleic) selaiale stele «eh oleleie 143
The vital body is of opposite sex or polarity to the dense

PV OUY AE ta ree nasal aie ceva eimai Shales aatia era Sve wieta tla. Sate 61
Lemurian girls developed memory first on account of

Having a Positive vital HOdy..0 2. cis. clls aes clelelolels 280


The blood and glands are its particular expression... .397, 455
The positive vital body of woman gives intuition, also
causing periodical flow and tears................-. 66
The blood absorbs from inspired air panorama of life
engraves it on seedatom and vital body...... 91, 397, 398
At death vital body is withdrawn and panorama of past
MRP ERE RULACTC The: «S . Bee ele) Met inte Nolo Oo iene Gretel, erelal ove 97, 102
When seedatom is withdrawn vital body gravitates back
to. dense body and decays simultaneously with


UAE eron ere terse erates ie yaD Neate eller choleraiaratetseleietel slate tete 102, 103
Our waking consciousness results from war between de-

Binebody AnddaviruclembOdyiem teres) sate cietels ioteleleveieteWie safe 4535
Collapse of the vital body is cause of sleep.............. 93


In health surplus of vitality is radiated as N-rays; they
expel deleterious microbes from system......... noo (ae)


572


ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION
PaGH
These radiations are weak in sickness, hence disease germs
may easily enter and eause complications.......... 63
Why pain is felt in a limb subsequent to amputation.... 64


The more lax the connection between the dense and vital
bodies, the more sensitive we become to superphysical


WADA CONS fo se sateyereveyoolepsvel evr aichetekoue aleieus is <ieuskch eae 241
The desirebody is improved by law; the vital body by
altruism, developed in higher life................. 404
Initiation before Christ was therefore reserved to a
Chosen LOW,pcoteloieinicia iedels telaeiaels pisieles =i aieuiettee 404, 405
Since vital body was partially freed at Golgotha, initiation
isvopen, to Mwhosoeverswill?). jo 32-154 ese oem rene 482


Initiation separates the four ethers of vital body so that
two may be extracted at will and used in “soul-
flichts’s through amner worlds... 2... ..s- <'-/leneee 482
The effect of prayer upon the vital body............ 434, 463
The specific method of separating the ethers. .91, 111, 483, 528
The vital body will be our densest vehicle in the Jupiter
period; it will contain essence of dense body.240, 242, 422
Its essence: the intellectual soul, will be absorbed by the


life spirit in the Venus period: . -).'. .< ie. a eciye yee 426
The vital bodies of plant and animal are differently con-
stituted from the human vehicle...............-- 58, 59
Among animals it is not concentric with the dense body
Except EN) sprodigiessspeicye aisle’! =n ose oie else eee A
DESIREBODY.


Given in the Moon Period by Lords of Individuality.... 215

It is now in second stage of its evolution.............. 76

In latter part of Lemurian and early part of Atlantis
some desirebodies divided into higher and lower parts


thus they became fit to harbor a human Ego..... 235, 395
These dense bodies assumed an upright walk which

emancipated them from rule of groupspirit....... 86, 236
Desirebody of man has now incipient sense centers...... 67
The Lords of Mind linked mind to higher part of desire-

body and implanted separate selfhood............. 243


The undivided desirebodies crystallized their dense ve-
hicles which have degenerated to anthropoids. .. .236, 243


INDEX 523


PAGE

The Archangels work in those, also in the lower part of
the human désirebody, giving passion........... 236, 243

Desirebodies of animals are not concentric with dense
body and otherwise differently constituted........ 65, 77

Only those bodies which have red blood and a liver can
havera separate desirebOdy. v1... ccs se ese esae oes 69

In coldblooded animals groupspirit forces currents of de-
SInewnwaras through) NVI... efejeiee cps erts)s/s oieiainiee in « 69

The separate spirit which dwells in warm red blood forces
its desire currents outwards through liver.......... 69
Thus the liver is the root of the desirebody............. 68

The desirebody has its particular field of operation in
the voluntary, nerves ‘and muscles............s08<. 455

Its operations in the spleen produce white bloodcor-
MS CLO Be techs crate Petspsiel cictate tayisi3-- atieroncPotote lelorate im oleveravetn custan 455

Material for new desirebody is gathered by Ego prior to
Gch Iona Ge sddndé dere posnadodocds dscns oopdondce 154

It is born at 14 when the life ether of the vital body is
ripe and the child becomes adolescent.......... 142, 143

The constant war between desirebody and vital body pro-
duces our waking consCiousness............+eese0e 455
Desirebody is temporarily withdrawn during sleep....... 93
It is permanently extracted at death................... 97

During life it is ovoid, but takes shape of dense body at
death, thus the man appears as before.............. 66


Desirebody of suicide feels hollowed out while archetype
of his dense body persists; he suffers pain like in-
ORS OMMLUTLL SOL renal ckerrex ate) oie otto ve tone cre chata-efe' so: ois siislole ele 104
Panorama of life etched on desirebody forms basis of
post mortem existence. Importance of deep etching


andenow, tO. assure: that end sie 6 wiles eacies 6 cn cisia 109
Process of purgation and extraction of conscience....105, 108
Dissolution of desirebody when seed atom is taken...... 120
Desirebodies of children who die do not dissolve......... zi


The desirebody will be perfected in the Venus Period
and compounded with essence of dense and vital
OCLOSe eecterno ener crater ice cis ners otaps corel shayis clsisters ood wreleistsrs 423

Its essence, the Emotional Soul, will be absorbed by the
hvwan epirit in Vulean Period......... AEC OD OCURDO 425


574 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
Prayer for the spiritualization of the desirebody........ 464
MIND.
The necessity and purpose of mind.............. 57, 75, 298
it is a focusing point like lens in stereopticon, valuable
when not subject to mental St. Vitus dance....... 8, 393
Given by Lords of Mind in early Atlantis.............. 222
Mind designed to give purpose to action, but became en-
meshed in desirebody originating cunning........... 298
Then Race religions were given to cow desire and free
MAIN <Thod HOMO oO SODCERO OOS OOO MeOOnmagt tone: 395
Original Semites, the progenitors of Aryan Races first to
evolve! thought amd ereasODieys a... crash eieieele seinen 299


The Jews, a crossbreed of Original Semites, (the sons of
God) and other Atlantean races, (the daughters of


MEM) WStill, TELA CUUMENS sey .42) a oie cey tel eerels wane telei cunt 310
How mindstuff for new mind is gathered prior to each

WOU bhi 5 tareis, sis cctera sous doneuetetels de oso lovee etota te joka helen aero 133
It assumes shape! of a larges bell... .\.iies joi oii hastened 134
Mind is born at 21 when man reaches ‘‘majority’’....... 142
The veil of Isis, the sheath of mind, which hides the Ego

EN OMMEIMCTUS LOM veketaleieictetemetetsiels els) ckelalelelsleiei aisha nes 293
What impels! thowe ht svesreieterc ol sicisierer-i0 sseselkelh tel ets ete 285
Conscious, subconscious and superconscious mind.. .90, 92, 397
The mind is temporarily withdrawn during sleep......... 93
It is permanently extracted from dense body at death.... 97
Why the mind of children which die, persist in their

Text (life: <5 saeco bogie each ahs) eiloioie ts. aesl’s aleteusteleask tet Reeene 7
The mind dissolved when Ego ascends to third Heaven... 129
The present war between heart and mind............-.. aly
The effects of open mind compared with scepticism..... if
Valuable training, for stheemindi cy... ssis)a11+\0) siexerelel serene 202
Prayer) for spiritualizings thes mind ier ajaije\epeikes ee denotes 464


The mind is now in its mineral stage, dead, hence we

work with dead chemical mineral substances. .298, 426, 428
In the Jupiter Period the mind will become alive. Then

we shall work with living plants........... 298, 427, 428
In Venus Period the mind will acquire feeling. Then

we shall work with living, feeling animals......... 428


INDEX 575


PAGE
In Vulcan Period the mind will become creative and cap-
able of propagating itself. Then we shall give our


creatures a mind and make them human.......... 428
How animals think though lacking mind............... 70
NNice mn sUINCumCATTY IS Ue icrats ajateye/eiel olese jain wisvene! J sfereieroy stots 78


Heo. (See Human Spirit.)
The Ego is a Virgin Spirit involved in a threefold veil
of matter which obliterates its original divine con-
sciousness and engenders the illusion of a separate


SEE 6 Gio Ho TOOe DOS ACN NC OMECE OA atx Odo ol 000m 216
During Involution it brooded unconsciously over the
evoiving form, separate and apart therefrom........ 235


In later Lemuria desirebody divided and dense body as-
sumed upright walk. Then Ego commenced to


CREP: abo nonhe te OCR e de WOOO bon OSr Ob bre Ute 236, 394
It did not become fully indwelling until the last third of

ANTES. ipnieicc POCO DMO L OUPCCO Oo OGIO A ONEE bo Ringo 294
Now the Ego is entirely in physical world while it lives

Mimo tit i glist Cara trebs,<toxeislies Pov aretoleocte) aetalsiclareielsieio\ Ce Hy BD
PREM SC VODE NITIMAN! sPLINCIPIES 7. <:0j:0)0 osel ele etsisherelexclerstellots oreus 6 88


Mars polarized the iron until Atlantis so that warm blood
could not be generated. Thus the Ego was pre-


vented from entering the form till it was ripe....... 268
The blood is the vantage ground of the Ego............ 350
Eeaieivemush be of right, temperature. .o0)./21. <1) <yeys winters 2 144


The Ego is born from time to time to gather experience.. 129
In heaven it assimilates experiences of previous lives. .135, 138


Tt also chooses its coming environment.............. 129, 136

While in heaven it builds that environment and arche-
types of the bodies it uses on earth................ 128

It gathers the materials for its new vehicles during its
CERORTE Woy HENTAI. 5 cc ono nb ode Oo aodece COO eo OD be 133


Recording Angels place matrix of its coming body in
womb of mother and seedatom in semen of father... 135
Ego enters womb 18-21 days after conception........... 138
Ego cannot generate blood from unripe childbody, hence
thymus gland gives a supply of parental blood till the
‘<T?? consciousness comes at puberty............... 143
How the Race Spirit held Ego in bondage............. 350


516 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
Christ came to emancipate us from Race Spirit...... 313, 352
How international marriages are furthering that object
by generating individualized blood................ 353
Human Spirit. (See Ego.)
Originally awakened by the Seraphim.................. 215
Cherubim and Lords of Wisdom linked human spirit to
THES PM SPivib fo rece lererver eles ce ccetcr ole ols sel chorea) neem 215
Lords of Flame and Lords of Individuality linked the
human spirit’ to the divine’ spirit: <2). qs1-1-+ stele 216
The Lords of Form are now in charge of the human
SPITE” trsre scree « coraterahoterete oats ele eicle’ ehelt a cla ese hy ieee 220


The divine spirit is the first veil of the Virgin Spirit, the
life spirit is the second and the human spirit is the
third, outermost sheath which imprisons the Virgin


Spirit and makes it a separate Ego....... Peesciratiiic:o:c 216
Lire Spirit.
Awakened by Cherubim in Sun Period.................. 211
Linked to divine spirit by Lords of Flame.............. 212
Linked to human spirit by Lords of Individuality....... 215
Lords of Individuality now in charge of life spirit....... 220
DIVINE Spirit.
Awakened ‘by Lords) of lame. 2)... ss «+s «1 «s cietetieremeine 207
Linked to life spirit by Lords of Flame........... Pena wile
Linked to human spirit by Lords of Individuality....... 216
Lords of Wisdom now in charge of divine spirit......... 220
MARRIAGE.
Marriage and generation both a duty and a privilege... 468
But not a license to unbridled indulgence............... 471.
Formerly Race Spirits commanded marriage in the family
toistrengthen’ they“tie of blood 77m se. ser neeeeeeee 353


Later international marriages were insisted upon to
emancipate the individual from race, kin and
COURLTY® Jorvre< zlclarsiete dove eietetts afalerstecois ciete cit. Reet 355

Under the former regime the common blood produced in
each member of family pictures of their common an-
eestors (second sight), thus intensifying feeling of
Kins Hip Mreeseatay otepeted «te letayavsbetetstoletets evetetere Sdomoopnagiooen 354

The Race Spirit is a ‘‘jealous God’’. He cuts off all
who marry outside of race..........2-.0...008 - 310, 338


INDEX 577


PAGE
International marriages have mixed the blood, destroyed
the pictures of ancestors and second sight (which is


TUVOUMTLa Ty, CLAlTVOV ARCO) cls s.. erefefeisicieasiatariy. tolee ss 358
Oni carmo ta hONE VINO ONS GEIS acre tarecs+ 4; yorsichovefeho le eras (ey eusus-eieeyons 219
CELIBACY; why practiced by high Imitiates................. 467
MATERIALISM.
Statement of the doctrine of materialism.............. 148
The nebular theory predicates a creator and sustainer of
PAGMU MULVETSS: « wievsvel's sysiois: sieeve rajare siete eke et atare ororstetete Retoyen 323
The logical necessity of a Creative Intelligence......... 129
Materialism at war with established facts.............. 149
Materialism a cause of various diseases...............- 113
Cause of earthquakes, illustrated by eruptions of
\WIGSITAATIST "Be Ce oO ORR Coney COO OU Oey Ae 510
Effect of materialism on life after death............... 112
MEDIUMS.
NMiiveauaroliable, even when Honest... ..csya0 o.ci0/s)e, <6 «fare s'nsyere 41


The connection between the dense and vital bodies of me-
diums is more lax than among ordinary people, and
their weak wills render them a prey to ‘‘controls’’... 241

Materialization of spirits is accomplished by these con-
trols by extracting medium’s vital body through the


SIGE “SGA BE SS Oe cen oe Cena Oe eae CIO ema eee 62
MATHEMATICS.
Mathematical ability and semicircular canals of ear..... 126
Memory.
Memory was first developed by the girls in Lemuria...... 280


In olden days it was greater than now. The third At-
Jantean Race, the Toltecs, achieved the highest ef-


NGO LOR dds o etaahodeucone sooo ho oedrn Od aoace 296
When men married in the family the common blood ear-
ried to them a memory of the lives of ancestors..... 353


Memory is threefold. Conscious, subconscious and super-
conscious. The conscious memory is unreliable, but
the subconscious memory stores all events. .90, 92, 149, 397


Why most people do not remember past lives.......... algal
Why some people remember more than others........... 172
At littloncirl SumemorynOt a Ast) ILC wor ciclels meiictelieisiele 172


19


578 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
MEMORY OF NATURE.
There is a picture in the reflecting ether, in the Region
of Archetypal Forces and the World of Life Spirit.. 38
MENSTRUATION.
Menstruation and tears caused by positive vital body of


ROLLA y aishatetevepsuetoverstonetenet nets couctalencns/c fats rotatctie ey eta tee ates 60
MICROBES.
How microbes are expelled from system by N-rays.....- - 63
MINERAL.
Entered evolution here in Harth Poriod............... « 232
Miueral has a consciousness similar to that of the humas
body when! intdeepest trance iss... oil state eyes 85
All forms have been built from chemical mineral sub-
Stance of thesearbhlic ces chs: ienre sacete te oxtets were heen 30, 31
All forms finally degenerate back to mineral....... cose. 343
Comparison of mineral amd mani. . .\.. 2s ci. e le oe nee 56
Why it is incapable of growth, motion and thoughi...... 58
Why it is unfeeling, though it responds to impacts....... 31
The mineral groupspirit is located in the Region of ab-
Strach THOUGH bas steel vietele re eiajes,crake-a/<)eva elemie fetes aeaeraes 85
sfISSION ARIES.
Needed at home more than abroad........... Spon uc 163
Why foreign missions are a mistaken effort............ 308
Music.
Musie of the spheres a fact in nature...............0+ 119
The Great Silence; the prelude to the celes-sal harmony
of Appollo’sseven-stringed Lyre................0-- 122
The power of rythmic vibration; supercilious incredulity
concerning the fall of Jericho’s walls gratuitous..... 122
Heaven the realm of tone and sound flows through Arche-
types: and” builds formiciys s,s <crcvs oteve aera cls creates 123, 124
The keynote tof the. WOdy? certs << cfsjele > «1s «1 eras setters 369
The semicircular canals of the ear and musi¢........... 126


NEBULAR THEORY.
Predicates and requires a creator and sustainer of the
MUMLVCTS" sacle ote Disa s aare's Ole cote tieee Meine aneare shayeeeers 323
N-rays. the invisible radiations of the vital body, expel mi-
CLODOS? LOM SY ALOU stars suelelsialehe «lev efeievs: eve iacrete efore WieieWe elev t are 63


INDEX 5Y9


PAGE
NEw JERUSALEM; an imitation is found in first heaven built
DARE ObUS OD PH SUDGECt... seis «+s cede. aes vic ao etet One 116
OSMOSIS.
A selective filtration of fluids through tissue of body.... 35
Man’s first method of obtaining nourishment........... 263
PAIN.
A blessing in disguise (illustration).................+.. 131
Torture used in Lemuria to waken consciousness......... 279
' How pain nas enlarged our consciousness.............. 362
PATRIOTISM.
Danger of patriotism when carried to extremes...... 307, 312
Patriotism breaking down before international mar-
MACOS We teh Acre taadte ae eines stelaattta MOE aMeeteN OOO


PHILOSOPHERS’ STONE.
As manufactured by nature, often handled by people... 438
PILGRIMAGE THROUGH MATTER.


Its beginning, its end and why undertaken.............. 87

Wiatewillbes the fruitapow rng tk a twos. stele ates © 429
PRAVER.

A OMIORCMS PIA OL. tele cts clelce oles atoteclerolatiers oieisralsl « 435, 462


Unselfish prayers for spiritual achievement spiritualize
vital body. Why we should pray ‘‘without ceas-
MEL Z Wate tarats ch ole ctehaleieel oul et were eaters arene ctaratarcts secretes 434, 463
PLANTS.
The present plants started their evolution as minerals of
the Moon Period, they become human in the Venus


EMOLUOGU I, ayeFater es « Heenan hehe. =, Soke Pere ntns Sees SOLS eMac eee ae eee 226
Their consciousness is like ours in deep sleep...........- 85
The Angels have particular charge over the plants....... 222
The groupspirits of plants are in the Region of Concrete

PROLLY owe era, Pare aN N ets cere Cea a Me CMMs oat as 74, 85
Comparison of a plant and man: the inverted plant... .57, 86
Why incapable of thought and motion...............-..58, 69


How the sap is caused to circulate and deposit color.... 37
The Earth Spirit feels pain when plants are pulled out
DV EL OOUS Meant. deaattians seals tie es ate te nie aera eee ae e 65
Seedatom of plants withheld by groupspirit pending
favorable conditions for growth......... Pret etetnslante 461


580 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PRECESSION OF THE EQUINOX. PAGE
Governs the frequency of rebirth............c.0seswee 159
PorMs.
Sir Launfal’s Vision (the ethics of giving).........-. ols
Raphael’s Song (from Faust; in re music of spheres)... 119
The Chambered Nautilus (progression of the soul)....... 159
Hatewwan des Breewlll:vnvacretyscsctela epee rekerctel 0) ssa ersiere herrea 162
The oftener we die, the better we live.............2.00- 24¢
The; Christi within. c4ceev-eterrad croswaareo ints eoeol etaraieene 33%
Wihoiisthe; Grailey. iste se mtottoneh = oie: oteyelers wicist~ siete tetstere eters 388
REASON.
First developed by the Original Semites; the progenitors
of ;the ;Aryam yp Ra cesis eel. re Sarsccps:i<; zs) srehateveliel « te sitereceUel aenaee 298
Cunning, the Atlantean characteristic of the Jew........ 309
Reason to be superseded by Love in New Galilee........ 311
Appealpto: students? measoniy. ersmi-rers)ateye) © ee eis tottel eee 9
Rosicrucian teachings endeavor to satisfy reason......... 439


RECORDING ANGELS.
Mold the vital body; impress panorama of coming life
thereon and place it in womb of mother............
They bring each being to birth at the auspicious moment
when the stellar influences will give it conditions re-
quisite to its next step in unfoldment..............
They also force the expiation of mature destiny..... 136,
RELIGION.
The evolution of Religion (chapter)...............ee00-
Why different Religicns are necessary to different people.
The four steps in Religion through fear, avarice, love
ANG, CUB; eters lay ejeverste cues wretore cyske ise ieiane tee teRe arene eens
Mistake of seeking a foreign religion.............s.e«.
Why the Bible, to be adequate to the needs of the West-
ern World, must contain both the Jewish religion of
the old Testament and the Christian religion of the
NEWPOONNOA OUI ATC 0 ObCOO GD ON GUD OoOaDAUa. 308, 314,
Paul asserts there is an allegorical meaning to the Bible
(yet it is only to be interpreted by who can see—II
Pet: 1.20). Both Paul and Christ gave an esoteric
teaching tows thendew el. .teft sic osatereteis stale: cyuteeaeteake
Why earlier Religions taught the doctrine of Rebirth and
Christianity does not specially feature it............


318


INDEX 581


PAGE


The purpose of Jehovistic Race religions is to curb the
desirenature that the intellect may gain scope. 334, 395,
The purpose of the Christian Religion is to spiritualize


the vital body by love and prayer......... 433, 435,
The Religion of the Father will spiritualize the dense body
IMU CS SOTO MUMMY Merete earcte obs ei oiet selelier tetaiete et tefoy as 435,
ROSICRUCIANS.
One of the seven schools of the lesser Mysteries.........
Christian Rosenkreuz and the Philosopher’s Stone.......
Initiation, the Order of the Rose Cross and the Rosicrucian
PELOLONVSHIUD! ects ove role cre cole! levers ovelenet olelete ne steteteetettetet sts
SALVATION.
Mrestheologicalsplanrot Salvation. 2). cms sells eee ©
The evolutionary plan of salvation........ 224, 229, 307,
Salvation by Atonement and Forgiveness of Sin........
eee poten ot ae tea. 4 91, 111, 373,
SLEEP.
Caused aby collapse of vital body..«....4...s20.acencne-
WV AIVMESLOCD MINUET CSLOYATIVE re <jereieieamn eletnre stp cane alec: otever stele


Chemical Ether, the avenue of restorative forces.......
Similarity between sleep and death....................
Similarity between sleep and concentration.............
Preliminary work of aspirant in desire world during
VSYO  dovdlscopoodco.dus6 DO COGA000 GO CUOOOROGNGAOGe

SENSE PERCEPTIONS.
Organs of sense, particularly the ear, started in the


SAP orIa CTIOM laters is eters eeetee er tele: clGielel es ete’ osha eee
Sense perception depends upon the forces in the Light
TSHR 8 CS oats onoie acne ttt ec a cca ceil eer pte iA Peco ks
Lemurians could hear anit feel at birth, but their sight
ORIN JONETe cob bo mecetiodnciodobngc Sootoeoadahonocted


SOLAR SYSTEM.


The logical necessity of a Creative Intelligence....... 122,
The nebular theory requires a Creator and Sustainer of
HHOeSOLATE SY StEMIeRRas gente eee ledteres ieee phrases


The Bible asserts that our system was formed from the
‘‘everlasting essence’’: primordial matter......... .


433


463


150
312


402


129


323


582 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
God is the Architect of our solar system..............-- 179
The Seven Spirits before the Throne, individually con-
sidered, are the Regents of the seven planets....... 180
Collectively, they, areyGode ss. stout s wick. ay arcbsnepeoleschetls 183, 253
THE Sun.
The real sun is as invisible as the real man............. 258
How it is scientifically possible to have light before the
creation.of, the sunigandmoonhy.stoe-cteiats sein tke eeree 398
The sun is the visible symbol of God................0+- 181
Spiritual and physical rays of the sun................-. 390
Will is a solar force expressed in the male sex. Imagina-
tion is, a female, lunar force... 2.6. «= « ener 267


The solar force works in vital body, makes for life, the
lunar rays crystallize the dense body and cause
CEath re. has: aisiolwincs uslegee chores opie sh joteusrstate ter) pete tama 265
Prior to end of Hyperborean Epoch sun, moon and
earth were yet one and humanity were malefemale.. 268
PLANETS AND Moons.


Spiritual reason for the formation of planets.......... 218
The planets are the bodies of the Planetary Spirits which
direct their movements from the center........ 255, 256
Birth of Uranus, Saturn and Jupiter................... 258
Mars and its canals, the Earth, Venus and Mercury......
siPovovelal-olga sfonetorsiche: ofa ole teyalererettetecetevensie ofeneneeeterns 259, 271, 272
The influence of Mars prevented the Ego from entering
the body before that was. ripe... ....22c0.esneeee 268
The influence of Mercury will help man free himself so
that he may leave body and re-enter it at will...... 273
The Lords of Venus as leaders of humanity............ 272
Why, some planets, have: Moons... so. s\s1100 «ln ipepsyenes 25y
Our moon, the abode of failures who erystallized........ 264


Crystallization of the matter which is eventually thrown
off as a planet commences at pole of the sun where


WAOHON IS: SlOWESre re apn wicle:s a o¥s sieve tialevare.s aicheeele tee yaaete 263
The Earth was thus expelled from the sun in the end
of) thes Hyperborean’ Hpochisaer arnt). soe eee 263


Then a part of the Earth crystallized too early and was
expelled in the beginning of the Lemurian Hpoch;
that. is the Moontide oasis. 20:8 aneogta. orors bret waWeR ly 2 oe 264


INDEX 583
PAGE

Neptune does not really belong to our solar system....... 260

(Por proof of this assertion, see Simplified Scientific
Astrology, page 5.)

ERO MOC UOUTDLOMy OL. DIATCTS 4 « axenic) a ssuchoye opera's eouels jobeys axle 256

Each planet has three worlds: the Physical World, the
Desire World and the World of Thought.......... 53

Mags.

Our evolution on that part of the sun which now consti-
tutes the earth commenced after Mars had been ex-
pelled and become a separate planet............... 263

The influence of Mars on the indwelling spirit...... 268, 274

Som NTearilaT: CANAIS 0,5 cs: siel 9, « «161015 ciatele «> 0)s: sp eeeeneesr eos 259

VENUS.

A number of Beings from Venus and Mercury were sent
to help nascent humanity in Lemuria. They were
looked up to as messengers of the gods......... 271, 272

After gestatory period of Aryan Race they gave freewill
Om Ne, OTISINAl, SCMIGES 2 5. leiaiccha.c:« elasshenete! =| ote) semi olal E50 301

They then withdrew and left human Initiates to guide
PREY OUN SEL WTOUNELSs octet laterclatelcteleneteletalaliotctel ste’ hci 304

Murcury.

Lords of Mercury were the original Hierophants of the
Mysteries. They initiated the most precocious among
mankind and made them kings (by grace of God)... 272

They first showed man how he may extricate himself at
MMUNMRE On) LENSE SDO Yoav cle elersteis eyarsysininessyehe's susioisiiae 274

Why quicksilver is fluidic and evaporates.............. 238

The influence of Mercury will increase................. 275

FEArtTHu.

During the Polarian Epoch that which is now the earth
and the moon was yet a part of the sun. Division
came in the end of the Hyperborean Epoch......... 263

The present Moon-hbeings crystallized part of the earth
and were expelled in beginning of Lemuria......... 264

Effect of the solar and lunar forces upon earth........ 265

Previous to advent of Jehovah, Earth and man were
under a groupspirit which worked from without..... 351

For ages prior to our era Christ worked upon earth and
IAD FLOM AVUWUPOU ao a,b 50045; is, olsus ten sie,ate.*feneissasatieied hs 404


584 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGS


When liberated from Jesus’ body at Golgotha the Christ
entered the Earth and has since been the indwelling
Earthspirit, the Regent of our planet..............

The planetary Christ immured in the earth is a ray from
the Cosmic Christ in the sun, refracted into each
planet when ready for Brotherhood.............+++

The sacrifice on Golgotha was but the commencement of
a protracted period of suffering on part of the Christ,
who is groaning and trayailing waiting for the day of


LibSrAtLOW Pe er tereeienctersie crete ee tie eycl or ohe serene 408,
Earth Spirit feels when stone is broken or flower
DIUCK CUM RA ecto erste erehe sine eneretencrs terre recone 65,
Inner constitution of the Earth and voleanie eruptions...
Stages of human development and various foods.......
The so-called ‘‘dead’’ transform the earth, its flora and
a UOTE len iS Ok AI GIS lp: AMICI DOIG HoT o 30 6
The* keynote’ of the™earth' ry... « da.s.«, 6 4.5 Se so other
The Bible agrees with occult teaching that man has
een On earehy DETOLCcrererereye sterols stele eteisic stoke etete ete
Sounp.
The Word made flesh, the Creative Fiat, a rythmic sound
which buultsall’ Ghimes' ister. cicero 2 schol ~ a) ce vere os cer enenanere
MHeMMUsic” OL tHE SPHEres acta e s atera ert assole hone ie ee teen
The Great Silence, a gate to the realm of sound, the
FUCaVENWOLLG srs seers she sole ere.cre sia crelt ser siorere ole te pene
Sound, the builder of climate, flora and fauna...........
The ram’s horn disrupting the walls of Jericho a scientifie
POSSIDUIL YOM ec eterate etre sie e tote era cre ete ce rer te net 122,
Sound, rhythm; inecrporates the soul into the spirit and
AMAl SAMALES' NSM severers as ole oie)e sreilsrel chet ere| als) srerelehetanete
SOUL.
The World-soul said by Plato to be crucified............
Soul is the spiritualized product of the body............
‘eT he soul ofall" fleshe1s"imthe) blood?” a... ose ees
Definite method of accomplishing soulgrowth...........
Sound and the amalgamation of soul with spirit........
Prior to entrance of indwelling Ego higher part of de-
sirebody was master, a sort of animal soul...... 394,


Theological doctrine of creation of soul..............--


407


408


95
124


235
150


INDEX


Soul of man and animal not weighed by doctors........
SPACE is spirit not yet crystallized to form.............


SPIRIT.

Of man may be seen before birth and after death........
itmiswclothed! intvarious’ bodies. a. .!\t seek sic «oe se letel-
Mars prevented the human spirit, the Ego from immur-

ing itself in body before it was ripe.........:.....
Effect of wine, the counterfeit spirit produced by decay,

Uponlvhe igo, the Spiniteot Likes. cater ote) atereteteerates
Space is spirit not yet crystallized into form..........
The positive pole of spirit manifests as life galvanizing

thesmesabives LOrm™ IntOe ACtION. stele lene cel eeettametetete


Marrer.

Is negative spirit substance; crystallized space or

TD RSS Pe pee sean Dameron ss Hees 120, 187,
Relation of force and matter illustrated................
The Seven Worlds are states of matter................
All physical matter is homogeneous in the ultimate......
Marhorsisndeyoid of true, feelings... ar. losers eyeis)-foieus-cisxote +) s/+1
Ether is physical matter; the field of operation of force

which acts upon the gases, liquids and solids........
Desirestuff is the matter of the Desireworld, which causes

Heeling and) COMPelS MOLION « <spaife0j5,01<jsk01 4) eceina sieysis1els
Mindstuff is the matter of the Region of Concrete thought

which we use to embody and concrete our ideas......
The use of desirestuff in our thought-activity...........
The reason for the spirits pilgrimage through matter... .
How its original divine All consciousness is obscured by


PHEMENTCOMVELIS SOL MALLE my psisiieysisiek sleeraks| disnaass sy <i -¥=
Spirit and matter merge in Chaos; only the seedatoms
GieguDe «VV OLld-olobes, WeTSist:., 2) -fayeres Step ouerepanshelaia taht
The Bible does not say the earth was created from
‘‘nothing’’. It names a basic substance...........
How the homogeneous primordial matter is formed into
Phe -SeveralaWrOrld Sievers of,5 x0 sinieysioierelareiplesesesole awlee eiehs


StorIES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.
A sure method of attaining wisdom................+0-


248


247
121
29
31
31


30


39


586


ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION
PAGE
Clairvoyant sees worlds as invisible to most people as the
light and color we see is to a blind man............ 24
The existence of Invisible Worlds, interpenetration of
Physical World (frostflower, freezing water)....... 27
Relative reality and permanency of visible and invisible
worlds shown by architects house...............6% 28
The purpose of visible world as school of right thought il-
lustrated, by, Inventorsimachine. « ..)i< 0.‘ «br. -pyayeane 33
Necessity for occult training, babe and blind who has ac-
quired sight, must; learn to see here... . pie piers 12 «ieresetote 41
Always look for the good. Christ and dead dog........ 44
Three men and dog show operation of twin feelings and
twinkedorcesirof Desineworld iis ami -isiacoeeens ele 46
Sponge, sand and water to show interpenetration and ex-
tension of the three worlds of a planet............. 53
Telegraph system illustrating operation vital fluid....... 63
Man’s dense body a concretion of his finer vehicles as
snails house is crystallized snail..............0+e0. 73
Illustration of difference between man with indwelling
Ego and animal with groupspirit.................. 78
Musician’s hand and gloves showing obscuration of con-
Sciousness! during) IMVOLONM. . sacle +s oe eens 80
Entering house on sunny day and finding focus showing
PULPOSe AN MeVOlUbiOMIey. sisi cisfe tisieierore «ones aretetranetens 81
Spirit buried ‘in matter as seed in soil..............5.0% 87
iWorldsoulisymbolrzed my Crossmrrarne aj-tei< ielmeye <1 icrelet ete 85
Boston doctor weighing soul of animal and man........ oe)


The young cling to life in body as tenaciously as seed
to pulp of unripe fruit, the aged die as easily as


seed: falls} ironiiuipe: £ruites «eas ct cpr cl eeeee 103
Snail illustrating relation of force and matter.......... 12]
Heidelberg wall and the walls of Jericho.............. 122
Spiritual causes produce physical effects; one man knock-

We CINK MON condoocgoounngadGes pNUCOOOb CG. 125
Necessity of a Creator; box of type and chaos......... 129
Nebular theory requires Creator and Sustainer........... 323
Blessing of pain; hand on hot stovesiscn eee i vets ciate 3m


How seedatoms gather material like magnet............ 133


INDEX 587


PAGE

Heredity and individuality; carpenter takes material from

certain pile, but builds as he will................. 138

Shape of body depends on etheric matrix like ice crystals

on@linesy of foree Im water ee. ee Ase se re Lot

Impossibility of escape from mature destiny........... 161

Story of a remembered! past lifer o.oo els 172

atiovmottchaos illustratedstas .% das altielessusbeicmelatetde ltrs 208

Color illustrating the divine and human principles....... 252

The personality, the reverse reflection of spirit as trees

MEHECLE. WIM PON Ae erate seis oie ate asta stele soa eee Rees 266

WacamiousmAt ONEMENt Masta s cic, ders iors 4 ones ofekepemenenenene ners 402

Nalucmofeas harde lifer yk. PIR Ri Sete mane sees 432

Initiation like pulling trigger of pistol................. 520
TEARS; why women are more prone to emotion than men.... 60
FUE MEM AMEN N DN NOTPUMNELIGEG. sss cys: -) «1+ atesevareparctateredsce mielerciemerarets 138
TEMPTATION; purpose of temptation.................... 110, 282
TRANSMIGRATION.

A fallacy not to be confused with rebirth.............. 157
TRANCE brings one in touch with subconscious mind......... 149
THOUGHT.

Costaousnhe taculty) of thought...) cn sis: te esse) <5 s\eislei smite 27¢

Thought and the faculty of expression are the highest

[DQ [eM SEES oe estar OniginS Slcwg COM Uomo Uno 236

Cunning was developed in early Atlantis............... 309

Difficulty of transmuting cunning to reason............. 310

Thought first developed by Original Semites who were

GiitaPLOCCIILONS taht vee sistas ents crave te eevee share 299, 308

Wihatempelstimané tomthini! $4.8 o.8 Reese. Shoe. 5.7 285

iHowranvidea: becomes aithought. oot ei. te. cece cie 88

How thoughts are generated, ensouled and projected..... 89

Thought impressed upon braincenters through Reflecting

IDOGT 45:6 halted ch tees eto Cece oknscecua canoe gcie OO toi 38, 89
How thoughts are impressed upon the conscious memory.. 90
How thoughts are impressed upon the _ subconscious

memory; ‘‘like chickens coming home to roost’’..... 91
The effect of the twin forces and feelings on thought..... 89
Thought transmission; how accomplished..............- 96


“nought, the supreme reality......... EO aco! bet Aor 28


588 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
The World of Thought where thoughts are generated. .48, 88
The Physical World where we are schooled in the right


USC i Ot gb bQuig DE 30442 cyoretcie steps eles eee Rhett aot ee ee 33

The elevating influence of abstract thought............. 203

How animals think though lacking mind................ 70
VESUVIUS eruptions the result of materialism............... 510
VIRTUE.

Not synonymous with innocence; it predicates knowledge

ANG Chol CO tay seyouhoersmret tayo cons oi sretetns stents eaten 282

VITAL FORCE.

Solar energy specialized through spleen..............- 63, 68

How used by Ego to operate muscles...............00- 89

How it expels deleterious microbes from system........ 63

How obstructed flow of vital force causes sleep......... 93
VITALITY.

Archetypes of AV tality cy. /.teretseisieotcke stele oteieley= lett ce eee 50
War.

War between heart and mind.............«...-> 17, 384, 393

Effect of death on the battlefield.................-.. 118

INot peace, but cag SWOrd sasteierecinicssiers iste cles se eteneene 387
WISDOM.

Human wisdom contrasted with animal instinct....... 79, 84
WILL.


Will is the spiritual expression of the positive, male and
solar sexforce. Imagination is feminine, negative and


INE Prono aco Onion OOCaT MIO ODUOGOMRCgodn coe Ah on 267
In early Lemuria, Will enabled man to frustrate God’s
plan and caused all our pain and suffering......... 362
It issthe) force,ensouling thought). scmtcn. alele -leeeicleerene eens 89
WorLpsovun; symbolically crucified .............+.-.seseess 85
WorD.
The Word made flesh the Great Creative Fiat......... 181
The cries of the Moon period beings the first echo of the
GNOabIV es fia tay let awatctens + af kslaeneyensta slekevers «jo tatnecicnele acetate 219
Verbal expression of thought our highest human achieve-
MONT PANGe Privilege svecaieisnecensied- rele ers wteNeNe re) palate 4 eavere 236


The larynx was originally part of the creative organ
sometime it will give back in fuil ‘‘the lost Word’’
the creative cHiatsrycycrar-cistlerretevererelelelene arerels 269, 364, 425


INDEX 589


PAGE
WORLDs.
The necessity of dividing matter into Worlds.......... 29
How the homogeneous primordial matter is disposed in
different manner to form various worlds........ 187, 375
The beginning, purpose and end of worlds.............. 188
There are worlds denser than the Physical World....... 233
Each planet has three worlds; the Physical World, the
Desire World and the World of Thought............ 53


The threefold planets of a solar system swim in a sea
of matter from a fourth world: the World of Life


COL eS CORIPOED OOOO DMEM CHOPeeCTS.o 5 <> cu ee 55
All the solar systems swim in a sea of matter from the
World of Divine Spirit which links them........... 55
Illustration to show this relationship................... 53
Why some worlds are invisible to most people though per-
Geivedmclearlym by (OLNeTS sss seks amirtuclecities stechocetateste 24
Why we should endeavor to investigate those worlds..... 27
REGION. F
A subdivision of any of the Worlds................... 30
The Chemical Region, the Etheric Region. Main divisions
MCN ME DY SICAM WOLLG, crwetacrasetetat rover c's, ceue'e ie. cvevelLe 30


The Region of Concrete Thought, the Region of Abstract
Thought. Main divisions of the World of Thought.. 30
PHYSICAL WORLD.
The chemical region consists of solids, liquids and the


gases which are the basis of form...:............. 30
The etheric region consists of four ethers which are the

avenue of life vitalizing form................ 32, 35, 38
The Physical World is the realm of form; why color and

HOHEPALO LE OTELON Ta TACLELO sa. See stents atte es tees «elles 119
Value of Physical Worid as a schooi of experience....... 32


CHEMICAL ETHER.
It is the avenue of the forces which accomplish assimila-


tion, the so-called dead among them.............. 35, 126

Ripe at seventh year when vitai boay is born............ 143
Lire ETHER.

Nsetheraventes Of propacavlonir ss cles. wctele cic cette aiie oie 36


It is ripe at the 14th year when child becomes adolescent
andecapapler ore reproduction. cca. sc rise sets ores 143


590 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
Forces working in positive pole produces males in the
negative MpolehLemalesignres. teveieosrelelstehe) teloleietlekete asked 36
Ligut ETHER.
Is our avenue of sense perception, the forces in positive


pole generate warm blood in negative cold blood..... 36
Clorophyl and circulation of sap in plants.............. 37
REFLECTING ETHER.
Storehouse of the memory of nature and of man......... 37
Ego makes impression on brain by this ether.......... 38, 89
Mediums and psychometrists read events there.......... 38


DESIRE WORLD.
Is preeminently the realm of light and color; forms are
extremely unstable but tone is sweeter than here, yet


NOt MALIVO, CO CHIS WOTLG. cicisccas he stelsicie eciaichate cieetets 119
The luminous desirestuff is disposed in seven regions or
states of varying density as force-matter........... 39


Purgatory is in the three densest states of the Desire-
world, the First Heaven in the three upper and be-
tween them a Borderland of monotony.............. 112
The twin forces and twin feelings of the Desire World... 42
REPULSION.
One of the twin forces of the Desire World tending to


purge us from evil and destroy ib. 2... 5. <.-:cexeeseyoiors 43,
It is dominant in the three lower regions............... 42
iMlustration of, its: opera tio cv ain sheieloussatetenel atime 46
How it operates in our thought activity................ 89

ATTRACTION.

One of the twin forces of the Desire World............. 42
Attraction builds virtue when Repulsion has shattered

VIG Gin cones icone ia co Mego ocoxeretarevevekeye che siete: kare emarenen tere area 47
Hilustration. of its operation. %\.j).).- ai sol -)aeeiaraek- eet 46
Its influence on our thought activity................... 89
Hereditys Cis cOunmbe die tere veioieyecyseinreierteinnaisiteieee -aseutte oor 156


INTEREST AND INDIFFERENCE.
The twin feelings indigenous to the 4th region of the
Desire. World: ssrritr aha. ccheteiestlgepeh tae ene ie ache rite 45
Dinstration <of their eoperabiouis spsyeias-uateke t-test ce oie sare 46, 89
How mathematics raises one above the realm of feeling.. 203


INDEX 591


PAGE
WorRLD OF THOUGHT.
It is preeminently the sphere of music or tone, as color
is indigenous to the Desire World and form to the
HEH SCA W ORIG. si ciaxe ace covslenss sparsuehs oxegaie'enozs syd a¥ascseqaya ovens 119
The Great Silence is the portal to this realm of Sound.. 122
The region of Concrete Thought embraces the four densest
subdivisions where Archetypes and Archetypal Forces


ALO MELONI OS TNA PLET re harsiee Seieisuny ser taustehecueee er eestclshs * 49, 50
The Region of Abstract Thought comprises the three
highest subdivisions where ideas are generated...... 51
mee Diacrameotmthe Sevens Worlds... .°). cisc1 «+ openers 54
WORLD PERIODS; THE SEVEN (topical).
Practical value of knowing cosmogony thoroughly....... 202
The World Periods are way stations on the evolutionary
journey of the spirit through matter............... 190


Why this pilgrimage was undertaken and its fruits....87, 429
SaTuRN PrERIop.
Activity in any Period starts in the preceding Cosmic


INUGANG 3 dp SOG On bbe Boao 4 NO aD UCe BO GH GOT Tao e 207
Location of the seven globes; they were dark and hot

Pom ULON G ANC MAS bases eselstaue sleseiaysie stetetrelsieis eset pe 205
The Bible also mentions this dark stage........... 321, 322
There was only one element: heat or incipient fire...... 234
Man went through a mineral like existence and had a

EMA CO slike). COMSCTOUSMESSe raves, oc; ous ojenes6 4 ous0 0 fel sue ous 206, 212
Phempavunot evolution eseribed aio. spate asso seco steps sail siete 195
Lords of Flame radiate germ of dense body and awaken

CLAN Speman aby WADI eae Oem bn ane DOU aot on ooo 206
There were some stragglers left behind................ 224
The Lords of Mind were human then and worked with us

as we work with present minerals.............. 222, 427

Sun Prrrop.

Location of the seven globes, they were light balls...... 210
There were two elements; fire and air............+..+- 234


Bible description of the Sun Period and how it is
scientifically possible to have light prior to the crea-
BLOM MOF SUN ATMO Oe tenys delsaagsetoteksysishonsiet elade tenes 328

Wian went through a period of plantlike existence and
had a consciousness like deep sleep............-- 1. 213


592 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


The path of evolution described .fo.000 20h. ec cess 198
Lords of Wisdom aid in reconstruction of dense body,
glands and alimentary canal begin germinally and


vital body has its inception as a thoughtform...... 211
The Cherubim waken life spirit... 0.0... .... 0.02 cece sees 211
Saturn stragglers awakened and become plantlike....... 224
The present animals started evolution in Sun Period

ANC SWEROMNINET AIS CHET las cree ieun vieleteteioiels (ls «ore reine 224
The Archangels were human in the Sun Period; they

work with both animal and man.............. 222, 349


Moon PERIOD.
Location of the seven globes, they were water and the


atmosphere was a steamy firefog...............+- 213
There were three elements; fire, air and water........ 234, 328
The Bible describes the dense water and firefog.......... 328


Man-in-the-making went through a period of animal-like
existence; he had internal picture consciousness like


CLEC HUTS a svohaserase’ = ere cunt (aiePeinl orale ose ois p aitetolee yd ee eee 217
At that time the divine consciousness of the spirit was
entirely obscured self-consciousness incipient........ 216
Lords of Individuality reconstruct dense and vital bodies,
skeleton, muscles and nerves had inception......... 214
Lords of Individuality give desirebody as a thought form,
Seraphim awaken human spirit................000% 215
Moon beings hung suspended in atmosphere and had hori-
zontal spines like animals now..........-.......-- 228
A division of the globe took place at close of Moon
Period and smaller part became satellite............ 218
Origin of birds’ migrations and honeymoon trips....... 219
The divided parts merged in Cosmic Night between Moon
and Marth’ Periods e coe civ scis © cc's scale o'e pls veld 220
List of classes which started in Moon Period........... 226
The Angels were human then and work now with plant,
aime And "MAN se cca t eee ieee ae cee Se eee 222, 349
Present plants were minerals then, parasites are strag-
ISEB: Tacks etal -s Simca ele ee sce! s arctoler aes Seren Martone coer 227, 228


Lucifer Spirits are stragglers from lifewave of Angels.. 286
DaRtTH PERIOD.
We have made 314 revolutions of the Earth Period...... 199


INDEX


593


PAGE


The nadir of density in our evolution was reached here

on earth, but there are worlds denser still....... 199,
Werkavernow tour elements). 2... ./.'ic2':- = Monee ine
Bible description of recapitulations ..................
Reconstruction of dense body to adapt it to mind.......
Reconstruction of vital body by Angels...............
Desirebody reconstructed by Archangels...............
Mind was given by Lords of Mind....5.......hi00.0-
The descending spirit meeting the ascending form in the

focusing mind marks the birth of the thinking

EEA DOIN inke apSekelaqeis P eness *cle Sls bee F)-Fstee tne eee
The mind is now in its mineral stage, dead, hence we

work ‘with dead minerals’; s,<..¢-</. sfoncife as)e\svsleve’s 426,
Classes of beings at beginning of Earth Period; the

minerals: entered evolution here.......0.0.2-.+s00.

JUPITER PERIOD.

The Earth will become etheric and globes will be dis-


posed as they were in the Moon Period............
There will be five elements, the 5th described..........
The vital body will be our densest vehicle..........240,
tee will reach highest perfection: 2... 5.560.+..s0 es ees
The dense body will be transmuted and compounded with

PACMEVILALS DOC ors scr, s:ats, ects o Sis te eee eiays aed eke a cic aa oeratel 8
MBOmEAING Will DECOME ALIVE. ..01c-¢ <5 s c/s e cieo sis cicleln'elelsiale
Then we shall work with plant life.................. 298,
We shall have an objective picture consciousness and be

capable of impressing pictures on other minds......
The human spirit, the Ego will be prominent...........
Pifemanimals will, be: humans soo cence oo clecetse siese ole 70,


VENUS PERIOD.

The globes will be located as in Sun Period.............
Consciousness of Venus Period described...............
The desire body will be perfected. ...........0.c00e00
The essences of the perfected dense and vital bodies will

hexcompounded ‘therewith 5<\., cre anctscyems oles ore eels
The Intellectual soul will be absorbed by the Life Spirit,

which will be most active principle then......... 423,
The mind will then acquire feeling and we shall create

living and feeling forms......... DAOC Paeeaal,


233
234
329
239
240
242
992


4aa


423


425


428


594 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
The plants will be human, the present mineral will be
EMMDEN IT Se ce Siocon ao apn coo da0nd Sono HACC ODOC 226


VULCAN PERIOD.
Globes will be located as in Saturn Period.............. 200
We shall have highest Spiritual, Creative Consciousness... 421
The Mind will be perfected and compounded with essences
Of ethreeLold bod yaemiascrc tere ste etosietel are ieee 422, 423
It will be able to propagate itself and create living, moy-
ing, thinking forms for present mineral which will


then Heshumant tyevalmee tees taiahe md cet rarer eet 427, 428
The divine spirit will be particularly active............. 423
The Emotional soul will be absorbed by Human Spirit.... 423
The ‘Creative Word= (chapter) ei.) Ric oe wae cdereteresenonete 425
REVOLUTIONS ‘and Periods defined a... eis iersiese es teremtnieee 196
RECAPITULATION.
Spirals swithimns piglets, satel eialete ne aise Mio etess ae eterna 321
The meaning and necessity of recapitulation........... . 208
Work pertaining to any Period delayed till previous
phases of evolution have been recapitulated........ 209
How deseribed’ il Bibl@sstaecje sce et etele eee eee sores 329
CosMic NiGHTS OR CHAOS.
Reason for Cosmic Nights and death.................. 244


Activity of any Period starts in middle of preceding Cos-
mic Night as a life commences at conception... .250, 207


Thus it is not a period of inactivity.......... POR SIs. 6 208
The work in cosmic night defined and described...... 196, 200
There are cosmic nights between revolutions also........ 207
Theractivity there described Mocs chp: iste tease Lene 243
Life and form merge in Chaos, only seedatoms of world-
PIOWES POTSISh cere vomeeverc anne Aer eich sheds aan eket ene 247
Com enius coined the word ‘‘gas’’ to represent spirit
AN CHAOS fae cos cs noNeraloba emsmslecotn sel Uielal # oye oie cet 251
Chaos, Cosmos, Genius and Epigenesis (chapter)........ 252
Pouarian Epocu.
It was a recapitulation of the Saturn Period............ 263
The matter which is now the separate Earth was then in
the; polararesion’ of; the’ SUM ssi o.<eroish «reteset sete 261


The dense body began to crystallize as mineral........ . 165


INDEX 595


PAGE

Propagation by fission, the pineal gland was then a local-
NZeesON Saving Oiw LOCIIN 4 14; tarot otis lel ie tereke ehinsisie a) sus eysuere¥ 262
ies Bible von the Polarian,, Hpochi..s «5 cver. ss.sys e'e: op) opensyar 330


HYPERBOREAN EpPocu.
Angels and Lords of Form clothe humanity with vital


body; mankind was therefore plant-like........... 263
Cain, the second epoch, man is represented as an agri-
RIRETUD ISD ote che wire ire) teitisalat, (sige Spel retest Pete 165, 166
Skeleton formed in end of Hyperborean Epoch and was
BOLTRASTCATEUALE:.. 55 ,.1g 00,5, o7e4s « « «jefeisue  Steis Serene 346
Towards end of this epoch the earth was expelled from
SUM, «ota S DOO BtGSn PA OOOdnaeDOS So Onc BU ot o's 56 5 HSc 263
1G) LENO) CNEL Guimnn a Gomera o5 OF oOo On aoc BO0e 330
LEMURIAN Epocu.
The Moon expelled from earth in beginning Lemuria..... 264
Atmosphere of firefog, boiling seas, giant fern forests and
ATIMDOIEN gg dog CHOON OOO DOD ods 7e0 toe 0.46% .5,4olem 275
A division also took place in the desire body........ 235, 395
The skeleton hardened under lunar forces........... 275, 346
Me mm TNO MSCXCS “SCPATALCK... 5... 21, ore euelajeusrsuetols ouole's «le 3 a0 268
Lords of Mind gave germinal mind and impregnated
higher part of desirebody therewith................ 243
Archangels work in lower part of desirebody........ 236, 243
When born man had hearing and feeling, he used his
WOdianIncONSClOUSIY cucraa-y-py 9 Holairsclrclayek Sore tales h 276, 277
He saw himself and others inwardly..........+...+5 277, 283
Propagation directed by Angels in harmony with the
stars. Then parturition was painless.............. 277
Sexrelation brought consciousness of dense body when
IP NGATNEN CCW. NISVWILC! ale sisi aietelelewis\e oie: efstphelayese)sie 283
Lucifer Spirits appeared to Lemurian woman’s inner con-
sciousness prompting to self assertion............. 287


When their eyes were opened they became aware of loss
of body at death and ignorance of stellar lore
caused them to propagate at wrong times, so parturi-
tion has, becomepmpaintullsiy. ste}. stemsl. bys -sletoaieteteiied-s 6. 283
Memory was first developed by Lemurian girls.......... 280
Science and Art were taught in Lemurian schools of Ini-
tiation conducted by Lords of Mercury......... 271, 281


596 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO CONCEPTION


PAGE
Lords of Venus were leaders of masses............... 272
Greatest number of Lemurians remained animal-like.... 289
Reasonttoririse and tftall ot marlon sy eye seis reine 289
The sixteen races from latter part of Lemuria to be-
ginmin ge Wot Newer Galilee a aerietenetere searaerntete terranes 271
Negroes are the remnant of Lemurian race............ 304
ATLANTEAN EPOCH.
Mand? was) unfolded Mbyafood srs acvelss sieeterestete  olonere eietete . 166
Atlantean Epoch, the 6th day of Creation.............+ 322
Inner heat of globe and outer cold gave foggy at-
THLOSPHELE Lye aeaccre ees eke ete afoot oils abntetefele versra1 sleet ener 291
In early Atlantis man had au inner perception, but did
nob ‘see’ outward things clearly. 0). 0.5. .00.+- se sene 293
When later atmosphere cleared he lost touch with spiritual
WiOUL Cla teeieterere tans lefatetoveleretolejoteve clelereloforetetaerts1-(eietstet tate . 294


THE ATLANTEAN RACES.

(1) The Rmoahals

Developed sensation, could feel pleasure, pain, sympathy
and antipathy; their word had magic power.........

(2) The Tlavatlis

Became ambitious, remembered great deeds of leaders, de-
veloped Sermr Ot, LOY Alby are ct scoyeicielers sis cil ler orereieteeenete

(3) The Toltecs

Started monarchy. Hereditary succession was reasonable
then, as father could transfer faculties to son......

(4) The Original Turanians

Abused power over lower classes; were idolaters.........

(5) The Original Semites

They were a chosen people, the seed race for our Aryan
MACES Wesiaus svocsue1e steninys eislevererencyelo etal sisisiie ateve: lel eae tatters 298,

They were to evolve thought and were the last race for-


bidden to marry outside family................. 299,
But some did that and are the present Jews..... 309, 335,


Then the atmosphere cleared and water filled seas.......

The Gods withdrew, giving man freewill and making him
responsible to law of consequence..........-..- 301,

(6) The Akkadians and

(7) The Mongolians

Evolved thought farther, but became unadaptable.......


294


295


296


297


334


355
355
300


INDEX 597


PAGE

Trt JEWS.
How patriotism has retarded their progress........... . 313
Andie wihy, Christ» was sborm ta) (Jew. «.nesercisls « ocielns cts os 313


How the tribes were lost and how they will be saved. .314, 335
America the melting pot of amalgamation and emancipa-


tion for all races; the cradle of a new people........ 315

ARYAN EPOCH.
IRE CmE SOMbe SINGS tOcShine): sini c:s.0i<,:0rs/eaelepnerie terete oles © 165
ENGAMMANG CHO WINE carci cle letstaye at eretebalel nfereiateuckes enetMeta tana Tels 168
PUB GmM eG Wa CHOSEN, DCOPIG me « cis je - 2:s.e- «+ evil sisio wis fettenene 305, 311


Anglo Saxons are the 5th of Aryan Races........... 304, 305


ilrmata Wad molistsydee wh
Ant Havw fer Pattee
Aw Maw fer ha


has Mol aive excite pl


“y,


y
ela 1 at oly, wh
pi$ ot ance t tt


Alphabetical Index


Abel killed no animals 166.
type of Lemurian Epoch 166.

Abraham, allegory of 819.
seed of 351, 352.

Absolute, boundless being 181.
center of earth corresponds to 507.
creation resolved back to 191.

God returns to 200.

Abstract Thought, region of, see Thought Abstract.
densest dark globe in 528.
is separative 380.

Action, choice of, essential 282.
conscious soul thrives by 424.
desire body incentive to 464.
right, promotes growth of conscious soul 96.

Activity, an aspect of God 182, 323.
third aspect of God 324.

Adam became breathing creature 345.
knew Eve 277.
the name of humanity 326.
number representing 500.
rik story of 346.

Adaptability, all progress depends upon 223, 303, 337.

Adept developed by first Great Initiation 502.
unused sex currents of 475.

Adm, distinguished from Adam 326.
the number of humanity 500.

Adoration, an aid in building inner vehicles 495, 496.
final steps to, seldom accomplished without teacher 495.
highest step toward union with God 465, 495.

Aerial Region 50.

Affix of surnames, origin, of 351.

Age of patriarchs 354.

Agnosticism, destructive force of 157.

Akkadians, see Atlantean races, (subhead Akkadians).

Alchemists, students of the occult 438.

Christian Rosenkreuz labored with 518.

Alchemy and soul growth 421-425.

Alcohol craved by desire body 105.
counterfeit spirit 169.

Alimentary canal begun in Sun Period 211.

All-consciousness, of virgin spirits 216.


600 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


All life is one 50.
Allegories of the Bible 319.
Altruism awakened by love of God 371.
compared to sound vibration 370.
developed by control of blood circulation 399.
factor in attaining initiation 404.
heart the home of 398.
latent within all 370.
selfishness being routed by 368.
supersedinge patriotism 355.
Alone Begotten, see Word.
Amphibians preceded birds 332.
Amputation, pain follows 64.
Analogy, one of the best helps to an understanding of
evolution 330.
Ancestor worship, origin of 295.
Ancient Truths in Modern Dress 515.
Anaesthetics, effect of, on vital body 62.
Angels aid Lords of Form 262, 2638.
belong to different evolution 285.
brain not used by 285.
built by force of love 285.
build embryo in womb 288.
build vital body 222, 349.
builders of ether 222.
control propagation 283, 536.
cosmic wisdom flowed into 285.
create without desire 285.
direct evolution of plant kingdom 299, 349, 427.
directed by Jehovah 334.
double-sexed 285.
function in vital body 285.
guard each ego 352.
humanity of Moon Period 222, 240, 262-263, 333, 349, 376,
427, 446.
Jehovah, highest Initiate of 376.
love of, is unselfish 286.
perpetuate the race 283, 288.
pioneers of Moon Period 286.
reconstruct vital body 240.
teach use of vital function 222.
unable to communicate with brain-beings 286, 361.
Angels, Recording, allow choice of embodiment 136.
bring to birth at required time 161.
build body of incoming ego 135.
enforce payment of debts 1386, 161.
impress vital body with new panorama 135.
Lords of Destiny 135.
overrule free will 136, 161.
watch unseen 136.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX : 601


Anglo-Saxon, fifth race of fifth epoch 304.

Anger, great danger of 144.

Animal group spirits govern by suggestion 78, 83.
send animals into re-embodiment 357.
sufferings of 78.
work through blood 350, 356.

Animal group spirits, see also Group Spirits.

Animal kingdom, classification of 416.

Animal Spirit, has reached Desire World 77.
not yet indwelling 69.
not individualized 356.

Animals aided by angels 222.
aided by archangels 222, 427.
as food undesirable 459.
blood infusion of 356.
clairvoyance of 77.
classification of 416
cold and warm blooded 36, 37, 69.
color of, changes 37.
consciousness of 74, 83.
constitute physical bodies of group spirits 79.
desire body of 65, 68, 69
domesticated 70.
evolution of, begun in Sun Period 224, 427.
free from sickness and pain 288.
have no will of their own 83.
humanity of the Jupiter Period 70, 342, 446.
hybrids 357.
instinct of 78.
killing of in “sport” 461.
man compared with 57.
missing link 342.
more advanced than man at same stage 69.
protection of 462.
reflecting ether inactive in 59.
seed atom of, withheld 357.
sent into re-embodiment 357.
symbolized by cross 86, 535.
thinking of 59, 70
vehicles of, not concentric 77, 293.
vital body built by angels 222, 349.
warm blooded 36, 69.
younger brothers of man 345, 446.
wild, propagation of, regulated 288.

Anthropoid apes belong to human life wave 229, 230, 235,

342.


and undivided desire body 236.
descendants of Lemurians 289.

have degenerated from man 342-348.
may overtake our evolution 235.


602 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Apocrypha, valuable information in 317.
Apostles symbolize Initiations 502.
Aquarian Age, Slav civilization during 305.
Archangel Michael, see Michael Archangel.
Archangels aid man from without 403.
aided man in Lemuria 265.
as race spirits still help man 349, 359.
as race spirits realize deficiencies of religions 383.
Christ highest initiate of 376.
controlling spirits of races 334, 349, 403.
enter man’s body through inspired air 380.
expert builders of desire body 222, 243, 349.
function in desire body 376.
give desire body purely animal desires 2438.
guide evolution of animals 349, 427.
humanity of the Sun Period 242, 334, 376, 427.
instigate wars 334.
lowest vehicle of the desire body 376, 403.
manipulate Sun forces 404.
man’s teachers in higher worlds 126,
prepare man to receive solar ray 404.
the Sun Spirits 403.
work in desire body of man 2438, 349.
Archetypal forces, region of 50.
exist in water stratum of earth 504,
man a part of 126.
Archetype, creative, built in second heaven 49.
of suicide 104.
Archetypes, creative thought molds 49.
Ariadne’s thread 201.
Arterial blood, contains more earthy matter than venous
blood 443.
Art, taught in ancient Initiations 281.
value of 516.
Aryan Epoch (Fifth Epoch) 304-306.
chosen people of 311-315.
fire first used in 304.
food of man modified in 168.
highest Initiate of, to appear 304.
human spirit unfolded in 165.
nucleug for last race to be formed in 305.
people of, made blind to higher worlds 169.
pioneers of humanity in, initiated in 304.
present Epoch 165.
seventh day of creation 338. {
thought and reason developed by man in 298, 309.
two classes in 304.
wine given eee in me
work of man begins in 3
Aryan Races, central Asia, the cradle of 301, 304, 310.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 603


descendants of Original Semites 304.
names of 305.
pioneers of human life wave 342.
seven 307.
two more to come 811.
Ash, our food should contain very little 449.
Asiatics and ancestor worship 295.
Asteroids, fragments of moons 260.
Aspirant, accomplishes union with higher self 465.
continence practiced by 471, 538.
cultivates concentration 483, 487.
first work of the conquest of desire body 433.
highest step of, is adoration 495.
learns much by meditation 489.
impossible for teacher to overlook 495-496, 525.
must avoid flesh food 446.
must cultivate contemplation 494.
must cultivate even temper 463.
must have confidence in his teacher 440.
must practice discrimination 493.
must practice observation 492.
to learn to leave body at will 484.
unselfishness required of 474, 476.
works consciously to attain 487.
Assimilation, all sustenance overcome by 457.
carried on by positive forces of chemical ether 35.
forces of, the so-called dead 457.
in childhood by macrocosmic vital body 1389.
law of 457-460.
of animal food, injurious 458.
of mineral, by plant 458.
of mineral leaves injurious waste product 457.
osmosis of Hyperborean Epoch 268.
of vegetables, easy and nourishing 458.
Astral body, see Desire body.
Astral World, see Desire World.
Astrology, and rulership of day of week 411.
based upon law of causation 161.
Astronomy, different theories of 514.
Atlantean Epoch 291, 332-333.
clearing of atmosphere of, and loss of clairvoyance 294.
cunning of 298.
desire body divided 394.
desire nature strong in 298.
education in 296.
ego very weak in 298.
eye evolved during 276.
foggy condition of atmosphere in 291.
(Fourth Epoch) 165.
man had spiritual perception in 298.


604 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


man involuntarily clairvoyant in 241.
man of, moved by flying leaps 292.
man of, the Adam of the Bible 382.
meat the food of 166.
mind unfolded by man 165, 298.
Nimrod, type of man of 166
sixth day of creation 332.
spirit enters vehicles middle third of 309.
water of, less dense 291.
Atlantean Races.
Akkadian, (sixth race) 303.
evolved faculty of thought 303.
unadaptable to new conditions 303.
Mongolians (fourth race) 308.
evolved faculty of thought along orthodox lines 303.
unprogressiveness of 303.
Original Semites (fifth race) 297.
become subject to law of consequence 301.
chosen people of Jehovah 334.
developed cunning 299, 309.
evolved corrective quality of thought 297.
first race given free will 302.
first race to discover brain superior to brawn 299.
imbued with racial characteristics 334.
last race forbidden to intermarry 355.
led from Atlantis by great entity 301.
married outside race 310.
not led out of Egypt 335.
progenitors of present Jews 334.
seed race of Aryan 298, 334.
used faculty of thought 299.
Original Turanians (fourth race) 297.
black magicians 297.
ope. poor 297.
selfish 2
vain ata aeareareee display of 297.
worshiped kings 297
Rmoahals (first race) 294.
developed feelings 294.
developed rudimentary language 294.
feelings as spirits inspired them 295.
harmless character of 295.
possessed words of power 295.
powers, resembled powers of nature 294.
Tlavatlis (second race) 295.
developed germ of royalty 295.
developed memory 295.
felt separate selfhood 295.
instituted ancestor worship 295.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 605


Atlantean Races, (con t.)
Toltec (third race) 295.
bestowed qualities upon offspring 295.
education of 295.
evolved memory 296.
inaugurated hereditary succession 295.
kings of Initiates 297.
tended to divide into nations 296.
valued experience 296.
Atlantis, atmosphere of, foggy 291.
beginning of separate nations in middle third of 296.
clearing of atmosphere of 300.
conditions existing in 291.
destroyed by flood 168, 304.
educators appeal to instinct 296.
memory of man greater than now 296.
refugees of, the Mongolians 304.
Atmosphere, clearing of 300.
Atom, grouping of, true 521.
Atomic weights, and valences 410.
Atoms float in sea of ether 58.
in cosmic root substance 375.
vibrated by vital points 61.
Atonement, vicarious, objections to 400.
reason for its inclusion in Christian religion 373.
reconciled to law of Consequence 402.
Attraction, battle of, with repulsion causes suffering 47.
builds virtue 47.
illustration of working of 46.
involved in mental processes 89.
law of, heredity explained by 156.
one of two twin forces in Desire World 42.
operative in third region of desire world 44.
roused by interest 46.
second aspect of Supreme Being manifests as 375.
Aurora Borealis, and Martian “canals” 259.
Aura becomes distinctive on completion of silver cord 10.
brightness of, attracts Teacher 525.
of earth 406.
unselfishness increases luminosity of 525.


Bacchus, significance of 169.
Bacon, Sir Francis, works of, mutilated 518.
and Shakespeare controversy 251.
Baldus, Jacobus, first poem of 251.
Bathing, benefit from 445.
Beast, number of 498, 514.
Beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into
pruning hooks 389.


606 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Belief and knowledge 147.

Bethlehem, Star of 389, 391.

Bible, allegorical significance of 319, 320.
agrees and differs with science 330.
hidden meaning in 3819, 320.

Jewish and Christian doctrines of 316.
King James 318.
limitations of 317-321.
mutilated 314, 536.
names of God in 333.
not an “open” book 319, 322.
revisions have not greatly improved 318.
occult analysis of Genesis 317-364.
occult key to 319.
original text lost 320.
Talmud, 320.
Thorah 319.
translators, forty-seven in all 318.
Versions:
Hebrew 320.
Martin Luther 318.
Masoretic 320.
Septuagint 320.
writers of, great. occultists 319.

Birth, each gives new chance 3863.
of desire body and puberty 142.
of mind and maturity 142.
of vital body and growth 141.
stages of 139.
result of ego’s desire for experience 129.

Birth place chosen by ego 136.

Blavatsky and earth’s third motion 512.

Blind man of gospels and rebirth 170.

Blood, absorbs vital energy 239, 3538.
action of Mars in 268, 274.
acts directly on stomach 239.
carries the feelings and emotions 91.
changes of temperature affect 144.
channel of expression for vital body 455.
children unable to generate 143.
circulation controlled by life spirit 399.
circulation due to light ether 36.
circulation in health and disease 445.
common, and longevity of Patriarchs 354.
common, carries pictures of outside world 398.
common, carries pictures from ancestors to descendants

397.
common, caused by tribal marriages 352.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 607


Blood (cont.) common, destroyed by marriage outside family,
tribe, or race 3855.
control of, develops altruism 399.
corpuscles given by parents 148,
currents developed in Moon Perivd 2:7
deposits earthy matter in system 443-444.
different in warm and cold blooded animals 69.
driven to field of greatest activity 239, 353.
ego, controls dense body through 238.
ego operates vehicles by heat of 350, 356.
etches pictures on seed atom 398.
excess of, produced by positive vital body 60.
haemolysis of 3538, 356.
highest expression of vital body 91, 239, 3538, 397.
influence of, reco~nized by Scots 145.
infusion in animals 356.
iron in 268, 274.
Jews forbidden to eat 349.
man does not recognize himself as ego in common 354.
medium for ego’s work on nervous system 238.
mediates for the soul 350.
mixing of, destroys negative clairvoyance 355.
“most peculiar essence” 145.
normal heat regulated by birth of mind 145.
occult significance of 145.
of Christ bore Sun Spirit into earth 407.
passes through heart in every cycle 397-398.
production of 148.
purified from desire 538.
race spirit in 3538, 406.
relation of, to life spirit 398.
relation to Memory of Nature 354, 397.
soul of all flesh in 350.
storehouse of subconscious memory 91, 358, 397.
vantage ground of spirit 356.
vehicle of ego 91, 148-146, 238, 350, 356.
white corpuscles in 455.
Blood, Cleansing, see Cleansing Blood.
Blood, lacked by our humanity in animal stage 69.
recent acquisition of man 218.
red, iron an essential constituent of 268, 274.
requisite to a separate desire body 69.
warm, requisite of indwelling spirit 86, 348.
Bodies, father and mother are 307.
interpenetration of 58.
necessary for functioning in various worlds 57.
suited to purpose they serve 255.
transmuted into threefold soul 424.
work on different bodies carried on simultaneously 440.


.


608 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Body, dense, see Dense Body.
Body, Desire, see Desire Body.
Body of Christ, pierced in six places 406.
Body, pituitary, see Pituitary Body.
Body, affected by occult development 440, 441.
evolved at end of Moon Period 217.
has individual will 394.
instrument of ego 156.
lower part of threefold, controlled by desire nature 394.
man learns to build 126.
method of spiritualization 123.
prayer spiritualizes threefold body 435.
quintessence of, built into threefold spirit 123.
shape of, changes 255.
vehicle of ego 94.
worked on simultaneously 440.
Body vital, see Vital Body.
Bones formed in Lemurian Epoch 346.
necessary for ego’s functioning 456.
Borderland between heaven and purgatory 112.
inhabitants of 112.
Boundless being the essence of the Absolute 181.
should be controlled through mind 394.
Brain, activities of ‘ert in areas of 399.
activity of, caused by Lucifer. 288.
and cerebro-spinal nervous system, secondary van-
tage of human spirit 397.
angels aid in construction of 286.
areas of, to be controlled by life spirit 399.
blood driven to, in thinking 145, 353.
building uses half creative power 270, 284.
built by thought 18, 267.
built in Earth Period 236, 239.
calls up pictures of outside world 353.
centers, manipulation of 89.
drained by blood after heavy meal 239.
drained of blood in sleep 239.
expression of desire body 353.
indirect way of gaining knowledge 363.
knowledge bought with pain and death 363.
location of, inefficient 256.
Lucifer spirits use 287, 361.
man’s link between spirit and matter 285.
organ to co-ordinate impulses 285.
phosphorus required by 452.
pineal gland, position of in 473, 475.
pituitary body, position of 473, 475.
separation of sexes step in building 267.
Breath, Jehovah blew, into man’s nostrils 345. 350.
(or life-breath ) Hebrew “nephesh” 332.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 609


Bridge to inner worlds 479.
Brotherhood, creation of, object of Christ’s second coming 352.
Brotherhood, Rosicrucian, see Rosicrucian Brotherhood.
Brotherhood, Universal, method of consummating, 355, 360,
384, 385, 388, 393, 399, 400, 406, 4385, 437, 468.

Brothers, Elder, see Elder Brothers.
Brothers of the Rose Cross, see Rosicrucian Brotherhood.
Brothers of the same ray 4388.
Buddha, Light of Asia 17.

body becomes alight at death 406.

is reborn at Shankaracharya 405-406.

religion of 515.

sayings of 150.
Building inner vehicles 480-485.


C. R. C., see Christian Rosencreuz.
Caduceus 410, 412-414.
Cain, agriculturist 166.

functioned in vital body 166.

sustained by plants 166.

symbolized man of second epoch 166.
Candidate, fre initiation, usually unaware of his selection

4,

hailed as “first born’ 527.

shown how to utilize stored up powers 524.
Caste, system crumbling in 436.
Catastrophes, liquidation of collective destinies 508.
Causation, see Consequence.
Cause and effect, see Consequence.
Causes, new, influx of 135.
Celibacy not always a virtue 471.

only necessary to Initiate 467, 472.

vow of 467, 472.
Cell, soul of permeated by desire 458.
Cells, consciousness of 81.
Centers, three spiritual in head 397.
Centers, six vital in body 406.
Cerebro-spinal nervous system, see Nervous system.
Chaos, see Cosmic night.
Chaos, a holy name 251.
Character and possessions result of past 154.
Chastity, necessity for 471.
Cheerfulness affects digestion 456.
Chemical elements 410.
Chemical ether assimilates nutriment 35.

excretes waste products 35.

positive and negative in manifestation 35.

restoration in sleep processes 94.

ripe at seventh year 143.

20


610 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Chemical force moves matter 121.
in mineral, due to planetary ether 58.
Chemical Region, basis of dense form 29-30.
densest state contacted by man 222.
inertia law of matter in 40.
rnineral stratum of earth corresponds to 503.
Chemical Region, see also Physical World.
Cherubim, aided man voluntarily 211, 215.
awakened germinal lite spirit 21z.
did not aid in creating form 326.
helped man to penetrate veil of matter 216.
in Moon Period 215, 229.
in Sun Period 212, 221, 225.
leave our evolution 220-221, 326.
not mentioned in Creation Story 326.
Child, latent faculties of 139, 140.
Childbirth, ignorance of spiritual laws causes pain in
278, 288, 362.
Children, birth of 139.
all eyes and ears 140.
carry memory of previous life through 117, 172.
clairvoyance of 140, 281.
desire body of, impressed with pictures 118.
do not produce individual blood 1438.
dying previous to fourteenth year 117, 172.
education of, in Atlantis 296.
education of, in Lemuria 278, 279, 361.
emotions of 140-141.
forced to lie 140.
given by Jehovah 334.
growth of vital body 141.
life in first heaven 116, 137.
negative clairvoyance of 140.
Chocolate, high nutritive value of 452.
Chosen people, of future will “willingly” follow a leader 315.
past, present, and future 298, 305, 311, 334.
rebellion of 310. :
Chosen People, see also Atlantean Races (subhead Original
Semites. )
Christ after ue eas appeared to disciples in vital body


aids seekers of truth 400.
brings relief to humanity 382.
brought sun force to earth 403.
carried into earth 406.
cleansed earth from race spirits 407.
coming of, loosened connection man’s dense and etheric
bodies 482.
composite being 374, 381, 388.
could not be “born” in dense body 380.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 611


Christ (cont.) crucifixion of 407.
customary vehicle of, the life spirit 376.
demands sacrifice of personal love 307.
desire body of, aids in work for humanity 407.
desire body of, diffused over earth 407.
did not take away individual sin 482.
distinguished from Christ Jesus 374, 381.
distinguished from the Word 181, 874-375.
divine compassion of 382.
Elder Brother of humanity 384.
emancipates from race and family spirits 313, 352.
entered earth at crucifixion 403, 407.
explained inner teachings to disciples 520.
feels every act on planet 65.
formed in individual 389.
founder of universal religion of future 374.
gives prayer to humanity 435.
has had only one physical embodiment 378.
has loosened connections of our vehicles 482.
highest Initiate of Sun Period 376, 383, 403.
influences our desire bodies from within 380, 403.
knowledge of, by meditation 489.
leader of coming race 3138.
leader of sixth epoch 306.
Light of the world 17.
Lord of love 398.
lowest vehicle desire body 378, 381.
method of salvation 408.
miraculous appearance of, contrary to evolution 383.
mission of 352, 360, 384, 405-
necessary to unify races 380.
older Brother of Sun Spirits 403.
only being spanning gap between God and man 382.
only partially confined to earth 408.
opens initiation to all 390, 400, 401, 405, 482.
possesses twelve vehicles 382.
purifies desire body of earth 407, 482.
purpose of, in taking Jesus’ body 318.
regent of earth 408.
regent of sun 408.
rejection of, by Jews caused dispersion 314.
salvation of, illustrated 402.
saves stragglers 401, 405.
second coming of 361, 386.
sent out impulse used by Jehovah 404,
spirit in the sun 391.
spiritual Savior 391.
suffers from earth’s limitations 408.
symbolizes Initiation of Vulcan Period 502.
time since coming only a moment in cosmic day 388.


612 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Christ (cont.) to use vital body at second coming 2.
unifying influence of 388.
union with 433.
unique among all Beings in seven worlds 382.
used lower vehicles of Jesus 381, 383.
vibrated by vital body 61.
worked upon earth previous to advent 404.
worle Savior 389.
Christ, see also Christ Jesus, Jesus.
Christ Jesus acknowledged law of prophets 405.
age of that of humanity 501.
and bringing of sword 3887.
and story of dead dog 44.
and Star of Bethlehem 389.
appeared as man amony men 883,
atonement of, necessary 378.
atonement of, reconciled law of consequence 401.
changed water into wine 169.
cleansing blood of 400, 406-410.
compared to Buddha 17.
crucifixion of 406.
distinguished from Christ 378.
imposed secrecy for esoteric teaching 320.
pierced in six places 406.
real work after transfiguration 406.
taught law of rebirth 169.
taught love must supersede law 405.
taught occult truth 320.
taught of God within 352.
understands humanity’s life 382.
vehicles of 377, 406.
violent death necessary 406.
wounds of, esoteric meaning 406.
wrought Philosopher’s Stone 520.
Christ Jesus, see also Christ and Jesus.
Christian doctrines:
atonement 3738, 400-411.
cleansing blood 406-411.
creation of 321-333.
fall of man 360-364.
forgiveness of sin 91, 111.
immaculate conception 379, 471.
salvation and damnation 229.
trinity of God 87, 253.
Christian Rosenkreuz, achieved union with Holy Spirit 433.
and Philosopher’s Stone 519.
appeared in Europe 518.
birth of, marked new era 518.
founded order of Rosicrucians 518.
incarnate at time of Christ 379.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 613
Christian Rosenkreuz (con ¢.) in continuous embodiment 379,
18


initiate of high degree 379, 518.
inspired writers 518, 519.
labored with alchemists 518.
sent to combat materialism 518.
speaks all languages 433.
symbolical name 519.
Christian Rosenkreuz, see also Saint-Germain.
Christianity being implanted in J. S. 815.
culmination of previous religions 164.
earned by pioneers of west 315.
fundamentally unifying 384.
has reached third step 303.
ideals too high for masses 384.
looks for one to come again 386.
malpractice of 392.
purpose of 352, 378, 4338, 485.
religion of future 367.
shadow of true Christ religion 360.
to cross to Asia 516.
to culminate on Pacific coast 516.
travels westward 516.
true esoteric 17, 164.
Christians have ever present Savior 408.
striving to love right 308.
Church and state, necessary separation of 386.
Cireulation of blood, control of 399.
Clairvoyance, among Lemurians 281.
aspirant must control 476.
caused by pineal gland 473, 477, 479.
caused by sense centers 67.
‘contact with inner worlds 477.
destroyed by mixing blood 855.
developed by study of mathematics 2038.
disbelief in 26.
four conditions destroyed 359.
inherent in all 19.
involuntary in animals 77.
involuntary in children 140, 281.
involuntary in mediums 140, 241.
must be sought unselfishly 476.
not universal knowledge 25.
of Hindus and Indians 241.
produced by intermarriage 354.
purity of desire for 476.
training for 19, 25, 41, 470-497.
undesirable development of 531-532.
use of 476. %
value of information obtained by 20.


614 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Clairvoyance (cont.) various versions result of 25.
vital body loosened in 241.
Clairvoyants trained, accept no money 68, 400, 476.
Clairvoyants, voluntary, control own body 242.
caused by sense centers 473-474.
differ in observation 26.
have no “off days” 474.
Lemurians were 281.
positive sense centers revolve clockwise 474,
to distinguish true 68, 400.
Clan, Scots cling to 358.
spirit of 351.
Clan, see also race spirits.
Cleansing Blood 400, 406-408.
bore Sun Spirit 407.
Christian doctrine of 406-411.
doctrine of, saves from despair 402.
necessity tor 406.
Climate altered by man 125.
Clock of Destiny 163.
Coal degenerated plant forms 348, 504.
Cocoa undesirable food 452.
Cohesion manifestation of Supreme Being 875.
Coincidence defense of skeptic 1138.
Color, changes with season 37.
deposited in all kingdoms by light ether 37.
in Second Heaven from sound 124.
produced by tone 128.
realm of 119.
relation of, to tone 123.
Seven Spirits before the Throne related to 258.
Trinity represented by 258.
Colors, in spectrum 258.
invisible 253.
of days and periods 418.
of seven rays 439.
three primary 258.
true thought pictures of, in Jupiter Period 418, 419.
Comenius and discovery of gas 250.
Compassionate Ones 118.
Eider Brothers are among 529.
Comte de St. Germain, see Saint-Germain, and Christian
Rosencreuz.
Concentration aid in building inner vehicle 486, 489.
compared to sleep 483.
conquers desire body 468.
deals thoroughly with things 494:
favorable time for 485,
must be cultivated 483, 487, 489.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 615


Concentration (cont.) striking instance of 488.
suggested subjects for 487.
upon sense centers 484.
Conception, and mold of vital body 137.
depends upon presence of seed atom 187.
Concord discovered by open mind 7.
Concrete Thought, region of, see Thought Concrete.
Confidence favorable effects of 440.
Confucius religion of 515.
Conscience, battle of, with desires in thought process 89.
etched into desire body 109.
feeling extracted from life panorama 109.
fruitage of purgatorial experience 109, 120.
Conscious soul, extract of dense body 96.
grows by experience 424.
increases consciousness of divine spirit 96.
to be absorbed by divine spirit 425.
Consciousness, commom, involuntary clairvoyance of 355.
enlarged by soul growth 96.
expanded by study of mathematics 203.
etheric sight, next step in 190.
evolved in different periods 201, 415-421.
fifth chapter of Genesis deals with 336, 354.
from Fall of man, results 362.
full waking, attained by man 189.
future expansion of 414, 417.
object of 417.
of animal 74, 83.
of body cells 81.
of different vehicles 74, 75.
of ego depends on bony structure 456.
of four kingdoms 70-86.
of God, by virgin spirits 216.
of man during Sun Period 218.
of man in Atlantis 300.
of man in Earth Period 418.
of man in Hyperborea 2638.
of man in Jupiter Period 418.
of man in Lemuria 279.
of man in Moon Period 217.
of man in Polaria 261.
of man in Saturn Period 212.
of minerals 85.
of mollusks 456.
of patriarchs 3565.
of plants 74, 85.
of self 216.
of virgin spirits 189.
of woman before Fall 361.
of world periods 417-421.


616 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Consciousness (con t.) one common, for all in earlier periods
347-348.
produced by war of desire and vital bodies 456.
survives after death 149.
unbroken in life and death 496-497.
Consequence, law of, adjustments 157.
and eating of fruit by Eve 362.
and life panorama 130.
and vicarious atonement 3738, 400, 402.
cause of heredity 156.
compatible with forgiveness of sin 373.
complexity of 136.
connected with planetary movements 160.
determined by present actions 163.
determines moment of birth 161.
disaster result of 507.
draws ego to rebirth 357.
each person responsible to 471.
every act seed ground 282, 507, 508.
explains life 154.
impersonal 106.
may not be evaded 157, 130, 161.
national debt of 290.
produces purgatorial suffering 106.
reaches beyond physical cause 125.
related to planetary movements 160.
rules in all realms 106.
works with stars 161.
Consequence, see also Rebirth.
Consumption, see Tuberculosis.
Contemplation, aid in building inner vehicles 494.
deals with soul of things 494.
holding an object in inner vision 494.
teaches life side of object 494.
union of higher and lower natures accomplished by
465.
Continental region of World of Thought 49.
Contradictions, apparent 227.
Co-operation, a growing desire for 436-437.
Copernican theory, not altogether correct 514.
Coral, crystallized animal forms 504.
Corpuscles, white 455.
Correspondences, law of 415.
red 456.
Corti, fibers of 126. ‘
Cosmic forces, milk puts man in touch with 447.
Cosmic lines, mystery orders formed on 521.
Cosmic night, around us 249.
basis for progress 249.
compared to death 196, 244.
contains germs of manifestation 252.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 617


Cosmic night (cont) distinction ceases between form and
life 247.
everything dissolved but nuclei during 247.
gives birth to new forms 249.
homogeneous state 244, 247.
important in evolution 250.
life of, based on work of active manifestation 249.
necessary for stragglers 250.
period of activity 196, 207.
period of rest and assimilation 196, 248, 250.
related to gas 251.
root substance 322, 325.
seed ground of cosmos 252.
significance of different names 247.
spirit of God 252.
takes place between revolutions and periods 207, 243, 250.
unifying in effect 250.
wedding with cosmos 252.
work of Hierarchies gain greatest efficiency in 207.
work of revolution most powerful in 207.
Cosmic Planes of, solar systems 179, 182.
varying rates of vibration in the different 375-376.
Cosmic Root Substance crystallizes 186.
molded by Word 375.
negative pole of universal spirit 186.
Cosmic sound first uttered in Moon Period 219.
Cosmos merges into chaos 244.
Cosmogony, importance of 191.
Craters 507.
Creation, accomplished in Lemuria 364.
attained by evolution 189.
Christian doctrine 321-3338.
described in Bible 321, 346.
groaning and travailing of 506.
lost word of 3638.
of form 332, 344, 426-427.
of life 299, 344, 427.
of new bodies 361.
seven days of 327, 333, 411-425.
Creation stories, contradiction of 344.
Creative act gave physical consciousness 283, 537.
Creative Fiat 181, 375.
Creative Force, see Sex Force.
Creative Hierarchies, see Hierarchies.
Creative Word, manifestation of 425-429.
molds root substance 375.
of early peoples 278, 281, 295.
to be spoken by larynx 363, 425.
Creator, heaven experience aids man to become 28, 126, 338,
363.
nebular theory requires 323.


618 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Creator (cont.) of universe, necessity for 129.
Cremation, premature 98.
rationality of 103.
Crimes against dying 101.
Critical point in evolution 229, 231, 235, 401.
Criticism and esoteric training 439-440.
should be constructive 493.
must be impersonal 493.
to be turned upon oneself 493.
Cross stripes of heart 396.
Cross symbolizes four kingdoms 86.
symbolizes man’s development 534.
Crucifixion, of Savior 406-407.
Crystallization, and planetary evolution 263
begins at pole of planet 263
moon forces produce 265.
of spirit causes matter 72, 248.
Cunning developed by original Semites 299.
first form of reason 299.
mental characteristic of Jews 310.
produced by union of mind with desire body 298
transmuted to reason 309.
Currents, flowing through moon beings 217.
Cycle of life 146.


Damnation, Christian doctrine of 229.
state of inertia 231.
Dark ages, spiritually bright 409.
volcanic eruptions during 510.
Dark Globes 208.
Days of creation 327-833, 411-425.
Days of week 411.
Dead, disposition of 108.
help the living 126.
work with man 126, 457.
Death, accompanied by loss of weight 99.
and purgatory 96-112.
beneficial 244.
by drowning 61, 102.
by freezing 61
by suicide 104.
cost of free will 368.
habits unchanged by 103, 104.
in early epochs 167, 278.
knowledge concerning, desirable 27.
necessitated by crystallization 244.
of children 118.
of races 281.
oftener we die 249, 3638.
on battlefield 118.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX


Death (cont-) only certainty 27.
produced by rupture of silver cord 98.
releases chemical forces of body 61.
riddle of 19.
separation of vehicles 97.
sometimes unperceived by ego 121.
symbols of 96.
value of peaceful 101, 109.

Decay, chemical activity of matter 31.
of dense and vital bodies 102.
result of particles escaping 458.

Degeneration, from lack of epigenesis 344.
of form 289, 291, 341-343.

Deity, no avenging 106.

Denderah, zodiac of 512.

Dense atoms, surrounded by ether 58.
vibrated by vital body 61.

Dense body, abandoned at death 97.
acquired eyes in Atlantean Epoch 276.
affected by food 440-441, 445-457.
affected by mode of living 441.
and vital body not always congruent 298.
archetype built in Second Heaven 126.
atoms of, replaced every seven years 97, 149.
birth of 139-141.
built by ego 128.
chemical composition of 456.
chemical furnace 448.

Christ never to use again 381.

commits no sin 171.

congruent with vital body 298.
connection with vital body loosened 482.
constitution of, in lower races 290.
control by ego 394.

counterpart of divine spirit 96.
degenerated in lower races 290.
desirability of retaining 444.

destroyed by higher vehicles 92.
disintegrates at death 511.

dulls suffering 105.

during sleep, ego outside of 482.

dwelling of God 171.

each step increases hardness 442.

ear first acquire? by 206.

earliest composition of 261.

efficiency of, result of ego’s building 128.
ego learns to build 126.

ego’s correlative to physical world 57, 252.


619


620 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Dense Body (cont.)  ego’s first vehicle 75.
ego’s most valuable vehicle 76, 237.
evolution of 261.
finer part saved by divine spirit 124.
formed under influence of Moon 346.
future development of 262.
future shape of 256.
germ of, given 206.
higher vehicles concentric with 292.
increases in density 442.
in four kingdoms 56.
in fourth stage of evolution 75, 76.
in involution 255.
instrument of spiritual intelligence 156.
interlocked with vital body 62.
interpenetrated by higher vehicles 88.
interpenetrated by planetary aura 58.
keynote of 369.
law of survival 368.
never craves alcohol 105.
nourishment of 441-460.
of future no localized sense organs 262.
of races 289.
organization of, shows ego’s dev elopment 128.
organs of, evolved by necessity 276.
ossification of 448, 453.
perfection of 76, 236.
prayer for 462.
premature loss of, in suicide 104.
propagation of, controlled by Jehovah 346.
proper activity gives soul growth 96.
quintessence of, in earth’s strata 511.
reaches highest development in Earth Period 421-422.
reconstructed in Earth Period 236, 237.
reconstructed in Sun Period 211.
replacement of atoms 97.
requires will and imagination 284.
seed atom of, in heart 97.
sense centers of 211.
shape of, determined by vital body 60.
silver cord, one part sprouts from seed atom 10.
spiritualization of 124, 435.
temple of living God 171.
vehicle of life dwelling in 235.
will be absorbed by divine spirit 424.
wonderful mechanism of 76, 237.

Density, different worlds vary in 29.

Desert of Gobi 335.

Desire battles with conscience 89.
binds disembodied to earth 1038.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX


Desire (cont.) detains ego in post-mortem progress 163.


exists as archetype 50.
incentive to action 464.
not altered after death 108.

Desire body, abandoned by ego in First Heaven 120.
absence of, denies emotion 64.
activities of, during waking hours 92.
apparent expansion of, after death 108.
archangels expert builders of 349.
archangels work in 2438.
assumes body’s shape after death 66.
birth of, marks puberty 142.


621


brain and nervous system highest expressions of 353.


can be conquered by concentration 463.
capable of separation 482.
centers of 483.
changes wrought by spirit 66.
checks excessive growth 142.
coalesces with mind. in Atlantis 298.
conscience etched into 109.
constitution of 66.
controls generation of white corpuscles 455.
counterpart of emotional soul 96.
counterpart of human spirit 404.
craves alcohol 105.
currents of, forced through liver 69.
currents of, in cold-blooded animals 69.
eurrents of, in individualized spirit 68.
destroys dense body 92.
difference in animals 65, 69, 77.
dissolves when seed atom is removed 120.
dissolves in First Heaven 120.
division into parts 235, 242, 394, 482.
division of, causes change of posture 236
division of, checks > sion 236.
effect of purgation upon 105, 108, 114.
ego gathers material for 134.
ego has great scope in molding 188.
eventually to contain other bodies 423.
evolved by milk 166.
extends beyond dense body 67.
field of operation of 3538, 455.
finer part, the emotional soul 424, 482.
first work of aspirant to overcome 4383.
functions of 66.
future organization of 68.
gained possession of spleen 455.
generated in Moon Period 215.

germ of, from Lords of Individuality 215.


622 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CUNCEPTION


wesire body (cont.) growth of 66.
higher part forms animal soul 2385, 394.
higher part “lower will” 594.
holds dense body in center 248.
importance of etching 109.
impressed by law 404.
impresses revenge on vital body 468.
in cold-blooded animals 69.
in future, interpenetrated by mind 248.
in second stage of evolution 75.
in different kingdoms 65, 235.
individual personality in higher part of 248.
induces development of languages 4383.
links to mind 243.
liver central vortex of 10.
lowest vehic'e of Christ 378.
lower part 1.ymains with dense body during sleep 482.
macrocosmic : 40.
muscles and cerebro-spinal nervous system stronghold
of 395, 455.
must be organized before vital body can divide 484.
must be conquered 381, 463.
df animals different from man 65.
of anthropoids 2386.
of animals, not concentric 77.
of child dying before fourteenth year 117, 172.
of earth, evolutionary changes of 404.
of earth has feeling 65.
of earth permeates all form 65.
of earth purified by Christ 482.
of mother 138.
of saint 66.
of suicide 104.
only separate feels emotion 64.
organized sometimes before vital bodw 484,
overcome by race religions 433.
ovoidal in shape 66.
panorama of 109.
partial withdrawal of 94.
perfected in Venus Period 422.
Yermanently leaves dense body at death 97.
perverted expression of ego 397.
prayer for 434-435, 4638.
purgatorial experience through 109
vurified extract welded into human spirit 124.
purification of, aids in union of Holy Spirit 433.
purification of, facilitates language study 433.
race religions overcome by 4388.
~econstructed 286, 242.
record etched upon 109.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX , 623


Desire body (cont.) reflection of human spirit 226.
rooted in liver 10, 68.
seed atom in great vortex of liver 10.
seed atom of, »ersists 120.
seed atom repository of experience 114.
sense centers of 67, 243, 478, 474, 488, 484.
separate requires red blood 69.
shape of, after death 66.
shape of, during life 66.
silver cord, one sprouts from seed atom 10.
spiritualization of 463.
stamped by life record 109.
stronghold of 455.
tendency to harden 455.
to be absorbed 424.
to be organized 68.
transmuted into soul 424.
undivided requires group spirit 236, 243.
unorganized still 248, 481.
vital body must conquer 463.
war with vital body produces consciousness 455, 456.
withdrawn in sleep 404.
worked upon by Jehovah 404.
Desire stuff, currents of, in animals 69 .
currents of, in man 68. J
expert builders of, the archangels 349.
matter of desire world 38.
not finer physical matter 39.
pulsates through physical forms 64.
purification of 408.
Desire World, 38-40,54, 104-121.
action of, attraction 42-48.
action of, interest 45.
activity of forces of 39.
all forms of, from emotion 39.
borderland of 112.
bridge to 479.
color in 40, 118, 119.
composed of life and color 40
consists of material for embodying desire 38.
difficult to understand 41.
distance and time almost non-existent in 29.
effect'of a lie in 48.
elixir of life in 93.
evil self-destructive in 438.
existence of art, altruism, and philosophy in 47.
existence of feeling in 45.
existence of passion in 44.


624 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Desire World (cont.) extends beyond etheric region 53, 179.
first heaven 113.
force and matter 39.
forces of animal and man mingle 40.
forces of, cause incentive to action 39.
forms levitate in 29.
furthers moral growth and evolution 39.
glimpsed by aspirant 489.
has fou1 dimensions 203.
has neither heat nor cold 29.
hierarchies of, spiritual beings in 41.
impressionability, second region 44.
matter of, changing 41.
music in 119.
ocean of wisdom and harmony 93.
old and infirm pass through quickly 103.
one degree less dense than physical 39.
pictures of previous life roll backwards 108-114.
pugatory three lower regions of 112.
purgative effect of 104-107.
puzzling changes of form in 480.
realm of color 119.
realm of feeling 42.
regions of 47.
repulsion, disintegrating force in 42.
time passes rapidly in 107.
training children in 118.
twin feelings in 42.
twin forces in 42.
vapor stratum of earth corresponds to 503-504.
vitalizes body 39.
Desires, chain disembodied to desire body 105.
Desires, highest, cause growth of Emotional Soul 96.
Destiny, clock of 163.
evasion of, impossible 161.
of man, to become creative 126.
recording angels, Lords of 161.
ripe 186, 163.
unavoidability of 161.
works in harmony with stars 161.
Destiny, Lords of, see Angels, recording.
Development, future and Initiation 411-429.
of animals 69. :
one-sided, not desirable 305.
Diagrams, (in this work) must be spiritually conceived 194,
Die, oftener we, better we live 249, 363.
Diet, see Food, also Nutrition.
Diet, individual needs of 84.
fruit an ideal 448.
important in esoteric training 440-441.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 625


Diet (con’t.) milk as a factor 447.

Digestion, accomplished by chemical forces 35.
different gastric juices of 237-238.
effect of temper upon 456.

Dimensions of space 151-152.

Dimensions of space, seven 194.
the “fourth” 208.

Discipleship, application for 532.

Discrimination, aid in building inner vehicle 493.
distinguishing good most important 498.
faculty of, logical reasoning 493.
to be practiced by aspirant 498.

Disasters, great, show trend of evolution 310-311.

Disease, consumption, cause of 1138.
lack of vitality in vital body 68.
paralysis, cause of 63.

Disease germs, eliminated by vital body 68.

Dispensation, old, limited Initiation 390-440.

Distillation of water 446.

Divine Rulers, explanation of 272-273.

Divine Spirit, awakened by Lords of Flame 207, 221, 225.
eared for by Lords of Wisdom 220.
counterpart of dense body 266.
first veil of spirit 216.
germ of, linked to that of life spirit 212.
linked to human spirit 216.
man’s highest spiritual principle 207.
seat of, root of nose 292-298, 397.
stronghold at root of nose 397.
strongest influence in Vulcan Period 423.
to absorb lower aspects of ego 428.
world of, reflecting stratum of earth corresponds to 506.

Doctrines, Christian, see Christian Doctrines.

Dog, incident of 44, 46.

Dream pictures of animals 217.

Dreamless sleep consciousness 74, 85, 218, 415, 421.

Dreams, cause of 94.
based in reality 484, 526.

Drowning, action on vital body 61.
and life panorama 149.

Drug habit, inhibits memory of invisible helpers 524.

Druids, Initiates under Jesus 409.

Drunkard, keeps vice after death 105.
purgation of 105.

Dual creative force 324.

Duty, incentive to 46.

Dying, and bringing to birth 249.
crime against 101.

Dynasties. how founded 272.


626 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Ear, accuracy of 206.
given in Saturn Period 206.
most highly developed sense organ 127, 206.
muscles of atrophying 478.
semi-circular canals of 126.

Earth, aura of, penetrated by Mars 268.
as affected by solidification and disintegration 505.
Blavatsky’s theory of motion 512.
body of Great Spirit 506.
center of, corresponds to Absolute 507.
center of, ultimate seed ground 507.
changes of 49, 125.
Christ Jesus regent of 408.
Christ Spirit permeates 406.
cleansed by Christ 407.
climate of, altered by man 125.
command to replenish 332.
constitution of 498-514.
core of, gained by first Great Initiation 502.
created from “ever-existing essence” 322.
dead work upon 125.
density of coming epoch 811.
density of present epoch 410.
densest globe is 233.
desire body of, penetrated by Mars 268.
development of 165.
effect of harvest upon 505.
effect of sun and moon upon 265.
entered by Christ 403, 407.
evolution of 361, 404.
flooded with spiritual light at crucifixion 407.
flora and fauna of, worked upon by dead 125.
generated by heat and moisture 330.
group spirits ruled 351.
in fourth stage of consolidation 410.
investigation of, difficult 498.
iron of, released from Martian control 268.
keynote of 128.
knowledge of, from initiation 498, 502.
lesser regents of 182.
man inhabited, before Adam 332.
man’s evolution, beginning of 263.
models of, in Region of Concrete Thought 125.
moon expelled from 264.
not “without form and void” in the beginning 327.
only partially confines Christ 408.
only planet of man’s evolution 275.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX


Earth (cont.) rebirths of 190, 412.


regent of 408.

school of experience 132.

seismic disturbances of 125.

seismic phenomena of 498.

sensations in sixth stratum 506.

slow vibration of, pain Christ Spirit 408.
soft in Polarian Epoch 166.

strata of 503-511.

surface of, reconstructed by man 125.
third movement of 512-513.

thrown off from sun 259, 263, 403.
vehicles diffused with Christ’s 406.
vehicles have feeling 65, 210, 505.
volcanic eruptions 498-514.

will become . iore ethereal 199.

with present moon expelled from sun 259.
worked upon by Christ from within 407.


worked upon by Christ previous to advent 404.
Earth Period, account of 329-333.


acme of density 246.

acme of diversification 246.

and recapitulations 245, 329-3338.

classes of beings at beginning of 234-236.


dense body reaches highest development in 421-422.


density of globes 2338.

earth densest globe of 197, 199.

epochs of 261-307.

failures of, sent to moon 264.

four elements of 234.

influence of Mercury during 273-275.
involution becomes evolution in 267.

life streams in 246.

Lords of Form most active in 220,240.
mental activity combined with form 426.
mind acquired in 222, 239, 426.

mind in mineral stage during 426.
mineral life started in 428.

most critical time for humanity 231, 401.
nadir of materiality 199, 401.

occultly called Mars-Mercury 274, 411.


present, the fourth revolution 199, 209, 245.


races first evolved in 271.


627


revolution, (fourth) real work on earth period 209, 245.


spirit most helpless in 240.


vehicles of man reconstructed 236, 240, 242.
voluntary nervous system added in 239-240.


work of hierarchies in 220, 222, 240.


Earthquakes, changing theories of 498.


628 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Earthquakes, spiritual cause of 125.
man responsible for 507.
Earthy matter, injurious in food 444.
needed by children 445.
present in water 444.
Efforts of individual 225.
Ego, active in blood 145, 396.
active in sleep 93-96.
all vehicles destroyed by materialism 231.
allowed limitea choice of environment 136.
and epigenesis 135, 138.
and Mars ction in blood 268.
assimilates past experience 96-139.
assumes upright position 2386, 269.
attraction to parents heredity 156.
becomes indwelling 269.
benefit from post-mortem interval 250.
birth of, determined by expediency 161.
birth of, when spirit takes possession of its vehicles
148, 266.
bi-sexual 267.
blood the direct vehicle of 91, 148, 238, 350.
born ahead of schedule 161.
born at intervals 129.
born twice during precession of sign 160.
builds archetypes in Heaven 128.
claims of past lives upon 136. ,
consciousness developed by work of desire body 456.
connected with threefold body by link of mind 95.
controls dense body by means of blood 239, 350.
controlled by race spirit 350.
definition of 216.
demands birth to gain experience 129.
deprived of birth 469.
drawn to birth 357.
drives blood into brain 239.
effect of wine upon 168.
effected by change of temperature 144.
emancipation from Race Spirit 318, 352.
enters dense body 236, 269, 294.
enters mother’s womb 138.
evolution depends on vehicles 289, 363.
evolving free will 357.
extracts quintessence of bodies 124.
for proper functioning normal blood 144.
functions in world of Abstract Thought 88.
gained illusion of separateness 216.
gaining control of heart 396.
gathers material for new bodies 183.
guide of body 156.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 629


Ego (cont.) has reached into physical world 74.
has state of waking consciousness 75.
helped by international marriage 359.
highly individualized 71, 357.
in Atlantis, not indwelling 292, 294.
inearnates in alternate sex 160, 280.
individual spirit 352.
learns construction of body 126.
liberation from the family spirit 351.
limited by descent into matter 81.
lower nature an illusory reflection of 398.
manner of collecting material for bodies 135.
material ot bodies previous to birth 134, 1388.
must cleanse its vehicles 432.
must complete divine plan 423.
operates by heat of blood 350, 356.
outgrows race bodies 289.
outside of vehicles when enraged 144.
outside of bodies during sleep 482.
part played by parents 137.
positive pole of, manifests as life 248.
powerless to avoid destiny 136.
prayers to, prepare reception for threefold soul 435.
prepares fcr rebirth 133-139.
previous to birth has only seed atoms 133.
primordial state of 216.
real une second heaven 124, 127.
refracted into three aspects 398.
relation of, to other vehicles 88, 95.
selection of gastric juices 237.
should control body 394.
three aspects of 95, 397.
threefold veil of spirit 216.
three points in head 397.
three requirements of 86.
unindividualized before Christ 351.
uses blood 143.
vehicle of virgin spirit 88, 21v.
vehicles of, interpenetrated after birth 139.
when first indwelling very weak 348.
wisdom of, working, subconsciously 237.
work of, to achieve unioi with Higher Self 432.
work of, upon vehicles negligibl] 138.
works outward through sever orifice 522.
Ego, see also Divine spirit, human spirit, lif spirit.


re


Egos. incoming, failure to provide suitable vehicles for


467-469.
Eighth Sphere, the Moon 264.
Elder Brothers, among the Compassionate Ones 529.
and books not written directly by 270.


630 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO.CONCEPTION


Elder Brothers (cont.) combat materialism 113, 409, 529.
concerned for safety of Western World 113, 529.
educate few to receive teachings 510.
guard secrets of creation of life 299.
guide humanity 327.
mediators between man and gods 304, 327.
sent Mesmer 512.
work for humanity 409, 510, 529.

Elder Brothers, see also Rosicrucian Brotherhood.

Electricity movement in ether 34.

Elements in Earth Period 234, 410.
in Jupiter Period 234.
in Moon Period 234.
in Saturn Period 234.
in Sun Period 234.

Elijah and John the Baptist 169, 405.

Elixir of life, Desire World 93.
second heaven 124.

Elohim, co-workers with God 325.
creative hierarchies 325.
double-sexed 325.
evolved man’s body 326.
rest during our age 3338.
saw work was good 826.

Elohim, see also Hierarchies, creative.

Emancipation, key to 137.

Embryo, human, first state of 441.
and gill-like breathing organs 346.
recapitulates past stages of evolution 228, 255.

Embryology, science of, corroborates occult teaching 343-

844


Embodiments, repeated, necessity for 132-133.
Emotional Soul, finest extract of desire body 424, 482.
grows by feeling 424.
to be absorbed by human spirit 425, 429.
Emotions improve vehicles 441.
Enemies, in same family 157.
Energy, twofold 321, 324, 325.
for building vehicles 189-190.
of ego turned inwards, for cognition of self 216.
Energy, see also Forces.
Environment, choice of 136.
Epigenesis, force of genius 185, 252.
degeneration from lack of 344.
free will 135.
improvement over parents 138.
influx of, causes 135.
involution and evolution 336-344.
lever turning involution to evolution 366.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 631


Epigenesis (cont.) modifies causation 135.
original creation 125, 185, 185, 338.
prenatal building 128, 138.
proved by science 338.

Epigenesis, see also Genius.

Epochs, described in Bible 327.
figurative days of creation 327.
five to present 165.
germinal mind given in fourth 245.

seven in human life wave 271.

Equinoxes, precession of, governs rebirth 159.

Esoteric Christians, ideal of 303.
Esoteric information, real, never sold 485.

Esoteric training, of vital body 381.

diet and hygiene in 440-441.
effective when doubt is stilled 439-440.
teaches neophyte to distinguish life from form in de-
sire world 480.
teaches neophyte to function consciously in inner worlds
480.

Essenes, cared for Jesus’ body 382.
educated Jesus 379.

Jewish sect 379.

Ether, density of, in Southern California 532.
forms an envelope for dense atoms 58.
four states of 16, 30, 58.
permeability of 34.
physical matter 30, 34.
transmitter of electric vibrations 34.

Ether, planetary, interpenetrates physical atoms 58.
imparts vitality to dense forms 30.

Etheric body, see Vital body.

Etheric region, extends beyond earth 53, 179.
fluidic stratum of, earth corresponds to 503.
physical but invisible 34.

reflection of world of life spirit 51, 397.
unexplored by material science 34.
unrolling of life panorama in 102.
vital body of a planet 59.

Ethers. four in man 59.
supply vital forces 35, 59.

Ethers four, see also Chemical ether, Life ether, Light ether,

and Reflecting ether.

Evening Exercises 697.

Ever-existing essence 322.

Everlasting salvation or damnation 151, 229.

Evil, destruction of 43.
first among Lemurians 280.
obliterated by good 111.


632 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Evil (cont.) tending towards good 42.
transmuted to good 282.
Evolution, and birth and death 401.
and caduceus 412.
and end of races 289, 291, 341.
and fall of man 190, 363.
Ariadne’s thread 201.
comprehension of, elevates mind 202.
deals with qualified and unqualified 224.
depends on soul growth 425.
end of, gaining experience 158.
end of human, is godhood 185.
epigenesis, backbone of 135.
exactness of 166.
four stages of 416.
hastened by Christ’s advent 407-408.
history of spirit’s progession in time 151.
impulse of, toward perfection 401.
Initiation hastens 526-527.
involution and epigenesis 336-344.
man’s began after expulsion of Mars 263.
method of man’s 87-146.
never repeats 135. 227.
now most critical 231, 401.
of earth 261-307.
of life waves 184.
of lower organisms 416.
of man and planet 404.
of man only on earth 275.
of man’s spiritual powers 287.
of scientist, form side only 185, 342.
path of 51, 194-200, 227.
period following involution 185, 201.
period of gainfng omniscience 185.
power developed by 415.
prevents degeneration 344.
progress or retrogression 341.
purpose of 201. 282, 338.
rendered origina] 185.
revolutions and cosmic nights 195-200.
scheme of 183-192. 245.
seven stages of 188-192, 411.
speed and adaptability 228.
stage of, in man’s bodies 77.
stage indicated by perfection of skeleton 456.
steps of. passed by embryo 344.
well ordered gradual process 184, 226, 267.
wine as factor in 165-172.
Evolutions of future 200.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 638


Examples:

adjustment of visual focus in evolution 81.

apparent contradiction of Christ’s words and woman
cleaning house 387-388.

astronomer and refractory telescope 394, 399.

astronomer’s experiment and need of God 323.

Australian aboriginies, a dying race 290.

blind man denies light 24.

body in childhood and old age 44, 445.

Boston physician weighs vital body 99.

chaos and body decay 208.

Christ and dog’s carcass 44.

concretion of man’s bodies and snail’s shell 73.

control of church by state 386-387.

demolition of buildings and Universal Brotherhood
355.

desire body likened to part of egg 67, 243.

divine and human principles like color 2538.

dulling of consciousness like donning gloves 89.

experiments in living and inventor’s machine 33.

experiments of science with gastric juices 237-238.

group spirit and manipulation of unseen fingers 78.

hate succumbing to love 419.

hatching of egg and crystallization of spirit 248.

heredity and carpenter’s building 1388.

ice crystals and etheric matrix 137.

lines of force and interpenetrating worlds 27.

man with spiritual sight and babe learning to see 41.

mature destiny and paying debts 161.

necessity for creator as for typesetter 129. n

occult and modern science, a comparison 499.

of density, aluminum and mercury 233.

of plant-like animals 2 4-235.

pain, a hot stove 131.

past life remembered by a child 172-174.

personality reflection of ego as water image 266.

plate, powder, and violin bow produce geometrical
figures 369.

power of concentration of Indian fakirs 488.

rapid ers of sun and early maturity in tropics

reality of the higher worlds and architect’s plan, etc. 28.

religion of the Father and facets of diamond 436.

rhythmic vibration and walls of Jericho 122.

rich gain of experience in life of cur 431, 482.

rudimentary sight organs of Lemurian and animals
born with eyes closed 276.

scientist’s experiment and God as first cause 323 .

seed atoms and magnetic attraction 133.


634 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Examples (cont.) seven occult schools and spectrum 489.
snail illustrates relation of force and matter 121.
spirit buried in matter as seed in soil 87.
spirit working in matter and power-drill 244.
spiritual cause knocks man down 125.
sponge, sand, and water and interpenetrating worlds 53.
story of young man seeking wisdom 21.
sympathy for sick dog, shows operating laws 46.
telegraph and operation of vital fluids 63.
tools of artisan and vehicles of ego 430.
tuning forks and power of sound vibrations 369.
unconscious body building and intra-uterine develop-
ment 261.

vicarious atonement and drowning man refusing help
402.

world soul and cross 86.

young cling to life as seed to unripe fruit 103.

Excretion by chemical ether 35.

Exercises:
adoration 495-497.
concentration 486-489.
contemplation 494.
discrimination 493.
meditation 489-492.
observation 492.
retrospection 1il.

Experiment, necessity for 33, 426.

Experience, acquisition of 158, 4382.
and development of will 1381.
conscious soul grows by 424.
dependent on forces of Desire World 89.
hard, value of 392, 431.
knowledge of, effects which follow causes 131.
without memory useless 424.
works on vital body 434.

Eye, built by light ether 36, 276.
evolved in Atlantis 276.
for an eye 384.

Eye, third, the pineal gland 262.
window of the soul 173.

Eyes were opened 190, 288, 337, 361-362, 565.
city life hard on 492.


Faculties brought over from the past 132.
host by admixture of strange blood 357-358.
of occult scientist 34.

Failure, ceasing to try 408.

Failures. stragglers differentiated from 264.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX


Failures (cont.) have opportunities in later scheme 501.
Faith, advantages of, in medicine 63.
Faith, childlike, advantage of 5.
Fall of man, doctrine of 360-364.
a temporary state 282.
gave consciousness of death and pain 362.
Family, integrity of, fostered by spirit of 353.
Family names, much honored 351.
Family spirit, lives in haemoglobin of blood 354.
Family spirits liberation from 351.
Family spirits, see also Race Spirits.
Fate, ripe, cannot be avoided 136, 163.
Father differs from other two of Trinity 179.
highest Initiate of Saturn Period 376, 377.
Father, religion of, for future 4385.
not of earth 435.
to eliminate separateness 435.
to spiritualize dense body 485.
Fauna, changes in archetype of 49.
worked upon by man 125.
Fear of God, origin of 310, 371, 395.
Feeling, action in Desire World 46.
archetype of, exists in aerial region 50.
aroused by torture 279.
creates interest or indifference 45.
deepened by purgatorial suffering 109.
distinct from motor response 82.
earth has 505-506.
evolved by Rmoahals 294.
emotional soul grows by 424.
expression of self-consciousness 32.
importance of 109.
is “still small voice” 109.
mathematics liberates from 203.
sensitory, localized in pineal gland 262.
separate desire body for true expression of 57.
region of 45-47.
Fertilization depends on seed atom 137, 461.
prevented by group spirit 137, 461.
Fiery nebula is spirit 249.
Fire, divine origin of 304.
First Heaven, see Heaven, first.
Fission, reproductive method in Polaria and Hyperborea
262-263.
Five dark globes 208.
Flame, Lords of, see Lords of Flame.


Flesh-eater, must replenish body cells more often than


frutarian 459.
Flesh food, see also Food


636 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Flood, destroyed Atlantis 304.
Flora, changes in archetypes of 49.
worked upon by man 125.
Flowers, suitable subject of concentration 487.
plucking of, gives pleasure to Earth Spirit 65, 505.
Fluid, solar 10, 62.
Foetus, human, bi-sexual at first 347.
formation of 441, 442.
Food as a factor in involution 166.
assimilation of 457-460.
chemical, of future 458, 454,
chocolate, importance of 452.
cocoa, undesirable 452.
earthy matter in 444.
flesh food, inferior nutritive value of 458, 459.
importance of sugar 447.
individual needs of 84, 448.
influence upon various epochs 165-168.
life in every particle 457.
nutritive value of 450, 451.
of future made in laboratories 458.
phosphorous valuable as 452.
plant, seed, and eggs 461.
pure, envelopes vital and desire bodies with parer
substance 440-441.
table of food values 450.
wine as 168.
Food, see also Nutrition.
Force, chemical, moves matter 121.
dual creative 324.
related to matter 120.
uncrystallized spirit 120, 247.
within, altruistic 368.
within, genius 185.
Force vital, see Vital force.
Forces, archetypal, work on matter 49, 51.
negative in children and mediums 140-141.
of attraction and repulsion 42-47.
of nature great intelligences 49.
of nature, in reflecting stratum 506-507.
only two active in formation of universe 324.
positive, manipulate individual vehicles 141.
transference of, on period globes 198.
Forgiveness of sin compatible with law 373
doctrine of 91, 111, 373.
eradicates memory of sin 91.
obtained by prayer 463.
shortens purgatory 111.
through retrospection 111.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 637


Form, archetypes of 123.
basic substance of 30.
built by Jehovah 334, 348.
built by tone 123.
built for purpose 235, 255.
erystallized thought 72.
crystallizes around negative pole of spirit 186.
crystallizes when life goes 504.
death and decay of 19, 31.
destroyed by strange blood 357.
devoid of feeling 31.
evolution of 31, 289, 337, 341, 343, 416.
expression of one life 460.
first chapter of Genesis deals with 336.
forces of, stored in earth’s strata 511.
independent of life 31.
man’s creations confined to 426-427.
man’s future 255.
merges into life in chaos 247.
multiplicity of 31, 511.
mutability of, in Desire World 40.
negative pole of spirit 186, 247.
origin of 504,
perpetually dissolves, into space 249.
physical, composed of chemical material 48.
physical degeneration of, due to stragglers 289, 342.
physical, endowed with life by etheric forces 48.
physical, fashioned by archetype 49, 50.
related to life and consciousness 2238, 416.
transformed into force 511.
Form, Lords of, see Lords of Form.
Formula, separates ethers 482.
Fossils, stragglers from vegetables 343.
Fourfold, steps to God 302-308.
Four Kingdoms 16, 56, 86.
assimilation in 458.
consciousness of 458.
degeneration from 342.
desire body in 65, 235.
forms of 31.
made of chemical matter 31, 298.
man compared with 56.
progress in 226.
remain confined to own life waves 342.
symbolized by cross 85.
vital body in 58.
Freedom, industrial, yet to be gained 436.
Free will, bought with pain and death 288, 363.
consists in making new causes 135.
develops with evolution 83.


638 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Free Will (cont.) given in all acts 110, 180, 163.
given to original Semites 308.

Fruit, forbidden, symbol of generative act 362.
nutritive value of 446, 448, 452, 458-460.

Fruit trees, pioneers of Moon Period 342.

Fungi, and Moon.Period plants 227.


Gas, mineral composition of 166.
original meaning of term 250.

Gastric juices, operation of 2387.
selected by ego 237.
various kinds of 287.

Geology, deals only with first stratum of earth 508.

Generation, present mode of, to be superseded 538.

Genesis, Book of, and nebular theory 322.
occult significance of 317-364.
two creation stories 336, 344.

Genesis, Book of, see also Bible.

Genius, appears in all kingdoms 252.
born ahead of schedule 161.
cause of epigenesis 185, 252.
developed by hard work 155.
evidence of rebirth 155.
fashions vehicles pre-natally 138.
force within 185.
hall mark of advanced soul 155.
in future common possession of all 155.
manifests as epigenesis 185.
reconciled to heredity 155, 161.

Genius, see also Epigenesis.

Germain, Saint, see Saint-Germain.

Germs, expelled by vital body 63.

Giant fern-forests of Lemuria 275.

Giants, traditions of 142.

Giants, in days of Lemuria and Atlantis 275, 292.

Gills, man once possessed organs similar to 346.

Gimle, regenerated earth of Norse mythology 383

Ginnungagap, the Norse Chaos 247.

Giving, the ethics of 114.

Glands, acquired by man in Sun Period 211.
ductless, little known concerning 478.
expression of vital body 395, 455.

Globes, five dark 208, 528.
and corresponding periods 245.
densest is chaos 528.

Earth, densest of 233.
passage of life wave through 196-200, 245.
we inhabit during cosmic nights 528.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 639


Globes, seven, evolution and involution in 195.
dissolution of 200.
evolutionary impulses travel through 195-200.
fields of evolution 264.
interpenetration of 195.
passage of life wave through 196-200.

Gobi Desert, 301, 310.

God, aggregate of hierarchies 1838, 253, 325.
and creation of solar system 187.
architect of solar system 177, 180.
ascription of numbers to 253.
collectively the planetary spirits 253.
co-workers of 325. °
differentiated from Trinity 179.
distinguished from Supreme Being 179.
dual in manifestation 325.
dwells in highest world 182.

Elder Brothers mediators of 327.
expression of Absolute Spirit 186.
in whom we live 87, 179.
logically necessary 129, 323.

love of, to awaken altruism 371.
man exists in 179.

merges into Absolute 200.
mysteries of, cpen to man 154.
only object of man’s worship 302.
powers of, in man 4380.

relation of, to man 177-182.

sun visible symbol of 181.
symbolized by nature 129.

temple of, within man 171.

those born of 538.

three attributes of 323.

tribal, work of 372

various stages in worship 302, 371.
within man as ego 171.

word of 374.

God, see also Father, Son, Jehovah.

God, World of, ninth stratum of earth corresponds to 507.

Gods, we are 171.

Golgotha, mystery of 374, 400-406.

Good, spirit’s assimilation of 47, 95, 123.
in everything, our aim to seek 493.

Good and Evil, comprehension of, necessary 282.
distinguished by man 287, 465.
in Jupiter Period 418.

Lemurians’ conception of 280.

Governments, inevitable changes of 437.

Grail Cup 409.


640 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


search for 114, 115.
Grail Knight Initiates helped by Jesus 409.
Grape juice, wonderful solvent 448.
Gratitude, important factor in soul growth 114.
Great silence 122.
Grief. effect of 109.
Group Spirit, one common, before Jehovah 351.
Group Spirits, archangels are 349.
cause reproduction 357.
cause similarity of appearance 71.
contrasted with ego 74, 78, 82, 350.
control rebirth of animals 357.
crystallize bodies from themselves 72.
currents of encircle Earth 86.
denizens of Desire World 74, 82.
direct desire currents inward 69.
ego must free itself from 82.
evolutionary progress of 82.
influence their charges from without 72.
ingenuity of 78.
instinet from 78.
lowest vehicle in Desire World 74.
of animals 81-85, 158, 350.
of trees 494-495.
oppose marriage into other species 356.
promptings of 78.
similar to Jehovistic rule 349.
suffer when charges suffer 78.
unwilling to relinquish hold on blood 356.
vehicles of aggregation of virgin spirits 82.
work through blood 350.
Group Spirits, of plants, currents of, flow from earth’s center
85.


lowest vehicle in region of Concrete Thought 74.
Group Spirits of minerals, lowest vehicle in Region of Ab-
stract Thought 74.
Growth, spiritual 431.
Guardian angels 352.
Gypsies, clairvoyance of 354.


Haeckel, Ernst Heinrich, correct theeries of 339.
evolutionary theory of 3438.
Haemolysis, spiritual effects of 353.
produced by international marriage 358.
result of in lower animals 355, 357.
Hand of God. Law of Consequence 507.
Hands, of musician 126.
value of 57, 80.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 641


Hair, of Atlantean and Aryan 292.
Half-steps, transitional states 227, 234.
Happiness, and sheltered environment 431.
Head of animals not concentric 77.
Healing, faith a factor in 63.
Health, action of vital body in 638.
milk as a factor 447.
not to be judged always by appearance 449,
Heart and mind, contention of 17, 393.
all blood in every cycle passes through 397-398.
anomaly of 393-400.
becoming voluntary muscle 399, 473.
cross-stripes of 396, 399-400.
education. of 398, 530.
home of altruistic love 398.
impulses of 398.
involuntary muscle in ordinary person 396.
muscles of 396.
perfect construction of 77.
secondary vantage of life spirit 397.
seed atom of dense body in 97, 396, 398.
sex currents flow through 477.
silver cord fastened to 98.
stopping, caused by rupture of seed atom 98.
the thought that a man thinks in his 398.
union with mind 18.
Heathen, conversion of 168.
Heaven, consciousness of, lost 359.
eternal, would have no “raison d’etre”’ 138.
Heaven, first, earned by good action 114, 116.
in higher Desire World 113.
music of 119.
place of unalloyed joy 116.
training school 118.
waiting place for children 117.
world of color i19.
Heaven, new, to be realized 311.
Heaven, Second, active preparation for coming life 123-129.
activities of 121-129.
assimilation of soul power in 123.
desire body discarded on entering 122.
good of past life assimilated in 116, 124.
Great Silence upon entering 122.
in Region of Concrete Thought 122.
man alters earth in 125.
man learns to build new body 126, 340.
preparing new earthly environment in 124-128.
real home of thinker 124.


21


642 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Heaven, Second (con’t.) realm of tone 119, 123.
Heaven, Third, ego enters without mind sheath 129.
ego enters without mind sheath 129.
harmony of 129.
highest division of tone world 119.
in Region of Abstract Thought 146.
panorama of coming life seen in 129.
thought and feeling built into ego in 146.
Hebrew alphabet, significance of 500.
language, old style 318.
words and vowel points 321.
Help given to man by leaders 438, 437.
Helpers of humanity, the self-sufficient 358.
Helps, three, given to man 4338, 435
Herculaneum and Pompeii, destruction of 510.
Hereditary Succession, in Atlantis 295-296
Heredity the effect, consequence the cause 157.
hard to counteract 138.
unable to account for genius 155.
usually law of attraction 156.
Hermaphrodite of Lemuria 268.
Hermes, see Mercury.
Hermetic axiom 1838, 410, 412, 528.
Hidden meaning in Christ’s teachings 320.
Hierarchies, creative, aid man during Saturn Period 206.
aid man in heaven 126.
composed group spirit of humanity 351.
composite being 325.
co-workers with God 325.
Elohim of the Bible 325.
five have withdrawn 220, 522.
have left humanity to care of Elder Brothers 327.
have withdrawn from creation 327.
included in God’s own being 183.
man contacts during involution 526.
most active between revolutions and periods 207.
of various cosmic planes 182.
seven still active 522.
status of 325.
symbolized by Rose Cross 522.
two nameless 220-221, 326.
twelve 221.
work of 326.
Hierarchies, see also Elohim, and diagram 9.
Hierophants, aim to teach man self-mastery 2738.
initiate at holy night 391.
initiated the chosen few 390, 404, 481.
in past chose families 404.
of lesser mysteries, Elder Brothers are 520.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 643


Higher life, worldly obligations to be met before speak-
ing 469, 470-471.
Higher self, union with 432, 437
Higher Vehicles, see Vehicles Higher.
must shine to attract teacher 525.
Hindu exercises 487.
Hindu race bodies 4387.
Holy Night, night of Initiation 390.
Holy of Holies 298.
Holy Spirit, see Jehovah.
Homesickness from race spirit 351.
Honeymoon relic of Moon Period 219.
Hope being destroyed 517.
Horoscope, accidents foreshown by 162.
Horse, projection of bodies of 77.
Human spirit, awakened by Seraphim 215.
in charge of Lords of Form 220.
in pineal gland and brain and cerebro-spinal nervous
system 397.
linked to divine spirit 216.
linked to life spirit 215.
most prominent in Jupiter Period 423.
reflected in desire body 206.
third aspect of spirit 215.
to be absorbed by divine spirit 428.
vivified by Lords of Form 265.
Humanity, acquired free will 288, 363.
acquired language 278.
aided by Venus and Mercury 271.
becoming expert body builders in chemical matter 222.
bodies of, slowly purified 437.
conduct of reflected in earth strata 506.
creative Hierarchies 4238.
desire bodies of, purer since crucifixion 408.
development of, and Initiation 416.
divisible into seven rays 439.
division of desire body 394.
Elder Brothers have worked in secret for 529.
enlightened by Lucifers 287.
escape from disasters 113.
first aided by reflected solar forces 403.
four great steps of 302.
given freedom under different race religions 383.
in great need of invisible helpers 496.
in past governed by group spirit 351.
in past ignored opportunities 167.
institute prayer 434.
leaders of, creative hierarchies 271, 325.
learns to appreciate unselfish life 392.
must know good and evil through experience 383.


644 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Humanity (cont.) never lived on Mercury or Venus 275.
nine the number of 500
past unconsciousness of 185.
progress through Periods 189-191.
segregated into races 306, 352, 401.
separate personality implanted in 248.
seventh creative hierarchy 326, 327.
sixteen bathe to destruction 306, 401.
steps of 202
still enslaved by race spirit 384.
three steps of 432.
three helps given 433.
to form spiritual fellowship 305, 312.
unconsciously directed 436.
will be saved as a whole 501.
works with mineral life wave 427- 428.
Humanity, see also Man, Races.
Hybrid, sterility of 357.
Hygiene, effect on vital and desire bodies 440-441.
Hyperborean Epoch, land of fire and crust islands 262, 331.
Lords of Form (with Angels) clothe man with vital
body in 262, 263.
man sustained by solar forces 269.
Hyperborean Epoch (Second Epoch) 165.
Hyperborea, Cain symbolizes man of 166.
described in Genesis 380.
ethereal plant forms solidified by heat 3381.
land of fire and crust islands 381.
man given vital body 165.
man of, agriculturalist 166.
man of, functioned in vital body 166.
man of, had dreamless sleep consciousness 263.
man of, hermaphrodite 268.
man plant-like in 165, 263.
one language in 433.
planets thrown off from Sun during 263.
propagation during 263.
Yypnotism, injurious effect on vital body 62.
formerly ‘“‘mesmerism’” 512.


“T Am” (the Ego) was before bodies 352.
Ibbetson, Peter, story of, and dreaming true 526.
Ice crystals, formation of 27.
Ideals, higher, result of allying mind to higher self 465.
Ideals in concentration 486.
Ideals, low, caused by mind, united to desire nature 465.
Ideas become thought forms 49.
future evolution of 417-418.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 645


Illusion of separateness 217, 401.

Imagination, builds new body within womb 284,
cultivation of true 488.
cultivation of, in Lemuria, 281.
female power from Moon force 267.
force first manifests as 324.
importance of 425.
in future to direct creation 425.
process of image making 353.
requires concentration 486.

Imbecile wastes sex force that builds brain 467.

Immaculate conception 278, 378.

Immortality of body 363.

Impressionability, region of 44.

Inbreathing 350.

Inbreeding and pictures in blood 353-354, 397.
involuntary clairvoyance retained by 471.

Incarnation, object of 158.

India, people of 167.
caste system crumbling in 436.
division of life, certain tribes of 470.
fakirs of, and growing plant illusion 488.
people of, neglect material development 470.

Indian, American, body of 290.

Indifference and interest 45.
obscures truth 203.
withering power of 46, 90.

Individual, birth of 266-67.
expresses through iron in blood 268, 274.

Individualism, evils of, apparent as civilization advances 393.
help needed by all during stage of 401.

Individuality of children 148.
of man and animals compared 71.
taught by Christ 352.

Individuality, Lords of, see Lords of Individuality.
separate, acquired by Semites 355.
without separateness 435-436.

Indwelling spirit at root of nose 298, 478.

Indwelling spirit, see also Ego.

Inertia is damnation 229.

Initiate builds own body 128, 188.
does not save himself 476.
gains knowledge of Earth Period 502, 526.
makes Philosopher’s Stone 519.
of Aryan Epoch 304.
of Venus Period 502.
sees earth strata 499.

Thorah written for 321.


646 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Initiate (cont-) vows of 414, 467, 476.
Initiates, Goethe 145
have taken place of messengers of Gods 272, 304
of Aryan Epoch 304.
of middle ages 409.
of three previous Periods 376.
test of all real 68, 400.
Initiation and bridge to inner worlds 479.
and Christ Star 391.
and future development 411-429.
and seven days of creation 411.
before Christ for chosen few only 390, 404-405, 407
by Lords of Mercury 271-275.
cannot be ppcpmeplisnss until work on vital body is begun
404.


consciousness obtained by 417-421.
culmination of prolonged spiritual endeavor 525.
desire body awakened by 405.
effect of, upon vital body 381, 404, 482.
expansion of consciousness through 417-420.
first great 502.
higher life or 404.
Holy Night 391.
Jesus’ bodies attuned by 381.
knowledge of various degrees 526.
lesser, given to Lemurians 413.
mystic term of 169.
not given prior to Mars half of Earth Period 413.
object of 381.
of Atlantean kings 297.
of Rose Cross 519.
opened to all 401, 405. 482.
path of 412, 414.
preparation for, aided by mathematics 203.
probation necessary preliminary to 478, 479.
puts candidates in touch with creative Hierarchies 526.
separates ethers 482.
strict celibacy not required in 472, 539.
symbol of 519.
teaches man to leave body 274.
ultimate achievement of all 414.
Vulean 502.
Initiations, earlier 381.
four Great 416, 502.
give initiate access to earth strata 500. _ 4
neophyte reviews consciously past evolutionary stages in


0.
nine lesser 416, 500, 516.
of Aryan Epoch 304.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 647


Initiations (cont.) results of 414.
symbolize Christ and apostles 502.
thirteen 414, 416, 501, 502.
Initiator helps candidate free vital from dense body 241.
shows candidate how to awaken conserved forces 525.
Inner perception in Atlantis 293.
Innocence distinguished from virtue 282.
Instinct compared to wisdom of man 79, 80.
in Atlantis, educators appeal to 296.
promptings of group spirit 78.
Intellect, unselfishly used 363.
demands knowledge of world mystery 439.
in abstract, sees beauty of loving one’s enemies 384.
misuse of, dangerous 530.
Rosicrucian teachings appeal to 521.
Intellectual Soul adds power to life spirit 96.
creates sympathy and antipathy 424.
links experience 424.
mediates between conscious and emotional souls 424.
product of vital body 482.
to be absorbed by life spirit 425.
Intensity of purpose prerequisite to first-hand knowledge 21.
Interest and Indifference 45, 89.
obscure truth 203.
Intermarriage 352.
International Marriages, see Marriage.
Interpenetration of worlds 58.
Interplanetary space pervaded by life spirit 55.
Intra-uterine development, recapitulates evolution 255,
343-344,
Intuition, development of 92.
impressions of, subconscious memory 92.
in woman 92.
true wisdom 398.
Inventors and faculty of imagination 425-426, 486
Invisible Helpers, great need for 496.
Invisible Leaders shaping events 437.
Invisible Playmates 140.
Involution and Caduceus 412.
belongs to life side 186.
creative Hierarchies assist man during 428.
devoted to attaining self-consciousness 185.
evolution, and epigenesis 336-344.
on different globes i95.
period of time given to building vehicles 185, 425.
spirit’s descent into matter 266.
unconscious development of man during 185, 201.
fron basis of separate consciousness 268.
essential to warm blood 268.


648 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Iron (cont.) influence of Mars upon 268, 274.
polarized by Mars 274.
Isis, veil of 298.


Jehovah, aided by archangels 404.
assumed control of bodies 346.
author of race religions 334, 374, 380, 383, 433, 435.
blew breath into man’s nostrils 345, 350.
builder of form 334, 346, 348.
concerned with Jews 334.
creative energy in nature 468.
did not put a curse on man 362, 278.
did not lead Jews out of Egypt 325.
directed formation of skeleton 346.
directs angels 277, 334, 352.
divides mankind into races 347, 352.
giver of children 334.
gives to every ego an angel 352.
gives to every race an archangel 352.
has dominion over form 3848.
has special care of seed races 334.
highest Initiate of Moon Period 376.
instituted law 395.
languages expressions of 4388.
leader of angels 333.
leader of Semites 334.
lowest vehicle of, the human spirit 380, 404.
mission of 3383, 336.
Most High 348.
nature of prayers to 434.
pits fear of God against desire 395.
put mankind t» sleep during parturition 360.
Race God 348, 433
reached man through air 380.
regent of Moon 3838.
regime of, followed common group spirit 351.
separated sexes 346, 347.
unable to work through brain 361.
union with 433.
unity impossible under 380.
works in desire body 395, 404.
Jehovah, religions of, see Race Religions.
Jericho, falling of walls of 122.
Jesus and Christ Jesus 874-388.
belongs to our humanity 378.
body of, attuned to Christ vibration 382.
body of, best of earthly vehicles 378.
body of, treated by Essenes 382.
born at time stated 379.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 649


Jesus (cont.) born into passionless body 378.
consented to surrender of vehicles 382.
disciple of high degree 381.
distinguished from Christ 378.
educated by Essenes 379.
evolved body to highest efficiency 378.
gathered new vital body 408.
gave lower vehicles to Christ 381.
guides esoteric organizations 409.
had pure mind 878.
had trod the path for ages 878.
immaculate conception of 378.
knew his destiny 382.
not Egyptian Initiate 379.
seed. atom of physical body of, returned after crucifixion
408.
record of incarnations of, in Memory of Nature 378.
taught disciples after crucifixion 409.
“the paly besopten Son of God” three distinct Beings
7


worked upon Initiates of middle ages, 409.
Jesus Christ, see Christ Jesus.
Jesus of Egyptian Initiation 379.
Jews aided by America 315.
American born most progressive 315.
and mission of Christ 313.
Archangel Michael, race spirit of 334, 405.
as Abraham’s seed 352.
cunning, mental trait 310.
Jehovah concerned with 334,
lost tribes of 310, 314, 335.
not led out of Egypt 335.
of pre-Christian era 351.
pride of race crystallizes 306, 312-318.
prohibited from eating blood 849.
rebellion of 310.
rejection of Christ caused dispersion 314.
wandering in wilderness 335.
John and Elijah 169, 405.
John, St., symbolizes the Venus Initiation 502.
Joseph, high Initiate 378.
Judas Iscariot 502.
Juices in vegetables 37.
Jupiter field of evolution for advanced beings 259.
and its “eighth sphere” moon 259.
retains heat 258.
third planet thrown off sun 258.
Jupiter Period, deception impossible in 70, 418.
divine spirit absorbs conscious soul in 425.


650 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION
Jupiter Period (cont-.) _ divine spirit absorbs human spirit
428


earth will become etheric in 199.

five elements 234.

forces of dense. body added to vital body 422.

first Great Initiation gives key to 502.

globes of, like Moon Period 199.

good and evil segregated in 418.

humanity of the animals 70, 342.

human spirit most prominent in 423.

humanity of purer type 70.

lowest globe in etheric region 422.

man able to work with plants 299, 428.

man becomes highly creative in 427, 428.

man first works with life in 298, 427, 428.

man’s accurate mental conceptions in 418, 419.

mind vivified 422, 427.

picture consciousness 418.

superphysical beings at man’s service in 419.

thoughts seen in 418.

vital body densest vehicle in 240, 242.

vital body reaches perfection 422.

Jupiter Revolution (fifth) of Earth Period, critical point of
PAPA) PAB PB,
Juvenile court 385.


Karma, see Consequence, law of.
Kathopanishad does not teach human rebirth in animal or
plant bodies 158.
Key to Bible 319.
Keynote 128, 368-370.
Killing to eat 458-462.
Kingdom, animal, pioneers of 234.
Kingdom of God and little child 5.
Kingdom, mineral, see Mineral.
Kingdoms, four, see Four kingdoms.
King James version of Bible 318, 326.
Kings by grace of God 273, 297.
Knights of Grail, under Jesus 409.
Knights of Round Table 409.
Knowledge, first-hand 21, 480, 497, 528.
from concentrated thought 487
higher, open to seeker 401.
of cause 84.
of cosmogony 191.
of self to be regained 537.
prerequisite of judgment 7.
superphysical, result of training 25, 41, 480.
Tree of 278, 362-363.
Krishna, Shri, sayings of 406.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 651


Labor, distribution of products of 393.
Lamentation, injurious effect of, on dying 101, 118.
Land, Promised 310, 335.
our present Earth 310.
Languages, all, spoken by Initiate 433.
desire body gives ability for 433.
holiness of 295.
one only in future 433.
purpose of 295.
Larynx, built by creative force 269.
built when body was baglike 269.
horizontal, under group spirit 236.
originally part, of creative organs 269, 536.
required by ego 86, 236.
reproduction from in future 363, 425.
to speak creative word 363, 425, 587.
rose in place of 538.
traversed by currents in aspirant 477.
vertical, essential for speech 86, 236.
vertical man’s high achievement 236.
Law, all sinned under 383, 407.
first, of occult science 460 .
must be superseded by love 384.
purpose in establishment of 309, 310. -
race religions based on 880, 383, 386, 292.
same, governs world, man, and atom 410.
Law of attraction 46.
Law of Consequence, see Consequence, law of.
before Christ, humanity’s debt under 407.
Law of Cosmos, as to vehicles 379.
Law of Rebirth, see, Rebirth, law of.
Laws, each world has its own 29.
Laws of nature, great intelligences 49,
reflecting man’s morals 506-507.
Lay Brothers, not Rosicrucians 528.
leave bodies consciously 523.
pupils of Elder Brothers 523.
Legend of Light Elves and Night Elves 418-419.
Lemniscate of Caduceus 413.
currents of Earth Spirit 507, 509.
currents of ninth stratum 502.
currents of unused sex force 475.
Lemurian continent destroyed by voleanic cataclysms 291.
Lemurian Epoch 265-275, 331, 332.
Abel type of man of 166.
atmosphere of 275.
beings who worked in 265.
consciousness of body 283.
death first recognized 283, 362.
desire body added 165.


652 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Lemurian Epoch (cont.) consciousness of body 283, 287.
desire body divided 394.
desire world real to man 287.
earth’s crust molten 275.
fifth day of Bible 331.
man involuntarily clairvoyant in 241.
man’s food, milk and plants 166.
milk as food in 166.
Moon thrown off from earth 264, 331.
red blood developed 269.
schools or Initiation 272, 281.
science and art taught in 281.
separation of sexes 267-268, 346.
soft skeleton formed 346.
spoken word creative 363-364.
(Third Epoch) 165.
Lemurian Race, acquired upright walk 269.
animal-like 165, 289.
birth and death unnoticed by 277.
bodies of plastic 275.
could hear and feel at birth 276.
could not see physical world 287.
descendants of 289, 304.
developed magic of best kind 281.
education of 278-281.
enlightened by Lucifers 287, 288.
formulate idea of good and evil 280.
given germ of mind 265.
had inner perception 277, 283, 287.
had sensitive spots for eyes 276.
inspired by feelings 295.
language of 276, 278.
lived in latter part of Lemurian Epoch 275.
lived upon islands 275.
memory developed 279, 281.
not distinct until end of epoch 271.
parturition painless 277.
perceived light inwardly 276.
physical consciousness produced by pain 277, 279.
propagation directed by angels 277.
seed for Atlantean races 289.
spiritual perception due to purity 282.
unconscious of body 277.
word of power 278.
Lens, mind corresponds to 52, 426.
Lesser Mysteries, seven schools of 523.
open to man in Mercury half 413.
Levitation, forms subject to, in Desire World 29.
Liberator 528, 529.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 658


Life, and form in Bible stories 336, 344.

breathing things 381.

creation of, beyond man’s present power 427.

cycle of 146.

distinction emphasized 289.

ensouling animals 224,

ensouling man 73, 205.

ensouling mineral 232.

ensouling plants 226.

ensouling tree 495.

excellent division of 470.

existence of, in intangible state 210, 248.

experiences feeling 32.

four streams of 31.

Hebrew Nephesh 332, 346.

in every particle of food 457.

in first heaven 113.

in four kingdoms 85.

in purgatory 96-112.

in second heaven 121-129.

in third heaven 129-138.

limited by form 210, 247.

merges into form 247.

need for higher 469, 481.

not in many foods as germ 461.

of God in everything 495.

positive pole of spirit 247.

prevalent theories of 148.

primordial fount of, in earth’s seed stratum 504.

problem of 19.

proceded form 504.

purpose of 1381.

related to form 223.

school of experience 132.

second chapter of Genesis deals with 336.

seven rays are streams of 246.

successful 481.

taking for food 446, 460.

tree of 363.

uncreated 332, 504.

value of, lessened by conditions at death 101.
Life ether, avenue of procreation 36.

polarity of determines sex 36.

positive and negative 36.

ripens with birth of desire body 148.
Life force, inward and outward manifestation of 337.
Life, higher, requirements 469.

evolving, improves vehicles 338-340.
ife panorama, see Panorama of life.


654 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Life, sentient, requires desire body 57.

Life Spirit, awakened in Sun Period 212, 225.
cared for by Lords of Individuality 220.
Christ’s ordinary vehicle 376.
contains true memory of nature 398.
differentiation ceases in 378.
interpenetrates all planets 216.
linked to divine spirit 212.
linked to human spirit 215.
most active in Venus Period 423.
perception of, in world of 398.

receives physical world pictures through reflecting

ether 398.

reflected in vital body 266.

related to blood 397.

seat of, in pituitary body and heart 397.

sixth stratum of earth corresponds to 506.

spirit of love 399.

substance of, second veil of spirit 216.

to be absorbed by divine spirit 428.

to control blood circulation 399.

to control brain aréas 399.

world of, reflected in etheric region 51, 397.

Life waves.
angels 222, 349, 376, 427.
animals 70, 224.
archangels 222, 349, 876, 427.
fOUT TA, (Ds
Lords of Mind 222, 376. 427.
man 205, 426, 428.
minerals 2380, 282.
must remain in borders 342.
plants 226.
reabsorbed by God 200.
thrown off with earth 264.

Light ether, builds eye 36.
circulates plant juice 37.
deposits color 37.
develoned in third septenary period 144.
generates blood heat 36, 1438.
positive and negative 36.
sense perception result of 36.

Light existed before creation of luminaries 328.

Lime phosphate, injurious 448.
not found in urine of children 445.

Link, missing 342.

Liver and red blood in cold blooded animals 69.
desire body rooted in 68.
great vortex of desire body 10.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 655


Liver (cont.) makes the “liver” 70.
passing of currents through 69
same meaning in different languages 70.
Lives, memory of past 171.
Lives of man on earth 275.
Logic, and semi-circular canals 126.
best teacher 208, 440, 493.
developed in Aryan Epoch 309.
safest guide in all worlds 493.
Logoi, seven great 178, 181. '
Longevity, desirable from occult standpoint 444.
Lords of Destiny, see Angels, recording.
Lords of Flame, aid man 216.
aid man voluntarily 206, 216.
awakened divine spirit 207, 221, 225.
brilliant luminosity of 205.
give germ of dense body 206, 207, 221.
left our evolution 220-221, 326.
link human spirit 216.
most active between Saturn and Sun Periods 207-208.
reconstruct dense body 211.
the “Thrones” of Bible 206.
Lords of Form, assisted man in Lemuria 265.
assisted man in Polaria 262.
assumed charge of human spirit 220-221.
did actual work on bodies 220.
given charge of Earth Period 221, 240, 265.
reconstruct dense body 240, 242, 265.
reconstruct vital body 240.
used evolving life as instrument 220.
vivify stragglers 265.
Lords of Individuality, give germ of desire body 215.
given charge of life spirit 220.
had charge of Moon Period 214.
reconstruct dense body 214.
reconstruct vital body 215.
Lords of Mercury, aid man toward self-mastery 273.
communed with Gods 272.
created kings 272.
initiated humanity 272.
instruct man in leaving body 274.
sent to aid humanity 272.
stragglers 260, 272.
work on individual 278.
Lords of Mind, become creative 222.
considered evil 222.
expert mind builders 222.
Father, highest initiate of Saturn Period 376.
give germinal vital body 211, 215, 221.


656 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Lords of Mind (cont.) human in Saturn Period 376, 427.
implant separate personality 243, 266.
work with man 222, 427.

Lords of Venus, leaders of humanity 272.
messengers of the Gods 272.
stragglers 260, 272.
teach sacredness of speech 278.
withdraw giving free will 301-304.

Lords of Wisdom, give vital body 211, 221.
given charge of Sun Period 211.
have charge of divine spirit 220.
highest hierarchy of Earth Period 220.
link divine to life spirit 214.
originate vital body 215.
reconstruct dense body 211.

Lord’s Prayer 435-437, 462-466.

Lost tribes 310, 318, 335.

Lost word, see Creative word.

Love must supersede law 384.

Love, of personalities must be replaced 406.
to guide reason 311.

Love, universal to be desired by man 464.
altruistic, increases cross-stripes of heart 396.
creative soul-force of 285.
must supersede law 399, 405.
selfish personal use of 285.
transmuting hate 419.

Lower will, expression of desire body 394.

Lucifer Spirits, aim to help man to gain knowledge 287.
are demigods 286.
bring pain and suffering to man 287.
enlighten man 287.
free man from outside influence 287.
half way between angels and man 286.
instigate mental activity 288.
much maligned class 286.
nature of man’s temptations from 287.
needed physical brain 287.
result of, temptation 287, 361.
serpents of Bible 288.
spoke to woman 361.
stragglers of angelic host 286-291, 361.
unable to assume dense body 286.

Lungs, air in, tribal or family spirits work by means of 350.

Macrocosmic, concrete mind 142, 145.
desire body prevents excessive growth 140-142.
vital body, wisdom of 1389-141.

Magi, the three, see Wise men,

Magicians of Lemuria 280.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 657


Man, acquired ability to make sound 219.
activities of Jehovah with 345-347, 352.
aided by beings from Venus and Mercury 271.
all four ethers dynamically active in 59.
and his evolution 87-146.
and his religion keep equal pace 367.
and origin of life 504.
an open book in Jupiter Period 70, 418.
applies himself to Earth life 167.
ascends to God in four steps 302-308.
becomes creator in three worlds 270.
becomes highly creative in future periods 427.
Biblical creation of 332.
body of, once round in shape 257, 536.
brings disorder into nature 468.
brotherhood of 355, 385, 898, 399.
builds body in heaven 128.
builds form to suit environment 252, 339.
carnivorous in Atlantis 166.
compared with other kingdoms 57-60, 71.
constantly improving vehicles 340.
constitution of 59, 86, 88, 95.
created present environment 154.
creative ability of, limited in Earth Period 426-427.
cultivation of “self” frees from family and race
spirit 358.
danger of being enslaved by possessions 386.
develops superphysical faculties by training 440.
directs force inward to build vehicles 255, 337, 536.
directs force outward in building environment 337, 536.
disposition affects length of life 456.
education of, in Lemuria 279.
emancipation of, through love 399,
enlightened by Lucifers 287.
evolved from unconsciousness 185, 284.
evolution recapitulated in embryo 255, 343-344.
expanding consciousness of 414.
fall of 282-286, 360-364.
free will gained by 84, 287, 363, 301-303.
gained death from Lucifers 287.
gained knowledge by his functions 277, 537.
gaze turned outward 190.
higher type than angels in human stage 69.
in animal stage lacked warm red blood 69.
in Atlantis, not indwelling 534.
individualization of 355.
individualized, law unto himself 72.
inherently a virgin spirit 398.
initiations of 416.


658 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Man (cont.) inverted plant 86.
in Moon Period fed by milk of nature 477.
is an indwelling spirit 367.
keynote of each 369.
know thyself 535.
loses half creative power om gaining brain and
larynx 285, 300.
loses memory of spiritual existence 167.
loses spirtiual sight 167, 287, 300.
loves and thinks selfishly 285.
must conquer race religions from within 380.
must expand consciousness 189.
must learn by experience 131, 3838.
never inhabited bodies of present animals 341,
not descended from anthropoid ape 3841.
neglects earth conditions 167.
never inhabited other planets 275.
next step in development of 190.
nine number of 500.
origin of faculties 59-64.
physical hardening of, through life 442.
pineal gland first sense organ of 262.
plantlike condition of 166.
power of, in Lemuria 278.
present power of, limited to chemical region 298-299.
progress of, through seven periods 189, 190.
relation to anthropoids 342.
relation to God 177-182.
represented in symbolism of cross 86, 534, 538.
response of, to solar and lunar currents 267.
self-generated when plant-like 535.
separate personality in Earth Period 248.
sevenfold constitution of 88.
seven human principles of 88, 485.
should follow promptings of heart 398-399.
sorrowed over loss of inner vision 359.
started evolution in Saturn Period 205, 427.
still under race spirit 384.
tenfold constitution of 95.
thinks in his heart 398.
type of, in Atlantis 292.
two forces work in 288.
will create by spoken word 364.
Man, see also Humanity, Races, ego vehicles.
Manichees, order of 418.
Manifestation, active, depends upon separateness 247.
day of 183-184, 190, 244, 388, 411, 495.
implies limitation 181.
progress in 249.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 659


Manifestation (cont.) seven great periods of 188.
various stages of 184.

Mankind, most advanced of, initiated by Mercurians 2792.
help needed during stage of individualism by 401.
nature forces aroused by anti-spiritual tendencies of 508.

Marriage, chastity of imperative 471.
honeymcoon trips 219.
in clan commanded by race spirits 353.
in clan retains pictures in blood 3855.
international 355, 359.

* reproduction the duty of 469.
triba] 353.

Marrow, necessity for 148, 456.

Mars, action of, in blood 268, 274.
canals of, atmospheric currents 259.
desire body of, interpenetrates earth 268.
life on, low development of 259.
man never lived on 275.
mystery of 259.
orbit of, has changed 268.
polarized iron 268, 274.
thrown off sun 259.

Mars-Mercury occult name for Earth Period 274, 411.

Mary highest type of purity 378.

Masons, have little of occult 501.
system of Initiation in past 501.

Masoretic translation of Bible 320.

Mastery of matter, purpose of evolution 201.

Material Science, and story of Atlantis 291.
attempts of, to “create” life 299.
doctrine of amphibians of 382.
efforts of, to discover origin of life 504.
gradually accepting occult ideas 511.
plays the part of God 3238.

Materialism, causes volcanic disturbances 1138, 510.
age of, dark from spiritual standpoint 529.
combated by Rosicrucians 118, 518, 529..
destroys all vehicles 2381.
diseases caused by 118.
effect on post-mortem progress 112, 118, 510-511.
effects of 409, 511.
hardening tendencies of 118, 511.
may cause ego to leave evolution 231.
of present, alarmed Leaders 113, 518.
theories of, require a Creator 323.
theory of death of 149.
theory of, regarding origin of religion 367.

Materialistic theory 149-150.

Materiality, acme of, has been passed 199, 401.


660 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Materialization 62.
Mathematics, cultivates abstract thought 203.
liberation gained through 203.
proficiency in, due to semi-circular canals 126.
requires space-perception 126.
study of, advocated by Pythagoras 203.
Matter, all forms of, chemically the same 31.
crystallized spirit 120, 186, 247.
densest in Earth Period 199.
devoid of feeling 31.
merges into spirit in chaos 247. :
molded by mind 149, 587.
of Bible 322.
primordial 875.
related to spirit 120, 121, 247.
resolved into spirit 121.
shuts spirit from consciousness 76, 216.
spirit’s pilgrimage through 87.
worlds of various states of 29.
Meat, see also Food.
Meditation, an aid in building inner vehicle 489-492.
deals with form side 494.
exercise of 489-492.
history of object traced by 494.
richness of knowledge gained by 489.
union of ates and lower natures accomplished by
Mediums, centers of desire body of, revolve counter clock-
wise 4738.
have retrograded 241.
lower vehicles loosely connected, 62.
read reflecting ether 38.
unreliability of 41, 474.
Mediumship, development of, easy 474.
produced by looseness in vehicles 62.
Memory, Conscious, promotes growth of Intellectual Soul 96.
conscious, cultivated by Lemurians 281.
in Atlantis greater than now 296.
intellectual soul grows by exercise of 424.
relates to experiences of this life 91.
storehouse for thought forms 90.
Memory of nature, exists in three regions 88, 398.
candidate for initiation watches revolutions and epochs
in 525-526.
explains heart anomaly 396.
man sees his ancestors in 354,
thought forms recoverable in 29.
Memory of past life, incident of 172-174.
responsibility of 171.
Memory, three kinds 91-92.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX


Memory, sub-conscious, blood the vehicle of 353, 397.
expunging record from 111.
impressed on vital body 91, 462-468.
in patriarchs 354.
in reflecting ether 101, 526.
of family history 354.
of this life 91.
Memory, super-conscious, engraved on life spirit 92.
impresses reflecting ether of vital body 92.
not always subject to reason 92.
of past experience 92.
Menstruation due to positive vital body in woman 60.
Mental consciousness of Earth Period 420.
Mental pictures in blood 358, 354.
Mental types in earth strata 511.


Mercurians work to help man toward Initiation 274.


Mercury (metal), as medicine 274.
frees ego from dense body 274.
Mercury (planet), beings from, aid man 271.
beings of, far advanced 272.
emerging from planetary rest 275.
influence of, increasing 275.
man never inhabited 275.
polarized metal 274.
staff of 410, 412-414.
thrown off from sun 263, 272.
Mercury, Lords of, see Lords of Mercury.
Mercy urged by heart 393.
Mesmer sent by Elder Brothers 512.
Messengers of Gods 272, 301, 304.
Metals, significance of 499.
Michael, Archangel 405.
Microbes expelled by vital body 68.
Migrations, of birds 219.
Milk aided evolution of desire body 166.
as dietary factor 447.
correct way of drinking 454.
of St. Paul’s simile 520.


special gastric juice required in digestion of 237.


Millennium, self-government, a requisite of the 278.
Mind, acquired in Earth Period 222, 426.


661


acquisition of, required change in desire body 394-895.


activity of, instigated by Lucifers 288.

aids lower will 394.

and heart, chasm between 17, 393.

arrogates rule of ego 394.

beneficial training of, in mathematics 202, 208.
birth of 142-148.


662 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Mind (cont-) coalesced with desire body 298, 394.
concepts of, furnished by 89, 353.
confers separate personality 266.
contributes to spiritual growth 95.
control of matter by 149.
development of, at first Great Initiation as at end of
Earth Period 502.
during sleep in Desire World 93.
extracted at death 97.
focusing point of ego 89, 95, 393, 426.
germinal, given by us to humanity of Vulcan Period 428.
given by Lords of Mind 222, 265.
given to man in Atlantis 298.
gives purpose to action 298.
goes with ego into Desire World 103.
highly creative in Jupiter Period 427.
in mineral stage 298, 426.
is not yet one-pointed 426.
linked to desire 395, 465.
macrocosmic, concrete 142, 145.
method of working of 89-91.
mirror or focus of matter and spirit 266.
most important instrument of spirit 425.
mystery of, revealed by first Great Initiation 502.
necessity of 57, 75, 298.
of child who dies, ete. 117, 172.
open, advantages of 7.
organs of, undeveloped 75.
prayer for 435, 464.
race religions given to emancipate 395.
resolved into threefold spirit essence 129.
to attain creative perfection in Vulcan Period 422.
to be absorbed by divine spirit 428.
to create living, growing forms in Jupiter Period 427.
to ene dte We: growing, feeling things in Venus Period
Ue
to create living, growing, feeling, thinking creatures in
Vulcan Period 427.
unfolded by man 166.
union of, with heart 18.
unorganized 75, 76, 481.
use of 57, 75, 298.
waking activities tear down body 92.
wedded to desire 395.
Mind, Lords of, see Lords of Mind.
Mind stuff, basis for thought 30.
manner of selection of 133.
Mineral, all gases are 166.
becomes human in Vulcan Period 428.
compared to man 56.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 663


Mineral (cont.) consicousness is that of trance 85.
entered evolution in Earth Period 232, 428.
group spirit of, in Region of Abstract Thought 74, 85.
has no feelings 65.
inert, due to lack of finer vehicles 58.
lack of conscious activity in 58.
latest life wave in Earth Period 74, 428.
lowest ether only active in 58.
planetary ether envelops 58.
present humanity works with 427, 428.
responds to impacts without consciousness 32.
will reach human stage in Vulean Period 342.
Mineral state, forms of stragglers go back to 3438.
breaking of, gives Earth Spirit pleasure 65.
Mining operations give feeling of relief to Earth Spirit 505-
506


Missing link 342.
Mission of Christ 367-410.
Missionaries, foreign 163, 308.
Mixing Blood, ceremony of 145, 353.
Mongolians, see Atlantean races (subhead Mongolians).
Monkeys, see Anthropoid Apes.
Moon, abode of failures of life wave 264.
and Sun forces in propagation 283.
beings of, degenerate 334.
eighth sphere 264-265.
emanations of, crystallizing 265, 334, 346.
field of disintegration 264.
Jupiter’s fourth 259.
Moon Forces, active in form building 265.
cause death 265.
in intra-uterine development 334.
work in female as imagination 267, 268.
Moon Yeriod, all-consciousness lost in 216.
atmosphere of, “‘fire-fog”’ 213, 217.
beings of, had gill-like organs 228.
beings of, had horizontal animal-spine 228.
characteristic of, moisture 213.
Cherubim aid man in 215, 221, 229.
classes evolving in 226.
consciousness of, internal pictures 217.
dense body reconstructed in 214.
described in Bible 328.
division of globe 218.
evolutionary status of man in 216, 217, 228.
flowing currents of 217, 219.
globes of, were water 213.
human spirit linked to divine spirit in 215.
human spirit linked to life spirit in 216.


664 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Moon Period (cont.) humanity of, the angels 222, 349, 376.
Lords of Individuality took charge of 214.
Lucifer Spirits progress in 286.
man becomes able to make sound in 219.
man fed upon milk of nature 447.
man gains germinal desire body 214-215, 422.
man in animal stage in 217, 228.
man suspended by cord 217, 228.
migratory propagative flights in 219.
mineral-plant soil of 227.
muscles acquired in 214.
pictures of, seen involuntarily by man 473.
pioneers of, fruit trees 342.
plants and minerals in 227, 228.
satellite of 219.
Seraphim awakened germ of human spirit in 215, 221,
228.


sympathetic nerves originated in 239. e
stragglers of 265.
three elements 234.
three kingdoms of 234.
vital body reconstructed 214-215.
Moon Revolution (third) of Earth Period 242, 243.
work on desire body in 209.
Moons, beings of, may return to parent planet 260.
dissolution of 260.
encircling planets 255.
purpose of 218, 259-260, 264.
Moral growth 39.
Morning Exercises 697.
Moses, face shines at death 406.
is reborn as Elijah 405.
Mosses, lowest degenerations of plant kingdom 3438.
Motives, four admirable 464.
Motion, an aspect of Supreme Being 178, 181.
Mountain, place of initiation 169.
Muscles, atrophying 478.
expression of desire body 395.
originated in Moon Period 214.
operated by desire body 455.
operated by ego 89
stronghold of desire body 455.
two kinds of 896.
Muscles, Involuntary, controlled by will 396.
heart only involuntary muscle cross striped like volun-
tary 396.
lengthwise stripes of 396.
Muscles, Voluntary, built by desire body 394.
stripes lengthwise and crosswise 396.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 665


Music and color, relation of 123, 124.
and work upon archetype 123, 124.
in sounds of nature 123.
of heaven world produces color 123.
of the spheres 119, 122.
second heaven home world of 80, 119, 123, 124.
spiritual wings of new Slavic race 305.
‘ vibrations of, affect form 122, 369, 375
Musical ability 126.
Musica] keynote of every ego 369.
Musician, mission of, to connect man with heaven 127.
Muspelheim, south fiery boundary of Chaos 247.
Mysteries, greater 529.
probed by heart and mind 18.
Mysteries, lesser, and earth’s strata 499-500.
deal with Earth Period 525.
deal with Mercury half of Period 413.
given to Lemurians 414.
nine degrees in 501, 525-528.
religion, science, and art taught in 517.
schools of 488, 520, 529.
Mystic, usually devoid of intellect 520.
unused sex currents of 475, 478.
Mystic Cross and Star 389.


National spirit, influence of, to be transcended 398.
Nations, rise and fall of 289.
Nations, separate, originated in Atlantis 296.
have had their day 4387.
Nature, changes of, slow 184, 226.
processes of, slow 226, 348, 368.
with acquisition of thought, man loses power over
298.
Nature Forces, agents of retributive justice 506-507, 508.
Nature spirits, dead work with 126.
Nebula, fiery, is spirit 249.
Nebular theory related to occult science 249, 322-325.
fails to explain many facts 514.
requires a creator 3238.
theory 205.
Negro, dense body of 290.
descendant of Lemurian 304.
helped by one of own race 318.
Nephesh, see Breath.
Neophyte must understand what he sees 480.
Neptune influences astrologers 260.
not of our solar system 260.
Nerve, pneumogastric 398.


666 ROS1CRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Nerves, an expression of desire body 353.
and vital fluid 63.

Nervous system, divided in Earth Period 239.
expression of desire body 353.
originated in Moon Period 214.

Nervous system, Cerebro-spinal, built by desire body 394.
and brain, secondary vantage of human spirit 397.
under control of will 476.

Nervous system, Sympathetic, controls involuntary mus-

cles 395.
started in Moon Period 239.

Nervous system, voluntary, started in Earth Period 239-240.

Neshamah, Hebrew word for soul 350.

New Galilee, sixth epoch 308, 805, 311, 360.

New heaven and new earth 313.

New Jerusalem in First Heaven 116.

New Race led by highest Initiate 304, 305.
progenitors of 3811.
seed of, from America 305.

New Testament, Christian Teaching of 315.

New Year, birth of 390.

Niflheim, cold foggy north boundary of Chaos 247.

Nimrod, type of Atlantean 166.

Nine, number, hidden in age of Christ 501.
most significant number 500.
number of Adam 500.
number of beast 499-500.
number of humanity 500-501.

Nine strata of earth 499-500.

Noah and wine, symbols 168.

Norsemen and test of blood mixing 145, 353.

Nose, base of, stronghold of divine spirit 397.
vital and dense bodies congruent at 293.

Not peace but sword 383-3888.

Nuclei of world globes persist in Chaos 247.

Number, an aspect of God and Man 253.
of Adam 500.
of the beast 499-500.
of humanity 500-501.
of the saved 501.

Nutrition and assimilation 457.
chocolate, importance of 452.
facilitated by cheerfulness 456.
importance of water in 446, 449.
phosphate of lime retards 443.
phosphorus, element of, in vegetables and fruits 453.
science of 441-457.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 667


Nutrition (cont.) sugar important in 447.
sugar, no phosphorus in refined 453.
value of plants and fruits in 452, 458-460.
Nutrition, see also Food.


Objective consciousness 417, 421.
creative 419, 421.
Objective Consciousness, see also Waking Consciousness.
Observation, important aid to aspirant 492.
neccessary in superphysical worlds 25, 492.
student should learn by 181.
Obsession, how to diagnose 173.
in anger 144,
Occult discovery of earth’s third motion 512.
exercises, warning concerning 399-400.
key to Bible 319.
knowledge, acquirement of, without proper motive dan-
gerous 22.
Occult schools, correlated to seven rays 488.
rites of initiation vary in B02,
seven orders of 438.
six steps of “Preparation” in 502.
teachings of, not definite about periods preceding and
following Earth Period 503.
Occult science, first law of 460.
seven secrets of 506.
teaching of, respecting sex function 471.
Occult. scientist, does not merely “believe” 147.
finds oer to heart anomaly in memory of nature
396.
food of 505.
investigates earth 498.
sees one life in all 495.
uses concentration as prayer 463.
Occult student learns by observation 181, 182.
Occultism, and science 99.
valuable books of, reconciled 270, 274-275.
Occultist, sees twelve colors in spectrum 253.
test of true 400.
unused sex currents of 475, 478.
Oceanic region 50.
Old Testament contains Jewish religion 308.
“On earth Peace, Goodwill toward men” 391.
Only Begotten, see Word.
Organs atrophying and developing 473.
dormant 473.
Original Semites, see Atlantean races (subhead Original
Semites).


668 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Original Semites (cont.) chosen people of Jehovah 309, 334.
dense and vital bodies become concentric in 300.
developed cunning 299, 309, 335.
difficult to guide 309.
lose sight in inner worlds 300.
married outside race, 310, 335.
see objects clearly defined 300.
used faculty of thought 299, 309.

Original sin esoterically explained 278.

Original Turanians, see Atlantean races (subhead Original

Turanians).

Osmosis first form of assimilation 263.

Ossification of dense body 442-448, 453.

Ova, difference in, indistinguishable between higher animals

and human being 348.
impregnated, worked on by mother’s desire body 138.


Pain and the bearing of children 278.
educational benefits of 131.
factor in developing independent thought 363.
factor in developing Lemurian’s bodily sensibilities 279.
in amputated limb 64.
in education of Lemurian 279.
Paine, Thomas, liberation of, from race spirit 350.
Painter learns to build artistic eye 126.
Panorama of life and retrospection 111.
basis of pleasure and pain 109.
ego watches 101, 102, 114.
in desire world 108.
in etheric region 102.
length of 102.
obtained from blood 398.
read in reflecting ether 135, 161.
Panoramas, two 129, 180.
Paralysis from condition of vital body 68.
Parturition, painful, cause of 283.
Passion, region of 44-45.
Past lives, memory of 171.
Paternalism superseded by individualism 393.
Paths, mystic and occult 520.
Patriarchs, long life of 354.
Patriotism, eliminated through international marriage 355-
fanatical, bar to progress 307, 312.
from race spirit 350, 359, 360.
superseded by altruism 355.
Peace and a sword 387, 388.
on earth 387.
that passeth understanding 122.
Peat, mineral-plant 227.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 669


Pentecost and gift of tongues 433.

Perception in Atlantis 293.
of higher worlds 24.

Periods and fo mending states of consciousness 189, 417,
and seven days of creation 327-433.
comparative length of 420, 421.
cosmic night of rest between 196, 243.
man’s progress through 189.
not related to planets 190, 412.

Periods, Seven, from man to God 188.
harmonize with Bible teaching 317.
incarnations of earth 188-193.

Perpetuation of race by angels 283, 288.

Persistence, no results without 487.
reward of 496.

Personality in desire body 248
desire body seeks to rule 348.

Phallicism taught spiritual regeneration, 534.

Philanthropist works in heaven 120.

Philosopher’s Stone, each makes for himself 488, 519.
formed of concrete material 519.
formula of, given esoterically 438.
handled by many 438.
making of, symbolized 519.
wrought by Christ 520.

Philosophies recognize involution and evolution 185.

Philosophy of Rosicrucians logical 8.

Phosphorus, brain needs 452-453.

Phosphorus, element peculiar to brain alone 452-453.
found in vegetables and fruits 458.
necessity of, for brain in mental and spiritual work 458.

Physical world, chemical region of 29-34.
densest 29, 187.
etheric region of 34-38.
man must conquer 300.
matter and force inseparable 149.
occupies less space than higher worlds 180.
reflected in higher regions 43.
seven divisions of 380.
transformed by imagination 426.
valuable as experiment station 32. \
world of form 119.

Physical world, see also Earth.

Picture consciousness of animals 83.
dream or internal 74, 83, 217, 415, 419, 421.
self-consciousness 418, 419, 421.

Pilgrimage through matter, beginning and end of 87.
culmination of 429.


670 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Pillar, Him that overcometh will I make a 158.
Pineal gland and pituitary body 473-477.
awakened by training 477.
degenerated 262.
dormant at present time 473.
first sense organ 261, 262.
now connected with voluntary nervous system 477.
organ of clairvoyant sight 477.
third eye 262, 473.
vantage of human spirit 397.
vibratory union with pituitary body 479.
will again connect man with inner worlds 473, 477.
Pioneers of animal kingdom 234.
of Earth Period receive mind 265.
progress of, result of adaptability 337, 342.
provided for 372.
Pituitary body and pineal gland 473-477.
awakened by training 477.
dormant at present time 478.
now connected with voluntary nervous system 477.
spiritual exercises for 478-479.
vantage of life spirit 397.
will again connect man with inner worlds 478, 477.
Planes, see Cosmic Planes.
Planetary ether interpenetrates form 58.
Planetary desire world interpenetrates physical world 65.
Planetary spirits, bodies of, spherical 255.
collectively are God 253.
differentiated hierarchies 182.
replaced by regents 182.
God’s ministers 180.
possess vehicles 252, 253.
Seven Spirits before Throne 180, 252-253.
threefold 182.
Planetoids, see Asteroids.
Planets, birth of 258.
bodies of planetary spirits 255.
each has three worlds 53.
evolution of 256.
satellites of 255.
seven, circle around our sun 255.
‘ thrown off from Sun 259, 271, 272.
unknown, in our solar system 513.
Plant as food 458, 460.
chaste generation of 535.
circulaticn of sap in 37.
compared to other kingdoms 56, 57, 86.
consciouness of 85, 458.
deposit of color in 37.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 671


Plant (cont.) explanation of inertness of 58, 69.
extirpation of, causes pain to Earth Spirit 65, 505.
group spirit of, in center of earth 85.
group spirit of, in Region of Concrete Thought 74, 865.
guided by angels 349, 427.
life of seed of, withheld by group spirit 461.
of Hyperborea 331.
of today moulded from Hyperborean 331.
only chemical and life ethers active in 58.
remains of, found in polar region 512.
started evolution in Moon Period 226, 427.
vital body of, built by angels 222, 349.
will reach human stage in Venus Period 342.

Plato’s theory of world soul 85.
story of Atlantis 291.

Pliny the Elder 510, 511.
elder 510-511.

Pneumogastric nerve 398.

Poems (quoted).

Chambered Nautilus. Oliver Wendell Holmes 159.
Creed or Christ. Max Heindel.

Dying and bringing to birth. Johann von Goethe 249.

I am the Voice of the Voiceless) Ella Wheeler Wilcox


460.
One Ship Sails East. Ella Wheeler Wilcox 168.
Sun intones his ancient song. Johann von Goethe 119.
Though Christ a Thousand Times Be Born. Angelus
Silesius 389. -
Vision of Sir Launfal. James Russell Lowell 115, 116.
When self-control he gains. Johann von Goethe 137.
Who is the Grail? Richard Wagner 389.
Poets inspired in Heaven World 120.
Poetry soul’s expression of feeling 119-120.
Polarian Epoch (first) 261-262, 830-381.
dense body in 165, 2638.
earth and man ethereal in 165.
evolution of earth during 261.
function of pineal gland in 261.
humanity evolves in a fiery condition 261.
man of, mineral-like 165, 261.
mankind confined to polar region of sun 261.
mentioned in Bible 330.
recapitulation of Saturn Period 263.
reproduction of man in 262.
Polyps, last degeneration of mammals 8438.
Possessions, worldly, a source of worry 386.
Power, first aspect of Supreme Being 178, 374.
Power, in words 295.
an aspect of Supreme Being 178, 181.


672 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


“Powers of Darkness” 222.
Prayer and concentration 468.
Lord’s Prayer 485, 462-466.
misuse of 386, 434.
proper use of 434.
saves post-mortem misery 4638.
unceasing 434.
Precession of equinoxes and rebirth 159.
Primordial substance 321.
Prisms, vital body built of 10.
Prisoners, humane treatment of 385.
Probationers, enter service of humanity 531.
must sever connections with other occult orders 531.
must shun “circles” or negative gatherings 531.
spiritual exercises performed in private 532.
Progress is Salvation 229.
result of adaptability 223, 303, 337, 340.
three factors in 337.
through loss of some faculty 300.
Progression or retrogression 341.
spiritual or physical 515.
Promised land, present earth 310, 335.
our present Earth 310, 335.
Propagation in Polarian and Hyperborean Epochs 262-263.
Propagation through life ether 36.
duty of 472.
Proselyting 308.
Psychical Research, Society for 140.
Psychometrists 38.
Ptolemaic system has points needed in physical world 514.
Puberty, changing of boy’s voice at 536.
Purgatory, avarice eradicated in 108.
benefits from 104, 109, 114.
children exempt from 117.
drunkenness eradicated in 105.
experiences built into seed atom in 114, 120.
life is shortened in, by restitution 107.
method of avoiding 111.
occupies lower regions of desire world 112.
purpose of 110.
suicide’s experience in 104.
suffering in 107.
time in, usually one-third of life in physical world 107.
Pythagoras demanded study of mathematics 203.
and music of the spheres 119.


Quartz, significance of 499.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 673


Race bodies, deve:opment of 289.
Race, must not identify ourselves with 307.
Race Religions aid humanity 438.
based on law, 380, 383, 386, 392.
creators of sin 880, 383.
enumeration of 374, 383.
fifth, conquering world of matter 168.
fundamentally separative 384.
influence man from without 380.
*nspired by same spiritual impulse 515.
Jehovah the author of 334, 374, 380, 383, 488, 485.
Jewish 312.
peculiar to Earth Period 271.
point to one who is to come 386.
prepare for union with Jehovah 433.
present insufficiency of 388, 395.
purpose of 3895, 483, 435.
spiritual solar impulses via moon 4038.
Race spirits, the archangels 834, 349, 403.
considered group before the individual 352.
exercise a protectorate over evolving humanity 348.
foster patriotism 350.
gain entrance to blood by means of air inspired 350,
356, 380.

guide the races through the blood 350.

instigate wars 3384.

promote pride of race 351.

realize deficiencies of religion 383.

still work with man 359.

unrelenting law of 384.

under rule of, groups were considered before indi-
viduals 392.

Race spirits, see also Archangels.

Races and their leaders 270-2738.
degeneration of 289, 290.
evanescent feature of evolution 311.
first evolved in Lemurian Epoch 271.
of fifth epoch 305.
of future aided by Mercury 275.
perpetuation of, controlled by angels 288.
progress through epigenesis 344.
sixteen in our evolution 271.
sixteen paths of destruction 306-307, 312, 401.
steps in evolution 312.
to end with coming epoch 305, 312.
worked upon by race spirits 350.

Ray, Brothers of same 4388, 439.

Rays, seven, of humanity 439.

Reality of higher worlds 28.


22


674 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Reason, cunning transmuted into 309.
based in desire 396.
frustrates designs of ego 399.
gained in Aryan Epoch 298.
in conflict with heart 398.
superseded by love 311.
to satisfy, aim of Rosicrucians 439.
Rebirth and Law of Consequence 147-174.
and precession of equinoxes 159.
Christian doctrine 164, 170.
compatible with justice 153.
continued embodiments in perfecting vehicles 153,
338-340.
ego’s preparation for 133-139.
evidenced by genius 155.
not adequate for stragglers 401.
proved by occult investigation 147.
provides purpose for living 132, 133.
purpose of, gaining experience 130, 131, 158.
reconcilable with Christ’s atonement 401.
regulated by sun’s position 159.
temporary suppression of truth of 167, 168.
Rebirth, Law of, allows free will in detail 129.
applies to evolution of earth 412.
brings ego back to work for self and others 183.
compatible with evolution 151.
connected with planetary movements 159, 160.
differs from transmigration 157.
explains life 157.
law of, not unalterable 160-161.
law of, secretly taught 160-169.
meets individual need 161.
public teaching of, forbidden by Christ 164, 165.
repeated embodiments in gradually improving vehicles
153


taught in story of blind man 170.
taught prior to Christ 167.
Rebirth, see also Consequence, law of.
Rebirths of our Earth 190, 401.
Recapitulation always on higher spiral 208, 245.
and embryo 255.
as spirals within spirals 245, 420-421.
Bible refers to 329.
in ante-natal development shows past stages of evolu-
tion 255, 343-344.
necessary at beginning of each period 208.
of previous periods 208-209, 420-421.
shows past stages of evolution 3438-344.
takes up new work 209.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 675


Reconstruction of earth’s surface 129.
Recording Angels, see Angels, Recording.
Red blood and indwelling spirit 86.
Red blood, warm, and indwelling spirit 69, 86, 268, 274.
outgoing current of 69.
cold, currents of, directed inward 69.
Redemption, see Salvation.
Reflecting ether, carries pictures to life spirit 398.
records of, unreliable 38.
records of; used by mediums 388.
reflects memory of nature 87, 38.
retains record of every happening 387.
transmits thought 38, 90.
Reflection of higher worlds and regions in lower 51.
Regent of earth 408.
Regents of planets 182.
Regions of physical world 30, 54.
of thought world 30, 54.
subdivisions of different 380.
Regions, see ulso Worlds.
Reincarnation. see Rebirth.
Relaxation preceding concentration 485.
Religion, evolution of 367.
evolves with man 367.
four steps in 302, 308.
proselyting objectionable 164, 308.
true. embodies science and art 516.
Religion of Father, see Father, religion of.
orthodox, fetters of 519.
universal, to be Christianity 367.
Religions, earlier, preliminary to Christianity 164.
hidden teaching in 520.
pre-Christian, taught rebirth 167.
various, necessary 371.
Repentance, 107, 111.
Replenish, significance of word 832-883.
Reproduction, duty of 539.
Repulsion and attraction 42, 43.
dominates lower desire world 42.
in thought processes 46, 89, 90.
mainspring of, is self-assertion 45.
shatters vice 47.
Rest between periods and revolutions 250.
compared with sleep 94.
Restitution, purgative effect of 107.
Retrogressior or progression 841.
Retrospection advances aspirant 111.
review 01 day’s ..appening 111.
shortens purgatory 111.
Return of good for evil 398.


676 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Revenge imprinted on vital body 463.
form of memory of desire body 468.
Revolution, circle of life wave 196.
present 199, 209, 245.
Revolutions and cosmic nights 195-200.
as correlated to man’s vehicles 209.
globes and periods of 412.
in Bible narrative 327.
of Earth 199, 209, 236-245.
recapitulate period 208-209, 212, 245.
rest periods between 2438-245.
three and one-half completed 199, 209.
Rhythmic vibrations, power of 122.
Rib of Bible narrative 347.
Rmoahals, see Atlantean races (subhead Rmoahals).
Root of Nose, seat of divine spirit 292-293.
Rose Cross, aim and end of human evolution 519.
Initiation of 519.
points to man’s ultimate perfection 519.
reveals Philosopher’s Stone 519.
symbolism of 5384-5389.
Rosenkreuz, see Christian Rosenkreuz.
Rosicrucian only known by brothers 250.
Rosicrucian Brotherhood, Christian Rosenkreuz link with
higher council of 528.
consists of thirteen 522.
devoted to making Philosopher’s Stone 519.
emblem of 522.
five brothers of, never leave temple 523.
formed on cosmic lines 521.
founded by Christian Rosenkreuz 518.
guards secret of creation of life 299.
head of, hidden from world 523.
Hierophants of Lesser Mysteries 520.
invisible power behind governments 520.
lay brothers live in world 523
mediators between man and Gods 804. 327.
one of the seven schools of Lesser Mysteries 438.
seven brothers go into world 528.
teachings correlate spiritual truths with science 521.
teachings for intellectual 439, 478. 521.
work of, for world 529.
Rosicrucian Brotherhood, see also Elder Brothers.
Fellowship 530-533.
greeting 538.
methods aim to make pupil self-reliant 531.
Rosicrucians:
Bacon 251, 518.
Baldus 251.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 677


Rosierucians (cont.) Boehme 251, 518.
Comenius 250.
Goethe 249, 519.
Helmont 251.
Paracelsus 251.
Saint-Germain 433.
Shakespeare 251.
Wagner 389, 519.
first occult school giving particulars of periods preceding
and following Earth Period 508.
Round table, knights of 409.
Royalty, Atlanteans institute 295.


Sacrifice, of Christ beacon of hope 378.

of self to Christ 372.

law of the spirit 368.
Saint-Germain, Comte de, incarnation of Rosenkreuz 433.
Saint-Germain, see also Christian Rosenkreuz.
Saint Paul believed in rebirth 315.

gives deeper teachings to qualified 320.

had an inner and outer teaching 520.

had knowledge of race spirits 350.

saying of 389, 434, 506.

“third heaven” of 146, 528.

uses allegory 319. |

Salt injurious 457.

Salvation, and A oars of sin 378, 402.
Christian doctrine of 400.
evolutionary plan 229.
is progression 229.
needed by many 402.
promised 315.
theology’s plan of 150, 151.

Saturr destroys his children 206.
second planet thrown off sun 258.

Saturn Period, Biblical narrative of 327-328.
candidate consciously views evolving life in 525-526.
consciousness of, trance-like 206.
darkness and warmth prevailed in 205.
dense body and divine spirit gained in 207.
densest globe in region of Concrete Thought 204- 205, 222.
evolution of 195-196.
in world of divine spirit 216.
life of incorporated in globe 205
Lords of Flame work on globes of 206.
Lords of Mind humanity of 222, 376, 427.
man mineral-like 205, 212, 427.
one element of 234.


678 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Saturn Period (cont.) sense organs, ability to develop,
in 206.
stragglers of 224, 230.
virgin spirits in world of divine spirit in 216.
Saturn Revolution, (first), brain formed in, of Earth Period
236.


first work on dense body 208, 236, 239.
Savages, descendants of Lemurians 289, 304.
Savior, physical and spiritual 391.

Savior, see also World Savior.
Science and Art, corroborates occultism 99.

deals only with form 185, 248, 342.

embodied in true religion 516.

erroneous conclusions of 342.

must become reverent 299, 410.

taught in initiation temples in Lemurian mes 281.
Science, orthodox, fetters must be repudiated 519.

overlooks degeneration of form 291.

Science, occult, harmonizes with science 322.

theories of, regarding earth strata 498, 511.
Scotch, clairvoyance of 354.

Second Coming depends on separation of church and state
386.
in sixth epoch 360.
unifying effect of 384.
Second sight, see Clairvoyance.
Seed Atom, Dense, blood etches picturés upon 398.

fastens silver cord 98.

forces of, leave body at death 97.

forces of, retained from life to life 97.

forces of, retained in all vehicles 97.

gathers new material 134.

in left ventricle of heart 97, 396.

nucleus for next body 97.

of world globes persist in chaos 247.

placed in semen 1387.

returned to Jesus by Christ 408.

withheld by group spirit 357, 461.

Seed Atom, Desire, extracted in First Heaven 120.

nucleus for new desire body 134.

seat of conscience 120.

Seed Atom, Mind; gathers new mind material 135.

Vital, forces of, extracted after death 103.
Seed, of Abraham 351, 352.

of those born of God 538.

Seed-Race, but few of, remained faithful 310.

under care of Jehovah 334.

Seeing not synonymous with knowing 25.
Seer, true, aim of 68.
Seismic phenomena, scientists seek physical causes of 498.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 679


Self and Not-Self 358.
Self-assertion, mainspring of repulsion 45.
Self-consciousness, object of descent into matter 189, 216.
possession of, enabled man to exercise will 166.
until attainment of, man led by higher beings 166.
Self-cultivation necessary 384, 393-394.
Selfhood, conversion of, into selfishness 397.
Self-mastery 273, 537-538.
Selfishness routed by altruism 368.
Semi-circular canals 126.
Semites, original, see Atlantean races, (Subhead, Original
Semites).
Sensation due to separate vital body 504.
of earth exists in fiery stratum 504-506.
Sense Organs, ability to develop, given in Saturn Period 206.
of genius 155, 161.
to be outgrown in future 262.
Sense perception, Lemurian had at birth 276.
through light ether 36.
Senses, higher, dormancy of 24.
Sensitives stragglers or pioneers 241.
Separateness, limitation of life by form 247.
Separation of sexes, see Sex separation.
Septuagint 320.
Seraphim, aid man voluntarily 215.
awaken germ of human spirit 215, 221, 228.
did not aid in creating form 326.
not mentioned in Creation Story 326.
passed to liberation 220-221, 326.
worked in Moon Period 215, 221, 228.
Serpentine Path of evolution 413, 414,
Seven Spirits before Throne, see Planetary spirits.
Seven unspeakable secrets 506.
Sex, alternation of, from life to life 160.
current necessary to work in inner worlds 478.
determined by life ether 36.
origin and end of 364.
Sex Force, abuse of, prompted by Lucifers 287.
aspirant must conserve 471.
half of, feeding brain 285, 467.
manifestation of, in inner worlds 267.
proper use of 472.
reflection of Holy Spirit’s creative energy 468.
stored in blood 144.
transmutation of 467.
used in inner growth 284, 536.


680 | ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Sex Function, abuse of, causes pain 278, 283, 288, 362.
and opening of man’s eyes 283.
controlled by angels 277, 283.
designed solely for perpetuation of species 288.
for propagation only 468, 469, 471.

mania leads to insanity 536.

obligation of 468-469, 472, 539.

Sex Separation, Biblical story of 347.

brain and larynx built by 269, 284.

consummated when earth was thrown off sun 268.

in Lemuria 267-270, 346.

Shakespeare, William, authorship of 251.

Sheep and goats, no arbitrary division of 224.

Sight gained in Atlantis 276.

Silence of Second Heaven 122.

Silent Watcher, see Divine Spirit.

Silver cord, both ends meet in vital seed atom 10.
completion of, ends childhood 10.
connects higher vehicles to dense body 97.
grown anew in each life 10.
joins heart, solar plexus, and liver 10.
rupture of, causes death 98, 102.
shape of 98.

Sin, against Holy Ghost 468.
natural consequence of race religions 380, 383.
purgation of, in purgatory 107.
taken away by Christ 408.
visited upon children 468.

Sin, forgiveness of, see Forgiveness.

Sinners, salvation of 402.

Sixteen paths to destruction 231, 306-307, 312, 401.

Sixteen races 231, 271, 306, 312, 401.

Skeleton indicates state of consciousness 456.
material expression of divine spirit 397.
originated in Moon Period 214.
pliability of, in Lemuria 275, 346.

Skepticism blinds to truth 6.

Skin important eliminating organ 444.

Slavs, future of 306.

Sleep, blood leaves brain when body goes to 239.
compared to death 102.
compared with rest 94.
fatigue of body removed in 94, 481.
induced by collapse of vital body 93.
lower ethers active during 482.
not an inactive state 93-94.
restores harmony 93.
similar to perfect concentration 483.
work of aspirant during 484, 485.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 681


Solar energy exhausted in digestion 239.
energy utilized by vital body 63.
fluid in vital body 68.
forces in Hyperborea fed man 269.

Plexus negative center of development 241.

Solar system, coagulation of 187.
creation of 183, 321, 323.
creator of, a logical necessity 129, 323.
God the architect of 179-181.
goes through birth and death 1838.
planetary spirits in 180, 258.
reason for 246.

Solar systems departments of God’s kingdom 180.
float in world of life spirit 55.
purpose of creation of 183.

Son, religion of, see Christianity.

Son, the creative word 181.
highest Initiate of Sun Period 376.
unifying religion of 384.

Sons of God marry daughters of men 810, 335.

Soul amalgamated with spirit 425.
creation, stories of 344-346.
intellectual, absorbed by life spirit in Venus Period 425.
is here to acquire experience 4382.
of all flesh in blood 850.
scientific attempts to weigh 99-101.
spiritualized product of body 95.
theological doctrine of creation of 148-151.
transmutation of bodies into 425.
yearns for power 17.

Soul, animal 482.

Soul force, twofold 284.

Soul growth depends on spirit’s activity 96, 424.
method of producing 95, 96, 424-426.
promoted by activity of dense body 96.

Soul Life, region of 47.

Soul Light, region of 47.

Soul Power, attained by evolution 189, 429.
region of 47.

Soul, Threefold, constitution of 95, 424-425.
evolved by spirit within 424.
spiritualized product of bodies 95, 96, 424, 485.

Souls, transmigration of, no basis for 158.

Sound builds climate, flora, and fauna 125.
in Second Heaven as color 124.
in Second Heaven builds bodies 124.
music of spheres 119, 122.


682 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Sound (cont.) power of 122, 181, 369.

power of 122, 181, 369.

vibrations of, change form 122, 369.
Sound, harmonious, factor in amalgamation 124.

rhythmic, creative power of universe 181.
Sounds of Nature, Earth’s “tone” 123.

in Lemuria 276-277.

Space, non-existent in higher worlds 29 .

sigpificance of 247.

unevystallized spirit 249.

Spectrum, invisible colors of 258.

and seven rays of virgin spirits 489.
Speech in Jupiter Period 234.

Lemurian considered, most holy 278.
Spermatozoon embodies human will 284.
Spheres, music cf 119, 122.

Spina) cord, Lucifers work in 361.
Spine, vertical, required by ego 86, 236.
Spiral, evolutionary path is 151, 152, 227, 413.

of attainment 420.

prevents duplication 227, 428.

within spirals 245, 420.

Spirit, independent of form 31.

involution of 337.

limitations of, in matter 81.

matter, states of 179.

meets form 266.

one, pervading all space 381, 247.

positive pole of, life 248.

refracted divisions of 398.

treasures of, retained from life to life 431.
Spirit Divine, see Divine Spirit.

Spirit Life, see Life Spirit.

Spirit, Threefold, see Ego.

Spiritual consciousness, highest 421.
Spiritual force from Sun 86, 390.

Spiritual growth 431.

Spiritual perception, faculties of 25, 41, 480.

of Atlanteans 294.

Spiritual powers to be regained by man 300.
Spiritual sight, see Clairvoyance.
Spirituality, must evolve through intellect 305, 306.

same wave of, inspired great religions 515.
Spleen, gate of vital body 63.

now controlled by desire body 455,

post-mortem suffering of 104.

specializes solar energy 238.

Sport, killing animals in 461.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 683


Staff of Mercury 410, 412-414.
Stages, four great, of past and future 416.
Starfish, plant-animal 234.
Star of Bethlehem 389, 391.
Star of Rose Cross, symbolism of 522.
Stars, successively become pole star 160.
the clock of destiny 163.
Stellar forces and creative function 278, 283, 362.
Steps, thirteen, and their correlations to stages of conscious-
ness 416.
thirteen in animal kingdom 416, 500.
three, to achieve union with higher self 432.
four great, to God 302.
Sterility and death of races 290.
cause death of races 341.
produced by strange blood 357.
Sthanu, signification of word 158.
Stimulants injurious for dying 101.
Stomach, blood accumulates in, after feeding 239.
ego acts upon 238.
Stragglers, and newcomers 223-232.
Christ came to aid 401.
classes of 226.
distinguished from failures 264.
form dark spots in sun globe 225.
Lucifer Spirits are 286.
may overtake pioneers 224.
of Moon Period 228.
of Sun Period 225.
promoted in Moon Period 229.
redemption of 265.
take forms outgrown by pioneers 340.
Strata of earth 499, 503-504.
Students of Fellowship Teachings are not Rosicrucians 528.
enrollment. of 530.
Subconscious memory, see Memory subconscious.
Subjective activity, illustration of 207-208.
Success through concentrated purpose 487.
refined, no phosphorus in 4538.
valuable in diet 447.
Suffix of surnames, origin of 351.
Sugar, contains no ash 447.
Suggestion, as an aid to medicine 63.
man becoming less amenable to 83.
Suicide, archetype of, persists after death 104.
post-mortem, suffering of 104.
Sun, breaks up into zodiac 256.
central 258.
effect of, upon earth 265, 390.


684 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Sun (cont.) emanates from central source 258.
exalted beings occupy 180, 1
evolution of, demands expulsion of stragglers 258.
human evolution confined to polar region of 261.
light of, contains all colors eae
man’s highest influence from
planets thrown off from 258- te 264, 271, 272.
planet evolves into a 256.
symbol of spiritual power 181, 390.
wabbling motion of 160.
works in male bodies as will 267-268.
works in vital body 2665.
Sun, spiritual, and Holy Night 391.
forces of 258, 390.
impulses of 515.
promotes soul growth 515.
Sun Period, alimentary canal and glands started in 211.
animals were mineral-like in 224.
Biblical mention of 328.
Cherubim work with man in 211, 212.
Christ highest Initiate in 3838.
Christ regent of 407.
consciousness of, dreamless sleep 213.
dense body reconstructed in 211.
densest globe in desire world 349.
germ of vital body given in 211.
globes of, gas-like consistency 210, 213.
globes of, were sensitive 210.
highest globes in World of Life Spirit 216.
humanity of archangels 349, 376.
life spirit linked to divine in 212.
life spirit started in 212.
life wave traverses globes of 198.
light existed before creation of sun 328.
Lords of Wisdom work in 211.
man plant-like in 213.
stragglers caused sun spots in 225.
two elements in 234.
virgin spirits blinded by second veil sof matter in 216.
work on vital body begun in 210, 211
Sun Revolution (second) of Earth Period, vital body recon-
structed in 240.
Sun Spirit, Christ is 391.
Sun spirits, see Archangels.
name of, in ancient race religions 383.
Sun spots, atavistic remainder from stragglers 225.
Sunlight, reflected, modified vibrations of 403
spiritual, floods earth 407.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 685


Superconscious memory, see Memory, superconscious.
Supreme Being, architect of universe 179, 374.
dissolves universe at end of manifestation 375.
known as THE ONE 181.
three aspects of 181, 375.
Surnames, origin of affix 351.
Survival of the Fittest, law for the body 368.
Sword, not peace 387.
perverted cross 392.
Symbols in three-dimensional world 534.
Sympathetic nerves, originated in Moon Period 239.
Sympathetic nervous system, see Nervous system, sym-
pathetic.
Syphilis, mercurial treatment of 274.


Talmud 320.

Teacher, attracted to neophyte 495, 496, 524, 525.
confidence in, necessary 440.

Tears, cause of 60.

Temper, injurious effect of 144, 455.
control of 463.
of youth and desire body 144.

Temperament, a factor in spiritual development 520.
and heredity 138.

Temples of Initiation, in Lemuria 281.

Temple, midnight services in 529.
no golden key to 524.
of Rosicrucian Order, lay brothers visit 523.
veil of, rent 390, 407

Temples, face the east 383.
in past open only to Initiates 390.

Temptation, purpose of 110, 282.

Tenfold Constitution of Man 95.

Terms, (in this work) best available 227.
relative 233.

Teutonic-Anglo-Saxon Race 290, 305, 392.
American branch of, has most flexible bodies 290.

The One is the Supreme Being 181.

Theological theory 148-151.

Theories, three, of life and death 147-148.

Third eye, pineal gland 262.

Third Heaven, see Heaven Third.

Thorah 319, 321.

Thought, absract, beneficial efects of 203.
activities selfish 285.
acts upon brain 89.
breaks down nerve tissue 399.
burns its way through obstacles 487.
controlled by life spirit 399.


686 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Thought, abstract (cont.) cost of 270.
creates image on photographic plates 537.
cunning first attempt at 309.
destined to become objectified 417, 418, 427.
destroying power of 92, 399.
determines character 398.
developed in Aryan Epoch 298.
effect of twin forces upon 89.
existed before brain 18.
expression of, highest privilege 236.
function diminished after eating 239.
gained in Atlantis 297, 299, 309.
gained with sacrifice of power over Nature 298.
generation and projection of 89-91.
great power of, usually wasted 486.
ideas transformed into 88, 486.
molds body 149.
molds matter 537.
must be generated by spirit from within 486.
physical world trains ego to use 33, 126.
protects as guardian angel 47.
reflecting ether transmits 38.
related to memory 90, 91.
result of unchaste 472.
transmission of 90.
Thought, Abstract, Region of, location of 48.
reflected in Desire world 51.
seed stratum of earth corresponds to 504.
Thought force, means of gaining knowledge 487.
permanent 29.
ultimate reality 28.
Thought forms clothe ideas 49.
permanency of 28.
return to their creator 91.
Thought, Concrete, Region of, archetype in 49.
divisions of 49-50, 54,
emotion as atmosphere in 50.
furnishes mind stuff 49.
location of 48.
models of Earth in 125.
region of, clear pictures of memory of nature in 38.
tone apparent as color in 124.
water stratum of earth corresponds to 504.
Thought, logical, semi-circular canals cause 126.
Thought, World of, central position of 48.
ego functions directly in 88.
extends beyond desire world 58, 179.
forms of, act as balance wheels 49.
highest of man’s present evolution 48.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 687


man obtains mind stuff from 30, 49, 88.
realm of music 119.

regions and subdivisions of 48, 54.
relation of four kingdoms to 70.

second heaven in 119, 146.

spirit and body meet in 48.

third heaven in 119, 146.

Threefoldsoul, see Soul, Threefold.

Threefold Soul, see Soul, Threefold.

Threefold spirit, see Ego.

Thrones, see Lords of Flame.

Thymus gland, stores blood in child’s body 148.

Time non-existent in higher worlds 29.
amplitude of 388.

Tlavatlis, see Atlantean Races, (subhead Tlavatlis).

Toltecs, see Atlantean races, (subhead Toltecs).

Tone produces color 1238, 124.
creator of form 123, 369.

Torah, see Thorah.

Trance 149.

Trance-like consciousness 74, 85, 212, 415, 421.
abeyance of recuperative forces in 94.
experiences in 149.

Transmigration of souls, no basis for 158.
retrogression 157.

Transmutation of baser metals into gold 438.
of bodies into soul 425.
of evil 43.
of motives 464.
of sex force 467.
work of, by Elder Brothers 529,

Tree of Knowledge 278, 362, 363.

Tree of Life 363. .

Tribal Spirit, appears. as a cloud to trained clairvoyant 350.

Trinity, Christian doctrine of 253, 376.

Trinity, of good, true, and beautiful 517.
of religion, science, and art 516.

Trottes worked on by Jesus 409.

Truth, higher always ahead 440.
is eternal 23.
many aspects of 321.
shall make you free 23.

Tuberculosis, cause of 113, 511.

Na see Atlantean Races, (subhead Original Turan-
ians).

Twelve and One, a cosmic grouping 521-522.

Twin feelings, interest and indifference 46, 54.

Twin forces, attraction and repulsion 46, 54.
will and imagination 284.


688 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Twofold energy, universal creative force 324.
man uses selfishly 285.
Unbelief, injury from 440.
Upright walk required by ego 86.
Uranus first thrown off sun 258.
life on, backward 258.
Union with God 495.
United States, melting pot 305, 306, 315.
Universal Brotherhood 311.
Universe, formation of 324, 325.
logic in 440.
maintained by God 324.
Unselfishness will release creative force 537.
Urinary system, saves man from early grave 444.


Vegetables contain very little ash 446.
Vegetarians versus meat-eaters, contests of 459
Vehicles center at root of nose 292
prayer for 452.
Vehicles, higher, have no specialized organs 75.
improved by advanced egos 289
leave body at death 97.
must shine to attract teacher 496.
of Christ Jesus 377, 406.
of each kingdom 73.
of new-born 139.
of the Trinity 376.
positive forces of individual necessary for use of 141.
retain ovoid form 255.
separate, importance of 58.
spiritualization of 124.
Veil of Isis 293.
Veil of Temple rent 407.
Venus, one side always to sun 219.
beings of, more evolved than man 271.
pole of, points to sun 219.
thrown off from sun 263, 272.
Venus, Lords of, see Lords of Venus.
Venus Period, consciousness of man in 419.
desire body perfected in 422.
divine spirit absorbs life spirit 428.
essences of bodies acquired by desire body in 428.
globes of, as in Sun Period 199, 200.
Initiate of, the Apostle John 502.
intellectual soul absorbed by life spirit in 425.
life spirit most active in 428.
mind creates in 427.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 689


Venus Period (cont.) minerals, the animals of 428.
plants human in 342, 428.
Vesuvius, eruption of 508.
Vibration, atoms have rate of 375.
each world has different rate of 187.
of pituitary body 479.
rhythmic power of 122, 369, 375.
varying rates of, determine substance 40.
Vicarious Atonement, see Atonement, vicarious.
Vice shattered by repulsion 47.
Vikings understood spiritual effects of haemolysis 353.
Virgin Mary 378.
Virgin Spirit always gives wise counsel 398.
clothed in vehicles 87.
man is 398.
to acquire soul power and creative mind 189, 429.
triple phase of 223.
Virgin Spirits, become unconscious 201.
constitute creative hierarchy 326.
differentiated within God 188, 216.
evolution of, depends on adaptability 228.
expressing as animals 81.
have independent will 189.
potentially God 189.
seven rays of 246, 438.
total number of, saved 231.
World of, atomistic stratum of earth corresponds to 507.
Virgin Spirits, World of, ego conscious of God in 189.
become unconscious 189, 201.
becoming experts in building chemical bodies 222.
constitute creative hierarchy 221, 326.
have being in 87, 189, 216.
Virgin, zodiacal sign of, on Holy Night 390.
Virtue built by attraction 47.
distinguished from innocence 282.
Vision, suitable glasses recommended as an aid to faulty 492.
Vital body absorbs solar energy 63.
amputated limbs and pain in 64.
anesthetics affect 62.
angels work in 288, 349.
appears to expand after death 108.
belongs to physical world 97.
birth of 141-142.
blood and glands expressions of 238, 397, 455.
builds and restores dense body 60
built by angels 222, 349, 427.
causes menstruation and tears 60.
Christ’s vehicle at Second Coming 381.
collapse of, produces sleep 92, 93.


690 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION
Vital body (cont.) color of new-blown peach blossom 60, 63,
2538.


composition of 58-61, 482.

congruent with dense body at root of nose 293, 294.
constructed of prisms 10.

decays with dense body 102, 103.
determines shape of dense body 60.
development of, object of esoteric traiaing 381, 481-482.
division of 481.

effect of hypnotism upon 62.

effect of prayer upon 434, 463.

eliminates disease germs 63.

embedded in dense body 61.

essence of, absorbed in Venus Period 424, 425.
ethers of, separated by Initiation 482.
expands after death 108.

extends beyond dense body 59, 60.

forms particular type of brain 135.
function of, to soften and build 455, 456.
given by Lords of Wisdom 211.

has straightened out 255.

immortal part of 482.

impressed with pictures of coming life 135.
impressed with revenge by desire body 463.
in animals 77, 298.

in four kingdoms 58.

in Jupiter Period absorbs dense body 422.
in Jupiter Period man’s lowest vehicle 242.
in likeness of physical body 240.

in medium 62.

in ordinary individual interlocked 62, 241.

in third stage 75, 76.

Initiations affect 404, 405.

intuition from 92.

looseness of, causes clairvoyance 241.

lower ethers active in sleep 482.
macrocosmic 139-140, 141.

matrix of 187.

medium of propagation 288.

memory resides in 94.

method of purifying 111, 482.

molds dense body 60, 137.

must conquer desire body 463.

next to physical body in organized efficiency 240.
now being separated from dense vehicle 242.
obtained in Sun Period 211, 212.

of Atlantean 293.

of different kingdoms 58, 59, 77.

of Lemurian woman developed memory 280.
of man 60.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 691


of woman 60.
panorama of life in 91, 185, 357.
perfected in Jupiter Period 422.
positive, causes menstrutation and tears 60.
prayer for 462. ;
prepared for Initiation 404, 481.
prismatic seed atom of, in solar plexus 10.
promotes sex love 397.
purification and control of 483-435.
radiations of 63.
reaction on dense and desire bodies 441.
reconstructed in Earth Period 240.
reconstructed in Hyperborean Epoch 262, 263,
reconstructed in Moon Period 214, 215, 240.
Recording Angels mold 135.
repetition builds 434.
requisite for growth 58.
ripening of ethers in 143.
rooted in spleen 10, 63.
seat of memory 481.
seed atom of, withdrawn at death 108.
sensation due to separate 505-506.
sensitized by prayer 92.
separate vehicle 240-241.
separation of ethers 481.
silver cord, both parts meet in seed atom of 10.
spiritualized product amalgamated with life spirit 124.
started in Sun Period 422.
unhealthy radiations of 63.
vehicle of sense perception 94.
vehicle of soul flights 482.
vibrates dense body 61, 62.
victory over desire body 468.
war with desire body produces consciousness 455, 456.
weighed by scientists 100.
will surpass physical vehicle in efficiency 242.
wthdrawal of, in sleep 93.
withdraws at death 97, 100, 102.
Vital force becomes rose-colored 63.
carries message to muscles 63.
comes from sun 62.
expels germs 63.
stopping of, causes sleep 93.
Vital forces from ethers 85.
Vitality element in Region of Concrete Thought 50.
Voice, vibrations of, form geometrical figures 369, 537.
Volcanic, action, and materialism 508, 511.
destroyed Lemuria 291.
eruptions and earth’s constitution 498-514.
nature forces cause 508.


692 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


Vulcan Period, consciousness of 421.
corresponds to the week 411.
corresponds to white containing all colors 413.
creative powers in 427, 428.
divine spirit strongest in 423.
emotional soul absorbed by hurnan spirit 425.
essences of bodies incorporated into mind 4238.
function of man in 428.
globes of, as in Saturn Period 200.
Initiation of, symbolized by Christ 502.
last period of our evolution 411.
man perfected in 427.
mind becomes purified 422.
minerals become human 428.
minerals humanity of 342.
recapitulations of preceding periods 411.
revolution, (seventh) work on Divine Spirit 209.
seventh day of creation 366.


Waking consciousness 74, 88, 300, 415, 420, 421.
Walk, upright, necessary to ego 86.
War, industrial, more destructive than military 393.
War between heart and mind 17, 384, 398.
death as result of 118.
race spirits instigate 334.
Warm red blood, and indwelling spirit 69, 86, 268, 274.
outgoing currents of 69.
Washington, Booker T., and help given negro race 313.
Water brings forth life-breathing things 3381.
changed to wine 169.
earthy matter in 444.
important in nutrition 446, 449.
in Atlantean Epoch 291
lines of force in 27,
Water, distilled, valuable 445. 446.
Wealth, opportunities to serve through 464.
purpose of 432.
Western peoples, vanguard will offer their bodies as “‘liv-
ing’ sacrifices 316.
World, Western, 118, 510, 518, ae 521, 523, 529.
“Whatsoever a man soweth” 1
Wilderness, wandering of ay in 3835.
Will, an aspect of God 182, 323.
and experience 131.
expression of desire body 394.
first aspect of God 178, 324.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 693


Will (cont.) indispensable soul force in propagation 284.
male power of, allied to Sun forces 267.
man frees himself by 362, 485
office of, in thought 89.
power, cultivation of, in Lemuria 281.
projects ideas into mind 88.

Wine added to diet 168 .
counterfeit spirit 169.
evolutionary factor 165-172.
water changed to 169.

Wisdom, cosmic, in World of Life Spirit 398.
an aspect of God 182, 323.

Eastern, teachings of, misconstrued 270.
human, and animal instinct 79, 84.
obtained through striving 22.

second aspect of God 324.

should guide motion 324-325.

Wisdom, Lords of, see Lords of Wisdom.
acquired by evolution 282.

Wisdom of Nature, will supersede brain knowledge 363.

Wise men 889.

Wolff, Caspar, his theory of generation 838.

Woman, allied to Lunar forces 267.
and Lucifer Spirits 361.
and painful parturition 283, 362.
developed memory 280.
education of, in Lemuria 279.
intuition or 92.
pioneer in culture 280.
positive vital body of 60, 280.

Word, creative, see CreativeWord.

Word, aided in creation 374.
“Alone-Begotten Son,” the 374.
aspect of Supreme Being 181.
highest power in universe 374.
lost 363.
made flesh 181.
spoken, in Jupiter Period 418.
spoken, of power in Lemurian 278, 295.

Words, spiritually understood 234.
use of, highest human privileve 236.

Work of ego, union with higher self 482.

World, Christ took away sin of 408.
has dominion over man 386.
unwilling to consider anything “too” unselfish 385.

World, Desire 29.

World, each, requires separate vehicle 57, 379.

World globes and chaos 247.

World of Divine Spirit 29.
virgin spirits unconscious in 189.

World of God 29.


694 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


World of Life Spirit, see Life Spirit, world of (See also 29).
World, Physical, see Physical World. (See also 29.)
World Savior, humanity led by star to 389.
World Soul crucified 85.
World of Thought, see Thought, World of (See also 29).
World of Virgin Spirits, see Virgin Spirits, World of (See
also 29).

World, Western 17, 118, 315, 470, 510, 518, 520, 521, 523, 529.
Worlds, higher, man now creates in 270.

higher, at crucifixion 407.
Worlds, called into existence separately 188, 375.

denser than ours 233.

each of seven, subdivided into seven regions 29.

each planet has three 53.

each vibrates at different rate 187, 375.

evolutionary scheme of 186-188.

five, field of man’s evolution 87, 188.

formation of 187, 375.

higher, created first 188.

interpenetrate 53, 55, 187, 233.

logic safest guide in all 440.

man loses touch with 294.

seven, vary in density 29, 54, 186-188.

three densest, comparatively evanescent 188.

universe divided into seven different 29.

visible and invisible 24-55, 186-188.


Yoga systems used in India 437.


Zodiac and rebirth 160.
as “clock of destiny” 163.
of Denderah 512.
Zodiac, signs of 221.
Zodiac womb of solar system 256.
Zohar written by occultists 319.


INDEX OF DIAGRAMS AND TABLES.


No. Page
The Four Kingdoms and Their Relation to the Three
\W/OHIGEL AAS ee ati eS AAS ep Rao c soln COIs 16
1—Relative Permanency of the Visible and Invisible Worlds 52
NOR SCVEN  WOL]dS:. «2.2.6 cn ci cre waragens otthels oleae eeateteecs. cis 54
o— Vehicles of the Four Kingdoms......:..... 0562 sane 73
4—Consciousness of the Four Kingdoms.................. 74
Seven-told. Constitution of Man: 5.2 ././.. . <a e 88
5—Three-fold Spirit, Soul, and Body..................... 95
Bis aes Sy heCy alk £0) 06 bese econ elo cing bit ole! anens 98
JN MLnttes Cyne eins ora rietn i oio aie aa om bin arte octaio lo psibid one 146
6—The Supreme Being, the Cosmic Planes, and God....... 178
eet omes Ag IET ELOPIO Ms aj. sx, «ne eee ls cise chemin ove iat otay artis alles coe 193
Sm vonlasiad: Globes, and) 7 sPeriods Wage... jan le 2 aevaels vs 197
S—They Twelve: Creative Hierarchies. 0.0... nes ees e ness 22
Classessat Dawn of Moom Period. ois tacicaee nace sss 22
10—Classes at Dawn of Earth Period; their vehicles and
status then; and their present status............... 230
in Thewla3, 7 and 10 Aspects of God and Man. ......... 252b
algo Ge WALOIO IEE Gree 6 anie60 ocd oto so pocmOorceE moc 264
12—Man’s Past, Present, and Future Form............... 257
a3 Phe Beginning and Hnding of Sex.......-.....00...55 364
SS oMeTE aS OL! CLEALION yale ac tein create ore stiegetemh yea 48 etre 366
14—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; their vehicles and status
LEMME MU TVETSC:. lapsncraicianieis ats a tei Cralieteric sles eos BCU
Pee NDOVE, 50 -Below,.?? sasha. ccc's, «oe Qos onside emacs ain 410
DayspotawWeek and Correspondences). ....5..52..5.75..0% 411
5 Symbolism of the Caduceus... .....csmsoceees eases cee 413
Classification of the Animal Kingdom.................. 416
Periods and Corresponding Consciousness.............. 421
MIS tesmOis EH OOCMAVANTIOS aria lciayatevenetetstel suelacers louse ciel sloverashete,« 450-1
em OR SEPA VOR. .yonycMNerss stole. stataisto.0,.clehes w’aiese ls ot loach ants 464
Hi ransmutation Of  SeCX-CULTENtS. «22. amie eere sis stele sels esis 475


TS CONSHItULLON, OL) thea Ei Arth topes ciate <1e) s\ereraleraxareisene it iereiei ere te 509


~ - Le @ i
, e , beg
+ af
Sn yes 4 «
nae Bar
e x 2 bs
eee rs
H vos ¥ wre 4.4.0" Pit
: '
hy " . oa
t
ite at
H *. ’ 1
Witing? J i
i ‘
Ay
< j :
‘
4édit + |
y ‘
Aik }
A F
i 7 oe its
‘ f
\ ae
¢ - 7 vt * 4 2 A
t ; f lanes) ’
-« a ‘ af
Pais apy iy ne ee
{ ' / Ay
qe y te i
{ i) . ¥ ay
~ jit AT ‘ ue eta
d > P ‘ ‘
,} savy ve fie a a laf rs .
Bs | .


; ’ : rites hall


tee eee an ey
; Te aio sid


ry .
_ y

4 {

al ° var) a ia ae a Myr Sipe aa.

¥ 4 ee Car
‘ edt ;

Lip? ‘ ; i et Se) ee >
7 ‘


el eet in wil Ga be

ga <8 ; = tthyel i de wtih al Mae
} ; AY way fagh ape Nya Onw Tl ia hall fe

5 Peer din’ te Rees eh wo


a a » Af is ys
Wi eae ste i
ind


¥ »" i we :
. ) af Ys -
: er nh ee ed
a J Py} ; =
bs es . . Was i
. 94 ee ae 9 7 ap


697;


Morning and Loening Lxercises Performed
by the Rusicrucian Aspirant


THE EVENING EXERCISE
(Mentioned on page 111)


The evening exercise, Retrospection, is of greater value
than any other method in advancing the aspirant upon
the path of attainment. It has such a far-reaching
effect that it enables one to learn now, not only the les-
sons of this life, but lessons ordinarily reserved for fu-
ture lives.

After going to bed at night the body should be relaxed.
Then the aspirant begins to review the scenes of the day
am reverse order, starting with the events of the evening,
then the occurrences of the afternoon, of the forenoon,
and the morning. He endeavors to picture to himself
each scene as faithfully as possible—seeks to reproduce
before his mind’s eye all that took place in each pictured
scene with the object of judging his actions, of ascer-
taining if his words conveyed the meaning he intended
or gave a false impression, or if he overstated or under-
stated im relating experiences to others. He reviews his
moral attitude in relation to each scene. At meals, did
he eat to live, or did he live to eat—to please the palate?
Let him judge himself and blame where blame is due,
praise where merited.

People sometimes find it difficult to remain awake
till the exercise has been performed. In such eases it
is permissible to sit up in bed till it is possible to follow
the ordinary method.


698 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


The value of retrospecticn is enormous—far-reaching
beyond imagination. Jn the furst place, we perform the
work of restoration of naarmony consciously and in a
shorter time than the desire body can do during sleep,
leaving a larger portion of the night available for out-
side work than otherwise possible. In the second place,
we live our purgatory and first heaven each mght, and
build into the spirit as Right Feeluong the essence of the
day’s experience. Thus we escape purgatory after death
and also save time spent in the first heaven. And last,
but not least, having extracted day by day the essence
of experiences which make for soul growth, and having
built them into the spirit, we are actually living in an
attitude of mind and developing along lines that would
ordinarily have been reserved for future lives. By the
faithful performance of this exercise we expunge day
by day undesirable occurrences from our subsconscious
memory so that our sins are blotted out, our auras com-
mence to shine with spiritual gold extracted by retrospec-
tion from the expervences of each day, and thus we at-
tract the attention of the Teacher.

The pure shall see God, said Christ, and the Teacher
will quickly open our eyes when we are fit to enter into
the ‘‘Hall of Learning,’”’ the desire world, where we ob-
tain our first experiences of conscious life without the
dense body.


THE MORNING EXERCISE
Concentration, the second exercise, is performed in the
morning at the very earliest moment possible after the
aspirant awakes. He must not arise to open blinds or
perform any other unnecessary act. If the body is com-
fortable he should at once relax and commence to con-
centrate. This is very important, as the spirit has just


MORNING AND EVENING EXERCISES 699


returned from the desire world at the moment of wak-
ing, and at that time the conscious touch with that world
is more easily regained than at any other time of the
day.

We remember from Lecture No. 4 that during sleep
the currents of the desire body flow, and its vortices
move and spin with enormous rapidity. But as soon as
it enters the dense body its currents and vortices are al-
most stopped by the dense matter and the nerve currents
of the vital body which carry messages to and from the
brain. It is the object of this exercise to still the dense
body to the same degree of inertia and insensibility as in
sleep, although the spirit within is perfectly awake, alert,
and conscious. Thus we make a condition where the
sense centers of the desire body can begin to revolve
while inside the dense body.

Concentration is a word that puzzles many and carries
meaning to but few, so we will endeavor to make its
significance clear. The dictionary gives several defini-
tions, all applicable to our idea. One is ‘‘to draw to a cen-
ter’’; another from chemistry, ‘‘to reduce to extreme
purity and strength by removing valueless constituents.”’
Applied to our problem, one of the above definitions tells
us that if we draw our thoughts to a center, a point, we
increase their strength on the principle that the power
of the sun’s rays is increased when focused to a point by
means of a magnifying glass. By eliminating from our
mind for the time being all other subjects, our whole
thought power is available for use in attaining the object
or solving the problem on which we are concentrating;
we may become so absorbed in our subject that if a
cannon were fired above our heads we would not hear it.
People may become so lost in a book that they are


700 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


oblivious to all else, and the aspirant to spiritual sight
must acquire the faculty of becoming equally absorbed in
the idea he is concentrating upon, so that he may shut
out the world of sense from his consciousness and give
his whole attention to the spiritual world. When he
learns to do that, he will see the spiritual side of an ob-
ject or idea illuminated by spiritual light, and thus he
will obtain a knowledge of the inner nature of things un-
dreamt of by a worldly man.


When he has reached that point of abstraction the
sense centers of the desire body commence to revolve
slowly within the dense body, and will thus make a place
for themselves. This in time will become more and more
defined, and it will require less and less effort to set
them going.

The subject of concentration may be any high and
lofty ideal, but should preferably be of such a nature
that it takes the aspirant out of the ordinary things of
sense, beyond time and space; and there is no better
formula than the first five verses of St. John’s gospel.
Taking them as a subject, sentence by sentence, morning
after morning, will in time give the aspirant a wonder-
ful insight into the beginning of our universe and the
method of creation—an insight far beyond any book
learning.


After a time, when the aspirant has learned to un-
waveringly hold before him for about five minutes the
idea upon which he is concentrating, he may try to sud-
denly drop the idea and leave a blank. Think of noth-
ing else, simply wait to see if anything enters the vacuum.
In time the sights and scenes of the desire world will fill
the vacant space. After the aspirant has become used to
that, he may demand this, that, or the other thing to


MorRNING AND EVENING EXERCISES 701


come before him. It will come and then he may inves-
tigate it.

The main point, however, is that by following the
above wmstructions the aspirant ws purtfymng himself ; his
aura commences to shine and will without fail draw the
attention of a teacher who will depute someone to give
help when required for the next step in advancement.
Even if months or years should go by and bring no
visible result, rest assured that no effort has been in
vain; the Great Teachers see and appreciate our efforts.
They are just as anxious to have our assistance as we
are to work. They may see reasons which make it inex-
pedient for us to take up work for humanity in this life
or at this time. Sometime the hindering conditions will
pass, and we shall be admitted to the hght where we can
see for ourselves.

An. ancient legend says that digging for treasure must
be done in the stillness of night and in perfect silence;
to speak one word until the treasure is safely excavated
will inevitably cause 1t to disappear. That is a mystic
parable which has reference to the search for spiritual
illumination. If we gossip or recount to others the expe-
riences of our concentration hour, we lose them; they can
not bear vocal transmission and will fade ito nothing-
ness. By meditation we must extract from them a full
knowledge ot the underlying cosmic laws Then the expe-
rience itself will not be recounted, for we shall see that
it is but the husk which hid the kernel of worth. The
law is of universal value as will be at once apparent, for
it will explain facts im life. and teach us how to take
advantage of certain conditions and to avoid others. The
law may be freely stated at the discoverer’s discretion
for the benefit of humanity. The experience which re-
vealed the law then will appear in its true light as of


702 ROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION


only passing interest and unworthy of further notice.
Therefore the aspirant should regard everything that
happens during concentration as sacred and should keep
it strictly to himself.

Finally, beware of regarding the exercises as a burden-
some task. Estimate them at their true worth; they are
our highest privileges. Only when thus regarded can we
do them justice and reap the full benefits from them.


Simplified Scientific Lphemeris


1860 TO DATE, PRICE, 25¢ EACH YEAR


THIS IS A SUPERIOR EPHEMERIS
IssvuED AT A SMALLER PRICE

THAN Is FREQUENTLY CHARGED By OTHERS
A glance at this publication will at once show the
Astrologer a number of advantages in our arrange-
ment. The times and places of New Moons, Full
Moon and Kelipses are plainly marked, also the
Moon’s Node. Tables of logarithms are given for 24

hours. The latitude of all the planets is included.


The type is as large as used in this book, the print
is clear. It will save eye strain.


SIM Pb tie D


Scientific Tables of Houses


Latitudes 25 to 60 Degrees, Inclusive


Volume 1. Volume 2. Volume 3.
25-36 degrees. 37-48 degrees 49-69 degrees
WITH LONGITUDES and LATITUDES
of about


FIFTEEN HUNDRED CITIES OF THE WORLD
These Tables of Houses are printed in size and style
uniform with our Simplified Scientific Ephemeris;
large type, clear print and fine paper.
—50 cents each Postpaid.—
The Rosicrucian Fellowship,
Mt. Ecclesia
Oceanside, California.


Correspondence Courses
oi 26 RS
The Rosicrucian Philosophy and


Astrology
(1) Rositcrucian Philosophy:


Using the Cosmo-Conception by Max Heindel as a
textbook, this course of twelve lessons points to a
logical explanation of the origin, evolution, and fu-
ture development of mankind, and opens the way to a
deeper knowledge of this great subject. This philos-
ophy seeks to make Christianity a living factor in the
world, and to combine the eternal facts of Science, Art,
and Religion. This course is open to all those inter-
ested.


(2) Astrology:


We want to assist you in helping yourself and
others. This correspondence course will teach you the
importance of astrology as a phase of religion and a
Divine Science. The one restriction is that our pupils
may not prostitute the knowledge thus obtained for
gain in any way. Anyone not engaged in fortune
telling or similar methods of commercializing spir-
itual knowledge may be admitted to this course.


For admission to these courses address,
(1) Philosophy Secretary.
(II) Astrology Secretary.


The Rosicrucian Fellowship,
Mt. Ecclesia
Oceanside, California.


Simplified Scientific Lphemeris


1860 TO DATE, PRICE, 25¢ EACH YEAR


THIS IS A SUPERIOR EPHEMERIS
IssvuED AT A SMALLER PRICE

THAN Is FREQUENTLY CHARGED By OrHmrs
A glance at this publication will at once show the
Astrologer a number of advantages in our arrange-
ment. The times and places of New Moons, Full
Moon and Kelipses are plainly marked, also the
Moon’s Node. Tables of logarithms are given for 24

hours. The latitude of all the planets is included.


The type is as large as used in this book, the print
is clear. It will save eye strain.


SIMPLIFIED


Scientific Cables of Houses


Latitudes 25 to 60 Degrees, Inclusive


Volume 1. Volume 2. Volume 3.
25-86 degrees. 37-48 degrees 49-69 degrees
WITH LONGITUDES and LATITUDES
of about


FIFTEEN HUNDRED CITIES OF THE WORLD
These Tables of Houses are printed in size and style
uniform with our Simplified Scientific Hphemeris;
large type, clear print and fine paper.
—50 cents each Postpaid.—


The Rosicrucian Fellowship,
Mt. Kcclesva
Oceanside, California.


The Messaye of the Stars


By Max HeEInpDEL anp Augusta Foss H&EINDEL


One of the most complete systems of character de-
lineation and reading the horoscope for medical


diagnosis yet given to modern astrology.


With many nontechnical articles to interest the


general student of the occult, a simple method of
PROGRESSION AND PREDICTION,


and a new index for quickly locating desired in-


formation, it is indeed a classic in its realm.


In the section on Medical Astrology the authors
have given a system that is based on years of prac-
tical experience. Thirty-six example horoscopes are
included, and the subject is dealt with most thor-


oughly.
YOU NEED THIS BOOK!

708 Pages. Cloth Bound. $3.50 Postpaid.
The Rosicrucian Fellowship,


Mt. Ecclesia
Oceanside, California.


Musteries of the Great Operas


By Max He&InpEu


Faust, Parsifal, The Ring of the Niebe-
lung, Tannhauser, Lohengrin


Folk Lore and its interpretation through music has
much to offer to the general reader as well as to the
musician and occultist. These Myths conceal many
of the hidden truths which are now being translated
from symbol and allegory, and this attractive book
is the key to these poetic tales of evolution, sacrifice,
and unfoldment.

176 Pages. Cloth Bound. $2.00 Postpaid.


Che Rosicrucian Philosophy
IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS


By Max HEInpDEL


A book of ready reference upon all mystic matters,
which ought to be in the library of every occult stu-
dent. It comprises the answers to hundreds of ques-
tions asked of Max Heindel on the lecture platform.

PARTIAL LIST OF SUBJECTS:
Life after Death.
Infe on Earth.
The Bible Teachings.
Spiritualistic Phenomena.
Clairvoyance.
Astrology.
Ammals.
176 Pages. Cloth Bound. $2.00 Postpaid.


The Rosicrucian Mysteries


AN ELEMENTARY EXPOSITION
By Max HerrnpEL


This is the Book for the busy man.
who is seeking a solution to the Great Mystery called
life but lacks leisure to wade through volumes of
metaphysical speculations. The lucid and logical ex-
planations carry conviction—they bear


THE STAMP OF TRUTH
Nevertheless, the language is so simple, clear and de-
void of technicalities that a child can understand its
message. It is therefore specially suited to beginners,

198 pp. cloth. $1.50 Postfree.


Hof Shall We Ruowm Christ
at His Coming ?


By Max HEINDEL


This book tells us that Christ will return in an
etheric, not a physical body. Hence mankind must
develop the etheric body to the point where they can
function in it consciously before Christ will return.
Then they will possess the inner spiritual perception
by which they will be able to recognize Him.

These matters are fully elucidated in this book.
29 Pages, Paper Bound. 15¢ Postfree.
The Rosicrucian Fellowship,

Mt. Ecclesia
Oceanside, California.


Ben


The Web of Destiny
HOW MADE AND UNMADE


By Max HEtnpEL


Including


The Occult Effect of Our Emotions
Prayer—A Magic Invocation


Practical Methods of Achieving Success


This book is based on personal occult investigations
by the author, in which he uncovered many of the
inner laws governing man’s hidden springs of action.

It gives information regarding the Dweller on the
Threshold, which every aspirant has to meet, usually
at an early stage of his progress into the unseen
worlds. It treats of the causes of obsession of men
and animals. It describes how we create our environ-
ment and some of the causes of disease, pointing the
way to final emancipation.

The part devoted to the emotions shows the fune-
tion of desire, the color effects of emotion, and the re-
sults of worry and remorse.

Prayer is shown here as a magic invocation by which
powerful forces may be marshalled. It throws much
light on the nature of prayer, pointing out that true
prayer is based on scientific principles which will
bring results when rightly applied.

Written in a simple and narrative style, it offers at
the same time serious instruction and pleasant relaxa-
tion.

175 Pages. Cloth Bound. $2.00 Postpaid.


\
\


9
10
11
12
13
14,

. 15
16.
17
18
19
20


Rosierucian Interpretation of


ve


CONAN


Christianity


ANCIENT TRUTHS IN MODERN DRESS


Price 10c Each, Postfree


The Riddle of Life and Death.

Where Are the Dead?

Spiritual Sight and the Spiritual Worlds.

Sleep, Dreams, Trance, Hypnotism, Mediumship
and Insanity.

Death and Life in Purgatory.

Life and Activity in Heaven.

Birth a Fourfold Event.

The Science of Nutrition, Health and Protracted
Youth.

The Astronomical Allegories of the Bible.

Astrology; Its Scope and Limitations.

Spiritual Sight and Insight.

Parsifal.

The Angels as Factors in Evolution.

Lucifer, Tempter or Benefactor?

ae of Golgotha and the Cleansing


ood.
The Star of Bethlehem; A Mystic Fact.
The Mystery of the Holy Grail.
The Lord’s Prayer.
The Coming Force; Vril or What?
Fellowship and the Coming Race.


These lectures are particularly suitable for beginners.
Read consecutively, they give a comprehensive outline of our
philosophy.


THEY FIT THE POCKET


and allow a busy man to utilize time on cars en route to or
from business.


GIVE ONE TO A FRIEND
It is an inexpensive and a helpful gift.


Gleanings of « Mystic


By Max HEINDEL


This book is devoted to practical mysticism, bringing
out a vast array of new information and fine points never
before presented in this form. The information contained
in this book will be of immense value to the student and
aspirant, enabling them to make swifter progress in both
their spiritual and material development.


A few chapter headings are appended to give a better
jdea of the contents:


Initiation—W hat It Is and Is Not.


The Sacraments of Communion, Baptism, and
Marriage.


The Coming Christ.

The Coming Age.

Magic, White and Black.

Our Invisible Government.

Practical Precepts for Practical People.
Sound, Silence, and Soul Growth.

The Mystervum Magnum of the Rose Cross.
Stumbling Blocks.

Why I Am a Rosicrucian.


196 Pages. Cloth Bound. $2.00 Postpaid.


Hreemasonry and Catholicism


By Max H&InpDEL


An Esoteric Treatise on the Underlying Facts re-
garding these two great Institutions as determined by
oceult investigation.


It explains in terms of Mystic Masonry the con-
flict between the Sons of Cain and the Sons of
Seth, and unravels the allegory dealing with the build-
ing of Solomon’s Temple, the Queen of Sheba, and
the Grand Master, Hiram Abiff.


If you are interested in the symbols of Masonry, in
knowing the source of these mysteries which have
come down to us from past ages, this is the book you
want.


Only a trained Seer could have read the Akashic
Records of the past and given such a clear explanation
of their meaning.


In addition, read what the author says about the
famous Philosopher’s Stone of the Alchemists, the
Path of Initiation, and the Coming Age.


This Book Should Be in Every Mason’s Inbrary.


98 Pages. Cloth Bound. $1.00 Postfree.


The Rosicrucian Fellowship,
Mt. Ecclesia
Oceanside, Califorma.


Ju the Hand of
The Listing Dead


AN OCCULT STORY


By Prentiss TUCKER


Among the many post-war books, here is one to
interest the soldier, student, and layman alike. Its
appeal is general and lasting in that it portrays in
story form the ever existing conditions on the super:
physical planes. It inclines toward that thing called
“‘The religion of the trenches,’’ and will help to open
the eyes of many a puzzled participant as well as of


those who lost friends and relatives in the Great War.


Look at some of the chapter headings:
A Visit to the Invisible Planes.
A Sergeant’s Experiences after ‘‘Passing out.’’
A Doughboy’s Ideas on Religion.
Helping a Slain Soldier to Comfort His Mother.


A Crisis in Love.


168 Pages. Cloth Bound. $1.50 Postpaid.


Che Mystical Interpretation
of Christmas


By Max HEINDEL


This treatise covers the Cosmic Significance of
Christmas and the annual Sacrifice of Christ, traces
the astrological interpretation up through the sim-
plicity of nature worship, and sketches a glorious
outlook for the coming age, which inspires the casual


reader to seek more Light.


Here is a book most attractively bound in heavy
mottled paper which, aside from its merit as a simple
gift, is most useful in answering inquiries on the oc-
cult significance of its subject. The world is beginning
to ask the greater meaning of this holy festival; it is


well to be informed.


Heavy Paper Binding.


75 Cents Postpaid.


Larthbound


By Avueusta Foss HEINDEL


An addition to our Rosicrucian Christianity Series
of twenty lectures. This pamphlet warns against the
craze for phenomena, mediumship, and the ouija
board. It cites concrete cases where those who held
too closely to things of this earth were thereby held
back in their progress after leaving the earthy body
and passing onward to the unseen realms of being. It
points out how this condition may be avoided; also
how some prolong their stay in the Borderland close


to the earth.


It describes the condition of those who are bound
to the lower Desire World after death by sense affilia-
tion, sorrow, or other causes, showing clearly their de-


lusions and their activities.


18 pages. Paper Bound. Price 10e.


Simplified Scientific Astrology


By Max HEINDEL
Fifth Edition.


WitTH Max HEINDEL’S PORTRAIT


198 Pages. Cloth Bound. $1.50 Postpaid.


A complete textbook on the art of erecting a horoscope,
making the process simple and easy for beginners. It also
includes a


Philosophic Encyclopedia


—and—


Tables of Planetary Hours


The Philosophie Encyclopedia fills a long felt want both
of beginners and advanced students for information con-
cerning the underlying reasons for astrological dicta. It is
a mine of knowledge arranged in such a manner as to be
instantly accessible.


The Tables of Planetary Hours enable one to select the
most favorable time for beginning new enterprises.


The unparalleled merits of this book have been amply at-
tested by many thousands of enthusiastic students who have
bought the first four editions.


No astrological student can afford to be without it.


ee


Astro-Dtagnosts--A Gutde
to Healing


By Max HEINDEL AND
Auvucustsa Foss HEINDEL


This book is devoted to medical astrology and diagnosis
from the horoscope and hand. It is the most compre-
hensive and complete book of its kind yet published.
Mr. and Mrs. Heindel are recognized authorities in the
field of medical astrology, having specialized in it for
many years. A chapter is devoted to each of the dif-
ferent parts of the body, such as the ears, throat,
lungs, ete., with actual examples of diagnosis from the
horoscope, showing exactly the modus operandi. Instruc-
tions in regard to reading the horoscope for the purpose
of diagnosis are included, as well as natural methods for
curing diseased conditions. This volume will be of great
value to students who are engaged in healing or nursing,
whether they are attached to the orthodox medical school
or to the nature-cure school.


The book contains 446 pages and has about 100
astrological charts. Beautifully bound in cloth, with
cover stamped in red and gold. Price $3.00 postpaid.


The Rosicrucian Fellowship,
Mt. Ecclesia


Oceanside, California.


Teachings of an Jutttate


By Max HEINDEL


This book is compiled from the writings of an Ini-
tiate of the Rosicrucian Order.


It comprises a series of lessons issued by the author
to his students, together with various public addresses.
A few chapter headings will give an idea of the con-
tents of the book:


The Scientific Method of Spiritual Unfoldment.
The Death of the Soul.

Mystic Light on the World War.

The Sign of the Master.

The Secret of Success.

Religion and Healing.


Max Heindel is well qualified to impart esoteric
knowledge on these subjects, by virtue of his various
Initiations into the Mysteries. ‘‘Teachings of an In-
itiate’’? contains the later fruit of the author’s exten-
sive occult investigations. It is of value to both the
beginner and the advanced student of occult philosophy.


212 Pages. Cloth Bound,
Indexed. $2.00 Postpaid.


The Rosicrucian Fellowship,
Mt. Ecclesia
Oceanside, California


at


aru | Shane


’ Aha 5 Ps aie.) Kay iy ee
aa) |
¥ = pe PE a ae ?
: ¢ 2b, | (isi yotur
' “
" id
eS 3 ;
ce: ;
a
® , , a
« -
it i y


DATE DUE
i
ars ag ld ©

ways
nov 2 8
pet i 7
SANG *
JANL&
aL 2 0 4
FEB 24
MAY 24


FER A
ae) él


HAs 20 208


212
HS


GREENVILLE COLLEGE LIBRARY


Ae AX, D. 1918
THE MROSICRUCIAN COSMO-CONCEPTION STX


PETIA


mee. La


<.
