DE L'ESPRIT: OR, ESSAYS ON THE MIND, AND ITS SEVERAL FACULTIES
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_de-lesprit-or-essays-_helvtius_1759): translated from the edition printed under the author's inspection (London: printed for the Translator, 1759).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

.


AND ITS


SEVERAL FACULTIES.


-


Written by HELVETIVUS,


Tranſlated from the Edition printed under the Author's Inſpection.


— Unde animi conſtet natura videndum,
Qua fiant ratione & qua vi quæque gerantur
In terris.


Luck Er. De rerum natura. Lib, 1,


— — „„


7


L ON DON
Printed for the TRANS LAT O R;,


And Sold by Mr. Dodſley and Co. in Pall-Mall; Meſſ. Millar, Nourſe, and Tonſon, in
the Strand; Meſſ. Hitch and Hawes, in Pater-noſter Row ; Mr. Fletcher, at Oxford;
Mr, Merril, at Cambridge; and J. Coote, in Pater- noſter-Row.


—


”


PR E B AE ©


H E ſubject J propoſe to examine in this work is new and intereſting.
People have hitherto conſidered the mind only under ſome of its
views: for great writers have no more than caſt a rapid glance over
it; and this has emboldened me to treat of the ſubject. |
The knowlege of the mind, when we conſider it in its utmoſt extent, is ſo
cloſely connected with the knowlege of the heart, and of the paſſions of
men, that it was impoſſible to write on this ſubject, without treating, on that
part of morality at leaſt, which is common to men of all nations, and which
in all governments can haveno other object in view than the public advantage.

The principles I eſtabliſh on this ſubject are, I think, conformable to the
general intereſt, and to experience. It is by facts that I have aſcended to
cauſes. I imagined that morality ought to be treated like all ine och.
ſciences, and founded on experiment, as well as natural philoſophy. I
have adhered to this idea, from the perſuaſion that all morality, where its
principles are of uſe to the public, is neceſſarily conformable te 12 morals
of religion, which are only the perfection of human morals r the reil,
it I am deceived, and if, contrary to my expectation, ſom ot my Principles
are not conformable to the general intereſt, this proceeds from an error of
my judgment, and not of my heart; and I declare, beforehand, that I diſ-
own them. |

I defice but one ſavour of my reader, that is, te hear, before he condemns
me; to {ollow ile chain that unites ai! my ideas together; to be my judge,
and not of my parry, This requeſt is not ©. effect of a fooliſh confidence,
for | ave too often found that ts be bad at night, which I have thought to
be good in the morning, to have an high opinion of my own abilities.

Perhaps I have treated of a ſubject above my ſtrength : but what man
knows himſelf ſo well, as not to preſume too much ? I cannot, however,
reproach myſelf with not having uſed my utmoſt endeavours to merit the
approbation of the public; and if I do not obtain it, I ſhall be more af-
flicted than ſurprized. In this caſe, to deſire is not ſufficient to obtain.

In every thing I have ſaid, I have ſought only for the truth, not merely
for the honour of delivering it, but becauſe truth is uſeful to man. If I
have deviated from it, I ſhall find, even in my errors themſelves, motives of
conſolation. ** If men, as M. de Fontenelle obſerves, cannot, on any ſubject
«© whatſoever, arrive at what is rational, till after having, in that very ſubject,
« exhauſted all imaginable folly,” my errors will then be of uſe to my fellow-
citizens: I ſhall have pointed out the rock by my ſhipwreck. © How many
„ abſurdities, adds M. de Fontenelle, ſhould we not now utter, if the ancients
had not already ſaid them before us, and had in a manner delivered us from
has | 5

I repeat then, that I ſhall warrant in my work nothing but the purity and
rectitude of my intentions. In the mean time, however aſſured we may be
of our intentions, the voice of envy is ſo favourably heard, and its frequent
declamations are ſo adapted to ſeduce the minds that are equally honeſt and

| M2 enlightened,


iv EET ACK


enlightened, that we cannot write in a manner without trembling. The diſ-
couragement given to men of genius from imputations frequently filled with
calumny, ſeem already to preſage the return of the ages of ignorance. It is,
in cvery inſtance, only in mediocrity of talents that people find an aſylum
againſt the purſuits of the envious. Mediocrity is now become a protection,
and I have probably obtained that protection in ſpite of myſelf. 7

Beſides, I believe that it will be difficult for envy to impute to me the deſire
of wounding my fellow-citizens. This kind of work, in which I conſider
no man in particular, but men and nations in general, ought to ſhelter me
from all ſuſpicion of malignity, I ſhall even add, that in reading theſe dif-
courſes, it will be perceived that I love men, and deſire their happineſs,
without hating or deſpiſing any of them in particular.

Some of my ideas will perhaps appear too bold, If the reader thinks them
Alle, I deſire him to recollect, while he condemns them, that it is only by the
eic attempts that the greateſt truths can ſometimes be diſcovered; and
that > ir of 2dvancing an error, ought not to deter us from proceeding
i the leach of truth. In vain would baſe and cowardly men preſcribe it,


and 10130 give it the name of odious and licentious; in vain do they


repeat, that trui;; is often dangerous. Suppoſing that this is ſometimes the
caſe, to what ſtill greater danger would that nation be expoſed, which ſhould
conſent to continue in jgnorace? Every nation without knowlege, when it has
ceaſed to be fierce ana ſavage, is degraded, and will ſooner or later be \h-
dued. It was leſs the valour, than the military knowlege of the Romans, chat
triumphed over the Gauls.

If the knowlege of ſuch a truth, mig. at foch an inſtant, be attended
with ſome inconveniencies; ther ;aitant Being paſt, that very truth will again
become uſeful to all ages and nations. :

Such is the fate of human things : there is none that may not at certain
moments become dangerous ; but it 1s only on this condition that we enjo
them. Wo to him that would from this motive deprive mankind of them.


At the very moment when they forbid the knowlege of certain truths, it


will no longer be permited to mention any. A thouſand men in power, who
have often ill intentions, under the pretence that it is ſometimes wiſe to
ro conceal the truth, would baniſh it entirely from the univerſe. Thus the
enlightened part of the public, who alone know all its value, inceſſantly de-
fire it : they are not afraid to expoſe themſelves to uncertain evils to enjoy
the real advantages it procures. Among the qualities of mankind, that
which they eſteem the molt is, that elevation of foul which refuſes to ſub-


mit to the meanneſs of a lye. They know how uſeful it is to think and ſpeak _


every thing; and that errors ceaſe to be dangerous, when it is permitted to
to contradict them. They are ſoon known to be errors ; they ſink of them-
ſelves into the abyſs of forgetfulneſs, and truth alone ſwims over the vaſt
extent of ages,


E


THE


CONTENTS.


ND DO DIO DU OLIOL TDI TOUT OL
E 8 9 N k


Or THE MIND CONSIDERED IN ITSELF.


HIS diſcourſe is to prove, that natural ſenſibility and memory are the
productive cauſes of all our ideas; and that all our falſe judgments are


the effect of our paſſions, or our ignorance,


CHAP. I. Pag. 1
Expoſition of the principles. | |
Th "CA KEW
Of the errors occaſioned by our Paſſions | 8
CH AP. III.
Of Ignorance, : 9


In this chapter, it is proved, that the ſecond ſource of our errors conſiſts in the igno-
rance of the facts of compariſon on which, in every inſtance, depends the juſt-


neſs of our deciſions, |
CHAP IF
Of the abuſe of Words, 17
Some 2 of the errors occaſioned by the ignorance of the ſignification of
words.


It follows from this diſcourſe, that our paſſions and our ignorance are the

ſources of our errors; that all our falſe judgments are the effects of acci-
dental cauſes, that do not ſuppoſe in the mind a faculty of judging diſtinct
from that of ſenſation. |


ERIE III III
E 8 8 a


Or THE MIND RELATIVELY TO SOCIETY. 23


T: 18 propoſed to prove in this diſcourſe, that the ſame intereſt which in-
fluences the judgment we form of actions, and makes us conſider them


as virtuous, vicious, or allowable, according as they are uſeful, prejudicial,
| A | or


* = CONTENTS


or indifferent, with reſpect to the public, equally influences the judgment we
form of ideas; and that, as well in ſubjects of morality, as in thoſe of
genius, it is intereſt alone that dictates all our judgments; a truth that can-
not be perceived in its full extent, without conſidering probity and genius,
relatively, 1. to an individual, 2. to a ſmall ſociety, 3. to a nation, 4. to dif-
ferent ages and countries, and 5. to the whole world. |


HK | 23
The general idea.
HA FP. Us |
„ Prebity relatively to an individual, | 25
| CHAP. III. | | 1
Of the Mind, or Underſtanding, with regard to an Individual, | "Y "378 |
It is proved by facts, that we eſteem in others, only the ideas that we have an intereſt n
in eſteeming. | | | |
| CH AP: 1X.
Of the Neceſſity we are under in eſteeming in others only ourſelves, TY


It is alſo proved in this chapter, that we are always, through indolence and vanity, forced
to proportion our eſteem for the ideas of others, to the analogy and conformity of
thoſe ideas with our own, * EP

C H A P o V.


Of Probity in relation to private Societies, 37


The deſign of this chapter is to ſhew that particular focieties give the name of worth

4 : 1 *

K only to ſuch actions as are uſeful: now the intereſt of theſe ſocieties being often

1 found to be oppoſite to the public intereſt, they muſt frequently apply the term
| worthy, to actions really prejudicial to the public; they muſt then by the praiſe of
theſe actions, frequently ſeduce the probity of the moſt worthy men, and, unknown
to themſelves, lead them aſtray from the path of virtue, |


CHAS. .
Of the Means of ſecuring Virtue, OR 5 8
In this chapter, is pointed out, how a perſon may repel the inſinuations of a particular 1
ſociety, xeſiſt their ſeductions, and preſerve a virtue not to be ſhaken by the ſhock
of a thouſand private intereſts, | mY” |
| . | =
| | Of the Underſtanding in relation to particular Societies, rel 42 1


RES.


It is here ſhewn, that ſociety weighs in the ſame balance the merit .of the ideas and 1
actions of men. Now the intereſt of thoſe ſocieties not being always conformable 1
to the general intereſt, they muſt, in conſequence of this, form very different judg- 9
ments of the ſame ſubjects from thoſe of the public. | | 3"


133 | £1 AP. WI. | ho

Of the Difference between the Judgments of the Public and thoſe of Private
Societies, „ 47

| In


The  C ON TT B © 2-43 | vii


In conſequence of the difference obſervable between the intereſt of the public, and
that of particular ſocieties, it is proved, in this chapter, that theſe ſacieties mutt


affix a great eſteem to what is called good breeding, and polite converſation.


'C.HAP.
Of an elegant manner of Speaking, and a polite Behaviour, 50
The public cannot have the ſame eſteem for polite converſation and genteel addreſs,
as particular ſocieties. | : | $f
; C H A P 0 X \ .


Why Men admired by the Public, are not always eſteemed by the Men of the World, 56
It is proved, that in this reſpect the difference between the judgment of the public and
particular ſocieties, depend on their different intereſts. $4


+" CHEE a. |
Of Probity in relation to the Public, 3 60


In conſequence of the principles above eſtabliſhed, it is ſhewn, that the general intereſt
regulates the judgment formed by the public of the actions of men.


c H A FP. *XIL
Of Genius in relation to the Public, 2 -3 61


In this chapter it is proved, that the eſteem of the public for the ideas of men, is
always proportioned to the intereſt people have in eſteeming them. |


CH A P. XIII.


Of Probity in relation to certain Ages and Nations, Y 66
It is propoſed to ſhew in this chapter, that people have, in all ages and all countries,
agreed to give the name of virtuous, only to ſuch actions as were, or at leaſt they
believed to be, of uſe to the public. To throw the greater light upon this ſubject,
virtue is diſtinguiſhed in this chapter into two different kinds,


| CHEAT,” XY: |
Of Virtues prejudicial and true, 71
We underſtand by prejudicial virtues, or thoſe that ariſe from prejudice, ſuch where the
exact obſervance of them does not in the leaſt contribute to the public happineſs;


and by true virtues, thoſe, the practice of which ſecures the felicity of the people.
In conſequence of theſe two different kinds of virtue, a diſtinction is made in this


9


7 chapter between two different kinds of the corruption of manners; the one reli-
| gious, the other political: a knowlege proper to diffuſe new light over the ſcience of :
M morality. |

1 Of the Uſe accruing to Morality, from the knowlege of the Principles laid down in

4 the preceding chapters. LC: EL 21 --

9 I be deſign of this chapter is to prove, that the virtues or vices of the people depend

"7 on the goodneſs or badneſs of the legiſlation 3 and that moſt moraliſts in the paintings

NE they make of the vices, ſeem leſs inſpired by the love of the public welfare, than by

WW | perſonal intereſt, or private hatred. |

1 a 2 e


7
4


viii EEE. 7


c HAP. XVI.
Of hvpecritical Moraliſts, | 84
| | The unfolding of the preceeding principles. |


HAF. :- |
Of the Advantages that reſult from the Principles above eſtabliſhed, 84


Theſe principles give individuals, nations, and even legiſlators, more clear ideas of
virtue; facilitate the reformation of the laws; inform us that the ſcience of mo-
rality, is the ſcience even of the legiſlation ; and, in ſhort, . furniſh us with the
means of rendering people more happy, and empires more durable. |


HA Pc. XVIII.


Of the Mind, conſidered with reſpect to different Ages and Countries, 88
The expoſition of the ſubject of inquiry in the following chapters. |


CH AP, XIX.


The Eſteem for different Kinds of Genius, is in every Age proportioned 10 the Intereſt
the People have in eſteeming them, 89


CHA P. X%


Of Genius, conſidered in relation to different Countries, 100


In conformity to the plan of this diſcourſe, it is here ſhewn, that intereſt, among all
nations, is the diſpenſer of the eſteem granted to the ideas of men; and that na-
tions, always faithful to the intereſt of their vanity, eſteem in other nations only
ſuch ideas as are analogous to their own.


, C HAP. XXI.
Of the reciprocal Contempt of Nations, proceeding from their Vanity, IO;


After having proved that nations deſpiſe manners, cuſtoms, and practices different
from their own, it is added, that their vanity makes them conſider as a gift of na-
ture, the ſuperiority ſome of them have over others ; a ſuperiority that is ſolely ow-
ing to the political conſtitution of the ſtate. |


WE ns . „ « 4
Why Nations confider as Gifts of Nature, the Qualities ſolely owing to the form of
their government, | # 109


In this chapter it is ſhewn, that vanity rules nations as well as individuals ; that every
one obeys the law of intereſt ; and that if conſequently each nation has not ſuch
an eſteem for morality, as it ought to have for that ſcience, it is becauſe morality is
{till in its cradle, and ſeems to be hitherto of no uſe to the world.


| CHAP. XXIII.


„5
Fonds: n £
. nib , 77 -
. eee n r
"up V


* * OS.” a * i
2 n Pas n
5 TN
— EEE
1 e 5 *


= Of the Cauſes that have hitherto retarded the Progreſs of Morality, 112
f CHAP. XXIV. |
Of the Means of perfecting Morality, | 115


7


Tie CC ON ES ix | |


CHAP. XXV.


of Probity, in relation to the World in general, 15
i C H A P. XXVI. 1
1 Of Genius, with reſpelt to the Univerſſe. 123 |


This chapter is to ſhew that there are ideas which are of uſe to mankind, and that
the ideas of this ſpecies: are the only ones that can make us obtain the eſteem of


nations.


The general concluſion of this diſcourſe is, that intereſt, as we propoſe to
prove, is the only diſpenſer of the eſteem and contempt affixed to the actions ;


and ideas of men.


ol 25-26-26096-46-40 95-95-25 00596-4546 gl 4895 95-93-5454


r


E 8 W A m8


WHETHER GENIUS OUGHT TO BE CONSIDERED AS A NATURAL GIFT, OR
AS AN EFFECT OF EDUCATION:


IN order to ſolve this problem, inquiry is made in this diſcourſe, whether

I nature has endued men with an equal ability of mind, or whether ſhe has

favoured ſome more than others; and it is examined whether all the men

who are well organized, have not in themſelves the natural powers of ac-

quiring the moſt lofty ideas, when they have motives ſufficient to ſurmount :
the pain of application. :


i E 127
x In this chapter it is ſhewn, that if nature has given to different men unequal diſpoſi-
tions of mind, it is by enduing ſome, preferably to others, with a little more deli-
cacy of the ſenſes, extent of memory, and capacity of attention. The queſtion
being reduced to this ſimple point, inquiry is made in the following chapters, what
influence the difference nature may have made in this reſpect among us, has on the
mind of man. | |


| CHAP. II.
it Of the Delicacy of the Senſes, 130
ol CEL |
0 Of the Extent of the Memory, AF | 131
1 TH | CH AF. v. 3 | :
Of the unequal Capacity of Attention, 136


It is proved in this chapter, that nature has endued all men commonly well organized,
with a capacity of attention neceſſary for the acquiſition of the moſt lofty ideas :
it is at length obſerved, that attention is a fatigue and pain, from which people
| would


x The GO TT EH KN Re


would always free themſelves, were they not animated by a paſſion proper to change
this pain into pleaſure ; hence the queſtion is reduced to the inquiry, whether all
men are by nature ſuſceptible of paſſions ſo ſtrong, as to endue them with that de-
gree of attention, to which ſuperiority of genius is annexed. In order to arrive at
this knowlege, inquiry is made in the following chapter, what are the powers by
which we are moved.


CHAEF Ty
Of the Powers that act upon the Soul, As


Theſe powers are reduced to two: one communicated by the ſtrong paſſions, and the
other by an averſion to laſſitude or inaction, The effects of this laſt force are exa-


mined in this chapter.


C:H A-P. .
Of the Power of the Paſſions, 1


It is proved that the paſſions lead us to heroic actions, and enable us to acquire the
moſt noble ideas.


„
Of the Superiority of the Mind, in Men of ſtrong Paſſions, above the Men of Senſe,


. 1
| C H AP. VIII. *
On Stupidity, the Confequence of the Ceſſation of Paſſions, ' 157


After having proved that the paſſions deliver us from incertitude and indolence, and
endue us with that continuity of attention neceſſary to raiſe the mind to the moſt
exalted ideas, it is proper to examine at length, whether all men are ſuſceptible of
paſſions, and whether they are ſo to that degree proper to endue them with this ſpe-
cies of attention. In order to diſcover this, it is proper to. aſcend to their origin.


| C:H AP. X.
Of the Origin of the Paſſions, 5 | 2). 67


The deſign of this chapter is to ſhew, that all our paſſions have their ſource in the


love of pleaſure, or in the fear of pain, conſequently in natural ſenſibility, For
examples of this Kind, choice is made of the paſſions that appear moſt independent
of this ſenſibility, that is, avarice, ambition, pride, and friendſhip,


C HA. X.

Of Avarice, N
It is proved that this paſſion is founded on the love of pleaſure, and the fear of pain;
and it is ſhewn how avarice, by kindling in us the thirſt of pleaſure, may always


deprive us of it.
| C HAF. KK ;
Of Ambition, | 1 | 165
The application of the ſame principles, which prove, . that the ſame motives that make
us defire riches, make us ſeek for grandeur,


CHAP.


163


The CONT ERS | X1.
CH AP. XII.


if Man, in the Purſuit of Greatneſs, ſeeks only the Means of aveiding Pain, and
enjoying natural Pleaſure, why does Pleaſure ſo len eſcape from the am.

© bttious? | 168
This objection is anſwered, and it is proved that in this reſpect, it is with ambition as


CHAP. XIII.


with avarice.


07 Pride, 172


The ſubje& of this chapter is to ſhew that people defire to be worthy of eſteem, only
that they may be eſteemed ; and for no other reaſon than to enjoy the advantages
which eſteem procures: advantages that are always reduced to natural pleaſures.


C HAF.
Of Friendſhip, #75


Another application of the ſame principles.


CHAEF a5


That the Fear of natural Pain, or the Defire of natural Pleaſure, may excite all
the Paſſions, 181


After having proved in the preceding chapters, that all our paſſions receive their origin
from natural ſenſibility. To confirm this truth it is proved, in this chapter, that by
the aſſiſtance of natural pleaſures, legiſlators may fill the heart with all the paſſions.
But granting that all men are ſuſceptible of paſſions, as it may be ſuppoſed they are
not leſs ſo of the degree of paſſion neceſſary to raiſe them to the moſt exalted ideas,


and that there might be brought, as an example of this opinion, the inſenſibility of


certain nations to the love of glory and virtue ; it is proved that the indifference of
theſe nations, in this reſpect, depends only on accidental cauſes, ſuch as the different
form of governments. : |


C HAP. XVI.


To what cauſe we ought to attribute the indifference of certain nations with regard
to Viriue, 3 185


In order to ſolve this queſtion, inquiry is made into man, in relation to the mixture of
his vices and his virtues, the ſport of his paſſions, and the idea that ought to be
annexed to the word virtuous ; and it is diſcovered that it is not to nature, but to the
particular legiſlation of ſome empires, that we ought to attribute the indifference of
certain nations to virtue. In order to caſt a greater light on this ſubje&, enquiry is
particularly made into deſpotic governments, and free ſtates, and into the different
effects produced by the different forms of theſe governments. The author begins
with deſpotic power; and the better to know its nature, examines what motive in-
flames man with an unbridled deſire of arbitrary power,


CHAP. XVII. |
Of the univerſal Deſire of being deſpotic; the means employed to arrive at this Peer,
and the Danger to which it expoſes Kings, 191

| CHAP. XVIII.


The Principal Effefts of deſpotic Power, 19


* 2


xii WW CONTENTMY


It is proved in this chapter, that the viſiers have no intereſt in obtaining inſtruction,
or ſupporting cenſure; that, being taken from the body of the citizens, they, on
entering into place, have no principles of juſtice or 1kill in the art of government;
and that they cannot form clear ideas of virtue, 4


CHAP. Ai


The ales and ſubmiſſive ſubjeftion in which the People are kept, occaſions the Igno-
rance of the viſiers, and is the ſecond Effet of deſpotic Power, 198


Ci AF Abs


The Contempt of Virtue, and the falſe Eſteem People affef? to have for it, the third
Effect of deſpotic Power, :


It is proved, that in deſpotic empires, people have really a contempt for virtue, and that
they only honour the name. |


CHAP. XXL


Of the Deſtruftion of Empires ſulject to arbitrary power : the fourth Effect of Ty-
ranny, | 203


After having ſhewn, in the ſtupidity and baſeneſs of moſt of the people ſubject to arbi-
trary power, the cauſe of the overthrow of deſpotic empires, it is concluded, from
what has been ſaid on this ſubject, that the indifference of certain nations to virtue,
depends ſolely on the particular form of government: and that nothing may be left


that might be wiſhed for on this ſubject, an enquiry is made, in the following chap-


ters, into the cauſes of the contrary effects,
CHAP. .
Of the Love of certain nations for-Glery and Virtue, | | 206


It is ſhewn in this chapter, that this love of glory and of virtue, depend, in every em-


pire, on the addreſs with which the legiſlator unites private intereſt with that of the


public: an union more eaſily formed in ſome countries than in others.


CHAP, XX.


That poor Nations have been always more greedy of Glory, and more fruitful in
virtuous Men, than opulent Nations, 208


It is proved in this chapter, that the production of great men is in all countries the
neceſſary effect of the rewards afligned to great abilities, and diſtinguiſhed virtue;
and that the virtues and talents are no where ſo well rewarded as in poor and war-
like republics. | :


CHAP. FEY
Proof ef this Truth, 211


This chapter contains the proof of the propoſition laid down in the preceding chapter.
From it is drawn this concluſion, that we may apply to every ſpecies of the paſſions
5 what


200


—
2 —


Se d 8 EE TS. xii


what is ſaid in the ſame chapter, of the love or indifference of certain nations for

glory and virtue; whence it 1s concluded, that we ought not to attribute to nature
that unequal degree of the paſſions, of which certain nations appear ſuſceptible.
This truth is confirmed by proving, in the following chapters, that the force of mens
paſſions is always proportioned to the force of the means made ule of to excite them.


EHT 1035
Of the exaf? Relation between the Strength of the Paſſions, and the. greatneſs of the
| JR . 1 en ont | 56 J f > 7 E Sf SIA
After having ſhewn the exactneſs of this connection, it is examined, to what degree of
warmth. the enthuſiaſm of the paſſions may be carried. | fot |


| CHAP. XXVI.
Of what Degree f Paſſions Men are ſuſceptible, 3X 3-05 rn eh JEL


It is proved in this chapter, that the paſſions may be carried to an incredible height,
and that all men are conſequently capable of a degree of paſſion more than ſuffi-
cient to make them triumph over their indolence, and to endue them with that
continued attention, to which ſuperiority of mind is annexed : that thus the great
inequality of genius perceivable among mankind, depends on the different educa-
tion they receive, and the unknown chain of different circumſtances in which they


are placed. In the following chapters is examined, whether hefe prin ples ae


-


:


agreeable to facts, | |


4 en 4-4 > 41


* 2


XXVII. |
Of the Agreement of Fatis with the Principles above eſtabliſhed, i


The firſt deſign of this chapter is to ſhew, that the numerous circumſtances, the con-
courſe of which is abſolutely neceſſary to form illuſtrious men, are o ſeldom found)
united, that on ſuppoſing all men have equal mental faculties, thoſe who have a
genius of the firſt rank, would be as uncommon as they are found to be. It is
moreover proved in this chapter, that in morality alone we ought to ſeek for the

true cauſe of the inequality of genius; that in vain we ſhould attribute it to the

different temperature of climates ; and in vain endeavour to explain from phyſical
cauſes, an infinite number of political phænomena, that are very naturally explained
by moral cauſes. Such are the conqueſts of the northern nations, the ſlavery and
eee genius of the orientals, and, in ſhort, the ſuperiority of different nations
in different arts and ſciences.


Mo C.H. K. nt! ava.»

Of the Conqueſts of the Northern. Nations, | | 223
In this chapter is ſhewn, that, to moral cauſes alone we ought to attribute the conqueſts
of the northern nations. ur A ICY Wer JZTELU N


—


| C HAP. XXIX.
H the Slavery and allegorical Genius of the Eaſtern Nations, 1322 22
The application of the ſame principles,


b CHAP.


. — — — i. as. — — a — — — —


xiv oer r n


| CHAT.
Of the Superiority of certain Nations in different ſciences, 2233


The nations who are the moſt illuſtrious in the arts and ſciences, are thoſe among |


whom the fame arts and ſciences have been moſt honoured : it is not then from the
different temperature of climates, but from moral cauſes that we ought to ſearch
for the reaſon of the inequality of genius. |


The general concluſion of this diſcourſe is, that all men well organized

have the natural power of acquiring the moſt exalted ideas, and that the
difference of genius obſervable in them, depends on the various circumſtances
in which they are placed, and on the different education they receive. This.
concluſion diſcovers the full importance of education.


EXEXEREREREREXERESEERNEAEEELELELEREL


.
OF THE DIFFERENT FACULTIES OF THE MIND.


1 * convey an exact knowlege of the nature of the mind, it is propoſed
in this diſcourſe to give clear ideas of its ſeveral Faculties. |


CHAP. I.
Of Genius, | 241


SHA. M.


Of Imagination and Sentiment, 246


CHAP. Nb |


| CHA ÞP.:IV;. - ©
Of refined and ſtrong Wit, 258


CHAP. V. |
Of a luminous, extenſive, and penetrating Wit; and of Taſte, 266


CHAE..VL


Of à Genius for writing with Elegance, 271


C HAP. VII.
Of zhe Spirit of the Age,


A


4
2 r . 1
* . 8 4 . + * — 2
S THY PE pI 4 bes fo, WES xe
— . e eee e e
P R ben = y
SIE." Rong


1
8 8

1
ry
3 Hg
£5


D w
SY x
*- 8
FA #


Of the ercluſtve Qualities of the Mind,


'The CON FF HE TS... xv


C HAP. VIII |
Of a true. Underſtanding, | 2%
It is proved, in this chapter, that in complicated queſtions, judgment is not ſufficient
to obtain a clear view of things; but that an extenſive mind is neceſſary for that
purpoſe ; that, in general, men are liable to be puffed up with an opinion of their
own judgment, and to prefer it to genius: that conſequently they pretend to be ſu-
perior to men of abilities, and believe, that by acknowleging this, they really do
themſelves but juſtice ; and do not perceive that they are drawn into this error by a
raiſtake, common to almoſt all mankind : a miſtake of which it is, doubtleſs, uſeful
to diſcover the cauſe. x


| | O HAP. R.
Of miſtaken Opinions, 2
This chapter is properly only an expoſition of the two following. There is here
ſhewn only the difficulty of knowing ourſelves. |


CHA As
How far we are liable to miſtake the Motives by which we are determined, ibid.


An explication of the preceding chapter.


CHAP: x2

Of Advice,” 292
Enquiry is made in this chapter, why we are ſo prodigal of advice, and fo blind to
the motives that determine us to give it; and into what errors ignorance of ourſelves


may, in this reſpect, ſometimes precipitate others. At the concluſion of this chapter
are pointed out ſome of the means proper to facilitate the knowlege of ourſelves. -


CHAP. XII.
Of Good Senſe, - | 297
| CHAP. XIII.
Of the Spirit of Condud, 299
| C-H A P. XIV... |


| 305
After having endeavoured, in the preceding chapter, to annex clear ideas to ſeveral of
the mental powers and faculties; it is of uſe to know what are the abilities of mind,
which, in their own nature, muſt reciprocally exclude each other; and the talents,
which, from contrary habits, are rendered in a manner incompatible. This is
the ſubject to be examined both in this chapter and the following, in which is more
particularly ſhewn the injuſtice of the public, in this reſpect, in relation to men


of genius.
CHAF a5 |
Of the Injuſtice of the Public in this reſpett, 312
Attention is paid in this chapter to the conſideration of qualities that muſt reciprocally


exclude each other ; this is done in order to enlighten mankind with regard to the
means of reaping the beſt advantage poſſible from their mental abilities.


CHA P.


xv} een


CHAP. XVI.
The Method of diſcovering that kind of ſtudy for which we are beſt qualified, 319


This method being pointed out, it ſeems that the plan of an excellent education


ought — to conclude this work : but this plan, though it might, perhaps,
appear eaſy to
difficult to execute. |


| CH APA
Of Education, 325


It is here proved, that it would, doubtleſs, be extremely uſeful to perfect the public
education; but that nothing could be more difficult; that our manners here actually
oppoſe every kind of reformation ; that in vaſt and powerful empires they have
not always an urgent neceflity for great men ; and that, conſequently, the go-
vernment cannot apply much attention to that part of the adminiſtration. It is,
however, obſerved, that in monarchies, ſuch as ours, it would not be impoſſible to
give the plan of an excellent education ; but that this attempt would be abſolutely
vain in empires ſubject to deſpotic power, ſuch as thoſe of the eaſt,


.


Page 1. line 10. after debate, add is.
13. Note, col. 2. line 3. for pœſity, read paucity,


D E


etch out, would be, as will be ſeen in the following chapter, very


2 Fung 93 EET 50>
OX * 6.0007 "4 1 —_ * 3 =
3 . J ͤ EIT


r


„
— "ms - I * *


| ; , , © : P * P TO
| 3 I . | 1
D E L ESPRIT.


N .
; **
I .
3
SD
EE
F * 5
KS |
f * 2
NJ :
SY e On * . *
1
= .
Es
me
. p
*. 4 A.
| AE
% 8 :
> 4
1
{IS
> Þ
7 f L
1 bY
> XY 1 3
+ 2 a
$ $5. 3 'L
© x .
„ 4 > 24%
I 32 1
n 9 2
1 9 *%
8 a 3.4
2 Rl * 3
8 VE
8 5
e
1 ; P 44
1 .
8 5 9
SL, El S
+: EL 3 OG
I 7 4
4 5 g * Mm
Weng” . 5
N * N ;
2 $5 5
5 8 5 SD, 25
g Þ . N
; 35 E H P. 0
i 2 :
9 8 :
992


Of the Mind confidered in ſelf.


E hear every day diſputes with regard to what ought to be

called the Mind; each perſon delivers his thoughts, but annexes {
different ideas to the word ; and thus the debate continued, with-

out underftanding each other.

In order therefore to enable us to give a juſt and preciſe. idea of the word |
Mind, and its' different acceptations, it is neceſſary firſt to am the :
Mind | in itſelf. |

We conſider the Mind either as the effect of the faculty of ak and
in this ſenſe the Mind is no more than an aſſemblage of our thoughts; or, we
conſider it as the very faculty of thinking.

But, in order to underſtand what is meant by the Mind, in the latter ac-
ceptation, we ought previouſly to know the productive cauſes of our ideas.

Man has two faculties ; or, if I may be allowed the expreſſion, two paſ-
ſive powers, whoſe exiſtence is generally and diſtinctly acknowledged.

The one is the faculty of receiving the different impreſſions cauſed by F
external objects, and is called Phyſical Senſibility.

The other is the faculty of preſerving the impreſſions cauſed by theſe ob-
jects, called Memory; and Memory is nothing more than a continued, but
weakened ſenſation.

Thoſe faculties which J conſider as the productive cauſes of our thoughts, £
and which we have in common with beaſts, would produce but a very ſmall _
number of ideas, if they were not aſſiſted by certain external organiſations. _

If nature, inſtead of hands and flexible fingers, had terminated our wriſt
with the foot of a horſe, mankind would doubtleſs have been totally deſtitute
B EE


— — —


2 DE L'ESPRI T; on,


of art, habitation, and defence againſt other animals. Wholly employed in the
care of procuring food, and avoiding the beaſts of prey, they would have till
continued wandering in the foreſts, like fugitive flocks (a). |

It is therefore evident, that according to this ſuppoſition, the police would
never have been carried in any ſociety to that degree of perfection, to which
It is now arrived. There is not a nation now exiſting, but with regard to the
action of the Mind, mult not have continued very inferior to certain ſavage


—— —-


(a) Many pieces have have been written
on the ſouls of beaſts. They have been al-
ternately denied and allowed the faculty of
thinking. And, perhaps, a reſearch ſuffici-
ently accurate has not yet been made into
the difference between the nature of man
and that of other animals, from whence the
cauſe of the inferiority of what is called the
ſoul of the latter may be derived.

1. All the feet of animals terminate either
in horn, as thoſe of the ox and the deer ;
or in nails, as thoſe of the dog and the wolf;
or in claws, as thoſe of the lion and the
cat. Now this different organiſation of our
hands, from that of the feet of animals, de-
prives them, as Mr. Buffon aſſerts, not only
of all claim to the ſenſe of the touch; but alſo
of the dexterity requiſite in handling an in-
ſtrument, in order to make any of the diſ-
coveries which ſuppoſe the uſe of hands.

2. The life of animals, in general, being
of a ſhorter duration than that of man, nei-
ther permits them to make ſo many obſerva-
tions, nor conſequently to acquire ſo many
ideas. |
2. Animals being better armed and hetter
cloathed by nature than the human ſpecies,
have fewer wants, and conſequently ought
to have leſs invention. If the voracious ani-
mals are more cunning than others, it is
becauſe hunger, ever inventive, inſpires them
with the art of forming ſtratagems to ſur-
priſe their prey.

4. The animals compoſe only a ſociety
that flies from man, who, by the aſſiſtance
of weapons, made by himſelf, is become
formidable to the ſtrongeſt among them.

Beſides, man is the moſt fruitful animal
upon earth. He 1s born, and lives in every
climate; while many of the other animals,
as the lion, the elephant, and the rhinoce-
ros, are found only in a certain latitude.

And the more a ſpecies of animals, capa-


—:l.Kl!l.nw . ͤ — ᷑———C —V—— — 2


ble of making obſervations, is multiplied,
the more ideas and genius it poſſeſſes.

But ſome may aſk why monkeys, whoſe
paws are nearly as dexterous as our hands,
do not make a progreſs equal to that of
man? Becauſe they are inferior to him in
ſeveral reſpects; becauſe men are more mul-
tiplied upon the earth; becauſe among the
different ſpecies of monkeys, there are but
few whoſe ſtrength can be compared to that
of man; becauſe the monkeys being frugivo-
rous, have fewer wants, and therefore leſs
invention than man, becauſe their life is
ſhorter, and they form only a fugitive ſociety
with regard to man, and ſuch animals as
the tyger, the lion, &c. and finally becauſe
the organical diſpoſition of their body, keeps
them like children, in perpetual motion, even
after their deſires are ſatisfied. Monkeys are
not ſuſceptible of laſſitude, which ought to
be conſidered, as I ſhall 'prove in the third


eflay, as one of the principles of the per-


fection of the human mind.
By combining all theſe differences between
the nature of man and beaſt, we may under-


ſtand, why ſenſibility and memory, though


faculties common to man and other animals,
are in the latter only ſteril faculties.


It may perhaps be objected, that God,


agreeable to his juſtice, cannot have ſub-


jected to pain and death innocent creatures;
and conſequently that beaſts are meer ma-
chines. But, in anſwer to this objection, I
muſt obſerve, that as neither the ſcripture,
nor the church has any where declared, that
animals are meer machines, we are doubtleſs
ignorant of the motives for God's conduct
towards animals; though we ought to ſup-
poſe them juſt. There is no neceſſity for
having recourſe to Malebranche's jocular re-
ply to a perſon, who maintaining to him that
animals were ſenſible of pain, ſaid, They have
then probably catcn forbidden hay.

na-


wb
& 5
%. $


"ET % 4


2


FSSAYS o ur MIN P. 5


i o have not two hundred different ideas (b), nor two hundred words
— —_ ideas; and whoſe language muſt conſequently be reduced,
like that of animals, to five or fix different ſounds or cries (c), if we take
from it, the words Bow, Arrow, Nets, &c. which ſuppoſe the uſe of hands,
From whence I conclude, that without a certain exterior organiſation, Sen-
ſibility and Memory in us would prove two ſteril faculties. We ought to
examine if theſe two hen p99s 8 the aſſiſtance of this organiſation, have
ity produced all our thoughts.

N - ln we examine this ſabjeRt, I may poſſibly be aſked, whether theſe
two faculties are modifications of a ſpiritual or a material ſubſtance ? This


queſtion, which has formerly been ſo often debated by philoſophers (d), and


by ſome perſons revived in our time, does not neceſſarily fall within the limits
of my work. What I have to offer, with regard to the Mind, is equally con-
formable to either of theſe hypotheſes. I ſhall therefore only obſerve, that
if the church had not fixed our belief in reſpect to this particular, and we had
been obliged by the light of reaſon alone, to acquire a knowledge of the think-
ing principle, we mult have granted, that neither opinion is capable of demon-
ſtration ; and, conſequently that by weighing the reaions, on both ſides,
balancing the difficulties, and determining in favour of the greater number of
probabilities, we ſhould form only conditional judgments. It would be the
fate of this problem, as it hath been of many others, to be reſolvable only
by the aſſiſtance of the calculation of probabilities (e). I ſhall therefore dwell


no


*
1


(b) The ideas of numbers, ſo ſimple, ſo
ealily acquired, and to which our wants often
refer us, are fo prodigiouſly limited in certain
nations, that they cannot reckon more than


three, expreſſing all numbers above three, by


the vague expreſſion, A preat many.
(c) Of this kind were the people Dampier
found in an iſland producing neither tree
nor ſhrub, and who lived on the fiſh which
the waves drove into their creeks; nor was
their language any more than a ſort of cluck-
ing noiſe, reſembling that of a turkey-cock.
(d) Whatever may have been affirmed by


the ſtoics; Seneca was not fully convinced


of the ſpirituality of the foul : * Your let-


| © ter (ſays he to one of his friends) came


« at an improper time: being delivered to
« me, when I was taking a delicious walk
in the temple of Hope. There I freed
e myſelf from all doubts with regard to my
„ ſoul's immortality: my imagination, gently
« warmed by the reaſoning of ſome great


men, firmly believed in that immortality,


„ which they promiſe more than they prove.
] began to be diipleaſed with my exiſtence,
and to deſpiſe the remains of an unhappy


: —


<< life, when I had opened to myſelf with
delight, the gates of eternity; but your letter
** awakened me, and of ſo pleaſing a dream left
* me only the regret of knowing it was a
„dream.“ |

A proof, ſays Mr. Deſlandes, in his criti-
cal hiſtory of philoſophy, that formerly nei-
ther the immortality, nor the immateriality
of the ſoul was believed, is, that in the time of
Nero, the people of Rome complained, that
the introduction of the new-fangled doctrine
of the other world enervated the courage
of the ſoldiers, and rendered them timorous;
that it deprived the unhappy of their princi-
pal coſolation, and added double terror to


death, by threatning them with new ſuffer-


ings after this life.

(e) It would be impoſſible to obſerve the
axiom of Deſcartes, and to acquieſce in evi-
dence only. This axiom is repeated in the
ſchools; becauſe it is not ſufficiently under-
ſtood. For Deſcartes, not having placed a
ſign, if I may be allowed the expreſſion, at
the inn of evidence, every one thinks he has
a righ* of lodging there his opinion. Who-
ever will be ſatisfied with evidence only can

B2 hardly


—


——


4 DE L'ESPRIT


no longer on this queſtion, but proceeded to my ſubject. I ſay, then, that
the Phyſical Senſibility and Memory, or, to ſpeak more exactly, that Senſibility
alone, produceth all our ideas, and in effect Memory can be nothing more


than


—


—— —— A 1 OI 9 —
— —— —


hardly be ſure of any thing, except his own
exiſtence. How could he, for example, be
convinced of that of other bodies ? For can-
nt God, by his omnipotence, make the ſame
impreſſions on our ſenſes, as the preſence of
the objects would excite? And if we grant,
that the Deuy can do this, how can it be
aftirmed, that he does not employ his power
in this manner, and that the whole univerſe,
is nothing more than a meer phenomenon ?
Beſides, as we are affected in our dreams by
the ſame ſenſation we ſhould feel were the
object preſent, how can it be proved, that
our life is not one continued dream? I
would not be underſtood from hence, to deny
the exiſtence of bodies, but only to ſhew
that we have leſs aſſurance of it than of our


own exiſtence. And, as truth is an indi-


villble point, we cannot ſay of a certain
fact, that it is more or leſs true; it is there-
fore evident, that if we are more certain of
our own exiſtence than of that of other
bodies, the exiſtence of the latter is no more
than a probability. It is, indeed, a very great
probability, and, with regard to the conduct


of life, equivalent to evidence; notwith-


ſtanding which, it is only a probability. If
then almoſt all our truths may be reduced
to probabilities, we could not too highly ex-
preſs our gratitude to the man of genius, who
would undertake to conſtruct phyſical, me-
taphyſical, moral, and political tables, in


which ſhould be preciſely marked all the
different degrees of probability, and conſe-


quently of belief aſſignable to each opinion.
The exiſtence of bodies, for example,


would be placed in the phyſical tables, as the


firſt degree of certainty in the following
would be determined what wagers may be
laid, that the ſun will riſe to-morrow; that


he will riſe in ten, in twenty years, &c. In


like manner, there would be placed in the
moral and political tables, as the firſt degree
of certainty, the exiſtence of Rome, or, of
London; then that of the heroes, as Cæſar
or William the Conqueror; and in this man-
ner, we ſhould deſcend by the ſcale of pro-
bability, to the facts of the leaſt certainty;


—— — !


*


and finally, from the pretended miracles of
Mahomet, even down to the prodigics at-
teſted by ſo many Arabians, but whoſe falſity
is nevertheleſs highly probable here below,
where liars are ſo common, and prodigies
ſo rare. | f

It would then follow, that men, who differ


in ſentiments generally from the impoſſihi-


lity of finding proper ſigns to expreſs the dif-
ferent degrees of belief they annex to their
opinion, would communicate their ideas to
each other with more facility; becauſe they
might always, if I may fo expreſs myſelf,
refer their ſeveral opinions to ſome partieular
number in the tables of probabilities.

As the progreſs of the Mind is always flow,
and the ſeveral diſcoveries in the ſciences
have been made at great diſtances of time
from one another, it muſt be granted, that if


tables of probability were once formed, there


would be only ſlight alterations made after-
wards, and even thoſe ſucceſſively, which
would relate, in conſequence of the diſco-
veries made, to the manner of encreaſing or


diminiſhing the probabilicy of certain pro-


politions, which we call truths; but, in rea-
lity, only probabilities more or leſs accumu-
lated. By this means the ſtate of doubting,
always inſupportable to the far greater part of
mankind would be more ealily endured.
Doubts then would no longer continue vague,
becauſe ſubjet to calculation, and conſe-
quently capable of valuation ; they would be
converted into affirmative propoſitions. Then
the ſect of Carneades, whole doctrine was
formerly” eſteemed the philoſophy of excel-
lence, being called by the name of elective,
would be purged of all thoſe flight errors,


for which wrangling ignorance has with too


much harſhneſs reproached a philoſophical


ſect, whoſe dogmas were equally adapted to


improve the Mind, and poliſh the manners.
Though this ſect, agreeable to their prin-
ciples, admitted no truths, yet they admitted
at leaſt appearances, and would have us regu-
late life by thoſe appearances ; and that we
ſhould rather act when it appeared more
eligible, than waſte our time in examination;
| that


5 N e, .


E S S AT S on The MIN. 5


than one of the organs of Phyſical Senſibility. The principle that feels in us
muſt neceſſarily be the principle that remembers : ſince to remember, as I ſhall
prove hereafter, is properly nothing more than to feel. |
When, in conſequence of a ſeries of ideas, or of the concuſſion cauſed in my
organ of hearing by certain ſounds, I recollect the appearance of an oak
my interior organs mult neceſſarily at that time be in the fame ſituation in
which they were when 1 ſaw that oak, That ſituation of the organs muſt
therefore inconteſtibly excite a ſenſation 3 whence it is evident, that to remem-


ber is to feel.


This principle being laid down, I farther ſay, that all the operations of


the Mind conſiſt in the power we have of perceiving the reſemblance and dif-


ference, the agreement or diſagreement of various objects among themſelves.
And this power, being the Phyſical Senſibility itſelf, every thing is reducible |


to feeling.
In order to be convinced of this truth, let us conſider Nature. She preſents


objects to us; thoſe objects have relations both with regard to us and them-


ſelves, the knowledge of thoſe relations conſtitute what we call the Mind,


which is more or lels extenſive as our knowledge in this particular is more


or leſs diffuſive. The human Mind aſcends to the knowledge of thoſe rela-
tions; but cannot paſs theſe bounds. All the words therefore of which the
various languages are compoſed, and which may be conſidered as a collection


of the ſigns of all the thoughts of man, recal to us either objects, as the words
Oak, Ocean, Sun; or repreſent ideas, namely, the different relations which


objects bear to one another; and theſe are either ſimple, as the words, Great-
neſs, Littleneſs, or compounded, as Vice, Virtue ; or, finally, they expreſs the
different relations which objects have with ourſelves, that is, our action upon
them, as in the words, I break, I dig, I raiſe; or their impreſſion upon us,
as, I am wounded, dazzled, terrified.

If I have before confined the ſignification of the word Idea, uſed in very
different acceptations, ſince we equally ſay, the Idea of a tree, and the Idea
of virtue, it is becauſe an undetermined ſignification of the expreſſion may


ſometimes cauſe us to commit thoſe errors which always flow from an abuſe
of words. |


The concluſion of what I have hitherto advanced, is, that if all the words


of different languages were confined to objects, or the relation of thoſe objects,
with regard either to us, or one another, the Mind would conſequently con-
fiſt, in comparing our ſenſations and ideas; that is, in contemplating the


—— ——


reſemblances, and differences, the agreements, and diſagreements, that ſub-


that we ought to deliberate maturely,
when we had time ſufficient for that pur-
poſe, that the determination might con-
ſequently be more certain; and that a free
paſſage might thence be opened in the
toul for all new truth ; an advantage re-
fuſed by the dogmatics. They farther in-


_ tended, that we ſhould be leſs tenacious


of our own opinions; leſs ready to condemn
thoſe of others, and conſequently become
more ſociable; and in fine, that the habit
of doubting, having rendered us leſs irritable
by contradiction,. ſhould ſtifle in us the moſt
fertile ſecds of hatred amongſt men. We do
not here glance at revealed truth ; theſe are
truths of another order,


ſiſt


6 | DE L'ESPRIT,z on,
ſift among them. Judgment therefore is only this very faculty of perceiving,


or, at leaſt the declaration of it; and conſequently, all the operations of the


Mind are reducible ro judgment.

The queltion being thus properly limited, I ſhall proceed to examine, if
Judging be not Feeling. When I judge of the magnitude, or the colour
of objects preſented to me, it is evident, that the judgment is formed from
the different impreſſions made by thoſe objects on my ſenſes; and therefore
may be ſaid, with the greateſt propriety, to be nothing more than a ſenſation,
For I can equally ſay, I judge, or I feel, that of two objects, the one, which
I call a Fathom, makes a different impreſſion on me, from that of the other,
which I call Foot; alſo, that the colour which I call Red acts upon my eyes
differently from that which I call Yellow: from whence I conclude, that in
all parallel caſes, Judging is the {ame with Feeling.

But ſome will tay, let us ſuppoſe that we are deſirous to know, whether
the ſtrength of the body be preterable to its magnitude; can it then be aſſerted,
that judging is nothing more than feeling? I anſwer, Les; becauſe, to enable
me to form a judgment on this ſubjct, my memory mult ſucceſſively retrace
to me the pictures of the different ſituations, in which Ihave acted, during
the whole courſe of my life. Conſequently, Judging is jecing in thole


different pictures, that the ſtrength of the body will be oftener ot ſervice to


me, than its ſize or magnitude. Others may reply, if a judgment is to be
formed, whether juſtice is preferable to goodneſs in a king, can it be imagined,
that ſuch a judgment is only a ſenſation?

This opinion, hath doubtlels, at firit the appearance of a paradox; yet
to prove the truth of it, let us ſuppoſe, that a man has the knowledge
of what is called Good and Evil; and that he allo knows, what evil
is more or lels ſo, according as it is more or leis pernicious to the welfare of
ſociety. According to this ſuppoſition, hat art mult a poet or orator em-
ploy, to make him perceive, in a more lively manner, that juſtice, preferable
in a king to goodnels, preſerves more citizens for the ſtate ? |

The orator will prelent three pictures to his imagination : in one he will
paiat the juſt king, who condemns a criminal, and orders him to execution.
In the ſecond, he will exhibit the good king, opening the ſame criminal's
priſon, and taking off his fetters. In the third, he will repreſent this very
criminal arming himſelf with a poniard, as he quits the priſon, and haſtening
to maſſacre fifty citizens. Now, what man, at the. fight of thele three pic-
cures, will not be convinced, that juſtice, which by the death of one has pre-
vented the death of fifty, is in a king preferable to goodneſs? This judg-
ment, however, is really no more than a ſenſation. In effect, if from a habi-
rude of uniting certain ideas to certain words, we can, as experience proves,
by ſtriking the ear with certain ſounds, excite in us nearly the fame ſenſations
that would be excited by the very preſence of the objects; it is evident, that
from the diſplay of thoſe three pictures, to judge, that in a king juſtice is
preferable to goodneſs, is feeling and ſeeing; that in the firſt picture, only
one Citizen is immolated, and in the third, fifty are maſſacred ; from whence
I conclude, that every judgment is nothing more than a ſenſation.


But ſhould this queſtion be ſtarted, muſt we alſo rank in the claſs of Sen-


ſations, judgments formed; for example, on the greater or leis degree of the
excel-


1 57 *
r SR
ENS ra Hh


E S S A T 8 O TRE MOI N D. 8 by


excellence of certain methods; ſuch as, that proper for fixing a great number
of objects in our memory, that of abſtraftion, or that of analyſis ?

In order to anſwer this queſtion, we mult begin by determining tae Done
fication of this word Method. A method is nothing more than the means
we employ, to attain ſome end propoſed. Let us ſuppole, a perſon intends to
place certain objects, or certain ideas in his memory; and that chance ſhould
have ſo arranged them there, that the remembrance of one fact, or of one
idea, makes him recollect an infinity of other facts, or af other ideas; and that
he may from thence have certain objects more readily and deeply engraved
in his memory. To infer from thence a judgment, that this order is the
beſt, and, to give it the name of Method, ſignifies, that he has exerted leſs
efforts of attention, and ſuffered a leſs painful ſentation, by ſtudying in that
order, than in any other. But to remember a painful ſenſation is to feel; it
is therefore evident, that in this caſe, Judging is Feeling.

Let us farther ſuppoſe, that in order to prove the truth of certain propo-
ſitions in geometry, and to make them more eaſily conceived by his pupils,
a geometrician had determined to make them conſider the lines independently
of their breadth and thickneſs; to judge therefore, that this means or method
of abſtraction, is more proper to convey to his ſcholars the knowledge of
certain geometrical, propoſitions, ſignifies, that leſs efforts of attention will
be neceſſary; and that his ſcholars will undergo a leſs painful ſenſation in
uſing this method than any other. | 1

Let us ſuppoſe, for a final example, that by ſeparately examining each truth
contained in a complicated propoſition, the underſtanding of that propoſition
is ſooner attained. Therefore, to judge that the means or method of analyſis
is: the belt, is ſaying alſo, that leis powerful efforts of attention have been
made; and conſequently, that a leſs painful ſenſation hath been ſufficient, by
particularly conſidering each truth contained in this complicated propoſition,
than would have been requiſite, had it been attempted to underſtand them all
at once. |

The reſult of what J have ſaid, is, that the judgments formed on the means
and methods which chance preſents to us, in order to attain a certain end,
are, in the ſtricteſt propriety, nothing more than ſenſations. Therefore, in
man, all is reducible to feeling.

But how did it happen, ſome may aſk, that hitherto, there has been ſup-
poſed in us a faculty of judging, diſtinct from the faculty of feeling? My
anſwer is, that we are indebted for that ſuppoſition to a belief, which has hither-
to prevailed, of its being impoſſible to explain in any other manner, certain
errors of the Mind. |

But entirely to remove this difficulty, I am going to ſhew, in the ſollowing
chapters, that all our falſe judgments and errors have their ſource from two


cauſes, which ſuppoſe in us only the faculty of feeling; and conſequently, that


fr would be of no utility, or rather abſurd, to admit a faculty of judging,
which could only explain, what might as well be done withour its aſſiſtance.
1 ſhall therefore, proceed with the ſubject; and I fay, that all our erroneous
judgments are either the effect of our paſſions, or our ignorance. 8


CH AP.


— 26 ⁰ — — —


.
— —— —
— ——————— — — —


8 DE L'ESPRET', og 1”


-


8 M W
Of the errors occaſioned by our paſſions.


N H E paſſions lead us into error, becauſe they fix our attention to that
particular part of the object they preſent to us, not allowing us to view,
it on every ſide. A king paſſionately affects the title of Conqueror. Victory,
ſays he, calls me to the remoteſt part of the earth: I ſhall fight; I ſhall gain
the victory; I ſhall load mine enemy with chains, and the terror of my name,
like an impenetrable rampart, will defend the entrance of my empire. Ine-
briated with this hope, he forgets that fortune is inconſtant; and, that the


victor ſhares the load of miſery, almoſt equally with the vanquiſhed. He


does not perceive, that the welfare of his ſubjects is only a pretence for his
martial frenzy; and that pride alone forges his arms, and diſplays his en-
ſigns: his whole attention is fixed on the pomp of the triumph.

Fear, equally powerful with pride, will produce the ſame effect; it will
taiſe ghoſts and phantoms, and diſperſe them among the tombs, and in the
darkneſs of the woods, preſent them to the eyes of the affrighted traveller,
ſeize on all the faculties of his ſoul, without leaving any one at liberty to reflect
on the abſurdity of the morives for ſuch a ridiculous terror.

The paſſions not only fix the attention on particular ſides of the objects
they preſent to us; but they alſo deceive us, by exhibiting the ſame objects,


when they do not really exiſf, The ſtory of a country clergyman, and an


amorous lady, is well known. They had heard, and concluded, that the
moon was peopled, and were looking for the inhabitants through their teleſ-
copes. If I am not miſtaken, ſaid the lady, I perceive two ſhadows; they
mutually incline towards each other : doubtleſs they are two happy lovers.----- -
O fie! madam, replied the clergyman, theſe two ſhadows are the two ſteeples of
a cathedral. This tale is our hiſtory, it being common for us to ſee in things
what we are deſirous of finding there : on the earth, as in the moon, different

aſſions will cauſe us to ſee either lovers or ſteeples. Illuſion is a neceſſary.
effect of the paſſions, the ſtrength, or force of which, is generally meaſured
by the degree of obſcurity into which they lead us. This was well known
to a certain lady, who being caught by her lover in the arms of his rival,
obſtinately denied the fact of which he had been a witneſs. How! ſaid he,
have you the afſſurance------ Ah! perfidious creature, cried the lady, it is


plain you no longer love me; for you believe your eyes, before all I can


ſay. This is equally applicable to all the paſſions, as well as to love. All
ſtrike us with the moſt perfect blindneſs. When ambition has kindled a war
between two nations, and the anxious citizens aſk one another, the news; what
readineſs appears, on one fide, to give credit to the good ; and on the other,
what incredulity, with regard to the bad? How often have chriſtians, from
placing a ridiculous confidence in monks, denied the poſſibility of the anti-
podes. There is no century, which has not, by lome ridiculous affirma-
tion or negation, afforded matter of laughter to the following age. A paſt


folly is ſeldom ſufficient to ſhew mankind their preſent folly,
2 | The


Ls


—


* + * W


$69.5 98
A %


2 8 Cr ae =
Eg GRE e ry REI e Ge ION
* - 2


Os ws wag le rg


WEL racy FLSA


Wes


*


ESSAYS on TRT MIND. 9


The ſame paſſions, however, which are the germ of an infinity of errors,


are alſo the ſources of our knowledge. If they miſlead us, they, at the ſame


time, impart to us the ſtrength neceſſary for walking. It is they alone that
can rouze us from that fluggiſhneſs and torpor always ready to ſeize on


the faculties of our ſoul. _ |
But as this is not the place for examining the truth of this propoſition, I


ſhall paſs to the ſecond cauſe of our errors.


VVV


S HM PF. 00
Of Ig norauce.
JJ E deceive ourſelves, when we pretend to judge of an object from one
M ſide only, to which our attention has been fixed by our paſſions. We
alſo deceive ourſelves, when we pretend to judge of a ſubject, when, our me-


mory does not contain all the facts, on a compariſon of which, the propriety
of our deciſions depend. Not that any perſon is deſtitute of a juſt percep-


tion: all have an idea of what they ſee ; but by not miſtruſting our ignorance,


we are too apt to believe that what we ſee in an object is all that is perceivable
In If, | |

In queſtions of any difficulty, we are to conſider ignorance as the principal
cauſe of our errors. To ſhew how eaſily we are, in this caſe, deceived, and
how by drawing from their principles, conſequences always juſt, men arrive


at concluſions directly oppolite, I ſhall give as an inſtance, a queſtion a little


complicated : ſuch is that of Luxury, which has occaſioned very different
judgments according to the light in which it has been conſidered. |
The word Luxury, being a vague term, without any fixed meaning, and
generally no more than a relative expreſſion ; we muſt previouſly fix an ade-
quate idea to the word Luxury, taken in a ftrict ſenſe; after which a defini-
tion muſt be given of Luxury, both with regard to a nation and an indi-
vidual. |
By the word Luxury, we are, in a ſtrict ſenſe, to underſtand all kinds of
ſuperfluities. That is, whatever is not neceſſary to a perſon's ſubſiſtance.
When the queſtion relates to a policed people, and the individuals of which
it is compoſed, the word Luxury, has a very different meaning; it becomes
abſolutely relative. The Luxury of a policed nation, is the expending its
Wealth on what 1s called ſuperfluities, by a people with which this nation is
compared. This is the caſe of England, with regard to Switzerland.
_ Luxury, in an individual, is allo the employment of his riches on what
.hould be called Superfluities, conſidering his ſtation, and the country in which
e lives. Such was the luxury of Bourvalais. |
Having given this definition of the word, let us ſee under what Cifferent
<ppearar.ces, national luxury has been conſidered ; ſince ſome have accounted
C | it


10 DE L'ESPRIT: 6


it uſeful and others detrimental to a ſtate. The former have confined their atten -
tion to the manufactures, which owe their origin to luxury, and induce a foreign
nation, eagerly to exchange its treaſures for the induſtry of the other. They
ſee the increaſe of riches bring in its train the increaſe of luxury, and the


perfection of arts proper to gratify it.


With them, the age of luxury is the


ra of the grandeur and power of a ſtate. The plenty of money, ſay they,
which it ſuppoſes, and brings into the nation, renders it happy at home and
formidable abroad. By money, numerous forces are maintained; maga-
Zines erected; arſenals filled with ſtores; and alliances formed and ſupported
with powerful princes: in fine, it is by money, that a nation can not only re-
Rift, but even rule over others more populous, and conſequently of more
real power than itſelf. As luxury renders a nation formidable abroad, to
it procures every Kind of felicity at home. It foftens the manners, creates
new diverſions, and thus furniſhes a comfortable ſubſiſtence to a competent
number of artiſts and Jabourers. It excites a ſalutary cupidity, which rouzes
man from that indolence, that laſſitude, which ſhould be conſidered as one
of the moſt cruel diſeaſes of human nature. It diffuſes through the Whole,
a vivifying heat; cauſes life to circulate through all the members of a ſtate ;
rouzes induſtry; opens the harbours; builds ſhips ; conveys them over the
ocean; and makes common to all mankind thoſe productions and riches
which covetous nature has concealed in the deep receſſes of the ſea, and the
bowels of the earth; or keeps ſeparate in a thouſand different climates. This,
believe, is nearly the point of view in which luxury preſents itſelf to thoſe


who conſider it as ufeful to ſtates.


Let us now examine the appearance under which it preſents itſelf to thoſe
philoſophers who look on it as the bane of nations. |

The happineſs of a people depends upon the national felicity, and the reſpect
they inſpire in others. With regard to the firſt, it is our opinion, theſe philoſo-
phers will ſay, that luxury and the wealth it produces in a ſtate, will render
the ſubjects happier only in proportion as this wealth is equally divided;
ſo that every one may procure thoſe conveniencies of which he fees himſelf


abridged by indigence.


Luxury is not therefore injurious as luxury, but as the effect of a great diſ-


parity in the wealth of individuals (a).


Accordingly, luxury is never carried


ta


—


(a) Luxury cauſes a cireulation of money;
it draws it from the coffers where avarice
would hoard it : it is luxury, therefore, ſay
ſome, that reſtores the equilibre between the
fortunes of individuals. But, I anſwer, that
it does not produce this effect. Luxury al-
ways ſuppoſes a cauſe of inequality of wealth
among individuals. And this cauſe, which


makes the firſt rich men, muſt, when theſe.


are ruined by Juxury, te reproducing others.
Take away this cauſe of the inequality of
riches, and luxury will diſappear with it.


Nothing of what i called luxury can be ſeen
in countries where the fortunes of individuals
are nearly equal. I add, that this inequality
of riches, being once founded, luxury itſelf
is partly the cauſe of the reproduction of
luxury: for whoever ruins himſelf by his lux-
ury, transfers the greateſt part of his wealth
to thoſe artificers who adminiſter to luxury;
and theſe, enriched with the ſpoils of an in-
finite number of prodigals, become rich in
their turn, and afterwards ruin themſelves
in the ſame manner. Now that wealth,

| which


1
*
2
1
14
13
N
fu
52
4


| choly, as it is incurable,


ESSAYS o ThE MIN P. 11


to exceſs, when there is not too great inequality in the diſtribution of riches
it increaſes in proportion, as theſe are confined to fewer individuals, and arrives
at its utmoſt height when a nation divides itſelf into two claſſes, one abound-
ing in ſuperfluities, the other wanting neceſſaries. 5 |
When it is arrived at this height, the ſtate of a nation 1s the more melan-
How ſhall then any equality be re-eſtabliſhed in
the fortunes of individuals? The rich man will have purchaſed extenſive lord-
ſhips ; and being able to take advantage of the neceſſities of his neighbours,
he will, in a ſhort time, have annexed an infinite number of ſmall farms to hy.
eſtate. A diminution of the number of proprietors increaſes the number ot
labourers. When theſe are multiplied, ſo that there are more labourers than
work, it will be with the workmen as with all kinds of merchandize, Which
becomes of leſs value in proportion as it becomes more common. Beſides,
the rich man, whoſe luxury even exceeds his wealth, is under a neceſſity of
lowering the price of labour, and giving the workman no more than is ab-
ſolutely neceſſary for a bare ſubliſtance (b). The latter is obliged, through
neceſſity, to accept of it; but in caſe of ſickneſs, or an increaſe of his family,
for want of a ſufficiency of wholeſome food, he dies, and incumbers the ſtate
with an indigent and deſtitute family. To prevent ſuch calamities, recourſe
muſt be had to a new diſtribution of lands; a diſtribution always unjuſt and
impracticable. Hence it is evident, that luxury, when it is arrived to a cer-
tain pitch, renders it impoſſible to reſtore an equality between the fortunes
of individuals. Then the rich, with their wealth, flock to the capitals, as the
ſeats of diverſion, and the arts of luxury; while the country remains deſo-


lated, poor, and uncultivated. Seven or eight millions of people languiſh in


miſery,


—


which from the wrecks of ſo many fortunes,
ſpreads itſelf over the country, can be only


the leaſt part; as the productions of the earth
adapted to the common uſe of mankind, can


never exceed a certain price.

It is otherwiſe with regard to thoſe pro-
ducts when they have been manufactured
by induſtry; for their value is then whatever
fancy pleaſes, and the price becomes exceſ-
five, Thus luxury neceſſarily keeps money
in the hands of its artizans, cauſes a per-
petual circulation of it in that claſs of men;
and, conſequently, muſt ſupport an inequa-
lity of riches among individuals.

(b) It is commonly thought that the
country is ruined by ſervices, impoſts, and
eſpecially, the poll- tax. Theſe I ſhall rea-
dily allow fo be very burdenſome; yet it
muſt not be imagined, that the ſuppreſſion


of this impoſt alone would render the con-
dition of the peaſants entirely happy. In


oft provinces the price of a day's labour is


only eight ſols. Now if ſrom theſe eight ſols
I deduct the impoſition of the church, that
is, near ninety ſundays and holy-days, and
perhaps thirty-five days in the year, when the
husbandman is ill, without work, or employ-
ed in his lord's ſervices; all that remains to
him is no more than ſix ſols per day. While
he is ſingle, I will ſuppoſe that theſe ſix ſols
are ſufficient to anſwer all his expences of
food, cloathing, and lodging: onhis marrying,
theſe ſix ſols will be deficient, as during the
firſt years after mariage, his wife will be too
much taken up in looking after the children,
to aſſiſt him: let us ſuppoſe, that his poll-tax
is then entirely remitted, which amounts to
five or ſix francs; and thus he gains about
a farthing a day more. Now certainly this
farthing would make very little alteration
in his condition. What then muſt be done
to render his condition happy ? Make a con-
ſiderable addition to the price of a day“
labour. In order to this, the proprietors

GS 2 mug


— — — — — —


. ES PN


miſery (c), and five or fix thouſand riot in an opulence which renders them
odious, without augmenting their happineſs. | 5

What indeed can the profuſe variety of a table add to a perſon's happi—
nels ? Is it not ſufficient for him to wait the call of hunger; but he mult pro-
portion his exerciſes, or the length of his airings, to the bad taſte of his cook,
that he may reliſh as delicious every food that is not deteſtible? Beſides, does he
not by frugality and exerciſe avoid that train of diſtempers occaſioned by glur-
tony, irritated by the variety and delicacy of the diſhes. Happineſs therefore
does not depend on the elegance of the table.

Neither does it confilt in the richneſs of dreſs, or the ſplendor of equi:
page. A perſon of quality appearing in public, dreſſed in an embroidered
ſuit, and leaning in a brilliant chariot, feels no phyſical pleaſures, gnd thete
only are real. At molt he is only affected with the pleaſure of vanity, of which
the privation would poſlibly be inſupportable; though the enjoyment be flat
and inſipid. Without any addition to his own happineſs, the rich man,


— —


_


muſt conſtantly reſide on their eſtates : then,
like their anceſtors, they would reward the
ſervices of their domeſtics, by beſtowing on
them ſome acres of land. The number of
proprietors would inſenſibly multiply; that
of day-labourers decreaſe; and the latter by
becoming more ſcarce, would ſet a higher
value upon their work.

(c) Itis very ſtrange that the nations moſt
celebrated for their luxury and police, ſhould
be the very countries where the majority
of the inhabitants are more unhappy than
the ſavage nations which are held in ſuch
contempt by the civilized. It is a queſtion,
whether the condition of a ſavage be not pre-
ferable to that of a peaſant? The ſavage
has no priſon, no increaſe of impoſts, to
tear; no oppreſſive lord, no tyrannical ſub-
delegate ; he is not perpetually mortified and
debated, by daily ſeeing perſons infinitely


above him in riches and power; without


ſuperior, without ſervitude, more healthy
and vigorous than the peaſant, becauſe hap—
Pier; he enjoys the ſatisfaction of equality,
eipecially of that ineſtimable privilege, liber-
ty, to vainly claimed by moſt nations.

In policed countties, the whole art of
government has often conſiſted in making an
infinite number of men {ubſervient to the
happineſs of a few ; in keeping, for this pur-
vole, the multitude under oppreſſion, and
in violating all the privileges of humanity they
have a right to demand.


But the true end of the legiſlative office,
is the general happineſs. Poflibly this hap-
pineſs could not be procured but by again
introducing the paſtoral life; and poſſibły the
diſcoveries in legiſlation bring us back, in
this reſpect, to the point from whence go-
vernment had its riſe. Not that I pretend
to decide ſo nice a queſtion, and which re-
quires the moſt careful examination : but I
own, to me it is very aſtoniſhing, that fo


many forms of government, eſtabliſhed at


leaſt on a pretence of the public good ; that
ſo many laws, fo many regulations, ſhould,
in moſt kingdoms, have proved only the in-
ſtrument of oppreſſion and calamity. Poſſi-
bly this misfortune can be removed only by
returning to manners infinitely more ſimple.


I am well aware, that many attractive plea-


ſures muſt be then renounced : bur if the ge-
neral good require it, this ſacrifice would
become a duty. May we not even appre-
hend that the extreme felicity of ſome indi-
viduals always flows from the calamities of
the majority? A truth not unhappily ex-
prefied in the two following lines on the ſa-
vages:


Chez eux tout eſt commun, chez eux


tout eſt ẽgal; 5
Comme ils ſont ſans palais, ils ſont ſans
hopital.


With them all common is, and equal all;
No palace have they, nor a hoſpital,


by


DE, 4


I * ns
*


3;

UF -
7
<8
3 5
5
*

4 * .
1 * :
97
8
2

% +


5
3
;
7
5
*
*
73
LS *
*
J
7525
Cd
01
725
*
2 *


”>


2
5
Ws
Dy.
— vw.
3
3
©; 85
by).
.
1
3
28
F
A
:


ESS AT S on Tus MERSD. 13


by diſplaying his luxury, ſhocks humanity; and the wretch * * 0 2
5 lags of poverty to the robe of opulence, imagines that there is the
ng. HR "bei heir dreſs, recals, on this occaſion,
ſame difference between their happineſs as their dreſs, 00 OTE
the painful remembrance of the diſtreſſes he endures 3 = 3 _
ſelf of the wretch's only comfort, a momentary forgetfu ne : of his 4 ws
It is therefore certain, continue theſe philoſophers, that re 18 pul
ductive of the happineſs of any; and that too great an inequ oy " ic N
among the members of a ſtate implies, that the greateſt 1 them he
wretched. Thus a nation, where luxury has been introduced, is not very
happy in itſelf; let us now fee whether it be reſpected _ EE
The plenty of money, which luxury produces in a f --y 3
the imagination. This ſtate is for a time, very powerful; - = an
tage, if there can be any advantage independent of the 3 5 0 .
bers, is, as Mr. Hume obſerves, only tranſitory. Riches, 11 * "= _
which ſucceſſively forſake and overflow a thouſand different * 5 and,
muſt ſucceſſively travel through a thouſand climates. When, by the _—_
of its manufactures, and the perfection of the arts of luxury, a nation »
drawn into it the riches of its neighbours, it is evident, that the price ©
goods, workmanſhip, and labour, will neceſſarily fall among ew impove-
riſhed people; and thence, by claudeſtinely procuring tome manufa _ out
of this rich nation, may, by degrees, in their turn, impoverith it, by ſupp ying
themlelves at a lower price with thoſe goods, which they before imported
from their rich neighbours (d). And no ſooner is the want of money perceived


in a ſtate accuſtomed to luxury, than it becomes contemptible.


*—


In


(d) What T mention of the commerce of


the goods for luxury, muſt not be applied


to all kinds of commerce. The riches brought
into a ſtate by the perfection oi che manu-
factures and the arts of luxury, are only tem-
porary, and do not increaſe che happinets of
individuals. But it is very diterent with re-
card to the wealth flowing in from the com-
merce of goods immediately neceſtaty. This
commerce ſuppoſe an excellent cultivation of
the lands, a ſuldiviſian of theſe lands into
an infinity of (mall demeſnes, and, conſe-
quently, a carer equality in the partition of
riches, J well know that this commerce
of necearies, will, in proceſs of time, be-
caſion © gieat ditproportion in the fortunes of
indi iduals, and introduce luxury. But it
wil not be impoſſible, in ſuch a caſe, to check
me progreſs of luxury. This is certain,
that the concentration of riches in a ſmall
number of hands proceeds much more low-
ly, -both becauic the proprietors are at once
20th cultivators and traders; and becauſe the


number of proprietors being greater, and that
of day-labourers ſmaller, theſe, by reaſon of
their polity, are, as 1 have already obſerved:
in a preceding note, able to. preſcribe laws:
tor fixing the value of their day's work,
and require ſuch wages as will procure a
comfortable ſubſiſtence for themſelves and:
families. Thus every perſon has a ſhare of
the riches accruing to a Rate by the traffick of
proviſions. Nor is this commerce ſubject
to the {ame viciſſitudes as that of themanufac--
tures of Iuxury. An art or a manufacture eaſily
paſſes from one country to another; but to-
overcome the ignorance and ſloth of pea-
ſants, and prevail on them to undertake the
culture of a new commodity, is a work of
time. Jo naturalize this new commodity:
in a country is attended with great trouble
and expence, by which the advantages of
trade will almoſt ever incline to chat coun-
try which produces this commodity natural-


ly; and where it has, for a long time been
cultivated,


There .


14 SE L'ESPRETT, an


In order to ſurmount theſe diſficulties, the only method is to return to a
ſimple lite; but this both the cuſtoms and laws oppale. Accordingly, the
epocha of the greateſt luxury of a nation, is generally the epocha preceding
its fall and debaſement. The happineſs and apparent power which luxury
tor a time imparts to nations, may be compared to thoſe violent fevers,
from which, during the paroxiſms, the patient derives an aſtoniſhing ſtrength
and which ſeem to augment his powers only to deprive him at once, when
the fit is over, both of this ſtrength and his life. |

In order to be convinced of this truth, ſay theſe philoſophers, let us con-
lier, what renders a nation truly reſpectable to its neighbours. Doubtlefs
the number and vigour of its members; their love for their country, and their


courage and virtue.
If we ſurvey the numbers of the inhabitants of different nations, we ſhall


find that the moſt luxurious countries are not the moſt populous.


It is well


known that Switzerland, in proportion to its extent, is better peopled than


Spain, France, or even England,


The expence of men neceſſarily occaſioned by an extenſive trade (e), is not
in thoſe countries the ſole cauſe of depopulation; luxury creates a thouſand


There is, however, a caſe, perhaps imagi-
nary, when the eſtabliſhment of manufac-
rurcs, and the commerce of the arts of luxury
might be eſteemed highly uſeful. This is,
when the extent and fertility of a country are
not proportionate to the number of its inha-
bitants. That is, when a ſtate is not able
to maintain all its people. In this caſe, a
nation, not having the advantage of ſending
its people to ſuch a country as America,
mult either ſend colonies to ravage the neigh-
bouring countries, and, as others have done
beſore them, ſettle themſelves in more fertile
countries, where they may procure a ſub-
ſiſtence; or erect manufactures, compel the
neighbouring nations to trade with them, and
give them in exchange the proviſions neceſſa-
ry for the ſubſiſtence of a certain number of
Mhabitants. The laſt is doubtleſs the moſt
humane; for whatever the chance of war
may be, every colony, whether victor or van-
quiſhed, entering a country in a hoſtily man-
ner, certainly occaſions more deſolation, ca-
lamities, and evils, than can poſſibly low from
raiſing a kind of tribute, exacted rather by
humanity than force. |

(e) This expence of men is however ſo
great, that the number deſtroyed by our
American commerce cannot be thought of
without horror. Humanity, which inſpires


us with a love for all our fellow-creatures,
requires, that with regard to the trade for
negroes, I ſhould place in the account of miſ-
fortunes both the death of my country-
man, and that of fo many Africans, ſtimu-
lated to battle by the hope of making priſo-
ners to give in exchange for our goods, If
to the number of men ſlain in the wars and
dying in their paſſage from Africa to Ame-
rica, be added, that of the negroes, who
after they are ſold become victims to the
caprices and tyranny of a cruel maſter ; and
if to this ſum we join the number of thoſe
who periſh by tie, ſhipwreck, or the ſcur-
vy; and laſtly, the vumber of ſailors who die
during their ſtay at St. Domingo, either
from diſtempers commor. to the climate, or
the conſequences of debaichery, which is
no where more dangerous ; -yery hogſhead
of ſugar landed in Europe miſt he allowed
to be died with human blood. Now, from
a view of the miſeries occaſioned Þ; the cul-
ture and exportation of this commodii, ho
would not refuſe to deprive himſelf & the
uſe of it, and renounce a pleaſure, wti-h
muſt be purchaſed by the tears and deſtructio.
of ſo many of our fellow- creatures? But let
us remove our eyes from ſo melancholy a
ſpectacle, ſo diſgraceful to human nature,
and which fills a generous mind with horror.


3 others,


EC —


FSSAYS ox ru MIND 4


others, drawing the riches of a nation to the capital, leaving the country i:
want, favouring arbitrary power, and conſequently the augmentation of tub.
fidies ; it alſo affords opulent nations an eaſy method of contracting debts (f,
which cannot be diſcharged but by loading the people with taxes. Now thele
different cauſes of depopulation, by plunging a whole country into miſery,
mult neceſſarily impair the conſtitution of the body. When was it ever known
that a people given to luxury, were robuſt? One part are enervated by plea-
ſure; and the other emaciated by want. | |
If a poor or ſavage nation, as the Chevalier de Folard obſerves, have in
this reſpect, a great ſuperiority over nations addicted to luxury, it is becauſe


a labourer is generally richer in a poor than in a wealthy nation; it is becaule -


a Swiſs peaſant is in eaſier circumſtances thana French pealant (g). ;

Robuſt bodies are formed only by a ſufficiency of ſimple and wholeſome
food, manly exerciſe, not carried to excels, and a conſtant habit of bearing the
inclemencies of the weather: this the peaſants are inured to, and, conſe-
quently infinitely'more proper to bear the fatigues of war than manufacturers,
moſt of whom are uſed to a ſedentary life. It is allo in poor nations that theſe
indefatigable armies are formed, which give a turn to the fate of empires.
What oppoſition can be made againſt ſuch armies, by a country abandoned
to luxury and indolence ? Neither the number nor ſtrength of its inhabitants
can intimidate them. It will perhaps be ſaid, that the love of one's country
will ſupply the want of numbers and ſtrength. But among ſuch a people,
what can produce this love for their country ? The labouring people, which
, makes two thirds of every nation, are wretched : the artificers are without
property; and having been taken from the villages, and placed in ſome ma-
nufacture or ſhop, and from thence to others of the ſame kind, roving is be-
come familiar to them; and they cannot contract an attachment for any place:
and being certain of getting a livelihood any where, they conſider themlelves
not as the members of any country, bur as citizens of the world.

Such a people, therefore, will not be long able to diſtinguiſh themſelves
by their courage; becauſe courage is generally the effect of the vigour of the
body, that blind reliance on our own ſtrength which conceals from men
halt the danger to which they expoſe themſelves: or it flows from a ſtrong
patriotic zeal, which deſpiſes dangers when employed in the ſervice of its
country. But luxury in proceſs of time dries up theſe two ſources of cou-
rage (h). Poſſibly avarice might open a third, had the barbarous cuſtoms
of former ages been ſtill continued, when the vanquiſhed were carried into
flavery, and cities abandoned to pillage.


But


— —


| (f) Holland, England, and France, are (h) In conſequence of this a military genius
overwhelmed with debts, while Switzerland has always been conſidered as incompatiblſe with


does not owe a penny.

(g) It is not ſufficient, ſays Grotius, that
the people be provided with things abſolutely
neceſſary to their preſervation and life; it muſt
be rendered eaſy and pleaſant to them.


a commercial. Not that they are abſolutely
irreconcileable; but that this is one of the
moſt difficult problems in politics. Thoſe
who have hitherto written on trade, have


treated it as an abſtracted queſſion. They


did


— ———— <= ro


|


- es ar et erin A CEO a I EIS "Ao — *


16 pk 1. ES AI


But the ſoldier being no longer ſtimulated by this motive, he can now a&
only from a principle of honour. Now the deſire of honour is extinguiſhed
when the people become inflamed with the love of riches (i). It is to nv
purpoſe to ſay, that what opulent nations loſe in virtue and courage, they
gain in happineſs and pleaſures. A Spartan (k) was equally happy with a
Perſian, and the firſt Romans, whoſe only reward for courage was a donation
of ſome proviſions, would not have envied the ſplendour of Craſſus.

Caius Duillius, who by an act of the ſenate was every evening conducted
back to his houſe by a company of men carrying flambeaux and playing on
flutes, was as well pleaſed with this ſimple concert, as we are with the fineit
ſonata. But graiting that opulent nations may procure themſelves ſome con—
veniences unknown to thoſe of a poor ſtate, who will enjoy thoſe convenien-
cies ? A handful of men of wealth and power, who, conſidering themſelves
as the whole nation, conclude from their private eaſe, that the peaſants are
happy. Bur ſhould thele conveniences be dittuled among a greater number
of the inhabitants, is this an advantage to be compared with theſe accruing to


a poor ſtate, from the courage, hardineſs, temperance, and an abhorrence of


{livery in its inhabitants? Nations among whom luxury have got footing, fall,
ſooner or later, victims to deſpotiſm. They offer their faint and trembling
hands to the chains which tyranny has forged for them. How ſhall they


avoid it? In ſuch nations ſome live in voluptuouſneſs, and voluptuouſneſs is


deſtitute both of thought and foreſight ; others languiſh in penury, and pinch-


ing want: and entirely abſorbed in finding methods for its relief, never look ſo
high as liberty. In a deſpotic government the riches of the nation are at the
dilpoſal of its maſter; in a republic, they are the property of men of power,
or of their brave neighbours. ** Bring us your treaſures,” might the Romans


TI
have ſaid to the  Carthaginians, * They belong to us: Rome and Carthage


Lad


both aimed at riches, but purſued different methods to attain their ends.


«© While you encouraged the induſtry of your people, erected manufactures,


covered the ſea with your ſhips, attempted the diſcovery of uninhabited


countries, and brought to Carthage the gold of Spain and Africa; we were,
«© more wiſely, promoting courage and hardineſs, enuring our ſoldiers to


—_—


did not ſuſicient]y perceive, that every thing
has its relatives; and that in government
there can properly be no abſtracted queſtion ;
that here the merit of an author conſiſts in
connecting together all the parts of the ad-
miniſtration ; and that a ſtate is a machine
moved by diſferent ſprings, the force of which
is to be increaſed or diminiſhed, according
to the reciprocal acticn of thoſe ſprings, and


the effect intended to be produced.


(i) There is no neceſſity for obſerving,
that in this reſpect luxury is more dan-
gerous to a continental than an inſular na-
tion; ſhips being their ramparts, and ſea-
men their ſoldiers, | |


[k] When the valour of the Spartans was
once mentioned with great applauſe in pre-
ſence of Alcibiades, I fee nothing re-
« markable in this, faid he; for conſidering
the wretched life they lead, it ſhould be
& their peculiar buſineſs to die.” This ſar-
caſm fell from the mouth of a young man
brought up in luxury: but he was miſtaken ;
Lacedemon did not in the leaſt envy the hap-
pineſs of Athens: which made an antient
lay, it was better to live like the Spartans
under good Jaws, than like the Sybarites un-
der fragrant bowers, |


* the


— £
3 7
» 's
"oF?
8,
4
+4
.
bs
*


.
F
A
"e's
Hs
FA
ry
"8 7
82%
4.
7
%
-
5
+.
*x
2.
12
vn
TY


E SS AVS o Th MIN. ot


ve the fatigues of war, well knowing that the induſtrious man labours only
« for the brave. The time for entering on poſſeſſion is now arrived: De-
< liver up to us thoſe treaſures you are not able to defend.” The Romans
did not indeed ſpeak in this manner; but their conduct, ſufficiently proved,
that they were animated with the ſame ſentiments. Why ſhould not the po-
verty of Rome have been ſuperior to the opulence of Carthage, and in this
reſpect maintained the advantage which almoſt all poor nations have had over
the wealthy ? Did not the frugal Lacedemon triumph over the wealthy and
commercial Athens? Did not the frugal Romans trample on the golden ſcep-
ters of Aſia? Were not Egypt, Phœnicia, Tyre, Rhodes, Genoa, and Ve-
nice, either ſubdued or humbled, by nations whom they termed Barbarians?
And who knows but one day the flouriſhing ſtate of Holland, actually leſs
happy than Switzerland, will oppoſe an invader with a leſs obſtinate reſiſ-
tance ? Such is the point of light in which luxury is ſeen by thoſe philoſo-
phers, who have conſidered it as the bane of nations. |

The concluſion of the premiſes is, that men though they have a clear view
of the objects before them, and draw juſt conſequences from their principles,
yet their reſults are often contradictory ; becauſe they do not contain in their
memory all the objects, on a compariſon of which the truths they ſeek
mult depend. | |

It is, I think, needleſs to ſay, that in ſtating the queſtion of Luxury
under two different aſpects, I do not pretend to determine whether luxury be
uſeſul or detrimental to ſtates; an accurate ſolution of this moral problem
would require details foreign to my intended purpoſe. All I intended by this
inſtance was to ſhew, that in complicated queſtions, when our judgments are
not biaſſed by our paſſions, ignorance alone is the cauſe of our errors. That
is, by imagining that the ſide we view of an object is all that can be ſeen in
that object. 45 2


CC A T EE


Cn LE WS
Of the Abuſe of Words.


| A Nother cauſe of error, and which is alſo a branch of ignorance, is the

abuſe of words, and the want of clearneſs in the ideas annexed to them.
This ſubject has been ſo happily diſcuſſed by Mr. Locke, that, if I undertake
to examine it, the conveniency of thoſe readers who are not ſufficiently
acquainted with the work of that philoſopher is my only motive,

Deſcartes had before Locke obſerved that the Peripateticks, intrenching
themſelves behind the obſcurity of words, were not unlike a blind man,
who, in order to be a match for his clear-ſighted antagoniſt, ſhould draw
him into a dark cavern, Now, added he, if this man can introduce light into
the cavern, and compel the Peripateticks to fix clear ideas to their words,


the victory is his own. In imitation of Deſcartes and Locke, I ſhall ſhew


that, both in metaphyſics and morality, the abuſe of words, and the ignorance
| D | | of


-


18 DE IL. ES PRI ü


of their true import, is a labyrinth in which the greateſt geniuſes have loft
themſelves; and in order to ſet this particular in a clear light, inſtance, in
ſome of thoſe words which have given riſe to the longeſt and ſharpeſt diſputes
among philoſophers : ſuch in metaphyſics, are Matter, Space, and Infinite.

It has at all times been alternately aſſerted that Matter felt, or did not feel,
and given riſe to diſputes equally loud and vague. It was very late before it came
into the diſputants heads, to aſk one another, what they were diſputing about,
and to annex a preciſe idea to the word Matter? Had they at firſt fixed the
meaning of it, they would have perceived, if I may uſe the expreſſion, that
men were the creators of Matter ; that Matter was not a being ; that in nature
there were only individuals to which the name of Body had been given ;.
anꝗ that this word Matter could import no more than the collection of pro-
perties common to all bodies. The meaning of this word being determined,
all that remained was to know, whether extent, ſolidity, and impenetrability,
were the only properties common to all bodies; and whether the diſcovery
of a power, ſuch for inſtance as attraction, might not give rite to a con-
jecture that bodies had ſome properties hitherto unknown, ſuch as that of
ſenſation, which though evident only in the organized members of animals,
might yet be common to all individuals ? The queſtion being reduced to this,,
it would have appeared, that, if ſtrictly ſpeaking, it is impoſlible to de-
monſtrate that all bodies are abſolutely inſenſtble, no man, unleſs inſtructed
by a particular revelation, can decide the queſtion otherwiſe than by calculat-
ing and comparing the veriſimilitude of this opinion with that of the contrary.

To bring therefore this diſpute to an iflue, there was no neceſſity for
erecting different ſyſtems of the world, of loſing one's ſelf in the combination
of poſlibilities, and exhauſting the genius in thoſe prodigious efforts which
have terminated, and in reality could not but have terminated in errors,.
more or leſs ingenious. Indeed (let me be allowed this reflection) if we-
are to avail ourſelves as much as poſſible from obſervation, we muſt walk
only by its ſide, ſtop at the very inſtant when it leaves us, and nobly dare
to be ignorant of what is not yet to be known.

Inſtructed by the errors of great men who have gone before us, we ſhould:
be ſenſible, that our obſervations, however multiplied and concentrated, are
ſcarce ſufficient to form one of thoſe partial ſyſtems comprehended in the ge-
neral ſyſtem; and that it is from the depths of imagination, that the ſeveral
ſyſtems of the univerſe have hitherto been drawn; and as our informations of


remote countries are always imperfect, ſo the informations philoſophers have


of the ſyſtem of the world are alſo defective. With a great genius and a mul-
titude of combinations, the products of their labours will be only fictions, till
time and chance ſhall furniſh them. with a general fact, to which all others
may be referred. |

What I have ſaid of the word Matter, I ſay alſo of Space. Moſt of the.
philoſophers have made a being of it; and the ignorance of the true ſenſe of
the word has occaſioned long diſputes (a). They would have been greatly
ſhortened by annexing a clear idea to this word ; for then the ſages would.


.


—
_—


(a) See the diſpute between. Leibnitz and Clarke,


have


ESSAYS ov tus MIN D. 19


have agreed, that Space, conſidered in bodies, is what we call extenſion; that
we owe the idea of a void, which partly compoſes the idea of Space, to the in-
terval ſeen betwixt two lofty mountains; an interval which being filled only
by air, that is by a body which at a certain diſtance makes no ſenſible impret-
lion on us, mult have given us an idea of a vacuum; being nothing more
than a power of repreſenting to ourſelves mountains ſeparated from each other,
and the intervening diſtances not being Bled by other bodies. 121 .
With regard to the idea of Infinite, comprehended alſo within the idea of
Space, I ſay that we owe this idea of Infinite only to the power which a man
ſtanding on a plain has of continually extending its limits, the boundary ot


his imagination not being determinable: the ablence of limits is therefore the
only idea we can form of Infinite. Had philoſophers, previouſly to their giv-
ing any opinion on this ſubject, determined the ſignification of the word


Iatinite, I am inclined to believe, they would have adopted the above defi-
nition, and not ſpent their time in frivolous diſputes. To the falſe philoſophy


— . 22 . . * 11 _ | .
of former ages, our groſs ignorance of the true ſignification of words is prin


cipally owing as the art of abuſing them made up the greateſt part of that
philoſophy. This art, in which the whole ſcience of the ſchools conſiſted,
confounded all ideas; and the obſcurity it threw on the expreſſions, generally
diffuſed itſelf over all the ſciences, eſpecially morality.

When the famous M. de la Rochefoucault, ſaid, that Self-love is the prin-
ciple of all our actions, what invectives, occaſioned by the ignorance of the
word Self-love, were thrown out againſt that illuſtrious author! Self-love was
conſidered as pride and vanity z and therefore M. Rochefoucault was ſaid to
conſider vice as the ſource of all the virtues. Yet it was eaſy to perceive, that
Self-love was nothing more than a ſentiment implanted in us by nature;
that in every individual this ſentiment became vice or virtue, according. to
his diſpoſitions and paſſions; and that Self. love, differently modified, was
equally productive of pride and modeſty. | me
The knowledge of theſe ideas would have ſecured M. de la Rocheſoucault
from the reproach ſo often thrown upon him, that he ſaw human nature


through too gloomy a medium. He ſaw it in its true light. I own that a


clear view of the indifference of almoſt all men concerning us is a mortifying
ſpectacle to our vanity : but, after all, men muſt be conſidered as they are. To
be offended at the effects of their Self-love is to complain of the ſhowers of


ſpring, the heats of ſummer, the rains of autumn, and the froſts of winter.


In order to love mankind, little muſt be expected from them. Inorder to
view their faults without aſperity, we muſt accuſtom ourſelves to forgive-
neſs ; to a ſenſe that indulgence is a juſtice which frail humanity has a right
to require from wiſdom. Now nothing has a greater tendency to diſpoſe us
to indulgence, to cloſe our hearts againſt hatred, and open them to the prin-
ciples of a humane and mild morality, than a profound knowledge of the
human heart; and this knowledge Mr. Rochefoucault poſſeſſed. Accord-'
ingly the wiſeſt men have always been the moſt indulgent. What beautiful
maxims of humanity are feattered through their works! It was the ſaying of
Plato, Live with your inferiots and domeſtics as with unfortunate friends.
Muſt I always, ſaid an Indian philoſopher, hear the rich crying out, Lord
<< deſtroy all who take from us the leaſt parcel of our poſſeſſions ; while the


20 DE L'ESPRY 6.


poor man, with a plaintive voice and eyes lifted up to heaven, cries, Lord
give me a part of the goods thou dealeſt out in ſuch profuſion to the rich;
and it others lets happy deprive me of a part, inſtead cf imprecating thy
** vengence, I ſhall conſider theſe thefts in the ſame manner as in ſeed-time
we ice the doves ranging over the fields in queſt of their food.“

However, if the word Self- love, by being miſunderſtood, raiſed ſuch an op-
polition to M. Rochefoucault, what diſputes, and of much greater importance,
irave not been occaſioned by the word Liberty! Diſputes which might have
been eaſily decided, had all men been ſuch friends to truth as father Malebranche,
and agreed with that able divine in his Premotion Phyſique, that Liberty
is a myſtery, When urged on this queſtion, he uſed to ſay, I am forced in-
itantly to ſtop ſhort. Not that it is impoſlible to form an adequate idea of
the word Liberty, taken in the common acceptation. A man at liberty is
a perion neither in chains, under confinement, nor intimidated like a ſlave by the
tear of puniſhment. In this ſenſe, the liberty of man conſiſts in the free exerciſe of
his power. I ſay of his power, becauſe, to conſider our inability of ſoaring to the
clouds like the eagle, of living under the water like the whale, of making ourſelves
king or pope, as a want of liberty, would be ridiculous. Thus we have an ade-
quate idea of the word Liberty, ina common acceptation. But not when the word
Liberty is applied to the will. What then is Liberty ? Nothing more can
be underſtood by it than the free power of willing, or not willing a thing.
But this power would ſuppoſe that there could be wills without a- motive,
and conſequently effects without a cauſe. And it would follow, that we could
equally wiſh ourſelves good and evil; a ſuppoſition abſolutely impoſſible. In
fact, if the deſire of pieaſure be the true principle of all our thoughts, and of

all our actions; if all men really tend towards their true or apparent happineſs,
it will follow, that all our wills are no more than the effect of this tendency.
In this ſenſe, therefore, no adequate idea can be annexed to this word Liberty.
But ir will be ſaid, If we are under a neceſſity of purſuing happineſs wherever
we diſcern it, we are at leaſt at liberty in. making choice of the means for pro-
curing our happineſs (b). Yes, I anſwer ; but then Liberty is only a ſyno-
nimous term for Knowledge. The more or leſs a perſon underſtands of the
law, or the more or leſs able the couſellor is by whom he is directed in his.
affairs, the more or leſs elegible will be his meaſures. But whatever his con- |
duct be, the deſire of happineſs will always induce him to take thoſe meaſures 8
which appear to him the beſt. calculated to promote his intereſt, his diſpo-
ſitions, his paſſions, and in fine, whatever he accounts his happinels.

How can the problem of liberty be philoſophically ſolved, if, as Mr.

Locke has proved, we are the diſciples of friends, parents, books, and, in


-


(b) There are ftill ſome who confider taken. We conceive, for inſtance, that while:
the ſuſpenſion of the mind as a proof of Li- we are chuſing between two pleaſures nearly
berty. They are not aware, that in volition equal, that we are deliberating. But what
ſuſpenſion is no leſs neceſlary than precipi- we conſider as Deliberation is only the
tancy, When, for want of conſideration, we flowneſs with which the heavier of two


have drawn on ourſelves ſome misfortune, weights nearly equal, makes one of the ;
Selt-love renders ſuſpenſion abſolutely neceſ- ſcales of a balance ſubfide. .
fary. The werd Deliberation is equally miſ- | | 1


— 3 - r= —
— ͤ ͤ ¹ä—T̃⅛¶— ² , IS
* RT
25


= 2 —
6 5 — 2


a ——_ nay *
= — 4 * —


—


—
—
—
£04 - —


21


EK SS ATS on ras MAD


fine, all the objects that ſurround us? All our thoughts and wills muſt then
be either the immediate effects, or neceſſary conſequences of the impreſſions
we have received. |

Thus no idea can be formed of the word Liberty, when applied to the will (c).
It muſt be conſidered as a myftery ; and we may well cry out with St. Paul,
O the depth! and allow that it is a ſubject only proper for theology; and
that a philoſophical treatiſe on Liberty would be a treatiſe on effects without
cauſes. |
Thus we fee, that an ignorance of the true ſignification of words often
proves an eternal fource of diſputes and calamiries. Not to mention the effu-
ſion of blood which theological feuds and diſputes have cauſed, diſputes
almoſt always founded on the abuſe of words; what calamities and mul-
fortunes have not this ignorance been productive of, and into what errors
has it not plunged nations! |

Theſe errors are multiplied beyond what is commonly thought. The ſtory of
a Swiſs * is well known. He was poſted at one of the doors of the Tuileries, with
ſtrict orders not to ſuffer any perſon to come in A citizen comes up, and of-
fers to enter. There is no going in, ſays the Swiſs. I do not want to go in,
anſwers the citizen, but only to go out over the Pont-royal. If you deſire only


to go out, replied the Swiſs, You may pals pn (d). Could it be thought,


— —


(c) * Liberty, ſay the Stoics, is a chi-
« mera. For want of knowing the motives,
« collecting the circumſtances, by which
« we are determined to act in a cer-
« tain manner, we think ourſelves free,
Can it be thought, that man has a ſelf- de-
„ termining power? Is he not rather impel-
« Jed and determined by external objects,
« and their infinite combinations ? Is his
will a vague and independent faculty,
.«« acting abitrarily and without choice?
It acts either in conſequence of judgment,
an act of the underſtanding, repreſenting
d to him that ſuch a thing is more advan-
«« tageous to his intereſt than any other; or,
independently of this act, the circum-
« ſtances in which a perſon finds himſelf, in-
„ cline and force the will to take a certain
direction; and he then flatters himſelf that
he turned that way freely, though he could
„ not well turn any other way.” Hiſtoire
« critique de la Philoſophie.

* The guards of the king of France are all
Sweitzers. »


(d) If, ſays Montagne, at ſeeing a chan-


cellor in his robe, his ample wig, and ſedate


countenance, we can hardly form a more di-
verting image to the fancy, than this ſame
chancellor conſummating marriage; poſſibly
ſomething, not leſs a ſubject of laughter,


6


is the ſollicitous air, the important and ſo-

lemn gravity with which certain great men

ſit in the divan only to deliberate like the

Swiſs. If you deſire only to go out you may

pals on. The application of theſe words are

ſo caſy and frequent, that the ſagacity of the

reader in this particular may be depended on,

and he may depend on finding every where
Swits centinels.

I cannot here forbear relating a pleaſant par-
ticular, being the anſwer of an Engliſh noble-
man to a miniſter of ſtate. The miniſter
was ſaying to ſome courtier, There can be
nothing more ridiculous than the manner in
which the council of ſtate aſſemble in ſome
Negroe nations. In the council-chamber are
placed twelve large jars, half full of water,
Twelve counſellors 'of ſtate enter naked;
and ſtalking along with great gravity, each
leaps into his jar, and immerſes himſelf up to
his chin; and in this pretty attitude, they
deliberate on the national affairs. You do
not ſmile, continued the miniſter, addreſſin
himſelf to a noble lord who fat next him.
Smile ! no, anſwered his lordſhip, I fee every
day things more ridiculous than that, Pray
what? returned the miniſter. A country,
replied the nobleman, where the jars alone
ſit in council.


that


13 PE L'ESPREIT; of


that this tale is the hiſtory of the people of Rome? Cæſar appears in the
Forum with an intention of being crowned ; and the Romans, tor want of
annexing preciſe ideas to the word Royalty, made no difficulty of granting
him, under the title of Imperator, what they would not hear of under that
of Rex. | |
What I have ſaid of the Romans is, in general, applicable to all divans
and councils of princes. Among nations, as among ſovereigns, there is
not one which the abuſe of words has not plunged into ſome groſs error.
To avoid this ſnare, Leibnitz directs a philolophical language to be formed,
determining the preciſe ſignification of every word. We Gould then under-
ſtand ore another, communicate our ideas with preciſion ; diſputes which
are rendered perpetual by the abuſe of words would be brought to an iſſue ;
and in all ſciences, men would ſoon be obliged to adopt the ſame principles.
But the execution of ſo deſirable a ſcheme is perhaps impoſſible. Languages
owe their origin to neceſſity, not to philoſophers ; and neceſlity here is eaſily
ſatisfied. Afterwards ſome falſe ideas were annexed to certain words; then
theſe ideas and words were combined and compared with one another. Every
new combination has produced a new error; theſe errors have increaſed, and
in their increaſe become ſo complicated, that now, without infinite labour
and application, the ſource of them cannot be traced. It is with languages
as with an algebraic calculation: at firſt ſome errors creep into it; theſe are


not perceived; the calculation is continued from ſtep to ſtep, till we arrive
at conſequences abſolutely ridiculous. The ablurdity is perceived; but how


ſhall we find the place of the firſt error? This requires the repetition and
proofs of a great variety of calculations. Unhappily there are few capable
of undertaking it, and ſtill fewer who will ſubmit to the drudgery, eſpecially
when the authority of men in power oppoſes this verification.

Thus have I ſhewn the true cauſes of our erroneous judgments. I have
demonſtrated, that all the errors of the mind have their ſource, either in the
paſſions, or in ignorance, either of certain facts, or the true import of words.
Error therefore is not eſſentially annexed to the human mind; our falſe judg-


ments are the effects of accidental cauſes, which do not ſuppoſe in us a fa-


culty of perception. Error, therefore, is only an accident; and therefore
it follows, that all men have a ſound underſtanding. |


Theſe principles being admitted, nothing will oppoſe my aſſerting, that to


judge, as I have already proved, is properly nothing more than to perceive,
And the general concluſion of this diſcourſe is, that the Mind may be con-
ſidered, either as the faculty productive of our thoughts, and in this ſenſe
it is nothing more than ſenſibility and memory; or the Mind may be conſi-
dered as an effect of theſe faculties ; and, in this ſenſe, the Mind is only an
aſſemblage of thoughts, and in every perſon may be ſubdivided into as many
parts as he has ideas,

Theſe are the true aſpects under which the mind appears, conſidered in
itlelt, Let us now conſider the Mind, relatively to ſociety.


ESSAY.


4 g *
* Pod
> 8 ent
. az


5 y 4 »
N IR
> RR, A


ESSAYS o Tus MIND. 2 T3


CCC


E Ss 3 II.
Of the Mind relatively to Society.


CH. A (


\CIENCE is only the remembrance of the facts or ideas of others. The
Mind, as diſtinguiſhed from Science, is therefore an aſſemblage of new
ideas of whatever kind. | |

This definition of the Mind is preciſe. It is even very inſtructive to a phi-
loſopher ; but cannot be generally adopted : a definition for the public muſt
be ſuch as will enable them to compare different underſtandings, and to judge of
their force and comprehenſion, But if the above definition were admitted,
how would the public meaſure the extent of a perſon's underſtanding ? Who
could lay before them an exact litt of his ideas; and how ſhall ſcience and
underſtanding be diſtinguiſhed ?

Suppoſe I claim the diſcovery of an idea already known ; the public, to be
convinced whether the title of ſecond inventor belongs to me, muſt previ-
ouſly know what I have read, ſeen, and heard; a knowledge, which it nei-
ther can, nor will acquire. Beſides, according to this impoſſible hypotheſis,
that the public could have an exact enumeration of the quantity and quality
of a perſon's ideas; I ſay, that in conſequence of this enumeration, the public
would be often obliged to claſs among geniuſes, perſons whom it denies ro be
men of wit; and ſuch in general are all artificers. |
However frivolous an art may appear, yet it is ſuſceptible of infinite com-
binations. When Marcel, with his hand placed on his forehead, his eyes
fixed, his body without motion, and in the attitude of profound meditation,
on ſeeing a young lady dance, cries out, What variety in a minuet! doubt-


leſs, this dancing-maſter then perceived in the manner of bending, riſing,
and performing the ſteps, elegancies inviſible to common eyes (a); and.


therefore his exclamation is no farther ridiculous than in the too great im-
portance it places on trifles. Now if the art of dancing includes ſo great a
number of ideas and combi nations, who knows, whether the art of declama-
tion does not ſuppoſe in the actreſs, who excels in it, as many ideas as a poli-
tician employs in forming a ſyſtem of government?

If we confult our beſt romances, who will affirm, that in the geſtures
dreſs, and ſtudied ſpeeches of a perfect coquet, there is not as many combina-


.


(a) This dancing - maſter pretends to know of that iſland where the people ſhare in the
a perſon's temper from his gait and air. A public adminiſtration, and make a part of


foreigner comingonceinto his dancing-ſchool, the ſupreme power ! No, fir, that down look,


Marcel aſked him, What countryman are that air of timidity, that effeminate gait,
you? Iam an Engliſhman. You an Eng- tell me you are only the titled ſlave of ſome
man!] replied Marcel; You a native eleQor,


tions


— —— — — p 8


5 DE L'ESPRIT; on,


tions and ideas as any ſyſtem of the world requires; and that, Le Couvreur,

and Ninon de 'Enclos were not, though of very different kinds, as great

geniules as Ariſtotle and Solon ?
do not pretend to give a ſtrict demonſtration of this propoſition. I only


intend to ſhew, that however ridiculous it may appear, no perſon living can


jolve it. Deceived by our ignorance we too often conſider the boundaries
which that ignorance gives to an art, as its Ne plus ultra. But ſuppoſing
that, in this reſpect, the public could be undeceived ; I ſay, that the clearett
evidence will never alter its manner of judgment. It will never meaſure its
eſteem for an art by the greater or ſmaller number of combinations neceſſary
tor proceeding in it. 1. Becauſe there is no ſuch thing as enumerating theſe
combinations. 2. Becauſe it will conſider the Mind only in that light in which
it is of importance to know it, viz. as relating to ſociety, Now conſidered in
this point of light, I ſay, that the Mind is no more than an aſſemblage,
more or leſs numerous, not only of new ideas, but alſo of ſuch as are inte-
reſting to the public; and that the reputation of a man of wit dees not fo
much depend upon the number and delicacy of his ideas as on the happy
choice of them.

la effect, if the combinations of cheſs be infinite, and there is no excelling
in it without forming a great number ; why are not the diſtinguiſhed players
at cheis honoured by the public with the title of great geniuſes ? Becauſe


their ideas are of no uſe to it, either with regard to entertainment or


inſtruction, and conſequently that it has no intereſt to eſteem them; and
intereſt (b) preſides over all our deciſions.

If the public has overlooked thoſe errors, the invention of which ſometimes
implies more combinations and genius than the diſcovery of a truth; and
if it eſteems Locke more than Malebranche, it is becauſe it always meaſures
its eſteem by its intereſt. In what other balance ſhould it weigh the merit of
men's ideas? Every individual judges of things and perſons, by the agreeable
or diſagreeable impreſſions he receives from them ; and the public is no more
than an aſſemblage of all the individuals; therefore it cannot fail of making its
intereſt the rule of its deciſions,

This point of view in which I examine the underſtanding, is I believe the
only one wherein it ſhould be conſidered. There is no other method of valuing
each idea, of fixing the uncertainty of our judgments on this point, and, in
fine, of diſcovering the cauſe of the amazing diverſity of men's opinions with
regard to the mind; a diverſity abſolutely depending on the difference of the
paſſions and ideas, their prejudices and inclinations, and conſequently of their
intereſts. | | |

It would indeed be very ſtrange, that the general intereſt (c) ſhould fix a
value on the different actions of men, and give the appellations of vicious
or lawful, as they were uſeful, detrimental, or indifferent to the public, and


—


—


(b) The word Intereſt is generally confin- ral to whatever may procure us pleaſure or ex-
ed to the love of money; but the intelligent empt us from pain. FREE |
reader will perceive that I uſe it in a more (c) It is perhaps needleſs to obſerve that
extenſive ſenſe; and that J apply it in gene- I here ſpeak as a politician, not as a divine.

| | that


ESSAYS own Tus M I N D. 25


that this ſame intereſt ſhould not have been the ſole diſpenſer of the eſteem or
contempt annexed to the ideas of men.

Ideas, like actions, may be divided into three different claſſes.

Uſeful ideas : and, taking this expreſſion in irs moſt extenſive ſenſe, I un-
derſtand by it, every idea adapted to our inſtruction or entertainment.

Detrimental ideas, are thoſe which make a contrary impreſſion on us.

Indifferent ideas : by theſe I mean all which, for want of an intrinſic agree-
ableneſs, or by being rendered too familiar, make. very little impreſſion on us.
Such ideas have hardly any exiſtence ; and can only, if I may uſe the expreſſion,
be termed indifferent for an inſtant. Their duration, or ſucceſſion, by which
they become tedious, ſoon reduces them to the claſs of detrimental ideas.

In order to ſhew how pregnant with truth this method of conſidering the


Mind is, I ſhall apply ſucceſſively the foregoing principles to the action and


ideas of men ; and prove, that at all times, and in all countries, both with regard


to morality and genius, perſonal intereſt alone, dictates the judgment of


individuals; while general intereſt dictates that of nations; and conſequent-
ly, that in the public, as in individuals, it is always love and gratitude that
praiſes, and hatred and revenge that depreciates.

In order to demonſtrate this truth, and clearly ſhew the exact and perpetual
ſimilarity in our manner of judging either the actions or ideas of men, I ſhall con-
ſider Probity, and the Mind, or Underſtanding, in different reſpects, and relative-
ly, 1. To an individual. 2. Toa ſmall ſociety. 3. To a nation. 4. To different
ages and countries: 5. Io the whole univerſe: and in theſe inquiries, al-
ways taking experience for my guide, ſhall prove, that in every point of
view, intereſt is the only judge of Probity and the Underſtanding.


NN NN A EL EL OE IEEE OED EE EEE EEE EL EE EY TE SEE EL YL LE


C W A $$:


Of Probity relative to an individual.


1 T 1s not real Probity ; that is Probity, with regard to the public, that I


conſider in this chapter, but merely Probity, conſidered relative to each

individual, | |
In this point of view, I fay, that each individual calls Probity in another only
the habitude of actions which are uſeful to him: I ſay habitude, becauſe it is not
one ſingle honeſt action, more than one ſingle ingenious idea, that will gain
us the title of Virtuous and witty, There is not that penurious wretch on
earth which has not once behaved with generoſity; nor a liberal perſon who
has not once been parſimonious; no villain who has not done a good action;
no perſon fo ſtupid who has not uttered one ſmart ſentence ; and, in fine, no
man who, on inſpeCting certain actions of his life, will not ſeem poſſeſſed of
all the oppoſite virtues and vices. A greater uniformity in the behaviour of
men would ſuppole in them a continuity of attention which they are incapable
| — of;


— — — Ae,


26 DE L*'ESPRIT; on,


of; differing from one another only more or leſs. The man of abſolute
uniformity has no exiſtence ; ſo that no perfection, either with regard to vice


or virtue, is to be found on the earth. | |

It is therefore to the habitude of actions advantageous to him, that an indi-
vidual gives the name of Probity : I ſay of actions, becauſe we cannot judge
of intentions. How is it poſſible ? It is ſeldom or never that action is the
effect of a ſentiment; we ourſelves are often ignorant of the motives by which
we are determined. A rich man beſtows a comfortable ſubſiſtence on a wor-
thy man reduced to poverty. Doubtleſs he does a good action; but is this
action ſimply the effect of a deſire of rendering a man happy? Pity, the hopes
of gratitude, vanity itſelf; all theſe different motives ſeparately, or aggre-
gately, may they not, unknown to himſelf, have determined him to that
commendable action? Now if a man be, in general, ignorant himſelf of the
motives of his generous action, how can the public be acquainted with them?
Thus it is only from the actions of men, that the public can judge of their
probity. A man, for inſtance, has twenty degrees of paſſion for virtue; but
he has thirty degrees of love for a woman; and this woman would inſtigate
him to be guilty of murder. Upon this ſuppoſition, it is certain, that this
perſon is nearer guilt than he, who with only ten degrees of paſſion for virtue,
has only five degrees of love for ſo wicked a woman. Hence I conclude,
that of two men, the more honeſt in his actions has ſometimes the leſſer paſ-
ſion for virtue. | | |

Every philoſopher alſo agrees, that the virtue of men greatly depends on
the circumſtances in which they are placed. Virtuous men have too often ſunk
under a ſtrange ſeries of unhappy events. | |

He who will warrant his virtue in every poſſible ſituation, is either an impoſ-
tor or a fool; characters equally to be miſtruſted. |

After determining the idea I affix to this word Probity, conſidered in rela-
tion to every individual, we mult, to aſſure ourſelves of the propriety of this
definition, have recourle to obſervation; and this will inform us, that there
are men, whom a happy diſpoſition, a ſtrong deſire of glory and eſteem, in-
ſpire with the ſame love for juſtice and virtue, which men in general have for
riches and honours.

The actions perſonally advantageous to theſe virtuous men are ſo truly juſt,
that they tend to promote the general welfare, or, at leaſt not to leſſen it.

But the number of theſe men is ſo ſmall, that I only mention them in honour
of humanity. And the moſt numerous claſs, which alone comprehends the
far greater part of mankind, is that of men ſo entirely devoted to their own in-
tereſt, that they never conſider the welfare of the whole. Concentrated, if I may
be allowed the expreſſion, in their own happineſs (a), theſe men call thoſe actions


i.


(a) Our hatred or love is an effect of the bes was aware of: but he knew that the epi-
good or harm we have received. Among thet of Wicked is applied only to thoſe whoſe
e“ the ſavages, ſays Hobbes, the only wick- wickedneſs is formidable. The anger and
«© ed man is the robuſt; and, in a civilized blows of a child are often thought engaging
ce ſtate, the man in power.” The ſtrong in him; but thoſe of a ſtrong man provoke ;
man, however, conſidered in theſe two ſenſes, his blows hurt, and he is called a brute.
is not more wicked than weak. This Hob-


only


* *
Top.


>
.


,

x "VE &

S

r
LET


8 e . As 2 n
r N e e ; E , |


B45 aft Lag

= + 22

e P
0 3. Tate, Co

greet e


9


"Ae


=;
p
*
As
5
*
*
:
3
4.
2
T
8


1
7
1
.
4 .
by


3's
IN
1
FL,
WP
Wi
42
|
.
3
1920
; N
88
*
KR:
Ich
Is
2 I
1%
12
OS.


ESSAYS ov Tus MI N D. -


only honeſt, which are advantageous to themſelves. A judge acquits a cri-
minal, a miniſter prefers an unworthy perſon yet both are Juſt, if thoſe they
have favoured may be credited. But ſhould the judge puniſh, and the miniſter
refuſe, the criminal and the party denied, will always conſider them as un-
juſt... | |
, If the monks, who, during the firſt dynaſty, were intruſted to write the
lives of our kings, have only given thoſe of their benefactors, indicating the
other reigns only with this words, NIHIL FECIT ; and if they have given the
name of Slothful kings to ſome princes truly worthy of eſteem ; it is becauſe
a monk is a man, and every man, in his judgment, conſults only his own
intereſt. |

The chriſtians, who juſtly branded with the name of barbarity and guilt
the cruelties inflicted on them by the pagans, did not they give the name
of zeal to the cruelties they, in their turn, inflicted on thoſe ſame pagans ?
It will, on examination, be found, that there is not a crime but is placed
among honeſt actions, by the ſocieties to which this crime is advantageous; nor
an action of public benefit that is not cenſured by ſome particular ſociety to
which it is detrimental. | |

In effect, what man, if he ſacrifices the pride of ſtiling himſelf more vir-
tuous than others to the pride of being more ſincere ; and if, with a ſcrupu-
lous attention, he ſearches all the receſſes of his ſoul, will he not perceive
that his virtues and vices are wholly owing to the different modifications of
perſonal] intereſt (b); that all equally tend to their happineſs; that it is the
diverſity of the paſſions and taſtes, of which ſome are agreeable and others
contrary to the public intereſt, which terms our actions either virtues or vices ?
Inſtead of deſpiſing the vicious man, we ſhould pity him, rejoice in our own
happy diſpoſition, thank heaven for not having given us any of thoſe taſtes
and paſſions, which would have forced us to have ſought our happineſs in the
miſery of another. For, after all, intereſt is always obeyed ; hence the injuſtice
of all our judgments, and the appellations of juſt and unjuſt are laviſhed on
the ſame actions, according to the advantage reſulting from them to parti-
culars. |

If the phyſical univerſe be ſubject to the laws of motion, the moral univerſe is
equally ſo to thoſe of intereſt, Intereſt is, on earth, the mighty magician, which
to the eyes of every creature changes the appearance of all objects. The innocent


CS


(b) The humane man is he to whom the himſelf, no gratitude is due to benefactors ?


fight of another's misfortunes is inſupportable,
and who to remove this afflicting ſpectacle,
is, as it were, forced to relieve the wretched.
The cruel man, on the contrary, is he, to
whom the fight of another's misfortunes
gives a ſecret pleaſure ; and it is to prolong
that pleaſure, that he refuſes all relief to the
wretched. Now thefe two perſons, fo very
oppolite, both equally tend to their pleaſures,
and are actuated by the ſame ſpring. But it
will be ſaid, if a man does every thing for


I anſwer, the benefactor, has at leaft, no
right to require any ; for otherwiſe, inſtead of
beſtowing a gift he has only made a contract.
The Germans, ſays Tacitus, make and re-
ceive preſents, without any reciprocations of
gratitude ; it is in favour of the unfortunate,
and to multiply the number of benefactors;
and therefore the public, with very good
reaſon, impoſes on the obliged the duty of
gratitude,


ſhes 2


28 BE L'ESPRET; om


ſheep, which feeds in our fields, is it not an object of dread and horror to thoſe
imperceptible inſects which live upon the leaves of herbs ? Let us, ſay


<« they, haſten from hence: that voracious and cruel animal is coming, whoſe


e enormous throat ſwallows at once both us and our cities. Why does not he act
like the lion and tyger ? Thoſe benign animals do not deſtroy our habitations ;
* they do not feed on our blood; bur, as juſt avengers of guilt, puniſh in
the ſheep the cruelties it inflicts on us.” Thus different intereſts meta-
morphoſe objects: we conſider the lion as a cruel animal, whereas among
the inſects, it is the ſheep; and what Leibnitz ſaid of the phyſical univerſe
may be applied to the moral : That this world being conſtantly in motion,
every inſtant offered a new and different phenomenon to each of its inhabi-
rants. |

This principle is ſo agreeable to experience, that, without entering into a far-
ther diſcuſſion, I think myſelf warranted to conclude, that perſonal interett
is the only and univerſal eſtimator of the merit of human actions; and, there-
fore, that Probity, with regard to an individual is, according to my definition,
nothing more than the habitude of actions perſonally advantageous to this


individual.
S οοοοο
CN A 0
Cf the Mind, or Underſtanding, with regard to an individual.


E T us now transfer to ideas the principles I have above applied to actions;

and it muſt be acknowledged, that each individual gives the name of
Underſtanding only to the habitude of thoſe ideas which are uſeful to him, ei-
ther with regard to inſtruction or entertainment; and that, in this reſpect alſo,
perſonal intereſt is ſtill the only judge of the merit of men.

Every idea offered to us, has always ſome regard to our ſtation, paſſions,
or opinions. Now in all theſe ſeveral caſes we value an idea in proportion
to its uſe. The pilot, the phyſician, and the engineer, will have more re-
gard for a ſhipwright, a botaniſt, and mechanic, than a bookſeller, a goldſmith,
and a maſon, will have for the ſame perſons ; they always prefering to them
the noveliſt, the deſigner, and the architect.


With regard to ideas proper for oppoling or countenancing our paſſions,


or our taſte, we ſhall doubtleſs account thoſe the moſt valuable, which moſt


Hatter thoſe paſſions or taſtes (a), A woman of an amorous complexion


——


(a) In order to deceive a woman, who
was remarkable for a volubility of tongue,
but otherwiſe did not want wit, a perſon was
introduced to her as one that had a remark-
able ſhare of it. The lady received him with
the greateſt joy and civility ; but, through
eagerneſs of rendering herſelf agreeable to
him, ſhe aſked him a hundred queftions, with-


out perceiving, that he returned no anſwer.
At the concluſion of the viſit, the was aſked
how ſhe liked the perſon ? He is a delightful
man indeed, anſwered-ſhe, his wit is ſo rea-
dy, and of fo exquiſite a turn! This ex-
clamation excited in the whole company,
a burſt of laughter ; for this charming com-
panion, this remarkable wit, was dumb.


3 will |


"4 $- . .
175
e

5 7 5 7


*


gn
F .
e EEE YEE
Cn S rr i REIT TOS, NNE Di


.
3
i
4
3
3 .
5
N
5
* N
8 2


* : LEE NZ Þ,


AS — ©
3 * LE, ©: FER: : E 8
WWWWWWWWWGWV We >


ESSAYS ov Tas MIN D. 29


will place a greater value on a romance than on a metaphyſical treatiſe : a
perſon of the character of Charles XII. will prefer the hiſtory of Alexander
to every other work : and, certainly, rhe miſer will perceive underſtanding
only in thoſe who ſhall inform him where to place his money at the higheſt
intereſt, | |

In opinions, as in paſſions, to eſteem the ideas of others, it mult be our inte-
reſt to eſteem them; and here I cannot help obſerving, that, with reſpect to the
latter, men may be moved by two kinds of intereſt. There are not wanting men,
who are animated with a noble and judicious pride; who, friends to truth,
attached to their opinions without obſtinacy, preſerve their minds in that
ſtate of ſuſpenſion which leaves a tree paſſage for new truths : of this number
are ſome philoſophic minds, and ſome perſons who, too young to have
eſtabliſhed opinions, do not bluſh to change them; theſe two claſſes of men,
will always eſteem in others true and adequate ideas, and ſuch as are proper
for gratifying their paſſion for truth, produced by a judicious pride. |

There are others, and in this number I comprehend the far greateſt part, who
are animated by a leſs noble vanity. Theſe can eſteem in others ſuch ideas only as
are conformable to their own (b), and proper for juſtifying the high opinion they
all entertain of the preciſion of their underſtanding. On this analogy of ideas is
founded their hatred or their love. Hence that ſure and ready inſtinct in almoſt all
common perſons, for knowing and avoiding perſons of merit (c); hence the ſtrong
attraction between perſons of genius; that attraction, which, as it were, forces them
to ſeek the acquaintance of each other, notwithſtanding the danger that often
attends their intercourſe, from their common thirſt of glory; hence that ſure
way of judging of a perſon's temper and underſtanding by his choice of books,
and friends. The fool has only fools for his companions: every connection
of friendſhip, when not founded on an intereſt of decency, love, protection,


avarice, ambition, or ſome other ſimilar motive, always ſuppoſes between men.
ſome reſemblance of ideas, or ſentiments.


It is this that brings together per-
ſons of a very different condition (d). On this account it was that Auguſtus,
Mæcenas, Scipio, Julian, Richelieu, and Conde, lived familiarly with men
of genius; and hence the well known proverb, the truth of which is conſirmed.
by its frequent uſe, ** Shew me your company, I will ſhew you the man.” _
Thus the analogy or conformity of ideas is to be conſidered as the attrac-
tive and repulſive. force, which ſeparates men, or draws them nearer to one


3


(b) All, who are of a limited underſtand-
ing, are continually depreciating, or decry-
ing thoſe whoſe underſtanding is equally
ſolid and comprehenſive. They accuſe them
of too much refinement ; and of thinking
with regard to every particular, in too ab-
ſtrated a manner. We will never, ſays
„Mr. Hume, allow that a thing is juſt,
«: when it is beyond our weak comprehen-
©« ſion. The difference, adds that illuſtrious
1 philoſopher, between the common perſon
* and the perſon of genius, is chiefly ſeen
in the more or leſs depth of the principles


© on which they found their ideas. With
*© molt men every judgment is particular;
they do not extend their views to the uni-
e verfal propoſitions; to them every general
& jdea is obſcure.” |

(c) Fools, were it in their power, would
gladly baniſh all men of genius, and, like
the Epheſians, would be always crying out,
If any one among us excels, let him go and
excel elſewhere. | |

d) At court the more wit a great man has,
the more countenance he ſhews to the men
of wit,


another.


20 DE L'ES:PRIET; at


another (e). Place in Conſtantinople, a philoſopher, who, being a ſtranger
to the lights of revelation, could follow only thoſe of reaſon. Let this phi-
loſopher deny Mahomet's miſſion, the viſions and pretended miracles of that
prophet ; who doubts but thoſe who are called true muſſelmans, would con-
ceive an averſion to this philoſopher, look upon him with horror, call him
madman, impious wretch, and ſometimes even a diſhoneſt man. It would
be to little purpole for him to ſay, that in ſuch a religion it is abſurd for him
to believe miracles of which he was not himſelf a witneſs ; and as it is more
probable that they are lies than miracles (f), to give too eaſy credit to them, is
rather believing in impoſtors than God. It would be equally vain for him
to repreſent, that had God been willing to confirm Mahomet's miſſion, he would
never have made uſe of miracles that appear ridiculous to the eyes of a reaſon
the leaſt reflective. Whatever arguments the philoſopher might uſe to ſup-
port his incredulity, he would never obtain, among thoſe good muſſelmans,
the character of wiſe and honeſt, till he became ſo weak as to believe abſur-
dities, or ſo falſe as to pretend a belief of them. So true is it, that men judge
of the opinions of others by the conformity of them with their own ; and it
is only by fooleries that fools are perſuaded. |

If the ſavage of Canada prefers us to the other nations of Europe, it is be-
cauſe we approach' nearer to his manners, and way of living. It is to this
complaiſance we owe the grand eulogium he thinks he makes of a Frenchman,
in ſaying, He is a man like me”.

Thus it appears that in manners, opinions, and ideas, it is always ourſelves


we eſteem in others; and this is the reaſon why the Cæſars, Alexanders, and


in general, all great men, have conſtantly had other great men under them.

A prince of capacity, graſps the ſceptre, and is ſcarce feated on the throne
than all the poſts are filled by ſuperior men. The prince did not form them
ſuch, he ſeems even to have taken them at random; but forced to eſteem


„kö


(e) There are very few men, who, had never built ſcaffolds; yet its miniſters have
they the power, would not make uſe of tor- ſometimes been ſeen, in order to avenge their


tures to cauſe their opinions to be adopted.
Have not we, in our days, ſeen perſons of
ſo little ſenſe, and ſuch an exceſſive pride, as
to deſire that the civil power would puniſh a
writer, becauſe he was of a different opinion
from them, in prefering the Italian muſic
to the French. If it is only in religious diſ-
putes that men generally proceed to extremi-


ties, it is becauſe other diſputes do not afford


the ſame pretences, nor the ſame means for
being cruel. It is only to impotence that a
perſon generally owes his moderation. The
humane and moderate man is rarely to be
found. On his meeting with a perſon of a
different religion, he ſays, This man indeed
entertains different opinions from me ; but
why ſhould I perſecute him? The goſpel
has no where enjoined us to uſe tortures and
priſons for making converts. True religion


+


pride, offended by opinions different from
theirs, to arm in their behalf the ſtupid cre-
dulity of people and princes. Few men
have deſerved the panegyric of the Egyptian
prieſts in Sethos, on queen Nephte. So far
from exciting animoſity, moleſtation, per-
ſecution, though the ſuggeſtion of a miſ-
taken piety; ſhe, ſay theſe prieſts, has
drawn from religion only maxims of lenity :
ſhe never believed that it was lawful to tor-
ture men, in order to honour the Gods.“

(f) Why, in ſuch a religion, ſhould not
the witneſs of a miracle be ſuſpected? We
are, ſays M. de Fontenelle, in order to re-
late a fact preciſely as we have ſeen it, that
is, without addition or diminution, to keep
ſo ſtrict a watch over ourſelves, that he who
pretends he has never caught himſelf in a lie
in this reſpect, may be concluded a liar.


and


— ——— —ͤ — * ——— — —


. be


e RT 3 pets Ry


4 8 ;
Y


ESSAYS o THE MIND. 31
and prefer perſons only of a genius ſimilar to his own, his choice muſt of


neceſſity be good. On the other hand, a weak prince is, by the ſame reaſon,


compelled to entertain ſuch as refemble him ; and thus he generally makes a
bad choice. It is from a ſucceſſion of ſuch princes, that the higheſt employ-
ments have been, for ſeveral ages, filled by a ſucceſſion of weak men Accord-
ingly the people, who cannot perſonally know their maſter, judge of him only
from the talents of thoſe he employs, and is eſteemed for entertaining men
of merit. Queen Chriſtina uſed to ſay, that, under a ſtupid monarch, the
whole court is, or will become ſuch. |


But it will be ſaid, men are ſometimes ſeen to admire in others, ideas which


they never would have produced, and which have no ſimilarity with their own.
The following ſaying of a cardinal, in generally known. On the nomination
of a pope, he went up to him, and accoſted him in this manner: © You are


now pope, and this is the laſt time you will hear truth; ſeduced by flattery,


you will ſoon fancy yourſelf a great man; but remember, that before your
exaltation you was both ignorant and obſtinate ; farewel, I am now to adore

ou.” Few courtiers have wit and reſolution to talk in ſuch a manner; moſt
of them, like thoſe people who both worſhip *and ſcourge their idol, tacitly
rejoice at the fall of the maſter to whom they are ſubject. Their vindictive
temper inſpires them to commend ſuch ſarcaſms; and revenge is an intereſt.
Whoever is not animated by an intereſt of this kind, eſteems and feels only
ſuch ideas as are analogous to his own ; accordingly the wand for diſcovering
a recent and unknown merit, is, and indeed can only be, in the hands of men
of genius; for the lapidary alone is ſkilful in rough deamonds, and genius
only perceives genius. It was the eye of a Turenne alone, that in young
Churchill could diſcern the famous Marlborough.

Every idea too foreign toour manner of ſeeing and reflecting, will always appear
ridiculous to us. The execution of a project, though vaſt and elevated, will ap-
pear eaſy to a great miniſter; while an ordinary miniſter will conſider it as ſenſe-
leſs and chimerical; and this project, according to a phraſe common among fools,
will be refered to Plato's republic. This is the reaſon why, in certain countries,
where the Minds are enervated with ſuperſtition, ſluggiſn, and little capable of
nobleenterprizes, the greateſt ridicule that can be thrown on a perſon, is to ſay of
him, he endeavours to reform the ſtate. A ridicule which, from the indigence,
the depopulation of theſe countries, and conſequently, the neceſſity of a re-
formation, in the eyes of foreigners, reflects on the authors of it. It is with
ſuch people as with thoſe mean buffoons (g) who think they ſeverely expoſe a
perſon, when they ſay, with a ſneering and malicious accent, He is a Roman;


he is a wit. A kind of raillery, which, taken in its true ſenſe, ſignifies thar
this man is not like them; that is, he is neither a fool nor diſhoneſt. How


— —


(g) The wealthy citizens add, in deriſion, value of knowledge. Beſides, how ſhould
that the wit is often ſeen at the rich man's riches eſteem knowledge? The man of learn-
door, but the rich man, never at the door ing can ſet a value upon ignorance, having


of the wit; that is, anſwers the poet Saadi, known it in his childhood; but the ignorant


Becauſe the man of wit knows the value of man cannot eſtimate learning, becauſe he never
riches, and the rich man is ignorant of the knew it. |


many


WV


32 ERL'ESPRIT; es


many of theſe weak acknowledgments and abſurd phraſes does an attentive
mind hear in different companies; which, reduced to their preciſe meaning
would ſufficiently confaund thoſe who uſe them. The man of merit, there-
fore, ſhould be indifferent with regard to the eſteem or contempt of an indiyi-
dual, as each ſignifies nothing more than that he does not think or act like him.
I might, by an infinity of other facts, farther prove, that we eſteem only ſuch
ideas as are analogous to our own ; but to aſcertain this truth, it muſt be ſup-


ported by proofs drawn from juſt reaſoning.


(
Of the neceſſity we are under of eſleeming in oth.rs only ourſelves.


WO cauſes equally powerful determine to this action, vanity, and

indolence. I ſay vanity, becauſe the deſire of eſteem is common to all
men ; though ſome, to the pleaſure of being admired, will add the merit of
contemning admiration; but this contempt is not real, the perſon admired
never thinking the admirer ſtupid : Now it all men are fond of eſteem, every
one, knowing, from experience, that his ideas will appear eſteemable, or
contemptible to others, only as they agree or claſh with their own, the con-
ſequence is, that, ſwayed by vanity, every one cannot help eſteeming in others
a conformity of ideas, which aſſure him of their eſteem ; and to hate in them
an oppoſition of ideas, as a certain indication of their hatred ; or, at leaſt, of
their contempt, which 'is to be conſidered as a corrective of hatred. But
even ſuppoſe a perſon ſhould ſacrifice his vanity to the love of truth, if this
perſon be not animated with the keeneſt deſtre of information, I ſay, that his
indolence will allow him to have, for thoſe opinions oppoſite to his own,
only an eſteem upon truſt. In order to explain what I mean by an eſteem
upon truſt, I ſhall diſtinguiſh eſteem into two kinds, one, which may be
conſidered as the effect, either of deference to public opinion (a), or of con-
fidence in the judgment of certain perſons; and this I call eſteem upon truſt.
Such is that of certain perſons for very indifferent novels, meerly becauſe they
imagine them to come from the pens of our famous writers. Such is even
the general admiration of Deſcartes and Newton; an admiration, which,


—


(a) M. de la Fontaine had only ſuch an
eſteem for Plato's phi'oſophy. M. de Fonti-
nelle relates on this head, that la Fontaine
one day ſaid to him; * This Plato was
certainly a great philoſopher.”— Do you
find any remarkable clearneſs of ideas in him?”
anſwered Fontinelle. Oh ! no: he is im-
penetrably obſcure.” Do not you find that
he contradicts himſelf.” Indeed, replied


Fontaine, he is nothing more than a ſophiſt.”
Then at once forgetting the acknowledg-
ments he had juſt made, Plato, ſays he,
places his characters ſo properly! Socrates
was on the Pyream, when Alcibiades, with
a garland of flowers round his head,
Vikas an admirable philoſopher this Plato
was! |


in


ESSAYS oN TRE MIND. | 33


in moſt men, is the more enthuſiaſtic, as it is founded on the leſs knowledge.
Whether, after forming to ourſelves a vague idea of the merit of thoſe great
geniuſes, their admirers, in this idea, reſpect the work of their own admira-
tion; or whether in pretending to bejudges;of ſuch a man as Newton they think
to ſhare in the elogiums they ſo profuſely beſtow on him. This kind of
eſteem, which our ignorance often obliges us to uſe, is, from that very cer-
cumſtance, the moſt general. Nothing is ſo uncommon as to judge ac-
| cording to our own ſentiments.

The other kind of eſteem is that which, independently of the opinions of
others, is produced folely by the impreſſion made on us by certain ideas ;
and therefore I call it Felt-eſteem, being the only real eſteem, and that which
is here meant. Now, in order to prove, that indolence allows us to grant
this kind of eſteem only to ideas analogous to our own, it will be ſufficient
to obſerve that, as geometry ſenſibly proves, by the analogy and ſecret rela-
tions which ideas already known have with unknown ideas, we obtain a
knowledge of the latter ; and that by following the progreſſion of theſe ana-
logies, we may attain the utmoſt perfection of a ſcience; it follows, that ideas
of no analogy with our own, would be to us unintellegible ideas. But it will be
ſaid, there are no ideas which have not neceſſarily ſome relation, as they
would otherwiſe be univerſally unknown. Ves; but this relation may be
either immediate or remote: when immediate, the faint deſire every one has
of information, renders him capable of the attention which the intelligence
of ſuch ideas ſuppoſes ; but when remote, as it generally is in thoſe opinions
- wiiich are the reſult of a great number of ideas and various ſentiments, it is

evident, that without being animated by a very keen deſire for information,
and allo a ſituation proper for gratifying that deſire, indolence will never allow
us to conceive, nor conſequently to acquire, any Felt-eſteem contrary to our
own.
Few have leiſure ſufficient for information. The poor man, for inſtance,
can neither reflect nor examine; he receives truth or error only by prejudice :
employed in daily labour, he cannot riſe to a certain ſphere of ideas. Accord-
ingly he prefers the blue library“, to the writings of St. Real, Rochefoucault,
and cardinal de Retz. Alſo, on thoſe days of public rejoicings, when there
is free admittance to the playhouſes, the actors, ſenſible what audience they
have to entertain, will rather a& Don Japhet and Pourceaugnac, than Hera-
clius and the Miſantrope. What I ſay of the populace, may be applied to
all the claſſes of mankind. The men of the world are diſtracted by a thou-
ſand affairs and pleaſures. With their taſte, philoſophical works have as little
analogy, as the Miſantrope with that of the populace. Accordingly, they
will, in general, prefer a romance to Locke. It is from the ſame principle
of analogies, that we explain why the learned, and even men of wit have pre-
tered authors leſs eſteemed, to thoſe of a ſuperior reputation. Why did Mal-
herbe prefer Statius to every other poet? Why did Heinſius (b) and Corneille


—


* Small books ſtitched in blue paper. proudly neighing, is to a drove of aſſes,
(b) Lucan, ſaid Heinſius, in compari- whoſe ignoble voice betrays their ſervile diſ-
ſon of the other poets, is what a fiery horſe, poſition, | By


F value


20 'DE L*ESPRIT; on


value Lucan beyond Virgil? How came Adrian to prefer the eloquence of
Caro to that of Cicero? For what reaſon did Scaliger (e) conſider Homer
and Horace as far beneath Virgil and Juvenal ? Becauſe, the eſteem we have
for an author, is proportional to the analogy between his ideas and thoſe of
his reader,

Let a manuſcript work be put into the hands of ſeven men of genius,
equally free from prepoſſeſſions or prejudice, and let them be ſeparately de-
fired to mark the moſt ſtriking paſſages: each of them will underline diffe-
rent places; and if, afterwards, the approved paſſages be compared with the
genius and temper of the approver, each will be found to have praiſed only
the ideas analogous to his manner of ſeeing and perceiving; and that under-
ſtanding is, if I may be allowed the expreſſion, a ſtring that vibrates only
with the uniſon. | | 2

If the Abbe de Longuerue, as he himſelf uſed to ſay, of all the works of
St, Auguſtine, remembered only, that the Trojan horſe was a military ma-
chine; and, in the romance of Cleopatra, a famous counſellor could ſee nothing
intereſting, except the diſſolution of the marriage of Eliza with Artabanes; it muſt
be acknowledged, that the only difference in this reſpect, between the learned,
or men of wit, and the common, is, that the former having a greater number
of ideas, their ſphere of analogies is much more extenſive. If the queſtion
relates to ſpecies of wit, very different from what he is maſter of, the man of
genius, who is in all reſpects like other men, eſteems only thoſe ideas that
are analogous to his own. Let a Newton, a Quinaut, a Machiavel, be brought
together; let them not be named; let no opportunity be given them for
conceiving for each other, that kind of eſteem which I call eſteem on truſt;
it will be found that after having reciprocally, but to no purpoſe, endeavoured
to communicate their ideas to one another, Newton will look upon Quinaut
as an inſupportable paultry rhimer; Newton will ſeem to him a maker of
Almanacks; and both will conſider Machiavel as a coffee-houſe politician ;,
and, in fine, all three, by calling each other men of very little genius, will
revenge, by a reciprocal contempt, the mutual uneaſineſs they gave each.
other. 55

Now, if ſuperior men, entirely abſorbed in their reſpective kinds of ſtudy,
are not ſuſceptible of a Felt- eſteem, for a ſpecies of genius too different from
their own, every author who abounds with new ideas, can only expect eſteem
from two ſorts of men: either young perſons, who by not previouſly adopting
any opinion, have ſtill the deſire and leiſure of informing themſelves ; or of
thoſe whoſe minds, being deſirous of truth, and analogous to that of the author,


had previouſly ſome glimpſe of the exiſtence of theſe ideas. But the number


of ſuch men has always been very ſmall. This retards the progreſs of the
human mind : and hence the extreme flowneſs with which every truth becomes
diſplayed to the eyes of all the world. |

From what has been ſaid it follows, that moſt men, ſubmitting to indo-
lence, conceive thoſe ideas only which are analogous to their own.


* * 2 1 4 5


(e) Scaliger quotes the ſeventeenth ode of Heinſius quotes it, as one of the maſter- pieces
the fourth book of Horace as execrable; and of antiquity. a
| It


2
74


ESSAYS os ru MI ND. 35


It appears, from what has been juſt ſaid, that moſt men, ſubject to indolence,
form a perfect conception only of thoſe ideas that are analogous to their own;
that they have only a Felt-eſteem for no other than this kind of ideas : and
hence proceeds that high opinion which every one is in a manner forced to have
of himſelf; an opinion which the moraliſts would not perhaps have attributed
to pride, had they been more thoroughly acquainted with the principles juſt
laid down. They would then have been ſenſible, that the ſacred reſpect and
the profound admiration, which when alone, they often feel for themſelves,
can be nothing more than the effect of the neceſſity we were under of having
an higher eſteem of ourſelves than for others,


How can we forbear having the higheſt ideas of ourſelves ? Every man-


changes his opinions, as ſoon as he believes that thoſe opinions are falſe. Every


one therefore believes, that he thinks juſtly, and conſequently, much better


than thoſe whoſe ideas are contrary to his own. Now, if there are not two
men who think exactly alike, it muſt neceſſarily follow, that each in parti-
cular believes, that his ſentiments are more juſt than thoſe entertained by all
the reſt of mankind (d). The ducheſs de la Ferte ſaid, one day to madam de
Stahl, I muſt confeſs, my dear friend, that I find no body always in the right


but myſelf (e). Let us hear the Talopoins, the Bonzes, the Bramins, the


Guebres, the Imans, and the Marabouts, when they preach againſt each


other in the aſſembly of the multitude, does not each of them ſay, like the


ducheſs de la Ferte ? Ye people, I aſſure you, that I alone am always in the
right. Each then believes that he has a ſuperior underſtanding, and the fools
are not the perſons who are the leaſt ſenſible of it (f). This gave room for
the fable of the four merchants, who went to the fair to ſell beauty, birth,
dignity, and wit; all of whom diſpoſed of their merchandize, except the
laſt, who returned without even taking handſel.

But, ſay they, we find ſome men acknowledge that others have greater
mental abilities than themſelves. Yes, I reply, we do find people who con-
feſs it; and this conſeſſion ſprings from a delicacy of ſoul : in the mean time,
they have only an efteem upon truſt, for thoſe whom they acknowledge their


* : —


(d) Experience informs us, that every one
places in the rank of dunces and of bad books,
every man and every work that contradicts
his opinions ; that he would impoſe ſilence on
the man, and ſuppreſs the work. Thus the
orthodox who are deficient in underſtanding,
have ſometimes given hereticks an advantage
over them. If in a trial at the bar, ſay theſe
laſt, one party ſhould forbid the other to ex-
hibit his proofs in ſupport of his right; would
not this act of violence in one of the parties
be conſidered as a proof of the injuſtice of his
cauſe ?

(e) See the entertaining Memoirs of ma-
dam de Stahl, which has been lately tranſlated


into Engliſh.


(f) What preſumption, ſay the perſons


of mean abilities, is there in thoſe called men
of genius ? How ſuperior do they think them-


ſelves to the reſt of mankind ? But the others


reply, the ſtag who boaſted of being the
ſwifteſt of all ſtags, muſt doubtleſs be puffed
up with pride; but without wounding his
modeſty, he may ſafely fay, that he runs bet-
ter than a tortoiſe. You are the tortoiſe;
you have neither read nor ſpent your hours
in meditation: how then can you have a
mind cultivated like his, who has taken great
pains in acquiring knowledge? You accuſe
him with preſumption; and you, without


ſtudy and reflection, would be upon an equal


footing with him. Which then of the two
is the more preſumptuous ?


F 2 ſupe-


1 —— ——


|


36 DE L'ESP-RIT; os;


ſuperior ; they only join in the public opinion, in giving them this preference, :


and confeſs that theſe perſons are eſteemed, without being inwardly convinced,
that they are more worthy of eſteem than themſelves (g). | |

A man will confeſs, without difficulty, that in geometry he is much. inferior
to Fontaine, d'Alembert, Clairaut, and Euler; that in poetry he is excelled by
Moliere, Racine, and Voltaire; but I ſay, that this man will ſet ſo much
the leſs value on that perfection in proportion as he acknowledges he has ſu-
periors in it; and that beſides, he will think himſelf ſo greatly recompenſed
for the ſuperiority the perions above- mentioned have over him, either by find-
ing that thoſe ſciences are of no conſequence, or by the variety of his know-


ledge, his good ſenſe, his acquaintance with the world, or by ſome other of


the like advantages; that, every thing properly conſidered, he will think him-
ſelf as worthy of eſteem as any other perſon whatever (h).

But how, ſay they, can it be imagined, that a man, who, for example, exe-
cutes the ſubordinate offices of the magiſtrate, can believe that he has a ge-
nius equal to Corneille ? *Tis true, I reply, that here he will make no body
his confidant : however, when by a ſcrupulous examination, we have diſcover-
ed how much weare daily affected by ſentiments of pride, without our perceiv-
ing it, and what elogiums are neceſſary to embolden us ſo far as to make us
confeſs to ourſelves and to others the profound eſteem we have for our own
abilities, we ſhall perceive that the ſilence of pride is no proof of its abſence,
Let us ſuppoſe, to follow the above example, that three counſellors leaving
the play-houſe, accidentally meet, and begin to talk of Corneille, all three per-
haps cry out at once, that Corneille was the greateſt genius in the world: hoW-
ever, if, to diſburden himſelf of this intolerable weight of eſteem, one of them
adds, that Corneille was indeed a great man, but he excelled in what is of a
very frivolous nature; it is certain, if we may judge from the contempt
which certain people affect to entertain for poetry, the two other counſellors
will be of the ſame opinion with the firſt : then from confidence to confidence
they come to compare the quibbles of law with poetry: the art of pleading,
ſays another, has its plots, its delicacies, and its combinations, like all other
arts. Really, replies the third, there is no art more difficult. Now, from an
hypotheſis very eaſily admitted, that in this difficult art, each of theſe coun-


(g) Fontenelle would readily have agreed
that Corneille had a ſuperior genius in poetry
to him; but he would not have been ſenſible
of it. Suppoſe, fin order to be convinced of
this truth, that Fontenelle had been deſired
to give the ideas he had entertained of the
perfection of poetry: it is certain that he
would here have propoſed no other excellent
rules than ſuch as he himſelf had obſerved as
well as Corneille; he muſt therefore have
ſecretly entertained the belief that he him-
ſelf was as great a poet as any other whatever;
and that, in confeſſing himſelf inferior to Cor-
neille, he conſequently did no more than
ſacrifice his opinion to that of the public. Few
men have the courage to confeſs, that they


have what I call a greater Felt-eſteem for
themſelves, than for any body elſe ; but whe-
ther they deny or confeſs it, it does not alter
the exiſtence of this ſentiment in their minds.

(h) We praiſe ourſelves for every thing
we poſleſs : ſome boaſt of their ſtupidity, un-


der the name of good ſenſe; others praiſe


their beauty; ſome puffed up with their riches,
place theſe gifts of fortune to the account of
judgment and prudence; the woman who


ſpends the evening with her cook, thinks her-


ſelf as worthy of eſteem as a perſon of learn-
ing. One who prints a work in folio, def-
piſes the writer of a romance, and fancies him-
ſelf as ſuperior to the latter, as a folio is big-
ger than a pamphlet.

ſellors


F nb NE AONas vs
. 1

7771

r *
W


FS S AX S on tate MI ND. 37


ſellors thinks himſelf the moſt able of the three, the reſult of this conference
will be, that each of them fancies he has as great a genius as Corneille. We
are, through vanity, and above all, through ignorance, ſo neceſſitated to eſteem
ourſelves preferably to others, that the greateſt man in every art, is he whom
each artiſt places in the firſt rank after himſelf. In the time of Themiſtocles,
when pride was only different from the pride of the preſent age, in its being
more undiſguiſed, all the captains, after the battle of Salamis, were obliged,
by notes laid upon the altar of Neptune, to declare who had the greateſt ſhare
in obtaining the victory; each gave that honour to himſelf, and adjudged the
ſecond place to Themiſtocles: upon which the diſcerning people gave the


greateſt reward to him, whom each captain had conſidered as the molt worthy


except himſelf,


It is then certain, that every perſon has neceſſarily the higheſt idea of him-
ſelf; and that he conſequently never eſteems in another any thing but his
own image and reſemblance. |

The general concluſion of what I have ſaid on the capacity of the mind,


conſidered in relation to the individual, is, that it is only the aſſemblage of


intereſting ideas to that individual, whether as agreeable or inſtructive:


whence it follows, that perſonal intereſt, as I had propoſed ro ſhew, is in
this reſpect the only judge of the merit of mankind.


CWC


CK
Of Probity in relation to private ſocieties.
U NDER this point of view, I ſay, that probity is only a more or leſs


diſtinguiſhed habit of performing actions particularly uſeful to this little
ſociety. Certain virtuous ſocieties indeed frequently appear to lay aſide their


own intereſt to judge the actions of men, in conformity to the intereſt of
the public; but in this they only gtatify the paſſion which an enlightened


pride gives them for virtue; and conſequently, like all other ſocieties, obey


the Jaw of perſonal intereſt. What other motive can determine men to gene-


rous actions ? It is as impoſſible to love virtue for the ſake of virtue as to
love vice for the ſake of vice (a). |


—
2


(a) The continual declamations of mora-


liſts againſt the malignity of mankind, are a


proof of their knowing but little of human
nature. Men are not cruel and perfidious,
but carried away by their own intereſt. The
declamations of the moraliſts will certainly
make no change in this moral ſpring of the
univerſe. They ought not therefore to com-


plain of the wickedneſs of mankind, but of
the ignorance of the legiſlators, who have
always placed private intereſt in oppoſition to
the general intereſt. If the Scythians were
more virtuous than we, it is becauſe their


legiſlators, and their manner of life, inſpired


more probity.


Brutus


:


38 | DE l. ESPRIT. on;


Brutus ſacrificed his ſon to the ſafety of Rome, only becauſe the paternal
love he felt for him was leſs powerful than his love for his country : in this
inſtance he only yielded to the ſtronger paſſion ; a paſſion which animating
him for the public intereſt, made him perceive, in a ſeverity to his own child,
ſo generous, ſo proper to revive the love of liberty, the only refource that
could ſave Rome, and prevent her falling again under the tyranny of the Tar-
quins. In the critical circumſtances in which Rome was then placed, ſuch
an action was neceſſary to ſerve as a foundation to the vaſt power to which
afterwards the love of liberty and the public welfare aroſe. |

But as there are few Brutus's, and fewer ſocieties compoſed of ſuch men,
I ſhall take my examples from the common order, to prove that in each ſociety
private intereſt is the only diſtributer of the eſteem beſtowed on account of
human actions. | |

To be convinced of this, let us caſt our eyes upon a man who ſacrifices all
his fortune to fave a relation, who is an aſſaſſin, from undergoing the ſeverity
of the law. This man will certainly be conſidered by his family as extremely
virtuous, though he is really extremely unjuſt. I ſay extremely unjuſt ; be-
cauſe, if the hope of impunity multiplies crimes, and the certainty of puniſh-
ment is abſolutely neceſſary to preſerve order in any nation; it is evident,
that a pardon granted to a criminal, 1s injuſtice to the public, of which he
renders himſelf an accomplice, who ſolicits for ſuch a pardon (b).

When a miniſter, deat to the ſolicitations of his relations and friends, be-
lieves that he ought to raiſe none to the higheſt poſts in the ſtate, but men of
the greateſt merit; ſo juſt a miniſter will certainly paſs in ſociety for a man
uſeleſs, void of friendthip, and perhaps even void of honeſty. It may be ſaid,
to the diſgrace of the preſent age, that it is almoſt always to injuſtice, that
a man in a high poſt, owes the titles of a good friend, of a good relation, of a
virtuous and beneficent man, laviſhly beſtowed upon him by the ſociety
in which he lives. |

When a father, by his intrigues, obtains the poſt of general for a ſon inca-
pable of commanding, that father ſhall be mentioned by his family, as a wor-
thy and beneficent man : yet what can be more abominable, than to expoſe a
nation, or at leaſt ſeveral provinces, to the ravages which tollow a defeat, only
to gratify the ambition of a family? |


"RY —


(b) I have been guilty, ſaid Chilo, when
dying, but of one crime, that of having, dur-
ing my magiſtracy, ſaved from the rigour of
the laws a criminal, my belt friend.

T ſhall alſo cite on this ſubject a fact re-
lated in Guliſtan. An Arab going to com-
plain to theSultan of the violences committed
by two unknown perſons in his houſe : the
ſultan went thither ; cauſed the lights to be
put out ; ſeized the criminals; had theirheads
wrapped up ina cloak, and ordered that they
ſhould be ſtabbed. The execution being
thus performed, he ordered the flambeaux
brought with him to be again lighted ; and


having examined the bodies of the criminals,
lift up his hands, and returned thanks to God.
What favour, ſaid the viſier, have you then
received from heaven ? Viſier, replied
the ſultan, I thought my ſon had been the
author of theſe crimes ; therefore, I ordered
the lights to be put out, and the faces of theſe
unhappy wretches to be covered with a
cloak. I was afraid leſt paternal tendernets
ſhould make me fail in the juſtice which |
owe my ſubjects. Judge whether I ought not
to thank heaven, when I find myſelf juſt,
without having taken away the life of my
ſon !


5 What


ESSAYS o Th MIND. 39


What can be more worthy of puniſhment than the ſolicitations, againſt
which it is impoſſible for a ſovereign to be always on his guard? Such ſoli-
citations, that have but too often plunged nations in the greateſt misfortunes,
are the inexhauſtible ſources of calamities: calamities from which, perhaps,
the people can be no otherwiſe delivered, than by breaking the bonds of affinity
that unite mankind, and declaring every citizen a child of the ſtate. This


is the only means of ſtifling the vices authoriſed by an appearance of virtue,


of hindering the ſubdiviſion of a people into an infinite number of families or
little ſocieties, whoſe intereſts are almoſt always oppoſite to that of the public,
and at length extinguiſh in the mind all kind of love for our country.

What I have ſaid ſufficiently proves, that before the tribunal of a ſmall
ſociety, intereſt is the only judge of the merit of men's actions: I ſhould, there-
fore, have added nothing to what I have ſaid, had I not propoſed the public
utility as the principal end of this work. Now I am ſenſible that an honeſt


man, apprehenſive of the aſcendency the opinion of the ſociety in which he


lives may have over him, may juſtly be afraid of being frequently turned
from the path of virtue. ; 8 |
I ſhall not, therefore, quit this ſubject, without pointing out the means


of eſcaping the ſeductions, and avoiding the ſnares that private ſocieties lay for


the probity of honeſt men, and into which they are but too often ſurpriſed.
KMM NN KN MN NN KN NN NE K N EN N E E N d n SHS


S HK
Of the means of ſecuring Virtue.


Man is juſt, when all his actions tend to the public welfare. Doing

well is not all that is requiſite to merit the title of virtuous. A prince
has a thouſand places to beſtow; he muſt fill them up; and he cannot avoid
rendering a thouſand people happy. Here then, his virtue depends only on
the juſtice and injuſtice of his choice (a). If, when a place of importance
is vacant, he gives it from friendſhip, from weakneſs, from folicitation, or
from indolence, to a man of moderate abilities, in preference to another of
ſuperior talents, he ought to be conſidered as unjuſt, whatever praiſes others
may beſtow on his probity.

In the affair of probity, he ought only to conſult and liſten to the public
intereſt, and not to the men by whom he is ſurrounded ; for perſonal intereft
too often leads him into an illufion. : |

In courts, this intereſt gives to falſnood the name of prudence, and that
of ſtupidity to truth, which is there conſidered at leaſt as a folly, and muſt


ever be conſidered as ſuch,


A —


(a) In certain countries, the placemen are what is called decency or favour ; but only to
covered with the ſkin of an aſs, to let them juſtice,


know, that they are not indebted for it to


It


— —
————_————__—_
Z


40 ADE L*'ESPRI EU.

It is there'dangerous ; and offenſive virtues will always be conſidered in the
rank of faults. Truth meets with favour, only from humane and good princes,
ſuch as Lewis XII. and Lewis XV. The players having repreſented the firſt
on the ſtage, his courtiers perſuaded him to puniſh them: No, ſaid he, they
do me Juſtice ; they believe me worthy of hearing the truth. An example
of moderation, ſince imitated by the duke d' —— The above prince being
forced to lay ſome impoſitions on a province, was wearied out by the remon-
ſtrances of a deputy from the ſtates of that province and at length, replied
with vivacity, And what are your forces, that you would bring to oppoſe
my will? What can you do? ------ Obey and hate, replied the deputy. A
noble anſwer, that did equal honour to the deputy and the prince. It was
almoſt as difficult for the one to hear, as for the other to make it. The ſame
prince had a miſtreſs, who was carried off by a gentleman. He was exaſpe-
rated, and his favourites incited him to revenge. Puniſh, ſaid they, an in-
lolent ------- I know, he replied, that it is ealy for me to revenge it; a word
would be ſufficient to rid me of a rival, and that is the very reaſon that hinders
my Pronouncing it. 77 | |

Such moderation is very rare; truth commonly meets with too bad a re-
ception from princes and the great, to ſtay long in courts. How can ſhe
dwell in a country where moſt of thoſe: who are ſtiled men of probity, habi—
tuated to baſeneſs and flattery, give, and really ought to give, to thoſe vices
the name of the cuſtoms of the world? It is difficult to perceive that to be
criminal which they find to be uſeful. Who doubts, however, that there is
not a kind of flattery more dangerous, and conſequently more criminal, in
the eyes of a prince animated with a love of true glory, than the libels wrote
againſt him? Not that I here vindicate libels; but flattery may lead a Prince
from the way of virtue, while a libel may ſometimes. bring a tyrant into
it. It is not often, that by the freedom of ſpeech, 'the complaints of the op-
preſſed can reach the throne (b). But intereſt will always hide ſuch truths


from the private connections of the court: and perhaps there is no other me-
thod of defending ourſelves from the ſeducing illuſions that prevail there, than


by keeping ata diſtance from thoſe connections. It is at leaſt certain, that there
can be no method of preſerving there a virtue conſtantly firm and uncorrupr,
without having habitually preſent to the mind, a principle of public utility (c);
without being thoroughly acquainted with the true intereſt of the public, and


conſequently without moral and political knowledge. Perfect probity never


(b) It is not, ſays the poet Saadi, the
te timid voice of miniſters that ought to bring
to the ears of kings the lamentations of
«© the miſerable ; the cries of the people
mould pierce directly to the throne.”

(c) In conſequence of this principle, Fon-
tenelle hasdefined a lie, theconcealing a truth
ought to divulge. A man, leaving a woman's
bed, meets her huſband, who cries, Where
have you been? What ſhall he anſwer ?
Shall he tell the truth? No, ſays Fontenelle,


" becauſe the truth would then be of no uſe to


— —


any one. Now, Truth herſelf is ſubject to the
public utility. She ſhould preſide in the com-
poſition of hiſtory, and in the ſtudy of arts
and ſciences : She ought to be preſent with
the great, and even to ſnatch from them the
veil that hides the faults prejudicial to the pub-
lic; but ſhe ought never to reveal thoſe that
injure none but the man himſelf, It is afflict-
ing him to no purpoſe ; under the pretence of
ſpeaking truth, it is being cruel and brutal ;
inſtead of ſhewing a love of truth, it is glo-
rying in another's humiliation,

falls


.


ESSAYS own Tus MIND. 41


falls to the lot of the ſtupid: for probity without knowledge, is only probity


of intention, for which the public neither have nor can have any real regard
both becauſe they cannot judge of the intention, and becaule in the judgment
they form, they conſult nothing but their own intereſt. |

If he is ſaved from death who has the misfortune to kill his friend in the
chace, this favour is not merely ſhewn to the innocence of his intentions, fince
the law capitally condemns the ſentinel who involuntarily ſuffers himſelf to be
ſurpriſed by fleep. The public, in the firſt caſe, only pardons, that the loſs
of one citizen may not be added to the loſs of another; in the ſecond he is
puniſhed in order to prevent their being ſurpriſed, and the misfortunes to which
they might be expoſed by ſuch want of vigilance. | |

We ought then, in order to be virtuous, to blend the light of knowledge with
greatneſs of foul, Whoever aſſembles within himſelf theſe different gifts of
nature always directs his courſe by the compaſs of the public utility. This
utility is the principle on which all human virtues are founded, and the baſis
of all legiſlations. It ought to inſpire the legiſlator with the reſolution to
force the people to ſubmit to his laws; to this principle, in ſhort, he ought to
ſacrifice all his ſentiments, and even thoſe of humanity itſelf,

Public humanity is ſometimes. void of pity for individuals (d). When a
veſſel is ſurprized by long calms, and famine has, with an imperious voice,


commanded the mariners to draw lots for the unfortunate victim who is to


ſerve as a repaſt to his companions, they kill him without remorſe : this
veſſel is the emblem of a nation; every thing becomes lawful, and even vir-
tuous, that procures the public ſafety. |

The concluſion of what J have juſt ſaid is, that in the caſe of probity,
counſel is not to be taken from private connections, but only from the inte-
reſt of the public: he who conſtantly conſults it will have all his actions
directed either immediately to the public utility, or to the advantage of indi-
viduals, without their being detrimental to the ſtate.


The perſon who ſuccours merit in diftreſs gives undoubtedly an example


of beneficence conformable to the general intereſt: he pays the tax which
probity impoſes on riches. 17 5 |

| Honeſt poverty has no other patrimony than the treaſures of virtuous opu-
ence,

Whoever conducts himfelf by this principle may give to his own mind
an advantageous teſtimony of his probity, and prove that he really merits the
title of a worthy man. I ſay merits: for to obtain a ſingular reputation of
this kind, it is not enough to be virtuous; it is neceſſary he ſhould, like Codrus
and Regulus, be happily placed in times, in circumſtances, and in a ſtation,
that will allow his actions to have a ſufficient influence on the welfare of the


—


(d) This principle was among the Arabians ducted to the governor's tribunal; he endea-
conſecrated by the example of ſeverity given vours to move him by his tears. Unhappy
by the famous Ziad, governor of Baſra. Af- ſtranger, ſays Ziad, I muſt appear to thee
ter having in vain endeavoured to purge that unjuſt, in puniſhing a breach of orders that
city from the aſſaſſins who infeſted it, he ſaw thou were ignorant of; but the ſafety of Bai-
himſelf ovliged to inflict the pains of death ra depends on thy death : I lament and con-
on every man who was found in the ſtreets demn thee.
at night. They ſtopped a ſtranger ; he is con- G


public.


2
—
.
*


—— — — , *


42 DE L'ESPRIT4; ow a


public. In any other ſituation the probity of a citizen unknown to the public
is, if I may ſo expreſs myſelf, only a virtuous accompliſhment in private ſo-
ciety, of ſingular benefit to thoſe with whom he is connected.

A private men can only by his abilities render himſelf uſeful and praiſe-
worthy to a nation. Of what ſervice is the probity of an individual to the
public? It is comparatively of little uſe (e). Thus the living are judged
as poſterity judges the dead: they do not enquire in what degree Juvenal was
wicked, Ovid debauched, Hannibal cruel, Lucretia impious ; how far Horace
was a Jibertine, Auguſtus guilty of diſſimulation, and Cæſar the huſband
of every wife, and the wife of every huſband : poſterity is only employed in
jorming a judgment of their reſpective talents. |

Upon which I ſhall remark, that moſt of thoſe who warmly exclaim againſt
the domeſtic vices of illuſtrious men do not give fo great a proof of their love
for the public welfare, as of their envying their abilities: this, in their eyes,
frequently wears the maſque of a virtue; but is commonly no more than a
diſguiſed envy, ſince in general they have not the ſame horror for the vices
of a man deſtitute of merit. Without making an apology for vices, we may
ſafely ſay, that worthy men would have cauſe to bluſh at the ſentiments on
which they pride themſelves, did they diſcover the baſeneſs of the princi-
ples upon which they are founded. | a

Perhaps the public ſhew too great an indifference for virtue; perhaps our
authors are ſometimes more careful in the correction of their works, than
in that of their manners; and follow the example of Averroes, a philoſo-
pher, who, it is ſaid, allowed himſelf to commit knaviſh actions, which he
regarded not only as hardly injurious, but even of uſe to his reputation. By this
means, ſay they, he put his rivals on a different ſcent, and turned thole cri-
ticiſms on his manners that would have been employed againſt his works, and
doubtleſs have given a more dangerous ſhock to his glory.

I have in this chapter pointed out the means of eſcaping the ſeductions of
private connections; of preſerving our virtue unſhaken amidſt the ſhock of
a thouſand private and different intereſts, by having a regard, in all our ſteps,
to the intereſt of the public.


RN NRNNN TE LE LE I IE eee EET EEE TIE
CCP


Of the underſtanding in relation to particular ſocieties,


W HAT I have here ſaid of underſtandng in relation to a ſingle man, I

ſhall here ſay of it, with reſpect to particular ſocieties; but not
repeat on this ſubject a tedious enumeration of the ſame proofs : I ſhall only
ſhew, by new applications of the ſame principle, that every ſociety, like


— —


(e) It is allowable to praiſe his heart, but elogium will obtain but a ſmall degree of ad-
not his mind; becauſe the firſt is of no great miration from the public.
conſequence, and envy fancies that ſuch an
5 | every


ESSAYS ov Tue MI ND, _


every individual, looks with eftcem or contempt on the ideas of other ſocieties
only according to their agreement, or diſagreement with the ideas, paſſions,
genius, and ſtation, in life of the perſons who compoſe that ſociety,

Suppoſe a Fakir was to appear in a circle of Sybarites, would he not be re-
carded with that contemptuous pity, which ſenſual and ſoft minds feel for a


man who loſes real pleaſures to purſue an imaginary good? Should a con-


queror enter the retreat of the philoſophers, who can doubt but that he would
treat their molt profound ſpeculations as things in themſelves the moſt vain


and frivolous; that he would conlider thele men with that contemptuous diſè


dain which a mind, filled with its own greatneſs, has for thoſe whom it little
eſteems; and with that ſuperiority with which power looks down upon weakneſs.
But if I tranſport this conqueror to the portico; Proud mortal, ſays the offended
Stoic, who deſpiſeſt fouls more lofty than thine own, learn that the object
of thy defires is that of our contempt ; and that nothing appears great on
earth, when contemplated by an elevated mind. In an antient foreſt ſits a
traveller at the foot of the cedar, which to him ſeems to touch the heavens ;
above the clouds where the eagle ſoars, the lofty trees creep above the ground
like the humble broom, and preſent to the eye of the king of birds only a
verdant carpet ſpread over the plains. Thus the Stoic filled with pride is
revenged for the diſdain ſhewn by the ambitious; and thus in general, all
treat each other who are animated by different paſſions. |

Let a woman young, beauritul, and full of gallantry, ſuch as hiſtory has
painted the celebrated Cleopatra, who, by the multiplicity of her charms, the
attractions of her wit, the variety of her careſſes, makes her lover daily taſte
all the delights that could be found in inconftancy, and in ſhort, whole firſt
enjoyment was, as Echard ſays, only the firſt favour ; let ſuch a woman ap-
pear in an aſſembly of prudes, whoſe age and deformity ſecured their chaſtity,
they would there deſpiſe her charms and her talents; ſheltered from ſeduc-
tion by the Meduſean ſhield of deformity, theſe prudes form no conception
of the pleaſure ariſing from the infatuation of a lover; and do not perceive
the difficulty a beautiful woman finds in reſiſting the deſite of making him
the confidant of all her ſecret charms : they therefore fall with fury upon this
lovely woman, and place her weakneſs among crimes of the blackeſt die ; but
let one of theſe prudes, in her turn, appear in a circle of coquets, ſhe will there
be treated with as little reſpect as youth and beauty ſhew to old age and de-
formity. To be revenged on her prudery, they will tell her, that the fair who


yields to love, and the diſagreeable who reſiſt that paſſion, are both prompted


by vanity ; that, in caſe of a lover, one ſeeks an admirer of her charms,


and the other flies on him who proclaims her diſgrace ; and that both being


animated by the ſame motive, there is no other difference but that of beauty

between the prude and the woman of gallantry. |
Thus the different paſſions reciprocally inſult over each other; the often-
tatious man, who will not know merit in a mean ſituation, and would ſee it
creep at his feet, is in his turn deſpiſed by men of ſenſe and learning. Fooliſh
mortal, cry they, on what doſt thou pride thyſelf ? Doſt thou glory in the honours
that are paid thee? This homage is not paid to thy merit, but to thy ſplendor
and thy power. Thou art nothing of thyſelf; if thou ſhineſt, the luſtre is re-
flected on thee by the favour of thy ſovereign, Behold the vapours that ariſe
G2 from


44 DE L'ESPRIT; on,


from the mud of thoſe marſhes; ſuſtained in the air, they are changed into
gaudy clouds; they ſhine like thee, with a ſplendor borrowed from the ſun;
but that (tar ſets, and the glowing brightneſs of the cloud diſappears. |

As contrary paſſions excite a reciprocal contempt in thoſe who are animated
by them, ſo too much oppoſition in the mind produces nearly the ſame effect.

Being neceſſitated (as I have already proved in chapter iv.) to reliſh no
ideas but thoſe that are analogous to our own, how is it poſſible for us to ad-
mire a turn of mind very different from ours? As the ſtudy of a ſcience
or an art makes us perceive an infinite number of beauties and difficulties in
it, of which we could have formed no conception without our having engaged
in fuch ſtudy, we have therefore neceſſarily more of what I call Felt- eſteem
for that ſcience or art which we thus cultivate. | |

Our eſteem for the other arts and iciences is always more or leſs proportio-
nable to their connection with the other arts to which we apply ourſelves,
For this reaſon the geometrician has commonly a greater efteem for the philo-
ſopher than for the poet; and the latter has an higher opinion of the orator
than of the geometrician. |

Thus with the beſt intentions, illuſtrious men of different taſtes ſet very
little value on each other. To be convinced of the reality of the contempr,
which on their part is always reciprocal, (for there is no debt more faithfully

aid than contempt) let us liſten to the diſcourſes of men of genius.

Like ſeveral empirics diſperſed in a market-place, each calls admirers to him-
ſelf, and thinks, that he alone can deſerve them. The writer of romances is
perſuaded, that his work ſuppoſes the moſt invention and delicacy of mind;
the metaphyſician fancies that he is the ſource of evidence, and the confidant
of nature. I alone, ſays he, can generalize ideas, and diſcover the ſeeds of
the events that daily untold themſelves in the phyſical and moral world, and by
me alone man is enlightened. The poet, who conſiders the metaphyſicians
as grave formal fools aſſures them, that if they would ſearch for Truth in the
well in which ſhe has hid herſelf, they need havenothing to draw her from thence
but the ſieve of the Danaides; that the diſcoveries of their art are doubtful, but
that the charms of his are certain. .

By ſuch diſcourſes theſe three men reciprocally prove the little efteem they
have for each other ; and if in ſuch a diſpute they take a politician for their
arbitrator, he will ſay, you mult know that the arts and ſciences are only ſe-
rious trifles, and frivolous difficulties. We may apply ourſelves to them
in our infancy, in order to exerciſe the mind; but it is only the knowledge
of the people's intereit that ought to fill the heads of perſons of ſenſe arrived
at the years of diſcretion. Every other object is little, and whatever is little
is deſpicable: whence he concludes, that he alone is worthy of univerſal ad-
miration. f

Now to cloſe this article with another example, let us ſuppole a natural phi-
loſopher has liſtened to this concluſion. He will immediately reply to the
politician, You deceive yourſelf, If we meaſure greatneſs of mind by the
greatneſs of the objects about which we are converſant, it is I alone who
am really worthy of eſteem. A ſingle diſcovery of mine changes the intereſt
of nations. I rub a needle upon the load-ſtone, and incloſe it within the com-


paſs; upon which America is diſcovered ; they dig mines: a thouſand veſlels
| loaded


= % & + *
* = nr n r n FP n = - n 3 9 a 7 -
e e ORE og _ Do EE IRIS CESS RU et a SE IR
8 N I 2» 3 2 ER ö TT. Xn RG A 7
e ths et . N 8 eee IRE ARS: Ds e ON 2
* N os, 2 2
r Ie rr ETps + -


| FS S AT S on Turf MIND. 45

ſoaded with gold divide the waves of the ſea, empty their treaſures in Eu-
rope ; and the face of the political world is changed. Always employed on
grand objects, if I retire to ſilence and ſolitude, it is not to ſtudy the little
revolutions of governments, but thoſe of the univerſe; it is not to penetrate
into the trifling ſecrets of courts, but into thoſe of nature: I diſcover how the
ſea has formed mountains, and how it has encroached upon the earth; I mea-
ſure both the force which moves the ſtars, and the extent of the luminous
circles they deſcribe in the azure vault of heaven; I calculate their magnitude,
compare it with that of the earth, and bluſh at the ſmallneſs of this globe. As
am ſo aſhamed of the hive, judge of the contempr I muſt feel for the infects
who inhabit it: the greateſt legiſlator is no more in my eye than the king of
bees.
Thus we ſee by what method of reaſoning each proves, that he himſelf
is the poſſeſſor of the moſt noble endowments of the mind; and how excited
by the deſire of proving it to others, the men of genius and learning, recipro-
cally depreciate each other, without perceiving that each of them being in-
volved in the contempt he inſpires for his equals, becomes the ſport and deri-
fion of the public, whoſe admiration he is ambitious of obtaining.

In vain would he endeavour to diminiſh the prepoſſeſſion each has entertained
in favour of his own turn of mind. We laugh at a floriſt ſtanding immovably
fixed over a bed of tulips ; he has his eyes continually upon them, and ſecs
nothing around him worthy of his admiration, but the fine mixture of the
colours, which, by cultivation, he has forced nature to paint : every man is
this floriſt, if he forms a judgment of the minds of men only from their know-
tedge of flowers, we alſo meaſure our eſteem for them only from the con-
formity of their ideas with our own, |

Our eſteem is ſo dependent on this conformity of ideas, that no body can
attentively examine themſelves, without perceiving, that in all the minutes
of a day, they do not afford the fame perſon exactly the ſame degree of eſteem;
and it is always to ſome one or other of theſe contradictions, inevitable in the
intimate and daily commerce with mankind, that we ought to attribute the
perpetual variation of tie thermometer of our eſteem : thus every man whoſe
ideas are not analogous to thoſe of the people with whom he converſes, is al-
ways deſpiſed by them. | |

The philoſopher who lives among a ſet of coxcombs, will be the jeſt and


ridicule of the company. He will find himſelf played upon by the greateft
fool amongſt them, whole inſipid jokes will paſs for excellent turns of wit;


for the ſucceſs of the raillery depends leſs on the delicacy of the author's wit,
than on his attention to ridiculenone but thoſe ideas that are diſagreeable to the
company. It is in pleaſantry as in pieces wrote with a party-ſpirit, which
are always admired by the cabal.

The unjuſt contempt of particular claſſes of men for each other is, there-
fore, like the contempt of an individual for an individual, only the effect of ig-


norance and pride: a pride that is doubtleſs cenſurable, though it is necel-


ſary, and inherent in human nature. Pride is the ſeed of ſo many virtues and
qualifications, that we ought neither to hope its deſtruction nor attempt to.
weaken it; but only to direct it to worthy purpoſes. If J here ridicule the
pride of certain perſons, I doubtleſs. do this only from another kind of pride,


perhaps.


44 DE L*'ESPRIT); on, |
from the mud of thoſe marſhes; ſuſtained in the air, they are changed into
gaudy clouds ; they ſhine like thee, with a ſplendor borrowed from the ſun;
but that ſtar ſets, and the glowing brightneſs of the cloud diſappears.

As contrary paſſions excite a reciprocal contempt in thoſe who are animated
by them, ſo too much oppoſition in the mind produces nearly the ſame effect.

Being neceſſitated (as I have already proved in chapter iv.) to reliſh no
ideas but thoſe that are analogous to our own, how is it poſſible for us to ad-
mire a turn of mind very different from ours? As the ſtudy of a ſcience
or an art makes us perceive an infinite number of beauties and difficulties -in
it, of which we could have formed no conception without our having engaged
in ſuch ſtudy, we have therefore neceſſarily more of what I call Felt- eſteem
for that ſcience or art which we thus cultivate, | |

Our eſteem for the other arts and iciences is always more or leſs proportio-
nable to their connection with the other arts to which we apply ourſelves,
For this reaſon the geometrician has commonly a greater efteem for the philo-
ſopher than for the poet; and the latter has an higher opinion of the orator


than of the geometrician.
Thus with the beſt intentions, illuſtrious men of different taſtes ſet very


little value on each other. To be convinced of the reality of the contempt,


which on their part is always reciprocal, (for there is no debt more faithfully
paid than contempt) let us liſten to the diſcourſes of men of genius. |

Like ſeveral empirics diſperſed in a market-place, each calls admirers to him-
ſelf, and thinks, that he alone can deſerve them. The writer of romances is

rſuaded, that his work ſuppoſes the moft invention and delicacy of mind;
the metaphyſician fancies that he is the ſource of evidence, and the confidant
of nature. I alone, ſays he, can generalize ideas, and diſcover the ſeeds of
the events that daily unfold themſelves in the phyſical and moral world, and by
me alone man is enlightened. The poet, who conſiders the metaphyſicians
as grave formal fools aſſures them, that if they would ſearch for Truth in the
well in which ſhe has hid herſelf, they need havenothing to draw her from thence
but the ſteve of the Danaides; that the diſcoveries of their art are doubtful, but
that the charms of his are certain. | .

By ſuch diſcourſes theſe three men reciprocally prove the little efteem they
have for each other; and if in ſuch a diſpute they take a politician for their
arbitrator, he will ſay, you muſt know that the arts and ſciences are only ſe-
rious trifles, and frivolous difficulties. We may apply ourſelves to them
in our infancy, in order to exerciſe the mind; but it is only the knowledge
of the people's intereſt that ought to fill the heads of perſons of ſenſe arrived
at the years of diſcretion. Every other object is little, and whatever is little
is deſpicable: whence he concludes, that he alone is worthy of univerſal ad-
miration.

Now to cloſe this article with another example, let us ſuppoſe a natural phi-
loſopher has liſtened to this concluſion. He will immediately reply to the
politician, You deceive yourſelf, If we meaſure greatneſs of mind by the
greatneſs of the objects about which we are converſant, it is I alone who
am really worthy of eſteem. A ſingle diſcovery of mine changes the intereſt
of nations. I rub a needle upon the load-ſtone, and incloſe it within the com-
paſs; upon which America is diſcovered ; they dig mines: a I I

| | oaded


ESSAYS on Tn MI ND, 45
loaded with gold divide the waves of the ſea, empty their treaſures in Eu-
rope ; and the face of the political world is changed. Always employed on
grand objects, if I retire to ſilence and ſolitude, it is not to ſtudy the little
revolutions of goveraments, but thoſe of the univerſe ; it is not to penetrate
into the trifling ſecrets of courts, but into thofe of nature : I diſcover how the
ſea has formed mountains, and how it has encroached upon the earth; I mea-
ſure both the force which moves the ſtars, and the extent of the luminous
circles they deſcribe in the azure vault of heaven; I calculate their magnitude,
compare it with that of the earth, and bluſh at the ſmallneſs of this globe. As
I am ſo aſhamed of the hive, judge of the contempt I muſt feel for the infects
who inhabit it: the greateſt legiſlator is no more in my eye than the king of
bees.


Thus we ſee by what method of reaſoning each proves, that he himſelf .


is the poſſeſſor of the moſt noble endowments of the mind; and how excited
by the deſire of proving it to others, the men of genius and learning, recipro-
cally depreciate each other, without perceiving that each of them being in-
volved in the contempt he inſpires for his equals, becomes the {port and deri-
fion of the public, whoſe admiration he is ambitious of obtaining.

In vain would he endeavour to diminiſh the prepoſſeſſion each has entertained
in favour of his own turn of mind. We laugh at a floriſt ſtanding immovably
fixed over a bed of tulips ; he has his eyes continually upon them, and fees
nothing around him worthy of his admiration, but the fine mixture of the
colours, which, by cultivation, he has forced nature to paint : every man is
this floriſt, if he forms a judgment of the minds of men only from their know-
tedge of flowers; we alſo meaſure our eſteem for them only from the con-
formity of their ideas with our own. |


Our eſteem is ſo dependent on this conformity of ideas, that no body can


attentively examine themſelves, without perceiving, that in all the minutes


of a day, they do not afford the ſame perſon exactly the ſame degree of efteem;
and it is always to ſome one or other of theſe contradictions, inevitable in the
intimate and daily commerce with mankind, that we ought to attribute the
perpetual variation of tie thermometer of our eſteem : thus every man whoſe
ideas are not analogous to thoſe of the people with whom he converſes, is al-
ways deſpiſed by them.


The philoſopher who lives among a ſet of coxcombs, will be the jeſt and


ridicule of the company. He will find himſelf played upon by the greateſt
fool amongſt them, whoſe inſipid jokes will paſs for excellent turns of wit;
for the ſucceſs of the raillery depends leſs on the delicacy of the author's wit,
than on his attention to ridicule none but thoſe ideas that are diſagreeable to the
company. It is in pleaſantry as in pieces wrote with a party-ſpirit, which
are always admired by the cabal. |

The unjuſt contempt of particular claſſes of men for each other is, there-
fore, like the contempt of an individual for an individual, only the effect of ig-
norance and pride: a pride that is doubtleſs cenſurable, though it is wiſh.
ſary, and inherent in human nature. Pride is the ſeed of ſo many virtues and


qualifications, that we ought neither to hope its deſtruction nor attempt to


weaken it; but only to direct it to worthy purpoſes. If I here ridicule the
pride of certain perſons, I doubtleſs. do this only from another kind of pride,


perhaps.


* +38


46 DE L'ESPRIT; on,


perhaps better intended than theirs in this particular inſtance,” as being more
conformable to the general intereſt; for juſtice in judgment and actions, is
_ any thing more than the happy union between our intereſt and that of the
ublic (a). |
„ If the eſteem different ſocieties entertain for certain ſentiments and ſciences
is different according to the diverſity of paſſions, and the mental purſuits of
thoſe who compoſe ſuch ſocieties; who can doubt, but that the different ſitu-
ations of men produce the ſame effect; and that ideas, agreeable to perſons of
a certain rank, are diſagreeable to thoſe in a different ſtation ? When a war-
rior, or a merchant, expatiates before the gentlemen of the law, one on the
art of ſieges, encampments, and military evolutions, and the other on the trade
of indigo, ſugar, ſilk, and cacaos, they will be heard with leſs pleaſure and
avidity than the man who lays open the intrigues of the judges, the prero-
gatives of magiſtracy, and the manner of conducting a particular ſuit ; for he
will talk of the objects which their turn of -mind, or their vanity, renders
more particularly intereſting to them. 1

In general, people conſider with contempt the mind of a man who is in
a ſtation inferior to theirs. Whatever merit a citizen may have, he will al-
ways be deſpiſed by a man who enjoys a high poſt, if that place-man has a
weak underſtanding ; *++ Though there is, as Domat ſays, but one civil diſ-
ce tinction between a citizen and a great lord, and one natural diſtinction
ce between a man of ſenſe and a ſtupid nobleman.”

It is always then perſonal intereſt, modified according to the difference of
our wants, our paſſions, our genius, and our conditions, which combining
in various ſocieties, in an infinite number of ways, produces ſuch an aſtoniſh-
ing diverſity of opinions. | | |

It is in conſequence of this variety of intereſts, that each ſociety have their
genius, their particular manner of judging, and their favourite ſpirit, which
they would freely deify, if the fear of the cenſures of the public did not op-
poſe ſuch an apotheoſis.

Thus we ſee the reaſon why people form themſelves into different ſocieties.
There is ſcarcely a man ſo ſtupid, but, if he pays a certain attention to the
choice of his company, may ſpend his life amidſt a concert of praiſes, uttered
by ſincere admirers ; while there is not a man of ſenſe, who, if he promiſcu-
ouſly joins in different companies, will not be ſucceſſively treated as a fool,
and a wiſe man, as agreeable and tireſome, as ſtupid and a man of ge-
nius. 5

The general concluſion of what I have juſt ſaid is, that perſonal intereſt
in each ſociety is the only appraiſer of the merit of perſons and things. It only
remains to ſhew, why men the moſt generally admired and ſought after by


—


— wor — INI


(aa) Intereſt preſents objects to us only ſame light as the public. Whoever thorougly
with ſuch aſpects as appear uſeſul to us on our examines his own mind will find fo many
perceiving them. When we judge of them errors, that they will force him to be modeſt ;
as confor mable to the public intereſt, we are and, inſtead of being puffed up with his own
not ſo properly to do honour to a juſt manner abilities, he will be ignorant of his ſuperio-
of — or to our love of juſtice, as to rity. Good ſenſe like health, when we have
being accidentally placed in ſuch a ſituation it, we do not perceive it. .

as makes it our intereſt to ſee objects in the


par-


ESSAYS o ru MIND. 47


particular ſocieties, ſuch as thoſe of which the ſuperior ſtations are compoſed,
are not always eſteemed by the public. |


FFC |
CH At. 26 | |
Of the difference between the judgments of the Public and thoſe of Private


Societies.
| |
O dicover the cauſe of the difference between the judgments formed by
the public and by private ſocieties, it muſt be obſerved, that a nation is
only an aſſemblage of the citizens of which it is compoſed : that the intereſt U
of each citizen is always by ſome ties attached to the public intereſt: that like | | 1
the ſtars, which ſuſpended in the deſerts of ſpace, are there moved by two |
principal motions, the firſt ſlow (a), in common with the whole univerſe, and
the ſecond more rapid, and peculiar to thoſe bodies: ſo each ſociety is moved by
two different kinds of intereſt. Ts
The firſt and weaker is in common with the whole ſociety in general, that is, | [
with the nation; and the ſecond more powerful, is abſolutely peculiar to the
individual. = | X |
Conſequently from theſe two kinds of intereſt ariſe two kinds of ideas,
adapted to pleaſe private ſocieties. |
One, which more immediately relates to the public intereſt, and has for its
object, laws, politics, commerce, war, arts, and ſciences : in this ſpecies of ideas,
every individual is intereſted; this ſpecies is conſequently the more generally,
and at the ſame time, the more weakly eſteemed by moit private ſocieties. I
ſay by moſt, becauſe there are ſocieties, ſuch as thoſe of the academical kind,
where the ideas moſt generally uſeful are ſuch as are the moſt particularly
agreeable, and where perſonal intereſt is by that means confounded with the
public intereſt. |
The other ſpecies of ideas has an immediate relation to the private intereft
of each little ſociety ; that is, to the taſtes and averſions, to the projects and plea-
ſures of its members. It is therefore more intereſting and more agreeable, in
the eyes of thoſe of this ſociety, who are commonly indifferent enough with
reſpect to the public intereſt. |
This diſtinction being admitted, whoever acquires a very great number
of ideas of this laſt kind, that is, of thoſe ideas that are particularly intereſting
to the ſociety in which he lives, will conſequently be regarded by them as a
man of abilities: but if this man appears in a public light, either by writing a
work, or by being raiſed to a high poſt, he will frequently appear in a very mean
light. Thus a voice appears charming in the chamber, that is too weak tor
the theatre. |
When a man, on the contrary, is wholly poſſeſſed by ideas, in which the
whole community in general are intereſted, he will be leſs agreeable to the


—


— —— —


(a) According to the ſyſtem of the antient philoſophers,


ſocieties


be DE L'ESPRIT, os,


ſocieties among whom he ſpends his time. To them he will ſometimes appear
inſipid, and out of his ſphere ; but if he is placed in a public light either by
writing a new work, or being raiſed to an eminent poſt, his genius will then
ſhine, and he will merit the title of a man of ſuperior abilities. He is a large
Coloſſal ſtatue that appears diſagreeable in the ſculptor's workſhop, but being
raiſed in a public ſquare, becomes the admiration of the citizens.

But why do not people unite in their own minds both theſe kinds of ideas,
and obtain at once the eſteem both of the nation in general, and of the indivi-
Uuals ? This is, I reply, becauſe the kind of ſtudy to which a man muſt apply
himſelf, in order to acquire ideas wherein the public is concerned, and to ob-
tain thoſe that relate to the private ſocieties af claſſes among mankind, are
abſolutely different. | .

If we would pleaſe the world, we muſt not dive too deep into any ſubject,
but ſkim inceſſantly from one ſubject to another. Our knowledge ſhould be
various, and for that reaſon it muſt be ſuperficial; we ſhould know eve
thing without loſing our time in learning to know every thing perfectly; and
conſequently give our knowledge more ſurface than depth. 55

Now the public has no intereſt in eſteeming men who are univerſally
ſuperficial; they perhaps do not even do them ſtrict juſtice, and never give
themſelves the trouble to meaſure the abilities of a mind filled with too
many different kinds of knowledge. It being only for their intereſt to eſteem
thoſe who render themſelves ſuperior in one kind, and by that means improve
the ſum of human knowledge; the public ought therefore to ſet but little value
on the ſuperficial attainments of the multitude. | | ;

We ought then, in order to obtain a general eſteem, to give our know-
ledge more depth than ſurface ; and to concentre, if I may ſo expreſs mylelf
as in the focus of a burning glaſs, all the heat and rays of the mind. How
then is it poſſible to divide our application to theſe two kinds of ſtudy, ſince
the life we muſt lead to follow either the one or the other is entirely different?
We can have therefore only one of theſe ſpecies of knowledge without the
bother. . . |

If, in order to acquire thoſe ideas in which the public are intereſted, it is
neceſſary, as I ſhall prove in the following chapters, to have recourſe to ſilence
and ſolitude; it is, on the contrary, neceſſary, in order to preſent before pri-
vate ſocieties ſuch ideas as are moſt agreeable to them, to mix entirely with
the multitude, with whom it is impoſſible to live without filling our heads
with falſe and puerile ideas: I ſay falſe, becauſe every man who is acquainted
with only one ſettled manner of thought, neceſſarily conſiders thoſe of the
claſs with whom he converſes as the moſt excellent ſociety in rhe univerſe :
he is led to imitate the different nations in the contempt they mutually ſhew
for the manners, religion, and even the different drefles of each other; where

every thing appears ridiculous, that does not reſemble what they have been
" accuſtomed to behold ; and conſequently they fall into errors of the groſſeſt
kind. Whoever warmly engages himſelf in the little intereſts of private ſo.
cieties muſt neceſſarily place too great an eſteem on trifles. |

Therefore, who can flatter himfelf with here eſcaping the ſnares of ſelf-love,
when he ſees that there is no attorney in his office, no counſeller in his cham-


ber,


ESSAYS on Tur MIND. 49


ber, no merchant in his compting-houſe, no officer in his garriſon, who does
not believe, that the attention of mankind is fixed on him (b)? 9.
Every one may apply to himſelf this tale of a mother in one of the con-
vents, who being witneſs of a diſpute between the aſſiſtant and her ſuperior,
aſked the firſt ſne found in the parlour, Do you know that mother Cecilia,
and mother Thereſa have juſt been quarrelling? But you are ſurprized?
Bleſs me ! is it poſſible that you can be really ignorant of their quarrel ? Where
do you come from? We are all of us more or; this mother: that
in which we and our companions are employed, mult be the employment of
all mankind ; what we think, believe, and ſay, muſt be thought, believed,
and ſaid by the whole univerſe. | | |
How a courtier who lives amidſt a variety of company, where nothing is
talked of but the cabals and intrigues of the court, of thoſe who riſe into cre-
dit, or fall into diſgrace, and who, in the extenſive circle of his acquaintance,
ſees no body who is not more or leſs affected with the ſame ſubjects; how,
I fay, can this courtier avoid perſuading himſelf, that the intrigues of the
court are the objects moſt worthy of meditation, and ſuch as are the moſt
generally intereſting to the human mind? Can he imagine that at the ſhop
next to his own houſe, the people neither know him, nor any of thoſe who
are the ſubjects of his converſation ; that they do not even ſuſpect the exiſtence
of the things that ſo warmly affect his imagination; that in a corner of his
garret, there lives a philoſopher, to whom the intrigues and cabals formed
by an ambitious man to obtain the ribbons of all the orders of knighthood
in Europe, appear as puerile, and even leſs rational, than a plot formed by


ſome ſchool-boys, to ſteal a box of ſugar-plums ; and in whoſe opinion the
ambitious are only old children, who think themſelves men ? | A

A courtier could never imagine, that any perſon living had ſuch ſentiments;
if he came to ſuſpect it, he would be like the king of Pegu, who having aſked
ſome Venetians the name of their ſovereign ; and they anſwering, that they
were not governed by kings, thought this anſwer ſo ridiculous, that he burſt


into laughter.


8 s 17 „ AE AR -


*


(b) What pleader is there, who is not in


an extaſy at the reading of his Factum,


and does not conſider it as a more ſerious
and important affair than the works, not only
of Fontenelle, but of all the philoſophers
who have written on the knowledge of the
heart, and of the human —
The works of the latter, ſays he, are amuſing,


but frivolous, and by no means worthy of


being the object of ſtudy.

To ſhew in a clear light the importance
which every perſon gives to his own employ-
ments, I ſhall here quote ſome lines from the
preface of a book intitled, A treatiſe on the
Nightingale: „I have, ſays the author, em-
<« ployed twenty years in compoſing this
« work. Men of reflexion have always main-
'<« tained, that the greateſt and the moſt re-


oy


—


& fined pleaſure we are capable of taſting in


this world, is that which refults from our


being ſenſible that we are of ſome uſe to ſo-
& ciety : this we ought to have in view in all
our actions; and he who does not thus em-
<< ploy himſelf in doing all he can to pro-


«© mote the general good of mankind, ſeems
<< to be ignorant, that he is born as much for


ec the advantage of others, as for his own.


Such are the motives that have engaged me
ce to preſent to the public, this Treatiſe on
the Nightingale.” Some lines after, the
author adds: . That love of the public wel-
« fare which has induced me to publiſh this


work, has not ſuffered me to forget, that it
<« ought to be written with frankneſs and ſin-
* | 5 2:47 00th


-


H . The


—ͤ—ä04œä' - — 2—— — A


50 ESPRIT; oh,


The great, *tis true, arẽ in general not ſubject to his ſuſpicions; every one
of them believes, that he fills a large and conſpicuous ſpace on this globe;
and imagines, that there is only one turn of thought, which ought to be the
ſtandard of thinking among mankind ; and that this manner of thinking is
that of all thoſe with whom he converſes. If from time to time, he hears,
that there are opinions different from his own, he perceives them only as at
a diſtance, where the objects are confuſed, and imagines them confined to the
heads of a ſmall number of ſtupid mortals. He is, in this reſpect, as filly
as the Chineſe geographer, who, filled with an extravagant love tor his native
country, drew a map of the world, that was almoſt entirely covered by the
empire of China, on the confines of which, could juit be perceived Aſia,
Africa, Europe, and America. Each is to himſelf the whole univerſe, and the
others are nothing. | 5

We ſee then, that a man being forced to render himſelf agreeable to the
little ſociety in which he is placed; to apply himſelf to trifling concerns, and to
adopt a thouſand prejudices, he muſt inſenſibly crowd his brain with an in-
finite number of ideas that will appear abſurd and ridiculous, when expoſed to
the public obſervation. |

I however, with great pleaſure obſerve, that by theſe courtiers. I do not
mean all in high ſtations: a Turenne, a Richelieu, a Luxembourg, a Row
chefoucault, a Retz, and many others prove, that folly is not the neceſſary
lot of all in an elevated rank; and that by the above we are to underſtand only
thoſe who never move, but in their own vortices. 7 |

Theſe are the men whom the public have, with ſuch good reaſon, conſidered:
as abſolutely void of ſenſe. I ſhall bring as a proof of it their ridiculous and
excluſive pretenſions, to an elegant manner of ſpeaking and a polite beha-
viour. Theſe pretenſions I the more freely chuſe as an example, becauſe
the young men, the dupes of the jargon of the world, too often take affecta-
tion for wit, and good ſenſe for folly.


STEEEEEEEEEEEENSEEEEEEELEENEEEEEESEEENEEESEEELESERESSHESS®:


KA NR IK;
Of an elegant manner of Speaking, and a polite Bebaviour.


| TA: Leng little ſociety divided by taſte and intereſt, reſpectively accuſe each
other with having a bad manner of ſpeech; that of the young men diſ-
pleaſes the old, that of the paſſionate man he who is of a phlegmatic diſpo-
ſition, and that of the monk the man of the world. |

If they underſtand by a good, or elegant manner, that proper to pleaſe
equally in all companies ; there is no man who has a good manner. . For,
in order to be poſſeſſed of this qualification, he ought te be acquainted
with all kinds of knowledge, all kinds of wit, and. perhaps all the different
jargons ; which is abſolutely impoſſible. We can then only underſtand
the words, Elegant Manner, that kind of converſation where both the ideas
and the expreſſions in which they are cloathed ought the moſt generally adapted to


pleaſe,


E SS AT S {on ene: ME NGD.. 51


Pleaſe. Now the elegant manner, thus defined, belongs to no one claſs of men in
particular, but only to thoſe who employ themſelves upon grand and important
ſubjects; and being verſed in the arts and ſciences, as morality, metaphy-
ſics, war, commerce, and politics, conſtantly preſent to the mind objects
that are of the utmoſt importance to human beings. This kind of converſa-
tion is doubtleſs the moſt generally intereſting; but it is not, as I have al-
ready obſerved, the moſt agreeable to ſome particular ſocieties. Every
one of theſe ſocieties regards their manner of ſpeaking as ſuperior to that of
the men of wit, and that of the men of wit as ſimply ſuperior to that of every
other kind. | |

Little ſocieties are, in this reſpect, like the peaſants of different provinces,
who ſpeak more readily the jargon of their own village than the language
of the nation; but prefer the national language to the dialeCt of any of the other
provinces. A good manner of ſpeaking is what each ſociety conſiders as
the beſt except his own, and that this manner is that of the men of wit.

I however confeſs, that were it neceſſary to chuſe to which manner we
ought to give the preference, it would, beyond all contradiction, fall to that of
the courtiers. Not but that a citizen has as many ideas : both frequently talk
without a meaning; and with reſpect to ideas, neither has any advantage over
the other; but the former, from the advantages of his ſituation, obtains *
thoſe ideas that are more generally intereſting. | |

In fact, if the manners, the inclinations, the prejudices, and the character of
kings, have a conſiderable influence on the happineſs or unhappineſsof the public,
every circumſtance relating to them mult be highly intereſting. The converſation
of a man attached to the court, who cannot ſpeak of his own employments,
without frequently mentioning his maſter, is therefore not ſo infipid as that of
a citizen. Beſides, perſons of high rank, being generally raifed greatly above
want, and having ſcarcely any thing elſe to do but to render themſelves
agreeable, it is certain that their converſation muſt, in this reſpect alſo, re-
ceive great advantages from their ſtation ; this generally renders the ladies of
the court ſo ſuperior to other women in graces, in wit, and vivacity ; and for
this reaſon the women of genius are almoſt entirely compoſed of the ladies
of the court. | PET {PRE

But though the manner of ſpeaking at court, is ſuperior to that of the citi-
zen, the great, not having always curious anecdotes to repeat of the private
life of kings, their converſation moſt commonly turns on the privileges of their
employments, on thoſe of their birth, on their adventures of gallantry, and
on the ridiculous incidents of an evening; converſations that mult appear
inſipid to moſt other ſocieties. | | |

Courtiers are then exactly in the ſame caſe as perſons cloſely employed in
any buſineſs or mechanic art ; they make them the only and perpetual ſubject
of converſation: in conſequence of this, they are taxed with a bad manner
of ſpeaking ; becauſe thoſe who are diſguſted always revenge themſelves by
giving a contemptuous word to thoſe who fill them with diſguſt. x

It will be replied perhaps, That no ſociety accuſes the great of having a
bad manner of expreſſion; but if moſt ſocieties are filent in this reſpect, it is
becauſe it is impoſed upon them by birth and titles, which prevent their diſ-

covering their ſentiments, and frequently hinders their countenancing them,
2 even


|


. DE L'ESPRIT; on,


even in their own minds. To be convinced of this, let us examine a man of
good ſenſe on this ſubject. The manner in which the great expreſs themſelves,
he will ſay, is very frequently full of affectation. This manner uſed at court
was doubtleſs introduced there by ſome perſon engaged 1n intrigues, who, to


throw a veil over his deſigns, reſolved to talk without ſaying any thing: the


dupes of this affectation followed his example, without having any thing to
conceal. They borrowed the jargon of the firſt, and fancied they uttered
ſomething very fine, when they pronounced words ſo melodiouſly arrayed.
The men in place, in order to divert the great from attending to affairs of an
important nature, and to render them incapable of applying to them, applaud-
ed this manner of ſpeaking, allowed it to be termed wit, and were the firſt
in giving it that name. But whatever elogiums are given to this jargon, if
we eſtimate the merit of the pretty turns and phraſes ſo admired in polite com-
panies, by tranſlating them into another language, the tranſlation will re-
move our prejudices in their favour, and moſt of the phraſes will be found
void of ſenſe. Therefore many people have the greateſt contempt for theſe
ſhining geniuſes, and frequently repeat this verſe of the play :


«© When a good manner appears, good ſenſe retires.”


The true elegant manner of ſpeaking, is therefore, that of the man of ſenſe,


in whatſoever ſtation he is placed.

I will add, that the courtiers applying themſelves to very few ideas, are in
this reſpect inferior to men of genius, but are ſuperior to them in the manner
of expreſſing their ideas; and their pretenſions here appear beyond all contra-
diction to be well founded. Though words in themſelves are neither noble
nor mean, and in a country where the people are reſpected, as in England,
they neither do, nor ought to make this diſtinction ; yet in a monarchy, where
the people are held in no eſteem, *cis certain, that words ought to take either
the one, or the other of theſe denominations, according as they are uſed or
rejected at court; and thus the expreſſions of the courtiers muſt always be
elegant; but moſt courtiers employing themſelves only about trifles, the dic-
tionary of the noble language is for this reaſon very ſhort, and is not ſufficient
even for a romance, in which theſe of high rank, who attempt to write, often
find themſelves much inferior to men of letters (a).

With reſpect to thoſe ſubjects that are conſidered as ſerious, and at the ſame
time connected with philoſophy and the arts, experience informs us, that the great


_— — Y 9 —_ i. nt th tt * 3 2 1 8


(a) What creates the greateſt prejudice in part of eloquence, they may, in converſing on


favour of the great, is the eaſy air, and the trifles, have, on this account, the advantage


plealing geſtures that accompany their diſ-
courſe, which ought to be confidered as the


effect of the confidence neceſſarily inſpired b


the advantage of their rank; and, in this reſ-
pect, they are therefore, commonly much
ſuperior to men of learning. Now, as de-
clamation is, according to Ariſtotle, the firſt


over men of letters. An advantage which
they loſe in writing, not only becauſe they
are not then ſupported by the deluſive arts of
declamation, but becauſe their writings are
only in the ſtyle of their converſations ; and
we commonly write ill, when we write as
we ſpeak.


can


ESSAYS o ru MIND. 53


can here ſcarcely ſtammer out their meaning (b): whence it follows, that in
regard to expreſſion, they are not ſuperior to men of learning ; and that, in
this reſpect, they have no advantage over common men, except in trifling,
which they have made their ſtudy, and in a manner formed into a particular
art; but this ſuperiority is not yet well eſtabliſhed, and yet almoit all men
exaggerate it, from a mechanical reſpect they ſhew to birth and titles.
But ridiculous as this excluſive privilege of having a good manner of ſpeak-
ing may appear in the great, it is leſs a-ridicule peculiar to their ſtation, than
to human nature. Why ſhould not pride perſuade the great that they, and thoſe
of their claſs, are endued with minds more adapted to pleaſe in converſation,
when the ſame pride has fully perſuaded nearly all men in general, that na-
ture has lighted the ſun only to give fertility to this little point called the
earth, and diſſeminated the firmament with ſtars, only to enlighten it during the
night ? | |
| Men are vain, full of contempt, and . conſequently unjuft, whenever they
can be ſo with impunity. For which reaſon, all men imagine, that on this globe
there is no part of it; in this part of the earth, no nation; in the nation, no
province; in the province, no city; in the city, no ſociety comparable to ours;
we think ourſelves ſuperior to all our acquaintance; and, ſtep by ſtep, ſur-
prize ourſelves into a ſecret perſuaſion, that we are the firſt perſons in the
univerſe (c). Thus fooliſh as the excluſive pretenſions to an elegant manner
of ſpeaking may be, and how ridiculous ſoever the public may repreſent the
great in this reſpect, this folly will always meet with favour from an indul-
gent and ſound philoſophy, which ought to ſpare them the mortification of
taſting the bitterneſs of uſeleſs remedies. 8
If an oyſter, confined within his ſhell, is acquainted with no more of the uni-
verſe than the rock on which it is fixed; and therefore cannot judge of its
extent: how can the courtier, involved in the midſt of a little ſociety, always
ſurrounded by the ſame objects, and acquainted with only one train of thoughts,
be able to judge of the merit of things ? =
Truth 1s never ingendered and perceived, but in the fermentation of con-
trary opinions. The univerſe is only known to us in' proportion as we be-
come acquainted with it. Whoever confines himſelf to converſing with one
ſet of companions, cannot avoid adopting their prejudices, eſpecially if they
flatter his pride.

Who can ſeparate himſelf from an error, when vanity, the companion of
ignorance, has tied him to it, and rendered it dear to him. |

Through an effect of the ſame vanity, the courtiers imagine themſelves the
ſole poſſeſſors of a polite behaviour; which, according to them, is the higheſt
merit, and without which, no ſuch thing as merit can ſubſift. They do not

perceive that this behaviour, which they call the cuſtom of the world, by
way of excellence, is only the cuſtom of thoſe with whom they converſe. Ar
Monomotapa, when the king ſneezes, all the courtiers are obliged, through


E, Py "
n_


(b) Tonly ſpeak in this chapter of thoſe of (c) See The Mock-Pedant, a comedy by
the great, who have never exerted and im- Cyrano de Bergerac. 2
proved the powers of the mind. | |


polite. -


54 D:E LES ERNI T; os.


politeneſs, to ſneeze alſo; and the ſneezing ſpreading from the court to the
city, and from the city to the provinces, the whole empire ſeems to have gotten
a cold. Who can doubt, but that there are ſome courtiers who value them-
ſelves in ſneezing in a more noble manner than other men, who do not con-
ſider themſelves, as in this reſpect, the only poſſeſſors of the polite behaviour;
and treat as bad company, or as barbarians, every individual, and all the na-
tions whoſe ſneezing appears to them leſs harmonious ? | |
Do not the inhabitants of the Marian iſlands pretend that civility confiſts
in taking hold of the foot of him to whom they would do honour, in genily
ſtroking the face, and in never ſpitting before a ſuperior. Wk,

Do not the Chiriguanes maintain, that it is proper they ſhould have breeches;
but that the politeſt manner of wearing them is under the arm, as we do our
hats? 5

Do not the inhabitants of the Philippines ſay, that it is not the buſineſs of the
huſband to make his wife taſte the firſt pleaſures of love; that this is a trouble
which he hires another to diſcharge ? Do not they add, that a girl who is a
maid at the time of her marriage is void of merit, and only worthy of con-
rempt ? } |

Do they not maintain at Pegu, that it is the moſt polite and decent beha-
viour for the king to advance into the audience-chamber, with a fan in his
hand, preceded by four of the moſt beautiful young men of the court, who
are deſtined to his pleaſures ; and are at the ſame time his interpreters, and the
heralds who declare his will ? | |

Were I to run through all the nations, I ſhould every where find a different
behaviour (d): and each people, in particular, would neceſſarily think them -
ſelves in the poſſeſſion of that which is the moſt polite. Now, if there is no-
thing more ridiculous than ſuch pretenſions, even in the eyes of our courtiers ;
if they do but return from theſe to themſelves, they will ſee that, under diffe-


rent names, they ridicule their own conduct.


To prove that what they here call,


The cuſtom of the world, * far


from being univerſally pleaſing, that it muſt generally diſpleaſe, let us tranſport
ſucceſſively, the petit maitre moſt learned in the geſtures, attitudes, and beha-


viour called, The cuſtom of the world, to China, Holland, and England; and


—_


—


(d) In the kingdom of Juida, when the
inhabitants meet, they throw themſelves
down from the hammocks in which they are;
place themſelves on their knees over againſt
each other ; kiſs the ground, clap their hands,
make their compliments, and riſe. The peo-


ple in this country certainly believe that their


manner of ſaluting is the moſt polite. _
The inhabitants of the Manillas ſay, that
politeneſs requires that they ſhould bow their
bodies very low, put each of their hands on
their cheeks, and raiſe up one foot from the
ground, keeping the knees bent,
The ſavage of New Orleans maintained,


4


*


that we failed in politeneſs towards our kings.
«© When I preſent myſelf, ſaid he, to the


« oreat chief, I ſalute him with a howl;


&« then I run to the bottom of the cabbin, with-
out caſting a ſingle glance to the right-ſide
« when the chief is ſeated. There I renew
* my ſalutation, raiſing my hands upon my
c head, and howling three times. The
& chief invites me to fit by a low figh : upon
« which I thank him with another howl. At
«every queſtion the chief aſks me, I howl
© once before I anſwer him; and I take leave
of him by drawling out a how! till I am out
& of his preſence.” 2
with


ESSAYS on Tus M I N D. 35
_


with him ſend a man of ſenſe, whoſe ignorance in theſe particulars has occa-
ſioned his being treated as ſtupid, or as bad company; it is certain, that the
latter will paſs among theſe ſeveral people as better inſtructed in the true be-
haviour of the world than the former?

But whence would they form ſuch a judgment? It is, becauſe reaſon, inde
pendent of the modes and cuſtoms of a country, is no where a ſtranger, and
no where ridiculous; but, on the contrary, the cuſtoms of a country where
they are unknown, always render him who obſerves them ridiculous, in propor-
tion as he is more attentive to fulfil what he believes to be polite behaviour ?

If, to avoid the dull and methodical air that is held in abhorrence by good
company, our young men often play the fool; who can doubt but that, in the
eyes of the Engliſh, the Germans, and the Spaniards, our petit maitre will
not appear the more ridiculous, as they are more attentive to- perform what
they believe to be polite behaviour ? | 159 | |

It is therefore certain, at leaſt if we may judge from the reception given to
our perſons of diſtinction in foreign countries, that what they call the uſage
of the world, is ſo far from pleaſing univerially, that it muſt be more gene-
rally diſpleaſing; and that it is as different from the true cuſtom of the world,
which is always founded on reaſon, as civility is from true politeneſs.

The one only ſuppoſes manners; the other a refined, delicate, and habi-
tual benevolence to mankind. 7 |

However, though there is nothing more ridiculous than theſe excluſive pre-
tenſions to an elegant manner of expreſſion, and a polite behaviour, it is ſo
difficult, as I have obſerved above, to live in the ſocietes of the great, without
adopting ſome of their errors, that men of ſenſe, who are moſt on their guard,
are not always ſure of keeping clear of them. Hence, errors of this kind are
extremely multiplied, which has determined the public to place the agreeable
in the rank of the falſe and little geniuſes : I ſay little, becauſe the mind which
is neither great nor little in itſelf, always borrows one or other of theſe deno-
minations from the grandeur or the ſmallneſs of the objects it conſiders;
and the courtiers can ſcarce apply themſelves to any other but little objects. |
It follows from the two preceding chapters, that the public intereſt is al-
moſt always different from that of private ſocieties; and that, in conſequence-
of this, the men moſt eſteemed in theſe ſocieties, are not always, in-the opinion
of the public, moſt worthy of eſteem. _ |

I ſhall now ſhew, that thoſe who merit the greateſt eſteem from the public,
muſt, by their manner of living and turn of thought, be mott diſagreeable to
private ſocieties. | | 2


CHAP.


36 pE L'ESPRIT; on,
SILSI0D0S0S90SSIS00000I0000002000000009


.


Why men admired 5 yy the public, are not always eſteemed by the men of
the world. |


N order to pleaſe private ſocieties, it is not neceſſary the horizon of our ideas

ſhould be very capacious; but we ought to engage in converſation, and
to ſtudy and know the world: on the contrary, to obtain a great reputation
in any art or ſcience whatſoever, and by that means to obtain the public
eſteem, requires, as I have faid above, a very different kind of ſtudy.

Suppoſe men deſirous of ſtudying moral philoſophy ; it is only by the aſſiſt-
ance of hiſtory, and the wings of meditation, that they can, according
to the different powers of their minds, raiſe themſelves to different heights ;
whence one diſcovers cities, another nations, this one part of the world, and
the other the whole univerſe. It is only by contemplating the earth in this
point of view, and railing to this height, that it inſenſibly diminiſhes, under
the eye of the philoſopher, to a ſmall ſpace; and to his view takes the form of
a village inhabited by different families that bear the name of Chineſe, Engliſh,
French, Italian, and in ſhort, all thoſe we give to the different nations. - Thus,
bringing before him the manners, laws, cuſtoms, religions, and the different
paſſions that actuate mankind, he becomes almoſt inſenſible, both to the praiſe
and the ſatire of nations, can break all the chains of prejudice, examine with
a tranquil eye the contrary opinions that divide the human ſpecies; paſs, with-
out aſtoniſhment, from a ſeraglio to a chartreuſe, contemplate with pleaſure
the extent of human folly, and ſee, with — eye, Alcibiades cut off the
tail of his dog, and Mahomet ſhut himſelf up in a cavern, the one to ridicule
the folly of the Athenians, and the other to enjoy the adoration of the world.

Now ſuch ideas never preſent themſelves but in ſilence and ſolitude. If the
muſes, ſay the poets, love the woods, meadows, and fountains, it is becauſe
they enjoy there, the tranquility that flies from cities. The reflections made
there on himſelf, by a man detached from the little intereſts of ſociety, are
the reflections made on man in general: they therefore belong to, and pleaſe
human nature. Now, in this ſolitude, where we are, in a manner, in ſpite of
ourſelves, led to the ſtudy of arts and ſciences; how then can we employ our-
ſelves in the little affairs that are the daily entertainment of the men of the
world? | |

Hence, our Corneille, and la Fontaine, have ſometimes appeared inſipid
amidſt the ſprightly mirth of good company; their merit itſelf has contributed
to make them thought ſo. How can the men of the world diſcover the illuſtri-
ous man under the cloak of modeſty? There are few men ſkilled in true
merit. If moſt of the Romans, as Tacitus ſays, deceived by the mildneſs and
3 of Agricola, ſought for the great man under his exterior modeſty,
without being able to find him; we muſt be ſenſible that, happy in eſcaping the

5 con-


ESSAYS o ru MIND. =


rontempt of private ſocieties, the great man, eſpecially if he be modeſt, muſt
renounce a Felt-eſteem for moſt of them. He is therefore, but feebly
moved by the deſire of pleaſing them. He has a confuſed idea, that the
eſteem of theſe ſocieties can only prove the analogy between his ideas and
theirs ; that this analogy would often be of little advantage to his reputation,
and that the public eſteem is the only one worthy of envy; the only one de-
fireable; ſince it is always a teſtimony of the public gratitude, and conſequent- G
ly a proof of real merit. The great man therefore, incapable of any of the
efforts neceſſary to pleaſe private ſocieties, finds every thing poſſible in his en -
deavours to merit the general eſteem. As the pride of commanding kings
recompenſed the Romans for enduring the ſeverity of military diſcipline, ſo the
noble pleaſure of being eſteemed, comforts the illuſtrious man, even under the
unjuſt frowns of fortune; and if he has obtained this eſteem, he thinks him-
ſelf the poſſeſſor of the moſt deſirable wealth. In fact, whatſoever indifference
vue affect to ſhew for the public opinion, every one ſeeks for ſelf-eſteem, and
believes that he is more worthy of it, in proportion as he finds himſelf more
generally eſteemed, |
As our wants, our paſlions, and above all, our indolence, does not ſtifle in
our minds this deſire of eſteem, there is no perſon who does not ſtrive to de-
ſerve it, and does not delire the public ſuffrage as a ſurety for the high opinion
he has of himſelf, Therefore, a contempt for reputation, and the ſacrifice ſaid
to be made of it to fortune and reflection, is always inſpired by the deſpair of
rendering ourſelves illuſtrious. |
We boaſt of what we have, and deſpiſe what we have not. This is a neceſ-
ſary effe& of pride; and we ſhould rebel againſt it, were we not its dupes.
It would in this caſe be too cruel to inform a man of the true motives of his
contempt, and merit is never led to commit ſo barbarous an action. Every
man, (let me be permitted to obſerve by the way) when he is not born wicked,
and when his paſſions do not extinguiſh the light of reaſon, will be always
more indulgent, in proportion as he is more enlightened. That this is a
truth, I ſhall the more readily prove, as by doing juſtice in this reſpect, to
the man of merit, I ſhall be able, even from the motives of his indulgence,
the more plainly to ſhew the cauſe of the little value he ſets on the eſteem of
particular ſocieties, and conſequently the little ſucceſs he can have in obtain-
ing it. | | „„
Ff the great man is always the moſt indulgent; if he conſiders as a bene- -
fit, all the evil that is not done him, and as a gift, all that the wickedneſs of
mankind ſuffer him to enjoy z if he pours over the faults of others, the lenient
balm of pity, and is flow in diſcovering them; it is becaule the elevation of
his mind will not permit him to expatiate upon the vices and follies of ſingle
perſons, but upon thoſe of mankind in general. If he conſiders their faults,
it“ is not with the malevolent eye of envy, which is always unjuſt, but with
the ſerenity wherewith two men, deſirous of knowing the human heart, and
of obtaining a knowledge of the mind, reciprocally examine each other as two
ſubjects of inſtruction, and two living ſtreams of moral experience; very diffe-
rent, in this reſpect, from the half wits ;- who, ambitious of a reputation that
flies from them, bloated with the poiſon of jealouſy, and inceſſantly upon
the watch for the faults of others, loſe all their little merit, if men ceaſe to be-
| I come


58 DE L'ESPRTT;, on, |
come ridiculous. The knowledge of the human mind is not to be obtained
by ſuch men as theſe: they are formed only to extinguiſh noble talents by
the efforts they make to ſtifle them. Merit is like gunpowder,. the ſtrength
of whoſe exploſion is in proportion to the degree in which it is compreſſed.
But, what hatred ſoever we bear. to theſe envious perſons, they are more
ro be pitied than blamed. The preſence of merit gives them pain : it they
attack it as an enemy, and if they are wicked, it is becauſe they are unhappy ;..
it is becauſe they endeavour to puniſh the offence merit has given to their va--
nity : their crimes are only acts of revenge. |

Another motion of the indulgence granted by the man of merit, ſprings
from the knowledge of the human mind. He has ſo often experienced its
weaknels, in the midſt of the applauſes of an Areopagus, that he is frequently
tempted, like Phocion, to return to his friend, to afk him if he had not uttered.
ſomething very fooliſn; and being always on his guard againſt. vanity, he
freely excuſes in others, the errors into which he himſelf has fometimes fallen.
He perceives that it is to the multitude of fools we. owe the expreflion a man of
genius;“ and that, in gratitude, he ought to bear, without being. offended...
the abuſe thrown upon him by men of mean abilities. He knows, that if theſe
laſt ſecretly boaſt among themſelves of their rendering merit ridiculous, and
of the contempt they pretend to feel for it, they are like thoſe bullies in im-
piety who blaſpheme with trembling. 3&4 | ;

The Jaſt cauſe I ſhall mention of the indulgence ſhewn by men of merit,
ſprings from the clear views of the neceſſity of human deciſions. They know
that our ideas, if | may thus venture to expreſs myſelf, ſo neceſſarily. proceed
from the company we keep, the books we read, and the objects preſented to
our ſight, that a ſuperior intelligence might equally divine our thoughts, from
the objects preſented before us; and, from our thoughts, divine. the. number.
and nature of the objects offered to the mind. 2 4675

The perſon of diſcernment knows that men are what they were deſigned to
be; and that all hatred againſt them is therefore unjuſt ;:that a fool bears follies
as a. wild ſtock bears bitter fruit; that to inſult him, is to reproach the oak.
for bearing acorns, and not olives; that if the man of mean abilities appears
ftupid to him; he in return appears a. fool to the man of abilities; for
as all fools are void of underſtanding, a man of genius will always appear a
fool to a man of mean intellects. Indulgence then is always the effect of ſu-
perior light, when it is not intercepted by the paſſions. But that indulgence, .
principally founded on the elevation of ſoul inſpired by the love of glory, ren-
ders the man of abilities very different with reſpect to the eſteem of private
ſocieties. Now this indifference, joined to a different kind of life, and to ſtudies
very unlike thoſe that are neceſſary to pleate either the public, or what is called
good company, will almoſt always render a man of merit diſagreeable to the
men of the world. tis 7 | | uf

The general concluſion of what I have faid on the mind, in regard to parti-
cular ſocieties is, that ſolely employed about their own intereſt, each fociety
meaſures on the ſcale of the ſame intereſt the degree of eſteem it grants to diffe-
rent kinds of underſtandings and ideas. It is with very fmall ſocieties, as with a ſin-
gle perſon, who, if he has a ſuit at law of great confequence, will receive his ad-
vocate with more complaiſance, and with greater teſtimonies of reſpect andefteem,
$297) . than


ESS ATS or Tj: MIND. 39
than he would receive Deſcartes, Locke, or Corneille; but the ſuit being endeds
he would ſhew an higher reſpect for the latter. Thus the difference of his
ſituation determines the reception he gives to each.

I would, in finiſhing this chapter, endeavour to encourage the ſmall number
of modeſt men, who, diſtracted by buſineſs, or the care of their fortunes, can
make no trial of their great talents ; and conſequently, cannot, on the prin-
ciples above eſtabliſhed, know whether, with reſpe& to geoius, they are

really worthy of eſteem. But whatever deſire I have to do them juſtice in
this reſpect, it muſt be confeſſed, that a man who declares that he has a great
genius, without giving any proof of his abilities, is exactly in the caſe of a
man who pretends to be noble, without having any titles of nobility. The
public can neither know nor eſteem any merit, that is not proved by facts.
Are they to judge of men of different ranks, they aſk the military man,
What victory have you obtained? The man in place, What relief have you
afforded to the miſeries of the people? To a private perſon, By what work
have you enlightened the human mind ? And whoever can make no anſwer
to thele queſtions, is neither known, nor eſteemed by the public.

I am ſenſible that, ſeduced by the deluſions of power, by the ſurrounding
pomp of grandeur, and the hope of the favours diſtributed by a perſon in
an important place, a great number of men mechanically acknowledge great
merit, wherever they perceive great power. But their elogiums, as fleeting
as the credit of thoſe on whom they are beſtowed, cannot impoſe on the
ſenſible part of the public. Sheltered from influence, exempt from all
private intereſt, the public jugde as the ſtranger; who acknowledges for a
man of merit, only him who is diſtinguiſhed by his talents; it is he alone
whom the ſtranger ſeeks with eagerneſs : an eagerneſs that is always pleaſing
to him who is the object of it (a). When we are not adorned with dignities,
this is a certain ſign of real merit.

He who would exactly know his own value, can then only learn it from
the public, and ought therefore to expoſe himſelf to its judgment. We
know the tidicule affected to be thrown on thoſe who attempt to obtain the
eſteem of the nation by being authors : but this ridicule makes no impreſſion
on the man of merit; he will conſider them as an effect of the jealouſy of
thoſe little minds, who imagining, that if no body gives a proof of merit, they
themſelves might the more eaſily arrive at it: this however is the only means
by which a perſon can either merit, or obtain the eſteem of the public. |

If we caſt our eyes on all thoſe great wits ſo much boaſted of in particular
companies, we ſhall ſee that, being placed by the public in the rank of men
of abilities, they owe the reputation for wit with which ſome have decorated
them, only to their being incapable of proving their folly, even by a bad
work. Thus, among theſe prodigies, thoſe who promiſe moſt, if I may
dare to uſe the expreſſion, are, with reſpe& to genius, neither more nor leſs than

a Perhaps. |


a wy 88 — =


. TY ˙ 0  _—y =» — *


a.
3 RP a. A. _. AA. A 4c. Ad


(a) Fontenelle was never better pleaſed nelle lived ? And they not being able to in-
with any elogium than with the queſtion of form him, How, faid he, are you Frenchmen
a Swede, who, entering Paris, aſked the of- ignorant of the abode of your moſt illuſtrious
hcers of the barrier, where M. de Fonte- citizens? You are unworthy of ſuch a man.


I 2 | This |


1 DE L. ESPRIT; os;


This truth, however certain it may be, and what reaſon ſoever modeſt men
have to doubt the reality of the merit that has often paſſed the crucible of
the public, yet, with reſpect to genius, a man may believe himſelf really wor-
thy of the general eſteem ; firſt, when he feels the higheſt regard for ſuch men
as are moſt eſteemed by the public and by foreign nations; ſecondly, when
he is praiſed (b), as Cicero ſays, by a man already praifed ; and laſtly, when
he obtains the eſteem of thoſe who, in their works, or in poſts of eminence,
have already diſcovered great abilities: their eſteem for him ſuppoſes a great
analogy between his ideas and theirs; and that analogy may be conſidered,
if not as a complete proof, at leaſt, as a very high probability, that if he
was, like them, expoſed to public notice, he would, like them, have a ſhare in


the public eſteem. | |

FCC
rr

Of Probity in relation to the Public.


S hall not in this chapter treat of Probity, with reſpect to a particular
perſon, or a private ſociety ;. but of true probity : of probity conſidered
in relation to the public. Thiskind of probity is the only one that really merits,
and has in general obtained the name. It is only conſidering it in this point
of view, that we can form clear ideas of honeſty, and diſcover a guide to. virtue.
Now, under this aſpect, I ſay that the public, like. particular ſocieties, is only
determined in its judgments by motives of intereſt ; that it does not give the
name of noble to great and heroic actions, but to thoſe that are of public uſe ;
and that the eſteem of the public, for ſuch and ſuch an action, is not propor-
tioned to the degree of ſtrength, courage, or generoſity, neceſſary to execute
it, but to the importance of that action, and the public advantage derived
from it. | |
In fact, when encouraged by the preſence of an army, one man alone fights
three men who are wounded : this is doubtleſs a brave action; but it is what
a thouſand of our grenadiers are capable of ; and for which they will never be
mentioned in hiſtory : bur when the ſafety of an empire formed to ſubdue
the univerſe, depends on the ſucceſs of this battle, Horatius is an hero, he is the
admiration of his fellow-citizens, and his name, celebrated in. hiſtory, is hand-
ed down to the moſt diſtant ages. | a
Two perſons threw themſelves into a gulph ; this was an action common
to Sapho and Curtius; but the firſt did it to put an end to the torments of
love, and the other to ſave Rome; Sapho was therefore a fool, and Curtius
a hero. In vain have ſome philoſophers given the name of folly to each of:
theſe actions; the public ſee clearer than they, and never gives the name of


fool to thoſe from whom it receives advantage.


1
*


1 n


„


(b) The degree of genius neceſſary to pleaſe us, is pretty nearly the ſame proportion:
that we ourſelves have. | .


CHAP.


—


ESSAYS on Tue MIND, 61


eee eee


c H A P. XII.
Of Genius in relation to the Public. |


ET us apply to Genius what I have ſaid on Probity, and we ſhall ſee
. that the public is invariable in its deciſions, and never conſults any thing bur
its intereſt ; that it does not proportion its eſteem to the different ſpecies of ge-
nius; or to the unequal difficulty of thoſe ſpecies ; that is, to the number and
delicacy of the ideas neceſſary to ſucceed ; but only to the greater or leſſer ad-
vantage derived from it. of : |

If an ignorant general gains three battles over a general ſtill more ignorant
than himſelf, he will, at leaſt, during life, be inveſted with a glory that is
never granted to the moſt excellent painter in the world. The latter has how-
ever merited the title of 'a great painter, by a remarkable ſuperiority over
other greatmaſters, and excelling in an art, without doubt leſs neceſſary, but
perhaps more difficult than that of war. I ſay more difficult, becauſe, on open-
ing hiſtory, we ſee an infinite number of men, as Epaminondas, Lucullus,
Alexander, Mahomet, Spinola, Cromwel, and Charles XII. in an inſtant ob-
tain the reputation of great generals, and the firſt day they took the command,
defeated armies ; but no painter, how happy ſoever the genius he has received
from nature, is cited among the illuſtrious painters, who has not at leaſt ſpent
ten or twelve years of his life in the preliminary ſtudies of that art. Why then
is a greater eſteem granted to an ignorant general than to an able painter?

This unequal diſtribution of glory, ſo unjuſt in appearance, proceeds from
the inequality of the advantages theſe two men procure to the nation. If
it be ſtill demanded, why the public aſcribes that ſuperior genius to an able
negotiator, which it refuſes to allow to a celebrated advocate? Does the im
portance of the affairs with which the firſt is intruſted, prove that he has a
genius ſuperior to that of the ſecond? Does it not frequently require as much
ſagacity and art to diſcuſs the intereſts, and terminate the ſuit of two lords
in a pariſh, as to pacify two nations? Why then is the public ſo avaricious
of its eſteem to the advocate, and ſo prodigal of it to the negotiator ? It is
becauſe the public, whenever it is not blinded by prejudice or ſuperſtition, is
capable of very refined reaſonings on its own concerns. The inſtin& that
makes it refer every thing to its intereſt, is like the ether, which penetrates
all bodies, without making any ſenſible impreſſion upon them. The public
has leſs need of painters and celebrated advocates, than of able generals and
negotiators ; it attaches therefore to the talents of theſe laſt the eſteem always
neceſſary to engage ſome citizen to acquire them.

On which fide ſoever we turn our eyes, we ſhall always ſee intereſt preſide
in the diſtribution the public makes of its eſteem. |

When the Dutch erected a ſtatue to William Buckelſt, who had taught
them the ſecret of ſalting and barreling herrings, they did not confer this ho-

Ds | nour


62 DE L'ESPRIT:; oa.


nour upon him on account of the extent of genius neceſſary for that diſcovery;
but from the importance of the ſecret, and the advantage it procured to the
nation. | |
When the petty Auguſtins ſent a deputation to Rome, to obtain the per-
miſſion of the holy ſeg to cut their beards, who knows, but that father Euſta-
cius employed in that negotiation as much genius and refinement as the pre-
+ ſidenrt Jeannin in his negociation in Holland? Nothing can be affirmed on this
ſubject. To what then do we attribute the ſenſation of laughter, or the eſteem
excited by theſe two different negotiations, if it be not to the difference of their
objects? We always ſuppoſe that great effects ſpring from great cauſes. A
man enjoys a high poſt, and by the poſition in which he is placed, he per-
forms great things with very ſmall abilities: this man will paſs with the multi-
tude, as far ſuperior to him as who, in an inferior poſt, and in leſs happy circum-
ſtances, can ſcarcely, with great abilities, execute little things. Theſe two
men are like unequal weights, applied to the different ends of a long lever,
where the lighteſt weight placed at one of the extremities, raiſes up a weight
ten times heavier, placed nearer the point of ſupport. | '
Now, if the public, as I have proved, always judges according to its own
intereſt, and is entirely indifferent with reſpect to all other conſiderations
and being an enthuſiaſtic admirer of the arts from which it receives advantage,
it ought not to require of the artiſts, who cultivate them, that high degree of
perfection, which is abſolutely neceſſary for thoſe who attach themſelves to
the arts leſs uſeful, and in which it is frequently more difficult to ſucceed.
Therefore, men, according as they apply themſelves to arts, more or leſs uſe-
ful, may be compared to tools and jewels : the firſt are always eſteemed good,
when the ſteel is well tempered, and the ſecond are valued only according as
they are perfect. Hence our vanity is always the more flattered with our ſuc-
ceſs, when we obtain it in a way leſs uſeful to the public, where we with
greater difficulty merit its approbation, and where the ſucceſs neceſſarily ſup-
poſes more genius and perſonal merit. |
By what different prejudices is the public affected, when it judges of the
merit of an author, or of a general ? Does it form a judgment of the firſt ? It
compares him with all thoſe who have excelled in that kind of writing, and
grants him its eſteem only as he ſurpaſſcs, or at leaſt equals, thoſe who have
preceded him. Does it judge of the merit of a general? It makes no en-
quiry, before it beſtows its praiſes, whether he equals in ability a Cæſar, a
Scipio, or a Sertorius, If a dramatic poet writes a good tragedy upon a plot
already known, Me is called a deſpicable plagiary ; but if a general, in a cam-
paign, draws up his troops in the ſame order of battle, and makes uſe of the
ſame ſtratagems that have been practiſed by a former general, he is frequently
the more eſteemed for it. | | |
If an author gains the prize over ſixty competitors, yet, if the public does
not acknowledge the merit of thoſe competitors ; or if their works are too in-
ſi znificant, the author and his ſucceſs are ſoon forgotten. ;
But when a general has triumphed, has the public, before his being crown-
ed, ever ſtated the ability and valour of the conquered ? Is the general required
to have that refined and delicate ſentiment of military glory, which at the
death of M. de Turenne, determiued M. de Montecuculi to quit the com-


mand


1


ESSAYS o Tur MI ND. : 63
mand of the army ? They can no longer, ſaid he, oppoſe againſt me, an ene-
my worthy of me. 9 |

The public then weighs in very different ſcales, the merit of an author and
that of a general. Now why does it contemn in the one, the mediocrity it
frequently admires. in the other? It is becauſe it derives no advantage from
the mediocrity of a writer ; and may derive very great ones from that of a
general, where ignorance is ſometimes crowned with ſucceſs. Its intereſt there-
fore requires, that he ſhould prize in the one, what it defpiſes in the other.

Beſides, if the public happineſs depends on the merit of men in great
employments; and if great poſts are ſeldom filled by great men, in order to
induce men of moderate abilities to perform their enterprizes with all the
| prudence and activity of which they are capable, it is neceſſary to flatter them

with the hopes of great glory. This hope alone may elevate, even to mo-
derate abilities, thoſe who would never have had them, if the public was a too
ſevere judge of their merit, and had given them a diſguſt for its eſteem, from
the difficulty of obtaining it.

This is the cauſe of the fecret indulgence with which the public forms a
judgment of men in great employments; an indulgence that is ſometimes blind
in the people, but always attended with diſcernment in the man enlightened
with knowledge. The latter knows, that men are influenced by objects that
ſurround them; that flattery,  aſfiduous with the great, is mixed with all the
inſtructions that are given them; and therefore, that we cannot, without in-
| Juſtice, demand from them as many virtues and abilities as are required from a
private perſon.

If a judicious ſpectator hiſſes at the French theatre what he applauds in the
Italian; if in a fine woman, and a pretty child, every thing is graceful, witty, .
and genteel, why ſhould the great be treated with leſs indulgence? We may
lawfully admire in them, the abilities commonly found among private ob-
ſcure perſons ; becaufe it is more difficult for them to acquire them. Spoil'd
by flattery, like handſome women by their admirers; engaged in a thou-
fand pleaſures, and diſtracted with a thouſand cares, they have not, like
a philoſopher, leiſure for thought to acquire a great number of ideas (a),
or to enlarge the bounds of their own genius, and that of the human mind.
It is not to the great that we owe diſcoveries in the arts and ſciences ;- their
hand has not formed a plan of the heavens and earth; has not built ſhips,
erected palaces, forged plow-ſhares, nor even written the firſt laws: it was
the philoſophers who poliſhed mankind, and from ſocieties of ſavages raiſed
ſocieties to the degrees of perfection, to which they are now arrived. If we
had been only aſſiſted by the knowledge of men in power, perhaps we might
yet have had neither corn for food, nor ſciſſars to-cut our nails. :


8


(a) This was it that probably made M. fmall degree of underſtanding, it is becauſe
Nicole aſſert, that God has given genius to they are ignorant, and have not contracted a
men of the common claſs, to recompenſe them habit of reflection. I ſhall however add,
for the other advantages the great have over that it is not for the intereſt of the lower
them. Though he adds, I don't believe that part of mankind, that the great ſhould be
God has condemned the great to have mean thus void of underſtandingr

abilities: but if moſt of them have but a © IS
7 | FT 1 Supe-


64 SELL ES2 NI an;


Superiority of underſtanding principally depends, as I ſhall prove in the follows
ing diſcourſe, on a certain concourle of circumſtances, wherein thoſe of the com-
mon claſs are rarely placed, and which it is almoſt impoſſible the great ſhould
ever meet with, We ought therefore to judge the great with indulgence, and
to be ſenſible that it is very uncommon to have a man of tolerable abilities
in an important poſt, |

Thus the public, eſpecially ir times of calamity, is profuſe of elogiums,
What praiſes were given to Varro for not deſpairing of the ſafety of the re-
public! In ſuch circumſtances as thoſe in which the Romans were then involv-
ed, a man of real merit is a God, |

If Camillus had foreſeen the misfortunes to which he put a ſtop ; if that hero,
when choſen general at the battle of Allia, had there deteated the Gauls he con-
quered at the foot of the capitol; Camillus, like an hundred other captains,
would not have acquired the title of the ſecond founder of Rome. If in times of
proſperity, M, de Villars had fought in Italy the battle of Denain ; and if he
had otained that victory, at a time when France did not lie open to the enemy,
the action would have been leſs important, the gratitude of the public leſs live-
ly, and the general's glory not ſo great.

The concluſion of what I have ſaid is, that the public always judges ac-
cording to the public intereſt; and if it has loſt ſight of this, it can form no
idea of either probity or genius, 1

If the nations enſlaved by deſpotic power, are the contempt of other nations;
if in the empires of Mogul and Morocco, we diſcover very few illuſtrious men ;
it is becauſe the mind, as I have already obſerved, being in itſelf neither great
nor little, borrows either of theſe denominations from the grandeur or the
ſmallneſs of the objects it contemplates. Now, in moſt arbitrary governments,
the citizens cannot, without.diſpleaſing a deſpotic prince, employ themſelves
in the ſtudy of the law of nature, or in that of the public, moral, and political.
They dare not aſcend to the- firſt principles of thoſe ſciences, nor form
grand ideas; they cannot therefore merit the title of great geniuſes. But if
all the deciſions of the public are ſubject to the law of the public intereſt, we
ought, it is ſaid, to find in this principle of the general intereſt, all the contra-
dictions we, in this reſpect, imagine to be evident in the ideas of the public.
For this propoſe, I ſhall purſue the parallel begun between the general and the
author, and purpoſe this queſtion : If the military art is, of all others the moſt
uleful, why have there been ſo many generals, whoſe glory is more eclipſed
in their life-time ; and ſo many illuſtrious men of all kinds, whoſe memory
and exploits are buried in the ſame tomb, when the glory of the authors and their
contemporaries, is ſtill preſerved in its firſt ſtate? The anſwer to this queſtion
is, that if we except the captains who have really improved the military
art, as Pyrrhus, Hannibal, Guſtavus, Conde, and Turenne, who in this
particular may be placed in the rank of models and inventors, all the generals
who were of an inferior claſs to theſe, ceaſing at their death to be of ſervice to
their country, have no longer a right to its acknowledgements, and conſe.
quently to its eſteem. Oa the contrary, the authors, in ceaſing to live, do
not ceaſe to be of uſe to the public; they have left in its hands the works that
had already merited its eſteem. Now as the gratitude ought to ſubſiſt as long
as the benefit, their glory cannot be eclipſed till the time comes, when their
works will ceaſe to be of uſe to their country. It is then only to the different

and


RE CORR FEI nos at IE et PE EC AEr E 8 n ,

2 8 N We 4 Mea; . n = fro ML Ig 1 r P * 8 5

7 1 5 8 SIN 8 RNAS. F "RIA LS E JK. S 1

28 7" 8 FS N 1 . e 1 ay 3 2 e NS We 9 8 WIE 2 4;
T8 . | & S i


I EE IS


3 r e .
2 P 8 "hs Ma iis ESTER SY ee L & 7
87 . . 8 / CE NES I R- IA a
oy CFT 3 r ooo Gr
8 725 6 95 )); ER BeEk 45S OTROS IF O21, ASS erg N 1 2


” vv Xs, 5 Fe, 2 x OY * FS nt 1 » « 7
CCC r uh, - . 15 I \ . F 72 . * oy & \ ; \
£54: 4. 3h Fo. . 1155 2 4 73 e A / / Fu © A's wo 8 IRS o 2 PERL ES LE 29 I n TR $9 n Wo 5 3
- E 7A BY n - rand * r 3 ON ar, Bn A os | OG c ⁵˙!̃—ꝑ f ꝶ CIR a Tc. 1 1 IE CTC or di EE ION, N
r SEE 2 pas BORES 5 1 WES: n r o oo EIT NIE e E r & HOY EL EL Yr FINS De Ys RIS? CRIED Np lt out OO OA RIWRY TIPS e
* . N 21 TOE 5 ATE e CCC DET ab . xc OI BR. CEL SD IRE C9 ob IANS E- 88 . 3 „jVVVTTVVV oe ee WIC RE n 8
2 8 — : # * W © 7 8 5 11 WT


ESSAYS orf Tus MIND. 63


and unequal uſe the author and the general appear to be of to the public after
their death, that we ought to attribute that ſucceſſive ſuperiority of glory,
which at different times they by turns obtain over each other. {TX

Hence we ſee the reaſon, why ſo many kings have been deified on the


\ throne, and forgotten immediately after their death; why the names of illuſ-


trios writers who, when living, were ſo rarely mentioned with princes, are
aſter their death, ſo often joined to thoſe of kings; why the name of Con-
fucius is more known, and more reſpected in Europe, than that of any of
the emperors of China; and why we place the names of Horace and Virgil by
the ſide of that of Auguſtus.

If we apply to diſtance of place, what [ here ſay of diſtance of time; if we
demand, why the illuſtrious learned is leſs eſteemed by his own cvuntry,
than an able miniſter; and for what reaſon a Roſny, who is mo:e honoured
amongſt us than a Deſcartes, is leſs eſteemed by the ſtranger ? It is, I reply,
becauſe a great miniſter is ſcarcely of any uſe but to his country: and that


in improving the inſtruments proper for the cultivation of the arts and ſciences,


in habituating the human mind to more order and juſtneſs, Deſcartes has ren
dered himſelf more uſeful to the world, and ought, conſequently to be more
reſpected by it. 5 ; * 1 fo

But, ſay they, if nations, in all their judgments, never conſult any thing
but their own intereſts, why are the huſbandman and the vine-dreſſer, who
are doubtleſs more uſeful than the poet and the geomerrician, leſs -ſteemed ?

It is becauſe the public has a confuſed ſenſation that eſteem is in its hands
an imaginary treaſure of no real value, without a wiſe and prudznt diſtri-
bution be made of it ; that conſequently efteem ought not to be attached
to labours of which all men are capable: for-efteem, then, by becoming too
common; would loſe, in a manner, all its virtue; it would no longer fertilize
the ſeeds of genius and probity, placed in all minds, and would no longer pro-
duce thoſe illuſtrious men of all kinds, whom it animates to the purſuit of
glory, by the difficulty of obtaining it. The public perceives then, that it
is the art and not the artiſt, which ought to be honoured; and that if formerly
the firſt who cultivated the earth, were 'deified under the names of Ceres and
Bacchus, this honour, ſo juſtly granted to the inventors of agriculture, ought
not to be laviſhed on labourers. * 8

In all countries where the peaſant is not overloaded with taxes, the hope of
gain, united to that of the harveſt, is ſufficient to engage him to cultivate the


earth; and I conclude from it, that in certain caſes, as has been ſhew by the


celebrated M. Duclos (b), it is the intereſt of nations to proportion their eſteem


not only to the utility of an art, but alſo to its difficulty.


Who doubts but that a collection of facts, ſuch as that of the Bibliotheque
Orientale, is not as inſtructive, as agreeable, and conſequently as uſeful, as an
excellent tragedy ? Why then has the public a greater eſteem for the tragic
poet, than for the learned compiler ? It is becauſe being convinced, by the
great number of attempts, and the few who have ſucceeded, of the difficulty
of dramatic poetry, the public is ſenſible; that to form ſuch geniuſes as thoſe


1


23


(b) See his excellent work entitled, . Conſiderations on the manners of the age.
| 2 of


*


66 DE L'ESPRIT); on,


of Corneille, Racine, Crebillon, and Voltaire, the ſucceſs ought to be attended
with infinitely more glory; and that it is ſufficient that the compilers be
honoured by a ſmaller ſhare of eſteem, in order to be abundantly ſupplied with
thoſe works of which all men are capable, and which are properly only works
of time and patience. £7.45

Among the learned, all thoſe who, deprived of the lights of philoſophy,
only form into collections facts ſcattered in the ruins of antiquity, are, in re-
lation to the man of genius, what the hewer of ſtones is to the architect;


theſe are they who furniſh the materials for the edifice ; and without them the


architect would be uſeleſs. But few men can become good architects, and
all men are capable of cutting ſtones; the intereſt of the public therefore
requires, that the firſt ſhould be paid with an eſteem proportionable to the dif-
ficulty of their art. From the ſame motive, and becauſe a ſyſtematical and
inventive genius is not commonly acquired without long and painful medi-
rations, more eſteem is granted to this kind of genius, than to any other ;
and in ſhort, in all the kinds where the utility is nearly equal, the public always
proportions its eſteems to the unequal difficulty of the ſeveral kinds.

I fay, an utility nearly equal; becauſe, if it were poſſible to imagine a kind
of abilities abſolutely uſeleſs, whatſoever diſficulty there might be in excelling
in it, the public would grant no efteem to ſuch a talent : he who had acquired
it would be treated as Alexander treated the man who, in his preſence, darted,
it is ſaid, with wonderful addreſs, grains of millet-ſeed, through the eye of a
needle, and obtained nothing from the equity of that prince, but a buſhel of
millet-ſeed for his reward. |

The contradiction that ſometimes ſeems obſervable between the intereſt and
the judgment of the public, is then only apparent; and the public intereſt, as
I had propoſed to prove, is therefore the ſole diſtributor of the eſteem granted
ro different kinds of genius. | | |


eee eee eee eee eee


EH a .


Of probity in relation to various ages and nations.


1 N all ages and nations, probity can be only an habit of performing actions
that are of uſe to our country. However certain this propoſition may be,
to render this truth the more evident, I ſhall endeavour to give a clear and
ful! idea of this virtue. |

To this purpoſe, I ſhall examine two ſentiments on this ſubject, that have hi-
therto divided the moraliſts.

Some maintain, that we have an idea of virtue abſolutely independent of
different ages and governments; and that virtue is always one and the ſame.
þ 5m others maintain, on the contrary, that every nation- forms a different idea
Ol it.


2 The


0


7
ol
7
e
AID
I 5 nt
=»
12
5 7
*
Nee
PS,
BEL;
>! Bonk
3
5
7 7
*
N
SF;
AE
FL
Ie
8
=,
Sy
Tt
1
FO
95
92
my
Fo
REA
' 1
7 82
Re
3
SEO
EI
7
.
mg
= OX
3
EL.
5
5 Xe
8
e
by
2
Jy Ce
.
* > *
Tt
EO
"Pts
7 1
1
rh 5
1 2
DE»,
1
n
FUEL

8
7
2
N
1
TT,
N
n
ns
Ob Ac,
Sys 7.

BE
55 N
7 x
9
8
> ROY
=
N

n

0 5

.
3
3
A
3
3 1

3

1
8
*
"Lg
1
3
ESTES
.
24
r
2 N
Va * "x 5
Ts JF; 5

+ 200

*

1

1
Wed...

*

1

3

98

1

RR >

1
>. ra
3
35 Vs 2
4

Roan $9”

*- Fab

WS,

- - NR

os ©. *

Wy

Fs -

+

* 2
a. \.

3

1

N

2

1

3

"1

- 2

- 4

.

„
- 1
2 —
RAG
Ss;

PRs. =,

75 *
.*
4

3
n
be REES

"IE

4+I%

+ 8

4 _

„

N

2 1 Fi

3

5 Vp
> Iu
"0
1
8

WES

+1 £

3

1 "7 *

1
3
3

2

<A

EE


1
WIS 1
« 4


ESSAYS or run MIN D. 67


The firſt bring, in proof of their opinions, the ingenious, but unintelligible
dreams of the Platoniſts. Virtue, according to them, is nothing but the idea |
of order, harmony, and eſſential beauty. But this beauty is a myſtery of which | |
they can convey no fixed ideas: they therefore do not eſtabliſh their ſyſtem |
on the knowledge which hiſtory affords us of the human heart, and the powers
of the mind. 5 |

The ſecond, and amongſt them Montaigne, with arms more ſtrangely tem- |
pered than thoſe of reaſoning, that is, with facts, attack the opinion of the |
firſt; prove that an action virtuous in the north, is vicious in the ſouth ; and
from thence conclude, that the idea of virtue is merely arbitrary.

Such are the opinions of theſe two ſects of philoſophers. Thoſe, from their
not having conſulted hiſtory, err in a metaphyſical labyrinth of words: theſe,
from their not having examined with ſufficient depth the facts preſented by hiſto- |
ry, have thought that caprice alone decided the goodneſs or turpitude of human
actions. Theſe two philoſophical ſects are deceived ; but they would both have
eſcaped error, had they, with an attentive eye, conſidered the hiſtory of the
world. They would then have perceived, that time mult neceſſarily produce,

in the phyfical and moral world, revolutions that change the face of empires;
that in the great cataſtrophes of kingdoms, the people always experience great
changes; that the ſame actions may ſucceſſively become uſetul and prejudicial,
and conſequently, by turns aſſume the name of virtuous and vicious.

If, in conſequence of this obſervation, they would have been willing to form a
mere abſtract idea of virtue, independent of practice, they would have acknow-
ledged, that by the word Virtue can only be underſtood, a deſire of the ge-
neral happineſs; that conſequently the public welfare is the object of virtue
and that the actions it enjoins, are the means it makes uſe of to accompliſh
that end ; that therefore, the idea of virtue is not arbitrary ; that in different
ages and countries, all men, at leaſt thoſe who live in ſociety, ought to form
the ſame idea of it; and, in ſhort, if the people repreſent it under different
forms, it is becauſe they take for virtue, the various means they employ to ac-
compliſh the end. |

This definition of virtue, I think, gives an idea of it that is at once clear,
ſimple, and conformable to experience; a conformity that alone can eſtabliſh
the truth of an opinion. |

The pyramid of Venus-Urania, whoſe top was loſt in the clouds, and whoſe
baſe was fixed on the earth, is the emblem of all ſyſtems, which crumble to
pieces as faſt as they are builr, if they are not founded on the ſteady baſis of
facts and experience. It is therefore on facts, that is on the hitherto inexpli-
cable folly and fantaſticalneſs of the various laws and cuſtoms, that I eſtabliſh
the proof of my opinion. | | |

However ſtupid we ſuppoſe mankind, it is certain, that enlightened by their
own intereſt, they have not, without motives, adopted the ridiculous cuſtoms
we find eſtabliſhed amongſt ſome of them; the fantaſticalneſs of theſe cuſtoms,
proceed then from the diverſity of the intereſts of different nations; and in fact, if
they have always, though confuſedly, underſtood by the word virtue, the deſire
of the public happineſs ; if they have conſequently given the name of honeſty
only to actions uſeful to the nation; and if the idea of utility has always been
ſecretly connected with the idea of virtue, we may aſſert, that the moſt ridicu-

K 2 | lous,


8
«
"7
__
W-
*
N
5
N :
SN 3
F<.
LR...
55
48
2
i r 7
e
*
N J
WS»
"2 SLAG y
.
HM ;
r.
"35M
Te 7
ACTS
5 ö
BY Jo
Mes Le
249
MN 1 c
1 "Fo
Fe.
5 ö
12
2
8
Fa. 6125
5 5 of *
5
Pg
WW
*
2
3 5
7
my
£17
To ws
8
.
EE ES]
8
1
3 f
.
1
Ly
* 7
FEE
HE
>< bh
3
* 70
1
LONG
1.
3
6
LH
=; *
oy
£2;
WER |
ES
A 9
F bs 4/5
2;
9
22
SER
AE
THY As
LN}
7
3
5
— 9
r
3
3 q «
fd
N
3
3
AV
IS 2
*
3 80
£8
7d. = Br
ME #7,
ey
<8
7,
3
3
e
Rs 2
F
is 2
1
1
3
Ie! hs
3
>
ny
5
8 8
7 4
1
2
11
1 all
WE. >
%
7
* 3
e
"7 £08
9 9
3
2
” NS
41 LON
08
3
Ws)
13.33
2
2
I
7's 3
„
1
1
EIN
— I
7} .
« —
9
ME
>
75
St
* . .
Bb" &
OE <1
8
N
7” (BY
; #7
gy *
1 8
be — EL
n
47%
SD.
5 Lt
"21, ng
K- 25
.
8 0
3
.
*
nb, +
"229A
N
3
8


F *
.
2 3 ec Puget vs DINE,


68


PE LEESPRT TT, 4;


lous, and even the moſt cruel cuſtoms, have always had for their foundation,
as I am going to ſhew by ſome examples, either a real or apparent utility with


reſpect to the public welfare.


Theft was permitted at Sparta; they only puniſhed the aukwardneſs of the
thief who was ſurprized (a): could any thing be more ablurd than this cuſtom ?
However, if we call to mind the laws of Lycurgus, and the contempt ſhewn
for gold and ſilver, in a country where the laws allowed the circulation of no
other money than that of a kind of heavy brittle iron, it will appear that


poultry and pulſe were almoſt the only things that could be ſtolen.


Theſe


thefts being always performed with addreſe, and frequently denied with firm-
neſs (b), they enured the Lacedemonians to a habit of courage and vigilance :


the law then which allowed of ſtealing,


might be * uſeful to that peo-


ple, who had as much reaſon to be afraid of the treachery of the Ilotes, as of
the ambition of the Perſians ; and could only oppoſe againit the attempts of
the one, and the innumerable armies of the other, the bulwark of theſe two


virtues,


It is therefore certain, that theft, which is always prejudicial to a rich +


people, was of uſe to Sparta, and theretore properly honoured.

At the end of winter, when the ſcarcity of provilions obliges the ſavage to
quit his cabin, and hunger calls him to go to the chaſe, in ſearch of proviſions;
ſome of the ſavage Jations aſſemble before their departure, when making
their old men mount the oaks, they ſhake the boughs with great violence, on


which moſt of the old men falling, they are in a moment "maſſacred.
and nothing can at firſt appear more abominable.


fact is well known;


This
How-


ever, what room for ſurprize is there, when, after having examined its origin,
we find that the ſavage conſiders the fall of theſe unhappy old men, as a proof
of their inability to ſuſtain the fatigues of hunting! Were they left in their
cabins, or in the foreſts, they would fall a prey to hunger or the wild beaſts;

they therefore, chuſe rather to preſerve them from the long duration, ang
the violence of pain; and by a ſpeedy and neceſſary paricide, fave their fathers


from a flow and cruel death.
cuſtom is founded;


This is the principle on which ſo execrable a
that erratic people, whom hunting, and the neceſſity of


procuring proviſions detains for ſix months together in im menſe foreſts, are
thus, in a manner, neceſſitated to this barbarity ; and in thoſe countries, pari-
cide is inſpired and committed from the ſame principle of ——— that


makes us to look upon it with horror (c).


2
_—_


(a) Robbery is alſo honoured in the king-
dom of Congo: but no theft is to be per-
formed, nor any thing taken without the
knowledge of the poſſeſſor of the thing ſtolen:
every thing is to be taken by force. This
cuſtom, ſay they, keeps up the courage of
the people. On the contrary, among the
Scythians, no crime was greater than that of
robbery ; and their manner of living required
that it ſhould be ſeverely puniſhed : their
flocks wandered here and there in the plains ;
with what eaſe might they then have been
ſtolen ; and what diſorders would the tole-


ration of robbery have occaſioned ? There-
fore, ſays Ariftotle, have they eſtabliſhed
amongſt them this law, as the guardian of
flocks.

(b) Every body knows the circumſtance
related of the young Spartan, who rather than
diſcover his theft, ſuifered, without crying
out, his bowels to be Kevoured by a young
fox, that he had ſtolen, and concealed un-
der his robe.

(c) In the kingdom of Juida, in Africa,
the people give no alfiſtance to the ſick ; they


cure chemſelves as well as they can, and when


they


ESS AT S on unn M LEMED 69


But without having recourſe to ſavage nations, let us caſt our eyes on polite
countries, ſuch as China: if it be demanded, why an abſolute authority is
there given to fathers, over the lives of their children, we find, that the lands
of that empire, how extenſive ſoever they are, cannot ſometimes furniſh ſub-
ſiſtance for the numerous inhabitants; now as the too great diſproportion be-
tween the multiplicity of men, and the fertility of the lands, would neceflarily
occaſion wars, fatal to that empire, and perhaps tc the whole world, we fee
that in a time of famine, and to prevent an infinite number of murders and
unneceſſary misfortunes, the Chineſe nation, humane in its intentions, but
barbarous in the choice of the means, has, through a ſentiment of humanity,
though a miſtaken one, conſidered the permiſſion to murder their infants,

as neceflary to the repoſe of the world. We ſacrifice, ſay they, for this pur- |
pole, ſome unfortunate victims, to whom infancy and ignorance conceal the | |
knowledge and the horrors of death, in which perhaps conſiſts its moſt formi- |
. dable terrors (d). | |

It is doubtleſs from the deſire of preventing the too great multiplication of
the human ſpecies, and conſequently from the ſame origin, that certain nations
in Africa {till preſerve a ridiculous veneration for anchorets, who deny them-
ſelves that commerce with women, which they allow themſelves with the
brutes.

It was equally a motive of public intereſt, and the defire of protecting mo- | |
deſt beauty againſt the attempts of incontinence, that formerly engaged
the Swiſs to publiſh an edit, by which it was not only permitted, but even
ordained, that each prieſt ſhould provide himſelf a concubine (e).

On the coaſt of Coromandel, where the women freed themſelves by poiſon
from the troubleſome yoke of marriage, this was at length the motive which,
by a remedy as odious as the evil, engaged the legiſlature to provide for the
ſafety of huſbands, by forcing the women to burn themſelves on their huſ-
band's pile (f). |

In conformity with my reaſonings, all the facts I have juſt cited, concur to
prove, that the cuſtoms, even the moſt fooliſh and the moit cruel, have always
their ſource in the real, or apparent utility of the public.


*


— —— — ᷣ¶ —


e


they are recovered, live in the ſame cordi- ceſtors, that enjoined every prieſt to have his


ality with thoſe who had thus abandoned them.
5 The inhabitants of Congo, kill thoſe whom
they imagine paſt recovery, to ſhorten their
pains and agonies.

In the iſle of Formoſa, when a man is
dangerouſly ill, they put a flip knot about
his neck, and ſtrangle him, to fave him from
the pain of a lingering death.

(d) The manner of diſpatching girls in
catholic countries, is forcing them to take
the veil, and many thus paſs an unhappy
life, a prey to deſpair: perhaps our cuſtom,


in this reſpect, is more baibarous than that


of the Chineſe. |
(e) Zeuinglius, in writing to the Swiſs
Cantons, repeats the edict made by their an-


concubine for fear he ſhould attempt his
neighbour's chaſtity. See Father Paul's hiſtory
of the council of Trent, book IJ. |

It is ſaid, in the ſeventeenth canon of the
council of Toledo, that he who is con-
e tented with one woman, by the title of
& wife or concubine, according to his choice,
c ſhall not be debared from the communion.”
The church then probably tolerated concubi-
nage, to ſecure the married women from in-
ſult.

(f) The women of Mezurado are burnt
with the bodies of their huſbands, They
themſelves demand the honour of being led
to the pile; but at the ſame time uſe all their
endeavours to prevent it.

But


70 DE L'ESPRIT; ons;


But it 1s ſaid, that theſe cuſtoms are not, on this account, the leſs odious
or ridiculous. *Tis true; but it is only becauſe we are ignorant of the motives
of their eſtabliſhment; and becauſe theſe cuſtoms, conſecrated by antiquity
and ſuperſtition, ſubſiſted here, by negligence, or the weakneſs of government,
long after the cauſes of their eſtabliſhment were removed. |

When France was, in a manner, only a vaſt foreſt, who doubts that thoſe
donations of uncultivated lands made to the religious orders, ought then to
have been permitted: and that tne prolongation of ſuch a permiſſion would
not now be as abſurd and injurious to the ſtate, as it might be wiſe and uſe-
ful, when France was uncultivated ? All the cuſtoms that procure only tran-
ſient advantages, are like ſcaffolds, that ſhould be pulled down, when the
palaces are raiſed. |

Nothing could be a greater proof of wiſdom in the founder of the empire
of the Incas, than his repreſenting to the Peruvians that he was the offspring
of the ſun; and had brought them the laws dictated to him by the god his
father. This falſhood impreſſed on the minds of the ſavages an higher reſpect
for the laws of that legiſlator : this falſhood was therefore of ſuch uſe to the
riſing ſtate, as to deſerve to be conſidered as virtuous; but after having eſta-
bliſhed the foundations of a good legiſlation ; after being aſſured, by the
form of the government itſelf, of the exactneſs with which the laws would be
always obſerved, this legiſlator ought to have become leſs proud, or ſtill more
JudiciGus ; he ſhould have foreſeen the revolutions that might have happened
in the manners and intereſts of his people, and the changes that, in conſequence
of them, ought to be made in the laws; he ſhould therefore have declared
to the people, by himſelf or his ſucceſſor, that he had made uſe of a neceſſary
falſhood only to render them happy; by which confeſſion he would have ſtrip-
ped the laws of the marks of divinity, which rendered them ſacred and in-
violable, which would have oppoſed all reformation, and might at laſt have
rendered them prejudicial to the ſtate, if by the landing of the Europeans, that
empire had not been deſtroyed, almoſt as ſoon as it had been formed.

The intereſt of ſtates, like all human things, is ſubje& to a thouſand re-
volutions. The ſame laws and the ſame cuſtoms become ſucceſſively uſeful
and prejudicial to the ſame people ; whence I conclude, that theſe laws ought
by turns to be adopted and rejected, and that the ſame actions ought ſuc-
ceſſively to bear the names of virtuous and vicious; a propoſition that cannot
be denied without confeſſing, that there are actions, which at one and the ſame
time, are virtuous and prejudicial to the ſtate, and conſequently without
lapping the foundations of all government, and all ſociety.

The general concluſion of all I have juſt faid is, that virtue is only the de-
fire of the happineſs of mankind ; and that probity, which I conſider as virtue
put into action, is among all people, and in all the various governments of
the world, only the habit of performing actions uſeful to our country (g).


5
— —


(g) I believe it is not neceſſary to obſerve, preſcribes duties of a different nature, and
that I treat only of Political, and not of Re- has a relation to more ſublime objects.
ligious Probity, which propoſes other ends, | | |

| How-


ESSAYS os Tus MIND.


| 71
However evident this concluſion may be, as there is no nation that does
not know, and confound together two different kinds of virtue, the one what
I ſhall call Prejudicial Virtue, and the other, True Virtue; I believe, that in
order to render nothing more to be deſired on this ſubject, ] ought to exa-
mine the nature of theſe different kinds of virtue.


5562005000000 oS0020U0000000055050026562


Cc BH a Þ. x1


Of virtues prejudicial and trie. |


Give the n 2me of Prejudicial Virtues to all thoſe where an exact obſervance

of them does not in the leaſt contribute to the public happineſs, ſuch as
the auſterities of thoſe ſenſeleſs Fakirs with which the Indies are peopled ;
virtues that being often indifferent, and even prejudicial to the ſtate, are the
puniſhment of thoſe who make vows for the performance of them. Theſe
falfe virtues are in moſt nations more honoured than the true virtues, and
thoſe that practiſe them held in greater veneration than good citizens.

No body is more honoured. at Indoſtan than the Bramins (a) : the people
adore even their nudities (b): and pay the greateſt reſpect to their penances;
which are really frightful (c) : ſome remain all their lives tied to a tree ; others
hang ſcorching over a fire; ſome are loaded with heavy chains; others take
no nouriſhment but mere liquids ; ſome ſhut up their mouths with a padlock,
and others faſten to it a little bell ; and it is an honour to parents, to proſtitute
their daughters to the Fakirs. |

Among the actions or cuſtoms, to which ſuperſtition has: united the name
of ſacred, one of the moſt pleaſant is undoubtedly that of Juibus's prieſteſſes,


of the iſland of Formoſa.


cc
«c
ac
cc


« To officiate worthily, and to merit the vene-
ration of the people, they ought after the ſermons, contorſions, and howl-
ings are ended, to cry out, that they ſee their gods; this being done,
they roll on the earth, mount to the roof of the pagod, diſcover their
nakedneſs, ſlap their poſteriors, ſcatter about their urine, come down


<* naked, and then waſh in the preſence of the aſſembly (d).


—K_w__— _— — —


——


(a) The Bramins have the excluſive pri-
vilege of begging alms : they exhort the peo-
ple to give them, and givenone themſelves.

(b) Why, when we are men, ſay theſe
Bramins,ſhould we be aſhamed of gaing nak-
ed, when we came naked and without ſhame,
out of our mother's womb ? |

The Cirabees are no lefs aſhamed of be-
ing ſeen cloathed, than we of being caught
naked. If moſt favages cover certain parts
of their bodies; it is leſs on account of their
modeſty, than from the tenderneſs and ſen-
ſibility of certain parts, and the fear of wound-


— — _—_——


ing them in traverſing the woods and thick-
ets. |
(c) In the kingdom of Pegu are a kind
of anchorets named Santons; they never
beg for any thing, though dying with hunger.
Indeed care is taken te anticipate all their
deſires. Whoever confeſſes to them cannot be
puniſhed, whatever crime he may have commit-
ted. The Santons lodge in the country, and
dwell in the trunks of hollow trees: aſter
their death they are honoured as Gods.

(d) © Voyages of the Dutch Eaſt-India-
company.“ |


Hap-


72 DE L'ESPRIT; os,


Happy the people among whom the prejudicial virtues are only ridiculous
they are frequently extremely burbarous (e). In the capital of Cochin, they
bring up crocodiles; and whoever expoles himſelf to the fury of one of theſe
animals, and is devoured, is reckoned among the ele&t. In the kingdom
of Martemban, 1t 1s an act of virtue, on the day when the idol is brought our,
for the people to throw themſelves under the wheels of his chariot, or to cut
their throats as he paſſes by; and whoever offers himſelf to this death, is re-
puted a faint, and his name is on that account regiſtered in a book.

As there are prejudicial virtues, there are alſo crimes of prejudice, It is one
for a Bramin, to marry a virgin. It during the three months in which the people,
of the iſland of Formoſa, are ordered to go naked, a man faſtens upon him
the ſmalleit piece of linen, he wears, ſay they, a cloathing unworthy of a
man. In the ſame iſland, it is a crime tor a woman with child to be brought
to bed, beſore the thirty Afth year of her age. Are they pregnant, they ex-
tend themſelves at the foot of the prieſteſs, who, in execution of the law,
tramples upon them, till ſhe cauſes a miſcarriage.


When the prieſts or magicians of Pegu have foretold the recovery or


S
death of the ſick (f), it is a crime for the lick perſon condemned to recover.


While he is on his recovery, every one flies from, and abuſes him. If he had
been good, ſay the prieſts, God would have received him into his company.

There is perhaps, no country Where the people have not a greater abhor-
rence for ſome of cheſe crimes of prejudice, than for villanies the moſt attro-
cious, and the molt injurious to lociety.

Among the Giagues, a people who devour their conquered enemies, they
are allowed, ſays tather Cavazi, to pound their children in a mortar, with
roots, oil, and leaves; to boil them, and form the whole into a paſte, with
which they rub their bodies, to render them invulnerable; it would be an
abominable ſacrilege not to maſſacre with the blows of a ſpade, a young man
and woman in the month of March, before the queen of the country. When


— ——


(e) The women of Madagaſcar believe waſhed three ſucceſſive mornings, is at length


that there are fortunate and unfortunate days
and hours; and it is a duty of their religion,
when any of them are delivered in an unfor-
tunate day or hour, to expoſe the infants to
be devoured by the wild beaſts, to bury them
alive, or to ſtrangle them.

In one of the temples in the empire of Pe-
gu, they educate their virgins. Every year at
the feſtival of the idol, they ſacrifice one of


- theſe unhappy creatures. The prieſt in his


ſacerdotal habits, ſtrips her naked, ſtrangles
her, plucks out her heart, and throws it in
the idol's face. The facrifice being ended,
the pricſt dines, drefles himſelf in a | habit of
a horrible form, and dances before the peo-
ple. In other temples in the fame country,
men only are ſacrificed. For this purpoſe
they buy a handſome well made ſlave. This


Nave is dreſſed in a white robe, and being |


ſhewn to the people. The fourth day the
prieſt opens his breaſt, plucks out his heart,
ſprinkles the idol with his blood, and eats
his fleſh as ſacred food. Innocent blood,


„ {ay the prieſts, ought to flow to expiate


ce the ſins of the nation: beſides, it is neceſ-
*© ſary that ſome ſhould go to the great
Gd, to put him in mind of his people.”
It is however, proper to remark, that the
prieſts never charge themſelves with this com-
miſſion.

(f) A Giague, after his death, is aſked,
why he left this life? When a prieſt coun-
terfeiting the voice of the deceaſed, anſwers,
that he has not made a ſufficient number of
ſacrifices to his anceſtors. Theſe ſacrifices


are a conſiderable part of the revenues of the


prieſts.


the


1
er


ESSAYS onrtut MI ND. 73


the corn is ripe, the queen, ſurrounded by her courtiers, leaves the palace,
and cutting the throats of thoſe ſhe finds in her way, gives them her retinue to
eat. Theſe ſacrifices, ſhe pretends, are neceſſary to appeaſe the ghoſts of her
anceſtors, who ſee with regret, the common people enjoy a lite of which they
are deprived z this poor conſolation they imagine may be ſufficient to prevail
on them to bleſs the harveſt. ; 335

In the kingdoms of Congo, Angola, and Matamba, the huſband may
without diſgrace ſell his wife; the father his ſon; and the ſon his father: in
theſe countries, they know only one crime (g), that of refuſing the firit fruits
of the harveſt to the Chitombe, who is the high prieſt of the nation. Theſe
people, ſays father Labat, ſo deſtitute of all true virtue, are very ſcrupulous
obſervers of this cuſtom.
his revenues has the beſt title with them to be the Chitombe: he has not the
leaſt deſire to inſtruct the ignorant; he is even afraid leſt too juſt an idea of
virtue ſhould diminiſh their ſuperſtition, and the tribute they pay him.

What I have ſaid of prejudicial virtues, and vicious prejudices, is ſufficient
fo ſhew the difference between thoſe virtues and true virtue; that is with thoſe
which inceſſantly add to the public felicity, and without which ſociety could
not ſubſiſt. .. |

In conſequence of theſe two different kinds of virtue, I ſhall diſtinguiſh. two
different kinds of the corruption of manners; Religious and Political Corrup-
tion (h). But before I enter into this diſcuſſion, I declare that I write in the
character of a philoſopher and not of a divine; and therefore in this and the
following chapters, I ſhall not pretend to treat of any other virtues but
thoſe that are merely human. This information being given, I enter upon
the ſubject, and ſay, that with reſpect to corruption of manners, the name of
religious corruption is given to all kinds of libertiniſm, and principally to
that of men with women. This ſpecies of corruption, for which I am not
an advocate, and which is doubtleſs criminal, ſince it is offenſive to God,
is not however incompatible with the happineſs of a nation. The people of
different countries have believed, and belieyt᷑ ſtil], that this corruption is not
criminal: but it is doubtleſs ſo in France, ſince it is contrary to the laws of
the country; but it would not be ſo if women wete in common, and their off-
ſpring declared the children of the ſtate : this crime would then, in a political
view, be attended with no danger. In fact, if we take a ſurvey of the earth,


A perſon ſolely employed in the augmentation of.


(g) In the kingdom of Lao, the Tala-
Poins, .who are the prieſts of the -country,
can only be judged by the king himſelf.


They go to confeſſion every month; and, be.


ing faithful obſervers of that cuſtom, may


commit a thouſand abominations with im-


punity. They ſo far blind their princes, that


2 Talopoin convicted of uſing falſe money,


was ſent back acquitted by the king; who,


only replied, that the ſeculars ought to make


him greater preſents. The moſt conſiderable
perſons in the country think it a great ho-


nour to perform the meaneſt offices for the


L


> at


Talopoins, and none of them will wear a
habit that has not been for ſome time worn
by a Talopoin. |

(h) This diſtinction is neceſſary, firſt, be-


cauſe I conſider probity in a philoſophical


light, and independently of the obligations
of religion with reſpect to ſociety, which I
beg the reader to keep in view, through the
whole courſe of this work; and ſecondly, to
avoid the perpetual confuſion found among
idolatrous nations between the principles of
religion, and thoſe of a political and moral
nature,

Ve


— ar ot _ —


74 DE L'ESPRIT; on,


we ſhall ſee different nations of people among whom what we call libertiniſm
is not only conſidered as no corruption of manners, but is found authorized
by the laws, and even conſecrated by religion.

Without reckoning the ſeraglios in the Eaſt, which are under the protec-
tion of the laws; at Tonquin, where fruitfulnefs is honoured, the pain im-
poſed by the law on barren women, is to ſearch for agreeable girls, and to
bring them to their huſbands. In conſequence of this political inſtitution, the
Tonquineſe think the Europeans ridiculous in having only one wife; and can-
not conceive why among us, rational Beings can think of honouring God, by a
vow of chaſtity. They maintain that when there is an opportunity, it is as cri-
minal not to give life to what has it not, as to take it from thoſe who already
have it (i). |

It is alſo under the protection of the Jaws, that the Siameſe women, with
their boſoms and thighs half naked, are carried into the ſtreets in palanquins,
where they ſhew themſelves in the moſt laſcivious attitudes. This law was
eſtabliſhed by one of their queens named Tirada, who, in order to diſguſt the
men againſt a more ſhameful paſſion, thought herſelf obliged to uſe all the
power of beauty. This project, ſay the Siameſe, ſucceeded:; they add, that
it is beſides a wiſe law, ſince it is agreeable to the men to have deſires, and to
the women to excite them. Thus it is the happineſs of both ſexes, and the
only bleſſing heaven has mingled with the evils by which we are afflicted,
and what ſoul can be ſo barbarous as to deſire to deprive us of it (Kk)?

In the kingdom of Batimena (I), every woman, of what condition ſoever,
is obliged by the law, upon pain of death, to yield to the embraces of who-
ever deſires it: a refuſal is a ſentence of death. |

I ſhould never have done, were I to endeavour to give a hiſt of all the na-
tions that have not the ſame ideas as we, of this kind of corruption of
manners : I ſhall content myſelf then, after having mentioned ſome of the
countries where libertiniſm is authorized by Jaw, to cite ſome of thoſe where
the ſame libertiniſm forms a part of religious worſhip.

In the iſland of Formoſa, drunkenneſs and lewdneſs are acts of religion.
Delights, ſay thoſe people, are the daughters of heaven, the gifts of its good-
neſs ; to enjoy them is to honour the Deity ; it is anſwering his kindneſs. Can
it be queſtioned, that the ſight of the careſſes and enjoyments of love is not
pleaſing to the Gods? The Gods are good, and there is no offering of our


(i) Among the Giagues, when a girl has this pleaſure with the general happineſs,
the ſigns of her being capable of bearing chil- Men, he adds, are ſo unhappy, that one
dren, they make a feaſt: but when theſe “ pleaſure more is well worth the pains of an
ſigns diſappear, tney put thoſe women to , attempt to ſeparate from this whatever
death, as unworthy of life, when they can “ may be dangerous with reſpect to ſociety ;
no longer communicate it. and perhaps it might be eaſy to ſucceed,

(k) A very ſenſible writer ſays on this © were we with this view to examine the
ſubject, it is beyond contradiction, that all © laws of thoſe countries where theſe plea-
pleaſures contrary to the general good ©* ſures are permitted.”
ought to be prohibited ; but before this prohi- (1) * Chriſtianity in the Indies, book iv.
bition, it is proper, that by a thouſand efforts page 308.“ | |
of the mind, endeavours be uſed to reconcile


OY


ESSAYS on TUR MIND. 75
gratitude more acceptable to them than our pleaſures; and in conſequence
of this reaſoning, they publicly give themſelves up to every kind of proſtitu-
tion (m). FT 2

It is alſo, in order to obtain the favour of the Gods, that the queen of the
Giagues, before declaring war, orders the moſt beautiful women, and the
handſomeſt of her warriors, to appear before her; where, in different attitudes,
they enjoy the pleaſures of love. In how many countries, ſays Cicero, are
temples erected to debauchery ? how many altars have been raiſed to proſti-
tuted women (n) ? Beſides the antient worſhip of Venus, do not the Banians,
under the name of the goddeſs Banani, adore one of their queens, who, ac-
cording to Gamelli Carreri, ** expoſed all her beauties to the ſight of her
whole court, and ſucceſſively laviſhed her favours to ſeveral lovers, and even
to two at the ſame time?“ | ;

I ſhall cloſe my quotations on this head, with a paſſage from Julius Fir-
micus Maternus, a father of the ſecond century, in his treatiſe de errore pro-
fanarum religionum. Aſſyria, together with a part of Africa, ſays this
“e father, worſhip the air by the name of Juno, or the virgin Venus. This
<< goddeſs preſides over the elements: ſhe has her temples, where prieſts offi-
* ciate dreſſed and painted like women; they perform their devotions in
ce languid, effeminate accents; provoke men's deſires, gratify them, and glory
cin their lewdneſs; and after theſe preparatory pleaſures, call on the god-
* deſs with vehement vociferations, and inſtrumental muſic, pretending to be
under a divine inſpiration, and to utter prophecies.” | |

Thus there are many countries where that corruption of manners, which
I call religious, is authoriſed by the laws; or conſecrated by the religion.

What innumerable evils, will it be ſaid, are annexed to this kind of cor-
ruption ? May it not be anſwered, that diſſoluteneſs is then only politically
dangerous in a ftate, when it countervenes the law of the country, or is blend-
ed with ſome other defect of the government. It is in vain to add, that the
nations where ſuch diſſoluteneſs prevails are the contempt of the whole world.

But without mentioning the eaſtern nations and others, either ſavage or mar-


—


(m) In the kingdom of Thibet, the young
women wear about their necks the gifts of
lewdneſs ; that is, the rings of their gallants :
and the more they have, with the greater


charitable ftranger had reſtored them to a
ſtate of peace. 5
The convents of the Bonzes are full of


ſplendor and rejoicings are their nuptials ce-
lebrated. | |

- (n) At Babylon, all the women were to en-
camp near the temple of Venus, and once


in their life, by an expiatory :proftitution,


obtain the remiſſion of their fins ; they were
not to deny the defire of the firſt ſtranger,


who was for purifying their ſoul, by the en-


joyment of their bodies. The pretty and hand-
ſome had doubtleſs ſoon diſcharged their pe-
nance; but they, who nature had not favour-
ed with an inviting perſon, may be generally
ſuppoſed to have waited a long time, till ſome


idolatrous nuns as concubines. When tired
of them, they are diſmiſſed” and replaced by
others; the gates of theſe convents are crowd-
ed by votaries, and it is generally by preſents
to the Bonzes, that they obtain the high
favour of being admitted. In the kingdom
of Cochin, the Bramins being defirous of
giving the firſt taſte of the joys of love to

rides, make both the ſovereign and people
tell them this holy work is to be committed
to them: wherever they go, fathers leave


them with their daughters, as huſbands do
with their wives. 45


1 | tial


—


76 EFT TaLTSFRIT; on,


tial, who, though given up to voluptuouſneſs of every kind, are happy at home,
and formidable abroad ; what nation ever excelled the Greeks ! a people
which to this day is the admiration and honour of human nature? Before
the Peleponeſian war, an æra fatal to their virtue, what nation, what country
produced ſo many virtuous and great men? Yet, the taſte of the Greeks,
tor the moſt indecent love is well known: ſo general was it that Ariſtides, ſur-
named the Juſt, that Ariſtides, with whole praiſes, ſaid the Athenians, our
ears are perpetually filled, loved Themiſtocles. It was the beauty of the
young Steſileus, which kindling violent deſires in the heart of both, at the ſame
time inflamed it with implacable hatred againſt each other. Plato was ſen-
ſual; Socrates himſelf, whom the oracle of Apollo declared to be the wiſeft
of men, beſides having two wives, and frequenting courteſans, loved Alcibia- -
des and Archelaus. Thus it is certain, that according to our idea of mora-
lity, the moſt virtuous of the Greeks would have been looked upon in Europe
as debauchees. Now this kind of corruption of manners was in Greece carri-
ed to the utmoſt exceſs, when at the ſame time this country produced ſuch great
men of every kind, that it made Perſia tremble ; conſequently, that corrup-
tion of manners which I call religious does not ſeem incompatible with the
greatneſs and felicity of a ſtate. |
There is another kind of corruption of manners, which is preparative of
the fall of an empire, and preſages its ruin; this I ſhall diſtinguiſh by the
name of political corruption. With this a people is infected when the bulk of the
individuals ſeparate their intereſt from that of the public. This kind of cor-
ruption, which fometimes is blended with the preceding, has led many mo-
raliſts to confound them : if the queſtion be only of the political intereſt of a
ſtate, the latter would perhaps be the moſt dangerous. A people, however
pure its firſt manners might have been, when this corruption gets footing,
muſt neceſſarily be unhappy at home, and little feared abroad : the duration
of ſuch an empire is precarious ; it is chance which either delays or haſtens the
fall of it. |
To evince how dangerous this anarchy of the ſeveral intereſts is in a ſtate,
let us conſider the evils ariſing only from the oppoſition of the intereſts of one
body to thoſe of the common-wealth. We will allow the Bonzes, the Talopoins,
all the virtues of ourſelves : yet, if the intereſts of the body of the Bonzes
be not connected with the public interelt ; if, for inſtance, the Bonzes autho-
rity depends on the people's blindneſs, the Bonze will neceſſarily be an enemy
to the nation which maintains him ; will be to that nation what the Romans
were to the world, honeſt among themſelves, robbers with regard to the uni-
verſe. Were every Bonze in himſelf greatly averſe to dignities, and high
ſtations, the body will not be the leſs ambitious; all its members will labour
for its aggrandizement often without knowing it : they will even think them-
ſelves authoriſed ſo to do from a principle of virtue (o); therefore in a ſtate
there is nothing more dangerous than a body whoſe intereſt is not connected


with the general intereſt,


a
3


(o) In the true religion, priefts have been found, who, in the times of ignorance have
abuſed the devotion of the people for arrogating to themſelves the rights of ſovereignty. _


4 - 52 F


FSSAYS o THE MTN D. . 77


If the Pagan prieſts cauſed Socrates to be put to death, and were ever oppoſ-
ing. eminent perſons, it was owing to the oppoſition of their private intereſt to
that of the public; it was becauſe the prieſts of a falſe religion, find their ac-
count in keeping the people in blindneſs, and for this purpoſe pertecute and
remove out of the way all who may open their eyes: an example which has
ſometimes been copied by the miniſters of the true religion, who, without
the ſame neceſſity, have practiſed the ſame cruelties, have perſecured, have


oppreſſed great men; have laviſhed their panegyrics on works of little merit,
and have virulently criticiſed others very excellent; but in both have been.


diſowned by more candid or more knowing divines (p).


For inſtance, can there be any thing more ridiculous than the prohibition -
in ſome countries againſt bringing into it a ſingle copy of the Spirit of Laws? a


work which more than one prince, takes care that his ſon ſhall read over and


over. May we not here uſe the expreſſion of a man of wit, that the monks,


in ſoliciting this prohibition, ated as the Scythians did with their ſlaves, putting


our their eyes that they might turn the mill with leſs diſtraction. |
Thus it is clear, that the-public happineſs, or calamity, depends ſolely on the
agreement or oppoſition of the intereſtof individuals with the general intereſt ;


and that the religious corruption of manners may, as hiſtory abundantly.


proves, be often joined with magnanimity, elevation of ſoul, wiſdom,
abilities, in fine, with all the qualities which form great men.


That citizens, infected with this kind of corruption of manners, have often


rendered more important ſervices to-their country than the moſt auſtere ancho-


rites, is undeniable; how happy have been the conſequences of the amorous
Circaſſian's care, either for her own or her daughter's beauty, who firft ven-


a — - — . —


-


(p) Father Millot, in a diſcourſe which ob- © continual object was man; men he ſtudied, -


*


tained the prize of the academy at Dijon, on * and knew them. The ſertile ſeeds al-


the queſtion, Whether it is moſt uſeful to * ready are ſeen to germinate, which he


ſtudy men or books?” expreſſes himſelf in. * caſt into the minds of the chiefs of nations,


the following manner, concerning M. de “ and the rulers of empires. Let us gratefully
Monteſquieu. Thoſe rules of conduct, *< reap the fruits, &c.“ Father Millot adds
« thoſe maxims of government, which ſhould in a note When an author of confeſſed pro-
« be engraved on the thrones of kings, and ** bity, a free-thinker, who, always expreſ-


on the hearts of every one inveſted with au- „ ſing himſelf as he imagines, formally ſays,


« thority ; is it not to a cloſe ſtudy of men that Chriſtianity, the ſole view of which ſeems to


« we owe them? Witneſs that illuſtrious pa- © be the happineſs of the other life, alſo con-


« triot that interpreter, that judge of the * ſtitutes our happineſs ia this,” and after re-
« Jaws, on whoſe tomb France and all Eu- futing a dangerous paradox of Bayle, he adds,


ce rope ſhed tears; but whoſe genius will ever *The principlesof chriſtianity, well engraved .


ebe ſeen to inſtruct nations, tracing the“ in the heart, would be infinitely ſtronger


te plan of public happineſs; that immortal than this falſe honour of monarchies, theſe


« writer, Who abridged every. thing, be- human virtues of republics, and this fer-
<« cauſe he ſaw every thing, who was for © vile fear ofdeſpotic Rates, which is ſtronger
« putting us on thinking, as what we ſtand © than the three principles of political go-
« more in need of than reading. With what * vernment, laid down in the Spirit of Laws:


te ſagacity had he ſtudied human nature? © can ſuch an author, by any one who has


„ Travelling like Solon, meditating like © read his work, be accuſed of deſigning to
« Pythagoras, converſing like Plato, read- © ſtrike at Chriſtianity ?” | |
« jng like Cicero, writing like Tacitus, his 5

| tured


*
>


78 FIDE L'ESPRIT; Mm,


tured on innoculation ? what numbers of children have by this method been
ſaved from an early death? Poſſibly there is not a foundreſs of any order of nuns
ro whom the world owes ſuch an extenſive and important benefit, and who
conſequently is entitled to ſo much of its acknowledgment. |

Let me be allowed once more, for a concluſion of this chapter, to declare,
that it has by no means been my intention to vindicate debauchery. All I
meant was only to impart clear ideas of theſe two different kinds of corruption
of manners, which have been too often confounded, and the general ideas of
which ſeemed to have been dark and perplexed ; becauſe, on a more explicit in-
formation of the true ſcope of the queſtion, the importance of it may be better
known, the degree of contempt aſſignable to theſe two different forts of cor-
ruption may be better determined, and we ſhall better perceive that there are
two different ſpecies of bad actions; ſome vicious in every form of government,
others which in a ſtate are pernicious, and conſequently criminal, only as thoſe
actions are contradictory to the laws of thoſe countries.

Moraliſtz, by a clearer inſight into the evil, will naturally acquire a greater
ſkill in the cure. They may now view morality in a new point of light, and,
trom a vain ſcience, improve it to a ſcience of univerſal utility.


S


.


Of the uſe accruing io morality, from the knowledge of th: principles laid
down in the preceding chapters. |


F morality hitherto has little contributed to the happineſs of mankind, it is not
I owing to any want of perſpicuity or beauty of ſtile, or propriety and loftineſs
of ſentiment in the moraliſts : but amidſt all their ſuperior talents, it muſt
be owned, that they have not often enough conſidered the different vices of
nations as neceſſarily reſulting from the different form of their government
yet, it is only by conſidering morality in this point of light, that it can become
of any real uſe to men. What have hitherto been the effects of all the ſplendid
maxims of morality ? If ſome individuals have been corrected by them of faults
which perhaps they reproached themſelves with, no change in the manners
of nations have been produced. What is this to be imputed to? It is becauſe,
the vices of a people, if I may preſume to ſay ſo, always lie at the bottom
of its legiſlation. There he muſt ſearch, who would pluck up the root whence
its vices ariſe, He who wants either penetration, or courage, for ſuch an un-
dertaking, is in this reſpect of little or no uſe to the univerſe. To attempt
extinguiſhing the vices. annexed to the legiſlation of a people, without making
any change in this legiſlation, is no leſs than rejecting the juſt conſequence
after admitting the principles. 5 |
What can be hoped for from jo many declamations againſt the falſity of
women, if this vice be the neceſſary effect of an oppoſition betwixt the deſires
of nature, and the ſentiments which by the law of decency women are
— forced


ESSAYS o Tat M I N D. 79


forced to affect? In Malabar and Madagaſcar, all women are faithful,
becauſe they have gallants without number, and they never pitch on a huſ-
band till after repeated trials; it is the ſame with the favages of New Orleans,
and of thoſe people where the relations of the Great Sun, the princeſs of the
blood may, on any diſguſt taken at their huſhands, diſmiſs them and marry
others. In ſuch countries, no unfaithful wives are heard of, becauſe they
have no manner of intereſt to be fo. |

Very far am I from inferring, that from theſe examples the ſame manners
ſhould be introduced among us; I only ſay, that women cannot reaſonably
be reproached with a breach of faith which decency and the laws, as it were,
impoſed on them as a neceſſity ; and that whilſt the cauſes are ſuffered to ſub-
fiſt, the effects will continue. |

For a ſecond inſtance, we ſhall take defamation. This is a vice, but a ne-
ceſſary vice, becauſe in every country where the people have no ſhare in the
adminiſtration of public affairs, and being thus little concerned about mental
improvement, muſt ſtagnate in a ſcandalous ſloth. Now, if in this country


it be the faſhion to contract a numerous acquaintance, and to frequent public


places, and loquacity is accounted the mark of breeding and ſpirit ; he who
is ignorant, and not able to diſcourſe of things, muſt neceſſarily make per-
ſons the ſubject of his talk: and panegyric being inſupportable, and ſatire
entertaining, the ignorant, to avoid being inſupportable, are obliged to
talk ſcandal: thus this vice cannot be ſuppreſſed without aboliſhing the pro-
ductive cauſe, without delivering the citizens from idleneſs, and conſequent-
ly without altering the torm of government. Why is the man of ſenſe gene-
rally leſs a buſy body in private companies than the man of faſhion? It is be-


cauſe the former, taken up with greater objects, ſpeaks of perſons, only as they


have, like great men, an immediate relation with great things ; likewiſe the
man of ſenſe, as he never defames but by way of revenge, it is very rarely
he defames ; whereas the man of the world muſt either defame or be mute.

What I ſay of defaming, I likewiſe ſay of debauchery, againſt which the
moraliſts have always ſo violently inveighed : debauchery is ſo generally al-
lowed to be a neceſfary conſequence of luxury, that any farther proof of it
would be ſuperfluous. Now, if luxury, which I am very far from thinking,
but which is commonly believed, be very uſeful to the ſtate; if, as may be eaſily
ſhewn, the taſte for it cannot be extinguiſhed, and citizens brought to the ob-
ſervance of ſumptuary laws, without altering the formof government, then ſome


- alterations of this kind mult take place, antecedently to any hopes of aboliſh-


ing debauchery. Every harrangue on this head is good divinity, but not po-
licy; the object of policy and legiflation is the opulency, power, and happineſs
of a people: now with regard to this, I ſay, that if luxury be really uſeful to
France, it would be ridiculous to attempt to introduce there an. auſterity of
manners incompatible with a taſte for luxury. There is no proportion between
the advantages which commerce and luxury procure to a ſtate in its preſent
conſtitution, (advantages which to ſuppreſs debauchery it muſt forego) and the
infinitely ſmall evil occaſioned by the love of women. This is to complain
of finding in a rich mine ſome ſparks of copper intermixed with veins of


gold. Wherever luxury is neceſſary, it is a ſoleciſm in politics to account


intriguing a moral vice; and if it muſt be called a moral vice, the conſequence .


13


79 DE L'ESPR 1:T; og,

is that, in ſome countries and ſome ages, there are uſeful vices ; and that 1
is to the mud of the Nile Egypt owes its fertility. In effect, on a political
examination of the behaviour of iatriguing women, it will be found that,
though in certain reſpects blameable, they are, in others of great uſe to the
public; that for inſtance, in the uſe they make of their money, they are more
advantageous to the ſtate than the moſt virtuous of their ſex. By the deſire
of pleaſing, which ſends an intriguing woman to the mercer and milliner, ſhe
not only faves an infinite number of workmen from the indigence into which
ſumptuary laws at once would plunge them, but the ſame. deſire pats her upon acts
of the moſt judicious charity. If luxury be ſuppoſed uſeful to a nation, is
it not the women of dreſs, who by exciting the induſtry of the artiſts of luxury,
continually improve their uſefulneſs to the ſtate? Virtuous women therefore
are not ſo well adviſed by their directors in beſtowing on beggars and crimi-
nals, as intriguing women by the deſire of pleaſing. Theſe ſupport uſeful
members of ſociety : the others nuiſances, even the enemies of mankind.

From what I have faid it follows, that no change in the ideas of a people is
to be hoped for, till after a change in its legiſlation ; that the reformation of
manners is to be begun by the retormation of laws; and declamations againſt
a vice uſeful in the preſent form of government, would politically be detri-
mental, were they not found fruitleſs. But ſo they will always be, for it is
only the force of the laws that can ever act on the bulk of a nation. Beſides,
let me be allowed curſorily to obſerve, that among the moraliſts, there are very
few who, by ſetting our paſſions at variance, know how to avail themſelves
.of them, ſo as to procure their opinions to be adopted. Moſt of their admo-
nitions are too dogmatical, and imperious ; yet they ſhould be ſenſible, that
invectives will never prevail againſt ſentiments : that it is only a paſſion which
can get the better of a paſſion; for inſtance, to bring a gay woman to more
reſerve and modeſty in public, her vanity muſt be contraſted with her co-
quetry, and it mult be urged to her, that modeſty is an invention of love and
of refined delight (a); that it is to the gawſe which covers a woman's beavties,


_


—


(a) It is by conſidering modeſty in this
light, that we may anſwer the arguments
of the Stoics and Cynics, who affirmed,
that the virtuous man did nothing in private
- which he ſhould not do in public, and who
conſequently believed that they might pub-
licly act the pleaſures of love. If moſt legiſ-
lators have cenſured theſe Cynical principles,
and claſſed modeſty among the virtues, it is
will it be anſwered, becauſe they apprehend-
ed, that the frequent fight of enjoyment
might caſt ſome diſguſt on a pleaſure, on
which depends the converſation of theſpecies,
and the continuance of the world ? They
were likewiſe aware, that dreſs concealing
ſome female charms, decked a woman with
all the beauties which a lively imagination
could ſuggeſt ; that this dreſs inflamed curio-
fity ; heightened the joys of female careſles ;
rendered their favours more extatic, and mul-


*
7
*


tiplied the delights of our afflictive ſtate.
It Lycurgus had baniſhed from Sparta
a certain kind of modeſty ; and if the
young women, in preſence of a whole peo-
ple, wreſtled naked with the youth of the
other ſex; the legiſlator's intention herein
was, that being made ſtronger by ſuch exer-
ciſe, their children might be more robuſt and
fitter for the conſtitution of that ſtate, which
was purely military. He knew that however
the cuſtom of ſeeing naked women might cool
the defire of ſeeing their hidden beauties, the
deſire itſelf was unextinguiſhable, eſpecially
in a country where it was only in ſecret and
by ſtealth, that huſbands were admitted
to the embraces of their wives. Beſides, Ly-
curgus, as he made love one of the prin-
cipal ſprings of his legiſlative ſyſtem, intended


it for the recompence, and not the occupa-


tion of the Spartans,
which


*
9 5
9
"+.
* is
3
Xs
Rey
Ws
Varney,
#4 *
15 <
: 8 85
"Is 5 4
7
F648
red
5


ESSAYS on Tu MIND. | $1


that the world owes moſt of its pleaſures; that at Malabar,, where the young


beauties appear in company halt naked; that in certain parts of America,
where the. women wear no covering, the deſires have nothing, of that ardour
and vivacity, which curioſity would impart to them; that in thoſe countries,
beauty ſerves only for the call of neceſſity ; and that, on the contrary, among
thoſe nations where modeſty has placed a veil between deſires and nudities, this
myſterious veil is the taliſman which holds the lover at his charmer's feet;
that in fine, modeſty puts, into beauty's weak hands, the ſcepter to which power
ſubmits. Beſides, they will ſay to the woman of gallantry, You muſt know
that the wretched are very numerous; that the unfortunate born enemies to


the happy man, make a crime of his happineſs ; that they hate in him a fe-


licity too independent of them; that the ſubject of your amuſements is to be
concealed from their ſight; and that levity and indecency, by betraying the
ſecrets of your pleaſures, expoſes you to all the ſtrokes of their revenge.

By thus ſubſtituting the ſoft language of intereſt, inſtead of the peremptory
clamour of invective, the moraliſts may eſtabliſh their maxims. I ſhall not
enlarge farther on this head: but return to my ſubject; and I ſay, that all
men tend only towards their happineſs ; that it is a tendency from which
they cannot be diverted ; that the attempt would be fruitleſs, and even the
ſucceſs dangerous; conſequently, it is only by incorporating perſonal and
general intereſt, that they can be rendered virtuous. This being granted, mo-
rality is evidently no more than a frivolous ſcience, unleſs blended with policy


and legiſlation : whence I conclude that, if philoſophers would be of uſe to the


world, they ſhould ſurvey objects from the ſame point of view as the legiſla-
tor. Though not inveſted with the ſame power they are to be actuated by
the ſame principle. The moraliſt is to indicate the laws, of which the legiſla-
tor inſures the execution by ſtamping them with the ſeal of his authority. |

Among the moraliſts, there are doubtleſs but few duly impreſſed with
this truth, even of thoſe whoſe minds are capable of the moſt exalted ideas ;
many in the ſtudy of morality, and the portraits of vices, are animated only by
perſonal intereſt and private contentions; conſequently they confine themſelves
only to the repreſentation of ſuch vices as moleſt ſociety ; and their mind gra-
dually contracting itſelf within the narrow circle of their intereſt, ſoon loſes
the force neceſſary for ſoaring to ſublime ideas. In the ſcience of morality, the
elevation of the thought often depends on the elevation of the ſoul. To fix on
ſuch moral truths, as are of real advantage to men, there muſt be a warm paſ-
on for the general good; and unhappily morality, like religion, is not with-
out hypocrites. |


M H Ap.


32 DE L'ESPRIT, oz,


r d


A .
Of Hypocritical Moraliſts.


Y a hypocrite, I mean him who, in the ſtudy of morality, is not animated
) by a deſire of procuring the happineſs of mankind, being too much taken
up with himſelf; this is a numerous claſs; and known on one hand by the cold-
neis with which they they diſcuſs thoſe vices big with the fall of empires;
and on the other, by their impotent invectives againſt private vices. It is in
vain for ſuch to ſay, that they have the public welfare at heart. Were you
really animated with ſuch a generous paſſion, it will be ſaid to them, your
hatred to every vice would be always proportionate to the miſchief it does in
ſociety ; and if you are irtitated at ſuch faults as are leaſt detrimental to a ſtate,
with what eye ſhould you look on the ignorance of the proper means for form-
valiant and magnanimous patriots ? How extreme would be your concern at
perceiving lome faults in the adminiſtration of juſtice, or the aſſeſſment of taxes;
or, how would you glow with indignation at a fault in military diſcipline, which
ſo often decides the fate of battles, and the devaſtations of provinces? Were
ſuch your temper, overcome by excels of grief, you would, like Nerva, deteſt-
ing life by which you are a ſpectator of the calamities of your country, termi-
nate its courſe; or, at leaſt, you would imitate that heroic Chineſe, who juſtly
provoked at the oppreſſions of the great, boldly entered the emperor's pre-
lence with his complaints: I come, ſays he, to offer myſelf to that puniſhment,
which on account of ſuch repreſentations, ſix. hundred of my fellow-ſubjects
have already ſuffered. I give you notice to prepare for further execution
China has {till eighteen thouſand firm patriots, who, for the ſame informa-
tion, will be coming to aſk of you the ſame reward.” At theſe words he ceaſed
ſpeaking; but the ermperor, aſtoniſhed at his firmneſs, rewarded it in the
manner moſt acceptable to a virtuous man, the puniſhment of the guilty, and
the ſuppreſſion of oppreſſive impoſts. In this manner the love of the
public welfare declares itſelf, If you are really animated by theſe paſſions,
I would ſay to theſe cenſors, your hatred to every vice will be proportioned to
its detriment to the ſtate : if it be only the offences injuring yourſelves, which
excite your anger, the name of moraliſt does not belong to you; you are no
more than mere egotiſts. Thus it is only by an abſolute detachment from
perfonal intereſt, by a profound ſtudy of the ſcience of legiſlation, that a mo-
raliſt can become ſerviceable to his country. He is then able to weigh the ad-
vantages or diſadvantages of a law or cuſtom, and to judge whether it ſhould be
aboliſhed or continued. | |
We are too often obliged to comply with errors, or even barbarous cuſtoms ;
if in Europe, duels have been ſo long tolerated, it is becauſe in nations void
of a Roman love for their country, and where courage is not exerciſed by con-
tinual wars, moraliſts probably could think of no other way of ſupporting
courage, that the ſtate might not be deſtitute of valiant defenders ; and by this.
toleration, they hoped to have purchaſed a great good at the expence of a ſmall
| £7 8 evil.


ESSAYS: on Tux MIN p. =


evil. They were extremely deceived with regard to the particular caſe of duel-
ing; but there are a thouſand others where this muſt be complied with, and
it is often in the choice of two evils, that the man of genius diſtinguiſhes him-
ſelf. Away with"thoſe pedants enamoured with a falſe idea of perfection
nothing is more dangerous in a ſtate, than theſe ſenſeleſs moral declaimers,
who concentered within a ſmall ſphere of ideas, are continually repeating
what they have heard from their nurſes, inceſſantly recommending modera-
tion in our deſires, and an univerſal extinction of the paſſions : not aware
that their precepts, though uſeful to a few individuals in certain circumſtances,
would prove the ruin of the nations that ſhould adopt them.

In fact, if, as hiſtory informs us, ſtrong paſſions, ſuch as pride and patrio-
tiſm among the Greeks and Romans, fanaticiſm among the Arabs, and
avarice among freebooters, always produce the moſt formidable wars ;
whatever general leads men without paſſions, againſt ſuch ſoldiers, will op-
poſe only fearful lambs to the fury of wolves. Wiſe nature has therefore al-
ways placed in the heart of man, a preſervative againſt the reaſonings of ſuch
philoſophers. Thus, the nations who ſubject their intentions to theſe pre-
cepts, always find themſelves feeble in action; and without this happy
weakneſs, the people ſcrupulouſly attached to their maxims, would become
the contempt, and the ſlaves of other nations.


It requires thoſe vaſt geniuſes that embrace all the parts of a government,


to determine how far the fire of the paſſions ought to be exalted or mode-
rated. Whoever is endowed with theſe abilities, is, in a manner, deſigned
by nature to fulfil, with reſpect to the legiſlature, the part of a thinking mi-
niſter (a) ; and to juſtify the obſervation of Cicero, that a man of genius is
never a mere citizen, but a true magiſtrate.

Before we ſhew the advantages the univerſe would receive from more ex-
tenſive and more ſound ideas of morality, I think I ought to remark, by the
way, that theſe ideas throw great light upon all the ſciences, eſpecially
upon hiſtory, whoſe progreſs is at the ſame time the cauſe and effect of the
progreſs of morality.

Were writers better inſtructed in the true objects of hiftory, they would
praiſe nothing in the private life of a king, but ſuch particulars as were
proper to repreſent his character; they would not ſo curiouſly deſcribe
his manners, and his domeſtic virtues and vices; they would be ſen-
ſible, that the public demands from ſovereigns an account of their edicts,
and not of their ſuppers; that the public love to know the man in the prince,
only fo far as the man has a ſhare in the deliberations of the prince; and
that, inſtead of puerile anecdotes, they ought, in order to inſtruct and pleaſe,


ſabſtitute the agreeable or dreadful picture of the public felicity or miſery, and


tae cauſes that produce them. From the mere exhibition of ſuch a picture
would ariſe an infinite number of reflections and uſeful regulations.


—


(a) In China they diſtinguiſh two kinds forming projects, examining thoſe who pre-
of miniſters; the one are the Signing mi- ſent them, and propoſing ſuch changes as
niſters; who grant audiences; and add their times and circumſtances require to be made
ſignatures: the others bear the name of in the adminiſtration.

Thinking miniſters; and have the care of |


M 2 What


84 ESPRIT; os
What I ſay of hiſtory, I alſo ſay of metaphyſics, and civil law. There are
few ſciences but what have a relation to that of morality. The chain which


connects them together, is more extenſive than we are apt to imagine; it
ſurrounds the whole univerſe. | |


C ²⁵ . jðᷣ


„
Of the advantages that reſult from the principles above eſtabliſhed.


1 Paſs with rapidity over the advantages that would be obtained by indivi-
duals; theſe would conſiſt in their having clear ideas of morality ; the
principles of which have been hitherto ſo ambiguous and contradictory, that
they permitted the moſt ſenſeleſs perſons conſtantly to juſtify the folly of their
conduct by ſome of its maxims. |

Beſides, the individual being better informed of his duties, would be leſs


dependent on the opinion of his friends. Sheltered from the injuſtice wherein,


unknown to himſelf, he might be frequently involved by thoſe with whom he
converſes, he would be freed from the puerile fear of ridicule; a phantom
that baniſhes reaſon, and is the terror of thoſe timid and ignorant fouls, who
ſacrifice their inclinations, their pleaſures, their repoſe, and ſometimes even


their virtues, to the humour and caprice of thoſe ſplenetic mortals, whoſe cri-


ticiſm we cannot eſcape, when we have the misfortune to be known.
A perſon ſolely ſubject to reaſon and virtue, might then brave every pre-
judice, and arm himſelf with thoſe manly and courageous ſentiments that


form the diſtinguiſhing character of a virtuous man: ſentiments deſirable in


every citizen, and which we have a right to expect from the great. How
ſhall the perſon, raiſed to the higheſt poſts, remove the obſtacles to the ge-
neral welfare, which certain prejudices raiſe againſt it, and reſiſt the menaces and
cabals of men in power, x A intereſted in the public misfortnne, if his foul
is not inacceſſible to all kind of ſollicitations, fears and prejudices ?

It appears. then, that the knowledge of the above principles procures at
leaſt, theſe advantages to the individual ; it gives him a clear and certain idea
of honeſty ; ſaves him from all inquietude on this ſubject, ſecures the peace
of his conſcience, and conſequently procures him the inward ſecret pleaſure
blended with the practice of: virtue. | 3

As to the advantages the public would derive from it, they would doubt-
leſs be more conſiderable. In conſequence of theſe principles, we might, if
I may venture to uſe the expreſſion, compoſe a catechiſm of probity, the
maxims of which being ſimple, true, and level to all underſtandings, would
teach the people that virtue, though invariable in the object it propoſes,
is not ſo in the means it makes uſe of; that, conſequently, we ought to con-
ſider actions as indifferent in themſelves; to be ſenſible, that it is the buſineſs
of the ſtate to determine theſe that are worthy of eſteem or contempt; and,


in fine, that it is the office of the legiſlator to fix, from his knowledge of the
4. public


P75
3

AS
2


KI
255


ESSAYS ov Tje MIND. =


public intereſt, the inſtant when an action ceaſes to be virtuous, and becomes


VICIOUS.

Theſe principles being once received, with what facility would the legiſla-
tor extinguiſh the torches: of fanaticiſm and ſuperſtition, ſuppreſs abuſes,
reform barbarous cuſtoms, perhaps uſeful at their eſtabliſhment, but ſince
become fatal to the world? Cuſtoms that ſubſiſt only from the fear of not
being able to aboliſh them, without cauſing an inſurrection among the people,
who are always accuſtomed to take the practice of certain actions for virtue
itſelf, without kindling long and bloody wars; and in ſhort, without occaſion-
ing thoſe ſeditions, which are always dangerous to the common-people, and
can really be neither foreſeen or ſubdued, but by men of firmneſs and great
abilities. | |

It is then by weakening the ſtupid veneration of the people for antient laws
and cuſtoms, that ſovereigns would be enabled to purge the earth of moſt
of the evils that lay it waſte, and be furniſhed with the means of-ſecuring the
poſſeſſion of their crowns.

At preſent, when the intereſt of a ſtate is changed, and the laws which at
their firſt foundation were uſeful, are become prejudicial z thoſe very laws, by
the reſpect conſtantly preſerved for them, muſt neceſſarily draw the ſtate to its
ruin. Who doubts. that the deſtruction of the Roman republic, was the


effect of a rediculous veneration for the antient laws, and that this blind


reſpect forged the fetters with which Cæſar loaded his country? After
the deſtruction of Carthage, when Rome attained the ſummit of her glory,
the Romans, from the oppoſition they then found between their intereſts, their
manners and their laws, ought to have foreſeen the revolution with which
the empire was threatened; and to have been ſenſible that to ſave the ſtate,
the republic in a body ought to have preſſed the making thoſe reformations
which the times and circumſtances required, and above all to haſten the pre-
vention of thoſe changes that perſonal ambition, the moſt dangerous to the
legiſlature, might introduce. The Romans would have had recourſe to this
remedy, had they had clearer ideas of morality. Inſtructed by the hiſtory
of all nations, they would have perceived, that the ſame laws which had raiſed
them to the higheſt elevation, could not ſupport them in that ſtate; that an
emperor is like a veſſel which the winds have driven to a certain latitude,
where, being oppoſed by other winds, it is in danger of being loſt, if to
avoid ſhipwreck, the pilot does not ſpeedily change his courſe : this political
truth was well known to Mr. Locke, who, on the eſtabliſhment of the legiſ-
lature of Carolina, propoſed that his laws ſhould be in force only during one
century; and that time being expired, they ſhould become void, if they were
not a-freſh examined and confirmed by the Engliſh. He was ſenſible that a
military, or commercial government, ſuppoſed very different laws; and that
a legiſlation proper to favour commerce and induftry, might one day become
fatal to that colony, if its neighbours entered into a war amongſt themſelves,
and circumſtances made it neceſſary for that people to become more wake
than commercial. | of |

It we apply Mr. Locke's idea to the falſe religions, we ſhall be ſoon con-
vinced of the folly of their inventors, and their followers. Whoever, in fact,
examines the religions, (all of which, except ours, are formed by the hand of
man) mult perceive, that none of them was ever contrived by the great genius


of


80 DB E:L'ELSPRATx: on, |

of a legiſlator, but by the narrow mind of an ordinary perſon; that conſe-
quently a falſe religion was never founded on the baſis of the laws, and a
principle of public utility : a principle always invariable, but pliable in its
application to all the various ſituations in which a people can ſucceſſively be
placed. This is the only principle that ought to be admitted by thoſe, who,
after the example of Anaſtaſius, Ripperda, Thamas Kouli-Kan, and Gehan-
Guir, would trace the plan of a new religion, and render it of ule to mankind.
It in the compoſition of falſe religions, this plan had been always followed,
they would have prelerved, in thele religions, whatever is of uſe; they would
neither have deſtroyed Elyſium, nor Tartarus; and the legiſlator might at
his pleaſure have given pictures of them more or leſs pleaſing or terrible,
according to the greater or leſſer ſtrength of his imagination. Theſe religions,
merely ſtripped of what is hurtſul in them, could not have laid the mind
under the ſhameful yoke of a fooliſh credulity. What crimes and ſuperſtitions
would then have vaniſhed from the earth! We ſhould not have ſeen an in-
habitant of Java (a), perſuaded by the ſlighteſt inconvenience, that the fatal
hour was come, make haſte to rejoin the god of his fathers, implore death,
and conſent to receive it; the prieſts would have endeavoured, in vain, to ob-
tain his conſent to be ſtrangled by their hands, and to ſuffer them to regale
themſelves with his fleſh. The Perſians would have never nouriſhed that
abominable ſect of derviſes, who demand alms ſword in hand; who kill
with impunity, whoever does not admit their principles to be true ; who raiſe
a murdering hand againſt a Sophi, and plunge the poniard into the breaſt
of an Amurath. The Romans, who were as ſuperſtitious as the Negroes (b),
would not have regulated the exertion of their courage by the appetite of the
ſacred chickens. In ſhort, the religions of the eaſt could not have produced
thoſe long and bloody wars (c), firſt made by the Saracens againſt the chriſ-
rians; and afterwards under the ſtandards of Omar and Hali, continued by the
ſame Saracens againſt each other; and this doubtleſs gave birth to the fable
made uſeof by a prince of Indoſtan, to ſuppreſs the indiſcreet zealof an Iman.

Submit thyſelf, ſaid the Iman, to the order of the mott high. The earth is
going to receive his holy law; victory every where marches before Omar.


a 4.


V


(a) To the eaſt of Sumatra. Orleans marches againſt the enemy with


(b) When the warriors of Congo, ad-
vance towards an enemy, if they meet in
their way a hare, a crow, or ſome other fearful
animal, they ſay it is the genius of the ene-
my, come to inform them of their fear, and
then fight with intrepidity. But if they hear
the crowing of a cock, at any other hour
than is uſual, they ſay, it is a certain preſage
of a defeat; and therefore they always reſolve
not to expoſe themſelves to it. If the crow-
inggof a cock is at the ſame time heard by


boch armies, no courage *an detain them,


for veing equally. frighted at the fatal omen,

they mſtantly diſpand themſelves, and both

lices retire, When the ſavage of New
.


moſt intrepidity, a dream, or the barking of
a dog is ſufficient to make him return home.

c) The human paſſions have ſometimes
kindled the like wars among the chriſtians
themſelves; but nothing can be more con-
trary to the ſpirit of their- religion, which
is a ſpirit of diſintereſtedneſs and peace; to
its morals, which breathe nothing but mild-
neſs and indulgence ; to its maxims, which
every where preſcribe beneficence and cha-
rity ; to the ſpirituality of the objects it pre-
ſents to the mind; to the ſublimity of its
motives ; and, in ſhort, to the grandeur, and
the nature of the rewards it propoſes,

I


Thov


ESSAYS or THP M I N D. 87
Thou ſeeſt Arabia, Perſia, Syria, and all Aſia ſubdued : The Roman eagle
is trampled under the feet of the faithful, and the ſword of terror is reſtored
to the hand of Khaled. From theſe certain ſigns, acknowledge the truth of
my religion, the ſublimity of the Koran, the ſimplicity of its doctrines, and
the mildneſs of our lay. Our God is not cruel ; he is honoured by our very
pleaſures ; and, as Mohammed ſays, by breathing the odour of perfumes,
and by taſting the voluptuous careſſes of love, my foul is kindled with new
fervor, and ſprings with greater rapidity up towards heaven. Crowned inſect,
how long wilt thou wreſtle againſt thy God? Open thine eyes, ſee the ſuper-
ſtitions and vices with which thy people are infected: wilt thou for ever de-

ive thyſelf of the light of the Koran?“ |

Iman, replied, the prince, there was'a time when the republic of beavers,.
as in my empire, complained of a few robberies, and even of ſome aſſaſſina-
tions: to prevent theſe crimes, nothing more was neceſſary, than to open
ſome public treaſuries, where the rich might depoſite their wealth; to enlarge
the high roads, and to erect a few priſons. The ſenate of beavers were ready
to come to this reſolution, when one who was advanced in years, lifting up his
eyes to the azure firmament, ſuddenly cried out, let us take example from man.
He believes that the palace in the air is built, inhabited, and governed by a
more powerful Being than himſelf: this Being is named Michapour. Let us
| publiſh this doctrine, that the nation of the beavers may ſubmit to it. Let
us perſuade them that an etherial ſpirit is, by order of this God, placed as a
centinel on each planet; that from thence contemplating our actions, he may
be employed in diſpenſing happineſs to the good, and miſery to the wicked:
this creed being once believed, guilt will fly far from us. He was ſilent; they en-
ter into a conſultation ; they deliberate on the affair; theidea pleaſes on account
of its novelty, and is adopted : this becomes the eſtabliſhed religion,and the bea-
vers at firſt live like brethren. Soon after, however, a great controverly ariſes,
One ſays that it 1s the otter, and another ſays, that it is the muſk-rar, who
firſt preſented to Michapour, the grains of ſand with which he formed the
earth. The diſpute grows warm; the people divide into parties; thy abuſe
each other; from abuſe they come to blows, and Fanaticiſm ſounds her
charge. Before that religion ſome robberies and aſſaſſinations had been com-
mitted ; but now a civil war is kindled, and half the nation expires. Be
inſtructed by this fable, and pretend not, O cruel Iman, added this Indian
prince, to prove to me the truth and utility of a religion that ſpreads deſola-
tion throngh the univerſe.”

It follows from what has been ſaid in this chapter, that if the legiſlature
were authoriſed, in conſequence of the principles above eſtabliſhed, to make
ſuch changes in the laws, cuſtoms, and falſe religions, as the times and cir-
cumſtances required, they might drain the ſource of an infinite number of
evils, and doubtleſs ſecure the repoſe of nations, by extending the duration
of empires.

Beſides, what light would theſe principles fpread over morality, in mak-
ing us ſenſible of the neceffary pee hike is between $23.4 and 8 b
laws of a country; and by informing us that the ſcience of morality is nothing
more than the ſcience of the legiſlature? Who doubts that the moraliſts,
being more aſſiduous at this ſtudy, would then carry the ſcience to that high


degree


88 D ESPRIT 67


degree of perfection, which good minds can now have only a glimpſe of, and
to which perhaps they do not imagine it can ever arrive (d)? |

If in almoſt every government, all the laws being incoherent, and incon-
ſiſtent with each other, ſeem to be the work of mere chance; it is becauſe
guided by different views and intereſts, thoſe who formgd them, gave them -
{elves little trouble about the connection and agreement that ſubſiſted hetween
them. It is with reſpect to the formation of theſe entire bodies of laws, as
with the formation of certain iſlands. The peaſants reſolved to clear the
fields of the uſeleſs woods, ſtones, herbs, and mud; for that purpoſe, they
let in a river, when thoſe materials, driven by the currents, were collected into
a heap about ſome reeds, they hardened, and at length formed a piece of
dry land.

Ir is however, on the uniformity of the legiſlator's views, and the depen-
dence of theſe laws on each other, that their excellence conſiſts. But, in order
to eſtabliſh this dependence, it would be neceſſary to refer them all to one
ſimple principle, ſuch as that of the public utility; or, to that of the greateſt
number of men, ſubject to the ſame form of government: a principle mote
extenſive and more fruitful than imagination can conceive: a principle that
includes all the morality and all the legiſlations, of which many men diſcourſe
without underſtanding them, and of which the legiſlators themſelves have
yet but a very ſuperficial idea, at leaſt if we may judge from the unhappineſs
of almoſt all the nations upon earth (e). |


C H A F. XVIII
Of the Mind, considered with reſpect to different ages and countries.


C...õͤĩV7«é ISHII SIG IS


1 Have proved, that the ſame actions ſucceſſively uſeful and prejudicial in
various ages and countries, were alternately eſteemed and deſpiſed. It


is with ideas as with actions.


The diverſity of the people's intereſts,


and the changes produced in thoſe intereſts, produced revolutions in their


taſtes,


—


f


(d) It is in vaĩn to ſay, that, this great work of
an excellent legiſlation is not to be performed
by human wiſdom, and therefore no better than
a mere chimera. I would ſuppoſe that a long
and blind ſeries of events following each other,
the firſt buds of which were unfolded at the
creation, is the univerſal cauſe of all that has
been or ſhall be. On admitting this princi-
ple, I add, that if in this long chain of events
is neceſſarily comprehended the wiſe men
and the fools, the cowards and the heroes
that have governed the world, why may


there not alſo be comprehended in jt, the
diſcovery of the true principles of govern-


ment, to which that ſcience owes its perfec-


tion, and the world its happineſs ?

(e) In moſt of the empires of the eaft,
they have not even the leaſt idea of the laws
of nature and nations. Whoever ſhould en-
deavour to enlighten the people in this reſpect,
would almoſt conſtantly expoſe himſelf to the
fury of the tyrants, who lay waſte thoſe un-
happy countries. In order to violate with
the greater impunity 'the laws of humanity,

| they


8
n
"4


4
5
„
1
«
4
e
-
©
_
p
*
*
vo
1
2
4 5
1
2
*
TY
pF
00
*
aw
* *
1
54
* *
i
2 pu;
ec
3
3
*
2
=
It
75
*
y
E
*
*
5
Fa
*
*
5 1
3
YL
75
l
8
ET
$7
8
N
.
Oy
5
+ the
5.
5
72
I
*
»,
*
pay
9 1
4
Iz
5
. *
ty
1
21
1
* 5
*
$4
. :
\
—


ESSAY Sow int MIME . Po


their taſtes, occaſioned the ſudden creation, or entire annihilation of certain
kinds of genius, and the unjuſt or proper, though, always reciprocal contempt
which different geniuſes, ages, and countries have always felt for each other.
The truth of this propoſitioa Jam going to prove in the two following
chapters, by ſeveral examples. |


KEREEEEEEEEESENINEEENEEIEREEEIENEIEELEENISEEEESIEEEEKKHERS ES


S HK F: a


The eſtcem for different kinds of Genius is in every age proportioned to
| the intereſt the people have in ejtecming them.


O ſhew the perfect juſtneſs of this propoſition, let us firſt take romances
for an example. From the publication of Amadis to the romances of the
preſent age, that kind of writing has ſucceſſively experienced a thouſand
viciſſitudes. Would we know the cauſe ? If it be aſked, why the romances
that have been held in eſteem during three hundred years now appear


tedious and ridiculous ? we ſhall find that the principal merit of moſt of theſe |


works depends on the exactneſs with which, in theſe performances, the virtues
and vices, the paſſions, cuſtoms, and follies of a nation are painted.

Now the manners of a nation generally change every age; this change muſt
then occaſion a revolution in taſte, and conſequently in romances : one nation
is therefore conſtantly forced by the very defire of amuſement to deſpiſe in
one age what it admired in that which preceded it (a). What I have ſaid
of romances may be applied to almoſt all other works. But, to ſhew this truth
in a ſtronger light, it may perhaps be proper to compare the genius of the ages


of ignorance with that of the prelent age. Let us ſtop a moment to make


this enquiry. | |
As the eccleſiaſtics were then the only perſons who were able to write, I
can only draw my obſervations from their works and ſermons. Whoever


reads them will perceive no leſs difference between thoſe of Menot (b) and


father


—


—


they will have their ſubjects ignorant of what,
as men, they have a right to expect from the
prince, and of the tacit contract by which he
binds himſelf to his people. What reaſon
ſoever theſe princes give for their conduct, it
can only be founded on a perverſe deſire of
tee” 1h over their ſubjects.

(a) Not but that theſe antient romances
are ſtill agreeable to ſome philoſophers, who
look upon them as the true hiſtory of the
manners of the people, conſidered in a certain
aze, and under acertain form of government,
Theſe philoſophers, convinced that there is
a great difference between two romances, the
one written by a Sibarite, and the other by


N


—_—


a Crotoniate, chuſe to form a judgment of the


character and genius of a nation from the


kind of romance with which they are moſt
charmed. Theſe ſorts of judgments are com-
monly very juſt : an able politician may, by
theſe helps, determine pretty exactly what
enterprizes it would be prudent or raſh to at-
tempt againſt a nation. But common peo-
ple, who read romances leſs for inſtruction
than amuſement, do not conſider them in
this point of view; and, conſequently, can-
not form the ſame judgment from them.

(b) In one of Menot's ſermons, he


treats of the promiſe of the Meſſiah, and


ſays, God had from all eternity as >
| OY


—————————— ͤ ͤ Q——— mobo . wmwꝛm gee OE


- —ͤ —— —
——PPIrf— — * —


ä 7


1
_
—


—— —ä


—


— —— —


—


PPP


— ̃ ͤ 01
— —


go DE L'ESPRIT,; on,


father Bourdaloue, than between the knight of the ſun and the princeſs of
Cleves. Our manners being changed, and our knowledge increaſed, we now
laugh at what we formerly admired. Who does not ſmile at the ſermon
delivered by a preacher at Bourdeaux, who, to ſhew the gratitude of the deceaſed,
for all who cauſe prayers to be offered for them, and give for that purpoſe
money to the monks, gravely cried out in the pulpit that, ** at the mere ſound
e of tle money, which fell into a box or plate, and founded tin, tin, tin, all
<« the ſouls in purgatory, were ſeized with ſuch joy, that they could not forbear
laughing our ha, ha, ha (c).?

In the ſimplicity of the ages of ignorance, objects preſented themſelves un-
der a very different aſpect from that in which they appear to enlightened eyes.
The tragedies of our Saviour's paſſion, edifying as they were to our anceſtors,
appear to us as ſcandalous. It ſeems the fame with reſpect to almoſt all
the ſubtil queſtions then debated in the divinity- ſchools. Nothing can appear
more indecent than diſputes in form, whether God is naked or cloathed in the
hoſt ? whether if God be omnipotent, he has the power of linning ? whether God


could aſſume the nature of a woman, a devil, an aſs, a rock, a gourd, and a


thouſand other queſtions ſtill more extravagant (d) ? |


Every


FY


<« ed the incarnation, and the ſalvation of the
« human race; but he reſolved that ſome
<« great perſonages, ſuch as the holy fathers,
ce ſhould entreat for it. Adam, Enos, Enoch,
« Methuſalah, Lamech, and Noah, after
<« having in vain beſought him for that pur-
<« poſe, agreed among themſelves to ſend
« ambaſſadors to him, the firſt was Moſes,
« the ſecond David, the third Ifaiah, and
© the laſt the church; but theſe ambaſ-
ce ſadors having no better ſucceſs than the
<« patriarchs, they thought it adviſable to
c ſend ſome women. Madam Eve preſented
4c herſelf firſt, towhom God made anſwer. Eve,
ce thou haſt ſinned, thou art not worthy of
my fon, Afterwards they ſent madam Sarah,
« who cried, O God, do thou help us'; but
« God ſaid, Thou haſt rendered thyſelf un-
&« worthy of it, by the incredulity thou ſhew-
« eſt, when I reformed thee, that thou
c {houlſt be the mother of Ifaac, The third
< was madam Rebecca, to whom God ſaid,
« Thou haſt done a great injury to Eſau, in
« favour of Jacob. The fourth was madam
& judith, to whom God faid, Thou art an
« aſſaſſin. The fifth was madam Eſther, to
« whom he ſaid, Thou haſt been too great a
« coquette; thou haſt ſpent thy time in
« dreſſing thyſelf to pleaſe Ahaſuerus. At
« length they ſent the chamber-maid, who
« was fourteen years of age. She cait down
4 her eyes, and with, a baſhful countenance,
6 kneeled and ſaid, let my beloved come into


. —


my garden, and eat of the fruit of his ap-
« ples; and the garden was the virgin's womb.
„Now the ſon having heard theſe words,
„ ſaid, Father, I have loved her from my


„ youth, and will have her for my mother.


At that inſtant God called Gabriel, and
c ſaid, O Gabriel, go to Nazareth and
„ preſent theſe letters from me to Mary:
„ and the ſon added, Take mine and tell
„ her, that I have choſen her to be my mo-
ther. Aſſure her, ſaid the Holy Ghoſt,
„ that I will dwell within her; let her know
ec that ſhe ſhall be my temple, and deliver to
cher theſe letters.” All Menot's other ſer-


' mons are nearly in the ſame taſte.


(c) In thoſe times ſuch ignorance prevail-
ed, that an incumbent having a trial with his
pariſhioners about who ſhould pave the
church, the prieſt, when the judge was ready
to give the cauſe againſt him, thought pro-
per to quote this paſiage from the prophet ſe-
remiah, ** Paveant illi, & ego not paveam ;”?
when the judge not knowing what to anſwer,
ordered that the church ſhould be paved at the
expence of the pariſhioners.

There was a time, when the arts and ſci-
ences were conſidered by the church as earth-
ly things unworthy of a chriſtian. Tt is even
ſaid on this ſubject, that an angel whipt
St. Jerome for endeavouring to imitate Cice-
ro's ſtyle, The abbe Cartaut pretends, that
this was for imitating him but badly, |

(d) Utrum Deus potuerit ſuppoſitare mu-

licram,


ESSAYS on run M I NE


91


E very thing, even miracles themſelves, bore in thoſe times of ignorance,
the marks of the bad taſte of the age (e). |


Among many of thoſe pretended miracles mentioned in the


1emoirs of


the academy of inſcriptions and belles-lettres (f), I ſhall chute one wrougit


in favour of a monk.


«© This monk, returning from a houſe into which he


« was introduced every night, had a river to pals : but Satan overſetting the
ce boat, the monk was drowned, as he was beginning the invitatory of the ma-


a tins to the Virgin Mary.


Two devils ſeized his foul, but were ſtopped by


two angels, who claimed him on account of his being a chriſtian. My Lords,
c {aid the devils to the angels, *ts true, God died for his friends, and that


« js no fable; but this man was one of God's enemies:


and ſince we


« have found him in the filth of fin, we ſhall go and caſt him into the mire
of hell, and ſhall be well rewarded by our provoſt. After many altercations,


ce the angels propoſed to refer the diſpute to the virgin's tribunal.


The devils


„ replied, that they would freely take God for judge; becauſe his judgment
* was always agreeable to the laws: but as for the virgin, ſaid they, we can-
ce not hope for juſtice from her; for ſhe would break all the gates of hell ra-
c ther than leave there for a ſingle day, the perſon who, while living, per-


e formed ſome reverences to her image.


God contradicts her in nothing.


<« She may ſay, that the magpie is black, and that troubled waters are clear:
* he agrees to every thing. We no longer know what we are about: of


lierem, vel diabolum, vel aſinum, vel ſilicem,
vel cucurbitam: & ſi ſuppoſitaſſet cucurbitam,
quemadmodum fuerit concionatura, editura
miracula, & quonammodo ſuiſſet fixa cruci.
Apolog. p. Herodot. vol. iii. p. 127.

(e) Whatever may be ſaid in vindication of
the ages of ignorance, it can never be proved,
that they were favourable to religion, though
they were to ſuperſtition. Therefore nothing
can be more ridiculous than the declama-
tions uttered againſt philoſophers, or againſt
the academies in the country. Thoſe who
compoſe them, it is ſaid, cannot enlighten
the earth; they would therefore do better to
cultivate it. Such men, it may be replied,
are not in a condition to labour at that em-
ployment. Beſides, would it be of any ad-
vantage to agriculture, to tegiſter them in the
lit of labourers, while we entertain ſo many
mendicants, ſoldiers, artiſts in points of luxu-
ry, and domeſtics : this would be to recover
the finances of a ſtate, by ſaving the ends of
candles, I ſhall even add, that ſuppoſing
theſe country academies make but few diſ-


coveries, we may at leaſt conſider them as


the canals by which the knowledge of the


capital is communicated to the provinces,


Nothing can be of greater uſe than enlighten-
ing the minds of mankind; © Philoſophical


N 2


Knowledge, ſays the zbbe de Fleury, can
never be prejudical.” It is only by im-
proving human reaſon, adds Mr. Hume, that
nations can hope to improve their laws and
politics.” The mind is like fire, its effects
are every where ſeen : there are few great
politicians and great captains in a country,
where there are no men diſtinguiſhed by their
{ſkill in literature and the ſciences. How can
it be imagined, that a people, who know nei-
ther the art of writing, nor that of reaſoning,
can form good laws, and free themſelves
from that yoke of ſuperſtition which ſpread
deſolation through the ages of ignorance ?
Solon, Lycurgus, and that Pythagoras who
formed ſo many legiſlators, prove how far the
progreſs of reaſon may contribute to the pub-
lic happineſs. We ought therefore to conſi-
der theſe country academies as very uſeful.
I even ſay, that if we conſider the learned
merely as traders, and compare the hundred
thouſand livres the king diſtributes among
the academies and the men of learning, with
the produce of the ſale of our books to fo-
reigners, we may aſſert, that this kind of
commerce gained a thouſand per cent. to
the ſtate.

(f) <* Hiſtory of the academy of inſcrip-
tions and Belles lettres, tome xvii.” |


a duce


* -


92 ESPRIT; ons,
« a duce ſhe will make a tre, of two duces two cinqs, ſhe holds both the dice
and the chance. The day when God made her mother was very fatal
to us.” | |

People muſt doubtleſs be but little edified by ſuch a miracle ; and the fol-
lowing is equally ridiculous. It is taken from Letters edifying and curious
on the viſit of the biſhop of Halicarnaſſus, and appears to me lo very extra-
vagant, that I cannot reſiſt the deſire of placing it here |

To prove the excellence of baptiſm the author relates, that ** formerly in
„ the kingdom of Armenia was a king who had a great averſion to the
« chriſtians; and therefore perſecuted thoſe of that religion in a very cruel
* manner. He well deſerved to be puniſhed by the Almighty ; but God,
« who is infinitely good, and who opened the heart of St. Paul to convert him
« when perſecuting the fathful, opened alſo the heart of this monarch, and made
« him know his holy religion: for it happened as the King was holding a
« council in the palace with the Mandarins, to deliberate on the means of abo-
« liſhing intirely the chriſtian religion throughout his dominions, that the king
« and Mandarins were immediately changed into ſwine. At the grunting of theſe
te hogs, the people flocked thither, without knowing the caule of ſuch an ex-
&« traordinary change.
ic had been put to the torture the day before; and, running at the noiſe occa-
« ſioned by this event, reproached the king for his cruelty to thoſe of his reli-
« gion. At Gregory's diſcourſe, the ſwine put a ſtop to their noiſe, became
« ſilent, and lifred up their ſnouts to hear him, while Gregory examined them
«in theſe terms: are you from this time forward reſolved to amend your


« lives? At this demand, all the ſwine bowed their heads and cried, ouen, ouen,


« quen, as if they would have ſaid oui, (or yes). Then Gregory thus reſumed
« his diſcourſe. If you are reſolved to amend ; if you repent of your ſins,
« and conſent to be baptiſed, in order that you may perfectly obſerve the holy
<« religion, the Lord will look upon you with pity ; if not, you will be miſerable,
« both in this world and the next. All the ſwine bowed their heads and
« cried, ouen, ouen, ouen, as if they would have ſaid, they deſired to do ſo.
Gregory ſeeing the {wine thus humbled, took holy water, and baptiſed them
« all: and there immediately happened a great miracle; for, as he baptiſed


each hog, he inſtantly changed into a more beautiful perſon than he was


before.“ 5
Theſe miracles, ſermons, tragedies, and theological queſtions that appear


ſo ridiculous to us, were, and muſt have been-admired in the ages of igno-
rance; becauſe they were ſuited to the genius of the times, and men always
admire ideas analogous to their own. The groſs ſtupidity of moſt of them
would not permit them to form any conception of the holineſs and grandeur
of religion for with almoſt every body religion was in a manner nothing more
than ſuperſtition and idolatry. But thanks to philoſophy, we may now ſay, that
we have more elevated ſentiments. Whatever injuſtice has been done to the
ſciences; whatever corruptions they are acculed of introducing into our man-
mers, it is certain that mo of our clergy are now as pure as they were then
depraved, at leaſt, if we give any credit to hiſtory and antient preachers.
Maillard and Menot, the moſt celebrated among them, have always theſe


words in their mouths: Sacerdotes religioſi, concubinarii. © Damned infa-
© mous


Among them was a chriſtian named Gregory, who.


3 4

*
RES”!
.


ESSAYS o rn MIND. 93


© mgus wretches, cries Maillard, whoſe names are written in the regiſters
« of the devil: thieves and robbers, as St. Bernard ſays, can you think that
<« the founders of your benefices gave you them to do nothing but to live
« luxuriouſly and play with the girls? And you gentlemen, the fat abbots,
with your benefices, who keep horſes, dogs, and wenches, aſk St. Stephen
« if he obtained paradiſe by leading ſuch a lite as this, making good cheer,
being always art feaſts and banquets, giving wealth to the church, and the
c crucifix to the ladies of pleaſure(g)?” : Wk

I ſhall ſtop no longer to conſider thoſe ſtupid ages in- which all men,
the ſuperſtitious and the brave, amuſed themſelves with nothing but the tales
of the monks, and extravagant feats of chivalry. Ignorance and folly al-
ways prevail together : before the revival of philoſophy, authors, though born
in different ages, wrote all in the ſame ſtrain, What is called taſte, ſup-
poſes knowledge : but there is no taſte, and conſequently no revolutions of
taſte among the people who continue barbarous ; for theſe are only to be found
in enlightened ages. Now theſe kinds of revolutions are always preceded by
ſome change in the form of government, the manners, laws, and fituation
of a people. There is then a ſecret dependence eſtabliſhed between the taſte
of a nation and its intereſt. |

To illuſtrate this principle by ſome applications. If it be aſked, why the
moſt memorable tragic paintings of revenge, ſuch as that of Attrides, does
not kindle in us the ſame tranſports as thoſe with which they filled the Greeks ?
we ſhall find that this difference of impreſſion is occaſioned by the difference
between our religion and polity, and the religion and polity of the Greeks.
The antients raiſed temples to revenge: that paſſion, now placed among
the vices, was then reckoned among the virtues. The antient polity favoured
this worſhip. In an age too warlike not to be a little ſavage, the only means
of putting a reſtraint upon rage, fury, and treachery, was making it diſho-
nourable to forget an injury, and to place the picture of revenge by the ſide
of that of an affront: thus they kept up in the hearts of the citizens a reſpect-
ful and falutary fear, that ſupplied the defects of the government. The paint-


(g) This Maillard, who with ſuch vehe- Gomorreen Doctor ; and the following epi-
mence declaimed againſt the clergy, was not gram was made on him, which appears tole-
himſelf exempt from the vices with which he rably well turned for the time:

provoked his brethren. He was called the


Noſtre maiſtre Maillard tout par tout met le nez,
Tantoſt va chez le roy, tantoſt va chez la royne;
II fait tout, il ſcait tout & à rien reſt idoine ;

II eſt grand orateur, poëte de mieux nes,

Juge ſi bon qu'au feu mille en a condamnes,
Sophiſte auſſy aigu que les feſſes d'un moine.

Mb ais il eſt fi meſchant, pour n'eſtre paſs chanoine,
Qu'aupres de lui fon ſaincts le diable & les damnes.
Si ſe fourrer par tout a gloire il le repute,

Pourquoy dedans Poiſſi neſt il à la diſpute ?

Il dit qu'a grand regret il en eſt eloigne ;

Car Beze il cut vaincu, tant il eſt habile homme.
Pourquoi done n'y eſt- il? Il eſt embeſoignẽ.
Apres les fondemens pour rebaſtir Sodome.


ing


94 ESPRIT; on;
Ing of that paſſion was ſo very analogous to the antient prejudices of the pegple,
that it could not fail of being examined with pleaſure.

But 1a the age in which we live, at a time when the police is much improv-
ed, and in which we are no longer ſubject to the ſame prejudices, it is evi-
dent, that from conſulting in the ſame manner our own intereſt, we muſt ſee
with indifference the painting of a paſſion, which, far from maintaining peace
and harmony in ſociety, produces nothing but diſorders and uſeleſs cruelties.
Why do the tragedies, full of thoſe brave and manly ſentiments that inſpire
a love of our country, now make ſo flight an impreſſion upon us? Be-
cauſe it is very uncommon for people to unite a certain degree of courage


and virtue with an extreme ſubmiſſion : thus the Romans became baſe and


vile as ſoon as they had obtained a maſter, and as Homer ſays, The dread-
ful inſtant that puts the freeman in irons, ſnatches from him half his prime-


val virtue.” Whence I conclude, that the ages of liberty, which produce


great men, and great paſſions, are the only times wherein people are really
admirers of brave and noble ſentiments.

Why was Corneille's manner ſo much admired, while that great poet was
living, and fo little reliſhed at preſent ? It is becauſe, being juſt eſcaped from
thoſe troubleſome times, when minds, heated by the fire of ſedition,
are more daring, fonder of bold ſentiments, and more ſuſceptible of ambi-
tion; it is becauſe the characters Corneille gives his hereos, and the projects
he makes the ambitious form were conſequently more analogous to the ſpirit
of the age, than they are now, at a time when we have few heroes (h), few
true citizens, and few men enflamed by ambition, ſince a happy calm has
ſucceeded fo many ſtorms, and the volcanos of ſedition are extinct.

How can an artiſt, accuſtomed to groan under the weight of indigence and
contempt; a rich man, and even a great lord accuſtomed to cringe to a man
in a high poſt, and to regard him with that ſacred reſpect which the Egyptian
feels for his Gods, and the negro for his idol, be ſtruck with the verſe, where


Corneille ſays,
“Pour Etre plus qu'un roi, tu te crois quelque choſe ?”


That is, | .
To be more than a king, thou thinkeſt thyſelf ſomething.


Such ſentiments muſt appear to them fooliſh and gigantic. They cannot ad-
mire elevation of mind without frequently bluſhing at the abject ſtate of their


own ; therefore if, we except a ſmall number of wits and men of elevated


genius, who ſtill preſerve a rational and felr-eſteem for Corneille, the other ad-
mirers of that great poet eſteem him leſs from their own judgment and taſte,
than from hearſay, and a favourable propoſſeſſion.

Every change in government, or the manners, of a people muſt neceſſarily
introduce a revolution in taſte. From age to age, people are differently ſtruck
with the ſame objects, according to the different paſſions by which they are


animated. ;


96


(h) Civil wars are a misfortune, to which we frequently owe great men.
2 It


ESS AVS ov Tat MIN D. 95


It is with reſpect to the ſentiments of men as with their ideas; if we only
conceive in others the ideas analogous to our own, we can only, ſays Salluſt,
be affected by thoſe paſſions which ſtrongly affect ourſelves (i).

Jo be touched with the painting of fome paſſion, we mult have felt it our-
ſelves. 5 |

Let us ſuppoſe that the ſhepherd Tircis meets with Cataline, and that they
reciprocally make each other the confident of the ſentiments of love and am-
bition with which they are agitated ; they certainly can only communicate to
each other an impreſſion of the paſſions that animate them, but very dif-
ferent from what they feel themſelves. The firſt cannot conceive that there
is any thing ſo captivating in ſupreme power; and the fecond, that there is
ſuch a charm in the tender ſmile of a woman beloved. Now, to apply the
different kinds of tragedy to this principle, I ſay, that in every country
where the inhabitants have no ſhare in the management of public affairs;
where the words, country and citizen are ſeldom mentioned, the public can
be only pleaſed by repreſenting on the ſtage, paſſions ſuited to the people;
ſuch for inſtance as love. Not that all men are equally ſenſible of this: it is
certain that fierce and bold minds, the ambitious, politicians, miſers, and
men involved in important affairs are but ſlightly touched with the painting
of that paſſion : and this is the very reaſon why dramatic pieces have not
ſuch great ſucceſs as in republican ſtates, where the hatred of tyrants, the
love of liberty and of our country are the points for engaging the public
eſteem.

In any other government, the citizens not being united by a common in-
tereſt, the diverſity of perſonal intereſts muſt neceſſarily oppoſe the univer-
ſality of the applauſe. In theſe countries we can only pretend to a greater or
leſſer ſucceſs, by painting ſuch paſſions as are more or lets generally intereſting
to individuals. Now among the paſſions of this kind, there is- no doubr,
but that of love, which is in part founded on a neceſſity of nature, is the moſt
univerſally felt. Thus we now prefer in France, Racine to Corneille, who,
in another age, or perhaps in a different country, ſuch as England, would
probably have the preference.

This proceeds from weakneſs, that is a neceſſary conſequence of luxury,

and a change of manners; which, depriving us of all ftrength and elevation
of mind, makes us already prefer comedies to tragedies, which are now no-
thing but comedies in an elevated ſtyle, where the action is performed in a
1 king's palace. | |
E-1 The happy encreaſe of ſovereign authority, which diſarming ſedition, and
85 degrading the condition of tradeſmen, has almoſt entirely baniſhed them from
the comic ſcene; where we no longer ſee any, but men of a good air and in high
life, who really fill the place that was formerly poſſeſſed by men of the com-
mon rank, and are properly the bourgois of the age. |
We ſee then, that at different times, certain kinds of genius made very dif-
ferent impreſſions on the public ; but that theſe were always proportioned to


7


—


(i) At ſeeing an account of an heroic action, the reader believes nothing that he js not
capable of doing himſelf; he rejects the reſt as mere invention, FG 1


their


96 EL 'ESPRIT; on,


their intereſt in approving them. Now, this public intereſt is ſometimes ſo
very different in one age from what it 1s in the next, as to occaſion the ſudden
creation or annihilatioa of certain kinds of ideas and works; fuch are all thoſe
of controverſy, which are now as unknown, as they were, and ought to have
been, formerly, known and admired. |

In fact, at a time when the people being divided about their creed, were ani-
mated by a ſpirit of intemperate zeal ; when thoſe of each ſect, ardent to main -
tain their opinions, would take up either the ſword or arguments to declare,
prove, and cauſe them to be adopted by the whole world ; works of contro-
verſy were, on account of the ſubjects, too generally intereſting not to be
univerſally eſteemed ; beſides theſe works were wrote, at leaſt on the part of
certain heretics, with all the addreſs and ſpirit imaginable, to perſuade a
perſon of the truth of the tale of an Aſs's ſkin ; or that of Blue-beard, which
reſemble ſome hereſies (k). The controverſal writers were obliged to employ
in their writings, all the art, the force, and the reſources of logic, that their
works might be maſter-pieces of ſubtilty, and perhaps in this particular the
greateſt efforts of the human mind. It is therefore certain, both from the im-
portance of the ſubject, and from the manner of treating it, that the contro-
vertiſts mult have then been conſidered as the writers moſt worthy of eſteem.

But in an age, when the ſpirit of fanataciſm has almoſt entirely fled ; when
both the King and people, inſtructed by paſt misfortunes, no longer employ
themſelves in theological diſputes; and when the principles of the true re-
ligion are daily more and more confirmed, theſe writers ought no longer to
make the ſame impreſſion on the minds of the people. Thus a perſon now
'reads thole writings with the ſame diſguſt that he would find in peruſing a
Peruvian controverſy, in which is debated, whether Mancocapac is, or is not
the ſon of the ſun.

To confirm what I have juſt ſaid, by a fact that has fallen within our own
obſervation, let us call to mind the heat with which the diſpute was carried
on, in relation to the ſuperiority of the antients over the moderns. This fana-
ticiſm gave reputation to ſeveral indifferent diſſertations compoſed on this ſub-
Jet; and yet the indifference with which it has been ſince conſidered, has ſuf-
fered to be loſt in oblivion, the diſſertations of the celebrated de la Motte, and
the learned abbe Terraſſon: diſſertations which, notwithſtanding their having
a juſt title to be conſidered as maſter- pieces and models in this kind of writing,
are almoſt unknown to all but men of learning. |

Thele examples are ſufficient to prove, that to the public intereſt differently
modified, according to the different ages, we ought to attribute the creation,
and annihilation of certain kinds of ideas and works. |

Nothing now remains but to ſhew how this public intereſt, in ſpite of
the changes that daily happen in the manners, paſſions, and taſtes of a
people, may however ſecure to certain works the conſtant eſteem of all ages.

For this purpoſe we mult remember, that the manner of writing in moſt
eſteem in one age and country, is often the molt deſpiſed in another age
and in another country; and conſequently, that this is not what is ſtrictly


wid


(k) See the hiſtory of Herefies, by St. Epiphanius.
| 2 called,


ag


ESS AVS o Tur MIN D. 97


called, genius. Now among the ſentiments entertained of theſe pieces, ſome
are fleeting and others durable. We may then reduce to two kinds, all the
different ſpecies of genius: the one, where a momentary utility is depen-
dent on the changes that happen in commerce, government, the paſſions,
employments, and prejudices of a people, which may be termed, I he ſpirit
of the mode (I): the other, whoſe utility is eternal, unalterable, independent
of the various manners and governments, confined to the very nature of man,
and conſequently always invariable. This may perhaps be conſidered as the
true genius, or that moſt deſirable. *

All kinds of genius being thus reduced to theſe two, I ſhall conſequently
diſtinguiſh the works produced by them into two ſorts. |
The one is deſigned to have a glorious and rapid ſucceſs ; the other, a ſac-
ceſs more extenſive and durable. A ſatyrical romance, for inſtance, in which
is painted in a, true, but ſevere light, the fcllies of the great, will certainly
have a run among the common people. Nature, who has engraven on all
hearts the ſenſation of primitive equality, has placed an eternal ſeed of hatred
between the great and the little: theſe laſt, therefore, ſeize, with all the plea-
F ſure and ſagacity poſſible, the fineſt ſtrokes of theſe ridiculous pictures, where-
#4] ever the great appear unworthy of their ſuperiority. Such works muſt then
E have a rapid, though not an extenſive and durable ſucceſs : not extenſive, be-

cauſe it is neceſſarily confined to the country where theſe follies took their
birth; and not durable, becauſe the mode, by introducing new follies, diſ-
places the old ones, and thus ſoon effaces the remembrance of the follies of
the men, and of the authors who have exhibited them; and becauſe, weary of
contemplating the ſame follies, the malignity of the common-people makes
them ſearch for freſh faults, from new motives of juſtifying their contempt for
the great. Their impatience, in this reſpect, ſtill haſtens the fall of theſe
works, and their fame is frequently ſhorter than the duration of the ridicule.
Such is the ſucceſs that neceſſarily attends a ſatyrical romance. In regard
to a work on morality or metaphyſics, it cannot ſucceed in the ſame manner;
the deſire of inſtruction, which is always more uncommon, and leſs lively
than that of cenſure, cannot furniſh in one nation, either ſo great a number
of readers; or of ſuch paſſionate admirers. Beſides, the principles of theſe
ſciences, with whatever clearneſs they are repreſented, always require from


the readers, a degree of attention that muſt neceſſarily diminiſh their number
very conſiderably.


But if the merit of this moral or metaphyſical work is not ſo ſpeedily known
as thoſe of a ſatyrical kind, it is more generally acknowledged; becauſe trea-
tiſes, ſuch as thoſe of Locke or Nicole, which treat neither of an Italian, a

Frenchman, nor an Engliſhman, but of man in general, muſt neceſſarily
find readers among all civilized nations, and even continue to do ſo in every


a—_


- *


(1) I underſtand by this word, what- which ſucceſſively take place of each other,
ever belongs to the nature of man and of and in relation to the revolutions of ages,


things : I conſequently comprehend under may be reckoned among the works of the
the ſame word, the works that appear to us mode,


more durable: ſuch are the falſe religions
age.


98 TE L”ESPFRI T1} Of, |

age, Whatever work derives its merit from the elegance of the obſerva-
tions made on the nature of man and things, cannot ceaſe to pleaſe at any
time. |

I have ſaid enough to ſhew the true cauſe of the different kinds of eſteem
united to the exertion of different kinds of genius; if any doubts ſtill remained
on this ſubject, I might, by making freſh applications of the principles above
eſtabliſhed, obtain freſh proofs of their truth.

Would we know, for example, what would be the different ſucceſs of two
writers, one of whom diſtinguiſhed himſelf by the depth of his thoughts, and
the other by the elegance of his language? In conlequence of what I have
ſaid, rhe ſucceſs of the firſt will be lower; becauſe many more are judges of
the delicacy, the graces, the pleaſing turn of an expreſſion, and in fine of all
the beauties of ſtyle, than of the beauty and juſtneſs of ideas. A polite writer,
like Malherbe, muſt then have a ſucceſs more rapid than extended, and more
ſhining than durable. There are two reaſons for this; the firſt is, that a
work tranſlated from one language to another, always loſes in the tranſlation
the freſhneſs and ſtrength of its colouring; and conſequently paſſes to ſtrangers,
ſtripped of the charms of ſtyle, which upon my ſuppoſition is its principal


excellence; the ſecond is, that the language inſenſibly grows old; the moſt


happy turns of expreſſion become, at length, more common; and in ſhort,
the work being thus, in the very country where it was compoſed, deprived
of the beauties that rendered it agreeable, can at moſt preſerve for the author
only the eſteem of tradition. | |

In order to obtain an entire ſucceſs, it is neceſſary, that fine ideas ſhould be
dreſſed in the beauties of language. Without this happy choice, a work can-
not ſtand the teſt of time, and eſpecially of a tranſlation, which may be con-
ſidered as the moſt proper crucible for ſeparating the pure gold from the tinſel.
Thus we ought to attribute to this defect of ideas, too common to our antient
poets, the unjuſt contempt which many judicious perſons have conceived
againſt poetry. |

I ſhall only add one word to what I have ſaid: namely that, among the works
deſerving to be celebrated through all ages and countries, there are ſome
which being in a peculiar manner more generally intereſting to human nature,


D 1 g 3
muſt have a ſpeedier and more extenſive ſucceſs. To be convinced of this, it is


fufficient to recollect that, among men there are few who have not experienced


ſome paſſion: that moſt of them are leſs pleaſed with the depth of an idea,
than with the beauty of a deſcription ; that, as experience proves, almoſt all


of them have felt more than they have ſeen, but have ſeen more than they have


reflected (m); ſo, the paintings of the paſſions muſt be more generally
agreeable, than thoſe of natural objects; and a poetical deſcription of the ſame
objects muſt find more admirers than philoſophical works. Even with regard
to theſe laſt works, men being leſs deſirous of underitanding botany, geogra-
phy, and the fine arts, than of knowing the human heart, the excellent phi-
loſophers of this laſt kind muſt be more generally known and eſteemed than


— Org _ —


—


—


Im.
*


(m) This is the reaſon why in Greece, Rome, and almoſt all countries, the poetical


age has always foretold and preceded that of philoſophy. 6
| | SE botaniſts,


FSSAYS o rh MIN D. RY


botaniſts, geographers, and great critics. Thus, M. de la Motte, (if I may
be allowed to mention him as an example) would have been doutleſs more ge-
nerally known and eſteemed, had he treated more intereſting ſubjects, with
the ſame delicacy, elegance, and judgment, he has ſhewn in his diſcourſes on
the ode, fable, and tragedy. |

The public, ſatisfied with admiring the moſt finiſhed pieces of celebrated
poets, ſet little value on great critics, whoſe works are only read, judged, and
valued by perſons verſed in that art, to whom they are of uſe. This is the
true cauſe of the ſmall proportion obſerved between the reputation and merit
of M. de la Motte. |

Let us now ſee what are the works that ought to have a rapid, as well as
an extenſive and durable ſucceſs. 995;

The ſeveral kinds of ſucceſs are to be obtained at once, only in the works
where, according to my principles, the authors have joined a momentary and
durable utility; as in certain poems, romances, theatrical pieces, and moral
a:d political writings: on which it is proper to obſerve, that theſe works,
ſoon ſtripped of the beauties that depend on the manners and prejudices of
the times and countries where they are written, preſerve nothing tor poſtericy
but the beauties comman to all ages and countries ; and for this reaſon, Homer
mult now appear leſs agreeable than he did to the Greeks of his time. But
this loſs ; or, if I may preſume to ſay fo, this diminution of merit, is more or
leſs great, according as the durable beauties which enter into the compoſition
of a work, and are always unequally mixed with thoſe of a day, have a

reater or leſs aſcendency over thele laſt. Why is the Learned women of the

celebrated Moliere, already leſs eſteemed than his Miſer, his Tartuffe, and
his Miſanthrope? People have not calculated the number of ideas contained
in each of theſe pieces, and conſequently they have not determined the de-
gree of eſteem due to them; but they have found by experience, that a come-
dy, ſuch as the Miſer, where the ſucceſs is founded on the painting of a vice
that ever ſubſiſts, and is always prejudicial to mankind, neceſſarily includes
an infinite number of beauties, that flow from the happy choice of the ſub-
ject, which-renders them durable: on the contrary, a comedy, ſuch as that of
the Learned women, whoſe ſucceſs was only ſupported by a faſhionable
and tranſient folly, could only ſparkle with thoſe momentaneous beauties
that ariſe from the ſubject; and though once perhaps, more proper to make
a lively impreflion on the public, could not make thoſe that are fo durable.
Hence we feldom fee among different nations, celebrated pieces paſs with
ſucceſs from one theatre to another. 18 73701

The concluſion of this chapter is, that the eſteem granted to all works of
genius, is, in every age, always proportionable to the intereſt people have in
eſteeming them. ;


100 or L'ESPRIT; ed


„


Of Genius conſidered in relation to different countries.


HAT I have ſaid on the different ages, I apply to different countries;

and prove that the eſteem or contempt affixed to the ſame kind of

genius among different people, are always the effect of the different forms of
their governments, and conſequently, of the diverlity of their intereſts.

Why is eloquence held in ſuch eſteem in republics? It is becauſe, by the

form of their government, eloquence opens a way to riches and grandeur.

Now the fondneſs and regard all men entertain for wealth and honour muſt


neceſſarily make them reflect on the proper means of acquiring them. In re-
ublics, honour is paid, not only to eloquence, but to all the ſciences, which,


like politics, civil law, morality, poetry, or philoſophy, may ſerve to form
orators.

In deſpotic vountries, on the contrary, they ſet but little value on the ſame
kind of eloquence; becauſe it does not lead to fortune. In thoſe countries
it is ſcarcely of any uſe, becauſe men do not give themſelves the trouble to
perſuade when they can command. 5 1

Why did the Spartans affect to ſhew great contempt for that kind of ge-
nius proper to carry to perfection works of luxury? It was, becauſe a poor
little republic, that could only oppoſe the virtue and valour of its. citizens
againſt the formidable power of Perſia, ought to deſpiſe all the arts adapted
to enervate the brave, which were perhaps with reaſon deified at Tyre, or at
Sidon. | |

Why have the people of England leſs eſteem for the art of war, than the
antient Romans and Greeks ? It is becauſe the Engliſh having now more of the
Carthagenian than the Roman, are, by the form of their government, and
their natural ſituation, leſs in need of great generals, than of able mer-
chants ; it is becauſe, the ſpirit of trade, which neceſſarily leads in its train,


a taſte for luxury and effeminacy, muſt every day encreaſe, in their eſteem,


the value of gold and induſtry, muſt daily diminiſh their regard for the mili-
tary art, and even for courage : a virtue, which among a free people, for a
long time ſupported the national pride; but neverthelels, growing daily
weaker and weaker, may, perhaps, be the diſtant cauſe of the fall, or ſub-
Jection of that nation. If, on the contrary, celebrated writers, as for example,
a Locke, and a Addiſon, have been hitherto more honoured in England,
than in any other country, it is from its being impoſſible, that a high value
ſhould not be ſet on merit, in a country where every citizen has a ſhare in
the management of affairs in general, and where every man of abilities may
enlighten the public with reſpect to its true intereſt. For this reaſon, we ſo


commoaly meet in London, with knowing men, who are with much more diffi-
. | culty


Peg
"Fe *
72
£805
23 J
ik 2
if Fe
7
3
PR" LN
7 15 53 «
1
Ie
>,
2
9 2
43}
5
4s
N
1
©


ESS A 1 8 ov Tun M 1 5 101


cultly found in France: not that the climate of England, as has been pre-
tended, is more favourable to genius than ours; the liſt of our celebrated
men, in war, politics, and the arts and ſciences, is perhaps more numerous
than theirs. If the Engliſh nobility are in general more learned than ours, it
is becauſe they are forced to acquire knowledge to recompence them for the
advantages the form of our government may have over theirs ; they have
therefore, in this reſpect, a very conſiderable one over ours; an advantage
which they will preſerve, till luxury has entirely corrupted the principles of
their government, till it has made them inſenſibly bend their necks to ſer-
vitude, and has taught them to prefer riches to talents. It is a merit at Lon-
don to have learning; but at Paris it is ridiculous. This is ſufficient to
Juſtify the anſwer made by a foreigner to the duke of Orleans, regent of France,
| who examined him with reſpect to the character and different genius of the
i= ſeveral nations of Europe. The only manner of replying to your royal
1 highneſs's queſtion, ſaid the foreigner, is to repeat the firſt queſtions that
among the different nations is moſt commonly aſked on the appearance of a
perſon among them. In Spain, added he, they aſk, Is he a grandee of the
firſt quality ? In Germany, Is he admitted into the chapters? In France,
Is he reſpected at court? In Holland, How much money is he worth? In
England, What ſort of a man is he? | | |
The ſame general intereſt, which in republican ſtates, and thoſe of a mixed
government, preſides in the diſtribution of eſteem, is alſo in empires ſubject
to deſpotic power, the ſole diſtributer of that eſteem. If in thoſe governments
little regard is ſhewn to genius; and if at Iſpahan and Conſtantinople, they
have more reſpect for the eunuch, the icoglan, and the paſcha, than for men
of merit; it is becauſe, the people there have no intereſt in eſteemin
great men: not that theſe great men are in thoſe countries uſeleſs and diſ-
=_ pleaſing ; but none of the individuals of whom the public is compoſed, have
T any intereſt in becoming ſo, and every perſon has always little eſteem for what
I he has no ambition to obtain. |
Who in thoſe empires can engage a ſingle perſon to ſupport the fatigues
of ſtudy, and the meditations neceſfary to carry his abilities to perfection?
Great talents. are always ſuſpected in unjuſt governments; and abilities can
neither procure dignities nor riches. Riches and dignities are however the
only advantages vilible to all eyes, the only ones reputed real bleflings, and
as ſuch are univerſally deſired. In vain is it ſaid, that they are inſipid to the
poſſeſſor, they are, if you will, decorations that are ſometimes diſagreeable
in the eyes of the actor; but nevertheleſs, they always appear admirable in
the point of view from whence they are contemplated by the ſpectator ; and
therefore people make the greateſt efforts to obtain them. Thus illuſtrious
men only increaſe in countries, where honour and riches are purchaſed by
great abilities; and thus deſpotic ſtates are, from a contrary reaſon, always
barren of great men. Upon which I ſhall obſerve, that gold is now of ſuch
great value in the eyes of all nations, that in governments infinitely more wiſe, | :
and learned, the poſſeſſion of that metal is almoſt always conſidered as the firſt
merit. rw many rich men are there, who, elated by univerſal homage, think
85 | them-


-
—


102 EL” ESP RIF; d.

themſelves ſuperior to (n) men of abilities; felicitate themſelves in a tone ſu-
perbly modeft, for having-prelerred the uſeful to the agreeable ; and having,
in the want of genius, ſay they, made a purchaſe of good ſenſe, which, accord -


ing to the ſigaification they affix to the word, is the true, the good, and the


ſupreme genius! Such men muſt always take philoſophers for viſionary ſpecu—
laciſts, their writings for works ſeriouſly frivolous, and ignorance for merit.
Riches and honours are too much coveted, for any one to honour talents
in the people, where the pretenſions to merit are excluſive of the pretenſions
to fortune. Where is the country in which, to make a fortune, a man of
genius is not obliged to loſe, in the antichamber of a protector, the time
which to excel in any manner, he ought to employ in cloſe and continual
ſtudies ? To what flattery, to what meanneſſes, mult he ſtoop to obtain the
favour of the great? If he is born in Turky, he muſt expoſe himſelf to the
diſdain of a mufti, or a ſultana; in France, to the affrontive goodneis of a
great lord, (o) or a place- man, who deſpiſing in him a kind of genius too
different from his own, conſiders him as a man uſeleſs to the ſtate, incapa-
ble of ſerious affairs, and like a pretty child entirely taken up with ingenious
trifles. Beſides, being ftrictly jealous of the reputation of men of merit (p),
and afraid of their cenſure, the place-man receives them leſs from taſte than from
oſtentation, only to ſhew that he has people of all kinds at his houſe. Now, how
can it be imagined, that a man animated by a paſſion for glory, which makes
him deſire the ſweets of pleaſure, will debare himſelf fo far? Whoever is born to
do honour to the age in which he lives, is always on his guard againſt the
great; he enters into connections with none but perſons whoſe genius and
character are calculated to make him eſteem people of abilities, and to be diſ-
guſted in moſt companies; ſeeks for, and meets a man of genius, with the
ſame pleaſure that two Frenchmen find in meeting with each other in China,


where they become friends at firſt ſight.


*


— 11


(n) Seduced by their own vanity, and the but through their goodneſs, as through the
praiſes of a thouſand flatterers, the moſt mo- rents in Diogenes's cloak, we may perceive
derate among them believe themſelves at their vanity. |
leaſt ſuperior to every one who is not above (p) On my entering into the world,
them in this reſpedt. They do not per- ** ſaid the preſident de Montefquieu, one day
ceive that it is with men of genius as with “ I was introduced as a man of genius, and
thoſe who run a race: ſuch a one, ſay they © was received favourably enough by the men
to each other, does not run at all, Yet, it © in place: but when, by the ſucceſs of
is neither the impotent, nor the man of the © the Perſian Letters, I had perhaps, proved,
ordinary capacity who gains the prize. that this character was juſt; and that I had

If people are ſilent, with reſpe& to the * obtained ſome eſteem from the public,
poor abilities of moſt of the men ſo vain of “ that of the place-men grew cold, and I
their riches ; it is becauſe they do not even “ fuffered a thouſand mortifications. You
think of mentioning them. People's filence, <©* muſt imagine, added he, that, ſecretly
with reſpect to us, is always a bad fign; it “ hurt by the reputation af a man who b
proceeds from their being unable to be re- obtained ſome applauſe, they humbled hi
venged on us for our ſuperiority. They ſay „ out of revenge; and that a man himſelf
little that is bad of thoſe who do not deſerve * ought to merit many praiſes, to enable
praiſe. „ him to ſupport patiently the praiſes of

(o) They ſometimes counterfeit good men; © another,”

: The


2 5
788
3
Ks
NS
be fag
"RF
1
IL


EY,
5,
3
25
8


#


ESSAYS ov tut MI ND. 1033


The character therefore proper to form illuſtrious men neceſſarily expoſes them
to the hatred, or at leaſt the indifference of the great, and of men in place,
eſpecially among people like the Oricntals, who, being rendered ſtupid by the
form of their government, and their religion, remain ina ſhameful ignorance ,
and hold, it I may preſume to ſay ſo, the middle rank between men and
brutes. |

After having proved that the want of eſteem for merit, is, in the Eaſt,
founded on the ſmall intereſt people have in eſteeming men of genius; the bet-
ter to ſhew the power of that intereſt, let us apply to this principle things
that are more familiar to us. Let us examine, why the public intereſt, mo-
1 dified according to the form of our government, gives us, for inſtance, ſuch.
Bs a diſguſt for that kind of diſpenſations that appear to us infupportable : and
b we ſhall find that theſe diſſertations, are heavy and tireſome ; that the citizens

having, by the form of our government, leſs occaſion for inſtruction than
amuſement, they generally deſire only thoſe works that can render them agree-
able in company: they muſt conſequently ſet little value on cloſe reaſoning :
and muſt more or leſs reſemble that courtier, who, being leſs tired than per-
plexed by the reaſons a wiſe man brought in proof of his opinion, cried out
haſtily, Oh! ſir, I would not have it proved to me. |
Every thing among us yields to lazineſs. If in converſation, we only make
uſe of looſe and hyperbolical phraſes; if exaggeration is become the peculiar
eloquence of our age and nation; and if we ſet no value on the juſtneſs and
preciſion of our ideas and expreſſions, it 1s becauſe we are no ways intereſted
to eſteem them. It is out of reſpect to this lazineſs, that we conſider taſte as
a gift of nature, an inſtinct ſuperior to all the rational knowledge, and in ſhort,
as a quick and lively ſenſation of good and evil; a ſenſation that diſpenſes
us from all examination, and reduces all the rules of criticiſm to two ſingle
words, Delightful and Deteſtable. To the ſame lazineſs we alſo owe ſome of
the advantages we enjoy above other nations. Our little propenſity to ap-
plication, which will foon render us incapable of it, makes us deſire a clearneſs
in all works, to ſupply this incapacity for attention; we are children, who in.
our reading mult be ſapported by the leading- ſtring of order. An author
muſt theretore then take all the pains-imaginable to prevent his readers'taking
any; and ſhould often repeat, after Alexander, O Athenians, how much has-
it coſt me to obtain your praiſes !'* Now the neceſſity of being clear, in order
to be read, renders us, in this reſpect, ſuperior to the Engliſh, who give them
ſelves the leſs trouble about being extremely clear, becauſe their readers pay
leſs regard to it; for their minds being more uſed to cloſe application, they
can the more eaſily ſupply this defect. This in a ſcience like metaphyſics,
may give us ſome advantage over our neighbours. If people have always
applied to this ſcience the proverb, There is no wonder without a veil ;”*
and if its darkneſs has long cauſed it to be treated with reſpe&, our lazineſs.
now no longer endeavours to pierce through it, its obſcurity renders it con-
temptible : people would have it ſtripped of the unintelligible language in
which it has been hitherto cloathed, and ſeparated from the clouds of myſtery-
wherein it was involved. Now this deſire, which is ſolely owing to our lazi-
neſs, is the only means of rendering metaphyſics, that has been hitherto only-
a ſcience of words, a ſcience of things. But to ſatisfy the taſte of the public.
| on


2
W.
8
3 4
{88
2
2
1
3
"_
Ry
27
8
7
*
5
a 1 >


104 DE L'ESPRIT;,; on,


on this point, as the illuſtrious hiſtoriographer of the academy of Berlin re-
marks, * it is neceſſary that minds ſhould break the ſhackles of ſuperſtitious
* reſpect, know the limits which ought eternally to ſeparate reaſon and reli-
gion, that enquirers fooliſhly averſe to every work founded on argumenta-
<< tion, may no longer be condemned as a nation of triflers.”

What I have ſaid is, I think, ſufficient to diſcover at the ſame time, the
caule of our fondneſs for tales and romances, our ſuperiority in the frivolous,
and yet difficult art of talking and ſaying nothing, and of the preference we
give to a ſprightly wit, above any other kind of genius; a preference that ac-
cuſtoms us to conſider the wit as a diverting creature, and to diſgrace him, by
confounding him with a harlequin; and a preference, in fine, that renders
us the moſt gallant, the moſt amiable, and the moſt frivolous people in
Europe. | = |

It neceſſarily follows, from our manners, that we ought to be ſo. The
path to ambition is, by the form of our government, that againſt moſt of the
citizens, and nothing remains for them but pleaſure. Among the pleaſures,
that of love is the moſt lively; in order to enjoy it, we muſt render ourſelves
agreeable to the women ; as ſoon as love is felt, that of pleaſing ought to
kindle in our breaſts. Unhappily, it is with lovers as with thoſe winged in—
ſects that take the colour of the herb to which they attach themſelves ; it is
only, by borrowing the reſemblance of the object beloved, that a lover is
enabled to pleate. Now, if the women, by education, acquire rather trifling
endowments, and graces, than ſtrength and juſtneſs of ideas, our minds being
modelled by theirs, muſt conſequently catch the ſame defects.

There are only two . ways of ſecuring ourſelves from them. The firſt is
improving the education of women ; giving them more elevation of foul, and
more extent to their minds. There is no doubt, but we ſhould be ena-
bled to perform great things, if we had a love for our preceptor, and the hand
of beauty was to caſt into our minds, the ſeeds of wit and virtue. The ſecond
means, (and this is what I certainly cannot adviſe), would be to diſincumber
the women of thoſe remains of modeſty, which, before it can be ſacrificed,
gives them a right to require the perpetual worſhip and adoration of their
lovers. The favours of women would then become more common, and ap-
pear leſs precious; and the men becoming more independent and more wile,
would loſe in their company only the hours conſecrated to love, and conſe-
quently they might enlarge and ſtrengthen their minds by ſtudy and medi-
tation. Among all nations, and in all countries devoted to the idolatry of
women, there is a neceſſity of making them Roman ladies, or ſultanas ; the
middle way between theſe two is the moſt dangerous. | |

What I have ſaid above proves, that it is to the diverſity of governments,
and conſequently to the intereſt of the people, that we. muſt attribute the
altoniſhing variety of their characters, genius, and taſte. If we imagine,
that we ſometimes perceive a point to which the general eſteem radiates ; if
for exampie, the art of war is among almoſt all nations, conſidered as
the principal; its is becauſe, a great general will be in a manner, every
where conſidered as the moſt uſeful man, at leaſt, till the concluſion of
an univerſal, and unalterable peace: but that peace being once confirmed,
people will, without diſpute, give the men celebrated in the ſciences, Jaws, lite-

| rature,


ESSAYS own Tis MIND. 105
ture, and the polite arts, the preference to the greateſt generals upon earth :
whence I conclude, that the general intereſt is, in every nation, the only
diſpenſer of its eſteem. | | |
It is to this cauſe, as I am going to prove, that we ought to attribute the
unjuſt or rational, but always reciprocal contempt, which nations ſhew for
their different manners, cuſtoms, and characters. |


FCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCC


C, H A 2

Of the reciprocal contempt of nations, proceeding from their vaniſy.
Tris with nations as with individuals: if every one of us believes himſelf
1 infallible, places contradiction in the rank of offences, and can neither
eſteem nor admire any thing in another, but what reſembles ſomething in
himſelf; ſo every nation, in like manner, never eſteems in others, any ideas
that are not analogous to its own, and every contrary opinion is a ſeed of
contempt.

Let us caſt our eyes with rapidity over the univerſe : there are the Engliſh,
who take us for giddy-headed mortals, while we ſay that their brains are
diſordered. There is the Arab, who, perſuaded of the infallibility of his Khalif,
laughs at the credulity of the Tartar, who believes the Great Lama immortal.
In Africa is the negro, who, paying his adorations to a root, the claw of a
lobſter, or the horn of an animal, ſees nothing on the earth but an im-
menſe maſs of Deities, and laughs at the ſcarcity of Gods among us; while
the ill-informed muſſelman accuſes us with acknowledging three. Farther ſtill
are the inhabitants of the mountain of Bata, who are perſuaded that every man
who eats a roaſted cuckow before his death is a faint z they conſequently make
a mock of the Indian. What can be more ridiculous, ſay they, than to
«bring a cow to the bed of the ſick; and to imagine, that if the cow whom
ce they draw along by the tail, happens to piſs, and ſome drops of her urine
e fall upon the dying, this renders him a ſaint? What more abſurd in the
c bramins, than to require of their new converts to eat no other food for
&« fix months than cow's dung (a).“ |

The reciprocal contempt of nations is always founded on ſome difference
of manners and cuſtoms. From this motive (b) the inhabitant of Antioch,
formerly deſpiſed, in the emperor Julian, that ſimplicity of manners, and that


—


(b) One of the inhabitants of the Caribbee


a *


— SOL


(a) „Theatre of idolatry, by Abraham


Roger.“ |

The cow, according to Vincent le Blanc,
is reputed holy and venerable at Calicut.
There is nothing that has in general a greater
reputation for ſanctity : it ſeems that the cuſ-
tom of eating cows dung by way of penance,
is very antient in the Eaſt,


b |


iſlands, offended at our contempt, cried out,


I know no other ſavages but the Europeans,

e who adopt none of our cuſtoms.” Of the

arg! n and manners of the Caribbees, by La
OTC. 22 i *


frugality


106 DE L'ESPRIT, on,


frugality which juſtly obtained the admiration of the Gauls. The difference |


of religion, and conſequently of opinion, induced at the ſame time the chriſ-
tians, more zealous than juſt, to blacken with the moſt infamous calumnies,
the memory of a prince, who by diminiſhing the taxes, reſtoring military diſ-


Cipline, and reviving the expiring virtue of the Romans, ſo juſtly deſerved


to be placed in the rank of the greateſt emperors (c). |

If we caſt our eyes on all ſides, we ſee every place thus unjuſt. Each na-
tion convinced, that ſhe is the ſole poſſeſſor of wiſdom, takes all others for
fools; and nearly reſembles the inhabitants of the Marian iſlands (d), who,
being perſuaded that theirs was the only Janguage in the univerſe, concluded
from thence, that all other men knew not how to ſpeak.

If a ſage deſcended from heaven, and in his conduct. conſulted only the
light of reaſon, he would univerſally paſs for a fool. He would be, as So-
crates ſays, like a phyſician, whom the paſtry-cooks accuſed before a tribunal
compoſed of children, for having prohibited the eating of pies and tarts; and
would certainly be condemned. In vain would this ſage ſupport his opinions,
by the ſtrongeſt demonſtrations ; all the nations would be with reſpect to him,
as the nation of hump-backed people, among whom, as the Indian fabuliſt ſay,
came a God, beautiful, young, and well-proportioned. This God, they add,
entered into the capital, where he was ſoon ſurrounded by a multitude of the
inhabitants: his figure appeared extraordinary; their laughter and taunts
declared their aſtoniſhment : and they were going to carry their affronts ſtill
farther, if, to ſave him from danger, one of the inhabitants, who had
doubtleſs ſeen other men that were not hump-backed, had not ſuddenly
cried out, O my friends! what are we going to do? Let us not in-


ſult this unhappy piece of deformity : if heaven has granted to us all the gifts


of beauty; if it has adorned our backs with a mountain of fleſh, ler us be
filled with gratitude to the immortals, repair to the temple, and return thanks
to the Gods. This fable is the hiſtory of human vanity, All people admire
their own defects, and deſpiſe the contrary qualities. To ſucceed in any coun-
try, we muſt carry the hump of the nation into which we travel. TEE:
There are in every country but few advocates who plead the cauſe of the
neighbouring nations; few men who acknowledge in themſelves the ridicule
they caſt upon ſtrangers, and take example from I do not know what Tartar,
who, on this ſubject, had the addreſs to make the Great Lama himſelf bluſh
at his injuſtice, | | |


This Tartar had travelled through the North, viſited the country of the


Laplanders, and even purchaſed a wind of their ſorcerers (e). On his return
to his native country, he related his adventures; and the Great Lama reſolving
to hear him, was ready to burſt his ſides with laughing at his ſtory. Of what
folly, cried he, is the human mind capable! What fantaſtic cuſtoms ! How


(e) There was engraven on the tomb of company.” | |
Julian at Tarſus, Here lies Julian, who (e) The Laplanders have ſorcerers, who
<« Joſt his life on the banks of the Tigris. He fell to mariners, pieces of cord with knots
„ was an excellent emperor, and a valiant tied at certain diſtances, which are to give


« warrior.” them a favourable wind,
(d) « Voyages of the Dutch Eaſt India


credulous


**


pn UNE
Pe.


ESSAYS o ras MIN D. 107


credulous are the Laplanders ! Are theſe men? Yes indeed, replied the Tar-
tar: I might inform you of ſomething even till more ſurpriſing. Theſe Lap-
landers, with their ridiculous wizards, laugh no leſs at our credulity than
thou doſt at theirs, Impious! cried the Great Lama, dareſt thou pronounce
this blaſphemy, and compare my religion with theirs ? Eternal Father, replied
the Tartar; before the ſecret impoſition of thy hand on my head had waſhed
me from my lin, I would have repreſented that thou oughteſt not to have en-
gaged thy ſubjects to make a profane uſe of their reaſon, If the ſeyere eye
of examination and doubt was ſpread over all the objects of human belief,
who knows whether thy worſhip itſelf would be ſheltered from the raillery of
the incredulous? Perhaps thy holy urine, and thy ſacred excrements, which


thou doſt diftribute in preſents to the princes of the earth, would appear leſs pre-


cious ; perhaps they would not find they had ſtill the ſame ſavour (f): they


would no longer put it powdered into their ragouts, nor any longer mix
it in their fauces. Already, in China, does impiety deny the nine incar-


nations of Viſthnou. Thou, whoſe penetrating view comprehends the paſt,
the preſent, and the future, haſt often repeated it to us: it is to the. taliſman
of blind belief that thou oweſt thine immortality, and thy power on earth:
without this entire ſubmiſſion to thy doctrines, thou wouldeſt be obliged to
quit this aboad of darkneſs, and aſcend to heaven, thy native country.
Thou knoweſt that the Lamas, ſubject to thy power, are one day to raiſe
altars to thee in all the countries of the world. Who can aſſure thee, that they
will execute this project, without the aſſiſtance of human credulity; and that
without it, enquiry, which is always impious, will not take the Lamas for
Lapland wizards, who ſell winds to the fools that buy them? Excuſe then,
O living Fo, the diſcourſe dictated by my regard for thy worſhip ; and may
the Tartar learn of thee to reſpect the ignorance and credulity which heaven,


ever impenetrable in its views, ſeems to ordain in order to make the earth
ſubmit to thee.


Few men perceive the ridicule of their own nation, which they cover from
the eye of reaſon, while under a foreign name, they laugh at their own folly :
but there are ſtill fewer nations capable of improving by ſuch advice. All are ſo


ſcrupulouſly attached to the intereſt of their own vanity, that in every country


they give the title of wiſe only to thoſe who, as Fontenelle ſays, are the fools
of the common folly. How fantaſtic ſoever a fable is, it is in ſome nations
believed, and whoever doubts of its truth, is treated by that nation as a fool.
In the kingdom of Juida, where they adore the ſerpent, what man dare deny
the tale which the Marabouts tell of a hog, which, ſay they, inſulted the divi-
nity of the ſerpent (g), and eat him up. An holy Marabout, they add, per-


ceived it, and carried his complaints to the king. In an inſtant, ſentence of


death was paſſed upon all the ſwine: the execution followed, and the whole
race was going to be extirpated, when the people repreſented to his majeſty,


— x *
*


9 „


(f) They give the Grand Lama the name (g) Voyages to Guinea and Cayen, by
of Eternal Father. The princes are very gree- Father Labat. |
dy of his excrements, General hiſtory of |

voyages, tome vii. 5


FP 4 8 that


|
|
N


108 SINE LPE:SPRIT; ,
that it was not juſt to puniſh ſo many innocent ſwine for one guilty hog. Theſe
remonſtrances ſuſpended the prince's wrath : they appeaſed the grand Marabout,
the maſſacre ceaſed, and the hogs were ordered to behave with more reſpe&
to the deity for the future. Thus, cry the Marabouts, the ſerpent, to bejre-
venged on the impious, kindled the wrath of kings, that the whole univerſe
might acknowledge his divinity, his temple, and his high prieſt, at the order
of the Marabout appointed to ſerve him, and of the virgins conſecrated to his
worſhip. If retired at the bottom of his ſanctuary, the ſerpent-god, inviſible
to the ſight even of the king himſelf, receives not his queſtions, and makes
no anſwer to his requeſts, but by the mouth of the prieſt ; it is not for mortals
to pry into theſe myſteries with a profane eye: their duty is to believe, to proſ-
trate themſelves, and adore. 1 |

In Aſia, on the contrary, when the Perſians (h), ſtained, with the blood of the
ſerpents ſacrificed to the God of goodneſs, ran to the temple of the Magi, to
boaſt of this act of piety ; can it be thought, that if a man had ſtopped them in
order to prove the ridiculouſneſs of their opinion, he would have been well re-
ceived ? The more fooliſh an opinion is, the more it is praiſe-worthy, and the
more dangerous it is to prove its folly. |

Thus, Fontenelle was accuſtomed to ſay, that If he held every truth in
his hand, he would take great care not to open it to ſhew them to men.” In
fact, if the diſcovery of one truth alone, even in Europe, threw Galileo into the
priſons of the inquiſition, to what puniſhment would he be condemned who re-
vealed them all (i)? 1

Among the rational part of my readers, who at this inſtant laugh at the
folly of the human mind, and are filled with indignation at the treatment
of Galileo, perhaps there is not one, who in the age of that philoſopher, would
not have ſolicited for his death. They would then have been of different
ſentiments, and in what cruelties are we involved when barbarity and fana-
ticiſm are united to our opinions? How has this union deluged the earth
with the moſt dreadful evils! and yet it is an union that it muſt be equally
Juſt, uſeful, and eaſy to diſſolve. 10-7

In order to learn to doubt of our opinions, it is ſufficient that we examine
the powers of our minds, conſider the picture of human follies, and recollect
that fix hundred years after the eſtabliſhment of univerſities, there aroſe an
extraordinary man (K), who was perſecuted by the age in which he lived, and
at length placed in the rank of demigods, for having taught men to admit
nothing for truth of which they had not clear ideas: few men were capable
of knowing the extent of this principle, for among the greateſt part of man-
kind principles include no conſequences. |

However great the vanity of mankind may be, it is certain that if they fre-
quently call to mind ſuch facts; if, like Fontenelle, they often ſay to themſelves,


—


(h) Beauſobre's hiſtory of Manicheiſm. ſelves againſt thoſe who would take hold of
(i) To think, ſays Ariſtippus, is to draw truth, and in every thing ſeize whatever is

upon ourſelyes the irreconcilable hatred of eflentially neceſſary to be known.

tie ignorant, the weak, the ſuperſtitious, and (k) Deſcartes.

the corrupt, who all loudly declare them-


„No-


3


ESSAYS o nr MIN pb. 109


«© Nobody eſcapes from error, and am] alone infallible ? may I not be deceiv-
« ed in thoſe very things which I maintain with the greateſt fanaticiſm ?” If
men had this idea habitually preſent to their minds, they would be more on
their guard againſt vanity, more attentive to the objections of their adverſa-
ries, and better prepared to perceive the force of truth : they would be more
mild; more enclined to toleration, and doubtleſs would have a leſs high opi-
nion of their own wiſdom. Socrates frequently repeated, *All that I know
« js, that I know nothing.” In our age we Know every thing except what
Socrates knew. Men would not be ſo often ſurpriſed into error, were it not
for their ignorance ; and their folly is in general the more incurable, from
their believing themſelves wiſe. | |

This folly, which is common to all nations, and is in part produced by their
vanity, makes them not only deſpiſe the manners and cuſtoms that are diffe-


rent from their own, but makes them allo regard as a gift of nature that ſu-


periority which ſome of them have over others : a ſuperiority that is ſolely
owing to the political conſtitution of their nation.


CCCP


C H A FP - XxX


Why nations conſider as gifts of nature the qualities ſolely owing to the
form of their government.


HIS error is likewiſe founded on vanity, and what nation can triumph
in ſuch an error ? Let us ſuppoſe, for example, that a Frenchman, ac-
cuſtomed to ſpeak freely, and here and there to converſe with ſome good
Citizens, leaves Paris, and lands at Conſtantinople ; what idea would he form


of a country ſubject to deſpotic power, on his conſidering the diſgrace to


which he ſaw human nature reduced ? On his every where perceiving the print


of ſlavery ? On his ſecing tyranny infect, with her peſtilential breath, the buds
of every talent and every virtue; ſpreading ſtupidity, ſervile fear, and depopu-


lation from Caucaſus to Egypt? And in ſhort, on his being informed,
that the tranquil Sultan, who is ſhut up in his ſeraglio, while the Perſian
defeats his troops and ravages his provinces, unmoved by the public cala-


mities, drinks his ſherbet, careſſes his women, cauſes his baſhaws to be ſtrangled,


and is wearied with his indolence ? Struck with the cowardice and ſlavery of
theſe people, and at once animated by the ſenſations of pride and indignation,
what Frenchman would not think himſelf of a ſuperior nature to a Turk? Are
there many who are ſenſible, that contempt for a whole nation is always un-
juſt ? That the ſuperiority of one country over another depends on the greater
or leſſer happineſs of their forms of government? and that in fine, a Turk
might make him the fame anſwer that was made by a Perſian to a Spartan


ſoldier, who reproached him with the cowardice of his country, Why do


you inſult me? ſaid he. This is the caſe of every nation that acknowledges
"FEM at!


2 — —


.
y
— — — — U —


110 D. E L ESPRIT; OR,


an ablolute maſter. A king is the yniverſal ſoul of a deſpotic ſtate; and it is
his courage or weakneſs that cauſes this empire to revive or to languiſn. If we
were conquerors under Cyrus, and are now vanquiſhed under Xerxes, it is
becaule Cyrus was the founder of the throne on which Xerxes was ſeated by
his birth; it is becauſe Cyrus when born, had his equals; becauſe Xerxes was
always ſurrounded by ſlaves; and thou knoweſt that the vileſt of theſe in-
habit the palaces of kings. It is then the dregs of the nation thau ſeeſt inveſted
with the firit employments; it is the foam of the ſea, which riſes on its ſur-
face. Acknowledge the injuſtice of thy contempt ; but if thou art till in
doubr, give us the laws of Sparta, and take Xerxes for thy maſter : thou wilt
then be the ſlave, and I the hero.

Let us now call to mind the time when the cry of war had awakened. all the
nations of Europe, and its thunder was heard from the north to the ſouth of
France (I). Suppoſe that at this time a republican, animated by the ſpirit of
liberty, arrived at Paris, and entered into the beſt company, how would he be
{urpriled at ſeeing every one there treat public affairs with indifference, and
warmly employ themſelves about nothing but the faſhion, a novel or a lit-
tle dog |

Struck with the difference, that in this reſpect would be viſible between
our nation and his own, there is ſcarcely an Engliſhman who would not believe
himſelf to be a Being of a ſuperior nature; who would not take the French for
a giddy-brained trifling people, and France for the kingdom of baubles : not
bur that he might eaſily perceive, that his fellow-countrymen owe their ſpirit
of patriotiſm, and the elevation unknown to all but free countries, not merely to
the form of their government, but to the ſituation of England. |

In fact, to be ſenſible that this liberty of which the Engliſh are ſo proud,
and that really includes ſo many virtues, is leſs the reward of their courage
than the gift of fortune, let us conſider the infinite number of factions that have
hitherto divided England; and we ſhall be convinced, that if the ſea, by em-
bracing that empire, had not rendered it inacceſſible to the neighbouring na-
tions, they would, by taking advantage of the diviſions in England, either have
ſubdued them, or at leaſt have furniſhed their kings with the means of bring-
ing them into ſubjection; and that therefore their liberty is not the fruit of their
wiſdom. If, as they pretend, it only depends on a firmneſs and prudence pecu-
liar to their nation; after the frightful crime committed on the perſon of
Charles I. would they not at leaſt have drawn all advantages they might have
reaped from it? Would they have ſuffered that, by public ſervices and pro-
ceſſions, a prince ſhould be placed in the rank of martyrs, whom it was their
intereſt, ſay ſome of them, to have conſidered as a victim ſacrificed to the
public welfare, and whoſe puniſhment was neceſſary to ſet an example to the
world, and ought for ever to terrify any prince who ſhould endeavour to make
the people ſubmit to an arbitrary and tyrannical authority ? All the ſenſible
part of England muſt then be convinced, that its government in its preſent
form could not ſubſiſt on the continent, without great improvements; and
that the only ſubject of their pride is reduced to the happineſs of being born
in an iſland, rather than on the continent.


IT - —


(1) In the laſt war, when the enemy entered Provence,


4 | A par-


thy?


ESS ATS om MEND et


A particular perſon may any where make a confeſſion of this kind ; but
never the public. Never does a nation ſubmit its vanity to the ſhackles of
reaſon : more equity in its judgments would ſuppoſe a ſuſpenſion of vanity,
too ſeldom to be found in a ſingle perſon ever to appear in a whole nation.

Each country therefore al ways places among the gifts of nature, the virtues
derived from the form of its government, Its vanity is influenced by the
counſels of intereſt; and who can reſiſt the counſel of intereſt?

The general concluſion of what I have ſaid on the mind, conſidered in relation
to various countries, is, that intereſt is the only diſpenſer of the eſteem or con-
tempt which nations feel for their different manners, cuſtoms, and turns of


mind.


The only objection that can be brought againſt the above concluſion is this:
If intereſt, ſay they, be the only diſpenſer of the eſteem granted to different kinds
of genius and learning, why is morality, though of uſe to all nations, no more
honoured? Why are the names of Deſcartes and Newton, more celebrated
than thoſe of Nicole, La Bruyere, and all the other moraliſts, who, perhaps,
in their works gave as great a proof of genius? It is, I reply, becauſe great
natural philoſophers have, by their diſcoveries, been ſometimes of uſe to the
whole human race, while molt moraliſts have hitherto been of no ſervice to-
mankind. To what purpoſe is it to repeat inceſſantly, that it is noble to die
for one's country ? An apothegm never makes an hero. To merit efteem,.
moraliſts ought to ſearch for the proper means of forming brave and virtuous
men ; and thus employ that time and thoſe abilities they have loſt, in compoſing
maxims of virtue. When Omar wrote to the Syrians,. I ſend againſt you
e men as greedy of death, as ye are of pleaſures ;” the Saracens, deceived by
the deluſions of ambition and credulity, conſidered heaven as the reward of
valour and victory, and hell, as the puniſhment of cowardice anda defeat.
They were then animated with the moſt violent fanaticiſm; and theſe paſſions,
not maxims of morality, form courageous men. The moraliſts ought to be


| ſenſible of this; and to know, that, like a ſtatuary, who, from the trunk of


a tree, can make a God or a bench: the legiſlator forms at his pleaſure, he-
roes, great geniuſes, and virtuous men. I call for witneſs the Moſcovites,
transformed into men by Peter the Great.

In vain do the people, fooliſhly enamoured with their own government,
ſeek for the cauſe of their misfortunes in the laws not being put in execution..
The non- performance of the laws, ſays the ſultan Mahmouth, is always a
proof of the ignorance of the legiſlator. Reward, puniſhment, glory, and in-
famy, ſubject to his will, are four divinities, with which he can always pro-


mote the public welfare, and create illuſtrious men of all kinds.


The whole ſtudy of the moraliſts conſiſts in determining the uſe that ought
to be made of theſe rewards and puniſnments, and the aſſiſtance that may be
drawn from them in order to connect the perſonal with the general intereſt,
This union is the maſter-piece which moraliſts ought to propoſe to them-
ſelves. If citizens could not procure their own private happineſs without pro-
moting that of the public, there would then be none vicious but fools. All


men would be under the neceſſity of being virtuous ; and the felicity of nations


would be of benefit to morality : now, who doubts but, on that ſuppoſition,
this ſcience would be greatly honoured, and that the excellent writers of this


kind.


112 DE L'ESPRIET; vs; |


kind would, at leaſt by an equitable and grateful poſterity, be placed in the
ſame rank with Solon, Lycurgus, and Confucius ? |

ö But, it is replied, that the imperfection of morality, and the ſlowneſs of its
I progreſs, can be only an effect of the ſmall proportion to be found Between
| the eſteem granted to moraliſts, and the efforts of mind neceſſary to carry
| that ſcience to perfection: therefore the general intereſt, they add, is not
ll conſidered in the diſtribution of the public eſteem ?

Il. In reply to this objeftion, we mult ſearch for the unſurmountable obſtacles
i that have hitherto oppoſed the advancement of morality, among the cauſes of
that indifference with which people have conſidered a ſcience, the improve-
ment whereof muſt always be accompanied with that of the legiſlation, and
conſequently it is for the intereſt of every nation to bring it to perfection.


FFF
| £3 A P. XML
Of the cauſes that have bitherto retarded the progreſs of morality.


F poetry, geometry, aſtronomy, and, in general, all the ſciences advance L
more or leis rapidly towards perfection, while morality ſeems ſcarcely to Ll
have left its cradle; it is becauſe men being forced to unite in ſociety, and to ;
give themſelves laws, were obliged to form a ſyſtem of morality before they
had learnt from obſervation its true principles. The ſyſtem being formed, no
farther notice was taken of it; thus, we have in a manner the morals of the
| world in its infancy, and how ſhall it be brought to perfection?
| The progreſs of a ſcience does not ſolely depend on its being of uſe to the
| public : every citizen of which a nation is compoſed ought to reap ſome ad-
| vantage from its improvement. Now in the revolutions that have taken place
| among all the nations of the earth, the public intereſt, which is that of the
| majority, among whom the principles of ſound morality ought to find its ſup-
! port, not being always agreeable to the intereſt of thoſe moſt in power; the
fi latter being indifferent with reſpect to the progreſs of all ſciences, muſt effec-
tually oppoſe that of morality. | 3
| The ambitious man, who is raiſed above his fellow-citizens ; the tyrant
who tramples them under his feet; and the fanatic, who keeps them proſtrate ;
all theſe ſeveral ſcourges of the human race, all theſe different kinds of flagitious
men, forced by their private intereſt, to eſtabliſh laws contrary to the gene-
ral good, have been very ſenſible, that their power had no other foundation,
than the ignorance and weakneſs of mankind : they have therefore impoſed
| ſilence on whoſoever, by diſcovering to the people the true principles of mora-
4 lity, would have opened their eyes with reſpect to their misfortunes and their
rights, and have armed them againſt injuſtice. | | #4
| But, it is replied, if in the firſt-ages of the world, when deſpotic princes held
j the nations in ſubjection, and ruled them with a rod of iron, it was then their
intereſt to conceal from the people the true principles of morality; principles,
which by animating them againſt tyrants, would have made revenge the duty
| | of


ESSAYSo Tit MIND,


113


of each citizen: yet now, when the ſceptre is not purchaſed with guilt, but
placed by unanimous conſent, in the hand of a prince, and ſupported by the
love of the people; when the glory and happineſs of a nation, reflecting on
the ſovereign, adds to his grandeur and felicity ; what enemies of the human
race are there ſtill to oppoſe the progreſs of morality ?

This is no longer done by kings, but by two other ſorts of men in power.
ThE@frſk are the fanatics, whom I ſhall not confound with the men truly pious.
Theſe laſt ſupport the maxims of religion, and the others are their deſtroyers :
the one are.the friends of humanity (a); the other who are outwardly mild,
but within barbarous, have the voice of Jacob and the hands of Eſau: they
are indifferent with reſpect to worthy actions; they judge virtuous not what
is done but what is believed; and the credulity of men is, according to them,


the only ſtandard of their probity (b).


They mortally hate, ſaid queen Chriſ-


tina, all who are not their dupes; and to this they are led by their inte-
reſt, Being ambitious, hypocritical, and artful, they imagine that, to inſlave
the people, they ought to put out their eyes: thus, theſe impious wretches are
inceſſantly ſetting up the cry of impiety againſt every man born to enlighten
the nations: every new truth is ſuſpected by them; and they reſemble infants
that are terrified at every thing in the dark. 3

The ſecond ſpecies of men in power who oppoſe the progreſs of morality


are the half politicians.


Among theſe are ſome naturally diſpoſed to truth,


who are enemies to newly diſcovered truths, only from their indolence, and


their being unwilling to apply the attention neceſſary to examine them.


There


are others animated by dangerous motives, and theſe are moſt to be feared.
Theſe are the men whoſe minds are without abilities, and whoſe ſouls are deſ-
titute of virtues; they want not the courage of being greatly wicked; and
incapable of new and elevated views, they believe that their importance de-
mands a week or diſſembled reſpect for all the received opinions and errors


countenanced by them.


Furious againſt every man who would itagger the em-


pire, they arm (c) againſt him even thoſe paſſions and prejudices which they
deſpiſe; and, without ceaſing, terrify weak minds with the cry of novelty.


As


—ů̃ —


(a) They freely ſay to the perſecutors,


what the Scythians ſaid to Alexander, Thou
cart not then a God ſince thou doſt evil to
« men.” As the chriſtians exclaimed againſt
de turn or the Moloch of the Carthaginians,
ro whom men were offered in ſacrifice, that
ſuch a religion was a proof of its falſhood,
how often have our fanatical prieſts given
room to the heretics to retort this argument
againſt them? How many prieſts of Mo-
loch are there among us ? |

(b) Thus they have all the reluctance in
the world againſt acknowledgnig the probity
of an heretic. |
(c) Intereſt is always the concealed motive
of perſecution, There is no doubt but a want


—


of toleration is an evil contrary to Chriſtia-


nity and ſound politics : but it would be none
to repent of the revocation of the edit of
Nants. Theſe diſputes, ſay they, are dan-
gerous. They are fo when authority takes
a part in them: then the want of toleration
in one party ſometimes forces the other to
take up arms. When the magiſtrates do not
interfere, the divines, after abuſing each
other, come to an accommodation. This
tact is proved by the peace enjoyed in the
countries where toleration is owed: But
this toleration, they reply, though it be agree-
able to certain governments, would be per-
haps fatal to ours. Are not the. Turks,
whoſe religion is a religion of blood, and

whoſe


114 SEL *ESPRIT 08:


As if all truths baniſh virtue from the earth, and every thing relating to
them was of ſuch advantage to vice, that we cannot be virtuous without
being void of underſtanding ; as if morality ſhewed the neceſſity of it, and as
if the ſtudy of that ſcience conſequently became fatal to the univerſe ; they are
reſolved, that the people ſhall be kept as proſtrate before the received prejudices,
as before the ſacred crocodile of Memphis. Does any perion make a diſcovery
in morality ? It is to us alone, ſay they, that it ought to be revealed: we alone,
after the example of thoſe who were initiated into the facred myſteries of Egypt,
ought to be the depoſitories of them : the reſt of the human race ſhould be


involved in the darkneſs of prejudice; for the natural ſtate of man is


blindnels.


Like thoſe phyſicians, who jealous of the diſcovery of emetics, abuſed the
credulity of ſome prelates, by engaging them to excommunicate a remedy
whoſe aſſiſtance was ſo ſpeedy and 1o ſalutary, they impoſe upon the credulity


whoſe government is tyranny, leſs averſe to


toleration than we? We ſee churches at Con-


ſtantinople, but there are no moſques at Pa-
ris : they do not put the Greeks to the tor-
ture, on account of their creed, and yet their
toleration does not kindle the flames of war.
To conſider it as a chriſtian, it is a crime.
The goſpel, the apoſtles, and fathers, almoſt
conſtantly preach of mildneſs and toleration.
St. Paul and St. Chyſoſtom ſay, that a biſhop
ought to gin men by perſuaſion, not by
conſtraint. Biſhops, they add, ſhould only
have authority over thoſe who ſubmit to their


power; but inſtead of this they are kings,


who reign over thoſe who could not ſubmit to
their dominion. |

In the Eaſt, the council was condemned
that confented to have Bogomilus burnt.

What an example of moderation did St.
Baſil give in the fourth century, when the
queſtion relating to the divinity of the Holy
Ghoſt was debated ? a queſtion: that occa-
ſioned much diſturbance. That faint, ſays
St. Gregory de Nazianzen, though firmly
perſuaded of the truth of the doctrine of the
divinity of the Holy Spirit, conſented, that
the title of God ſhould not be given to the
third perſon in the trinity,

Though this wiſe condeſcenſion was, ac-


cording to M. de Tillemont, condemned by


ſome angry zealots; and though St. Baſil was


accuſed of. betraying the truth by his ſilence,
that very condeſceniion was approved by the
moſt cclebrated and molt pious men ot that


time, and among others, by the great St. Atha-
naſtus, who cannot be ſuſpected of wanting
fir. neis.


This fact is related in M. de Tillement's
Life of St. Baſil, art. 63, 64, and 65. That
author adds, that the Æcumienig council of
Conſtantinople approved St. Baul's conduct,
by imitating it. |

St. Auguſtin ſays, that we ought neither
to condemn nor puniſh him who has not the
ſame idea of God as we have: at leaf, ſays he,
if it is not through hatred to God, which is
impoſſible. St. Athanafus, in his epiſtles ad
Solitarios, lid. I. page 855, ſays, that the
perſecutions of the Arians are a proof that
they have neither piety nor the fear of God.
The property of piety, adds he, is to perſuade
and not to conſtrain; we ought to take exam-
ple from our Saviour, who left every one the
liberty of following him. He betore ſays,
page $39, that the devil, the father of lies,
has need of hatchets and axes to cauſe his opi-
nions to be embraced; but our Saviour is
mildneſs itſelf, He knocks ; if we open, he
enters; if we refuſe him, he retires. It is
not with ſwords, javelins, priſons, ſoldiers,
and arms in our hands, that we teach the
truth, but by the voice of perſuaſion.

People have really recourſe to force only
for want of arguments. If a man denies that
the three angles of a triangle are equal to
two right angles, he is laughed at, but not


perſecuted: but fire and gibbets are often uſed


as arguments by divines, who have in this
reſpect given heretics and unbelievers the
advantage over them. Jeſus Chriſt did no
violence to any man. He only faid, Follow
thou me: but intereſt has not always permit-
ted his miniſters to imitate his moderation.


2 2


FSSAYS ov THE MIND.


| | © 125
of honeſt men, who are, however, ſo ſtupid, that under a' government Teſs
wiſe, they would drag to punithment a man with the integrity and under-


ſtanding of a Socrates. | |
Such are the means employed by theſe two kinds of men, to impoſe ſilence


on thoſe enlightened by knowledge. In vain would they endeavour to reſiſt
them by leaning on the favour of the public, When a citizen is animated
by a love of truth and the general welfare, T am ſenſible that he will always
_ diffuſe through his work the perfume of truth, which will render it agreeable
to the public, who will become his protector. But as when under the buckler
of gratitude and the public eſteem, they are not ſecure from the perſecution of
thoſe fanatics, there are very few among the wiſe ſo virtuous, as to dare to
brave their fury. — 8 =

Theſe are the unſurmountable obſtacles that have hitherto oppoſed the pro-
greſs of morality z and the reaſons why that ſcience is almoſt always uſeleſs,
and in conſequence of my principles, {till deſerves little eſteem.

But may we not make the nations ſenſible of the advantages they would ob-
rain from an excellent ſyſtem of morality ? and might we not haſten the pro-
greſs of that ſcience, by conferring greater honours on thoſe who improve it?

Conlidering the importance of this ſubject, I ſhall run the hazard of a digreſ-
ſion, in order to treat it more fully. |


PLI-6 TILL HOLE PHPHEE TESSSESESESES eee
C H A P. XXIV.
Of the means of perfecting Morality.


T would be ſufficient for this purpoſe to remove the obſtacles placed againſt
I its progreſs by the two kinds of men I have mentioned. The only means of
ſucceeding in this, is to pull off their maſks, and to ſhew that the protectors
of ignorance are the moſt cruel enemies of human beings; to ſhew the na-
tions, that men are in genera] more ſtupid than wicked; that in curing them
of their errors we ſhould cure them of moſt of their vices; and that oppoſing
their cure is committing the crime of treaſon againſt human nature. |
Every man who conſiders the picture of public miſeries exhibited in hiſtory,
ſoon perceives that ignorance, which is ſtill more barbarous than ſelf-love,
has cauſed moſt of the calamities that have overflowed the earth. Struck with
this truth, we are ready to cry out, Happy the nation where the citizens are
permitted to perpetrate only the crimes that flow from ſelf-love ! How are they
multiplied by ignorance, and what blood has been ſpilt on its altars (a)? How-
| ever,


—


OE


(a) A king of Mexico, on the conſecra-
tion of a temple, cauſed ſix thouſand four hun-
drcd and eight men to be facrificed in four
days, Gemelli Carreri, vol. vi. pag. 56.

In India, the Brachmans of the ſchool of
Niazam, taking advantage of the favour of


I — Cn gr nr gn — —— . — A


the princes, maſſacred the Baudhiſts in ſeveral

kingdoms. "Theſe Baudhiſts are atheiſts, and

the others deiſts. Balta was the prince who

cauſed moſt blood to be ſpilt. To purify him-

ſelf from this crime, he afterwards burnt him-

ſelf with great ſolemnity on the coaſt of —_
C


116 BE L'ESPRI Tz on; ,

ever, man is made to be virtuous; and in fact, if force eſſentially reſides in the
greater number, and juſtice conliſts in the practice of actions uſeful to the
greater number, it is evident that juſtice is in its own nature always armed
with a power ſufficient to lupprets vice, and place men under the neceſſity of
being virtuous.

If audacious and powerful wickedneſs ſo often puts juſtice and virtue in
chains, and oppreſſes the nations, this is only done by the aſſiſtance of igno—
rance, which conceals from every nation 1ts true intereſt, hinders the action and „
union of its ſtrength, and by that means, ſhields the guilty from the ſword of 31

Juſtice. |
; To what contempt ought he to be cendemned who would hold: the people
in the darkneſs of ignorance ? This truth has not hitherto been inſiſted upon
with ſufficient force; no, all the .altars of error muſt one day be overthrown.
I know with what precaution we ought to advance a new opinion. I know,
that in deſtroying prejudices, we ought to treat them with reſpect ; and that
before we attack an error generally received, we ought to ſend, like the doves
from the ark, ſome truths on the diſcovery, to ice if the deluge of prejudices
does not yet cover the face of the earth; if error begins to ſubſide, and if
there can be perceived here and there ſome iſles, where virtue and truth may
find reſt for their feet, and communicate themſelves to mankind.

But fo many precautions are only to be taken with thoſe prejudices that are
not very dangerous. What reſpect do we owe to the man, who, jealous of
dominion, would beſot the people, in order to tyrannize over them ? We muſt
with a bold hand break the taliſman of imbecility, to which is attached the
power of theſe malevolent genii; to diſcover to nations the true principles of
morality ; to teach them that being inſenſibly drawn towards happineſs, either
apparent or real, grief and pleaſure are the only movers of the moral univerſe ;
and that the ſenſation of ſelf. love is the only baſis on which we can place the
toundations of an uſeful morality.

How can they flatter themſelves with concealing from men 78 knowledge
of this principle? In order to ſucceed in it, they muſt forbid their penetrating
into their own hearts, examining their conduct, opening thoſe hiſtorical works
where they perceive men in all ages and in all countries, ſolely attentive to the


voice of pleaſure, ſacrifice human beings like themſelves, I will not ſay to great


—


—_—


cha, It is obſervable, that thoſe were deiſts
who cauſed ſuch a torrent of human blood to
be ſpilt. See the letters of father Pons, the


Jeſuit.
The prieſts of Merce in Ethiopia diſpatch-


ed, whenever they pleaſed, a courier to the


king to order him to die. See Diodorus.
Whoever kills the king of Sumatra is
elected king in his room. By ſuch an aſſaſ-
fination, ſay the people, heaven delares its
will. Chardin obſerves, that he heard .a
preacher, who was declaiming againſt the
Sophis, ſay, that they were atheiſts, and
deſerved to be burnt; that he was aſtoniſhed


they ſhould be ſuffered to live ; and that the
killing a Sophi was an action more pleaſing
toGod than the preſervationof the lives of ten
worthy men. How often has the ſame man-
ner of reaſoning been uſed among us

It was doubtleſs from the view of ſo much
blood ſpilt by fanaciciſm, that the abbe Lon-
guerue, who is profoundly verſed in hiſtory,
ſays, that if we were to put into two ſcalcs
the good and the evil done by religion, the
evil would preponderate, vol. 1. pag. IT.

«© Take not a houſe, ſays a Peilian proverb,
c alluding to this ſubject, in a quarter where
„ the lower people are ignorant and devout.

and


— .
*


N 3 2 - 3 y ; N * c 228 0
8 ALF © FR II So 8 y Gen af ho PO EINE

n Ire ER LN THO oe 422 Fg I; OG. 2 of % l ä , *

* R ( K 5 6 8 8 g r £ v 5 9 2 3
U 1 o NP 3 n . \ : : 9 88
1 * 3 r r V ws 1 " 25
PPTP . ; i AS EI,
3 Sr ae ¶ͤ b A 1 f
FA My I 4 R


E S 8 AVS o fur MIN D, 117


and important intereſts, but to their ſenſuality and amuſement. I take to
witneſs thoſe fiſh-ponds where the barbarous gluttony of the Romans drowned
the ſlaves, and gave them as food to their fiſhes, in order to render them
more delicate eating; that iſle of Tiber, whither the cruelty of the maſters
tranſported their old, infirm, and ſick ſlaves, and left them to periſh, by the
torments of hunger: I alſo call to witneſs, the ruins of thoſe vaſt and ſuperb
amphitheatres, where the moſt polite people in the univerſe ſacrificed thouſands
of gladiators to the mere pleaſure that aroſe from beholding their combats ;
where the women ran in crowds ; where the tender ſex, nouriſhed in luxury,
ſoftneſs, and pleaſure, that ſex made for the ornament and delight of the world,
who ſeemed, as if made to breathe only voluptuous endearments, carried their
barbarity ſo far, as to deſire the wounded gladiators to fall, when dying, in an


agrecable attitude. Theſe facts, and a thouſand: others of the like kind, are


roo well atteſted for them to flatter themſelves with concealing their true cauſe
from men. Every one knows, that he is not of a different nature from the
Romans; that the difference of his education produces the difference of. his
ſentiments, and from thence he is ſhocked at the bare recital of a ſpectacle
which cuſtom would doubtleſs have rendered agreeable, had he been born on
the banks of the Tiber. In vain do ſome men, the dupes of their lazineſs
in examining, and of their vanity in thinking too well of themfelves, imagine,
that they owe the ſentiments of humanity with which they would be affected
at ſuch a ſpectacle to the particular excellence of their nature: the ſerffible
man agrees, that nature, as Paſcal ſays (b), and as experience proves, is no-
thing but our firſt habit. It is therefore abſurd to conceal from men the prin-
ciple by which they are actuated. RES”

But ſuppoſing they could ſucceed in this, what advantage would mankind
receive from it? They would certainly only veil from the eyes of men of groſs
ideas the ſenſation of ſelf-love. They would not hinder their being actuated
by this ſenſation ; nor would they change its effects: men would not be any
other than they are, therefore this ignorance would be of no uſe to them. I
proceed ſtill farther, and ſay, it would be prejudicial. It is, in fact, to a conſci-
ouſneſs of our being actuated by ſelf- love, that ſociety owes moſt of the ad-
vantages it enjoys: this conſciouſneſs, imperfect as it ſtill is, has informed
mankind of the neceſſity of arming the hand of magiſtrates with power; and
has made the legiſlator obtain a confuſed idea of the neceſſity of founding the
principles of probity on the baſis of perſonal intereſt. Indeed upon what other
baſis could they reſt it? Could it be placed on the principles of thoſe falſe
religions, which, notwithſtanding their errors, it is ſaid, might be rendered ſub-
ſervient to the temporal happineſs of mankind (c)? But moſt of theſe are
too abſurd to ſerve as ſupports to virtue; neither could it be reſted on the prin-
ciples of the true religion. Indeed the morals of this religion are excellent; its
maxims elevate the ſoul, fill it with an inward joy, and give it a foretaſte
of the tranſports of heaven; but theſe principles would only be ſuited to a
ſmall number of chriftians diſperſed over the earth; and a philoſopher, who,


— ——-—— 2 — —


(b) Sextus Empiricus, ſaid before him, ſtanding his being a place-man, as he really
That our natural principles are perhaps no- was, he thought it his duty to ſhew the peo-
thing more than our cuſtomary principles. ple the abſurdity of the Pagan religion.

(c) Cicero did not think fo ; for, notwith- |


in


— —  ——


118 ä DE L'ESPRETIF; 'on,

in his writings, is always ſuppoſed to be ſpeaking to the univerſe, ought to
give virtue a foundation on which ail nations may equally build, and conſe-
quently erect it on the baſis of perſonal intereſt. He ſhould the more cloſely
adhere to this principle, as the motions of temporal intereſt, managed
with addreſs by a ſkilful legiſlator, are alone ſufficient to form virtuous men.
The example of the Turks, who admit into their religion the doctrine of
neceſſity, a principle deſtructive to all religion, and may conſequently be con-
ſidered as deiſts; the example of the Chineſe materaliſts (d); that of the Sad-
ducees, who denied the immortality of the ſoul, and yet received from the
Jews the title of the Juſt, by way of excellence; in fine, the example of the
Gymnoſophiſts, who, notwithſtanding their being conſtantly accuſed of
atheiſm, were always reſpected for their wiſdom and gravity, diſcharged the


duties of ſocicty with the utmoſt exactneſs: all theſe examples, and a thou-


ſand others of the like kind, prove, that the hope or fear of temporal rewards
and puniſhments, are as efficacious, and as proper to form virtuous men as
thoſe pleaſures and pains that are eternal, which being conſidered in the per-
ſpective of futurity, commonly make too weak an impreſſion to engage men
to ſacrifice to them their preſent criminal pleaſures. 3

Why ſhould they not give the preference to motives of temporal intereſt ?

They inſpire none of thoſe pious and holy cruelties, condemned by our reli-

ionle), that law of love and humanity ; but which its miniſters have ſo often
uſed : cruelties that will for ever be the diſgrace of former ages, and the
horror and aſtoniſhment of the future.

With what ſurprize ought the virtuous citizen, and the chriſtian, filled
with that ſpirit of charity ſo often recommended in the Goſpel, to be ſeized,
when he caſts his eye upon the paſt ages of the world! He there ſees different
religions invoke all the rage of fanaticiſm, and glut themſelves with human


blood (f).
There


_
2


—


(d) Father le Compte, and moſt of the cauſe they had not a right to do it, but be-


Jeſuits agree, that all the men of letters are
atheiſts. The celebrated abbe Longuerue is
of the ſame opinion. 5
(e) When Bayle ſaid, that religion, which
in the firſt ages, was humble, patient, and
beneficent, is ſince become ambitious and
fanguinary ; ſince it puts to the word who-
ever rcfii's it; ſince it calls for tormentors,
invents new kinds of torture, ſends bulls to
excite the people to revolt, forms conſpita-
cies, and, in fine, orders the murder of
princes, he miſtook the work of man for
that of religion; and chriſtians have too of-
ten been theſe men. When they are only
a finall number, they pleaded for toleration ;
but their number and credit being encreaſed,
they preached againſt it. Bellarmine ſaid, on
this ſubject, that if the chriſtians did not de-
tatone Nero and Diocleſian, it was not be-


cauſe they were not ſtrong enough: and it
muſt be confeſſed, that they made uſe of their
ſtrength as foort as they were able. The
emperors deſtroyed paganiim with arms in
their hand; and thus by fighting againft here-
ſies, preached the Goſpel to the Frieſlanders,
the Saxons, and throughout all the North.
All theſe facts prove, that the principles of
our holy religion have been but too often a-

buſed. |
(f) In the infancy of the world, the firſt
uſe man made of his reaſon was to perſuade
himſelf, that the Gods were cruel. They
thought of rendering the Gods propitious by
the effuſion of human blood; and in the qui-
vering entrai!s of the vanquiſhed, they ſtrove
to read the decrees of fate. After the Ger-
man had with the moſt horrgple imprecations
devoted his enemics to death, his heart was
12


= 401
.


ESSAYS on Tar MIN D. 119

There the different ſects of chriſtians exaſperated againſt each other, tear
in pieces the empire of Conſtantinople: farther ſtill ariſes in Arabia a hew
religion, which commands the Saracens, to lay waſte the earth with fire and
ſword. The irruption of theſe barbarians is ſucceeded by a war againſt the
infidels. Under the ſtandard of the croſs entire nations deſert Europe, and
ſpread like an inundation over Aſia; they commit on the road the moſt
baſe and ſcandalous robberies, and are buried in the ſands of Arabia and Egypt.
At length fanaticiſm arms afreſh the hand of chriftian princes, and orders the
catholics to maſſacre the heretics: then again appears on the earth the tor-
tures invented by the Phalariſes, the Buſiriſes and the Neros; it prepares, it
kindles in Spain, the flaming pile of the inquiſition; while the pious Spa-
niards, leave their ports, and traverſe the ſeas, to plant the croſs and deſola-
tion in America (g). If we caſt our eyes to the north, the ſouth, the eaſt,
and the weſt, we every where ſee the ſacred knite of religion held up to the
breaſts of women, children, and old men; the earth ſmoaking with the blood
of victims ſacrificed to the falſe Gods, or to the Supreme Being; every place
offers nothing to the ſight but the vaſt, the horrible carnage, cauſed by a
want of toleration. What virtuous man, and what chriſtian, if his tender
mind is filled with the divine love, that exhales from the maxims of the Goſ-
pel, if he is capable of feeling the complaints of the miſerable, and if he has
ſometimes dried up their tears, would not at this fight be touched with com-
paſſion for human nature (h), and endeavour to found probity, not on princi-
ples ſo venerable as thoſe of religion, but on thoſe that cannot be ſo eaſily
abuſed, ſuch as the motives of perſonal intereſt ? 1
eſe


no longer open to pity; commiſeration ap-
peared to him as ſacrilege.

To calm the reſentment of the Nereides,
a polite people faſtened Andromeda to a
rock; to appeaſe Diana, and open a way to


the city of Troy, Agamem non himſelf drag-
ged Iphigenia to the altar, Calchas ſtruck the
blow, and believed that he did honour to the

Gods, | |


(g) Thus in an epiſtle ſuppoſed to be addreſſed to Charles V. an American is repreſented


ſpeaking thus :


Le neſt point nous qui ſommes les barbares :

Ce ſont, ſeigneur, ce ſont vos Cortez, vos Pizarres,

Qui pour nous mettre au fait d'un ſy{teme nouveau, k
Aſſemblent, contre nous, le pretre & le bourreau. ,


That ,
It is not we who are barbarians:


Theſe, my lord, are your Cortezes, your Pizarroes,
Who to oblige us to receive a new religion,
Aſſemble againſt us prieſts and executioners.


(h) On account of this perſecution, The-
miſtius the ſenator, in a letter addreſſed to
the emperor Valens, fays, „Is it a crime to
< think differently from thee ? If the chriſ-
* tians are divided among themſelves, the


< philoſophers are no leſs ſo. Truth has an
infinite number of faces, by which ſhe
may be ſeen. God has engraven in all
hearts a reſpect for his attributes; but eve-
< ry one has the liberty of ſhewing that reſ-

0 pect


EL ESPRIT; on,


120
Theſe motives, without contradicting the principles of our religion, would


be ſufficient, to lay men under a neceſſity of being virtuous. The Pagan re-
ligion, by peopling Olympus with villians, was doubtleſs leſs adapted than
ours to form juſt men: who, however, can doubt that the firſt Romans were
more virtuous than we? Who can deny, that priſons have diſarmed more
robbers than religion? That the Italian, more devout than the French, has
not with his chaplet of beads in his hand uſed the ſtilletto and poiſon? And
that at the time when devotion was warmer, and policy more imperfect,
they did not commit infinitely more crimes (i) than in the ages when devotion


grew cool, and policy was carried to perfection?
It is then only by good laws (k) that we can form virtuous men. All the


art therefore of the legiſlator conſiſts in forcing them by ſelf- love to be always


juſt


—


cc pect in the manner he thinks moſt agreea-
«ble to the deity; and no one here has a
right co prevent him.” |

St. Gregory de Nazienzen had a great eſ-
teem for Themiſtius, to whom he wrote,
„Thou alone, O Themiſtius, ſtruggleſt
<« againſt the decline of literature: thou art
< at the head of the learned; thou canſt phi-
© loſophize in high employments, join
« ſtudy to power, and dignities to ſcience.”

(i) There are few men reitrained by reli-
gion. What crimes have been committed
even by thoſe intruſted to guide us in the
ways of ſalvation, St. Bartholomew's day,
the aſſaſſination of Henry IV. the maſſacre
of the Templars, &c. &c. &c. ſufficiently
prove.

(x) Euſebius, in his Evangelical preparation,
lib. vi. cap. 10. mentions this remarkable
fragment of a Syrian philoſopher, named
Bardezanes : *©* Apud Seras, lex eſt qua cæ-
des, ſcortatio, furtum & ſimulachrorum cul-
tus omnis prohibetur; quare in ampliſſima re-
gione, non templum videas, non lenam, non
meretricem, non adulteram, non furem in
jus raptum, non homicidam, non toxicum.“
Among the Seres, the Jaw prohibits mur-

der, fornication, robbery, and all kinds
of religious worſhip; fo that in this vaſt
« region we ſee neither temple, nor adultery,
« nor bawds, nor whores, nor robbers, nor
« aſſaſſins, nor priſoners.” A proof that the
laws are ſufficient to reſtrain men.

We ſhould never have done, were we to
attempt giving a liſt of all the people who,
without the idea of a God, live in ſociety
more or leſs happily, according to the greater
or leſs wiſdom of their legiflator, -1 ſhall


mention only thoſe that firſt occur to my
memory.

Before the Goſpel was preached to the in-
habitants of the Marian Iſlands, ſays father
Jobien the jeſuit, they had neither altars,
nor temples, nor ſacrifices, nor prieſts: they
had only ſome cheats, named Macanas, who
preached to them. They however believed
that there was an hell and a paradiſe : their
hell was a furnace, where the devil beat ſouls
with a hammer, like iron in a forge; their
paradiſe was filled with cacao- trees, ſugar-
canes, and women. But it was neither their
virtues nor vices that entitled them to a place
either in paradiſe or in hell; for hell was al-
lotted to thoſe who died of a violent death,
and the others were admitted into paradiſe.
Father Jobien adds, that to the ſouth of the
Marian Iſles, are thirty two iſlands inhabited
by nations who are abſolutely deſtitute of the
knowledge of any religion, or of a Deity, and
employ themſelves ſolely in eating, drink-
ing, &c.

The Caribbees, according to Le Borde,
who was employed in their converſion, have
neither ptieit, nor altars, nor ſacrifices, nor
any idea of the Deity ; and will be well paid
by thoſe who would make them chriſtians.
They believe that the firſt man, named Lon-
guo, had a great navel, from whence came
mankind. This Longuo was the firſt agent;
he had made the earth without mountains,
which, according to them, were produced
by a deluge. Envy was one of the firſt crea-


' tures, and ſhe ſoon overſpread the earth with


eviis ; ſhe thought herſelf beautiſul, but hav-
ing ſeen the ſun, ſhe went to hide herſelf,
and ever ſince appears only in the night.
| The


ESS ATS o Tz MI ND. 121
juſt to each other. Now, in order to compoſe ſuch laws, it is neceſſary that
the human heart ſhould be known, and in the firſt place that we ſhould be
convinced that men having ſenſibility for themſelves, and indifference with
| reſpect to others, are neither good nor bad, but ready to be either, according
as a common intereſt unites or divides them; that ſelf-love, a ſenſation ne-
ceſſary to the preſervation of the ſpecies, is engraven by Nature in a manner
not to be erazed (1) ; that a phyſical ſenſibility has produced in us a love of
pleaſure and a hatred of pain; that pleaſure and pain have at length produced,
| and opened in all hearts the buds of ſelf-love, which by untolding them -
| ſelves give birth to the paſſions; whence ſpring all our virtues and vices.
| By contemplating theſe preliminary ideas, we learn why the paſſions, of which
the forbidden tree is, according to ſome rabbins, only an ingenious image,
bear equally on it branches good and evil fruit; we perceive the mecha-
Wo niſm employed by them in the production of our virtues and vices; and in
#1 ſhort, a ſegillator diſcovers the means of laying men under a neceſſity of being
© virtuous, and caufing the paſſions to bear no other fruit -but probity and
wiſdom.

Now, if the examination of theſe ideas, ſo proper to render men virtuous, is
forbidden by the two ſpecies of men in power above-mentioned, the only means
of haſtening the progreſs of morality, will be, as I have already ſaid, to ſhew
that theſe protectors of ſtupidity, are the moſt cruel enemies of human nature,
and to ſnatch from their hands the ſceptre of ignorance, by which they are au-
thorized to command a ſtupid people. Upon which I ſhall obſerve that this,
ſimple and eaſy as it appears in ſpeculatien, is extremely difficult. in the exe-
cution : Indeed there are men who have great and judicious minds united
to the virtue and ſtrength of foul : there are men, who, being perſuaded that
a citizen without courage is alſo without virtue, are ſenſible that the fortune
and even the life of every individual is not his own, but is in a manner a depo-
ſit which he ought always to be ready to deliver up when the ſafety of the pub-
lic makes it neceſſary : but the number of ſuck men is always too few for them
to enlighten the public; beſides, virtue mutt ever be of little weight, when
the manners of an age fix upon it the ruſt of ridicule. Thus morality and the


— Ls * . — — — — — 4 * — — — —


The Chiriguanes do not acknowledge a
God. Letters ediff. 24.
The Giagues, according to Father Cavaſ-
ſy, acknowledge no being diſtinct from mat-
ter, and have not even in their language a
word expreffive of that idea: they worſhip
only their anceſtors, whom they believe to be
always living; and imagine, that their prince
has authority over the rain. |


At Indoftan, ſays father Pons the Jeſuit,


is a ſet of Brachmans, who think, that the


mind is united to matter, -and abſorbed by it ;
'that the wiſdom which purifies the ſoul, and
1s only the knowledge of truth, produces the
deliverance of the mind, by way of an analy-
is, Now the mind, according to theſe


R


Brachmans, diſengages itſelf ſometimes of a
form, and ſometimes of a quality, by theſe
three truths, © IT am not in any thing, no-
thing is in me, I am not.” When the mind
ſhall be delivered from all theſe forms, there


will be an end of the world. They add,


that religion is ſo far from diſengaging the
mind from theſe forms, that it only binds it
the faſter within the matter by which it is ab-
ſorbed. bes: 5

(1) The ſoldier and the commander of a
privateer, deſire war, and nobody imputes it to
them as a crime. It is viſible that in this reſ-
pect their intereſt is not ſufficiently connected


wich the general intereſt,


legiſlation,


122 SEL ESPRAIT: oo


legiſlation, which I conſider as one and the ſame ſcience, can only make an
inſenſible progreſs. |
Nothing bur the lapſe of time can recal thoſe happy ages, deſcribed under


the names of Aſtrea and Rhea, which were only an ingenious emblem of


the perfection of theſe ſciences.


le e l ee le ee ene


C
Of Probity, in relation to the world in general,


F there was any ſuch thing as probity in relation to all mankind it would:

only conſiſt in the habit of performing actions uſeful to all nations: now no
action can have an immediate influence on the happineſs or unhappineſs of all
mankind. To illuſtrate this by an example, the moſt generous action can
produce in the moral world an effect no more ſenſible than a ſtone thrown
into the ocean can produce in the ſeas, by raiſing the ſurface.

There is then no practical probity in relation to the univerſe. With reſ-


pect to probity of intention, which is reduced to a conſtant and habitual.


delire of the happineſs of mankind, and conſequently to vague and ineffica-
cious wiſhes for the univerſal felicity, I maintain that it is nothing but a Pla-
tonic chimera. In fact, if the oppoſition of intereſts that ſubtiſts between
different nations, with reſpe& to each other, keeps them in a ſtate of per-
petual war; if a peace concluded between two nations is in truth merely a.
ceſſation like that between two veſſels, which after a long fight take time to
repair their rigging and ſtop their leaks, only to renew the attack; if nations.
cannot extend their conqueſt and their commerce, without doing it at the ex-
pence of their rivals in fine, if the felicity and grandeur of one nation is
almoſt always cloſely connected with the misfortunes and weakneſs of another,
it is evident that a ſpirit of patriotiſm, a paſſion ſo deſirable, ſo virtuous, and fo
worthy of eſteem in any citizen, is, as is proved by the example of the Greeks
and Romans, abſolutely excluſive of the love for all mankind..

It is neceſlary, in order to give exiſtence to this kind of probity, that the
nations by reciprocal. laws and conventions, ſhould unite together as families
compoſing one ftate ; that the private intereſt of nations thould ſubmit to a
more general intereſt; and that the love of our country, becoming extinguiſhed
in the heart, ſhould give place to the more extended flame of univerſal love:
a ſuppoſition that will not be realized long for a ſeries time, Whence I conclude,


that there can be no ſuch thing as practical nor even intentional probity,


with reſpect to all mankind; and in this reſpect the mind is at variance with

probity. |
In fact, though the actions of a- ſingle perſon cannot at all contribute to the
general happineſs, and though the influences of his virtue cannot ſenſibly ex-
tend beyond the limits of an empire, it is not ſo with his ideas: if a man diſ-
| | covers.


4


ESSAYS on Tu MIND. 123


covers a ſpecific remedy, or if he invents a wind-mill, theſe productions of
the mind may render him a benefactor to the world (a).

Beſides, in affairs of genius the love of our country is not, as in the caſe
of probity, excluſive of a love of all mankind, A nation does not acquire
knowledge at the expence of the neighbouring ſtates : on the contrary, the
more nations are enlightened, the more they reciprocally reflect ideas, and
the more the force and activity of the univerſal genius is augmented. Whence
I conclude, that though there is no probity relative to the univerſe, there are
at leaſt certain kinds of genius that may be conſidered in this light.


FFEDErEREPEEIELCEEIL EEE EE LEE LILLIE TELL ELLE F40


C ‚ H A FP. XXL
Of Genius, with reſpect to the ui verſe.


| Enius conſidered in this point of view will be, in conformity to the
8 preceding definitions, the power of raiſing intereſting ideas in the minds
of all people, either as inſtructive or agreeable.

This kind of genius is, doubtleſs, the moſt defirable. There never was a
time when that ſpecies of ideas. which was ſuppoſed by all nations to flow
from genius, was not really worthy of that name. It is not the ſame with
reſpect to the power of creating thoſe Kinds of ideas which one nation alone
ſuppoſes to be derived from this ſource. Every nation has a time of ſtupi-
dity and degradation, during which the people have no clear idea of genius;
it then prodigally beſtows the name on certain aſſemblages of ideas that are
agreeable to the mode, and always ridiculous in the eyes of poſterity. Theſe
ages of degradation are commonly thoſe of deſpotic power; when, as a poet
ſays, God deprives nations of one half of their underſtandings, that they may
be enabled to bear the miſeries and puniſhments of ſlavery. |

Among the ideas proper to pleaſe all people are thoſe that are inſtructive ;
which are belonging to certain arts and ſciences : others are alſo agreeable,
ſuch as firſt the admired ideas and ſentiments in certain parts of Homer, Vir-
gil, Corneille, Taſſo, and Milton; in which, as I have already oblerved, thoſe
illuſtrious writers do not confine themſelves to the painting of a particular
nation or age, but to that of human nature; ſuch are, in the ſecond place,
the grand images with which theſe poets enrich their works.


wot"


(a) Thus reaſon is the greateſt of our ad-
vantages, and perhaps infinitely more to the
happineſs of men than the virtue of any par-
ticular perſon. To this, is reſerved the
power of forming the beſt legiſlation, and
conſequently of rendering men as happy as
poſhble. Tis true the romance of this le-
giſlation, is not yet completed, and that ſe-
veral ages will ſlide away before the fiction be


1


realized: but, arming ourſelves with the pa-
tience of the abbe de ſaint Pierre, we may,
after him, foretel, that every thing that
is now a ſubject of the imagination will have
exiſtence. |

Men muſt neceſſarily have a confuſed ſen-
fation, that reaſon is the principal of all our
advantages, ſince envy will allow a man to
mention his probity, but not his good ſenſe.


To


124 DE L*ESPRIT; or;


10 prove, that in every work of genius there are beauties proper to pleaſo
univerſally, I chuie theſe images for an example; and ſay, that grandeur in
poetic pictures is a ſource of univerſal pleaſure (a). Not that all men are
equally {truck with them: there are ſome as inſenſible to the beauties of de-
{criptioa as to the charms of harmony; and whom it would be as unjuſt as it
would be uſeleſs to attempt to diſabuſe. By their inſenſibility they have ac-
quired an unhappy right of diſowning the pleaſure they do not feel: but there
are only a ſmall number of theſe people. 4%

In fact, Whether it be the habitual and impatient deſire of felicity that
makes us wiſh for all perfections as a means of encreaſing our happineſs,
and renders all thoſe grand objects agreeable to us where their contemplation
ſeetns to give a greater extent of ſoul, and more ſtrength and elevation of
ideas; whether grand objects make a ſtronger, a more laſting, and more
agreeable impreſſion; or whether, in ſhort, it is from ſome other cauſe, we
find that we are offended at a confined view, and perceive ourſelves confined.
in the narrow paſſages. between mountains, or when incloſed by a great wall;
while, on the contrary, the eye loves to extend its view over a vaſt plain, to
take in the ſurface of the ſea, or to loſe itſelf in examining a diſtant horizon.

Every thing that is great is adapted to pleaſe the eye and imagination of
mankind : this ſpecies of. deſcriptive beauty has infinitely the advantage over
all thoſe that, depending on juſtneſs of proportions, can neither be ſo warmly.
nor ſo generally felt, ſince all nations have not the ſame ideas of proportions.

If we oppoſe to the caſcades, ſubterranean caves, and terraſes proportioned
by art, the cataracts of the river St. Laurence, the gaping caverns of Etna,
the enormous maſles of rock heaped upon each other, without, order in the -
Alps, ſhall we not find that the pleaſure produced by the prodigality and rude -


— a. * * — —_ 8 — | A
— — —


—


foreſt? That in the Pyrenean mountains, in
the midſt of deſerts, abyſſes, and rocks,
the imagination, ſtruck with the idea of the
war of the Titans, beholds the mountains of
Oſſa and Pelion, and looks with fear on


(a) If grand pictures do not always forci-
bly ſtrike us, this want of effect uſually de-
pends on a cauſe that has no relation to their
grandeur. It moſt commonly proceeds from


being connected in our own minds with
ſome diſagreeable object. Upon which 1
ſhall obſerve, that we rarely, in reading a po-
etical deſcription, receive only the pure im-
preſſion that would have been made on us by
an exact view of the image. All objects par-
ticipate of the uglineſs as well as of the beau-
ty of thoſe with which they are commonly
connected; to this cauſe we ought to attri-
bute moſt of our diſguſts, and our vnjult fits
of enthuſiaſtic applauſe. A proverb uſed in
the market, though ever ſo excellent, always


appears low; becauſe it is neceſſarily con-


nected in our memory with the image of
thoſe who make uſe of it.


Who can doubt of its being from the ſame.


reaſon that the tales of ſpirits and apparitions
recur in the night upon the mind of the wan-
dering traveller, and double the horrors of a


the field of battle of theſe giants? Who


doubts but that the remembrance of the bower


deſcribed by Camoens, where the nymphs
naked, flying, and purſued by warm deſires,
fell at the feet of the Portugueſe, where love
ſparkled in their eyes, and circulated in their
veins; where their words were loſt, and no-
thing heard but the murmurs of happy lovers:
who doubts, I ſay, that the remembrance of
ſo voluptuous. a deſcription. has ſome time
embelliſhed every grove ? |

From this reaſon it is ſo difficult to ſeparate
entirely from the pleaſure we receive at the
preſence of an object all the other pleaſing
ſenſations that ſeem in a manner reflected up-
on it, from other objects to which it happens
to be connected. 525


mag-


ESSAYS or Tut MIND: 125
magnificence viſible in the works of nature is infinitely ſuperior to that re-
ſulting from juſtneſs of proportions?

To be convinced of this, let a perſon in the night aſcend a mountain in order
to contemplate the firmament : what is the charm that draws him thither ?
Is it the agreeable ſymmetry in which the ſtars are ranged ? Here, in the Via
lactea, are innumerable ſuns heaped up without order, ſome farther diſtant
than others; and there are vaſt deſerts, What is then the ſource of his plea-
ſures ? The immenſity of heaven itſelf. Indeed, what idea muſt he form of
this immenſity, when worlds of fire appear but as luminous points ſcattered
here and there in the plains of ether ? when ſuns ſtill farther involved in the
profound ſpaces of the firmament can ſcarcely be pereeived ? The imagina-
tion, which launches forwards to theſe laſt ſpheres,to comprehend all the worlds
poſlible, is ſwallowed up in the vaſt and immeaſurable concavity of the heavens,
and plunged in a raviſhing delight, produced by the contemplation of an ob-
ject that fills his whole ſoul. Thus the grandeur of the decorations of this
kind has occaſioned the obſervation, That art is inferior to nature; which
means no more than that great and noble pictures appear to us- preferable to
thoſe that are comparatively little and mean.

In the arts ſuſceptible of this kind of beauty, ſuch as ſculpture, architecture,
and poetry, it is the enormity of the maſſes that places the coloſſus of Rhodes
and the pyramids of Memphis among the wonders of the world. It is
the grandeur of the"deſcriptions that makes us admire Milton, for having the
moit ſtrong and ſublime imagination. His ſubje& too, though little ca-
pable of beauties of another kind, was infinitely ſo of the beauties of deſcription. .
He was obliged by his ſubject on the terreſtrial paradiſe, to aſſemble in the
hort compaſs of the garden of Eden all the beauties nature has diſperſed over
the earth, to adorn a thouſand different climates. Carried by the choice of
the ſame ſubject to the unformed abyſs of Chaos, he was to draw from thence
his primitive materials for erecting the univerſe, to excaviate the bed of the
ocean, to crown the earth with mountains, to cover it with verdure, to move
and kindle the ſun and ſtars, to ſpread over them the pavilion of the heavens, to -
paint the beauties of the firſt day of the world, and that freſhneſs of the opening
ſpring, with which his lively imagination embelliſhed nature at her birth. He
had then not only the moſt grand, bur the moſt new and varied pictures to paint,
which to the imagination of man are two other univerſal ſources of pleaſure.

It is with the imagination as with reaſon: by contemplation, or the com-
bination either of the pictures of nature, or of philoſophical ideas, poets and
philoſophers improve their imaginations and their reaſon; and thus are ena-
bled to excel in different kinds, in which it is equally rare, and perhaps
equally difficult to ſucceed. | x7,

What man, indeed, does not perceive, that the progreſs of the human.
mind ought to be uniform to whatever ſcience or art it applies? If, to pleaſe.
the mind, ſays Fontenelle, we muft employ, without fatiguing it ;..if we can-
not employ it,. without offering thoſe new, grand, and primitive truths, where
their novelty,. importance, and fertility, ſtrongly fix the attention; if we
avoid fatiguing only by preſenting ideas ranged with order, exprefſed in the
meſt proper words, in which the ſubject has an uniformity and ſimplicity that

| roeonders-


125 rr ot,


renders it eaſily comprehended, and where the variety is joined to ſimplicity (b)ʒ
it is equally to the combination of grandeur, novelty, variety, and ſimpli—
city in the pictures, that is joined the greateſt pleaſure of the imagination. If,
for example, the view or deſcription of a great lake is agreeable, that of a
calm and boundleſs ſea is doubtleſs ſtill more to: its immenſity is a ſource of
greater pleaſure. However beauriful this proſpect may be, its uniformity
would ſoon render it tireſome. Therefore, if envelopped by black clouds,
and carried by the north-wind, the tempeſt, perſonified by the poet's imagi-
nation, haſtens to the ſouth, rolling before him moveable mountains of water;
who doubts but that the rapid, ſimple, and varied ſucceſſion of terrifying pic-
cures, preſented by the troubled ſea, will every moment make new impreſſions on
the imagination, ſtrongly fix our attention, employ the mind without fati-
guing it, and conſequently pleaſe us more? But it tae night happens to redouble
the horrors of the ſame tempeſt, and the watry mountains where the chain
terminates and encloſes the horrizon be inſtantly lighted by repeated and re-
llected flaſhes of lightning, who can doubt but that this dark ſea, ſuddenly
changed to a ſea of fire, would form by the united novelty of the grandeur and
varizty of the images, a picture more adapted to fill the imagination with
aitoniſhment? Thus the art of poetry, conſidered merely as deſcriptive, is to
offer nothing to view but objects in motion, and, if poſſible, to ſtrike ſeve-
ral ſenſes at once. May not the deſcription of the roaring of the water, the
howling of the winds, and the burſt of rolling thunder, add till to the ſecret ter-
ror, and conſequently, to the pleaſure we experience at the view of a tempeſ-
tuous ſea? At the return of ſpring, does not the deſcent of Aurora into the
gardens of Marly, to open the buds of flowers; does not the perfumes ſhe at
that inſtznt exhales, the warbling of a thouſand birds, and the murmur of
caſcades, encreaſe the charms of thoſe delightful groves ? All the ſenſes are
ſo many gates, by which agrecable impreſſions may enter our ſouls; and the
more of thein are opened at once, the higher does our pleaſure ariſe.

We ſee then, that as there are ideas generally uſeful to nations from their
being inſtructive as thoſe that immediately belong to the ſciences, there are
others alſo univerſally uſeful, as being agreeable; and that differing in this
particular from probity, the genius of a ſingle perſon may have a relation to
the whole univerſe. |

The concluſion of this diſcourſe is, that in affairs that relate to the mind,
as well as in moral actions, it is in the nature of man to praile love or grati-
tude, and to deſpiſe hatred or revenge. Intereſt then is the only diſpenſer of
his eſteem : genius under whatſoever point of view it is conſidered is then never
any thing more than a capacity for aſſembling ideas that are new and intereſt-


ing; and conſequently uſeful to mankind, either as being inſtructive or agreeable.


—


(b) It is proper to remark, that the ſimplicity in ſubjects and images is a perfection
relative to the weakneſs of our minds. 1 |


E S-


ESSAYS on Tae MIND. r27


SSIHISSISSSS0S000D0$04


E-: 8 1 III.


Whether Genius ought to be confidered as a natural gift ; or, as an effet
| | F education. |


Lad


C HH A+ B.-k


AM going to examine in this diſcourſe what the mind' receives from
nature and education: for whick purpoſe it is neceſſary, firſt, to deter-

mine what is here meant by the word Nature. |

This word may raile in our minds a confuſed idea of a being or a force
that has endued us with all our ſenſes > now the ſenſes are the ſources of
all our ideas. Being deprived of our ſenſes, we are deprived of all the ideas rela-
tive to it: a man born blind has for this reaſon no idea of colours; it is then
evident, that in this ſignification genius ought to be conſidered as a gifr of
nature. 1 5

But if the word is taken in a different acceptation, and we ſuppoſe that
among the men well formed, and endued with all their ſenſes, without any
perceivable defect of their organization, nature has made ſuch a remarkable
difference, and formed ſuch an unequal diſtribution of the intellectual powers,
that one ſhall be ſo organized as to be ſtupid, and the other be a man of
genius, the queſtion will become more delicate.

I confeſs, that at firſt we cannot conſider the great inequality in the minds
of men, without admitting that there is the ſame difference between them as
between bodies, ſome of which are weak and delicate, while others are ſtrong,
and robuſt. What can here occaſion ſuch variations from the uniform man-
ner wherein nature operates ? | :

This reaſoning, 'tis true, is founded only on analogy. It is like that of
the aſtronomers, who conclude that the moon is inhabited, becauſe it is com-
poſed of nearly the ſame matter as our earth.

How weak ſoever this reaſoning may be, it mult yet appear demonſtrative;

for, ſay they, to what cauſe can be attributed the great diſproportion of in-
tellects obſekvable between people who appear to have had the ſame edu-
cation ?

In order to reply to this objection, it is proper firſt to enquire, whether ſe-
veral men can, ſtrictly ſpeaking, have the ſame education; and for this pur-
poſe to fix the idea included in the word Education. | |

If by education, we merely underſtand, that received in the ſame places,
and under the ſame maſters ; in this ſenſe the education is the ſame with an.
infinite number of men. |

But, if we give to this word a more true and extenſive fignification, and
in general comprehend every thing that relates to our inſtruction; then, I ſay,


that


128


DE L ESPRIT; on,


that nobody receives the ſame education; becauſe each individual has, for
his preceptors, if I may be allowed to fay fo, the form of government under
which he lives, his friends, his miſtreſſes, the people about him, whatever he
reads, and in ſhort chance; that is an infinite number of events, with reſ-
pect to which our ignorance will not permit us to perceive their cauſes, and


the chain that connects them together.
ſhare in our education than is imagined.


Now, this chance has a greater
It is this that places certain objects


before us, and in conſequence of this occaſions more happy ideas, and ſome-
times leads to the greateſt diſcoveries. To give ſome examples: it was chance
that conducted Galileo into the gardens of Florence, when the gardeners were
working the pumps: it was that which inſpired thoſe gardeners, when not being
able to raiſe the water above the height of thirty-two feet, to aſk him the
caule, and by that queſtion, piqued the vanity of- the philoſopher : it was
at length his vanity, put in action by ſo caſual a queſtion, that obliged him to
make this natural effect the ſubject of his thoughts, till at laſt, by diſcovering
the weight of the air, he found the ſolution ot the problem.

In the moment when the peaceful ſoul of Newton was employed by no buſt-
nels, and agitated by no paſſion, it was alſo chance that, drawing him under
an apple-tree, looſened ſome of the fruit from the branches, and gave that
philoſopher the firſt idea of his ſyſtem on gravitation: it was really this in-
cident that afterwards made him turn his thoughts to enquire whether the
moon does not gravitate towards the earth with the fame force as that with
which bodies fall on its ſurface ? It is then to chance that great geniuſes are


frequently obliged for their moſt happy thoughts.


How many great minds


are confounded among the people of moderate capacities for want of a certain
tranquility of ſoul, the queſtion of a gardener, or the fall of an apple!
I am ſenſible, that we cannot at firſt, without ſome pain, attribute ſuch


great effects to cauſes fo diſtant and ſo ſmall in appearance (a).


However, ex-


perience informs us, that in the phyſical, as in the moral world, the greateſt


events are often produced by almoſt imperceptible ca es.


Who doubts that


Alexander owed in part his conqueſt of Perſia to the inſtitutor of the Ma-
cedonian phalanx? That the adventures of Achilles, animating that prince
with all the rage of glory, had a ſhare in the deſtruction of the empire of Darius,
as Quintius Curtius contributed to the victories of Charles XII? Who can
doubt that the tears of Veturia, by diſarming Coriolanus, confirmed the power
of Rome, which was ready to ſink under the efforts of the Volſcii, and occa-
ſioned that long train of victories which changed the face of the world; and


1


(a) We read, in the Literary year, that Boi-
leau, when a child, playing in a yard, fell
down. In his fall, his coats turned up,
when a turky gave him ſeveral pecks on a ve-
ry tender part. Boileau felt the injury during
his whole life ; and perhaps from thence
.aroſe. that ſeverity of manners, and that
want of ſenſibility viſible in all his works ;
from thence his fatire againſt women, againſt
Lulli, Quinaut, and ail verſes of gallantry,


* — *


Perhaps his antipathy againſt turkies might
occaſion that ſecret averſion he always had to
the Jeſuits, who brought them into France.
To the fame accident, perhaps, we owe his
ſatire on double meanings, his admiration of
Mr. Arnaud, and his epiſtle on the love of
God; fo true it is, that imperceptible cauſes
often determine the whole conduct of life, and
the whole ſeries of our ideas, |


I that


22
wo”.
„
15
*
4 2.
"> 2
:
*
=
ER
"9%:
* *
Ec . :
Br
6 q
8
E
.
by
EP
5
1
pe
8
* <%
Ix
bo.
.
+ Be
5
«So!
4 de
"I
DET ng
"$57 4
3
8 4
54's
.
3
8
3
3
3
Wars.”
1
. Oe
A
\ 2 5
3
_
E
FRE 1
5
2 4
Fon...
: FH
= ol
8
IP
.
7 © *
.
rg
__ 8
*
8
*
"$7 4Y
Sa
SY
LIE
7
wh LIES,
8 9
Fs
938
8 |
"VE -
n
DE
Hh Yo
N
£27
3
Kage
2
.
1
25 re.
12 "FY
of 5
45 5
Ver
A
8
N
3
5
Fl
"£4
S328
Y p
7
K's
KY»
CS
WA
7 oh <A
3
|
1
9
3%
2 AT
8
n
OG
3
LR
Ka 8
5
3
4 2
.
xy Fi
Se
8
*
n «
5
*
ge”
ph
>
"kg
IRE
4%
3
RM
2
1
3
7
155
37 %e
"SR
338.
*
Eo >
{x57
1
5
&
5


E SS AT S ON Tm MIND. 129
that, conſequently, it was to the tears of Veturia, that Europe owes its preſent


ſituation? What a number of facts of the like kind (b) might here be mention-


ed? Guſtavus, ſays the abbe de Vertot, proceeded in vain through all the pro-
vinces of Sweden; he wandered above a year in the mountains of Delecarlia.
The mountaineers, though prepoſſeſſed by his good mien, the tallneſs of his
ſtature, and the apparent ſtrength of his body, were not however determined
to join him, till on that very day when the prince harangued the Delecarlians,


the old men of the country remarked, that the north wind had for ſome time


conſtantly blowed. This wind appeared to them as a certain ſign of the pro-
tection of heaven, and as an order to take up arms in favour of the hero. It
was then the north wind that placed the crownof Swedenon the head of Guſtavus.

Moſt events ſpring from cauſes equally ſmall: we are unacquainted with
them, becauſe moſt hiſtorians have been themſelves ignorant of them, or have
not had eyes capable of perceiving them. *Tis true, that in this reſpect, the
mind may repair their omiſſions; for the knowledge of certain principles eaſily
ſupplies the knowledge of certain facts. Thus, without ſtaying any longer to
prove that chance plays a greater part in the theatre of the world than is ima-
gined, I ſhall conclude what I have juſt ſaid with obſerving, that if under
the word Education, be comprehended every thing in general that contributes
to our inſtruction, this chance muſt neceſſarily have the greateſt ſhare in it;
and that no perſon being placed in exactly the ſame concourle of circumſtances,
no perſon can receive exactly the ſame education.

This fa& being well weighed, who can be certain that a difference in edu-
cation does not produce the difference obſervable in minds? Who can aſſert,
that men are not like thoſe trees of the ſame ſpecies, whole ſeed being abſo-


lutely the ſame, but never ſown exactly in the ſame earth, nor expoſed en-


tirely to the fame winds, the ſame ſun, or the ſame rain, muſt in unfolding
themſelves neceſſarily produce an infinity of different forms. I may then
conclude, that the inequality obſervable in the minds of men may be indif-
ferently conſidered, either as the effect of nature, or of education. But what-
ever truth there may be in this concluſion, yet as it is extemely vague, and
may be reduced in a manner to a perhaps, I think I ought to conſider this
queſtion in a new point of view, and return back to principles more certain
and determinate. To this purpoſe, it will be proper to reduce the queſtion
to ſimple points; to aſcend to the origin of our ideas, and to the opening ofthe
mind; and to recollect that man can only make uſe of his ſenſes, remember,
and obſerve reſemblances and differences, that is, the connection ſubſiſting


between the different objects that preſent themſelves, either to him, or to his


memory; that therefore nature can only give men more or fewer capacities of
mind, by enduing ſome preferably to others, with a little more delicacy of the
ſenſes, extent of memory, and capacity of attention.


23


—


(p) In the minority of Louis XIV. when


LOU ceived leſs honour from that important coun-
that prince was ready to retire into Burgundy,


; ſel, than from defeating five hundred horſe.
St.Evremond ſays, that the advice of Turenne So true is it, that we with difficulty attribute


kept him at Paris, and ſaved France. great effects to cauſes that appear fo ſmall and
However, that great general, he adds, re- diſtant.
8 CHAP.


130 11 DE L*ESPRIT3z on;


CCC


8 II.
Of the Delicacy of the Senjes.


AN the greater or leſs perfection of the organs of ſenſe, in which is

neceſſarily included that of the interior organization, ſince I can here
Judge of the delicacy of the ſenſes only by effects, be the cauſe of the ine-
quality obſervable in the minds of men ? |

In order to reaſon with ſome degree of juſtneſs on this ſubject, it is neceſſa-
ry to enquire, whether the greater or leſs delicacy of the ſenſes gives the mind
either more extent or more juſtneſs, which neceſſarily includes all the mental
faculties.

The greater or leſs perfection of the organs of ſenſe has no influence on juſt-
neſs of thinking, if men, whatever impreſſion they receive from the ſame ob-
jets, mult always perceive the ſame connections between thoſe objects. Now,
to prove that they perceive them, I ſhall chuſe the ſenſe of ſight for an exam-
ple, as that to which we owe the greateſt number of our ideas. And I ſay, with
reſpect to the difference of eyes, that if a fathom appears to one man ſhorter,
ſnow leſs white, and ebony not ſo black as they appear to another, yer,
theſe two men always perceive the ſame relations between thoſe objects.;
conſequently, a fathom always appears longer than a foot; the ſnow whiter
than any other body, and ebony the blackelt of all kinds of wood.

Now, as the juſtneſs of our thoughts always conſiſts in a clear view of the
true relations that ſubſiſt between objects, and as in repeating, with reſpect to
the other ſenſes, what I have here ſaid on that of fight, we ſhall conſtantly
come to the ſame concluſion ; I infer, that the greater or leſs degree of per-
fection, either in the external or internal organization, can have no influence
on the juſtneſs of our judgments. f

Moreover, if extent be diſtinguiſned from juſtneſs of thought, the greater
or leſs degree of delicacy of the ſenſes will make no addition to that extent.
If ſight be again taken for an example, it is evident, that a mind, being more
or leſs extenſive, does not depend on the greater or leſs number of objects,
to the excluſion of others which a man endued with very fine ſenſes may

lace in his memory. There are very few objects ſo imperceptible by their
ſmallneſs, that conſidered exactly with the ſame attention by two eyes equally
young, and as well employed, can be perceived by the one, and not by
the other: but was the difference in this reſpe&t made by nature between men,
whom I call well organized, that is, in whoſe organization there appears no


defect (a), infinitely more conſiderable than it is, I am able to ſhew, that


.


(a) I ſpeak in this chapter only of thoſe pidity, which are commonly produced, the
men who are well organized and deprived of one by a defect of memory, and the other by
none of the ſenſes, and who beſides are not a total want of that faculty. |


afflicted either with the diſeaſe of folly or ſtu-
| this


.


PE as!


a F S S A X S O Tne MIND. 131


this difference does not produce any with reſpect to the extenſiveneſs of the
mind. .

Let us ſuppoſe two men endued with the ſame capacity for attention, the
ſame extent of memory, and, in ſhort, equal in every thing except the deli-
cacy of the ſenſes; upon this hypotheſis, he who has the beſt ſight may, be-
yond all contradiction, place in his memory, and combine many of theſe
objects which by their ſmallneſs are concealed from him who, in this reſpect,
has a leſs perfect organization; but theſe two men having upon my ſuppoſi-
tion a memory equally extenſive, and capable if they pleaſe, of containing
two thouſand objects, it is certain, that the ſecond may ſupply by hiſtorical
facts the objects which a ſmaller degree of delicacy of fight would not
have permitted him to receive; and that he may complete, if he pleaſes, the
number of two thouſand objects, contained in the memory of the firſt, Now,
if between theſe two men, he who has the ſenſe of fight leſs perfect may yet
depoſit in the magazine of his memory as great a number of objects as the


other; and if, beſides, theſe men are equal in every thing elſe, they muſt


conſequently form as many combinations. The greater or leſs perfection of
the organ of ſight cannot however fail of having an influence on the genius or
bent of their minds, and make one a painter, or a botaniſt, and the other an hiſ-
torian and a politician ; but it can have no influence with reſpect to the extent
of their minds. Thus, we do not obſerve a conſtant ſuperiority of mind either
among thoſe who have a greater delicacy in the ſenſes of ſeeing and hearing or
thoſe who habitually uſe ſpectacles, and ear-trumpets ; theſe means make
a greater difference between them and other men than in this reſpect


nature herſelf has done. From whence I conclude, that between the men


whom I call well organized, the ſuperiority of knowledge, is not in propor-


tion to the external or internal perfection of theſe organs; and that the


great inequality ſubſiſting between minds neceſſarily depends on ſome other
cauſe. | |


FF


GC: HH A
Of the Extent of the Memory.


HE concluſion of the preceding chapter leads to the enquiry whether,

the unequal extent of the memory, be the cauſe of the great variety of
mental faculties in mankind ? The memory is the magazine, in which are
depoſited the ſenſations, facts, and ideas, whoſe different combinations fo
what is called knowledge.

The ſenſations, facts, and ideas, muſt then be conſidered as the primary
matter ok knowledge. Now, the more ſpacious the magazine of the memory
is, the more it contains of this primary matter; and the greater is the ability
of obtaining knowledge. | | |

Though this manner of reaſoning may ſeem well founded, yet in ſearching
it thoroughly it will appear to be Top ſpecious. To give it a complete anſwer,


2 it


rm


132 DE L'ESPRIT; on,
it is neceſſary firſt to examine, whether the difference of extent in the me-
mory of perſons well organized be as remarkable in fact, as it is in appear-
ance : and ſuppoſing this difference real, it muſt ſecondly be conſidered, whe-
ther it ought to be regarded as the cauſe of the unequal diftribution of mental
abilities. |

As to the firſt ſubje& of enquiry, I ſay, that attention alone may engrave
in the memory the ſubjects that without attention would make only inſen-
ſible impreſſions upon us; nearly reſembling thole a reader ſucceſſively receives
of each of the letters that compoſe a page in a book. It is then certain, that
to judge whether the defect of memory is in men an effect of their inatten-
tion, or of an imperfection in the organs, we muſt have recourſe to experience.
This teaches us that among men there are many, as St. Auguſtin and
Montaigne ſay of themſelves, who appear to be endued with only a very weak
memory; and yet from the deſire of obtaining knowledge, acquire ſuch a
number of ideas, as to cauſe them to be placed in the rank of perſons of an
extaordinary memory. Now, if the deſire of inſtruction be alone ſufficient to
enable us to know a great deal, I conclude, that the memory is almoſt entirely
factitious. The extent of the memory therefore firſt depends on the daily uſe
made of it: ſecondly, on the attention with which we conſider the objects
we would impreſs upon it, and which without attention, as I have juſt ſaid,
would leave only flight traces that would be eaſily effaced; and thirdly, on
the order in which we range our ideas. To this order we owe all the prodi-
gies of memory; it conſiſts in uniting together all our ideas, and conſequenly
charging the memory only with ſuch objects as by their nature, or the manner
in which they are conſidered, preſerve between them a connection ſufficient
to recal each other. | TY |

The frequent repreſentations of the ſame objects to the memory are in
a manner ſo many touches of the graver, which cuts them deeper in propor-
tion to the frequency with which they are repreſented (a). Beſides, this order
ſo proper to recal the ſame objects to our remembrance, not only gives us an
explanation of all the phenomena of the memory, but teaches us, that the ſa-
gacity of mind in one perſon, that is, the promptitude with which one man
is ſtruck with the force of truth, frequently depends on the analogy of that
truth with the objects about which he is employed. He cannot catch it by
perceiving all its connections, without rejecting all the ideas that firſt preſented
themſelves to his remembrance, and without turning up- ſide down the whole
magazine of his memory, to ſearch for the ideas connected with that truth.. |

This is the reaſon why ſo many men are inſenſible to the expoſition of cer-
tain facts, for thoſe truths ſhake the whole chain of their thoughts, by awaken-
ing a great number of ideas in their minds: it is a flaſh of lightning, which.
ſpreads a rapid light over the whole horizon of their ideas. It is then to order
that a perſon frequently owes the ſagacity of his mind, and the extent of his
memory: thus it is, a want of order, the effect of the indifference a perſon 2
entertains for a certain kind ef ſtudies, which prevents all remembrances in 3]
thoſe who, in all reſpects, appear to have more extenſive memories. This is =


—


(a) Memory, ſays Mr. Locke, is a table of braſs, covered with characters that become


inſenſibly effaced by time, if they are not ſometimes touched up by the graver. X
| the


3
©


—


ESS AT S o rr MIN P. 133


che reaſon why the learned in languages and hiſtory, who, by the aſſiſtance
of a chronological order, eaſily impreſs and preſerve the remembrance of
words, dates, and hiſtorical facts, cannot often retain the proof of a moral
truth, the demonſtration of a geometrical problem, or the painting of a land-
ſcape, which they have long examined: in fact, theſe ſorts of objects having
no analogy with the reſt of the facts or ideas with which their memories is
filled, they cannot frequently renew the repreſentation, or impreſs them more
deeply, and conſequently they are unable to preſerve them long.

This is the productive cauſe of all the different kinds of memory, and the-
reaſon why thoſe who know the leaſt in one kind of knowledge, are com-
monly thoſe who in that kind forget the moſt. |

It appears then, that a great memory is a phenomenon of order; that
it is almoſt always factitious; and that between thoſe whom I call well
organized, that great diſproportion viſible in point of memory is not ſo much
the effect of the unequal perfection of the organs that ſupply it with materials
as of an unequal attention to improve it. |

But ſuppoſing that the unequal extent of memory obſervable among man-
kind was entirely the work of nature, and was as conſiderable in reality as it
is in appearance, I aſſert, that it could not have any influence on the extent
of the mind ; firſt, becauſe 2 great genius, as I am going to ſhew, does not


+ neceſſarily ſuppoſe a great memory; and, ſecondly, becauſe every man is


endued with a memory ſufficient to raiſe him to the higheſt degree of mental
abilities. | c
Before the firſt of theſe propoſitions is proved, it is proper to obferve, that
as perfect ignorance conſtitutes perfect folly, the man of genius ſometimes ap-
pears to want memory only from the too confined ſignification given to the
word memory, in reſtraining it to the remembrance of names, dates, places,
and perſons, for which the man of genius has no curioſity, and often finds
that here his memory fails him. But in comprehending in the ſignification of
this word the remembrance of ideas, images, and reaſonings, none of them


is deficient; whence it follows, that there is no ſuch thing as genius without


memory.

This Cb being made, I am to enquire what extent of memory is
neceſſary to conſtitute a great genius. Let us chuſe for example two men
illuſtrious in different kinds of genius, as Locke and Milton, and- examine
whether the greatneſs of their talents ought to be conſidered as the effect of
the extraordinary extent of their memories. |

If we firſt caſt our eyes on Locke; and ſuppoſe, that ſtruck with a happy
thought of his own, or obtained by reading Ariftotle, Gaſſendi, or Mon-
taigne, that philoſopher perceived that all our ideas are derived from the
ſenſes, it is evident that to deduce his whole ſyſtem from this firſt idea re-
quired leſs extent of memory than cloſe application to reflections; that the


ſmalleſt memory is ſufficient to retain all the ſubjects, from the compariſon:


of which he is to deduce the certainty of his principle, to enable him to unra-


vel the chain, and conſequently to merit, and obtain the title of a great genius,


With reſpect to Milton, if I conſider him in the point of view in which he
is generally allowed to be infinitely ſuperior to the other poets 3. if I conſider:
only the ſtrength, grandeur, variety, and novelty of his poetic images, I am

obliged-


134


a great extent of memory.


ESP NTT. on


obliged to confeſs, that the ſuperiority of his genius in theſe does not ſuppoſe
Whatever grandeur there may be in his pictures,


ſuch as that where uniting fire to ſolid terreſtrial matter, he paints the ground
of hell as burning with ſolid, as the Jake with liquid fire; but grand as his
compoſitions are, [I lay, it is evident, that the number of bold images proper
to form ſuch pictures ought to be confined within proper bounds : conle-
quently, the grandeur of this poet's imagination is leſs the effect of a great


extent of memory, than of deep reflection upon his art.


It was this reflection


that made him ſearch out the ſource of the pleaſures of the imagination; and
made him diſcover, that they conſiſted in the aſſemblage of new images, pro-
per to form grand, true, and ſtriking pictures, and in the conſtant choice of
thole ſtrong expreſſions are the colours of poetry, and by which he has ren-
dered his deſcriptions viſible to the eyes of the imagination.

As the laſt example of the imall extent of memory, neceſſary to a fine ima-
gination, I give in a note, the tranſlation of a piece of Engliſh poetry (a).


This


* * 4. „* FSFE Oy


—


(a) A young virgin awaked and guided by
love goes before the appearance of Aurora,
to a valley, where ſhe waits for the coming
of her lover, who, at the riſing of the ſun,
is to offer a ſacrifice to the Gods. Her foul,
in the ſoft ſituation in which ſhe is placed,
by the hopes of approaching happineſs, in-


dulges while waiting for him, the pleaſure


of contemplating the beauties of nature, and
the riſing of the luminary that was to bring
the object of her tenderneſs. She expreſſes
herſelf thus: | :

Already the fun gilds the tops of thoſe an-
tique oaks: and the waves of thoſe falling tor-
rents that roar among the rocks, ſhine with his
beams. Already I perceive the ſummit of
thoſe ſhaggy mountains, whence ariſe the
vaults which, half concealed in the air, offer
a formidable retreat to the ſolitary who there
retire. Night folds up her veil. Ye wan-
ton fires that miſlead the wandering traveller,
retire to the quagmires and marſhy fens : and
thou, ſun, lord of the heavens, who filleſt
the air with reviving heat, who ſoweſt with
dewy pearls the flowers of theſe meadows,
and giveſt colours to the varied beauties of
nature, receive my firſt homage, and haſten
thy courſe : thy appearance proclaims that of
my lover. Freed from the pious cares that de-
tain him ſtill at the foot of the altars, love
will ſoon bring him to mine. Letall around
me partake of my joy! Let all bleſs the riſing
of the luminary, by which we are enlightened |!
Ye flowers that encloſe in your boſoms the
odours that cool night condenſes there, open
your buds, and exhale in the air your balmy


vapours. I know not whether the delightful


Intoxication that poſſeſſes my foul does not


embelliſh whatever I behold ; but the rivulet
that in pleaſing meanders winds along thi
valley, enchants me with its murmurs. Ze-
phyrus careſſes me with his breath. The fra-
grant plants, preſſed under my feet, waft to
my ſenſes their perfumes. Oh ! if felicity
ſometimes condeſcends to viſit the abode of
mortals, to theſe places ſhe doubtleſs retires.
But with what ſecret trouble am J agitated !
Already impatience mingles its poiſon with
the ſweetneſs of my expectation: this valley
has already loſt its beauties. Is joy then ſo
fleeting ? Is it as eaſy to ſnatch it from us,
as for the light down of theſe plants to be
blown away by the breath of the Zephyrs ?
In vain have I recourſe to flattering hope ;
each moment increaſes my diſturbance.--He
will come no more]. Who keeps him ata diſ-
tance fromme? What duty more ſacred than
that of calming the inquietudes of lovel- But
what do I ſay? Fly jealous ſuſpicions, inju-
rious to his fidelity, and formed to extinguiſh
my tenderneſs. If jealouſy grows by the ſide
of Jove, it will ſtifle it, if not pulled up by
the roots: it is the ivy which by a verdant
chain embraces, but dries up the trunk that
ſerves for its ſupport. I know my lover too
well to doubt of his tenderneſs. He, like me,
has far from the pomp of courts ſought the
tranquil aſylum of the fields. Touched by
the ſimplicity of my heart, and by my beauty,
my ſenſual rivals call him in vain to their
arms. Shall he be ſeduced by the advances
of coquetry, which on the check of the

; young


F


C
FEE
VO Fo 4 _ 7


N
rn EL *


.


ESSAYS o Tf MIN P. | 135
This traſlation and the preceding examples will, I believe, prove to thoſe


who would decompoſe the works of illuſtrious men, that a great genius does
not neceſſarily ſuppoſe a great memory. I will even add, that the extraordi-


nary extent of the one is abſolutely excluſive of the extraordinary extent of
the other. As ignorance cauſes the genius to languiſh for want of nouriſh-
ment, ſo vaſt erudition frequently choaks it up, by a ſuper-abundance of ali-
ment. To be convinced of this, it will be ſufficient to examine into the dif-
ferent uſe two men muſt make of their time, who would render themſelves
ſuperior to each other, the one in genius, and the other in memory. :

If a work of genius is an aſſemblage of new ideas, and if every new idea
is only a relation newly perceived between certain objects, he who would diſ-
tinguiſh himſelf by his genius muſt neceſſarily employ the far greateſt part
of his time in obſerving the various relations objects have to each other, and
ſpend only 'the leaſt part in placing facts or ideas in his memory. On the con-
trary, he who would ſurpaſs others in extent of memory muſt, without loſing
his time in contemplating and comparing objects with each other, employ
whole days without ceaſing in arranging new objects in his memory. Now,
by ſo different an uſe of time, it is evident, that the firſt of theſe two men
muſt be as inferior in memory to the ſecond as he will be ſuperior in genius :
a truth which was probably perceived by Deſcartes, when he ſaid, that in
order to improve the mind we ought leſs to learn, than to contemplate.
Whence I conclude, not only that a very great genius does not ſuppoſe a very
great memory, but that the extraordinary extenſiveneſs of the one is always
excluſive of the extraordinary extent of the other. N |

To conclude this chapter, and to prove that the inequality obſervable in the
mental abilities is not to be attributed to the unequal extent of the memory,
it only remains to ſhew, that men being commonly well organized are en-
dued with an extent of memory ſufficient to raiſe the molt lofty ideas. Every


man is, in this reſpect, ſo favoured by nature, that if the magazine of his


memory is capable of containing a number of ideas or facts, he may by
comparing them, always perceive ſome new relations, conſtantly encreaſe the


*


young maid tarniſhes the ſnow of innocence, as I perceive him, my agitated mind is calm;


and the carnation of modeſtly, and daubs it and J often forget the too juſt cauſe J have for


with the whiteneſs of art, and the paint of
effrontery ? What do I ſay? His contempt
for her is, perhaps, only a ſnare for me.
Can I be ignorant of the partiality of men,
and the arts they employ to ſeduce us ? Nou-
riſhed in a contempt for our ſex, it is not us,
1t 1s their pleaſures that they love. Cruel as
they are, they have placed in the rank of the
virtues, the barbarous fury of revenge, and
the mad love of their country; but never
have they reckoned fidelity among the vir-
tues ! Without remorſe they abuſe innocence;
and often their vanity contemplates our


_ grie's with delight. But, no; fly far from me,


ye odious thoughts; my lover will come! A
thouſand times have I experienced it : as ſoon
+ | |


complaint ; for near him I can only know
happineſs.,---Yect, if he is treacherous to me,
if in the very moment when my love excuſes
him, he conſummates. the crime of infidelity
in another's boſom, may all nature take up
arms in revenge] may he periſh l What do
I ſay? Ye elements be deaf to my cries |
thou earth, open not thy profound abyſs | let
the monſter walk the time preſcribed him on
thy ſplendid ſurface, Let him ſtill commit
new crimes; and ſtil] caufe the tears of the
too credulous maids to flow, and, if heaven
avenges them, and puniſhes him, may it at
leaſt be the prayer of ſome other unfortunate
woman, &c.


number


x 36 EE L*'E SPEER ET:% a8;
number of his ideas, and conſequently be always enlarging his mind. Now,
if thirty or forty objects, as geometry thews, may be compared with each other
in ſuch a number of ways that in the courſe of a long life no body could ob-
ſerve all the relations, or deduce all the poſſible ideas that might be drawn from
chem, and if among the men whom 1 call well organized, there are none
whoſe memory cannot contain not only all the words of one language, but
alſo an infinite number of dates, facts, names, places, and perſons, and in
ſhort, a number of particulars far exceeding ſix or ſeven thouſand, I may
boldly conclude from thence, that every man well organized is endued with
a capacity of memory, much ſuperior to what he can uſe for enlarging his
ideas; that a greater extent of memory would not give a more extenſive genius;
and that, therefore, we ſhould be far from conſidering this inequality of me-
mory among mankind as the cauſe of inequality of their mental faculties,
ſince this laſt inequality is only the effect either of the greater or leſs attention
with which they obſerve the connections between different objects, or of the
bad choice of the objects with which they load their memories. There are,
indeed, barren objects, ſuch as dates, names of places, perſons, or other
things of the like kind, which hold a great place in the memory without be-
ing able to produce either new, or intereſting ideas with reſpect to the public.
The inequality of miads depends in part then on the choice of the objects placed
in the memory. If young men who obtained a great reputation in the colleges
have not always ſupported it in a more advanced age, it is becauſe the com-
pariſon, and happy application of Deſpautere's rules, which make good ſcho-
lars, are not the leaſt proof that theſe young men carried their views
to thoſe objects of compariſon from which reſult ſuch ideas as thoſe in which
the public is intereſted : and therefore few great men, have not courage to be
ignorant of an infinite number of uſeleſs things.


CCC ˙ QA A M*


N
Of the unequal capacity of Attention.


Have ſhe wn, that theſe great inequalities of genius do not depend on the

greater or leſs degree of perfection, either of the organs of ſenſe, or of the

organ of memory. Nothing now remains but to ſearch for the cauſe of the
unequal capacity for attention among men.

As it is the greater or the leſs degree of attention that engraves more or leſs
deeply the objects in the memory, which makes us perceive more or leſs perfect -
ly, the relations that form moſt of our judgments, whether true or falſe; and as
to this attention we owe almoſt all our ideas, it ſeems evident, ſay they, that
the unequal powers in the minds of men are owing to their unequal capacity
for attention. 8 | |

If the ſlighteſt diſeaſe, to which we give the name of indiſpoſition, is thought


ſufficient to render moſt men incapable of a continued attention, it is doubt-
: | leſs


ESS AT S -on thn MERE _- 137


leſs to diſeaſes, in a manner inſenſible, and conſequently to the inequality of
power given by nature to different men, that we ought principally to attri-
bute the total incapacity for attention, and the unequal proportion of men-
tal abilities obſervable in moſt of them: from whence it is concluded that thoſe
abilities are merely gifts of nature.

But how plauſible ſoever this reaſoning may appear, it is not confirmed
by experience. | .

If we except the men afflicted by habitual diſeaſes, who being compelled
by pain to fix their whole attention on their condition, cannot place it on ob-
jects proper to improve their minds, and conſequently cannot be included in
the number of the men whom I call well organized, we ſhall ſee that all other
men, and even thoſe of weak and delicate conſtitutions, ought, according to
the above manner of reaſoning, to have fewer abilities than men of a ſtrong
and robuſt form, though in this reſpect they frequently appear more favoured
by nature. x

In men of healthy and ſtrong conſtitutions, who apply themſelves to the
arts and ſciences, it ſeems as if their ſtrength and vigour, by giving them a
greater propenſity to pleaſure, frequently diverts them from ſtudy and reflec-
tion; and that thoſe of a weak and delicate conſtitution cannot be diverted
from their ſtudies by ſlight and frequent indiſpoſitions. All that we can be
be certain of is, that among the men animated by nearly an equal love of
ſtudy, our ſucceſs in meaſuring the greatneſs of their mental abilities ſeems en-
tirely to depend either on the greater or fewer diſtractions occaſioned by a dif-
ference of taſtes, fortunes, and ſtations, and on the happy or unhappy choice
of ſubjects on which we treat, the more or leſs perfect method uſed in com-
poſing, the greater or leſs propenſity to reflection, the books we read, the
men of taſte with whom we converſe, and, in ſhort, the objects which chance
daily preſents to our view. It ſeems as if, in the concourſe of circumſtances


neceſſary to form a man of genius, the different capacity for attention that


may be produced by a greater or leſs ſtrength of conſtitution is of no moment.
Thus the inequality of genius occaſioned merely by the different conſtitutions
of men is altogether inſenſible; and, as no exact obſervations have hitherto been
made to determine what conſtitution - is moſt proper to form men of genius,
we cannot yet be gertain, whether the tall or the ſhort, the fat or the lean,
the bilious or the ſanguine, have the greateſt aptitude of mind.

But though this ſummary anſwer may be ſufficient to refute a manner of
reaſoning founded only on probabilities ; yet, as this queſtion is of oreat im-
importance, it is neceſſary to reſolve it with preciſion, and to enquire whether
this want of attention in men is either the effect of a natural incapacity for ap-
plication, or of a too languid deſire of inſtruction. |


All the men whom I call well organized are capable of attention, fince


all learn to read, obtain their mother-tongue, and are capable of underſtanding
the firſt propoſitions of Euclid, Now all men capable of comprehending theſe
firſt propoſitions have a phyſical power of underſtanding them all: in fact,
both in geometry, and in all the other ſciences, the greater or leſs facility with
which we diſcover truth depends on the number, either greater or leſs of thoſe
antecedent propoſitions, which, in order to perceive it, muſt be preſented
to the memory. Now, if every man well organized, as J have proved in the


pre-


=
|
|
|
|
|


Ce ce Re cr ys es. — EDS" <I>. Rs — ne rn re EI — ne — — — — —


138 DE L'ESPRIT; „


preceding chapter, may place in his memory a number of ideas much ſupe-
rior to what is required for the demonſtration of any propolition in geometry;
and if by the aſſiſtance of order, and the frequent repreſentation of the ſame
ideas, we may, as experience proves, render them ſo familiar, and ſo habi-
tually preſent, as to recollect them without difficulty, it muſt follow that
every one has a phyſical power of purſuing the demonſtration of any geome-
trical truth; and that after having aſcended from propoſition to propolition, and


from analogous ideas to other analoguus ideas, till a perſon has acquired the


knowledge, for inſtance, of ninety-nine propoſitions, he may demonſtrate
the hundredth with the ſame eaſe that he did the ſecond, which is as diſtant
from the firſt as the hundreth is from the ninety-ninth. :

It is proper now to examine, whether the degree of attention neceſſary to
comprehend the demonſtration of one geometrical truth is not ſufficient for
the diſcovery of thoſe truths that place a man in the rank of thoſe of diſtin-


guiſhed learning. In order to this, I deſire the reader to obſerve with me
the ſteps by which the human mind is led either to the diſcovery of truth, or-


in merely following demonſtration. I ſhall not draw my example from geo-
metry, becaule the g
ſhall therefore chuſe morality, and propoſe the following problem, Why


unjuſt conqueſts do not reflect as much diſhonour on nations as robberies do


on individuals?”

In reſolving this moral problem, the ideas that would firſt preſent them-
ſelves to my mind are thoſe of juſtice, which are the moſt familiar to me:
I confider it then between individuals, and perceive that robbery, which diſ-
turbs and overthrows the order of ſociety, is juſtly conſidered as infamous.

But what advantage ſoever there may be in applying to nations my ideas
of the juſtice that ſubſiſts between citizens; yet, at the ſight of ſo many un-
Juſt wars, at all times undertaken by people who are the admiration of the
world, I ſhall ſoon ſuſpect that the ideas of juſtice, conſidered as relating to
a private perſon, are not applicable to nations. This ſuſpicion would be the
firſt ſtep made by my mind to arrive at the diſcovery propoſed. To clear up
this ſuſpicion, I firſt baniſh the ideas of juſtice moſt familiar to me: I recal
to my memory, and reject ſucceſſively an infinie number of ideas, till I
perceive, that in order to reſolve this queſtion, it is neceſſary firſt to form
clear and general ideas of juſtice; and that for this purpoſe, it is neceſſary to
aſcend to the eſtabliſhment of ſociety, till I come to thoſe diſtant times where
we may better perceive its origin, and in which we may more eaſily diſcover
the reaſon why the principles of juſtice conſidered. in relation to citizens is not
applicable to nations. | |

This I may call the ſecond ſtep. I may conſequently repreſent to my mind
men abſolutely deſtitute of knowledge and arts, and nearly ſuch as they muſt
have been in the firſt age of the world. I then fee them diſperſed in the
woods, like other voracious animals : I ſee, that before the invention of arms,
theſe firſt men being too weak to oppoſe the wild beaſts, and, becoming in-
ſtructed by danger, neceſſity, or fear, perceived that it was for their mu-
tual intereſt to enter into ſociety, and to form a league againſt the animals
their common enemies. I at length perceive that theſe men, thus aſſembled,
ſoon became enemies, from the deſire of poſſeſſing the ſame things, and took


up


- -


greateſt part of mankind are ignorant of that ſcience ; I


5
.
2
*
3
34
*
„
25
* „
*
>
I
3
3
Ch:
3
MX *
5H
-
6
„
3
6
2M
2
Xs
bn”
I
1
.
Ws
Ry”
7
5
ms


53d me oo tf rn tt R 8 12 88810 e rag \ my ö 2 e 8 £ . 8 <t 2 88 ow 24 * 1
3 R o TC 3 . :


ö i hs is, ACS A
. * A OO TS e 3 r N 5 n * 1, FE IS Ie Ly .
+ 9 v Oe Ow CAO MSIE Cor Os 1 * 4 o Cie eps te c
VJ 4 6 PCC N ð d T 2 r 28 R
2 S V rr d . Ie EE YYY 0 ⁵D„f 77) STDERR Fd BE CRY n
be N L VA 3 8 E : 4 : : - PE" — p * E *


ESSAYS on Tr MIND. 139


up arms mutually to raviſh them from each other; that the ſtrongeſt at firſt
frequently took them from thoſe who had greater mental abilities, who in-
vented arms, and prepared ambuſcades to recover them again; and that
ſtrength and dexterity were conſequently the firſt titles to property: that the
earth originally belonged to the ſtrongeſt, and afterwards to the more ingenious :


and that theſe two were the only titles by which every thing was poſſeſſed :


but that at length, inſtructed by their common misfortunes, they perceived
that their union could be of no advantage to them, and that ſociety could not
ſubſiſt, without adding new conventions to the firſt, by which each individual
perſon ſhould renounce his right to make uſe of his own ſtrength - and dex-
terity, contrary to the intereſt of the whole, and all in general ſhould recipro-
cally guarantee the preſervation of the life and ſubſtance of each, and engage
to take up arms againſt the perſon who ſhould violate theſe conventions : that
thus the intereſt of particular perſons formed a common intereſt, that neceſſa-
rily gave to different actions the names juſt, lawful, and unjuſt, according as
they were uſeful, indifferent, or prejudicial to ſociety.

Being once arrived at this truth, I eaſily diſcover the ſource of human vir-
tues. I ſee that men, without a ſenſibility of pain and natural pleaſure, with-
out deſires, without paſſions, and equally indifferent with reſpe& to every
thing, would not have known a perſonal intereſt : that without perſonal inte-
reſt they would not have united in ſociety, would not have entered into con-
ventions among themſelves, and would not have had a general intereſt; con-
ſequently there would have been no actions, either juſt or unjuſt ; arid that thus
natural ſenſibility and perſonal intereſt have been the authors of all juſtice (a).

This truth, founded on the followingaxiom ofthe civil law, © thatintereſt is the
meaſure of human actions”, and beſides, confirmed by athouſand facts, proves to


me thatvirtuous or vicious, according as our particularpaſſions or taſtes are con-


formable, or contrary to the general intereſt, tends ſo neceſſarily to our par-


ticular welfare, that the Divine Legiſlator himſelf has thought proper to en-


gage men to the practice of virtue, by promiſing an eternal happineſs in ex-
change for the temporal pleaſures they are ſometimes obliged to ſacrifice to it.

This principle being eſtabliſhed, my mind draws ſeveral conſequences from
it; and I perceive that every convention, where private intereſt is found to be
oppoſite to the general intereſt, would always have been violated, had not the
legiſlators conſtantly propoſed great rewards as inducements to the practice of
virtue; and if they had not inceſſantly oppoſed the bank of diſhonour and pu-
niſhment againſt that natural inclination that leads all men to uſurpation. I ſee
then that rewards and puniſhments are the only bands by which they have
been able to bind the private to the general intereſt; and 1 conclude, that laws


made for the happineſs of all would be obſerved by none, if the magiſtrates


were not armed with the power neceſfary to put them in execution. Without
this power, the laws, being violated by the majority, might with juſtice be
infringed by each individual; becauſe, having no other foundation than the
public advantage, as ſoon as by a general infraction they became uſeleſs, they
would from thence forward be void, and ceaſe to be laws; each perſon would


0


*


(a) This propoſition cannot de denied, without admitting innate ideas.
T2 | then


140 Re L*ESPRYIT; of;


then reſume his original natural rights; each would ſolely conſult his private
intereſt, which juſtly forbids his obterving laws that would become prejudicial
to him who ſhould alone oblerve them. And therefore, if for the ſafety of
travelling on the high roads, all ſhuuld be forbid to carry arms, and yer for
want of patrols the roads ſhould be infeſted with robbers, that law would
not conſequently have anſwered its end: I therefore not only ſay, that a man
might travel upon it with arms, and violate that convention, or that law,
without injuſtice, but that he could not even obſerve it without folly.

After my mind has thus proceeded ſtep by ſtep, till it has arrived at clear
and general ideas of juſtice; after having found that it conſiſts in the exact ob-
ſervation of the laws which the common intereſt, that is, the aſſemblage of
all the intereſts of the individuals has cauſed them to make, I have nothing
tarther to do than to apply theſe ideas of juſtice to nations. Inſtructed by
the principles above eſtabliſhed, I immediately perceive that all nations have
not entered into conventions, by which they reciprocally guarantee the poſſeſ-
ſion of the countries and effects of each other. If I would diſcover the cauſe, my
memory, on my tracing the general map of the world, informs me, that dit-
ferent ſtates have not made theſe kinds of conventions, becauſe they have not
been prompted to it by ſo preſſing an intereſt as that of the individuals; be-
cauſe nations may ſubſiſt without any fuch conventions, though ſociety can-
not be ſupported without laws. Whence I conclude, that the ideas of juſtice
conſidered between nation and nation, or individual and individual, ought to
be extremely different.

if the church and ſovereign princes permit the negroe trade; if the chriſtian
who curſes in the name of God him who brings troubles and diſſention into fa-
milies, bleſſes the merchant who ſails to the gold coaſt or to Senegal, to ex-
change the merchandize of which the Africans are fond for negroes; if for
the lake of this commerce, Europeans feel no remorſe at keeping up an eter-
nal war among thoſe people, it is becauſe, from the want of particular treaties,
and cuſtoms generally known by the law of nations, both the church, and
ſovereign powers think that people are, with reſpect to each other, in the
ſame ſituation as man in a ſtate of nature before they entered into ſociety,
when they acknowledged no other laws but thoſe of ſtrength and cunning ;
when they had no convention among themſeives, no property, and conle-
quently there could be no robbery nor injuſtice. Even with reſpect to the
particular treaties which nations enter into with each other, theſe never being
guarantied by a ſufficient number of great nations, it appears that they can
hardly ever cauſe them to be obſerved by force; and conſequently being like
laws without power, they muſt frequently remain unexecuted. |

When by applying the general ideas of juſtice to nations, my mind has re—
duced the queſtion of this point, in order to diſcover why the people who break
the treatics they have made with others are leſs guilty than the private perſon
who violates the conventions made with ſociety; and why, in conformity
to the public opinion, unjuſt conqueſts are Jeſs diſhonourable to a nation than
a robbery is to a particular perſon, it is ſufficient to recal to mind a liſt of
all the treaties broken from time to time by all nations. I then ſee that there
is always a high probability, that without regard to theſe treatics, the gover-
nors of every nation will take advantage of times of calamity to attack their

| neigh-


Fs +1 4 Mott ba LAWS, 2 . = *
* nne e re * 1
TT.... ͤ d ³ð2AAAu!ꝛ ² ¹ . .uũ
= 2 MO BEES I an $i ̃ ů) TT n * a
0 CS EI ID : ESE CEL c rn a a” oo uey
: Cc 2 PINT * re, , ß . TE BEEN y 4
8 5 id 8 1 SOM". * * e r 8 7


%
3
2
8
1
"1
2
N
be?
*
Co 4
=
Tots
*
7
3
=
8
wy
4H
34
x
4 -
34
1
8
>
A
728
” rb
ny
525
2
ts
<2
85
*
2
Th
IH
8
8
.
2%
Feit
bY}
IP
E
AE
1
3
IE
.
9
W
LEE,
Bo. 15
18
is
We,
8
FEE
2.
r
N
& .
3
Ve
5
A ”
I —
8
a
3
*
E.


EIS > nA ne «8Ä— —— ————————————————————————— — —
— — —


* - 4 > 08 e by c - 0 as” 4 of mes EIS . 2 k % Sint How 5 93 8 . * \ 4
e 2 5 * e edt Pars ee f ðß ]è , d , e rr... IE ee W R '
e prom PLES AST HE Vo ian 1 OT OR TR No ERS 8 % „%%% l TT Crt He PEE n 22 ⁵ðͥVu ha * .
7 - e c Re Lo 30 F r d , e IL or 5 wn” „ 34 F 1 7 EE IL en OA 8 n
„„ ; ́ö Ṽj dd mm n Wn V2 a NLO : N — ,


ESSAYS on TH MIND. 141


neighbours, to conquer them, or at leaſt to put it out of their power to hurt
them. Now, every nation being inſtructed by hiſtory may conſider this
probability ſufficiently great, to juſtify the belief that the infraction of a treaty
which the prince finds it for his intereſt to violate, is a tacit clauſe of all
treaties, which are properly no more than truces ; and that conſequently, in
ſcizing a favourable opportunity of humbling his neighbours, he only pre-
vents them, ſince all nations being forced to expoſe themſelves to the reproach
of injuſtice, or of bearing the yoke of ſervitude, are reduced to the alter-
native of being ſlaves or ſovereigns. |
_ Beſides, as it is almoſt impoſſible for any nation to preſerve itſelf z and as
limiting the aggrandizement of an empire muſt, as is proved by the hiſtory
of the Romans, be conſidered as an almoſt certain preſage of its decay, it is
evident that each nation may even believe itſelf the more authorized to make
thoſe conqueſts that are called unjuſt, as not finding, for inſtance, in the gua-
rantee of two nations againſt a third as much ſecurity as an individual finds
in his own nation againſt another individual; the treaty relating to it ought then
to be much the lels ſacred, as its execution 1s more uncertain. |

Thus, when my mind has penetrated to this laſt idea, I diſcover the ſolu-
tion of the moral problem I had propoſed to myſelf. I then perceive that
the infraction of treaties, and that kind of robbery. which ſubliſts between
nations, muſt, as what is paſt has proved, be a ſecurity for times to come,
and ſtill continue till all fates, or at leaſt the greateſt number of them, have
concluded general conventions ; till the nations in conformity to the project
of Henry IV. or the abbe de faint Pierre, have reciprocally guarantied their


poſſeſſions z and engaged to take up arms againſt the people who ſhall attempt


to ſubdue another; till chance ſhall have formed ſuch a diſproportion between
the power of each ſtate in particular, and that of all the others whoare united,
that theſe conventions may be maintained by force; and tiil the different na-
tions have eſtabliſhed among each other the ſame policy which a wile legiſla-
tor uſes with reſpect to the citizens, when by rewards affixed to good actions,
and puniſhments to the bad, he lays the citizens under a neceſſity of being
virtuous, by giving probity perſonal intereſt for its ſupport. |

It is then certain, that, in conformity to the public opinion, unjuſt con-
queſts being not ſo contrary to the laws of equity, and conſequently leſs
criminal than robberies committed by private perſons, they ought not to
caſt ſuch diſhonour on a nation as on a citizen.

This moral problem being reſolved, if the progreſs made by my mind for
that purpoſe be obſerved, it will be found that 1 at firſt recollected the ideas
that were moſt familiar to me: then compared them with each other, and ob-
ſerved their agreement and diſagreement in relation to the ſubje& of my enqui-
ry ; that I at length rejected thoſe ideas, in order to recolle& others, and
repeated this, till at laſt my memory preſented the objects of compariſon
from which the truth I was in ſearch of ought to flow. |

Now, as the progreſs of the mind is always the ſame, what J have ſaid on
the diſcovery of one truth ought in general to be applied to all. I ſhall only
remark on this ſubject, that, in order to make a diſcovery, we muſt neceſſarily
have in our memories the objects from which truth is to be drawn.


If


142 DE LES PRI T; on,


If the reader recollects what I have ſaid, in the example I have juſt
given, and in conſequence of it would know whether all men well orga-
nized are really endued with an attention ſufficient to raiſe their minds to the
molt lofty ideas, he may compare the operations of the mind in making a
diſcovery, or when he imply follows the demonſtration of a truth, and exa-
mine which of theſe operations ſuppoſes the moſt attention.

In purſuing the demonſtration of a. propoſition in geometry, it is of no uſe
to recal many objects to the mind; the maſter is to lay before his pupil thoſe
proper to give the ſolution of the problem he propoſes to him. But whether
a man diſcovers a truth, or purſues a demonſtration, he ought, in both caſes,
to obſerve equally the relations that ſubſiſt between the objects preſented to him
by his memory or his maſter. Now, as he cannot without great hazard
preſent only to the mind the ideas neceſſary to the diſcovery of truth, and

_ conſider none but preciſely the faces he ought to compare with each other,
it is evident, that in order to make a diſcovery, he ought to recolle& a mul-
titude of ideas foreign to the object of enquiry, and to form a number of uſe-
leſs compariſons ; compariſons whoſe multitude may deter him. He muſt
then ſpend much more time in diſcovering a truth than in purſuing a de-
monſtration : but the diſcovery of this truth does not require, in any one
inſtance, a greater effort of attention than is ſuppoſed in the purſuit of a de-
monſtration. |

To be aſſured of this, let us obſerve a ſtudent in geometry, and we ſhall
find, that he muſt apply ſo much the greater attention in conſidering the
geometrical figures the maſter places before him, as theſe objects being leſs
familiar than thoſe preſented to him by his memory, his mind is at once em-
ployed by a double care, in conſidering theſe figures, and in diſcovering the
relations that ſubſiſt between them: whence it follows, that the attention ne-
ceſſary to purſue the demonſtration of a propoſition in geometry is ſufficient.
for the diſcovery of truths of a very different kind. *Tis true, in this laſt caſe,
the attention ought to be continued: but this continuance is properly no more
than the repetition of the ſame acts of attention. Beſides, if all men, as 1
ſaid above, are capable of learning to read, and of learning their mother
tongue, they are all capable not only of the lively, but of the continued
attention requiſite for the diſcovery of truth. |

What continuity of attention muſt he uſe to know his letters, to aſſemble
them, form them into ſyllables, or to unite in his memory objects of a diffe-
rent nature, that have only an arbitrary connection with each other, as the
words Oak, Grandeur, Love, which have no real connection with the things,
idea, or ſenſation they expreſs ? It is then certain that if, by the continuance
of attention, that is, by the frequent repetition of the ſame acts of attention,
all men may ſucceſſively engrave in their memory every word in a language,
they are all endued with a force and continuity of attention neceſſary to raiſe
thoſe great ideas whoſe diſcovery places them in the rank of illuſtrious men.

But it may be aſked, if all men are endued with the attention neceſſary to
excel in one kind of ſtudy, when a contrary habit has not rendered them in-
capable of it, it is certain that this attention is more difficult to one man than
to others: now to what other cauſe can this greater or leſs difficulty of atten-

| tion


AE ont CEE Rata I 1 © 4
EE ³˙·¹¹¹Aͤ » ;
JESS 2 FFC N T0 I PETE Er A TEN END Wn "D
* n enen r , , I ,
e ” * Ca * en 1 . N RR e Hoe 88 N R *


„


OED n eee ee YL 28 RESI 5 * _
Bon c 82 R  NBE 1 Ss r . KO,
SEE DG ß


ESSAYS or TRE MIND. 143


tion be attributed, if it be not owing to a greater or leſs perfection of orga-
nization? | |

Before I make a direct reply to this objection, I ſhall obſerve, that atten-
tion is not foreign to the nature of man; that in general, when we believe at-
tention difficult tobe ſupported, it is becauſe we take the fatigue of wearineſs and
impatience for the fatigue of application. In reality, if there be no man with-


out deſires, there is no man without attention. When it is reduced to a habit, it


becomes a want: what renders it fatiguing is the motive that determines us to
it: if that be neceſſity, indigence, or fear, attention is then painful ; but if it
be the hope of pleaſure, attention itſelf then becomes a pleaſure. Lay before
a man two written copies equally difficult to read; the one a verbal proceſs
at law, and the other a letter from his miſtreſs ; and who can doubt that the
attention would not be as painful in the firſt caſe as it would be agreeable
in the ſecond? From this obſervation we may eaſily explain, why attention is
more painful to ſome than to others. It is not neceſſary for this purpoſe, that
there ſubſiſts between them any difference of organization: it is ſufficient to
ſhew, that here the pain of attention is always greater or leſs in proportion.


to the greater or leſs degree of the pleaſure which each conſiders as the re-


ward of his labour. Now if the ſame objects are never of the ſame value in:
the opinion of different men, it is evident, that in propoſing to different men
the ſame objects as a reward, they have not an equal reward in view; and be-
ing obliged to make the ſame effort of attention, theſe efforts muſt conſe-


quently be more painful to ſome than to others. We may then reſolve the


problem of a greater or leſs caſe of attention, without having recourſe to the
myſtery of an unequal perfection in the organs which produced it. But on
admitting, in this reſpect, a difference in the organization of men; in ſup-
poling, | ſay, they have a warm deſire of inſtruction, a defire of which all
men are ſuſceptible, there are none but will then find that they are endued with
a capacity of attention neceſſary to diſtinguiſh themſelves in an art. In fact,
if the deſire of happineſs is common to all men, and if it is their moſt lively
ſenſation, it is evident that every man will do whatever is in his power to ob-
tain it: now every man, as I have juſt proved, is capable of a degree of at-


tention ſufficient to enable him to obtain the moſt noble ideas. He will


then make uſe of this capacity for attention, when by the legiſlation of his
country, his particular taſte, education, or happineſs ſhall become the prize
to be obtained by his attention. It will, I believe, be difficult to reſiſt this
concluſion; eſpecially if, as I can prove, it is not even neceſlary. for a man


to give all the attention of which he is capable to be ſuperior in one kind of


ſtudy.


Not to leave any doubt with reſpect to this truth, let us conſult experience,
and examine the men of genius: they have all experienced, that it is not the moſt.


painful efforts of attention that they owe the fineſt verſes of their poems, the
moſt ſingular ſituations in their romances, and the molt. learned and inſtruc-


tive of their philoſophical works. They confeſs that they owe them to the
happy concourſe of certain objects which chance has placed before their eyes,
or preſented to their memory ; and by comparing theſe, they have produced
_ thoſe noble verſes, thoſe ſtiking ſituations, and thole grand philoſophical ideas:


ideas which the mind always conceives with a greater promptitude and facility,


4 z in


Ber Tr ˙ ü  o araS


a
——— — — — —— — Cee 1b— — — . — — —


— —3


——— — ——— . —


—


—— — —
— —


— — ———


——ů —— — . ̃ꝗ ͤUwUNm̃̃̃ u wy


144 DE L'ESPRIT; on,


in proportion to their being more true and general. Now, if in every work
thele fine ideas, of whatſoever kind they may be, are in a manner the ſtrokes of
genius; if the art employed about them is not a work of time and patience,
and what is called the labour of the brain, it is thence certain, that genius
is leſs the price of attention than a gift of chance, which preſents theſe hap-
Py ideas to all men, among whom thole alone who are fond of glory are at-
tentive to ſeize them. If chance 1s generally acknowledged to be the author
of moſt diſcoveries in almoſt all the arts, and if in ſpeculative ſciences its power
is leſs ſenſibly perceived, it is not perhaps leſs real ; it no lefs preſides at the
opening of the fineſt ideas. Thus they are not, as I have juſt ſaid, the price
of the molt painful efforts of the attention*; and it may be aſſerted, that the
attention required in following the order of ideas, the manner of expreſſing
them, and the art of paſſing from one ſubject to another (b) is, beyond all
contradiction, much more fatiguing; and that, in ſhort, the moſt painful of
all is the compariſon of objects that are not familiar to us. For this reaſon
the philoſopher capable of {ix or ſzven hours application to ſtudy could not,
without a very painful attention ſpend fix or ſeven hours, either in examining
witneſſes, or making a faithful and correct copy of a manuſcript : hence it
is evident, that the beginning of every ſcience is always the moſt thorny.
It is only owing to the habit we have acquired of conſidering certain objects,
that we owe not only the facility with which we compare them, bur alſo the
Juſt and rapid compariſons we draw from conſidering them with reſpect to
each other. Thus at the firſt glance of the eye, the painter perceives in a
picture the faults with reſpect to the deſign and colouring : thus the ſhepherd,
accuſtomed to conſider his ſheep, finds reſemblances and differences between
them, that makes him know them; and thus we are properly maſter only of
the ſubject on which we have long meditated. It is in proportion to the
greater or leſs degree of application with which we examine a ſubject, that our
ideas of it are profound or ſuperficial. It appears that works that have long
employed our thoughts, and been long in compoling have greater ſtrength ;
and that in thoſe of ſciences, as in mechanics, we gain in ſtrength, what is
loſt in time. | |

But not to ramble from my ſubject : I ſhall repeat again, if the moſt pain-
ful attention is that which ſuppoſes the compariſon of objects leaſt familiar
to us, and if that attention is required in the ſtudy of languages, every man
being capable of learning his own language, all are conſequently endued with
a ſtrength and power of attention ſufficient to raiſe them to the rank of illuſ-
tious men. + | |

There only remains, as a laſt proof of this truth, to recolle& here, that
error, as 1 have ſaid, in my firſt eſſay, is always accidental, and not inhe-
rent in the particular nature of certain minds; and that all our falſe judgments
are the effects of our paſſions, or of our ignorance : whence it follows, that all
men are, by nature, endued with a mind equally juſt; and that on its pre-
ſenting to them the ſame objects, they would all form the ſame judgments.
Now as the word a Sound Mind includes in its moſt extenſive ſignification


—


—


(b) T antum ſeries juncturaque pollet. ;
all


E S S A T S o Tus MIN D. 145
all minds; it follows from what I ſaid above, that all whom I call well orga-
nized, being born with a found mind, they have all a natural power of ac-
quiring the molt lofty ideas (c). |

Bur it is replied, if this be the caſe, why do we ſee ſo few illuſtrious men?
It is becauſe ſtudy is attended with ſome trouble; and to conquer a diſincli-
nation to ſtudy, as I have already inſinuated, a perſon ought to be animated
by ſome paſſion. | i . i |

{a early youth, the fear of puniſhment is ſufficient to force boys to ſtudy :
but in a more advanced age, when they do not meet with the ſame treatment,
they muſt be induced to undergo the fatigue of application, by the warmth


-of ſome paſſion, as for inſtance, the love of glory. The force of attention


is then proportioned to the force of the paſſion. Let us conſider children:
if they make a more equal progreſs in learning their own tongue than in a
foreign language, it is becauſe they are excited to it, by more equal neceſſi-
ties; that is, by eating and drinking, by the love of play, and by the deſire
of making known the objects of their love and averſion: now wants nearly
equal muſt produce effects that are alſo nearly equal. On the contrary, as
the progreſs in a foreign language depends both on the method uſed by the
maſter ; the fear with which he inſpires his ſcholars, and the intereſt parents
take in the ſtudies of their children; it is evident, that their progreſs depending
on ſuch various cauſes, ſo combined and diverſified, muſt for this reaſon be
very unequal, Whence I conclude, that the great inequality of genius obſer-
vable amongſt men depends, perhaps, on their unequal deſire of inſtruction.
But this deſire, it is ſaid, is the effect of a paſſion : now if we are obliged only
to nature for the greater or leſs ſtrength of our paſſions, it follows from thence
that the mental abilities ought conſequently to be conſidered as a gift of
nature. |

To this point, which is really delicate and deciſive, the whole queſtion is
reduced. To reſolve it, we muſt know both the paſſions and their effects,
and enter into this ſubject in a very deep and circumſtantial manner.


„


3


(c) It muſt always be remembered, as I
have ſaid in my ſecond diſcourſe, that ideas,
in their own nature, are neither lofty, great
nor little; that frequently the diſcovery of
an idea called little does not ſuppoſe a leſs
genius, than the diſcovery of one that is lofty:
taat it is ſometimes as neceſlary to ſeize with
delicacy the ridicule of a character, as to


perceive the miſtakes of government; and


that if by way of preference the name of
great and lofty is applied to diſcoveries of
the laſt kind, it is from our meaning by the
epithets lofty, great, and little, _ ſuch
ideas as are more or leſs generally intereſt-
ing.


105 DE IL. ESPRIT; os,


FFC
A r.
| Of the Powers that act upon the Soul,


Xperience alone can diſcover what theſe powers are. It informs us that
E lazineſs is natural to man; that attention gives him pain and fatigue (a);
that he gravitates inceſſantly towards repoſe as bodies towards a centre. He
there remains ſtrongly fixed, if he is not every moment repelled by two kinds
of powers that counterbalance his lazineſs and inertia; on the one hand
by ſtrong paſſions, and on the other by hatred and laſſitude. |

Laſſitude, or weariſomneſs of inaction, is a more general and powerful
ſpring than is imagined, Of all pains, this is doubtleſs the leaſt; but never-
theleſs it is one. The deſire of happineſs makes us always conſider the abſence
of pleaſure as an evil. We would have the neceſſary intervals that ſeparate
the lively pleafures always connected with the gratification of our natural
wants, filled up with ſome of thoſe ſenſations that are always agreeable when
they are not painful: we therefore conſtantly deſire new impreſſions, in order
to put us in mind every inſtant of our exiſtance; becauſe every one of theſe
informations affords us pleaſure. Thus the ſavage, as ſoon as he has ſatisfied
his wants, runs to the banks of a river, where the rapid ſucceſſion of the waves
that drive each other forward make every moment new impreſſions upon
him: for this reaſon, we prefer the ſight of objects in motion to thoſe at
reſt : and we proverbially ſay, that fire makes company; that is, it helps
us to deliver us from laſſitude.

It is this neceſſity of —_ put in motion, and the kind of inquietude pro-
duced in the mind by the abſence of any impreſſion, that contains in part th
principle of the inconſtancy and improvement of the human mind, and which
forcing it to actuate all our ſenſes muſt, after a revolution of an infinite num-
ber of ages, invent and carry to perfection the arts and ſciences, and at length


lead to the decay of taſte (b). | |


*


—— _


(a) The Hottentots will neither reafon
nor think. Thought, ſay they, is the
« ſcourge of life.“ How many Hottentots
are there among us? Theſe people are en-
tirely devoted to indolence: to deliver them-
ſelves from all kinds of employment, they
deprive themſelves of every thing they can
poſſibly do without.

The native inhabitants of the Caribbee
iſlands have the ſame averſion to thought and
labour ; they would ſooner die with hunger
than prepare their caſſava bread, or make
their pot boil. Their wives do every thing :
they labour only one or two hours a day incul-
tivating the earth, and ſpend the reſt of their


time in their hammocks. If any perſon de-
fired to buy their bed, they will fell it very
cheap in the morning ; for they will not give
themſelves the trouble of thinking whether
they ſhall want it at night.

(b) Perhaps by comparing the flow pro-
greſs of the human mind with the preſent
{tate of perfection of the arts and ſciences,
we may form a judgment of the antiquity of
the world. A new ſyſtem of chronology
might be made on this plan, that would be
at leaſt as ingenious as thoſe that have hi-
therto appeared : but the execution would
require great delicacy and ſagacity of mind
from him who undertook it. 71

n


ESSAYS o r MIND. 147


In fact, if the impreſſions made upon us are the more agreeable in propor-
tion as they are more lively, and of the duration if the fame impreſſion blunts
its vivacity, we muſt be deſirous of thoſe new impreſſions that produce in
our minds the pleaſure of ſurprize : artiſts ambitious of pleaſing us, and ex-
citing in us theſe kinds of impreſſions, ought therefore, after having in part
exhauſted the combinations of beauty, to ſubſtitute in its room the ſingular,
becauſe it makes a newer, and conſequently a more lively impreſſion upon us.
This, in polite nations cccaſions the decay of taſte, |

To know ſtill better the effect of laſſitude upon us, and what the activity
of this principle (c), is capable of producing, let us obſerve mankind with an
attentive eye; and we ſhall perceive, that the fear of laflitude prompts moſt
of them to thought and action. In order to ſave themſelves from it, at the
hazard of too ſtrong, and conſequently diſagreeable impreſſions, men ſearch
with the greateſt eagerneſs for every thing capable of putting them in motion :
it is this deſire that makes the common people run to ſee an execution, and
the people of faſhion a play ; and it is the ſame motive in a gloomy devotion,
and even in the auſtere exerciſes of pennance, that frequently affords old wo-
men a remedy againſt the tireſomeneſs of inaction ; for God, who by all poſ-
ſible means endeavours to bring ſinners to himſelf, commonly uſes with reſ-
pect to them that of laſſitude. |

But eſpecially at the age when the ftrong paſſions are enchained, either by
morals, or the form of government, the weariſomnels of inaction plays its
greateſt part : it then becomes the univerſal mover. |

At court and about the throne it is the fear of laſſitude, joined to the ſmal-
leſt degree of ambition, that produces lazy courtiers of thoſe who are bur
little ambitious. This makes them conceive little deſires, form little intrigues,
little cabals, little crimes, to obtain little places proportioned to the littleneſs
of their paſſions : this makes a Sejanus, but never an Octavius; tho' it is how-
ever ſufficient to raiſe them to thoſe poſts, where they indeed enjoy the privi-
lege of being inſolent, but ſearch in vain to ſecure themſelves from laſſitude.

Such are, if I may be allowed the expreſſion, both the active and inert forces
which act on our ſouls; and in obedience to theſe two oppoſite forces, we in

eneral wiſh to be moved, without taking the trouble of moving ourſelves.
1 is from this cauſe we defire to know every thing, without being at the pains


(c) Laſſitude, it is true, is not commonly
very inventive; its ſpring is certainly too
weak to enable us to execute grand enter-
prizes, and particularly to make us acquire
great talents.
dolence that produced a Lycurgus, a Pelopi-
das, an Homer, an Archimedes, and a Mil-
ton; and we may aſſure ourſelves, that it is
not the want of laſſitude that makes us want
great men, However, it ſometimes produces


great effects. It is ſometimes capable of arming


princes, and of drawing them to battle ; and
when their firſt enterprizes are attended with


=


It was not the languor of in-


ſucceſs, it may make them conquerors. War
may become an employment which habit
renders neceſſary. Charles XII. the only
hero who was ever inſenſible to the pleaſures
of love and of the table, was perhaps in part
determined by this motive. But if laſſitude
is capable of making a hero of this kind, it
can never make a Cæſar nor a Cromwell;


it required a ſtrong paſſion, to enable them


to make the efforts of genius and ſkill neceſſa-


ry to clear the ſpace that ſeparated them from
the throne. :


of


148


ESPRIT; es,


of learning, and therefore being more obſequious to opinion than to reaſon,
which in every caſe would force us to undergo the fatigue of enquiry: men,
on their entering iato the world, accept indiſcriminately all ideas preſented to
them whether true or falſe(d); and why, in fine, being impelled by the flux and


reflux


—


(d) Credulity is partly the effect of indo-
lence, We have been habituated to believe
a thing abſurd ; the falſity of ſuch a belief is
ſuſpected, but to be fully ſatisfied requires the
fatigue of examination; thus we are not for
undergoing; and thus chooſe rather to believe
than examine. In ſuch a diſpoſition the moſt
convincing proof of the falſity of an opinion
will always appear inſufficient. Every weak
reaſoning perſuades ; every ridiculous ftory is
believed. I ſhall only produce one inſtance
from Marini's account of Tonquin, A reli-
„gion, ſays this author, was to be given to
the Tonquineſe, and that of the philoſopher
« Rama, in the Tonquin language called
« 'Thic-ca, was made choice of. Its ſuppoſed
origin, which they firmly believe, is as fol-
<& lows. One day the mother of the God
« 'Thic-ca had a viſion of a white elephant,
& myſteriouſly formed in her mouth and
coming out of her left ſide. The dream
„ being ended, was realized, and ſhe de-
es livered of Thic-ca, who no ſooner ſaw
the light than he puts his mother to death;
© takes feven ſteps, marking the heaven
with one finger and the earth with another;
„ he boaſts of being the only faint, in
heaven or on earth. At ſeventeen years
© of age he marries three wives; at nine-
„ teen he forſakes his wives, and his ſon
„ withdraws to a mountain, where he is
* inſtructed by two demons A-la-Ja and
% Ca-la-la. He afterwards comes among
„ the people, by whom he is received,
© not as a teacher but as a pagod, or idol:
«« he has four-ſcore thouſand diſciples, among
« whom he ſelects five hundred, which num-
* ber he afterward reduces. to one hundred,
« and theſe again to ten, who are called, the
© ten great ones. This is what is told the
« Tonquineſe and is. what they believe, tho
C informed. by a private tradition, that theſe
e ten great ones were his friends and confi-
„ dants, and whom alone he did not deceive ;
« for, after preaching his doctrine above for-
«© ty-nine years, ſenſible of the approach of
* death, he called together all his diſciples,
* and frankly addreſſed them in the follow-


« ing manner: Hitherto I have deceived
&« you ; all that I told you is mere fiction:
the only truth I have now to teach you
« js, that from nothing all came, and to it
all ſhall return. Let me however adviſe
“you to keep my ſecret, and externally con-
« form to my religion: there is no other
© way to keep the people in due ſubjection
c to you.” Though this confeſſion of Thic-
ca on his death-bed, be mn 4 generally
known in Toquin, yet the worſhip of that
impoſtor till ſubſiſts, from a willingneſs of
believing what they are accuſtomed to believe,
Some ſcholaſtic ſubtilties, to which indolence
gives the force of proof, have been ſufficient
for the diſciples of Thic-ca thro” a cloud to
aver this confeſſion, and keep the Tonquineſe
in their belief. The ſame laborious diſciples
have wrote five thouſand volumes on the life
of this Thic-ca. They maintain that he per-
formed miracles ; that immediately after his
birth he aſſumed ſucceflively four-ſcore thou-
ſand different forms; that his laſt metamor-
phoſis was into a white elephant ; and that
hence is derived the extraordinary reſpect paid
all over India to ſuch animals. Of all auguſt
titles, that of king of the whiteelephant ismoſt
valued among Indian monarchs, and the king
of Sjam is ſtiled, the king of the white ele-
phant. The diſciples of Thic- ca add, that ther:
are fix worlds ; that on our dying inthis we are


born again in another; that the good man


thus paſſes from one world to the other;
and that after this rotation, the wheel returns
to its firſt poſition, and he is a ſecond time
born in this world: whence, at the ſeventh
time he departs in the plenitude of purity and
perfection, and then having attained the ut-
moſt period of immutability finds himſelf
exalted to the dignity of pagod or idol. They


hold a paradiſe and likewiſe a hell, from


which, as in moſt falſe religions, the only
way of eſcaping is to reſpect and be liberal to
the Bonzes, and build monaſteries. With
regard to the devil, they relate, that he once
had a diſpute vit i the idol of Tonquin,
which ſhould be maſter of the earth. At


laſt the devil agreed with the 1do], that what-
| ever


ESSAYS on Txe M I ND. 149


reflux of prejudices, now towards wiſdom, then towards folly, rationalorirrational
by mere accident, the ſlave of opinion is equally irrational in the eyes of the
wiſe man, whether he maintains a truth, or advances an error. He is no
better than the blind man who may accidentally tell the colour preſented
to him. | h

Thus the ſoul appears to be moved by the paſſions and a hatred of laſ-
ſitude ; by theſe it is rouſed from its natural tendency to reſt, and ſurmounts
the Vis inertiæ, to which it is always inclined to yeild. But however certain
this propoſition may appear, both in morality and natural philoſophy, opinions
are always to be eſtabliſned on facts and in the following chapter, I ſhall
prove by inſtances, that it is the ſtrong paſſions alone, that prompt men to the
execution of thoſe heroic actions, and give birth to thoſe grand ideas which
are the aſtoniſhment and admiration of all ages.


PFC


e wm
Of the Power of the Paſſions.


| A ſſions are in the moral, what motion is in the natural world. If motion

creates, deſtroys, preſerves, animates the whole, that without it every
thing is dead: fo the paſſions animate the moral world. It is avarice which
conducts ſhips over the deſerts of the ocean; it is pride which fills up vallies,
levels mountains, hews itfelf a paſſage through rocks, raiſes the pyra-
mids of Memphis, digs the lake Mœris, and caſts the Coloſſus of Rhodes.
Love, it is faid, formed the crayon for the firſt deſigner, In a country where
revelation had never penetrated it was love, which, to ſooth the grief of a
widow, rendered diſconſolate by the death of her young ſpouſe, intimated to
her the ſyſtem of the immorality of the foul. It was the enthuſiaſm of grati-
tude which claſſed the benefactors of mankind among the Gods; which in-
vented the falſe religions and ſuperſtitions, all of which, however, have not
their. ſource in ſuch noble paſſions as love and gratitude.


ever it could cover with its robe ſhould be of the miferies- of mankind,. aſſumed the
long to him. On which the idol procured human nature. :
a robe made of ſuch extent that it covered the Kolbe relates, that among the Hottentots
whole earth, and the baffled devil was obliged there are many who maintain the ſame doc-
to retire into the ſea, whence he ſometimes trine, and believe that their God has viſibly
returns; but flies immediately on the fight appeared to their nation in the form of one of
of the idol. ; the moſt beautiful mien among them; but
Whether theſe people had formerly any the generality conſider this tenet as a mere
confuſed notion of our religion is not known; chimera, and pretend, that to metamorphoſe
but one of the firſt articles of the creed of God into a man, is to make him a& a part
Thic-ca is, that there is an idol that faves very unbecoming his majeſty, They pay him
mankind, and makes full ſatisfaction for their no worthip ; they ſay that God is good, and
{ins ; and who, in order to have a more ade- that our prayers are not regarded by him.
quate knowledge and a more tender ſenſe | ,


It:


150 SF RNRI T of,


It is therefore to ſtrong paſſions that we owe the invention and wonders of arts;
and conſequently they are to be conſidered as the germ productive of genius,
and the powerful ſpring that carries men to great actions. But before we pro-
ceed, it may be proper to fix the idea I intend to convey by the word Strong
Paſſion. If men in general ſpeak without underſtanding each other, it 1s
owing to the obſcurity of words; to this cauſe (a) may be attributed the pro-
longation of the miracle wrought at the tower of Babel.

By the word Strong- Paſſion, I mean a paſſion, the object of which is ſo ne-
ceſſary to our happinels that without the poſſeſſion of it life would be inſup-
portable. This was Omar's idea of the paſſion, when he ſaid, + Whoever
thou art, that loveſt liberty, deſireſt to be wealthy without riches, pow-
* erful without ſubjects, a ſubject without a maſter ; dare to contemn death:
Kings will then tremble before thee, whilſt thou alone ſhalt fear no perſon.”

It is indeed only paſſions carried to this degree of force that can execute
the greateſt actions, defy dangers, pain, death and heaven itſelf.

Dicearchus, the general of Philip, in preſence of his whole army erects two
altars, one to impiety, the other to injuſtice, ſacrifices on them, and marches
againſt the Cyclades. | |

Some days before the aſſaſſination of Ceſar, conjugal love, united with a no-
ble pride, prevailed on Portia to make an inciſion in her thigh, to ſhew the
wound to her huſband ; and at the ſame time to ſay to him, ** Brutus you are
e meditating ſome great deſign which you conceal from me. I never before
« aſked you an indiſcreet queſtion : I knew that our ſex, however weak in
e itſelf, gathers ſtrength by converſing with wiſe and virtuous men; and that
« I was daughter to Cato, and ſpouſe to Brutus; but love rendered me fo ti-
© merous, that I miſtruſted my weakneſs. You ſee the eſſay I have made
« of my fortitude : judge from this trial of pain, whether I am worthy of your
confidence.“ | |

It was the paſſion of honour and philoſophic fanaticiſm alone that could
induce Timicha, the Pythagorean, in the midſt of torture, to bite off her
tongue, that ſhe might not expoſe herſelf to reveal the ſecrets of her ſect.

Cato, when a child going with his tutor to Sylla's palace, at ſeeing the
bloody heads of the proſcribed, aſked with impatience, the name of the mon{-
ter who had cauſed ſo many Roman citizens to be murdered. He was aniwer- |
ed, it was Sylla : How, ſays he, does Sylla murder thus, and is Sylla ſtill
a live?” Yes, it was replied, the very name of Sylla diſarms our citizen.
O Rome, cried Cato, deplorable is thy fate, ſince within the vaſt com-


—


— —


ſtacles. It is with the word Paſſion, 25 with
that of Underſtanding, its ſignification de-
pends on the pronounciation. A man, who


(a) For inſtance, if the word Red contains
the ſeveral gradations from ſcarlet to carna-
tion, let us ſuppoſe two men, one has ſeen


only ſcarlet, and the other carnation, the
firſt will very juſtly ſay, that red is a vivid
colour; the other will be as poſitive, that
it is a faint colour. For the like reaſon, two
men may pronounce the word Will without
underſtanding each other; for this word ex-
tends from the coldeſt to the moſt vehement
degree of volition, which ſurmounts all ob-


other ſociety,


in a ſociety of ſhallow perſons is conſidered as
weak may be concluded ſimple: it is
otherwiſe with him who is looked upon as a
perſon of tolerable parts by geniuſes of the firſt
claſs; the choice of his company proves his
ſuperiority to common men. Here he is a
midling orator, but would be the firſt in any


paſs


ESSAYS o n MIN D. 151


1% paſs of thy walls not a man of virtue can be found, and the arm of a fee-
« ble child is the only one that will oppoſe itſelf againſt tyranny!” Then turn-
ing towards his governor, ** Give me, ſaid he, your ſword; I will conceal
„ jt under my robe, approach Sylla, and kill him. Cato lives, and Rome
« js again free (b).“ ES,

In what climates has not this virtuous love of one's country performed he-
roic actions? In China, an emperor being purſued by the victorious forces of
a private patriot, in order to oblige this victor to diſband his troops, had

recourſe to that ſuperſtitious reſpect, which in that country a ſon pays to the
orders of his mother. He diſpatched an officer, who approached her with his
drawn poiniard 1n his hand, told her peremptorily ſhe muſt comply or periſh.
Does thy maſter, anſwered ſhe, with a diſdainful ſmile, flatter himſelf that
I] am ignorant of the tacit but facred conventions between the people and
« their ſovereigns, by which the people are to obey, and the kings to render
« them happy? He firſt broke the conventions. And thou, bale tool of a
<« tyrant, learn from a woman what in ſuch caſes is due to thy country.”
Then ſnatching the poiniard from the officer's hand, plunged it in her breaſt ;
ſaying, Slave, if thou haft ſtill any virtue, carry this bloody poiniard to my
& ſon; bid him revenge the nation, and puniſh the tyrant. He has now nothing
to fear, no cautions to obſerve for me: he is now at liberty to be virtuous (c).“

If the generous pride, the paſſion of patriotiſm and glory, determine citizens
to ſuch heroic actions, with what reſolution and intrepidity do not the paſ-
ſions inſpire thoſe who aim at diſtinction in the arts and ſciences, and whom
Cicero calls, the peaceable heroes? It is from a deſire of glory, that the aſtro-


nomer is ſeen, on the icy ſummits of the Cordeleras, placing his inſtruments


62


(b) It was the ſame Cato who, when re-
tiring to Utica, being urged to conſult the
oracle of Jupiter Ammon, anſwered, Oracles
are for the fearful and the ignorant. The brave
man is independent of the Gods, and knows
when to live or die: he with compoſure offers
himſelf to his fate, whether it be known or
concealed,” Cæſar, after having fallen into
the hands of pirates is ſtill the ſame man,
threatens them with death, and at landing
makes good his words.

(c) The paſſion of duty alſo animated Ab-
dalla's mother, when her ſon, being forſaken
by his friends, beſieged in a caſtle, and urged
to accept of an honourable capitulation of-
fered him by the Syrians, conſulted her
how he ſhould act, and ſhe gave him this
anſwer, Son, when thou tookeſt up arms
* againſt the houſe of Ommiah, did'{t thou
© think it was eſpouſing the cauſe of juſtice
© and virtue? Yes, anſwered he. O then,
* replied his mother, What cauſe is there
« for deliberation? Doſt thou not know
that cowards only are ſwayed by fear? wilt


—_


«© thou be the contempt of the Ommites ?
“ and ſhall it be ſaid, that when thou waſt
<< to determine between life and duty, thou
didſt prefer the former ?” ;

It is the ſame paſſion for glory that, when
the Roman army, periſhing with cold for
want of cloathing, was on the point of diſperſ-
ing, brought to the aſſiſtance of .Septiemus
Severus the philoſopher Antiochus, who,
{tripping himſelf before the army leaped into a
heap of ſnow, at which the troops chearfully
perſevered in their duty. ;

Thraſea being one day counſelled to make
ſome ſubmiſſion to Nero, „How, ſaid he,
«© ſhall I ſtoop ſo low to prolong my life a
«© few days? No death is a debt: I'll dif-
charge it like a free man, and not pay it
like a ſlave.”

Veſpaſian, in a guft of paſſion threatning
Helvidius with death, received this anſwer:
© Did I ever tell you I was immortal? By
„putting me to death, you will act in cha-
ce radter like a tyrant ; ] like a citizen in re-
„ ceiving it without fear,”


in


— IR —


152 BEL ESPRIT; ob,

In the midſt of ſnows and froſt; which conducts the botaniſt to the brinks of
precipices in queſt of plants; which anciently carried the juvenile lovers of
the ſciences into Egypt, Ethiopia and even into the Indies, for viſiting the
mott celebrated philoſophers, and .acquiriag from their converſation the prin-
ciples of their doctrine.

How ſtrongly did this paſſion exert itſelf in Demoſthenes, who, for per-
fecting his pronunciation, uſed every day to itand on the ſea-ſhore, and with
his mouth full of pebbles harangue the agitated waves ! It was from the ſame
deſire of glory, that the young Pythagoreans ſubmitted to a filence of three
years, in order to habituate themſelves to recollection and meditation; it induced
Democritus (d) to ſhun the diſtractions of the world, and retire among
the tombs, to meditate on thoſe valuable truths, the diſcovery of which, as
it is always very difficult, is allo very little eſteemed : in fine it was this,
that prompted Heraclitus to cede to his younger brother the throne of Ephe-
ſus (e), to which he had the right of primogeniture, that he might give him-
ſelf up entirely to philoſophy; which made the Athletic improve his ſtrength,
by denying himſelf the pleaſures of love; it was alſo from a deſire of popular
aplauſe that certain antient prieſts renounced the ſame pleaſures, and often,
as Boindin pleaſently obſerves of them, without any other recompence for
their continence than the perpetual temptation it occahons. cn.

I have ſhewn that it is to the paſſions we owe moſt of the objects of our
admiration; under their powerful influence we ſuitain dangers, pain, and
death; and that they animate us to take the boldeſt reſolutions.

I am now going to prove that, in critical occaſions, it is by their aſſiſtance
only that great men are inſpired to ſay, and act, and do the beit. |

Let us here call to rememberance the memorable and celebrated ſpeech of
Hannibal to his ſo Idierson the day of the battle of Ticinus; and we ſhall own
that it could be inſpired only by his hatred of the Romans and his paſſion for
glory. Fellow ſoldiers, ſaid he, heaven aſſures me of the victory. Let the
% Romans, not you, tremble. View this field of battle: it offers no retreat
„ for cowards : we all periſh, if any retire. What can be a more certain pledge
<« of triumph? What plainer indication of the protection of the Gods? They
<« have placed us between victory and death.“ f
Can it be doubted that Sylla was not animated with theſe ſame paſſions, when
Craſſus aſked an eſcort to go and raiſe new levies in the country of the Marſians,
Sylla anſwered, << If you are afraid of the enemy, the eſcort I give you are
« your fathers, brothers, relations, and friends, who, maſſacred by the tyrants,
* cry for vengeance and expect it from you.

When the Macedonians, wearied with the toils of war, deſired Alexander
to diſcharge them, it was pride and the love of glory that dictated to him this
ſpirited anſwer, ©* Away ingrates, lazy cowards ; I'll ſubdue the world with-
c out you ; Alexander will never want ſubjects and ſoldiers, where there are


«© men.


— ll.


(d) Democritus was very rich, but he did ter; and being diſengaged from all public
not think this entitled him to neglect his duties, he uſed to retire among the ſolitary


mind, and to live in a flattered ſtupidity. rocks, to indulge himſelf in profound reflec-
(e) Miſon, ſon of the tyrant of Chenes, tions
alſo renounced his right to his father's ſcep- 1
t


7


ESSAYS o Tus MI ND. 153


It is only from men of ſtrong paſſions that ſuch ſpeeches can be expected.
Genius itſelf, in ſuch caſes, can never ſupply the want of ſentiment. We
are ignorant of the language of paſſions we never felt.

Beſides, it is not only in a ſingle act, as eloquence in the paſſions, every
kind are to be eſteemed as the germ productive of ſuperior underſtanding :
it is they, which keeping a perpetual fermentation in our ideas, fertilize in us
the ſame ideas, which, in frigid ſouls, are barren, and would be no more
than ſeed ſcattered on a rock. | | | AN

It is the paſſions which, having ſtrongly fixed our attention on the object
of our deſire, cauſes us to view it under appearances unknown to other men;
and which conſequently prompt heroes to plan and execute thoſe hardy enter-
prizes which, till ſucceſs has proved the propriety of them, appear ridiculous,
and indeed muſt appear ſo to the multitude.

The cauſe, ſays the cardinal de Richlieu, why a timorous mind perceives
an impoſſibility in the moſt ſimple projects, when to an elevated mind, the
moſt arduous ſeems eaſy is, becauſe, before the latter the mountains ſink,
and before the former mole-hills are metamorphoſed into mountains.

It is, in effect, only a ſtrong paſſion, which, being more perſpicuous than

264 ſenſe, can teach us to diſtinguiſh the extraordinary from the impoſ-
ſible, which men of ſenſe are ever confounding ; becauſe, not being animated
by ſtrong paſſions, theſe ſenſible perſons never riſe above mediocrity : a pro-
poſition which I am now going to demonſtrate, in order to prove the great
tuperiority of the man of ſtrong paſſions above any other, and that in reality
great paſſions only can produce great men.


CC ²˙ XXX ²Ü . d


GO H A VE:
Of the ſuperiority of the mind in men of ſtrong paſſions above the men of ſenſe.


F antecedently to ſucceſs great geniuſes of every kind are conſidered as
1 romantic by the men of ſenſe, it is becauſe the latter, incapable of any
thing great, cannot Tonceive the exiſtence of the means great men employ
in the execution of great things.

It is on this account, that great men muſt of conſequence be derided, till
they excite admiration. - When Parmenio, urged by Alexander to deliver
his opinion on Darius's propoſals of peace, ſaid, * Were I Alexander, I would
e accept them ;” the Macedonians doubtleſs, till victory juſtified that prince's
apparent raſhneſs, were better pleaſed with Parmenio's motion, than with
Alexander's aniwer: *© And J alſo were I Parmenio.” One characterizes, the
man of ſenſe, the other an extraordinary man. Now, the firſt claſs greatly
exceeds in number that of the ſecond. It is therefore evident, that had not
the ſon of Philip already gained the reſpect of the Macedonians by his ſignal
exploits, and habituated them to extraordinary enterprizes, his anſwer muſt
have appeared abſolutely ridiculous. None of them would have perceived
the motive for it, either in the interior conſciouſneſs which this hero could have
of the ſuperiority of his courage and abilities, and the- advantage both
_ theſe qualities gave him over a luxurious, effemir.ate people like the Perſians;
or, laſtly, in the knowledge he had acquired, both of the temper of the Mace-
| | þ | ; donians


154 ME LESPREIT;.on,


donians and his alcendency over their minds, and conſequently of the facility
of communicating to them, by his geſtures, looks, and words, that intrepidi-
ty which animated himſelf. Yet theſe were the various motives which, inforced
by an ardent thirſt of glory, made him, with reaſon, conclude the victory
much more certain than it appeared to Parmenio, and conſequently inſpired
him with a bolder anſwer. Fen |

When Tamerlane fixed his engines before the ramparts of Smyrna, from
which the forces of the Ottoman empire had lately been obliged to retire with
great loſs, he was aware of the difficulty of his enterprize; he well knew that
he was attacking a place which the chriſtian powers might continually ſupply
with proviſions : but the paſſion for glory which excited him to the enterprize,
iuggeſted to him the means of executing it. He fills up the large abyſs of
the waters, checks the ſeas, and baffles the European fleets by a dyke ; diſplays
his victorious ſtandards on the breaches of Smyrna, and ſhews the aſtoniſhed

vorld, that nothing is impoſſible to great men (a). |

When Lycurgus formed a plan for making Lacedemon a republic of heroes,
he did not proceed by inſenſible alterations, according to the flow and there-
fore ſteady ſtep of what is called, wiſdom. This great man, heated by a paſ-
lion for virtue, perceived that by ſpeeches, or ſuppoſed oracles, he could
inſpire his countrymen with the ſame ſentiments that glowed in himſelf;
and that by ſeizing the firſt inſtant of ardour, he might change the conſtitu-
tion of the govenment, and bring abour, in the manners of that people, a ſud-
den revolution, which in the common methods of prudence .would have re-
quired many years. He knew that paſſions are like volcanos, whoſe ſudden
eruptions alter the channel of a river, which art could not have diverted, bur
by digging another bed for it; and conſequently, not till after a long ſucceſ-
fion of time and prodigious expence. By this means, he ſucceeded in a plan,
perhaps the boldeſt ever undertaken, and which would have been too difficult for
any ſenſible man, who, deriving that title only from his incapacity of being
excited by ſtrong paſſions, is alſo incapable of inſpiring them.

Men of theſe paſſions, being intelligent judges in the various methods of kind-
ling the fire of enthuſiaſm, have often had recourſe to ſuch, which ſenſible per-
ſons, for want of knowing this part of the human heart, have before the ſuc-
ceſs always conſidered as puerile and ridiculous. | |

Such was the ſtratagem of Pericles, who, when marching towards a ſuperior
enemy, in order to make a hero of every ſoldier, conceals, in a dark wood a
man of an extraordinary ſtature, ſeated in a car, drawn by four white horſes, he
ſuddenly iſſues forth covered with a gorgeous mantle, on his legs glittering
buſkins, and his head adorned with radiant treſſes; thus, he rapidly drives along
the front of the army calling out, ** Pericles, the victory is thine ; I promiſe
<«< it thee!” | |

Such was the method taken by Epaminondas for rouzing the courage of


the Thebans ; he cauſed one night, the arms hanging in a temple, to be ſe-


em m———_—


(a) The ſame thing may be ſaid of Guſta-
vus, who, at the head of his army and artille-
ry, availing himſelf of the time when the win-
ter had conſolidated the ſurface of the water,
he croſſed the frozen ſeas for making a deſ-
cent in Seeland. He knew as well as his of-
kcers, that 7 deſcent might be eaſily op-


pofed ; but he alſo knew that a wiſe temerity
ſeldom fails of diſconcerting the foreſight
of common men; that the boldneſs of the en-
terprizes oſten ſecures their ſucceſs; and that
there are caſes when the higheſt boldneſs is
the higheſt prudence,


cretly


ESSAYS ov The M I N D. 155


cretly removed, and perſuaded the ſoldiers that the patron- gods of Thebes
had made uſe of them in order to come armed the next day, and join in battle
with them, againſt their enemy.

Such, laſtly, was the order given by Ziſka on his death-bed, when, ſtill

breathing the molt furious hatred againſt the catholics, who had perſecuted
him, he recommends to his partizans, that immediately after his death, they
ſhould flea him, and of his ſkin make a drum, aſſuring them of the victory
every time they ſhould beat this drum in their encounters with the catho-
lics; and this promiſe, ſeemingly ſo chimerical, was verified by conſtant
ſucceſſes. | |

Thus it is ſeen, that the moſt deciſive means, the beſt adapted for producing
great effects, ever unknown to thoſe who are called men of ſenſe, are dif-
cernible only by men of ſtrong paſſions, who, in the circumſtances of thoſe
heroes would have had the like ſentiments. je ;

Without the reſpect due to the reputation of the great Conde, would it
be thought, that a project of that prince for recording in every regiment the
memorable actions and ſayings of the ſoldiers, ſhould prove the ſeed of emu-
lation in the troops? Does not the inexecution of this project convince us ho r
little its uſefulneſs was perceived? How few, like the celebrated chevalier Fo-
| lard, are ſenſible of the power of ſpeeches on the ſoldiery? Does every body

equally perceive all the beauty of that ſaying of the duke de Vendome; when,
ſeeing a body of his troops flying, whilſt the officers omitted nothing to rally
them, he thrs himſelt among the fugitives, calling out to the officers,
„Let the ſoldiers alone, this is not the place, but yonder,” (pointing to
a tree about a hundred paces off) *whither this? corps is going to form again.”
Here the ſoldiers courage was perceiveable; he thus revived in them the paſ-
ſions of ſhame and honour, which they flattered themſelves they ſtill retained in
his eyes. By this reſource alone could they have been ſtopped, and thus
they were again led on to action and to victory.

Now can it be queſtioned ſuch a ſpeech had not its origin in the temper;
and that in general, all the ways made uſe of by great men for kindling in
others the fire of enthuſiaſm, have not been ſuggeſted to them by their paſ-
ſions? Where is the ſenſible man who, for increaſing the confidence and reſ-
pe& of the Macedonians, would have allowed Alexander to term himſelf
the ſon of Jupiter Ammon? Would have put Numa on feigning a private

commerce with the nymph Egeria ? Would have adviſed Zamolxis, Zaleuxus,
and Mneves to pretend themſelves inſpired by Veſta, Minerva, or Mercury?
Marius to have among his retinue a fortune-teller ? Sertorius to conſult his
hind? And laſtly, Who like the count de Dunois, would, for checking the
progreſs of the Engliſh, have put the ſword into the hands of a country girl?

Few extend their thoughts beyond the common mode of thinking; and ſtill
ſmaller is the number of thoſe who dare (b) execute and ſpeak what they think.
If ſenſible men attempted to put ſuch methods in practice, they would never
be happy in the application, for want of a certain experimental acquaintance


(b) Yet by theſe alone is the human mind - public applauſe and gratitude ; for in ſciences
improved. When it is not a caſe of govern- an infinite number of men muſt be miſtaken,
ment, where the ſlighteſt faults may be pro- that others may no longer be miſtaken. This
quctive of national evils, but only a ſcientifical line of Martial is applicable to them,
point, the very errors of geniuſes deſerve the Si non erraſſet, fecerat ille minus.

X 2 With


156 DE L ESPRIT; os,


with the paſſions, They mulPfollow beaten paths, if they forſake them, they
bewilder themlelves. Indolence is always the predominant quality in a man cf
ſenile : he has nothing of that activity of ſoul, by which a great man in power
forms new ſprings for moving the world, or ſows the ſceds of future events.
It is only to the man of paſſion, and him who thirſts after glory, that the book
of tururity is open. | |

At the battle of Marathon, Themiſtocles was the only man of all the Greeks,
who forrſa the fight of Salamine, and who by exerciſing the Athenians in
naval affairs, prepared them for victory. 2

When Cato the cenſor, a man whoſe ſenſe exceeded his ſagacity, joined
the ſenate determined to deſtroy Carthage, Why did Scipio alone oppoſe the
ruin of that city? Becauſe he conſidered Carthage both as a rival worthy of
Rome, and as a dyke for oppoſing the torrent of vices and corruptions then
breaking into Italy. Employed in the politic ſtudy of hiſtory, habitutated into
meditation, and that laborious attention which a paſſion for glory alone can
render us capable, he attained a kind of divination. Accordingly he pre-
dicted all the misfortunes that would fall on Rome, the very moment when
the miſtreſs of the world erected her throne on the ruins of all the monarchies
of the univerſe ; he in every country ſaw a Marius and a Sylla; and when the
Romans could perceive only triumphal palms, and hear the ſhouts of victory,
he heard the proclamations of the ſanguinary tables of proſcription. That

eople were then like ſailors, who, when the ſea is ſmooth, and the zephires
gently ſwell the ſails and dimple the ſarface of the ocean, abMon themſelves
to levity and mirth, while the attentive pilot beholds at the very extremity
of the horizon the ſtorm which will ſoon throw the deep into a ferment.

If the Roman ſenate lighted Scipio's advice, it is becauſe very few, by
the knowledge of the paſt and preſent, ſee into futurity (c); it is becauſe ſtates,
like the oak, the growth and decay of which is inſenſible to the epheme-
rical inſects living under its ſhade, ſeem to them as it were in a ſtate of immo-
bility; and this apparent immobility they rather believe as being molt flatter-
ing to their indolence, which thus thinks itſelf diſcharged from the ſollicitude
of foreſight and precaution. | |

It is in morality as in phyſics: the people think the ocean conſtantly chained
within its bed, whereas the philoſopher ſees it ſucceſſively diſcover and over-
flow vaſt tracts, and ſhips traverſing thoſe plains which were lately furrowed
by the plough. The people behold with admiration the even ſummits"
of ſtupendous mountains; but the philoſopher ſees their aſpiring tops,
gradually ruined by time tumbling down into the vallies, and filling them with
their fragments. But to view the moral univerſe, like the natural, in a ſuc-
ceſſive and perpetual deſtruction and reproduction, and thence to diſcern the
remote cauſes of the overthrow of ſtates, is the gift only of ſuch as are inured

to application. It is eagle- eyed paſſioi which penetrates into the dark
abyſs of futurity: indifference is born blind and ſtupid. In a ſerene ſky and pure
air, the inhabitant of the town does not foreſee the tempeſt : it is the attentive


| | c) A ſlight preſent goody frequently ine- ſtantial evils. They imagine that in branding

| : ; briates, a nation, that in its blindneſs it ex- him as a malecoment, virtue puniſhes vice ;
claims againſt the eminent genius who, in whereas generally it is only folly laughing at
this ſlight preſent good, foreſees many ſub- judgment. 2

3 | | an


-


ESSAYS ov Tue MIN O. 157


and intereſted eye of the huſhandman that beholds, with terror, inſenſible exhala-
tions riſing from the ſurface of the earth, condenſing in the air, and overſpread-
ing it with thoſe clouds which will ſoon diſcharge themſelves in dreadful light-
nings and deſolating hail, to the utter ruin of his promiſing crops.

If every paſſion be particularly examined, it will be found, that all are very
ſagacious in the purſuit of their objects; that they alone can ſome time per-
ceive the cauſe of effects which the ignorant attribute to chance; conſequently
that they alone can curtail, and perhaps one day totally deſtroy the empire
of this chance; of which each diſcovery neceſſarily contracts the limits.

If the ideas and actions ariſing from ſuch paſſions as avarice and love, are in
general little valued, it is not that theſe ideas and actions do not often require
great underſtanding and a multitude of combinations; but becauſe both the
one and the other are either indifferent or detrimental to the public, which,
as I have proved in the preceding diſcourſe, confers the appellations of vir-
tuous or ingenious only on ſuch actions and ideas as are uſeful to it. Now,
of all paſſions, the love of glory is that alone which is never at a loſs, that
can always inſpire ſuch actions and ideas. It was this which inflamed an
eaſtern monarch when he cried out: Wretched are the ſovereigns of ſlaves !
alas! the joys of juſt praiſe, which fo delights the gods and heroes, are not
made for them]! Ye nations, added he, who have baſely parted with the right
of publicly blaming your maſters, you have thereby loſt the right of praiſing
them: the panegyric of the ſlave is ſuſpicious, and his unfortunate ſovereign
remains always in ignorance, whether he deſerves eſteem or contempt. How
painſul is this uncertainty to a noble foul !”? |

Such ſentiments always ſuppoſe an ardent paſſion for glory. This paſſion
is the ſoul of men of genius and talents in every kind; to this deſire they owe
the enthuſiaſm they have for their art, and which they ſometimes carry ſo far,
as to conſider it as the only occupation worthy the mind of man; an opinion,
for which, ſenſible perſons call them mad- men; but they are conſidered in
another light by the knowing, who, in the cauſe of their madneſs, diſcern
that of their abilities and ſucceſs. . |

The concluſion of this chapter is, that the men of ſenſe, thoſe idols of the
common people, are always very inferior to the men of paſſion ; and that ir
is the ſtrong paſſions which, reſcuing us from ſloth, can alone impart to us
that continued attention productive of ſuperior intellefts. All that remains
to confirm this truth is, to ſhew in the following chapter, that even they who
are juſtly ranked among illuſtrious perſonages, when no longer ſupported


by the ardour of paſſion inſtantly fink into the claſs of the moſt ordinary men.


PEPE TE EEE r S5 Sr fr f. f. EEE TT fr r fr iv 25 ir r & . fr . f f K EU U W N
| CH ( 25
On Stupidity, the conſequence of the cefſation of Paſſions.
T HIS propoſition is a neceſſary conſequence of the former. In effect, if
a man animated with the moſt violent deſire of eſteem, and as ſuch ca-
pable of the ſtrongeſt paſſion, finds himſelf able to ſatisfy this deſire, he will
ſoon ceaſe to be animated with that paſſion, it being the nature of every deſire


to languiſh and die away, unlefs nouriſhed by hope. Now, the ſame cauſe
f | | which


158 ESPRIT. on,


which extinguiſhes in him the paſſion for eſteem will neceſſarily kill in him
the germ of ſuperior intellects.

Suppoſe perſons no leſs ambitious of public eſteem than the Turennes, the
Condes, the Deſcartes, the Corneilles, the Richlieus, were made receivers of
a tax, or the like; this ſtation, depriving them of all hopes of glory, they would
want even the common underſtanding neceſſary for ſuch employ ments. Little
adapted tothe ſtudies of edicts and tarifs, they would remain unqualified for a poſt
odious to the public; they would be filled with averſion and diſgult for a ſcience,
in which he who has acquired the moſt profound and extenſive knowledge,
and who conſequently retired to reſt, in his own opinion, very learned and
very reſpectable, may awake very ignorant and very uſeleſs, ſhould the go-
vernment have thought fit to ſuppreſs, or incorporate theſe duties. Totally
given up to the Vis inertiz, tuch perſons will ſoon become incapable of any
Kind of application. | | 4

This is the reaſon why, in the management of an inferior poſt, men born
for great things are often found inferior to the moſt ſhallow underſtandings.
Veſpaſian, who on the throne, was the admiration of the Romans, would,
whilſt Pretor have been the object of their contempt (a). The eagle, which
in its bold flight pierces the clouds, ſkims the ſurface of the earth with a leſs
rapidity than the ſwallow. To deſtroy the animating paſſion in a man is to
deprive him at once of all his capacity; in this, Sampſon's hair ſeems to be
the emblem of paſſion ; that being cut off, Sampſon was reduced to a com-
mon man.

To confirm this truth by a ſecond example, let us take a view of Fol:
eaſtern uſurpers, endued with amazing boldneſs, neceſſarily blended great abi-
lities ; let us enquire, why moſt of them, when ſeated on the throne, ſhewed but
little genius; why, very much inferior to the weſtern uſurpers, there is ſcarce
one, as the form of the Aſiatic governments ſufficiently proves, who can be ac-
counted a legiſlator : not that they always delighted in the calamities of their
ſubjects, but becauſe having once obtained the crown, the object of their de-
fire was fulfilled ; becauſe the puſilanimity, the ſubjection, and obedience of a
{laviſh people, enſuring them of the poſſeſſion, the paſſion which had raiſed
them to the empire ceaſed to animate them ; that, being now without motives
of a power to induce them to bear the fatigue of attention implied in the diſ-
covery and eſtabliſhment of good laws, they are, as I have ſaid above, in the
caſe of thoſe men of ſenſe, who, for want of a ſpirited deſire, have never taken
the pains neceſſary to free themſelves from the delights of ſloth. If, on the
contrary, ſeveral weſtern uſurpers have, when on the throne, diſplayed great
ralents. If Auguſtus, Cromwell, and many others of a ſimilar genius, may
be claſſed among legiſlators, it is becauſe, they had to do with ſubje&s of a
more exalted turn of mind, and too brave and generous patiently to bear the
rein; the apprehenſion of loſing the object of their defires, ſtill kept alive
in them the paſſi>n of ambition in all its former vivacity. Raiſed to thrones .
on which ſlzep might have been fatal, they found it abſolutely neceſſary to
conciliate their refractory ſubjects, to enact laws uſeful in that juncture (b), to

| impoſe


—


(a) Caligula ordered Veſpaſian's robe to juſt epitaph : a | |
be dragged through the dirt tor his neglecting - Ci git le deſtructeur d'un pouvoir légitime,
to cauſe the ſtreets to be cleaned. Fuſqu'a fon dernier jour favorite des cieux,
(b) This gained Cromwell the following | Dem


Eo. ESSAYS O Tſe MIN D. 159


impoſe on their people, at leaſt delude them with the phantom of a tranſitory
happineſs, to make them amends for the real misfortunes attending a uſurpation.

Thus it is to the danger the latter were continually expoſed to on the
throne, that they owed that ſuperiority of talents which raiſed them above moſt
of the eaſtern uſurpers; they were in fome reſpects like the man of genius, who,
being the butt of criticiſm and perpetually moleſted in the enjoyment of a
very precarious reputation, feels that it is not he alone who is heated with the
paſſion of vanity z and that if his renders him deſirous of eſteem, that of
another will conſtantly withold it, unleſs he takes care, by uſeful and enter-
taining works and continual efforts of wit, to comfort them under the mor-
tification of commending him. It is on the throne, that this fear keeps the
mind in a ſlate of every kind of fecundity ; this fear removed, the ſpring of che
mind is broken. | Es |

Who doubts, but that a natural philoſopher often examines a phyſical pro-
blem, though ſometimes of little importance to ſociety, with infinitely more at-
tention than a ſultan beſtows on the deliberation of a law, big with the happineſs
or calamity of thouſands. If the latter beſtows leſs time in weighing and di-
geſting his ordinances and edicts than a wit does in compoling a ſonnet or
epigram, it is becauſe thinking, which is always fatiguing, is, as it were con-
trary to our nature (e); and that a ſultan being above puniſnment and ſatire,
was deſtitute of motives for overcoming ſloth, the enjoyment of which is ſo
agreeable to all mankind. Ru

Thus we fee the activity of the mind depends on the activity of the paſſions.
It is therefore during the age of paſſion, that is from twenty-five to thirty-five
and forty, that man is capable of the greateſt efforts, both of virtue and genius.
At this age, men born for great things, have acquired a proper compaſs of
learning, and their paſſions have yet ſcarce loſt any thing of their force: but
beyond this term, our paſſions decline, and this is the period of mental ac-
quiſition, no new ideas are then acquired ; and whatever ſuperiority there
may afterwards appear in their works, it is no more than the application and
diſplay of the ideas acquired in the time of the efferveſcence of the paſſions,
but which hicherto had not been reduced to practice.

Farther, it is not only to age that the decay of the paſſions is to be attributed :
we abate of our fondneſs for an object, when the pleaſure promiſed to our-
ſelves from its poſſeſſion, does not equal the trouble of the acquiſition. He
who is fond of glory ſacrifices his inclination to it, no farther than he thinks
the ſacrifice will be repaid by the prize. On this account it was that ſo many
heroes only could eſcape the ſnare of voluptuouſneſs in the tumult of
camps and the acclamations of victory : on this account it was, that on a day


—


ſomething betterthanaſceptreacquiredbyguilt.
Strange | that from uſurpers the ſons of ma-
jeſty are taught the qualities becoming kings.


Dont les vertus meritoient mieux

Que le ſceptre acquis par un crime.
Par quel deſtin faut-il, par quelle etrange loi,
Qu'a tous ceux qui ſont nes pour porter la cou-


[ronne,
Ce ſoit Puſurpateur qui donne


L'exemple des vertus que doit avoir un roi

The ſubſtance of which is: Here lies the diſ-
- troyer of regal power, whom heaven con-
ſtantly favoured, and whoſe virtues deſeryed


(e) Some philoſophers have advanced this
paradox that ſlaves, under the hardeſt bodily
labour, enjoyed perhaps in the tranquility
of their minds a compenſation for all their
ſufferings; and that by this tranquility of
mind, the condition of the ſlave was oſten
in happineſs equal to his maſter.


—


£7


ESPRIT; .

of battle alone, the great Conde could maſter his choler, being then per—
fectly calm and ſedate; it is on this account, if things called ſmall may be
compared with great, that Dupre, noted for a careleſs gait, never laid aſide
that awkward cultom but on the ſtage, where he thought the admiration of the
ſpectators ſufficiently compenſated for the trouble he took to pleaſe them. Ha-
bits and ſloth are to be overcome only by a love of glory; and ſometimes it is
nothing but the greateit which will ſatisry men, ſo that if they cannot make
themſelves maſters of almoſt the whole empire of eſteem, moſt of them give
themſelves up to a ſcandalous ſloth, Extreme pride and extreme ambition
often produce in them the effect of indifference and moderation. In reality,
it is a minute foul which deſires a minute glory. If they who are ſo curious
in dreſſing, figuring, and - ſpeaking in aſſemblies, are generally incapable of
great things; it is not only, becaule by acquiring an infinity of minute talents
and accompliſhments they loſe that time which they might employ in the diſco-
very of exalted ideas, and the culture of eminent talents, but becauſe the very
purſuic of ſuch a trivial glory implies a debility and narrownels in their de-
ſires. Accordingly, great men are ſeen for the moſt part utterly negligent of
the minute cares and oblervances neceſſary to acquire a regard; thele are ways
they diſdain. In that young man (laid Sylla ſpeaking of Cæſar), who
e walks fo immodeſtly along the ſtreets, I ſee ſeveral Mariuſes.”

The reader, I hope, is now lufficiently convinced, that the total abſence of
paſſion, if poſſible, viould reduce us to the moſt ablolate ſtupidity z and that the
leſs we are animated by our paſſions, the nearer we approach that flate (d).
Paſſions indeed are the celeſtial fire which vivifies the moral world; it is to the
paſſions that the arts and ſciences owe their diſcoveries, and the ſoul its eleva-
tion. If they are alſo the ſources of the vices and of moſt of the misfortunes
of men, theſe misfortunes do not warrant moraliſts in condemning the paſſions,
and exploding them under the appellations of madneſs and folly. Sublime vir-
tue and diſcerning wiſdem are two products of this folly, which ſhould render
it reſpectable in their eyes.

The general concluſion of what I have ſaid on the paſſions is, that it is on!
their force that can counterballance in us the force of indolence and inertia, lack
us from that indulgence and ſtupidity to which we are inceſſantly gravitating ;
and laſtly endue us with that continuity of attention to which a ſuperiority of
talents is annexed. | 45
But it will be ſaid, has not nature by thus kindling in ſome men ſtronger dif-
poſition to mental paſſions than in others, given men unequal improvements? To
this queſtion I anſwer, That, if to excel in one kind does not, as I have above
ſhewn, require the utmoſt ſtretch of application, neither is it neceſſary for diſtinc-
tion in the ſame kind to be animated with the moſt fer vent pafſion, but only with a
degree ſufficient for ſtimulating us to alertneſs and attention; beſides, it may
be proper to obſerve, that, relatively to paſſions, there is not that diff: rence
between men as is imagined. To know whether nature in this reſpect has ſo
unequally diſtributed its gifts, we muſt examine, whether all men are ſuſcep-
tible of paſſions; and in order to this we muſt go back to their origin.


160


„„ —


(d) It is often from the want of paſſions
that ariſes the obſtinacy of perſons of mean


he who is not deſirous of inſtruction, has ne-
ver ſufficient motives for altering his mind.


parts; their ſlender knowledge ſuppoſes that
they never had any deſire of inſtruction, or, at
leaſt, that this deſire has been always very ſaint;
very much below their fondneſs fer ſloth: now


To fave himſelf the fatigue of imagination,
he muſt always turn a deaf ear to the remon-
ſtrances of reaſon ; and obſtinacy in this caſe


is the neceſſary effect of ſloth.
F.


ESSAYS on Tu: MIND . 161


e ß AR AN / ß ALAS AL / / ASD AN AN AN ASL ASCASIARLASI/
e LO DELLS eee eee 2 :


Cc. 3" 7
Of the Origin of the Paſſions:


N order to arrive at this knowledge, we muſt diſtinguiſh the Paſſions into
1 two kinds: thoſe immediately given us by nature; and thoſe we owe to the
eſtabliſhment of ſociety. And to know which of theſe paſſions has produced
the other, let us tranſport ourſelves in idea to the firſt ages of the world, and
we ſhall there ſee that nature, by hunger, thirſt, heat, and cold, informed man of
his wants, and added a variety of pleaſing and painful ſenſations; the former


to the gratifications of theſe wants, the latter to the incapacity of gratifying


them: there we ſhall behold man, capable of receiving the impreſſions of plea-
ſure and pain, and born as it were with a love for the one, and hatred for the
other. Such was man, when he came from the hand of nature. | |
In this ſtate he had neither envy, pride, avarice, nor ambition ; ſenſible only
of the pleaſure and pain derived from nature, he was ignorant of all thoſe
artificial pains and pleaſures we procure from the above paſſions. Such paſſions
are then not immediately given by nature; but their exiſtence, which ſuppoſes
that of ſociety, alſo ſuppoſes that we have in us the latent ſeeds of thoſe paſſions.
If therefore we receive at our birth only wants, in thoſe wants and in our firſt
deſires we mult ſeek, the origin of theſe artificial paſſions, which can be nothing
more than the unfolding of the faculty of ſenſation.


Perhaps both in the moral and natural world, God originally implanted only


one principle in all he created, and that what is, and what ſhall be, is only the
neceſſary unfolding of this principle. . |

He ſaid to matter, I endow thee with power. Immediately the elements ſub-
ject to the laws of motion, but wandering and confounded in the deſarts of ſpace,


formed a thouſand monſtrous aſſemblages, and produced a thouſand different


chaoſes, till they at laſt placed themſelves in that equilibrium and natural order,
in which the univerſe is now ſuppoſed to be arranged.

He ſcems alſo to have ſaid to man, I endow thee with ſenſibility, the blind
inſtrument of my will, that being incapable of penetrating into the depth of my


views, thou may'ſt accompliſh all my deſigns. I place thee under the guardian-


ſhip of pleaſure and pain: both ſhall watch over thy thoughts, and thy actions;
they ſhall beget thy paſſions, excite thy friendſhip, thy tenderneſs, thine aver-
ſion, thy rage; they ſhall kindle thy deſires, thy fears, thy hopes; they ſhall
take of the veil off truth ; they ſhall plunge thee in error. and after having
made thee conceive a thouſand abſurd and different ſyſtems of morality and go-
vernment, ſhall one day diſcover to thee the ſimple principles, on the unfolding
of which depends the order and happineſs of the moral world. 8 8
Let us ſuppoſe that heaven ſuddenly animates ſeveral men, their firſt employ-
ment will be to ſatisfy their wants, and ſoon after they will endeavour, by their
cries, to expreſs the impreſſions they receive from pleaſure and pain. Thoſe
| þ © cries


: of Me RN ds ” a


162 DE L'ESPRIT); ox,
cries will conſtitute their firſt language, which, if we may judge from the po.
verty of the languages of the favages, muſt be very confined, and reducible to.
theſe firſt ſounds. When mankind, by becoming more numerous, ſhall begin.
to ſpread over the ſurface of earth; and like the waves of the ocean, which
cover its diſtant banks, and inſtantly retire into its capacious bed, many ge-
nerations ſhall have 3 on the earth, and be ſwallowed up in the gulph
wherein all things are forgotten; when families ſhall live nearer to each other;
when the deſire becomes common of poſſeſſing the ſame things, as the fruit of
a certain tree, or the favours of a particular woman, it wif! excite quarrels.
and combats; and theſe beget anger and revenge. When, ſated with blood, and.
weary of living in perpetual fear, mankind ſhall conſent to loſe a ſmall part of.
that liberty they found ſo prejudicial in a ſtate of nature; they will enter into con-
ventions with each other, and theſe conventions will be their firft laws ; when.
they have formed laws, they will entruſt ſome perſons with the care of ſeeing
them put in execution, and thoſe will be the firſt magiſtrates. Theſe rude ma-
giſtrates of a ſavage people will inhabit the foreſts, After having in part de-
ſtroyed the animals, the people will no longer be able to live by hunting, and the
ſcarcity of proviſions will teach them the art of breeding and tending their
flocks, which will ſupply their wants; and the nations that ſubſiſted by hunting,
will become nations of ſhepherds. After a certain number of ages, when theſe
laſt will be extremely multiplied, ſo that the earth will not in the ſame ſpace
yield nouriſhment for a greater number of inhabitants, without being cultivated
by human labour, the nations of ſhepherds will diſappear, and give place to.
nations of huſbandmen. The calls of hunger in diſcovering the art of agricul-
ture, ſhall ſoon learn them that of meaſuring and dividing the lands. This
being done, every man's property muſt be ſecured to him, and thence will ariſe
a number of ſciences and Jaws. Lands from their different nature and cultiva-
tion, bearing different fruits, men will purchaſe what they want, by making
exchanges with each other, and at length perceive the advantage of a general
exchange that will repreſent all commodities ; and for this purpoſe, they will.
make uſe of ſhells or metals. When ſocieties are arrived at this point of per-
tection, all equality between men will be deſtroyed :: they will be diſtinguiſhed:
into ſuperiors and inferiors: then the words Gcoo0D and Evi, formed to ex-
reſs the naturabÞ ſenſations of pleaſure and pain we receive from external ob-
8, will generally extend to every thing that can procure, increaſe, or dimi-
niſh either of theſe ſenſations ;. ſuch are riches and indigence : and then riches.
and honours, by the advantages annexed to them, will become the general ob-
xt of the deſires of mankind. Hence will ariſe, according to the different
forms of government, criminal or virtuous paſſions, ſuch as envy, avarice,
pride, and ambition, patriotiſm, a love of glory, magnanimity, and even love,


which being given by nature only as a want, will be confounded with. vanity,


and become an artificial paſſion, that will, like the others, arife from the un-
folding of the natural ſenſibility.

However certain this concluſion may be, there are few men who can clearly
perceive the ideas from which it reſults. Beſides, by owning that our paſſions
originally derive their ſource from natural ſenſibility, we may believe, that in
the ſtate in which polite nations are actually placed, theſe paſſions exiſted inde-


pendently of the cauſes that has produced them, I propole then to follow the


1 metamorphoſis


ESSAYS ov tux MIN D. 163
metamorphoſis of the natural pleaſures and pains, into the artificial pleaſures
pains and, to ſhew, that in the paſſions, ſuch as avarice, ambition, pride, and


friendſhip, which ſeem leaſt to belong to the pleaſures of ſenſe, we always either
ſeek natural pleaſure, or ſhun natural pain. |


ade h en l. r h r . r d rer n lr 5 ere 8 . 5
| CC H A FN. 1
Of Avarice.


FOLD and ſilver may be conſidered as objects agreeable to the eye: but
if we deſired nothing more in their poſſeſſion, than the pleaſures pro-
duced by the luſtre and beauty of theſe metals, the avaricious man would reſt
ſatisfied with being allowed to contemplate freely, heaps of gold and ſilver in
the publick treaſury. But as this view would be far from gratifying his paſſion,
it neceſſarily follows, that the avaricious, of whatever claſs, either deſires riches
as the means of procuring pleaſure, or as an exemption from the miſeries with
which poverty is attended. |

This principle being eſtabliſhed, I aſſert that man being, by nature, ſenſible of
no other pleaſures than thoſe of the ſenſes, theſe pleaſures are conſequently the

only object of his deſires. A fondneſs for luxury, magnificent <quIPages, ex-
penſive entertainments, and ſuperb furniture, is then an artificial paffion neceſ-
farily produced by the natural wants either of love, or the pleaſures of the
table. Indeed, what real pleaſure can this luxury and magnificence procure the
avaricious voluptuary, if he does not conſider them as the means of pleaſing
women, and obtaining their favours, if they are the objects of his fondneſs ; or
of impoſing on men, and forcing them, by the uncertain hope of a reward, to
remove from him every pain, and to aſſemble around him every pleaſure ?

With theſe avaricious voluptuaries, who certainly do not properly deſerve to
be called covetous, avarice is the immediate effect of the fear of pain and the
love of pleaſure. But it may be asked, how can this love of pleaſure, or this
fear of pain be excited in the really avaricious, thoſe wretched miſers, who ne-
ver part with their money to purchaſe pleaſure? If they pals their lives in the
want of common neceſſaries, and exaggerate to themſelves and others the plea-
ſures annexed to the poſſeſſion of gold, it is merely to divert their attention from
a misfortune, which no body can, or ought to pity. |

However ſurprizing the contradiction may be, that is found between their
conduct, and the motives from which they act, I fhall endeavour to diſcover

the cauſe, which, leaving them the inceſſant deſire of pleaſure, muſt always
deprive them of its eoyment. |

In order to which, I ſhall obſerve firſt, that this kind of avarice derives its
ſource from an exceſſive and ridiculous fear of the poſſibility of indigence, and
of the many evils with which it is accompanied. The avaricious are like thoſe
afflicted with an hypocondriac melancholy, who live in perpetual agonies, ſee


themſelves ſurrounded with dangers, and are afraid of being cruthed by every one
that approaches them, ,
1 2 = This


164 DE L*'ESPREIEFT; on,

T his ſpecics of the avaricious we commonly find among thoſe who were born
in a ſtate of indigence, and have themſelves experienced the long train of evils
with which it is attended, Their folly is therefore, in this reſpect, more pardon-
able than in men born in a ſtate of affluence, among whom there are ſeldom
tound any of the avaricious, except the proud or voluptuous. |

To explain how among the former, the fear of wanting neceſſaries forces
them to live in perpetual want, let us ſuppoſe any one of them when ſinking
under the weight of poverty, forms a project for delivering himſelf from the

painful burthen. Hope immediately ſteps in to his aſſiſtance, and gives freſh
vigour to his foul, which had been bowed down by indigence ; revives his ac-
tivity, and makes him ſearch for protectors: She confines him to the anti-cham-
bers of miniſters, makes him cringe at tie feet of the great, and devote him-
{elf to a very miſerable life, till he has obtained a poſt that will raiſe him above
want. But when he is arrived at this deſirable ſtate, will pleaſure be tlie
only object of his purſuit ? A man of this character, who. is timid and diſtruſt-
ful, will have a lively remembrance of the evils he has experienced, and the
{ame motives that prompted the deſire of delivering himſelf from them, will
determine him to refuſe the indulgence of every gratification, till he has acquired
the habit of depriving himſelf of them. This man being once raiſed above
want, if he is thirty-five or forty years of age, if the love of pleaſure has
its edge every moment blunted, and is leſs ſenſibly felt, what will he then do?
He will become more difficult in his pleaſures ; if he is fond of women, he
will have the moſt beautiful; and hols favours are purchaſed at the deareſt
rate: he will therefore accumulate new riches, to gratify his new appetites. Now
if in the time required for obtaining theſe acquiſitions, diſtruſt and timidity,
which encreaſe with age, and may be conſidered as the effects of the ſenſibility
of our weakneſs, ſhew him that, in point of riches, he can never have enough ;
and if his inſatiable thirſt after them is found to be equally balanced by his
love of pleaſure, he will then be drawn by two different attractions. In order
ro obey both, this man, without renouncing pleaſure, will prove to bimſelf,

that he ought, at leaſt, to defer its enjoyment, till he has accumulated greater
riches, when he may, without fear of futurity, employ himſelf entirely in the
indulgence of preſent gratifications. If in the new interval neceſſary to amaſs
new wealth, age ſhould ſuddenly render him inſenſible of pleaſure, will he then
change his manner of life? Will he renounce habits, which the incapacity of
acquiring new ones have rendered dear to him? No, he certainly will not: ſatis-
fied in contemplating his riches, and with the poſſibility of the pleaſures they
are capable of procuring, he will endeavour to eſcape the pain of laſſitude, by
giving up himſelf entirely to his ordinary purſuits: he will become ſo much the
more avaricious in his old age, as the habit of accumulating wealth is no longer
counterbalanced by the deſire of enjoying it, which will be ſtrengthened by the
mechanical fear of want, where with old age is always accompanied.


CHAP.


ESSAYS on r MIN D. 166


EXELL EN KKK Sd


SA
Ambition.


N be E credit annexed to important poſts, as well as to riches, preſerves us
f from pain, procures us pleaſures, and conſequently is to be conſidered as
the means of avoiding the one, and procuring: the other. We may therefore
apply to Ambition what I have ſaid of Avarice. :

Among the ſavage nations, whoſe chiefs or kings. have no other privilege,
than that of being fed and cloathed with what is caught by their warriors in.
hunting, the deſire of being freed from theſe wants conſlitutes ambition.

Rome in its infancy appointed no other reward for great actions, than as much
land as one Roman could clear and till in a day; and this alone was ſufficient to
form. heroes, |

What I ſay of Rome, I ſay of all poor nations, among whom the ambitious-

deſire only to be delivered from labour and fatigue. On the contrary, among
opulent nations, where all who have any pretenſions te great places, have
riches ſufficient to procure, not only the conveniencies, but the accommoda-
tions of lite, ambition almoſt always flows from a love of pleaſure.
But, it is ſaid, that purple robes, coronets, and, in general, every mark of
honour, can afford no natural ſatisfaction of pleaſure : ambition then canno:
be founded on a love of pleaſure, but on the deſire of eſteem and reſpect, and
is not therefore the effect of natural ſenſations. 10755

If the deſire of grandeur, I reply, was only kindled by the deſire of glory
and eſteem, it would never excite ambition any where but in republics, ſuch as
Rome and Sparta,. where dignities were commonly the inſignia of the great- vir-
tues and the diſtinguiſhed talents of which they were the reward. Among them
ambition might flatter pride, ſince it ſecured to a man the eſteem of his fellow -
citizens; and he having always great enterprizes to execute, might conſider
great poſts as the means of rendering his glory conſpicuous, and proving his
{ſuperiority over others. Now the ambitious with equal ardour aſpire to gran-
deur in ages, where it is debaſed by the choice of the men who-are raiſed to
it, and conſequently at the time when its poſſeſſion is leſs flattering. Ambition
is not then founded on the deſire of eſteem. In vain it is pretended that, in
this reſpect, the ambitious may deceive himſelf : the marks of refpect laviſhed
upon him, inform him every moment that this honour is paid to his place, and
not to him, He is ſenſible that the reſpect he enjoys is not perſonal ; that it
will vaniſh by the death or diſgrace of the poſſeſſor; that the advanced age of the
prince may be ſufficient to deſtroy it; that then the perſons raiſed to the firſt em-
ployments, ſurround the ſovereign like the golden clouds that attend the ſetting:
ſun, whoſe ſplendor is obſcured and diſappear, in proportion as that luminary
ſinks below the horizon. He has a thouſand times heard, and has himſelf as
often ſaid, that honours are not purchaſed. by merit; that promotion to _

| | Polts,


166 ESPRIT; on,

poſts, is no proof of merit in the eyes of the public ; and that on the contrary, it
is generally conſidered, as the price of intrigue, and the meanneſs of importu-
nity. If he doubts of it, let him conſult hiſtory, and eſpecially that of By-
zantium, where he will ſee that a man may, at the ſame time, be inveſted with _
all the honours of an empire, and loaded with the contempt of nations. But
if it be ſuppoſed, that the ambitious have a confuſed idea of the eſteem they
are deſirous of obtaining, and that this is the only motive for their ſtriving for
important poſts ; it is eaſy to ſhew that this is not the true motive by which
they are determined; and that in this particular they deceive themſelves ; ſince
no one, as I ſhall prove, when I conſider pride, can deſire eſteem for its own
ſake; but for the advantages it procures. The delire of greatneſs is not then
produced by the deſire of efteem. |

To what then muſt we attribute the ardour with which perſons ſeek for
dignities? Why is the ambitious man, like the young men of fortune, wha
love to ſhew themſelves in public in brilliant equipages, fond of appearing
abroad, decorated with marks of honour ? It is becauſe he conſiders theſe ho-
nours as a proclamation that informs the people of his independence, and of the
power with which he is poſſeſſed of rendering, at his pleaſure, ſeveral of them
happy or miſerable ; and that it is for the intereſt of them all to merit his fa-
vour, which is always proportioned to the pleaſures they procure for him.

But, it will be asked, is not the ambitious fond of the reſpect and homage of
mankind ? It is indeed, their reſpect he deſires ; but why does he defire it? In
the homage paid to the great, it is not the reſpectful geſture that pleaſes: if that
geſture was of itſelf agreeable, there is no rich man, who would not procure
himſelf ſuch happineſs without going out of his houſe, and ſtriving after great-
neſs. To pleaſe himſelf, he would hire twelve porters, cloath them in magni-
ficent habits, adorn them with all the ribbons in Europe, and make them wait
every morning in his anti-chamber, to come daily to pay his vanity a tribute of
_ adulation and reſpect. | |

The indifference of the rich for this kind of pleaſure, is 2 proof that they
.are not fond of reſpe& for its own ſake, but as it is an acknowledgment of
the inferiority of other men, as a pledge of their favourable diſpoſitions,
and of their eagerneſs to avoid giving them pain, and to contribute to their

leaſures. | |

F The deſire of greatneſs is then only founded on the love of pleaſure and the
fear of pain. If this deſire did not derive its ſource from thence, what could
be more eaſy than to undeceive the ambitious? O thou! might a perſon ſay,
who art ſcorched with envy, oa contemplating the pomp and ſplendor belong-
ing to high poſts, dare to exalt myſelf to a more noble pride, and their luſtre
ſhall ceaie to impoſe upon thee. Imagine for a moment that thou art as ſu-
perior to other men, as the inſects are inferior to them; then theſe courtiers
will ſeem only as bees that buz about their queen; and the ſceptre itſelf will ap-
pear no more than a glittering bauble. | |

Why do men never liſten to ſuch diſcourſes? Why will they always pay re-
ſpect to thoſe who have little in their power, and conſtantly prefer great places
to great abilities? It is becauſe greatneſs is a benefit, which, like riches, is ca-
pable of purchaſing an infinite number of pleaſures. Thus they are ſought for
with ſo much the more ardour, as they are capable of giving us a more extenſive

| 7H power


> ESSAYS on Tex MIN p. 167


power over mankind, and conſequently of 2 us a greater number of
advantages. In proof of this truth, ſuppoſe the thrones of Iſpahan and Lon-

don were offered to our choice; there is hardly a man to be found who would
not prefer the iron ſcepter of Perſia to that of England. Yet who can doubt,
that in the opinion of a good man, the latter would appear moſt deſirable;

and that were he to make his choice, he would chuſe that where the king being
limited in his power, finds himſelf under a happy incapacity of injuring his
ſubjects? If there are ſcarcely any of the ambitious, who would not rather chuſe

to command the Perſians, a nation of ſlaves, than the Engliſh, a free people, it
is becauſe an abſolute authority over men renders them more attentive to pleaſe
us; becauſe they are informed by a ſecret inſtinct, that fear always pays more

homage than love; becauſe tyrants, at leaſt while living, have been generally
more honoured than good kings ; becauſe gratitude has always raiſed leſs ſump-

tuous temples, to the beneficent gods, who bear the horn of plenty (a), than fear
has conſecrated to the cruel and coloſſal dignities, who, borne on ſtorms and
tempeſts, and in lightning, are painted with a thunderbolt in their hands; be-
cauſe, in ſhort, being inſtructed by this knowledge, they are ſenſible that more

is to be expected from the obedience of a: ſlave, than from the gratitude of a
man who taſtes the ſweets of liberty. |

The concluſion to be drawn from this chapter, is that the deſire of greatneſs


is always produced by the fear of pain, or the love of ſenſual pleaſure, to which


all the other: pleaſures muſt neceſſarily be reduced. Thoſe derived from power and-
reſpect do not properly deſerve the name, they having obtained it only becauſe


hope, and the means of. procuring pleaſures, are pleaſing ſenſations ; .but theſe


ſenſations only. derive their exiſtence from natural pleaſure (b).

I am very ſenſible that in the ſchemes, the enterprizes, the crimes, the virtues,
and the dazzling pomp of ambition, it is difficult to perceive the operations of na-
tural ſenſibility. How:in haughty ambition, who, with her arm ſmoaking with


laughter, ſits in the midſt of a field of battle, on a heap of carcaſes, and in token


of. victory claps her wings dropping with blood; how, I ſay, in this figure.


*


(a) In the city of Bartam the inhabitants vague deſire of happineſs. But I ſhall aſk,
offered their: firſt fruits to the evil ſpirit, what is the vague deſire of happineſs? It
and nothing to the great Deity, whe, they is a deſire that has no determinate object.
ſay, is pwr. and ſtands in no need of theſe I would know, if the man, who, without
offerings. Vincent le Blanc. loving any particular woman, loves the ſex
The inhabitants of Madagaſcar believe in general, is not animated by a deſire of
there is a good and an evil ſpirit. Before natural pleaſure ? Whenever we give our-
they eat they make an offering to God, ſelves the trouble of decompounding the
and another to the demon. They begin vague ſenſation of love or happinefs, we
with the latter, and throwing a piece on always. find the natural pleaſures at the


the right ſide, ſay, ** That is for thee, my bottom of the crucible. It is the ſame wit


lord devil.” They afterwards throw a the ambitious as with the avaricious, who
piece on the left ſide, ſaying, That is for would not be covetous of money, if it could
<< thee, my Lord God.“ They make no not be given in <A for pleafure, or
prayers to him. Collect. of edifying letters. be made the means of eſcaping pain. No-


(bb) To prove that ambition is not pro- body deſires money in a city like Sparta,


duced by the natural pleaſures, ſome may where money had no currency.
perhaps ſay, that this paſſion ariſes from a | of.


108 DE L'ESPRIT; on,

of ambition, ſhall we diſcover the daughter of pleaſure ? How ſhall we imagine,
that by the dangers, the labours, and the fatigues of war, men are only in the pur-
ſuit of pleaſure ? Yet it is ſhe alone, I maintain, who, under the name of libertiniſm,
recruits the armies of almoſt all nations. People love pleaſure, and conſequently
the means of procuring it: they deſire riches and honours, and inſpired alſo by in-
dolence, would make their fortune in a day, Now war, which promiſes the ſol-
diers the plunder of cities, and the officers honours, at the ſane time flatters their
indolence and impatience. Men therefore more freely endure the fatigues of
war (c), than the labours of agriculture, which affords them only a diſtant
proſpect of wealth. Thus the antient Germans, the Celtes, the Tartars, the
inhabitants on the coaſt of Africa, and the Arabs, were always more fond of
robbery and piracy, than of the cultivation of the earth.

It is with war as with high play, which is preferred to playing for ſmall ſums,
even at the riſque of ruin ; becauſe playing deep flatters us with the hope of
immediately obtaining great riches.

To take every thing that looks like a paradox from the principles I have juſt
eſtabliſhed, I ſhall, in the title of the next chapter, expoſe the only objection I
have not yet anſwered. |


CADENCE d · ꝑ c Med cf PDE
c H A P. XI.


Man in the purſuit of Greatneſs ſeeks only the hreans F avoiding Pain
and enjoying natural Pleaſure, why does Pleaſure ſo often eſcape from


the ambitious ?


E may divide ambitious men into two kinds. Unhappily for ſociety,
WW there are ſome men who are enemies to the felicity of others, and deſire
high poſts, not to enjoy the advantages they procure, but to delight in the mi-
ſeries of the unfortunate, to torment mankind, and ſport with their diſtreiles,
This ſpecies of ambitious men are of a character not unlike that of the falſe de-
votees, who are generally eſteemed wicked; not becauſe the law they profeſs
is not a law of love and charity, but becauſe the men who are commonly led
to embrace an aultere devotion (a) are diſſatisfied with this lower world, and

| | can


—__—
—
2 - —_— — ” —


(c) © Repoſe, ſays Tacitus, is to the
«© Germans, a ſtate of violence; they in-
<< ceſſantly ſigh after wars, in which they
«© ſoon diftinguifh themſelves ; they are
more fond of fighting than of labour.”

(a) Experience proves that, in general,
the perſons of a character moſt inclined to


deny themſelves certain pleaſures, and to
embrace the auſtere maxims and practices
of a particular kind of devotion, are com-


monly of a very unhappy diſpoſition. This
is the only way of explaining, tow ſo many
ſectaries have been able to unite the holy
and mild principles of. religion, to ſo much
wickedneſs and want of toleration : a want
of toleration proved by ſuch a number of
maſſacres. If youth, when no obſtacle is
oppoſed to the paſſions, is commonly more
humane and generous than old age, it is
becauſe the mind is not yet hardened by

misfortunes


ESSAYS on Tut MIND. 169
can hope for happineſs only in another, and being gloomy, timid, and diſſatisfied,
they endeavour by the view of the misfortunes of others, to divert their atten-
tion from their own, The ambitious of this caſt are but few in number; they
have no greatneſs and nobleneſs of ſoul; they are ranked among tyrants, and
by the nature of their ambition are deprived of all pleafures. | |

The other claſs of the ambitious comprehends almoſt the whole number, and
amongſt theſe I include all, who, in the poſſeſſion of great places, ſeek only for
the advantages annexed to. them. Of theſethere are ſome, who from their birth


or ſituation are at firſt raiſed to important poſts: whence they may ſometimes
unite pleaſure and ambition; they are born, as it were, in the middle (b) of


the courſe they have to run. This 1s not the caſe of the man in moderate cir-
cumſtances, who, like Cromwell, would riſe to the higheſt poſts. In entering
the path of. ambition, in which the firſt ſteps are commonly the moſt difficult,
he has a thouſand intrigues: to invent, and a thouſand friends to manage; he has
at one and the ſame time the care of forming grand projects, and the particulars
in relation to their execution. Now to diſcover how ſuch men, who are warmly
engaged in the purſuit of every pleaſure, and animated alone by this motive, are
ſo often deprived of it, let us ſuppoſe, that, greedy: of theſe pleaſures, and
{ſtruck with the eagerneſs with which people endeavour to anticipate the deſires
of the great, ſuch a-man endeavours to raiſe himſelf to the firſt poſts. If he
is born in thoſe countries where the people have the diſpoſal of favours, where
the public eſteem can only be obtained by' ſervices done to his country, and
where merit is conſequently neceſſary ; or if he be born under an abſolute deſpo-
tic government, as that of the . Mogul, where honours are purchaſed by in-
trigue; or where-ever elſe he received his birth, he can afford little time for
pleaſure. To prove it, I will take the pleaſure of love for an inſtance, not only
as the moſt lively of all the paſſions, but alſo. as the moſt univerſal ſpring of
civilized ſocieties. For it is proper to obſerve by the way, that there is in every
nation a natural want that may be conſidered as the univerſal ſoul of that nation.
Among the ſavages in the north, who are often expoſed to the molt dreadful.
famine, and are always employed either in hunting or fiſhing, all their ideas
flow from hunger and not love: this want is in them the ſeed of all their
thoughts. Thus all the combinations formed by their minds, turn on the ſtra-
tagems uſed in hunting and fiſhing, and on the means of ſupplying the calls
of hunger. On the contrary, the love of women is, among civilized nations,


**


— —


misfortunes and infirmities. The man of a * and are never employed in ſharpening


generous diſpoſition is gay and obliging, and
he alone ſays, Let all the world partake
« of my joys.“ But the man of a gloomy
temper is wicked. Cæſar ſaid, ſpeaking of
Caſſius, 54+ I dread theſe men with pale

% meagre countenances; it is not ſo with
the Antonies, who are wholly taken up
«© with pleaſure, their hands gather flowers,


* poniards.” This is a fine obſervation of
Cæſar, and is more generally true than is
imagined. |

(b) Ambition in them, is, if I may (6


expreſs myſelf, rather an appendage of their


rank, than a ſtrong paſſion, ſtimulated by
obſtacles and triumphing over all oppoſi-
tion,


Z „


170 DE L'ESPRIT, on, |

the main ſpring by which they are moved (c). In theſe countries love in-
vents and produces every thing: magnificence, and the arts of luxury, neceſ-
farily flow from the love of women, and a deſire to pleaſe them; and even our
inclination to impoſe on one another, by the ſplendor of wealth and greatneſs,
is only a new method of ſeducing them. Let us then ſuppoſe, that a man,
born without a fortune, but fond of the pleaſures of love, has obferved, that
the women comply the more eaſily with the defires of a lover, in proportion
as the elevation of his rank, will reflect the greater honour on her; and that
being thus filled with ambition by his paſſion for women, he afpires to the poſt
of general, or to that of prime miniſter ; in order to obtain thoſe places, he
muſt apply his whole care in acquiring abilities, or in forming intrigues. Now
the kind of life moſt proper to enable him to become a man of deep art, or a
perſon of merit, is entirely oppoſite to a life of gallantry; women being pleaſed
with aſſiduities that are incompatible with the life of an ambitious man. It is
then certain that in youth, and till he obtains thoſe great places, that will induce
the women to exchange their favours for the honour and credit of his embraces,
he muſt deprive himſelf of the enjoyment of his favourite gratification, . and
facrifice almoſt for ever, preſent pleaſures to the hope of enjoying future de-
lights. I fay almoſt for ever; becauſe the road of ambition is commonly very
long in running. Not to mention thoſe, whoſe ambition is encreaſed as ſoon as
ſatisfied, and whoſe deſires are no ſooner accompliſhed, than new ones ſucceed ;
who from being miniſters, would be kings; who from being kings would aſpire,
like Alexander, to univerſal monarchy, and would aſcend a throne where the re-
ſpect of the whole world would aſſure them, that the whole world was em-
ployed in contributing to their happineſs : without mentioning, I ſay, theſe ex-
traordinary men, and ſuppoſing even moderation in ambition, it is evident that
a man who becomes ambitious from the love of women,. will not, ia common,
obtain the higheſt poſts, till he arrives at the age when his deſires will be ex-
tinguiſhed.


pn EEE „


(e) Not that theſe are the only motives


that may kindle the fire of ambition. In


countries where the inhabitants are poor,


as I have obſerved above, the power of ſup-
plying their wants is the object to which
the ambitious aſpire. In deſpotic ſtates the


fear of the puniſhment to which a perſon.


may fuddenly be put, by the caprice of a
tyrant, may alſo form ambitious men. But
in civilized nations it is a vague deſire of
happineſs ; a deſire that is conſtantly de-
rived as I have already ſhewn, from the
pleaſures of ſenſe, that commonly.in-
{pires a love of greatneſs. Now from among
theſe pleaſures, I was doubtleſs in the right
to chuſe that of women, as the moſt lively
and powerful. As a proof that we are ani-


mated by pleaſures of this kind, it appears
that we are only capable of the acquiti-
tion of the great abilities, and deſperate
reſolutions, neceſſary to aſcend to high
poſts, in the time of youth, that is, at an
age when the natural wants are more
warmly felt. But old men: aſcend with
pleaſure to great employments: they do ſo,
accept of them, and they deſire them;
but this defire does not deſerve the name
of a paſſion, ſince they are no longer ca-
pable of thoſe hardy enterprizes, and ex-
traordinary efforts ny mind, that fpring from
the paſſions. The old man may proceed
by habit, along the courſe in which he ſet .
out in his youth; but he can never begin
a New ONCE. |
But


ESSAYS ox Tus MIND, | 171


Rut ſuppoſing that his deſires are till luke-warm, ſcarce has he obtained his
wiſhes, when he finds himſelf placed on a fteep and ſlippery rock; he ſees
himſelf on every ſide the butt of the envious, who ſtand about him with their
bows bent, ready to pierce him with their arrows. He then diſcovers, with
horror, the tremendous abyſs that opens for him; he perceives that by his fall,
as a ſad appendage of greatneſs, he will be miſerable without being pitied ; ex-
poſed to inſults from thoſe whom he had affronted by his pride; he will be the
object of the contempt of his rivals; a contempt more painful than any outrage
they could offer him; that being the deriſion of his inferiors, they will then
free themſelves from that tribute of reſpect, which, in the enjoyment, may
ſome time appear troubleſome z but its loſs is inſuppertable, when habit has
rendered it a want. He ſees then, that deprived of the only pleaſure he had ever
taſted, and reduced to a ſtate of debaſement, he will no longer enjoy the con-
templation of his grandeur, like the avaricious man in contemplating his wealth,
vith the poſſibility of obtaining all the enjoyments they are capable of afford-
ing him. | | | |
his ambitious man is then by the fear of pain, and the laſſitude of indo-
lence, kept in the courſe he entered from a love of pleaſure : the defire
of preſerving, ſucceeds the deſire of acquiring. Now the care neceſſary to
maintain his dignities being nearly the ſame as thoſe by which he acquired them,
it is evident that he muft ſpend his youth and riper age in the purſuit and pre-
ſervation of thoſe places, that were only deſired as the means of obtaining the
pleaſures that always fly from him. Thus being advanced to an age at which
he is incapable of a new kind of life, he gives himſelf up entirely to his old
employments, and muſt do ſo ; becauſe a mind continually agitated by fear and
lively hopes, and inceſſantly actuated by ſtrong paſſions, will always prefer the


 *orments of ambition, to the inſipid calm of tranquil life. Like the veſſeis


w..ich the waves ſtill carry towards the ſouth, when the north wind has ceafed
to blow, men follow in old age the ſame direction that was given them by their
_ paſſions in their youth. |

I have now ſhewn how the ambitious man, called to greatneſs by a paſſion fot
women, enters into a rugged path. If he, by chance, meets with ſome plea-
ſures, theſe are always mixed with bitterneſs z he taſtes them with delight only,
becauſe they are very rare, and ftrewed here and there, like the trees ſcattered fat
from each other in the deſerts of Lybia, whoſe ſcorched Jeaves can afford no
agreeable ſhelter, except to the burnt African who repoſes under them,

The contradiction we perceive between the conduct of an ambitious man, and
the motives from which he acts, is then only fo in appearance; ambition there-
fore, is kindled by a love of pleaſure, and a fear of pain. But it may be ſaid,
that though avarice and ambition are the effects of a natural ſenſibility, pride,
at leaſt, cannot be derived from the ſame ſource. CE


172 DEL'ESPRIT; ox,


26 0526-45 45-28 2645-30-15 955-96 93-2 95 95 43-45 45-96 (5-115
. 6
Of Pride.


PA is only a true or falſe opinion of our own excellence: an opinton
which, depending on the advantageous compariſon we make between our-
ſelves and others, mult conſequently ſuppoſe the exiſtence of men, and even the
eſtabliſhment of ſociety. |

The ſenſation of pride is not then innate, like thoſe of pleaſure and pain:
pride is therefore an artificial paſſion, that ſuppoſes the knowledge of beauty and
excellence, Now excellence and beauty are only what the greateſt number of
mankind have always conſidered as ſuch. The idea of eſteem then preceded
that of being worthy of eſteem : but theſe ideas were ſoon confounded toge-
ther. Thus the man, who, animated by the noble and pompous deſire of
pleaſing himſelf, and ſatisfied with his own eſteem, believes that he looks with
indifference on the general opinion, is, in this particular, the dupe of his own
7 and miſtakes the deſire of being eſteemed, for the deſire of being worthy

eſteem.

In reality, pride can never be any thing more than a ſecret and diſguiſed de-
ſire of the public eſteem, Why will the ſame man, who in the foreſts of Ame-
rica, derives his vanity from the ſtrength and agility of his body, be leſs proud
of theſe advantages in France, where their want is compenſated by more eſſen-
tial qualifications ? It is becauſe ſtrength and agility of body neither can nor
ought to be ſo much eſteemed by a Frenchman as by a ſavage. |

To prove that pride is only a diſguiſed love of eſteem, let us ſuppoſe a man
ſolely poſſeſſed by the deſire of raiſing in his mind an aſſurance of his own ex-
cellence and ſuperiority. Upon this ſuppoſition, that ſuperiority, which is the
moſt perſonal, and the moſt independant of chance, will doubtleſs appear the
moſt flattering : and therefore, if he is to chuſe either literary or military glory,
he would give the preference to the former, Would he contradict Cæſar him-
ſelf? Would he not confeſs with that hero, that the laurel of victory is by the
ſenſible part of the public, always divided between the general, the foldier, and
chance; and that on the contrary, the laurels of the Muſes belong without
participation to thoſe whom they inſpire ? Would he not confeſs that chance
might often place ignorance and cowardice on the triumphant car, and that it
has never crowned the brow of a ſtupid author ? |

In conſulting only his pride, that is, the deſire of entertaining an high opinion

of his own excellence, it is certain, that literary glory would appear the moſt

deſirable. The preference we give a great general above a profound philoſo-

pher, would not, in this reſpect, alter his opinion: he would perceive, that if

the public has a higher eſteem for the general than for the philoſopher, it is be-
cauſe the talents of the firſt have a more ſpeedy influence on the public —_
| | neſs,


ESSAYS on Th: MIND. 173
neſs, and that the maxims of a wiſe man muſt appear of immediate uſe only to
a ſmall number of thoſe who are deſirous of inſtruction. |

Yet if there be nobody in France, who would not prefer the glory of arms
to that of literature, I conculde from thence, that it is only to the deſire of
being eſteemed, that they owe the deſire of being worthy of eſteem, and that
pride is nothing more than the love of eſteem. |

In order to prove that this paſſion of pride or eſteem is produced by the
ſenſes, it is proper now to enquire if any one deſires eſteem for its own fake, and
if this fondneſs for eſteem is not the effect of the fear of pain and the love of

leaſure. | ;
a To what other cauſe, in fact, can be attributed the ſolicitude with which
people endeavour to obtain the eſteem of the public? Is it owing to an inward
diſtruſt of our merit, and conſequently to pride, that being defirous of eſteem-
ing ourſelves, and not being able to do it alone, we want the public ſuffrage to
prop tne high opinion we have of ourſelves, in order to enjoy the delicious
thoughts of our own excellence?

Bur if we owe the love of eſteem only to this motive, then the moſt exten-
ſive eſteem, that is, ſuch as ſhould be granted by the greateſt number of men,
would, without doubt, appear the moſt flattering and deſirable, as the moſt
proper to ſilence in our minds an importunate diſtruſt, and to make us reſt ſa-
tisfied with our own merit. Now, ſuppoſing that the planets were inhabited by
beings like ourſelves ; and that one of the inhabitants of thoſe worlds came every
moment to inform us of what paſſed there, and that a man had the choice
either of having the eſteem of his own country, or that of all thoſe celeſtial worlds:
upon this ſuppoſition, is it not evident, that he would deſire the moſt extenſive
eſteem, that is, that of all the planetary inhabitants, and that they ſhould give
him the preference to all his fellow citizens? There is however, nobody, who,
in this caſe, would not determine in favour of the national eſteem. We then
do not owe this love of eſteem to our. defire of being firmly aſſured of our
own merit, but to the advantages this eſteem procure for us. ; b

In order to be convinced of this, let any man put the following queſtion to

himſelf, whence comes the ſolicitude, with which thoſe who declare themſelves
the moit anxiouſly fond of the public eſteem, ſeek for high poſts in thoſe periods
of time, when croſſed by intrigues and cabals, they can be of no ſervice to their
country; and when conſequently they will be expoſed to the deriſion of the
public, who, always equitable in their judgments, deſpiſe the man who is ſo in-
Cifferent with reſpect to eſteem, as to accept of a poſt, the duties of which he
cannot worthily diſcharge ? Let him alſo ask himſelf, why a man is more de-
| lighted at having the eſteem of a prince, than that of a private perſon of no
conſequence ; and it will be found that in every caſe our fondneſs for eſteem, is
always in proportion to the advantages that may accrue from it ?
If we prefer the eſteem of the ignorant multicude to that of a few ſelect
perſons, it is becauſe we ſee a greater number of men ſubje& to that kind of
empire which eſteem rules over minds ; and becauſe, a greater number of
admirers more frequently lay before us an agreeable image of the pleaſures they
may procure for us.


For


„ DE L' ESPRIT. os; |
For this reaſon, we are quite indifferent with reſpect to the admiration of a


people with whom we have no connection; there are few Frenchmen who
would be much affected by the eſteem felt for them by the inhabitants of Great


Tibet.


If there are men who would poſſeſs univerſal eſteem, and be anxious


for poſſeſſing that of the Terra Auſtralis, this deſire is not the effect of a greater


love of eſteem; but only flows from the habit they have acquired of uniting
the idea of a greater happineſs, to the idea of a greater eſteem (a).


IT be laſt and the ſtrongeſt proof of the truth of what is here advanced, is,
the diſguſt people have for eſteem (b), and the ſcarcity there is of great men,


in the ages when no rewards are adjudged to merit.


It appears as if a man


capable of exerting great talents, or great virtues, enters into a tacit contract
with his country, by which he promiſes to render himſelf illuſtrious by his
abilities, and by actions that ſhall be of uſe to his fellow- citizens, pro-
vided they will have the gratitude to eaſe his pains, and aſſemble about him


every pleaſure.


To the negligence and punctuality of the public in fulfilling theſe tacit en-
gagements, is owing, in all ages and countries, the multitude or the ſcarcity of


great men.


We do not then love eſteem for its own ſake, but only for the advantages it


procures.


In vain would people arm themſelves againſt this concluſion, with
the example of Curtius: a fact that ſtands almoſt alone in hiſtory, can prove


nothing againſt principles ſo abundantly ſupported by experience, eſpecially when


that very fact may be attributed to other


other cauſcs.


principles, and naturally explained by


In order to form a Curtius, it is ſufficient that a man, weary of life, finds
himſelf under that unhappy diſorder of body, that renders ſo many of the
Engliſh ſuicides: or that in a very ſuperſtitious age, like that in which Curtius
lived, a man ſhould ariſe, who, having more ſuperſtition and credulity than the


the gods.


pleaſures,


reſt, ſhould fancy, that by ſacrificing himſelf he ſhould obtain a place among
Upon either of theſe ſuppoſitions, he might devote himſelf to death,
either to put an end to his miſeries, or to enter into the poſſeſſion of celeſtial


The concluſion of this chapter is, that people deſire to be worthy of eſteem,
only to enjoy eſteem z and that they deſire eſteem, only to enjoy the pleaſures


annexed to it: a fondneſs for eſteem is then a diſguiſed love of pleaſure.


Now,


if there be only two ſorts of pleaſures, the one the pleaſures of ſenſe, and the


other the means of acquiring them; for theſe means are ranked in the claſs of


pleaſures, becauſe the hope of obtaining them is the beginning of pleaſure ;
but of a pleaſure that has no real exiſtence till this hope is realized. Natural
ſenſuality is then the ſeed that produces pride, and all the other paſſions, among


(a) Men are habituated by the principles


of a good education, to confound the idea
of happineſs with that of eſteem. But
under the name of eſteem they really deſire
only the advantages it procures. -

(b) Little is done to merit eſteem in


"Bu


countries, where it produces no fruit : but
whenever it procures great advantages,


people run to it, like Leonidas, to defend


with three hundred men the paſs of Ther-
mopyle. |


which


ESSAYS on Tur MIND. 175


which I include friendſhip, which being, in appearance, more independent on
the pleaſures of ſenſe, deſerves to be examined, in order to confirm, by this laſt
example, all that has been here {aid on the origin of the paſſions,


FCC


CH A P. XIV.
Of Friendſhip.


LEES implies want, and there is no friendſhip. without it; for this


would be an effect without a cauſe. All men have not the ſame wants,


and therefore the friendſhip that ſubſiſts between them, is founded on different
motives: ſome want pleaſure or money, others credit; thoſe converſation, and


theſe a confident, to whom they may diſburthen their hearts. There are con-


ſequently friends of money (a), of intrigue, of the mind, and of misfortune.


* .


(a) Perſons have hitherto taken. intoler-


able pains to repeat after each other, that


thoſe ought not to be reckoned in the lift
of friends, whole interefted. views makes
them love us only for our money. This.
kind of friendſhip is certainly not the moſt
flattering : but it is nevertheleſs a real friend-
ſhip. Men, for inſtance, love in a comp-
troller general-the power he has of obliging


them; and in moſt of them the love of the


perſon is incorporated with the love of the
money. Why is the name of friendſhip


refuſed to this ſenſation ? Men do not love


us for ourſelves, but always on ſome other


account, and the above-mentioned is as
good as any other. A man is in love with
a woman: can it. be faid that. he does not
love her, becauſe he only admires the beau-


ties of her eyes, or complexion ? But, it is


ſaid, the rich man, when reduced to po-
verty, is no longer beloved. This is not


denied; but when the ſmall-pox robs a.


woman of her beauty, all addreſſes to her
commonly ceaſe; tho* this is.no proof that
ſhe was not beloved while ſhe was beauti-
ful. Suppoſe a friend in whom we had the


goa confidence, and for whoſe mind,


iſpoſition, and character, we had the high-
eſt eſteem, was ſuddenly become blind,


deaf, and dumb; we ſhould regret in him


the loſs of a friend; we ſhould ſtill reſpect
his memory; but in fact, we ſhould no
longer love him; becauſe he would have no


— —


reſemblance of the man we had loved. If


a comptroller general falls into diſgrace, we


no longer love him, for this reaſon, becauſe
he is the. friend who is ſuddenly become blind,
deaf, and dumb. It is nevertheleſs true, that


the man anxious for money, has great ten-


derneſs for him who can procure it for him.
Whoever has this want of money, is born


the friend of the poſt of comptroller ge-


neral, and of him who poſſeſſes it. His


love is inſcribed in the inventory of the


moveables and utenſils belonging to his -
office. It is then our vanity that makes us


refuſe giving the name to ſo ſelfiſn and. ne-


ceſſary a paſhon. Upon which, I ſhall -
obſerve, that the moſt ſolid: and durable
friendſhips are commonly thoſe of virtuous -


men, however villains themſelves are ſuſ-


ceptible of it. If, as we are forced to


confeſs, friendſhip is only the. ſenfation by
which two men are united, we cannot de-
ny, but that friendſhip ſubſiſts between the


wicked, without contradicting the moſt au-
thentic. facts. Can we, for inſtance, doubt


that two conſpirators may be united -; the
warmeſt friendſhip ? That Jaffier did not


love James Piero? That Octavius, who


was certainly not a virtuous man, did. not


love Mecznas, who was at beſt but a weak


man? The power of friendſhip is not in


r to the honeſty of two friends,


ut to the force of the intereſt by which
they are united.


Nothing;


— . — —
— — eee — 5


176 DBEc LESPHRIT; 68;
Nothing can be of more uſe than to conſider friendſhip under this point of view,
and to form clear ideas of it. ; |

In friendſhip, as in love, people form the moſt romantic ideas: they always

ſearch for the hero, and every inſtant think they have found him : they hang
upon the firſt that offers; they love him, while they know little of him, and
are deſirous of knowing him better; but no ſooner is their curioſity ſatisfied,
than they are diſguſted. They have not found the hero of romance. Thus we
become ſuſceptible of ſome regard, but are incapable of friendſhip. It is there-
fore for the intereſt of friendſhip itſelf, that we ſhould have clear ideas
of 1t. | „
I confeſs, that in conſidering it as a reciprocal want, it cannot but be acknow-
ledged, that it is very difficult for the ſame wants, and conſequently, for
the ſame friendſhip (b), to ſubſiſt between two men for a long courſe
of time, and therefore nothing is more uncommon than friendſhip of long
ſtanding (c). 5 | | |

Friendſhip is much more durable than love; and yet has however, its birth, its
encreaſe, and decay ; but thoſe who have not felt its power, never paſs from the
warmelt friendſhip to the ſevereſt hatred, nor are they ever expoſed to the pain
of deteſting him they have loved. Does a friend diſappoint our expectations?
We are not enraged againſt him; we give a ſigh to human nature, and with
tears exclaim, my friend has no longer need of me LT.

It is difficult enough to form clear ideas of friendſhip. With reſpect to this
paſſion, all about us contribute to deceive us. There are ſome, who, to ren-
der themſelves more worthy of eſteem in their own eyes, exaggerate to them-
{clves their affection for their friends; make romantic deſcriptions of friendſhip,
and perſuade themſelves that they are real ; till a proper occaſion, by undeceiving
both them and their friends, convinces them that they did not love them fo much
as they thought they did. | |

Theſe frequently pretend, that they are defirous of loving, and of being
warmly beloved. But we are never ſo violently affected with the virtues of a
man, as when we firſt fee him; for as cuſtom renders us inſenſible ro perſonal
beautics, a good underſtanding, and even the qualities of the ſoul, we are ne-
ver ſo ſtrongly agitated as by the pleaſure of ſurprize; a man of wit ſaid plea-
ſantly enough on this occaſion, that thoſe who would be beloved (d), with ſuch

| warnith,


—


ful eſteem felt for an acknowledged friend,
or that happy point of honour fo uſeful to
ſociety, that makes us keep an acquain-
tance with thoſe whom we call our friends.


(pb) The circumſtances in which two
friends ought to be found, being once given,
and their characters known; if they are
ever to quarrel, there is no doubt, but


that a man of penetration, by foreſeeing
the time when theſe two men would ceaſe
to be reciprocally of ufe to each other,
might calculate the moment when their
rupture would happen, as an aſtronomer
calculates the time of an eclipſe.

c) We ought not to confound with
friendſhip the chains of habit, the reſpect-


We perform the ſame ſervices for them,
that we did, when they filled us with the
warmeſt ſenſations; though in reality we
do not want their company, and do not love

them. |
(d) Friendſhip is not, as ſome people
pretend, a perpetual tender ſenſation, be-
cauſe mankind are never conſtant in any
thing.


ESSAYS ow tux MIND. 175


warmth, ought in friendſhip, as well as in love, to have many new paſſions,
but none of them laſting ; becauſe, added he, the beginnings in both, have al-
ways the moſt lively and tender moments.

But for one who impoſes on himſelf, there are ten hypocrites in friendſhip,
who pretend to have the ſenſations they do not feel, make many dupes, bur
are never dupes themſelves. They paint friendſhip in lively, but falſe colours:
being only attentive to their own intereſt, they endeavour to make others model
themſelves in their favour after the portait they draw of that paſſion (e).

Man being expoſed to ſo many errors, it is very difficult to obtain adequate
ideas of friendſhip. But what evil, ſay they, is there in exaggerating a little
the force of this {ſenſation ? The eyil of habituating men to expect from their
friends perfections not to be found in human nature? 5
An infinite number of ſenſible men, ſeduced by ſuch pictures, have long
purſued a vain chimera; but being at length enlightened by experience, are be-
come diſguſted with friendſhip, for whoſe connections they had been well
adapted, had they not formed ideas of it that were too romantic.

Friendſhip ſuppoſes a Want; and the more this want is felt, the more lively
will be the friendſhip : the want is then the meaſure of the ſenſation. A man
and woman eſcaping ſhipwreck, fave themſelves on a deſart iſland ; where,
having no hope of ever ſeeing their native country, they are forced to bend
their mutual aſſiſtance, to defend themſelves from the wild beaſts, to enjoy life,
and to eſcape deſpair : no friend ſhip can be more warm than that between this
man and woman, who world have perhaps hated each other, had they remained
at Paris. If one of them happens co perith, the other has really loſt the half
of himſelf ; no grief can equal his: he muſt have dwelt alone in a deſart iſland,
who can be feaſible of all its violence? |

As the force of friendſhip is always proportioned to our wants, there are
forms of government, manners, circumſtances, and, in ſhort, ages, more fa-
vourable to friendſhip than others.

In the ages of chivalry, when they choſe a companion in arms, and two knights
ſhared in the glory and danger, and when the cowardice of one might coſt the
life and honour of the other, they became, from intereft, more careful in the


choice of their friends, and conſequently more cloſely united to them.


—


— oe 3 ag..e _—_— * . #4 - —


thing. Between the moft cordial friends which friendſhip made the Scythians and
there happen moments of coolneſs: friend- Greeks perform? If they examine them-
ip is then a continual queceſſion of warmth felyes with ſincerity, they will confeſs, that
and coolneſs ; the latter are very rare. in this age we have not even the idea of
- It may, perhaps, require courage, this kind of friendſhip. Thus, Among the
nd @ capacity for friendſþip, to enable a Scythians and Greeks, friendſhip was placed
perſon to give a clear idea of jt: for we in the rank of the virtues. A Scythiap
are at leaſt cextain of raiſing againſt hs the could not have above two friends; but he
pocrites in friendſhip : Ss are ſome of was to ſtop at nothing in ferving them.
© who, like bragging cowards, are al- They were in part animated by the loye of
ways baaſting of their explgits. Let thoſe eſteem, under the name of friendſhip; for
who pretend to he ſuſceptible of friendſhip, friendſhip alone would never have been ſo
read the Toxaris of Lucian, and aſk them- courageous. | Ls
ſelves, if they are capable of the actions


A a When


173 FT ES PR1T on,

When the faſhion of duels ſupplicd the place of chivalry, the men who with
their friends daily expoſed themſelves to the danger of death, became more
dear to each other. Friendſhip then was held in great veneration, and reckoned
among the virtues : it ſuppoſed in the knights and duelliſts great loyalty and va-
lour ; virtucs that were honoured, and ought to be lo, as theſe virtues were al-
moſt always in action (f). |

t is proper ſometimes to recollect that the ſame virtues are, at different times,
more or lets valued, according to their unequal uſe in different ages.

Who doubts that in revolutions and times of diſtreſs, and in a form of go-
vernment that ſeems to favour factions, friendſhip is ſtronger, and more coura-
geous, than when every thing is in a ſtate of tranquility ? Hiſtory furniſhes us
with a thouſand examples of heroiſm of this kind. Friendſhip then ſuppoſes a
man poſſeſſed of courage, diſcretion, firmneſs, knowlege, and prudence : qua-
lities that being abſolutely neceſſary in troubleſome times, and rarely to be found
in the ſame man, ought to render him extremely dear to his friend,

Our manners do not require the ſame perfections (g) in our friends, becauſe
theſe perfections are of no uſe to us: we have no important ſecrets to truſt, nor
battles to fight, and conſcquently have no occaſion either for prudence, know-
lege, diſcretion, or courage, in a friend. og

In the actual form of our government, the individuals are not united by any
common intereſt, In order to make our fortunes, we have leſs need of friends,
than of an infinite number of protectors. Luxury, and what 1s called the ſpi-
rit of ſociety, have ſecured a great number of men from the want of friendſhip.
No motive, no intereſt, is now ſufficient to make us overlook the ſeeming or
real faults of our friends, There is therefore no friendſhip (h); we do not
affix to the word friend, even the ſame ideas as formerly; we may in this age
cry out with Ariſtotle (i), „O my friends! no longer is there a friend to be
found.” | | h

Now, if there are ages, manners, and forms of government, wherein there is


more or leſs need of a friend, and if the warmth of friendſhip, is proportioned


*— —


(f) BRAVE was then ſynonymous to


HONEST; and, from the remains of antient
cuſtom, we ſtill ſay a BRAVE MAN, when
we mean one who is loyal and honeſt.

(g) In the preſent age, friendſhip requires
ſcarcely any qualifications. An infinite
number of men give themſelves out for true
friends, in order to appear of ſome conſe-
quence. Others become hackney ſolicitors
in other people's affairs, in order to eſcape
the pain of having nothing to do: others
perform ſervices, but make the perſons they
have obliged pay dear for them, by the loſs
of their liberty ; and ſome few others, in
ſhort, believe themſelves worthy of friend-
ſhip, becauſe they are the ſure guardians of
a ſecret, and have the virtues of a ſtrong


(h) Thus, fays the proverb, we ſhould
ſay we have many friends, and think we
have but few,

(i) Every body repeats after Ariſtotle,
that there is no ſuch thing as a friend to
be found, and yet each maintains that he
is a good friend. Two ſuch contradictory
propoſitions can only ariſe from the great
number of hypocrites in. point of friend-
ſhip, and there being many men who do not
know themſelves, | |

Theſe laſt, as I have already ſaid, will
oppoſe ſome of the propoſitions in this
chapter. I ſhall have their clamours
againſt me; but, unhappily for them, 1
have experience on my fide,


[C0]


ESSAYS o Tux MIN D. 179


to the greatneſs of this want, there are alſo ſituations in which the heart becomes
more eafily opened to the admiſſion of friendſhip, and theſe are commonly
thoſe where we have more frequent need of the aſſiſtance of others.

The unfortunate are, in general, the molt tender friends : united by their
reciprocal diſtreſſes, they enjoy, while condoling the misfortune of a friend, the
pleaſure of being affected with their own. |
What I have ſaid on circumſtances, I alſo ſay of characters: there are ſome
who cannot live without a friend. The firſt are thoſe of a weak and timid diſpo-
ſition, who, in their whole conduct never conclude on any thing, without the
advice and aſſiſtance of others : the ſecond are, the perſons of a gloomy, ſevere,
and tyrannical temper, who are the warm friends of thoſe over whom they vent
their ſpleen : theſe are like one of the wives of Socrates, who, at the news of
the death of that great man, became more inconſolable than the ſecond, who,
being of a mild and amiable diſpoſition, loſt in Socrates only an huſband, while
the other loſt in him the martyr of her capricious temper, and the only man who
could bear with it. 0 2 |

There are, in ſhort, men free from all ambition, or ſtrong paſſions, and whoſe
ſole delight is in the converſation of men of ſenſe and learning. In the preſent
ſyſtem of manners, the men of this caſt, if they are virtuous, are the moſt
tender and faithful of their friends. Their ſouls, always open to friendſhip,
know all its charms: and having, upon my ſuppoſition, no paſſion that can
counterbalance this ſenſation, it becomes their only want : thus they are ſenſible
of a very rational, and courageous friendſhip, without however having ſo much
as that of the Greeks and Romans.

From a contrary reaſon, people are in general, the leſs ſuſceptible of friend-
ſhip, in proportion as they are more independent on other men. Thus the
rich and powerful are commonly but little ſenſible of friendſhip ; and generally
paſs for men without feeling. In fact, whether men are naturally cruel, when-
ever they can be ſo with impunity ; whether the rich and powerful conſider the
miſeries of others as a reproach for their own happineſs ; or, in ſhort, whether
they deſire to be delivered from the importunate requeſts of the unhappy, it
is certain, that they almoſt conſtantly treat the miſerable with inhumanity (k).
The ſight of the unfortunate has on moſt men the effect of Meduſa's head,
at his aſpect, hearts are turned to ſtone. . |

There are beſides ſome perſons quite indifferent with reſpe& to friendſhip


and others who enjoy a ſelf-ſufficiency (1). Accuſtomed to ſeek for, and to find
| RA happineſs


2


(k) The leaſt fault a man in diſtreſs
commits, is a ſufficient pretence for the
rich to refuſe him all aſſiſtance; they would
have the unhappy entirely perfect.

(1) There are few men of this claſs ; the
power of finding a ſufficiency in ourſelves,
which is made an attribute of the Deity,
and we are forced to revere in him, is al-
ways placed in the rank of the vices, when


A 3


it is found in man. Thus we blame under
one appellation, what we admire under an-
other. How many times have people, undcf
the name of inſenſibility, reproached M.
de Fontenelle, for the power of being ſelf-
ſufficient; that is, of being one of the
wiſeſt and happieſt of all mankind. _
As the princes of Madagaſcar make war


on their neighbours, whoſe flocks are more
numerous


180 DE L'ESPRIT; os, 5
happineſs in themſelves, and being become too knowing to be made dupes, they
cannot preſerve a happy ignorance of the wickedneſs of mankind ; a pretious
ignorance, which in early _ locks fo cloſely the bends of friendſhip: thus
they are but little ſenſible of the charms of this ſenſation ; not that they are now
incapable of feeling it. Theſe are often, as a very ſenſible lady ſaid, rather
diſabuſed, than inſenſible. | | | | |
It follows from what 1 have ſaid, that the power of friendſhip is always pro-
portioned to men's want of each other (m); and that this want is varied accord-
ing to the difference of ages, manners, forms of government, circumſtances,
and characters. But if friendſhip, it is objected, be a want, it is at leaſt no na-
tural want. What is a friend? Is it not a relation of choice? We deſire a
friend, to live, in a manner, in him, to pour out our ſoul into his, and to enjoy
a converſation, which confidence always renders delightful. This pafſion is
then founded neither on the fear of pain, nor the love of ſenſual pleaſure. But,
I reply, in what dot$ the charm of the converſation of a friend conſiſt? It is
in the charm of ſpeaking of ourſelves. Has fortune placed us in a comfortable


ſituation? We converſe with a friend, on the means of encreaſing our wealth,


4 - " * ” [2


_ FT * * — 1


numerous than theirs, they al repeat
theſe words, *© Thoſe are Yar ia who
are richer and more happy than we; fo we
may aſſure ourſelves, that after their exam-
ple, moſt men declare war againſt the
wiſe, They hate in him a moderation of
temper, which reducing his defires to his
poſleffions, makes him a reproach to their


conduct, and renders the wife too inde-
pendent on them. They regard this inde-


penderice as the feed of all the vices, be-
cauſe they perceive that the fource of hu-
manity would be dried up, as ſoon as a
period was put to their reciprocal wants.
Theſe wiſe men ought, however, to be
Very dear to ſociety. Fe extraordihary wiſ-
dom ſometimes renders them indifferent
with reſpect to the friendſhip of particular
ns; it alfo makes them, as we find
1 the example of the Abbe de Saint
Pierre, and Fontenelle, pour out on human
nature in general, all thoſe tender fenfa-
tions, which the moſt lively paſſions force
us to laviſh on a ſingle individual. Far
different from th6ſe men who are not good,
becauſe they have been impoſed upon, and
whofe'gdodneſs decreaſes in proportion as
they obtain mare knowlege ; the wiſe man
alone may be conſtantly good, becauſe he
alone knows mankind. ir wickedneſs
does not fill him with indignation : he,
le Democritus, fees in them none but fools,
ar chlldren, againſt whom it would be ri-


diculous to be offended, and who are more
worthy of pity than of anger. He cofiſi-
ders them with the eye of a mechame who
examines the working of a machine, and,
without inſulting humanity, complains that
nature has united the preſervation of one
being, to the deſtruction of another; that
to afford nouriſhment he orders the hawk,
to ſcize in his talons the dove; made ft
neceſſury for the inſect to be devoured; and
rendered every being an affaffin.

If che laws alone are diſphſfionate judges,


the wiſe man, in this reſpect, reſembles the


laws. His indifference is always juſt and
impartial; this ought always to be conſider-
ed as one of the greateſt virtues of a place-
man, —— too great want of friends al-
ways lays under the neceſſity of being guilty
of Janie ik of imjuſtice, g *

In fine, the wiſe man alone may be ge-
nerous, becauſe he is independent. Thoſe
not be liberal to each other. Friendſhip


can only make exchanges, and nothing but


independence can offer Z ifts.

(m) If we loved a ffiend only for him-
ſelf, we ſhould never conſider arty thing
but his happineſs; we ſhould not teproach
him for being fo long without feeing dr
writing to us: we ſhould ſay that he had
probably ſpent his time more agrerably;


and ſhowld rejoice in his happintfs.


our


ESSAYS on TERMIN D. 181


out honour, dur credit, and our reputation. Are we in low circumſtances? We


feek with the ſame friend the means of delivering ourſelves from indigence:
and his converſation faves us, at leaſt, the wearinels we ſhould feel, while under
misfortunes, from the pain of engaging in indifferent converſations. It is al-
ways of theſe pains, or of theſe pleaſures, that a perſon talks to his friend.
Now if there are no true pleaſures or pains, as 1 have already proved, but
phyſical pain and pleaſure; if the means of procuring them ariſe from the
pleaſure of hope, which ſuppoſes the exiſtence of the firſt, and are only a con-
ſequence of them; it follows, that friendſhip, as well as avarice, pride, am-
bition, and the other paſſions, is the immediate effect of phyſical ſen ·
ſibility. | lr *

As the laſt proof this truth, I am going to ſhew, that, with che affiſtance of
theſe pleaſures and pains, we may excite in our minds all kinds of paſſions ;
and that therefore the pleaſures and pains of ſenſe, are ꝙ e prolific feed of all

| t. ; '


c ne na ner dine na ne ndcintncionxt
CHAD 3:


That the fear of natural Pain, or the defire of natural Pleaſure, may ex-
8 5 cite all the Paſſions. | PERF


IF we open hiſtory, we ſhall find, that in all the countries where certain
virtues were encouraged by the hope of ſenſual pleaſures, theſe virtues were
more common, and caſt a greater luſtre. | |

Why were the Cretans, the Beotians, and in general, all the people mot
addicted to love, moſt diſtinguiſhed by their bravery ? It is becauſe the women
granted their favours only to the brave; becauſe the pleaſures of love, as Plu-
tarch and Plato obſerve, are moſt proper to exakt the minds of che people, and
the moſt worthy of rewarding heroes and virtuous men. |

It was probably from this motive that the Roman ſenate, the vile flatterers
of Cæſar, reſolved, as ſome hiſtorians relate, to grant him, by an exprefs law,
the right of enjoying all the Roman ladies. This is alſo the reaſon, which,
according to the Gretian manners, made Plato fay, that after a battle, the moſt
beautiful ought to be the reward of the moſt valiant; a project of which Epa-
minondas himſelf had ſome idea, ſince at the battle of Leuctra, he placed the
lover by the ſide of his miſtreſs; a method which he always confidered as moſt
proper to ſecure military ſucceſs. How greatly indeed are we influenced by
the pleaſures of ſenſe ! they rendered the facred battahon of the Thebans in-
vincible ; they inſpired ancient nations with the greateſt courage, when the con-
querors divided between them the niches and the women of the conquered ;
they, in ſhort, formed the character of thoſe virtuous Samnites, among whom
the greateſt beauty was the reward of the greateſt virtue.

To confirm this truth by a more circumſtantial example, let us examine by
what means the famous Lycurgus diffuſed into the hearts of his fellow citizens
the enthuſiaſm, and, if I may uſe the term, the fever of virtue; and, 9 |

e,


182 TAE L*ESPRAIT;z on;


Indeed, if the pleaſure of love is to man the moſt lively of his pleaſures,
what fruitful ſeeds of courage are included in it, and what ardour for brave
actions may be inſpired by the deſire of women (a)? vo 12
- - Whoever will examine himſelf in this particular, will be ſenſible, that if the
Spartans had been more numerous, that if more in fancy could have been heaped
on the coward, that if it had been poſſible to have paid ſtill more reſpect and
homage to valour, Sparta would have carried ſtill further the enthuſiaſm of
virtue. 1 | |

Let us ſuppoſe as a proof of this, that penetrating, if I may thus expreſs
myſelf, more deeply into the views of nature, ſhe had adorned beautiful wo-
men with ſo many charms, and affixed the higheſt degree of pleaſure to their
enjoyment, to render them the reward of the moſt exalted courage. Let us
ſuppoſe alſo, that after the example of thoſe virgins, conſecrated to Iris or to
Veſta, the moſt beautiful of the Spartan ladies had been conſecrated to merit;
that being preſented naked in the aſſemblies of the people, they had been car-
ried off by the warriors, as prizes obtained by their courage ; and that theſe
young heroes had experienced at the ſame inſtant, the double intoxication of love


5 —


(a) To what dreadful dangers did it ex- off, and bring to Saul, the foreſkins of two
poſe David himſelf, when to obtain Michal, hundred Philiſtines ?


he laid himſelf under an obligation to cut
| and


ESSAYS ow TERMIN D. 183


and glory : however fantaſtical and diſtant from our manners this may appear,
it is certain that'it would have rendered the Spartans ſtill more brave and vali-
ant, ſince the force of virtue is always proportioned to the pleaſure allotted for
its reward, | |
I ſhall obſerve on this ſubject, that, chimerical as this cuſtom is in appearance,
it is ſtill in uſe in the kingdom of Biſnagar, of which Narſinga is the capital.
To raiſe the courage of the warriors, the king of that country, according to
to the accounts of travellers, purchaſes, entertains, and dreſſes in the moſt
magnificent manner, beautiful women, ſolely appropriated to the pleaſures of the
warriors, who have diſtinguiſhed themſelves by ſome glorious exploits. By this
means he inſpires his ſubjects with the greateſt courage; and draws to his court
all the warriors of the neighbouring nations, who, flattered by the hope of
enjoying theſe beautiful women, abandon their country, and ſettle at Marſinga,


where they feed only on the fleſh of lions and tygers, and drink nothing but the


blood of thoſe animals (b). |


It follows from the abovementioned examples, that the pains and pleaſures
of the ſenſes are capable of inſpiring all the paſſions, ſenſations, and virtues.


Therefore, without having recourſe to diſtant ages and countries, I ſhall cite,
as the laſt proof of this truth, thoſe ages of chivalry, when the women taught:
their pupil knights, both the art and the catechiſm of love. 101


In theſe times, as Machiavel remarks, and fo early as when the French


made their deſcent into Italy, they appeared ſo brave and fo ſenſible to the poſte-


rity of the Romans, that they were animated by the greateſt courage; becauſe,


as that hiſtorian adds, the women granted their favours only to the moſt vali-
ant. In order to judge of the merit and tenderneſs of a lover, they required
proofs that he had taken priſoners in wars, ſcaled the walls of a city, or taken
a poſt from an enemy. They choſe rather to have a lover periſn than to fly.
A knight was then obliged to fight, in order to maintain the beauty of his lady,
and the exceſs of his tenderneſs. The exploits of the knights were the perpe-.
tual ſubjects of converſation and romances, that always recommended galan-
try. The poets direct the knight in the midſt of the dangers of the battle,
to have the picture of his lady preſent in his mind; and in tournaments, be-
fore the charge was ſounded, he was to lift up his eyes to his miſtreſs, as
the following ballad proves : 105 wy


Servants d'amour, regardez doucement,

Aux eſchaftands, anges de paradis;
Lors joufterez fort & joyeuſement,

Et vous ſerez honorez & cheris.


(b) The women among the Gelons were quoted by Euſebius in his Evangelical Pre-
obliged by the laws to do all the works paration. Te . OI
that required ſtrength, as building of houſes, The inhabitants of Florida have a very
and cultivating the earth: but to reward ſtrong and agreeable drink, which they
them for their pains, the ſame Jaw granted never preſent to any, except the warriors,
them the privilege of lying with every war- who have diſtinguiſhed themſelves by their
rior they liked, The women were much bravery. Collect. of edifying letters.
attached to this law. See Bardezanes,


Which


184 DE L'ESPRIT; on,
Which may be thus tranſlated :;


Ye gallant knights, before ye toſs the lance,
Or to the deeds of chivalry advance,
Behold that radient circle of the fair,
To thoſe bright forms direct your votive pray'r;
Implore the aid of their angelic eyes, |
Nor fear to die, when beauty is the prize.


Thus, every thing dictated love; and by what more powerful motive can the
mind be affected? Is not the ſtep, the look, the leaſt geſture of beauty ſufficient
to charm and intoxicate themſelves? Is it not in the power of women to give
ſouls and bodies at their pleaſure, to the fool and the feeble? And did not the
Pheœnicians, under the names of Venus, or Aſtarte, raiſe altars to beauty?
Thbeſe altars could only be pulled down by our religion: for what object can
there be, to him who is not enlightened by the eye of faith, more worthy of
our adoration, than that to which heaven has granted the precious truſt X the
molt lively of our pleaſures ? Pleaſures, whoſe enjoyment alone may enable us
to ſupport the painful burthen of life, and comfort us under the misfortunes that
attend Our exi |
The general concluſion of what I have ſaid on the origin of our paſſions, is,
that ſenſual pain and pleaſure give thought and action to man, and are the only
eounterpoiſe that moves the moral world. |
The paſſions are then in us the immediate effect of phyſical ſenſibility: now,
all men are ſuſceptible and ſenſible of paſſions; all conſequently carry within
them the prolific ſeeds of the mental faculties. But, it may be ſaid, that
though all men have ſenſibility, they have it not in the ſame degree; thus, for
inſtance, we ſee whole nations indifferent with reſpe& to a love of glory and
virtue: now if men are not ſuſceptible of ſuch ſtrong paſſions, if all are not ca-
of the ſame continuance of attention, that mult be conſidered as the cauſe
of the great inequality of their intellectual faculties : whence it follows, that nature
has not given to all men the ſame mental powers.
In anſwer to this objection, it is not neceſſary to enquire, whether all men are
endued with equal ſenſibility ; this queſtion, which would be more difficult to


. reſolve than is imagined, would be foreign to my ſubject. What I propoſe is


to enquire, whether all men are not at leaſt ſuſceptible of paſſions ſtrong enough
to furniſh them with that continued attention, neceſſary to give a ſuperiority of
mind. ts

For this purpoſe, I ſhall firſt refute the argument drawn from the inſenſibi-
lity of certain nations, to the paſſion and glory of virtue; an argument from
which ſome have endeavoured to prove, that all .men .are nat ſuſceptible of
paſſions. I ſay then, that the inſenſibility of theſe natians ought nat to be at-
tributed to nature, but 20 accidental cauſes, ſuch as the different farms of
governments. | 1 0 |


CHAP.


ESSAYS on Tue MIND. 185


369690 8 0 8 88 U 8.8 8 J 0 8 88 48 8 CAS


C W ML


To what cauſe we ought to attribute the indifference of certain Nations
| with regard to Virtue.


O determine whether the indifference of certain nations with reſpect to
virtue, depends on nature, or the particular form of governments, we
muſt firſt know man; penetrate even into the abyſs of the human heart; and
recollect, that, being born ſenſible of pleaſure and pain, he owes, to this phy-
ſical ſenſibility, his paſſions; and that to his paſſions he owes all his virtues
and vices. | |
Theſe principles being laid down, in order to reſolve the queſtion above pro-
poſed, we mult at length examine, whether the ſame paſſions, on being moulded
by different forms of government, do not produce in human beings, the op-
polite vices and virtues.
' Suppoſe a man be ſo in love with glory, as to ſacrifice to it all his other paſ-
ſions : if, by the form of government, glory is conſtantly the reward of vir-
tuous actions, it is evident, this man will be always under a neceſſity of being


virtuous ; and that to form a Leonidas, and an Horatius Cocles, there needs no


more than to place him in a country and circumſtances like theirs.

But, it is objected, that there are few men who raiſe the paſſion to this
height. To which, I reply, that none but the man who enters deeply into this
paſſion, can penetrate into the ſanctuary of virtue. This is not the caſe with
reſpect to the men incapable of lively paſſions, and are called honeſt men: if
the latter are kept in the path of virtue, at a diſtance from this ſanctuary, it
proceeds from their being conſtantly held there by the fetters of indolence, which
they have not the ſtrength to break. | |

The virtue of the former is alone rational and active; but it does not increaſe,
or at leaſt arrive at a certain height, except in warlike republics ; becauſe in no
other form of government the public eſteem can raiſe them above other men,
and procure them greater reſpect; this eſteem is therefore the moſt pleaſing,
the moſt deſirable, and the moſt proper to produce great effects.

The virtue of the latter being grafted on indolence, and produced, in a manner,
by the abſence of ſtrong paſſions, is only a paſſive virtue, which being attended
with little knowledge, may be dangerous in the firſt and moſt important poſts,
though otherwiſe it is a ſure guide. It is common to all who are called honeſt
men, who are more eſteemed for the evils they do not commit, than for the
good they perform. 5

With reſpe& to the men of ſtrong paſſions, whom I have juſt mentioned,
it is evident, that the ſame deſire of glory, which in the early ages of the Ro-
man republic, produced ſuch men as Curtius and Decius, muſt have formed
a Marius and an Octavius in thoſe periods of trouble and revolutions, when


B b glory,


186 TIDE L'ESPRITF; of,


glory, as in the latter times of the republic, was only connected with tyranny
and power. What J have ſaid of the paſſion for glory, I apply to the love of
eſteem, which is only a diminutive of the love of glory, and the object that at-
tracts the deſires of thoſe who cannot ariſe to fame. |

T his deſire of eſteem mult in like manner produce, in different ages, oppoſite
virtues and vices. When intereſt is a ſurer path to preferment than merit,
this deſire makes men of intrigue and flatterers ; when money is more honoured
than virtue, it produces avaricious men, who ſeck for riches, with as much
eagerneſs as the firit Romans fled from them, when they were aſhamed to have
them in their poſſeſſion : whence I conclude, that from the influence of different
manners and governments, the ſame deſire muſt neceſſarily produce a Cincin-
natus, a Papyrius, a Craſſus, and a Sejanus. 5

I ſhall obſerve, by the way, on this ſubject, the difference there is between
the ambitious of glory, and the ambitious of high- poſts, or of riches. The
firſt can never be otherwiſe than great criminals, becauſe great crimes, from the
ſuperiority of the talents neceſſary to the commiſſion of them, and the extraor-
dinary advantages united with the ſucceſs, can alone impoſe ſo far on the imagi-
nation of mankind, as to extort their admiration ; an admiration founded on the
inward and ſecret deſire of reſembling theſe illuſtrious criminals. Every man
in love with glory, is then incapable of all little crimes. If this paſſion made
a Cromwell, it never made a Cartouche. From whence I conclude, that Sylla
and Cæſar, in any other ſituations than thoſe uncommon and extraordinary ones,
in which they found themſelves, would, by the nature even of their paſſions,
have remained faithful to virtue ; while the cunning and avaricious, influenced
by the baſeneſs and obſcurity of their vices, have daihy opportunities of commit-


ing new ones. |


Having ſhewn how the ſame paſſion which impels us to the love and prac-
tice of virtue, may in different ages and governments produce the oppoſite
vices ; let us now endeavour to penetrate more deeply into the human heart;
and diſcover, why, in any government whatſoever, man, variable in his conduct,
is determined by his paſſions ſometimes to good, and at others to bad actions:
and why, his heart is an amphitheatre, always open to the conteſts between virtue
and vice.

In order to reſolve this moral problem, it is neceſſary to ſearch into the cauſe
of the ſucceſſive diſquietude and ſleep - of conſcience, into the ſource of thoſe
confuſed and various emotions of ſoul, and of thoſe inward ſtruggles which
the tragic poet preſents with ſuch ſucceſs on the ſtage, only becauſe the ſpecta-
tors have all had the ſame inward feelings; and we muſt ask ourſelves, what are
theſe two ſelfs, which Paſchal (a) and ſome Indian philoſophers have ac-
xnowleged in their own breaſts ?- 5 | |


9 — 4 _ _—_ —_— »— — —⅛


(a) In the ſchool of Vedantam, the felves from Maya, and in perſuading our-
Brachmans of that ſect teach, that there are ſelves, by a conſtant application, that the
two principles; the one poſitive, which is ME is the only eternal, infinite being: the
the ME ; the other negative, to which they key of the deliverance is in theſe words,
give the name of Maya, or or ME, that is the. ME is the ſupreme being.
error... Wiſdom conſiſts in delivering our-


3 | To


*


ESSAYS o rA MIN D. 187


To diſcover the univerſal cauſe of all theſe effects, it is ſufficient to obſerve,
that men are not moved by one ſingle ſpecies of ſenſations ; that none of them
are completely animated by thoſe ſolitary paſſions, that fill the whole capacity
of the ſoul; that, drawn by turns by different paſſions, ſome of which are con-
formable, and others contrary to the general intereſt, every man is ſubje& to
two different attractions; one of which leads him to virtue, and the other to
vice. I ſay every man, for the probity of none was ever more univerſally ac-
knowleged, than that of Cato and Brutus, becauſe no man can flatter himſelf
with being more virtuous than theſe two Romans: the former however, ſurprized
by a defire of avarice, committed ſome inſtances of extortions in his government ;
and the latter, moved by the entreaties of his daughter, obtained of the ſenate,
in favour of Bibulus, his ſon-in-law, a grant he had refuſed to Cicero, -his
friend, on account of its being contrary to the intereſt of the republic. This
1s the cauſe of the mixture of vice and virtue perceivable in all hearts; and the
reaſon why there is neither pure virtue nor unmixed vice upon earth.

Now, in order to know what it is that denominates a man virtuous or vicious,
it muſt be obſerved, that among the paſſions by which every man is animated,
there is neceſſarily one that principally preſides over his conduct, and has a greater
influence over his mind than all the others.

In proportion. then, as the latter commands more or leſs imperiouſly, and
is in its own nature, or from particular circumſtances, uſeful or prejudicial to
the ſtate, the man is more frequently determined either to good or to evil, and
receives the name of virtuous or vicious. | | |

I ſhall only add, that the ſtrength of his virtues or vices will be always pro-
portioned to the vivacity of his paſſions, and their ſtrength to the degree of
pleaſure he receives from indulging them. For this reaſon, in early youth,
which is moſt ſenſible of pleaſure, and of the ſtrength of the paſſions, we are
generally capable of greater actions. | |

The moſt exalted virtue, as well as the moſt ſhameful vice, is the effect of
the greater or leſs intenſeneſs of the pleaſure it affords us.
| Thus we can form no exact idea of the degree of our virtue, till we have
diſcovered, by a ſcrupulous examination, the number and degrees of thoſe pains
which a paſſion, as for inſtance, the love of juſtice or of glory, may enable us
to ſupport. The perſon to whom eſteem is every thing, and life nothing,
will, like Socrates, ſubmit rather to ſuffer death, than meanly to beg for life.
He who is become the ſoul of a republican ſtate, in which pride and glory
render him paſſionately deſirous of the public welfare, will, like Cato, prefer
death, to the mortification of ſeeing himſelf and his country ſubmit to the yoke
of arbitrary power. But ſuch actions are the effect of the greateſt love of
glory. This is the higheſt pitch to which the ſtrongeſt paſſions can attain, and
here nature has fixed the bounds of human virtue. | :

In vain would we deceive ourſelves; we neceſſarily become the enemies of
men, when we can no otherwiſe be happy, but by their misfortunes (b). It ts
the pleaſing conformity we find between our own intereſt and that of the public,


— ——


—_ — 2


(b) Secundum id guod amplius nos delectat operemur neceſſe e/t, ſays St. Auguſtin.
| | B b 2 a conformity


t OE L'ESPRIT; on, |
a conformity generally produced by the deſire of eſteem, that gives us thoſe


tender ſentiments that are rewarded by their affection.


He who to be virtuous


mult always conquer his inclinations, muſt neceſſarily be a wicked man. The


meritorious virtues are never certain and infallible virtues (c).


It is impoſſible,


in practice for a man to deliver himſelf up, in a manner, daily to a war with the


paſſions, without loſing many battles.


Being always forced to yield to the moſt powerful intereſt ſome of that
love for eſteem, we never ſacrifice any great pleaſure to it, but thoſe it pro-
cures, If, on certain occaſions, ſacred perſonages have ſometimes expoſed them-
ſelves to the contempt of the public, it is becauſe they would not facrifice their
ſalvation to their glory; and if ſome women reſiſt the ſolicitations of a prince,
it is becauſe they believe, that his conqueſt would not recompence them for the
Joſs of their eſteem : thus, there are few inſenſible to the love of a king, who
is young and charming ; and none who reſiſt ſuch beneficent, amiable, and
powerful beings, as we paint the ſylphs and genii, who, by a thouſand allure-
ments can at once intoxicate all the ſenſes of a mortal.

This truth, founded on ſelf. love, is not only known, but even acknowleged


by the legiſlators.


Convinced that ſelf-love is, in general, the ſtrongeſt paſſion of mankind, the
legiſlators have never pronounced it criminal, for a man to kill another in his
own defence, nor blamed a citizen for not devoting himſelf to death, like Decius,


for the preſervation of his country.


The virtuous man is not then he who ſacrifices his pleaſures, habits, and
ſtrongeſt paſſions to the public welfare, ſince it is impoſſible that ſuch a man
ſhould exiſt (d); but he whoſe ſtrongeſt paſſion is ſo conformable to the general
intereſt, that he is almoſt conſtantly neceſſitated to be virtuous. For this reaſon, he
approaches nearer to perfection, and has a greater claim to the name of being a
virtuous man, who requires ſtronger motives of pleaſure, and a more powerful
intereſt, in order to determine him to do a bad action, than are neceſſary to his
performing a good one, and conſequently ſuppoſes that he has a greater paſſion


for virtue than for vice,


Cæſar was, without doubt, not the moſt virtuous among the Romans; yet if
he would not renounce the title of a good citizen, without taking that of the
maſter of the world, we have not, perhaps, a right to baniſh him from the claſs
of honeſt men. In fact, among the virtuous, who really deſerve that title,
how few are there, who, if placed in the ſame circumſtances as Cæſar was, would
refuſe the ſcepter of the world, eſpecially if, like Cæſar, they thought they
had thoſe ſuperior talents that ſecure the ſucceſs of great enterprizes ? Leſs
abilities would perhaps render them better citizens; and a moderate degree of


A—


(c) In the harem it is not to the me-
ritorious virtues, but to impotency, that
the Grand Seignior intruſts his women.

(d) If ſome men have ſeemed to ſacrifice
their intereſt to the public welfare, it is be-
cauſe, in a good form of government, the
idea of virtue is ſo united to that of happi-


neſs, and the idea of vice to that of con-
tempt, that they are hurried away by a
lively ſenſation, the origin of which is not
always to be diſcovered; and from this
motive perform actions, that are often con-


trary to their intereſt.


virtue,


ESSAYS own tus MIN D, 189


virtue, ſupported by a greater anxiety for the ſucceſs, would be ſufficient to
deter them from engaging in ſo bold a project. Indeed ſometimes a want of
talents preſerves us from vice; and frequently to the ſame defect we owe all
our virtues. | |

We are on the contrary leſs virtuous, as leſs powerful motives lead us to the
commiſſion of a crime. Such, for inſtance, is that of ſome of the emperors
of Morocco, who, ſolely from the motive of making a parade of their de-
terity, would, with one blow of a ſabre, in mounting a horſe, cut off the head
of the groom who held the ſtirrup. | 5

This is what diſtinguiſhes the virtuous from the vicious man, in a manner
the moſt clear, preciſe, and conformable to experience; on this plan the public
might make an exact thermometer, which would ſhew the various degrees
of virtue and vice in each citizen, if, by penetrating to the bottom of the hrart,
we could diſcover there the value that each ſets on his virtue. But the impoſſi-
bility of arriving at this knowlege, forces us to judge of men only by their
actions; a judgment extremely faulty in every particular, but on the whole
RY conformable to the general intereſt, and almoſt as uſeful as if it
was juſt, |

After having enquired into the influence of the paſſions, and explained the
cauſe of that mixture of virtue and vice obſervable in all men; having ſtated
the limits of virtue, and at length fixed the idea that belongs to the
word virtuous ; we are now at liberty to judge, if we ought to attribute
"on 3 of certain nations for virtue, to nature, or to a particular
egiſlation. . | |

elf pleaſure be the only object of man's purſuit, we need only imitate nature,
in order to inſpire a love of virtue. Pleaſure informs us of what ſhe would
have done, and pain what ſne forbids, and man will readily obey her mandates.
Why may not a legiſlature, armed with the ſame power, produce the ſame ef-
fects? Were men without paſſions, there would be no means of producing a
reformation ; but the love of pleaſure, againſt which men, poſſeſſed of a pro-
bity more venerable than enlightened, have conſtantly exclaimed, is a bridle by
which the paſſions of the individuals might always be directed to the public
good. The hatred moſt men have for virtue, is not then the effect of the cor-
ruption (e) of their nature, but of the imperfection of the legiſlation. It is the
legiſlation, if I may venture to ſay ſo, that excites us to vice, by mingling
it with pleaſure ; the great art of the legiſlator is that of ſeparating them, and
making, no proportion between the advantage the villain can receive from his
crime, and the pain to which he expoſes himſelf. If among the rich men,
who are often leſs virtuous than the indigent, we ſee few robbers and aſſaſſins, it


—— — * * 8


* —— —


(e) If robbers are as faithful to the agree-
ments made between themſelves, as honeſt
men, it is becauſe the common danger, by
which they are united, neceſſitates them to
it. From the ſame motive people diſcharge
their debts contracted at play, and with ſuch
aſſurance become bankrupts to their creditors.


Now if intereſt makes villains do what virtue
makes honeſt men perform, who can doubt
that by dexterouſly managing the principle
of intereſt, a judicious legiſlator might lay
all men under a neceflity of being vir-
tuous.


18


190 : EL "ESPRIT3; oh

is becauſe the profit obtained by robbery is never to a rich man proportionable to
the hazard of a capital puniſhment : but this is not the caſe with reſpect to the
indigent ; for the diſproportion falling infinitely ſhort of being ſo great with reſpect
to him, virtue and vice, are in a manner placed in an equilibrium. Not that I
would here pretend to inſinuate, that men ought to be driven as with a rod of
iron. In an excellent legiſlation, and among a virtuous people, contempt,
which deprives man of all conſolation, and leaves him deſolate in the midſt of
his native country, is a motive ſufficient to form virtuous minds. Every other
kind of puniſhment renders men timid, inactive, and ſtupid. The kind of
virtue produced by the fear of puniſhment reſembles its origin ; this virtue is
puſilanimous, and without knowlege ; or rather fear, which only ſmothers vice,
but produces no virtues. True virtue is founded on the love of eſteem and glory,
and the fear of contempt, which is more terrible than death itſelf. I cannot
cite here a more appoſite example, than the anſwer which the Engliſh Spectator
puts into the mouth of a ſoldier fond of duelling, who thus addreſſes Phara-
mond, who reproached him for having diſobeyed his orders. How could I obey
ſuch orders, faid the ſoldier? Thou puniſheſt indeed with Death thoſe who vio-
late them ; but with Infamy thoſe who obey them. Know then, that I fear death
leſs than infamy. f

1 might conclude from what I have ſaid, that the love or indifference of cer-
tain nations for virtue, does not ariſe from nature, but from the different con-
ſtitutions of ſtates: but however juſt this concluſion might be, it would not be
ſufficiently proved, if I did not endeavour to throw more light on this ſubject,
by ſearching more particularly in ſuch governments as are either free or deſpotic,
for the cauſes of this love or indifference for virtue. I ſhall firſt enquire into
the nature of a deſpotic government; and, in order to obtain a more accurate
knowlege of this ſubject, I ſhall examine what motive it is, that can excite in
man, ſuch an unbridled luſt of arbitrary power, as is felt in the eaſt. i

I chuſe the eaſt for an example, becauſe an indifference with reſpect to virtue

is no where conſtantly felt, but in governments of that kind. In vain do ſome
zealous neighbouring nations accuſe us with already bending under the yoke of
eaſtern deſpotic power: I ſay that our religion does not permit princes to uſurp
ſuch a power; that our conſtitution is monarchical and not deſpotic ; that the
individuals may conſequently be ſtripped of their property by law, but not by
arbitrary authority ; and that our princes claim the title of monarch, and not
that of uncontroulable ſovereigns ; that they acknowlege themſelves bound by
the fundamental laws of the kingdom, and declare themſelves the fathers, and
not the tyrants of their ſubjects. Beſides, a deſpotic power could not be eſta-
bliſhed in France, without the whole country being ſoon ſubdued. This king-
dom is not like Turkey, and Perſia ; thoſe empires are defended by vaſt deſarts,
and their immenſe extent ſupplying the depopulation occaſioned by deſpotic
power, always furniſhes freſh armies for the ſultan. In a country like ours,
ſurrounded by wiſe and powerful nations, the minds of the people could not be
ſunk with impunity ; and France depopulated by tyranny, would ſoon fall a
prey to theſe nations. The prince in loading the hands of his ſubjects with irons,
would only bow them to the yoke of ſlavery, to render himſelf ſubje& to the
yoke of the neighbouring princes, It is then impoſlible for him to form ſuch a


project,
CHAP.


ESSAYS on ru MIND. =


LXELALXLXEXEXEXEXESEEXIALIL IE IE IEEE


c H A p. XVII.


Of the uni verſal deſire of being deſpotic ; the means employed to arrive at
; this power, and the danger to which it expoſes kings.


ff hy deſire derives its ſource from the love of pleaſure, and conſequently
from the nature bf man himſelf, Every one would be as happy as pol-
ſible 3- every one would be inveſted with the power of forcing men to contribute
to their happineſs to the utmoſt of their power; and for this reaſon every one
deſires to command. |
All people are either governed according to laws and eſtabliſhed conventions
or by an arbitrary will. In the firſt caſe, the power over them is leſs arbitrary,
and they are not under fo great a neceſſity of pleaſing the prince; beſides, he
that would govern a people according to their laws muſt know them, reflect
upon them, and endure the fatigue of ſtudying them: from which, indolence
always ſeeks to be delivered. In order to gratify this indolence, he aſpires to an
abſolute power, which, exempting him from all care, ſtudy, and the fatigue of
attention, makes his fellow creatures the abject ſlaves of his will. =
According to Ariſtotle, a deſpotic government is that in which all men are
faves, and only one free, |
This is the motive that induces every man to deſire to be deſpotic. In order
to be fo, he muſt demoliſh the power both of the great, and of the common
people, and conſequently divide the intereſt of the citizens. In a long ſuc-
ceſſion of ages, opportunities will offer, and almoſt all ſovereigns being ani-
mated by a view of their intereſt, more lively than rational, embrace them with
avidity. |
| On this anarchy of intereſts is eſtabliſhed the deſpotic power of the eaſt, re-
ſembling the picture given by Milton of the empire of Chaos, which, _ Be.
extends its royal pavilion over a barren and waſteful abyſs, where Confuſion, -
involved in herſelf, maintains the anarchy and diſcord of the elements, and
governs each atom with a ſcepter of iron. |
A diviſion being once ſown between the citizens, it is neceſſary to debaſe and
degrade their minds, by brandiſhing the ſword of tyranny, and making it dazzle
in their eyes; to place the virtues in the rank of crimes, and to puniſh them
as ſuch. To what cruelties of this kind have not only the deſpotic power of
the eaſt, but even that of the Roman emperors been carried? Under the reign
of Domitian, ſays Tacitus, the virtues were decrees of death. Rome ſwarmed
with informers ; the ſlave was a ſpy on his maſter, the freedman on his patron,
the friend on his friend. In thoſe calamitous ages, the virtuous man did not
adviſe the commiſſion of crimes, but he was obliged to wink at them. Had he
ſhewn more courage and firmneſs on ſuch occaſtons, it would have been treated
| as a crime againſt the ſtate. Among the degenerate. Romans, weakneſs 10
| | |; | the


192 DE L'ESPRIT; on,

the heroiſm. In that reign were puniſhed Senecio and Ruſticus, the panegy-
riſts of the virtues of Thraſea and Helvidius ; thoſe illuſtrious orators were
treated as criminals of ſtate, and their works burnt by public authority. Ce-
lebrated writers, ſuch as Pliny, were reduced to compoſe grammatical books,
becauſe every work on a more elevated ſubject, might have given umbrage to
the tyrant, and have been dangerous to the author. The learned, who had been
invited to Rome by an Auguſtus, a Veſpaſian, an Antoninus, and a Trajan,
were baniſhed by a Nero, a Caligula, a Domitian, and a Caracalla : the phi-
loſophers were driven away, and the ſciences proſcribed. Theſe tyrants,
ſays Tacitus, endeavoured to obliterate whatever had the marks of genius and
virtue,

By thus keeping the mind in the perpetual tremours of fear, tyranny debaſes it
to her purpoſes. It is ſhe who in the eaſt has invented thoſe cruel tortures and pu-
niſhments practiſed there (a); puniſhments ſometimes neceſlary in thoſe deteſtable
countries, becauſe the people are invited to commit crimes, not only by their mi-
ſery, but alſo by the example of the ſultan, who teaches them to deſpiſe juſtice.

Theſe are both the motives on which the love of deſpotic authority is found-
ed, and the means employed to arrive at it. Thus fooliſhly in love with arbi-
trary power, kings inconſiderately throw themſelves into a road interrupted by
a thouſand precipices, down which a thouſand tyrants have fallen, Let us here
venture, for the good of human nature, and that of ſovereigns, to lend them
ſome light, and to ſhew them the dangers to which, under ſuch a government,
they and their people are expoſed. Let them from hence forward keep far
from them every perfidious counſel, that inſpires them with the deſire of arbi-
trary power ; and let them at length know, that the ſtrongeſt and moſt maſterly
2 againſt tyranny, would be a treatiſe on the happineſs and preſervation


But, it is ſaid, who can conceal this truth from them? Why do not they
compare the ſmall number of princes banithed from England, with the prodigious
number of Greek and Turkiſh emperors murdered on the throne of Conſtan-
tinople ? If the ſultans, I reply, are not deterred by theſe terrible examples, it is
from their not having this picture habitually preſent to their minds: it is from
their being continually prompted to deſpotiſm, by the wretches who would
ſhare with them the arbitrary power; and becauſe moſt of the eaſtern princes,
being governed by the will of a vizier, yield, through weakneſs, to his de-
fires, and are not ſufficiently informed of their injuſtice, by the noble reſiſtance
of their ſubjects.

The entrance into deſpotiſm is eaſy. The people ſeldom foreſee the evils
a confirmed tyranny prepares for them ; and if they at laſt perceive it, it is not
till they ſink under the yoke, are changed on all ſides, and being unable to
defend themſelves, only wait trembling for the puniſhment to which they muſt
be condemned.

: 85 —

(a) The puniſhments in uſe almoſt all not the caſe in republics, where the laws
over the ealt, fill the human mind with are always mild, becauſe thoſe who eſtabliſh
horror; becauſe the tyrant who orders ſubmit to them. |
them, is himſelf above the laws. This is

Emboldened


ESSAYS own Tut MIND. 193


Emboldened by the weakneſs of the people, the princes become deſpotic ty-
rants. They do not know, that they themſelves ſuſpend over their heads the
ſword that is to give them the mortal blow; that to abrogate all law, and re-
duce every thing to arbitrary power, they muſt perpetually have recourſe to
force, and often employ the ſoldier's ſword. Now, the habitual cuſtom of
making uſe of ſuch methods, either provokes the citizens to revolt, and in-
vites them to revenge, or inſenſibly accuſtoms them to know no other juſtice
than force. |

Tho? a long time be required to ſpread ſuch an idea among the people, it
forces its way at laſt, and reaches even to the ſoldiers, who, at length perceiving
that no collective body in the ſtate is capable of reſiſting them, and that the
prince, odious to his ſubjects, owes all his power to them, their ſouls are open
ro the moſt audacious projects, and they long to better their condition. If
then a bold and courageous man flatters them with the hope of plundering
ſome great cities; ſuch a man, as all hiſtory proves, is ſufficient to cauſe a re-
volution ; a revolution that is always ſpeedily followed by a ſecond ; ſince in
deſpotic ſtates, as the illuſtrious preſident de Monteſquieu obſerves, the tyrants
are often aſſaſſinated, without deſtroying the tyranny. When once the ſoldiers
know their ſtrength, it is impoſſible to keep them within juſt bounds. - I could
cite on this occaſion, all the Roman emperors proſcribed by the Pretorian bands,
for reſolving to free the country from the tyranny of the ſoldiers, and to
re-eſtabliſh the ancient diſcipline of the army.

The deſpotic tyrant then, in order to command ſlaves, is forced in his turn
to obey his ever turbulent and imperious troops. But the caſe is very different,
when the prince has created in the ſtate a powerful body of magiſtrates, by
whom the people being judged, obtain ideas of juſtice and equity ; the ſoldiers
being always taken out of the body of the citizens, preſerve@ in their new
ftate ſome idea of juſtice ; beſides, they are ſenſible that the entire body of the
citizens, called together by the prince and the magiſtrates, under the ſtandard of
the laws, would oppoſe any bold attempt, and let the valour of the army be
ever ſo great, it mult at length be overpowered by numbers. Hence, the ſol-
diers are kept within the bounds of duty, by ſentiments of juſtice and fear.

A powerful body of magiſtrates is then neceſſary to the ſafety of kings:

x is a buckler, behind which both the prince and people are ſheltered,
the one from the madneſs of ſedition, and the other from the cruelties of

anny. |
The Khalif Aaron Al-Raſchid reflecting on this ſubject, in order to preſerve
himſelf from the dangers, which, on all ſides ſurround deſpotic princes, one day
asked his brother, the celebrated Beloulh, what advice he could give him on
the manner of reigning well? © Make thy will, ſaid he, conformable to the
< laws, and not the laws to thy will. Reflect, that men without merit are al-
< ways craving, and that great men are ſo modeſt that they ſeldom ask; refuſe
then the requeſts of the one, and prevent thoſe of the other. Load not thy
people with taxes too burthenſome ; and recollect on this ſubject, the advice
< which king Nouchirvon the Juſt, gave to his fon Ormous: My fon, ſaid
he, No body will be happy in thine empire, if thou thinkeſt only of pleaſure.
« When thou art reclined on thy pillow, and ready to taſte the ſweets of ſleep,
remember thoſe whom oppreſſion —__ awake; when a ſplendid repaſt *

2 | x c 46


194 DE L'ESPRIT; on,


7


0 ſerved up before thee, think on thoſe who languiſn in miſery; when thou
e rambleſt through the delightful groves of thine harem, remember that there
© are thoſe who are unfortunate, and whom tyranny keeps in irons.” I ſhall
only add one word more, ſaid Beloulh ; receive into thy favour men emi-
nent in the ſciences, and conduct thyſelf by their advice, in order that mo-
* narchy may be obedient to the written law, and not the law to mo-
narchy (b). |
Themiſtius (c) being commiſſioned by the ſenate to harangue Jovianus, on
his advancement to the throne, made nearly the fame diſcourſe to that emperor :
© Remember, ſaid he, that though the army has raiſed thee to the empire, thou
4 mult learn from the philoſophers the art of governing; the firit bas given thee
e the purple of the Cæſars; but the latter will teach thee how. to. wear it
« worthily.” | |
Even among the ancient Perſians, the moſt abject and daſtardly of all people,
the philoſophers, who inaugurated the princes, were allowed to repeat theſe
words to them, at their coronation (d): Know, O king, that thine authority
« ſhall ceaſe to be lawful, on the very day that thou ceaſeſt to render the
« Perſians happy.” A truth, of which Trajan appears to be fully ſenſi-
ble, when, being raiſed to the throne, and preſenting the ſword, as uſual, to
the præfectus pretorio, he ſaid, ** Receive from me this ſword, and make
« uſe of it under my reign, either to defend in me a juſt prince, or to pyniſh
« in me a tyrant.“ | 4 fl |
Whoever, under pretence of ſupporting the authority of his ſovereign, would
ſtretch it to-an arbitrary power, is at the ſame time a bad father, a bad citizen,
and a bad: ſubject: a bad father and a bad citizen, becauſe he would load his
poſterity and his country with the chains of flavery-; and a bad ſubject, becauſe
by changing a lawful for an arbitrary authority, he is ſummoning up ambition and
deſpair againſt the king, I call to witneſs, the thrones of the eaſt, ſo often
ſtained with the blood of their ſovereigns (e). If the ſultans well underſtood
their own. intereſt, it would never permit them either to wiſn for ſuch a power,
or in this reſpect to yield to the deſires of their viſiers. Kings ought to be deaf
to ſuch advice, and to recollect that their higheſt intereſt requires, if I may fo
expreſs myſelf, that they ſhould ſet a proper value on their kingdom, in order
that it may be enjoyed; by them and their poſterity, This true intereſt can only
be underſtood by intelligent priuces :. in others, the contemptible glory they pro-
poſe to themſelves, by commanding abſolutely, and the love of indolence, which
conceals. from them the dangers with which they are ſurrounded, will always
prevent their engaging. in more noble purſuits 3, hence all governments perpe-
tually tend towards deſpotic power. | ao! i! £0


*


3 HELI —̃ —
—


(b) See Chardin, vol. v. often led ſeveral thouſands of them to fa-
(c) Critical Hiſt. of Philoſophy, by M. crifice themſelves on the tomb of their mo-
Deſlandes. narchs; yet how many revolutions has the
d) Ibid, _ | ambition of arbitrary power excited in
(e) Notwithſtanding the attachment of that empire? See the Hiſtory of the Huns,
the Chineſe to their ſovereigns, which has by M. de Guignet, in the article of China,


- CHAP.


w_ ”.


ESSAYS on TE MI ND. 195


CANE RODEN An CEE DE DEN
| c M mb
The principal Effects of Deſpotic Power.


Shall firſt diſtinguiſh deſpotic power into two kinds; one ſuddenly eſtabliſhed
by force of arms in a virtuous nation, that bears it patiently. This nation
is like an oak bent down by main force, whoſe elaſticity ſoon breaks the
_— which hold it down. Greece furniſhes a multitude of inſtances of this
kin E | 1 ; 2
The other is founded by time, luxury, and effeminacy. The nation among
whom it is eſtablifnhed, is like an oak, which being bent down by little and little,
inſenſibly loſes the elaſticity, neceſſary to make it riſe and recover its firſt ſtate;
Of this laſt kind of deſpotic power, I ſhall treat in this chapter. |
In nations ſubject to this kind of government, the men in high poſts can have
no clear idea of juſtice ; they are in this reſpe& plunged into the moſt pro-
found ignorance. Indeed, what idea can a viſier form of juſtice ? He does not
even know, that there is ſach a thing as the public welfare: yet deftitute of this
knowlege he muſt wander here and there without a guide. The ideas of juſt
and unjuſt, received in early youth, inſenſibly become obſcured, and at length
entirely diſappear. |
But who, it is objected, can conceal this knowlege from the viſiers? How
can they acquire it, I reply, in theſe deſpotic countries, where the citizens
have no fhare'in the management of public affairs; where the perſon, who fixes
his attention on the misfortunes of his country, meets with the eye of reſent-


ment; where the miſtaken intereſt of the ſultan is oppoſed to the intereſts of


his ſubjects; and where, to ſerve the prince, is to betray the nation? In order to
be juſt and virtuous, it is neceſſafy that they ſhould know what are the duties
of a prince and his ſubjects, and ſtudy the reciprocal engagements that bind
together all the members of ſociety. Juſtice is no more than a conſummate
knowlege of theſe engagements. To riſe to this knowlege, they muſt think;
but what man among a people ſubject to arbitrary power, dares to think ?
Indolence, inutility, inackion, and even the danger of thinking, ſoon draw after
them an incapacity of thought; for they think but little in countries, where
they keep their thouglits concealed. It would be an idle ſurmiſe, to ſay, that
they are ſilent from prudence; but this does not prevent their thinking. It is
certain, that they are void of thought, and that great and noble ideas are never
formed in the heads of thoſe ſubject to arbitrary power. |

In thoſe countries people are never animated by that opinion of their own
importance, and that giddinefs which foretels the deſtruction of empires. Every
one keeping his eyes fixed on his private intereſt, never places them on that
of the public. The people then can have no idea either of the public welfare,
or the duty of citizens; and the viſiers being taken from the body of the nation,
muſt, on entering their office, be void of every principle that can teach them -4

C 2 WI


196 DE L'ESPRIT, on,

wiſe adminiſtration, or a proper diſtribution of juſtice ; the people then muſt
ſeek for great places, not with a view of doing good, but to make their court
to the ſovereign, in order to obtain a ſhare of his power,

But even ſuppoſing them animated with the deſire of doing good; their ig-
norance prevents their being able to accompliſh it : and the attention of the vi-
ſiers being neceſſarily engroſſed by the intrigues of the ſeraglio, they have not
leiſure for reflection. | 5 ä

Beſides, to obtain knowlege, they muſt expoſe themſelves to the fatigue of
ſtudy and meditation; and what motive can engage them to take this trouble?
They are not ſtimulated to it even by the fear of cenſure (a). | x

If we may be allowed to compare ſmall things with great, let us take a ſur-
vey of the republic of letters. If the critics were baniſhed from thence, is it
nat obvious, that authors, being freed from the ſalutary fear of cenſure, which
now compels them to take pains in improving their talents, they would then
preſent the public with only rude and imperfect pieces. This is exactly the caſe of
viſiers; this is the reaſon of their inattention to the adminiſtration of affairs, and
the of their never condeſcending to conſult men of learning (b).

What I have ſaid of the viſiers, may be applied to the ſultans. Princes do
not eſcape the general. ignorance of their own nation: their eyes are, even in
this reſpect, covered with a thicker darkneſs. than thoſe of their ſubjects. Almoſt
all, who are intruſted with their education, or who ſurround them, being ea-
gerly deſirous of governing under their name, have an intereſt in rendering
them ſtupid (c). Thus, the prince deſtined to reign, being fhut ap in the ſe-
raglio, till. the death of his father, paſſes from the harem to the throne, without
any clear idea of the knowlege of government, and before he has even been
once preſent at a divan. | 2 1 | |

Wherefore then, after the example of Philip of Macedon, whoſe ſuperior.
courage and underſtanding did not inſpire with a blind ſelf-confidence, and
who paid his pages for repeating to him every day, Remember, Philip,
<< that thou art a man;*” why ſhould not viſiers ſometimes allow critics to


put them in mind of being men (d)? Wherefore, I ſay, cannot they without


od


a crime,


W


(a) For this reaſon the Engliſh efteem
the liberty of the preſs one of the moſt va-
Juable of their privileges. |

(b) The preſident de Monteſquieu's au-
thority has been quoted in the parliament of
England, becauſe the Engliſh are a free
people: and'in relation to laws and the ad-


miniſtration of affairs, Peter the Great con-


ſulted the famous Leibnitz; becauſe one
great man is not aſhamed to conſult an-
other ; and becauſe Ruſſia, by is commerce
with the other European nations, may ob-
tain more knowledge, than other eaſtern
nations.

(c) Ina form of government very diffe-
rent from thoſe of the eaft, even among


ourſelves, Louis XIIL. in one of his letters
complains of the marſhal d'Ancre, 4 He
% oppoſes, ſays he, my walking in the
cc ſtreets of Paris, and allows me no plea-
& ſures, but thoſe of hunting, and taking
« a few turns in the Thuilleries: he has
ce forbid the officers of my houffiold, as
well as all my ſubjects, to converſe with
«© me on ſerious — and to ſpeak to
« me in private.” It ſeems as if, in every
country, pains are taken to render the
princes but little worthy of the throne,
where they are called to it by their birth.
(d) There is not a perſon like the duke
of Burgundy to be found in the eaſt. That


prince read all the libels made againſt _
| an


| ESSAYS on Tyre MIND. 197
x crime, doubt of the juſtice of their deciſions, and repeat after Grotius, . That
* every decree or every law, which people are forbid to examine, and to cen-
{© ſure, can never fail of being unjuſt ?” |
It is becauſe theſe viſiers are but men. Are there many among the authors,
who would have the generoſity to ſpare the critics, had they the power to puniſh:
them? It is at leaſt only the men of a ſuperior genius, and an elevated cha-
rater, who, ſacrificing their reſentment to the public advantage, would preſerve
in the republic of letters the critics, ſo neceſſary to the progreſs of the arts and
| ſciences. How then can ſuch generoſity be required from a viſier? |
«© There are, ſays Balzac, but few miniſters ſo generous as to prefer being
e praiſed for their clemency, which laſts as long as the families of thoſe they
e have preſerved, to the pleaſure of revenge, tho” the latter paſſes away as ſwiftly
&« as the fall of the ax that ſeparates the head from the body.” Few viſiers de-
ſerve the praiſes given in Sethos to queen Nephta, when the prieſt pronouncihg
her panegyric, ſays, ſhe pardoned like the Gods, with the full power of
« puniſhing.” | GE
Thoſe in power will be always unjuſt and vindictive. M. de Vendome, ſaid
_ pleaſantly enough on this ſubject, that in the march of armies he had often
enquired into the quarrels between the mules and the muleteers ; but, to the
diſgrace of human nature, reaſon was almoſt always on the fide of the
mules. |
M. de Vernay, who was ſo well skilled in natural hiſtory, that by the bare
inſpection of the tooth of an animal, he knew whether it was carnivorous or
fed on graſs, often ſaid. Let me only ſee the tooth of an unknown animal,
„ and by that I ſhall judge of its manners.“ After his example, a moral phi-
loſopher may ſay, ſhew me the degree of power where with a man is inveſted, -
and by that I ſhall form a judgment of his juſtice. In vain ſhould we attempt
to difarm the cruelty of the viſiers, by repeating after Tacitus, that the puniſh-
ment of critics, 1s only the trumpet that informs poſterity of the diſgrace and
vices of their executioners. In deſpotic ſtates, people care, and indeed cannot
avoid caring but little for glory and poſterity, ſince they do not love, as I have
already obſerved, eſteem for its own fake, but for the advantages it procures
ſince nothing is granted to merit, and there is nothing which they dare refufe'
to power. ö |
I he viſiers having then no intereſt in improving their minds, and conſe-
quently in ſupporting cenſure, they muſt generally remain ignorant (e). an
| lord


*


and Louis XIV. He was deſirous of be- cannot ſeize, at a ſingle glance, the long


ing informed, and was ſenſible that hatred


and humour can alone, ſometimes, dare


to preſent the truth to kings.

(e) As all the citizens are very ignorant
of what conſtitutes the public welfare, moſt
of the projectors in thoſe countries are ei-


ther cheats, who have no particular uſe in


view, or people of mean abilities, who


chain by which the ſeveral parts of a ſtate
are connected together, and conſequently
they always propoſe ſchemes, that are in-


conſiſtent with the. general ſyſtem of go-


vernment: for this reaſon, they ſeldom
dare to expoſe them in their works to pub-
lic view. N

| 'The


— — — ——— —— AED — ꝝ:: oe nent i


198 DE L'ESPRIT, on, EE.

lord Bolingbroke ſays on this ſubject, When young, I at firſt conſidered thoſe
« who governed the nations as ſuperior intelligences;“ but, he adds, experi-
ce ence ſoon undeceived me. I examined thoſe who were at the helm of af-
« fairs in England, and ſoon found that the Great were like thoſe gods of
« Phcenicia, on whoſe ſhoulders were fixed the head of a bull, as a mark of
cc ſupreme power; and that, in general, men were governed by the greateſt
4 blockheads among them.” This truth, which Bolingbroke applied, perhaps
from humour, to England, is, doubtleſs, not to be diſputed, in almoſt all the
empires of the eaſt.


—


LXERXEREXEREEXEXEXESXELXEEEXEXEEEXEXEL
XIX.


The abject and ſubmiſive ſubjefion in which the people are kept, oc- _
caſians the ignorance of the viſiers: and is the ſecond effect of
: | deſpotic power. ,


H O' the viſiers, it is objected, may not find it for their intereſt to im-
prove their minds, yet it is moſt certainly for the intereft of the public,
that they ſhould not be ignorant ; ſince every nation deſires to be well governed :
what then is the reaſon, that no citizen in thoſe countries has the virtue to re-
proach the viſiers for their ignorance and injuſtice, and to force them by the
fear of contempt, to become good citizens ? It is becauſe the property of
deſpotic power is to debaſe and degrade the mind. 1
1. the ſtates where the law alone diſpenſes puniſhments and rewards, and
where obedience is paid to none but the laws, the virtuous, dwelling in ſafety,
contract a boldneſs and firmneſs of ſoul, that cannot ſubſiſt in a country which
is the ſeat of deſpotic power, where property, life, and liberty depend on the
caprice (a) and arbitrary will of one man. In theſe countries it would be wy
55 prudent


C HAP.


— 8 FS" "IR yy " ” - WY, i FX:


— * * * —


S OO SO Ie” 209" "IRS ah


The man of ſenſe and learning perceives,
that in theſe governments every change is


a new misfortune, becauſe no plan can be


followed, and every thing is corrupted by a
deſpotic adminiſtration. The only uſeful
regulation to be made in theſe governments,
is inſenſibly changing their form. From
the want of this view, the famous Peter
the Great, has perhaps done nothing to-
wards. promoting the happineſs of his peo-
ple. He ought, however, to have: foreſeen
that one great man is ſeldom ſucceeded by
another ; and that having made no change


in the conſtitution of the empire, the Ruſ-
ſians, from the form of their government,


from which he had begun to deliver them.
(a) We can find no inſtance in Furky,
like that which happened in Scotland, of
the laws puniſhing the ſovereign for an act
of injuſtice committed againſt a ſubject.
At Malcolm's acceſſion to the throne of
Scotland, à nobleman preſented to him the
patent of his privileges, entreating his ma-
jeſty to confirm them: but the king took
the patent, and tore it in pieces. The
| nobleman


ESSAYS ow ru MIND. x99


prudent to be virtuous, as it would have been to be vicious in Crete and Lacede-
mon. There no man riſes up againſt injuſtice, and rather than applaud it, cries
with the philoſopher Philoxenes, Let me be carried back to the quarries.”

In theſe governments, how difficult would it be to be virtuous ? To what
dangers would a perſon of probity be expoſed ? Suppofe a man in love with
virtue; would we have ſuch a man perceive, that the injuſtice or incapacity of
the viſiers or fatraps, was the cauſe of the miſeries of the public, and yet be
filent ; this would be a contradiction. Beſides, a mute probity would here be
of no uſe. The more virtuous this man was, the more eager would he be to
point out him, on whom the national contempt ought to fall: and I even main-
tain, that he ought to do it. Now, the injuſtice and weakneſs of a viſier, in-
veſted, as I have ſaid above, with the power neceffary to condernn merit to the
greateſt torments, this man would be fo much the ſooner delivered to the
mutes, in proportion to his being more the friend of virtue than of his
country. |

As Nero, when on the ſtage, extorted the applauſes of the ſpectaters, more
barbarous than himſelf ; fo the viſiers require the praiſes of even thoſe they ufe
il, and overload with taxes. They are like Tiberius, under whoſe reign the
fighs. and cries of the unhappy wretehes under oppreſſion, were conftrued to
proceed from a factious ſpirit, becauſe every thing is criminal, fays Suetonius,
under a prince, who is conſtantly ſtung with his own- guilt. | |

There is not a viſier, who would not reduce mankind: to the condition of choſe
ancient Perſians, who being cruelly whipped, by the order of their prince, were
obliged to appear before him: We come, ſaid they, to thank thee for having
«© condeſcended to remember us. e

The noble boldneſs of a citizen, ſo virtuous as to reproach the vifiers for their
ignorance and injuſtice, would be ſoon followed by his puniſhment (b); to
which no body would expoſe themſelves. No body, you will fay, but the
brave man, the hero. He might do-it, I reply, when ſupported by the hope
of eſteem and glory; but if he is deprived of this hope, his courage abandons
him. Among a laviſh people, the name of factious is given to a generous ci-
tizen ; and there will be found thefe who his puni There is
no crime on which praiſe is not Javiſhed, in a ſtate where an abject meanneſs is
become the mode. If the plague, ſays Gordon, had garters, penſions, and
C xibbons to beſtow, there are churchmen vile enough, and civilians baſe enough
to maintain, that the plague reigns by divine right; and that to withdraw


—


nobleman complained of this to the parlia-
ment, who decreed, that the king ſhould
ſit on his throne, and in the preſence of the
whole court ſtitch the nobleman's patent
together with a needle and thread.

(b) When a viſier commits a fault dur-
ing his adminiſtration, if the public ſuffer
by it, the people complain, and the viſier's
pride is offended: but ſo far is he from
changing his meaſures, and trying by a


better conduct to calm their too juſt com-


plaints, that he ſolely employs himſelf in
methods of impoſing ſilence on the citizens.
Theſe methods of force exaſperate them,


and they redouble their cries : the viſier has


then only two parts to take, either to expoſe
the ſtate to revolutions, or to-

tic power to that exceſs which always threa-
tens the ruin of empires. This laſt choice
is moſt commonly preferred by the viſiers.


« ourſelves


200 DEL*ESPRIT; on, | |

« ourſelves from its malignant influences, is a fin againſt God.“ It is then more
prudent in theſe countries, to be the accomplice, than the accuſer of knaves ; for
virtue and talents are always the butt of tyranny.

On the conquſt of India, by Thamas Kouli Khan, the only man worthy of
eſteem, which that prince found in the Mogul's empire, was one named
Mahmouth, and this Mahmouth was baniſhed. | | |

In countries ſubject to a deſpotic government, the love of the eſteem and ac-
clamations of the people is ſo criminal, that the prince always puniſhes thoſe
who obtain them. Agricola, after having triumphed over the Britons, in order
to eſcape the applauſes of the people, as well as the fury of Domitian, paſſed the
ſtreets of Rome in the night, in his way to the emperor's palace: the prince
embraced him coldly : Agricola retired z and the conqueror of Briton, ſays Ta-
citus, was inſtantly loſt in the crowd of other ſlaves.

In thoſe unhappy times, one might have cried out at Rome, with Brutus,
6 O virtue, thou art but an empty name!” How can we expect to find it
amongſt a Ry who live in perpetual agonies, and whoſe minds, being broke
with fear, have loſt all their force and vigour ? Among ſuch people, we only
meet with powerful inſolence, and abject, daſtardly flaves. What picture can
be more humbling to human nature, than the audience of a viſier, when with a
grave and ſtupid air of importance, he advances into the midſt of a crowd of
clients, who, grave, mute, and immovable, with their eyes fixed and caſt down,
wait trembling for the favour of a look (c), nearly in the attitude of thoſe bra-
mins, who, with their eyes fixed on the end of their noſes, wait for the blue
and divine flame, with which heaven is to beſtow its illuminations, and whoſe
appearance, according to them, is to raiſe them to the dignity of a pagod.

When we ſee merit thus humbled before an ignorant viſier, or even a deſpi-
cable eunuch, we cannot help calling to mind, the ridiculous veneration in which
cranes are held at Japan, where the name of that bird is never uttered, without
its being preceeded by O- thuriſama, or, my lord. |


2 Ni xi N .


R Y ö ß ß oo / AS CAS ASCASLAS AS AN ANA AS Y ¶ (
NSC ESC II TS SIRI SO OO SL I I ICON II TOC DC DD a


a Go


Ga A ©.


The contempt of Virtue, and the falſe efteem people alfect to have for it,
| the third effeft of deſpotic Power.


8 INC E, as I have already proved in the preceding chapters, the igno-
O rance of the viſiers is a neceſſary conſequence of deſpotic forms of govern-
ment; the ridicule, which in thoſe countries is caſt on virtue, ſeems equally to
proceed from the ſame effect.


(c) The viſier himſelf never enters the divan, when the ſultan is there, without
trembling. | E 7 :
| 8


ESSAYS ow Tus MIN O. 209
6 F it to be doubted, that in the ſumptuous repaſts of the ancient Perſians,


and in their elegant evening entertainments, they ridiculed the frugality and.
coarſe food of the Spartans? And that the courtiers, accuſtomed to cringe
in the anti- chamber of the eunuchs, in order to obtain the diſgraceful honour of
being their ſport, did not give the name of ferocity to the noble pride which
forbad the Greeks proſtrating themſclves before the great king. Tote on
A ſlaviſh people cannot avoid treating with ridicule. bravery, magnanimity,
diſintereſtedneſs, a contempt. of life, and all the virtues founded, on patriotiſm
and liberty. In Perſia, they muſt then have treated as a fool, and the enemy
of a prince, every virtuous ſubject, who, ſtruck with the heroiſm of the Greeks,
exhorted his fellow citizens to aſſemble, and, by a ſpeedy reformation of the
government, prevent the approaching ruin of an empire, where virtue was de-
ſpiſed (a). The Perſians, to eſcape the mortification of thinking themſelves mean,
were under the neceſſity of conſidering the Greeks as ridiculous. We can never
be ſtruck by any ſentiments that do not effect us in a lively manner. A brave


—


citizen, who is had in veneration, wherever the rank of a citizen ſubſiſts, muſt


* *


ever pals for a fool in all deſpotic governments. i
Among us Europeans, who approach nearer to the heroiſm. of the Greeks,
than to the ſervility of the eaſtern empires, how many great actions would be
deemed fooliſh, were they not conſecrated by the admiration of all ages! T9
this admiration is to be aſcribed our not mentioning as ridiculous, the order
ſent by the people of Sparta to king Agis, before the battle of Mantinea:
« Take no advantage of ſuperiority of numbers: ſend back a part of the
% troops, and fight the enemy with equal force.“ In like manner we ſhould
treat as ridiculous the anſwer made by Callicratidas, general of the Lacede-
monian fleet, before the battle of Argineuſes. Hermon adyiſing him not to
engage the Athenian fleet with unequal force, O Hermon, he replied, the
« Gods forbid, that I ſhould follow an advice, that would be attended with
e ſuch fatal conſequences to my country. Sparta ſhall not be diſhonoured.by
<« her general. Here both I and my army muſt either conquer or periſh, Is it
& for Callicratidas to teach the art of making a retreat, to men, who, to this
ce day, have never enquired what were the numbers of the enemy, but only
e where they were encamped?“ So bold and noble an anſwer would to moſt
men appear fooliſh. What men have ſuch an elevation of ſoul, ſuch, a pro-
found knowlege of politics, as to perceive, like Callicratidas, the importance of
cheriſhing in the Spartans, that obſtinate bravery that rendered them invincible ?
This hero knew, that to be inceſſantly employed in cheriſhing their ſentiments
of courage and glory, tco much prudence might blunt their edge; and that a
nation can have none of the virtues, without having the ſcruples that attend
them. 4 , E 3 | ia | 3 7218
Half politicians, for want of comprehending a ſufficient extent of time, are
always ſtruck in too lively a manner with a preſent danger. Accuſtomed to con-


-*


1 : $24.175. 2435} 3


(a) At the very moment when three games, when a Perſian Jord cried out,
hundred Spartans defendedthe paſs of Ther- * What men are we going to fight! in-
mopyle, ſome Arcadian deſerters were giv- “ ſenſible of intereſt, they are only greegy
ing Xerxes an account of the Olympic © of glory!“


D d ſider


202 DE L'ESPRIT, on,


ſider every action independently of the chain by which they are all united,
when they think of correcting the ſucceſs of any virtue that prevails among a
people, they too often only take from them the palladium, to which 1s fixed
their ſucceſs and glory. 1

It is then to this ancient admiration, that we owe our ſtill continuing to ad-
mire theſe actions: this admiration is then only hypocritical, or the effect of
prejudice. A felt admiration would neceſſarily lead us to imitation. |
Now, what man is there, among thoſe who pretend to be paſſionately fond
of glory, who would bluſh at a victory, that was not entirely owing to his
bravery and military skill? Are there many Antiochus Soters ? That prince,
ſenſible that he owed the defeat of the Galates, only to the terror and confu-
ſion into which they are thrown, by the unexpected ſight of the elephants, ſhed
rears on his triumphal palms, and on the field of battle cauſed trophies to be
raiſed to his elephants. | | 2 |

They boaſt of the generoſity of Gelon. After the defeat of the innumer-
able army of the Carthaginians, when the conquered expected the hardeſt con-
ditions, that prince only required of the humbled Carthaginians, the abolition
of the barbarous ſacrifices of their own children, they offered to Saturn, That
conqueror would reap no other advantage from his victory, than the concluſion
of the only treaty that perhaps was ever made in favour of human nature.
Among ſo many admirers, why has Gelon no imitator ? A thouſand heroes have
by turns ſubdued Aſia : however, there is not one, who, ſenſible of the miſeries
ſuffered by the human race, has improved his victory, by freeing the Orientals
from that weight of wretchedneſs and degradation, into which they have been
ſunk by deſpotic power. None of n deſtroyed thoſe houſes of grief
and lamentation, where jealouſy without remorſe mutilates the unhappy perſons
deſtined to guard their pleaſure, and condemned to the puniſnment of having
defires always reviving, and always impotent. People have then no eſteem for
Gelon's action, but what is hypocritical, or the effect of prejudice.
' We honour valour, but it is leſs than it was honoured at Sparta: therefore, we
do not experience, at the view of a fortified town, the ſenſations of contempt felt
by the Spartans. Some of them paſſing under the walls of Corinth, asked, by what
«« women is this city inhabited? * Theſe are, they were told, the Corinthians.“
Do not theſe mean ſpirited and cowardly men know, they reſumed, that the
only ramparts impenetrable to the enemy, are citizens determined to die?
Such courage and elevation of ſoul are only to be found in warlike republics.
With whatever love we are animated for our country, we do not ſee the mo-
ther after the loſs of a fon killed in battle, reproach her other ſons who have
ſurvived the defeat. We do not take example from thoſe virtuous Spartans :
after the battle of Leuctra, aſhamed of having borne in their wombs,
men capable of flying, thoſe whoſe children had eſcaped the ſlaughter, re-
tired to the innermoſt parts of their houſes, in mourning and filence ; while,
on the contrary, the mothers, whoſe ſons died fighting, filled with joy, and
with their heads crowned with flowers, went to the temple to return thanks
to the Gods. [$35 =p

However brave our ſoldiers may be, we do not ſee a body of twelve
hundred men ſuſtain, like the Swiſs at the battle of St. James *

185 4,7


| | 203
tal (b), the efforts of an army of ſixty thouſand men, who paid for their vic-


ESSAYS onTtuse MIN D.


tory by the loſs of eight thouſand ſoldiers. We no longer ſee governments treat
as cowards, and condemn as fuch, ten ſoldiers, who, eſcaping from the ſlaugh-
ter of that battle, brought home the news of ſo glorious a defeat.

If in Europe itſelf, we have only a barren admiration of ſuch actions and
ſuch virtues, what contempt muſt the people of the eaſt feel for the ſame
virtues? Who can make theſe think of them with reſpect? Thoſe countries are
peopled with abject vicious minds; and when the virtuous men in a country
are not ſufficiently numerous to give the bent to a nation, it neceſſarily receives
it from thoſe who are corrupt. Theſe laſt, always intereſted in ridiculing the
ſenſations they do not feel, render the virtuous ſilent. Unhappily, there are but
few, who do not yield to the clamours of thoſe by whom they are ſurrounded,
who are courageous enough to brave the contempt of their country, and have
the judgment to think, that the eſteem of a nation, placed on a certain degree
of degradation, is leſs flattering than diſhonourable.

Did the little value ſet on Hannibal, at the court of Antiochus, di ſhonour that
great man? Did the cowardice, with which Pruſias would have fold him to
the Romans, ſtain the glory of that illuſtrious Carthaginian ? In the eyes of
poſterity, it has only diſhonoured the king, the council, and the people, who.
deliberated upon it. | 1

The reſult of what I have ſaid is, that people have really in deſpotic empires,
only a contempt for virtue, and that nothing but the name is honoured. If,
every day we invoke this virtue, and require it of the citizens, it is only, in
this caſe, with virtue as with truth, it is demanded on condition we are ſo pru-
dent as to conceal it.


264640460006 0645 40-46-000-40-95-00-060646-4046-3-415 85
C H A P. XXI.


Of the Deftrufion off Empires ſubjeft to Arbitrary Power : the fourth

effect of tyranny. 5

HE indifference of the eaſtern nations, with reſpe& to virtue, their ig-

norance and abject ſtate of mind, neceſſarily follow from the form of

their government, and muſt at the ſame time, render citizens diſhoneſt to each
other, and void of courage, with reſpect to an enemy.


(b) M. Duclos, in the hiſtory of Louis
XI. ſays, that the Swiſs, to the number of
three thouſand, ſuſtained the ſhock of the
Dauphin's army, compoſed of fourteen
thouſand French and eight thouſand Eng-
liſh. The battle was * near Botte-
lin, and the Swiſs were almoſt all ſlain.
At the battle of Morgarten, thirteen
hundred Swiſs routed the archduke Leo-


D d 2


pold's army, compoſed of twenty thouſand
men. Near the Weſen, in the canton of Gla-
ris, three hundred and fifty Swiſs defeated
eight thouſand Auſtrians: every year they
celebrate the memory of this defeat, on the
field of battle; when an orator makes a
panegyric on this action, and reads the
lift of the three hundred and fifty names.


From


**


oc DE L'ESPRIT, on, |
From this ſource we may trace the aſtoniſhing rapidity, with which the Greeks
and Romans ſubdued Aſia. How could flaves, educated and nurtured in the
anti- chamber of a maſter, ſtifle, at the ſight of the Roman ſwords, the habitual
ſenſations of fear they had contrafted from arbitrary power? How could men,
ſo debaſed, without elevation of mind, accuſtomed to trample on the weak, and


to cringe before the powerful, avoid yielding to the magnanimity, the policy,


the valour of the Romans, and ſhew themſelves equally daſtardly in counſel, and
in the field of battle? „CC 5
If the Egyptians, as Plutarch ſays, were ſucceſſively the ſlaves of all nations,
it was owing to their being ſubject to the moſt ſevere deſpotic power: thus, they
almoſt conſtantly gave proofs of cowardice. When king Cleomenes, being
driven from Sparta, took refuge in Egypt, he was impriſoned by the intrigues
of a miniſter, named Sobiſius; but having killed his guard, and broken his


fetters, the prince preſented himſelf in the ſtreets of Alexandria; but in vain


did he exhort the citizens to revenge him, to puniſh the injuſtice of his treat-
ment, and ſhake off the yoke of tyranny : every where, ſays Plutarch, he
found only immoveable admirers. Theſe baſe and cowardly people had only
that ſpecies of courage which made them admire great actions, but not that
which would excite them to imitate them. | |

How can a ſlaviſh people reſiſt a free and powerful nation? In order to make
uſe of arbitrary power with impunity, the tyrant is forced to enervate the minds
and the courage of his ſubjects. What renders him formidable at home, ren-
ders him weak abroad: with liberty, he baniſhes from his empire, all the vir-
tues; they cannot, ſays Ariſtotle, inhabit baſe and ſervile minds. We mult
* (fays the illuſtrious preſident de Monteſquieu, whom we have already quoted)
begin by being bad citizens, in order to become good ſlaves.” They could
only oppoſe againſt the attacks of a people like the Romans, councils and gene-
rals, abfolutely unacquainted with political and military knowlege, taken from
that very nation, whoſe courage was ſoftened, and whoſe minds were debilitat-
cd ; it then neceſſarily followed, that they muſt have been overcome.

But, it is ſaid, the virtuous, have however ſhone with the greateſt luſtre in
deſpotic ſtates. This is true, when it has happened, that the throne has bten
ſucceſſively poſſeſſed by ſeveral great men. Virtue benumbed by the preſence
of tyranny, revives at the appearance of a virtuous prince : His preſence may
be compared to that of the fun ; when his light pierces and diſperſes the black.
clouds that cover the earth, all nature revives, every thing glows with new life;
the plains are peopled with laborious huſbandmen, the groves reſound with aerial
concerts, and the winged inhabitants of the skies fly to the tops of the oaks,
to welcome the returning ſun. O happy times (cries Tacitus, under the
«« reign of Trajan) when people obey only the Jaws, when every one may
* think freely, and freely tell his thoughts, when every heart flies to. the prince,
and the ſight of him is a benefit!”

The luſtre thrown upon ſuch nations, is always but of ſhort duration. If
ſometimes they attain to the higheſt pitch of power and glory, and become il-
luſtrious by ſucceſs of all kinds, this. ſucceſs being united, as I have already
ſaid, with the wiſdom of the kings who governed, and not with the form of go-
vernment, has always. been as fleeting as brilliant: the ſtrength of ſuch ſtates,


Rowever it may impoſe upon us, is but an illuſion : it is. the coloſſus of Nebu-
Chadnezzar,


E S S A Y S ow: THE M I N D, | 205
chadnezzar,: whoſe feet were of potter's clay. Theſe empires reſemble the lofty
pine, whoſe top reaches to the heavens,” the beaſts of the field, and the birds of
the air ſeek for ſhelter under its branches; but, being fixed to the earth by too
weak a root, is overthrown by the firſt ſtorm. ' Such ſtates have but a mo-
mentary exiltence, if they are not ſurrounded by nations, who have little diſpo-
ſicions for great enterprizes, and are ſubject to arbitrary power. The reſpective
ſtrength of ſuch nations conſiſts then in an equilibrium of weakneſs. If a
deſpotic empire has received a ſhock, and the throne.cannot be ſecuted without
a manly and courageous reſolution, that empire is deſtroyed. |

The people who groan beneath the yoke of arbitrary power, have then only
a momentary ſucceſs, a mere flaſh of glory; and muſt, ſooner or later, ſubmit
to a free and enter priſing nation. But ſuppoſing that particular circumſtances
and ſituations ſave them from this danger ; the bad adminiſtration of theſe king-
doms is fufficient to deſtroy, to depopulate, and to turn them into deſarts; the
lethargic languor that ſucceſſively ſeizes all the members, produces this effect.
The property of deſpotic power is to ſtifle the paſſions: now when minds have,
by the want of paſſions, loſt their activity; when the citizens are in a manner
rendered ſtupid by the opium of luxury, indolence and ſoftneſs, the ſtate then
falls into a conſumption: the apparent calm it enjoys, is, in the eyes of men of
underſtanding, a languid ſtate that is the forerunner of its diſſolution. The
paſſions are neceſſary in a nation, and are its life and ſoul; the people who
have the ſtrongeſt, are in the end triumphant. 7 |

The moderate efferveſcence of the paſſions is ſalutary to an empire; which
m this reſpect reſemble the ſea, whoſe ſtagnate waters on becoming corrupt,
would exhale vapours that would prove fatal to the univerſe, if they were not
purified by the riſing of tempeſts. | |

But, if the grandeur of nations ſubject to arbitrary power is only momenta-
neous, it is not ſo in goverments where the power, as in Rome and Greece, is
divided between the people, the nobility, or the kings. In thoſe ſtates, private
mtereſt, cloſely connected with that of the public, changes men into citizen.
It is in ſuch ſtates only that the people, whoſe ſucceſs depends on the conſtitu-
tion of the government, may hope that it will be of long duration, The ne-
ceſſity in which the citizens here find themſelves, of being employed about im-
portant objects, and the liberty of thinking and ſpeaking whatever they pleaſe,
give greater ſtrength and elevation of mind ; the boldneſs of their thoughts have
an influence on their hearts, and make them conceive more extenſive, more
courageous projects, and execute them with greater intrepidity. I ſhall even
add, that if private intereſt is not intirely ſeperated from that of the public, if
the manners of a people, like thoſe of the Romans, are not as corrupt as they
were in the time of Marius and Sylla; the ſpirit of faction, which obliges the
citizens to watch, and be a mutual reſtraint on each other, is the preſerving ge-
pius of theſe empires. They are maintained only by. a counterbalance of oppo-
fite intereſts. Never are the foundations of thele ſtates more ſecure, than at
the time when theſe exterior ferments appear ready to overthrow them. Thus,
the bottom of the ſea is calm and tranquil, even when the north winds, let looſe -
wn its ſurface, ſeems to turn it up from its abyls. |


After


206 DE L'ESPRIT;, or,


After having diſcovered in the deſpotic power of the. eaſtern nations, the
cauſe of the ignorance of the viſiers, the indifference of the people with re-
ſpect to virtue, and the overthrow of empires ſubject to that form of govern-
ments, I ſhall now proceed, to ſhew the oppolite effects produced from other
political conſtitutions.


e ere : r . r ri rer


C H A P. XXII.
Of the love of certain Nations for Glory and Virtue.


G 8 HIS chapter is ſo neceſſary a conſequence of the preceding, that I ſhould
| think myſelf excuſed from all farther examination of this ſubject, were
1 not convinced, that an explanation of the means proper to neceſſitate men to
virtue, would be agreeable to the public, and that ſuch diſquiſitions are in-
ſtructive even to thoſe who are moſt virtuous. I therefore enter into this
ſubject. I caſt my eyes over the republics more fruitful in virtuous men: I
ſtop them at Greece and Rome, and ſee a multitude of heroes ariſe. Their
great actions, preſerved with care in hiſtory, ſeem collected there, to ſpread the
odour of virtue into the moſt corrupt and diſtant ages: it is with theſe actions
as with the vaſes of incenſe, which, placed on the altars of the Gods, are ſuffi-
cient to diffuſe their perfume over the vaſt extent of their temples.

W hoever conſiders the virtuous actions hiſtory has tranſmitted of theſe peo-
ple, and would diſcover the cauſe, they will find that it proceeded from the ad-
dreſs with which the legiſlators of thoſe nations united private and public in-
tereſt (a). |
I take the action of Regulus for a proof of this truth. Suppoſing in this ge-
neral, no ſentiment of heroiſm, not even thoſe with which he muſt have been in-
ſpired by a Roman education; I maintain, that in the age when that conſul
lived, the legiſlation was, in certain reſpects, brought to ſuch a degree of per-
fection, that had Regulus conſulted merely his own perſonal intereſt, he could not
avoid the generous action he performed. For whoever, calls to mind the diſci-
pline of the Romans, and that flight, and even the loſs of their buckler in bat-
tle was puniſhed with the baſtinado, under which the guilty commonly expired,
muſt be convinced that a conſul conquered, made priſoner, and deputed by
the Carthaginians to treat about the exchange of priſoners, could not appear
before the Romans, without the fear of that contempt, which is always fo
humbling to republicans, and fo inſupportable to an elevated mind. Hence the
only part Regulus had to take, was to efface, by ſome heroic action, the ſhame
of his defeat. He therefore oppoſed the treaty of exchange, which the ſenate
was ready to ſign. He doubtleſs expoſed his life by this advice : but the dan-
ger was not imminent ; it was very probable, that, aſtoniſhed by his courage,


(a) In this union conſiſts the true ſpirit of the laws,


the


ESSAYS on Tat MIND. 20


the ſenate would be only the more eager for concluding a treaty, that would
reſtore to them fo virtuous a citizen. Beſides, ſuppoſing the ſenate was brought
over by his advice, it was very probable, that the Carthaginians, from the fear
of repriſals, or an admiration of his virtue, would not make him ſuffer the pu-
niſnment, with which they had threatened him. Regulus did not then expoſe
himſelf to any danger, to which, I will not ſay an hero, but even a ſenſible and
prudent man would have preſented himſelf, to avoid the contempt, and obtain
the admiration of the Romans. l |

There is then an art of neceſſitating men to perform heroic actions; not that
] would pretend to inſinuate here, that Regulus did nothing more than obey
this neceſſity, nor do I mean to ſtain his glory; the action performed by Re-
gulus, was doubtleſs the effect of an impetuous enthuſiaſm, which led to vir-
tue ; bur ſuch an enthuſiaſm could no where be kindled but at Rome.

The virtues and vices of a nation are always neceſſary effects of its legiſla-
tion; and it was doubtleſs the knowlege of this truth, that made way for that
excellent law in China; to fertilize the feeds of virtue, the mandarins participate
in the glory or ſhame of the virtuous or infamous actions committed in their
governments (b); and in conſequence of them, thoſe mandarins are raiſed to ſu-
perior, or degraded to inferior poſts. 1

How can it be doubted, that virtue is not among all nations the effect of the
greater or leſs degree of wiſdom in the adminiſtration? If the Greeks and Ro-
mans were ſo long animated by theſe manly and courageous virtues, which
Balzac calls“ the excurſions of the foul beyond the common duties,” it is be-
cauſe the virtues of this king are almoſt conſtantly peculiar to the nations, where
each citizen has a part in the ſovereignty.

It is only in theſe countries that we find a Fabricius. Being preſſed by Pyr-
rhus to follow him to Epirus: © Pyrrhus, ſaid he, thou art doubtleſs an illuſ-
e trious prince, and a great warrior; but thy people groan in miſery. What
& raſhneſs would it be to take me into Epirus? Canſt thou doubt that thy
% people, ſoon ranged under my law, would not prefer exemption from tribute,
“ to being overloaded with taxes, and ſecurity to the uncertainty of their poſ-
« ſeſſions? To- day thy favourite, to-morrow I ſhould be thy maſter. Such a
diſcourſe could only be pronounced by a Roman. In republics we perceive
with aſtoniſhment, how far the heighth of courage, and the heroiſm of nations
may be carried (c.) I ſhall mention Themiſtocles for an example of this * :
a few


3 I II


(b) This is not the caſe in the other
empires of the eaſt, where the governors
are only employed in levying taxes, and
oppoſing ſeditions. Beſides, they are not
required to trouble themfelves about the
happineſs of the people in their provinces ;
their power in this reſpect is even very li-
mited.


letters, that he was ſenſible of the advan-


(c) We ſee from cardinal Mazarine's


tages of this form of government. He was


afraid that England, by forming a republic,
would become too formidable to its neigh-
bours. In a letter to M. le Tellier, he
ſays, Dom Louis and I know very well,
*« that Charles II. is out of the kingdoms
e that belong to him; but among all the
„ reaſons that may engage the kings our
«© maſters, to think of his reſtoration, one
« of the ſtrongeſt is, hindering *

cc m


203 DE I'ESPRIT, on, |
a few days before the battle of Salamis, that wartior, infulted in full council by
the Spartan general, made no other reply to his menages than theſe words,
«+ Strike, but hear.” To this example I ſhall.acd, that of Timoleon: he was
accuſed of a miſdemeanor, and the people were ready to cut his accuſers in
pieces; but he ſtopped their fury by ſaying. O Syracuſans, what are you a
e going to do? Think that every citizen has a right to accuſe me: Take care,
<« leſt by giving way to your gratitude, ye, do not injure that very liberty,
which it is my glory to have reſtored to you.“ _ |

If the Greek and Roman hiſtory is full of «theſe heroic ſtrokes, and if we
in vain ſcarch the whole hiſtory of deſpotic power to find the like; it is
only becauſe, in theſe governments, private intereft is never united to. that of
the public; becauſe, in theſe countries, among a thouſand qualities, they do
honour only to baſeneſs, and reward none but thoſe of moderate abilities (d);
and becauſe, to theſe men of moderate abilities, the adminiſtration of public
affairs is almoſt always intruſted ; while men of genius are excluded, The
are of opinion, that theſe being reſtleſs and too active, they would diſturb the
repoſe of the ſtate ; à repoſe that may be compared to the momentary ſtillneſs
of nature preceding a tempeſt. The tranquility of a ſtate does not always
prove the happineſs of the ſubject. In arbitrary governments, the men are like
thoſe horſes, whoſe noſes being wrung, ſuffer, without flinching, the moſt
_ cruel operations, while the courſer at liberty prances at the firſt touch. In theſe
countries, a lethargy is taken for tranquility. The love of glory, unknown to
theſe nations, can only be preſerved in a body politic, by the mild fermenta-
tion that renders it ſound and robuſt, and calls forth every virtue and every ta-
lent. The ages moſt favourable to literature have, for this reaſon, always been
moſt fruitful in great generals and great politicians : the ſame ſun gives life "to
the cedar and the plane- tree. |

Moreover, this paſſion for glory, which was deified by the pagans, has re-
ceived the homage of all republics, but principally of thoſe that are poor and
warlike, | 35


PRIAIEISIEIEITEIEITEIEEVITEIECEIETEDE:


„
That poor Nations have been always more greedy of Glory, and more


fruitful in virtuous Men, than opulent N ations .


HE heroes in commercial republics, ſeem to. appear only to deſtroy ty-
: ranny, and then to vaniſh. It was in the infancy of the liberty of the
Dutch, that Balzac, ſpeaking of that nation, ſaid, that they deſerved to have


— — r * — N= ES . as » * *


— * * = * * 1 E


from forming a powerful republic, which, (d) In theſe countries genius and abilities

4 in the end, would give all its neighbours are only honoured in great princes, and

« cauſe to look about them.” great miniſters, God
cc


ESSAYS own Tus MIND. | 209


« God for their king, ſince they could not bear to have a king for their
«© God.” The ſoil proper for the production of great men in republics, is
then ſoon exhauſted. The glory of Carthage diſappeared with Hannibal. The
ſpirit of commerce there, neceſſarily deſtroyed that of valour. Rich nations,
« ſays Balzac, are governed by the force of lucrative reaſons, and not according
« to moral inſtitutions, which propoſe motives to great and honeſt enterprizes.“

A virtuous courage is only preſerved among poor nations. The Scythians
were, perhaps, the only people who ſung hymns in honour of the gods, with-
out asking any favours, from their being perſuaded that the courageous could
want for nothing. Subject to commanders, whoſe power was ſufficiently exten-
ſive, they were independant, becauſe they ceaſed to obey their chiefs, when
they ceaſed to obey the laws. There are no rich nations who reſemble the
Scythians, in having no other want but that of glory. Wherever commerce
flouriſhes, riches are preferred to glory, becauſe riches afford an exchange for
all pleaſures, and it is more eaſy to acquire them.

What a ſterility of virtues and talents muſt this preference occaſion? The
decrees of glory never proceding, but from public gratitude, its acquiſition is
always the reward of ſervices rendered to our country; and the deſire of obtain-
ing it, conſtantly ſuppoſes the deſire of performing ſervices, that may be of uſe
to the nation.

This is not the caſe with the deſire of riches. They may ſometimes be the
reward of ſtockjobbers, of meanneſs, of ſpies, and very often of crimes; they
ſeldom fall to the ſhare of thoſe, who have the greateſt abilities, or of thoſe
who are moſt diſtinguiſhed by their virtues. The love of riches does not neceſ -
farily lead to the love of virtue. Commercial nations ought therefore to be more
fruitful in good merchants, than in good citizens, and in great bankers, than
in heroes. | |

It is not then in the land of luxury and of riches, but in that of poverty, that
the ſublime virtues grow and flouriſh (a); nothing is ſo uncommon, as to meet
with great minds in opulent empires (b); the citizens there contract too many
wants, Whoever has multiplied them, has given tyranny hoſtages, for his
baſeneſs and cowardice. Virtue, with which few are ſatisfied, can alone ſecure
the people from corruption. It was this kind of virtue that dictated the anſwer
of an Engliſh lord, diſtinguiſhed by his merit, to a miniſter. The court finding
it for their intereſt, to bring him over to their party, Mr. Walpole waited upon
him: I come from the king, ſaid he, to aſſure you of his protection; to let you
know, that he is ſorry for his not yet having done any thing thing for you;
and to offer you a poſt more ſuitable to your merit, Sir, replied the nobleman,
before I anſwer your propoſal, permit me to have my ſupper ſerved up. Im-
mediately was brought in the remains of a leg of mutton, on which he had
dined ; then, turning to Mr. Walpole, Sir, ſaid he, do you think that a man,


COT


(a) To which I add happineſs. What (b) Among all the nations of Germany,
it is impoſſible to ſay of individuals, may the Sucones, ſays Tacitus, after the exam-
be ſaid of nations ; that the moſt virtuous ple of the Romans, ſet a value on riches,
are always the moſt happy ; though they and like them have ſubmitted to deſpotic
are not the moſt rich and commercial. power,


E e who


210 SL! ESPRHF;:on,


who can be contented with ſuch fare, can be eaſily gained over? Tell his ma-
jeſty, what you have ſeen, this is the only anſwer I have to make “.

Such a diſcourſe could only proceed from a perſon, who knew how to con-
tract the circle of his wants: but how few perſons in a rich country, can
reſiſt the perpetual temptation of ſuperfluities? What virtuous men does po-
verty give to a nation, whom luxury would have corrupted ? * O philoſophers,
„ Socrates often ſaid, you who repreſent the gods on earth, learn like them to
ebe ſelf-ſufficient, and to be contented with little; eſpecially, go not cringing
to ſolicite princes and kings.“ * Nothing can be more firm and virtuous,
„ ſays Cicero, than the firſt ages of Greece; they were terrified at no dan-
«« ger, they were diſcouraged at no obſtacles, and no reſpect reſtrained them,
e or made them facrifice the truth to the abſolute will of princes.” But theſe
philoſophers were born in poor countries; therefore, their ſucceſſors did always
preſerve the ſame virtues. Thoſe of Alexandria, were reproached with having
too much complaiſance for the princes their benefactors, and with purchaſing,
by their meanneſs, the tranquil leiſure thoſe princes ſuffered them to enjoy. On
this ſubject, Plutarch cries out, What fight can be more degrading to hu-
* man nature, than to ſee ſages proſtitute their praiſes to men in place! Muſt
ce the courts of kings be ſo often the rocks on which wiſdom and virtue ſplit ?
“ Ought not the great to be ſenſible, that all who entertain them, with things
of only a frivilous nature, deceive them (c)? The true manner of ſerving
them, is to reprove them for their vices and bad conduct, and to let them
% know, that it ill becomes them, to ſpend their days in diverſion. This is
«© the only language proper to a virtuous man; lying and flattery ſhould never
« dwell upon his lip.“ | |

This exclamation of Plutarch is very fine ; but it is a greater proof of his
love of truth, than of his Knowlege of human nature. It is the ſame with re-
ſpect to Pythagoras: I refuſe, ſays he, the name of philoſophers to thoſe
% who give into the corruption of courts : thoſe alone are worthy the name,
& who are ready to facrifice before kings, their life, their riches, their dignities, |
<« their families, and even their reputation. By this love of truth, he adds, we
<«« participate with the divinity, and become united to him in the moſt noble and
ce intimate manner.“ . 10 | |

Such men do not indifferently ariſe in all kinds of governments : they are
produced, either by a philoſophical enthuſiaſm, that 1s ſpeedily extinguiſhed,
by a ſingular education, or by an excellent legiſlation. The philoſophers men-
tioned by Plutarch and Pythagoras, have almoſt conſtantly been born in poor
nations paſſionately fond of glory.


— —_— *


* This ſtory I find related of a member


of parliament, in the reign of Charles II.


in the General Dictionary.

(c) There was doubtleſs a time, when
men, diſtinguiſhed by their wiſdom, had a
right to ſpeak only to princes, in order to
tell them what was truly. uſeful, Hence,
the philoſophers of India left their retrcat
but once in a year. This was to repair to


the king's palace, where each of them ut-
tered, with a loud voice, his political reflec-
tions on the adminiſtration, and the changes
and regulations they would have made in
the laws. "Thoſe whoſe reflections were
for three times ſucceſſively judged falſe or
trivial, loſt their right of ſpeaking. Crit.
Hiſt. of Philoſophy, tom. II.


Not


ESS A s on me MI 211


Not that I regard indigence as the ſource of virtues: it is to the greater or
leſs wiſdom in the adminiſtration of honours and rewards, that we mult attribute
the production of great men among all nations. But what can ſcarcely be ima-
gined is, that virtue and abilities are no where to be recompenſed in fo flatter-
ing a manner, as in poor and warlike republics. |


NN N N, N NN N N N Ng Ng u vlg dig dig dig dig dug dig dig dung dung
FFT


C H A P. XXIV.
| Proof of this Truth.


'T 1 take from this propoſition the air of a paradox, it is ſufficient to ob-
ſerve, that the two moſt general objects of the deſires of mankind, are
wealth and honours. But of theſe two objects, men are moſt deſirous of ho-
nours, they are diſpenſed in a manner flattering to ſelf-love. |

The deſire therefore of obtaining them, renders men capable of the greateſt ef-
forts, and it is then that they perform prodigies. Now theſe honours are no
where diſtributed with more juſtice than among the people, who, having no
other money to pay for the ſervices rendered to their country, have conſequently
the greateſt intereſt in ſupporting their value : thus, the poor republics of Greece
and Rome have produced more great men, than all the vaſt and rich empires
of the eaſt. | | |

Among the nations oppulent and ſubject to deſpotic power, people place, and
ought to place, more value on money, than on honours. As honours received
their value from the manner in which they are adminiſtered, and as in the eaſt,
the ſultans are diſpenſers of them, it appears, that they muſt bring them into
_ diſcredit, by the ill choice they make of thoſe whom they adorn with them.
Thus in thoſe countries, honours are properly mere titles only : they cannot flatter
pride in a very lively manner, becauſe they are ſeldom united with glory, which
is not in the power of princes, but in that of the people only to beſtow ; ſince glory
is nothing more than the acclamation of public gratitude. Now when honours
are debaſed, the deſire of obtaining them grows cool, and this deſire no longer
enables men to perform great things; they become in a ſtate a ſpring without
force, and therefore placemen juſtly neglect to make uſe of them.

There is a diſtrict in America, where, when an Indian has gained a victory,
or managed a negotiation with dexterity, they ſay to him in an aſſembly of the
nation, Thou art a man.” This elogium is a more powerful incentive to
great actions, than all the dignities propoſed by deſpotic ſtates, to thoſe who
render themſelves illuſtrious by their talents. :
In order to be fully ſenſible of the contempt, which muſt be ſometimes
thrown on honours, from the ridiculous manner in -which they are beitowed,
let us remember the abuſe that was made of them, in the reign of Claudius :
under that emperor, ſays Pliny, a citizen killed a raven remarkable for his dex-
terity : this citizen was put to death, and a magnificent funeral was made for
the bird; a muſician playing on a flute, preceded the bed of ſtate, on m"_

; EC. the


212 DE L*'ESPRIT; on,

the raven lay, which was ſupported by two ſlaves, and in the proceſſion fol-
lowed an infinite number of people of both ſexes, and of all ages. Upon this
ſubje&, Pliny cries out, What would our anceſtors fay, if in Rome itſelf,
«+ where our firſt kings were intered without pomp, where they did not revenge
e the death of the deſtroyer of Carthage and Numantia, they had aſliſted ar
the obſequies of a raven !” 5

But, you will ſay, in countries ſubject to arbitrary power, honours are however
ſometimes the reward of merit. They doubtleſs are ſo: but they are oftner
the reward of vice and meanneſs. Honours are in theſe governments like the
ſcattered trees in a deſart, whoſe fruits are ſometimes carried off by the birds
of heaven, but become too often the prey of the ſerpent, which from the foot
of the tree aſcends even to its top.

Honours being once degraded, ſervices performed for the ſtate can only be

aid for with money. Now every nation, who diſcharges its obligations only
with ſpecie, ſoon becomes overcharged with expences, and in a little time inſol-
vent; there is then no reward for virtue and abilities. |
In vain, is it ſaid, that inſtructed by want, princes in this extremity, ought to
have recourſe to the payment of their obligations with honours : for as in poor
republics, where favours are diſtributed by the body of the nation, it is eaſy to
raiſe the value of honours, nothing can be more difficult. than to render them
valuable in deſpotic countries. | |

W hat probity would that adminiſtration ſhew, that ſhould endeavour to re-
ward with honours ? What ſtrength of mind would it require to reſiſt the in-
trigues of courtiers? What diſcernment, to grant theſe honours only to perſons
of great talents, and diſtinguiſhed virtues, and conſtantly to refuſe them to
thoſe of mean abilities, who would diſcredit them ? What juſtneſs of thought
would it demand, to ſeize the preciſe moment, when theſe honours, by becom-
ing too common, would no longer excite the citizens to make the ſame efforts,
and when they ought conſequently to create new ones ?

It is not the ſame with honours as with riches, If the public intereſt forbids
the melting down the gold and filver ſpecie, it on the contrary requires, that
honours ſhould not be beſtowed as a reward, when they have loſt the value
which they only receive from the opinion of the people. | |

I ſhall obſerve on this ſubject, that we cannot without aſtoniſhment conſider
the conduct of moſt nations, who employ ſo many men in the management of
their revenues, and appoint none to watch over the diſtribution of honours. Yet
what can be of greater uſe, than a ſevere ſcrutiny into the merit of thoſe, whom
they raiſe to dignities? Why has not each nation a court, in which, by a pro-
found and ſtrict examination, they may aſcertain the reality of thoſꝭ talents that
are to be rewarded ? What a value would ſuch an examination give to honours ?
Wrat a deſire to merit them? What a happy change would this deſire pro-
duce, not only in private education, but by little and little, in that of the
public? A change, on which, perhaps, depends all the difference obſervable
between nations, | |

Among the baſe and cowardly courtiers of Antiochus, how many would
there have been, had they been educated from their infancy at Rome, who.
would, like Popilius, have drawn a circle about that king, beyond which he


could not paſs, without rendering himſelf a ſlave, or the enemy of the Ro-
mans ? | | Having


ESSAYS on Tus MIN D. 1
Having proved that great rewards produce great virtues, and that the wiſe
diſtribution of honours is the ſtrongeſt band, which legiſlators can uſe to unite
the private and general intereſt, and to form good citizens; I think I have a
right to conclude from thence, that the love or indifference of certain nations
for virtue, is an effect of the different forms of their governments. Now,
what I have ſaid of the love of virtue, which I take for an example, may be
applied ro any other of the paſſions, We ought not then to attribute to
—_— that unequal degree of paſſions, of which different nations appear ſuſ-
ceptible.
25 the laſt proof of this truth, I am going to ſhew, that the ſtrength of our
paſſions is always proportioned to the force of the means employed to excite


them.


CARE DEAR NDAD


CH A FE, * a.


Of the exact Relation between the Strength of the Paſſions, and the Great-
neſs of the Rewards propoſed to Mankind.


N order to be ſenſible of this connection, it is neceſſary to have recourſe to
hiſtory. I open that of Mexico: I ſee heaps of gold affording the avarice
of the Spaniards greater riches, than they could have procured by the plunder
of all Europe. Animated by the deſire of poſſeſſing them, theſe very Spani-
ards quit their ſubſtance and their families, and, under the conduct of Cortez,
undertake the conqueſt of the new world ; combat at once the climate, want,
numbers, and, valour ; and by a courage as obſtinate as impetuous, triumph over
them all. |

More heated ſtill by the luſt of gold, and more greedy of riches, as they were
more indigent, I ſee the Bucaniers, paſs from the northern to the ſouthern
ſeas; attack impenetrable intrenchments ; defeat, with a handful of men, numerous
bodies of diſciplined ſoldiers, and often, having ravaged the coaſts of the Pacific
Ocean, open to themſelves a new paſſage into the northern ſeas, by ſurmount-
ing, with incredible fatigue, continual - combats, and a courage that was proof
againſt every thing, all the obſtacles which men and nature threw in their way.

If I caſt my eyes on the hiſtory of the north, the firſt people who preſent -
themſelves to my view, are the diſciples of Odin. They are animated with the-
proſpect of a reward, which, though imaginary, is the greateſt of all, when
realiſed by credulity. Thus, while they are actuated by a lively hope, they
ſhew a courage, which being proportioned to a celeſtial recompence, is even ſupe-
rior to that of the Bucaniers. Our warriors, greedy of death, ſays one of their
e poets, ſeek for it with fury; being ſtruck in battle by a mortal blow, they fall,”

and laughing die.” This truth is confirmed by one of their kings, named
Lodbrog, when, crying out in the field of battle, With what unknown joy am
] ſeized? I die: I hear the voice of Odin call me; already the gates of his


<< palace are opened; I ſee coming from thence, beautiful virgins half — 3
7 t ey .


214 DE L'ESPRIT;, on,


e they wear a blue ſcarf, which augments the whitenſs of their boſoms, they ad-
«© vance towards me, and offer me the moſt delicious beer, in the bleeding
„ $kulls of my enemies.“ |

If from the north I paſs to the ſouth, I ſee Mahomet, the creator of a new re-
ligion like that of Odin, call himſelf the envoy of Heaven, proclaim to the Sa-
racins, that the Moſt High had delivered to them the earth, that he would make
terror and deſolation march before them; but that they muſt merit the empire
by their valour. To excite their courage, he teaches, that the Eternal has thrown _
a bridge over the abyſs of hell, narrower than the edge of a ſcymeter ; and
that after the reſurrection, the brave will skip over it with a light foot, in order
to arrive at the celeſtial abodes ; while the coward falling from this bridge, will
be precipitated into the jaws of the horrible ſerpent, that inhabits the dark ca-
vern of the houſe of ſmoke. |

To confirm the miſſion of the prophet, his diſciples add, that mounted on
Al-borak, he paſſed through the ſeven heavens, ſaw the angel of death, and
the white cock, which, with his feet fixed on the firſt heaven, concealed his
head in the ſeventh : that Mahomet cut the moon in two ; made fountains
iſſue from his fingers; gave ſpeech to the brutes ; cauſed himſelf to be followed
by the foreſts, and ſaluted by the mountains (a); and that, beloved of God, he
brought the law, dictated to him by the Almighty. |

Struck by theſe recitals, the Saracins liſtened to the diſcourſe of Mahomet
with the more credulity, as he gave them the moſt voluptuous deſcriptions of
the celeſtial abodes, deſigned for the brave. Intereſted by the pleaſures of ſenſe to
be enjoyed in paradiſe, I fee them glowing with the warmeſt zeal, and ſighing
inceflantly after the Houris, ruſh with fury upon their enemies. Warriors,
<« cried in battle one of their generals named Ikrimach, I ſee thoſe beautiful
«« virgins with black eyes: they are foreſcore in number. If one of them
* ſhould make her appearance on earth, all its ſovereigns would quit their
* thrones to follow her. But what do I ſee! one of them advances, ſhe has
gold buskins on her legs; in one hand ſhe holds an handkerchief of green
« filk, and in the other a topaz cup: ſhe beckons me with her head, ſaying,
6 come hither, wy well-beloved.—Stay for me, divine Houris, I ruſh among
de the battalions of the infidels, I give, I receive death, and fly to thee.”

While the credulous Saracins thus diſtintly faw the Houris, their love of
conqueſts being proportionable to the greatneſs of the rewards they expected,


— —


(a) Many other miracles are related of
Mahbomet. A reſtive camel having perceived
him at a diſtance, came to him, they ſay,
and fell on his knees before the prophet,
who, ſtroking him, ordered him to amend.
It is ſaid, that at another time, the ſame pro-
phet fed thirty thouſand men with a ſheep's
liver. Father Maracio does not difpute the
fact, but pretends, that this was the work
of the devil, With reſpect to the prodigies
t hat are ſtill more aſtoniſhing, ſuch as cut-
ing the moon in two, making the moun-


tains dance, and a roaſted ſhoulder of mut- -
ton ſpeak, the Muſſulmans affert, the per-
formance of ſuch amazing prodigies, fo
much above all human ſtrength and cun-
ning, was abſolutely neceſſary to convince
ſtubborn minds, who are always very diffi -
cult to be perſuaded of the truth of mi-

racles. |
The Perſians, according to Chardin,
believe that Fatima, Mahomet's wife, was
in her life time carried up to heaven. They
celebrate her aſſumption. |
| animated


— —


ESSAYS ow Tr MIN P. 215


animated them with a courage ſuperior to that inſpired by the love of our
country: it therefore produced the greateſt effects; for, we ſee, that in leſs
than one century, they ſubdued more nations than the Romans had conquered in
ſix hundred years. | |

Thus the Greeks, who were ſuperior to the Arabs in number, diſcipline,
arms, and warl:ke machines, fled before them like doves at the ſight of the
hawk (b). All the nations leagued together, could only have oppoſed an inef-
fectual barrier againſt them. |

In order to reſiſt them, it would have been neceſſary to arm the Chriſtians
with the ſame ſpirit as that with which the law of Mahomet animated the Muſ-
ſulmans; to promiſe heaven and the palm of martyrdom, as St. Bernard did, in
the time of the Cruſades, to every warrior who died fighting the infidels : a
propoſal the emperor Nicephorus made to the biſhops who were aſſembled. But
they wanting the judgment of St. Bernard, unanimouſly rejected it (e). They
did not perceive, that this refuſal would diſcourage the Greeks, promote the
extinction of chriſtianity, and the progreſs of the Saracins, to which they cond
oppoſe no other defence, than a zeal equal to their fanaticiſm. Theſe biſhops,
therefore, continued to attribute the calamities that laid waſte the empire, to the
crimes of the nation, though a judicious eye might have diſcovered the cauſe,


in the blindneſs of theſe very prelates, who, in ſuch conjunctures, might be con-


ſidered as the ſcourges heaven made ule of to affict the empire. |

The aſtoniſhing ſucceſs of the Saracins, depended ſo much on the ſtrength
of their paſſions, and the ſtrength of their paſſions on the means made uſe of
to excite them, that theſe very Arabs. theſe warriors ſo formidable, before whom
the earth trembled, and the armies of the Greeks fled, and were diſperſed like
the duſt before the wind, trembled themſelves, at the ſight of a ſect of Muſſul-
mans named Saffrians (d). Inflamed, like all reformers, with the fierceſt pride,


*


(b) The emperor Heraclius, aſtoniſhed
at the numerous victories obtained over his
armies, aſſembled a council compoſed ra-
ther of divines than ſtateſmen: the evils to
which the nation was expoſed, were laid
before them, and they enquired into the
cauſe; upon which they concluded, ac-
cording to the cuſtom of thoſe times, that
the Almighty was offended at the crimes of
the nation; and that the only way of put-
ing a ſtop to fo many misfortunes, was by
prayer, faſting, and tears.


his reſolution being taken, the empe-


ror conſidered none of the reſources that
ſtill remained after ſo many diſaſters ; re-
ſources that would, at firſt have preſented
themſelves to his mind, if he had known,
that courage only ſprang from the paſſions ;
that ever ſince the deſtruction of the repub-
lic, the Romans being no longer animat-


ed by the love of their country, their ſend-
ing men without paſſions to fight ſuch fa-
natics, was oppoſing fearful ſheep againſt
ravenous wolves.

(c) They alledged, in favour of their
opinion, the ancient diſcipline of the eaſtern
church, the thirteenth canon, and the letter
of St. Bazil the Great, to Amphilochus.
This letter declares, that “ every ſoldier
that killed an enemy in battle, could
not receive the communion for three
« years after.” Whence it may be con-
cluded, that though it is of the greateſt ad-
vantage to be governed by a man of ſenſe
and diſcernment, nothing can ſometimes be
more dangerous, than being governed by a
ſaint.

(d) Theſe Saffrians were ſo formidable,
that Adi, a captain of great reputation,
having received orders to attack with fix

hundred


216 SRI 4 os, |
and a firm belief, theſe ſcctaries ſaw more diſtinctly the celeſtial pleaſures,
which hope preſented to the other Muſſulmans, at a confuſed diſtance. Thus,
theſe furious Saffrians reſolved to purge the earth of its errors, enlighten, or
exterminate the nations, which at their appearance, they ſaid, ought to be
ſtruck with light, or terror, and quit their prejudice, as ſpeedily as an arrow is
ſhot from a bow.

What | have ſaid of the Arabs and Saffrians, may be applied to all the na-
tions, influenced by the motives of religion ; it 1s here the unequal degree of
credulity, which, among different nations produces the equilibrium of their paſ-
ſions and courage. | |

In regard to paſſions of another kind, it is ſtill the unequal degree of their
ſtrength, always occaſioned by the diverſity of their goverments, and the ſitua-
tions of the people, which in the ſame emergencies, determines them to act in
ſo different a manner. |

When Themiſtocles went armed, to raiſe conſiderable ſubſidies on the rich
allies of the republic; thoſe allies, ſays Plutarch, made haſte to furniſh him,
becauſe a fear, proportioned to the riches he might take from them, rendered
them ſubmiſſive to the will of the Athenians. But when the ſame Themiſtocles
addreſſed himſelf to indigent people, and diſembarking at Andros, made the
ſame demand to thoſe iſlanders, declaring that he came attended by two power-
ful deities, Neceſſity and Force, which, ſaid he, always bring perſuaſion in their
trains; * Themiſtocles, they replied, we ſhould, like the other allies, ſubmit
<* to thine orders, if we were not allo protected by two deities as powerful as
4e thine, Indigence and Deſpair, which ſpurn at Force. |

The vivacity of the paſſions depends, therefore, on the means employed by
the legiſlator in kindling them, or in the ſituations in which fortune has placed
us (e). The more lively our paſſions are, the greater are the effects produced by


ati


hundred men, an hundred and twenty of
thoſe fanatics, who were aſſembled in the
government of a man named Ben Mer-
van, that captain repreſented ; that each
of theſe ſectaries longing for death, might
attack with advantage twenty Arabs ; and
that therefore the inequality of courage not
being, on this n compenſated by
the inequality of numbers, he would not
hazard a battle, which the determined va-
lour of theſe fanaticks rendered ſo un-
equal.
() Inſignificant means always produce
inſignificant paſſions, and inſignificant ef-
fects: grand motives are required to excite
us to perform bold enterprizes. It is weak-
neſs, rather than folly, which in moſt go-
vernments perpetuates the abuſe. We are
not ſo inferior as we appear to be to poſte-
rity. Is there a man, for inſtance, who
does not perceive the abſurdity of the law,


*


which prohibits citizens diſpoſing of their
effects, before they are twenty-five years of
age, and yet, at ſixteen, allows them to
diſpoſe of their liberty, by becoming
monks? Every one knows the remedy of
this evil, and perceives at the ſame time the
difficulty of applying it. What obſtacles
does the intereſt of ſome ſocieties raiſe
againſt the public intereſt in this reſpec ?
hat long and painful efforts of courage
and judgment, and what conſtancy does
the execution of ſuch a project ſuppoſe ?
Perhaps it would be neceſſary, in order to
make the attempt, that placemen ſhould
be prompted by the hope of the greateſt
glory, and flatter themſelves that public
gratitude would every where erect ſtatues
to their memory. We ought always to re-
collect, that in morality, as well as in na-
tural philoſophy and mechanics, the effects

are always proportioned to the cauſes.
them,


f ESSAYS OY Tus MIND. 217


them. Thus ſucceſs, as all hiſtory proves, conſtantly attends the people who
are animated by ſtrong paſſions: a truth too little known, the ignorance of
which has oppoſed the progreſs that otherwiſe might have been made in the art
of inſpiring the paſſions : this art is at preſent unknown even to thoſe politicians
of reputation who calculate pretty juſtly the intereſt and ſtrength of a ſtate,
but have never perceived the ſingular reſources, which, in critical conjunctures,


might have been drawn from the paſſions, when people have the art of ex-


citing them. | |

The principles of this art, though as certain as thoſe of geometry, appear,
in fact, to have been hitherto perceived only by great men, with reſpect to war
and politics. Upon which I ſhall obſerve, that if the virtues, the courage,
and conſequently the paſſions, with which ſoldiers are animated, contribute no


leſs to obtain a victory, than the order in which they are ranged; a treatiſe on -


the art of inſpiring them would be of no leſs uſe to generals, than the excellent
treatiſe of the illuſtrious chevalier Folard on Tactics (f).

It was the paſſions united to the love of liberty, and the hatred of ſlavery,
more than the skill of the engineers, that occaſioned the celebrated and obſti-

nate defence of Abydos, Saguntum, Carthage, Numantia, and Rhodes.
Ihn the art of exciting the paſſions, Alexander excelled almoſt all other great
generals: to this art he owed thoſe inſtances of ſucceſs, ſo often attributed, by
thoſe who are called men of ſenſe, to chance or a fooliſh raſhneſs, becauſe
they do not perceive the almoſt invincible ſprings by which that hero performed
ſo many prodigies. |

The concluſion of this chapter is, that the ſtrength of the paſſions is always
proportioned to the ſtrength of the means made uſe of to inſpire them. Now
I ought to examine, if theſe very paſſions may in all men, well organiſed, be car-
ried to ſuch a height as to endue them with that continued attention to which
ſuperiority of genius is attached. | n


Dee eee eee a0 eee ee eee


C H A f.
Of what degree of Paſſion men are ſuſceptible.


| is „ In order to determine this degree, I tranſport myſelf over the mountains
of Abyſſinia, I there ſee men, at the order of their khalifs, become impa-
tient of death, and precipitate themſelves on the points of poniards and
rocks, and others into the abyſs of the ſea : no other reward is, however, pro-
poſed to them, beſides the celeſtial pleaſures promiſed to all Muſulmans; but


(f) Diſcipline is, in a manner, nothing courage : but it cannot prevail againſt the
elſe but the art of inſpiring foldiers with a fierce and obſtinate valour of people ani-


greater fear of their officers than of the mated by fanaticiſm, or a warm love of


enemy. This fear has often the effect of their country.
Ff their


218 ESE L'ESPRIT; on,

their poſſeſſion appears more certain; conſequently the deſire of enjoying them
makes more lively impreſſions on their minds, and their efforts to merit them
are proportionally greater. |

In no other place, beſides Abyſſinia, is ſo much care and art employed to
confirm the belief of theſe blind and zealous executioners of the will of their
prince. The victims deſtined to this employment, can nowhere receive ah edu-
cation ſo proper to form fanatics. Tranſported from the moſt tender age into
a diſtant, wild, and loneſome part of the ſeraglio, where reaſon is made to
wander in the darkneſs of the Muſulman's faith, they are informed of the miſ-
ſion and the laws of Mahomet, the prodigies performed by that prophet, and
the abſolute reſignation due to the orders of the khalifs: there, by givin
them the moſt voluptuous deſcriptions of paradiſe, they fill them with the mo
ardent deſire for celeſtial pleaſures. Scarce have they arrived at that age, when
they become ſenſible of pleaſure, when, by impetuous deſire, nature indicates
their impatience and power of enjoying the moſt lively gratifications, then in
order to fortify the belief of a young man, and to enflame him with the moſt
violent fanaticiſm, the prieſt, after having mixed an intoxicating liquor in his
drink, tranſports him, during his ſleep, from his gloomy abode to a delightful
grove appointed for that uſe. 3

There, reclined on a bed of flowers, ſurrounded with ſpouting fountains
he repoſes till Aurora, by giving form and colour to the univerſe, awakes
all the productive powers of nature, and makes love circulate in the veins
of youth. Struck with the novelty of the objects that ſurround him, the
young man looks about, and fixes his eyes on ſeveral fine women, whom his
credulous imagination transforms into Houris. Theſe, being accomplices in the
cheat formed by the prieſt, are inſtructed in the art of ſeducing; he ſees them
advancing towards him, dancing, they enjoy his ſurpriſe ; by a thouſand ſportive
motions they excite in him unknown deſires, oppoſe the flight gauze of a
pretended modeſty to the impatient wiſhes with which they enflame him : they,
at length, yield to love; then changing thoſe ſportive actions to careſſes, plunge
him in delight. This intoxication is ſucceeded by a voluptuous repoſe, which
is ſoon interrupted by freſh pleaſures ; till the young man's deſires being gra-
tified, he is conducted by theſe women to a delicious banquet, where he is
again intoxicated with liquor, and carried, during his ſleep, to his firſt abode.
There he no ſooner awakes, than he ſeeks for the objects with which he had
been enchanted ; but, like a deceitful vifion, they are vaniſhed from his ſight ;-
he ſtill calls the Houris : he finds none near him, but the Imans: he relates to
them his dream, which is no ſooner ended, than placing their foreheads on the
earth, the Imans ſay, O veſſel of election! O my fon! doubtleſs our holy
„ prophet has taken thee up into paradiſe to give thee a foretaſte of the plea-
„ tures reſerved for the faithful, in order to ſtrengthen thy faith and courage.
Merit, therefore, ſo particular a favour, by being abſolutely devoted t- the
orders of the Khalifs.“

By a ſimilar education the derviſes animated the followers of Iſmael with
the firmeſt belief: thus they made them entertain an hatred of life, and a love
of death, which they confidered as the gate that afforded an entrance fo ce-
I-{tial pleaſures, and infpired them with that determined courage, which for
lome time aſtoniſhed the univerſe, Hs:


I ſay,


. . ESSAYS on Tr MEND. _
I ſay for ſome time, becauſe this kind of courage ſoon diſappears with the
cauſe that produced ir. Of all the paſſions, that of fanaticiſm founded on
the deſire of pleaſure is doubtleſs the ſtrongeſt, and always the leaſt durable,
becauſe fanaticiſm being only founded on prejudice and deceit, reaſon muſt
inſenſibly ſap its foundation. Thus the Arabs, the Abyſſinians, and in ge-
neral all the Mahometan nations, within the ſpace of one century, loſt all
that ſuperiority of courage which had diſtinguiſhed them from all other
people; and in this particular they were much inferior to the Romans.


The bravery of theſe laſt, excited by a ſpirit of patriotiſm, and founded


on real and temporal rewards, would always have been the ſame, if luxury
had not paſſed into Rome with the ſpoils of Aſia; if the deſire of riches
had not broke the chain that united perſonal and general intereſt, and had
not at once corrupted the manners and form of government among that
eople, |

, Crs help obſerving with reſpect to theſe two kinds of courage, the
one founded on. religious fanaticiſm, and the other on the love of our coun-
try, that the latter is the only one with which a wiſe legiſlator ought to
inſpire his fellow-citizens. A fanatic courage is ſoon weakened and ex-
tinguiſhed, ' Beſides, this: courage deriving its ſource from the blindneſs of
ſuperſtition,. a nation has: no: ſooner loſt its fanaticiſm, than nothing remains
but its ſtupidity; and it then becomes the contempt of all nations, to which
it is in every, reſpect really inferior.

It is to the Muſulman's ſtupidity that the Chriſtians owe ſo many ad-


vantages obtained over the Turks, who by their numbers alone, ſays the cheva-
lier Folard, would be too formidable, if they made ſome ſlight changes in


the order of battle, their diſcipline and arms; if they quitted the ſabre for
the bayonet, and could lay aſide the ignorance in which they will ever be
kept by ſuperſtition; for their religion, he adds, is only fit to eterniſe the
ſtupidity of that nation. | |

I have:ſhewn, that the paſſions are le of making us perform pro-
digies : a truth proved both by the deſperate courage of the followers of
Iſmael; by the meditations of. the Gymnoſophiſts, whoſe probation! is not
finiſhed till after a retreat of thirty-ſeven years ſpent in ſilence and ſtudy
by the barbarous and continued macerations of the Fakers ; by the revenge-
ful fury of the Japanneſe (a); by the duels of the Europeans; and in ſhort,
by the firmneſs of the Roman gladiators, who on receiving a mortal blow,

fell and died with the ſame courage with which they had fought.

All men, as I propoſe to prove, are then, in general, ſuſceptible of a de-
gree of paſſion more than ſufficient to make them triumph over their lazineſs,
and to endue them with that continuance of attention to which ſuperiority
of knowledge is attached.


4


_— —_ * _ .


(a) One of theſe rips open his belly in of infamy, obliged to follow his example,
the preſence of the perſon who offended and rip up his.
him; upon which the latter is, under pain


Ff 2 The


220 DE L'ESPRIT; on

The great inequality of mind, obſervable in mankind, therefore, only de-
pends on the different education they receive, and the unknown and varied
chain of circumſtances in which they are placed, |

In fact, if all the operations of the mind are reducible to perceiving, re-
membering, and obſerving the relations that ſubſiſt between different ob-
jects, and their connection with us, it is evident that all men being endued,
as I have already ſhewn, with ſenſe, extent of memory, and, in ſhort, with
the capacity of attention neceſſary to render them capable of the higheſt ideas;
among men who are well organiſed (b), there are conſequently none who
may not render themſelves illuſtrous by great talents. |

I ſhall add, as a ſecond demonſtration of this truth, that all the falſe
judgments, as I have proved in my firſt diſcourſe, are the effect either of
ignorance, or of the paſſions: of ignorance, when we have not in our me-
mory the ſubjects of compariſon from whence the truths we are in ſearch of
ought to reſult : of the paſſions, when they are ſo modified that we have
an intereſt in ſeeing objects different from what they really are. Now theſe
cauſes, which are the only general ones that produce our errors, are entirely
accidental. | © |

Ignorance, in the firſt place, is not neceſſary; it is not produced by any
defect in the organization, ſince there is no man, as I have ſhewn in the be-
ginning of this diſcourſe, who is not endued with a memory capable of
containing infinitely more objects than are required for the diſcovery of the
moſt important truths. In regard to the paſſions, the natural wants being
the only paſſions immediately given by nature, and the wants being never
deceitful, it is evident that the want of juſt thinking is never produced by
a defect in the organization; and that we have all the power of forming
the ſame judgments on the ſame things. Now to have the ſame view of
them is to have equal abilities of mind. It is then certain, that the inequality
of abilities obſervable in the men whom I call well organiſed, does no ways
depend on the greater or leſs degree of the excellence of their organiza-
tion (c); but on the different education they have received, on the various
circumſtances in which they have been placed, and, in ſhort, on the little apti-
tude they have for thought, from the hatred they have contracted in early


—


*


(b) That is, thoſe in whoſe organiza-


tion we perceive no defect, which is the


caſe with moſt men.
(e) I obſerve on this ſubje, that the


title of a man of genius, as I have ſnewn


in the ſecond diſcourſe, 1s not granted on
account of the number or delicacy, but
the happy choice of the ideas preſented to
the public; and if chance, as experience
proves, determines us to engage in more
or leſs intereſting ſtudies, and almoſt con-
ſtantly makes us chuſe the ſubjects of


which we treat; thoſe who conſider ge-
nius as a gift of nature, are, upon this
ſuppoſition, obliged to confeſs that genius
is rather the effect of chance than the ex-
cellence of the organization; and that it
cannot be conſidered as the mere gift of
nature; unleſs the word nature be extend-
ed to the eternal and univerſal chain which
binds together all the events that happen
in the world, and in which the idea even
of chance is comprehended.


youth


ESSAYS on TRE MIND. 221


youth for application, of which they became abſolutely incapable in a more
advanced age.

How probable ſoever this opinion may be, as its novelty may ſtill pro-
duce ſurpriſe, ſince we with difficulty lay aſide ancient prejudices, and, in
ſhort, as the truth of a ſyſtem is proved by the explication of the phæno-
mena that depend upon it; I am going, in conſequence of my principles,
to ſhew, in the following chapter, why ſo few perſons of genius are to be
found among mankind, when all are formed to be of this claſs.


FP YL A \ N * L *
3 b * »
% 1 71 4 o 57% 41 1


ccc
C II A P. XXVII.


Of the agreement of facts, with the principles above ęſtabliſped.


XPERIENCE ſeems to contradict my doctrines, and this apparent


contradiction may render my opinions ſuſpected. If all men, ſay they,


have equal capacities, why in a kingdom, compoſed of fifteen or eighteen
millions of people, do we ſee fo few of ſuch men, as Turenne, Rony, Col-


bert, Deſcartes, Corneille, Moliere, Quinault, le Brun, and, in ſhort, of
thoſe men who are mentioned as an honour to their age and country ?
To reſolve this queſtion, let us examine the vaſt concourſe of circum-
ſtances abſolutely neceſſary to form illuſtrious men of what kind ſoever, and
we ſhall acknowledge, that men are ſo rarely placed in that happy concourſe


of circumſtances, that geniuſes of the firſt order muſt be in fact as ſcarce


as they are found to be. |
Suppoſing in France ſixteen millions of perſons endued with the moſt
happy diſpoſition of mind; ſuppoſing an ardent deſire in the government


of calling forth theſe diſpoſitions, yet, as experience ſhews, books, men, and


the aſſiſtance proper to unfold theſe diſpoſitions, are only to be found in an
opulent city, it is, conſequently, among the eight hundred thouſand perſons
who live, or have long lived at Paris (a), that we ought to find men ſupe-
rior in the different arts and ſciences. Now, if from theſe eight hundred
thouſand perſons we firſt deduct half, that is, the women, whoſe education
and manner of life oppoſe the progreſs they might make in the arts and
ſciences ; if we exclude alſo children, old men, artizans, manufacturers,
monks, domeſtics, ſoldiers, the merchants, and, in general, all thoſe who


by their ſtations, dignities, and riches, are ſubje& to employments, or given


(a) If we run over the liſt of great men,


we ſhall ſee that Moliere, Quinault, Cor- and that the muſes, ſo fond of woods,


talents are always condemned to obſcurity;


neille, Conde, Paſcal, Fontenelle, Malle-
branche, &c. have been under a neceſſity
of improving their minds by the aſſiſtances
to be obtained in the capital; that country


meadows, and fountains, would be no bet-
ter than country laſſes, if they did not
from time to time breathe the air of great


cities. f
up


*


222 | DR L'ESPREF;, on,
up to pleaſure, which take up a part of their time; if we conſider, in ſhort,
the ſmall number of thoſe, who being placed in their youth in that ſtation
where they feel no other pain than that of not being able to comfort all the
miſerable, and who can, without inquietude, give themſelves up intirely to
ſtudy and reflection; it is certain, that this number cannot exceed that of
ſix thouſand; that of theſe ſix thouſand, there are not ſix hundred animated
with the deſire of inſtruction; that of theſe {ix hundred, there are not half
of them animated with this deſire, with the degree of warmth proper to fer-
tilize grand ideas; that we cannot reckon a hundred who add to the deſire
of inſtruction, the conſtancy and patience neceſſary to carry their abilities to
perfection, and who thus unite two qualities, which vanity, too impatient of
producing itſelf to view, ever hinders being united; in theſe there are not,

rhaps, fifty who in their early youth have always applied to the ſame
kind of ſtudy, who have always been inſenſible to love and ambition, and
who have not in too varied ſtudies, in pleaſures, or intrigue, loſt the moments,
the loſs of which is always irreparable to whatever. would render himſelf ſu-
perior in any ſcience or art whatſoever. Now of theſe fifty, who, divided
by ſeveral: kinds of ſtudy, will produce only. one or two of each kind, if I
deduct thoſe who have not read the works, lived with the men moſt proper
to enlighten them; and from this number, thus reduced, I ſtill retrench all
thoſe whoſe. progreſs has been. ſtopped by death, the reverſes of fortune, or
other accidents; I ſay, that under the actual form of our government, the
multitude of circumſtances, the concourſe of which is abſolutely neceſſary to
form great men, oppoſes their multiplication, and the men of genius muſt
be as uncommon as they really are. | |

We. ought then. only to ſearch into morals for the true cauſe of the in-
equality obſervable. in. various. minds.; to account, therefore, for the ſcarcity,
or multiplicity of great men in certain ages or countries, ve have no reaſon
to have recourſe to the influence of the air, and the. different climates, which,
ſo conſtantly repeated, have. been always contradicted- both by hiſtory, and
experience. 14 |

If the different temperature. of climates. had ſuch an influence on the mind
and its capacities, how comes it that the Romans (b), ſo magnanimous, ſo
brave under a republican government, are now ſo. daſtardly and effemi-
nate? How comes it that the Greeks and Romans, who were formerly
ſo worthy of eſteem for their wit and virtue, and were the admiration of
the earth, are now. dwindled into contempt-? How comes it that thoſe
Aſiatics, ſo. brave under the name. of. Eleamites, were ſo cowardly and baſe
in the. time of Alexander, under that of | Perſians; and yet under the
name of Parthians became the terror of Rome, and that in an age when the


2 CY
2


(b) Though ſome people acknowlege cient Rome, ſay they, conquered is by her
that the Romans, at preſent, do not re- virtues and her valour, ſo modern Rome
ſemble the ancient Romans, yet they pre- has reconquered it by her plots and poli-
tend that they have this in common, their tical artifices; and Pope Gregory VII. is
being the maſters of the world. As an- the Cæſar of this ſecond Rome.


Romans
N


o


ESSAYS os TR MIND. 223.
Romans had loſt none of their courage and diſcipline? How comes it that
the Spartans, the moſt brave and virtuous of the Greeks, while they were re-
| ligious obſervers of the laws of Lycurgus, loſt their reputation for both,
when, after the Peloponeſan war, they ſuffered gold and luxury to be intro-
duced among them? How comes it that the ancient Cattæ, ſo formidable to the
Gauls, are now void of the ſame courage? How comes it that the Jews, fo
often defeated by their enemies, ſhewed under the conduct of the Maccabees
a courage worthy of the moſt warlike nation? How comes it that the arts
and ſciences have been by turns cultivated ind neglected by different nations,
and have ſucceſſively run through almoſt all climates ? | wa
In one of Lucian's dialogues, that philoſopher ſays, „It was not in
&« Greece, that I made my firit abode. I began by directing my ſteps to-
„ wards the Indus; and the Indian, to hear me, humbly Jeſcended from
« his elephant. From the Indies, I turned towards Ethiopia; I tranſported
« myſelf into Egypt; from Egypt, I went to Babylon; I ſtopped in Scythia;
e returned by Thrace. I converſed with Orpheus, and Orpheus brought me
“ into Greece.“


Why did philoſophy paſs from Greece into Heſperia, from Heſperia to
Conſtantinople and Arabia? and why repaſſing Arabia into Italy, has it
found an aſylum in France, England, and even in the north of Europe?
Why do we no longer find a Phocion at Athens, a Pelopidas at Thebes, and
a Decius at Rome ? The temperature of theſe climates is not changed: to
what then ought we to attribute the tranſmigration of arts, ſciences, courage,
and virtue, if it is not to be aſcribed to moral cauſes ? EO

To theſe cauſes we owe the explanation of an infinite number of political
phznomena, which people in vain endeavour to explain by Ae
Such are the conqueſts of the people of the north, the ſlavery and allego-
rical genius of the orientals, and the ſuperiority of certain nations in certain
ſciences : a ſuperiority which they will ceaſe, I think, to attribute to the
different temperature of the climate, when I have rapidly pointed out the
cauſe of thele principal effects.


e HAF. XXVII.
Of the conqueſts of the northern nations.


HE phyſical cauſe of the conqueſts made by the inhabitants of the

northern part of Europe, is ſaid to be derived from that ſuperiority of
courage or ſtrength, which nature has given to the northern nations, preferably
to thoſe of the ſouth. This opinion, ſo proper to flatter the pride of the na-
tions of Europe, moſt of which derive their origin from thoſe people, have met
with no oppoſition, However, in order to aſſure ourſelves of the truth of ſo
flattering an opinion, let us examine, whether the inhabitants of the north are


really poſſeſſed of greater bravery than thoſe of the ſouth. For this 1
5 8 "MF


1


224 | DE L'ESPRIT; or,
let us firſt enquire what courage is, and aſcend up to the principles that may
throw a light upon one of the moſt important queſtions in morality and

litics, .

N in animals is only the effect of their wants, and theſe being gra-
tified, they become cowards: the famiſhed lion attacks a man; the lion, whoſe
ſtomach is filled, flies from him. The hunger of animals being once appeaſed,
the ſelf-love of every being, ſo neceſſary to its preſervation, makes it fly from
all danger. Courage in animals is, therefore, an effect of their want. We
give the epithet of timid to the animals who feed on graſs, only becauſe they
are not forced to fight for food, and have no motive to brave dangers : if they
have a want, they become courageous ; the ſtag, in rutting time, is as furious
as a beaſt of prey. | |

Let us apply to man, what I have ſaid of animals. Death is always pre-
ceeded by pain, and life always accompanied with ſome pleaſure. We are then
attached to life by the fear of pain and the love of pleaſure : the happier life
is, the more are we afraid to loſe it : and from thence proceeds the horror felt
by thoſe who live in plenty at the approach of death. On the contrary, the
leſs happineſs there is in life, the leſs do people regret to leave it: hence pro-
ceeds the inſenſibility with which the peaſant waits for his diſſolution.

Now, if the love of our being is founded on the fear of pain, and the love
of pleaſure, the deſire of being happy is more powerful than the deſire of life.
To obtain the object in the poſſeſſion of which we place our happineſs, every
one is capable of expoſing himſelf to dangers, either of a greater or a leſs na-
ture, but always proportioned to the greater or leſs warmth of deſire the per-
ſon feels for poſſeſſing that object (a). To be abſolutely without courage,
it is neceſſary to be abſolutely without deſire.

The objects of the deſires of mankind are various; they are animated with
different paſſions, as avarice, ambition, the love of their country, that of wo-
men, &c. Conſequently, the man capable of the boldeſt reſolution to gratify
one particular paſſion, will be without courage when another paſſion is con-
cerned. We have a thouſand times ſeen the buccanier animated by a valour
more than human, when ſtimulated by the hope of booty, yet find himſelf
without the courage to revenge an affront. Cæſar, whom no danger could ter-
rify in his march to glory, mounted with trembling into this carr, and never ſat
down in it till he had ſuperſtitiouſly repeated three times a certain verſe, which
he imagined had the power to keep him from being thrown from it (b). The
fearful man, whom every danger affrights, may be animated with the moſt
deſperate courage, in the defence of his wife, his miſtreſs, or his children. In
this manner we may explain a part of the phænomena of courage, and the
reaſon why the ſame man is brave or timorous according to the various cir-
cumſtances in which he is placed. |


th.


(a) The moſt courageous nation is, con- (b) See the Critical Hiſtory of Philo-
ſequently, that where valour is beſt re- ſophy. |
warded, and cowardice moſt puniſhed. |


After


P


ESSAYS own The MIND. 217


After having proved, that courage is the effect of our wants, a force com-
municated to us by our paſſions, and that it is exerted on obſtacles, which
chance, or the intereſt of others oppoſe to our happineſs ; it is proper now to
prevent all objections, and to throw a greater light on a ſubject of ſuch impor-
tance, to diſtinguiſh two kinds of courage.

The one, which I call true courage, conſiſts in ſeeing danger as it is, and
facing it. The other has, in a manner, nothing but eſſects: this kind of
courage, common to almoſt all men, makes them brave dangers, becauſe they
are ignorant of them; for the paſſions, by fixing all their attention on the ob-
ject of their deſires, conceals from them, at leaſt, a part of the danger to which
they expoſe themſelves — _ | |

To have an exact meaſure of the true courage of this ſort of men, it is ne-
ceſſary to take away all that part of the danger, which paſſion or prejudice con-
ceals from them; and this part is very conſiderable. Propoſe the plunder of a
city to the ſame ſoldier who would mount with fear to the aſſault, avarice will
facinate his eyes, he will wait impatiently for the hour of attack : the danger
will diſappear ; and his intrepidity. will be in proportion to his avarice. A thou-
ſand other cauſes produce the effect of avarice, the old ſoldier is brave, becauſe
the cuſtom of being in a danger, from which he has always eſcaped, renders
it almoſt nothing in his view; the victorious ſoldier marches to the enemy
with intrepidity, becauſe he does not expect much reſiſtance, and believes,
that he ſhall triumph without danger. Thus is bold, becauſe he thinks himſelf
fortunate z that, from an opinion of his own valour; and a third, becauſe he
thinks himſelf very expert. Courage is ſeldom founded on a true contempt of
death. Thus, the man who is intrepid with a ſword in his hand, will be often
a coward at fighting with piſtols. Remove the foldier who braves death in
battle, into a ſhip, and he will look with horror on a tempeſt, becauſe he really
ſees nothing but deſtruction. | |
Courage is often then only the effect of a man's not having a clear view of
the danger he confronts, or of his being intirely ignorant of it. How many
are there, who are ſeized with terror at the noiſe of thunder, and would be
afraid to paſs a night in a wood, at a diſtance from the high road, while there
are none found who do not paſs in the night without fear from Paris to Ver-
failles ? However, the blunder of a poſtillion, or the meeting an aſſaſſin on the
high road, are accidents more common, and conſequently more to be feared
than a clap of thunder, or the meeting an aſſaſſin in a diſtant wood. Why
then is fear more common in the firſt caſe, than in the laſt? It is becauſe flaſhes
of lightning, and the noiſe of thunder, as well as the darkneſs of woods, preſent
every inſtant to the mind images, that gives us the idea of danger, which do
not ariſe in our minds in the road from Paris to Verſailles. There are few men
who can ſupport the preſence of danger: its appearance has ſuch an effect upon
them, that we have ſeen men aſhamed of their cowardice, kill themſelves,
though they had not the power to revenge an affront. The face of their ene-
my. ſilenced in their breaſts, the cries of honour ; which to obey, they muſt by
alone working up this ſenſation in their minds, and then ſeizing the moment of
their rage, to give themſelves death, if I may fo expreſs myſelf, without per-

ceiving what they are about, | |
G g Thus,


226 DEL!'ESPRIT:; on,


Thus, to prevent the effect produced by the ſight of danger, in almoſt al!
mankind, people at war are not content to range their ſoldiers in an order that
renders their flight very difficult; in Aſia, they heat them with opium, in Eu-
rope, with brandy, and encourage them with the ſound of the drum, or by
their united ſhouts (c). By theſe means, on concealing a part of the danger to
which they are expoſed, they place their love of honour in an equilibrium with
their fear. What I have ſaid of the common ſoldiers, I allo ſay of the officers ;
among the moſt brave, there are few, who in bed (d), or on the ſcaffold, con-
fider death with a tranquil eye, What weakneſs did marſhal] Biron, ſo brave in
the field, betray at the execution of his ſentence ?

In order to ſupport the appearance of death, it is neceſſary to have a diſguſt
for life, or to be carried away by ſuch ſtrong paſſions, as determined Calanus,
Cato, and Portia, to kill themſelves. Thoſe animated by theſe ſtrong paſſions,
love life only on certain conditions, their paſſions do not conceal from them the
danger to which they expoſe themſelves : they ſee it as it is, and brave it. Bru-
tus reſolves to free Rome from tyranny, he aſſaſſinates Czſar, raiſes an army,
and fights Octavius; he is conquered, and kills himſelf ; life is inſupportable
without the liberty of Rome. | .

W hoever is ſuſceptible of ſuch ſtrong paſſions, is alſo capable of performing
the greateſt action; he not only braves death, but alſo pain. This is not the
caſe, with men who give themſelves death from a diſguſt of life; they merit al-
moſt as much the name of wiſe as of courageous ; moſt of them would be
without courage, amidſt the agonies of torture : for they have not life and
ſtrength enough to ſupport pain. The contempt of life is not the effect of a
ſtrong paſſion, but of the abſence of the paſſions ; it is the reſult of a calcula-
tion, by which they prove to themſelves, that it is better not to be, than to be
unhappy. Now, this diſpoſition of mind renders them incapable of great
things. Whoever is diſguſted with life, employs himſelf but little about the
affairs of this world. Thus, among ſo many Romans, who voluntarily em-
braced a violent death, there are few, who, by the killing of tyrants would
have dared to have rendered themſelves uſeful ro their country. In vain do
they ſay, that the guards which on all ſides ſurrounded the palaces of tyranny,
forbad their acceſs : their hands were diſarmed by the fear of puniſhment.
Such men drown themſelves, or open their veins; but they did not expole
themſelves to cruel torments, no motive could determine them to it.


(c) Marſhal Saxe, in his ReviRIEs,


ſpeaking of the Pruſſians, ſays, that a cu-


ſtom they uſe of loading their muſkets as


they march, is a very good one. Diverted
by this employment, he adds, the ſoldier
becomes leſs capable of attending to his
danger.

Speaking of a people called the Aries,
who painted their bodies in a frightful
manner, he adds, why does Tacitus ſay,
that in battle the eyes are firſt conquered ?


It is becauſe a new object recalls more di-
ſtinctly to the ſoldiers memory the image
of death, of which he had before but a
confuſed view. |

(d) If the young in general ſhew more
courage on a death-bed, and greater weak-
neſs on the Scaffold, than the old; it is,
becauſe, in the firſt caſe, young men pre-
ſerve more hope ; and in the ſecond, ſuffer
a greater loſs, |


Te


ESSAYS O Tue MIN D. 227


It is the fear of pain that explains to us whatever is fantaſtical in this ſpecies
of courage. If the man has ſuch reſolution, as to blow out his brains with a
piſtol, and would ſhrink at ſtabbing himſelf with a dagger, and has an averſion
to certain kinds of death, this only proceeds from a fear, either true or falſe,


of ſuffering greater pain. |
The e e above eſtabliſhed, I think, afford a reſolution to all queſtions


of this kind, and prove, that courage is not, as ſome pretend, an effect of
the different temperature of climates, but of the paſſions and wants, common
to all men. The bounds of my ſubject, do not permit me to treat here of va-
rious names given to courage; ſuch as thoſe of bravery, valour, intrepidity,
&c. Theſe are only the different ways in which courage is ſhewn.

This queſtion being diſcuſſed, I paſs to the ſecond. Whether, as it is pre-
tended, we ought to attribute the conqueſts of the northern nations, to the pe-
culiar ſtrength and vigour, with which nature has endowed them. |

Experience will be of little ſervice in aſcertaining the truth of this opinion;
for hitherto, no ſufficient proof has preſented itſelf to a ſcrupulous enquirer,
that nature has given greater ſtrength to her productions in the north, than to
thoſe in the ſouth. If the north has its white bears, and its orax, Africa has
its lions, its rhinoceroſſes, and its elephants. They have not cauſed a certain
number of negroes of the gold coaſt or Senegal, to wreſtle with an equa] num-
ber of Ruſſians or Finlanders : they have not weighed the inequality of their
ſtrength, by the different weights they are capable of lifting. So far are they
from having any thing ſettled in this reſpe&, that if I-was to attack prejudice,
with prejudice, I might oppoſe to whatever has been ſaid on the ſtrength of
the northern nations, the praiſe given to that of the Turks. People can then
no otherwiſe ſupport the opinion they have of the ſtrength and courage of the
people of the north, but by the hiſtory of their conqueſts ; and even here all
nations may, from the ſame pretenſions, juſtify them by the ſame reaſons, and
believe, that each is equally favoured by nature.

If we have recourſe to hiſtory, we there ſee the Huns quit the Palus Meotis
to enſlave the nations ſituated to the north of their country : we there ſee the
Saracins deſcend in crowds from the burning ſands of Arabia, to ſcourge the
earth, ſubdue the nations, triumph over Spain, and ſpread deſolation even into
the heart of France ; we there ſee the ſame Saracins, break with their victorious
hands, the ſtandards carried in the cruſades, and the nations of Europe, by re-

eated attempts in Paleſtine, multiply their ſhame and defeats.

If I direct my view to other regions, I ſtill ſee the truth of my opinion con-
_ firmed, as well by the triumphs of Tamerlane, who, from the banks of the
Indus, purſues his victories, even to the frozen climates of Siberia; by the con-

queſt of the Incas, and by the valour of the Egyptians, who, in the time of
Cyrus, were eſteemed as the moſt courageous of all people, and proved them-
ſelves at the battle of Tembreia, worthy of their reputation ; and in ſhort, by
thoſe Romans, who carried their victorious arms even into Sarmatia, and the
illand of Britain. | |
Since then victory has flown alternately from the ſouth to the north, and from


the north to the ſouth ; ſince all nations have been by turns conquering and '
- G g 2 conquered;


220 | DE L'*'ESPRIT;, on,
Conquered z ſince, as hiſtory informs us (e), the people of the north are not
much leſs ſenſible of the burning heat of the ſouth, than the people of the
ſouth are of the piercing cold of the north, and both make war with equal diſ-
advantage in climates too different from their own, it is evident, that the con-
queſts of the northern nations are abſolutely independent on the particular tem-
3 of their climates; and that people ſearch in vain into phyſical cauſes,
or a fact, where the moral one is ſo ſimply and naturally explained.

If the north has produced the laſt conquerors of Europe, it is becauſe fierce
and ſavage nations, ſuch as thoſe of the north are (f), as the Chevalier Toland
remarks, infinitely more courageous and warlike, than people indulged in luxu-
ry, ſoftneſs, and ſubject to arbitrary power, as were then the Romans (g). Un-
der the laſt Emperors, the Romans were no longer that 22 who, being the
conquerors of the Gauls and Germans, held the ſouth alſo ſubject to their laws;
for then thoſe maſters of the world had ſunk under the ſame virtues, that had
made them triumph over the univerſe.

But in order to ſubdue Aſia, little more, it is ſaid, was neceſſary, than to carry
chains there. The rapidity with which they conquered it, I reply, does
not prove the cowardice of the people of the ſouth : What cities ever defended
themſelves with more obſtinacy than Marſeilles, Numantia, Saguntum, and
Rhodes ? Did not the Romans in the time of Craſſus, find the Parthians enemies
worthy of their courage? It is then to the ſlavery and ſoftneſs of the Aſiatics
char che Romans owed the rapidity of their ſucceſs. £0

When Tacitus ſays, that the monarchy of the Parthians was leſs formidable
to the Romans, than the liberty of the Germans, it is the form of government
in the Jaſt, that he attributes the ſuperiority of their courage. It is then
to moral cauſes, and not to the particular temperature of the countries of the


north, that we ought to attribute the conqueſts of the northern nations,


(e) Tacitus ſays, that if the northern
nations bore cold and hunger better than
the ſouthern, theſe laſt ſupported heat and
thirſt better than they. |

The ſame T acitus ſays, in his Manners
of the Germans, that they could not ſup-
port the fatigues of war.

(f) Olaus Vormius, in his Daniſh An-
tiquities, confeſſes, that he drew moſt of
his knowlege from the rocks of Denmark,
that is, from the inſcriptions engraved upon
them in Runic or Gothic characters.
Theſe rocks formed a ſeries of hiſtory and
chronology, that compoſed almoſt the whole
library of the north.

In order to preſerve the memory of ſome
events, they made uſe of unhewn ſtones
of a prodigious ſize ; ſome of theſe were


thrown confuſedly together, and to others
they gave ſome ſymetry. We ſee many of
theſe ſtones on Saliſbury Plain in England,
which ſerved as a ſepulchre to the princes,
and heroes of the Britons, as is proved from
the great quantity of bones and armour that
has — found there.

(s) If the Gauls, 1 Czſar, were for-
merly more warlike than the Germans,
and now yield to them the glory of arms,
it is becauſe the former, being inſtructed by
the Romans in commerce, are become rich
and civilized.

What has happened to the Gauls, ſays
Tacitus, has happened to the Britons,
theſe two nations have loſt their courage


with their liberty.


CHAP.


ESSAYS on Tur MIN P. 221


LAEAEXEREERENEXERESEEX LEE EE XENEAEXEL


CH 4a Þ. an
Of the Slavery, and allegorical Genius of the Eaftern Nations.


6 ſnocked by the heavy yoke of deſpotic power, and the long


and ſhameful patience of the people who groan under it, the weſtern
nations, proud of their liberty, have recourſe to phyſical cauſes, to explain
this political phænomenon. They have maintained, that the luxury of Aſia
produced only men without ſtrength and courage, and that delivered up to
brutal deſires, they are only born for ſlavery. They have added, that the
countries in the ſouth are therefore, only capable of adopting a ſenſual re-
ligion. | |


Their conjectures are contradicted by hiſtory and experience: we know that


Aſia has produced very warlike nations: that love does not weaken courage


(a): that the nations moſt ſenſible of its pleaſures, have often been, as Plutarch
and Plato obſerve, the moſt brave and courageous : that the ardent deſire of


women can never be conſidered as a proof of the weakneſs of the conſtitutions
of the Aſiatics (b); and that in ſhort, long before Mahomet, Odin had eſta-


bliſhed among the moſt northren nations, a religion, perfectly like that of the
prophet of the ſouth (c). | |


Being forced to abandon this opinion, and to reſtore, if I may uſe the ex- -


_ preſſion, ſouls and bodies to the Aſiatics, people have thought to diſcover in


the natural ſituation of the eaſtern nations, the cauſe of their ſlavery : in conſe-
5 of which, they have conſidered the ſouth as a vaſt plain, whoſe extent


furniſhes tyranny with


the means of keeping their people in ſubjection. But


unhappily this oppoſition is not confirmed by geography: we know the ſouth


of the globe abounds in mountains: that the north, on the contrary, might be


conſidered as a vaſt plain deſart, and covered with woods, as were probably


the plains of Aſia.


After having in vain exhauſted phyſical cauſes, for the foundation of the


eaſtern deſpotiſm, it is proper to have recourſe to moral cauſes, and conſe-


(a) The Gauls, ſays Tacitus, loved wo-
men, and treated them with the greateſt
reſpect ; they even conſidered them as
ſomething divine, and therefore admitted
them into their councils, and deliberated
with them on ſtate affairs. The Germans
treated theirs in the ſame manner; their
decifions ſeemed to be received by them
as ſo many oracles. Under Veſpaſian, one


Velleda, and before her one Aurinia, and


ſeveral others, were treated with the ſame


veneration. In fine, fays
Germans owed to their aſſociating with
women, both their courage in battle, and
their wiſdom in councils,


Tacitus, the -


OE
*


(b) According to the Chevalier Beau- jeu.


the northern nations have always been ad-
dicted to the pleaſures of love. Ogerius,


in Itinere Danico, ſays the ſame thing.


(c) See in chap. xxv. the exact confor-


mity between theſe two religions.
quently


208 DE-L*ESPRIT; on,

quently to hiſtory. This informs us that the nations, by becoming civilized,
inſenſibly loſt their courage, their virtue, and even their love of liberty; that
every ſociety, immediately after its inſtitution, according to the different cir-
cumſtances in which it was placed, marched with a flower, or more rapid
pace towards ſlavery, Now the ſouthern nations, being the firſt aſſembled in
ſociety, mult conſequently have been the firſt ſubject to deſpotic power; becauſe
to this every ſpecies of government tends, and it is a form which every ſtate

reſerves, till its intire deſtruction.

But ſay thoſe who believe the world more ancient than we do, how does it
happen that there are ſtill republics upon earth ? To this it may be replied,
that if all ſocieties, by being civilized, tend to deſpotiſm, all deſpotic power
tends to depopulation, The climates ſubject to this power, after a certain
number of ages becoming uncultivated and depopulated, are changed into de-
farts; the plains, in which were cities of immenle extent, or where ſumptuous
edifices were raiſed, became by little and little, covered with foreſts, in which
ſome families took refuge, who, inſenſibly formed new nations of ſavages ;- and
this ſucceſſion mult conſtantly preſerve republics upon earth.

I ſhall only add to what I have juſt ſaid, that if the people of the ſouth have
been longer ſlaves, and if the nations of Europe, except the Muſcovites, may
be conſidered as free, it is becauſe, theſe nations have been more lately poliſhed :
becauſe, in the time of Tacitus, the Germans and Gauls were ſtill no more
than a kind of ſavages, and that unleſs a nation be at once driven to ſlavery by
force of arms, this will not be accompliſhed till after a long ſucceſſion of ages,
and by inſenſible, but continued attempts made by tyrants to extinguiſh in the
hearts of their ſubjects, that virtuous love, which all mankind naturally have
for liberty, and thus to debaſe the mind, ſo far as to make it bow to oppreſſion
and ſlavery. When once a people have become thus unhappy, they are no
longer capable of any noble and generous actions (d). If the nations of A ſia
are the contempt of Europe, it is becauſe time has ſubdued them to a deſpotiſm
incompatible with a certain elevation of mind. It is the ſame deſpotiſm ſo de-


(d) In theſe countries magnanimity ne-
ver triumphs over revenge. We do not ſee
in Turky, what happened ſome years agoin
Eveland. The young pretender being pur-
ſued by the king's troops, found an aſſylum
in the houſe of a perſon of diſtinction, who
being accuſed of having afforded a retreat
to the pretender, was ſummoned to appear
before his judges; he did ſo, and on his
appearance faid, © ſuffer me, before I an-
« ſwer any queſtions, to aſk, which of
you, if the pretender had taken refuge
c in his houſe, would have proved ſo baſe
« and abject, as to have delivered him up?“
At this quſtion the court was filent, aroſe
and diſmiſled the accuſed, |

We do not fee in Turky the poſſeſſor of
the land, trouble himſelf about the welfare


of his vaſials; a Turk does not eſtabliſh
manufactures on his eſtate, he will not ſup-
port with a ſecret pleaſure, the inſolence
of his inferiors; an inſolence with which
a ſudden fortune almoſt always. inſpires
thoſe who are born in indigence. We
ſhall never hear from his mouth, this
fine anſwer made by an Engliſh lord, to
thoſe who blamed him for his too great in-
dulgence. Were I defirous of receivin

„ more reſpect from my dependants,
„ ſhould conſider as well as you, that mi-
„ fery has an humble and timid voice; but
„ with them happy: and thank heaven,
< that their boldneſs now afſures me, that
they are richer and happier than they
5 were.” |


ſtructive


ESSAYS on Tus MIN D. 2231


ſtructive to every ſpecies of genius and abilities, that has made people regard
the ftupidity of certain nations of the eaſt, as produced by a defect in their
organization. It would however, be eaſy to perceive, that the exterior diffe-
rence obſervable, for inſtance, in the countenances of the Chineſe aud the Swedes,
can have no influence on their minds; and that, if all our ideas, as Mr. Locke
has ſhewn, proceeds from the ſenſes, the northern nations having no greater
number of ſenſes, than the Orientals, have by their natural conformation equal
mental capacities, , | |

It is only to the different conſtitution of empires, and conſequently, to-moral
cauſes, that we ought to attribute all the difference obſervable in the under-
ſtandings and characters of nations. For inſtance, the Orientals owe to the
form of their government that allegorical genius, which forms the diſtinguiſh-
ing character of their works. In countries where the ſciences have been culti-
vated, where the people ſtill preſerve the deſire of writing, where they are
however, ſubject to arbitrary power, and conſequently, the truth can only be
preſented under an emblem, it is certain, that the authors mult inſenſibly con-
tract an allegorical manner of thinking. Thus to make I know not what ty-
rant ſenſible of the injuſtice, and the ſeverity with which he treated his ſubjects,
and the reciprocal and neceſſary dependance, by which a ſovereign and his peo-
ple are united, an Indian philoſopher invented, ſay they, the game of cheſs.
He gave leſſons to the tyrant ; made him remark, that if in this game the people
became uſeful after the loſs of the king, the king after the taking of his men
was found incapable of defence, and that in both caſes he was equally loſt (e).

might give a thouſand other examples of the allegorical form, under which
ideas are preſented to the Indians; theſe examples, I believe, are ſufficient to
ſhew, that the form of the government to which the eaſtern nations owe ſo many
ingenious allegories, have in thoſe countries occaſioned great ſcarcity of hiſto-
rians. For though the hiſtorical kind of writing, doubtleſs ſuppoſes great abi-
lities, it does not however, require greater than any other kind. Why then,
among their writers, are good hiſtorians ſo ſcarce? It is becauſe, in order to ob-


(e) The viſiers have, by the like addreſs, © deſart village, that I may repeople it
found the means of giving uſeſul leſſons to „ with my men, my labour, my care, and
their ſovereigns. A king of Perſia be- * my induſtry. The king gave orders,
<« ing exaſperated, depoſed his grand viſier, “ that ſuch a village as he deſired, ſhould
ce and choſe another in his room; how- „ he ſought for; but after a long ſearch,
« ever, as he was in other reſpects ſatisfied ““ thoſe entruſted with the commiſſion came
e with the ſervices of him he had depoſed, © to inform him, that they had been un-
he bad him chuſe whatever place in hisdo- © able to find one. This the king told to
«© minions he pleaſed, where he might ſpend * the depoſed viſier, who then faid ; I well
<« the reſt of his days, with his family, in “ knew, that there was not one ſingle
c the enjoyment of the fortune he had ac- © ruined place in all the countries thou
« quired. The viſier replied, I have no © hadſt committed to my care. What I
« occaſion for all the wealth with which © have done, was in order, that thou, O
ce thou haſt loaded me; I therefore entreat © king, mighteſt know in what condition
« thee to ſuffer me to reſtore it, and if „ I have placed thy dominions, and that
ce thou haſt ſtill any favourable thoughts of “ thou mighteſt charge another to render
« me, I aſk not for a place inhabited, but “ thee as good an account.” Gallandi


ce earneſtly entreat thee to grant me ſome Bon mots des Orientaux. 125
a tain


224 DE L*'ESPRIT; on,
tain a reputation, it is neceſſary, not only to be born in an happy concourſe of
circumſtances, proper to form a great man; but alſo, in countries where they
may with impunity practice virtue, and ſpeak the truth. Now deſpotiſm op-

ſes this, and ſhuts the mouth of hiſtorians (f), if its power is not in this re-
ſpect limited by ſome prejudice, ſuperſtition, or particular eſtabliſhment, Such
in China is the hiſtorical tribunal, a tribunal at preſent equally deaf to the en-
treaties and menaces of kings (g). |

What I have ſaid of hiſtory, I ſay of eloquence. If Italy was ſo fruitful in ora-
tors, it was not as ſome learned pedants of the college weakly pretend, becauſe,
the foil of Rome was more proper than that of Liſbon, or Conſtantinople, for
producing great orators. Rome loſt at the ſame inſtant her eloquence, and her
liberty: in the mean time, no accident happened to the earth under the emperors,


(f) If in theſe countries the hiſtorian
- cannot mention the traitors, who in the
preceding ages have ſometimes ſold their
country, without expoſing himſelf to great
dangers ; if he is thus forced to ſacrifice
the truth to the vanity of deſcendants, who
are often as guilty as their anceſtors; how
can a miniſter in theſe countries be of ſer-
vice to the public ? What obſtacles will be
oppoſed to his projects by men in power, who
are infinitely more intereſted in prolonging
an abuſe, than in the reputation of their
fathers? How, in theſe governments can


any one dare to require virtue from a citi-


zen, or to declaim againſt the wickedneſs
of mankind. It is not the men who are
wicked; but the legiſlation which renders
them ſuch, b
does well, and ſpeaks the truth.


(g) The hiſtorical tribunal, ſays Mr.


Freret, is compoſed of two ſorts of hiſto-
rians, the one are entruſted with writing
what paſſes without the palace, that is,
every thing that relates to affairs in gene-
ral; and the other every thing that paſſes
in it, that is all the actions and diſcourſes
of the prince, his miniſters, and officers.
Every one of the members of this tribunal,
_ writes upon a leaf of paper, whatever comes
to his knowlege, ſigns it, and without com-
municating it to his brethren, throws it into
a large cheſt, placed in the midſt of the hall
where they aſſemble. To ſhew the ſpirit of


this tribunal, Mr. Freret relates, that a ge-
neral, named T-fou-i-chong, cauſed his
ſovereign, T-chouang-chong to be aſſaſ-
finated, for taking from him one of his
wives, The hiſtorical tribunal prepared an


puniſhing every one who


account of that event, and placed it in the
archives ; when the general being informed
of this ſtep, deprived the preſident of his
place, condemned him to ſuffer death, ſup-
preſſed the relation, and nominated ano-
ther. preſident in his room. But ſcarce was
he fixed in his place, than he cauſed a new
memorial of this event to be drawn up, to
ſupply the place of the other. When the
general being informed of this boldneſs,
diſſolved the tribunal, and cauſed all the
members to be put to death. Immediately
the empire overflowed with an innudation
of papers, in which the general's conduct
was painted in the blackeſt colours. Upon
which, fearing a ſedition, he reſtabliſhed
the hiſtorical tribunal. | |

The annals of the dynaſty of Tang, re-


late another fa& on this ſubject, Ta-i-t-


ſong, the ſecond emperor of the dynaſty of

Tang, one day demanded of the preſident
of this tribunal, the ſight of the memoirs
deſtined for the hiſtory of his reign. My
& lord, ſaid the preſident, know, that we


render an exact account of the virtues


“ and vices of ſovereigns; and that we
& ſhould be no longer free, if thou ſhould'ſt
« perſiſt in thy demand.” «© What,
6 replied the emperor, wilt thou who oweft
c all that thou haſt to me, wilt thou who
art ſo attached to me, inform poſterity
« of my faults, if I commit any? It is not
cc in my power, ſaid the preſident to con-
«© ceal them. It would be with grief that
4 I ſhould write them; but ſuch is the duty
« of my employment, that it obliges me
“ even to inform poſterity of the converſa-
« tion thou haſt this day had with me.”

| nor


ESSAYS ov Taiz MIND. 233


nor was the climate of Rome changed. To what then ought we to attribute
the ſcarcity of orators that were then found among the Romans, if it was not
owing to moral cauſes, that is, to the changes which happened in the form of
their government? Who can doubt, that by forcing the orators to exert their
talents on trifling ſubjects (h), deſpotiſm drained the ſources of eloquence? Its
force principally conſiſts in the grandeur of the ſubjects of which it treats. Let
us ſuppoſe, that as great a genius was required to write the panegyric on Tra-
Jan, as to compoſe the orations againſt Catiline : upon this ſuppoſition, I ſay,
Pliny, from the choice of his ſubject, muſt remain much inferior to Cicero.
The view of the latter was to draw the Romans from that lethargy in which
Catiline would have ſurpriſed them ; he ſtrove to awaken in them the paſſions
of hatred and revenge; and muſt not a ſubject, fo intereſting to the maſters
of the world, have made them confer the palm of eloquence on Cicero ?

If we examine the foundation Of the reproaches of barbariſm and ſtupidity,
which the Greeks, the Romans, and all the - Europeans, have long caſt
on the people of the eaſt, we ſhall ſee, that nations having given the name of
genius only to ſuch aſſemblages of ideas as were of uſe to them, and deſpotiſm
having in almoſt all Aſia prohibited the ſtudy of morality, metaphyſics, civil
law, politics, and, in ſhort, of all the ſciences in which mankind are intereſted ;
the orientals muſt, conſequently, be treated as ſtupid barbarians by the en-
lightned people of Europe, and eternally become the contempt of free nations
and of poſterity.


SSE AW OW A A Leer Lee Leeb


C. HA? - SS.


Of the Superiority of certain nations in different ſciences.


| py H E natural ſituation of Greece is always the ſame, why then are the
Greeks at preſent different from what they were formerly? It is becauſe

e form of their government is changed; like water which aſſumes the ſhape
of all the veſſels into which it is poured, the character of nations is ſuſceptible
of all forms, and in every country the genius of the government conſtitutes
the genius of the nation (a), Now, under the republican government, what
| country


(h) The air of liberty, which Taci-
tus in his younger days breathed in the
reign of Veſpaſian, gave a ſpring, a vigour
to his ſoul ; by whoſe energy, as the abbe
de la Bletterie obſerves, he became a
man of genius; whereas, had he been
born in the reign of Nero, he never would


—


have ſoared above the character of a ſen-


ſible man.

(a) Nothing is generally more falſe and
ridiculous than the portraits drawn to re-
preſent the characters of different nations.
Some paint their own nation after the par-
ticular ſociety they frequent, and conſe-

quently


234 OE LL ESIPRIT; or,

country ought to be more fruitful of great generals, politicians, and heroes, than
Greece? Without ſpeaking of ſtateſmen, what philoſophers muſt have been
produced in a country where philoſophy was ſo honoured ? Where king Philip,
the conqueror of Greece, wrote to Ariſtotle: ** I return thanks to the Gods,
& not for their having given me a fon, but for having cauſed him to be born
«© while thou art living. I entruſt thee with his education; and hope thou wilt
% render him worthy of thee, and of me.“ What letter could be more
flattering than that of Alexander, the maſter of the world, who, when ready
to mount the throne of Cyrus, thus wrote to him: ** I am informed that thou
<« art going to publiſh thy treatiſes on Acroatics. What ſuperiority ſhall I
„ now maintain over other men? The ſublime ſciences thou haſt taught me
<« will become common, and yet thou knoweſt that I had rather ſurpaſs men
in the knowlege of theſe noble ſubjects than in power. Adieu.“

But philoſophy was not honoured in Ariſt#le alone. We know that Ptolemy,
king of Egypt, treated Zeno as a ſovereign, and ſent ambaſſadors to him
that the Athenians erected a mauſoleum to that philoſopher, at the public ex-
pence ; that, before Zeno's death, Antigonus, king of Macedonia, thus wrote
to him: Though fortune has raifed me to the higheſt poſt, though I ſurpaſs
<« thee in grandeur, I acknowlege that thou ſurpaſſeſt me in wiſdom and in


© yirtue,


Come then to my court ; thou ſhalt be of uſe not only to a great


„ king, but alſo to the whole Macedonian nation. Thou knoweft what an


—


quently repreſent the people as gloomy or
gay, dull or witty. Methinks I hear the
order of friars, called the Minims, afk, what
is the taſte of the French with reſpe& to
cookery? and they reply, that every body
in France eats oil. Others copy what a
thouſand writers have ſaid before them ;
they have never examined the changes ne-
ceſſarily produced in the character of a
people, by thoſe which happen in the ad-
miniſtration, and the alteration of man-
ners. It has been ſaid, that the French are
gay; and this will be repeated to eternity.
They do not perceive, that the misfortunes
of the times having obliged the princes to
Jay conſiderable taxes on the country peo-
ple, the French nation cannot be gay,
becauſe the peaſants, who alone compoſe
two thirds of the nation, are in want, and
want can never be gay: that even, in re-
gard to the cities, the neceſſity, it is ſaid,
the police of Paris is under of defraying a
part of the expence of the maſquerades per-
formed on holidays at St. Anthony's gate,
is not a proof of the gaiety of the artiſt
and the citizen: ſpies may contribute to


the ſafety of Paris; but being carried too
far, they diffuſe a general giffidence through
the minds of the people, that is abſolutely


incompatible with joy, on account of the


ill uſe that may be made of them: the
youth, being forbid to enter a tavern, have
loſt a part of that gaiety, which has fre-
quent need of being animated by wine :
that, in ſhort, good company, by baniſhing
groſs joy from their aſſemblies, have ba-
ni the true. Thus moſt foreigners find
a great difference between the real charac-
ter of our nation, and that it has obtained
abroad. If gaiety ever dwells in any part
of France, it is certainly on the ramparts
in feſtival days; yet the people there are
too wiſe to be eſteemed gay; for joy is al-
ways ſomewhat licentious. Beſides, gaiet
ſuppoſes eaſe ; and the true ſign of the eaſe
of a people is what certain perſons call
their inſolence; that is, their knowing the
rights of humanity, and what man” owes
to man: a knowlege never acquired by
thoſe who are diſcouraged, and rendered
timid by poverty. Eaſe defends its rights,
but indigence giyes them up.


* effect


ESSAYS o] Tix MIND. 233
<< effect the power of example has on the people; they are the ſervile imitators
of our virtues, and he who inſpires princes with them, gives them to the
people. Farewel.” Zeno replied : I applaud the noble ardour with which
thou art animated: in the midſt of the feſtivity, pomp, and pleaſures, with
© which kings are ſurrounded, it is beautiful to defire wiſdom and virtue. My
great age, and the bad ſtate of my health, will not permit me to repair to thee;
e but I ſend thee two of my diſciples : liſten to their inſtructions. If thou


«© heareſt them, they will ſhew thee the path of wiſdom and true happineſs.


« Farewel.” |

It was not philoſophy alone, but to all the arts that the Greeks paid fuch
homage. A poet was ſo extremely admired in Greece, that the Athenians,
by an expreſs law, forbad their leaving the country on pain of death (b). The
Spartans, whom certain authors have taken a pleaſure in repreſenting as vir-
tuous men, but leſs poliſhed, and not ſo ingenious as the other Greeks, were
no leſs ſenſible than they to the beauties of the arts and ſciences (c). Paſſio-
nately fond of poetry, they invited to them Archilocus, Xenodames, Xeno-
critus, Polymneſtes, Sacados, Periclitus, Phrynis, and Timotheus (d). So


great was their eſteem for the poems of Terpander, Spendo, and Alcman, that
there ſlaves were forbid to ſing them; they would have looked upon this as a2


profanation of divine things. They were not leſs skilled in the art of reaſon-
ing than that of painting their thoughts in verſe : ** Whoever, ſays Plato,
converſes with a Spartan, were he even the meaneſt among them, might find
him at firſt coarſe ; but if he entered into a ſubject, he will hear him ſpeak
« with a dignity, a preciſion, and a delicacy, that render his words like fo
% many ſharp arrows. Any other Greek beſides would appear but like a
ce ſtammering infant.“
with elegance and purity. To juſtneſs of thinking, they added the graces and
delicacy of expreſſion; that their anſwers being always ſnort and juſt, might
be poignant and agreeable. Thoſe who, through precipitation or ſlowneſs,
made either a bad anſwer, or none at all, were inſtantly puniſned. Bad rea-
ſoning was chaſtiſed at Sparta with as much ſeverity as in other places was
ſhewn to a bad conduct. Nothing, therefore, could impoſe on the under-


— — —


Thus they learnt from their moſt early youth to ſpeak


(b) A poet in the Marian iflands is con-
ſidered as a very ſurpriſing man, and this
character alone renders him reſpected by
the nation.

(c) Indeed, they had an abhorrence for
all poetry tending to enervate their minds,
and weaken their courage. They drove
Archilocus from Sparta, for ſaying in verſe,
that it was more wiſe to fly, than to die in
arms, His exile was not the effect of their
indifference for poetry, but of their love
of virtue. The care taken by Lycurgus


to collect the works of Homer; the ſtatue


of Laughter raiſed in the midſt of Sparta,
and the laws he gave to the Spartans, prove
that this great man had no deſign of ren-
dering them a dull and ſtupid people.

(40 Among the Lacedæmonians Cyne-
tho, Dionyſodotus, Areus, and Chilo, one
of the ſeven wiſe men, diſtinguiſhed them-
ſelves by their poetic talents. The poetry


of the Spartans, ſays Plutarch, was ſimple,
maſculine, and full of energy: it was ani- |


mated with that fire proper to fill the ſoul
with warmth and courage.


Hh2 | ſtanding


236
ſtanding of this people.


FR FT; |
A Spartan, exempt from the cradle from the capri-


OR


cious humours and peeviſhneſs of childhood, was in his youth freed from all
fear, he walked with aſſurance in ſolitude and darkneſs; and being leſs ſuper-
ſtitious than the other Greeks, they cited their religion before the tribunal of


realon.


It was impoſſible that the arts and ſciences ſhould not have ſhone with the
greateſt luſtre in ſuch a country as Greece, where ſo general and ſo conſtant an


honour was paid to them.


I fay, ſo conſtant, in order to anticipate the ob-


jection of thoſe who pretend, with the abbe Dubos, that, in certain ages, ſuch


as thole of Auguſtus and Lewis XIV.


they bring flights of uncommon birds.


certain winds blow over great men as
In favour of this opinion they allege


the pains ſome ſovereigns have vainly taken to revive the arts and ſciences in


their dominions (e),


ful, it was becauſe they were not conſtant.


If the efforts of theſe princes, I reply, were not ſucceſs-


After ſome ages of ignorance, the


ſoil of the arts and ſciences is ſometimes ſo wild and uncultivated that it can-
not produce truly great men, till it has been firſt grubbed up by ſeveral gene-


rations of the learned.


Such was the age of Lewis XIV. in which great men


owed their ſuperiority to the learned who had preceded them in the ſtudy of
the arts and ſciences : a ſtudy in which theſe learned would not have ſucceeded,
hal they not met with the favour of our kings, as is proved by the letters-
patents of the 1oth of May 1543, in which Francis I. expreſsly forbids curſing,


and uſing invectives againſt Ariſtotle (f
addrefled to Ronſard (g). |


), and by the verſes which Chartes IX.


J ſhall


— —— r *


i. —_— _—_—_


(e) Sovereigns are apt to think, that by
a word, or by a law, they can ſuddenly
change the ſpirit of a nation, and, for in-
ſtance, render a cowardly and indolent
people, courageous and active. They are
ignorant that diſeaſes in the ſtate, which are
long contracting, require much time in
curing ; and that in the body politic, as
well as in the human, the impatience of
the prince and the ſick perſons often oppoſe
the cure.

(f) In the flouriſhing ages of the church,
ſome have raiſed the books of Ariſtotle to
the dignity of the divine text, and others


(g) Theſe are the verſes the monarch wrote to that poet:


L'art de faire des vers, dit-on Sen indigner,
Doit etre a plus haut prix que celui de regner ;
Ta lyre, qui ravit par de fi doux accords,
T'aſſervit les eſprits dont je Wai que les corps;
Elle d'en rend le maitre, & te fait introduire
Ou le plus fier tyran ne peut avoir d'empire.


have compared him with Jeſus Chriſt ; ſome
have advanced, in printed theſes, that were
it not for Ariſtotle, religion would want its
principal explications. They have facri-
ſiced to him many critics, and among
others, Ramus : this philoſopher having
cauſed a work to be printed, under the title
of Cenſure on Ariſtotle, all the old doctors,
who, ignorant from their ſtation, and ob-
ſtinate through ignorance, ſaw themſelves,
in a manner, driven from their patrimony,
and, therefore, caballed againſt Ramus, and
cauſed him to be ſent into exile,


That


ESSAYS -on: Tue -M 1 Ne 237


I ſhall add only one word to what I have juſt ſaid, which is, that as fire-
works rapidly flying through the air, diſſeminate it with ſtars, and having for
a moment enlightned the horizon, vaniſh, and leave nature in a more pro-
found darkneſs; ſo the arts and ſciences, in many countries, do no more than
blaze, diſappear, and abandon the people to the darkneſs of ignorance. The
ages moſt truitful in great men, are generally followed by an age in which the
arts and ſciences are leis happily cultivated. In order to diſcover the cauſe, we
muſt not have recourle to natural philoſophy, but to morality. In fact, if ad-
miration is always the effect of ſurpriſe, the more great men are multiplied in
a nation, the leſs are they eſteemed, the leſs is excited in them the ſpirit of
emulation, the leſs are their efforts to attain to perfection, and the farther
diſtant they are from it. After ſuch an age it becomes neceſſary that a coun-
try ſhould lie fallow during ſeveral ages of ignorance, to render it again fertile
in great men.

It appears then, that we can only attribute the ſuperiority of certain nations
over others in the arts and ſciences, to moral cauſes; and that there are no-
people privileged in point of virtue, genius, and courage. Nature, in this
reſpect, has not made a partial diftribution of her favours. Indeed, if the
greater Or lets ſtrength of mind depended on the different climate of countries,
it would be impoſſible, conſidering the age of the world, but that what was in this
reipe& moſt favoured, ſhould by its progreſs have acquired a great ſuperiority
over all others. The eſteem which different nations have by turns obtained,
with reſpect to genius, and the contempt into which they have ſucceſſively
fallen, prove the little influence climates have on the mind. I ſhall even add,
that, if the place of our birth determined the extent of our intellects, moral
cauſes could not here give us fo ſimple and natural an explication of the phæ-
nomena that depended on phyſics. Upon which I ſhall obſerve, that, if there

are no people to whom the climate of their particular. country, and the ſmall
difference it muſt produce in their organization, have at preſent given any con-
ſtant ſuperiority over other nations, we may at leaſt ſuſpect, that the trifling
differences to be found in the organization of the individuals of which a
nation is compoſed, cannot have a more {ſenſible influence on their minds (h).
Every thing concurs to prove the truth of this propoſition. It ſeems that
the moſt complicated problems of this kind preſent themſelves only to:


ad.


I commonly call well organized, we may
at leaſt aſſure ourſelves, that this influence
is ſo inconſiderable, that they may be con-
ſidered as thoſe quantities which are of ſuch


That is, The art of poetry, whoever it
offends, is of greater value than that of
ſwaying the ſceptre; the raviſhing harmo-
ny of thy lyre renders minds ſubject to


_ thee, while I reign over bodies: it renders
thee maſter, and thy pleaſing ſway is felt,
where the power of tyranny cannot reach.
(h) If it cannot be ſtrictly ſhewn, that
a difference of organization has not any
influence on the abilities of the men whom


ſmall importance, that we negle& them in
algebraical calculations; and that, in ſhort,
we may very well explain by moral cauſes,
what has been hitherto attributed to na-
tural ones, without any perſon's being able
to explain them by thoſe cauſes.


the


238 TRE L'ESPRITTPT;. oo,
the mind, in order to be reſolved by the application of the principles I have
eſtabliſhed. | |

Why do men of moderate abilities almoſt always reproach illuſtrious men
with being guilty of a very extraordinary conduct? It is becauſe genius is not
the gift of nature; and that a man, who embraces a kind of lite that nearly
reſembles that of the reſt of the ſociety, does not require an higher degree of
underſtanding than theirs; becauſe, a man of genius ſpends his time in ſtudy
and application, and that a life ſo different from that of others will always
appear ridiculous. Why is the preſent age more knowing 'than thoſe which
Preceeded it? And why is genius leſs common? Why, as Pythagoras ſays,
do we ſee fo many people take the thyrſis, and ſo few animated by the ſpirit of
the God who carries it? It is becauſe men of learning being too often forced
from their cloſets by want, and obliged to enter into the world: there they dif-
tuſe knowlege, and form men of abilities; but they neceffarily loſe the time,
which, by being ſpent in ſolitude and reflection, would have given a greater
extent to their genius. The man of learning 1s like a body, that, having been
forcibly ſtruck againſt other bodies, loſes the force it communicates to them.

Theſe are the moral cauſes that give us an explanation of all the various
phenomena of the mind ; and inform us, that, like the fiery particles which lie
incloſed in gun-powder, and remain there without action, if no ſpark ſets them
in motion, the mind remains without action, till it is actuated by the paſſions ;
that the paſſions often render a man who is ſtupid a man of ſenſe, and that
we owe all to education. | |

If, as it is pretended, genius is a gift of nature, why, among the men of
certain employments, or thoſe who were born, or have long lived in the coun-
try, are there none who excell in poetry, muſic, and painting ? Why does not
the gift of genius ſupply in men, entruſted with employments, the loſs of time
taken up by their poſts? And in country gentlemen, why does it not counter-
balance the converſation of the ſmall number of men of abilities, who are only
to be found in the capital? Why have the great no genius for any thing but
what has long engaged their application ? Is it not evident, that, if the man of
genius does not preſerve the ſame ſuperiority on other ſubjects, it is becauſe he
has not made them the objects of his attention? For the man of genius has
no advantage over other men but the habit of application, and a method of
ſtudy. What is the reaſon, why among great men there are ſo few great mi-
niſters? It is becauſe to the multitude of circumſtances that mult neceſſarily
concur to form a great genius, there muſt be united a concurrence of circum-
ſtances proper. to raiſe this man to the genius of a minifter. Now the union
of theſe circumſtances, ſo extremely uncomman among all nations, is almoſt
impoſſible in countries where merit alone does not entitle a perſon to the higheſt
poſts. Therefore, if we except Xenophon, Scipio, Confucius, Cæſar, Hani-
bal, Lycurgus, and perhaps about fifty ſtateſmen in the whole world, whoſe
minds might really ſtand the teſt of ſtrict examination, all the others, and even
ſome of the moſt celebrated in hiſtory, whoſe actions have made the greateſt
noiſe, notwithſtanding all the encomiums laviſhed on their extenſive talents,
were but men of very common capacities. It is to the force of their character

in


ES SAT S ov


Tus MIND, 2239


in life, more than to that of their minds, that they owe their fame (i). The
little progreſs made in legiſlation, the indifference of ſeveral works that are al-
moſt unknown left by Auguſtus, Tiberius, Titus, Antoninus, Adrian, and
Charles V. and which they have compoſed on ſubjects in which they ought to
have excelled, too plainly prove the truth of this opinion.


The general concluſion of this diſcourſe is, that genius is common, and the
circumſtances, proper to unfold it, very extraordinary. If we may compare
what is profane with what is ſacred, we may fay in this reſpect, Many are calle


but few are choſen.


The inequality obſervable among men, therefore, depends on the goveru-


ment under which they lie; on the greater or leſs happineſs of the age in which


they are born; on the education; on their deſire of improvement, and on the
importance of the ideas that are the ſubject of their contemplations.

The man of genius is then only produced by the circumſtances in which he
is placed (k). Thus all the art of education conſiſts in placing young men


2


in


1


(i) The force of characters, which are
often unjuſt, render a perſon in political
affairs more proper for performing great
things, than perſons of great genius whoſe
characters are unknown. It is neceſſary,
ſays Cæſar, rather to execute than to deli-
berate upon bold enterpriſes. However,
theſe great characters are more frequent
than great geniuſes. A ſtrong paſſion is
ſufficient to form a great character, but it
is only one means of acquiring a great ge-
nius. Thus, among three or four hundred
miniſters, or kings, we commonly find one
great character; while we are not always
ſure of finding one great genius among
two or three thouſand, that is ſuppoſing,
that ſuch a genius as that of Minos, Con-
fucius, and Lycurgus, &c. are only proper
for forming legiſlators. 5

(xk) The opinion I advance muſt ap-
pear very pleaſing to the vanity of the
greateſt part of mankind, and, therefore,
ought to meet with a favourable reception.
According to my principles, they ought not
to attribute the inferiority of their abilities
to the humbling cauſe of a leſs perfect or-
ganization, but to the education they have
received, as well as to the circumſtances
in which they have been placed. Every
man of moderate abilities, in conformity
with my prineiples, has a right to think,


that if he had been more favoured by for-


tune, if he had been born in a certain age


or country, he had himſelf been like the
great men whoſe genius he is forced to ad-
mire. Yet, however favourable this opi-
nion may be to the mean abiliries of the
greateſt part of mankind, it muſt generally
diſpleafe ; becauſe, there is ſcarcely a man
who thinks he has only moderate adili-
ties, and that he has any degree. of ſtupi-


dity, ſince he every day with great pleaſure
thanks nature for the particular care ſhe has
taken of his organization. . Conſequently, .


there is ſcarcely a man who will not treat
as à paradox, principles that openly ſhock
his pretenſions. Every truth, which ſhocks


pride, muſt for a long time wreſtle with


that paſſion, before it can triumph over it.
People are juſt only when they have an in-
tereſt in being ſo. If the citizen exagge-
rates leſs the advantages of birth than the
man of quality, if he makes a truer eſti-


mate of its real value, it is not becauſe he


is wiſer; his inferiors have too often reaſon


to complain of his being guilty of that ri-
diculous haughtineſs for which he abuſes


the great: the juſtneſs of his judgment is


then only the effect of his vanity ; ſince,


in this caſe, it is his intereſt to be on the
fide of reaſon. I will farther add to what
I have ſaid, that the principles above eſta-
bliſhed, ſuppoſing them to be true, will
ſtill meet with oppoſition from all who
cannot admit them without abandoning


ancient prejudices, When we are arrived


at


d,


—— — A — . 1/1 as —̃— — —— j ——


240 Gr E ESPR IT; on,

ſuch a concurrence of circumſtances as are proper to unfold the buds of

genius and virtue. A love of paradoxes has not led me to form this conclu-

fion ; but the deſire of promoting the happineſs of mankind. I am con-

vinced that a good education would diffuſe light, virtue, and, conſequently,

happineſs, in ſociety ; and that the opinion, that genius and virtue are merely

gifts of nature, is a great obſtacle to the making any farther progreſs in the

ſcience of education, and in this reſpect is the great favourer of idleneſs and

negligence. With this view, examining the effects which nature and educa-

tion may have upon us, I have perceived that education makes us what we

are; in conſequence of which I have thought that it was the duty of a citizen

to make known a truth proper to awaken the attention, with reſpect to the L
means of carrying this education to perfection. And to caſt the greater light |
on ſo important a ſubject, I ſhall endeavour in the following diſcourſe, to fix,

in a preciſe manner, the ideas we ought to form on the different faculties of


the human mind.


at a certain age, lazineſs exaſperates us
againſt every new idea that impoſes upon
us the fatigue of examination. A new opi-
nion finds partizans only among thoſe men
of genius, who being ſtill too young to
have wedded themſelves to their ideas, or


the truth where ever they find it. They
alone, as I have already obſerved, render
themſelves witneſſes in behalf of the truth,
introduce it, preſent it, and eſtabliſn it in
the world ; from them alone a philoſopher
may expect ſome praiſe : molt of the other


to have felt the ſting of envy, greedily ſeize men are corrupted by lazineſs or envy.


ESSAY


ESSAYS ON Tus MIND. —_—


46-46-9696 9690 96 9040505 Sr . lg. g· 8. · df · dl · Af · Jg Sl · 88.88


8 1 d © IV.
Of the different Faculties of the Human Mind *.
1 © H A P. I.
Of Genius.


| MONG the many authors who have have written on genius, moſt of

A them have conſidered it as a fire, an inſpiration, and a divine enthuſiaſm ;
and theſe metaphors they have taken for definitions. |
But however vague theſe kind of definitions may be, the ſame reaſon that makes
us ſay that fire is hot, and induces us to place in the number of its properties
the effect it has upon us, has made us give the name of fire to all the ideas
proper to kindle and move our paſſions. ,

Few men have perceived, that theſe metaphors, which are applicable to cer-
tain kinds of genius, ſuch as that of poetry or eloquence, are not ſo to the ge-
nius of reflection, ſuch as that of Locke and Newton.

In order to obtain an exact definition of the word genius, and in general, of
all the names given to the mental faculties, we muſt obtain more general ideas;
and, for this purpoſe, liſten with great attention to the judgments formed by
the public. | | |

The public equally places in the rank of men of genius, Deſcartes, Newton,
Locke, Monteſquieu, Corneille, Moliere, &c. The name of genius given to
ſuch different men, ſuppoſes therefore, a common quality, which characterizes
what 1s called genius, |

In order to know what this quality is, let us conſider the etymology of the
word genius, ſince it is commonly by theſe etymologies, that the public moſt
clearly ſhew the idea they fix to words.

That of genius is derived from cicnxRE, oi; I bring forth, I produce;
it always ſuppoſes invention, and this quality, is the only one which belongs to
all the different kinds of genius. |

Inventions and diſcoveries are of two kinds. The one which we owe to
chance, ſuch as thoſe of the mariners compaſs, gunpowder, and in- general al-
moſt all the diſcoveries we have made in the arts.

The other which we owe to genius : and here we ought to underſtand
by the word diſcovery, a new combination, or a new relation perceived between


*The ſubje& of this diſcourſe as ex- which cannot be literally tranſlated, and
preſſed by our author is, © The different ſignifies not only the mind, but its faculties.


names given to the Eſprit,” a word,
| SE certain


DOE — — — ——̃ — —U—i;L
— — h:


—_—


242 DE L*'ESPRIT; os,
certain objects, or ideas. A perſon obtains the title of a man of genius, if the
ideas which reſult from this combination form one grand whole, are fruitful in
truths, and are of importance with reſpe& to mankind (a). Now the ſubjects
which employ our reflections generally proceed from chance. This has a greater
ſhare than we imagine in the ſucceſs of great men, ſince it furniſhes the more
or leſs intereſting ſubjects upon which they treat; and it is the ſame chance
that has cauſed them to be born at a time, when theſe great men were capable of
improving their abilities. |

t muſt be obſerved, that every inventor of an art or ſcience, which he draws
in a manner from its cradle, is always ſurpaſſed by the man of genius, who fol-
lows him in the ſame ſtudy, and this ſecond by a third, and ſo on, till the art
has made a certain progreſs. When it has arrived at the laſt degree of perfec-
tion; or, at leaſt to the degree neceſſary to render it conſidered as perfect
among, the people, then he who has given it its Jaſt degree, obtains the title of
genius; though he may not have advanced the art in greater proportion, than
thoſe who preceded him: The having a genius therefore, is not ſufficient to ob-


. hee 1 —— EET
0


tain a title to it.


From the tragedies on the paſſions to the poets Hardy and Rotrou, and till
the Mariamne Triſtan, the French theatre ſucceſſively acquired many degrees of
perfection. Corneille was born at a time, when the perfection he added to that
art rendered it complete; Corneille is therefore a genius (b).

I by no means pretend by this obſervation, to diminiſh the glory of this great
poet; but only to prove, that the law of continuity is always exactly obſerved,
and that there are no breaks in nature (c). We may apply to the ſciences, the


obſer vation made on the drama.


Kepler diſcovered the laws by which bodies ought to gravitate towards each
other; Newton, by the happy application of this to the heavenly bodies, which
a very ingenious calculation enabled him to make, confirmed the exiſtence of


theſe laws. Newton therefore; lived in a pr


rank of men of genius.


oper period, and was placed in the


—_ 5 * — —


(a) The novelty, and ſingularity. of ideas,


are not ſuffeient to merit the title of ge-


nius; it is alſo neceſſary that theſe new
ideas ſhould be beautiful, general, or ex-
tremely intereſting in theſe particulars, a


0


poſe this kind of beauty, ſo well known to


the Greeks. |
(c) There are a thouſand fources of il-


Tufton of this kind. A man is perfectly


acquainted with a foreign language, we


work of genius principally differs from a- will ſuppoſe the Spaniſh. If the Spaniſh


mere original work, chiefly characterized by
its ſingulanty.

(b) Not but that tragedy was, in the time
of Corneille, capable of new improvements:
Racine has ſhewn, that they may be written
with more elegance; Crebillon, that they
may have more fire; and Voltaire has be-
yond all contradiction made it appear, that
there might be introduced into them greater
pomp and ſhew, if the ſtage, which is al-
ways crouded with ſpeCtators, did not op-


writers are then ſuperior to us in the drama,
the French author, who improves himſelf
by reading their works, though he ſurpaſles
his model ever ſo little, muſt, to his igno-
rant fellow-countrymen, appear a very ex-
traordinary man: and no doubt is made,
but he has carried the art' to that high de-
gree of perfection, to which it would have
een impoſſible for the human mind to have
at firſt raiſed it, |


Ariſtotle,


ESSAYS o Tut MIND. 243


Ariſtotle, Gaſſendi, and Montaigne, had a confuſed view, that we owe all
our ideas to our ſenſations : Locke cleared up, ſearched into this principle, and
eſtabliſhed its truth by an infinite number of applications; and hence Locke is
a genius. 6 | |

It is impoſſible that one great man ſhould not have been preceded by another
(d). Works of genius are like ſome of thoſe ſuperb monuments of antiquity,
which executed by ſeveral generations of kings, bear the name of him who fi-
niſhed them. | |

But if chance, that is, the chain of effects of whoſe cauſes we are ignorant,
has ſuch a ſhare in the glory of men, who have rendered themſelves illuſtrious
in arts and ſciences ; if it determines the inſtant in which each ought to be born,
in order to receive the name of a man of genius; has not this chance, ſtill greater
influence on the reputation of ſtateſmen ?

Czſarand Mahomet have filled the earth with their renown. The latter is by
half the globe reſpected as the friend of God; and in the other he is honoured

as a great genius: however this Mahomet, a mere dealer in cattle in Arabia,
without learning, without education, and himſelf in part the dupe of the fa-
naticiſm he inſpired, was forced, in order to compoſe the ridiculous work named
the Koran, to have recourſe to ſome Greek monks. Now, how is it poſſible,
not to acknowlege, that ſuch a man owed to chance his being placed in times
and circumſtances proper to produce the revolution in which this bold adven-
turer did little more than lend his name. |

Who doubts but this ſame chance, ſo favourable to Mahomet, did not con-
tribute to the glory of Cæſar? I do not pretend to leſſen the praiſes due to
that hero: but Sylla had, like him, humbled the Romans. The actions of
war are no where ſo circumftantially mentioned, as to enable us to judge, whe-
ther Cæſar was really ſuperior to Sertorius, or any other captain. If he was the
only Roman who has been compared to the conqueror of Darius, it is becauſe
both ſubdued many nations. If the glory of Cæſar has tarniſhed chat of the
great captains of the republic, it is becauſe his victories laid the foundations of
the throne, which Auguſtus eſtabliſhed (e) ; becauſe his dictature was the period

when the ſlavery of the Romans began ; and becauſe he produced a revolution


— — 2 — — — —


greateſt generals, even according to the ſe-
vere judgment Machiavel, who eraſes from
the liſt of celebrated captains all thoſe who
with ſmall armies have not executed great
and new things.
& Tf to excite their enthuſiaſm, adds that

celebrated author, we ſee great poets
take Homer for a model, and when the

write, aſk themſelves, had Homer this
thought, how would he expreſs him-
ſelf ? So great generals, the admirers of


(d) I may even ſay accompanied by
ſome great men. Whaever is pleaſed to
conſider the human mind, muſt ſee in every
ape, five or ſix men of abilities, who ap-
= themſelves to the diſcoveries made by a
man of genius. If the honour remains in
the poſſeſſion of tlie laſt, it is becauſe this ©
diſcovery under his management is more
fruitful, than in that of others; becauſe he
conveys his ideas with more ſtrength and
clearneſs; and becauſe, in ſhort, we al-


ways ſee from the different manner in
which men take an advantage of a-princi-
ple or diſcovery, to whom that principle or
diſcovery belongs. |
(e) Not but that Cæſar was one of the


112 | in


*© ſome great captain of antiquity, imitates
« Scipio, and Ziſka, one of whom was
cc propoſed by Cyrus, and the other by Han-
«© nibal for a model.” |


244 | TELE SPRIT; on;
in the world, of fo aſtoniſhing a nature, that it muſt neceſſarily add to the


fame he had merited by his great talents.


What part ſoever I give to chance, whatever ſhare it has in the reputation of
great men, it however can do nothing for thoſe who are not animated by a lively


deſire of glory. |


This deſire, as I have already obſerved makes men ſupport, without pain, the
fatigue of ſtudy and reflection. It endues a man with that conſtancy of atten-
tion, neceſſary to render him illuſtrious, in any art or ſcience whatſoever. To
this deſire perſons owe that boldneſs of mind, which enables them to cite before
the tribunal of reaſon, the opinions, prejudices, and errors, conſecrated by time.

It is this deſire alone, which, in the arts and ſciences raifes us to the percep-
tion of new truths, or procures us new amuſements. This deſire, in ſhort, is
the ſoul of the man of genius: it is the ſource of what appears ridiculous in him


(f), and of his ſucceſs ; a ſucceſs commonly owing to the obſtinacy with which


he


the marriage, went in the morning to
neille, and without N entered his
I


(f) Every man abſorbed in deep reflection,
and employed about great and general ideas,
lives in the forgetfulneſs of thoſe forms,
and in the ignorance of thoſe cuſtoms,
which compoſe the knowlege of a great part
of the world; and thus almoſt , conſtantly
appears ridiculous. Few men perceive that
the knowlege of little things, generally
fuppoſes the ignorance of thoſe that are
great ; that every man who lives like the
reſt of the world, has no ideas but thoſe that
are common to all; that ſuch a man cannot


raiſe himſelf above the abilities of the com-


mon people ; and that, in fhort, genius al-
ways ſuppoſes a man to have a lively defire
of glory, which rendering him inſenſible to
all other deſires, opens his mind only to the
love of knowlege.

Anaxagoras is an example of this. Be-
ing preſſed by his friends to place his affairs
in order, and for that purpoſe to employ
ſome hours of his time, O my friends,


ce he replied, you aſk what is impoſſible.


« How can I divide my time between my
« affairs, and my ſtudies, when I perfer
« one drop of wiſdom, to whole tuns of
« riches ?” | |
Corneille was doubtleſs of the ſame opi-
nion, when a young man, to whom he had
promiſed his daughter, and whoſe affairs
ut him under the neceſſity of l off
or-


cloſet: * I come, ſaid he, Sir, to retract
my promiſe, and to give you the motives


not a man a
the ſame ſimplicity, that one ＋ compar-


of my conduct. Why, Sir, replied
„ Corneille, could not you, without inter-
«« rupting me, talk of all that to my wife?
«© Go up to her: I underſtand nothing at
all of theſe affairs.”

There is ſcarely a man of genius, of
whom ſome ſuch circumſtance might not
be mentioned. A domeſtic enters in a


fright the cloſet of the learned Budeus,


and tells him, the houſe is on fire: Well,
&« ſays he, inform my wife of it. I do not
<« interfere in houſhoid affairs.”

A taſte for ſtudy ſuffers no diſtraction.
It is to the retreat to which, this taſte con-
fines illuſtrious men, that they owe that


| — of manners, and thoſe fimple un-


expected anſwers, whichſo oftenfurniſh men
of moderate abilities with the pretence of
ridiculing men of genius. I ſhall upon this
ſubject mention two paſſages of the cele-
brated la Fountaine. One of his friends,
who had doubtleſs his converſion much at
heart, lent him one day the epiſtles of St. Paul.
La Fontaine read them with avidity, but be-
ing naturally of a mild and humane diſpoſi-
tion, he was ſhocked at the ſeeming ſeverity
of that apoſtle's writings, and ſhutting the
book, returned it to his friend, ſaying, *< I
<© reſtore you your book: this St. Paul is

Fer my mind.“ It was with
ow, cried


ing St. Auguſtin to Rabelais,


la Fountaine, can men of taſte prefer


the reading of St. Auguſtin to that of
Rabelais, ſo ſprightly and ſo TG 12
| ; 5 very


ESSAYS ON Tus MIND. 245


he concenters himſelf in one kind of ſtudy. One ſcience is ſufficient to fill the
the whole capacity of one mind ; it therefore, neither has nor can have an
univerſal genius. . 1 1

The length of the reflections neceſſary to render a perſon ſuperior in one kind
of ſtudy, compared with the ſhortneſs of life, ſhews us the impoſſibility of
excelling in many. |

Beſides, there is only one age, namely that of the paſſions, in which we
can conquer the firſt difficulties that forbid acceſs to each ſcience. This age
being paſt, we may learn ſtill to manage with more dexterity, the inſtruments
we have always made uſe of, the better to unfold our ideas, and to preſent
them to public view: but we are incapable of the neceſlary efforts for clearing
a freſh ſoul. |

Genius, of whatever kind, is always the effect of an infinite number of com-
binations, that can only be formed in early youth. |

Moreover, by genius, I do not merely underſtand the diſcoveries made in.

the ſciences or the invention, with reſpect to the matter and plan of the work,
there is alſo a genius of expreſſion. The principles of the art of writing are fo
obſcure, ſo few, and imperfect, that no one can obtain the title of being a ce-
lebrated writer, without being really an inventor.
La Fontaine and Boileau have employed but little invention, in relation to
the ſubjects of which they have treated: yet both of them have been juſtly
eſteemed men of genius ; the firſt, from: the ſimplicity and agreeable manner
in which he has formed his narrations ; the laſt, from the correctneſs, ſtrength,
and poetic ſtyle, which runs through his works. Whatever reproaches are caſt
on Boileau, we are forced to confeſs, that by infinitely improving the art of ver-
ſification, he has really merited the title of an inventor.

Among the different kinds of genius to which people apply themſelves,
ſome are more deſirable than others. In poetry, for inſtance, the genius of ex-
preſſion is, if I may uſe the term, the genius of neceſſity. The epic poet, the
moſt rich in the invention of a ſubject, is not read if he is void of the genius
of expreſſion ; on the contrary, a poem, where the verſification is good, and
the piece abounds with poetic beauties, though otherwiſe without invention, will
always meet with a favourable reception from the public. |

This is not the caſe with philoſophical works: in theſe, the firſt merit is that
of the ſubject. In order to inſtruct mankind, it is neceſſary to preſent to them
a new truth, or to ſhew them the connection that ſubſiſts between truths, that
appear ſeparate. In works of inſtruction, the beauty and eloquence of the
diction, and an agreeable arrangement form only a ſecondary merit. Thus
among the moderns we have ſeen philoſophers without ſtrength, grace, and even
_ clearneſs of expreſſion, obtain great reputation. The obſcurity of their writ-
ings, may, for ſome time, condemn them to oblivion ; but at length they riſe
from it : there, ſooner or later, appears a penetrating mind, which ſeizing the


Every man who is concentered in the acts like himſelf, and ſcarcely ever like any
ſtudy of intereſting objects, finds himſelf body elſe; conſequently, he muſt almoſt al-


alone in the midſt of the world, he always ways appear ridiculous, | _
pil o 5 : | trutns


246 | DES L'ESP:RIT; on,

truths contained in their works, frees them from the obſcurity with which they
are covered, and clearly explains them. A genius like this, ſhares with the
inventors the merit and glory of their diſcoveries. He is a labourer, who digs
up a treaſure, and divides with the proprietor of the land, the riches he finds
buried there.

After what I have ſaid of the invention required in the ſubject, and of the
genius of expreſſion, it is eaſy to explain, how a celebrated writer may compoſe
a bad work : it is ſufficient, that the genius with which he writes, ſhould be only
a ſecondary one. For this reaſon, a celebrated poet may be a bad philoſopher,
and a good philoſopher, a bad poet; a writer of a romance may be a bad hiſto-
rian, and an excellent hiſtorian compole a bad romance. |

The concluſion of this chapter is, that though genius always ſuppoſes inven-
tion, all invention, however, does not ſuppoſe genius. In order to obtain the
the title of a man of genius, it is neceſſary, that his invention ſhould be em-
ployed about objects that are general and important; and that he ſhould be
born at a time, when, by his talents and diſcoveries, he may make a figure in
the learned world, by carrying to perfection the arts and ſciences. |

The man of genius, is then, in part, the work of chance ; it 1s chance which,
always in action, prepares the diſcoveries, inſenſibly brings truths together,
that are always uſeleſs when too far ſeparated, and which gives hirth to the
man of genius, at the very inſtant, when the truths, already brought together,
afford him general and clear principles: genius ſeizes theſe, preſents them to the
public, and ſome part of the empire of the arts and ſciences 1s enlightened.

Chance then diſcharges, with reſpect to genius, the office of thoſe winds,
which, diſperſed at the four corners of the earth, there charge themſelves with
the inflammable matter that compoſe the meteors : this matter diſperſed looſely
through the air, produces no effect, till the moment, when, by contrary winds,
its particles impetuouſly claſh againſt each other,; then the lightning kindles
its flaſhes faſt through the air, and the horizon is in a blaze. |


LE EL SO LLLLLLLISSL
e SY I


Of Imagination and Sentiment.


OST of thoſe, who have hitherto treated of the imagination, have too
much confined and reſtrained the ſignification of the word. To obtain
a clear idea of this term, let us conſider its etymology z it is derived from
the Latin IM Ado, image. | |

Many have confounded the memory and the imagination. They have not
perceived, that there are no words exactly ſynonimous ; that the memory con-
ſiſts in a diſtinct remembrance of the object preſented to us, and the imagination
in a combination, a new aſſembiage of images, and proper relations perceived
between theſe images, and the ſenſations they would excite. If this be terror,
the imagination gives being to the ſphinx and to the furies. If this be aſtoniſh-


ment


ESSAYS ow The M IN D, 247


ment or admiration, it creates the garden of the Heſperides, the enchanted
iſland of Armida, and the palace of Atalanta.

Imagination is then the invention with reſpect to images (a), as genius is
with reſpect to ideas. |

The memory, which is only the exact remembrance of the objects preſented
to us, differs no leſs from the imagination, than a portrait of Louis XIV.
done by le Brun, differs from a picture of the conquelt of Franche Comte (b).

It follows from this definition of the imagination, that it is employed ſcarcely
about any thing elſe, but in deſcriptions, pictures, and decorations. In all other
caſes, the imagination can only ſerve to cloke the ideas and ſentiments we re-
preſent. It formerly played a much greater part in the world ; it explained al-
moſt all the phænomena of nature. It was from the urn on which a naiad
reſted that the rivers flowed, which winded along the vallies ; the foreſts and
plains were covered with verdure, by the care of the napeæ and the dryades ;
the rocks torn from the mountains, were rolled into the plains by the orcades ;
the powers of the air, under the name of genii, or demons, unchained the
winds, and let looſe the ſtorms on the countries they would ravage.

Though in Europe, people no longer explain the phænomena of nature, by
the imagination; though they make no other uſe of it, than to give a greater
clearneſs and beauty to the principles of the ſciences, and though they expect to
diſcover the ſecrets of nature only by experiments, we muſt not imagine that all
nations, are equally enlightened in this reſpect. Imagination is ſtill the philoſo-
phy of India : it is ſhe, who, in Tonquin, has fixed the inſtant of the forma-
tion of pearls (c): it is ſhe, who by peopling the elements with demi-gods,


—


(a) We give the title of a man of a lively
imagination, to him who expreſſes his ideas
by ſtrong images. It is true, in coverſation
we generally confound imagination with
invention and paſſion. It is however, eaſy
to diſtinguiſh the man of warm paſſions,
from the man of a ſtrong and lively imagi-
nation, ſince it almoſt always proceeds from
the want of imagination that a poet who
excells in ca or comedy, ſo often makes
but a very indifferent figure in an epic or
lyric poem. on

(b) It muſt be remembered that Louis
XIV. is painted in this picture.

(c) Imagination, ſupported by ſome ob-
ſcure and ridiculous traditions, teaches in
relation to this ſubjeR, that a king of Ton-
quin, a great magician, had formed a bow of
pure gold, and that all the arrows ſhot from
it carried death. Armed with this bow he
routed an army. A neighbouring king at-
tacked him with more numerous forces: he
experienced his power, and was defeated;
he concluded a treaty, and obtained for his
ſon the daughter of the conqueror. Amidit


the intoxication of the firſt night, the bride-
groom conjured his ſpouſe to ſubſtitute in
the room of her father's magic bow, an-
other perfectly like it. This the imprudence
of love promiſed ; ſhe executed her promiſe,
and did not ſuſpect her being guilty of a
crime. But ſcarce was the ſon-in-law
armed with the wonderful bow, when he
marched againſt his father-in-law, defeated
him, and forced him to fly with his daugh-
ter to the ſea coaſt. There a demon ap-
peared to the king of Tonquin, and let
him know the author of his misfortune.
The father enraged, ſeized his daughter,
and drew his ſcimeter: ſhe in vain pro-
teſted her innocence, ſhe found him inflex-
ible. She then foretold, that all the drops
of her blood ſhould be changed into pearls, -
whoſe whiteneſs ſhould render future ages
a witneſs of her imprudence, and her in-
nocence. She was filent, the father ſtruck ;
the metamorphoſis began; and the coaſt,
ſtained with this paricide, is ſtill that where
they fiſh for the fineſt pearls, N


creating


248 DE L'ESPRIT;' on,


creating at her pleaſure demons, genii, fairies, and inchanters, in order to ex-


plain the phenomena of the natural world, has, with a bold wing, often raiſed
herſelf to its origin. After having long run over the immeaſurable deſarts of
ſpace, and of eternity, ſhe is at length forced to ſtop at a point; at this point
time begins. The dark, thick, and ſpiritual air, which according to the Taautus
of the Phoenicians, covered the vaſt abyſs, is filled with love for its own prin-
ciples; love produces a mixture, and this mixture receives the name of deſire ;
this deſire conceives the aqueous corruption; this corruption contains the ſeed
of the univerſe, and of all living creatures. Intelligent animals, under the name


of Zophaſemin, or the contemplators of the heavens, received their being: the


{un was kindled, the earth and ſeas were warmed with its rays ; they reflected
them, and enflamed the air : the winds blew, the clouds aroſe, ſtruck againſt
each other, and from their ſhock proceeded thunder and lightening ; the
noiſe awakened the intelligent animals, who afrighted, began to move, and
fled, ſome into the caverns of the earth, and others into the abyſs of the


Ocean.


The ſame imagination, which joined to the principles of a falſe philoſophy,


had in Phoenicia thus deſcribed the formation of the univerſe, in ſeveral other
countries brought chaos into order, by a thouſand different ways (d).

In Greece, it inſpired Heſiod, who, when full of his enthuſiaſm, ſaid, In
the beginning were Chaos, black Erebus, and Tartarus. Time did not yet
«« exiſt, when eternal night, which, on heavy and extended wings, roved through


(d) They aſſert in the kingdom of Lao,
that heaven and earth ſubſiſted from all eter-
nity. According to them, ſixteen terreſtrial


worlds are ſubject to ours, and the moſt


elevated are the moſt delightful. A flame
ſent forth, every thirty-ſix thouſand years,
from the abyſs of the firmament, ſurrounds
the earth, as the bark of a tree incompaſſes
the trunk and reſolves it into water. Nature,
for ſome moments reduced to this ſtate, is
revived by a genius of the firſt heaven. He
deſcends on the wings of the winds, their
breath makes the waters retire; the moiſt
earth is dried; the foreſts and plains are
covered with verdure, and the earth reſumes
its primeval form. |

At the laſt conflagration, which, the
inhabitants of Lao, ſay, preceeded the


age of Xaca, a mandarin named Ponta-


bobamy-ſuan, caſt himſelf upon the ſur-
face of the waters: a flower ſwam on
their immenſity ; the mandarin perceived it,
and cut it with his ſcimeter. By a ſudden
metamorphoſis, the flower cut from its
ſtalk, changed into a virgin ; nature had
never produced any thing fo beautiful. The


-


mandarin conceived the moſt violent paſſion
for her, and made known his tenderneſs.
The love of virginity rendered the maid
inſenſible to the tears of her lover. The
mandarin admired her virtue ; but not being
able to deprive himſelf of her ſight, placed
himſelf at ſome diſtance from her, where


reciprocally darting ardent glances at each


other, they had ſuch an effect, that the
maid conceived, and brought forth without
loſing her virginity. To provide nouriſh-
ment for the new inhabitants of the earth,
the mandarin cauſed the waters to retire ;
he excavated the vallies, raiſed the moun-
tains, and lived among mankind, till at
length leaving the earth, he. flew towards
heaven: but the gates were ſhut againſt
him, and not opened till he had endured
a long and ſevere penance on earth. Such
is the poetic picture, given in the kingdom
of Lao, of the generation of beings; a
picture that is varied by different nations,
ſo as to be more or leſs grand or fantaſti-


Fal, but it is always formed by the ima-


giVation,


the


ESS AT S on THE MIN PD. | 249
« the immenſe plains of ſpace ſuddenly ſtopped at Erebus: ſhe there depo-
« ſited an egg: Erebus received it into her boſom, hatched it, and Love
« ſprang from thence. He aroſe on his golden wing, united himſelf to Chaos:
e and this union gave being to the heavens, to the earth, to the immortal gods,
* to men, and to animals. Already Venus, conceived in the ſea, aroſe on the
„ ſurface of the waters; all animated bodies ſtopped to contemplate her; the
* emotions which Love had impreſſed on all nature, were then directed towards
" m_ Now order, regularity, and deſign were firſt known in the uni-
er | |

Thus in the firſt ages of Greece imagination built the palace of the
world. Now more wiſe in her conceptions, ſhe ſuffers us to arrive at the
knowledge of its foundation by the information of hiſtory. Inſtructed by an
infinite number of errors, ſhe no longer interteres in the explication of the phæ-
nomena of nature; but, in conſequence of experiments, ſhe applies herſelf only
to deſcriptions and pictures. |
Ir is there that ſhe creates thoſe beings, and thoſe new ſcenes which poetry

by its turns, the magnificence of its expreſſions, and propriety of words, ren-
der viſible to the eyes of the reader,

Are bold paintings required? Imagination is ſenſible that the grandeſt pic-
tures, ſhould they be incorrect, are even the moſt proper to make an impreſtion
that people prefer to the mild and pure light of the lamps burning before the
altars, the mingled exploſions of fire, aſhes, and ſmoke, darted from mount
Etna. |

Is a voluptuous picture required? Imagination conducts Adonis into the
midſt of a grove : he there fees Venus ſleeping on a bed of roſes; the goddefs
awakes ; the bluſh of modeſty covers her cheeks ; a ſlight robe conceals a part
of her beauties; the ardent Adonis is enraptured with the ſight ; he ſeizes the
goddeſs ; he triumphs over her reſiſtance ; the veil is ſnatched with an impa-
tient hand, Venus is naked, the alabaſter of her body is expoſed to the eye of
deſire : and here the picture remains looſely terminated, leaving to caprice, and
the varied fancies of love, the choice of attitudes and careſſes.

Is it neceſſary to repreſent a ſimple fact under a ſhining image? to ſhew, for
inſtance, the diſſentions among the citizens? Imagination will repreſent Peace
leaving the city in tears, with the olive hanging withered over her eyes. Thus
in poetry, imagination ſhows how to repreſent every thing by ſhort images, or
allegories, which are properly only continued metaphors.

In philoſophy, the uſe that may be made of the imagination is infinitely more
limited : it there ſerves only, as I have ſaid above, to throw a clearer and more
agreeable light on principles. I ſay a clearer ; becauſe men who underſtand -
very well what they mean, when they pronounce the words that repreſent ſenſ-
ible objects, as an eak, the ocean, the ſun, do not underſtand the meaning of
the terms beauty, juſtice, virtue, whole ſignification includes a great number of
ideas. It is almoſt impoſſible for them to affix the ſame complex ideas to the
fame word, and hence ariſes the eternal and hot diſputes, that have ſo often ſtain-
ed the earth with blood.

The imagination, which endeavours to clothe abſtract ideas, and the princi-
ples of the ſciences, with ſenſible images, gives therefore clearneſs and charms


to philoſophy.
F . . K k | It


259 aer of,

t equal.y embelliſhes works of ſentiment, When Arioſto conducts Rolando
into the grotto, whither Angelica is to repair, with what art does he adorn it?
On every ſide are inſcriptions engraved by love, beds of turt prepared by plea-
jure; the murmur of rivulets, the freſhneſs of the air, the perfume of flowers,
are all united to excite the defires of Rolando, The poet knew that the more
this grotto was embelliſhed, the more pleaſure it promiſed, and the ſweeter de-
light it infuſed into the foul of the hero, the more violent would be his deſpair,
when he ſhould learn the falſhood of Angelica; and the more would this pic-
ture raiſe in the minds of his readers thoſe tender emotions, to which their plea-
lurcs are attached, |

I thall conclude this piece on the imagination with an oriental fable, which is
perhaps in ſome reſpects incorrect, but very ingenious, and extremely fitted to
prove how much the imagination may ſometimes add charms to a ſentiment.
It is a fortunate lover, who, under the veil of an allegory, ingeniouſly attributes
to his miltreſs the love he has offered her, and the perfections he admires.

e was one day in the bath: an odoriferous earth, an animated hand paſſed into
« mine. I asked, art thou musk ? art thou amber? It replied, lam but com-
mon earth, but I have had ſome connexion with a roſe; its beneficent virtue
has penetrated me; without that I ſhould ſtill be only common earth (e).“

I have, I think, clearly determined what we ought to underſtand by imagina-
tion, and ſhewn ſeveral ways the uſe that may be made of. it. 1 now pals to
ſentiment, | | | |

The moment when paſſion is awaked with the greateſt flrength, the ſtrong
feelings which it excites in us are called ſentiments. Thus we underſtand by
paſſion only a continuity of mental feeling, or ſentiments. A man's paſſion for
a woman, 1s only the duration of his deſires, and ſentiments, with reſpect to her.

This definition being given in order to diſtinguiſh the different ideas affixed
to the word ſentiment, it muſt be obſerved that it is frequentiy uſed in an inde-
terminate ſenſe, and often confounded with ſenſation : we mutt recollect that
there are appetites and paſſions ; the firſt are immediately given by nature, theſe
are hunger, thirſt, &c. the others not being immediately given by nature,
ſuppoſe the eſtabliſhment of ſociety, as ambition, pride, the love of luxury,
&c. hence I diſtinguiſh two kind of ſentiments. One of which has a relation to
the natural wants, and are termed ſenſations; the other to the paſſions, and are
particularly called ſentiments. It is of the laſt ſpecies, that I ſpeak in this chapter.

In order to form a clear idea of this ſubject, it muſt be obſerved that there
are no men without deſires, and conſequently without ſentiments ; theſe ſenti-
ments are either weak or lively. When they are only weak, we ſhall conſider
them as not having any at all. We allow ſentiments only to thoſe who are
ſtrongly affected. If we are affrighted, if our fear does not precipitate us in-
to greater dangers than thoſe we would avoid, and allows us the full uſe of our
- reaſon, we can never be charged with being fearful men. What I ſay of the
ſentiment of fear, I alſo ſay of that of love and ambition.

It is only to the paſſions, that man owes thoſe lively emotions and tranſports,
to which we give the name of ſentiments. |


—


(e) See the Guliſtan, or the Empire of Roſes, by Saadi.


We


ESSAYS own Txt MIND. 251


We are animated by theſe paſſions, when a ſingle deſire governs the mind,
and imperiouſly commands all the ſubordinate defires. Whoever yields ſuc-
ceſſively to different deſires, deceives himſelf if he thinks he is poſſeſſed with
ſtrong paſſions : he miſtakes inclinations for paſſions. |

The deſpotic power, if I may be allowed the term, of a deſire to which all
the others are ſubordinate, is therefore in us what characterizes paſſion. There
are, conſequently, but few men of ſtrong paſſions, and but few capable of
lively ſentiments. |

Frequently the manners of a people, and the conſtitution of a ſtate, oppoſe
the expanding of the paſſions and ſentiments. How many countries are there,
where certain paſſions cannot ſhew themſelves, at leaſt, by actions! In an ar-
bitrary government, always ſubject to a thouſand revolutions, the great are
almoſt conſtantly ſcorched by the-fire of ambition ; but this is not the caſe in a
monarchy, where the laws are put in force. In ſuch a ſtate the ambitious are
chained, and we ſee none but the intriguing, to whom I do not give the title
of ambitious. Not but in. theſe countries there are an infinite number
of people who have the ſeeds of ambition; but, except in ſome ſingu-
lar circumſtances, they die away, without ever ſhooting forth. Ambition in
theſe men, is like thoſe ſubterraneous fires kindled in the bowels of the earth,
where they burn without exploſion, till the moment when the waters penetrate
to them, where being rarified by the fire, they rife, burſt open the mountains,
and ſhake the foundations of the earth. | |

In countries where the ſeeds of certain paſſions and ſentiments are choaked,
the public can only know and ſtudy them by pictures exhibited by cele-
brated writers, and principally the poets. en 4 /

Sentiment is the ſoul of poetry, and above all of the drama. Having
marked out the ſigns by which great painters, and men of lively ſentiments,
may underſtand the paſſions, it is proper to obſerve, that neither theſe, nor the
ſentiments, can ever be well painted by thoſe who have never felt them. If they
place a hero in a ſituation proper for his ſhewing all the force of the paſſions,
in order to draw a true picture they themſelves muſt be affected with the ſame
ſentiments whoſe effects they deſcribe, and draw the model from their own hearts.
If they are without paſſions, they can never ſeize the preciſe point which a
ſentiment attains, and never ſurmounts (f) : they always fall ſhort, or go beyond
nature. |

Beſides, in order to ſucceed here, it is not ſufficient to be in general ſuſcept-
ible of the paſſions, they muſt alſo be animated by that which they paint. One
kind of ſentiment does not make'us divine another, and we always expreſs that
but poorly, which we feel but weakly. Corneille, whoſe ſoul was more elevat-
ed than tender, paints great politicians and heroes better than lovers. A

It is principally to truth, that painters of the paſſions and ſentiments owe their
fame. I know, however, that happy ſituations, noble maxims, and elegant


(f) In theatrical works, nothing is more the hero perform actions which ſurpaſs his
common than to expreſs the ſentiment with motives. There are few dramatic poets
ſpirit, Would they paint virtue, they make free from this fault.


K k 2 verſe,


252 DE L'ESPRIT; os,


verſe, have ſometimes obtained great ſucceſs on the ſtage ; but whatever merit
there is in this ſucceſs, it is in the drama only a ſecondary merit.

The verſes in which the character is expreſſed in tragedies, make the greateſt
impreſſion upon us. Who is not ſtruck with that ſcene, where Catiline an-
ſwers the reproach of being an affaſſin, made him by Lentulus :


Crois que ces crimes
Sont de ma politique, & non pas de mon caur :


Foros de * plier aux maurs de ſes complices. :


Believe that theſe crimes
Proceed from policy, and not my heart:
Forced to yield to the manners of my accomplices.


It is neceſſary, he adds, that the chief of a conſpiracy ſhould ſucceffively
aſſume all characters. If I had only ſuch as Lentulus in my party,


Et il wetoit rempli que d' hommes vertueux,
Je waurois pas de peine d Pitre encor plus que eu.


And was it only filled with virtuous men,
I ſhould find no pain in ſurpaſſing them.


What a character is included in theſe two laſt lines! What a chief of a con-
ſpiracy, is a man ſo much maſter of himſelf, as to be according to his choice
either virtuous or vicious ! What an ambition is that, which, in ſpite of the uſual
inflexibility of the paſſions, can make the proud Catiline ſtoop to aſſume all
characters | Such an ambition proclaims the deſtroyer of Rome.

Such verſes are always inſpired by the paſſions. He who is not ſuſceptible
of them, ought to renounce all attempts to paint them. But it is asked, by
what marks ſhall the public, who are often but little capable of judging of
what falls ſhort, or exceeds nature, know the great painters of the ſentiments ?
By the manner, I reply, in which they expreſs them. By means of reflection
and memory, a man of genius may form a good judgment of what a lover
ought to do or ſay in a particular ſituation ; he may ſubſtitute the expreſſion of

the ſentiment, for the ſentiment itſelf: but he is in the ſituation of a painter, who

in the deſcription of the beauty and form of a woman, might draw her por-
trait; and might perhaps make a fine picture; but not a true reſemblance.
Mere genius can never divine the language of the heart.

Nothing can be more inſipid to an old man, than the converſation of two
lovers. The man inſenſible, but witty, is the caſe of the old man; the ſimple
language of the heart appears to him flat; he ſeeks, in ſpite of himſelf, to raiſe
it by ſome ingenious ſtrokes, which always diſcover, that he does not feel what
he deſcribes. | TEN

When Peleus braves the wrath of heaven, when the burſts of thunder pro-
claim the preſence of the God, his rival, and Thetis, ſtruck with fear, in order
to calm the ſuſpicions of her jealous lover, ſa ys: |


Va,


ESSAYS oo rn MI ND, 253


Va, fuis; te montrer que je crains,
C'ęſt te dire afſez que je t'aime (g):


Go, fly ; and let my tender fears impart,
The trembling apprehenſions of my heart:


we perceive that the danger in which Peleus found himſelf was too ſudden, for
Thetis to be in fo tranquil a ſituation, as to give this ingenious turn to her an-
ſwer. Terrified at the approach of a God, who, with a ſingle word, could
reduce the lover to nothing, and preſſed with the eager deſire of ſeeing him
gone, ſhe had properly only time to cry, Fly, I adore thee. |

Every phrafe ingeniouſly turned, is at the ſame time a proof of wit, and a
want of ſentiment; The man intirely agitated by a paſſion which he ſtrong-
ly feels, does not trouble himſelf about the manner in which he expreſſes
it ; the moſt ſimple is that which firſt occurs.

When Cupid, weeping at the knees of Venus, asks her to grant him Pſyche,
and the goddeſs laughs at his grief, Cupid ſays:


Je ne me, Plaindrois pas, ſi je Pouvo's mourir.
I ſhould not complain, were it poſſible to die.


When Titus declares to Berenice, that the Deſtinies have ordained that they
ſhould be ſeparated for ever (h), Berenice anſwers :


Pour jamais ue ce mot eſt affreux quand on aime
J q q


For ever ! A word how frightful when we love !


When Palmira ſays to Seide, that in vain ſhe attempted by her prayers to move
her raviſher, Seide replies:


. »


—


(g) If in this verſe of Ovid; and hers: if Octavia be flighted at pre-
| « ſent, ſtill Octavia is thy wife; a never
Pignora certa petis, do pignora certa timendo, dying hope dwells in her ſoul, drys her
| | % tears, and comforts her in misfortune.
the ſun ſays nearly the ſame thing to Phae- To- morrow Hymen may place thee again
ton; it is becauſe Phaeton is not yet mount- © in her arms. But what is my deſtiny! A
ed in his chariot, and conſequently is not “ moment's ſuſpenſion of love in thy heart,
in the moment of danger.. | and all my hopes are fled, She can ſigh,
(b) In the Engliſh tragedy of Cleopatra, „ and fawn on the beloved object, hope to
Octavia rejoins Antony: and it is natural © move him, flatter herfelf with a return
that Antony ſhould find his love revive for “ of love -l cannot one fingle in-
her: this Cleopatra fearing, Antony com- „ ſtant of indifference, and there's an end
forts her: «The difference,” ſays he to © of all to me; immenſe ſpace and eter-
her, „between Octavia and Cleopatra!” © nity will for ever ſeperate me from thy
„ Oh, my lord,” replies ſhe, a much © love.“ -
greater difference between my condition


Que!


2” II. on, *
Quel eft donc ce mortel inſenfible à tes larmes 5


What is then this mortal inſenſible to thy tears?


Theſe verſes, and in general, all thoſe expreſſive of the ſentiments are ſimple,
both in the turn and the expreſſion. But wit, void of ſentiments, would always
lead us far from this ſimplicity, and even ſometimes turn a ſentiment into a
maxim. | |

How may we prevent ourſelves from being in this reſpe& the dupe of wit?
It is the buſineſs of wit to obſcrve, to generalize obſervations, and to draw from
them concluſions or maxims. Accuſtomed to this progreſs, it is almoſt im-
poſſible for the man of genius who has never been in love, and would paint
that paſſion, to avoid turning ſentiments into maxims. Thus Fontenelle has
made one of his ſhepherds ſay : | |


Lion ne doit point aimer, lerſqu'on a le cæur tendre.
When we have a tender heart, we ought not to love.


An idea common to him with Quinault, who expreſſes himſelf very differently,
when he makes Atys ſay : | | | |


Si jaimors un jour, par malbeur,
Je connois bien mon cæur,
J. feroit trop ſenſible.


If ever Cupid wounds my heart,
So well I know its tender part,

My ſure misfortune, it mult prove,
And I ſhall loſe myſelf for love.


If Quinault has not turned the ſentiment of Atys into a maxim, it was becauſe he
was ſenſible that a man warmly affected, does not amuſe himſelf with genera-
lizing his ideas.

It is not in this reſpect with ambition as with love. Sentiments in ambition
may be united with wit and reflection: the cauſe of this difference is produced
by the different objects propoſed to theſe two paſſions. ä

A lover deſires the favours of her whom he loves. Now theſe favours are
not granted to the ſublimity of his wit, but to the exceſs of his tenderneſs.
The lover in tears and deſpairing at the feet of his miſtreſs, is the eloquence
moſt proper to move her. This is the intoxication of the lover, by which he
prepares and ſeizes thoſe moments of weakneſs, which puts the finiſhing ſtroke
to his happineſs. Wit has no ſhare in the triumph: it is then a ſtranger to the
ſentiment of love. Beſides, the excels of the lover's paſſion, promiſes to afford
a thouſand pleaſures to the object beloved. It is not ſo with the ambitious ;
for his ambition promiſes no pleaſure to his accomplices. If a throne be the ob-
ject of his deſires, and in order to mount it, he muſt be ſupported by a *

; u


ESSAYS o Tar MIN D. 255


ful party ; in vain would he lay before the eyes of his partizans all the exceſs of
tis ambition, they would hear him with indifference z did he not aſſign to each

the ſhare he was to have in the government, and prove how much it would be
tor their interelt to raiſe him to his wiſhes, |

The lover, in ſhort, depends only on the object beloved; a ſingle moment
procures his felicity ; reflection has no time to eater a heart, the more warmly
agitated as it approaches nearer the attainment of its deſires. But the ambitious
in order to execute his projects, has continual need of the aſſiſtance of all ſorts
of men: and to make a proper uſe of them, he muſt know them : beſides, his
tueccls depends on projects artfully managed, and long prepared. What abi-
lities are required to concert and purſue them? The ſentiment of ambition is there
neceſſarily connected with abilities and reflection. |

The dramatic poet may then render faichfully the character of the ambitious,
by ſometimes putting into his mouth thoſe ſententious verſes, which, that they
may ſtrongly ſtrike the ſpectator, ought to be the reſult of a lively ſentiment and
profound reflection. Such are thoſe verſes, where, to juſtify his audacity, Ca-
tiline ſays to Probus, who accules him with imprudence:


L'imprudence n'eſt pas dans la temerite,

Elle eſt dans un projet faux & mal concerle ;

Mais, Sil eſt bien ſuivi, Ceſt un trait de prudence
Que db aller quelguefois jujques a Iinſolence.

Et je ſais, pour dompter les plus impericux,

Quil faut ſouvent moins dart que de mepris pour eux.


Imprudence conſiſts not in raſhneſs,
But in falſe and ill-concerted projects;
If *ris properly tim'd, 'tis a ſtroke of prudence
Sometimes even to proceed to inſolence.
I know to tame the moſt imperious,
Often requires leſs art than contempt.


What I have ſaid of ambition ſhews in what different doſes, if I may uſe the
term, wit may be applied to the paſſions,


I ſhall conclude with this obſervation, that our manners, and the form of


our government not permitting us to give ourſelves up to ſtrong paſſions, ſuch
as ambition and revenge, our painters commonly employ themſelves in repre-
ſenting the ſentiments of ſenſible men, as love, filial and paternal tenderneſs, .
which, for this reaſon, has almoſt taken intire poſſeſſion of the French theatre,


CHAP.


'
|
i
|

i
'


256 bp E IL. E SPIRIT; on,


77


ER AP. 1.
Of Wit.


I T is nothing but an aſſemblage of new ideas and combinations. Had
we made in any one kind all the combinations poſſible, we could in that
ſpecies carry no farther either our invention, or our wit; we might be learned,
but we could not be witty. It is then evident, that if there were no diſcove-
ries to be made, all would be ſcience, and wit would be impoſlible : for we


ſhould have aſcended up even to the firſt principles of things. Being once ar-


rived at thoſe general and ſimple principles, the knowledge of the facts, that
had raiſcd us to them, would be no more than a frivolous ſcience, and all
the libraries filled with thefe facts would become uſeleſs. We ſhould then'poſleſs
all the materials of politics and legiſlation, that is, have extracted from all
hiſtories the ſmal] number of principles, which being proper to preſerve among
mankind the greateſt equality poſſible, would one day give birth to the beſt form
of government. It would be the ſame with natural philofophy, and in general
with all the ſciences. |

Then the human underſtanding, ſcattered in a infinite number of works, would
be concentered by an able hand in a ſmall volume of principles, nearly as the
ſpirit of the flowers diffuſed through vaſt plains, are, by the art of chemiſtry,
eaſily concentered in a bottle of eſſence. |

The human mind, indeed, is in every ſcience very far from having arrived at
the term here ſuppoſed, and I freely confeſs that we ſhall not ſoon be reduced to
the ſad neceſſity of being only learned; and that, in ſhort, thanks to human
Ignorance, we ſhall long be permitted to have wit. :

Wit then always ſuppoſes invention. But what difference, it is asked, is
there between this kind of invention, and that which obtains for us the title of a
genius? In order to diſcover this, Jet us conſult the public. In morality and in
politics they, for inſtance, honour with the title of men of genius, both Ma-
chiavel, and the author of the Spirit of Laws; and give the title of men of
great wit to Rochefaucault and la Bruyere, The only ſenſible difference between
theſe two kinds of men is, that the firſt treat of the moſt important ſubjects,
connect more truths together, and form a greater aſſemblage of them than the
ſecond. Now the union of a greater number of truths, ſuppoſes a greater quan-
tity of combinations, and conſequently a more uncommon perſon. Beſides, the
public are fond of ſceing all the conſequences that can be drawn from a principle:
they ought then to reward with a ſuperior title, like that of genius, whoever
procures them this advantage, by uniting an infinite number of truths under the
lame point of view. Such is in philoſophy, the ſenſible difference between
genius and wit,

ln the arts, people expreſs by the word talent, what in the ſciences is meant
the word wit; or it ſeems that the difference is very ſmall.

| Whoever


}
*
*


ESSAYS ow Tae MIN D. 257


Whoever either models himſelf after the great men who have already preceded
him in the ſame courſe, does not ſurpaſs them, or has not written a certain
number of elegant pieces, has not made ſufficient efforts of mind, nor given ſuth-
cient proofs of invention to merit the title of a genius. Conſequently we place
in the liſt of men of talents or abilities Reynard, Vergier, Campiſtron, and
Flechier; while we quote as men of genius Moliere, la Fontaine, Corneille,
and Boſſuet. I ſhall even add on this ſubject, that people ſometimes refuſe to
the author, the title they grant to the work. A tale, or a tragedy has great
ſucceſs, and they ſay of theſe works that they are full of genius, without daring
ſometimes to grant the title to the author. In order to obtain it, it is neceſſary
to have, like Fontaine, in an infinite number of ſmall pieces, the value of a
great work ; or, like Corneille and Racine, have compoſed a certain number of
excellent tragedies. | | |

The epic poem is, in poetry, the only work, the extent of which ſuppoſes a
degree of attention and invention, ſufficient to adorn a man with the title of


*
Pl


a genius, |


There remains two obſervations to be made before I conclude this chapter.
The firft is, that in the arts, people give the name of wit only to'thoſe, who
being without a genius, or talent of one kind, transfuſe into their works thoſe
of another: ſuch are, for inſtance, the comedies of Fontenelle, which being det-
titute of the comic genius and talent, ſparkled with philoſophic beauties. The
ſecond is, that invention belongs ſo necèſſarily to wit, that we have not hitherto,
by any epithets applicable to a great wit, pointed out thoſe who have filled
uſeful employments, that did not require invention. The fame cuſtom, which
gives the epithet of good to a judge, A receiver of the revenues (a), or an able
arith metician, permits us to apply the epithet of ſublime to the poet, the legiſ-
lator, the geometrician, and the orator. Wit then always ſuppoſes invention.
This invention, more elevated in genius, ſuppoſes a more extenſive view, and
conſequently more of that conſtancy and boldneſs of character, which ſtrikes
out new paths. : |

Such is the difference "between genius and wit, and of the general idea we
ought to affix to the latter. | |

This difference being eſtabliſhed, I ſhould obſerve, that we are forced, by a
dearth of language, to take this word in a variety of acceptions, which are only
diſtinguiſhed by the epithets prefixed to the word wit. Theſe epithets being al-
ways given by the reader, or the ſpectator, are conſtantly relative to the im-
preſſion made upon him by a certain kind of ideas.

If people have ſo often, and perhaps without ſucceſs, treated of this ſubject, it is
from their not having conſidered wit under the ſame point of view; and from
their having taken the epithets refined, "maſculine, ſparkling, &c. joined to the
word wit, for real and diſtinct qualities; and, in ſhort, from their not having
conſidered theſe” epithets as expreſſing the different effects upon us, and the various
ſpecies of ideas, and different manners of conveying them. To diſperſe the


eee * CEOs > " Lo T1685 OO Es Lo 7K 2 2 2 4 2 > þ 4 —


(a) I do not ſay that good judges, or of judges, or receivers; unleſs we confound
good receivers of the revenue, have not wit 3 the quality of judge, with that of the
but only that they have it not in the quality legiſlator,

LE” darkneſs


es DE L'ESPRIT; os,

darkneſs ſpread over this ſubject, I am going in the following chapters to endea-
vour to determine, in a clear manner, the different ideas that ought to be affixed
to the epithets often united with the word wit.


DOD RECDRDeODe G G0


.
Of refined and flrong Wit *.


N natural philoſophy, we give the epithet fine, or refined, to what we can-
I not perceive without ſome trouble. In morality, that is, in ideas and ſenti-
ments, we alſo give the name of fine and refined, to what cannot be perceived
without ſome efforts of the mind, and great attention.

The Miſer of Moliere, ſuſpects his valet of having robbed him, and not
finding any thing in his pockets, fays ; Give me what thou haſt ſtolen, with-
« out ſearching.” This ſpeech of Harpagon's is fine, it is ſtrongly characteriſ-
tic of the miſer ; but it was difficult to diſcover it there.

In the opera of Iſis, when the nymph Io, to ſooth the complaints of Hierax,
asks him: Are your rivals better treated than you? Hierax replies:


Le mal de mes rivaux n'egale pas ma peine.
La douce illuſion d'une eſperance vaine
Ne les fait point tomber du faite du bonheur :
Aucun d'eux, comme moi, n'a perdu votre ceur
Comme eux, a votre humeur ſevere
Je ne ſuis point accoutume. |
Quel tourment de ceſſer de plaire,
Lorſqu'on a fait Peſſai du plaiſir d'ttre aime !


Oh! what to mine, my rival's pain!
Like me, they have not hop'd in vain;
Like me, they have not Ioft your love;
They no ſuch wretchedneſs can prove.
Your ſcorn they only yet have Ele, |
While I have hop'd your heart to melt.
Tormenting thought ! no hopes of eaſe,
Tho' once belov'd, I ceaſe to pleaſe !


This ſentiment is nature; it is alſo fine; it is concealed in the bottom of the
heart; and it required the eyes of a Quinault to perceive it there.

From ſenſations let us paſs to refined ideas. We underſtand by a refined idea,
a refined conſequence drawn from a general idea (a). I ſay a conſequence; be-


—


* The title of this chapter is, (a) Fontenelle's works furniſh a thouſand |
De Peſpirit fin, de Peſpirit fort. examples of this. | |


cauſe


ESS ATS on mn MENS - 259


cauſe an idea no ſooner becomes fruitful in truths, than it loſes the name of a
refined idea, and is called a principle, or general idea. People ſay, the prin-
ciples, and not the refined ideas of Ariſtotle, Locke, Newton, and Deſcartes.
Not but that in order to aſcend like theſe philoſophers, from obſervations to ob-
ſervations, till we have acquired general ideas, requires great delicacy of mind,
that 1s, much attention. This attention (let me be permitted to obſerve by the
way), is a microſcope which enlarges objects, without deforming them, makes
us perceive an infinite number of reſemblances and differences, inviſible to the
eye that is not attentive. Wit of every kind, is properly no more than an
effect of the attention. |

But not to ramble from my ſubject, I ſhall obſerve, that every idea and every
ſentiment, the diſcovery of which ſuppoſes that an author has great delicacy of
thought, and much attention, will not receive the name of refined, if this ſen-
timent, or this idea, be exhibited upon the ſtage, or delivered in a ſimple and
natural manner: for the public do not give the name of refined, to what they
underſtand without any effort of the mind. They never point out by the
epithets they unite with the word wit, any thing farther than the impreſſions
made upon them, by the ideas and ſentiments preſented to them. |

This being conſidered, we underſtand by a refined idea, an idea which eſcapes
the penetration of moſt readers: now 1t eſcapes them, when the author skips
over the intermediate ideas, neceſſary to make them conceive that which he
offers them.

Such is this ſentence, which Fontenelle repeats ſo often: ©* People would de-
& ſtroy almoſt all religions, if thoſe who profeſſed them were obliged to love
„one another (b). A man of wit eaſily ſupplies the intermediate ideas, which
connect together the two propoſitions included in this ſentence (c) : but there are
few men of wit. 2 |

We alſo give the name of refined ideas, to thoſe that are dreſſed in obſcure,
enigmatical, and far-fetched terms. We, in general, affix the epithet fine, leſs
to the ſpecies of ideas, than to the manner of expreſſing them. :

In the elogium on cardinal Dubois, when ſpeaking of the care he took of the
education of the duke of Orleans, M. de Fontenelle, ſays, That this pre-


(b) That which may be true of a falſe this ſentence, have not endeavoured to un-


religion, is not applicable to ours, which
commands us to love our neighbour,

(c) It is the ſame with this other phraſe,
uſed by M. de Fontenelle : << In writing,”
ſays he, I have always endeavoured to
« underſtand myſelf.” Few men really
comprehend the force of this ſentence,
They do not, like him, perceive all the
importance of a precept, the obſervation
of which is ſo difficult, Without men-
tioning people of ordinary underſtandings,
among ſuch-men as Malebranche, Leibnitz,
and the greateſt philoſophers, how many
are there who, for want of making uſe of


*


derſtand themſelves, to de- compound their
principles, in order to reduce them to ſim-
ple and clear propoſitions, which they can-
not perform without knowing whether the

do, or do not underſtand themſelves? They
have ſupported themſelves on theſe vague


principles, the obſcurity of which muſt be


always ſuſpected by every one who has Fon-
tenelle's words habitually preſent to his


mind. For want of having, if I may uſe


the term, dug into the virgin earth, the


immenſe edifice of their ſyſtem has ſunk in


proportion as they have raiſed it.


EI late


-
——
— —— — — —— — — —  — —


DE L'ESPRIT; o


< late had laboured every day to render himſelf uſeleſs ;** it is to the obſcurity
of the expreſſion, that this ſentence owes its refinement.


260


In the opera of Thetis, when that goddeſs, to revenge herſelf on Peleus,
whom ſhe believes unfaithful, ſays : |
Mon ceaur Heſt engage ſous Fapparance vaiue

Deus feux que tu feignis Pour moi ;
Mais je veux en punir, en in impoſant la peine

D'en aimer un autre que toi;


My heart was obtained by the ſemblance vain,
Of the paſſion thou feignedſt for me;

But to puniſh myſelf, I will ſuffer the pain
Of loving another like thee ;


it is ſtill certain that this idea, and all the ideas of this kind, owe the name of
refined, which is commonly given them, to the enigmatical turn in which they
make their appearance, and conſequently, to a ſmall effort of mind required to
comprehend them. Now an author writes only to be underſtood : every thing
then in the ſtyle which renders him obſcure, is a fault; and all refined turns of
expreſſion are therefore blameable (d); we ſhould then be more attentive to give
a ſimple and natural turn to an idea, in proportion as that idea is more refined,


and may more eaſily eſcape the notice of the reader.
Let us now fix our attention on the kind of wit expreſſed by the epithet


ſtrong.


A ſtrong idea, is one that is intereſting and proper to make a lively impreſſion.
This impreſſion may either be produced by the idea itſelf, or the manner in


which it is expreſſed (e).
A very common idea,


delivered in a ſtriking expreſſion, or image, may make


a very ſtrong impreſſion upon us. The abbot Cartaut, comparing Virgil to
Lucan ſays ; Virgil is only a prieſt raiſed in the midſt of the grimaces of the


-


(d) Jam very ſenſible that refined turns
have their admirers. What every body
eaſily underſtands, ſay they, every body be-
lieves they themſelves could have ſaid ;
clearneſs of expreſſion is therefore a want
of addreſs in the author ; who ought al-
ways to ſpread ſome clouds over his thoughts.
Flattered by piercing this cloud, which is
impenetrable to common readers, and with
perceiving truth through the obſcurity of
the expreſſion, a thouſand men praiſe with
ſo much the more enthuſiaſm this manner of
writing, as under-the pretence of making
an elogium on the author, they make one
on their own penetration; this fact is cer-
tain, But I maintain, that we ought to
deſpiſe ſuch praiſes, and reſiſt the deſire of


deſerving them. Is a thought finely ex-
preſſed? there are at firſt few men who un-
derſtand it; but at length it is generally
underſtood. Now as ſoon as the enigma
of the expreſſion is diſcovered, this thought
is by men of ſenſe reduced to its intrinſic
value, and placed much below it by men of
moderate abilities : aſhamed of their want
of penetration, they always look upon it
with an unjuſt contempt, to revenge the
affront done to their ſagacity, by the fine-
neſs of the turn. LO

(e) In Perſia they repreſent the unequal
powers of different poets, by the epithets
painters and ſculptors; and therefore ſay,
a poet-painter, a poet-ſculptor.


<« temple ;_


| ESSAYS or Tus MIN D. 22861
s temple ; the ſaiveling, hypocritical, and devout character of his hero, diſ-
« honours the poet; his enthuſiaſm ſeems to be kindled by the flame of the
lamps ſuſpended before the altars; while the bold enthuſiaſm of Lucan is ſet
«© on fire by the lightning.” What ſtrikes us forcibly, is what is underſtood
by the epithet ſtrong. Now the great and ſtrong have this in common, that
they make a lively impreſſion upon us, and hence they are often con-
founded. |

To fix clearly, the different ideas that ought to be formed of grandeur and
ſtrength, I ſhall ſeperately conſider the meaning of theſe terms, firſt, in ideas
fecondly, in images; and, thirdly, in ſentiments,


A grand idea is one that is generally intereſting : but the ideas of this kind


are not always thoſe that affect us in the moſt lively manner. The axioms of
the Portico, or the Lyceum, though intereſting to all mankind in general, and
conſequently to the Athenians ; muſt not however, have made ſo great an im-
preſſion upon them as the ſpeech of Demoſthenes, when that orator reproached
them for their cowardice. * You ask one another, ſaid he, is Philip dead?


<< Well, of what importance is it to you, Athenians, whether he be dead or


„ living? When heaven ſhall have delivered you, you yourſelves will ſoon be
& another Philip.” If the Athenians were more ſtruck at the ſpeech of their
orator, than at the diſcoveries of their philoſophers, it was becauſe Demoſ-


thenes preſented them with ideas more ſuitable to their preſent ſituation, and


conſequently thoſe, in which they were more immediately concerned.

Now the men, who are in general only ſenſible of the preſent moment, will
be always affected in a more lively manner by this kind of ideas, than with
thoſe, which, on account of their being grand and general, belong leſs imme-
diately to the ſituation in which they are placed. |

Thus thoſe pieces of eloquence proper to fill the ſoul with emotion, and thoſe


orations ſo ſtrong, becauſe they diſcuſs the actual intereſt of a ſtate, are not, and


cannot be, of ſuch extenſive and durable uſe, as the diſcoveries of a philoſo-
pher, which are equally ſuited to all times and places. |
In relation to ideas, the only difference between the great and the
ſtrong is, that the one is more generally, and the other more warmly 1n-
tereſting (f). | 3
Does the inquiry relate to thoſe beautiful images, thoſe deſcriptions, or thoſe pic-
tures, intended to ſtrike the imagination? The ſtrong, and the great, have this in
common, that they preſent to us grand objects. |
Tamerlane and Cartouche were two robbers, one of whom ravaged the world
with four hundred thouſand men, and the other with four hundred ; the firſt at-
tracts our reſpect, and the laſt our contempt (g). |


—


(f) People ſometimes ſay of a method of
reaſoning, that it is ſtrong; but this is
when it relates to ſomething in which they
intereft themſelves. Thus we do not give
this name to geometrical demonſtrations,
which of all reaſonings are doubtleſs the
ſtrongeſt.


(g) Every thing becomes ridiculous with-
out ſtrength, and every thing is ennobled
with it. What a difference is there be-
tween the roguery of a ſmugler, and that


of Charles V ?


What


|


|


——— eel.


—Þ ——. de a a rn
—— 2 —


—


[

N

|

| |
0
4


09005 "35" SEG GERT O79 VERITY — nr


252 PRI; on,

What I fay of morals, I apply to phyſics. Every thing which in its own
nature is little, or becomes ſuch on being compared with thoſe that are great,
makes ſcarcely any impreſſion upon us. |

Let Alexander be painted in the moſt heroic attitude at the moment when
he ruſhes on the enemy, if the imagination places at the ſide of the hero one
of thoſe ſons of war (h), which growing every year a cubit in circumference,


and three or four in height, might heap Offa upon Pelion ; Alexander is no


more than a pretty puppet, and his fury becomes ridiculous.

But though the ſtrong is always grand, the grand is not always ſtrong. A
decoration, either of the temple of the Deſtinies, or a heavenly feſtival, may
be grand, and even ſublime ; but it will affect us leſs ſtrongly than a deſcription
of Tartarus. The picture of the Glory of the Saints, does not aſtoniſh the
imagination ſo much as the Laſt Judgment of Michael Angelo. |

The ſtrong is then produced, by the grand united to the terrible. Now if all
men are more ſenſible of pain, than of pleaſure : if violent pain ſilences every
agreeable ſenſation, while a lively pleaſure cannot ſtifle within us the ſenſation of
violent pain, the ſtrong muſt make a more warm impreſſion, and we muſt be
more ſtruck with the picture of Hell, than with one of Olympus.

In regard to pleaſure, imagination excited by the deſire of the greateſt hap-


-pineſs is always inventive, and ſome charms in Olympus are alway wanting.


Does the ſubject require the terrible? Imagination has not the ſame intereſt
in the invention of ſcenes of horror, this is leſs difficult: Hell is always ſuffi -
ciently terrible. |

Such, in decorations and poetical deſcriptions, is the difference between the
great, and the ſtrong. Let us now examine, whether in dramatic pictures, and
the painting of the paſſions, we ſhall not find the ſame difference between theſe
two kinds of wit. |

In tragedy we give the name of ſtrong to every paſſion, to every ſentiment
that affects us forcibly ; that is, to all thoſe of which the ſpectator may be the
ſport, or the victim. | |

No body is ſheltered from the ſtroke of revenge and jealouſy. The ſcene of
Atreus, who preſents his brother Thyeſtes, with a cup filled with the blood of
his ſon; the fury of Rhadamiſtus, who, to deliver the charms of Zenobia
from the laſcivious looks of the conqueror, drags her bleeding into the Araxes,
affords two pictures, which, in the opinion of every one, are more terrible than
that of an ambitious man ſeated on the throne of his maſter, |

In this laſt picture, a private perſon ſees no danger that can happen to himſelf.
None of the ſpectators are monarchs : the misfortunes frequently occaſioned by
revolutions are not ſo imminent as to ſtrike terror. The ſpectator muſt then


conſider ſuch a ſight with pleaſure (i). This ſpectacle charms ſome by _
them


*


*


(h) In the eyes of this ſame giant, that ſcourges of the earth; for thoſe warriors
Cæſar who ſaid of himſelf, Veni, vidi, vici, whoſe valour overturns empires, and changes
and whoſe conqueſts were ſo rapid, would the face of the world. We read their
appear to crawl upon the earth, with the hiſtory with pleaſure ; but we rejoice that
flowneſs of a ſtar-fiſh, or a ſnail. we were not born in their time. It is with

(i) To this cauſe, we ought in part, to theſe conquerors as with thoſe black clouds


refer the admiration conceived for thoſe ſtreaked with lightning, the —
whi


ESSAYS on TR MI ND. 268


them ſee, in the moſt elevated ranks, the inſtability of happineſs which creates a cer-
tain equality among all conditions, and comforts the lower claſs for the inferiority
of their ſtate. It pleaſes the others by flattering their inconſtancy: an incon-
ſtancy, which being founded on the deſire of bettering their condition, makes
the hope of a more happy ſtate glitter in their eyes, by the overthrow of
empires, and ſhews them a poſſibility, as a poſſibility at hand. It, in ſhort, de-
lights moſt men by the grandeur of the picture it repreſents, and by their being


forced to intereſt themſelves in the fate of the hero virtuous and worthy of _


eſteem,. placed by the poet on the ſtage. The deſire of happineſs, which al-
ways makes us conſider eſteem as the means of being more happy, creates in
us a kind identity with, ſuch a perſonage ; this identity is the more perfect,
and we intereſt ourſelves ſo much the more warmly in the happineſs, or un-
happineſs, of a great man, in proportion as that great man appears to us more
worthy of eſteem ; that is, as his ideas and ſentiments, are more analogous to
our own. Every one acknowledges in a hero, the ſentiment with which he him-
ſelf is affected. This-pleaſure is the greater, when the hero plays the greateſt
part; when he, like Hannibal, Sylla, Sertorius, and Cæſar, triumphs over a
people, on whoſe deſtiny that of the earth depends. |

Objects always ſtrike us in proportion to their grandeur. If we repreſent on
the ſtage the conſpiracy of the Genoeſe, and that of Rome; if we trace with a
hand equally bold, the characters of- the count Fieſchi and Catiline; if we give
them the ſame force, the fame courage, the ſame ſpirit, and the ſame elevation:
I fay, that the bold Catiline will gain almoſt the whole of our admiration ; the
grandeur of his enterprize will be reflected on his character, and render him great
in our eyes, and our illuſion will make us even deſire his happinels. |

In fact, we ſhall always believe ourſelves the more happy, as we ſhall be
more powerful, as we ſhall reign over a greater number of people, as more
men will have an. intereſt in preventing and fatisfying our deſires, and as by be-
ing the only perſons free upon earth, we ſhall. be ſurrounded by an univerſe of
ſlaves. - -

Theſe are the principal cauſes of the pleaſure we receive from the painting
of ambition, of that paſſion which obtains the name of great only from the
great changes it produces on the earth. | 2

Though love has ſometimes occaſioned. the like; though, it decided the battle
of Actium in favour of Octavius-z though in an age nearer to our own, it
has opened the ports. of Spain to the Moors; and though it has ſucceſſively
overturned and raiſed an infinite number of thrones ; theſe great revolutions are
not, however, ſo much the neceſſary effects of love, as they are of ambition.

Thus the deſire of grandeur, and the love of our country, which laſt may
be conſidered as a more virtuous ambition, have always received the name-of
great, preferably to all the other paſſions: a name, which being confered on
the heroes inſpired by theſe paſſions, has been at length given to Corneille, and
the celebrated poets, who have painted them. Whence I obſerve, that


_— 2


which darting from them, roars and rends freezes us with terror; ſeen at a diſtance it
the trees and rocks. Seen near, the fight fills us with admiration.


the


204 SE 4 EESPRIT; .

the paſſion of love is not leſs difficult to paint, than that of ambition. To
manage the character of Phædra with as much addreſs as Racine has clone,
certainly requires as many ideas and combinations, and as much wit, as to
trace in Rodogune the character of Cleopatra. The name of great, then, de-
pends leſs on the ability of the painter, than on the choice of his ſubject.

It follows from what J have ſaid, that if men are more ſenſible of pain than
of pleaſure, the objects of fear and terror muſt, with reſpect to ideas, pictures,
and paſſions, affect them more ſtrongly than objects formed for the general
aſtoniſhment and admiration, The great is then, in every kind that which uni-
verſally ſtrikes ; and the ſtrong, that which makes a leſs general, but more lively
impreſſion. .

The diſcovery of the compals, is, without diſpute, of more general ule
to mankind, than the diſcovery of a conſpiracy ; but this laſt is infinitely more
important, with reſpect to the nation where the conſpiracy is formed. |

The idea of ſtrength being once determined, I ſhall obſerve, that men being
only able to communicate their ideas by words, if 'the ſtrength of the expreſſion
is not anſwerable to that of the thought, however ſtrong that chought may be,
it will always appear weak, at leaſt to thoſe indued with a vigour of mind ſuf-
ficient to ſupply the faintneſs of the expreſſion, _

Now to give ſtrength to a thought, it is neceſſary, firſt, that it ſhould be
expreſſed in a clear and preciſe manner: every idea clothed in an ambiguous
expreſſion, is an object perceived through a fog; the impreſſion is not diſtinct
enough to be ſtrong. Secondly, It is neceſſary that this thought ſhould, if
poſſible, be repreſented by an image, and that the image be exactly ſuited to
the thought. | | | |

In fact, if all our ideas are preſented by our ſenſations, we ought to convey
our ideas to other men by the ſenſes; and as I have faid in the chapter on
Imagination, to ſpeak to the eyes, in order to be underſtood by the'mind.

To ſtrike us ſtrongly, it is *not even enough that an image be juſt and ex-
actly adapted to an idea; it muſt be great without being gigantic (k): ſuch is
the image employed by the immortal author of the Spirit of Laws, when he
compares tyrants to the ſavages, who, with an ax in their hand cut down the
tree, when they would gather the fruit, | |

It is alſo neceſſary, that this grand image, ſhould be new, or at leaſt pre-
- ſented under a new aſpect. It is the ſurpriſe excited by its novelty, which
fixing our whole attention on an idea, gives time to make a ſtronger im-
preſſion upon us. | EN |

We, in ſhort, attain the laſt degree of perfection in this kind, when the image
under which we preſent an idea is in motion. The moving picture is always to
be preferred to a picture of an object at reſt; it excites in us more ſenfations,


3


1


©.


(x) The exceſſive greatneſs of an image, are few men whoſe imaginations are ſuffi-
ſometimes renders it ridiculous. When the ciently ſtrong, to form a clear and lively
pſalmiſt ſays, that the mountains skipped picture of mountains ſkipping about like
« like rams,” this grand image makes but ſheep. |
a ſmall impreſſion upon us, becauſe there


and


ESSAYS oN Tus MIND. 265


and conſequently makes a more lively impreſſion. We are leſs ſtruck with
the calm air, than with a tempeſt.

It is then to the imagination, that an author owes, 1n part, the ſtrength of his
expreſſion ; by its aſſiſtance, he tranſmits into the ſoul of his readers, all the fire
of his thoughts, If the Engliſh in this reſpect, attribute to themſelves a great
ſuperiority over us, they owe this advantage leſs to the peculiar ſtrength of
their language, than to the form of their government. People always uſe
ſtrength of - expreſſion in a free ſtate, where men conceive the moſt noble
thoughts, and may expreſs them with as much boldneſs as they conceive them.
This is not the caſe in monarchies : in theſe countries, the intereſt of certain bo-
dies, that of ſome men in power, and more frequently ſtill, falſe and little
politics, .oppole theſe flights of genius. Whoever in theſe governments con-
ceives grand ideas, is often forced to conceal them, or at leaſt to enervate their
ſtrength by ambiguous, enigmatical, and weak expreſſions. Thus lord
Cheſterfield, in a letter, addreſſed to the abbe de Guaſco, ſays, ſpeaking of the
author of the Spirit of Laws, It is a pity that the preſident of Moniclquieu,
„ doubtleſs reſtrained by the fear of the miniſtry, has not had the courage to
* ſpeak out. We perceive upon the whole, what he thinks on certain ſubjects
e but he does not expreſs himſelf with ſufficient clearneſs and ſtrength: we
« ſhould have better known what he thought, if he had compoſed it at Lon-
don, and had been born in England.” |

This want of ſtrength in expreſſion does not however proceed from a want of
genius in the nation. In every thing that appears trifling to thoſe in place,
are, with diſdain, abandoned to genius, I may cite a thouſand proots of this
truth. What force of expreſſion is there in ſome of Boſſuet's orations, and in
ſome of the ſcenes of Mahomet! a tragedy which, notwithſtanding the criti-
ciſms made upon it, is, perhaps, one of the fineſt works of the celebrated
M. de Voltaire. wy

I ſhall conclude with a paſſage from the abbe Cartout, full of that ſtrength
of expreſſion, of which it has been thought that our language is not capable.
He there diſcovers the cauſes of the ſuperſtition of the Egyptians.

«© How could this people avoid being highly ſuperſtitious? Egypt, ſays he,


« was the country of enchantment ; imagination was there perpetually itruck


© by the grand machines of the marvelous, and nothing was to be ſeen but
*« nights of terror and admiration. The prince was an object of aſtoniſhment
« and fear: like the thunder which gathers in the depths of the clouds, and
« ſeems there to roll with greater grandeur and majeſty ; it was from the moſt
«* retired part of his labyrinths and his palace, that the monarch dictated his


« will, The kings never ſhewed themſelves without the terrifying and formid-


able apparatus of a power ſprung from a divine original. The death of
e the kings was an apotheoſis: the earth ſunk under the weight of their Mau-
* foleums. By theſe powerful gods, Egypt was covered with ſuperb obchsks,
% filled with wonderful inſcriptions, and with enormous pyramids, whoſe
“ ſummits were loſt in the air: by theſe beneficent gods thoſe lakes were
formed, which ſecured Egypt againſt the inattentions of nature.

More formidable than the throne and its monarchs, the temples and their
* pontiffs ſtil] farther impoſed on the imagination of the Egyptians. in one of
** thele temples was the coloſſus of Serapis. No mortal dared to approach 3
Mm .


266 ESL ESPRIT; on

& To the duration of this coloſſus, was connected that of the world: whoever
* had broke this taliſman, would have replunged the earth into its firſt chaos.
* No bounds were ſet to credulity; every thing in Egypt was enigma, won-
* der, and miſtery. All the temples gave oracles ; all the caverns belched forth
* horrible howlings z every where were ſeen trembling tripods, the Pythia
* in a rage, victims, priefts, and magicians, who, inveſted with the power of
« the gods, were intruſted with their vengeance.

«© The philoſophers armed againſt ſuperſtition, roſe up againſt it: but ſoon
* engaged in the labyrinth of too abſtracted metaphyſics, diſpute divided
their opinions; intereſt and fanaticiſm took advantage of it, and produced the
chaos of their different ſyſtems ; from thence ſprung the pompous myſteries
of lfis, Ofiris, and Horus. Then, covered with the myſterious and ſublime
« darkneſs of theology and religion, the impoſture was undiſcovered. If
*« ſome Egyptians perceived it, by the glimmering uncertain light of doubt,
« revenge, always ſuſpended over the head of the indifcreet, ſhut their eyes
to the light, and their mouths to the truth. Even the kings, who in order to
{© ſhelter themſeves from all inſult, had at firſt in concert with the prieſts,
«« raiſed up about the throne terror, ſuperſtition, and the phantoms in their train;
« the kings, I ſay, were themſelves terrified at them, and ſoon entruſted
<« the temples with the ſacred depoſitum of the young princes : fatal epocha of
te the tyranny of the Egyptian prieſts! No obſtacle could then oppoſe their
* power. Their ſovereigns were encircled from their infancy with the
** bandage of opinion; free and independent as they were, while they ſaw ro-
thing in theſe prieſts but cheats, and mercenary enthuſiaſts, they became
their ſlaves and victims. The people, the imitators of their kings, followed
„their example, and all Egypt fell proſtrate at the feet of the pontiff, and the
altar of ſuperſtition.”

This magnificent picture, by the abbe Cartout, proves, I think, that the
weakneſs of expreſſion with which we are reproached, and which on certain
occaſions, is viſible in our writings, cannot be attributed to a want of natural
genius,


VCC


.
Of a luminous, extenſive, and penetrating Wit; and of Taſte,


' fu we believe certain people, genius is a kind of inſtinct, that may, without
the knowlege of him who is poſſeſſed of it, render him capable of producing
the greateſt things. They place this inſtinct much below the light of wit,
which they take for univerſal intelligence, This opinion, ſupported by ſome
men remarkable tor wit, is not however yet adopted by the public,


In


ESSAYS o Tus M INK 2 67

In order to arrive at ſome concluſions on this ſubject, it is neceſſary to attach
Clear ideas to the term, luminous wit. |

In phyſics light is a body which renders objects viſible. The light of wit is
then that which renders our ideas viſible to common readers. It conſiſts in
_ diſpoſing all the ideas that concur to prove a truth in ſuch a manner, that we
may ealily comprehend them. The title of luminous wit, is then granted by
the gratitude of the public, to him who enlightens them.

Before M. de Fontenelle, moſt of the learned, after having ſcaled the ſharp
ſummit of the ſciences, found themſelves there alone, and deprived of all com-
munication with other men. They had not ſmoothed the road of the [ciqnces,
nor marked out a path for ignorance to walk in. Fontenelle, whom I do not
conſider here in a light, which places him in the rank of men of genius, was,
if I may uſe the term, the firſt who eſtabliſhed a bridge of communication be-
tween learning and ignorance. He perceived that the ignorant themſelves might
receive the ſeeds of all truths : but that for this purpoſe, addreſs ought to be
uſed to prepare their minds for it; that a new idea, to uſe his own expreſſion,
is a wedge which we cannot drive in at the broad end, he therefore made uſe of

all his endeavours to preſent his ideas with the greateſt clcarneſs; he ſucceeded
in this: the turf of weak minds was ſuddenly k indled, and the gratitude of the
public beſtowed on him, the title of a luminous wir. |
What muſt be done to produce ſuch a prodigy ? Simply to obſerve the progrels
of ordinary minds: to know that every thing leads and contributes towards it;
that in relation to ideas, ignorance is always conſtrained to yield to the im-
menſe power of the inſenſible progreſs of light; which I compare to thole
ſlender roots, which inſinuating themſelves into the crannies of the rocks, there
grow, and cauſe them to ſplit. It is alſo neceſſary to perceive, that nature is
only a long chain, and that by the aſſiſtance of the intermediate ideas, we may
raiſe minds of moderate abilities, nearer and nearer, till they reach the higheſt
ideas (a). |

The light of wit is therefore only the talent of bringing thoughts nearer to
each other, of uniting the ideas already known, with thoſe that are leſs known,
and of giving theſe ideas in clear and determinate expreſſions.

This talent is in philoſophy, what verſification is in poetry. All the art of
the verſifier conſiſts in giving the thoughts of the poets with force and harmo-
ny; all the art of a luminous wit, is in expreſſing, with great clearneſs, the ideas
of the philoſophers. | 4


—


But what time and ob-


(a) There is nothing that men may not
underſtand. However complicated a propo-
ſition may be, it is poſſible, by the aſſiſtance of
analyſis, to reduce it to a number of ſimple
propoſitions, and theſe propoſitions will be-
come ſo evident, that a man will be unable
to deny them, without contradicting him-
ſelf, and without ſaying, that a thing may
and may not be at the ſame time. Every


truth may be brought to this concluſion;
and when this is done, no eyes will be ſhut


M m 2


| againſt the light.


ſervation are neceſſary to carry the analyſis
to this point, and to reduce for certain the
truths, to ſuch ſimple propofitions ! this is
the labour of all ages, and of all men of
learning, who are conſtantly employed in
the inveſtigation of truth, and uniting ſe-
parate ideas, while the public wait for the
ſucceſs of their diſcoveries, in order to ſeize
the truths they propoſe.


In


268 SEL ESPRIYT;, ors,


Theſe two talents neither ſuppoſe nor exclude genius or invention. If De-
ſcartes, Locke, Hobbes, Bacon, have this light of wit united to genius and
invention, all men are not ſo happy. The light of wit is ſometimes only the
interpreter of the philoſophical genius, and the organ by which it communi-
cates, to common minds, ideas too much above their underſtanding.

If people have ſometimes confounded luminous wit with genius, it proceeds
from their both enlightening mankind, and their not having fully perceived that
genius was the centre and focus, to which this kind of wit attracts the luminous
ide as which are reflected on the multitude. |

In the ſciences, genius, like a bold navigator, ſearches for, and diſcovers un-
known regions, It is the buſineſs of the luminous wits, to draw ſlowly after
their ſteps, the heavy maſs of common minds. |

In the arts, genius, more free than the light of wit, may be compared to a
proud courſer, that, with a rapid foot, puſhes into the thickeſt part of the
foreſt, and bounds through the thickets and over the quagmires. Inceſſantly
employed in obſerving him, and wanting the activity to follow him in his courſe,
the luminous wit waits at ſome opening, there obſerves him, and marks ſome
of the ſteps he has imprinted on the ground ; but can only fix on a ſmall
number. Ie |

In fact, if in the arts, ſuch as eloquence and poetry, a luminous wit might
give all the fine rules, from the obſervation of which muſt reſult perfect poems
or diſcourſes, eloquence and poetry would no longer be arts of genius; we
ſhould become great poets, and great orators, as we become good arithmeti—
cians. Genius alone can ſeize all thoſe fine rules, which ſecure its ſucceſs. The
inability of the light of wit, to diſcover every thing, is the cauſe of its little
ſucceſs in the very art, in which it has often given excellent precepts. It happily
accompliſhes ſome of the conditions neceſſary for making a good work, but it
omits the principal, |

M. de Fontenelle, whom I quote, in order to illuſtrate this idea, by an ex-
ample, has certainly given excellent precepts. That great man, however, not
having, in his art of poetry, treated either of verſification, or of moving the
paſſions, it is probable, that by obſerving the fine rules that he has preſcribed, he
would have compoſed none but dull tragedies. |

It follows from the difference. eſtabliſhed between genius, and the light of
wit, that the human race is not obliged: to the latter for any diſcoveries, and
that luminous wit does not extend to the bounds of our ideas. |

This kind of wit is then only a talent, a method of conveying, in a clear
manner, our ideas to others. Upon which, I ſhall obſerve, that all men who
would concentrate themſelves in one art, and expreſs with clearneſs only, the
principles of that art; as for inſtance, muſic or painting, would not be reckoned
among the luminous wits. | | |

In order to obtain this title, it is neceſſary, either to diffuſe light upon ſome-
thing extremely intereſting, or upon a number of different ſubjects, What is
called light, always ſuppoſes extenſive knowlege. This kind of wit, ought,
for this reaſon, to impoſe even on men of learning, and in converſation, have
the advantage over genius. Let one of theſe luminous wits be placed in an aſ-
jembly of men, celebrated for their skill in the different arts and ſciences ; if he
ſpeaks of painting to a poet, of philoſophy to a painter, or of ſculpture to a

| philoſopher,


ESSAYS o Tre MI NP, 269


philoſopher, he will expreſs his principles with more preciſion, and exhibit his
ideas with greater clearneſs, than theſe illuſtrious men would expreſs them to
each other, and thence he would obtain their eſteem, But let this man go,
and talk of painting to a painter, of poetry to a poet, or of philoſophy to a
philoſopher, and he would appear no more than a perſon of clear, but limited
underſtanding, and well verſed in common place. There is only one caſe in
which luminous and extenſive wits may be reckoned among the men of genius:
that is, when they are well skilled in ſome ſciences, and perceiving, the relations
that arty between them, they reduce them to their common and more general
rinciples. :
| F What I have ſaid, eſtabliſhes a ſenſible difference between penetrating, lumin-
ous, and extenſive wits : theſe Jaſt, caſt a rapid view over an infinite number of
objects; the others, on the contrary, attach themſelves to few objects; but
they dive to the bottom of them; they ſurvey in depth, the ſpace which the
extenſive wits run over in ſurface, The idea I affix to the word penetrating,
agrees with its etymology. The property of this kind of wit 1s to pierce into
a ſubject; but if it has dived to a particular depth, it then loſes the name of
penetrating, and aſſumes that of profound.
Profound wit, or the genius of the ſciences, is, ſays Mr. Formey, the art of
reducing ideas already diſtin, to other ideas ſtill more ſimple and clear, till we
have the laſt ſolution poſſible. Whoever could know, adds Mr. Formey, to
what a point every man has carried this analyſis, would have the gradual ſcale of
the depth of all minds.
lr follows from this idea, that the ſhortneſs of lite will not permit a man to
be profoundly skilled in many ſciences, that wit is leſs extenſive, in proportion
as it is more penetrating and profound, and that there is no ſuch thing as a uni-
verſal wit. |

In regard to a penetrating wit, I obſerve, that the public grants this title
only to the illuſtrious men, who employ themſelves in the ſciences, in which
they are more or leſs initiated; ſuch are morality, politics, metaphyſics, &c.
With reſpect to painting or geometry, a perſon is conſidered as penetrating,
only by thoſe who are proficients in that art or ſcience. The public, too igno-
rant to ſet a value on theſe different kinds of penetration with refpect to the
mind of a particular perſon, judge of his works, end never apply to his abilities
the epithet of penetrating ; they wait before they praiſe him, till by the ſolution
of ſome difficult problems, or the drawing of ſome fine picture, a man has de-
ſerved the tiile of a great geometrician, or a great painter, |

I hall add but one word to what I have faid, which is, that ſagacity
and penetration partake of the ſame nature. A perſon appears endued with
great (igacity, when having long meditated, and had habitually preſent to
this mind, the ſubjects moſt commonly treated of in converſation, he ſearches
into them with vivacity. The only difference between penetration and ſa-
gacity of mind is, that this laſt ſuppoſes more quickneſs of conception, and
that the perſon has more lately ſtudied the queſtions that afford proofs of
his ſagacity. A perſon has ſo much the more ſagacity in relation to any ſub-
jet, is he has more profoundly and more lately been employed about it.

Let us now paſs to taſte: the laſt ſubje& I propoſe to examine in this


chapter.


- n
Taſte,


' + (« 8 LL p PRI Ty on, © :
Taſte, taken in its moſt extenſive ſignification, is, in relation to works»
the knowledge of what merits the eſteem of mankind. Among the arts
and ſciences there are ſome with regard to which the public adopt the opinion
of men of ſkill, and never of themſelves pronounce any judgment ; ſuch are
geometry, mechanics, ſome parts of natural philoſophy, and painting. In
theſe arts and ſciences the only men of taſte are the perſons verſed in them;
and taſte is in theſe various kinds only the knowlege of the truly beautiful.
This is not the caſe with reſpect to thoſe works of which the public are,
or believe themſelves to be judges, as poems, romances, tragedies, moral
diſcourſes, politics, &c. In theſe various kinds we ought not to underſtand
by the word taſte the exact knowlege of that beauty proper to ſtrike people
of all ages and countries; but the more particular knowlege of what pleaſes
the public in a certain nation, There are two methods of arriving at this
knowlege, and conſequently two different kinds of taſte. One which I ſhall
call habitual taſte : ſuch is that of molt players, who, by the daily ſtudy of
the ideas and ſentiments proper to pleaſe the public, are rendered very good
judges of theatrical works, and eſpecially of thoſe which reſemble the pieces
already publiſhed. The other is a rational taſte, founded on a profound
knowlege of human nature, and the ſpirit of the age. The men endued
with this laſt kind of taſte are particularly qualified to judge of original
works. He who has only an habitual taſte muſt be void of taſte whenever he is
deſtitute of objects of compariſon. But this rational taſte, which is doubt-
leſs ſuperior to that I call habitual, is only acquired, as I have already ſaid,
by long ſtudy both of the public taſte, and of the art or ſcience in which a
perſon pretends to the title of a man of taſte. I may then, by applying to
taſte, what I have ſaid of wit, conclude that there is no ſuch thing as uni-
verſa] taſte. | |
The only obſervation that remains on the ſubject of taſte is, that illu
ſtrious men are not always the beſt judges of it, in that very kind where
they have had moſt ſucceſs. What it may be aſked, is the cauſe of this
literary phenomenon ? To this I reply, it is with great writers as with great
painters, each has his manner. M. de Crebillion, for inſtance, ſometimes
expreſſes his ideas with a force, a heat, an energy, peculiar to himſelf. M. de
Fontenelle preſents them with an order, a clearneſs, and a turn remarkable
of his own ; and M. de Voltaire expreſſes them with an imagination, grandeur,
and continued elegance, Now each of theſe illuſtrious men, neceſſitated by
his taſte to conſider his own manner as the beſt, muſt, conſequently, ſet a
greater value on the man of moderate abilities, who ſeizes it, than on the
man of genius, who has a taſte of his own. Hence arrives the different
judgments often formed on the ſame work by the celebrated writers and
the public, who, having no eſteem for imitators, would have an author be
himſelf, and not another. | |
Thus the man of wit, who has perfected his taſte in one kind without
having compoſed himſelf or adopted another's manner, has commonly a
ſurer taſte than the greateſt writers. No intereſt puts him under an illuſion,
and hinders his placing himſelf in the ſame point of view in which the public
conſiders and forms a judgment of a work. |
| | | CHAP,


ESSAYS own The MIND. 271


A eee ee eee


E 35 & Fe
Of a Genius for writing with elegance.


We: pleaſes in all ages and in all countries is called beautiful. But
to form a more exact and diſtinct idea, perhaps it may be neceſſary
to examine what it 1s in each art, and even in each part of an art, that con-
ſtitutes beauty. From this examination we may eaſily deduce the idea of a
beauty common to all the arts and ſciences, from whence we may at length
form an abſtract and general idea of beauty.

If the public unites the epithet of beauty to the productions of the mind,
theſe are called works of elegance; an elegance which conſiſts in beauty.
We mult not, however, affix to this epithet the idea of that true beauty of


which we have not yet given a clear definition. It is to works of entertain-


ment that we particularly give the name of elegant. This kind of genius
is very different from the inſtructive. Inſtruction is leſs arbitrary: for im-
portant diſcoveries in chemiſtry, natural philoſophy, and geometry, equally
uſeful to all nations, are equally eſteemed. This is not the caſe with what is


produced by a fine genius: the eſteem, conceived for a work of this kind,
ought to be differently modified among different nations, according to the
difference of their manners and form of government, and of the progreſs
which the arts and ſciences have made. Every nation then attaches different
ideas to the word elegant. But as there are none where they do not
compoſe poems, romances, theatrical pieces, panegyrics, hiſtories (a), and
thoſe works, in ſhort, which employ the reader without fatiguing him, ſo
there is no nation where, at leaſt under another name, they do not know
what we here mean by the capacity for elegant writing.


Whoever, in theſe ſeveral kinds, do not attain to the title of a genius, is


comprehended in the claſs of elegant writers, when he joins grace and ele-
gance to a happy choice of ideas. Deſpreaux ſaid, ſpeaking of the elegant
Racine, That it was only from my taſte for the elegance of this author,
<« that I learnt with difficulty to make verſes.” I certainly do not adopt
Deſpreaux's judgment on Racine; but I think I may conclude from it,
that it is principally in the clearneſs, the colouring, the expreſſion, and in
the art of repreſenting our ideas, that conſiſts that elegance of writing to


which is given the name of beauty, only becauſe it pleaſes, will really pleaſe,


and moſt generally ought to do ſo.


(a) I do not ſpeak of thoſe hiſtories tics, and not being to be read without ſome
written with a view of inſtruction, ſuch as efforts of attention, cannot, for this reaſon,
the Annals of Tacitus, which being filled be fo generally reliſhed and felt.
with profound ideas on morality and poli- WY


| 1


— — 2 — — —


and mean expreſſions.


252 DEEL”"ESPRIT; on,

In fact, If, as M. de Vaugelas remarks, there are more judges of words
than of ideas, and if men are in general leſs ſenſible. of the juſtneſs of rea-
ſening than of the beauty of an expreſſion (b), it is to the art of expreſſing
ourſelves well that we ought to affix the title of elegant writing.

After having ſtated this idea, it will, perhaps, be concluded, that a ca-
pacity of writing with elegance is no more than the art of writing elegantly
upon nothing and without a meaning. My anſwer to this concluſion is,
that a work, void of ſenſe, would be only a continued flow of harmonious
ſounds, that would obtain no eſteem (c); and, therefore, the public adorns
with the title of elegant writers only thoſe whoſe works are full of grand,
ſublime, or intereſting ideas. There is no idea which may be excluded from
polite writing, if we except thoſe, which, ſuppoſing too much preliminary
ſtudy, are not thought ſuitable to the polite.

do not pretend in this anſwer, to caſt any blemiſh on the glory of phi-
loſophers. Philoſophic ſtudies, beyond all contradiction, ſuppoſe ſtricter
reſearches, cloſer reflections, more proſound ideas, and even a particular
kind of life. In the world we learn to expreſs our ideas well; but it is in
retirement that we acquire them. We there make an infinite number of
obſervations on things, and in the world we only make them on the man-
ner of expreſſing them. Philoſophers ought then, on account of the depth
of their ideas, to be preferred to polite writers; but from theſe laſt are re-
quired ſo many graces and ſuch elegance, that the neceſſary conditions, to
merit the title of philoſopher, or an elegant writer, are, perhaps, equally dif-
ficult to be fulfilled. - It appears, at leaſt, that in theſe two kinds, illuſtrious
men are equally rare. Indeed, in order to be able to inſtruct and to pleaſe
at the ſame time, what knowlege does it require in language, and in the
ſpirit of the age? What taſte, always to preſent ideas under an agreeable
aſpect? What ſtudy, to diſpoſe them in ſuch a manner as to make the moſt
lively impreſſion on the mind of the readers? What obſervations, to diſtin-
guiſh the particulars that ought to be treated at large, from thoſe, which, in
order to be felt, have only need of being preſented? And what art, con-
ſtantly to unite variety to order and clearneſs; and, as M. de Fontenelle ſays,
to excite the curioſity of the mind to manage its lazineſs, and to prevent its
znconſtancy ? |

It is here the difficulty of ſucceeding, that is, doubtleſs, in part the cauſe
of the little value polite writers commonly ſet on works of mere reaſoning.
As the man of a contracted mind perceives in philoſophy nothing but a
heap of puerile and myſterious enigmas, and hates in philoſophers the trouble


_
—


his confeſſor, to inſpire him with the greater


enjoy theſe celeſtial pleaſures? ” — « O
ſir! replied Malherbe, talk to me no
more about them, your bad ſtyle gives


(b) 1 ſhall relate on this ſubject a ſaying
of Malberbe. He was on his death-bed, and „


fervour and reſignation, deſcribed to him
the joys of heaven ; but made uſe of low
The deſcription
being ended. Well, ſaid he to the ſick
„ man, do not you feel à great deſire to


me a diſguſt to them.“
(c) A perſon would not now be quoted


as a man of wit, for writing a madrigal


or a ſonnet,


It


ESS AV S os THE MIND. 5
it would give him to underſtand them, fo the polite genius treats' them


ſcarcely with greater favour : he alſo hates in their works the dryneſs and
ſtiffneſs of inſtruction, Too much employed about writing well, and leſs


ſolicitous about ſenſe (d), than about the elegance of the phraſe, he ac-


knowleges only thoſe to be good thoughts, where the ideas are happily ex-
preſſed. The leaſt obſcurity ſhocks him. He is ignorant that a profound
idea, however clearly it is expreſſed, will be always unintelligible to common
readers, when they cannot reduce it to ſuch propoſitions as are extremely
ſimple ; and that it is with theſe profound ideas as with the pure and limpid
waters, which by their depth always loſe their tranſparency. |

Beſides, among the elegant writers there are ſome who, being the ſecret
enemies of philoſophy, countenance the opinion of men of limited under-
ſtandings. The dupes of a little ridiculous vanity, they, in this reſpect, adopt
popular errors : and without eſteem for the juſtneſs, profoundneſs, and novelty
of the thoughts, they ſeem to forget that the art of elegant expreſſion neceſſa-
rily ſuppoſes, that a perſon ſhould have ſomething to ſay; and that, in ſhort,
an elegant writer may be compared to a jeweller, whoſe dexterity becomes
uſeleſs if he has no diamonds to ſet. |

The learned and the philoſophers, on the contrary, give themſelves up in-


tirely to reſearches into facts or ideas, and are often ignorant of the beauties


and the difficulties of the art of writing. They, conſequently, ſet little
value on an elegant writer; and their unjuſt contempt is principally founded
on a great inſenſibility with reſpect to the ſpecies of ideas that enter into the


compoſition of elegant performances. They are almoſt all, in ſome reſpects,


like that geometrician, before whom a great elogium was made on the
tragedy of Iphigenia; this elogium excited his curioſity; he deſired the
perſon to lend him the tragedy; but having read ſome ſcenes, he returned
it, ſaying, For my part, I cannot think what you find ſo beautiful in this
< work ; it proves nothing.“

The learned abbe de Longuerue was nearly in the ſame caſe: with this geo-
metrician: poetry had no charms for him; he equally deſpiſed the grandeur
of Corneille, and the elegance of Racine : he had, he ſaid, baniſhed all the

ts from his library (e). Me. ; |

In order to be equally ſenſible of the merit both of ideas and expreſſions,
we ought, like Plato, Montaigne, Bacon, Monteſquieu, and ſome of our

philoſophers whoſe modeſty prevents my naming them, to unite the art


(d) Nothing can be more diſagreeable to 92 ec There are, ſays the fame abbe de
a perſon, who does not expreſs himſelf hap- ©*
pily, than to be judged by the elegant more than Homer himſelf; the firſt is,
writers, or even the — They make AnTIQUITATESHOMERICE, the other,


no account of his ideas, and only judge of HoMERLI GNoMOLOGIA, PER DUPoR-
his words. How ſuperior ſoever he may . TUM. Whoever has read theſe two


onguerue, two works on Homer, worth


really be. to thoſe who treat him as weak,
he will never reform their judgment, and,
in their opinion, he will always paſs for a


cc books, has read all that is good in Ho-
< mer, without ſuffering the fatigue of his
& ſleepy tales.“


Nn „


N — —
TT


— m


——


— —


— *


ö
|
}
1
h
'
q
|
'


274 DE L'ESPRIT;,; ox,
of writing, with 'the art of thinking well; an uncommon union, never toi
be found but in men of great genius. TE

After having pointed out the cauſes of the contempt which ſome: of the
learned and ſome of the polite writers reſpectively. entertain for each other;
I ought to ſhew the caules of the contempt into which polite writers fall,
and muſt daily do ſo, rather than thoſe of any other kind. +4

The taſte of our age for philoſophy has filled it with writers of diſſerta-
tions, who, though dull, heavy, and tireſome, are, however, full of admi-
ration for the profoundneſs of their judgments. Among theſe writers: there
are ſome who expreſs themſelves very ill: they ſuſpect it; they know that
every one is a judge of elegance and clearneſs of expreſſion, and that, in this
reſpect, it is impoſſible to impoſe upon the public: they are then forced,

from a regard to their own vanity, to renounce the title of elegant writers, in
order to aſſume that of good writers. They have heard that a good writer
ſometimes expreſſes himſelf in an obſcure manner; they are ſenſible, there-
fore, that, by limiting their pretenſions to the title of good writers, they
may always hide the abſurdity of their reaſonings under the obſcurity of their
expreſſions, and that this alone is a certain way of preventing their being
convicted of folly: thus they ſeize it with avidity, concealing as much as
poſſible from themſelves, that the want of elegance is the only thing that
can give them a claim of being good writers, and that writing ill is no proof
that they think well. | t | |

The judgment of ſuch men, rich and powerful as they often are (f),

would yet make no impreſſion on the public, if they were not ſupported by
the authority of certain philoſophers, who being, like the polite? writers,
Jealous of an excluſive eſteem, do not perceive: that every different kindof!
writing has its particular admirers; that there are every where found more
laurels than there are heads to be crowned with them; that every nation has,
at its diſpoſal, funds of eſteem ſufficient to ſatisfy all the pretenſions of il-
luſtrious men; and that, in ſhort,” by inſpiring a diſguſt againſt polite wir -
ing, they arm againſt all the great writers the contempt: of perſons, of mean
capacities, who having: an intereſt of deſpiſing: wit, ina hs 962.
under the name of a fine writer, which is ſcarcely more known to them,
both the learned and the philoſopher, and in general all the thinking” part
of mankind. | |


3
— Om AY”  .


(f) In general thoſe who without ſuc- prompt the fools to do ſo ; they would an-
ceſs have cultivated: the arts. and ſciences, nihilate that ikind-of genius in which they
if they are raiſed to the higheſt poſts. in have not ſucceeded; We may ſay, that in
the ſtate, become the moſt cruel enemies of letters, as well as in religion, apoſtates are
the men of letters. To deery them, they the greateſti perſecutors.


CHAP:


ESSAYS on Tn MIN D. 275


RR c Ge III ILSS
CHA'P. .
Of the Spirit of the age.


THIS kind of ſpirit does not at all contribute to the advancement of
the arts and ſciences, and would have no place in this work, if it did
not fall a very great one in the heads of an infinite number of men.

Wherever the people are held in no conſideration, what is called the ſpirit
of the age, is only the ſpirit of the perſons who give the lead, that is, the
men of diſtinction and the courtiers.

The men of diſtinction and the polite writers both expreſs themſelves
with elegance and purity, and both are commonly more ſolicitous about
expreſſing themſelves well, than about thinking juſtly : however, they nei-
ther do, nor ought to diſcourſe on the ſame ſubjects (a), becauſe they have
different objects in view. The elegant writer, greedy of the public eſteem,
ought either to exhibit grand pictures, or to preſent ſach ideas as are of
importance to mankind in general, or at leaſt to his own nation. A.perſon
of diſtinction, ſatisfied, on the contrary, with the admiration of thoſe that
give the lead, employs himſelf only in preſenting agreeable ideas to what is
called good company. |

I have ſaid in the ſecond diſcourſe, that we can talk in company only on
things, or perſons; that good company are commonly ſuperficial ; that they
employ themſelves ſcarcely about any thing but perſons; that praiſe is
burdenfome to whoever is not the ſubject of it, and that it makes the audi-
tors yawn. Thus thoſe who. compoſe the polite circles, give a malignant
interpretation to the actions of men, ſeize their weak fide, turn into a jeſt
things the moſt ſerious, laugh at every thing, and throw a ridicule upon
all ideas contrary to thoſe agreeable to the company. The ſpirit of conver-
ſation is then reduced to the talent of agreeable defamation, eſpecially in this
ace, in which every body pretends to wit, and believes he has a great deal ;
in which no one can mention the ſuperiority of another, without wounding
the vanity of every one elſe; in which they diſtinguiſh the men of merit,
from the man of mean abilities, only by the manner in which they defame
him; in which they are in a manner agreed to divide the nation into two
claſſes, the one that of brutes, who are the moſt numerous, the other that
of fools, and comprehend in this laſt claſs all thoſe whom they cannot help
acknowleging to be poſſeſſed of abilities.


„


r K Y ä „„


-


FRY 4 . G :
bk CADA MACH m4 _ 2 — = — — 9 — z
p = -


(a) A thouſand agreeable ſtrokes in con- © The reader, ſays Boileau, would make
verſation would be inſipid to the reader, © a profit of his amuſement,”


2 755 Nn 2 | Beſides,


— CO


— —


2 —_— CNS Ir


276 DELESPIRIT; on,

Beſides, defamation is now the only rejource they have left for praiſing
themlelves and the company. Every one is deſirous of doing this: whether
he blames or approves, whether he ſpeaks or is ſilent, he is always making
his own apology ; for every man is an orator, who, by his diſcourſe, or his
actions, is perpetually making his own panegyric. There are two ways of
praiſing ourſelves ; one, by ſaying things to our own advantage; the other,
by ſpeaking ill of our neighbours. Cicero, Horace, and in general all the
ancients, were more frank in their pretenſions, and openly gave themſelves
the praiſes they thought they deſerved. Our age is become more delicate
on this article. It is only by the ill we ſay of another, that we are now per-
mitted to make our own elogium. It is by making a jeſt of a fool, we in-
directly boaſt our own wit. This manner of praiſing ourſelves is doubtleſs
the molt directly oppoſite to good manners; however, it is the only one in


ule. Whoever ſays of himſelf the good he thinks, is puffed up with pride,


and every one ſhuns him. Whoever, on the contrary, praiſes himſelf by
the evil he ſays of others, is a charming man; he is ſurrounded with grate-


ful auditors ; they ſhare with him the praiſes he indirectly gives himſelf, and


incefiantly applaud the fine ſpeeches which deliver them from the vexation


of being obliged to offer incenſe to their own vanity. It appears, that, in


general, the malignity of the world proceeds leſs from the deſign of doing
an injury, than from people's deſire of raiſing an opinion of their own
merit. Thus this vice is eaſily indulged and put in practice, not only by
the polite, but by men of narrow and contracted minds, whoſe intentions
are {till more odious. The man of merit knows, that the perſon of whom
they ſay no ill, is, in general, one of whom they can ſay no good; that
thoſe who do not love to praiſe, have commonly been themſelves but little
praiſed : he is, therefore, not deſirous of their commendations : he con-


ſiders ſtupidity as a misfortune, on which ſtupidity always ſeeks to be re-


venged. Let them prove no fact againſt me, ſaid a man of great wit
„ let them talk as ill of me as they pleaſe, I ſhall not be ſorry for it; it
&« js proper that every one ſhould amuſe himſelf.” But if philoſophy par-
dons malice, it ought not, however, to applaud it. To theſe indiſcrete ap-
plauſes we owe ſuch a number of miſchievous perſons, who, in other reſpects, are
ſometimes a very good ſort of people. Flattered by the praiſes beſtowed on
malice, and by the reputation for wit which it procures, they do not know
how to place a proper eſteem on the goodneſs that is natural to them : they
would render themſelves formidable by the ſeverity of their ſatire: they
have unhappily ſo much wit as to ſucceed in it : they, at firſt, became wicked
to give themſelves an air, and afterwards remain ſo by habit.

O you, who have not yet contracted this fatal cuſtom, ſhut your ears
to the praiſes given to thoſe ſatirical ſtrokes, that are as prejudicial to ſo-
ciety, as they are common. Conſider the impure ſources from whence de-
traction ſprings (b). Recollect, that indifferent with reſpect to the m—_—

0


n —
— —


(b) One is guilty of ſlander, becauſe he is of himſelf, conceitedly fond of talking, hu-
ignorant and lazy; another, becauſe, tired mourouſly, and ſhocked at the leaſt *
| e


ESSAYS o Tuz MIND. | 277


of a particular perſon, the great man only employs himſelf about great
things; that old and wicked appear to him as ridiculous as- old and charm-
ing; that, among perſons of diſtinction, thoſe who deſerve to be great muſt
ſoon be diſguſted with that taſte for ſlander, which is held in abhorrence by
other nations (c): abandon it then to little minds, to whom defamation is a
want. Born the enemies of thoſe of a ſuperior genius, and jealous of the
eſteem they cannot attain, they know, that, like thoſe baſe plants that can
only bud and grow on the ruins of palaces, they can only riſe by the fall of
great reputations, and, for that reaſon, they take pains to deſtroy them.

Theſe men of contracted minds are very numerous. Formerly the people
were inſpired with envy only by their equals; at preſent every one aſpires
to wit, and believes that the public are intirely filled with envy at his merit.
People no longer read for inſtruction ; but to criticize. Now, among
all works, there are none that can hold out againſt this difpoſition of
readers. Moſt of them, employed only in ſearching for faults, are like
thoſe unclean animals that are ſometimes found in cities, and ramble there


only to grovel in the kennels. Are they ſtill ignorant that it requires no


leſs wit to diſcover the beauties than the faults of a work; and that in
books, as an Engliſh author ſays, we ought to ſearch for ideas, and ſet


«© a great value on the book, when we have found a conſiderable number


« of them??“


”


All the injuſtice of this kind is the neceſſary effect of folly. What diffe-
rence, in this reſpect, is there between the conduct of a man of genius, and


2


he is habitually unhappy: it is more to his
humour than to his wit, that he owes the
ſeverity and keenneſs of his expreſſion;
Facit indignatio verſum. A third is natu-
rally ſplenitic ; he flanders his neighbours,
becauſe he thinks them his enemies. O
what grief to live perpetually with the ob-
jets of his hatred ! He places his pride in
not ſuffering them to impoſe on him: he
ſees none but what are villains or diſguiſed
cheats: he ſays ſo, and he frequently ſays
true ; but he is ſometimes deceived. Now
I aſk, if we are not equally dupes, when
we take vice for virtue, as when we take
virtue for vice? The happy age is that in
which a man is the dupe of his friends and
his miſtreſſes. Wo to him whoſe pru-
dence is not the effect of experience! A
premature diſtruſt is the certain ſign of a


depraved heart, and an unhappy temper.


Who knows, whether he is not the moſt
ſenſeleſs of all mankind, who, that he may
not be the dupe of his friends, expoſes
himſelf to the puniſhment of perpetual diſ-


truſt? People, in ſhort, defame others to


—


ſhew their wit: it is not ſaid, that ſatirical
wit is only the wit of thoſe who have none
at all; but, in fact, what is the wit that
only ſubſiſts in the ridicule of others, and


a talent in which we cannot excel without


the elogium beſtowed on wit becoming a
ſatire on the heart? How can we puff our-
ſelves up with our ſucceſs, where, if we


have preſerved any virtue, we ought eve


day to bluſh at thoſe ſmart ſtrokes whic
our vanity makes us applaud, and which it
would force us to deſpiſe, were it attended
with more knowlege.

(c) It is only in France and in good


company, that we repreſent as a man of


wit, a perſon whom they will not allow to
have common ſenſe. Thus a foreigner,
always ready to deprive us of a great ge-
neral, an iluſtrious writer, a celebrated
artiſt, or an able manufacturer, will never
take from us a polite companion [un homme
du bon ton]. Now what ſort of a wit is
that, which no nation will have any thing
to do with? |


that


2.78
that of aparrow mind? The firſt takes an advantage of every thing, There


GS. DS 4 3B


they pointed out the form of government moſt proper to render men happy ?
Have they only made the romance of a good legiſlation (e), ſuch as might
ſerve for a colony eſtabliſhed on ſome deſert coaſt in America ? |

Time in every age has preſented ſome truths to man; but many of his gifts
are ſtill to be beſtowed, We may then acquire an infinite number of new
ideas. The maxim, that every thing has been thought of and ſaid, is then
falſe; it was invented firſt by ignorance, and has been repeated ſince by envy.
There is no means which the envious, under the appearance of juſtice, do not
employ to degrade merit. We know for inſtance that there is no truth that


_ * —


23245 ĩ 4148 „li 1418511 211311
(9) The wiſe, ſays the Perſian proverh,

(Know and inquire ** but the ignorant 0

10 W . SE iir 13 6 Pl O07 to
ot Even know What to enquire about.


_ —


days in prayer. The biſhop heard of it,
and went to ſee her: What are then the
not Even know What to enquire abou long prayers, ſaid be, to which you conſe-
(e) We do pot even underſtand the prin- erate your days ? I repeat my Pater- noſter,
ciples we repeat every day: to PUNISH and faid the girl. The Pater-noſter, replied
REWARD is a maxim; every body knows the biſhop, is certainly an excellent prayer;
the words, but few are acquainted with the hat, in ſhort, it is foon ſaid. O my lord!
ſenſe. Whoever could perceiye its full ex- returne the girl, what ideas of the grandeur,


„1 4417


tent, might refolve, by the application of
this principle, the problem of a Neiße le-
giſlation. * How many things of the like
kind do we imagine we know and repeat
every day, without underſtanding chem!
What & different ſignification haye the ſame
words in %% mans | 4%
It is related of a young woman, in repu-
tation for her ſanctity, that ſhe paſt whole


-


quires a very dexterous hand.


power and goodneſs, of Gog are included


in theſe two words, Pater- noſter! they are
enough for a week's meditation.
[ may ſay the ſame of certain proyerbs;


1 compare them to tangled chains; if we


get hold of an end, we, may wind off all
the morals and politics; but this work re-


funds


ESSAYS or Tae. MIN D. 279
ſtands alone; that every new'idea has a dependancè on ſome ideas already known,
to which it has neceſſatily ſome reſemblance: yet from theſe ræſemblances, envy
daily accuſes the illuſtrious men our cotemporaries with plagiaty (f): when they
declame againſt plagiaries, they ſay! it' is to puniſſi the literary robbers; and to
revenge the public. But, it might be replied, if you confulted only - the
public intereſt, your declarations would not be ſo warm; you would perceive
that theſe plagiaries, though leſs worthy of eſteem than the men of genius, are
however of great uſe to the public; that a good work, in order to be gene-


rally known, ought to be divided into an infinite number of works, of leſs


In fact, if the individuals, of which the ſociety is compoſedz ought to be
ranged under ſeveral claſſes,” that all, in order that they may underſtahd and
hear, have different ears and eyes, it is evident, that the ſame wfiter, . whatever
be his genius; cannot be equally ſuitable to them, and that there” ſhould be au-
thors of all claſſes (g), ſuch as Neuville to preach in the city, and Bridaine in
the country; In morality; as in politics, certain ideas are not univerſally: felt,
and their evidence not fully ſettled, that they have from the moſt ſublime plii-
lofophy deſcended to poetry and from poetry, into the ſtreets: they then become
common enough to be uſeful. | | | 1

Moreover this envy, which ſo often aſſumes the name of juſtice, and from
which no body is intirely exempt, is a vice peculiar to no nation: but it is
commonly moſt active and dangerous in the vain men of little minds. The
man of' ſuperior abilities has but fely objects of jealoufy; and people of diſtini-
guiſhed rank are too fluctuating to''obty the ſame ſenſation for a long time to-
gether: beſides, they do not hate metit, and particularly literary merit, which


.


they often even protect: their only pretence” for mkingꝭ uſe of ſlander, ariſes


from their deſite of being agreeable;” and of ſhining in converſation. In this


1 5 7 - :
> a 17 2 1 1 : 1 ; 5
— 4 4 ” * os £2344 ew beds ifs 7 — 4


— r


(f.) Under the name of love, Hęſiod, a principle that no body had found there
for inſtance, gives us pretty nearſy the idea before, 1 aprt; a diſcobery ;.
of attraction; but in that poet it is only a that this diſcovery ſuppoſes, at leaſt, in him
vague idea: on the contrary, in Newton, who made it, a great number of obſerva-
it is the reſult of combinations! and neW tions hic led to this principle; and that,
calculations; Newton was then the inven- in ſhort, he who aſſembles many ideas in
tor. What I ſay of Newton, I ſxy equally the ſame point of view, is a man of genius
of Locke: when Ariſtotle Taid, NiHIL EST and an inventor,
IN INTELLECTU, QUOD, NON PRIUS FU=-- (g) Lſhafl mention on this ſubject a fact
ERIT IN SENSU, - certainly © he did "not? plafarit enough. A man one” day cauſed
attach to this maxim the ſunſe ideas as Mro hintif: ta bo introduced to a magiſtrate, a
n n
in the Greek: philoſopher, than a glimpſcof'; ployment, fays c e ee [ compple,
a diſcovery to be made, and the honour of books he anſwere
it Was intirely to belong to an-Engliſh phi- books have yet fallen into my hands, re-
loſopher. It is envy alone that makes us turned the magiſtrate, I believe fo, replied
find in the ancients, all the diſcoveries of the àuthor: I do nothing for Paris. As ſodn
the moderns. A*phrafe void of ſenſe; or at as one of my works is printed, I fend the
leaſt unintelligible before theſe diſcoveries, edition to America: I compoſ only for
is ſufficient to raiſe the cry of plagrary.“ the colon?
They do not ſay, that to perceive in a worle


Locke. This was neither: more nor lefs gerſon pff great wit. What is your, em- .


pretenſion -


— — — — ——— — —-—- ——


280 DE LL'ESPRIT; or,
pretenſion properly conſiſts the ſpirit of the age: thus, there is nothing that
they will not invent, to eſcape the reproach of being inſipid.

A woman who has but little wit, appears intirely taken up with her dog ;
the ſpeaks only of him ; the pride of her viſitors offend her ; they tax her with
impertinence, but they are to blame. She knows that a perſon makes ſome
appearance in ſociety, when ſhe has pronounced a number of words (h), when
ſhe has performed a number of geſtures, and made fo much noiſe : her em-
ployment with her dog, is therefore Jeſs an amuſement to her, than a means of
concealing the meannels of her abilities: ſhe is, in this reſpect, well adviſed by
her ſelf-love, which, on certain occaſions, makes her put the beſt face on her
folly. | T3 | TY |

T thall only add one word to what I have already ſaid of the ſpirit of the age;
and that is, that it is eaſy to repreſent it under a ſenſible image. Let an able
painter be directed, for inſtance, to make allegorical. pictures of the ſpirit of
one of the ages of Greece, and of the actual ſpirit of our own nation. In the
firſt picture, would he not be forced to repreſent the genius and ſpirit of Greece,
under the figure of a man, who, with his eyes fixed, and his ſoul abſorbed in
profound meditation, remains in one of the attitudes given to the muſes? In
the ſecond picture, would he not be under a neceſſity of painting the ſpirit of
the French, under the appearance of the god of raillery ; that is, in the figure
of a man, who conſiders every thing with a malicious laugh, and an eye of
ridicule ? Now theſe two pictures, ſo different in themſelves, give us pretty ex-
actly the difference between the ſpirit of the Greeks and ours. Upon which, I
ſhall obſerve, that in each age an ingenious painter would give to the ſpirit of a
nation different features, and that the allegorical meaning of ſuch pictures would
be very agreeable and very curious with reſpect to poſterity, who, with a glance
of the eye, might judge of the eſteem or contempt, which in every age ought to
be granted to the ſpirit of each nation. |


CRXERERERERERENERESNERRAERERENERNENEEL
| C H A P. VIIL
Of a true Underſtanding (a).
N order to form conſtantly a juſt judgment on the different ideas and opi-
nions of mankind, we ought to be exempt from all the paſſions, which


miſlead the mind; we ſhould have habitually preſent to our memories, the
ideas, the knowlege of which leads to that of all human truths : for this pur-


(h) On this ſubje& the Perſians ſay, I ſtanding is univerſal; but of this kind of
hear the noiſe of mill, but I don't ſee the underſtanding 1do not treat in this chapter :
I here take the word in its common accep-


corn.
(a) In the extenſive ſenſe of true under- tation.
poſe,


ESSAYS o Tue MIN D. 281


poſe, we ſhould know every thing. No body does know every thing: we
have therefore, only in certain reſpects, a true or ſolid underſtanding. .

In dramatic writing, for inſtance, one is a good judge of the harmony and
propriety of the verſe, of the ſtrength of the expreſſion, and, in ſhort, of all
the beauties of ſtyle; but he is no judge of the juſtneſs of the plan. Another,
on the contrary, is a connoiſſeur in the laſt particular; but he is neither ſtruck


with that juſtneſs, that propriety, nor that force of ſentiment, on which de-


pends the truth of the dramatic characters, and is the firſt merit of theſe pieces.
I fay, the firſt merit, becauſe, the real utility, and conſequently the principal
beauty of this kind, conſiſts in faithfully painting the effects produced by the
ſtrong paſſions. |

We have then properly a folid underſtanding only in ſuch things as have em-
ployed our thoughts. | |

We cannot then confound genius and an extenſive and profound knowlege with
a true underſtanding, without acknowleging, that this laſt, is liable to miſtake,
When it relates to thoſe complicated propoſitions, where the diſcovery of truth
is the reſult of many combinations ; where, to ſee diſtinctly, it is neceſſary to ſee
a great deal ; and where juſtneſs of thought depends on its extent : thus, we
commonly underſtand by a true underſtanding, only that kind of knowlege pro-
per to draw juſt, and ſometimes new conſequences, from thoſe opinions that
are preſented to the mind, whether they are true or falſe.

In conſequence of this definition, a ſolid underſtanding contributes little to the
advancement of human knowlege; however, it merits ſome eſteem. He, who
departing from principles or opinions admitted, draws from thence conſequences
that are always juſt, and ſometimes new, is an extraordinary man among the


common people. He is even, in general, more eſteemed by men of moderate


abilities, than perſons of ſuperior genius, who too often calling men to the ex-
amination of received principles, and tranſporting them into unknown regions,
muſt at one and the ſame time offend their lazineſs, and wound their pride.
Beſides, however juſt the conſequences may be, that are drawn from a ſen-
timent, or a principle: I ſay, that far from obtaining the name of a ſolid under-
ſtanding, the perſon will always be mentioned as a fool, if that ſentiment, or that
principle, appears either ridiculous or fooliſh, A vapouriſh Indian imagined,
that if he diſcarged his urine, he ſhould overflow all Biſnagar. In conſequence
of this opinion, this virtuous citizen, [wage the ſafety of his country to
his own health, continued to refrain from this neceſſary diſcharge ; and was
ready to periſh, when a phyſician, a man of wit, entered ſeemingly in a great
fright into his chamber, Narſinga (b), faid he, is in flames; it will ſoon be
« reduced to aſhes : make haſte and let the ſtream flow.“ At theſe words, the


good Indian reaſoned juſtly, piſſed, and paſſed for a fool (c). 5


— —
—


EARS a


(b) The capital of Biſnagar. bliſhed. It may appear to them the juſt
(cc) Perſons of a ſolid underſtanding may confequence of theſe two propoſitions :
conſider the cuſtom formerly practiſed, in * Nothing happens but by the order of the
order to decide the juſtice or injuſtice of a * Almighty, and God cannot permit in-
cauſe, by force of arms, as properly eſta- Jn &« If a diſpute aroſe in relation

| | 0 I


„
* _— *
„ „ a” -


— z —


3 — —ũ—k— ——ͤł—ũ — — —


*


ern confine myſelf to the. trial of cold * them know the truth,” Ibid,


282 sR; on

If ſuch men are generally conſidered as fools, it is not ſolely from the draw-
ing their reaſonings from falſe principles; but from principles that are reputed
ſuch. In fact, the Chineſe theologian, who proves the nine incarnations of
Wiſthnou; and the Muſſulman, who, after the Koran, maintains, that the
earth is carried on the horns of a bull; certainly found their opinions on prin-
ciples as ridiculous as thoſe of my Indian; yet each of them, in his own country,
is eſteemed a perſon of ſenſe. What can be the reaſon of this? It is becauſe
they maintain opinions generally received. In relation to religious truths, rea-
ſon loſes all her force againſt two grand miſſionaries, Example and Fear. Be-
ſides, in all countries, the prejudices of the great are the laws of the little.
This Chineſe and this Muſſulman paſs then for wiſe, only becauſe they are fools
of the common folly. What I have ſaid of folly, I apply to ſtupidity : he
alone is mentioned as ſtupid, who has not the ſtupidity in faſhion,
Certain countrymen, it is ſaid, erected a bridge, and upon it carved this
inſcription: THE PRESENT BRIDGE 1s BUILT HERE: others reſolved to draw a
man out of a pit, into which he had fallen, and letting down a cord with a
ſlip-knot, pulled him out ſtrangled. If ſtupidity of this kind muſt always ex-
cite laughter, how can we {ſeriouſly hear the doctrines of the Bonzes, the
Brachmans, and Tallapoins? Doctrines as abſurd as the inſcription on the
bridge. How can we without laughter, ſee the kings, the people, the mini-
ſters, and even the great men, proſtrate themſelves ſometimes at the foot of
idols, and ſhew the moſt profound veneration for ridiculous fables? How, in ſur-
veying voyages, can we avoid being aſtoniſhed at ſeeing the exiſtence of ſorcerers
and magicians as generally believed as the exiſtence of God, and paſs among
moſt nations for a truth equally certain? From what reaſon, in ſhort, do not
different abſurdities, that are equally ridiculous, make the ſame impreſſion upon
us? It is becauſe people freely ridicule the ſtupidity from which they think
themſelves exempt, becauſe no body repeats after tae countrymen, ** The pre-


<< to the property of ſome land on a per- water: © After ſome prayers pronounced
+ ſon's eſtate, if the caſe was not very clear over the patient, they tied his right hand
< on both ſides, they choſe champions to to his left foot, and his leit hand to his
© make it more ſo. The emperor Otho, © right foot, and in this condition, threw
about the year 968, conſulted his lawyers him into the water; if he ſwam he was
© to know, if a line repreſented in a land- © treated as a criminal, and if he ſunk he
«*: ſcape ought to be complied with: as „ was declared innocent. Upon this foot-
„they were of different opinions, they „ ing they muſt find few guilty; becauſe,
** nominated two bravos to decide this “ the perſon being unable to make any
point of law, and the advantage falling “ motion, and his weight being ſupe-
eto him who fought in behalf of the re- © rior to that of the water contained in
<< preſentation, the emperor ordered that © the ſame ſpace, he muſt neceflarily fink.
„ ſhould take place for the future.” Me- © They were doubtleſs not ignorant of fo
moirs of the Academy of Inſcriptions and © fimpie a principle of ſtatics, of which
Belles Lettres, tom. XV. & they macg ſo common an experiment;

I might cite here, after the Memoirs of * but the ſimplicity of thoſe times made
the Academy of Inſcriptions, many other „ them always expect a miracle, which
examples of different trials, appointed in „ they did not think that heaven codld re-
thoſe times of ignorance, as judgments of „ fuſe them, when it was proper to let


6 ent


ESSAYS o THERE MIN D, 283


*< ſent bridge is built here:“ and that the caſe is very different, when it relates to
pious ablurdity. No body believing themſelves intirely free from the ignorance
which produced it, they are afraid of laughing at themſelves under another's -
name.

It is not therefore in general to abſurdity of reaſoning, but to the abſurdi-
ties of a certain kind of reaſoning, that we give the name of ſtupidity. We
cannot then underſtand by this word any thing more, than an appearance that is
but little common. Thus, people ſometimes give the name of ſtupid, to
thoſe whom they even allow to have a great genius. The knowlege of common
things is the knowlege of common men, and ſometimes the man of genius is,
in this reſpect, groſsly ignorant: eager to proceed to the firlt principles of the
art or ſcience he makes his ſtudy, and contented with ſeizing ſome of thoſe
new, primary, and general truths, whence flow an infinite number of ſecondary
ones, he neglects all other kinds of knowlege. Does he leave the bright path
| traced out by his genius? he falls into a thouſand errors, and Newton writes a
comment on the Apocalypſe, __

Genius enlightens ſome acres. of that immenſe night, which ſurround little
minds 4 but it does not enlighten all. I compare the man of genius to the pillar
which marched before the Hebrews, and was ſometimes dark and ſometimes
luminous. The great man, always ſuperior in one kind of ſtudy, neceſſarily
wants abilities for many others ; at leaſt if we underſtand here by abilities, an
aptitude for inſtruction, which perhaps may be conſidered as knowlege begun.
The great man by the habit of application, the method of ſtudy, and the di-
ſtinction he is led to make between- an half-knowlege and one that is intire,
has certainly, in this reſpect, a conſiderable advantage over the common rank
of men. Theſe laſt, not having contracted the habit of reflection, and having
known nothing deeply, believe themſelves always ſufficiently inſtructed, when
they have obtained a ſuperficial knowlege. Ignorance and folly eaſily perſuade
them, that they know every thing: both theſe are always attended with pride.
The great man alone can be modeſt. "I

If I ſtreighten the empire of genius, and ſhew the bounds in which nature
forces it to be encloſed, it is to make it more evidently appear, that the man of
underſtanding, who is much inferior to one of genius, cannot, as is imagined, al-
ways decide with ſtrict truth, on the various ſubjects of reaſoning. Such an un-
derſtanding is impoſſible. The property of a true underſtanding is to draw exact
conſequences from received opinions: Now theſe opinions are for the moſt
part falſe, and the underſtanding never proceeds ſo far as to an examination of
them: a true underſtanding is then, moſt frequently, only the art of reaſoning falſe-
ly according to method : perhaps this kind of underſtanding is ſufficient to make a
good judge; but it can never make a great man. Whoever is endued with it,
commonly excells in no kind of ſtudy, and cannot be commended for any one
talent. He often obtains, it is ſaid, the eſteem of perſons of ordinary abili-
ties. I confeſs it : but their eſteem making him conceive too high an idea of
himſelf, it becomes the ſource of errors; of errors, from which it is impoſſible
for him to free himſelf. For, in fine, if the mirrour of all counſellors, the
moſt poliſhed and diſcreet, cannot make a man ſenſible of his own deformity,
who can diſabuſe a man, and make him quit the too high opinion he has
conceived of himſelf, eſpecially when that opinion is ſupported by the eſteem -

O O 2 mo


284 GE LESPRIT; on;

moſt of thoſe who ſurround him? It is ſtill modeſt enough for him, not to
eſteem himſelf, till after he has obtained the elogium of others. Hence ariſes
that confidence, which a man of underſtanding places in his own knowlege, and
that contempt for the great men whom he often regards as viſionaries, as men of
ſyſtematic minds and wrong heads (d). | 5

O ye men of ſolid underſtanding! might one ſay, when you treat as wrong-
headed perſons, thoſe great men, who at leaſt are ſo ſuperior to you, in that kind of
ſtudy which the public moſt admire ; what opinion, think you, muſt the public
have of you, whole abilities extend no farther than to the drawing of ſome petty
conſcquences, from principles that may be either true or falſe, the diſcovery of
which is but of ſmall importance ? Always in an extaſy at beholding your little
merit, you are, you ſay, not ſubject to the errors of celebrated men. True,
becauſe it is neceſſary either to run, or at leaft to walk, before one can fall.
When you boaſt of the juſtneſs of your underſtanding, methinks I hear cripples
glory in making no falſe ſteps. Your conduct, you add, is often wiſer than
that of the men of genius. Ves; becauſe you have not within you that prin-
ciple of life and of the paſſions, which equally produces great vices, great vir-
tues, and great talents. But are you more worthy of commendation for this?
Of what importance is it to the public, whether the conduct of a particular
perſon be good or bad? A man of genius, had he vices, is ſtill more worthy of
eſteem than you: in fact, he ſerves his country either by the innocence of his
manners, and the virtuous example he ſets, or by the knowlege he diffuſes
abroad. Of theſe two ways of ſerving his country, the laſt, without doubt,
molt directly belongs to genius, and is at the ſame time, that which procures
the greateſt advantages to the public. The virtuous example given by a parti-
cular perſon, 1s ſcarcely of uſe to any beſides the ſmall number of thoſe with
whom he converſes: on the contrary, the new light the ſame perſon ſpreads over
the arts and ſciences, 1s a benefit to. the whole world. It is then certain, that
the man of genius, even though his probity ſhould be very imperfect, would
have a greater right than you to the gratitude of the public.

The declamations of the men of folid underſtanding againft thoſe who are di-
ſtinguiſhed by their genius, muſt doubtleſs at times impoſe on the multitude : no-
. thing is more ealy than to deceive them. If the Spaniard, at the ſight of the ſpec-
tacles, which ſome of his teachers conſtantly wear on their noſes, perſuades him-
telf, that theſe doctors have almoſt pored themſelves blind with reading, and
that they are very wiſe ; if we every day take vivacity of geſture for that of
wit, and taciturnity for knowlege ; we may alſo take the uſual gravity of the
men of underſtanding for an effect of their wiſdom. But the deluſion vaniſhes of
itſelf and we ſoon call to mind that gravity, as mademoiſelle de Scudery ſays,
is only a ſecret of the body, to conceal the defects of the mind (e). There are
then properly none but theſe men of underſtanding, who are long dupes to the
gravity they affect. Moreover, if they believe themſelves wiſe, becauſe they are
terious, if, inſpired by pride and envy, when they decry genius, they believe


(d) Saying that a man has a wrong head, (e) The aſs, ſays Montaigne, on this
15 trequently ſaying, without knowing it, he ſubject, is the moſt ſerious of all animals.
has more wit than we have, |


that


ESSAYS own Tue MIN D. 285


that it proceeds from juſtice, no body in this reſpe& can eſcape from error.
Theſe miſtaken ſentiments are every where ſo general, that I believe I ſhall gra-
= — _ of the reader, by conſecrating to this examination ſome pages
of this work. E


$69696 9695-92 4645 454595526493 30 05 950645-28-05 23-4%


c H A
Of miftaken Opinions.


IKE a ray of light which is compoſed of a collection of . rays, every ſen-

timent is compoſed of an infinite number of ſentiments, which concur to
produce a particular volition of foul, and a particular action of the body. Few
men have the priſm proper to ſeparate this aſſemblage of ſentiments : conſe-
quently people often believe themſelves animated either by one ſentiment alone,
or by different ſentiments, from thoſe by which they are moved. This is the
cauſe of fo many miſtaken opinions, and the reaſon why we are almoſt always
ignorant of the true motives of our actions.
In order the better to ſhew the difficulty of eſcaping theſe miſtaken opinions,
1 ſhall repreſent ſome of the errors, in which we are involved, by a profound
ignorance of ourſelves,


EEE EEE ES SS Ab DMS SS


EGS A


How far ce are liable to miſtake the Motives by which we are
determined. |


MOTHER idolizes her fon ; I love him, fays ſhe, for his own fake.

However, one might reply, you take no care of his education, though
you are in no doubt that a good one would contribute infinitely to his happineſs :
why, therefore do not you conſult ſome men of ſenſe about him, and read ſome
of the works wrote on this ſubject 2 Why, becauſe, ſays ſhe, I think I know
as much of this matter as thoſe authors and their works. But how did you get
this confidence in your own underftanding ? Is it not the effect of your indif-
ference ? An ardent deſire always inſpires us with a falutary diſtruſt of our-
ſelves. If we have a ſuit at law of conſiderable conſequence, we viſit counſel-
lors and attorneys, we conſult a great number, and examine their advice. Are
we attacked by any of thoſe lingering diſeaſes, which inceſſantly place around
us the ſhades and horrors of death ? We ſee phyſicians, compare their opinions,


read phyſical books, we ourſelves become little phyſicians. Such is the conduct
| prompted


236 DIE L'ESPRIT; on,


prompted by a warm intereſt. With reſpect to the education of children, if
you are not influenced in the ſame manner, it is becauſe you do not love your
ſon ſo well as yourſelf. But, adds the mother, what then ſhould be the mo-
tive of my tenderneſs? Among fathers and mothers, I reply, ſome are influ-
enced by the deſire of perpetuating their name in their children; they properly
love only their names: others are fond of command, and ſee in their children
their ſlaves. The animal leaves its young when their weakneſs no longer keeps
them in dependance ; and paternal love becomes extinguiſhed in almoſt all
hearts, when children have by their age or ſtation attained to independance.
Then, ſaid the poet Saadi, the father ſees nothing in them but greedy heirs,
and this is the cauſe, adds ſome poet, of the extraordinary love of the
grand-father for his grand- children; he conſiders them as the enemies of his

enemies. |
There are, in ſhort, fathers and mothers, who make their children their play-
things and their paſtime. The loſs of this play-thing would be inſupportable
to them; but would their affliction prove that they loved the child for itſelf ?
Every body knows this paſſage in the life of M. de Lauzun : he was in the Ba-
ſtile ; there, without books, without employment, a prey to laſſitude, and the
horrors of a priſon, he took it in his head to tame a ſpider. This was the only
conſolation he had left in his misfortune. The governor of the Baſtile, from
an inhumanity common to men accuſtomed to ſee the unhappy (a), cruſhed the
ſpider. The priſoner felt the moſt cutting grief, and no mother could be af-
fected by the death of a ſon with a more violent forrow. Now whence is de-
rived this conformity of ſentiments for ſuch different objects? It is becauſe, in
the loſs of a child, or in the loſs of the ſpider, people frequently weep for no-
thing but for the laſſitude and want of employment into which they fall. If
mothers appear in general, more afflicted at the death of a child, than fathers
employed in buſineſs, or given up to the purſuit of ambition, it is not becauſe
the mother loves her child more tenderly ; but becauſe ſhe ſuffers a loſs more
difficult to be ſupplied. The errors, in my opinion are, in this reſpect very fre-
quent, people rarely cheriſh a child for its own ſake. That paternal love *
| which


——


(a) The habit of ſeeing the unhappy,
renders men cruel and mercileſs. In vain
do they ſay, that they are cruel with regret,
and that their duty impoſes upon them the
neceſſity of being ſevere. Every man who
from a regard to juſtice, can, like an exe-


- Cutioner kill one of his own ſpecies in cold


blood, would certainly aſſaſſinate for his
own perſonal intereſt, was he not afraid of
the hangman. |

(b) What I fay of paternal love may be
applied to metaphyſical love, fo much
boaſted of in our old romances, We are
in this reſpect, ſibje&t to many miſtaken
opinions. When a perſon imagines, for in-


ſtance, that he loves only the ſoul of a wo-
man, it is certainly her perſon that he de-
fires, and here, to ſatisfy his wants, and
eſpecially his curioſity, he is rendered capa-
ble of every thing. This truth may be
proved from the little ſenſibility moſt ſpec-
tators ſhew at the theatre, for the affection
of a man and his wife, when the ſame
ſpeRators are ſo warmly moved by the love
of a young man for a young woman,
What can produce theſe different ſenſa-
tions, if it is not the diffcrent ſenſations
themſelves have experienced in theſe two
relations? Moſt of them have felt, that as
they will do every thing for the favours de-

fired,


MIN D.


which ſo many men make a parade, and by which they believe themſelves ſo
warmly affected, is moſt frequently nothing more than an effect, either of a
deſire of perpetuating their names, of the pride of command, or the fear of laſ-
ſitude and inaction.

Such a miſtaken opinion perſuades the devout fanatics, that to their zeal for
religion they owe their hatred to philoſophers, and the perſecutions they kindle


ESSAYS on TEE 287


againſt them. But it may be ſaid, either the opinion which ſhocks you in phi-
loſophical work is falſe or it is true. In the firſt caſe, you ought to be animated
with that mild virtue which religion ſuppoſes, and to prove philoſophically its falſe-
hood ; this you alſo owe to chriſtianity; We require not of you, ſays St.
“ Paul, a blind obedience ; we teach, we prove, we perſuade.” In the ſecond
caſe, that is, if this philoſopher's opinion be true, it is not contrary to religion:
to believe that it is, would be blaſphemy. Two truths cannot be contradictory ;
and truth, ſays the abbe de Fleury, can never injure truth. But this opinion,
the fanatical devotee will ſay, cannot be reconciled with the principles of reli-
gion. You think then, it may be replied, that every thing which reſiſts the
efforts of your mind, and which you cannot reconcile with the doctrines of
your religion, is really inconſiſtent with thoſe doctrines? Do you not know


that Galileo (c) was unworthily dragged to the priſon of the inquiſition, for


8 *


having


ſired, they will do little for the favours ob-
tained; that in the caſe of love, curioſity
being once gratified, they eaſily comfort
themſelves for the loſs of one who proves
unfaithful, and that then the misfortune of
a lover is very ſupportable. Whence I con-


clude, that love can never be any thing


elſe but a diſguiſed deſire of re

(c) The perſecutors of Galileo, doubt-
leſs, believed that they were animated with
a zeal for religion, and were the dupes
of that belief. I however confeſs, that if
they had been ſcrupulouſly examined and
asked, Why the church reſerved to herſelf
the right of puniſhing the errors of a man
by the dreadful torment of fire, while ſhe
grants an inviolable aſylum to crimes near
the altars, and declares herſelf, in a manner,
the protectreſs of aſſaſſins? If they had
been farther aſked, why the ſame church
by her toleration, ſeems - to favour the
crimes of thoſe fathers, wh} without pity,
mutilate their children, whom in temples,
concerts, and on the ſtage they devote to
the pleaſure of ſome delicate ears ? and


that, in fine, had they perceived, that ec-


cleſiaſtics themſelves encourage unnatural
fathers to perpetuate their crime, by per-
mitting theſe unfortunate victims to be re-


ceived into the churches, and hired to ſerve


in them at a high price: they would then


neceſſarily have agreed, that a religious zeal
was not the only paſſion, by which they
were actuated. They would have been
ſenſible that churches were made a refuge
for criminals only to preſerve, by this
means, a greater credit with an infinite
number of men, who would look with
reſpect upon the monks, as the only pro-
tectors that could ſave them from the ri-
gour of the laws ; that they puniſhed Ga-


lileo for the diſcovery of a new ſyſtem, only


to be revenged for the involuntary injury
done them by a great man, who, perhaps,


by enlightening the human race and ap-


pearing more learned than the clergy, might
leſſen their credit with the people. It is
true, that, even in Italy, people recollect
with horror the treatment of the philoſo-
pher by the inquiſition. As a proof of this
truth, I quote part of the poem of the
prieſt Benedetto Menzini, printed and
publicly ſold at Florence. The poet ad-
dreſſes himſelf to the inquiſitors, who con-
demned Galileo: “ What, ſays he, was
“ your blindneſs, when you unworthily
% dragged this great man to your dungeon?
« Is this the pacific ſpirit recommended


to


— .nu


288 ME L'ESPRTITEFT;' on,


having maintained that the ſun is place in che centre, and does not move
round the earth; that his ſyſtem firſt offended the weak, and appeareFFairectly
contrary to that text of Scripture, ** Sun ſtand thou iwull ??”” However, able
divines have ſince made Galileo's principles agree with thoſe of religion. Who
has told you, that a divine more happy, or more enlightened than you, will not
remove the contradiction, which you think you perceive between your religion,
and the opinion you reſolve to condemn ? Who forces you by a precipitate cen-
ſure to expoſe, if not religion, at leaſt its miniſters, to the hatred excited by
perſecution? Why always borrowing the aſſiſtance of force and terror, would
you impoſe ſilence on men of genius, and deprive mankind of the uſeful know-
lege they are capable of diſpenſing ? | | |

You obey, you ſay, the dictates of religion. But it commands you to diſ-
truſt yourſelves, and to love your neighbour. If you do not act in conformity
to theſe principles, you are then not actuated by the ſpirit of God (d). But
you ſay, by who then are we inſpired ? By lazineſs and pride. It is lazineſs, the
enemy of thought, which makes you averſe to thoſe opinions, which you cannot,
without ſtudy and ſome fatigue of attention, unite with the principles received
in the ſchools ; but which being proved to be philoſophically true, cannot be
theologically falſe. | |

It is pride which is ordinarily carried to a great height in the bigot, than in
any other perſon, which makes him deteſt in the man of genius, the benefactor
of the human race, and which exaſperates him againſt the truths diſcovered by
humility. |

It is "TR this lazineſs, and this pride, which, diſguiſing themſelves (e) under
the appearance of zeal (f) renders them the perſecutors of men of learning ;


—


*


ce to you by that holy apoſtle, who died in an illuſion with reſpect to all the reſt, Every
& exile at Fakes ? No: ou were always other vice we transform into ſo many vir-
4, deaf to his precepts, 25 us perſecute tues. We take the deſire of granduer, for
<« the wiſe; this is your maxim. Proud elevation of ſou] ; avarice, for oeconomy;
„ mortals, under an exterior that inſpires defamation, for the love of truth; and an
only humility, you, who ſpeak with ſo ill-humour for a laudable zeal. Thus moſt
< ſoft a voice, and yet dip your hands in of theſe paſſions, are pretty commonly al-
blood; what miſchievous demon intro- lied to bigotry. 7


& duced you among us?“

(d) If the ſame devout fanatic, mild in
China, and cruel at Liſbon, preaches in
different countries tolleration, or perſecu-
tion, according as he is there more or leſs
powerful; how can he reconcile ſuch a con-
tradictory conduct, with the ſpirit of the
goſpel; and not perceive, that under the
name of religion, he is inſpired by the
pride of command ?

(e) If we except luxury, of all the fins


moſt prejudicial to mankind ; but which


conſiſts in an act which it is impoſſible to
conceal from ourſelves, though we are under


(f) Thoſe divines who believe, that the
popes have a right to diſpoſe of thrones,
alſo imagine themſelves animated with a
pure zeal for religion. They do not per-
ceive that a ſecret motive of ambition is
blended with the ſanctity of their inten-
tions ; that the only means of command-


ing kings, is to conſecrate the opinion,


that gives the pope a right to depoſe them,
in caſe of hereſy, Now ecclefiaſtics being
the ſole judges of _—_ the court of
Rome, ſays the abbe de Longuerue, have
made uſe of it at their pleaſure, againſt all
the princes who diſpleaſe them.


and


ESSAYS o Tr MIN D. „


and which in Italy, Spain, and Portugal, have forged chains, built gibbets, and
held the torch to the piles of the inquiſition. |

Thus the ſame pride, which is ſo formidable in the devout fanatic, and which
in all religions makes him perſecute, in the name of the Moſt High, the men of
genius, ſometimes arms againſt them the men in power.

After the example of thoſe Phariſees, who treated as criminals the perſons
who did not adopt all their deciſions, how many viſiers treat as enemies to
the nation, thoſe who do not blindly approve their conduct! Drawn into this
error, by a miſtaken opinion common to almoſt all makind, there is no viſier,
who does not take his intereſt for that of the nation; who does not maintain,
without knowing it, that to humble his pride, is to inſult the public; and that
to blame his conduct, with whatever precaution it be done, is to excite diſturb-
ances in the ſtate. But you deceive yourſelves, it may be replied, for in form-
ing this judgment, you conſult only your vanity, and not the general intereſt.
Are you ignorant, that a virtuous citizen, can never ſee with indifference, the
evils occaſioned by a bad adminiſtration ? As legiſlation is the moſt uſeful of all
the ſciences, ought it not, like every other ſcience, to be improved by the ſame
means? Is it not by removing the errors of Ariſtotle, Averroes, Avicenna, and
all the inventors in the ſciences and arts, that people have improved theſe arts,
and theſe ſciences. To reſolve to cover the faults of the adminiſtration with
the veil of ſilence, is then to oppoſe the progreſs of the legiſlation, and conſe-
quently the happineſs of mankind. It is the ſame pride, masked under the
name of the public welfare, which makes you advance this maxim, that a fault
being once committed, the divan ought always to maintain it, and 'that au-
thority ought not to ſubmit, But if the public welfare is the principal object
propoſed by every prince, and every government, ought they to make uſe of
authority in the ſupport of folly? The maxim you eſtabliſh, can only ſignify,
J have given my advice, and would not, by ſuffering the prince to be informed
of the neceſſity of changing his conduct, clearly prove to him, that I have
given him bad counſel, :

There are few men who .eſcape illuſians of this kind, How many perſons
who have good intentions, are diſhoneſt for want of examining themſelves !


If there are ſome to whom the bodies of others, if I may uſe the term, are


diaphanous, and who equally penetrate into their hearts, and into their own,
the number of theſe is but ſmall. In order to obtain a true knowledge of our-
ſelves, we ſhould obſerve, and for a long time ſtudy our own hearts. The
perſons of ſtrift morals, are the only perſons who concern themſelves about this
examination; molt other men are ignorant of this ſtudy.

Among thoſe who declaim with ſuch heat, againſt the ſingularities of men of
wit, how many are there who believe themſelves ſolely animated by the love of
Juſtice and truth! However, let me ask, why do you attack with ſuch fury a
ridicule, which is frequently attended with no injury to any one? A man affects
ſingularity ? Laugh at him, and welcome : you would thus behave to a perſon
without” merit, and why ſhould you not treat a man of genius in the ſame man-
ner? It is becauſe his ſingularity attracts the attention of the public: now their
attention being once fixed upon a perſon of merit, it is employed about him,
they forget you, and your pride is * This is the ſecret principle, 2

P | |


= — — —— - - —
— — 2 - + _- — _
„ * FFP


290 SEZPESPRET:; on; |
of the reſpect you affect to ſhew for the cuſtoms of the world, and of your
hatred of ſigularity. | |

You will tell me, perhaps, that what is extraordinary makes an impreſſion,
and that this adds to the fame of the man of wit; that ſimple and modeſt
merit is leſs eſteemed, which is an injuſtice you are willing to revenge, by
cecrying ſigularity. But does envy, I reply, prevent your perceiving where
affectation is, and where it is not? In general, men of ſuperior abilities are
but little ſubject to it; a lazy and thoughtful diſpoſition may be attended with
fingularity, but will never produce much appearance of it. The affectation of
ſingularity is then very uncommon. : |

What activity does it require to ſupport a ſingular character? What know-
lege of the world muſt ſuch a perſon have, nicely to chuſe ſuch a ridicule
as will render him neither deſpicable, nor odious, to other men ; to adapt that
ridicule to his character, and proportion it to his merit? For, in ſhort, it is
only a particular degree of genius that is allowed to be particularly ridicu-
lous. Have we this; we may make ule of it, the ridicule far from injuring us,
is of ſervice, When Æneas deſcended into hell, in order to pacify the mon-
{ter that watched at its gates, that hero, by the advice of the Sybil, provided
himſelf with a cake, which he toſſed into the mouth of Cerberus. Who knows
whether merit, in order to appeaſe the hatred of its cotemporaries, ought not
thus to caſt into the mouth of envy the cake of ridicule ? Prudence requires
this, and even human nature renders it neceſſary, If there appeared a perfect
man, it would be neceſſary for him by ſome great follies to ſoften the hatred of
his fellow-citizens. It is true, that in this reſpect we may truſt to nature, ſince
ſhe has provided every man with a ſufficient number of faults to render him
ſupportable. | ; |
A certain proof, namely envy, under the name of juſtice, is let looſe againſt the
Follies of men of genius, ſo that all their ſingularity does not offend us. A groſs
ſingularity, that flatters the vanity of a man of moderate abilities, by making
him perceive, that the man of meric has faults, from which he is _—_ by
perſuading him that all men of genius are fools, and that he alone is wiſe, is a
fingularity always very proper to conciliate his good-will, Let a man of genius,
for inſtance, dreſs himſelf in a particular manner, moſt men who do not diſ-
tinguiſh wiſdom from folly, and know it only by. the length of a peruke, will
take him for a fool; they will laugh at him; but like him the better for it. In
exchange for the pleaſure they find in ridiculing him, they will freely allow him
the praiſe that is his due. People cannot frequently laugh at a man, without
talking much of him. Now this, which would ruin a fool, increaſes the re-
putation of a man of merit. They do not laugh at him without acknowledg-
ing, and perhaps, even exaggera.ing his ſuperiority, with reſpect to his diſtin-
guiſhing excellence; and by outrageous declamations, the envious, unknown to
themſelves, even contribute to His glory. What gratitude do I owe you? will
the man of genius freely ſay, your hatred makes me friends! The public will
not long be deceived by the motives of your anger: you are offended, not by
my ſingularity, but at my reputation. If you dared, you would like me be
ſingular : but, you know, that an affected ſingularity is extremely flat in a
man without wit; your inſtinct informs you, cither that you have nor, =

| a


*


ESSAYS os Tut MIND. 291


leaſt that the public does not grant you, the merit neceſſary to appear particu-
lar. This is the true cauſe of your abhorrence of ſingularity (g). You re-
ſemble thoſe artful women, who, inceſſantly exclaiming againſt the indecency of
all modern dreſſes proper to ſhew the ſnape, do not perceive, that they owe
their reſpect for ancient faſhions only to their perſonal deformity.

Whatever we have that is ridiculous, we always conceal from ourſelves, we
only perceive it in others. I ſhall mention on this ſubject a fact pleaſant enough,
which is ſaid to have happened in our days. The duke of Lorrain gave a
grand entertainment to his whole court. The ſupper was ſerved up in a veſtibule,
which opened on a parterre. In the midſt of the ſupper, a lady thought ſhe
ſaw a ſpider: ſhe was ſeized with fear, ſcreamed out, left the table, fled into
the garden, and fell down on the graſs. At the moment of her fall, ſhe heard
ſomebody near her; this was the duke's prime miniſter. O ſir,“ ſaid ſhe,
you revive my courage, how much am I obliged to you! I was affraid I had
e been guilty of an impertinence.” * O madam, who could ſtay there,“ replied
the miniſter: but tell me, was it a very large one? Dear fir, it was
quite frightful. “ Did it fly near me?“ added he. What do you mean?
cc the ſpider fly?” “ How,” returned he, is it only for a ſpider that you
c make all this to do? Go, madam, you are very weak: I thought it had
ce been a batt.” This fact is the hiſtory of all mankind. We cannot ſupport
our own ridicule in another ; we reciprocally offer abuſe, and in this world it is
always abſurdity that laughs at folly. Thus, after Solomon, one is always
tempted to cry out, All is vanity. On this vanity depends moſt of our miſ-
taken opinions. But as it is more particularly in affairs of advice, that theſe
miſtakes are more eaſily perceived, after having expoſed ſome of the errors,
into which we are thrown by a profound ignorance of ourſelves ; it muſt ſtill be
of uſe to ſhew the errors into which we are ſometimes precipitated by the igno-
rance of others. | |


(g) To the ſame,cauſe we ought to at-
tribute, the love which almoſt all fools affect
-to have for probity, when they ſay, we fly
the men of wit, they are bad company, and
dangerous men. But it may be ſaid, the
church, the court, the 2 and the
treaſury furniſh men as worthy of cenſure
as the academies. Moſt men of learning,
have not even an inclination to become
knaves. Beſides, the deſire of eſteem, which
always ſuppoſes the love of ſtudy, ſerves
them, in this reſpect, as a preſervative,


Among the men of learning, there are few
whoſe probity is not confirmed by ſome vir-
tuous actions. But even ſuppoſing them as

reat cheats as the blockheads, the qua-
ities of the mind may at leaſt compenſate
for the vices of the heart ; but the fool has
nothing to attone for them. Why then do
they fly from the men of genius? It is be-
cauſe they are humbled by their preſence,
and take that for a love of virtue, which
is only an ayerſion to perſons of ſuperior
abilities,


CHAP;


— S i w—— — — * —
— — — - — —


292 DE L'ESPRIT; oa,


ON TU AS NAS ASL ASLAN ANAL AN AN AN / ASL AN AN NAN ALANA ALAS NAN AUR ASCO 1
POO EEO ER RUE E ELLE EEE EEE SEES COOL BO EG


C H A P. XL
Of Advice.


VERY man whom we conſult, always believes that this counſel is dic-

tated by friendſhip. He ſays ſo ; moſt men believe him upon his word,
and their blind confidence but too often leads them into error. It would
however, be very eaſy to undeceive ourſelves in this particular; for we love but
few people, and would adviſe all the world. From whence does this madneſs of
giving advice derive its ſource? From our vanity. Moſt men have the folly to
believe themſelves wiſe, and much more fo than their neighbours, and therefore
they are pleaſed with every thing that confirms this opinion. Whoever conſults
us, is agreeable to us, for this is a confeſſion of inferiority which flatters
our vanity. Beſides, what opportunities does our being conſulted, give us to
diſplay our maxims, our ideas, and our ſentiments, to talk much of ourſelves,
and to our own advantage? Thus there is nobody who does not-take advantage
of it. More employed about the intereſt of our vanity; than about the in-
tereſt of the 1 — who comes to conſult us, he commonly leaves us without
being inſtructed, or enlightened; and our: counſels have been our own panegy-
ric. Thus our advice is almoſt conſtantly dictated by vanity; and hence we
would correct all the world. |

Upon this ſubject, a philoſopher replied, to one of theſe perſons eager to
give his advice; How ſhould I correct my faults, when thou thyſelf haſt not
s corrected the deſire of giving correction?“ If it was in fact friendſhip alone
that gave counſel, this, like all other lively pafſions, 'would make known
when, and how, we ought to give advice. In the cafe of ignorance, for ex-
ample, there is no doubt but advice may, be very uſeful : a phyſician, a coun-
ſellor, a philoſopher, and a politician, may each, in their ſeparate profeſſions,
giveexcellent advice.. In every ether caſe it is uſeleſs, and often even ridiculous,
becauſe people, in general, always propoſe themſelves for a model.

Let an ambitious man confult a perſon of moderate deſires, and propoſe to
him his views and projects: abandon them, the latter will fay ; do not expoſe
youlelf to dangers and vexations without number; but deliver yourſelf to
ſweet and peaceful employments. . To this the ambitious man will reply, If I
had ftill my choice to make, I might follow your advice: but my paſſions are


fixed, my character formed, and my habits ſettled. - I would make the beſt of


them, fo as to promote my own happineſs ; and upon this point I would con-
ſult you. In vain would he add, that the character being once formed, it is
impoſſible to change it; that the pleaſures of a man of moderate deſires, are
inſipid to one filled with ambition; and the miniſter diſgraced, would die with
laſſitude and inaction. Whatever reaſon he alleged, the man of moderate abili-
ties would conſtantly repeat, You ought not:to be ambitious. Methinks, I hear
a phyſician ſay to his patient, Sir, do not have a fever. =
S


ESSAYS on Tue MIND. 293


The old men conſtantly uſe the ſame language. When a young man conſults
them, in regard to the conduct he ought to obſerve: Fly, ſay they, plays,
operas, balls, the aſſemblies of the women, and every frivolous amuſement ;
imitate us, and employ yourſelf intirely about making your fortune. But the
young man will reply, I am till fond of pleaſure, I love women to diſtraction,
how then ſhall I renounce them? You muſt be ſenſible that at my age, this
pleaſure is an appetite. Whatever he can ſay, an old man will never compre-
hend, that the enjoyment of a woman is ſo neceſſary to the happineſs of a
young man. Every ſenſation, which we do not experience, we cannot allow to
exiſt, The old man no longer ſeeks pleaſure, and pleaſure no longer ſeeks him.
The objects with which he was inceſſantly employed in his youth, inſenſibly re-
tire from his ſight, Man then may be compared to a veſſel that fails.
with a fair wind in a high ſea; it gradually loſes ſight of the perſons that
ſtand on the ſhore, and ſoon diſappears from their eyes. Whoever conſiders
the ardour with which men propoſe. themſelves for models, may imagine,
that he ſees a number of perſons ſwiming upon a great lake, and being carried
by different currents, lift up their heads above the water, crying to each other,
It is me you muſt follow, and there you muſt land. Held fait by chains of
braſs, fixed to a rock, the wiſe-man contemplates their folly, crying, Do you
not ſee, that, drawn by different currents, you cannot land at the ſame place ?
To adviſe a man to ſay this, or to do that, is commonly nothing more than, I
would act in that manner, or I would ſpeak thus. Thus the words in Moliere,
* You area goldſmith, maſter Joſſe;“ applied to the pride of ſetting ourſelves
up for an example, is more general than is imagined. . There is not a blockhead,
but would take upon himſelf to direct the conduct of the man of the greateſt
genius (a), Methinks, I ſee the chief of the Natches (b), who every morning,
at the riſing of Aurora, walks out of his cabbin, and marks out for the ſun,
his brother, the courſe he is to take.

But, ſay you, the man who is conſulted may, doubtleſs, be under an illu ſion,
and attribute to friendſhip what is only the effect of vanity z but how can this illu-
ſion paſs upon him who conſults him? Why is not he in this reſpe& enlightened
by his own intereſt ? It is becauſe he readily believes, that others take an intereſt
in his concerns, which they really do not; becauſe moſt men are weak, and not
being able to conduct themſelves, they have occaſion for others to mark out their
conduct, and it is very eaſy, as obſervation proves, to communicate to ſuch a
perſon the high opinion the adviſer has of himſelf, This is not the caſe wit} one
who has a firm mind. If he conſults, it is becauſe he is ignorant : he kriows
that in every other caſe, and particularly what relates to his own happineſs, -he
ought to conſult none but his own judgment. In fact, if the goodneſs of ad-
vice depends upon an exact knowlege of the circumſtances, in which thoſe
whom we adviſe are placed, to whom can a man better apply, than to himſelf ?
As a warm intereſt enlightens us with reſpect to all the ſubjects of our inquiries,


_


(a) He who is not an equerry, gives no very learned, and able to give advice to
advice about hreaking horſes. But we are the whole world.
not ſo diffident in caſes of morality :, with= (b) A ſava e nation.
out having ſtudied it,. we believe. ourſelves , | *
WIS


— Ae oc I ens GAIA <= ran — - - — — —


294 DERELESPIRTET;; os,

who can be more enlightened than we, in regard to our own happineſs? Who
knows whether on the characters being formed, and the habits fixed, each
perſon is not able to conduct himſelf as well as poſſible, even though he ſhould
appear a fool? Evcry body knows the anſwer of a famous oculiſt: a country-
man went to conſult him, and found him fitting at table, eating and drinking
heartily:“ What mult 1 do for my eyes? ſaid the peaſant, Lou muſt ab-
„ ſtain from wine,” replied the oculiſt. But it ſeems to me,” returned the
peaſant, walking up nearer to him, * that your eyes are not much better than
% mine, and yet. you drink. Truly,“ replied the oculiſt, “ that is be-
<« caule I am tonder of drinking than of being cured. How many men are
there, like this oculiſt, whoſe happineſs depends on paſſions that muſt plunge
them in the greateſt miſery ; and yet however, if I may venture to lay ſo,
would be fools did they endeavour to be more wiſe. There are men, and ex-
perience has ſhewn that they are pretty numerous, who are ſo miſerable, that
they can no otherwiſe be happy than by performing actions that lead to the
grave (c). But it may be anſwered, there are alſo men who, for want of wiſe ad-
vice, daily commit the groſſeſt faults; and good advice, doubtleſs, might
make them eſcape theſe misfortunes. But, I ſay, that they would commit more
conſiderable ones ſtill, if they gave themſelves up inconſiderately to the counſels
of others. Whoever blindly follows them, muſt obſerve a conduct full of incon-
ſiſtences, commonly more fatal than the exceſs even of the paſſions.

A perſon by abandoning himſelf to his diſpoſition ſpares at leaſt, the uſeleſs
efforts he might make to reſiſt it. However violent the tempeſt may be, when
we ſail before the wind we ſupport without fatigue the impetuoſity of the ſea :
but if we reſolve to ſtruggle againſt the waves, and turn the ſide of the veſſel to
the ſtorm, we ſhall always find the fea more rough and dangerous. |

Inconſiderate advice precipitates us too often into the abyſs of misfortune.
Hence we ought often to call to mind this ſaying of Socrates: ** May I,”
ſays that philoſopher, „always be on my guard againſt my maſters, and my
«© friends, conſtantly preſerve my ſoul in a tranquil ſituation, and obey none
but reaſon, the beſt of counſellors ! ** Whoever hears reaſon, is not only
deaf to bad counſel, but alſo weighs in the ballance of doubt the counſels even
of thoſe men who are reſpectable by their age, their dignity, and their merit,
yet conſider themſelves as of too much importance, and, like the hero of Cer-
vantes, have a corner of folly, to which they would bring every thing.

If advice is ever uſeful, it is when it puts us in a condition to judge better
for ourſelves: if it is prudent to deſire it, it is only ſo when it is asked of thoſe
wiſemen (d), who, knowing the ſcarcity and value of good counſel, are very
frugal in giving it. In fact, in order to give ſuch as will be of uſe, it requires

the greateſt care to dive into the character of the man: what knowledge is


(c) If, as Paſcal ſays, habit is a ſecond,
and perhaps a firſt nature, it muſt be ac-
knowleged, that a guilty habit once con-
firmed, will laſt as long as life. |

(d) Every age, perhaps, produces not
above five or fix men of this kind; and yet


in morals, as well as in phyſic, we conſult


the firſt good woman. We do not ſay that
morality, like each of the other ſciences,
requires much ſtudy and reflection. Every
one believes that he underſtands it, becauſe
there is no public ſchool in which it is to be


learned,


neceſſary


ESSAYS o Tus MIN D. 295


neceſſary for the adviſer to have of his taſte, his inclinations, the ſenſations by
which he is animated, and the degree of thoſe inward feelings by which he is
affected? What skill to foreſee the faults he would commit and the circum-
ſtances in, which he may be placed by fortune, and to judge in conſequence of
this, whether the fault he would correct, would not be changed into a virtue,
in the ſtation in which he will probably be placed? This is the picture of thoſe
difficulties which render the wiſe ſo reſerved on the article of giving advice. Thus
it is only of thoſe, who ſcarce even give any, that we ought to demand it. All
other counſels may be juſtly ſuſpected. 3
But is there any mark by which we may know the counſels of a wiſe man?
Yes, doubtleſs, there are. All the paſſions have a different language. We
may then from the advice itſelf form a judgment of the motive from which
it was given. In moſt men, as I have ſaid above, it is dictated by pride; and
the counſels of pride, which are always humbling, are ſcarcely ever followed.
Pride gives them; pride reſiſts them. It is the anvil which makes the hammer
fly back, The art of making them reliſhed, which of all the arts among
mankind is, perhaps, the leaſt improved, is abſolutely unknown to pride. It
does not examine: its counſels, and its deciſions are proofs of its ignorance.
Mortals, cries the proud man, liſten to me : ſuperior in underſtanding to others,
I ſpeak, let them attend, and rely on my knowlege : to reply is to offend me.
Thus always full of a profound reſpect for himſelf, whoever reſiſts his advice is
a conceited fellow, who wanted flatterers and not friends. Vain man, might
they reply, on whom ought this reproach to fall but on thyſelf, who behaves
with ſuch violence to thoſe, who do not, by a blind deference to thy deciſions, -
Natter thy preſumption ? Learn that it is thy ill temper that ſaves thee from the
vice of flattery. Beſides, what would'ſt thou mean by that love of flattery,
with which all men reciprocally reproach each other, and of which particularly
the great, and principally kings, are accuſed ? Every body, doubtleſs, hatas
praiſe when he believes it to be falſe : people then love flatterers only in the
quality of ſincere admirers. Under this it is impoſſible not to love them, be-
cauſe every one believes that his actions are laudable and worthy of praiſe.
"Whoever diſdains elogiums, ſuffers at leaſt people to praiſe him on this account.
When they deteſt the flatterer, it is becauſe they know him to be ſuch. In
flattery it is not then the praiſe, but the falſhood which ſhocks us. If the man
of abilities appears leſs ſenſible of elogiums, it is becauſe he more frequently per-
ceives their falſhood: but let an artful flatterer praiſe him, perſiſt in praiſing
him, and ſometimes ſeem to mingle blame with the elogiums he beſtows, the
man of genius will, ſooner or latter, be his dupe. From the artiſt to the prince,
every one loves praiſe, and conſequently delicate flattery..
But it may be asked, have not kings been ſeen to bear with gratitude, the
ſevere repreſentations of a virtuous counſellor? Yes, without doubt; but theſe
princes were jealous of their glory; they were warmly defirous of promoting
the public welfare; and this diſpoſition forced them to invite to their courts,
men animated by the ſame paſſion, that is, men who would give them no coun-
ſels but what were favourable to the people. Now if ſuch counſellors flatter a a
virtuous prince, at leaſt in the object of his paſſion, if they do not always flat-
ter him in the means he makes.uſe of to ſatisfy it, ſuch a liberty cannot offend
him. I ſay more, ſuch a truth may ſometimes flatter him: it is the pleaſing
blow of a miſtreſs, | | Let


296 DE L'ESPIRIT; os,


Let a man go to a miſer and tell him, you are to blame, you place your
money out very badly; if you was to employ it in ſuch a manner, you would
find your account in it: far from being ſhocked at ſuch frankneſs, the miſer would
be pleaſed with the author of it. In diſapproving his conduct, he flatters him
in what is moſt dear to him, that is in the object of his paſſion, Now what 1
ſay of the miſer may be applied to the virtuous king.

In regard to a prince who 1s not in love with glory, or the public welfare,
this prince can draw to his court none but ſuch men as may inſtruct him in re-
lation to the objects of his deſires; as his taſte, his prejudices, his views, his
projects, and his pleaſures : he will then be ſurrounded by none but vicious men,
to whom the public diſlike gives the name of flatterers (e). All virtuous men
fly far from him. To require that they ſhould aſſemble about his throne, would
be to demand an impoſſibility, and to reſolve to produce an effect without a cauſe.
Tyrants and great princes ought to determine themſelves by the ſame motives,
in the choice of their friends; they differ only in the paſſion by which they are
animated. | | |

Every man would then be praiſed and flattered ; but all would not have it
done in the ſame manner ; and it 1s only in this particular that the difference be-
tween them conſiſts. The proud are not free from this deſire: what ſtronger
proof can there be of this, than the haughtineſs with which they decide, and
the blind ſubmiſſion they require ? It is not thus with the wife man : his ſelf-love
is not ſhewn in a inſolent manner; and if he gives advice, he does not require
that it ſhould be followed. Sound reaſon always ſuſpects that it has not con-
ſidered an object in all its views. Thus in theſe counſels are always found ſome
expreſſions of doubt proper to ſhew the ſituation of the mind. Such are thele
phraſes : I believe that you ought to conduct yourſelf in ſuch a manner: ſuch is
my advice : ſuch the motives on which I form my opinion : but adopt nothin
without examination, &c. From this manner of giving advice, we may di.
cover the wiſe man: he alone can ſucceed with men of abilities; and if he has
not always the ſame ſucceſs with men of meaner intellects, it is becauſe theſe
laſt, being often uncertain, require a perſon to put an end to their irreſolution,
and determine for them; they confide more in folly, delivered with a firm voice,
than in the wiſdom that ſpeaks with heſitation. |

The friendſhip which adviſes, aſſumes nearly the ſame voice with that of wil-
dom, it only unites the expreſſion of that paſſion with that of doubt. Is the
advice reſiſted, or does the friend proceed fo far as to deſpiſe it? It then makes
itſelf better known, and after having made its repreſentations, it cries with
Pylades, Let us go, my lord, let us carry off Hermione.”

Every paſſion has then its turns, its expreſſion, and its particular manner :
therefore, the man who by an exact analyſis of the phraſes and expreſſions uſed
by the different paſſions, ſhould give the ſigns by which we might know them,

t


DV


would doubtleſs highly deſerve the gratitude of the public. Then we might,


- 4


— * * * *


—


(e) Moſt princes, ſays the poet Saadi, calamity, when theſe virtuous men appear
are ſo indifferent with reſpect to good coun- at court. They are never called but in an
ſel, and have ſo ſeldom need of virtuous extremity, and commonly at the inſtant
friends, that it is always a ſign of a public when the ſtate is without reſource.


from


ESSAYS on Tje MIND. 297
from the multitude of ſenſations produced by each act of the will, diſtinguiſh,
at leaſt, that which rules over us. Till that time men will be ignorant of them-
ſelves, and will fall into the groſſeſt errors. 8 |


Nerd


Of Good Senſe.


H E difference between wit and good ſenſe, proceeds from the different

| cauſes by which they are produced. The one is the effect of ſtrong
paſſions, and the other of the abſence of thoſe very paſſions. The man of good
ſenſe does not commonly fall into any of thoſe errors into which we are drawn
by the paſſions ; neither does he receive any of thoſe beams of light that are
*%wing to warm paſſions. In the current of life, and in ſuch things where a per-
fect view may be obtained by an indifferent eye, the man of good ſenſe does
not deceive himſelf in relation to thoſe queſtions that are a little complicated,
where, in order to perceive and diſcover the truth, ſome efforts muſt be made,
and ſome fatigue of attention endured; the man of good ſenſe is blind: de-
prived of the paſſions, he finds himſelf at the fame time deprived of that
courage, of that activity of ſoul, and of that continued attention which alone
can enlighten him. Senſe ſuppoſes then no invention, nor conſequently any wit :
and here, if I may venture to uſe the term, ſenſe ends where wit begins (a).

We ought not, however, to conclude from hence, that good ſenſe is ſo very
common. The men without paſſions are rare. Solid judgment, which of all the
faculties of the mind, is, beyond contradiction, the neareſt to good ſenſe, is
not free from the paſſions. Beſides, the blockheads are not leſs ſuſceptible of
them, than the men of wit. If all pretend to good ſenſe, and even aſſume the
character, we ſhall not believe them upon their word. M. Diafoirus ſays, 1
judge by the heavineſs of my ſon's imagination, that he will in time have a
good judgment.” People always want good ſenſe, when they have no other
pretenſions to it than their want of wit.

Is the body politic ſound? The men of good ſenſe may be called to great
places, and fill them worthily: but if the ſtate is attacked by a diſeaſe, the men
of good ſenſe are extremely dangerous. Mediocrity preſerves things in the ſtate
in which it found them. Every thing is left to go on as it will: the ſilence of
theſe people conceals the progreſs of the evil, and oppoſes the effectual reme-
dies that might be brought againſt it: they commonly do not make known the
diſeaſe till it is become incurable. In regard to thoſe ſecondary places, where
they are not intruſted with the management, but the punctual execution, they


—


TY
— — —— ” ———


(a) It will be found, that [ here diſtin- times confounded in the ordinary uſe of
guiſh wit from good ſenſe, which are ſome- theſe words,


Q q | are


298 DE LIE S PRI. T; on,
are commonly very proper for them. The only faults they commit are
thoſe of ignorance, which, in inferior places, are almoſt conſtantly of little
importance. As to their particular conduct, it is not maſterly, but it is
always reaſonable. The abſence of the paſſions preventing all the light de-
rived from theſe paſſions, makes them at the ſame time avoid all the errors
to which the paſſions would precipitate them. Senſible men are in general
more happy than thoſe influenced by ſtrong paſſions: in the mean time, the
indifference of the firſt renders them leſs happy than the man of an amiable
diſpoſition, who, being born ſenſible, has by age and reflection weakened
that ſenſibility; but his heart is ſtill open to the weakneſs of others: his
ſenſibility revives for them, and he enjoys the pleaſure of being ſenſible
without being leſs happy. Thus he is more amiable in the eyes of all his
fellow-citizens, who are pleaſed with his weakneſs. |
However rare good ſenſe may be, the advantages it procures. are only per-
ſonal, they cannot be extended to the human race. The man of good ſenſe
cannot pretend to the public gratitude, nor conſequently to glory. But pru-
dence, it is is ſaid, which is one of the attendants of good ſenſe, is a virtue
which it is for the advantage of all nations to honour, This prudence, ſo
boaſted of, and ſometimes ſo uſetul to individuals, is not, with reſpe& to a
whole nation, a virtue ſo derivable as is imagined. Of all the gifts heaven
could beſtow —_ a people, the moſt fatal, without diſpute would be that
of prudence, if it was rendered common to all the citizens. What, in fact,
is the prudent man? He who keeps evils at a diſtance; an image ſtrong
enough for what balances in his mind the preſence of a pleaſure that would
be fatal to him. Now let us ſuppoſe, that prudence was to deſcend on all
the heads that compoſe a nation : where. would be found the men who, for
five pence a day, would in battle confront death, fatigue, and diſeaſes ?
What woman would preſent herſelf at the altar of Hymen to expoſe herſelf


humours and contradiction of a huſband, and to the vexations occaſioned
by the death or ill conduct of children? What men, in conſequence of the
principles of his religion, would not deſpiſe the fleeting pleaſures of this
world, and intirely devoting himſelf to the care of his ſalvation, ſeek only
in an auſtere life the means of increaſing the felicity that is to be the re.
ward of ſanctity? What man would not chuſe, in conſequence of this, the
moſt perfect ſtate, and that in which his ſalvation would be leaft expoſed ;
would he not prefer the palm of celibacy to the myrtles of love, and bury
himſelf in a monaſtery (b)? It is then to imprudence that poſterity owes its
exiſtence. It is the preſence of pleaſure, its all- powerful view, that braves
diſtant misfortune, and deſtroys foreſight : it is, therefore, to imprudence
and folly that heaven attaches the preſervation of empires, and the duration


(b) When it was inquired in China, ſubject, ſaw no danger in it. They did not
whether the miſſionaries fhould be allowed foreſee, ſaid they, that a religion, in which
to preach freely the Chriſtian religion, it celibacy is the moſt perfect ſtate, could be
is ſald, the men of letters, aſſembled on this very extenſive. |

| of


Fs


* +


to the trouble of child-bearing, to the pain and danger of delivery, to the


ESSAYS ov Tue M IND, 3 299


of the world. It appears that, according to the actual conſtitution of moſt
governments, prudence is only deſirable in a very ſmall number of citizens;
that reaſon, a ſynonimous word to good ſenſe, and ſo much boaſted of by
mankind, deſerves but little eſteem ; that the wiſdom, which is ſuppoſed to
belong to it, tends to inaction ; and that its apparent infallibility is often no
more than an apathy. I, however, conteis that the title of a perſon of
good ſenſe, uſurped by an infinite number of people, certainly does not be-
long to them. |

It we ſay of almoſt all the ſtupid, that they are men of good ſenſe, it is,
in this reſpect, with them as with the ordinary women, who are always
mentioned as mighty good. We freely boaſt of the merit of thoſe who have
none : we repreſent them in the moſt favourable light, and perſons of ſupe-
rior abilities in a light the moſt diſadvantageous. How many men beſtow
the greateſt praiſes on good ſenſe, which they place above wit? In reality
every one would place a higher eſteem on himſelf than on others, and the
men of moderate abilities, perceiving that they are nearer to good ſenſe than
to wit, ſet little value upon the latter, and conſider it as a trifling endow-
ment : and hence the proverb is ſo often repeated by men of moderate abi-
lities: An ounce of good ſenſe is worth a pound of wit;” a phraſe by
which every one of them would inſinuate, that at the bottom they have more
wit than any of our celebrated men, |


SIISSSSSSSDD050000000000000000000S00000
C H AW 1
| Of the Spirit of Conduct.


HE common object of men's deſires is happineſs : and it is the buſi-
neſs of conduct, or the art of conducting themſelves, that renders them
happy. This art appears leſs an endowment of the mind, than an effect of
wiſdom, of the regulation of our temper, and the moderation of our de-
fires. The greateſt part of mankind, tormented by their paſſions, or lan-
guiſhing under the calm of laſſitude, may be compared, the firſt to a veſſel
buffeted by the tempeſts of the north, and the ſecond to a ſhip ſtopped by
a calm in the midſt of the ſeas of the torrid zone. To her aſſiſtance, one
calls upon the calm, and the other upon the winds. In order to fail happily,
it is neceſſary for them to be driven by a ind that is always equal. But
all I might ſay, in this reſpect, on happineſs, would have no relation to the
ſubject on which I treat. | Were |
People have hitherto underſtood by the ſpirit of conduct, only the art of
guiding themſelves to the various objects they have in purſuit. :
In a republic, ſuch as that of the Romans, and in every government
| where the people are the diſtributers of favours, and where honours are the
reward of merit, the ſpirit of conduct is nothing leſs than genius and great abili-


Qq 2 ties.


300 DE L'ESPRIT,; on,


ties. This 1s not the caſe in governments where favours are in the hands of
men, whoſe greatneſs is independent of the public happineſs : in theſe coun-
tries the ſpirit which directs the conduct, is only the art of becoming uſe-
ful or agreeable to the diſpenſers of favours; and it is leſs to his ſpirit, than to
his turn of mind, that a man commonly owes this advantage. The moſt
favourable and moſt neceſſary diſpoſition for ſucceeding with the great, is a
temper pliable to all characters and circumſtances. Was a man void of
abilities, ſuch a diſpoſition, aſſiſted by favourable circumſtances, would be
ſufficient to make his fortune. But it may be ſaid, that nothing is more
common than ſuch characters, therefore, there is nobody who may not make
his fortune, and obtain the good will of the great man by becoming the
miniſter of his pleafures, or his ſpy. Chance muſt then have a great ſhare
in the fortunes of men. It is chance which makes us fathers, huſbands,
and the friend of the heauty that is offered, and who pleaſes the patron ; it
is chance which places us near a great man at the moment when he wants
a ſpy. © Whoever is without honour and without humour, ſaid the duke
of Orleans, the late regent, is a perfect courtier.” According to this de-
finition, it muſt be allowed, that the perfect man, in this kind, is only rare
in regard to humour.

But, if great fortunes are, in general, the work of chance, and if man
no otherwiſe contributes to obtain them, than by ſtooping to the mean and
baſe actions neceſſary to procure them, it muſt, however, be confeſſed, that
wit has ſometimes a ſhare in our elevation. The firſt, for example, who,
by importunity, has made a patron; he who improving the haughty temper
of the place-man, has drawn upon himſelf thoſe rough ſpeeches which diſ-
honours him who pronounces them, and forces him to become the protector
of the perſon he has offended; he, I ſay, has introduced invention and wit
into his conduct. It is the ſame with the firſt, who has perceived that, in
order to riſe in the houſe of the man in power, he muſt condeſcend to be
the butt of ridicule, and ſell, at as high a price as he can, his being deſpiſed
and made a buffoon.

He who thus makes uſe of the vanity' of another, to obtain his ends, is
endowed with the ſpirit of conduct. The man of addreſs, in this kind, pro-
_ceeds conſtantly towards his intereſt ; but always under the ſhelter of an-
other's intereft. He is an able man, if, in order to arrive at the end he pro-
poſes, he takes a road which ſeems to lead from it. This is the means of
lulling to fleep the jealouſy of his rivals, who do not awake till they can
be no obſtacle to his projects. How many men of wit have played the fool,
rendered themſelves ridiculous, and have affected the greateſt ſtupidity before
their ſuperiors, who are too Eaſily deceived by the baſe perſons who can
ſtoop to this meanneſs? How many men have, conſequently, arrived at the
higheſt fortune, and muſt have done ſo ? In fact, all thoſe who are not ani-
mated with an extreme love for glory, cannot, in point of merit, even love
any but their inferiors. This taſte derives its ſource from a vanity common
to all men. Every one would be praiſed; now of all praiſes the moſt flat-
tering is, without diſpute, that which moſt evidently proves our own excel-
lence. What gratitude do we owe to thoſe who diſcover to us defects, ot,
without


ESSAYS o Tux MIN D. | 301


without being prejudicial to us, aſſure us of our ſuperiority ? Of all flattery
this is the moſt artful. At the court of Alexander it was dangerous to ap-
pear too great. My ſon, make thyſelf little before Alexander, ſaid Par-
* menio to Philotas : give him ſometimes the pleaſure of reproving thee :
e and remember, that, to thy apparent inferiority thou wilt owe his friend-
* ſhip.” How many Alexanders are there in the world, who have a ſecret
hatred to ſuperior talents (a?? The man of mean abilities is beloved. Sir,
<« faid a father to his ſon, you would ſucceed in the world, and yet believe
that you have great merit. To humble your pride, know to what qua-
“ lities you muſt owe your ſucceſs : you are born without vices, without
&© virtues, without character; your knowlege is little, your mind is li-
« mited ; what a right, O my ſon, have you to the good will of man-
* kind! ”

But whatever advantage mean abilities procure, and whatever acceſs it *
opens to fortune, wit, as I have ſaid above, has ſometimes a ſhare in our
elevation: why then has the public no eſteem for this kind of wit? It is, I
reply, becauſe they are always ignorant of the arts made uſe of by the per-
fon of intrigue, and ſcarcely even know whether he owes his elevation to his
wit, or to mere chance. Beſides, the number of ideas, neceſſary for a per-
fon to make his fortune, is not immenſe. But what knowlege, ſay they,
is neceflary to improve upon mankind ? The man of intrigue, I reply, knows
perfectly the perion he wants to make uſe of, though he is not acquainted
with the reft of the world. Between the man of intrigue and the philo-
ſopher, we, in this reſpect, find the ſame difference as between the courier
and the geographer. The firſt knows, perhaps, better than M. Danville the
ſhorteſt way to Verſailles; but he does not know the ſurface of the globe
like that geographer. Let an artful man of intrigue be obliged to ſpeak in
public, and in an aſſembly of the people, he will be there as filly, as miſ-
placed, and as ſilent, as a ſuperior genius, when before a great man; he
is ambitious of knowing mankind in all ages and all countries, and deſpiſes
the art of knowing a particular man. The man of intrigue has not then
a knowlege of mankind, which would be of no uſe to him. His view is
not to pleaſe the public, but ſome men in power, who have 'often mean in-
tellects, and too much wit would be prejudicial to his deſign. To pleaſe
the people of ordinary underſtandings, we ought, in general, to give into
common errors, to conform to eſtabliſhed cuſtoms, and to reſemble the reſt
of the world. A perſon of an elevated genius cannot ſtoop ſo low. He
chuſes rather to be the bank which oppoſes a torrent, though he ſhould be
overwhelmed by it, than a light bough floating about on the ſurface of the
water. Beſides, the man of great abilities, with whatever addreſs he maſks


6— on


(a) A courtier belonging to Emanuel, told him. The courtier only replied by a
king of Portugal, being ordered to write a profound bow, and went to take leave of
diſpatch, the prince compoſed one upon the his beſt friends : there is nothing more. for
ſame ſubject, and having compared them, me to do at court, ſaid he, the king knows
found that of the courtier the beſt, this he I have more wit than he.


himſelf,


302 ESPRIT; oa,

himſelf, can never ſo exactly reſemble one that is ignorant, as an ignorant
man reſembles himſelf. They are more ſure of a perſon when he takes, than
when he pretends to take errors for truth.

The number of ideas, ſuppoſed by the art of conducting ourſelves, is not
then very extenſive : but ſhould it require more, the public would have no
elteem for this kind of genius. The man of intrigue makes himſelf the
center of nature; to his own intereſt alone he refers every thing; he does
nothing to promote the public welfare : if he obtains high employments, he
then enjoys the reſpect always annexed to power, and eſpecially to the fear
he inſpires ; but he cannot attain the reputation that ought to be conſidered
as flowing from the gratitude of the people. I even add, that the abilities,
by which he arrived at his high poſt, ſeem ſuddenly to abandon him. He is
raiſed to great employments only to diſhonour them; becauſe the ſpirit of
intrigue neceſſary to obtain them, has no relation to that ſtrength and depth
of genius neceſſary to diſcharge them worthily. Beſides, the ſpirit of in-
trigue is united to a certain meanneſs that muſt ſtill render him deſpicable in
the eyes of the public. |

Not but that people may unite in great intrigues with an extraordinary
elevation of mind. If, after the example of Cromwell, a man is deſirous of
mounting a throne; the power and luſtre of a crown, and the pleaſures
annexed to government, may doubtleſs, in his eyes, ennoble the baſeneſs of
his plots, ſince they efface the. horror of his crime in the opinion of poſte-
rity, who places ſuch a one in the rank of the greateſt men : but if, by an
infinite number of intrigues, a man endeavours to raiſe himſelf to thoſe little
poſts which he can never deſerve ; if he is mentioned in hiſtory by the
name of villain, or cheat, he is rendered deſpicable, not only in the eyes of
honeſt men, but alſo in thoſe of perſons of underſtanding. He ought to be
a little man who deſires little things. Whoever finds himſelf above want,
without being by his rank entitled to the firſt poſts, can have no other mo-
tive than that of glory, and has no other part to chuſe, if he is a man of
abilities, than to. ſhew himſelf ſteadily virtuous.

The man of intrigue ought then to renounce the public eſteem. But it
may be ſaid, that he is fully recompenſed for the loſs of it, by the happineſs
annexed to a great fortune. People deceive themſelves, I reply, if they think
him happy; for happineſs is not an appendage of great places; it depends
only on the agreement between our diſpoſitions and the circumſtances in
which fortune has placed us. It is with men as with nations, the moſt
happy are not always thoſe that make the greateſt figure in the world.
What nation more fortunate than the Swiſs! Among theſe wiſe people the
happy do not throw every thing into diforder by their intrigues ; contented
at home, they employ themſelves but little about others; they are not found
in the road of ambition; a part of their time is taken up in ſtudy; they
are but little known, and the obſcurity of their happineſs renders it ſecure.

It is not thus with the man of intrigue ; the miniſters ſell him dear the
titles with which they adorn him. What does the patron require from him?
The perpetual ſacrifice of the will is the only homage that can pleaſe him.
Like Saturn, Moloch, and Tuiſco, if he dared, he would be honoured by

| none


— I -


E S8 AT 8 ion wud MIND. 303


none but human ſacrifices. The pain endured by thoſe he protects, is an
agreeable ſight to the protector; this informs him of his power, and make;
him conceive an higher opinion of himſelf. Thus it is only to the moſt
painful attitudes that moſt nations have attached the ſign of reſpect.

Whoever would, by his intrigues, riſe to the poſſeſſion of great employ-
ments, muſt devote himſelf to humiliations. Ever reſtleſs, he can at firſt
only perceive happineſs in the perſpective of an uncertain futurity ; and it is
from hope, that reviving dream of men awake and unhappy, that he muſt
expect his felicity. When he has obtained it by ſuffering a thouſand mor-
tifications, he commonly revenges what he has felt, by his ſeverity and cruelty
rowards the unhappy, refuſes them his aſſiſtance, renders their miſery a
crime, reproaches them for it, and believes that, by this reproach, he makes
his inhumanity conſidered as an act of juſtice, and his fortune as derived
from merit: he does not, however, enjoy the pleaſure of convincing any
one that this is the truth. | |

How can we be aſſured that the fortune of a man is the effect of this
conduct, eſpecially in thoſe countries that are intirely deſpotic, where of the
vileſt ſlave they make a viſier; where riches depend on the will of the prince,
and on a momentary caprice, the cauſe of which is not always perceived ?
The -motives, which in this caſe determine the ſultans, are almoſt conſtantly
concealed ; hiſtorians relate only the apparent motives, they are ignorant of
the true ones; and, in this reſpect, we may, after M. de Fontenelle, aſſert,
that hiſtory is only a fable which people conſider as true.

In a compariſon between Cæſar and Pompey, if, as Balzac ſays, ſpeaking
of their fortune, |


One is the workman, and the other the work,


it muſt be acknowleged, there are but few Cæſars, and that, in arbitrary
governments, chance is almoſt the only god of fortune. Every thing there
depends on a moment, and on the circumſtances in which a perſon is placed ;
and this, perhaps, as in the eaſt, has given the greateſt credit to the doctrine
of fatality. According to the Muſulmans, deſtiny keeps every thing under
her empire, places kings on the throne, drives them from thence, fills their
reign with happy or unhappy events, conſtitutes the felicity or unhappineſs
of all mortals. According to them, wiſdom and folly, or the virtues and
vices of a man, make no change in the decrees engraven on: the tables of
light (b). To prove this doctrine, and, conſequently, to ſhew that the
moſt criminal is not always the moſt unhappy, and that one proceeds to
puniſhment by the ſame road which leads another to fortune, the Indian Ma-
hometans relate a remarkable fable.


— —


(b) The Muſulmans believe that every CALAMu-Az ER, and the writing above is
thing, which is to happen till the end of named Caza, or CAD AR, that is, THE
the world, is written on a table of light iNEVITABLE PREDESTINATION,
called Loun, with a pen of fire called


Want,


304 DEL'ESPRIT; os,

Want, ſay they, formerly aſſembled a number of men in the deſarts of
Tartary. Deprived of all, ſaid one, we have a right to all. The law, which
ſtrips us of neceſſaries to augment the ſuperfluities of ſome rajahs, is unjuſt.
Let us ſtruggle with injuſtice. A treaty can no longer ſubſiſt, where the
advantages ceaſe to be mutual. We muſt force from our oppreſſors the
wealth they have forced from us. At theſe words the orator was ſilent; a
murmur of approbation ran through the whole aſſembly, they applauded
the ſpeech ; the project was noble, and they reſolved to execute it. They
divided about the means. The braveſt roſe firſt: Force, ſaid they, has
deprived us of all; it is by force we muſt recover all. If our rajahs have
by their tyrannic injuſtice ſnatched from us even what is neceſſary, ſo far
as to require us to laviſh upon them our ſubſtance, our labour, and our lives,
why ſhould we refuſe to our wants what the tyrants permit to their injuſtice?
At the confines of theſe regions, the baſhaws, by the preſents they require,
divide the profits of the caravans ; they plunder the men enſlaved by their
power and by fear. Leſs unjuſt and more brave than they, let us attack
men in arms; let valour decide the victory, and let our riches be at leaſt,
the price of our courage. We have a right to them. Heaven, by the
gift of bravery, points out thoſe who ſhould ſhake off the fetters of tyranny.
Let the huſbandman without ſtrength or courage, plow, ſow, and reap :
it is for us that he has gathered in the harveſt.

Let us ravage, let us pillage the nations. We conſent to all, cried thoſe
who having more wit and leſs courage, feared to expoſe themſelves to dan-
ger; yet let us owe nothing to force, but all to impoſture. We ſhall receive
without danger from the hands of credulity, what we ſhall in vain, perhaps,
attempt to ſnatch by force. Let us clothe ourſelves with the name and the
habit. of the bonzes, or the bramins, and encompaſs the earth ; we ſhall ſee
every one eager to ſupply our wants, and even our ſecret pleaſures,

This party appeared baſe and cowardly to thoſe who were fierce and cou-
rageous. Being divided in opinion, the aſſembly ſeparated ; one party ſpread
itſelf into India, Tibet, and the confines of China. Their countenances were
auſtere, and their bodies macerated. They impoſed on the people, they
taught, they perſuaded, they divided families, cauſed the children to be diſ-
inherited, and applied their ſubſtance to themſelves. The people gave them
lands, built them temples, and ſettled upon them great revenues. They
borrowed the arm of power, in order to make the man of underſtanding bow
to the yoke of ſuperſtition. In ſhort, they ſubdued all minds by keeping
the ſceptre carefully concealed under the rags of miſery and the aſhes of

nance.

"" Diving this time, their old brave companions retired into the deſarts, ſur-
priſed the caravans, attacked them {word in hand, and divided among them-
ſelves the booty. | l j

One day, when, doubtleſs, the battle had not turned to their advantage,
the people ſeized one of theſe robbers, they conducted him to the next city,
they prepared the ſcaffold, they led him to execution. He walked with a
firm ſtep, till he found in his way and knew again, under the habit of a
bramin, one of thoſe who had ſeparated from him in the deſart, The people

| _ reſpectfully


ESSAYS on THE MIND. | 305


reſpectfully ſurrounded the bramin, and conducted him to his pagod. The
robber ſtopped at ſeeing him: Juſt Gods ! cried he, though equal in crimes,
what a difference is there in our deſtiny ! What do I ſay? Equal in crimes !
In one day he has, without fear, without danger, without courage, made
more widows and orphans ſigh, and deprived the empire of more riches,
than I have pillaged in the whole courſe of my life. He had always two
vices more than I, cowardice and falſehood ; yet I am treated as a villain,
he honoured as a faint; they drag me to the ſcaffold, him they lead to his
pagod; me they impale, him they adore. - |

Thus do the Indians prove, that there is neither happineſs nor unhappi-
neſs in this world. | |


CDC VEIGNDA GG UNNDUAND EH
C H A FP. .


Of the excluſroe Qualities of the Mind and Soul.


M: view 1n the preceding chapters was to affix clear ideas to the ſeveral
qualities of the mind ; I propoſe in this to examine, if there are ta-
lents that muſt neceſſarily exclude each other. This queſtion, it is ſaid, is
determined by facts: no perſon is at the ſame time ſuperior to all others
in many different kinds of knowlege. Newton is not reckoned among the
2 nor Milton among the geometricians: the verſes of Leibnitz are
ad. There is not a man who in a ſingle art, as poetry, or painting, has
ſucceeded in all the branches of it. Corneille and Racine have done no-
thing in comedy comparable to Moliere: Michael Angelo has not drawn
the pictures of Albani, nor Albani painted thoſe of Julius Romano. The
enius of the greateſt men appears then to be confined within very narrow
imits. This is, doubtleſs, true: but I aſk, what is the cauſe ? Is it time,
or is it wit, which men want to render themſelves illuſtrious in the different
arts and ſciences ? |
The progreſs of the human mind, it is ſaid, ought to-be the ſame in all
the arts and ſciences : the operations of the mind are reduced to the know-
lege of the reſemblances and differences that ſubſiſt between various objects.
It is then by obſervation that we obtain, in all the different kinds of ſtudy,
the new and general ideas on which our ſuperiority depends. Every great
phyſician, every great chemiſt, may then become a great geometrician, a
great aſtronomer, a great politician, and the firſt, in ſhort, in all the
ciences. This fact being ſtated, it will, doubtleſs, be concluded, that it
ne is


306 DE L*ESPRIT; or
is the ſhort duration of human lite that forces ſuperior minds to limit them-
ſelves to one kind of ſtudy.

It muſt, however, be confeſſed, that there are talents and qualities
poſſeſſed only by the excluſion of ſome others. Among mankind ſome
are filled with the love of glory, and are not ſuſceptible of any other of the
paſlions: ſome may excel in natural philoſophy, civil law, geometry, and,
1n ſhort, in all the ſciences that conſiſt in the compariſon of ideas. A fond-
neſs for any other ſtudy can only diſtract or precipitate them into errors.
There are other men ſuſceptible not only of the love of glory, but an in-
finite number of other paſſions : theſe may become celebrated in ſeveral diffe-
rent kinds of ſtudy, where the ſucceſs depends on being moved. |

Such is, for inſtance, the dramatic kind of writing: but, in order to
paint the paſſions, we mult, as I have already ſaid, feel them very warmly :
we are ignorant both of the language of the paſſions and of the ſenſations
they excite in us, when we have not experienced them. Thus ignorance of
this kind always produces mediocrity. If Fontenelle had been obliged to
paint the characters of Rhadamiſtus, Brutus, or Catiline, that great man
would certainly have fallen much below mediocrity. :.

Theſe principles being eſtabliſhed, I conclude that the love of glory is com-
mon to all who diſtinguiſh themſelves in any kind of ſtudy whatſoever ; ſince
that alone, as I have proved, is fufficient to make us ſupport the fatigue of
thought. But this paſſion, according to the circumſtances in which fortune has
placed us, may be united to other paſſions. The men in whom. this union
ſubſiſts, can never have any great ſucceſs, if they give themſelves up intirely to
the ſtudy of one ſcience, as, for inſtance, morality, where, in order to ſee well, we
muſt fee with an attentive, but indifferent eye: in this ſcience it is indifference
which holds the balance of juſtice. In diſputes, it is not the parties, but an
indifferent perſon who is taken for judge. What man, for inſtance, that is ca-
pable of loving violently, would, like M. de Fontenelle, approve the crime of
infidelity ? “ In an age, ſays that philofopher, when I was moſt amorous, my
« miftreſs left me for another lover. I heard of it, and was enraged : I went
<< to her, and loaded her with approaches: ſhe heard me, and laughing, ſaid,
« Fontenelle, when I took you, it was doubtlefs pleaſure that I ſought : I found
more with another, Is it to the leaſt degree of pleaſure that I ought to give
te the preference? Be juſt, and anfwer me. On my faith, ſaid Fontenelle, yon
« are in the right; and though J am no longer your lover, I will ftill be your
friend.“ Such an anſwer ſuppoſes but little love in Fontenelle: the paſſions
do not reaſon fo juſtly. 0 |

We may then diſtinguiſh: two different kinds of the arts and ſciences, the
firſt of which ſuppoſes a mind free from every other paſſion but that of glo-
ry; and the ſecond, on the contrary, ſuppoſes a mind ſuſceptible of a variety of
paſſions. There are then excluſive talents ; and the ignorance of this truth is the
ſource of much injuſtice. We deſire that men ſhall have contradictory qualities;
we demand impoſſibilities from them: and would have the ſtone that is thrown,
remain ſuſpended in the air, without obeying the laws of gravitation, -


Let


ESSAYS- on Tur MIN p. .


Let a man, for inſtance, like M. de Fontenelle, contemplate, without ſeve-
rity, the wickedneſs of mankind ; let- him conſider it, let him riſe up againſt
crimes without hating the criminals, and people will applaud his moderation;
and yet, at the ſame inſtant, they will accuſe him of being too lukewarm in
friendſhip. They do not perceive, that the ſame abſence of the paſſions, to
which he owes the moderation they commend, mult neceſſarily render him leſs
ſenſible of the charms of friendſhip. |
Nothing is more common than to require contradictory qualities from men.
This is occaſioned by our blind love of happineſs : we would be conſtantly
happy, and thence would have the fame objects aſſume every inſtant the form
we think moſt agreeable. We have ſeen various perfections ſcattered among
different objects; hence, we would find them united in one, and taſte a thou-
ſand pleaſures at once. For this purpoſe, we would have the ſame fruit have


the luſtre of the diamond, the odour of the roſe, the taſte of the peach,


and the coolneſs of the. pomegranate. It is then the blind love of happi-
neſs, the ſource of an infinite number of ridiculous wiſhes, that makes men
deſire qualities that are abſolutely impoſſible to be blended together. To deſtroy
this fruitful ſeed of unjuſt expectation, it is neceſſary to treat this ſubject in a
pretty extenſive manner. It is only by pointing out, in conformity to the end I
propoſe, both the qualities abſolutely excluſive, and thoſe that are too ſeldom
found united in the ſame perſon for us to have a right to defire them, that a
man can be at once rendered more enlightened, and more indulgent.

A father would have his fon unite to great talents a moſt wiſe conduct. But
do you know, I ask, that you deſire to have in your fon qualities that are al-


moſt incompatible ? Know, that if ſome ſingular concourſe of circumſtances '


have ſometimes united them in the ſame man, yet they are very ſeldom blended
together; that great abilities always ſuppoſe ſtrong paſſions ; that ſtrong paſ-
fions produce a thouſand irregularities; and that, on the contrary, what is
called good conduct, is almoſt always the effect of the abſence of the paſſions,
and conſequently the appendage of moderate abilities. It requires ſtrong paſ-

ſions to form the great, of what kind ſoever. Why do we lee fo many coun-
tries barren of great men? Why ſo many little Cato's, ſo wonderful in early
youth, who have commonly in advanced age only common abilities ? From
what reaſon, in ſhort, is the world fo full of ingenious children, and ſtupid men?
It is becauſe in moſt governments the citizens are not inflamed by ſtrong paſ-
ſions. Well, I conſent, the father will ſay, that my fon ſhall be animated by
them, it will be ſufficient for me to direct them towards certain objecty, of
ſtudy. But do you perceive, I reply, the hazard of the deſire ? It is expect-
ing that a man with good eyes, ſhould perceive only the objects you point out
to him. Before you form any plan of education, you ought to be fully de-
termined within yourſelf, and know what you deſire moſt for your ſon, whe-
ther great abilities, or a wiſe conduct. Is it to a good conduct that you give
the preference? Believe that ſtrong paſſions would be a fatal gift to your fon,
and eſpecially among a people, where, by the conſtitution of the government,
the paſſions are not always directed towards virtue; ſtifle therefore within him,
if poſſible, all the ſeeds of paſſions. 1 I ſhall then, the father will reply,

1 | e'2 give


ODE ESPRIT;,


OR,

give up the hope of rendering him a man of merit, Doubtleſs you will. If
you cannot refolve upon this, reſtore him the paſſions and endeavour to direct
them to laudable purſuits: but expect to ſce him perform great things, and


208


ſometimes commit the greateſt faults. There is no medium in a man of ſtrong
paſſions ; and it is chance which generally determines his firſt ſteps. If the
men of ſtrong paſſions become illuſtrious in the arts, if the ſciences preſerve
ſome empire over them, and if they ſometimes obſerve a wiſe conduct; it is
not ſo with the men of ſtrong paſſions, whoſe birth, character, dignities, and
riches call them to the firſt poſts in the world. The good or bad conduct of
theſe is almoſt intirely ſubject to the empire of chance; according to the cir-
cumſtances in which they are placed, and the moment of their birth, their qua-
lities change into vices and virtues. Chance makes at its pleaſure an Appius or
a Decius. In M. de Voltaire's tragedy, Cæſar ſays, If I was not the maſter
of the Romans, I ſhould be their avenger.


e Had I not been Cæſar, I ſhould have been Brutus.”


Give to the ſon of a cooper, wit, courage, prudence, and ale. Among re-
publicans where military merit opens a door to grandeur, you will make a The-
miſtocles or a Marius (a): at Paris you will only form a Cartouche.

Let a man bold, enterprizing, and capable of executing the moſt deſperate
reſolutions, appear when the ſtate, ravaged by powerful enemies, ſeems without
reſource ; if ſucceſs favours his enterprizes, he is a demi-god : at any other
time, he is no more than a madman or a fool.

To theſe different ends are we frequently conducted by the ſame paſſions.
This is the danger to which the father expoſes himſelf, whoſe children are ſuſ-
ceptible of theſe ſtrong paſſions, which ſo often change the face of the world.
It is, in this caſe, the conformity of their minds and diſpoſitions, with the ſta-
tion in which they are placed, that make them what they are. Every thing
depends on this conformity. Among thoſe ordinary men, who by important
{ervices cannot render themſelves of uſe to the world, crown themſelves with
glory, nor pretend to the general eſteem, there are none who would not be of
advantage to their fellow citizens, and aquire a right to their gratitude, were
they but placed in the poſts moſt ſuitable to them: it is on this ſubje& that
Fontaine ſays, |


— — 2 IEEE.
—_


a) Lu-cong- founder of the dyna-
Fee Han, wal the fr of a gang of —
bers; he made himſelf maſter of a town;
attached himſelf to the ſervice of T- cou;
became the general of armies, defeated


T-fin, rendered himſelf maſter of ſeveral
cities; took the title of king; and fought


and diſarmed the princes, who revolted
againſt the empire : by his clemency more
than by his valour he reſtored the peace of
China, was acknowledged emperor, and is
mentioned in the Chineſe hiſtory as one of
their moſt illuſtrious princes,


Us


ESSAYS ov Tis 'M I'N'D. 309


Us roi prudent & ſage |
De ſes mainares ſujets ſait tirer quelque uſage.


That is,


A wiſe and prudent king 3 :
Will turn to his own advantage the abilities of his meaneſt ſubjects,


Let us ſuppoſe, for inſtance, that a place of conſequence is vacant. A perſon
muſt be nominated to fill it ; and it requires one that can be depended upon.
He who is propoſed, has but little wit, beſides, he is indolent. This, I ſay,
ſignifies nothing tq him who nominates him : give him the place. A good con-
ſcience is often indolent; activity, when it is not the effect of the love of glory,
is ſuſpicious; the knave, always agitated by remorſe and fear, is inceſſantly in
action. Vigilance, ſays Rouſſeau, is the virtue of vice.“ 4 |

A place is ready to be diſpoſed of: it requires aſſiduity. He who is propoſed
is a ſloven, diſagreeable, and burthenſome to good company: ſo much the bet-
ter, aſſiduity will render his being a ſloven a virtue.

I ſhall not expatiate any farther on this ſubje&t ; but conclude with what
I have ſaid above, that a father, by requiring the greateſt talents from his
ſon, joined to the wiſeſt conduct, deſires that he ſhould have the principle of
irregularity, and yet that he ſhould never ſwerve from a regular conduct.

Not leſs unjuſt with reſpe& to deſpotic princes, than the father with reſpect
to his fon; throughout all the eaſt, there are people who require from their
ſultans many virtues, and more particularly great knowlege : yet what can be
more unjuſt ? Are you ignorant, might one ſay to theſe people, that knowlege
is the reward of much ſtudy and reflection? Study and reflection are painful:
the people then muſt make uſe of all their endeavours to preſerve the prince
from them ; he muſt then give way to his lazineſs, if he is not animated by a
motive ſo powerful as to make him triumph over it. What can this motive
be? Nothing but the deſire of glory. But this deſire, as I have proved in the
third diſcourſe, is itſelf founded on the defire of the pleaſure procured by
glory, and the general eſteem. Now, if the ſultan, in quality of a deſpotic
prince, enjoys all the pleaſures which glory can promiſe to other men, the ſultan
is then without deſires, and nothing can kindle in him the love of glory : he has
not a motive ſufficient to enable him to undergo the tireſome task of buſineſs,
and to expoſe himſelf to that fatigue of attention, neceſſary to his obtaining in-
ſtruction. To require knowlege from him, is to deſire, that the rivers ſhould
run back to their ſource z and to expect an effect without a cauſe. 5
All hiſtory juſtifies this truth. Let us open that of China: we there ſee re-
volutions rapidly ſucceed each other. The great man who raiſes himſelf to the
empire, has for his ſucceſſors princes born in purple, who not having the ſame
powerful motives as their father to render themſelves illuſtrious, ſleep on the
throne; and moſt of them loſe it by the third generation, frequently without
having any other crime to reproach themſelves with, but that of indo-


lence.
I ſhall


N


310 DE L'ESPRIT; on,


I ſhall mention only one example of this (b). Li-t-ching, a man of an ob-
{cure birth, took up arms againſt the emperor T-cong-ching, placed himſelf at
the head of the malecontents, raiſed an army, marched to Pekin, and ſur-
prized that city. The empreſs and the queens ſtrangled themſelves ; the em-
peror ſtabbed his daughter, and retired into a diſtant part of his palace, where,
before he put an end to his life, he wrote theſe words on the lappet of his
robe: I have reigned ſeventeen years: I am dethroned, and in this misfor-
tune ſee nothing but the puniſhment of heaven, juſtly offended at my
* indolence. I am not, however, the only one guilty : the great men of my
court are ſtill more ſo than I; it is they, who, by concealing from me the
© knowlege of the affairs of the empire, have dug the pit into which I am
fallen. With what face ſhall I appear before my anceſtors ? How ſupport
their reproaches? O ye, who have reduced me to this dreadful. ſituation !
take my body, cut it in pieces, I conſent to it; but ſpare my poor people:
*© they are innocent, and already unhappy enough, in having had me fo long
„for their maſter.”

A thouſand of the like inſtances found in hiſtory, prove, that luxury and
ſoftneſs influence almoſt all thoſe, who, by their birth are armed with arbitrary
power. The atmoſphere ſpread over theſe thrones, and the deſpotic ſovereigns
who fit upon them, ſeem to be filled with a lethargic vapour, which ſeizes all
the faculties of their ſouls. Thence they are ſeldom reckoned among great
kings, except when they have cleared the way to the throne, or been long
inſtructed in the ſchool of misfortune. They always owe their knowlege to the
intereſt they have in acquiring it. WE, |

Why are little princes generally more able men than the moſt powerful deſ-
potic ſovereigns ? It is becauſe they have, in a manner, their fortunes to make;
becauſe they are obliged, with an inferior force, to reſiſt that which is ſuperior ;
becauſe they live in the perpetual fear of having their dominions taken from
them; and becauſe their intereſt, being more ſtrictly united with that of their
ſubjects, muſt enlighten them with reſpect to the various parts of the legiſlation.
Thus they are in general much more buſily employed in training up ſoldiers,
contracting alliances, and in peopling and enriching their provinces. Thus we
might, in conſequence of what I have ſaid, prepare geographi-political maps of
the merit of the princes in the ſeveral empires of the eaſt. Their underſtand-
ing, meaſured by the ſcale gf their power, would decreaſe in proportion to the
extent and the ſtrength of Mir empires, to the difficulty of penetrating into
them, and in ſhort, to the more or leſs abſolute authority they have over their
ſubjects; that is, to the more or leſs preſſing intereſt they have in being en-
lightened. This ſcale being once calculated and compared with obſervation, it
would certainly afford very juſt concluſions : the Sophies and Moguls would,
for example, be placed in the rank of the moſt ſtupid princes ; becauſe, except-
ing ſome ſingular circumſtances where they have accidentally had a good edu-
cation, the moſt powerful muſt commonly be the moſt ignorant. | 4


oy « 1 \ 2 To


ca Hb TT = =” T” —— 7 I * * * 21


(b) Sce the hiſtor of the Huns, by M. de Guignes, tom. I. p. 74. 0
| 0


%


ESSAYS o Tix MIND. 211


To require an eaſtern deſpotic prince to conſult the happineſs of his people,
and with a ſtrong arm and a ſteady hand to hold the helm of government,
would be to deſire that the arm of Ganymede ſhould wield the club of Her-
cules. Let us ſuppoſe that an Indian was, in this reſpect, to make ſome re-
monſtrances to the Mogul: of what doſt thou complain? might he reply.
Can'ſt thou without injuftice require, that I ſhould be more enlightened than
thyſelf with refpect.to-thy- own intereſt? When thou didſt inveſt me with 1u-


preme power, couldſt thou believe that, forgetting pleaſure for the painful ho-


nour of rendering thee happy, I and my. ſucceſſors would not enjoy the ad-
vantages attached to arbitrary power ? Every man loves himſelf preterably to all
others; thou knoweſt this. To require then, that, deaf to the voice of care
and the cry of my paſſions, I ſhould ſacrifice them to thy intereſt, is to en-
deavour to fubyert the order of nature. How can'ſt thou imagine, that being
able to do every thing, I would never do any thing unjuſt ? The man fond of
the public eſteem thou ſay'ſt, makes a different uſe of his power. I confels
it; but of what importance is glory, and the eſteem of the public to me ? Is
there one pleaſure granted to virtue, that is refuſed to power? Beſides, the


men paſſionately fond of glory are ſcarce, and this is not a paſſion that deſcends


to their ſucceſſors. This ought to have been foreſeen, and thou ſhouldſt have
been ſenſible, that by arming me with an arbitrary authority, thou haſt cut the
knot of mutual dependance, which binds the ſovereign to the ſubje&, and
that thou haſt ſeparated my intereſt from thine. Imprudent, in placing in
my hand the ſceptre of deſpotiſm ; cowardly, in not daring to ſnatch it from
me ; be at once puniſhed for thine imprudence and thy cowardice : know, that
if thou breatheſt, it is becauſe I permit thee : learn, that every inſtant of thy
life is a favour, Vile ſlave, thou wert born, thou liveſt for my pleaſures. Bend
under the weight of thy chain, cringe at my feet, languiſh in miſery, die; I for-
bid thee to complain: ſuch is my will.

What I have faid of ſultans, may in part be applied to their miniſters : their
knowlege is, in general, in proportion to the intereſt they have in acquiring it.
In the countries where the cries of the public may depoſe them, great abili-
ries are neceſſary, and they are obliged to acquire them. On the contrary,
among the public, where the people has neither credit nor the leaſt influence,
they deliver themſelves up to idleneſs, and are contented with that kind of merit


neceſſary to make their fortunes at court; a merit abſolutely incompatible with


great abilities, from the oppoſition found between the intereſt of the courtiers

and the general intereſt, It is in this reſpect wth miniſters as with men of
learning: It is a ridiculous pretence to aim at the ſame time at glory and paſ-
ſions : before they compoſe their works, chey ought always to chuſe, whether
they would have the eſteem of the public, or that of the courtiers. It mult be
known, that in moſt courts, and eſpecially in thoſe of the eaſt, the men are
from their infancy, ſwathed and confined in their ſwadling cloaths of prejudice
and arbitrary. conſtraint ; that moſt minds. are bound up lo, that they cannot riſe
to be great; that no man who is born and lives near deſpotic thrones, can eſcape


the general cohtagion, and he is under a neceſſity of never having any but


mean ideas.


Thus,


312 DE L'ESPRIT; on;


Thus, true merit reſides far from the palaces of kings. It never approaches
but in times of misfortune, when the princes are forced to invite it. At any
other time, want alone may draw men of merit to the court; but in this ſitua-
tion there are few who preſerve the ſame ſtrength and elevation of mind. Want
is too nearly allied to guilt. | |

It follows from what I have been ſaying, that it is demanding an impoſſibi-
lity to require great talents of thoſe, who, by their ſtate and ſituation, cannot
be animated by ſtrong paſſions. But how many of theſe demands are made
every day? People complain of the corruption of manners; we ought, ſay
they, to form virtuous mew, and they would have the citizens warmed with
the love of their country, and yet ſee in ſilence the misfortunes occaſioned by
a bad legiſlation. They do not perceive, that this is requiring a miſer not to
exclaim againſt a robber, when he is carrying off his ſtrong box. They do not
obſerve, that thoſe, who, in certain countries are called wiſe men, are always
indifferent with reſpect to the public welfare, and are conſequently without vir-
tue. It is with equal injuſtice, as I am going to prove in the following chapter,
that people demand of men, not only talents, but qualities and habits contrary
to each other, and which cannot ſubſiſt together.


C H A P. XV.
Of the Injuſtice of the Public in this reſpe#.


PR: LE require that an equerry, accuſtomed to point his toes to his
horſes ears, ſhould have chem as well turned as a dancer at the opera-
houſe ; they would have a philoſopher, ſolely employed in ſtrong and general


ideas, write like a woman of diſtinction, or even be ſuperior, for inſtance,


in the epiſtolary ſtyle, where, in order to write well, it is neceſſary to write
agreeably without a ſubject. They do not perceive that this is demanding the
union of talents that are almoſt incompatible ; and, that there is no woman of
wit who is not, in this reſpe&, ſuperior to the moſt celebrated philofopher.

It is, with the ſame injuſtice that people expect the man who has never read
or ſtudied, and has ſpent thirty years of his life in diffipation of thought,
ſhould ſuddenly become capable of ſtudy and meditation: they ought, how-
ever, to know, that it is the habit of meditation to which we owe the capacity
for meditating, and that this capacity is loſt when we ceaſe to make uſe of it.
In fact, when a man, though habituated to labour and application, finds him-
ſelf ſuddenly truſted with too great a part of the adminiſtration, a thouſand
different objects will paſs rapidly before him: he can only caſt a OI

| glance


ESSAYS on rar MEND: 3r3


glance on each affair, and for this very reaſon, after a certain time, he will become
incapable of a long and clole attention, We have not, therefore, a right to re-


quire an equal attention from a miniſter. It is not for him to pierce to the -


firſt principles of morality and politics; to diſcover, for inſtance, how far luxury
is uſctul in a ſtate, what changes it may introduce 'in the manners of a people,
and in the conſtitution ; what kind of commerce ought to be encouraged ; by
what laws we may 1n the ſame nation reconcile the ſpirit of commerce with that
of war, and render it at the fame time rich at home, and formidable abroad.
The ſolution of ſuch problems requires leiſure, and a habit of reflection: now,
how can a perſon think much when he has much to execute ? We ought not
then to require from a man in an high poſt, that jnvention that ſuppoſes cloſe
application, What we have a right to demand from him, is a juſt, lively, and
penetrating wit, and which, in matters of debate in relation to politics and phi-
loſophy, is capable of ſtriking out the truth, and ſeizing it with ſtrength ; and
of being lo fertile in expedients as to carry into execution the projects he adopts :
for this laſt reaſon he ought to add to this wit a firmneſs and conſtancy not to be
ſhaken. |

The people are not always ſufficiently grateful for the advantages they receive
from miniſters : being ungrateful through ignorance, they do not know what
courage is neceſſary to do good, and to triumph over the obſtacles which per-


ſonal intereſt places againſt the general happineſs (a). Thus, courage enlightened


by probity, is the principal merit of men in high poſts. In vain do the people
flatter themſelves with the hopes of finding in them a fund of knowlege ; they


cannot be deeply verſed in any affairs that have not been the ſubject of their


contemplations, before they obtained great employments : now theſe affairs are


neceſſarily but few in number. To be convinced of this, let us follow the life


of thoſe who are deſigned for high poſts. At ſixteen or ſeventeen years of
of age they leave the college, learn to ride the great horſe, and to perform
their exerciſes; then ſpend two or three years in the academies, and the ſchools
of law ; the ſtudy of the law being ended, they purchaſe a place. In order to


——


(a) At the moment when a perſon is no- © derable, the affairs under your manage-
minated to be a miniſter, one of the firſt “ ment will not permit you to apply to it
commiſſioners of Verſailles, who is com- „ the neceſſary funds, and to loſe your
monly a man of much wit, addreſſes him *< diſburſements. If the ſucceſs depends
to this purpoſe : * You love what is good, * on the vigilance and probity of thoſe you
& and you are now enabled to do it. A *© employ, fear leſt they force you to be un-
c thouſand projects, of uſe to the public, * der a difficulty in the choice of proper
will be preſented to you, and you will © perſons: fear alſo that you are going to
« defire that they may ſucceed : take care * be ſurrounded by knaves; it requires a
© however of undertaking any thing before * very penetrating eye, to diſcover them;
<« you have examined it, whether the exe- © and the firſt, but at the ſame time the
& cution of theſe projects will require only * moſt difficult knowlege of a miniſter,
4 ſmall ſums, little care, and but little * is that of knowing how to make a proper
5 probity. If the money required for the “ choice,” |
4 ſucceſs of one of theſe projects be conſi-


8 s diſcharge


|
|
|


— —
— — rr en EOOTN_—A — — — —


n


314 | se T; on,
ditcharge the duty of it, it is not neceſſary to inſtruct themſelves in the law of
nature and nations, and the public law, but to conſecrate all their time to the
examination of ſome particular cauſes. They paſs from thence to the govern-
ment of a province, where, over-burthened by daily details, and fatigued by
giving audiences, they have no time for reflection, They at length rife to ſu-
perior places, and find, that after thirty years exerciſe, they have only the ſame
kind of ideas as they had at twenty, or twenty-two years of age. Upon
which I ſhall obſerve, that voyages made to the neighbouring nations, in which
they might compare the -differences to be found in the form of government,
and in the legiſlation, genius, commerce, and manners of the people, would
be, perhaps, more proper to form ſtateſmen than the education actually given
them. I ſhall expatiate no farther on this ſubject ; but ſhall conclude this
chapter with conſidering the men of genius; becauſe it is chiefly in them that
people deſire excluſive qualities and abilities. |
To cauſes, equally powerful, lead to this injuſtice ; the one, as I have ſaid
above, is the blind love of our own happineſs, and the other is envy.

Who has not condemned cardinal de Richlieu for that exceſſive love of glory
that rendered him greedy of every ſpecies of ſucceſs? Who has not ridiculed
the ardour with which, it we may believe Dumaurier (b), he deſired canoniza-
tion; and the order given in conſequence of it to his confeſſors, to publiſh every
where, that he had never committed a mortal ſin? In ſhort, who has not
laughed at being informed, that at the ſame inſtant inflamed with a deſire of
being thought to excel in poetry, as well as in politics, that cardinal cauſed
Corneille to be asked to give up to him the honour of writing the CIp? It
was however to this love of glory, fo often condemned, that he owed his great
abilities for the adminiſtration. If we have not ſince ſeen a miniſter make pre-
tenſions to fo many kinds of glory, it is becauſe we have yet had only one car-
dinal de Richlieu.

The reſolution to centre in one ſingle deſire the action of the ſtrong paſſions,
and to imagine, that a man enflamed with a love of glory, ſhould be contented
with one ſingle ſpecies of ſucceſs, when he believed he has it in his power to
obtain it in ſeveral, is to deſire that a piece of excellent land ſhould produce only
one kind of fruit. Whoever has a ſtrong love of glory, is ſecretly conſcious
that the ſucceſs of political projects ſometimes depend on chance, and often on
the folly of thoſe with whom he treats : he would have it more perſonal. Now,
without a ridiculous and ſtupid pride, he cannot diſdain the glory acquired by
learning, to which ſo many great princes and heroes have aſpired. Moſt of
them, not ſatisfied with immortalizing themſelves by their actions, have reſolved
to do it by their writings, and at leaſt to leave to poſterity precepts on the art
of war and in politics, in which they have excelled. How ſhould they avoid
being ambitious of this honour ? Theſe great men loved glory, and no one is
ambitious of obtaining it without deſiring to communicate to mankind the
ideas that ought to render us in their eyes ſtill more worthy of eſteem. How


(b) See Memoires pour ſervir à Phiſtoire de la Hollande, article Grotius.


many


ESSAYS on Tus MIN D. | 313


many proofs of this truth are to be found in hiſtory? Xenophon, Alexander,
Hannibal, Hanno, the Scipios, Cæſar, Cicero, Auguſtus, Trajan, the Antoni-
nuſſes, Comnenes, Elizabeth, Charles V. Richlieu, Montecuculi, du Guay-
Trouin, and the count de Saxe, by their writings reſolved to enlighten the world


and ſhade their heads with different kinds. of laurels, | |
If now it cannot be conceived, how men intruſted with the adminiſtration of


the world, found time to think and write; it is, I reply becauſe buſineſs is ſoon con-


_ cluded, when they do not deviate into particulars, and affairs are taken by their

true principles. If all great men have not compoſed, all have at leaſt protected
men of learning, and were under a neceſſity of doing it, becauſe, being in love
with glory, they knew that the great authors beſtowed it. Thus, Charles V.
founded an academy before Richlieu : thus, the fierce Attila himſelf aſſembled
about him the learned of all kinds; the caliph Aaron Al-Raſchid had them at his
court; and Tamerlane eſtabliſhed the academy of Samarcand. What a recep-
tion did Trajan give to merit ? Under his reign people were allowed to think,
to ſpeak, and to write every thing; becauſe the writers, ſtruck with the luſtre
of his virtues and abilities, could not avoid being his panegyriſts : very different
in this reſpect were Nero, Caligula, and Domitian, who, from a contrary reaſon,
impoſed ſilence on the men of learning, leſt in their writings they ſhould tranſ-
mit to poſterity the vices and diſgrace of thoſe tyrants.

I have ſhewn in the examples above-mentioned, that the ſame deſire of glory
to which great men owe their ſuperiority, may, with reſpe& to genius, make
them aſpire to univerſal monarchy. It is doubtleſs poſſible to unite greater mo-
deſty to abilities: for theſe qualities are not in their own nature excluſive, though

they are ſo in ſome men. There are thoſe who cannot be deprived of this vain
opinion of themſelves, without having the ſeeds of their genius loſt. This is
a defect, and envy takes the advantage of it, in order to diſcredit merit; ſhe
is pleaſed with pulling men in pieces, ſure of always finding, by this means,
ſome disfavourable fide, under which ſhe may preſent them to the public. We
cannot too often recolle&, that it is with men as with works; that we ought to
Judge of them together; that there is nothing perfect on earth; and that if
we were to deſcribe the virtues and defects of each man's mind and cha-
rater, by ribbons of two oppoſite colours, there is not a man who would
not be ſpeckled with thoſe two colours. Great men are like thoſe rich
mines, where gold is always found more or leſs mixed with lead. It is neceſſary
then, that the envious ſhould fometimes ſay to himſelf : if it be poſſible to
degrade this gold in the opinion of the public, what value ought they to ſet on
me, who am a mine of mere lead ? But the envious will be always deaf to ſuch
advice. Dexterous at ſeizing the leaſt faults committed by the men of genius,
how often have they accuſed them with not being ſo agreeable in their manners
as the reſt of the world? They will not recollect, as I have ſaid above, that
like thoſe animals that remain in the deſarts, moſt of the men of genius live in
retirement, and that it is in the ſilence of ſolitude that truth unveils herſelf to

their ſight. | :
| Now all men who by their kind of life are thrown into a particular chain of


circumſtances, and who contemplate objects under a new face, cannot have in
1 S's 2 their


— —
— — — —L— *
Py —


. 2


322ͤ —˙ · Ä 4 2
4


316 GPEALESPRIT; on,

their minds either the good qualities, or defects, common to ordinary men.
Why does a Frenchman reſemble another Frenchman, more than a German, and
a German much more than a Chineſe ? Becauſe theſe two nations by their educa-
tion, and the reſemblance of the objects preſented to them, have an infinitely
greater connection with each other, than with the Chineſe. We are what we are
made by the objects with which we are ſurrounded. To expect that a man who


- ſees other objects, and leads a life different from mine, ſhould have the ſame


ideas as I have, would be to require contradictions, and to deſire that a ſtaff
ſhould not have two ends. |

What injuſtice of this kind is done to men of genius! How often are
they accuſed of folly, at a time when they give a proof of the higheſt wiſdom?
Not but men of genius have often, as Ariſtotle ſays, a corner of folly, They.
are, for inſtance, ſubject to repreſent the art they cultivate, as of greater impor-
tance than it really deſerves (c). Beſides, the ſtrong paſſions which genius ſup-
poſes, may ſometimes render their conduct irregular: but though this is the ſeed
of their errors, it is alſo the ſeed of their knowlege. Men of a cold diſpoſition,
void of paſſions and abilities, do not fall into the irregularities of the man of
ſtrong paſſions. But it ought not to be imagined, as their vanity would per-
ſuade them to believe, that before they take a reſolution, they calculate the ad-
vantages and inconveniences of it: was this the caſe, theſe men would only be
determined in their conduct by reflection; but experience informs us, that they
are always moved by ſenſations, and that in this reſpect, the men of cold diſpo:
ſitions are the ſame as the reſt. To be convinced of this, let us ſuppoſe that
one of them is bit by a mad dog: they fend him tothe ſea: he is put into a
bark ; they are going to plunge him. He runs no risk : he is ſure of it, and
knows that in this caſe, his fear is altogether unreaſonable ; he ſays ſo himſelf.
They dip him in the water. Reflection no longer acts upon him; the ſenſa-
tion of fear takes poſſeſſion of his mind; and to this ridiculous fear he owes
his cure. Reflection is then in men of a cold diſpoſition, as well as in other
men, ſubject to ſenſation. If men of a cold conſtitution are not liable to ſuch
frequent deviations, as the men of ſtrong paſſions, it is becauſe they have fewer
principles of motion; and, in this reſpect, it is only to the weakneſs of their
paſſions that they owe their wiſdom. However, what an high eſteem do they
conceive of themſelves ! With what reſpect do they think they inſpire the pub-


(c) They have frequently an excluſive „ the men of our art owe to you: allow
eſteem for them, Among cven thoſe, who * me to dance before you, and to improve
diſtinguiſh themſelves only in the moſt tri- „ by your advice,” —*< Freely, ſaid Mai-
fling arts, there are ſome who think, that “ cel.” Immediately the Engliſhman per-
there is nothing done well in their own formed a thouſand difficult ſteps, and crofs
country, but what is done by them. I capers. Marcel looked at him, and ſud-
cannot help mentioning on this ſubject, a denly cried. out, * Sir, people jump in
ſaying attributed to Marcel. A very cele- © other countries; they only dance at Pa-


brated Engliſh dancer, arrived at Paris, and © ris ; but, alas! poor kingdom! we can
went to pay a vilit to Marcel; © I came, do nothing well but that!“ |
<& {aid he, to pay you the reſpect which all |


lic,


ESSAYS os Tus MIN D. | 317


lie, who ſuffers them to enjoy the title of men of ſenſe, and never call them
fools, becauſe they are never mentioned. How can they, without ſhame, thus
ſpend their lives in watching for what is ridiculous ? If they diſcover any thing
in a man of genius, and he commits the ſlighteſt fault, though it ſhould be,
for inſtance, paying too high a price for the favours of a woman, what a triumph
is it for them! They aſſume a right from thence to deſpiſe him. Yet, if in
the woods, if in ſolitude and danger, fear has often in their eyes exaggerated the
greatneſs of danger; why may not love exaggerate pleaſure, as fear exaggerates
perils? Are they ignorant, that there is properly none but himſelf that can
be the juſt appraiſer of his own pleaſure : that men being animated by different
paſſions, the ſame objects cannot appear of the ſame value to different eyes;
that ſentiment alone can judge of ſentiment ; and that the deſire of always citing
to the tribunal of cold reaſon, is aſſembling the diet of the empire, in order to
determine upon Caſes. of conſcience ? They ought to be ſenſible, that before.
they paſs ſentence on the actions of a man of genius, they ſhould at leaſt know
what are the motives that determine him; that is, the force by which he is
drawn : but, for this purpoſe they ſhould know both the power of paſſing,
and the degree of courage neceſſary to reſiſt them. Now, every man that ſtops
to make this examination, may ſoon perceive, that the paſſions alone may fight
againſt the paſſions; and that theſe. rational people that pretend to. conquer
them, give to very weak . inclinations the name of paſſions,” in order to obtain
the honours of a triumph. In fact, they do not reſiſt the paſſions, but eſcape
from them. Wiſdom is not in them the effect of knowlege, but of an indiffe-
rence equally barren of pleaſure and of pain. The abſcnce of unhappineſs is
the only felicity they enjoy, and a kind of reaſon which ſerves them for a
guide on the ſea of human life, makes them avoid the rocks only by
ſteering at a diſtance from the fortunate iſle of pleaſure. Heaven arms men
of a cold diſpoſition with only a buckler for defence, and not with a ſword
to conquer. | | 288

Let reaſon direct us in the important affairs of life: but let us abandon
the little affairs of it to our taſtes and our paſſions. He Who would ever
conſult reaſon, will be inceſſantly employed in conſulting what he ought to
do, and never do any thing; he will always have before his eyes the poſſibi-
lity of all the misfortunes with which he is ſurrounded. - The pain and
daily irkſomeneſs of ſuch a conſultation would, perhaps, be more to be feared

than the evils from which it might deliver him. | |
Whatever reproaches are made to men of wit, however attentive: envy
is.to depreſs them, and to diſcover their perſonal and trifling faults, in order
to ſhade the luſtre of their glory, the men of genius ought to be inſenſible
to ſuch attacks, and to perceive that they are often ſnares which envy lays
to divert them from their ſtudies. Of what importance is its inceſſantly re-
preſenting: their inattention as a crime? People ought to know, that moſt of
thoſe little attentions, ſo much recommended, have been invented by the in-
dolent, to ſerve as the employment of their idle hours; that there is no man
endued with a ſufficient attention to become illuſtrious in the arts and ſciences,
if that attention is to be employed about an infinite number of trifles ; be-
| ſidles,


—— — — — —— — — —


318 BSP RI TT; os,

lides, as what is called attention procures no advantage to a nation, ſo it is
for the public intereſt that a learned man ſhould make a diſcovery at no more
than fifty attempts at leaſt,

I cannot help mentioning on this ſubject a fact ſaid to have happened at
Paris. A man of learning had for his neighbour one of thoſe indolent
people ſo troubleſome to ſociety; this laſt, tired of himſelf, went one day
to pay a viſit to the man of letters, who received him in a very agreeable
manner, and with great politeneſs continued tired of him, till being weary
of ſtaying any longer in the ſame place, the idler took his leave, in order
to plague ſomebody elſe. He was no ſooner gone than the man of learning
returned to his ſtudies, and forgot his vexation. Some days after he was
accuſed of not having returned the viſit he had received, and taxed with
the want of politeneſs; upon which he, in his turn, went to ſee the idler:
Sir, ſaid he, I am informed that you complain of me: however, you
„ know that it was being weary of yourſelf that brought you to me. I,
<< who tire nobody, received you as well as I could; it is then you who are
„ obliged, and I who am taxed with unpoliteneſs. Be yourſelf the judge of
e my proceedings, and ſee whether you ought not to put an end to com-
ce plaints that prove nothing, but that I have not, like you, occaſion for
5 viſits, and have neither the inhumanity to plague my neighbour, nor the
< injuſtice to defame him after I have tired out his patience.” How many
are there to whom we might apply the ſame anſwer ? How many idlers re-
quire from men of merit that reſpect, and thoſe abilities, that are incom-
patible with their employments, and take upon them to demand contra-
dictions ? | | 5.

A man has ſpent his life in negotiations, and the affairs, in which he has
been employed, have rendered him circumſpect: let this man go into the
world, they would have him wear that air of freedom which the conſtraint
of his ſituation has made him loſe. Another man is of an open diſpoſition,
and has pleaſed us by his frankneſs : he is required ſuddenly to change his
character, and to become circumſpect, at the preciſe moment when it is de-
fired. People are always for having impoſſibilities performed. There is,
doubtleſs, a neutral ſtate in which a man is found to have all the qualities
that are not abſolutely contradictory; and I am ſenſible that a ſingular con-
courſe of circumſtances may bend us to oppoſite habits ; but this is a mi-
racle, and we ought not to reckon upon miracles. In general, we may af-
ſure ourſelves, that every thing depends-on the diſpoſitions of men ; that
their good qualities are blended with their faults, and that there are certain
vices of the mind annexed to certain ſtations. |

Let a man poſſeſs an important poſt; let him every day have a hundred
affairs to decide, if no appeal is made againſt his judgment, and his deci-
ſions are never diſputed, it is certain that in time pride will take poſſeſſion of
his ſoul, and he will have the greateſt confidence in his own underſtanding.
This will not be the caſe where a man has his opinions frequently debated
and contradicted in council by his equals; or with a learned man, who
being ſometimes miſtaken in relation to ſubjects which he has thoroughly

| examined,


ee. DN CRC CE ea


ESS AT S on Tas MIND. | 319


examined, will neceſſarily contract the habit of ſuſpending his judgment (d);
this ſuppoſition, which being founded on a ſalutary diſtruſt of our own un-
derftandings, makes us penetrate to thoſe hidden truths that are ſeldom per-
ceived by a proud and ſuperficial glance, It ſeems as if the knowlege of
truth was only to be purchaſed by this wiſe diſtruſt of ourſelves. The man,
who refuſes to doubt, is ſubje& to a thouſand errors: he has himſelf ſer
bounds to his mind. One of the moſt learned men in Perſia being aſked,
how he had acquired ſo much knowlege, replied, By freely aſking what I
did not know. Examining one day a philoſopher, ſays the poet Saadi, I
<« preſſed him to tell me from whom he had acquired his knowlege. From
ce the blind, he replied, who do not lift up their feet without having firſt
felt with their ſtaff the earth that was to ſupport them.”

What I have ſaid on excluſive qualities, both with reſpect to nature and
contrary habits, is ſufficient for the object I had in view. I am now to ſhew-
the uſe that may be made of this knowlege. The * is, to learn to
make the beſt advantage of the mind, and of this I am going to treat in
the following chapter.


3 * * ol o » 1 v Ul + o 88888 9 * * „ 7 p4 v 7
282 Joo! 8 8


C HAP. XVI.
The Method of diſcovering that kind of ftudy for which we are beſt


qualified.


TN order to know our abilities, we muſt examine with what kind of ob-

jects chance and education have principally charged the memory, and
what degree of love we have for glory. Upon this combination we may de-
termine the kind of ſtudy to which we ought to apply ourſelves.

There is no man intirely deſtitute of knowlege. According as we have
in the memory more phyſical or hiſtorical facts, more images or ſentiments,
we ſhall have a greater or leſs aptitude to natural philoſophy, politics, or
poetry. Is it to this laſt art that a man would apply himſelf? He may be-
come ſo much the greater painter in this kind of writing, in proportion as
the magazine of his memory is better furniſhed with the objects that enter
into the compoſition of a certain ſpecies of pictures. A poet, born in thoſe


(d) It might, perhaps, be wiſhed, that, underſtandings; for by applying this diſtruſt
before men were raiſed to high poſts, they to buſineſs, they would manage it with
would better-perceive the difficulty of doing more attention,
well; they would learn to diſtruſt their own

| rugged


320 DE L'ESPRIT; on,


rugged climates of the north, with a rapid wing inceſſantly traverſes the
black ſtorms : his eye never wanders through ſmiling valleys; he only knows
eternal winter, who, with his hair whitened by the hoar froſt, reigns over
barren deſarts: the echoes only repeat to him the howling of bears: he ſees
nothing but the ſnow and the ice thrown up in heaps; fir-trees as old as
the earth, cover with their dead branches the lakes which waſh their roots.
Another poet, born, on the contrary, in the fortunate climate of Italy, where
the earth is ſtrewed with flowers, the Zephyrs with their breath gentle move the
fragrant groves; he fees the rivulets winding their ſilver ſtreams through
the verdant meadows ; art and nature unite to adorn the cities and fields, and
every thing ſeems formed to pleaſe the eye and raviſh the ſenſes, Can we
doubt, that the laſt of theſe two poets would draw more agreeable pictures;
and the firſt, pictures more bold and terrible? However, neither of theſe
poets would compoſe theſe pictures, were they not animated by an ardent
love of glory. |
The objects which chance and education place in our memory, are indeed
the primary matter of the mind ; but it remains there dead and inactive, till
it is put into a ferment by the paſſions. It then produces a new aſſemblage
of ideas, images, or ſentiments, to which we give the name of genius, wit,
or talents. | | 8 91 - MA
After having diſcovered what is the number, and what the ſpecies of ob-
jets depoſited in the magazine of the memory, before we can determine on
any kind of ſtudy, we muſt calculate to what a degree we are ſenſible of glory.
We are liable to miſtake in this particular, and to give the name of paſſion
to mere inclination ; nothing, however, as I have already ſaid, is more eaſily,
diſtinguiſhed. We have a ſtrong paſſion when we are animated with a ſingle
deſire, and all our thoughts and actions are ſubordinate to it. We have
only inclinations, when the mind is divided by an infinite number of nearly
equal deſires. The more numerous theſe deſires are, the more moderate
are our inclinations ; on the contrary, the leſs our deſires are multiplied, the
more nearly do they approach to unity, and the more do theſe inclinations
become lively, and the readier to be changed into paſſions. It is then the
unity, or at leaſt the pre-eminence of one deſire over all the others, that
conſtitutes paſſion. | | | |
The paſiions being once determined, we muſt know their ſtrength, and,
for this purpoſe, examine the degree of enthuſiafm we feel for great men,
This is in early youth a pretty exact ſtandard of our love of glory. I fay,
in early youth ; becauſe, being then more ſuſceptible of the paſſions, we
deliver ourſelves the more freely up to our enthuſiaſm. Beſides, we have
then no motives to degrade merit and abilities, and we may ſtill hope to ſee
eſteemed in ourſelves what we eſteem in others : this 1s not the caſe with thoſe
who are grown up to manhood. Whoever has attained to a certain age
without having any.merit, always indulges the contempt of. abilities, to com-
fort himſelf for the want of them. In order to be a judge of merit, we
ſhould be intirely diſintereſted, and, conſequently, not have yet experienced
the ſenſation of envy, We are but little ſuſceptible of it in early youth:
therefore,


*


ESSAYS o Tux MIN D. . ne”


therefore, young people commonly look upon great men with the ſame im-


partial eye as: poſterity, It is generally neceſſary for us to renounce the
eſteem of the men of our own age, and expect it only from thoſe who are
young. It is from their praiſes that we muſt ſtate the value of our merit,
and by the praiſes they give great men, we may form a judgment of the
value of theirs. As we eſteem in others only ſuch ideas as are analogous to
our own, our reſpect for wit is always proportioned to the wit we have our-
ſelves; we celebrate great men only when we are made to be great. Why
did Cæſar weep on his ſtopping before the buſt of Alexander? It was becauſe
he was Cæſar. Why do not we weep at the ſight of the ſame buſt? It is
becauſe we are not Czar. |


We may then from the degree of eſteem conceived for great men, meaſure
the degree of our love of glory, and, conſequently, come to a reſolution in


the choice of our ſtudies. The choice is always good, wherever the ſtrength
of the paſſions is proportioned to the difficulty of the ſucceſs. Now it is
more difficult to ſucceed in any one art or ſcience in proportion to the num-
ber of men employed in it, and to their having carried it nearer to perfec-
tion. Nothing can be more bold than to enter into the ſame courſe in which
Corneille, Racine, Voltaire, and Crebillon, have rendered themſelves illu-
ſtrious. To be diſtinguiſhed in it, a perſon muſt be capable of the greateſt
efforts of mind, and, conſequently, be animated by the ſtrongeſt love of
glory. He who is not ſuſceptible of this extraordinary degree of paſſion,
ought not to enter the liſts with ſuch rivals, but to apply himſelf to a kind
of ſtudy in which it is more eaſy to ſucceed. There are in natural philoſo-
phy, for inſtance, uncultivated lands, and ſubjects on which the men of great
genius, at firſt employed about more intereſting objects, have only in a
manner caſt a ſuperficial glance. In this, and all other of the like kinds of
ſtudy, the diſcoveries and the ſucceſs are within the reach of almoſt all minds
and theſe are the only ones in which the weak paſſions are capable of ob-
taining ſucceſs. He who is not intoxicated with the love of glory, ought to
ſeek for it in winding paths, and particularly to avoid the roads beaten by
the men of the greateſt underſtandings, His merit, if compared with that


of theſe great men, will be eclipſed by their luſtre, and the public, prejudiced


againſt him, will refuſe him even the eſteem he deſerves.

The reputation of the man of weak paſſions depends, therefore, on the
addreſs with which he avoids being compared with thoſe who, burning with
a ſtronger paſſion for glory, have made greater efforts of genius. By this
addreſs, the man of weak paſſions, who has, however, in his youth con-
tracted an habit of labour and reflection, may ſometimes, with a very ſmall
degree of genius, obtain a very great reputation. It appears then that, to
reap the greateſt advantage poſſible from his genius, the principal attention
ought to be comparing the degree of the paſſion with which a man is ani-
mated, with the degree of the paſſion ſuppoſed by the kind of ſtudy to which
he applies himſelf, Whoever is, in this reſpect, an exact obſerver of his


own mind, mult eſcape from the numerous errors into which men of merit
i a ſometimes


oy
7 $65 rr —


——
—


2


— —
———— — —— — —— . —UUœ—


—
4 * —
—


x r


- 1 1 FN


FEE
8 I *


WEE I Iron cron ————e———_—


AUF - DE L*ESPRIT; on,

ſometimes fall. We ſhall not, for inſtance, ſee him engage in a new kind
ef ſtudy at a time when age has abated the ardour of the paſſions. He will
perceive that, by paſling ſucceſſively through different arts and ſciences, he
can never become any thing more than univerſally ſuperficial ; that this uni-
verſality is a rock to which vanity leads, and upon which men of genius
are often wrecked; and that, in ſhort, it is only in youth that we are en-
dowed with that indefatigable attention which dives even to the firſt prin-
ciples of an art or ſcience : an important truth, the ignorance of which often
ſtops genius in its courſe, and oppoſes the progreſs of the ſciences.

In order to reap advantage from this idea, we ought to recollect, that the
love of glory, as I have proved in my third diſcourſe, is kindled in our
breaſts by the love of natural pleaſures ; that this love is never more warmly
felt than in early youth; and that it is, conſequently, in the ſpring of life, that
we are ſuſceptible of a more violent love of glory. We then feel in ourſelves
the glowing ſparks of virtues and abilities: health and ſtrength, which cir-
culate in our veins, bring with them the ſentiment of immortality; the years
appear then to paſs with the ſlowneſs of ages; we know, but we do not feel,
that we muſt die, and thence we are more ardent to procure the eſteem of
poſterity. It is not ſo when age cools our paſſions: we then have a perſpec-
tive view of the gulph of the grave, and the ſhades of death, mingling with
the rays of glory, tarniſh their luſtre. The univerſe then in our eye changes
its form : we ceaſe to have an intereſt in it, and do nothing of importance.
If we ſtill follow the courle in which the love of glory made us firſt enter,
it is from our giving way to habit; for habit has become ſtronger while the
paſſions were growing weaker. Beſides, we are afraid of the laſſitude of in-
dolence; and, to preſerve ourſelves from it, continue to cultivate the ſcience,
the ideas of which, being familiar, are combined in our minds without dif-
ficulty. But we are incapable of the ſtrong attention required in a new kind
of ſtudy. Are we arrived to thirty-five years of age, we cannot, from
being a great geometrician, become a great poet; from a great poet, a great
chemiſt z; from a great chemiſt, a great politician. Yet, at that age a man
is raiſed to an high poſt ; but if the ideas, with which he has already charged
his memory, have no relation to the ideas required in the place he poſſeſſes,
either the place does not require much wit or abilities, or that man will not
fill it worthily. |

Among the magiſtrates, who are ſometimes too much involved in the diſ-
cuſſion of private diſputes, is there one who-can with ſuperiority fill the firſt
places, if he does not in his retired hours profoundly: ſtudy the ſubjects re-
lative to his employment? The man, who neglects to paſs through theſe
ſtudies, mounts: to high. places only to diſhonour them. Is this man of an
arbitrary and deſpotic temper ? the enterprizes he will form will be ſevere,
fooliſh, and always prejudicial to the public. Is he of a mild character, and
the friend of mankind ? he will not dare to undertake any thing. How can
he run the hazard of making any changes in the adminiſtration ? We do not
walk with a firm ſtep: in ways unknown, and interrupted by a thouſand pre-
cipices. The firmneſs and courage of the mind depends always on its extent.


The


| ESSAYS on Tur MIND. 323
The man fruitful in the mears of executing his projects, is bold in his con-
ceptions: on the contrary, the man barren of refources, neceſſarily contracts
an habit of timidity, which folly takes for wiſdom. It is very dangerous
to touch too often the machine of government, and there are alſo times in
which the machine, if it is not furniſhed with new ſprings, will ſtop of
itſelf : the ignorant workman dares to undertake nothing, and, therefore,
the machine deftroys itſelf. This is not the caſe with the able artiſt; he
knows how to preſerve it by repairing it with a bold hand. But a wiſe
boldneſs ſuppoſes a profound ſtudy in the ſcience of government; a ſtudy
that is fatiguing, and of which we are only capable in early youth, and, per-
haps, in countries where the public eſteem promiſes many advantages.
Wherever this eſteem is barren of pleaſures, it produces no great talents.
The ſmall number of illuſtrious men, who, from the chance of an excellent
education, or a remarkable chain of circumſtances, are rendered in love with
this eſteem, then deſert their country, and this voluntary exile” preſages its
ruin: they are like thoſe eagles whoſe flight proclaims the approaching fall
of the antique oak from which they retire. | |

I have ſaid enough on this ſubject ; and ſhall conclude, from the principles
eſtabliſhed in this chapter, that all the mental abilities are produced by the
objects placed in our memory, and by thoſe objects being put into a fermen-
tation by the love of glory. It is then, as I have already ſaid, only by

combining the ſpecies of objects with which chance and education have
charged our memories, with our love of glory, that we can really know the
ſtrength and kind of our genius. Whoever ſcrupulouſly obſerves himſelf in
this reſpect, finds that he is nearly in the ſame fituation with thoſe able che-
miſts, who, on being ſhewn the ſabſtances with which the retorts are filled,
and the degree of heat that has been given them, can foretell the reſult of
the proceſs. Upon which I ſhall obſerve, that if there is an art of exciting
in us ſtrong paſſions, if there are eaſy means of filling the memory of a young
man with a certain ſpecies of ideas and objects, there are, conſequently,

certain methods of forming men of genius.

This knowlege of the nature of the mind may then be very uſeful to thoſe
who are animated with the deſire of becoming illuſtrious : it may furniſh
them with the means of doing it; teach them, for inſtance, not to diffuſe
their attention upon too great a variety of objects, but to fix it intirely on
the ideas and objects relative to the ſcience in which they would excel. Not
that they ought, in this reſpect, to carry their ſcruples too far: for men
are not profoundly ſkilled in any ſcience, if they have not made excurſions
into every thing analogous to that they cultivate, We ought even to fix
for ſome time our attention on the firſt principles of ſeveral ſciences. It is
of uſe to follow the uniform progreſs of the human mind in all the different
arts and ſciences, and allo to conſider the univerſal chain which binds to-
gether all the ideas of man. This ſtudy gives greater ſtrength and extent
to the mind; but we ought only to conſecrate a ſmall part of our time to it,
and to fix our principal attention on the particulars of the art or ſcience we

| 1 cultivate.


r a ̃ ˙ mA ]⅛ Äö̃ ²qG̃ ůẽùm“'P'


324 DIE E*ESPR1T ;. on,

cultivate, He who in his ſtudies liſtens to an indiſcrete curioſity, ſeldom ob-
tains a great reputation. Leta ſculptor, for inſtance, be from his taſte equally
drawn towards the ſtudy of ſculpture and politics, and, conſequently, charge
his memory with ideas that has no relation to each other, I maintain thar
the ſculptor will be certainly leſs ſkillful, and leſs celebrated, than he would
have been, had he always filled his memory with objects analogous to the
art he profeſſes, and had not united in himſelf, if I may venture thus to ex-
preſs myſelf, two men, who can neither communicate their ideas, nor con-


verſe together. 2]
Moreover, this knowlege of the mind may not only be of uſe to indivi-


duals, but alſo to the public: it may enlighten miniſters with reſpect to the.


knowlege of making a proper choice, and enable them to diſtinguiſh- men


of ſuperior abilities. They will know, in the firſt place, the ſpecies of ob-
jects about which a man is employed; and, in the ſecond, the paſſion he
has for glory, the ſtrength of which, as I have already ſaid, is always pro-
portioned to his abilities, and almoſt conſtantly to the merit of thoſe with
whom he converſes. | | gr. |

He who neither loves nor eſteems thoſe who, by their actions or works,
have obtained the general eſteem, is certainly a man without merit. The
little analogy between the ideas of a dunce and a man of genius prevents all
ſociety between them. In relation to merit it is a curſe to be too much
pleaſed with the converſation of men of mean abilities. e

After having conſidered the mind in ſo many various relations, I ought,
perhaps, to trace out the plan of a good education, and perhaps a complete
treatiſe on this ſubject ſhould have been placed at the concluſion of this
work. If I avoid this labour, it is becauſe, ſuppoſing that I could really
point out the means of rendering men better, it is evident, that, from the
actual manners of the people, it would be almoſt impoſſible to make uſe of
them. T ſhall therefore content myſelf with caſting a rapid glance over what
is called edycation. 85 553550 Ao


CHAP.


UU— —


ESSAYS on Tus MIND. 323


AARP NL kg gz: PPS ATCA PE AAP PL MEE
c H A P. XVII
Of Educati on.


HE art of forming men is in all countries ſo ſtrictly connected with
the form of the government, that, perhaps, it is impoſſible to make

any conſiderable change in public education, without making the ſame in the
conſtitution of ſtates. | | 5

The art of education is no other than the knowlege of the means proper
to form ſtrong and robuſt bodies, and wiſe and virtuous minds. As to
the firſt object of education, we ſhould take example from the Greeks, who
honoured bodily exerciſes, and with whom theſe where conſidered as medi-
cinal, As to the means of rendering the mind more enlightened, more
ſtrong and virtuous, I believe that having ſhewn the importance of making
a proper choice of the objects placed in the memory, and. the facility with
which we may kindle the ſtrong paſſions, and direct them to the general
welfare, I have ſufficiently pointed out to the intelligent reader the plan that
ſhould be followed to perfect the public education.

We are, in this reſpect, too far diſtant from any thoughts of a reforma-
tion, for me to enter into particulars, which are always tedious when they are
uſeleſs. I ſhall content myſelf with obſerving, that we do not, in this
reſpect, attend to the reformation of the moſt groſs abuſes, and thoſe that
are the moſt eaſily corrected. Who doubts, for inſtance, that, in order to
reap the greateſt advantage in our power, we ought to make the beſt diftri-
bution of our time poſſible ? Who doubts, that the ſucceſs depends, in part,
on the economy with which it is managed? And what man, convinced of
this truth, does not perceive, at the firſt glance, the reformation that might
be made in this reſpect in the public education ? |

We ought, for example, to conſecrate ſome part of our time to the rational
ſtudy of the national language, What can be more abſurd than to loſe eight or
ten years in the ſtudy of a dead language, which we immediately forget after
leaving the colleges z becauſe it is almoſt of no uſe in the courſe of life? In vain
is it ſaid, that if young men are kept ſo long in the colleges, it is not ſo much
to teach them Latin, as to make them contract the habit of labour and applica-
tion, But to bend them to this habit, might not there be propoſed a ſtudy
leſs irkſome and diſagreeable? Is there not reaſon to fear the extinguiſhing or


blunting that natural curioſity, which in early youth warms us with the defire
of


226 | DE ;L'ESPRIT;.on,
of learning ? How much would this deſire be ſtrengthened, if in the age when
. we are not yet diſtracted by ſtrong paſſions, they were to ſubſtitute in the room
of the inſipid ſtudy of words, that of natural philoſophy, hiſtory, mathematics,
morality, poetry, &c. 221 | |
The ſtudy of the dead per. it is replied, in part anſwers this purpoſe.
It ſubjects us to the neceſſity of tranſlating and explaining authors; it conſe-
quently furniſhes the heads of young men with all the ideas contained in the beſt
works of antiquity. But, I reply, is there any thing more ridiculous than to
conſecrate many years to placing in the memory ſome facts or ideas, that we, by
the aſſiſtance of tranſlations, might engrave upon it in two or three months?
The only advantage that can be derived from eight or ten years ſtudy, is then
the very uncertain knowlege of thoſe delicacies of expreſſion in the Latin
tongue, that are loſt in a tranſlation, I ſay very uncertain ; for, in ſhort, how |
long ſo ever we ſtudy the Latin tongue, we ſhall never know it ſo perfectly as
we know our own. Now if among pur learned men there are very tew ſenſible
of the beauty, ſtrength, and elegance of a French expreſſion, can we imagine
that they are more happy in relation to a Latin one? May we not ſuſpect that
their learning, in this reſpect, is only founded on our ignorance, our credulity,
- and their boldneſs ; and that were the manes of Horace, Virgil, and Cicero to


appear, the moſt elegant diſcourſes of our orators, would ſeem to them to be
written in an almoſt unintelligible jargon? | Rf

I ſhall not, however, lay any ſtreſs on this ſuſpicion, and will agree, if they
will have it ſo, that a young man, on his leaving the college, is well inſtructed
in the delicacies of the Latin tongue : but even upon this ſuppoſition I will ask,
whether they ought to pay for this knowlege the price of eight or ten years
labour; and if in early youth, in the age when curioſity is not obliged to ſtrug-
gle with any paſſion, when we are conſequently more capable of application,
theſe eight or ten years conſumed in the ſtudy of words, would not be better
employed in the ſtudy of things, and eſpecially in things that have a relation to
the ſituation in which a perſon will probably be placed ? Not that I adopt the
too auſtere maxims of thoſe, who believe that a young man ought to be ſolely
confined to the ſtudies ſuitable to his ſtation, The education of a young man
ought to have a reference to the different paths he may take, for the genius
ſhould be left free. There are even branches of knowlege of which every ci-
tizen ought to be poſſeſſed ; ſuch are the principles of morality, and the laws
of his country. All that I require is, that the memory of a young man be
principally charged with the ideas and objects relative to the employment he will
probably embrace. What can be more abſurd, than to give exactly the ſame edu-
cation to three different men, one of whom is to enjoy ſome little place in
the revenue, and the two others the firſt places in the army, the magiſtracy, or
the adminiſtration ? Can we, without aſtoniſhment, ſee them employed in the
ſame ſtudies till they are ſixteen or ſeventeen years of age, that 1s, till they


enter into the world, and till diverted by pleaſure they become incapable of ap-
plication ? | | | |


Whoever


ESSAYS on tur MIND. | 327
Whoever examines the ideas with which the memory of young men are loaded,
and compares their education with the ſtation in which they are to be placed,
will find it as fooliſh as it would have been in the Greeks, to have given only
a maſter of the flute to teach thoſe who were to be ſent-to the Olympic games,
to diſpute the prize of running or wreſtling. 1 >
But it may be asked, that if we might make a much better uſe of the time
ſpent in education, why do we not attempt it? To what cauſe can we attribute
our indifference in this reſpe&t ? Why do we put from infancy the pencil in the
hand of the deſigner? Why place at that age the fingers of the muſician on the
{trings of the violin? Why do both thele artiſts receive an education ſo ſuitable
to the arts they are to profeſs, while we neglect ſo much the education of
princes, of great men, and in general of all thoſe who by their birth are enti-
tled to important poſts? Are we ignorant that the virtues, and particularly the
learning of the great, has an influence on the happineſs or unhappineſs of na-
tions? Why then do we abandon to chance ſo effential a part of the admini-
{tration ? It is not, I reply, from there not being in the colleges a great number
of learned men, who are equally ſenſible of the faults in education, and the re-
medies that ſhould be applied to them: but what can they do without the aſ-
ſiſtance of the government? Now governments ought to trouble themſelves but
little about the cares of public education. We ought not in this reſpect to com-
pare great empires with little republics, Great empires ſeldom feel the preſſing
want of a diſtinguiſhed genius: great ſtates ſupport themſelves by their own
bulk. This is not the caſe with a republic, for inſtance, like that of Sparta,
which, with a handful of citizens, was obliged to ſupport the enormous weight
of the armies of Aſia, Sparta therefore owed her preſervation only.to the great
men who ſucceſſively aroſe in her defence; and being from thence conſtantly em-
ployed in forming new defenders, the principal attention of the government was
fixed on the public education. | | |
Great ſtates are ſeldom expoſed to ſuch dangers, and the ſame precautions are
not taken for their ſecurity. The greater or leſs want of any thing, is in every
Inſtance the exact ſtandard of the efforts of the mind made to procure it. But it may
be ſaid, that there is no ſtate, even among thoſe who are moſt powerful, where
a want of great men is not ſometimes felt. This is doubtleſs true; but this want
not being habitual, no care is taken to prevent it. Foreſight is not the virtue of
great ſtates: perſons in important poſts have too much buſineſs upon their hands.
to attend to the public education; whence it neceſſarily becomes neglected.
Beſides, how many obſtacles does perſonal intereſt, in great empires, raiſe up
againſt the production of men of genius? Yet men might even there become
well inſtructed ; for nothing prevents taking advantage of early. youth, in order
to plant in the memory of young men the ideas relative to the poſts they may
happen to poſſeſs : but never will they form men of genius; becauſe theſe ideas
are barren, if not fertilized by the love of glory. In order to kindle this love
in our minds, it is neceſſary that glory, like money, ſhould' procure an infinite
number of pleaſures, and that honours ſhould be the reward of merit. Now
the intereſt of the powerful does not permit them to make ſo juſt a unn :
| | | b | they


— _m—__r =. ——_—


o
— —_— 23 —
1 — 0


S a


228 HEL ES PR.IT; ons,
they would not accuſtom the citizens to conſider favours as a debt due to abi
Itirs, and conſequently they ſeldom grant them to merit: they perceive that they
jhall obtain ſo much the more gratitude from thoſe they oblige, as they are leſs
worthy of their favours. Injuſtice then muſt often preſide in the diſtribution of
tavours, and the love of glory become extinguiſhed in all hearts.

Such are in great empires the principal cauſes of the ſcarcity of great men ;
of the incifference wita which they are conſidered, and of the little care taken
of the public education. Great, however, as the obſtacles are, which, in theſe
countries, oppole the reformation of the public education; yet in monarchies,
tuch as moſt of thoſe in Europe, theſe obſtacles are not inſurmountable : but
they become ſo in governments abſolutely deſpotic, ſuch as thoſe of the eaſt.
What means are there in thoſe countries, of improving education? There can
be no education without having an object in view, and the only one that can be
propoſed is, as I have already ſaid, to render citizens ſtronger, more enlight-
ened, more virtuous, and, in ſhort, more proper to contribute to the happineſs
of the fociety in which they live. Now in arbitrary governments, the oppoſition
deſpotic princes think they perceive between their intereſt and the general inte-
reſt, does not permit them to adopt a ſyſtem ſo conformable to the public utility.
In theſe countries, there is then no object of education, and conſequently no
education. In vain would they reduce it to the ſole means of pleaſing the ſove-
reign ; for what an education muſt that be, where the plan is to be traced after
the ever imperfect knowlege of the manners of a prince, who may either die,
or change his diſpoſition, before the education is completed. In thoſe countries
it would be in vain to labour after the reformation of the public education, till
that of the ſovereign's was perfected, | Ts

But a treatiſe on this ſubje& ought doubtleſs to be preceded by a work, ſtill
more difficult to be wrote, in which it ſhould be examined, whether it be poſſible
to remove the powerful obſtacles which perſonal intereſt always raiſes up againſt
the good education of kings. This is a moral problem, which, in arbitrary
governments, ſuch as thoſe of the eaſt, is, I believe, not to be reſolved. The
viſiers, too jealous of reigning under the name of their maſters, always keep the
ſultans in a ſhameful and- almoſt invincible ignorance ; and they keep from them
every man capable of inſtructing them, Now where the education of princes is
thus abandoned to chance, what care can be raken of that of private perſons? A
father deſires to raiſe his ſons: he knows that neither knowlege, nor abilities,
nor virtues, will ever open them a way to fortune ; and that princes never be-
lieve they have occaſion for men of genius and learning: he will then deſire for
his ſons neither knowlege, nor abilities :' he will even have a confuſed idea, in
ſuch governments, that a perſon cannot be virtuous with impunity. All the pre-
cepts of his morality will then be reduced to ſome vague maxims, which having
bur little connexion with each other, cannot give his children clear ideas of virtue;
for he will be in this reſpe& afraid of giving them precepts too ſevere, and too
determinate. He will have a glimpſe that a rigid virtue would be injurious to
their fortunes; and that if two things, as Pythagoras ſays, render a man like
the gods, the one promoting the public welfare, and the other ſpeaking truth,
he who modelled himſelf by the gods, would certainly be ill treated by men,


This


ESSAYS on THB MIND. 329

This is the ſource of the contradiction to be found between the moral precepts,
which even in countries ſubject to deſpotic power, people are forced by cuſtom
to give to their children, and the conduct they preſcribe to them. A father ſays
in general, and as a maxim, ge virtuous :** but he ſays to them, without
knowing it, Do not mind this maxim, be a fearful and cautious villain ; and
« have no more honeſty, as Moliere ſays, than is juſt ſufficient to ſave you from
« being hanged.” Now in ſuch a government, how can they perfect even that
part of education, which conſiſts in rendering men more firmly virtuous ? There
is no father, who, without contradicting himſelf, can anſwer the preſſing argu-
ments that a virtuous ſon might offer on the ſubject.

To illuſtrate this truth by an example, ſuppoſe that under the title of baſhaw,
a father deſigns his ſon for the government of a province, and that, ready to
take poſſeſſion of that poſt, his ſon ſays to him, O my father, the principles of
virtue I have acquired in my infancy have budded in my foul. 1 depart to go-
vern men: it is their happineſs which I ſhall make my only aim. I ſhall not
lend a more favourable ear to the rich, than to the poor. Deaf to the menaces
of the powerful oppreſſor, I ſhall always hear the complaints of the weak under
oppreſſion, and juſtice ſhall preſide in all my judgments.

O my ſon, how amiable does the enthuſiaſm of virtue render youth] but age
and prudence will teach thee to moderate it. We ought, doubtleſs, to be juſt:
yet to what requeſts art thou going to be expoſed ! To how many little acts of
injuſtice muſt thou be blind ! If thou art forced to refuſe the great, what graces,
my fon, ought to accompany thy refuſal ! Elevated as thou art, a word from the
ſultan can reduce thee to nothing, and confound thee in the throng of the vileſt
ſlaves. The hatred of an eunuch, or an icoglan, may deſtroy thee; think,
therefore, of treating them with reſpect.

Shall I reſpect injuſtice! No, father. The ſublime porte frequently requires
a too burthenſome tribute from the people: I ſhall not liſten to its views. I
know that a man is under obligations to the ſtate only in proportion to the in-
tereſt it takes in his preſervation ; that the unfortunate owe nothing to it; and
that affluence itſelf, which ſupports the taxes, requires a wiſe ceconomy, and not
prodigality. Upon this point I ſhall enlighten the divan.—
| Abandon this project, my ſon ; thy repreſentations would be vain; it muſt
always be obeyed. - | |
| Obeyed! No, rather let me reſign to the ſultan the place with which he ho-
nours me. |

O my ſon! a fooliſh enthuſiaſm for virtue leads thee aſtray, Thou wilt ruin
thyſelf, and the miſeries of the people will not be removed: the divan will no-
minate in thy place a man of leſs humanity, who will diſcharge thine office in a
more ſevere manner, 5
* Yes, injuſtice will doubtleſs be committed; but I ſhall not be the inſtrument.
The virtuous man entruſted with the adminiſtration, either does well, or retires :
the man more virtuous ſtill, and more ſenſible of the miſeries of his fellow ci-
tizens, ſnatches. himſelf from the _— of cities, into deſarts, foreſts, and
LU, u even


220 : "DEE ESPRIF. on; |
even among the ſavages, he flies from the odious aſpe& of tyranny, and the
too afflicting ſight of the misfortunes of his equals. Such is the conduct of
virtue. I ſhould have, thou ſayeſt, no imitators : I am not ſure of that : thy
ſecret ambition makes thee think ſo, and my virtue makes me doubt it. But I
would not have my example followed: did the zealous Muſſulman, who firſt
proclaimed the law of the divine prophet, and braved the fury of tyrants, take
care, in marching to puniſhment, that he was followed by other martyrs ? Trutk
ipoke from his heart, he owed it an authentic teſtimony, and he paid it. Do
we owe lels to humanity than to religion? And are its doctrines more ſacred
than the virtues? But ſuffer me to examine thee in my turn: if I aſſociate my-
tclf with the Arabs, who plunder our caravans, may I not ſay to myſelf,
whether I live with theſe robbers, or feparate myſelf from them, the caravans
will be neverthelels attacked : yet living with the Arab, I ſhall ſoften his man-
ners: I ſhall oppoſe at leaſt, the uſeleſs cruelties he commits on the travellers :
1 ſhall do my duty without adding to the public miſery, This reaſoning is
thine : and if neither my nation, nor thyſelf can approve it, why then ſhouldſt
thou permit, under the name of Baſhaw, what thou forbideſt under that of Arabs ?
O my father! my eyes are at length opened, I ſee that virtue does not inhabit
deſpotic ſtates, and that in thy breaſt ambition ſtifles the cry of equity. I can-
not proceed to grandeur by trampling juſtice under my teet. My virtue defeats
thy hopes : my virtue becomes odious to thee, and thine hopes being deceived,
thou giveſt it the name of folly. It is ſtill to thee that I mult refer it; fathom
the abyſs of thy foul, and anſwer me. If I facrifice juſtice to pleaſure and wan-
don caprice, by what power wilt thou recall to my mind, thoſe auſtere maxims
of virtue I learned in my youth? Why is thine ardent zeal grown cool, when
I am required to facrifice this ſame virtue to the orders of a ſultan, or a
viſier? I dare to anſwer this queſtion : it is becauſe the luſtre of my grandeur,
the unworthy price of a baſe obedience, would be reflected on thyſelf : thou
wouldſt then overlook the crime; but if thou didſt diſcover it, thou wouldſt
think it only my duty. | |
It is evident, that preſſed by ſuch reaſonings, it would be very difficult for a
father not to perceive a manifeſt contradiction between the principles of ſound
mortality, and the conduct preſcribed to his ſon. He would be forced to con-
feſs, that by deſiring the grandeur of his fon, he has, in an implicit and
confuſed manner, exhorted him to devote himſelf intirely to his advancement,
and to facrifice to it even juſtice and humanity, Now in the Aſiatic govern-
ments, where, out of the mire of ſervitude they draw the ſlave who is to com-
mand the other ſlaves, this deſire muſt be common to all fathers, What man
would then endeavour, in thoſe empires, to mark out the plan of a virtuous
education, which no parent would give to his children? What madneſs but to
pretend to- form minds filled with magnanimity in countries, where men are
not vicious from a general propenſity to vice, but becauſe vice is rewarded,
and virtue puniſhed ? What can be hoped for, in this reſpect, from a people


among whom we can only cite as honeſt men, thoſe who are ready to — 5
0 |


ESSAYS on u MIND. 331


ſo as ſoon as ever the form of the government will admit of it? Where be-
ſides, no body being animated with a ſpirit of patriotiſm, there cannot be any
man truly virtuous? In deſpotic governments they ought then to renounce the
hope of forming men celebrated for their virtues or abilities. This is not the
caſe in monarchies, where, as I have already ſaid, this may be doubtleſs at-
tempted, with ſome hope of ſucceſs ; but it ought at the ſame time to be ac-
knowleged, that the execution would be the more difficult, in proportion as the
conſtitution of the monarchy approached nearer to the deſpotic form of go-
vernment, or the manners of the people were more corrupt.

I ſhall not expatiate any farther on this ſubject, but ſhall content myſelf with
recalling to the mind of the zealous citizen, who would form more virtuous and
more learned men, that the whole problem of an excellent education is reduced,
firſt, to the fixing in each of the different ſtates where fortune has placed us,
the kind of objects and ideas that ought to be placed in the memories of young
men; and, ſecondly, to the determining the moſt certain means of inflaming them
with a love of glory and the public eſteem. |

This problem being ſolved, it is certain that the great men that are now
produced by a fortuitous concourſe of circumſtances, will become the work of-
the legiſlature, and that by leaving it leſs in the power of chance, an excellent
education may infinitely multiply the abilities and virtues of the citizens in great


empires.
