The Torrents of Spring (Ernest Hemingway, 1926)
==========================================================
The Anderson parody that ended a mentorship — Hemingway's comic novella and publishing gambit. Public domain. Sourced from the Internet Archive scan 'bwb_Y0-AHF-303' (https://archive.org/details/bwb_Y0-AHF-303).

To m friend Ww. Z. Rodor 
who ~ [auqhs at things 
like +his 

WIA LUNA 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING ts 


~ 


r% 


The 
Torrents of Spring 


A Romantic Novel in Honor of the 
Passing of a Great Race 


BY 
ERNEST HEMINGWAY 


AUTHOR OF “IN OUR TIME” 


And perhaps there is one reason why a comic 
writer should of all others be the least excused 
for deviating from: nature, since it may not be 
always so easy for a serious poet to meet with 
the great and the admirable; but life every- 
where furnishes an accurate observer with the 


ridiculous. Henry Figvpine. 


NEW YORK 
CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS 
1928 


Copyricut, 1926, BY 
CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS 


Printed in the United States of America 


eae! 


3 
4 
OE 
A 


TENA 


CONTENTS 


PART ONE 

z PAGE 

Red and Black Laughter. s... l 
PART TWO 

The Struggle for Life . . + ++ +++ 39 


PART THREE 
Men in War and the Death of Society . 77 


PART FOUR 


The Passing of a Great Race and the 
Making and Marring of Americans . 111 


Author s Final Note to the Reader. . . 141 


Part One 
Red and Black Laughter 


The only source of the true Ridiculous (as it appears 


to me) is affectation. 
HENRY FIELDING. 


Chapter One 


Yoc1 JOHNSON stood looking out of the 
window of a big pump-factory in Michigan. 
Spring would soon be here. Could it be that 
what this writing fellow Hutchinson had 
said, “If winter comes can spring be far be- 
hind?” would be true again this year? Yogi 
Johnson wondered. Near Yogi at the next 
window but one stood Scripps O’Neil, a tall, 
lean man with a tall, lean face. Both stood 
and looked out at the empty yard of the 
pump-factory. Snow covered the crated 
pumps that would soon be shipped away. 
Once the spring should come and the snow 
melt, workmen from the factory would break 
out the pumps from piles where they were 
snowed in and haul them down to the 
G. R. & I. station, where they would be 
loaded on flat-cars and shipped away. Yogi 
Johnson looked out of the window at the 
snowed-in pumps, and his breath made lit- 
tle fairy tracings on the cold window-pane. 
Yogi Johnson thought of Paris. Perhaps it 


[3] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


was the little fairy tracings that reminded 
him of the gay city where he had once spent 
two weeks. Two weeks that were to have 
been the happiest weeks of his life. That was 
all behind him now. That and everything 
else. 


Scripps O’Neil had two wives. As he 
looked out of the window, standing tall and 
lean and resilient with his own tenuous hard- 
ness, he thought of both of them. One lived 
in Mancelona and the other lived in Petos- 
key. He had not seen the wife who lived 
in Mancelona since last spring. He looked 
out at the snow-covered pump-yards and 
thought what spring would mean. With his 
wife in Mancelona Scripps often got drunk. 
When he was drunk he and his wife were 
happy. They would go down together to the 
railway station and walk out along the 
tracks, and then sit together and drink and 
watch the trains go by. They would sit under 
a pine-tree on a little hill that overlooked 
the railway and drink. Sometimes they 
drank all night. Sometimes they drank for a 


han 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


week at a time. It did them good. It made 
Scripps strong. 

Scripps had a daughter whom he playfully 
called Lousy O’Neil. Her real name was 
Lucy O’Neil. One night, after Scripps and 
his old woman had been out drinking on the 
railroad line for three or four days, he lost his 
wife. He didn’t know where she was. When 
he came to himself everything was dark. He 
walked along the railroad track toward 
town. The ties were stiff and hard under his 
feet. He tried walking on the rails. He could- 
n’t do it. He had the dope on that all right. 
He went back to walking along the ties. It 
was a long way into town. Finally he came 
to where he could see the lights of the 
switch-yard. He cut away from the tracks 
and passed the Mancelona High School. It 
was a yellow-brick building. There was noth- 
ing rococo about it, like the buildings he had 
seen in Paris. No, he had never been in 
Paris, That was not he. That was his friend 
Yogi Johnson. i 

Yogi Johnson looked out of the window. 
Soon it would be time to shut the pump-fac- 


L3] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


tory for the night. He opened the window 
carefully, just a crack. Just a crack, but that 
was enough. Outside in the yard the snow 
had begun to melt. A warm breeze was 
blowing. A chinook wind the pump fellows 
called it. The warm chinook wind came in 
through the window into the pump-factory. 
All the workmen laid down their tools. Many 
of them were Indians. 

The foreman was a short, iron-jawed man. 
He had once made a trip as far as Duluth. 
Duluth was far across the blue waters of the 
lake in the hills of Minnesota. A wonderful 
thing had happened to him there. 


The foreman put his finger in his mouth 
to moisten it and held it up in the air. He 
felt the warm breeze on his finger. He shook 
his head ruefully and smiled at the men, a 
little grimly perhaps. 

“Well, it’s a regular chinook, boys,” he 
said. 

Silently for the most part, the workmen 
hung up their tools. The half-completed 
pumps were put away in their racks. The 


[e] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


workmen filed, some of them talking, others 
silent, a few muttering, to the washroom to 
wash up. 

Outside through the window came the 
sound of an Indian war-whoop. 


[7} 


Chapter Two 


Scripps O’NEIL stood outside the Mance- 
lona High School looking up at the lighted 
windows. It was dark and the snow was fall- 
ing. It had been falling ever since Scripps 
could remember. A passer-by stopped and 
stared at Scripps. After all, what was this 
man to him? He went on. 

Scripps stood in the snow and stared up 
at the lighted windows of the High School. 
Inside there people were learning things. Far 
into the night they worked, the boys vying 
with the girls in their search for knowledge, 
this urge for the learning of things that was 
sweeping America. His girl, little Lousy, a 
girl that had cost him a cool seventy-five 
dollars in doctors’ bills, was in there learn- 
ing. Scripps was proud. It was too late for 
him to learn, but there, day after day and 
night after night, Lousy was learning. She 
had the stuff in her, that girl. 

Scripps went on up to his house. It was 


[8] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


not a big house, but it wasn’t size that mat- 
tered to Scripps’s old woman. 

“Scripps,” she often said when they were 
drinking together, “I don’t want a palace. 
All I want is a place to keep the wind out.” 
Scripps had taken her at her word. Now, as 
he walked in the late evening through the 
snow and saw the lights of his own home, he 
felt glad that he had taken her at her word. 
It was better this way than if he were com- 
ing home to a palace. He, Scripps, was not 
the sort of chap that wanted a palace. 

He opened the door of his house and went 
in. Something kept going through his head. 
He tried to get it out, but it was no good. 
What was it that poet chap his friend Harry 
Parker had met once in Detroit had written? 
Harry used to recite it: “Through pleasures 
and palaces though I may roam. When you 
something something something there’s no 
place like home.” He could not remember 
the words. Not all of them. He had written 
a simple tune to it and taught Lucy to sing 
it. That was when they first were married. 
Scripps might have been a composer, one of 


[9] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


these chaps that write the stuff the Chicago 
Symphony Orchestra plays, if he had had a 
chance to goon. He would get Lucy to sing 
that song to-night. He would never drink 
again. Drinking robbed him of his ear for 
music. Times when he was drunk the sound 
of the whistles of the trains at night pulling 
up the Boyne Falls grade seemed more 
lovely than anything this chap Stravinsky 
had ever written. Drinking had done that. 
It was wrong. He would get away to Paris. 
Like this chap Albert Spalding that played 
the violin. 

Scripps opened the door. He went in. 
“Lucy,” he called, “it is I, Scripps.” He 
would never drink again. No more nights out 
on the railroad. Perhaps Lucy needed a new 
fur coat. Perhaps, after all, she had wanted 
a palace instead of this place. You never 
knew how you were treating a woman. Per- 
haps, after all, this place was not keeping 
out the wind. Fantastic. He lit a match. 
“Lucy !” he called, and there was a note of 
dumb terror in his mouth. His friend Walt 
Simmons had heard just such a cry from a 


[10] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


stallion that had once been run over by a 
passing autobus in the Place Vendôme in 
Paris. In Paris there were no geldings. All 
the horses were stallions. They did not breed 
mares. Not since the war. The war changed 
all that. 

“Lucy!” he called, and again “Lucy!” 
There was no answer. The house was empty. 
Through the snow-filled air, as he stood 
there alone in his tall leanness, in his own 
‘deserted house, there came to Scripps’s ears 
the distant sound of an Indian war-whoop. 


[11] 


Chapter Three 


Scripps left Mancelona. He was through 
with that place. What had a town like that 
to give him? There was nothing to it. You 
worked all your life and then a thing like 
that happened. The savings of years wiped 
out. Everything gone. He started to Chicago 
to get a job. Chicago was the place. Look at 
its geographical situation, right at the end 
of Lake Michigan. Chicago would do big 
things. Any fool could see that. He would 
buy land in what is now the Loop, the big 
shopping and manufacturing district. He 
would buy the land at a low price and then 
hang onto it. Let them try and get it away 
from him. He knew a thing or two now. 

Alone, bareheaded, the snow blowing in 
his hair, he walked down the G. R. & I. rail- 
way tracks. It was the coldest night he had 
ever known. He picked up a dead bird that 
had frozen and fallen onto the railroad 

g tracks and put it inside his shirt to warm it. 


{ 12] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


The bird nestled close to his warm body and 
pecked at his chest gratefully. 

“Poor little chap,” Scripps said. ‘‘You 
feel the cold too.” 

Tears came into his eyes. 

*““Drat that wind,” Scripps said and once 
again faced into the blowing snow. The wind 
was blowing straight down from Lake Supe- 
rior. The telegraph wires above Scripps’s 
head sang in the wind. Through the dark, 
Scripps saw a great yellow eye coming 
toward him. The giant locomotive came 
nearer through the snow-storm. Scripps 
stepped to one side of the track to let it go 
by. What is it that old writing fellow Shake- 
speare says: ‘‘Might makes right” ? Scripps 
thought of that quotation as the train went 
past him in the snowing darkness. First the 
engine passed. He saw the fireman bending 
to fling great shovelfuls of coal into the 
open furnace door. The engineer wore gog- 
gles. His face was lit up by the light from 
the open door of the engine. He was the en- 
gineer. It was he who had his hand on the 
throttle. Scripps thought of the Chicago an- y 


[13] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


archists who, when they were hanged, said: . 
“Though you throttle us to-day, still you 
cannot something something our souls.” 
There was a monument where they were 
buried in Waldheim Cemetery, right beside 
the Forest Park Amusement Park, in Chi- 
cago. His father used to take Scripps out 
there on Sundays. The monument was all 
black and there was a black angel. That was 
when Scripps had been a little boy. He used 
often to ask his father: ‘‘Father, why if we 
come to look at the anarchists on Sunday 
why can’t we ride on the shoot the chutes ?”’ 
He had never been satisfied with his father’s 
answer. He had been a little boy in knee 
pants then. His father had been a great com- 
poser. His mother was an Italian woman 
from the north of Italy. They are strange 
people, these north Italians. 

Scripps stood beside the track, and the 
long black segments of the train clicked by 
him in the snow. All the cars were Pullmans. 
The blinds were down. Light came in thin 
slits from the bottom of the dark windows 
as the cars went by. The train did not roar 


[14] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


_by as it might have if it had been going in 
the other direction, because it was climbing 
the Boyne Falls grade. It went slower than 
if it had been going down. Still it went too 
fast for Scripps to hitch on. He thought how 
he had been an expert at hitching on grocery 
wagons when he was a young boy in knee 
pants. 

The long black train of Pullman cars 
passed Scripps as he stood beside the tracks. 
Who were in those cars? Were they Ameri- 
cans, piling up money while they slept? 
Were they mothers? Were they fathers? 
Were there lovers among them? Or were 
they Europeans, members of a worn-out civ- 
ilization world-weary Hom the war? Scripps 

~ wondered. 

pe The last car raed him and the train went 
3 on up the track. Scripps watched the red 

light at its.stern disappearing into the black- 

y; _ness through vhich the snowflakes now came 

softly. The bird fluttered inside his shirt. 

Scripps started along the ties. He wanted to 

get to Chicago that 1 night, if possible, to start 

work in the morning. The bird fluttered 


Ni 


ae [15] 


“Wie 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


again. It was not so feeble now. Scripps put 
his hand on it to still its little bird flutter- 
ings. The bird was calmed. Scripps strode on 
up the track. 

After all, he did not need to go as far as 
Chicago. There were other places. What if 
that critic fellow Henry Mencken had called 
Chicago the Literary Capital of America? 
There was Grand Rapids. Once in Grand 
Rapids, he could start in in the furniture 
business. Fortunes had been made that way. 
Grand Rapids furniture was famous wher- 
ever young couples walked in the evening to 
talk of home-making. He remembered a sign 
he had seen in Chicago as a little boy. His 
mother had pointed it out to him as together 
they walked barefoot through what now is 
probably the Loop, begging from door to 
door. His mother loved the bright flashing of 
the electric lights in the sign. 

“They are like San Miniato in my native 
Florence,” she told Scripps. ‘‘Look at them, 
my son,” she said, ‘‘for some day your music 
will be played there by the Firenze Sym- 
phony Orchestra.” 


[16] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


Scripps had often watched the sign for 
hours while his mother slept wrapped in an 
old shawl on what is now probably the 
Blackstone Hotel. The sign had made a 
great impression on him. 


LET HARTMAN FEATHER YOUR 
NEST 


it had said. It flashed in many different col- 
ors. First a pure, dazzling white. That was 
what Scripps loved best. Then it flashed a 
lovely green. Then it flashed red. One night 
as he lay crouched against his mother’s body 
warmth and watched the sign flash, a police- 
man came up. “‘ You'll have to move along,” 
he said. 

Ah, yes, there was big money to be made 
in the furniture business if you knew how to 
go about it. He, Scripps, knew all the wrin- 
kles of that game. In his own mind it was 
settled. He would stop at Grand Rapids. 
The little bird fluttered, happily now. 

“Ah, what a beautiful gilded cage PI 
build for you, my pretty one,” Scripps said 
exultantly. The little bird pecked him con- 


[17] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


fidently. Scripps strode on in the storm. The 
snow was beginning to drift across the track. 
Borne on the wind, there came to Scripps’s 
ears the sound of a far-off Indian war-whoop. 


[18] 


Chapter Four 


WHERE was Scripps now? Walking in the 
night in the storm, he had become confused. 
He had started for Chicago after that dread- 
ful night when he had found that his home 
was a home no longer. Why had Lucy left? 
What had become of Lousy? He, Scripps, 
did not know. Not that he cared. That was 
all behind him. There was none of that now. 
He was standing knee-deep in snow in front 
of a railway station. On the railway station 
was written in big letters: 


PETOSKEY 


There were a pile of deer shipped down by 
hunters from the Upper Peninsula of Michi- 

* gan, lying piled the one on the other, dead 
and stiff and drifted half over with snow 
on the station platform. Scripps read the 
sign again. Could this be Petoskey? 


[19] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


A man was inside the station, tapping 
something back of a wicketed window. He 
looked out at Scripps. Could he be a telegra- 
pher? Something told Scripps that he was. 

He stepped out of the snow-drift and ap- 
proached the window. Behind the window 
the man worked busily away at his telegra- 
pher’s key. 

“Are you a telegrapher?” asked Scripps. 

“Yes, sir,” said the man. “‘I’m a telegra- 
pher.” 

“How wonderful V’ 

The telegrapher eyed him suspiciously. 
After all, what was this man to him? 

“Ts it hard to be a telegrapher?” Scripps 
asked. He wanted to ask the man outright 
if this was Petoskey. He did not know this 
great northern section of America, though, 
and he wished to be polite. 

The telegrapher looked at him curiously. 

“Say,” he asked, “‘are you a fairy?” 

“No,” Scripps said. “I don’t know what 
being a fairy means.” 

“Well,” said the telegrapher, ‘“‘what do 
you carry a bird around for?” 

[ 20 ] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“Bird?” asked Scripps. ‘‘What bird?” 

“That bird that’s sticking out of your 
shirt.” Scripps was at a loss. What sort of 
chap was this telegrapher ? What sort of men 
went in for telegraphy ? Were they like com- 
posers? Were they like artists? Were they 
like writers? Were they like the advertising 
men who write the ads in our national week- 
lies? Or were they like Europeans, drawn 
and wasted by the war, their best years be- 
hind them? Could he tell this telegrapher 
the whole story ? Would he understand? 

“I started home,” he began. “‘I passed the 
Mancelona High School z 

“I knew a girl in Mancelona,” the teleg- 
rapher said. “Maybe you knew her. Ethel 
Enright.” 

It was no good going on. He would cut the 
story short. He would give the bare essen- 
tials. Besides, it was beastly cold. It was 
cold standing there on the wind-swept sta- 
tion platform. Something told him it was 
useless to go on. He looked over at the deer 
lying there in a pile, stiff and cold. Perhaps 
they, too, had been lovers. Some were bucks 


[21] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


and some were does. The bucks had horns. 
That was how you could tell. With cats it is 
more difficult. In France they geld the cats 
and do not geld the horses. France was a 
long way off. 

“My wife left me,” Scripps said abruptly. 

“I don’t wonder if you go around with a 
damn bird sticking out of your shirt,” tne 
telegrapher said. 

“What town is this?” Scripps asked. The 
single moment of spiritual communion they 
had had, had been dissipated. They had 
never really had it. But they might have. It 
was no use now. It was no use trying to cap- 
ture what had gone. What had fled. 

““Petoskey,” the telegrapher replied. 

“Thank you,” Scripps said. He turned 
and walked into the silent, deserted North- 
ern town. Luckily, he had four hundred and 
fifty dollars in his pocket. He had sold a 
story to George Horace Lorimer just before 
he had started out with his old woman on 
that drinking trip. Why had he gone at all? 

What was it all about, anyway? 
_ Coming toward him down the street came 


[22] 


i 7 THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


fetiadians. They looked at him, but their 
faces did not change. Their faces remained 
the same. They went into McCarthy’s bar- 
ber shop. 


[23] 


* 


Chapter Five 


Scripps O’NEtL stood irresolutely before 
the barber shop. Inside there men were be- 
ing shaved. Other men, no different, were 
having their hair cut. Other men sat against 
the wall in tall chairs and smoked, awaiting 
their turn in the barber chairs, admiring the 
paintings hung on the wall, or admiring their 
own reflections in the long mirror. Should he, 
Scripps, go in there? After all, he had four 
hundred and fifty dollars in his pocket. He 
could go where he wanted. He looked, once 
again, irresolutely. It was an inviting pros- 
pect, the society of men, the warm room, the 
white jackets of the barbers skilfully snip- 
ping away with their scissors or drawing 
their blades diagonally through the lather 
that covered the face of some man who was 
getting a shave. They could use their tools, 
these barbers. Somehow, it wasn’t what he 
wanted. He wanted something different. He 
wanted to eat. Besides, there was his bird to 
look after. 


[24] 


`- THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 

sf pps O’Neil turned his back on the 
barber shop and strode away up the street 
of the silently frozen Northern town. On his 
right, as he walked, the weeping birches, 
their branches bare of leaves, hung down to 
the ground, heavy with snow. To his ears 
came the sound of sleigh bells. Perhaps it 
was Christmas. In the South little children 
would be shooting off firecrackers and cry- 
ing “‘Christmas Gift! Christmas Gift!” to 
one another. His father came from the 
South. He had been a soldier in the rebel 
army. ’Way back in Civil War days. Sher- 
man had burned their house down on his 
March to the Sea. “War is hell,” Sherman 
had said. “‘But you see how it is, Mrs. 
O’Neil. I’ve got to do it.” He had touched 
a match to the white-pillared old house. 

“If General O’Neil were here, you das- 
tard!’ his mother had said, speaking in her 
broken English, “‘you’d never have touched 
a match to that house.” 

Smoke curled up from the old house. The 
fire was mounting. The white pillars were 
obscured in the rising smoke-wreaths. 


[25 } 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


Scripps had held close to his mother’s ey- 
woolsey dress. 

General Sherman climbed back onto his 
horse and made a low bow. “‘Mrs. O'Neil,” 
he said, and Scripps’s mother always said 
there were tears in his eyes, even if he was a 
damned Yank. The man had a heart, sir, 
even if he did not follow its dictates. ““Mrs. 
O’Neil, if the general were here, we could 
have it out as man to man. As it is, ma’am, 
war being what it is, I must burn your 
house.” 

He motioned to one of his soldiers, who 
ran forward and threw a bucket of kerosene 
on the flames. The flames rose and a great 
column of smoke went up in the still evening 
air: 

“At least, General Sherman,” Scripps’s 
mother said triumphantly, “‘that column of 
smoke will warn the other loyal daughters 
of the Confederacy that you are coming.” 

Sherman bowed. ‘“‘“That is the risk we 
must take, ma’am.’’ He clapped spurs to his 
horse and rode away, his long white hair 
floating on the wind. Neither Scripps nor his 

[ 26 } 


= THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


mother ever saw him again. Odd that he 
should think of that incident now. He looked 


up. Facing him was a sign: 


BROWN’S BEANERY THE BEST BY 
TEST 


He would go in and eat. This was what he 
wanted. He would go in and eat. That sign: 


THE BEST BY TEST 


Ah, these big beanery owners were wise fel- 
lows. They knew how to get the customers. 
No ads in The Saturday Evening Post for 
them. Tue Best sy Test. That was the 
stuff. He went in. 

Inside the door of the beanery Scripps 
O’Neil looked around him. There was a long 
counter. There was a clock. There was a 
door led into the kitchen. There were a 
couple of tables. There were a pile of dough- 
nuts under a glass cover. There were signs 
put about on the wall advertising things one 
might eat. Was this, after all, Brown’s Bean- 
ery? ` 
“I wonder,” Scripps asked an elderly 

[27] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


waitress who came in through the swinging 
door from the kitchen, “‘if you could tell me 
if this is Brown’s Beanery ?” 

“Yes, sir,” answered the waitress. ‘“The 
best by test.” 

“Thank you,” Scripps said. He sat down 
at the counter. “‘I would like to have some 


beans for myself and some for my bird 
here.” 


He opened his shirt and placed the bird 
on the counter. The bird ruffled his feathers 
and shook himself. He pecked inquiringly at 
the catsup bottle. The elderly waitress put 
out a hand and stroked him. “‘Isn’t he a 
manly little fellow ?” she remarked. “‘ By the 
way,” she asked, a little shamefacedly, 
“what was it you ordered, sir?” 

“Beans,” Scripps said, ‘‘for my bird and 
myself.” 

The waitress shoved up a little wicket that 
led into the kitchen. Scripps had a glimpse 
of a warm, steam-filled room, with big pots 
and kettles, and many shining cans on the 
wall. 

“A pig and the noisy ones,” the waitress 


[28] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


called in a matter-of-fact voice into the open 
wicket. “‘One for a bird!” 

“On the fire !” a voice answered from the 
kitchen. 

“How old is your bird?” the elderly wait- 
ress asked. 

“I don’t know,” Scripps said. “I never 
saw him before last night. I was walking on 
the railroad track from Mancelona. My wife 
left me.” 

“Poor little chap,” the waitress said. She 
poured a little catsup on her finger and the 
bird pecked at it gratefully. 

““My wife left me,” Scripps said. ‘‘We’d 
been out drinking on the railroad track. We 
used to go out evenings and watch the trains 
pass. I write stories. I had a story in The 
Post and two in The Dial. Mencken’s trying 
to get ahold of me. I’m too wise for that sort 
of thing. No politzei for mine. They give me 
the kalzenjammers.” 

What was he saying? He was talking 
wildly. This would never do. He must pull 
himself together. 

“Scofield Thayer was my best man,” he 


[29] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


said. “I’m a Harvard man. All I want is for 
them to give me and my bird a square deal. 
No more wellpolitik. Take Doctor Coolidge 
away.” 

His mind was wandering. He knew what 
it was. He was faint with hunger. This 
Northern air was too sharp, too keen for 
him. 

“I say,” he said. ‘‘Could you let me have 
just a few of those beans. I don’t like to rush 
things. I know when to let well enough 
alone.” 

The wicket came up, and a large plate of 
beans and a small plate of beans, both 
steaming, appeared. 

““Here they are,” the waitress said. 

Scripps fell to on the large plate of beans. 
There was a little pork, too. The bird was 
eating happily, raising its head after each 
swallow to let the beans go down. 

“He does that to thank God for those 
beans,” the elderly waitress explained. 

“They’re mighty fine beans, too,” Scripps 
agreed. Under the influence of the beans his 
head was clearing. What was this rot he had 


[30] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


been talking about that man Henry Menck- 
en? Was Mencken really after him? It 
wasn’t a pretty prospect to face. He had four 
hundred and fifty dollars in his pocket. 
When that was gone he could always put an 
end to things. If they pressed him too far 
they would get a big surprise. He wasn’t the 
man to be taken alive. Just let them try it. 

After eating his beans the bird had fallen 
asleep. He was sleeping on one leg, the other 
leg tucked up into his feathers. 

“When he gets tired of sleeping on that 
leg he will change legs and rest,” the waitress 
remarked. “‘We had an old osprey at home 
that was like that.” 

“Where was your home?” Scripps asked. 

“In England. In the Lake District.” The 
waitress smiled a bit wistfully. ‘‘Words- 
worth’s country, you know.” 

Ah, these English. They travelled all over 
the face of the globe. They were not content 
to remain in their little island. Strange Nor- 
dics, obsessed with their dream of empire. 

“I was not always a waitress,” the elderly 
waitress remarked. 


[31] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“Tm sure you weren't.” 

“Not half,” the waitress went on. “It’s 
rather a strange story. Perhaps it would bore 
you?” 

‘Not at all,” Scripps said. ‘“ You wouldn’t 
mind if I used the story sometime?” 

‘Not if you find it interesting,” the wait- 
ress smiled. ‘‘You wouldn’t use my name, of 
course.” 

“Not if you’d rather not,” Scripps said. 
“By the way, could I have another order of 
beans?” 

“‘Best by test,” the waitress smiled. Her 
face was lined and gray. She looks a little 
like that actress that died in Pittsburg. 
What was her name? Lenore Ulric. In 
“‘Peter Pan.” That was it. They say she al- 
ways went about veiled, Scripps thought. 
There was an interesting woman. Was it 
Lenore Ulric? Perhaps not. No matter. 

“You really want some more beans?” 
asked the waitress. 

“Yes,” Scripps answered simply. 

“‘Once again on the loud ones,” the wait- 
ress called into the wicket. “Lay off the 
bird.” 

[32] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“On the fire,” came the response. 

“Please go on with your story,” Scripps 
said kindly. 

“Tt was the year of the Paris Exposition,” 
she began. “I was a young girl at the time, 
a jeune fille, and I came over from England 
with my mother. We were going to be pres- 
ent at the opening of the exposition, On our 
way from the Gare du Nord to the hotel in 
the Place Vendôme where we lodged, we 
stopped at a coiffeur’s shop and made some 
trifling purchase. My mother, as I recall, 
purchased an additional bottle of ‘smelling 
salts,’ as you call them here in America.” 

She smiled. . 

“Yes, go on. Smelling salts,” Scripps 
said. 

“We registered, as is customary, in the 
hotel, and were given the adjoining rooms 
we had reserved. My mother felt a bit done 
in by the trip, and we dined in our rooms. I 
was full of excitement about seeing the ex- 
position on the morrow. But I was tired 
after the journey—we had had a rather 
nasty crossing—and slept soundly. In the 
morning I awoke and called for my mother. 


[33] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


There was no answer, and I went into the 
room to waken mummy. Instead of mummy 
there was a French general in the bed.” 

“Mon Dieu!” Scripps said. 

“I was terribly frightened,” the waitress 
went on, “‘and rang the bell for the man- 
agement. The concierge came up, and I de- 
manded to know where my mother was. 

‘But, mademoiselle, the concierge ex- 
plained, ‘we know nothing about your 
mother. You came here with General So- 
and-so’—I cannot remember the general’s 
name.” 

“‘Call him General Joffre,” Scripps sug- 
gested. 

“Tt was a name very like that,” the wait- 
ress said. “‘I was fearfully frightened and 
sent for the police, and demanded to see the 
guest-register. ‘You'll find there that I am 
registered with my mother,’ I said. The po- 
lice came and the concierge brought up the 
register. ‘See, madame,’ he said. ‘You are 
registered with the general with whom you 
came to our hotel last night.’ 

“I was desperate. Finally, I remembered 


[34] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


where the coiffeur’s shop was. The police 
sent for the coiffeur. An agent of police 
brought him in. 

“**T stopped at your shop with my moth- 
er, I said to the coiffeur, ‘and my mother 
bought a bottle of aromatic salts.’ 

““T remember mademoiselle perfectly,’ 
the coiffeur said. ‘But you were not with 
your mother. You were with an elderly 
French general. He purchased, I believe, a 
pair of mustache tongs. My books, at any 
rate, will show the purchase.’ 

“I was in despair. In the meantime the 
police had brought in the cab driver who 
had brought us from the gare to the hotel. 
He swore that I had never been with my 
mother. Tell me, does this story bore 
you?” 

““Go on,” said Scripps. “If you had ever 
been as hard up for plots as I have been !” 

“Well,” the waitress said. ‘“‘That’s all 
there is to the tale. I never saw my mother 
again. I communicated with the embassy, 
but they could do nothing. It was finally 
established by them that I had crossed the 


[35] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


channel with my mother, but they could do 
nothing beyond that.” Tears came into the 
elderly waitress’s eyes. “‘I never saw mum- 
my again. Never again. Not even once.” 

“What about the general?” 

“He finally loaned me one hundred francs 
—not a great sum even in those days—and 
I came to America and became a waitress. 
That’s all there is to the story.” 

“‘There’s more than that,” Scripps said. 
“Td stake my life there’s more than that.” 

“Sometimes, you know, I feel there is,” 
the waitress said. “‘I feel there must be more 
than that. Somewhere, somehow, there must 
be an explanation. I don’t know what 
brought the subject into my mind this 
morning.” 

“It was a good thing to get it off your 
mind,” Scripps said. 

“Yes,” the waitress smiled, the lines in 
her face not quite so deep now. “‘I feel bet- 
ter now.” 

“Tell me,” Scripps asked the waitress. 
“Is there any work in this town for me and 
my bird?” 

{ 36 } 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“Honest work?” asked the waitress. ‘‘I 
only know of honest work.” 

“Yes, honest work,” Scripps said. 

“They do say they’re hiring hands at the 
new pump-factory,” the waitress said. Why 
shouldn’t he work with his hands? Rodin 
had done it. Cézanne had been a butcher. 
Renoir a carpenter. Picasso had worked in 
a cigarette-factory in his boyhood. Gilbert 
Stuart, who painted those famous portraits 
of Washington that are reproduced all over 
this America of ours and hang in every 
schoolroom—Gilbert Stuart had been a 
blacksmith. Then there was Emerson. Em- 
erson had been a hod-carrier. James Russell 
Lowell had been, he had heard, a telegraph 
operator in his youth. Like that chap down 
at the station. Perhaps even now that teleg- 
rapher at the station was working on his 
‘‘Thanatopsis” or his “To a Waterfowl.” 
Why shouldn’t he, Scripps O’Neil, work in 
a pump-factory? 

“You'll come back again?” the waitress 
asked. 

“If I may,” Scripps said. 

[37] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“And bring your bird.” 

“Yes,” Scripps said. “The little chap’s 
rather tired now. After all, it was a hard 
night for him.” 

“I should say it was,” agreed the waitress. 

Scripps went out again into the town. He 
felt clear-headed and ready to face life. A 
pump-factory would be interesting. Pumps 
were big things now. Fortunes were made 
and lost in pumps every day in New York 
in Wall Street. He knew of a chap who’d 
cleaned up a cool half-million on pumps in 
less than half an hour. They knew what they 
were about, these big Wall Street operators. 

Outside on the street he looked up at the 
sign. Best By Tesr, he read. They had the 
dope all right, he said. Was it true, though, 
that there had been a negro cook? Just once, 
just for one moment, when the wicket went 
up, he thought he had caught a glimpse of 
something black. Perhaps the chap was only 
sooty from the stove. 


[38] 


Part Two 
The Struggle for Life 


And here I solemnly protest I have no intention to 
vilify or asperse any one; for though everything is 
copied from the book of nature, and scarce a character 
or action produced which I have not taken from my 
own observations or experience; yet I have used the 
utmost care to obscure the persons by such different 
circumstances, degrees, and colors, that it will be im- 
possible to guess at them with any degree of certainty; 
and if it ever happens otherwise, it is only where the 
failure characterized is so minute, that it is a foible 
only which the party himself may laugh at as well as 


any other. 
HENRY FIELDING. 


Chapter Six 


Scripps O’NetL was looking for employ- 
ment. It would be good to work with his 
hands. He walked down the street away 
from the beanery and past McCarthy’s bar- 
ber shop. He did not go into the barber 
shop. It looked as inviting as ever, but it 
was employment Scripps wanted, He turned 
sharply around the corner of the barber shop 
and onto the Main Street of Petoskey. It 
was a handsome, broad street, lined on 
either side with brick and pressed-stone 
buildings. Scripps walked along it toward 
the part of town where the pump-factory 
stood. At the door of the pump-factory he 
was embarrassed. Could this really be the 
pump-factory? True, a stream of pumps 
were being carried out and set up in the 
snow, and workmen were throwing pails of 
water over them to encase them in a coating 
of ice that would protect them from the 
winter winds as well as any paint would. 


[ 41}. 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


But were they really pumps? It might all be 
a trick. These pump men were clever fel- 
lows. 

“T say!” Scripps beckoned to one of the 
workmen who was sloshing water over a 
new, raw-looking pump that had just been 
carried out and stood protestingly in the 
snow. ‘‘Are they pumps?” 

“They will be in time,” the workman said. 

Scripps knew it was the factory. They 
weren’t going to fool him on that. He walked 
up to the door. There was a sign on it: 


KEEP OUT. THIS MEANS YOU 


Can that mean me? Scripps wondered. 
He knocked on the door and went in. 

“Td like to speak to the manager,” he 
said, standing quietly in the half-light. 

Workmen were passing him, carrying the 
new raw pumps on their shoulders. They 
hummed snatches of songs as they passed. 
The handles of the pumps flopped stiffly in 
dumb protest. Some pumps had no handles. 
They perhaps, after all, are the lucky ones, 


[42] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


Scripps thought. A little man came up to 
him. He was well-built, short, with wide 
shoulders and a grim face. 

“You were asking for the manager?” 

“Yes, sir.” 

“Tm the foreman here. What I say goes.” 

“Can you hire and fire?” Scripps asked. 

“T can do one as easily as the other,” the 
foreman said. 

“‘T want a job.” 

“Any experience?” 

“Not in pumps.” 

“All right,” the foreman said. “We’ll put 
you on piece-work. Here, Yogi,” he called to 
one of the men, who was standing looking 
out of the window of the factory, “‘show this 
new chum where to stow his swag and how 
to find his way around these diggings.” The 
foreman looked Scripps up and down. “I’m 
an Australian,” he said. “Hope you'll like 
the lay here.” He walked off. 

The man called Yogi Johnson came over 
from the window. ‘‘Glad to meet you,” he 
said. He was a chunky, well-built fellow. 
One of the sort you see around almost any- 


[ 43 ] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


where. He looked as though he had been 
through things. 

‘Your foreman’s the first Australian I’ve 
ever met,” Scripps said. 

“Oh, he’s not an Australian,” Yogi said. 
“He was just with the Australians once dur- 
ing the war, and it made a big impression on 
him.” 

“Were you in the war?” Scripps asked. 

“Yes,” Yogi Johnson said. “I was the first 
man to go from Cadillac.” 

“It must have been quite an experience.” 

“It’s meant a lot to me,” Yogi answered. 
‘Come on and IIl show you around the 
works.” 

Scripps followea this man, who showed 
him through the pump-factory. It was dark 
but warm inside the pump-factory. Men 
naked to the waist took the pumps in huge 
tongs as they came trundling by on an end- 
less chain, culling out the misfits and plac- 
ing the perfect pumps on another endless 
chain that carried them up into the cooling 
room. Other men, Indians for the most part, 
wearing only breech-clouts, broke up the 


[44] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


misfit pumps with huge hammers and adzes 
and rapidly recast them into axe heads, wag- 
on springs, trombone slides, bullet moulds, 
all the by-products of a big pump factory. 
There was nothing wasted, Yogi pointed 
out. A group of Indian boys, humming to 
themselves one of the old tribal chanties, 
squatted in a corner of the big forging room 
shaping the little fragments that were 
chipped from the pumps in casting, into 
safety razor blades. 

“They work naked,” Yogi said. ‘“They’re 
searched as they go out. Sometimes they try 
and conceal the razor blades and take them 
‘out with them to bootleg.” 

' “There must be quite a loss that way,” 
Scripps said. 

“Oh, no,” Yogi answered. “‘The inspect- 
ors get most of them.” 

Up-stairs, apart in a separate room, two 
old men were working. Yogi opened the 
door. One of the old men looked over his 
steel spectacles and frowned. 

“You make a draft,” he said. 

“Shut the door,” the other old man said, 


[45] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


in the high, complaining voice of the very 
old. 

“They're our two hand-workers,” Yogi 
said. ‘‘They make all the pumps the manu- 
factory sends out to the big international 
pump races. You remember our Peerless 
Pounder that won the pump race in Italy, 
where Franky Dawson was killed?” 

“I read about it in the paper,” Scripps 
answered. 

“Mr. Borrow, over there in the corner, 
made the Peerless Pounder all himself by 

harid,” Yogi said. 
~~ “T carved it direct from the steel with this 
knife.” Mr. Borrow held up a short-bladed, 
razorlike-looking knife. ‘‘Took me eighteen 
months to get it right.” 

““The Peerless Pounder was quite a pump 
all right,” the high-voiced little old man 
said, “‘But we’re working on one now that 
will show its heels to any of them foreign 
pumps, aren’t we, Henry?” 

“That’s Mr. Shaw,” Yogi said in an un- 
dertone. ‘‘He’s probably the greatest living 
pump-maker.” 

[ 46 } 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


““You boys get along and leave us alone,” 
Mr. Borrow said. He was carving away 
steadily, his infirm old hands shaking a little 
between strokes. 

“Let the boys watch,” Mr. Shaw said. 
“Where you from, young feller?” 

“Tve just come from Mancelona,” Scripps 
answered. “My wife left me.” 

“Well, you won’t have no difficulty find- 
ing another one,” Mr. Shaw said. “‘You’re a 
likely-looking young feller. But take my ad- 
vice and take your time. A poor wife ain’t 
much better than no wife at all.” 

“I wouldn’t say that, Henry,” Mr. Bor- 
row remarked in his high voice. “Any wife 
at all’s a pretty good wife the way things 
are going now.” 

“You take my advice, young feller, and 
go slow. Get yourself a good one this time.” 

“Henry knows a thing or two,” Mr. Bor- 
row said. “He knows what he’s talking 
about there.” He laughed a high, cackling 
laugh. Mr. Shaw, the old pump-maker, 
blushed. 


“You boys get along and leave us get on 


[47] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


with our pump-making,” he said. “Henry 
and me here, we got a sight of work to do.” 

“T m very glad to have met you,” Scripps 
said. 

‘Come on,” Yogi said. “I better get you 
started or the foreman will be on my tail.” 

He put Scripps to work collaring pistons 
in the piston-collaring room. There Scripps 
worked for almost a year, In some ways it 
was the happiest year of his life. In other 
ways it was a nightmare. A hideous night- 
mare, In the end he grew to like it. In other 
ways he hated it. Before he knew it, a year 
had passed. He was still collaring pistons. 
But what strange things had happened in 
that year. Often he wondered about them. 
As he wondered, collaring a piston now al- 
most automatically, he listened to the laugh- 
ter that came up from below, where the lit- 
tle Indian lads were shaping what were to 
be razor blades. As he listened something 
rose in his throat and almost choked him. 


bog 


Chapter Seven 


Tuat night, after his first day in the pump- 
factory, the first day in what was or were 
to become an endless succession of days of 
dull piston-collaring, Scripps went again to 
the beanery to eat. All day he had kept his 
bird concealed. Something told him that the 
pump-factory was not the place to bring his 
bird out in. During the day the bird had 
several times made him uncomfortable, but 
he had adjusted his clothes to it and even 
cut a little slit the bird could poke his beak 
out through in search of fresh air. Now the 
day’s work was over. It was finished. Scripps 
on his way to the beanery. Scripps happy 
that he was working with his hands. Scripps 
thinking of the old pump-makers. Scripps 
going to the society of the friendly waitress. 
Who was that waitress, anyway ? What was 
it had happened to her in Paris. He must 
find out more about this Paris. Yogi Johnson 
had been there. He would quiz Yogi. Get 
him to talk. Draw him out. Make him tell 


[49] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


what he knew. He knew a trick or two about 
that. 

Watching the sunset out over the Petos- 
key Harbor, the lake now frozen and great 
blocks of ice jutting up over the breakwater, 
Scripps strode down the streets of Petoskey 
to the beanery. He would have liked to ask 
Yogi Johnson to eat with him, but he didn’t 
dare. Not yet. That would come later. All in 
good time. No need to rush matters with a 
man like Yogi. Who was Yogi, anyway? 
Had he really been in the war? What had 
the war meant to him? Was he really the 
first man to enlist from Cadillac? Where was 
Cadillac, anyway ? Time would tell. 

Scripps O’Neil opened the door and went 
into the beanery. The elderly waitress got 
up from the chair where she had been read- 
ing the overseas edition of The Manchester 
Guardian, and put the paper and her steel- 
rimmed spectacles on top of the cash regis- 
ter. 

“Good evening,” she said simply. ‘‘It’s 
good to have you back.” 

Something stirred inside Scripps O’Neil. 


[50] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


A feeling that he could not define came 
within him. 

“Tve been working all day long”—he 
looked at the elderly waitress—‘‘for you,” 
he added. 

“How lovely !” she said. And then smiled 
shyly. “And I have been working all day 
long—for you.” 

Tears came into Scripps’s eyes. Something 
stirred inside him again. He reached forward 
to take the elderly waitress’s hand, and with 
quiet dignity she laid it within his own. 
‘You are my woman,” he said. Tears came 
into her eyes, too. 

“You are my man,” she said. 

“Once again I say: you are my woman.” 
Scripps pronounced the words solemnly. 
Something had broken inside him again. He 
felt he could not keep from crying. 

“Let this be our wedding ceremony,” the 
elderly waitress said. Scripps pressed her 
hand. ‘‘ You are my woman,” he said simply. 

“You are my man and more than my 
man.” She looked into his eyes. “‘ You are all 
of America to me.” 


[51] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“Let us go,” Scripps said. 

“Have you your bird?” asked the wait- 
ress, laying aside her apron and folding the 
copy of The Manchester Guardian Weekly. 
“PIL bring The Guardian, if you don’t 
mind,” she said, wrapping the paper in her 
apron. “It’s a new paper and I’ve not read 
it yet.” 

“Tm very fond of The Guardian,” Scripps 
said. ‘‘My family have taken it ever since I 
can remember. My father was a great ad- 
mirer of Gladstone.” 

“My father went to Eton with Glad- 
stone,” the elderly waitress said. ‘‘And now 
I am ready.” 

She had donned a coat and stood ready, 
her apron, her steel-rimmed spectacles in 
their worn black morocco case, her copy 
of The Manchester Guardian held in her 
hand. 

“Have you no hat?” asked Scripps. 

ec No.” 

“Then I will buy you one,” Scripps said 
tenderly. 

“It will be your wedding gift,” the elderly 

[52] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


waitress said. Again there were tears shone 
in her eyes. 

“And now let us go,” Scripps said. 

The elderly waitress came out from be- 
hind the counter, and together, hand in 
hand, they strode out into the night. 

Inside the beanery the black cook pushed 
up the wicket and looked through from the 
kitchen. ‘“‘Dey’ve gone off,” he chuckled. 
““Gone off into de night. Well, well, well.” 
He closed the wicket softly. Even he was a 
little impressed. 


[53] 


Chapter Eight 


Harr an hour later Scripps O’Neil and 
the elderly waitress returned to the beanery 
as man and wife. The beanery looked much 
the same. There was the long counter, the 
salt cellars, the sugar containers, the catsup 
bottle, the Worcestershire Sauce bottle. 
There was the wicket that led into the kitch- 
en. Behind the counter was the relief wait- 
ress. She was a buxom, jolly-looking girl, and 
she wore a white apron. At the counter, 
reading a Detroit paper, sat a drummer. The 
drummer was eating a T-bone steak and 
hashed-brown potatoes. Something very 
beautiful had happened to Scripps and the 
elderly waitress. Now they were hungry. 
They wished to eat. 

The elderly waitress looking at Scripps. 
Scripps looking at the elderly waitress. The 
drummer reading his paper and occasion- 
ally putting a little catsup on his hashed- 
brown potatoes. The other waitress, Mandy, 
back of the counter in her freshly starched 


[54] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


white apron. The frost on the windows. The 
warmth inside. The cold outside. Scripps’s 
bird, rather rumpled now, sitting on the 
counter and preening his feathers. 

“So you’ve come back,” Mandy the wait- 
ress said. ““The cook said you had gone out 
into the night.” 

The elderly waitress looked at Mandy, her 
eyes brightened, her voice calm and now of 
a deeper, richer timbre. 

“We are man and wife now,” she said 
kindly. “We have just been married. What 
would you like to eat for supper, Scripps, 
dear?” 

“I don’t know,” Scripps said. He felt 
vaguely uneasy. Something was stirring 
within him. 

““Perhaps you have eaten enough of the 
beans, dear Scripps,” the elderly waitress, 
now his wife, said. The drummer looked up 
from his paper. Scripps noticed that it was 
the Detroit News. There was a fine paper. 

“Thats a fine paper you're reading,” 
Scripps said to the drummer. 

“Its a good paper, the News,” the drum- 


[55] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


mer said. “‘ You two on your honeymoon?” 

“Yes,” Mrs. Scripps said; “we are man 
and wife now.” , 

“Well,” said the drummer, “‘that’s a 
mighty fine thing to be. I’m a married man 
myself.” 

“Are you?” said Scripps. “‘My wife left 
‘me. It was in Mancelona.” 

‘Don’t lets talk of that any more, 
Scripps, dear,” Mrs. Scripps said. “You’ve 
told that story so many times.” 

“Yes, dear,” Scripps agreed. He felt 
vaguely mistrustful of himself. Something, 
somewhere was stirring inside of him. He 
looked at the waitress called Mandy, stand- 
ing robust and vigorously lovely in her 
newly starched white apron. He watched her 
hands, healthy, calm, capable hands, doing 
the duties of her waitresshood. 

““Try one of these T-bones with hashed- 
brown potatoes,” the drummer suggested. 
“They got a nice T-bone here.” 

“Would you like one, dear?” Scripps 
asked his wife. 

“TIl just take a bowl of milk and crack- 


[ 56 J 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


ers,” the elderly Mrs. Scripps said. ‘You 
have whatever you want, dear.” 

“‘Here’s your crackers and milk, Diana,” 
Mandy said, placing them on the counter. 
“Do you want a T-bone, sir?” 

“Yes,” Scripps said. Something stirred | 
again within him. 

“Well done or rare?” 

“Rare, please.” 

The waitress turned and called into the 
wicket: “Tea for one. Let it go raw!” 

“Thank you,” Scripps said. He eyed the 
waitress Mandy. She had a gift for the pic- 
turesque in speech, that girl. It had been 
that very picturesque quality in her speech 
that had first drawn him to his present wife. 
That and her strange background. England, 
the Lake Country. Scripps striding through 
the Lake Country with Wordsworth. A field 
of golden daffodils. The wind blowing at 
Windermere. Far off, perhaps, a stag at bay. 
Ah, that was farther north, in Scotland. 
They were a hardy race, those Scots, deep 
in their mountain fastnesses. Harry Lauder 
and his pipe. The Highlanders in the Great 


[57] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


War. Why had not he, Scripps, been in the 
war? That was where that chap Yogi John- 
son had it on him. The war would have 
meant much to him, Scripps. Why hadn’t 
he been in it? Why hadn’t he heard of it in 
time? Perhaps he was too old. Look at that 
old French General Joffre, though. Surely he 
was a younger man than that old general. 
General Foch praying for victory. The 
French troops kneeling along the Chemin 
des Dames, praying for victory. The Ger- 
mans with their “Gott mit uns.” What a 
mockery. Surely he was no older than that 
French General Foch. He wondered. 

Mandy, the waitress, placed his T-bone 
steak and hashed-brown potatoes on the 
counter before him. As she laid the plate 
down, just for an instant, her hand touched 
his. Scripps felt a strange thrill go through 
him. Life was before him. He was not an old 
man. Why were there no wars now? Perhaps 
there were. Men were fighting in China, 
Chinamen, Chinamen killing one another. 
What for? Scripps wondered. What was it 
all about, anyway ? 


[ 58 J 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


Mandy, the buxom waitress, leaned for- 
ward. “Say,” she said, “‘did I ever tell you 
about the last words of Henry James?” 

“Really, dear Mandy,” Mrs. Scripps said, 
“‘you’ve told that story rather often.” 

“Let’s hear it,” Scripps said. “I’m very. 
interested in Henry James.” Henry James, 
Henry James. That chap who had gone away 
from his own land to live in England among 
Englishmen. Why had he done it? For what 
had he left America ? Weren’t his roots here? 
His brother William. Boston. Pragmatism. 
Harvard University. Old John Harvard with 
silver buckles on his shoes. Charley Brickley. 
Eddie Mahan. Where were they now? 

“Well,” Mandy began, “‘Henry James be- 
came a British subject on his death-bed. At 
once, as soon as the king heard Henry James 
had become a British subject he sent around 
the highest decoration in his power to be- 
stow—the Order of Merit.” 

“The O. M.,” the elderly Mrs. Scripps ex- 
plained. | 

“That was it,” the waitress said. ‘‘ Profes- 
sors Gosse and Saintsbury came with the 


[59] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


man who brought the decoration. Henry 
James was lying on his death-bed, and his 
eyes were shut. There was a single candle on 
a table beside the bed. The nurse allowed 
them to come near the bed, and they put the 
ribbon of the decoration around James’s 
neck, and the decoration lay on the sheet 
over Henry James’s chest. Professors Gosse 
and Saintsbury leaned forward and smoothed 
the ribbon of the decoration. Henry James 
never opened his eyes. The nurse told them 
they all must go out of the room, and they 
all went out of the room. When they were 
all gone, Henry James spoke to the nurse. 
He never opened his eyes. ‘Nurse,’ Henry 
James said, ‘put out the candle, nurse, and 
spare my blushes.’ Those were the last 
words he ever spoke.” 

“James was quite a writer,” Scripps 
O’Neil said. He was strangely moved by the 
story. 

“You don’t always tell it the same way, 
dear,” Mrs. Scripps remarked to Mandy. 
There were tears in Mandy’s eyes. “I feel 
very strongly about Henry James,” she said. 

[ 60} 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“What was the matter with James?” 
asked the drummer. ‘‘Wasn’t America good 
enough for him?” 

Scripps O’Neil was thinking about Man- 
dy, the waitress. What a background she 
must have, that girl! What a fund of anec- 
dote! A chap could go far with a woman’like 
that to help him! He stroked the little bird 
that sat on the lunch-counter before him. 
The bird pecked at his finger. Was the little 
bird a hawk? A falcon, perhaps, from one of 
the big Michigan falconries. Was it perhaps 
a robin? Pulling and tugging at the early 
worm on some green lawn somewhere? He 
wondered. 

“What do you call your bird?” the drum- 
mer asked. 

“I haven’t named him yet. What would 
you call him?” 

“Why not call him Ariel?” Mandy asked. 

“Or Puck,” Mrs. Scripps put in. 

“What’s it mean?” asked the drummer. 

“Its a character out of Shakespeare,” 
Mandy explained. 

“Oh, give the bird a chance.” 

[61] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“What would you call him?” Scripps 
turned to the drummer. 

“He ain’t a parrot, is he?” asked the 
drummer. “‘If he was a parrot you could call 
him Polly.” 

“‘There’s a character in “The Beggar’s 
Opera’ called Polly,” Mandy explained. 

Scripps wondered. Perhaps the bird was a 
parrot. A parrot strayed from some com- 
fortable home with some old maid. The un- 
tilled soil of some New England spinster. 

“Better wait till you see how he turns 
out,” the drummer advised. ““You got plen- 
ty of time to name him.” 

This drummer had sound ideas. He, 
Scripps, did not even know what sex the 
bird was. Whether he was a boy bird or a 
girl bird. 

“Wait till you see if he lays eggs,” the 
drummer suggested. Scripps looked into the 
drummer’s eyes. The fellow had voiced his 
own unspoken thought. 

“You know a thing or two, drummer,” he 
said. 

“Well,” the drummer admitted modestly, 

[ 62] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“I ain’t drummed all these years for noth- 
ing.” 

“You're right there, pal,” Scripps said. 

“That’s a nice bird you got there, broth- 
er,” the drummer said. “You want to hang 
onto that bird.” 

Scripps knew it. Ah, these drummers 
know a thing or two. Going up and down 
over the face of this great America of ours. 
These drummers kept their eyes open. They 
were no fools. 

“Listen,” the drummer said. He pushed 
his derby hat off his brow and, leaning for- 
ward, spat into the tall brass cuspidor that 
stood beside his stool. “I want to tell you 
about a pretty beautiful thing that hap- 
pened to me once in Bay City.” 

Mandy, the waitress, leaned forward. 
Mrs. Scripps leaned toward the drummer to 
hear better. The drummer looked apologeti- 
cally at Scripps and stroked the bird with 
his forefinger. 

“Tell you about it some other time, 
brother,” he said. Scripps understood. From 
out of the kitchen, through the wicket in the 

[63] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


hall, came a high-pitched, haunting laugh. 
Scripps listened. Could that be the laughter 
of the negro? He wondered. 


[ 64} 


Chapter Nine 


ScRIPPS going slowly to work in the pump- 
factory in the mornings. Mrs. Scripps look- 
ing out of the window and watching him go | 
up the street. Not much time for reading 
The Guardian now. Not much time for read- 
ing about English politics. Not much time for 
worrying about the cabinet crises over there 
in France. The French were a strange peo- 
ple. Joan of Arc. Eva le Gallienne. Clemen- 
ceau. Georges Carpentier. Sacha Guitry. 
Yvonne Printemps. Grock. Les Fratellinis. 
Gilbert Seldes. The Dial. The Dial Prize. 
Marianne Moore. E. E. Cummings. ‘‘The 
Enormous Room.” “Vanity Fair.” Frank 
Crowninshield. What was it all about? 
Where was it taking her? 

She had a man now. A man of her own. 
For her own. Could she keep him? Could she 
hold him for her own? She wondered. 

Mrs. Scripps, formerly an elderly waitress, 
now the wife of Scripps O’Neil, with a good 
job in the pump-factory. Diana Scripps. 

[65] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


Diana was her own name. It had been her 
mother’s, too. Diana Scripps looking into 
the mirror and wondering could she hold 
him. It was getting to be a question. Why 
had he ever met Mandy? Would she have 
the courage to break off going to the restau- 
rant with Scripps to eat? She couldn’t do 
that. He would go alone. She knew that. It 
was no use trying to pull wool over her own 
eyes. He would go alone and he would talk 
with Mandy. Diana looked into the mirror. 
Could she hold him? Could she hold him? 
That thought never left her now. 

Every night at the restaurant, she could- 
n’t call it a beanery now—that made a lump 
come in her throat and made her throat 
feel hard and choky. Every night at the res- 
taurant now Scripps and Mandy talked to- 
gether. The girl was trying to take him 
away. Him, her Scripps. Trying to take him 
away. Take him away. Could she, Diana, 
hold him? 

She was no better than a slut, that Man- 
dy. Was that the way to do? Was that the 
thing to do? Go after another woman’s man ? 

[ 66 J 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


Come between man and wife? Break up a 
home? And all with these interminable liter- 
ary reminiscences. These endless anecdotes. 
Scripps was fascinated by Mandy. Diana ad- 
mitted that to herself. But she might hold 
him. That was all that mattered now. To | 
hold him. To hold him. Not to let him go. 
Make him stay. She looked into the mirror. 

Diana subscribing for The Forum. Diana 
reading The Mentor. Diana reading William 
Lyon Phelps in Scribner's. Diana walking 
through the frozen streets of the silent 
Northern town to the Public Library, to 
read The Literary Digest “Book Review.” 
Diana waiting for the postman to come, 
bringing The Bookman. Diana, in the snow, 
waiting for the postman to bring The Satur- 
day Review of Literature. Diana, bareheaded 
now, standing in the mounting snowdrifts, 
waiting for the postman to bring her the 
New York Times “Literary Section.” Was 
it doing any good? Was it holding him? 

At first it seemed to be. Diana learned ed- 
torials by John Farrar by heart. Scripps 
brightened. A little of the old light shining 

[ 67 } 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


in Scripps’s eyes now. Then it died. Some 
little mistake in the wording, some slip in 
her understanding of a phrase, some diver- 
gence in her attitude, made it all ring false. 
She would go on. She was not beaten. He 
was her man and she would hold him. She 
looked away from the window and slit open 
the covering of the magazine that lay on her 
table. It was Harpers Magazine. Harper's 
Magazine in a new format. Harpers Maga- 
zine completely changed and revised. Per- 
haps that would do the trick. She wondered. 


[68] 


Chapter Ten 


SPRING was coming. Spring was in the air. 
(Author’s Note.—This is the same day on 
which the story starts, back on page one.) A 
chinook wind was blowing. Workmen were 
coming home from the factory. Scripps’s 
bird singing in its cage. Diana looking out 
of the open window. Diana watching for her 
Scripps to come up the street. Could she 
hold him ? Could she hold him? If she could- 
n’t hold him, would he leave her his bird? 
She had felt lately that she couldn’t hold 
him. In the nights, now, when she touched 
Scripps he rolled away, not toward her. It 
was a little sign, but life was made up of 
little signs. She felt she couldn’t hold him. 
As she looked out of the window, a copy of 
The Century Magazine dropped from her 
nerveless hand. The Century had a new edi- 
tor. There were more woodcuts. Glenn 
Frank had gone to head some great univer- 
sity somewhere. There were more Van Dor- 

[69 } 


4 


& 


f 
B 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


ens on the magazine. Diana felt that might 
turn the trick. Happily she had opened The 
Century and read all morning. Then the 
wind, the warm chinook wind, had started 
to blow, and she knew Scripps would soon 
be home. Men were coming down the street 
in increasing numbers. Was Scripps among 
them? She did not like to put on her spec- 
tacles to look. She wanted Scripps’s first 
glimpse of her to be of her at her best. As she 
felt him drawing nearer, the confidence she 
had had in The Century grew fainter. She 
had so hoped that would give her the some- 
thing which would hold him. She wasn’t sure 
now. 

Scripps coming down the street with a 
crowd of excited workmen. Men stirred by 
the spring. Scripps swinging his lunch-buck- 
et. Scripps waving good-by to the workmen, 
who trooped one by one into what had for- 
merly been a saloon. Scripps not looking up 
at the window. Scripps coming up the stairs. 
Scripps coming nearer. Scripps coming near- 
er. Scripps here. 

““Good afternoon, dear Scripps,” she said. 

[70 } 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“Tve been reading a story by Ruth 
Suckow.” 

“Hello, Diana,” Scripps answered. He set 
down his lunch-pail. She looked worn and 
old. He could afford to be polite. 

“What was the story about, Diana?” he 
asked. f 

“Tt was about a little girl in Iowa,” Diana 
said. She moved toward him. ‘‘It was about 
people on the land. It reminded me a little 
of my own Lake Country.” 

“That so?” asked Scripps. In some ways 
the pump-factory had hardened him. His 
speech had become more clipped. More like 
these hardy Northern workers’. But his 
mind was the same. 

“Would you like me to read a little of it 
out loud?” Diana asked. “‘They’re some 
lovely woodcuts.” 

“How about going down to the bean- 
ery?” Scripps said. 

“As you wish, dear,” Diana said. Then 
her voice broke. “I wish—oh, I wish you’d 
never seen that place!’’ She wiped away her 
tears. Scripps had not even seen them. “PI 


[71] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING | 


ing the bird, dear,” Diana said. “He has- 

n't been’out all day.” 

f oatho they went down the street to 
the ‘beanery. They did not walk hand in 
hand'now They walked like what are called 
old married people. Mrs. Scripps carried the 
bird-cage. The bird was happy in the warm 
wind. Men lurching along, drunk with the 
spring, passed them. Many spoke to Scripps. 

- He was well known and well liked in the 
town now. Some, as they lurched by, raised 
- their hats to Mrs. Scripps. She responded 
vaguely. If I can only hold him,’ she was 
thinking. If I can only hold him. As they 
walked along the slushy snow of the narrow 
sidewalk of the Northern town, something 
began, to beat in her head. Perhaps it was 
the rhythm of their walking together. I can’t 
hold him. I can’t hold him. I can’t hold him. 

Scripps took her arm as they crossed the 
street. When his hand touched her arm 
Diana knew it was true. She would never 


3- + hold him. A group of Indians passed them 
-> on the street. Were they laughing at her or 


‘was it some tribal jest? Diana didn’t know. 


[72] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


All she knew was that rhythm that beat into 
her brain. I can’t hold him. I can’t hold him. 


Autuor’s Note: 

For the reader, not the printer. W; hal differ- 
ence does it make to the printer? Who ts the 
printer, anyway? Gutenberg. The Gulenberg 
Bible. Caxton. Twelve-point open-face Caston. 
The linotype machine. The author as a Little 
boy being sent to look for type lice. The author 
as a young man being sent for the key lo the 
forms. Ah, they knew a trick or two, these 
printers. 


(In case the reader is becoming confused, 
we are now up to where the story opened 
with Yogi Johnson and Scripps O’Neil in the 
pump-factory itself, with the chinook wind 
blowing. As you see, Scripps O’Neil has now 
come out of the pump-factory and is on his 
way to the beanery with his wife, who is 
afraid she cannot hold him. Personally, we 
don’t believe she can, but the reader will see 
for himself. We will now leave the couple on 
their way to the beanery and go back and 


Sa [73] 
«a 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


take up Yogi Johnson. We want the reader 
to like Yogi Johnson. The story will move a 
little faster from now on, in case any of the 
readers are tiring. We will also try and work 
in a number of good anecdotes. Would it be 
any violation of confidence if we told the 
reader that we get the best of these anec- 
dotes from Mr. Ford Madox Ford? We owe 
him our thanks, and we hope the reader 
does, too. At any rate, we will now go on 
with Yogi Johnson. Yogi Johnson, the read- 
er may remember, is the chap who was in 
the war. As the story opens, he is just coming 
out of the pump-factory. (See page three.) 
It is very hard to write this way, begin- 
ning things backward, and the author hopes 
the reader will realize this and not grudge 
this little word of explanation. I know I 
would be very glad to read anything the 
reader ever wrote, and I hope the reader will 
make the same sort of allowances. If any of 
the readers would care to send me anything 
they ever wrote, for criticism or advice, I am 
always at the Café du Déme any afternoon, 
talking about Art with Harold Stearns and 


[74] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


Sinclair Lewis, and the reader can bring his 
stuff along with him, or he can send it to me 
care of my bank, if I have a bank. Now, if 
the reader is ready—and understand, I don’t 
want to rush the reader any—we will go back 
to Yogi Johnson. But please remember that, 
while we have gone back to Yogi Johnson, 
Scripps O’Neil and his wife are on their way 
to the beanery. What will happen to them 
there I don’t know. I only wish the reader 
could help me.) 


[75 ] 


Part Three 
Men in War and the Death of Society 


It may be likewise noted that affectation does not im- 
ply an absolute negation of those qualities which are 
affected; and therefore, though, when it proceeds from 
hypocrisy, it be nearly allied to deceit; yet when it 
comes from vanity only, it partakes of the nature of 
ostentation: for instance, the affectation of liberality 
in a vain man differs visibly from the same affectation 
in the avaricious, for though the vain man is not what 
he would appear, or hath not the virtue he affects, 
to the degree he would be thought to have it; yet it 
sits less awkwardly on him than on the avaricious 
man, who is the very reverse of what he would seem 


to be. 
HENRY FIELDING. 


Chapter Eleven 


Yoc1 JoHNson walked out of the work- 
men’s entrance of the pump-factory and 
down the street. Spring was in the air. The 
snow was melting, and the gutters were run- 
ning with snow-water. Yogi Johnson walked 
down the middle of the street, keeping on 
the as yet unmelted ice. He turned to the 
left and crossed the bridge over Bear River. 
The ice had already melted in the river and 
he watched the swirling brown current. Be- 
low, beside the stream, buds on the willow 
brush were coming out green. 

It’s a real chinook wind, Yogi thought. 
The foreman did right to let the men go. It 
wouldn’t be safe keeping them in a day like 
this. Anything might happen. The owner of 
the factory knew a thing or two. When the 
chinook blew, the thing to do was to get the 
men out of the factory. Then, if any of them 
were injured, it was not on him. He didn’t 
get caught under the Employer’s Liability 
Act. They knew a thing or two, these big 

[79] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


pump-manufacturers. They were smart, all 
right. 

Yogi was worried. There was something 
on his mind. It was spring, there was no 
doubt of that now, and he did not want a 
woman. He had worried about it a lot lately. 
There was no question about it. He did not 
want a woman. He couldn’t explain it to 
himself. He had gone to the Public Library 
and asked for a book the night before. He 
looked at the librarian. He did not want her. 
Somehow, she meant nothing to him. At the 
restaurant where he had a meal ticket he 
looked hard at the waitress who brought him 
his meals. He did not want her, either. He 
passed a group of girls on their way home 
from High School. He looked carefully at all 
of them. He did not want a single one. De- 
cidedly something was wrong. Was he going 
to pieces? Was this the end? 

Well, Yogi thought, women are gone, per- 
haps, though I hope not; but I still have my 
love of horses. He was walking up the steep 
hill that leads up from the Bear River out 
onto the Charlevoix road. The road was not 

[80] 


\ THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


eally so steep, but it felt steep to Yogi, his 
egs heavy with the spring. In front of him 
was a grain and feed store. A team of beau- 
tiful horses were hitched in front of the feed 
store. Yogi went up to them. He wanted to 
touch them. To reassure himself that there 
was something left. The nigh horse looked | 
at him as he came near. Yogi put his hand in 
his pocket for a lump of sugar. He had no 
sugar. The horse put its ears back and 
showed its teeth. The other horse jerked its 
head away. Was this all that his love of 
horses had brought him? After all, perhaps 
there was something wrong with these 
horses. Perhaps they had glanders or spavin. 
Perhaps something had been caught in the 
tender frog of their hoof. Perhaps they were 
lovers. 

Yogi walked on up the hill and turned to 
the left onto the Charlevoix road. He passed 
the last houses of the outskirts of Petoskey 
and came out onto the open country road. 
On his right was a field that stretched to 
Little Traverse Bay. The blue of the bay 
opening out into the big Lake Michigan. 


[81] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


Across the bay the pine hills behind Harbor 
Springs. Beyond, where you could not see it, 
Cross Village, where the Indians lived. Even 
further beyond, the Straits of Mackinac with 
St. Ignace, where a strange and beautiful 
thing had once happened to Oscar Gardner, 
who worked beside Yogi in the pump-fac- 
tory. Further beyond, the Soo, both Cana- 
dian and American. There the wilder spirits 
of Petoskey sometimes went to drink beer. 
They were happy then. "Way, ’way beyond, 
and, in the other direction, at the foot of the 
lake was Chicago, where Scripps O’Neil had 
started for on that eventful night when his 
first marriage had become a marriage no 
longer. Near there Gary, Indiana, where 
were the great steel mills. Near there Ham- 
mond, Indiana. Near there Michigan City, 
Indiana. Further beyond, there would be In- 
dianapolis, Indiana, where Booth Tarking- 
ton lived. He had the wrong dope, that fel- 
low. Further down there would be Cincin- 
nati, Ohio. Beyond that, Vicksburg, Missis- 
sippi. Beyond that, Waco, Texas. Ah! there 
was grand sweep to this America of ours. 


[82] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


Yogi walked across the road and sat down 
on a pile of logs, where he could look out 
over the lake. After all, the war was over 
and he was still alive. 

There was a chap in that fellow Ander- 
son’s book that the librarian had given him | 
at the library last night. Why hadn’t he 
wanted the librarian, anyway? Could it be 
because he thought she might have false 
teeth? Could it be something else? Would 
a little child ever tell her? He didn’t know. 
What was the librarian to him, anyway? 

This chap in the book by Anderson. He 
had been a soldier, too. He had been at the 
front two years, Anderson said. What was 
his name? Fred Something. This Fred had 
thoughts dancing in his brain—horror. One 
night, in the time of the fighting, he went 
out on parade—no, it was patrol—in No 
Man’s Land, and saw another man stum- 
bling along in the darkness and shot him. 
The man pitched forward dead. It had 
been the only time Fred consciously killed 
a man. You don’t kill men in war much, 
the book said. The hell you don’t, Yogi 

[83] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


thought, if you’re two years in the infantry 
at the front. They just die. Indeed they 
do, Yogi thought. Anderson said the act 
was rather hysterical on Fred’s part. He 
and the men with him might have made 
the fellow surrender. They had all got the 
jimjams. After it happened they all ran 
away together. Where the hell did they 
run to? Yogi wondered. Paris? 

Afterward, killing this man haunted Fred. 
It’s got to be sweet and true. That was the 
way the soldiers thought, Anderson said. 
The hell it was. This Fred was supposed 
to have been two years in an infantry regi- 
ment at the front. 

A couple of Indians were passing along 
the road, grunting to themselves and to 
each other. Yogi called to them. The In- 
dians came over. 

“Big white chief got chew of tobacco?” 
asked the first Indian. 

“White chief carry liquor?” the second 
Indian asked. 

Yogi handed them a package of Peerless 
and his pocket flask. 


[ 84] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“White chief heap big medicine,” the 
Indians grunted. 

“Listen,” Yogi Johnson said. “I am 
about to address to you a few remarks 
about the war. A subject on which I feel 
very deeply.” The Indians sat down on © 
the logs. One of the Indians pointed at the 
sky. “Up there gitchy Manitou the 
Mighty,” he said. 

The other Indian winked at Yogi. “White 
chief no believe every goddam thing. he 
hear,” he grunted. 

“Listen,” Yogi Johnson said. And he 
told them about the war. 

War hadn’t been that way to Yogi, he 
told the Indians. War had been to him like 
football. American football. What they 
play at the colleges. Carlisle Indian School. 
Both the Indians nodded. They had been 
to Carlisle. 

Yogi had played centre at football and 
war had been much the same thing, in- 
tensely unpleasant. When you played foot- 
ball and had the ball, you were down with 
your legs spread out and the ball held out 

[ 85 } 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


in front of you on the ground; you had to 
listen for the signal, decode it, and make 
the proper pass. You had to think about 
it all the time. While your hands were on 
the ball the opposing centre stood in front 
of you, and when you passed the ball he 
brought his hand up smash into your face 
and grabbed you with the other hand under 
the chin or under your armpit, and tried 
to pull you forward or shove you back to 
make a hole he could go through and break 
up the play. You were supposed to charge 
forward so hard you banged him out of the 
play with your body and put you both on 
the ground. He had all the advantage. It 
was not what you would call fun. When 
you had the ball he had all the advantage. 
The only good thing was that when he had 
the ball you could rough-house him. In this 
way things evened up and sometimes even 
a certain tolerance was achieved. Football, 
like the war, was unpleasant; stimulating 
and exciting after you had attained a cer- 
tain hardness, and the chief difficulty had 
been that of remembering the signals. Yogi 
[ 86 } 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


was thinking about the war, not the army. 
He meant combat. The army was some- 
thing different. You could take it and ride 
with it or you could buck the tiger and let 
it smash you. The army was a silly business, 
but the war was different. 

Yogi was not haunted by men he had 
killed. He knew he had killed five men. 
Probably he had killed more. He didn’t be- 
lieve men you killed haunted you. Not if 
you had been two years at the front. Most 
of the men he had known had been excited 
as hell when they had first killed. The 
trouble was to keep them from killing too 
much. It was hard to get prisoners back 
to the people that wanted them for identi- 
fication. You sent a man back with two 
prisoners; maybe you sent two men back 
with four prisoners. What happened? The 
men came back and said the prisoners 
were knocked out by the barrage. They 
would give the prisoner a poke in the seat 
of the pants with a bayonet, and when the 
prisoner jumped they would say, “You 
would run, you son of a bitch,” and let 

[87] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


their gun off in the back of his head. They 
wanted to be sure they had killed. Also 
they didn’t want to go back through any 
damn barrage. No, sir. They learned those 
kind of manners from the Australians. 
After all, what were those Jerries? A bunch 
of goddam Huns. “Huns” sounded like a 
funny word now. All this sweetness and 
truth. Not if you were in there two years. 
In the end they would have softened. Got 
sorry for excesses and begun to store up 
good deeds against getting killed them- 
selves. But that was the fourth phase of 
soldiering, the gentling down. 

In a good soldier in the war it went like 
this: First, you were brave because you 
didn’t think anything could hit you, because 
you yourself were something special, and 
you knew that you could never die. Then 
you found out different. You were really 
scared then, but if you were a good soldier 
you functioned the same as before. Then 
after you were wounded and not killed, 
with new men coming on, and going 
through your old processes, you hardened 
and became a good hard-boiled soldier. 

[88] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


Then came the second crack, which is 
much worse than the first, and then you 
began doing good deeds, and being the boy 
Sir Philip Sidney, and storing up treasures 
in heaven. At the same time, of course, 
functioning always the same as before. As 
if it were a football game. 

Nobody had any damn business to write 
about it, though, that didn’t at least know 
about it from hearsay. Literature has too 
strong an effect on people’s minds. Like this 
American writer Willa Cather, who wrote 
a book about the war where all the last 
part of it was taken from the action in the 
“Birth of a Nation,” and ex-servicemen 
wrote to her from all over America to tell 
her how much they liked it. 

One of the Indians was asleep. He had 
been chewing tobacco, and his mouth was 
pursed up in sleep. He was leaning on the 
other Indian’s shoulder. The Indian who 
was awake pointed at the other Indian, who 
was asleep, and shook his head. 

“Well how did you like the speech?” 
Yogi asked the Indian who was awake. 

“White chief have heap much sound 

{ 89 } 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


ideas,” the Indian said. ‘White chief edu- 
cated like hell.” 

“Thank you,” Yogi said. He felt touched. 
Here among the simple aborigines, the only 
real Americans, he had found that true 
communion. The Indian looked at him, 
holding the sleeping Indian carefully that 
his head might not fall back upon the snow- 
covered logs. 

“Was white chief in the war?” the In- 
dian asked. 

“I landed in France in May, 1917,” Yogi 
began. 

“I thought maybe white chief was in 
the war from the way he talked,” the In- 
dian said. ‘‘Him,” he raised the head of 
his sleeping companion up so the last rays 
of the sunset shone on the sleeping Indian’s 
face, “he got V. C. Me I got D. S. O. and 
M. C. with bar. I was major in the Fourth 
CIM RIS 

“Tm glad to meet you,” Yogi said. He 
felt strangely humiliated. It was growing 
dark. There was a single line of sunset 
where the sky and the water met ’way out 

[90] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


on Lake Michigan. Yogi watched the nar- 
row line of the sunset grow darker red, thin 
. to a mere slit, and then fade. The sun was 
down behind the lake. Yogi stood up from 
the pile of logs. The Indian stood up too. 
He awakened his companion, and the In- | 
dian who had been sleeping stood up and 
looked at Yogi Johnson. 

“We go to Petoskey to join Salvation 
Army,” the larger and more wakeful Indian 
said. 

*‘White chief come too,” said the smaller 
Indian, who had been asleep. 

“TIl walk in with you,” Yogi replied. 
Who were these Indians? What did they 
mean to him? 

With the sun down, the slushy road was 
stiffening. It was freezing again. After all, 
maybe spring was not coming. Maybe it 
did not make a difference that he did not 
want a woman. Now that the spring was 
perhaps not coming there was a question 
about that. He would walk into town with 
the Indians and look for a beautiful woman 
and try and want her. He turned down the 


[91] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


now frozen road. The two Indians walked 
by his side. They were all bound in the 
same direction. 


[92] 


Chapter Twelve 


THROUGH the night down the frozen road 
the three walked into Petoskey. They had 
been silent walking along the frozen road. 
Their shoes broke the new-formed crusts 
of ice. Sometimes Yogi Johnson stepped 
through a thin film of ice into a pool of 
water. The Indians avoided the pools of 
water. 

They came down the hill past the feed 
store, crossed the bridge over the Bear 
River, their boots ringing hollowly on the 
frozen planks of the bridge, and climbed 
the hill that led past Doctor Rumsey’s 
house and the Home Tea-Room up to the 
pool-room. In front of the pool-room the 
two Indians stopped. 

“White chief shoot pool?” the big Indian 
asked. 

“No,” Yogi Johnson said. “My right 
arm was crippled in the war.” 

“White chief have hard luck,” the small 
Indian said. ‘‘Shoot one game Kelly pool.” 


[93] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“He got both arms and both legs shot 
off at Ypres.” The big Indian said in an 
aside to Yogi. “Him very sensitive.” 

“All right,” Yogi Johnson said. “PI 
shoot one game.” 

They went into the hot, smoke-filled 
warmth of the pool-room. They obtained a 
table and took down cues from the wall. 
As the little Indian reached up to take down 
his cue Yogi noticed that he had two arti- 
ficial arms. They were brown leather and 
were both buckled on at the elbow. On the 
smooth green cloth, under the bright elec- 
tric lights, they played pool. At the end of 
an hour and a half, Yogi Johnson found 
that he owed the little Indian four dollars 
and thirty cents. 

“You shoot a pretty nice stick,” he re- 
marked to the small Indian. 

“Me not shoot so good since the war,” 
the small Indian replied. 

“White chief like to drink a little?” 
asked the larger Indian. 

“Where do you get it?” asked Yogi. “I 
have to go to Cheboygan for mine.” 

[ 94] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“White chief come with red brothers,” 
the big Indian said. 

They left the pool-table, placed their 
cues in the rack on the wall, paid at the 
counter, and went out into the night. 

Along the dark streets men were sneak- — 
ing home. The frost had come and frozen 
everything stiff and cold. The chinook had 
not been a real chinook, after all. Spring 
had not yet come, and the men who had 
commenced their orgies were halted by the 
chill in the air that told them the chinook 
wind had been a fake. That foreman, Yogi 
thought, he’ll catch hell to-morrow. Per- 
haps it had all been engineered by the 
pump-manufacturers to get the foreman 
out of his job. Such things were done. 
Through the dark of the night men were 
sneaking home in little groups. 

The two Indians walked on either side of 
Yogi. They turned down a side street, and 
all three halted before a building that looked 
something like a stable. It was a stable. 
The two Indians opened the door and Yogi 
followed them inside. A ladder led up-stairs 

L2] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


to the floor above. It was dark inside the 
stable, but one of the Indians lit a match 
to show Yogi the ladder. The little Indian 
climbed up first, the metal hinges of his 
artificial limbs squeaking as he climbed. 
Yogi followed him, and the other Indian 
climbed last, lighting Yogi’s way with 
matches. The little Indian knocked on the 
roof where the ladder stopped against the 
wall. There was an answering knock. The 
little Indian knocked in answer, three sharp 
knocks on the roof above his head. A trap- 
door in the roof was raised, and they climbed 
up through into the lighted room. 

In one corner of the room there was a 
bar with a brass rail and tall spittoons. Be- 
hind the bar was a mirror. Easy-chairs were 
all around the room. There was a pool-table. 
Magazines on sticks hung in a line on the 
wall. There was a framed autographed por- 
trait of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow on 
the wall draped in the American flag. Sev- 
eral Indians were sitting in the easy-chairs 
reading. A little group stood at the bar. 

“Nice little club, eh?” an Indian came 

[96 } 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


up and shook hands with Yogi. “I see you 
almost every day at the pump-factory.” 

He was a man who worked at one of the 
machines near Yogi in the factory. Another 
Indian came up and shook hands with Yogi. 
He also worked in the pump-factory. 

“Rotten luck about the chinook,” he 
said. 

“Yes,” Yogi said. “‘Just a false alarm.” 

“Come and have a drink,” the first In- 
dian said. 

“Im with a party,” Yogi answered. 
Who were these Indians, anyway? 

“Bring them along too,” the first Indian 
said. “Always room for one more.” 

Yogi looked around him. The two In- 
dians who had brought him were gone. 
Where were they? Then he saw them. 
They were over at the pool-table. The tall 
refined Indian to whom Yogi was talking 
followed his glance. He nodded his head in 
understanding. 

“‘They’re woods Indians,” he explained 
apologetically. ‘“We’re most of us town In- 
dians here.” 


2 


E97] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“Yes, of course,” Yogi agreed. 

“The little chap has a very good war 
record,” the tall refined Indian remarked. 
“The other chap was a maior too, I be- 
lieve.” 

Yogi was guided over to the bar by the 
tall refined Indian. Behind the bar was the 
bartender. He was a negro. 

“How would some Dog’s Head ale go?” 
asked the Indian. 

“Fine,” Yogi said. 

“Two Dog’s Heads, Bruce,” the Indian 
remarked to the bartender. The bartender 
broke into a chuckle. 

“What are you laughing at, Bruce?” 
the Indian asked. 

The negro broke into a shrill haunting 
laugh. 

“I knowed it, Massa Red Dog,” he said. 
“I knowed you'd ordah dat Dog’s Head all 
the time.” 

“He’s a merry fellow,” the Indian re- 
marked to Yogi. “‘I must introduce myself. 
Red Dog’s the name.” 

“‘Johnson’s the name,” Yogi said. “Yogi 
Johnson.” 

[98] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“Oh, we are all quite familiar with your 
name, Mr. Johnson,” Red Dog smiled. “I 
would like you to meet my friends Mr. 
Sitting Bull, Mr. Poisoned Buffalo, and 
Chief Running Skunk-Backwards.” 

“Sitting Bull’s a name I know,” Yogi re- 
marked, shaking hands. 

“Oh, I’m not one of those Sitting Bulls,” 
Mr. Sitting Bull said. 

“Chief Running Skunk-Backwards’s 
great-grandfather once sold the entire Isl- 
and of Manhattan for a few strings of 
wampum,” Red Dog explained. 

“How very interesting,” Yogi said. 

“That was a costly bit of wampum for 
our family,” Chief Running Skunk-Back- 
wards smiled ruefully. 

“Chief Running Skunk-Backwards has 
some of that wampum. Would you like to 
see it?” Red Dog asked. 

‘Indeed, I would.” 

“Its really no different from any other 
wampum,” Skunk-Backwards explained dep- 
recatingly. He pulled a chain of wampum 
out of his pocket, and handed it to Yogi 
Johnson. Yogi looked at it curiously. What 

[99] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


a part that string of wampum had played 
in this America of ours. 

“Would you like to have one or two wam- 
pums for a keepsake?” Skunk-Backwards 
asked. 

“I wouldn’t like to take your wampum,” 
Yogi demurred. 

“They have no intrinsic value really,” 
Skunk-Backwards explained, detaching one 
or two wampums from the string. 

“Their value is really a sentimental one 
to Skunk-Backwards’s family,” Red Dog 
said. 

“It’s damned decent of you, Mr. Skunk- 
Backwards,” Yogi said. 

“Tt’s nothing,” Skunk-Backwards said. 
*“You’d do the same for me in a moment.” 

“It’s decent of you.” 

Behind the bar, Bruce, the negro barten- 
der, had been leaning forward and watch- 
ing the wampums pass from hand to hand. 
His dark face shone. Sharply, without ex- | 
planation, he broke into high pitched un- 
controlled laughter. The dark laughter of 
the negro. 

f 100 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


Red Dog looked at him sharply. “I say, 
Bruce,” he spoke sharply; “your mirth is 
a little ill-timed.” 

Bruce stopped laughing and wiped his 
face on a towel. He rolled his eyes apolo- 
getically. 

“Ah, can’t help it, Massa Red Dog. 
When I seen Mistah Skunk-Backhouse 
passin’ dem wampums around I jess 
couldn’t stand it no longa. Whad he wan 
sell a big town like New Yawk foh dem 
wampums for? Wampums! Take away 
yoah wampums!”’ 

“Bruce is an eccentric,” Red Dog ex- 
plained, “‘but he’s a corking bartender and 
a good-hearted chap.” 

“Youah right theah, Massa Red Dog,” 
the bartender leaned forward. “Pse got a 
heart of puah gold.” 

“He is an eccentric, though,” Red Dog 
apologized. ‘“‘The house committee are al- 
ways after me to get another bartender, 
but I like the chap, oddly enough.” 

“Tm all right, boss,” Bruce said. ‘‘It’s 
just that when I see something funny I 

T101] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


just have to laff. You know I don’ mean 
no harm, boss.” 

“Right enough, Bruce,” Red Dog agreed. 
“You are an honest chap.” 

Yogi Johnson looked about the room. 
The other Indians had gone away from the 
bar, and Skunk-Backwards was showing 
the wampum to a little group of Indians 
in dinner dress who had just come in. At 
the pool-table the two woods Indians were 
still playing. They had removed their 
coats, and the light above the pool-table 
glinted on the metal joints in the little 
woods Indian’s artificial arms. He had just 
run the table for the eleventh consecutive 
time. 

“That little chap would have made a 
pool-player if he hadn’t had a bit of hard 
luck in the war,’ Red Dog remarked. 
“Would you like to have a look about the 
club?” He took the check from Bruce, 
signed it, and Yogi followed him into the 
next room. 

“Our committee room,” Red Dog said. 
On the walls were framed autographed 

[102] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


photographs of Chief Bender, Francis Park- 
man, D. H. Lawrence, Chief Meyers, Stew- 
art Edward White, Mary Austin, Jim 
Thorpe, General Custer, Glenn Warner, 
Mabel Dodge, and a full-length oil paint- 
ing of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. 

Beyond the committee room was a 
locker room with a small plunge bath or 
swimming-pool. “Its really ridiculously 
small for a club,” Red Dog said. “But it 
makes a comfortable little hole to pop into 
when the evenings are dull.” He smiled. 
“We call it the wigwam, you know. That’s 
a little conceit of my own.” 

“Ifs a damned nice club,” Yogi said 
enthusiastically. 

“Put you up if you like,” Red Dog of- 
fered. ‘“What’s your tribe?” 

“What do you mean?” 

“Your tribe. What are you—Sac and 
Fox? Jibway? Cree, I imagine.” 

“Oh,” said Yogi. “‘My parents came from 
Sweden.” 

Red Dog looked at him closely. His eyes 
narrowed. 


[ 103] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


‘You're not having me on?” | 

“No. They either came from Sweden or 
Norway,” Yogi said. 

“Td have sworn you looked a bit on the 
white side,” Red Dog said. “Damned good 
thing this came out in time. There’d have 
been no end of scandal.” He put his hand 
to his head and pursed his lips. “‘Here, 
you,” he turned suddenly and gripped Yogi 
by the vest. Yogi felt the barrel of an auto- 
matic pushed hard against his stomach. 
“You'll go quietly through the club-room, 
get your coat and hat and leave as though 
nothing had happened. Say polite good-by 
to any one who happens to speak to you. 
And never come back. Get that, you 
Swede.” 

“Yes,” said Yogi. “Put up your gun. 
I’m not afraid of your gun.” 

“Do as I say,” Red Dog ordered. ‘‘As 
for those two pool-players that brought 
you here, IIl soon have them out of this.” 

Yogi went into the bright room, looked 
at the bar, where Bruce, the bartender, was 
regarding him, got his hat and coat, said 

[104] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


good-night to Skunk-Backwards, who asked 
him why he was leaving so early, and the 
outside trap-door was swung up by Bruce. 
As Yogi started down the ladder the negro 
burst out laughing. “I knowed it,” he 
laughed. “I knowed it all de time. No 
Swede gwine to fool ole Bruce.” 

Yogi looked back and saw the laughing 
black face of the negro framed in the ob- 
long square of light that came through the 
raised trap-door. Once on the stable floor, 
Bruce looked around him. He was alone. 
The straw of the old stable was stiff and 
frozen under his feet. Where had he been? 
Had he been in an Indian club? What was 
it all about? Was this the end? 

Above him a slit of light came in the 
roof. Then it was blocked by two black 
figures, there was the sound of a kick, a 
blow, a series of thuds, some dull, some 
sharp, and two human forms came crash- 
ing down the ladder. From above floated 
the dark, haunting sound of black negro 
laughter. 

The two woods Indians picked them- 

[105] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


selves up from the straw and limped toward 
the door. One of them, the little one, was 
crying. Yogi followed them out into the 
cold night. It was cold. The night was 
clear. The stars were out. 

“Club no damn good,” the big Indian 
said. ‘‘Club heap no damn good.” 

The little Indian was crying. Yogi, in 
the starlight, saw that he had lost one of 
his artificial arms. 

“Me no play pool no more,” the little 
Indian sobbed. He shook his one arm at 
the window of the club, from which a thin 
slit of light came. “‘Club heap goddam hell 
no good.” 

“Never mind,” Yogi said. “PIl get you 
a job in the pump-factory.” 

“‘Pump-factory, hell,” the big Indian 
said. “‘We all go join Salvation Army.” 

“Don’t cry,” Yogi said to the little In- 
dian. “TIl buy you a new arm.” 

The little Indian went on crying. He sat 
down in the snowy road. “No can play 
pool me no care about nothing,” he said. 

From above them, out of the window of 

[106] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


the club came the haunting sound of a 
negro laughing. 


Autuor’s NOTE To THE READER 

In case it may have any historical value, 
I am glad to state that I wrote the fore- 
going chapter in two hours directly on the 
typewriter, and then went out to lunch 
with John Dos Passos, whom I consider 
a very forceful writer, and an exceedingly 
pleasant fellow besides. This is what is 
known in the provinces as log-rolling. We 
lunched on rollmops, Sole Meuniére, Civet 
de Lièvre à la Chez Cocotte, marmelade 
de pommes, and washed it all down, as we 
used to say (eh, reader?) with a bottle of 
Montrachet 1919, with the sole, and a 
bottle of Hospice de Beaune 1919 apiece 
with the jugged hare. Mr. Dos Passos, I 
believe, shared a bottle of Chambertin 
with me over the marmelade de pommes 
(Eng., apple sauce). We drank two vieux 
marcs, and after deciding not to go to the 
Café du Déme and talk about Art we both 
went to our respective homes and I wrote 

[107] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


the following chapter. I would like the 
reader to particularly remark the way the 
complicated threads of the lives of the 
various characters in the book are gath- 
ered together, and then held there in that 
memorable scene in the beanery. It was 
when I read this chapter aloud to him that 
Mr. Dos Passos exclaimed. ‘‘ Hemingway, 
you have wrought a masterpiece.” 


P. S.— FROM THE AUTHOR TO THE READER 

It is at this point, reader, that I am 
going to try and get that sweep and move- 
ment into the book that shows that the 
book is really a great book. I know you 
hope just as much as I do, reader, that I 
will get this sweep and movement because 
think what it will mean to both of us. Mr. 
H. G. Wells, who has been visiting at our 
home (we're getting along in the literary 
game, eh, reader?) asked us the other day 
if perhaps our reader, that’s you, reader— 
just think of it, H. G. Wells talking about 
you right in our home. Anyway, H. G. 
Wells asked us if perhaps our reader would 

r 108 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


not think too much of this story was auto- 
biographical. Please, reader, just get that 
idea out of your head. We have lived in 
Petoskey, Mich., it is true, and naturally 
many of the characters are drawn from 
life as we lived it then. But they are other | 
people, not the author. The author only 
comes into the story in these little notes. 
It is true that before starting this story 
we spent twelve years studying the various 
Indian dialects of the North, and there is 
still preserved in the museum at Cross Vil- 
lage our translation of the New Testament 
into Ojibway. But you would have done 
the same thing in our place, reader, and I 
think if you think it over you will agree 
with us on this. Now to get back to the 
story. It is meant in the best spirit of friend- 
ship when I say that you have no idea, 
reader, what a hard chapter this is going 
to be to write. As a matter of fact, and I 
try to be frank about these things, we will 
nat even try and write it until to-morrow. 


[ 109} 


Part Four 


The Passing of a Great Race and the 
Making and Marring of Americans 


ye 


But perhaps it may be objected to me, that I have 
against my own rules introduced vices, and of a very 
black kind, into this work. To which I shall answer: 
first, that it is very difficult to pursue a series of human 
actions, and keep clear from them. Secondly, that the 
vices to be found here are rather the accidental con- 
sequences of some human frailty or foible, than causes 
habitually existing in the mind. Thirdly, that they 
are never set forth as the objects of ridicule, but de- 
testation. Fourthly, that they are never the principal 
figure at that time on the scene: and lastly, they never 


r i il. 
produce the intended evil CEET EEEN A 


Chapter Thirteen 


Yocı JoHNSON walking down the silent 
street with his arm around the little In- 
dian’s shoulder. The big Indian walking 


along beside them. The cold night. The 
shuttered houses of the town. The little 
Indian, who has lost his artificial arm. The ` 


big Indian, who was also in the war. Yogi 
Johnson, who was in the war too. The three 
` of them walking, walking, walking. Where 
were they going? Where could they go? 
What was there left? _ 

Suddenly under a street light that swung 
on its drooping wire above a street corner, 
casting its light down on the snow, the big 
Indian stopped. “Walking no get us no- 
where,” he grunted. “Walking no good. 
Let white chief speak. Where we go, white 
chief?” 

Yogi Johnson did not know. Obviously, 
walking was not the solution of their prob- 
lem. Walking was all right in its way. 

[113] 


oe!” 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


Coxey’s Army. A horde of men, seeking 
work, pressing on toward Washington. 
Marching men, Yogi thought. Marching 
on and on and where were they getting? 
Nowhere. Yogi knew it only too well. No- 
where. No damn where at all. 

“White chief speak up,” the big Indian 
said. 

“I don’t know,” Yogi said. “I don’t 
know at all.” Was this what they had 
fought the war for? Was this what it was 
all about? It looked like it. Yogi standing 
under the street light. Yogi thinking and 
wondering. The two Indians in their macki- 
naw coats. One of the Indians with an 
empty sleeve. All of them wondering. 

“White chief no speak?” the big Indian 
asked. 

“No.” What could Yogi say? What was 
there to say? 

“‘Red brother speak?” asked the Indian. 

“Speak out,” Yogi said. He looked down 
at the snow. “One man’s as good as an- 
other now.” 

“‘White chief ever go to Brown’s Bean- 

[1144 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


ery?” asked the big Indian, looking into 
Yogi’s face under the arc light. 

“No,” Yogi felt all in. Was this the end? 
A beanery. Well a beanery as well as any 
other place. But a beanery. Well, why not? 
These Indians knew the town. They were 
ex-service men. They both had splendid 
war records. He knew that himself. But a 
beanery. 

“White chief come with red brothers,” 
the tall Indian put his arm under Yogi’s 
arm. The little Indian fell into step. ‘‘For- 
ward to the beanery,” Yogi spoke quietly. 
He was a white man, but he knew when he 
had enough. After all, the white race might 
not always be supreme. This Moslem re- 
volt. Unrest in the East. Trouble in the 
West. Things looked black in the South. 
Now this condition of things in the North. 
Where was it taking him? Where did it all 
lead? Would it help him to want a woman? 
Would spring ever come? Was it worth 
while after all? He wondered. 

The three of them striding along the 
frozen streets of Petoskey. Going somewhere 

[115] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


now. En route. Huysmans wrote that. It 
would be interesting to read French. He 
must try it sometime. There was a street 
in Paris named after Huysmans. Right 
around the corner from where Gertrude 
Stein lived. Ah, there was a woman! Where 
were her experiments in words leading her? 
What was at the bottom of it? All that in 
Paris. Ah, Paris. How far it was to Paris 
now. Paris in the morning. Paris in the 
evening. Paris at night. Paris in the morn- 
ing again. Paris at noon, perhaps. Why 
not? Yogi Johnson striding on. His mind 
never still. 

All three of them striding on together. 
The arms of those that had arms linked 
through each other’s arms. Red men and 
white men walking together. Something 
had brought them together. Was it the 
war? Was it fate? Was it accident? Or 
was it just chance? These questions strug- 
gled with each other in Yogi Johnson’s. 
brain. His brain was tired. He had been 
thinking too much lately. On still they 
strode. Then, abruptly, they stopped. 

T116] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


The little Indian looked up at the sign. 
It shone in the night outside the frosted 
windows of the beanery. Best By TEsT. 

““Makeum heap big test,” the little In- 
dian grunted. 

“White man’s beanery got heap fine T- 
bone steak,” the tall Indian grunted. ‘‘Take 
it from red brother.” The Indians stood a 
little uncertainly outside the door. The 
tall Indian turned to Yogi. ‘‘White chief 
got dollars?” 

“Yes, I’ve got money,” Yogi answered. 
He was prepared to go the route. It was 
no time to turn back now. “The feed’s on 
me, boys.” 

“White a nature's nobleman,” the 
tall Indian grunted. 

“White chief rough diamond,” the little 
Indian agreed. 

“*You’d do the same for me,” Yogi dep- 
recated. After all, perhaps it was true. 
It was a chance he was taking. He had 
taken a chance in Paris once. Steve Brodie 
had taken a chance. Or so they said. 
Chances were taken all over the world 

[117] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


every day. In China, Chinamen were tak- 
ing chances. In Africa, Africans. In Egypt, 
Egyptians. In Poland, Poles. In Russia, 
Russians. In Ireland, Irish. In Armenia 

‘‘Armenians no take chances,” the tall 
Indian grunted quietly. He had voiced 
Yogi’s unspoken doubt. They were a canny 
folk these red men. 

“Not even in the rug game?” 

“Red brother think not,” the Indian 
said. His tones carried conviction to Yogi. 
Who were these Indians? There was some- 
thing back of all this. They went into the 
beanery. 


[118] 


AutHor’s NOTE TO READER 


It was at this point in the story, reader, 
that Mr. F. Scott Fitzgerald came to our 
home one afternoon, and after remaining 
for quite a while suddenly sat down in the 
fireplace and would not (or was it could not, 
reader?) get up and let the fire burn some- 
thing else so as to keep the room warm. I 
know, reader, that these things sometimes 
do not show in a story, but, just the same, 
they are happening, and think what they 
mean to chaps like you and me in the liter- 
ary game. If you should think this part of 
the story is not as good as it might have 
been remember, reader, that day in and day 
out all over the world things like this are 
happening. Need I add, reader, that I have 
the utmost respect for Mr. Fitzgerald, and 
let anybody else attack him and I would 
be the first to spring to his defense! And 
that includes you too, reader, though I 
hate to speak out bluntly like this, and take 

[119] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


the risk of breaking up a friendship of the 
sort that ours has gotten to be. 


P. S—To THE READER 

As I read that chapter over, reader, it 
doesn’t seem so bad. You may like it. I 
hope you will. And if you do like it, reader, 
and the rest of the book as well, will you tell 
your friends about it, and try and get them 
to buy the book just as you have done? 
I only get twenty cents on each book that 
is sold, and while twenty cents is not much 
nowadays still it will mount up to a lot if 
two or three hundred thousand copies of 
the book are sold. They will be, too, if 
every one likes the book as much as you 
and I do, reader. And listen, reader. I meant 
it when I said I would be glad to read any- 
thing you wrote. That wasn’t just talk. 
Bring it along and we will go over it to- 
gether. If you like, I’ll re-write bits of it 
for you. I don’t mean that in any critical 
sort of way either. If there is anything you 
do not like in this book just write to Mr. 
Scribner’s Sons at the home office. They’ll 

[ 120} 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


change it for you. Or, if you would rather, 
I will change it myself. You know what I 
think of you, reader. And you’re not angry 
or upset about what I said about Scott 
Fitzgerald either, are you? I hope not. Now 
I am going to write the next chapter. Mr. 
Fitzgerald is gone and Mr. Dos Passos had 
gone to England, and I think I can promise 
you that it will be a bully chapter. At least, 
it will be just as good as I can write it. We 
both know how good that can be, if we read 
the blurbs, eh, reader? 


T121} 


Chapter Fourteen 


Insine the beanery. They are all inside 
the beanery. Some do not see the others. 
Each are intent on themselves. Red men 
are intent on red men. White men are in- 
tent on white men or on white women. 
There are no red women. Are there no 
squaws any more? What has become of the 
squaws ? Have we lost our squaws in Amer- 
ica? Silently, through the door which she 
had opened, a squaw came into the room. 
She was clad only in a pair of worn mocca- 
sins. On her back was a papoose. Beside 
her walked a husky dog. 

“Don’t look!” the drummer shouted to 
the women at the counter. 

“Here! Get her out of here!” the owner 
of the beanery shouted. The squaw was 
forcibly ejected by the negro cook. They 
heard her thrashing around in the snow 
outside. Her husky dog was barking. 

“My God! What that might have led 

[122] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


to!” Scripps O’Neil mopped his forehead 
with a napkin. 

The Indians had watched with impas- 
sive faces. Yogi Johnson had been unable 
to move. The waitresses had covered their 
faces with napkins or whatever was handy. 
Mrs. Scripps had covered her eyes with The 
American Mercury. Scripps O’Neil was 
feeling faint and shaken. Something had 
stirred inside him, some vague primordial 
feeling, as the squaw had come into the 
room. 

“Wonder where that squaw came from?” 
the drummer asked. 

“Her my squaw,” the little Indian said. 

““Good God, man! Can’t you clothe her?” 
Scripps O’Neil said in a dumb voice. There 
was a note of terror in his words. 

“Her no like clothes,” the little Indian 
explained. “‘Her woods Indian.” 

Yogi Johnson was not listening. Some- 
thing had broken inside of him. Something 
had snapped as the squaw came into the 
room. He had a new feeling. A feeling he 
thought had been lost for ever. Lost for 

[123] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


always. Lost. Gone permanently. He knew 
now it was a mistake. He was all right now. 
By the merest chance he had found it out. 
What might he not have thought if that 
squaw had never come into the beanery? 
What black thoughts he had been think- 
ing! He had been on the verge of suicide. 
Self-destruction. Killing himself. Here in 
this beanery. What a mistake that would 
have been. He knew now. What a botch 
he might have made of life. Killing him- 
self. Let spring come now. Let it come. 
It couldn’t come fast enough. Let spring 
come. He was ready for it. 

“Listen,” he said to the two Indians. 
“I want to tell you about something that 
happened to me in Paris.” 

The two Indians leaned forward. ‘‘ White 
chief got the floor,” the tall Indian re- 
marked. 

“What I thought was a very beautiful 
thing happened to me in Paris,” Yogi 
began. “You Indians know Paris? Good. 
Well it turned out to be the ugliest thing 
that ever happened to me.” 


[ 124} 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


The Indians grunted. They knew their 
Paris. 

“Tt was the first day of my leave. I was 
walking along the Boulevard Malesherbes. 
A car passed me and a beautiful woman 
leaned out. She called to me and I came. 
She took me to a house, a mansion rather, 
in a distant part of Paris, and there a very 
beautiful thing happened to me. Afterward 
some one took me out a different door than 
I had come in by. The beautiful woman 
had told me that she would never, that she 
could never, see me again. I tried to get the 
number of the mansion but it was one of a 
block of mansions all looking the same. 

“From then on all through my leave I 
tried to see that beautiful lady. Once I 
thought I saw her in the theatre. It wasn’t 
her. Another time I caught a glimpse of 
what I thought was her in a passing taxi 
and leaped into another taxi and followed. 
I lost the taxi. I was desperate. Finally on 
the next to the last night of my leave I was 
so desperate and dull that I went with one 
of those guides that guarantee to show you 

[125] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


all of Paris. We started out and visited 
various places. ‘Is this all you’ve got?’ I 
asked the guide. 

“ ‘There is a real place, but it’s very ex- 
pensive,’ the guide said. We compromised 
on a price finally, and the guide took me. It 
was in an old mansion. You looked through 
a slit in the wall. All around the wall were 
people looking through slits. There, look- 
ing through slits could be seen the uni- 
forms of men of all the Allied countries, and 
many handsome South Americans in eve- 
ning dress. I looked through a slit myself. 
For a while nothing happened. Then a 
beautiful woman came into the room with 
a young British officer. She took off her 
long fur coat and her hat and threw them 
into a chair. The officer was taking off his 
Sam Browne belt. I recognized her. It was 
the lady whom I had been with when the 
beautiful thing happened to me,” Yogi 
Johnson looked at his empty plate of beans. 
“Since then,” I said. “I have never wanted 
a woman. How I have suffered I cannot 
tell. But I’ve suffered, boys, I’ve suffered. 
I blamed it on the war. I blamed it on 

[126] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


France. I blamed it on the decay of mo- 
rality in general. I blamed it on the younger 
generation. I blamed it here. I blamed it 
there. Now I am cured. Here’s five dollars 
for you, boys,” his eyes were shining. “‘Get 
some more to eat. Take a trip somewhere. 
This is the happiest day of my life.” 

He stood up from his stool before the 
counter, shook the one Indian impulsively 
by the hand, rested his hand for a minute 
on the other Indian’s shoulder, opened the 
door of the beanery, and strode out into the 
night. 

The two Indians looked at one another. 
“White chief heap nice fella,” observed the 
big Indian. 

“Think him was in the war?” asked the 
little Indian. 

“Me wonder,” the big Indian said. 

“‘White chief said he buy me new arti- 
ficial arm,” the little Indian grumbled. 

“Maybe you get more than that,” the 
big Indian said. 

“Me wonder,” the little Indian said. 
They went on eating. 

At the other end of the counter of the 

[ 127} 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


beanery a marriage was coming to an end. 

Scripps O’Neil and his wife sat side by 
side. Mrs. Scripps knew now. She couldn’t 
hold him. She had tried and failed. She 
had lost. She knew it was a losing game. 
There was no holding him now. Mandy 
was talking again. Talking. Talking. Al- 
ways talking. That interminable stream of 
literary gossip that was bringing her, 
Diana’s, marriage to an end. She couldn’t 
hold him. He was going. Going. Going 
away from her. Diana sitting there in 
misery. Scripps listening to Mandy talk- 
ing. Mandy talking. Talking. Talking. The 
drummer, an old friend now, the drummer, 
sitting reading his Detroit Mews. She 
couldn’t hold him. She couldn’t hold him. 
She couldn’t hold him. 

The little Indian got up from his stool 
at the beanery counter, and went over to 
the window. The glass on the window was 
covered with thick rimy frost. The little 
Indian breathed on the frozen window- 
pane, rubbed the spot bare with the empty 
sleeve of his mackinaw coat and looked 

[128] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


out into the night. Suddenly he turned 
from the window and rushed out into the 
night. The tall Indian watched him go, 
leisurely finished his meal, took a tooth- 
pick, placed it between his teeth, and then 
he too followed his friend out into the night. 


[ 129} 


Chapter Fifteen 


Tuey were alone in the beanery now. 
Scripps and Mandy and Diana. Only the 
drummer was with them. He was an old 
friend now. But his nerves were on edge to- 
night. He folded his paper abruptly and 
started for the door. 

“See you all later,” he said. He went 
out into the night. It seemed the only 
thing to do. He did it. 

Only three of them in the beanery now. 
Scripps and Mandy and Diana. Only those 
three. Mandy was talking. Leaning on the 
counter and talking. Scripps with his eyes 
fixed on Mandy. Diana made no pretense 
of listening now. She knew it was over. It 
was all over now. But she would make one 
more attempt. One more last gallant try. 
Perhaps she still could hold him. Perhaps 
it had all been just a dream. She steadied 
her voice and then she spoke. 

“Scripps, dear,” she said. Her voice 
shook a little. She steadied it. 

[130] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“What’s on your mind?” Scripps asked 
abruptly. Ah, there it was. That horrid 
clipped speech again. 

“Scripps, dear, wouldn’t you like to come 
home?” Diana’s voice quavered. ‘‘There’s 
a new Mercury.” She had changed from 
the London Mercury to The American 
Mercury just to please Scripps. “It just 
came. I wish you felt like coming home, 
Scripps, there’s a splendid thing in this 
Mercury. Do come home, Scripps, I’ve 
never asked anything of you before. Come 
home, Scripps ! Oh, won’t you come home?” 

Scripps looked up. Diana’s heart beat 
faster. Perhaps he was coming. Perhaps 
she was holding him. Holding him. Hold- 
ing him. 

“Do come, Scripps, dear,” Diana said 
softly. “Theres a wonderful editorial in 
it by Mencken about chiropractors.” 

Scripps looked away. 

“Won’t you come, Scripps?” Diana 
pleaded. | 

“No,” Scripps said. “I don’t give a damn 
about Mencken any more.” 

f 1314 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


Diana dropped her head. ‘‘Oh, Scripps,” 
she said. “‘Oh, Scripps.” This was the end. 
She had her answer now. She had lost him. 
Lost him. Lost him. It was over. Finished. 
Done for. She sat crying silently. Mandy 
was talking again. 

Suddenly Diana straightened up. She 
had one last request to make. One thing 
she would ask him. Only one. He might 
refuse her. He might not grant it. But she 
would ask him. 

“Scripps,” she said. 

“What’s the trouble?” Scripps turned 
in irritation. Perhaps, after all, he was sorry 
for her. He wondered. 

“Can I take the bird, Scripps?” Diana’s 
voice broke. 

“Sure,” said Scripps. “Why not?” 

Diana picked up the bird-cage. The 
bird was asleep. Perched on one leg as on 
that night when they had first met. What 
was it he was like? Ah, yes. Like an old 
osprey. An old, old osprey from her own 
Lake Country. She held the cage to her 
tightly. 


[ 132] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“Thank you, Scripps,” she said. “‘Thank 
you for this bird.” Her voice broke. “And 
now I must be going.” 

Quietly, silently, gathering her shawl 
around her, clutching the cage with the 
sleeping bird and the copy of The Mercury 
to her breast, with only a backward glance, 
a last glance at him who had been her 
Scripps, she opened the door of the bean- 
ery, and went out into the night. Scripps 
did not even see her go. He was intent on 
what Mandy was saying. Mandy was talk- 
ing again. 

“That bird she just took out,” Mandy 
was saying. 

“Oh, did she take a bird out?” Scripps 
asked. “‘Go on with the story.” 

“You used to wonder about what sort 
of bird that was,” Mandy went on. 

“That’s right,” Scripps agreed. 

“Well that reminds me of a story about 
Gosse and the Marquis of Buque,” Mandy 
went on. 

‘Tell it, Mandy. Tell it,” Scripps urged. 

“It seems a great friend of mine, Ford, 

{ 133 } 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


you’ve heard me speak of him before, was 
in the marquis’s castle during the war. 
His regiment was billeted there and the 
marquis, one of the richest if not the richest 
man in England, was serving in Ford’s 
regiment as a private. Ford was sitting in 
the library one evening. The library was 
a most extraordinary place. The walls 
were made of bricks of gold set into tiles 
or something. I forget exactly how it was.” 

“Go on,” Scripps urged. “It doesn’t 
matter.” 

“Anyhow, in the middle of the wall of 
the library was a stuffed flamingo in a 
glass case.” 

“They understand interior decorating, 
these English,” Scripps said. 

“Your wife was English, wasn’t she?” 
asked Mandy. 

“From the Lake Country,” Scripps an- 
swered. ‘‘Go on with the story.” 

“Well, anyway,” Mandy went on, ‘‘Ford 
was sitting there in the library one evening 
after mess when the butler came in and 
said: “The Marquis of Buque’s compliments 

[134] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


and might he show the library to a group 
of friends with whom he has been dining?’ 
They used to let him dine out and some- 
times they let him sleep in the castle. Ford 
said, ‘Quite,’ and in came the marquis in 
his private’s uniform followed by Sir Ed- 
mund Gosse and professor Whatsisname, 
I forget it for the moment, from Oxford. 
Gosse stopped in front of the stuffed fla- 
mingo in the glass case and said, ‘What 
have we here, Buque?’ | 

“Its a flamingo, Sir Edmund,’ the 
marquis answered. 

“*That’s not my idea of a flamingo,’ 
Gosse remarked. 

“ “No, Gosse. That’s God’s idea of a 
flamingo,’ Professor Whatsisname said. I 
wish I could remember his name.” 

“Don’t bother,” Scripps said. His eyes 
were bright. He leaned forward. Something 
was pounding inside of him. Something he 
could not control. “‘I love you, Mandy,” 
he said. “‘I love you. You are my woman.” 
The thing was pounding away inside of 
him. It would not stop. 

[135] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“That’s all right,” Mandy answered. 
“Tve known you were my man for a long 
time. Would you like to hear another story ? 
Speaking of woman.” 

“Go on,” Scripps said. “You must never 
stop, Mandy. You are my woman now.” 

“Sure,” Mandy agreed, “‘This story is 
about when Knut Hamsun was a street- 
car conductor in Chicago.” 

‘Go on,” Scripps said. “You are my 
woman now, Mandy.” 

He repeated the phrase to himself. My 
woman. My woman. You are my woman. 
She is my woman. It is my woman. My 
woman. But, somehow, he was not satis- 
fied. Somewhere, somehow, there must be 
something else. Something else. My woman. 
The words were a little hollow now. Into 
his mind, though he tried to thrust it out, 
there came again the monstrous picture of 
the squaw as she had strode silently into 
the room. That squaw. She did not wear 
clothes, because she did not like them. 
Hardy, braving the winter nights. What 
might not the spring bring? Mandy was 

[136] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


talking. Mandy talking on in the beanery. 
Mandy telling her stories. It grows late 
in the beanery. Mandy talks on. She is his 
woman now. He is her man. But is he her 
man? In Scripps’s brain that vision of the 
squaw. The squaw that strode unannounced 
into the beanery. The squaw who had been 
thrown out into the snow. Mandy talking 
on. Telling literary reminiscences. Authentic 
incidents. They had the ring of truth. But 
were they enough? Scripps wondered. She 
was his woman. But for how long? Scripps 
wondered. Mandy talking on in the beanery. 
Scripps listening. But his mind straying 
away. Straying away. Straying away. Where 
was it straying? Out into the night. Out 
into the night. 


{ 137 } 


Chapter Sixteen 


Nicut in Petoskey. Long past midnight. 
Inside the beanery a light burning. The 
town asleep under the Northern moon. 
To the North the tracks of the G. R. & I. 
Railroad running far into the North. Cold 
tracks, stretching North toward Mackinaw 
City and St. Ignace. Cold tracks to be 
walking on at this time of night. 

North of the frozen little Northern town 
a couple walking side by side on the tracks. 
It is Yogi Johnson walking with the squaw. 
As they walk Yogi Johnson silently strips 
off his garments. One by one he strips off 
his garments, and casts them beside the 
track. In the end he is clad only in a worn 
pair of pump-maker shoes. Yogi Johnson, 
naked in the moonlight, walking North be- 
side the squaw. The squaw striding along 
beside him. She carries the papoose on her 
back in his bark cradle. Yogi attempts to 
take the papoose from her. He would carry 
the papoose. The husky dog whines and 

[138] 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


licks at Yogi Johnson’s ankles. No, the 
squaw would carry the papoose herself. 
On they stride. Into the North. Into the 
Northern night. 

Behind them come two figures. Sharply - 
etched in the moonlight. It is the two In- 
dians. The two woods Indians. They stoop 
and gather up the garments Yogi Johnson 
has cast away. Occasionally, they grunt to 
one another. Striding softly along in the 
moonlight. Their keen eyes not missing a 
single cast-off garment. When the last gar- 
ment has been cast off they look and see 
far ahead of them the two figures in the 
moonlight. The two. Indians straighten up. 
They examine the garments. 

“White chief snappy dresser,” the tall 
Indian remarks, holding up an initialled 
shirt. 

‘White chief going get pretty cold,” 
small Indian remarks. He hands a vest to 
the tall Indian. The tall Indian rolls all the 
clothing, all the cast-off garments, into a 
bundle, and they start back along the 
tracks to the town. 

{ 139 } 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


“Better keep clothes for white chief or 
sellem Salvation Army?” asks the short 
Indian. 

“Better sellem Salvation Army,” the 
tall Indian grunts. ‘“‘White chief maybe 
never come back.” 

“White chief come back all right,” 
grunted the little Indian. 

“Better sellem Salvation Army, any- 
way,” grunts the tall Indian. ‘“White chief 
need new clothes, anyhow, when spring 
comes.” 

As they walked down the tracks toward 
town, the air seemed to soften. The Indians 
walk uneasily now. Through the tamaracks 
and cedars beside the railway tracks a 
warm wind is blowing. The snow-drifts are 
melting now beside the tracks. Something 
stirs inside the two Indians. Some urge. 
Some strange pagan disturbance. The warm 
wind is blowing. The tall Indian stops, 
moistens his finger and holds it up in the 
air. The little Indian watches. ‘‘Chinook?” 
he asks. 

“Heap chinook,” the tall Indian says. 

f 140 } 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


They hurry on toward town. The moon is 
blurred now by clouds carried by the warm 
chinook wind that is blowing. 

“Want to get in town before rush,” the 
tall Indian grunts. 

“Red brothers want be well up in line,” | 
the little Indian grunts anxiously. 

““Nobody work in factory now,” the tall 
Indian grunted. 

“Better hurry.” 

The warm wind blows. Inside the Indians 
strange longings were stirring. They knew 
what they wanted. Spring at last was com- 
ing to the frozen little Northern town. The 
two Indians hurried along the track. 


Tue END 


Autuor’s FINAL NOTE TO THE READER 


Well, reader, how did you like it? It 
took me ten days to write it. Has it been 
worth it? There is just one place I would 
like to clear up. You remember back in 
the story where the elderly waitress, Diana, 

f 141} 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


tells about how she lost her mother in 
Paris, and woke up to find herself with a 
French general in the next room? I thought 
perhaps you might be interested to know 
the real explanation of that. What actually 
happened was that her mother was taken 
violently ill with the bubonic plague in 
the night, and the doctor who was called 
diagnosed the case and warned the authori- 
ties. It was the day the great exposition 
was to be opened, and think what a case 
of bubonic plague would have done for the 
exposition as publicity. So the French 
authorities simply had the woman disap- 
pear. She died toward morning. The gen- 
eral who was summoned and who then got 
into bed in the same room where the mother 
had been, always seemed to us like a pretty 
brave man. He was one of the big stock- 
holders in the exposition, though, I believe. 
Anyway, reader, as a piece of secret history 
it always seemed to me like an awfully good 
story, and I know you would rather have 
me explain it here than drag an explana- 
tion into the novel, where really, after all, 
[1424 


THE TORRENTS OF SPRING 


it has no place. It is interesting to observe, 
though, how the French police hushed the 
whole matter up, and how quickly they 
got ahold of the coiffeur and the cab-driver. 
Of course, what it shows is that when you’re 
travelling abroad alone, or even with your 
mother, you simply cannot be too careful. 
I hope it is all right about bringing this in 
here, but I just felt I owed it to you, reader, 
to give some explanation. I do not believe 
in these protracted good-bys any more 
than I do in long engagements, so I will 
just say a simple farewell and Godspeed, 
reader, and leave Me now to your own 
devices. 


{ 143 } 


Bo 


is 


APR 
A ‘ 
vats 

T
