The Fitness of the Environment (Lawrence J. Henderson, 1913)
==========================================================
The environment fitted to life as life to environment; teleology's scientific rehabilitation. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (cu31924003093659).

ALBERT R. MAlSOSr 
LIBRARY 



New York State Colleges 

OF 

Agriculture and Home Economics 




AT 

Cornell University 



'^mmmm«^,S!l%!iS±?.!]TJ?.Pt^ an inquir 





Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tliis book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924003093659 



THE FITNESS 
OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

AN INQUIRY 

INTO THE BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF 

THE PROPERTIES OF MATTER 

BY 

LAWRENCE J. HENDERSON 

ASSISTANT PEOFE880B OP BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTHT 
IN HABVABD UNIVEBSITT 



IN PABT DELIVEKED AS LECTURES .IN THE 
LOWELL INSTITUTE, EEBKUART, 1913 



ISeia gorft 

THE MACMILLAJSr COMPANY 

1913 



AU HgMa reserved 

E.V. 



e 

QH5-1I 



5, 1 



CLf>P. I 



copteight, 1918, 
By THK MACMILLAN COMPAKT. 

Set up and electrotyped. Published February, 19x3. 



TSatiaaati ^xtss 

J. 8. Oushlng Co. — Berwick & Smith Co. 

Norwood, Mass., TT.B.A. 



PREFACE 

Darwinian fitness is compounded of a 
mutual relationship between the organism 
and the environment. Of this, fitness of en- 
vironment is quite as essential a component as 
the fitness which arises in the process of or- 
ganic evolution ; and in fundamental charac- 
teristics the actual environment is the fittest 
possible abode of life. Such is the thesis 
which the present volume seeks to establish. 
This is not a novel hypothesis. In rudimen- 
tary form it has already a long history behind 
it, and it was a familiar doctrine in the early 
nineteenth century. It presents itself anew 
as a result of the recent growth of the science 
of physical chemistry. 

About fifteen years ago I first beca^me inter- 
ested in the connection between physical and 
chemical properties of simple substances and 
the organic functions which they serve. At 
that time the applications of the new physical 
chemistry to physiology were only just begin- 
ning, and the older speculations of natural 
theology upon such subjects had long since 



vi PREFACE 

passed into oblivion. It was a time of very 
little interest in such matters, for many lines 
of development of natural science during the 
preceding quarter century had conspired to 
divert attention to other problems. The im- 
mediate occasion of my interest was, I well 
remember, the chance reading of Maly's im- 
portant but almost forgotten papers upon 
the diffusion and dialysis of phosphates, re- 
counting phenomena which, in the light of the 
modern theory of ionization, appeared simple 
enough, though to their discoverer they had 
been in some respects inexplicable. A series 
of researches have grown out of this interest, 
and since that time, whenever freedom has 
permitted, I have been occupied with various 
aspects of the problem of the neutrality or 
faint alkalinity of the organism. For it soon 
appeared that the key to the peculiar condi- 
tions of equilibrium between acids and bases 
in blood and protoplasm is to be found in such 
characteristics of phosphate solutions as Maly 
had observed, and in like behavior of similar 
solutions containing carbonic acid. When at 
length it became possible quantitatively to 
describe the chemical equilibra in such sys- 
tems, it was at once clear that, of all known 
substances, phosphoric acid and carbonic acid 
possess the greatest power of automatic regu- 



PREFACE Vii 

lation of neutrality (the concentration of ion- 
ized hydrogen and hydroxy! at the neutral 
point) . 

One does not like to accept a fact of such 
far-reaching importance as mere chance, and 
yet no other explanation was at hand. For, 
after the briefest consideration, it was obvious 
that here, at least, natural selection could not 
be involved. But it was also certain that this 
is no unique instance of a property of a simple 
substance automatically serving a very useful 
purpose in the processes of life. Like every 
one who has received a chemical training, I 
was vaguely conscious of numerous other simi- 
lar cases ; like every one who has any acquaint- 
ance with the general properties of matter, I 
knew that the remarkable thermal properties 
of water are of great importance to living or- 
ganisms. However, in spite of the fact that 
I had been brought face to face with a definite 
problem whose solution now appears to be 
perfectly* patent, so great is the natural inertia 
of the mind, and so firmly established was the 
belief that natural selection is, on the whole, 
quite adequate to account for biological fit- 
ness, that for a number of years I made no 
further progress. 

Then, finally, after a long period of uncer- 
tainty, came the realization of the reciprocal 



viii PREFACE 

character of Darwinian fitness, and at once 
the whole difficulty was resolved. On all 
sides instances of environmental fitness were 
manifest, and casual search brought many 
other cases to hght. The forgotten literature 
of natural theology is crammed with illustra- 
tions, and the recent biological developments 
of physical chemistry have provided still 
others. It is, indeed, a very curious episode 
in the history of thought that these well- 
known facts should have been so long forgot- 
ten or misconstrued. But, though forgotten, 
they have, so to speak, lain dormant in the 
minds of physical scientists, and I have found 
both chemists and physicists ready to accept 
them without hesitation. In the following 
pages an attempt has been made to collect 
and to interpret such facts, in so far as they 
arise among the compounds of carbon, hydro- 
gen, and oxygen, especially in the cases of 
water and carbonic acid. This restriction has 
been adopted in order to facilitate the logical 
discussion, and it should be borne in mind 
that other phenomena, dependent upon the 
properties of other substances, such as the 
above-mentioned characteristics of phosphate 
solutions, belong in the same category. 

The argument which has been thus devel- 
oped is comparatively rigid and closely woven. 



PREFACE ix 

That is, perhaps, in some respects unfortunate, 
because the impression which must be pro- 
duced is unlike that of the facts themselves, 
and the argument is certainly very different 
from the mental process through which I have 
myself passed in reaching the conclusion. But 
it would be very difficult indeed in any other 
manner to set forth all the necessary consid- 
erations, so that they should be intelligible to 
any one but the physico-chemical biologist, 
and on the whole there seems to be no choice 
but to follow a logical rather than a descrip- 
tive method. The reader will find, however, 
that in the main Chapters III, IV, V, and 
VI are concerned with evidence alone. This 
taken together, as a whole, is the only true 
ground for a conclusion, and it is upon the 
general character of the evidence rather than 
upon an argument which only serves as a 
means to the end that I should wish to rest 
my case. To many, on the other hand, as to 
any biologist who may not care to examine 
the difficult facts of physics and chemistry, 
Chapters I, II, VII, and VIII will be sufficient 
to explain both the purpose of the book and 
the outcome of the investigation. 

There has been a constant effort to restrict all 
discussions to the utmost, because at the pres- 
ent time encyclopaedic handbooks covering all 



X PREFACE 

departments of science have so multiplied that 
hardly any facts or theories which come within 
the scope of this work are inaccessible to the 
general reader. On the other hand, it has 
been deemed necessary to explain every sub- 
ject as it has arisen, for many of the readers 
of this volume will perhaps be unfamiliar even 
with the rudiments of all the departments of 
science which have necessarily been touched 
upon. 

Much of the content of the following pages 
has already been set forth in lectures. The 
general conclusion was presented last February 
to the members of the Harvard Seminary of 
Logic ; later in the academic year I delivered 
the substance of the book as part of a college 
course to my students of biological chemistry 
in Harvard College. 

I am indebted to many of my colleagues in 
Harvard for valuable assistance, criticism, 
and expressions of opinion. Without such 
assurances that I have not fallen into gross 
blunders, and that the conclusions appear rea- 
sonable to experienced men of science, I should 
not have dared to undertake a task which 
overtaxes my knowledge, or positively to as- 
sert a proposition which is in conflict with 
much of the scientific thought of the last half 
century. Especial thanks are due to Professor 



PREFACE XI 

Josiah Royce. His learning and generosity 
have in the past aided me to reach an under- 
standing of the philosophical problems of sci- 
ence, and in the preparation of this book they 
have repeatedly guided me aright. 

Seal Harboe, Maine, 
August, 1912. 



CONTENTS 
CHAPTER I 

PASS 

FITNESS 1 

I. Purpose and Ohdee 1 

II. Fitness 4 

in. The Environment 8 

A. Matter 8 

B. Energy 15 

C. Space and Time 19 

rV. The Ohganism 21 

A. Metabolism 24 

B. Organic Chemistry 28 

C. The Characteristics of Life .... 30 
V. The Pkoblem 36 



CHAPTER II 

THE ENVIRONMENT 38 

I. ASTBONOMT 38 

II. Possibm; Envibonmbnts 49 

ni. Geophysics 52 

IV. The Atmosphebe 55 

V. Gbnebai Cosmogbaphical Conclusions . . 60 
VI. The Pbimabt Constituents op the Envibon- 

MENT 61 

VII. The Ultimate Peoblem 63 

Vm. The Method op Solution 67 

xiii 



xiv CONTENTS 

CHAPTER in 



PAGE 



WATER ''^ 

I. Thermal Pbopehties 80 

A. Specific Heat 80 

B. Latent Heat 92 

C. Thermal Conductivity 106 

D. Expansion before Freezing .... 106 
n. The Action op Water upon Other Substances 110 

A. Water as a Solvent Ill 

B. Ionization 118 

C. Surface Tension 126 



CHAPTER IV 

CARBONIC ACID 133 

I. SOLUBILTTT 136 

II. Acidity 140 



CHAPTER V 

THE OCEAN 164 

I. The Regulation of Physico-chemical Conditions 164 

II. The Circulation of Water 180 

III. The Ocean as Environment .... 183 



CHAPTER VI 

THE CHEMISTRY OF THE THREE ELEMENTS . 191 

I. Organic Chemistry 191 

A. Valence 196 

B. Hydrocarbons 197 



CONTENTS XV 



PAGE 



C. Compounds of Carbon, Hydrogen, and Oxygen 202 

D. Other Organic Compounds .... 208 

E. The Characteristics of Organic Substances . 209 

F. The Sugars 222 

6. Hydrolysis 232 

n. Inorganic Chemistet 237 

III. Thehmochemistbt 243 



CHAPTER Vn 

THE ARGUMENT 249 

I. Analysis of the Evidence 260 

n. The ExHAxrsTivENESs or the Treatment ' . . 253 

m. Summary 267 



CHAPTER Vin 

LIFE AND THE COSMOS 274 

I. The Significance of Fitness .... 274 

n. Vitalism 282 

A. The Vitalism of Bergson 293 

B. Vitalism and Teleology 298 

HI. Cosmic Evolution 301 

A. The Periodic System 303 

B. Teleology 305 



CHAPTER I 

FITNESS 

I 
PURPOSE AND ORDER 

IDEAS of purpose and order are among 
the first concepts regarding their en- 
vironment which appear, as vague antici- 
pations of philosophy and science, in the 
minds of men. In truth, when the manifold 
phenomena and experiences of daily life 
stored in the memory are critically scruti- 
nized, purpose and order seem naturally to 
suggest themselves as explanations of the 
universe. Day and night, the changing but 
recurring seasons, the fertilizing sunshine 
and rain, the flight of birds, the powers of 
the human hand, and all the beauties and 
mysteries of nature cannot fail of such in- 
terpretation by the simple and untrained 
mind. Alike anthropology and the history 
of primitive civilizations bear witness to this 
natural tendency of thought. Such ideas pre- 



2 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

cede exact knowledge and civilization, and 
arise spontaneously among savage peoples. 
They are the solvent of the chaos, as which 
the outer world first presents itself to our 
eyes and hands, and they are the fabric of 
all theologies. 

As civilization has progressed, these early 
hypotheses have received endless criticism, 
and their definition has been continually 
sharpened. Meantime natural science has 
sought and provided ever more accurate 
accounts of the phenomena which first sug- 
gested them to man, and of countless other 
forms and transformations of matter and 
energy, and the discovery of laws of nature 
has steadily changed once quite mysterious 
order and 'purpose into the plainest of neces- 
sary results. 

Upon the advent of modern science Order 
speedily began to receive its true account 
when, after only a half century of progress, 
dynamics through Newton provided a formu- 
lation of the laws which govern the most 
striking of all the orderly phenomena of 
nature.^ Since Newton's day the explana- 

' " Die Newton'schen Principien sind geniigend, um ohne 
Hinzuziehung eines neuen Princips jeden praktisch vorkom- 
menden mechanischen Fall, ob derselbe nun der Statik oder 
der Dynamik angehort, zu durchschauen. Wenn sich hierbei 
Schwierigkeiten ergeben, so sind dieselben immer nur mathe- 



FITNESS 3 

tion of natural order as the automatic result 
of natural law has not ceased, and at length 
has become so nearly complete that the ap- 
pearance of order under any circumstances is 
now taken as proof of the existence of a law, "* 
The fate of the hypothesis of purpose in 
nature has been less simple, because the dis- 
covery of law, or even of the possibility of 
law, underlying adaptation and fitness was 
more difficult. Until the middle of the nine- 
teenth century the countless adaptations of 
organisms to the environment and the mani- 
fest fitness of nature for the activities of 
living things seemed to many biologists only 
explicable as the result of some directing 
force.^ Even skeptics were nearly or quite 

mathischer (formeller) und keineswegs mehr principieller 
Natur." — Mach, "Die Mechanik in Ihrer Entwickelung 
Historisch-Kritisch Dargestellt." Leipzig, 1897, 3d ed., p. 257. 

"Dann hat er auch die Aufstellung der heute angenom- 
men Principien der Mechanik zu einem Abschluss gebracht." 
— Mach, ibid. p. 181. 

* See for example that remarkable series of works, the 
Bridgewater Treatises "On the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness 
of God, as manifested in the Creation ; illustrating such work 
by all reasonable arguments, as for instance the variety and 
formation of God's creatures in the animal, vegetable, and 
mineral kingdoms; the efifect of digestion, and thereby of 
conversion; the construction of the hand of man, and an 
infinite variety of other arguments ; as also by discoveries 
ancient and modern, in arts, sciences, and the whole extent 
of literature." — Whewell, "Astronomy and General Phys- 



4 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

unable, however strong their desire, to ac- 
count for the facts with a plausible theory. 
The dogma of final .causes had led a thou- 
sand times to the truth by teaching the 
investigator that the true description of an 
organ or physiological process was to be found 
in its utility to the organism as a whole. 
Such considerations were far too numerous 
and too patent for science to shirk some 
explanation, and the only weighty explana- 
tion at hand seemed the teleological one. 

II 

FITNESS 

With a suddenness which to many seemed 
catastrophic Darwin's hypothesis of natural 
selection changed the whole aspect of the 
problem. Law appeared as the basis of 
purpose just as it had appeared as the basis of 
order, and adaptations became, in the judg- 
ment of most men, the necessary results of* 
an automatic process. To-day, after a half 
century, there is no longer room for doubt 
that the fitness of organic beings for their life 
in the world has been won in whole or in part 

ics Considered with Reference to Natural Theology." Lon- 
don, 1834, 4th ed., p. ix. 

To this series such men as Whewelland Sir Charles Bell 
contributed. 



FITNESS 5 

by an almost infinite series of adaptations of 
life to its environment, whereby, througb a 
corresponding series of .transformations, pres- 
ent complexity has grown out of former sim- 
plicity.^ 

The great and fruitful ideas which Darwin 
brought to the attention of the whole world 
have long since been incorporated into hu- 
man thought. Not the least important 
among them is the new scientific concept of 
fitness, as it emerges from the discussion of 
natural selection. Before Darwin, this concept 
possessed all the vagueness of an idea which, 
though in part founded on observation, was 
not to be explained with the help of existing 
scientific theories. But although Darwin's 
fitness involves that which fits and that which 
is fitted, or more correctly a reciprocal rela- 
tionship, it has been the habit of biologists 
since Darwin to consider only the adaptations 
of the living organism to the environment.^ 

* The ideas which are associated with the names of de 
Vries, as well as the very dififerent hypotheses of Driesch, 
Bergson, and others are, of course, concerned with the manner, 
not with the fact of adaptation and organic evolution. 

' Far different was the earlier point of view. An examina- 
tion of Whewell's Bridgewater Treatise at once reveals im- 
portant, if often fallacious, discussions of environmental fit- 
ness; e.g. "It has been shown in the preceding chapters that 
a great number of quantities and laws appear to have been 
selected in the construction of the universe ; and that by the 



6 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

For them, in fact, the environment, in its 
past, present, and future, has been an inde- 
pendent variable, and it has not entered into 
any of the modern speculations to consider 
if by chance the material universe also may 
be subjected to laws which are in the largest 
sense important in organic evolution. Yet 
fitness there must be, in environment as well 
as in the organism. How, for example, could 
man adapt his civilization to water power if 
no water power existed within his reach ? 

adjustment to each other of the magnitudes and laws thus 
selected, the constitution of the world is what we find it, and 
is fitted for the support of vegetables and animals in a manner 
in which it could not have been, if the properties and quan- 
tities of the elements had been different from what they are. 
We shall here recapitulate the principal of the laws and 
magnitudes to which this conclusion has been shown to 
apply. 

1. The Length of the Year, which depends on the force of 
the attraction of the sun, and its distance from the earth. 

2. The Length of the Day. 

3. The Mass of the Earth, which depends on its magni- 
tude and density. 

4. The Magnitude of the Ocean. 

5. The Magnitude of the Atmosphere. 

6. The Law and Rate of the Conducting Power of the 
Earth. 

7. The Law and Rate of the Radiating Power of the 
Earth. 

8. The Law and Rate of the Expansion of Water by Heat. 

9. The Law and Rate of the Expansion of Water by Cold, 
below 40 degrees. 



FITNESS 7 

At first sight it may well seem that inquiry 
into such a problem must end unsuccessfully 
in vague and unprofitable guesses. Indeed 
the past has brought forth no lack of such vain 
attempts, usually guided by a devotion to 
the doctrine of design in the service of the- 
ology. Yet other sciences have grown since 
1859, and physical and chemical data in 
abundance are now at hand to aid in a recon- 
sideration of the environment's fitness, if 

10. The Law and Quantity of tlie Expansion of Water by 
Freezing. 

11. The Quantity of Latent Heat absorbed in Thawing. 

12. The Quantity of Latent Heat absorbed in Evapora- 
tion. 

13. The Law and Rate of Evaporation with regard to 
Heat. 

14. The Law and Rate of the Expansion of Air by Heat. 

15. The Quantity of Heat absorbed in the Expansion of 
Air by Heat. 

16. The Law and Rate of the Passage of Aqueous Vapor 
through Air. 

17. The Laws of Electricity; its relations to Air and 
Moisture. 

18. The Fluidity, Density, and Elasticity of the Air, by 
means of which its vibrations produce Sound. 

"' 19. The Fluidity, Density, and Elasticity of the Ether, 
by means of which its vibrations produce Light." — Whe- 
WBLL, "Astronomy and General ' Physics Considered with 
Reference to Natural Theology." London, 1834, 4th ed., 
pp. 141-143. 

It is hard to understand how such ideas could have fallen 
into oblivion. 



8 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

such exist. Clearly it is well to seek among 
these data for a more precise formulation of 
the problem, which may then perchance lead 
to some more ambitious quest, or at least to 
new understanding of the old failure. 

Ill 

THE ENVIRONMENT 

The world of our senses is a world of matter 
and energy, space and time. After centuries 
of philosophical and scientific study, these, 
the very logical elements of science, are no 
doubt still without a final description. None 
the less is there sound foundation for the 
belief that our preliminary accounts of all 
four possess completeness in some respects 
and for certain purposes. Nor are we to-day 
less confident of the finality of some of our 
ideas regarding the nature of life and the vital 
processes, as they exist in this world. But 
both of these conclusions call for further 
consideration. 

A 

MATTER 

Many facts contribute to the belief, uni- 
versal among chemists, that the known ele- 
ments constitute by far the greatest part of 



FITNESS 9 

a system of materials out of which the uni- 
verse is formed, within which all chemical 
changes (except certain phenomena of radium 
and a few other anomalies, including perhaps 
unknown changes in the interiors of the 
celestial bodies) take place. 

It is certain that nearly all the chemical 
transformations upon the earth consist of 
rearrangements of the atoms of the known 
elements. A century and a half of scientific 
chemistry guarantee that conclusion with a 
security rarely attained in descriptive science. 
And the testimony of the spectroscope is 
equally conclusive that the visible stars, 
like the sun itself, are made up almost or 
quite exclusively of the same chemical ele- 
ments. Such facts, so familiar that they re- 
quire no comment or explanation, might 
sufficiently justify the acceptance of the chem- 
ist's known elements as the only important 
matter in the universe. But even more 
weighty evidence is at hand; I mean the 
so-called periodic classification of the ele- 
ments. 

It has long been evident that simple rela- 
tionships exist in some cases between the 
atomic weights of similar elements. For ex- 
ample, the atomic weights of bromine, stron- 
tium, and selenium are approximately equal 



10 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

to the means of the atomic weights of chlorine 
and iodine, of calcium and barium, and of 
sulphur and tellurium respectively. More 
general relationships between the atomic 
weights and properties of the elements were 
first pointed out by Newlands in 1864 and 
were extended by Mendeleeff and Lothar 
Meyer a little later. Out of these studies 
has arisen the law that the properties of the 
elements are periodic functions of their atomic 
weights. 

The essential characteristics of tliis law are 
best illustrated by a consideration of the 
relative volumes occupied by atoms of the 
various elementary substances, the so-called 
atomic volumes, which may be expressed by 
dividing atomic weights by specific gravities. 
The facts are graphically represented upon 
the accompanying diagram, where atomic 
weights are plotted horizontally, atomic vol- 
umes vertically. 

Beginning with lithium the volumes fall 
to boron and carbon, then rise irregularly to 
sodium. A second fall leads to aluminium, 
a second rise to potassium, and then the rises 
and falls of the curve are repeated until, 
among the elements of higher atomic weight, 
gaps break the continuity of the relationship. 
On the whole curve similar elements occupy 



FITNESS 



11 




12 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

similar positions. Thus the alkali metals, 
lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium, and 
caesium, occupy the crests of the waves; the 
halogens, fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and 
iodine, fall about midway between crests 
and troughs, and a little further study dis- 
closes a host of other corresponding relation- 
ships. 

Similar periodic variations may be shown 
to occur in other physical properties of the 
elements ; — the melting points, the boiling 
points, the magnetic characteristics, etc. 
Even more striking are the periodic varia- 
tions in chemical properties, including the 
general characteristics which first led to the 
idea of rational classification, and more spe- 
cific qualities like the combining powers for 
hydrogen, oxygen, and other elements. 

The clearest proof of the value of the 
periodic classification has been the predic- 
tion of "new" elements, and accurate fore- 
knowledge of their properties. Thus when 
Mendeleeff first described the system, the 
element germanium, discovered by Winkler 
in 1886, was unknown ; but from the proper- 
ties of the elements surrounding a gap in the 
system the Russian chemist was able to 
predict its properties with almost incredible 
exactness, as the following table shows. 



FITNESS 



13 



Atomic weight . . . 
Specific gravity . . . 
Atomic volume . . . 
Formula of oxide . . 
Specific gravity of oxide 
Formula of chloride . 
Boiling point of chloride 
Specific gravity of chloride 
Formula of fluoride . . 
Formula of ethyl compound 
Specific gravity of ethyl compound 




Finally it is to be especially noted that, 
upon arranging the known elements in a 
table rationally constructed upon the basis 
of the above recorded facts, comparatively 
few spaces within the range of known atomic 
weights remain to be filled. The conclusion 
is obvious that very few elements now un- 
known are possible unless they possess very 
high atomic weights. But the apparent 
transmutation of radium into helium is a 
pretty clear indication that elements of very 
high atomic weight may be unstable. If 
they have existed in number and large quan- 
tity, they probably have long since ceased 
so to exist, except perhaps in the interior 
of celestial bodies, and they are not likely 
elsewhere to complicate natural phenomena 
by their unknown properties. 



14 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 









§ 


Fe Co Ni 
56.9 59.0 58.7 

Ru Rh Pd 
101.7 103.0 106.5 

03 Ir Pt 
191 193.0 194.8 


1-4 
> 


"^S^gSS '-^ . . . . 


> 


o to ^ cDO> £t- 


> 


q o « ^'- ^g Bi 
I?-* Ph^ >^ rt o» 

" " " fS : e5S : 


> 


c 

12.00 

Si 
28.4 

Ti 
48.1 

Ge 

72.5 

Zr 
90.6 

Sn 
119.0 , 

Ce 

140.2 

Pb 
206.9 

Th 

232.5 




CO »-l rH 


HH 


Be 
9.1 

Mg 
24.36 

Ca 
40.1 

Zn 
65.4 

Sr 
87.6 

Cd 
112.4 

Ba 

137.4 

Hg 

200.0 

Ra 

225 


M 


Li 
7.03 

Na 
23.05 

39.15 

Cu 
63.6 

Rb 

85.5 

Ag 
107.93 

Cs 
133 

Au 
197.2 


o 


S-^S^l ■■ ^^ ■■ X^ : : : 



FITNESS 15 

The behavior of radium and the classifica- 
tion jtself suggest one further idea: the hy- 
pothesis that the elements are genetically 
related, that they have been evolved by some 
unknown process according to unknown laws. 
Certain it is that the properties of matter are 
no chance phenomena, and that transmuta- 
tion has ceased to be merely a philosopher's 
dream. 

All of these familiar facts of chemical science 
fully justify us in dealing, with matter as a 
known factor in the study of life conditions 
in the universe. For, whatever may be the 
fate of present theories, our present practical 
knowledge of the behavior of matter cannot 
fail us in the future. 

B 

ENERGY 

Contemporary with the work of Darwin 
and of Mendeleeff were the feats of Mayer, 
Joule, Helmholtz, Kelvin, and Clausius, 
whereby ideas of energy assumed their mod- 
ern aspect. In the revolution wrought by 
these men imponderables and fluids vanished 
from this domain, and energy became that 
which, not being matter, is conserved. The 
new principles of the 'fifties have held their 
own until to-day. Meantime they have 



16 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

made of thermodynamics (the department of 
science which is especially concerned with 
the laws of energy transformation) a sub- 
ject which few who cultivate the physical 
sciences may disregard. Countless develop- 
ments and achievements of thermodynamics 
give very real ground for the belief that we 
may speculate about the transformations of 
energy in the universe with the same assur- 
ance that we have in discussing chemical 
changes. 

Our reasons for confidence in the truth of 
current general notions of energy, and in 
their adequacy to account for any phenomena 
so far as energy is concerned, wherever life 
exists in the universe, are manifold, and not 
unlike those which have been reviewed in dis- 
cussing the elements. 

Centuries of search have revealed, in addi- 
tion to that most obvious form which is 
studied in dynamics, a very small number of 
varieties or manifestations of energy, such as 
heat, electricity, magnetism, optical energy, 
and chemical energy. Such manifestations 
of energy are by no means confined to the 
earth or to the solar system. Indeed Newton 
first worked out the general laws of dynamics 
and erected them into a complete science 
with the aid, not of terrestrial, but of astro- 



FITNESS 17 

nomical phenomena.^ And recent most re- 
markable studies of the stars have enabled 
astronomers to account for obscure events 
in far distant parts of the universe by the 
application of the principles of dynamics. 
Similarly light, heat, and chemical energy, as 
we know them, are unquestionably universal. 
No doubt the manifestations of energy 
within the sun and stars, like the accompany- 
ing material phenomena there, can to-day 
only be surmised. For aught we know, 
these places may, as has been guessed, be the 
birthplace of elements and the seat of mani- 
festations of energy quite different from 

^ "What the Occasion of Sir Iscloc Newton's leaving the 
Cartesian Philosophy, and of discovering his amazing Theory 
of Gravity was, I have heard him long ago, soon after my first 
Acquaintance with him, which was 1694, thus relate, and of 
which Dr. Pemberton gives the like Account, and somewhat 
more fully, in the Preface to his Explication of his Philos- 
ophy: It was this. An Inclination came into Sir Isaac's 
Mind to try, whether the same Power did not keep the Moon 
in her Orbit, notwithstanding her projectile Velocity, which 
he knew always tended to go along a strait Line the Tangent 
of that Orbit, which makes Stones and all heavy Bodies with 
us fall downward, and which we call Gravity f Taking this 
Postulatum, which had been thought of before, that such 
Power might decrease, in a duplicate Proportion of the Dis- 
tances from the Earth's Center." — "Memoirs of the Life 
of Mr. William Whiston by Himself." London, 1749, Vol. I, 
pp. 35-38. Quoted by Ball. "An Essay on Newton's Prin- 
cipia." London, 1893, p. 8. 
c 



18 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

what we have ever observed. But, however 
interesting and important such processes may 
be, it is not to be supposed that they are of 
direct moment in physiological processes. 
These conditions are far beyond the limits 
of our present investigation. Accordingly, 
everything that observation has taught con- 
firms the belief that energy, like matter, is 
in general well known to us. Its manifesta- 
tions are few, and they are universal. But 
just as the generalizations of science yield 
further assurance regarding matter, so they 
do not fail to confirm our conclusions in the 
study of energy. The law of the conserva- 
tion of energy and the law of the degradation 
of energy, otherwise known as the first and 
second laws of thermodynamics, clearly in- 
dicate that the manifestations of energy are 
not accidental nor independent of one an- 
other. They are orderly, and they obey laws. 
Energy is one and indestructible. 

Such are the apparently irrefragable con- 
clusions of the brief half century of creative 
development, from the time when Young 
first used the word "energy" and Bolton and 
Watt first employed the idea of measuring 
energy in horse power, through the period of 
Carnot's brilliant intuition regarding the ref- 
lation between heat and work, to the epoch 



FITNESS 19 

of the foundation of thermodynamics.'^ To- 
day we know that just so much heat, neither 
more nor less, may be obtained by the com- 
plete conversion of a unit of electrical energy 
or by a given chemical process. We know, 
moreover, that not every conceivable change 
from one form of energy to another is possible. 
On the whole, energy can flow in but one 
direction; perpetual motion is impossible; 
and useful energy is steadily becoming de- 
graded, dissipated, and useless. 

Such laws are fully worthy of a place be- 
side the periodic law, and they justify equal 
confidence in the adequacy of our current 
descriptions of matter and of energy for the 
piuposes of biology. 

C 

SPACE AND TIME 

Since Kant revolutionized modern phi- 
losophy, the whole world has steadily realized 
that between matter and energy on the one 
hand, and space and time on the other, there 
is a real and highly significant difference.^ 

^ An excellent account of this period may be found in 
Merz's "History of European Thought in the Nineteenth 
Century," Vol. U, Chap. VII, "On the Physical View of 
Nature." 

^ For a brief statement of Kant's argument see Royce, 
"The Spirit of Modern Philosophy," pp. 121-125. 



20 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

But, however important such distinctions may 
be for the philosopher, the man of science in 
his practical task is obliged to put them 
aside and to make the best of whatever evi- 
dence experience, observation, and experi- 
ment may supply. Out of such studies space 
and time have emerged, usefully defined by 
mathematical criticisni as substantial parts 
of the edifice of science.^ 

There is no small difficulty in the exposi- 
tion of modern critical results regarding 
space and time, but fortunately there is little 
need of considering them on the present 
occasion. For in spite of all assaults of phi- 
losophers and mathematicians space remains 
for practical purposes more certainly than 
ever the Euclidian space of the ancients, 
only it has become somewhat richer in char- 
acteristics. And time is now and forever 
that which flows equably, wholly independ- 
ent of all else, though almost all else is , 
dependent upon time. It is Euclidian space 
in which the earth moves and describes its 
ellipse, parallel rays of light never do meet 
in our practical experience, and our crystals 

1 The works of Poincare, "La Science et THypotli^e," "La 
Valeur de la Science," and "Science et M6thode," published 
by Flammarion, may be consulted for a/^opular statement of 
such mathematical studies. 



FITNESS 21 

are in form the figures of Euclidian geometry. 
Our time flows ever in proportion to the 
swings of a pendulum, the propagation of 
light, and the progress of a chemical change. 
Time and space are thus bound to matter 
and energy by experience, and for practical 
purposes we accept all four as science at 
present knows them.^ We cannot doubt 
that knowledge of them will increase and 
ideas of them change. But we can scarcely 
think that our present ideas are inadequate 
for our present purposes, or that, for life, 
matter will ever be other than the elements 
of the periodic classification, energy that set 
of quantities to which we apply the laws of 
thermodynamics, and time and space the 
concepts which were familiar to Galileo and 
Euclid. 

IV 

THE ORGANISM 

Thus the growth of physical science has 
provided the speculative biologist with a 
very accurate and extensive description of 
the physico-chemical structure of the ma- 
terial universe and with a well-founded con- 

^ In the present work we need have no concern for the 
so-called principle of relativity. 



22 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

fidence in his right to make use of the descrip- 
tion in investigating the relationship between 
life and the environment. 

The biologist studies living organisms as 
inhabitants of this world, and by holding 
fast to physics and chemistry he has created 
modern physiology, a science which unites 
many, indeed nearly all, of the departments 
of physics and chemistry in the task of de- 
scribing the processes of life. 

That task has proved an arduous one, even 
in comparison with the other enterprises of 
science, and it must be confessed that few 
of the depiartments of physiology wear an 
aspect of finality which has long been famil- 
iar in Such sciences as mechanics and crystal- 
lography, for example. Yet, as time has 
passed, and the nature of the material basis 
of life and the conspicuous features of the 
mechanism which the organism presents for 
study have become more familiar, assurance 
has steadily grown of the possibility of decid- 
ing upon fundamental and essential char- 
acteristics of the life process. No doubt 
opinions have fluctuated, and in diflferent 
periods of the history of science particular 
phenomena of living organisms have been 
examined, criticized, and then well-nigh for- 
gotten. But gradually ideas, ever more and 
more precise, have arisen and been accepted. 



FITNESS 23 

Until very recent times, however, the 
main interest has centered upon morpho- 
logical problems and upon the processes of 
growth and development. The ancient con- 
troversies regarding types and homologous 
parts, the question of spontaneous genera- 
tion and the whole science of embryology, 
and inquiries into the nature of fermentation 
and the role of microorganisms are examples 
of the older tendencies. Such interests have, 
it need hardly be said, lost none of their im- 
portance, but they scarcely touch the physico- 
chemical problem of the nature of living 
things. Yet there is in these subjects one 
point of view, a favorite of Cuvier's, now, 
though still familiar, less often emphasized, 
which states a most important characteristic 
of life in terms of matter and energy, space 
and time.^ Living things preserve, or tend 

* "La vie est done un tourbillon plus ou moins rapide, 
plus ou moins complique, dent la direction est constante, 
et qui entratne toujours des molecules de mSmes sortes, mais 
ou les molecules individueUes entrent et d'ou elles s&rtent 
continuellement, de maniere que la forme du corps vivant 
lui est plus essentielle que la matiere." ("Regne animal," 
p. 13, etc.) "II vient sans cesse des elements du dehors en 
dedans : D s'en echappe du dedans en dehors : toutes les par- 
ties sont dans un tourbiUon continual, qui est une condition 
essentielle du phenomene, et que nous ne pouvons suspendre 
longtemps sans I'arrSter pour jamais. Les branches les plus 
simples de I'histoire naturelle participant deja a cette compli- 



24 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

to preserve, an ide£(,l form, while through 
them flows a steady stream of energy and mat- 
ter which is ever changing, yet momentarily 
molded by life; organized, in short. This 
idea, to which we must later return, could 
not possess in the early nineteenth century 
the significance and value which now attach 
to it. It needed the explanation which the 
study of metabolism has at length provided. 

A 

METABOLISM 

Metabolism is the term applied to the in- 
flow and outflow of matter and energy and 
their intermediary transformations within the 
organism. Its serious investigation began 
with Lavoisier, the principal founder of mod- 
cation et a ce mouvement perp6tuel, qui rendent si difiBcile 
rapplication des sciences generales. " (" Rapport," p. 150, etc.) 
" Dans les corps vivans chaque partie a sa composition propre 
et distincte ; aucune de leurs molecules ne reste en place ; 
toutes entrent et sortent successivement : la vie est un tour- 
billon continuel, dont la direction, toute compliqu6e qu'elle, 
est, demeure constante, ainsi que I'espece des molecules qui 
y sent entralnees, mais non les molecules individuelles elles- 
mSmes. . . . Ainsi la forme de ces corps leur est plus 
essentielle que leur matiere," etc. (^Ibid. p. 200.) — "Eloges 
historiques," Vol. I, p. 200. Quoted by Merz, "A History of 
European Thought in the Nineteenth Century," Vol. I, p. 
1294 Edinburgh and London, 1898. 



FITNESS 25 

ern chemistry, who by ingenious experiments 
discovered that the essential feature of the 
chemical process in the animal is combus- 
tion or oxidation, and that the amount of oxy- 
gen required by such combustion is not much 
less than that needed to burn substances which 
resemble the foods in the air. The problems 
which thus arose have been studied by a 
host of later investigators, notably by Liebig 
and Voit, and gradually a vast array of facts 
concerning the turnover of matter and en- 
ergy in the body have been accumulated. 
Among other achievements is the proof that 
the principle of the conservation of energy 
applies to the living organism. These have 
been chemical investigations, carried out by 
chemists, and for that reason, until quite 
recently, they have not received their due 
in general biology. 

Meantime, as knowledge of the balance 
sheet of the body, the total metabolism so- 
called, has been perfected, more and more 
interest has developed in the changes which 
attend the passage of matter and energy in 
their various stages through the organism. 
Such problems at once demand a physico- 
chemical description of protoplasm as a nec- 
essary basis for their solution. The same 
demand has also arisen in other quarters. 



26 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

Thus the microscope, with all its brilliant 
contributions to knowledge of the form and 
more gross structural elements of the cell, 
hardly at all contributes to knowledge of its 
physico-chemical organization as a mechan- 
ism. Out of such needs a preliminary, if 
very imperfect, rational description of proto- 
plasm has arisen, and gradually the physical 
and chemical laws governing protoplasm, its 
form, composition, and stability, its con- 
stituent parts and their mode of action, and 
the physical and chemical changes within 
it are being discovered.^ The idea of dur- 
able form in matter and energy that change 
can now be applied to the cell with greater 
advantage, in that descriptions of the form 
and of the change are now at hand, though 
as yet all too imperfect. 

Another profoundly important contribu- 
tion of the science of metabolism to our 
knowledge of the characteristics of life is the 
discovery of the cycle of matter through 
plants and animals.^ The plant takes up 
carbonic acid and water and a few other 
simple substances from air and soil," and 

1 This subject is extensively treated by Hober, "Physik- 
alische Chemie der Zelle imd der Gewebe." Leipzig, 1911, 
3ded. 

^ This was origmally clearly stated by Lavoisier. 



FITNESs 27 

transforms them into oxygen, which renews 
the air, and sugar, starch, and other sub- 
stances, which are the food of the animal.^ 
These products the animal burns, thereby 
forming once more carbonic acid and water, 
which return to the plant and so pass through 
the cycle again and again. The changes in 
energy which accompany this process are 
quite different from the chemical changes. 
Starch and sugar and oxygen, formed in the 
leaf of the plant, are compounded of carbonic 
acid, water, and sunshine. This sunshine, 
or solar energy, wh'en changed into the 
chemical energy of the carbohydrate, is pre- 
served and transmitted to the animal.^ In 
his body it is set free as muscular force and 
heat, and then dissipated. ' Accordingly, when 
carbonic acid and water are combined to 
form sugar and oxygen in the leaf, it is al- 
ways a new store of solar energy which they 
bear, and while matter goes round and 
round, energy is being constantly degraded 
and lost. The one process is cyclic, the 
other moves steadily in one direction from 

^ Our knowledge of photosjmthesis is largely based upon 
the classical work of N. T. de Saussiu-e, "Eecherches Chi- 
miques sur la Vegetation." Paris, 1804. 

2 Only after the establishment of the principle of the 
conservation of energy was it possible to gain a clear con- 
ception of the energetics of metabolism. 



28 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

sunshine to the waste heat of the animal 
body.^ 

B 

ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 

Independent alike of general biology and 
of the science of metabolism there has grown 
up still another department of natural sci- 
ence, organic chemistry, which contributes 
very materially to the description and com- 
prehension of living things. During a large 
part of the nineteenth century the efforts of 
chemists were mainly directed to the cultiva- 
tion of this subject, which seeks to describe 
the molecular constitution of all the com- 
pounds of carbon, including nearly all the 
individual substances which make up animals 
and plants. Gradually, as organic chemis- 
try has progressed, very complete descrip- 
tions of the atomic groupings within the 
molecules of fats,^ carbohydrates,* and pro-' 

' Here, as in so many other cases, it is not the conservation 
of matter and energy, but the conservation of matter and the 
degradation of energy which are important. For an exten- 
sive development of this important difference see B. Brunhes, 
"La Degradation de I'Energie." Paris, 1909. 

^ Chevreul, "Recherches Chimiques sur les Corps Gras." 
Paris, 1823. 

^ E. Fischer, " Untersuchungen Uber Kohlenhydrate imd 
Fermente." Berlin, 1909. 



FITNESS 29 

teins/ the chief of such things, and most 
of the other biologically important sub- 
stances have been obtained, and we are at 
length in possession of exceedingly clear and 
reliable ideas as to the chemical constitu- 
tion of living matter. In fact, the nature 
and laws of the chemical composition of pro- 
toplasm are actually more certain than the 
nature and laws of its physical structure.^ 

In this manner, by slow degrees, the de- 
scription of living things has progressed, and 
gradually the characteristics of life have 
become less obscure and their aspects more 
simple. It cannot be denied that many 
traits like consciousness and inheritance are, 
at least for the present, beyond the scope of 
description in terms of matter and energy, 
and the fundamental riddle shares this de- 
tachment.' But the physico-chemical basis 

* E. Fischer, " Untersuchungen tiber Aminosatiren, Poly- 
peptide und Proteine." Berlin, 1906. 

^ Substantial progress in the latter field is nearly all of 
very recent date, almost whoUy since the sudden rise of 
physical chemistry. 

' "But now, having confessed that Life as a principle of 
activity is unknown and unknowable — that while its phe- 
nomena are accessible to thought the implied noumenon is 
inaccessible — that only the manifestations come within the 
range of our intelligence while that which is manifested lies 
beyond it; we may resume the conclusions reached in the 
preceding chapters. Our surface knowledge continues to be 



30 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

of life is firmly established in the world of our 
senses. On the whole the composition of 
living matter, its physical structure, the 
changes of matter and energy which consti- 
tute the metabolic process, together with the 
totality of such changes, which make up the 
fundamental economic process of that largest 
community which consists of all living beings, 
are all clearly defined. 

C 

THE CHARACTERISTICS OP LIFE 

Under the circumstances it is certainly no 
rash enterprise to seek a definition of some 
of the essential characteristics of life. Al- 

a knowledge of its kind, after recognizing the truth that it is 
only a surface knowledge. 

"For the conclusions we lately reached and the definition 
emerging from them, concern the order existing among the 
actions which living things exhibit ; and this order remains the 
same whether we know or do not know the nature of thaj 
from which the actions originate. We found a distinguish- 
ing trait of Life to be that its changes display a correspond- 
ence with coexistences and sequences in the environment; 
and this remains a distinguishing trait, though the thing 
which changes remains inscrutable. The statement that 
the continuous adjustment of internal relations to external 
relations constitute Life as cognizable by us, is not invali- 
dated by the admission that the reality in which these rela- 
tions inhere is incognizable." — Herbekt Spencer, "The 
Principles of Biology." New York and London, 1909, Vol. 
I. Revised and enlarged edition, pp. 122-123. 



FITNESS 31 

though it is probably far beyond our present 
power to make a complete study of the prob- 
lem, I feel sure that a brief analysis will 
justify certain very definite conclusions. Life 
as we know it is a physico-chemical mechan- 
ism, and it is probably inconceivable that it 
should be otherwise.^ As such, it possesses, 
and, we may well conclude, must ever pos- 
sess, a high degree of complexity, — physi- 
cally, chemically, and physiologically; that is 
to say, structurally and functionally. We 
cannot imagine life which is no more complex 
than a sphere, or salt, or the fall of rain, and, 
as we know it, it is in fact a very great deal 
more complex than such simple things. Next, 
living things, still more the community of 
living things, are durable. But complexity 
and durability of mechanism are only pos- 
sible if internal and external conditions are 
stable. Hence, automatic regulations of the 
environment and the possibility of regulation 
of conditions within the organism are essen- 
tial to life. It is not possible to specify a 
large number of conditions which must be 
regulated, but certain it is from our present 
experience that at least rough-segtiiat-ien-of 



' I mean, of cours&>for the purposes of physical and chem- 
ical study. With such qualifications the statement is prob- 
ably no longer open to objection from any quarter. 



32 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

temperature, pressure, and chemical consti- 
tution of environment and organism are 
really essential to life, and that there is great 
advantage in many other regulations and in 
finer regulations. Finally, a living being must 
be active, hence its metabolism must be 
fed with matter and energy, and accordingly 
there must always be exchange of matter 
and energy with the environment. 

Returning to the concept of the organism 
as a durable form through which flow matter 
and energy, it is now possible to make these 
ideas more vivid. The complex structure of 
the living being is relatively stable, alike in 
the chemical composition of its individual 
constituent molecules, in their proportions 
and amounts, in their aggregation into the 
invisible structural elements of protoplasm, 
in the visible parts of the cell, in the organs 
and tissues, and finally in toto, as a man or a 
tree. Similarly stable are the physical con- 
ditions within this structure: temperature, 
pressure, alkalinity, and osmotic pressure. 
Finally, that which surrounds it, the imme- 
diate environment, possesses also a high de- 
gree of stability, or if the organism be very 
complex, it may be that it has an efficient pro- 
tection against change of environment; a skin 
which insulates, for instance. But in this case 



FITNESS 3S 

it has also acquired an environment, a milieu 
inUrieur for its cells, — like the blood and 
lymph, — which serves the same purpose as 
stability of the external environment, and ex- 
ercises the further function of supplying food. 

It is through this structure, in the process 
of metabolism, that matter and energy flow. 
Entering in various forms and quantities, 
they are temporarily shaped exactly to the 
form and condition of the organism; they 
conform to the characteristics of the king- 
dom, class, order, family, genus, species, and 
variety to which it belongs, and they assume 
even the characteristics of the in^vidual 
itself.^ Then they depart through th6 va- 
rious channels of excretion. 

When these ideas are reduced to their very 
simplest forms, it appears that life must be 
highly complex in structure and function; 
that the conditions of the environment must 
be regulated, and that there must be very exact 
regulation of conditions, both structural and 
functional within the organism, and finally, 
that, while life is active, there must be ex- 
change of both matter and energy with the 
environment. Complexity, regulation, and 
food are essential to life as we know it, and 

^ Science is, of course, still at a loss for an adequate gen- 
eral explanation of such processes. 



34 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

in truth we cannot otherwise conceive of life, 
or indeed of any other durable mechanism. 
For my part I do not doubt that these pos- 
tulates are quite as true of the world of our 
senses as are the fundamental laws of matter 
and energy, space and time. 

Obviously these few conclusions can make 
no claim to completeness. Fully to describe 
life, the discovery of many other fundamen- 
tal characteristics is necessary, including such 
as are related to inheritance, variation, evo- 
lution, consciousness, and a host of other 
things. But in the formation and logical 
development of such ideas there is danger 
of fallacy at every step, and since the present 
list will suffice for the present purpose, further 
considerations of this sort are best dispensed 
with. This subject should not be put aside, 
however, without clear emphasis that the 
postulates which have been adopted above 
are extremely meager. The only motives for 
abandoning further search are the economy 
and the security which are thus insured, and 
the very great difficulty of extending the 
list. Any one who is familiar with similar 
efforts to elucidate the essential character- 
istics of life, such as that of Wallace,^ cannot, 
I fear, fail to perceive the extreme limitations 

1 A. R. Wallace, "Man's Place in the Universe." New 



FITNESS 35 

which are imposed upon inquiry by assuming 
complexity^reg]ilaiion,--«,H:dr-m«%arb&Usffl--ex=^ 
clusively. Perhaps in reaUty these postu- 
lates are only two. Metabolism might with- 
out difficulty be included under regulation, 
but the consideration of such purely logical 
questions is beside the present purpose. 
However, these are probably the character- 
istics of the organism which are best fitted for 
discussion in relation to the physico-chemical 
phenomena of matter and energy, and it is 
barely possible that no others bear the same 
simple relations to the outside world. 

York, 1903, Chaps. X and XI, especially the following 
statement : — 

"The physical conditions on the surface of our earth 
which appear to be necessary for the development and main- 
tenance of living organisms may be dealt with under the fol- 
lowing headings : — 

" 1. Regularity of heat supply, resulting in a limited range 
of temperature. 

"2. A sufficient amoimt of solar light and heat. 

" 3. Water in great abundance, and universally distributed. 

"4. An atmosphere of sufficient density, and consisting of 
the gases which are essential for vegetable and animal life. 
These are Oxygen, Carbonic-acid gas. Aqueous vapor. Ni- 
trogen, and Ammonia. These must all be present in suitable 
proportions. 

"5. Alternations o£ day and night." 

It must be remembered, however, that such conclusions 
depend upon reasoning from analogy, a dangerous proceed- 
ing. 



36 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 



THE PROBLEM 

We may now return to the problem of the 
fitness of the environment. So long as ideas 
of the nature of living things remain vague 
and ill-defined, it is clearly impossible, as a 
rule, to distinguish between an adaptation of 
the organism to the environment and a ease 
of fitness of the environment for life, in the 
very most general sense. No doubt there 
are clear instances of both phenomena which 
require no close analysis for their interpreta- 
tion. Thus the hand is surely an instance 
of adaptation, and the anomalous expansion 
of water on cooling near its freezing point 
an instance of environmental fitness. But 
how much weight is to be assigned to adapta- 
tion and how much to fitness in discussing the 
relations between marine organisms and the ■ 
ocean ? Evidently to answer such questions 
we must possess clear and precise ideas and 
definitions of living things. Life must by ar- 
bitrary process of logic be changed from the 
varying thing which it is into an independ- 
ent variable or an invariant, shorn of many 
of its most interesting qualities to be sure, 
but no longer inviting fallacy through our 



FITNESS 37 

inability to perceive clearly the questions 
involved. 

Such is the purpose, and the justification, 
for setting up the postulates of complexity, 
regulation, and metabolism as inherent in 
that mechanism which is called the living 
organism. With them, at length, we face 
the problem-which awaits us. To what ex- 
tent do the characteristics of matter and 
energy and the cosmic processes favor the 
existence of mechanisms which must be com- 
plex, highly regulated, and provided with 
suitable matter and energy as food ? If it shall 
appear that the fitness of the environment to 
fulfill these demands of life is great, we may 
then ask whether it is so great that we can- 
not reasonably assume it to be accidental, 
and finally we may inquire what manner 
of law is capable of explaining such fitness of 
the very nature of things. 



CHAPTER II 
THE ENVIRONMENT 

I 

ASTRONOMY 

AN examination of the relationship be- 
tween Uf e and the environment, in which 
by means of the simphfying postulates pre- 
viously developed life is arbitrarily taken as 
an invariant, should, if it is to be quite general, 
rest upon a physico-chemical description of 
the whole universe. We require to know the 
form and structure of stars and of interstellar 
space, of nebulae and of solar systems, and 
the conditions and changes which accompany 
such aggregations of matter. Evidently this 
requirement can be but imperfectly fulfilled, 
and yet one need not be too apologetic in 
venturing the attempt. In the end, to be 
sure, we shall found our argument upon the 
safe basis of terrestrial phenomena, but mean- 
time it will be an advantage to consider con- 
ditions far and wide. 

38 



THE ENVIRONMENT 39 

The science of cosmography is probably 
the earliest of all the natural sciences, and 
cosmological speculation appears to accom- 
pany it from the outset. Long before the 
dawn of history the Chaldeans possessed 
much accurate information about the stars, 
and the zodiac was known to the Egyptians 
not less than fifteen centuries before our era. 
Always pursued with great interest, such studies 
received their first provisional systematic for- 
mulation at the hands of Hipparchus in the 
second century B.C. He, the greatest of the 
astronomers of antiquity, succeeded in bring- 
ing the apparent movements of the sun, moon, 
and planets into an arbitrary scheme which 
was nearly perfect for the sun, though less 
so for the other movable celestial bodies. He 
also measured and catalogued the positions 
of a large number of fixed stars. Upon this 
secure foundation of quantitative observa- 
tions modern astronomy has built. At the 
beginning of the modern period Copernicus, 
Tycho Brahe, Kepler, Galileo, and Newton 
reduced the phenomena of the solar system 
to law. At a later day speculations based 
upon their results and upon growing knowl- 
edge of physics and chemistry led Thomas 
Wright, Kant, and finally Laplace to a ra- 
tional, if somewhat imperfect, cosmological 



40 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

theory of the solar system. Finally, ever 
more accurate observations and the marvel- 
ous fertility of spectroscopical investigations 
have brought the stars within our reach. 

The whole universe now appears to be not 
unlike our part of it, both chemically and 
physically. The same forms of matter, the 
same material aggregates, the same manifes- 
tations of energy, and similar movements are 
everywhere present. The stars are no longer 
changeless, but violently active bodies ; they 
are no longer permanent, but evolving sys- 
tems ; they are born, they grow, age, and 
die; and throughout their evolution they 
obey laws, which, though as yet imperfectly 
known, appear to be common to all. Mean- 
time the study of nebulae, comets, and meteor- 
ites has kept pace with other departments of 
the science, and our interpretation of the re- 
sults of stellar astronomy ^ constantly gains 
from ever increasing knowledge of the physical 
and chemical processes in the sun. 

The universe which thus gradually has been 
revealed to the astronomer is made up of a 
relatively small number of types of material 

^ A description of such facts from the physico-chemical 
point of view may be fomid in Arrhenius's "Lehrbuch der 
kosmichen Physik." Leipzig, 1903. A brief popular account 
of some of the facts in the same author's " Worids in the Mak- 
ing," translated by Boms. New York and London, 1908. 



THE ENVIRONMENT 41 

aggregation. These include luminous dense 
bodies like the sun and stars; non-luminous 
dense bodies like the earth, the moon, the 
planets, and invisible partners of certain stars ; 
nebulae, comets, and meteorites. The larger 
of these bodies are separated by vast extents 
of space which contain only rare meteorites, 
perhaps minute traces of gaseous material, 
and cosmic dust. There can be little doubt 
that other types of bodies do not commonly 
occur in that portion of the universe which is 
open to astronomical investigation. Both the 
enormous collections of astronomical data 
which are now at hand and the beginnings 
of clear knowledge of cosmic processes justify 
this belief. Of what may lie beyond the 
visible stars we can, of course, know nothing. 

The nature of the stars is revealed to us 
chiefly by study of their spectra, according 
to which they have been roughly classified, 
by Vogel ^ for example, quite simply into 
three principal types. 

I. White stars in which there is marked 
evidence of the presence of hydrogen, or, in 
some instances, helium. The stars of this 
class undoubtedly are extremely hot, the 
helium stars probably especially so. Their 
atmospheres seem to be very dense and to 

1 See Arrhenius's "Lehrbuch," pp. 23-27. 



42 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

consist of hydrogen or helium or a mixture 
of the two gases. There is evidence that some 
of these stars possess very high rotational 
velocities. 

II. Yellow stars, including the sun, whose 
spectra indicate the presence of hydrogen and 
numerous metals, — sodium, iron, calcium, 
magnesium, etc. The lines which show the 
presence of hydrogen in the stars of this type 
vary in intensity. The current belief is that 
those stars which appear to possess more 
hydrogen are the hottest. The stars of this 
type are less hot than those of type I. 

III. Reddish stars whose spectra show little 
or no sign of the presence of hydrogen, but 
indicate that of chemical compounds, in- 
cluding hydrocarbons. The presence in these 
spectra of the lines of sodium, iron, calcium, 
and magnesium is clearly established. Stars 
of this type are evidently the coolest of lumi- 
nous dense bodies. 

This classification is, of course, provisional 
and unsatisfactory, and probably sometimes 
results in bringing together relatively unlike 
stars and in separating such as are very much 
akin. Moreover, subdivisions in the classifica- 
tion are necessary and hard to make. Other 
better but more complex classifications appear 
to exist, but they suflFer only in less degree 



THE ENVIRONMENT 43 

from like defects. In short all the known 
facts can best be explained by the assump- 
tion that the stars represent different stages 
of development of suns.^ In that case this 

1 "Bei Durchmusterung der Specktra der verschiedenen 
Sterne kann man sich nicht des Gedankens erwehren, dass 
die verschiedenen Sterngruppen verschiedenen Entwick- 
lungsstadien entsprechen. Die jungsten und warmsten 
aller Sterne wUren (nach der allgemeinen Ansicht, vgl. weiter 
unten Kap. Kosmogonie) diejenigen der ersten Gruppe. 
Das kontinuierliche Licht, welches von dem eigentlichen 
Stemkorper ausstrahjt, rlihrt haupstfichlich von Kondensa- 
tionen, wolkenartigen BUdungen in der Atmosphare der 
Sterne, zum geringeren Teil von den stark verdichteten 
Metalldampfen im Inneren des Sterns her. In den hbheren 
Schichten dieser Atmosphare finden sich die leichten Gase, 
WasserstoEE oder Helium oder aUe beide, weiter unten Metall- 
dampfe. Bei den Sternen erster Klasse ist die Atmosphare 
der leichten Gase so dick und heiss, dass die fUr uns sicht- 
baren Kondensationen beinahe alle in diesen oberen Schichten 
vor sich gehen. Wir sehen deshalb keine oder nur schwache 
MetalUinien, dagegen sehr starke Wasserstoflf- oder Helium- 
linien. BisweUen ist die Menge und Temperatur der leichten 
Gase genUgend, um helle Umkehrungen dieser Linien zu 
verursachen. Bei dem zweiten Spektraltypus ist die Ab- 
kUhlimg weiter fortgeschritten, so dass Kondensationen 
nicht nur in den hochsten Schichten der Atmosphare, sondem 
auch innerhalb der Metallatmosphare vorkonmien. Man 
sieht dann die dunklen MetalUinien scharf hervortreten. Das 
Zurllcktreten des violetten Endes des Spektrums und einige 
schwache BSnder im roten Tefl deuten auf niedrigere Tem- 
peratur hin. Bei den rotlichen Sternen treten tiefe Temper- 
atur andeutende Erscheinungen noch mehr hervor. Die bei 
denselben gewohnlich vorkommende Veranderlichtkeit lasst 
auf das Vorkommen von kalteren und warmeren Perioden 



44 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

development or evolution must be a contin- 
uous process through which every sun slowly 
passes, and on the whole all suns must be 
much alike. Certainly we have the best of 
evidence to justify the assumption that most 
stars, including the sun, have very much the 
same chemical composition, and that differ- 
ences in spectra are due to the slowly progress- 
ing physico-chemical changes which have 
accompanied the process of cooling. 

Needless to say, the chemical composition 
of the sun itself is far better known than that 
of the stars. Particularly prominent among 
his constituent elements are those above 
mentioned: hydrogen, sodium, calcium, mag- 

schliessen, wie solche in geringerem Maasstab bei unserer 
Sonne durch die Fleckenperiode sich kundgeben. Zuletzt 
wird die Leuchtkraft der Sterne sekr schwach und das Licht 
ausgepragtrot, der relativ niedrigen Temperatur entsprech- 
end. Nach diesem Stadium kommt dasjenige, worin die 
dunklen nltraroten StraHen allein henrschen, der Stem ist in 
einen nichtleuchtenenden Himmelskorper Ubergegangen (vgl.* 
weiter unten Kap. Kosmogonie). 

Im Grossen und Ganzen zeigen die Sterne dieselbe chemi- 
sche zusammensetzung wie die Sonne. Die hervorragende 
Eolle des Wasserstoffs und Heliums, sowei des Eisens, Na- 
triums, Calciums und Magnesiums, macht sich uberall be- 
merkbar. Es ist dann kein Zweifel, dass unsere Sonne mit 
den Fixsternen sehr nahe verwandt ist, und zwar ist sie als 
ein Fixstern der ersten Abteilung in der zweiten Klasse an- 
zusehen." — Abehenius, "Kosmische Physik." Leipzig, 
1903, p. 27. 



THE ENVIRONMENT 45 

nesium, and iron. Also some others, which 
because of their low density are concentrated 
near the surface, are known to occur. The 
elements which have not yet been discovered 
are those like the metalloids which do not un- 
der ordinary circumstances give well-marked 
spectra, and those like gold, platinum, and 
mercury, whose higher specific gravities may 
be supposed to cause their accumulation in 
the interior. Carbon is certainly present, 
and almost certainly oxygen as well. Indeed 
it is only reasonable to conclude, as Kirchhoff 
originally suggested,^ that all the elements 

* "Diese Vorstellung von der Beschaffenheit der Sonne 
stimmt mit der von Laplace begriindeten Hypothese Uber 
die Bildung unseres Planetensystems uberein. Wenn die 
Masse, die jetzt in den einzelnen Korpem dieses Systems 
verdichtet ist, in fruheren Zeiten einen zusammenhangenden 
Nebel von ungeheurer Ausdehnung bildete, durch dessen 
Znsanunenziehung Sonne, Planeten und Monde entstanden 
sind, so mussten alle diese Kbrper bei ihrer Bildung im 
wesentlichen von ahnlicher chemischer Zusammensetzung 
sein. Die Geologie hat gelehrt, dass die Erde einst in glU- 
hend fliissigem Zustande sicli befunden tat ; man muss anneh- 
men, dass auch die anderen Korper unseres Systems einmal 
in einem solchen gewesen sind. Die AbkUhlung, die infolge 
der Ausstrahlung der Warme bei aUen eingetreten ist, hat 
aber bei ihnen sehr verschiedene grade erlangt ; und wShrend 
der Mond kalter als die Erdegeworden ist, ist die Temperatur 
des SonnenkSipers noch nicht unter die Weissgluhhitze 
gesunken. Die irdische Atmosphare, die jetzt nur wenige 
Elemente enthalt, musste, als die Erde noch gliihte, eine viel 
mannigfaltigere Zusammensetzung haben ; alle in der GlUh- 



46 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

are present in the sun, and very often, at 
least, in the stars. Exceptions may arise, but 
probably they will hardly suffice to invalidate 
the rule. 

The large, dark, dense bodies which are 
directly known to us are the planets and 
their satellites. There are, however, many in- 
dications that the heavens are occupied by 
great numbers of "dead" suns, incrusted and 
therefore no longer luminous. Such appear 
to be the only conclusions which can be drawn 
from a study of the energetics of solar evolu- 
tion, for sooner or later a sun must cool from 
loss of energy until at length a crust forms, and, 
barring catastrophe, it must then endure for- 
ever. Moreover, as we have seen, the varying 
aspects of the stars seem to disclose suns in 
all stages of such a process. 

More nearly direct is the evidence furnished 
by study of variable stars of the Algol type. 
Algol itself (/S Persei) is a star of second 
magnitude with a period of 2 days, 20 hours, 
48 minutes, 53.8 seconds. During each period 

hitze fluchtigen Stofife mussten in ihr vorkommen. Eine 
entsprechende Beschaffeaheit muss heute noch die Atmosphere 
der Somie besitzen." — G. Kihchhoff, — " Untersuchungen 
liber das Somienspektrum und die Spektren der Chemischen 
Elemente." Abhandlungen der Koniglichen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften zu Berlin, 1861. Zweite, durch einen An- 
hang vermehrte Ausgabe. Berlin, 1862. 



THE ENVIRONMENT 47 

for about 2j days it shines with constant in- 
tensity; thereupon it begins to decline and in 
approximately 4^ hours sinks to its minimum 
of brightness; then it becomes gradually 
brighter until after 4^ hours more it has re- 
attained its full brilliancy. This behavior is 
explained by the supposition that Algol is 
accompanied by a dark star and that their 
movements are such that a partial eclipse 
occurs every 69 hours. Pickering has suc- 
ceeded in calculating, upon the assumption 
that the dark star as a whole intercepts the 
rays of Algol, the approximate sizes, veloci- 
ties, and orbits of these two stars, one of 
which is quite invisible. Many similar phe- 
nomena lead to similar conclusions regarding 
other variable stars. 

It is apparent that such dark bodies, whether 
extinct suns or planets, represent another 
stage in celestial evolution. Their past his- 
tories may be various, for there is still room 
for much doubt as to the manner of formation 
and origin of planets, but at any rate all are 
probably derived from luminous stars or 
planets through the process of cooling, with 
its accompanying crust formation. Like their 
earlier forms, they must therefore be made up 
of matter as we know it, since when a heavenly 
body puts on a crust, it does not change the 



48 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

matter of which it is composed. Finally 
terrestrial chemistry completes the evidence 
regarding the composition of such astronom- 
ical bodies; geophysics that regarding their 
state. The number of extinct suns is prob- 
ably very great ; Arrhenius thinks it not un- 
likely that they may be one hundred times 
more numerous than the luminous stars.^ 

It is more difficult to gain a clear idea of 
the nebulae, for such aggregations of matter 
are very diverse in appearance, and none lie 
near enough to the earth for us to study them 
as we study the solar system. However, in- 
vestigation of new stars, of the spiral forms of 
many nebulae, of the so-called star rifts 
which appear to be due to the movement of a 
large body through a nebula, sweeping up 
smaller bodies and leaving a channel behind, 
and a variety of considerations dependent 
upon the modern development of the sciences 
of physics and chemistry, all contribute to a 
growing belief that nebulae may often, and 
sometimes at least do certainly arise from col- 
lisions between dense bodies. Further, the 
nature of the processes by which stars may be 
formed out of nebulae becomes constantly 
better understood, and while there is small 
ground to regard our present science of nebulae 

1 " Worlds in the Making," p. 151. 



THE ENVIRONMENT 49 

as final, there is none at all for the belief 
that anything essentially inexplicable either 
physico-chemically or genetically will be dis- 
covered in their organization. 

Putting aside all contentious matters, it is 
abundantly clear that nebulae, however they 
may vary among themselves, are made up of 
vast extents of gaseous material and dust 
which are exceedingly rare and at very low 
temperature, and that they may contain all 
kinds of foci of condensation, from stars to 
meteorites, in great variety of forms and 
conditions. 

On the whole the common-sense judgment 
that the solar system may be taken as a fair 
sample of the universe, and that its probable 
evolution is in the main typical of cosmic 
evolution in general seems to be well founded. 
Any other hypothesis does violence to a host 
of facts, and .to the larger generalizations of 
modern science. 

II 

POSSIBLE ENVIRONMENTS 

If now we seek to make the best of existing 
astronomical knowledge, as hastily sketched, 
in the study of our biological problem, cer- 
tain considerations at once present themselves.. 



50 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

Obviously it is not everywhere in such a uni- 
verse that life can exist. The visible stars, 
like the sun, certainly cannot support life. 
Throughout such bodies durable and complex 
arrangements of matter are impossible, for if 
formed, they must be at once dissipated by 
catastrophes far greater than any which can 
occur upon the earth's crust. The enormous 
intensity of heat, even in the most superficial 
parts of suns, must effectually preclude any 
state of matter but the gaseous, and thus 
prevent the existence there of anything of 
the nature of a mechanism. Such bodies, 
apart only from continuous variation from 
center to periphery, in the proportions of the 
elements, in density, and in the nature of the 
chemical unions between the elements, must be 
essentially homogeneous. They can scarcely 
possess relatively as much structure as the 
earth's atmosphere. In truth the sun itself 
seems to be the one and only durable solar 
mechanism. 

Not less evident is the impossibility of active 
life in interstellar space or in nebulae. Dor- 
mant life (panspermia) may indeed be possible 
universally, except only in the neighborhood 
of suns. But if life is to be fed, if there is to 
be active metabolism, including exchange of 
matter with the environment, something more 



THE ENYIRONMENT 51 

nourishing than the rare molecules of a nebula, 
or the still rarer particles of interstellar space, 
must be provided. 

We may safely conclude, therefore, on the 
basis of our reliable knowledge of the universe, 
that active life can exist probably only upon 
a dense, crusted body ^; for, of course, the in- 
terior of the earth is no better suited to life 
than is the interior of the sun. 

We have perhaps taken a long road to arrive 
at so familiar an idea. But our task involves 
the consideration of every conceivable form 
of life, not merely that relatively anthropo- 
morphic kind which we commonly think 
of when speculating loosely regarding life in 
other worlds. 

It is indeed possible that the common-sense 
judgment of the universe which declares our 
solar system to be on the whole, in its funda- 
mental characteristics, typical of every such 
system may turn out to be in some respects 
unjustified. For the present, however, so 
long as we use it only as an indication of the 
direction in which we are to turn our atten- 
tion, there is certainly no risk whatever in fol- 
lowing this hypothesis in the later discussion. 

' For an interesting discussion of the necessary conditions 
of existence see P. Lowell, "Mars as the Abode of Life." 
The Macmillan Company, New York, 1908. 



52 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

m 

GEOPHYSICS 

Let us, accordingly, now examine such 
phenomena as are likely to occur upon the 
surfaces of bodies which in the course of 
cosmic evolution have acquired a solid crust. 
In faithfully carrying out such a plan, the 
sciences of geology and meteorology must be 
brought under contribution, and climatic 
conditions must receive especial attention. 
Not, to be sure, that our globe in every respect 
can fairly be taken as meteorologically typical 
of all incrusted bodies. On the contrary, there 
are a large number of phenomena which are 
unquestionably of highest significance in fa- 
voring the existence of life on this particular 
planet which appear to be accidental and prob- 
ably somewhat uncommon.^ Such are the 

* These also have been favorite subjects in the works on 
natural theology. The Bridgewater Treatises of Whewell 
and of Prout are replete with illustrations, those of Whewell 
often moderately expounded, while Front's are, as a rule, most 
curious and antiquated. 

"Lastly, who will venture to assert that the distribution 
of sea and of land, as they now exist, though apparently so 
disproportionate, is not actually necessary as the world is 
at present constituted ? What would be the result, for 
instance, if the Pacific or the Atlantic oceans were to be con- 
verted into continents ? Would not the climates of the exist- 



THE ENVIRONMENT 53 

size of the sun taken in relation with, its dis- 
tance from the earth; the size of the earth, 
which enables it to retain its present atmos- 
phere; the eccentricity of its orbit and the 
inclination of the ecliptic; the relative 
amounts of land and sea, and a host of other 
factors. Together these probably make of 
the earth, in comparison with other bodies, 
an extremely favorable abode for the living 
organism. Yet it cannot be denied that in 
detailed chemical constitution the earth is 
certainly more or less typical of all similar 
bodies. Moreover the earth's crust and its 
atmosphere, being formed in accordance with 

ing continents, as formerly observed, be completely changed 
by such an addition to the land, and the whole of their fertile 
regions be reduced to arid deserts ? Now, this distribution 
of sea and of land, so wonderfully adapted as it appears to 
be to the present state of things, depends of course ia a great 
measure upon the absolute quantity of water in the world. 
While, on the other hand, the relative gravity of water, as com- 
pared with that of the earth, keeps the ocean within its 
destined limits, notwithstanding its incessant motion. Thus 
Laplace has shown that the world would have been con- 
stantly liable to have been deluged from the slightest causes, 
had the mean density of the ocean exceeded that of the earth ! 
Hence the adjustment of the quantity of water and of its 
density, as compared with that of the earth, afford some of 
the most marked and beautiful instances of design," — Phout, 
The Bridgewater Treatises, Treatise VIII, "Chemistry, 
Meteorology, and the Function of Digestion." London, 1834, 
pr,-^l«6-187. 



54 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

general laws, are likewise typical or at all 
events were so at the time of their origin. 

Neither can the change in crust and atmos- 
phere which time has wrought be wholly 
unique, though here a possible exception may 
again arise in the action of life itself. Since 
we do not at present positively know of the 
existence of life elsewhere and certainly have 
no detailed knowledge of its nature, we can- 
not feel sure that the conversion of atmos- 
pheric carbonic acid into oxygen and coal is 
either a universal or a common occurrence. 
In details of the geological process indeed there 
may well be marked differences. Probably the 
greatest variation will occur in the relative 
duration of conditions like those , which we 
now enjoy on the earth, the length or brevity 
of the period from the full establishment of 
the circulation of water by evaporation, cloud 
formation, rainfall, with the flow of lakes and 
streams, until its extinction by cold. Thus 
there is more liability of error in an analyis 
of the general characteristics of those spon- 
taneous changes which must occur upon the 
surface of a body after the formation of a 
crust than there is in the attempt to dis- 
cover the general characteristics of stellar 
evolution. But here again our knowledge is 
not based upon terrestrial phenomena «lone. 



THE ENVIRONMENT 55 

With greater or less completeness and accu- 
racy the atmospheres of the moon, of Mars, 
and of other planets have been studied and 
accounted for. 

IV 

THE ATMOSPHERE 

Even at the earliest period in the evolu- 
tion of a typical star there appears to be 
a progressive variation in chemical composi- 
tion from center to periphery. Theoreti- 
cally it seems inevitable that the heaviest 
elements should be concentrated in the interior 
and that those of lowest atomic weight should 
be present in greatest amount near the sur- 
face. Actually, as above stated, spectro- 
scopic investigation fully confirms this view. 
Thus the spectra of typical hot stars show 
that hydrogen is an invariable constituent 
of their superficial parts. Indeed the uni- 
versal presence of hydrogen under such cir- 
cumstances is undoubtedly one of the most 
clearly established facts of stellar astronomy. 
As stars cool and become red the spectral 
changes quite as unmistakably point to the 
presence of carbon. Accordingly we possess 
the best of evidence and the best of reasons 
for the belief that large quantities of hy- 



56 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

drogen and carbon must exist at or near 
the surface when a crust forms upon a cool- 
ing star. 

The nature of the chemical combinations 
into which these elements at first enter is 
perhaps open to some question. But as the 
temperature falls in the cooling of a sun or 
planet the affinities of carbon and hydrogen 
for oxygen increase, so that carbonic acid and 
water must normally result. For oxygen 
is almost certainly present in the sun; it is 
found in meteorites, and the vast store of it 
in the earth's atmosphere and crust (roughly 
one half of their total mass) justifies the be- 
lief that it is everywhere one of the commonest 
of elements. Hence an atmosphere contain- 
ing water and carbonic acid appears to be a 
normal envelope of a new crust upon a cooling 
body. Even were not these substances at 
first present in such an atmosphere, volcanoes 
must soon belch them forth in enormous 
quantities to relieve the pressure which inevi- 
table chemical processes set up. 

It is clear that no one can give an exhaus- 
tive description of the formation of the earth's 
atmosphere and the changes which underlie 
vulcanism, so long as the theoretical considera- 
tions involved remain often more obscure than 
the facts. However, be the process what it 



THE ENVIRONMENT 57 

may, it is at least automatic, and must repeat 
itself in other similar circumstances. 

There is, moreover, direct evidence in sup- 
port of the above conclusions. Spectro- 
scopic investigation has proved the presence 
of water vapor in the atmospheres of Mars, 
Venus, Jupiter, and Saturn, and nobody has 
suggested what the snowcaps of Mars may be 
unless they are real snow (hoarfrost) or, im- 
probably, carbonic acid. Lowell and Arrhe- 
nius agree in considering them snowcaps.^ 

In the earth's atmosphere carbonic acid has 
been very largely converted into oxygen and 
vegetable matter, which later has been turned 
into enormous quantities of coal. It is, in 
fact, possible, in accordance with the sugges- 
tion of Koene, that all the oxygen of the 
atmosphere has been thus formed from car- 
bon dioxide, and that therefore coal, peat, and 
other similar substances within the earth are 
chemically equivalent to the oxygen now free. 

If a typical atmosphere must contain water 
and carbon dioxide, its evolution must ob- 
viously be in part conditioned by the presence 
of these substances. Hence terrestrial meteor- 
ology, no less than terrestrial geology, must be 
in greater or less degree a special case of a 

1 Arrhenius, "Kosmische Physik," p. 173; Lowell, "Mars 
as the Abode of Life," p. 81. 



58 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

general process, and meteorological condi- 
tions on the earth cannot be perfectly 
unique. 

A number of circumstances, however, cause 
far greater variations in meteorological pro- 
cesses than in most other phenomena which 
have yet been discussed. For instance, on 
small astronomical bodies with weak gravi- 
tational attractions atmospheres cannot long 
endure. Like the moon these bodies must 
gradually lose nearly all their gases to space. 
Such loss has almost certainly occurred from 
the earth itself, and probably accounts for 
the absence of hydrogen and helium from the 
air. These gases, being very light, are not 
attracted with sufficient force to the earth, 
and gradually rise to the upper level of the 
atmosphere and fly away. Again, in the ab- 
sence of a near-by sun which steadily provides 
energy to balance loss by radiation, the period 
during which water and carbonic acid can 
remain in an atmosphere must be relatively 
short. Gradually, but in a time wholly in- 
considerable in comparison with the duration 
of the terrestrial atmosphere, the gases sur- 
rounding bodies so placed must condense and 
then solidify. Finally, a body which con- 
stantly turns one face to a sun must slowly 
condense its whole atmosphere upon its dark. 



THE ENVIRONMENT 59 

cold surface, and so no less certainly be de- 
prived of a gaseous envelope and of oceans. 

Accordingly it appears safe to say that 
really durable atmospheric conditions depend 
j upon sufficient size of the planet, the presence 
I of a sun, and rotation.^ No doubt a host of 
other factors which exist in the case of the 
earth are only less important. In any event, 
all such phenomena, though varied by chance, 
are of automatic origin, and whatever may be 
the peculiarities of our solar system there is 
no reason to suppose that like conditions 
are not of frequent occurrence. Throughout 
space there must be thousands of planets 
which, like the earth and Mars, are enveloped 
in an atmosphere that endures through count- 
less centuries, and that contains great quan- 
tities of water and carbon dioxide. 
! All such atmospheres must in greater or 
less degree manifest general meteorological 
phenomena. There must be winds and clouds, 
rain and snow and ice, the formation of oceans 
and ocean currents, streams and lakes, all in- 
terrelated by complex cyclic processes which 
endure. Tides, too^ and magnetic and elec- 
trical phenomena cannot be absent, while 

1 A full discussion of all such problems will be found in the 
"Lehrbuch" of Arrhenius and in S. GUnther's "Handbuch 
der Geophysik." Two volumes, Stuttgart. 1897-1898. 



60 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

the action of water through long ages must 
accomphsh its gigantic work of disintegration 
and sedimentation. Soil must be formed, and 
water must penetrate it. In short a possible 
abode of life not unlike the earth apparently 
must be a frequent occurrence in space. 



GENERAL COSMOGRAPHICAL CONCLUSIONS 

Such, in the present state of knowledge, 
are the general cosmographical views which 
naturally suggest themselves to one who 
considers the possibility of life throughout 
the universe. The solar system appears to 
be, in its most general traits, a fair sample 
of the whole ; the sun is a typical star ; the 
planets are certainly members of a large class 
of similar bodies. These various types of 
material aggregation are a good deal alike , 
wherever they occur. They are formed of 
the same matter, probably in very much the 
same proportions. They are actuated by the 
same manifestations of the same energy, and 
their evolutionary histories are similar. One 
and all are likely to possess, for a longer or 
shorter time, climates which make life possible. 
On the other hand, it is already obvious that 



THE ENVIRONMENT 61 

the solar system, and especially the earth 
among planets, are very favorable for life, 
partly through apparently accidental circum- 
stances. Putting aside, therefore, the biological 
fitness of the special climates of the earth both as 
a familiar fact, and as possibly in no small de- 
gree accidental, we may more advantageously 
give our attention at once to other phenomena 
which appear to be of a far more general 
character, — the occurrence of large quanti- 
ties of water and carbon dioxide in the atmos- 
phere, and the fundamental meteorological 
processes which their presence involves. Ni- 
trogen and various other substances auto- 
matically find a place beside water and car- 
bonic acid, but it will be convenient to pass 
them by or to postpone the consideration 
until other aspects of the subject have been 
more fully developed. 

VI 

THE PRIMARY CONSTITUENTS OF THE 
ENVIRONMENT 

Of course a consideration of the prop- 
erties of water and carbonic acid might 
be approached from a study of terrestrial 
processes exclusively. But since the assump- 
tion that such phenomena are common occur- 



62 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

rences throughout the universe, and that they 
are the normal result of cosmic evolution, does 
not in any way modify the subsequent course 
of the inquiry, there appears to be no loss of 
logical security from its introduction. Mean- 
while the evidence that the special phenomena 
under discussion are probably the nowise ex- 
ceptional outcome of the operation of general 
laws, and not merely sporadic, cannot fail to 
lend weight to whatever conclusions may 
ultimately be reached. 

Obviously it is in the physical and chemical 
attributes of these two compounds and their 
constituent elements that we find very many 
of the conditions which make life possible 
upon the earth. They are material, provided 
and mobilized automatically, out of which 
living things undoubtedly can be formed. 
Moreover if we limit our study to the physico- 
chemical properties of water and carbonic 
acid, and to the compounds of carbon, hydro- 
gen, and oxygen, we shall greatly simplify our 
problem. It cannot be denied that this re- 
striction, no less than the earlier decision to 
restrict the postulated characteristics of life 
to complexity, regulation, and metabolism, is 
sure to limit the inquiry, often perhaps in a 
very unwelcome manner. On the other hand, 
the gain in economy and security is once 



THE ENVIRONMENT 63 

more of great importance, and at present is 
perhaps essential to clear thinking. Such a 
procedure manifestly influences not at all the 
validity of any conclusions which may be 
reached; only it must not be forgotten that 
the conclusions apply directly to our limited 
field of inquiry alone. 

VII 

THE ULTIMATE PROBLEM 

Such is the outcome of a preliminary 
glance at the many departments of science 
which are necessarily involved in the ques- 
tion of fitness of the environment. Living 
things permit themselves to be simplified into 
mechanisms which are complex, regulated, 
and provided with a metabolism ; the environ- 
ment, by a series of eliminations, is reduced 
to water and carbonic acid. These are sim- 
plifications counseled solely by expediency. 
Neither logical process is necessary ; each in- 
volves a disregard for many circumstances 
which might be of weight in the present in- 
quiry. But in the end there stands out a 
perfectly simple problem which is undoubt- 
edly soluble. That problem may be stated 
as follows : In what degree are the physical, \ 
chemical, and general meteorological char- ! 



64 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

acteristics of water and carbon dioxide and 
of the compounds of carbon, hydrogen, and 
oxygen favorable to a mechanism which must 
be physically, chemically, and physiologi- 
cally complex, which must be itself well regu- 
lated in a well-regulated environment, and 
which must carry on an active exchange of 
matter and energy with that environment ? 

The first step in seeking a solution must be 
to review the data of physics and chemistry 
which describe the properties of water and 
carbonic acid, having due regard to their 
meteorological significance. Such data of the 
highest accuracy exist in great profusion, for 
almost every conceivable property of these 
substances has been studied with patient care. 
Next, the properties of the compounds of 
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen must be con- 
sidered, and some of the characteristics of 
the chemical reactions into which they enter 
must be discussed. For this examination the 
unparalleled development of the science of 
organic chemistry provides ample material. 
All of these things must be scrutinized quan- 
titatively as well as qualitatively, and here 
again there is no lack of necessary information. 

Immediately one advantage of the method 
here proposed becomes evident. We can deal 
with the familiar abstractions of physical 



T&E ENVIRONMENT 65 

science, — specific heat, coefficient of expan- 
sion, solubility, heat of reaction, etc., — and 
thereby we shall gain all the advantages of 
the most exact sciences. No qualifications, 
no doubtful or contentious matter, no imper- 
fect descriptions need enter. 

In this manner it will be easy to estimate 
the absolute biological fitness in certain re- 
spects of water and carbonic acid, and at once 
a host of automatic results of their proper- 
ties will become evident. Many of these re- 
sults, such as the nearly constant temperature 
of the ocean, the ample rainfall, the freezing 
of water upon the surface, the great variety of 
carbon compounds, are familiar subjects of 
speculation, though since Darwin little in- 
terest has been manifested in them; others, 
only recently brought to light by the growth 
of physical science, are nearly or quite un- 
known in this connection. All deserve to 
receive more serious attention from biologists 
than is at present vouchsafed them, for they 
constitute a part of the very foundation of 
general biology, and they cause many of the 
phenomena with which man is concerned in 
his struggle for mastery of the environment. 

Yet the mere exposition of such facts and 
relationships cannot suffice in a discussion of 
the fitness of the environment. In the first 



66 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

place these are in the main familiar ideas, 
and if they were altogether conclusive to 
prove the existence of really significant fitness, 
if they could be regarded as alone adequate 
to establish the necessity of putting fitness by 
the side of adaptation as a coordinate factor 
in causing the marvels of life, it is hard to be- 
lieve that they would have been so long neg- 
lected. In the second place there is nothing 
comparative about such information. Water 
is indeed a wonderful substance which fills 
its place in nature most satisfactorily, but 
would not another substance do as well ? Is 
not ammonia, for example, a possible substi- 
tute ? And are there not many other chemical 
bodies which might, in a very different world, 
serve equally useful purposes ? Perhaps, too, 
the great variety of carbon compounds which 
are known to the chemist are known only be- 
cause the vital processes furnish an abundance 
of material with which to experiment. Is it 
not possible, therefore, that another element, 
silicon, for instance, may enter into even 
greater varieties of compounds ? It is such 
questions, ever present in the minds of men of 
science, yet never carefully scrutinized to see 
if an answer be possible, which, I suspect, have 
long deflected attention from this subject. 
Clearly, therefore, it will be necessary to 



THE ENVIRONMENT 67 

compare the properties of water and carbonic 
acid and of the carbon compounds with those of 
other substances. It will be necessary to find 
out whether these substances are not only fit 
but fittest, — and this no doubt is a task of a 
very different sort. It may even seem at first 
sight an impossible one, but I hope to show 
that this is not the case, and that in spite 
of the incompleteness of our physical and 
chemical knowledge, it may be pressed to a 
satisfactory issue. A few remarks may now 
indicate the general line of thought we shall 
pursue, and then the actual study must pro- 
vide the proof. 

vni 

THE METHOD OF SOLUTION 

The very const ant temperature of the o cean 
is a most important factor in the economy o f 
nature. It constitutes, for example, a vital 
regulation of the environment of a large pro- 
portion of all the living organisms of the world, 
and it has many other important "functions." 
This constancy of temperature is in large part 
due to the magnitude of the specific heat of 
water. Other things being equals the greater 
the specific heat of water, the more constant 
must be the temperature of the ocean. If, 



68 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

then, the specific heat of water, as is actually 
the case, be nearly or quite a maximum among 
all specific heats, it follows that the fitness of 
water in this respect is nearly maximal. 

Again the ocean contains an astonishing 
variety of substances in solution, and they 
are present often in large quantities. In this 
manner a very great supply of food in very 
great variety is offered marine organisms. 
Of course such richness of the environment is 
an exceedingly favorable circumstance for the 
organism, and it is due principally to the 
ability of water to dissolve a multitude of 
things in large quantities. It is not to be 
supposed that the substances present in sea 
water are all of use to every organism. This 
need not be the case at all ; but a variety of 
supplies which may be adapted to special re- 
quirements as they arise, here iodine, there cop- 
per, for instance, is a very genuine advantage. 
Further, the vast utility of the solvent action 
of water in blood, lymph, and all the body 
fluids is too patent to call for comment. If, 
now, it can be shown that the eflSciency of 
water is nearly or quite a maximum, as it 
really is, among all known solvents, then it 
must be evident that in another respect the 
fitness of water is nearly or quite maximal. 

Again the amount of energy that is re- 



THE ENVIRONMENT 69 

quired to tear apart molecules of water, and 
to liberate hydrogen and oxygen, is very great 
indeed, and when hydrogen and oxygen re- 
combine to form water, this energy must 
reappear, — under ordinary circumstances as 
heat. This fact, too, is very favorable for the 
organism, because almost all compounds which 
contain hydrogen yield a great deal of energy 
when they are burned ; they are, in short, great 
reservoirs of energy which can be tapped in 
the process of metabolism. If, therefore, the 
heat of combustion of hydrogen be nearly or 
quite a maximum, as it is, among all sub- 
stances, it is clear that water is again, in an- 
other respect, most wonderfully fitted for life. 

Finally, if it be true, and such is the case, 
that very few of the substances which share 
the fitness of water in one of these character- 
istics also share or approach its fitness in 
either of the others, and that none possesses 
all these qualifications in a degree that merits 
consideration, it must, I conceive, be admitted 
that so far as the investigation has proceeded 
water is the only possible fit substance. 

A criticism may here be made; are there 
not other substances which possess other 
groups of qualifications which water lacks ? 
And that is a difficulty which is even harder 
to meet. But in the first place it is evident 



70 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

that there are not an infinity of important 
physical properties; in fact there are very 
few. And in the second place it is evident, 
both from centuries of experience in physical 
science and from the postulates above adopted 
regarding life, which undoubtedly do in the 
main describe its physico-chemical character- 
istics, that very few properties indeed are of 
importance in the least comparable with those 
which I have mentioned. 

Finally, it is in the highest degree probable 
that we are acquainted with most of the truly 
essential physical properties, and know them as 
biologically important, when they are so ; and I 
think we shall find it possible to consider them 
all, and thus to make the argument complete. 

Meanwhile it should be noted that there are 
two different ways of illustrating the fitness 
of a physical property. Properly employed, 
both are free from fallacy, and it will be de- 
sirable for us to employ both. Thus it may 
be shown, as in the case of the temperature of 
the ocean, that a particular property of water, 
its high specific heat, automatically produces 
a maximum of something which is favorable 
to life. Or again, as in the case of the regula- 
tion of the temperature of the human body by 
the process of perspiration, it may be shown 
that a particular property of water, its high 



THE ENVIRONMENT 71 

heat of vaporization, has been utilized through 
adaptation of the organism to secure very- 
high efficiency in a physiological process. 

Such is the method which must be followed 
in order to decide the question of the fitness of 
the environment. The physico-chemical char- 
acteristics of water, carbonic acid, and the 
carbon compounds are to be taken up one by 
one, and their absolute and relative magnitudes 
considered. The possible utility of such proper- 
ties, both automatically and through process of 
organic adaptation, must then be estimated, 
bearing in mind the fundamental characteris- 
tics of the living organism which have been 
arbitrarily postulated. Finally the various 
favorable qualities of water, carbonic acid, 
and the carbon compounds must be grouped 
together in order to see if they constitute a 
unique ensemble of fitness, among all possible 
chemical substances, for a living organism 
which must be complex, regulated, and en- 
gaged in active metabolism. 

At length the problem of fitness appears in 
a simple form. The road to a solution is 
open, and we may now proceed to an untram- 
meled discussion of unexceptionable data and 
well-known laws of physics, chemistry, meteor- 
ology, and physiology. Without further hypo- 
thetical difficulties, these must lead to the goal. 



CHAPTER III 
WATER 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 

IT was assuredly not chance that led Thales 
to found philosophy and science with the 
assertion that water is the origin of all things. 
Whether his belief was most influenced by 
the wetness of animal tissues and fluids, or by 
early poetic cosmogonies, or by the ever pres- 
ent importance of the sea to the lonians,^ 
however vague his conception of water may, 
indeed must, have been, he at least expressed 
a conclusion which proceeded from experience 
and serious reflection. Later, when positive 
knowledge had already grown to be a sub- 
stantial basis for speculation, both meteor- 
ological and chemical views contributed to 
the decision of Empedocles and Aristotle to 
include water among the elements.^ And it 
is especially worthy of note that of earth, air, 

^ Windelband, "Handbuch der Altertumswissenschaft," 
V. 1. 139. Nordlingen, 1888. 

2 Windelband, I.e.; S. Gunther, "Geschiclite der Natur- 
wissenschaften." Reclam, Leipzig, Vol. I, p.l9. 

72 



WATER 73 

fire, and water the last is the only one which 
happens to be an individual chemical com- 
pound. From that day to this the unique 
position of water has never been shaken. It 
re&^ins the most familiar and the most im- 
portant of all things. 

Within a comparatively recent time, to be 
sure, it has definitely lost its claim to be a true 
element, in the modern sense, but meanwhile 
almost every great development of science has 
but contributed to make its importance more 
clear. In physics, in chemistry, in geology, 
in meteorology, and in biology nothing else 
threatens its preeminence. The physicist has 
perforce chosen it to define his standards of 
density, of heat capacity, etc., and as a means 
to obtain fixed points in thermometry. The 
chemist has often been almost exclusively 
concerned with reactions which take place in 
aqueous solution, and the unique chemical 
properties of water are of fundamental sig- 
nificance in most of the departments of his 
science. In geology neptunism has at length 
won a certain though incomplete truimph over 
plutonism, and the action of water now appears 
to be far the most momentous factor in geolog- 
ical evolution.^ The meteorologist perceives 

1 "Of all geological agencies water is the most obvious and 
apparently the greatest, though its efficiency is conditioned 



74 TL\e fitness OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

that tlie incomparable mobility of water, 
which depends upon its peculiar physical prop- 
erties and upon its existence in vast quanti- 
ties in all three states of solid, liquid, and 
gas, is the chief factor among the propertie„v of 
matter to determine the nature of the phenom- 



upon the presence of the atmosphere, upon the relief of the 
land, and upon the radiant energy of the sun. Tiirough the 
agency of rainfall, of surface streams, of underground waters, 
and of wave action, the hydrosphere is constantly modifying 
the surface of the Uthosphere,. whUe at the same time it is 
bearing into the various basins the wash of the land and 
depositing it in stratified beds. It thereby becomes the 
great agency for the degradation of the land and the buUding 
up of the basin bottoms. . It works upon the land partly by 
dissolving soluble portions of the rock substance, and partly 
by mechanical action. The solution of the soluble part usu- 
ally loosens the insoluble, and renders it an easy prey of the 
surface waters. These transport the loosened material to 
the valleys and at length to the great basins, meanwhile roll- 
ing and grinding it and thus reducing it to rounder forms and a 
finer state, until at length it reaches the still waters or the low 
gradients of the basins and comes to rest. The hydrosphere 
is, therefore, both destructive and constructive in its action. 
As the beds of sediment which, it lays down follow one another 
in orderly succession, each later one lying above each earlier 
one, they form a time record. And as relics of the life of 
each age become more or less imbedded in these sediments, 
they furnish the means of following the history of life from 
age to age. The historical record of geology is, therefore, very 
largely dependent upon the fact that the waters have thus 
buried in systematic order the successive life of the ages." 
— Chamberlin and Salisbubt, "Geology." New York, 
1904, Vol. I, p. 8. 



WATER 75 

ena which he studies;^ and the physiologist 
has found that water is invariably the prin- 

^"Of all the terrestrial agents by which the surface of 
the fyl th is geologically modified, by far the most important 
is Water. We have already seen, when following hypogene 
changes, how large a share is taken by water in the phenom- 
ena of volcanoes and in other subterranean processes. Re- 
turning to the surface of the earth and watching the opera- 
tions of the atmosphere, we soon learn how important a part 
of these is sustained by the aqueous vapor that pervades 
the atmosphere. 

"The substance which we term water exists on the earth 
in three well-known forms : (1) gaseous, as invisible vapor ; 
(2) liquid, as water; and (3) solid, as ice. The gaseous 
form has already been noticed as one of the characteristic 
ingredients of the atmosphere. Vast quantities of vapor 
are continually rising from the surface of the seas, rivers, 
lakes, snow fields, and glaciers of the world. This vapor 
rema;ins invisible until the air containing it is cooled down 
below its dewpoint, or point of saturation, — a result which 
follows upon the union or collision of two aSrial currents of 
different temperatures, or the rise of the air into the upper 
cold regions of the atmosphere, where it is chilled by expansion, 
by radiation, or by contact with cold mountains. Condensa- 
tion appears only to take place on free surfaces, and the 
formation of cloud and mist is explained by condensation 
upon the fine microscopic dust of which the atmosphere is 
full. At first minute particles of water vapor appear, which 
either remain in the liquid condition, or, if the temperature 
is sufficiently low, are frozen into ice. As these changes take 
place over considerable spaces of the sky, they give rise to 
the phenomena of clouds. Further condensation augments 
the size of the cloud particles, and at last they fall to the sur- 
face of the earth, if still liquid, as rain ; if solid, as snow or 
hail; if partly solid and partly liquid, as sleet. As the 
vapor is largely raised from the ocean surface, so in great 



76 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

cipal constituent of active living organisms.^ 
Water is ingested in greater amounts than all 

measure it falls back again directly into the ocean. A con- 
siderable proportion, however, descends upon the landi and 
it is this part of the condensed vapor which we have 'now 
to follow. Upon the higher elevations it falls as snow, and 
gathers there into snow fields, which, by means of glaciers, 
send their drainage towards the valleys and plains. Else- 
where it falls chiefly as rain, some of which sinks underground 
to gush forth again in springs, while the rest pours down the 
slopes of the land, swelling the brooks and torrents which, 
fed both by springs and rains, gather into broader and yet 
broader rivers that bear the accumulated drainage of the 
land out to sea. Thence once more the vapor rises, con- 
densing into clouds and rain to feed the innumerable water 
channels by which the land is furrowed from mountain top 
to seashore. 

"In this vast system of circulation, ceaselessly renewed, 
there is not a drop of water that is not busy with its allotted 
task of changing the face of the earth. When the vapor 
ascends into the air, it is, comparatively speaking, chemi- 
cally pure. But when, after being condensed into visible 
form, and working its way over or under the surface of the 
land, it once more enters the sea, it is no longer pure, but more 
or less loaded with material taken by it out of the air, rocks, 
or soUs through which it has traveled. Day by day the 
process is advancing. So far as we can tell, it has never ceased 
since the first shower of rain fell upon the earth. We may 
well believe, therefore, that it must have worked marvels 
upon the surface of our planet in past time, and that it may 
effect transformation in the future." — Geikie, "Textbook 
of Geology." London, 1903, 4th ed., Vol. I, pp. 447, 448. 

^ Thus water makes up from 70 to 85 per cent of fishes, 
about 87 per cent of oysters, 85 per cent of apples, 78 per 
cent of potatoes, 95 per cent of the edible portion of lettuce, 
etc. 



WATER 77 

other substances combined, and it is no less 
the chief excretion. It is the vehicle of the 
principal foods and excretory products, for 
most of these are dissolved as they enter or 
leave the body.^ Indeed, as clearer ideas of 
the physico-chemical organization of proto- 
plasm have developed it has become evident 
that the organism itself is essentially an 
aqueous solution in which are spread out col- 
loidal substances of vast complexity.^ As a 
result of these conditions there is hardly a 
physiological process in which water is not of 
fundamental importance. 

All of these circumstances, which completely 
justify the interest in water which Thales and 
Aristotle, and nearly all later students of nature 
have manifested, depend in great part upon 
the quantity of water which is present out- 
side the earth's crust, and upon its often, 
unique physical and chemical properties. 

* Properly speaking, the entrance of the foods into the 
body is across the wall of the intestine; at this point the 
foods have all undergone digestion and are almost exclu- 
sively in solution. In like manner excretion takes place 
across the renal epitheUum, or the epithelium of the lungs, 
or across that of the sweat glands ; these too are traversed 
only by substances in solution. 

^ "Der Organismus, Pflanze wie Tier, ist ein GefSss voU 
wassemer Losung, in dam sich als disperse Phase v^rschieden- 
aj-"^" ^oide befinden." — Bechhold, "Die KoUoide in 
be que^ Medizin." Dresden, 1912. 



78 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

^uch properties are our present concern. 
Doubtless if it were not for the enormous 
quantity of water which exists upon our 
planet, all its physical properties would be of 
little avail to bring about its universal^im- 
portance in nature. This, however, as has 
been above explained, appears to be neither 
an accidental nor an uncommon phenomenon. 
Of the total extent of the earth's surface 
the oceans make up about three fourths, and 
they contain an amount of water sufficient, 
if the earth were a perfect sphere, to cover 
the whole area to a depth of between two and 
three miles. This corresponds to about 0.2 per 
cent of the volume of the globe. The occur- 
rence of water is, moreover, not less important 
and hardly less general upon the land. In 
addition to lakes and streams, water is al- 
most everywhere present in large quantities in 
the soil, retained there mainly by capillary 
action, and often at greater depths. The 
atmosphere also contains an abundance of 
water as aqueous vapor and as clouds. NowS 
the very occurrence of water upon the earth, 
and especially its permanent presence, is due 
in no small degree to its chemical stability 
in the existing physical and chemical con- 
ditions. This stability is of great moir'^^t in 
the various inorganic and organic T^ ettut,^. 



WATER 79 

in which water plays so large a part. In the 
first place the chemical reactions in which it 
is concerned during the process of geological 
evoljLition, though they are no doubt in the 
total of great magnitude, are both slow and 
far from violent. Long since any very active 
changes of this sort, so far as the superficial 
part of the crust is concerned, have run their 
course. In the second place water is really, 
at the temperature of the earth and in com- 
parison with most other chemical substances, 
an extremely inert body, for the union of hydro- 
gen with oxygen is so firm that it is not readily 
dissolved. 

Thus water exists as a singularly inert con- 
stituent of the atmosphere, as a liquid nearly 
inactive in chemical processes on the surface 
and in the soil, and everywhere as a mild sol- 
vent which does not easily attack the sub- 
stances which in great variety dissolve in it. 
The chemical changes which do follow upon 
solution are not such as to produce substan- 
tial chemical transformations, and most sub- 
stances can pass through water unscathed. 
The nature of water, then, is a great factor in 
the chemical stability, which, no less than the 
physical stability of the environment, is es- 
sential to the living mechanism. But it may 
be questioned if such stability would not 



80 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

necessarily be ultimately attained in greater or 
less degree with almost any other substance, 
as a result of the general tendency of chemical 
processes to reach a condition of equilibrium, 
and it will therefore be well to turn to more 
secure fields of inquiry. 



THERMAL PROPERTIES 

The most familiar among such are certain 
characteristics of water which have been long 
known, and which, as the Bridgewater Trea- 
tises and other works on natural theology 
testify, were formerly favorite subjects of 
metaphysical speculation, — the thermal prop- 
erties. These characteristics of water were 
recognized at an early stage in the develop- 
ment of modern science, and in many cases 
their special importance in meteorology and 
in other departments of the sciences of nature 
is almost self-evident. 

A 

SPECIFIC HEAT 

First among these is the heat capacity or, 
as it is more commonly termed, the specific 
heat of water. This quantity has the value of 



WATER 81 

1.000 for th'i interval between 0° and 1° 
centigrade, a number which is due to the 
choice of water in defining the calorie or 
fundamental unit of heat. The calorie, small 
calorie, or gram . calorie is that quantity of 
heat which is required to raise the temperature 
of one gram of water through 1° centigrade, 
and it varies slightly with the temperature, 
having the relative values 1.000 for the in- 
terval from 0° to 1°, 0.998 for the interval from 
4° to 5°, 0.992 for the interval from 15° to 
16°, and its mean value for the interval from 
0° to 100° is 1.004. The heat capacity of 
water is then 1.000, in that 1.000 calorie is re- 
quired to raise the temperature of 1.000 gram 
of water through 1.000 degree centigrade. 

The approximate specific heats of a variety 
of important substances are as follows: — 

Glass 0.20 

Sugar 0.30 

Ammouia, liquid . . . 1.23 

Chloroform 0.24 

Hydrogen 3.4 

Alcohol 0.6-0.7 

Hexane 0.50 

It is unnecessary to enter upon an elaborate 
analysis of the data concerning specific heats, 
for the magnitude of the specific heat of a 
substance is dependent upon its chemical 
nature, as was first made clear by Dulong 



Water 
Lead . 


liquid . . 
solid . . 

gas . . 


. . 1.00 
. . 0.60 

. 0.3-0.5 
. . 0.03 


Iron . 




. . 0.10 


Quartz 
Salt . 




. . 0.19 




. . 0.21 


Marble 




. . 0.22 



82 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

and Petit in 1819. The law wb'cli bears their 
name consists of the statement that in the 
case of elementary substances the product of 
specific heat and atomic weight is a constant, 
— roughly, 6.4. Certainly this so-called raw 
is a mere approximation, aiid some elements, 
notably carbon, silicon, and boron, at the 
ordinary temperature, depart widely from its 
requirements, but in the main the approxi- 
mation holds good. Later the researches of 
Neumann, Garnier, Cannizaro, and especially 
of Kopp made possible an extension of the law 
to compounds. 

It is evident that the law of Dulong and 
Petit amounts to the statement that for all 
elementary substances the quantity of heat 
which is required to change the temperature 
of every atom, regardless of its nature, is a 
constant. A brief discussion will serve to 
make this plain. According to the law the 
specific heat of an element varies inversely 
as its atomic weight, diminishing as the atomic 
weight increases, so that the product of the 
two quantities remains constant. But of 
course the number of atoms per gram of sub- 
stance also varies inversely as the atomic 
weight. Hence the specific heats of elemen- 
tary substances and the number of atoms per 
gram are always roughly proportional, which 



WATER 



83 



can only be the case if all atoms, no matter 
of what element, require a constant amount of 
heat to raise their temperatures one degree. 
That is to say, in all elementary substances 
the heat capadty oLttm atom I's ppristaTit^ and 
independent of the nature of the element 
(with the qualifications above noted). 

The study of compounds has shown that 
this same generalization is also true of them. 
This means that in all substances the heat 
capacity of every atom is nearly constant and 
is independent of its nature and of that of the 
compound in which it finds itself. 

Accordingly the law of Dulong and Petit 
may be formulated as follows ; — the specific 
heat of a substance multiplied by the average 
of the atomic weights of all the constitutent 
atoms in the molecule is often equal to about 
6.4, and is always not very different from this 
number. This conclusion may be tested with 
the data above recorded. 



Sub STANCH 


molectjlab 
Weight 


NUMBEB 
OF 

Atoms 


Average 
Atomic 
Weight 


SpEoimc 
Heat 


Specific Heat 

X 

Atomic Weight 


Water . 


18 


3 


6 


1.0 


6.0 


Ammonia 


17 


4 


4 


1.2 


4.8 


Quartz . 


60 


3 


20 


0.2 


4.0 


Salt . . 


58 


2 


29 


0.2 


5.8 


Sugar. . 


342 


45 


8 


0.3 


2.4 


Hexane . 


86 


20 


4 


0.6 


2.0 



84 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

It must be confessed that such, data are not 
a briUiant confirmation of the law. A series 
of numbers which vary from 2.0 to 6.0 is 
something quite different from constancy, 
and every one of these numbers is less than 
6,4. It is, however, certain that these quanti- 
ties are uniformly of the same order of magni- 
tude, and this is all that is of importance for 
our present purpose. For accordingly they 
prove that unless the average atomic weight 
of a substance be very low its specific heat 
cannot be very high. Of course only com- 
pounds which are largely made up of hydrogen 
can possess very low average atomic weights, 
and among such those will be lowest in this 
respect which contain a relatively small number 
of atoms of another element of low atomic 
weight, like carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, etc. 
Of such substances the hydrocarbons make up 
the only numerous group, and for the most 
part their specific heats appear to be, like 
that of elementary carbon itself, considerably 
lower even than would be predicted by the 
rule. So it is that the conclusion is warranted 
that water shares the characteristic of very 
high specific heat with a very small number of 
substances, among which hydrogen and am- 
monia are probably the only important chemi- 
cal individuals. From this conclusion another 



WATER 85 

follows directly ; namely, that water possesses 
certain nearly unique qualifications which 
are largely~respon^le for maHng the earth 
habitable, or at least very favorable as a 
habitation for living organisms. 

It need hardly be pointed out that this 
importance of the h igh heat__ eapaeity-€>£-water 
is a very well-known fact. Even in the early 
decades of the nineteenth century, when 
natural theology and argument from design 
were the subject of lively controversy, es- 
pecially in England, such subjects were very 
familiar, and an excellent temperate dis- 
cussion from the theologian's side will be found 
in Whewell's Bridgewater Treatise.^ At that 
time, before a clear formulation of the concept 
of adaptation existed, it was of course impos- 
sible to disentangle such natural fitness from 
the results of the organic evolutionary process. 
In the more modern period since the publi- 
cation of "The Origin of Species," the late 
Professor J. P. Cooke of Harvard has dwelt 
upon this and other properties of water 
and sought to show that, lying wholly apart 
from the new ideas, such phenomena remain 

* Chapter IX of this work deals with "The Laws of Heat 
with Respect to Water." Although the ideas are somewhat 
vague, the importance of the capacity of water to absorb 
heat is cleairly brought out. 



86 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

unexplained and inexplicable by our present 
laws of natural science. He, too, endeavored 
to employ such facts as theological arguments 
but, in spite of many sound contentions, with 
less success in a more skeptical age.^ 

The most obvious effect of the high specific 
heat of water is the tendency of the ocean and 
of all lakes and streams to maintain %jiearly 
coTistant temperature. This phenomenon is 
of course not due to the high specific heat 
of water alone, being also dependent upon 
evaporation, freezing, and a variety of cir- 
cumstances which automatically mix and stir 
water. But in the long run the effect of 
high specific heat is of primary importance. 
It will be convenient to postpone considera- 
tion of the regulation and importance of the 
constant temperature of the ocean until the 
other properties of water which contribute 
thereto have been discussed. 

A second effect of the high specific heat of 

' "Assume that the variations preserved by natural selec- 
tion are all accidental, a point on which naturalists greatly 
differ, still what is the result ? An adaptation to the environ- 
ment. According to the theory, then, the conditions of the 
environment are a determining cause ; and unless we believe 
that all nature was the result of a fortuitous concourse of atoms, 
we can find in these conditions abundant opportunities where 
intelligent causation can act." — Josiah Paksons Cooke, 
"The Credentials of Science." New York, 1888, p. 251. 



WATER 87 

water is the moderation of both summer and 
winter temperatures of the earth. It is not 
easy to estimate the total magnitude of this 
effect, but the manner in which it comes about 
is well illustrated by the differences between 
seaboard and inland climates or between the 
climate of a large part of the United States, 
which is a continental climate, and that of 
Western Europe, which is essentially an in- 
sular climate. In the most extreme form 
such moderation of climate is to be observed 
on the high seas and upon small islands. 
There are found the smallest known differences 
between the mean temperatures of diflFerent 
months of the year and of different hours of 
the day, and the least tendency to violent 
changes of temperature. The calculation of 
Zenker regarding normal temperatures may 



Latitude 


Continental Climate 


Makinb Climate 


Difference 


Degrees 


Degrees 


Degrees 


Degrees 





34.6 


26.1 


-8.5 


10 


33.5 


25.3 


-8.2 


20 


30.0 


22.7 


-7.3 


30 


24.1 


18.8 


-5.3 


40 


15.7 


13.4 


-2.3 


50 


5.0 


7.1 


2.1 


60 


-7.7 


0.3 


8.0 


70 


-19.0 


-5.2 


13.8 


80 


-24.9 


-8.2 


16.7 


90 


-26.1 


-8.7 


17.4 



88 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

be. cited as a good illustration of the nature of 
the case.^ 

It is unnecessary to discuss the efiFects 
upon living organisms of the equable tepi- 
perature of the ocean and of the moderation 
of climate, for obviously we are here confronted 
by a true instance of regulation of the environ- 
ment. 

The high heat capacity of water operates 
in still another manner to regulate tempera- 
ture upon the land and at the same time to 
increase the mobility of the environment of 
marine organisms. For directly or indirectly 
it is involved in the formation and duration 
of ocean currents, especially the movement of 
water in the depths from the polar to the 
tropical seas, and it determines the amount 
of heat carried by such currents. A similar 
and even more important "function" is the 
direct promotion of winds, with the resulting 
distribution of aqueous vapor throughout the 
atmosphere, a primary factor in the dissemina- 
tion of water by means of the rainfall. Here 
the essential thing is the existence of a vast 
warm reservoir in the tropics and of two 
similar cold reservoirs at the poles. Under 

' A discussion of Zenker's work will be found in Hann's 
"Handbook of Climatology," translated by Ward, pp. 210- 
215. 



WATER 89 

these circumstances the circulation of winds, 
bearing away water vapor from the tropical 
oceans, is inevitable, and the process is 
intensified by the high specific heat of 
water. , 

The living organism itself is directly favored 
by this same property of its principal constit- 
uent, because a given quantity of heat pro- 
duces as little change as possible in the tem- 
perature of its body. Man is an excellent 
case in point. An adult weighing 75 kilo- 
grams (165 pounds) when at rest produces 
daily about 2400 great calories, which is an 
amount of heat actually sufficient to raise 
the temperature of his body more than 32° 
centigrade. But if the heat capacity of his 
body corresponded to that of most substances, 
-the same quantity of heat would be sufficient 
to raise his temperature between 100° and 
150°. In these conditions the elimination of 
heat would become a matter of far greater 
difficulty, and the accurate regulation of the 
temperature of the interior portion of his body, 
especially during periods of great muscular 
activity, well-nigh impossible. Extreme con- 
stancy of the body temperature is, of course, 
a matter of vital importance, at least for all 
highly organized beings, and it is hardly 
conceivable that it should be otherwise. In 



90 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

the first place marked influence of change of 
temperature upon chemical reaction is almost 
universal, and as a rule an increase of 10° 
centigrade in temperature will more than 
double the rate of a chemical change.^ Sec- 
ondly all living organisms contain both chemi- 
cal substances and physico-chemical struc- 
tures or systems which begin to be altered, 
and usually irreversibly altered, at a tempera- 
ture which is very little above that of the 
human body.^ It is perhaps imaginable that 

^ If the velocity of a chemical reaction be represented by 
a coefficient, h, the increase in its magnitude with rising tem- 
perature is unlike that of ordinary physical coefficients, and 
in many cases amounts to a two or threefold rise for a tem- 
perature increase of 10° centigrade. The well-known data 
concerning the transformation of dibromsuccinnic acid into 
brommaleic acid and hydrobromic acid in aqueous solution 
illustrate a typical case. 



t 


k 


15° 


0.00000967 


40° 


0.0000863 


50° 


0.000249 


60.2° 


0.000654 


70.1° 


0.00169 


80° 


0.0046 


89.4° 


0.0156 


101° 


0.0318 



^ This is attested not only by the low temperature at 
which many proteins coagulate, but also by the action of 
temperatures between 50° and 60° to inactivate enzjmies, and 



WATER 91 

conditions might be otherwise in beings of a 
very different kind, but to-day every chemist 
well knows that if he is to control a chemical 
process, almost the first desideratum is rigid 
regulation of the temperature at which the 
process takes place.^ 

It is therefore incontestable that the un- 
usually high specific heat of water tends 
automatically and in most marked degree to 
regulate the temperature of the whole envi- 
ronment, of both air and water, land and sea, 
and that of the living organism itself. Like- 
wise the same property favors the circulation 
of water by facilitating the production of 
winds, besides contributing to the formation 
of ocean currents. Here is a striking instance 
of natural fitness, which in like degree is un- 
attainable with any other substance except 
ammonia. 

to produce alterations in many of the complex substances 
that are involved in the phenomena of immunity and other 
similar things. 

1 Almost the most conspicuous change in the equipment 
of modem chemical laboratories, as a result of the growth of 
physical chemistry, is the introduction everywhere of thermo- 
stats. 



92 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

B 

LATENT HEAT 

Very different from specific heat in their 
relationship to the chemical constitution of 
a substance, but not unlike it in biological 
importance, are the so-called latent heats of 
melting and of evaporation. 

The latent heat of melting is expressed as 
the number of calories which are required to 
convert one gram of solid at the freezing point 
into one gram of liquid at the same tempera- 
ture. For water its value is approximately 
80, which indicates that the same quantity 
of heat must be employed to melt ice as to 
raise the temperature of the resulting ice- 
water to 80° centigrade. 

The latent heat of evaporation is similarly 
defined as the number of calories required to 
change one gram of liquid into vapor. Its 
magnitude depends upon the temperature at 
which the process takes place. The latent 
heat of evaporation of water is approximately 
536. There is required, accordingly, as much 
heat to boil away one gram of water as to 
raise the temperature of 536 grams through 1° 
centigrade. 

There are a number of important effects of 



WATER 93 

the high latent heats of fusion and evapora- 
tion of water upon the meteorological pro- 
cesses. When, for example, a body of water 
becomes cooled to its freezing point, the 
further abstraction of heat cannot lower its 
temperature below that point, which, to be 
sure, is somewhat variable in the case of salt 
water. And so long as water and ice exist 
in contact, the system constitutes a ther- 
mostat, a very accurate one if the water be 
fresh, which changes only in respect to the 
quantities of ice and water as heat is added or 
removed.^ Heating serves merely to melt 
the ice, cooling to freeze the water. Accord- 
ingly, as long as the earth shall remain habit'- 
able the cooling of its oceans and seas will 
remain rigidly limited by their freezing point. 
However inclement the atmosphere, the ocean 
can always support life until the final extinc- 
tion of water by cold. It is worthy of note 
that the freezing point of water, though to 
man with his carefully regulated body tem- 
perature apparently low, is in reality very 
high indeed compared with that of any like 
substances, — perhaps 100° centigrade above 
the average. 

* In fact, there is no better means of obtaining a constant 
temperature in the chemical laboratory than by mixing pure 
ice with pure water. 



94 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

Table of Melting Points 



Degrees 



Water 

Hydride of antimony . 
Hydride of arsenic . , 
Hydrobromic acid . , 
Hydrochloric acid . , 
Hydrofluoric acid . . 
Hydriodic acid . . . 

Methane 

Carbon dioxide . . . 
Hydride of phosphorus 
Hydrogen sulphide . . 
Sulphurous oxide . . . 

Ammonia 

Nitric oxide . . . , 




This is, no doubt, one of the most important 
facts with which we are concerned, for while a 
very large number of chemical processes take 
place quite freely at 0°, the conditions are 
very different at the freezing point of am- 
monia, for instance. At that temperature the 
velocity of most chemical processes is but a 
fraction of one per cent of their velocity at 
0°, and a large part of the chemical activity 
which is familiar to us ceases. 

The result of the unusually high freezing 
point of water and of the phenomenon of 
latent heat is felt, however, not merely in the 
avoidance of an excessive fall in the tempera- 
ture of lakes and seas. As above explained. 



WATER 



95 



whenever the ocean comes in contact with 
cHmates of very low temperature it tends to 
moderate them, the more effectively the 
greater the disparity between the temperature 
of the air and that of the water, and here 
latent heat is quite as important a factor, 
though indirectly, as specific heat. 

It remains to point out that the latent heat 
of melting of water is nearly the greatest 
which has yet been discovered, being ex- 
ceeded, in fact, by that of ammonia alone. 

TABiiE OP Latent Heats of Melting 



Substance 



Lead . . 
Bromine . 
Cadmium . 
Iron . . . 
Gallium . 
Iodine 
Potassium . 
Copper . . 
Sodium 
Nickel . . 
Palladium . 
Phosphorus 
Platinum . 
Mercury . 
Sulphur . 
Silver . . 
Bismuth . 
Zinc . . . 
Tin . . . 



FOSMUIiA 


Melting 
Point 


Latent Heat 
OP Fusion 


Pb 


326° 


5.4 Calories 


Br 


-7.3 


16.2 


Cd 


321 


13.7 


Fe 




23-33 


Ga 


13 


19.1 


I 




11.7 


K 


58 


15.7 


Cu 




43 


Na 


96.5 


31.7 


Ni 




4.64 


Pd 




36.3 


P 


27.35 


4.7 


Pt 


1779 


27.18 


Hg 




2.82 


S 


115 


9.37 


Ag 


999 


21.07 


Bi 


266.8 


12.64 


Zn 


415 


28.13 


Sn 


233 


14.25 



96 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 







Melting 


Latent Heat 


Substance 


FOBMULA 


Point 


OF Fusion 


Water 


H2O 


0° 


80 Calories 


Ammonia .... 


NH3 


-75 


108 


Antimony chloride . 


SbCU 


73 


13.4 


Antimony bromide . 


SbBra 


94 


9.7 


Lead chloride . . 


PbCk 


485 


20.9 


Calcium chloride . 


CaCU-eHaO 


28.5 


40.7 


Potassium nitrate . 


KNO3 


339 


47.4 


Sodium nitrate . . 


NaNOs 


310.5 


63 


Phosphoric acid 


H3PO4 


18 


26.7 


Nitric acid . . . 


HNO3 


-47° 


9.5 


Sulphuric acid . . 


H2S04 


10.3 


24. 


Sulphuric oxide . . 


SOs 




76.7 


Ethylene bromide . 


Cz^Brj 


8 


13 


Formic acid . . . 


H.COOH 


-7.5 


67.4 


Chloral hydrate 


CjHsClsOa 


46 


33.2 


Dimethyl oxalate . 


Q04(CH8)2 


49.5 


42.6 


Acetic acid . . . 


CH3COOH 




43.7 


Glycerine .... 


C3H8O3 


13 


42.5 


Stearic acid . . . 


CisHseOi! 


64 


47.6 


Benzene . . . . 


CeHe 


5.3 


30.1 


Nitrobenzene . . 


CHsNOj 


-9.21 


22.3 


Di-chlorbenzene 


C6H4CI2 


62.5 


29.9 


j)-Toluidine . . . 


C7H9N 




35.8 


Phenol . . . . 


C«HbOH 


25.4 


24.9 


Menthol . . . . 


C10H20O 


42 


18.9 


Phenylhydrazine . 


C6H6.NH.NH2 




24.5 


Phenylacetic add . 


C9H6.CH2.COOH 


75 


26.4 


Naphthaline . . . 


CioHs 


80 


36.7 



Accordingly, the processes above described 
possess nearly the highest possible eflSciency. 
A very large amount of heat must be ab- 
stracted from a body of water before it can 
be solidified; after a given amount of cool- 



WATER 97 

ing a very large quantity of water must re- 
main liquid; a body of water at 0° centi- 
grade can warm up a very large amount of 
colder air with the formation of a very small 
quantity of ice. Thus the permanency of 
the ocean, and the moderating eflEect of water 
upon cold climates are very nearly maximal. 
These are also facts, directly dependent upon 
the physico-chemical nature of water, which 
are remarkably favorable to the organism. 

Still more important is the latent heat of 
evaporation of water. Wherever water is 
in contact with the air, evaporation must take 
place until, if the system be of small dimen- 
sions, equilibrium is established between aque- 
ous vapor and the liquid; in short until the 
air is saturated with water. Unlike freezing, 
which occurs only at one particular tempera- 
ture, this process goes on continuously through- 
out all ranges of temperature at which liquid 
water can exist, and even upon ice at low tem- 
peratures. It is always accompanied by the 
conversion of heat, in the^ amount measured 
by the latent heat of evaporation, into other 
forms of energy; the heat becomes latent. 
And since air in contact with water is rarely 
saturated with aqueous vapor, owing to the 
constant movement of the atmosphere, the 
process of evaporation, with the accompany- 



98 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

ing conversion of heat into latent heat, is a 
continuous process. The phenomenon is a 
variable one, however, for while at high tem- 
perature, both because of the greater supply 
of heat and because of the greater amount of 
water vapor that the air can hold, the process 
is very important and active, at low tem- 
perature it is far less considerable. This in 
itself is no doubt a benefit because it tends 
esJ>eciaUy to restrict the upward march of 
temperature when the temperature is high, 
but is of minor importance when the tempera- 
ture is low. 

In view of the other favorable qualities of 
water it is perhaps not surprising to find that 
its latent heat of evaporation is by far the 
highest known. So great, in truth, is this 
quantity and so important the process that 
the latent heat of evaporation is one of the 
mo^ important regulatory factors at present 
known to meteorologists. 

When the sun shines upon a body of water, 
only a small part of the energy which the 
water receives contributes to the elevation of 
its temperature. Thus Fitzgerald has con- 
cluded from his studies of Lough Derg in 
Ireland during clear hot summer weather ^ 

* See Harm, "Handbook of Climatology," translated by 
Ward, p. 131. 



WATER 99 

Table of Latent Heats op Evaporation 







Temper- 




StIBSTANCE 


FOSHULA 


ATDKE OF 

Vapor- 

IZAIION 


Latent Heat or 
Vapobization 


Water 


H2O 


100° 


636 Calories 


AmTnonia 


NHs 




295 


Bromine 


Bra 


61.6 


43.7 


Chlorine 


CI2 


-22 


67.4 


Iodine 


I2 


174 


23.9 


Hydrofluoric acid . . 


Hi' 




360 


Oxygen 


(h 


-188 


58 


Nitrogen 


N2 




49.8 


^Phosphorus . . . . 


P 


287 


130.4 


Mercury 


Hg 


350 


62 


Sulphur 


& 


316 


362 


Nitrous oxide . . . 


NiiO 




100.6 


Nitric acid .... 


HNO3 




115 


Sulphurous oxide . . 


SO2 





91.2 


Sulphuric oxide . . . 


SO, 


18 


147.5 


Sulphuric acid . . . 


H2S04 


326 


122.1 


Thionylchloride . . 


SOC12 


82 


54.5 


Arsenic chloride . . 


AsCla 




69.7* 


Phosphorus trichloride 


PCU 




67.2* 


Stannic chloride . . 


SnCl4 




46.8* 


Silicon chloride . . . 


SiCU 




37.3 


Carbon dioxide . . . 


C02 




72.2 


Carbon disulphide . . 


CSii 





90 


Carbon tetrachloride . 


CC14 





52 


Cyanogen 


(CN)2 





103 


Hydrocyanic acid . . 


HCN 


20 


211* 


Methyl alcohol . . . 


CH3OH 


0° 


289.2 


Ethyl alcohol . . . 


C^HbOH 





236.5 


Amyl alcohol . - ■ 


CsHuOH 


131 


120 


Cetyl alcohol . . . 


CieHssOH 




68.5 


Hexane 


CeHu 


68 


79.4 


Methyl chloride . . 


CHaCl 





96.9 



* Total heat of vaporization. 



100 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 







Temper- 




Substance 


FORiniLA 


attjbe of 
Vapor- 
ization 


L.4TENT Heat or 
Vaporization 


Ethyl bromide . . 


CzHsBr 


38.2 


60.4 Calories 


Amyl iodide . . 




CsHuI 




47.5 


Aldehyde . 






CH3.CHO 




136.4 


Chloroform 






CHCI3 





67 


Ether . . 






(CjH6)20 


34.9 


90.4 


Acetone . 






CH3.CO.CH3 


56.6 


125.3 


Formic acid 






HCOOH 




103.7 


Acetic acid 






CH3COOH 


118 


84.9 


Acetic anhydride 




(CHsCOsO 


137 


66.1 


Dichlor-acetic acid 




CHCI2COOH 


138.4 


79.1 


Valerianic acid . 




C5H10O2 




103.5 


Ethyl acetate . 




C4H7O2 




105.8 


Acetyl chloride . 




CH3COCI 




78.9 


Acetonitrite . . 




CHjCN 


81.S 


170.6 


Ethyl amine . . 




C2H5NH2 




146.2 


Benzene . . . 




CcHa 





109 


Toluene . . . 




CeHsCHs 


111 


83.5 


Nitro-benzene 




CeHeNOz 


151.5 


79.1 


Aniline . . . 




CbHsNHi! 




93.3 


Acetophenone . 




C6H6COCH3 


203.7 


77.2 


Benzonitrite . . 




CeHeCN 


191 


87.7 


Piperidine . . 




CsH„N 


105.8 


88.9 


Pyridine . . . 




CsHeN 


115.5 


101.4 



that in the morning the surface temperature 
rises about 0.6° per hour. This, however, 
appears to account for but a small fraction 
of the solar heat which the lake had taken 
up; the rest must have been expended in 
evaporation. Another element of great im- 
portance is the transparency of water. As a 
result the rays of the sun are not absorbed 



WATER 101 

by the mere surface alone, but a considerable 
layer of water near the surface receives the 
heat. 

At the equator the evaporation of the ocean 
appears to be about 2.3 meters per year/ 
which involves more than 1,000,000,000,000,- 
000 calories of latent heat per square kilo- 
meter. The amount of heat which is em- 
ployed in evaporating water from 100 square 
kilometers of the tropical ocean is accordingly 
vastly more than all the energy employed in 
the metabolism of the total population of 
the United States, and it amounts to more 
than 100,000,000 horse power. This is equiv- 
alent to more than one horse power per square 
meter day and night throughout the year. 
To a greater or less extent all over the earth 
this same process goes on, and as a result the 
water vapor in the air probably averages 
between 15 and 20 kilograms per square meter 
of the earth's surface, an ample supply for 
the formation of rain. The effect of this 
enormous evaporation to moderate the tem- 
perature of the tropics is very considerable; 
but the heat which thus disappears is not 
lost. Rendered latent at the place of evap- 
oration, it is turned back into actual heat at 

* This and other similar facts will also be found in the 
work of Hann. 



102 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

the point of condensation, and thus serves 
to warm another and cooler locality. 

This process, so vast that all the water power 
of the globe may be regarded as its secondary 
by-product, possesses, in respect to its ten- 
dency to moderate and equalize the temper- 
ature of ocean, of lakes, and of the climates 
of all the earth, a maximal value. No other 
liquid could, during the evaporation of a 
given quantity of material, bind so much heat; 
no other vapor could yield so much heat upon 
condensation. 

Quite as important to man as this great 
power of meteorological regulation is the 
corresponding physiological activity, evap- 
oration of water from the skin and lungs. 
In an animal like man, whose metabolism is 
very intense, heat is a most prominent ex- 
cretory product, which has constantly to be 
eliminated in great amounts, and to this end 
only three important means are available:- 
conduction, radiation, and the evaporation of 
water. The relative usefulness of these three 
methods varies with the temperature of the 
environment. At a low temperature there 
is little evaporation of water, but at body 
temperature or above there can be no loss of 
heat at all by conduction and radiation, and 
the whole burden is therefore thrown upon 



WATER 103 

evaporation. The manner in which evapora- 
tion becomes important in temperature reg- 
ulation is well illustrated by the following cal- 
culation from a chart of Rubner's.^ The 
experiments upon which the chart is based 
were made upon the dog, an animal which 
lacks man's apparatus of sweat glands. The 
values of the table are only approximate. 



TEMPESATTJBIi 


Hbat Loss by Etapobation 


Degrees 


Per Cent 


9 


16 


11 


19 


13 


22 


15 


25 


17 


27 


19 


30 


31 


32 


23 


32 


27 


36 


29 


42 


31 


68 


33 


64 


35 


79 



In plants evaporation is even more impor- 
tant than in animals. Evidently such adap- 
tation of the physiological processes to the 
conditions of the environment is enormously 
favored by the high latent heat of evapora- 
tion.'^ 

1 Lusk, "The Science of Nutrition," p. 99. 
^ A full discussion of this subject will be found in the 
work of Lusk (see above), Chap. Ill, especially pp. 98-100. 



104 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

There is still another beneficial result of 
this property: the great variation in the vapor 
tension of water which accompanies variation 
in temperature. Vapor tension measures the 
amount of vapor which is present in the 
atmosphere when it is in contact with a liquid 
and after it has become saturated with the 
liquid's vapor. Now, according to a well- 
known law, the rate of increase of vapor ten- 
sion, or in other words the amount of vapor 
which the air can hold, is greater the greater 
the latent heat of vaporization.'^ Hence, 
degree by degree there is more variation in 
the vapor tension of water than there could 
be if the latent heat were lower. Such great 
variability in the quantity of water which 
the air can hold is in meteorology the most 
important characteristic of aqueous vapor.^ 
The relationship between vapor tension and 
temperature (centigrade) is shown in the 
accompanying table. 

' Near the freezing point an increase of 10° in temperature 
doubles the amount of water which the air can hold. The 
increase is proportional to the latent heat of vaporization 
according to the formulae 

2.3025 log El = I8:W/T^^\ 
^ PC 1.99 V ToTi / 
where W stands for the latent heat of vaporization, p for vapor 
tension, and T for temperature. 

^ Arrhenius, "Kosmische Physik," p. 612. 





WATER 




Tbmpbratttsb 




Vapor Tension 


Degrees 




MilliiaeteTB 







4.58 


10 




9.18 


20 




17.41 


30 




31.55 


40 




54.97 


50 




92.17 


80 




355.47 


90 




526.00 


100 




760.00 



105 



These variations are what make possible both 
the evaporation of water and its precipitation 
as rain and as dew in the meteorological cycle. 
And therefore the high latent heat of vapori- 
zation of water is in still another manner a 
most favorable circumstance in its effect upon 
the organisms. 

To sum up, this property appears to possess 
a threefold importance. First, it operates 
powerfully to, equalize and to moderate the 
temperature of the earth; secondly, it makes 
possible very effective regulation of the tem- 
perature of the living organism; and thirdly, 
it favors the meteorological cycle. All of 
these effects are true maxima, for no other 
substance can in this respect compare with 
water.^ 

' This conclusion may be contrasted with that of Whewell 
(Bridgewater Treatise, p. 142). He includes the expansion of 
water by heat, the expansion of water by cold below 40?. the 
^^ansion of water in freezing, the latent heats of melting and 



106 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

C 

THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY 

The heat conduction of water is also a maxi- 
mum among ordinary liquids, and, though 
very low compared with good conductors like 
metals, must favor the equalization of tempera- 
ture within the living cells whose structure hin- 
ders the establishment of convection currents. 

Table of Heat CoNDtrcTiviTiES 

Water 0.0125 Rubber 0.0004 

Alcohol 0.00048 Tin 0.15 

Ether 0.00034 Lead 0.08 

Benzene 0.00033 Iron 0.16 

Glycerine 0.00066 Copper 0.72 

Crown glass .... 0.0016 Silver 1.10 

D 

EXPANSION BEFORE FREEZING 

A final thermal property of water remains 
to be considered; namely, its anomalous ex- 
pansion when cooled at temperatures neaA- 
the freezing point. The facts are illustratecj 
by the accompanying table. 

evaporation, and the rate of evaporation of water. It will 
be seen that eighty years ago it was already possible to 
make out a strong case for the fitness of water ; but it should 
not be forgotten that at that time ideas were in some respects 
still very vague, and comparative data few. 



WATER 



107 



Tempebatubb 


Density- of Watbh 


Expansion From 4P 






Per cent 





0.99987 


0.013 


1 


0.99993 


0.007 


2 


0.99997 


. 0.003 


3 


0.99999 


0.001 


4 


1.00000 


0.000 


5 


0.99999 


0.001 


6 


0.99997 


0.003 


7 


0.99993 


0.007 


8 


0.99988 


0.012 


9 


0.99981 


0.019 


10 


0.99973 


0.027 


20 


0.99824 


0.176 


30 


0.99567 


0.44 


40 


0.99233 


0.77 


50 


0.98813 


1.19 


100 


0.95934 


4.07 



This unique property of water is the most 
familiar instance of striking natural fitness of 
the environment, although its importance 
has perhaps been overestimated.^ If, how- 
ever, water, like all other common substances, 

1 It scarcely merits tke curious .rhapsody of Prout, for 
instance : "The above anomalous properties of the expan- 
sion of water and its consequences have always struck us as 
presenting the most remarkable instances of design in the 
whole order of nature — an instance of something done ex- 
pressly, and almost (could we indeed conceive such a thing 
of the Deity), at second thought, to accomplish a particular 
object." — Prout, Bridgewater Treatise, "Chemical Meteor- 
ology and the Function of Digestion." London, 1834, pp. 
249-250. 



108 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

steadily contracted on cooling, so that its 
point of maximum density fell at tlie freezing 
point, it is impossible to say how great would 
be the disadvantage for living organisms. 
Certain it is that life upon the earth would be 
thereby very greatly restricted. For this prop- 
erty, together with the by no means unique phe- 
nomenon of expansion upon solidification,^ is 
very largely responsible for the permanence 
in liquid state of many bodies of water in 
cold climates. In salt water the anomalous 
contraction disappears, and the lack of paleo- 
crystic ice is due to the density of ice and to 
the great mass of the ocean and the movement 
of its waters.^ 

There is an old experiment of Rumford's 
which well illustrates what conditions must 
have been had the contraction of water been 
normal and ice denser than water.^ He 
found that in a vessel filled with water, which 
contains ice confined at the bottom, it is 
possible to heat and even boil the superficial 
portion of the water without melting the ice. 
And so it would be with lakes, streams, and 
oceans were it not for the anomaly and the 

^ The density of ice at the melting point is 0.91674. 
^ A full discussion of this subject will be found in S. 
Giinther's "Handbuch der Geophysik." 
' See WheweU's Bridgewater Treatise. 



WATER 109 

buoyancy of ice. The coldest water would 
contiipLually sink to the bottom and there 
freeze. The ice, once formed, could not be 
melted, because the warmer water would stay 
at the surface. Year after year the ice would 
increase in winter and persist through the 
summer, until eventually all or much of the 
body of water, according to the locality, 
would be turned to ice. As it is, the tempera- 
ture of the bottom of a body of fresh water 
cannot be below the point of maximum den- 
sity ; on cooling further the water rises ; 
and ice forms only on the surface. In this 
way the liquid water below is effectually pro- 
tected from further cooling, and the body of 
water persists. In the spring the first warm 
weather melts the ice, and at the earliest 
possible moment all ice vanishes. 

Such are the important thermal properties 
of water, and in briefest outline their unique 
fitness for the living mechanism. No other 
known substance could be substituted for 
watery as the material out of which oceans, 
lakes, and rivers are formed, and as the sub- 
stance which passes through the meteorolog- 
ical cycl'e, without radical sacrifice of some 
of the most vital features of existing condi- 
tions. Ammonia in these respects is the only 
substance now known which approaches the 



110 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

^fitness of water. But not only is it almost 
inconceivable that ammonia should ever jaccur 
in sufficiently vast quantities upon a planet's 
surface, but it is evident as well thalt am- 
monia wholly lacks the qualification of anoma- 
lous expansion, /and also in some of the most 
important of the other thermal properties 
falls far short of water ; while in latent heat 
of melting and in specific heat its advantage 
over water is inconsiderable. ^ 

It is obvious that upon a body like the 
earth the state of the oceans and the meteor- 
ological phenomena are of the utmost impor- 
tance to all living things. Unless these be 
favorable, human experience and reflection 
alike agree that life could not widely exist. 
It seems, therefore, almost safe to say, on the 
basis of its thermal properties alone, that 
water is the one fit substance for its place in 
the process of universal evolution, when we 
regard that process biocentrically. 

II 

THE ACTION OF WATER UPON OTHER SUB- 
STANCES 

Although the thermal properties of water 
make up the classical subject-matter for dis- 
cussions of the fitness of the natural en- 



WATER 111 

vironment, other no less important physical 
properties exist. Such especially are those 
characteristics of liquid water which in no 
small measure determine the nature of the 
resulting physico-chemical systems when other 
substances, whether soluble or insoluble, crys- 
talline or colloidal, are brought into contact 
with it ; I mean the solvent power, the dielec- 
tric constant, together with the related ioniz- 
ing power, and the surface tension. 

A 

WATER AS A SOLVENT 

As a solvent there is literally nothing to 
compare with water. In truth its qualifi- 
cations are on this point so unique and ob- 
vious that nobody seems to have taken the 
trouble to gather together the evidence, and, 
accordingly, beyond the bare assertion, a brief ^ 
statement of the facts is not easy.^ In the 
first place the solubility in water of acids, 
bases, and salts, the most familiar classes of 
inorganic substances, is almost universal. 

* Nearly the whole science of chemistry has been built 
around water and aqueous solutions. A reference to any text- 
book wiU at once reveal the truth of this statement. At first 
sight such a condition appears to be a matter of chance, but, 
as one becomes more familiar with the true character of the 
science, realization of a rational justification for the historical 
fact steadily grows. 



112 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

Relatively few of these bodies are highly 
insoluble; very many are exceedingly soluble 
in water. Apart from their electrolytic dis- 
sociation and hydrolysis, which will be later 
discussed, the chemical changes wrought upon 
such dissolved substances in solution are 
commonly very unimportant;^ For chemical 
inerthess, depending upon great stability, 
is a most significant characteristic of water, 
and undoubtedly a highly advantageous one- 
as well. 

On the whole the best evidence for the 
efficiency of water as a solvent of inorganic sub- 
stances is to be found in the data of geology. 
Of all geological agents water appears to 
have been by far the most active within the 
periods of which investigation is made pos- 
sible by the geological record.^ Rainfall, 
the movement of surface streams and of 
water beneath the ground, and wave action, 
all contribute to the work of disintegration, 
sedimentation, etc., partly by dissolution of 
soluble material, partly by mechanical action. 
But mechanical action is itself much in- 
creased by the loosening which earlier dis- 
solution has caused. In this manner the great 
solvent power of water throughout its meteor- 
ological cycle largely contributes, to the mobil- 

1 Geikie, "Textbook of Geology." pp. 447-597. 



WATER lis 

ization of many materials which could not 
otherwise be brought to the organisms which 
need them. 

It has been calculated by Murray^ that 
the total yearly run off of all the rivers of the 
earth is about 6500 cubic miles, carrying 
nearly 5,000,000,000 tons of dissolved mineral 
matter and prodigious quantities of sediment. 
The average composition of such water has 
been estimated as follows : — 

Parts per Million 

Potassium as KjO 2.40 

Sodium as Na20 7.10 

Lithium as LiaO 0.20 

Calcium as CaO 43.20 

Magnesium as MgO 14.70 

Manganese as Mns04 1.20 

IronasFeO 2.80 

Aluminium as AI2O3 3.10 

SiUconasSi02 '16.40 

Carbonic acid as CO2 46 

Phosphorus as P2O6 0.30 

Nitric acid as NjOs 3.80 

Sulphuric acid as SO3 . . 8 

Chlorine as CI 3.70 

Ammonia as NH3 0.07 

Total mineral matter 152.97 

It is, of course, almost exclusively to these 
constant accessions that the ocean owes its 
salinity, which in the course of time has 
reached well-nigh inconceivable magnitude. 
The common salt alone in the oceans of all 

» Russell, "Rivers of North America," p. 80. 

I 



114 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

the earth amounts to not less than 35,000,000,- 
000,000,000 tons. Quite as significant of the 
solvent power of water is the variety of 
elements whose presence in sea water can be 
demonstrated, thus proving that the total 
store of them is in any case enormous. They 
include hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, carbon, 
chlorine, sodium, magnesium, sulphur, phos- 
phorus, which are easily demonstrated; 
further, arsenic, caesium, gold, lithium, ru- 
bidium, barium, lead, boron, fluorine, iron, 
iodine, bromine, potassium, cobalt, copper, 
manganese, nickel, silver, silicon, zinc, alumin- 
ium, calcium, and strontium.^ 

Equally striking is the evidence in regard 
to the first stages of this geological process. 
Under the action of water, aided, to be sure, 
in many cases by dissolved carbonic acid, 
every species of rock suffers slow destruction. 
All substances yield in situ to the solvent 
work of water, and the dissolved parts may* 
all be found in the great final reservoir, the 
ocean. It has been proved that nearly 
every one of the substances which are thus 
set in motion upon the face of the earth are 
placed under contribution by life, for bio- 
chemical analysis reveals them as constitu- 
ents of living organisms, absorbed either 

^ Arrhenius, "Kosmische Physik." 



WATER 115 

on their way down from the mountain tops 
to the ocean or by the marine flora and 
fauna. 

Not less valuable to the community of 
living things than the dissolution of the rocks, 
is the disintegration and transport of solid 
material, largely dependent thereon, which 
among its many results includes the prelim- 
inary steps of soil formation. By these 
familiar and enduring geological means chemi- 
cal substances are mobilized in the greatest 
variety of forms and conditions, and thus 
rendered available for the living organism. 
It is clearly evident from the chemist's long 
experience with solvents that no other fluid 
could permanently carry on this process with 
such acceptable regularity and eflSciency. 
For no other chemically inert solvent can 
compare with water in the number of things 
which it can dissolve, nor in the amounts of 
them which it can hold in solution; and of 
course any chemically active solvent must 
sooner or later exhaust itself by its chemical 
action, when the cycle must cease. Here, 
then, is a fitness of water which is open to no 
doubt. 

Let us turn for further proof to the organ- 
ism itself, taking blood serum as a source of 
information. The composition of this sub- 



116 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

stance (in the case of the cow) is roughly as 
follows : ^ — 

Parts per 1000 

Water 913-6 

Protein 72.5 

Sugar 1-OS 

Cholesterine 1-24 

Lecithine 1-68 

Fat 0.93 

Organic phosphoric acid 0.01 

NajO 4.31 

K2O 0.26 

CaO 0.12 

MgO 0.45 

CI 3.69 

PjOs 0.08 

Most of these substances are in solution, 
and unquestionably a host of others are pres- 
ent with them, in small and varying amounts. 
Among these may be mentioned iodine, 
bromine, iron, sulphates, urea, ammonia, ben- 
zoic acid, amino-acids, etc. But indeed all 
substances found in urine (see below) also 
occur in blood. It cannot be doubted that^ 
if the vehicle of the blood were other than 
water, the dissolved substances would be 
greatly restricted in variety and in quantity, 
nor that such restriction must needs be ac- 
companied by a corresponding restriction of 
the life processes. 

^ A full discussion of the following data may be found in 
such works as those of Hanunarsten -and Abderhalden on 
physiological chemistry. 



WATER 117 

The composition of the urine provides 
another excellent illustration of the utility 
of the solvent power of water. In the course 
of its complex chemical processes a higher 
organism produces a host of end products 
which must be removed, and also finds itself 
accidentally in possession of a great variety 
of other useless substances which require 
excretion. The solvent power of water is 
one of the great factors in facilitating this 
task. Human urine has been reported to 
contain in solution the following stibstances: 
urea, carbamic acid, creatinine, creatine, 
uric acid, xanthine, guanine, hypoxanthine, 
adenine, paraxanthine, heteroxanthine, epi- 
sarkine, epiguanine, oxalic acid, allantoine, 
hippuric acid, phenaceturic acid, benzoic acid, 
phenolsulphuric acid, skatoxylsulphuric acid, 
paraoxyphenylacetic acid, homogentisic acid, 
urobiline, urochrome, uroerythrine, glucose, 
levulose, lactose, numerous compounds of 
glycuronic acid, glycine, alanine, leucine, tyro- 
sine, and other amino-acids, various enzymes, 
putrescine, cadavarine, and countless other 
organic substances, chlorides, bromides, and 
iodides, phosphates and sulphates, potassium, 
sodium, ammonia, calcium, magnesium, iron, 
carbonic acid, nitrogen, argon, etc. 

Here again ifis sure that such variety could 



118 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

not be attained with another solvent. It is 
no exaggeration to say that except atmos- 
pheric oxygen and carbonic acid, nearly all 
the food of living organisms is water borne, 
and all material in its passage into the body, 
through the body, and out of the body nearly 
always employs the same vehicle. Cer- 
tainly no other form of transport would be so 
efficient and so economical. 

B 

IONIZATION 

If, therefore, aqueous solutions are, ap- 
parently of necessity, the very basis of the 
life processes, the state of substances when in 
this condition, and also when in contact with 
water, is of vital importance. Here two prop- 
erties of water, the dielectric constant and 
the surface tension, exert a cardinal influence. 

Among the phenomena of solution those 
which are related to electrolytic dissociation, • 
as suggested by the hypothesis of Arrhenius, 
have deservedly received a great deal of at- 
tention since the secure establishment of the 
new science of physical chemistry in the 
eighties of the last century. In the course 
of time the belief that in aqueous solution 
the molecules of all acids, bases, and salts 
are more or less split into particles which bear 



WATER 119 

electrical charges has been universally ac- 
cepted. These so-called ions are the source 
of nearly all the electrical phenomena of solu- 
tion, whether in batteries, in the manifesta- 
tions of animal electricity, or in simple con- 
duction through an aqueous solution. But 
the more familiar electrochemical processes 
are by no means the only results of ioniza- 
tion. An infinite number of chemical inter- 
actions between dissociated bodies follow 
inevitably. These changes are not, to be 
sure, decisive and irreversible, but balanced 
actions, which, however, vastly increase the 
variety of substances that exist in water. 

Let us consider, for example, a system which 
has been made by dissolving in water the 
simple salts sodium chloride, NaCl, potas- 
sium bromide, KBr, and lithium iodide, Lil. 
According to the ionization hypothesis, more 
than half of the molecules of every one of 
these salts will at once dissociate into ions as 
follows: — 

NaCl=Na+Cl 

KBr=K-hBr 

LiI=Li+i 

These reactions are balanced, and it is 
confidently believed that the ions are con- 



120 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

stantly recombining to form molecules and 
the molecules constantly dissociating once 
more to form ions. At the same time, noth- 
ing hinders the union of sodium ions with 
bromine ions, or of any other pair of positive 
and negative ions. Accordingly, the solu- 
tion at once contains not only the three origi- 
nal salts and the six different varieties of 
ions, but also the following new molecules: — 
sodium bromide, NaBr, sodium iodide, Nal, 
potassium chloride, KCl, potassium iodide, KI, 
lithium chloride, LiCl, and lithium bromide, 
LiBr. All nine varieties of molecules and 
all six of ions are concerned in a complicated 
system of chemical reactions which are now 
well understood, the state of equilibrium 
depending upon known conditions. For in- 
stance, if the solution be a moderately dilute 
one and the original substances be present in 
chemically equivalent quantities, about 90 
per cent of the material will be in the ionic 
state, each variety of ions making up about 15 
per cent of the total, and about 10 per cent 
will be in the form of molecules, each variety 
constituting about 1.1 per cent. 

There can be no doubt that ionization 
plays a great part in determining the char- 
acteristics of solutions of acids, bases, and 
salts, and in bringing about the reactions which 



WATER 121 

occur among them, and between them and 
other substances. 

Such, then, is the process to which are due 
most of the electrical phenomena and many 
of the chemical phenomena of solutions, and 
it is certain that the extent and variety of 
ionization in water far surpass what is possi- 
ble in any other solvent. One reason for this 
is most simple. The ionizing substances are 
so very much more often soluble in water 
than in any other solvent, and when soluble 
are in general so much more highly soluble, 
that the opportunity for ionization in water 
is quite unparalleled. Further, ionization in 
solution unquestionably depends upon^^the- 
dielectric constant of the solvent{ in accord- 
ance with the principle first stated by Nernst 
that the greater the dielectric capacity of the 
solvent, the greater is the degree of electro- 
lytic dissociation of substances dissolved in it, 
when the conditions are otherwise the same.^ 

1 "The following consideration will make this principle 
clearer : The positively and negatively charged ions would 
unite to form electrically neutral molecules because of the 
electrostatic attraction which exists between them if it were 
not for the action of another and opposing force, the nature of 
which is as yet unlcnown. The equilibrium between these 
two forces gives rise to the equilibrium between the ions and 
the undissociated molecules, or determines the degree of dis- 
sociation. When the dielectric constant is increased, the 



122 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

This is the case because the tendency of the 
electrically charged ions to reunite and form 
electrically neutral molecules must be less 
the greater the dielectric constant of the sol- 
vent. Now the dielectric constant of water <> 

^^s nearly the highest at present known, and 
therefore ionization in water is on that account 
also more extensive than in almost any other ^ 

' solvent. 

Finally, for reasons that are not yet under- 
stood, the process of ionization in other sol- 
vents than water is a much more complex 
afifair, and there can be no doubt that such 
complexity limits the phenomena which are 
dependent upon ionization.^ 

electrostatic attraction between the ions is alone weakened, 
and hence the degree of dissociation is increased." — Lb 
Blanc, "A Textbook of Electro-Chemistry." New York, 
1907, p. 147. 

^ "It would be natural to expect that the conceptions 
which have been found serviceable in the case of solutions in 
water could be applied directly to solutions in other solvents, 
keeping in mind that, according to the individual nature of 
any given solvent, the degree of dissociation, the migration 
velocity of the ions, and consequently the conductivity of a 
solution of a given concentration would be different. It is 
a noteworthy fact, however, that the behavior of non-aque- 
ous is much more complicated than that of aqueous solutions. 
This is shown especially by the investigation of the conduc- 
tivity of solutionsof various substances in liquid sulfur dioxide 
made by Walden and Centnerszwer. Neither the law of the 
independent migration of the ions, nor the law that by increas- 



WATER 123 

Physiologically, as researches of the last 
twenty years clearly prove, the action of ions 
is of fundamental significance. The brilliant 
investigations of J. Loeb, and the long series 
of studies by various other physiologists of 
the influence of electrolytes upon colloids 
form perhaps the most telling evidence for 
this belief.^ At all events there is no ques- 
tion that the simple equilibria between acids 
and bases and salts are of extreme importance 
in physiological processes. They lie at the 
very basis of the structure of all protoplasm, 

ing dilution the conductance approaches a maximum value, 
nor, finally, the dilution law, was found to hold. Molecular 
weight determinations carried out at the same time by the 
boiling-point method gave normal values for non-electrolytes, 
and abnormally large values for electrolytes, whereas abnor- 
mally small values would be expected. This indicates that 
association has taken place, to a considerable extent, which 
in all probability takes place not only between molecules of 
dissolved substance, but also between these molecules and 
those of the solvent. Considering these circumstances, it 
is very fortunate for the advance of the sciences of chemistry 
and electro-chemistry that such complications are generally, 
although not always, absent in the case of aqueous solutions. 
It is due to this fact that it has been possible to deduce simple 
laws from a study of such solutions." — Le Blanc, "A Text- 
book of Electro-Chemistry." New York, 1907, pp. 142-143. 
• Full discussion of such subjects will be found in the 
"Dynamics of Living Matter," by Loeb, and in his contribu- 
tion to Oppenheimer's "Handbuch der Biochemie," as well 
as in HSber's "Physikalische Chemie der Zelle und der 
Gewebe." 



124 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

and the sure and definite relations between 
such bodies provide, as it were, a secure foun- 
dation for the more complex organic structures. 

More obvious is the value of ions as sources 
of electricity. If the older electro-physiology 
of the third quarter of the nineteenth cen- 
tury has proved in some respects a sterile 
field, there can yet be no doubt that more 
subtly, and quite apart from the nervous im- 
pulse and the peculiar phenomena of electrical 
fishes, electrical phenomena are everywhere 
involved in the most intimate of the physio- 
logical processes. 

Even without further discussion of a sub- 
ject that must soon lead into difiicult and 
highly technical considerations, I feel sure 
that the existence of another important fitness 
of water is patent. For ions are evidently 
a real contribution to the richness of the 
environment. They enhance the ■variety of 
chemical substances and of chemical reactions ; 
they constitute a group of singularly mobile 
chemical agents; they provide electricity; 
and, finally, aqueous solutions are by far the 
best source of ions. 

■- It must be pointed out before leaving this 

subject that the dielectric constant, hence 

the ionizing power, is somehow related to 

svarious other properties of the solvent. In 



WATER 



125 



the accompanying table Kq stands for the 
dielectric constant, Hy for the latent heat 
of vaporization, and K^ for the absolute 
conductivity for heat. It is to be observed 
that on the whole all three quantities decrease 
simultaneously. These properties are also 
related to the critical pressure, to the van 
der Waals constant a, and to the molecular 
volume at the boiling point. 



Solvent 



H^ 



Water, H2O 

Methyl alcohol, CH3OH . . . 
Ethyl alcohol, CjHsGH . . . 
Formic acid, H • COOH . . . 
Acetic acid, GH3 • COOH . 

Ammonia, NH3 

Methylamine, CH3 • NH2 
Sulphurous oxide, SO2 . . . 
Acetone, CH3 • CO • CH3 . . . 
Ethylacetate, CHj ■ CO • O • QiHe 

Benzene, CeHe 

Toluene, CeHs ■ CHs .... 
Ether, (C2H6)20 . . . 

Chloroform, CHCI3 .... 
Tetrachlormethane, CCI4 . . 
Stannic chloride, SnClj . . 



81.7 
32.5 
21.7 
57.0 
6.5 
16 
<10.5 
14 
20.7 
5.85 
2.26 
2.31 
4.36 
4.95 
2.18 
3.2 



536.5 
267.5 
205 
103.7 
89.8 
329 

92.5 
125.3 
86.7 
93.5 
83.6 
84.5 
58.5 
46.35 
30.53 



0.154 

0.0495 

0.0423 

0.0648 

0.0472 



0.0348 
0.0333 
0.0307 
0.0303 
0.0288 
0.0252 



Such evidence clearly suggests that some 
of the manifold fitnesses of water proceed 
from a single cause or group of causes. For 
the present, however, these relationships are 



126 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

obscure, and in any case there seems to be 
no immediate hope of bringing them into 
connection with the science of biology. 

C 

SURFACE TENSION]' 

Of all common liquids, except mercury, 
water has the greatest surface tension. 

Table or Suktacb Tensions 

Water 75 

Carbonic acid 1.8 

Ammonia 41.8 

Mercmy 436 

Benzene 28.8 

Methyl alcohol 23 

Ethyl alcohol 22 

Ether 16.5 

Glycerine 65 

Acetone 23 

Formic acid 37.1 

Acetic acid 23.6 

Chloroform 26 

This fact is of enormous' moment in biology, 
most obviously perhaps in its influence upon 
the soil. For surface tension and density 
determine the height to which a liquid will 
rise in a capillary system, and thus it comes 
about that the principal factor in bringing 
water within reach of plants is the exceptional 
surface tension of water. The nature of the 
case is clearly explained by Hilgard. "The 



WATER 127 

liquid water lield in the pores of the soil, in 
the form of surface films representing the 
curved surface seen in capillary tubes, and 
therefore tending to cause the water to move 
upwards, as well as in all other directions, 
until uniformity of tension is established, is 
of vastly higher importance to plant growth 
than hygroscopic moisture. It not only serves 
normally as the vehicle of all plant food ab- 
sorbed during the growth of the usual crops, 
but also, as a rule, to sustain the enormous 
evaporation by which the plant maintains, 
during the heat of the day, a temperature 
sufficiently low to permit of the proper op- 
eration of the processes of assimilation and 
building of cell tissue."^ ■■] 

The rise of water in capillary systems re- 
sembling soil, under the action of surface 
tension, may be as much as ten feet. In soil 
itself the highest rise under the usual circum- 
stances is unquestionably as much as four 
or five feet; but if the surface tension of 
water were like that of most liquids it could 
be, under similar conditions, but two or three 
feet. There seems to be little doubt that the 
rise of fluids in tall plants is also in large 
part due to the action of surface tension, and 
accordingly it must be much favored by the 

» Hilgard, "Soas." New York, 1907, p. 201. 



128 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

magnitude of that quantity in the case of 
water. 

Finally, surface tension is of great impor- 
tance, indeed in simple cases is the one effective 
agent, in the phenomenon called adsorption.^ 
On the basis of thermodynamical considera- 
tions first developed by Willard Gibbs, it is 
easy to show that whenever the dissolution 
of a substance changes the surface tension 
of a solvent, the distribution of the dis- 
solved substance will not be strictly homo- 
geneous. If the solution has a lower surface 
tension than the solvent, the surface of the 
solution will become more concentrated than 
the interior; or if the surface tension of the 
solution be greater than that of the solvent, 
the surface of the solution will become less 
concentrated than the interior. This result, 
quite insignificant in simple solutions, becomes 
a matter of much moment when, as in the 
case of suspensions of fine particles like ani- 
mal charcoal, in emulsions, jellies, or any 
other system of like disperse heterogeneity 
of physical constitution, there occurs very 
great increase of surface area. Then it is 

' A familiar example of adsorption is the use of bone- 
black to decolorize sirup in the process of sugar refining. 
The colored matters are almost completely removed from 
solution, and cling to the surface of the charcoal. 



WATER 129 

that adsorption becomes a factor of the great- 
est weight; for, other things being equal, 
the total force of surface tension in a system 
is proportional to the area of surface. Under 
these circumstances dissolved substances are 
no longer distributed with any approach to 
equality or regularity in the system, but they 
collect at the surface in very great quantities, 
and in the most irregular manner. 

Now of all known physical structures there 
is none which rivals protoplasm in its fine 
complexity, and adsorption is therefore un- 
questionably a prominent agent in deciding 
its physico-chemical constitution. Mgreover, 
adsorption influences and complicates almost 
every process of chemical physiology, for no 
product of life is without its colloids, i.e. sub- 
stances which are finely divided and there- 
fore endowed with great surface areas. In 
truth colloids are probably quite essential to 
fine complexity, and so to every conceivable 
form of life.^ 

The evidence for this universal importance 

1 "Eines aber mochte ich behaupten, welches aucli immer 
die stoflSiche Zusammensetzung jener Lebewesen (living 
organisms in another world) sein mag : es mlissen KoUoide 
sein. . . . Welcher andere Zustand, ausser dem Kolloiden, 
konnte derart veranderliche, derart plastisehe Formen bilden 
und wSre doch im stande, diese Formen, wenn notig, miver- 
anderlieh zu wahren." — Bechhold, l.c., p. 194. 



130 THE FITNESS OP THE ENVIRONMENT 

of adsorption in biology is not to be briefly 
presented, but it may be found in almost 
endless profusion in such works as those of 
Freundlich and Bechhold.^ 

It must not be supposed that the phenomena 
of adsorption in biology are simple and exactly 
understood. What is certain is that they 
are universal, and that surface tension lies 
at the root of the matter. This is because 
all living things are colloidal, and I am in- 
clined to think that most physiologists will 
admit that life without colloids is probably 
unthinkable, even in a world very differently 
constituted from our own. Colloidal struc- 
tures are, in fact, the first and greatest factors 
in physical complexity of organization, and 
the principal force, unless it be in exceptional 
cases an electrical charge due to ions, which 
operates upon the colloidal structures is sur- 
face tension. This, then, is another striking 
fitness of water above all other things. * 

Such are the facts which I have been able 
to discover regarding the fitness of water for 
the organism. The following properties ap- 
pear to be extraordinarily, often uniquely, 

* Freundlich, "Kapillarchemie." Leipzig, 1909. Bech- 
hold, "Die Kolloide in Biologie und Medizin." Dresden, 
1911. 



WATER 131 

suited to a mechanism which must be complex, 
durable, and dependent upon a constant 
metabolism : heat capacity, heat conductiv- 
ity, expansion on cooling near the freezing 
point, density of ice, heat of fusion, heat of 
vaporization, vapor tension, freezing point, 
solvent power, dielectric constant and ionizing 
power, and surface tension.^ 

In no case do the advantages which these 
properties confer seem to be trivial; com- 
monly they are of the greatest moment; 
and I cannot doubt, even after allowances 
have been made for the probability of occa- 
sional fallacies in the development of an argu- 
ment which, though simple, is beset with many 
pitfalls, that they are decisive. Water, of its 
very nature, as it occurs automatically in the 
process of cosmic evolution, is fit, with a fitness 
no less marvelous and varied than that fitness 
of the organism which has been won by the 
process of adaptation in the course of organic 
evolution. 

If doubts remain, let a search be made for 

* Contrasting this statement with that of Whewell in his 
Bridgewater Treatise, it is evident that while the progress 
of science has provided much novel information, and elim- 
inated many false views, the present situation differs from the 
earlier one only in the better definition of the issue, and in 
our modern freedom from metaphysical and theological 
associations. 



132 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

any other substance which, however slightly, 
can claim to rival water as the milieu^ of 
simple organisms, as the milieu interieur of 
all living things, or in any other of the count- 
less physiological functions which it performs 
either automatically or as a result of adapta- 
tion. 

In truth Darwinian fitness is a perfectly 
reciprocal relationship. In the world of 
modern science a fit organism inhabits a fit 
environment. 

^ Here and elsewhere the word " milieu " has been employed 
when it is desired to express oidy that part of the conception 
of environment which is involved in the literal meaning of 
the word, leaving to environment the added significance of 
that which provides food. 



CHAPTEE IV 
CARBONIC ACID 

TWO chemical individuals stand alone in 
importance for the great biological 
cycle upon the earth. The one is water, the 
other carbon dioxide. The one, for reasons 
which we have just reviewed, is the most 
familiar of all the varieties of matter. The 
other rarely is seen except by chance, and with- 
out scientific research never could have been 
known for what it is in value to living things. 
Yet these two simple substances are the com- 
mon source of every one of the complicated 
substances which are produced by living 
beings, and they are the common end prod- 
ucts of the wearing away of all the constitu- 
ents of protoplasm, and of the destruction of 
those materials which yield energy to the 
body.^ 

1 A man weighing 60-70 kilograms excretes daily the fol- 
lowing quantities of material : — 

Water 2500-3500 grams 

Carbon dioxide .... 750-900 grams 

All other substances . . 60-125 grams 

133 



134 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

Once perhaps the atmosphere of the earth 
consisted chiefly of water and carbon dioxide; 
but coohng has caused the condensation of 
most of the water, and geological processes, 
more recently aided by the action of vegetation 
with coal and peat formation, have removed 
nearly all of the carbon dioxide. The latter 
transformations have resulted in the substitu- 
tion of oxygen in the atmosphere. However, 
the interior of the earth continues to deliver 
through volcanoes large amounts of carbon 
dioxide, and thus the original source of atmos- 
pheric carbon dioxide persists as a diminish- 
ing supply. 

To-day carbon dioxide makes up only a 
little more than 0.03 per cent by volume of 
the whole atmosphere, approximately 4.6 
kilograms per square meter of the earth's 
surface, or about 2,300,000,000,000 metric 

Water is, tkerefore, three fourths, carbon dioxide one fifth, » 
of the total, and all other substances amount to but 2 to 3 
per cent. 

In like manner the materials ingested by an ordinary green 
plant are proportioned, water making up more than nine 
tenths, and carbon dioxide amounting to fully five times the 
sum of all other substances combined. 

Needless to say, a large part of the water which enters 
and leaves plants and animals has had no real share in their 
organization. It is merely the bearer of dissolved substances 
or the means, through evaporation, of lowering the tempera- 
ture of their bodies. 



CARBONIC ACID 



135 



tons for the whole earth. ^ In the ocean the 
amount of carbonic acid is about 0.1 gram per 
liter, or approximately 0.01 per cent by 
weight. Here, however, much the larger 
part is in chemical union with bases, chiefly 
in the form of bicarbonates.^ 

There can be no doubt that the physical 
properties of carbon dioxide are less important 
to the living organism than are those of water. 
But indeed the characteristics of water so 
largely determine the nature of the environ- 

^ The composition of dry air is as follows : — 



Per Cubic Metbb 



Volume in Liters 



Weight in 
Grama 



Nitrogen . . 
Oxygen . . 
Argon . . . 
Carbon dioxide 




299 
10.4 
0.6 



Feb Kiloqram 




* See below in the discussion of the alkalinity of the ocean. 



136 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

ment and the conditions within the organism 
alike, that this is necessarily the case. How- 
ever, the less conspicuous substance is not 
without its physical fitnesses, and we must 
now turn to them. 



SOLUBILITY 

The most obvious of the properties of car- 
bonic acid is its all-pervasiveness. Originally 
formed in vast quantities by the cosmic pro- 
cess, and accumulated in the atmosphere, the 
store has been steadily replenished there by 
vulcanism. It is probable that of the enor- 
mous quantities now deposited as limestone 
in the earth's crust, a quantity sufficient to 
yield an atmospheric pressure greater ten- 
fold than the present atmospheric pressure, 
only a fraction was at any one time actually 
gaseous. For it happens that the presence 
of carbonic acid in the atmosphere insures the 
occurrence of greater, or at least nearly equal, 
quantities in the ocean and in all the natural 
waters of the earth. This is due to the solu- 
bility of carbon dioxide, to the magnitude of 
its absorption coefficient in water. 

The absorption coefficient is the volume 
of gas absorbed by one liter of liquid when 



CARBONIC ACID 137 

the gas pressure is one atmosphere. Accord- 
ing to the law of Henry, however, the absorp- 
tion of the gas is always proportional to its 

Table op Absobption Coefficients at 0° 

Oxygen 0.049 

Hydrogen 0.021 

Nitrogen 0.024 

Carbon monoxide 0.035 

Carbon dioxide 1.797 

Sulphurous oxide 79.79 

Ammonia 1299 

partial pressure in the atmosphere, and there- 
fore the absorption coefficient measures the 
ratio, after equilibrium has been attained, 
between the concentration of a substance in 
solution and in the g^aseous state, no matter 
what that concentration may be. 

The absorption coefficient is not constant 
under all circumstances, and varies especially 
with the temperature. 

Table op Absorption Coefficients op COj 

Tempehatubb Absoeption Coefficient 

0° 1.797 

10° 1.185 

20° 0.901 

37.29° 0.563 

100° 0.244 

It will be seen from the tables that, differ- 
ing from most gases, carbon dioxide has an 
absorption coefficient nearly equal to one, and 



138 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

that for the ordinary temperature of the earth's 
waters, where they are in contact with car- 
bonic acid gas, it is very close indeed to 1.0, 
Hence, when water is in contact with air, and 
equiHbrium has been estabhshed, the amount 
of free carbonic acid in the water is almost 
exactly equal to the amount in the air. Unlike 
oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen, carbonic acid 
enters water freely; unlike sulphurous oxide 
and ammonia, it escapes freely from water. 
Thus the waters can never wash carbonic acid 
out of the air, nor the air keep it from the 
waters. It is the one substance which thus, 
in considerable quantities relative to its total 
amount, everywhere accompanies water.^ In 
earth, air, fire, and water alike these two sub- 
stances are always associated. 

Accordingly, if water be the first primary 
constituent of the environment, carbonic acid 
is inevitably the second, — because of its 
solubility possessing an equal mobility with 
water, because of the reservoir of the at- 
mosphere never to be depleted by chemical 

* "Carbonic acid being more soluble than the other gases, 
is contained in rain water in proportions between 30 and 40 
times greater than in the atmosphere." — Geikie, "Text- 
book of Geology." 4th ed., Vol. I, p. 449, 1903. 

It must not be forgotten that carbonic acid in subterr?inean 
water, by which so much geological change is accomphshed, 
originates, not in the air, but from organic matter in the soil. 



CARBONIC ACID 139 

action in the oceans, lakes, and streams. In 
truth, so close is the association between these 
two substances that it is scarcely correct logi- 
cally to separate them at all; together they 
make up the real environment and they never 
part company. Carbonic acid thus possesses 
the first great qualification of a food: its 
occurrence is universal and its mobility a 
maximum. This is due to the fact that its 
absorption coefficient is on the average ap- 
proximately one, the most favorable value. 

Needless to say the absorption coefficient 
of carbonic acid is also of great importance 
in many physiological processes, chiefly per- 
haps in excretion. In the course of a day a 
man of average size produces, as a result of 
his active metabolism, nearly two pounds of 
carbon dioxide. All this must be rapidly re- 
moved from the body. It is difficult to im- 
agine by what elaborate chemical and physical 
devices the body could rid itself of such enor- 
mous quantities of material were it not for 
the fact that, in the blood, the acid can cir- 
culate partly free ^ and, in the lungs, by a pro- 
cess which under ordinary circumstances has 
all the appearances of a simple physical phe- 

1 Of the total carbonic acid of the blood 6-10 per cent 
exists as the free acid, partly in the plasma, partly in the cor- 
puscles. 



140 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

nomenon,^ can escape into air which is charged 
with but Kttle of the gas.^ Were carbon 
dioxide not gaseous, its excretion would be 
the greatest of physiological tasks; were it 
not freely soluble, a host of the most universal 
existing physiological processes would be im- 
possible. 

n 

ACIDITY 

The only other property of this substance 
which calls for consideration at this point is 
its acid nature and strength. Very few min- 
erals are freely soluble in pure water, and 
nearly all yield to the process of weathering 
far more readily because of the carbonic acid 
which all natural waters contain.^ The latter 

1 The determination of the exact nature of the process 
by which carbonic acid is excreted across the lung membrane 
is one of the standing difficulties of physiology, but we need 
not here enter upon its consideration. 

^ Expired air contains on the average more than 4 per cent 
by volume of carbonic acid. 

^ "A few minerals (halite, for example) are readily soluble 
in water without chemical change, and without the aid of any 
intermediate element; hence the copious brine-springs of 
salt regions. In the great majority of cases, however, solu- 
tion is effected through the medium of carbonic acid or other 
reagent. Limestone is soluble to the extent of about 1 part 
in 1000 of water saturated with carbonic acid. The solution 
and removal of lime from the mortar of a bridge or vault, 



i CARBONIC ACID 141 

constituent is probably a necessary adjuvant 
in the most far-reaching geological phenom- 
ena. Indeed, it is the united action of water 
and carbonic acid, aided in lesser degree by 
nitric acid, which has been formed in the atmos- 
phere by electrical action, and by acid prod- 
ucts of vegetation, which sets free the in- 
organic constituents of the earth's crust and 
turns them into the stream of metabolism. 

But apart from the solvent action of car- 
bonic acid, there is another group of phenomena 
which depend upon its acid character. These 
must now be explained. They are the neu- 
trality or faint alkalinity of the ocean, and of 
protoplasm. 

According to the modern theory of solution, 
water itself, like the dissolved electrolytes, 
is dissociated into ions, though only to a very 
slight degree.^ The reaction is expressed as 
follows: — 

H20=H+0H 

and the deposit of the material so removed ia stalactites and 
stalagmites, likewise the rapid effacement of marble epi- 
taphs in our chmrch yards, are instances of this solution. . . . 
Among the sulphates, gypsum is the most important example 
of solution. It is dissolved in the proportion of about 1 
part in 400 parts of water. Even silica is abstracted from 
rocks by natural waters." — Geikib, "Geology," pp. 451-452. 
1 For a discussion of this subject the textbook of Mellor, 
"Chemical Statics and Dynamics," p. 206, may be consulted. 



142 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

If the water be pure, the concentrations of 
hydrogen and hydroxyl ions are necessarily 
the same, for water is electrically neutral. A 
variety of independent methods of estimation 
have shown that at 25° (centigrade) this 
concentration amounts almost precisely to 
O.OOOOOOIN, in the ordinary units.^ This 
corresponds to 0.0000001 gram of ionized 
hydrogen and 0.0000017 gram of ionized 
hydroxyl in 1000 grams of water. Further, 
the theory of solution explains acidity in 
water by the occurrence of hydrogen ions, 
formed from dissolved electrolytes, in excess 
of hydroxyl ions ; and alkalinity by a similar 
excess of hydroxyl over hydrogen ions. Neu- 
trality is then the condition when, as in pure 
water, the two concentrations are equal. In 
short, expressing the concentration of ionized 

* Concentrations are expressed in terms of claemieal 
equivalents, gram-molecules, or moles. N (normal) is the 
symbol for tUs unit. The values of the concentration of 
ionized hydrogen at neutrality as estimated by different 
investigators are as follows : — 

6. X10-' Kohlrausch 1884 

1.0 X10-' Ostwald 1893 

1.1 XIO"' Arrhenius, Shields 1893 

1.2 XW Wijs 1893 
0.9 X10-' Kanolt 1907 
1.02 X 10"' Heydweiller 1909 
1.02 X 10-' Lund6n 1907 



CARBONIC ACID 143 

+ 
hydrogen by (H) and of ionized hydroxy! by 

(OH):- 

If (H) = O.OOOOOOIN = (OH) 

the solution is neutral; 

if (H) > O.OOOOOOIN > (OH) 

the solution is acid; 

if (H) < O.OOOOOOIN < (OH) 

the solution is alkaline. 

It remains to point out that implicit in 
these definitions is the well-founded hypothesis 
that in water the concentrations of hydrogen 
and hydroxyl ions vary inversely, so that 
with constant temperature under all circum- 
stances their product is constant: ^ — 

(H) X (OH) = K 

Substituting in this equation the value 
0.0000001 of the concentrations at neutral- 
ity, we obtain the value 

K = 0.00000000000001 

, .Xs 0.00000000000001 
whence (H) = — -^^ 

(OH) 

1 This corresponds with the requirements of the Mass. 
Law. 



144 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

Whenever a weak acid is present in aqueous 

solution in company with such bases as 

sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, etc., 

which are invariable constituents of the ocean, 

blood, protoplasm, etc., provided the add he 

in excess, it is a simple matter to determine 

the reaction, which can best be measured by 

+ 
the values of (H) and (OH), following the 

considerations above. 

Now there is a certain characteristic prop- 
erty of an acid, its ionization constant, h, 
which measures its tendency to dissociate 
in aqueous solution, thereby to produce hydro- 
gen ions, and hence to increase the intensity 
of acidity. Strong acids have ionization con- 
stants which are of the order of magnitude of 
1.0, weak acids of the order of magnitude of 
0.0001, the weakest acids, 0.00000001, or less. 

Table op Ionization Constants 

HCI, HNOa, etc 1. 

HsPOi 0.011 

HsAs04 0.005 

HNO2 0.0005 

HzCOs 0.0000003 

NaHaPOj 0.0000002 

H2S 0.000000091 

HsBOa 0.0000000007 

NaaHPOi 0.00000000000036 

It has been discovered that in the general 
case above discussed the concentration of 



CARBONIC ACID 145 

ionized hydrogen is always almost exactly 
proportional to the ratio of free acid to salt, 
and is equal, in very close approximation, 
to the product of this ratio by the ionization 
constant of the acid. That is to say, repre- 
senting free acid by HA and salt by BA, 

+ 

whence, if k= (H) 

HA_, 
BA 

From this relationship, therefore, follows the 
conclusion, fully established by experiment, 
that whenever in such a solution the excess 
of acid, HA, is chemically equivalent to the 
quantity of salt, BA, the hydrogen ion concen- 
tration is almost exactly equal to the ioniza- 
tion constant of the acid. But the ionization 
constant of carbonic acid (first hydrogen atom) 
is 0.0000003. Hence in a solution containing 
exactly equivalent quantities of free carbonic 
acid and, for example, sodium bicarbonate, 
the hydrogen ion concentration must be 
0.0000003 N. Further, since 

HA __ (H) 
BA k 



146 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

if the amount of acid be ten times the amount 
of salt i^^-r = 10 ], the hydrogen ion concentra- 
tion must be 0.000003 N, and if the reverse 

be the case (^;r-r=T7:) the value must be 
vBA 10/ 

0.00000003 N. 

The range of variation of concentration of 
hydrogen ions in the usual solutions of the 
chemical laboratory considerably surpasses 
the limits 1.0 N and 0.00000000000001 N. In 
comparison with such enormous differences 
those between 0.000003 N and 0.00000003 N are 

almost negligible f : -Y 

UOO 100,000,000,000,000/ 

Hence ordinarily it is quite accurate enough 

to speak of any solution containing both 

free carbonic acid and a bicarbonate, when 

the disparity between the concentrations of 

the two substances is not very great, as of 

constant neutral reaction. For, obviously, 

the neutral point, which at a temperature of 

25° amounts to a concentration of hydrogen 

and hydroxyl ions 0.0000001 N, falls well 

within the narrow range of reaction of such 

solutions, being characterized by a ratio of 

carbonic acid to bicarbonate of about 1:3. 

Thus carbonic acid, like the almost equally 

weak acids sulphuretted hydrogen and phos- 



CARBONIC ACID 147 

phoric acid (after its first hydrogen has been 
neutralized by base), has the remarkable 
property of preserving a neutral reaction 
whenever it exists in solution with its salts, 
provided there be an excess of acid. All acids 
whose strength is even a little either greater 
or less than carbonic acid lack the property.^ 

This characteristic of carbonic acid is of 
the utmost significance, first by regulating 
one of the most fundamental of physico- 
chemical conditions, and secondly by pre- 
serving throughout nature the characteristic 
chemical inactivity of water, which disappears 
whenever the reaction becomes either appre- 
ciably acid or appreciably alkaline. Almost 
the only case of important geological action 
due to acidity or alkalinity of water is the 
action of fresh water, containing carbonic acid 
itself, to weather the rocks. This process is, 
however, self -limited, for the dissolved material 
forms bicarbonates, and thus at once pro- 
vides permanently inactive balanced solutions. 

It is impossible to understand the eflSciency 
with which neutrality is preserved by carbonic 
acid, without the actual discussion of a par- 
ticular case. Let us therefore consider a solu- 

* Henderson, "The Relation between the Strengths of 
Acids and their Capacity to Preserve Neutrality," American 
Journal o/ Physiology, XXI, 173, 1908. 



148 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

tion of 1 kilogram of carbon dioxide in 100 
liters of water, to which sodium hydrate is 
being added. At the beginning of the experi- 
ment the hydrogen ion concentration will be 
approximately 0.0001 N, almost exactly one 
thousand times that at neutrality, and the 
hydroxyl ion concentration 0.0000000001 N, 
one one-thousandth that at neutrality. If, now, 
the sodium hydrate be added to the solution 
in successive portions, the change of reaction 
will be as indicated in the following table: — 



Amount of 


+ 
(H) 


(OH) 


lUTBNSITT COMPAHED WITH 

A NbtitraIi Solution of 


NaOH 


Acidity 


Alkalinity 


Grams 



0.0001 N 


0.0000000001 N 


1000 


0.001 


50 


0.0000052 


0.000000002 


52 


0.02 


100 


0.0000024 


0.000000004 


24 


0.04 


150 


0.0000015 


0.000000006 


IS 


0.06 


200 


0.0000011 


0.000000009 


11 


0.09 


250 


0.0000008 


0.000000012 


8 


0.12 


300 


0.0000006 


0.000000017 


6 


0.17 


350 


0.0000005 


0.000000020 


5 


0.20 


400 


0.0000004 


0.000000025 


4 


0.25 


450 


0.0000003 


0.000000033 


3 


0.33 


500 


0.00000025 


0.00000004 


2.5 


0.4 


550 


0.00000020 


0.00000005 


2.0 


0.6 


600 


0.00000016 


0.00000007 


1.5 


0.7 


650 


0.00000012 


0.00000008 


1.2 


0.8 


700 


0.00000009 


0.00000011 


0.9 


1.1 


750 


0.00000006 


0.00000017 


0.6 


1.7 


800 


0.00000004 


0.00000025 


0.4 


2.5 


850 


0.00000002 


0.0000005 


0.2 


5.0 



CARBONIC ACID 149 

From the table it appears that the first 
50 grams of alkali reduce the hydrogen ion 
concentration to but 50 times that of neutral 
solutions, and 200 grams of alkali have made 
it only about 10 times that of pure water, in 
spite of the fact that there are more than 
750 grams of free carbonic acid still present 
in the solution. So much acidity can at once 
be obtained by dissolving merely 0.004 gram 
of hydrochloric acid in 100 liters of water. 
Thereafter neither acidity nor alkalinity sur- 
passes this intensity until 450 grams more of 
sodium hydrate have been added to the solu- 
tion. Yet in 'pure water 0.005 gram of sodium 
hydrate would make the reaction more alka- 
line than that. 

Such is the case when the equilibrium is 
homogeneous, i.e. in an isolated solution. 
But when, in similar cases, an atmosphere 
containing carbon dioxide is present, the con- 
ditions are still more striking. Suppose, for 
example, a solution of 100 liters containing 1 
kilogram of sodium bicarbonate in equilib- 
rium with an atmosphere containing 1 gram 
of carbon dioxide per liter. Let hydrochloric 
acid be added in successive small portions to 
the solution. Further let the solution be 
constantly stirred and shaken, and let the 
experiment be conducted slowly, so that there 



150 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

shall always be equilibrium between the car- 
bonic acid in the solution and in the atmos- 
phere. Further^ let the temperature be such 
that the absorption coefficient of carbon 
dioxide shall be 1.000. Then the successive 
states of the solution will be approximately 
as recorded in the following table: — 



HC! 
Added 


HiCOs: 
NaHCOs 


+ 
(H) 


(OH) 


Relative 
Acidity 


Relative 
Alka> 
LiNrrr 


Grams 















2.27:11.9 


0.000000067 N 


0.000000176 N 


0.57 


1.76 


10 


2.27 : 11.6 


0.000000059 


0.000000170 


0.59 


1.70 


50 


2.27 : 10.0 


0.000000068 


0.000000147 


0.68 


1.47 


100 


2.27: 8.2 


0.000000083 


0.000000120 


0.83 


1.20 


160 


2.27: 6.3 


0.000000108 


0.000000093 


1.08 


0.93 


200 


2.27: 4.4 


0.000000154 


0.000000066 


1.54 


0.66 


250 


2.27: 2.6 


0.00000026 


0.000000039 


2.6 


0.39 


300 


2.27 : 0.68 


0.0000010 


0.000000010 


10 


0.10 


310 


2.27 : 0.31 


0.0000022 


0.0000000046 


22 


0.045 


318 


00 


0.00026 


0.00000000039 


260 


0.0039 


320 




0.00045 


0.00000000022 


450 


0.0022 


330 




0.0027 


0.000000000037 


2700 


0.00037 



From the beginning of the experiment until 
almost 250 grams of hydrochloric acid have 
been added, neither alkalinity nor acidity is 
double in intensity the values which obtain 
in a perfectly neutral solution. This amounts 
to a constancy of reaction which, until a few 
years ago, was scarcely known to the chemist 
at all. Such close approach to neutrality 



CARBONIC ACID 151 

can be attained with pure water only after 
elaborate and very difficult purification, yet 
in the presence of carbonic acid it is the natural 
condition. Of course the case above dis- 
cussed is an extreme one. In nature the con- 
centrations of dissolved substances are less, 
the mixing less efficient, and the variations of 
reaction a little greater. There is also, in 
nature, likely to be a considerable excess of 
bicarbonate over free carbonic acid present. 
The cause of the greater constancy of re- 
action in the "case of the heterogeneous equi- 
librium is simple enough. At the beginning of 
the experiment the free carbonic acid of the 
solution is exactly in equilibrium with that of 
the atmosphere. Accordingly, when hydro- 
chloric acid is poured in and reacts with so- 
dium bicarbonate to form sodium chloride and 
more carbonic acid, 

NaHCOg + HCl = NaCl -f- H2O + CO2 

every bit of the latter escapes to the atmos- 
phere, and the total amount of acid is just 
what it was before. But a certain amount of 
carbonic acid has been replaced by the equiv- 
alent amount of hydrochloric acid. This 
latter substance, however, is wholly in union 
with sodium, as its salt. Thus the addition of 
the strong acid diminishes the amount of 



152 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

alkaline salt (sodium bicarbonate), but does 
not increase the amount of free acid. Not 
until the bicarbonate is entirely decomposed 
(318 grams HCl) does the hydrochloric acid 
begin to exert its own action as an acid, and 
then 2 grams cause about as much rise in 
acidity as 318 grams have previously caused, 
or nineteen times the rise effected by the first 
300 grams, or about two hundred times the 
rise caused by one hundred times the quantity 
of hydrochloric acid at the beginning of the 
experiment. 

These statements all rest upon facts which 
have been accurately established by experi- 
ment and are brought forward in company 
with the theoretical treatment, based upon 
the Mass Law, only for the sake of complete- 
ness of statement and because brief exposition 
is otherwise scarcely possible. The extraor- 
dinary capacity of carbonic acid to preserve 
neutrality in aqueous solution, which is ex- ' 
plained by its ^rength and solubility in water, 
is a well-established experimental fact, and no 
other known substance shares this power. ^ 
Hydrogen sulphide might perhaps be thought 
of as an exception. But while its solubility 

1 Henderson, "The Theory of Neutrality Regulation in 
the Animal Organism," American Journal of Physiology, XXI, 
427, 1908. 



CARBONIC ACID 153 

in water is not favorable for the best results, 
its instability is a fatal obstacle. 

Such are the physico-chemical facts re- 
garding neutrality regulation in heterogeneous 
systems by means of carbonic acid and bicar- 
bonates, and, though the exposition is diflScult, 
it has seemed necessary to make them clear. 
For there is, I believe, except in celestial me- 
chanics, no other case of such accuracy in a 
natural regulation of the environment. More- 
over, the chemist has discovered no means of 
rivaling the efficiency and delicacy of adjust- 
ment of the process. Finally, acidity and 
alkalinity surpass all other conditions, even 
temperature and concentration of reacting 
substances, in the influence which they exert 
upon many chemical processes.^ 

Almost wholly through this mechanism the 
oceans are always nearly neutral. Chiefly 
with its aid protoplasm and blood possess an 
unvarying reaction. Quite recently the con- 
centration of hydrogen ions in the ocean has 
been very carefully studied by Palitzsch,^ 

* Of all catalytic agents these ions are by far the mo^ 
important. In their influence upon the stability of colloidal 
systems they are also unapproached by other substances. 

^ " Etant donne que I'eau de mer a un contact is jntime 
avec les organismes de la mer et que non seulement elle les 
entoure de ses flots, mais qu'eUe traverse leurs branchies et 
impregne en partie les corp des invertebres, il semble assez 



154 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

who finds very great constancy, the extreme 
variations (with the exception of the Black 
Sea) being 0.000000011 N to 0.0000000045 N. 
Allowing for the change • of the ionization 
constant of water with the temperature, and 
the fact that in siich systems the hydrogen 
ionization is nearly independent of the tem- 
perature, these values roughly correspond to 
hydroxyl ion concentrations 0.000002 N and 
0.000005 N respectively at the lower temper- 
atures and slightly higher values at the higher 
temperatures of sea water. This is a sufficient 
excess of hydroxyl ions properly to be termed 
faint alkalinity, though it amounts to but 
about 0.00005 gram per liter, or 0.000005 per 
cent. It is in part due to the fact that the 
quantity of carbonic acid in the air is now 
very small, while in the ocean the concentra- 
tion of bicarbonates is great. Indeed, the 
ocean has unquestionably grown alkaline; 

justifie de la placer dans la m^me categorie que les autres- 
liquides physiologiques. Des determinations exposes dans 
ce qui precede jl ressort que, de mgme que ces liquides, I'eau 
de mer est douee d'une grande capacit6 de r6gler sa concentra- 
tion en ions liydrogene, bien que cette capacity soit moins 
prononcee que celle constatee par example dans le sang." 
— S. Palitzsch, " Siu' le mesurage et la grandeur de la concen- 
tration en ions hydrogene de I'eau salee," Comptes-rendus 
des travaux du Laboratoire de Carlsberg, lOme Volume, 
Ire Livraison, 1911, p. 93, 



CAEBONIC ACID 155 

for its origin must have been acid from the 
presence of carbonic acid unbalanced by base. 
The present ratio between bicarbonates and 
carbonic acid in sea water has not been accu- 
rately estimated, but it is perhaps 50 : 1 or 
100 : 1. The conditions are complicated by 
flora and fauna, and such influences have not 
yet been determined. 

Turning to the acid-base equilibrium of 
blood and protoplasm, we encounter a subject 
which is better understood, though not more 
significant in the present discussion. The 
alkalinity of the blood is one of the familiar 
subjects of physiological investigation, and 
its clinical importance has long been clear. 
Not until the introduction of the ionization 
hypothesis, however, was it possible to explain 
the conditions. The outcome of these studies 
has been to assign to the equilibrium between 
carbonic acid and bicarbonates a first place in 
the regulation of the reaction of blood ;^ and 
since such substances are invariably constitu- 
ents of all protoplasm, to make evident the 
universal biological importance of this equi- 

* Friedenthal, "Arcliiv fiir Physiologie, Verhandlungen 
der Physiologischen Gesellschaft Berlin," May 8, 1903. Hen- 
derson, American Journal of Physiology, XV, 257, 1906, 
"Ergebnisse der Physiologie," VHI, 254-325, 1909 (the last 
a review of the equilibrium between acids and bases in the 
organism). 



156 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

librium. The process is complicated by the 
intervention of all the other acids and bases 
of the body. Of these, however, only phos- 
phates, and in lesser degree proteins, are im- 
portant. Thus it is certain that in the one 
universal chemical equilibrium of protoplasm 
which has thus far been defined and quantita- 
tively described the carbonates take a prin- 
cipal part. 

It is not possible to explain the significance 
of carbonic acid in this physiological process 
as chiefly an adaptation ; for natural selection 
can have nothing to do with the occurrence of 
carbonic acid in the living organism, or, pre- 
sumably, with the nature of the original 
living things upon the earth.^ The presence 
of carbonic acid is inevitable, and whatever 
the first forms of terrestrial life may have 
been, certain it is that carbonic acid was one 
of the constituent substances. From that day 
to this it has steadily fulfilled the function of 
regulating the reaction of protoplasm, and of 
body tissues and fluids. 

The recent studies of Hasselbach and Lunds- 
gaard^ indicate that the hydrogen ion concen- 
tration of normal blood at body temperature 

1 It was this obvious fact which originally led me to a re- 
consideration of fitness. 

2 " Biochemische Zeitschrift, Vol. 38, p. 77, 1912. 



CARBONIC ACID 157 

is about 0.000000044 N. This value is sub- 
ject to constant slight variations, diminish- 
ing as the blood passes through the lungs, 
increasing during the greater circulation; but 
variations of this kind are certainly very- 
slight in the healthy organism. The value 
corresponds to a concentration of bicarbonates 
about ten times as great as that of free car- 
bonic acid. Together the acid and its salts 
make up the larger part of all the carbonic 
acid, and a very considerable fraction of all 
the dissolved molecules of the blood. In 
disease, especially diabetic coma, the hydro- 
gen ion concentration may rise to 0.0000001 N, 
or perhaps higher ; when acid is injected into 
the blood the value may be greater still, but 
death speedily ensues, and it is certainly im- 
possible during life that there should be any 
considerable permanent variation. 

Increase in acidity of the blood can occur 
only in association with marked diminution 
in the concentration of bicarbonates, which 
may fall to less than one third of their normal 
amount, greatly impoverishing the blood in 
respect to carbonic acid, and interfering with 
its excretion. This is due to the fact that 
the amount of free carbonic acid in the blood 
is under the independent control of the respira- 
tory center, and when acids decompose bicar- 



158 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

bonates the carbonic acid which is hberated 
escapes through the lungs into the air. This 
action is analogous to the simple heterogeneous 
equilibrium explained above, and calls for no 
special discussion. 

The importance of this physiological equi- 
librium is to be sought in part in one of 
the primary characteristics of the metabolic 
process, — the chiefly oxidative formation of 
acid. In the main the foodstuffs are neutral 
substances, but their principal end products, 
except water, are almost exclusively acid 
compounds, — carbonic acid, phosphoric acid, 
sulphuric acid, uric acid. Moreover, there 
is a well marked tendency, at least in man and 
the vertebrates, under very many pathological 
conditions, to form other acids, such as lactic 
acid, )8-oxybutyric acid, acetoacetic acid, etc. 
This tendency toward acidity of reaction and 
the accumulation of acid in the body is one 
of the inevitable characteristics of metabo- 
Usm ; the constant resistance of the organism 
one of the fundamental regulatory processes. 
Now it comes about through the carbonate 
equilibrium that the stronger acids, as soon as 
they are formed, and wherever they are 
formed, normally find an ample supply of 
bicarbonates at their disposal, and accordingly 
react as follows: — 



CARBONIC ACID 159 

HA + NaHCOs = NaA + H2CO3 

This reaction corresponds exactly to the 
simple case first discussed, and so causes an 
inconsiderable change in the concentration of 
ionized hydrogen. The free carbonic acid 
then passes out through the lungs, and the 
salt is excreted in the urine. Other processes 
are involved, including a device for final re- 
tention of a part of the alkali which has neutral- 
ized acidj^^ but in the whole complex function 
nothing is more important than the simple 
reaction written above. 

The hydrogen ion concentration exerts a 
marked influence upon the rate of progress 
of chemical reactions. Thus, for example, 
the so-called inversion of cane sugar by a proc- 
ess of hydrolytic cleavage into glucose and 
fructose, 

C12H22O11 -}- H2O = C6H12O6 + C6H12O6, 

is commonly accomplished by warming a solu- 
tion of sugar to which a little acid has been 
added. It was shown by the classical investi- 
gation of Wilhelmi that the velocity of this 
process depends upon the strength of the 
acid, or, according to the modern view, upon 

' Henderson, Journal of Biological Chemistry, IX, 403, 
1911. 



160 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

the concentration of hydrogen ions. Indeed, 
these ions are the efifective agents in the 
process. 

Reactions of this type, in which carbohy- 
drates, fats, proteins, and other substances 
take part, make up a very large, if not the 
largest fraction of all the processes of metabo- 
lism, and there can be no doubt that for their 
regulation very accurate adjustment of acidity 
and alkalinity is essential. In the body, to 
be sure, such reactions are under the control of 
enzymes, but the concentration of hydrogen 
and hydroxyl ions is not less, rather more 
important for that reason. Beside retaining 
their direct influence upon the reaction, the 
ions also exert an influence upon the enzymes 
themselves. Moreover, not only enzymes, but 
almost all colloidal bodies, especially such 
unstable structures as the colloids of proto- 
plasm, are profoundly affected by changes of 
reaction, and for the preservation of their' 
stability they also are absolutely dependent 
upon constancy of acidity and alkalinity. 

Finally, it is to be noted that glucose, which 
is the principal source of energy in physiolog- 
ical processes, is very unstable in even faintly 
alkaline solutions, and that its stability varies 
in most marked degree with the slightest 
change in the concentration of hydroxyl 



CARBONIC ACID 161 

ions.^ Further, there is also reason to be- 
heve that the concentration of hydrogen and 
hydroxy! ions may sometimes be concerned 
in adjustments of great magnitude, which 
involve the distribution of water between the 
tissues and the body fluids, or at least be- 
tween red blood corpuscles and the plasma.^ 
Recently, for example, a theory has been sug- 
gested which seeks to account for certain 
forms of oedema as the result of local or general 
increase in the acidity of the organism.^ 
In any case, whatever the fate of these latter 

' Henderson, Journal of Biological Chemistry, X, 3, 1911. 

^ The changing distribution of material between red 
blood corpuscles and plasma as the tension of carbonic acid 
changes has, since its discovery by Zuntz, been investigated 
by a series of physiologists. (See Spire and Henderson, 
Biochemische Zeitschrift, 15, 114, 1908.) In each complete 
cycle of the circulation there occurs a complete cycle of changes 
between the constituents of the corpuscles and of the plasma. 
As the blood passes through the tissues and receives carbonic 
acid the volume of the red corpuscles increases from the 
entrance of water coming from the plasma; chlorine simul- 
taneously passes in the same direction; and various other 
changes occur. In the lungs, with the escape of carbonic 
acid, the process is reversed. There seems to be no doubt 
that this process is largely dependent upon changes in re- 
action accompanying changes in the concentration of carbonic 
acid. 

' M. H. Fischer, "(Edema," New York, 1910. It is impos- 
sible to judge of the correctness of many of the views set 
forth in this work. At present they appear to be in part ill- 
founded. 



162 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

views may be, the common physiological 
processes, and the structural conditions which 
depend for their integrity upon constancy of 
the concentration of hydrogen and hydroxyl 
ions are certainly manifold. 

The principal conditions and processes, 
both inorganic and organic, which rest upon 
the acid nature of carbonic acid and its char- 
acteristic distribution between the atmos- 
phere and aqueous solutions have now been 
indicated. In their origin at least they are 
nowise due to the agency of organic evolution. 
Yet directly, because of the nature of carbon 
dioxide as a gas, because of its solubility in 
water, and on account of the precise degree 
of its weakness as an acid, they possess the 
highest possible efficiency. This conclusion 
might be established with rigorous accuracy 
by means of a mathematical analysis, but the 
above discussion is sufficient for the present 
purpose.^ 

In this manner carbonic acid shows itself 
in its physico-chemical traits variously fitted 
for the organic mechanism. Less various, to 
be sure, and less obvious than those of water, 
such fitnesses as it does possess are quite as 

1 Henderson, American Journal o/ Physiology, XXI, 173, 
1908. 



CARBONIC ACID 163 

genuine. But they are dependent upon water ; 
secondary in their nature ; resting upon solu- 
bihty and ionization ; upon interactions be- 
tween the two substances. So they lead us 
to a consideration of the most intricate of 
all mutual relations, to a purely chemical 
study of the compounds of carbon, hydrogen, 
and oxygen, into which water and carbonic 
acid can be transformed. 



CHAPTER V 

THE OCEAN 

AT every stage of our inquiry we have seen 
that the unique properties of water and 
carbonic acid contribute vitally important 
characteristics to the ocean. Such conclusions 
accord with the ordinary experiences of life, 
and they gain in significance from the un- 
doubted fact thj,t -organic beings first existed, 
ai]id_fo^r^a^.^y_Jong^Jime exi^^ onlyTiHr the 
waters. On this account it will be well to pause 
before attacking the problems of organic 
chemistry, and, in somewhat greater detail, 
to examine the ocean in its relation to the 
inhabitants of the globe. Thus we shall be 
able more clearly to perceive the manner in 
which, in one most important instance, the 
properties of water and carbonic acid operate 
to fit the world for life. 



THE REGULATION OF PHYSICO-CHEMICAL 
CONDITIONS 

The most Striking of all the ocean's qualities 
is its constancy. No doubt since its origin 

164 



THE OCEAN 



165 



it has grown colder and more saline, and has 
changed its reaction from faintly acid to 
faintly alkaline. But a million years are little 
in such great slow processes, and no living 
thing has ever experienced appreciable change 
in any one of them. 

Modern research in oceanography has de- 
tected surprisingly little variation in the tem- 
perature of the ocean. ^ The temperature of 
surface water depends upon the climatic 
character of the locality, but it is subject to 
far less variation than the temperature of the 
atmosphere above it, and is higher than the 
latter. The accompanying tables ^ indicate 
the nature of some of the variations in the 
temperature of sea water. 



Annual Ranges of Temperatures of Ocean Water 
AND OF THE Am Over Land 



Latitude 
Ocean . 
Land 



0° 
2.3 



10° 

2.4 



20° 
3.6 

7.2 



30° 
5.9 
10.2 



40° 
7.5 
14.0 



50° 
6.6 
25.4 



* Nearly all the facts contained in the present chapter have 
been drawn from the following works : S. Gunther, "Hand- 
buch der Geophysik " ; Arrhenius, "Kosmische Physik " ; and 
Hann's "Climatology," translated by Ward. 

2 See Hann's "Climatology," translated by Ward, p. 
135. 



166 THE FITNESS OP THE ENVIRONMENT 



Water and Aie Tempebatubes at Lesina 





WlNTEE 


Spkino 


Summer 


Autumn 


Yeab 


Air 


9.2° 


14.8° 


24.4° 


17.9° 


16.6° 


Surface water . . 


13.5 


15.0 


22.0 


19.5 


17.5 


Water at 10 meters 


13.9 


14.7 


20.3 


18.4 


16.8 



Range 



15.2° 
8.5 
6.4 



According to Schott the variation of surface 
temperature of the open ocean over the whole 
globe is never less than 1° nor more than 15°. 
Such variations are slight on the equator, 
larger in the region of the trade winds, less 
again in the northern and southern seas.^ 
The surface temperature extends only a short 
distance into the water, thus constituting a 
warm surface layer. It has indeed been 
known since the time of Aristotle that the 
depths of the sea are cold. In the open 
ocean the temperature increases steadily as 
the depth increases, but more rapidly near 
the surface, more slowly at greater depths. 
The bottom water at great depth varies from 
a temperature of 2° in the tropics to about 
— 2° in the polar waters. Such low temperature 
of the depths of the tropical oceans is almost 
certainly due to the inflow of cold water from 
high latitudes. 

* Arrhenius, I.e. 



THE OCEAN 167 

In the Atlantic the temperature varies ap- 
proximately as follows with increasing depth : — 



Depth in Metbbs 


Tbmpebatuhe Cemtiqkadb 





19° 


500 


16 


1000 


9 


1500 


4' 


2000 


3 


2500 


2.5 


3000 


2 



In the Mediterranean, where no cold cur- 
rent flows in at the bqttom of the ocean, the 
temperature sinks rapidly to 11° at a short 
distance below the surface, and thereafter re- 
mains constant. This is due to the fact that 
in winter the surface water is cooled to that 
temperature and sinks, remaining then pro- 
tected from the summer heat by the warmer 
layer of less .density above. 

The slight range of ocean temperatures, 
whether with changing seasons, with chang- 
ing depth, or with changing latitude, depends 
primarily upon the latent heat of water, 
especially its heat of vaporization, and upon 
the very high freezing point, as already ex- 
plained in the discussion of these physical 
properties. 

Far more constant than the temperature is 
the alkalinity of sea water. It has been stated 
above that the extreme variation in concentra- 



168 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

tion of ionized hydrogen is from O.OOOOOOOllN 
to 0.0000000045 N. In his studies during a 
voyage of five months in the summer season 
of 1910 of the Danish steamship Thor, Palitzsch 
made the following observations : ^ surface 
water from the Skager-Rack, from the south- 
ern portions of the North Sea, and from the 
west of the Baltic ranged from about 
0.000000010 N to about 0.000000009 N ; in the 
North Sea the surface water varied from 
0.0000000083 N to 0.0000000074 N ; at the lati- 
tude of Murray Firth, twenty miles from the 
coast, the values were between 0.0000000071 N 
and 0.0000000066 N. In the Atlantic the 
surface water corresponded in the most north- 
ern portions to that of the North Sea, while in 
the Bay of Biscay and along the coast of 
Portugal the values were 0.0000000056 N, 
corresponding to slightly increased alkalinity, 
especially if account be taken of the rising 
temperature. In general the waters of the 
Mediterranean corresponded to those of the 
coast of Portugal. But from the Sea of Mar- 
mora, the Bosphorus, and the Black Sea 
samples were obtained which gave the value 
0.0000000045 N. 

In ,. general, j&__±he — depth— incr-eased, the 

1 Palitzsch, " Comptes-rendus des travaux du Laboratoire 
de Carlsberg," lOme Volume, p. 85, 1911. 



THE OCEAN 



h ydrogen ion concentr ation increased, 
the alkalinity accordingIy~dimiriished. 



169 



and 



Depth in 

Mbtebb 


+ 
(H) X 100,000,000 


Mbditerbanzian 


Atlantic 


North Sea 


Black Sea 





0.59 


0.60 


0.74 


0.46 


10 








0.56 


25 








0.65 


50 


0.59 


0.66 




0.71 


75 








0.93 


85 








1.03 


100 


0.62 


0.74 


0.81 


1.38 


200 


0.65 




0.83 


2.1 


300 








2.8 


400 


0.65 


0.91 


0.93 


3.0 


600 






0.98 




700 






1.05 




800 


0.68 


0.98 






1000 


0.72 


0.98 






1200 


0.72 


1.05 






1500 


0.76 


1.13 






2000 


0.81 


1.13 






2500 


0.85 








3200 


0.85 









The only variation from the truly remark- 
able constancy of reaction of the ocean, so 
far as we know, is in the case of the Black Sea. 
But this sea, at depths below 180 meters, con- 
tains sulphurous acid, which undoubtedly 
accounts for the slight diminution of alkalin- 
ity recorded in the table. This last obser- 



170 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

vation also provides a striking example of 
the eflSciency with which the reaction of sea 
water is maintained. In spite of the unusual 
circumstances here the variation is inconsider- 
able. The only known important factor which 
operates to establish and to preserve the re- 
action of sea water is the carbonate equilib- 
rium. 

There is one consideration which must be 
especially noted before passing on. The most 
obvious effect of slight changes of temperature, 
and of slight changes of alkalinity as well, 
is upon the velocity of chemical reactions. 
In this respect the effect of hydroxyl ions is 
likely to be in proportion to their concentra- 
tion,^ and the effect of temperature is usually 
such that a change of about ten degrees doubles 
the velocity of the reaction.^ Hence ordinary 
chemical reactions will progress about eight 
times as fast in the hottest as in the coldest 
ocean waters, and about seven times as fast 
in the most alkaline as in the least alkaline 
parts of the ocean. But in the case of any 
organism inhabiting a particular locality such 
changes in reaction velocity will be scarcely 

* The chief actions of hydroxyl ions are catalytic, and, as 
in the case of the catalysis of esterification, the efEect is pro- 
portional to the concentration of the hydroxyl ions. 

' This observation is due to van't Hoff. 



THE OCEAN 



171 



appreciable. Accordingly, the regulation is 
physiologically adequate. 

The concentration of sea water is another 
nearly constant characteristic, though gener- 
ally speaking the salinity is somewhat greater 
on the high seas than near the coasts, where 
fresh water is constantly diluting the salt 
water, and there are some other causes which 
produce slight variations. The average salt 
content is about 3.45 per cent. The quan- 
tities of the rno|e~ vigiportant constituents, 
calculated from:- i^^^mar's data,^ are as fol- 
lows : — 



Per Cent 



Relative Amount 



Sodium, Na . 
Magnesium, Mg 
Calcium, Ca . 
Potassium, K 
CMorine, CI . 
Sulphate, SO4 
Carbonate, CO3 
Bromine, Br . , 



1.049 
0.130 
0.041 
0.038 
1.896 
0.263 
0.007 
0.006 



30.59 
3.79 
1.20 
1.11 

55.27 
7.66 
0.21 
0.19 



Most of the other numerous constituents are 
present in very small quantities. For in- 
stance, in each metric ton of sea water there 



1 Dittmar, Report of Voyage of the Challenger, 1884, p. 
203. The original data were calculated upon the erroneous 
assumption that the various salts exist in solution independ- 



172 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

are dissolved about 0.019 gram of silver and 
about 0.006 gram of gold, amounts which 
correspond to 0.0000019 per cent and 
0.0000006 per cent, respectively. 

It has been calculated that 166,000,000 
years have been required for the streams to 
carry into the sea the sodium chloride which 
is now present. The calcium carbonate of 
the rivers would however suffice to supply 
the present amount of that substance in 500,- 
000 years. Accordin^frai^e^present store of 
the latter substance re]^ ^'^nts but a very 
small fraction of what has passed through the 
ocean, and as a result of the intervention of 
life has finally been deposited as sedimentary 
limestone. Since the formation of the ocean, 
if present conditions correspond with the past, 
water must have carried to the dwellers of 

ently of one another. Thus the composition of sea water is 
stated as follows : — 





Relative 
Amottnt 


Sodium chloride, NaCl 


77.758 


Magnesium chloride, MgClz 


10.878 


Magnesium sulphate, MgS04 


4.737 


Calcium sulphate, CaS04 


3.600 


Potassium sulphate, K2SO4 


2.465 


Calcium carbonate, CaCOs 


0.345 


Magnesium bromide, MgBra ... ... 


0.217 



THE OCEAN 173 

the sea not less than 300,000,000,000,000,000 
tons of calcium carbonate, which they have 
temporarily utilized as structural material. 
Whether this estimate be correct or not, the 
process is certainly the cause of the most 
considerable change wrought by life upon the 
face of the earth. 

The relative qiiantities of the several saline 
constituents of the oc ean are ^^j tardry" at a ll 
^ub3ecr"t o""viTiation. Chlorine, for example, 
makes up never less than 55.21 per cent and 
never more than 55.34 per cent of all the dis- 
solved inorganic substances, so that the total 
salinity may be readily estimated with consid- 
erable accuracy by titration of the chlorides. 
Such constancy is due to the elaborate mixing 
of the waters resulting from ocean currents. 
There can be no doubt, however, that the 
relative amounts of the different acids and 
bases have slowly but steadily changed during 
the progress of geological evolution. Many 
substances, like calcium carbonate, have been 
steadily removed, a few, like sodium chloride, 
have steadily accumulated without loss. 

The total salinity of the ocean, as stated 
above, is subject to slight variation. Along 
the North American coast, in the polar cur- 
rent, upon the coast of Norway, and toward 
the south of South America, the concentration 



174 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

of the Atlantic is 3.2 per cent to 3.3 per cent. 
Areas where the concentration ranges from 
3.3 per cent to 3.4 per cent are still more 
extensive. The greater part of the North 
Atlantic ranges in concentration from 3.5 
per cent to 3.6 per cent. In general there is a 
region of maximum concentration between the 
Equator and the Pole. 

The Mediterranean, the Red Sea^ and other 
similar bodies of water possess a somewhat 
higher salt concentration, dependent upon 
excessive evaporation and the absence of 
great currents ; but only in exceptional cases 
and small isolated bodies of water does the 
concentration rise above 4.1 per cent. 

The salinity of ocean water varies also with 
the depth. In seas where there is a great 
influx of fresh water the surface is less con- 
centrated than the depths; in seas where 
there is much evaporation the surface is more 
concentrated than the depths. In the latter 
case the higher temperature of the surface 
causes expansion of the more concentrated 
water, and enables it to remain above. When 
these two influences of dilution and evapora- 
tion are combined, they may bring about a 
yearly variation of salinity. Such variations 
of the environment are important to animal 
life, slight though they may be. Thus the 



THE OCEAN 175 

herring in tlieir migrations keep to a water 
whose concentration ranges from 3.2 per 
cent to 3.3 per cent. 

From the constancy of the relative pro- 
portion of the salts in sea water it follows that 
every such constituent is subject to no greater 
variations than the sum of all. Interesting 
recent experiments have shown this fact to 
be of vital consequence to living organisms. 
Thus a host of experiments of Loeb and his 
pupils, and of others, have demonstrated re- 
markable toxicity in the action of pure salts, 
physiologically antagonistic actions of vari- 
ous pairs of salts, and peculiar advantages of 
media containing a variety of salts in definite 
relative amounts.^ Of all such balanced solu- 
tions sea water is by far the best, a condition 
which is almost certainly due to the processes 
of organic evolution. Herbst ^ has shown 
that the development of the fertilized eggs 
of sea urchins can only take place in the 
presence of the chlorides, sulphates, and car- 
bonates of sodium, potassium, calcium, and 
magnesium, and in a faintly alkaline reaction. 
Every one of these substances is essential, 

* See the article by Loeb in Oppenheimer's "Handbuch 
der Biochemie." 

^ Herbst, Archiv. fur Entioiclcelungswteehanik, 5, 650, 1897 ; 
7. 486, 1898; 11, 617, 1901 ; 17, 306, 1904. 



176 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

except that in a measure potassium may be 
replaced by rubidium and caesium, and chlo- 
rine by bromine. Moreover the relative con- 
centrations are of the highest importance. 
Thus it has become clear that the remark- 
able relative and absolute constancy of the 
chemical composition of sea water is biolog- 
ically far more important than formerly 
could be surmised. This characteristic of 
the ocean undoubtedly fits it for living 
things as they exist. 

It is further to be noted that the salinity of 
sea water is proportional to its osmotic pres- 
sure. This important property also is there- 
fore nearly constant. 

When a solution is inclosed in a membrane, 
a bladder, for example, and the latter is im- 
mersed in water, both water and dissolved 
substance pass through the wall of the mem- 
brane. Ordinarily, however, the water will 
move much more rapidly than the dissolved- 
substance, hence the volume of the solution 
will increase, and hydrostatic pressure will 
be established. If a well-supported mem- 
brane of cupric ferrocyanide be substituted 
for the bladder, the process will be modified, 
in that water alone, not the dissolved sub- 
stance, can pass through the membrane, 
which is accordingly termed semigermeable. 



THE OCEAN 177 

Under these circumstances the pressure, called 
osmotic pressure by van't Hoff, may be very 
great. 

According to the theories of van't Hoff 
and Arrhenius this pressure is, in the case of 
dilute solutions, proportional to the total 
number of particles (molecules plus ions) 
which are present in solution. In its magni- 
tude and the laws governing its variation such 
pressure corresponds exactly to gaseous pres- 
sure. In fact the theory of solution consists 
primarily in the extension of the laws of Boyle 
cind Gay-Lussac, of the hypothesis of Avo- 
gadro, and of the manifold theoretical develop- 
ments which have been based upon them, to 
solutions. The great force of osmotic pres- 
sure always comes into action when solutions 
are in contact with permeable or semiper- 
meable membranes. It must therefore al- 
ways be reckoned with in physiology. The 
biological importance of the constancy of the 
osmotic pressure of sea water is strikingly 
exemplified by the precision with which every 
higher vertebrate preserves constant the os- 
motic pressure of its own body fluids, all at 
about seven or eight atmospheres. 

It may readily be shown that the osmotic 
pressure of a solution is proportional to the 
depression of its freezing point, and accord- 



178 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

ingly osmotic pressure is commonly estimated 
with the help of this relationship. In the 
following table the facts regarding blood sera 
of certain animals are collected.^ 

Depression of the Freezing Point of Blood Sebum 

Degree 

Man 0.S26 

I, Cow 0.585 

'"^Horse 0.564 

' Pig 0.616 

Rabbit 0.592 

Dog 0.571 

Cat 0.638 

Sheep 0.619 

In man the freezing point depression of the 
blood is, under ordinary circumstances, practi- 
cally constant, and there can be no doubt that 
such is the case for all highest organisms. 
Accordingly the differences in the above table 
may be taken to indicate slight constant dif- 
ferences between the different species. 

The marine animals, except a few of the 
vertebrates, are adjusted in their osmotic 
pressures to the water which surrounds them. 
As in the following table so in another lo- 
cality where the freezing point of the water 
was —1.9° the body fluids of the animal 
were again found to agree with it. It is 
therefore evident that constancy of osmotic 
1 Hober, "Physikalische Chemie der Zelle und der Gewebe." 



THE OCEAN 179 

pressure is for marine animals a matter of 
real moment. 

Depbessions of the Freezing Point 

Degrees 

Coelentrate, Alcyonium palmatum 2.196 

Echirwderm, Asteropecten auraniiacus 2.312 

Echinoderm, Holothuria tuhulosa 2.315 

Worm, Sipunculus nudus 2.31 

Crustacean, Maja squinada 2.36 

Crustacean, Homarus vulgaris 2.29 

. Cephalopod, Octopus macropus 2.24 

Selachian, Torpedo marmorata 2.26 

Selachian, Mustelus vulgaris ... 2.36 

Selachian, Trygon violacea 2.44 

Teleost, Charax puntazzo .1.04 

Teleost, Cerna gigas 1.035 

Teleost, Crenilabrus pavo 0.74-0.76 

Teleost, Box salpa .... 0.82-0.88 

Reptile, Thalassochelys caretta 0.61 

Sea Water 2.3 

The great importance of osmotic pressure 
is also attested by many of the facts of phys- 
iology. The study of this subject has in- 
deed from its origin always been .closely 
associated with the biological sciences, and it 
was in great part biological experiments and 
wholly experiments of biologists which were 
employed by van't Hofif in his development, 
on the basis of osmotic phenomena, of the 
theory and laws of dilute solutions. 

Absorption, secretion, excretion, and the 
movement of substances across membranes. 



180 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

— to say nothing of the establishment of 
liquid currents within the body, — are all 
related to osmotic pressure. The forces in- 
volved in such processes are large, and osmotic 
phenomena assume a special importance 
wherever colloidal systems occur. It appears 
to be certain that osmotic pressure is now se- 
curely established as one of the fundamental 
factors in the physico-chemical organization of 
the living mechanism, and one of the constant 
conditions, like concentration of the several 
constituents, alkalinity, temperature, etc., 
whose preservation is of vital importance. 



II 

THE CIRCULATION OF WATER 

There are a number of causes which bring 
about ocean currents. In the tropics high 
temperature causes a far greater evaporation 
of water than can be oflfset by rainfall and the 
flow of rivers ; near the poles this relation is 
reversed. Hence water must steadily flow 
from high to low latitudes, there to evaporate 
and complete the cycle in the atmosphere and 
on the land. In polar regions the cold water 
sinks and penetrates along the bottom of the 
sea in great deep currents to the tropics. 



THE OCEAN 181 

The surface currents of the ocean have a 
different origin, for they depend upon winds, 
especially trade winds, etc. Such continuous 
action of moving air upon water has been 
theoretically explained by Helmholtz and 
Zopperitz. Needless to say, in addition to 
these principal causes there are a great variety 
of lesser factors which assist in the formation 
and preservation of ocean currents. 

It is impossible here to undertake an analy- 
sis of the phenomenon, but certain it is that 
into the processes that constantly stir the 
ocean, beside the rotation of the earth, the 
eccentricity of its orbit, and the inclination of 
its axis, the thermal properties of water enter 
as fundamentally important factors. 

The magnitude and the extent of the 
movements which result from such influences 
are very considerable. The principal surface 
currents are oval in form, one in the North 
Pacific between 10° and 50° north latitude, 
one in the North Atlantic between 10° and 
30° north latitude, one in the South Pacific 
between 5° and 45° south latitude, one in the 
South Atlantic between 0° and 40° south 
latitude, and one in the Indian Ocean between 
0° and 40° south latitude. The greatest of 
these are the Pacific currents. In the far 
south is an Antarctic current flowing from 



182 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

west to east; in the north a current flows 
from east to west, from the Siberian coast 
to Northeast Greenland and thence along the 
east coast; another flows from Baffin's Bay 
along the east coast of North America. 

Of all ocean currents, the Gulf Stream, a 
branch of the northern equatorial current, 
has been most carefully studied. Its maxi- 
mum velocity is 220 kilometers per day, 
greater therefore than that of the Rhine at 
Coblentz ; the mean about 134 kilometers a 
day. In the Straits of Yucatan the Gulf 
Stream carries 0.2 cubic kilometer (200,000,- 
000 tons) per second. If all this water were 
to be cooled to the temperature of the polar 
ocean this would be equivalent to the trans- 
port of about 5,000,000,000,000,000 gram 
calories per second. The magnitude of this 
quantity, of course, depends upon the specific 
heat of water. 

In this manner vast quantities of water, 
carrying enormous stores of heat, are constantly 
in motion all over the globe. The result is> 
that homogeneity of the ocean which has beerl 
discussed above, — constancy of concentra- 
tion, of composition, of temperature, of alka- 
linity, and of osmotic pressure. 



THE OCEAN 183 

III 
THE OCEAN AS ENVIRONMENT' 

There are, in accordance with our funda- 
mental postulates of the characteristics of 
life, two principal requirements of the living 
organism which an environment must ful- 
fill, — such a supply of matter and energy 
for food as may be suitable to a complex 
mechanism, and stability of conditions. 

After a general review of the chief character- 
istics of the ocean, it is therefore necessary to 
examine them more particularly in relation to 
such requirements. In so doing it must not 
be forgotten, however, that these characteristics 
of the ocean which we have just discussed are 
only in part due to the unique physical proper- 
ties of water which have been already dis- 
cussed in Chapter III, and to those of carbonic 
acid which have been discussed in Chapter 
IV. In part they depend upon the mere 
magnitude of the sea, on the stability of the 
solar system and the consequent antiquity of 
the geological and meteorological processes, 
and upon a great variety of astronomical and 
geophysical conditions. However, we shall 
only a little extend the scope of our inquiry 
if we now consider water not only as an indi- 



184 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

vidual chemical substance, that is to say ab- 
stractly, but also naturally, as automatic 
processes of cosmic and geological evolution 
have fashioned it into the principal constit- 
uent of the face of the globe. Primarily, 
at any rate, the outcome of such processes is 
dependent upon the inherent properties of 
water and upon the quantity of it which is 
present on the surface of the earth, and the 
subject is too important to be passed com- 
pletely by. 

Perhaps the first desideratum in an en- 
vironment as a source of food is mobility. 
Any organism which, like the lilies of the field, 
need not toil for its nourishment, is in most 
favorable conditions, and such conditions 
are the principal cause of the enormous wealth 
of vegetation upon the earth. Now the ocean, 
apart from the flora and fauna which inhabit it, 
is perfectly homogeneous ; hence its mobility 
brings to an organism all that it has to offer, 
and even sweeps along organic nourishment 
as well. In the ocean not only plants but 
many animals may remain motionless and, 
like the oyster, await the food that will surely 
be borne to them; or they may float freely, 
relying on the mixing of the water to bring 
them into contact with their food. 

After mobility, richness and variety of 



THE OCEAN 185 

environment are important. It is certainly 
impossible to imagine a medium more rich and 
varied in elementary constituents than sea 
water, unless it be sea water with still other sub- 
stances added to it. But, in the first place, 
there are few absent elements which might 
be added, and, in the second place, the addition 
of other substances would be likely to cause 
the escape of bodies which are present. At 
all events, the ocean is certainly more favor- 
able in these three respects than if it were 
anything else that could occur in the course 
of nature. Almost ideally mobile, rich, and 
varied, the sea is an almost perfect source of 
supply for a complex mechanism. To be 
sure there are great difficulties in extracting 
its constituents from sea water, and the 
efficiency of physiological processes is a factor 
essential to their utilization, but at least 
there stand materials ready for the mechanism 
which can employ them. 

The predominance of water, no doubt, forces 
that substance upon living beings as their 
chief constituent; in view of the fitness of 
water for the purpose that is in itself a favor- 
able circumstance. Otherwise the organism 
is left free to choose from all the common 
elements, and from some of the rare ones, what 
may be most suitable to its purposes at every 



186 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

stage of the infinitely varied process of organic 
evolution. As a result we find here and there 
in the marine flora and fauna almost every 
element which the sea affords concentrated 
and put to use. 

After what has gone before it will not be 
necessary further to discuss the second great 
qualification of an environment — stability 
of conditions in the ocean. The principal 
physical conditions and chemical compounds 
therein are constant; that is the whole case. 
But it is a case which cannot be bettered. 
Certainly nowhere else where life is possible, 
probably in no other place in the universe 
except another ocean, are so many conditions 
so stable and so enduring. 

The regulatory devices of our modern labo- 
ratories have not yet succeeded in rivaling 
the ocean. Singly, certain conditions, for 
example, temperature, alkalinity, and concen- 
tration, may be more accurately regulated by " 
man, though on a small scale only ; but the 
regulation of all such properties together is 
not yet possible. The only known improve- 
ment upon the ocean is the body of a higher 
warm-blooded animal. Here, however, the 
processes of organic evolution have begun 
with the ocean, and in several respects merely 
perfected existing arrangements. 



THE OCEAN 



187 



This statement is far from fanciful. Not 
only do the body fluids of the lower forms of 
marine life correspond exactly with sea water 
in their composition, but there are at least 
strong indications that the fluids of the highest 
animals are really descended from sea water, 
from the sea water of an earlier epoch, to be 
sure, and they are not changed beyond recog- 
nition by the transformations of evolution.^ 
A comparison of the relative amounts of 
various saline constituents in sea water and 
in mammalian blood (roughly averaged from 
a variety of measurements in different species) 
will demonstrate this relationship. 

Composition op the Salts in Per Cent 





Sea Water 


Blood Sebttm 


Na 


30.59 
3.79 
l.iSO 
1.11 

65.27 
7.66 
0.21 
0.19 


39 


Me 


0.4 


Ca 


1 


K 


2.7 


CI 


45 


SO4 




COs 


12 


Br 




P,Ob 


0.4 







' See the interesting paper by Macallum, Transactions of 
the Royal Society of Canada, 1908, 11, p. 145. 



188 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

The gaps in the table do not indicate that 
substances are lacking, but merely that the 
amounts are small. In short, the same sub- 
stances are present in both cases, and in both 
cases sodium chloride largely predominates. 
The importance of carbonic acid in metabo- 
lism accounts for the large amount of sodium 
bicarbonate in the blood, and this raises the 
amounts of both sodium and carbonic acid. 

It is also to be noted that the regulatory 
processes in the ocean and in the organism 
are in one or two aspects similar, e.g. tempera- 
ture regulation by evaporation, and regula- 
tion of the alkalinity. Of course no impor- 
tance attaches to such resemblances, beyond 
the fact that both regulations are highly 
favorable, because of the special fitness of 
water in one case and of carbonic acid in the 
other. But it is at least worthy of mention 
that the regulation of the ocean in general 
bears a striking resemblance to a physiolog- < 
ical regulatory process, although such physi- 
ological processes are supposed to be the 
result of organic evolution alone. Very much 
this same idea occurred to Palitzsch in the 
course of his investigation of the alkalinity 
of the ocean.^ The resemblance is more ob- 
vious still when the stability of all the more 

^ See note above, p. 153. 



THE OCEAN 189 

important physical conditions of the ocean is 
taken into account. Indeed, however difficult 
it may be to make out those subtle traits of 
physiological processes which account for 
their efficiency, their adaptability, and their 
exactness, I feel sure that no one who is thoP 
oughly conversant with the general char- 
acteristics of the life process can fail to see a 
rough counterpart in the means by which 
conditions in the ocean are regulated. ^ 

It is certainly a salient, and hardly a mean- 
ingless fact that the processes of inorganic 
and organic evolution have a similar out- 
come in complex, exact, and almost ideally 
efficient activities. Is it not possible that in 
the case of the organic processes some have 
now and then been regarded as adaptations 
which in reality arose automatically and 
quite inevitably ? 

The existence of efficient regulation of the 
ocean, establishing its most important physico- 
chemical characteristics as constants, is of 
far greater importance in the sciences of nature, 
especially for living organisms, than could 
formerly have been guessed. Such natural 
processes were perhaps even necessary to 
make life possible in the birthplace of life. I 
cannot undertake to explain the very great 
importance which to-day the physical chemist 



190 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

attaches to the regulation of the conditions of a 
chemical process. The only way to gain an 
idea of this is to examine a work on physi- 
cal chemistry. Certainly, however, nothing has 
lately arisen more essential to biology than the 
understanding of the influence of temperature, 
pressure, reaction, concentration, ionization, 
etc., upon all physico-chemical structures 
and changes, whether inorganic or vital. 

Thus the fitness of the ocean appears as an 
embodiment of the physical fitnesses of water 
and carbonic acid, resulting directly and in- 
evitably from these and other natural phenom- 
ena, and providing a lodgment for life and a 
medium for its earlier development upon the 
earth. No philosopher's or poet's fancy, no 
myth of a primitive people has ever exag- 
gerated the importance, the usefulness, and 
above all the marvelous beneficence of the 
ocean for the community of living things. 



Chapter vi 

THE CHEMISTRY OF THE THREE 
ELEMENTS 



ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 

A HUNDRED years ago the firm belief 
was held by all chemists that whatever 
substance is synthesized within the body of 
the living organism possesses special and pe- 
culiar characteristics of its own, which mark 
it oflf from all inorganic bodies, and divide 
chemistry into the two great and perfectly 
distinct departments of Organic Chemistry 
and Inorganic Chemistry. To be sure, even 
then many organic substances had been sep- 
arated from the organism, purified, and sub- 
jected to the usual experiments of the labora- 
tory, without at any stage manifesting unique 
properties. But, as Berzelius believed, a 
special vital force had presided over their 
formation, and this, therefore, he supposed 
to be impossible under any other circum- 
stances. 

191 



192 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

In the course of time, however, a long series 
of successful syntheses of undoubted constitu- 
ents of animals and plants, among which Woh- 
ler's preparation of urea in 1828 is the most 
famous, completely destroyed the old erro- 
neous assumption. The compounds of organic 
chemistry gradually came to be recognized 
as different from inorganic substances only 
in the sp ecial characteristic s of the element s 
c arbon, hydrog enj_aiid_oxygen when in chem- 
ical union with one another, ]ust as the com- 
pounds of any other elements have their own 
specific characteristics. No other difference 
remains; every principle of chemical science 
applies to organic and inorganic substances 
alike; and accordingly life has been for- 
ever subjected to the general laws of chem- 
istry. 

As syntheses multiplied, the organic chem- 
ist found many fields for investigation where 
life was not concerned. The application of- 
his new substances in the arts, as well as many 
fascinating theoretical problems, led him on, 
until, about the middle of the century or a 
little later, it became clear that organic sub- 
stances in the original sense are but a small 
part of his scope. His occupation had be- 
come the study of all the compounds of 
carbon, wherever and however they might 



CHEMISTRY 193 

occur, and as a rule he had little to do with 
physiological or biological chemistry. Not 
that he was now ever disposed to distinguish 
between substances which happened to occur 
in living organisms and others ; for at length 
he had completely accepted the view that, 
apart possibly from a few complicated sub- 
stances like the proteins, such distinctions 
are thoroughly irrational. But the nature of 
the subject and the historical accidents of 
its development directed his attention in the 
main elsewhere. 

Nevertheless, the distinction between or- 
ganic chemistry as the science of all the com- 
pounds of carbon, and inorganic chemistry 
as the science of all other chemical compounds 
whatever has persisted, and not without 
sound reasons. In the course of the wonder- 
ful development of organic chemistry, which 
must ever be counted as one of the greatest 
achievements of the nineteenth century, enor- 
mous numbers of new chemical substances 
were discovered. In 1883 the number of 
carbon compounds had reached 20,000, in 
1899, 74,000, and in 1902 it exceeded 100,000.^ 

> See M. M. Richter, "Lexikon der Kohlenstoffverbindun- 
gen," Hamburg and Leipzig, 1900, continued in supplemen- 
tary volumes. This work catalogues all the compounds of 
carbon as they come to light. 



194 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

This is the sufficient practical ground for pre- 
serving organic chemistry as a separate sci- 
ence. The subject is so vast that in fact it 
is impossible to incorporate it with other 
departments of chemistry. Even the com- 
pounds of carbon and hydrogen alone are 
counted by hundreds, those of carbon, hydro- 
gen, and oxygen, by thousands, and the 
number of possible compounds of the three 
elements is almost unlimited. 

The mere number of organic compounds is, 
however, far from constituting the only dis- 
tinction between the two departments of 
descriptive chemistry. The unique variety 
of compounds containing carbon, hydrogen, 
and oxygen, and, in a small proportion of cases 
a few other elements besides, must obviously 
rest upon the nature of the elements them- 
selves, especially of course upon the nature of 
carbon, upon the properties which are pe- 
culiar to them and which mark them off from' 
other elements, just as the properties of 
argon, of the metals of the alkalies, or of the 
halogens determine their own chemical be- 
havior. Moreover, such characteristics must 
and do contribute properties to the com- 
pounds of carbon which are theirs as a class, 
which distinguish them from the compounds 
of other elements in somewhat the same way 



CHEMISTRY 195 

that the anatomical characteristics of one 
class of animals distinguish such a class from 
other classes of animals. In short, the carbon 
compounds are not unique merely because 
they are numerous; they are uniquely nu- 
merous because they are compounds of carbon 
with hydrogen, oxygen, and in some cases 
certain other elements. They possess, more- 
over, other less obvious class properties as 
well, though of these, it must be admitted, 
chemistry is even yet far from a clear under- 
standing. But unquestionably that is due 
to the incompleteness of the science, for the 
peculiar methods of organic chemistry are a 
sufficient guarantee of the existence of such 
class peculiarities.^ 

In our present investigation a study of the 
possibilities of chemical union between the 
elements carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen is of 
great importance, and accordingly we must 
now examine some of the results of synthetic 
organic chemistry. 

* See the introductory chapter to Meyer and Jacobson's 
"Lehrbuch der Organischen Chemie," Leipzig, 1907. 



196 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

A 
VALENCE 

The principal theoretical foundation of 
organic chemistry is the idea of valence. 
Let us consider the chemical formulas of a 
number of the simple compounds of hydrogen, 
e.g. HCl, H2O, NH3, CH4, HI, HBr. It is 
evident that in such formulas a single atom of 
hydrogen is never represented as in union 
with more than one atom of another element. 
There are, however, cases where one atom of 
hydrogen is in union with a single other atom, 
e.g. HCl, HBr, HI; or two atoms of hydro- 
gen may unite with a single other atom, e.g. 
H2O; or three atoms of hydrogen with one 
other, e.g. NH3; or four hydrogens with one 
other, e.g. CH4. If the assumption be made 
that discrete bonds or forces take part in the 
union of atoms, hydrogen must possess but a 
single such bond or valence. Otherwise com- 
pounds of the type X-H-X, X-H/J, or 

of some other type in which one atom of 
hydrogen is in union with more than one atom 
of lower valence, must exist, and this is con- 
trary to fact. 

We may, therefore, employing a dash to 
represent valence, write the constitutional 



CHEMISTRY 197 

formulas of hydrochloric acid, water, and 
methane, as follows : — 

it4ci, H-O-H, ^>C<^ 

Accordingly, oxygen appears to possess two 
valences and carbon four. These conclu- 
sions are justified by an almost inconceivable 
wealth of experience; they are the means of 
constructing the elaborate constitutional for- 
mulas which are so necessary a part of organic 
chemistry; and there can be no doubt that 
in almost all the compounds with which we 
shall be concerned hydrogen is invariably 
univalent, oxygen bivalent, and carbon quad- 
rivalent. On this basis the construction of 
possible formulas of organic compounds is 
merely an exercise in a somewhat peculiar 
department of mathematics. 

B 

HYDROCARBONS 

The compounds of carbon and hydrogen 
may first be considered. With but a single 
atom of carbon in the molecule one only is 

possible : — 

H 

I 

H-C-H 

I 

H 



198 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

Uniting two carbon atoms by a single valence, 
the formula 

H H 

I I 

H-C-C-H 

I I 

H H 

representing the compound ethane is ob- 
tained ; but if the process be extended, great 
complexity speedily ensues. For example, 
the hexanes, compounds formed upon this 
plan containing six carbon atoms, all of one 
empirical formula, number five. Their con- 
stitutions are represented by the accompany- 
ing structures, every one of which corre- 
sponds to a known substance : — 

H H H H 

I I I I 

H-C-H H-C-H H-C-H H-C-H H 

H-C-H C-H 



H-C-H H-C-H 

I I 

H-C-H H-C-H 

I I 

H-C-H H-C-H 

I I 

H-C-H H 

I 
H 




- 


CHEMISTRY 






199 


H 

1 


H 

1 


H 

1 




H 

1 


H-C-H 


H-C-H 

C-H 

1 

C-H 


H-C-H 


"^ — 
C 


H-C-H 


H-C'H 

1 


H-C-H 

1 


H-C-H 




H-C-H 


1 
H 


1 
H 


1 
H 









H-C-H 

.1 
H 

In each of the compounds represented by 
these formulas every carbon atom is believed 
to have four valences and every hydrogen 
atom one. \ 

As the number of carbon atoms in the mole- 
cule increases the number of possible forms, 
isomers so called, multiplies with great rapid- 
ity. Of compounds C7H16 there are 9 forms; 
for CgHis, 18; for C9H20, 35; for C10H22, 75; 
for CiiH24, 159; for C12H26, 355; for C13H28, 
802; and for C14H30, 1855 possibilities.^ There 
can be no reasonable doubt that the prepara- 
tion of each and all of these compounds would 
be possible, and that once formed they would 
be very stable substances. In truth, no one 

1 Cayley, Berichte, 8, 1056 (1875). F. Hermann, Berichte, 
13, 792 (1880) ; 30, 2423 (1897) ; 31, 91 (1898). Losanitsch, 
Berichte, 30, 1917, 3059 (1897). "Optical isomers" are dis- 
regarded in the estimate. 



200 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

has ever failed who has set out with skill, 
a good plan, and suitable starting materials, 
to prepare such a body. 

The number and variety of hydrocar- 
bons is further enormously extended by the 
possibility of ^dQ]il)le and treble unions be- 
tween pairs of fearbon atoms, as in effiyTene, 

>=< 

and acetylene, 

H-C=C-H 

Further, more than one double or treble 
bond, or single, double, and treble bonds in 
combination, may occur, as in the well-known 
substances CH3 - CH = CH2, CH3 - C = CH, 
CH2=C = CH2, etc. 

Finally, the carbon atoms possess the prop- 
erty of uniting to form ring compounds in 
great variety, e.g. 





H 


H 


CH2 

/\ 

CH2 CH2 

1 1 


C 

HC CH2 

1 1 


C 

X\ 
HC CH 

1 II 
HC CH 

X/ 

c 

H 


1 1 > 

CH2 CH2 

CH2 


1 1 > 
HC CH2 

X/ 
C 
H 



CHEMISTRY 201 

CH2 — C J12 CH2 — CH2 

II . \/ 

Cxla CH2 CH2 

\/ 

CH2 



Moreover, such rings may unite with carbon 
chains, both those containing single bonds, 
and those containing double and treble bonds, 
whether straight or forked, in great variety; 
and also with other rings, e.g. 



CHs 

1 


CHs 

1 


CM, 

1 


1 
C 


1 
C 


1 
C 


/\ 


/\ 


X\ 


HC CH 


H-C C-CH3 


HC CH 


1 II 


1 II 


1 II 


HC CH 


HC CH 


HC C-CHs 


X/ 


X/ 


\y 


C 


C 


C 


H 


H 


H 


CHg 

1 


H 


CHs 

1 


C 


C 


C 


X\ 


HC C-CH< 

1 II XHs 


/X 


HC CH 


HC CH2 


1 II 


. 1 1 


HC CH 


HC CH 


HC CH2 


X/ 


X/ 


X/ 


C 

1 


C 
H 


CH 

1 


CHg 




C 

/X 

CH, CH2 



202 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

H H H H 

C C C H C 

X\/\ -/\ I x\ 

HC C CH HC C - C - C CH 

I II I . 1 II I I II 

HC C CH HC CH H HC CH 

X/X^ X/ X/ 

C c c c 

H H H H 

It is quite impossible briefly to indicate, 
still less to give an adequate idea of the 
bewildering diversity and complexity of the 
known hydrocarbons. They exist by the 
hundreds, and there are certainly countless 
thousands of possible stable bodies made up 
of carbon and hydrogen alone. 

C 

COMPOUNDS OF CARBON, HYDROGEN, AND OXYGEN 

With the addition of oxygen, the variety and 
number of known and of possible substances 
is still further multiplied. Oxygen may enter , 
into the following types of union with carbon 
and hydrogen in organic compounds : — 

= C-0-H, =C-0-C=, =C = 0. 

Alone or in combination, these groups yield 
a great variety of important classes of com- 
pounds. Representing a group or radical 
consisting of carbon and hydrogen alone by 



CHEMISTRY 



203 



R, a few of the most simple and important 
divisions are as follows : — 



Alcohols, primary 


RCH2OH 


Alcohols, secondary- 


II2CHOH 


Alcohols, tertiary 


R3COH 


Aldehydes 


ECHO 


Ketones 


R2CO 


Acids 


RCOOH 


Esters 


RCOOR 


Ethers 


ROR 



By the introduction of oxygen into the 
molecule any complex hydrocarbon may be 
converted into a great number of substances, 
and even in simple cases such derivatives 
are not few. In the accompanying formulas 
I have gathered together the possible hydro- 
carbons, containing three carbon atoms (ex- 
cluding ring compounds), and their possible 
oxygen derivatives, most of which are capa- 
ble of existence as substances of varying 
stability, many of them being in fact well- 
known common substances like lactic acid, 
glycerine, propionic acid, propyl alcohol, two 
of the simplest sugars, etc. 



CH3 

1 


CH3 

1 


CH2 

II 

C 
II 
CH2 


CHs 

1 


CH2 

1 

CH3 


CH 

II 
CH2 


1 

C 
III 
CH 



204 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 



CH3 

1 


CH3 

1 


CHs 

1 


CHs 

1 


CH20H 

1 


CHa 

II 

C 

II 
CHOH 


CH2 

1 

CH20H 


CHOH 
1 
CHs 


CH 

II 
CHOH 


COH 

II 

CH2 


CH 

II 
CHa 


CH3 

1 


CH2OH 

1 


CHs 

1 


CH2OH 

1 


CH3 

1 


CHaOH 

1 


1 

c 

111 

COH 


1 

C 
III 
CH 


CHOH 
CHoOH 


CHa 
CH2OH 


COH 

II 
CHOH 


CH 

II 
CHOH 


CH2OH 

1 


CHOH 

II 

C 
II 
CHOH 


CH2OH 

1 


CH2OH 

1 


CH2OH 

1 




COH 

11 
CH2 


1 

C 

III 
COH 


CHOH 
1 
CH2OH 


COH 

II 
CHOH 




CH3 

1 


CHs 

1 


CHs 

1 


CHO 

1 


CO 

II 

c 

II 

CHa 


CHO 

I 


CH2 
1 
CHO 


CO 

1 
CHs 


CH 

II 
CO 


CH 

II 
CHa 


1 

C 
III 
CH 


CHa 

1 


CHO 

1 


CHO 

1 


CO 

II 

C 
II 
CO 


CHO 

1 




CO 

[ 


CH2 

1 


CH 

II 
CO 


CO 

1 




CHO 


CHO 


CHO 




CH3 

1 


COOH 

1 


COOH 

1 


COOH 

1 






CH2 
1 
COOH 


CH 

II 
CHa 


1 

c 

III 

CH 


CHa 

1 
COOH 






CH3 

1 


CH2OH 

1 


CH2OH 

1 


CHs 

1 


CH2OH 

1 


CHO 

1 


CHOH 

1 
CHO 


CH2 

1 
CHO 


CO 

1 

CHs 


COH 

II 
CO 


CH 

II 
CO 


COH 

II 
CHa 







CHEMISTRY 




205 


CHO 

1 


CHOH 

II 

c 

II 

CO 


CHO 

1 








CH 

II 
CHOH 


1 

C 
III 
COH 








CH2OH 

1 


CH20H 

1 


CH2OH 

1 


CHO 

[ 


CH2OH 

I 


CHO 

1 


CHOH 

1 
CHO 


CO 

1 
CH20H 


COH 

II 
CO 


COH 
II 
CHOH 


CO 

1 
CHO 


CHOH 
1 
CHO 


CHO 

1 












COH 

II 
CO 






















CH3 

1 


CH20H 

1 


COOH 

1 


COOH 

1 


COOH 

1 


CH2OH 

1 


CHOH 

1 
COOH 


CH2 

1 

COOH 


COH 

II 
CH2 


CH 

II 
CHOH 


1 

c 

III 

COH 


CHOH 

1 
COOH 


COOH 

1 


COOH 

j 










COH 

II 
CHOH 


CHOH 

1 










COOH 










CH3 

1 


CHO 

1 


COOH 

1 


COOH 

1 






CO 

1 


CH2 

1 


CH 

II 
CO 


CO 

1 






COOH 


COOH 


COOH 






CH2OH 

1 


CHO 

1 


COOH 

1 








CO 


CHOH 


COH 









I I II 

COOH COOH C = 



206 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

This is relatively a simple case. As the 
number of carbon atoms in the molecule 
increases, the number of possible oxygen 
derivatives multiplies in a far more rapid 
progression than in the case of the simplest 
hydrocarbons, which has been stated above. 
Accordingly there can be no doubt that in 
addition to the many thousands now known, 
the existence of countless millions of com- 
pounds consisting of carbon, hydrogen, and 
oxygen alone is possible. In a large propor- 
tion of cases the only difficulties involved in 
their preparation are to obtain suitable start- 
ing materials, and the enormous labor of the 
process. There are, for instance, hundreds 
of thousands of possible hydroxyl derivatives 
alone of the paraflfine hydrocarbons of the 
formula C14H30, but only one of these is now 
known.^ Yet all, or at least a vast majority, 
would unquestionably be stable bodies if 
once formed. 

Not less important than the number and 
variety of such substances is their ^iverSty; 
of physical and chemical characteristics. The 
following are, for example, individiial chemi- 
cal compounds of at least moderate purity, 
made up of the three elements alone : al- 
cohol, formaldehyde, acetic acid, carbolic 

^ Methal, a constituent of spermaceti. 



CHEMISTRY 207 

acid, oxalic acid, acetone, ether, lactic acid, 
sugar, cotton, glycerine, olive oil, camphor, 
tannin, ophiotoxin (the chief poisonous con- 
stituent of cobra venom), starch, vanilline 
(the flavoring constituent of the vanilla bean), 
oil of wintergreen, salol, benzoic acid, digita- 
line. 

Here is a variety that baffles description; 
but description is hardly necessary, for the 
facts explain themselves. In short, the com- 
pounds of the three elements which compose 
water and carbon dioxide exist in enormous 
numbers and in unparalleled diversity of chem- 
ical and physical characteristics. They in- 
clude substances of the greatest stability, and 
others of exceeding instability ; liquids, solids, 
and gases ; chemically active and chemically 
inert bodies; acids and neutral substances; 
substances' which are readily oxidized and 
others which are oxidized only with great 
difficulty. In a very large proportion of 
cases these compounds are capable of enter- 
ing into reactions with one another. They 
are, moreover, capable of forming still more 
complex substances, in still greater variety 
by entering into union with other elements, 
notably with nitrogen and sulphur. 



208 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

D 

OTHER ORGANIC COMPOUNDS 

The organic substances which contain 
nitrogen are very numerous and exceedingly 
diverse in their properties. A few of the 
principal classes of such compounds are the 
following : — 



Amines 


R-NHa, R2NH, R3N 


Nitro compounds 


R-NO2 


Nitriles 


R-C = N 


Isonitriles 


R-NC 


Amino-acids 


R-CHNH2COOH 




R-N. 
I>0 


Azoxy compounds 




R-N^ 



Azo compounds R— N = N — R 

Hydrazo compounds R— NH — NH— R 

Derivatives of purine, pyridine, and other 
ring systems, etc. 

The nitrogenous organic substances include 
classes of compounds which differ in their 
properties from any of the non-nitrogenous 
substances. Of such special properties the 
most conspicuous is perhaps alkalinity. Like 
ammonia, of which it is a derivative, the 
amino group (— NHg), and various other 
groups containing nitrogen possess this char- 



CHEMISTRY 209 

acteristic. Such compounds, accordingly, 
supplement those which contain the acid 
carboxyl group ( — COOH) and make possible 
the fundamental relations of acid, base, and 
salt among organic compounds, corresponding 
to those of inorganic chemistry. 

There exist also many compounds of sul- 
phur, of chlorine, bromine, and iodine, as 
well as of various less common elements 
among organic substances ; but in all such 
cases the complexity and variety of the 
compounds depend primarily upon the ca- 
pacity of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, or 
carbon and hydrogen together, to form nu- 
merous, varied, and complex compounds on 
which, as it were, the further complexity is 
superposed. 

E 

THE CHARACTERISTICS OP ORGANIC SUBSTANCES 

Thus the great diversity of organic sub- 
stances depends in the first instance upon the 
quadrivalence of carbon, which makes of 
tfe' carbon atom in the organic molecule a 
focus, from which chains of atoms may ex- 
tend in four different directions; or, in the 
case of double or treble ties, in three directions ; 

t 
or in but two: -^C-*-, ^C=>, -«=C=*-, 

y 



210 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

■<-Cs>. Next comes the fact that carbon 
atoms, when otherwise exclusively in com- 
bination with hydrogen, and under other 
circumstances in lesser degree, possess an 
almost ualiiriited__.cap.aciJtyLjto_joinJj3^ether 
and form chains^ and rings in great variety. 
The longest carbon chain yet synthesized oc- 
curs in the compound hexakontane,^ C60H122, 
a substance whose constitution is probably as 
follows : — 

CH3 • CH2 • CH2 . • . CH2 • CH2 • CH3. 

(CH2)64 

The stability of this substance justifies a 
belief that even far longer chains of carbon 
atoms can exist, and, in fact, there is no known 
limit to the possibility of stringing carbon 
atoms together. 

No other element is believed to share both 
of these characteristics, and there are various 
reasons to suppose that the resulting pecul- 
iarity of the system of organic compounds 
is really unique. Turning to the periodic 
classification of the elements, it will be seen 
that carbon is a member of the first series. 
Several of the elements of this series, unlike 
all the other elements except hydrogen, pos- 
sess very definite individual properties, which 

1 "HeU und Hagele," Berichte, 22, 502 (1899). 



CHEMISTRY 211 

mark them off sharply from other substances. 
Thus carbon bears relatively little resem- 
blance to its neighbors silicon or titanium, 
nitrogen to phosphorus or vanadium, oxy- 
gen to sulphur or chromium; while hydro- 
gen, of course, has a place quite apart in the 
classification, and as an element appears to 
be correspondingly unique. 

It is, therefore, in the highest degree prob- 
able that compounds made from elements of 
such positive chemical characteristics and 
very unusual properties will be unlike com- 
pounds formed from other elementary sub- 
stances. In this manner the periodic classi- 
fication confirms our confidence in the results 
of many decades of experience, which lead us 
to believe that other elements are exceedingly 
unlikely readily to form compounds com- 
parable in number, variety, and complexity 
with those of organic chemistry as we know it. 

For more evidence we may turn to certain 
further data of organic chemistry. I refer 
principally to the character of the organic 
radicals composed exclusively of carbon and 
hydrogen. In making a rational classifica- 
tion of the carbon compounds it has been 
found convenient to commence with that 
series of hydrocarbons, called paraffines, with 
which the present discussion was begun. 



212 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRNOMENT 

From them other series may be derived by 
making a substitution in the molecule. Thus 
the substitution of a hydroxyl radical for a 
single hydrogen atom leads from the paraf- 
fine hydrocarbons, C„H2„+2, to the alcohols 
C„H2„+iOH; the substitution of a carboxyl 
radical — COOH, for the methyl group — CH3, 
leads from the parajQfine hydrocarbons 
C„H2„+iCH3 to the acids C„H2„+i-C00H. 

Moreover, the classes of compounds thus 
defined chemically fulfill the logical require- 
ments of a class. They are collections of 
well-characterized and very similar individual 
things which diflfer greatly, and in well-marked 
manner, from all other things. In other 
words, growing complexity of the molecule, 
when it consists only in increase in complexity 
of the simple radical comprised of carbon 
and hydrogen, of the formula C„'H.2n+u 

CH3 — , CHs-CHj — , CH3-CH2'CH2 — , CH3-CH2'CH2'CH2 — 



CHa^ CH3. 



>CH-, 



CH-CH2- 



CH3 CH3 

CH3 — CHj. 

>CH- 
CW 
CH3\ 
CH3-9C- 
CH3/ 



has very little effect upon the properties of 
the molecule. Thus the compound methane. 



CHEMISTRY 213 

CH4, very closely resembles normal butane, 
CH3 • CH2 • CH2 • CH3 ; and again propionic 
acid, CH3 CH2 - COOH, and heptylic acid, 
CH3 • CH2 • CH2 • CH2 • CH2 • CH2 • COOH, are 
very much alike. 

Quite difiFerent is the case when any other 
radical accumulates in the molecule. For 
instance, propyl alcohol, CH3-CH2*CH2-OH, 
which closely resembles ordinary alcohol, 
CH3 -0112011, is very different in its behavior 
from glycerine, CH2OH CHOH • CH2OH, 
and similarly, acetic acid, CHs* COOH, di&ers 
materially in properties from oxalic acid 
COOH -COOH. Even more marked are the 
differences when a radical accumulates upon 
a single carbon atom. In successive stages 
of oxidation ethane, CH3 • CH3, yields alcohol, 
CHa- CH2OH, aldehyde, CUs' CH(0H)2, which 
by a secondary transformation goes over into 
the more stable form CHs-CHO, and acetic 
acid, CH3-C(OH)3, which similarly becomes 
CH3"C00H. These changes correspond to 
the conversion of ethane, that is monomethyl 
methane, into dimethyl methane, trimethyl 
and tetramethyl methane : — 

CH3- CH3->CH3 • CH2 • CH3 -> 

CH3\p,TT /-.TT _. CH3\ p /CH3 



CH3\piTT /-.TT _. CJ:l3\ p /( 

CHs/^ " ' CH3/ ^ \CH3 



214 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

In the latter ease the introduction of methyl 
groups in place of hydrogen produces no appre- 
ciable change in the general characteristics 
of the substances ; in the former, the succes- 
sive introduction of hydroxyl groups forms 
substances belonging to three diflferent classes 
of compounds, — alcohols, aldehydes, and acids, 
which have nothing in common. In short, 
variation in the number and arrangement of 
such groups as occur in the paraffine hydro- 
carbon. 



-C 
I I I 

— C — CII3, — C — CH2 — c — , 




-d \c-, 
I I 

is without manifest effect upon the more 
important properties of the molecule, but 
variation in the number and arrangement of 
any other groups produces complete change 
in its characteristic properties. 



CHEMISTRY 215 

It may perhaps be urged that this argu- 
ment is fallacious, in that the increase of the 
relative amount of hydroxyl in the above 
cases is larger than the relative change in 
radicals of the types — CH3, =CH2, =CH, 
and = C. But, in the first place, it is evi- 
dent that the latter four radicals are actually 
different, and a 'priori there is no reason to 
suppose that they should not greatly differ 
in their effect upon the properties of a mole- 
cule, for instance, to render dissimilar the 
compounds normal pentane CH3-CH2*CH2' 
CH2*CH3 and tetramethyl methane, 

CHaV^^/CHs 
CH3/ \CH3, 

which is not the case. In the second place, 
the change from methane, CH4, to ethane, 
CH3 • CH3, is a larger proportional change in 
the molecule than the change from alcohol, 
CH3CH2OH, to glycol, CH2OHCH2OH, or 
aldehyde, CH3 • CHO, both of which produce 
far greater changes in the properties. 

In fact, the union of carbon with hydrogen 
in organic compounds is a unique and peculiar 
chemical relationship, upon which the proper- 
ties of the carbon compounds, their number, 
variety, and complexity largely depend. It 
seems to make no important difference whether 



216 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

a carbon atom is attached to four hydrogen 
atoms, or to one carbon and three hydrogens, 
or to two carbons and two hydrogens, or to 
three carbons and one hydrogen, or to four 
carbon atoms ; in all such cases the_£Sect 
of the radical upon the general characteristics 
of the molecule va ries j v ery littl e. 

There are a great number of phenomena 
which might be employed further to illustrate 
the nature of the case, but two will suffice. 
The acidity of acetic acid, CHa'COOH, is 
only slightly and slowly changed by the 
accumulation of hydrocarbon radicals; thus 
the compounds propionic acid, CH3-CH2' 
COOH, and butyric acid, CHg-CHaCHa' 
COOH, are only a little less acid than acetic 
acid itself, because nearly all the effect of 
such larger radicals as they contain is already 
exerted by the methyl group. 

Ionization Constants of Acids 



Acetic acid. 


CHs ■ COOH 


0.000018 


Propionic acid, 


CH3CH2 COOH 


0.000014 


Butyric acid, 


CH3CH2CH2 COOH 


0.000016 


Glycolic acid, 


CH2OH COOH 


0.00015 


Chloracetic acid, 


CH2CI COOH 


0.0015 


Dichloracetic acid. 


CHCI2 COOH 


0.05 


Trichloracetic acid, 


CCI3 COOH 


1.2 


GlycocoU, 


CH2NH2COOH 


0.00000000018 


Oxalic acid, 


COOH COOH 


0.1 



CHEMISTRY 217 

But if a hydroxy! group be substituted, as in 
glyeolic acid, CHaOH-COOH, or a chlorine 
atom, as in monochloracetic acid, CH2C1- 
COOH, the acidity is greatly increased, while 
the compound trichloracetic acid, CCls- 
COOH, is a strong acid. On the other hand, 
aminoacetic acid, CHa'NHa-COOH, is 
scarcely acid at all. 

The effect of introducing a carboxyl group 
in place of a methyl group into any paraffine 
hydrocarbon, regardless of its constitution, 
e.g. CHa-CHa-^CHa-COOH, is to diminish 
the heat of combustion of the molecule almost 
exactly 157 calories ; but the conversion of 
acetic acid into oxalic acid, CHa'COOH-*- 
COOH -COOH, structurally an identical 
change, diminishes the molecular heat of 
combustion only 147 calories. "^ In both these 
instances it is certain that the nature of the 
influence of the radicals consisting of carbon 
and hydrogen exclusively is nearly independ- 
ent of their size and configuration. Any 
other group, however, by its presence at once 
modifies the nature of the case, though un- 
concerned in the process or property. Since 
it can be shown that such effects, like the 
difference between monochloracetic acid and 

1 Stohmann, Zeitschrift fiir Physikalische Ckemie. 11, 29, 
1888. 



218 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

trichloracetic acid, depend upon the number 
of such foreign groups and their arrangement/ 
it is evident that the hydrocarbon radicals 
have a constancy of influence upon the prop- 
erties of the molecule which is not shared by 
other radicals. 

The indifference of effect of hydrogen and 
carbon, when linked to carbon, upon the 
properties of the molecule is undoubtedly a 
principal cause of the stability of complex 
organic substances. Through this peculiar- 
ity of the two elements the integrity of the 
valence energy of carbon is preserved, and the 
long carbon chains are stable. Whenever 
the molecule becomes overloaded with radi- 
cals of other kinds the strength of the tie 
between carbon atoms diminishes and the 
compound becomes unstable. The proper- 
ties of the carbohydrates, which will be later 
discussed, admirably illustrate such instabil- 
ity. In short, organic compounds are in some 
respects properly to be regarded as compounds 
of carbon and hydrogen jointly, for it is not 
the properties of carbon alone, but those of 
carbon and hydrogen together which chiefly 
make them possible. 

' Henderson, Journal of Physical Chemistry, IX, 40, 1905 ; 
Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 
XLII, 639, 1907 ; Zeitschrift fiir Physikalische Chemie, LX, 
413, 1907. 



CHEMISTRY 219 

In the more complex substances, such as 
the various ring systems of organic chemistry, 
it is not possible to discuss such problems of 
molecular mechanics. There too, however, 
hydrogen predominates over all other elements 
except carbon, and that may well be taken as 
a sufficient indication of its continued im- 
portance. 

All of these considerations taken together 
suffice, I believe, to prove, or at least to make 
it exceedingly probable, that organic chemistry 
is in truth a unique field, and that no other 
elements can form compounds in such variety, 
complexity, and number as carbon, hydrogen, 
and oxygen. At any rate there can be no 
possible doubt that the compounds of organic 
chemistry are in these respects very remark- 
able indeed, and that similar cases must be 
extreniely rare among all the possible systems 
of compounds made up of all the known 
elements. 

It follows from the peculiarities just ex- 
plained that the first great factor in the com- 
plexity of living organisms as we know them, 
the complexity and variety of their chemical 
constituents, depends principally upon the 
nature of the elements which compose such 
substances, and is most probably a unique, 
certainly a very rare characteristic of matter. 



THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

That the very elements which make up water 
and carbonic acid, and apparently they alone, 
should possess this wonderful property is, 
when taken together with the physical prop- 
erties of water and carbonic acid and their 
place in cosmic evolution as constituents of 
the atmosphere, a fact which cannot lightly 
be set aside. 

Not less valuable for the organism than the 
multiplicity of organic substances, and the 
diversity of their properties, are the great 
variety of chemical changes which they can 
undergo, and that characteristic instability 
which renders such great complexity of chem- 
ical behavior easily attainable. In short, 
organic substances are uniquely fitted not 
only to provide complexity of structure to the 
organism, but also, through their instability 
and manifold transformations, to endow it 
with diverse chemical activities, with com- 
plexity of physiological function. 

One factor in determining the complexity 
of chemical changes which organic chemical 
substances manifest is the enormous number 
of simple structural relationships which every 
substance bears to others. This may be 
readily illustrated by the formulas of some of 
the derivatives of propane which possess 
biological importance : — 





CHEMISTRY 


221 


CHs 

1 


CH3 

1 


CH3 

1 


CH3 

r 


CHa 

1 


CHj 

COOH 
Propionic acid. 


cio 

1 


io 

1 


CH2OH 

Propyl alcohol, 


1 
CH3 

Acetone, 


CHO 

Methyl glyoxal, 


CH3 


CH2OH 

1 


CH2OH 

1 


CH2OH 

1 


CHOH 

1 


CHOH 

CH2OH 

Glycerine 


CHOH 

1 


1 
CO 

1 


COOH 

Lactic acid. 


CHO 

Glycerine 
aldehyde. 


CH2OH 

Dioxyacetone 


CH3 

1 


CH2OH 

1 


CH2 SH 

[ 


CH3 
CH SH 

j 


CHNH2 


CH NH2 


CH NH2 

[ 


COOH 

Alanine, 


COOH 

Serine, 


COOH 

Cysteine, 


COOH 

a-Thiolactic 
acid 



Of the above substances, acetone, lactic acid, 
glycerine, glycerine aldehyde, dioxyacetone, 
alanine, serine, and cysteine are of the great- 
est moment in physiological processes. 

Such complexity of chemical relationships 
results automatically, so to speak, in a variety 
of chemical transformations. But the trans- 
formations are greatly facilitated by that 
characteristic instability of organic substances, 
which is perhaps the chief distinguishing fea- 
ture of their behavior. For example, many 
inorganic substances may be subjected to very 



222 THE FITNESS OF THE ENYIRONMENT 

high temperatures without undergoing chem- 
ical change, but there are hardly any organic 
substances which can survive such treatment. 
Organic substances are also peculiarly liable 
to modification from the action of light and 
air. These are, however, but rough indica- 
tions of instability, and a special case will help 
more clearly to define the real characteristic. 

F 

THE SUGARS 

In accordance with the researches of Emil 
Fischer, the following constitution is ordina- 
rily assigned to glucose.^ 

H 

C=0 
I 
H-C-O-H 
I 
H-O-C-H 
I 
H-C-O-H 

I 
H-C-O-H 

CH2OH 

1 A discussion of this formula may be found in any text- 
book of organic chemistry. 



CHEMISTRY 223 

It must be noted that carbon atoms to 
which four different groups are attached are 
asymmetric, that is to say, they can exist in 
two forms which resemble each other as the 
right hand resembles the left (Pasteur, LeBel, 
van't Hoff). This characteristic results in 
further increase in the number and variety of 
organic compounds. It is therefore neces- 
sary, in writing the formula, to represent the 
form of the molecule as it exists in space (in 
three dimensions), and this is actually accom- 
plished by imagining the three-dimensional 
formula to be projected upon the paper so that 
when the hydrogen atom is written to the right 
of the carbon atom one asymmetric form of 
the latter is designated, when the hydrogen 
atom appears to the left, the other. 

It has long been known that when glucose 
is dissolved in water its optical activity, as 
the power of a substance to rotate the plane 
of polarization of light is loosely termed, 
changes slowly for some time before reaching 
a constant value. Recently it has been shown 
that this phenomenon probably depends upon 
the existence in solution of three different forms 
of glucose, which pass freely into one another 
and ultimately attain a state of equilibrium.^ 

* This subject has been fully discussed by Hudson, Journal 
of the American Chemical Society, XXXII, 889, 1910. 



224 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

H 
I 

CHO HO-C 

I 
H-C-OH 



OH 

I 
H-C 

1 
H-C-OH 

I 

HO-C-H 

I 
H-C 



H-C-OH 



HO-C-H :5i HO-C-H 

I 







H-C-OH 
I 
CH2OH 



H-C-OH 

I 
H-C-OH 
I 
CH2OH 



H-C 

I 
H-C-OH 
I 
CH2OH 



When to such, a solution of glucose a small 
quantity of alkali is added, certain remarkable 
further changes occur, as was first demon- 
strated by Lobry de Bruyn.^ These pro- 
cesses result in the formation of mannose and 
levulose, probably according to the accom- 
panying diagram. 

Moreover, like glucose, levulose and man- 
nose both exist in solution in three different 
forms, so that the resulting solution contains 
at least ten chemical individuals. But it is 
almost certain that other changes simultane-' 
ously occur and that the solution is actually 
still more complex, even from the outset. 

Upon a continued increase of alkalinity, 
or even slowly under the original conditions, 
a multitude of other changes set in. These 

* See the numerous papers by Lobry de Bruyn and Al- 
berda van Eckenstein in Recueil des Travavx Chimiques 
des Pays Bos, XIV-XIX. 





CHEMISTRY 




21 




CHO 

1 








HCOH 

1 








HOCH 

1 








HCOH 

t 








HCOH 

1 








CH2OH 








1 






CHjOH 

1 


CHOH 

II 

C-OH 

1 




CHO 

1 


CO 

1 


HO- 


-C-H 

1 


HO-C-H ^^ 

1 


HO-C-H =5^ 

1 


HO- 


-C-H 

1 


H-C-OH 

1 


H-C-OH 

1 


H- 


-C-OH 

1 


H-C-OH 

1 


H-C-OH 

1 


H- 


-C-OH 

1 


CH2OH 


CH2OH 




CH2OH 


Levulose 




Mannose 



are known sometimes to lead to the formation 
of lactic acid, CHg-CHOH-COOH, methyl- 
glyoxal, CHs-CO'CHO, and formaldehyde, 
H • CHO. Further, as Neff has shown,^ many 
other substances may also be formed. Such 
bodies chiefly belong to the class of oxyacids. 
It is also certain that a great variety of other 
simple sugars resembling glucose, levulose, 

» Neff, "Liebig's AnnaUen," 376, p. 1, 1910, and 357. 
p. 294, 1907. 
Q 



226 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

and mannose are produced, and, all told, the 
constituents of such a solution probably 
number at least two hundred, all produced 
from glucose alone, under the influence of a 
slight excess of hydroxyl ions. Among these 
substances the greatest diversity of chemical 
behavior is to be distinguished. Alcohol, 
aldehyde and ketone, and acid radicals occur 
in great profusion and variety of combinations ; 
compounds possessing forked chains are pres- 
ent ; and double bonds between carbon atoms 
add to the complexity. Moreover, all these 
substances themselves possess great chemical 
activity. 

A single case may perhaps illustrate this 
point. It has been shown by Windaus and 
Knoop ^ that in such solutions, in the presence 
of ammonia, one molecule of methyl glyoxal, 
one of formaldehyde, and two of amihonia 
unite to form the cyclic compound, methyl 
imidazol, a substance related to histidine, 
the latter being an important constituent of 
the protein molecule : — 

CHa— C=0 NH3 /H CH3— C-N/H 

I c^O -^ II \c-H 

C = NH3 ^ H— C— N<^ 

I 
H 

1 Knoop and Windaus, Berichte, XXXVI, 1166, 1905. 
Hofmeister's Beitrdge, VI, 392, 1905. 



CHEMISTRY 227 

The instability of glucose and of all the 
simple sugars is indeed exceptional in char- 
acter, and the resulting processes are perhaps 
far more intricate and numerous than in any 
other similar case. However, this very case 
is of exceptional physiological importance, be- 
cause carbohydrates are the direct result of 
that synthetic action of chlorophyll, 

6 CO2 + 6 H2O = CeHiaOe + 6 O2, 

which is the source of all organic substances 
and of all the energy of the organic cycle in 
plants and animals. Carbohydrates, more- 
over, are the chief constituents of plants and 
the chief food of animals. 

Turning to this synthesis of carbohydrate 
in the plant, we find much that is important 
in the present study. The details of the 
chemical transformation by which water and 
carbonic acid and solar energy are changed 
to sugars and oxygen still remain unknown, 
in spite of many careful investigations. But, 
at all events, it is possible to see that two 
things must somehow be done in order to 
accomplish the synthesis : — 

(1) Carbonic acid and water must be re- 
duced. That is to say, oxygen must be sepa- 
rated from both of these compounds iSo that 
free valences may exist to unite carbon and 



228 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

liydrogen in one molecule, and so that, further, 
the relative proportions of the three elements 
may become what they are in the simple 
carbohydrates, C:H:0= 1:2:1. 

(2) Somehow individual carbon atoms must 
be joined together until there are six in each 
molecule, where formerly there was but one. 

Theoretically, it might be possible by reduc- 
tion to form from carbon dioxide and water 
without union of carbon atoms the following 
substances: carbon monoxide, CO; formic 
acid, H-COOH; formaldehyde, H-CHO; 
methyl alcohol, CH3OH; and methane, CH4. 
Of such reductions the formation of formic acid, 
formaldehyde, and carbon monoxide has been 
directly realized by laboratory experiment.^ 

The most familiar theory of the formation 
of carbohydrates in the leaf is that of von 
Baeyer, which assumes a polymerization of 
one of the above substances, formaldehyde, 
leading directly to the formation of sugar, 
according to the reaction 

6HCHO = C6Hi206. 

This process also has been carried out ex- 
perimentally. Indeed, as a result of the 
investigations of Butlerow, O. Loew, and 

^See Meyer u. Jacobson's "Lehrbuch der Organischen 
Chemie," Leipzig, 1907, p. 688, 693-696. 



CHEMISTRY 229 

E. Fischer, it is known that in distinctly alka- 
hne solutions formaldehyde spontaneously goes 
over into a mixture of sugars which resemble 
glucose. Moreover, such a solution is un- 
questionably made up of much the same 
variety of substances as a glucose solution 
which has been subjected to the action of 
alkali in the same concentration. 

As stated above, it is evident that if any- 
thing is to be done chemically with a mix- 
ture of carbon dioxide and water, oxygen must 
be split oflF from both carbon and hydrogen 
so that they may enter into the same mole- 
cule. If this chemical change, which, to be 
sure, is no easy one in the laboratory, be ac- 
complished, formaldehyde among other things 
results ; and in alkaline solution formaldehyde 
produces carbohydrates and leads to that 
amazing tangle of substances and reactions, 
whose nature has been briefly indicated above. 
In short, the one chemical 'process which is 
open, if any transformations whatever are to be 
accomplished with carbonic acid and water, 
leads directly and to all appearances necessarily 
to the greatest complexity that has been found in 
any one chemical process; to a system made up 
of possibly two hundred substances or more, 
most of which possess very great chemical 
activity. 



230 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

It must not be forgotten that the share of 
the organism in such processes is also impor- 
tant. If possible, the smoothness with which 
chemical reactions are carried out in the leaf, 
perhaps quite without any stop at the formal- 
dehyde stage, and the certainty with which 
definite substances in large amounts instead 
of mixtures in very small amounts are pro- 
duced, seem more remarkable than the under- 
lying chemical facts. Needless to say, one 
great factor in such processes is the action of 
enzymes. Otherwise we are at a loss for a 
description of the ways and means by which 
the organism operates, though the brilliant 
studies of chlorophyll which have recently 
been carried out by Willstatter promise great 
achievements in the future.^ 

The underlying chemical facts, however, 
remain ; carbohydrates are among the natural 
products of carbon dioxide and water; they 
manifest in solution, especially in such con- 
ditions as obtain in protoplasm or the ocean,^ 
unparalleled instability and variety of reac- 
tions; and they produce spontaneously an 
enormous number of very active chemical 
substances. It is easy to see that, given 

' See his many papers of recent years in "Liebig's Annal- 
len." 

2 Henderson, Journal of Biological Chemistry, X, 3, 1911. 



CHEMISTRY 231 

an enzyme possessing the power to select and 
catalyze any one of the reactions, the for- 
mation of any special one of the many possible 
products in comparative purity is an auto- 
matic result. 

Such processes are in nature carried out 
with a perfection which to the chemist is 
almost inconceivable, by means of organic 
structures of the highest intricacy; but in 
the last analysis they rest upon the native 
properties of the three elements. 

The important consideration, I repeat, is 
this : that reduction, the necessary first change 
of carbonic acid and water, can lead directly 
by a single continuous chemical transforma- 
tion, of which the exact control is no whit 
more remarkable than the accurate control 
of the other processes of chemical physiology,^ 
to the full intricacy of organic chemistry ; to 
the very most notable instance of number, 
variety, and activity of substances, all formed 
inevitably, in the nature of the case, which 
has yet come to light. It is of no consequence 
that most of the substances must be formed 
in mere traces by the spontaneous synthesis, 
for in highest degree the organism possesses 
the power, by enzymiatic catalysis, to select 

1 Consult the work of Bayliss on Enzymes. London, 
Longmans, Green & Company. 



232 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

any one of a group of simultaneous reactions 
that may serve its needs, and make that one 
predominant. In short, the fitness is recip^ 
rocal," the unique chemical adaptability of 
the process and the unique chemical powers of 
the living organism interlock. 

Such, in brief, are the superlative advan- 
tages which the properties of the compounds 
of the three elements contribute to the organic 
mechanism. They include number of sub- 
stances, variety of substances, variety of 
properties, variety of reactions, facility of 
reactions (instability), and the remarkable 
relationship between carbon dioxide and water 
and the carbohydrates. And they insure 
that extreme variety of chemical relationship 
which especially fits organic substances, once 
created, to be, throughout the various forms 
of life, the source of still other bodies, and the 
source of energy, by means of far-reaching 
chemical changes rapidly accomplished. 

G 

HYDROLYSIS 

In the course of digestion the principal 
foodstuffs, carbohydrates, fats, and proteins, 
undergo a series of changes which are substan- 
tially the same for all. Such processes are 
known as hydrolytic cleavage, or more loosely 



CHEMISTRY 233 

as hydrolysis. Essentially they amount to 
successive splittings of the large molecules 
of the native substances, each cleavage being 
•accompanied by the addition of a molecule 
of water, until finally from starches and like 
substances the simple sugars like glucose result; 
from the fats, fatty acids and glycerine; 
from the proteins, the so-called amino acids. 
The cleavage of fats closely resembles the 
hydrolysis of a simple ester; the cleavage 
of proteins and carbohydrates a little more 
remotely resembles the same process. Accord- 
ingly, the hydrolysis of the simplest ester, 
methyl formate, may serve as an illustration 
of the nature of the reaction: — 

H-C-O-fCHs-l-HO ;h = H-C-0-H-|-H-0-CH, 

II : i II 

o ' ' o 

This process is nothing less than the typical 
reaction between water and organic sub- 
stances. Accordingly, it is not surprising that 
such reactions are by no means confined to 
the digestion of food. Once formed, the prod- 
ucts of digestion are absorbed, the more 
readily because of their simplicity, and, also 
because of their simplicity, they carry into 
the body no trace of the organism in which 
they previously existed. But, if they are to 



234 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

be built up into the tissues of the animal, 
they must now be turned back into such fats, 
carbohydrates, and proteins as are character- 
istic of his physical structure ; into glycogen, 
haemoglobin, fibrinogen, etc. Accordingly, 
they undergo a process which is the exact 
reverse of the digestive change, in the simple 
case: — 



H-C-0-H + H-0-CHs = H-C-0-CHa + H-0-H 

II II 

o o 



But this is by no means the end of the matter. 
For example, glycogen thus formed in the 
liver from the glucose of the portal blood is 
soon torn down to glucose again. More- 
over, there are a host of other special cases 
of the same hydrolytic cleavage, or the re- 
verse process, in mammalian physiology. For 
instance, the formation of hippuric acid frord 
benzoic acid and glycocoll, and the formation 
of urea itself from ammonium carbonate 
belong to this same class. In fact, such 
reactions make up a large part of all the 
chemical - changes which take place within 
the organism. 

It must not be imagined, however, that 
hydrolytic cleavages are infrequent outside 
the organism, or that the types of processes 



CHEMISTRY 235 

which occur within the organism are the only 
ones of this class. There is no more common 
and universally important reaction in organic 
chemistry, and many compounds and classes 
of compounds which have nothing to do with 
the organism undergo hydrolysis. Moreover, 
generally speaking, all reactions of this class 
are very similar in their principal character- 
istics, resembling one another both dynami- 
cally and statically. Spontaneously they oc- 
cur not at all, or very slowly. Under the 
influence of enzymes, of acids, and of alkalies 
acting catalytically, that is to say, facilitating 
the process without in the end taking part 
in it, much as oil facilitates the action of a 
machine, they progress rather slowly and 
very smoothly. By-products are not formed ; 
the reactions are simple, uncomplicated, and 
reliable. Hence they enable the organism to 
make all sorts of rearrangements and recon- 
structions of chemical substances efficiently 
and without loss of material. 

The chief cause of such traits in hydrolysis 
is the fact that the energy transformation 
which accompanies the process is almost 
exactly nil. For it has been found in general 
that chemical reactions which liberate much 
energy are violent, hard to regulate, often 
complicated by intricate side reactions, and 



236 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 



complete. In contrast, those which are with- 
out energy change generally proceed smoothly, 
slowly, and without complication to a state of 
equilibrium in which the reaction is very in- 
complete.^ Under the latter circumstances 
slight changes of conditions make possible 
a reversal of the delicately balanced process; 
the reaction can be made to run in either 
direction at will. 

The absence of transformation of energy 
accompanying hydrolysis may be illustrated 
by a few typical cases chosen from the data 
of simple substances. 





Calokies 


Feb Cent 


Cane sugar 

Milk sugar 

Maltose 

Ethyl acetate 


+1.9 
+4.3 
-3.7 
+2.0 


0.2 
0.3 
0.3 
0.3 



Such measurements of heats of reaction fall 
well within the limits of error of the method 
of investigation, and there can be no doubt 
that in all such cases the heat of reaction is 
so small that it cannot be detected by the 
ordinary methods of measurement.^ 

1 van't Hoff, "Acht Vortrage Uber Physikalische Chemie." 
Brunswick, 1902, Lecture 6. 

''■ Stohmann, Zeitschrift fiir Physikalische Chemie, II, 29, 
1888 (see also Ostwald's "Lekrbuch. der Allgemeinen Che- 



CHEMISTRY 237 

Thus it is evident that the process possesses 
another advantage. In the course of such 
rearrangements no energy is lost. This con- 
clusion is thoroughly confirmed by the studies 
of the energy transformations of metabolism. 
The body may carry on such processes as it 
will, in the greatest variety and complexity, 
rearranging and modifying its chemical struc- 
tures to any extent, and there will never be 
an appreciable wastage of precious material 
or of equally precious energy in the process. 

This process, as we have seen, is the char- 
acteristic reaction between water and the 
organic compounds. As such it is necessarily 
one of our chief concerns ; its maximal fitness 
as a means of regulation, and otherwise, there- 
fore assumes real importance in the present 
discussion. 

II 

INORGANIC CHEMISTRY 

With the survey of organic chemistry we 
have exhausted the compounds of carbon; 

mie"). These data are the most accurate now in existence 
which permit an estimate of the heat of hydrolysis of non- 
nitrogenous compounds. Numerous studies of protein deriv- 
atives from Fischer's laboratory prove that the facts are 
the same for these substances, and direct measurements 
confirm the measurements of heats of combustion. 



238 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

not so those of hydrogen and oxygen. In 
ajmost equal frequency the latter elements 
take part in the reactions of inorganic chem- 
istry, and help to form its molecular struc- 
tures. As an illustration of their importance 
in this department of the science I have 
counted the compounds and the classes of 
compounds mentioned in the table of con- 
tents of the second edition of Erdmann's 
" Lehrbuch der Anorganischen Chemie." In all 
435 substances are referred to; of these 259, 
approximately 60 per cent, contain oxygen; 
130, or 30 per cent, contain hydrogen. There 
seems to be little doubt that this is a fair 
test, for the work is compendious, and all im- 
portant substances and classes of substances 
are mentioned. Even if the acids, and the 
small number of bodies which are referred to 
in connection with their water of crystalli- 
zation, be eliminated from the above count 
the great importance of the two elements 
remains clearly evident. 

Only about one fourth of all the compounds 
mentioned contain neither hydrogen nor oxy- 
gen. A very large proportion of these con- 
sist of the chlorides, bromides, iodides, sul- 
phides, fluorides, and other similar binary 
compounds, whose importance certainly does 
not depend upon the variety of chemical 



CHEMISTRY 239 

reactions into which they may enter, while 
their formation unquestionably does depend 
upon the intervention of both hydrogen and 
oxygen. All told, the chemical substances 
which contain neither carbon, nor hydrogen, 
nor oxygen make up only a few per cent of 
known bodies. 

It is also clear that an especially large pro- 
portion of the most active inorganic com- 
pounds contain either hydrogen or oxygen. 
All acids contain hydrogen; most of them 
oxygen as well. All bases contain oxygen. 
Moreover, the most important classes of re- 
actions of inorganic chemistry are probably 
oxidations and reductions, and the formation 
of salts from acids and bases. In such pro- 
cesses both oxygen and hydrogen are con- 
cerned. 

In addition to the oxides and resulting 
bases and acids, a few other important sub- 
stances which contain hydrogen or oxygen 
may be cited : ozone O3, hydrogen peroxide 
II2O2, ammonia NH3, hydrazine N2H4, hydrox- 
ylamine NH2OH, sulphuretted hydrogen H2S, 
hydrochloric acid HCl, nitrosyl chloride NOCl, 
thionyl chloride SOCI2, phosgene COCI2, phos- 
phine PH3, phosphorus oxychloride POCI3, 
arsine AsHs. Such compounds, and many 
other similar ones, are of great importance on 



240 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

account of the variety of chemical processes 
into which they can enter. They make up 
the active agents of inorganic chemistry, and 
it is safe to assume that their activity depends 
in great part upon the properties of oxygen 
and hydrogen. 

The importance of oxygen and hydrogen 
in inorganic chemistry possesses a double 
significance in the present inquiry. In the 
first place it provides further confirmation 
of the view that the elements which make 
up water and carbon dioxide are unique. For 
the data of inorganic chemistry prove that 
hydrogen and oxygen are likely to confer 
great chemical activity wherever they are, 
and that they are quite unrivaled in this 
respect. Secondly, the occurrence of hydrogen 
and oxygen as primary factors of the metabolic 
process and as the chief constituents of the 
environment and of the living organism enables 
the latter to make use of other elements at * 
need. Without hydrogen and oxygen, op- 
portunities for the introduction of such other 
elements into the physiological processes would 
be necessarily much restricted, and in many 
cases the physiological utility of compounds 
containing the elements of inorganic chemistry 
is very great. 

Chlorophyll, for example, contains mag- 



CHEMISTRY 241 

nesium, and it is thought that the process of 
reduction in the leaf may depend upon the 
characteristic properties of this element; at 
all events, in organic chemistry, magnesium, 
when employed in Grignard's reaction, is one 
of the most eflfective agents to accomplish 
reductions. 

In like manner, haemoglobin contains iron, 
and the capacity of haemoglobin to unite 
with oxygen, and as oxyhaemoglobin to carry 
it from the lungs to the tissues is unquestion- 
ably due to the chemical behavior of that 
metal. Other similar metallic elements, no- 
tably copper in the class of compounds known 
as haemocyanines, fulfill a similar function in 
lower animals. 

Phosphorus in organic union is an essential 
constituent of a great variety of the chemical 
structures of living organisms, — the nucleic 
acids, which appear to be not less important 
than fats, carbohydrates, and proteids them- 
selves in both animal and plant cells, contain 
phosphorus as an essential constituent. Thus 
phosphorus follows close upon nitrogen, after 
carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, as structural 
material in biological chemistry. This same 
element also occurs in many other compounds, 
the simplest derivative of such bodies being 
glycerophosphoric acid. 



242 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 
CH2OH 



CHOH 

I 

^x /0-H 



qH 



a compound of phosphorus, hydrogen, and 
oxygen with glycerine. 

Sulphur is a constituent of the proteins, 
and occurs in many other important com- 
pounds. In the metabolic process of the 
animal sulphur is converted from a derivative 
of hydrogen sulphide, HgS, by oxidation, into 
sulphuric acid, H2SO4, and in the plant the 
process is reversed. 

Iodine occurs in the thyroid and in many 
marine organisms. The availability of this 
element depends upon its existence in nature 
as iodides, that is to say, upon its capacity* 
to unite with hydrogen to form hydriodic 
acid, HI. Finally, it is the analogous com- 
pound of chlorine with hydrogen, hydro- 
chloric acid, which contributes acidity to the 
gastric juice. 

This list might be much further extended, 
but I think that the nature of the case is now 
established. The conclusion seems inevitable 



CHEMISTRY 243 

that active, diverse, and important inorganic 
substances usually contain oxygen or hydro- 
gen, and that it is the union of other elements 
with these two which renders them available 
and useful to the organism. 

Ill 

THERMOCHEMISTRY 

Every chemical change consists in simul- 
taneous rearrangements of matter and energy. 
The true nature of the chemical process is to 
be sought neither in the one nor in the other 
of these two phenomena, but in both together ; 
and properly energy is as much the chemist's 
concern as matter itself. 

Thus far in the present investigation, con- 
siderations regarding energy have been avoided 
except in the case of hydrolytic cleavages, and 
these constitute a unique class of reactions. 
No other large and important class is char- 
acterized by inappreciable heat of reaction, 
for it is as heat that chemical energy commonly 
manifests itself when liberated. It is evident, 
however, in accordance with the fundamental 
postulates, that the organism must have 
energy to actuate as well as matter to form 
its mechanism. Therefore the nature of the 
energy transformations, which make up one 



244 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

aspect of the chemical reactions into which 
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen enter, must be 
now noticed. 

It has been shown above that the one pos- 
sible chemical process by means of which any- 
thing can be made out of the primary con- 
stituents of the environment is reduction, — 
the more or less complete tearing off of oxygen 
from carbon and hydrogen atoms in the mole- 
cules of carbon dioxide and water. As a 
function of the extent of the reduction the 
energy change involved in the process will 
vary. In all cases, however, the process is 
accompanied by large absorption of heat, as 
the following table of the energy absorbed 
per gram of the resulting substance, when 
reduction begins with water and carbonic 
acid, may indicate: — 



H3 


34.5 Cal 


c 


8.1 


CH4 


13.3 


CH30H 


5.3 


HCHO 


4.2 


CgHiaOe 


3.74 


CO 


2.4 


HCOOH 


1.4 



Such new compounds hold their energy 
only so long as they persist unchanged, and 



CHEMISTRY 245 

upon oxidation they yield it all back again, 
just as water vapor on condensing yields 
back the latent heat which it has taken up 
during evaporation. In this manner, every 
gram of glucose or other monosaccharide is 
necessarily a temporary depository of solar 
energy amounting to about 3.74 calories, 
taking up just that amount of energy when 
synthesized by chlorophyll, yielding it back 
when burned in the muscle. 

Compounds of carbon and hydrogen are 
especially well qualified to be reservoirs of 
energy which may be liberated by oxidation, 
as the following table shows: — 

HEATS OF COMBUSTION OP ELEMENTS PER GRAM 



Hydrogen 


34.5 Cal 


Carbon 


8.1 


Sulphur (to SO2) 


2.3 


Sulphur (to SO3) 


3.2 


Nitrogen (to NO2) 


0.2 


Phosphorus 


5.9 


Boron 


12.3 


Silicon 


3.3 


Potassium 


1.3 


Calcium 


3.3 


Aluminium 


7.0 



Hydrogen, it will be seen, far exceeds any 
other element in the amount of heat that it 



246 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

yields upon oxidation; carbon is surpassed 
by but one other element, boron. Although 
necessarily a good deal of this heat cannot be 
stored in the compounds of the two elements 
which still contain some oxygen, yet enough 
remains to make the common constituents 
of the organism greater reservoirs of energy 
than most of the other elements themselves, 
far greater than compounds of any other 
elements. Thus the heat of combustion of 
carbohydrates ranges from about 3.7 calories 
to about 4.2 calories per gram, that of the 
proteins from about 5 calories to about 6 
calories, that of the fats from about' 9.2 calo- 
ries to' about 9.5 calories. On account of the 
small quantity of oxygen and the large quan- 
tity of hydrogen which they contain, the fats 
are a richer source of energy than carbon 
itself, or than any other element except hydro- 
gen and boron. 

There remains one other equally important 
consideration to be dealt with: the very great 
energy change which is involved in processes 
of oxidation and reduction compared with 
other chemical processes. The following 
table, showing the amount of heat liberated 
in the process of formation of certain binary 
compounds from their several elements, illus- 
trates the case: — 







CHEMISTRY 


24 




HEATS OF 


FORMATION 




H20 


3.83 Cal. 


CS2 


-0.25 Cal, 


COa 


2.22 




NaCl 


1.67 


HCl 


0.60 




LiCl 


2.20 


HF 


1.97 




NaBr 


0.87 


NH3 


1.23 




NaF 


2.64 


02^ ^2 


0.08 




NaaS 


1.14 


CCI4 


0.49 




SiH4 


-0.21 


PI3 


0.26 




SiFi 


2.31 


BCI3 


0.79 




NS 


-0.69 



Oxygen, as will be seen, far surpasses the 
other chemical elements (except fluorine) in 
the amount of energy liberated in the process 
of its chemical union with other substances. 

Accordingly, it may be concluded that, on 
the whole, oxidations are the best chemical 
source of energy; reductions the best means 
of storing energy by chemical processes; 
and that among oxidations and reductions 
those of hydrogen especially, and then those 
of carbon, are associated with the largest 
energy transformations. 

This is the last argument which I have to 
present, but it is one of the most potent. The 
very chemical changes, which for so many 
other reasons seem to be best fitted to be- 
come the processes of physiology, turn out to 
be the very ones which can divert the greatest 



248 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

flood of energy into the stream of life; and 
these are the reactions automatically provided 
for by the cosmic process. 

From the materialistic and the energetic 
standpoint alike, carbon, hydrogen, and oxy- 
gen, each by itself, and all taken together, 
possess unique and preeminent chemical fit- 
ness for the organic mechanism. They alone 
are best fitted to form it and to set it in motion; 
and their stable compounds, water and car- 
bonic acid, which make up the changeless 
environment, protect and renew it, forever 
drawing fresh energy from the sunshine. 



CHAPTER VII 
THE ARGUMENT 

THE statement of evidence for the bio- 
logical fitness of the environment is at 
length completed. Whatever favorable prop- 
erties of water, carbonic acid, and the com- 
pounds of the three elements, whatever results 
favorable to life, I have succeeded in finding, 
have been set forth. 

Now, therefore, we may return to the exam- 
ination of this evidence in the manner sug- 
gested in Chapter II. We may inquire into 
the exhaustiveness of the preceding treatment 
of important physical properties, seeking to 
discover what things have been overlooked. 
Thus it may be possible to decide the weighty 
question whether another group of elements 
can possess another group of equally impor- 
tant properties. Next, we may consider if 
there be other elements or compounds which 
rival carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, water and 
carbonic acid, in the qualities which make 
these fit for the organic mechanism, taking 
such properties as a whole. Unfortunately, 

249 



250 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

in adopting this somewhat rigid logical 
method, tedious and perhaps unnecessary 
repetition is involved, but the advantages of 
care at this stage of the inquiry seem to be 
very great, for it is not easy to survey so 
large a field, and at best certainty that impor- 
tant oversights have been avoided is obviously 
impossible. For example, peculiarities like the 
anomalous expansion of water, or the relation 
of carbonic acid and water to the carbohy- 
drates are not to be foreseen. On the other 
hand, the more general characteristics of 
matter are well known and, for the most part, 
must reveal themselves to diligent search. 

I 

ANALYSIS OF THE EVIDENCE 

First the natural phenomena which seem to 
be concerned in fitness may be brought to- 
gether analytically, and their effect briefly 
summarized. 

NATURAL PHENOMENA WHICH PROMOTE FITNESS 
IN THE ENVIRONMENT 

I. The occurrence of great quantities of 
water and carbon dioxide outside 
the solid crust of an astronomical 
body. 



THE ARGUMENT 251 

II. Properties of Water. 

a. Specific Heat. 

b. Freezing Point. 

c. Latent Heat of Fusion. 

d. Latent Heat of Vaporization. 

e. Vapor Tension. 

/. (Thermal Conductivity.) 
g. Expansion before Freezing. 
h. (Expansion in Freezing.) 
i. Solvent Power. 
j. Dielectric Constant. 
k. Ionizing Power. 
I. Surface Tension. 
HI. Properties of Carbon Dioxide. 

a. Solubility in Water. 

b. Ionization Constant. 
IV. ' Properties of the Ocean. 

a. Number and Variety of Constituents. 

b. Quantity of Dissolved Material. 

c. Mobility. 

d. Constancy of Temperature. 

e. Constancy of Osmotic Pressure. 
/. Constancy of Alkalinity. 

g. Constancy of Composition. 
V. Chemical Properties of Carbon, Hydro- 
gen, and Oxygen. 

a. Number of Compounds. 

b. Variety of Compounds. 

c. Complexity of Compounds. 



252 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

d. Number of Reactions. 

e. Variety of Reactions. 

/. Complexity of Reactions. 

g. The Evenness and Lack of Energy 
Change of the Process of Hydro- 
lytic Cleavage. 

h. The Chemical Relationship of Car- 
bonic Acid and Water to the Sugars. 

i. Instability of the Sugars. 

j. Variety and Reactions of the Sugars. 

h. Heats of Reaction in Organic Chemis- 
try. 

I. The Number and Variety of Com- 
pounds and Reactions of Oxygen 
with Other Elements. 

m. The Number and Variety of Com- 
pounds and Reactions of Hydro- 
gen with Other Elements. 

All the properties or other phenomena 
noted in the above table (except II /, and II h) 
are in character or in magnitude either unique 
or nearly so, and are in their effect favorable 
to the organism as defined in the fundamental 
postulates. Indeed, they constitute or bring 
about an extraordinary set of conditions 
favorable to life, — ubiquity, abundance, va- 
riety, stability, mobility, constancy of composi- 
tion, and in variance of physico-chemical con- 



THE ARGUMENT 25S 

ditions in the environment ; number, variety, 
complexity, adaptability, availability, activity, 
and richness in energy of the substances which 
take part in the metabolic processes and in 
the chemical and physical formation of the 
organism ; constancy of physico-chemical con- 
ditions, such as temperature, alkalinity, col- 
loidal disperseness, etc., within the organism; 
the ejQSciency of many physiological processes ; 
the availability of electrical forces, etc. 

In short, by many independent and united 
actions the above catalogued natural char- 
acteristics of the environment promote and 
favor complexity, regulation, and metabo- 
lism, the three fundamental characteristics 
of life upon which all our discussion has 
been based. 

II 

THE EXHAUSTIVENESS OF THE TREATMENT 

One manner of judging the completeness 
with which different types of phenomena and 
properties, different elements and compounds, 
have been considered in the descriptive chap- 
ters preceding is to glance at the several 
departments of physical science, — chemistry, 
mechanics, heat, sound, light, magnetism, elec- 
tricity, and physical chemistry. 



254 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

In setting out to consider physical and 
chemical properties we may perhaps begin 
with chemical phenomena in the narrowest 
sense. Such phenomena, depend, according 
to the atomic theory, upon rearrangements 
of atoms within molecules. They result in 
the conversion of individual substances into 
one another, and they are accompanied by 
rearrangements of energy. 

In the first place, it is to be noted that 
enormous quantities of carbon, hydrogen, 
and oxygen, as water and carbonic acid, are, 
during a very long period of time, apparently 
inevitable constituents of the atmosphere of 
an astronomical body of sufficient size, after 
cooling has led to the formation of a crust. 
Further, it has been shown that in number, 
variety, complexity of forms and changes, and 
in the magnitude of the accompanying trans- 
formations of energy the known substances 
made up of carbon and hydrogen, and those 
made up of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen far 
surpass the compounds of any other elements. 
Likewise the known compounds of oxygen and 
hydrogen with other elements are. the most 
numerous and important among inorganic 
substances. Two peculiarities of the carbon 
compounds, the formation and properties of 
the carbohydrates, and the nature of the pro- 



THE ARGUMENT 255 

cess known as hydrolytic cleavage, add to this 
list of chemical characteristics which make 
for fitness. 

These facts appear to indicate that in gen- 
eral chemical behavior, in certain special 
characteristics as well, and in the magnitude 
of the quantity of energy rendered available 
by their chemical changes, the elements car- 
bon, hydrogen, and oxygen are uniquely and 
most highly fitted to be the stuff of which life 
is formed and of the environment in which it 
exists. 

Mechanics has taken a place subordinate 
to chemistry in the present work. Neverthe- 
less, it has been noted that the unique proper- 
ties of water are the cause of the admirable 
mobility of that substance and of the whole 
environment, and therefore of the dynamical 
processes of geology, meteorology, etc., in- 
cluding soil formation ; that it is surface ten- 
sion which holds water in the soil ; that the 
eflScacy of water as a means of dissolving the 
greatest variety of substances in the greatest 
amounts, makes possible high osmotic pres- 
sures, as well as mobility of all the elements ; 
and there are a host of other considerations 
which have been discussed above. In all 
such cases the properties of water have been 
found to be favorable influences for the wel- 



256 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

fare of the organism. Considering the com- 
parative unimportance of mechanics in rela- 
tion to the fundamental postulates, it seems 
clear that this department has not been over- 
looked. 

Thermal processes and thermal effects are 
perhaps more conspicuous in the table. The 
thermochemical characteristics of organic com- 
pounds and the thermal properties of water 
are all very favorable to life. Stores of heat 
for the organism, constancy of temperature 
of both organism and environment, the per- 
manence of bodies of water, and a multitude 
of other most important results flow from these 
properties and bear witness to their unique 
fitness. 

Sound, light, and magnetism have not been 
considered, for they appear to bear only a 
secondary relation to the fundamental postu- 
lates. 

In electricity no phenomena are more im- 
portant than those of ionization in solution. 
To bring about ionization and thus make 
possible electrochemical processes, water is 
the very best medium, and the possibility of 
such processes is probably necessary to the 
organic mechanism. 

In addition to the topics of physical chem- 
istry already referred to under chemistry 



THE ARGUMENT 257 

and the several departments of physics, the 
colloids and the ions of hydrogen and hydroxyl 
remain to be mentioned. It has been shown 
that the properties of water are exceptionally 
favorable to the existence and stability of 
colloidal systems ; also that the properties of 
carbonic acid result in automatic regulation 
of the cohcentration of hydrogen and hydroxyl 
ions in the ocean and in the organism. 

So far, then, as It is possible to judge by 
telling over the departments of physical 
science, our examination of physical and chem- 
ical properties has not been incomplete. 

This conclusion may be further tested with 
the help of the ideas which underlie Willard 
Gibbs's " Phase Rule." ^ According to this rule, 
the condition of equilibrium in any material 
system depends upon the number of its com- 
ponents, the number of its phases, temperature, 
pressure, and, in general, the concentrations 
of all the components. Without entering 
upon an explanation of the exact mathemat- 
ical notions which determine the meaning 
of the terms " component " and " phase " it 
will here suflBce to say that in general the 
number of components increases as the num- 
ber of separate chemical individuals increases, 

1 See, for instance, Findlay, "The Phase Rule and its 
Applications." London, 1911, 3d ed. 



258 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

and that a phase is any solid, liquid, or gas- 
eous part of the whole system which possesses 
homogeneity of composition. For instance, 
if a system is made up of sand, salt solution, 
ice, and aqueous vapor, each of these separate 
parts, in that it is homogeneous, is a phase. 

Now the properties of water have the result 
that more readily than other substances it 
exists simultaneously and in large quanti- 
ties in the three phases of solid, liquid, and 
gas as ice, water, and aqueous vapor. This 
depends upon the high latent heats of fusion 
and vaporization, the high freezing point of 
water, and its vapor tension. Water en- 
hances the complexity of the environment, 
and is one principal factor in the mobility of 
the environment as a whole. Further, it 
makes for stability ; other things being equal, 
the greater the number of phases, the less the 
tendency to change. Among phases the dis- 
perse colloidal type is unique and of very 
great importance — almost the sole basis, 
indeed, of great physical complexity — and, 
as above shown, the peculiar properties of 
water highly favor the colloidal condition. 

The solvent power of water much increases 
the number of components which may enter 
into a system of which it is a part ; hence the 
large number of components of sea water. 



THE AEGUMENT 259 

blood plasma, etc. The variety of compounds, 
both organic and inorganic, which contain 
carbon, hydrogen, or oxygen also causes enor- 
mous increase in the number of components 
of biological systems like, protoplasm. 

The effects of the properties of water above 
enumerated to regulate temperature are almost 
too numerous to mention. The specific heat 
of water, its latent heats of fusion and vapori- 
zation, and the high freezing point all con- 
tribute to the restriction of temperature range 
within the organism, in the waters, and over 
the whole surface of the earth. The vapor 
pressure of water has been shown to possess 
great and exceptional variability with change 
of temperature. This is the most impor- 
tant property of water meteorologically, and 
is the necessary condition for its ample cir- 
culation. The ratio between the gas pressure 
of carbonic acid and its concentration in 
water (absorption eoeflScient) has been shown 
to be the great factor in establishing the mo- 
bility of that substance. The total atmos- 
pheric pressure has not entered into our dis- 
cussion, for it seems to have no important 
special relation to the properties of the three 
elements. 

In short, the properties of water and of the 
carbon compounds provide for number, va- 



260 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

riety, and complexity of phases and compo- 
nents, and for constancy of temperature, while 
equally important and unique relationships 
between the properties of water and carbonic 
acid and their vapor or gas pressures exist, 
and exert much influence upon the meteoro- 
logical cycle. 

Thus, judged by the phase rule, the actual 
characteristics of the environment may be 
shown to contribute the factors which make for 
complexity and regulation of material sys- 
tems. Now there can be no doubt that, when 
feasible, the ideal method — from the physico- 
chemical point of view — to describe a ma- 
terial system is in the terms of the phase 
rule.^ Hence the characteristics which that 

* "Ten years after the law of mass action was propounded 
by Guldberg and Waage, Willard Gibbs, Professor of Physics 
in Yale University, showed how, in a perfectly general manner, 
free from all hypothetical assumptions as to the molecular 
condition of the participating substances, all cases of equi- 
librium could be surveyed and grouped into classes, and how 
similarities in the behavior of apparently different kinds of 
systems, and differences in apparently similar systems, could 
be explained. 

" As the basis of his theory of equilibria, Gibbs adopted the 
laws of thermodynamics, a method of treatment which had 
first been employed by Horstmann. In deducing the law of 
equilibrium, Gibbs regarded a system as possessing only three 
independently variable factors — temperature, pressure, and 
the concentration of the components of the system — and he 
enunciated the general theorem now usually known as the 



THE ARGUMENT 261 

rule contemplates are in certain respects the 
most important of characteristics. Accord- 
ingly the above test is a valuable indication 
of the adequacy of the preceding analysis of 
physical and chemical properties. 

In order if possible to discover the nature 
of such properties of matter as may have been 
omitted in our study of fitness, I have ex- 
amined the index of Landolt and Bornstein's 
" Physikalisch-chemischen Tabellen," a very 
extensive and comprehensive work. In addi- 
tion to information regarding the arbitrary 
units of physical science, I find mention of the 
following properties which have not been 
considered in the present discussion: — 

The Mechanical Equivalent of Heat. 

The Dimensions of the Angles of Crystals. 

The Refraction of Light. 

Compressibility. 

The Dimensions of the Molecules of Gases. 

Elasticity. 

The Electromagnetic Rotation of the Plane 

of Polarization of Light. 
Color. 

Phase Rvle, by wliich he defined the conditions of equilibrium 
as a relationship between the number of what are called the 
phases and the components of the system." — Findlay, 
"The Phase Rule and its Applications." London, 1911, 3d 
ed., p. 8. 



262 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

Viscosity. 

Torsion. 

The Velocity of the Molecules of Gases. 

Hardness. 

Magnetism. 

The Velocity of Light. 

Optical Activity. 

Friction. 

The Velocity of Sound. 

The Wave Length of Light. 

The Length of the Path of a Gaseous Particle. 

To these may be added the phenomena of 
radioactivity, etc. 

It is clear that in the present state of 
knowledge the consideration of most of these 
properties is uncalled for. However, it may 
perhaps be noted in passing that the com- 
pressibility of water is remarkably small, that 
of protoplasm even less.^ Hence even great 
changes in pressure do not readily damage the 
organism, and, indeed, a frog's muscle appears 
to function normally after undergoing a 
pressure of 500 atmospheres.^ Further, it is 
of decided consequence for many reasons 
that the optical properties of water are such 

* Henderson and Brink, American Journal of Physiology, 
XXI, 248, 1908. 

* Henderson, Leland, and Means, American Journal of 
Physiology, XXn, 48, 1908. 



THE ARGUMENT 263 

that light readily penetrates it to considerable 
depths. As for color, landscape and modern 
chemical industry alike testify to the availa- 
bility of carbon compounds as its source. 

A final test of thoroughness may be based 
upon a consideration of other compounds 
and elements. Accepting the decision that 
no other properties can be so important to 
an active, complex, and, regulated mechan- 
ism as those possessed nearly or quite as 
maxima by water, carbonic acid, and the 
compounds of the three elements, what are 
the possibilities of obtaining the same char- 
acteristics from other substances ? 

So far as chemical substances are now 
known, the only compound which can be even 
considered on this score as a substitute for 
water in the environment is ammonia, and 
in many respects, no doubt, ammonia might 
serve as well.^ However, chemical processes 

' A full discussion of the properties of ammonia which qual- 
ify it as a substitute for water in the r61e of solvent and other- 
wise will be found in the article by E. C. Franklin, "The 
Ammonia System of Acids, Bases, and Salts," American Chem- 
ical Journal, Vol. 47, p. 285, 1912. In this paper the re- 
sults of a long series of investigations are brought together. 
Especially important for the present purpose are the intro- 
ductory remarks. "The many striking analogies between 
liquid ammonia and water as electrolytic solvents have been 
emphasized by the writer and his co-workers in papers which 
have appeared from time to time during the past decade. In 



264 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

being what they are, it is impossible to im- 
agine the presence of vast amounts of am- 
monia in an atmosphere, while the loss of 
the greater part of the energy which can be 
stored by tearing apart hydrogen and oxygen 
would be a very serious difficulty; but the 
loss of substantially all the incomparable 
chemical activity of oxygen is to all appear- 
ances an insurmountable obstacle to the sub- 
stitution of ammonia for water in biological 
processes. 

From time to time, loose discussion has 
arisen among chemists as to the possibility 
of substituting another element for carbon in 
the organic cycle. Such speculations have 
never been serious, but they have at least 

all those properties which, give to water its unique position 
among solvents, such as its abnormally high boiling poiat, 
its high specific heat, its high heat of volatiUzation, its high 
critical temperature and pressure, its high association con- 
stant, -its high dielectric constant, and its low boiling-point 
elevation constant, its power as an electrolytic solvent, and 
the facility with which it forms compounds with salts, liquid 
ammonia shows a remarkable similarity to water." 

" While the boiling point of liquid ammonia is 33.46° below 
zero, it stiU appears abnormally high when compared with 
the boiling temperatures of phosphine, arsine, stibine, me- 
thane, ethylene, hydrogen sulphide, hydrochloric acid, etc. 
The specific heat of liquid ammonia and the heat of fusion 
of the solid are greater than the corresponding constants 
for water or any other known substance, while its heat of 
volatilization, with the one exception of water, is the highest 



THE ARGUMENT 265 

demonstrated that very few elements, prob- 
ably only silicon, and perhaps boron, can 
even be imagined in such a r6Ie. It has, 
moreover, just been shown that there are 
many facts leading to the conclusion that 
only carbon among elements, and carbon itself* 
only in conjunction with hydrogen, has the 
power to form the skeletons of compounds 
numerous, complex, and varied like those of 
organic chemistry. But, apart from this 
conclusion, it is certain that silicon and boron 
could not be mobilized like carbon. Quartz, 

of any known liquid. The critical temperature of ammonia 
is abnormally high, and its critical pressure — the more char- 
acteristic constant — is higher than that of any other liquid 
exceptLQg water. Ammonia is an associated liquid, and its 
dielectric constant, though much below that of water, is still 
high when compared with that of non-electrolytic solvents. 
Its boiling-point elevation constant is the lowest of any 
known liquid, namely 3.4, as compared with 5.2 for water. 
In its tendency to unite with salts and other compounds, it 
probably exceeds water, since salts with ammonia of crystal- 
lization are perhaps even more numerously recorded in the 
literature than are salts with water of crystallization. As a 
solvent for salts it is generally much inferior to water, though 
some salts, for example the iodides and bromides of mercury, 
lead, and silver, dissolve very much more abundantly in 
ammonia than they do in water, and it far surpasses the latter 
solvent in its ability to dissolve the compounds of carbon. 
Finally it exhibits conspicuous power as an ionizing solvent, 
the more dilute ammonia solutions at 33.5° being very much 
better conductors of electricity than aqueous solutions of the 
same concentration at 18°." 



266 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

the oxide of silicon, is the most inert and 
immobile of rocks ; the oxide of boron is only 
less available as a movable constituent of the 
environment; and there is no other stable 
compound of either element which can be 
compared with carbonic acid for its mobility. 
It must be remembered that this property 
is the result of two independent characteris- 
tics of the latter substance, its gaseous na- 
ture, and the precise degree of its solubility 
in water. Finally, the regulation of the 
reaction of aqueous solutions by means of 
carbonic acid has to be taken into account. 

Hence it may be concluded that hydrogen, 
oxygen, and carbon, water and carbonic 
acid, are not to be rivaled in their own qual- 
ities, even as these cannot be balanced by 
others which they do not possess. 

On the whole, then, we niay believe that the 
physico-chemical characteristics of material 
systems and material processes have been com- 
prehensively examined in the course of the 
present study. Accordingly, we may finally 
conclude that the fitness of water, carbonic 
acid, and the three elements make up a unique 
ensemble of fitness for the organic mechanism. 
The search, however incomplete, has certainly 
not overlooked properties so important and 
so numerous, or compounds and elements so 



THE ARGUMENT 267 

unique, as those which have been considered 
and set forth. 

With the assurance that, in such measure 
as the present state of science permits, our 
study has been indeed exhaustive, a final 
argument arises. So far as we can see, all the 
properties of water, carbonic acid, and the 
three elements are fit, according to our defi- 
nition of fitness. There is nothing about these 
substances that is really and seriously inferior 
to the same thing in any other substance; 
and in all the subjects which we have reviewed 
not a single disability of the primary constit- 
uents of the environment has come to light. 

m 

SUMMAEY 

For the convenience of my readers the argu- 
ment which has been developed in the course 
of the preceding pages is here re-stated in 
outline. 

I. Fitness is a mutual or reciprocal 
relationship between the organ- 
ism and the environment. 
II. Life is a mechanism (froin the 
point of view of physical sci- 
ence) . Accordingly it must be — 



268 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

a. Complex (physically, chemically, 
physiologically) . 

h. Durable, hence well regulated 
physico-chemically. This con- 
clusion applies to — 

1. The Organism. 

2. The Environment. 

c. Endowed with a metabolism. 
Hence there must be ex- 
change with the environment 
of — 

1. Matter. 

2. Energy. 

III. The primary constituents of the natural 

environment are — 
a. Water. 
6. Carbonic acid. 

IV. In places where life is possible the 

primary constituents of the 
environment are necessarily 
and automatically formed in 
vast amounts by the cosmic 
process. 
V. Water, carbonic acid, and their con- 
stituent elements manifest 
great fitness for their biologi- 
cal r61e. 
a. Water possesses a great number of 
unique or very unusual prop- 



THE ARGUMENT 269 

erties, e.g. thermal proper- 
ties, solvent power, dielectric 
constant, surface tension, 
which together result in max- 
imal fitness in certain respects, 
e.g. mobility, ubiquity, con- 
stancy of temperature and 
richness of the environment, 
richness of the organism in 
chemical constituents, variety 
of chemical processes, electri- 
cal phenomena, colloidal phe- 
nomena. 

b. Carbon dioxide possesses very un- 

usual properties, e.g. mag- 
nitude of absorption coeflB- 
cient, strength as acid, which 
together result in maximal fit- 
ness in certain respects, e.g. 
mobility, ubiquity, richness of 
the environment and organ- 
ism in other elements and 
compounds, constancy of re- 
action, etc. 

c. Chemical compounds containing 

carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen 
possess unique properties, e.g. 
number, variety, complexity, 
activity, variety of chemical 



270 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

relations and reactions, heats 
of reaction, instability, etc., 
which together result in maxi- 
mal fitness in certain respects, 
e.g. as sources of matter and 
energy for the processes of 
metabolism, as sources of com- 
plex structures, as the means 
of establishing complex func- 
tions, etc. 
VI. Oceans are formed automatically in 

the cosmic process. 
VII. The ocean possesses unique properties, 
e.g. mobility, richness in dis- 
solved substances, durability, 
and stability of physico-chem- 
ical conditions, depending 
chiefly upon the properties of 
water and carbonic acid, which 
together result in maximal fit- 
ness in certain respects, e.g. 
as milieu, and as source of 
matter for the processes of 
metabolism, to moderate and 
equalize temperature, etc. 
VIII. The physical and chemical properties 
which have been taken into 
consideration include nearly 
all those which are known to 



THE ARGUMENT 271 

be of biological importance 
or which appear to be related 
to complexity, regulation, and 
metabolism. 

IX. There are no other compounds which 
share more than a small part 
of the qualities of fitness of 
water and carbonic acid; no 
other elements which share 
those of carbon, hydrogen, and 
oxygen. 
X. None of the characteristics of these 
substances is known to be 
unfit, or seriously inferior to 
the same characteristic in any 
other substance. 

XI. Therefore the fitness of the environ- 
ment is both real and unique. 

In drawing this final conclusion I mean to 
assert the following propositions : — 

I. The fitness of the environment is one 
part of a reciprocal relationship of which the 
fitness of the organism is the other. This 
relationship is completely and perfectly recip- 
rocal ; ^ the one fitness is not less important 

' This is not to be understood as an assertion that the rela- 
tionship is symmetrical. The fact is that each organism fits 
its particular environment, while the environment in its most 
general and universal characteristics fits the most general and 
universal characteristics of the organic mechanism. 



272 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

than the other, nor less invariably a constitu- 
ent of a particular case of biological fitness; 
it is not less frequently evident in the char- 
acteristics of water, carbonic acid, and the 
compounds of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen 
than is fitness from adaptation in the char- 
acteristics of the organism. 

II. The fitness of the environment results 
from characteristics which constitute a series 
of maxima — unique or nearly unique prop- 
erties of water, carbonic acid, the compounds 
of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen and the 
ocean — so numerous, so varied, so nearly 
complete among all things which are concerned 
in the problem that together they form cer- 
tainly the greatest possible fitness. No other 
environment consisting of primary constitu- 
ents made up of other known elements, or 
lacking water and carbonic acid, could possess 
a like number of fit characteristics or such 
highly fit characteristics, or in any manner 
such great fitness to promote complexity, 
durability, and active metabolism in the organic 
mechanism which we call life. 

It must not be forgotten that the possibility 
of such conclusions depends upon the universal 
character of physics and chemistry. Out of 
the properties of universal matter and the 
characteristics of universal energy has arisen 



THE ARGUMENT 273 

mechanism, as the expression of physico- 
chemical activity and the instrument of physico- 
chemical performance. Given matter, energy, 
and the resulting necessity that life shall be 
a mechanism, the conclusion follows that the 
atmosphere of solid bodies does actually pro- 
vide the best of all possible environments for 
life. 



CHAPTER VIII 
LIFE AND THE COSMOS 

I 

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF FITNESS 

A HALF century has passed since Darwin 
wrote "The Origin of Species," and once 
again, but with a new aspect, the relation 
between life and the environment presents 
itself as an unexplained phenomenon. The 
problem is now far different from what it was 
before, for adaptation has won a secure posi- 
tion among the greatest of natural processes, 
a position from which we may suppose it is 
certainly never to be dislodged; and natural 
selection is its instrument, even if, as many 
think, not the only one.^ Yet natural selec- 

' Natural selection remains still a vera causa in the origin 
of species; but the function ascribed to it is practically 
reversed. It exchanges its former supremacy as the supposed 
sole determinant among practically indefinite possibilities 
of structure and function, for the more modest position of 
simply accelerating, retarding, or terminating the process of 
otherwise determined change. It furnishes the brake rather 
than the steam or the rails for the journey of life ; or in better 

274 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 275 

tion does but mold the organism ; the environ- 
ment it changes only secondarily, without 
truly altering the primary quality of environ- 
mental fitness. This latter component of fit- 
ness, antecedent to adaptations, a natural 
result of the properties of matter and the 
characteristics of energy in the course of 
cosmic evolution, is as yet nowise accounted 
for. It exists, however, and rtaust not be 
dismissed as gross contingency. The mind 
balks at such a view. Coincidences so nu- 
merous and so remarkable as those which 
we have met in examining the properties of 
matter as they are related to life, must be the 

metaptor, instead of guiding the ramifications of the tree 
of life, it would, in Mivart's excellent phrase, do little more 
than apply the pruning knife to them. In other words, its 
functions are mainly those of the third Fate, not the first, of 
Siva, not of Brahma. — Patbick Geddes and J. Arthur 
Thomson, "Evolution." New York, Home University Li- 
brary, 1911, p. 248. 

"But as my conclusions have lately been much misrep- 
resented, and it has been stated that I attribute the modifica- 
tion of species exclusively to natural selection, I may be 
permitted to remark that in the first edition of this work, 
and subsequently, I placed in a most conspicuous position — ■ 
namely, at the close of the Introduction — the following 
words : 'I am convinced that natural selection has been the 
main but not the exclusive means of modification.' " — 
Chables Dabwin, "The Origin of Species by Means of 
Natural Selection." New York, reprinted from the Sixth 
London Edition, The Home Library, pp. 495-496. 



276 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

orderly results of law, or else we shall have to 
turn them over to final causes ^ and the phi- 
losopher. 

There is, in truth, not one chance in count- 
less millions of millions that the many unique 
properties of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, 
and especially of their stable compounds 
water and carbonic acid, which chiefly make 
up the atmosphere of a new planet, should 
simultaneously occur in the three elements 
otherwise than through the operation of a 
natural law which somehow connects them 
together. There is no greater probability 
that these unique properties should be with- 
out due cause uniquely favorable to the 
organic mechanism. These are no mere acci- 
dents ; an explanation is to seek. It must be 
admitted, however, that no explanation is at 
hand. 

For the coincidence of properties itself a 
rational explanation based upon known laws 
of nature is perhaps conceivable. Attention 
has already been called to the interconnection 
of such properties as latent heat of vaporiza- 
tion, thermal conductivity, molecular vol- 
ume, the value of the van der Waals constant a, 

* Bacon compared final causes to vestal virgins. "Like 
them," he says, "they are dedicated to God, and are barren." 
— "The Advancement of Learning," Book IE, p. 142. 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 277 

the dielectric constant, and ionizing power. 
Further, it is of course most probable that 
numerous other properties are necessarily 
associated with these; and finally it is not 
surprising that elements of low atomic weight, 
which become concentrated in the atmos- 
phere on account of the small specific gravity 
of their gases, should possess unusual proper- 
ties, like high specific heat, or if one property 
leads to another, many unusual properties. 
Be that as it may, chemical science is still 
a very long way from accounting for the simul- 
taneous occurrence of the various character- 
istics of water, especially if we include such 
things as heat of formation, solvent power, 
the process of hydrolytic cleavage, the degree 
of solubility of carbon dioxide, the anomalous 
expansion on cooling near the freezing point, 
etc. 

There is, in fact, exceedingly little ground 
for hope that any single explanation of these 
coincidences can arise from current hypotheses 
and laws. But if to the coincidence of the 
unique properties of water we add that of the 
chemical properties of the three elements, a 
problem results under which the science of 
to-day must surely break down. If these 
taken as a whole are ever to be understood, it 
will be in the future, when research has pene- 



278 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

trated far deeper into the riddle of the prop- 
erties of matter. Nevertheless an explana- 
tion cognate with known laws is conceivable, 
and in the light of experience it would be 
folly to think it impossible or even improbable. 

Such an explanation once attained might, 
however, avail the biologist little; for a 
further problem, apparently more difficult, re- 
mains. How does it come about that each and 
all of these many unique properties should 
be favorable to the organic mechanism, should 
fit the universe for life ? And for the answer 
to this question existing knowledge provides, 
I believe, no clew.^ 

Thus regarded, our new form of the old 
riddle appears twofold, and, on that account, 
for the present the more unanswerable. There 
is but one immediate compensation for this 
complexity; a proof that somehow, beneath 
adaptations, peculiar and unsuspected relation- 
ships exist between the properties of matter 
and the phenomena of life; that the process 
of cosmic evolution is indissolubly linked 
with the fundamental characteristics of the 
organism; that logically, in some obscure 

* The great difficulty appears to be that there is here no 
possibility of iateraction. In our solar system, at least, the 
fitness of the environment far precedes the existence of the 
living organisms. 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS £79 

manner, cosmic and biological evolution are 
one. In short, we appear to be led to the 
assumption that the genetic or evolutionary 
processes, both cosmic and biological, when 
considered in certain aspects, constitute a 
single orderly development that yields results 
not merely contingent, but resembling those 
which in human action we recognize as pur- 
poseful. For, undeniably, two things which 
are related together in a complex manner by 
reciprocal fitness make up in a very real sense 
a unit, — something quite different from the 
two alone, or the sum of the two, or the re- 
lationship between the two.^ In human af- 
fairs such a unit arises only from the effective , 
operation of purpose. 

Now it is most clearly evident from the 
experience of centuries that ordinary teleology 
is dangerous doctrine in science, and in the 
past, accidents apart, it has been invariably 
sterile.'^ A statement that the legs have 
been formed for the purpose of locomotion, 
no doubt possesses scientific validity, if it be 
properly interpreted. But the real scientific 
concern is for the bones and muscles, the 

1 This appears logically to correspond with the "achop- 
ferische Synthase" of Wundt. 

^ Interesting discussions bearing upon this subject will 
be found in Pearson's well-known "Grammar of Science." 



280 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

tendons and ligaments which are employed 
in walking, and for the evolutionary process 
by which they have been adapted to their use. 
Nevertheless, biological science has not been 
able to escape the recognition of a natural 
formative tendency, which Darwin identified 
as the result of natural selection. And now 
it appears to be necessary to postulate a like 
tendency in the evolution of inorganic nature. 
We have found that the properties of the 
environment, biologically considered, present 
the same fitness as the properties of life. In 
each case the fitness results, at least in part, 
from an evolutionary process. Through the 
main lines of later development these are 
both known, though in both cases we stop 
short, perhaps far short, of the origins — the 
origin of life and the origin of the universe — 
if indeed they have ever originated.^ Can 
we then deny that in the one as in the other 
process there is a tendency, a bent, a direc- 
tion of flow or development ? ^ I think not, 

* It is hardly necessary to point out that the properties 
of the elements are themselves quite free from variation of 
any sort. 

^ "Alike in the external and the internal worlds, the man of 
science sees himself in the midst of perpetual changes of which 
he can discover neither the beginning nor the end. If, trac- 
ing back the evolution of things, he allows himself to enter- 
tain the hypothesis that the universe once existed in a dif- 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 281 

and it seems clear that the facts of physical 
science call for an explanation of the tend- 
ency to fitness of the environment in the 
same way that formerly the facts of biologi- 
cal science called for an explanation of the 
tendency to fitness of the organism. 

To postulate such a tendency is, however, 
in itself rather a philosophical than a scientific 
act, and so, too, must be conjecture regarding 
the origin of fitness. It is open to any one 
who may be so minded speculatively to enrich 
this tendency with characteristics of any sort. 
He may follow the lead of M, Bergson and 
call it impetus, with all which that term now 
implies, or he may turn to natural theology 
and regard it as proof of supernatural purpose 
and design, or he may find a model for teleolog- 
ical views in many other quarters. But one 
thing is certain, no such discussion, be it ever 
so important to the philosopher or the theo- 
logian, can directly contribute to scientific 
knowledge and comprehension of the under- 
lying phenomena, which are the sole positive 
and certain knowledge of the subject that 

fused form, he finds it utterly impossible to conceive how this 
came to be so ; and equally, if he speculates on the future, 
he can assign no limit to the grand succession of phenomena 
ever unfolding themselves before him." — Herbert Spencer, 
"First Principles." New York, reprinted from the Fifth 
London Edition, 1880. The Home Library, p. 57. 



282 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVHIONMENT 

we possess. For these facts an explanation of 
a different sort would be necessary, some- 
thing logically resembling natural selection, 
a natural process acting automatically through 
the properties of matter and energy, and 
never overstepping the limits of matter and 
energy, space and time; neither supernatural 
nor metaphysical, but purely mechanistic. 
Lacking any indication of what such an expla- 
nation may be, or how it is to be sought, we 
shall do well to turn to other considerations. 

II 

VITALISM 

All the skill of trained biologists, multi- 
plying and refining our knowledge of the 
forms of life, has even yet not availed to make 
clear the fundamental ideas of the science. 
Complexity exists here in the very nature 
of the case, and here, if at all, the complete 
subjugation of natural phenomena to physi- 
cal science may be expected to fail. 

In an earlier chapter the painful advance of 
physics and chemistry into the domain of 
biology has been sketched, and it was then 
shown how progress is beset with well-nigh 
insuperable obstacles. Thus it is that bio- 
logical thought has never attained to that 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 

finality which appears, at least by contrast, 
to characterize the greater body of opinions 
in physical science. 

In particular two extreme views, though 
often commingled, have continually striven 
for the mastery. The one of these, purely 
scientific and wholly positive, declares the 
phenomena of life to be, while partly unknown, 
ultimately knowable as manifestations of 
matter and energy. According to this view 
life is a mechanism and nothing more, in its 
positive scientific aspects at least. Without 
necessarily denying such assertions, the 
other view sees the unique properties of life 
to be dependent upon an equally unique 
force or tendency, operating in or through 
its physico-chemical organization. Either 
there is a peculiar vital force; or there is 
manifest in the organism a peculiar tendency ; 
or at any rate life patently follows the path 
into which it was propelled by an original 
impetus, peculiar to life, unknown in other 
phenomena. All such views inherently par- 
take of metaphysics, and have, therefore, 
ever aroused most determined opposition 
among the more orthodox devotees of science. 
Descartes appears to have been the first 
person to adopt the modern scientific attitude 
toward life, and from him a very large pro- 



284 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

portion of French biologists, as well as those 
of other nations like Huxley and DuBois- 
Reymond, derive their philosophical views 
concerning their science. Descartes per- 
ceived, apparently the first among the mod- 
erns, that the scientific explanation of vital 
phenomena must be a physical one, in terms 
of matter and motion. Far in advance of 
his time he applied such ideas to the nervous 
system, thereby establishing the nature of 
reflex action and invading the very citadel 
of animism. Outside natural science, how- 
ever, Descartes was far from being a mechan- 
ist. Since the early seventeenth century the 
conflict between vitalism and mechanism 
has ranged over the whole field of biology, and 
its history is most complicated. After Des- 
cartes, Lavoisier, by his studies of combustion 
within and without the body, made the next 
very important step. He was then followed 
by Liebig, Wbhler, and a host of later chem- 
ists. 

In the main the growth of exact science has 
steadily delivered over one vitalistic strong- 
hold after another to the mechanists. And 
though in the first flush of triumph mechan- 
ism has sometimes seemed to gain more in a 
particular engagement than later proved to 
be the case, vitalism has perhaps not had a 



LIFE AND. THE COSMOS 285 

positive success in three centuries. Such a 
history no doubt depends upon the very na- 
ture of the situation; upon the inherent and 
inevitable weakness, within the domain of 
science, of vitalistic views. 

Experience seems to show that the only kind 
of hypothesis which can find conclusive scien- 
tific support, or sound basis in the phenomena 
of matter and energy, is a mechanistic hy- 
pothesis. Exact and positive knowledge can 
demonstrate scientifically the truth of no 
other hypothesis with the finality which char- 
acterizes its proof of a mechanistic theory. 
Hence, so far as it ventures into the field of 
science at all, a vitalistic theory, when attacked 
by science, cannot effectually avail itself of 
the weapons of the assailant, and can never 
make a powerful counter attack. Its only 
method consists in a determined resistance, 
yielding little by little before the advance of 
positive knowledge and never gaining new 
territory, nor, except by accident, regaining 
what it has lost. Where this process is to 
end ; in what respect and how far life is des- 
tined ever to remain a scientific riddle, can 
only be surmised. 

The chief definitive triumphs of the mech- 
anistic view are two : the elimination of vital 
force and of a belief in peculiarity of chemical 



286 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

composition from organic chemistry, through 
the actual successes of the laboratory in new 
syntheses; and the final recognition, based 
upon understanding of the principle of the 
conservation of energy, that, whatever else 
"vital force" may be, it is certainly not 
force, — a form of energy. Thus limited, 
vitalism has been obliged to take refuge in a 
more restricted belief; namely, that the organ- 
ism is somehow governed by a directive 
tendency which, like an architect, presides 
over its development ; but that meanwhile the 
manifold processes of life and evolution go on 
within the world of physical science just as 
the work of the builder conforms to the laws 
of mechanics, though following the plan of the 
architect. 

This view has been well stated by another 
great Frenchman, Claude Bernard: "Life 
is the directive idea or evolutive force of the 
being ; . . . but it would be an error to believe 
that this metaphysical force operates after 
the manner of a physical force. . . . The 
metaphysical evolutive force by which we 
may characterize life is useless to science, 
because, existing apart from physical forces, 
it can exercise no influence upon them. Hence 
we must here separate the world of meta- 
physics from the world of positive phenomena 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 287 

which serves it as foundation, but which has 
nothing to contribute to it. . . . Summariz- 
ing, if we can define life with the help of a 
special metaphysical conception, it is none 
the less true that mechanical, physical, and 
chemical forces are the sole eflFective agents of 
the living organism, and that the physiologist 
has to take account of their action alone. We 
shall say with Descartes, 'One thinks meta- 
physically, but one lives and acts physically.' " ^ 
Thus restricted, vitalism can apply only to 
formative processes and the like, though the 
vitalist still sees in the state of the organism 

* "Claude Bernard, 'La Science Exp6rimentale,' 3me ed., 
p. 211 : 'La vie est I'idee directrice ou la force evolutive de 
I'fitre ; . . . mais I'erreur serait de croire que cette force meta- 
physique est active a la fa^on d'une force physique. . . . La 
force metaphysique evolutive par laquelle nous pouvons 
caract6riser la vie est inutile a la science, parce qu'etant en 
dehors des forces physiques elle ne peut exercer aucune in- 
fluence sur elles. H faut done ici separer le monde metaphy- 
sique du monde physique phenomenal qui lui sert de base, 
mais qui n'a rien k lui emprunter. . . . En resume, si nous 
pouvons definir la vie El I'aide d'une conception metaphysique 
sp6ciale, U n'en reste pas moins vrai que les forces meca- 
niques, physiques, et chimiques, sont seules les agents effectifs 
de I'organisme vivant et que le physiologiste ne peut avoir k 
tenir compte que de leur action. Nous dirons avec Descartes : 
on pense metaphysiquement, mais on vit et on agit physique- 
ment.' " — Mehz, "A History of European Thought in the 
Nineteenth Century." Edinburgh and London, 1903, Vol. 
n, pp. 379-380. 



288 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

effects of vitalistie control of its evolution, 
just as we perceive in a house not only the 
material structure, but the idea of the archi- 
tect. Further, the origin of life itself remains 
shrouded in mystery. Meanwhile, for most 
men physiology has become merely biophys- 
ics and biochemistry, and mechanism is un- 
doubtedly firmly established throughout every 
department of the science. 

Such limitations of the vitalistie hypothesis, 
damaging though they may be, do not de- 
stroy its claim to consideration as a controlling 
factor of the processes of evolution, embry- 
ology, repair, etc., in spite of the fact that 
even here it has suffered serious though less 
complete reverses. In 1859 Darwin's natural 
selection offered itself as a possible substi- 
tute for vitalism in a part or the whole of this 
field, and soon gained very general accept- 
ance. The survival of the fittest has now 
become in the judgment of all biologists an 
unquestioned force in the molding of life. 
Therefore, at best, but a restricted scope 
within its restricted field remains to vital- 
ism. 

From the earliest days of the new hypothesis 
it has been widely recognized that to accept 
the survival of the fittest as one factor in the 
adaptation of life to its environment is quite 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 289 

a different matter from proving it to be the 
only force which directs evolution. An early 
eulogy by Du Bois-Reymond upon the work 
of Darwin clearly discloses the nature of the 
situation: "Here is the knot, here the great 
difficulty that tortures the intellect which 
would understand the world. Whoever does 
not place all activity wholesale under the sway 
of Epicurean chance, whoever gives only his 
little finger to teleology, will inevitably arrive 
at Paley's discarded 'Natural Theology,' and 
so much the more necessarily, the more 
clearly he thinks and the more independent 
his judgment . . . the physiologist may define 
his science as a doctrine of the changes which 
take place in organisms from internal causes. 
. . . No sooner has he, so to speak, turned 
his back on himself than he discovers himself 
talking again of functions, performances, ac- 
tions, and purposes of the organs. The possi- 
bility, ever so distant, of banishing from na- 
ture its seeming purpose, and putting a blind 
necessity everywhere in the place of final' 
causes, appears, therefore, as one of the 
greatest advances in the world of thought, 
from which a new era will be dated in the 
treatment of these problems. To have some- 
what eased the torture of the intellect which 
ponders over the world-problem will, as long 



290 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

as philosophical naturalists exist, be Charles 
Darwin's greatest title to glory." ^ 

Recently the work of de Vries, "The Muta- 
tion Theory," has at length set forth a num- 
ber of trustworthy observations of the origin 
of species in plants with which natural selec- 
tion, in the restricted original sense at least, 
can have nothing to do. The origin of species 
by mutation consists in a sudden discontinu- 
ous variation, and selection, therefore, has 
no opportunity to operate upon a series of 
numerous minute variations which them- 
selves display no tendency of any sort what- 
ever, in the manner demanded by the Darwin- 
ian hypothesis.^ Hence it appears certain 
that natural selection cannot be regarded as 
completely master of the situation; apart 
from the origin of life there remains a lacuna 
in biology which for the present no existing 
mechanistic hypothesis can fill. 

Moreover, among other things, the ordinary 
processes of regeneration and repair have 
frequently been brought forward with some 
success as purposeful activities inexplicable 

* Du Bois-Reymond, "Darwin »ersMS Galiani," "Reden," 
Vol. I, p. 211. Quoted from Merz, "History of European 
Thought in the Nineteenth Century," Vol. II, p. 435. To 
the same source I am indebted for several other quotations. 

2 Hugo de Vries, "The Mutation Theory." Chicago, 2 
vols.. 1909, 1910 (trans. Farmer and Darbishire). 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 291 

by natural selection.^ Thus Du Bois-Rey- 
mond: "One of the greatest difficulties pre- 
sents itself in physiology in the so-called re- 
generative power, and — what is allied to it 
— the natural power of healing ; this may now 
be seen in the healing of wounds, in the delim- 
itation and compensation of morbid processes, 
or, at the farthest end of the series, in the 
re-formation of an entire fresh-water polyp 
out of one of the two halves into which it had 
been divided. This artifice could surely not 
have been learned by natural selection, and 
here it appears impossible to avoid the assump- 

* "Still less explicable in any way thus far proposed are 
certain remedial actions seen in animals. An example of 
them was furnished in §67, where 'false joints' were de- 
scribed — joints formed at places where the ends of a broken 
bone, failing to unite, remain movable one upon the other. 
According to the character of the habitual motions there re- 
sults a rudely formed hinge-joint or a baU-and-socket joint, 
either having the various constituent parts — periosteum, 
fibrous tissue, capsule, ligaments. Now Darwin's hypothesis, 
contemplating only normal structures, fails to account for 
this formation of an abnormal structure. Neither can we 
ascribe this local developnlent to determinants : there were 
no appropriate ones in the germ-plasm, since no such struc- 
ture was provided for. Nor does the hypothesis of physi- 
ological units, as presented in precediog chapters, yield an 
interpretation. These could have no other tendency than to 
restore the normal form of the limb, and might be expected 
to oppose the genesis of these new parts." — Herbeht 
Spencer, "The Principles of Biology," Vol. I. New York 
and London, 1909, revised and enlarged edition, p. 362. 



292 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

tion of formative laws acting for a purpose. 
They do not become more intelligible by the 
fact that the regeneration of mutilated crys- 
tals, observed by Pasteur and others, points 
to similar processes in inanimate nature. 
Also the ability of organisms to perfect them- 
selves by exercise has not found sufficient 
appreciation with regard to natural selec- 
tion." 1 

To sum up, it appears certain that at least 
in a few instances, and possibly quite generally, 
purposeful tendencies exist in the organism 
which seem to be inexplicable by natural selec- 
tion or any other existing mechanistic hypoth- 
esis. It is not too much to hope that a scien- 
tific explanation of these phenomena in whole 
or in part may some day be found ; but mean- 
time they constitute the natural subject 
of vitalistic speculation. A field remains, 
though limited, where the physical scientist 
cannot yet successfully subdue the vitalist, 
however strong his conviction of the errors of 
vitalism.^ 

1 Du Bois-Reymond, "Reden," Vol. I, p. 226. 

^ The indeterminism which is based uniquely upon belief 
in freedom of the will appears to be foreign to the present dis- 
cussion. It is, accordingly, entirely disregarded in the follow- 
ing considerations. Hence the conclusions of the present in- 
quiry are not to be taken as cognate with such metaphysical 
hypotheses as the indeterminism of Kant and Lotze. 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 293 

Vitalism therefore flourishes, as the recent 
remarkable works of Driesch and Bergson tes- 
tify. Of these two authors the former is 
concerned to prove that pure mechanism is 
insufficient in biology, and that to mechanism 
must be added his entelechies ; ^ the latter 
has gone beyond the vitalism of earlier au- 
thors, to give his own view of his speculations, 
and introduced the idea of the vital impetus. 



THE VITALISM OP BERGSON 

Upon analysis the theory of Bergson 
amounts to this, that there is an original 
creative impetus impelled upon life which, at 
all events in the main, is responsible for the 
course that organic evolution has taken. 
To quote his own words: "So we come back, 
by a somewhat roundabout way, to the idea 
we started from, that of an original impetus 
of life, passing from one generation of germs 
to the following generation of germs through 
the developed organisms which bridge the 
interval between the generations. This im- 
petus, sustained right along the lines of evo- 
lution among which it gets divided, is the 
fundamental cause of variations, at least 

1 Driesch, "The Science and Philosophy of the Organism." 
London, 1907 and 1908, two volumes. 



294 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

of those that are regularly passed on, that 
accumulate and create new species. In gen- 
eral, when species have begun to diverge from 
a common stock, they accentuate their diver- 
gence as they progress in their evolution. 
Yet, in certain definite points, they may 
evolve identically ; in fact, they must do so 
if the hypothesis of a common impetus be 
accepted. This is just what we shall have to 
show now in a more precise way, by the same 
example we have chosen, the formation of 
the eye in molluscs and vetebrates. The idea 
of an 'original impetus,' moreover, will thus 
be made clearer." ^ . . . "If life realizes 
a plan, it ought to manifest a greater harmony 
the further it advances, just as the house 
shows better and better the idea of the archi- 
tect as stone is set upon stone. If, on the 
contrary, the unity of life is to be found solely 
in the impetus that pushes it along the road of 
time, the harmony is not in front, but behinc 
The unity is derived from a vis a tergo: il 
is given at the start as an impulsion, not 
placed at the end as an attraction. In com- 
municating itself, the impetus splits up more 
and more. Life, in proportion to its progress, 
is scattered in manifestations which un- 

^Bergson, "Creative Evolution," translated by Mitchell. 
New York, 1911, pp. 87. 88. 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 295 

doubtedly owe to their common origin the 
fact that they are complementary to each other 
in certain aspects, but which are none the less 
mutually incompatible and antagonistic." ^ 

The contention of Bergson may be divided 
into two parts : a statement of belief in an 
original impetus, and his biological argu- 
ments in favor of such a view. The former, 
in so far as it is a question exclusively of an 
original impetus, appears to lie outside the 
scope of science, in company with speculations 
upon the origin of the universe; the latter, 
because it deals with the subject-matter of 
science, is open to scientific criticism, and from 
the standpoint of the biologist is certainly 
far from conclusive.^ 

Bergson's hypothesis is, however, in es- 
sence not less vitalistic than that of Driesch. 
Both philosophers assume the existence of a 
special vital characteristic, and explain the 
course which evolution has taken as a result 
of it. In short, modern vitalism consists 
in postulating a directive tendency which 
manifests itself in or through the organism 
alone, and is peculiar to life. 

» Ibid., p. 103. 

' In fact, until the mechanistic operation of Bergson's 
impetus can be clearly perceived, it must remain scientifically 
an unsound hypothesis. 



296 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

In such speculations the properties of 
matter and the process of cosmic evolution 
have no place.^ Bergson, indeed, very defi- 
nitely, and it would seem gratuitously, puts 
aside cosmic evolution and also, with certain 
slight reservations, the properties of matter as 
of no essential consequence in organic evolu- 
tion; e.g. "This twofold result has been ob- 
tained in a particular way on our planet. But 
it might have been obtained by entirely dif- 
ferent means. It was not necessary that life 
should fix its choice mainly upon the carbon 
of carbonic acid. What was essential for it 
was to store solar energy ; but, instead of ask- 
ing the sun to separate, for instance, atoms of 
oxygen and carbon, it might (theoretically 
at least, and, apart from practical difficulties 

^ Driesch, to be sure, has considered the problem of uni- 
versal teleology, but unsuccessfully and with obvious vitalistic 
preconceptions such as individuality. His nearest approach 
to the thesis of the present work is to be found in the follow- 
ing lines : "I do not hesitate to confess that, apart from 
historical teleology relating to the sequence of one state of poli- 
tics or economy upon another, and apart from phylogeny, 
there seems to me to be a certain sound foundation in the 
concept of the general harmony between organic and inor- 
ganic nature, a something which seems to show that nature 
is nature for a certain purpose. But I confess at the same time 
that I am absolutely unable to consider this purpose in 
any other than a purely anthropomorphic manner." — L.c, 
Vol. n, pp. 348-349. 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 297 

possibly insurmountable) have put forth other 
chemical elements, which would then have had 
to be associated or dissociated by entirely dif- 
ferent physical means. And if the element 
characteristic of the substances that supply 
energy to the organism had been other than 
carbon, the element characteristic of the 
plastic substances would probably have been 
other than nitrogen, and the chemistry of 
living bodies would then have been radically 
different from what it is. The result would 
have been living forms without any analogy 
to those we know, whose anatomy would have 
been different, whose physiology also would 
have been different. Alone, the sensori-motor 
function would have been preserved, if not its 
mechanism, at least in its effects. It is there- 
fore probable that life goes on in other planets, 
in oilier solar systems also, under forms of 
which we have no idea, in physical conditions 
to which it seems to us, from the point of 
view of our physiology, to be absolutely op- 
posed. If its essential aim is to catch up 
usable energy in order to expend it in explo- 
sive actions, it probably chooses, in each 
solar system and on each planet, as it does 
on the earth, the fittest means to get this 
result in the circumstances with which it is 
confronted. That is at least what reasoning 



298 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

by analogy leads to, and we use analogy the 
wrong way when we declare life to be impos- 
sible wherever the circumstances with which 
it is confronted are other than those on the 
earth. The truth is that life is possible wher- 
ever energy descends the incline indicated by 
Carnot's law and where a cause of inverse 
direction can retard the descent — that is to 
say, probably, in all the worlds suspended 
from all the stars. We go further : it is not 
even necessary that life should be concen- 
trated and determined in organisms properly 
so called, that is, in definite bodies present- 
ing to the flow of energy ready-made though 
elastic canals. It can be conceived (although 
it can hardly be imagined) that energy might 
be saved up, and then expended on varying 
lines running across a matter not yet solidified. 
Every essential of life would still be there, 
since there would still be slow accumulation 
of energy and sudden release." ^ 

B 

VITALISM AND TELEOLOGY 

These conclusions appear to be based upon 
decisions regarding the essential physico-chem- 
ical conditions and characteristics of life arbi- 

* Bergson, I.e., pp. 255, 256. 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 299 

trarily reached in accordance with precon- 
ceived views, and quite without scientific 
justification. There is certainly no reason 
to ascribe greater importance to energy than 
to matter in the vital processes, and in the 
light of the facts with which the preceding 
chapters are concerned, such views seem 
absurd. Indeed, whoever is disposed to spec- 
ulate about biological fitness — and not even 
the incomparable finesse of M. Bergson's dia- 
lectic can make fitness other than the most 
general result of the process of organic evolu- 
tion — must now weigh well the cosmic pro- 
cesses. For, if allowance be made for the 
results of natural selection in the organic 
world, fitness of the environment has the 
greater claim to be considered. 

The two fitnesses are complementary; are 
they then single or dual in origin ? The simple 
view would be to imagine one common impe- 
tus operating upon all matter, inorganic and 
organic, through all stages of its evolution, 
in all its states and forms, and leading to 
worlds like our own through paths apparently 
purposeful and really not yet explained. 
Such, it seems to me, is the natural hypothesis 
for the vitalist to adopt. But then vitalism 
vanishes, only teleology remains; for the 
unique characteristic of life is gone. Yet, 



300 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

putting aside mechanistic differences, is it not 
now lost in any case ? Has not modern vital- 
ism in accepting the limitation to entelechies 
or impetus destroyed itself ? 

The situation, briefly, seems to be as fol- 
lows : two evolutionary processes independ- 
ently result in two complementary fitnesses; 
hence they are related. In the one process 
the origin of fitness is in part explained by a 
mechanistic hypothesis. Nevertheless, many 
philosophers, as is their right, declare that in 
this process a further extraphysical influence 
is to be assumed. But any one who makes 
such an assumption for the one process must 
certainly now make it for the other ; thus he 
will be led to see impetus or entelechies every- 
where. Under these circumstances it may 
be doubted if his acquaintance with the na- 
ture of his impetus or entelechies is so inti- 
mate that he will be able to distinguish the 
inorganic from the organic, for he has surren- 
dered to science all the positive physico-chem- 
ical differences between organic and inorganic 
bodies and processes. Hence, unless he is to 
make an arbitrary and unintelligible distinc- 
tion, or to indulge in the spinning of cob- 
webs, his vitalism has ceased to be exclusively 
organic, in short has ceased to be vitalism at 
all, and has become mere universal teleology. 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 301 

m 

COSMIC EVOLUTION 

But, for the scientist, these are matters 
of little moment. He, at least, is not obliged 
to take any stand concerning them. This 
could hardly be better illustrated than by our 
new facts themselves. For it seems to be 
clear that where science is most self-sufficient, 
at the very basis of physical science itself, 
if anywhere, teleology is at work. Yet it is 
certain that physical science needs no tele- 
ology to explain its phenomena and pro- 
cesses. These are mechanisms, and since 
the publication of Newton's "Principia" no 
one has seriously doubted the fact.^ 

To-day there is as little room for doubt that 
a complete description of cosmic evolution in 
terms of matter and energy is possible; for 
it is sound scientific doctrine that wh9,t exists 
in the finished solar system depends upon 
what already existed in the nebula. The 
forms and states and quantities of matter 
and energy in the nebula determine the re- 
sulting solar system. Further, since both 
nebulae and solar systems are common oc- 

* Laplace's reply to a question of Napoleon's, "Why the 
name of God did not occur in his ' Mecanique celeste,' " will 
be recalled : "Sire, je n'ai pas besoin de cet hypothese." 



302 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

currences, it is evident that nebulae them- 
selves are in a general way determined by 
other antecedent conditions and phenomena, 
which turn out to be collisions between stars. 
Thus arises the suspicion that cosmic evolu- 
tion may be in truth a cyclic process which 
had no beginning and can have no end.^ 
An alternative hypothesis regards the pres- 

' Such a view, until quite recently, was universally rejected 
bscause it appeared to conflict with the second law of thermo- 
dynamics, — that of the degradation of energy. But lately it 
has been put forth by no less an authority than Arrhenius, 
who has advanced a theory to explain away the difficulty of 
the second law. 

"The recognition of the indestructibility of energy 
seemed to accentuate the difficulties of the cosmogonic prob- 
lems. The theses of Mayer and of Helmholtz, on the man- 
ner in which the Sun replenished its losses of heat, have had 
to be abandoned. My explanation is based upon chemical 
reactions in the interior of the Sun in accordance with the 
second law of thermodynamics. The theory of the 'degra- 
dation' of energy appeared to introduce a still greater diffi- 
culty. That theory seems to lead to the inevitable conclu- 
sion that the Universe is tending towards the state which 
Clausius has designated as 'Warme Tod' (heat death), when 
all the energy of the Universe will be uniformly distributed 
through space in the shape of movements of the smallest 
particles. That would imply an absolutely inconceivable 
end of the development of the Universe. The way out of this 
difficulty which I propose comes to this: the energy is 'de- 
graded ' in bodies which are in the solar state, and the energy 
is 'elevated,' raised to a higher level, in bodies which are in 
the nebular state." — Arrhenius, "Worlds in the Making," 
translated by Boms. New York and London, 1908, p. xiii. 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 303 

ent form of our universe as the result of a 
gradual evolution from an earlier unknown 
form, the development of successive solar 
systems being mere incidents of the larger 
process, the evolution as a whole directively 
governed by the law of the degradation of 
energy. 

A 

THE PERIODIC SYSTEM 

In either hypothesis the remarkable sys- 
tematic relationship between the elements 
which is manifest in the periodic classifica- 
tion has a peculiar place. If the second hy- 
pothesis be accepted, there seems to be little 
room for doubt that at an early period the 
chief cosmic process was the evolution of the 
elements themselves; and in the first theory 
the nebula, whose properties depend almost 
wholly upon chemical constitution and chem- 
ical and molecular energy, occupies a unique 
position, like the leaf in the organic cycle, 
or spring among the seasons. Thus, whether 
or not the periodic system is to be regarded 
as the one remaining plain result of a process 
by which the elements were evolved, at least 
it takes precedence over the other properties 
of matter, and lies at the very foundation of 
the known processes of evolution. Clearly, 



804 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

no one can doubt that upon the properties 
of matter as determined by the periodic 
system, and upon the relative amounts of the 
different elements, the actual process of cos- 
mic evolution from nebula to solar system 
is dependent.^ 

Hence, in accordance with the general 
method of science, we must assume that the 
origin of environmental fitness lies at least 
as far back as the phenomena of the periodic 
system, at least as far back as the evolution 
of the elements, if they were ever evolved. 
We simply cannot doubt that the origin of a 
body like the earth depends exclusively upon 
chance plus the properties of the elements, 
their relative amounts, the indestructible 
forces of nature, and the other known factors 
of mechanism. The perfect induction of phys- 
ical science, based upon each and all of its 
countless successes in every department of 
physics and chemistry, conclusively proves 
that the whole process of cosmic evolution 
from its earliest conceivable state to the pres- 
ent is pure mechanism.^ 

^ The same considerations apply to any other scientific 
hypothesis of the genesis of the solar system. 

" Not only is this proved by all experience of physical 
science, it has also ever been the necessary working hypoth- 
esis of physicists and chemists. 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 305 

B 

TELEOLOGY 

If, then, cosmic evolution be pure median- 
ism and yet issue in fitness, why not organic 
evolution as well ? Mechanism is enough 
in physical science, which no less than biolog- 
ical science appears to manifest teleology; 
it must therefore suffice in biology. 

Thus once more we arrive at the negation of 
vitalism. For this conclusion we possess 
two arguments: the argument that in such 
aspects as concern physical science, and apart 
from diflEerences scientifically explicable, or- 
ganic and inorganic phenomena are alike, and 
therefore a specifically vital teleology is un- 
necessary; and the argument that inorganic 
science unquestionably has no need of non- 
mechanistic teleology. Hence we are obliged 
to conclude that all metaphysical teleology is 
to be banished from the whole domain of 
natural science.^ 

What then becomes of fitness .'' Clearly 
there are two logical possibilities. Either there 
exists an unknown mechanistic explanation of 
that common issue of the organic and cosmic 

1 Such at least is the simplest provisional hypothesis, and 
the only view which involves no gratuitous assumptions. It is 
therefore the one which must now be adopted. 



306 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

evolutionary processes, or there does not. If 
such an explanation be possible, at least it 
must be admitted that it is very hard to con- 
ceive. Yet, recalling the diflSculty before the 
idea of natural selection arose of imagining any 
mechanistic explanation whatever of fitness, 
we shall do well not to decide against such a 
possibility. 

On the other hand, it is conceivable that a 
tendency could work parallel with mechanism 
without interfering with it, according to a 
view which has been held by such thorough- 
going mechanists as Descartes, Claude Ber- 
nard, Virchow, DuBois-Reymond, and many 
another. Although I have no intention of 
here seeking a choice between these two hy- 
potheses, being in fact convinced that now, 
at all events, no choice is scientifically possi- 
ble, and doubting if properly speaking they are 
alternatives at all,^ I do feel concerned to 

^ "Either the multitudmous kinds of organisms which now 
exist, and the far more multitudinous kinds which have existed 
during past geologic eras have been from time to time sep- 
arately made, or they have arisen by insensible steps, through 
actions such as we see habitually going on. Both hypotheses 
imply a Cause. The last, certainly as much as the first, 
recognizes this Cause as inscrutable. The point at issue is, 
how this inscrutable Cause has worked in the production of 
living forms. This point, if it is to be decided at all, is to be 
decided only by examination of evidence. Let us inquire 
which of these antagonistic hypotheses is most congruous 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 307 

remove from the latter view, if I may, some of 
the objections which are commonly raised 
against it in scientific circles, conscious that 
in this attempt I am overstepping the bound- 
aries of natural science. 

It is evident that a perfect mechanistic 
description of the building of a house may be 
conceived. Within the world of physical 
science the whole process is logically complete 
without consideration of the architect's de- 
sign and purpose. Yet such design and 
purpose, whether or ' not in themselves of 
mechanistic origin, are at one and the same 
time determining factors in the result, and 
nowise components of the physical process. 
Now it seems clear that a similar effect of a 
tendency working steadily through the whole 
process of evolution is also at least conceive- 
able, however small its bearing upon science, 
provided, like time itself, it be a perfectly 
independent variable, making up, therefore, 
with time the constant environment, so to 
speak, of the evolutionary process. The tend- 
ency must not be demonstrable either by 
weighing or by measuring, else it would 
amount to an interference within the mech- 

with established facts." — Hekbebt Spenceb, "The Prin- 
ciples of Biology." New York and London, 1909, Vol. I, 
revised and enlarged edition, p. 416. 



308 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

anistic process, and it must not be itself 
liable to any kind of variation whose detec- 
tion would directly reveal it. Where then 
can the origin of such a tendency be located? 
Why clearly, if we accept the induction in 
favor of mechanism, only where Bergson has 
shrewdly placed his vital impetus, at the very 
, origin of things, just before mechanism begins 
to act. In short, our new teleology cannot 
have originated in or through mechanism, 
but it is a necessary and preestablished asso- 
ciate of mechanism. Matter and energy have 
an original property, assuredly not by chance, 
which organizes the universe in space and 
time. 

This is in very truth a metaphysical doc- 
trine; but it has strong claims to sympa- 
thetic regard from men of science. In the 
first place, it leaves mechanism with the 
perfectly free hand which that process has 
undoubtedly earned in the world of phe- 
nomena. Secondly, it does but add one further 
riddle, and that an old and familiar one, to 
those two already tacitly recognized by most 
scientists : the existence of the universe and 
the existence of life. Given the universe, life, 
and the tendency, mechanism is inductively 
proved sufficient to account for all phenomena. 
The existence of the universe, on the other 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 309 

hand, is no concern of the scientist. What- 
ever else it may achieve, mechanism can never 
explain, cannot even face the problem of the 
existence of matter and energy. Within the 
world of science these are conserved ; only 
outside that world can they have originated 
or not originated. As for the existence of 
life, in spite of our utter ignorance, it must 
be admitted that a half century has greatly 
diminished the number of substantial biolo- 
gists who really look forward to its scientific 
explanation, and the greatest chemists have 
ever shared such a view. Liebig is reported 
by Lord Kelvin to have replied to the ques- 
tion whether he believed that a leaf or a flower 
could be formed or could grow by chemical 
forces, "I would more readily believe that a 
book on chemistry or on botany could grow 
out of dead matter. " ^ Darwin, too, once 
said, "It is mere rubbish thinking at present 
of the origin of life ; one might as well think 
of the origin of matter."^ Since Liebig's 
day the chemical organization of the cell has 
become in scientific knowledge vastly more 
complex than it was before, and I know of no 
biological chemist to whom the spontaneous, 

1 Lord Kelvin, "On the Dissipation of Energy," Popular 
Lectures, Vol. Ill, p. 464. 

2 Merz. Vol. II, p. 406. 



310 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

that is to say, the mechanistic, origin of a cell 
is scientifically imaginable,^ though all believe 
that once formed, cells exist as mechanisms 
in a mechanistic universe.^ Thus the chem- 
ist puts his mind at rest regarding the exist- 
ence of life, just as the physicist calms his 
regarding the existence of matter, simply by 
turning his back on the problem. Thereby 
he suffers nothing in his practical task as a 
man of science. 

Returning now to fitness, we may be sure 
that, whatever successes science shall in future 
celebrate within the domain of teleology, the 
philosopher will never cease to perceive the 
wonder of a universe which moves onward 
from chaos to very perfect harmonies, and, 
quite apart from any possible mechanistic 

* This is not to express an opinion concerning the problem 
of abiogenesis; all admit that we cannot disprove such a 
theory. But while biophysicists like Professor Schafer follow 
Spencer in assuming a gradual evolution of the organic from 
the inorganic, biochemists are more than ever unable to per- 
ceive how such a process is possible, and without taking any 
final stand prefer to let the riddle rest. But if lite has 
originated by an evolutionary process from dead matter, 
that is surely the crowning and most wonderful instance of 
teleology in the whole universe. 

^ See, for instance, F. Hofmeister, "Die Chemische Organ- 
isation der Zelle," Vieweg, Brunswick, 1901, and Alsberg, 
"Mechanisms of Cell Activity," Science, pp. 97-105, July 28, 
1911. 



LIFE AND THE COSMOS 311 

explanation of origin and fulfillment, to feel it 
a worthy sub j ect of reflection. From this point 
of view, however, science need expect no inter- 
ference, but without any last vestige of former 
shackles may pursue the search after mechan- 
istic explanations of all natural phenomena.^ 

At length we have reached the conclusion 
which I was concerned to establish. Science 
has finally put the old teleology to death. 
Its disembodied spirit, freed from vitahsm 
and all material ties, immortal, alone lives 
on, and from such a ghost science has noth- 
ing to fear. The man of science is not even 
obliged to have an opinion concerning its 
reality, for it dwells in another world where 
he as scientist can never enter. 

* "An evolution is a series of events that in itself as series 
is purely physical, — a set of necessary occurrences ia the 
world of space and time. An egg develops into a chick; 
a poet grows up from infancy; a nation emerges from bar- 
barism ; a planet condenses from the fluid state, and develops 
the life that for millions of years makes it so wondrous a place. 
Look upon all these thiags descriptively, and you shall see 
;aothing but matter moving instant after instant, each con- 
taining in its full description the necessity of passing over into 
the next. Nowhere will there be, for descriptive science, 
any genuine novelty or any discontinuity admissible. But 
look at the whole appreciatively, historically, synthetically, 
as a musician listens to a symphony, as a spectator watches 
a drama. Now you shall seem to have seen, in phenomenal 
form, a story." — Eoyce, "The Spirit of Modern Philosophy." 
Boston and New York, 1896, 8th ed., p. 425. 



812 THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT 

I cannot hope to have provided more than 
a very imperfect illumination of certain as- 
pects of teleology in this venture upon the 
foreign field of metaphysics, and I should 
wish to be understood as very doubtful of my 
success in stating what seem to me some of 
the philosophical conclusions to be dr^wn 
from the fitness of the environment. 

There is, however, one scientific conclusion 
which I wish to put forward as a positive and, 
I trust, fruitful outcome of the present 
investigation. The properties of matter and 
the course of cosmic evolution are now seen 
to be intimately related to the structure of 
the living being and to its activities ; they 
become, therefore, far more important in 
biology than has been previously suspected. 
For the whole evolutionary process, both cos- 
mic and organic, is one, and the biologist may 
now rightly regard the universe in its verv 
essence as biocentric. 



INDEX 



Absorption coefficient, 136-138. 

tables, 137. 
Acetylene, 200. 
Acidity, 140, 142, 143. 
Acids, 144, 157, 212, 213, 216, 217. 
Adaptation, 5, 36, 66, 156, 274. 
Adsorption, 128, 129, 130. 
Air, 135. 

tables, 135. 
Alcohols, 212. 
Algol, 46, 47. 

Alkalinity, 142, 143, 155, 167-170, 
188. 

blood, 155-159. 

sea water, 167-170. 

table, 169. 
Ammonia, 66, 110, 263, 264. 
Analysis of evidence, 250-253. 
Animism, 284. 
Astronomy, 38-49. 
Asymmetric carbon atom, 223. 
Atlantic, 167, 168. 
Atmosphere, 55-60, 134, 135. 

tables, 135. 
Atomic volume, 10, 11. 

curve, 11. 
Atomic weights, 14. 
Avogadro's Hypothesis, 177. 

Balanced solutions, 175. 
Baltic, 168. 

Bicarbouates in blood, 157. 
Biocentric point of view, 110, 

312. 
Biological chemistry, 193. 
Black Sea, 168, 169. 
Blood, 115, 116, 153, 155-158, 
161. 
alkalinity, 155-158, 187. 
serum, 116. 

tables, 116, 187. 
Boron, 265. 



Bosphorus, 168. 
Bottom water, 166. 
Boyle's Law, 177. 
Bromine, 209. 

Calcium carbonate, 172, 173. 
Calorie, 81. 
Cane sugar, 159. 
Capillary action, 78, 126, 127. 
Carbohydrates, 218, 222-232. 

complexity of reactions, 229. 

instability, 223-226. 

mutarotation, 223. 

photosynthesis, 227-229. 
Carbon, 55, 66, 64, 211, 245. 

constituent of environment, 64. 

in stars, 55, 56. 

source of energy, 245. 

unique chemical properties, 211. 
Carbon chains, 210. 
Carbon compounds, 66, 193, 194, 

245. 
Carbon dioxide. Chapter IV 
(133-163), 56, 61, 62, 63, 
64, 65, 66. 

absorption coefficient, 136-140. 

acidity, 140-163. 

atmospheric, 134, 135. 

distribution, 138, 139. 

excretion, 139, 140. 

in sea water, 170. 

metabolism, 132, 133. 

necessary component of atmos- 
phere, 56, 61, 62. 

regulates neutrality, 147. 

solubUity, 136-140. 
Carbonic acid, see Carbon dioxide. 
Celestial mechanics, 153. 
Characteristics of life, 30-35. 

incompleteness of, 34. 
Chemical properties, 206, 207, 
209-222, 254, 255. 



313 



314 



INDEX 



Chemiatry, Chapter VI (191-248). 

inorganic, 237-243. 

organic, 191-237. 
Chlorine, 209, 242. 
CUorophyU, 230, 240, 241. 
Circulation of water, 91, 180-182. 
Classification of organic com- 
pounds, 212. 
Climate, 87. 

table, 87. 
Coagulation, 90. 
Coal, 57. 

Colloids, 77, 123, 128, 129, 130. 
Color, 263. 
Combustion, 25. 
Complexity, 31. 
Compounds of carbon, hydrogen, 

and oxygen, 202-207. 
Compressibility, 262. 
Concentration, 171. 
Conditions, 31, 164-180. 
Conservation of energy, 15, 18, 

25, 286. 
Constitutional formulas, 197-207. 
Contraction, see Expansion. 
Copper, 241. 

Cosmic evolution, 131, 301-312. 
Cosmography, 39, 60, 61. 
Cycle of matter, 26-28. 
CycUo compounds, 200, 201, 219. 

Degradation of energy, 18. 

Design, 85, 307. 

Dew, 105. 

Diabetic coma, 157. 

Dielectric constant, 121, 122, 125. 

table, 125. 
Digestion, 232. 
Distribution, 128, 138. 
Double bonds, 200. 
Dulong and Petit's Law, 82, 83, 84. 
Durability, 31. 
Dynamics, 2, 16. 

Earth, 61-63. 
Electricity, 256. 
Electro-physiology, 124. 
Elements, 72, 73. 
chemical, 9-16. 

figure, 11. 

table, 14. 



Energy, 15-19, 68, 69, 237. 
Enteleohy, 293, 300. 
Environment, Chapter II (38- 
71), 8-21, 32, 33, 183-190. 
possible, 49-51. 

primary constituents of, 61-63. 
Enzymes, 90, 230, 231. 
Ethane, 198. 
Ethylene, 200. 

Evaporation, 92, 97, 98, 101, 102, 
103, 127, 174, 180. 
latent heat of, 97-103. 
table, 99, 100. 
Evolution, 278, 279. 
Excretion, 139. 
Exhaustiveness of treatment, 263- 

267. 
Expansion, 106-110. 
table, 107. 

Fauna, 186. 

Figure, the atomic volume curve, 

11. 
Final causes, 4, 276. 
Fitness, Chapter I (1-37), 4-8, 
65, 66, 69, 181, 132, 266, 
267, 274-282, 305-307. 
explained by Darwin, 5. 
Flora, 186. 
Form, 24, 26, 32. 
Formaldehyde, 225, 228, 229. 
Freezing point, 93, 94, 178, 179. 
depression, 178, 179. 

tables, 178, 179. 
table, 94. 
Frog's muscle, 262. 
Fusion, 92-94. 

latent heat, 92-97. 
table, 95, 96. 

Gastric juice, 242. 
Gay-Lussac's Law, 177. 
Geology, 73, 112, 173. 
Geophysics, 52-55. 
Gennanium, 12, 13. 

table, 13. 
Glucose, 160, 222-227. 

formation, 227. 

mutarotation, 223. 

reactions, 224-226. 
Glyoerophosphoric acid, 241, 242. 



INDEX 



315 



Glycogen, 234. 
Gulf Stream, 182. 

Haemocyamne, 241. 
Haemoglobin, 241. 
Heat of combustion, 69, 217, 245, 
246. 

table, 245. 
Heat of formation, 244-247. 

tables, 244, 247. 
Heat of reaction, 235, 236, 243- 
247. 

table, 236. 
Helium, 41, 42, 58. 
Henry's Law, 137. 
Herring, 175. 
Heterogeneous equilibrium, 151, 

158. 
Hexakontane, 210. 
Hexanes, 198, 199. 
Hippurio acid, 234. 
Histidine, 226. 

Homogeneous equilibrium, 149. 
Hydrocarbons, 197-202. 
Hydrogen, 55, 56, 58, 64, 211, 
237-243, 245. 

ions, 141-143, 169. 

in sea water, table, 169. 
Hydrogen sulphide, 152. 
Hydrolysis, 159, 232-237. 
Hydroxyl ions, 141-143. 

Impetus, 281, 293-295. 
Inactivity, 147. 
Inorganic chemistry, 237-243. 
Instability, 221. 
Interstellar space, 50. 
Iodine, 209, 242. 
Ionization, 118-126, 155. 

constant, 140-163, 216. 
tables, 144, 216. 

water, 141-143. 
Iron, 241. 

Lactic acid, 225. 
Latent heat, 92-105, 125. 

tables, 95, 96, 99, 100. 
Lesina, 166. 

table, 166. 
Levulose, 224-226. 
Life, origin of, 288, 309, 310. 



Light, 256. 
Limestone, 136. 

Lobry de Bruyn's phenomenon, 
224. 

Magnesium, 241. 

Magnetism, 256. 

Mannose, 224-226. 

Marmora, Sea of, 168. 

Mass Law, 152. 

Matter, 8-15. 

Mechanics, 255, 256. 

Mechanism, 282-300, 301. 

Mediterranean, 167, 168, 174. 

Melting, see Fusion. 

Melting point, see Freezing point. 

Metabolism, 24-28, 32, 33, 35, 

158. 
Meteorology, 57, 58, 73-75, 
Methane, 197. 
Methyl formate, 233, 234. 
Methyl glyoxal, 225, 226. 
Methyl imidazol, 226. 
Mobility, 139, 184. 
Mobilization, 115, 141. 
Molecular constitution, 28, 196- 

210. 
Molecular volume, 125. 
Morphology, 23. 
Mutarotation, 223, 224. 
Mutation, 290. 

Natural selection, 4, 156, 274, 

280, 288. 
Natural theology, 85, 281, 289. 
Nebula, 48-50. 
Neptunism, 73. 
Neutrality, 142, 143, 146. 

regulation, 143-162. 
tables, 148, ISO. 
Nitrogen, 211. 

compounds of, 208, 209. 
North Sea, 168, 169. 
Nucleic acids, 241. 

Ocean, Chapter V (164-190), 78, 
113, 114, 135, 136, 153- 
155. 
alkalinity, 167-171. 

table, 169. 
as environment, 183-190. 



316 



INDEX 



Ocean, concentration, 171-176. 
table, 171. 
currents, 88, 180-182. 
mobility, 180-182. 
osmotic pressure, 176-179. 

tables, 178, 179. 
regulation of conditions, 164- 

180. 
temperature, 165-167. 
tables, 165, 166, 167. 
Oceanography, 165. 
CEdema, 161. 
Optical activity, 223. 
Order, 1. 
Organic chemistry, 28-30, 191- 

237. 
Organism, 21-36, 63, 76. 
Osmotic pressure, 176-180. 
Oxidation, 25, 246, 247. 
Oxygen, 64, 211, 237-243. 

Paleocrystic ice, 108. 
Panspermia, 50. 

Paraffine hydrocarbons, 212, 214. 
Partial pressure, 137. 
Periodic system, 9, 11, 14, 210, 
211, 303, 304. 

figure, 11. 

table, 14. 
Pharmaoologioal action, 175. 
Phase Rule, 257-261. 
Phosphoric acid, 146, 147, 156. 
Phosphorus, 241, 242. 
Photosynthesis, 27, 227-231. 
Physical chemistry, 256, 257. 
Physiology, 22, 123, 124. 
Planets, 46, 60. 
Possible environments, 49-51. 
Primary constituents of the en- 
vironment, 61-63. 
Propane, derivatives of, 203-205. 
Properties of matter, 70. 

interconnection, 276, 277. 

omitted, 261, 262. 
Proteins, 156, 242. 
Protoplasm, 26, 129, 130, 153, 

155, 156. 
Purpose, 1, 307. 

Radicals, 211-218. 
Rain, 105. 



Red Sea, 174. 

Reduction, 227, 228, 231, 244, 

247. 
Reflex action, 284. 
Regeneration, 290-292. 
Regulation, 31, 164-180, 186, 189. 
Repair, 290-292. 
Respiratory center, 157. 
Rivers, 113, 172, 180. 
composition, 113. 
table, 113. 

SaUnity, 113, 114, 171-175, 187. 

table, 171. 
Salt, 113, 114, 172, 173. 
Sea urchin, 175. 
Sea water, 114, 153, 154, 155, 185. 

a balanced solution, 175. 
Silicon, 66, 265. 
Skager-Rack, 168. 
Sofl, 78, 127. 
Solar system, 60, 61. 
Solidification, 108. 
Solubility, 136-138, 140. 

of carbonic acid, 136-140. 
Solvent, 68, 79, 111-118, 121. 
Sound, 256. 
Space, 19-21. 

Specific heat, 67, 68, 80-91. 
StabUity, 78, 150, 164, 186, 218. 
Stars, 41-44, 50. 
Sugars, 218, 222-232. 
Sulphur, 209, 242. 
Sulphureted hydrogen, 152. 
Sulphurous acid, 169. 
Summary, 267-273. 
Sun, 44-46, 50, 60. 
Surface temperature, 166. 
Surface tension, 126-130. 
Survival of fittest, 288. 
Synthesis, 192, 286. 

Tables: 

Absorption coefficients, 137. 
Alkalinity and acidity, 148, 

150. 
Alkalinity of sea water, 169. 
Comparison of blood and sea 

water, 187. 
Comparison of properties, 125. 
Composition of air, 135. 



INDEX 



317 



Composition of blood serum, 

116. 
Composition of river water, 

113. 
Composition of sea water, 171. 
Derivatives of propane, 203- 

205. 
Elements, 14. 
Expansion of water, 107. 
Fitness, 250-252. 
Freezing point of blood serum, 

178, 179. 
Germanium, 13. 
Heat conductivity, 106. 
Heat loss of dog, 103. 
Heats of combustion, 245. 
Heats of formation, 247. 
Heats of reaction, 236. 
Heats of reduction, 244. 
Ionization constants, 144, 216. 
Latent heat of fusion, 95, 96. 
Latent heat of vaporization, 

99, 100. 
Melting points, 94. 
Normal temperatures, 87. 
Properties omitted, 261, 262. 
Range of temperature, 165, 166, 

167. 
Specific heats, 81, 83. 
Surface tension, 126. 
Vapor tension, 105. 
Teleology, 279-282, 289, 298-300, 

301, 305-312. 
Temperature, 67, 137, 153, 165, 

166, 167, 170, 188. 
range, 165, 166, 167. 

tables, 165, 166, 167. 
tables, 87, 165, 166, 167. 
Temperature regulation, 70, 86, 

87, 89, 91, 95, 98, 102, 103, 

109, 167. 
Theory of solution, 177, 179. 
Thermal conductivity, 106, 125. 

table, 106. 
Thermal properties, 80-110. 



Thermochemistry, 243-248. 
Thermodynamics, 16, 18, 19, 128. 
Time, 19-21. 
Trade winds, 181. 
Treble bonds, 200. 

Urea, 192, 234. 
Urine, 117. 

Valence, 196, 197. 
Van der Waals's constant a, 125. 
Vaporization, see Bvaporization. 
Vapor tension, 104, 105. 

table, 105. 
Variable stars, 46, 47. 
Variety, 68, 207, 220. 
Velocity of reaction, 90, 94, 159, 

170, 171. 
Vital force, 191, 286. 
Vitalism, 282-300, 305. 

of Bergson, 293-298. 
Volcanoes, 56, 134. 

Water, Chapter III (72-132), 57, 
61-67, 131 ; transparency, 
100; as element, 72, 73; 
universal importance, 73— 
78 ; quantity and distri- 
bution, 78-79 ; chemical 
inertness, 79 ; thermal prop- 
erties, 80-110; specific 
heat, 80-91 ; effect upon 
temperature, 86-91 ; latent 
heat, 92-105 ; evapora- 
tion, 101-104 ; vapor ten- 
sion, 104, 105 ; thermal 
conductivity, 106 ; expan- 
sion, 106-110 ; solvent, 
111-118; ionization, 118- 
126 ; surface tension, 126- 
130; in soil, 126, 127; 
fitness, 131. 
vapor, 101. 

Weathering, 114, 140. 

Winds, 88, 181, 



'T^HE following pages contMn advertisements of a 
few of the Macmillan books on kindred subjects. 



The Science of Human Behavior 

By 
MAURICE PARMELEE 

Professor of Sociology, University of Missouri 



CUth, $2.00 net; postpaid, $2.14. 



This is the first book to bring together the results of the most 
recent work in biology, zoology, neurology in particular, in genetic 
and comparative psychology, and in anthropology, showing the sig- 
nificance of this work for the analysis of the fiindamental factors in 
the determination of human behavior ; namely, instinct, intelligence, 
feeling, and the different types of social relationships. 

The book contains contributions which are vital to psychologists, 
anthropologists, and social scientists, and will be of great value to 
the general reader bringing together in convenient form the results 
of work which is of so much significance for the study of human 
behavior and human nature. To those engaged in educational 
work it will be of great use, and will be found valuable as a col- 
lege and university text-book in certain courses in psychology and 
sociology. 



THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

PuTilistaers 64-66 Pifth Avenue New York 



An Outline of 
the Theory of Organic Evolution 

With a Description of some of 
the Phenomena tvhich it explains 

By MAYNARD M. METCALF, Ph.D. 

Professor of Biology in the Woman's College of Baltimore 
Second Edition, Revised 

Cloth, 8vo, Colored Plates, $2.50 net 

The lectures out of which this book has grown were written for the 
author's students at the Woman's College of Baltimore, and for others in 
the college not familiar with biology who had expressed a desire to attend 
such a course of lectures. The book is, therefore, not intended for biolo- 
gists, but rather for those who would like a brief introductory outline of 
this important phase of biological theory. 

It has been the author's endeavor to avoid technicality so far as possible, 
and present the subject in a way that will be intelligible to those unfamiliar 
with biological phenomena. The subject, however, is somewhat intricate, 
and cannot be presented in so simple a manner as to require no thought 
on the reader's part; but it is hoped that the interest of the subject will 
make the few hours spent in the perusal of this book a pleasure rather 
than a burden. 

In many instances matter that might have been elaborated in the text 
has been treated in the pictures, which, with their appended explanations, 
form an essential part of the presentation of the subject. This method of 
treatment has been chosen both for the sake of the greater vividness thus 
secured and because it enables the book to be reduced to the limits de- 
sired. Many of the illustrations have been obtained from books with 
which the reader may wish later to become familiar. 



THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

Publishers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 



THE WORKS OF HENRI BERGSON 

Professor at the CoUige de France 

Time and Free Will 

An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness 

Authorized Translation by F. L. Pogson, New York 

Cloii, Svo, $2.7S net 

"The translation is faithful and readable. There are added a sym- 
pathetic preface by the translator and an admirably comprehensive 
bibliography of articles about Bergson's philosophy in several lan- 
guages. The first presentation of this important contemporary to 
our public has been so vrell done that all readers of the book must 
lament the sudden death of the young Oxford scholar to vrhom we 
owe the service." — Nation. 

"This is a great work, profoundly original, rigorous and keen in 
analysis, clear in statement ; and while showing that language com- 
pels us to treat life and its problems in a symbolical manner, yet it 
also shows that a close analysis of experience clearly reveals the true 
concrete life. Professor Bergson does not profess to cover the entire 
field of philosophy in this volume, but what he has covered is done 
in such an original and profound way that no one who pretends to 
keep abreast of philosophical thought will ignore it." — Boston Tran- 
script. 

Matter and Memory 

Translated by Nancy Margaret Paul and W. Scott Palmer 

Cloth, 8m, XX + 33() pages, index, $2.75 net; by mail, %2.g3 

This translation has been made from the fifth edition, 1908, of " Ma- 
tifere de Memoire," by Henri Bergson, Member of the Institute and 
Professor at the College de France. It has the very great advantage 
of being revised in proof by the author. A new introduction has also 
been written which supersedes that which accompanied the original 
work. The reader's attention is called to the fact that all the mar- 
ginal notes are peculiar to the English edition ; and that M. Bergson 
is not responsible for their insertion or character. 

Laughter C'^'"*> ^'•'^s *"'• '>y """^' ^'-34 

The work has been highly successful in France, where it is in its sev- 
enth edition. It has been translated into Russian, Polish, and Swed- 
ish. German and Hungarian translations are under preparation. Its 
success is due partly to the novelty of the explanation offered of the 
comic, and partly also to the fact that the author incidentally dis- 
cusses questions of still greater interest and importance. 



THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

FuTjliBhers 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York 



-.ONSERVATIQM 

■"•W: i-" 

To ^a nglaud ^ ^^1?'"^' 



